Simon J. Girling
Veterinary Nursing
Of Exofic Pets
SECOND EDITION
WILEY-BLACKWELL
小尾巴宠物健康中心http：//ttahc.taobao.com
Veterinary Nursing
ofExoticPets
SECONDEDITION
Veterinary
Nursing of
Exotic Pets
SECOND EDITION
Simon J. Girling
DZooMed DipECZM CBiol FSB EurProBiol MRCVS, Royal College of
Veterinary Surgeons Recognised Specialist in Zoo and Wildlife Medicine,
European Veterinary Specialist in Zoological Medicine (Zoo Health
Management)
MWILEY-BLACKWELL
A Johr Wiley & Soris, Ltd, Publicatior1
This edition hirst published 2013 @ 2003 by Blackwell Publishing, Ltd,
2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
author have used theirbest effortsin preparing this book,they make
no representations or warranties with the respect to the accuracy or
Wiley-Blackwell is an imprint of John wiley & Sons, formed by the
completeness ofthe contents ofthis book and specifically disclaim
merger of wiley's global Scientinc, Technical and Medical business with
 any implied warranties of merchantability or htness for a particular
Blackwell Publishing.
 purpose. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged
in rendering professional services and neither the publisher nor the
Registered offrce: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate,
author shall be liable for damages arising herefrom. If professional
Chichiester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
advice or other expert assistance isrequired,the servicesofa competent
 professional should be sought.
Editorial ofices: 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex,
Library ofCongress Catatoging-in-Publication Data
PO19 8SQ, UK 2121 State Avenue, Ames,
ISBN: 9780470659175
Iowa 50014-8300, USA
Girling, Simon
() s  I s  /sad xao s A
For details of our global editorial offces, for customer services and for
DZooMed DipECZM(Zoo Health Management) CBiol MSB MRCVS. -
information about how to apply for permission to reuse the copyright
2nd edition.
material in this book please see our website at www.wiley.com/wiley-
pages cm
blackwell.
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-470-65917-5 (pbk. : alk. paper) 1. Exotic animals-
The right of the author to be identined as the author ofthis work has
been asserted in accordance with the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents
I. 'Title.
Act 1988.
SF997.5.E95G57 2013
636.089*073dc23
All rights reserved. No part ofthis publication may be reproduced,
2012028349
stored ina retrieval system,r transmited, in any form or by any means
electronic,mechanical,photocopying,recording or otherwise,except as
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, without
the prior permission of the publisher.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some
 content that appears in print may not be available in electronic books.
ayo ae sonpad yaue ysmunsi an sauedao ia pasn suuaisa
claimed as trademarks. All brand names and product names used in 
Cover image: @ Simon J. Girling
this book are trade names, service marks,trademarks or registered
Cover design by Meaden Creative
trademarks oftheir respective owners. The publisher is not associated
with any product or vendor mentioned in this book. This publication
Set in 9/12 Minion Pro by Aptara Inc., New Delhi, India
is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in
Printed in |Country onlyl
regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold on the understanding 
that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. If
1 2013
professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a
competent professional should be sought.
Contents
Preface, vii
(Part I  Small Mammals, 1
Chapter 1 Basic Small Mammal Anatomy and Physiology, 2
Chapter 2 Small Mammal Housing, Husbandry and Rearing, 26
Chapter 3 Small Mammal Handling and Chemical Restraint, 36
Chapter 4 Small Mammal Nutrition, 49
Chapter 5 Common Diseases of Small Mammals, 59
Chapter 6 An Overview of Small Mammal Therapeutics, 91
Chapter 7 Small Mammal Diagnostic Imaging, 110
Chapter 8 Small Mammal Emergency and Critical Care Medicine, 122
(Part Il) Avian Species, 131
Chapter 9 Basic Avian Anatomy and Physiology, 132
Chapter 10 Avian Housing and Husbandry, 150
Chapter 11 Avian Handling and Chemical Restraint, 158
Chapter 12 Avian Nutrition, 170
Chapter 13 Common Avian Diseases, 185
Chapter 14 An Overview of Avian Iherapeutics, 209
Chapter 15 Avian Diagnostic Imaging, 226
Chapter 16 Avian Emergency and Critical Care Medicine, 234
Part Ill) Reptiles and Amphibians, 245
Chapter 17 Basic Reptile and Amphibian Anatomy and Physiology, 246
Chapter 19 Reptile and Amphibian Handling and Chemical Restraint, 272
viContents
Chapter 20 Reptile and Amphibian Nutrition, 286
Chapter 21 Common Reptile and Amphibian Diseases, 297
Chapter 22 An Overview of Reptile and Amphibian Iherapeutics, 319
Chapter 23 Reptile Diagnostic Imaging, 337
Chapter 24 Emergency and Critical Care Medicine of Reptiles, 346
Appendix 1 Legislation Affecting Exotic Pet Species in the United Kingdom, 355
Appendix 2 Useful Addresses, 357
Index, 358
Preface
Since the first edition of this textbook was published,
equivalent qualification "Veterinary Nursing of Exotic
'ased ie donaaap ot panuuos se auia iad sora
Species. This qualification is now in its 12th year and has
More and more of the pet-owning public are turning to
seen over 500 veterinary nurses qualify and is now rec-
exotic pets whether it be due to their increased availabil-
ognised as the industry standard for veterinary nurses
ity, physical attraction or the constraints of space making
wishing to train in this area in the UK. Ihis year (2012),
Mou ane sasinu Aieuanan dueadde anou siad aes
the course has been taken back in-house by Girling and
expected to understand the basics of diseases, husbandry,
Fraser Ltd. Training and Consultancy making it available
anatomy, and physiology of exotic pets as outlined by the
to a wider audience (see www.girlingandfraser.co.uk ).
 RCVS examinations. Also as the veterinary nurse is often
This revised and enlarged second edition of 'Veterinary
the practice-client interface, a sound knowledge base in
Nursing of Exotic Pets' hopes to further educate and in-
these species is essential.
form future generations of veterinary nurses, technicians
Many courses have developed over the last 12 years to
and veterinary students in one of the most fascinating of
support this increased need in training and this textbook
subdisciplines of veterinary medicine.
acts as a companion to the City and Guilds NVQ level-4
Simon J. Girling
vii
Part
Small Mammals
Part I: small MaMmal
Chapter 1
Basic Small Mammal Anatomy
and Physiology
Classification of small mammals
process. The scapula articulates with the humerus which
The commonly seen species of small mammals in veteri-
in turn articulates with the radius and ulna. In rabbits,
 nary practice are classified in Table 1.1.
the ulna fuses to the radius in older animals and the
two bones are deeply bowed. The radius and ulna articu-
late with the carpal bones which in turn articulate with
RABBIT
the metacarpals and the five digits.
Biological average values for the
 The femur is flatter than a cat ventrodorsally, and the
domestic rabbit
tibia and fbula are fused inthe rabbit. The tibia articulates
Table 1.2 gives the biological parameters for domestic
distally with the tarsal bones where there is a prominent
rabbits.
calcaneus bone. The tarsals articulate with the metatarsals
which articulate with the four hindlimb digits.
Musculoskeletal system
The hindlimbs are well muscled and powerful.
The skeletal system of rabbits is light. As a percentage
of body weight, the rabbit's skeleton is 7-8%, whereas
Respiratory anatomy
the domestic cat's skeleton is 12-13%. Ihis makes rab-
Upper respiratory tract
bits prone to fractures, especially of the spine and the
Rabbits, like horses, are nasal breathers, with the naso-
hindlimbs.
pharynx permanently locked around the epiglottis;
hence, upper respiratory disease or evidence of mouth
Skull
 breathing is problematic. The nasolacrimal ducts open
The mandible is narrower than the maxilla, and the tem-
onto the rostral floor of the nasal passage. The epiglot-
poromandibular joint has a wide surface area, allow-
 tis is not visible easily from the oral cavity, making direct
 ing lateral movement of the mandible in relation to the
intubation difficult. It is narrow and elongated and leads
maxilla.
into the larynx which has limited vocal fold development.
The larynx leads into the trachea which has incomplete
C-shaped cartilage rings for support.
Axial skeleton
 The cervical vertebrae are box-like and small and give
mobility. The thoracic vertebrae possess attachments to
Lower respiratory tract
the 12 paired ribs, which are flattened in comparison to
The trachea bifurcates into two primary bronchi. There
cat's ribs. Ihe pelvis is narrow and positioned vertically.
are two lungs, which are relatively small in proportion to
The iliac wings meet the ischium and pubis at the acetab-
the overall rabbit's body size. Ihis means that even minor
ulum, where an accessory bone unique to rabbits, called
lung disease may cause serious problems. Each lung has
the os acetabuli, lies. The pubis forms the floor of the pel-
three lobes, with the cranial ones being the smallest (see
vis and borders the obturator foramen which is oval in
Figure 1.1).
rabbits.
Respiratory physiology
Appendicular skeleton
 The impetus for inspiration derives from the muscular
 The scapula is slender and distally has a hooked supra
contraction and flattening of the diaphragm. The lung
hamate process projecting caudally from the hamate
Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets, Second Edition. Edited by Simon J. Girling. @ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
 AhojoisAyd pue Awojeuy jewwew llews yiseg
Table 1.1 Classification of commonly seen small mammmals.
Lago-
Car-
Didelphimor-
Diprotodon-
Order
morpha
Rodentia
nivora
phia
tia
Sub-
Sciuro-
Canifor-
ape
Myomorpha
Hystricomorpha
morpha
mia
Lepori-
Chinchilli- Octodon-
Musteli-
Muridae
Part I: small mammals
Family dae
Cricetidae
Caviidae
dae
tidae
Sciuridae dae
Didelphidae
Petauridae
Species
Domestic
Rat(Rattus
Gerbil
Guinea
Chinchilla 
Degu
Siberian
Domestic
Virginia
 Sugar glider
rabbit 
norvegicus)(/Meriones
pig (Cavia
(Chinchilla
(Octodon
dhipmunkf
ferret
opossum 
(Petaurus
(Oryctola-Mouse
ungui-
porcellus)
aniger)
(sn6ap
(Eutamias
(Mustela
(Didelphis
breviceps)
gu/s
(/MLus
culatus)
sibiricus)
putorius
virginiana)
(snnasnu(snnun
 Syrian 
Eastern 
furo)
hamster
dhipmunk
(Mesocrice-
(Tamias
tus auratus)
striatus)
Rus5ian
hamster
(fhodopus
sungorus)
Chinese
hamster 
(Cricetulus
griseus)
Table 1.2 Biological pararmeters for the domestic rabbit.
 Biological parameter
Domestic rabbit
Weight (kg)
1.5 (Netherland dwarf) to
10 (New Zealand whites
 and Belgian hares)
Rectal body temperature (°C)
38.5-40
 Respiratory rate at rest (breath5
09-0E
per minute)
Heart rate at rest
130 (New Zealand whites)
(beats per minute)
to 325 (Netherland dwarf)
Gestation length (days)
29-35 (average 31)
Figure 1.1 Lateral post-mortem view of a rabbit with the chest and
Litter size
4-10 
abdominal walls removed. The structures from left to right (cranial
to caudal) are the dark red heart, bright red lungs (three lobes),
Age at sexual maturity (months)
darker brown diaphragm and liver, pale cream stomach, yellow
Male
5-8
brown small intestines (the dark brown large intestines and caecum
Female
4-7
are reflected ventrally) and yellov-coloured urinary bladder. The left
kidney may be seen dorsally as a dark brown structure in the mid-
Lifespan (years)
6-10
abdomen tucked under a fold of skin. (Fraser and Girling, 2009)
Digestive system
Oral cavity
supplied with anaphylactic mediating chemicals. Ihese
The dental formula is
are strong enough to cause fluid extravasation and blood
pooling as well as spasms within the walls of the main
I 2/1 C 0/0 Pm 3/2 M 3/3.
 pulmonary arterial supply, leading to rapid right-sided
The teeth are elodont (open rooted'), allowing continual
heart failure.
growth throughout the rabbit's life. The molar enamel is
4  Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
 folded providing an uneven occlusal surface with the ip-
Small intestine
silateral jaw which allows interlocking. Wear is kept even
The total length of the small intestine in the average rab-
 by the lateral movement of the mandible, allowing inde-
bit may be some 2-3 feet! It is difficult to determine the
pendent left and right arcades to engage in mastication.
 divisions between duodenum, jejunum and ileum as they
 The incisors differentiate Lagomorpha from Rodentia as
all have a similar diameter.
rabbits and hares have two smaller incisors, or peg teeth',
Caecum and large intestinal anatomy
 aa a  sosi i  si adn
At the junction of the ileum and caecum lies the saccu-
the labial surface, whereas the smaller maxillary peg teeth
lus rotundus. Ihis is a swelling of the gut, infltrated with
have enamel on the labial and lingual sides. Ihis creates a
lymphoid tissue and a common site for foreign body
wedge-shaped bite-plane where the lower incisors close
impactions. Ihe caecum is large, sacculated and spiral-
immediately behind the upper large incisors and fit into a
shaped, fnishing in a blind-ended, thickened, fnger-like
4S
groove made by the peg teeth. The permanent incisors are
 projection known as the vermiform appendix, which also
present at birth, although the peg teeth are replaced by per-
contains lymphoid tissue. Ihe bulk of the caecum is thin
 manent peg teeth at around the second week oflife. The de-
walled and possesses a semi-fluid digestive content.
ciduous premolars present at birth are replaced and joined
 The start of the large intestine is the ampulla coli which
by permanent molars by the fourth week of life. There are
sits near to the sacculus rotundus and caecum. It is a
no canines; instead, there is a gap, or diastema, between the
smooth-walled portion of the gut with some lymphoid
incisors and premolars (Figure 1.2).
infltration of its walls, unlike the rest of the large intestine.
H is also distinguished by having bands of fbrous tissue
Stomach
(known as faerniae) which create sacculations (also known
The stomach is alarge, simple structure, with a strong car-
as hausfra). At the end of the proximal colon, the taeniae
diac sphincter (see Figure 1.1). This makes vomiting in
 and haustra cease, and the gut is then known as the fusus
the rabbit virtually impossible. There is a main body, or
coli, its walls becoming thickened and smooth because of
fundus, and a pyloric section with a well-formed pyloric
the presence of large members of nerve ganglia which act
sphincter. The lining of the stomach wall contains acid-
q a a   i  s 5
secreting and separate pepsinogen-secreting cells. The
The distal descending colon continues through the pelvis
pH of the rabbit's stomach contents is surprisingly lower
to empty through the rectum and anus. There are a couple
than a cat's or dog's at 1.5-1.8. In addition, a healthy rab-
of anal glands just inside the anus, one oneither side, emp-
bit's stomach never truly empties.
tying their secretions onto the faecal pellets.
Figure 1.2 Lateral diagram of a normal rabbit skull showving the relation of tooth roots to the orbit and javvbones. Note peg-teeth incisors
behind main incisors in maxilla.
Basic Small Mammal Anatomy and Physiology  5
Large intestinal physiology
Urinary anatomy
Two types of faecal pellets are produced by the rabbit.
Kidney
 One is a true faecal pellet, comprising waste material in
The kidneys are bean shaped. Ihe right kidney is more
a dry, light brown spherical form. The other is a much
cranial than the left, and they are often separated from the
darker, mucus-covered pellet known as a caecotroph.
ventral lumbar spine by large fat deposits. A single ureter
 The caecotroph is eaten directly from the anus, as soon
arises from each kidney and traverses across the abdomi-
as it is produced, which in the wild is during the mid-
nal cavity to empty into the urinary bladder.
dle of the day when the rabbit is underground. In cap-
tivity, they are often produced overnight, but may be
Bladder
produced at any time. The caecotroph contains plant
The bladder lining is composed of transitional cell epi-
material from which all of the nutrients have yet to be
thelium. The urethra in the male rabbit exits through the
extracted.
 pelvis and out through the penis. In females, the urethra
saad jo sadi oml anpoid us lamoq aiel au
opens onto the floor of the vagina.
NS
due to the contraction waves in the large intestine and
caecum. The proximal colon can separate out food as
Renal physiology
the haustra or sacculations of the colon hold on to the
Rabbit's urine is alkaline with a pH varying between 6.5
 smaller particles. The larger particles become pushed
and 8, but it will become acidic if the rabbit has been ano-
towards the colon lumen. The haustra then push the
rectic for 24 hours or more. Ihe urine contains varying
small particles towards the caecum by contracting, and
amounts of calcium carbonate. This is because it has no
the segmental contractions of the colon itself propel the
larger particles towards the rectum producing a waste
gut, and so any excess calcium must be excreted by the
pellet. When caecotrophs are produced, the haustra dra-
kidneys into the urine. This can be seen as a tan-coloured
matically reduce their contractions, and instead the seg-
silt Porphyrin pigments may also be seen in rabbit's urine.
mental activity drives material from the caecum through
 These are plant pigments and make the urine appear any-
the distal colon where they are covered in mucus and
where from a dark yellow to a deep wine-red in colour
then eaten directly from the anus. Ihe caecum is thus the
This may mimic haematuria; therefore, to diagnose blood
powerhouse flled with microbes which turn the ingesta
in the urine, it is necessary to examine it microscopically.
into volatile fatty acids (VFAs) which can either nour-
ish the caecal epithelium (butyrates) or be absorbed and
Cardiovascular system
converted to glucose by the liver (acetates). A high-fibre
Heart
diet is important to maintain the balance of VFAs which
The rabbit heart is small in relation to body size. Ihe right
should be made of predominantly acetates followed by
atrioventricular valve has only two cusps instead of three.
butyrates and then propionates. Decreases in fbre lev-
The pulmonary artery also has a large amount of smooth
els increase butyrates and propionates at the expense of
 muscle in its wall which can contract vigorously during
acetates, which results in reduction in the normal peri-
anaphylactic shock, causing immediate right-sided car-
stalsis of the gut and leads to hypomotility disorders and
diac overload and failure.
ileus or gut stasis.
Blood vessels for sampling
Liver
Vascular access in rabbits includes
The rabbit liver has four lobes. Ihere is a gall bladder,
which has an opening separate from the pancreatic duct
Lateral ear vein
into the proximal duodenum. IThe main bile pigment is
 This runs along the lateral margin of either ear. It may be
biliverdin, rather than bilirubin seen in cats and dogs.
accessed using a 25 or 27 gauge needle or catheter and
used for slow intravenous injections and blood sampling.
Pancreas
The pancreas is a diffuse organ, suspended in the loop
Cephalic vein
of the duodenum. Ihere is one single pancreatic duct,
 This runs in a similar position to that seen in cats and
separate from the bile duct, emptying into the proximal
dogs. It may be split into two in some individuals, but may
duodenum.
be used for intravenous fluids and sampling (Figure 1.3).
6  Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Reproductive anatomy
Male
The paired testes can move from an inguinal position with-
in the thin-skinned scrotal sacs, to an intra-abdominal
position through the open inguinal canal (see Figure 1.4).
 The scrotal sacs are sparsely haired and lie on either side
of the anogenital area.
The accessory sex glands in the buck attached to the
W
urethra in the caudal abdomen are: dorsal and small-
er ventral prostate; bilobed vesicular gland; bilobed
W
coagulating gland and a bilobed bulbourethral gland.
The prepuce has numerous small preputial glands in the
WS
dermis, and there are a couple of inguinal glands situ-
ated on either side of the penis which secrete a brown-
RT
coloured sebum clearly seen adjacent to the anus.
Female
 The ovaries are supported by the ovarian ligament and
Figure 1.3 Cephalic vein access in a rabbit using a pre-heparinised
lie caudal to each respective kidney. The ovarian artery
butterfly catheter.
often splits into two parts after leaving the aorta, and it,
along with the rest of the reproductive tract, is frequently
Saphenous vein
encased in large amounts of fat.
This runs across the lateral aspect of the hock, as in cats
The uterus is duplex - there is no common uterine
and dogs, and may also be used for venipuncture.
body. Instead there are two separate uteri with separate
cervices emptying into the vagina. Ihe vagina is large and
Jugular vein
thin walled, with the urethra opening onto its floor cra-
The jugular veins are prominent in the rabbit but they
nial to the pelvis. The vulva therefore is a common open-
form the major part of the drainage of blood from the
ing for the reproductive and urinary systems unlike many
 orbit of the eye. If a haematoma or thrombus forms and
rodents. It lies just cranial to the anus and is flanked on
blocks the lumen of a jugular vein, severe orbital oedema
either side by the inguinal glands, as with the buck.
 may occur, with possible damaging effects.
 The doe has on average four pairs of mammary glands
extending from the inguinal region to the axillary areas.
Lymphatic system
Spleen
The spleen is a flattened structure, oblong in nature and
attached to the greater curvature of the stomach, and is
thus found predominantly on the left side.
Thymus
The thymus is a large structure in the cranial thoracic
compartment even in the adult rabbit. It provides the
body with the T-cell lymphocytes.
Lymph nodes
The root of the mesentery supporting the digestive tract is
well supplied with lymph nodes, as is the hilar area of the
lungs where the two main bronchi diverge to supply each
lung. In addition, there are superficial lymph nodes in the
Figure 1.4 Close-up of the caudal abdomen of a male rabbit
showing the retracted testes and the inguinal canals and the ful
popliteal, prescapular and submandibular areas.
urinary bladder. (Fraser and Girling, 2009)
Basic Small Mammal Anatomy and Physiology  7
Reproductive physiology
Sexing
Male
The young may be sexed from 4 to 5 weeks of age. Gentle
The buck rabbit has the same sexual hormones as in cats
pressure is placed on either side of the reproductive or
and dogs, but they are on a seasonal time clock triggered
anal area to protrude the vulva or penis. Ihe vulva of the
by the lengthening daylight of spring. This is mediated
 young doe is rounded and has a central slit in midline and
through the pineal gland in the brain which has neural
 projects cranially. The penis of the young buck is more
links from the eyes and controls the hormone melato-
 conical and pointed, with no central slit and tends to proj-
nin. It in turn controls the pituitary release of follicle-
ect caudally when protruded. Once the buck is older, the
stimulating and luteinising hormones which then act upon
testes descend into the scrotum.
the testes.
skin
Female
Lop breeds, particularly does, have extra skin folds called
Does are induced ovulators. Waves of follicles swell and re-
dewlaps' around the ventral neck region. In addition,
 gress during the course of the season, starting to increase
such extra folds of skin may be found around the ano-
in activity in early spring. If not mated, these follicles will
 genital area, leading to increased risk of urine and faecal
often dominate the cycle for 12-16 days at a time. There is
soiling
no real anoestrus phase in does; instead, a slight waning in
Rabbits do not have keratinised footpads. Instead they
activity for 1-2 days occurs before a return toheat. During
have thick fur covering the areas of the toes and metatar-
peak sexual activity, the vulva is often deeply congested
sals which are pressed flat to the ground.
and almost purple in colour and considerably enlarged.
In addition to the para-anal scent glands mentioned
Once mated, the male's semen may form a copulatory
above, there are a series of discrete submandibular chin
plug, which is a gelatinous accumulation of sperm which
glands. Ihese are used to mark territory and also, in the
drops out of the doe's vagina 4-6 hours post-mating. Gesta-
case of does, to mark their young to distinguish them
tion lasts from 29 to 35 days, with the foetus forming a hae-
from others
mochorial placenta (where the outer chorion layer of the foe-
The rabbit has no skin sweat glands except a few along
tal placental membrane burrows into the lining of the uterus
the margins of the lips. This means that they are very
so that it directly attaches to the blood in the intrauterine ves-
 prone to heat stress at tenperatures greater than 28°C.
sels) at about day 13. This is a common time for abortions to
 The presence of many vibrissae or sensitive hairs
Occur. A pregnant doe will renmove fur from her ventrum to
-ues shqqei asus jueodu ane uuo pue sdi au punone
line the nest in the latter few days prior to parturition.
not see anything immediately below their mouths, and so
Dystocia is uncommon. The doe only nurses the kit-
rely on touch to manipulate food towards the mouth.
tens once a day for 20 minutes or so, often in the early
morning. It is therefore not uncommon for owners to
Eyes
thinkthat the doe is neglecting her young as she will often
 Rabbits have prominent eyes, which allow a near 3600
 spend the rest of the time eating and away from the litter.
feld of vision. Ihere is a prominent third eyelid, which
Pseudopregnancy often occurs after an unsuccessful
moves from the medial canthus of the eye and possesses a
mating or mounting activity by another buck or doe. A
large anmount of reactive lymphoid tissue within its struc-
 corpus luteum forms and this lasts for 15-17 days during
ture and a Harderian tear gland at its base. Ihis is often
which time the doe may produce milk and build a nest. At
enlarged in the buck during the breeding season and pos-
this time, the doe is susceptible to mastitis.
sesses two lobes in both the sexes.
Neonatology
Haematology
The young kits or kittens are altricial in nature, that
The most notable feature is the staining of the rabbit neu-
is they are totally dependent on the mother for nutri-
 trophil, which resembles the cat or dog eosinophil, and
tion and survival for the first few weeks of life. They are
 so is often known as the pseudoeosinophil. Many rabbits
born blind, deaf and furless. Fur growth appears around 
 have more lymphocytes than pseudoeosinophils, resem
day 5-6, the eyes open at day 8-10 and the ears at 11-12.
 bling other mammals such as cattle, rather than cats and
Weaning occurs around 6 weeks of age, with the young
dogs, in which the neutrophil is the commonest white
taking solid food from 2 to 3 weeks.
blood cell.
8 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
RAT AND MOUSE
Axial skeleton
Biological average values for the
The pelvis of the female mouse is joined at the pubis and
ischial areas midline by fibrous tissue. This allows separa-
rat and mouse
tion of the pelvis during parturition in the mouse. Ihere
The normal biological values for the rat and mouse are
are no fbrous areas to the pelvis of the female rat and
given in Table 1.3.
consequently no pelvic separation occurs.
Musculoskeletal system
Appendicular skeleton
Skull
The scapula articulates at its coracoid process with the
The skull of both species is elongated. Ihe eyes are lat-
clavicles as well as the humerus. Ihere are four metacar-
erally situated, and there is a long snout and a shallow
 pal bones in the rat, with four digits. Occasionally the ves-
cranium. Ihe maxilla is narrower than the mandible. Ihe
tigial remnant of digit 1 is present.
2
temporomandibular joint is elongated(
craniocaudally,
 The hindlimbs have a strong laterally bowed fibula in
allowing the mandible to move rostrally and caudally
both species. Ihe tibia articulates with five metatarsal
in relation to the maxilla. This allows the incisors to be
bones at the hock joint. Consequently there are five digits
in the hindlimbs of these species. Rats and mice are plan-
Alternatively, the molars may be engaged for mastication
tigrade in their stance, that is they walk with the whole of
prior to swallowing, while the incisors are disengaged.
the metatarsal bone area flat to the ground.
r at the
 same time. The
 Male rats may still have open growth plates in many
rostral symphysis, joining each half of the mandible, is
of their long bones well into the second year of their
also articulated allowing movement of each hemimandi-
 lives, whereas mice close their growth plates in the first
ble independently of the other.
3-4 months of life.
Table 1.3 Biological pararmeters for the rat and mouse.
Respiratory system
 The nares of both species are prominent and surrounded
Average
Average
by an area of hairless skin containing some sweat glands.
Biological parameter
range rat
range mouse
 There is a vomeronasal organ in the floor of the nasal
passages, accessed via two small stoma in the roof of the
Weight (g)
400-1000
25-50
mouth just caudal to the maxillary incisors. Ihis organ is
Rectal body
37-38
responsible for detecting pheromones secreted by other
37.638.6
temmperature (°C)
individuals.
The right lung of the rat is divided into three distinct
Respiration rate at rest
60-140
100-280
lobes, whereas the left lung is undivided. Ihe chest cav-
(breaths per minute)
ity itself is smaller in proportion to the abdominal cavity
than is the case in cats and dogs, meaning that rats and
Heart rate at rest (beats
250-450
500-600
per minute)
mice have little respiratory reserve.
Gestation length (days)
20-22
19-21
Digestive system
Oral cavity
Litter size
6-16
8-12
The lips of mice, and particularly rats, are deeply divided
exposing the upper incisors, with large areas of loose folds
Age sexual maturity
(weeks)
of skin forrming the cheeks.
Male
8
6
 Both species have pigmented yellow - orange enam-
Female
10
7
el coating the labial aspect of the incisors. The maxil-
lary incisors are one-third to one-quarter of the length of
 Oestrus interval (days)
4-5
4-5
the mandibular incisors. There is a chisel shape to their
Lifespan (years)
3-4
2-3
occlusal surfaces due to the absence of enamel on the
lingual aspect of the incisors making them wear quicker
6 AhojoisAyd pue Awoieuy jewwew lews yiseg
on this side. Ihe mandibular incisors are also mobile and
of ducts into the bile duct. Its function appears to be
loosely rooted in the lower jaw. Iheir dental formula is
the same as in cats and dogs, producing both insulin
and glucagon for glucose homeostasis and the digestive
I 1/1 C 0/0 Pm 0/0 M 3/3.
enzymes - amylase, lipase and trypsinogen.
There is no evidence of any deciduous or 'milk' teeth
being present in either species. Ihe molars grow extremely
Urinary system
slowly.
Kidney
MALS
Both species have a diastema. In the case of rats, this
The kidneys are bean shaped. Ihe right kidney sits in a
 gap is particularly noticeable and large enough to allow
depression in the right lobe of the liver, and the left kid-
them to draw their cheeks into the gap to effectively close
ney is slightly more caudal. Each empties through its ure-
off the back of the mouth. Ihis enables them to gnaw,
ter which enters the bladder at the trigone area.
The tongue is relatively mobile and its surface is cov-
Bladder
NS
ered with small, backward-pointing papillae.
The bladder islined with transitional epithelium and emp-
ties through the urethra. In the female mouse and rat, the
Stomach
urethra empties through a separate urinary papilla rather
The stomach of the mouse and rat is elongated and nar-
than onto the floor of the vagina as it does with higher
row. In the rat, in particular, the stomach is divided into
 mammals. Ihe female mouse and rat therefore have three
two regions. The most cranial is known as the proven-
 orifces caudoventrally: the anus most caudally, the re-
tricular region and is covered by a thin, whitened lining
 productive tract entrance next cranially and the urinary
of aglandular mucosa. The oesophagus enters the stom-
 papilla the most cranial of the three.
ach halfway along the length of its lesser curvature. Ihe
caudal area of the stomach is covered by a redder, thicker,
Cardiovascular system
glandular mucosa known as the pyloric region.
Heart
The heart of the mouse and rat has four chambers, as in
Small intestine
other marmmals. As with rabbits, the chest compartment
The small intestine comprises the largest portion of the
 is relatively small in comparison to the abdomen, and the
the duodenum direct from the liver in the rat, which has  rest of the chest. Ihe heart occupies the fourth to sixth
no gall bladder. The mouse does have a gall bladder which
 rib spaces.
empties into the first part of the duodenum.
Blood vessels for sampling
Large intestine
Useful vessels from which to sample blood are the lateral
 The ileum enters the large intestine at the junction of
 tail veins. Ihese are best accessed after frst warming the
the caecum and the large intestine on the left side of the
 tail, or lightly sedating the mouse or rat to allow dilation
abdomen. The caecum is a medium-sized organ in the
 of the vessels. A 25-27 gauge needle or butterfly catheter
mouse and rat, reflecting their omnivorous nature, and
 is required. Some mild pressure at the tail base allows fur-
forms a blind-ended pouch which is flexed back on itself.
ther dilation.
 In the rat, the femoral vein may also be used for
Liver
sampling. This is found on the medial aspect of the
 The liver is divided in both species into four lobes. There
thigh, close to its junction with the inguinal area, just
is a gall bladder present in the mouse but not in the rat.
caudal to the femur. This vessel is best used only un
The liver sits cranial to the stomach. Biliverdin is the
der anaesthetic due to the difficulty of accessing it in a
 prominent bile pigment in rats and mice.
conscious rat.
For small capilary samples, a microcapillary tube may
Pancreas
 be gently pushed into the medial canthus of the eye sock-
Ihe pancreas lies along the proximal aspect of the duo-
 et in the anaesthetised rat or mouse. Ihis collects blood
denal loop. In both species, it empties through a series 
from the orbital sinus.
10 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Lymphatic system
Instead, at puberty, the solid mass of tissue forms its
Spleen
own lumen, breaking through to the surface at the time
The spleen of male mice is often twice the size of that in
of the first ovulation.
females. In both species, it is a strap-like organ sitting
 The mouse uterus is almost exactly the same except
along the greater curvature of the stomach.
that the two separate uterine horns do fuse just before the
cervix, making it truly bicornuate and so there is just the
Thymus
one cervical opening into the vagina. Ihe vagina is also
The thymus is an obvious organ in the cranial chest, and
 non-patent in the immature state.
may be split into several smaller islands of tissue. It is fre-
Mammary tissue is extensive in both female rats and
quently present in the adult rat or mouse.
mice. In mice there are normally five pairs of mammary
glands, three in the axillary region, with mammary tissue
Lymph nodes
extending dorsally nearly to midline! Ihe other two pairs
MS
The lymph nodes follow similar patterns to those seen in
of glands are in the inguinal region, with mammary tis-
the rabbit. The mesenteric lymph nodes can become very
sue extending around the anus and tail base. In rats there
 prominent in certain bacterial infections.
are more commonly six pairs of mammary glands. Ihree
are located in the axillary region, again with some tissue
Reproductive anatomy
moving onto the lateral chest wall. The other three glands
Male
are inguinally located.
 The male rat and mouse reproductive systems are nearly
identical in design.
Reproductive physiology
The testes are large and can move between the abdo-
The female rat is non-seasonally polyoestrus. Ihe com-
men and the scrotal sacs, although somewhat inhibited by
monest time for heat to occur is during the night. The
alarge fat body attached to the tail of each testicle extend-
first cycling activity occurs around 8 weeks of age in the
ing through the open inguinal canal. Each testis descends
female rat, with the cycle lasting 4-5 days in total. Ovu-
into the scrotum around the fifh week of age in the rat
lation is spontaneous and occurs towards the end of the
 and the third to fourth week in the mouse.
12-hour-long heat. There is a reduction in reproductive
 The vasa deferentia are joined by the opening of the
activity in the female rat over 18 months of age.
small ampullary glands which open into a swelling of
During mating, the semen deposited in the female rat's
the vas deferens known as the ampulla just before they
vagina forms a copulatory plug which sits in the cranial
join the urethra. Other accessory sex glands, the ve-
vagina, blocking both cervices. This dries and falls out
sicular glands, the coagulating glands ( which are joined
within a few hours of mating, but seems to play an impor-
together) and the two parts of the prostate (the ventral
tant role in the success of mating. It is often eaten rapidly
and dorsal lobes), open into the urethra itself. As the ure-
after being passed.
thra exits the pelvic canal, a paired bulbourethral gland
Gestation length is around 21 days. The placentation
empties into its lumen.
of the rat and mouse is discoidal, that is the area of
 These accessory glands produce nutrients and support-
attachment is disc-like with the chorion of the placenta
ing fluids for the spermatozoa. In addition, the coagulat-
in contact with the blood stream of the dam's uterus.
ing glands are responsible for allowing a plug of sperm to
There may be a bloody mucous discharge from the
form in the female's vagina immediately after mating. The
vagina around 14 days, which is normal. This stops
penis has an os penis in both species. Ihere is a preputial
within 2-3 days. Mammary development occurs at
gland in the small prepuce, which is used for territorial
around days 12-14 and at that stage the foetuses may
marking. Male mice and rats have no nipples.
 be palpate d.
 Parturition is rarely complicated. There is no separa-
Female
tion of the pelvis in the female rat, although the female
The rat uterus has two separate uterine horns which
mouse's pelvis does separate at the ischial and pubic
come together at two separate cervices. From the out-
sutures. Parturition occurs in the afternoon and is fol-
side these appear to merge to form a common uterine 
 lowed by a post-partum oestrus.
body, and so it is referred to as bicornuate in nature.
 Pseudopregnancy is seen in both rats and mice. During
Ihe vagina itself has no lumen in the immature rat.
this time the female may build a nest; there may be some
.I   AhojoisAyd pue Awojeuy jewwew llews yiseg
 mammary development and no signs of a heat for up to
The tails of rats and mice are relatively hairless. As rats
2 weeks.
age, there is an increasing number of coarse skin scales
There are a couple of important physiological reproduc-
 present on the tail surface making blood sampling diff-
tive phenomena in mice and rats. One ofthese is the Whit-
cult. Rats should not be grasped by the tip of the tail as the
ten effect. Ihis is when a group of anoestrus females will
skin may slough in this region.
all come into heat spontaneously some 72 hours after be-
White fur will often yellow in rats as they age, and most
ing exposed to the pheromones of a male. This has benefi-
rats will show evidence of a yellow hue to the skin on the
cial effects when it comes to successful rapid breeding. The
back with time.
other is the Bruce effect. This is when a female in the early
 The vibrissae around the lips and nose are important
stages of gestation will reabsorb the embryos and come
for detecting vibrations and determining where food is
back into heat when presented with a new male. By pref-
due to their inability, as with rabbits, to see food immedi-
erentially allowing successful mating with a new male, this
ately below their mouths.
is thought to have a beneficial effect on genetic diversity.
NS
Eyes
Neonatology
Rats and mice have a prominent set of small eyes located
Rat and mouse pups are altricial. They are born blind,
laterally. The albino breeds lack pigment in their irises or
 deaf and hairless. Ihe ear canals open around days 4-5
retinas, and so their eyes appear pink red.
and the eyes at around 2 weeks of age. Ihe first few hairs
are also seen in the frst week of life. Ihe pups are born
Haematology
without teeth, the incisors becoming visible at 1-2 weeks
 The haematological parameters are similar to those seen
 of age with the molars developing later.
in cats or dogs, except that the lymphocyte, as opposed
The female rat and mouse are prone to cannibalism
to the neutrophil, is the most common white blood cell.
if disturbed with their young in the first few weeks after
parturition. It is therefore important to leave the female
GERBIL AND HAMSTER
rat and mouse alone during this period, only disturbing
them to replenish food and clear the worst of any cage
Biological average values for the
soiling.
gerbii and hamster
Table 1.4 gives the average normal values for the basic
Sexing
biological values for gerbils and hamsters.
Sexing may be done from 4 to 6 weeks of age. In males
the urinary papilla is slightly larger than the female and
Musculoskeletal system
further away from the anus. It may be possible in the sex-
Skull
ually mature female to see the small reproductive tract
The skull of the gerbil is not dissimilar to that of the rat or
entrance as a transverse slit in between the anus and uri-
mouse; in the hamster, the skull is shortened, particularly
nary papilla. Also, in male mice and rats, no nipples are
in the Russian and Chinese hamster subspecies
visible. In mature males, if the rat or mouse is gently sus-
pended in a vertical position with the head uppermost,
Axial skeleton
the testes will often descend into the scrotal sacs and are
The axial skeleton is much the same as for the rat and
then obvious.
mouse, except the hamster has much fewer coccygeal ver-
tebrae (only seven or so).
skin
Rats and mice possess no generalised sweat glands and so
Appendicular skeleton
are prone to heat stress at temperatures above 26-28°C.
Gerbils have a longer femur and tibial length, giving
There are some sweat glands present on the soles of the
 them longer hindlimbs equipped for jumping. Their nor-
feet as well as the nares.
mal stance is bipedal, standing erect on their hindlimbs.
There is a layer of brown fat between the shoul-
Hamsters are a much shorter-legged creature, stockier in
der blades dorsally; its function is not clearly known,
build and walk predominantly on all fours.
but it decreases with age and may play a role in thermo
The forelimbs have four digits, and the hindlimbs have
regulation.
five in both species.
12  Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Table 1.4 Biological parameters for the gerbil and hammster.
Biological parameter
Russian hamster
Syrian hamster
Gerbil
Weight (g)
09-0E
90-150 (male larger)
70-120 (mmale larger)
Rectal body temperature (°C)
8E-9E
36.2-37.5
37.5-39
Respiration rate at rest
60-80
40-70
80-150
(breaths per minute)
Heart rate at rest (beats per minute)
300-460
250-400
250-400
Gestation (days)
Average 16 (Chinese
15-18
24-26 (up to 42 days with
hamster 21)
delayed implantation
Litter size
4-8
4-12
2-6
NS
Age at sexual maturity (weeks)
Male
5-6
8-9
8-9
 Female
6-8 (Chinese hamster 14)
8-12
9-10
Oestrus interval (days)
3-4
4
4-6
Lifespan (months)
18-24
24-36
09-9E
Respiratory system
Stomach
As with rats and mice, the chest cavity is small in relation
The stomach of the hamster has two separate areas. Ihe
 to the abdomen, but the situation is not so pronounced as
oesophagus enters the proximal portion. Ihis portion is
that seen in rats.
non-glandular and has a bacterial population that allows
limited microbial breakdown of food. It is sharply divided
Digestive system
by a deep groove from the distal area of the stomach,
Oral cavity
which is glandular, with a redder lining composed of the
 The incisors in both species are continuously erupting
acid- and pepsinogen-secreting cells that start the process
(open rooted), and both species have orange pigmenta-
of enzymatic digestion.
tion of the enamel surfaces. Ihe dental formula is
The gerbil has two areas to the stomach but they are
less clearly demarcated, and the proximal portion does
I 1/1 C 0/0 Pm 0/0 M 3/3.
 not support a significant microbial population.
 Hamsters are born with the incisors fully erupted, and
use them to grasp the nipples of the female enabling them
Small intestine
to suck effectively.
The hamster's small intestine is extremely long, being
 The molars do grow continually, but at a very slow rate.
three to four times its own body length! Ihe gerbil has a
In addition, there appears to be no evidence of deciduous
similar layout to the mouse.
teeth. Both species possess a diastema. Ihe mandible is
generally wider than the maxilla.
Large intestine
The cheek pouches of the hamster are its most dis-
 In the hamster the caecum is a sacculated and enlarged
tinguishing feature. These are not present at birth, but
organ sitting in the ventral left portion of the abdomen
rather develop during the second week of life from a solid
at the ileocaecal junction. It has fine divisions within it,
cord of cells which disintegrate, creating the cavities. The
which may function to increase its surface area and aid
entrances to the cheek pouches open into the diastema.
fibre fermentation. The gerbil has a similar layout to the
Each cheek pouch extends caudal to the respective ear.
mouse.
 They are lined with stratifed squamous epithelium, and
have a reduced local immune system and lymphatic func
Liver
tion. This can be a problem if the cheek pouch becomes
The liver in both species is divided into four lobes. In
infected.
both hamsters and gerbils, a gall bladder is present. A
Basic Small Mammal Anatomy and Physiology 13
bile duct empties into the duodenum accompanied by
Reproductive anatomy
the pancreatic duct.
Male
The male hamster has a smaller fat body attached to the
Pancreas
testicle than has the rat. The testes are freely moveable be-
 The pancreas is found adjacent to the descending duode-
tween the abdominal cavity and the scrotal sacs. A small
num. It has a similar structure and function to that seen
os penis is present in the penile structure.
 in the rat and mouse.
The male gerbil is similar to the male rat and mouse.
The main difference is the slightly smaller size of the tes
Urinary system
tes in relation to the overall body size and the presence of
Kidney
a pigmented scrotum.
The kidneys are similar to the rat and mouse kidney.
Ihe gerbil is very good at concentrating its urine, being
Female
a desert-dwelling species, and to do this it has very long 
 The hamster uterus is bicornuate. It has two separate cer
NS
loops of Henle which contain a countercurrent multiplier
vices opening into a common vagina, although the uter-
system. In the hamster, the renal papilla is particularly
uouuos e asnpoid o Aeuaixa uo! ot readde suou au
long and protrudes from each kidney into its ureter.
terine body. The vagina is, as with the rat, not patent at
birth. It opens after the tenth day of life, rather than at
Bladder
puberty as in the rat.
The bladder of gerbils and hamsters is essentially the
The gerbil reproductive tract is similar to that of the
same as that seen in rats and mice.
mouse. Ihe main difference is that, while there is only one
cervical opening into the vagina, the division between
Cardiovascular system
the left and right uterine lumens persists to within a
Heart
few millimetres of this single cervical orifice.
The heart is similar in form to the rat and mouse heart.
The female hamster has six to seven pairs of mammary
glands stretching in a continuous band from the axillary
Blood vessels for sampling
region to the inguinal and perianal region.
The hamster has very few accessible external vessels
The female gerbil has four pairs of marmmary glands.
for blood sampling. Ihis is principally due to its much
 Two pairs are found in the axillary region and two pairs
reduced tail length, which provides the main vascular
in the inguinal region.
access in the rat and mouse. Ihe gerbil's tail breaks off eas-
ily, making its use for blood sampling very restricted. Ves-
Reproductive physiology
sels used therefore include the jugular veins and the femo-
 The female hamster is seasonally polyoestrus with cycling
ral veins, both of which require the hamster or gerbil to be
sedated or anaesthetised. Capillary samples may be taken
 productive cycle is short, lasting 4 days. Ihe female ham-
 from the orbital sinus as described in the rat and mouse.
ster develops a creamy white vaginal discharge around
the frst day following oestrus. Ihis may be mistaken for
Lymphatic system
a pathological discharge as it has an odour. Ovulation is
Spleen
spontaneous and generally occurs overnight. Phantom
The structure and position of the spleen is much the same
pregnancy does occur in the hamster, postponing oes
 for both species as that seen in the rat.
trus for 7-13 days. Gestation itself lasts for 15-18 days in
the Syrian hamster, an average of 21 days in the Chinese
Thymus
 hamster and an average of 16 days in the Russian hamster.
The thymus is again a prominent organ in the cranial
 Successful mating is followed by the presence of a copula-
 chest and often persists in the adult. It provides the T-cell
 tory plug of coagulated semen 24 hours later. Pregnancy
lymphocytes.
can be confirmed by failure to produce the copious white
discharge 5 days after mating, and an increase in weight
Lymph nodes
at around day 10. There is no evidence of pelvic separa-
 The presence of lymphatic tissue is the same as that seen
tion at parturition. There is reduced fertility in the female
in the mouse and rat.
hamster after l year of life.
14 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Gerbils form a monogamous pair, that is they pair
29-30°C, although if the humidity levels increase above
for life. Ihe female gerbil is seasonally polyoestrus and
 50% they will rapidly suffer from heat exhaustion.
a spontaneous ovulator. The oestrus cycle lasts for
 In hamsters, there is a pair of oval, raised, flank scent
4-6 days. Oestrus lasts for 24 hours, and may occur with-
glands situated on each flank cranial tothe thigh region. In
 in 14-20 hours of parturition. Gestation lasts an average
the mature adult, particularly the male, they may become
of 26 days, but may take up to 42 days if mating has oc
darkly pigmented. The secretions ofthese glands may matt
curred at the post-partum heat as when the female is still
the sparsely covered fur, increasing their prominence.
feeding the young, the fertilised ova will not implant, so
In gerbils, there is a large ventral sebaceous scent gland
 prolonging the interval from mating to parturition.
in the region of the umbilical scar. This is devoid of fur,
secretes a yellow sebaceous fluid and is more prominent
Neonatology
in males. This is a predilection site for the development
The young hamster is altricial. The pale pink colour of
of adenocarcinoma in adults. Ihe tail of gerbils is fully
MS
the skin is replaced by some darker pigmentation after
furred, but has a series of fracture planes allowing a de-
the first 2-3 days, with the eyes opening at 2 weeks of
gloving injury if a gerbil is grasped by the tail. The soft tis-
age. Weaning occurs around 3-4 weeks of age, with the
sue structure never regrows, and the denuded vertebrae 
female hamster becoming sexually mature at 6-8 weeks
will die offleaving a stump.
(up to 14 weeks for the Chinese hamster) and the male
Haematology
at 8-9 weeks.
The young gerbil is also altricial. The skin is a pale pink
The lifespan of the gerbil erythrocyte is short, lasting
at birth but darkens by the end of the first week with the
only 10 days. Ihis is why so many gerbil red cells show
appearance of the frst few hairs. The teeth erupt in the first
degenerative basophilic speckling when stained with
few days of life. Ihe eyes open at 2 weeks of age and the
Romanowsky stains. Gerbil blood is often lipaemic, and
ears around days 4-5. Weaning occurs at 3-4 weeks of age.
this has been blamed on their high-fat (sunflower seed)
The female gerbil becomes sexually mature at 9-10 weeks
diet. In addition, the blood parameters vary depending on
of age when the vaginal opening becomes patent. Ihe
the sex. The male gerbil has a higher packed cell volume,
male gerbil becomes sexually mature at 8-9 weeks of age,
white blood cell and lymphocyte count than the female.
with the testes descending into the scrotal sac at 5 weeks.
Hamster haematology is similar to that seen in mice.
It is inadvisable to disturb the female hamster with her
young as cannibalism can occur. However, a common
GUINEA PIG AND CHINCHILLA
 protective action of the female is to place the young into
her cheek pouches to move them, and this may make it
Biological average values for the
look as if she is'eating' the young. Gerbils are less prone to
guinea pig and chinchilla
abandoning or abusing their young if disturbed.
The average normal values for guinea pigs and chinchillas
are given in Table 1.5.
Sexing
Musculoskeletal system
This may be performed from 4 weeks of age. In the imma-
ture gerbil and hamster, the differences are determined by
Guinea pig
 anogenital distances as with the rat and mouse. In the sex-
Skull
ually mature hamster, the male has a pointed outline to its
The skull is rodent shaped, with an elongated nose, low
rear, owing to the descended testes, whereas the female
forehead and widely spaced eyes. Ihere are moderately
has a more rounded appearance. In both, it is relatively
large tympanic bullae which house the middle ear and are
easy to determine the sex once mature if the individual is
clearly visible on radiographs.
supported in a vertical position with the head uppermost.
 In this position, the testes will descend into the scrotal
Axial skeleton
sacs where they are clearly visible!
The vertebral structure is the same as that seen in the rat
and mouse, except the number of coccygeal vertebrae is
skin
much reduced at 4-6 and they are less mobile. Ihere are
Hamster and gerbil skin has no sweat glands. Gerbils,
13 ribs; the last two are more cartilaginous than miner-
however, can tolerate wider temperature ranges, up to
alised. Guinea pigs also possess clavicles.
 Basic Small Mammal Anatomy and Physiology 15
Table 1.5 Biological parameters for the guinea pig and
Appendicular skeleton
chinchilla.
 The forelimbs and hindlimbs are relatively long in com-
 parison to the rat and mouse, but the same bone formu-
Biological parameter
 Guinea pig
Chinchilla
las exist. Ihe main difference is that the guinea pig has
Weight (g)
600-1200
400-550
four digits on each forelimb and only three digits on each
 Rectal body temperature (°C)
37.2-39.5
hindlimb.
37.8-39.2
 Respiration rate at rest
60-140
50-60
Chinchilla
(breaths per minute)
Skull
Heart rate at rest
100-180
120-160
The bones of the skull are more domed than the guinea
(beats per minute)
pig, although still distinctly rodent-like (Figure 1.5). Like
Gestation length (days)
59-72
111
the guinea pig, the chinchilla has very large tympanic
(average 63)
bullae which are clearly visible as coiled, snail-shell-like
WS
Litter size 
1-6
1-5
 features on radiographs.
PART
(average 3)
(average 2)
Axial skeleton
Age at sexual maturity (months)
2-3
6-7
The vertebral structure is similar to that seen in the rat
Male
Female
1.5-2
8-9
and mouse. Chinchillas are fine-boned and prone to frac-
 Oestrus interval (days)
16
05-00
tures.
Lifespan (years)
8-E
6-10
Appendicular skeleton
 The hindlimbs in particular have very long femurs and
tibias. Ihe chinchilla has the usual four digits on each
The pelvis of the female is joined at the pubis and ischi-
forelimb, but, unlike the guinea pig, has four digits on
um by a fibrocartilaginous suture line, allowing separa-
each hindlimb as well.
tion of the pelvis prior to and during parturition. If the
female guinea pig has not had a litter by the time she has
Respiratory system
reached 1 year of age, this suture line mineralises and
The lung structure of the guinea pig is similar to that
prevents future separation. Female guinea pigs not mated
seen in the rat and mouse. Ihe left lung is divided into
before 1 year should therefore not be mated for the rest of
three lobes, and the right into four. Chinchillas follow a
their life as dystocia problems are common.
similar pattern.
Figure 1.5 Lateral diagram of the skull of a normal chinchilla showing the relation of tooth roots to the orbit and jawbones. Note hov close
the roots of the third and fourth cheek teeth are to the inner aspect of the eye; hence, root elongation often causes watering of the eyes.
16 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Digestive system
men. The large intestine of the guinea pig has a compli-
Oral cavity
cated series of coils, which form a spiral of bowel on the
 The dental formula for both chinchillas and guinea pigs is
right cranial ventral aspect of the abdomen. Ihe chinchil-
la's colon is much more simply arranged, and not as long.
I 1/1 C 0/0 Pm 1/1 M 3/3.
 In both species, all of the teeth, incisors, premolars and
Liver
molars, are elodont ('open rooted') and therefore continu-
 The liver of the guinea pig has six lobes. There is also an
ously growing. This canlead to malocclusion, particularly
obvious gall bladder, unlike the rat. The gall bladder emp-
in chinchillas, if an inappropriately non-fibrous diet is
ties through one bile duct into the small intestine. The
fed. Ihe incisors of the chinchilla are orange yellow pig-
chinchilla's liver has a similar format.
mented on their enamel surfaces, but those of the guinea
pig are often white. In both cases, a diastema is present.
Pancreas
MS
Both species also have a palatal ostium creating an en-
The pancreas has two limbs in the guinea pig and lies
trance through the soft palate, allowing communication
 alongside the stomach and proximal duodenum. It emp-
RT
 of the oropharynx with the pharynx. It exists because the
ties via one duct into the mid-descending duodenum and
soft palate is actually connected with the base of the mus-
 performs the same functions as in other mammals.
cular tongue.
Urinary system
Stomach
Kidney
The whole stomach of the guinea pig is covered with a
As with the hamster, the guinea pig has a relatively long
glandular epithelium containing acid- and pepsinogen-
renal papilla. Both kidneys in the guinea pig are sur-
secreting cells and is usually full of food material. It has
rounded by large amounts of fat, making them difficult
a strong cardiac sphincter, making vomiting a rare and
to see at laparotomy. Ihe chinchilla's kidneys are not so
grave occurrence. Ihe stomach of the chinchilla is much
covered in fat deposits.
the same.
Lower urinary tract
Small intestine
 The small intestine of both species is relatively long and
The urine of the guinea pig is often yellow and cloudy
pink in colour, measuring anywhere up to 50-60 cm in the
in nature. Like all herbivore urine, it is alkaline under
chinchilla and more than 120 cm in the adult guinea pig!
normal conditions and may contain calcium carbonate
Or calcium oxalate crystals. In the female guinea pig, the
Large intestine
urethra empties just caudal to the vagina, but without a
The large intestine starts at the ileocaecal junction on the
urinary papilla, giving the false impression of a common
left side of the abdomen where the ileum enters the cae-
urogenital opening.
cum. The caecum is a large, sacculated organ, measuring
In the female chinchilla, cloudy alkaline urine is com-
20 cm in length, and in the guinea pig it contains 60-70%
mon. Ihe urethra of the bladder, however, opens through
of all the gut contents. It is attached to the dorsal abdo-
a separate orifce from the vagina. The urinary papilla is a
men and has a series of three smooth muscle bands run-
large structure in the female chinchilla and may easily be
ming along its length known as faeniae coli. These produce
confused with the male penis.
the sacculations of the caecum known as haustra. In the
chinchilla, the caecum is smaller, containing only 20-25%
Cardiovascular system
of gut contents, but it is more folded. Ihe caecum itself
Heart
forms a blind-ending sac at one end and empties into the
In both species, the thoracic cavity appears relatively
colon near to the ileocaecal junction
small in comparison with the abdominal cavity; there-
The colon is twice as long as the small intestine in both
fore, the heart appears relatively large in comparison with
species and is dark brown. In the chinchilla, the proxi-
the lung field.
 mal section of the colon possesses taeniae and haustra,
whereas in the guinea pig the whole of the colon is smooth
Blood vessels for sampling
surfaced. The latter half of the colon in both species can
The jugular veins are the vessels commonly used for
be distinguished by the presence of faecal pellets in its lu-
blood sampling. Small doses of intravenous medications
Basic Small Mammal Anatomy and Physiology  17
may be administered through the ear veins which are
 into similar grooves in the female reproductive system.
dearly visible on the non-furred ears or via the cephalic
The whole penis is contained in a prepuce, which pos-
or saphenous veins which occupy the same positions as
sesses sebaceous glands, and is partly formed from a fold
in other species.
of perineal skin.
Lymphatic system
Chinchilla
Spleen
There is no true scrotum. The tail of the epididymis sits lat-
 The spleen of the guinea pig is a wide structure attached
eral to the anus, while the testis occupies an inguinal posi-
to the greater curvature of the stomach on the left side of
tion. A fat body projects from each testis into the abdomi-
the cranial abdomen.
nal cavity. Ihe vas deferens opens into the urethra caudal
The spleen of the chinchilla is a smaller strap-like
to the bladder neck along with the accessory sex glands.
organ attached again to the greater curvature of the stom-
These include the ventral and dorsal paired lobes of the
ach on the left side.
 prostate as well as the paired, frond-like vesicular glands.
The urethra then passes caudally through the pelvis, be-
Thymus
coming ensheathed in the ischiocavernosus muscles that
 In guinea pigs, the thymus is prominent in the cranial
control the movement of the penis and pelvic floor. Ihe
thorax in the immature stage,but there are often only
 bulbourethral glands lie dorsal to the urethra in this area.
remnants left in the adult. A similar situation exists in the
The urethra then passes out of the pelvis and into the pe-
chinchilla.
nis, which is tubular and blunt ended and points caudally
when relaxed. Ihe penis forms a Z-like flexure, similar to
Lymph nodes
the guinea pig, and contains an os penis in its most caudal
portion.
us infections of the cervical lymph nodes, which run in
Male chinchillas are often prone to fur rings. This is
a chain along the ventral aspect of the neck Both species
when a band of fine fur becomes wound around the penis
have prominent mesenteric lymphoid deposits.
inside the prepuce. Ihis may constrict and so may cause
ischaemic damage to the penis.
Reproductive anatomy
Male
Female
Guinea pig
Guinea pig
The male guinea pig is often referred to as a boar. Its tes-
The female guinea pig is often referred to as a sow. Its
tes are prominent and occupy the scrotal sacs on either
lterus is bicornuate. It has two uterine horns, a short
side of the anus. Each testis has a large fat body project-
 lterine body and a single cervix. Ihe ovaries are closely
ing through the open inguinal canal into the abdomen.
 associated with the respective kidneys. Ihe periuterine
The vas deferens opens, with the accessory sex glands (the
tissues and cornuate ligaments are sites for the same fat
vesicular glands, the coagulating glands and the ventral
 deposition that is seen in the female rabbit. The vagina
and dorsal prostate lobes), into the proximal urethra. The 
opens just cranial to the urethral opening. A small clito-
vesicular glands are the most prominent, curving cra-
 ris sits just ventral to the urethral opening, and the two
nially into the abdomen for 10 cm or more. The paired
are enclosed in skin folds to create a Y-shaped slit. The
bulbourethral glands lie dorsal to the urethra just before
entrance to the vagina is sealed by epithelial tissues at
i passes into the penis, which is Z-shaped, moving cra-
 all times other than at oestrus and immediately prior to
nioventrally from the caudal brim of the pelvis and then
parturition.
caudoventrally so to point caudally at rest. The penis is a
The female guinea pig has two mammary glands in the
large structure by rodent standards and possesses a glans
inguinal region (the male has two vestigial glands as well).
structure distally. Ihere is an os penis which sits dorsal to
the urethra when the penis is erect and pointing cranially.
 Chinchilla
Ventral to the distal urethra are two invaginated spurs, 
The female chinchilla has a uterus like the rabbit.
which, when the penis is erect, project from the end of
 There are two uterine horns but no common uterine
the glans as two slender spurs 4-5 mm in length. Their
 body. Instead two separate cervices open into the vagina.
function is not fully known but they may aid in locking
The entrance to the vagina is sealed at all times except
18 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
during oestrus and just prior to parturition. Ihe urethra
palpation from day 60. Female chinchillas may continue
opens through a separate urinary papilla.
to breed up to 10 years of age.
The chinchilla placenta is haemochorial.
Reproductive physiology
Neonatology
Guinea pig
 The female guinea pig is non-seasonally polyoestrus.
Both guinea pigs and chinchillas are precocial, that is
Ihe cycle lasts for around 16 days, oestrus lasting for
they are born fully furred, with eyes and ears open, and
6-12 hours, and ovulation is spontaneous. Immediately
oten start to eat small amounts of solid food from day
W
after mating (1-2 hours), a copulatory plug may be found
1. Weaning generally occurs at 6 weeks in guinea pigs
and oi Aiessaoau si sul iel aqissod st l 'aes au u
and 6-8 weeks in chinchillas. Sexual maturity occurs
W
vent leakage of sperm back out of the reproductive tract,
from 2-3 months in the guinea pig to 6-8 months in the
but it could also prevent another male from successfully
chinchilla.
MS
mating the female. Gestation lasts on average 63 days,
Sexing
although it may take up to 67 days for small litters and
Guinea pig
RT
59 days for large ones. The average litter contains three
Sexing of male and female guinea pigs is relatively simple
young. Pregnancy may be detected by gentle palpation
from 3 weeks. The entrance to the vagina is closed at all
and may be performed from the first few weeks of life.
The female anogenital area is oval in nature. Ihe anus is
times other than immediately before parturition, and for
2-3 days around oestrus. Ihere is a post-partum heat
closest to the tail base, and cranial to this is a Y-shaped slit
housing the small clitoris and the entrance to the urinary
within 10 hours of parturition at which the female may
and genital tracts. In the male, the distance between the
be successfully re-mated.
anus and urogenital system is larger, and gentle pressure
In the last 2 days of gestation, hormones, such as relaxin
 on either side of the prepuce will allow protrusion of an
and progesterone, allow the pelvic ligaments to separate the
obvious penis.
 pubis and ischium by up to 2 cm, allowing the passage ofthe
relatively large young. This occurs only if the female is less
Chinchilla
than 1 year of age or has had her first litter before l year.
The female chinchilla has a large urinary papilla making
Nulliparous females more than l year of age have a fused
identification diffcult. Ihe identification is made on the
pelvis, and dystocias are therefore common. Many female
distance between the anus and the urinary papilla. Ihe
guinea pigs will breed through to 2 years of age.
female's urinary papila is close to the anus, and if exam-
The guinea pig placenta is haemochorial. That is the
ined closely, it may be possible to observe the transverse
membranes of the placenta (chorion) are in contact with
slit which marks the sealed (when not in heat) entrance to
the blood of the mother. This allows for large amounts
the reproductive tract lying between the anus and urinary
of immune system exchange between mother and foetus
papilla. The male's prepuce, which resembles the female's
during gestation.
urinary papilla, is much larger and more cranial, and the
 penis may be protruded in compliant individuals.
Chinchilla
In chinchillas, females are larger than males - the
The chinchilla is seasonally polyoestrus. Ihe repro-
reverse of many other rodents.
ductive season stretches from November to May, and
the cycle lasts on average 40 days. Ihe entrance to the
skin
vagina opens at oestrus, which lasts for 12-24 hours, and
The guinea pig has a prominent sebaceous gland on its
stays patent for 3-4 days. At this stage, the perineum may
back, cranial to the tail base. This secretes a yellow waxy
darken in colour, and clear mucus may be seen from the
material which frequently matts the fur in this area. Ihere
-ned on sond shep 0-7 suado ose ln Buuado reunen
are additional glands emptying into the anal sacs in the
-lsod uaas Auoo au io uado suean pue uoi
folds of skin which enclose the anus and genitalia. Ihese
partum oestrus.
 as ass am aa e ad 
Chinchillas are spontaneous ovulators. A copulatory
the boar. Guinea pig fur is often relatively coarse in nature.
plug is frequently found the day after a successful mat-
Conversely, the coat of the chinchilla is renowned for
ing. Gestation lasts on average 111 days, with typically
its soft silky nature. It responds badly to moisture, requir-
two kits being born. Pregnancy may be diagnosed by
ing dust baths for cleaning. In addition, the chinchilla
Basic Small Mammal Anatomy and Physiology 19
 may experience a feature known as fur slip? This is when
Table 1.6 Biological pararmeters for the chipmunk.
a section of fur will drop out due to fright or stress. The
alopecic area left may take several weeks to regrow its fur.
Biological parameter
Chipmunk
In both species, the ears are prominently furless, with
Weight (g)
55-150
the chinchilla in particular having the largest pinnae.
Rectal body termperature (°C)
37.8-39.6 (when not
The guinea pig has a prominent subcutaneous fat pad
hibernating)
 over the scruff region of the neck, which makes large
Respiration rate at rest
06-09
MALS
 injections at this site painful.
(breaths per minute)
Ihe chinchilla has very small claws on each digit. In
Heart rate at rest (beats per minute)
150-280
comparison, the guinea pig has prominent claws on
every digit. Both have defined leathery pads at the ends
Gestation (days)
28-35
SMAll
of each digit.
Litter size
2-10 (average 4)
Age at sexual maturity (rmonths)
Eyes
8-9
Part I:
Male
The eyes of the guinea pig are small in comparison to the
Fermale
9-12
size of their heads. Ihere is a prominent third eyelid tear
 Oestrus interval (days)
Average 14
gland which may prolapse. Ihe chinchilla on the other
Lifespan (years)
8-12 (may be
hand has large prominent eyes, and a vertical, slit-like
shorter in captivity)
pupil which allows the chinchilla to virtually close off all
light reaching the retina. This is to protect it from bright
sunshine in its wild habitat high in the Andes of South
America.
Axial skeleton
The spinal vertebral layout is the same as the rat.
Haematology
 In both species, the morphology of the red and white cells
Appendicular skeleton
is similar to that seen in other rodents. There are pre-
Each forelimb has four and each hindlimb five digits.
dominantly more lymphocytes than neutrophils in the
 Iheir gait is a jumping sinuous movement, which makes
white cell count. In the guinea pig, an intracellular inclu-
them excellent climbers, with forelimbs and hindlimbs a
sion known as the Kurloff body may be seen in circulat-
similar length. Their bodies are more elongated than those
ing monocytes, which are known as 'Kurloff cells. These
of rats or mice, and their long, prehensile tail is used for
are rare in juvenile and male guinea pigs, but common
balance and support. Iheir bone structure is lightweight
in adult females particularly during gestation, and they
and more bird-like than the heavier structure of the rat.
may play a role in the physiological immunity relation-
ship between mother and foetus. Iheir origin is not clear
Respiratory system
but they are thought to come from the thymus or spleen.
 The lungs are divided into three lobes on the left side and
four on the right. Iheir thoracic cavity is larger in relation
CHIPMUNK
to the abdomen than is the case in many other rodents.
Biological average values for
Digestive system
the chipmunk
Oral cavity
The normal values for the basic biological parameters for
The incisors are open rooted, or continuously grow-
the chipmunk are given in Table 1.6.
ing, and malocclusions are not uncommon. Ihe dental
formula is
Musculoskeletal system
I 1/1 C 0/0 Pm 0/0 M 3/3.
The musculoskeletal system has many similarities to the
rat as outlined above.
They have a diastema. The mouth is narrow, the tongue
fleshy and fixed frmly at the base, although the rostral tip
Skull
is mobile. There are smallcheek pouches, communicating
The skull is typically rodent in its long and flattened form.
with the diastema of the oral cavity and extending back to
20 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
the ear base. Ihese are frequently sites for abscess forma-
Lymphatic system
tion if sharp seeds, such as unhusked oats, are fed.
Spleen
The spleen is a small, strap-like organ on the greater
Stomach
curvature of the stomach to the left side of the cranial
The stomach is of a simple glandular design. Ihere is
abdomen.
a strong cardiac sphincter which normally prevents
regurgitation.
Thymus
 The thymus is a prominent organ in the juvenile, and per-
Small intestine
sists in the cranial thorax of the adult.
The small intestine is relatively long. Ihe duodenum re-
ceives a duct from the gall bladder just after the pyloric
Reproductive anatomy
sphincter, and one further on from the pancreas.
Male
MS
The testes sit in a caudally placed scrotum, but only dur-
Large intestine
ing the reproductive season. During the quiescent period,
The initial part of the large intestine at the ileocaecal junc-
the testes are retracted into the abdomen. The scrotum
tion has a small, blind-ending caecum with some saccula-
and testes thus enlarge during the breeding season from
tions, or haustra.
January to September.
Liver
Female
The liver has four main lobes and possesses a gall bladder
The female chipmunk has four pairs of mammary
and bile duct which join the descending duodenum.
glands, two inguinal and two thoracic. Otherwise, the
reproductive tract follows a pattern similar to that of
Pancreas
the rat.
The pancreas is found along the descending duodenum
and the edge of the stomach. It empties through one duct
which empties into the proximal descending duodenum.
Reproductive physiology
The chipmunk is seasonally polyoestrus, cycling
Urinary system
between March and September. Chipmunks are sponta-
Kidney
neous ovulators, with an oestrus cycle length of around
The kidneys are a typical bean shape. Fat deposits are of-
14 days. Ihere is no evidence of a post-partum oestrus,
ten found in this area during the late summer and early
and gestation length averages 31-32 days. Mammary
autumn. Each kidney has the usual ureter passing cau-
development becomes prominent 24-48 hours prior
dally to the urinary bladder.
to parturition.
Reproductive success drops dramatically after
Bladder
6-7 years of age in the female.
 Chipmunk urine is usually alkaline in nature and may
Neonatology
contain calcium crystals. However, due to their more
omnivorous nature (they eat insects, eggs, etc.), they may
Chipmunk young are altricial and so are born blind, deaf
also produce acidic urine.
and hairless. Fur starts to appear around 7-10 days of
age, and the eyes open at 4 weeks. Ihe age at weaning is
Cardiovascular system
5-7 weeks. Sexual maturity is reached at 8 months in the
Heart
male and 10 months in the female.
The heart is similar to that seen in the rat and mouse.
Sexing
Blood vessels for sampling
The male chipmunk has a clearly visible penis which
The jugular veins make the best vessels for blood sam-
points caudally. During the breeding season, the scrotum
pling. The ventral tail vein may be used but care should be
-ed [enuaaom e sey aeuay au “paieua Aqeasou s!
exercised and the chipmunk should be sedated as the tail
pilla, but the distance from anus to papilla is less than the
skin can deglove and slough relatively easily.
distance from anus to prepuce in the male.
17  AhojoisAyd pue Awoeuy jewwew lews yiseg
skin
Most marsupials have extra pubic bones that project
Chipmunks have soft fur covering the whole of their bod-
cranially from the floor of the pelvis and are thought
ies. Sebaceous glands exist around the anus in both sexes.
 to help to support the pouch in females and abdominal
They have five digits on their forepaws and four on the
muscles in both sexes. They are, however, absent in sugar
ae sea a sme pue sed reus ssassod um u
gliders.
 small and furred.
 Both the sugar glider and the Virginia opossum have
prehensile tails.
PET MARSUPIALS
Respiratory system
Biological average values for
The respiratory tract is similar to that of Eutherian mam-
some pet marsupials
mals. Respiratory rates for the sugar glider are around
Table 1.7 gives the basic normal biological values for
16-40 breaths per minute and for the Virginia opossum
sugar gliders (Petaurus breviceps) and Virginia opossums
around 25-40 breaths per minute.
5M
(Dideliphis virginiana) - two of the more commonly kept
marsupial pets.
Digestive system
 Sugar gliders may enter a stage of torpor when faced
 The sugar glider's dental formula is
with starvation in an attempt to lower energy demands.
I 3/1 C 1/0 Pm 3/4 M 4/4.
Virginia opossums may sham death when attacked (the
 derivation of playing possum).
The incisors are specialised to gouge the bark of acacia
 trees to release their sap.
Musculoskeletal system
The Virginia opossum's dental formula is
'sq iean pue juony uo shaip any seu iapia iens au
I 5/4 C 1/1 Pm 3/3 M 4/4.
but the second and third digits of the rear limbs are part
fused together into a grooming comb. The frst digit of the
The sugar glider has an enlarged caecum which may help
hindlimb is opposable.
to digest its natural diet of acacia gum. Otherwise the di-
The Virginia opossum has five digits, including oppos-
 gestive system of omnivorous marsupials is similar to that
able thumbs on both front and rear limbs. The majority of
of many omnivorous rodents with the exception that mar
marsupials have no claw on the first digit of the hindlimbs.
supials have a cloaca, similar to that in a bird or reptile as a
Table 1.7 Biological pararmeters for the sugar glicder and Virginia opossum.
Biological parameter
Sugar glider
Virginia opossum
Weight (g)
Male
115-160
4000-5000
 Female
95-135
2000-2500
Cloacal body temperature (°℃)
34-35
32.2-35
Respiratory rate at rest (breaths per minute)
16-40
25-40
Heart rate at rest (breaths per minute)
200-300
70-100
Gestation length (days)
16
12-13
Litter size
1-2
8-20 ernbryonic young
(average 13)
Age at sexual maturity (months)
Male
12-14
8-9
 Fermale
8-12
8-9
 Oestrus cycle length (days)
29
28
Oestrus length (days)
1-2
1-2
Lifespan (years)
12-14
3-5
22 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
common opening for the urinary, reproductive and diges-
The testes have epididymides, and the vas deferens
tive systems. Most male marsupials have anal glands just
when it leaves the scrotum enters the body and joins the
inside this (females have pouch glands), but the Virginia
large disseminated prostatic gland and one or more pairs
opossum has cloacal glands in the female as well. In the
 of bulbourethral glands (Cowper's glands). The duct of
Virginia opossum, the secretions of this gland are green.
the bulbourethral gland enters the urethra on the ventral
surface. Marsupial males lack seminal vesicles and coagu-
Urinary system
lating glands.
The urinary tract is similar to that of Eutherian mammals,
except the ureters pass medial to the reproductive tract
Female
instead of lateral.
Female marsupials have a double reproductive system.
5
Each side has from cranial to caudal: an ovary, an oviduct
Cardiovascular system
and a uterine body. The caudal half of the reproductive
Heart
tract is composed of paired lateral and one median vagi-
As marsupials have a heart rate around half that of a
 nal canals. All marsupials give birth through the central
comparative sized Eutherian mammal, their heart size is
(median) vaginal canal. In some species, for example
around 30% heavier than a comparative sized Eutherian
the brushtail possum, there is a septum that blocks the
 mammal's heart.
median canal and that is breached during birth, and
which subsequently reforms; in others, for example the
Blood vessels
grey kangaroo, this median canal remains open perma-
 In the sugar glider, the cephalic, lateral saphenous, fenm-
nently. Caudal to the three vaginal canals is the urogenital
oral, ventral or lateral tail veins may be used to collect
sinus that also contains the urethral opening on its ventral
blood samples.
floor. Ihis then empties into the cloaca.
 In the Virginia opossum, the cephalic, saphenous,
The female sugar glider has a well-developed pouch
ventral or lateral tail veins may be used to collect blood
during the breeding season and has an average of four
samples. In addition, the female has pouch veins which
nipples inside, although some may only have two.
may be accessed under anaesthetic.
The female Virginia opossum has a well-developed
a uado ue u paue ae sadiu ei ym u ynod
Endocrine system
with one in the centre, although there may be some varia-
Most marsupials are unable to thermoregulate when
tion in this layout between individuals.
born. This ability develops around halfway through their
time in the pouch and coincides with the development of
Reproductive physiology
the thyroid gland.
Female sugar gliders are polyoestrus with a cycle averag-
 The adrenal glands of the female marsupial are around
ing around 29 days. Females may produce two litters a
twice the size of the male's in milligrams per kilogram
year. In captivity there appears to be no specific breeding
body weight. Ihis difference increases during lactation
season. Gestation is on average 16 days.
due to development of the cortex of the adrenal gland (the
Female Virginia opossums are polyoestrus with a cycle
'X' zone), which is due to the production of a testoster-
of around 28 days and are in full oestrus for 1-2 days. Gen-
one-like hormone.
erally the breeding season starts in December to January
in the northern hemisphere with a second peak of breed-
Reproductive anatomy
ing in the early spring with an average of 110 days separat-
Male
 ing the two litters. Gestation is on average 12-13 days
The reproductive system of the male is much more
Females tend to have a post-partum oestrus during
similar to that of Eutherian mammals than that of the
which breeding and fertilisation can occur, although
female. Ihe main differences in the male are external
if there are joeys in the pouch, the fertilised egg stops
rather than internal and comprise a bifurcate penis
development and implantation until the young have been
which is posterior to the scrotum. When flaccid, the
weaned or die. Ihis is known as foetal diapause (similar
 penis is held in an S-shaped curve withdrawn into the
to delayed implantation in some mammals - although
body and lies on the ventral cloacal floor. Ihe scrotum is
 the placenta of marsupials never actually implants during
obvious and pendulous.
foetal development)
Basic Small Mammal Anatomy and Physiology 23
Neonatology
over the cranial abdomen and cranially facing. Ihe fur is
Marsupial milk changes in consistency during the period
soft with no guard hairs and the tail is well furred.
of development of the young. However, maternal immu-
In the Virginia opossum, the fur consists of a soft
noglobulins are absorbed across the neonate's gut right
underfur with white-tipped guard hairs which are unique
up until weaning. This makes up for the lack of placental
to the family Didelphidae. Ihe first tenth of the tail is
transfer of immunity.
covered with fur and the rest is naked skin.
In all neonates, a strong shoulder girdle of cartilage
Haematology
(metacoracoid) exists at birth to aid their struggle to
Red and white cell morphologies are similar to that
the pouch. This regresses once the journey is made and
of Eutherian mammals.
becomes the coracoid process of the scapula. The teat
once in the neonate's mouth swells up, and the neonate
FERRET
becomes firmly attached.
The sugar glider in the wild lives in nests containing
Biological average values for the
NS
p to seven males and females and their young as an
domestic ferret
extended family. Ihe young weigh around 0.19 grams at
Table 1.8 gives the basic normal biological values for the
birth and usually two are born. Ihey first detach from the
domestic ferret.
nipple at around day 40 or life and frst leave the pouch
around day 70. Ihey are reported to become weaned from
Musculoskeletal system
day 111.
Skull
Ihe Virginia opossum's young are very underdevel-
 Ihe skull is more rodent-like, in that it is pointed and flat-
oped but have impressive claws which they use to climb
tened dorsoventrally. The eyes are forward-facing, giving
from the mother's birth canal to the pouch. They are only
binocular vision for prey detection.
Generally around 13 young are born but as many as 56
Axial skeleton
have been reported! As there are only around 13 man-
The vertebral formula for the ferret is similar to that of
mary glands, more than 13 rarely survive. Ihe young
most mammals and comprises the usual 7 cervical ver-
release their grip on the mammary glands around 50 days
tebrae, with the extended 15 thoracic (occasionally
14), 5-7 lumbar, 3 sacral and, on average, 18 coccygeal
of age and willleave the pouch for short periods from day
70 onwards. They are cormpletely weaned and indepen-
vertebrae.
 dent of the mother around 3-4 months of age with sexual
Table 1.8 Biological parameters for the dormestic ferret.
 maturity occurring around 6-8 months.
Biological parameter
Domestic ferret
Sexing
 The female sugar glider has a well-developed pouch with
Weight (kg)
Male
1-2
usuall four mammary glands. Ihe male has an obvious
Fermale
0.5-1
 pendulous scrotum.
Rectal body termperature (°C)
37.8-40
 The female Virginia opossum has an obvious pouch
with around 13 mammary glands within. Ihe male has a
Respiration rate at rest
40-80
(breaths per minute)
pendulous scrotum.
Heart rate at rest
180-250
skin
(beats per minute)
 One of the most strilking features of the sugar glider is the
Gestation length (days)
41-42
patagium which stretches from the fth digit of the fore-
limb to the tarsus of the ipsilateral hindlimb. The sugar
Litter size
2-14 (average 8)
glider has multiple scent glands on the head (often creat-
Age at sexual mmaturity (months)
Male 
4-6
ing a bald patch in males), the chest and in the paracloacal
Female
4-8
area. Smaller scent glands are found around the corners of
(spring following birth)
the mouth, the paws and the inside of the ears. Ihe female
Lifespan (years)
5-10
has scent glands inside her pouch which islocated ventrally
24 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Appendicular skeleton
Liver
The form is basically similar to that seen in the cat. The
The liver is divided into six lobes. Ihe right lobe has the
 forelimbs and hindlimbs each have five digits.
usual renal fossato accommodate the right kidney. A gall
 bladder is present and empties via a common duct with
Respiratory system
the pancreas.
 Ferret lungs are split into two lobes on the left side and
four on the right. The entrance to the thoracic cavity is
Pancreas
very small and is bounded by the first ribs.
The pancreas is a prominent organ, with two main lobes,
E
one along the descending duodenum and the other along
Digestive system
the pyloric axis. A single duct merges with the bile duct to
Oral cavity
 provide a common entrance to the duodenum.
The ferret has a set of deciduous teeth, which appear at
Urinary system
MS
3-4 weeks of age. These are replaced by permanent teeth
Kidney
at 7-1l weeks of age. The dental forrmula for the adult is
PART
 The kidneys are the traditional kidney-bean shape. The right
I 3/3 C 1/1 Pm 3/3 M 1/2.
kidney sits more cranially, in a fossa in the right lobe of the
liver. The leftkidney is more caudal and freely suspended.
The deciduous formula for the ferret is
I 1/0 C 1/1 Pm 3/3.
Bladder
The bladder is similar to that seen in cats or dogs. The
The most prominent teeth are the canines, which are
urethra passes through the penis in the male ferret, which
responsible for holding onto the prey. Ihe molars and
contains a J-shaped os penis. Ihis makes urinary cath-
premolars are shearing teeth. Ihe tongue is fleshy and
eterisation of the male difficult.
mobile.
Ferret urine is naturally acidic in nature due to its car-
Stomach
nivorous diet.
The stomach is of a simple form, lined with glandular epi-
Cardiovascular system
thelium containing both acid- and pepsinogen-secreting
Heart
cells. It has a weak cardiac sphincter, allowing easy vomi-
The heart occupies rib spaces 6-8. Its tip is connected to
tion, and a pronounced pyloric sphincter. The stomach
the sternum by a ligament which frequently contains fat,
can dilate markedly when full.
making the heart appear elevated offthe sternal floor on
radiographs.
Small intestine
The descending duodenum begins at the pylorus of the
Blood vessels for sampling
stomach and passes across to the right side of the abdo-
Blood vessels for sampling include the jugular, cephalic
men. It is entered into, after the frst 5 cm or so, by the
and saphenous veins. These are found in the same places
common bile and pancreatic duct.
as for the cat. The ferret also has an unusual series of ar-
teries branching from the main aortic trunk. In cats and
Large intestine
dogs, two separate carotid arteries arise frorm the aortic
The large intestine is not easily differentiated from the
trunk In the ferret, a single vessel (the brachiocephalic
small intestine since it is the same width and colour,
or innominate artery 1) leaves the aortic arch. This then
although the mesenteric lymph node marks the junction
divides into the left and right carotid arteries, as well as
between the two. There is no caecum in the ferret. The
 into the right subclavian artery at the thoracic inlet. This
terminal portion of the rectum has two anal glands at-
 prevents restriction of blood flow to the head which could
tached which, when emptied, can give off the very un-
occur due to the narrow chest inlet.
pleasant odour associated with a frightened ferret! The
removal of these glands is considered an unnecessary
Lymphatic system
mutilation by the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons
Spleen
in the UK and so should not be done unless there is a
 The spleen varies greatly in size between individuals, and
medical reason.
it is attached to the greater curvature of the stomach on
Basic Small Mammal Anatomy and Physiology  25
the left side. Its ventral tip may extend across the floor of
Neonatology
the abdomen and back up to meet the right kidney.
The young ferret is known as a kit. Ihey are born altricial,
blind, furless and deaf. The average litter size is eight kits. The
Thymus
fur starts to appear around the second day post-partum and
 The thymus is a prominent organ in the cranial thorax
is pronounced by 2 weeks. Ihe eyes open around 3 weeks
of the young ferret. It dwindles to a few islands of tissue
and the ears around 10 days. Ihe kit is born with a promi-
 in the adult.
nent fat pad on the dorsum of the neck, providing some
energy reserves during the early stages of life. The fenmale
Lymph nodes
ferret is sexually mature from 4 to 8 months and the male
 The lymph nodes are of a similar arrangement as seen in
from 4 to 6 months, usually in the spring following birth.
the cat. Ihe most notable lymph node is the mesenteric
node, which can be used to differentiate between snmall
Sexing
and large intestine.
WS
 The male ferret has an obvious prepuce on the ventral abdo-
men similar to that seen in the domestic dog. In addition,
Reproductive anatomy
PART
the male has a caudally located scrotum with obvious testes.
Male
The female has a vulval orifice just ventral to the anus.
 The male ferret is known as a hob. The testes are situated
in a perineally located scrotum. They enlarge in the breed-
skin
ing season (March to September). There is no movement 
The claws are not retractable. Ihe odour of a ferret is pri-
of the testes from scrotal sac to abdomen.
marily from the normal sebaceous glands present within
 The prostate lies at the neck of the bladder and opens
the skin, giving it the characteristic musky smell. These
into the lumen of the urethra. The urethra passes caudally
glands are particularly well concentrated around the
through the pelvis before bending ventrally and cranially to
mouth, chin and perineum. Ihe odour of the male fer-
exit at the ventrally located prepuce. The os penis is J-shaped.
ret is particularly strong due to the action of testosterone
on these glands and the tendency to spray and empty the
Female
anal glands to mark territory. Neutering reduces this lat-
The female ferret is known as a jill. The ovaries are found
ter problem.
dose to the caudal poles of the respective kidneys. Ihe
uterus is bicornuate and similar to that seen in the cat,
Haematology
with two long uterine horns and a short uterine body.
One noticeable aspect of the ferret blood count is the con-
There is a single cervix opening into the vagina. The ure-
sistently high packed cell volume, often in the 58-63%
thra opens into the floor of the vagina, so there is a com-
range in healthy adults. Ihe white cell count on the other
 mon urogenital opening at the vulva, cranial to the anus.
hand tends routinely to be lower than that seen in cats
and dogs. Ihe neutrophil is generally the predominant
Reproductive physiology
white cell seen.
The female ferret is seasonally polyoestrus and an induced
ovulator. Ovulation occurs 1-2 days after mating. The
Further reading
breeding season runs from March to September. Oestrus
Fraser, M.A. and Girling, S.J. (2009) Rabbit Medicine and Surgery
is demonstrated by the obviously swollen vulva, which
for Veterinary Nurses. Black well-Wiley, Oxford.
returns to normal 2-3 weeks after a successful mating
Harkness, J.E. and Wagner, JE. (2000) Biotogy and Medicine of
Gestation lasts on average 42 days. The placenta is
Rabbits and Rodents, 5th edn. Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia, PA.
Keeble, E. and Meredith, A. (2009) Manual of Rodents and
 zonary, similar to that seen in cats and dogs.
Ferrets. BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
a siaa aeay a inoqe juod jueo iso a
Meredith, A. and Flecknall, P (2006) Mamual of Rabbits, 2nd edn.
 productive cycle is that if she is not mated, or brought out
BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
Uagoisao oi aimsodxa juaisisiad al Kem aos un 1eay jo
Meredith, A. and Johnson-Delaney, C. (2010) Marual of Exotic
can cause a fatal bone marrow suppression in one sea-
Pets, 5th edn. BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
Okerman, L. (1998) Diseases of Domestic Rabbits, 2nd edn.
son. Female ferrets should therefore be mated by entire or
Black well Science, Oxford.
vasectomised males, treated with progesterone hormone
Quesenberry, K.E. and Carpenter, J. (2003) Ferrets, Rabbits and
therapy or GnRH agonists to suppress oestrus
Rodents, 2nd edn. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
Chapter 2
Small Mammal Housing, Husbandry
and Rearing
5
DOMESTIC RABBIT
slope to the rear of the hutch to avoid rain dripping into
the front, or pooling on the roof. The hutches should also
Breeds
be raised offthe floor on legs to avoid the bottom rotting
There are many different breeds of rabbit, varying from
from the damp ground surface. A ranp should therefore
the miniature breeds such as the Netherland dwarf,
be supplied if the rabbits are to be allowed in and out of
weighing in at 0.5-0.75 kg, through to the New Zealand
the hutch of their own accord. Wooden hutches are also
whites and the Belgian hares at 8-10 kg. Other commonly
much more easily destroyed by gnawing.
seen breeds include the lop-eared crosses, the angora
 In commercial fur- and meat-producing situations,
breeds, the Rex and the traditional Dutch rabbits.
anoqe papuadsns sain ysau aim u idaY ane shqe
a solid floor. Ihe wire mesh “hutch has one major ad-
Cage requirements
vantage in that it prevents soiling of the fur by urine and
Size and construction
faeces. However, it can cause abrasions of the hocks in
The traditional hutch is a common feature of rabbit hus-
older overweight rabbits and is not advised for housing
bandry (see Figure 2.1). Ihe provision of a wooden enclo-
 pet rabbits.
sure that is suffciently large to provide sleeping quarters,
a feeding area and a toilet area is common. In general,
Substrates
a rough guide to a minimum width of a rabbit hutch is
Substrates used for cage floor covering include straw, hay.
three times the length of the rabbit to be housed when
shavings and newspaper. Many rabbits will preferentially
it is stretched out at rest. Ihe depth should be one rabbit
select hay and straw for bedding over shavings and paper.
length, and the height equal to that of the rabbit stand-
One of the advantages of the former is that they allow
 ing on hind legs. Anything smaller and the rabbit must be
urine to drop through the fibre framework and away from
 provided with an outside run, or allowed out of the hutch
the rabbit, so reducing the likelihood of urine scalding in
for regular exercise periods every day. Indeed current
older and arthritic rabbits.
recommendations suggest that all rabbits should have
Positioning
ensure adequate environmental enrichment and exercise.
Care should be taken to avoid overheating of the hutch,
Cooping a rabbit up in too small a hutch is cruel; it will
as rabbits cannot sweat and temperatures above 26-28°C
also lead to muscular and skeletal atrophy and increase
will rapidly cause hyperthermia and death. Hutches
the risk of spontaneous spine and limb fractures when
should therefore be positioned out of direct sunlight,
the rabbit overexerts itself. However, many commercially
particularly in the summer months. Rabbits will shiver
available hutches are in fact too small for the adult rabbit,
when cold, although they can tolerate cold better than
being the correct size only for the small juvenile or dwarf.
heat. Care should still be taken to ensure that the hutch
Wooden hutches are the standard and are satisfactory
is not overly draughty or exposed during the winter
in many cases. Iheir disadvantage is that they will tend to
months. Bringing it into a shed or garage is often advis-
 rot with the absorption of urine and rain unless properly
able in the worst weather.
protected. Care should be taken with wood preservatives
to ensure an animal-friendly preservative is chosen (do
Food and water bowls
not use creosote!). Ihe roof may be further protected with
Feeding bowls should be a ceramic or metal. Ihe former
the felt material used to roof garden sheds and should
are preferable, as they are heavier and harder to knock
/7 bujeay pue Apueqsnh "6uisnoh lewwew lews
Figure 2.1 Traditional wooden rabbit hutch. Care should be taken
Figure 2.2 In an extensive open housing system outside, be
NS
to ensure that access is given to a run to ensure adequate exercise
prepared for considerable digging and creation of natural warrens!
and enrichment.
PART
over. Plastic feed bowls should be avoided as they are
House rabbit
easily chewed. Water feeders are better offered with ball
Many rabbits are now kept as house rabbits, with sleep-
valve drip dispensers. Ihey allow less contamination of
ing quarters and a litter tray. Rabbits can be toilet-trained
the water with food, urine and faeces than an open bowl.
relatively easily. Ihe first steps in this are to keep the rab-
Care should be taken with these feeders, though, as some
bit in a small area with a sleeping area, the litter tray and a
rabbits reared with water bowls will not drink from them.
feeding area. Once the litter tray has been associated with
In addition, the ball valve often leaks and this will lead to
excessively damp substrate and mould growth. Drip feed-
more freedom to roam.
ers will also suffer from bacterial build-up and need care-
Hazards in the home include electrical cabling, which
fl cleaning once or twice a week, or even daily if a large
should be hidden beneath carpets or protected inside
number of rabbits are housed.
heavy-duty cable trunking, which is available from hard-
ware stores. Houseplants are another problem. Many of
Outdoor runs
the exotic tropical houseplants are poisonous. Examples
I is advisable to provide outside runs attached to the
include African violet, Dieffenbachia, cheese plant and
hutch in the summer months. This allows the rabbit ac-
spider plant.
cess to unfltered sunshine, which is important for vita-
 min D, synthesis as well as for stimulating normal annual
Social grouping
rhythms of behaviour. Fresh grass is also the food item
Rabbits are in general a social species, preferring
rabbits are supremely adapted to eat. Ihe fbre content,
to live in a group rather than singly. Problems arise
in particular, is vital for wear of the teeth and stimulation
though with keeping a number of entire males togeth-
of normal gut motility. Grass should not be cut first and
er, as bullying and sexual harassment will occur. Neu-
then offered however, as this rapidly ferments and can
tering is therefore advised where more than one male
produce colic.
is to be kept and may be performed in bucks from 4
Care should be taken when securing outside runs to
to 5 months of age. Mixed sex groups will work well
make them both rabbit proof and predator proof. For
if the does are spayed. This may be safely done from
this reason, it may be necessary to bury the wire sides
5 to 6 months of age and is advisable even in solitary
to any run a foot or so beneath the ground surface as
 does due to the high risk of developing a malignant
does in particular will burrow regularly (see Figure 2.2).
 uterine cancer, known as a uterine adenocarcinoma, in
To prevent foxes and cats gaining access to the run, a
middle age.
meshed roof should be provided. Finally, all outdoor 
 Some owners advocate the grouping of guinea pigs
rabbits should be vaccinated against myxomatosis, the
with rabbits. This is to be discouraged for two important
viral condition spread by fleas and mosquitoes from
 reasons. One is that the rabbit has very powerful hind
wild rabbits, and preferably against viral haemorrhagic
legs, and the guinea pig, a long and fragile spine. Con-
disease as well.
sequently, one well-placed kick from the rabbit can do a
28 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
great deal of damage. Ihe other reason is that rabbits are
A rearing formula has been derived (Okerman, 1998):
frequently asymptomatic carriers of the bacteria Borde-
25 mL of whole cow's milk to 75 mL of condensed milk
tella bronchiseptica in their airways. Ihese bacteria can
and 6 g of lyophilised skimmed milk powder. To this a
cause a severe pneumonia in guinea pigs. Other domestic
vitamin supplement may be added. The kitten is fed only
 pets are not advised to be mixed with rabbits, as both cats
twice a day, from 2 to 10 mL depending on its age. Ihis
and dogs are potential predators!
should continue until the kitten is 2 weeks old when more
and more good quality hay and pellets should be intro-
Behaviour
duced, aiming to wean the kitten at 3 weeks. The anogeni-
Rabbits are a prey species and therefore communicate in
tal area should be stimulated with a piece of damp cotton
a very different manner from the more commonly under-
wool after every feed to stimulate urination and defeca-
stood cats and dogs. Indeed, it may seem that rabbits are
tion for the first 2 weeks.
very poor at communicating their feelings to their own-
MS
ers, when in fact they may be communicating, but in a
RAT AND MOUSE
much more subtle manner.
PART
Affection is shown by mutual grooming of a com
Varieties
Rat
case common. Other signs of relaxation include com
 The common albino laboratory rat is widely domesticated.
ing to the owner to be fed treats, following an owner
around the house and, in many rabbits, making a buzz-
groups. These are all variations on the Rattus norvegicus
ing noise from the larynx. Ihis may be mistaken for a
species, and the fancy rat numbers are ever increasing.
disease problem by inexperienced owners as it can be
quite loud!
Mouse
Aggression is shown by scratching, boxing with the
As with rats, there are many different varieties of domesti-
front legs and biting. Aggression may be initiated because
cated mouse. These vary from albinos through to the Rex,
of a hormonal state, such as those caused by coming into
whole body colour types, etc.
season or bucks fighting for territory in the early spring.
or it may be fear or pain driven. Aggression may also be-
Cage requirements
come a learnt behaviour if an act of aggression results in
Construction and temperature
a desired effect, such as immediate backing off by the vic-
These are similar for both rats and mice. The traditional
 tim or replacing of a rabbit that has just been picked up
solid, plastic-bottomed and wire mesh upper cages are
by an owner.
advisable. These allow good air circulation at the level of
Fear is shown initially by the regular thumping of the
the rat or mouse. The fish-tank style of housing is much
hind legs. This is a warning signal. As the object of fear
less ventilated and allows the build-up of ammonia from
approaches, the rabbit will either then freeze and remain
urine-soaked bedding. Ammonia is a heavy gas and sits
motionless or suddenly bolt towards an exit.
just above substrate level, that is at the rat's or mouse's
Chewing of almost everything in the rabbit's environ-
nose level, and is thus inhaled often in high concentra-
ment is a perfectly normal behaviour and no amount
tions in this style of housing. Ammonia is highly irritant
of training will alter this fact. Owners of house rabbits
to the sensitive mucous membranes of the airways and
should be warned of this and take appropriate action to
will inflame and damage them, allowing secondary bacte-
prevent chewing of electric cables and other hazardous
rial infection. Ihis leads to the all-too-common problem
items of household furnishing.
of pneumonia seen in these species.
Environmental temperatures should range from 18°C
Fostering
to 26°C. Because they lack skin sweat glands, tempera-
Rabbit kittens are difficult to hand-rear. Many fe-
tures above 28-29°C will rapidly induce hyperthermia
males will not foster a strange doe's kittens, but does
and death in rats and mice. Rats can tolerate cooler tem-
-e uao m a aes a ie aueie pue iaiaao ida
peratures better than mice,because of their lower surface
low others’ young to suckle. Ihis is the best scenario if
area to body mass ratio and deposits of brown fat beneath
another known lactating doe is available. If not, as is often
the skin. However, temperatures consistently below 10°C
the case, hand-rearing may be attempted.
will lead to poor health and hypothermia.
Small Mammal Housing, Husbandry and Rearing 29
Substrate
the frst few days following parturition. Food and water
Wood shavings are well tolerated by rats and mice, but
should therefore be provided prior to whelping, to last
be aware that many pine and coniferous woods con-
 for the following 7-10 days, and the female then left The
tain resins which may cause skin and airway irritation.
female rat builds a relatively poor nest in comparison to
Alternatively, newspaper or paper towelling may be used.
 other members of the rodent farmily.
Straw and hay may be used, but again beware that para-
sites may be introduced from wild rodents inadvertently
Mouse
with these bedding materials.
Mice are generally relatively docile, although male mice
may be more aggressive than females. Ihe latter though
Cage furniture
will be aggressive in the defence of her young. In addi-
As with hamsters, wheels are enjoyed by mice in particu-
 tion, although cannibalism towards her young is rare, a
lar. But these should be solid in construction rather than 
 female mouse should be left undisturbed for a minimum
open wired to avoid damage to limbs. Rats are less keen to (
 of 2-3 days post-partum. It is advisable to remove the fe-
NS
use wheels, although they do enjoy climbing and hiding
 male to a separate tank once she has mated to allow her to
 inside cardboard tubes and other enclosed items.
give birth and rear her young undisturbed.
PART
Food and water bowls
Fostering
 As with rabbits, sip feeders are ideal, as they lead to mini-
I is extremely difficult to rear young rats and mice suc-
mal wastage and contamination. Ceramic or stainless
cessfully. Attempts may be made using a 1:1 dilution of
steel bowls are preferable to plastic.
evaporated milk to previously boiled water fed every
2hours for the first 1-2 weeks. Weaning may be performed
Social grouping
at 3 weeks. Stimulation of the anogenital area should be
Rat
performed to encourage urination and defecation.
Male rats may be kept with other males, particularly if
reared together from an early age, without fighting.
GERBIL AND HAMSTER
Females may also be paired with other females and seem
to benefit from the company. Intersex groups also work
Varieties
well, although care should be taken to neuter the males
Gerbil
(which may be performed from 3 to 4 months of age)
There seems to be one main breed common in captiv-
if unwanted pregnancies are to be avoided. Ihis may be
ity, although a separate species known as the fat-tailed
done from 3 to 4 months of age. If breeding is intended,
gerbil (Pachyuromys duprasi) has become more popular
uuand au saeua g-l um paied aq Aeu sien ae
 recently. Ihere are however several different fur colour
female should be removed to a separate cage from the
 types, with albinos, black variants and greys as well as the
 male rat 4-5 days prior to parturition to avoid disturbing
normal tan colouration now available.
the female at this sensitive time.
Hamster
Mouse
There are four main species: Syrian, European, Chinese
Females may be kept in groups, particularly if reared to-
and Russian. Within these species there are many colour
gether from a young age. Males should always be housed
variations, from albino to red to black, with differing fur
singly, as severe fghts and even death may result from
types such as the fluffy teddy bear' version of the Syrian
aggression between sexually mature males. If breeding is
hamster in addition to the more common short-coated
intended, male mice may be 'paired’ with 1-6 females. It
varieties.
is then advised to remove the pregnant female from the
male some 4-5 days prior to parturition.
Cage requirements
Cages and substrates
Behaviour
Gerbil
Rat
These enjoy tunnelling through deep litter substrates.
 Rats are generally docile and rarely do they bite. Female
 It is important that the environment is kept dry, as hu-
rats are prone to cannibalism of the young if disturbed in
mid conditions lead to poor fur quality and increased
30 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
skin and respiratory infections. Shavings are an ide-
Food and water bowls
al substrate and should be at least 10-15 cm deep
Food bowls for both species are best made of a ceramic
(see Figure 2.3). Placing ceramic or cardboard tubes
material, as these resist gnawing, are easily cleaned and
through the substrate can help tunnel formation and pro-
difficult to tip over. Water is usually supplied in the tra-
vide environmental enrichment. Peat and other soil sub-
ditional drip feeders, although care should be taken es-
strates should however be avoided due because they are
pecially with gerbils that the valve is not leaky, as this
 more likely to encourage damp. Environmental tenmpera-
leads to excessively wet substrate conditions and resultant
tures are usually kept around 20-25°C if possible.
dermatitis.
Hamster
Social grouping
Cages for hamsters are best constructed of solid walls.
Gerbil
The Rotastak?-style cage is ideal, with multiple tunnels
Gerbils are best housed singly, as a female pair or a neu-
MS
for the hamster to manoeuvre from enclosed space to
tered male and female pair. In the wild they will often
enclosed space. Wire cages are not so good, as hamsters
bond, male to female, for life. Males housed together
RT
have a habit of climbing up the sides, and then hand-
though will fight, inficting severe wounds. Female ger-
over-hand across the roofs of these cages. Ihey will
bils will rarely cannibalise their young, unlike hamsters,
often lose their grip suffer back injuries or compound
although care should still be taken not to disturb the fe-
fractures of the tibia as they land on the cage floor. It
 male and young too much in the first week post-partum.
is advised to keep housing temperatures between 18°C
and 26°C. Temperatures less than 5-6°C will result in
Hamster
the hamster hibernating. In this state, respiration and
Males of the European, Chinese and Syrian species will
heart rates slow considerably, making it difficult in
fight. To a certain extent males of the Russian species will
many instances to detect if the hamster is still alive.
also fight, although this is lessened somewhat if they are
Temperatures above 29-30°C will result in hyperther-
reared from a young age together. Females may also be
mia and death.
aggressive and so it is advised that hamsters in general be
housed individually. For breeding purposes it is better to
Cage furniture
introduce a male hamster to a female's cage, rather than
Hamsters enjoy wheels much, but these should be of a
solid type, rather than the open wire format. This is to
hamster that has recently given birth should not be dis-
prevent the inadvertent damaging or even fracturing of a
turbed for a minimum of 10 days as the incidence of can-
hind leg if it gets pushed between the wire slats. Tubes are
nibalism of the young is high. To avoid this, enough food,
ideal to entertain gerbils as mentioned above.
water and bedding material (too little bedding is another
reason for a female hamster killing the young) should be
placed in the female's cage a few days prior to parturition
and the female left undisturbed for the next 10-14 days.
Behaviour
Gerbil
Gerbils can be difficult to handle if not acclimatised to
it from an early age. Ihey will often bite if frightened or
handled roughly. They are rarely vocal, but they willcom-
municate their alarm through regular drumming of the
floor of the cage with one hind leg, in much the same way
as a rabbit will do. Gerbils spend the day dozing and they
are most active at night; that is, they are nocturnal.
Hamster
Hamsters are frequently accused of being aggressive. They
Figure 2.3 Deep substrate using shavings or paper is important for
gerbils to allow burrowing.
will certainly bite readily if handled roughly, disturbed or
1e bujeay pue Apueqsnh "6uisnoh lewwew lews
frightened. Chinese and Russian hamsters are more ag-
requirements are easier to provide than for rabbits. Care
 gressive than Syrian and European ones. Hamsters are
should be taken to ensure that any steps or ramps are not
also nocturnal and much of the aggression is due to being
so steep that a guineapig could fall, as their long and frag-
disturbed from their nest during the day. Therefore, they
ile backbone is easily damaged. Guinea pigs are expert
really do not make good pets for children. Females may
chewers so, if allowed access to the home, precautions
be aggressive towards their young if disturbed.
should be observed as with rabbits. Bowls and drinkers
for food and water are as for rabbits.
Fostering
Gerbil
Chinchilla
 See rats and mice. Young gerbils are extremely difficult to
og ueul iaieana ane seiusuo iog suaaian aneds
rear artificially.
guineapigs as they are extremely active.Recommendations
include enclosures in excess of 2 m?. They appreciate ver-
Hamster
tical space, unlike the ground-dwelling guinea pig. Cage
NS
See rats and mice. Young hamsters are extremely difficult
construction should be of wire mesh, with a solid or mesh
to rear artificially. Ihey do not foster well onto another
floor. This is because chinchillas are particularly good at
female in any of the species, except perhaps the Russian
chewing wood, and rapidly destroy wooden hutches.
hamster where a lactating female may accept another's
Chinchillas prefer an actual nest box rather than plentiful
young.
substrate. Ihis should ideally be 20 cm? or more in size
and can be lined with hay or straw, although the rest of
GUINEA PIG AND CHINCHILLA
the cage is often left bare. Ihe floor is often a wire grid
Breeds
structure, to prevent any fluid accumulating, as this may
Guinea pig
lead to damage of the fur. The provision of lengths of
There are several different varieties of domesticated
drainpipe tubing is also advised, as for guinea pigs, to al-
 guinea pig: the Abyssinian, which possesses whorls of fur
 low the shy chinchilla to hide from public gaze.
 over the body and head; the Peruvian, which is particu-
Water can be provided in the traditional drip feed-
larly long-furred; the English or short-furred variety; and
ers. Chinchilla fur mats very quickly when wet, so care
the Rex varieties, with short fuzzy fur. Colour variations
should be taken to prevent the cage from becoming damp
are many and varied from whole body colours of tan,
from any leakage. Because of this tendency to mat eas-
white and black, through mixtures of two or three colours
ily, chinchillas should not be allowed to bathe in water,
and albinos.
but instead provided with daily access to a fine, pumice
 sand and fuller's earth mixture as a dust bath. This can be
Chinchilla
provided in a metal box which may be clipped onto the
There are just two subspecies of chinchilla recognised.
inside of the cage or in a cat litter tray. The latter is less
Chinchila lanigera is the standard domestic long-tailed
satisfactory as the chinchilla may chew the plastic. Ihe
chinchilla, which comes in a variety of colours from
sand bath should only be provided for short periods each
silver, to white, to champagne, to black. Some authori-
day as otherwise the chinchilla tends to spend all day in
ties also recognise a subspecies known as Chinchilla
the bath! Environmental temperatures should not exceed
brevicauda, which is a short-tailed, larger version of the
20-22°C as heat stress may occur with that thick fur coat.
above.
Social grouping
Cage requirements
Guinea pig
Guinea pig
Guinea pigs are a social species, and they live a much
A hutch system similar to that outlined above for rabbits
more contented life in the presence of other guinea pigs.
is advised, although the whole structure should be on one
Entire males can fight, although this is less likely if they
level. The same substrate and bedding materials are of-
are reared together from an early age. Even so, males will
fered. In addition, it is often advised that lengths of tub-
form a hierarchical system, and subordinate males may
 ing, such as drainpipe, should be offered as bolt holes for 
be bullied and bitten on a regular basis. Females live
the guinea pigs to use when frightened. Access to graz-
happily together, and the sexes may be mixed, although
ing is useful, and guinea pigs cannot climb or dig so pen
 castration of the males (which may be done from 4 to 5
32 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
months of age) is advised to prevent unwanted pregnan-
anogenital area of the young guinea pig should be stimu-
cies. In addition, females are unusual among the species
lated with damp cotton wool to encourage urination and
 so far discussed in that they will allow the nursing of oth-
defecation.
er young than their own.
Chinchilla
Even though young chinchillas are precocious at birth,
Chinchilla
Chinchillas will often form bonded pairs, although they
they can be difficult to rear successfully. A rough guide to
will equally live happily in multi-sex and multi-chinchilla
a rearing formula is to feed a 50:50 mix of a commercial
groups. If breeding is to be prevented, one or both of the
cat- or dog-rearing formula added to evaporated milk
sexes should be neutered. Males may be castrated fronm
Alternatively, a 1:2 mix of evaporated milk with cooled,
W
5 to 6 months and females from 6 to 7 months.
previously boiled water, thickened with a little fruit or
vegetable baby food (Milupa or Farex) may be used. Ihis
MS
Behaviour
should be fed through a kitten feeder every 2 hours for
Guinea pig
the frst week, dropping to every 3-4 hours once the
RT
Guinea pigs make good pets for the older child. They are
young chinchilla starts nibbling small volumes of solid.
 docile and easily handled and rarely bite. Unlike many of
Chinchillas may be weaned early at 4 weeks if eating suffi-
the other species discussed here, they are very vocal. Their
cient dry foods. Iheir weight should be measured daily to
normal, contented vocal sounds include a series of chir-
ensure regular gains. After each meal, the anogenital area
rups and chattering noises which are low pitched. When
should be stimulated with a piece of damp cotton wool to
stimulate urination and defecation, although this is really
alarmed, though, they will emit higher pitched squeaks of
warning. Ihey will also run around the perimeter of their
only necessary for the first 7-10 days.
enclosure at high speed when stressed, and may flatten
 any younger guinea pigs in the process!
CHIPMUNK
Species
Chinchilla
The two main species seen in captivity are the Siberian
 a a sa a p as are s
chipmunk and, to a lesser extent, the North American
affectionate and will make chirruping noises when con-
chipmunk. The coat variations are limited, but the basic
tented. When frightened they will bite, bark and often
pattern is with a light brown base coat with darker longi-
exhibit fur-slip, where fur will drop out leaving alopecic
tudinal stripes. Albinos do exist.
areas which last for many weeks. When distressed, many
chinchillas will urinate at the handler. Ihis includes fe-
Cage requirements
males who, having a large urinary papilla, can direct their
Cages and substrates
urination as accurately as males!
Chipmunks appreciate a combination of cage environ-
ments. Ihe enclosure itself resembles more closely an avi-
Fostering
ary system designed for cage birds, with a wire mesh wall.
Guinea pig
The most successful examples combine a deep litter floor
Use of a foster mother for any orphaned guinea pigs is
with bark chippings to allow foraging for food for envi-
advisable, even though they are precocious and may start
ronmental enrichment and roost boxes attached a few
to eat solids from day 3 post-partum. Even so, rearing
feet off the ground. These are constructed along similar
milk formulas are still advised to be fed. Recipes for these
lines to bird boxes. Ihe cage may be further enhanced by
include conmmercial feline weaner formulas, or using a
stringing ropes from side to side to create aerial walkways.
1:2 mixture of evaporated milk to previously boiled and
then cooled water, thickened with a proprietary vegetable
Positioning
baby food powder (Richardson, 1992). This may be given
It is important not to house chipmunks near any source
through a kitten-rearing feeder every 2 hours for the first
of electrical radiation in the 50-60 Hz range. Ihis in-
week, but the young should be encouraged to take sol-
cludes television sets and many strip lights and com-
ids as early as possible as a high incidence of cataracts
puter terminals. Ihe radiation waves given off by these
is noticed in young guinea pigs fed for too long on cat,
electrical items cause high degrees of stress to the chip-
dog or cow's milk replacers. For the frst 7-10 days the
munks, which will exhibit manic behaviour. Ihis occurs
E8 bujeay pue Apueqsnh "6uisnoh jewwew lews
even when they are turned offbut still plugged in to the
Rabbit hutches and runs may be adapted for use but some
mains socket.
facility for climbing should be provided. Substrate can be
shredded paper, shavings or bark Environmental tem-
Social grouping
perature ranges of 12-25°C should be achieved with rela-
Chipmunks prefer to be grouped together. Males are ter-
tive humidity levels above 60%.
ritorial and will fight during the breeding season, but
females will tolerate each other well. In general, family
Social grouping
 groups are preferred, but the parents will chase away the
Sugar glider
young when weaned.
They are social animals and should not be kept singly as
self-mutilation may occur. The most suitable group struc-
Behaviour
ture is to keep an adult male and an adult female together
Buis Aai pue snoaiau Aiaaxa ae sud
plus young. The young in a breeding pair of adults will
creatures. Ihey will bite if handled, and are difficult to
usually comprise last year's joeys plus the current year's
tame, even when hand-reared. Ihey will chatter excitedly
joeys in the pouch. When the former are sexually mature
to each other when stressed and often emit high-pitched
and need to be removed from the group then the latter
PART
squeaks. Some willalso drum their hind legs as a warn-
will have been weaned.
ing signal. Tail flicking occurs almost continually, but be-
 comes even more excited when stressed.
Virginia opossum
Bunon 'senpiaipun nn siied se ida Aensn ane asa
Fostering
should be removed 4-6 weeks after weaning. Neutered
 Young abandoned chipmunks are difficult to rear. A rear-
adults can be kept together in larger groups assuming suf-
ing formula has been proposed using a mixture of one
ficient space is allowed.
part evaporated milk to two parts water, adding vegetable
Behaviour
baby foods to this as the chipmunk ages. Minerals and
Sugar glider
vitamins may then be added, and the whole fed through
a kitten-rearing feeder every 4 hours for the first 2 weeks
These are very vocal when frightened and will make small
of life, dropping down to every 8 hours from 3 weeks
barking noises as well as screeches. Ihey will vigorously
until they are weaned at 5-6 weeks. Ihe young chipmunk
scent-mark and are very territorial, particularly the males.
should be stimulated to urinate and defecate with a piece
of damp cotton wool rubbed over the anogenital area
Virginia opossum
immediately after feeding.
These are very vocal and will hiss, click and growl as well
as making a screeching sound when frightened. They can
also 'play possum' that is feign death when threatened.
MARSUPIALS
Cage requirements
Fostering
Sugar glider
Orphaned joeys must frst be brought up to the correct
Minimum cage dimensions for an adult pair would be
body temperature (35-37°C) before being fed. Any milk
2 m X 2 m floor space with a height of 1.8 m. Mesh size
 replacer should be warmed to 35°C before being offered.
should be 1 cm?. A nest box should be provided such
Frequency depends on maturity with non-furred joeys
as a wooden cylinder with a narrow opening. Branches
 being fed every 2-3 hours and furred ones being fed every
should also be provided within the enclosure as sugar
 4-6 hours. Volumes fed should be between 10% and 20%
gliders are arboreal in nature. Additional heating is usu-
 of the joey's body weight over a 24-hour period. Teats on
ally required to maintain environmental temperatures 
 feeding bottles should have small needle holes and be
above 25°C with humidity of 60-80%. Substrate can be
 long and thin in shape.
shredded paper or shavings.
 MacPherson (1997) derived a formula for sugar glid-
ers using 1 scoop of Puppy Esbilac powder to 3 scoops
Virginia opossum
of Pedialyte? (or equivalent small animal electrolyte re-
Minimum cage dimensions should be 2 m X 2 m
 placer). A similar replacer can be used using 1 part Puppy
unless they are regularly allowed out of their cages.
Esbilac to 3-5 parts water.
34 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
FERRET
to be capable of carrying two ferrets separately and are
 of a simple design in wood with ventilation holes and a
Cage requirements
og pauaisap iou ane Aau suues ioy dens iapmous
Cages and substrates
keeping a ferret in for any length of time.
Many ferrets are kept in outside hutches in a fashion simi-
 lar to rabbits in the United Kingdom, particularly during
Social grouping
the summer months (see Figure 2.4). Increasingly though,
Female ferrets get on well together, and ferrets in general
ferrets are being kept as house pets in the United King-
like company, so it is often advisable to house them to-
dom, and of course have been kept as such in the United
gether. Male ferrets (hobs) though may fight and so care
States of America for many years now. Ihe problem with
should be taken when housing multiples. Chemical neu-
wooden hutches is that the often strong-smelling urine
tering using deslorelin implants of male ferrets is advised
of the ferret will penetrate the wood. This is not so bad
on grounds of reducing odour in any case and this makes
in ferrets that are kept outdoors, but for indoor ones this
MS
them more malleable and less likely to fight as well. Ihe
may be a considerable downside! Iherefore the use of
female ferret (jill) is not susceptible to cannibalism of the
-un ioy paiayand st saaes iaddn am pue pauooq-iaas
young if disturbed, although care should be exercised
door ferret keeping, as this type of cage can be easily dis-
when interfering with the young as the jill will defend
infected. Ihe size of the ferret cage should be a minimum
them vigorously if she feels threatened.
of two ferret lengths in each direction. Ferrets like to
make use of vertical space, so the provisions of ashelf and
Behaviour
raised sleeping quarters are useful. Care should be taken
Ferrets are extremely inquisitive creatures and will ex-
to ensure that the wire mesh is no larger than 2.5 cm? to
plore everything and anything! They are generally docile
avoid smaller ferrets escaping. Substrate in the cage may
when reared in the company of humans, but they can give
be newspaper, hay, shavings or straw. Ihe nest box is best 
a ferocious bite when frightened, from which it may be
lined with towelling or a similar material. Ferrets enjoy
difficult to disengage.
hiding in plastic tubing and investigating every nook and
cranny of a house. It is therefore essential not to allow a
Management
ferret access to rooms where there are holes in the walls
Ferrets are currenly kept in the United Kingdom mainly
for pipes, such as the kitchen, as they usually end up dis-
as working pets, for hunting, chiefly, of rabbits. Ferrets
appearing down them!
may be 'trained’ to fush out rabbits from their warrens,
although this is merely taking advantage of their natural
Hacking boxes
hunting tendenc y.
These are used for working ferrets to transport them to
Ferrets may be walked on a harness, and they can be
and from the area of rabbiting (see Figure 2.5). Ihey tend
litter trained with perseverance.
M220
Figure 2.4 A typical temporary outside ferret run and housing for
Figure 2.5 A typical working ferret hacking box to carry the ferret
the summer months.
to and from the area of rabbiting.
Small Mammal Housing, Husbandry and Rearing 35
The odour of ferrets is reduced in the case of the
neonatal cats and dogs, kits require stimulation of their
hobby castration. However this has now been shown to
anogenital areas with damp cotton wool after each feed to
be associated with adrenal gland neoplasia, therefore the
encourage urination and defecation.
use of gonadotropin releasing hormone agonist such as
desolrelin has been advocated instead. The removal of the
References
anal glands is prohibited as an unnecessary mutilation in
MacPherson, C. (1997) Sugar Gliders. A Complete Owners
the United Kingdom.
Manual. Barron's Educational Series, Hauppage, NY.
Okerman, L. (1998) Diseases of Domestic Rabbits, 2nd edn.
IMALS
Fostering
Black well Science, Oxford.
Richardson, V. (1992) Diseases of Domestic Guinea Pigs. Blackwell
Care should be taken to ensure correct nursing of the
Publishing, Oxford.
kit after failure of the jill to nurse, produce milk or when
W
SMAlL
S au huaisy Aq auop isaq si s 'sooo ss
Further reading
onto another lactating jill, but this is often difficult. If
Booth, R. (2003) Sugar gliders. Seminars in Avian and Exotic Pet
the affected jill is still well enough the kits should be left
Medicine,12(4), 228-231.
Fraser, M.A. and Girling, S.J.(2009) Rabbit Medicine and Surgery
PARtI
with her to gain what litle milk they may. Supplemen-
tal feeding may then be given using a proprietary feline
for Veterinary Nurses. Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford.
 milk replacer enriched with whipping cream to increase
Harkness, JE. and Wagner, J.E. (2000) Biology and Medicine of
Rabbits and Rodents, 5th edn. Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia, PA.
the fat content. A rough guide is 2-3 parts feline milk re-
Keeble, E. and Meredith,A.(2009) Manual of Rodents and
placer to one part whipping cream. This needs to be fed
Ferrets. BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
every 2 hours or so via a nipple feeder, preferably warmed
Meredith, A. and Flecknall, P. (2006) Mamual of Rabbits, 2nd edn.
prior to feeding. Weaning may be brought forward to 3
BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
Meredith, A. and Johnson-Delaney, C. (2010) Manual of Exotic
weeks, and the kits trained to drink milk replacer from a
Pets, 5th edn. BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
saucer. Generally kits cannot manage to survive on solid
Quesenberry, K.E. and Carpenter, J. (2003) Ferrets, Rabbits and
foods alone until they are over 5 weeks of age. As with
Rodents, 2nd edn. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
Chapter 3
Small Mammal Handling and
Chemical Restraint
5
Before attempting to restrain a small mammal patient, we
the rabbit is frightened. In addition, a struggling rabbit
must first be sure that it is necessary. Points to be consid-
may lash out with its powerful hindlimbs and fracture or
MS
ered include
dislocate its spine. Severe stress can even induce cardiac
· Is the patient severely debilitated and in respiratory
arrest in some rabbits. Rapid and safe restraint is there-
RT
distress? Examples include the pneumonic
rabbit
fore essential.
with obvious oculonasal discharge and dyspnoea, or
 If aggressive, the lagomorph may be grasped by the
the chronic lung disease so often seen in older rats.
scruff with one hand while the other supports the hind
Excessive or rough handling of these patients is con-
legs. If the rabbit is not aggressive, then one hand may be
traindicated.
 placed under the thorax, with the thumb and first two fi n-
· Is the species a tame one? Examples of the more un-
 gers encircling the front limbs, while the other is placed
 usual small mammals that may be kept include chip-
under the hind legs to support the back (see Figure 3.1).
munks, sugar gliders, marmosets and raccoons. All of
When transferred from one room to another the
these are potentially hazardous to handlers and them-
rabbit must be held close to the handler's chest. Non-
selves as they will often bolt for freedom when fright-
fractious individuals may also be supported with their
ened, or turn and fight!
heads pushed into the crook of one arm, with that fore-
+ Is the small mammal suffering from a metabolic bone
arm supporting the length of the rabbit's body. The other
 disease? This is often seen in small primates, young
hand is then used to place pressure on or grasp the scruff
rabbits and, to a lesser extent, guinea pigs. The diet
region (see Figure 3.2).
may have been deficient in calcium and vitamin D3
Once caught the rabbit may be calmed furtherby wrap-
and exposure to natural sunlight may be absent. Ihere-
ping it in a towel, so that just the head and ears protrude.
fore, long-bone mineralisation during growth will be
There are also specifc rabbit papooses that encircle the
poor leading to easily fractured bones.
rabbit, but leave the head and ears free. Ihis allows ear
·Does the small mammal patient require medication or
 blood sampling and oral examinations, but controls their
physical examination, in which case restraint may be
powerful hindlimbs. It is important not to allow them to
essential?
overheat in this position, as rabbits do not have significant
sweat glands and do not actively pant. Ihey can therefore
Handling techniques
overheat quickly with fatal results if their environmental
Because of the wide range of species grouped under the
temperature exceeds 23-25°C.
heading small mammal, this section is easier if consid-
ered under specific groups and orders. Always approach
Rat and mouse
small mammals from the sides and low levels to avoid
 Mice will frequently bite an unfamiliar handler, espe-
mimicking the swooping action of a bird of prey.
reau en a dsna 'isig 'shuuois auens u ren
to the base and then position the mouse on a non-slip
Domestic rabbit
surface. While still grasping the tail, the scruff may now
The majority of domestic rabbits are docile. In the occa-
 be grasped firmly between thumb and forefinger of the
sional aggressive rabbit, the main dangers are from the
other hand.
claws, which can inflict deep scratches, and the incisors,
Rats will rarely bite unless roughly handled. Ihey are
which can produce deep bites. Aggression is worse at the
best picked up by encircling the pectoral girdle immedi-
start of the breeding season in March and April, or when
ately behind the front limbs with the thumb and fingers
Small Mammal Handling and Chemical Restraint 37
Mil
MAMMALS
Part I: sMAll
Figure 3.1 Method of restraining a tame rabbit for examination.
Figure 3.3 Method of restraining a hand tame rat. Note support of
hind quarters with free hand.
Gerbil and hamster
Hamsters can be difficult to handle. If the hamster is rela-
 tively tame, cupping the hands underneath the animal is
sufficient to transfer it from one cage to another.
Some breeds of hamster are more aggressive than oth-
ers, with the Russian hamster (also known as the Djun-
 garian or hairy-footed hamster) being notorious for its
short temper. In these cases, the hamster should be placed
onto a firm flat surface, and gentle but firm pressure
placed onto the scruff region with finger and thumb of
one hand. As much of the scruff should then be grasped
Figure 3.2 Method of transporting a rabbit from one place to
as possible, with the pull in a cranial direction, to ensure
anothier.
that the skin is not drawn tight around the eyes (hamsters
(paymis Aanoi ji sana lal asodoid ol Aouapuale aat
of one hand, while bringing the other hand underneath
(Figure 3.4). If a very aggressive animal is encountered,
the rear limbs to support the rat's weight (Figure 3.3).
the use of a small glass or perspex container with alid for
The more fractious rat may be temporarily restrained by
 Examination and transport purposes is useful.
 grasping the base of the tail before scruffng it with thumb
Gerbils are relatively docile, but can jump extremely
and forefinger.
well when frightened and may bite. For simple transport
Under no circumstances should mice or rats be re-
they may be moved from one place to another by cupping
strained by the tips of their tails as de-gloving injuries to
 the hands underneath them. For more rigorous restraint,
the skin covering them will occur.
the gerbil may be grasped by the scruff between thumb
38 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
up the chinchilla calmly and quickly with minimal re-
straint, placing one hand around the pectoral girdle from
the dorsal aspect just behind the front legs, and the other
hand cupping the hind legs and supporting the chinchil-
la's weight. Degus may be handled in a similar fashion,
although they are less prone to fur-slip.
Chipmunk
W
sas j auie an pe us a ae s
and fear aggression is essential to avoid fatalities. They
W
are diffcult to handle without being bitten, unless hand-
reared, when they may be scruffed quickly, or cupped in
MS
both hands. To catch them in their aviary-style enclosures
the easiest method is to use a fine-meshed aviary or but-
PARTI
terfly net, preferably made of a dark material. Ihe chip-
munk may then be safely netted and quickly transferred
to a towel for manual restraint, examination, or injection
Figure 3.4 Method for restraining a hamster. Note the large amount
or induction of chemical restraint.
of loose skin which must be grasped and the high position at which
it is grasped immediately behind the ears to avoid eye proptosis.
Marsupials
Sugar gliders are very docile and may be restrained with
and forefinger of one hand after placing it onto a flat level
minimal force. If they need to be held firmly for any rea-
surface. It is vitally important not to grasp a gerbil by the
son, one hand can hold the base of the tail and the other
tail. Ihe skin will strip off, leaving denuded coccygeal ver-
the dorsal aspect of the neck. For Virginia opossums that
tebrae, and the skin will never regrow. Jerds and jerboas
are tame, one had may be used to grasp around the pecto-
are related species and handling techniques are the same.
ral girdle and the other to support the rear end in a simi-
lar fashion to that described for domestic rats. For more
Guinea pig and chinchilla
aggressive animals leather gardening gloves/gauntlets
Guinea pigs are rarely aggressive, but they are highly
should be used. They may also be wrapped in towels in a
stressed when separated from their companions and nor-
fashion similar to rabbits.
 mal surroundings. Dimming the lighting, and reducing
noise and other stress can aid in control.
Ferret
The guinea pig should be grasped behind the forelimbs
Ferrets can make excellent house pets and many are
from the dorsal aspect with one hand, while the other is
friendly and hand-tame. However, in the United King-
placed beneath the hindlimbs to support its weight. Ihis is
dom, ferrets are most frequently kept for rabbit hunting;
 particularly important as the guinea pig has alarge abdo-
hence, many ferrets are not regularly handled and so may
men but slender bones and spine. Without supporting the
be aggressive.
rear end, spinal damage is risked.
 For excitable or aggressive animals, a frm grasp of the
Chinchillas are equally timorous and rarely if ever bite.
scruff, high up at the back of the neckis advised. The ferret
They too can be easily stressed and reducing noise and
may then be suspended while stabilising the lower body
dimming room lighting can be useful. When restrained
 with the other hand around the pelvis. In tamer animals.
they must not be scruffed under any circumstances as
they may be suspended with one hand behind the front
this will result in the loss of fur at the site held. This fur-
legs, cupped between thumb and fingers from the dor-
slip will leave a bare patch which will take many weeks
sal aspect, with the other hand supporting the hindlimbs.
to regrow. Chinchillas may actually lose some fur due
 This hold may be varied somewhat in the more lively in-
to stress of restraint, even if no physical gripping of the
dividuals by placing the thumb of one hand underneath
skin occurs. Some chinchillas, when particularly stressed,
the chin, so pushing the jaw upwards, and the rest of the
will rear up on their hind legs and urinate at the handler 
fngers grasping the other side of the neck The other
with surprising accuracy! It is therefore essential to pick
 hand is then brought under the hindlimbs as support.
Small Mammal Handling and Chemical Restraint 39
Aspects of chemical restraint
under- or overdosage of 10%! The use of scales that will
Chemical restraint may be necessary for a number of rea-
read accurately down to l g in weight is therefore essential.
sons in small mammals:
Blood testing
· Sanmple collection, such as blood testing or urine col-
 Blood testing is starting to become much more common
lection
in smal mammals and should be considered in every
· For procedures such as radiography
clinically unwell or senior patient where a sufficiently
+ Oral examinations
large sample may be obtained. Sites for venipuncture are
Is the patient fit enough for chemical restraint?
detailed below.
H is important to assess whether the patient is fit enough
Rabbit: A 25-27 gauge needle may be used in the lat-
for a chemical restraint before it is attempted. Factors that
eral ear vein. Prior to sampling, apply a local anaesthetic
should be considered prior to the anaesthesia of small
cream to the site and warm the ear. Alternatively, the ce-
mammals are outlined below.
phalic or the jugular veins may be used. The latter should
be used with caution as it is the only source of blood
Low-grade respiratory infections
drainage from the eyes, and so, if a thrombus forms in
Many rodents and lagomorphs suffer from low-grade re-
this vessel, ocular oedema and permanent damage or
spiratory infection all of their lives. Most will cope with
Even loss of the eye may occur.
this, but when anaesthetised the respiratory rate slows
Rat and ouse: The lateral tail veins may be used. These
and respiratory secretions, already thickened or increased
due to chronic infection, become more tenacious. This
run on either side of the coccygeal vertebrae and are best
can cause physical blockage of the airways.
seen when the tail is warmed as for the lateral ear vein in
lagomorphs. A 25-27 gauge needle is required.
Respiratory system anatomy
Ferret: Ihe jugular vein is the easiest to access, but may
The majority of the species considered are nose breath-
be difficult in a fractious animal. One handler holds onto
ers, with their soft palates permanently locked around  both front limbs with one hand, clamping the body with
the epiglottis. Therefore,if the patient has a blocked nose,  forearm and elbow, the other hand placed under the chin
whether it be due to pus, blood, tumours or abscesses, 2
 and raising the head. Towel restraint may also be utilised
then respiratory arrest is made much more likely under
to papoose the ferret. Cephalic veins may also be used.
anaesthetic.
Needles of 23-25 gauge suffice.
Guinea pig and chinchilla: The jugular veins are the most
Hypothermia
accessible. One handler holds both front limbs with one
Because of their small size and resultant high body surface
hand and brings the patient to the edge of the table, rais-
area to volume ratios, these small mammals are prone to
hypothermia during anaesthesia. This is due to the cooling
ing the head with the other hand. The other operator may
effect of the inhaled gases and reduced muscular activity.
then take a jugular sample with a 23-25 gauge needle.
 Lateral saphenous veins may be used in guinea pigs, but
H is dangerous, therefore, to anaesthetise a patient that is
already hypothermic without first treating this condition.
enough to sample.
Dehydration
Gerbil and hamster: These are difficult. With care (par-
Respiratory fluid losses during drying gaseous anaes-
ticularly in gerbils) the lateral tail veins may be used.
thetic procedures are much greater than in cats, dogs or  Frequently cardiac puncture under anaesthetic is often
larger species. Hence, putting a severely dehydrated small  necessary to obtain a sufficient sample.
mammalian patient through an anaesthetic without prior 
Chipmurk: Jugular blood samples may be taken, but in
fuid therapy is not advisable.
nearly every case anaesthesia is required first.
Pre-anaesthetic management
Marsupials: The lateral or ventral tail vein, cephalic
Weight measurement
 or lateral saphenous may be used. Anaesthesia may be
It is vitally important to weigh the patient accurately.
 required first though due to the small size of some and
A mistake of just 10 g in a hanmster, say, will lead to an
 potential aggression of others.
40  Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Fasting
before it has a chance to work. Glycopyrrolate, which
Rabbit: Ihese do not need to be fasted prior to anaesthe-
functions in a similar manner, may be used instead at
sia, as they have a very tight cardiac sphincter prevent-
doses of 0.01 mg/kg subcutaneously.
ing vomiting. Starving may actually be deleterious to the
 patient's health as it causes a cessation in gut contractility
Tranquilisers
and subsequent ileus. It is important, though, to ensure
Tranquilisers are used to reduce the stress of induction.
that no food is present in the mouth at the time of induc-
Many species will breath-hold during gaseous induction,
5
tion, hence a period of 30-60 minutes starvation should
to the point where they may become cyanotic. In rabbits,
W
be ensured.
the shock' organ is the lungs, and during intense stress
the pulmonary circulation can go into spasm, making the
W
Rat and mouse: Because of their high metabolic rate
hypoxia due to breath-holding even worse, even to the
and likelihood of hypoglycaemia, rats and mice need
 point of collapse and cardiac arrest!
MS
only be starved a matter of 40-60 minutes (mice) to
 45-90 minutes (rats) prior to anaesthetic induction.
Acepromazine: Acepromazine (ACP) can be used at
doses of 0.2 mg/kg in ferrets, 0.5 mg/kg in rabbits and
Guinea pig and chinchilla: Ihese may be starved
0.5-1 mg/kg in rats, mice, hamsters, chinchillas and
for 3-6 hours prior to surgery to ensure a relatively enpty
guinea pigs. In general, it is a very safe premedicant even
stomach and reduce pressure on the diaphragm. Again,
in debilitated animals. However, it is advised that it not
prolonged starvation (>4 hours) will lead to hypoglycae-
be used in gerbils, as ACP reduces the seizure threshold,
mia and gut stasis.
and many gerbils suffer from hereditary epilepsy. Ihis au-
Gerbil and hamster: As for Muridae, a period of 45-90
thor uses a dose of 0.2 mg/kg ACP in combination with
0.05 mg/kg atropine as a premedication for chinchillas.
minutes is usually sufficient. Any longer than 2 hours and
 post-operative hypoglycaemia is a real problenm.
Diazepam: Diazepam is useful as a premedicant in some
species. In rodents, doses of 3 mg/kg can be used, even in
Chipmunk: Periods of fasting of 2 hours have been re-
gerbils. In rabbits, the benefts are somewhat outweighed
ported as safe.
by the larger volumes required. In addition, as the drug
 Marsupial: Smaller marsupials may be starved for 1 hour
is oil based, the intramuscular route is employed and this
with larger ones requiring 3-6 hours.
may be painful.
Ferret: Ihese may be starved for 2-4 hours. Many have
Neuroleptanalgesics
insulinomas and will develop hypoglycaemia. Also mus-
 The fentanyl/fluanisone combination (Hypnorm?) may
telids have a high metabolic rate and short gut transit
be used at varying doses as a premedicant, a sedative or
times.
as part of an injectable full anaesthesia. As a premedi-
cant, doses of 0.1 mL/kg for rabbits, 0.08 mL/kg for rats
 Pre-anaesthetic medications
 0.2 mL/kg for guinea pigs (one-fifh the recormmended
Pre-anaesthetic drugs are used because they provide a
sedation doses) can produce suffcient sedation to pre-
smooth induction and recovery from anaesthesia, or be-
vent breath holding and allow gaseous induction. These
cause they ensure a reduction in airway secretions, act as
doses are given intramuscularly 15-20 minutes before
a respiratory stimulant or prevent serious bradycardia.
induction. However, Hypnorm is an irritant and large
doses in one site may cause post-operative lanmeness. It
Antimuscarinics
can be reversed after the operation with butorphanol at
pue shid eauna se yns saioads aos u pasn si audoi
0.2 mg/kg or buprenorphine at 0.05 mg/kg intravenously.
chinchillas where oral secretions are high and intubation
Should a vein not be available, both may also be given
is difficult. Doses of 0.05 mg/kg have been used subcuta-
intramuscularly.
neously 30 minutes before induction. Atropine also acts
to prevent excessive bradycardia, which often occurs dur-
Fluid therapy
ing the induction phase.
Fluid therapy is a vitally important pre-anaesthetic con-
H is not useful in lagomorphs, as around 60% of rabbits 
sideration and will be mentioned below and elsewhere in
have a serum atropinesterase that breaks down atropine
the book
Small Mammal Handling and Chemical Restraint 41
Induction of anaesthesia
Rat, mouse, gerbil and hamster: Ketamine can be used
Injectable agents
at 90 mg/kg in combination with xylazine at 5 mg/kg in-
Table 3.1 outlines some of the advantages and disadvan-
tramuscularly or intraperitoneally in rats and 100 mg/kg
 tages of injectable anaesthetics in small mammals.
ketamine with 5 mg/kg xylazine in hamsters (Harkness
& Wagner, 1989). Mice require 100 mg/kg of ketamine
Propofol
and 10 mg/kg xylazine (Orr, 2001). Ihese combinations
It may be used in ferrets at 10 mg/kg after the use of a
 provide 30 minutes or so of anaesthesia.
 premedicant such as ACP. However, in rabbits and hystri-
 In gerbils, the dose of xylazine may be reduced
comorphs, apnoea can be a problem, and because it must
to 2-3 mg/kg as they appear more sensitive to the
be given intravenously it is difficult to use in the smaller
hypovolaemic effects of the alpha-2 drugs, with ketamine
rodents. Doses of 5-10 mg/kg have been used intrave-
doses at 50 mg/kg (Flecknell, 1998).
nously in rabbits.
Ketamine may also be used at 75 mg/kg in combina-
tion with medetomidine at 0.5 mg/kg in gerbils (Keeble,
NS
Alfaxalone
 Alfaxalone has also been used at 5 mg/kg intravenously in
2001) and rats (Orr, 2001). Mice may require as much as
1 mg/kg medetomidine (Orr, 2001). The advantages of
rabbits, but it must be given slowly as apnoea can result.
isateue poog anad han iei are sisiuot z-eqde a
Ketamine
(which ketamine does not) and that they may be quickly
Ketamine is a dissociative anaesthetic commonly used in
reversed with atipamezole at 1 mg/kg. Their disadvan-
small mammals.
tages include severe hypotensive effects, and that once
administered they are more difficult to control than a gas-
Ferret: Ketamine may be used alone for chemical re-
eous anaesthetic. Alpha-2 agonists also increase diuresis
straint in the ferret at doses of 10-20 mg/kg but, as with
and may exacerbate renal dysfunction.
cats and dogs, the muscle relaxation is poor and salivation
can be a problem. More often, ketamine is combined with
Guinea pig and chinchilla: Ketamine at 40 mg/kg in con-
other drugs such as the alpha-2 agonists xylazine and
junction with xylazine at 5 mg/kg can be used in guinea
medetomidine. In ferrets, 10-30 mg/kg ketamine may be
pigs to produce a light plane of anaesthesia (Mason, 1997).
used with 1-2 mg/kg xylazine (Flecknell, 1998), prefera-
Ketanmine at 40 mg/kg may also be used with medetomi-
bly giving the xylazine 5-10 minutes before the ketamine.
dine at 0.5 mg/kg for guinea pigs (Flecknell, 2001), or ket-
amine at 30 mg/kg with medetomidine at 0.3 mg/kg for
Rabbit: Ketamine is used at a dose of 5-10 mg/kg in
chinchillas (Mason, 1997). Ihese doses may be reversed
conjunction with medetomidine at 0.1-0.25 mg/kg and
with 1 mg/kg atipamezole. Ihe response to both of these
butorphanol at 0.5 mg/kg or with xylazine at 5 mg/kg
combinations may be improved after an ACP premedica-
(Flecknell, 2000). The advantages are a quick and stress-
tion of 0.25 mg/kg. Alternatively, for chinchillas, a ket-
 free anaesthetic, but the combination will cause blueing
amine (40 mg/kg) and ACP (0.5 mg/kg) combination can
 of the mucous membranes due to peripheral shut-down,
be used (Morgan et al., 1981). Induction takes 5-10 min-
making detection of hypoxia diffcult. Respiratory de-
Ltes and typically lasts for45-60 minutes, but recovery may
pression may become a problem and intubation is often
take 2-5 hours for the non-reversible ACP combination,
advised. Medetomidine may be reversed using atipa-
hence reducing the dose of this drug and using the revers-
mezole at 1 mg/kg.
ible alpha-2 antagonists may be beneficial. This author uses
Table 3.1 Advantages and disadvantages of injectable
a combination of 0.2 mg/kg ACP plus 0.05 mg/kg atropine
anaesthetics.
as a premedication followed by 2-4 mg/kg ketamine and
0.02-0.04 mg/kg medetomidine as induction in chinchil-
Advantages
Disadvantages
las which is suitable for radiography, dental examinations/
 Easily adrministered 
 Delay in reversal
molar burring and minor invasive procedures.
 Minirmal stress 
Hypoxia and hypotension
Fentanyl/fluanisone (Hypnorm Vetapharma Ltd)
 Prevent breath-holding
Tissue necrosis
This drug combination is a neuroleptanalgesic licensed
for use in rats, mice, rabbits and guinea pigs. Fentanyl
Inexpensive
Organ metabolism required
is a morphine-/opioid derivative, and fluanisone is the
42 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
neuroleptic. It is mentioned here particularly because it is
Guinea pig and chinchilla: Hypnorm may be used for
specifcally licensed for use in rabbits, rats and mice and
sedation only on its own at a dose of 1 mL/kg intramus-
 guinea pigs in the United Kingdom.
cularly. This may be problematic in guinea pigs as large
volumes are required. Hypnorm is an irritant and may
Rabbit: Sedation at doses of 0.5 mL/kg intramuscularly
cause lameness when the whole dose is placed in one
(see data sheets) produces sedation and immobilisation
spot - multiple sites are therefore preferred. It should be
for 30-60 minutes, but the analgesic effect from the opi-
noted that it is not licensed for use in the chinchilla in the 
oid derivative fentanyl will persist for some time longer.
United Kingdom.
W
 It may however be reversed with 0.5 mg/kg butorphanol
Alternatively, it may be combined with diazepam
intravenously, or 0.05 mg/kg buprenorphine, both of
(1 mL/kg Hypnorm and 2.5 mg/kg diazepam) in sepa-
which will counteract the fentanyl and its analgesia and
rate syringes and given intraperitoneally, or with mid-
substitute their own pain relief.
Alternatively, to provide anaesthetic depth fentanyl/
azolam by making the stock solution as described above
MS
fluanisone may be combined with diazepam at a dose of
for rats and mice, and then administering 8 mL/kg of this
solution intraperitoneally. Hypnorm? may be reversed
0.3 mL Hypnorm? to 2 mg/kg diazepam given intraperi-
with the partial opioid agonists buprenorphine and bu-
toneally or intravenously (but in separate syringes as they
torphanol, or with the full antagonist naloxone.
do not mix). It may also be combined with midazolam
(0.3 mL Hypnorm? to 2 mg/kg midazolam) and given
Gaseous agents
Table 3.2 gives some advantages and disadvantages of
Hypnorm? may also be given intramuscularly first and
gaseous anaesthetics in small mammals.
then followed 15 minutes later by midazolam given intra-
venously into the lateral ear vein. These two combinations
provide good analgesia and muscle relaxation with dura-
Isoflurane
tion of anaesthesia of 20-40 minutes.
Usually a premedication is used as due to its mildly
The fentanyl part may be reversed with buprenorphine
irritant effects on mucus membranes, breath-holding
or butorphanol given intravenously. In emergencies, nal-
is common, particularly in rabbits. Its advantage over
oxone at 0.1 mg/kg intramuscularly or intravenously may
  aas s u si a se s sas sn
be given, but this provides no substitute analgesia.
debilitated patient. Only <0.3% of the gas is metabolised
Fentanyl/ fluanisone combinations are well tolerated in
0 Aiaaoau iy aexa buaq Aaau iau au ieeda
most rabbits, but they can produce respiratory depression
occur. Recovery is therefore rapid.
and hypoxia.
 Induction levels vary at 2.5-4% and maintenance usu-
ally is 1.5-2.5% assuming adequate analgesia. Breath-
Rat and mouse: Hypnorm may be used as sedation
holding can still be a problem, even with premedication,
only on its own at a dose of 0.01 mL/30 g body weight in
but the practice of supplying 100% oxygen to the patient
mice and 0.4 mL/kg in rats. Ihis produces sedation and
for 2 minutes prior to anaesthetic administration helps
immobilisation for 30-60 minutes and may be reversed
with buprenorphine or butorphanol as above.
Table 3.2 Acdvantages and disadvantages of gaseou5
Alternatively, it may be combined with diazepam (mice
 an aesthetics.
0.01 mL/30 g Hypnorm? with 5 mg/kg diazepam intra-
peritoneally; rats 0.3 mL/kg Hypnorm? with 2.5 mg/kg
Advantages
Disadvantages
diazepam intraperitoneally). In this case the diazepam
Faster alteration of depth
Increased drying effect on 
and Hypnorm? are given in separate syringes as they
 of anaesthesia possible
respiratory membranes
do not mix. Midazolam is miscible with Hypnorm? and
for rodents the recommendation is that each drug is in-
Recovery tirnes shorter
Hypothermic effect from 
drying
dividually mixed with an equal volume of sterile water
Less organ metabolism
 Difficulty in some species
first. Ihese solutions are then mixed together in equal
which breath-hold
volumes. Of this stock solution, mice receive 10 mL/kg
and rats receive 2.7 mL/kg as a single intraperitoneal
Delivered in 100% oxygen
May be considerably more
injection. These two combinations provide anaesthesia
50 better oxygenation than
expensive
injectables on their own
for a period of 20-40 minutes.
minimise hypoxia. Isofurane is then gradually introduced,
passed through the laryngeal opening, and, once in, the
first 0.5% for 2 minutes, then, assuming regular breathing.
 endotracheal tube is threaded over the top and the wire
increased to 1% for 2 minutes and so on until anaesthetic
withdrawn.
levels are reached. This allows a snmooth induction.
Alternatively the rabbit may be intubated blindly. Ihis
 is performed in sternal recumbency, after initial induc-
Sevoflurane
tion. Ihe head is lifted vertically off the table and the
 This gas anaesthetic is used commonly in small mam-
endotracheal tube is inserted orally in the midline until
mals now, and has an advantage over isoflurane in that
slight resistance and a cough is elicited. It is then ad-
breath-holding, when it is used as an induction agent is 
vanced slowly, and air passage through the tube checked
much reduced, particularly in rabbits. At levels exceeding
to ensure correct placement.
4% on induction it can still induce breath-holding, so it
Intubation is a specialised procedure for rodents
is preferable to use it at 4% for induction and 2-3% for 
such as rats and mice where rigid guide tubes and
maintenance. In guinea pigs, profuse lacrimation as well
wires and smaller scopes are used to guide the tube
NS
as salivation occurs with both isoflurane and sevoflurane
 into the larynx. If intubation is not possible, then oxy-
 and therefore it is advisable to use atropine or glycopyr-
gen on its own or with an anaesthetic gas may be sup-
rolate as a premedicant.
plied via an intranasal catheter as rodents are obligate
nose bre athers.
Maintenance of anaesthesia
Intubation of omnivorous marsupials is more straight-
Intubation
forward as they have a large oral opening. However, the
As with all gaseous anaesthetics, the placement of an
 small overall body-size of the sugar glider may still make
endotracheal tube for maintenance after induction is to
it a challenge.
be recommended whenever possible. This is relatively
Intubation of ferrets is similar to that for cats. Ihey
straightforward in ferrets, being much the same proce-
should be frst induced by face mask (see Figure 3.6) or
dure as for cats.
by using injectable anaesthetics before intubation is at-
In rabbits, the use of a number 1 Wisconsin flat-
tempted.
bladed paediatric laryngoscope and a 2-3 mm tube is
 In rabbits and ferrets it is helpful to use xylocaine spray
advised. The rabbit is first induced either with an inject-
 on the larynx to reduce laryngospasm and aid intubation
able anaesthetic or with an inhalational one. It is then
(see Figure 3.7).
placed in dorsal recumbency, allowing the larynx to fall
dorsally and into view. Ihe tongue should be pulled out
Intermittent positive pressure ventilation
to one side and the laryngoscope and endotracheal tube
 Intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV) may be
are inserted (see Figure 3.5). A guide wire may frst be
necessary in some individuals who breath-hold during
induction. The patient should receive ventilation at their
Figure 3.5 Insertion of a laryngoscope and ET tube in an already
anaesthetised rabbit in dorsal recumbency. Note the careful lateral
Figure 3.6 Induction of a ferret is easily achieved using a face mask
displacement of the tongue to avoid laceration on the incisors.
and isoflurane or sevoflurane in 100% oxygen.
44Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
A1003
W
MS
Figure 3.8 A Mapleson C circuit with a 0.25 L rebreathing bag is
deal for smaller species.
Figure 3.7 Spraying the larynx, which is easily visualised, is advised
prior to inserting an ET tube in the ferret.
of weight on the diaphragm, and as the majority of small
mammals considered here are diaphragm breathers, the
 resting respiratory rate. If intubation is not possible then
hindrance to inspiration is signifcant. During lengthy
three options are available:
'eixodu pue eaoude ot pea Aeu siul 'saimpasaid lesiains
1. Ensure a tight-fitting face mask and use an Ayres
Therefore, place the patient with its cranial end elevated
T-piece, Mapleson C or modifed Bain circuit with
above the caudal when in dorsal recumbency. This allows
0.5 L bag attached to attempt ventilation.
gravity to draw the intestine away from the diaphragm.
2. Place a nasopharygeal tube, via the medial meatus
of the nose, into the pharyngeal area. Then sup-
Maintenance of body temperature
ply 4 L or so of oxygen (to combat the resistance of
Maintenance of core body temperature is vitally impor-
the small diameter tubing of 1-2 mm) via this route.
n Aianoa mssaoons ansua on sluaed [e ui jue
 This cannot be done in mammals smaller than a young
anaesthesia, but is particularly important in small mam-
guinea pig.
mals. This is primarily due to their increased surface area
3. Perform an emergency tracheostomy with a 25-27
to volume ratio, allowing more heat to escape per gram
gauge needle attached to the oxygen outlet, placing
of animal. To help minimise this, the following actions
the needle between the supporting C-shaped laryngeal
may be taken:
cartilages ventrally.
· Perform minimal surgical scrubbing of the site, and
minimal clipping of fur from the area. Do not use sur-
Anaesthetic circuits
gical spirit as this rapidly cools the skin.
Most of the small mammals described here are less than
 Ensure the environmental room temperature is at the
 2 kg in weight. For this reason an Ayres T-piece, modified
warm end of comfortable.
(mini) Bain or Mapleson Ccircuit are the best ones to use,
· Place the patient onto either a water-circulating heat
as they provide the minimum of dead space (Figure 3.8).
pad or a hot air blankets, or use latex gloves/hot water
 For larger rabbits, an Ayres T-piece is usually suffcient.
 bottles grouped around the patient (making sure that
the containers are not in direct contact with the patient
Supportive therapy during and
as skin burns may ensue).
after anaesthesia
· Administer warmed isotonic fluids subcutaneously,
Recumbency
intravenously or intraperitoneally prior to and during
For most surgical procedures, the positioning for restraint
surgery.
 or recumbency wil be dependent upon the area being
Anaesthetic gases have a rapidly cooling effect on the
 operated on. Ihis may necessitate being placed in dorsal
oral and respiratory membranes, and so patients main-
recumbency. Because small herbivores rely on their gut
tained on gaseous anaesthetics will cool down quicker
flora to aid digestion, most of them have developed an en-
than those on injectable ones. Ihis effect will worsen as
larged hindgut. When in dorsal recumbency there is a lot
the length of the anaesthesia increases.
It is worth noting, however, that hyperthermia may be
example, should not be used to assess depth of anaes-
as bad as hypothermia. Small mammals generally have
thesia in small mammals. Instead, a useful method is to
few or no sweat glands, so heat cannot be lost via this
assess the response to noxious stimuli such as pain.
route. In addition, very few actually pant to lose heat, so
The first reflex lost is usually the righting reflex - the
if over-warmed the core body temperature rises and ir-
 uaquman euan oi umau ci aqeun st 
reversible hyperthermia will occur. A rectal thermometer
The next reflex to be lost, for example in rabbits and
is useful to monitor body temperature. Normal body tem-
guinea pigs, is the swallow reflex. However, this may
 perature ranges are given in Table 3.3.
be difficult to assess. Palpebral reflexes (the response of
blinking when the peri-ocular area is lightly touched) are
Fluid therapy
generally lost early on in the course of anaesthetic, but
Intra-, pre- and post-operative fluid therapy is important 
rabbits may retain this reflex until wel into the deeper
in small manmmals, even for routine surgery. Ihe small
planes of surgical anaesthesia. The palpebral reflex is also
affected by the anaesthetic agent used. Most inhalant gas-
NS
volume of these patients means that they will dehydrate
eous anaesthetics cause loss of the reflex early on, but it is
much faster, gram for gram, than alarger cat or dog. Stud-
maintained with ketamine.
ies have shown that the provision of maintenance levels
The pedal withdrawal reflex is useful in small mam-
of fluids to small mammals during and immediately after
mals, with the leg being extended and the toe firmly
se Aq siaaa ajes oase paaodu Aans aun
 pinched. Loss of this reflex suggests surgical planes of an-
much as 15% in some cases, with higher levels if the sur-
aesthesia, but again rabbits will retain the pedal reflex in
gery was being performed on severely debilitated animals.
the forelimbs until much deeper (and often dangerously
It is therefore recommended that all small mammal
deep!) planes of anaesthesia are reached. Other pain stim-
patients receive fluids during and after an anaesthetic be
uli such as the ear pinch in the guinea pig and rabbit are
it routine or not. For further information see chapter 6.
useful. Loss of this indicates a surgical plane, as does the
loss of the tail pinch reflex in rats and mice.
Monitoring anaesthesia
Monitoring of the heart and circulation may be done
No one factor will allow you to assess anaesthetic depth.
in a conventional manner, with stethoscope and femoral
Indeed, in small mammals many of the useful techniques
pulse evaluation, or, in the larger species, an oesopha-
used in cats and dogs are irrelevant. Eye position, for
geal stethoscope may be used. Increases in the respira-
 tory and heart rates can indicate lightening of the plane
Table 3.3 Norrmal body temperatures for selected smmall
of anaesthesia.
marmmal5
Pulse oximetry may be used in rabbits, but many ox-
imeters will not read heart rates above 250 beats per min-
Normal body temperature
ute, so care should be taken in selection of these. Ihe ear
Species
range (°℃)
 artery may be used, as may the ventral tail artery or a toe
Rabbit
37-39.4
artery in larger rabbits.
As with cats and dogs, the aim is to achieve 100% satu-
Guinea pig
37.2-39.5
ration, and levels below 93% would indicate significant
Chinchilla 
37.8-40
 hypoxaemia and the initiation of assisted ventilation. The
Rat
38 (average)
ear artery is useful for this in rabbits, using the clip-on
probe, while the linear probes may be used succesfully
Mouse
37.5 (average)
 on the ventral aspect of the tail in most other species.
 Gerbil
37.4-39
Other forms of cardiac monitoring include ECGs, which
are adapted to minimise trauma by substituting fine nee-
 Hamster
36.2-37.5
e au uuq q o sa reie r saqd a
Chipmunk
38 (average)
tor teeth. Oesophageal ECG probes are generally too large
Ferret
37.8-40
to be of use in small mammals.
Doppler probes that can detect blood flow in the
 Marsupial
32 (sugar glider)
32.2-35 (Virginia opossum)
smallest of vessels up to the heart itself are also useful.
The Doppler probe converts blood flow into an audible
46 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
signal, which is transmitted through a speaker device.
anorexic and due to their high metabolic rates will
This can then be assessed by the anaesthetist during
rapidly lose weight. Heart and respiratory rates will
surgery for changes in strength of output and heart
often increase
 but remember that small mammals
rate.
in strange surroundings with a fear response will also
Respiratory monitors may be used if the patient is in-
have elevated respiratory and heart rates. Addition-
tubated and many pulse oximeters have outlets for these.
ally, as most rodents will have a heart rate in excess of
Their use allows for assessment of respiratory rates, which
300 beats per minute, this can be a difficult parameter
for rodents are typically 50-100 breaths per minute and
to measure with accuracy.
for rabbits and ferrets, around 40-50 breaths per minute.
The following clinical signs may indicate pain
A reduction by 50% or more in this rate would give cause
 in rodents (Miller & Richardson, 2011):
W
for concern. Capnographs can also be used but obviously
· Abnormal appearance, including lack of grooming.
 neither of these is useful for patients maintained on face
piloerection, hunched position and porphyrin stain-
MS
masks or on injectable anaesthetics alone. In addition,
ing, in rats; facial changes in mice: for example orbital
because of the small lung capacity and the need to mi-
tightening, nose bulges and cheek bulges
nimise dead space, only side-stream capnographs can be
· Changes to normal behaviour: for example a decrease
used and these may not give accurate readings. However,
in normal exploratory behaviours - such as walking,
changes in the trend can still be more useful than relying
sniffing - and an increase in sleeping; also, a decrease
on absolute figures.
in food and water consumption
· Guarding behaviour with alteration in body posture,
Recovery and analgesia
 preventing contact with the affected area
Recovery
 Self-mutilation with excessive grooming, licking, bit-
Recovery from anaesthesia is improved with the use of
ing, scratching of the painful area
suitable reversal agents, if available. Examples include
· Vocalisation when the painful area is palpated. In
 atipamezole after medetomidine anaesthesia or sedation,
 guinea pigs, there may be a reduction in vocalisation
and naloxone, butorphanol or buprenorphine after opioid
with pain
or Hypnorm anaesthesia or sedation. Gaseous anaesthe-
● Specific behaviour changes: for example belly press-
sia, particularly with isoflurane, tends to result in more
ing (particularly rats and mice with abdominal pain),
rapid recovery than injectable anaesthetics, but recovery
abdominal contractions, twitching, back arching,
 from all forms of anaesthesia is improved by ensuring ad-
raised tail (particularly mice) and increased aggression
equate maintenance of body temperature and fluid bal-
Analgesia is vitally important to a quick and smooth
ance during and after anaesthesia.
recovery process. Ihe time taken to return to normal
Most small mammals will benefit from a quiet, dark-
activity such as grooming, eating, drinking has been
ened and warm recovery area. Subsequent fluid adminis-
shown to be considerably shortened following adequate
tration the same day is frequently beneficial, as many of
analgesia. Dosages for analgesics frequently used in
these creatures will not be eating as normal for the frst
 small mammals are given in Table 3.4. The administra-
12-24 hours.
tion of analgesia prior to the onset of pain makes for
 Recovery temperatures of 28-30°C are recommended
the most effective control. In NSAIDs COX-2 inhibi-
for most small mammals. This should be reduced to their
tors are preferable, for example meloxicam or carprofen.
mormal thermal range (see chapter on husbandry) as soon
Meloxicam has been used at 1.5 mg/kg once daily orally
as they are recovered to prevent hyperthermia.
for 5 days with no significant changes in biochemistry
or detectable deterioration in the health of the rabbit
Analgesia
(Turner ef al., 2006). Indeed, there is evidence that the
Recognising pain
routinely published doses of meloxicam are not suffi-
This can be one of the most challenging aspects of
cient for post-surgical analgesia in rabbits. Meloxicam at
small mammal medicine. The species that we are deal-
1 mg/kg per os post-surgery followed by 0.5 mg/kg once
ing with here are all prey species and as such there is
daily on the following 2 days produced a significant re-
a survival benefit in not showing signs of ilness or
duction in some pain-associated behaviours associated
 pain. When in pain, many small mammals will become
with ovariohysterectomy (Leach et al., 2009). As always,
Table 3.4 Analgesics used in small mammal5.
Myomorph
Chinchilla
Drug
Ferret
Rabbit
uapa
and degu
Guinea pig
Chipmunk
Marsupial
Butorphanol
0.3 c4h
0.3 q4h
1-5 q4h
0.5-2 c4-8h
0.5-1 q4-8h
1-5 cq4h
0.2-0.5 q4h
 Buprenorphine
0.010.03
0.010.05
0.010.05
0.01-0.05
0.010.05
0.01-0.05
0.010.03
c8-12h
q8-12h
c8-12h
q8-12h
c8-12h
q8-12h
c8-12h
MALS
 Tramadol
 3-5 q8-12h
10 q12-24h
5 q8-12h
5 q8-12h
5 q8-12h
5 q8-12h
一
Morphine
2-5 q3-4h
2-5 q3-4h
2-5 q3-4h
 2-5 c3-4h
2-5 q3-4h
 2-5 q3-4h
-
 Carprofen
2-4 q24h
 2-4 g24h
5 q24h
5 q24h
5 q24h
 2-4 q24h
-
SMAI
Meloxican
0.2 q24h
0.3-0.6 q24h
0.5-1 q24h
0.3-0.6 c24h
0.30.6 q24h
0.30.6 c24h
0.2-0.4 q24h
 Source: Data from Johnson-Delaney (2010), Flecknell (1998) and Mason (1997).
PART
Values are in mg/kg body weight.
q4h, every 4 hours; q8h, every 8 hours; and so on.
care should be exercised in the use of NSAIDs in renally
References
compromised animals.
Flecknell, P.A.(1998) Analgesia in small mammals. Seminars in
pue iiou leusaui mols Aeu sisuoe piondo il
Avian and Exotic Pet Medicine, 7(1), 41-47.
therefore their use in hindgut ferrmenters such as rabbits,
Flecknell, PA.(2000) Anaesthesia.Manual of Rabbit Medicine and
Surgery (ed P. Flecknell), 1Ist edn. BSAVA, Cheltenham, UK.
chinchillas and guinea pigs should be accompanied by
Flecknell, P. (2001) Guinea pigs. In: Manual of Exotic Pets (eds
gut motility enhancing medications. Ihey can of course
A. Meredith & S. Redrobe), 4th edn. BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
also produce respiratory suppression. Buprenorphine
Harkness, J.E. and Wagner, J.E. (1989) The Biology and Medicine
does have some of these effcts but as a partial agonist
of Rabbits and Rodents, 3rd edn, Pp. 61-67. Lea & Febiger,
Philadelphia, PA.
they are significantly less than morphine. Tramadol has
Johnson-Delaney, C. (2010) Marsupials. In: Manual of Exotic
been used successfully at 10 mg/kg in the rabbit. Howev-
Pets (eds A. Meredith & C. Johnson-Delaney), Sth edn, PP.
er, pharmacokinetic data suggested that 11 mg/kg orally
103-126. BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
 did not achieve the necessary levels inthe blood stream to
Keeble, E. (200l) Gerbils. In: Manual of Exotic Pets {eds
provide analgesia in humans (Souza et al., 2008).
A. Meredith & S. Redrobe), 4th edn, PP. 34-46. BSAVA,
 Multimodal analgesia is also important as with other
Cheltenham, UK.
Leach, M.C., Allweiler, S., Richardson, C., et al. (2009)
mammals, as the combination of NSAIDs and opioids
Behavioural effects of ovariohysterectomy and oral
are of greater benefit than the separate sum of their in-
administration of meloxicam in laboratory housed rabbits.
dividual parts.
Research in Veterinary Science,87(2),336-347.
Mason, D.E. (1997) Anaesthesia, analgesia and sedation for
Local anaesthesia may be used in rabbits and rodents at
small mammals. In: Ferrets, Rabbits and Rodents (eds E.V.
a maximum of 2 mg/kg lidocaine. Ihis is useful for head
Hillyer & K.E. Quesenberry), Pp. 378-391. W.B. Saunders,
surgery where infraorbital nerve, mental nerve, man-
Philadelphia, PA.
dibular nerve, maxillary nerve and palatine nerve blocks
Miller, A.L. and Richardson, C.A. (20ll) Rodent analgesia.
may be performed as with cats and dogs.
Veterinary Clinics of North America: Exotic Animal Practice,
Choice of analgesic depends on the level of pain and
14, 81-92.
Morgan, RJ., Eddy, L.B., Solie, T.N. and Turbe, C.C. (1981)
other factors, such as concurrent disease processes. Flu-
 Ketamine-acepromazine as anaesthetic agent for chinchillas
nixin, for example, is not a good
(Chinchilla laniger). Laboratory Animals, 15, 281-283.
hydrated animals or those 
with renaldisease.
.Opioids
Orr, H. (200l) Rats and mice. In: Manual of Exotic Pets {eds
depress respiration and so may be
 contraindicated in
A. Meredith & S. Redrobe), 4th edn, PP. 13-25. BSAVA,
cases of severe respiratory disease. Buprenorphine re-
Cheltenham, UK.
Souza, M.J,
Greenacre,
C.B. and Cox, S.K.
(2008)
quires 2 to 3 times daily administration, while carprofen
Pharmacokinetics of orally administered tramadol in the
and meloxicam have been shown to be useful when given
domestic rabbit (Oryctolagus cuniciulus). American Journal of
only once daily.
Veterinary Research, 69(8), 979-982.
48 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Turner, PV, Chen, H.C. and Taylor W.M. (2006)
Keeble, E. and Meredith, A. (2009) Manual of Rodents and
Pharmacokinetics of meloxicam in rabbits after single and
Ferrets. BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
repeat oral dosing. Compendium of Medicine, 56(1), 63-67.
Meredith, A. and Flecknell, P. (2006) Manual of Rabbits, 2nd edn.
BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
Further reading
Meredith, A. and Johnson-Delaney, C. (2010) Mamual of Exotic
Booth, R. (2003) Sugar gliders. Seminars in Avian and Exotic Pet
Pets, 5th edn. BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
Okerman, L. {1998) Diseases of Domestic Rabbits, 2nd edn.
Medicine, 12(4),228-231.
Fraser, M.A.and Girling, S.J. (2009) Rabbit Medicine and Surgery
Blackwell Science, Oxford.
57
for Veterinary Nurses. Blackwell-Wiley, Oxford.
Quesenberry, K.E. and Carpenter, J. (2003) Ferrets, Rabbits and
W
Harkness, JE. and Wagner, JE. (2000) Biotogy and
Rodents, 2nd edn. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
Medicine of Rabbits and Rodents, 5th edn.Lea & Febiger,
W
Philadelphia, PA.
SMAI
Chapter 4
Small Mammal Nutrition
Classification
sip-feeders), some animals may actually defecate in their
 One way of classifying small marmmals is according to
water bowls. Ihis can cause massive bacterial population
their diet. Ihere are three main categories of the com-
explosions which may lead to gastroenteritis. Enriching
monly seen small mammals as defined by their diet.
the water with mineral and vitamin supplements will also
allow rapid bacterial growth.
Carnivores
The amount of water an individual small mammal con-
The main carnivore seen in small mammal practice is the
sumes will obviously depend on the diet being offered
ferret, which, like the cat, is totally carnivorous. To cope
and the species considered. On dry biscuit or seed-based
with this diet, the ferret has developed sharp shearing
diets, water consumption will be much higher than for
teeth and powerful crushing jaws. In addition, because its
 small marmmals such as rabbits and guinea pigs, which
diet consists of highly digestible fats and proteins, it has a
consume large amounts of fruit and vegetables. A gerbil,
very short gastrointestinal tract.
for example, is a desert, seed-eating rodent and may only
drink 5-10 mL of water in a 24-hour period whereas an
Herbivores
 A variety of species, from lagomorphs to hystricomorphs,
average 2 kg rabbit may drink 200 mL or more. Sugar
gliders have been reported to require 103 mL water
are herbivores. Their teeth are grinding in nature. Some
species have continually growing molars and incisors, and
per kilogram bodyweight on a daily basis either as free
water or more usually as part of the wet food they con-
their gastrointestinal tracts are long and often sacculated.
This increases their volume and allows the bacterial fer-
sume (Hume, 1999).
mentation that assists digestion of the relatively indigestible
Maintenance energy requirements
cellulose, which forms a large part of their diet in the wild.
 Every species has a level of energy consumption per day
Omnivores
that is needed to satisfy basic maintenance requirements.
Some rodents will eat a mixed diet. Rats and chipmunks
It is the energy used purely to maintain current status
will consume meat and eggs if offered, but both species
under minimal activity and hence is frequently the lowest
 are primarily herbivorous by preference, and true ormni-
energy requirerment during that mammals life. As with
vores, such as humans, are uncommon among the small
other species a formula has been derived as maintenance
mammals seen routinely. The two species of marsupi-
energy requirements (MER) is dependent on the basal
als we have looked at so far - the sugar glider and the
 metabolic rate (BMR = the energy requirement when at
Virginia opossum are both omnivores.
complete rest) and metabolic body weight as follows:
 Individual species have become highly evolved to cope
MER = constant (k) × (body weight) 0.75
with certain types of food. In addition to the above gen-
eralisations, we also know that in the wild, many of these
The constant, k, varies with family groups and has
been estimated at 100 for adult rabbits, going up to 200
creatures have a changing food supply throughout the year.
for growth and 300 for lactation (Carpenter & Kolm-
General nutritional requirements
stetter, 2000). Other small mammals are similar, having
Water
much higher metabolic rates than their larger dog and
Maintaining good water quality is important. Many small
cat counterpars. Marsupials have much lower energy
mammals will dunk food in their water supply or, if the
requirements and their k factor is around 40-60 which
water feeders are poorly situated (in bowls rather than in
means that obesity is common as owners often feed
50 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
them the equivalent amount of food that would be fed
useful when moulting. In rabbits and other grazing herbi-
to a same-sized Eutherian mammal. Studies by Dieren-
vores, the majority of the proteins are from plant sources
field et al. (2006) suggest that young male sugar gliders
such as clover, alfalfa hay and good quality grass hays.
require energy levels of between 105 and 147 kJ/day.
Deficiencies in amino acids have been shown to cause
Energy requirements give a guide to what a small
certain diseases. An example of this is urolithiasis seen
anuu on iapio ui Aep iad amsu isnu [e
in ferrets that are fed on plant protein sources, which are
to maintain good health and body weight. Hence, if the
deficient in several essential amino acids. In addition, the
5
foods offered are so low in energy content that the small
lack of arginine in plant proteins will cause the young
W
mammal has to eat more of it than will fit into its digestive
growing ferret to develop hyperarmmonaemia and neuro-
system in 24 hours, the animal will rapidly lose condition.
logical signs such as fitting (Bell, 1993).
W
An example is that of meat-based foods such as ro-
dent prey which have an energy content of 19-21 kJ/g
Fats and essential fatty acids
MS
dry matter (6.3-7.5 kJ/g real or wet weight), whereas
-dns ose mq siaua jo sueuass yatu apiaand sie
high water-content vegetable foods such as lettuce have
ply the small mammal with essential fatty acids. These are
PART
alower energy density of 12.5 kJ/g dry matter (0.75 k]/g
soq buq au se pue Aau iemas iog panba
real or wet weight). The latter is therefore unlikely to
of internal chemicals such as prostaglandins, which play a
meet the requirements of a high-energy-demanding fer-
 part in reproduction and inflammation.
ret (irrespective of the fact it is a carnivore!) which has a
Fats also provide a carrier mechanism for the absorp-
tion of fat-soluble vitamins such as vitamin A, D, E and K.
Kolmstetter, 2000).
Ihe primary fats and essential fatty acid (EFA) for
Conversely, many pet smal mammals will continue
small mammals is linoleic acid, as it is for larger mam-
to eat until their digestive tracts are full. If all they are
mals, with the absolute dietary requirement being 1% of
offered are the energy-dense seed types (the all-sunflower
the diet. If the diet becomes deficient, a rapid decline in
seed diet) then they will rapidly achieve their MER and
cellular integrity occurs. This is manifested clinically by
then exceed it, leading to obesity.
the skin becoming flaky and dry and prone to recurrent
infections. Fluid loss through the skin is also increased,
Protein and amino acids
even to the extent of causing polydipsia. It is, however,
The 10 essential amino acids required by birds and rep-
tiles are also needed by the small mammals considered
ficient in linoleic acid as it is widely found in sunflower
here, and the concept of biological value of a protein is
seeds and safflower seeds among others. It is also present
just as applicable. In addition, it is known that an extra
in the animal protein fed to ferrets.
supplement of the amino acid glycine is required for diets
The latter species has a requirement for arachidonic
low in the amino acids methionine or arginine.
acid as well, similar to cats, without which they will
 For small mammals, levels of dietary protein required
develop a number of problems such as skin diseases, in-
have been shown to vary from maintenance to reproduc-
cluding intense pruritus. Ferrets have an overall fat re-
tive needs (Hillyer ef al., 1997; Dierenfield et al., 2006),
quirement of 20-30% of dry matter fed. Rabbits require
and from species to species:
no additional dietary fat other than the 2-5% provided
· 35% for ferrets
in their vegetable-based diet, similar to the rodent, chin-
+ 14-20% in rodents
chilla and guinea pig families. Sugar gliders have been re-
。18-20% in guinea pigs
ported typically fed fats at 6-14% dry matter (Dierenfeld
· 15-18% in rabbits as dry matter
etal.,2006).
 16-20% for chinchillas and guinea pigs
Another essential fatty acid which is thought to be
· Reported as low as 7% but advised to be 19-25% for
important for rodents is alpha-linolenic acid which is nec-
sugar gliders
essary for some prostaglandin and eicosanoid synthesis.
The majority of this protein in granivorous rodent diets
The problem of overconsumption of fats in small mam-
seems to come from seeds. Some seeds are very high pro-
viders of certain amino acids. Sunflower seeds, white mil-
and high-fat oil seeds are the prime culprits in this case.
let and rapeseed, for example, provide high levels of the
Obesity can also be a problem for overfed, underworked
sulphur-containing amino acids methionine and cystine,
ferrets fed overweight laboratory rats, for example.
Small Mammal Nutrition  51
Saturated animal fats provide cholesterol, often in exces-
sive amounts, to ferrets, and hepatic lipidosis can be the
result. Because rodents and rabbits have a much lower re-
quirement for fat, excess plant fats can also cause severe
hepatic lipidosis and, in rabbits, atherosclerosis in the
aorta. Sources of sunflower and other high-fat oil-based
seeds are often the culprits.
MALS
Carbohydrate
Carbohydrates are primarily used for rapid energy pro-
duction. This is particularly important for herbivorous
small mammals that constantly demand rapid supplies of
energy for their often hyperactive and high-metabolic-rate
WS
Figure 4.2 A chinchilla showing cheek tooth elongation leading to
lives. Small mammals that are debilitated in some way will
mouth ulcers and anorexia.
particularly benefit from the supply of high carbohydrate
foods. Ferrets have no requirement for carbohydrates
(similarly to cats) with blood glucose being provided by
hepatic gluconeogenesis from amino acid sources.
Fibre
Dietary fibre does not seem to be important for ferrets.
Indeed, their extremely short gastrointestinal tract and
minimal bacterial microflora show an inability to cope
with any fbre at all. Herbivorous small mammals, par-
ticularly the guinea pig, the chinchilla and the rabbit, rely
more heavily on fibre. Fibre in these species is important
for a number of reasons.
First, it provides a source of abrasive food, as most of
the fbre-providing foods, such as grasses, contain sili-
Figure 4.3 A guinea pig showing cheek tooth elongation and
buccal spurs leading to ulceration of the tongue and anorexia.
cates, which wear down the teeth. This is important as
these species have open-rooted or continually growing
Second, the fbre is essential to stimulate gut motility.
teeth, which need to be kept in check (Figures 4.1-4.3)
These species are hind gut fermenters and rely on the mi-
croflora of the hind gut to digest food by breaking down
the cellulose. Fibre is converted by the intestinal micro-
flora into volatile fatty acids, which decrease the pH of
the caecum and large bowel, so preventing bacterial over-
growth and minimising enteritis problems. Without suf-
ficient fibre, the hind gut fermenting species develop a
mucoid enteropathy, with intermittent constipation, diar-
rhoea and colic.
Rabbits may also be inclined to overgroom themselves,
consume large volumes of fur as a “fibre source' and so
develop fur balls (trichobezoars) which may complete-
ly block the stomach. Rabbits have a requirement for
12-16% crude fbre, which is similar to guinea pigs, but
chinchilla dietary fibre levels have been quoted as vary-
 Figure 4.1 Incisor malocclusion in a rabbit may be due to
ing from 15% to 35% (Hoefer, 1994). Ihe high levels for
inappropriately low levels of fibre in the diet, leading to molar
overgrovth. This forces the mouth open so that the incisors do not
chinchillas are explained by their natural diet, which is
wear against each other and so overgrow.
chiefly composed of poor-quality, highly abrasive and
52 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
fbrous grasses in the arid and high altitude Andes Moun-
Vitamin D: This vitamin is primarily concerned with
tains of South America. The lack of such fibre in pet diets
calcium metabolism. Cholecalciferol is manufactured in
  a s  s s s 
bility to molar malocclusion problems. It is recommend-
violet light. Small mammals kept indoors therefore pro-
ed that chinchillas and rabbits are fed good quality hay,
duce much less of this compound, and this can lead to
dried grass or dried grass pellets as 30-50% of their diet
deficiency. Cholecalciferol must then be activated in the
as a minimum. The sole feeding of pelleted and dry mix
liver and kidneys before it can function in calcium me-
5
foods currently available leads to a major fibre shortage
tabolism. Once formed into its active metabolite it acts in
W
which leads to lack of dental wear, gastrointestinal upsets
concert with parathyroid hormone to increase reabsorp-
and obesity.
tion of calcium at the expense of phosphorus from the
W
Unlike rabbits and other species, guinea pigs do not
kidneys, to increase absorption of calcium from the intes-
eat until their calorific requirements are satisfied and
tines and to mobilise calcium from the bones, all of these
then stop, but instead eat until their digestive system is
functions increasing the blood's calcium levels.
full, irespective of how diluted the energy of the diet is
Hypovitaminosis D3 causes problems with cal-
RT
by increased fbre. Recommended minimum crude fibre
cium metabolism and leads to rickets. This is exac-
levels for guinea pigs are 10%, with an average of 13%
erbated by low-calcium-containing diets, a typical
being routinely offered (Hillyer et al., 1997).
sufferer being an indoor kept small mammal, fed an all
seed diet in the case of a rodent or an all meat and no
Vitamins
calcium supplement diet for a ferret. This leads to well-
Fat-soluble vitamins
muscled, heavy rodents or ferrets, with poorly miner-
Vitamin A: In small herbivores the diet frequently con-
alised bones, flaring of the epiphyseal plates at the ends
tains only the vitamin A precursors, as carotenoid plant
of the long bones and concomitant bowing of the limbs,
pigments, whereas in ferrets, vitamin A itself is obtained
especially the tibiotarsal bones. Recommended mini-
from animal proteins and does not need to be synthesised.
-oel pue stuapoi ioy paag yo S/ni 6-s'e ane slaaal umu
In small herbivores, the most important form of these
morphs (Wallach & Hof, 1982) and 0.5-1.5 IU/g dry
 precursors in terms of how much vitamin A can be pro-
matter for sugar gliders.
duced from it is beta-carotene. Because it is fat-soluble,
Hypervitaminosis D occurs due to over supplementa-
vitamin A can be stored in the body, primarily in the liver.
tion with D and calcium and leads to calcification of soft
Hypovitaminosis A is an uncommonly seen problem
tissues, such as the medial arterial walls, and the kidneys,
in small mammals. This is because green vegetables are
creating hypertension and causing organ failure. Recom-
good providers of the beta-carotenes. A problerm can
mended maximum levels are 20o0 IU/kg dry matter of
arise with rodents that develop an addiction to seeds such
food fed for most small mammals (Wallach & Hoff, 1982).
as sunflower seeds and peanuts. Hypovitaminosis A in
rabbits can cause infertility, foetal resorption, abortion,
Vitarmin E: Ihis compound is found in several active
stillbirth and neurological defects such as hydrocepha-
forms in plants, the most active being alpha-tocopherol. It
lus. In ferrets it can cause infertility, poor coat and fluid
is used as an antioxidant and in immune system function.
retention (anasarca). Recommendations for dietary levels
Hypovitaminosis E in ferrets results in a yellow disco-
include 70o0 IU/kg for rabbits (Carpenter & Kolmstetter,
louration in body fat deposits, haemolytic anaemia and
2000). The low levels may be met by as little as 200 g of
a progressive paresis of the limbs. In addition, a series of
carrot per day for a 2 kg rabbit, but would require 70 kg of
firm swellings underneath the skin in the inguinal area
oats to provide the same levels!
may be seen. In rabbits a similar disease is seen with
Hypervitaminosis A rarely occurs naturally, but may
hindlimb paresis and white muscle degeneration. In ham-
be induced by overdosing with vitamin A injections
sters, deficiencies have been reported as causing muscu-
at 10o0 times or more the daily recommended doses. If this
lar weakness, ocular secretions and death, often due to
occurs, acute toxicity develops with mucus membrane and
cardiac muscle damage. Hypovitaminosis E may occur
skin sloughing, liver damage and frequently, death within
due to a reduction in fat metabolism or absorption as can
24-48 hours. It may also be seen in ferrets fed predomi-
occur in small intestinal, pancreatic or biliary diseases,
nantly the livers of prey items. In these cases excess bony
or due to a lack of green plant material, the chief source
production may occur similar to the syndrome seen in cats.
of the compound, in the diet. Recommended levels for
Small Mammal Nutrition  53
rabbits are 40 mg/kg dry matter of food offered (National
dermatitis. Rats may also have anaemia and porphyrin-
Research Council, 1978).
In addition, feeding diets high in unsaturated fats
Biotin: Deficiency may occur in animals fed large
(such as oily fish) may use up the body's reserves of vita-
amounts of unfertilised, raw eggs, the whites of which
 min E and so induce signs of hypovitaminosis E. This has
contain the antibiotin vitamin, avidin. Ihis can be seen
occurred in ferrets and mink fed such a diet.
in ferrets and chipmunks when greater than 10% of the
Hypervitaminosis E is extremely rare.
diet is composed of raw egg. Deficiency produces exfolia
Vitamin K: Because of its production by bacteria, it
tive dermatitis, toes may become gangrenous and slough
is very diffcult to get a true deficiency of vitamin K,
off and ataxia may be observed. The recommended mini-
although absorption will again be reduced when fat di-
aeu Aip se pooy udd te'o-zl'o st juauanban uumu
gestion or absorption is reduced, as in, for exarmple, bili-
for small mammals ( Wallach & Hoff, 1982).
ary or pancreatic disease.
Folic acid: Deficiency occurs mainly because of the
Ferrets eating prey which has been killed by warfarin
will show signs of deficiency. Rabbits and guinea pigs
folic acid inhibitors that are present in some foods such
as cabbage and other brassicas, oranges, beans and peas.
-adxa ose ues siaaol laams jo sumoue aaiel Burea
ence a relative deficiency. The signs of disease that are
The use of trimethoprim sulphonamide drugs also reduc-
es gut bacterial folic acid production. Deficiency causes
seen are due to increased internal and external haem-
a number of problems, such as failure in reproductive
orrhage, but vitamin K also has some function in
tract maturation, macrocytic anaemia due to failure of
calcium/phosphorous metabolism in the bones and this
red blood cell maturation and immune system cellular
may also be affe cted.
dysfunction.
Choline: Because of their interactions, the need for cho-
Water-soluble vitamins
 line is dependent on levels of folic acid and vitamin Bi2-
Vitamin B,(thiamine): Hypovitaminosis B is uncom-
mon, but may be seen in ferrets fed raw saltwater fish
That is, a deficiency may be caused if the latter are def-
which contain thiaminases. When a relative deficiency
cient, as may occur in an animal fed a diet high in fats.
Deficiency causes retarded growth, disrupted fat metabo-
occurs, neurological signs such as opisthotonus, weak-
ness and head tremors are seen. Ferrets can suffer from
lism and fatty liver damage. Recommended minimum
a condition known as Chastek syndrome. The symptoms
requirements for small mammals are 880-1540 mg/kg
may include salivation, paralysis, incoordination, pu-
food as dry matter.
pillary dilation and easily induced convulsions, which
Vitamin C: There is no direct need for this vitamin in
are characterised by strong ventral flexion of the neck.
small mammals other than the guinea pig, as vitamin C
Evidence of dilated cardiomyopathies is seen at post-
may be synthesised from glucose in the liver. In sonme
mortem. Ihe recommended minimum level for most
 marsupials it can be synthesised in the kidney. In the sug-
small mammals is around 6-7 mg/kg of diet dry matter
 ar glider it is not currently known whether it can synthe-
(Wallach & Hoff, 1982). Sugar gliders fed primarily on
sise vitamin C, but the Virginia opossum can do so in its
pollen/nectar replacers may develop thiamine deficien-
liver. The guinea pig lacks the enzyme L-gluconolactone
cies owing to the low levels of thiamine in these food
oxidase and therefore cannot convert glucose to ascorbic
sources. Clinically this can present with seizures. Ensur-
acid, so has a dietary requirement for vitamin C. How-
ing adequate mineral vitamin pre-loading of insects in
ever, during disease processes, particularly those condi-
the sugar glider diet will prevent this.
tions that affect liver function, it may be beneficial to the
Vitamin Bz (riboflavin): Hypovitaminosis Bz is very rare
recovery process in all species to provide a dietary source
and produces growth retardation, roughened coat, alope-
of vitamin C
Vitamin C is required for the formation of elastic
cia, excess scurf and cataract formation.
fbres and connective tissues and is an excellent antioxi-
Niacin: Rodents fed a high proportion of one type of seed
dant, similar to vitamin E. Deficiency leads to 'scurvy'
such as sweetcorn can become deficient in niacin. Ihey
Signs of scurvy include poor wound healing, increased
exhibit blackening of the tongue (known as pellagra) and
bleeding due to capillary-wall fragility, gingivitis and
oral mucosa, retarded growth, poor coat quality and scaly
bone alterations. Ihese include the swelling of long bones
54 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
close to joints (the epiphyseal plates), which become very
Levels of calcium >4% dry matter for rabbits will lead to
painful. In addition, crusting occurs at mucocutane-
soft tissue mineralisation in sites such as the aorta and
ous junctions such as the eyes, mouth and nose, as well
kidneys. Calcium deficiency and metabolic bone disease
as loosening of the teeth due to periodontal ligament
problems are common in omnivorous marsupials such as
weakening.
the sugar glider which consume sap and insects in large
Vitamin C also helps in the absorption of some miner-
als, such as iron, from the gut.
calcaemic tetany has also been reported in sugar gliders.
57
The daily recommended requirement for guinea pigs
W
Phosphorus: Like calcium, phosphorus is used in bone
is 10 mg/kg body weight for maintenance, increasing to
formation, but it is also used in cell structure and energy
30 mg/kg body weight during gestation, although treat-
W
storage. It is widespread in plant and animal tissues, but
ment of scurvy recormmends levels of 50-100 mg/kg until
in the former it may be bound up in unavailable form as
resolution of clinical signs (Harkness & Wagner, 1995).
MS
 u aos no ua q uia aq  s
phytates. Levels of phosphorus are controlled in the body
as for calcium, the two being in equal and opposite equi-
min C tablets may be placed in the drinking water each
 librium with each other. Iherefore, if dietary phosphorus
day if the guinea pig is still drinking adequately. In addi-
tion, fresh fruit and vegetables as well as a specific sup-
levels exceed calcium levels appreciably (a maximum
of twice the calcium levels on average) the parathyroid
plemented guinea pig diet, should always be fed. Many
glands become stimulated to produce more parathyroid
deficiencies occur due to guinea pigs being housed with
 rabbits and therefore fed only dry rabbit food which has
hormone in an effort to restore the balance. This causes
nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism which leads
no supplemental vitamin C
to progressive bone demineralisation and then renal dam-
age due to the high circulating levels of parathyroid hor-
Minerals
mone. High dietary phosphorus also reduces the amount
Macro-minerals
of calcium which can be absorbed from the gut, as it com-
Calcium: Calcium has a wide range of functions, the two
plexes with the calcium present there. Ihis can be a big
most obvious being its role in the formation of the skeleton
and mineralisation of bone matrix, and its use in muscu-
problem for ferrets that are fed pure meat diets with no
calcium or bone supplement, and in rodents that are pre-
lar contraction. Ihe active form of calcium in the body is
dominantly seed eaters, as cereals are high phosphorus/
the ionic double-charged molecule Ca?+. Low levels of this
low calcium foods. Feeding green vegetables or supple-
form, even though the overall body reserves of calcium
mentation with calcium powders may therefore be neces-
may be normal, lead to hyperexcitability, fitting and death.
sary. In the case of ferrets a standard ferret complete diet,
Calcium levels in the body are controlled by
 or whole rodent prey, should be fed to avoid this.
vitamin D, parathyroid hormone and calcitonin.
The ratio of calcium to phosphorus is very important.
Potassiur: As with larger mammals, this is the ma-
As one increases the other decreases and vice versa. A
jor intracellular positive ion. Rarely is there a dietary
ratio therefore of 2:1 calcium to phosphorus is desirable
deficiency. Severe stress can cause hypokalaemia due to
in juvenile and lactating small mammals and 1.5:1 for
increased kidney excretion of potassium due to elevated
adults.Excessive dietary calcium (>1%) though reduces
plasma proteins, as can persistent diarrhoea. Hypokalae-
the use of proteins, fats, phosphorus, manganese, zinc,
mia can lead to cardiac dysrhythmias, muscle spasticity
iron and iodine. In rabbits, this is exacerbated by their
and neurological dysfunction. Other symptoms are stunted
unique method of calcium control, in that they have no
growth, ascites, abnormally short hair and reduced appe-
ability to reduce calcium absorption from the gut, as do
tite. Potassium is present in high amounts in certain fruits,
other species. Instead, all available calcium is absorbed
such as bananas. It is controlled in equilibrium with sodi-
from the diet, and any excess must then be excreted
um by the adrenal hormone aldosterone which promotes
through the kidneys. Ihis leads to excess calcium excre-
sodium retention and potassium excretion.
tion into the urine, the formation of calcium carbonate
 crystals and urolithiasis. In addition, as rabbits are herbiv-
Sodium: This is the main extracellular positive ion and
orous, their urine pH is alkaline, and as calcium carbon-
regulates the body's acid-base balance and osmotic
ate (limestone) is less soluble in alkaline environments it
potential. In conjunction with potassium, it is responsible
precipitates more readily in the urine, forming crystals.
for nerve signals and impulses. Rarely does a true dietary
Small Mammal Nutrition  55
deficiency occur, but hyponatraemia may occur due to
similar to those of vitamin E in that it helps keep
chronic diarrhoea or renal disease. This disrupts the os-
 peroxidases from attacking polyunsaturated fats in cell
motic potential gradient in the kidneys and water is lost
membranes. A general deficiency in both selenium and
leading to further dehydration. Excessive levels of sodium
vitamin E will lead to liver necrosis, steatitis and muscular
'os rood oi peal (papuaosan sanl 0i<) iatp aui u!
dystrophy. The selenium content of plants is dependent
polyuria, hypertension, oedema and death
on where they were grown and the levels of selenium in
the soil. Recommended minimum requirements are still
Chlorine: This is the major extracellular negative ion and
not clearly defined for small mammals in general.
responsible for maintaining acid-base balances in con-
junction with sodium and potassium. Deficiencies are
Zinc: This is a vital trace element for wound healing and
rare, but if they do occur, retarded growth and kidney
tissue formation, forming part of a number of enzymes.
disease are commonly seen.
 Deficiencies can occur in young, rapidly growing guinea
 pigs and chinchillas fed on plant material high in phy-
WS
tates such as cabbage, wheat bran and beans. In addition,
Micro-minerals (trace elements)
Copper: Copper is used in haemoglobin synthesis, col-
high dietary calcium decreases zinc uptake. Deficiency
lagen synthesis and in the maintenance of the nervous
produces retarded growth and poor skin quality with
increased scurf and hyperirritability. Zinc deficiency alo-
system. Copper toxicosis has been reported in ferrets in
the United States as a possible hereditary storage disease.
 pecia is particularly seen at about day 50 of gestation in
The symptoms are of liver disease, as seen in Bedlington
chinchillas with hair regrowth occurring 2-3 weeks after
Terriers (Brown, 1997). Deficiency has been reported in
parturition (Smith et a., 1977). Minimum recommended
hamsters as a cause of poor coat quality and generalised
requirements are 20-122 ppm for small mammals ( Wal-
alopecia. Minimum recommended levels are 13-20 ppm
lach & Hoff, 1982). Zinc toxicosis has been reported in
(Wallach & Hoff, 1982).
ferrets, with anaemia, lethargy and hindlimb paresis, and
was associated with feeding from zinc galvanised buckets
Iodine: Iodine's sole function is in thyroid hormone syn-
(Donnelly, 1997).
thesis, which affects metabolic rate. Deficiency causes
goitre, and has knock-on effects on growth causing stunt-
Requirements for young and
ing, stillbirths and neurological problems. It is a relatively
lactating small mammals
uncommon finding in small mammals but may occur in
Rabbit
species such as rabbits that are fed large volumes of goi-
Neonatal rabbits nurse for only 3-5 minutes at a time once
trogenic (iodine inhibiting) plants such as cabbage, kale
or twice in a 24-hour period and are totally dependent on
and Brussels sprouts.
their mother's milk up to day 21 postpartum (Okerman,
Iron: This is essential, as with larger mammals, for the
1994). At this time they should be weighed, as solid foods
formation of the oxygen-carrying part of the haemoglo-
offered will be increasingly consumed, and weight losses
bin molecule. Absorption from the gut is normally rela-
may be seen if they do not eat enough of this. The doe
tively poor, as the body is very good at recycling its own
-aq spooy Aip panaad aro Aauisanu panao aq Aeu
iron levels. Vitamin C enhances iron uptake from the gut.
fore weaning, as her energy demands increase to 3.5 times
 In sugar gliders Dierenfield et al. (2006) recommend less
maintenance by peak lactation. Ad-lib dry food is there-
than 50 μg/g of dry diet of iron to avoid iron storage dis-
fore often advocated for the doe at this stage. It should
ease, which can damage the liver.
be noted though that levels of food for the doe should
Manganese: Deficiency has been reported as causing
not start to be dramatically increased until 5-7 days after
poor bone growth, with limb shortening as a conse-
parturition. Early overfeeding can cause excessive milk
 production, and mastitis will result if the kits do not have
quence. Recommended daily requirements are from 40
shid eauna ioy saesop nauau au m udd Zon 0
qea pe spuea Aieu a Aidua oi aadde qnoua
sitting. For hand-rearing forrmulas, see page 28.
(Wallach & Hoff, 1982).
Growing kits require higher levels of vitamin D and
Selenium: The main role of selenium is as part of the
calcium than their adult counterparts. To ensure that this
antioxidant enzyme glutathione peroxidase, with which
 is received, a balanced diet should be offered, combining
vitamin E is also involved. Its functions are therefore
pelleted food, good quality grass hay and some greens
56 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Dry foods should be carefully chosen. Many are bal-
Young guinea pigs are frequently not hungry for the
anced nutritionally, but only if the rabbit consumes all
first 12-24 hours after birth because they have brown fat
parts equally. Rabbits are concentrate selectors (that is
reserves. Ihey should not be force-fed during this time.
they will preferentially pick out those foods containing
Young chinchillas and guinea pigs eat solid foods practi-
the highest calories in their environment and eat them
cally from day 1 after parturition. It is important therefore
first). Therefore, if offered one of the 'muesli'-type diets,
to ensure high-fibre foods are offered preferentially at this
it will eat all of the fatty, carbohydrate foods first, and,
stage so as to avoid them developing into fussy eaters in
5
if provided ad-lib, they will not get around to eating the
later life.
W
high fibre, calcium-containing grass pellets. Hence, it is
Rodents such as rats and gerbils have been quoted as
advised either to use a homogenous pelleted diet where
 needing a dietary protein level of 20-26% during and pri-
W
all of the pellets are exactly the same, or to feed enough
or to pregnancy and lactation, as opposed to their more
in 24 hours so that the bowl is cormpletely ermptied before
usual 1618%
MS
offering more. Access to unfiltered natural sunlight is also
For rearing formulas see page 29.
advised, even if for only 15-20 min/day, to ensure suf-
ficient vitamin D synthesis. Lactating does will also have
Omnivorous marsupials
higher calcium requirements, and so their consumption
of pelleted diet and grass products (both high in calcium)
gliders from around 46 k]/day as basal requirements to
will increase. Care should be taken, though, not to overdo
229 kJ/day for growth and activity. Lactation has much
se 'sseia/key Aitenb poog po asuadxa aul ie siat paiaiad
higher demands on the female marsupial than gesta-
excessive amounts of calcium and vitamin D can come to
tion, due to the altricial nature of the joeys when born.
be present, leading to reno- and urolithiasis as well as soft
Many insectivorous marsupials can enter a state of torpor
tissue mineralisation.
when food sources (mainly the insect source which pro-
vides most of the protein, fats and calories) are scarce to
Ferret
Young ferrets have a higher calorific requirement than
they will appear to be unrousable. It is not uncommon for
adults, as do lactating jills, needing 1.5-2 times main-
these periods to last up to 1l hours.
tenance adult calorie levels. Ihe protein requirement
For rearing formulas for sugar gliders and Virginia
is a minimum of 35% in young growing ferrets and
aeas sssodo
lactating jills with a fat level of a minimum of 25% as
dry matter (Kupersmith, 1998). For rearing formulas
Requirements for debilitated
see page 35.
small mammals
In general, requirements for debilitated animals will vary
Rodents, chinchilla and guinea pig
from 1.5 to 3 times maintenance levels, with the lower
The guinea pig sow, when lactating, has a requirement
levels being for mildly injured or infected animals and the
for vitamin C which increases from 10 to 30 mg/kg per
upper levels for burns victims and cases of serious organ
day. She also has the usual increases in calcium, energy
damage or septicaemia.
and protein demands. Ihe demands for increased calo-
 Fluid therapy as additional support is essential, par-
ries are particularly important, as the long gestation of
ticularly for the herbivorous mammals, which have very
the guinea pig (average 63 days) and the frequent litter
high maintenance requirements when compared with
size of 3-4 piglets, place huge stresses on the sow. If these
cats and dogs (on average 80-100 mL/kg per day). Also,
increased requirements are not met, then a condition
herbivore gut contents are voluminous and need to be
known as pregnancy toxaemia, or ketosis ensues. This
kept fluid. For further details see chapters 6 and 8.
is when a lack of available calories leads to increased fat
mobilisation. If this is combined with a glucose defcit
Rabbit
the fats are converted into chemicals known as ketones.
The debilitated rabbit may be supported with naso-
These produce metabolic acidosis in addition to the
gastric or oral syringe feeding of vegetable-based baby
hypoglycaemic state. Death can follow within 24 hours.
foods (lactose free varieties), or, for preference, with a
Prevention is geared towards avoiding obesity and sud-
gruel composed of ground dry rabbit pellets and water
den dietary change, both of which set up the condition.
as this will supply a better fbre level for gut stimulation.
Small Mammal Nutrition  57
Amounts suggested to feed at any one sitting vary from 3
 scruffed prior to administration. Volumes suggested vary
to 15 mL four to six times daily.
 from 0.5 mL for a mouse, up to 2.5 mL for a rat at any one
A nasogastric tube (more correctly a naso-oesophageal
sitting, the dose to be repeated 6-8 times daily to ensure
tube as the tubing must not allow reflux of acid stomach
correct calorie administration. Diets such as dry rodent
contents into the oesophagus) is placed after first spraying
pellets ground in a coffee grinder and then added to wa-
the nose with lignocaine spray. A 3-4 French tube is pre-
ter to form gruel, or the use of vegetable-based, lactose-
measured from the extended nose to the seventh rib or
-u pe sid eau asn aq aeu sooy Aeq aa
caudal end of the sternum and then inserted. Sterile water
las beneft from the use of oral cisapride to stimulate gut
should be flushed through the tube before and after feed-
motility, as well as the use of gruels made from higher-
ing to ensure it is correctly placed and does not become
fbre chinchilla or rabbit pellets. Naso-oesophageal tubes
blocked. The tube may then be glued, taped or sutured to
can be attempted for the larger individuals of these two
the dorsal aspect of the head and a bung inserted when
species.
not in use. It may be necessary to put an Elizabethan col-
NS
lar on the rabbit to prevent removal.
Marsupials
Ihe use of cisapride at a dose of 0.5 mg/kg orally every
- al a Pom ia i e siaa s 
8-24 hours (Smith & Bergmann, 1997) is to be advocated
lowing (Johnson-Delaney, 2010): 15 mL of Leadbeater's
 in rabbits to stimulate large bowel activity, and encourage
mix (which is in itself made of 150 mL warm water plus
the return of normal appetite.
150 mL honey plus one shelled, hard-boiled egg plus 15 g
 Older rabbits often do better on lower protein (14%)
of baby cereal (rice-based) plus 5 g of powdered avian
and higher fbre (18%) diets as these reduce the risk of
vitamin and mineral supplement); 15 g of an insectivore/
obesity, kidney and liver damage.
carnivore diet; and then various additions as treats such
as chopped fruit and live gut fed insects, which should not
Ferret
exceed 10% of the diet. The practice of gut-loading insects
The debilitated ferret may be supported with nasogas-
with vitamin/mineral supplements is useful and should
tric or oral syringe feeding of meat-based baby foods,
be familiar to anyone keeping reptiles.
or commercially prepared liquid meat-based formu-
las designed for cats and dogs such as Reanimyl and
Probiotics
Hill's a/d. Amounts suggested for feeding at any one sit-
The use of oral probiotics is recommended for small her-
ting vary from 2 to 10 mL three to six times daily. It is vi-
bivores, to encourage normal digestive function by pro-
tally important that no debilitated ferret goes longer than
viding enzymes and to encourage normal pH conditions.
4 hours without nutritional support, as they will become
 Probiotics are best added to the drinking water but may
rapidly hypoglycaemic.
be added to the syringed food to ensure consumption.
A feline 3 French nasogastric tube can easily be placed
via the nostril after frst spraying the area with lignocaine
References
spray. Ihe tube should be premeasured to extend from
Bell, J. {1993) Ferret nutrition and diseases associated with
the nose tip to the level of the seventh rib (i.e. it is really a
inadequate nutrition. Proceedings of the North American
Veterinary Conference, Orlando,FL, pp. 719-720.
naso-oesophageal tube, to avoid the acid contents of the
Brown, S.A. (1997) Basic anatomy, physiology and husbandry.
stomach refluxing and causing an oesophagitis) and cut
Ferrets, Rabbits and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and
to this length. It may then be secured with tissue glue,
Surgery (eds E.V. Hillyer & K.E. Quesenberry), Pp. 3-13.
or taped or sutured to the skin over the forehead. It is
W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
advised to fit an Elizabethan collar to prevent the ferret
Carpenter, J.W. and Kolmstetter, C.M. (2000) Feeding small
exotic mammals. Hills Nutrition, Pp. 943-960. Mark Mervis
removing the tube. The tube should be flushed with sterile
Institute, Marceline, MO.
water before and after feeding to ensure the tubing is in
Dierenfeld, E.S., Thomas, D. and Ives, R. (2006) Comparison of
the correct position and does not block
commonly used diets on intake, digestion, growth and health
in captive sugar gliders (Petaurus breviceps). Journal of Exotic
Rodents, chinchilla and guinea pig
Pet Medicine, 15{3), 218-224.
Donnely, TM. (1997) Basic anatomy, physiology and
Syringe feeding orally or using a straight avian crop tube
husbandry. Ferrets, Rabbits and Rodents: Clinicat Medicine and
to administer liquid food directly into the oesophagus are
Surgery (eds E.V. Hillyer & K.E. Quesenberry), Pp. 147-159.
advised. The latter may be stressful, as the rodent must be
W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
58 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Harkness, J.E. and Wagner, J.E. (1995) The Biotogy and Medicine
Smith, J.C., Brown, E.D. and Cassidy, W.A. (1977) Zinc and
gf Rabbits and Rodents, 4th edn, P. 230. Lea & Febiger,
vitamin A: interrelationships of zinc metabolism. Current
Philadelphia, PA.
Aspects in Heatth and Disease. Alan R. Liss, Inc., New York.
Hillyer, E.V., Quesenberry, K.E. and Donnelly, T.M. (1997)
Wallach, J.D. and Hoff, G.L. {1982) Nutritional diseases of
Biology, husbandry and clinical techniques. Ferrets, Rabits
mammals. Noninfectious Diseases of Wildlife (eds G.L. Hoff &
and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery (eds E.V.
JW. Davis), Pp. 133-135 and 143-144. Iowa State University
Hillyer & K.E. Quesenberry), Pp. 243-259. W.B. Saunders,
Press, Iowa.
Philadelphia, PA.
Hoefer, H.L. (1994) Chinchillas. Veterinary Clinics North
American Small Animal Practice, 24, 103-111.
Further reading
W
Hume, I. (1999) Metabolic rates and nutrient requirements.
Booth, R. (2003) Sugar gliders. Seminars in Avian and Exotic Pet
Marsupial Nutrition (ed. I. Hume), PP. 1-34. Cambridge
Medicine, 12(4), 228-231.
2
University Press, Cambridge.
Fraser, M.A.and Girling, S.J.(2009) Rabbit Medicine and Surgery
Johnson-Delaney, C. (2010) Marsupials. Manual of Exotic
for Veterinary Nurses. Blackwell-Wiley, Oxford.
WS
Pets {eds A. Meredith & C. Johnson-Delaney), 5th edn,
Harkness, JE. and Wagner, J.E. (2000) Biotogy and Medicine of
PP. 103-126. BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
Rabbits and Rodents, 5th edn. Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia, PA.
Kupersmith, D.s. (1998) A practical overview of small mammal
Keeble, E. and Meredith, A. (2009) Manual of Rodents and
1H
nutrition. Seminars in Avian and Exotic Pet Medicine, 7(3),
Ferrets. BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
141-147.
MacPherson, C. (1997) Sugar Gliders. A Complete Owners
National Research Council {1978) Nutrient Requirements of
Marual. Barron's Educational Series, Hauppage, NY.
Laboratory Animals. National Academy Press, Washington,
Meredith, A. and Flecknall, P. (2006) Marual of Rabbits, 2nd edn.
DC.
BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
Okerman, L. (1994) Diseases of Domestic Rabbits, lst edn.
Meredith, A. and Johnson-Delaney, C. (2010) Manual of Exotic
Blackwell Science, Oxford.
Pets, Sth edn. BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
Smith, D.A. and Bergmann, PM. (1997) Formulary. Ferrets,
Okerman, L. (1998) Diseases of Domestic Rabbits, 2nd edn.
Rabbits and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery {eds
Blackwell Science, Oxford.
E.V. Hiller & K.E. Quesenberry), Pp. 392-403. W.B. Saunders,
Quesenberry, K.E. and Carpenter, J. (2003) Ferrets, Rabbits and
Philadelphia, PA.
Rodents,2nd edn. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
Chapter 5
Common Diseases of Small Mammals
DISEASES OF THE DOMESTIC
All of the above mites are surface-dwelling, and may
RABBIT
therefore be harvested for identification using a flea
Skin disease
comb, or Sellotape strip applied to the affected area and
then stuck to a microscope slide for examination.
Ectoparasitic
Burrowing mites are rare in rabbits, the two main ones
Mites
being Sarcoptes scabiei and Notoedres spp. They produce
Cheyletiella parasitivorax produces dense, white scurf
intensely pruritic skin lesions, and are diagnosed after
along the dorsum, starting around the nape of the neck
 skin scrapings and microscopic examination.
and spreading outwards and caudally. Ihe fur drops out
-de jou Aeuu uopuos aul Xidei smoiaa iny mau pue
Lice
pear pruritic, although in severe cases rabbits will self-
traumatise. Microscopically it appears as a large mite,
mestic rabbits, and belongs to the sucking (Anoplura)
with an obvious waist. Ihe mouthparts have claws, and
family. It is slender and often blood flled, and may cause
the ends of the legs posses combs rather than suckers.
significant anaemia in young kits.
Owners may be bitten by this mite in the classical pattern
of three bites.
Fleas
Psoroptes cuniculi lives in the external ear canal of rab-
The rabbit flea is Spillopsyllus cuniculi and is the chief vec-
bit, where it irritates the lining making it weep serum.
tor for myxomatosis. It tends to concentrate around the
The serum dries in brown crusts which in severe cases
ears of the rabbit and may be distinguished from the cat
may obliterate the lumen completely (see Figure 5.1).
[eua paaueue kanbiqo jo aouasand au Aq ea bop pue
Infestation can lead to serious secondary bacterial ear in-
ctenidium. Ihese are the fronds which line the mouth-
fections which can cause vestibular disease. Ihe mites are
parts of the flea, and which are horizontal in the cat and
large enough to be seen with the naked eye. Microscopi-
dog fleas.
cally they have pointed mouthparts and conical suckers to
the ends of the legs.
Blow-fly
Blow-flies cause a condition called myiasis (fly strike').
Leporacarus (Listrophorus) gibbusis a non-pathogenic fur
This horrible condition is common in outdoor rabbits
mite of rabbits. It is an oval mite with short legs, and so
that have perineal soiling due to urine scalding or diar-
may be distinguished from the above two mites on clini-
 rhoea. It is caused by flies including the blue, black and
cal signs and the absence of a 'waist' and having conical
green bottle families. These lay their eggs on the skin of
suckers and combs on the end of its legs.
the rabbit. In warm conditions these eggs hatch into lar-
Neotrombicula autumnalis is the harvest mite. It is not a
vae within 2 hours. The larvae then mature and burrow
true parasite, but the juvenile (six-legged) bright orange-
into the rabbit.
red mite may irritate the skin of rabbits which have ac-
cess to hay, grass or straw. It causes irritation of the skin
Other parasites
surface chiefly over the palmar/plantar aspect of the feet,
Coenurus serialis, which is the intermediate host for the
the face and ears. Its typical orange-
red colour is visible
adult tapeworm of dogs Taenia serialis, may form large,
to the naked eye, and its six-legged form distinguishes it
fluid-flled cysts in subcutaneous sites containing the sco-
from other mites.
lices of the tapeworm.
60  Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
ALS
W
W
WS
PARTI
Figure 5.2 Mlyxoma lesions on the nose of a rabbit with partial
immunity to myxomatosis.
‘Blue fur disease’is caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
which produces a blue pigment, staining the fur, and is
common in outdoor rabbits, or those kept in damp con-
ditions. It will infect damaged skin, such as occurs in the
dewlap area of many lop breeds, where wet skin chafes.
Rabbit syphilis, due to Treponema paraluiscuniculi,
affects the anogenital area, the nose and lips, producing
brown crusting lesions. Ihese may progress over the face.
Figure 5.1 Psoroptes cunicuf infection in a rabbit. Note the
This bacterium is thought to be passed from doe to young
extensive tan-coloured crusting and ulceration inside the pinna.
during parturition, and may be sexualy transmitted from
Viral
buck to doe and vice versa. It is not infectious for humans.
Myxomatosis
 In rabbits with partial immunity, myxomatosis produces
Fungal
crusting nodules on the skin of the nose, lips, feet and
The two commonly seen are Microsporum canis, which
base of the ears (see Figure 5.2). In these rabbits, death
will fluoresce under ultraviolet Wood's lamp, and the
can still occur up to 40 days after the initial signs, but
environmental Trichophyton mentagrophytes, which
does will not. Ihe lesions are dry, scaly, often grey
many will recover. Ihe acute form of myxomatosis causes
oedema of the periocular region, the base of the ears and
 mq eu pe a ia Buadde sanbd
the anal and genital openings. Ihe virus attacks internal
spreading to the feet and the rest of the body. Cultur-
organs as well, and in the unvaccinated domestic rabbit
ing brushings of the lesions on dermatophyte medium is
 is almost invariably fatal, running a course of 5-15 days.
advised for definitive diagnosis.
The myxomatosis virus is a member of the pox virus
family, and is transmitted by biting insects, chiefly fleas,
Managemental
 but mosquitoes and lice may also provide a source of
 The fur of fine- and long-haired breeds, such as the Ango-
infection.
ras mats easily, particularly when the animal is bedded on
straw, hay or shavings. Owners are advised to keep them
Bacterial
on paper or wire mesh, and to groom their rabbit once or
Rabbit pus is thick and inspissated Abscesses are com-
twice daily.
mon in the head where they are invariably associated
Overgrown claws are common, particularly in hutch-
with dental disease. Bacteria involved include Pasteu-
kept rabbits with little access to the outside. Claws should
rella multocida and Staphylococcus aureus although, after
be regularly assessed and, if necessary, trimmed on a
 prolonged antibiotic treatment, many anaerobic bacteria
4-6-week basis. Overgrown claws can lead to lateral
will flourish.
twisting of digit joints and deformity of the foot.
Common Diseases of Small Mammals 61
Perineal soiling may be due to faecal soiling from diar
evolved to cope with this. With a reduced abrasive diet,
rhoea, or inability to consume the caecotrophs which are
 teeth won't wear as rapidly and overgrowth will occur. As
softer than the faecal pellet. Urine scalding is also com-
the rabbit's mandible is narrower than its maxilla, even
mon. Older rabbits may have spinal arthritis, which pre-
wear occurs by lateral movement of the mandible across
vents them from positioning correctly to urinate, and lop
the maxilla. Inless abrasive, easier-chewed diets, this hap-
breeds have excessive folds of skin around the urogeni-
pens less effectively, and so the outer or buccal edges of
tal area. For mild cases, provision of absorbent bedding
the mandibular cheek teeth wear, and the inner or lingual
underneath a deep layer of straw is advised. Attention
edges of the maxillary cheek teeth wear, causing sharp
to cage and rabbit hygiene on a daily basis is essential to
points to form on the tongue side of the mandibular teeth
 prevent blow-fly strike and secondary bacterial skin in-
and the cheek side of the maxillary. These points grow,
fections.
the teeth tilt, and the mandibular teeth then cut into the
tongue, and the maxillary teeth into the cheeks leading to
Digestive disease
deep ulcers, pain and anorexia.
NS
Oral
The roots of the cheek teeth may grow back into the
Dental disease may present from salivation and anorex-
jaws as they elongate, due to a lack of space inside the
ia, through jaw bone swellings, to full-blown abscesses.
mouth. The roots then push through the ventral aspect of
Overgrown teeth may be obvious, as with incisor maloc-
the mandible, and may be felt as a series of lumps under-
clusions, or may be hidden from external view, as with
neath the angle of the lower jaw. In the maxilla, the roots
cheek teeth malocclusions. Dental problems may affect
of the last two cheek teeth can push into the orbit of the
other parts of the head, creating abscesses behind the
eye, causing ocular pain and epiphora.
globe of the eye, or the tear duct as it runs over the cheek
Incisors may overgrow due to elongation of the molars 
teeth and maxillary incisor roots, causing pus to appear at
 pushing the mouth open wider. Ihe maxillary incisors are
the eye or nares.
tightly curved whereas the mandibular incisors are more
Causes of dental disease include hereditary defects
(Netherland dwarf and lops), due to a shortened rostro-
maxillary incisors no longer close rostralto the mandibu-
caudal length of skull and abnormal bite (Figure 5.3), or
lar ones, and overgrowth ensues. The maxillary incisors
dietary deficiencies. Ihe two most commonly cited di-
curl back and into the mouth like ram's-horns, the man-
etary deficiencies include a lack of suitable abrasive food-
dibular incisors grow up in front of the nose. Maxillary
stuffs for dental wear, and a lack of calcium and vitamin
 root elongation may also occur when incisors meet end
 D, for proper jawbone mineralisation.
on end, causing constriction of the tear duct which bends
 Rabbits have adapted to survive on a diet consisting of
around them. This leads to dacryocystitis (inflammation
85% grass, and 15% leafy herbage. Meadow grass is very
of the tear duct). Ihe duct then dams back and a milky
high in silicates. Ihese are abrasive and are naturally very
white discharge appears at the eye. This is often misdiag-
wearing. Rabbits’ normal dental growth has therefore
nosed as a primary conjunctivitis (see Figure 5.4).
Figure 5.4 Ocular disease may be associated with rabbit snuffles
Figure 5.3 Brachygnathism is hereditary and may be a cause of
but often starts in the tear duct (dacryocystitis) due to pinching of
 malocclusion in rab bits.
the duct by overgrown (usually incisor) teeth roots.
62  Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Other causes of dental disease include physical trauma
only found in rabbits with access to the outside, where they
to the head and inappropriate clipping' of the teeth with
 may pick up the eggs of these worms directly from wild rab-
nail clippers. This twists and cracks the tooth root causing
bits faeces or indirectly via passive spread from wild birds,
further deformity and predisposing to infection.
Etc. A large intestinal pinworm, Passalurus ambiguus,is com-
 Radiography of the rabbit head plus close oral exami-
monly seen, but rarely causes disease. All of these worms'
nation under sedation or anaesthesia is essential to exam-
eggs may be detected in the faeces by flotation methods.
ine the full extent of the dental problem. Positive contrast
techniques may be used in the tear ducts to highlight
Hypomotility disorders
areas of narrowing or blockage (see Chapter 7).
Aetiology and clinical signs: One ofthe most important fac-
tors is the level of indigestible fibre in the diet. A lack of
Gastrointestinal
fibre results in reduced motility both by a lack of physical
Dietary
stimulation of the colon due to the absence of large fibre
Dietary causes, for example, a sudden change in diet,
particles and a decreased production of volatile fatty acids
will lead to tenmporary diarrhoea. Other dietary factors
in the caecum. Other causes include: increased adrenergic
PART
include the type of food fed. Spoiled foods and part-fer-
stimulation due to stress or pain resulting in reduced mo-
mented grass cuttings will inevitably lead to diarrhoea.
tility (e.g. dental disease, osteoarthritis, etc.); and intestinal
infectious diseases, all of which can cause varying effects on
Latrogenic
gut motility. Most cases in domestic rabbits are due to stress
latrogenic causes include the oral administration of certain
and a long-term dietary deficiency in indigestible fibre.
antibiotics, for example penicillin and clindamycin. These
Stomach inmpaction seen in cases of hypomotility usu-
destroy the normal flora of the gut, leaving bacteria such
ally comprises a matt of fur and food material. These
as Clastridium spiriformae or Clostridium perfringens to
trichobezoars in rabbits have been blamed for occlu-
flourish. These are found in small quantities in the normal
sion of the pylorus so causing gastrointestinal motility
gastrointestinal flora of the rabbit, but once they achieve a
disorders. Ihe stomach of the rabbit, however, has been
critical threshold level, they can release toxins which are ab-
shown to always contain food material and groomed fur
sorbed into the bloodstream and cause toxaemia and death.
(Okerman, 1994). Gastric foreign bodies were artificially
Bacterial
created using latex, but rabbits affected showed no reduc-
Bacteria, for example Escherichia coli, common in young
tion in appetite or in weight (Leary et al., 1984). It is now
weaner rabbits, are a cause of sudden death, due to the re
widely assumed that trichobezoar formations are due to
lease ofenterotoxins. Death may occur before any signs of
reduced gastrointestinal motility rather than the cause of
diarrhoea. An unknown agent, suspected to be bacterial
it. Intestinal obstructions though can occur and will also
is the cause of Epizootic Rabbit Enteropathy (ERE) which
lead to stomach distension (see Figure 5.5).
is the single biggest cause of mortality in rabbits fattened
for the meat industry in Europe. Clinical signs include
loss of appetite, over-full stomachs and watery diarrhoea
with a high mortality rate. Disease can be stopped by rap-
id treatment with antibiotics such as tiamulin and baci-
tracin (Huybens et al., 2008).
Parasitic
Coccidia, for example Eimeria spp, are single-celled
protozoal parasites which destroy the lining of the small
intestine, causing diarrhoea and death in heavy infesta-
tions. In mild cases it may simply cause poor growth and
stunting in young rabbits. Eimeria stiedae is of particu-
lar inportance in rabbits as it will also damage the liver.
Coccidial oocysts may be detected in the faeces.
The stomach worm Graphidiurm sfrigosum and the small
Figure 5.5 Lateral radiograph of a rabbit with a suspected small
intestinal worm Trichostrongylus retortaeforris are usually
intestinal obstruction and a massively dilated stomach.
Common Diseases of Small Mammals 63
Onset can be rapid or more insidious. Ihe rabbit is of-
increase in plasma free fatty acid and glycerollevels in obese
ten dull, anorexic and lethargic, may show signs of dehy-
rabbits (Lafontan & Agid, 1979). A high-fat diet increases
dration and is often suffering from hepatic lipidosis and
the risks of ketonaemia and so ketoacidosis during anorexia
ketoacidosis. Death, when it occurs, is usually due to liver
(Jean-Blain & Durix, 1985). Pregnant does between days 24
and kidney failure.
and 30 are insulin resistant adding to the likelihood they
Leporine dysautonomia is another cause of hypomotil-
will develop pregnancy ketosis (McLaughlin & Fish, 1994).
ity. Clinical signs include dry mucus membranes, reduced
The longer the anorexia, the worse the lipid mobilisa-
tear production, dilated pupils, bradycardia, urinary re-
 tion and the more the liver is swamped with lipids and
tention (with overflow incontinence), caecal and large
 free fatty acids. Ihe lipids affect hepatocyte function and
intestine impaction, loss of anal tone and proprioceptive
 make them less able to successfully perform the TCA cy-
deficits. Aspiration pneumonia may also be seen due to
cle which is further exacerbated by an absence of glucose
megaoesophagus.
in the bloodstream.
Once the liver has become lipidotic, the kidneys fre-
NS
Diagnosis: Radiographs of the abdomen may show a dis-
tended stomach with food material and an accumulation
quently follow.
of gas in stomach and caecum. Blood results show hepatic
Clinical signs: Ihe early stages may be imperceptible. Most
dysfunction, elevation of hepatic associated leakage en-
cases are triggered by a period of anorexia, the main clini-
zymes (AST) lipaemia, metabolic acidosis and hypergly-
cal signs being reduction in food intake and faecal output.
caemia although early cases may show hypoglycaemia,
As the condition progresses, the rabbit becomes comatose,
and dehydration as witnessed by an elevated packed cell
hypoglycaemic and acidotic, and dies of liver and kidney
volume (usually over 45%). Cases where hepatic lipido-
failure. Any rabbi anorexic for 12 hours or more (6-8
sis and ketoacidosis are advanced may see damage to the
 hours in pregnant does) should be given assisted feeding.
kidneys and resultant elevation in urea, creatinine, phos-
Diagnosis: There is no liver specific leakage enzyme in
phate and potassium.
Diagnosis of dysautonomia include absence/reduc-
the rabbit; therefore, aspartate aminotransferase (AST),
tion of tears on a Schirmer tear test (<3 mm in a minute),
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and creatine kinase (CK)
are measured together as AST is found in the liver and
dramatic miosis when 0.1% pilocarpine is applied to the
eyes, radiography demonstrating aspiration pneumonia,
skeletal muscle, LDH in liver, cardiac and skeletal muscle
and CK only in skeletal muscle. GGT elevations are as-
aaiel pue umsaes papuaisip/paisedul 'smeudosaoebau
intestine and distended urinary bladder. Histopathology
reveals chromolytic degeneration of the autonomic neu-
cellular damage, and therefore have been associated with
 rons similar to that seen in equine grass-sickness cases.
conditions such as hepatic coccidiosis by E. stiedae.
Elevations in triglycerides and cholesterol levels will
Prevention: Ensure all rabbits are fed on a high-fibre
also occur. Ihere may be hypoglycaemia in severe cases,
diet, for example freshly grazed grass, good quality hay
and levels of β-hydroxybutyrate will be elevated where
or dried grass. Any stressful procedure where significant
ketosis is present.
catecholamine release is likelyto occur, for example post-
Serum proteins may also be elevated, particularly
operatively - it is beneficial to use prokinetic drugs such
alpha-2- and beta-2-lipoprotein increases. Finally, ultra-
as metoclopramide and ranitidine and to provide ad-
sound and endoscopic biopsy of the liver gives a reliable
equate analgesia.
indication of hepatic lipidosis but obviously gives no indi-
cation of the degree of ketoacidosis present.
Hepatic lipidosis
Aetiology: Hepatic lipidosis is seen most commonly in
Respiratory disease
overweight indoor rabbits that go through a period of an-
Pasteurellosis
orexia or food withdrawal.
Pasteurella rmultocida causes 'rabbit snuffles. It is common-
In rabbits we generally assume that increased mobilisa-
ly found in the airways of unaffected rabbits, but it can lead
tion of fat deposits from a period of anorexia/food depri-
to purulent oculonasal discharge, and wet, matted fur of
vation/pregnancy is the main cause. However, stress can
the forepaws. This can develop into pneumonia. P. multo-
increase fat mobilisation in overweight rabbits and minor
cida contains a dermonecrotic toxin similar tothat causing
invasive procedures such as saline injections induced an
arophic rhinitis in pigs. Hence many rabbits with these
64 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
infections are left with permanent upper and lower respi-
rabbits. The cause of cardiomyopathy is not always clear
ratory tract damage. Poor housing, with damp, anmmonia-
and rabbits may be asymptomatic. Endocardiosis is seen in
laden bedding can irritate the airways and allow rapid in-
older rabbits with the mitral valve being most commonly
fection to occur. Dental disease and myxomatosis are other
affected. Alpha-2 drugs such as medetormidine have been
factors. Similarly, overcrowded hutches and concurrent
associated with myocardial ischaemia and cardiomyopa-
 disease elsewhere in the body may lower inmmunity.
thy development, as has stress. Stress induces catechol-
Pasteurella infections may also be found in tooth ab-
amine release resulting in coronary arterial constriction
5
scesses and middle ear disease. Infections may result in
in the rabbit and myocardial ischaemia. End-stage dilated
E
chronic abscessation of the lungs, mediastinum, pleurae
cardiomyopathy may present with congestive heart failure
and pericardium.
with ascites, dyspnoea and tachypnoea.
Other bacterial infections
Arrhythmias
MS
Bordetella bronchiseptica may be found as a commensal
The most commonly seen arrhythmia in rabbits is brady-
of the upper airways of the rabbit but it can also produce
cardia associated with a heart block It may also be a cause
disease. Some strains are cytotoxic and so enhance infec-
of syncope and collapsing bunny syndrome.
tions of Pasteurella multocida.
Lead poisoning
Staphylococcus aureus and S. albus are commonly iso-
lated from the upper respiratory tract of healthy and dis-
This may lead to anaemia with basophilic stippling of
eased rabbits. S. aureus can produce toxins which destroy
the erythrocytes with Romanowsky stains. Clinically,
neutrophils as well as protein A which can bindto immu-
profound chronic non-regenerative anaemia and neu-
 noglobulins. It has been associated with abscessation of
rological signs have been reported. Lead levels above
the head, lungs, mediastinum and middle ears.
1.1 μmol/L on heparinised blood are diagnostic.
Urinary tract disease
Viral haemorrhagic disease
This is a calicivirus and has been in the United King-
Urolithiasis and cystitis
Cystitis and urolithiasis are common, as rabbits absorb all
dom since 1992. It does not cause respiratory disease ex-
clusively, as it will attack all organs within the body, par-
of the calcium they can from their diet, and then excrete
ticularly the lungs, digestive system and liver. It is spread
any excess into the urine via the kidneys. Ihe commonest
urolith is calcium carbonate, which forms readily in the
via contact, and in naive rabbits it is 100% fatal, often with
rabbit's alkaline urine, and is radio-dense, often filling the
no obvious clinical disease. Post-mortem examination
reveals widespread internal haemorrhage. The disease
bladder outline on radiographs. Secondary bladder infec-
Ot Araeuxde jo ae a iapun stqqe iae pou saop
tions are common as the crystals irritate the lining of the
weeks, as the virus requires the presence of a liver enzyme
bladder. See Table 5.1 for details of urinanalysis.
which is not produced until after this age. Iherefore very
young kits are protected from the disease.
Table 5.1 Urinanalysis results for healthy domestic rabbits.
Cardiovascular disease
10-35 mL/kg/day average
Urine volume
(depending on diet)
Arterial wall calcification
With an excess of calcium/vitamin Ds, calcium becomes
Urine specific gravity
1.003-1.036
deposited in the walls of the major blood vessels, reduc
 Uine erythrocyte
<5 erythrocytes per high
ing their elasticity and leading to increased blood pres-
numbers
power field
 sure. Ihis is common in the aorta, and may also occur
Urine protein levels
Trace to absent (rmay be more in
within the kidney parenchyma itself. Some rabbits may be
juveniles)
 genetically predisposed to this problem. There is no cure.
Urine colour
Varies from pale yellow to deep red
 Prevention is aimed at avoiding over-supplementation
depending on presence/absence of
porphyrins
with calcium and vitamin D3.
Urine average pH
8.2
Cardiomyopathy and valvular disease
Urine crystals
Small volumes of armmonium
Cardiomyopathy, atherosclerosis and valvular insuffciency
magnesium phosphate or calcium
carbonate are normal
with resultant congestive heart failure are also seen in
Common Diseases of Small Mammals 65
Haematuria
Replication occurs in the kidneys and spreads to the CNS
 The presence of red-coloured urine in the rabbit does not
as well as the cardiac muscles. Ihe most common renal
-d uiod pan a eae aieiu essa
presentation is chronic renal disease due to a granuloma-
ments from the diet (particularly some leafy greens such
tous interstitial nephritis and tubular degeneration.
as beetroot) will be excreted in the urine. Causes of hae-
Pyelonephritis/renoliths: Rabbits affected may be in severe
maturia include cystitis, uterine tumours, aneurysms and
pain, sometimes vocalising when passing urine. Urine
kidney infections.
may be obviously turbid with pus, or blood. Individuals
may also have Gl associated signs such as increased bor-
Renal disease
Aetiology
borygmi or Gl stasis. Ihe patient is often hunched and
anorectic. However, some individuals with early renoliths
In general, chronic renal failure cases are associated with:
E. cuniculi; pyelonephritis; chronic progressive nephrosis;
may be clinically unaffected.
amyloidosis; renal calcinosis; congenital polycystic kid-
NS
neys (which tend to produce CRF by 2-3 years of age);
Diagnosis
 neoplasia (lymphoma) and renoliths/ureteroliths.
Chronic renal failure: Ihe major acute phase protein in
Acute renal failure may be seen associated with:
 rabbits is C-reactive protein travelling in the beta-globulin
E. cuniculi; pyelonephritis; drug toxicity and renoliths/
fraction. With acute renal failure due to nephritis an in-
ureteroliths causing hydronephrosis.
crease in alpha-2 globulins is also seen (alpha-2 macro-
globulin), as is the case with the nephrotic syndrome. In the
Clinical signs
nephrotic syndrome (chronic renal disease), there is also an
Chronic renal failure: This is associated with weight loss,
increase in beta-1 globulins (due to transferrin and beta-2
 dehydration, loss of appetite, polydipsia and polyuria. In
lipoprotein). In chronic renal failure, there is often a signif-
addition, a reduction in gastro-intestinal motility, with
cant drop in albumin whereas in acute renal failure there is
caecal impaction may be observed. Clinical anaemia may
often elevation (due to dehydration) or normal levels.
be present and other signs associated with specific condi-
In chronic renal failure, urea, creatinine and phosphate
tions (e.g. neurological signs with E. cuniculi infection)
levels will be raised, and the patient is often anaemic. Only
may also be demonstrable.
when <25% of renal functional mass has been destroyed
will these blood parameters become elevated, so these are
Acute renal failure: The rabbit is usually in good bodily
not sensitive. A better assessment of glomerular filtra-
condition, with a history of recent medication admin-
tion rate may be made using endogenous clearance rates
istration (e.g. nephrotoxic drugs such as the aminogly-
for creatine. Weisbroth et al. (1974) calculated the nor-
cosides, or NSAIDS) or in does in late pregnancy with
mal rate at 2.2-4.2 mL/kg/minute. Ihis requires bladder
toxaemia or in obese animals which undergo a period of
catheterisation and accurate urine output. Urine protein
anorexia where fatty infltration may occur.
levels should be minimal or absent, therefore, presence
Encephalitozoon cuniculi: This can be a cause of chronic
of protein and casts in the urine is significant and may
and acute renal failure, and of course, may be associated
indicate chronic renal failure and/or infection. An assess-
with neurological signs, for example torticollis, fitting.
ment of urine protein:creatinine levels can be made using
cataracts and uveitis (often unilateral), muscle tremors,
in-house kits for cats (e.g. Idexx), although no definitive
paresis and paralysis of hindlimbs and urinary overflow
normal values exist for rabbits - this author and others
with urine scalding. Death may occur due to heart failure,
use the cut-off range for cats as a reference point.
renal failure or meningoencephalitis. The organism is a
Ionised and total calcium levels may be elevated and
microsporidian parasite found in a wide range of mam-
soft tissue mineralisation seen radiographically - most
mals, including rabbits and is a potential zoonotic disease
commonly the aorta and kidne ys. Hypermineralisation of
in immunocompromised humans (e.g. AIDS affected
the bones may also be seen which is not seen in cats and
individuals). Ihere are different strains of E. cuniculi -
 dogs. Hypermineralisation is exacerbated by diets supple-
strain I (found in rabbits and humans), strain II (found
 mented with vitamin D as rabbits are sensitive to toxicosis.
in rodents) and strain Il (found in dogs and humans).
 Ultrasonographically, the renal outline may be smaller
Infection is by ingestion of food contaminated by infected
than normal (<3 cm craniocaudally and <2 cm ventro-
urine, although vertical transmission is possible in utero.
dorsally).
66 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Acute renal failure: Blood parameters will be elevated
Pyometra
as for chronic renal failure, but there is often renal shut-
 Pyometras occur in older does, and are often due to E. coli
 down and anuria. Ihe main difference between acute and
infections of hyperplastic endometrial tissues.
chronic failure is the loss of body condition and gener-
ally slower onset of debilitation and polydipsia/polyuria
Mammary gland
in chronic failure.
 Mastitis occurs following pregnancy when the kitens
Utrasonographically, the renal outline may be larger
are lost or in phantom pregnancy Many of the coliform
than normal (>4 cm craniocaudally and <2.5 cm ventro-
type of bacteria involved willrelease endotoxins into the
W
dorsally).
bloodstream causing rapid toxaemia, fever and death of
the doe. Others may just cause severe mastitis with ab-
W
Pre-renal azotaemia: These can be differentiated from
scess formation.
acute renal failure by the presence of other clinical signs,
 Mammary gland neoplasia can be seen in older rabbits
usually cardiovascular/hypovolaemic shock in conjunc-
MS
and is usually benign.
tion with a urine SG of >1.030. Confirmation occurs with
PART
reduction of renal parameters with rehydration and treat-
Musculoskeletal disease
ment of hypovolaemia.
Splayleg
Encephalitozooncuniculi: Antibodies are produced
Splayleg is an inherited congenital disease wherein the kit
2-3 weeks after infection There is no correlation between
cannot position one or more hindlimbs underneath itself.
antibody levels and degree of spore shedding, or with the se-
Instead the affected limb sticks out awkwardly. Ihere is no
verity oflesions at post-mortem. A rising titre over 3-4 weeks
treatment for this condition.
is suggestive of recent infection. An IgG and IgM antibody
test and a PCR test to detect spores in urine are available.
Fractured or dislocated spine
This is common in indoor-reared, poorly fed rabbits. The
Hydronephrosis: This may be diagnosed using intrave
 close confinement leads to weakening of bones and mus-
nous pyelography using an iodine-based radiopaque me.
cles due to disuse atrophy, and the absence of sunlight can
dium (0.5-1 mL/kg) injected through a peripheral vein.
exacerbate vitamin D; and calcium deficiency in a poor
Ultrasonography may be used to determine if there is hy-
diet. Osteoporosis occurs, with spontaneous fractures,
dropic degeneration. Doppler flow ultrasound may also
often in the lumbosacral area. Compression fractures of
help to ascertain renal arterial blood flow.
vertebral bodies are more commonly seen in the thora-
Renoliths/ureteroliths: Ihese may be easily diagnosed via
columbar area.
radiography or ultrasonography. Renoliths are usually bi-
lateral. The prognosis is generally guarded as renal dam-
Other bone fractures
age is common and may be either acute or more com-
The rabbit skeleton forms a smaller proportion of total
monly chronic. Pyelonephritis may also be present.
body weight than manmmals such as dogs, cats or humans.
Rabbit long bones also have a thinner, more brittle cortex,
Reproductive tract disease
and are prone to fissure propagation, shattering with
Uterine
rough handling. Displacement of the superficial flexor
Uterine adenocarcinoma
tendons in the hindleg may mimic a spinal problem with
This is a common condition seen in does over the age
a shuffling gait and arched back.
of four years with reported incidence at nearly 80%. Ihe
 In contrast to cats and dogs, in rabbits, distal tibial frac-
condition is fatal if not detected early as the tumour read-
tures are the most commonly present fracture, followed
by metatarsal fractures and then radius/ulna fractures.
the chest is therefore advised if the condition is suspected,
Common causes of hindlimb lameness that may be
to determine if spread has occurred.
missed are metatarsal and hindfeet phalangeal fractures.
Venereal spirochaetosis
Osteoarthritis
Rabbit syphilis is caused by the bacteria Treponema
This is common in large breeds, even in young ani-
paraluiscuniculi. The condition is self-limiting, but pro-
mals and can affect any joint. Most commonly though
duces crusting of the anogenital area, the nose and lips.
the stifles, (due to caudal cruciate damage rather than
Common Diseases of Small Mammals 67
cranial), hips (often associated with dysplasia) and spine
Ophthalmic disease
a  asns q on pa  s ae ae
Uveitis
staining of the perineum and faecal soiling due to an in-
This is commonly seen in rabbits with Encephalitozoon
ability to flex the spine to allow urination and caecotro-
cuniculi infections where leakage of the lens contents
phy and muscle wasting.
stimulates a phacoclastic uveitis. Ihis is frequently unilat-
eral. Uveitis can also be seen with bacterial infections, for
Neurological disease
example Pasteurella multocida and, of course, glaucoma.
Encephalitozoonosis
Encephalitozoon cuniculi affects the kidneys and the CNS,
Glaucoma
and may remain latent for years, producing no clinical
New Zealand white rabbits have a recessive bu gene where
signs. Alternatively, paresis/paralysis of the fore- and/or
intraocular pressures may reach 26-48 mmHg. N.B.:
hindlimbs, ftting, head tilt or other vestibular symptoms
 most tonometers underestimate intraocular pressure in
and blindness may be seen (see Figure 5.6). Diagnosis is
rabbits. Corneal oedema occurs, but the condition does
WS
as previously described.
not appear painful and the eye pressure returns to normal
as increased pressure results in damage to the ciliary body
Vestibular disease
which produces the intraocular fluid.
One cause of vestibular disease is encephalitozoonosis.
Cataracts
Others include tumours or infarcts of the hindbrain, and
These are commonly associated with E. cuniculi infection,
more commonly Pasteurella multocida or other bacterial
and unilateral. However, congenital and spontaneous id-
infection of the middle and inner ear. Bacteria gain access
iopathic cataracts have been reported.
to the middle ear via the Eustachian canal, or less com-
monly via a perforated ear drum (e.g. in ear mite infesta-
Conjunctivitis
tions). Many are unable to stand. Prognosis in advanced
The milky discharge seen in rabbit eyes is often mistaken
cases may be poor. Dorsoventral radiography of the
for primary conjunctivitis when dacryocystitis due to
middle ear bullae can demonstrate sclerosis of the bul-
dental disease pinching the tear duct occurs. Narrowing of
lae and loss of trabecular detail indicating infection. Pus
the tear duct can be shown by injecting iodine-based dye
is observed in the external ear canal as the disease origi-
into the tear duct through the ventral punctum and radio-
nating from the middle ear tends to result in tympanic
 graphing the head (see Figure 5.7). True conjunctivitis may
membrane rupture. For this reason ear drops should not
 also be seen, and is one ofthe clinical signs in myxomatosis.
be used in rabbits.
Lead poisoning
Lead poisoning may cause anaemia, and also neurologi-
 cal signs such as fitting, depression and sudden death.
Figure 5.7 An iodine-based positive contrast study of the tear duct
of a rabbit with dacryocystitis. Note the syringe with the iodine and
Figure 5.6 An extreme example of encephalitozoonosis
catheter to the righit and follow the contrast media down to the
neurological disease with forelimb paralysis.
root of the maxillary incisor where it becomes narrowved.
68 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Aberrant conjunctival overgrowth
Notoedres muris is a burrowing mite of rats and causes
This is unique to the rabbit where a fold of conjunctival
crusting lesions on the ear tips and tail which may then
tissue develops from the limbus of the eye and looks like
 spread to the rest of the body. It is extremely pruritic in
limbal keratitis. The tissue is not attached to the cornea,
 the rat and secondary bacterial infections are common.
but overlies it and may be easily removed. Ihe condition
 Diagnosis of these mites is based on the clinical signs
is a congenital abnormality with an unknown aetiology.
and discovering them on skin scrapings.
Exophthalmos
Lice
 The common sucking louse seen in both rats and mice is
This is seen due to a cranial mediastinal mass surround-
ing the anterior vena cava which restricts venous drainage
Polyplax spinulosa. This seems to be mildly pruritic, but if
 from the eyes. The exophthalmos is not permanent but
present in suffcient numbers (the louse may be seen with
occurs with stress, often disappearing when the stressful
the naked eye), it can cause anaemia.
MS
incident goes away. Examples include cranial mediastinal
Fleas
abscesses, lymphoma, thymoma and carcinomas.
 Retrobulbar abscesses may result in (usually) unilateral
In most pet households, infestation of pet rats and mice
with either Ctenocephalides felis or Ctenocephalides
exophthalmos and are associated with cheek tooth abscesses.
canis is possible. Ihese may cause significant anaemia.
Xenopsylla cheopis is the main vector for the bacterium
DISEASES OF THE RAT AND
Yersinia pestis, the cause of bubonic plague. It is not found
MOUSE
in the United Kingdom, but is in parts of Africa, China,
Skin disease
South America and the western states ofthe United States.
Ectoparasitic
Viral
Mites
Both species may be affected by their own form of pox
Myobia musculi tends to affect the head of mice causing
virus. These are rare, although the mouse pox virus
intense pruritus inducing self-mutilation. Some mice
(ectromelia) can cause problems in laboratories.
may be asynmptomatic carriers, but equally some may be
Sialodacryoadenitis virus (rat coronavirus) infec-
so severely affected as to die of secondary bacterial infec-
tion is a disease affecting the tear glands and periorbita
tion (see Figure 5.8).
of rats and mice. It causes local swelling and epiphora.
Myocoptes rmusculinus causes disease over the body of
 The tears contain porphyrin pigments making them red
the mouse. It may produce intense pruritus, but does not
(chromodacryorrhoea) and mimicking dried blood. Ihe
tend to induce the large areas of ulceration which are as.
disease is not treatable, but is generally self-limiting, al-
sociated with Myobia musculi.
though red tears may reappear in rats at times of stress.
In the rat, the fur mite is Radfordia ensifera. In the trop
ics, the blood sucking mite Liponyssus bacoti can cause
Bacterial
anaemia and general debilitation.
Generalised bacterial skin problems are common as a se-
quel to any self-induced trauma. Bacteria such as Staphy-
lococcus aureus and Streptococcus spp. and Pseudomonas
spp. are seen commonly.
Pododermatitis
Sores commonly develop on the hocks of older, over-
weight rats. Ihey start as pressure sores, allowing second-
ary infections to occur. Causes include osteoarthritis, ex-
cessive weight carriage and poor bedding.
Fungal
In rats and mice dermatophytes such as Trichophyton
mentagrophytes produce lesions on the head and neck,
Figure 5.8 A mouse with Myobia muscuf infestation and
ulceration.
with a typical scaling and dry crust. Ihe tail may also be
Common Diseases of Small Mammals 69
affected, and the lesions do not appear to be pruritic. This
seen, treatment is diffcult, as clearing a rat or mouse of
ringworm does not fluoresce under Wood's lamp.
Salmonella spp. is almost impossible. Euthanasia may be
advised due to the human health risk.
Miscellaneous
Barbering
Transmissible murine colonic hyperplasia: Transmissible
 Barbering of the whiskers and fur is common particu-
murine colonic hyperplasia (TMCH) is an infection of
larly in male mice kept together. Ihe whiskers and fur is
mice caused by the environmental bacteria Citrobacter
chewed short and may proceed to more serious injuries.
freundi. It causes progressive thickening of the mucosa
 For this reason male mice should not be kept together.
 of the large intestine, diarrhoea, abdominal pain, anorex-
ia and sometimes rectal prolapse, particularly in young
Ringtail
mice, 2-4 weeks of age. Death occurs in a small number
Ringtail is seen in rats where circular constrictions of the
of cases. The more common outcome is stunting of the
skin covering the tail occur, stopping the blood supply
mouse. It is highly infectious, and poor cage hygiene
and causing skin sloughing. It is thought to be due to a
Auolos e yano peaids pideu smo
reduction in the relative humidity of the environment of
the rat. Levels of humidity below 40-50% have been as-
Tyzzer's disease: This is an infection by Clostridium (Bacillus)
piliformis. It is common in rats, where it can cause sudden
sociated with this problem.
death, or watery diarrhoea, perineal staining, heart and liver
Atopy
disease. It is highly infectious and spread in the faeces.
Atopy is hypothesised to exist in rats. This is an aller-
gic skin condition similar to that seen in dogs, and can
Viral
occur due to contact with any potential allergen in their
Rotavirus: Rotavirus infection is seen before weaning.
environment. Classically, the rat is pruritic and is covered
Chronic infections, yellow diarrhoea and stunted growth
in scabs. Ihere is no evidence of mites on skin scrapings,
are common.
and no response to ivermectin medication.
Mouse hepatitis virus: Mouse hepatitis virus (MHV) is
a highly pathogenic coronavirus affecting suckling mice.
Digestive disease
H causes rapid deterioration, a yellow diarrhoea, muscle
Oral
 tremors, ftting and death in infected individuals, and is
Dental disease is uncommon in rats and mice. If seen it is
spread via the respiratory and faecal-oral routes.
usually incisor malocclusion.
Respiratory disease
Gastrointestinal
Mycoplasma pulmonis
Endoparasitic
The bacteria Mycoplasma pulrmonis is widespread in rats
Pinworms such as Syphacia obvelata (chiefly in mice),
 and mice. It is carried in the upper airways and the repro-
Syphacia muris (chiefly in rats) and Aspiculuris tetrap-
ductive tract. Transmission is by close contact between
tera (chiefly in mice) are common. They may cause no
 male and female at mating, mother and young during
disease at all, but the characteristic asymmetrical eggs
-ipul oi [enpiaipun uoy peaids josoiae Aq pue Susnu
may be found in the faeces, or around the anus, where
vidual over greater distances. It is highly infectious.
Syphacia spp. may cause irritation. Diarrhoea, if present,
Signs of disease include snufles, head tilts (inner and
middle ear infections), dyspnoea, hyperpnoea and death
prolapses.
from advanced bronchopulmonary disease. The course of
Protozoal
the infection can be chronic, with repeated bouts of bron
These include Entamoeba muris, Trichomonas muris and
chitis and pneumonia. They will exhibit poor body con-
dition, a dull staring coat, chromodacryorrhea, anorexia
Giardia muris. All protozoans can cause mild diarrhoea
but many may cause no disease signs at all when present
and lethargy. Another presentation includes infertility,
in low numbers.
reduced fertility and early abortions.
Some factors will encourage onset of the infection
Bacterial
and these include other respiratory tract infections,
Salmonellosis: Mice and rats may remain subclinical
(e.g. Sendai virus) and unsanitary conditions. Urine soil-
carriers of the bacteria for years. Diarrhoea is not always
 ing which leads to a build-up of ammonia gas which then
 70 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
leads to respiratory tract irritation and infection has also
Poxvirus
been implicated.
Cowpox virus can be carried by rodents and may result in
disease in other domestic and wild animals (Girling et al.,
Other bacterial respiratory infections
2011). It is subclinical in rodents. Turkmenian rodent pox-
Streptococcus pneumoniae (a cause of pneumonia and
virus has been recorded in laboratory rats in Europe and
meningitis in humans and therefore a zoonosis), Pasteu-
Russia. Dermal and respiratory lesions with severe respira-
rella pneumotropica,Bordetella bronchiseptica,Coryne-
tory interstitialpneumonia and oedema have been reported.
bacterium kutscheri and the cilia-associated respiratory
W
bacillus (CAR) may all occur in rats and mice. Clinical
Diagnosis of viral respiratory disease in rodents
signs are respiratory and reproductive disease. Chla-
Many laboratories can offer serological testing for rodent
mydophila muridarum is the mouse pneumonitis (MoPn)
viruses. Virus isolation may also be attempted if fresh tis-
agent, but experimentally mice are also susceptible to C.
sue or lung washes can be submitted.
MS
psittaci and C. trachomatis. In all cases infection is via the
respiratory route. Severe acute infections produce ruffled
Fungal respiratory disease
RT
fur, hunched stance, laboured breathing and an intersti-
Pneumocystosis
Pneumocystis carinis an opportunistic pathogen of the
tial pneumonia. Many will die quickly, but more chronic
cases will produce cyanosis of the ear and tail tips.
respiratory tract of mice, rats and probably all domestic
mammals and humans. Transmission occurs by the inha-
Sendai virus
lation of infective cysts. Mice or rats that are immunosup-
This is a paramyxovirus type 1, transmitted by sneezing,
 pressed may develop a fatal pneumonia. Affected mice are
direct contact, via food bowls or fomites. It is common-
hunched, tachypneic, with weight loss. Decreased repro-
 est in recently weaned mice as younger mice are protected
ductive efficiency is commonly observed in colonies of
by maternal antibodies. Signs of disease include dullness,
immunodeficient mice. Histology of the lungs and PCR
dyspnoea, chattering ofthe teeth, weight loss, anorexia and
are used for diagnosis.
a dull coat. In young mice the mortality rate may be high.
Aspergillus spp.
Other viral respiratory diseases
 This fungus has been reported as a cause of fatal pneumo-
Mouse cytomegalovirus infection
nia and rhinitis in rats. Corncob bedding was implicate d
 Also known as murid herpesvirus 1 (MuHV-1). Pathol-
in the source of the fungus.
ogy is found in the salivary glands but it can also affect
the lungs. Neonates of all mice strains can be affected.
Other respiratory tract disease
Transmission can be via saliva, tears, urine and semen.
Acidophilic macrophage pneumonia
Clinically apparent disease is rare.
This can occur in older mice, particularly where there are
pulmonary tumours, pneumocystosis or chronic pneu-
Mouse hepatitis virus
monia. Grosly the lungs appear tan to red in discoloura-
Also known as murine hepatitis virus (MHV) it is a coro-
 tion and do not collapse.
navirus. Natural infections are generally subclinical. The
virus can infect nasal mucosa, pulmonary vascular endo-
Amyloidosis
thelium and the draining lymph nodes. It is highly con-
This is seen in older mice and hamsters. It can affect
tagious and spread by aerosol and faeces. It is a problem
any organ and is common in cases of chronic infection
 in laboratories. Elimination of the virus may be achieved
and neoplasia. Clinically, the signs depend on the organ
by stopping breeding of seropositive animals for &8 weeks
affected. It can be more commonly found in male mice,
 plus environmental decontamination.
 partic ularly those under stress in overcrowded housing.
Pneumonia virus of mice
Eosinophilic granulomatous pneumonia and
Ihis can infect mice, rats, hamsters, guinea pigs and
asthma
gerbils. It is a Paramyxoviridae Pneumovirus. In
This tends to be a problem in Brown Norwegian rats.
 non-imrmunocompromised rodents it generally produces 
It has been associated with asthma, which is common
subclinical infections. In immunodeficient mice it can
in this breed. However, it has been reported in rats not
produce rhinitis, cyanosis, dyspnoea and chronic wasting.
exposed to allergens, and may be associated with an
Common Diseases of Small Mammals 71
unknown infectious agent. Incidence can be up to 100%
Klebsiella spp. Culture and sensitivity testing of cystocen-
at 3-4 months of age.
tesis collected samples is advisable.
Interstitial nephritis can occur with Leptospira spp.
Neoplasia
(such as L. ballum) in most rodents and this can be a
 This has regularly been reported in older rats and is often
zoonotic disease. Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus
due to primary lung tumours. Metastasis from mammary
(LMCV) can cause interstitial nephritis and is also zoo-
adenocarcinomas is possible in female mice.
notic. Clinically, the rodent presents with anorexia, leth-
argy, dehydration and abdominal pain.
Cardiovascular disease
Atrial thrombosis is common in aged mice, usually in
Renal coccidiosis and bladder worms
'ssoioae Aq paudue aq  i ume yal a
Renal coccidian Kossiella hydromyos has been reported
Amyloid is deposited in the walls of the great vessels.
 in rats, sporocysts being found in the urine. Sulphon-
Cardiac disease is seen clinically as dyspnoea, tachypnoea
amides are effective in most cases.
and abdominal distension.
Trichosomoides crassicauda (bladder threadworms)
Cardiomyopathy and myocardial fibrosis are the two
have also been reported in rats (8-12 weeks of age) (see
most commonly seen cardiac abnormalities. Cardiomy-
Figure 5.9). Clinical signs include poor growth, staring
coats and difficulty urinating/cystitis. Worm eggs may be
rats that are over-fed, and can be seen as early as 3 months
seen in the urine.
of age. Ihe incidence of myocardial disease can be re-
duced by 25-30% by dietary restriction.
Nephrocalcinosis
Endocardiosis and atrial thrombus formation are com-
This can be seen in older rats and is thought to be as-
mon in older rats. Myocardial mineralisation may be seen
sociated with a high-calcium, low phosphorus diet,
secondary to chronic renal disease. Congestive heart fail-
combined with high levels of vitamin D3. It is believed
ure will result.
that oestrogens have a role in causing the disease as it is
Myocardial abscesses can be seen with Tyzzer's disease.
found more frequently in older females. Radiography is
diagnostic.
Urinary tract disease
Chronic progressive nephrosis
Hydronephrosis and polycystic disease
Chronic progressive nephrosis is common in ageing rats
Hydronephrosis can occur due to urolithiasis of the ure-
and mice. The kidneys become progressively more dam-
ters. More commonly it is seen as an inherited condition
aged by protein deposits in the tubular lumens. In certain
in rats (e.g. Brown Norway, Sprague Dawley and Gunn
strains of mice an autoimmune factor is seen. In rats, a
breeds).
high-protein, low-potassium diet has been implicated,
with males more susceptible than females. Recurrent dis-
ease equally may have a role to play. An increase in thirst
and urination may be seen, with weight loss and dehy-
dration. Blood samples demonstrate increased urea and
creatinine with low blood albumin.
Urolithiasis
This is common in older rats and mice, especially males
where uroliths may block the narrower urethra proximal
to the os penis. Ihe composition varies, but is frequently
calcium carbonate, ammonium phosphate or calcium
 Oxalate. Ihere is often a secondary cystitis.
Nephritis/pyelonephritis
Often seen in older rats and involving bacteria such
Figure 5.9 An example of the bladder nematode Trichosomoides
as Pseudomonas spp, E. coli, Proteus mirabilis and
crassicavoa found in the urine of a 12-week-old rat.
72 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Reproductive tract disease
osteoarthritis, reducing mobility, causing pain and irri-
Uterine
tating spinal nerve function.
Dystocias are uncommon in rats and mice. Uterine infec
tions do occur infrequently, with pyometras being seen
Neurological disease
in rats.
Vestibular disease
Head tilts are common in rats. Causes include infections
Mammary gland
by Mycoplasma pulmonis and Streptococcus pneumoniae,
The mammary glands are commonly affected by cancer in
which can affect the inner ear or hindbrain, affecting the
both rats and mice.
vestibular centres. Other causes are tumours, with pitu-
In rats, the most frequent is the fibroadenoma.
itary tumours reported commonly in older female rats on
This is a benign, but rapidly growing tumour, and can
high-calorie/protein diets.
occur in any of the mammary tissue which extends
from cranially at the forelimbs to the inguinal region
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus
(see Figure 5.10). The masses are well defined and eas-
This is mainly seen in wild mice. It is shed in the urine
ily removed surgically, although the predisposition
and saliva, and affected mice may show no symptoms,
appears to be hereditary, and the likelihood of further
or they may show neurological signs such as head tilts,
tumours occurring is high. Many are prolactin sensi-
ftting and death. It is a zoonotic disease and can cause
tive. Fibroadenomas can occur in male rats as well as
meningitis in humans and other primates.
females. Adenocarcinomas do occur in 10% of cases
 and may metastasise.
Degenerative radiculoneuropathy
 In mice, the mammary cancer most commonly seen is
This is a condition in aged rats similar to that seen in
malignant and caused by an RNA virus, the Bittner agent,
German Shepherd dogs where a progressive, primary
which, in a susceptible strain of mouse, causes mammary
segmental demyelination is seen in rats over 18 months
adenocarcinoma. Surgery is often unsuccessful.
old (Gilmore, 2005).
Testicular
Ocular disease
A form oftesticular cancer, a Leydig celladenoma, is seen
Sialodacryoadenitis virus causing red tears has been men-
 in old male rats. It is benign and causes a soft swelling.
tioned above, and will infect rats, mice, hamsters and
and may be accompanied by some hair loss.
gerbils. Chronic infections may cause permanent reduction
in tears, leading to keratitis sicca. Conjunctivitis may occur
Musculoskeletal disease
secondary to this, or to the presence of finely chopped or
Spondylosis is common in older rats, and may cause in
dusty bedding, creating a foreign body reaction.
continence and reduction of function of the hindlimbs.
Cataracts are often associated with a hereditary
Typically, the lumbosacral area is affected by the
deformed eye seen as microphthalmia.
Many young rats and mice have a persistent hyaloid
artery which may bleed into the vitreous humour and
appear as haemorrhages at the front of the eye.
Albino rats and mice must be given shelter from
light, as their retinas are prone to damage. Even normal-
coloured rats and mice require a shelter that is light proof.
DISEASES OF THE GERBIL
Skin disease
Ectoparasitic
Demodex merioni rarely causes disease. It has a typical
cigar shape under microscopy of skin scrapings. Other
mite infestations are rare, although cases of Notoedres
Figure 5.10 Fibroadenomas in a female rat.
muris and Sarcoptes scabiei have been reported
Common Diseases of Small Mammals 73
Storage mites have been reported as causing irritation
Digestive disease
to the nose and facial area which is in contact with food.
Oral
Dental disease is relatively uncommon in the gerbil, al-
Bacterial
though traumatic damage to the incisors leading to frac-
Staphylococcus aureus infections ofthe nose and face occur
tures and overgrowth may occur.
secondary to wet substrate conditions. Sialodacryoadeni-
tis virus infection of the tear glands, can also lead to wet
Gastrointestinal
dermatitis in the perinasal area, allowing Staphylococcus
Bacterial
mureus to create a pyoderma.
Tyzzer'sdisease -Clostridium(Bacillus)piliformis:Tyzzer's
disease causes enteritis, but rarely diarrhoea, and of-
Fungal
Do sisel asast au "leat pue ianil aul oi speaids ual
The dermatophyte, Trichophyton mentagrophytes is the
1-4 days and may produce sudden death or a more
commonest seen, causing areas of hyperkeratosis with
lingering disease with dullness, lethargy, a hunched pos-
NS
grey scaling of the skin, particularly in the head region.
ture, scant or soft faeces and a dull staring coat.
 Diagnosis is made on microscopy and culture.
Proliferative ileitis: Due to the intracellular bacteria
skin tumours
Lawsonia intracellularis also causes wet-tail in hamsters.
Ventral scent gland adenomas/adenocarcinomas, which
It is passed from gerbil to gerbil via the faecal-oral route,
develop from 2 years of age onwards predominantly in
and causes thickening of the ileum resulting in maldiges-
the male gerbil, are significant (see Figure 5.11).
tion and malabsorption, producing the classical ‘wet
 Other skin tumours, such as melanomas, are seen, par-
tail of matted damp fur around the rear. Ihe condition
tic ularly on the extremities. Squamous cell carcinomas of
is much less common in gerbils than hamsters, but can
the ears and nose have been reported.
nonetheless be a serious and fatal condition.
Endocrine
Endoparasitic
Cystic ovarian disease (see below) has been associated
 The mouse pinworm Syphacia obvelata and the rat pin-
with symmetrical hair loss over the flanks of female ger-
worm Syphacia muris rarely cause clinical disease.
bils, along with a swollen abdomen.
The potentially zoonotic cestode Rodentolepis (Hyme-
nolepis) nana can be found and is discussed in hamsters.
Miscellaneous
The gerbil is the definitive host for the pinworm Dentosto-
 Tail skin degloving injuries are common in gerbils that
mella translucida, which is considered non-pathogenic.
have been roughly handled or restrained by the end of the
tail. Ihe denuded vertebrae will die oflater on, and the
Respiratory disease
tail never regrows.
The gerbil is affected by more or less the same respira-
tory conditions as the rat and mouse, although it is less
susceptible.
Cardiovascular disease
Tyzzer's disease may cause myocarditis, otherwise cardio-
vascular disease is uncommon.
Urinary tract disease
Gerbils are prone to ageing changes involving gradual
scarring of renal tissue and the nephrotic syndrome, but
the incidence of this is much less than in the rat or mouse.
Reproductive tract disease
Uterine infection
Figure 5.11 Ventral scent gland adenocarcinoma in a male gerbil.
 Uterine infections are uncommon in gerbils.
74 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Ovarian cysts
Ovarian cysts are common. Ihe cysts may be quite large and
 cause distension of the abdomen. The condition is heredi-
tary and bilateral and causes disruption of the oestrus cycle.
The cyst secretes low levels of oestrogens which have an ef-
fect on fur growth, causing mild alopecia over the flanks.
Uterine and ovarian neoplasia
After cancer of the adrenal gland, cancer of the ovaries
and the female reproductive tract are the most common
tumours in the gerbil. Uterine cancers may cause bleed-
ing from the reproductive tract, or abdominal swelling.
MS
Diagnosis may be made on clinical signs, or ultrasound
and radiographical examination.
Figure 5.12 Fur loss and scaling over the dorsum of a hamster with
Musculoskeletal disease
early demidocosis.
Fractures are uncommon in gerbils, as are other muscu-
loskeletal problems, other than the degloving tail injuries
Crusting lesions of the ears, face and other extremities
 mentioned above.
have been reported in Syrian hamsters affected by the sar-
Neurological disease
coptiform mite Notoedres notoedres. Diagnosis in all cases
is made based on positive skin scrapings.
Vestibular disease
Vestibular disease is common and is usually due to bacte-
Fungal
rial inner ear disease, often Mycoplasma pulmonis, Pasteu-
The dermatophyte Trichophyton mentagrophytes can be
rella pneumotropica or Streptococcus pneumoniae, which
found as a secondary cause of skin disease in hamsters as
gain access from the oropharynx via the Eustachian
a se quel to mange or mycosis fungoides.
canals and the middle ear. Pus may be observed at the
external ear canal in some cases.
Bacterial
Aural cholesteatoma, papilloma and polyp formation
Primary bacterial skin disease is uncommonly seen in
with secondary bacterial infection are also common.
hamsters. The main bacteria isolated from wounds in-
Epilepsy
clude Pasteurella pneumotropica and Staphylococcus
Epilepsy in gerbils appears to be hereditary, and it is
aureus. Secondary infections of skin ulcers associated
advisable not to keep susceptible individuals in rooms
with T cell lymphoma are common.
with strip lighting, television sets or computer terminals,
as these all emit electromagnetic radiation of around
skin tumours
 50-60 Hz, which may induce a fit. In addition, handling
The commonest is a form of T-cell lymphoma known as
gerbils from a young age to familiarize them with human
mycosis fungoides. Ihis infltrates the epidermis, produc-
contact can reduce the likelihood of seizures in later life.
ing chronic thickening of the skin and is pruritic. Alope-
cia is seen due to the obliteration of the hair follicles. The
cancer eventually metastasises.
DISEASES OF THE HAMSTER
Melanomas affecting the head, ears and flank scent
Skin disease
glands are also seen. These are usually pigmented, fast
Ectoparasitic
growing andoccur more frequently in males than females.
Demodex criceti and Demodex aurati both infest ham-
Cutaneous epitheliomas are associated with a Hamster
sters and can cause clinical disease. D. criceti is shorter
papovavirus (see Figure 5.13). The virus is host specific
and rounder, whereas D. aurati is longer and more like
and lesions are found in hamsters from three months to
D. canis. The clinical disease is manifested by alopecia
 a year old. The lesions are wart-like and occur most often
over the dorsum caudally and intense white scurf (see
around the face or perianal area. Ihe virus is highly conta
Figure 5.12). Ihe lesions are mildly pruritic.
gious and is passed through urine. It has along incubation
Common Diseases of Small Mammals 75
Cheek pouch prolapse
Prolapse may occur after the hamster has ermptied the
cheek pouch. Ihe sac, now everted, may not return to
normal and protrudes as a pink mass from the mouth. It
may also occur due to infection or neoplasia.
Gastrointestinal
Proliferative ileitis (^wet-tail')
The bacterium Lawsonia intracelularis produces hyper-
trophy of the ileum, reducing digestion and absorption
which leads to diarrhoea. It can lead to rectal prolapse
and intussusceptions. Some hamsters die within 24 hours
of contracting the disease without showing any obvious
NS
Figure 5.13 Papovavirus- induced neoplasia in a hamster.
signs.
period and is very resistant. It will also induce lymphoma
Salmonellosis
in other organs. Ihere is no spontaneous resolution
Salmonellosis is uncommon. The bacterium Salmonella
enferifidis is the most frequently reported and this is a
Endocrine
zoonotic disease. Signs include sudden death, frequently
Hyperadrenocorticism is due to a chromophobe adeno-
before any diarrhoea is produced. Younger animals seem
ma in the pituitary gland. This secretes excessive levels of
more susceptible.
ACTH which causes bilateral adrenal gland hyperplasia,
increased levels of cortisol producing polydipsia, poly-
Parasitic
uria, symmetrical alopecia, increased appetite and thin-
Rodentolepis (Hymenolepis) nana is a dwarf tapeworm
ning of the skin and coat over the flanks. Plasma cortisol
which is zoonotic. It appears to cause little or no dis-
levels should be between 13.8 and 27.6 nmol/L in healthy
ease in hamsters. A diagnosis may be made by finding
hamsters. Serum alkaline phosphatase may also be raised
cestode egg sachets in the faeces, or by seeing the cream
coloured, 1-2-mm long egg packet wriggling on the
mal values being 8-18 U/L. It has been suggested that 
perianal fur!
hamsters may secrete both cortisol and corticosterone;
therefore, diagnosis based on blood cortisol levels alone
Miscellaneous
may not be accurate. Ultrasonography of the adrenal
Examples of other causes of diarrhoea include rapid diet
gland may show enlargement or abnormalities.
changes. Certain foods should be avoided altogether, for
example, those containing lactose and over-sugary fruit
Irritant
such as grapes, kiwi fruit and bananas.
Skin irritation has been reported in hamsters kept on
cedar pine chips. Ihese are highly resinous and can cause
Respiratory disease
intense skin irritation, particularly over the ventrum and
Sendai virus
 nasal areas. Removal of the hamster from these shavings
This is an RNA paramyxovirus (parainfluenza 1) virus
produces improvement within days.
and affects rats, mice, guinea pigs and hamsters. Hamsters
are rarely severely affected by infection.
Digestive disease
Oral
Pasteurella pneumotropica
Cheek pouch impaction
In hamsters it can cause acute or chronic respiratory
Impaction of the cheek pouch may occur because the
 disease - see section on rats and mice for clinical signs.
hamster may have overfilled the pouch or have become
ill before emptying it. Because the hamster uses his 
Corynebacterium kutscheri
hindlimb to empty the pouch, losing a hindleg may also 
 Hamsters may act as carriers but seem not to develop dis-
lead to impaction on that side.
ease from this bacterium.
76 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Other causes of respiratory disease
Diabetes mellitus
Hamsters suffer from pulmonary thromboembolisms due
 In the Chinese hamster, diabetes mellitus is a hereditary
 to atrial thrombotic lesions which may prove fatal, and
condition. Clinical signs include polydipsia (drinking
are a cause of sudden death.
often in >50 mL of water per day) and polyuria, cystitis,
lethargy and weight loss. Glucosuria of 2% is common
Cardiovascular disease
and blood glucose is often in excess of 25-30 mmol/L.
Cardiomyopathy and atrial thromboses
Pathophysiology suggests that cardiormyopathy occurs
Reproductive tract disease
E
first followed by left atrial thrombosis and death as a result
Uterus
of coagulopathy. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy has also
Pyometra is seen, but may be mistaken for the normal re-
been reported as a cause for thrombus formation. In one
productive tract discharge found during the oestrus cycle.
study the incidence of cardiac disease was assumed to be
Pyometras, however, persist, and smell much worse! Closed
MS
around 6% (Schmidt & Reavill, 2007). Interestingly, an-
pyometras are more difficult to diagnose due tothe absence
 drogens protect the heart from heart disease in hamsters.
of a discharge, but the hamster is often lethargic, anorectic,
ART
The age of onset of heart disease in females is therefore
 polydipsic, dehydrated and has a tender, swollen abdomen.
 younger (around 13.5 months) than males (21.5 months).
Neutering male hamsters therefore removes this effect
Ovaries
and so means that they are more likely to develop heart
a aa as u  ae sa 
'a8e 1asumo e ie aseasi
 of8 months. The condition is bilateral, and may be accom-
 Diagnosis is based on the signs and the demonstration
panied by some mild symmetrical alopecia of the flanks.
of an enlarged heart on radiography and ultrasound ex-
amination. Ihe latter are often able to show the thrombi
Ocular disease
in the atria.
Chinese hamsters are prone to cataract development as a
result of diabetes mellitus.
Other causes of cardiovascular disease
Bacterial disease such as Tyzzer's and salmonellosis can
Musculoskeletal disease
lead to myocarditis and heart failure. Amyloidosis is com-
Compound fractures of the tibia are the commonest, es-
 mon in all rodents with age and chronic disease and may
pecially from hamsters falling from the roof or the sides of
lead to thickening of arterial walls and organ failure.
wire cages up which they have climbed, and leg anputa-
Urinary tract disease
tion may be required Other fractures commonly seen are
Kidney disease
fractures of spinal vertebrae, or more commonly vertebral
 Chronic progressive nephropathy is seen as in mice and
subluxations, usually in the lumbar area, again due to falls.
rats. They are also prone to amyloidosis. Clinical signs
 These will present as bilateral hindlimb paresis or paralysis.
eisdipaiod Kea 'ssor uaiam apmou Aeu mq Xien
and polyuria with or without proteinuria.
Neurological disease
 Polycystic disease is seen in older male hamsters and
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus generally produces
may also involve the liver. It is congenital in nature and
little or no clinical signs in the hamster. It is excreted in
presents as a rapidly enlarging abdomen. Diagnosis is
the urine and saliva. It is relatively rare in captive ham-
most easily made using ultrasound. Drainage of the cysts
sters, being found more commonly in wild mice, but it
can help, but they tend to reform within 2-4 weeks
is a serious zoonotic disease causing meningitis in man.
Bladder
Like mice and rats, hamsters can suffer from cystitis and
DISEASES OF THE GUINEA PIG
urolithiasis. Calcium oxalate and calcium carbonate are
Skin disease
the two commonly seen uroliths.
Ectoparasitic
Mites
Endocrine disease
The scabies mite Trixicara caviae causes intense pruri-
Hyperadrenocorticism
tus and distress. Ihe affected individual may scratch it-
See above under the discussion of skin diseases.
self deeply and may be so severe as to cause abortion in
Common Diseases of Small Mammals 77
heavily pregnant females. Diagnosis is made on clinical
weight loss, secondary infections and organ failure.
signs and skin scrapings under the microscope.
Treatment with chemotherapeutic agents is frequently
The fur mite, Chirodiscoides caviae,seems to cause little
unsuccessful.
trouble.
Benign trichofolliculomas appear as solid, cyst-like
Cheyletiella parasitovorax occasionally produces pruri-
structures, over the lumbosacral area dorsally. Sebaceous
tus and scaling along the dorsum.
adenoma, fbroma, fbrosarcoma, lipoma, liposarcoma
Demodex caviae is commonly found but rarely causes
and schwannomas have also been reported.
clinical disease. Diagnosis is made by collecting skin
Hormonal
Cystic ovarian disease is extremely common in aged fe-
Lice
male guinea pigs (a 76% incidence in animals between
Gliricola porceli and Gyropus ovalis are Mallophagan lice
1.5 and 5 years old has been reported). Ihe aetiology is
and so live off cellular debris, but rarely cause disease.
unknown, although oestrogenic substances in hay have
been implicated. Some are embryological in origin (cystic
Bacterial
rete ovarii). Abdominal enlargement and infertility can
Cervical lymphadenitis
occur and bilateral non-pruritic alopecia is common.
Cervical lymphadenitis is a disease of the cervical lymph
Diagnosis is as for gerbils and hamsters.
nodes caused by the Streptococcus zooepidermicus. It is also
found in the airways and mouth of the healthy guinea pig.
Miscellaneous
and causes problems when the mucosa of the oropharynx
Guinea pigs may barber each other in the same way as
becomes abraded by rough food particles. Ihis leads to
rats and mice. Increasing fbre in the cage and providing
local lymphadenitis, with subcutaneous abscessation. Ihe
more space and tubing or other hides, may help to pre-
disease may gain access to the bloodstream causing septi-
vent this. Cheilitis is common, and may be due to alack of
caemia which is rapidly fatal.
vitamin C, although a pox virus and Candida spp. yeasts
have also been implicated.
Pododermatitis
Pododermatitis is commonest in overweight, older
Digestive disease
guinea pigs, which will spend more time resting, and
Oral
which will walk on the flat of the hock It can also be seen
 Molar overgrowth most commonly in the mandibular
in older guinea pigs with osteoarthritis. Bacteria involved
 cheek teeth which results in entrapment of the tongue is
include E. coli, Corynebacterium pyogenes, Staphylococus
 common. Ihe normal occlusal plane of the cheek teeth in
mureus and Streptococcus spp.
the guinea pig is actually oblique and slopes from a dorsal
position buccally to a ventral position lingually. Causes
Fungal
are similar to those in rabbits.
Dermatophytosis due to Mirosporum canis and Tricho-
phyton mentagrophytes produces lesions over the head,
Gastrointestinal
paws and rear with brittle hairs, grey crusts and some
Salmonellosis
scabs. Diagnosis is as for rats and mice.
Salmonella enteritidis and Salmonella typhimurium can
both cause enteritis in guinea pigs. Ihe young and debili-
Viral
tated are most at risk. Diarrhoea is uncommon; instead, a
 A pox virus has been detected in association with cheilitis
dull staring coat, weight loss and abortion are seen.
in two guinea pigs with crusting ulcerated lesions around
the lips and philtrum.
Other bacterial disease
Skin tumours
scesses, chronic wasting and diarrhoea or acute death.
Lymphosarcoma affecting the superficial lymph nodes
Mycobacterium tuberculosis,Listeria monocytogenes and
caused by a retrovirus can also produce a blood-borne 
 Clostridium perfringens can also cause intestinal disease.
leukaemia affecting the spleen and liver. Ihe course
Guinea pigs are also prone to Tyzzer's disease, due to
of the disease is 3-4 weeks, with rapid deterioration,
Costridium piliformis.
78 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Endoparasitic
may be discovered on radiography or may cause clini-
Balantidium coli is a zoonosis and causes large intestinal
 cal dyspnoea in conjunction with a respiratory pathogen.
inflammation and profuse diarrhoea in an immuno-
Lymphoma due to type C cavian leukaemia virus has also
compromised guinea pig. A coccidial organism, Eimeria
been reported.
caviae, may also cause diarrhoea in piglets.
Cryptosporidum wrairi has been reported as a major
Avocado toxicity
cause of small intestinal disease in young guinea pigs
This has been reported, causing respiratory distress, hy-
resulting in stunting, bloating, diarrhoea and weight loss.
dropericardium, generalised congestion, anasarca and
Most immunocompetent animals will recover within
death. It appears that the leaves, fruit, bark and seed of av-
4 weeks. Diagnosis is by PCR of faeces or by modified
ocados are toxic for a number of rodent and avian species.
W
acid fast stains demonstrating the oocysts.
Cardiovascular disease
MS
Faecal impaction
Pericarditis has been recorded in conjunction with respi-
This is seen in older guinea pigs, particularly males. It
ratory tract infection involving Streptococcus pneumoniae
occurs when excessive folds loose skin around the ano-
and may cause heart failure and death. Hypertrophic
genital opening trap faecal pellets. Ihis can create serious
and dilated cardiomyopathies have been reported. In
constipation problems, and localised infection.
addition, metastatic and dystrophic mineralisation and
pericardial effusions may also be seen. Calcification may
Respiratory disease
be asymptomatic in guinea pigs older than 1 year of age
Bacterial disease
but may equally have been associated with poor growth,
Lung infections are common in guinea pigs housed
muscle stiffness, bone deformities and death. Causes
with rabbits, as the latter often carry the bacteria Bor-
include magnesium deficiency, renal failure and diets
detella bronchiseptica asymptomatically. This bacterium
high in calcium.
causes a severe bronchopneumonia in guinea pigs. It can
also cause otitis media and interna, abscesses and me-
Urinary tract disease
tritis. Other pathogenic bacteria include Streptococcus
Kidney disease
pneumoniae,which is zoonotic, Kebsiella pneumonia,
Chronic progressive interstitial nephritis may be a sequel
Moraxella spp, Pasteurella pneumotropica and Pseudo-
to diabetes mellitus and staphylococcal pododermatitis.
monas spp. S. zooepidemicus may also result in broncho-
Clinically, the guinea pig is polyuric and polydipsic and
pneumonia. Chlamydophila caviae has been reported in
loses weight. Blood parameters may indicate elevated
guinea pig breeding colonies and affects guinea pigs be-
urea and creatinine levels, often with low blood albumin
tween 2 and 8 weeks of age. It is usually asymptomatic
-ss iaap Aeu sisheun sasso uaioid Aieun oi anp
although conjunctivitis and rhinitis may be seen, as may
tis, and commonly reveals proteinuria.
 abortions and urogenital tract infections.
Diagnosis can be made on history, clinical signs, aus-
Bladder
cultation of the harsh-sounding chest and, if necessary,
Calcium oxalate or calcium carbonate crystals are found
radiography showing consolidation of the lungs and
in the bladder. Older boars may experience urethral ob-
bronchioalveolar patterns.
struction due to dried accessory sex gland secretions, as
well as being more susceptible to urolith blockage of the
Viral disease
urethra at the os penis.
 Sendai virus has been reported in guinea pigs and may
Secondary, or primary bacterial cystitis is often seen,
exacerbate bacterial disease. An adenovirus has also
the former due to irritation of the bladder by the uroliths.
been reported in debilitated animals but is generally
the latter leading to clumps of bacteria around which
subclinical.
uroliths form. Clinically the affected guinea pig is dull,
lethargic, vocalises and may periodically strain, passing
Lung neoplasia
small volumes of blood-stained urine. Diagnosis can be
 Pulmonary adenoma has been recorded in guinea pigs.
confirmed with examination of the sediment of a centri-
The tumour is slow growing and does not metastasise
but causes a reduction in functional lung volume. It
calcium oxalate crystals are less radio-dense than struvite.
Common Diseases of Small Mammals 79
Endocrine disease
Reproductive tract tumours
Cystic ovarian disease
Ovarian granulosa cell tumours often follow cystic ova-
See reproductive tract disease.
ries. Other forms of reproductive tract cancer include: be-
nign leiomyomas; and uterine adenocarcinomas, which
Diabetes mellitus
are malignant. Diagnosis is made on palpation of an
Spontaneous diabetes mellitus has been reported in
enlarged womb, radiographical or ultrasonographic evi-
 guinea pigs. Ihey may present with concurrent scurvy
dence of enlargement of the tract, or reproductive tract
and poor hair coat, as well as polydipsia, polyuria and
discharge, which may be haemorrhagic.
cataracts. Possible aetiologies include an unclassified in-
fectious agent in Abyssinians (possibly viral in origin),
Dystocia
hereditary factors, congenital manganese deficiency in
If a sow has not given birth before 12 months, the fibro-
 juveniles and high sugar, high carbohydrate diets, such as
cartilaginous ligament which holds the two sides of the
apples and carrots, which exacerbate the problem.
pubis and ischium together will become mineralised and
Diagnosis is based on elevated blood glucose lev-
fuse. Ihis ligament normally stretches just before parturi-
els, often greater than 20 mmol/L (normal values are
tion under the influence of the hormone relaxin. If it does
3.3-6.9 mmol/L), hyperlipidaemia and results of glucose
not, it significantly narrows the birth canal, and this will
tolerance tests. For this the guinea pig is fasted for 18
leadto dystocias. Any maiden sow older than 7-8 months
hours. Blood glucose levels are measured, and then a dose
of age should not be mated.
of oral glucose is given at 1.75 g/kg body weight. Blood
aso-aid al aiml rano ae iae sou t saal aso
Pregnancy toxaemia
value in diabetic animals and only 1-1.5 times the pre-
This is common in late pregnancy and early lactation in
dose value in normal animals.
Udde oi aia iso st l 'saou asy iamiao
Treatment of diabetes in both guinea pigs and hamsters
in the presence of concurrent disease, (e.g. Trixicara caviae
consists of a high-fibre diet. Insulin therapy is rarely in-
 mange), which may reduce the sow's appetite. A rapid mo-
dicated and spontaneous recoveries are common. Where
bilisation of body fats occurs, producing ketones. Ihese
 insulin is required, NPH insulin at 1 IU q12 hours has 
cause a ketoacidosis that is rapidly fatal. Blood glucose
been used.
levels are very low (<3 mmol/L) and there is an increase
in the acidity ofthe blood. Ihe urine becomes acidic. The
Reproductive tract disease
sow becomes dull, lethargic and hyperpnoeic and then
Cystic ovarian disease
collapses and becomes comatose. Death can occur within
Cystic ovarian disease is common in female guinea pigs
two days, the sow fitting and convulsing in extremmis.
over 15 months. It is often bilateral causing a swollen
abdomen (see Figure 5.14). There is often bilateral sym-
Mammary gland tumours
metrical alopecia over the flanks.
Mammary gland adenomas are common in older sows.
sazis aqeiaidde yoeai Aeu mq umo mos ae Aa
In 20-30% of cases the tumour may be a malignant ad-
enocarcinoma.
Mastitis
 Poor hygiene predisposes the guinea pig to this condi
tion. Ihe bacteria involved (such as E. coli) may release
endotoxins into the bloodstream which can rapidly cause
endotoxic shock.
Musculoskeletal disease
Scurvy
The daily requirement for vitamin C is 10 mg/kg. If this
is not met then it will develop scurvy within 4-5 days.
Figure 5.14 Surgically removed cystic ovaries and uterus from a
guinea pig-
Guinea pigs lack the gene that controls the production of
80  Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
 L-gulonolactone oxidase which converts l-gulonolactone
DISEASES OF THE CHINCHILLA
to ascorbic acid (vitamin C). Clinical signs include a dull
Skin disease
staring coat, dental malocclusions, anorexia, slobbers,
Fur slip
diarrhoea and immobility due to painful, swollen joints.
Stress and rough handling will cause clumps of fur to
 The guinea pig is in constant pain and clinical signs and
fall out spontaneously. This will regrow, but often not for
history are enough to make a diagnosis. Radiographically
though, it can be seen that the epiphyses of the long bones
some time.
and the costochondral junctions of the ribs are flared lat-
Fur ring
erally, hence younger, stillgrowing guinea pigs are more
In male chinchillas, a ring of fur can become wrapped
susceptible.
around the penis inside the prepuce. Ihis must be re-
Fractures
moved before it causes ischaemia. Males should be
Fractures of the spine are common in guinea pigs that are
checked monthly, but more frequently during the breed-
MS
housed with rabbits due to trauma. Clinically there is pa-
ing season - every 2-3 days - as it can be caused by
resis or paralysis of the rear limbs, urinary incontinence
mounting behaviour.
etc. depending on the severity of the lesion. Ihis may be
confirmed as a fracture or subluxation on radiography.
Fur matting
 The prognosis is poor.
This is common if the fur is allowed to become danp.
Chinchillas should never be washed, shampooed or al-
Ocular disease
lowed to live in damp environmental conditions. Fine
Hypovitaminosis C can cause flaking of the skin of the
 pumice sand and Fuller's earth should be provided once
eyelids and periocular area, as can dermatophytosis.
or twice daily as a dust bath for fur hygiene and grooming.
Conjunctivitis is often seen in guinea pigs kept on deep
shavings or fine-chopped straw due to foreign bodies.
Barbering
A primary cause of conjunctivitis is Chlarmydophila
This is a common problem in chinchillas housed in pairs
psittaci, which causes crusting of the lids, reddening of
or groups. The fur of the tail and the whiskers are the
the conjunctiva, increased tear production and a white-
most commonly chewed parts, and this increases when
green tinged mucus discharge.
environmental stresses such as overcrowding are high,
Other ocular problems include: hereditary and dia-
and when the diet is lacking in fibre or when dental dis-
betic cataracts, and 'pea eye' - where subconjunctival fat
ease is present.
accumulates in the ventral fornix area, making the tissue
protrude.
Fungal disease
Neurological disease
The dermatophyte Trichophyton mentagrophytes can
Drug toxicity
cause alopecia in chinchillas, particularly over the nose
 Aminoglycosides can induce renal failure; an ascending
and pinnae where non-pruritic grey crusts forrm.
-an uaq seq sid eauma u yeap pue siskeed pise
Digestive disease
ported.
Oral
Ulcerative pododermatitis
Dental disease is very common in chinchillas. Dental
Ihis is a particularly common condition in guinea pigs
(cheek teeth) malocclusion occurs, as with rabbits, usually
that have a more plantigrade stance with non-furred
due to a lack of abrasive foods in the diet, and possibly
metatarsal areas. See the section on dermatological dis-
combined with a lack of calcium and vitamin D; during
eases. This may lead to osteomyelitis.
growth. There is probably a hereditary component to the
disease. Elongation of the crowns of the maxillary cheek
Pregnancy toxaemia
teeth occurs laterally, so that they penetrate the cheek
See page 79 for details.
mucosa, with the crowns of the mandibular cheek teeth
flaring medially, impinging on the tongue.
Spinal trauma
Elongation of the roots of the third and fourth maxil-
See above heading 'Fractures’ for details.
lary cheek-teeth can cause pain and discomfort, as they
Common Diseases of Small Mammals 81
 penetrate the ocular orbit causing epiphora. The frst and
Endoparasitic: Giardia is a single-celled protozoal para-
second maxillary cheek teeth enter the floor of the nasal
site found in healthy and sick chinchillas alike, and
passages/sinuses causing sneezing and nasal discharge.
therefore its role in disease is not fully understood. It
The mandibular cheek teeth roots penetrate the ventral
 is, however, a potential zoonosis. It is currently thought
aspect ofthe jaw and can be felt as aseries of bumps along
that poor diet, stress or concurrent disease allows the
its lower border.
normally present Giardia spp. parasite to multiply up to
When the molars overgrow, gaps form between in-
sufficient numbers in the large bowel to cause diarrhoea.
dividual molars. Ihese allow food particles to become
There is often the presence of soiled fur around the rear,
wedged between the molars. Ihe food particles then de-
and a general dullness. Diagnosis is by finding the motile,
cay, creating periodontal disease and eventually abscesses.
single-celled organisms on microscope examination of
Diagnosis of these problems can be made on clinical
fresh faeces samples suspended in isotonic saline.
signs and radiography. Clinically, the chinchilla is often
seen to be drooling saliva (the so-called 'slobbers'). It may
Hepatic lipidosis
NS
 also be anorectic, have lost weight and started consuming
Many chinchillas are overweight. Ihey may then go on
 softer fresh foods rather than the harder dry pellets.
to develop dental problems or other conditions which
may cause anorexia. Fat reserves are mobilised and the
Gastrointestinal
uod aun on spu ie ui padms saonaq ia
Colic
at which failure may occur, with dullness and anorexia
Gas-colic is often due to feeding sugary food items such
being the two most commonly seen non-specific signs.
Diagnosis is made on finding elevated bile acid levels in
petence and a hunched appearance.
conjunction with elevated AST and often GGT (gamma-
 glutamyl transferase) levels in the blood, and an enlarged
Caecocolic disease
liver shadow on radiography.
Caecocolic disease occurs rarely in chinchillas, but is
more likely if the chinchilla is suffering from severe di-
Respiratory disease
arrhoea. The caecum or proximal colon may become in-
Pneumonia is common in chinchillas housed in damp
volved in an intussusception or a torsion. Ihe chinchilla
 and drafty conditions, but it may occur in any individ-
is in severe pain, hunched in posture, often grinding its
 ual. The pathogens chiefly involved are bacteria such
teeth and drooling saliva, and occasionally rolling around
as Bordetella bronchiseptica, Streptococcus pneumoniae,
the cage. Loops of bowel in the caudal and ventral por-1
Pasteurella pneumotropica, and Pseudomonas spp. Diag-
tions of the abdomen, grossly swollen with gas, are seen 
 nosis is as for guinea pigs.
on radiograph.
Cardiovascular disease
Constipation
Chinchillas are prone to both hypertrophic and dilated
Constipation due to ileus is seen most commonly as a se-
cardiomyopathies. In addition, metastatic and dystro-
quel to: dental disease; obesity; late stage pregnancy; in-
phic mineralisation and pericardial effusions may also
testinal or abdominal surgery; sudden change in diet to a
be seen. Calcification may be asymptomatic and causes
less fibrous, higher protein (such as an all-seed diet) diet.
are thought to be similar to guinea pigs. In chinchillas,
The chinchilla may produce scant, small faecal pellets for
ventricular septal defects and tricuspid regurgitation have
a number of days, and then none at all. Chinchillas so af-
been reported.
fected are often uncomfortable, and may sit hunched with
tucked in abdomens.
Urinary tract disease
Urinary crystalline deposits have been seen in chinchillas
Diarrhoea
and resemble those found in guinea pigs. Diagnosis is as
Bacterial: Any of the bacteria mentioned in the section
for guinea pigs.
on guinea pigs may cause diarrhoea, with the E. coli and
Salmonella spp.families appearing frequently. Clostridium
Reproductive tract disease
spp enterotoxaemia will occur if inappropriate antibiot-
Dystocia occurs infrequently. There appears to be no as-
ics are used (e.g. oral penicillin).
sociated significant separation of the pelvis as is seen in
82  Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
the guinea pig, and therefore age at frst breeding is not
Salmonella spp. being reported. Tyzzer's disease (Clostrid-
so critical.
ium (Bacilus) pilformis), which may cause liver damage,
is also seen.
Musculoskeletal disease
Fractures are common in chinchillas, and tend to oc-
Respiratory disease
cur in the longer, more slender bones such as the tibia
Pneumonia is frequently bacterial, and often occurs after
 and femur. Chinchilla bones are more brittle than other
periods of stress such as re-homing and handling. In ad-
rodents.
dition, it is thought that the human influenza virus may
be transmissible to chipmunks.
Ocular disease
Conjunctivitis presents epiphora. It may be due to exces-
Cardiovascular disease
sive dust bathing with resultant foreign body irritation,
Chipmunks are very nervous and care should be taken
MS
or to the bacteria Chlamydophila psittaci. Alternatively,
to handle them carefully and in dimmed lighting. Rough
dental disease may be present, so the problem may not be
handling and high levels of stress can lead to fitting and
RT
a true conjunctivitis.
cardiac arrest.
Neurological disease
Urinary tract disease
Several causes of fitting have been described in chinchil-
Struvite crystals and calcium oxalate are seen. E. coli bac-
las. Ihese include the virus which causes lymphocytic
terial cystitis is often associated. Since they have a longer
choriomeningitis, as well as the bacteria Listeria monocy-
urethra and an os penis, urolithiasis causes more prob-
togenes, which may be spread by wild rodents.
lems for males than for females. Haematuria may be seen,
and a swollen penis found on close physical examination.
The calculi may be demonstrated radiographically and in
DISEASES OF THE CHIPMUNK
urine samples.
Skin disease
Ectoparasitic
Reproductive tract disease
Burrowing mites such as Notoedres muris as well as
Hypocalcaemic paralysis
ane Aau 'oiipe ui 'paodan uaaq aney dds saidong
This can occur soon after parturition, particularly if the
susceptible to the harvest mite Neotrombicula autumnalis,
chipmunk is on a poor-quality all-seed diet. The fenmale
as well as the avian red mite Dermaryssus gallinae. The
appearslethargic, oftenis not suckling the young and may
latter can cause anaemia and is commonly found where
become unconscious.
birds nest and roost.
Uterine disease
Bacterial
Uterine infections such as pyometras may be seen. There
Bacteria such as those described for rats and mice are
may be a vulval discharge, sometimes tinged with blood,
commonly isolated from the skin of chipmunks and their
and the female chipmunk is often anorectic, lethargic and
associated abscesses. Abscesses are common in chip-
polydipsic. Metritis may be seen shortly after parturition,
 munks housed in groups as they frequently fight.
with the female presenting as collapsed and weakened
with a swollen abdomen and signs of peritonitis.
Digestive disease
Oral
Mammary gland disease
Overgrown incisors are common due to trauma. Over-
Mastitis is uncommon, but bacteria such as E. coli,
growth or damage of the incisors may cause them to im-
Klebsiella spp. and Staphylococcus spp. have been isolated.
pinge on the floor of the nasal passage. The chipmunk of-
 Mammary gland fbroadenomas and adenocarcinomas
ten shows signs of a runny nose with a copious discharge.
have been recorded.
Gastrointestinal
Musculoskeletal disease
Chipmunks suffer diarrhoea from bacteria seen in
Chipmunks are acrobatic and fractures are common and
rats and mice, with Yersinia pseudotuberculosis and
 often involve the spine. If a spinal fracture is suspected,
Common Diseases of Small Mammals 83
radiography may be performed. The prognosis is poor
have resolved when the environmental humidity has been
and euthanasia is advised in these cases.
increased.
Neurological disease
Digestive disease
 Fitting is a problem in chipmunks housed in rooms with
Dental disease
50-60 Hertz wavelength equipment (TVs etc.). In addi-
Tartar build-up with periodontal disease and abscesses
tion, some chipmunks may be prone to hereditary epi-
are common in sugar gliders and Virginia opossums and
lepsy. Finally, bacteria such as Listeria rmonocyfogenes and
are worsened by sugar rich soff food diets.
Streptococcus pneumoniae, protozoa such as Toxoplasma
gondi, as well as viruses such as LCMV may also cause
Bacterial disease
central nervous system disease.
Gastrointestinal infections with bacteria such as Yersinia
dds unpuso pue dds ououps ssonuaqnopnasd
have been reported in sugar gliders and Virginia opos-
DSEASES OF SUGAR GLIDERS
sums. Yersiniosis may result in acute death or a more
ANd VIRGINIA OPOSSUMS
chronic wasting condition, with granulomata formation in
Skin disease
 the intestines. Clostridiosis has been associated with acute
Bacterial skin disease
death, but it and E. coli enteritis may also result in diar-
Similar pyoderma problems as those seen in Eutherian
rhoea, tenesmus and rectal prolapses in sugar gliders. My-
 mammals have been reported in marsupials. Fight wounds
cobacterial infections of marsupials have been reported in
may be common where stocking densities are high or
the wild but are relatively uncommon in captivity.
where sexually mature entire males are housed together.
Parasitic disease
Fungal skin disease
Giardia spp. have been reported in both species and re-
Dermatophyte Trichophyton mentagrophytes has been
sulted in small intestinal disease with diarrhoea and de-
associated with scaling lesions in Virginia opossums.
hydration.
aeau u pandan uaaq seu dds unuodsondhi
Ectoparasites
sugar gliders and in immunocompromised individuals
Specific mites such as Petauraiges rackae in sugar gliders
 has resulted in diarrhoea and a malabsorption maldiges-
and Haemogamasus spp. in Virginia opossums have been
tion problem.
associated with mange. Marsupials also appear suscep-
Various nematodes have been reported in the gut of
tible to Sarcoptes scabei mites. Harvest mites (Neotrorm-
the sugar glider including Parastrongyloides spp., Paraus-
bicula autumnalis and Guntheria kowanyam)have also
frastrongylus spp. and Paraustroxyuris spp. In the Virginia
been seen to cause pruritus and self-mutilation.
opossum nematodes such as Capillaria spp, Physalop-
Common cat and dog fleas are not host specific and so
tera spp, and Cruzia spp., have been reported. Intestinal
could also infest both species of marsupial.
iuana u panodan uaaq oste aneu (sapoieanl) sa
opossums and may be associated with diarrhoea.
Neoplasia
Liver flukes (Athesria spp.) have been reported asymp-
Cutaneous lymphoma has been reported in sugar gliders
 and lymphoma in appears common in this species.
 tations could result inliver damage.
Self-trauma
Respiratory disease
Sugar gliders may self-traumatise digits, genitalia and
Bacterial disease
their tails when stressed, initially, just removing the hair
Infections with Pasteurella multocida, Streptococcus pneu
and then causing tissue injuries.
moniae and Klebsiella spp. have all been reported result-
sunssodo euaiA pue siapia 1egns ul ejuoumaud ut Bu!
Miscellaneous
Virginia opossums have been reported with scaling of
Fungal disease
the non-haired portion of the tail. Some cases have been
Cryptococcus neoformans, a yeast, has been reported as
determined as ectoparasite associated disease and some
the cause of pneumonia in sugar gliders. It produces a
84 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
 granulomatous reaction which may be seen radiographi-
other animals, it is associated with a lack of calcium and
cally and is difficult to treat. Sources of infection are con-
vitamin D3. Clinically, it can present with bowing of long
taminated feed/environmental plants.
bones, spontaneous fractures and collapse of the spinal
column, with resultant paresis/paralysis. Radiographs
Cardiovascular disease
reveal poor bone mineralisation/density and hypocalcae-
Cardiomyopathy (dilated) has been reported in both sugar
mia and hypoproteinaemia may be seen on blood bio-
gliders and Virginia opossums and can produce congestive
chemistry. Diets that contain large amounts of unsupple-
heart failure. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy may also be
mented fruit or meat are common culprits.
seen in Virginia opossums, particularly those over 2 years of
age and may present with tachycardia and also renal failure.
Neurological disease
Microabscessation of the myocardium and associated
Paresis or paralysis, usually of the hindlimbs, associated
heart failure may also be seen in various bacterial infections,
with nutritional osteodystrophic collapse of the spinal
MS
 particularly those associated with Clostridium spp. bacteria.
column resulting in spinal cord damage is common.
Heartworm - Dirofilaria immitis has also been re-
In sugar gliders, seizures associated with hypovita-
PART
ported as a cause of heart failure in Virginia opossums. It
minosis B have been reported where diets have not been
is transmitted principally by mosquitoes and is not cur-
supplemented with this vitamin (home-made sugar/nec-
rently found in the United Kingdom although it is present
tar formulas are often deficient in this).
in parts of continental Europe and the USA
All marsupials are very susceptible to Toxoplasma spp.
Mineralisation of the aorta and main arteries has also
infection which can result in fever, seizures and usu-
been reported in Virginia opossums due to oversupple-
ally death. Sources are typically contamination of food/
mentation with calcium and vitamin D3
environment by the faeces of domestic cats, although the
Urinary tract disease
Virginia opossum is known to scavenge dead rodents
which can also provide a source.
Leptospira spp. infections of the urinary tract have been
associated with interstitial nephritis, hepatitis and death
Migration through the spinal cord of the nematode
Bayliascaris spp. has also been reported as a cause of pa-
of marsupials.
ralysis in sugar gliders.
Urolithiasis and cystitis have been reported in sugar
Many aged Virginia opossums will show evidence of
gliders and may be associated with urinary retention due
fine and intention tremors due to fbrosis of the vascu-
to a lack of territory (overcrowding).
lature within the brain leading to reduced oxygenation.
 Prostatic hypertrophy and prostatitis resulting in dys-
uria have been reported in Virginia opossums.
Ocular disease
Reproductive tract disease
Cataracts have been reported in sugar gliders associ-
Infections of the pouch can be seen in both species.
ated with both hypovitaminosis A and with diabetes
Bacteria involved include Pseudomonas spp., E. coli and
mellitus. Senescent cataracts have been reported in both
Staphylococcus aureus.
marsupials.
Infections of the reproductive tract have also been
reported as a cause of il-health and infertility and
DISEASES OF THE FERRET
may result in uterine prolapse in Virginia opossums.
Skin disease
Neoplasia of the reproductive tract is also relatively com
mon in older females.
Ectoparasitic
 Male sugar gliders are known to self-mutilate the penis
Mites
 and scrotum when kept on their own.
The ear mite Otodectes cynotis causes intense irritation,
Infertility may also be seen in individuals that are obese
and the production of copious black wax. This may lead
 and in situations where there is overcrowding.
to facial dermatitis, otitis externa, otitis interna and ves-
tibular syndrome. Diagnosis is by finding the typical
Musculoskeletal disease
mites on wax samples (see Figure 5.15).
Nutritional osteodystrophy
Less common is Sarcoptes scabei which can cause in-
Also known as metabolic bone disease, it is common in
tense pruritus over the head, ears, paws and tail. Diagno-
captive marsupials, particularly in sugar gliders. As with 
sis is made on skin scrapings.
Common Diseases of Small Mammals 85
along the nose and ear tips in particular. Ihey are malig
nant tumours and rapidly spread. Sebaceous epitheliomas
and basal cell tumours are seen on the head, neck and
 shoulders and are well-defined, benign tumours, but may
ulcerate. Fibrosarcomas have been reported in response
to injection site reactions, as in cats. Mast cell tumours
are also common in ferrets but many will spontaneously
resolve being generally less aggressive than those seen in
dogs and cats (see Figure 5.16).
Hormonal
Hyperadrenocorticism is the most commonly seen cause
of non-pruritic alopecia in the ferret (although around
40% may be pruritic!). Hair loss is mainly over the dorsum
Figure 5.15 Otooectes cynotis ear mite from a ferret.
and flanks initially. Secondary signs of hyperadrenocorti-
cal disease including pendulous abdomen, thinning of the
Fleas
skin, weight gain etc. are also seen - see Endocrine diseases
The domestic cat and dog fleas Ctenocephalides felis and
 In male ferrets, Leydig/interstitial cell tumours can
C. canis may infest ferrets. Many ferrets are used in the
produce excess testosterone and Sertoli cell tumours can
United Kingdom for hunting, and therefore rabbit fleas
produce excess oestrogen resulting in fur loss. In females,
Spilopsyllus cuniculi or ‘stick tight’ fleas Echidnophaga
granulosa cell tumours of the ovaries have been associ-
spp. may also be seen.
ated with hair loss, as has the common hyperoestrogen
condition of unmated entire females.
Ticks
Ixodes ricinus are commonly found in ferrets used for
Digestive disease
hunting.
Oral
Bacterial
Dental disease is common in ferrets over 18 months of
age on wet diets, which cause tartar and periodontal
Abscesses frequently develop, particularly in the cervical
disease.
area, due to intraspecific fighting. Bacteria include Strep-
tococcus spp., Staphylococcus spp., Arcanobacterium (Acti-
Oesophageal
nomyces) pyogenes, Pasteurella spp., and E. coli. A. pyogenes
Megaoesophagus has been reported in ferrets and results
infections often produce copious green-coloured pus, and
 in regurgitation, wasting and aspiration pneumonia. It
 may be associated with immunosuppressive conditions.
Fungal
Dermatophytosis due to Microsporum canis or Trichophy-
fon mentagrophytes is relatively uncommon in the ferret.
Viral
Canine distemper virus (CDV), a paramyxovirus, may
affect the skin with a rash over the chin and ventrum fol-
lowed by brown crusts, particularly around the eyes and
chin a week after infection. A nasal discharge may be pres
ent. Unless vaccinated, most ferrets will die from canine
distemper between 7-21 days after contracting the virus.
skin tumours
Squamous cell carcinomas are the most frequently re-
ported skin neoplasm in ferrets, occurring on the head,
Figure 5.16 Mast cell tumour in a ferret prior to excision.
86 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
appears to be an acquired disease rather than congenital
A member of the rotavirus family can cause diarrhoea
but the cause is unknown. Diagnosis is made using posi-
 in young, unweaned and recently weaned ferrets.
tive contrast radiography.
Other bacterial causes of diarrhoea
Gastric
Salmonellosis due to Salmonella typhimurium has been
Gastric ulceration is a common problem in ferrets and
reported and is a potential zoonosis.
may be associated with Helicobacter mustelae infection.
Gastric tumours and renal disease may also lead to gastric
Liver disease
ulcer development, as will gastric foreign bodies.
The liver is commonly affected by lymphoma, although
The clinical signs vary from: dullness: abdominal
primary cancer of the liver is uncommon. Hepatic lipi-
guarding; salivation; vomiting; melaena and weight loss.
dosis has been recorded in persistently anorectic ferrets.
Further tests involve blood tests for renal disease, radio-
In all of these cases the ferret may simply appear to be
MS
graphs, both plain and barium studies, and ultimately gas-
vaguely unwell, jaundice being an uncommon feature.
tric biopsy to demonstrate/culture Helicobacter mustelae.
Blood results may suggest a rise in ALT above 275 IU/L
RT
(Hillyer et al. 1997), but it often requires ultrasonographic
Intestinal
and biopsy tests to make a diagnosis.
Proliferative ileitis
Liver disease associated with copper poisoning has also
Proliferative ileitis is similar to the 'wet tail' seen in ham-
been reported in ferrets.
sters and is due to Lawsonia intracelularis. Clinically, a
green, mucoid, bloody diarrhoea and weight loss are
Respiratory disease
 seen. Diagnosis is made on clinical signs primarily which
Viral
are unlike almost any other condition. Biopsy can be
Canine distemper virus (CDV) is a paramyxovirus. The
confirmatory.
virus is spread by aerosol from one infected ferret or
canid to another, when they sneeze or breathe. It may also
Intestinal lymphoma
be transmitted on a handler's hands and clothing. The
This is relatively uncommon, but lymphoma of the mes-
virus gains access through the upper airways and incu
enteric lymph nodes and the liver are seen in older ferrets.
bates inside the ferret for 7-10 days, spreading through-
This may present with vague gastrointestinal signs, such
 out the body via the bloodstream.
as constipation, liver disease or even as apparently acute
 The frst signs of the disease occur on the skin (see
liver failure with jaundice.
skin diseases). The ferret is pyrexic and may have a serous
oculonasal discharge. Secondary bacterial infections of
Endoparasitic disease
the lungs on top of widespread immunosuppression often
Coccidiosis and giardiasis have both been described as
results in the death of an infected ferret. Towards the end
causes of lethargy, diarrhoea and dehydration. Nematode
 of the disease fitting, nystagmus and generalised incoor-
and cestode parasites are rarely seen, although hunt-
dination are all seen. Ihe condition is fatal in nearly all
ing individuals are more likely to be exposed to these
cases of unvaccinated ferrets. Diagnosis is made on clini-
parasites, with Toxocara spp. and Toxascaris spp. being
cal signs, demonstration of viral antigens/antibodies in
the most commonly seen. Rarely do they cause clinical
the bloodstream and/or mucus secretions of the ferret.
disease.
Human influenza C virus, an orthomyxovirus, is trans-
missible from human to ferret and back again. It causes a
Viral disease
d 'asd suass e m aseas Aemie an Au
 A parvovirus known as Aleutian disease is particularly
ducing pyrexia for 3-4 days.
lethal to mink, but in ferrets it produces unpleasant di-
arrhoea, although it is rarely fatal. It may produce me-
Bacterial
laenic faeces, fever, loss of weight and a number of other
Bacteria such as Pasteurella spp, Bordetella bronchisep-
immune-system mediated symptonms.
tica, Klebsiella pneumonia, Streptococcus pneumonia,
Canine distemper can produce gastrointestinal signs
Nocardia spp. have all been associated with pneumonia
such as diarrhoea. In addition, the influenza virus C may
in the domestic ferret. Diagnosis is made on lung radio-
also be responsible for mild diarrhoea.
 graphs, lung washes and isolation of the bacteria.
Common Diseases of Small Mammals 87
Parasitic
and snails as the intermediate host. Ihe adult worms live
The lungworm Aelurostrongylus abstrusus can cause
in the right side of the heart and pulmonary vasculature
chronic coughing in ferrets. The adult worm sits in the
with eggs being shed into the blood stream, entering the
pulmonary vasculature and sheds its eggs into the blood-
airways and being coughed and swallowed and passed
stream which burst into the alveoli and are coughed up,
in the faeces. Severe cases may show signs of right-sided
swallowed and passed in the faeces. Ihis parasite uses
heart failure.
molluscs (e.g. slugs and snails) as intermediate hosts. Ihe
lungworm Capilaria aerophila has also been reported in
Lymphoma
ferrets and will cause coughing. It sits in the actual air-
Blood-borne leukaemia is uncommon; however, the
ways as an adult worm. Again eggs are coughed up and
 tissue-associated lymphoma is very common - being the
passed in the faeces, where they may be ingested by earth-
third most frequently seen neoplasia in the ferret after
worms or rodents which may act as a paratenic host.
adrenal gland neoplasia and insulinomas. Some authors
believe that there are two types of lymphoma: one is a ju-
Cardiovascular disease
venile, aggressive (lymphoblastic) form of lymphoma seen
Cardiomyopathy
in ferrets under 14 months of age, often found in one site
 Dilated cardiomyopathy is the most commonly seen, and
(e.g thymus or spleen), develops rapidly and responds well
may lead to congestive cardiac failure with lethargy, fluid
 to chemotherapy; the other is a more chronic (lympho-
respiratory noises, weight loss, polydipsia, ascites and
's  a saa u uaas i e (
audible systolic murmurs on auscultation of the chest.
which affects more than one site and responds poorly to
 Diagnosis is made on radiographic signs of lung conges-
 chemotherapy. Other authors agree that this is what is
tion, occasionally pleural effusion and an enlarged cardiac
seen clinically but believe that a staging protocol similar
shadow, ECG changes and ultrasonographic demonstra-
to that used in dogs is more useful (Schoemaker, 2009):
tion of heart-wall thinning and valvular incompetence.
· Stage l: a single site is involved (typically but not
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is rarely seen. Vertebral
restricte d to the spleen or thymus)
heart scores have been derived for ferrets to assess the
● Stage 2: Multiple non-contiguous sites on the same side
radiographic size of the heart relative to the thoracic ver-
 of the diaphragm
tebrae - see Chapter 7 for further information.
· Stage 3: Multiple lymphatic sites on both sides of the
diaphragm
Endocardiosis
● Stage 4: Multiple sites on both sides of the diaphragm
Endocardiosis is common in ageing ferrets. The present-
 including non-lymphatic tissue or bone marrow
ing signs are similar to those seen in dogs with productive
Obviously stage 1 has the best prognosis for chemo-
coughs, lethargy and, in more serious cases, heart failure
therapy or surgery and the prognosis steadily worsens to
with ascites and cyanosed membranes. Diagnosis is by
stage 4.
auscultation, clinical signs and ultrasonographic demon-
stration of valvular incompetence and thickening.
Urinary tract disease
Kidney
Heartworm
Polycystic kidney disease is inherited in ferrets and is
Again, although it is not endemic in the United King-
rare. Discrete renal cysts are asymptomatic but can be as
dom, heartworm due to Dirofilaria irmmitis can be seen
common as 10-15%.
in ferrets from overseas. The parasite is transmitted by
Pyelonephritis (e.g. E. coli) is seen in ferrets. In addi-
mosquitoes and the adult develops in the right ventricle
tion, interstitial nephritis due to Leptospira spp. is com-
of the heart. Ferrets affected may present with right-sid-
mon in working ferrets coming into contact with wild
ed heart failure, that is, pleural effusion and ascites. An
rodents, which are the reservoir for this disease. Chronic
ELISA test is available but ferrets often produce false-
interstitial nephritis is also common in all ferrets and is
negative results. Right-sided enlargement of the heart
progressive from 2 years of age resulting in renal failure
may be seen on radiographs and abnormalities may be
from 4 to 5 years of age.
seen on echocardiographic examination of the heart. In
Aleutian disease can produce a strong antibody
the United Kingdom, it is also possible to see the heart-
response and result in circulating antibody-antigen
worm Angiostrongylus vasorum. This nematode uses slugs
complexes. Ihese can damage the glomerular membranes
88 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
 of the kidneys, and produce membranous glomerulone-
starting over the tail rump and dorsum and spreading over
 phritis and tubular interstitial nephritis which may result
the flanks and rest of the body; pruritus in 40% of cases;
in renal failure.
and swelling of the vulva or prepuce in a ferret that has
Renal function can be assessed using blood urea and
-sond 'saay aeu ul paanau Aems Asnad uaa
creatinine levels - the latter of which are lower normally
tatic cysts and hyperplasia are seen which may present
than in other mammals (17-46 μmol/L).
with dysuria or stranguria. Ultrasound may show enlarge-
ment of the adrenal gland, but this can be difficult in early
Bladder
cases. Urinary corticoid: creatinine ratio (UCCR) is often
 Urolithiasis is seen in ferrets that are fed protein from a
 increased and resistant to dexamethasone suppression. The
plant source, such as is found in dog food. This creates
adrenocorticotrophin hormone (ACTH) level is often de-
 an alkaline urine pH and allows these salts to precipitate.
 pressed and an increase in plasma cortisol levels has been
The provision of solely animal proteins in the diet leads 
 observed after an injection of human chorionic gonadotro-
MS
to acidic urine and dissolution of the calculi. Pregnant
phin (hCG) (Schoemaker et al., 2008). In general a panel of
jills are susceptible, as they are mobilising large volumes
oestradiol, androstenedione, 17-hydroxyprogesterone and
of minerals from their bones for foetal development and
dehydroepiandrosterone sulphate (DHEAS) +/— cortisol
milk production. Uroliths are struvite or magnesium
has been recommended by many as effective in detecting
ammonium phosphate.
adrenocortical disease in ferrets.
Male ferrets may experience obstruction at the os penis
if it is of large enough calculi form. Clinically they are
Diabetes mellitus
dull, straining to urinate and sometimes prolapsing the
Diabetes mellitus is uncommon in ferrets, but presents as
rectum. Often, the prepuce is swollen and the abdomen
a disease similar to that seen in cats.
tense; occasionally crystals may be seen on the hairs
around the prepuce. Radiography will confrm the
Insulinoma
diagnosis.
Hypoglycaemia may occur due to prolonged fasting (fer-
Stranguria and dysuria may be seen in male ferrets
rets should not be fasted for more than 4-6 hours due to
with prostatic hypertrophy and prostatic/paraprostatic
their high metabolic rates), overdosage with insulin in a
cysts which are associated with hyperadrenocorticism.
diabetic case or due to an insulinoma (an insulin secret-
ing pancreatic tumour). Insulinomas have been reported
Endocrine disease
as the most commonly seen neoplasm in older ferrets
Adrenal
(>4 years) with an incidence varying from 21.7% (Williams
The cause of adrenal disease in ferrets is still not fully
& Weis, 2003) to 25% (Li et al., 1998). Tumours secrete in-
understood, but a correlation between neutering and de-
sulin continuously and are not altered by the production
velopment of the disease has been deduced. Ihe patho-
of hypoglycaemia. Rebound hypoglycaemia can also occur
 physiology is thought to be due to ferrets (like mice and
though, if a brief period of hyperglycaemia has occurred,
humans) having luteinising hormone (LH) receptors in
their adrenal tissue, which increase in number with el-
Metastatic spread is low in ferrets with insulinomas.
evated circulating LH which occurs after gonadectomy.
Diagnosis ofinsulinoma is based on clinical signs, which
This triggers the production of sex steroid hormones by
include weakness of hindlimbs, ataxia, collapse, opis-
the adrenal glands, so clinical disease (as well as hyper-
thotonus and drooling saliva with pawing at the mouth.
trophy and neoplastic change of the gland). Some suggest
Rarely do ferrets exhibit full seizures as is seen in dogs
that certain genetic lines of ferrets are more predisposed.
with insulinomas. Blood levels of glucose lower than 3.3
In ferrets, adrenal gland hyperplasia accounts for 56% of
mmol/L are suggestive of insulinoma but not diagnostic.
adrenal disease, adrenocortical adenoma accounts for
 Elevated insulin levels (normal range reported as 35-250
16% and adenocarcinoma for 26%, both producing sex
pmol/L (Jenkins, 2000) in the presence of hypoglycaemia
steroid hormones, particularly oestradiol. In addition, the
are confirmatory. Some ferrets, however, may present with
left adrenal gland seems more likely to develop disease
normal glucose levels with elevated insulin due to recent
than the right.
food consumption. These can be very carefully fasted for
Diagnosis of adrenal disease is based on clinical signs
3-4 hours to watch for the development of hypoglycaemia
for example, polyuria/polydipsia; bilateral hair
loss,
in the presence of persistent hyperinsulinaemia
Common Diseases of Small Mammals 89
Hyperoestrogenism
recommendations are for the jill to be brought out of heat
For details, see below.
by (1) being mated by an entire or vasectomised male;
(2) being injected with proligestone (Delvosteron? MSD
Reproductive tract disease
 Animal Health) a synthetic progesterone; or (3) Implant-
Pregnancy toxaemia
ed with a gonadotrophin releasing hormone (GnRH)
 Pregnancy toxaemia is similar to that seen in the guinea
agonist such as deslorelin (Suprelorin Virbac Animal
pig. It occurs inlate gestation, often in a first-time mother,
Health). Surgical neutering is not recommended due to
during a period of anorexia. Ketoacidosis develops, lead-
adrenal neoplasia.
ing to dullness, lethargy, vomiting, dehydration, alopecia,
neurological signs, abortion and death of the jill.
Prostatic disease
Prostate cysts are particularly common in ferrets with an
Dystocia
actively secreting adrenal gland tumour. If enlarged, the
Dystocia is relatively uncommon in the ferret. It is more
 prostate will obstruct the urethra, and therefore prevent
common in jills carrying a small litter due to low levels of
urination. Large prostatic and paraprostatic cysts are
foetal corticosteroid produced. If the jill exceeds day 43 of
commonly seen with this condition.
gestation, labour may need to be induced.
Musculoskeletal disease
Mastitis
Fractures in ferrets are uncommon, although the spine is
 Mastitis may occur as an acute illness immediately after
the most commonly affected. Posterior paresis or paraly-
 parturition. Bacteria commonly present in these cases are
 sis is often associated with vertebral fractures, but may
Streptococcus spp. and E. coli. Toxaemia may develop.
also be a sign of cardiovascular disease, hypoglycaemia
A more chronic condition is seen due to the bacteria
or anaemia. Diagnosis is by radiography and tests already
Staphylococus intermedius. This form of mastitis is highly
discussed.
infectious between jlls and destroys much of the mam-
 mary tissue, leaving scar tissue and pockets of infection.
Neurological disease
Fitting may be seen towards the end stages of CDV in-
Pyometra and metritis
s u s m se raus seo ui
 Metritis occurs immediately after parturition and may
anaemia. Posterior paresis may be associated with spinal
cause an acute toxic reaction in the jll. The jill may be
 trauma, cardiovascular disease, hypoglycaemia, anaemia
very dull and pyrexic at this stage, and have no milk
and CDV.
production.
Mild incoordination, posterior ataxia and paresis
Pyometra occurs at any stage, and is manifested by
can be associated with spinal disease due to trauma,
a dark, foul-smelling vulval discharge, polydipsia and
abscessation or neoplasia. Aleutian disease can re-
sometimes toxaemia. Occasionally, a closed pyometra
sult in antigen-antibody complex-mediated vasculitis
with no external discharge may occur. Palpation of the
which can also produce these clinical signs. Diagnosis
abdomen reveals a swollen uterus in the caudal dorsal
 of Aleutian disease is often made using serum protein
abdomen. The diagnosis may be confirmed with radiog-
electrophoresis with a gamma globulin level in excess of
raphy or ultrasonography.
20% of the total serum protein level.
Hyperoestrogenism
Ocular disease
An entire female will remain in oestrus forthe whole of the
Ophthalmia neonatorum, a failure of the kits' eyes to
breeding season (March-October), unless she is mated or
 open, is often due to bacteria from the Staphylococcus and
chemically brought out of oestrus as ferrets are induced
Streptococcus spp.
ovulators. This chronic, long-term exposure to oestrogen
Other ocular problems include crusting and weep-
results in fatal anaemia from bone marrow suppression.
ing associated with CDV, photophobia associated with
The jill presents as tachypnoeic, with pale, petechiated
the influenza virus, conjunctivitis, night blindness and
 mucous membranes, lethargic and collapsed. Early signs 
cataracts associated with hypovitaminosis A. Corneal
are a prominently swollen vulva, symmetrical alope-
ulcers due to trauma and local infections are common
cia of the flanks, and often a vulval discharge. Current
in ferrets.
90 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
References
Schmidt, R.E. and Reavill, D.R. (2007) Cardiovascular disease in
Gilmore, S.A. (2005) Spinal nerve root degeneration in aging
hamsters: review and retrospective study. Journal ofExotic Pet
laboratory rats: a light microscopic study. Anatomical Record,
Medicine, 16, 49-51.
174(2), 251-257.
Schoemaker, N.J. (2009) Endocrine and Neoplastic Diseases.
Girling, S.J., Pizzi, R., Cox, A. and Beard, P. (201l) Fatal
Manual of Ferrets and Rodents (eds E. Keeble & A. Meredith),
cowpox infection in two squirrel monkeys (Sairmiri sciureus).
Pp. 320-329. BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
Veterinary Record, 169(6), 156.
Sdhoemaker, N.J, Kuijten, A.M. and Galac, S. (2008) Luteinizing
Hillyer, E.V, Quesenberry, K.E. and Donnelly, T.M. (1997)
hormone-dependent Cushings syndrome in a pet ferret
Biology, husbandry and clinical techniques. Ferrets, Rabbits
(Mustela putorius furo). Domestic Animat Endocrinology, 34,
and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery PP. 243-
278-283.
259. WB Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
Weisbroth, S., Flatt, R.E. and Kraus, A.L. (1974) Anatomy,
Huybens, N., Houeix, J., Szalo, M., Licois, D., Mainil, J. and
physiology and biochemistry of the rabbit. The Biology of
Marlier, D. (2008) Is epizootic rabbit enteropathy (ERE) a
the Laboratory Rabbit (eds Manning et al.), 2nd edn, p. 65.
bacterial disease?Proceedings ofthe 9th World Rabbit Congress,
Academic Press, London.
NS
Pp. 971-975. Verona, Italy.
Williams, B.H. and Weis, C.A. (2003) Ferret neoplasia. Ferrets,
Jean-Blain, C. and Durix, A. {1985) Efects of dietary lipid
Rabbits and Rodents: Clinicat Medicine (eds K.E. Quesenberry
level on ketonemia and other plasma parameters related to
& J.W. Carpenter), 2nd edn, PP. 91-106. WB Saunders,
RT
glucose and fatty acid metabolism in the rabbit during fasting.
St Louis.
Reproductive NutritionatDevelopment, 25, 345-354.
Jenkins, JR. (2000) Ferret metabolic testing. Laboratory
Medicine: Avian and Exotic Pets (ed.
.A.M. Fudge),
Further reading
 Pp. 305-309. WB Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
Fraser, M.A.and Girling, S.J. (2009) Rabbit Medicine and Surgery
Lafontan, M. and Agid, R. {1979) An extra-adrenal action of
for Veterinary Nurses. Blackwell- Wiley, Oxford.
adrenocorticotrophin: physiological induction of lipolysis by
Heatley, J.J. (2009) Cardiovascular anatomy, physiology and
secretion of adrenocorticotrophin in obese rabbits. Journal of
disease of rodents and small exotic mammals. Veterinary
Endocrinotogy,&1, 281-290.
Qinics of North America: Exotic Animal Practice, 12, 99-113.
Leary,S.L., Manning,PJ. and Anderson, L.C. (1984) Experimental
Hinton, M. (198l) Kidney disease in the rabbit: a histological
and naturally occurring gastric foreign bodies in laboratory
survey. Laboratory Animals,15,263-265.
rabbits. Laboratory Animal Science, 34(1), 58-61.
Keeble, E. and Meredith, A. (2009) Manual of Rodents and
Li, X., Fox, J.G. and Padrid, PA. (1998) Neoplastic diseases in
Ferrets. BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
ferrets:574 cases{1968-1997).JournalofAmerican Veterinary
Lowe, J.A. (1998) Pet rabbit feeding and nutrition. The Nutrition
Medicat Association, 212(9), 1402-1406.
of the Rabbit (eds De Blas and Wiseman), PPp. 304-331. CABI
McLaughlin, R.M. and Fish, R.E. (1994) Clinical biochemistry
Publishing, Cambridge.
and haematology. The Biology of the Laboratory Rabbit
Meredith, A. and Flecknall, P. (2006) Manual of Rabbits, 2nd edn.
(eds PJ. Manning, D.H. Ringler & C.E. Newcomer), 2nd 
BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
edn, pp. 11l-124. Academic Press, London.
Meredith,A.and Johnson-Delaney,C. (2010) Marual of Exotic
Okerman, L. (1994) Inherited conditions and
congenital
Pets, 5th edn. BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
deformities. Diseases of Domestic Rabbits,
2nd edn,
Quesenberry, K.E. and Carpenter, J. (2003) Ferrets, Rabbits and
Pp. 109-112. Blackwell, Oxford.
Rodents, 2nd edn. WB Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
Chapter 6
An Overview of Small Mammal
Therapeutics
FLUID THERAPY
In addition, many patients are not able to drink im-
mediately after surgery. Some forms of surgery, such as
Maintenance requirements
incisor extraction in rabbits suffering from malocclusion,
In small mammals there is little water lost as sweat, as ro-
will lead to inappetence for a period of time. Dehydration
PART
dents, and lagomorphs have little or no skin sweat glands,
will result, as many rabbits gain the majority of their fluid
and most do not pant either. Increased metabolic rates,
intake from their vegetable diets.
and their small size, lead to a large lung surface area in
relation to volume and the loss of large amounts of fluids
Electrolyte replacement
during normal respiration. In addition, glomerular filtra
Eectrolyte replacement can be necessary in cases of
tion rates are higher. Ihis makes their daily maintenance
chronic diarrhoea such as in coccidiosis in rabbits or wet
fluid requirement per kilogram nearly double those seen
tail in hamsters. Ihe main electrolyte losses are bicarbon-
 in larger mammals. Some values are given in Table 6.1
ate and potassium, leading to metabolic acidosis.
Small herbivores, particularly rabbits, rarely vomit
The effect of disease on fluid
and so electrolyte loss by that route is unlikely to ocur.
requirements
Ferrets can vomit, for example, stomach ulceration due
Respiratory disease is common in small mammals, es-
to bacteria such as Helicobacter rmustelae. In these cases,
pecially rabbits, rats and mice. In these animals often
metabolic alkalosis may result.
chronic levels of lung infection are present, with in-
creased respiratory secretions being the result. Fluid loss
Fluid types used in small mammal
can therefore be appreciable via this route.
practice
 Individuals suffering from diarrhoea will experience
Lactated Ringer's/Hartmann's
fluid loss and often metabolic acidosis due to the pro-
Lactated Ringer's solution is useful as a general-purpose
longed loss of bicarbonate.
rehydration and maintenance fluid. It is particularly use.
Another route of fluid and electrolyte loss is through
ful for small mammals suffering from metabolic acidosis,
skin disease. Rabbits (in particular, those kept in wet or
such as those described above with chronic gastrointesti-
unsanitary conditions) willcontract skin infections from
nal problems, but can also be used for fluid therapy after
environmental bacterial organisms such as Pseudomonas
routine surgical procedures.
spp. These produce lesions, which resemble chemical or
thermal burns, and leave large areas of weeping, exuda-
Glucose/saline combinations
tive skin causing further fluid loss.
Glucose/saline is useful for small mammals, as they may
have been through periods of anorexia prior to treatment,
Post-surgical fluid requirements
and therefore may well be borderline hypoglycaemic.
Surgical procedures may cause intrasurgical haemorhag-
Glucose/saline combinations are also useful for cases of
ing, necessitating vascular support with isotonic crystal-
urethral obstruction, such as ferret urolithiasis.
loids or, in more serious blood losses (>10%), colloidal
fluids or even blood transfusions. Even if surgery is rela-
Hypertonic saline
tively bloodless, there are inevitable losses via the respira-
 a  se s  a a  s
tory route due to the drying nature of the gases used to
    Aidn Aq sm l '
deliver the anaesthetics.
cellular and pericellular space into the circulation to
92 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Table 6.1 Maintenance fluid values for selected smmall marmmal5.
Intraosseous donations may be made if vascular access is
not possible. Calculations for volumes are based on those
Fluid maintenance values
available for cats, that is
Species
(mL/kg per day)
Vol. of donor blood
Rabbit
80-100
Desired change in PCV
required(mL) = 60 × BW(kg) ×-
Guinea pig
100
PCV of trandused blood
力
Chinchilla
100
where BW is body weight of the recipient in kilograms.
W
Other rodent
90-100
Oral fluids and electrolytes
Sugar glider
80-100
 Oral fluids may be used in small mammal practice for those
 Ferret
75-100
patients experiencing mild dehydration, and for home ad-
ministration. The most useful products contain pro/prebi-
MS
otics which aid the return to normal digestive function.
support central venous pressure. See Chapter & for fur-
ther details of its use. It must be administered intrave-
Calculation of fluid requirements
nously or intraosseously.
Fluid within food is difficult to take into consideration
when calculating fluid needed, and therefore it is safer
 Protein amino acid/B vitamin supplements
to assume that the debilitated small mammal will not be
Protein and vitamin supplements are useful for nutri-
eating enough for it to matter. Once it is appreciated that
tional support (e.g. Duphalyte@ at 1 mL/kg per day).
maintenance for most small mammals is double that re-
Ihese supplements are particularly good in cases where
quired for the average cat or dog, then deficits may be cal-
the patient is malnourished or has been suffering from
culated in the same manner. Assume that 1% dehydration
a protein-losing enteropathy or nephropathy. It is also a
equates with needing to supply 10 mL/kg fluid replace-
useful supplement for patients with hepatic disease or
ment, in addition to maintenance requirements.
severe exudative skin diseases.
Then estimate the percentage of dehydration of the pa-
tient as follows:
Colloidal fluids
·3-5% dehydrated - increased thirst, slight lethargy,
These are of use in small mammals which may be given
tacky mucous membranes
an intravenous bolus. They are used when a serious loss of
7-10% dehydrated - increased thirst, anorexia, dull-
 blood ocurs in order to support central blood pressure.
ness, tenting of the skin and slow return to normal, dry
Ihis may be a temporary measure while a blood donor
mucous membranes, dull corneas
is selected, or, if none is available, the only means of at-
·10-15% dehydrated - dull to comatose, skin remains
 tempting to support such a patient.
 tented after pinching, desiccating mucous membranes.
Alternatively, if a blood sample may be obtained, a
Blood transfusions
1% increase in PCV, associated with an increase in total
If the packed cell volume (PCV) starts to drop below
proteins, may be assumed to equate to 10 mL/kg fluid
20%, blood transfusions may be required. Ihey must be
deficit (see Table 6.2).
same species-to-species transfers (i.e.rat to rat, guinea pig
en usadan ot  pe ae aq eu syap asa
U uaiam Apoq %T aey Ae 1ouop auI (3id eaum 01
idly. Indeed, it may be dangerous to overload the patient's
blood removed, assuming it is healthy. Ihe sample is best
system with these fluid levels all in one go. Therefore, the
taken directly into a pre-heparinised syringe, or using ci-
following protocol is worth follwing to ensure fluid over-
trate acid dextrose at 1 mL of anticoagulant to 5-6 mL
load, renal shutdown and pulmonary oedema are avoided:
of blood, and immediately transfers it in bolus fashion to
▪ Day 1: Maintenance fluid levels +50% of calculated de-
the donor. Ihe use of intravenous catheters is advised, as
hydration factor
administration should be slow, giving 1 mL over a period
· Day 2: Maintenance fluid levels +50% of calculated de-
of 5-6 minutes. Iherefore sedation, or good restraint, is
hydration factor
required. Very little information is currently available
· Day 3: Maintenance fluid levels
about crossmatching blood groups of small mammals,
If the dehydration levels are so severe that volumes are
although ferrets, it seems, do not have detectable groups.
still too large to give at any one time, it may be necessary
An Overview of Small Mammal Therapeutics 93
Table 6.2 Comparison of normal PCV and total proteins for
dlogging of the needle lumen with bone fragments after in-
 selected small mammals.
sertion. Spinal needles of 23-25 gauge are usually suffcient.
Hypodermic needles may be used for the same pur-
Species
PCV range (L/L)
Total protein (g/L)
pose, although the risks of blockage are higher. Hypo-
Ferret
0.44-0.60
51-74
dermic needles may also be used for the administration
Rabbit
0.36-0.48
54-75
of intraperitoneal and subcutaneous fluids. Generally,
Guinea pig
0.37-0.48
46-62
23-25 gauge hypodermic needles are suficient for the task.
Chinchilla 
0.32-0.46
50-60
Rat
0.36-0.48
56-76
Nasogastric tubes
Mouse
Nasogastric tubes are often used in small mammals to
0.39-0.49
35-72
provide nutritional support in as stress-free a manner
Gerbil
0.43-0.49
43-85
as possible. Ihey are useful as a route for fluid admin-
Harnster?
0.36-0.55
45-75
istration. It should be noted though that in severely de-
NS
 Sugar glidler
0.45-0.53
 51-61
hydrated individuals, there is no way that all of the fluid
Virginia opossum
0.34-0.47
56-78
deficits may be replaced via this route alone. Ihis is due to
aThe range given for hamsters is an average of Syrian and Russian
the limited fluid capacity of the stomach of these species,
hamster values.
as well as the real possibility that gut pathology may ex-
ist. This route is therefore restricted for use in facilitating
to take 72 hours rather than 48 hours to replace the cal-
fluid replacement and is used mainly for mutritional sup-
culated deficit.
port and rehydrating the gut microflora.
 In addition, in those species such as ferrets, which can
vomit, the fluid lost in vomitus expelled should be consid-
Syringe drivers
ered, assuming 2 mL/kg per vomit.
For continuous fluid administration, such as is required
 In other species such as the small herbivores, where
for intravenous and intraosseous fluid administration, sy-
diarrhoea only is the norm, it is much more diffcult to
ringe drivers are recommended. Their advantage is that
make estimations, although fluid losses may approach
small volumes may be administered accurately. An error
100-150 mL/kg per day.
of 1-2 mL in some of the species dealt with over an hour
could be equivalent to an over-perfusion of 50-100%! In
Equipment for fluid administration
addition, it is almost impossible to keep gravity-fed drip
Catheters
sets running at these low rates.
 The blood vessels available for intravenous medication are
 often 30-50% smaller than their cat and dog counterparts.
Intravenous drip tubing
Small paediatric butterfly catheters may be used. It is ad-
Fine drip tubing is available for attachment to syringes and
visable to flush with heparinised saline, prior to use, to pre-
syringe-driver units. It is useful if these are luer locking, as
vent clotting. Catheters of 25-27 gauge are recommended
this enhances safety and prevents disconnection when the
and will cope with venous access for rabbits, guinea pigs,
patient moves. It may be necessary to purchase a sheath,
chinchillas and ferrets. Occasionally a 28- or 29-gauge
such as is available for protecting household electrical ca-
catheter may be needed to catheterise a lateral tail vein in
bles, to cover drip tubing, as most ofthe small herbivores are
a rat or mouse, although 27-gauge catheters often suffice.
Experts at removing or chewing through plastic drip tubing!
Hypodermic or spinal needles
Elizabethan collars
Hypodermic and spinal needles are useful for the admin-
It may be necessary to place some of the small herbivores
istration of intraosseous, intraperitoneal and subcutaneous
into an Elizabethan-style collar as they are the world's
fluids. Ihe intraosseous route may be the only method of
 greatest chewers! These can be purchased as cage bird col-
giving central venous support in very small patients, or pa-
lars and adapted to fit even the smallest of rodents.
tients where vascular collapse is occurring. Ihe proximal
femur, tibia or humerus may be used Entry can be gained
Routes of fluid administration
by using hypodermic or spinal needles. Spinal needles are
These routes have their advantages and disadvantages,
preferable because they have a central stylet to prevent
given in Table 6.3.
94 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Table 6.3 The acvantages and disadvantages of various fluid therapy routes in srmall marmmals5
Route
Advantages
Disadvantages
Oral
Reduced stress
May increase stress in guinea pig5
Well accepted 
Risk of aspiration pneumonia in some
Physiological route
Not useful in cases of gut dlisease
Minimal tissue trauma
Slow rates of rehydration
Rehydration of gut flora
Maxium volume is 10 mL/kg
Subcutaneous
Large volumes may be given reducing dosing
Guinea pigs react badly to scruff injections and fur slip i5
frequency
 common in chinchillas
 Minimal risk of organ puncture 
 Slow rehydration time
5
 May irmpede respiration due to pressure on chest wall
Hypotonic or isotonic crystalloid fluids only
Intraperitoneal
Large volumes may be given at one time
 Risk of organ puncture
NS
Uptake faster than subcutaneous if mild 
Stressful positioning (dorsal recumbency)
 dlehydration is present 
 Pressure on diaphragm may increase; respiratory effort
 Minimal discomfort
needed
Isotonic or hypotonic crystalloids only
Intravenous
Rapid central venous support
 Minimal peripheral access in somme species (e.g. harmsters,
 May be used for continuous perfusion
gerbils3
Can be used for colloidal fluids, hypertonic saline,
Increased vessel fragility due to srmall patient size
cextrose/glucose and blood transfusion5/
Requires increased levels of operator skill
replacers
IntraosseoU5
Rapid support of the central venous syster
Not useful in fragile bones or metabolic bone dlisease
 Useful in collapsed and very srmall patients where
 Not useful in bone fractures or osteomyelitis 
vascular access is difficult
Increased risk of infection (osteomyelitis)
May still be used for blood transfusions/replacers 
 Painful procedure requiring sedation/analgesia
Miniral risk of organ damage (puncture)
Continuous perfusion required (syringe drivers) otherwise
 maximum boluses are small (0.25-0.5 mL for myomorph
 rodents and sugar gliders, 1-2 ml for hystricomorph
rodents, 2-3 mL for rabbits, Virginia opossums and ferrets)
Oral
Guinea pig and chinchilla
Rabbit
Naso-oesophageal tubes may be placed and doses of
The oral route is not good for seriously debilitated rabbits,
10 mL/kg may be administered at any one time. Guinea
 but it is useful for those with naso-oesophageal feeding
pigs and chinchilas are more likely to regurgitate
tubes in place. It may also be useful for mild cases of de-
than rabbits, especially when debilitated, so care is
hydration where owners wish to home treat their pet. This
needed.
route is restricted to small volumes, with a maximum of
10 mL/kg administered at any one time.
Marsupial
saq don laie1s uei io saqn (yis) a
 Rat, mouse, gerbil and hamster
can be used to place fluids directly into the marsupial
Gavage (stomach) tubes or avian straight crop tubes can
oesophagus. Ihe marsupial needs to be firmly scruffed to
be used to place fluids directly into the rodent oesophagus.
adequately restrain it and to keep the head and oesopha-
The rodent needs to be firmly scruffed to adequately re-
gus in a straight line. Alternatively fluids may be drip fed
strain it with the head and oesophagus in a straight line.
from a syringe or teaspoon into the lip sulcus either side
This method is often stressful but the alternative is to
of the mouth and lapped up from there.
syringe fluids into the mouth, which often does not work
 as rodents can close off the back of the mouth with their
Ferret
cheek folds. Maximum volumes which can be given via
Naso-oesophageal tubes are not well tolerated in ferrets,
the oral route in rodents vary from 5 to 10 mL/kg. Naso
but many will accept sweet-tasting oral electrolyte solu-
oesophageal or gastric tubes are not a viable option in ro
tions from a syringe. Ferrets, especially when debilitated,
dents due to their small size.
can regurgitate, so care is needed.
An Overview of Small Mammal Therapeutics 95
Subcutaneous
Intraperitoneal
The advantages and disadvantages of this method are
The advantages and disadvantages of the intraperitoneal
given in Table 6.3.
route in small mammals are given in Table 6.3.
Rabbit
Rabbit
The scruff or lateral thorax makes ideal sites. Ihis is a
The rabbit is placed in dorsal recumbency to allow the
good technique to use as routine post-operative admin-
gut contents to fall away from the injection zone. The
istration of fluids for minor surgical procedures such as
needle is inserted in the lower right quadrant of the
spaying or castration. It is possible to give a maximum of
ventral abdomen, just through the abdominal wall
 30-60 mL split into two or more sites at one time depend-
and the syringe plunger drawn back to ensure that no
 ing on the size of rabbit.
puncture of the bladder or gut has occurred. A maximum
volume of 20-30 mL may be given at one time depend-
Rat, mouse, gerbil and hamster
ing on the size of the rabbit. Previous notes regarding
The scruff area is easily utilised for volumes of 3-4 mL of
fluids for smaller rodents and up to 10 mL at any one time
concurrent respiratory or cardiovascular disease should
for rats. The use of a 25-gauge needle is recommended.
be considered. If positioned correctly, there should be no
resistance to injection.
Guinea pig and chinchilla
This is an easily used route for post-operative fluids and
 Rat, mouse, gerbil and hamster
mild dehydration in these species. Ihe scruff area and
 The positioning and administration site for rodents is as
lateral thorax are preferred sites (Figure 6.1). Ihe scruff
for rabbits (Figure 6.2). Ihe needle should be 25 gauge
may be painful for guinea pigs as it is a site of brown fat 
 or smaller and maximal volumes of 1-4 mL in smaller
deposition and well innervated. Doses of 25-30 mL may
 rodents, up to 10 mL in large rats, may be given.
be given at one time, preferably at two or more sites. Fur
slip is a problem in chinchillas.
Guinea pig and chinchilla
Similar principles apply for this route as for rabbits and
Marsupial
other rodents. Doses of 15-20 mL may be given. Ihis is
 This is an easily used route for post-operative fluids and
agood route for more serious cases, as intravenous fluids
mild dehydration in these species. Ihe scruff area and
 are not so well tolerated, particularly in chinchillas and
lateral thorax are preferred sites. Volumes of 3-4 mL in
guinea pigs.
sugar gliders and 15-20 mL in adult Virginia opossums
may be administered.
Marsupial
Similar principles apply for this route as for rabbits and
Ferret
Volumes of 15-20 mL may be given in two or more sites
rpdents. Doses of 2-4 mL in sugar gliders and 15-20 mL
over the scruff.
in Virginia opossums may be given.
Figure 6.1 Subcutaneous fluids being administered in the scruff
Figure 6.2 Intraperitoneal fluids administered to a rat showing
region in a chinchilla post-opera tively.
anund uehio pioae ot uoensupe aes jof painban buuosod
96 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Ferret
rabbit's head if using intermittent intravenous boluses,
The technique is as for rabbits. Restraint may be diff-
but it is important to ensure the catheter is regularly
 cult in the conscious patient, and maximum volumes are
flushed with heparinised saline.
20-25 mL.
Cephalic vein: This may be used as for the cat and dog.
although this vein may be split in some rabbits: A 25-27
Intravenous
gauge over-the-needle or butterfly catheter may be used
The advantages and disadvantages of intravenous fluid
for access and taped in as for cats and dogs.
therapy in small mammals are given in Table 6.3.
Saphenous vein: For this, it is better to use a 25-27 gauge
butterfly catheter as it is relatively fragile. It runs over the
Rabbit
lateral aspect of the hock (Figure 6.4).
The blood vessel that is best tolerated is the lateral ear
vein. The technique for using it is described below.
All of these routes can be used for intravenous boluses
MS
of up to 10 mL for larger rabbits and 5 mL for smaller
Lateral ear vein: The following technique should be used
dwarf breeds; but for continuous therapy, a syringe driver
(Figure 6.3):
is required.
1. The area should be shaved and surgically prepared.
Warm the ear under a lamp or hot water bottle or ap-
Rat, mouse, gerbil and hamster
ply local anaesthetic cream to dilate the vessel. (NB. If
The intravenous route in hamsters and gerbils is
the rabbit is sedated with Hypnorm?, the ear veins will
extremely diffcult, as they have few peripheral veins and
dilate anyway.)
the tail veins in gerbils are dangerous to use due to the
2. Use the lateral ear vein. Do not be tempted to use the
risk of tail separation. In mice and rats, the lateral tail
apparently larger vessel that runs in the midline of the
veins may be used. An intravenous bolus of fluids can be
pinna as this is the central ear artery. Catheterisation of
given using a 25-27 gauge insulin needle or by insertion
this vessel may lead to thrombosis followed by ear tip
of a butterfly catheter (Figure 6.5). Warming the tail and
necrosis!
applying local anaesthetic cream wil help to dilate the
3. Use a 25-27 gauge butterly catheter, pre-heparinised.
vessels and make venipuncture easier. Volumes of 0.2 mL
Once in place, tape it in securely and reflush. Attach
in mice and up to 0.5 mL in rats as abolus may be given. It
the intravenous drip tubing or catheter bung to the end
is also possible to perform a cut-down jugular catheteri-
of the butterfly catheter.
sation, but this requires anaesthesia.
4. Fit the rabbit with an Elizabethan collar or apply an in-
travenous drip guard to the intravenous tubing to pre-
Guinea pig and chinchilla
vent chewing, and attach this to the syringe driver. It is
Ihe cephalic and saphenous veins may be used - but gen-
possible to tape the butterfly catheter to the back of the
erally these are very small and difficult to catheterise. A
Figure 6.3 Catheterisation of the lateral ear vein in a rabbit using a
Figure 6.4 Catheterisation of the saphenous vein in a rabbit using
butterfly catheter.
a butterfly catheter.
An Overview of Small Mammal Therapeutics 97
over-the-needle catheters; however, movement once con-
sciousness has been regained frequently dislodges these
catheters, and ferrets will often chew the dressings off.
Bolus therapy, when unconscious, may be preferable with
 5-10 mL given over several minutes.
Intraosseous
The advantages and disadvantages of this route in small
mammals are given in Table 6.3.
Rabbit
The proximal femur is the easiest to use. Ihe landmark
Figure 6.5 Blood transfusion in a rat. Blood is administered to an
anaesthetised patient via the tail vein, here in a pre-heparinised
to aim for is the fossa between the hip joint and the
syringe.
greater trochanter. A 20-23 gauge hypodermic needle
PART
or spinal needle is used, and the procedure requires se-
cut-down technique may be used to access the jugular
dation. Ihe area is surgically prepared and the needle
veins in an emergency.
is screwed into position in the same direction as the
Hugular vein catheterisation: Sedation or anaesthesia is
long axis of the femur. It may be necessary to cut down
through the skin with a sterile scalpel blade in some
 necessary for this procedure, which is as follows:
rabbits. Ihis method will require a syringe-driver per-
1. The guinea pig or chinchilla is sedated and placed in
dorsal recumbency. Ihe ventral neck is surgically pre-
fusion device.
pared.
It is possible to use the proximal tibia but this is less well
2. An incision is made lateral to the midline and
tolerated due to interference with the stifle joint. Ihere is
 paral to the trachea, through the skin, and the un-
 frequently a need for tubing guards or Elizabethan collars
derlying tissues are bluntly dissected to expose the
for all intravenous or intraosseous techniques.
jugular vein.
3. An over-the-needle catheter is preferred, preferably a
Rodents
25 gauge with wings which can be sutured to the skin
The proximal fermur may be tolerated as for rabbits in
after insertion
 larger rats but smaller species often have a too small med-
 4. Ihe catheter is flushed with heparinised saline, a bung
ullary cavity for needles to be safely inserted.
is placed over the port and the catheter bandaged in
place.
Hystricomorphs
This is the preferred route for severely dehydrated chin-
Marsupial
chillas and guinea pigs with the proximal femur being the
Sugar gliders are diffcult to catheterise consciously
easiest site. Access is via the natural fossa created by the
because of their small size. The jugular vein is the easiest
hip joint and the greater trochanter. Infusion devices such
to catheterise in the sedated animal for significant fluid
as syringe drivers are advised for this route of administra-
administration but tolerance of these catheters is poor.
tion (Figure 6.6).
Other peripheral vessels such as the saphenous and ce-
phalic are only accessible with 25-27 gauge needles. In
Virginia opossums, the cephalic or saphenous veins are
Marsupial
the most accessible. In addition, the lateral tail vein may
The proximal femur is the easiest bone to use for intraos
also be used. However, tolerance of indwelling catheters
seous fluid administration. Ihe landmarkto aim for is the
in the conscious animal is poor and so maintenance is
fossa between the hip joint and the greater trochanter.
difficult.
 Insertion is as for rabbits and guinea pigs. In the sugar
gider, due to their small size, a 25-gauge needle is re-
Ferret
quired. In Virginia opossums, a 21-23 gauge needle may
Ferrets are difficult to catheterise when fully con-
be used. These are slightly better tolerated than intrave-
scious. Ihe cephalic vein may be used with 24-27 gauge
nous catheters.
98 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
penicillins, all cephalosporins, all macrolides (clindamy-
cin, erythromycin, etc.), the aminoglycosides, streptomy-
cin, dihydrostreptomycin and oral gentamicin.
Guinea pigs (Hystricomorpha)
The following antimicrobials should not be used in
guinea pigs for fear of causing a fatal enterotoxaemic
condition: all penicillins, all cephalosporins and all mac-
E
rolides.
Chinchillas (Hystricomorpha)
The following antimicrobials should not be used in chin-
chillas for fear of inducing a fatal enterotoxaemia: all pen-
MS
huisn bid eauinh e ui uawaneld jatauie snoassoeul g'g aunb
icillins, all cephalosporins and all macrolides. Metronida-
the proximal femur, showing attachment to drip set and infusion 
zole has been associated with liver failure in chinchillas,
device, and before bandaging in place.
but this author has not experienced this problem.
Ferrets
Chipmunks (Sciuromorpha)
The proximal femur is the easiest bone to use for intraos-
Avoid the macrolide family and oral penicillins as both
seous fluid administration. Ihe landmark to aim for is the
can cause diarrhoea, particularly the former.
fossa between the hip joint and the greater trochanter.
 Insertion is as for rabbits.
Marsupials
Omnivorous marsupials such as the sugar glider and the
Drug toxicities in small mammals
Virginia opossum seem to be generally unaffected by
Lagomorpha
most antimicrobials.
Drugs of the penicilin family should not be used orally
Ferrets
due to their ability to cause an enterotoxaemia with Clos-
Ferrets are generally unaffected by most antimicrobials.
tridia spp gut overgrowth. Ihe same is true of the cepha-
losporin and the macrolide family such as clindamycin.
TREATMENTS FOR DISEASES
Other antimicrobial additives to avoid in rabbits include
IN Small mammals
procaine, which is often added to penicillin preparations.
The tables in this section are intended to give an overview
Muridae
of the therapies available and are by no means compre-
Medications containing procaine (such as procaine peni-
hensive. Readers are advised to consult one of the many
cillin) and streptomycin have been reported as causing
excellent texts listed at the end of this chapter for further
toxicity in mice and rats.
information.
Lagomorph disease therapies
Gerbils (Cricetidae)
Tables 6.4-6.8 discuss common treatments for selected
Gerbils are sensitive to streptomycin and dihydrostrepto-
diseases of lagomorphs on a system basis.
 mycin containing antimicrobials. Ihey are mildly affected
 by potentiated penicillins orally, and these should be used
Muridae disease therapies
with care. It is not advised to use any macrolides in gerbils
Tables 6.9-6.11 discuss common treatments for selected
(e.g. clindamycin, erythromycin).
diseases of Muridae (rats and mice, chiefly) on a system
basis.
Hamsters (Cricetidae)
The following antimicrobials should never be used in
Cricetidae disease therapies
hamsters because of their ability to cause a fatal enterotox-
Tables 6.12-6.15 discuss common treatments for selected
aemic condition and in the case of the aminoglycosides
diseases of Cricetidae (gerbils and hamsters, chiefly) on a
because of the risks of renal damage and ototoxicity: all
system basis.
An Overview of Small Mammal Therapeutics 99
Table 6.4 Treatrment of selected skin dliseases in lagomorph5.
Diagnosis
Treatment
Mites, lice and flea5
Ivermectin/selarmectin are the drugs of choice for mites and lice. Various preparations of ivermectin are
available under the small animal exemption scheme (SAES) in the United Kingdom (e.g. Xeno450@.
Dechra Veterinary Products).
Imadocloprid (Advantage@, Bayer) is licensed for treating fleas in rabbits and combined with moxidectin
(Advocate?, Bayer) for ferrets in the United Kingdom.
 Blowfly strike
Prevention by remmoving urine and faecal soiling. Fine mesh to cover outdoor hutch openings. The use
of topical growth inhibitor cyromazine (Rearguard@, Novartis Animal Health) preventing maggot
maturation. Once infected, manually remmove maggots and use ivermectin, covering antimicrobials and
fluid therapy.
SMAll I
Bacterial diseases
Based on culture and sensitivity results. Blue fur dlisease requires a fluoroquinolone (e.g. enrofloxacin)
 Rabbit syphilis (Treponema paraluiscunicufi infection) requires injectable penicillin.
Part I:
Dermatophytosis
Miconazole spray licensed under the SAES (Mycozole?, Dechra Veterinary Products) in rabbits in the United
yonoyle pasn ag uen uianyoasuh jeo Aiep anuo byybw sie pasn ag Aew alozeuonen! leio wophuy
not in pregnant does due to its terratogenic side effects
Myxomatosi5s
vaccine in the United Kingdom (NobiVac Myxo-RHD@, MSD Animal Health)
Table 6.5 Treatrment of selected dligestive system diseases in lagornorph5
Diagnosis
Treatment
Dental disease
 Prevention by access to good quality hay, dried grass or fresh grazing is essential. Hommogenou5 pelleted
grass-based foods are also useful. Once teeth are overgrown, regular burring to a normal shape must be
performed every 6-8 week5.
Gastrointestinal
Digestive lubricants, liquid paraffin, fluid therapy and prokinetic drugs, if there is no evidence of a
foreign body
complete obstruction. Surgery should be considered if tests indicate a cormplete obstruction
Diarrhoea
Fluid therapy. Cause must be determined before treatrment.
If suspect clostridial overgrowth, then use oral cholestyramine (Questran?, Par Pharmaceutical Inc.
a human producty to bind toxins and prevent absorption plus potentially metronidazole to kill the
clostridia. The suspected bacterial cause of ERE has been treated by using tiamulin (licensed in feed
product Denagard 2% or Denagard 10% w/w Medicated prermix for pig5, chicken5, turkeys and
rabbits?, Novartis Anirmal Health Ltd.).
infeed preparations are licensed for rabbits in the United Kingdom containing diclazuril (Clinacox 0.5%
Premix@, Huvepharma NV), robenidine hydrochloride (Cycostat 66G@, Pfizer Animal Health Ltd.).
 Nematodle infections treated with an ivermectin injection at 0.2 rng/kg (various products licensed under
the SAES in the United Kingdom, 5ee Skin Diseases) or oral fenbendazole at 20 mg/kg once daily for
paa 'aloziden b'a 'wophuy paun aun u! sis aun apun pasual sinpoud snoei sep t
Veterinary Products; Panacur Rabbit 18.75% oral paste@, MSD Animal Health).
Bacterial enteritis may be treated according to culture and sensitivity results.
Loperamide may be used to symptomatically reduce diarrhoea
Hypomotility dlisorder
(2-5 mg/kg q12 hours) and metoclopramide (0.5 mg/kg q8-12 hours), is required. Fluid therapy i5
therm with food to administer to the patienty.
Hepatic lipidosis
Prokinetics (if obstructive cause ruled out), e.g. ranitidine, metocloprarmide and cisapride. Assisted feeding
is irmportant with soluble carbohydrates initially to ensure correct calorie supply.
Use of L-carnitine, extract of milk thistle and inositol are helpful in supporting hepatocyte function.
100 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Table 6.6 Treatment of selected respiratory and cardliovascular diseases in lagormorph5.
Diagnosis
Treatment
Pasteurellosis
Fluid therapy. Treatrment with fluoroquinolone (in the UK, Baytril 2.5% Injection@ or Baytril 2.5%
oral solution@, Bayer Animal Health, are licensed) or sulphonamide antimicrobial is advised. In
commercial rabbit production, tilmicosin in feed is licensed in the United Kingdom for treating
pasteurellosis (Pulmotil G1 00 Premix for medicated feedstuff@, Elanco Animal Health)
Mucolytics (e.g. bromhexine hydrochloride orally or acetylcysteine via nebulisation) and manual
 cleaning of the nares.
W
Viral haemorrhagic disease
No treatment. Vaccination is possible using a combined myxomatosis/VHD vaccine in the United
W
(VHD)
Kingdom (NobiVac Myxo-RHD?@, MSD Animmal Health). This is currently at time of press dosed a5
one close per rabbit frorn 5 weeks of age and boostered at yearly intervals. Alternatively, single
VHD vaccines are available (e.g. Cylap?, Pfizer Animal Health; Lapinject VHD@, CEVA Animal
SM
Health Ltd.)
：
PARTI
Congestive heart failure
This is the end-stage of heart disease and may have multiple initial causes. Treatrent is based
on reducing fluid congestion with dliuretics, e.g. furosemidle (1-4 mg/kg as required) and
spironolactone (1-2 mg/kg q24 hours); reducing the afterload, the heart has to work against
with ACE inhibitors (watch for hypotension a5 rabbits are more sensitive to this than cats and
dogs, so usually a lower dose of drugs such as benazepril is advised at 0.1-0.2 mg/kg (Girling,.
2003); positive inotropes such a5 pimobendan (0.25 mng/kg twice daily)
If atrial fibrillation is present, then digoxin has been used at 0.005-0.01 mg/kg orally g24-48
hours. If heart block5 and bradycardia are 5een, then glycopyrrolate at 0.01 mmg/kg
Diagnosis
Treatment
Urolithiasis
aa panbau Aeuoseo ains eau piny aissae pue aea usn usaae
dlietary calcium and restrict dry food to maximum 25-30 g/day. Antimnicrobials and analgesia may
be needed, if concurrent cystitis. Radiographs are helpful to look for renoliths, which will worsen
the prognosis.
Chronic renal failure
Aggressive fluid therapy - initially intravenously or intraosseously, but may be supported by
subcutaneous fluids once stabilised.
Treatment of exacerbating conditions, e.g. pyelonephritis urolithiasis/renolithiasis and
encephalitozoonosi5.
ACE inhibitors, e.g. benazepril, have been shown to be helpful in increasing renal perfusion as has
been seen in domestic cats, but rabbits are more prone to hypotension and so dosages should be
reduced (0.1-0.2 mg/kg q24 hours) (Girling. 2003).
Anabolic steroids to prevent catabolisrn every 3-4 weeks along with multiple B vitarmins can help
with appetite. Prokinetics, e.g. cisapride, ranitidine or metoclopramide, may also be required to
maintain gut motility.
-uoouny leuan auasaid diay Aew stles ateydsoud se liam se iaip aul ui uiatoid jo uoonpan au
that is, reducing pelleted portion of the diet and increasing leafy green5.
Uterine adenocarcinoma
Treatrment by surgical spaying. Prevention is by surgical spaying at 4-5 months of age
Venereal spirochaetosi5
 Penicillin G, single dose, subcutaneously at 40 000 IU/kg. May need to repeat after 7 days. Care 
should be taken as it can be toxic if given orally.
Mastitis 
Antibiosis based on culture and sensitivity (fluoroquinolones such as enrofloxacin usually effective
meloxicam 0.3-0.6 mg/kg daily. Fluid therapy and supportive treatment is essential.
An Overview of Small Mammal Therapeutics 10 1
Table 6.8 Treatrment of selected musculoskeletal, nervous systerm and ocular diseases in lagormorph5.
Diagnosis
Treatment
 Osteoarthritis
NSAIDs, e.g. meloxicam, at 0.3-0.6 mg/kg g24 hours have proved useful. More advanced cases mmay
require mmultimodal analgesia with drugs such as tramadol (10 mg/kg q24 hours) or buprenorphine
(0.03 mg/kg q8-12 hours)
 Fractures
 Spinal dislocations and fractures with hindlimb paresis carry poor prognosis, but shock doses of short-
acting corticosteroids, e.g. rmethylprednisolone, are considered if adrninistered within 12 hours of injury.
 Small mammals
Otherwise, use NSAIDs such as meloxicarm.
Limmb fractures carry a better prognosis. Most require external/tie-in fixators as rabbit bones are brittle with
large mmedullary cavities
aseasp auog pogeaw jo sasen u uoeiuawalddns ea uueii pue wnilen lapisuo
Vestibular dlisease dueFluoroquinolone or sulphonarnide antirnicrobials are useful where Pasteurefa or Streptococcaf infections
to otitis media
Part I:
horizontal canal. Bulla osteotomy is difficult and failure rates are high due to the tenacious pus, deep 
seated nature of the bullae and their srmall size. Prognosis is guarded for full recovery, but generally not 
life-threatening if due to uncornplicated otitis media.
 Encephalitozoono5i5
Fenbendazole at 20 mg/kg orally once daily for 28 days (Suter et af., 2001). Short-acting corticosteroids
g umoig-noneh) alozepuaquay ot uoppe ui sarns auos yrm sasen aaaas ui pasn uaaq aneu
Holloway, 2003). Management of renal disease mmay also be required (see urogenital section).
 Prognosis guarded once neurological disease is apparent.
Lead poisoning
Rermoval of larger particles by surgery may be posible but frequently the particle size is very small.
Treatrment with chelating agent, e.g. 5odium calcium edetate (27.5 mg/kg q6-8 hours for 5 days),.
combined with fluid therapy to reduce nephrotoxicity.
 Anterior uveitis 
Jo asn snid savs yiuaiss yri eisajeuy (anoge aas) ansod j rean pue sisouoozoeydanua jof isal
may be necessary.
Dacryocystitis
 Not a true ocular problerm but a dental problem with constriction of the tear duct by elongating maxillary incisor
root. Treatrment is reliant on controlling the dental problern and cannulating and flushing the tear cduct.
Conjunctivitis
pe ain husn sdop aa eid wagd ed e se o sop a euoas in  s
(e.g. Fucithalmic Vet?, Dechra Veterinary Products) or gentamicin (e.g. Tiacil@, Virbac Animmal Health) are
licensed for use in rabbits with conjunctivitis in the United Kingdom.
Table 6.9 Treatment of skin diseases in Muridae.
Diagnosis
Treatment
Mites
Ivermectin at O.2 mg/kg is advised (several products licensed uncder the SAES in the United Kingdon, see
rabbit skin dliseases)
Lice and fleas
Iverrmectin orally/spot-on.
Bacterial disease
Based on culture and sensitivity results. Pododermatitis may require surgical debridement, analgesia
 (carprofen/meloxicam) and hydrating gels/dressing5s, as well as improving cage substrate to increase
padding. Weight loss also advisable.
 Dermatophyto5i5
Topical miconazole available uncler the SAES in the United Kingdorn (Mycozole@, Dechra Veterinary
 Products). Oral griseofulvin has been used, but beware of teratogenicity in pregnant fermales. Oral
itraconazole has also been used (5 mg/kg q24 hours) but beware of hepatotoxicity and anorexia.
Atopy
Topical soothing shampoos (e.g. Episoothe@, Virbac) and oral essential fatty acids (oil of evening primrose).
Oral corticosteroids have been used in acute flare-ups but long-term use has side effects. Oral
antihistarnines have also been tried with varying success
102 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Table 6.10 Treatrment of selected digestive, respiratory and cardliovascular systerm diseases in Muridae.
Diagnosis
Treatment
Dental disease
Burring. every 3-4 weeks with a low speed dental burr, is advised for incisor malocclusion.
 Parasitic disease
Ivermectin at 0.2 mg/kg once (see Skin Disease) or fenbendazole at 20 mg/kg orally once daily for 5
days for nematodes.
For coccidliosis, use sulfadlimidline in water at 200 mg/L for 7 days. Metronidazole is useful for other
protozoa.
W
Bacterial dlisease
Gram-negative bacterial infections and is licensed for use in rodents in the United Kingdom.
W
Oxytetracycline is used for Tyzzer's dlisease at 0.1 g/L drinking water.
 Other treatments based on culture and sensitivity.
NS
Respiratory disease
Culture and sensitivity advised. Oxytetracycline, doxycycline, azithromycin and enrofloxacin are useful
against Mycoplasma spp., Streptococcus pneumonia and Kiebsiella spp infections.
 Consider mucolytics, e.g. bromhexine hydrochloricle orally or acetylcysteine by nebulisation.
PARTI
Nebulisation of antimicrobials may also be helpful.
Cardiovascular disease
See protocols and drugs for rabbits.
Table 6.11 Treatrment of selected urogenital tract, musculoskeletal, neurological and ocular dliseases in Muridae.
Diagnosis
Treatment
Chronic renal failure
Reduce dlietary protein, but increase the biological value. Reduce phosphate in dliet (if necessary, use
alurminium hydroxidle orally to bind phosphorus in the gut and prevent absorption)
gs on Ae (snoasouysnouaaeu Aqeaad -Adeau pin
 Anabolic steroids and B vitarmin supplementation
Urolithiasis
 Remmoval of blockages manually Reduce calcium content of diet and increase bran levels.
Antimicrobials for preputial gland abscess/cystitis.
 Spondylosis 
Meloxicarn at 0.5-1 mg/kg orally once/twice daily for pain relief.
Fractures
Splinting and strict confinement plus analgesia (NSAlD); allow rapid callus formation and repair (2-3
weeks).
Vestibular disease
If bacterial use fluoroquinolone or sulphonamide antimicrobials.If caused by a pituitary tumour,
surgery rarely possible
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Topical cyclosporin has been used successfully
Table 6.12 Treatment of skin diseases in gerbils.
Diagnosis
Treatment
Dernodicosis
Amitraz washes (1 mL solution to 0.5 L water) once every 2 weeks until negative scrapings. Beware
toxicity. Alternatively ivermectin at 0.4 mg/kg once weekly for 6 weeks has been used.
Bacterial disease
Oral or parenteral antibiosis based on culture and sensitivity results. Enrofloxacin orally or in water.
oxytetracycline at 0.8 mg/L water may be useful.
Dermatophytosis
Topical miconazole available under the SAES in the United Kingdom (Mycozole@, Dechra Veterinary
e saeuat iueuaid ui Aiiuaoteat jo aemag ing 'pasn uaag ey noasuh ieio (snoid
eixaloue pue Aixoioieday jo anemag ing (sinoy tzb by/bw s) alozeuonet!
Neoplasia
Surgical excision of ventral scent gland adenocarcinomas or melanomas is advised.
 Degloving injuries
eauaedienidoi upaalg wars ot ainssaid io (seids wnie) sueineoue enidoi Adeaun pinid
antimicrobials advised. May need surgery to rermove denuded coccygeal vertebrae
An Overview of Small Mammal Therapeutics 103
Table 6.13 Treatrment of selected cligestive, respiratory and urogenital system dliseases in gerbils.
Diagnosis
Treatment
 Proliferative ileitis (wet tail -
 Difficult, but oxytetracyclines and chlorarmphenicol have been suggested.
[aw/sonia intraceffularis infection)
 Parasitic disease
Rodentoiepis nana may need to repeat after 2 week5.
Respiratory disease
Treatment is as for Muridae
Cystic ovarian disease
Surgical spaying is curative. Alternatively, percutaneous drainage or human chorionic
gonadotrophin at 100 IU/kg may remove the cysts for a tirme but they will re-occur.
Table 6.14 Treatrnent of selected skin and dligestive systern cdiseases in harmsters.
Part I:
Diagnosis
Treatment
Demodicosis
Amitraz is the treatment of choice but ivermectin may also be used (see Gerbils). However,
the problerm is often an underlying immunosuppressive dlisease that allows the mites to
proliferate and so without correcting this treatments may be unsuccessful.
Sarcoptiform mange (Notoedres
Iverrmectin at 0.2 ng/kg once weekly on 2-4 occasion5.
notoedric)
 Dermatophyto5i5
See dermatophytosis in Table 6.12
Hyperadrenocorticism
This is often untreatable. Surgery is generally too cormplicated with high failure rates.
Metapyrone has been used at 8 mg orally once daily, but this is potentially toxic and may
result in the death of the hamster.
Cheek pouch impactions
Milking the contents manually or with a dampened cotton bud is advised. Flushing the
 pouches with dilute chlorhexidine can remove any superficial infection.
Cheek pouch prolapse
 Surgical replacement with a cotton bud under anaesthesia. A suture may be placed through
the skin into the cheek pouch behind the ear to keep in place.
Proliferative ileitis (wet tail due to
Extremely difficult, see Gerbils.
[av/sonia intracelfularis infection)
Table 6.15 Treatment of selected cardiovascular, encocrine, reproductive and musculoskeletal diseases in harnsters.
Diagnosis
Treatment
Aortic thrombosis and
Use of furosemide at 0.25-0.5 mg/kg may be useful, as may the ACE inhibitor enalapril at
cardiornyopathy
0.25 mg/kg orally once daily. Beware of hypotensive effects.
Hyperadrenocorticismn
See Skin Disease5.
 Diabetes mellitus
 Protamine zinc insulin therapy at 0.5-1 unit/kg (requires dilution in saline). Aim for
0.25-0.5% glucose in urine and water consumption 10-15 mL/day.
Use glucose/saline intraperitoneally and human glucose oral gels on rmembranes if evicdence
of hypoglycaemic overdose.
 Pyometra
uesgers engoiee pue Adeaun pin jae buainau ieinins
Cystic ovarian disease
gonadotrophin at 100 IU/kg may remove the cysts for a time but they will re-occur.
 Fractures
Compound fractures of the tibia may require leg amputation. If closed they may heal
aiaau aanea s ym huuuid Aelinpaeul eisabieue pue isau yim Aiaaeuasuos
are possible.
104 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Hystricomorph disease therapies
Marsupial disease therapies
Tables 6.16-6.20 discuss common treatments for selected
Tables 6.23 and 6.24 discuss common treatments for se-
diseases of hystricomorphs on a system basis (chiefly
lected diseases of sugar gliders and Virginia opossums on
chinchillas and guinea pigs).
a system basis.
Sciuromorph disease therapies
Mustelid disease therapies
Tables 6.21 and 6.22 discuss common treatments for se-
Tables 6.25-6.28 discuss common treatments for diseas-
lected diseases of sciuromorphs (chiefly chipmunk) on a
es of mustelids (chiefly the domestic ferret) on a system
system basis.
basis.
Table 6.16 Treatrment of selected skin diseases in guinea pig5.
NS
Diagnosis
Treatment
Mites
Ivermectin at 0.2 mg/kg is effective against Trixicara caviae (various products licensed under the SAES in
PART
the United Kingdom). Analgesics (e.g. mmeloxicam) and tranquilisers (e.g. diazepam) may be necessary in
severe cases.
Lice
Fipronil sprayed on to a cloth and then wiped over the fur. lvermectin may also be useful.
Cervical lyrnphadenitis 
 Surgical lancing of the abscess and treatment with antimicrobials (e.g. enrofloxacin) is advised.
Derrmatophytosis
See dermatophytosis in Table 6.12.
Pododermatitis
See bacterial diseases in Table 6.9
Table 6.17 Treatrment of selected digestive, respiratory and urinary system diseases in guinea pig5.
Diagnosis
Treatment
 Dental dlisease
This is similar to rabbits. Change the diet to increase, abrasive, grass-based foods. Burr mnolar spikes every
 6-8 weeks under sedation. Treat oral infections based on culture and sensitivity +/- inforrnation.
Bacterial dlisease
As for hamsters and gerbils, it is based on culture and sensitivity. Enrofloxacin useful for Saimonefa spp
Parasitic disease
Nernatodes may be treated with 0.2 mg/kg iverrmectin. Coccidliosis requires oral sulfadlirnidline at 40 mg/
kg, once daily for 5 days. 8. cofi require metronidazole orally but use with caution due to risk of liver
danage.
Faecal impaction
 Manual ernptying of perianal skin folds daily and flushing with dilute chlorhexidine.
Respiratory disease
Enrofloxacin, doxycycline and sulphonamide drugs are useful. Mucolytics, e.g. oral bromhexine
hydrochloride and nebulised acetyl cysteine, are useful. Nebulised antimicrobials also helpful.
 Neoplasia often so acdivanced by the time cliagnosis is made, that treatment is not possible
 Chronic renal failure
See chronic renal disease of rabbits in Table 6.7.
Urolithiasis
Restriction of dry food to 15-20 g/day to reduce clietary calcium levels. Fresh vegetables and fluidls to help
flush through calciurm crystals. Treat with antinicrobials if cystitis is suspected.
Table 6.18 Treatment of selected reproductive, ocular and mmusculoskeletal diseases in guinea pig5.
Diagnosis
Treatment
Cystic ovarian dlisease
 See hamsters in Table 6.15.
Pregnancy toxaemia
Oral glucose gel, intravenous or intraperitoneal glucose-saline a5 a 5-7 mL bolus. Dexamethasone 0.2 mgy
kg intramuscularly (but will cause abortion). To prevent, do not let sow become overweight or stressed.
Mastitis
Antimicrobials such as enrofloxacin or sulphonamides with fluid therapy and NSAID analgesia. Surgery may
be necessary
An Overview of Small Mammal Therapeutics 105
Diagnosis
Treatment
Hypovitaminosis C
a u   pue   e Aeaae  ue
('Scunvy')
Fractures
Splinting with hexalite materials plus cage restriction and analgesia. Surgical fixation with external fixators.
Methyl-prednisolone may be needed if spinal trauma is involved and treatment can be adrministered
within 12 hours. Otherwise NSAID use is preferred.
Conjunctivitis
Chlortetracycline eye ointrment for Chlamydophifa psittaci conjunctivitis. See scurvy for vitamin C related
problerms.
Table 6.19 Treatment of selected skin and digestive system diseases in chinchillas.
Diagnosis
Treatment
PArt I:
Derrnatophytosis
See dermatophytosis in Table 6.12
Dental dlisease
As for rabbits - dental burring under sedation every 6-8 week5, dietary change to grass-based product5.
o s'o) apudesin se yons sauioud jo asn Aleo (opewe -/+ weixoa buisn ued poon og eisaiieus
kg q12 hours), ranitidine (2-5 mg/kg q12 hours) and metoclopramide (0.5 mg/kg q8-12 hours)
 Use of antimicrobials based on culture and sensitivity testing although anaerobes are comrmon and 5o
oral metronidlazole at 10-20 mg/kg q12 hours (somme texts suggest metronidlazole is hepatotoxic in
chinchillas 5o beware its overuse).
Hypomotility disorcler T
 This is generally associated with dligestive tract dlisease or pain and so the cause of the ciscomfort/dlisease
('colic')
apnpui uen Aowody jo puawea yeuaidus uawea adoid ansua ot pauuaap ag ot spaau
fluidl therapy, analgesia (e.g. meloxicam) and prokinetics as outlined for cental disease.
Hepatic lipidosis
Reduce excess fats and soluble carbohydrates in diet. Fluid therapy and assisted nutrition/feeding
Bacterial diarrhoea
Antimicrobial treatrment is based on culture and sensitivity results.
Fluicd therapy and analgesia as well as assist feeding may also be required.
Parasitic dliarrhoea
Treatment of giardliasis with fenbendazole at 25 mg/kg orally once daily for 3 day5.
pue aseasip letuap jot l pasn sey jouine sir ing ixoioieday ot anp alozepioau pione sixat auos
giardliasis at 10-20 mg/kg orally twice daily for 7 days without any sidle effect5.
Table 6.20 Treatrnent of selected carcliovascular, musculoskeletal, nervous and ocular dliseases in chinchillas.
Diagnosis
Treatment
Congestive heart
Treatrment is based on reducing fluid congestion with diuretics such as furosemide (1-4 mg/kg as required)
failure associated
 isiee om ot sey heay al peae a hunpau (snoy tb bsh zl) auoeoonids pe
with dilated
ACE inhibitors such as enalapril/benazepril; positive inotropes 5uch as pimmobenden
cardiormyopathy
If atrial fibrllation is present, then digoxin has been used at 0.005-0.01 mg/kg orally q24-48 hours.
Fractures
Long bone fractures are best fixed with external fixation surgically. Srmaller fractures may be splinted with
 human finger splints.
Seizures
 intravenous/peritoneal fluids.
Conjunctivitis
Use of chlortetracycline eye ointrments is recommended for Chiamydophifa psittaci. Always check for
dental disease in any case of epiphora as molar root elongation pressing on the globe is a cormmon
cause of epiphora in chinchillas.
106 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Table 6.21 Treatment of selected skin, digestive and respiratory 5ystem diseases in chipmunk5
Diagnosis
Treatment
Mites
lvermectin at 0.2 mg/kg is advised. In addition, for Dermanyssus galfinae, burn bedding and dust cage with
 bromcyclen powder.
Bacterial skin disease 
Antimicrobials based on culture and sensitivity. Generally, enrofloxacin, tetracycline and sulphonamides are
safe and effective.
Dental disease
Burring of incisor malocclusion with a slow speed dental drill every 4-6 week5.
W
Diarrhoea
As for rats and mice.
W
Respiratory disease
Oxytetracycline at 22 mg/kg once daily for 5-7 days is useful for Mycopiasma spp. Enrofloxacin and
doxycycline may also be used.
NS
RT
Table 6.22 Treatrment of selected urogenital, musculoskeletal and nervous system cliseases in chipmunks
Diagnosis
Treatment
Urolithiasis
Surgical or manual removal of obstructing uroliths. Give meat-based foods temporarily to acidify urine and 
dlissolve crystals, or increase seeds and fruits and reduce pelleted food.
Hypocalcaemic
100 mg/kg calcium gluconate intramuscularly. Prevention based on dietary supplementation. Beware that
 paralysis
some of these cases are actually associated with spinal trauma and not hypocalcaemia, 5o a radliographic
 assessment is advisable.
Uterine infections
Based on culture and sensitivity results. Pyometra may require surgery after fluid stabilisation.
Mastitis
 Enrofloxacin and oxytetracyclines may be useful with NSAID analgesia. Surgery may be required if
abscessation is severe.
Fractures
Spinal trauma has a poor prognosis, but methyl prednisolone may be used peracutely
Minor fractures may respond to cage rest and infood NSAIDs. Long bone fractures will require fixation
preferably with external or tie-in fixators.
Seizures
Removal from rooms with TV and computer screens. Use of 0.5-1 mg/kg diazepam intramuscularly
 may help
Table 6.23 Treatrnent of selected skin, dligestive and respiratory system cdiseases in sugar gliders and Virginia opossums.
Diagnosis
Treatment
Bacterial skin disease
Antimicrobials such as amoxicillin, cephalexin, enrofloxacin and TMP sulfonarmides have all been used
 successfully against bacterial pyodermas in marsupials.
Fungal skin disease
See dermatophytosis in Table 6.12.
Parasitic skin dlisease
lvermectin at 0.2 mg/kg for mites. Pyrethrin powders have been used against other ectoparasites topically.
Dental disease
Extraction of rotten teeth, scaling and polishing and antibiosis with potentiated amoxicillin is
recommended.
Gastroenteritis
Bacterial dlisease may be treated with amoxicillin or enrofloxacin.
 Nemmatodes may be managed with ivermectin (0.2 mg/kg) or fenbendazole (20-50 mmg/kg)
Giardliasis has been treated with rmetronidazole.
Pneumonia 
Bacterial pneumonia has been treated with fluoroquinolones such as enrofloxacin or penicillins.
An Overview of Small Mammal Therapeutics 107
Table 6.24 Treatment of selected cardiovascular, urogenital, musculoskeletal and neurological diseases in sugar gliders and Virginia
opossum5s.
Diagnosis
Treatment
Cardliornyopathy
Treatrment is simmilar to that in ferrets
 Heartworrm
Treatment and prevention is sirmilar to that in ferets - again beware of anaphylactic shock when treating.
 Urolithiasis
 Catheterisation of the urethra in males to relieve any blockages. Flushing of the bladder or cystotomy to
MAMMALS
remove larger uroliths.
Metabolic bone
 Correction of the dliet to increase calcium and vitamin D3/provision of ultra violet light in early stages.
disease
Calcitonin has been used once blood levels have been normalised to encourage calcium deposition in 
the bones. In later stages, the problern is not reversible.
SMALL
 Paresis/paralysis
Common sequel to metabolic bone disease, particularly in sugar gliders and so may not be treatable
PArt I:
Table 6.25 Treatment of selected skin diseases in mustelids.
Diagnosis
Treatment
 Mites
Ivermectin at 0.2 mg/kg once and repeated after 14 day5.
This author has found successin treating ear mites (Otodectes cynotis) using Advocate spot-on for small 
cats and ferrets@ (Bayer Animal Health), although this product is not specifically licensed for this use in
the United Kingdom.
Fleas
A licensed product containing imidacloprid and moxidectin (Advocate spot-on for small cats and ferrets@,
 Bayer Animal Health) exists in the United Kingdom for treating flea infestation and preventing heart
worr clisease (Dirofilaria immitis infection).
Bacterial disease
Based on culture and sensitivity with drugs such as enrofloxacin at 5-10 mg/kg (licensed UK product Baytril
2.5 % oral solution@, Bayer Anirmal Health), potentiated sulphonamides at 15-30 mmg/kg twice daily and
potentiated ammoxicillin at 10-20 mg/kg twice daily.
 Dermatophytosis
See dermatophytosis in Table 6.12
Neoplasia
Surgical excision where possible.
 Hormonal skin disease 
Testosterone or oestrogen-dependent alopecia - immplantation with a gonadotrophin releasing horrmone
a ot anp papaa auol ou si uunan (eq 'uujaidns) uaosap ba) sjuoe (u)
development of adrenal gland neoplasia and disease subsequently.
Hyperadrenocorticism treatment is given in Table 6.28
Table 6.26 Treatrment of selected dligestive system cliseases in mustelids.
Diagnosis
Treatment
Dental disease
Extraction of rotten teeth, antibiosis with clindamycin at 5.5 mg/kg twice daily or potentiated
amoxicillin is recommended. Encourage dry foods to prevent recurrence.
Gastric ulceration
Remove any gastric foreign bodies as these can result in gastric ulceration.
 Use cytoprotectants: cinetidine (10 mg/kg twice daily), sucralfate (100 mg/kg daily orally) and bisnuth
subsalicylate (1 mL/kg three times daily, orally).
If Helicobacter mustelae is present, combined amoxicilin and metronidazole is advised but enrofloxacin
at 4.25 mng/kg q12 hours with bisrmuth subcitrate (6 mg/kg q12 hours) for 14 days has also been
used successfully (Johnson-Delaney, 2009)
 Proliferative ileitis
Chloramphenicol is the antibiotic of choice.
 Lymphoma
Chemotherapy with drugs such as vincristine, cyclophosphamide and prednisolone has been tried but
 prognosis is guardled and dlependls on numerous factors including age, lymphoma grading and type.
(continued)
108 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Table 6.26 (continued)
Diagnosis
Treatment
Bacterial disease
 This is based on culture and sensitivity results of faeces sarmples, but fluoroquinolones and potentiated
amoxicillin are effective against a range of Grarm-negative and anaerobic bacteria.
 Parasitic disease
Giardiasis treatment is with metronidazole.
Coccidiosis is with sulfadimidine.
57
 Nermatode infestations may be treated with 0.2 rmg/kg iverrmectin or with oral fenbendazole (variou5
W
products licensed undler the SAES).
Liver dlisease
Lactulose at 1.5-3 mg/kg orally once daily may help. Supportive therapy with vitamin B supplements 
2
and reduced fat/high biological value proteins advised. Use of inositol, L-carnitine and extract of milk
thistle may also be useful where hepatic lipidosis is present.
NS
RT
Table 6.27 Treatment of selected respiratory, cardiovascular and urinary syster diseases in mustelids.
PAI
Diagnosis
Treatment
Canine distemper virus
There is no treatment. Prevention is by vaccination. No currently licensed ferret vaccine in the United
Kingcom (although one exists in the USA). In the United Kingdom, canine distemper vaccines are
used but care should be taken to choose a vaccine not raised in ferrets. Consultation with the canine
vaccine manufacturer is advised for specific dlosing.
 Bacterial pneumonia
 This is based on culture and sensitivity results, but fluoroquinolones and potentiated amoxicillin are
 effective against a wide range of Gram-negative and positive respiratory pathogen5.
 Congestive heart failure
 Furosemide at 1-4 mg/kg in acute crisis is useful, intravenously or intramuscularly.
associated with dilated
ACE inhibitor enalapril at 0.5 mmg/kg every 48 hours but watch for hypotensive effects. Pirnobenden at
cardioryopathy
 0.25 mg/kg q12 hours may be used a5 a positive inotrope.
 Digoxin may also be used in heart failure where atrial fibrillation occurs.
 Lungworm and
These can be treated using averrnectins such as iverrmectin, selamectin or rmoxidlectin. When treating
heartworm
cases of patent heartworm infection, massive die-offs of the nematode can result in anaphylaxis 
or vascular blockage. In ferrets, Advocate spot-on@ (Bayer) has a license in the United Kingdom for
 preventing heartworm.
Urolithiasis
Surgery may be required to remove obstructions and/or bladder stones. Feedling an all-meat-based
protein diet is essential to prevent formation. Treatment of any primmary or secondary cystitis is based
on culture and sensitivity results.
Chronic renal failure
This may be treated as in the domestic cat.
Table 6.28 Treatment of selected endocrine, reproductive and ocular diseases in mustelids
Diagnosis
Treatment
Hyperadrenocorticism
 Medical therapy can be ineffective as the tummour is adrenal based. However, recent work with 
gonadotrophin releasing hormone agonist (GnRH) deslorelin (Suprelorin?, Virbac) suggests that this
implant may help in some cases to reduce tumour size and clinical effects. Otherwise treatment is
surgical.
Insulinoma
Surgical excision of pancreatic neoplasm - but may be difficult due to their srmall size. Management
with oral prednisolone (0.25-2 mg/kg q12 hours) with weekly monitoring of blood gluco5e level5.
Diazoxide has been used where resistance to prednisolone is seen.
 Diabetes mellitus
Tends to be rare but treatrnent is based on protarnine zinc insulin at 1-2 units per ferret, and increasing
by 0.5 units until blood glucose falls to 15 mmol/L or urine glucose to 0.5%. Twice daily dosing may
be required
Pregnancy toxaemia
40% glucose at 0.5-1 mL/kg by slow intravenous bolus. Bicarbonate supplernent to fluids is advised to
counteract acidosis. Dexamethasone may be required in severe cases but abortion will occur.
An Overview of Small Mammal Therapeutics 109
Diagnosis
Treatment
Uterine infections
sensitivity results are available. This may lead to adrenal gland neoplasia in later life.
 Mastitis
 Broad-spectrum antibiotics and NSAIDs with fluid therapy advised. Surgical excision of abscesses may
be needed.
Hyperoestroginism
 Prevention based on irnplantation of GnRH agonist deslorelin (Suprelorin@, Virbac) at 5 months, or
 SMall mAmmals
mating with an entire or vasectomised hob, or regular proligesterone treatment at the start of the
season (50 mgy/jill).
If disease has developed then treat with blood transfusion if PCV < 20%, or in early stages stop oestru5
with proligesterone or human chorionic gonadotrophin and then use GnRH implant.
References
Further reading
Girling, S.J. (2003) Preliminary study into the possible use of
Fraser, M.A. and Girling, S.J.(2009) Rabbit Medicine and Surgery
Part I:
 benazepril on the management of renal disease in rabbits.
for Veterinary Nurses. Black well-Wiley, Oxford.
British Veterinary Zoologicat Society Proceedings, Edinburgh
Keeble, E. and Meredith, A. (2009) Manual of Rodents and
Zoo, p. 44.
Ferrets. BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
Harcourt-Brown, EM. and Holloway, H.K.R.(2003)
Meredith, A.and Johnson-Delaney, C. {2010) Manual ofExotic
Encephalitozoon cuniculi infection in pet rabbits. Veterinary
Pets, 5th edn. BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
Record, 152, 427-431.
Quesenberry, K.E.and Carpenter, J. (2003) Ferrets, Rabbits and
Johnson-Delaney, C. (2009) Ferrets: digestive system disorders.
Rodents, 2nd edn. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
Manual of Rodents and Ferrets(edsA.Meredith &C.Johnson-
Delaney), Pp. 275-281. BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
Suter, C., Muller-Doblies, U.U., Hatt, J.M. and Deplazes, P.
(200l) Prevention and treatment of Encephalitozoon cuniculi
infection in rabbits with fenbendazole. Veterinary Record, 148,
478-480.
Chapter 7
Small Mammal Diagnostic Imaging
5
RADIOGRAPHY
Other causes of a precardiac shadow can include medias-
Introduction
tinal abscesses and other forms of neoplasia.
The lungs show similar changes to dogs and cats when
Physical restraint
affected by infection. Ihey are also one of the main sites
In most cases, small mammals will not lie still long
of metastasis for certain neoplasms, for example uterine
enough to allow radiography. Iherefore, chemical re-
adenocarcinomas. Pleural effusions may also be seen in
straint is preferred.
rabbits, with the characteristic rounding/blunting of the
caudal lung lobe border and widened pleural space on
Chemical restraint
dorsoventral views and may be seen in cases of congestive
 Sedation with drugs suchas Hypnorm or medetomidine/
heart failure.
ketamine/butorphanol
l combinations or anaesthesia
with sevoflurane/isoflurane is preferred. See anaesthesia
Abdomen
chapter for further details.
The caecum should always be full of ingesta, often with
small volumes of gas in the healthy rabbit, and is posi-
Positioning
tioned ventrally and to the right side. Excessive gas build-
In the majority of cases, it is preferable to ensure that
up such as that seen in mucoid enteropathy and penicillin
the patient is immobilised chemically when performing
toxicity where the whole of the stomach, small intestine,
radiography to ensure proper positioning. Lateral and
caecum and large intestine may be filed with fluid and
dorsoventral/ventrodorsal views are routine. Further
gas (see Figure 7.3).
oblique views may be useful when imaging structures
The liver is found completely underneath the caudal
such as the head, where right and left dental arcades may
 ribcage and is a flattened shadow cranio-caudally. A num-
need to be viewed separately. In addition, rostro-caudal
 ber of liver diseases may result in enlargement and exten-
views of the head may be useful where visualisation of the
sion of the liver beyond the ribcage (e.g. hepatic lipidosis,
temporomandibular joint or frontal sinuses is required.
hepatic coccidiosis due to Eimeria stiediae).
The stomach should always contain food - but a small
Interpretation of rabbit
 gas crescent dorsally may be seen. Excessive gas build-
radiographs
up in the stomach can indicate a blockage or stasis of
Thorax
 the bowel. Stomach emptying and intestinal motility are
Two views, a traditional right later and a dorsoventral
difficult to assess in the rabbit due to the permanently
view, are generally preferred (see Figures 7.1 and 7.2). The
full stomach. However, one study suggested that 32% of
heart sits between the fourth and sixth rib spaces and ap-
 a liquid marker should reach the caecum in 1 hour and
pears large due to the small size of the thoracic cavity in
80% by 12 hours in the healthy rabbit (Pickard & Stevens,
relation to the overall body. Enlargement of the heart sil-
1972). Solid markers however reached the caecum within
houette is common in rabbits and can be due to pericar-
4 hours.
dial fat or disease such as valvular disease or cardiomy-
The normal kidney shadow should be 1.4-2.2
opathy. Pathological atherosclerosis and mineralisation
times the length of the second lumbar vertebra with
of the blood vessels can be seen radiographically (Shell &
a mean of 1.8 times. Renal calculi are frequently
Saunders, 1989). Ihe thymus persists in the adult rabbit
seen and may be a cause of intense pain in rab-
and thymic neoplasia can be seen as a precardiac mass.
bits (see Figures 7.4 and 7.5). Negative contrast
Small Mammal Diagnostic Imaging  111
PaRt I: Small MaMmals
Figure 7.1 Lateral view of a normal rabbit. (Fraser and Girling. 2009)
Figure 7.4 Lateral abdomen of a rabbit showing radiodense calculi
in left kidney and radiodense silt in bladder. Note also spondylosis 
lesions in L5-6 and L6-7. (Fraser and Girling, 2009)
 Figure 7.2 Dorsoventral view of a normal rabbit. (Fraser and
Girling, 2009)
Figure 7.3 Gastric and intestinal bloat in a rabbit as a result of
penicillin toxicity. Chest cavity is normal. The radiodense object over
the neck is a staple in a skin wound. (Fraser and Girling, 2009)
Figure 7.5 Dorsoventral view of the rabbit in Figure 7.4 showing
multiple radiodense calculi in left kidney and radiodense silt in 
techniques after catheterisation of the bladder using
urinary bladder. (Fraser and Girling, 2009)
air at 5-8 mL/kg body weight may be used in rabbits to
using 2 mL/kg of an intravenous iodine-based contrast
outline the bladder lining. Double contrast techniques
media injected into a peripheral vein. In healthy rab-
can be used with iodine at a rate of 2-3 mL/kg. Excre-
bits, the presence of large amounts of calcium 'silt' may
tory urograms may be useful in assessing renal disease
lead to a significant outline of the bladder.
112 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
The uterus may become enlarged due to neoplasia
(e.g. uterine adenocarcinomas), pyometra or gravidity.
 The vagina may also become enlarged due to venous an-
eur ysms.
 In the male rabbit there is no os penis. Ihe testes sit
scrotally but can be retracted into the abdomen.
Head
Radiography is essential to assess dental disease
which is common in rabbits (Harrenstein, 1999) (see
5
Figure 7.6). Root elongation and lysis of the alveolar
bone is often an early radiographic sign of abnormal
MS
dental wear (Redrobe, 2001). Irregular wear of the teeth
and touching of the cheek teeth at rest are also indica-
RT
 tors of dental disease.
Figure 7.7 Dorsoventral viev showving middle ear disease in a
Final stage of dental disease includes abscess formation
rabbit (worse in right middle ear), dental disease (flaring laterally of
and osteomyelitis. Oblique views of the head may allow
first cheek teeth) and enlarged heart. (Fraser and Girling, 2009)
 examination of one dental arcade from the other.
Exophthalmos may be due to cheek-tooth abscess, ret-
Appendicular skeleton
robulbar neoplasia and cranial mediastinal masses such
Osteoarthritis is common in rabbits. Luxation of the
as thymic neoplasia; therefore, chest radiographs are also
elbow has also been observed. Neoplasia of the limb in the
necessary.
form of fbrosarcomas and osteosarcomas are also seen in
Dacrocystitis may be associated with dental disease
rabbits. Hypertrophic osteopathy has also been reportec
often due to incisor root elongation or infection. Contrast
associated with an intrathoracic neoplasm (DeSanto,
studies of the nasolacrimal ducts may be performed using
1997), as has a limb neurofbrosarcoma in association
iodine-based contrast media injected into the ventral tear
with a thymic neoplasm (Clippinger et al., 1998).
duct punctum and show the pinching of the duct around
the roots of the incisor.
Axial skeleton and ribs
For otitis media causing vestibular disease, a dor-
The spine shows some breed variation in numbers of
soventral square-on view of the skull is necessary (see
vertebrae with some individuals possessing 13 thoracic
Figure 7.7). Skull neoplasia has also been recorded in the
vertebrae (Kozma ef al., 1974). Fractures of the spine, as-
rabbit (Weisbroth & Hur witz, 1969).
sociated often with metabolic bone disease, or luxations/
subluxations of the vertebraljoints are common.
 Arthritis of the spine (spondylosis) and spinous pro-
cess fractures are also common. In one study, three types
 of spinal lesions were observed in the rabbit nucleus pulp-
osus of the intervertebral discs undergoing chondroid
metaplasia, eventually involving the whole spinal column
by 2 years of age; mineralisation with hydroxyapatite de-
position in the nucleus pulposus of the discs radiographi-
cally, primarily in the thoracic segments (seen as young as
3 months of age) and finally, spondylosis in rabbits over
24 months, chiefly bridging those discs that did not show
mineralisation (Green et al., 1984).
Myelography has been described (Longley, 2005). The
access point is L5/6 with 0.4 mL/kg of iodine-based con-
Figure 7.6 Lateral head of a rabbit showing cheek tooth and incisor
trast medium will extend the media from T2-L7. A 23G,
malocclusion. Note contact of the occlusal surfaces of cheek teeth.
1%4-inch needle will allow access to the subarachnoid
Roots of cheek teeth projecting through ventral mandible and
upper/lower incisors meeting end on. (Fraser and Girling, 2009)
space.
Small Mammal Diagnostic Imaging 113
Interpretation of rodent and
marsupial radiographs
Imaging techniques in rodents and marsupials are the
same as for other mammals. Iheir small size precludes
the use of grids. Ihe use of non-screen film may help in
examining fine structures. In many cases, short exposure
times are required due to the rapid rates of respiration,
AMMALS
Even when anaesthetised.
Anaesthesia or sedation is generally required in all
cases to allow proper positioning. In all cases, several
W
inmportant features of rodents are visible on radiographs.
 The main problem is that the chest cavity is very small in
Figure 7.9 Lateral view of an adult (overweight) rat. Note the
relation to the abdominal cavity, making examination of
radiodense masses in the chest typical with mycoplasma pneumonia
WS
and lung consolidation. Note also the enlarged heart due to cor
the lung felds for minor abnormalities difficult (Girling,
puimona/e.
PART
2002) (see Figures 7.8a-7.8b). Generally though, when
patients are presented, the pathology is advanced and
small mammals (see Figure 7.10). Some species, such as
it may be diffcult to see any normal lung tissue! (see
rats, have open growth plates on many long bones, even
Figure 7.9). Heart disease is commonly seen in many
as adults. Males of most rodents have an os penis, and ex-
tensive testicular tissue, which when retracted, may fill
(a)
the caudal abdomen (see Figure 7.8a). In hind gut fer-
menters, such as the guinea pig and chinchilla, the capa-
cious large intestine and caecum fils the abdomen mak-
 ing discernment of other structures difficult.
 Dental disease is particularly common in Hystrico-
morphs such as chinchillas (see Figures 7.11 and 7.12),
 guinea pigs (see Figure 7.13) and degus.
ae uaad auq dida ue a sensin
from the pubis and thought to support the ventral body wall
and pouch. The sugar glider however does not possess this.
h
Figure 7.8 (a and b) Lateral and dorsoventral view of a normal
Figure 7.10 Dorsoventral view of a hamster's chest with
healthy adult male rat. Note the small size of the chest, the open
growth plates particularly on the proximal tibia and the ischial
endocarditis. This radiograph was taken using dental non-screen
region of the pelvis and the presence of an os penis.
film to improve minor details.
114  Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
aaie
SMALL
Figure 7.11 Lateral view of a chinchilla. Note the capacious
intestinal mass full of ingesta, the small lung field size, which makes
PARTI
the heart look enlarged. The dentition of this chinchilla is near
normal.
Figure 7.13 Lateral view of a guinea pig's head and thorax. Note
the small lung field size that makes the heart look enlarged. Note
also in this case the elongated cheek teeth whose roots are pushing
 aun pue algipuew jeuan aun yhnout pue sabessed jeseu at ou!
incisors, which are meeting end on end instead of the maxillary
incisors meeting rostral to the mandibular incisors.
thoracic vertebral units similar to that seen in the dog
and cat. The following formula has been used to assess
the heart of both male and female ferrets:
RL LA (cm) + RL SA (cm)
T5 - T8 (cm)
Figure 7.12 Lateral view of a chinchilla's head and thorax. Note the
where RL LA means right lateral long axis (base of heart
severe loss of cheek teeth.
to apex), RL SA means right lateral short axis (widest part
of the heart) and T5-T8 means thoracic vertebra 5 to tho-
racic vertebra 8.
Interpretation of ferret
radiographs
Thoracic cavity
Heart
The heart is positioned more caudally than in the cat or
dog and may be slightly elevated from the sternum due to
fat deposition in the pericardiac ligament (Orcutt, 1998)
(see Figures 7.14 and 7.15).
Cardiac enlargement due to cardiomyopathy and con-
gestive heart failure is common in ferrets (see Figure 7.16).
The size of the heart may be assessed using the modified
vertebral heart score (VHS) that compares heart length
along the long axis against its width on a right lateral plain
Figure 7.14 Lateral view of the thorax of a normal ferret. Note the
 radiograph and relating this to the length of the heart in
inlet which makes the trachea appear enlarged.
Small Mammal Diagnostic Imaging 115
mineralisation due to over-supplementation with cal-
cium and vitamin D can affect the primary vessels, and
of course the kidneys.
The oesophagus
The oesophagus is not easily seen in the healthy ferret, but
megaoesophagus has been reported. Contrast studies us-
ing barium sulphate are necessary to help define the oe-
sophagus. A dose of 10-15 mL/kg orally and may be made
more palatable by mixing it with a meat-based dog/cat
food. Pollock (2007), however, describes that strawberry-
flavoured barium sulphate is readily accepted by ferrets.
WS
Figure 7.15 Dorsoventral view of the thorax of a normal ferret.
Abdominal cavity
Note the more transverse position of the heart. Note also in this
Liver
PART
case some gas in the stomach which in this case is due to pre
The liver is normally completely covered by the cau-
 anaesthetic starva tion.
dal ribcage. Enlargement of the liver shadow has been
associated with neoplasia (such as lymphoma, biliary
cystadenoma, cholangiosarcomas and hepatocellu-
lar carcinomas), polycystic disease and infectious disease
such as mycobacteriosis (Saunders & Ihomsen, 2006).
Stomach and intestines
The stomach is on the left side dorsoventrally and imme-
diately behind the dorsal part of the liver shadow on the
lateral view. Ihe cranial border of the stomach in a ven-
trodorsal radiograph extends to the 13th thoracic verte-
bra (Evans & An, 1998). Normally, the stomach has small
amounts of gas present except in the case of an anaesthetic.
Gastric bloat can be seen in recently weaned ferrets and
can produce large amounts of gas (Fox, 1988). Other causes
Figure 7.16 Lateral view of the thorax of a ferret with cardiomegaly.
a yo uoeiam oi anp Aensn ane yoeois au ut seg go
 stomach (e.g. foreign bodies, neoplasia and Helicobacter
The ratio was 1.35 (standard deviation 0.07) for males
mustelae infections) or small intestinal foreign bodies.
and a mean of 1.34 (standard deviation 0.06) for females
The small intestine is much the same diameter through-
(Stepien et al., 1999).
Out. There is no caecum.
Heartworm infestation may show a pleural effusion
Thickening of the small intestine may be seen due to
and cardiomegaly, principally the right side of the heart.
neoplasia such as malignant lymphoma and inflamma
 In addition, the caudal vena cava is often noticeably di-
tory disease such as proliferative ileitis caused by the
lated (Supakorndej et al., 1995).
bacterium Lawsonia intracelulare. Alternatively, it may
be more diffuse as in eosinophilic enteritis and inflamma-
Lungs and other organs
tory bowel disease.
Pneumonia produces a typically interstitial and then al-
veolar pattern similar to that seen in cats and dogs. Lung
Spleen
patterns around the perihilar region suggest lung oedema
 As mentioned, the normal spleen may appear larger in
and congestive heart failure.
the ferret and so radiographic interpretation of disease
Pleural effusions may be seen due to a right-sided fail-
 in the spleen may be difficult. Gross splenic enlarge-
ure, for example thymic neoplasia, traumatic wounds
ment may occur due to neoplasia such as lymphoma (see
and pleurisy or as with heartworm infestation. Soft tissue
Figure 7.17) or haemangiosarcomas.
116 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
W
W
4S
ART
Figure 7.17 Lateral view of the abdomen of a ferret with an enlarged spleen due to early lymphoma.
Kidneys
Cormplete gastric emptying varies from conscious ferrets
The right kidney is in front of the left as in other mam-
(75 +/— 54 minutes) to ferrets sedated with ketamine and
mals. Renal cysts are commonly seen in ferrets, although
diazepam (130 +/-40 minutes) (Schwarz et al., 2003). Nor-
the genetically inherited polycystic kidney disease is less
mally, small intestinal width should not exceed 5-7 mm.
common (Orcutt, 2003).
Contrast radiography of the urinary tract
Urinary bladder
After anaesthesia, catheterisation of the female ferret's
Urolithiasis is common in ferrets and is more commonly
bladder is possible, but diffcult with the urethral open-
seen in males due to the presence of the os penis.
ing positioned approximately 1 cm cranial to the clito-
ris on the ventral floor of the vestibule. Ihe male ferret
Reproductive organs
is more challenging due to the J-shaped os penis and the
The male ferret possesses a prostate which is at the neck of
small diameter of the urethra. Orcutt (2003) suggests
the urinary bladder and may be affected by adrenal gland
using a 22 gauge, 8-inch jugular catheter to catheterise
neoplasia with the production of considerable cysts. The
male ferrets. However, if severe para-urethral/prostatic
os penisis curved in the shape of the letter J.
disease is present, the pressure on the urethra may still
Radiography may of course be used to detect gravidity in
prevent passage of a catheter.
the female - skeletal development occurs around day 29-30.
Pyelograms may be performed with a dose of
720 mg iodine/kg ferret of a non-ionic iodine-containing
Contrast radiography of the gastrointestinal tract
media, for example iohexol, intravenously via a peripheral
The period of fasting for ferrets prior to radiography is
vein (Orcutt, 2003). Non-ionic iodine media is preferable
around 3-4 hours - longer than this can cause prob-
 to ionic as it does not induce osmotic diuresis so making
lems. Positive contrast using barium sulphate mixed
contrast studies clearer, and it induces less side-effects. The
with meat-based food or strawberry-flavoured barium at
cephalic vein is perhaps the most easily accessed vessel.
10-15 mL/kg. In cases of stomach/intestine perforation
iodine-based products, for example iohexol, can be used.
Head
These should be diluted 1:1 with tap water and then ad-
 Dental disease is common and bisecting angle radiogra-
ministered at a rate of 10-15 mL/kg of this mixture orally
 phy as used in cats and dogs can help in the detection of
or by stomach tube (Pollock, 2007).
periodontal disease and abscess formation.
Small Mammal Diagnostic Imaging 117
Benign neoplasia of the skull such as osteomas have
wave Doppler techniques are also extremely useful in
been described (Dernell et al., 2001). However, more
assessing cardiac disease and may be used in the rabbit
aggressive neoplasia has also been described including
as with cats and dogs.
squamous cell carcinomas of the gums which may invade
 underlying bone producing radiolucent bony changes on
Additional equipment
The patient should be shaved and a coupling gel is ap-
radiography (De Voe et a., 2002).
plied a few minutes before imaging, as with any species,
to allow it to soak into the outer layers of the skin. In some
MALS
Axial and appendicular skeleton
The vertebral formula of the ferret is C7, T14-15,
cases, a stand-off is required. Commercial stand-offs are
L5-7, S3, Cd18, and the dental formula is I 3/3 C 1/1
superior to home-made ones as they do no create attenu-
 Pm 3/3 M 1/2 in the adult ferret. Ihe growth plates par-
ation, resolution or distortion artefacts.
ticularly in the pelvis and long bones do not often close
Rabbit ultrasound interpretation
until the ferret is more that 7 months of age.
WS
Thorax
Spinal lesions are frequently reported in ferrets due to
 a     
traumatic injuries creating in vertebral disc collapse or
PART
bit (Tello de Meneses et al., 1989; Marano et al., 1997).
more commonly vertebral body fractures and neoplastic
Some injectable anaesthetics have an effect on cardiac
 processes being seen (Ritzman & Knapp, 2002).
function but isoflurane has less of an effect on reducing
Chordomas, a tumour of the spinal cord, commonly
myocardial contractility than halothane, for example
affect the end of the spine but may also affect the cer-
(Marano et al., 1997). Marini et al. (1999) used ultraso-
vical area (Li & Fox, 1998). Other neoplasms affecting
nography to demonstrate myocardial fibrosis associated
the spine in ferrets include lymphoma and plasma cell
with ketamine/xylazine anaesthesia in rabbits.
myeloma, both of which can produce metastasise and
Orcutt (20oo) has shown the ultrasound prob-
produce lytic lesions (Li & Fox, 1998).
lems associated with congestive heart failure. In addi-
tion, bacterial endocarditis has also been reported as
YLTRASONOGRAPHY
has atherosclerosis and associated thrombi (Snyder et al.,
Physical/chemical restraint and
1976) (see Figure 7.18).
positioning
 A prominent thymus and wide cranial mediastinum
 A right lateral position, using a cut out imaging window
exist even in the adult rabbit and may be imaged through
the heart.
in the table below, is useful for the examination of the
heart and kidneys, but it can be stressful to some patients
Abdominal cavity
and may require prior se dation.
The urinary bladder is often used as an acoustic window
A standing position is often better tolerated in the con-
to assess many of the caudal abdominal organs, such
scious patient and allows easier access to organs such as
as the uterus and kidneys. However, calcium carbonate
the liver which sits underneath the ribcage.
Equipment for small mammals
Ultrasound unit
A sector probe transducer is preferred due to its
smaller footprint. This is particularly important if
trying to image the heart due to the narrow inter-rib
spaces. 10 MHz probes may be useful for imaging
structures such as the eye but otherwise 7.5 MHz are
suitable. B mode ultrasound is mainly used to provide
a two-dimensional real-time image of the organs be-
ing examined. M mode is useful when examining the
heart to assess its contractility. Pulsed wave Doppler
techniques for assessing blood flow direction and the
measurement of ejection volumes with continuous
e e  se   a   
1 18 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
crystals may cause a scintillating snow-storm effect and
lymphoma, ocular abscesses and uveitis lesions caused by
reduce transmission of the ultrasound beam.
lens rupture due to Encephalitozoon cuniculi. In addition,
Examination of the liver, just caudal to the xiphoid
retrobulbar masses may be determined using ultrasonog-
is straightforward. Hepatic lipidosis can be diagnosed
raphy (Redrobe, 2001).
as an increase in echogenicity. The gall bladder is eas-
ily seen.
Ferret ultrasound interpretation
Ihe normal kidney outline and internal structure is
Thoracic cavity
similar to that seen in the cat, although rabbits are uni-
Echocardiography
papillate (see Figure 7.19). A decrease in renal size plus
Numerous authors have reported M mode and Doppler
irregular surface is commonly seen in cases of chronic
echocardiography in the ferret (Stepien et al., 2000; Vast-
damage caused by E. cuniculi.
enburg et al., 2004). The pulmonary artery (rather than the
Adenocarcinomas of the uterus may be demonstrated
aorta) was recommended for measurement of volume flow
MS
with ultrasound (see Figure 7.20), which can also be used
in ferrets due to the difficulty in aligning the aortic outflow
for pregnancy diagnosis and the presence of pyometra.
tract (Stepien et al., 2000). Vastenburg et al. (2004) showed
Venous aneurysms within the vagina may also be seen.
that mitral/pulmonary valve regurgitation is not significant.
Dilated cardiomyopathy and less commonly hyper-
Ocular ultrasound
trophic cardiomyopathy have been reported in ferrets.
The eye may also be imaged using a 10 MHz probe
Valvular insufficiency is increasingly commonly diag-
preferably with a stand-off. It can be useful to check for
nosed in older ferrets. Aortic regurgitation is a common
incidental finding in ferrets with little significance (Petrie
& Morrisey, 2004).
Dirofilaria immitis heartworm produces typically a
right-sided heart failure with right ventricle, right atrial
and caudal vena cava enlargement on echocardiography.
 The adult worms may be seen in the riglt ventricle, right
atrium and pulmonary artery.
Abdominal cavity
Adrenal glands
Adrenal neoplasia has been detected using ultrasound.
Average normal adrenal lengths vary from 5 to 13 mm
and widths from 2 to 5 mm (Neuwirth et al., 1997).
Kidneys
Figure 7.19 A normal rabbit kidney in longitudinal section.
About 10-15% of ferrets undergoing a post-mortem
report had a coincidental renal cyst (Orcutt, 2003). Poly-
cystic disease including polycystic kidneys is unusual in
ferrets and is differentiated from renal cysts by the pres-
ence of multiple irregular cysts in the kidneys and often
the liver (Puerto et al., 1998).
Spleen
The spleen can be one of the initial sites along with the
thymus and liver for juvenile lymphoblastic leukaemia
and haemangiosarcomas and so may show increased
echogenicity and overall size.
Liver
Neoplasia of the liver is common in the ferret and includes
Figure 7.20 Uterine adenocarcinomas in the uterus of a rabbit.
juvenile lymphoblastic leukaemia, biliary cystadenoma,
Small Mammal Diagnostic Imaging 119
cholangiosarcoma and hepatocellular carcinoma. The
distances involved. However, despite this, a consider-
normal liver has six lobes and a gal bladder.
able amount of contact gel is required as a stand-off pad
to avoid near-field artefacts. Normal values for the eye
Pancreas
have been determined (Hernandez-Guerra et al., 2007).
 Insulinomas are very small (1-2 mm) and so are often
 missed on ultrasound examination.
Other small mammal ultrasound
interpretation
Intestines
A 7.5 MHz probe is usually required. A stand-off may also
Focal thickening of the ileum caused by the bacterium
be useful.
Lawsonia intracelhulare and lymphoma which may affect
Cardiac disease, common in marsupials, chinchillas
the whole intestine may be seen on ultrasound. Ihese are
 and guinea pigs, as well as hamsters, may be interpreted
often focal. More diffuse areas, as in eosinophilic enteritis
 using ultrasonography using principles described above
and inflammatory bowel disease with hyperechoic areas
for rabbits (see Figure 7.21).
NS
of gas, may also be seen.
Pregnancy diagnosis may be made easily in hystrico-
morphs and it is an extremely useful tool to confirm the
Urinary bladder
presence of cystic ovarian disease (see Figure 7.22).
Urolithiasis is common and may result in cystitis and
In addition, renal structure may be examined where
bladder wall thickening. Para-urethral cysts are common
cystic disease of chronic failure and atrophy is suspected.
in hyperadrenocorticism (adrenal gland disease). Neo-
plasia is uncommon but has been reported.
CAL+
10M
20M
Prostate
 The prostate is bilobed in the male ferret and sits at the
neck of the urinary bladder. Hyperadrenocorticism is as-
 sociated with the enlargement of the prostate and the de-
velopment oflarge cysts, which are easily detectable using
ultrasound
Uterus
 The non-gravid uterine body diameter has been quoted
as 1.1-2.5 mm (An & Evans, 1988). Gravidity, cystic and
neoplastic endometrial changes and pyometras may all be
diagnosed with ultrasound. It may also be used to detect
Figure 7.21 Long axis section through the heart of a hamster with
bacterial endocarditis.
suffering from hyperadrenocorticism.
Mesenteric lymph node
The mesenteric lymph node, situated at the junction of
the cranial and caudal mesenteric veins, may be mistaken
for one of the adrenal glands, but its mobile and more
ventral position should aid in differentiating it. A tech-
nique to allow fine needle aspirate cytology of the mes
enteric lymph node as an aide to detecting lymphoma has
been described in the ferret (Paul-Murphy et al., 1999)
Other organs
Ocular ultrasonography has been recorded. A 10 MHz
transducer is required in B mode due to the short focal
Figure 7.22 Large ovarian cysts in the abdomen of a gerbil.
120 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
MRI ANd CT SCANNING OF
Girling, SJ (2002) Mammalian imaging and anatomy. Manual of
SMAll MAMMALS
Exotic Pets (eds A. Meredith & S. Redrobe), 4th edn, Pp.1-12.
BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
These techniques are becoming more commonplace in
Green, PW., Fox, R.R. and Sokoloff, L. (1984) Spontaneous
rabbits and small mammals.
degenerative spinal disease in the laboratory rabbit.Journalof
Computed tomography (CT) scanning creates a
Orthopaedic Research, 2, 161-168.
Harrenstein, L. (1999) Gastrointestinal diseases of pet rabbits.
cross-sectional image of the patient and is particu-
Seminars in Avian and Exotic Pet Medicine, 8, 83-99.
larly good for assessing bony changes such as that seen
Hernandez-Guerra, A.M., Rodilla, V. and Lopez-Murcia, M.M.
with advanced dental disease as has been suggested in
(2007) Ocular biometry in the adult anesthetized ferret (Mustela
chinchillas (Chinchilla laniger) (Crossley et al., 1998)
putoriusfuro). Veterinary Ophthalmology, 10(1),50-52.
and rabbits. In addition, other conditions affecting the
Kozma, C., Macklin, W., Cummins, L.M. and Mauer, R. (1974)
The anatomy, physiology and biochemistry of the rabbit. The
head, such as neoplasms, sclerosis of the middle ear and
Biology of the Laboratory Rabbit (eds S.H. Weisbroth, R.E.
turbinate atrophy and infection, are ideally suited to
Flatt & A.L. Kraus), Pp. 50-69. Academic Press, London.
NS
this modality. Anaesthesia must be used as the patient
Li, X. and Fox, J.G. (1998) Neoplastic diseases. Biology and
must be cormpletely immobile while a rotating X-ray
Diseases of the Ferret (ed J.G. Fox), 2nd edn, Pp. 405-447.
RT
Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore, MD.
beam images the patient in segments.
Longley, L.(2005) Epidural catheterisation in rabbits. Proceedings
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is more useful
f the British Veterinary Zoological Society Spring Meeting,
for assessing soft tissue structures, such as aneurysms,
Chester, UK, 2005, Pp. 56-57.
tumours and organ enlargement. It also requires the
Marano, G., Formigari, R., Grigioni, M. and Vergari, A.
patient to be anaesthetised and completely immobile.
(1997) Efects of isoflurane versus halothane on myocardial
contractility in rabbits: Assessment with transthoracic two-
 Lesions in organs such as the brain make ideal candi-
dimensional echocardiography. Labaratory Animal Science,
dates for MRI, although spinal abscesses (Runge et al.,
31, 144-150.
1998) and pyelonephritis (Runge et al., 1997) have been
Marini, R.P, Li, X., Harpster, N.K. and Dangler, C. {1999)
assessed in the rabbit using MRI.
Cardiovascular pathology possibly associated with ketamine/
xylazine anesthesia in Dutch belted rabbits. Laboratory Arnirmal
Science, 49, 153-160.
References
Neuwirth, L., Collins, B. and Calderwood-Mays, M. (1997)
An, N.Q. and Evans, H.E. (1988) Anatomy of the ferret. Biology
Adrenal ultrasonography correlated with histopathology in
and Diseases of the Ferret (ed G.J. Fox), 1st edn, pp. 15-65. Lea
ferrets. Veterinary Radiology and Utrasound, 38(1),69-74.
& Febiger, Philadelphia, PA.
Orcutt, C.J. (2000) Cardiac and respiratory disease in rabbits.
Clippinger, TL., Bennett, R.A., Alleman, A.R., Ginn, PE.
Proceedings ofthe British Veterinary Zoological Society Autumn
and Bellah, JR. (1998) Removal of a thymoma via median
Meeting, RVC, London, Pp. 68-73.
sternotomy in a rabbit with recurrent appendicular
Orcutt, C.J (1998) Emergency and critical care of ferrets.
neurofibrosarcoma. Journal of the American Veterinary
Veterinary Clinics of North America: Exotic Animal Practice,
Medical Association, 213, 1140-1143.
1(1), 99-126.
Crossley, D.A., Jackson, A, Yates, J. and Boydell, I.P. {1998)
Orcutt, C.J (2003) Ferret urogenital diseases. Veterinary Clinics
Use of computed tomography to investigate cheek tooth
ofNorth America:Exotic Animal Practice,6(1),113-138.
abnormalities in chinchillas (Chinchilla laniger). Journal of
Paul-Murphy J, O'Brien, T., Spaeth, A., Sullivan, L. and
Snall Animal Practice, 39, 385-389.
Dubielzig, R.R. (1999) Ultrasonography and fne needle
Dernell, W.S., Straw, R.C. and Withrow, S.J. (2001) Tumors of
aspirate cytology of the mesenteric lymph node in normal
the skeletal system. Small Animal Clinical Oncology (eds
domestic ferrets(Mustela putorius furo).Veterinary Radiology
S.J. Withrow & E.G. MacEwen), 3rd edn, Pp. 406-454. WB
and Utrasound, 40(3), 308-310.
Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
Petrie, J-P. and Morrisey, LK. (2004) Cardiovascular and other
DeSanto, J. (1997) Hypertrophic osteopathy associated with an
diseases. Ferrets, Rabbis and Rodents: Clirical Medicine and
intrathoracic neoplasm in a rabbit. Journal of the American
Surgery (eds K.E. Quesenberry & J.W. Carpenter), Pp. 58-71.
Veterinary Medical Association, 210,1322-1323.
WB Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
De Voe, R.S., Pack, L. and Greenacre, C.B. (2002) Radiographic
Pickard, D.W. and Stevens, C.E. (1972) Digesta flow through the
and CT imaging of a skull associated osteoma in a ferret.
rabbit large intestine. American Journal of Physiology,222,
Veterinary Radiotogy and Utrasound, 43(4),346-348.
1161-1166.
Evans, H.E. and An, N.Q. (1998) Anatomy of the ferret. Biology
 Pollock, C. (2007) Emergency medicine of the ferret. Veterinary
and Diseases of the Ferret (ed J.G. Fox), 2nd edn, Pp. 19-70.
Clinics of North America: Exotic Animal Practice,l0(2),
Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore, MD.
463-500.
Fox, JG. (1988) Systemic diseases. Biology and Diseases
Puerto, D.A., Walker, L.M. and Saunders, M. (1998) Bilateral
of the Ferret (ed J.G. Fox), Pp. 258-259. Lea & Febiger,
 perinephric pseudocysts and polycystic kidneys in the ferret.
Philadelphia, PA.
Veterinary Radiology andUtrasound,39(4),309-312.
Small Mammal Diagnostic Imaging 121
Redrobe, S. (200l) Imaging small mammals. Seminars in Avian
rabbit: a preliminary study. Annals of Veterinary Research, 20,
and Exotic Pet Medicine, 10, 187-197.
175-185.
Ritzman, T.K. and Knapp, D. (2002) Ferret orthopedics.
Vastenburg, M.H.A.C., Boroffka, S.A.E.B. and Schoemaker, N.J.
Veterinary Clinics of North America: Exotic Animal Practice,
(2004) Echocardiographic measurements in clinically healthy
5(1),129-155
ferrets anesthetized with isoflurane. Veterinary Radiology and
Runge, V.M., Timoney, J.F. and Williams, N.M. (1997) Magnetic
Utrasound,45(3),228-232.
resonance imaging of experimental pyelonephritis in rabbits.
Weisbroth, S.H. and Hurwitz, A. (1969) Spontaneous osteogenic
Investigative Radiology, 32,696-701.
sarcoma in Oryctolagus cuniculus with elevated serum alkaline
Runge, VM., Williams, N.M., Lee, C. and Timoney, JF. (1998)
phosphatase. Laboratory Animal Care, 19, 263-265.
 MRI imaging in a spinal abscess model. Preliminary report.
Investigative Radiotogy,33,246-255.
Further reading
Saunders, G.K. and Thomsen, B.V. (2006) Lymphoma and
Besso, J.G., Tidwell, A.S. and Gliatto, J.M. (2000) Retrospective
Mycobacterium avium infection in a ferret (Mustela putorius
study of the ultrasonographic features of adrenal lesions in 21
furo). Journal of Veterinary Diagnostic Investigation, 18(5),
ferrets. Veterinary Radiology and Utrasound,41(4), 345-352.
Fraser, M.A. and Girling, S.J. (2009) Rabbit Medicine and Surgery
513-515.
5M
Schwarz, L.A., Solano, M., Manning, A., Marini, R.P. and Fox,
for Veterinary Nurses.Blackwell-Wiley, Oxford.
 JG. (2003) The normal upper gastrointestinal examination
Girling, S.J. (2006) Diagnostic
imaging.
Manualof
PARTI
in the ferret. Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound, 44(2),
Rabbits (eds A. Meredith & P. Flecknall), 2nd edn, Pp. 51-62.
165-172.
BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
Shell, L.G. and Saunders, G. (1989) Arteriosclerosis in a rabbit.
Jensen, W., Myers, R. and Lin, C. {1985) Osteoma in a ferret.
Fournal of the American Veterinary Medicat Association,194,
Journat of the American Veterinary Medicat Association,
679-680.
187(12), 1375-1376.
Snyder, S.B., Fox, J.G., Campbell, L.H. and Soave, O.A. (1976)
Neuwirth, L., Isaza, R., Bellah, J., Ackerman, N. and Collins,
Disseminated staphylococcal disease in laboratory rabbits
B. (1993) Adrenal neoplasia in seven ferrets. Veterinary
(Oryctolagus cuniculus).LaboratoryAnimal Science,26,86-88.
Radiology and Utrasound, 34(5), 340-346.
Stepien, R.L., Benson, K.G. and Forrest, L.J. (1999) Radiographic
O'Brien, R.T, Paul-Murphy, J. and Dubielzig, R.R. (1996)
measurement of cardiac size in normal ferrets. Veterinary
Ultrasonography of adrenal glands in normal ferrets.
Radiology and Uttrasound, 40(6), 606-610.
Veterinary Radiology and Utrasound, 37(6), 445-448.
Stepien, R.L., Benson, K.G. and Wenholz, L.J. (2000) M-mode
Silverman, S. (1993) Diagnostic imaging of exotic pets.
 and Doppler echocardiographic findings in normal ferrets
Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small Animal Practice,
sedated with ketamine hydrochloride and midazolam.
23, 1287-1299.
Veterinary Radiotogy and Uttrasound, 41(5), 452-456.
Stefanacci, J.D. and Hoefer, H.L. (2004) Radiology
and
Supakorndej,P, Lewis, R.E. and McCall,J.W. (1995) Radiographic
ultrasound. Ferrets,Rabbits and Rodents, Clinical Medicine
and angiographic evaluations of ferrets
experimentally
and Surgery (eds K.E. Quesenberry & J.W. Carpenter),
infected with Diroflaria immitis. Veterinary Radiology and
2nd edn, Pp. 395-413. WB Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
Utrasound, 36(1), 23-29.
Williams, J. (2002) Orthopaedic radiography in exotic animal
Tello de Meneses, R., Mesa, M.D. and Gonzalez, V. (1989)
practice. Veterinary Clinics of North America: Exotic Animal
Echocardiographic assessment of cardiac function in the
Practice, 5{1), 1-22.
Chapter 8
Small Mammal Emergency and
Critical Care Medicine
W
5
RABBIT EMERGENCY AND
intubation. If the rabbit has stopped breathing, then
CRITICAL CARE MEDICINE
this technique becomes extremely difficult; therefore,
MS
Introduction
a laryngoscope with a Wisconsin 0 paediatric blade
can be used to visualise the glottis (Heard, 2004). This
Emergency medicine is a challenging discipline, and per-
is best achieved with the rabbit in dorsal recumbency
haps none more so than in some of the smaller patients
and the tongue pulled laterally. A guide wire may
that we deal with. Rabbits are often presented to veteri-
be inserted through the glottis first and the ET tube
nary practices and emergency clinics with acute ailments,
threaded over the top. Alternatively a fine endoscope
many of which can lead rapidly to a life-threatening
or needlescope may be used as a guide wire instead,
condition. Although specific information on emergency
threading the ET over the scope prior to intubation.
medication of the acutely collapsed rabbit is scarce, the
Once through the glottis, the ET tube may be advanced
medical approach should follow protocols already created
and the scope retracted easily.
for cats and dogs, but with some tailoring of the therapy
Direct intubation itself may be difficult in the rabbit
based on the differing anatomy and biology of the rabbit.
owing to the narrow oral cavity and relatively large size
This chapter aims to provide clinicians with information
of the tongue caudally, or the presence of an obstruc-
on emergency therapy and stabilisation of the domestic
tion such as a pharyngeal abscess or foreign body. In an
rabbit.
emergency therefore it may be necessary to pass a long
As with other small mammals, emergency therapy
through-the-needle catheter into the tracheal lumen be-
in the rabbit should initially follow the ABC' (Airway,
tween two tracheal rings ventrally. A luer adaptor may
Breathing and Circulation) protocol already adopted for
be attached to allow connection to an anaesthetic circuit
cats and dogs. However, there is increasing debate that
for oxygen administration. A tracheostomy may also be
the protocol should be CAB as the blood stream in acute
performed in the same way as for a cat or dog. Ihe main
cases has sufficient oxygen to keep organs functioning
providing the circulation persists. It should be noted that
difference is that some breeds of rabbit, particularly the
doe, have large dew flaps with plentiful subcutaneous fat
the drugs listed below, unless stated, are not licensed for
deposits which may make tracheostomy surgery chal-
use in rabbits.
lenging. Other wise see below.
1. Alongitudinal incision is made over the trachea caudal
Emergency airway access and
to the larynx, followed by blunt dissection onto the tra-
ventilation (A and B)
chea itself.
Should breathing stop, orhypoxiabe detected,then emer-
2. A 180° ventral incision in between the tracheal rings
gency ventilation willbe required. This is best achieved by
 3-4 below the larynx is made and an ET tube inserted.
inmmediate endotracheal intubation.
 3. Incise the skin and subcutis - note the lack of extensive
Intubation may be achieved blindly, with the rabbit
muscles. Incise between the tracheal rings.
in sternal recumbency. The rabbit's head is lifted and
4. Insert the ET tube.
the ET tube is advanced slowly until breathing sounds
 5. Connect ET tube to anaesthetic circuit.
are heard through the tube. The tube may then be
 If intubation is not possible, then either a tight-fitting
quickly advanced on inspiration. If a transparent tube
face mask connected to an anaesthetic circuit may be ap-
is used, then condensation from the rabbit's breath
plied, and a high flow rate of oxygen (4-5 L), or an Ambu
when the tube is over the glottis can be seen aiding
bag, to force ventilate the rabbit. Alternatively, moving
Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets, Second Edition. Edited by Simon J. Girling. @ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Small Mammal Emergency and Critical Care Medicine 123
the rabbit in a see-saw manner may aid ventilation by
Table 8.1 Ermergency drugs used in rabbits.
moving the abdominal viscera backwards and forwards
onto the diaphragm and acting as a pump mechanism
Drug
Dosage and route
(Briscoe & Syring, 2004). Ihis works on the basis that
Adrenaline
0.2-1 mg/kg IV, intratracheally
most of the impetus for inspiration comes from the flat-
(1 :1000 = 1 mg/mL)
tening of the diaphragm rather than the outward move-
ment of the ribcage.
Dexamethasone
2 mg/kg IV (use with caution)
Interestingly, end-tidal CO, levels may be used to
Diazepan
1-3 mg/kg IV, IIM 
MA
monitor cardiac output during CPCR. A steady increase
Doxapram
2-5 mg/kg SC, IV, PO q 15 min
in end-tidal COz is more likely to be associated with a
successful outcome and conversely if the end-tidal COz
100 mL/kg per day maintenance
does not increase above 10 mm Hg after a resuscitation
Furosemide
1-4 mg/kg IV, SC, IM 
time of 15-20 minutes, then it is unlikely to be successful
(Marino, 1997).
Glycopyrrolate
0.02 mg/kg SC, IM
Part I:
Lidocaine
1-2 mg/kg IV; 24 mg/kg
Cardiovascular support (C) and
intratracheally
drugs (D)
 In mammals <10 kg, direct cardiac massage by compress-
Midazolam
0.5-2 mg/kg IV, IM, intranasally
ing the chest directly over the heart is most effective at
Source: Adapted from Kottwitz and Kellehier (2003).
qanon pooq auioy pue annssaid sienou husai
the arterial vasculature (Henrik, 1992). Heart compres-
If severe bradycardia is detected, glycopyrrolate should
sion rates of 100 beats per minute need to be achieved in
be used (see Table 8.1) in preference to atropine as 60% of
rabbits; the technique recommended to maximise cardio-
domestic rabbits possess serum atropinesterases making
vascular output is circumferential chest compression, as
 atropine less effective (Okerman, 1994).
is used in human infants, where the chest is compressed
Lidocaine may be administered intratracheally or in-
over the heart from both sides at once (Costello, 2004).
 travenously if ventricular arrhythmias such as ventricular
If a cardiac beat is present or a beat is restarted, ECG
premature complexes leading to ventricular tachycardia
leads should be applied to discern any dysrhythmias. Ihe
occur (see Table 8.1 for dose). However, lidocaine should
type of dysrhythmia reported in rabbits during resuscita-
not be used in cases of AV block or severe bradycardia
tion techniques has thus far been different from that re-
(DeFrancesco, 2000), which are more commonly seen in
ported in cats and dogs. Ihe latter have been associated
rabbits.
with electro-mechanical dissociation, whereas in rabbits,
Cardiomyopathy and valvular insufficiency with re-
profound bradycardia, ventricular asystole and ventricu-
sultant congestive heart failure are also seen in rabbits
lar fbrillation have been reported (Rush & Wingfield,
as is atherosclerosis. Treatment of congestive heart fail-
1992). Adrenaline may be used, intratracheally if intu-
ure initially depends on the use of diuretics such as fu-
bated, or intravenously if no cardiac beat is detected and
rDsemide at 1-4 mg/kg intravenously, repeated every
no ECG trace. In the case of fine ventricular fbrillation,
4-6 hours as required. ACE inhibitors have been used in
the use of adrenaline has been advocated to convert the
rabbits but they are more susceptible to hypotensive side
electrical activity to coarse ventricular fbrillation which
effects than cats or dogs. Iherefore, reduced dosages and
is easier to convert (DeFrancesco, 20oo) - see Table 8.1
 regular monitoring of the systolic blood pressure using
for dosages.
non-invasive techniques devised for cats are advisable
Conversion of coarse fibrillation is based on the use of
(Girling, 2003).
cardiac massage as described above, or if the clinic has
access to defibrillation devices then the use of these exter-
Diagnostic procedures
 nally at 2-10 J/kg (starting at low energies and increasing
ECG (E)
if no response is achieved) may be performed (Costello,
As mentioned above, should cardiac arrest or arrhyth-
2004). Greater success is achieved with defbrillation
mias be detected, ECGleads may be applied as in cats and
devices if three initial countershocks are applied at low
dogs and the trace assessed. See Table 8.2 for some nor-
energies.
mal values for rabbits.
124 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Table 8.2 Normal ECG values (lead ll) for healthy rabbit5.
Blood testing
Routine haematology and biochemistry assessment
Parameter
Normal result
Notes
should be made - values may be found in standard rabbit
P wave height
0.10.15 mV
 Deflection is low or
textbooks. On acritical care level, blood lactate levels may
negative in lead I and
also be measured in rabbits with levels above 10 mmol/L
always positive in leads Il
being viewed as abnormal (Lichtenberger & Ko, 2007).
and II 
5
P wave duration
0.03-0.04 5
Fluid therapy (F)
P-R interval
0.05-0.1 5
Hypovolemic shock
QRS complex
0.015-0.04 5
If the rabbit is dehydrated or hypovolemic, shock doses
duration
of fluids should be administered. It should be noted that
fluids should be avoided post resuscitation in cases of
R wave armplitude
0.30.39 mV
NS
cardiovascular arrest where there is no hypovolemia/
Q-T interval
0.08-0.16 5
Change of dleflection of
dehydration prior to the arrest as these fluids may
RT
the T-wave frorm positive
to negative or vice versa
decrease myocardial perfusion pressures and dimin-
indicates myocardlial
ish overall nutrient delivery through the cerebral and
hypoxia as with cats and 
coronary vasculature (Cole et al., 2002). Rabbits tend
s6op
to more closely mimic cats in hypovolemic shock with
Source: From Kozma et af. (1974) and Huston and Quesenberry
the decompensatory stage being seen without compen-
(2004)
satory shock, i.e. evidence of bradycardia, hypoten-
sion and hypothermia. In these cases a slow intrave-
Radiography
nous bolus of fluids such as hypertonic saline 7.2-7.5%
This is essential where acute gastrointestinal signs are
at 3 mL/kg to draw fluid rapidly into the circulation
present, such as bloat or visceral pain, or where evi-
is advised (Lichtenberger & Lennox, 2010). Ihis can
dence of limb fractures, paresis or paralysis is present
be maintained by follow-up administration of Hetas-
and should be performed when clinically safe to do so as
tarch (3 mL/kg) over 10 minutes. Ihe patient should
 part of a full clinical work-up. In this chapter there is not
be warmed, and crystalloids at 3-4 mL/kg/h should be
-get ssoup supreau eiap oui o oi au yanoua
administered. It is important to measure systolic blood
ing but the following conditions may be associated with
pressure during this procedure. Once the rabbit has been
 radiographically visible changes.
warmed, the aim is to get the systolic blood pressure
Abdominal pain may be associated with a number of
above 90 mm Hg. Ihis may require further boluses of iso-
conditions including renal calculi, obstructive and non-
tonic crystalloids (10 mL/kg) with Hetastarch (5 mL/kg).
obstructive intestinal ileus and peritonitis. Spinal luxa-
Once normovolaemia has been achieved, replacement
tions, fractures and dislocations may also be identified
of fluid deficits may be started (remember maintenance
radiographically. Gradation of severity may be made as
values for rabbits are 80-100 mL/kg per day)
with cats and dogs. Acute treatment with short-acting
intravenous corticosteroids (e.g. dexamethasone, see
General fluid administration
 Table 8.1) and immobilisation with analgesia are advised
Oral
for spinal trauma with concurrent paresis or paralysis
Not such a good route for seriously debilitated animals
as for other small mammals. Surgery may then be per-
but useful for those with naso-oesophageal feeding tubes
formed for collapsed discs or fractures as for cats and
in place. Again it may be useful for mild cases of dehydra-
dogs as required.
tion where owners wish to home treat their pet. This route
though is restricted to small volumes with a maximum of
Ultrasound
10 mL/kg at any one time administered. In practice it may
This may be of use where renal, bladder, cardiac and
be possible to administer much less than this.
hepatic diseases are concerned. Cardiomyopathies (dilat-
ed) and atherosclerosis have been reported. Hepatic lipi-
Subcutaneous
dosis is common in rabbits. Urinary bladders often contain
The scruff area or lateral thorax makes ideal sites. This is a
large amounts of silt which create a snow-storm effect.
good technique for routine post-operative administration
Small Mammal Emergency and Critical Care Medicine 125
louu Suioaiapun sjuaied Aiaaosan iatuol ioy spim jo
the long axis of the femur. Use an 18-23 gauge, 1-1.5 inch
surgical procedures such as spaying or castration. It is
spinal or hypodermic needle. Analgesia should be em-
possible to give a maximum of 30-60 mL split into two
ployed (see Chapter 3) whenever placing an intraosseous
Or more sites depending on the size of rabbit at one time.
catheter as should prophylactic antibiosis such as enro-
floxacin (Baytril 2.5% Bayer - licensed for use in rabbits).
Intraperitoneal
Intraosseous and intravenous fluid administration
To perform this it is necessary to tilt the rabbit's head
should be accurately titrated using syringe drivers rather
downwards whilst it is in dorsal recumbency to allow the
than relying on drip sets since even a small error in fluid
gut contents to fall out of the injection zone. The needle is
administration may be proportionally more significant
inserted in the caudal right quadrant of the ventral abdo-
considering the small size of many rabbits.
men. It is inserted just through the abdominal wall and
the plunger drawn back on the syringe to ensure that no
Other medications and
 puncture of the bladder or gut has occurred. A maximum
supportive nutrition
WS
volume of 20-30 mL may be given at one time depending
Many rabbits presented as an acute emergency either
on rabbit size. Previous notes regarding concurrent respi-
have already or frequently go on to develop gastrointes-
ratory or cardiovascular disease should be considered.
tinal stasis. Providing obstructive causes have been ruled
If positioned correctly, there should be no resistance to
out; the use of prokinetic medications, such as cisapride,
injection.
metoclopramide and ranitidine, should be performed
(see Table 8.3). Ranitidine acts to reduce acidity in the
Intravenous
stomach, which is beneficial as many rabbits with gastro-
Venous access is relatively straightforward in the rabbit.
intestinal stasis have punctate ulceration of the stomach
The marginal ear vein, jugular vein, cephalic vein and
lining. In humans it also has prokinetic effects encourag-
lateral saphenous vein can all be used for intravenous
 ing emptying of the stomach and some increased motility
catheter placement. Long-term (>2-3 days) use of the
 of the snmall intestine, which seems to be synergised by
marginal ear vein may, however, cause sloughing of
metoclopramide; this appears clinically to be the case in
the ear tip, although in the author's experience this is
rabbits in this author's and others' opinion.
relatively rare with careful venipuncture technique. Use
Assisted feeding should be carried out in conjunction
of a topical local anaesthetic cream is recommended
with the use of prokinetics. Ihis can start off with easily
prior to placement. In addition, if a sedative such as
absorbed essential sugars and amino acids (e.g. Criti-
Hypnorm? (VetaPharma UK Ltd.) is used (a fentanyl/
cal Care Formula, Vetark Professional) either syringed
fluanisone combination neuroleptanalgesic drug), pe-
into the mouth or delivered via a naso-oesophageal tube.
ripheral vasodilation is common facilitating ear vein
 As the rabbit improves clinically, this should be stepped
catheter placement. Ihe fentanyl portion of this drug
up to use proprietary critical feeding formulas such as
may be reversed using the partial opioid agonists - bu-
Science Recovery and RecoveryPlus? (Supreme Pet-
prenorphine (0.01-0.05 mg/kg) or butorphanol (0.1-0.5
foods) or Critical Care for Herbivores? (Oxbow Pet
mg/kg). The jugular vein may be difficult to access, par-
Products) or vegetable-based baby foods (lactose-free
ticularly in does where there is a pronounced ruffof skin
and fat deposits. In addition it forms the main venous
drainage for the eye, and thrombus formation may lead
Table 8.3 Gut motility enhancing drugs for rabbits.
to periocular swelling. An Elizabethan collar can be
Frequency of dosing
used to prevent the rabbit from che wing or removing
6na
Dose rate
and notes
the catheter, although this will prevent caecotrophy and
Cisapride
0.5 mg/kg PO
012 hourly
ing to eat, otherwise assisted feeding (see below) should
Metocloprammide0.5 mg/kg SC 8-12 hourly
be institute d.
Ranitidine
2-5 mg/kg PO 
1 12 hourly (in combination
with metoclopramide acts
Intraosseous
to promote motility a5
Intraosseous catheters may be placed into the proximal
well as reducing acidlity)
femur, in the trochanteric fossa, in a parallel direction to
Note that none are licensed for use in rabbits.
126 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
varieties). Ihe disadvantage of baby foods is that they
in sternal recumbency whilst the head of the rodent is
do not contain fbre and thus have little or no prokinetic
 placed into a face mask with 100% oxygen.
activity, although they do provide nutrients in an easily
 2. Place the small mammal in dorsal recumbency and
digestible form.
 grasp the tracheabetween the fingers of one hand. Pass
 The levels of energy required for a debilitated rabbit
a 23-25 gauge over the needle catheter between two
should approach that calculated for growing-to-lactating
cartilage rings 1 cm caudal to the larynx. Remove the
rabbits using the formula - MER =kX(wt [kg])0.75 where
stylet and leave the catheter in place. Ihis may then be
k = 200 for growth and 300 for lactation (Carpenter &
used to administer IPPV and 100% oxygen.
Kolmstetter, 20oo). Therefore for debilitation, the follow-
3. Place the small mammal in dorsal recumbency. Make a
ing daily energy requirement may be used:
skin incision over the trachea caudal to the larynx and
bluntly dissect down onto the trachea as with the rab-
MER = 250 × (wt [kg])0.75
bit. Ihe trachea may then be incised between cartilage
MS
To re-populate the intestinal flora, transfaunation of
rings to insert a tube.
Jo uan al pie a lqqe Aea e uoiy sdoiona
For IPPV, a rate of 20-30 breaths per minute with a pres-
 normal bowel function. The use of commercial probiot-
sure of 8-10 cm HzO may be applied similar to rabbits.
ics designed for rabbits has also been advocated, and re-
duces the risk of transferring potential parasites and other
Cardiovascular support (c)
 agents to the debilitated patient.
As for rabbits, circumferential chest conpressions should
be instituted, but chest compression rates of 150+ beats
Naso-oesophageal tube in rabbits
 per minute should be attempted where possible.
 A naso-oesophageal tube (as the tubing must not allow
reflux of acid stomach contents into the oesophagus) is
Drugs (D)
placed after first spraying the nose with lidocaine spray
Similar drugs may be used for small mammals as
and inserting the 3-4 French tube which has been pre-
are used for rabbits (see Table 8.4). Cardiac disease,
measured from the extended nose to the seventh rib.
specifically dilated cardiomyopathies and associated
Sterile water should be flushed through the tube before
pue shid eauina u uaas aq Aeu aney leay anisauos
and after feeding to ensure it is correctly placed and does
hamsters commonly. Hamsters are also prone to bacte
not become blocked. The tube may then be glued, taped
rial endocarditis.
or sutured to the dorsal aspect of the head and a bung
Atropine may be used where bradycardia is seen
inserted when not in use. It may be necessary to put an
as none of the species discussed here have serum atro-
Elizabethan collar on the rabbit to prevent removal.
pinesterases.
Table 8.4 Energency drugs used in small marnal5.
EMERGENCY CARE OF OTHER
SMAll MaMMAlS
Drug
Dosage and route
Emergency airway access and
Epinephrine
0.2-1 mg/kg IV, intratracheally
ventilation (A and B)
(1 :1000 = 1 mg/mL)
 Providing a direct airway may be very diffcult in rodents.
Atropine
0.1-0.2 mg/kg SC, IM
In ferrets and omnivorous marsupials, intubation is simi-
Dexammethasone
0.5-2 mg/kg IV (use with caution)
lar to small cats. Access to the epiglottis is difficult owing
Diazepan
3 mg/kg IV, IM 
to the nature of rodent anatomy, whereby the soft palate
is locked around the epiglottis making its access via the
Doxapram
2-5 mg/kg SC,IV, PO q 15 min
mouth very difficult.
spinid 
100 mL/kg per day maintenance
If the rodent is still breathing, placement in a small con-
 Furosemide
2-10 mng/kg PO, SC, IM 
tainer and piping in oxygen may be all that is necessary.
 If the small mammal is not breathing, then any of the
Glycopyrrolate
0.02 mg/kg SC, IM
following three techniques may be attempted.
Lidocaine
12 mg/kg IV; 2-4 mg/kg intratracheally
1. Massage the chest of the small mammal gently with
Midazolarn
1-2 mg/kg IV, IM, intranasally
two fingers on either side of the chest with the rodent
Small Mammal Emergency and Critical Care Medicine 127
Gerbils are prone to epilepsy which is hereditary. This
intraosseously. This is followed by a bolus of a colloid,
 may be controlled using midazolam/diazepam.
-Ul no) AIsmouaeu B/Tu s te ueseaH AIqeayand
traosseously) slowly over 5-10 minutes. Once blood
Diagnostic procedures
 pressure has risen above 50 mm Hg or more, then the
ECG (E)
patient may be warmed and further crystalloid fluids
 Most small mammals have such a fast heart rate and such 
administered. Blood pressure may be measured in larg-
a small cardiac mass that the ECG trace is difficult to
er rodents using the same techniques as in rabbits. In
57
determine. However, it is still often worth applying ECG
 small rodents, such as mice and rats, this may not be
leads should an arrhythmia be detected on auscultation
possible, so one cycle of crystalloid:colloid fluids should
or where cardiac disease is suspected. A trace speed of
be administered to see if a response to treatment occurs.
50 mm/s should be used preferably with a 2 cm to 1 mV
This may be repeated twice further, leaving an interval
deflection if possible.
of 15-20 minutes between attempts. Warming is essen-
tial as the adrenergic receptors do not tend to respond to
Radiography
fluid therapy and catecholamines if the body tempera-
This is of use where respiratory and cardiovascular dis-
ture is less than 98°F (Lichtenberger, 2007).
PART
eases are concerned. Lung volumes are small in rodents,
and clear lung fields are often difficult to visualise. How-
General fluid therapy provision
ever, lung tumours are common in rats and guinea pigs,
See the section in Chapter 6.
and varying degrees of lung consolidation may be seen
in cases of pneumonia, common in rats, mice and guinea
Other medications and
pigs. Cardiomyopathies and heart failure are common in
supportive nutrition
guinea pigs and hamsters.
Herbivorous rodents, such as guinea pigs and chinchillas,
Spinal fractures can be seen in any rodent, but are
often benefit from the use of prokinetics as rabbits. Dos-
more commonly seen in guinea pigs and chipmunks, and
ages are similar. Smallherbivores should avoid the same
collapsed spinal columns are common with nutritional
antibiotics that are harmful to rabbits. It is possible to
hyperparathyroidism in sugar gliders.
safely use fluoroquinolones and trimethoprim sulphon-
Urinary bladder stones (calcium oxalate usually) are
amides in small herbivores at doses similar to that used
common in guinea pigs and hamsters, and calculi may
in rabbits.
also be seen in the kidneys.
For nutritional support the same MER formula for
Gastrointestinal bloat may be seen in chinchillas and
rabbits may be used as for rodents. Ihe value of k will
 guinea pigs associated with severe enteritis or inappropri-
change according to the species and has been estimated
 ate antibiotic administration.
to be 300-450.
Ultrasound
General notes on fluid therapy
Polycystic ovarian disease is easily diagnosed using ultra-
and blood transfusions
sound in guinea pigs, gerbils and hamsters.
If small mammals are dehydrated or hypovolemic, shock
Cardiac disease may be diagnosed using the smaller
doses of fluids should be administered. It should be noted
10 MHz or even 7.5 MHz frequency in larger individu-
that fluids should be avoided post resuscitation in cases
als in the case of hamsters and guinea pigs where cardiac
of cardiovascular arrest where there is no hypovolemia
enlargement and valvular disease are common.
or dehydration prior to the arrest as these fluids may
decrease myocardial perfusion pressures and diminish
Fluid therapy (F)
overall nutrient delivery through the cerebral and coro-
Hypovolemic shock
nary vasculature (Cole et al., 2002).
As with rabbits, the rapid support of blood pressure
in hypovolemic shock is essential. A bolus of isotonic
Maintenance values
fluids is administered (warmed to body temperature)
Maintenance fluid rate for all small mammals is estimated
at 10-15 mL/kg intravenously/intraosseously. If severe
to be at 80-100 mL/kg per day, i.e. twice that estimated
hypovolemia is present, then a bolus of hypertonic sa-
for cats and dogs. The reason is their generally smaller
line may be administered at 3-4 mL/kg intravenously.
sizes and higher metabolisms. This leads to greater
128 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
glomerular fltration rates and insensible losses through
Fluid types suitable for use
the lungs, etc.
Crystalloids
The main rehydration fluid of choice is likely to be a lac.
Calculation of fluid deficits
tated Ringer's compound. However, species such as guinea
These may be calculated as for cats and dogs; however, it
pigs are prone to ketosis, and a glucose saline isotonic/
is worth noting that a lot of fluid intake normally is con-
hypotonic fluid may be of use. Hypertonic saline is use
sumed as food, i.e. in the form of fresh vegetation. This is
lwheresev
hypovolemia is pre
sent as it can rapidly
difficult to take into consideration, and therefore it is safer
increase blood pressure. However, it should always be fol-
to assume that the debilitated small mammal will not be
lowed by isotonic/hypotonic fluids as it does not replace the
eating significant enough amounts for this to matter in
overall fluid deficit, rather it relies on drawing fluid from
the calculation.
the intra and extracellular space into the bloodstream.
As with cats and dogs, assume that 1% dehydra-
MS
tion equates with needing to supply 10 mL/kg body
Colloids
weight fluid replacement in addition to the maintenance
 These may be used in small mammals as in cats and dogs.
requirements.
Assumptions then have to be made on the degree of
Additives
dehydration of the small mammal concerned, and this
Protein amino acid/B vitamin supplements
can be done clinically as follows:
(Fort Dodge) at the rate of 1 mL/kg body weight per day.
3-5 % dehydrated
Increased thirst, slight lethargy, tacky
They are particularly good in cases where the patient
mucous mermbranes
is malnourished or has been suffering from a protein-
7-1 0% dehydrated
Increased thirst leading to anorexia,
losing enteropathy, such as cases of heavy parasitism, to
dullness, tenting of the skin and
help replace some of the compounds needed for replen-
slow return to normal, dry mucou5
ishment. It is also a useful supplement for patients with
membranes, 'dull corneas'
hepatic diseases or severe exudative skin diseases such
10-15% dehydrated Dull-comatose, skin rermains tented
as heater burns.
after pinching, desiccating mucou5
membranes
Bicarbonate
Ihis should be considered where metabolic acidosis
Alternatively we can rely on the PCV and total protein
exists such as in rabbits with hepatic lipidosis and second-
levels to assess dehydration if a blood sample can be taken
ary ketosis and guinea pigs with pregnancy ketosis. Cal-
(see Chapter 5).
culations of replacements are same as for cats and dogs.
Day 1: Maintenance fluid levels + 50% of calculated
dehydration factor
Electrolytes
Day 2: Maintenance fluid levels + 50% of calculated
Sodium and potassium levels should be monitored and
dehydration factor
corrected for defcits where found. In practice, potassium
Day 3: Maintenance fluid levels
levels will often be depressed in cases of long-standing
If the dehydration levels are so severe that volumes
diarrhoea and elevated in cases of renal disease. The use
are still too large at any one time, it may be necessary to
of calcium gluconate when a patient has a high potas-
take 72 hours to replace the calculated deficit rather than
sium level can help minimise hyperkalemia-associated
48 hours.
arrhythmias.
In addition for those species which can vomit, such as
ferrets, the levels of vomitus expelled should be consid-
Blood transfusions
ered. As with cats and dogs, assuming 2-4 mL/kg body
Blood transfusions are sometimes performed if PCV
weight per vomit is an acceptable level.
levels start to drop below 20%. Ihey are best performed
In other species where diarrhoea only is the norm,
by direct, same species-to-species transfers (i.e. a rat to
such as small herbivores, it is much more difficult to
a rat, and a guinea pig to a guinea pig). A healthy donor
make estimations, although fluid losses may approach
may have the equivalent of 1% of body weight removed
100-150 mL/kg body weight per day.
as blood without any deleterious effects. This may be
        
increased to 4% if required, although careful monitoring
Heard, D. (2004) Anesthesia, analgesia and sedation of small
 of the donor after this is needed. The sample is best taken
mammals. Ferrets, Rabbits and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and
directly into a pre-heparinised syringe (or use citrate acid
Surgery (eds K.E. Quesenberry & J.W. Carpenter), 2nd edn,
PP. 356-369. WB Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
dextrose if available at a rate of 1 mL of anticoagulant to
Henrik, R.A. (1992) Basic life support and external cardiac
5-6 mL of blood) and immediately transferred in bolus
compression in dogs and cats. burnal of the American
fashion to the donor. Intravenous catheters are advised
Veterinary Medical Association, 200, 1925-1931.
 for the transfers as administration should be slow, giving
Huston, S.M. and Quesenberry, K.E. (2004) Cardiovascular and
1 mL over aperiod of 5-6 minutes if possible, hence seda-
lymphoproliferative diseases. Ferrets Rabbits and Rodents:
Clinical Medicine and Surgery (eds K.E. Quesenberry & J.W.
tion or good restraint is required. Very little information
Carpenter), 2nd edn, Pp. 211-220. WB Saunders, St Louis, MO.
is currently available about cross-matching blood groups
Kottwitz, J. and Kelleher, S. (2003) Emergency drugs: quick
of small mammals, although ferrets, it seems, do not have
reference chart for exotic animals. Exotic DVM, 5.5
appreciably detectable groups. Intraosseous donations
(November), 23-25.
Kozma, C., Macklin, W., Cummins, L.M. and Mauer, R. (1974)
 may be made if vascular access is not possible.
The anatomy, physiology and biochemistry of the rabbit. The
Oxyglobin@ may be used at 4-10 mL/kg replacement 
Biology of the Laboratory Rabbit (eds S.H. Weisbroth, R.E. Flatt
PART
for severe deficits and 1-2 mL/kg replacement for minor
& A.L. Kraus),Pp. 50-69. Academic Pres, London.
losses.
Lichtenberger, M. (2007) Shock and CPCR in small mammals
and birds. Veterinary Clinics of North America: Exotic Animat
References
Practice, 10(2), 275-291.
Briscoe, J.A. and Syring, R. (2004) Techniques for emergency
Lichtenberger, M. and Ko, J. (2007) Critical care monitoring.
Veterinary Clinics of North America: Exotic Animat Practice,
airway and vascular access in special species. Serminars in
Avian and Exotic Pet Medicine, 13(3), 118-131.
10(2),317-344.
Lichtenberger, M. and Lennox, A. (2010) Updates and advanced
Carpenter, J.W. and Kolmstetter, C.M. (2000) Feeding small exotic
animals. Hil's Nutrition II(eds L.D. Lewis, M.L. Morris & M.S.
therapies for gastrointestinal stasis in rabbits. Veterinary
Clinics of North America: Exotic Animal Practice, 13(3),
Hand), Pp. 943-960. Mark Mervis Institute, Marceline, MO.
Cole, S.G., Otto, C.M. and Hughes, D. (2002) Cardiopulmonary
525-541.
Marino, PR. {1997) Cardiac arrest. The ICU Book (ed. PL.
cerebral resuscitation in small animals: a clinical practice
Marino), Pp. 260-298. Lippincott Williams & Williams,
review. Journal of Veterinary Emergency Critical Care, 12,
Philadelphia, PA.
261-267.
Costello, M.F. (2004) Principals of cardiopulmonary cerebral
Okerman, L. (1994) Inherited conditions and congenital
deformities.
Diseases of Domestic
Rabbits, 2nd edn,
resuscitation in special species. Seminars in Avian and Exotic
Pp. 109-112. Blackwell Publishing, Oxford.
Pet Medicine, 13(3), 132-141.
DeFrancesco, T.C. (2000) Cardiac emergencies. Kirk and Bistners
Rush, J.E. and Wingfeld, W.E. (1992) Recognition and frequency
of dysrhythmias during cardiopulmonary arrest. Journal of the
Handbook ofVeterinary Procedures and Emergency Treatment
(eds S.1. Bistner, R.B. Ford & M.R. Raffe), Pp. 54-61. WB
American Veterinary Medicat Association, 200, 1932-1937.
Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
Girling, S.J. (2003) Preliminary study into the posible use of
Further reading
benazepril in the management of renal disease in rabbits.
Kelleher, S. (2006) Rabbit cardiology cases. Proceedings of the
Proceedings of the British
Veterinary Zoological Society,
British Veterinary Zoological Society, Bristol, November,
Edinburgh, Scotland, p. 44.
Pp. 17-18.
Part Ii
Avian Species
Chapter 9
Basic Avian Anatomy and Physiology
Classification
passes through the calvarium via a single hole rather
 Birds are classifed into many different family groups ac-
than through multiple smaller ones associated with
-noaa pue esnuoieue “esisaud jo iaqunu e on Bupios
the cribriform plate of mammals. Ihe other 11 cranial
tionary factors. It is useful to know to which group a bird
nerves have similar functions as seen in mammals, and
 belongs as this gives an indication of the other birds it is
the reader is referred to more in-depth anatomy texts
related to. This is of some help when faced with a species
for more information (King & McLelland, 1975; Ben-
which you have not seen before.
nett, 1994).
Table 9.1 contains some of the more commonly en-
 Each of the wings has a nervous supply from a brachial
countered family groups of birds seen in general and
plexus derived from the spinal nerves in the caudal cervi-
avian-orientated practices.
cal area. There are three nerve plexuses in the lumbosa-
The Psittaciformes are among the most colourful of
cral region: lumbar, ischiatic and pudendal. The lumbar
birds kept as pets.
plexus derives from the last two lumbar and the first one
123
to two sacral spinal nerve roots. Like the other lumbosa-
Nervous system
cral plexuses, it lies in a hollow of the pelvis, dorsal to the
The avian brain is extremely smooth, lacking the
cranial kidney area. It supplies the body wall and upper
4
 many gyri (the ridges in the brain) seen in mammals
leg muscles and gives rise to the obturator, femoral, cra-
(Figure 9.1). Sight appears to be the dominant sense in
nial gluteal and saphenous nerves. Unlike dogs and cats,
二
most birds. Two large optic lobes lie between the ce-
birds have an ischiatic plexus which is derived from four
RT
rebral hemispheres and the cerebellum, and it is here
to seven spinal nerves in the sacral area and which is situ-
PA
where the optic nerves communicate and disseminate
ated in a hollow of the pelvis dorsal to the mid-kidney
information. There is no corpus callosum, the cerebral
structure. It gives rise to the principal nervous supply for
cortex is generally very thin but the corpus striatum is
the hindlimbs - the ischiatic nerve which is the largest
well developed and is thought to be the site of mental
peripheral nerve in the body and the caudal gluteal nerve.
association in birds. An important feature of the bird's
Finally, a pudendal plexus forms in a hollow of the pelvis
brain is the pineal body which sits in the diencephalon,
dorsal to the caudal kidney area from five coccygeal spi-
cranial to the cerebellum in midline dorsally. The pi-
 nal nerves and innervates the tail and cloacal area.
neal body has secretory cells similar to photoreceptors
Musculoskeletal system
and so will respond to light. Ihey are linked also via the
cranial cervical ganglia to the optic nerve. The pineal
Most birds have the power of flight. Ihe dense, cumber-
body is responsible for regulating many seasonal effects
some bones of the earthbound mammal would require
such as reproduction and migration as well as circadian
rhythms. It has a direct effect via hormone secretion
adapted their skeletal structure, simplifying the number
onto the hypothalamus.
of bones by fusing some together, and generally light-
ening the whole structure by creating air spaces within
in its mammalian counter
many of the bones.
nerves (CN), the same nl
anddogs.In
To further lighten the skeleton, several of the larger
birds, the optic nerve (CN II) is the largest cranial nerve,
bones, and even some of the vertebrae in the spine, are
being almost half the diameter of the spinal column. It
connected directly or indirectly to the airways, and are
Basic Avian Anatomy and Physiology 133
Table 9.1Avian farmily groups cormmnonly encountered in veterinary practice.
Order
Common species
 Psittaciformes 
This is the order of birds which includes those we know as 'parrots'. This includes the budgerigar, the amazons, the
Passeriforrmes
This is the largest order of birds and includes the canary, the finch farmily, birds of paradise, the mynah birds.
orn ammental starlings, sparrows and others.
Anseriformnes
This order includes
•The farmily Anatidae, subfarnily Anatinae, for example the mallard duck, shoveller, eider ducks and shelducks
·The family Anatidae, subfarmily Anserinae, Tribe Anserini (swan and true geese), for exarmple the mute,
Whooper's and Bewick's swans, barnacle and greylag geese
 Piciformes
This order includes the family Rhamphastidae such as toucan, toucanette and hornbills
 Strigiforrnes
This covers the owl families
Falconiforrmes
This order covers
· The Falconidae family for example the peregrine falcon, the saker, the llanner, the gyrfalcon
· The Accipitridae family such as the buzzards (common, rough-legged and honey), the sparrowhawk, goshawk,
 golden eagle
similar to that which forms the exoskeleton of insects.
 Ihis keratin layer is known as the rhamphotheca. It is
further classified so that the maxillary layer is referred to
as the rhinotheca, and the mandibular layer as the gnato-
theca. The rhinotheca and gnatotheca grow from a plate
53
at the base of the respective sides of the beak, the rate of
replacement depending upon the type of food eaten and
the abrasion the beak receives.
 In Psittaciformes (Table 9.1), the upper beak is power-
fully developed and ends in a sharp point overhanging
the broader, stouterlower beak. The tremendous power in
a parrot's beak is due to a synovial joint or hinge mecha-
nism, known as the kinetic joint, which joins the beak to
Figure 9.1 Dorsal aspect of avian cerebral hemispheres showing
lack of gyri.
the skull. Ihe parrot's lower beak has a series of pressure
sensors at its tip, which allow it to test the consistency and
said to be pneumonised. Ihis replaces the thick medul-
structure of objects grasped.
lary cavity or bone marrow present in the centre of mam-
In raptors, the upper beak is extremely sharp and
malian bones, and produces a light, trabecular structure.
 pointed, but lacks the kinetic joint attachment so it can-
Whilst light, the structure is nevertheless extremely
not produce such powerful downward force. Instead, it is
strong.
used as a ripping instrument.
Figure 9.2 shows a generalised avian skeleton.
In Anseriformes (the duck family), the beak is flattened
and may have fine serrations at the edges which allow the
Skull
bird to filter fine particles from the water. Ducks such as
Beak
mallards and shovellers have this type of beak. These ser-
The beak, or bill, is the principal feature of the avian skull.
 rations may be further developed to a jagged edge (e.g.
H has been modifed into a bewildering number of shapes
 in the aptly named sawbill family) which allows the bird
and sizes, depending mainly on the diet to which the bird
to grip slippery food, such as fish. Anseriformes also
has become adapted. In all cases it is composed of an up-
have nerve endings in a plate at the tips of their beaks
ae m yeaq (enquu) iamo pue (aexeu) iad
(known as the 'nail') which allow them to find food hid-
covered in a layer of keratin, a tough protein compound
den in mud.
134 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Minor digit
Single
Major and minor
First and
occipital
metacarpals 
condyle
Radius
Alula
Scleral ossicles
and ulna
carpal
Primary flight feathers attach here
Upper
bones
and
Cervical vertebrae
Radius
lower
Humerus
Ulna-secondaryflightfeathersattach here
Notarium
Scapula
Synsacrum
Antitrochanter
Clavicles
Pygostyle
Coracoid
Stifle
Unfused pubic bones
Keel
Tibiotarsus
Thoracicrib
Fibula
- Intertarsal joint
Patella
Tarsometatarsus
Sternal rib
Digits1+4
Digits2+3
Figure 9.2 Avian skeleton.
In all birds there is a series of smaller bones behind
become partially blocked and act as one-way valves, al-
the lower and upper beaks which allow them to move the
lowing air into the sacs but not out. Ihe sacs may then
123
 beak independently of the skull. Ihese include the pala-
overinflate, and sof swellings are then commonly seen
tine, quadrate and pterygoid bones and the jugal arches.
over the back or nape of the bird's head.
Their exact movements are beyond this text to describe,
The sinuses and external nares communicate with the
 but many of the references at the end of this chapter give
oropharynx via the choanal slit. Ihis is a narrow opening
good accounts of their function.
in the midline of the hard palate and is sited immediately
二
over the glottis when the beak is closed, allowing the bird
LH
Nostrils
to breathe through its nostrils. It is often the area cho-
PA
The nostrils, or nares, lie at the base of the upper beak
sen for taking samples when trying to isolate infectious
in most birds and are often surrounded by an area of
agents for upper air way disease in birds.
featherless skin known as the cere. Ihis may be highly
The skull of the avian patient connects to the atlas (or
coloured in some species, such as the budgerigar, where
first spinal vertebra) via only one occipital condyle at the
they may be used to identify the sex of the bird. In many
base of the skull, unlike the mammalian two. There are
Anseriformes the nares lie more towards the tip of the
also a large number of highly mobile cervical vertebrae.
 beak The nares themselves are merely openings into the
These two factors make the avian head extremely agile.
sinus chambers, which in turn connect with a branching
However, the atlanto-occipital joint is also a weak point,
network of bony chambers throughout the bird's head.
making dislocation at that site very easy.
These sinuses vary according to the species, but the ma-
jority of avian patients have an infraorbital sinus. Ihis sits
Vertebral column
below the eyes, and is often involved in sinus and ocular
Cervical vertebrae
infections. It differs from sinuses seen in most mammals
The cervical vertebrae (Figure 9.2) are independently mo-
in that the lateral wall has no bone, being covered by soft
 bile in the avian patient, as they are in the mammalian
tissue only. This means any infraorbital sinus infection of-
patient, and vary in number depending on the species
ten results in swelling on the face of the bird ventral to the
between 11 and 25. Ihey are generally box-like in form.
eye. These sinuses also communicate with head and neck
 air sacs. The function of these air sacs is not clear, but they
Thoracic, lumbar and sacral vertebrae
may help with voice resonance. When a bird suffers from
The thoracic vertebrae (Figure 9.2) are fused in raptors,
sinus infections, the narrow inlets to these sinuses may
pigeons and many other species to form a single bone
Basic Avian Anatomy and Physiology 135
known as the notarium. In other species they have some
known as the coracoid (Figure 9.2). Ihis latter bone forms
limited mobility. Ihere are then two intervertebral joints
 a strut propping the shoulder joint against the sternum.
between the notarium and the fused lumbar and sacral
 The supracoracoid muscle attaches to the keel, then
vertebrae. These fused vertebrae are known as the synsa-
 passes through the foramen, or opening, formed at the
crum. Ihe synsacrum fuses with the pelvis itself to form
meeting point of these bones, and so reaches the dorsal
a dorsal shield of bone over the caudal aspect of the bird.
aspect of the humerus where it attaches. Contraction of
this muscle, along with some elastic tissues which are
Coccygeal vertebrae
also present, helps to raise the wing. Ihe pectoral muscles
The majority ofthe caudal coccygeal vertebrae (Figure 9.2)
attach from the keel onto the humerus to pull the wing
are usually fused into a single structure known as the
downwards. Ihe fused clavicles, or wishbone (often re-
Pygostyle - which forms the ‘parsons nose' part of the
ferred to as the furcula), articulate with the coracoid bone
chicken!
and provides a degree of spring to the flapping of the
wings. The humerus is pneumonised, which means that it
Pelvis
The roof of the pelvis is formed by the synsacrum
cannot be used for intraosseous fluid therapy. Ihis is also
an important point to consider when repairing fractures.
(Figure 9.2). Ihe two 'sides' of the pelvis are reduced
The humerus articulates with the radius and ulna at the
in size compared with mammals but consist of the iliac
elbow joint. The radius is the smaller of these two bones
and ischial bones, with the acetabulum being created
and lies cranially. Ihe ulna provides the source of attach-
where they meet. Ihe acetabulum in birds is not a com-
plete bony socket as it is in mammals, but a fibrous sheet.
ment for the secondary flight feathers, which insert di-
rectly into the periosteum of this bone (Figure 9.3). Ihe
There is a ridge on the lateral pelvis known as the antitro-
ulna is often used for intraosseous fluid administration
chanter, which articulates with the greater trochanter of
in birds.
the femur. The function of this ridge is to prevent the limb
The radius and ulna articulate with one radial carpal
53
from being abducted when perching. Ihe pubic bones of
153
the pelvis do not fuse in the ventral midline as in mam-
bone and one ulnar carpal bone, respectively. Ihese in
mals. Instead they form fine long bones which extend
turn articulate with three metacarpal bones. Ihe frst
caudally towards the vent. Ihey provide support for the
metacarpal bone is the equivalent of the avian 'thumb'
skin covering the caudal abdomen and enough space for
H is known as the alula, or "bastard wing' and forms a
feathery projection from the cranial aspect of the carpo-
the passage of eggs in the female bird.
metacarpal joint. Ihe remaining two metacarpal bones
Ribcage
are known as the major and minor metacarpal bones,
Psittaciformes have eight pairs of ribs (Figure 9.2). Each
and articulate with the first phalanx cranially and the mi-
rib has a dorsal segment known as the thoracic rib, and
nor digit caudally. Ihe frst phalanx then articulates with
a ventral segment, or sternal rib. Ihese ribs point back-
the second phalanx, forming the wing tip. Ihe primary
wards and rigidly connect the thoracic vertebrae dorsally
and the keel, or sternum, ventrally.
Sternum
The sternal vertebrae are fused in birds to form the keel. The
keel has a midline ridge which divides the pectoral muscles
into right and left sides. Ihe ridge may be a deep structure,
as is seen in pigeons, raptors and Psittaciformes, allowing
large pectoral muscles to attach for strong flight. Alterna-
tively, the keel may be flattened, as with Anseriformes, to
provide a boat-like structure more suited to floating.
Wings
The shoulder joint is formed by the meeting of three
bones: the humerus, the scapula (which is more tubu-
Figure 9.3 Ventral aspect of a kestrels (Fa/co tinnuncufus) wing
withi covert feathers removed showing the attachment of the
lar than the flattened mammalian one) and a third bone
primaries to the manus and the secondaries to the ulna.
136 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
feathers attach to the periosteum of the phalanges and
third and fourth digits point forwards and the first points
minor metacarpal bones (Figure 9.3).
backwards creating an anisodactyl limb. Some species,
The area of the wing is enlarged by thin sheets of elas-
such as the osprey (Pandion haliaetus), may move the
tic tissue which span from one joint surface to another.
fourth digit to face forwards or backwards to aid captur-
The largest extends from the shoulder to the carpal joint
ing its prey, creating a semi-zygodactyl limb.
cranially and is known as the propatagium or wing web'
(Figure 9.4). Ihis can be used in some species, such as
Special senses
 pigeons, for vaccine administration.
Eye
 The avian eye is unique in that it contains a series of small
Pelviclimb
bones. These are known as the scleral ossicles (Figure 9.2).
The acetabulum of the pelvis holds the femoral head
They form a ring-shaped structure which supports the
(Figure 9.2). Ihe limb may be locked, and prevented from
 front of the eye. Ihe avian eye also differs from the mam-
being abducted, by the greater trochanter of the femur en-
 malian eye in that it is not a globe, but pear-shaped, with
gaging with the antitrochanteric ridge on the pelvis. The
the narrower end outermost.
femur is pneumonised in many birds. At the stifle joint,
The avian eye is large in proportionto the overall size of
the fermur articulates with the patella and the tibiotarsal
the skull, with only a paper-thin bony septum separating
bone. Ihe tibiotarsal bone is so called because it is formed
the right and left orbits. Birds have a mobile, translucent
from the fusion of the tibia and the proximal row of tarsal
third eyelid, and upper and lower eyelids, the lower of
bones, and may also be used for intraosseous fluid ad-
which is more mobile than the upper. Two tear-produc-
ministration. On the lateral aspect of the proximal tibio-
ing glands commonly exist: the third eyelid, or Harderian
tarsus is the much reduced fbula.
gland, which is located at the base of the third eyelid, and
Distally, the tibiotarsal bone articulates with the tar-
the lacrimal gland situated caudolaterally, as in mammals.
53
sometatarsal bone. This bone is formed by the fusion of
The colour of the iris may change with age in some
123
the distal row of tarsal bones with the solitary metatarsal
parrots, for example the African grey parrot has a dark
bone. The joint between the tibiotarsus and the tarso-
grey iris until 4-5 months of age, when it turns yellow-
AVIAN
 metatarsus is known as the intertarsal, or suffrago, joint.
grey, and then silver as it continues to age. In others the
The tarsormetatarsus then articulates with the phalanges.
iris may be used as an indicator of the sex of the bird:
:1
In Psittaciformes, two digits point forwards (the sec-
in large cockatoos, for example, the female has a bright,
RT
ond and third) and two backwards (the first and fourth),
red-brown iris, whereas the male's is a dark, brown-black.
PA
The avian retina is thick and possesses no visible surface
langes, the second digit has three phalanges, the third
blood vessels, unlike that of mammals. To provide nutri-
has four phalanges and the fourth has five phalanges. In
tion to the retina, birds possess a pleated and folded vascu-
 perching birds (Passeriformes) and raptors, the second,
lar structure called the pecten oculi, which is found at the
point where the optic nerve enters the eye. It contracts in-
termittently, expelling nutrients into the vitreous humour.
Finally, the avian iris has skeletal-muscle fibres within
it, unlike mammals which possess only smooth-muscle
fibres. This means the avian patient can constrict and di-
late its pupil at will, so reducing the value of the pupil-
lary light reflex as a tool in determining ocular function.
Because the two optic nerves are completely separated
from each other, the consensual light reflex is also a poor
indicator of cerebral function.
Ear
There is no pinna in birds, although some species, such as
the long- and short-eared owls, have feathers in this area.
Figure 9.4 Dorsal aspect of a kestrel's (Fa/co tinnuncu/us) wing
There is a short, horizontal external canal, covered by
with covert feathers removed showing the elastic sheet of the
propatagium bridging the elbow joint.
feathers, which is located caudolateral to the ocular orbit.
Basic Avian Anatomy and Physiology 137
The tympanic membrane may be clearly seen. Ihe middle
This is where the bird produces most of its voice. It is
ear connects to the oropharynx via the Eustachian canal.
composed of a series of muscles and two membranes
The mammalian aural ossicles are replaced in the bird by
which can be vibrated, independently of inspiration or
alateral, extra columella cartilage and a medial columella
expiration.
bone which transmit sound waves to the inner ear.
The inner ear contains the cochlea and the semicircular
Lower respiratory system
canals, which fulfl the same functions as in mammals.
Lungs
The lungs of avian species are rigid in structure and do
Respiratory anatomy
not inflate or deflate significantly. Ihey are flattened in
Upper respiratory system
shape and firmly attached to the ventral aspect of the tho-
The nares open into the nasal passages, which in turn
racic vertebrae and vertebral ribs. There is no diaphragm
communicate with the glottis of the larynx via a midline
 in birds, and the common body cavity is referred to as
aperture in the hard palate which forms the roof of the 
the coelom.
 caudal mouth. This aperture is called the choanal slit. he
The paired bronchi are supported by C-shaped rings
sinus system and cervicocephalic air sacs have been pre-
 of cartilage, unlike the trachea. The primary bronchi sup-
viously mentioned.
ply each of the two lungs, and rapidly divide into second-
ary and tertiary bronchi, or parabronchi. There are four
Larynx
main groups of secondary bronchi supplying the lung but
 Birds have a reduced laryngeal structure, lacking an epi-
their role in gas exchange is minimal. The tertiary bron-
glottis, the thyroid cartilage, and the vocal folds seen in
cats and dogs. The main structure is the glottis, which
are flled with membranes capable of gaseous exchange.
protects the entrance to the trachea. External muscles pull
These areas appear as small pits, or atria, to which are
the glottis and trachea forwards so that it communicates
connected even finer tubes known as air capillaries. These
153
directly with the choanal slit, allowing the bird to breathe
intertwine with each other to form a three-dimensional
through its nostrils. The glottis is held closed when at rest,
mesh interwoven with the blood capillary beds. Ihese
only opening on inspiration and expiration.
air capillaries vary in size but average around 3-5 mm in
an sanond aa ts raaa s rana
Trachea
high forces of attraction between their walls when fluid
The trachea of avian species differs from the mammalian 
secretions are present, resulting in rapid blocking of the
trachea in that its cartilage rings are complete, signet- 1
respiratory surfaces. To stop this from occurring, there
PA
ring-shaped circles, interlocking one on top of the other, 
 are cells within the parabronchi which secrete surfactant,
rather than the C-shaped rings of the mammalian tra-
to ensure the airways stay open.
chea. In Psittaciformes and diurnal raptors, the shape of
The lung structure may be further classifed by the di-
these cartilage rings is slightly flattened in a dorsoventral
rection of airflow within it into the neopulmonic lung and
direction, whereas in most Passeriformes they are round.
the paleopulmonic lung. These will be mentioned later on
 In some species, such as the Whooper's swan and the
when discussing respiratory physiology.
guinea fowl, the trachea forms a series of loops and coils
at the thoracic inlet. Other species, such as the emu, have
Air sacs
a midline ventral split in the trachea three quarters of the
 The final part of the avian lower respiratory system is
distance between the head and the thoracic inlet. Ihe 
composed of the air sacs (see Figure 9.5). These are
balloon-like sacs which act as bellows, pumping the air
a tracheal sac. This improves vocal resonance. In male
aaotu ol asuodsan ul shuml ueiae piatu at jo ino pue ou
ducks, such as mallards, there is a swelling in the last por-
 ments of the body wall and sternum. Ihe air-sac walls are
tion of the trachea, often just inside the thorax, known as
 very thin and composed of simple squamous epithelium
the tracheal bulla.
which covers a layer of poorly vascularised elastic con-
nective tissue.
Syrinx
 In the majority of birds there are nine air sacs. One of
Before the trachea divides into the two main bronchi,
these is the separate air sac already mentioned, the cer-
there is a structure known as the syrinx (Figure 9.6).
vicocephalic air sac, which does not communicate with
138 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Figure 9.5 Avian air-sac system in a duck:
(a) nasal passages; (b) infra-orbital sinus;
(c) cervicocephalic air sacs (single); (d)
clavicular air sacs: (e) cranial thoracic air
sacs; (f) caudal thoracic air sacs; and (g)
abdominal air sacs. H, heart; L, liver; Lu,
lungs; B, syringeal bulla (male ducks).
the lungs at all. The other eight all communicate with the
5. Ihe paired abdominal air sacs lie caudal to the caudal
lungs via a secondary bronchus (except the abdominal
thoracic air sacs. They touch the caudal aspect of each
 air sacs which connect to the primary bronchus on each
lung feld before spreading caudally into and around
side). Figure 9.5 shows the air sac system of a duck.
the gut. Ihese communicate with the air spaces in the
 In addition to the separate cervicocephalic air sac, the
 medullary cavities of the notarium, synsacrum, pelvis
other standard eight air sacs are
and femurs.
1. A single cervical air sac which lies between the lungs
and the dorsal oesophagus and communicates with air
Respiratory physiology
spaces within the cervical vertebrae.
Respiratory cycle
123
2. A single clavicular air sac which has two diverticuli,
The downward movement of the sternum and the cra-
one of which involves the heart and, cranial to this,
nial and lateral movement of the ribs create negative
the thorax. Ihe other extends around the bones and
pressure in the coelom and so inflate the air sacs and
AN
AVI.
muscles of the pectoral girdle and crop. Ihis air sac
draw air through the lungs. There are two portions to
communicates with the air spaces within the medul-
the avian lung, known as the neopulmonic and paleo-
:11
lary cavity of the humeri, scapulae and sternum.
pulmonic sections. The neopulmonic part of the lung
RT
3. Ihe paired cranial thoracic air sacs lie dorsolaterally
is caudolateral and is absent in certain species, such
in the chest, ventral to the lung field and immediately
as penguins. It differs from the paleopulmonic lung
caudal to the heart.
in that air passes through the paleopulmonic section
4. Ihe paired caudal thoracic air sacs lie immediately
of the lung in one direction only, whereas the neopul-
caudal to the cranial air sacs. These are again posi-
monic lung receives air on inspiration and expiration.
tioned dorsolaterally within the chest and tend to be
The avian cycle of inspiration and expiration is given
slightly smaller than the cranial ones.
in Box 9.1.
Box 9.1 Avian respiratory cycle
Inspiration
Aeat pue epuoas au oui anow youoq Aewyd aut pue eauoenn aut jo aoeds peap aut ui jie aun pue jie ysa
Aeat ouowndoau an yhnou slaen je st yo awos uope u uihaq ueo auxa s aau douog
 bronchi into the caudal thoracic and abdominal air sacs where it takes no part in respiration.
 Expira tion
 The caudal thoracic and abdominal air sacs contract and expel their air back through the neopulmonic part of the
lung and into part of the paleopulmonic lung whiere gas exchange occurs.
Second inspiration
 The air expelled during expiration through the neopulmonic and paleopulmonic lung continues to move cranially
into the cervical, clavicular and cranial thoracic air sacs.
Second expiration
The air in the clavicular, cervical and cranial thoracic air sacs is expelled through secondary bronchi to the primary
bronchi and so out of the body.
Basic Avian Anatomy and Physiology 139
It can be seen that the avian respiratory system is ex-
the canary, finch and songbird families), or it may be
tremely efficient at extracting oxygen from the air. For
highly muscular and mobile as in the Psittaciformes
one thing, the whole cycle occurs over two inspirations
family. Alternatively, it may be extensible and special-
and expirations, allowing oxygen to be extracted on
ised as is found in the hummingbirds and, to a lesser
both inspiration and expiration. In addition, the air flow
extent, in the nectar-ating parrots, the lories and lori-
through the parabronchial tubes is at right angles to the
keets which have a fringed tongue for pollen and nec-
accompanying blood flow. This creates a cross-current
tar fee ding.
system, wherein oxygen in the airway is always at a
higher concentration than its accompanying blood vessel,
Oesophagus and crop
The oesophagus is a muscular tube connecting the oral
bloodstream.
cavity to the first stomach (Figure 9.6). As in the lower
digestive system, a series of peristaltic waves pass along
Physiological control of respiration
the oesophagus when food is present, pushing the bo-
 This is in many ways similar to mammalian respiratory
 lus of food towards the stomach. The oesophagus runs
control. Carotid body chemoreceptors in the carotid ar-
to the right of the trachea in the neck and is lined with
teries monitor the partial pressure of oxygen in the blood,
 many salivary glands. Some fish-eating species of birds
whilst carbon dioxide sensitive receptors in the paleo-
have a series of hooks and papillae, directed caudally
pulmonic parabronchi of the airways stimulate respira-
to force slippery food items to travel in one direction
tion once the airway partial pressure of carbon dioxide
only.
reaches a critical threshold. Some anaesthetic gases, such
Along its route, usually at the thoracic inlet, some
as halothane, can depress the function of these carbon di-
 species have a diverticulum of the oesophagus, known
 oxide receptors, creating apnoea in the patient.
 as the crop. Ihis is an expansible sac acting as a storage
chamber for food. It has no digestive-enzyme secreting
53
Digestive system
properties, although in some species, such as pigeons,
Oral cavity
a form of lipid 'milk' is produced from the lining of the
The functions of this part of the digestive system are pre-
crop, which acts as a source of nutrition for the young.
hension, mastication and manipulation of food into the
This crop 'milk' is really composed of exfoliated lining
Desophagus, just as other mammals use their teeth, lips
cells filled with lipid.
and tongue. Ihe avian oral cavity differs from the mam-
Some species, such as a few grain-eating finches, pen-
malian in that it possesses relatively few taste buds and
guins, gulls, toucans, ducks and geese, do not have a
produces little saliva during the mastication process.
specific crop, but instead have a much more distensible
oesophagus, which can be used in the same way. The
Tongue
crop ermpties into the thoracic portion of the oesophagus,
The avian tongue may be relatively immobile and
which passes dorsally over the heart before entering the
strap-like, as in Passeriformes (perching birds such as
 proventriculus or true stomach.
Proventriculus
Trachea
Uterus
Syrinx
Ovary
Bursa of
Kidneys
Fabricius
Lurg
Ureters
Ventriculus
Spleerr
Oesophagus
Rectum
Cloaca
Crop
Vent
Small intestines
Descending and
ascending duodenum
Figure 9.6 Generalised view of the
Keel
Pancreas
 internal organs of a female bird.
140 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Avian 'stomachs'
from its neighbour by a sheet of tendinous tissue. Ihe
Birds have two stomachs (Figure 9.6). The first of these
gizzard lies on the left side of the avian coelomic cavity,
is the ‘true' stomach, known as the proventriculus. Ihis
caudally, and empties into the duodenum. Food outflow
organ is responsible for the secretion of the digestive en-
from the gizzard is regulated by a fold-like sphincter.
zyme pepsin and hydrochloric acid. Unlike marmmals, the
Grit particles may be consumed by the bird and lodge
secretion of these two substances occurs from the same
in the gizzard and act as an abrasive source for food
compound gland, rather than two separate ones. Other
grinding. Ihis is important for seed eating, or granivo-
glands are present which secrete a protective mucus. Ihe
rous, birds which do not remove the outer husks with
sac-like proventriculus empties into the more circular
their beaks, for example pigeons and gamebirds.
ventriculus, also known as the gizzard or grinding stom-
ach. Ihere is often movement of food backwards and
Small intestine
 forwards between proventriculus and gizzard to mix and
The first part of the small intestine is the duodenum. It
digest food thoroughly before passing it on to the rest of
forms a descending and then an ascending limb which
the gut.
are adherent to each other, but separated by the pan-
In seed-eating species, the gizzard is larger than the
creas (Figure 9.6). The duodenum has separate open-
 proventriculus and very muscular. In nectar-eating spe-
ings into it from the liver biliary system and the pan-
cies, such as the lories and lorikeet family of parrots, and
creatic ducts.
 other species, such as hummingbirds and raptors, the giz-
The proximal duodenum contains many mucus-
zard is much smaller. Ihe mucosa of the gizzard is lined
 secreting goblet cells which serve to protect its lining
with deep tubular glands. Ihese glands secrete a protein
from the acidic food mixture leaving the gizzard. As
substance which, in conjunction with cells shed from the
in the mammalian duodenum, the avian duodenum is
inside of the gizzard, forms a tough sheet-like layer known
covered with a thick carpet of villi, which increases its
53
as the koilin or cuticle. Ihis layer becomes heavily stained
absorptive area. The small intestinal brush border cells
123
with bile refluxing into the gizzard from the duodenum
secrete some disaccharidase and monosaccharidase en-
d5
(see Figure 9.7). Its function appears protective and it is
zymes to further digest food. There is no evidence of the
AVIAN
periodically replaced. Some species of raptors wil regur-
enzyme lactase in birds, so the feeding of milk-sugar
gitate the koilin as a neat package when expeling waste
or lactose-containing foods is not recommended. Ihe
:1
fur and bones from prey which has been consumed.
jejunum and ileum are very small in avian patients, and
RT
The gizzard itselfis constructed of two pairs of muscles,
difficult to defi ne.
PA
 one pair of smaller muscles and one larger pair, forming
an asymmetric structure. Each muscle bundle is separated
Large intestine
The large intestine is frequently referred to as the 'rec-
tum’ in birds because of its small size. It is smaller in
diameter than the small intestine (Figure 9.6). Ihe rec-
tum is responsible for the absorption of water and some
electrolytes.
At the junction of the ileum and rectum are the caeca.
These may be absent in most Psittaciformes or reduced
in many Passeriformes to one or two lymphoid deposits.
In some other species such as the duck family or the do-
mestic fowl the caeca may be relatively large. Other eK-
anmples of species with large caeca are ratites, such as the
ostrich or emu, willow grouse and red grouse, which live
off twigs and shoots such as heather. Ihe caeca in these
species often act as fermenting chambers for the micro-
Figure 9.7 View of the opened gizzard (ventriculus) and associated
bial digestion of cellulose and hemicellulose present in
digestive tract from a psittacine bird. Note the bile staining of the
these tougher vegetable foods. The rectum empties di-
01 wnuaponp aut jo dool aut pue puezzib pauado aut jo buju! uloy
pue huipuase a uaaag seaued jo aqol e y puby addn au
rectly into the most cranial part of the cloaca known as
descending loop.
the coprodeum.
Basic Avian Anatomy and Physiology
141
Cloaca
the droppings. These pigments turn the urates mustard-
This is the communal chamber into which the digestive,
yellow or lime-green. Starved blood bile acid levels are
urinary and reproductive systems ermpty (Figure 9.6). The
therefore preferred as indicators of liver function.
most cranial segment is the coprodeum which receives
faeces from the rectum.
Pancreas
The coprodeum is separated by a mucosal fold from the
The pancreas lies mainly between the descending and
next chamber of the cloaca, known as the urodeum. Ihe 
ascending loops of the duodenum (Figure 9.6). It has
urodeum receives the urinary waste from the ureters, and
three lobes: dorsal, ventral and splenic. The gland is tu-
the reproductive tract opens into it as well. The mucosal
 buloacinar in structure, similar to that of mammals, and
fold may be everted or pushed out through the vent, en-
 is responsible for the secretion of the enzymes: amylase,
suring that the faeces do not contaminate the urodeum
lipase, trypsin, chymotrypsin, carboxypeptidases, ribo-
and therefore the reproductive system. This fold can also 
 mucleases, deoxyribonucleases and elastases. As in mam-
dlose off the coprodeum from the urodeum completely
 mals, it is also responsible for the production of bicarbon-
when the male ejaculates, or when the female is egg lay-
 ate ions which help neutralise the hydrochloric acid from
ing, so as to prevent faecal contamination of semen or
the stomachs. The pancreas also produces the endocrine
egg.
chemicals: insulin and glucagon.
The last chamber of the cloaca before the vent is the
 proctodeum. Ihe proctodeum is connected to the bursa
Urinary anatomy
of Fabricius which is the germinal centre for the B lym-
Kidney
phocyte line of the immune system (see the Lymphatic
The kidneys are paired structures found within the pelvis.
System section).
They are tightly adhered to the backbone in the lumbosa-
cral area (Figure 9.6). Each kidney is divided into cranial,
Gastrointestinal tract innervation
middle and caudal lobes (Figure 9.8).
ECI
The intestines and avian stomachs are supplied by
branches of the tenth cranial nerve, the vagus, which also
Nephron
d5
carries branches of the parasympathetic nervous system.
The nephron is the functional unit of the kidney, as it is
 The sympathetic nervous system also contributes to gut
 in mammals; however, there are two types in birds. One
innervation, mainly via the intestinal nerve, which is a
is the cortical form of nephron which lacks a loop of
large plexus of sympathetic nerves that is close to the cra-
Henle. It makes up 70-90% of the nephrons, depending
 nial and caudal mesenteric arteries and supplies the small
on the species, and is found only in the outer cortex of
PA
 and large intestines.
the kidney. It can only produce isotonic urine. The other
Liver
 The liver is bilobed and lies caudal to the heart, ventral to
the proventriculus and cranial to the gizzard (Figure 9.6).
Ihe liver produces bile salts and bile acids, which are
excreted into the duodenum via bile canaliculi and bile
ducts and aid in the emulsification of fats in the small in-
testine.
 Some species have a gall bladder, but many parrots and
pigeons do not possess one. In those species with a gall
bladder, it tends to receive bile only from the right lobe
of the liver, the left lobe draining directly into the duo-
denum.
The main bile pigment in birds is biliverdin. This
means that measurement of total bilirubin levels is of
no clinical use in birds for assessing liver disease. It does
mean that liver inflammation may often be indicated by
Figure 9.8 Ventral aspect of African grey parrot's (Psittacus
erithacus) kidneys (far right of picture) showing vascular supply and
the presence of biliverdin pigments in the urate portion of
three-lobed appearance.
142 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
is known as the medullary nephron, which accounts for
may be made more concentrated than the plasma. There-
the other 10-30%. This has a loop of Henle, which, like
fore, most of the urine produced by birds is isosnmotic,
its mammalian counterpart, dips into the inner medul-
that is it is of the same concentration as the extracellular
lary region of the kidney and can produce mildly hy-
fluid.
pertonic urine. Irrespective of the type of nephron, they
 The rennin-angiotensin system present in mammals
both start with a Bowman's capsule and a glomerulus.
is also present in birds and functions primarily to con-
Both types of nephrons empty into the collecting ducts,
trol sodium balance. It does this by causing the release
with the duct tubes becoming fewer and fewer and their
 of aldosterone from the adrenal glands or by altering the
diameter becoming larger and larger until they empty
resistance of the afferent and efferent glomerular arteri-
into the ureter.
oles. Ihis causes an alteration of the volume of the filtrate
 produced.
Ureters
 In mammals, when an animal becomes dehydrated,
Each kidney has a ureter which arises from its cranial
antidiuretic hormone (also known as arginine vasopres-
lobe. The ureter then passes caudally, on the ventral
sin) is released from the posterior pituitary. This causes
surface of the middle and caudal renal lobes, receiving
the opening of channels in the renal collecting ducts for
 branches from the amalgamation of the collecting ducts.
further absorption of water. In birds the chemical re-
Each ureter continues caudally and finally empties into
leased is arginine vasotocin (AVT). Ihis chemical works
the urodeum segment of the cloaca, on its dorsal surface.
on several areas of the bird's body as, unlike mammals,
 Birds do not have a urinary bladder or urethra.
birds do not rely solely on the kidneys for water conser-
vation. This is because of their poor ability to produce
Renal blood supply
concentrated, hypertonic urine. AVT therefore has more
Each kidney in the avian patient is supplied by three re-
of an effect on the blood flow through the glomeruli
nal arteries, the cranial, middle and caudal renal arteries,
rather than on the glomeruli themselves. By reducing
123
which supply the cranial, middle and caudal renal lobes,
this, it reduces the amount of fltrate produced and so
respectively.
conserves water.
AVIAN
In addition to this arrangement, the avian kidney also
To remove the salts which build up during dehydra-
receives blood from the renal portal system. Ihe renal
tion, many species of birds have salt glands which excrete
portal veins form a ring of vessels surrounding the kid-
concentrated sodium chloride from the body. Ihey are
RT
neys and connect with the vertebral sinus cranially and
present in their nostrils and are also influenced, positively
PA
the caudal mesenteric vein caudally. Within the common
this time, by AVT.
iliac vein, draining the hindlimb and anastomosing with
Finally, some fluid is reabsorbed in the avian rec-
the renal portal veins, is a valve. This renal portal valve
tum as urine enters the urodeum of the cloaca and may
can divert blood in a number of directions. For instance
then be refluxed back through the coprodeum and into
+ It can allow blood through from the leg and so on into
the rectum.
the caudal vena cava, bypassing the kidneys altogether.
·It could shut and so divert blood from the hindlimb
Cardiovascular system
into the kidney tissues. (Ihis is of importance theo-
Heart
retically when administering potentilly nephrotoxic
The avian heart has four chambers and is larger in pro-
drugs or drugs which are excreted by the kidneys, into
 portion to the rest of its body than its mammalian coun-
the hindlimbs of birds.)
01 pareduos se 1uaiam Apoq %s'l-I Buge1ane “jediat
· Ihe blood could equally be shunted towards the liver
0.5% body weight on average in mammals (Figure 9.9).
via the caudal mesenteric vein or into the internal ver-
The sinus venosus, which forms part of the wall of the
tebral venous sinus within the spinal canal. The blood
flow is therefore complex and may alter almost at will.
ber in the bird, into which the caudal vena cava and the
right cranial vena cava enpty The left vena cava empties
Renal physiology
nearby but is separated from the other two vessels by a
The anatomy of the cortical nephrons is signifcant be-
septum. There are also sinoatrial valves separating the
cause they do not have a loop of Henle, and so there is
caudal vena cava entrance and the right cranial vena cava
no counter-current multiplier system by which the urine
from the rest of the right atrium
Basic Avian Anatomy and Physiology 143
Left cranial vena cava
Right cranial vena cava
Caudal vena cava
Common
Sinusvenosus
pulmonary
vein
Right atrium
Left atrium
Outflow ofpulmonary artery
Outflow of aorta
Right ventricle
Left ventricle
Vertebralartery
Common carotid artery
Internal
Radial artery
carotid
Subclavian artery
artery
Ulnar artery
Brachiocephalic trunk
Part Il: Avian species
Brachial
artery
 Descending aorta
Cranial mesenteric
artery
Coeliacartery
Testicular or (left)
ovarian artery
Testicular artery
Cranial renal artery
Femoral artery
External iliac artery
Cranial tibial
artery
Caudal mesenteric
Ischiadic
artery
artery
Popliteal
nternal
artery
iliac
Middle and caudal renal arteries
Figure 9.9 Dorsal view of avian heart and
artery
circulation.
The two atria are separated from the ventricles by atrio-
Blood vessels
ventricular (AV) valves. Ihe right AV valve has only one
 The avian patient difers from the mammalian in that the
muscular flap with no chordae tendineae. Ihe left AV
aorta curves to the right side of the chest rather than the
valve is much the same as in cats and dogs as it has two
left (Figure 9.9).
valves. In some birds there may be three.
Ihe avian abdominal’ contents are supplied with the
There are two coronary arteries supplying blood to the
 same coeliac, cranial and caudal mesenteric arteries as the
myocardium, and four major coronary veins as opposed
 mammalian. The main difference is that three arteries sup-
to the single mammalian coronary vein.
ply the kidneys. In the case of reproductive organs, the tes-
144 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
tes are supplied by arteries arising from the cranial renal ar-
sits adjacent to the proventriculus. It has white and red
teries, whilst the left ovary is supplied by an artery branch-
pulp areas, as in mammals, and acts to remove old red
ing off from the left cranial renal artery. ( Ihere is often only
blood cells, as well as functions as part of the immune
one ovary - see the Reproductive System section.)
system and in cell production. It is particularly irmpor-
The legs are supplied by a femoral artery arising from
tant in systemic infectious diseases, such as psittacosis,
the external iliac artery. However, the leg is also supplied
where due to antigenic stimulation it may increase ten-
by alarger vessel than the femoral artery, known as the is-
fold in size.
chiatic artery. This arises from a common vessel offshoot
of the aorta which also creates the middle and caudal re-
Thymus
nal arteries, and so passes through and over the kidney
 IThe thymus is composed of a series of islands of lymphoid
structure. It continues down the leg, changing into the
tissue strung out along the neck and thoracic inlet. It is re-
 popliteal and cranial tibial arteries.
sponsible for the production of T-lymphocytes which are
The head is supplied with blood chiefly by the left and
necessary for cellular immunity. As with mammals, the
right carotid arteries which arise from the left and right
thymus decreases in size with age but may still be present
brachiocephalic arteries. Ihe wings are supplied from
in the adult bird.
the subclavian arteries which also supply the pectoral
muscles forming the breast. Ihe subclavian artery gives
Lymph nodes
rise to the brachial artery which supplies the humeral re-
These do not occur as recognisable organs in birds except
 gion. Ihe brachial artery then gives rise to the radial and
in some waterfowl such as ducks and geese. These water-
ulnar arteries to supply the rest of the more distal wing.
fowl have two main nodes, one near to the gonads and
The head is drained chiefly by the right and left ex-
kidneys and one near to the thoracic inlet.
ternal jugular veins. In the majority of avian species, the
 In other species, lymphatic tissue is present in accumu-
right jugular vein is much larger than the left.
133
The abdominal contents of the bird are drained through
lated areas within the internal body organs such as the
kidneys, liver, digestive system, pancreas and lungs.
a series of vessels. Ihe main vessel returning to the heart is
AN
the caudal vena cava which is supplied by two large hepatic
veins and many minor ones. The liver is supplied by two he-
Bursa of Fabricius
This is a structure unique to birds. It is situated in the
vessel in the mammal system. Ihe caudal vena cava also
dorsal wall of the proctodeum segment of the cloaca. It
RT
receives blood from the common iliac vein and the two tes-
is where the avian B-lymphocyte population, responsible
PA
for humoral or antibody immunity, is produced. Ihe
ticular or one ovarian vein depending on the sex of the bird.
The common iliac vein receives supplies from the call
bursa, as does the thymus, decreases in size with age and
 dal and cranial renal veins and from the structure known
usually disappears altogether in the adult bird.
as the renal portal circulation.
The majority of the blood from the legs is drained
Reproductive anatomy
first by the tibial vein, then into the popliteal vein, then
Male
femoral vein and finally the external iliac vein which itself
Testes
empties into the common iliac vein.
There are two testes, both of which, unlike in mammals,
The wing is drained by the radial and ulnar veins which
sit entirely within the abdominal or coelomic cavity. They
converge to form the brachial vein. This runs alongside
are positioned cranial to the kidneys and are tightly ad-
the humerus on its caudoventral aspect and can be used
herent to the dorsum of the body wall either side of the
for intravenous injections in many species. Ihe brachial
midline.
vein runs into the subclavian vein and so on into the left
da an  aa uao saisan a
or right cranial vena cava.
season, most noticeably in species such as the pigeon
and dove family (Columbiformes), where the testes may
Lymphatic system
ong azis uoseas-jo-imo 1a sail 0z 0n dn Aq a1ea
Spleen
each testis runs a single vas deferens or spermatic cord
The avian spleen is spherical in many species of Psittaci-
which traverses the ventral surface of the kidney before
formes, but may be more strap-like in other species, and
entering the urodeum section of the cloaca.
Basic Avian Anatomy and Physiology 145
Phallus
larger in diameter than the infundibulum, with many
There is no phallus in many species of birds. Instead the
folds to its lining. There are multiple ducts leading to the
semen is transferred by the apposition of the male cloacal
lumen of the magnum, with the most caudal portion con
vent to female cloacal vent.
taining mucus glands as well.
Some species do have a phallus, including the Anseri-
Attached to the caudal portion of the magnum is the
formes, or duck, goose and swan family, as well as the
isthmus, which is narrower in diameter and less coiled,
ratite (ostrich, cassowary, emu and rhea) family and the
 but with more prominent longitudinal folds.
domestic chicken.
The phallus lies in its dormant state on the ventral
Uterus
aspect of the cloaca. When aroused it engorges with blood
Attached to the caudal portion of the isthmus is the
and everts through the vent to curve in a ventral and cra-
shell gland or uterus. This is a short portion of the
nial direction. Along the dorsal surface of the erect phal-
tract with many leaf-like folds. It enmpties into the
lus runs the seminal groove. Ihe semen drops from the
S-shaped vagina, from which it is separated by a mus-
vas deferens openings in the cloaca into the groove, which
cular sphincter.
then guides the sperm into the female cloaca. The phallus
therefore plays no part in the process of urination, unlike
Reproductive physiology
its mammalian counterpart.
Male
 The male avian testes are primarily composed of semi-
Female
niferous tubules. In between these are the interstitial, or
Ovary
Leydig, cells which are the main source of androgens,
         
such as testosterone, in the male bird. The seminiferous
(Figure 9.10). One or two species have two ovaries, the kiwi
tubules are similar to their mammalian counterparts and
and many hawks for exarmple. The ovary is cranial to the
contain the Sertoli cells in which the spermatozoa are
53
left kidney, suspended from the dorsal body wall by a mes-
 nourished and develop.
entery containing numerous short ovarian arteries derived
In perching birds (Passeriformes) each vas deferens
from the aorta. For this reason, when speying an avian pa-
forms an enlarged area just before entering the urodeum,
tient, only the uterus is removed, leaving the ovary intact.
known as the seminal glomus. The two glomi become
so swollen during the breeding season as to form one
Infundibulum
mass, known as the cloacal promontory, which acts as
From this one ovary arises a one-sided reproductive sys-
the storage chamber for sperm. Ihese can be used to sex
tem. Adjacent to the ovary is the fimbria or funnel part
many species of Passeriformes.
of the infundibulum. Ihis 'catches' the oocyst when it is
 In general, the testes will enlarge during the reproduc-
shed into the reproductive tract. Attached immediately to
tive season, with sperm production ceasing during the
the funnel is the tubular part of the infundibulum, which
winter months. In many birds the left testis is larger than
is also known as the chalaziferous region.
the right, following a pattern similar to that of the female
gonad. Ihe colour of the testes may also change during
Magnum
the breeding season, going from a yellow, or in some in-
Joining onto the infundibulum is the magnum portion of
stances blackened, colour to a grey or white as they en-
the reproductive system. Ihis is highly coiled and much
large with spermatozoa.
Infundibulum
Ovary
Fimbria
Chalaziferousregion
Isthmus
Shell gland
Muscular sphincter
Stalk
W
Follicle/yolk
Leaf-Like
folds
Vagina
Magnum
Longitudinal
Cloaca
folds
(Urodeum)
Figure 9.10 Avian female reproductive tract.
146 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Female
▪Male cockatiels have a solid-coloured underside to
 In the ovary, folliculogenesis (production of the oocyte
their tails and a vivid orange cheek patch, whereas
 and its yolk) is similar to that seen in mammals. Ihe cycle
females have horizontal light and dark bars to
is as follows:
the underside of the tail and a paler cheek patch.
1. Each follicle starts with the oocyte. Ihe oocyte ob-
(Problems do arise in these two species when dilute
tains its 'yolk' of lipids and proteins from the liver via
colour variants (known as lutinos) and albino birds
the bloodstream in response to follicle-stimulating
 appear as there is often no pigmentation in the cere
hormone which is secreted by the anterior pituitary.
 in these species.)
 2. Over the surface of the folicle lies a white band known as
· In some species the two sexes have totally different
the stigma which splits, shedding the oocyst from the fol-
body feather colours. For example,the male eclectus
licle into the infundibulum. This occurs as a result of the
parrot is a vivid green with a yellow beak, whereas
release ofluteinising hormone from the anterior pituitary.
the female is red and deep blue with a black beak.
3. Ihe corpus haemorrhagicum and corpus luteum,
+ Male large species cockatoos have a dark brown iris
which are seen in mammals, are absent in birds, al-
and the females a red-brown one.
though some progesterone hormone production may
·Male canaries will sing during the breeding season.
occur from remaining cells.
· Many male songbirds are more highly coloured
 4. Ihe ovum is fertilised in the infundibulum (assuming a
than the female. This is also true of many waterfowl,
successful mating) 15-20 minutes after ovulation. Ihe
for example many ducks.
fertilised ovum moves through the tubular portion of
 In raptors there may be a wide variation in colours
the infundibulum (the chalaziferous portion). Here the
and sizes between the sexes. In most raptors, the
chalazion, or egg yolk supporting membrane, is deposit-
female is larger than the male bird, often as much as
ed around the egg yolk This is a dense layer of albumen
double the size.
or inner egg white. The ovum moves on into the mag-
PECII
In sexually monomorphic species, such as African
num where the bulk of the egg white (albumen) is de-
 grey parrots, many macaws and Amazons, identifying
 5P
posited. After this the egg moves into the isthmus gain-
the sex of the bird has to be done by surgical sexing or
AVIAN
ing the tough shell membranes. Finally it moves into
DNA sexing, as there is no obvious reliable external
the uterus or shell gland where the mineralised shell is
difference between the sexes.
:1
deposited. It is also here that plumping' occurs. Ihis is
2. Surgical sexing involves anaesthetising the bird
PART
when the bulk of the water content is added, mainly to
and passing a fine rigid endoscope through the flank
the albumen portion of the egg. When the egg is ready.
of the patient in order to examine the internal gonad(s)
the uterine or vaginal sphincter opens, allowing the egg
visually. There are risks to such a procedure, which is
 to move into the vagina.
why the process has been largely replaced by DNA
 5. The vagina acts as the main storage site for spermato-
sexing.
zoa immediately after copulation and it is where the
 3. DNA sexing requires either a sample of the patient's
sperm mature. It is also responsible for the deposition
blood or the pulp from a freshly plucked body feath-
of the outer egg surface (cuticle) providing a micro-
er. Ihis is submitted to the laboratory to determine if
porous, protective breathing membrane on the egg's
the DNA is that of a male or female bird. In birds the
surface. When the egg is ready, the vagina expels it by
female is the heterogametic sex, having sex chromo-
muscular contractions.
somes known as YZ; the male is homogametic for the
sex chromosomes, being ZZ. This is the reverse of the
Sex determination and
 situation in mammals where females are homogamet-
identification
ic. In mammals, the sex chromosomes are referred to
In the majority of species of birds, sexual identity is chro-
 pue X se
mosomally (i.e. genetically) determined.
 Sex identification may be performed in three main ways:
Skin and feathers
1. Some species show sexual dimorphism. That is the two
skin
sexes appear physically different. For example
Avian skin is much thinner than that of mammals, and
·When sexually mature, the male budgerigar (in 95%
has little or no hypodermis. This means that in general it
of cases) has a blue cere, and the female a brown one.
is poorly or loosely attached to the underlying structures.
Basic Avian Anatomy and Physiology 147
However, in regions such as the lower legs, the skin ad-
other species, but is absent in some parrots, Amazons for
heres directly to the bone.
Example, pigeons and some of the ratites.
The skin has an outer epidermal layer which is com-
posed of three main layers - from inside to out: the germi-
Feathers
natory layer; the maturation layer and the cornified layer.
Feathers are unique to the class Aves (Figure 9.11). They
The dermis is much reduced compared to mammals. It
are arranged in a set pattern over the surface of the
forms very little in the way of a substantial structure but it
body, with some tracts of skin being completely devoid
does give the skin some elasticity, although nowhere near
of feather follicles. These areas of skin without follicles
 as much as mammalian skin.
are known as apterylae, whilst other areas have rows of
There are no sweat glands in avian skin. A bird regu-
feather tracts known as pterylae.
lates its temperature by panting, known as gular flutter-
There are six types of feathers in most species. Ihese
ing, and by altering feather alignment to allow heat either
are known as
to escape or to be trapped against the body surface
1. The contour or flight feathers
2. Ihe down feathers
Claws
 3. Ihe powder feathers
The tip of each toe is supplied with a claw, formed of a
4. Ihe semi-plume feathers
    e n   
 5. Ihe floplume feathers
adapted to form the basic perching claws of the Passeri-
6. Ihe bristle feathers
formes, the multipurpose perching and grasping claws
of Psittaciformes or the ripping and prey-capture imple-
Contour feathers
ments of the raptor family.
These form the flight feathers on wings and tail, and the
The members of ratite family also have varying num-
main feathers outlining the body. Ihe flight feathers are
bers of claws on their wing digits, and some falcons, such
subdivided into primaries and secondaries, depending on
53
 as the kestrel and peregrine falcon, have a claw on the first
153
whether they are derived from the “hand’ or manus (the
digit or alula of the wing.
carpus and digits) of the wing (the primaries) or the ulna
or antebrachium of the wing (the secondaries). Ihere
Preen (uropygial) gland
are also contour feathers forming the tail, known as the
The uropygial gland is situated over the synsacrum at
rectrices. (Ihe primaries and secondaries combined are
the base of the tail. It is a highly developed structure in
referred to as the remiges.)
most waterfowl, as it is responsible for producing oil to
The remiges attach directly onto the periosteum of the
waterproof the feathers. The oil produced from the preen
 relevant wing bone and so are deeply attached. In addi-
gland may also act as a source of vitamin D for the bird.
tion they are covered at their bases by smaller feathers
It has a bilobed structure with two tubular exits, one
on the dorsal aspect of the wing known as covert feathers
for each lobe. The preen gland is also present in many
(Figure 9.12).
Main shaft/rachis
 Semi-plume feather
Flight feather
 Distal barbule
Down feather
Hamuli
Vane
Barb
Proximal
barbule
Filo-plume feather
Calamus
Figure 9.11 Avian plumage.
148 Veterinary Nursing of ExoticPets
relatively powder-free, such as Amazon parrots. Ihis is a
good reason for not mixing these species together in the
same aviary or cage.
 Many viral and bacterial agents may infect the powder
feathers. The infection is then spread when the powder
is shed. Examples of these organisms are Chlamydophi-
lα psiftaci, the cause of psittacosis, psittacine beak and
feather disease virus (a circovirus), and the gamma
herpes virus which causes Marek's disease. Other feather
follicles may also be affected.
Semi-plume feathers
The semi-plume feathers have long shafts, but like the
down feathers, they have no barbules. This gives them a
Figure 9.12 Dorsal aspect of a Kestrel's (Fa/lco tinnuncu/us) wing
"fluffy' appearance. They are situated below the contour
showing the primary, secondary and covert feathers.
feathers and are thought to provide insulation.
The structure of the contour feather is the classical quill
Filoplume feathers
shape. It is supported by the main shaft of the feather
The filoplume feathers are situated close to the contour
which is embedded in the follicle. Ihe part of the shaft to
feathers and possess long, fine, bare shafts which end in a
which the vane of the feather is attached is known as the
clump of barbs. Iheir roots are surrounded with sensory
rachis. The vane is formed from parallel side branches set
 at 45° to the rachis, which are known as barbs. From the
nerve endings. It is thought that these feathers are respon-
 barbs arise distal and proximal barbules, each of which
sible for sensing the positions of the adjacent contour
123
 has its own smaller hooks known as hamuli. These form
feathers. Ihis allows the bird to make accurate alterations
d5
 of flight and body feather positions.
AVIAN
interconnections with other barbules, and this allows the
 feather to form a solid but ultra-light structure.
Bristle feathers
Ihe part of the shaft which is devoid of the feather
:1
These are similar to the floplumes in that they have bare
vane is known as the calamus. Ihis is the part which is in-
RT
shafts with a few barbs at the tip. They are, however,
serted into the follicle and which, in the immature grow-
shorter and found around the beak and eyes, and again
ing feather, is flled with nerves and blood vessels. This
seem to have a sensory, tactile function.
is known as the feather pulp. It is this area which, when
emerging through the skin, is at risk of being damaged
Bood feathers and pin feathers
by the bird. It can then bleed profusely, giving the young
The blood feather is the young immature feather as it
feather its alternative name of blood feather?
emerges from the follicle. It is so named because it pos-
Down feathers
sesses a plentiful blood supply.
The down feathers provide an insulating layer below the
At this stage, the feather is protected by an outer kera-
contour feathers of the adult bird. Ihey are also the main
tin sheath, which gives it its other name of 'pin' feather. As
feather of the chick. They are much shorter in length than
the feather develops inside this sheath, it is surrounded
the contour feathers and have a 'fluffy' look, as there are
by a blood supply. As the vane forms, the blood supply
 no barbules to interlock the vane structure.
retracts to the base of the feather below the skin surface.
At this point, the sheath should split and allow the feather
Powder feathers
to unfurl. If the sheath is damaged prior to retraction of
As their name suggests, the powder feathers produce a
the blood supply, then profuse bleeding will occur.
fine white powder which is shed over the surface of the
In some birds the sheath is retained long after the
bird. This appears to act as a semi-waterproof covering.
blood supply has regressed, and this gives the appearance
Some species produce more powder than others, African
of multiple, white pin-like structures over the plumage.
grey parrots and cockatoos, for example. This powder
This can be a sign of general debilitation or of a nutri-
may cause irritation to the airways of species which are
tional deficiency.
Basic Avian Anatomy and Physiology 149
Moulting
3. Ihe basophil, lymphocyte and monocyte are basically
isnj Arensn teaf e auo spnq isou u smsso sumnon
similar to those in mammals and have broadly the
after the breeding season in the late spring/early summer.
same functions.
 Some species will moult more frequently, having a winter
4. Ihe eosinophil has a clear blue cytoplasm with a bi-
 and a summer plumage which allows them to blend in
lobed nucleus which stains more intensely than the
with their surroundings. Many eagles and large Psittaci-
heterophil. It has round, bright red staining granules.
formes kept indoors though will moult every 2 years.
It is more commonly seen in increased numbers in
In general the stimulus for moulting seems to be
 parasitic conditions, such as intestinal ascarid (round-
a combination of diurnal rhythms and temperature
worm) infestations. It may appear more basophilic in
changes. The new feather forms at the base of the old, and,
some species, such as African grey parrots.
like a permanent tooth pushing out a deciduous one, it
5. Ihe thrombocyte (platelet) is nucleated, unlike the
dislodges the existing feather and grows in behind it.
mammalian anucleated form.
Most species do this gradually, taking several weeks to
Avian blood samples for haematological analysis may be
moult all of the feathers fully. Some though, such as some
taken into potassium EDTA tubes except in a few species.
ducks, become completely flightless due to the loss of all
Examples of these exceptions are members of the crow,
of their flight feathers at once.
crane, flamingo and penguin families in which the eryth-
Immature birds will often go through three to five
rDcytes will haemolyse. In these species heparin should
rapid moults in their frst year or so of life as the ini-
be used for haematology. A fresh smear for the differen-
tial down feathers give way to more and more contour
 tial white cell count should also be made. Ihis is because 
feathers and adult plumage.
heparin samples yield inferior staining results.
 Blood sarmpling for biochemistry testing in avian pa-
Haematology: an overview
tients is best performed in heparin anticoagulant tubes.
 The cells in a bird's bloodstream are significantly different
Eci
from those in mammals. Ihere are five main diferences:
References
1. Ihe avian erythrocyte is nucleated and oval in shape.
Bennett, R.A. (1994) Neurology. Avian Medicine: Principles and
Application {eds B.W. Ritchie, G.J. Harrison & L.R. Harrison),
This contrasts with the mammalian anucleate, bicon-
Ist edn, Pp. 723-747. Wingers Publishing, Lake Worth, FL.
cave structure.
King, A.S. and McLelland, J. (1975) Outlines of Avian Anatomy.
2. Heterophils replace the mammalian neutrophil. Iheir
Bailliere and Tindall, London.
function is similar, as the frst line of defence against
viral and bacterial infections. Heterophils, however,
Further reading
PA
are a rounded cell with a colourless-to-pale-pink cy-
Braun, EJ. (1998) Comparative renal function in reptiles, birds
toplasm and a multiple-lobed nucleus (averaging two
and mammals. Seminars in Avian and Exotic Pet Medicine,
7(2), 62-71.
to three lobes). They possess brick red, cigar-shaped-
to-oval granules, and during infection these may ap-
Seminars in Avian and Exotic Pet Medicine, 6(4), 172-179.
pear to disintegrate, with the cytoplasm becoming
Klasing, K.C. (1999) Avian gastrointestinal anatomy and
vacuolated or foamy. This effect is useful in assessing
physiology. Seminars in Avian and Exotic Pet Medicine, 8(2),
the presence of infection, and these cells are referred
42-50.
Ritchie, B., Harrison, G. and Harrison, L. (1994) Avian Medicine:
to as 'toxic' heterophils. Excessive heterophil counts
Principles and Applications. Wingers Publishing, Lake Worth, FL.
(>30 x 1o*/L) are associated with diseases such as
Stormy-Hudelson, K. (1996) A review of mechanisms of avian
 psittacosis, aspergillosis, avian tuberculosis or egg
reproduction and their clinical applications. Seminars in Avian
yolk peritonitis.
and Exotic Pet Medicine, 5(4), 189-190.
Chapter 10
Avian Housing and Husbandry
Cage requirements for
Perches
Psittaciformes and Passeriformes
Perches should be made of various different diameters,
The advice given in the Wildlife and Countryside Act
0l pue iaay siq aul rog asiiaxa aioid cl raio i
1981 (as amended in 20o0) is that the cage should be suf-
prevent pressure sores from forming. The presence of
ficiently large enough for the bird to be able to stretch its
single-diameter sized perches will lead to pressure being
wings in all three dimensions. This is a bare minimum
applied to the same parts of the bird's feet continuously.
requirement, and the cage sizes should be as large as is
This causes reduced blood circulation and results in
feasibly and financially possible.
corns and ulcers. If not corrected, it will ultimately lead
to deep foot infections, referred to as bumblefoot. The
Cages to avoid
perches are best made of hardwood branches, such as
It is worthwhile avoiding certain cage types:
beech, mahogany, and witch-hazel, which are relatively
·“Hamster’ style cages which are wider than they are
smooth and non-toxic. It is important to avoid using
123
high. Birds enjoy freedom of movement in a vertical
 branches from trees such as ornamental cherries and
 plane and feel more at ease when caged accordingly.
laburnum, which are found in many gardens, as these are
d5
 Tall, narrow cages which prevent lateral flight and
poisonous. If using branches collected from hedgerows,
AN
movement.
it is important to clean them to prevent contamination
AVI.
· Cages coated in plastic which may be chewed off, as
and disease transmission from wild birds. They should
many plastics contain zinc and other compounds
be cleaned in dilute bleach or an avian-safe disinfectant
RT
which may be toxic.
and then dried before placing them in the cage. Concrete
 Cages which have a poor metallic finish. Many cages
perches should be avoided as some parrots in particular
are made of zinc alloys, and if the fnish of the wire sur-
have been known to eat these, causing gastrointestinal
face is poor, the zinc may become available to the bird.
problems or mineral over-supplementation leading to
As parrots in particular use their beaks to manoeuvre
kidney problems.
themselves around the cage,the tendency is to swallow
 Perches should never be covered with sandpaper. This
the zinc dust coating the wire. Ihe zinc builds up in
does not keep their nails short, but does lead to foot abra-
the bird’s body over a number of weeks and can lead to
sions which become seriously infected, resulting in con-
kidney and liver damage and, in severe cases, death.
ditions such as bumblefoot.
* Cages with very small doors on them, which makes
Perches should be positioned so as not to allow the
catching the bird diffcult.
bird to foul the food and water bowls and should not be
The preferred construction material for cages for
stacked on top of one another as this allows any other bird
Psittaciformes and Passeriformes is stainless steel. Ihis is
in the cage to defaecate onto the one below!
non-toxic and easy to keep clean. Unfortunately, stainless
steel cages are heavier and can be more expensive to buy.
Food and water bowls
Food and water bowls should not be made of metal alloys
Cage 'furniture'
as most are galvanised with zinc or have soldered edges,
Various items are necessary to provide for basic needs
which contain lead. Both lead and zinc are highly toxic
and to improve welfare. Consideration should be given
to any cage bird. Plastic or ceramic bowls are therefore
to the type and position of perches, food and water bowls,
preferred. Alternatively, single-pressed (i.e. no soldered
floor coverings and toys.
seams) stainless steel food bowls can be used instead.
Avian Housing and Husbandry 151
Floor coverings
apple trees and grape vines may also be used. It is es-
Sawdust, shavings and bark chips should be avoided as
sential that these are well cleaned and have not been
these are difficult to keep clean and are often consumed
sprayed with fertilisers/pesticides/fungicides first!
by the cage bird. Newspaper, kitchen towel paper, and
· Rye grass growing in a shalow dish may be particu
-do ialaq ate sdous iad Aueu u! Plos iadedpues au
larly well accepted by smaller Psittaciformes and many
tions. However, certain ground-dwelling species, such as
 Passeriformes, such as canaries.
quail, may benefit from bark chippings as a floor cover-
+ Placing favourite food items inside hollowed-out piec-
ing because it allows natural foraging activity. Whatever
es of wood - so the bird has to pick the food out - can
the floor covering used, it should be changed regularly, at
keep a bird occupied for hours.
least twice-weekly. Newspaper or other paper coverings
+ Ihick ropes and closed chains may be used to suspend
have the advantage that they are easy to remove, so it is
toys. However, no bird should be left unattended with
easier to maintain hygiene standards, and the droppings
these as they can easily become entangled.
may be observed for any changes from normal.
Positioning of the cage
Toys
Correct positioning of the cage is vitally inportant.
Passeriformes, the perching birds such as canaries,
passas Aiuaueuad e ol peal ue Suusd suom
finches and mynah birds, are generally less interested in
bird. Severe illness or even death may result from an
toys, although providing their food in novel forms can
incorrectly placed cage.
lead to a better quality of life. Psittaciformes, on the other
Birds of the Psittaciformes and Passeriformes families
al aa u 'si sai an yn ane u
are prey animals rather than predators and are therefore
larger parrots have a mentality of the typical 2-year-old
constantly on the look-out for potential predators. If left
human, and so benefit from toys and mental stimulation.
to their own devices, they will position themselves in
Toys offered should of course be safe, attractive, and of a
such a way as to minimise risk. This means achieving
53
size and number appropriate to the space allowed.
some height (to avoid ground-based predators) and get-
asaul papione aq Pous pue myuiey ane shoi auos
ting themselves into a position where a predator can only
include the following:
approach from one or two sides.
· Open chain links: A bird's foot can easily become
Therefore, some perches should be at eye level to
caught in one of these, particularly if the bird has an 
achieve a little height. It is important not to place the
identification ring on its leg-
bird too far above this as the bird may then start to feel
▪Bells with clappers in fhem: Birds, particularly parrots,
dominant to its owner and may become increasingly dif-
will remove and often swallow these. Ihe clappers are
ficult to catch. To minimise fear of predator attack, the
frequently made of a lead alloy, which is potentially
cage should be placed in a corner of the room, rather
dangerous as birds are very susceptible to lead and
than in its centre. For greater security, three of the four
other heavy metal poisons.
sides may be "blocked off, for example by a wall or with
·Human mirrors: Ihese have various lead oxides as their
a towel.
backing and so present another source of lead poison-
The positioning should also allow direct sunlight to fall
ing. Polished, stainless steel mirrors are better.
iq an ynoe ep an jo jed aos roy as an uo
· Plastic children's toys: Ihe plastics are often too soft,
should not be in direct sunlight continuously as this will
and so are easily broken up and swallowed, sometimes
leading to gut impaction. Some toys contain zinc,
bird's native habitat, which often means a 12- to 14-hour
which is toxic.
day followed by a 10- to 12-hour period of darkness, and
*Toxic plants: Many tropical houseplants, such as spider
cages may be covered to provide the correct number of
plants and cheese plants, are poisonous.
hours of darkness. Towels are often used to cover the cage,
Some toys which may be safely offered include:
for this purpose, but it is important to ensure that ventila-
+Whole vegetables, such as apples, pears, broccoli, beet-
tion remains adequate.
root or carrots.
Room temperature is also important. Smaller cage
· Pine cones and clean hardwood branches such as beech
birds have a large body surface area in relation to their
or mahogany (cockatoos and macaws particularly love
 size and therefore lose heat rapidly. A comfortable room
to strip bark from these). Edible fruit trees such as
temperature should be maintained day and night for most
152 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
species. Ihis should be 16-20°C for most commonly kept
Psittaciformes and Passeriformes. It is especially impor-
 tant to maintain room temperature for young birds.
The room chosen for the bird is also important. For ex-
 ample,the bird should not be placed in the kitchen. Many
birds are potential carriers of zoonotic diseases which are
 more easily transmitted by close proximity to food prepa-
ration areas. In addition, many fumes produced by cook-
ing can be life-threatening to birds. Some of these toxic
fumes include:
· Fumes from overheated Teflon-coated pans. Ihese
aan ae nq sanu um sq o  ae
undetectable to the human sense of smell.
Figure 10.1 Mlultiple retained feather sheaths may suggest a
▪ Fumes from frying fats can cause serious lung oedema
and death within minutes.
include a lack of exposure to ultraviolet light and lov environmental
humidity.
With no antidote to even mild exposure to these hazards,
aq m Adenan aaiodns papioae aq Aidus isnu Aa
discussed later on in the book.
Aviary flight construction
Nor should birds be placed in bedrooms because
Construction
the owner may be exposed to dander and faecal mat-
Aviary flights are generally constructed of wood and
ter. This can cause allergic or anaphylactic reactions
stainless steel. Ihe flight flooring is made of solid
and poses a risk of zoonotic diseases which many birds
concrete. Ihis is preferable to a soil covering which can
53
carry. In addition bedrooms are often the coldest rooms
allow the build-up of pathogens and canbe extremely dif-
123
in the house and so not suitable for a bird. If a bird is to
ficult to clean. The rest of the flight is usually based on
d5
be housed indoors, choose the living room or assign it
four stainless steel mesh sides supported by a hardwood
AVIAN
a special room of its own.
Or stainless steel frame. The roof is also of wire mesh, or
clear corrugated plastic, and some form of nest box or
Outdoor enclosures - aviary flights
enclosed roosting area, for breeding and extra protection
LH
One problem that occurs with indoor housing of cage
during bad weather, is provided. Many of these flights are
PA
birds is the lack of exposure to the ultraviolet spectrum
attached to the sides of houses, providing a solid wall to
of the sun's radiation. Ultraviolet light is required for
one side and the additional protection that the heat and
vitamin D synthesis (Figure 10.1). Some evidence also
eaves of the house offer.
 Aessau si asoa iu ar  siss
Any wire mesh used to form the sides ofthe aviary flight
 normal circadian rhythms to be set and to reduce stress
should ideally be made from stainless steel, rather than a
and mental health problems which may lead to feather
galvanised alloy to avoid the risk of zinc poisoning. Ihe
plucking and generalised illness. Specific ultraviolet
size of the mesh depends on the size of the species kept.
lamps are now being sold for birds, which are kept in-
If wood is used, it should preferably be hardwood and
doors. However, it is becoming increasingly common to
must not have been treated with any potentially harmful
encourage owners to provide some form of outdoor en-
wood preservatives, such as creosote.
closure for their pet birds for all or part of the year
H is sensible to provide a double-door system to gain
Exposure to the changing daylight lengths is required
for setting the diurnal and seasonal body clock of the
to a corridor, from which each aviary flight has a door
bird. Another advantage of an outdoor enclosure is that
branching off. Ihis helps to minimise the risk of a bird
it can be made sufficiently large to allow the bird(s)
escaping during entering or exiting.
room to fly and exhibit other natural display activities.
Another potential hazard of outdoor flights is the risk
These outdoor enclosures are often referred to as aviary
of rodent and wild bird access to the system. This can
flights by owners and breeders and may be used to house
cause fouling of food and water bowl contents as well
several members of the same species or even mixed spe-
as the transmission of diseases. Care should be taken
cies exhibits.
 to ensure that the wire mesh is regularly inspected for
Avian Housing and Husbandry 153
signs of damage and that the food and water bowls are
some form of flooring substrate is required, with bark
placed in a part of the cage with a solid roof over them to
chips or peat being the most popular. Care should be tak-
minimise faecal contamination by wild birds.
en in these cases to ensure that the flooring is kept very
clean and that any Psittaciformes present do not start eat-
Positioning
ing large quantities of substrate.
Protection from the prevailing wind direction
is important to prevent chilling. Equally inmportant is to
Raptors
ensure that the nest or roosting box is not in direct sun-
Cage requirements
light all day. Temperatures will soar during the summer,
The cage requirements for raptors are different from those
leading to hyperthermia of adults and chicks alike. It is
of Psittaciformes and Passeriformes. This is due to both
also useful to provide an area in the flight that protects
the different environmental requirements of raptors and
 from wind in the winter and provides shade in the sum-
the reasons for which they are being kept. For example,
mer. This allows the bird to alter its own microclimate at
many trained raptors are kept tethered for much of their
will, minimising environmental stresses.
lves, although there is a growing trend to keep them
loose in an outside aviary system.
Nest box
It is still necessary though for working raptors to be
The nest or roosting box should be large enough to
tethered for 2-4 weeks during their training period.
accommodate all birds housed in the flight and should 
The tethering device is the jess, a leather strap which is
be cleaned out regularly during the non-breeding season.
attached to each leg via an anklet at the tarsometatarsal
During the breeding season, if breeding pairs are kept, the 
 area just above the foot. Each jess is the same length and
 box should not be disturbed at all to avoid stress and mis-
is attached to a metallic swivel that allows rotation. This
mothering of the eggs or young. It is also inmportant to
swivel is then attached to a leash. The leash may then be
provide additional nest boxes if multiple pairs of breeding
used to tether the bird to a perch, which is usually po-
53
ECI
adults are kept together, so as to prevent intra- and inter-
sitioned close to the ground. It is important to keep the
species aggression. The nest boxes should be waterproofed
leash relatively short to prevent the bird reaching suff-
d5
and positioned out of the prevailing wind and direct sun-
cient flight velocity before the leash becomes taut as this
light. They are generally constructed of marine plywood.
can seriously damage its legs.
This can lead to chewing of the boxes by the larger parrot
 species, and so some breeders coat the inside and outside
Cage or shelter designs
of the box with stainless steel wire. Care should be taken
Cages are generally sited outdoors and vary to suit
PA
of the material used for this, and the wire should not have
the particular raptor and the presence or absence of
sharp edges which may harm chicks inside the box.
tethering.
As with Psittaciformes and Passeriformes, the cage
Perches
design should provide protection from the weather as well
Within the flight, perches made of hardwood should
as from rodents and other potential pests and predators.
be provided. Ihese should be of differing diameters, as
discussed earlier, and be sufficient to provide all flight oc-
Tethered raptors
cupants with a perch. Food bowls may be clipped to the
 Raptors should only be kept tethered during the summer
mesh sides of the flight or placed in an alcove recessed
months as, by the very nature of tethering, the bird can-
into one of the walls. Food and water bowls should not be
 not move around or achieve shelter and so may die from
placed in the roost or nest boxes, as fouling of the water
Exposure during the colder months or suffer frostbite.
and fights are much more likely to occur. Again, multiple
During the summer months, this form of housing for
tiering of perches, especially over food and water bowls, is
a tethered raptor is known as a weathering (Figure 10.2).
to be avoided as it may lead to widespread contamination
This is a three-sided, solid wooden construction, with
of food and water.
a solid roof and open at the front. Ihe perch is placed
centrally on a floor covered with sand or gravel. Recom-
Substrate
mended dimensions for these shelters are 2.5 m X 2.0 m
If mixed-species aviary flights are used, ground-dwelling
for Falconidae and 3.5 m X 2.5 m for hawks and eagles
species, such as quail, are often included. In these cases
(Forbes & Parry-Jones, 1996).
154 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Figure 10.2 Basic layout of a weathering for
raptors: a three-sided and roofed building.
usually of wood, with a gravel floor and 
open at the front. The bird is tethered to a
perch in the centre.
This form of shelter is prone to two major problems.
Water should be provided fresh each day, even for
One is that during the summer, the weathering may
those species which do not routinely drink Many free
become extremely hot, and so adequate shade must be
flight aviaries also provide some form of shallow bathing
 provided to prevent heat stroke. Dehydration may also be
area, which should be kept scrupulously clean on a daily
a problem as most raptors (particularly Falconidae) obtain
basis.
123
their water from their food and will not drink free water.
The floor should be of solid concrete, with excellent
The second problem is the risk of predation due to the
 drainage to minimise the build-up of potential pathogens.
AVIAN
open housing and the restrained, low position of the bird.
Perches
Aviary flights
These depend on whether the bird is tethered or free fly-
LH
Ihese are often built along similar designs to the Psit-
ing. In tethered situations there are two types of perches
taciformes and Passeriformes styles already mentioned.
(Figure 10.3).
There is a major difference, though, in that raptors do not
Ihe frst is the block perch, which is mainly used for
socialise well with other raptors, and so aviaries tend to
falcons. As its name suggests, it cormprises a block of
 contain individuals or a breeding pair and no others.
flat wood, mounted on a short pole (usually 30-60 cm
One of the more successul designs is a pattern simi-
long). Ihe block is often padded with a material such as
lar to the weathering, except the front is covered with
Astroturf to provide cushioning for the feet. This is to
a wire mesh rather than being open. Roofing materials
prevent bumblefoot or deep-seated foot infections. Rap-
which have been found to minimise overheating during
tors, particularly falcons, will remain motionless on block
the summer, but are waterproof, include the compound
perches for hours at a time, putting continuous pressure
Eternit, which is a type of concrete matting (Forbes &
on the same parts of the sole of the feet. This causes re-
Parry-Jones, 1996).
duced blood supply and necrosis of small areas of skin
As with the aviary flights already mentioned, it is advis-
which may become secondarily infected leading to infec-
able to have a double-door system so as to avoid escapees.
tion (bumblefoot - see Figure 10.4).
 Food is often provided on a feeding block mounted on one
The second type of perch for tethered raptors is the
side of the aviary, off the ground. It is accessed either di-
bow perch. Ihis is a curved rod, usually of tubular iron or
rectly from inside the aviary or from outside the aviary via
steel with padding wound around the highest point of the
an access hatch. Feeding frequency is generally geared to
curve for the bird to grasp. This is the commonest perch
the appetite ofthe individual bird, but care must be taken
offered to the larger raptors such as hawks and eagles.
as overfeeding non-working raptors with fatty prey such
In both cases the length of the leash should not be so
as laboratory rats can lead to atherosclerosis and obesity.
long as to allow the bird sufficient speed off the perch to
Avian Housing and Husbandry 155
(a)
(b)
Figure 10.3 (a) A block perch for falcons, with tether, metal swivel and jesses. (b) A bow perch for hawks with padding to prevent bumblefoot.
Part Il: Avian species
Figure 10.4 Bumblefoot in an Eagle owl (8ubo bubo).
be violently jerked backwards when it becomes taut but
aso Pmons piq a j ie hous os aq t Poqs iaa
its footing, it becomes suspended in mid-air by its legs.
Hacking boxes
 These are carry boxes to move birds of prey around from
place to place. Ihey are a simple box design, often made
Figure 10.5 A hacking box containing a Harris hawk (Parabuteo
of wood or plastic, with a perch and a front opening door.
unicinctus). Note the leash attached to the jeses that trails outside
The raptor is placed into the box, and a leash and swivel
the box and the Astroturf covering the floor of the box.
are attached to its jesses which then exits the box so the
falconer can control the bird by grasping this leash before
in dovecotes or dove lofts, many of which are hundreds of
the door is opened (see Figure 10.5).
years old. Conversely the more athletic racing pigeons are
- a  auisa aas s u as pas
Columbiformes
pose and divided into breeding quarters, roosting areas
Shelter requirements
 and traps for racing.
There is a huge variation in the forms of housing offered
to doves and pigeons in the United Kingdom. To a large
Racing pigeons
extent, it depends on the reason for which the bird is
 A loft design will depend largely on the individual own-
being kept. Ornamental doves and pigeons are often kept
 er's preference and space available. It is recommended
156 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
that the minimum space requirement in the loft area be
The type of species kept also determines the nature
0.25 m? per bird with head room of around 2 m for the
of the enclosure. For example, geese enjoy areas of open
younger stock. This requirement should be doubled for
grassland to graze. However, they are inclined to turn
adult individuals (Harper, 1996).
 grass around a pond into a mud-bath. This can lead to
 Ihe provision of wooden doweling perches is standard.
the rapid spread of pathogens, such as avian tuberculosis
ds uad a o  paun st 
(Mycobacteriurm avium). Because of this, many waterfowl
than there are birds be provided to avoid overcrowding
keepers will concrete the edges of ponds or place obsta-
stresses (Harper, 1996). The perches should be arranged
cles around them to prevent such damage occurring.
side by side rather than stacked vertically. Ihis is because,
 Other factors must be taken into account when pro-
as with all birds, the dominant individuals take the high-
viding ponds. One is the high incidence of bumblefoot
est perches leading to soiling of birds below.
or pedal dermatitis and abscessation, which is made
Within the loft system, an owner may house his or her
worse if the standing surfaces surrounding the pond are
 pigeons in several different ways.
rough and muddy. A smooth concrete finish is there-
fore preferred.
Racing loft - natural loff system: In the natural loft
Any pond should also contain an island at its centre.
system, both male and female pigeons are housed to-
This is useful to encourage nesting, as waterfowl feel more
gether during the reproductive season. Each pair has its
secure from predation on such islands.
 own nest box and perch but can mix with the other pairs
in a communal area. As its name suggests, this system
Maintenance of water quality
is the most natural, but it may be more stressful for the
Maintaining good water quality can be one of the most
birds, demanding that they race and rear their young at
difficult aspects of keeping waterfowl. With large stock-
the same time.
ing densities or with muddied margins to the water
Racing loft - widowhood loft system: Ihe widowhood loft
area, the water itself can be rapidly turned into a murky
133
houses only the males. Ihe hen birds are housed in an
breeding ground for bacteria and parasites. It is impor-
adjacent loft, and this provides an additional incentive for
tant to prevent stagnation of the water, which means
AN
the males to race back! To reduce fighting, it is necessary
the standing water must move out of the pond, to be
se uao piq qoea pue piq aad uooi aio apiaond ol
replaced by fresh water. Ideally this should be achieved
 a double-sized nest box as well as individual feeding sta-
by using natural resources such as local streams, but
RT
tions. Ihe racing season in the United Kingdom is from
in some cases water has to be piped in and out to
April to July for the older birds and July to September
achieve it.
for the younger ones. The females are allowed into the
Other methods of water purification include the plant-
widowhood loft just before the males to allow rearing of
ing of certain marginal bog plants, which can also pro-
a single chick. After this the hens are removed and the
vide cover for waterfowl and enhance the look of a pond.
 males fed to fitness for racing.
A specific reed type (Phragmites australis) has been used
for this.
Young loft: Ihe young loft is used to house that year's
young and so will have differing populations of pigeons
Mixing species
throughout the year. Depending on the breeding success
 Many waterfowl keepers will wish to keep several differ-
of the year, overcrowding can occur and the diseases and
ent species together. Ihere are some species which cannot
stress that go with it.
be kept inthe same water. Exanples include mixing fresh-
water species and salt-water species. Salt-water birds can
Anseriformes
be kept on freshwater, but they do need very deep water
Shelter requirements
levels to enable them to dive properly.
The Anseriformes order is a large one but there is a com-
Other combinations to avoid include:
mon requirement for all the species and that is the need
 Mixing together more than one pair of trumnpeter
for open water. Ihe form in which it is presented, how-
swans
ever, depends on the species. Ihe swan family will benefit
● Mixing of Hawaian geese with Canada geese
from deeper water in which they can swim and dabble
* Mixing of a pair of Bewick's swans with a pair of whis-
than the duck family.
tling swans (Forbes & Richardson, 1996).
Avian Housing and Husbandry 157
H is generally advisable to keep any swan or shelduck as a
suffciently large enough to allow them to stretch their
single pair on smaller ponds as multiple pairs willalways
wings in all three dimensions. Parrot minimum cage
fight in the nesting season.
sizes should be similarly assessed, but often they can be
Other considerations
to maintain some degree of familiarity. For longer periods
 One of the main concerns of any waterfowl keeper is the
of treatment, larger spaces should be provided to encour-
loss of birds to wild predators, such as foxes, cats, weasels,
age exercise.
stoats and mink Ihe provision of an island in the centre
It is important to site birds away from areas of noise
of an expanse of water is one of the most useful preventive
and from potential predators (e.g. cats), which may stress
measures. Other measures include the erection of fox-
the patient. If the bird is feather plucking, then every at-
proof fencing or the setting of live traps for mink, weasels
 tempt to maintain environmental temperatures above
and stoats. It is worthwhile noting that if non-native spe-
20°C should be made to avoid chilling. Dimming lights
cies of birds are allowed to escape, the owner could be in
may also help reduce stress as may providing some low-
contravention of the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981,
level background noise such as a radio - particularly for
which expressly forbids the release of non-native species
 prey species such as Psittaciformes and Passeriformes.
into the wild in the United Kingdom.
Waterfowl may be kept out of water for a few days, but
if longer periods are anticipated then attempts should be
Quarantine
made to provide water for swimming and to encourage
Birds are highly susceptible to viral diseases, and many
 preening and dabbling behaviour.
small Psittaciformes may carry Chlamydophila psittaci
It is vitally important that any practice-owned
without showing clinical signs. For this reason it is im-
bird cage is cleansed thoroughly between patients to
 portant to consider quarantining any new bird addition
avoid spread of diseases. Ihe use of povidone iodine
before adding it to your collection. Periods of quarantine
based cleansing agents such as Tamodine-E (Vetark
53
153
suggested have varied from 4 weeks to 6 months. Testing
 Professional Ltd) or quaternary ammonium compounds
for important diseases where possible should be under-
such as F10? (Health and Hygiene Pty) or sulphur com-
taken within this period.
pounds such as Virkon-S (Dupont Animal Health)
The new bird(s) should be housed preferably not only
should be considered.
se aoeds ine aieiedas e ul mq Aieiae/ages aieiedas e ul
References
 many diseases such as psittacosis and Bornaviruses may
Forbes, N.A. and Parry-Jones, J. (1996) Management and
LH
spread through the aerosol route.Separate utensils should
husbandry (raptors). Manual of Raptors, Pigeons and
be used, and the quarantined birds should be cleaned
Waterfowl (eds PH. Benyon, N.A. Forbes & N.H. Harcourt-
out and fed last to avoid cross-contamination. Disinfec-
Brown), Pp. 116-128. BSAVA, Cheltenham, UK.
tion is important to avoid potential spread of diseases.
Forbes, N.A. and Richardson, T. (1996) Husbandry and nutrition
Typical disinfectants suitable for birds include quater-
{waterfowl). Manual of Raptors, Pigeons and Waterfowl
nary ammonium compound based products, such as
(eds PH. Benyon, N.A. Forbes & N.H. Harcourt-Brown),
Pp. 289-298. BSAVA, Cheltenham, UK.
Ark-Klens (Vetark Professional Ltd) and F10 (Health
Harper, FD.W. (1996) Husbandry and nutrition (pigeons).
and Hygiene Pty) as well as sulphur-based compounds
Manuat of Raptors, Pigeons and Waterfowl (eds PH. Benyon,
such as Virkon-S? (Dupont Animal Health).
NA. Forbes & N.H. Harcourt-Brown), Pp. 233-236. BSAVA,
Cheltenham, UK.
Hospitalised birds
Further reading
The guidelines given above should be applied as much
Chitty, J.C. and Harcourt-Brown, N. (2005) Marual of Psittacine
as possible for any hospitalised bird. Raptors may be
Birds, 2nd edn. BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
brought in on their mobile block or bow perch and teth-
Chitty, J.C. and Lierz, M.(2008) Manual of Raptors, Pigeons and
ered inside a standard veterinary kennel unit which is
Passerine Birds. BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
Chapter 11
Avian Handling and Chemical
Restraint
Handling the avian patient
Prior to approaching the capture of the avian patient,
Is there a need to restrain the avian patient?
all items of cage furniture or other obstacles, such as toys,
This may seem a basic point, but it is sometimes necessary
water bowls, food bowls, perches, should be removed
to be sure that restraint is required. A decision on whether
from the cage or box. Ihis helps to avoid self-trauma and
the bird in question is safe to restrain has to be made.
reduces the time needed to capture the patient.
Points which need to be considered include
 Once you have made these initial arrangements, you
· Is the bird in respiratory distress, and is the stress of
can then confdently approach the avian patient.
handing going to exacerbate this?
· Is the bird easily accessible, allowing quick, stress-free
Equipment used in avian handling
Birds of prey
and safe capture?
· Does the bird require medication via the oral or
Leather gauntlets are a must for restraint of all birds of
injectable route, or can it be medicated via nebulisa-
 prey as their talons, and the power of the grasp of each
foot, canbe extremely strong. The feet of birds of prey and
123
tion, food or drinking water?
not the beak (unless dealing with the larger eagles where
d5
· Does the bird require an in-depth physical examina
the beak is also a formidable weapon) represent the major
tion at close quarters, or is cage observation enough?
AN
If the decision is reached that restraint is necessary,
danger to the handler. It is important to note that when
it should be remembered that many avian patients
the bird of prey is positioned on the gauntleted hand the
wrist of this hand (traditionally the left hand in European
are highly stressed individuals, so any restraint should in-
LH
volve minimal periods of handling and captivity.
falconers) is kept above the height of the elbow. If not,
PA
the bird has a tendency to walk up the arm of the handler
Techniques useful in handling avian patients
with potentially serious and painful results! Ihe type of
The majority of avian patients seen in practice (with the
gauntlet should be either a specific falconer's gauntlet or
exception of the owl family, Strigiformes) are diurnal, so
one of the heavy-duty leather pruning gauntlets available
 reduced or dimmed lighting usually has a calming effect.
from garden centres. The larger the bird of prey generally
This can be used to the handler's advantage when catch-
the larger and thicker the gauntlet required. To handle a
ing a flighty or stressed bird.
bird of prey, the following steps should be taken:
In the case of Passeriformes and Psittaciformes, turn-
First, place the gauntleted hand into the cage or box or
ing down the room lights or drawing the curtains or
beside the bird's perch.
blinds in order to dim the room is enough. For birds of
Grasp the jesses (these are the leather straps which are
prey, there may wellbe access to the practice's or the bird's
attached to the anklets) with the thumb and forefin-
ger of the gauntleted hand and encourage the bird to
head and draw tight around the neck, leaving the beak
step up onto the glove. Most birds prefer to step up, so
free but completely covering the eyes. Ihey are used to
always position your hand slightly above the perch.
calm some raptors when on the wrist or during handling
· Once the bird is on the hand, retain hold of the jesses
or transporting.
Bal spiq au ol aso rauganog pue q uaamiaq
H is also advisable to keep noise levels down when
and loop the end of the jesses through the third and
 of hearing is their
fourth fingers. In birds where a hood canbe used, such
next best sense after sight. With these two factors borne in
as many of the falcons, then slip the hood over the
mind, stress and time for capture can be greatly reduced
bird's head.
Avian Handling and Chemical Restraint 159
The bird of prey may then be safely examined 'on the
from being bitten without masking the true strength of
hand’ and frequently is docile enough to allow manipula-
the handler's grasp. Ihis is very important because birds
tion of wings and beak, for small injections to be admin-
 do not have a diaphragm and so rely solely on the out-
istered or for oral dosing.
ward movement of their ribcage for inspiration. Restric-
If the bird of prey does not have jesses on but is trained
 tion of this with too tight a grip can be fatal.
to perch on the hand, it may well step up onto the gauntlet
Before attemptingto restrain the patient,its cage should
of its own accord. If not, then it is advisable to have the 
be cleared of all obstacles which may hinder capture or re-
room darkened for Falconiformes. Alternatively, a blue or 
sult in injury of the patient. Ihe towel and hand are then
red light source could be used. Ihis allows the handler to
introduced into the cage, and the bird is firmly but gently
see the bird but prevents the bird of prey seeing normally
grasped from behind. First grasp the head. Position the
as their sight is limited in these light spectra.
thumb and forefinger beneath the lower beak, pushing it
You must then cast' the bird by grasping it from behind,
upwards and preventing the bird from biting. Ihen use
ensuring that you are aware of where its head and feet are.
the rest of the towel to wrap around the bird, gently re-
In order to cast the bird ofprey for a closer examination,
 straining its wing movements. Ihis will avoid excessive
the bird may be approached once on the fist by a second
 struggling and wing trauma (Figure 11.1). Ihe patient
handler from behind with a thick towel, ensuring that you
 may then be cocooned in the towel with the head still
are aware of where the bird's head is. Ihe towel is draped
 held extended from behind through the towel and the
over the wings and the hands are quickly slipped down
rest loosely wrapped around the bird's body. Individual
to grasp the legs just above the feet to prevent the bird
limbs may then be drawn from the towel one at a time for
footing (grasping) either itself or you. The bird's dorsum
 Examination, or the body accessed for medicating.
may then be brought against the handler's ventrum and
The towel technique is also better than gloves alone be-
another person can then examine the bird more closely It
cause the towel presents a larger surface area for the bird
is vitally important that the handler keeps the feet separate
 to try to evade. Ihe bird is then less likely to try to bolt
53
 toprevent the raptor from grasping one foot with its other
153
for freedom, whereas abare hand is a much smaller target
foot, thus avoiding puncture wounds and infection which
d5
'sduale adessa sateimosua pue
can have serious consequences. If the raptor is loose in its
aviary, then it is advisable to use nets and towels
be used and the bird transferred to a latex gloved hand.
Finally, it is important to remember that the majority of
aiasand oi e s! l os umo Aemaau ane Aaid go spi
ART
the integrity of their fight and tail feathers. A falconer
Aal J! ay spIq au Io sTY Buaes ioy noA Yueu iou Aeu
then cannot fly that bird until after the feathers have been
replaced at the next moult - usually the following autumn.
Parrots and other cage birds
All of these birds will benefit from the use of subdued or
blue or red light to calm the bird and to allow it to be
restrained with minimal fuss.
Psittaciformes' main weapon is its beak and powerful
bite. ( The hyacinth macaw, the largest inthe family, can eas-
ily crack the largest Brazil nuts, and so even sever a finger.)
Passeriformes main weapon may be its beak, although
this is less damaging as a biting weapon. It may still be a
sharp stabbing weapon in the case of starlings and mynahs.
Heavy gauntlets are not recommended for restraint
of either family group as they do not allow for accurate
judgement of grip on the patient. Instead, dish or bath
towels for the larger species and paper towels for the
Figure 11.1 Restraint of larger parrots may be easily performed
smaller ones are advised. Ihese provide some protection
with a towel.
160 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Figure 11.2 Smaller Psittaciformes suchi as this budgerigar
Figure 11.3 Restraint of a pigeon.
(Me/oosittacus unoufatus) may be restrained with one hand. Note
the scaly beak infection.
The neck of the bird should be held between the index and
 handler's fingers curl around the neck and under the bill,
middle fingers. You can then use your thumb and forefin-
while the thumb supports the back of the neck and the
ger to manipulate the legs or wings. The rest of the hand
potentially weak area of the atlanto-occipital joint. Failing
should gently cup the bird's body to discourage struggling
this, a swan's or shepherd's crook, or other smooth metal,
(Figure 11.2). It is still necessary to be cautious with this
or a wooden pole with a hook attached, can be used to
approach to prevent over-constraining the patient as this
catch the neck - again high up under the bill. Care should
could cause physical harm.
be exercised with these 'swan hooks' as overzealous han-
123
In the case of particularly aggressive parrots, which are
dling can lead to neck trauma.
very diffcult to handle, leather gauntlets may be used.
Having restrained the head and beak, it is essential that
 Extreme care should be exercised as too strong a grasp
you control the powerful wings by using a towel, thrown
4
around the bird's body could prove fatal.
or draped over the patient's back and loosely wrapped
under the sternum. Many institutions have access to more
Other avian species
specialised goose or swan cradle bags which wrap around
LH
Toucans and hornbills: Ihese have an extremely im
the body, containing the wings but allowing the feet, head
PA
pressive beak, with a serrated edge to the upper bill
and neck to remain free.
Providing the head is initially controlled using the towel
 The waterfowl may now be safely carried or restrained
technique previously described for parrots, anelastic band
by tucking its body (contained within the towel or
or tape may be fastened around the bill to prevent biting.
restraint bag) under one arm and holding this close to
The handler still needs to be careful of stabbing manoeu-
the torso. With the other hand, the handler may hold the
vres, and it is a good idea to work with a second handler
neck loosely from behind, just below the beak.
who is solely responsible for containing the beak. Other-
wise, restraint is the same as for the Passeriformes.
Capturing escaped avian patients
Where a bird is loose, a number of methods can be used
Columbiformes: Ihese are restrained in a manner simi-
lar to the Psittaciformes (Figure 11.3). Ihe following ap-
to capture it. Darkening the room and reducing its area,
if possible, are both helpful to calm and confine the bird.
proach may be used, with the bird's wings and feet cupped
 In the case of larger parrots, the use of a heavy bath
in one hand from the dorsum, while resting the sternum
towel thrown over the bird can confine it long enough to
in the other hand.
allow the handler to restrain the head from behind and
Waterfowl: Restraint of these species is relatively straight-
then wrap the patient in the towel.
forward but may become hazardous with the larger swan
For very small birds, a fine aviary or butterfly net is ex-
and goose family. Ihe frst priority is capturing the head.
tremely useful to catch the bird safely either in mid-flight
This can be done by grasping the waterfowl around the
or against the side of the cage or room. Ihe mesh should
upper neck from behind. It is important to ensure that the
be fine enough to ensure that no limbs or feathers will
Avian Handling and Chemical Restraint 161
become entangled within it. Ihe mesh is best made of a
 possible,be inflated as this will cause pressure necro-
dark or black material to restrict light and calm the bird.
sis in the lining of the trachea. In some cases, such
 It is important to ensure that the patient is rapidly
as when flushing out the crop or proventriculus of
transferred from the net into the hander's hands or a con-
the bird to remove foreign bodies, it may be neces-
tainer as this is the most stressful period of the capture,
sary to inflate the cuffin order to prevent inhalation
and the inability to see whether the patient is in respira-
 pneumonia. This must be performed with great care.
tory distress can lead to fatalities.
3. Avian lungs are semi-rigid structures. It is the air sac sys-
To recapture escaped raptors, a lure, baited with prey,
tem that is responsible for the movement of air through
can be used. Most raptors will remain within the area of
the lungs, in combination with the lateral movement
their release for several days, and many captive-reared
ofthe chest wall. Therefore, ifthere is any form of restric-
birds will not be able to kill prey for themselves. They will
tion to the outward movement of chest and keel, ventila-
then become hungry and will often look for their handler
tion will be reduced, leading to hypoxia.
to offer prey, either on the glove, if they are trained birds,
or within the vicinity of their cage, if they are non-trained
Pre-anaesthetic preparation
Exhibit or breeding birds. Patience and persistence are two
Blood testing
essential virtues when trying to recapture escaped raptors!
H may be advisable to run biochemistry and haematology
tests on avian patients prior to administering anaesthet-
Aspects of chemical restraint
ics, particularly in older and obviously unwell individu-
Assessment of the patient's status
als. Blood may be taken from the following vessels:
All methods of chemical restraint require that the patient
+Ihe right jugular vein in nearly all species (it is signif-
is first restrained manually, even though it may be for a
cantly larger than the left) (see Figure 11.4).
short period, while the medication is being administered.
· In the larger species the brachial vein, which runs
Ihe aim is to keep the period of manual restraint to a
cranially on the ventral aspect of the humerus (see
53
minimum, in order to reduce stress.
Figure 11.5).
Before any form of chemical immobilisation can be
- In many waterfowl, long-legged birds and raptors, the
used, an assessment of the patient's status must be made.
 medial metatarsal vein, which runs, as its name sug-
The following points need to be considered:
gests, along the medial aspect of the metatarsal area
· Is the procedure to be performed necessary for life-
(see Figure 11.6).
saving medication or treatment, or can it be postponed
if the patient's health is sub-optimal?
Fasting
PA
· Is the patient's condition likely to be worsened by the
Because of the high metabolic rate of avian patients,
anaesthetic drugs used?
Extended fasting may be detrimental to their health and
their ability to recover from anaesthesia. This is because
Implications of avian respiratory anatomy
and physiology
There are three main differences between avian and
mammalian anatomy and physiology, which are impor-
tant when considering restraint:
1. Absence of a complete larynx. The bird does have
a glottis, but there are no vocal cords or epiglottis to
worry about on intubation. The majority of the vocal
sounds a bird makes come from the syrinx, which lies
 at the bifurcation of the trachea into the bronchi.
2. Presence of complete cartilaginous rings supporting
the trachea. This is important for two reasons.
·It is difficult to suffocate the bird by constricting the
neck.
There is no 'give' to the trachea, and so inflatable
Figure 11.4 The right jugular vein is the largest accesible vein in
cuffs on endotracheal tubes should not, if at all
most birds.
162 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Pre-anaesthetic medications
Pre-anaesthetic medications are infrequently used in
birds. Of those used, fluid therapy is the most important.
Whether it is crystalloid or colloid, pre-, intra- and post-
operative fluids can make the difference between success-
ful surgery and failure. Fluid therapy is covered in more
detail in Chapter 14.
Antimuscarinic premedicants
Atropine and glycopyrrolate have been used as pre-
anaesthetic medicants to reduce vagally induced brady-
cardia and oral secretions which may block endotracheal
tubes. Ihey both, however, may have unwanted side ef-
fects. Ihe two main side effects are
Figure 11.5 The brachial vein is easy to see but is fragile and
'blows' easily.
· Causing unacceptably high heart rates, increasing
 myocardial oxygen demand and so increasing the risk
 of cardiac hypoxia and arrest.
·Making oral or respiratory secretions so thick and
tenacious that they make endotracheal tube blockage
even more likely.
Benzodiazepine premedicants
53
 Avian Specil
Diazepam or midazolam may be used in waterfowl as
these species may exhibit periods of apnoea during mask
induction of anaesthesia. Ihis is a stress response (often
referred to slightly inaccurately as a 'diving response')
mediated by the trigeminal receptors in the beak and
:11
nares. When this response is triggered, the breath is
RT
held and the blood flow is preferentially diverted to the
PA
kidneys, heart and brain.
Figure 11.6 The medial metatarsal vein is easy to access in
waterfowl and long-legged birds.
Induction of anaesthesia
hepatic glycogen stores, which provide the most rapid form
Anaesthesia may be induced with two main catego-
of stored energy, can be quickly depleted. Birds larger than
ries of drugs: injectable anaesthetics and inhalational
300 g bodyweight, which have larger glycogen stress, are
anaesthetics.
slightly less likely to become hypoglycaemic with fasting.
The purpose of fasting is to ensure ermptying of the
Injectable agents
crop. Fasting prevents passive reflux of fluid or food
Advantages of injectable anaesthetics include
material during the anaesthetic which may then be
·Ease of administration (most birds have a good pecto-
inhaled, obstructing the air way or causing pneumonia.
ral muscle mass for intramuscular injections)
 l m s a s io 
· Rapid induction
 3 hours depending on their body size. Ihe smallst have
·Low cost
the shortest period of fasting, often amounting to just
·Good availability
1-2 hours at most. Birds weighing over 300 g may be
 Disadvantages include
able to tolerate an overnight fast of 8-10 hours, assuming
+ Recovery is often dependent on organ metabolism.
 good health and body condition, and this may be neces-
·Reversal of medications in emergency situations is
sary particularly if surgery on the gastrointestinal system
potentially diffcult.
 or crop is intended. Whatever the period of fasting, water
Prolonged and sometimes traumatic recovery periods
should only be withheld for 1 hour prior to anaesthesia.
may ensue
Avian Handling and Chemical Restraint 163
·Muscle necrosis at injection sites and lack of adequate
halothane or isoflurane to allow a surgical plane of an-
muscle relaxation may occur with some medications.
aesthesia to be reached.
The following are some of the injectable anaesthetics
Isoflurane: Isoflurane is the anaesthetic of choice for the
more commonly used in avian practice.
Ul saiads ueae u asm iog pasua ose st l "luaed uei
Ketamine and ketamine combination anaesthesia:
the United Kingdom. Induction may be achieved by face
When used alone, ketamine produces inadequate an-
mask at 4-5% concentration, reducing to 1.25-2% for main-
aesthesia and recoveries are often traumatic, with the
 tenance, preferably via endotracheal tubing inserted into the
patient flapping wildly. Doses of 20-50 mg/kg are quot-
 'a y s e   's   r 1
ed (Forbes & Lawton, 1996). However, combining it
increase in gas concentration of 25-30% is required
with the benzodiazepines, diazepam (0.5-2 mg/kg) or
Advantages of isoflurane include
midazolam (0.2 mg/kg) (Curro, 1998) helps with mus-
 Low blood solubility and minimal metabolism of the
cle relaxation and sedation, reduces flapping on recov-
drug by the bird (<0.2%). This means that the drug
ery and allows the dose of ketamine to be reduced to
does not accumulate in the bloodstream and is rapidly
around 10-20 mg/kg.
excreted by the patient, allowing rapid changes in an-
Ketamine may also be combined with xylazine
aesthetic depth.
(1-2.2 mg/kg) (Forbes & Lawton, 1996) or medeto-
· Minimal cardiopulmonary effects at sedative or light
midine (60-85 mg/kg) (Forbes & Lawton, 1996). This
anaesthesia levels.
inproves recovery, sedation and analgesia and again al-
· Little or no tendency to cause cardiac arrhythmia
lows reduction of the ketamine dosage to 10-20 mg/kg
·Unlike halothane, isoflurane does not require meta-
depending on the species and procedure. Ihe medetomi-
bolism in the liver, making it suitable for sick avian
 dine may be reversed with atipamezole (the same volume
cases.
as medetomidine is given). However, the alpha-2 drugs
· Cardiovascular arrest does not occur at the same time
53
such as medetomidine have severe cardiopulmonary de-
as respiratory arrest, allowing time for resuscitation.
Eci
pressive effects and may compromise blood flow to the
· Isoflurane has a minimum alveolar concentration
kidneys, risking renal damage. Sun-conures have been
(MAC) (i.e. the concentration that produces no re-
noted to be particularly intolerant of ketamine-alpha-2
sponse in 50% of cases exposed to a noxious stimulus)
combinations (Rosskopf et al., 1989).
of 1.44% in cockatoos (Curro et al., 1994).
The combined medications are usually given intramus-
Sevoflurane: Like isoflurane, it requires little or no organ
cularly. Induction will take on average 5-10 minutes, but
metabolism and is very safe. Slightly higher percentages
PA
complete recovery may take 2-4 hours or more and is
are required to induce and maintain the patient, but low
dose dependent.
blood solubility does allow rapid changes in anaesthesia
It is also worth noting that ketamine is actively excreted
levels (Greenacre, 1997). It also depresses plasma ionised
from the proximal tubule of the kidneys, and so any kid-
calcium levels significantly, and so care should be taken
ney damage can lead to a prolonged recovery when using
when using in African Grey parrots which are prone to
this drug.
hypocalcaemia.
a jugular, medial metatarsal or brachial vein catheter. It
Maintenance of anaesthesia
produces profound apnoea and is rarely used as an induc-
For prolonged anaesthetic procedures, gaseous main-
tion or anaesthetic agent in birds.
tenance is required. Isoflurane and sevoflurane are cur-
rently the agents of choice.
Inhalation agents
Nitrous oxide: This is rarely used in avian anaesthe-
intubate the bird for more effective control of rate and
sia. It has good analgesic properties, but accumulates
depth of anaesthesia. Its respiratory depressive effects
 1l 1n no aos si atn 'suno moloy 'a u
 are also dose dependent. This means that with prolonged
 may therefore accumulate in the air sacs and may con- 
aban pu yiaoude aaq Ae aned a 'saaoid
siderably prolong anaesthetic recovery times. Recent
 either manual or positive pressure ventilation. This can be
evidence disputes this, but it cannot be used on its own
 more of a risk with some species, such as the African grey
for anaesthesia. It must be used in combination with
parrot, than with others.
164 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Endotracheal intubation
Anaesthetic circuits
The beak must be held open by using an avian gag or by
Anaesthetic circuits used must be non-rebreathing and
attaching short lengths of bandage to the upper and lower
minimise dead space as many avian patients are much
beaks. One handler can then use them to hold the beak
smaller than the more routinely seen cats and dogs. Mod-
open, while a second intubates the bird (see Figure 11.7).
ified Bain circuits or Mapleson C circuits are useful for
The glottis will be easilyvisible at the base of the tongue, in
these reasons. Even the Ayres T-piece may be used for
the midline. Intubation can be made easier if the tongue is
larger parrots and waterfowl. In any instance a 0.25-0.5 L
grasped with atraumatic forceps, enabling it and the glot-
rebreathing bag is frequently necessary.
tis to be pulled forward. Sizes of tube vary but would be
typically a 3-3.5 F for a Grey parrot and up to a 4-5 F for
Air sac catheterisation
a larger Macaw. Ihe smaller tubes will block more easily
In an airway obstruction, or if head or oral surgery is re-
with respiratory secretions, and the use of parasympa-
quired, it may be necessary to deliver the inhalant gases
tholytics does not stop this. Indications of tube blockage
via a tube placed directly into one of the air sacs. Ihis is
include apnoea and initially increased expiratory phase of
possible because many of the avian air sacs are very close
respiration. Such cases should be extubated and the tube
to the skin's surface. These structures take no part in gas-
checked for mucus plugs.
eous exchange, simply shunting the air back and forth
It is better not to inflate the cuff on endotracheal tubes
through the rigid lung structure, but, as birds extract
because of the risk of causing severe damage to the lin-
Oxygen from the air on expiration as well as inspiration, it
ing of the rigid avian trachea. It is therefore essential to
does not matter which direction the oxygen and gases are
use a well-fitting tube. If positive pressure is required, the
introduced into the respiratory system.
very smallest inflation of the cuff may be used - enough
Air sacs which may be catheterised include the clavicu-
 to prevent air escaping when ventilated but not enough to
lar air sacs and the abdominal or caudal thoracic air sacs. A
53
 traumatise the tracheal rings.
small stab incision is made in the skin over the air sac. The
SPECI
underlying muscle is bluntly dissected with a pair of hae-
mostats, and the endotracheal tube may then be inserted
AVIAN
to a depth of 4-5 mm and sutured in place. Ihe clavicular
air sacs lie at the thoracic inlet, just dorsal to the clavicles.
:11
The caudal thoracic air sacs may be entered between the
PART
sixth and seventh ribs in Psittaciformes. The abdominal air
sacs may be entered by raising the leg cranially so that the
femur crosses the last ribs, incising just caudal to the stifle.
Monitoring of anaesthesia
Monitoring of anaesthesia is crucial. Ihe depth of an-
aesthesia should be adequate enough for the procedure
required, while cardiovascular and respiratory parame-
ters should remain constant. The following points should
be considered:
● During the initial stages of anaesthesia (stages l and 2),
the respiratory rate will be shallow and erratic. The pa-
tient will be lethargic and have drooping eyelids, a low-
ered head and rufled feathers.
· As the depth increases, palpebral, corneal, pedal and
cere reflexes will remain, but all voluntary movement
ceases.
·As the next stage of anaesthesia (stage 3) is reached,
the respiration rate becomes regular, and the depth of
breathing is increased. Ihe corneal and pedal reflexes
Figure 11.7 Intubation of a Buzzard using a 'Coles' endotracheal
tube which is tapered at the tip to make intubation easier.
are slow and the palpebral reflex disappears. Ihis is the
Avian Handling and Chemical Restraint 165
light plane of anaesthesia required for minor proce-
 probe attachments are the best and may be used cloacally
dures. Ihe depth at which the pedal reflex is lost but
or orally. However, care should be taken in interpreting
the corneal reflex is retained will allow most surgical
results due to the difference in haemoglobin format in
procedures to be performed.
birds from mammals, and their main use is in monitor-
· As anaesthesia is allowed to deepen, respiratory rate
and tidal volume will continue to decrease, until,
 In addition, many birds can be hypercapnic despite be-
if allowed, respiratory arrest will occur. Therefore,
ing well oxygenated, so monitoring end-tidal COz is sug-
monitoring of the rebreathing bag, for rate and depth
 gested as more accurate for assessing avian ventilation
of respiration, can provide valuable information.
(Edling et al., 2001).
One study indicated that the ideal anaesthetic depth oC-
Again, it is important to find an oximeter which can
curred when the patient's eyelids were completely closed,
read the higher heart rates of even anaesthetised birds as
pupils were mydriatic, pupillary light reflex was delayed,
these will be greater than those of cats or dogs. Indeed,
corneal reflex resulted in slow movement of the third eye-
no pulse oximeters currently available commercially will
lid across the eye, all muscles were relaxed and all pain
read heart rates of birds less than 150 g accurately.
reflexes were absent (Korbel et al., 1993).
Additional supportive therapy
Equipment used for monitoring anaesthesia
Recumbency
A stethoscope may be used to monitor the heart rate
H is important that the ribcage is unrestricted, otherwise
externally, or, during anaesthesia, an oesophageal stetho-
hypoxia will develop. Common positions for surgery
scope may be inserted.
 include lateral or dorsal recumbency.
ECGleads may be attached using adhesive pads or fine
 Dorsal recumbency may be a problem in larger ani-
needles to the avian skin rather than the more cumber-
mals of any species when the larger body organs may
some and traumatic alligator clips. These leads may be
 press on the lungs. Ihis is exacerbated in birds because
53
153
attached to the wing web (propatagium) and the folds of
 of the lack of a diaphragm and presence of thin-walled air
skin connecting the legs to the body wall cranially. The
sacs. Some really large species also have a problem with
avian ECG differs somewhat from its mammalian coun-
ventral recumbency due to the weight of the bird press-
terpart due to a much larger RS wave than Q. Readers are
ing on the keel or sternum. However, the smaller species
advised to consult standard texts for further information
pue uaqoid siu uony Aiaiaaas se ians jou op Aeauan
on the ECG trace for avian patients (Lumeij & Richie,
aau c dupoooe pauosod aq Au
1994; Oglesbee et al., 2001). An example of a lead II nor-
PA
mal ECG wave in a bird is shown in Chapter 16.
Intermittent positive pressure ventilation and
Respiratory flow monitors can be used if endotracheal
resuscitation techniques
tubes are involved, although the very low flow rates of
If a bird's respiratory rate becomes depressed below
 3-4 breaths per minute, then it should be given respira-
designed with cats and dogs in mind.
tory assistance. The usual anaesthetic checklist should
Capnography may be used in birds. Side stream tends
be checked - flow rates, patency of endotracheal tubing.
to be preferred owing to many patients' small size. An
anaesthetic gas levels, etc., and the emergency ABC (Air-
end-tidal CO2 level of 30-45 mm Hg indicates adequate
way, Breathing, Cardiovascular) protocol initiated if ap-
ventilation in an African Grey Parrot (Edling et al., 2001).
noeic. In general, the percentage of anaesthetic gas deliv-
The advantage of capnography is that it can then be used
ered should be reduced or the anaesthetic ceased during
to indicate the rate and depth of respiration required
 periods of apnoea, and respiratory support started.
when performing IPPV.
If the avian patient is still breathing, even spo-
Doppler flow recorders can be useful to assess periph-
radically, then positive pressure ventilation with 100%
eral perfusion and rate and rhythm of pulse. The medial
oxygen should be used at a rate of 2-3 times per min-
 metatarsal vessels (which as their name suggests run up
ute. This is best done with a mechanical ventilator unit,
the medial aspect of the lower leg) can be readily used for
operating at 10-15 cm of water (see Figure 11.8). If us-
this technique.
ing manual “bagging' techniques, then the gentlest of
Pulse oximeters may also be used to measure the rela-
touches on the rebreathing bag - enough just to allow
tive saturation of the haemoglobin with oxygen. Reflector
the bird's ribcage to rise - should be used. If the bird is
166 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Minimising the risk of hypothermia
To minimise hypothermia a series of procedures can be
used:
· Ihe surgical feld should receive minimal plucking of
feathers and minimal soaking with surgical antiseptic
solutions. (Avian skin has low levels of bacteria and
fungi in comparison to mammals.)
· Ihe patient should be covered with surgical drapes,
preferably clear drapes.
· Ihe patient may be placed onto a circulating warm
water or hot air blanket.
+Warm water filled latex gloves may be placed close to
the patient. These should not be allowed to come into
direct contact with the bird, as when too hot they may
Figure 11.8 A cockatoo attached to a small animal ventilator after
e mp ene k ai loo ai se pue es
intubation.
away from the patient.
totally apnoeic, then a rate of 10-15 breaths per minute
Although it is important to prevent hypothermia, care
should be started.
should also be taken not to induce hyperthermia. Dur-
 Doxapram may be used orally or by injection to stimu-
ing the operation, cloacal temperature can be measured
late the central nervous system respiration centres. Doses
directly. It may be necessary to use an electronic probe as
 of 10 mg/kg by injection or 0.5 mg orally are useful.
most mercury-based thermometers do not register tem-
 If the bird is being maintained on a mask rather than
 peratures as high as the core body temperature of birds.
being intubated, it is possible to carry out mechanical
133
ventilation by grasping the uppermost wing at the carpus,
Fluid therapy and blood transfusions
d5
and gently but frmly moving it in and out at 90° to the
Healthy, anaesthetised birds should receive replace-
AN
chest wall. This will simulate muscular movement of the
 ment fluids at 10 mL/kg/h for the first 2 hours, and then
ribcage and so allow air to move back and forth through
 5-8 mL/kg/h thereafter to prevent overhydration (Curro,
the air sacs and lungs. Alternatively, the sternum may be
1998).
LH
pushed towards the spine. Ihis can also be useful for car-
If blood loss occurs during surgery, then the replace-
PA
diac massage in cases of cardiac arrest.
ment volume of crystalloid fluid should be three times the
Cardiac arrest frequently and rapidly follows apnoea,
blood loss volume. However, if the volume of blood lost is
'ued ueiae ue aaiaai ol imoup Aiaaxa ual s l pue
greater than 30% of the normal total blood volume, then a
Adrenaline may be given at 10o0 units/kg body weight -
blood transfusion should be considered. Other indicators
 preferably via endotracheal tubing or directly through the
for blood transfusions are a total plasma protein level be-
glottis into the trachea. Alternatively, it may be adminis-
low 25 g/L and/or a packed cell volume (PCV) below 15%.
tered intravenously via either the right jugular vein or the
Blood donors should at least be of the same avian
Sns ood e si aa a mq  m e
family - for instance parrot to parrot, and preferably the
rate.
same species, for example, one budgerigar to another
The likelihood of apnoea occurring depends upon the
budgerigar. It is useful to remember that on average one
type of anaesthetic used. Xylazine is notorious as a deep
drop of blood is roughly equivalent to 0.05 mL, and that 
respiratory depressant (Curro, 1998). Isoflurane will also
the estimated blood volume of an avian patient is 10% of
'sd aa uer u unssandap Aroendsan anpaid
its body weight in grams. Ihis means, for instance, that
Even at the lowest surgical levels (Forbes & Lawton, 1996).
a healthy 500 g African grey parrot would have rough-
ly 50 mL of blood circulating in its body. However, it is
Maintenance of body temperature
equally worrying to note that a 40 g budgerigar will only
Maintaining the body temperature is important for the
have 4 mL of blood, and thus the loss of 25% of its blood
successful outcome of any anaesthetic procedure. The
volume will occur with just 20 drops of blood (1 mL).
large body surface to volume ratio of birds results in loss
Routes of administration of fhuids will depend on the
of body heat at a faster rate than dogs and cats.
surgical procedure and the health status of the patient.
Avian Handling and Chemical Restraint 167
Subcutaneous routes are frequently used for healthy birds
Blue-fronted Amazon parrots, indicating species vari-
undergoing minor or routine surgery. Areas that can be
ability at this dosage. It has been used at 2 mg/kg IM
used for this purpose include the interscapular area, the
as a single injection in Hispaniolan Amazon Parrots as
axillae, and the fold of inguinal skin which lies cranial to
 pre-emptive, pre-operative analgesia, where sevoflurane
each leg.
has been used for endoscopy and shown to be both safe
For more serious cases, the intraosseous and intrave-
and effective (Klaphke et al., 2006). Butorphanol had less
nous routes should be used (see Chapter 14).
than 10% bioavailability when given orally at 5 mg/kg in
Hispaniolan Amazon Parrots, and so the oral route is not
Post-operative recovery
recommended (Sanchez-Migallon et al., 2008). Adverse
Recovery should always involve ventilation with 100%
effects such as dysphoria have not been reported in birds.
oxygen. The endotracheal tube should be removed once
 Dosage frequency appears to be as frequent as 2 hours
the bird starts to cough or swallow. It is important to note 
 in birds.
that practically all patients will appear disorientated and
Butorphanol does, however, cause some respiratory de-
will attempt to flap their wings during recovery. Every at-
 pression. It also requires metabolism by the liver for ex-
tempt should be made to constrain them gently (without 
cretion. However, these disadvantages are much reduced
restricting respiration) to ensure that they do not dam-
age their wings or feathers. Ihis can best be achieved by
Buprenorphine: Work in pigeons has shown predomi-
nant kappa opioid receptors in the central nervous sys-
With isoflurane anaesthesia, recovery is complete in
 5-10 minutes, and the patient is often then able to perch.
tem (Mansour et al., 1988). Buprenorphine does not
appear to be effective at 0.1 mg/kg in African grey par-
However, if ketamine is used, recovery may take much
longer - anything up to 3-4 hours. During any recovery
rots when tested, and it was shown that the drug did not
reach plasma levels known to be effective in humans at
the environmental temperature should be kept between
53
this dosage (Paul-Murphy et al., 1999, 2004). However,
153
25°℃ and 30°C to prevent hypothermia developing. It
also helps to keep the recovery area quiet and dimly lit to
dosages of 0.25-0.5 mg/kg in pigeons increased the la-
tency period for withdrawal from noxious electrical
ensure minimal adverse stimulation.
stimuli from 2 to 5 hours (Gaggermeier et al., 2003). It
The patient should be encouraged to take food as soon
is postulated that birds may not possess distinct mu and
as it is able. This is to minimise the deleterious effects of
hypoglycaemia seen in these high metabolic rate species.
kappa receptors or that the two receptors in birds have
similar functions.
Analgesia
Opioids do, however, have some respiratory suppres-
Pain assessment in birds
sion side effects and will require some liver metabolism to
 Pain assessment in many birds is difcult as many are prey
excrete, but these are much reduced in comparison with
other opioid analgesics.
species and so, like small herbivores, will not demonstrate
pain and often become immobile when watched. Feather
Nalbuphine hydrochloride: Ihis predominant kappa re-
grooming may cease with mild pain, but will increase and
ceptor active opioid (some partial mu activity) was shown
move to feather chewing or plucking with more serious
to have little respiratory depression, good bioavailability
pain. In social species of birds, pain will often result in
affer intramuscular dosage and had little sedative effects,
that individual isolating itself from the group. Others may
 but it did increase threshold values of thermal foot with-
sleep more and become less interactive with their owners,
drawal in Hispaniolan Amazon parrots for up to 3 hours
or become more aggressive or demonstrate inappropriate
when dosed at 12.5 mg/kg (Keller et al., 2009). Increased
aggression towards cage mates, owners or handlers.
dosage of nalbuphine did not increase analgesia.
Analgesics used in birds
NSAIDs: Cyclo-oxygenase (COX) has been demonstrat-
Butorphanol: Butorphanol, at a dose of 3-4 mg/kg
ed in chickens (Mathonnet et al., 2001). Iherefore, it is
(Bauck, 1990) or at 1 mg/kg intramuscularly (IM) or
 assumed that COX receptors are present in other birds.
0.02-0.04 mg/kg intravenously (IV), reduced the amount
The distribution of COX-1 and COX-2 enzymes varies
of isoflurane required during anaesthesia (Curro et al.,
1994). However, it did not produce the same results in
pain pathways.
168 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
NSAIDs which have been used and shown to have ben-
Gabapentin (a gamma-aminobutyric acid analogue)
eficial effects include meloxicam (0.1-1 mg/kg q12-24h).
has been used in multimodal analgesia in birds. It is
As with all NSAIDs, particular care should be taken with
patients with gastrointestinal or renal disease just as you
channels. It was shown to relieve self-mutilation in three
would with mammalian patients. Avian patients, due to
studies (Doneley, 2007; Siperstein, 2007; Shaver et al.,
their kidney structure, are more sensitive to some of these
2009).
side effects. The recent mass mortalities due to the use of
I is worth remembering that drugs such as ketamine
the NSAID diclofenac acid in Indian white backed vul-
 and the alpha-2 adrenergic drugs have analgesic proper-
tures, which has seen a 95% population decline, are an
ties as well.
example of the potential toxic effects of some NSAIDs
Local anaesthesia: Local anaesthetics may be used as
 in birds. Concurrent fluid therapy is therefore often ad-
ring blocks around amputations to reduce the chances of
vised when using NSAIDs, with or without gastrointes-
 post-operative self-mutilation. Doses should not exceed
tinal protectants such as sucralfate and ranitidine. There
4 mg/kg of lidocaine and should be diluted to at least 1:10.
appears to be a wide variation in dosage within birds
 Bupivicaine has also been used, but there are con-
for meloxicam with Budgerigars receiving 0.1 mg/kg
cerns that its toxic effects take longer to resolve in birds
q24h for 7 days showing signs of glomerular congestion
than in mammals. In ducks (Anas platyrhynchos) a dose
(Pereira & Werther, 2007) and Hispaniolan Amazon par-
 of 2 mg/kg bupivicaine subcutaneously showed a faster
rots showing improved weight bearing on arthritic limb
uptake versus elimination rate, but evidence of seques-
at 1 mg/kg IM q12h (Cole et al., 2009). A pharmacoki-
tration and redistribution of bupivicaine suggested by
netic study carried out by Wilson et al. (2005) suggested
increases in plasma concentrations 6 and 12 hours after
0.5 mg/kg per os q12h was required to maintain serum
dosing suggests that toxicity may be delayed (Machin &
levels in ring-necked parakeets (Psitfacula krameri). It is
Livingstone, 2001). Bupivicaine has also been used as
therefore apparent that birds often metabolise NSAIDs
133
intra-articular injections in chickens with osteoarthritis
rapidly but there is considerable species variation.
d5
and showed improved analgesia (Hocking et al., 1997)
Carprofen has also been widely used but its dosage is
and has been mixed 1:1 with dimethyl sulfoxide and ap-
AN
difficult to elucidate. Extremely high doses (30 mg/kg)
AVI.
plied to beak amputations in chicke ns where an increase
had to be administered to provide analgesia in chickens
in feed consumption was observed (Glatz et al., 1992).
:1
with experimentally induced arthritis (Hocking et al.,
RT
2005). In a study in Hispaniolan Amazon parrots, a dose
References
PA
 of 3 mg/kg produced an improvement in lameness of an
Bauck, L. (1990) Analgesics in avian medicine. Proceedings of the
arthritic limb within 2 hours but wore off before the 12-
Association of Avian Veterinarians,Pp. 239-244.
 hour dosage interval used in mammals (Paul-Murphy ef
Cole, G.A., Paul-Murphy, J., Krugner-Higby, L., et al. (2009)
al.,2009)
Analgesic effects of intramuscular administration of
It is important to point out, however, that NSAIDs
meloxicam in Hispaniolan Amazon parrots (Amazonα
wntralis) with experimentally induced arthritis. American
can cause unwanted gastrointestinal and renal side
burnal of Veterinary Research, 70, 1471-1476.
effects, just as is the case in mammalian patients. Because
Curro, T.G. (1998) Anaesthesia of pet birds. Seminars in Avian
of their kidney structure, avian patients are more sensi-
and Exotic Pet Medicine, 7(1), 10-21.
tive to some of these renal side effects. Concurrent fluid
Curro, TG., Brunson, D.B. and Paul-Murphy, J. (1994)
therapy is therefore advised when using NSAIDs, as is the
Determination of the EDs0 of isoflurane and evaluation of
the isoflurane-sparing effect of butorphanol in cockatoos
use of gastrointestinal protectants such as sucralfate and
(Cacatua spp.).Veterinary Surgery,23,429-433.
cimetidine
Doneley, B. (2007) The use of gabapentin to treat presumed
neuralgia in a little corella (Cacatua sanguinea). Proceedings of
Other anaigesics: Tramadol has been used in bald eagles
the Australian Association of Avian Veterinarians Conference,
at 11 mg/kg q12h and achieved plasma concentration
Pp. 169-172.
shl eisatieue ioy sueunq u pamban jeul on juaeaimba
Edling, T.M., Degernes, L., Flammer, K. and Horne, W.B.
oral bioavailability in birds is higher than that observed in
(2001) Capnographic monitoring of African Grey Parrots
during positive pressure ventilation. Journal of the American
humans or dogs (mean 97.94%) and its t1/2 in bald eagles
Veterinary Medicat Association, 219, 1714-1717.
was two times that reported in dogs but half as long as
Forbes, N.A. and Lawton, M.PC. (1996) Formulary. Marual of
that in humans (Souza et al., 2009).
Psittacine Birds (ed PH. Beynon), BSAVA, Cheltenham, UK.
Avian Handling and Chemical Restraint 169
Gaggermeier, B., Henke, J. and Schatzmann, U. (2003)
species) and cockatoos (Cacatua species). burnal of Avian
 Investigations on analgesia in domestic pigeons (C. livia,
Medicine and Surgery, 15(1), 17-22.
Gmel., 1789, var dom.) using buprenorphine and butorphanol.
Paul-Murphy, J., Brunson, D.B. and Miletic, V. (1999) Analgesic
Proceedings of the European Association ofAvian Veterinarians,
effects of butorphanol and buprenorphine in conscious
Pp. 70-73.
African grey parots (Psittacus erithacus erithacus and
Glatz, PC., Murphy, L.B. and Preston, A.P. (1992) Analgesic
Psittacus erithacus timneh).American Journal of Veterinary
therapy in beak-trimmed chickens. Australian Veterinary
Research,60,1218-1221.
Journal,69,18.
Paul-Murphy,J., Hess, J. & Fialkowski, JP.(2004) Pharmacokinetic
Greenacre, C.B. (1997) Comparison of sevoflurane to isoflurane
 properties of a single intramuscular dose of buprenorphine in
in Psittaciformes. Proceedings of the Association of Avian
African grey parrots (Psittacus erithacus erithacus). Journal of
Veterinarians,Pp. 123-124.
Avian Medicine and Surgery,18,224-228.
Hocking, PM., Gentle, M.J., Bernard, R. and Dunn, L.N. (1997)
Paul-Murphy, J.R., Sladky, K.K.,1
Krugner-Higby, L.A.,
Evaluation of a protocol for determining the effectiveness of
et al. (2009) Analgesic effects of carprofen and liposome-
pretreatment with local analgesics for reducing experimentally
encapsulated butorphanol tartrate in Hispaniolan parrots
induced articular pain in domestic fowl. Research in Veterinary
(Amazona
ventralis)
with
experimentally
induced
Science,63(3),263-267.
arthritis.American Journal of Veterinary Research,70(10),
Hocking, PM., Robertson, G.W. and Gentle, M.J. (2005) Effects
1201-1210.
of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs on pain-related
Pereira, M.E. and Werther, K. (2007) Evaluation of the renal
behaviour in a model of articular pain in the domestic fowl.
effects of flunixin meglumine, ketoprofen and meloxicam in
Research in Veterinary Science,78, 69-75.
budgerigars (Metospittacus undulatus). Veterinary Record,
Keller, D., Sanchez-Migallon, G.D., Klauer, J, et at. (2009)
160, 844-846.
Pharmacokinetics of nalbuphine HCL in Hispaniolan Amazon
Rosskopf, W.J., Woerpel, R.W. and Reed, S. (1989) Avian
parrots (Amazona ventralis). Proceedings of the American
anaesthesia administration. Proceedings of the American
Association of Zoo Veterinarians Conference, p. 106.
Animal Hospital Association,Pp. 449-457.
Klaphke, E., Schumacher, J., Greenacre, C., et at. (2006) Com-
Sanchez-Migallon, G.D., Paul-Murphy, J., Barker, S., et al.
parative anesthetic and cardiopulmonary effects of pre-versus
(2008) Plasma concentrations of butorphanol in Hispaniolan
postoperative butorphanol administration in Hispaniolan
Amazon parrots (Amazona ventralis) after intravenous and
Amazon Parrots (Amazona ventralis) anesthetized with
oral administration. Proceedings of the Anmual Conference of
ECI
sevoflurane.Journal of Avian Medicine and Surgery,20,2-7.
the Association of Avian Veterinarians, Pp. 23-24.
d5
Korbel, R., Milovanovic, A., Erhardt, W., et al. (1993) Aerosacular
Shaver, S.L., Robinson, N.G., Wright, B.D., et al. (2009)
perfusion with isoflurane - an anesthetic procedure for head
A multimodal approach to management of suspected
surgery in birds.Proceedings of the 2nd Annual Conference of
neuropathicpain inaprairie falcon (Falco mexicanus). Journal
the European Association of Avian Veterinarians, Pp. 9-37.
of Avian Medicine and Surgery, 23, 209-213.
Lumeij, J.T. and Richie, B. (1994) Cardiology. Avian Medicine:
Siperstein, L.J. (2007) Useof neurontin (gabapentin) to treat leg
Principles and Applications {eds B. Richie, G. Harrison
twitching/foot mutilation in a Senegal parrot. Proceedings
& L. Harrison), PP. 697-711. Wingers Publishing, Lake
of the Association of Avian Veterinarians Conference,
Worth,FL.
p. 335.
Machin, K.L and Livingstone, A. (200l) Plasma bupivicaine
Souza, M.J., Sanchez-Migallon, G.D, Paul-Murphy, J., et al.
levels in mallard ducks (Anas platyrhynchos) following a single
(2009) Pharmacokinetics of intravenous and oral tramadol
subcutaneous dose. Proceedings of the American Association of
in the bald eagle (Haliaeetus leucocephalus). Journal of Avian
Zoo Veterinarians Conference,Pp. 159-163.
Medicine and Surgery, 23, 247-252.
Mansour, A., Khachaturian, L.M.E., Akil, H. and Watson,
Wilson, G.H., Hernandez-Divers, S., Budsberg, S.C., Latimer, S.,
S.J. (1988) Anatomy of CNS opioid receptors. Trends in
Grant, K. and Perthel, M. (2005) Pharmacokinetics and use of
Neuroscience, 1l, 301-314.
meloxicam in psittacine birds. Proceedings ofthe 8th European
Mathonnet, M., Lalloue, F, Danty, E., et at. (200l) Cyclo-
Association of Avian Veterinarians, Arles, Pp. 230-232.
oxygenase 2 tissue distribution and developmental pattern
of expression in the chicken. Clinical Experimental
Pharmacologicat Physiotogy,28,425-432.
Further reading
Oglesbee, B.L., Hamlin, R.L. and Hartman, S.P. (2001)
Taylor, M. (1988) General cautions with isoflurane. Association
Electrocardiographic reference values for macaws (Ara
ofAvian Veterinarians Today,2,96-97.
Chapter 12
Avian Nutrition
Classification of birds
levels of lead in their water source. This can produce
according to diet
problems for humans at higher levels, but even low lev.
els of lead can build up in a bird's body over a period
Dietary preferences may be used to help classify avian
species into groups, which often possess similar physical
of weeks, causing lead poisoning. This is an insidious
characteristics dictated by these preferences.
disease and results in the gradual weight loss, with
chronic bone marrow and immune system suppression
There are two main categories of cage and aviary birds:
· Hardbills are predominantly members of the parrot
 as well as liver and kidney damage. Safe levels reported
 and finch families. Ihey will eat a variety of foods, both
for humans of <50 mg/mL of water are acceptable for
fruit and vegetable, and also seeds and nuts. To cope
birds.
with these, the parrot family has developed a powerful
Problems can also arise when mineral and vitamin
crushing beak, the upper part of which has a synovial
supplements are administered in the drinking water. The
joint at its connection with the skull that allows even
enriched water will allow rapid bacterial growth over a
123
greater pressures to be generated.
24-hour period, requiring owners to be rigorous about
+Softbills comes from a variety of species, from the in-
bowl hygiene if they are giving their bird any of these
sectivorous birds, such as wild blackbirds and starlings,
'tonics.
AN
to the nectivorous hummingbirds and the omnivorous
The amount of water consumed by individual birds
AVI.
toucans.
will depend on the diet being offered. On dry biscuit or
In addition, there is the raptor family, which contains
seed-based diets, water consumption will be higher than
RT
the main species of birds of prey, including owls, falcons
for birds which consume large amounts of fruit and veg-
PA
eagles and buzzards, all of which possess a sharp hooked
etables - even so, a budgerigar, e.g. may only consume
beak used as a ripping tool for tearing prey.
 5-10 mL of water in a 24-hour period.
In all of these cases, the individual species have be-
am pooy yo sadi ua auey oi panoa kuay au
Maintenance energy requirements
also know that many of these creatures in the wild have a
It is extremely difficult to determine the basal metabolic
changing food supply throughout the year, so what may
rate (BMR) of avian patients, as this term covers the
form a staple diet in the summer does not necessarily ap-
energy expenditure when at complete rest in a thermo-
ply in the winter.
neutral environment after a period of sleep. Iherefore,
the more useful concept of maintenance energy require-
General nutritional requirements
ment (MER) is used in birds. This is the energy usage
Water
Water is a necessity. However, just as important as provid-
environment. Ihis can still be difficult to calculate with
ing it is maintaining its quality. Many birds will dunk their
accuracy; however, studies of the budgerigar, e.g. have
food in water, and indeed, if the water feeders are poorly
revealed that current MER levels are 30 kJ per day for
situated, at low levels, may defaecate in the water bowls.
an adult bird.
Ihis can lead to massive bacterial population explosions
There are times in a bird's life when this will vary. For
and gastroenteritis, sour crop and other health problems.
instance, this requirement will be more than doubled in
The quality of water that comes from the tap is also
active egg-laying females, during heavy moults or dur-
important. Many older buildings may have appreciable
ing disease or growth. A formula has been devised to
Avian Nutrition 171
calculate MER. MER is dependent on the BMR and may
levels of 10-13% protein content in the diet have been
be calculated from it by the following formula:
shown to be adequate (Harper & Skinner, 1998). Most of
this protein in cage birds seems to come from seeds. Some
MER = 1.5 × BMR
seeds are very high providers of certain amino acids. Sun-
and
flower seeds, white millet and rapeseed, e.g. provide high
BMR = k ×[weight(kg)].75
 levels of the sulphur-containing amino acids methionine
The constant, k, varies with family groups, and has been
and cystine. Ihese amino acids are useful during moult-
estimated at 78 for non-passerine (i.e. non-perching birds
ing when new feathers are being produced rapidly.
such as parrots) and 129 for passerines (perching birds
Deficiencies in certain amino acids have been shown
such as finches, canaries).
to cause certain diseases (Figure 12.1). For example a de-
The MER of abird gives a guide to what a bird must con-
ficiency in lysine has been shown to cause depigmenta-
sume per day in order to continue to maintain good health
tion of wing feathers and a lack of arginine is associated
and body weight. If the foods offered are so low in kilo-
with feather picking. In some species of birds, e.g. the car-
joules or calories that the bird has to eat more of it than will 
 nivorous raptors, a deficiency in essential amino acids is 
fit into its digestive system in 24 hours, the bird will rapidly
extremely rare.
lose condition. However, many pet birds will continue to
eat until their digestive tracts are full, so if all they are of-
Fats and essential fatty acids
Fats provide high concentrations of energy as well as
fered is the high oilseed types then they will rapidly achieve
supplying the bird with essential fatty acids (EFAs). The
their MER and then exceed it. Ihis will lead to obesity.
latter are required for cellular integrity and are used as
Oilseeds, such as rapeseed or sunflower seeds, which
the building blocks for internal chemicals. These internal
have an energy content of 25 MJ/kg weight, have a high
chemicals, such as prostaglandins, play an important part
energy density, whereas carbohydrate-based seeds, such
in reproduction and inflammation. Fats also provide a
as millet, have a low energy density of 17 MJ/kg weight
53
carrier mechanism for the absorption of fat-soluble vita-
153
(Harper & Skinner, 1998). Ihis means that the bird has to
mins, such as vitamins A, D, E and K.
consume more of the carbohydrate based seeds to gain the
The primary EFA for birds is linoleic acid, as it is for
same energy dose. In general, though, carbohydrates are the
mammals (Brue, 1994). The absolute dietary requirement 
ae Aau se Xpoq al roy Aiaua jo ainos jueiod iso
of this fatty acid is 1% of the diet. If the diet becomes de-
the only source of energy the brain can use (Brue, 1994).
ficient in this EFA, there will be a rapid decline in cell
structure. This is shown clinically by the skin becoming
Protein and amino acids
PA
flaky, dry and prone to recurrent infection. Linoleic acid
Proteins are assembled from groups of up to 22 amino ac-
deficiency also leads to fluid loss through the skin, which
ids. In general terms, it seems that for humans and birds,
 ten amino acids are essential and therefore must be pro-
in turn leads to polydipsia. It is, however, unlikely that
vided in the diet. Ihe others may be manufactured from
these ten. Ihe essential amino acids are shown below:
·leucine
* tryptophan
·lysine
·isoleucine
· methionine
·valine
*phenylalanine
·arginine
threonine
·histidine
 In addition, it is known that if a diet is low in the amino
acids methionine or arginine, an extra supplement of the
amino acid glycine is required.
Proteins are assessed on their ability to provide these
 essential amino acids, with poor proteins supplying only
non-essential ones. This is quantified by the term bio-
logical value. Foodstuff of high biological value contains
Figure 12.1 Amino acid deficiencies may lead to feather growth
more of the essential amino acids. For companion birds
abnormalities.
172 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
any seed-eating bird will be deficient in linoleic acid, as
it is widely found in sunflower seeds and safflower seeds
amongst others.
Another EFA which is thought to be inportant for
birds is alpha-linolenic acid, which is necessary for some
 prostaglandin and eicosanoid production.
which are not exercising regularly is well known, and high-
fat oil seeds are prime culprits for this (Figure 12.2). Ihe
eamasde pam-iapusaeaes
ratory rats. Female raptors are particularly prone to this af-
ter the breeding season, when large amounts of cholesterol
are mobilised for yolk production. Hypercholesterolaemia
is hereditary as well as dietary in raptors, but it can be re-
duced by regular exercising and feeding of lean, low-fat
Figure 12.3 Preen gland impaction has been associated with a
deficiency in essential fatty acids and vitamins A and E.
prey. Saturated animal fats provide a supply of cholesterol
in excessive amounts for seed and fruit eaters, causing ath-
do not have a dietary fibre requirement either. Only a few
erosclerosis in older parrots fed on meat and fatty foods.
wild birds, such as the ratites (ostriches, emus, rheas and
Preen gland impactions have many causes but may be
cassowaries) and grouse have large fermenting caeca. Ihe
associated with a deficiency in EFAs and vitamins A and
red grouse, e.g.lives predominantly on heather shoots for
E (see Figure 12.3)
certain times of the year.
Apart from these general dietary requirements, birds,
Carbohydrates
like all animals, require avariety of vitamins and minerals
123
 Carbohydrates are mainly used for rapid energy produc-
for a healthy diet.
tion. This is particularly inmportant in birds, because they
are in constant demand of rapid supplies of energy for
Vitamins
their often-hyperactive and high-metabolism lives. Birds
Vitamins are obviously an essential part of the bird's nu-
that are debilitated in some way will particularly benefit
tritional requirement.
from the supply of high carbohydrate foods.
LH
These compounds are grouped together, although they
PA
are widely differing in nature, and all animals have a re-
Fibre
quirement for various numbers of these. They are catego-
Dietary fibre does not seem to be important for cage and
rised into:
aviary birds, as the presence of excessive volumes of di-
gestive contents does not make good survival sense when
·Fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E and K
*Water-soluble vitamins such as the B vitamin complex
trying to evade predators. As raptors are carnivorous, they
and vitamin C.
Fat-soluble vitamins
Vitamin A: In cage birds and waterfowl the diet fre-
quently contains only the vitamin A precursors, which
are present as carotenoid plant pigments. In birds, the
most important version of these, in terms of how much
vitamin A can be produced from it, is beta-carotene
(Harper & Skinner, 1998). Vitamin A is needed for a
number of functions, the best known of which is main-
tenance of the light sensitive pigment in the retina of the
eye. It is also inmportant in the process of epithelial cell
turnover and keratinisation, which is why a deficiency
Figure 12.2 Obesity may cause many problems, such as lipoma
in vitamin A has been linked with mite infestations,
 formation in this budgerigar.
such as 'scaly face'
Avian Nutrition 173
Hypovitaminosis A is a commonly seen problem in
Vitamin A is required for bone growth, for the normal
companion birds, particularly parrots. Ihis is mainly due 
function of secretary glands such as the adrenals and for
to the very low levels of beta-carotenes present in seeds,
normal reproductive function. On another level, coloured
especially in the much loved sunflower seeds, millet and
plumage, particularly the red and yellow, is derived from
peanuts. An example of the requirement for vitamin A is
beta-carotene pigments. Therefore, birds such as the red-
quoted as 40 IU per budgerigar, up to a safe maximum of
factor canaries will become paler in colour if they are fed
2500 IU (Harper & Skinner, 1998). Ihe lower levels may
 a diet deficient in this vitamin precursor.
be met by as little as 0.4 g of carrot per day, but would
Because it is fat soluble, vitamin A can be stored in
require 200 g of millet seed to provide the same anmount -
the body, primarily in the liver. Ihe recommended mini-
ie. five times a budgerigar's average weight!
mum dietary levels are 8000-11 000 IU/kg of food offered
If a relative deficiency in vitamin A occurs then mucus
for both Passeriformes and Psittaciformes (Scott, 1996;
membranes become thickened. Oral and respiratory se-
Kollias & Kollias, 2000).
cretions dry up because of blockage of salivary and mucus
glands with cellular debris. This leads to poor function-
Vitamin D: Ihis vitamin is primarily concerned with cal-
ing of the ciliary mechanisms in the airways that have a
cium metabolism, and vitamin D compound is the most
role in removing foreign particles. This, combined with
active in calcium homeostasis. Plants are not effective as
vitamin A's role in immune system function, leads to re-
suppliers of this compound.
spiratory and digestive tract infections (Figure 12.4). One
Cholecalciferol is manufactured in the bird's skin in a
 of the most frequently seen infections, particularly in par-
 process enhanced by ultraviolet light. Indoor-kept birds
rots fed an all-seed diet, is the fungal respiratory disease
produce much less of this compound and this can lead to
aspergillosis. Sterile pustules and cornifed plaques inside
deficiencies. Exposure to just 11-45 minutes of unfltered
the mouth are also commonly seen, with enlargement of
 sunshine (glass flters out the important ultraviolet light)
the sublingual salivary glands.
has been shown to prevent rickets in growing chickens
53
(Heuser & Norris, 1929). Cholecalciferol must then be ac-
153
tivated, frst in the liver and then by the kidneys, before it
becomes functional. It works with parathyroid hormone
to increase reabsorption of calcium at the expense of
phosphorus from the kidneys. It also increases absorp-
tion of calcium from the intestines and mobilises calcium
from the bone, increasing the blood's calcium levels.
Hypovitaminosis D; affects with calcium metabolism
and causes rickets. Ihis is exacerbated by diets low in
calcium. Typical sufferers are Psittaciformes, indoor-
kept birds fed all-seed diets and raptors fed all-meat
diets with no calcium supplementation. Ihis produces
well-muscled, heavy birds which have poorly miner-
alised bones. Radiographical evidence shows flaring of
the epiphyseal plates at the ends of the long bones. Ihe
end result is bowing of the limbs, especially the tibiotarsal
 bones. The recommended minimum levels are 500 IU/kg
of food offered for Psittaciformes and 10o0 IU/kg for Pas-
seriformes (Kollias & Kollias, 2000).
Hypervitaminosis D, is caused by over supplementa-
tion with D and calcium, and leads to calcification of
soft tissues, such as the medial walls of the arteries, and
the kidneys. Ihis leads to hypertension and organ fail-
ure. Ihe recommended maximum levels are 20oo IU/kg
Figure 12.4 Hypovitaminosis A may lead to increased thickening of
of food offered for Psittaciformes and 2500 IU/kg for
airway mucus secretions and increased risk of respiratory disease, as
in this African grey parrot.
Passeriformes (Kollias & Kollias, 2000).
174 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Vitamin E: Vitamin compound is found in several active
Hypovitaminosis B is uncommon. The most likely
forms in plants. The most active is alpha-tocopherol. It
cause is the presence of enzymes called thiaminases in the
has an inmportant role in immune system function, par-
diet, which destroy thiamine. A source of thiaminases is
ticularly lymphocyte cell activity. Vitamin E is combined
raw saltwater fish, which may be fed to some raptors, such
with selenium into the metalloenzyme glutathione per-
as sea-eagles and ospreys. However, there are thiamine
oxidase. Ihis mops up the free radicals that are produced
antagonists present in foods such as blackberries, beet-
 in the metabolism of dietary polyunsaturated fats, which
root, coffee, chocolate and tea. When a deficiency occurs,
would otherwise cause cellular damage.
neurological signs such as opisthotonus, weakness and
Hypovitaminosis E produces a condition known as
head tremors appear. In addition, the fungal infection as-
'white muscle disease' in which damage occurs to the
pergillosis is a common sequel to Bj deficiency. The rec-
muscle bundles and their myoglobin content, leading to
ommended minimum levels for raptors, Psittaciformes
 pale-coloured muscles and muscle weakness. In addition, 
 and Passeriformes are 4 ppm (Kollias & Kollias, 2000) or
birds deficient in vitamin E, such as cockatiels may be
5 g of usable vitamin B per day for raptors (Wallach &
more susceptible to the protozoal gut parasite Giardia spp.
Cooper, 1982).
 and may pass undigested whole seeds in their droppings.
Vitamin Bz (riboflavin): Vitamin B, is present in particu-
Hypovitaminosis E may occur due to a reduction in
fat metabolism or absorption, as can occur with small in-
larly small amounts in seeds, and so deficiency is primar-
testinal, pancreatic or biliary diseases. It may also occur
ily seen in seed-eating birds. Hypovitaminosis Bz causes
because of a lack of green plant material in the diet, as
growth retardation and curled toe paralysis in chicks. This
this is the main source of vitamin E. Vitamin E deficiency
is due to its function in cartilage, collagenous and nerve
may also occur in birds fed on diets high in polyunsatu-
cell tissue growth. Birds can be supplemented using com-
rated fatty acids, such as fish-eating raptors fed oily fish
mercial powder supplements or simple brewer's yeast.
like tuna. Ihese diets rapidly deplete vitamin E reserves
The recommended minimum levels for Psittaciformes
123
in metabolising the polyunsaturated fats.
and Passeriformes are 6 ppm (Kollias & Kollias, 2000),
d5
Hypervitaminosis E is extremely rare. Ihe recom-
for game birds 3.6 mg/kg and waterfowl (Austic & Cole,
AVIAN
 mended minimum level is 50 ppm for both Passeriformes
1971) 4 mg/kg of feed offered (Scott & Norris, 1965)
and Psittaciformes (Kollias & Kollias, 2000)
Niacin: Niacin is found widely in many foods, but the
Vitamin K: Because vitamin K is produced by bacteria
form that occurs in plants has a low availability to the
RT
bird. It is used in many cellular metabolic processes.
normally present in the gut, it is very difficult to get a true
PAI
deficiency, although absorption will be reduced when fat
Birds fed a high proportion of one type of seed, such
digestion/absorption is reduced as in, e.g. biliary or pan-
as waterfowl overfed on sweetcorn, can become deficient.
creatic dise ase.
This results in retarded growth, poor feather quality and
The consumption of warfarin- and coumarin-derived
scaly dermatitis on the legs and feet. Intertarsal joint
 compounds (such as those found in plants like sweet clo-
deformities can occur in the larger waterfowl. The rec-
vers) can increase the demand for clotting factors. It can
 ommended minimum requirements are 50 ppm for Pas-
also be a problem for raptors that have eaten prey that
seriformes and Psittaciformes (Kollias & Kollias, 2000)
has been killed by these rodenticides. The deficiency
 or 55-70 mg/kg of feed in general (Wallach & Cooper,
 produced causes internal and external haemorrhage, but
1982).
vitamin K also functions in calcium/phosphorous me-
Vitamin Bs (pyridoxine): Any deficiency of pyridoxine
tabolism in the bones and this may also be affected. Ihe
will result in retarded growth, hyperexcitability, convul-
recommended minimum level for raptors, Passeriformes
sions, twisted neck and polyneuritis, although a defi-
and Psittaciformes is 1 ppm (Wallach & Cooper, 1982)
ciency is rarely seen. Recommended minimum levels
are 6 ppm in Passeriformes and Psittaciformes (Kollias
Water-soluble vitamins
& Kollias, 2000) or 2.6-3 mg/kg of feed for game birds
Vitamin B, (thiarmine): Thiamine is found widely in plant
(Scott & Norris, 1965).
and animal tissues alike. It is concerned with a number of
cellular functions, one of which involves the integrity of
Pantothenic acid:Pantothenic acid is found widely in
the central nervous system.
plants and animals and so deficiency rarely occurs. When
Avian Nutrition 175
it does occur in birds, signs include crusting of the feet,
in fats. Deficiencies cause retarded growth, disrupted fat
eyelids and commissures of the beak, poor feather growth
 metabolism, fatty liver damage and perosis (slipping of
and general epidermal desquamation. The recommended
the Achilles tendon off the intertarsal joint groove). The
minimum levels are 20 ppm for Passeriformes and
recommended minimum requirements are 1500 ppm
Psittaciformes (Kollias & Kollias, 2000) or 35.2 mg/kg of
for Passeriformes and Psittaciformes (Kollias & Kollias,
feed in ducks (Scott & Norris, 1965).
2000) or 1300-1900 mg/kg of feed offered (Wallach &
Cooper, 1982)
Biotin: True deficiencies are rare due to gut bacterial pro-
duction. Deficiencies produce a range of signs, including
Vitamin C: There are only a few wild birds that have a
exfoliative dermatitis and gangrenous toes. Ihe recom-
direct need for vitamin C. Ihese include the red-vented
mended minimum requirements are 0.25 ppm for Pas-
bulbul (Pycnonotus cafer) and the willow ptarmigan/red
seriformes and Psittaciformes (Kollias & Kollias, 2000) or
grouse (Lagopus lagopus) as well as the crimson sun-
0.09-0.15 mg/kg of feed in waterfowl (Wallach & Cooper
conure, a form of parrot. Birds in general do not need
1982).
vitamin C in their diets as it can be produced from glu-
cose in the liver. If a bird is suffering from liver disease,
Folic acid: Folic acid deficiency leads to severely inmpaired
therefore, it may require a dietary source of vitamin C.
cell division. This can lead to a number of problems, such
Vitamin C is needed for the formation of elastic fibres
as failure of hen birds' reproductive tract development, a
and connective tissues and is an excellent anti-oxidant
macrocytic anaemia due to failure of red blood cell matu-
similar to vitamin E. Deficiency leads to scurvy in which
ration and immune system cellular dysfunction.
there is poor wound healing, increased bleeding due to
Folic acid is needed to form uric acid, the waste prod-
capillary wall fragility and bone weakness.
uct of protein metabolism in birds. Therefore, a relative
Vitamin C also increases gut absorption of some min-
deficiency of folic acid may occur in some individu-
erals, such as iron. Ihis may be important for chronically
53
als fed a very high protein diet. In addition, some foods
 anaemic patients, but can be a danger for sofbills, such as 
153
such as cabbage and other brassicas, as well as oranges
the mynah and toucan families, as these birds are prone to
beans and peas, contain folic acid inhibitors. Ihe use of
liver damage from excessive dietary uptake of iron.
trimethoprim sulphonamide drugs may also reduce gut
bacterial folic acid production. The recommended mini-
Minerals
mum requirements are 1.5 ppm for Passeriformes and
 There are two main groups of minerals:
Psittaciformes (Kollias & Kollias, 2000) or 1.25 mg/kg of
·Macro-minerals
feed (Scott & Norris, 1965).
▪Micro-minerals
Vitamin Biz: Vitamin Bz is produced by intestinal bacte-
Macro-minerals (such as calcium and phosphorus) are
 present in large amounts in the body. Micro-minerals or
ria so deficiency is uncommon, although it may occur after
prolonged antibiotic medication. Vitamin Biz is required
trace elements (such as manganese, iron and cobalt) are
all necessary for normal bodily function, but are needed
for many metabolic pathways and neurological func-
tion and a defciency may cause a knock-on deficiency
in far lower quantities.
in folic acid. It will cause slow growth, muscular dystro-
a t pe sai i ond saa an u a
Macro-minerals
Calcium: The active form of calcium in the body is the
rates in young birds, as well as hatching deformities. The
ionic, double-charged molecule Ca2t. Lowered levels of
recommended minimum requirements are for 0.01 ppm
this form lead to hyperexcitability, fitting and death. This
in Passeriformes and Psittaciformes (Kollias & Kollias,
can occur even though the overall body reserves of cal-
2000) or 0.009-0.25 mg/kg of feed offered (Wallach &
cium are normal.
Cooper, 1982).
Calcium levels in the body are controlled by
Choline: Choline may be synthesised in the body, but
vitamin D3, parathyroid hormone and calcitonin work-
not in enough quantities for the growing bird. Because
 ing in opposition to each other. The ratio of calcium to
of their interactions, the need for choline is dependent
phosphorus is particularly important - as one increases,
 on levels of folic acid and vitamin Bzz. Excess dietary pro-
the other decreases and vice versa. A ratio of 2:1 calcium
tein increases choline requirements, as does a diet high
to phosphorus is desirable in food for growing birds and
176 Veterinary Nursing of ExoticPets
1.5:1 for adults. In periods of high egg laying though, to
kidneys leading to further water loss and dehydration.
keep pace with the output of calcium into the shells, a ra-
Excessive levels of sodium in the diet (greater than ten
tio of 10:1 may be needed (Brue, 1994). A known defi-
times recommended levels) lead to poor feathering, poly-
ciency problem occurs in many birds fed an all-seed diet
uria, hypertension, oedema and death. Minimum levels
due to the lack of calcium in such a diet and the presence
are quoted as 5-10 mg/kg of feed offered (Wallach &
of phytates (phosphorus containing compounds) which
Cooper, 1982) or around 0.12% of the diet offered (Kollias
bind calcium in the gut and prevent absorption. Ihis is
& Kollias, 2000).
 particularly a problem in African Grey Parrots (Psittacus
Potassium: As with mammals, potassium is the major
erithacus), which may present with collapse or seizures
intracellular positive ion. It is essential in maintaining
due to low blood calcium levels. Excessive calcium in the
membrane potentials and it is the principal intracellular
diet (>1%), however, reduces the use of proteins, fats,
cation affecting acid-base reactions and osmotic pres-
phosphorus, manganese, zinc, iron and iodine and com-
sure. Rarely is there a dietary deficiency, but, severe stress
bined with a high level of vitamin D3 may lead to calcifi-
may cause potassium deficiency hypokalaemia. This is
cation of soft tissue structures.
caused by an increased kidney excretion of potassium
Phosphorus: Phosphorus, like calcium, is used in bones
due to an elevation in plasma proteins which is often seen
It is also used in the storage of energy as adenosine tri-
at times of stress. This can lead to cardiac dysrhythmias,
phosphate (ATP), and as a part of the structure of cell
muscle spasticity and neurological dysfunction.
membranes. Levels of phosphorus are controlled in the
 Potassium is present in high amounts in certain fruits
body as for calcium, the two being in equal and opposite
such as bananas. It is controlled in the body in equilib-
equilibrium with each other. Nutritional secondary hy-
rium with sodium under the influence of the adrenal hor-
mone aldosterone, which promotes sodium retention and
exceeds calcium, and this can lead to progressive bone de-
 potassium excretion. The recommended minimal level is
133
 mineralisation and renal damage due to high circulating
0.4-1.1 mg/kg (Scott & Norris, 1965).
levels of parathyroid hormone.
Chlorine: This mineral is the major extracellular negative
AN
High dietary phosphorus, particularly as phytates, will
ion. It is responsible for maintaining acid-base balances
reduce the amount of calcium which can be absorbed
in conjunction with sodium and potassium. Deficiencies
from the gut, as it forms complexes with the calcium pres-
are rare due to its combination with sodium in the diet
ent there. Ihis can be a big problem in cage birds which
LH
as salt.
PA
are predominantly seed eaters, as cereals are high in phos-
phorus and low in calcium. It may also be a problem for
Micro-minerals (trace elements)
raptors fed pure meat with no calcium/bone supplement.
Iron: Iron is required for the formation of the oxygen-
binding centre of the haemoglobin molecule. Absorp-
Magnesium: Most of the magnesium in the body is found
tion from the gut is normally relatively poor as the body
in the bone matrix. However, it is also essential for phos-
 phorus transfer in the formation of ATP, and cell mem-
is very good at recycling its iron levels from old red
blood cells.
branes in soft tissues such as the liver. Most magnesium
is absorbed in the smallintestine, and is affected by large
Certain species have a greater ability to absorb iron
amounts of calcium in the diet, which will reduce magne-
from the small intestine. The mynah and toucan/toucanet
sium absorption. Ihe recommended minimum levels are
qod e aaq a aie s sra ae sa
 600 ppm (Kollias & Kollias, 2000) or 475-550 mg/kg of
feed ( Wallach & Cooper, 1982).
cies. For example, rodents and day-old chicks may be
fed to toucans, and so occasionally are various brands
Sodium: Sodium is the main extracellular, positively
of dog or monkey biscuits. In addition, vitamin C in-
charged ion and regulates the body's acid-base balance
creases iron absorption by converting the iron into the
and osmotic potential. Along with potassium, it is re-
more easily absorbed ferrous (Fe?+) state. Ihis can lead
 sponsible for nerve signals and impulses.
to a condition known as haemochromatosis, where the
A true dietary deficiency (hyponatraemia) is rare,
liver becomes fatally overloaded with absorbed iron. Ihe
but may occur due to chronic diarrhoea or renal dis-
recommended minimum requirement for Passeriformes
ease. These disrupt the osmotic potential gradient in the
and Psittaciformes is 80 ppm, but for toucans and mynahs
Avian Nutrition 177
a maximum of 60 ppm, or less than 160 mg/kg of feed, is
 problems. It is a relatively common finding in budgerigars
recommended (Worrell, 1991). Dietary deficiencies rarely
 fed on an all-seed diet without additional supplementa-
Occur. However, ground foraging species reared on im-
tion. Ihey adopt a classic, hunched posture on the perch
pervious surfaces such as wire or concrete have suffered
because the enlarged thyroid gland constricts the tracheal
iron deficiency Ihis is because soil consumption, which
lumen. Ihey may also be seen to regurgitate seed from
occurs during ground feeding, is another source of iron.
the crop. Goitre is one of the differential diagnoses in a
vomiting budgerigar. Levels of 4 mg per budgerigar per
Copper: Copper is used for haemoglobin synthesis, colla
week prevent goitre from developing (Blackmore, 1963)
gen synthesis and the maintenance of the nervous system.
 Deficiencies occur, as with iron, in some ground feed-
Selenium: Its functions are similar to vitamin E, as it is
ing species like pheasants and other game birds, reared on
found in the enzyme glutathione peroxidase. If there is
surfaces such as concrete where soil consumption during
a general deficiency in both selenium and vitarmin E, a
the foraging process does not occur. Signs include chronic
condition known as exudative diathesis will occur. Ihis
anaemia with general weakness, limb deformities and
is when the smaller, subcutaneous blood vessels become
hyperexcitability. The recommended minimum require-
damaged and leakier. Fluid then moves rapidly out into
ments are 8 ppm for Passeriformes and Psittaciformes, and
the subcutaneous spaces and oedema forms over the
4 ppm for Galliformes (Wallach & Cooper, 1982).
neck, wings and breast. This is often followed by stunted
growth, limb weakness and death.
 Zinc: This is a vital trace element for wound healing and
The selenium content of plants is dependent on where
tissue formation, forming part of a number of enzymes.
they were grown and the levels of selenium in the soil. The
Deficiencies can occur in young, rapidly growing birds
recommended minimum requirement is 0.1 ppm for Pas-
fed on plant material high in phytates such as cabbage,
seriformes and Psittaciformes (Kollias & Kollias, 2000).
wheat bran and beans. Ihis is because, as with calcium,
the phytates bind zinc and prevent its absorption from the
Examples of food types for Psittaciformes and
Eci
gut. In addition, high dietary calcium itself decreases zinc
Passeriformes
uptake. Deficiencies cause retarded growth, poor feath-
As a rough exanmple of food types suitable for commonly
ering, enlarged intertarsal joints and slipped Achilles
kept cage and aviary birds, please examine the list given
tendon (perosis). Ihe minimum recommended require-
below.
ment is 50 ppm for Passeriformes and Psittaciformes
(Kollias & Kollias, 2000).
Seeds
Rape seed, millet, canary seed, hemp and linseed are use-
Manganese: Manganese is primarily found in plant ma-
ful for smaller species such as finches, canaries, budgeri
terials but is often present in unavailable forms. Efficient
gars and cockatiels.
bile salt production is required for its absorption, so birds
Saflower, sunflower and pumpkin seeds are useful for
with hepatic and biliary dysfunction are most at risk of a
 larger parrots but beware of addiction to sunflower seeds!
deficiency.
Manganese is necessary for normal bone structure;
hence deficiencies are most commonly manifested by the
Nuts
swelling and flattening of the lateral condyles of the inter
Almonds, walnuts, Brazil nuts and hazel nuts are useful
for larger parrots, but be careful of addiction to peanuts
tarsal joint, allowing the Achilles tendon to slip out of the
groove created for it (a condition known as perosis). In
and Aspergillus spp. toxin poisoning. Peanuts and pine
addition, the tibiotarsus and tarsometatarsus may exhibit
nuts may also be fed. Nuts are high in calories.
lateral rotation. Young may be born with retracted beaks
and shortened long bones. Ihe recommended minimum
Fruits
requirement is 55-60 mg/kg of feed (Wallach & Cooper,
A wide variety of fruits are useful foods. Examples in-
1982).
dude apple, pear, melon, mango, papaya, pomegranate,
 guava, apricot, peach, nectarine, oranges and bananas.
fodine: The sole function of iodine is in thyroid hor-
Grapes and kiwi fruit should be fed sparingly due to their
mone synthesis. Deficiencies cause goitre, and produce
high sugar content, which can cause diarrhoea. Oranges
effects such as reduced growth, stunting and neurological
should also only be fed in small amounts, since excess can
178 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
cause gastric upset, and they should not be fed to toucans
If, during this growth phase, disease or low environ-
and mynah birds due to their high vitamin C content and
mental termperatures are introduced, energy is diverted to
iron absorption facilitation.
immune system function and heat supply. This results in
less energy for growth and in slowing of the growth rate.
Vegetables
Ihis may be reversed inlater periods of growth, assuming
Broccoli, watercress and wild rocket are good sources of
no permanent damage has been caused. The obvious side-
vitamin A and calcium. Other good vegetables include
effect of this, though, is that adult weights are achieved at
Swiss chard, kale, sweet pepper, carrot, beetroot, boiled
 alater age. If a retarded bird is supplied with excess nutri-
potato, peas, mung beans (particularly sprouted ones),
tional levels after this period of leanness, a compensatory
cauliflower, tomato and sweetcorn.
growth spurt may occur and the chick appears to grow
Do not feed avocados as these cause severe fatty liver
'dnoia aae jeut yo spiq auio ueu Aipiden aou
damage in birds. Lories, lorikeets and hummingbirds are all
For all of this growth to occur, it has been estimated
nectar feeders and so require a specialised artificial syrup
that minimum energy requirements for small Psittaci-
food. Many are commercially produced. Ihey may also take
formes and Passeriformes are five times that of adults.
very ripe fruits, and enjoy eating the pollen from flowers.
Young chicks nearly double their weights over 48 hours,
and require a protein level of 15-20%, as opposed to
Specific nutritional requirements
an adult's protein need of 10-14% (Harper & Skinner,
Nutritional requirements for growth
1998). Commercial and home-prepared diets for chicks
Embryonic growth
are usually preformulated mashes with this level of pro-
The egg is a perfect capsule of nutrients providing all that
tein, eggs and dairy products which have a good broad
is needed for the developing embryo. The hen must be fed
spectrum of amino acids supplementation and 20%
a balanced diet to ensure that she has the nutrients avail-
protein levels.
53
able to instil into the egg. If she is fed a poor or deficient
Excessive protein supplementation may be equally
123
diet then the egg may not be fertile. It could also undergo:
damaging. Levels greater than 25% of diet have been
d5
· Early embryonic death (EED). Ihis is often signalled
shown to lead to behavioural problems, and claw, beak
AVIAN
by a blood ring left in the yolk, which suggests a vita-
and skeletal deformities, particularly if combined with a
min A deficiency.
lack of calcium. Levels of 0.6-1.2% of the diet as calcium
:11
· Retarded embryonic development (RED). Ihis is often
have been quoted for chick growth (Brue, 1994) with a
PART
associated with vitamin B deficiencies.
calcium:phosphorus ratio of 2:1 maintained.
· Embryonic deformities, which may be seen with man-
ganese, zinc or other trace element deficiencies.
Nutritional requirements for breeding
These requirements include those needed for egg pro-
Post-hatch growth
duction as well as for courtship behaviour. The require-
Hatching occurs after the developing chick has absorbed
ments for egg production are high, with large volumes
the external yolk sac, and the chick must then be supplied
needed of fats for the yolk, calcium for the shell and
within 3-4 days with high levels of energy and protein for
proteins for the albumen (egg white). As egg produc-
the growth phase. The remaining internal yolk sac supply
tion commences, the hen bird will increase the volume
will last that long.
of food consumed, so removing the need to increase
When feathers are produced, a huge demand for pro-
the energy concentration of the diet being offered. It
tein occurs, as feathers are made of keratin, a protein, and
is, however, essential that the diet offered is a balanced
will eventually make up one-tenth of the bird's weight. In
one, with increased protein content, particularly from
addition, there will be several feather changes during the
methionine and cystine (the sulphur containing amino
frst 2 years of life, as juvenile down plumage is replaced
acids) and lysine.
by adult plumage. Young birds also have a much larger
 In addition, a moderate increase in the amount of cal.
requirement for calcium and vitamin D, for developing
cium and vitamin D; offered (an increase of 0.35% of the
bones. On average, sexual maturity for the larger parrots,
adult maintenance requirement for calcium) is needed, so
such as African grey parrots, macaws and cockatoos, is
that levels approach 1% of diet (Harper & Skinner, 1998).
not reached until 2-4 years of age, so this growth phase
This not only helps to ensure proper calcification of egg-
may be prolonged.
shells and the developing embryo, but also to prevent
Avian Nutrition  179
egg-binding in the hen. This is when poor calcium re-
Third, protein requirements should be evaluated, as de-
serves lead to low calcium blood levels, weakness, uterine
bilitation will increase amino acid and protein turnover.
muscular paresis, egg retention, shock and death.
 This may be through the increased use of proteins in the
Other compounds which, if supplied above the mini-
immune system response, or for repair of damaged tissue
mum daily requirements mentioned earlier, help with egg
 Or simply after using tissue proteins as an energy source.
production, include vitamins A, Bi2, riboflavin and the
 mineral zinc. In addition, it is useful for improved hatch-
Birds with liver disease
ing rate, to increase the levels of the B vitamins biotin,
Birds affected by hepatic dysfunction should be fed a diet
folic acid, pantothenic acid, riboflavin (Bz) and pyridox-
which reduces liver use by decreasing its need to con-
ine (Bs), as well as vitamin E, iron, copper, zinc and man-
vert body tissues into blood glucose, and decreasing its
 ganese to above the minimum daily requirements.
need to break down the waste products of excess protein
metabolism. Iherefore birds should be fed a diet high in
Nutritional requirements for the older birds
digestible carbohydrates, such as boiled rice, pasta or po-
As with cats and dogs, the aim is to provide a diet of high
tatoes, for energy and sugars. Protein sources should be
digestibility whilst reducing slightly the protein, sodium
of a high biological value (high in essential amino acids)
and phosphorus levels. Ihis preserves renal function and
 such as those found in whole eggs. This is in an attempt
prevents hypertension.
to keep to a minimum the overall amount of protein fed,
In addition, lowering cholesterol and unsaturated fat
punog ane se yns suaoid sunpoid-aunnd aemied
 in fish, meat, etc. These protein sources lead to the greater
levels is important, as atherosclerosis is common in older
birds. Ihe levels of vitamins A, E, thiamine (B), Biz, and
build-up of waste products of protein digestion, which
pyridoxine (Bs), the mineral zinc, amino acid lysine and
the liver then has to detoxify and eliminate via the kid-
fatty acid linoleic acid should also be slightly increased to
neys. The feeding of frequent, snmall meals is also advis-
ensure that any decrease in digestive function and age-
able for liver disease patients, as is the addition of vitamin
53
B supplements to the diet.
153
 related cellular damage is contained.
Birds with renal disease
Special nutritional requirements
for debilitated birds
Like the liver, the kidney is responsible for eliminating
the waste products of protein metabolism (Figure 12.5).
Extra nutritional support for debilitated and diseased
H is therefore important in renal disease to reduce protein
birds is vital and plays an essential role in ensuring recov-
levels, and ensure that the protein sources provided have
ery of the avian patient after disease or debility. Enteral
a high biological value.
PA
 mitrition is currently the most usual method of support-
In addition, restricting phosphorus in the diet is help-
ing the debilitated patient, with parenteral (intravenous)
ful, as excess may lead to dermineralisation of the bone,
 mtrition still being in its infancy in avian therapeutics.
 First, fluid requirements should be assessed, as any ani-
increased levels of parathyroid hormone and further re
nal damage.
mal will succumb to dehydration long before starvation.
The reader is referred to chapter 14 for a more detailed
discussion of this topic.
Second, energy requirements should be estimated.
These can be calculated roughly from the MER by mul-
tiplication as follows:
Starvation = 0.5 × MER
Trauma = 1.5 × MER
Sepsis = 2.5 × MER
Burns = 3-4 ×MER
From these crude estimations, a rough idea of the levels of
nutrition demanded and the energy concentration of the
Figure 12.5 Gout crystals may form in joints (articular gout) as in
diet can be derived.
this cockatiel (Nymphicus ho/fanoicus) with renal disease.
180 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Finally, restricting sodium is important to reduce fluid
Table 12.1 Examples of dietary deficiencies in avian species
retention and decrease hypertension. Vitamin B supple-
-Siape s i uems aadde ue se draq ues uoeua
Vitamin or
anlos-iaiem e buaq se ases Aue un l juaualddns oh arqe
mineral
Functions
vitamin, it can be flushed out of the body where polyuria
Vitamin A
Seems to irprove the activity of the
 Occurs,leading to deficiency.
mononuclear immune system as well as
governing cellular turnover of epithelial surfaces
Birds with heart disease
Vitamin B
Thiarnine especially helps stirnulate appetite,
complex
and many B vitarnins are useful in protein and
Heart disease is commonly seen in older parrots and
energy metabolism, making them important
some raptors, particularly females. It is also seen as a
during recovery periods
sequel to iron storage disease (haemochromatosis) in
Vitamin C
Also seems to aid immune system function,
 toucans and mynahs. Reduction of sodium in the diet to
and may be in short supply if the avian patient
reduce hypertension due to fluid retention is helpful. So
is suffering from hepatic disease, since it is the
too is lowering cholesterol levels by removing saturated
liver which manufactures vitarmin C
fats, such as dairy products and overly fatty prey for rap-
Vitamin D
Production of this vitarmin may also be irnpaired
tors. Avoiding meat in general for birds such as parrots
due to renal or hepatic dysfunction. However, it
 is advised. For toucans, mynah birds and related species,
is worthwhile noting that excess vitamin D can
the avoidance of high iron-containing diets is essential
cause soft tissue mineralisation, including in the
kidney itself 
to prevent haemochromatosis and the cardiac damage
which can ensue.
Vitamin E
Aids immune system function and helps reduce
free radlical oxidation of tissues
Birds suffering from maldigestion and
Vitamin K
This may become deficient due to prolonged
antibiotic therapy, where intestinal bacteria are
malabsorption syndromes
123
depleted or where a raptor has consumed a
Birds suffering from maldigestion and malabsorption
warfarin poisoned rodent
syndromes such as pancreatic disease should be fed
Zinc
This mineral helps the healing process,
AN
highly digestible carbohydrate foods such as rice, pota-
particularly in skin dliseases, but can al5o
AVI.
toes and pasta, whilst reducing all fats in the diet such as
help immmunity, particularly with respect to
:11
seeds, meat, etc. The addition of pancreatic enzyme sup-
phagocyto5i5
LH
plementation is to be considered, along with B-vitamin
PA
supplementation.
This is due to a failure to mobilise calcium into the blood
stream. IThe aflicted parrot will become weak, collapse and
Birds suffering from anaemia
start ftting which may progress to a coma and death. It
 Anaemic patients should have the cause of their anaemia
appears to be a hereditary condition and birds often grow
investigated, as common causes include heavy-metal poi-
anel ot ieadde spiq paiuv 'paeueu Aimyaiesjl l yo ino
soning and chronic disease processes. Other aids to in-
plenty of calcium in their bones, but seem unable to mo-
creasing red blood cell production (erythropoiesis) are
bilise it. Management, therefore, consists of providing suf-
supplementation with iron and with smaller increases in
ficient dietary calcium so that blood levels remain normal.
copper and cobalt levels. Vitamin Bz, niacin, and folic
acid levels should be six times the normal minimal values
Obesity
to ensure that the extra demands caused by increased red
In overweight or obese birds, particularly where a fatty
cell production are met.
liver syndrome is suspected, a strict diet management is
indicated.
Other dietary factors and conditions
Other factors which are known to aid the recovery of
Correcting dietary deficiencies
debilitated birds are given in Table 12.1.
Attempting to encourage new
food consumption
Hypocalcaemic tetany
Birds are highly intelligent, particularly members of the
A specific disease of African grey parrots commonly be-
Psittaciformes order. This means that the introduction of
tween the ages of 2 and 4 years is hypocalcaemic tetany.
new foods, in an attempt to correct dietary deficiencies,
Avian Nutrition 181
can be a significant problem. The following techniques
 or the vitamins may encourage bacterial growth in the
may be employed to tempt a cage bird to accept new food
water bowl. Multivitamin and mineral preparations may
items.
be used as a general supplement to a diet where the in-
dividual bird will not take a wide variety of food types;
Overcoming unfamiliarity
an exarmple is the seed-obsessed parrot. Ihey should be
Just because the bird was not interested in the food item
used though, not as an excuse to give up on offering other
today is no reason to suspect that it may not try the food
food types, but more to ensure nutritional balance whilst
tomorrow. Just like children, birds may view a new or un-
 trying to encourage the bird onto a more stable diet. Ihey
familiar food with suspicion and reject it purely for that.
may also be used, even when a balanced diet is being fed
uo Aqenaand pooy al buuasandan daay oi si Aa au
and eaten, to supplement a bird at certain times of its life
the top of its food bowl, so that the bird has to remove it
when requirements for minerals and vitamins increase,
to get to the usual food underneath. Ihe bird may even-
such as during egg-laying, growth, moulting and old age.
tually become used to its sight, smell and taste, and may
therefore start to eat it.
Dietary requirements peculiar to
specific families
Tempting the bird with food
Larger members of the Psittaciformes order
Many birds want to eat what their owners are eating.
Larger members of the parrot family, such as cockatoos,
as obviously it must be better than the rubbish in their
macaws, Amazons and African grey parrots, have slightly
own food bowl! This can be used to our advantage, as the
 different requirements from the smaller members of the
owner can sample the food in front of the bird and then
family, such as the conures and parakeets. Many of their
offer it to the bird. This can trigger acceptance.
larger parrots require slightly more fats in their diets, to
Fooling the bird with food
increase their calorific density, than their smaller cousins.
This is not so surprising considering that the normal wild
53
Covering the food item that you wish the bird to eat in
153
diets of these parrots involve a moderate amount of oil-
the flavour or colour of a food item it already likes can
based nuts and seeds. It is advisable therefore, that larger
work well. An example would be honey- or peanut butter-
mits, such as hazel nuts, Brazil nuts, cashews, etc. should
coated broccoli or carrot.
be included in the diet of these species.
Pelleted commercial diets
An example of the MER of some of the larger species
Many excellent pelleted avian diets are available for spe-
of parrot include 452 kJ per day for a scarlet macaw (Arα
cies ranging from flamingos to toucans, parrots to ducks.
macao) as opposed to 200 kJ per day (Nott & Taylor,
Their main advantage is homogeneity - the bird cannot
1993) required by the lesser sulphur-crested cockatoo
pick and choose what it wishes to eat, but is rather forced
(Cacatua sulphurea). Iherefore, to maintain calorific in-
to eat a balanced, pre-prepared diet.
take, a scarlet macaw will have to eat far more of a seed
The disadvantages include the problem of selection.
such as the sunflower seed, which has an energy content
Some of these diets are multi-coloured and birds have
 of approximately 24 kJ per gram of dry matter (18 g dry
good colour vision and may pick out one coloured biscuit
matter or nearly 22.5 g fresh), as opposed to the cashew
to eat only. This is fine if all of the biscuits are of the same
mut which has an energy content of 32 kJ per gram of dry
composition no matter what the colour, but does lead to
matter (14 g dry matter or nearly 17 g fresh)
wastage. In addition, palatability can be a problem, so get-
However, many of the larger parrots, especially the
ting a bird to eat some of these diets can be difficult.
Amazons and African grey parrots, are also prone to ath-
Fresh water must be available at all times, as these diets
erosclerosis, or hardening of the major arteries, due to
are dry pellets and chronic dehydration can occur.
cholesterol deposition in their walls. This happens if their
diets are persistently high in saturated fats, such as meat
Avian mineral and vitamin supplements
and dairy products, but may also occur with chronic over-
These are very important, particularly for species fed a
 consumption of high fat nuts and seeds. Hepatic lipidosis,
home-prepared diet. Ihey are produced by many compa-
or the obliteration of the liver cells with fat, is also a com-
nies and cover all aspects of supplementation. Some are
mon sequel to over-supplementation of the diet with high
put in the food itself, some in water. The latter may be
fat nuts and seeds in parrots. So it is important to get the
problematic as the taste may prevent water consumption
balance right.
182 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
In formulating these diets it is also important that at-
ensure healthy egg production. Care should be taken with
tention is paid to calcium and mineral levels, as seeds and
egg-laying female raptors though, to ensure they are not
nuts are extremely poor suppliers of these. Nuts may also
fed obese prey items, as the presence of cholesterol and
be a potential source of fungal growths of Aspergillus spp.
lipids for yolk production in their blood stream makes
These can not only produce spores which may cause re-
them very prone to atherosclerosis at this time.
spiratory disease, but can also produce highly poisonous
toxins, known as aflatoxins and gliatoxins, which may
Water consumption
cause sudden death, neurological damage or chronic he-
Water consumption is of course vital. Dehydration may
patic damage, depending on the dose consumed.
occur due to the feeding of previously frozen and then
The most commonly seen deficiencies in the larger psit-
thawed prey, only because the freezing process causes
tacines occur with vitamin A, vitamin D and the mineral
dehydration of the carcass. Therefore, when defrosting
calcium. Ihis is particularly the case with African grey
the rodent or avian prey item, it is advisable to soak it
 parrots because of hypocalcaemic tetany - an inherited
in water.
condition of 2- to-4-year-old birds, where blood calcium
levels cannot be maintained. This can lead to hypocalcae-
Food composition
mic fts. In addition, African grey parrots fed an all-seed
Protein levels are as expected for a carnivorous family,
diet, are very prone to respiratory infections, especially
relatively high, at 15-20% (Cooper, 1991) and this is de-
aspergillosis (the air sac and lung infestation with the
sirable for full fitness. However, excessive levels of protein
fungus Aspergillus fumigatus). This is often associated
(greater than 30%) should be avoided, as this can lead to
with hypovitaminosis A.
an excess of protein degradation products in the blood-
However, as with so many nutrients, too much is as
stream, such as purines. These are converted into uric
bad as too little. Excessive levels of vitamin D3 commonly
acid for renal excretion, but if the levels are excessive, the
cause toxicosis in African grey parrots and macaws, lead-
uric acid concentration will exceed that which can be dis-
133
ing to softtissue calcification and renal damage. Excessive
solved in the blood. This will lead to the precipitation of
vitamin A can also cause problems in the large parrots
uric acid causing gout.
AVIAN
and in hand-reared chicks, causing liver damage, kidney
damage and haemorrhage.
been estimated at 20-25% (Cooper, 1991). Prey such as
some laboratory rats and mice, as mentioned, can cause
RT
Raptors
hypercholesterolaemia and atherosclerosis in under-
PA
Raptors are carnivorous. They therefore require regular
worked raptors.
fresh rodent or avian prey. If fed whole, these usually pro-
Mineral supplementation may be necessary. Ihis is es-
vide a balanced diet. To determine the amounts of prey to
pecially so in chicks which are often fed small pieces of
be fed, a rough rule of thumb is that the larger the raptor,
meat, rather than whole prey. Ihis can result in calcium
the smaller the food consumption is, as a percentage of
deficiencies, as muscle tissue is low in calcium and high
that bird's weight. A golden eagle, e.g. may consume 5-7%
in phosphorus. A ratio of calcium to phosphorus of 2:1 or
of its body weight per day, whereas a sparrowhawk would
at least 1.5:1 should be maintained.
perhaps consume 25% body weight per day.
For raptors in training, the main aim is to keep the
Prey
birds lean and slightly hungry to make it easier to hand-
The feeding of certain types of prey should be done with
train them. If underfed, however, the consequence is
care. For example, pigeons fed to larger birds of prey can
starvation; if overfed the bird will become obese, and ath-
be a source of Trichomonas gallinae infestation. This is a
erosclerosis is a major problem in overfed raptors. To try
 protozoal parasite which invades the crop and digestive
to prevent under- or overfeeding a useful technique is to
weigh the raptor on a daily basis to ensure constant weight
in the affected raptor. Therefore, it is recommended that if
levels. This is not always possible, however; e.g. when
pigeon is to be fed, it be deep frozen and then thoroughly
breeding the raptors they must not be handled, and so
sand ssuro ds su ae i on pas
at certain times of the year it may be diffcult to assess
in the carcass.
their condition. During this period, however, it is useful,
Other parasites such as the worm Capillaria spp. can
as with any animal to increase the levels of nutrition to
Avian Nutrition 183
avian and mammalian prey, the presence of lead shot is
Commercial pellets come in four main categories:
again a potential hazard and a cause of lead poisoning in
* Pellets designed for the brooding, egg-laying female,
raptors.
 which are higher in calcium and protein
Other problems due to poisoning from prey offered are
· Pellets for the very young waterfowl chick up to
-o a ied si pue said
2-3 weeks of age (known as 'starter pellets' or 'crumbs')
rines and organophosphates. Ihese concentrate in animal
· Pellets for the juvenile growing waterfowl (up to
fats and so pass up through the food chain, producing
4-6 months)
highest concentrations in top predators such as raptors.
+ Adult non-breeding maintenance pellets.
In addition, there are compounds such as the polychlo-
The differences lie in the provision of proteins and
rinated biphenyls (PCBs). Ihese are used for a number
calcium, with the highest being in the starter pellets (at
of purposes, including insulation and electrical circuitry,
around 20% protein) through to the lower end as adult
and may enter the food chain through small rodents.
pellets (14% protein). There are now companies which
These also concentrate in animal fats, so concentrating
also produce special diets for other ornamental waterfowl
their levels in the tissues of animals, as one moves up the
 such as sea duck and flarmingos. (Flamingos require more
food chain. They cause problems similar to those caused
 protein and a selection of salts to encourage plurmage
by the pesticides: reproductive problems, chick mortali-
colouration.)
ties and neurological tremors which can lead to death.
 Duck and geese enclosures need to be routinely exam-
ined for evidence of foreign objects, such as lead shot,
Food management for racing pigeons
 barbed wire fragments and so on. This is because of these
The day-to-day feeding of racing pigeons includes the
birds' desire to consume any and every loose potential
provision once or twice a day of a grain-and-pulse-
food item they can find when foraging.
based diet. For racing pigeons, one trend is the feeding
of carbohydrate-based foods, such as grains, early on
References
53
Eci
in the course of a week, and then increasing the pro-
Austic, R.E. and Cole, R.K. (1971) Impaired uric acid excretion in
tein levels with supplements and pulses as the racing
chickens selected for uricemia and articular gout. Proceedings
of the 1971 Cornell Nutritional Conference, November 2-3,
day, often a Saturday, approaches. Many companies
Buffalo, Colarado.
now produce homogenous pelleted feeds for racing pi-
Blackmore, D.K. (1963) The incidence and aetiology of thyroid
geons, containing differing levels of protein depending
dysplasia in budgerigars (Melopsittacus undulatus). Veterinary
on whether they are actively training or rearing young.
Record, 75, 1068-1072.
Grit can be given freely. It is insoluble and aids in the
Brue, R.N.{1994) Nutrition. Avian Medicine: Principles and
PA
grinding of grain in the gizzard. This is important in
Applicatior {eds B. Ritchie, G. Harrison & L. Harrison),
Pp. 63-95. WB Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
species such as pigeons, which do not de-husk seed be-
Cooper, JE. (1991) Nutritional diseases including poisons.
fore swallowing it. Water is offered, as with game birds,
Veterinary Aspects of Captive Birds of Prey,Pp. 124-142.
from communal feeders, and pigeon owners will often
Standfast Press, Glos.
add multivitamins, minerals and medicants to these
Harper, E.J. and Skinner, N.D. (1998) Clinical nutrition of small
fountain feeders.
 x p   s ssid  s
Medicine,7(3),116-127.
Heuser, G.F. and Norris, L.C. (1929) Rickets in chicks IIl: The
Waterfowl
effectiveness of mid-summer sunshine and irradiation from a
Nutrition of waterfowl receives less attention, as many
quartz mercury vapour arc in preventing rickets in chickens.
geese and ducks are kept in outdoor smallholding set-
Pouttry Science, 8, 89-98.
tings and so live predominantly on grass and other herb-
Kollias, G.V. and Kollias, H.W. (2000) Feeding passerine and
psittacine birds. Small Animal Clinical Nutrition (eds M.S.
age. Geese in particular need ample grass for grazing. It
Hand, C.D. Thatcher, R.L. Remillard & P. Roudebush),
is essential to ensure that access to poisonous plants or
4th edn, Pp. 979-991. Mark Mervis Institute, Marceline,
trees, such as laburnum and foxgloves, is restricted, as
Missouri.
these birds will eat almost anything. In poor weather, or
Nott, H.M.R. and Taylor, EJ. (1993) The energy requirements of
pet birds. Proceedings ofthe Association of Avian Veterinarians,
with limited grass production, commercial pelleted food
Pp. 233-239.
should be given. Ihere are now commercial duck and
Scott, M.L. and Norris, L.C. {1965) Vitamins and vitamin
 geese pellets available. Alternatively the use of poultry
deficiencies. Diseases of Pouitry {eds H.E. Biester & L.H.
layer' pellets can be tried.
Schwarte), 5th edn. Iowa State University Press, Ames, Iowa.
184 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Scott, PW. (1996) Nutrition. Manual of Psittacine Birds (eds PH.
Worrel, A. (1991) Serum iron levels in rhamphastids. Proceedings
Beynon, N.A. Forbes & M.PC. Lawton), Pp. 17-26. BSAVA,
of the Association of Avian Veterinarians, Pp. 120-130.
Cheltenham, Gloucester.
Wallach, JD. and Cooper, J.E. (1982) Nutritional diseases of
Further reading
wild birds. Non-infectious Diseases of Wildlife {eds G.L. Hoff
Stahl, S. and Kronfeld, D. (1998) Veterinary nutrition of large
& J.W. Davis), Pp. 113-126. Iowa State University Press,
Psittacines. Seminars in Avian and Exotic Pet Medicine, 7(3),
Ames, Iowa.
128-134.
531
Part Il: Avian specl
Chapter 13
Common Avian Diseases
Skin and feather disease
The condition is mainly seen in members of the Psit-
Feather plucking
taciformes, although some of the hawk family such as
Feather plucking can be one of the most complicated
Harris' Hawk are also susceptible.
conditions in avian medicine to accurately diagnose and
Behavioural feather plucking may be diagnosed often
treat. The causes of feather plucking can vary tremen-
only after the ruling out of infectious/pain causes.
dously. For examples, see below (Figure 13.1).
1. Ectoparasites
Ectoparasites
2. Endoparasites
Ectoparasites are not as commonly seen in cage birds as
3. Skin infections (bacterial, viral and fungal)
might be expected. Ihere are, however, many inportant
4. Iatrogenic (e.g. poor wing clip)
skin and feather parasites of raptors, game birds and wa-
terfowl kept in captivity.
 5. Behavioural
6. Organopathy
Mites
E5
7. Heavy metal poisoning (lead, zinc)
Knemidocoptes: Ihey are seen mainly in the budgerigar
8. Psittacosis
and canary. These eat cell debris and cause the conditions
9. Salmonellosis
known as 'scaly beak' and 'tassle foot. The presenting signs
10. Hormonal
are crusting and enlargement of the cere at the base of the
11. Environmental
 contaminant (e.g. nicotine-tainted
beak, and thickening and proliferation of the skin of the
feathers).
Bumdap au si suid oi ead a iauy 'sa
12. Viral diseases affecting other organs (e.g. bornavirus)
mite (Knemidocoptes laevis). This mite causes disintegra-
(the causal agent of proventricular dilatation disease)
tion of the feather quill, causing it to break offclose to the
13. Pain
skin and producing bald areas.
14. Hepatitis/hepatomegaly (e.g. hepatic lipidosis)
15. Atopy/allergic skin disease
Sarcoptes: Scabies mites (Sarcoptes spp.) are uncommon-
Diagnosis requires a full, detailed history to be taken as
ly seen, but have been reported in macaws. Ihe symptoms
well as a full health examination. A diagnosis of a behav-
are feather loss and widespread self-trauma.
ioural condition can only be made accurate by extensive
Dermanyssus: The red feather mite (Dermanyssus gal-
history taking and elimination of medical conditions
linae) has been reported in raptor flights, pigeon lofts
from the picture.
and in some cases, cage and aviary birds such as parrots,
 particularly those in outside flights. Ihis mite does not
Behavioural feather plucking
live on the bird permanently. It hides in the cracks and
The most basic classification is to divide feather pluck-
crevices of the cage or shelter during the day and crawls
ers into two types. The first is the true feather plucker
out to attack the bird when it is roosting at night. It is a
which removes the whole feather. The second is the
 blood sucking mite and can cause anaemia and weakness
feather chewer which just mutilates the feather but
in heavily parasitised birds.
leaves it embedded in the skin. In addition, some spe-
cies of Psittaciform bird such as the cockatoos may also
Ornithorryssus: Another blood sucking mite is the north-
exhibit self-mutilation of the body as well as feather
ern fowl mite (Ornithoryssus syiviarum). This mite inhabits
plucking.
the host continuously, so it is easier to detect and to treat.
186 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
wounds. The maggots of these species then eat their way
into the bird with devastating results, and allow the colo-
nisation of the wounds by smaller species of fly maggot.
The Hippoposcidae genus contains such species as
the sheep and horse keds, which are however capable of
infesting aviary birds, particularly raptors. Ihe juvenile
form of the fly is flightless and so spends large amounts
of time living on its host. Ihese species will often create
infection and anaemia. Ihey can also transmit blood-
borne parasites, e.g. avian malaria, Haemoproteus spp.
and Leucocytozoan spp, which may cause anaemia and
inmmunosuppression. The pigeon louse fly (Pseudolyn-
chia canariensis) has been associated with transmission
of Haemoproteus spp, but also pigeon adenovirus 1 and
Figure 13.1 Feather plucking may have many causes.
possibly pigeon pox virus.
Other mites such as the skin mites, Backericheyla spp.
Mosquitoes
and Neocheyletiella media in passerine birds, and Epider-
They have been shown to cause irritation and to act as a
moptes bilobatus and Michrolichus avus may also cause
vector for avian malaria in penguins, as well as causing
pruritus. Qul mites such as Dermatoglyphus spp. and
the spread of other blood parasites and viruses, such as
-d aeay sd ase ose Au ds sndus
West Nile fever eastern and western encephalitis viruses.
ing and loss.
Gnats
123
Lice
Gnats can transmit blood-borne parasites such as Leuco-
All avian lice belong to the order Mallophaga, and so
cytozoan spp.
ae an si an ma q a ra asn
 generally elongated, squeezing in between the barbs of
Ticks
-noopino ul uaas auoo ano ane Aau 'siaiea a
These can rapidly be fatal to birds, possibly due to the
二
LH
housed birds and the main route for infestation is from
 presence of a toxin in the saliva of the tick. They are seen
PA
wild birds.
 The waterfowl mite is Holormenopon spp. It has been
for hunting, as ticks are ground dwellers. Ihey are also
associated with damage of feathers, leading to a lack of
common in aviary-kept birds which are overhung by sur-
normal structure and loss of waterproofing. This causes
rounding trees. Ihe ticks may be carried on wild birds
the feathers to look bedraggled and soggy so-called 'wet
and so drop-off roosts and nests into an aviary beneath.
feather'disease.
Again, they may transmit many bacteria, such as mem-
 In pigeons, two main types of louse are seen. Ihe
bers of the Rickettsia family, as well as blood-borne para-
body louse (Menapon latum) and the slender louse
sites and viruses.
(Columbicula columbae) are seen on the wings. Ihey
cause damage to the structure of the feather, damaging
Endoparasites
the interlocking of the barbs which keep the feather's
The parasite Giardia spp. can infest cockatiels leading to
shape intact, and so give the pigeon a somewhat ragged
internal irritation, which causes the affected bird to pluck
appearance.
the feathers over its flanks and ventrum. In addition, se-
 Raptors are prone to lice and a wide variety of species-
vere ascarid nematode infections have been associated
specific lice are found. The mites destroy feather integrity
with feather plucking in psittacine birds.
and this leads to poor flight.
Viral diseases affecting the skin
Flies
Psittacine beak and feather disease
The blow fly family, such as the blue, black and green
Psittacine beak and feather disease (PBFD) is caused by
bottles, may be drawn to birds with diarrhoea or with
a member of the circovirus family. There is evidence of
Common Avian Diseases 187
the presence of different strains of the virus in different
Diagnosis is based on polymerase chain reaction
species. As its name suggests, it is mainly seen in Psittaci-
(PCR) demonstration of the viral antigen in blood or
formes, although many other orders of birds have been
feather pulp
0 - it is advised that both are submitted as
found to be affected. Some species may recover from
frequently one can be negative depending on the stage
infection, such as many lorikeets and lories. In many
of the disease. Others have suggested liver biopsy in
species, circoviral disease is a terminal infection. Grey
Grey parrots as this appears to be the target organ (Gr-
parrots (Psittacus erithacus) are an example where two
und et al., 2005). Alternatively, histopathology of skin
main forms of the disease are commonly seen: An acute
biopsies can demonstrate viral inclusions and at post-
form which is seen in juvenile birds that present with clin-
mortem in young birds, depletion of B lymphocytes
ical anaemia and immunosuppression (and frequently
from the Bursa of Fabricius with viral inclusions in
aspergillosis); and a chronic form which causes increas-
the bursa, thymus and in the bone marrow. Ihere is no
ing feather, nail and beak dystrophia, death finally occur-
 treatment for the virus although avian gamma inter-
ring due to dysphagia and inanition (see Figure 13.2). In
feron therapy has been tried with varying degrees of
many birds, the first feathers to be affected are the powder 
success. Vaccination has been attempted, but if the bird
feathers - this is more obvious in cockatoos which nor-
is already infected, then vaccination has been shown to
mally have a very dusty beak - those infected with circo-
actually deteriorate the bird's condition.
virus have a shiny beak free of dust.
In Eclectus parrots and Lovebirds, early circoviral
Polyomavirus
disease can present with self-mutilation making circo-
Avian polyomavirus (APV) infection is common and
viral infection a differential in feather plucking. In Bud-
causes systemic disease in various species of psittacine,
gerigars, the disease is known as ‘French moult, with
gallinaceous, passerine and raptor birds. In budgerigars
birds from 4-5 weeks becoming depressed then show-
(Melopsitfacus undulatus), it is the cause of budgerigar
ing necrosis of developing feathers. Some may die after
fledgling disease/feather duster disease. In this condition,
53
153
1-2 weeks with diarrhoea and crop stasis. Transmission
neonates in infected flocks may die suddenly at around
of circovirus in psittacine birds is by feather dander, oral
10-15 days. Others may develop abdominal distension,
and faecal routes. In Columbiformes, a typical disease
reduced feathering and haemorrhages under the skin.
pattern occurs in young squabs between 2 months and
Some may show neurological signs such as ataxia and
1 year of age. Incubation periods are 2 weeks. Clinical
 tremors of the head. If infected afer 15 days of age, they
signs include anorexia, diarrhoea, weight loss, respira-
will often survive but develop feather abnormalities pre-
tory disease and lethargy. Death commonly occurs with-
venting flying. In juvenile finches (primarily Gouldian
PA
in 3-5 days. The disease produces immunosuppression
finches), clinical signs include weight loss, fluffed appear-
and therefore concurrent infections are common-most,
ance, diarrhoea and dehydration. A polyomavirus has
typically Chlarydophila psittaci or Aspergillus spp.
also been identifed in canaries (Serinus canaria) with
infections.
 similar signs plus loss of feathers and some neurological
 signs. Many of these had secondary infections.
 Diagnosis is based on clinical signs and PCR testing of
dloacal swabs or tissues at postmortem. Testing indicates
that the canary and finch strain are different (Shivaprasad
et al., 2009). Clinical gross postmortem and basophilic
intranuclear indlusion bodies on histopathology are
suggestive.
There is no treatment for this condition, although there
is now a vaccine in the United States (Biomune II Psit-
timune?). Detecting virus DNA particles from a cloacal
swab or faecal sample is the standard test.
Avipox viruses
Figure 13.2 PBFD in an African grey parrot - note the overlong
These can occur in all avian species, although none
beak, which is splitting, and some poor fea ther quality.
have so far been recorded in Strigiformes. Signs include
188 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
pox-like lesions, occurring predominantly on the face,
*Type II: This is the next stage, wherein the mild scabs
eyelids, feet and cere. Ihese become secondarily infected,
become deeply infected. This condition may also be
 and may lead to more extensive lesions. Respiratory tract
caused by the raptor puncturing its own foot with one
disease is also seen and may cause sloughing of the lining
of its claws. Ihe bacteria involved include Staphylococ-
 of the trachea and smaller air ways, causing asphyxiation.
cus aureus, E. coli, Pseudomonas spp. and occasionally
Transmission may occur directly from bird to bird, and
yeasts.
by flying insect vectors. Ihe pox virus affecting canaries
· Type IIl: This is the worst lesion, with deeper struc-
 ss a   aia ad si
tures such as bones within the toes, ligaments etc., all
ity in canary flocks and has been associated with lung
becoming infected. These birds are often not possible
neoplasia.
to treat. The feet are very swollen and painful and hot
Diagnosis is based on demonstrating the classical Bol-
to the touch.
linger bodies, seen due to virus particles inside infected
More recently, bumblefoot has been further refined
cells, as well as the clinical signs described.
in classification into five categories from the mildest at
I, with early devitalisation of the plantar aspect of the
Papillomavirus
foot, to severe osteomyelitis of the phalangeal bones at V
This may lead to proliferative skin masses on the feet and
(Oaks, 1993; Remple, 1993).
legs of passerine birds and they are considered enzootic in
 some populations of waterfowl, Gruiformes and Ciconi-
Fungal diseases affecting the skin
iformes and may mimic mite infestations. Rarely in psit-
These tend to be secondary to other injuries, or skin mu-
tacine birds, proliferative lesions on the face and around
tilation. Candida albicans has been reported in lorikeets
the beak may be seen. Papillomas of the digestive tract
and associated with hypovitaminosis A. It has also been
 are now thought not to be caused by a papillomavirus but
seen in lovebirds with feather loss around the eyes, beak
rather by a herpesvirus. Diagnosis is by histopathological
 and neck with scaling.
133
demonstration of intranuclear inclusion bodies. There is
Malessezia spp. have been associated with pruritus
d5
no treatment at present.
in galahs, eclectus parrots, mynah birds and cockatiels
AN
(Reavill et al., 1990).
Bacterial disease affecting the skin
Dermatophytosis has been recorded in Galliformes
Examples include Salmonella typhimurium var. copenha-
where it is known as favus, and is generally seen most
二
LH
gen joint infection of pigeons, which may then erupt as a
commonly around the wattles and comb.
PA
 boil visible on wing joints such as the elbow; and Staphy-
lococcal spp. and E. coli infections of the feet of many spe-
Allergic skin conditions
cies, which cause bumblefoot.
There is some evidence that allergic skin disease is a
problem in Psittaciformes. Serological tests do not seem
Bumblefoot
to be reliable in birds, but intradermal skin testing has
In raptors, it is more frequently seen in falcons. Persistent
been shown to be useful in determining allergens and has
pressure on the same parts of the sole of the foot when
been shown to give significantly different results in feath-
 perching restricts the blood flow to these areas. Ihis will
er plucking and normal birds (MacWhirter et al., 1999).
ultimately lead to hypoxia and death of tissues, followed
Codeine phosphate is used as the positive control as it
by open sores and deep pedal infections. Bacteria most
 gives more consistent results than histamine (Colombini
commonly seen such as E. coli and Staphylococci spp., but
et al., 2001). The intradermal skin test is carried out using
yeasts such as Candida spp. may also be seen in cases that
the skin either side of the keel over the pectoral muscles
have been on antibiotics for prolonged periods of time.
which limits the amount of allergens which can be tested
Many categorisations for the differing stages of bumble-
for in one go and also due to the thin nature of the avian
 foot have been described, the most basic being proposed
skin requires the bird to be anaesthetised with isoflurane.
by Cooper (1985):
However, the results indicate that some feather plucking
· Type I: This is when the injuries are restricted to
parrots do have an allergic response to allergens, such as
smoothing of the normally papillated underside of the
sunflower seeds, house dust mites and Aspergillus spp.
foot. There may or may not be the presence of a corn
Hypovaccination has not been tried on any major scale
and sometimes a mild scab.
but this author has had some effects with hypovaccines.
Common Avian Diseases 189
Miscellaneous diseases affecting the skin
Changes in feather colouration and structure
Split keel
This may occur due to a lack of one nutrient, such as the
-u ruatamao um u aas as s ay s
paler colour seen in some canary breeds, for example, red
reared birds, particularly those which have been care-
factors, when deprived of vitamin A. Vitamin A in par-
lessly wing clipped. It occurs when the bird attempts to fly
ticular is required for the production of the yellow and
off a high perch, and, either due to poor wing muscling
red colouration of feathers. Other colour changes which
 or lack of flight feathers, drops like a stone and hits the
can be seen include the follwing:
 ground with force. This often splits the thin skin cover-
*Vasa parrots will develop white feathers rather than their
ing the prominent keel area and this split may become
normal grey, when they are infected with PBFD virus.
secondarily infected. This delays healing, and may neces-
· Red colouration of the grey feathers in African grey
sitate the use of antimicrobials or even surgery to achieve
 parrots may also be seen with hepatic disease and with
wound healing.
PBFD virus.
· Black feathers appearing in green-coloured birds such
Ulcerative skin disease
 as Amazons can suggest liver disease.
Ulcerative skin disease can be due to bacterial infections,
for example, Staphylococcus spp., or may be due to fungal
Fret marks
infections such as infection by Aspergilus spp. Birds most
Fret marks are another common feather abnormality seen
commonly affected are species such as lovebirds, cocka-
in birds with a history of illness. Ihese are breaks in the
toos and cockatiels.
-ul au jo uonpaid iood ot anp siaueay au jo Aaau!
The bird traumatises the skin underneath each wing,
terlocking barbs. Ihis produces a noticeable band on all of
leading to a weeping ulcerative dermatitis. The infections
those feathers which were growing at this time. Ihe pres-
 may be primary or secondary. Little is known about the
Ence of fret marks suggests some systemic disease or malnu-
true initial causes of this condition, although some sug-
trition at the time the feathers were being produced, and can
53
be a useful external indicator of a bird's recent past health,
153
gestions recently have included allergic skin conditions
similar to those seen in dogs.
although they say nothing about its current health status.
Hormonal skin disease
Psittacosis/chlamydophilosis
Hypothyroidism has been recorded in chickens and Afri-
Systemic infection with Chlamydophila psittaci has been
can grey parrots. Clinical signs include slow growth and
implicated in some parrots with feather plucking and
 poorly coloured feathers, which often lack the interlock-
ing barbules and so appear ragged. Diagnosis is based
on the thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) test where 1
IU/kg of TSH is administered intramuscularly after mea-
surement of basal T4 levels. T4 levels are then measured
24 hours later, over which time a 2.5 times increase in T4
should have occurred. Failure to do so suggests hypothy-
rpdism. It has been suggested that an underlying cause
of hypothyroidism may be a dietary deficiency of iodine.
Tumours and feather cysts
The more common skin tumours include subcutaneous
lipomas, and the so-called xanthoma seen particularly
along the distal wings of birds (e.g. budgerigars). This
is more an accumulation of fat deposits within the cells,
producing a thickening of the area, and a characteristic
yellow colouring of the skin.
 saq u a s are sis r
canaries (Figure 13.4). Ihe condition occurs when a new
growing feather fails to find its way through the skin
Figure 13.3 Infection with Chlamyooohila psittac may cause many
 conditions, one of which may be feather plucking as seen here.
surface, and so continues to grow while trapped under
190 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Figure 13.4 A bleeding feather cyst on the wing of a budgerigar.
Figure 13.5 Wing tip oedema in a kestrel (Falco tinnuncu/us)
the skin. The feather cyst becomes an enlarging caseous
commonly associated with frostbite in raptors. It will of-
nodule, which can ulcerate and become secondarily in-
tenlead to avascular necrosis of the wing tips once the oe-
fected. It is thought that the condition is hereditary and
dema has subsided if not treated quickly (see Figure 13.5).
the affected birds should be removed from breeding stock.
Digestive disease
Oil spills
Sea birds and shore birds alike become coated with crude
Crop
oil, making them flightless and removing their water-
Ingluvitis
 proofing. Many also succumb to the toxic and irritant ef-
 Ingluvitis is inflammation of the crop. It can be caused by
123
fects of the oil itself.
 an overgrowth of the yeast Candida albicans or bacteria
d5
 Treatment is based on a number of principles which in-
such as E. coli and other Gram-negatives. Candida albi-
AVIAN
clude stabilisation of the oten dehydrated and malnour-
cans infection tends to be confined to the crop and gastro-
ished bird, followed by prevention of further irritation
intestinal tract. It is often a sequel to prolonged antibiotic
:1
and absorption of oil across mucous membranes, and
therapy such as tetracycline treatment of chlamydophilo-
PART
finally removal of the oil from the pelage (feathers and
sis or in neonate psittacine birds. Clinical signs usually in-
skin) (Chapter 6).
volve regurgitation and delayed crop emptying. Diagnosis
is by visualising the thickened crop lining, which has been
Heavy metal toxicosis
likened to a towel surface and by demonstration of typi-
sixn (suz pue peal aioud) eia eal an
cal peanut-shaped budding yeasts. Presence of pseudohy-
 has been associated with neurological and renal disease in
phae indicates deeper tissue involvement and worsens the
birds. However, chronic lead toxicosis in particular is also
prognosis.
implicated in feather plucking. Older houses often have
 Ingluvitis can also be due to parasites such as Tricho-
wooden surfaces that have decades of lead based paints,
monas spp., which are a common cause of regurgita-
which parrots are adept at chewing off! Kitchen units use
 tion of seed in budgerigars and cockatiels. In pigeons
lead in the leading of glass doors. Solder and many pewter 
 and raptors, Trichomonas spp. cause a condition, known
items contain lead Diagnosis is via blood testing - the cut-
 as 'canker' or 'frounce, which results in caseous yellow
off level for lead is >0.2 ppm (20 ug/dL or 1.25 umol/dL)
 nodules at the corners of the oropharynx and the proxi-
measured in lithium heparin whole blood. Levels >0.5 ppm
mal oesophagus. It can however spread throughout the
leu anBie auos 'ssouaeTp axe (TP/[oum 9'z 1o Tp/8n 0s)
as lead is not required for any bodily system function and
in raptors. Ihe feeding of wild-caught pigeons to raptors
therefore the presence of any lead is significant.
is a prime means of transmitting this particular patho-
gen. If a raptor owner is to feed wild-caught pigeon,
Wing tip oedema
then it should first be frozen for 3-4 weeks and then
This, as its name suggests, is seen clinically as swelling
thoroughly defrosted before being fed, so as to kill off
and oedema of the wing tips (carpus distally) and is most
any Trichomonas spp. present. Diagnosis of the causal
Common Avian Diseases 191
agent is by crop wash. The volume of crop wash saline
 infections are associated with high mortality because of
used varies from 0.5 ml in a budgerigar up to 10 ml in a
intense vomiting. In cases of capillariasis, characteristic
large macaw. The sample should then be examined using
St apohs a ai sasay al ui uaas aq Ae saa ieodia
both Gram's stain and Diff-Quik? style dichrome stains.
 often indirect and may involve earthworms.
Trichomonas spp. may be difficult to pick up using this
The parasite Streptocara spp. have been associated with
method, as it is often in the lining of the crop. Treatment
oesophageal damage in waterfowl similar to that caused
has to be given on the assumption that this disease ex-
by Capillaria spp. in other birds.
ists, once all of the other possibilities have been ruled
out. Willette et al. (2009) describe trichomoniasis as the
Crop burns
 Jo spiq u aseasi sseied juesyuais Aieiu iso
 These are frequently seen in hand-reared Psittaciformes.
prey. Certain species however seem more; for example,
 They occur when the owner has fed the juvenile bird a
resilient-peregrine falcons, which naturally feed on wild  rearing formula porridge that has been microwaved and
Columbiformes, are less likely to suffer from trichomo- 
 not thoroughly stirred and allowed to stand resulting
niasis. Conversely, Northern Goshawks (Accipter gen-  in hot spots' within the mixture, which will cause local
tilis), gyrfalcons (Falco rusticolus) and barn owls (Tyto  burns. Ihese can be full thickness, causing the skin to
alba) are much more susceptible. In addition, young 
slough after 7-10 days.
birds seem more susceptible.
Bacterial infections causing ingluvitis due to E. coli,
 Foreign bodies
Pseudomonas spp. and Aeromonas spp. are also not un-
Many larger Psittaciformes may consume foreign
common, particularly in juvenile birds and neonates.
objects, which become lodged in the crop and may
cause irritation, retching, and may lacerate the thin
Sour crop
crop lining. Retrieval of the object via endoscopic ex-
Sour crop in Psittaciformes is associated with juvenile
amination under anaesthesia is advised, with repair of
53
birds. It occurs when the contents of the crop ferment,
any lac erations.
producing a foul-smelling acidic environment. This con-
dition may be life-threatening. In raptors, it may be as-
Associated crop disorders
sociated with overconsumption of food. The crop has a
 The lack of iodine in an all seed diet will cause thyroid
neutral pH and so if food is present for too long a period
gland enlargement (goitre). This enlarged gland will press
 of time it can ferment and go offleading to sour crop.
on the crop and proximal oesophagus, so limiting its abil-
ity to enpty and fll. Often seen in budgerigars, they will
Crop impaction
adopt a horizontal posture lying across the perch with the
Crop impaction occurs in juvenile birds that may over-
head slightly raised. There is frequent intermittent regur-
eat. Some may occur due to poor motility associated
gitation of seed.
with neurological conditions such as lead poisoning
or proventricular dilatation disease. Alternatively, they
Proventriculus
may eat the floor covering, and, if this is composed of
Proventriculitis
Inflammation of the true stomach (proventriculus) can be
ticularly common in pheasants and other young game
caused by the yeasts Candida spp. and Macrorhabdus or-
birds).
mifhogaster (forrmerly known as 'Megabacteria'). Signs can
include the vomiting of food, the passing of undigested
Capillariasis
seed in the faeces, and in the case of Psittaciformes, an-
Capillariasis is the name given to the infestation of the
orexia, diarrhoea and weight loss.
crop lining with the nematode Capillaria spp. This is
In budgerigars, the incidence of Macrorhabdus ornitho-
mainly a problem for pigeons and raptors, but is also seen 
gaster infection is relatively high. Many birds are carri-
in Passeriformes (e.g. finches and canaries), as well as
 ers with no clinical signs, but a percentage of a flock will
species of Galliformes (e.g. pheasants and grouse). It is
show a 'going light' syndrome. Ihey will eat voraciously,
 much rarer in Psittaciformes.
but lose weight, often passing undigested seed in their
Clinically, raptors flick their head from side to side
faeces. Diagnosis is by finding the typical bacillus-like
when eating, and will regurgitate. In pigeons, acute
Gram-positive chains of the yeast in faeces.
192 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
 Megabacteriosis is seen in a wide host of other species
affected birds may show signs of ataxia, nervous tremors,
including finches, canaries, parrotlets, cockatiels, love-
central blindness, fitting and torticollis (Steinmetz et al.,
birds, ostriches and domestic poultry (ducks, chickens,
2008). Ihe median age of onset appears to be 3-4 years
turkeys and geese).
but has been reported as early as 5 weeks of age and as old
as 17 years (Phalen, 2006a; Smith, 2009).
Proventricular dilatation disease
The virus is an avian Bornavirus (Gancz et al., 2009;
Proventricular dilatation disease (PDD) has been re-
Gray et al., 2009; Shivaprasad et al., 2009) with Koch's pos-
 ported in over 50 species of psittacine and nonpsittacine
tulates being fulflled in the cockatiel (Nymphicus hollandi-
birds. It was frst reported in Macaws (aka 'Macaw wast-
cus) (Hoppes et al.,2010) and Patagonian Conures (Gray et
ing disease') and its current name is derived from the
al., 2010). Ihey cause most ofthe clinical signs by stimulat-
lymphoplasmacytic ganglioneuritis, which damages the
ing the body's own immune system. Multi-bird households
 nerves supplying the proventriculus resulting in progres-
have a significantly higher incidence of infection with avi-
an Bornavirus than single bird households (71.4% versus
 drome, starvation and eventually death (see Figures 13.6
51.3%). Infection may be associated with higher incidences
and 13.7). Ihe disease appears to be able to affect the
of feather plucking (76% of positive cases showed plucking
central nervous system as well as the myenteric and so
behaviour) (Zantop, 2010). Transmission is suspected to
be faeco-oral but respiratory transmisson is also suspected
(Perpinan et al., 2007). Incubation period may be rapid as
witnessed by the young age of some cases, but may also
take up to 7 years to manifest itself.
Definitive diagnosis is difficult. Clinically, the disease
has been diagnosed based on histopathology of a proven-
53
AVIaN SpECIl
tricular or crop biopsy. Diagnosis by crop biopsy is less
accurate ([66-76%] Doolen, 1994; Gregory et al., 1996);
although trying to ensure ablood vessel is incorporated to
increase the likelihood of sectioning a nerve increases the
chances of success. Proventricular biopsy although more
accurate is more challenging due to the risk of postopera
LH
tive coelomitis. Other supportive diagnostic tests include
PA
positive contrast radiography demonstrating a dilated
proventriculus and displacement of the ventriculus to the
Figure 13.6 Severe emaciation and death is the clinical outcome
right side with prolonged erptying times. Ihese signs
of proventricular dilata tion syndrome (breast feathers have been
manually removed to show extent of weight loss).
may be mimicked by other disease such as neoplasia,
foreign bodies and heavy metal poisoning. PCR serology
uojelaiios iood e pamous iej os aneq Asdonq dous pue
between the three (Clubb & De Kloet, 2010). Villaneuva
et al. (2010) have shown that western-blotting techniques
to test for antibodies to avian Bornavirus was effective;
however, of the 117 psittacine birds detected as positive,
 only 30 could be confrmed on histopathology sugesting
that subclinical carriers of avian Bornavirus are common.
The same study also showed that many seronegative birds
also were positive on detected antigen in faeces by PCR
again showing further discrepancies.
Proventricular/ventricular impaction
If insoluble grit is fed, the grit builds up can block the
Figure 13.7 An enlarged proventriculus (cream structure curving
gizzard. Other causes of impaction are seen in juve-
around the darker liver) is seen on examination.
nile cockatoos (Cacatua spp.) and African grey parrots
Common Avian Diseases 193
(Psiftacus erithacus), which often compulsively ingest
Epomidostormum and Amidostomum spp. which infest
items in their environment such as fragments of wood,
the gizzard of geese, cause bleeding into the lumen, diar-
plastic etc. These birds present as vaguely unwell, losing
rhoea, enteritis and weight loss. In young birds, it causes
condition, rarely with vomiting although recurrent bacte-
growth retardation and even death.
rial enteritis has been reported (Speer, 1998).
Game birds: Heterakis isolonche is a significant cause of
Endoparasites
mortality in young pheasants, causing severe damage to
Helminths
the caecal lining. In many Galliformes, such as turkeys
 Ascaridia spp: Ascarids are commonly seen in cage and
and chickens, this worm carries another pathogen with
aviary birds, particularly those that have a deep litter or
it - Histomonas meleagriditis, a single-celled protozoan
earth floor to their aviary, as this allows maturation of
parasite that can cause significant focal liver necrosis, giv-
ing the disease its name of black spot.
any worm eggs that are passed in the faeces. Species seen
include Ascaridia platycerci (psittacine birds), A. her-
Corvids and thrushes: Porrocaecum spp. have been associ-
maphrodita (in a Hyacinth macaw), A. columbae (found
ated with weight loss and intestinal/stomach granulomas.
in psittacine birds and Columbiformes), A. columbae
(Columbiformes) and A. galli (found in Galliformes and
Non-helminth digestive system parasites
psittacine birds).
 Infected individuals may show no external signs, but
Motile
protozoan parasites: Giardia psittaci are
commonly found in cockatiels and budgerigars. Signs of
a aiam aso Aeu Aa yanoua Aaeau passeied j!
diarrhoea or, in severe cases, may experience intestinal
the disease vary, and in the case of the cockatiel, it has
been associated with a deficiency in vitamin E, producing
blockage and death. Ascarids have a direct life cycle. Ihis
feather plucking.
means that the eggs passed in the faeces of an infected
Diagnosis is by finding the parasites on faecal smears.
bird, after a few days, can be directly infectious to another
53
The sample is suspended in saline and examined
153
bird without having to be taken up by an intermediate
host. Diagnosis is made by finding the thick-walled eggs
using the x400 microscope lens. Ihe sample must be
fresh, as the parasite disintegrates rapidlly once the faeces
in the faeces of the affected bird.
dry. When fresh, movement of the organism which has
Capillaria spp: In pigeons, Capillaria obsignata bur-
eight flagellae can be observed.
rows into the lining of the intestine where it can cause
Hexarmita spp. are commonly found in pigeons. It
severe diarrhoea and regurgitation, often with fatal
produces weight loss and diarrhoea. It is seen in young
birds towards the end of the breeding season when envi-
ence of the bioperculate eggs in the faeces or regurgitated
 ronmental contamination is high. Diagnosis is by finding
material produced by the infected bird. Its life cycle
large numbers of the motile, eight-flagellae-bearing, elon-
is direct, as with the ascarid family.
gated protozoa using the x400 microscope lens on a slide
of fresh faeces suspended in saline.
Other digestive system worms seen in birds
Trichomonas spp. may affect the intestines as well as the
ae aisas ansap an un un m jo saads ia
crop.
largely nematodes and include Ornithostrongylus quadri-
Cochlosoma spp. are a flagellate single-celled proto-
radiatus which is found in the intestine of pigeons. It is a
zoal parasite, which has been associated with widespread
blood-sucking worm, similar to the hookworms. Its eggs
mortalities in Australian finches. It causes diarrhoea,
are thin walled and more spherical than the Capillaria
dehydration and moulting abnormalities particularly in
 birds between 10 days and 6 weeks of age.
Pp.eggs.
Waterfowl: There are many different species of nema-
tode worms. Echinuria spp. cause a high mortality rate
geons and cage birds to Galliformes and waterfowl. They
in young ducks and swans. It is transmitted via the inter-
 contribute to the going light syndrome where the bird
 mediate host Daphnia spp., the water flea. It can produce
loses condition. In pigeons, heavy burdens of E. colum-
tumour-like lumps in the lining of the proventriculus
and gizzard, which may lead to partial blockage of these
Clinical signs may appear before oocysts are detected in
organs
the faeces. In canaries, Isospora canaria affects canaries of
194 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
2 months of age and older producing diarrhoea and ema-
ciation, primarily damaging the duodenum which may be
be particularly diffcult to treat as the bacteria become
oedematous at postmortem. In hill mynah birds, Eimeria
entrenched in the lining of the intestines. The main sal-
spp. have been associated with haemorrhagic enteritis.
monellae seen in birds are Salmonella typhimurium and
Caryospora spp. cause crop and intestinal damage.
S. arizonae. Clinical signs resemble those seen in yersini-
There is often high mortality in young birds, with adults
osis but are generally more chronic. However, significant
exhibiting abdominal discomfort. Ihere are over seven
mortality can occur, particularly in finches and other
species of Caryospora known to affect birds of prey, the
small passerine birds. In pigeons, S. typhimurium var.
two most commonly seen in captivity being C. falconis
 Copenhagen typically produces swollen joints, especially
and C. neofalconis (Forbes and Simpson, 1997; Heiden-
on the wings referred to as boils' by pigeon racers and
reich, 1997). Transmission is by direct means although
fanciers. In addition, weakness, lethargy, green urates, di-
there is evidence that rodent prey can act as a heterox-
arrhoea and death of young hatchlings may all point to a
enous host. Clinical signs include general debility, diar-
salmonella problem. In pigeons, afer paramyxovirus 1,
rhoea, weight loss and anorexia and are most commonly
salmonellosis is the next most common cause of neuro-
 seen in young raptors between 3 and 6 months of age.
logical signs and may also mimic mycobacterial disease
The parasite sexually reproduces in the gut, but encysted
when infecting bones. Culture and sensitivity testing
forms can be found in the muscle and central nervous
using specific Salmonella spp. culture medium should
system, and result in an encephalitis with neurological
 n      aq s
signs such as torticollis. Merlins (Falco columbarius) ap-
of diarrhoea and weight loss. Escherichia coli are gener
pear particularly susceptible with sudden death occur-
ally absent from the intestines of passerine and psittacine
ring. Diagnosis can be made on clinical signs and the
birds (Dorrestein, 2009), but are typically found in 97% of
presence of huge numbers of oocysts in the faeces with
all pigeon intestinal tracts (Harlin & Wade, 2009). Clini-
a typical single sporocyst with eight sporozoites within it.
cal signs of E. coli infection include diarrhoea and sudden
123
In canaries and other Passeriformes, Atoxoplasma spp.
death, and may be associated with epizootic mortalities in
may be found. It spreads from the gut into the mono-
imported finches. Clostridium spp. have been associated
AN
nuclear white blood cells and is carried through the
 with gastrointestinal disease and death of a wide range
bloodstream affecting organs such as the liver, result-
of birds. They may be found in the gastrointestinal tract
ing in hepatomegaly known as “black spot' because it is
of many species notably raptors. Clostridium perfringens
RT
visible through the thin skin of the canary's abdomen.
is considered a normal part of the flora of a raptors di-
PA
Diarrhoea or death may be seen, but the disease may be
gestive system. However, as with clostridial bacteria in
asymptomatic.
rabbits, overgrowth may occur in poor conditioned birds
Diagnosis of coccidiosis is by finding the oval to round
resulting in enterotoxaemia. In addition, food spoiled by
oocysts in the bird's faeces using sugar flotation methods,
clostridial toxins will result in rapid death of the raptor.
or by direct smear of the liver.
In addition, the mycobacterium Mycobacterium avium,
the cause of avian tuberculosis, is often seen in waterfowl
Cryptosporidium spp: Ihis coccidian organism appears
and raptors. It inhabits the gut and associated organs and
to be able to infect any epithelial surface and so has been
is thus spread via the faecal-oral route. It is often impli-
reported in the gastrointestinal, respiratory and urinary
cated in chronic wasting diseases, and produces classical
tracts. It has a direct life cycle and the transmission route
caseous nodules throughout the gut. Diagnosis is made
is faeco-oral, in food (other avian prey) or by respira-
on Ziehl-Neilsen stains demonstrating the acid-fast bac-
tory aerosol. In psittacine birds, the proventricular form
teria, and bacterial culture of the faeces. It is not treatable
is the most commonly observed, with birds co-infected
and, as it is a zoonotic disease, affected birds should be
with Macrorhabdus ornithigaster being most likely to die
euthanased.
(Messenger & Garner, 2010).
Viral gastrointestinal disease
Bacterial gastrointestinal disease
Duck plague virus
Bacteria such as E. coli, Campylobacter spp., Clostridium
The duck plague virus is a member of the alpha herpesvirus
spp., Pseudomonas spp, Salmonella spp., Yersinia spp. and
family. It affects both ducks and geese. It is spread in the
Chlarmydophila psiftaci may all cause diarrhoea and even
faeces and oral secretions and may be carried latently with
Common Avian Diseases 195
no clinical disease, or can cause death with no premonitory
Other liver bacterial diseases
signs. Alternatively it may cause violent diarrhoea, anorex-
Any bacteria, such as Salonella spp., E. coli and Pseu-
ia and neurological tremors. It can be associated with mass 
domonas spp., which breaches the gut wall may affect the
 outbreaks in ducks. Death usually occurs within 3-12 days
liver directly via the enterohepatic circulation. In addi-
 of infection, and 1-10 days after developing clinical signs.
 tion, the pansystemic infection of Chlamydophila psittaci
 Diagnosis is made on the clinical signs and isolation of the
 will cause hepatitis manifested, as with so many hepatic
virus from faeces, or on demonstration of intranuclear in-
disorders, by green-to-yellow coloured urates. Diagnosis
clusion bodies in the gut wall on postmortem.
is based on clinical signs, biochemistry and isolation of
the bacteria from the gastrointestinal tract and, if pos-
Avian papillomatosis
sible, from hepatic swabs.
This condition is thought to be due to a herpesvirus. It
occurs in members of the Psittaciformes family causing
Viral liver diseases
papillomas throughout the digestive system frequently
Psittacid herpesvirus isolates 1, 2 and 3 have been record-
in the cloaca. In the cloaca, it often leads to irritation
ed, all of which can cause 'Pacheco's disease′ in psittacine
and eversion or even prolapse due to repeated straining.
birds. Old World psittacine birds appear more resistant
 Other clinical signs include regurgitation, recurrent bouts
 to infection than New World ones with Amazon parrots
of enteritis, passage of blood in the faeces and infertility.
and conures being considered the most susceptible. Clini-
Papillomatosis is also linked with a high incidence of liver
cal signs may be sudden death for New World birds, or a
 and pancreatic cancer in affected birds.
-Tangan 'eixanoue 'uoissaidap jo asinos paauoloid anou
Diagnosis is made in the live bird by visualising the
tation and green diarrhoea before death in more resistant
'uoisal al ot pioe sase %s Buidde Aq papie soided
species. Occasionally, haemorrhagic diarrhoea may be
which will cause the papillomas to turn white while nor-
seen. Some cockatoos have been reported as surviving in-
 mal mucosal folds will remain pink
53
153
 Transmission appears to be in oropharyngeal secretions
Liver disease
and faeces. At postmortem, the liver is often bronze in co-
Haemochromatosis
lour and enlarged. Ihe kidneys may also be enlarged and
Haemochromatosis is where excessive amounts of iron
the intestines and brain congested. Intranuclear inclusion
are deposited in the liver. Birds affected are commonly
 bodies (Cowdry type A) with hepatocellular necrosis are
members of the toucan, toucanette, mynah and star-
suggestive. Diagnosis can also be made using PCR tech-
ling families. In the wild, these species often live in iron
 nology on cloacal or oropharyngeal swabs. A vaccine is
PA
poor soil areas, and their digestive systems are therefore
available in the United States.
adapted to absorb as much iron as possible. When pre-
sented with an iron-rich diet, high levels of vitamin C
Raptor herpesviruses: Currently have three distinct iso-
(which encourages iron absorption from the gut), too
lates: Falconid herpesvirus 1 (FHV1); strigid herpesvirus
much iron is absorbed. This iron is then deposited in the
1 (SHV1) and accipitrid herpesvirus 1 (AHV1). Al cause
liver, leading to damage and failure.
 hepatitis and splenitis with typical herpesvirus inclusion
Clinical signs include ascites, dullness, dyspnoea (due
 bodies. Wernery and Kinne (2004) suggest that transmis-
to the ascites pressing on the air sacs), abdominal swelling
sion is via the ocular/intranasal route in falcons.
and sudden death. Diagnosis is based on species, clinical
Falconid herpes virus: This virus affects Falconidae and
signs, and liver biopsy to assess iron levels. Ihis can be
occurs mainly in Europe and the Middle East. It is usu-
a dangerous procedure, particularly if the bird has asci-
ally fatal, particularly in gyrfalcons and causes liver and
tes. Ihere is then a real danger of rupturing air sacs and
spleen swelling and necrosis, bone marrow necrosis and
drowning the bird.
gut inflammation with haemorrhage. It is transmitted di-
rectly from bird to bird and via prey items.
Avian tuberculosis(Mycobacterium avium
infection)
Strigid (Owl) herpes virus: This virus causes liver, spleen
Avian tuberculosis may produce liver disease, causing
and bone marrow necrosis and is specific to the owl fam-
classical caseous nodules throughout the structure, and is
ily. It is invariably fatal within 3-9 days. Yellow nodules
also associated with intestinal disease.
may be found in the gut and the pharyngeal mucosa. It
196 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
is spread in urine and faeces, as well as respiratory se-
that are not working, but are still being well fed. Affected
cretions. Some birds that survive will remain latently
birds are often sleek, plump birds, which then become
infected. There is no treatment or vaccine available.
dull and lethargic, and may exhibit signs varying from as-
cites, to respiratory distress and clotting defects.
Pigeon herpesvirus: Ihis can cause a mild pharyngitis/
oesophagitis with cellular necrosis in young birds. Older
Toxic liver conditions
birds are frequently immune but remain persistent car-
a asi  sas jo raq e  su
riers. Anorexia, regurgitation and sometimes neurologi-
Aaeay au apnu asn uad unae al u an
cal signs in conjunction with green urates are suggestive.
metal toxicoses such as lead and zinc poisoning. It may
Inclusion body hepatitis can be seen on biopsy of affected
also include other metals such as copper, chromium and
livers.
mercury.
Duck viral hepatitis: Duck viral hepatitis affects chiefly
Lead poisoning: Lead poisoning is frequently seen in wa-
young ducklings under 3 weeks of age and is caused by
terfowl, which have inadvertently eaten lead shot from
a member of the Picornaviridae. It is rapidly fatal and
hunting or fishing. Psittaciformes may also be affected, as
produces severe liver damage and haemorrhage from the
they will consume or destroy many household items that
liver surface.
contain lead. These include
+ Lead window effects on kitchen units
Avian reovirus: Not all are pathogenic but some can
* Lead weights in curtains or blind drawer cords
●Lead in the foil used for wine bottles
Grey parrots. High mortalities have been reported in the
● Metallic cloths used for sanding/polishing metals
United Kingdom in budgerigar flocks (Manvell et al.,
· Lead paints in older houses
2004; Pennycott, 2004). Clinical signs include anorexia,
Clinical signs include
fluffed up appearance, dyspnoea, nasal discharge, diar-
123
*Weakness (S-shaped neck of the swan)
rhoea and sudden death. Postmortem reveals hepatitis,
+ Lethargy, vomiting, passage of blood in the faeces (very
mephritis, serositis with ascites, pneumonia and splenitis
AVIAN
common in Psittaciformes)
with subcutaneous haemorrhages. There is oftenlympho-
* Passage of lime green faeces (very common in raptors)
plasmacytic infltrates of various organs, haemosiderosis
· Chronic non-regenerative anaemia
haemorrhage and fbrin deposition. Infections are com
Seizures
RT
monly associated with other pathogens such as C. psiffaci,
·Kidney and liver damage
adenovirus and M. ornithogaster infections.
· Death
Avian leukosis/sarcorma virus: This family group of vi-
Diagnosis is by finding blood lead levels in excess of
0.2 ppm (12.5 mmol/L). Ihose in excess of 0.4-0.6 ppm
ruses is known to induce a tissue borne leukaemia in Psit-
(25-37.5 mmol/L) are diagnostic. In addition, radiogra-
taciformes, Galliformes and Passeriformes (such as the
phy will often show lead particles as radiodense areas in
canary). It destroys the liver and kidneys, which become
infltrated by rapidly dividing lymphocytes. Hen birds
the proventriculus and ventriculus.
seem more susceptible than cock birds, and it is shed in
  s    d 
the faeces, oral/respiratory secretions and semen. It is
shortly after they have been moved into a new cage
also passed in genetic material from mother to young in
('new wire cage disease'). Occasionally, the finish of
the egg. Clinical signs include hepato- and renalomegaly,
these cages is of a poor quality and a fine powder of zinc
ascites, respiratory distress, weight loss, green coloured
oxide forms the surface of the wires. The parrot manoeu-
urates, polydipsia and polyuria. Ihere is no treatment.
vres itself around the cage with feet and beak, and takes
in small volumes of this powder on a daily basis. After
Hepatic lipidosis
4-6 weeks, liver and kidney damage will occur, and the
Hepatic lipidosis is usually diet related. High fat diets
bird may present weak, lethargic, having seizures and
(such as the all-seed diets so beloved of Psittaciformes)
with anaemia. Other sources of zinc include some forms
and lack of exercise lead to obesity and fat deposition in
of coin, some plastics and other alloys. Diagnosis is
the liver cells or hepatocytes. Liver function suffers as a
made on clinical signs, history and finding zinc blood
consequence. Ihis condition may also be seen in raptors
levels above 2 ppm (2000 mg/L)
Common Avian Diseases 197
Other poisons affecting the liver: Aflatoxins released by
Pigeon herpesvirus (PHV) affects young (<6 months)
Aspergillus spp., are known to be hepatotoxic and carci-
 pigeons. It causes a nasal discharge, sneezing and necrotic
nogenic, as are the organic poisons found in rapeseed,
plaques to form inside the mouth and upper airways. It
ragwort and the castor bean. Treatment is rarely possible.
may also cause the cere to become discoloured and crusty.
In severe cases death may occur. There is no specific treat-
Pancreatic disease
ment or vaccine available, although many will survive.
 Diabetes mellitus is a common condition in budgerigars
Sinusitis may be seen in conjunction with rhinoliths
and cockatiels. It may be hereditary, although pancreatitis
and nasal discharges. It may be visible as a swelling on the
can result in the development of this disease.
face, often ventral to the eye in the area of the infraorbital
Clinical signs include polydipsia and polyuria, often
sinus.
with dramatic weight loss despite a healthy appetite.
Diagnosis is made on the clinical signs in conjunc-
Lower respiratory tract
tion with persistently raised blood glucose (often
Trachea
above 25 mmol/L up to 44 mmol/L). Some glucose may
Gape worm infection: Syngamus trachea is found in Gal-
be found in the urine normally, but high levels (>1%) are
liformes, pigeons and raptors (e.g. buzzards). Ihis parasite
strongly suggestive of disease.
Lses the earthworm as its intermediate host before finally
Pancreatitis can be seen in birds. It has been linked with
maturing in the windpipe of the aflicted bird. There it
infections due to Paramyxovirus III (e.g. cockatiels). The
causes irritation and secondary infection, and may be pres-
passage of partially digested seed or pasty tan coloured
ent in sufficient numbers to suffocate the bird Diagnosis
faeces may be seen combined with weight loss.
is made by finding the characteristic Y-shaped worms (the
male and female worms are permanently joined in copula-
Respiratory disease
tion!) in the mucus of the mouth and trachea.
Upper respiratory tract
53
Eci
Nostrils
Avipox virus: In Amazon parrots, a severe form of avipox
Clinically often feathers are stained just above the nares,
virus may cause the sloughing ofthe lining of the windpipe,
and there may be sneezing and head flicking due to the
on yeap uana pue enuoumaud ‘eaoudshp u Bumsa
discharge.
secondary infection. All avipox viruses cause pox lesions
Rhinoliths, concretions of dried secretions that form
 on the face, particularly around the eyes and mouth, the
a ball of solid material blocking the entrance to the na-
pharynx and trachea, but may also produce lesions on the
sal passages, may be caused by dietary insufficiencies
feet. Secondary infections are common. In pigeons there
PA
such as hypovitaminosis A, and/or may involve local or 
are vaccines available. Diagnosis is confirmed by finding
deeper infections due to bacteria such as Mycoplasma
 the characteristic Bollinger bodies that are the reproduc-
spp.(e.g-, pigeons), or Chlamydophila psittaci (e.g. Psit-
tive centres of virus replication within the host cells.
taciformes).
Aspergillosis: Ihe fungus Aspergillus spp., can produce a
Fungi, such as Aspergillus spp., or viruses, such as the
growth that blocks the windpipe in a matter of days (see
avipox virus group, are also the causes. The mite Kremi-
Figure 13.8). Ihis condition is particularly common in
docoptes spp. may also contribute to the blockage of the
raptors and many Psittaciformes such as African grey
nostrils (e.g. Psittaciformes and raptors).
 parrots. Diagnosis is discussed below.
Some species of parrot, such as Amazons, are suscep-
tible to nasal irritation in dry environments, and in the
Air sac mites: Air sac mites, Sternostoma tracheacolum,
presence of feather dander, produced by African grey par-
are common in Passeriformes such as canaries, Lady
rots and cockatoos.
Gouldian finches and goldfinches where they prefer the
A congenital defect is the absence of a patent internal
trachea and bronchi, and cause dyspnoea. The mites
choanal slit. Ihis prevents the normal nasal secretions
may be seen if the feathers of the neck region are wetted
from draining ventrally into the oropharynx. The secre-
 a puaq  auous si i pos aiq e pe
tions then present as a clear nasal discharge.
The mites are silhouetted as dark pinheads within the
Theromyzon tessulatum is the duck nasal leech and is a
trachea. Another form of air sac mite, known as Cyto-
common parasite. It may lead to secondary infections of
dites nudus, is seen in waterfowl, and produces dyspnoea
the nasal passages.
often with a cough
198 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Pigeons are commonly affected by chlamydophilosis
showing persistent conjunctivitis and sneezing. Con-
versely, in species such as the macaw family, the first
sign of psittacosis may be death! Ihe strain of C. psif-
faci seen in Psittaciformes is more virulent and more
zoonotic than the strains seen in pigeons, waterfowl and
other species.
C. psiffaci can infect almost every internal organ, in-
cluding the spleen, the liver and the kidneys. It has also
been reported as a cause of otitis media, meningoen-
cephalitis and bursitis. It would be more accurate there-
fore, in species such as the Psittaciformes, to consider
chlamydophilosis as a systemic disease with respiratory
symptoms.
Figure 13.8 An aspergilloma growing in the trachea of this raptor
resulted in asphyxiation and its death.
Diagnosis of chlamydophilosis
Because of the intermittent shedding of the bacteria into
Avian cholera: Ihis is a disease of waterfowl caused by the
the environment that frequently occurs in carrier status
bacterium Pasteurella multocida. It causes a thick mucoid
individuals no one diagnostic technique is 1o0% accurate.
discharge from the mouth and trachea, dyspnoea and of-
Radiography and white blood cell counts are useful, as in-
ten death in young birds. A related bacterium, Reimerella
fected Psittaciformes often have marked enlarged spleens
(Pasteurella) anatipestifer, will cause tracheal and upper
on radiography and white blood cell counts in excess of
airway discharge in ducklings and a condition known as
30 × 10*/L, if infected.
133
duck septicaemia. It is a common cause of mortality.
The standard test is the PCR used to detect the bacteria
d5
 in droppings, or, on postmortem, from internal organs.
Lungs and air sacs
 Due to intermittent shedding, faecal testing may not pick
AN
The absence of a diaphragm in avian species means that
AVI.
up all cases but collecting droppings over 3-5 days helps
any disease causing fluid retention or production, such as
to minimise false negatives.
:1
St si tueaq iae ct eaod a s a iaa
particularly so when a thin-walled air sac ruptures and
The Immunocomb@ test (Biogal Labs) detects antibod-
RT
allows fluid to access the respiratory system. The bird may
ies (Igy) produced by the bird’s immune system, and so
PA
is beneficial in testing birds which may be carriers of the
then become suddenly severely dyspnoeic.
disease and not shedding it into the environment. Ihe
Chlamydophila psitaci infection: This bacterium pro-
disadvantage of the test is that the bird may not be cur-
duces the condition chlamydophilosis, also known as or-
rently infected, and yet still have antibodies against the
nithosis and psittacosis.
disease if it was infected in the past.
Psittacosis refers to the condition in Psittaciformes, or-
Chlamydophilosis is a zoonosis: All humans are sus-
nithosis to the condition in other avian species and chla-
ceptible, but those most at risk include
mydophilosis may be applied to both. The bacterium is of
·The very young
 great significance frst because of its widespread presence,
· Ihe very old
particularly in the smaller species such as cockatiels and
* Those on immunosuppressive medication (e.g. cortico-
-es se ioe Aeuu spiq asmesaq Aiuosas pue 'sieaiapnq
steroids, chemotherapy)
ers of the bacteria for months to years without necessarily
showing any signs of disease. They may shed the bacte-
mellitus, AIDS).
rium into their faeces and oral secretions intermittently,
Ifthe owner falls into one of these categories, then serious
which can make detection of carriers difficult.
thought should be given to rehoming or even euthanas-
The disease is spread via faecal, oral and respiratory
ing the bird.
secretions and feather dander, and different strains of the
 In a pet shop situation, where the public are at risk, the
bacteria affect different species of bird. Not all strains are
 affected livestock must be removed from public areas into
as potent, either to the bird or to human.
a specific quarantined area. All handlers of birds during
Common Avian Diseases 199
the treatment period should wear face masks and protec-
lead to blockage of the airway in the case of the syrinx,
tive clothing when in the same air space as the birds. Fae-
 or it can lead to the production of large balls of fungus,
ces should be incinerated.
known as fungal granulomas, within the air sacs.
 The owner should also be informed of the symptoms of
The fungus progressively blocks airways leading to dys-
chlamydophilosis in humans, and advised to contact his
pnoea and death through asphyxiation, or it invades the
or her doctor immediately to receive testing or medica-
 bloodstream and is transported to other organs, such as
tion if any of these occur.
the liver, kidneys and central nervous system.
The symptoms of chlamydophilosis in humans include
Aspergillus spp. can also produce a toxin known as afla-
all or some of the following:
toxin. Ihis is highly toxic to birds and rapidly causes liver
· A dry, non-productive cough
damage, failure and death. In addition, a gliatoxin may
'Flu-like muscle pains and fever
also be released causing central nervous system damage
。Migraines
with paresis, ftting and other neurological signs being
+Kidney and liver damage
observed.
。Dyspnoea
There is some evidence to suggest that due to its im-
+Heart damage
 portant role in cellular turnover of the airway linings and
·Occasionally death
local immunity, hypovitaminosis A may play a part in the
Despite all of these problems, chlamydophilosis is not
disease.
a notifiable disease unless it is diagnosed in domestic
Diagnosis of aspergillosis
poultry. This does not, however, diminish the veterinary
Full blood cell counts are useful as the condition
surgeon's responsibility under Health and Safety guide-
will often cause a markedly elevated white blood cell
lines to ensure that all staff, as well as owners, are aware of
count (>30 X 10*/L). Radiographs are useful to show
the risks and health hazards, and that all precautions are
thickening of the air sacs, and any fungal granulomas
taken to ensure adequate protection of staff dealing with
within them.
the infected birds.
Rigid endoscopy is frequently essential to examine
Veterinary nurses and technicians are equally obliged
 the syrinx and the internal air sacs allowing sampling for
to follow practice protocols and health and safety proce-
culture.
dures, when dealing with positive cases.
Tracheal and lung washes may be performed with ster-
Aspergillosis: This is the fungal condition caused by
ile saline (0.5-1 mL/kg of bird) flushed into the trachea of
Aspergillus spp, frequently Aspergillus fumigatus. This is
the anaesthetised bird, and then immediately aspirated.
Recent work has confirmed the diffculty in diagnosing
PA
an environmental contaminant and so any bird may be
affected. It is not infectious from one bird to another.
aspergillosis: Antibody results can be positive in birds not
Certain environments will contain more airborne mi-
currently infected with aspergillosis and negative due to
croscopic spores of this fungus. Ihese include areas near
 anergic responses; Aspergillus galactomannan tests used
rotting vegetation, which includes the bottom of a parrot
in humans for invasive aspergillosis can also produce
cage which has not been cleaned out recently!
 positive results in noninfected birds although confirmed
Certain species are very susceptible, including most
cases had 2.6 times the levels than presumptive healthy
raptors (e.g gyrfalcons, golden eagles, Northern Goshawk
 birds; derangements in the plasma protein electrophore-
and snowy owls), penguins (e.g. Gentoo and King) are
sis trace however were 2.4 times more likely in positive
Extremely susceptible. In Psittaciformes, all species can
cases than healthy ones with specific elevations of beta
suffer from this condition, but African grey parrots are
and ganma globulins (Cray et al., 2009, 2010). Girling
more likely.
(2002) describes typical plasma protein electrophoresis
Younger birds are more commonly affected than adults
ads aueinsd jo raqn e un sisoinadse ol sasuodsa
Aspergillosis may also be seen in birds that are irmmuno-
cies. Variations in response are dependent on species and
suppressed due to concurrent illness, or immunosuppres-
sexual maturity includes the following: Ara spp. produced
sive medication (e.g. corticosteroids).
 a significantly higher alpha-1 globulinlevel when infected
The fungal spores settle out on the surface of the respi-
 compared with other psittacines, whereas Psittacus spp.
ratory tract, particularly in the region of the syrinx, the
and Amazona spp. produced a higher alpha-2 globulin
abdominal air sacs and the lung structure itself. This can
response; elevations in beta globulins were significant
200 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
in cases of aspergillosis and across the species elevations
requests must be made to the Government Agency AH-
above 3.5 times normal were considered significant indi-
VLA. Ihis is not currently possible in Scotland.
cator of aspergillosis.
Prevention of infection should revolve around the use
of virucidal footbaths, careful storage of feed to prevent
Paramyxovirus/Newcastle disease: This is a condition
spoiling by wildlife and avoiding wearing the same cloth-
seen primarily in pigeons, and is important, as Newcastle
 disease and paramyxovirus-1 (PMV-1) are notifiable due
ing outside the aviary system. Commercial quarantine
to their ability to cause mortality and debility in commer-
separate consignments. Negative pressure ventilation sys-
cial poultry.
tems are also advised. New arrivals should be quarantined
Symptoms of paramyxovirus disease may include:
for a minimum of 30 days before being introduced to the
·Dyspnoea
rest of the collection.
·Tachypnoea
·Periocular oedema
Bacterial pneumonias and air sacculitis: Psittacosis has
+ Listlessness and neurological signs, e.g. wing drooping
already been mentioned and may result in bacterial pneu-
▪Head tilt and circling (torticollis)
monia and air sacculitis.
· Sudden death
Mycoplasmosis: Mycoplasma spp. have been isolated
The virus is thought to be transmited via droppings.
from most species of bird. In many pigeons, small pas-
Diagnosis is based on the symptoms and confirmation is
serine and psittacine bird's clinical signs include conjunc-
made using viral haemagglutination inhibition tests.
tivitis and upper respiratory disease. M. gallisepticum has
Other paramyxoviruses have been recorded with se-
been implicated in many of these outbreaks.
rotype 5 being seen in the 1970s in budgerigars mani-
Others are due to secondary bacterial infections such
fested by depression, diarrhoea and high mortality.
as those occurring in raptors after infestation by the rap-
Paramyxovirus serotype 3 has been reported in small
tor air-sac mite Serratospiculurm spp.
133
 psittacines more recently causing torticollis and circling
Diagnosis is made upon clinical signs, full blood cell
(Jung et al., 2009).
counts and full body radiographs.
AVIAN
Infhuenza virus disease: Avian influenza viruses are all of
Pasteurellosis: Pasteurella rmultocida is the cause of avian
type A, enveloped single stranded RNA viruses belong-
cholera. P multocida serotypes 1 and 3 are seen most com-
 ing to the orthomyxoviridae family and have high genetic
monly In passerine birds, the disease is usually spread via
RT
variability. Ihey are classified according to the properties
aerosol or contaminated equipment. In raptors, it often
PA
of the envelope haemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase
gains access to the body via infected prey, causing an
(NA) glycoproteins. Ihey are also classifed according to
oesophagitis, pharyngitis and can lead to septicaemia.
their pathogenicity (high [HPAI] and low [LPAI] patho-
For falconry birds, vaccination has been recommended
genic). All known HPAI are of the H5 or H7 subtype
using commercial polyvalent killed pasteurella vaccines
(although not all H5 and H7 strains are HPAI). Clinical
(Willette et al., 2009)
signs of influenza A virus infection vary between different
influenza A strains and different avian species. In HPAI
Other bacteria: Aeromonas spp. and Pseudomonas spp.
virus infection (e.g. H5N1), widespread mortality in do-
bacteria have been reported in cases of upper respiratory
mestic poultry with peracute deaths is reported. However,
tract and gastrointestinal disease (the former may present
it is possible for certain breeds of birds, such as waterfowl,
as a septicaemic syndrome as well). Bordatella avium can
to carry the virus asymptomatically and so introduce the
cause an upper respiratory tract infection and has been
virus to new areas. In pigeons, gross pathological find-
associated with the lockjaw syndrome in cockatiels. Kleb-
ings were mild and confined to the nervous system with
siella pneumoniae, K. ozaenae and K. oxytoca have all been
lymphohistiocytic meningoencephalitis (Klopfleisch
associated with contaminated water whether for drinking
et al., 2006).
or in incubators. It tends to colonise the gut first and then
If certain strains are isolated (H5 and H7) then com-
spread via the bloodstream to the respiratory tract.
pulsory culling will be enforced of captive birds. In the
Enterococcus faecalis has been linked to chronic trache-
face of an outbreak, it is possible in England and Wales
itis, air sacculitis and pneumonia in canaries.
Diagnosis is made on clinical signs, full blood cell
to prevent infection (under EU Decision 2006/474)
counts and full body radiographs.
Common Avian Diseases 201
Toxins: Teflon and smoke-inhalation toxicity: Birds
Streptococcus gallolyticus (formerly known as S. bovis)
are extremely sensitive to the odourless fumes given off
has resulted in acute/peracute death of pigeons. Initial
by overheated Teflon coated pans. The consequence
 clinical signs include inability to fly and drooping wings
can be a reaction causing pulmonary oedema with
followed by anorexia, polyuria/polydipsia, green urates
 ues juaieanl anojaq qeap uago pue eaoudshp aiaas
and ascites. Peracute cases have evidence of septicaemia
be initiated. A similar situation is seen with poison-
with pericarditis.
ing due to the toxic fumes from smoke, or cooking fat
Many Gram-negative bacteria such as E. coli, Klebsiella
inhalation.
sauoapuAs ot peal ose ues dds sououopnasd pue ds
such as vegetative endocarditis.
Cardiovascular disease
Mycobacterial disease has also been associated with
Congenital heart defects
myocarditis and pericarditis.
With the success of breeding programmes to produce col-
Parasites such as those causing toxoplasmosis and sar-
our variants, the incidence of congenital heart defects has
cocystosis have both been reported in birds as a cause of
incre ased.
myocarditis heart failure and death.
Atherosclerosis
Cardiomyopathy
It is often because of lack of exercise and inappropriate,
Dilated cardiomyopathy has been reported in birds and
high fat diets. Ihe major arteries become thickened with
associated with rapid growth, hypoxia, high altitude, fu-
cholesterol deposits, their lumen diameter decreases and
razolidone, monensin and sodium toxicities, vitamin E
they become less elastic, so blood pressure increases (Fig-
and selenium deficiencies, rancid fat in the diet and in-
ure 13.9). Calcification of the plaques often occurs, par-
breeding (Strunk & Wilson, 2005). Ihe mechanism by
ticularly if excessive amounts of vitamin D, and calcium
which the disease develops appears to be the same as for
are consumed.
mammals.
53
153
Arterial calcification
Haematological disease
Over-supplemention of calcium and vitamin D may lead
Anaemia may be due to heavy metal, such as lead or zinc,
to loss of elasticity and increased blood pressure, heart
 poisoning, debilitation or haemoparasites. Leucocytozoan
 failure and organ damage.
spp. inhabit red and white blood cells and causes intra-
vascular haemolysis leading to anaemia, and spleen and
Vegetative endocarditis and myocarditis
liver damage where the parasite multiplies. It is transmit-
Chlamydophilosis can lead to myocardial damage, as can
 ted by black flies and is known to cause serious problens
a number of septicaemic and bacteraemic conditions. It
in young Galliformes, raptors and Anseriformes.
can also lead to vegetative endocarditis.
Other significant blood parasites include malarial
 parasites, Plasmodium spp., which can cause severe anae-
mia, lethargy, vomiting, seizures and death, particularly
 in penguin species, snowy owls and gyr falcons and their
hybrids. Plasmodiurm spp. are transmitted by mosquitoes
of the Anopheles spp. or by direct blood to blood transfer
during fighting. Clinical signs include mucous membrane
 pallor, lethargy, haemoglobinuria and death. A common
haemoparasite, Haemoproteus spp., which inhabit the
avian red blood cell, generally does not cause disease. It is
transmitted via biting flies (Hippoboscids).
Atoxoplasmosis caused by Isospora (Atoxoplasma)
serini in canaries can multiply in the liver resulting in
massive liver enlargement (black spot disease' due to
the projection of the liver beyond the caudal sternum
Figure 13.9 An enlarged heart in an African grey parrot (Psitacus
ventrally). It tends to occur in juvenile canaries from
noh enueh a aun ose ato sisoasoae o anp (se
aney leuan Aepuoas on anp wnpuejad aun buuao sieiso
 2-9 months with clinical signs of general debilitation,
202 Veterinary Nursing of ExoticPets
 diarrhoea and in around one-fth cases of neurological
Otherwise, it is based on clinical signs such as anuria
signs. It has been implicated in the 'going-light syn-
 or oliguria, and extreme depression, with a history of
drome of Greenfinches (Cooper et al., 1989). Mortality
exposure to the relevant poison. Blood tests may show
can be significant around the 80% marker. Impression
a massively elevated uric acid level (>1500 umol/L) and
smears of the cut surface of the liver and spleen will
 Ps i (o ) sa sod s
show the intracellular coccidian in the cytoplasm of
noted that a moderate rise in uric acid levels will occur,
monocytes indenting the monocyte nucleus into a cres-
particularly in raptors, for several hours after a meal. Urea
cent shape. Faecal examination is often unrewarding
levels may also be measured and compared with uric acid
due to the low number of oocysts shed after the initial
levels to ascertain if pre-renal azotaemia or renal disease
acute phase of the disease.
 is present as pre-renal azotaemia will cause a predomi-
Blood-borne leukaemia is uncommon in birds.
nant rise in urea. Ihe problem is the ratios need to be
Much more commonly seen are the tissue associated
worked out for each species - the ratio is calculated by
lymphomas. Avian type C retrovirus group (avian
multiplying the plasma urea level (in mmol/L) by 1000
leucosis-related viruses) includes avian leucosis and
and then comparing it with plasma uric acid level (in
sarcoma virus (ALSV). Transmission is both horizon-
umol/L). In peregrine falcons, the ratio is >6.5 (Lumeij,
tal (faeces and saliva) and vertical via gonadal cells.
2000). Birds are often anuric with acute renal failure and
Female birds are more susceptible than males and the
so urinanalysis is not possible.
lsan a i 'so au aq uo poiad uoqn
in immunosuppression and has been associated with
Chronic renal disease
discrete renal tumours in budgerigars resulting in uni-
Aetiology
lateral leg paralysis.
As with acute nephritis, this has a number of causes. Ihe
A type C retrovirus unrelated to SLV is the cause of
causes could be
lymphoma in turkeys. Marek's disease is a gamma her-
1. Toxicity/poisonings (e.g. lead)
133
 pesvirus affecting Galliformes, inducing lymphormatous
2. Chronic infection
d5
changes in peripheral nerves, bursa, thymus and visceral
a. Bacterial (e.g. Pseudomonas spp.)
AN
organs.
b. Viral (e.g. infectious bronchitis)
AVI.
c. Fungal (e.g aspergillosis)
Urinary tract
d Parasitic (e.g. microsporidia such as Encephalito-
LH
Acute renal disease
zoon hellum)
PA
Aetiology
 3. Excessive levels of calcium and vitamin D in the diet
This is often due to bacterial causes. It may also be caused
4. Long-term excessive levels of protein in the diets of
by poisons such as zinc antifreeze and chocolate or due
Psittaciformes.
to nonsteroidal ant-inflanmmatory drugs (e.g. diclofenic
5. Neoplasia (e.g. ALSV in budgerigars)
acid that causes the precipitous decline of white-backed
6. Chronic dehydration (e.g. in hen's incubating eggs)
vultures in India). Viruses such as APV in Psittaciformes
7. Renal lipidosis (e.g. Galliform chicks, adult Merlins
and infectious bronchitis virus in Galliformes have also
correlated with a high-fat/low-protein diet, starvation,
been implicated. Another cause in geese is the coccidial
 biotin deficiency and chronic liver disease)
parasite Eimeria truncata, producing lethargy, rapid
8. Amyloidosis (e.g., aged waterfowl).
weight loss and diarrhoea with high mortality rates. An
 Bacteria may get into the kidneys either via the reflux
acute syndrome in adult Merlins (Falco colubarius) ex-
or via the ureters from the cloaca, or via the bloodstream
ists where the kidneys become damaged by fatty degen-
directly from the intestinal tract due to the renal portal
eration, the bird often dying in good body condition.
system that exists in birds.
Its exact aetiology is unknown. Acute renal failure may
Excessive supplementation of calcium and vitamin D3
also be due to shock - cardiogenic or more commonly
can lead to calcification of soft tissue structures, leading
hypovolaemic.
to renal calcinosis and failure.
 In laying hens, renal urolithiasis, which can lead to post
Diagnosis
renal failure due to blockage of the renal tubules, occurs
PCR tests are available for many viral diseases such
due to the high circulating calcium levels present during
as polyomavirus and bacteria such as chlamydophila.
egg laying, some of which overspill into the urine. This
Common Avian Diseases 203
may be exacerbated if the bird becomes egg-bound due
in disease but also during migration stress. An ex-
to pressure on the kidneys, so restricting renal blood flow
amination for protein or fat casts should be made.
 and creating ischaenmia.
Small numbers of red cells and bacteria (from fae-
ALSV infection in budgerigars results in renal tumours
cal contamination) and uric acid crystals are nor-
in birds of 3-6 years old. Clinically, this may present as
mal. Large amounts of blood may indicate heavy
unilateral limb paresis/paralysis due to pressure on the
metal toxicosis or neoplasia. Protein levels up to 2
ischiatic nerve that passes through the kidney, or with
g/L are normal. Glucose levels should be low. High
coelomic distension and no other clinical signs. Other
levels of GLDH indicate severe kidney cell dam-
suspected ALSV infections have been reported in psit-
age. The presence of coccidia or cryptosporidia is
tacine birds, Galliformes, Columbiformes and passerine
of course also significant. Rosskopf et al. (1986)
birds resulting in lymphoid neoplasia often in the liver
describes the change of casts from granular/cellu-
spleen or kidneys.
 matory process. Finally, early work on measurement
Diagnosis
of N-acetyl-gamma-D-glucosaminidase (NAG) in
Diagnosis of chronic renal disease in birds is based on a
the urine of birds has shown its level's increase when
number of tests:
tubular damage occurs, but normal values are not
1. Uric acid measurement exceeding 500 umol/L. Ihis
currently available for birds.
should be performed in a fasting bird, as (particularly
6. Blood pressure monitoring may show hypertension
 in the meat-eating raptors) a recent meal can elevate
(see Chapter 16) with chronic renal failure.
the levels falsely.
Renal biopsy can be used to ascertain definitive diag-
 2. Excessively high levels of calcium (>3 mmol/L) sug-
noses of the condition. This can be performed through a
gesting over-supplementation, providing the bird
left or right flank approach using rigid endoscopy.
 is not an inlay hen, when blood levels may rise high
Renal failure will lead to a buildup of uric acid, which
53
Eci
normally due to calcium mobilisation for shell
 rapidly reaches its saturation point. After this, the crystals
production.
 of uric acid form in the bloodstream and adhere to vital
3. Radiography may show kidney enlargement in the
structures. This causes encasement of these structures in
case of nephritis and tumours. It will also show in-
the hard, white crystalline uric acid, further damaging
creased radiodensity in cases of calcinosis. Normally,
them.
the avian kidney is difficult to see as it is located in
Sites initially and preferentially found with uric acid
the roof of the synsacrum, but with renalomegaly,
deposits in them include the kidneys themselves (see Fig-
PA
it often projects cranially in front of the ilium on a
ure 13.10), the heart, pericardial sac, liver and of course
lateral view. Urography may be used to assess renal
the joints.
excretion. The ulna vein is used and iodine-based
contrast is injected at 2 mL/kg with the first view
being taken after 30 seconds. The dye should have
reached the ureters by 1 minute post injection.
4. Ultrasound examination is difficult owing to the pres-
ence of air sacs. However, it may be of use in some spe-
cies where the probe can be placed on the lateral body
wall without coming up against the ribcage (e.g. Gal-
liformes and Columbiformes) and where large neopla-
sias are present.
5. Urinanalysis: Green urates indicate bilverdinuria
and liver disease. Normal specific gravity levels
tend to be 1.005-1.020 g/mL. The pH is variable but
is between 6 and 8 depending on species and diet
fed (more acidic in laying hens and more alkaline
Figure 13.10 Chronic renal failure in an African grey parrot
in bacterial nephritis cases). Ketones may be found
(Psittacus erithacus). Note the pale colour of the kidneys and the
in cases of beta oxidation of fats， which can occur
multiple small white dots of gout crystals or tophi.
204 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Renal urolithiasis
Renal urolithiasis is common in laying hens. It can lead
to renal failure due to blockage of the renal tubules. It
- ie es jo siant yai al jo asesaq suadde
culate during egg laying, some of which spill over into
the urine. Ihe situation may be exacerbated if the bird
becomes egg-bound, pressing on the kidneys, restricting
renal blood flow and creating renal ischaemia.
Renal tumours
Renal tumours are common (e.g. budgerigars) due to
ALSV as described earlier.
Reproductive tract disease
Egg binding
Figure 13.11 Egg yolk coelomitis in a chicken. Note the yellow
 This is the most common complaint of the avian repro-
fibrin tags, the increased coelomic fluid and the congested nature of
the coelomic organs.
ductive system. There is a history of compulsive egg lay-
ing and poor diet, high in seeds and low in calcium. The
and Galliformes. Diagnosis can be confirmed with
 hen bird becomes lethargic, dull and sits on the floor of
ultrasound and needle aspiration, although care should
its cage. Egg abnormalities or uterine rupture may also
be taken to avoid puncture of air sacs.
contribute (too cold).
Neoplasia
53
Diagnosis of egg binding
Ovarian tumours are the most commonly seen female re-
123
 Clinical signs plus palpation of the egg if it is situated in
productive tract tumour. They can enlarge dramatically
the lower reproductive tract, just caudal to the sternum.
and so cause dyspnoea. Adenocarcinomas, adenomas and
 Radiography is useful for more cranially situated eggs.
AVIAN
granulosa cell tumours are the most commonly reported.
Salpingitis
They may be associated with leg paresis in the same way
Salpingitis is also known by the name of vent gleet because
as of kidney neoplasia. A similar problem is seen in males
LH
of the discharge from the cloaca which accompanies it. It is
as testicular neoplasia, involving one or both testes, is also
PA
due to infection of the uterus, or, more correctly, the portion
commonly seen in budgerigars. Ihese tumours metasta-
of the uterus corresponding to the salpinx Signs may vary
sise to the liver. Most are inoperable due to their size and
from nonspecific malaise, with a bird becoming intermit-
vascularity.
tently duland lethargic, toan obvious purlent discharge.
Musculoskeletal disease
Prolapsed oviduct
Fractures
This may be a sequel to egg binding and often involves
The assessment of injuries is essential to triage patients.
prolapse of the cloaca. Tissues become rapidly desiccated
Fractures occur commonly in many cage and aviary
and infected if outside of the body.
birds. Ihe fractures which occur are often open fractures
due to the brittle nature of the bones, which produce very
Egg yolk coelomitis
sharp fragments. Any bird that has injuries so bad that
This is a life-threatening situation where internal laying
a leg needs to be amputated should be euthanased as no
of yolks occurs. If the yolk membrane ruptures, the lipids
bird manages well on one leg, particularly if over 150 g.
it contains cause an intense inflammatory reaction and
Wing amputations will mean no release of wild birds and
coelomitis (see Figure 13.11). Ihis may then become sec-
no breeding potential for males as they cannot mount the
ondarily infected. In any case, it generates an inflamma-
female successfully.
tory response including a raised white cell count (often
>30 × 109/L) There is often a history of regular egg laying
Carpometacarpal luxation
followed by a cessation and then lethargy and collapse. It
This condition is often known by its colloquial name of an-
is more regularly seen in cockatiels, budgerigars, macaws
 gel wing and is seen commonly in budgerigars, macaws,
Common Avian Diseases 205
 geese and other waterfowl. I is when the carpormetacarpal
The breed of bird may suggest a condition, for example,
joints in either wing rotate and subluxate so that the distal
a fitting African grey parrot between the ages of 2 and
'aeieadde auey e uaia aesiop d siaea Aed
4 years may well have hypocalcaemia syndrome, and wa
H is thought that the condition may have a connection with
terfowl is prone to lead poisoning fromlead shot and fish-
calcium/vitamin D; deficiency (rickets) and excess dietary
ing tackle weights.
 protein levels, as it is a growth deformity.
Heavy metal toxicosis
Nutritional osteodystrophy/metabolic
Heavy metal toxicosis is common in Psittaciformes, wa-
bone disease
terfowl and raptors. In raptors, it is often due to feeding
Nutritional osteodystrophy is due to a defciency in
wild lead-shot prey. In waterfowl, it is often lead fishing
vitamin D; and calcium. Several syndromes are seen. The
weights or again spent lead shot. In Psittaciformes,it may
most common is bowing of the tibiotarsal and tarsometa-
be due to lead paints on woodwork of old buildings, lead
tarsal bones. This is because the weight of the growing
 strips on windows/kitchen units, pewter ware/wine tops
bird cannot be properly supported by poorly mineralised
etc. Zinc poisoning is generally a disease of Psittaciformes
bones. Often the diets of the birds have high levels of pro-
and may be associated with housing in zinc-galvanised
tein as well as low calcium and vitamin D3, promoting
cages. The Psittaciform manoeuvres itself around the cage
rapid growth and further exacerbating the situation.
using beak and feet and so will take in small amounts of
zinc oxide; after 4-6 weeks enough may have been con-
Pinwheel
sumed to cause toxicity.
Pinwheel is a developmental deformity of the stifle joint
 In all cases of heavy metal poisoning, a range of clini-
of young pigeons. It occurs around 2-4 weeks of age. The
 cal signs can be seen that include weakness, paresis (rap-
squab cannot flex its stifle, and since only one leg is usu-
tors often rock back onto their intertarsal joints with
ally affected, it leads to the circling or pinwheeling, which
one foot holding the other, waterfowl have serpentine
53
ECI
gives the condition its name. It seems to occur in well-
necks and are unable to fly), liver problems (diarrhoea
fed chicks reared in flat-bottomed nests with little nesting
and biliverdinuria), regurgitation/ileus, kidney failure
material. Prevention is the key to success. Treatment is
(polydipsia/polyuria), anaemia and fitting. Diagnosis is
usually ineffective.
made on clinical signs and confirmed by radiography to
demonstrate metal particles in the gizzard and blood lev-
Articular gout
dd z< suz no d z'o< peayo sa
 Articular gout is seen commonly in older cage and aviary
birds and has been discussed under chronic renal disease.
Other causes of neurological disease
Hypocalcaemic syndrome of African grey parrots
Neurological disease
This is seen in African grey parrots between the ages of 2
Fitting
and 4 years. It occurs where, although bone calcium qual-
 This condition has many aetiologies, including
ity is adequate, the parrot is unable to mobilise calcium
+Trauma (flying into glass windows etc.)
reserves to maintain blood calcium levels. This is often
+ Nutrition (hypoglycaemia, hypocalcaemia, hypovita-
compounded by low calcium, that is all seed, diet. This
minosis B)
leads to hypocalcaemia, muscular weakness, tremors, col-
+ Heavy metal poisoning (lead and zinc primarily)
lapse, fits and death. Blood ionized calcium levels should
· Plant and pesticide poisons
be between 0.96 and 1.22 mmol/L in healthy African grey
+ Meningoencephalitis (bacterial, viral or protozoal)
parrots.
*Organopathy (particularly hepatic disease)
+ Idiopathic epilepsy (reported in red-lored Amazons)
Hypoglycaemia seizure/collapse
·Vestibular disease
In the case of small raptors, such as kestrels, sparrow
 Cardiovascular disease (fat emboli during egg produc-
hawks etc., which have a high metabolic rate, the condi-
tion, atherosclerosis)
tion of hypoglycaemia is seen in malnourished or highly
*Cancer
stressed birds. Ihere is often a history of being flown in
· Congenital CNS disease (cerebellar hypoplasia seen in
poor weather and failure to monitor body weight regu-
lutino colour birds).
larly during the flying season.
206 Veterinary Nursing of ExoticPets
Hyperglycaemia
An overview of avian biochemistry
One or two species of raptor, such as the Northern Gos-
Biochemical parameters may be measured using hepa-
hawk, are prone to hyperglycaemia. This species is prone
rinised blood or clotted blood samples. As mentioned
to hyperglycaemia when retraining at the start of the
in the section on anatomy and physiology, haematologi-
season occurs and the bird is possibly overweight. Blood
cal parameters are best measured in potassium edetate
glucose levels often exceed 30 mmol/L (normal range is
collected blood samples, but in some species of bird,
12-17 mmol/L).
potassium EDTA causes lysis of erythrocytes (e.g. many
penguins and corvids).
Kidney tumours
dannau eadad uos e si sisheed a eaeu
Liver biochemical parameters
thy in budgerigars. It is often due to tumours of the kid-
The most reliable test for liver function in avian species
neys induced by ALSV infection (see above).
is that for bile acids. Normal ranges vary from species to
species, but commonly range from 20-80 mmol/L.
Kidney disease
Other useful tests include aspartamine transami-
Any form of kidney disease which results in swelling of
nase (AST) rather than the mammalian AST. Alkaline
the renal parenchyma can theoretically place pressure on
phosphatase (ALKP) is too nonspecifc for birds to be
the leg nerves and so produce varying signs of paresis and
of great use. AST activity is also found in muscle tis-
sue, so often the two other biochemical tests of lactate
paralysis.
dehydrogenase (LDH) and creatinine phosphokinase
(CPK) are performed. Ihis allows some differentiation
Egg binding
 between liver and muscle damage, as CPK is only found
Egg binding is a common cause of bilateral hind limb pa-
 in muscles. LDH is released in the early stages of liver
resis and paralysis in hen birds. Ihe egg becomes stuck in
123
disease, but also has some skeletal and cardiac muscle
the pelvic inlet, placing pressure on the nerves in the roof
distribution. Ihe enzyme glutamate dehydrogenase
of the pelvis that innerve the legs. Radiography will aid in
diagnosing this condition.
(GLDH) is released when liver and kidney cells die or
AVIAN
are disrupted. As the renal source of this enzyme goes
into the urine directly, and not the bloodstream, blood
Wing paralysis
levels of GLDH reflect any hepatocyte damage. Levels
Wing paralysis is common after flying injuries or fracture
RT
greater than 2 IU/L are considered elevated in psitta-
PA
of the humerus. This fracture results in rotation laterally
cines (Hochleithner, 1994).
 of the distal fragment, often lacerating the radial nerve.
Kidney biochemical parameters
Spinal abscesses and fungal infection
The only reliable test for renal function is uric acid. Nei-
 Spinal abscesses and fungal infection can occur in birds.
ther urea nor creatinine is useful in avian species. How-
Spinal abscesses may occur from bacteria, which have
Ever, uric acid is not a sensitive test, and is only elevated
spread there via the bloodstream, particularly after spinal
once the majority (>75%) of the renal mass ceases to
trauma, such as bruising after a flying injury. Fungal gran-
function. Levels may be falsely elevated in raptors imme-
ulomas are common in cases of aspergillosis, and may in-
diately after feeding, so samples should be taken in the
vade the spinal cord as many vertebrae are pneumonised
fasted bird. Levels greater than 420 mmol/L in psittacines
and so connected to the air sac system.
 550 mmol/L in fasted raptors and 750 mmol/L in racing
pigeons are suggestive of renal problems. Blood tests in
Paramyxoviruses/Newcastle disease
chronic renal failure may show a massively elevated uric
Paramyxovirus is frequently isolated from pigeons. The
acid level (>1500 umol/L) and sometimes potassium lev-
condition is preventable by vaccination, which is com-
els (>5 mmol/L). Urea levels may also be measured and
pulsory in pigeons presented at races and shows under
compared with uric acid levels to ascertain if pre-renal
the Disease of Poultry Order 1994 (SI 1994/3141). In ad-
azotaemia or renal disease is present as pre-renal azotae-
dition to respiratory problems, the virus can also cause
mia will cause a predominant rise in urea. Ihe problem
dorp sum apnsut stu go suiis 'saseasi lesioanau
is the ratios need to be worked out for each species - the
ing, circling, torticollis and opisthotonus
ratio is calculated by multiplying the plasma urea level
Common Avian Diseases 207
(in mmol/L) by 1000 and then comparing it with plasma
References
uric acid level (in umol/L). In peregrine falcons, the ratio
Qubb, S. and De Kloet, S. (2010) Comparison of crop biopsy,
is >6.5 (Lumeij, 2000),
serology and PCR for diagnosis of subclinical proventricular
dilatation disease. Proceedings of the Anmual Conference of the
Association of Aviar Veterinarians, San Diego, California, Pp. 3-9.
Calcium and phosphorus
Colombini, S., Foil, C.S., Hosgood, G. and Tully, TN. (2001)
Levels of calcium and phosphorus depend on nutritional
Intradermal skin testing in Hispaniolan parrots (Amazono
ventralis). Veterinary Dermatology,11,271-276.
levels and renal function as well as on the presence of
Cooper, J.E. (1985) Foot conditions. Veterinary Aspects of Captive
vitamin D3 and functional parathyroid glands. Nor-
Birds of Prey, 2nd edn, Pp. 97-11l. Standfast Press, UK.
mal values quoted for total calcium are 2-2.8 mmol/L
Cooper, J.E., Gschmeissner, S. and Greenwood, A. (1989)
in most psittacines and 1.9-2.6 mmol/L in pigeons, or
Atoxoplasma in greenfinches (Carduelis chioris) as a possible
0.96-1.22 mmol/L ionized calcium in African grey par-
cause of going light: Veterinary Record, 124, 343-344.
 )      
Cray, C., Reavill, D., Romagnano, A.,et al. (2009) Galactoman nan
may suggest over-supplementation, providing the bird
assay and plasma protein electrophoresis findings in psittacine
birds with aspergillosis. Journatl ofAvian Medicine and Surgery,
is not an inlay hen, when blood levels may raise this
23, 125-135.
high normally due to calcium mobilisation for shell pro-
Cray, C., Watson, T, Rodriguez, M. and Arheart, K. (2010)
duction. For phosphorus, 0.9-5 mmol/L in psittacines
Serodiagnostic testing options for avian aspergillosis.
and 0.57-1.33 mmol/L in pigeons are considered nor-
Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the Association of
 mal. Elevated phosphorus and calcium may suggest renal
Avian Veterinarians, Pp. 371-372.
Doolen, M. (1994) A low risk diagnosis for neuropathic
dysfunction. Low calcium and high or normal phospho-
gastric dilatation. Proceedings of the Annual Conference of
rus suggest nutritional defciency or the hypocalcaemic
the Association of Avian Veterinarians Lake Worth, Florida,
syndrome seen in African grey parrots.
PP. 193-196.
Dorrestein, G.M. (2009) Bacterial and parasitic diseases of
passerines. Veterinary Clinics of North America: Exotic Anirmat
53
Plasma proteins
Practice, 12 (3), 433-451.
153
 These are very useful in birds to allow an assessment of
Forbes, N.A. and Simpson, G.N. (1997) Caryospora neofalconis:
mtrition and hepatic function. To gain accurate values
An emerging threat to captive-bred raptors in the United
for albumin and globulins though, it is necessary to per-
Kingdom. Journal of Avian Medicine and Surgery, 1l, 110-114.
form protein electrophoresis. The laboratory practice, dry
Gancz, A.Y., Kistler, A.L., Greninger, A., et al. (2009) Avian
Bornaviruses   and   proventricular   dilatation  disease.
chemistry systems, used for mammals are not accurate
Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the Association of
enough for this. Plasma protein electrophoresis is a use-
Avian Veterinarians,pp.5.
Girling, S.J. (2002) Plasma protein electrophoresis: Variations in
PA
fil technique to assess whether the bird is mounting an
immune response, when the values of some acute phase
health and disease in the family Psittaciformes Dissertatiorn as
proteins may rise, and the pattern of this can be sugges-
Part-fulfiltment for the RCVS Diploma in Zoologicat Medicine,
RCVS Library.
tive of some types of disease. An example would be in
Gray, P, Hoppes, S., Suchodolski, P, et ai. (2010) Use of avian
cases of aspergillosis where elevations in beta globulins
 Bornavirus isolates to induce proventricular dilatation disease
are commonly seen (Girling, 2002).
in conures. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 16, 473-479.
Gray, P, Villaneuva, I., Mirhosseini, N., Hoppes, S., Payne, S.
and Tizard, 1. (2009) Experimental infection of birds with
Blood glucose
avian Bornavirus. Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the
Blood glucose measurement is useful in raptors, where
Association of Avian Veterinarians, Pp. 7.
the values should range between 17-22 mmol/L. If lev-
Gregory, C.R., Latimer, K.S., Campagnoli, R.P and Ritchie, B.
els fall below 15 mmol/L, hypoglycaemic fitting and
(1996) Evaluation of crop biopsy for the diagnosis
of
 proventricular dilatation syndrome in psittacine birds. ournal
coma may develop in small species of raptor. If levels
ofVeterinary Diagnostic Investigation, 8,76-80.
exceed 27 mmol/L, hyperglycaemic fitting can occur.
Grund, C.H., Kohler, B. and Korbel, R.T. (2005) Evaluation of
Diabetes mellitus is seen in Psittaciformes such as
various tissues for diagnosis of psittacine beak and feather
budgerigars. Here values greater than 30 mmol/L may
disease (PBFD). Proceedings for the Sth European AAV
be observed. It is worth noting though that small el-
Conference - 6th Scientifc ECAMS Meeting, Arles, France,
24-30 April, 2005.
evations in blood glucose commonly occur in stressed
Harlin, R. and Wade, L. (2009) Bacterial and parasitic diseases
birds and should not necessarily be taken to suggest
of Columbiformes. Veterinary Clinics of North Aerica: Exotic
clinical disease.
Animat Practice, 12 (3), 453-473.
208 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Heidenreich, M. (1997) Parasites. Birds of Prey: Medicine and
and case reports. Proceedings of the Anrual Conference of the
Management, Pp. 133. Blackwell Science, Oxford.
Association of Avian Veterinarians, Miami, Florida, Pp.61-73.
Hochleithner, M. (1994) Biochemistries. Avian Medicine:
Shivaprasad, H.L., Franca, M., Honkavuori, K., Briese, T.
Principles and Applications {eds B. Ritchie, G. Harrison & L.
and Lipkin, W.1. (2009) Proventricular dilatation disease
Harrison), Pp. 223-245. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
associated with bornavirus in psittacines. Proceedings of the
Hoppes, S., Gray, PL., Payne, S. and Shivaprasad, H.L. (2010) The
Annual Conference of the Association of Avian Veterinarians,
isolation, pathogenesis, diagnosis, transmission and control
Pp. 3-4.
of avian Bornavirus and proventricular dilatation disease.
Smith,J. (2009) Unusual outbreak of PDD in a psittacine nursery.
Veterinary Clinics of North America: Exotic Animal Practice,
Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the Association of
13, 495-508.
Avian Veterinarians, Pp. 9-13.
Jung, A., Grund, C., Muller, I. and Rautenschlein, S. (2009)
Speer, B.L. (1998) Chronic partial proventricular obstruction
'sdao u uau e adors sxid u
caused by multiple gastrointestinal foreign bodies in a juvenile
Cyanoramphus and Neophema species. Journal of Avian
umbrella cockatoo (Cacatua alba). Journal of Avian Medicine
Medicine and Surgery, 23, 205-208.
And Surgery, 12 (4), 271-275.
Klopfleisch, R. Werner, O., Mundt, E., Harder, T. and Teifke, J.P.
Steinmetz, A., Pees, M., Schmidt, V, Weber, M., Krautwald-
(2006) Neurotropism of highly pathogenic avian influenza
 Junghanns, M.E. and Oechtering, G. (2008) Blindness as a sign
virus A/Chicken/Indonesia/2003 (HsN1) in experimentally
of proventricular dilatation disease in a grey parrot (Psittacus
infected pigeons (Columba livia f domestica). Veterinary
erithacus erithacus).Journal of Small Animal Practice，49,
Pathology, 43, 463-470.
660-662.
Lumeij, J.T. (2000) Pathophysiology, diagnosis and treatment
Strunk, A. and Wilson, G.H. (2005) Avian cardiology. Vterinary
of renal disorders in birds of prey. Raptor Biomedicine 3 {eds
Cinics: Exotic Animal Practice (ed A. Rupley), Pp. 221-240.
IT. Lumei, ID. Remple, PT. Redig, et al.), Pp. 169-178.
Elsevier Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
Zoological Education Network, Lake Worth, FL.
Villaneuva, I., Gray, P., Mirhosseini, N., et al. (2010) The diagnosis
MacWhirter, P, Mueller, R. and Gill, I. (1999) Ongoing research
of proventricular dilatation disease: use of a Western blot
report: Allergen testing as part of diagnostic protocol in
assay to detect antibodies against avian bornavirus. Vterinary
self-mutilating Psittaciformes. Proceedings of the Annual
Microbiotogy, 143, 196-201.
Conference of the Association of Avian Veterinarians,Pp. 125.
Wernery, U. and Kinne, J. (2004) How do falcons contract a
123
Manvell, R., Gough, D., Major, N. and Fouchier, R.A. (2004)
herpesvirus infection? Preliminary findings. Falco, 23, 16-17.
Mortality in budgerigars associated with a reovirus-like agent.
d5
Willette, M., Ponder, J., Cruz-Martinez, L., et at. (2009)
Veterinary Record, 154, 539-540.
Management of select bacterial and parasitic conditions of
AN
Messenger, G.A. and Garner, M.M. (2010) Proventricular
raptors.Veterinary Clinics of North America: Exotic Animal
AVI.
cryptosporidiosis in small psittacines. Proceedings of the
Practice, 12 (3), 491-517.
:11
Anmuat Conference of the Associationof Avian Veterinarians,
Zantop, D.W. (2010) Bornavirus: Background levels in “well
Pp.55-58.
birds and links to non-PDD illness. Proceedings of the Anmual
RT
Oaks, J.L. (1993) Immune and inflammatory responses in falcon
Conference ofthe Association of Avian Veterinariars, Pp. 305-310.
staphylococcal pododermatitis. Raptor Biomedicine (eds
PT. Redig, J.E. Cooper, J.D. Remple & D.B. Hunter), Pp. 72-87.
Further reading
 University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, MN.
Chitty, J. and Harcourt-Brown, N. (eds) (2005) BSAVA Marual of
Pennycott, T. (2004) Mortality in budgerigars in Scotland:
Psittacine Birds, 2nd edn. BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
Pathological fndings. Veterinary Record, 154, 538-539.
Chitty, J. and Lierz, M.(2008) BSAVA Manual of Raptors, Pigeons
Perpinan, D., Fernandez-Bellon, H., Lopez, C. and Ramis, A.
and Passerine Birds. BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
(2007) Lymphoplasmacytic myenteric, subepicardial and
Cray, C. (1997) Application of aspergillus antigen assay in the
pulmonary ganglioneuritis in four nonpsittacine birds. Journat
diagnosis of aspergillosis. Proceedings ofthe Arruat Conference
of Avian Medicine and Surgery, 2l, 210-214.
of the Association of Avian Veterinarians,Pp. 219-220.
Phalen, D. (2006a) Implications of viruses in clinical disorders.
Harrison, G. and Lightfoot, T. (2006) Clinical Avian Medicine.
Clinicat Avian Medicine {eds G. Harrison & T. Lightfoot),
Spix Publishing Inc., Palm Beach, FL.
PP. 721-760. Spix Publishing Inc., Palm Beach, FL.
Payne, L.N. and Purchase, H.G. (1991) Leukosis/sarcoma group.
Reavill, D.R., Schmidt, R.E. and Fudge, A.M. (1990) Avian skin
Diseases of Pouttry (eds B.W. Calnek), 9th edn, Pp. 388-439.
and feather disorders: a retrospective study. Proceedings of the
Iowa State Press, Ames, IA.
Annual Conference of the Association of Avian Veterinarians.
Redig, PT., Brown, PA. and Talbot, B. (1997) The ELISA as a
Phoenix, AZ, Pp. 248-254.
management guide for aspergillosis in raptors. Proceedings
Remple, J.D. (1993) Raptor bumblefoot: A new treatment
of the 4th Conference of the European Committee of the
technique. Raptor Biomedicine (eds PT. Redig, J.E. Cooper,
Association of Avian Veterinarians,Pp. 223-226.
JD. Remple & D.B. Hunter), Pp. 154-160. University of
Ritchie, B. (1995) Avian Viruses Function and Controt (ed).
Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, MN.
Wingers Publishing Inc., Lake Worth, FL.
Rosskopf, W.J., Woerpel, R.W. and Lane, R.A. (1986) The practical
Ritchie, B., Harrison, G. and Harrison, L. (1994) Avian Medicine:
use and limitations of the urinalysis in diagnostic pet avian
Principles and Applicatiors. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
medicine: With emphasis on the differential diagnosis of
Samour, J. (ed) (2008) Avian Medicine, 2nd edn. Mosby Elsevier,
polyuria, theimportance of cast formation in theavian urinalysis
Edinburgh, IN.
Chapter 14
An Overview of Avian Therapeutics
FLUID THERAPY
loss of bicarbonate. Ihere may also be chronic losses of
Maintenance requirements
potassium.
 Most avian patients have the potential to regurgitate.
In birds there is almost no water lost as sweat as they
Huid loss by this route is therefore not uncommon.
have no proper skin sweat glands. However, there are
The secretions of the crop are mainly neutral to alkali
greater losses compared with cats and dogs, due to their
and so losses are more likely to give straightforward
increased metabolic rates and because of their high body
neutral water loss. However, more severe true vomiting
surface and lung area to body weight ratio. Ihis means
will occur in birds with proventricular disease, such as
that proportionately large amounts of fluids are lost
PDD or 'megabacteriosis, and metabolic alkalosis due to
through respiration.
loss of hydrogen ions will ensue.
To compensate, birds can conserve water more eff-
Another route of fluid and electrolyte loss is through
ciently than mammals. Unlike urea, their waste protein
skin disease. Lovebirds and cockatiels in particular are
excretory product, uric acid, requires very little water to
53
 prone to ulcerating skin conditions, particularly under
be excreted. However, the losses and gains equal out, so
the wings. These produce lesions which resemble chemi-
that maintenance levels in companion birds have been
cal or thermal burns, and leave large areas of weeping.
estimated as 50 mL/kg/day, which is the same as for cats
exudative skin which allow fluid and electrolyte loss.
and dogs.
Post-surgical fluid requirements
The effect of disease on
Surgical procedures bring their own requirements for
fluid requirements
fluid therapy. Ihere is the possibility of intrasurgical
With any disease the need for fluids increases, even if no
haemorrhaging, necessitating vascular support with an
obvious fluid loss has occurred. The disease process may
aqueous electrolyte solution or, in more serious blood
affect the kidneys causing increases in the glomerular fil-
losses (>10%), colloidal fluids or even blood transfusions
tration rate or reduction in water reabsorption by the col-
(Figure 14.1).
lecting ducts, leading to increased urine output, or there
Even if surgery is relatively bloodless, there are inevi-
may be a loss of absorption of water from the small or
table losses via the respiratory route because of the drying
large intestine. For example, the endotoxins produced in
nature of the gases used to deliver the anaesthetics com-
cases of E. coli septicaemia or enteritis cause a reduction
laiel aaey spiq ialeus Xiaains ueiae ul pasn Aquou
in the response of the renal collecting ducts to arginine
surface areas in relation to volume, and this applies to the
vasotocin (AVT) (the avian equivalent of antidiuretic
lung fields as well as the skin. Avian patients also have an
hormone (ADH) released from the pituitary). This will
air sac system, which increases the surface area for fluid
lead to less concentration of the urine, more fluid loss and
loss even further.
dehydration.
Many patients are not able to drink immediately after
Respiratory disease is common in avian patients,
surgery. The period without food or water intake may
stretch to a few hours, enough time for any avian to start
A and aspergillosis, all of which may lead to fluid loss.
to dehydrate. Finally, some forms of surgery, such as pros-
Individuals suffering from diarrhoea will experience
thetic beak repair procedures, willead to inappetence for
fluid loss and often metabolic acidosis due to prolonged
a period.
210 Veterinary Nursing of ExoticPets
glucose/saline fluids), the addition of potassium to
the fluids at rates of 0.1-0.3 mEq/kg body weight may
help stimulate appetite and reduce the risk of cardiac
 arrhythmias.
In cases of metabolic acidosis, an assessment of
bicarbonate ion loss can be made from a blood sample.
However, in many cases it is not possible in practice to
measure it. Therefore, if persistent vomiting or chronic
weight loss or trauma occurs and metabolic acido-
sis is suspected, a rough approximation may be made.
Give a sodium bicarbonate supplement at 1 mEq/kg at
15-30-minute intervals until a maximum of 4 mEq/kg
has been reached. (This supplement must not be given
Figure 14.1 Removal of tumours, such as this uropygial gland
tumour from an African grey parrot, will result in blood loss and
with the lactated Ringer's solution as it will precipitate
require fluid replacement therapy.
out.)
Hypertonic saline
Electrolyte replacement
This may be used in birds with acute hypovolaemia.
 In cases of chronic fluid loss, electrolytes as well as fluids
It works by rapidly drawing fluid from the cellular
will often need replacing. Chronic diarrhoea, such as in
and pericellular space into the circulation to support
megabacteriosis or Giardia infestations, will cause loss of
central venous pressure. See chapter 16, Avian Emer-
food, water and electrolytes to waste. The main electrolyte
gency and Critical Care Medicine, for further details
losses involve bicarbonates and potassium.
of its use. It must be administered intravenously or
123
Because they have a crop between the mouth and the
intraosseously.
d5
true stomach, birds may well regurgitate rather than
AVIAN
vomit. Ihe crop contents are alkaline to neutral, and so
Glucose/saline combinations
metabolic alkalosis is unlikely to occur with regurgita-
Glucose/saline solutions are useful for small avian
:11
tion or crop problems, indeed metabolic acidosis is more
LH
likely. However, in serious proventriculus disease, such
anorexia prior to treatment and therefore may be border-
PA
as the viral condition 'macaw wasting syndrome, stom-
line hypoglycaemic. The concentration to start with when
ach megabacteriosis or ulcers, loss of hydrogen ions will
dehydration is present is 5% glucose, 0.9% saline. Once
occur and metabolic alkalosis can ensue.
dehydration has been reversed, the avian patient may be
moved on to the 4% glucose, 0.18% saline concentration
Fluids used in avian practice
for maintenance purposes.
Lactated Ringer's/Hartmann's
This is useful for rehydration and to supply maintenance
Protein amino acid/B vitamin supplements
needs. It is useful for avian patients suffering from meta-
Protein and vitamin supplements can be very useful for
bolic acidosis, e.g. those with chronic gastrointestinal dis-
nutritional support. Products such as Duphalyte (Fort
ease and bicarbonate loss, but it can also be used for fluid
Dodge) may be given at the rate of 1 mL/kg/day. They
therapy after routine surgical procedures. The quantity of
are particularly useful to replace nutrients in cases
 potassium present in lactated Ringer's solution is unlikely
where the patient is malnourished or has been suffer-
to cause a problem in birds with hyperkalaemia (such as
those suffering from rapid weight loss or with serious skin
thy. They are also good supplements for patients with
or tissue trauma). The use of calcium gluconate (5 mg/kg)
hepatic disease or severe exudative skin disease such as
or the addition of a glucose-containing fluid will help
thermal burns.
drive the potassium ions into the cells and so reduce the
hyperkalaemic threat.
Colloidal fluids
 In hypokalaemic birds (such as those suffering from
Colloidal fluids have been used in avian practice only
chronic diarrhoea, vomiting, burns or on long-term
by the intravenous route, but they can be used via the
An Overview of Avian Therapeutics 211
intraosseous route. They are used in the same way as with
bacteria are useful to aid digestion, which is also often
cats and dogs:
upset during periods of dehydration.
When a serious loss of blood occurs
Where severe hypoproteinaemia is seen
Calculation of fluid requirements
· In order to support central blood pressure
A critically ill avian patient is assumed to be at least
This is due to their ability to stay in the bloodstream for
5-10% dehydrated. As with cats and dogs, you should
several hours after administration whereas crystalloids
 assume that 1% dehydration is equal to the need to supply
10 mL/kg body weight of fluid in addition to maintenance
Colloids may be used as a tenmporary measure whilst a
requirements. Assumptions then have to be made on the
blood donor is selected, or, if a donor is not available,
degree of dehydration of the bird concerned. Roughly,
the only means of attempting to support such a patient.
* 3-5% dehydrated - increased thirst, slight lethargy
Bolus treatment with gelatin colloids such as Gelofusine@
tacky mucous membranes, increased heart rate
(Millpledge) and Haemaccel (Hoechst) may be given at
· 7-10% dehydrated - increased thirst, anorexia, dull-
10-15 mL/kg intravenously four times over a 24-hour
ness, tenting of the skin and slower return to normal
period to aid in the treatment of hypoproteinaemia. Use
over eyelid or foot, dry mucous membranes, dull cor-
 of Hetastarch? which has a larger colloid particle size and
neas, red or wrinkled skin in chicks
so stays in the circulation for up to 24 hours is preferred
· 12-18% dehydrated - dull to comatose, skin remains
where this is available. See section Chapter 16 for Shock
tented after pinching, desiccating mucous membranes,
fluid therapy.
sunken eyes
These deficits may be large and the volume required for
 Blood transfusions
replacement will be difficult to administer rapidly. Indeed,
Blood transfusion should be considered if the PCV
it may be dangerous to overload the patient's system with
(packed cell volume) drops below 15%. Birds are more
these fluidlevels all in one go. To spread the deficit evenly,
53
tolerant of blood loss than mammals as the oxygenation
it is advised that the following protocol be used:
of their blood is more effcient. However, transfusions are
· Day 1: Maintenance fluid levels +50% of calculated
sometimes required. Donors should be from the same
dehydration factor
species, e.g. African grey parrot to African grey parrot,
· Day 2: Maintenance fluid levels +50% of calculated
 or budgerigar to budgerigar. Blood can be collected from 
dehydration factor
the donor into a container or syringe with acid citrate
+ Day 3: Maintenance fluid levels.
a e a     as
If the dehydration levels are so severe that volumes are
PA
ised syringe may be used. Ideally, a blood filter should be 
 still too large to be given at any one time, it may be neces-
used before blood is transfused into the recipient bird, but 
 sary to take 72 hours rather than 48 hours to replace the
frequently this is not possible in general practice, and so 
calculated deficit.
collection and administration should be done with care,
To add to the problem, debilitated avian patients
 Budum pue siskrouaeq asnpai cl
 may also be anaemic, and therefore PCVs may appear
It is useful to remember that one drop of blood is
 misleadingly normal, so total protein levels are an addi-
roughly equal to 0.05 mL and that the estimated blood
 tional parameter to look at when assessing dehydration.
volume of an avian patient is 10% of its body weight
Uric acid levels may also be measured, as these will often
in grams. Volumes that can be transfused range from
increase in cases of moderate to severe dehydration.
0.25 mL in a budgerigar to 5 mL in an African grey parrot.
Other useful parameters include weight measurement
and of course fluid intake and urine output. Table 14.1
Oral fluids and electrolytes
gives some normal PCV and total protein values.
Oral fhuids may be used in avian practice for those
patients experiencing mild dehydration, and for "home'
Equipment for fluid administration
administration. Many products are available for cats and
 Ihe equipment required to administer fluids to birds is
 dogs, and may be used for birds. One electrolyte in partic-
often very small in size. For example, the blood vessels
ular may be useful and that is Avipro by VetArk This is a
available for intravenous medication are often 30-50%
probiotic, but used at the correct concentration may also
 smaller than their cat or dog counterparts and tend to be
be used as an oral electrolyte solution. The lyophilised
highly mobile and much more fragile and prone to rupture
212 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Table 14.1 Normal packed cell volumes (PCV) and total blood
proteins for selected avian species.
Species
PCV I/l
Total protein (g/L)
Budlgerigar
0.45-0.57
20-30
 Amazon parrot
0.410.53
E5-66
 African grey parrot
0.42-0.52
26-49
Macaw
0.43-0.54
25-44
Cockatoo
0.42-0.54
28-43
Cockatiel
0.43-0.57
31-44
Mallard duck
0.42-0.56
32-45
Canada goose
0.35-0.49
37-56
Mute swan 
0.32-0.5
36-55
Chicken
0.24-0.43
33-55
Pheasant
0.28-0.42
42-72
Pigeon
0.36-0.48
21-35
Figure 14.2 Method of inserting a crop tube. Approach from left
Peregrine falcon
0.370.53
25-40
side of beak and aim towards the lower right neck region.
Barn owl
0.42-0.51
29-48
133
Tawny owl
0.36-0.47
27-46
It is advised to flush any catheter with heparinised
d5
saline prior to use to prevent clots forming. Twenty-five
4
to twenty-seven gauge sizes are recommended and will
Crop tubes
cope with venous access for budgerigars through to small
They are useful as a route for fluid and nutrition admin-
二
conures. Twenty-three to twenty-five gauge sizes will suf-
RT
istration. Crop tubes come either as straight or curved
fice for larger parrots and some of the bigger waterfowl
metal tubes, both with blunt ends. To insert a crop tube,
and raptors.
extend the bird's head. Starting from the left side of the
Ordinary over-the-needle catheters may also be used
-nd aul umop aqnl al ssed eaq iamol aul jo aisu
for catheterisation of jugular veins. The latex catheter is
mal oesophagus into the crop at the right side of the tho-
useful for long-term maintenance of venous access, as
racic inlet. Maximal volumes which may be given vary
butterfly catheters tend to rupture the vessels if left in for
from 0.5 mL in a budgerigar to 15 mL in a large macaw
long periods. It is better to use an over-the-needle cath-
(Figure 14.2).
eter which has plastic flanges so that it can be sutured to
the skin at the site of insertion to prevent removal.
Catheters
 Because they have a length of tubing attached to the
Hypodermic or spinal needles
needle, butterfly catheters are extremely useful for the
 Spinal needles have a central stylet to prevent clogging of
small and fragile avian vessels. If the syringe or drip set
the lumen of the needle with bone fragments after inser-
is connected to this piece of flexible tubing rather than
tion and are therefore useful for intraosseous catheterisa-
directly to the catheter, there is less chance of the catheter
tion. Twenty-one to twenty-five gauge spinal needles are
becoming dislodged; should the bird draw back after the
usually sufficient for most cage birds. Straightforward hy-
catheter is inserted. Also, the piece of clear tubing on the
podermic needles may also be used for the same purpose,
catheter allows you to see when venous access has been
although the risks of blockage are higher. Hypodermic
achieved, as blood will flow back into this area without
needles may also be used, of course, for the adminis-
having to draw back on the syringe ( which would collapse
tration of subcutaneous fluids. Generally, 21-25 gauge
the fragile veins anyway).
hypodermic needles are sufficient for cage birds.
An Overview of Avian Therapeutics 213
Syringe drivers
mammals is not available for use in birds, due to the lack
For continuous fluid administration, such as is required
of a diaphragm and the presence of air sacs. Ihis means
for intravenous and intraosseous fluid administration
that any injection into the body cavity (or coelom) may
during anaesthesia, syringe drivers are becoming more
inadvertently enter an air sac and thence on to the bird's
widely used. Ihey are less useful inthe conscious bird due
airways, resulting in drowning.
to poortolerance of drip tubing; hence bolus fluid therapy
 is more commonly used in avian practice.
Oral
Lactated Ringer's solution, probiotic or electrolyte so-
Collars
lutions such as VetArk's Avipro? and Critical Care
 It may be necessary to place some of the psittacine fam-
Formula? or 5% dextrose solutions may be used. The
ily into an Elizabethan-style collar as they are the world's
maximum volumes which may be administered via crop
greatest chewers! There is also a selection of lightweight
tube are given below.
Perspex neck braces which may be better tolerated. How-
*Budgerigar: 0.5-1 mL
ever, these are not so useful when jugular vein catheters
* Cockatiel: 2.5-5 mL
are used.
+ Conure: 5-7 mL
+ Cockatoo: 10 mL
Routes of fluid administration
* African grey: 8-10 mL
There are four main routes available for administration of
▪ Macaw: 10-15 mL
fluids to birds. They are
· Oral
Subcutaneous
Subcutaneous
Table 14.2 gives the advantages and disadvantages of sub-
·Intravenous
cutaneous fluid therapy. Ihe sites for subcutaneous fluid
Intraosseous
administration are located in the inguinal web of skin which
 The advantages and disadvantages of the four routes are
attaches the leg to the body cranially, the axillary region in-
ECI
given in Table 14.2. The intraperitoneal route used in
 mediately under each wing, and the dorsal interscapular area.
5P
AVIAN
Table 14.2 Acvantages and disacvantages of various avian fluid therapy route5.
Route
Advantages
Disadvantages
PArt Il: 
 Oral
 Reduced stress (if competent handler)
Increased stress (if inexperienced)
 Physiological route
Not useful in cases of digestive tract dysfunction or
Less trauma
disea5e
 Home therapy possible
Risk of aspiration pneumonia if regurgitates
Slow rate of rehydration (not good for serious
hypovolaemia)
Inaccurate method of dosing (unless crop tubing)
Subcutaneous
Faster uptake of fluids than oral route
Reduced uptake in severe dehydration or peripheral
Volumes given may be large, reducing dosing
vasoconstriction
frequency
May be painful in smmaller species
Only hypotonic or isotonic fluids may be used
Intravenous
Rapid rehydration and support of the central
Venous access may be difficult in some species
venous pressure
Veins may be fragile
 Use of hypertonic and colloidal fluids possible
Some species will not tolerate permmanent indwelling
Good for waterfowl where rmedial metatarsal vein5
intravenous catheters
can take incwelling catheters or multiple venipuncture
Intraosseou5
Rapid rehydration and support of the central
 Potentially painful procedure requiring analgesia and,
venous pressure
local or general anaesthetic
Useful in smmaller species where venous access i5
Risk of bone fracture or osteomyelitis
Bolus of fluids takes longer to administer due to rigid 
 May be better tolerated for indwelling catheters
 confines of bone cortices
than intravenous routes
Avoid use of pneumonised bones (e.g., humerus and
Use of hypertonic and colloidal fluids possible
fermur) as will cause drowning.
214 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Intravenous
·Buzzard: 12-14 mL
Table 14.2 gives the advantages and disadvantages of
·Macaw: 14 mL
+Swan: 25-30 mL
Blood vessels used for intravenous therapy
Placement of intravenous catheters
Right jugular vein catheterisation
Veins which may be used for intravenous therapy include
1. Sedate or lightly anaesthetise the avian patient, prefer-
the basilic and ulnar veins, which run on the underside
ably with isoflurane, to ensure no trauma occurs and to
of the wing in larger species. Ihe right jugular vein may
be used for bolus injections in all species down to the size
minimise stress.
2. The feathers overlying the area should be wetted and
of a canary. In raptors, a jugular vein catheter is very well
parted. An area of no feather growth (known as aptery-
tolerated for repeated bolus injections (see Figure 14.3).
lae) lies over the immediate area of the right jugular
In waterfowl, such as swans and ducks, raptors and some
vein.
larger parrots, the medial metatarsal vein, which runs
3. Raise the vein at the base of the neck with athumb and
along the medial aspect of the lower leg, can be used.
swab the area lightly with surgical spirit.
Avian species will tolerate catheterisation of this vessel
4. Use a 23-25 gauge over-the-needle catheter, pre-flushed
extremely well for several days.
with heparinised saline. Insert it in a caudal direction,
as these are often better tolerated than cranially pointing
Volumes of fluid which may be administered
ones, particularly when administering fluids.
intravenously
5. Once in place, suture the catheter securely to the skin
Isotonic solutions may be given at 10-15 mL/kg per bolus,
on either side with fine nylon and re-flush to ensure
although volumes up to 30 mL/kg rarely cause problems.
it is properly in the vein. Then attach the intravenous
 Maximum intravenous bolus volumes are given below:
drip tubing or catheter bung to the end of the catheter.
 sPeCI
+Finch: 0.5 mL
6. Sometimes a light bandage may be necessary to protect
· Budgerigar: 1 mL
*Cockatiels: 2 mL
the catheter. In severe cases, an Elizabethan bird col-
lar may be used (although the latter may catch on the
AN
+Conure:6 mL
AVI.
catheter). Many avian patients will tolerate a catheter
·Amazon parrot: 8 mL
unprotected at this site for 24-48 hours.
:1
+ Owl: 10 mL
RT
+ Cockatoo: 14 mL
Medial metatarsal catheterisation for waterfowl: This
 procedure may be used for larger Psittaciformes and rap-
tors. It may also be performed with the bird conscious,
particularly in waterfowl, as the blood vessel is less mobile
and likely to rupture.
1. Wipe the inside of the lower leg with surgical spirit or
povidone-iodine just above the intertarsal joint.
2. Ihe vessel runs from the anterior aspect distally to a
more medial aspect proximally, and is obvious without
digital pressure.
 3. Use a23-25 gauge over-the-needle catheter inserted in
a proximal direction (i.e., in the direction of blood flow
up the leg).
4. Tape the catheter in place using zinc oxide tape and
apply a catheter bung after flushing with more heparin
saline.
Figure 14.3 A jugular catheter placed in the right jugular of a
parrot. Note the silk tape which is then sutured to the bird's skin to
Intraosseous
hold the catheter in place. Note also the bung as intravenous fluids
 apen snonuiuoo ueut jauiey sasnloq se uanjh Ajejauab ane spuiq u!
Table 14.2 gives the advantages and disadvantages of
infusion due to the intolerance of drip sets etc.
intraosseous fluid therapy in avians.
An Overview of Avian Therapeutics 215
Bones used for intraosseous fluid therapy
The two bones most commonly used for intraosseous
fluid therapy are the ulna and the tibiotarsus. Ihe ulna
may be accessed from a distal or proximal aspect, and
the tibiotarsus is accessed from a cranial proximal aspect
through the crest just distal to the stifle joint.
Placement of intraosseous catheters
Proxirnal tibiotarsus: This is the procedure for placing a
tibiotarsal intraosseous catheter.
1. Sedation or anaesthesia is needed for conscious animals.
 In all cases good analgesia must be administered.
2. Pluck the area overlying the cranial aspect of the tibial
crest and surgically prepare this with dilute povidone-
iodine.
3. Insert a 21-25-gauge needle through the tibial crest
Figure 14.4 Method of inserting an intraosseous catheter into
(depending on the size of the patient), screwing it into 
the distal ulna. Note the flexed carpal joint and that the ulna runs
the bone in the direction of the long axis of the tibio-
caud al to the radius.
tarsus distally.
4. Flush the needle with heparinised saline. Ihe advan-
tage of using a spinal needle is that it has a central
stylet, which helps prevent it from becoming plugged
with bone fragments.
53
153
5. Tape the needle securely in place and apply an antibi-
otic cream around the site. Radiographing the area to
ensure correct intramedullary placement of the needle
is advised.
6. Once correct placement has been assured, attach the
needle to intravenous tubing and a syringe driver and
bandage this securely in by wrapping bandage material
 around the limb. If the catheter has merely been placed
for use later, insert a catheter bung and bandage in place.
 7. Finally, fit an Elizabethan collar or avian neck brace
Figure 14.5 Simple method of giving a bolus of fluids via the distal
if the patient shows signs of trying to remove the
ulna in a cadaver using a hypodermic needle and syringe.
catheter.
Distal uina in all species (Figures 14.4 and 14.5): Sedation
spinal needle, screw into the medullary cavity of the
or isoflurane anaesthesia is often required.
bone along the long axis of the ulna from a distal to
1. Pluck the feathers over the distal aspect of the carpal
proximal direction.
 joint of the wing to be used.
4. Flush the catheter with heparinised saline and place a
2. Surgically prepare the site with povidone-iodine or
catheter bung over the end. Radiographs may be taken
surgical spirit and flex the distal tip of the wing cau-
to ensure accurate placement, and antibiotic cream can
dally. Ihis flexure exposes the distal aspect of the ra-
be used at the site of insertion.
dius and ulna bones within the carpal joint. Ihe ulna is
 5. Bandage the wing to the side of the bird to immobilise
the larger of the two bones, unlike in manmmals, but as
it. Encircle the thorax and pass both cranial and cau
with mammals it lies caudal to the radius.
dal to the opposite wing's attachment at the chest wall,
 3. Palpate the end of the ulna with the carpal joint maxi-
otherwise the bird may flap wildly and loosen the cath-
mally flexed, and using a 23-25-gauge hypodermic or
eter or traumatise itself.
216 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
6. Ihe catheter may then be used for either intermittent
feet of the bird to expand and contract as they grip
slow bolus injections or for attachment to a syringe
the differing perches allowing blood to be pumped
 driver for continuous perfusion.
through the foot, preventing devitalisation, and also
applies pressure to different areas, preventing corns.
TREATMENT OF AVIAN
· For falcons and raptors, perches should be covered in
padding such as Astroturf, particularly if they are
DISEASES
tethered for days at a time. Ihis cushions the foot and
As this text is aimed at the veterinary technical nurse, it is
 prevents excessive pressure that causes ischaemia.
mot intended to give exhaustive lists of treatments or drug
· A good quality diet is vital. Vitamin A is particularly
aqissod suaanl aul jo eap! ue ania ot iauen 'saesop
inportant for skin integrity and local immunity, as
and the techniques useful to aid recovery. For drug dosages,
well as the vitamin B complex and minerals such as
the reader is referred to one of the many excellent texts
calcium. Preventing obesity is also important as this
isted in the additional readinglist atthe end of this chapter.
will lead to increased pressure on the feet.
In the case of existing pododermatitis:
Avian dermatological disease
+ For type I-1I lesions (Cooper, 1985; Oaks, 1993, pad-
therapy
ding the perches is asimple solution. In the case of rap-
Table 14.3 highlights some of the treatments and thera-
tors, increasing the time spent flying helps, and the use
pies commonly used for the management of avian skin
of antibiotics has been recommended where inflam-
 diseases. In addition, the management of the bacterial
mation is present.
pododermatitis problem known as bumblefoot' as well as
· If a scab exists, it should be debrided under sedation
behavioural feather plucking is also discussed.
with antiseptic such as povidone-iodine, followed
by padding of the foot. Ihe padding is formed from
Treatment and prevention of bumblefoot
a non-adherent dressing such as Coflex/Vetband,
123
 This condition is seen in almost any species, and preven-
which is wound in small strips around the base of each
tion is better than cure. Some methods to prevent bum-
digit. Ihis lifts the plantar aspect of the foot off the
AN
blefoot from developing include the following:
 perch, thus allowing increased circulation.
AVI.
· Provide a variety of different diameter natural wood
· For type Ill-IV lesions (Oaks, 1993), it is recom-
:1
 ae  as q a  a  s
mended that a culture of the lesion is taken in order
RT
PA
Table 14.3 Treatment of avian skin diseases
Diagnosis
Treatment
Ectoparasites
Mites (e.g. Knemidocoptes spp.: Ivermectin at 0.2 mg/kg once, orally, topically or by injection.
 Repeat after 10-14 days
sprayed onto a cloth and wiped over feathers or pyrethrin based powders. Dermanyssus gallinae will require
treatrment of cage/aviary environment as they only live on the host at night. Pyrethrins are available
Avipoxvirus
No specific treatment. Antibiosis and topical treatment with dilute povidone-iodine are useful.
Psittacine
Avian garnma interferon (not cormmmercially available) has been used with success at 1 x 10 IU injected once
circovirus (PBFD)
daily for 90 days (Stanford, 2004)
Prevention is possible by live vaccine (produced in Australia), but this mnust not be given to alreadly infected
 birds as it accelerates the course of the dlisease.
Psittacine
 No treatment is available. Prevention may be attermpted using a cormmercial vaccine from the USA
 polyormavirus
(Biomune Il Psittimmune@)
 Pigeon poxviru5
Vaccine available for prevention. Columbovac PMV/Pox (Pfizer Animal Health) given subcutaneously over
the dorsal neck.
Neoplasia and
Surgical excision in the case of neoplasia. For cysts excision or marsupialisation (opening the cyst and sewing
feather cysts
the capsule to the skin surface)
Ulcerative derrmatitis
exposure to UV light, need to be considered. Possibility of allergic skin disease
An Overview of Avian Therapeutics 217
to choose the correct antibiotic. The wounds should
chlamydophilal or circoviral disease can mimic self-
be repeatedly debrided with dilute povidone-iodine 
mutilation.
and the toes bandaged. In more severe cases, the
 If the cause is sexual frustration due to the keeping of a
application of a ball bandage (where a wad of padding 
single parrot, these cases may inmprove by the pairing with
is placed in the grip of the foot and the foot bandaged
a suitable mate. Alternatively, the reproductive hormone
to this ball) may be necessary (see Figure 14.6). Alter-
axis may be blocked temporarily by reducing daylight to
natively, casting materials may be used to create a large
less than 10 hours to mimic the nonbreeding season. Or,
but lightweight 'corn plaster, which removes pressure
more permanently, by using GnRH agonists such as lell-
from the affected area of the foot. It is usually neces-
prolide acetate (100 ug/kg IM which lasts for 3-4 weeks)
sary to do this to both feet to avoid putting pressure on
or deslorelin (4.7 mg implant lasts 6-10 months). Ihe lat-
the non-affected foot.
ter is more readily available in a long-acting implant form
· For type V-VIlesions (Oaks, 1993), the process is the
in the United Kingdom and is implanted subcutaneously
same as for type III-IV. If bone is involved, the outlook
over the back of the head where it cannot be removed by
 is poor but antibiotic-impregnated polymethylmethac-
the parrot. Remember that this drug works by initially
rylate (AIPMMA) beads have been shown to improve 
stimulating the sex hormonal axis; therefore, the condi-
healing and recovery rates. Ihese beads are implanted
tion may initially worsen until the axis is shutdown.
and sewn into the wounds where they release antibi-
Many larger parrots develop feather plucking disorders
otic slowly at the site of the infection over a period
due to lack of socialisation as they have been hand-reared,
of weeks. Alternatively, drains may be placed in the
would normally spend many years with their parents and
affected foot, exiting proximally on the caudal aspect
so have not developed any avian social interactive skills.
of the tarsometatarsus. This allows the wounds to be
These can be more difficult to manage, but training these
flushed with antibiotics for a number of days. Ihe foot
individuals to accept basic commands and to learn their
should be placed into a ball bandage dressing, which
place in the household. Ihe owner and all other house-
53
hold members should be dominant to the parrot. Top
153
should be changed after each flush
 birds are always higher up than the subdominant; there-
Treatment of behavioural feather plucking
fore, the parrot's cage should never be placed so that the
Ihis can be extremely difficult and it cannot be stressed
bird perches higher up than its owner's shoulder. Never let
enough that a full work-up to rule out infectious,
 parrots perch on your shoulder as this also allows them to
nutritional or pain causes of feather plucking/mutilation
feel dominant. Training parrots to simple commands such
should be carried out. For example, subclinical PDD,
 as 'up' to step up onto a hand or proffered perch, down'
PA
to step back onto its own perch, 'no' when an undesirable
action has occurred and vocal praise plus a treat when the
parrot does what you want are good places to start this.
Environmental enrichment is essential to take the bird's
mind off self-mutilation and to give its beak something
else to work on! Food puzzles, toys and regular changing
of these to reduce boredom are important. Background
noise such as a low level of radio sound is also important
as very quiet environments are stressful to prey species as
this often indicates the presence of a predator. Access out
of the cage is important, but they should have free access
back into it as the cage should be seen as a safe zone.
Physical prevention of self-mutilation may be neces-
sary in the form of Elizabethan collars or neck braces.
These have a role to play, but they should not be used on
their own without correction of the underlying psycho-
logical problem.
Figure 14.6 Application of a ball bandage to the feet of a raptor
with bumblefoot. Note gauze packing to support the foot before
Psychotropic drugs similarly should not be used with-
using elasticated bandage material.
out attempting to alter the underlying cause. Diazepam
218 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
has been used at 0.5 mg/kg for short-term control of
Avian respiratory tract
self-mutilation in cockatoos with anxiety and hysteria.
disease therapy
Haloperidol has been used in those where skin mutilation
Table 14.5 highlights some of the treatments and thera-
has occurred and appears to be the most successful in the
pies commonly used for the management of avian respira-
more extreme self-mutilation cases at 0.1 mg/kg orally
tory tract diseases. Avian nasal sinus flushing is described,
q12 hours. Clomipramine (0.5-1 mg/kg q12-24 hours)
which is useful in the treatment of upper respiratory tract
has also been used but seems less successful if behavioural
disease. Air sac tube placement may be necessary dur-
modification therapy is not included and has been asso-
ing surgery or treatment of tracheal/syringeal disease, or
ciated with deaths (possibly due to its arrhythmogenic
when a tracheal/syringeal obstruction occurs.
effects).
Performing a sinus flush
Avian digestive tract
(aaau saoq sn s) as e go qn au ardy
disease therapy
to one external nostril. To make a snug ft between syringe
Table 14.4 highlights some of the treatments and thera-
and nostril it is often helpful to remove the rubber stopper
pies commonly used for the management of avian diges
of a 2 mL syringe, pierce a hole through its centre and attach
tive tract diseases.
this to the hub of the syringe containing the medication.
Table 14.4 Treatment of avian diseases of the dligestive system.
Diagnosis
Treatment
Nermatodles (e.g.
Fenbendazole 15-20 mg/kg orally daily for 3-5 days for Capifaria spp. - care during moult can
Capillania spp.)
damage growing feathers. Radliomirmetic effects reported and suppression of white blood cell
counts have been seen. For a5carids, once dosing with 20 mg/kg and then repeating in 2 weeks for
123
heavier burdens may be sufficient.
Flubendazole available as an in-feed wormer for poultry and game birds (Flubenvet? Janssen).
d5
Ivermectin 0.2 mg/kg orally or by injection once. May repeat 10-14 days later
AVIAN
Protozoa (e.g. Trichomonas
Metronidazole 10-30 mg/kg orally twice daily for 3-5 days. May need 50 mg/kg orally for Hexamita in
spp.. Hexamita spp..
pigeons for 7 days. Watch for toxicity
:11
Giardia spp.)
Carnidazole (e.g. Spartrix? - Harkers) for pigeons with Trichomonas infections but can be used in
other birds as well at 20-25 mg/kg orally once.
PART
apes u ootx 1 - suau seuooui ym soaid ot (sae - aaeie aa) alozo
Coccidliosis
Caryospora spp. - clazuril 5-10 mg/kg orally every other day for 3 doses or 5-10 mg/kg daily for 2
do5e5
Eimeria and (sospora intestinal phase sulfadimethoxine (e.g. Coxi-plus@ Dechra Veterinary Procducts) in
 snp pad hue au unp o ases uau y su ui an aea s  o ae
lasalocid have been used in feed for game birds (e.g. Avatec? Pfizer Animmal Health), but these can be
toxic to some cage birds. Toltrazuril (Baycox 2.5% oral solution? Bayer Anirmal Health) has also been used
but rmust be cliluted at 1 mnL/L drinking water for 2 days as it is highly alkaline in nature.
Bacterial/fungal
Based on culture and sensitivity results.
infections
Macrorhabdus ornithogaster - amphotericin B for 3-5 days (e.g.in water 2 % preparation Megabac-5@
5 g/L for 5 days). Cider vinegar added to drinking water at 60-120 mL/L to acidify water and reduce
spread in the flock
Candicda albicans - nystatin 300,000 units/kg orally twice daily. Alternatively 10 mg/kg itraconazole
orally twice daily (warning has toxicity issues in grey parrots). Associated with a lack of vitamin A
Sour crop
Food should leave crop after 3-4 hours. If not crop, wash and rermove manually. May need
antirnicrobials plus sodium bicarbonate (antacid) plus metoclopramide
Crop irpaction
Crop wash under anaesthetic with warm water. Milk the contents out. Make sure the bird is intubated
with a snug fitting tube or lightly inflate the cuff to avoid inhalational pneumonia
Crop burns
Leave until full extent of skin slough develops (often 5-7 days) and treat with covering antirnicrobials
and pain relief +/- fluid therapy. Surgically debride the necrotic skin and underlying tissues and close in
separate layers using monofilarment dissolving suture material. Large deficits may require flaps or grafts.
Duck plague
No treatrnents. A vaccine is available for prevention (Nobilis Duck Plague® MSD Animal Health)
An Overview of Avian Therapeutics 219
Diagnosis
Treatment
Haemochromatosis
Iron chelation agent, e.g. deferoxamine, 100 mg/kg once daily. Phlebotomy (bleeding 1-2 mL blood/
kg once weekly). Diet should contain <60 ppm iron levels for susceptible species and low vitamin C,
which facilitates iron uptake.
Cloacal papilloma5
Surgical removal using caustic silver nitrate under anaesthesia
Hepatic lipidlosis
Reduce fats and proteins in diet but maintain biological value of proteins. Vitarmin B and K
supplements are advisable. Use of hepatic supporting drugs such as inisotol and L-carnitine, or
Spirulina as dlietary supplemments. Lactulose syrup (0.3 nL/kg) orally once daily.
Lead/zinc poisoning
Heavy metal chelation agent, e.g. 5odium calcium edetate, 20-50 mg/kg twice daily by injection for
 5 days minimum. D-penicillarmine at 50-55 mg/kg orally twice daily may also be used. Beware of
renal toxicity so fluid therapy is essential. Flushing out proventriculus/ventriculus to remove all metal
particles is also advisable.
 Diabetes mellitus
Protamine zinc insulin 0.1-1 unit/kg. Dilute in saline to allow accurate dosing. Rarely however controls
blood glucose. Aim is rather to stop weight loss. Twice daily dosing often required.
 Proventricular dilatation
No treatment. Has been managed with dietary changes (switch to rearing formulas) plus use of
disease
NSAIDs such as celecoxib (10 mmg/kg orally once daily) and meloxicam (0.2 mg/kg orally once daily)
Pacheco's disease and other
 Lirnited success if caught early in the course of the disease with the use of acyclovir at 80 mg/kg orally
herpesvirus infections
every 8-12 hours
Table 14.5 Treatrment of avian respiratory syster disease.
Diagnosis
Treatment
Upper respiratory tract
 Antinicrobial therapy based on culture/sensitivity. Swab from the choanal slit. Surgical rermoval of
 SpecCil
clisease
rhinoliths, sinus flushes (see below), parenteral antirmicrobials
Respiratory parasites
Iverrnectin 0.2 mg/kg once. May be repeated in 10-14 days to catch the recently hatched eggs.
(e.g. Syngamus trachea
AVIAN
 and air-sac nites
Ornithosis/psittacosis/
Use of doxycycline advised. In water preparation licensed in United Kingdom (Ornicure@ Dechra
PArt Il: 
infection with
suea atem ui asen rou lm soed lahiel Aue sg ae pue suoaid og (sinpoin Aeuuaia
Chiamydophila psittaci
50 injections of 75-100 mg/kg human intravenous doxycycline hycylate (Vibravenos? Pfizer) once
weekly may be used. Periods of 42 days plus are advised (the life span of the alveolar macrophage in
which the organism often resides). Candida overgrowth of the gut is a common sequel
Aspergillosis
Treatment is difficult and prolonged. Surgical debridement of granulomas, possible air sac tube
placement (see below).
Nebulisation with amphotericin B/diluted F1 0@ 34 tirmes daily particularly for the first 12 weeks is
Useful.
care should be used.
Oral itraconazole 10 mg/kg twice daily is effective but this drug is toxic in African grey parrots.
Voriconazole has been used in raptors.
Terbinafine may be used at 10-15 mg/kg orally twice daily instead. Treatrnent periods are often
3-12 months
 Bacterial lower respiratory
This depends on bacterial culture and sensitivity testing. However, mycoplasrmosis tends to respond to
tract disease
fluoroquinolones (e.g. Baytril@ Bayer Anirmal Health) and tetracyclines (e.g. Ornicure? Dechra Animal
Health), and pasteurellosis will respond to fluoroquinolones and sometimes pencillins.
Paramyxovirus
No treatment. Prevention is via vaccination in pigeons (e.g. Colombovac PMve (Pfizer Animal Health)
and Nobilis Pararnyxo P201@ (MSD Anirnal Health). Essential for racing pigeons in United Kingdom 
by law (Disease of Poultry Order 1994 (Sl 1994/3141))
Smoke inhalation toxicity
Supportive therapy. Furosemide 1-4 mg/kg intravenously/intrarmuscularly (beware of nephrotoxicity)
Oxygen-enriched atmosphere is advised, and in severe cases methylprednisolone at 10-20 mg/kg
or prednisolone at 6 mg/kg for lung oederma may be given. Beware of corticosteroids
imrmunosuppressive drugs, side effects a5 aspergillosis and bacterial infections may appear.
220 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
The bird is held inverted and the contents of the syringe
advisable, as the reproductive tract frequently becomes
(0.5 mL for a budgerigar, up to 5-7 mL for a large macaw
 dry and friable due to the pressure of the retained egg.
or raptor) are expelled into the nostril. The mixture should
Historically,
,the hen was often administered
exit through the infraorbital sinus and out through the
0.1-1 unit/kg of oxytocin by intramuscular injection,
eye, and through the internal choanal slit and out of the
once. However in birds, oxytocin is not produced (they
mouth. Holding the bird upside down minimises aspira-
produce vasotocin) and in reality it results in cardiovas-
tion of this mixture.
cular effects and very painful but often ineffective smooth
 Repeat the procedure for the other nostril.
muscle contractions.
Prostaglandin E2 gel, dinoprost at 0.02-0.1 mg/kg
Air-sac tube placement
topically on the entrance of the reproductive tract to the
In many cases of syringeal aspergillosis or when perform-
cloaca, to allow dilation of the vaginal sphincter has also
ing tracheal washes in a dyspnoeic bird, the placement of
been used. It may be necessary to lubricate the exit of the
 an air-sac tube may be vital to keep a patent airway. Ihis
reproductive tract with a sterile gel.
is further discussed in chapter 16.
If none of these methods work, then collapse the egg
within the bird in order to reduce the pressure which
Nebulisation
causes the ischaemia of the intestines and kidneys. Ihis
 A nebulisation circuit may be used to administer oxygen
may be done either by passing a hypodermic needle of
or drugs in aerosol form to avians with respiratory disease
23 gauge attached to a 2 mL syringe or through the cloaca
(Figure 14.7). Antibiotics such as gentamicin that are effec-
and into the end of the egg that is visible. The contents are
aspirated. This collapses the egg. It is not necessary to go
venously can be nephro- and ototoxic, may be administered
in after the shell fragments, as these will usually be passed
by nebulisation as they will not cross the air-blood barrier.
over the next 24 hours.
 If the egg is not visible via the cloaca, then the needle
123
Avian reproductive tract disease
may be passed through the body wall in midline ventrally.
therapy
 Again the contents of the egg are then aspirated and the
Egg binding
4
egg gently collapsed.
The supplementation of 100 mg/kg calcium given intra-
Covering antibiotics and analgesia should also be consid-
venously, slowly or intramuscularly is the first step where
ered, particularly if collapse of the egg has been carried out.
LH
there is suspicion of hypocalcaemic flaccidity.
PA
The hen should then be placed in a warm environ-
Prevention
ment and kept in a quiet situation. Fluid therapy is also
Firstly, it is important to provide a well-balanced diet,
which is correctly supplemented in calcium.
Secondly, if the hen has started to lay eggs, or has a
history of problems, a few environmental changes may
be performed to reduce further stimulus to lay. Ihe frst
of these is to reduce daylight length to a maximum of
10 hours/day. Ihis tries to mimic the conditions found in
mid-winter, and should help to discourage reproductive
activity in the hen.
It is also useful to remove nest boxes from the cage to
reduce the visual stimulus to nest and reproduce.
The use of plastic commercial egg replacers to fool the
hen in thinking she has produced a full clutch of eggs is
useful with indeterminate egg layers such as cockatiels
which will keep laying eggs until they reach a certain clutch
size. If egg replacers are not available then do not remove
the eggs. With budgerigars, it doesn't matter as they are
Figure 14.7 A nebulisation circuit that may be attached to an
shnup jasuwpe o tunuosngau eqeajad jo Addns uabxo
determinate egg layers, i.e., they will lay a set number of
in aerosol form to avian patients with respiratory disease.
eggs irrespective of whether they are removed or not.
An Overview of Avian Therapeutics 221
 If egg laying persists, then hormonal therapy may be
Temporary wing splinting
tried to suppress the reproductive cycle. Progesterone
Splinting of wing fractures may be perforrmed with ban-
injections had been the mainstay of hormonal modula-
dage material. It should be noted, though, that when a
tion such as medroxyprogesterone acetate. The down
bird's joint is kept immobilised for a few days it starts
side to this medication is the damaging effect the proges-
to stiffen. Ihis can be disastrous for raptors and wild
terone has on liver function, as well as the risk of iatro-
birds. Bandaging techniques are therefore more suitable
 genic diabetes mellitus. Human chorionic gonadotrophin
for cage and aviary birds, and also for emergency sup-
hormone has been used at 500-1000 IU/kg on days 1, 3
ot ueu o aqissod si i aiam o 'suissap iod
 and 5. This has fewer side effects and can stop egg laying
movement.
for up to 6 weeks. More recently, gonadotropin releasing
The technique for humeral/radial/ulna fractures is
hormone (GnRH) agonists have been used - specifically
described below:
deslorelin implants that can last for many months. These
*Flex the wing using coflex/vet wrap.
work by making the GnRH - pituitary - ovary axis to
● Starting from the point of the elbow, take the bandage
become refractory to stimulation and so they shut down.
 over the dorsal aspect of the wing to a point just distal
The last resort is spaying of the bird. This is a risky
to the point of the carpus.
operation, and involves the removal of just the uterus.
Place the bandage over the ventral aspect of the wing,
 The ovary is left, due to its multiple arterial blood supply
heading back to the point of the elbow.
making removal dangerous.
Cover the dorsal aspect of the wing to apoint just prox-
Table 14.6 highlights some of the other treatments and
imal to the carpus.
therapies commonly used for the management of avian
· Put the bandage onto the ventral aspect of the wing
 reproductive tract dise ases.
towards the digits.
Avian urinary tract disease therapy
● Rollit over the leading edge of the wing and the dorsal
8
Table 14.7 highlights some of the treatments and thera-
aspect once more and back to the elbow.
ECI
This “figure of eight' technique bunches the primary
pies for avian urinary tract diseases.
d5
feathers together and so uses them as a splint.
Avian musculoskeletal system
disease therapy
Avian neurological system
Table 14.8 highlights some of the treatments and thera-
disease therapy
pies commonly used for the management of avian mus-
Table 14.9 highlights some of the treatments and
culoskeletal system diseases. The process for splinting a
therapies commonly used for the management of avian
PA
fractured wing is also described.
neurological system diseases.
Table 14.6 Treatment of reproductive system diseases.
Diagnosis
Treatment
 Prolapsed
May be a sequel to egg binding and often involves prolapse of the cloaca. Uterus is the most commonly prolapsed
oviduct 
part of the oviduct. Tissues become rapidly desiccated and infected, if outside of the body. If the tissues are not too
devitalised, they may be pushed back with a moistened cotton bud under anaesthetic. Two sirmple interrupted sutures
may be placed, one either side of the vent, to try and reduce the aperture and prevent recurrence. If the oviduct i5
osle sasdeloud Aipateadan l! j aneld ul painins ag ol paau Aeuu eneolp ayl Aessanau aq Aeuu jenowau uaut pasieiaan
Salpingitis
This is by first identifying the bacteria involved by bacterial culture and sensitivity from a swab of the reproductive
tract. However, even when the correct antibiotic is chosen for the bacteria isolated, the infection may not be fully
cleared. This may be due to the area affected which walls off the infection from the body and results in the need to
consider spaying the bird.
Egg yolk
Abdominocentesis may be necessary to relieve pressure fromm the air sacs but should be performed cautiously via
coelomitis
midline ventrally under anaesthesia. Antibiotics are also required effective against Gram-negative bacteria (particularly
uoeinuei jo puawapgap pue Auoionedel auinban Aewu juawea walbuol ing paapisuon aa pinous stueldu
tissue, lipid and surgical spay. The prognosis is guarded.
222
Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Table 14.7 Treatment of avian urinary tract disease
Disease
Treatment
Acute renal
This is aimed towards encouraging urine production using fluid therapy (see chapter 16) and diuretics, particularly
disease
 if shock is present. The diuretic used is principally furosemide at 1-4 mg/kg intravenously or intrarmuscularly.
Specific therapy for heavy metal poisoning is based on the chelating agent, e.g. sodium calcium edetate, at
10-30 mg/kg twice daily, intrarnuscularly for 5 day5.
For renal coccidliosis, the use of clazuril at 5-10 mg/kg orally every third day on three occasions, or sulphadinidine
 at 25 mg/kg orally, twice daily for 3 days, resting for 2 day5 and repeating for 3 day5.
For chlamydophilosis, doxycycline is the antibiotic of choice (see respiratory tract section), but for Gram-negative
bacteria, fluoroquinolones or third-generation cephalosporins are advised.
Chronic renal
Even once the causative agent is removed/treated, management of chronic renal failure is challenging.
disease
Fluid therapy is required in the early stages of treatrent (chapter 16). Supplermentation of water-soluble vitamins
 (B vitamnins) and the use of anabolic steroids (to reverse catabolisrn and bone marrow suppression) have also been 
advocated.
The use of allopurinol at 10-15 mg/kg orally q1 2 hours is advised when uric acid levels are high, but in sorme specie5
(e.g. red-tailed hawk) this has been associated with an increase in uric acid levels (Lummei & Redig, 1992). Colchicine
is used in humans to reduce uric acid and can be used in birds at 0.02-0.04 mg/kg orally q12-24 hour5.
Many birds are too ill to stabilise and euthanasia should be considlered where uric acid levels remain >1000 umol/L
Surgery may be performed to rermove gout crystals, in joints and alleviate some of the pain and dliscomfort.
However, the underlying renal disease needs to be rectified. Diet of a high bioavailable but lower protein source
is sensible. Omega-3 fatty acids have been 5uggested as useful (Pollock, 2006)
Table 14.8 Treatment of avian musculoskeletal systerm diseases.
Diagnosis
Treatment
123
Fracture
In all cases it is important, particularly for wild birds, to obtain as near a 100o% successful repair otherwise there
d5
management
could be a welfare issue releasing such a bird into the wild.
AN
Coracoid, furcula
AVI.
 These usually recover with rest alone - occasionally, they may require an intrarmedullary pin.
:11
Humerus
PART
nney easpu pue pasiuonaud si auog aal (smey aieiadsa) soide ui annee uoo sou ae si sia
often traumatise radial nerve. A tie-in external fixator is often required.
Elbow dislocation
Aaun siluei lny ot unau e os papaau s! uoexy ienesue se sisouaoid ood
Uina and radius
hu pasau y alaa Aeauae isa ae uaaeds ou si aaul pue pane si eun au Auo ji
movement for 2-3 weeks. If the radius is fractured then intramedullary pin fixation is required. NB: Watch for
synostosis between ulna and radlius.
Femur
This is uncommon but may be seen in heavier birds. The bone is pneumonised in raptors but often not in
Psittaciforrnes. A tie-in external fixator will be required.
Tibiotarsus and tarsometatarsus
Often associated with trapping or jess injuries in raptors. If a crushing injury occurs then there is a poor prognosi5.
If it is a clean break but stil viable then good prognosis. An external fixator with a tie-in is needed unless it
involves small species in which case an 'Altman splint' may be used with two pieces of zinc oxide tape applied on
either side of a reduced fracture (see Figure 14.8)
Digit injuries
These may be dressed with a ball bandage (see Figure 14.4) or if armputation is necessary, a light padded
elasticated support (see Figure 14.9)
Carpometacarpal
o a  sy u a  an u o ea ji sa g r l o an  s a
luxation
option is surgical. Poor prognosis for wild release.
Nutritional
'ap atenbape ot paea s! uouaaaid lesibins ane suodo Auo aul pasleauiu pue pauojap ane sauog aouo
An Overview of Avian Therapeutics 223
Table 14.9 Treatrment of avian nervous system disea5e5.
Diagnosis
Treatment
Hypocalcaemic
Acute collapse: Slow intravenous/ intramuscular injection of 100 mg/kg calcium gluconate. Diazeparm (0.2 mg/
syndrome of
kg) or dliazepam (2 mg/kg) intrarmuscularly to control fitting.
African grey
eonu yanoa paaipe ag uen sl ea ue pue wniien Aeia aienbape sainban uouaaid
parrots
supplements, ultraviolet light provision (strip lamps if indoors or obviously access to unfiltered natural
sunshine) and access to vegetables and some dairy products ( e.g. bioyoghurts and cotage cheese). Most
 birds grow out of the condlition by 5-6 years of age.
Seizuring
Treatrnent is based on dliagnosis of the cause.
For heavy metal toxicity see Digestive Syster Diseases.
 For hypocalcaemic syndrome, see above; also seen in young raptors.
Symptomatic treatrment - dlirnrmed lighting, reduced noise levels, careful handling. Use of dliazeparm/midazolam
 0.3-1 rng/kg intravenously/intrarmuscularly.
If the condition occurs in a small raptor, it may be hypoglycaemia. Administer 40% glucose/dextrose w/V
ais au uo bupuadap panu 1- o ie Aos pue Asnouaeu!
Northern goshawks are also prone to hyperglycaemia at the start of the training season. Diagnosis is blood
glucose >30 mmol/L. To treat use protamine zinc insulin 0.1 unit and repeat until glucose levels fallbelow
15 mmol/L (Forbes, 1996b)
Lories and lorikeets fed on horme prepared nectar formulations may experience hypovitarminosis B1 and seizure.
 Injections of 3 mg/kg once followed by dietary supplementation at 35 mg/kg food are successful if the bird is
 treated quickly.
Newcastle
Treatrment is not posible but vaccination for PMV-1 pigeon pararmyxovirus is compulsory in racing pigeons in
disease/PMV-1
the United Kingdom. Vaccines include Colombovac? (Pfizer Animal Health) and Nobilis Pararmyxo P201 @
(MSD Animal Health). Pigeon paramyxovirus is notifiable in the United Kingdom and so should be reported to
o ()   e e e  r a
53
123
Proventricular
This mmay result in central nervous system disease such as torticollis, circling, central blindness and fitting. See
dlilatation 
5P
disease
Prognosis is poor with CNS sign5.
Spinal disease
Fractures of lumbar spine are common sequels to windlow/car strike incidlents. Surgery to stabilise can be
attermpted with postoperative use of anti-inflammatories such as meloxicarm 0.2 mg/kg once daily and
PART II:
Aspergillomas may also invadle the spinal canal from the uncdlerlying lung or air sacs. Treatment is as for
ood uiebe s! sisouhoud saseasia watsss Aotenidsay u sisolbuadse
Figure 14.8 An Altman splint applied
to the tibiotarsus of this cockatiel
(Nymphicus ho/lanoicus) for a simple
closed fracture. Two pieces of heavy zinc
oxide tape are used to sandwich the
proximal and distal fragments together.
224 Veterinary Nursing of ExoticPets
the bird in a heated cage. Afer cleaning and ensuring that
the birds are feeding properly and maintaining condition,
it is often necessary to retain waterfowl in captivity for
a few days to ensure that they are regularly preening to
waterproof their feathers.
Lead poisoning
It is often caused by the bird consuming lead shot from
shotgun discharges or old lead weights from coarse fish-
ing ( which are now banned but can still be found in the
environment). Commercial mining may also occasionally
contribute to discharges of lead and other heavy metal
discharges, such as zinc and tin.
Figure 14.9 A light padding and elasticated bandage support for
Diagnosis should be made by radiographing the bird
a toe amputation.
to demonstrate radiodense particles in the gizzard or
ventriculus. However, many affected birds no longer have
Miscellaneous conditions
lead particles in their digestive system but are still suf-
Oil spills
fering from lead poisoning. Iherefore, a blood sample to
Stabilisation
demonstrate elevated levels of lead is required. Normal
 This involves fluid therapy to correct dehydration, due to
levels are below 0.4 ppm, while levels over 0.5 ppm, and
diarrhoea. Birds are often hypothermic due to plumage
Buuosiod peao souepane udd z iano aiemd
damage. Gentle warming in warm air, such as that from a
hair dryer, can be used to bring body temperature to near
twice daily intramuscularly is recommended as achelating
123
normal. Heated cages with dimmed lighting to reduce
agent - fluid therapy should also be administered as both
further stress are also advisable. As these birds may have
the heavy metal and the drug are nephrotoxic. Treatment
been unable to feed for days, readily digestible liquid food
should continue until a return to 'normal' blood levels of
should be provided - if necessary by crop tube.
lead (<0.2 ppm) or zinc (<2 ppm) are seen assuming all
:11
radiodense material has been removed from the gut. Ihe
Initial treatment
latter may be facilitated by a proventriculus wash with
RT
Oral administration of adsorbents, such as activated char-
PA
warmed saline under anaesthetic. A tube may be passed
coal, prevents further absorption of oil. Covering antibiot-
with care through the oesophagus and past the crop and
ics and further fhuid and nutritional support may also be
into the proventriculus. Ihis is then flushed out by tilting
necessary. Due to the extreme stress of the situation, many
the bird head down. It is essential that an endotracheal
birds succumb to systemic fungal diseases such as aspergil-
tube is used in this process, and that it is snug fitting or
losis and this may necessitate additional treatment.
has a light amount of air inserted into the cuff. If the par-
Cleaning
ticulate matter has moved on, the use of peanut butter on
 The best cleaning agent for removal of oil is washing-up
bread for Psittaciformes or waterfowl has been suggested
liquid, which should be diluted 1 part to 50 parts water.
 as a means of 'sticking' heavy metal particles and allowing
 This should be lathered into the oil and sprayed off using
 passage out of the ventriculus and gut.
a shower head attachment. The water supply should be
kept at around the bird's own body temperature (between
References
Cooper, JE. (1985) Foot conditions. Veterinary Aspects of
40 and 45°C) to reduce further loss of body heat. Ihis
Captive Birds of Prey, 2nd edn, Pp. 97-11l. Standfast Press,
 is important as it may take up to an hour to clean some
Gloucestershire.
birds. Attention must be paid to thoroughly cleaning all
Forbes, N.A.(1996b) Fits and incoordination. Manual of Raptors,
of the feathers, so a cleaning patern or routine should
Pigeons and Waterfowi (eds PH. Beynon, N.A. Forbes & N.H.
be used. Washing can stop when the water starts to form
Harcourt-Brown), Pp. 197-207. BSAVA, Cheltenham, UK.
Lumeij, J. and Redig, P (1992) Hyperuricaemia and visceral gout
small, bead-like droplets on the feathers.
induced by allopurinol in red-tailed hawks (Buteo jamaicensis).
Once the oil has all been removed, the feathers should
Proceedings Tagung der Fachgruppe Gefhegelkrankheiten,
be dried initially using a hair dryer, and then by placing
Giessen, Germany.
An Overview of Avian Therapeutics 225
 Oaks, J.L. (1993) Immune and inflammatory responses in falcon
Chitty, J. and Lierz, M. (2008) BSAVA Manual of Raptors, Pigeons
staphylococcal pododermatitis. Raptor Biomedicine (eds PT.
and Passerine Birds. BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
Redig, J.E. Cooper, J.D. Remple & D.B. Hunter), Pp. 72-87.
Forbes, N.A. (1996a) Respiratory problems. Manual of
University of Minnesota Press, Min neapolis.
Raptors, Pigeons and Waterfowt (eds PH. Beynon, N.A.
Pollock, C. (2006) Diagnosis and treatment of avian renal
Forbes & N.H. Harcourt-Brown), Pp. 147-157. BSAVA,
disease. Veterinary Clinics of North America, Exotic Animat
Cheltenham, UK.
Practice, 9, 107-128.
Harrison, G. and Lightfoot, T. (2006) Clinical Avian Medicine.
Stanford, M. (2004) Interferon treatment of circovirus infection
Spix Publishing Inc., Palm Beach, FL.
in grey parrots (Psittacus e. erithacus). Veterinary Record, 154,
Lightfoot, T.L. (1998) Approach to avian obstetrics. Proceedings
435-436.
of the North American Veterinary Congress,Pp. 757-778.
Ritchie, B. {ed) {1995) Avian Viruses Function and Control.
Further reading
Wingers Publishing Inc., Lake Worth, FL.
Chitty, J. and Harcourt-Brown, N. (eds) (2005) BSAVA Manual of
Samour, J.(ed.) (2008) Aviar Medicine, 2nd edn.Mosby Elsevier,
Psittacine Birds, 2nd edn. BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
Edinburgh.
531
Part Il: Avian specil
Chapter 15
Avian Diagnostic Imaging
Physical restraint
Positive contrast techniques
Purpose built perspex restraint boards may be purchased.
Barium
 The basic design is a flat sheet of perspex with at one end a
This is routinely used to highlight foreign bodies in the
neck vice which constrains the head. A couple of attached
gastrointestinal tract, and to differentiate opacities in
fine ropes can be applied to the legs, and a strap will re-
the caudal coelom, such as retained eggs, from the rest
 strain the wings in a dorsal extended position.
of the coelomic contents. Usually, it is only performed
This author prefers to use chemical restraint when ra-
in stabilised patients as it requires 3-4 hours fasting to
diographing avian species to minimise stress.
empty the gut out, and it requires that the patient be con-
The only occasions where this is not possible is
scious for serial radiographs, which is stressful (although
in the use of positive contrast digestive system studies,
it may be performed using horizontal beam radiography
where transit times are important and anaesthesia will
with the bird on a perch). For the smaller birds such as
of course alter these. Also in the case of horizontal beam
cockatiels and budgerigars, 3-5 mL of a 25-30% barium
123
radiography, which may be used to determine fluid lines
mixture should be crop tubed. For larger birds such as
in an ascitic patient, the avian patient needs to be con-
African grey parrots and Amazons, 12-15 mL may be
scious and perching!
used, and for the larger macaws, 20-30 mL. Serial ra-
diographs are taken at 30 minutes and then hourly un-
Chemical restraint
til 2 hours post administration, then at 4, 8 and 24 hours
 In general, the method of chemical restraint preferred by
 post administration.
LH
this author is isoflurane gaseous anaesthetic in 100% oxy-
 Transit times vary with species, an African grey parrot's
PA
gen to both induce the patient (at 3-4%) and to maintain
(at 1.5-2%) preferably after intubation. Sevoflurane may
ministration of barium sulphate into the crop, reaching
also be used (induction of 4-6% in 100% oxygen; mainte-
the small intestines around 30-60 minutes, the large in-
nance at 2-3% in 100% oxygen).
testine at 60-120 minutes and the cloaca at 120-130 min-
Ketamine may be used at doses of 20-50 mg/kg
utes (see Figure 15.3). Many hawks on the other hand will
(Beynon ef al., 1996b) for psittacines or as 15 mg/kg
show proventriculus emptying times around 5-15 min-
in combination with 150-350 mg/kg of medetomidine
 utes post crop tubing, reaching the small intestine around
for raptors (Beynon et al., 1996a). However, recovery
15-30 minutes, the large intestine around 30-90 minutes
time is less predictable and longer, and the results less
and the cloaca around 90-360 minutes (McMillan, 1994).
satisfactory.
 Barium will also highlight dilations of the crop, and
proventriculus as can occur in some neuropathies, or par-
Avian patient radiography
asitic diseases, as well as swellings, growths, ulcers, etc.
As with other species, the traditional two views are re-
quired. In avian patients though the wings have a habit
Iodine
of getting in the way, and therefore to maximise the po-
Iodine, aqueous-based techniques may be used for intra-
tential of this medium, the wings must be fully abducted
venous excretory urography examinations when examin-
and placed extended over the dorsum of the bird when
ing the kidney structures for the presence of abnormali-
taking lateral views. In addition, the legs should be pulled
 ties, or for angiography (although fluoroscopic techniques
caudally to avoid excessive overlying of the caudal coelonm
rather than traditional flm cassette-based radiography is
(see Figures 15.1 and 15.2).
required for this) techniques.
Avian Diagnostic Imaging 227
In addition, conditions such as choanal atresia, which
is a common cause of a permanent clear sinus discharge,
may be elucidated by iodine-based contrast techniques
injected into the nasal sinuses.
Normal radiographic findings
 The avian skeleton is significantly different from its mam-
malian cousin. Many bones have become fused, e.g. no
tarsal bones survive; the proximal row having fused to the
distal end of the tibia, forming the tibiotarsus; and the dis-
tal row fusing with the proximal metatarsals forming the
tarsometatarsus. Birds possess a prominent keel in many
species, particularly Psittaciformes, formed from the ful-
sion and extension of the sternal vertebrae (see Figures
Figure 15.1 Positioning for a right lateral view radiograph in a bird.
15.4 and 15.5). However, some species such as the ratite
family and many waterfowl have a flattened, more boat-
shaped sternum without the prominent midline crest.
Many bones are pneumonised (i.e. connected to the air sac
system and therefore have an air-flled medullary cavity
rather than bone marrow); common examples include the
femur and the humerus, although individual species vary.
The pelvis is not fused having two separate slender pubic
 species
bones projecting caudal to the femur. The dorsal aspect of
the pelvis forms a protective dome fusing with the sacral
bones forming the synsacrum. Ihe thoracic vertebrae and
sacral vertebrae are both largely fused and immobile. In
AVIAN
contrast the cervical vertebrae are highly mobile.
The body cavity, as with reptiles, is not divided into a
thorax and abdomen as there is again no diaphragm. In
PART
addition, the avian lungs are a rigid structure, paired and
Figure 15.2 Positioning for a standard ventrodorsal view
closely adherent to the dorsal body wall in the cranial coe-
 radiograph in a bird.
lom and appear homogenously mottled on lateral radio-
 graphs. The air sacs which fll the coelom appear as marked
 Figure 15.3 Lateral barium digestive tract study in a normal African
grey parrot.
         
228 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
view, and forms the upper part of an hour glass shape, with
the lower chamber being produced by the shadow of the
liver. Some species such as the larger cockatoos may have
a small heart shadow and/or a small liver shadow which
may be a normal radiographic finding. Ihe gizzard or
ventriculus is often clearly seen in grit consuming birds,
lying to the left of midline in the caudal coelomic region.
Abnormal radiographic findings
Skeletal
 Evidence of fractures may be obvious as with most long
bone fractures, or slightly less blatant, as with femoral
head fractures.
Metabolic bone disease is common in juvenile birds that
are fed inappropriate diets, and the bones most commonly
 affected are the long bones, especially the tibiotarsus, which
('t amig aas) ae  aad e ci aq a
Other skeletal deformities include polyostotic hyperos-
tosis which is often associated with cystic ovarian disease
and persistent hyperoestrogenaemia, leading to a mottled
appearance to the long bones.
Soft tissue
123
 Enlargement or reduction in size may be noted in any of
 Figure 15.5 Ventrodorsal view of a normal African grey parrot.
the internal organs if affected by disease.
AN
An enlarged liver often present as a reduction in the
radiolucent areas, and allow clear definition of many inter-
'waist' of the hourglass shape created by the heart and
 nal organs. Ihe trachea is mobile and elongated, and may
liver shadows on the ventrodorsal view, an increase in the
LH
have many coils in certain species of waterfowl such as the
width of the liver area and narrowing of the caudal air
PA
 trumpeter swans. In many ducks, such as the common
mallard, the trachea may have a swelling at its base formed
 by a bulla, which is a perfectly normal finding.
On lateral radiographs, the heart may be clearly seen
with the major arterial and venous trunks leaving and en-
tering it. The caudal border of the heart merges with the
liver shadow. Dorsal to the liver lies the spleen, which is
spherical in many cage birds, and enlarges markedly dur-
ing infectious diseases such as chlamydophilosis. In ad-
dition, in this region lies the 'true' acid secreting stomach
 or proventriculus, and immediately caudal to this lies the
often grit flled in granivorous species, ventriculus, giz-
zard or second stomach. Caudal to this lie the intestinal
mass. Ihe kidneys lie on the dorsal body wall within the
shadow of the pelvis and may be seen to project cranially
when enlarged due to inflammatory disease or tumours.
The ventrodorsal view is useful to compare the thoracic
and abdominal air sacs, which are prime sites for fungal
granuloma formation in diseases such as aspergillsis.
Figure 15.6 Ventrodorsal view of an eclectus parrot chick vith
metabolic bone disease. Note the deformed long bones and rib
The heart shadow is clearly outlined on the ventrodorsal
cages, the growth plates and the poor bone quality.
Avian Diagnostic Imaging  229
Figure 15.7 Ventrodorsal view of an Amazon parrot with
hepatomegaly. Note the reduced caudal air-sac space, the reduction
in the 'waist' of the hourglass shape of the major body organs and
the increase in width of the liver shadow.
Part Il: Avian Species
sacs (see Figure 15.7). A reduction in the size of the liver
may be seen as a visible gap between the caudal border of
Figure 15.9 Ventrodorsal view of the parrot in Figure 15.8 showing
the heart and the cranial border of the liver.
an enlarged proventriculus on the bird's left hand side (our right).
An enlarged proventriculus may be seen in gastric dila-
which may be mistaken for an enlarged liver.
tation syndrome, and is shown by a fluid-flled organ dorsal
to the heart and liver shadow on a lateral radiograph (see
K
Figure 15.8). On a ventrodorsal view, the enlarged proven-
 triculus which lies on the left hand side can be mistaken for
an enlarged liver shadow which overlies it (see Figure 15.9).
An enlarged spleen as mentioned may be clearly seen
on lateral radiographs dorsal to the liver shadow, around
the mid-femur level in infectious disease states, particu-
larly chlamydophilosis/psittacosis (see Figure 15.10).
Figure 15.10 Lateral view of a macaw with psittacosis/
chlamydophilosis showing an enlarged spleen (the spherical organ
mid coelom, at the level of the mid femur).
Enlarged or damaged kidneys may appear more ra-
diodense, or they may project craniall out from the
boundaries of the pelvis, or may move dorsocaudally to
obliterate a section of the abdominal air sac which nor-
Figure 15.8 Lateral view of an African grey parrot with an enlarged
 proventriculus seen as a gas-filled viscus above the liver and heart.
mally lies over the dorsal aspect of the caudal kidney area.
230 Veterinary Nursing of ExoticPets
Figure 15.11 Lateral view of an African grey parrot with thickening
and increased radiodensity of the major vessels exiting the heart,
typical of atherosclerosis.
The great vessels exiting the heart may become dilated,
or more radiodense with either atherosclerosis or meta-
static mineralisation (see Figure 15.11). Ihe heart itself
may also become enlarged with progressive failure in
older or diseased birds.
Foreign bodies may also be seen using radiography.
53
 particularly metallic elements, which may result in heavy
 Avian SpeCll
metal (e.g. lead and zinc) poisoning. Ihey will often
lodge in the ventriculus (gizzard) in psittacine birds (see
Figure 15.13 Ventrodorsal view of an Amazon parrot with
advanced chronic aspergillosis. The bird's right side (our left) is
Figure 15.12).
completely obliterated with fungal grovth obscuring the air sacs
Infections of the air sacs are common in psittacine birds
and anatomical structures.
and raptors. Ihe most frequently seen disease is perhaps
PART
 aspergillosis - a fungal infection of the lungs and air sacs.
This may produce subtle changes initially but may go on
to produce significant radiographic changes in advanced
chronic disease (see Figure 15.13).
Figure 15.14 Lateral view of a Kestrel's skull showing the
prominent hooked beak and large eye sockets and scleral ossicles -
the small bones that support the structure of the eye around the
scleral junction.
Species variations
There are considerable species variations. Raptors have
 notable adaptations of the head (see Figure 15.14) and feet
Figure 15.12 Lateral viev of an African grey parrot with lead
(see Figure 15.15) amongst others. Many passerine birds
poisoning. Note the radiodense metallic particles present in the
ventriculus (gizzard).
and other nonpsittacine birds have a more elongated body
Avian Diagnostic Imaging 231
Liver: The liver as mentioned is easily imaged from aven-
tral approach immediately caudal to the sternum. As with
mammals, the normal liver is homogenous in density (see
m aeai uas aq a siassa pooa (it'it aint
the parenchyma as hypoechoic areas. Most of the com-
monly seen species in general practice do not possess a
 gallbladder.
Heart: The heart can be seen as a four-chambered struc-
ture, although there is a disproportionate difference be-
tween the size of the larger left ventricle and the smaller
right ventricle (see Figure 15.17). It is generally difcult to
see all four chambers in one section as the right and leff
Figure 15.15 Lateral view of a Kestrel's feet showing the
atria are in a slightly different plane from the ventricles.
anisodacty limb (as opposed to the zygodactyl limb of psittacine
The left ventricle also has a thinner wall than the right
 birds) and prominent claws.
ventricle. The right ventricle ends before reaching the car-
diac apex.
The valves of the heart may also be distinguished. The
form and do not have the hourglass shape comprised of
heart and liver but rather a more rectilinear shape.
right atrioventricular (AV) valve is normally thickened,
muscular and is singular. Ihe left AV valves are similar
Ultrasonography
Positioning
 The transducer is usually applied to the skin caudal to
53
153
the keel, ventrally, or in Galliformes and other species
where the ribs do not extend as far caudally, access may
d5
be gained from the lateral body wall just in front of the
leg. Iherefore, restraint in lateral or dorsal recumbency,
with the head elevated to allow the organs to fall towards
the transducer is preferable. It may be possible to image
PART
raptors, e.g. on their perches if they are hooded.
Normal ultrasound findings
Figure 15.16 Liver structure should be homogenous. Note the
For most imaging of birds above 150-200 g, it is pos-
blood vessel creating a hypoechoic line arcing across the lowver right
sible to use a 7.5 MHz sector probe. A 10 MHz probe or
of the structure.
a standoff may be required for such a small species as a
budgerigar though. Adequate amounts of coupling gel
should be applied and allowed to soak into the skin be-
fore imaging. It may be necessary to pluck a few feath-
ers as well, although careful wetting and parting of the
feathers, particularly immediately caudal to the sternum
on the ventrum, will allow access to the skin without this.
The main problem with ultrasound examination of
birds is the presence of the air sacs which of course com-
pletely block the passage of ultrasound waves. It is pos-
sible to use organs as 'windows' to view other organs, and
this is usually the case with the liver which is easily acces
sible from the caudal sternum position and may be used
to image the heart. Where ascitic/coelomic fluid is pres-
Figure 15.17 Image of the heart. Note the liver at the top of the
ent, of course this modality becomes much more useful.
picture, which is used as the acoustic window to visualise the heart.
232 Veterinary Nursing of ExoticPets
to that seen in the cat and dog. Ihe aortic valves are also
Heart: The presence of a pericardial effusion, as with
easily seen and are paired.
mammals is considered abnormal in birds. Overall car-
 Normal values for the heart parameters have been
diac enlarged, as associated with cardiomyopathies is also
published for African grey and Amazon parrots by Pees
easily diagnosed. Valvular defects have been reported
et af.,2004.
in birds and ultrasound may be used to diagnose these
 Other organs: It is not normally possible to image many
(Rosenthal & Stamoulis, 1993).
of the healthy organs of birds due to the presence of the
Kidneys: Renal tumours, such as those commonly seen
air sacs, these include: Kidneys, spleen and reproductive
in budgerigars, may be diagnosed, as they often enlarge
Ay Aisnoiaqo ieadde ponpino al ut saa palaus sueai0
rapidly from the cranial pole of a kidney and may be cys-
perechoic,but laminated eggs,i.e.those without a shell yet
tic in nature.
formed around the yolk and albumen, may also be seen in
the oviduct. Ihe yolk tends to be more hyperechoic, and
Reproductive syster: Coelomic deposition of eggs (so-
called “internal laying') may occur with some cage birds
the albumen hypoechoic in structure (see Figure 15.18).
and may result in egg yolk peritonitis. Such eggs may be
Abnormal ultrasound findings
seen either as hypoechoic or multilaminate structures.
Liver: Liver enlargement is difficult to assess using ultra-
Other organs: Where ascitic/coelomic fluid is present,
sound as the full extent of the liver cannot be determined
most of the organs may be imaged easily. In cases of cys-
in one view. However, the protrusion of the liver be yond
tic ovarian disease, the classical hypoechoic bunches of
the caudal sternum/xiphoid is usually taken as an indica-
grapes' may be seen as the ovary becomes enlarged enough
tion of hepatomegaly.
 to push ventrally. Egg yolk peritonitis will present with a
Where the liver is markedly enlarged, it may be pos-
marked coelomic effusion which has a turbid appearance,
sible to see dilated vessels within the parenchyma and
and so has areas of increased echogenicity whereas a true
133
increased echogenicity of their walls. Hepatic lipidosis
ascitic effusion tends to be hypoechoic in nature.
(fatty liver degeneration) is seen as increased echogenici-
Dilatation of the proventriculus may also be imaged,
AN
ty and liver size. Hepatic tumours, whether primary or
due to its distended size, and a thinning of its wall may
secondary, may of course be identified with ultrasound
further enhance a diagnosis. Splenomegaly, particularly
oa pasaap pe pasa go sare s saia
in cases of chlamydophilosis, may also be diagnosed by
genicity, although these may be diffcult to separate from
LH
ultrasound, as the spleen pushes ventrally towards the
 granulomas and areas of hepatic necrosis unless a discrete
PA
body wall caudal to the proventriculus. Ihe spleen in
capsule to the neoplasm is seen. Hepatic enlargement and
most Psittaciformes is rounded, and will have increased
necrosis seen as large hypoechoic areas is a common find-
echogenicity in comparison to the liver, but is normally
ing inliver diseases such as haemochromatosis (iron stor-
homogenous in character. Splenic tumours are rare, but
age disease)
may also present as with mammals with hypoechoic areas
within the parenchyma.
MRI and CT scanning
Both these modalities have been reported in avian pa-
tients. CT scanning of the head to examine fractures of
jaw bones such as the quadrate bone which is easily dam
aged when birds fly into windows is far easier than trying
to make the same diagnosis using radiography. MRI scan-
ning of the heart and liver is useful as these are difficult
sometimes to visualise on radiographs and ultrasound ex-
aminations owing to their encasement within the ribcage.
Endoscopy
Rigid endoscopes are extremely useful to enable visuali
Figure 15.18 Egg in the coelomic cavity. The outer albumin is
hypoechoic and the central yolk is hyperechoic.
sation and guided sampling of lesions. Ihey can be used
Avian Diagnostic Imaging  233
 to look down the trachea for syringeal aspergillomas, into
The left flank is used when wishing to examine the
the crop and on into the proventriculus for upper Gl tract
 gonads for sexing, as well as being useful for examining
examination, into the cloaca to look for papillomas etc. In
the spleen, gizzard, pancreas left kidney and left lung.
addition, the presence of air sacs within the bird makes it
The right flank is preferable for examining the right tes-
an ideal candidate for laparoscopic endoscopy.
tis, right kidney and right lung. For views of the liver, the
bird should be in dorsal recumbency and the access point
Access to coelom
is immediately caudal to the sternum and midline.
 The point of access is the lateral body wall. Ihe boundar-
ies of the entrance point are taken as the cranial edge of
References
the iliotibial muscles (with the bird in lateral recumbency
Beynon, PH., Forbes, N.A. and Harcourt-Brown, N. (1996a)
and the legs pulled caudally) and the caudal edge of the
Formulary. Manual of Raptors, Pigeons and Waterfowl.
BSAVA, Cheltenham, UK.
pectoral muscles. This site is between the last two ribs for
Beynon, P.H., Forbes, N.A. and Lawton, M.PC.(1996b) Formulary.
a psittacine bird (may be just caudal to the last rib in a
Manual of Psittacine Birds.BSAVA, Cheltenham, UK.
passerine or raptor) (see Figure 15.19). Ihe skin is incised
McMillan, M.C. (1994) Imaging techniques. Avian Medicine:
with scissors and the body wall muscles are bluntly dis-
Principles and Applications (eds B.W. Ritchie, G.J. Harrison
sected using a pair of mosquito haemostats.
and L.R. Harrison), Pp. 246-326. Wingers, Fort Worth, FL.
Pees, M., Straub, J. and Krautwald-Junghens, M.E. (2004)
 Echocardiographic examinations of 60 African grey parrots
and 30 other psittacine birds. Veterinary Record, 155,73-76.
Rosenthal, K. and Stamoulis, M. (1993) Diagnosis of congestive
heart failure in an Indian hill mynah (Gracula religiosa).
Journal of Association of Avian Veterinarians, 7(1), 27-30.
Further reading
Chitty, J. and Harcourt-Brown, N. (eds) (2005) BSAVA Manual of
ECI
Psittacine Birds,2nd edn. BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
d5
Chitty, J. and Lierz, M.(2008) BSAVA Manual of Raptors, Pigeons
and Passerine Birds. BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
Harrison, G. and Lightfoot, T. (2006) Clinical Avian Medicine.
Spix Publishing Inc., Palm Beach, FL.
Krautwald, M.E., Tellhelm, B., Hummel, G., Kostka, V. and
Kaleta, E.F. (1991) Atlas of Radiographic Anatomy and
Diagnosis of Cage Birds. Paul Parey, Berlin.
Ritchie, B. (ed) (1995) Avian Viruses Function and Control.
Wingers Publishing Inc., Lake Worth, FL.
Figure 15.19 Site and positioning of the avian patient for standard
Samour, J. (ed) (2008) Avian Medicine, 2nd edn. Mosby Elsevier,
rigid endoscopic examination of the coelomic cavity.
Edinburgh.
Chapter 16
Avian Emergency and Critical
Care Medicine
Triage
2. Elevate the uppermost wing (left). Another operator
Any bird presented unconscious, ftting, with evidence of
 pulls the uppermost leg caudally.
head trauma or respiratory distress should be attended to
3. Make a small skin incision just caudal to the last rib,
immediately. Birds that are off colour and dull should be
and just ventral to the pelvis at its conjunction with the
moved into a quiet, warm (29-30°C), dimly lit area with
spine (see Figure 16.1).
supplemental oxygen, if there is any evidence of tachy/
 4. Pass either a specifically designed air-sac tube (see Fig-
hyperpnoea and should be examined as soon as possible.
ure 16.2) through the body wall or a short length of
2-3.5 gauge endotracheal tubing is grasped with a pair
Cardiopulmonary-cerebral
of haemostats and pushed through the body wall. Ihe
resuscitation in birds
cuff on the endotracheal tube or air-sac tube may be
The ABC may be followed for birds as for mammals -
inflated and the tube sutured to the body wall.
although there is now some feeling that the correct order
5. Ihe outlet of the anaesthetic circuit may then be at-
should be CAB as the circulation contains enough oxygen
 tached to the free end of the tube to administer anaes-
123
to maintain life, providing it can keep moving around the
thetic or oxygen. Alternatively, in the conscious bird
d5
body even with temporary loss of breathing.
the air-sac tube is cut short and may be left in place for
AVIA
normal breathing for 3-4 days whilst the bird's condi-
A for airway and B for breathing
tion is treated.
During anaesthesia with isoflurane or sevoflurane, cardi-
LH
ac arrest is usually preceded by respiratory arrest when it
C for cardiovascular system
PA
occurs. Ihe prognosis, providing the bird is intubated and
Bradycardia often precedes cardiac arrest and is due
the anaesthetist vigilant and the process is spotted before
to heart blocks developing (similar to those in small
cardiac arrest, is good. Ihe anaesthetic should be stopped
mammals). If this is detected quickly, administration
immediately and mechanical ventilation initiated. If in-
of atropine (0.01-0.02 mg/kg IM/IV) or glycopyrrolate
tubation is not possible, a tight-fitting face mask may be
(0.01 mg/kg IM/IV) may be enough to reverse this.
used; but it is preferable to consider placing an air-sac
If cardiac arrest has occurred, then the prognosis in
tube (see below). Doxapram may be used to stimulate res-
birds is poor. Ihis is owing to the fact that the heart is pro-
 piration centrally by applying a drop to the oral mucosa
tected behind the keel/sternum and ribs and so external
or injecting intramuscularly 1-2 mg/kg (roughly 0.1 mL
massage is less effective than in mammals. In addition,
for birds 200 g).
a asn po siii os pue rnip ou st aa
Where the trachea may be blocked as with a foreign
 a a c s dd 
body or an aspergilloma, it may be necessary to place an
thoracic pressure. Adrenaline may be administered, pref-
air-sac tube. This is where a tube is inserted through the
erably intratracheally, at 0.01-0.02 mg/kg with atropine
body wall into an air sac due to the fact that birds can
0.02-0.04 mg/kg. Application of regular compressions on
extract oxygen from the air on both inspiration and expi-
the caudal sternum can be attenmpted to start cardiac mas-
ration, it does not matter which way the air enters the re-
sage. Ihe patient is best placed in dorsal recumbency to
spiratory tract. A typical air-sac tube is placed as follows:
allow better compression of the heart with the sternum,
1. Place the bird in the right lateral recumbe
but be aware that positive pressure ventilation is more dif-
The bird may first be anaesthetised,
ficult in this position owing to the pressure of the viscera
this may be performed in the conscious bird.
on the lungs and heart.
Avian Emergency and Critical Care Medicine 235
uppermost wing at the carpal joint and rhythmically
 pumps the wing up and down. This has the effect of rais-
ing and depressing the chest wall,thus simulating inspira-
tion and expiration.
 Other drugs used before a diagnosis can be accurately
made include broad spectrum antibiosis. Often combina-
tions of a fluoroquinolone (e.g., enrofloxacin (Baytril2.5%@
Bayer Animal Health) at 10 mg/kg b.i.d. or marbofloxacin
(Marbocyl Small Animal Injection? Virbac) at 10 mg/kg
s.i.d.) and a potentiated penicillin (e.g., amoxicillin/clavu-
lanate at 150 mg/kg b.i.d.) are advised as these will cover
most of the bacterial pathogens seen in avian medicine. If
aspergillosis is suspected, then nebulisation of drugs such
 as Amphotericin B (Fungizone? Squibb) and F10 (Health
Figure 16.1 A stoma in the caudal body wallbeing made using
and Hygiene Pty) may be of some help, as is an intravenous
blunt dissection with a pair of haemostats to allov the insertion of
an air-sac tube.
bolus of Amphotericin B (at 1.5 mg/kg IV) or oral itracon-
azole (Itrafungol Janssen) (at 5-10 mg/kg b.i.d.) or oral
terbinafine (at 10-15 mg/kg b.i.d.).
In the case of birds such as grey parrots or in laying
 hens/birds on poor quality diets where a possible calcium
deficiency may be a cause for collapse of the patient, the
use of calcium gluconate is advised. Doses of 50-100 mg/
kg IM have been quoted. Doses of 0.2-0.5 mg/kg diaz-
53
153
epam may be needed to control seizure initially in some
of these cases.
Where heavy metal poisoning (mainly lead or zinc) is
suspected, the chelating agent sodium calcium edetate
should be used at 20-50 mg/kg IM b.i.d. Fluid therapy
should always be used as heavy metals and possibly this
drug itself may be nephrotoxic.
PA
Where egg binding has occurred, it is vital to keep the
Figure 16.2 Commercially available (Cook Veterinary Products)
patient warm, quiet and wellhydrated. Use of prostaglan-
air-sac tubes.
din E2 gel applied directly to the oviduct sphincter inside
the cloaca is necessary to help release the sphincter and
D for drugs
encourage contraction of the uterine muscle. In some cir-
See Table 16.1 for tabulated information on emergency
cumstances, collapsing the egg inside the bird either by
drugs in birds. In cases of respiratory arrest, administra-
 puncturing it through the cloaca with a needle or via a
tion of 0.5 mg/kg doxapram, per os or intravenously, is
midline ventral abdomen insertion of a needle attached
advised followed by intubation and manual or machine-
to a syringe may be necessary to relieve pressure from the
assisted IPPV. If cardiac arrest occurs, then intubation
abdomen, which can cause ischaemic necrosis of the vital
and intratracheal administration of adrenaline (0.05 mL
 organs due to the relatively large size of bird eggs.
for a budgie and up to 0.5 mL for a grey parrot) followed
by compression of the cranial chest wall between finger
E for ECG
and thumb five times in a row, followed by five breaths via
ECG traces may be taken from birds, although it is pref-
an ET tube, and then five compressions of the chest wall
erable to anaesthetise the bird to perform them. It is also
etc. may allow revival. Intubation should be attempted
helpful to blunt the alligator teeth on the clamps as these
wherever possible. However, if it is not possible, then a
can traumatise the skin very easily. Ihe bird is placed in
face mask with 100% oxygen is used and the resuscita-
 dorsal recumbency and the clips attached to the skin of
tor places the bird in lateral recumbency and grasps the
the thighs and the skin of the propatagium (the bit of
236 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Table 16.1 Commonly used emmergency and recovery medications for bird5.
Drug
Dosage
Notes
 Adrenaline
0.05-0.5 mL depending
 Use intratracheally after intubation and IPPV with 100 % oxygen
on patient size
Amoxicillin/clavulanate
150 mg/kg b.i.d.
Useful where anaerobes may be present (e.g.. cat bites etc.)
Amphotericin B (Fungizone? Squibb)
1.5 mg/kg IV
Aspergillosis. Always use aggressive fluid therapy as nephrotoxic
Calcium EDTA
20-50 mg/kg b.i.d. IM
 Chelating agent for lead or zinc poisoning. Always use
aggressive fluid therapy to avoid renal daage
 Calcium gluconate
50-100 mg/kg IM
Hypocalcaemic fits, particularly African grey parrots
Diazepam
0.2-0.5 mg/kg IM/V
Muscle necrosis if given IM
Doxapram
0.5 mg/kg PO/V
Intubate and use IPPV
Doxycycline (Vibravenosa Pfizer)
75-100 mg/kg IM every
 Treatment for psittacosis. Human drug and requires VMD
5-7 days for 42 days
authorisation for import to United Kingdom. Causes muscle
necrosis.
Doxycycline (Ornicure Dechra
 In water medication
Works if patient drinks water. NB is licensed for treatment of
Animal Health)
psittacosis in cage birds and pigeons in the United Kingdom.
Enrofloxacin (Baytril 2.5% Bayer
10 mng/kg b.i.d.
Licensed antibiotic for birds. Useful against Gramm-negative
Animal Health)
bacteria but not against anaerobes. Can cause muscle necrosi5
Furosemide
0.1-2 mg/kg
Diuretic. Lories (type of nectar eating parrot) are very sensitive
Itraconazole (Itrafungol@ Janssen)
5-10 mg/kg b.i.d.
Aspergillosis - do not use in African grey parrots
123
Midazolam 
0.2-0.5 mg/kg IM/V
Less likely to cause muscle necrosis than dliazeparm
AN
Meloxicam
0.2 mg/kg IM/PO s.i.d.
Beware use if already has renal damage
Prostaglandin E2 gel
Apply 0.1 mL/100 g bird 
Apply direct to oviduct sphincter inside vent to relax sphincter.
increase uterine tone and aid egg passage
LH
PA
skin between the shoulder and carpus of the wing on the
：
wings leading edge). Alternatively, place hypodermic
 needles through the skin of the wings and thighs, and at-
ST
tach the clamps to these.
 In most avian species, the lead II trace appears as a
PR
mammalian one, except the QRS complex appears in-
verted. Ihis is not the case, but rather it occurs because
the S wave is the dominant deflection and the Q wave
hardly records at all. For this reason, bird's QRS waves are
S
often referred to as 'rS' waves. P and T waves are as for
 Figure 16.3 Normal lead Il annotated ECG trace for a bird
-as as u sso (e'it ay as) se
cies (pigeons, some parrots), there is a small depression
wave known as a Ta wave immediately after the P wave
Values for ECGs in birds have been published but vary
and this is normal (it represents atrial repolarisation) see
between species and exceed the scope of this text. Many
Figure 16.4. In addition, the P on T phenomena (where 
birds have heart rates too fast to record on even 50 mm/
the P wave is superinposed onto the following T wave)
second traces. It is more important to look for arrhyth-
is a normal finding in some African grey and Amazon
mias such as severe bradycardia (a common abnormality
parrots.
before cardiac arrest in anaesthetised birds) instead.
Avian Emergency and Critical Care Medicine 237
may be anaesthetising the patient in 100% oxygen with
8
isoflurane is the preferred method.
 Initial assessment should look at the following points:
1. Feather condition - chewed feathers, fret lines, disco-
louration, feather loss etc.
Ta
2. Are the feathers fluffed up?
3. Are the eyes closed?
4. Are the corneas bright?
 5. Is there respiratory noise?
S
6. Is there tail bobbing when breathing indicating
Figure 16.4 Normal lead Il annotated trace for pigeons and
dyspnoea/hyperpnoea?
some psittacine birds shovving the Ta wave associated with atrial
 7. Are the nares clear or is there a serous or purulent
rep olarisation.
discharge?
8. Is there any faecal clumping to the feathers around
Monitoring of cpcR responses
the vent?
Assessment of cardiac output by using end-tidal CO2
9. What is the recent faecal output like?
level has been suggested (Lichtenberger, 2007). A steady
10. Are the urates green/mustard yellow? (may indicate
increase in end-tidal CO, during CPCR should occur and
liver disease)
if it has not exceeded 10 mm Hg after resuscitation has
11. Is there any blood in the faeces (may indicate haema-
been ongoing for 15-20 minutes, the prognosis is poor.
turia such as is seen in heavy metal poisoning)?
Venous blood is preferable for assessment of blood
12. Is there undigested seed in the faeces? (may indicate
 gases and pH as this more closely represents the body or-
 proventricular dilatation disease or pancreatitis)
 gan's status than arterial blood does.
13. What is the bird's weight, and what is the muscle con-
53
Mucous membrane colour should be assessed where
dition of the pectoral area like? (body scores of 0-5
possible - the lining of the cloaca or the mouth are the
may be given as with other animals)
two best sites in birds. Cloacal temperature may also
14. What is the stance of the bird like? (upright on the
give an indication of peripheral perfusion and should be
perch, on the floor, leg weakness, respiratory distress
40-42°C.
etc.)
Blood pressure may be monitored as described below
15. Is there evidence of vomitus/regurgita on the feathers
under monitoring of acute hypovolaemia
around the head?
PA
 All of these assessments can be made relatively quickly
Initial clinical assessment of
and often without actually handling the patient.
the avian patient
 Do not be too quick to physically restrain the sick avian
Detailed examination of
patient, particularly if it is a small species and/or in re-
the avian patient
spiratory distress. Severe respiratory distress is obvious,
Once it is assumed safe to handle the patient, a more de-
with respiratory stertor, wheezes and whistles, but subtle
tailed examination may be made.
changes such as an increase in respiratory rate, tail bob-
See Table 16.2 for some normal biological parameters
bing and nasal discharge/blocked nares may all indicate
of selected birds.
relatively serious respiratory pathology. Birds have no
diaphragm and therefore rely on the outward movement
Examination
of the ribcage and downward movement of the keel to al-
A detailed examination should include the following:
low inspiration. Any restriction of this (coupled with a
1. An intraoral examination using a mouth gag or a pen/
 stress response increase in oxygen demand) will lead to
pencil to encourage the bird to open its beak This
hypoxia, possible cardiac ischaemia and arrest.
should allow a close examination of the tongue, the
Examine in cage first, use dimmed/blue/red lighting. If
internal nostril or choanal slit (the communication
in doubt, admit to place the patient in an oxygen-enriched
between the nasal passages and the mouth), and the
atmosphere +/— nebulisation with saline first. Then see if
palate. Ihe glottis may also be visualised. Abnormali-
you can physically restrain the patient for examination. It
ties such as a discharge from the choanal slit, loss of
238 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Table 16.2 Biological pararmeters for selected bird specie5.
Heart rate at  Respiration rate
Average
Species
Order
rest (bpm)
at rest (bpm)
weight
Diet
Canary
 Passeriformes (perching birds)
275
60-80
25-30 g
Seedls, grasses
Zebra finches
 Passeriformes (perching birds)
OOE
90-110
15-20 g
Seeds, grasses
Budgerigar
 Psittaciforrmes (parrot)
250
60-75
25-45 g
 Seeds, vegetables and fruits
Cockatiel
 Psittaciforrmes (parrot)
200
40-50
50-60 g
 Seeds, vegetables and fruits
African grey
 Psittaciformes (parrot)
150
15-45
400-500 g
Seeds, nuts, pulses,
parrot
 vegetables and fruits
Blue-fronted
 Psittaciforrmes (parrot)
150
15-45
400-550 g
Seeds, nuts, pulses,
Amazon
vegetables and fruits
 Blue and gold 
Psittaciformes (parrot)
100
20-25
650-850 g
Seeds, nuts, pulses.
macaw 
vegetables and fruits
Ringedl-neck
 Psittaciforrmes (parrot)
175
30-45
80-100 g
Seeds, vegetables and fruits
parakeet
Tawny owl
Strigiformes (owl)
150
15-40
400-550 g
 Chicks, rodents
Barn owl 
Strigiforrmes (owl)
150
15-40
400-500 g
 Chicks, rodents 
Harris hawk
Falconiformes (bird of prey)
100
20-40
0.75-1.5 kg
 Chicks, rodents
Peregrine falcon
Falconiformes (bird of prey)
125
30-45
0.65-1 kg
Chicks, rocents
133
Golden eagle
Falconiformes (bird of prey)
90
10-20
6X 9-E
Chicks, rodents, rabbits
NB: All birds body temperature is higher than mammals, and all are broadly similar at around 4142°C. Birds do not seem to show significant
AN
 physiological pyrexia in the presence of infection.
AVI.
LH
 papillae on the palate, an abnormal or foul odour and
4. A detailed auscultation of the lungs and air sacs. Ihe
PA
evidence of white or yellow plaques on the mucosa
lungs are best auscultated from the dorsum between the
should all be noted, and if possible, sampled with a
wings as they are closely attached to the ventral aspect of
swab dampened with sterile water.
the thoracic area. The air sacs are dispersed throughout
2. A detailed examination of the nares and the eyes. Ihis
the body. Ihe most easily auscultated, and thankfully
will allow an assessment of any upper respiratory tract
those with often the most pathology are the abdominal
 disease. Clinical signs of this include: abnormal shaped
and caudal thoracic air sacs that may be auscultated on
nare(s); loss of the rostral concha(e) (operculum);
the ventral aspect of the body caudally, just behind the
sinking of the globe of the eye; swelling below the
keel bone. The heart may be auscultated from the lateral
globe of the eye (the region of the infraorbital sinus);
body wall just underneath the wings.
discharge from the eye itself; swelling of the conjunc-
5. A detailed examination of the wings may be made.
tiva; and corneal blemishes.
When anaesthetised, an idea of wing integrity and
3. A detailed examination of the feathers themselves.
the elasticity of the propatagium (wing web) may be
This is particularly useful regarding the blood or
 made by placing the bird on its sternum and extend-
ne wly emerged 'pin' feathers. These may be plucked
ing both wings laterally to an equal distance and then
from the body area and the sheath carefully slit to
letting them go. They should both recoil equally. Any
reveal the pulp, which may then be made into a
asymmetry should be noted and may indicate joint or
smear and stained. This can give evidence for skin/
propatagial injury.
feather pulp infections. Examination of the shaft
 6. A detailed examination of the vent and caudal abdomen
and vane of the feather may also reveal evidence of
should also be made. Ihe caudal abdomen, unprotect-
lice and mites.
ed by the keel bone, should be naturally concave. Any
Avian Emergency and Critical Care Medicine 239
ai  s o-ads e aiu  Aaon
The heart may be auscultated over the pectoral area.
coelomic cavity of the bird, such as hepatomegaly, orthe
Heart rates are usually very fast even in the larger parrots
 presence of ascites. In smaller birds (<300 gm) slightly
and so hearing murmurs is difficult. Arrhythmias, how-
wetting the feathers over the ventrum in this region
Ever, may be detected.
will allow the clinician to see through the thin skin of
the body wall, and if hepatomegaly is present, the dark
Neurological assessment
black-brown shadow of the liver will be seen. Normally,
Fitting or collapsed birds may be affected by heavy metal
the liver does not extend caudal to the keel bone
poisoning (particularly lead, but also zinc); hypocalcaemia
 (particularly in a hen bird that is egg laying and on an un-
Monitoring and vital sign
supplemented diet or a young African grey parrot as the lat-
assessment
ter species has a particular hypocalcaemia syndrome); hy-
Pulse assessment
poglycaemia (particularly common in birds of prey that are
Assessing a pulse can be very difficult in birds owing to
umderweight and being flown regularly); or a CNS infection
their rapid heart rates and thin-walled vessels which can 
whether it be due to parasites (usually protozoa) or bacteria.
be easily occluded. In most cases, assessments of pulse
Assess whether the bird can perch using both legs. If
are made using Doppler ultrasound probes that can be
held in the hand, see if the bird can grasp a finger/towel
attached to the following blood vessels:
with both feet. Unilateral leg paresis through to full pa-
1. Basilic vein (runs over the ventral aspect of the elbow
ralysis is common, particularly in small psittacine birds
joint of the wing)
such as the budgerigar where they are often associated
2. Medial metatarsal vein (runs over the medial aspect of
with a renal or gonad tumour (the gonads are of course
the lower unfeathered leg and may be clearly seen in
internal in birds in both males and females). This is due
waterfowl)
to the mass pressing against the sciatic nerve (referred to
Capillary refill times should be less than 2 seconds as
as the ischiatic nerve in birds), which passes through the
53
153
with manmmals. Ihey may be assessed on mucous mem-
kidneys before entering the leg. The same syndrome may
branes around the mouth and face or vent.
be seen in toxicities such as heavy metal (lead or zinc)
 poisoning or organic toxins such as those associated with
Cardiac and respiratory auscultation
aspergillosis infection of the air ways.
To auscultate the lungs of a bird, the stethoscope dia-
Birds of prey that are suffering from lead poisoning, hav-
phragm must be placed over the dorsum of the bird as the
ing consumed lead shot in the prey that they have been fed,
lungs are closely adherent to the underside of the dorsal
will often sit on the floor, rocked back onto their “hocks'
PA
thoracic wall. Air sounds may be heard over the flanks
with drooped wings and a slightly drunk appearance.
and ventrum, but these are due to referred sounds and
 Assess whether the bird is holding both wings nor-
the sounds of air moving through the air sacs (balloon-
mally. One wing drooping is most likely to be associated
like structures inside the bird). The lungs being rigid, and
with a muscular/skeletal injury. Both wings drooping is
there being no diaphragm, the bird inspires by moving its 
more likely to be lead or permethrin/organophosphate
keel bone ventrally and ribcage laterally, which creates a
poisoning.
negative pressure inside the single body cavity (coelom).
ae Aau se snueisu aaa anensuouap iou [m spi
This allows air to be drawn in through the trachea, down
 relatively large in comparison to the skull. Instead, birds
to the lungs (which do not inflate or deflate significantly
with central nervous system dise ase affecting the vestibu-
lar section of the brain will often demonstrate a whole
 head nystagmus. In addition, head tilts are common with
moves into the air sacs caudally. On expiration, the pro-
peripheral and central vestibular disease.
cess is reversed, and means that air in the caudal air sacs
Pupillary reflexes do not work well in birds as they
is pushed back through the lungs, allowing extraction of
 have a significant amount of skeletal muscle in their irises 
oxygen on both inspiration and expiration. It then goes
which is under conscious control. Also the eyes are so big
into the cranial air sacs. In fact, the whole process, from
and the bone separating them from each other in midline
the moment any one air molecule enters the trachea to its
aianang aa auo oui aous lai iel 'ui os uao s!
 passes through the bony septum and into the opposite eye
expiration.
as well!
240 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Pulse oximetry
conditions will push the white cell count over 30 × 107/L
saal reisip ot pauene aq Aeu saqoid iaiauxo asmd
and these are
over the me dial metatarsal area or over the basilic (bra-
1. Psittacosis (infection with Chlamydophila psittaci)
chial) vein on the ventral aspect of the elbow. However,
2. Egg yolk coelomitis (equivalent to peritonitis but
it should be noted that avian haemoglobin is different
where the yolk ruptures internally instead of being
from mammalian and therefore the accuracy of pulse
shed into the oviduct)
oximeter readings is questionable. It is still useful to
3. Mycobacteriosis (rare)
use the probe to assess changes in the SpOz, but actual
Occasionally, infections such as aspergillosis (a fungal
values (providing the readings stay above 90%) are not
infection usually of the airways) may stimulate a similar
reliable.
response, although more commonly the patient has alow
white cell count when severely affected
Blood biochemistry
The avian equivalent of the neutrophil is the heterophil
ua Aue iel siq jo sanads Au os ane ana
so named because of its part basophilic part eosinophilic
staining with Romanowsky stains. It has a bi-trilobed
 Instead, Table 16.3 below gives broad ranges of common
nucleus and brick red cigar-shaped granules in its cyto-
 biochemical parameters for birds routinely seen in prac-
plasm. Evidence on a blood smear of degranulation of
tice. It should be noted that, as with reptiles, uric acid is
these and rupture of the cells (toxicity) is a strong indica-
the only useful indicator of renal function, although us-
tor of active and severe infection.
ally less than one quarter of the kidneys need to be left
Erythrocytes and platelets in birds are nucleated. The 
functioning before uric acid levels become elevated. Urea
erythrocytes are rugby ball shaped with a similar shaped
and creatinine levels do not provide information on renal
mucleus. Ihe platelets are oval and smaller. Other cells are
function in birds and reptiles.
similar to those seen in mammals.
123
Haematology
Urinalysis
As with biochemistry, values vary between species. Some
This is less useful than for mammals owing to the fae-
AN
indication of PCVs across avian species has been given
cal contamination that occurs with avian urine. How-
in chapters 9 and 14. In general, white cell counts are
ever, it is important to look at the urates (white portion
:
in the range of 10-18 × 10°/L. In parrots, three main
of the dropping) to see if there is any blood, or if the
LH
PA
Talble 16.3 Average plasma biochermistry values for birds.
Parameter
Value
Notes
 Total protein g/L
05-06
 Albumin g/L
16-32
AST IU/L
100-350
Not liver specific, also found in muscle
CK IU/L
50-300
Only found in muscle
LDH IU/L
150-450
Not liver specific, also found in muscle including cardiac
Calcium mmol/L
2-3.25
May be elevated in hen birds around egg production. Total calcium levels may appear
within norrmal range whilst bird is still showing signs of hypocalcaemia (especially African
poed Aaa ues) uoey ae Aeiboloig aui s wnien pasiuoi se (soed ra
ionised calcium results around 0.96-1.22 mmol/L)
Phosphorus mmol/L
1-1.85
 Glucose mmol/L
10-20
Note: Budgerigars may be seen with glucagon-associated dliabetes mellitus; birds of prey
may be seen with hypoglycaermia associated with exercise when malnourished-glucose
levels usually 30 mmol/L
Uric acid μmol/L
150-350
Gout (precipitation of uric acid) occurs when levels exceed 1500.
May be transiently elevated in birds of prey immedliately after a meal.
Avian Emergency and Critical Care Medicine 241
urates have turned mustard yellow or lime green. If the
Supportive therapy
latter has occurred, this is evidence of biliverdinuria,
Ongoing medication
which in birds is an indicator of liver inflammation/
 Details of antibiotics useful in birds have been given in
damage (common with psittacosis in parrots and lead
Table 16.1. Chelation therapy for heavy metal poisoning
poisoning in birds of prey). Biliverdin is the main ex-
 is also listed. Prokinetics are not necessary.
cretory product of the liver as opposed to bilirubin in
Ongoing nutritional supplermentation with calcium/
mammals.
vitamin D; replacers is useful in cases of African grey
Volumes of water/true urine should be small in a
parrot hypocalcaemia and examples include Nutrobal@
-do se iaem Aian ane Aa y Buddop spnq Aue
and Zolcal-D produced by Vetark Professional Ltd.
posed to diarrhoea, then this may indicate polyuria.
Other mineral and vitamin supplements are often re-
Blood in the urates is often associated with heavy
quired if the diet is poor or restricted to seeds in the case
metal, particularly lead poisoning.
of parrots (as well as trying to introduce fruit and veg-
etables), particularly vitamin A.
Monitoring and treatment of
acute hypovolaemia
Critical care nutrition including calculation of
Systolic blood pressure monitoring can be performed by
energy requirements
placing a cuff on the distal humerus or femur and the
Calculation of energy requirements can be made using
 Doppler probe on the medial surface of the proximal ulna
the formula
(proximal ulnar artery) or tibiotarsus (medial metatarsal
BMR = k × (weight (kg))0.75
artery). Cuff widths should be 40% of the circumference
of the humerus or distal femur, which means that for
where k the constant is 78 for parrots and 129 for other
small avian patients, the available commercial cuffs are
birds. Remember that MER (metabolic energy require-
really too large. Systolic blood pressure monitoring using
ment) is generally 1.5-2x the basal metabolic require-
53
the indirect method correlate better with directly mea-
153
ment (BMR) and if disease is present, then this further
sured blood pressure in birds than is the case in mam-
anplifes the required calories (sepsis and burns for ex-
mals (Lichtenberger & Ko, 2007). Central venous pres-
annple may increase MER by 2-3X).
sure monitoring in birds has not been quantified and is
technically difficult.
Assisted feeding techniques and foods
Anything below 90 mm Hg is considered hypovo-
The majority of cage birds are granivorous/herbivorous/
laemic for birds (and anything above 200 mm Hg is
frugivorous. Members of the parrot family should not be
PA
hypervolaemic). Bolus administration of fluids should
 fed meat or dairy products as these can result in renal,
be attempted intravenously or intraosseously (see be-
hepatic, and cardiovascular diseases. Many cage birds can
low for access sites) until correction of blood pres-
feed themselves; however, emergency nutrition may need
sure. Crystalloids are administered at a rate of 10 mL/
to be used such as Vetark Professional Ltd's Critical Care
kg and colloids such as Hetastarch or Oxyglobin@ can be
Formula, or even vegetable-based baby foods (avoid lac-
administered at 5 mL/kg - usually one or two boluses are
tose in these products) and these may need to be crop
required. Inlarger species 5 mL/kg of 7.5% hypertonic sa
tubed. This process preferably involves the use of a pur-
line may be used once to increase systolic blood pressure.
pose designed, steel blunt-ended crop tube that can be
attached to a syringe containing the food formula. Ihe
Calculation of fluid therapy
beak is opened and a gag inserted whilst the tube is ad-
requirements in birds
vanced from the bird's left side, dorsally over the base of
Please refer to Chapter 14 for standard fluid requirements
the tongue and glottis and down to the base of the neck
and administration in birds.
slightly to the right of midline. See section headed 'Crop
Tubing' for maximum values that may be crop tubed at
Nebulisation
one time.
This can be a good method to deliver medications for the
 Raptors are of course by nature carnivores and should
respiratory system and also to deliver moisture aiding in
 preferably be fed whole prey such as rodents or day-old
rehydration, particularly in small species. For further in-
chicks. However, in the practice environment, this may
formation, see Chapter 14.
Bungeaes/suqn do, anoyaiu pue aqissod aq 1ou
242 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
is necessary. This can be performed by making use of
products such as Hills a/d, Virbac's Reanimyl or other
related cat/dog high-protein/calorie diets. Care should
be taken initially to ensure that the patient is correctly
hydrated before loading large amounts of protein into it.
It may be better in a severely weakened bird to start off
with simple sugar/amino acid products such as Vetark's
Critical Care Formula? before moving on to high-
protein/fat diets.
Crop tubing
Once rehydrated, crop tubing with critical care support
formulas (such as Critical Care Formula Vetark) may
be crop tubed (see Figures 16.5 and 16.6). An idea of
maximum volumes that may be safely crop tubed into an
Figure 16.6 Crop tubing a Kestrel with support formula.
 avian patient at any one time are given in Table 16.4.
Table 16.4 Maximum volumes that may be safely administered
Nursing of wounds
via crop tube
Aian lou si us lal se adea Aenauan spunm ueiy
Species
Maximum volumes
elastic. However, the skin is often very thin and has a low
Budgerigar
bacterial burden, so traumatic wounds if relatively clean
0.5-1 mL
may be cleaned briefly with dilute povidone-iodine or
Cockatiel
2.5-5 mL
chlorhexidine, and then either staple or glue it closed.
123
 5-7 mL
 An Elizabethan collar should be applied to the bird, mak-
Cockatoos
10 mL
ing sure it is reversed to point caudally as parrots cannot
African grey
move around their cage or eat with the collar projecting
8-10 mL
cranially (see Figure 16.7).
Macaw5
10-15 mL
For deeper wounds associated with bites etc., particu-
LH
larly if they occur over the legs distally, debridement of
the wound under anaesthetic is essential to prevent in-
GranuFLEX? (Convatec UK Ltd.) to aid granulation, or
fections of the avascular tendons or worse, osteomy-
covered with Veterinary Biosist? (Cook Products Ltd.)
elitis. Once cleaned, the wounds may be dressed with
-ial pue Aeuas lyap ai raao pains aq re ie
0l doi aul iano paldde aq Aeu [eae ahepueq Aie
protect the wound further. A collar should always be used
in parrots, although many birds of prey will leave dress-
ings alone, particularly if they are hooded (falcons).
For fracture stabilisation, a figure-of-eight ban-
dage may be used on wing fractures for a short period
(<48 hrs) to contract the wing and bind it to the lateral
of the joints and will result in severe impairment in
wing function.
Leg fractures in small cage birds such as canaries,
may be stabilised using the so-called Altman' splint.
This is simply two pieces of heavy zinc tape applied lat-
erally and medially to the fractured leg, sandwiching
the leg between them. These can be left on or replaced
as the bird chews them off for the duration of the heal-
Figure 16.5 A curved, stainless steel crop tube attached to a
disposable syringe.
ing process.
Avian Emergency and Critical Care Medicine 243
Finger splints or tongue depressors may be used in
larger birds for temporary stabilisation, but these will
generally require a surgical fixation.
Placement of tubes
Feeding tubes are generally not used in birds owing to the
fragile nature of their skin and the presence of air sacs
throughout the body.
Air-sac tubes are mentioned above.
References
Lichtenberger, M. (2007) Shock and CPCR in small mammals
and birds. Veterinary Clinics of North America: Exotic Animal
Practice, 10, 275-291.
Lichtenberger, M. and Ko, J. (2007) Critical care monitoring.
Veterinary Clinics of North America: Exotic Animal Practice,
10, 317-344.
Further reading
Chitty, J.and Harcourt-Brown, N.(eds) (2005) BSAVA Manual of
Psittacine Birds, 2nd edn. BSAVA, Quedgeley, Glos.
Chitty, J. and Lierz, M. (2008) BSAVA Manual of Raptors, Pigeons
and Passerine Birds. BSAVA, Quedgeley, Glos.
Harrison, G. and Lightfoot, T. (2006) Clinical Avian Medicine.
531
Spix Publishing Inc., Palm Beach, FL.
 Avian specll
Rosenthal, K. and Stamoulis, M. (1993) Diagnosis of
congestive heart failure in an Indian hill mynah (Gracula
religiosa). Journal of Association of Avian Veterinarians,
7 (1),27-30.
Figure 16.7 When applying an Elizabethan collar to birds, make
 sure it is positioned to face backwards otherwise the bird cannot eat
Samour, J. (ed) (2008) Avian Medicine, 2nd edn. Mosby Elsevier,
or limb around its cage.
Edinburgh.
PArt Il: 
Part I".
J Reptiles and Amphibians
AMPHIBIAN!
Chapter 17
Basic Reptile and Amphibian
Anatomy and Physiology
Classification
and rattlesnakes, must be licensed and registered in the
Reptiles are classified into many different family groups,
United Kingdom under the conditions of the Dangerous
according to a number of physical, anatomical, and evo-
Wild Animals Act of 1976.
lutionary factors. It is useful to know to which group a
The anatomy of the snake's head has a number of ad-
reptile belongs, as this gives an indication of the other
aptations that allow it to swallow large prey. In all snakes,
reptiles to which it is related. This is of some help when
laaoi PIal Aiasool ane me raMoI jo saneq oMl a
faced with a species that you have not seen before.
rostrally and the mandibular symphysis can separate. In
Table 17.1 contains some of the more commonly en-
addition, the snake has no temporomandibular joint. In-
pue [eaua ui uaas saidan jo sdnona kuey paiaun
stead it possesses a quadrate bone, which articulates be-
reptile orientated practices.
tween a mandible and the skull and allows the mandibles
to be moved rostrally and laterally, dislocating? The max-
illa also hinges only loosely with the rostral aspect of the
SNAKES
cranium, so allowing the nose of the snake to be raised,
Like the bird, the snake has no diaphragm, so no separate
increasing the oral aperture.
thorax and abdomen. Instead it has a coelomic, or com-
The skull articulates with the atlas vertebra via a sinple
mon, body cavity.
joint containing only one occipital condyle, rather than the
mammalian two. The coccygeal vertebrae (those caudal to
Musculoskeletal system
the vent) are the only vertebrae with no ribs attached. In-
All true snakes have no limbs. This distinguishes them from
stead they have paired, ventral, haemal processes between
species such as the slow worm, which is actually a lizard
which the coccygeal artery and vein run. This vein can be
with vestigial limbs. Ihere are some remnants of limbs in
used for venipuncture both for sampling and for intrave-
one or two of the older evolutionary species of snake such
nous injections. Ihe site for this is one third the distance
as the boid family (pythons and boa constrictors). Ihese
from the vent to the tail tip on the ventral aspect.
can possess vestigial pelvic remnants, having claw-like
The ventral scales, known as scutes or gastropeges,
spurs either side of the vent representing the hind limbs
N
overlie the muscular casing of the snake's torso. Ihis mus-
The snake skull possesses a small cranial cavity con-
cle is segmental and supplied by intervertebral nerves. It
taining the brain and a large nasal cavity. Ihe maxilla has
is by alternately contracting and relaxing these segmental
4 rows of teeth, two on either side. Ihe mandible has the
muscles that the snake can propel itself across the ground
more normal two rows of teeth (Figure 17.1). The teeth
the caudal edge of each ventral scute providing friction.
ONG
vary somewhat between the genera. The more commonly
A very few species of snake, such as the glass snake, ex-
seen non-poisonous species such as the colubrid family
hibit autotomy. Ihat is, they will shed their tail if roughly
(containing the kingsnakes and rat snakes) and the boid
handled or caught by a predator. They will regrow their
family, have simple, caudally curved, peg-like teeth. Some
tail later.
of the more poisonous species have specialist adaptations.
Rattlesnakes, for exanple, have hinged, rostrally situated
Respiratory system (Figure 17.2)
strike. All teeth are re-
Upper respiratory system
placed as the
ethin
oisonous
The nostrils are paired and open into the roof of the
(other than
mouth. Snakes, like all reptiles other than crocodilians,
do not have a hard palate. When the mouth is closed.
7  AhojoisAyd pue Awoieuy ueiq!ydwy pue alday yiseg
Table 17.1 Basic classification of reptiles.
Superord er
Description
Chelonia
Contains all shelled reptiles, e.g., the order Testudines which itself contains most turtles and
tortoises such as the true 'tortoises' (Fammily Testudinidae - e.g.. Testudo spp. Mediterranean
tortoises)
Lepidosauria
Suborder Serpentes (i.e., the snakes) suborder Lacertilia (i.e., the lizards) suborder
Amphisbaenia (the worm-lizards)
More recently the order Squarmata has been divided into the:
Suborder lguania (containing the Agamids, lguanids, Chameleons and New world lizards)
Suborder Scleroglossa which itself is then split into the following infraorders
Anguirmorpha (Monitor lizards, Heloderma lizards, slow worms etc.)
Amphisbaenia (worm lizards)
Gekkota (the gecko5)
Scincomorpha (skinks, whiptail lizards and European Lacertid lizards)
Serpentes (the snakes)
Crocodylomorpha
Contains the order Crocodylia which contains the following farmilies
Gavialidae (the gharial)
 Alligatoridae (the alligators and caimans)
Crocodylidae (the crocodiles)
the internal nostrils are positioned directly above the
Lower respiratory system
entrance to the trachea. This is guarded by the glot-
In the majority of colubrid species, such as rat snakes and
tis. An epiglottis may be present in vestigial form, but
kingsnakes and some Viperidae, the right lung is the major
there is often fusion of the cartilages here to form a
 lung, the lef having regressed to a vestigial structure. The
glottal tube. Ihis tube is rigid enough to withstand the
vestigial lef lung is often replaced by a vascularised air sac
pressures placed upon it when the snake is swallow-
and so can take part in gaseous exchange. In the evolution-
ing whole prey. At rest the glottis is held closed, only
 arily older species such as the Boidae there are two lungs.
opening when the snake breathes. Ihe glottis then
The trachea bifurcates at the level of the heart. Ihe
opens into the trachea which, in the snake family, is
lungs occupy the frst half of the middle third of the
supported by C-shaped cartilages similar to those of
 body of the snake. As there is no diaphragm, inspiration
the cat and dog.
is purely due to the outward movement of the ribs and
intercostal muscles. Ihis is aided by elastic tissue present
within the lung structure, which allows the lungs to ex-
pand and recoil. Expiration is facilitated by contraction of
abdominal and intercostal muscles, and the elastic recoil
of the lungs themselves. A 'tracheal lung' is often pres-
ent as an outpouching of the lining of the trachea from
the open part of the C-shaped cartilages. Ihis is thought
to aid respiration when main lungs are being compressed
during the swallowing oflarge prey items.
The stimulus for respiration is a lowered partial pressure
of oxygen, rather than an increase in the partial pressure of
carbon dioxide, as is the case in mammals.
Digestive system
Oral cavity
Figure 17.1 Intraoral view of a young Burmese python showing
The tongue sits in a basal sheath at the rostral end of the
the four upper and two lower rows of teeth, as well as the
glottal tube and tracheal entrance, rostral to which is the tongue
oral cavity just in front of the glottis and can be pushed out
shea th.
through the lips even when the mouth is closed through
248 Veterinary Nursing ofExotic Pets
Gall bladder
Small intestine
Glottis
Cut away of
tail showing
Right testis
inverted
Stomach
hemipene
Left testis
Trachea
Pancreas
Cloaca
Heart.
atria
Left lung
Spleen
Left
kidney
Air
Heart
sac
Vas
ventricle
deferens
Right lung
air sac
Ureters
Right
kidney
Oesophagus
Caecum
Liver
Right lung
Colon
Figure 17.2 Diagram of a male snake (ventral aspect).
the labial notch. The tongue is bifid (split into a forked
pancreas and gall bladder are found at the point where
end) and is used to catch odours on its moist surface.
the pylorus empties into the small intestine. Some snakes
These are then pushed into the roof of the mouth into the
have a fused splenopancreas. The gall bladder is found at
vomeronasal organ. The vomeronasal organ is connected
the most caudal point of the liver, which is an elongated
to the olfactory region of the brain and is a primitive but
structure extending from the mid-point of the lungs to
effective pheromone and scent detector. Ihe oral cavity
the caudal stomach.
contains salivary glands which are stimulated to release
 The small intestine enpties into the large intestine,
saliva during mastication. Ihe mouth is normally free of
which is distinguished from it by its thinner wall and
saliva at other times.
larger diameter. In the Boidae there may be a caecum at
The oropharynx passes on into the oesophagus, which
this junction.
is an extremely distensible muscular tube travelling ven-
 The large intestine empties into the coprodeum por-
tral to the lungs and entering the stomach in the second
tion of the cloaca, which, as with birds, is the common
half of the middle third of the snake's body.
enmptying chamber for the digestive, urinary and repro-
ductive systems.
Stomach, associated organs and intestine
The stomach is a tubular organ, populated with com-
Urinary system
pound glands secreting both hydrochloric acid and pep-
Ihere are paired elongated kidneys (Figure 17.3),
N行
sin (mammals having two separate cells) and separate
situated in the distal half of the caudal third of the
mucus secreting glands. Ihere is no well-defined cardiac
snake's body, attached to the dorsal body wall. The right
sphincter. Ihe majority of the digestive process occurs
kidney is cranial to the left and both has a single ureter
in the stomach and is continued by the small intestine.
each which travels across their ventral surface to empty
The only substance which cannot be digested is the hair
into the urodeum of the cloaca, caudal to the proctode-
of the prey, known as the felt', which is passed out in
um. Ihere is no urinary bladder in snakes. Ihe caudal
the stool.
portions of the kidneys in male snakes are the 'sexual
The stomach empties into the duodenum, which is
segments, enlarging during the breeding season as they
poorly defined from the jejunum and ileum. Ihe spleen,
provide seminal fluid.
6t7 Ahogoisayd pue Awoeuy ueigiydwy pue alday yiseg
and then fuse into a single abdominal aorta. Ihe pulmo-
nary artery that leads to the lung(s) also arises here.
 As with birds, snakes have a renal portal system. Ihe
blood supply from the caudal portion of the snake in
the coccygeal artery splits into two and can enter the
renal circulation or may bypass it via a series of valves.
This is important when administering drugs which are
nephrotoxic, or which may be excreted by the kidneys, as
i means they might be concentrated there. They should
therefore be administered in the cranial part of the snake.
There is also a hepatic portal system from the intestine
 to the liver. A ventral abdominal vein lies in the midline,
just beneath the ventral abdominal musculature, and
Figure 17.3 Postmortem showing the elongated lobular right and
Two external jugular veins run just medial to the ven-
left kidneys of a rainbow boa constrictor (Eoicrates cenchria).
tral cervical ribs, and may be reached to place catheters
for intravenous fluid administration via a surgical cut-
 Renal physiology
down procedure. Ihe ventral tail vein has already been
mentioned and is useful for venipuncture for blood col-
As with the majority of reptiles, snakes are uricotelic, that
lection.
is, like birds their primary nitrogenous waste product is
not urea but uric acid. This compound is relatively insol-
Lymphatic system
uble allowing conservation of water. Ihis is particularly
There are no specifc separate lymph nodes as seen in
important for reptiles, as they have no loops of Henle in
mammals, a situation similar to birds. Instead, as with
their kidneys; therefore, they cannot create hypertonic
birds, there are discrete accumulations of lymph tissue
urine as mammals can. To further conserve water, urine
within most of the major organs, particularly the liver
in the urodeum portion of the cloaca can be refluxed back
into the terminal portion of the gut where more water re-
and intestines. Ihere is also a spleen, as mentioned above.
which has loosely arranged red and white pulp. Lym-
absorption can occur. If the reptile becomes dehydrated,
phatic vessels are found throughout the body. A lymphatic
or renal blockage or infection occurs, then excretion of
sinus, for example, runs the length ofthe snake just ventro-
uric acid is reduced and can lead to gout as is seen in
lateral to the epaxial musculature immediately below the
birds.
skin surface on either side of the body. Ihis may be used
for small volumes of fluid administration. In the walls of
Cardiovascular system
many of the lymphatic vessels there are muscular swell-
Heart
 ings known as lymph hearts' which aid in the return of
The heart is three-chambered, with two atria and a com-
the straw-coloured lymphatic fluid back to the true heart.
mon ventricle situated within the pericardial sac, but it
despite this functions as a four chambered organ. Ihe
Reproductive system
heart lies in the caudal half of the proximal third of the
Male (Figure 17.2)
snake's body, and is mobile, to allow the passage of large
The paired testes lie intracoloemically (within the coelom
food items through the oesophagus above it. There are
or common body cavity, as snakes, like most reptiles, have
two cranial venae cavae and one caudal vena cava enter-
no diaphragm and so no separate thorax and abdomen;
ing via the sinus venosus (a narrow tube leading to the
rather they have only a common coelomic cavity). They
right atrium from which it is separated by the sino-atrial
are situated cranial to each kidney, and caudal to the pan-
valve).
creatic tissue, with the right testis slightly cranial to the
left, and are oval in shape. Ihe testes enlarge during the
Blood vessels
breeding season, often reaching two to three times their
The snake family has paired aortas. Ihey exit one from
quiescent state. Close to the testes lie the adrenal glands.
each of the two sides of the single ventricle of the heart
Each testis has a solitary vas deferens leading down to the
250 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
urodeum portion of the cloaca, where seminal fluids from
vent and advanced just to one side of the midline in a
the reproductive sexual segment of the kidneys are added.
 caudal direction. If the snake is a male, then the probe
The male snake also has paired penises, known as
will pass into one of the inverted hemipenes to a depth
hemipenes, in its tail. At rest they are like two inverted
 of 8-16 subcaudal scales. In the female, there are anal
sacs either side of the midline and lie ventral to two other
paasu aq Aeu aqoid au os pue 'uoaan sl ul spue
small invaginations in the tail which form the anal glands.
only to a depth of 2-6 subcaudal scales. In some species,
When a hemipene's lining becomes engorged with blood,
such as the boid family, the males possess a paracloacal
it everts, forming a finger-like protrusion through the
spur. This is the remnant of the pelvic limb and may be
vent. As with the domestic cat, the hemipenes are often
found on either side of body, ventrally, at the level of the
covered in spines and barbs, and they each have a dor-
cloaca. In very young snakes it may be possible carefully
sal groove into which the sperm drops from the cloaca,
to evert the hemipenes manually, a technique known as
and so is guided into the female's cloaca. The hemipenes
Buddod
 therefore do not play any part in urination.
skin
Female
The outer epidermal layer in snakes is thrown into a se-
Ihe female has paired ovaries, cranial to the respective
ries of folds forming scales, which cover the whole sur-
kidneys, with the right ovary cranial to the left. There are
face of the snake. There are different sizes of scale over
two coiled oviducts starting with the fimbriae opposite
the body, with smaller, less raised ones covering the head
each ovary, and moving through the tubular portion of
and larger and more raised scales over the main por-
the infundibulum and on into the magnum. From here
tion of the body. Some species have scales with ridges
the tract merges into the isthmus and then the shell gland
on their surface to add greater grip; other species have
or uterus before opening into the muscular vagina. This
smooth scales. In some snakes, such as the sea snakes,
organ ensures that the eggs are laid only when the timing
the skin is very loose fitting, and apparently has few elas-
is correct. Ihe vagina enmpties into the urodeum section
tic fibres. Other snakes have elastic skin which relatively
of the cloaca. Ihe vascular supply is from the dorsally sus-
quickly returns to its normal shape. The reptile skin has
pended oviduct mesentery, rather than the caudocranial
little or no skin glands. Its outer layer, or stratum cor-
route employed in mammals.
neum, is heavily keratinised, and composed of three lay-
Most females are stimulated to reproduce in the
ers of dead cells filled with keratin. Ihese cells become
 spring, when the weather warms and the daylight length
progressively more flattened as they approach the sur-
increases. The tropical boas (such as the boa constric-
face. On the ventral surface of the snake there is a single
tor) and the Burmese python (Python molurus), however,
row of scales which span the width of the snake, and are
start breeding when the temperature drops slightly dur-
 known as the ventral scutes or gastropeges. The caudal
ing the cooler portion of the year.
edge of each overlaps the cranial edge of the following
Some species of snake are oviparous (i.e., they lay
scale (Figure 17.4).
eggs), others are viviparous (i.e., they bear live young).
The latter are, for example, the garter snakes (Thamno-
 phis sirtalis) and the boid family, which have a vestigial
egg structure more closely resembling a placenta. Other
 species make nests, and some species of python will incu-
ON寸
bate eggs by contracting and relaxing skeletal muscles, so
creating warmth.
Sex determination and identification
Snakes are chromosomally dependent for sex determina-
tion, as with most mammals. Ihis is in contrast with the
Chelonia, Crocodylia and some lizards, in which sex may
be temperature dependent.
 Sex identification is best made by surgical probing. A
Figure 17.4 The vent of a rat snake showing the division of the
ventral scales from single scutes cranial to the vent to paired scales
fine, sterile, blunt-ended probe is inserted through the
ca udally
It AhogoisAyd pue Awoeuy ueigyydwy pue aday piseg
Ecdysis
Snakes do not possess an external eardrum or middle
Ecdysis is the regular shedding of the entire skin. Other rep-
ear. Ihey can, however, hear airborne sounds and can of
tiles also shed their skin, but the Chelonia and Crocodylia
course detect ground tremors.
shed individual scutes, and the lizards shed in patches. Only
the snakes shed all of their skin (including the clear, fused
LIZARDS
eyelids, or spectacle) in one go. Ihe stimulus can be depen-
dent on time of year, health status and age of the snake and
Musculoskeletal system
the process is parly controlled by the thyroid gland
Lizards have a musculoskeletal system more familiar to
First, the new layer of skin is formed deep to the old
those used to dealing with mammalian forms. They pos-
sess, in the majority, four limbs, an axial skeleton and
lymph fluid between the new layer of skin and the old one.
 much of the anatomical layout of small mammals. There
At this time the snake will become dull in colour, and often
are some exceptions, one being the slow worm, a native of
exhibits blueing of the eyes. Ihe fluid forces the outer layer
mainland Britain and northern Europe which resembles
of old skin to separate away from the new, and often con-
a snake, having no obvious external limbs. It is actually,
 tains enzymes to help in this process. Once separation has
 however, a highly evolved lizard with rudimentary limbs.
been achieved the fluid is reabsorbed and the snake's eyes
 The skull is more rigid than its snake counterpart,
may be seen returning to normal. A few days later the snake
having less mobile jaws. Ihere are four rows of teeth,
will shed the old skin. It starts the process by rubbing the
 one to each jaw. These are peg-like in shape and are con-
corners of its mouth on some abrasive surface. Ihe shed-
tinually replaced in lizards except for the Agamidae and
ding proceeds with the head skin first and the snake then
Chamaeleonidae. Ihere are no fang teeth in lizards, but
rolls the old skin back until the tail is the last to emerge.
the beaded lizard (Heloderma horribilis) and the Gila
In a healthy snake all of the skin should come away at
monster (Heloderma suspectum) have hollow teeth which
 once. If the skin does not shed the condition is known as
allow the venom from sublingual venom glands to ooze
dysecdysis. Ihere can be many reasons for this. Disease,
through them into the prey when they bite them. Ihese
dehydration (which causes too little flhuid to be produced),
two species are therefore currently classified as danger-
scars on the skin surface or lack of an abrasive surface upon
ous wild animals under the Dangerous Wild Animals Act
which to remove the skin can all be factors. Regular bathing
1976 (as amended), in the United Kingdom requiring a
and soft but abrasive damp surfaces may be needed to aid
special licence to keep them in captivity outside of a zoo-
shedding, and any underlying disease should be attended to.
logical collection.
The skull articulates with the atlantal cervical vertebra
Special cutaneous adaptations in snakes
via a single occipital condyle. Ihe thoracic vertebrae and
There are one or two special structures associated with
a  s d a a aa 
the skin of snakes. Ihese include the lateral spurs of the
side. Ihe coccygeal vertebrae possess ventral haemal
Boidae, which have been mentioned earlier. Ihe male
arches, between which it is possible to access the ventral
possesses larger spurs than the female.
tail vein for venipuncture.
Snakes do not have mobile eyelids. Instead, the eyelids
In many lizards, the tail possesses fracture planes which
have become fused together and transparent, forming the
allow the tail to break off during escape from a predator.
so-called 'spectacle.
These fracture planes occur in the mid to caudal portions
Many snakes also have special sense organs on the
of the tail, but not proximally, where vital structures such
head. Ihe older snake families such as the Boidae have la-
as the male reproductive organs and fat pads are stored.
bial pits - a series of depressions running along the dorsal
Only certain species exhibit this tail autotomy. This in-
Aeane se tonioung asa mef addn al go raiog
dudes most of the Iguanidae, but does not include the
heat sensors. In the more evolutionarily advanced species,
 Agamidae, monitor lizards and true chameleons. When
such as the pit vipers, the heat sensing organs can actually
the tail is regrown in these species, the coccygeal verte-
focus on their prey, and are conposed of bilateral, for-
brae are not replaced, instead a cartilaginous rod of tissue
ward-facing pits midway between the nares and the eyes.
forms the rigid structure. In addition the rows of scales
They are supplied by branches of the trigeminal nerves,
 over the new tail surface are often haphazardly arranged
and, in the case of pit vipers, may be sensitive enough to
and do not match the size and shape of the rest of the tail
detect changes of heat as small as 0.002°C!
(Figure 17.5).
252 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
to conserve water. Ihe sodium chloride may be seen as
a white crystalline deposit around the nostrils which is
often sneezed out by the lizard. Ihe nostrils enter into the
rostral part of the oral cavity, there being no hard palate.
 The entrance to the trachea is guarded by a rudimen-
tary larynx which often lacks an epiglottis and vocal folds.
Some species, such as the Geckonidae, do possess vocal
folds and are capable of producing a variety of sounds.
In most species, the trachea is supported by incomplete
cartilaginous C-shaped rings similar to those of the cat
and dog.
Lower respiratory system
Figure 17.5 Regroth of the tail is possible in many species of
lizard, but the scales which regrow are arranged haphazardly, and
The trachea bifurcates into two main bronchi in the cra-
the vertebrae lost are replaced by a rod of cartilage.
nial thorax to supply two lungs. In more primitive lizards,
the lungs are sac-like structures with large bulla-like divi-
Respiratory system (Figure 17.6)
sions and alveoli. In the more advanced lizard species, the
Upper respiratory system
lungs are more like the mammalian sponge-like system,
Lizards have paired nostrils situated rostrally on the
with finer divisions and more structured alveolar systenms.
maxilla. To the side, or just inside the nares, particularly
Lizards will often overinflate their lungs in an attempt to
in iguanids, there is often situated a pair (one on each
make themselves look bigger, when threatened.
side) of salt-secreting glands. Ihese are responsible for
There is no diaphragm in any lizard species, so there
excreting excess sodium as sodium chloride so helping
is no clear distinction between the thorax and abdomen,
rather there is a common body cavity, known as the coe-
lom, as in snakes and birds.
Glottis
Respiration is thought to be stimulated by falling par-
tial pressures of oxygen in the blood stream. The act of
inspiration is due to the mechanical contraction of the
Trachea
 intercostal muscles causing an upwards and outwards
Atria of heart
Oesophagus
movement of the rib cage. Ihis is aided by the elastic
tissues that are present within the lung structures them-
Ventricle of
selves. Expiration is by contraction of the abdominal and
heart
intercostal muscles, and by the elastic recoil of the lung
Right lung
tissue.
Left lung
Liver
Testes
Digestive system
Gall bladder
(attached
to dorsal
Oral cavity
Pancreas
body wall)
The majority of lizards have a large, fleshy tongue which
Caecum
Spleen
is frequently mobile. In some species however, such as the
ONG
and colon
Right and left
chameleons, the tongue has become specialised. It lies
Urinary bladder
kidneys
coiled in the lower jaw and can be projected out at a flying
S3
(reflected)
Ureter
insect or other potential prey item. The green iguana has a
Cloaca
Prefemoral
more traditional fleshy tongue, which has a much darker
pores (male)
tip. This is not to be confused with pathological changes.
A vomeronasal organ is present.
ven
Inverted hemipenes
Stomach, associated organs and intestine
The stomach is a simple sac-like structure in most spe-
Figure 17.6 Diagram of male green iguana (ventral aspect)
cies. Ihe glands are combined hydrochloric-acid- and
Et Ahojoisayd pue Awoeuy ueigiydwy pue alday yiseg
pepsin-secreting glands lining the walls. Ihere are also
Renal physiology
separate mucus-secreting glands for lubrication.
 The renal physiology is similar to that already described
The small intestine is better developed in more car-
for snakes. Ihe main diffrences lie in the variable pres-
nivorous species such as the monitor lizards and the
ence of the urinary bladder, which may have some water
insectivorous water dragons. In herbivorous species it is
reabsorption capabilities.
relatively short. It is poorly divided into jejunum and ileal
 structures. In a few, mainly herbivorous, species, at the
Cardiovascular system
junction between the small and large intestines lies the
Heart
caecum. Ihe liver is roughly bilobed in structure and is
The lizard heart is very similar to the snake model, with
situated ventral to the stomach and lungs. There is usu-
 paired atria and a single common ventricle which never-
ally a gall bladder, with the primary bile pigment be-
theless functions as two. The majority of the deoxygen-
ing biliverdin, as with birds, rather than the bilirubin of
ated blood is channelled to the pulmonary arteries and
mammals.
the oxygenated blood enters the paired aortas.
The large intestine is more highly developed in herbiv-
orous species than in carnivorous or omnivorous species.
Blood vessels
Examples include the green iguana and the chuckwalla.
 The two aortas fuse dorsally, after giving off paired carotid
These have a large intestine which is often sacculated and
trunks, to form the abdominal aorta. Lizards also possess
divided into many chambers by leaf-like membranes.
a hepatoportal venous supply and a renal portal system,
- n os  s  a a 
hence, as with birds and snakes, intravenous injection
crobes, upon which these species depend for vegetation
into the caudal half of the lizard of medications which are
digestion, may colonise it.
Excreted through the renal tubules, could result in their
The large intestine then empties into the coprodeum
failure to reach the rest of the lizard's body. It could also
 portion of the cloaca. Ihe cloaca itself is then continued,
increase the toxicity of substances known to be renally
as with birds and snakes by the other two segments, the
toxic if given by this route.
urodeum which receives the urogenital openings, and the
Lizards, like snakes, also possess a large ventral
 proctodeum which is the last chamber before waste exits
abdominal vein, which returns blood from the tail area
the cloaca through the vent.
and passes just beneath the body wall, ventrally and in
the midline. Ihis must be avoided when performing
Urinary system
abdominal surgery. Ihis vessel can be used, carefully, for
The kidneys are paired and often bean-shaped organs.
venipuncture for blood sampling in lizards, although the
Their position is variable depending on the species.
preferred vessel is the ventral tail vein. For intravenous
In some, such as the green iguana, they are both situ-
use, the cephalic vein may be accessed on the cranial as-
ated in the pelvis, attached to the dorsal body wall
 pect of the antebrachium, via a cut-down procedure, in
(see Figure 17.6). Other species, such as chameleons, have
the larger species.
longer kidney structures which extend cranially into the
coelomic cavity. As with snakes, the males of some species
Lymphatic system
have a specially developed caudal portion of the kidneys
 The lymphatic system is similar to that of snakes, with no
known as the 'sexual segment, which enlarges during the
discrete lymph nodes.
breeding season and contributes to the production of
seminal fluid. Ihe kidneys empty into the ureters which
Reproductive system
empty into the urodeum portion of the cloaca.
Male
Many lizards have a bladder. This is not, however, like
The paired testes are situated cranial to the respective
the sterile bladder of mammals, as it is not connected
kidneys in those species which have abdominally posi-
directly to the ureters. Instead, it is joined to the cloaca,
tioned kidneys (Figure 17.6). In those where the kidneys
and so urine has to enter the cloaca, before entering the
 are more pelvic in position, the testes are located just
bladder. Ihere is some evidence that the bladder is able to
caudal to the end of the lungs and liver, in the middle
absorb some fluid from its contents, or it may function as
part of the coelomic cavity. Ihey are supplied by several
a fluid storage chamber, flushing its contents back into the
arteries each and drained by several veins. Both are very
caudal large intestine for further fluid absorption.
tightly adhered to their vascular supply, the left testicle
254 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
being separated from the left renal vein (into which the
being female whereas if the temperature was greater than
left testicular veins drain) by the left adrenal gland. Ihe
32.2°C, 90% of the offspring would be male.
right testicle is tightly attached to its right renal vein,
Sex may be identifed by surgical probing as men-
which separates it from the right adrenal gland. Ihis
tioned above. Ihis is often the only method available for
positioning, so close to such vital structures, makes cas-
some species such as the beaded lizard, some monitors
trating aggressive lizards a difficult operation. The testes
and the Gila monster. However, in most other species
enlarge during the bree ding season and regress out of it.
there are external physical differences. Ihese include
Each testis drains into a vas deferens which has a tightly
the prominent pre-femoral pores of males that are seen
coiled course over the ventral surface of the respective
 on the caudoventral aspect of the thigh of iguanids
kidney before emptying into the urodeum portion of
(see Figure 17.6). Some male lizards have a series of
the cloaca. Some species, such as the Chameleonidae,
pre-anal pores just cranial to the vent. Males have wider
have a pronounced epididymis extending caudally from
tail bases than the females to house the large hemipenes
each te sticle.
(Figure 17.7). Some males have greater ornamentation
 The male lizard has paired penises, as with the snake,
(Figure 17.8). Male green iguanas and plumed basi-
known as hemipenes. These lie in the base of the tail
lisks have larger crests, male Jackson's chameleons have
structure, either side of midline, and function as with
horns, male water dragons have larger crest spines and
the snake family. At rest they are inverted sacs in the tail
many male geckos have a wider vent size and hemipe nal
base. During copulation, one will engorge with blood and
bulge.
evert itself, creating a groove along its dorsal surface. Into
this groove sperm and spermatic fluid will drop from the
cloaca, and the hemipene will guide this into the female
lizard's cloaca.
Female
a i se aoe as an r s i aeag a
scribed for the snake.
Egg-producing physiology
Reproductive physiology in the female lizard is broadly
similar to that of the avian patient. Some species, such as
some of the Chameleonidae, are ovoviviparous. Ihat is,
they produce live young instead of laying eggs, although
the eggs are produced internally. Some species are vi-
Figure 17.7 Eversion of a hemipene in a male leopard gecko to
remove a hemipenal plug (accumulation of dried secretion).
viparous, in which a form of placenta or thin-walled egg
 structure allows the foetus to develop and live young are
produced. Many other species are oviparous: that is, they
lay eggs. One or two species are parthenogenic: that is,
the females produce entire females with no need for a
male lizard - some species of Lacerta and Hemidactylus
(geckos) are capable of this.
N行
Reptile eggs are generally soft shelled and more leath-
ery than those of their avian cousins. Sexual maturity var-
ies according to the species, green iguanas, for example,
reaching it at 2-3 years.
Sex determination and identification
Sex determination is largely dependent on chromosomes.
However, geckos as a family are temperature depen-
 Figure 17.8 Greater ornamentation: more spines and larger
dewlaps as well as brighter colouration distinguish the male green
dent, with 99% of eggs incubated between 26.7-29.4°C
guana.
S5t Ahojoisayd pue Awoeuy ueigiydwy pue alday yiseg
skin
condyle, similar to birds and other reptiles. There are
Lizard skin is much the same as that of snakes. The
two strong muscles attached to the back of the cheloni-
scales in most cases are much smaller than the snake
an skull, connecting it to the point of fusion of the cer-
equivalent.
vical vertebrae with the shell. These are responsible for
the retraction of the head in Cryptodira, those species
Special cutaneous adaptations in lizards
which can pull their heads back into the shell. There
There are some specialised skin glands and structures in
are some turtles (the side necked or Pleurodira turtles)
lizards. Ihe males of certain species, such as the green
which, as their name suggests, fold their head side ways
iguana, have secretory glands or pores. The green iguana's
into the shell, rather than fully retracting it in a cra-
are on the ventrocaudal aspect of the femoral area. Some
niocaudal manner. The thoracic vertebrae are fused
geckos have precloacal pores.
with the dorsal shell, becoming flattened and elon-
Many lizards have large numbers of chromatophores
gated. The same is true of the lumbar and sacral
in their skins. These are connected to neural networks,
vertebrae. The coccygeal vertebrae emerge distally to
allowing them to alter the colour they produce according
form the mobile tail.
to external stimuli and mood. This ability is seen in the
Chelonia are distinguished from other animals by
chameleons, and, to alesser extent, in green iguanas and
the presence of their shell. Ihis structure is composed
many other species.
of fused living dermal bone covered by keratinised epi-
Unlike snakes, lizards have a tympanum, located ven-
dermis. It therefore can feel sensations and pain and
trocaudal to the eye, and a middle ear.
so should never be used to tether tortoises to ropes
Many males will have large amounts of ornamenta-
 Or chains. Ihe shell is composed of an upper section,
tion on their body surface for display purposes. Exam-
known as the carapace (Figure 17.9), and a lower, flatter
ples include the male green iguana, which often has
ventral section, known as the plastron (Figure 17.10).
large coloured scales on the head and a bluish sheen
These two sections of the shell are connected either
to the head and neck colouring. Others, such as male
side between the fore- and hind limbs by the pillars of
anoles, have extendable chin flaps which are often
the shell. The carapace is a fusion of dermal bone, ribs,
brightly coloured and can be ‘flashed’ in display. Some
thoracic and lumbar vertebrae. Ihe scutes (the individ-
males, such as the male plumed basilisks, have larger nu-
ual segments of the shell epidermis) are given specific
chal crests than the female.
names. Ihey do not overlie directly the bone sections
Many lizards, such as the green iguana have a parietal
of the shell, there is some overlap. Some tortoises, such
eye. Ihis is a special adaptation on the very top of the
as the box turtle (Terrapene carolina), possess a hinge
skull midway between the eyes. It is connected directly,
to the plastron allowing them to close themselves into
via neural pathways, to the pineal gland in the brain and
their shells even further.
it is responsible for informing the lizard about light in-
Some of the Mediterranean species of tortoise such as
tensity and daytime lengths. These in turn influence feed-
the spur-thighed tortoise (Testudo graeca) can have cau-
ing and reproductive behaviour. In the tuatara, which is
 dal plastral hinges. This can be particularly useful in fe-
 found in New Zealand, a primaeval lizard in its own class
males, when they can increase the caudal exit space of the
of the reptile family, this parietal eye actually has a vesti-
shell for egg laying.
gial lens within it.
Another unusual feature of Chelonia is that the scapu-
lae are to be found on the inside of the shell: that is, inside
the ribcage, due to the shell structure. Ihis is unique in
CHELONIA (TORTOISES,
the animal world. In addition, the elbow joint is effec-
TURTLES AND TERRAPINS)
tively rotated through nearly 180° to cause the twisted
Musculoskeletal system
forelimb so characteristic of tortoises.
asnns me iamol pue iaddn piai e aney eiuoau
The fore- and hind limbs are supplied with extensive
similar to that of the lizard family, but unlike lizards
muscles making them extremely strong for their size. Ihe
they have no teeth. Instead, the maxillae and man-
Horsfield’s tortoise ( Testudo horsfieldii) differs from most
Auo e uoy oi ueia yano qm paa ane saq
Mediterranean species in that it is generally smaller than
beak, similar to that seen in birds. The skull articulates 
most but it has the unique four toed/clawed forelimbs
with the atlantal cervical vertebra via a single occipital
whereas the rest have five.
256 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
 Pleural
Vertebral scutes
scutes
Marginal scutes
Dorsal view
Figure 17.9 Dorsal viev of carapace.
Inter gular
Gularplate/scute
Axillary
plate/scute
Pectoral
AMPHIBIAI
'Pillars'
Abdominal
PART III: REPTILES AND
Inguinal
Femoral plate/scute
Anal plate/scute
Ventral view
Figure 17.10 Ventral view of plastron.
Basic Reptile and Amphibian Anatomy and Physiology 257
Respiratory system (Figure 17.11)
confined lungs. In addition, there are muscles attached to
Upper respiratory system
the membrane that separates the lungs from the rest of
Chelonia have paired nostrils leading to the rostral por-
the viscera. In breathing, these contract and relax. Many
tion of the oral cavity. As with other reptiles (excepting
chelonians can survive without breathing for several
the crocodylians) there is no hard palate. The entrance to
hours if necessary. Ihe stimulus for respiration is, as with
the trachea is guarded by the glottis, which, as with lizards
other reptiles, a fall in blood partial pressure of oxygen.
and snakes, is closed at rest. It opens into the trachea,
which has complete cartilaginous rings, and bifurcates
Digestive system
relatively far cranially, often in the neck area, allowing the
Oral cavity
chelonian to breathe easily even when the neck is with-
The tongue is relatively tightly attached, but is fleshy in
drawn deep into the shell.
structure with the glottis at its base. Salivary glands se-
crete mucus only when eating to lubricate food. The phar-
Lower respiratory system
 ynx is wide and passes into a distensible smooth-muscle
The two bronchi supply two lungs. These structures
 covered oesophagus. Many of the aquatic turtles have
are situated in the dorsal aspect of the coelomic cavity
caudally curved spines present in the caudal pharynx and
against the inside of the carapace, and above the liver
Desophagus, which are thought to aid in swallowing slip-
and digestive system. Between the lungs and the rest of
pery prey such as fish.
-ep anil ou imq aueiqua e st aiaul 'suebno Apoq au
phragm. Ihe lungs are sponge-like in structure and con-
Stomach, associated organs and intestine
tain smooth-muscle and elastic fbres, forming essentially
Ihe stomach sits on the left side ventrally in the mid-
a non-collapsible structure. In some aquatic species the
coelomic cavity. It has a strong cardiac sphincter, mak-
lungs have air sacs that act to incre ase buoyanc y.
ing vomiting in the healthy chelonian rare. The stomach
Respiration is aided by movement of the limbs and
leads to the duodenum and a short but highly coiled small
neck, which act to pump the air into and out of the
intestine. At the junction of the small and large intestine
Cross section
 of carapace
 Shell gland/uterus
Cervical
Lungs
vertebrae
Ovary.
Coccygeal
Gall bladder
((paired)
vertebrae
Trachea
Kidneys
Stomacl
(paired)
Nares
Liver
Urinary
ladder (bilobed)
Spleen
Vent
Proctodeum
Thymus
Ventricle
of heart 
of cloaca
Cross section
Coprodeum
Urodeum
Atria
Thyroid
of plastron
of cloaca
of cloaca
of heart
Small
intestine
Large intestine
Figure 17.11 Section through the midline of a female tortoise.
258 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
lies the caecum, which is often a rounded bag-like object.
these latter vessels which must be carefully negotiated
The large intestine itself has a large diameter and, for her-
when performing abdominal surgery in chelonians.
bivorous chelonia such as tortoises, is the principal site of
fermentation. It then narrows to form the rectum. Next
Lymphatic system
come the coprodeum and the urodeum, then the procto-
The lymphatic system is essentially the same as inthe snake
deum of the cloaca, and finally the vent.
 and the lizard. The spleen is situated close to the caecum.
The liver is a bilobed structure situated transversely
Reproductive system
across the mid-section of the coelomic cavity, dorsal to
Male
the digestive system, and ventral to the lungs. Ihere is a
Ihe testes are internal and often yellow cream coloured
gall bladder to the right of the midline.
oval organs cranial to the kidneys. As with the liver, there
Urinary system
may also be some dark pigmentation to the testes. Ihe
testes empty into the associated epididymal organs that
Ihe paired kidneys are situated caudally within the shell,
overlie their surface. The sperm then enter the vas defer-
tightly adhered to the ventral surface of the inside of the
ens, which courses over the ventral surface of the kidneys,
carapace and caudal to the acetabulae of the pelvis. There
and enters the urogenital sinus adjacent to the urodeum
is a difference in the marine species where the kidneys are
 portion of the cloaca.
situated cranial to the acetabulae. Two ureters empty into
The phallus is alarge fleshy organ, and, unlike in snakes
a urogenital sinus, a common chamber for the opening
and lizards, there is only one of them. It lies on the ven-
of the urinary and reproductive systems, which also con-
nects with the urinary bladder. The latter organ is alarge,
tral aspect of the cloaca at rest. When engorged, the free
caudal end of the phallus is projected through the vent
bilobed, thin-walled structure which has some ability to
and curves cranially. In so doing, a dorsal shallow seminal
reabsorb water. The urogenital sinus empties into the uro-
groove is formed to guide sperm into the female's vent
deum portion of the cloaca.
(see Figure 17.12).
Cardiovascular system
Heart
As with lizards and snakes, the chelonian heart is a three-
chambered organ situated within the pericardial sac. Ihe
tWo cranial vena cavae and one caudal vena cava merge
to form the sinus venosus, which enters the right atrium.
Blood vessels
Paired aortas give rise to the carotid arteries that supply
the head and neck. Ihey then curve dorsally to fuse into
the abdominal aorta. Just before fusing,the left aortic arch
gives rise to arteries supplying the digestive tract, and the
right aortic arch produces the brachiocephalic trunk that
supplies the head and forelimbs. Ihe abdominal aorta
then courses down the ventral aspect of the vertebrae,
supplying the shell and dorsal structures via intercostal
N
arteries. The shell itself has a blood supply arising from
cranially placed subclavian and caudally placed iliac
arteries which anastomose widely.
The venous return of blood follows a similar pattern to
 lizards and snakes. Another bypass system exists whereby
blood from the caudal vessels may cross from one side of
the body to the other via transverse pelvic veins. From
these, the blood may enter the paired abdominal veins
Figure 17.12 Phallus of an alligator snapping turtle (Macrochelys
which run along the floor of the coelomic cavity. It is
temmincki).
a57 Ahojoisayd pue Awoeuy ueigiydwy pue alday yiseg
Female
a jn ae an tuae sa iaisa moe oi unseld a
Paired ovaries are suspended from the mid-dorsal as-
box turtle (Terrapene carolina) has red coloured irises
pect of the coelomic cavity. Ihey shed their ova into the
whereas the female has yellow/brown ones. The female
infundibulum portion of the oviduct. This is connected
leopard- (Stigmochelys pardalis) and Indian starred tor-
to similar structures as in the snake and lizard families,
toises (Geochelone elegans) have longer hind limb claws
 including a magnum and a uterus. This fnally connects
for digging than the males. Ihe male red-eared terrapin
to the smooth-muscle lined vagina which is responsible
(Trachemys scripta elegans), has longer forelimb claws
for keeping the oviduct closed to the outside world until
than the females. Some males, such as the Horsfield's tor-
egg laying occurs. The oviducts empty into the urogenital
toise ( Testudo horsfieldi), have alarge, hooked scale at the
sinus and then into the urodeum portion of the cloaca
tip of their tails. In some species there is a size difference
between the sexes, the female of the Indian starred tor-
Reproductive physiology
toise and the red-eared terrapin species is larger than the
Folliculogenesis is stimulated by the time of year. In those
male when full grown, but the reverse is true of the red-
chelonians such as the Mediterranean species of tortoise,
footed tortoise (Chelonoidis carbonaria).
hibernation is an important factor. This period is neces-
sary for the pre-programming of the thyroid gland and
skin
the reproductive cycle. Two bouts of egg production can
Ihe skin covering the head, neck, limbs and tail of the
occur per year. On average, 10-30 eggs are laid each year
chelonian is much the same as that of snakes and lizards.
depending on the species. Most Mediterranean tortoise
 Many species of tortoise have enlarged scales over their
species do not become sexually mature until they are
 forelimbs, and some have horny spurs on their hindlimbs.
7-10 years of age.
The skin is particularly tightly adhered to the underlying
 The female tortoise will start to form fertile eggs after
 bony structures over the distal limbs and the head.
a successful mating. Ihese are carried in her reproductive
Tortoises and most other Chelonia have visible audi-
system for a period of time varying anywhere from
 tory membranes covering the entrance to the middle ear.
4 weeks to 3-4 years which means that it is possible for
These lie caudoventral to the eyes at the rear of the skull.
Mediterranean species to carry eggs through hibernation.
The shell is formed from the fusion of islands of bone
The female can also store the sperm from a successful
 produced within the chelonian's dermal layer the skin,
mating for long periods of time, eventually allowing fer-
rather than from the limbs or ribs. Ihe overlying epider-
tilisation to occur many months to years after exposure to
mis is highly keratinised and pigmented. The lines joining
the male, a factor which makes identification of the father
individual scutes on the shell are not directly above the
sometimes rather diffcult!
corresponding suture lines in the bony part of the shell.
There is some considerable overlap which reinforces the
Sex determination and identification
structure.
As with many reptiles, tortoise sex determination de-
pends on the tenperature at which the eggs were in-
cubated. Spur-thighed tortoises (Testudo graeca) will
CROCODYLIA (CROCODILES.
AlLIGAToRS, CAImANS AND
produce males if the eggs are kept at 29.5°C and females
GHARIALS)
if kept at 31.5°C. It seems that this fact can be applied to
a large number of other tortoise species, with males being
Musculoskeletal system
predominantly produced at the lower temperatures, and
The body plan for the Crocodylia is not dissimilar to that
females at the higher ones. Ifthe termperature range is kept
 of the lizards. Ihe basic structure is a quadruped rep-
from 28 to 31°C, a mixture of sexes is likely to be achieved.
tile, with an elongated tail, but instead of the short- to
Male Chelonia have longer tails, the vent being found
medium-length head, the crocodylians have elongated
on the tail caudal to the edge of the carapace, in order to
jaws. This is particularly accentuated in the long thin jaws
house the single phallus. Males of many Mediterranean
 of the fish eating gharial family.
species of tortoise and turtles possess a dished plastron,
The teeth are continually replaced and are held in crude
and a narrower angle to the caudal plastron in front of
sockets. One of the distinguishing features between the
the cloaca than the egg bearing female. Some female
more bad-tempered crocodiles and the alligator family is
Mediterranean species have a hinge to the caudal part of
that the fourth mandibular tooth on either side is visible
260 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
in the crocodiles. In the alligator subfamily the tooth is
sacs more caudally which can be inflated to provide some
hidden in a maxillary pocket.
buoyancy. More importantly, they can function as a gas
The articulation point of the upper and lower jaws
reserve, allowing them to remain submerged for up to
is located at the rear of the skull, giving more room for
1-2 hours before anaerobic respiration takes over. The
teeth and allowing a larger gape. Ihe jaws are powered
lungs are also different from those of other reptiles in that
by strong temporal and pterygoid muscles, allowing im-
there is a muscular, crude diaphragmatic structure sepa
rating the dorsally situated lung fields from the ventrally
the muscles responsible for opening the jaws are relatively
situated heart and digestive system. The diaphragm and
weak; hence once closed and taped shut, a crocodilian
 the intercostal muscles are important for respiration in
cannot easily open its mouth again.
crocodylians.
Ihere are eight pairs of ribs arising from the thoracic
vertebrae, with additional dermal bones embedded
Digestive system
in the ventral body wall known as gastralia or floating
Oral cavity
ribs. There are also thickened transverse processes of the
The crocodylian tongue is large and fleshy, but immobile.
 sacral vertebrae which float freely alongside the respec-
Caudally, the floor of the mouth forms a transverse fold,
tive vertebral bodies and have also been called ribs. Ihe
 as does the palate above. This shuts the oropharynx off
femur is proportionally longer than that of the lizards,
completely from the glottis and nasopharynx.
leading to a raised appearance to the crocodylian hind-
quarters.
Stomach, associated organs and intestines
The crocodilian stomach is large and divided into two
Respiratory system
areas, known as the body and the pars pylorus. Ihe body
Upper respiratory system
area is heavily populated by mucus-secreting glands and
The nares of the Crocodylia are frequently protected
surrounded by a thick band of smooth muscle. It is in
by lateral skin flaps which can be contracted medi-
this area that stones swallowed by the crocodilian may be
ally to close them when submerged. The nasal pas-
found, and therefore this area seems to be responsible for
sages have excellent neural endings in the ethmoid/
grinding and massaging food into smaller pieces, simi-
olfactory chamber area allowing an acute sense of
lar to the action of the avian gizzard. Ihe pars pylorus
smell. The crocodiles have a true hard palate that sepa-
has acid- and pepsin-secreting glands and empties into
u i a sssd s1  r a s
the small intestine through the well-developed pyloric
open caudally; therefore the glottis guarding the tra-
sphincter.
chea is also situated caudally.
The small intestine meets the large intestine at the il-
The entrance to the larynx is guarded by the glottis
eocaecal sphincter. The large intestine empties into the
but also by gular and a basihyal fold which originate in,
coprodeum portion of the cloaca, which opens into the
respectively, the floor and roof of the oropharynx and
urodeum, then the proctodeum before ending at the vent
can close access to the glottis from the mouth when a
to the outside world.
 crocodilian is submerged. Ihis allows them to drag prey
underwater at the same time preventing any water from
Urinary system
entering the caudal aspect of the pharynx. Providing its
There are paired kidneys located in the caudal abdomen,
nostrils are above water, the crocodilian can still draw air
and extending into the pelvis. Ihe aquatic crocodile kid-
ON行
in through the nasal passages.
The trachea is composed of complete cartilage rings,
than as the more usual reptilian uric acid, although the
similar to Chelonia and birds.
latter can also be produced, particularly when the ani-
mal is dehydrated. Osmoregulation, the maintenance
Lower respiratory system
of the electrolyte and water balance within the body,
The trachea bifurcates within the 'chest' into two primary
is not solely performed by the kidneys, as with many
bronchi, each supplying a well-formed lung structure.
other reptiles. Instead, there are salt-secreting glands
The lungs are basic in design, and do not contain well-
in the mouth which aid excretion of excess sodium as
defined lobules, as do their mammalian counterparts,
sodium chloride. There are no truly marine crocodil-
although they are very well vascularised. There are air
ians, although the saltwater crocodile and the American
Basic Reptile and Amphibian Anatomy and Physiology 26 1
crocodile will spend time in brackish water and will ven-
Lymphatic system
ture out into the sea.
The lymphatic system parallels the lizard's system.
The oral salt-secreting glands of the alligator sub-
family are not as highly developed, reflecting their
Reproductive system
more freshwater habitat. The kidneys empty through
Male
the ureters which travel into the urodeum portion of
The testes are long, thin organs situated medial to their
the cloaca.
respective kidneys either side of the caudal vena cava.
 The vasa deferentia travel to the urodeum portion of the
Cardiovascular system
cloaca. The testes enlarge during the reproductive season.
Heart
On the ventral aspect of the cloacalies the phallus. This
The crocodilian heart is different from that of other rep-
is a fibrous organ which has little erectile tissue, but once
tiles in that it has four chambers, similar to the mamma-
everted it forms a dorsal groove into which the semen is
lian model. There is however a small "hole in the heart'
deposited (Figure 17.12). Ihere are two accessory ducts
between the two ventricles, known as the foramen of
entering this groove which supply senminal fluids from the
 Panizza, which allows some mixing of oxygenated and
caudal kidney area.
The rate of mixing is dependent on the pressures
Female
within the left and right ventricles. While the animal
The paired ovaries are also to be found medial to their re-
is breathing, the left ventricle has higher pressure and
spective kidneys. Each ovary is slightly flattened and has a
so blood moves from the oxygenated side to the de-
central medullary area which is supplied with nerves and
 Oxygenated side. More important for the crocodilian is
blood vessels. Ihe rest of the reproductive system con-
what happens when he is submerged and not breath-
sists of the fimbria or ostium which catches the ova, and
ing. Ihe increased pulmonary resistance so produced
then there is a muscular portion followed by the isthmus
forces blood from the right ventricle to the left and out
and the shell gland or uterus. The paired oviducts open
through the abdominal aorta, decreasing the blood flow
 into the urodeum of the cloaca, adjacent to the clitoris.
to the non-functional lungs and sending it back around
the body. Ihe left ventricle blood, still returning from
the lungs and so still relatively well oxygenated, is di-
Reproductive physiology
Follicular activity is triggered by increasing day length in
verted through the brachiocephalic trunk to the head
and heart muscle which need more oxygen to keep func-
March-May, there being one cycle per year. An average
tioning. This allows the crocodilian to function in con-
dlutch of follicles varies from 20 to 80 per cycle.
ditions of reduced oxygen and anaerobic metabolism for
up to 6 hours!
Sex determination and identification
This varies with species. In the case of alligators and
Blood vessels
caimans, the lower incubation temperatures (from 28
 The basic structure of the blood vascular system is similar
to 31°C) produce all females. An intermediate temper-
 to the lizard's. There are paired aortas from the right and
ature (from 31 to 32°C) produces males and females,
left ventricles which fuse to form a single abdominal aorta
and a higher temperature (from 32 to 34°C) produces
after giving off the brachiocephalic trunk, which supplies
all males. In the case of crocodiles, temperatures at
the head and forelimbs.
the lower end of the range (from 28 to 31°C) also pro-
The venous system has many parallels with the liz-
duce all females. Intermediate temperatures (from 31
ard's. There is an hepatoportal system supplying the liver
to 33°C) produce some females but predominantly
directly from the intestines and a renal-portal system
males. For higher temperatures (from 33 to 34°C), pre-
wherein the blood returning from the hind limbs and tail
dominantly female crocodiles, with some males, are
enters a venous circle around the kidneys.
produced.
There is a large venous sinus caudal to the occiput of
The best method of sex identification is by manual pal-
the skull on either side of the midline which may be used
pation of the ventral surface of the cloaca for the presence
for venipuncture. Alternatively, the ventral tail vein may
of the phallus. This is an obvious structure if present, as
be used for blood sampling purposes.
otherwise the cloaca is completely smooth walled. The
262 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
crocodilian involved must be in dorsal recumbency and
· Eosinophils and basophils are present in most species,
adequately restrained in order to perform this!
basophils being common in turtles. Basophils gener-
ally stain blue, and are small, spherical cells with a
skin
non-lobed nucleus. Ihe eosinophil is a larger spheri-
The epidermis and dermis of Crocodylia are composed of
cal cell with eosinophilic cytoplasmic granules and a
thickened scales which are joined together like a patch-
mildly lobed to elongated nucleus. However, in the
work quilt by elastic tissue. Ihe skin is tightly attached
green iguana they often stain blue!
to underlying bone over the feet and the skull. Ihe skin
* Lymphocytes may vary with the season showing a de-
covering the dorsum has layers of dermal bone present
-ads [edon u suu iapoaum, a u asan
within it, making this area extremely thick and impos-
cies. Unlike mammals, the B lymphocyte can change
sible to penetrate for injections. Ihe caimans have areas
into the plasma cell form within the bloodstream dur-
of bone in the skin covering their ventral surface as well.
ing chronic or severe infections of reptiles. Hence, the
eccentrically placed nucleus and pale staining clock-
Specialised skin areas
face' cytoplasm of the plasma cell may be seen in blood
Within the majority of the scales of the crocodile subfam-
smears of reptiles.
ily are present integumentary sense organs (ISO). These
*The thrombocytes (platelets) of reptiles, like avian spe-
are absent in the alligator subfamily. Iheir function is to
 cies, are also nucleated.
determine underwater pressure sensations which can be
Most importantly, when collecting blood samples from
used to locate prey whilst submerged.
reptiles, it is better to do so into heparinised containers
for haematology, rather than potassium EDTA tubes used
Overview of reptilian
in birds and mammals. This is because the blood cells,
haematology
particularly erythrocytes, of many species (particularly
 The cells found in the reptilian bloodstream broadly mir-
the Chelonia) will rupture in potassium EDTA. An air-
- maj e iaamol aie aiau see u uaas asou ioi
dried smear for staining made at the time of sampling is
 portant differences:
also useful, as heparin interferes with the Romanowsky
· The reptilian (and amphibian) erythrocyte is oval in
stains.
 shape rather than biconcave and has a nucleus even
when fully matured.
AMPHIBIANS
+ Ihe reptile, like the avian patient, has a slightly different
Classification
version of the mammalian neutrophil, known as the
heterophil. This white blood cell has a bilobed nucleus,
Amphibians are classified into many different family
like the neutrophil, and contains cytoplasmic granules,
groups, according to a number of physical, anatomical
and evolutionary factors. It is useful to know to which
but these stain a variety of colours with Romanowsky
stains, rather than remaining neutral as seen in neu-
 group an amphibian belongs as this gives an indication
trophils. The heterophil performs similar functions to
of the other armphibians to which it is related. This is of
N
ou an non iel saiads e um paey uaum diaq aos
the neutrophil, being a first line of defence for infec-
tion. However, although its numbers may be increased
seen before.
during infections, they may stay the same, in which
Table 17.2 contains some of the more commonly en-
case the only tell-tale sign of an inflammatory process
 countered family groups of amphibians seen in general
AND
occurring is vacuolation and degranulation of the cell
and exotic species orientated practices.
(the so-called 'toxic' cell). This makes cytological ex-
S3
amination more important than cell counts in reptiles
Table 17.2 Basic classification of ammphibian5
An additional mononuclear cell is the azurophil. It
EE
stains a blue-red colour and is alarge, single nucleated
Order
Description
cell with moderate cytoplasm present. It is found nor-
Anura (Salientia)
Includes frogs and toads
RT
mally in small numbers, but if elevated in lizards and
Chelonia, it suggests an inflammatory/infectious pro-
Gymnophiona (Apoda)  Includes caecilians (legless amphibians)
cess. It is particularly associated with chronic granu-
Caudata (Urodela)
Includes salamanders and newts
loma formation.
Basic Reptile and Amphibian Anatomy and Physiology 263
Musculoskeletal system
salamanders and newts have four digits on their forelimbs
The body plan of Amphibia in general varies greatly within
and four or five digits on their hind limbs. Many salaman-
the family from the classic lizard shape of the salamanders
ders will show autotomy or tail shedding when roughly
and newts, through to the tailless quadruped form of the an-
handled as with many lizards.
urans (frogs and toads) through tothe worm-like caecilians.
 Many amphibians possess vestigial rib structures, and
In the case of the anurans and the salamanders, the
the majority also have a sternum. Ihe pectoral and pelvic
skeletal structure is very basic but similar to the lizard
girdles are fused tothe spine, giving increased rigidity to
model described above. The main difrences lie in the
the body structure.
anurans, which have long femurs, tibias and fbulas, and
The caecilians have a much simpler body plan with
metatarsals which are developed into the well-muscled
few if any bones. Iheir body plan is more worm-like, al-
hind limbs. Ihere is a basic spinal column of cuboid ver-
though they are anphibians rather than insects; but they
tebral bodies joining to the primitive pelvis caudally and
 do possess jaws, a primitive skull and a fbrocartilaginous
the single occipital condyle of the skull cranially.
spinal column. They also have small eyes and nostrils in
The skull possesses a mandible and maxilla with, in
the head (see Figure 17.14).
many cases, simple peg-like, open-rooted and continually
replaced teeth. The eye sockets are large in anurans, as is the
Respiratory system
well-developed eardrum that leads to the middle ear. Sight
In aquatic amphibians such as the primitive axolotl, gills
is mainly based on movement rather than sharp focus, but
are still present. Indeed, as an amphibian metamorpho-
the sense of hearing is very good, although low frequency
ses through from egg to larval or tadpole form it will also
sounds are transmitted through the bones of the forelimbs,
have gills, although these may be lost as the adult form is
and high frequency ones through the actual eardrum.
reached.
The majority of anurans have five digits on the fore-
Terrestrial amphibians, such as many of the anurans,
limbs and four on the hind limbs (see Figure 17.13). Many
have an internal lung structure. Ihis is often no more
than a simple air sac structure. There are no internal al-
veolar areas to this lung, although it may be folded to in-
 crease its surface area. No diaphragm is present, giving a
continuous body cavity or coelom; hence respiration for
those amphibians possessing lungs occurs due to inter-
costal muscle and limb movements pulling the chest wall
up and outwards.
 Many amphibians will use the skin surface for gaseous
exchange, whether they possess an internal lung structure
Or not. Indeed, the skin is often solely used for gas ex-
change during periods of low oxygen requirement, such
as during hibernation. For other skin breathers, such as
the plethodontid salamanders, other adaptations, such as
increasing the skin's surface area by having folds of skin,
Figure 17.13 The European frog (Rana temporaria) like many
Figure 17.14 The caecilians have a very basic, worm-like
Anurans has four digits on the hind limbs and five on the forelimbs.
body plan.
264 Veterinary Nursing of ExoticPets
or by having hairs’ on their surface (for example, the
itself into three chambers by producing an intra-atrial
African hairy frog (Trichobatrachus robustus), or reduc-
on Aeme uoiemsins sll panoian ose seu pue umidas
ing oxygen demands/metabolic rates, are necessary.
the gill arches of the larvae to the adult respiration organ
(the skin, lungs or again gill arches).
Digestive system
 Most adult amphibians are carnivorous, and their diges-
Blood vessels
tive systems are adapted to this diet. The majority possess
As far as the more peripheral vascular system is con-
a tongue which can be projected at high speed towards
cerned, the amphibians differ from the reptiles in that
their prey. It is covered in fne sticky cilia, as in many
the caudal body drainage goes through the hepatic portal
anurans, enabling it to capture flying prey. Ihe salanman-
system rather than the renal portal system. This is im-
ders, newts and most anurans have vestigial peg-like
portant for the administration of hepatically metabo-
teeth. There are frequently cilia within the oral cavity and
lised drugs or hepatotoxic drugs in the caudal half of an
oesophagus, which aid in the propelling of food into the
amphibian.
stomach. Terrestrial amphibians also have mucus-secret-
ing salivary glands to aid in the swallowing of prey.
Lymphatic system
The stomach is simple in nature, possesses mucus-
There is a large lymphatic drainage system, with paired
secreting glands and, in the majority of cases, combined
dorsal lymph sacs in anurans lying cranial to the hind
acid- and pepsinogen-secreting glands. Ihe small intes-
limbs laterodorsally. These help propel lymph fluid as
tine is short, and little defines its finish and the start of the
well as draining it via lymph hearts back to the true heart.
rectum which empties into the cloaca.
They may also play a role in electrolyte balance through
The liver is frequently dark coloured due to melanin
the skin overlying them.
pigmentation for protection from ultraviolet light, neces-
sary due to the thin nature of amphibian skin.
Reproductive system
 IThere are paired internal testes or ovaries depending on
Urinary system
the sex. Ihere is some variation in the size of the gonads
As with the reptile family, amphibians cannot concen-
during the reproductive season and basic hormones re-
trate urine beyond plasma tonicity. Ihe main excretory
sembling the activity of folicle stimulating hormone
product of aquatic amphibians such as caecilians and
(FSH) and luteinising hormone (LH) are produced.
aquatic newts and the axolotl, is anmmonia. This is actu-
In the female, there are paired oviducts which are
ally excreted, as with fish, through the gills if present, and
responsible for producing the jelly-like material that coats
the skin if not, rather than the kidneys.
the ova. Most amphibians fertilise their eggs outside the
In terrestrial amphibians, urea is the main waste prod-
body, but one or two species of anuran, and the caecilians,
uct of nitrogen metabolism and this is excreted through
do have a form of phallus for internal fertilisation. Indeed
a primitive paired kidney structure. Ihe cloaca of these
some caecilians are viviparous and actually secrete a uter-
e a ose Aeu (uey pe uee au a) saads
ine milk to nourish the foetuses within the oviduct.
pocket forming a primitive bladder. One or two amphibi-
When hatched, the amphibian then metamorpho-
ans can produce uric acid. The kidneys empty into ureters
ses through a series of changes, often known as instars,
which travel to the urodeum portion of the cloaca, before
one of which we all know as the 'tadpole' of the anurans
either refluxing into the bladder (if present) or ermptying
which has external gills and a tail and no legs initially.
ON行
through the vent.
The stimuli for the metamorphosis seem to come from
various external sources, such as environmental iodine
Cardiovascular system
 levels, as well as internal hormonal influences from the
Heart
thyroid gland.
The circulatory system changes dramatically during the
 metamorphosis of the amphibian. At the larval stage the
skin
circulatory system is more fish-like, with a two cham-
The terrestrial amphibian has a thin stratum corneum
 bered heart possessing only one atrium and one ventricle.
which provides extra cutaneous protection above that
When the adult forrm is achieved, the heart has divided
S97 AholoisAyd pue Awoneuy ueiq!ydwy pue aday yiseg
the skin. Ihe skin is shed regularly, similarly to a snake,
Some anurans, such as the midwife toad Xeropus lae-
and is frequently then eaten by the amphibian. Ihe skin
vis, have claws, but most have very fragile skin, which, as
contains many glands which secrete oils and mucus in to
 mentioned above, may have capabilities for gas exchange
further protect against water loss, but armphibians always 
 as well as water and electrolyte exchange.
have to have access to damp conditions or free water to
-o us Aq paai aq u suadue aeu aos
survive.
lour or ornamentation. Ihe male great crested newt has a
 Many of the toad family have poison glands located in
larger crest than the female, for example, and many male
their parotid glands which are used as a form of protec-
 frogs and toads have a swelling in the thumb area of the
tion. A similar ploy is used in the poison arrow tree frogs
hand which contains scent glands. Male caecilians often
which secrete neurotoxins onto the surface of their skin.
have a phallus in the cloaca.
AMPHIBIANS
PArt IIl: ReptIles AND i
Chapter 18
Reptile and Amphibian Housing.
Husbandry and Rearing
There are many good books available on the husbandry
 of the glass at reptile level allows them to appreciate that a
of reptiles and amphibians, and some are listed at the end
barrier exists and prevents this problem.
of this chapter. This chapter will therefore provide only a
brief overview of the main points in housing and caring
Heating
for reptiles and amphibians. It is essential when treating a
Reptiles are ectothermic by nature, i.e. they rely on the
reptile patient for the frst time that a thorough history is
environment to provide sufficient heat to warm them to
taken. This is particularly important as many problems can
their preferred body temperature (PBT). Their PBT is the
arise through improper care as with any captive animal
body temperature at which their organs and biochemical
processes function optimally. To maintain their PBT, the
Vivarium requirements
reptile must be provided with a preferred optimum tem-
Dimensions and construction
perature zone (POTZ) within which it may position itself.
Vivarium designs vary, as does their construction materi-
 This necessitates the provision of some form of artificial
 al. The main aim though is to ensure that they are durable,
heating within the tank/vivarium to create a temperature
easily cleaned for hygiene reasons and that they provide
gradient within which the reptile can place itself to either
enough space for the captive reptile to demonstrate nor-
cool down or warm up.
mal behaviour. Strict cage dimensions are therefore dif-
Two main forms of heating are advised. A back-
ficult to quantify, as each situation should be judged on
ground, continuous heat source is important to raise the
its own merits. However, some general principles apply
vivarium temperature above the background room tem-
(Figure 18.1). Size of the vivarium/terrarium will depend
perature. Ihis is often provided in the form of a radiant
on the species, number of individuals housed and sexual
heat mat, a mat which emits heat continuously, and is
maturity. It is important that the vivarium is large enough
placed on the outside wall of the vivarium (Figure 18.1).
to allow a temperature gradient to be created
It then radiates heat through the tank wall. Placing it
For species which are more arboreal (tree climbing) in
on the outside of the tank avoids the possibility of the
nature, for example, the green iguana and many snakes
reptile che wing, urinating or defaecating on it, so in-
(e.g. the boa constrictor and Burmese python), the em-
creasing hygiene and safety. Ihe size of available mats
phasis in cage design should be more on vertical height
varies, but a rough rule is that one-third to one-half of
rather than horizontal space. For tortoises, however, the
the longest side of the tank should be covered with the
provision of too much vertical space is pointless. Bar-
mat. Some form of insulation on the outside of the mat,
nard (1996) provided some minimum dimensions in
increasing reflection of heat into the vivarium, is also
Table 18.1.
N
useful.
Cage materials commonly used include perspex, re-
In addition, the vivarium requires a focal hot spot,
inforced glass, sealed wood and fbreglass (Figure 18.2).
which may be provided in the form of a ceramic, infrared
Wood should be avoided unless it is sealed to prevent
heat or combination heat/UV bulb. Ihis should be sus-
 moisture damage and rotting. Glass and clear perspex are
pended from the ceiling of the vivarium, and should be
useful when showing off a collection, but care should be
protected from the reptile to avoid the risk of burns. The
taken as many reptiles cannot see the tank sides, and so
bulb should be attached to a thermostat, which will allow
may continually rub their snouts along the inside of the
maximum and minimum tank temperatures to be set. A
vivarium, causing severe abrasions which can become in-
form of heated, plastic molded rock has been used to pro-
vide a basking point for reptiles. These should be avoided
Reptile and Amphibian Housing, Husbandry and Rearing 267
Table 18.1 Some minimum vivarium sizes.
Type of reptile
Minimum vivarium sizes
Arboreal lizards
Height should be 2-3 x reptile's length
Floor dirmensions should be minimum of 
 2 × reptile's length by 3 x reptile's length
Terrestrial lizards
Height should be sufficient to prevent
escape
 Floor dimmensions should be minirmum of
 2 × reptile's length by 3 x reptile's length
Arboreal snakes
Height should be minimum 1 x reptile's 
length
Floor dimensions should be minirnum
of 3/4 xreptile's length by 1/3 ×
reptile's length 
Figure 18.2 Vivarium made of moulded fibreglass.
Terrestrial snakes
Height should be minimum 1/2 xreptile's
length
is PBT by positioning itself at different points in the tank
 Floor dimensions should be minimum of
during the course of the day.
 3/4 × reptile's length by 1/3 × reptile's
length 
The temperatures required for different species of rep-
tile will naturally differ. A list of some species and their
Terrestrial
 Floor dimensions should be minimum of
 chelonians
 5 × reptile's length by 5 × reptile'slength
temperature requirements is given in Table 18.2.
Aquatic chelonians 
Height should be enough to prevent
Humidity
escape
 Humidity is also important. Many species of reptile come
 Floor dimmensions should be minirmum of
 5 × reptile's length by 3 × reptile's length
 from dry desert regions, but equally many originate in
 Water depth should be 1/2 xlength of
tropical rain forests. Therefore, their tolerance of water
reptile
     n r i a
 Source: Data from Barnard (1996).
basilisk or garter snake, all used to living near or in water,
will require a 75-90% humidity level. Ihis may be difficult
to maintain in a heated environment; as the hotter the air,
the more water droplets the air can hold, and so the rela-
a  s  d sa ai as
frequently, using a hand-held plant mister, with previously
boiled and then cooled water is useful. Alternatively, the
provision of water baths or dammp substrate within the tank
ii
Table 18.2 Preferred optimum temperature zones and relative
humiclity for selected species of reptile.
Temperature
Relative
Species
range (°C)
humidity
Figure 18.1 Basic diagrammatic representation of a vivarium: (i)
Medliterranean
Ultraviolet light source (on inside of tank as glass filters out UV
20-28
%05-0E
light); (i) radiant heat mat, usually placed on outside of tank for 
tortoises
 hygiene reasons; (i) focal heat source such as a heat lamp to
 provide a temperature gradient.
Green iguana
25-35
75-100%
Leopard gecko
25-34
30-40%
as should the thermostat break within such a device it can
REP
 Overheat and the reptile will injure itself.
Water dragon
24-30
80-90%
:
The importance of a focal heat source is that it pro-
 Bearded dragon
25-35
30-40%
vides a temperature gradient, allowing the reptile to bask
Corn snake
23-30
%0-0E
underneath the heat source or to escape to a cooler end of
Burmmese python
25-30
50-80%
the tank when overheated. The reptile can then maintain
268 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
can be used to increase humidity. Care should be taken
source (e.g. the intensity at 2 m from the source is a quar-
over hygiene levels though, as a too damp and soiled sub-
ter of that 1 m from its source).
strate can lead to skin infections such as blister disease, a
Some species are not so susceptible to ultraviolet de-
common problem in garter snakes. In the case of reptiles
privation, including more nocturnal species such as the
from more arid climates, a relative humidity between 25
leopard gecko and many snakes. The theory is that these
and 50% is often adequate (see Table 18.2). Ihis is around
species gain suffcient preformed vitamin D in their diets
the normal level of the average centrally heated home.
to cope. This is important if the owner is not feeding them
However, at certain times even these species require in-
correctly, as metabolic bone disease may then be seen.
creased levels of humidity. One such example is during the
H is also worth noting that the type of UV lighting
shedding cycle when the old skin layer is sloughed. At this
should be tailored to the species. Some species prefer to
time an increase in humidity is essential to prevent the old
bask in full sunlight and so a 'sunbeam' method of provid-
skin drying out before it has a chance to peel off and so
[ n ao a  y e ym  
resulting in constrictions around extremities such as the
halide light ideally in combination with an incandescent
digits. This is a very common problem in leopard geckos
lamp to produce the equivalent of a sunbeam in the bask-
and many adults have lost the ends of their toes through
ing zone. This should be big enough to get the whole
avascular necrosis. To prevent this, it is useful to provide a
reptile inside the basking zone. Ihis is most suitable for
hide that has an increased humidity level in addition to
reptiles noted for basking such as fence lizards (Scelopo-
a normal hide. Ihis can be achieved by placing a shallow
rus spp.), bearded dragons, frilled lizards, etc. Others do
dish of water with some cotton wool in it within the hide.
not bask and prefer a more dappled shade method where
an incandescent lamp is used at one end of the vivarium
Ultraviolet lighting
controlled by a dimming thermostat. This creates a suit-
-aant humona al oy suodu Aesed si Buai
able temperature gradient and a focal UVB source which
niles of many species. In the wild, many of these reptiles
then creates a UV gradient in the tank as well with a high
live in parts of the world where the intensity of the sun's
point underneath the heat lamp. Shelter is then provided
 using vegetation and plenty of hides so that the reptile is
a number of functions in the reptile; often encouraging
not continuously exposed to UV light. This is most suit-
 mating at certain times of year, and may act as a general
able for reptiles such as rat snakes, anoles, water/garter
appetite stimulus. This seems to be the role of the A sec-
snakes. More information can be found in Baines and
tion of the ultraviolet waveband.
Brames (2010) and Ferguson et al. (2010).
The B waveband of the ultraviolet spectrum is im-
portant in all species in encouraging the production
Cage 'furniture' and environmental enrichment
of vitamin D from precursors in the reptile's skin.
Many reptiles are relatively poorly adapted to captivity,
Vitamin D is intimately involved in the metabolism of
being wild animals in a confined space, and so it is impor-
calcium and bone growth within the juvenile reptile.
tant to ensure that their environment adequately caters
Therefore, a lack of ultraviolet light can be responsible
for their requirements.
N
for the presence of metabolic bone disease in several spe-
As previously mentioned, many arboreal species enjoy
cies, particularly the green iguana and the Mediterranean
exploring vertical space. They should therefore be provid-
tortoises (see chapter 21). Many terrestrial chelonia are
ed with branches and ramps up, which they may climb. It
 kept in open-topped, plastic or wooden enclosures with
is often useful to provide an elevated basking spot which
AND
suspended heat/ultraviolet lanmps.
they can lie out on near to the focal heat source.
Artificial ultraviolet lighting is therefore important in
In the case of ground-dwelling species, the provision of
S3
these species, and should be provided on the inside of the
some form of floor furniture is important. Tortoises are
vivarium. Ihis is because glass and perspex will filter out
best kept singly, except when breeding of course, or in the
the UV rays if the light is placed on the outside of the
case of small hatchlings which prefer to be in groups. In
tank In addition, the light source should be positioned
these cases, the provision of visual barricades which they
close to the reptile, i.e. within 30-45 cm. Ihis is because
can hide behind and so escape from one another is useful.
the intensity of these artificial lights is relatively low, and
All reptiles should be provided with a hide. Ihis is
the inverse square rule tells us that the intensity of the
important particularly for many snakes which will often
light diminishes with the square of the distance from its
refuse to eat their prey in the open, but rather prefer to
Reptile and Amphibian Housing, Husbandry and Rearing
269
take it back into the hide area away from view. Ihe size
of these areas does not need to be that large, in the case
of most species a space 2-2.5 times the size of the reptile
housed is suficient. Ihe number of hides should ideally
be equivalent to the number of reptiles housed plus one.
Flooring
The substrate of the vivarium, or floor covering, is im-
portant. It is vital that any substrate used is nontoxic to
the reptiles housed and is easily cleaned. In many cases
the provision of newspaper or unbleached household
paper is perfectly sufficient, although possibly not so
aesthetically pleasing, as more naturalistic substrates.
Figure 18.3 Example of hospital tank provision for an amphibian, in
Care should be taken with smaller reptiles with newspa-
this case an Argentinian horned frog.
 per, as the ink from the newsprint may prove irritant.
Other substrates used commonly include bark chip-
pings, calcite sand and peat. Bark chippings are a good
or by using any commercial dechlorinating tablets avail-
choice for deep litter situations, particularly when provid-
able from aquarists. In addition, the tap water should be
ing enough substrate for a pregnant female to dig a nest
allowed to come up to room temperature before being in-
in which to lay eggs. However, the chips should not be of
troduced to avoid cold shocking the reptile or amphibian.
cedar as the resins from this can be irritant. It is also more
Where large areas of water are provided, it is inmpor-
difficult to monitor the cleanliness of bark chippings as
tant to keep them clean. It is advisable for terrapins and
faeces and urine may fall into the substrate and so avoid
soft-shelled turtles that their habitat provides an area
detection.
in which they can immerse themselves completely in
Sand is useful for desert species such as leopard geckos,
water, and an area into which they can pull themselves
collared lizards, sand boas, etc., but care should be taken
out to bask and dry thenmselves off, preferably with a fo-
with any reptile on this substrate. If the diet contains min-
cal heat source above it. It is often advisable to remove
eral deficiencies or if there is intestinal parasitism pres-
them from the water and place them in a separate, dry
ent, many species will consume the sand and may suffer
or water-containing feeding tank. This is because they
intestinal blockages.
are extremely messy eaters and will quickly contaminate
Peat can be useful for species requiring damper condi-
their water with food. The food acts as a substrate for
tions such as water dragons, red-footed tortoises, etc., but 
bacteria, and this can increase the risk of shell infections
care again should be taken with the hygiene of this sub-
and septicaemia. An alternative would be a powerful
strate, as waste materials may build up unnoticed.
water filtration device placed in the tank to cope with
Certain types of substrate are best avoided. Coral is not
the large volumes of organic debris produced. Even if a
advised as a substrate for ecological reasons as well as the
feeding tank is provided, regular water changes or filtra-
tendency for reptiles to eat the substrate and suffer gut
tion is required, as they will of course still urinate and
impactions. Corn cobs should also be avoided as these
defaecate in their water.
are often inadvertently eaten, swell and cause intestinal
 Many anurans will appreciate a small amount of free
blockages.
water, but the rest of their vivarium should be well sup-
plied with moisture-retaining substrate such as mosses
Aquatic species and amphibians
 Or peat substitute mulches. These retain moisture and in-
Some reptile species, such as the terrapins and turtles, re-
 crease the humidity of the tank, ensuring protection of
quire large areas of free water; some, such as frogs and
the sensitive amphibian's skin. Other amphibians, such as
toads, a small area but damp environmental conditions
newts and salarmanders, require more access to free fresh
(Figure 18.3).
water and precautions similar to those mentioned for
aq A ianm den 'saias ras yo ases an u
freshwater turtles and terrapins should be taken. In addi-
used, but it should be dechlorinated. This may be done by
tion, for all these species, the construction of the vivarium
should ensure that it is waterproof!
270 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Egg incubation of reptiles
Table 18.3 Incubation tirmes and termperature ranges for
 It is necessary for successful egg incubation to use an in-
selected reptiles.
cubator. The basic cormponents of a reptile egg incuba-
Egg incubation 
Incubation
tor are as follows: A plastic, perspex or toughened glass
Species
time (days)
temperature (°C)
tank with a plastic lid containing aeration holes that can
Inland bearded 
65-115
28-32
be covered to regulate humidity and temperature; nest-
dragon
ing substrate is placed into small open containers within
Green iguana
60
25-30
the tank; and the eggs are placed in slight depressions
within the substrate - a useful substrate is the loft insulat-
Leopard gecko
150-170
28-32
ing material vermiculite. Alternatives include damp sand,
 Corn snake
55-70
28-30
sphagnum moss or even peat.
Burmese python
58-63
28-32
When the eggs are retrieved from the nest site particu-
Spur-thighed tortoise
56-70
29-32
the egg in the incubator. Ihe eggs should not be turned
Hermann's tortoise
85-100
EE-06
Horsefield's tortoise
60-75
28-32
foetal mortality.
Leopard tortoise
140-155
28-32
duction. Ihere are two methods for providing these.
 The containers containing the eggs and substrate may
For chelonians, the colder, northerly climes of the
be placed onto a wire mesh which divides the tank into
United Kingdom mean the incubation of eggs in an out-
a top and a bottom compartment. Ihe bottom compart-
side environment is not possible. It is therefore necessary
ment may then be three quarters filled with filtered
to artificially incubate them. Once laid the eggs will hatch
water, and a thermostatically controlled water heater
for most tortoise species in 8-12 weeks depending on the
placed into it. Ihis technique will provide heat and
temperature at which they are incubated. In snakes and
moisture, and is good for the higher-moisture-requir-
non-gecko lizards, the sex of the hatchling is determined
aiaa ue paau ien (suoap raiem d'a) saiads du
by genetics. In chelonians, many geckos and crocodyl-
80% humidity.
ians, the sex is generally determined by the temperature
 An alternative set-up is to attach a thermostatically
at which the egg was incubated. For example, the Her-
controlled radiant heat mat to the outside of the tank.
mann's tortoise egg if incubated below 29.5°C will pro-
The tank is then completely filled with the substrate,
duce predominantly male hatchlings and those incubated
which is kept moist by regular misting with a plant
at or above 32°C will produce predominantly female. In
sprayer, and by placing shallow containers of fltered
leopard geckos, temperatures at or below 29°C will pro-
and previously boiled water in amongst the eggs. This
duce predominantly females, intermediate temperatures
provides a drier atmosphere, more suitable for desert
30-32°C produce mostly males and temperatures above
dwelling species.
 34°C will again produce mostly females (although the lat-
Care should be taken not to allow the humidity to drop
ter temperatures are not recommended as they are close
below 50%, as reptile eggs are porous and excessively dry
to the lethal limit for incubation). It is interesting to note
conditions will dehydrate the foetus inside and lead to
that in leopard geckos incubated at cooler temperatures
high levels of mortality. Equally, excessive levels of hu-
are also more darkly pigmented than those incubated at
ONG
midity will lead to an increased risk of fungal infection of
higher temperatures.
the shell and contents and again higher mortality rates. It
is therefore important to have both a thermometer and a
Quarantine
humidity gauge within the incubator, and both should be 
 There are an increasing number of viral diseases being
monitored regularly.
discovered in reptiles as well as other known pathogens
Temperatures for incubation of reptile eggs vary from
that can have long incubation periods and may be dif-
26-32°C with an average incubation period in snakes of
ficult to detect ante-mortem. For this reason, it is in-
45-70 days. Incubation periods vary from 45-70 days
-aq adan Mau Aue Bunuueienb iapisuos ol juenod
1abiel pue seuenat 1oy sAep 0fl-06 ol spiezi iaeuus u!
fore adding it to your collection. Periods of quarantine
lizards - see Table 18.3 for more information.
suggested have varied from 6 weeks to 9-12 months.
Reptile and Amphibian Housing, Husbandry and Rearing 271
Veterinary health tests should be carried out where
 use of povidone-iodine-based cleansing agents such as
possible during this period. Ihe new reptile should be
Tamodine-E (Vetark Professional Ltd.) or quaternary am-
housed preferably not only in a separate vivarium but in
monium compounds such as F1o" (Health and Hygiene
-dag 'asedsiie auues au Bueus pione oi uoou aieiedas e
Pty) should be considered.
arate utensils should be used and they should be cleaned
out and fed last to avoid cross contamination. Disinfec-
References
'aseasip jo peands euanod pioae on sueodu si uo
Baines, F. and Brames, H. (2010) Preventive reptile medicine and
Typical disinfectants suitable for reptiles include qua-
reptile lighting. Proceedings ofthe Ist International Conference
on Reptile and Amphibian Medicine, Munich, 4-6 March,
ternary ammonium compound based products such as
PP. 3-13.
Ark-Klens(Vetark Professional Ltd.) and F10 (Health
Barnard, S.M. (1996) Reptile Keepers Handbook. Krieger
and Hygiene Pty).
Publishing, Malabar, FL.
Ferguson, G.W., Brinker, A.M., Gehrmann, W.H., Bucklin,
Hospitalised reptiles
S.E., Baines, EM. and Makin, S.J (2010) Voluntary exposure
The guidelines given above for ultraviolet light, humidity
of some western-hemisphere snake and lizard species to
and temperature should be applied for any hospitalised
ultraviolet-B radiation in the feld: How much ultraviolet-B
should a lizard or snake receive in captivity? Zoo Biology,
reptile. However, some important differences may be made
29(3), 317-334.
with regards to substrate which in most cases can be of
newspaper (avoid coloured print which may be irritant) or
Further reading
unbleached paper towelling to ensure good hygiene and fa-
Cooper, J.E. and Jackson, O.F (eds) (198l) Diseases of the
cilitate faecal collection. Space provision may also be com-
Reptilia, Volumes I and 2. Academic Press, London.
promised for short periods of hospitalisation, but periods
Frye, F. (1991) Biomedical and Surgical Aspects of Captive Reptile
of more than 2-3 days, every effort tokeep the reptile inthe
Husbandry, Volurme I and 2. Krieger Publishing, Malabar, FL.
Girling, S.J. and Raiti, P. (eds) (2004) BSAVA Manual of Reptile
minimum dimensions detailed should be made.
Medicine and Surgery, 2nd edn. BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
It is vitally important that the vivarium is cleansed
Mader, D.R. (ed) (2006) Reptile Medicine and Surgery, 2nd edn.
thoroughly between patients to avoid disease spread. The
Elsevier, Philadelphia, PA.
Chapter 19
Reptile and Amphibian Handling and
Chemical Restraint
Handling the reptilian patient
and the thumb and the other between middle and
Is there a need to restrain the reptilian patient?
fourth finger. The other hand is used to grasp the pel-
'ssno eie ian rel passas asea ssat are sada
vic girdle from the dorsal aspect, controlling one limb
and so restraint may be performed without as much risk
with the thumb and forefinger, the other again between
in the case of the debilitated animal. However, it is still
middle and fourth finger. Ihe handler may then hold the
lizard in a vertical manner, with head uppermost, placing
worthwhile considering factors that may make restraint
dangerous to animal and nurse alike.
the tail underneath his or her arm (Figure 19.1). It is then
· Is the patient in respiratory distress where excessive
possible to present the head and feet of the lizard away
manual manipulation can be dangerous?
from the handler to avoid injury. Ihe handler should al-
· Is the species a fragile one? Day geckos are extremely
low some flexibility as the lizard may struggle and overly
delicate and prone to shedding their tails when han-
rigid restraint could damage the spine.
dled. Similarly some species such as green iguanas are
 More aggressive iguanas may need to be pinned down
prone to conditions such as metabolic bone disease
first. Ihe use of a thick towel to control the tail and claws
where spontaneous fractures occur.
is useful. Gauntlets may be necessary for particularly ag-
+ Is the species an aggressive one? Some are naturally so,
gressive large lizards or for those which may have a ven-
e.g. snapping turtles, tokay geckos and rock pythons.
omous bite. It is important to ensure that you do not use
· Does the reptile patient require medication or physical
too much force when restraining the lizard, as those with
examination? In which case restraint is essential?
skeletal problems, such as metabolic bone disease, may be
I should be noted that many species of reptile have
seriously injured. In addition, lizards do not have a dia-
Salonella spp. present normally in their gut. Personal
phragm and so overzealous restraint will lead to increas-
hygiene is therefore very important when handling these
ing pressure on the lungs.
patients to prevent zoonotic diseases.
Day geckos and other fragile species are best examined
in a clear plastic container. Other geckos have easily dam-
Techniques and equipments
aged skin, so latex-free gloves and soft cloths should be used
involved in restraining reptile
for examination. When handling small lizards, they may be
patients
cupped in the hand and their heads controlled by holding
Lizards
between the index finger and thumb to prevent biting.
Their main danger areas to the handler are their claws and
 It is important that lizards are never restrained by their
teeth, and in some species, such as iguanas, their tails -
tails. Many will shed their tails at this time, but not all
which can lash out in a whiplike fashion.
of them will regrow. Green iguanas, e.g. will only regrow
N行
Geckos, other than tokay geckos, are generally docile
their tails as juveniles (less than 2.5-3 years of age). Once
as are lizards such as bearded dragons. Others, such as
they are older than this, they will be left tailless. However,
there are plenty of lizards that do not undergo autotomy,
RE
e.g. many agamids, chameleons, etc.
towards female owners and handlers as they are able to
detect pheromones secreted during
 the menstrual cycle.
Vagovagal reflex
RT
nd the shoul-
The vagovagal reflex can be used to place members of the
ders (the pectoral girdle) with
 hand, from the dor-
lizard family into a trancelike state. Ihe eyelids are closed
and gentle digital pressure is applied to both eyeballs. This
Reptile and Amphibian Handling and Chemical Restraint 273
Figure 19.1 The iguana should be approached from above grasping
Figure 19.2 Allowing the snake to coil itself around the handler's
A aq uan Aew pue Allesp seae olad pue leoad au jaao
but gently controlled. Tucking the tail underneath the arm prevents
hand and arms is preferable to over-zealous restraint in non-
aggressive species such as this small Royal python (Python regius),
eye injuries.
stinmulates the autonomic parasympathetic nervous sys-
 operating practice with the larger, constricting species
tem resulting in a reduction in heart rate, blood pressure
 of snake. A “buddy system' should be operated wherein
and respiration rate. Providing there are no loud noises
 any snake longer than 5-6 feet in length should only be
or environmental stimulation, after 1-2 minutes the liz-
 handled by two or more people. This ensures that if the
ard may be placed on its side, front, back, etc. allowing
snake was to enwrap one handler, the other could disen-
radiography to be performed without using physical or
tangle him or her by unwinding from the tail end first.
chemical restraint. A loud noise or physical stimulation
Above all, it is important not to grip the snake too hard as
will immediately cause the lizard to revert to its normal
this will cause bruising and the release of myoglobin from
wakeful state.
muscle cells. Ihis can damage the glomerular filtration
membrane in the kidneys.
Snakes
aq Ae satoads anissanle Aian no saeus snouan
 Snakes are all characterised by their elongated form and
-'t ae asi soo aus un ie painsa
absence of limbs. Ihe danger areas for the handler are
feet steel rods with a blunt shepherd's hook on the end.
their teeth (and in the case of the most venomous spe-
They are used to loop under the body of a snake to move
cies such as the viper family, their fang teeth), and, in the
it at arm's length into a container. The hook may also be
case of the constrictor and python family, their ability to
used to trap the head flat against the floor before grasp-
asphyxiate their prey by winding themselves around the
ing it with the hand. Once the head is controlled safely
victim's chest and neck.
the snake is rendered harmless. Exceptions include the
With this in mind, the following restraint techniques
spitting cobra family where handlers should wear plastic
may be employed. Non-venomous snakes can be re-
gpggles, or a plastic face visor as they can spit poison into
strained by controlling the head initially. Ihis is done by
the prey or assailant's eyes and mucous membranes caus-
placing the thumb over the occiput and curling the fin-
ing blindness and paralysis.
 gers under the chin. Reptiles, like birds, have only one oc-
cipital condyle, so it is important to stabilise the occipito-
Chelonia
atlantal joint. It is also important to support the rest of
The majority of Chelonia are harmless, although sur-
the snake's body so that not all of the weight of the snake 
prisingly strong. Mediterranean species, the tortoise
is suspended from the head. Allow the smaller species to
may be held with both hands, one on either side of
 coil around the handler's arm, so the snake is supporting
the main part of the shell behind the front legs. To keep
itself (Figure 19.2).
the tortoise still for examination, it may be placed onto a
 Inthe larger species (longer than 10 feet) it is necessary
cylinder or stack of tins, raising its legs clear of the table
to support the body length at regular intervals. This often
as it balances on the centre of the underside of the shell
requires several handlers. Indeed, it is vital to adopt a safe
(plastron)
274 Veterinary Nursing of ExoticPets
For aggressive species (e.g. snapping turtle and the al-
 Before discussing the administration of chemical re-
ligator snapping turtle), it is essential that you hold the
 straint it is important to understand the reptilian respira-
shell on both sides behind and above the rear legs to avoid
tory system.
being bitten. Chemical restraint is necessary in order to
examine the head region in these species.
Overview of reptilian respiratory
 For the soft-shelled and aquatic species, soft cloths and la-
anatomy and physiology
tex-free gloves should be used to prevent damaging the shell.
The reptilian patient has a number of variations on the
basic mammalian respiratory system.
Crocodylia
The reptile patient has a glottis similar to the avian pa
The Crocodylia include fresh and saltwater crocodiles, al-
tient, which lies at the base of the tongue. Ihis is more
ligators, fish-eating gharials, and caimans. Their dangers
rostral in snakes and lizards and more caudal in Chelonia.
to the handler lie in their impressively arrayed jaws and
At rest, the glottis is permanently closed, opening briefly
often their sheer size - an adult bull Nile crocodile may
 during inspiration and expiration. In crocodiles, the glot-
weigh many hundreds of kilograms.
tis is obscured by the basihyal valve which is a fold of the
 Small specimens may be restrained by grasping the
epiglottis. This fold has to be deflected before they can be
base of the tail in one hand whilst the other is placed
intubated (Bennett, 1998).
The trachea varies between orders. In Chelonia and
halter or noose may be tied around the snout so secur-
Crocodylia, complete cartilaginous rings similar to those
ing it closed. All of the major muscles in the crocodyl-
 of the avian patient are found, with chelonians having a
ian jaws are involved in closing not opening them, hence
very short trachea. In some species, this trachea bifurcates
relatively fine rope or tape can be used to keep the mouth
into two bronchi in the neck Snakes and lizards have in-
closed. The rest of the animal is restrained by pinning it
complete C-rings, with snakes having a very long trachea.
 to the ground.
The lungs of snake and lizard species are simple and
Always approach crocodylians from head on, as their
elastic in nature. Ihe left lung of most snakes is absent;
binocular vision is poor (although the alligator family
or vestigial in the case of members of the boiid family.
does have some). Care should be taken when close to the
The right lung of snakes frequently ends in an air sac.
crocodylian for head and tail movements both are di-
-ns bu paneido anou e aey saiads uenuola
rected at the assailant at the same time!
ture, and the paired lungs sit dorsally inside the carapace
 Much larger crocodiles require teams of people, with
of the shell. Crocodylian lungs are similar to mammalian
nets and snout snares in order to quickly clamp the
lungs and are paired.
jaws closed and to restrain the dangerous thrashing tail.
No reptile has a diaphragm, although crocodylians
 Chemical immobilisation via dart guns is another option
have a pseudodiaphragm which changes position with
to be seriously considered.
the movements of the liver and gut so pushing air in and
out of the lungs. Most reptiles use intercostal muscles to
Principles of chemical restraint
move the ribcage in and out in a manner similar to birds.
Chemical restraint is necessary for many procedures in
The exception to this is members of the order Chelonia.
reptile medicine, ranging from minor procedures such
These species need to move their limbs, neck and head
as extracting the head of a leopard tortoise or box turtle
into and out of the shell in order to bring air into and out
 from its shell, to enabling a jugular blood sarmple to be
of the lungs.
ON
taken or to carrying out coeliotomy procedures because
Some species can survive in oxygen-deprived atmo-
of egg binding. Before any anaesthetic or sedative is ad-
spheres for prolonged periods - chelonian species may
53
ministered, an assessment of the reptile patient's health
survive for 24 hours or more, and even green iguanas may
should be made. Considerations include
survive for 4-5 hours. Ihis makes induction of anaesthe-
REF
·Is sedation or anaesthesia necessary for the procedure
sia via inhalation of a gaseous anaesthetic agent almost
RT III:
required?
impossible in these animals. Ihe stimulus for respiration
+ Is the reptile suffering from respiratory disease or sep-
in reptiles is therefore predominantly driven by lowered
ticaemia?
pO2 rather than elevated pCO2 and many reptiles when
PA
 Is the reptile's health likely to be made worse by seda
breath-holding show right-to-left shunting of blood in
tion or anaesthesia?
the heart so by-passing the lungs
Reptile and Amphibian Handling and Chemical Restraint 275
 Many snakes have both intrapulmonary chemorecep-
to reduce bradycardia; however, these are not usually of
tors and stretch receptors whereas many chelonians have
concern in reptiles. Indeed, antimuscarinics may increase
only stretch receptors, hence when there are high levels 
the thickness of mucus secretions, leading to more rapid
of carbon dioxide, snakes can override the volume related
 blocking of the airways. In addition, in herbivores it can
feedback and continue to breathe. Hypercapnia tends to
 result in prolonged periods of ileus.
increase the tidal volume by suppressing the stretch recep-
tors. Hypoxia increases breathing frequency by reducing
Tranquilisers
or eliminating the non-breathing periods and these effects
Acepromazine (0.1-0.5 mg/kg IM) may be given one
aeiaduat euaaa iaa ne paseanut ae
hour before anaesthetic induction to reduce the levels of
In snakes, the central control of respiration can also 
anaesthetic required, as can diazepam (0.22-0.62 mg/kg
breathing even when constricting prey or swallowing
(Bennett, 1998).
large prey which may inmpinge on the lungs.
Pre-anaesthetic preparation
Alpha-2 adrenoceptor stimulants
Weight measurement
Xylazine at 1 mg/kg can be used 30 minutes prior to ket-
Ihis is important for accuracy as some species of reptile
amine in crocodylians to reduce the dose of ketanmine
may be very small. Scales accurate to 1 g are therefore ad-
 needed. Medetomidine, used at doses of 100-150 mg/kg,
vised for smaller reptiles to ensure correct dosage.
markedly reduces the dose of ketamine required in che-
lonians, and has the advantage of being reversible with
Blood testing
atipamezole at 500-750 mg/kg. Ihey both create a drop in
I may be advisable to test biochemical and haematologi-
blood pressure and cardiac output and so should be used
cal parameters before administering chemical immobilis-
with caution in debilitated reptiles.
ing drugs. Blood samples can be taken from
· Jugular vein in Chelonia
Opioids
· Dorsal tail vein in Chelonia
 Butorphanol (at 0.4 mg/kg IM) can be administered
· Ventral tail vein in snakes, Crocodylia and lizards
 20 minutes before anaesthesia; this provides analgesia
· Palatine vein or cardiac puncture in snakes (although
 and reduces the amount of anaesthetic required. This
they frequently need to be sedated or anaesthetised to
 drug may be combined with midazolam at 2 mg/kg.
collect blood from these routes).
It does not have any sedation or general anaesthetic
properties but does seem to have anaesthetic sparing
Fasting
properties allowing reduced levels of gaseous anaes-
Fasting is necessary in snakes to prevent regurgitation
thetic to be used.
and pressure on the lungs or heart. It is advisable to en-
od shep omi au u paio uaaq seq Aand ou je ains
to anaesthesia. Other reptiles require less fasting, e.g. che-
Fluids
Huid therapy is very important, and correction
lonians rarely if ever regurgitate. However, it is important
of fluid deficits should be attempted prior to surgery.
not to feed live prey to insectivores such as leopard geckos 
24 hours prior to an anaesthetic as the prey may still be
 Maintenance levels in reptile patients have been quoted
alive when the reptile is anaesthetised.
as 25-30 mL/kg/day (see chapter 22 for more information
on fluid therapy in reptiles).
Pre-anaesthetic medications
Induction of anaesthesia
Premedications are used to provide cardiopulmonary
and central nervous system stabilisation, a smooth an-
It should be noted that reptiles should never be immo-
aesthetic induction, muscle relaxation, analgesia and a
bilised by chilling or cooling them down. Ihis does not
 provide analgesia and has serious welfare implications.
'uotepas jo aa1gap
Antimuscarinic medications
Injectable agents
Atropine (0.01-0.04 mg/kg IM) or glycopyrrolate
 Table 19.1 describes the advantages and disadvantages of
(0.01 mg/kg IM) may be used to reduce oral secretion and
injectable anaesthetic agents.
276 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Table 19.1 Advantages and disadvantages of injectable
but induction takes longer via this route (25-40 minutes).
an aesthetics.
 Doses of 9 mg/kg have been advised and it appears in
many reptiles not to be capable of inducing full anaes-
Advantages
Disadvantages
thesia but rather permitting intubation and causing im-
 Ease of adrninistration
Recovery often dependent on
mobilisation (Sheelings et al., 2010).
organ metabolism 
Propofol: Propofol produces rapid induction and recov-
 Prevention of breath-holding
Difficult to reverse rapidlly
on induction
aq uoeua hos e apnu saeunape si xia
and minimal organ metabolism, making it relatively safe
Reduced costs
Often prolonged recovery times
to use in debilitated reptiles which often have some liver
Easy to administer
Muscle necrosis at site of
damage.
injection
Low risk to anaesthetist
although use of the intraosseous route is useful in green
iguanas at a dose of 10 mg/kg. Propofol also produces a
transient period of apnoea and some cardiac depression.
In this situation, intubation and positive pressure ventila-
Dissociative anaesthetics
tion is necessary.
Ketamine: Recommended levels range from 22
Doses of 10-15 mg/kg in chelonians given via the
to 44 mg/kg IM for sedation to 55-88 mg/kg IM for
dorsal coccygeal (tail) vein have successfully induced
surgical anaesthesia. Lower levels are needed if com-
anaesthesia in under l minute. Ihis allows intubation
-au io uelozepiu se ns juesiaaid e iim pau
and maintenance on a gaseous anaesthetic if required.
detomidine (Bennett, 1996). Doses in excess of 110
Alternatively, propofol can be used alone providing
mg/kg will produce profound bradycardia and the
a period of anaesthesia of 20-30 minutes. For giant
death of the reptile.
Effects are seen in 10-30 minutes but may take anything
species of Chelonia, lower doses of 1-2 mg/kg IV/IO have
been used.
up to 4 days to wear off particularly at low environmental
temperatures. Its main use is therefore at the lower dose
Depolarising muscle relaxants
range, to allow sedation, facilitate intubation and main-
Succinylcholine: This is a neuromuscular blocking
tenance of gaseous anaesthesia in species such as chelo-
agent and produces immobilisation without provid-
nians that hold their breath during gaseous induction.
ing analgesia. Therefore, it should only be used to aid
Doses of 5-10 mg/kg have been used in Chelonia to allow
the administration of another form of anaesthetic or for
extraction of the head from the shell.
transportation, and not as a sole source of anaesthesia.
I is, however, frequently painful on administration.
Recovery is dependent on liver metabolism and its use
Also, because ketamine is excreted by the kidneys, it is
in animals with possible liver disease should be avoided.
recommended that it is administered in the cranial half
It can be used in giant Chelonia at doses of 0.5-1 mg/
of the body. This is because blood from the caudal half
kg IM and will allow intubation and conversion to gas-
of the body travels to the kidneys before returning to the
eous anaesthesia. Crocodilians can be immobilised with
heart and the anaesthetic may thus be excreted before it
3-5 mg/kg IM, with immobilisation occurring within 4
has a chance to work In addition, as it is actively excreted
minutes and recovery in 7-9 hours. Respiration usually
by the kidneys, its use in reptiles with renal disease will
continues without assistance at these doses, but is im-
ON
result in prolonged recovery periods.
portant to have assisted ventilation facilities to hand as
Ketamine (5 mg/kg) may be combined with medeto-
paralysis of the muscles of respiration can easily occur.
midine (100 ug/kg) to facilitate intubation of small rep
Reversal of succinylcholine is not possible and the
tiles (<2 kg) or at 7.5 mg/kg ketamine plus 75 ug/kg me-
patient must be ventilated until the drug has been
REI
detomidine for reptiles >2 kg.
excreted.
Other injectable anaesthetics
Gallamine: This has been used in crocodiles (0.3-1.5 mg/
Alfaxalone: This can be used to aid induction, allow-
kg) to achieve immobility in 15-30 minutes with a recov-
ing intubation within 3-5 minutes when administered
ery time of 1.5-3 hours. Its advantage over succinylcho-
intravenously. It may be administered intramuscularly
line is that it is reversible with neostigmine (0.25 mg/kg).
Reptile and Amphibian Handling and Chemical Restraint 277
Table 19.2 Advantages and disadvantages of gaseou5
maintenance of light anaesthesia for longer procedures
anaesthetic.
but caution should be observed as it may not produce
[e u sainpand aniseau moe cl eisaisaeue yanoua
Advantages
Disadvantages
species. Kischinovsky and Bertelsen (2011) showed that
 Ease of administration via 
 Breath-holding (chelonia
30 mg/kg was required in green iguanas to achieve sur-
face mask
particularly)
 gical anaesthesia, but many became apnoeic. Recovery
 Pain free
Environmental pollution
times are often l-4 hours.
 Minirmal tissue trauma
Health risk to anaesthetist
Risk with dangerous reptiles
Gaseous agents
during handling
Isoflurane
Isoflurane is the gaseous maintenance anaesthetic of
choice (see also Table 19.2). Isoflurane is minimally me-
Gaseous agents
tabolised in the body (0.3%) and has a very low blood-
The gaseous anaesthetics used for induction will be dis-
gas partition coeficient (1.4 compared with 2.3 for hal-
cussed in the next section on maintenance of anaesthesia,
 othane in human trials). IThis means that it has a very
however, a table listing their advantages and disadvan-
low solubility in blood, so as soon as administration is
tages is presented in Table 19.2.
stopped the reptile starts to recover, excreting it from
the lungs. In addition, it has low fat solubility and so is
Maintenance of anaesthesia
 not stored. Isoflurane still has excelent muscle relaxing
Injectable agents
 properties and is a good analgesic during anaesthesia.
Dissociative anaesthetics
Apnoea precedes cardiac arrest, unlike the case with
Ketamine: Ketamine may be used on its own for anaes-
halothane anaesthe sia.
thesia at doses of 55-88 mg/kg IM. It is worthwhile not-
 It can be used to induce anaesthesia in those species
ing though that as the dosages get higher the recovery
not exhibiting breath- holding at levels of 4-5%, by in-
time also increases, and in some cases it can be as long
duction chamber. It is also possible to adapt the cases of
as several days. Also, doses above 110 mg/kg will cause
20 mL and 60 mL syringes to form long, thin face masks
 respiratory arrest and bradycardia.
to induce snakes. Isoflurane can then be used to maintain
Ketamine may be combined with other injectable
anaesthesia, preferably via endotracheal tube, at levels
agents to provide surgical anaesthesia. Exanmples of these
from 2-3% depending on the procedure.
combinations include
* Midazolam at 2 mg/kg IM with 40 mg/kg ketamine in
Sevoflurane
turtles (Bennett, 1996)
·Xylazine at 1 mg/kg IM, given 30 minutes prior to
As with isoflurane, this drug may be safely used. It is
highly insoluble in the bloodstream though, and so ven-
20 mg/kg ketamine in large crocodiles (Lawton, 1992)
·Medetomidine at 100 mg/kg IM with 50 mg/kg
tilation rates may need to be increased above the usual
4-6 breaths per minute to maintain anaesthesia. In this
ketamine in kingsnakes (Malley, 1997).
author's experience, it cannot be used to maintain anaes-
thesia alone in certain species of reptiles (leopard geckos,
Other injectable anaesthetics
bearded dragons and green tree pythons to name a few)
Propofol: Propofol may be used to give 20-30 minutes of
and so care should be taken in selecting this gas particu-
anaesthesia after administration, allowing minor proce-
larly when using a different induction agent as once the
dures such as wound repair, intraosseous or intravenous
catheter placement, or oesophagostomy tube placement
Induction and maintenance levels of sevoflurane are
to be carried out.
higher than for isoflurane being typically 6-8% and 3-4%
 It may be topped up at 1 mg/kg/min IV/IO, but apnoea
is extremely common and intubation and ventilation with
respectively.
100% oxygen is required.
Nitrous oxide
Alphaxalone: Ihis can be used for induction and also
Nitrous oxide can be used in conjunction with isoflurane,
for short periods of anaesthesia (average 25 minutes)
 reducing the percentage of gaseous anaesthetic required
at 9 mg/kg IV/IO. Topping up of the anaesthetic allows
for induction and maintenance of anaesthesia. Its other
278 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
advantages include good muscle relaxation and excellent
analgesic properties, making it useful in orthopaedic pro-
cedures.
 Disadvantages of nitrous include its tendency to accu-
loj uaqond e anond Aeu s 'sueio mou ui areu
herbivorous reptiles as they often have capacious hind guts
and nitrous oxide can accumulate there. Nitrous oxide also
requires some organ metabolism for full excretion and so
may be a problem in a seriously diseased patient. It also
prolongs anaesthetic recovery times by up to 50%.
Aspects of gaseous anaesthesia
maintenance for reptiles
Inhalant gaseous anaesthesia is becoming the main
method of anaesthetising reptiles for prolonged proce-
 dures. Ihe reptile patient should preferably be intubated
to allow the inhalant anaesthetic to be delivered in a con-
trolled manner.
Intubation
Intubation is straightforward in reptiles as they do not
Figure 19.3 Intraoral views after intubation of a green tree python
have an epiglottis and the glottis, which acts as the en-
(Morelia viriois) showing glottal tube.
trance to the trachea, is relatively cranial in the major-
ity of species. It is useful to note that the glottis is kept
closed at rest, so the operator must wait for inspiration
to occur to allow intubation. Reptiles produce little or no
saliva when at rest or not eating, so blockage of the tube
is uncommon.
 In snakes, the glottis sits rostrally on the floor of the
 mouth just caudal to the tongue sheath and is easily visible
when the mouth is opened (Figure 19.3). Intubation may
be performed in the conscious patient if necessary, as rep-
tiles do not have a cough reflex. The mouth is opened with
a wooden or plastic tongue depressor and the endotracheal
tube inserted during inspiration. Alternatively, an induc-
tion agent may be given and then intubation attempted.
Figure 19.4 Intraoral viev of a tortoise showing the fleshy tongue
In Chelonia, the glottis sits slightly more caudally
and the glottis at its base.
at the base of the tongue (Figure 19.4). Ihe trachea is
very short and the endotracheal tube should only be
some species of gecko (Porter, 1972). Some may be in-
inserted a fe w centimetres, otherwise there is a risk that
N行
tubated consciously, but most are better induced with an
only one or the other of the bronchi will be intubated,
injectable preparation or by face mask using gas. Some
leading to only one lung receiving the anaesthetic. An
species may be toosmallfor intubation. The larger species
induction agent such as ketamine or propofol is advised
may also require a mouth gag to avoid biting down on the
RE
for chelonians prior to intubation due to their ability to
tube (see Figure 19.6).
breath-hold and difficulty in extracting the head from
Crocodylia have a basihyal fold (Bennett, 1998) that
the shell.
acts as an epiglottis and needs to be depressed prior to
Lizards vary depending on the species, most hav-
intubation. Because they are potentially dangerous, these
ing just a glottis guarding the entrance to the trachea
species require some form of injectable chemical sedation
(Figure 19.5). Some species possess vocal folds, notably
 or induction prior to intubation.
Reptile and Amphibian Handling and Chemical Restraint 279
fully consciously, anaesthesia may be induced, even in
breath-holding species, by using positive pressure ventila
tion, in a matter of 5-10 minutes. Ihis does have some
advantages as the avoidance of injectable induction agents
leads to rapid post-operative recovery.
-Uan aimssaid aasod anban arojanaul saioads Ae
tilation during the course of an anaesthetic. The aim of
intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV) is to in-
flate the lungs with an oxygen and anaesthetic mixture
enough for an adequately oxygenated state to be main-
tained and for the animal to remain anaesthetised. To
this end it is sufficient to ventilate most reptiles six times
a minute and no more, at a pressure of 10-15 cm water.
As with birds, a ventilator unit makes life much easier,
Figure 19.5 Intraoral views after intubation of a green iguana
but with experience, manual "bagging' of the patient with
(guana iguana) showing fleshy tongue.
enough pressure just to inflate the lungs and no more can
be achieved (Figures 19.7 and 19.8a and 19.8b). A rough
guide is to inflate the first two-fifths of the reptile's body
at each cycle (Malley, 1997).
Anaesthetic circuits
For species weighing less than 5 kg, a non-rebreathing
system with oxygen flow at twice the minute volume
is suggested (Bennett, 1998). Ihis approximates to
300-500 mL/kg/min for most species. Ayres T pieces,
modified ('mini') Bain circuits and Mapleson C circuits
may all be used.
NB: normal tidal volumes vary in reptiles widely
(e.g., 12.5 mL/kg in boas to 45 mL/kg in freshwater
turtles. They frequently have a ventilation-perfusion mis-
Figure 19.6 A mouth gag may be needed in larger species such as
match and right-to-left pulmonary shunts, all of which
this Savannah monitor lizard (Varanus exanthematicus) to prevent
may be exacerbated by the presence of increased coelo-
them biting down on the tube.
mic contents such as gravidity or recent large meals.
Intermittent positive pressure ventilation
If intubation is performed on a conscious patient, anaes-
thesia may be induced, even in breath-holding species, by
 using positive pressure ventilation. Ihis has some advan-
tages as it leads to rapid post-operative recovery.
Tidal volume of reptiles varies between species (many
boids are around 12.5 mL/kg, many aquatic turtles are
around 45 mL/kg). There is ofen right-to-left pulmonary
3
shunting of blood which can be worsened by the presence
of intracoelomic masses such as eggs, food or effusions. In
REI
addition, position ofthe reptile may also create a perfusion
mismatch as many chelonians require to be placed in dor-
sal recumbency to expose the plastron for surgery, thus
PART
allowing the dorsally located lungs to be squashed by the
Figure 19.7 Manual bagging of a garter snake (7hamnophis
sirtalis). Note Doppler probe to monitor heart sounds, and Mapleson
liver and gastrointestinal tract. If intubation is performed
C circuit for smaller species.
280 Veterinary Nursing of ExoticPets
[a]
Reptiles should be maintained as near to their preferred
body temperature (PBT) as possible, which lies in the
range 22-30°C for most species. Ihis can be achieved by
placing the reptile onto acirculating water or air heating
pad during anaesthesia and room temperature should
be kept up to reduce heat losses. Warmed subcutane-
 ous or intracoelomic fluids can be given during and after
surgery.
 Hot water bottles or hot water-flled latex gloves may
juaaaid oi Busamoi ul paddeim aq snu imq pasn aq ose
direct contact with the reptile. Care should be taken when
these cool down, as they may then draw heat away from
the patient rather than provide it. Ihe use of clear drapes
will also help to keep heat in as will the utilisation of light
(b)
 sources for surgery, many of which radiate heat.
Fluid therapy
Fluid therapy is covered in more detail in chapter 22.
However, it should be noted that, as with small mammals,
post-operative fluid therapy will enhance the recovery
rate and improve the patient's return to normal function.
Recommended fluid volumes are 20-25 mL/kg every
24 hours across the species (Frye, 1991). Ihey should not
exceed 2-3% body weight in chelonians.
Monitoring anaesthesia
Box 19.1 shows the stages of anaesthesia seen in reptiles.
Figure 19.8 (a) and (b) Mechanical IPPV using a ventilator in
 Monitoring the heart rate and rhythm can be difficult
the green iguana (iguana iguana). Note again Doppler probe and
cranial position of the heart in iguanids.
with a conventional stethoscope due to the rough scales
of the reptile interfering with sound transmission and the
three chambered heart of reptiles which reduces the clar-
Additional supportive therapy
ity of the heart beat. Some of this can be overcome by
Recumbency
placing a damp towel over the area to be auscultated so
Many chelonians are placed in dorsal recumbency for
deadening the sound of the scales, but in many cases the
intracoelomic surgery. Other groups of reptiles may also
 best solution is to resort to using a Doppler probe which
 be placed in this position for similar techniques. The use
may be placed over the heart outlet at the base of the neck
of foam wedges, or positional polystyrene-filled vacuum
in lizards and Chelonia (Figure 19.9) and directly over the
 bags, is essential to maintain stability.
heart in snakes (Figure 19.10). Changes in rate and inten-
Snakes may become extremely flaccid during surgery.
sity of flow can then be monitored.
ON
 In order to provide stability they may be strapped to a
Pulse oximetry is not useful in reptiles due to the dif-
long board or wedged in place with foam wedges or vac-
ferences in haemoglobin structure, which makes inter-
uum bags. In any case, it is important to keep the body
pretation impossible. General trends though may be
wall of non-chelonian species free of constraint and to use
monitored but this author finds them generally unreliable
RE
IPPV if necessary.
in reptiles.
Capnography is also debateable as to its usefulness due
Maintenance of body temperature
to cardiac shunting of blood in reptiles, which means that
RT
Maintaining body temperature is important for succe ss-
expired carbon dioxide levels do not reflect arteriallevels.
ful recovery. Body temperature can be monitored us-
ECG leads may be attached to the patient to give an
ing a cloacal probe attached to a digital thermometer.
electrical trace of heart activity. Ihe alligator forceps on
Reptile and Amphibian Handling and Chemical Restraint 28 1
Box 19.1 Stages of anaesthesia in reptiles
 Stage 1
● Limb movements reduced
●Righting reflex present (reptile willflip back onto its feet after
being inverted)
● Snake tongue withdrawn after being grasped
● Responds to noxious stimuli
● Muscles are tense
 Writhing movements occur
Vent stimulation reflex present
● Palpebral reflex present
Stage 2
Righting reflex ceases
● Tongue withdrawal reflex much reduced
Figure 19.9 Doppler probe monitoring of heart sounds in an
 No response to noxious stimuli
anaesthetised spur-thighed tortoise ( Testuoc graeca)-
 Muscles start to relax
● Writhing movements cease
* Vent reflex reduced
* Palpebral reflex diminished
Stage 3
 Righting reflex ceased
● No voluntary motion
 Tongue withdrawal reflex totally absent
● No response to noxious stimuli
 Muscles totally relaxed
●Snakes: Bauchstreich reflex (where stroking of the ventral
 scales produces movement in the body wall) much reduced
 Laryngeal reflexes lost in alligators
● Chelonia still have a corneal reflex
● Vent reflex much reduced - loss of this indicates anaesthesia is
too deep
 Figure 19.10 Doppler probe monitoring heart sounds in an
 Stage 4
anaesthetized garter snake (Thamnoohis sirtalis). Note also the tape
● Extreme depression and death (Chelonia lose corneal reflexes
securing the ET tube and the snakes head to prevent dislodgement.
 just before entering this phase)
Respiratory flow monitors are not so useful due to the
need for IPPV in most reptile species.
the leads may be attached to hypodermic needles which
can then be attached to the patient to minimise the
Recovery and analgesia
crushing effects of the forceps on small fragile patients.
Recovery
In snakes, these can still be used, even in the absence
Reptiles often recover rapidly from isoflurane anaesthesia.
of limbs. Ihe leads are placed two heart lengths cranial
But, if other injectable drugs were used, such as alphaxo-
and caudal to the heart. In some lizards, such as iguanas,
lone or ketamine, recovery may be prolonged. It is essen-
skinks, chameleons and water dragons, the heart is situ-
tial at this time to keep the reptile patient calm, stress free
aed far cranially and hence the forelimb leads are better
and at its optimum preferred body temperature. It is also
placed cervically. Heart rates may be measured and com-
necessary to keep the patient intubated and on IPPV with
pared with the forrmula
Oxygen until the reptile is once again breathing for itself.
HR = 33.4 × [Body weight (kg)]-0.25
The use of doxapram at dose of 5 mg/kg by intramuscular
or intravenous injection is useful to help stimulate res-
Assuming the reptile is kept in its preferred optimum
 piration. Ihe stimulus for reptiles to breathe, however,
temperature, i.e. it is at its preferred body temperature.
is a falling blood partial pressure of oxygen, and not a
282 Veterinary Nursing of ExoticPets
rising partial pressure of carbon dioxide, so IPPV with
noted in concentrations needed, depending on where the
100% oxygen may actually inhibit respiration. Iherefore,
drug was administered with significantly reduced levels
recovery using room air, or increasing the intervals be-
being achieved, if injected in the hindlimbs versus the
tween ventilations from one every 10 seconds to one ev-
forelimb (thought to be hepatic removal) - also enterohe-
ery 20-30 seconds may be helpful in lowering pO2 and so
 patic rec ycling has been noted.
aid in stimulating spontaneous breathing.
Fluid therapy during this period will also help to speed
Morphine
m auia se yns suae i Aienadsa Kianoan
Morphine has been shown to be effective at high doses
are cleared through the kidneys. Once recovery is com-
in bearded dragons (10 mg/kg) (Greenacre et al., 2008),
plete, the reptile should be encouraged to eat, or, if ano-
but at 1.5-6.5 in turtles with a duration of activity which
rectic, the patient should be assist fed, stomach tubed etc.
lasted 24 hours (Sladky et al., 2007). At high doses, mor-
Many snakes wil start to show sinuous movements
phine can act as a significant respiratory depressant
from the tail end first as they recover. Chelonians will
in some species (Sladky et al., 2007; Sladky et al., 2008;
start to move hindlimbs and then forelimbs and lizards
Sladky et al., 2009) and that its onset of action can be pro-
will start uncoordinated hindlimb movements followed
longed (2-8 hours) due to unknown factors.
by forelimb movements.
Butorphanol
Analgesia for reptiles
The same studies suggested that butorphanol may not be
Pain assessment in reptiles
an effective analgesic even at excessive dosages. However,
Reptiles which have been provided with analgesia have
it has been used at 0.4 mg/kg prior to anaesthesia and
been shown to have a quicker return to normality, eat-
found to have anaesthetic sparing effects.
ing, normal behaviour etc. than those who do not re-
ceive analgesia. However, assessing pain in reptiles is
NSAIDS
extremely difficult owing to the huge species variations.
 All NSAIDs are potentially nephrotoxic and have gas-
 Mosley (2011) has derived an approach to pain assess-
trointestinal ulcerative side effects and hence fluid
ment which tries to encompass behaviour (taking into
therapy and close monitoring should be performed.
account species variations, stage of ecdysis, hibernation
Carprofen at 2-4 mg/kg IM once, and then 1-2 mg/kg
status, socialisation, concurrent illness, and owner assess-
every 24-72 hours thereafter has been advised. Pharma-
ment of their pet), environmental considerations (enclo-
cokinetic studies on meloxicam at 0.2 mg/kg orally ev-
sure and temperature range), locomotor activity (taking
ery 24 hours have also been recommended (Hernandez-
 into account posture, gait) and miscellaneous attributes
Divers et al., 2004). However, the same study showed
(including appetite, eyelid position, colour changes and
that doses of 5 mg/kg meloxicam were administered
abnormal respiratory movements). These are compared
ou pampoid pue seuenai uaana ui shep Zl roy Aeno
with the anticipation of pain levels based on our under-
clinically apparent abnormalities of histopathological
standing in mammals and birds.
lesions associated with toxicity.
N
General but non-specific signs of pain in reptiles in-
However, dosages of 0.3 mg/kg meloxicam in ball py-
clude immobility, anorexia, abnormal locomotion and
thons (Python regius) showed no decrease in physiologi-
 posture, increased aggression and in those species which
cal stress after a surgical procedure suggesting it did not
can control chromatophore expression in their skin, a
provide adequate analgesia (Olesen et al., 2008). This
ON
dull or dark colouration (e.g. chameleons and bearded
dragons). Many snakes with visceral pain will adopt an
53
S-shaped position.
control animals after surgery!
RE
Analgesics used in reptiles
Other analgesics
Buprenorphine
Tramadol has been used at 11 mg/kg in bearded dragons
Buprenorphine at 0.01-0.02 mg/kg IM have been recom-
(Greenacre et al., 2008) and at 10-25 mg/kg in red-eared
mended but doses of 0.075-0.1 mg/kg were needed in
terrapins (Cummings et al., 2009) and found to increase
red-eared terrapins in order to maintain therapeutic levels
the threshold to noxious stimuli and is thought to work
for 24 hours (Kummrow et al., 2008. Some difference was
via its weak opioid activity on mu receptors. Duration
Reptile and Amphibian Handling and Chemical Restraint 283
 in the terrapins was between 6 and 96 hours when given
When handing the amphibian patient, the method
 orally (10-25 mg/kg) and 12-48 hours when given paren-
 of restraint will obviously depend on the animal's body
terally (10 mg/kg).
shape. The elongated form of salamanders and newts will
Ketamine appears to be well tolerated in reptiles and
require similar restraint to that of alizard, with one hand
has been used as an adjunct to multimodal analgesia. The
grasping the pectoral girdle from the dorsal aspect, index
alpha-2 drugs may also be useful in analgesia but they do
finger and thumb encircling one forelimb, second and
seem to produce similar undesirable effects as in mam-
third fingers the other, with the opposite hand grasping
mals, i.e. bradycardia, hypotension and a reduction in
the pelvic girdle, again from the dorsal aspect in a similar
arterial pO2 levels (Sleeman & Gaynor, 2000; Dennis &
manner. Some salamanders will shed their tails if roughly
Heard,2002)
handled, so care should be taken with these species.
Large anurans can be restrained by cupping one hand
Local anaesthesia
around the pectoral girdle immediately behind the
Local anaesthetics may be used as ring blocks around
front limbs with the other hand positioned beneath the
amputations to reduce the chances of post-operative self-
 hindlimbs. Care should be taken with some species which
mutilation. Doses should not exceed 4 mg/kg of lidocaine
 have poison glands in their skin, as mentioned above, and
(known toxic doses in mammals are 10-22 mg/kg) and
 in the case of species such as the Argentinian horned frog.
should be diluted to at least 1:10. Bupivicaine should not
care should be taken as they bite. Aquatic urodeles should
exceed5 mg/kg.
be examined only in water as removal causes skin dam-
age. Some of the larger urodeles, such as the hellbender
Overview of amphibian
species (Cryptobranchus spp.) can also infict unpleasant 
anaesthesia
bite wounds on handlers, so firm restraint is required.
Techniques and equipment involved in
Smaller species and aquatic species may be best exam-
restraining amphibian patients
ined in small glass jars.
Examination of the amphibian patient should be per-
formed at that species' optimum preferred body tempera-
Aspects of chemical restraint in
ture, as with reptile patients. A rough guide is between 21
amphibians
and 24°C, which are lower than the more usual 22-32°C
There are three main routes of administration of anaes-
reptile housing conditions.
thetic and sedative agents to amphibians: Injections, in-
The examination table should be covered with paper
halant gaseous anaesthetics and in-water methods.
towels (unbleached) that have been soaked in dechlori-
nated water - preferably purified water. More purified wa-
In-water anaesthetic agents
ter should be on standby to be applied to the amphibian
There are two main anaesthetics - MS-222 and
 patient to prevent dehydration during the examination.
benzocaine.
Initially, it is useful not to restrain the amphibian pa-
tient until the extent of any problem is assessed, as many
MS-222
have severe skin lesions that are extremely fragile. Once
This is tricaine methanesulphonate, an anaesthetic used
an initial assessment has been made, the patient may be
commonly in fish restraint. It is a water soluble white
restrained manually. First, it is advisable to put on a pair
 powder. A range of 1-2 g/L water is required to anaes-
of latex-free gloves in order to minimise irritation to the
thetise most frogs and urodeles, but a solution of 3 g/L
amphibian's skin caused by either the handler's normal
is required for most toads (Wright, 1996). A much re-
acidic skin environment or by the powder in many pre-
duced level of 0.5 g/L can be used for tadpole anaesthesia.
packed latex gloves. The wearing of gloves is also essen-
The same weight of sodium bicarbonate is often added
tial in many species of anurans whose skin can produce
to the water to counteract MS-222's tendency to acidify
irritant or even potentially deadly toxins which can be
the solution.
absorbed through unprotected human skin. It may also
It is best to use the amphibian's own water to minimise
be necessary to wear goggles when handing some spe-
environmental changes, and to place this into a plastic
cies of toad - the giant toad (Bufo marinus) can squirt a
bag, or plastic-lined box. Ihis is useful as many amphib-
toxin from its parotid salivary glands over a distance of
ians go through an excitation stage during anaesthe-
several feet
sia, and the slight give in the plastic bags reduces skin
284 Veterinary Nursing of ExoticPets
damage. It is also important to ensure any anurans and
caecilians may actually suffer severe skin damage during
other non-gilled amphibians can raise their nostrils above
gas chamber induction due to the direct irritant effect of
the water, otherwise they will drown.
the anaesthetic on the skin.
Anaesthesia induction will take 20 minutes or so,
with reducing respiration rates. Respiration may even
Analgesia
stop, although cardiac function persists. During the
 There is limited research and knowledge into pain and its
induction period, the ventrum of the amphibian will
redden and anurans will become excited, making leap-
is also diffcult, but studies by Pezalla (1983) showed that
ing movements.
the wiping response (where the hindlimb wiped the af-
Initial anaesthesia is manifested by the inability of the
fected limb) to increasing levels of acetic acid was a spe-
 amphibian to right itself, and loss of the corneal reflex, but
cific response to pain. Ihese tests showed that opioids
with pain reflexes still intact. A deep plane of anaesthesia
(e.g, morphine, butorphanol and buprenorphine) could
is when all of these are abolished and only the heartbeat
raise the pain threshold in amphibians. Indications are
can be seen as a sign of movement. Ihe level of anaes-
that mu and kappa receptors exist in the spinal cord of
thesia can be maintained by trickling the anaesthetic so-
amphibians.
lution over the amphibian's body once the amphibian is
 In addition, other tests showed the analgesic efficacy
removed from the solution. Reversal is achieved by trick-
of alpha-2 agonists such as xylazine (Terril-Robb et al.,
ling fresh, distilled, oxygenated water over the amphib-
1996; Brenner et al., 1994). NSAIDs produced weaker but
ian's skin.
still significant analgesic effects. Barbiturates, however,
did not seem to provide analgesia in a similar study.
Benzocaine
Suggested analgesics for frogs include butorphanol
This can be used to anaesthetise many adult amphibians
(25 mg/kg intracoelomically),buprenorphine (14 mg/kg
at solutions of 0.2-0.3 mg/L water. It is more soluble in
intracoelomically), flunixin meglumine (25 mg/kg intra-
ethanol than in water and so is often dissolved in a small
coelomically once) and xylazine (10 mg/kg intracoelomi-
volume of this before it is added to the water. Recovery
cally q12—24 h) (Terril-Robb et al., 1996; Stevens, 2011)
occurs some 60 minutes after rinsing the amphibian with
 Ihis author has also used meloxicam at 0.2 mg/kg per os
benzocaine-free water.
q24 h in Anurans and newts as post-operative analgesia.
I may be necessary to add a buffer solution to the wa-
ter to correct acidification as with MS-222.
References
Bennett, R.A. (1996)Anaesthesia. Reptile Medicine and Surgery
Injectable anaesthetic agents
(ed R. Mader), Pp. 241-247. W.B. Saunders, London.
Ketamine may be used, but is less preferable to MS-222.
Bennett, R.A. (1998) Reptile anaesthesia. Seminars in Aviarn and
Exotic Pet Medicine, 7, 30-40.
This is because relatively large volumes are required
Brenner, G.M., Klopp, A.J, Deason, L.L., et al. (1994)
(75-100 mg/kg (Bennett, 1996)), and the anaesthetic
Analgesic potency of alpha adrenergic agents after systemic
takes a variable period to take effect, from 10 minutes to
administration in amphibians. Journal of Pharmacological
1-2 hours. Injections may be made intramuscularly, in-
Experimental Therapy, 270, 540-545.
Cummings, B.B., Sladky, K.K. and Johnson, S.M. (2009) Tramadol
travenously into the midline ventral abdominal vein or
analgesic and respiratory effects in red-eared slider turtles
subcutaneously.
(Trachermys scripta).Proceedings of the Association of Reptilian
and Amphibian Veterinarians, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, p. 115.
Inhalant gaseous anaesthetic agents
Dennis, PM. and Heard, D.J. (2002) Cardiopulmonary effects
N行
Isoflurane
of a medetomidine-ketamine combination administered
intravenously in gopher tortoises. ournal of the American
This may be used via induction chamber at dose of
Veterinary MedicatAssociation,220,1516-1519.
2.5-3%, or, in the larger species of toads, by dripping it
Frye, F. {1991). Biomedical and Surgicat Aspects of Captive Reptile
RE
directly onto the toad's skin. Some of the larger species
Husbandry. Krieger, Malabar, FL.
may also be intubated, but anaesthesia is often erratic, as
Greenacre, C.B., Massi, K., Schumacher, JP, et al. (2008)
alternative respiratory routes are available to amphibians
Comparative antinociception of various opioids and non-
RT
(cutaneous or buccopharyngeal routes, i.e. the amphibian
steroidal anti-inflammatory medications versus saline in the
bearded dragon (Pogonα vitticeps) using electrostimulation.
can breathe through its skin or oral membranes). Some of
Proceedings of the Association of Reptilian and Amphibian
the more fragile species, such as the smaller urodeles or
Veterinarians, Los Angeles, California, p. 87.
Reptile and Amphibian Handling and Chemical Restraint 285
Hernandez-Divers, S.J., McBride, A., Koch, T., et al. (2004) Single
with alfaxalone. Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the
dose oral and intravenous pharmacokinetics of meloxicam
Association of Reptilian and Amphibian Veterinarians, South
in the green iguana {lguana iguana). Proceedings of the
Padre Island, Texas, Pp. 114-115.
Association of Reptilian and Amphibian Veterinarians, Naples
Sladky, K.K., Kinney, M.E. and Johnson, S.M. (2008) Analgesic
Florida, p. 106.
efficacy of butorphanol and morphine in bearded dragons
Kischinovsky, M. and Bertelsen, M.F. (20ll) Alfaxalone
and corn snakes. Journat of the American Veterinary Medicat
 anaesthesia in green iguanas and red-eared sliders. Proceedings
Association,233,267-273.
ofthe European Association of Zoo and Wildlife Vets, Lisbon,
Sladky, K.K., Kinney, M.E. and Johnson, S.M. (2009) Effects
Lisbon, Portugal, p. 113.
of opioid receptor activation on thermal antinociception in
Kummrow, M.S., Tseng, F, Hesdse, L., et al. (2008)
red-eared slider turtles (Trachemys scripta elegans). American
Pharmacokinetics of buprenorphine after single dose
Journat of Veterinary Research, 70, 1072-1078.
subcutaneous administration in red-eared sliders (Trachemys
Sladky, K.K., Miletic, V., Paul-Murphy, J.J., et al. (2007) Analgesic
scripta elegans). Journal of Zoo and Wildlife Medicine,39,
efficacy and respiratory effects of butorphanol and morphine
590-595.
in turtles. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Lawton, M.PC. (1992) Anaesthesia. Manuat of Reptiles, 1st edn.
Association, 230, 1356-1362.
BSAVA, Cheltenham, Glos.
Sleeman, J.M.
and Gaynor, J. (2000) Sedative
PuE
Malley, D. (1997) Reptile anaesthesia and the practising
cardiopulmonary effects of medetomidine and reversal with
veterinarian. Practice, 19, 351-368.
atipamezole in desert tortoises (Gopherus agassizi). Journal of
Mosley, C. (201l) Pain and nociception in reptiles. Veterinary
Zoo and Witldlife Medicine, 3l, 28-35.
Clinics of North America: Exotic Animat Practice, 14, 45-60.
Stevens, C.W. (201l) Analgesia in amphibians: Preclinical studies
Olesen, M.G., Bertelsen, M.F., Perry, S.F, et al. (2008) Effects of
and clinical applications. Veterinary Clinics of North America:
preoperative administration of butorphanol or meloxicam on
Exotic Animal Practice, 14, 33-44.
physiologic responses to surgery in ball pythons. Journal of the
Terril-Robb, L., Suckow, M. and Grigdesby, C. (1996) Evaluation
American Veterinary Medical Association, 233, 1883-1888.
of the analgesic effects of butorphanol tartrate, xylazine
Pezalla, PD. (1983) Morphine-induced analgesia and explosive
hydrochloride and funixin meglumine in leopard frogs (Ranα
motor behaviour in an amphibian. Brain Research, 273,
pipiens). Contemporary Topics in Laboratory Animat Science,
297-305.
35, 54-56.
Porter, K.R.(1972) Herpetology. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
Wright, K.M. (1996) Amphibian husbandry and medicine.
Sheelings, T.F, Holz, P, Haynes, L., et al. (2010) A preliminary
Reptile Medicine and Surgery (ed D. Mader), Pp. 436-458. W.B.
study of the chemical restraint of selected squamate reptiles
Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
SN
AND
REPTILES 
RT III: 
Chapter 20
 Reptile and Amphibian Nutrition
Classification
Vitamin and mineral supplements administered in the
Reptiles and amphibians may be classified in a number of
water will allow rapid bacterial growth over 24 hours, so
 different ways, one of which is according to their diet. Of
bowl hygiene must be rigorous.
the commonly seen species there are four main categories
The amount of water consumed by individual reptiles
as defined by the diet. These are the following:
and amphibians will depend on the diets being offered as
Camivores are predominantly the members of the snake
well as on the species. On dry, insect-based diets, water
family, which will eat whole avian, amphibian or mam-
consumption will be much higher than for reptiles and
malian prey. To do this they have powerful crushing jaws.
anphibians, which consume large amounts of fruit and
Some have poison fangs while others, such as the boa and
vegetables. Even so a leopard gecko may only consume
the python species, rely on suffocating their prey.
 5 mL of water in a 24-hour period.
·Herbivores come from a variety of species, from the
Tap water contains chlorine, which may irritate the
tortoise family ( e.g. the Greek or spur-thighed tor-
skin of sensitive aquatic species such as amphibians or
toises), to the lizard family (e.g. the green iguana).
soft-shelled turtles. It is advised that tap water be allowed
· Insectivores are predominantly from the lizard fam
to stand for 24 hours to let the chlorine escape and to al-
ily (e.g. the leopard geckos, collared lizards, etc.), and
low it to come up to room tenperature.
from the anmphibians (e.g. the frogs, salamanders, etc.)
 Renal disease as a result of chronic dehydration is com-
· Omnivores are from a variety of reptile species, and
mon in captive reptile species. Many of these animals
E.g. green iguanas and water dragons, come from parts
their eating habits during the course of their life. For
of the world which have high relative humidity - any-
example, the bearded dragon
starts off as an insecti-
where from 60-100%. If these species are kept in vivaria
vore, but becomes more and more dependent on fruit
at their correct temperatures (a high of 30°C to a low of
and vegetable matter as it gets older.
20°C), then the air can hold large amounts of water, con-
In all these cases, the individual species have become
sequently the relative humidity often drops at these tem-
highly evolved to cope with certain types of food. We
peratures. Combine this with the fact that many reptiles
also know that many of these creatures in the wild have a
will not drink from water bowls, instead preferring to lick
changing food supply throughout the year, so what may
moisture from leaves or cage furniture, and we can see
form a staple diet in the summer does not necessarily ap-
that chronic dehydration can occur. To prevent this, it is
ply come the winter.
inportant not only to provide drinking bowls but also to
mist the cage, the reptile and the cage furniture several
General nutritional requirements
times daily. Ihis is of course less necessary for desert-
Water
dwelling species, such as leopard geckos, pancake tor-
As mentioned in the chapter on avian nutrition, the most
toises, but even these species benefit from being misted
inportant thing about the water provided is its quality.
every now and then.
Reptiles may defaecate in their water bowls, and turtles
Reptiles, like birds, are susceptible to renal disease
and terrapins eat in their water. These habits cause pollu-
because the waste product of protein metabolism is pre-
tion which leads to disease.
dominantly the insoluble uric acid. If the reptile is not
To prevent this, either the water
kept adequately hydrated, it will reduce the excretion of
uric acid through the kidneys. Ihis leads to deposition of
feeding tank which may be cleaned out after feeding.
uric acid inside the body, a condition known as visceral
Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets, Second Edition. Edited by Simon J. Girling. @ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Reptile and Amphibian Nutrition 287
gout. Once deposited, the uric acid forms a tough miner-
alised coating to the lining of blood vessels, the kidneys,
the heart and many other organs, leading to hypertension
and multiple organ failure.
Maintenance energy requirements
Aep iad uodunsus Aiaua jo fanal e seu saiads Aiang
which is needed to satisfy the basic maintenance require-
ments. This is the energy used purely to maintain current
status under minimal activity and is the minimum en-
ergy required to support the reptile's or amphibian's life.
In reptiles, basic maintenance requirements vary widely
depending on activity level and environmental tempera-
Figure 20.2 Malnutrition and blister disease in a Burmese python,
ture, so calculations are made at that animal's optimum
Python mo/urus bivittatus.
environmental temperature. Energy requirements will
also vary according to the animal's stage of life. For ex-
food) (Donoghue, 1998). From this we can see that in
ample, the maintenance energy requirements (MER) will
be more than doubled in active egg-laying females during
as fed’ terms, i.e. wet food, one would need to feed eight
times as much weight of vegetable matter to give the same
disease or growth.
energy dose in animal prey. This volume may well exceed
 MER is dependent on the basal metabolic rate (BMR -
the gut capacity of the reptile or amphibian.
the energy requirement when at complete rest) and meta-
Conversely many pet reptiles and amphibians will con-
bolic body weight as follows:
tinue eating until their digestive tracts are full, and if all
The constant, k, varies with family groups, and has
they are offered is high energy density food then they will
been estimated at 10 for reptiles in general.
rapidly achieve their MER, exceed it and become obese.
If the foods offered are so low in kilojoules that the rep-
tile or amphibian has to eat more of it than will fit into its
Protein and amino acid requirements
digestive system in 24 hours, that animal will rapidly lose
Proteins are assembled from groups of amino acids -
condition (Figures 20.1 and 20.2).
indeed a protein can contain up to 22 amino acids. In
For example, vegetables such as lettuce and celery
general terms, for humans, and it seems for reptiles and
have an energy content of 12.6 k]/g dry matter (or in real
amphibians, 10 amino acids are essential and need to be
terms 0.75 kJ/g wet food), whereas meat-based foods
provided in the diet. The others may be manufactured
Asuap Aiaua iaa yonu e aney Aand juapau se yons
from these 10. The essential amino acids are:
of 19-21 kJ/g dry matter (or in real terms 6-7.5 kJ/g wet
。leucine
· tryptophan
· lysine
isoleucine
▪methionine
·valine
· phenylalanine
*arginine
+threonine
▪histidine
In addition, it is known that for diets low in the amino
acids methionine or arginine, an extra supplement of the 
amino acid glycine is required.
 Proteins are therefore assessed on their ability to pro-
vide these essential amino acids, with poor proteins sup-
plying only non-essential ones. This is quantified by the
term biological value, a high-biological-value foodstuff
containing more of the essential amino acids.
For herbivorous reptiles, levels of 25% protein content
Figure 20.1 Malnutrition in a leopard gecko.
as metabolisable energy in the diet have been shown to be
288 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
adequate (Donoghue, 1998). Most of this protein source
fat foods such as dog- and cat food fed to herbivores, or
in herbivores seems to come from leafy greens, but defi-
ciencies are seen in herbivorous reptiles fed high cellu-
for this. Obesity can lead to a number of problems, high
lose, low-protein foods such as the ubiquitous lettuce, and
amongst which is fatty degenerative change in the liver
fruits. Chronic protein deficiencies are often presented as
(hepatic lipidosis), which can lead to liver failure. This is
gradual wasting conditions, with increased susceptibility
 particularly common in tortoises.
to infections.
Deficiencies in amino acids in carnivorous reptiles and
Carbohydrates
amphibians are extremely rare because they eat the whole
Carbohydrates are primarily used for rapid energy produc-
prey. This gives them 30-60% protein content as metabo-
tion. This is particularly important in herbivores which
lisable energy. Herbivorous deficiencies specific amino
consume plant matter only, and so gain the majority of
acids are possible, although not well documented.
their energy source from carbohydrates and proteins. Car-
In general, waste products of protein metabolism in
nivorous reptiles do not utilise carbohydrates much at all.
land-based reptiles are converted into the relatively in-
soluble uric acid. Alligators may produce ammonia as the
Fibre
waste product, as may many amphibians, depending on
Dietary fibre is extremely important for herbivorous rep-
their state of hydration, but adult frogs may excrete urea.
tiles. Indeed, the presence of fibre acts both as a bulking
 Protein excesses, such as those produced by feeding cat-
agent, encouraging gut motility, and as a source for fer-
or dog foods to predominantly herbivorous species, can
mentation by the intestinal microflora, essential for fatty
lead to an excess production of uric acid; visceral gout,
acid and B vitamin production. Snakes and other carni-
renal failure and death may result.
vores do not have a dietary fibre requirement, and indeed
if provided fbre will not be utilised. Ultimately it will
Fats and essential fatty acids
dilute the energy concentration of the diet, necessitating
Fats provide high concentrations of energy. Ihey also
feeding more frequent and larger meals.
supply the reptile or armphibian with essential fatty acids
(EFAs), which are required for cellular integrity and as
Vitamins
the building blocks for internal chemicals such as prosta-
These compounds are grouped together although they are
glandins ( which play a part in reproduction and inflam-
widely differing in nature, but all animals have a re quire-
mation). Fats also provide a carrier mechanism for the
ment for various numbers of these. They are categorised
absorption of fat-soluble vitamins such as vitamins A, D,
into fat-soluble (vitamin A, D, E and K) and water-soluble
E and K
(the B vitamin complex and vitamin C).
The primary EFA for reptiles is linoleic acid, as it is
for manmmals, with the absolute dietary requirement of
Fat-soluble vitamins
this fatty acid being 1% of the diet. If the diet becomes
Vitarmin A: In herbivore reptiles, beta-carotene is the
deficient in this EFA, a rapid decline in cellular integrity
Occurs. Ihis is manifested clinically by the skin becom-
vitamin A can be produced from it. Carnivorous reptiles
ing flaky, inelastic, and prone to recurrent infections and
and amphibians will gain the preformed vitamin A in
also to fluid loss through the skin, which in turn leads to
their prey food.
polydipsia ( Wallach & Hoff, 1982).
Hypovitaminosis A is a frequently seen problem in che-
NO
In herbivores, less than 10% of the diet on a dry matter
lonians, particularly in tortoises and young red-eared ter-
basis is composed of fats, the chief energy sources being
rapins. If a deficiency in vitamin A occurs, then mucous
carbohydrates and proteins. However, fermentation of fi -
membranes become thickened and oral and respiratory
bre in the lower bowel produces short-chain fatty acids
secretions dry up. This is due to blockage of salivary and
which can be used for energy. For carnivores, fat forms
mucous glands with cellular debris - a condition known
a major part of the energy source in the diet, as much as
as squamous metaplasia. This leads to poor functioning
 40-70% of the calories, with protein chiefly making up
of the ciliary mechanisms which have a role in removing
the rest.
foreign particles from the airways. Swelling of the perior-
The problem of overconsumption of fats in pet reptiles
bital membranes - a condition known as xerophthalmia
which are not exercising regularly is well known, and high
- ls also seen
Reptile and Amphibian Nutrition 289
Vitamin A's role in immune system function means
Tam, Aruaiedde Auanbanj s! paisae os leue u
that a deficiency makes respiratory and digestive tract in-
muscled, due to poorly mineralised bones which in-
fections more common. Ihe most frequently seen exam-
crease their thickness to maintain their strength. There
 ple of this is the increased susceptibility to pneumonias
is often flaring of the epiphyseal plates at the ends of the
seen in red-eared terrapins and manifested in the lopsid-
long bones, with concomitant bowing of the limbs. Green
ed position they adopt when swimming. This is because
iguanas and other herbivorous species such as terrestrial
of lung collapse or congestion which reduces buoyancy
 chelonians are particularly susceptible, with the lizards
 on the affected side
showing rachitic rosettes (Frye, 1991) due to flaring of the
Tortoises may suffer more frequently from upper re-
epiphysis in the ribs at the costochondral junction.
spiratory tract infections when a deficiency is present.
Chelonia develop “lumpy shell, a deformity of the
 Evidence of sterile pustules and cornified plaques inside
carapace in particular, where the edges roll upwards cre-
the mouth are commonly seen, with overgrowth of the
 ating a 'Cornish pasty' effect, and the muscles which at-
beak due to hyperkeratosis.
tach the limbs to the inside of the shell, pull the carapace
Vitamin A also has a role in bone growth and struc
downwards creating pits either side cranially and cau-
ture, the normal function of secretory glands such as the
dally (Figure 20.3). Recommended maximum levels are
adrenals and also in reproductive function. Finally renal
50-100 IU/kg every other day.
damage may occur in hypovitaminosis A, with evidence
Hypervitaminosis D3 occurs due to over supplenmen-
of oedema in the inguinal and axillary regions secondary
tation with D3 and calcium and leads to calcification of
 to failure of the renal tubular filtration system.
soft tissues, such as the medial wall of the arteries, and
Because it is fat soluble, vitamin A can be stored in the 
the kidneys, creating hypertension and organ failure. This
body, primarily in the liver. Recommended minimum
often occurs in herbivores such as tortoises fed on tinned
dietary levels are 200-300 IU/kg for reptiles (Wallach &
cat and dog food.
Hoff, 1982)
Vitamin E: Hypovitaminosis E may occur due to a reduc-
Hypervitaminosis A rarely occurs naturally but may
tion in fat metabolism or absorption, such as can occur in
be induced by overdosing with vitamin A injections at
small intestinal, pancreatic or biliary diseases, or due to a
1000 times or more the daily recommended doses. If
lack of dietary green plant material for herbivores. A rela-
this occurs, acute toxicity develops with mucous mem-
 a a sads  n  i a
brane and skin sloughing and frequently death within
 of polyunsaturated fats, e.g. marine fish such as tuna and
24-48 hours. Vitamin A supplements are therefore often
mackerel. These use up the body's vitamin E reserves. A
given orally as, due to slower absorption, this reduces the
condition called steatitis, wherein body fat starts to ne-
risk of this condition developing.
crose, has been seen in gharials (a fish-eating crocodilian)
(Frye, 1991) and terrapins.
Vitamin D: Vitamin D, is the most active form for cal-
cium homeostasis, and plants are not effective as suppli-
Hypervitaminosis E is extremely rare.
ers of this compound.
Cholecalciferol, the precursor of vitamin D, is manu-
factured in the reptile or amphibian's skin in a process
enhanced by ultraviolet light. For this reason, indoor
 animals produce much less of this compound unless sup-
plied with an effective artificial ultraviolet light source.
Hypovitaminosis Ds causes problems with calcium
metabolism, and leads to rickets. This is exacerbated by
low calcium, high phosphorus-containing diets. A typical
siooput ndax adau Bumona Sunon e aq Pmam iaans
with no ultraviolet light supplementation and fed on a
low-calcium diet - e.g. lettuce/celery/cucumber for her-
bivores, or meat only a day old mice/chicks for carnivo-
rous species. Ihe condition so produced is referred to as
Figure 20.3 Red-eared terrapin, Trachemys soriota e/egans, with
hypovitaminosis Ds. (Reproduced with permission from Girling &
'metabolic bone disease.
Raiti, 2004, @ BSAVA)
290 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Vitamin K: Because of its production by gut bacteria, it
Folic acid: A deficiency of folic acid is rare but can lead
is very difficult to get a true deficiency, although absorp-
to severely impaired celular division. Ihis can lead to a
tion will be reduced when fat digestion or absorption is
mumber of obvious problems, such as females' reproduc-
reduced, as in biliary or pancreatic disease. The consump-
tive tracts not maturing, macrocytic anaemia due to fail-
tion of warfarin- and coumarin-derived compounds (as
ure of red blood cell maturation and immune system cel-
found in sweet clovers) can increase the demand for
lular dysfunction. A relative deficiency of folic acid may
clotting factors, and this may also be seen in snakes con-
occur in some individuals fed a very high protein diet, as
suming prey which has been killed by these rodenticides.
folic acid is needed to produce the waste products of pro-
Disease so caused is characterised by increased internal
tein metabolism in reptiles, uric acid. In addition, there
and external haemorrhage, but vitamin K also has some
are inhibitors of folic acid in some foods such as cabbage
function in calcium/phosphorous metabolism in bone so
and other brassicas, oranges, beans and peas. Ihe use of
this may also be affected. Frye (1991) has recorded dis-
trimethoprim sulphonamide drugs also reduces gut bac-
ease in crocodiles exhibiting gingival bleeding without
terial folic acid production.
petechiation. Recommended minimum levels for reptiles
Vitamin Biz: Vitamin Bjz is produced generally by intes-
are 1 ppm (Wallach & Hoff, 1982).
tinal bacteria and so deficiencies are uncommon but may
occur after prolonged antibiotic medication. Deficiency
Water-solublevitamins
'saa au u Audosp imssu mna mos saad
Vitamin B,(thiarmine): A source of thiaminases, enzymes
poor hatching rates, high mortality rates and hatching
which destroy thiamine, is raw saltwater fish which may
deformities in young reptiles and amphibians.
be fed to some snakes, crocodilians and turtles, such as
garter snakes, red-eared terrapins and gharials. Ihere are
Choline: Choline may be synthesised in the body, but not
thiamine antagonists as well in blackberries, beetroot,
in enough quantities for the growing reptile. Because of
coffee, chocolate and tea when considering herbivores.
interactions, the need for choline is dependent on levels
When a relative deficiency occurs, neurological signs
 of folic acid and vitamin Bz. Excess protein, therefore, as
such as opisthotonus, weakness and head tremors may
with folic acid, increases choline requirements, as does a
be seen. In garter and water snakes, a classical inability
diet high in fats. Deficiency causes retarded growth, dis-
to right itself occurs, with the snake continually flipping
rupted fat metabolism and fatty liver damage.
 onto its back In addition, fungal infections are reported
as more likely after a B, deficiency. Ihe recommended
Vitamin C: Ihere is no direct need for this vitamin
minimum level for reptiles is 20-35 mg/kg food offered.
in reptiles and amphibians as vitamin C may be pro-
 In addition, if sea-fish such as smelt, which are high in
duced from glucose in the outermost portions of the
thiaminases, are to be fed, cooking the fish for 5 min-
kidneys. However, during disease processes, particu-
utes at 80°C deactivates the thiaminase. In a reptile with
larly those which affect liver function, it may be ben-
thiamine deficiency, doses of 50-100 mg/kg body weight
eficial to the recovery process to provide a dietary
should be given. Because of this problem it is often ad-
source of vitamin C. It is required for the formation of
vised that garter and water snakes be fed on rodent prey
elastic fibres and connective tissues and is an excellent
rather than sea-fish. They may be encouraged to eat this
anti-oxidant similar to vitamin E. Deficiency leads to
by wiping the rodent prey with the fish to which it is ac-
'scurvy' where there is poor wound healing, increased
customed to cover the scent.
bleeding due to capillary wall fragility and bone altera-
ONG
tions. Deficiency has been postulated as the cause of
Biotin: Deficiencies do occur commonly in Gila mon-
 skin splitting in snakes fed rodent prey that had been
S3
sters, beaded lizards and monitor lizards, all of which en-
starved for 24-48 hours before being fed (Frye, 1991).
joy raw eggs in the wild. In this state the majority of eggs
This allowed the emptying of their gastrointestinal
are fertile, and contain little avidin (an antibiotin vitamin).
 tract, and hence reduced levels of vitamin C from the
However, unfertilised hen's eggs are high in avidin so a
plant material therein. It has also been suggested that
1E
relative biotin deficiency may occur. Deficiencies produce
increasing vitamin C levels by supplementation at levels
muscular weakness, occasionally with skin lesions. It is
 of 10-20 mg/kg intramuscularly or orally (Frye, 1991)
therefore recommended that minimal levels of raw eggs
 may be useful in the treatment of chronic infections,
are fed to such reptiles.
such as 'mouth rot' in snakes.
Reptile and Amphibian Nutrition  291
Minerals
As with marmmals there are two main groups of miner-
als, those classified as macro-minerals, i.e. those present
 in large amounts in the body, such as calcium and phos-
phorus, and micro-minerals, or trace elements, such as
 manganese, iron and cobalt, which are all necessary for
Macro-minerals
Calcium: Calcium has a wide range of bodily functions,
the two most obvious being its role in the formation of
the skeleton and mineralisation of bone matrix, and its
requirement for muscular contractions. The active form
of calcium in the body is the ionic double charged mole-
bone disease and resultant spinal and limb deformity.
cule Ca²t. Lowlevels of this form, even though the overall
body reserves of calcium are normal, leads to hyperexcit-
Extensive resorption of calcium occurs from the bones
ability, fitting and death, conditions seen in gravid female
during dietary deficiencies, leaving only fibrous tissue.
egg-bound green iguanas.
This is considerably weaker and so the bones' thicken to
The ratio of calcium to phosphorus is important - as
maintain their strength. Even so, the bones are we akened
one increases, the other decreases and vice versa. Ihis is
and bowing of long bones and spontaneous fractures oc-
controlled by the hormones calcitonin, parathyroid hor-
cur in lizards, collapsing of spinal vertebrae and defor-
mone and the accessory hormone vitamin D3. A ratio of
 2:1 calcium to phosphorus is desirable in growing reptiles
 sns a a e saan iso u sa
chelonians. Excessive calcium in the diet (>1%) though,
and 1.5:1 for adults. In high egg laying periods though,
reduces the use of proteins, fats, phosphorus, manganese,
to keep pace with the output of calcium into the shells, a
zinc, iron and iodine, and can lead to sof tissue min-
ratio of 10:1 may be needed.
eralisation if in conjunction with adequate or excessive
Calcium deficiency causes nutritional osteodystrophy,
vitamin D, levels. Red-eared terrapins have been shown
or metabolic bone disease, and is often accompanied by
to have a requirement for 2% calcium on a dry matter
deficiency in vitamin Ds. Normal levels of vitamin D3,
basis (Kass et al., 1982).
however, may exacerbate this disease as they encour-
age further calcium resorption. Deficiency may be seen
Phosphorus: Phosphorus is widespread in plant and ani-
 in lizards such as green iguanas and water dragons, and
mal tissues, but in the former it may be bound up in un-
chelonians fed on diets high in fruit, lettuce, celery, etc..
available form as phytates. Levels of phosphorus are con-
Diets with excessive levels of oxalates, compounds which
trolled in the body as for calcium, the two being in equal
bind up calcium and prevent it being absorbed, such as
 and opposite equilibrium with each other. Iherefore, if
 spinach and beetroot or rhubarb leaves, can also lead to
dietary phosphorus levels exceed calcium levels apprecia-
a deficiency.
bly, the parathyroid glands become stimulated to produce
Calcium deficiency may also be seen in insectivorous
 more parathyroid hormone and nutritional secondary
species, such as geckos, and bearded dragons, fed on in-
hyperparathyroidism occurs. This leads to progressive
sects without supplementation (Figure 20.4). Insects have
bone demineralisation and renal damage due to high
ittle or no calcium, their tough outer coat is made of a
circulating levels of parathyroid hormone. High dietary
protein known as chitin. To provide adequate calcium
phosphorus also reduces the amount of calcium which
therefore, the insect must be dusted with a calcium pow-
can be absorbed from the gut, as it complexes with the
der immediately before being fed (if not, by the time the
calcium present there. Ihis can be a problem in reptiles
reptile has caught the insect most of the powder has fallen
fed pure meat with no calcium or bone supplement, and
off!). Alternatively, the insect is pre-fed on a calcium sup-
in herbivores which are predominantly fruit and lettuce
plement. This is mixed in with the insect's food and fed
ns m ssod yi ae asan se 'sin
for the 24-48 hours before feeding the reptile, so that the
foods. Green vegetables or supplementation with calcium
insect's gut is pre-loaded with calcium.
powders may therefore be necessary. In addition, low
292 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
calcium/high phosphorus levels frequently allow bladder
tortoises, which will exhibit goitre swelling of the neck
stones to form in those species (such as chelonians, green
It can also occur due to overfeeding with iodine-binding
iguanas) that have a bladder.
plants, such as cabbage, cauliflower, broccoli, kale and
Brussels sprouts. Excess iodine added to the water may
Magnesium: Most magnesium is absorbed from the
u i x sai a s s saas a
small intestine, and is affected by large amounts of cal-
salamander - i.e. its 'adult' form has the external gills
cium in the diet which reduce magnesium absorption.
more typical of a tadpole or intermediate life stage) to
 Deficiencies rarely occur, but muscular weakness can be
shed its external gills. Levels of 0.3 mg/kg body weight
the result.
have been quoted (Donoghue & Langenburg, 1996).
Potassiur: As with manmals, potassium is the major
intracellular positive ion. Rarely is there a dietary defi-
Specific nutritional problems in
ciency, but severe stress can cause hypokalaemia through
reptiles
increased kidney excretion because of elevated plasma
Below are some common presentations of nutritional
proteins. This can lead to cardiac dysrhythmias, muscle
 problems in reptiles.
spasticity and neurological dysfunction.
Post-hibernation anorexia
Sodium: Sodium is the main extracellular positive ion
PHA (post-hibernation anorexia) occurs in the Mediter-
and regulates the body's acid-base balance and osmotic
ranean species of tortoise (Hermann's, Greek or spur-
potential. In conjunction with potassium, it is responsible
thighed, marginated and Horsfelds), which hibernate
for nerve signals and impulses. Rarely does a true dietary
during the winter months. The commonest presenta-
deficiency occur, but hyponatraemia may occur due to
tion is that of an inappetant tortoise after coming out of
chronic diarrhoea or renal disease. Many reptiles have
hibernation, often with signs of systemic or respiratory
salt glands found outside the kidneys, responsible solely
tract infections (such as the 'runny nose syndrome') and
for the excretion of excess sodium whilst conserving wa-
often with a low body weight in relation to length (a low
aisun sasaid aie a'a 'suee is stn uaai atn al
Jackson's ratio). In addition the blood glucose levels are
the nostrils, and white crystalline deposits of salt may
frequently below 3.2 mmol/L, which appears to be the
be seen here and are frequently sneezed out. It may be
minimum level required for appetite stimulation (Law-
necessary to supplerment the diet of marine species with
rence, 1987), with high levels of urea. More severe cases
sodium chloride if kept in fresh water situations, or if fed
often have evidence of renal disease with elevated uric acid
 freshwater plants or fish.
levels and potassium. Many have become ketoacidotic with
Chlorine: This is the major extracellular negative ion and
the production of ketones such as beta hydroxybutyrate.
is responsible for maintaining acid-base balances in con-
Dehydration is apparent in these cases, and treatment
junction with sodium and potassium. Deficiencies are rare.
requires aggressive fluid therapy and nutritional support,
using glucose-containing fluids and liquid food stomach
tubing, as well as warming the tortoise to its optimum
N
Micro-minerals (trace elements)
These elements include zinc, copper, iron, manganese,
temperature (20-27°C) (Figure 20.5).
Causes of this condition could involve any one of the
cobalt and sulphur, al of which have an important part
following:
to play in cellular function. However, so far no actual
· Disease during or prior to hibernation
deficiencies specifically related to these elements have
ON行
● Poor nutrition leading to poor fat reserves prior to
been reported in reptiles or amphibians. The exception
hibernation
S3
is iodine.
· Owner failure to observe recovery from hibernation for
Iodine: Iodine's sole function is in thyroid hormone syn-
several days, so no food offered at the critical time, or
thesis, which affects metabolic rate. Deficiency causes
+ A period of cold weather immediately after recovery.
goitre and fluid retention (myxoedema). It has knock-
 It is the rising plane of blood glucose post hibernation
 on effects on growth, causing stunting and neurological
that acts as the stimulus for appetite in these chelonians,
 problems and in amphibians may prevent metamorpho-
and failure of this rise, due to malnutrition or failure to
sis from intermediate tadpole stages to the adult form. In
eat whilst the levels are still high, may lead to unrespon-
reptiles it is most often encountered in giant terrestrial
sive anorexia
Reptile and Amphibian Nutrition 293
 do so, they will eventually exceed the precipitation point
and form crystals inside the body.
Diet is important, as purine proteins, which are found
mainly in animal protein, are converted readily to uric
acid on degradation in the body. Iherefore, if herbivo-
rous species, such as green iguanas, which are not used
to large volumes of purines, are fed a diet rich in animal
protein, such as cat or dog food, they will produce exces-
sive amounts of uric acid and develop gout.
There are two forms of gout, visceral and articular.
Articular gout can easily be diagnosed ante-mortem, as
suof al u uoeueu pue Suams ssoia sasnes 1
where the uric acid crystals form. Visceral gout is more
difficult to diagnose ante-mortem, because it occurs
Figure 20.5 Spur-thighed tortoise, Testuoo graeca, with post-
hibernation anorexia being stomach tubed with Vetarks critical care
where uric acid crystals are deposited in the soft tissues
formula. Note also the intravenous drip into the jugular vein.
of the body, primary sites being the kidneys, the pericar-
dial sac, the lungs, spleen and liver. Once deposited, it
is almost impossible to move the crystals medically and
To prevent PHA, therefore, it is important to attend
permanent damage is often done.
disease prior to hibernation, and, if severely affected
or underweight, the tortoise should not be hibernated,
Obesity
but kept indoors at its optimum temperature range and
ue sadan u u aqond u e si an
fed throughout the winter. Ihe tortoise should also be
amphibians kept in captivity. Many species are overfed
checked regularly once in hibernation, around once or
because of owners' ignorance of natural feeding inter-
twice a week, to ensure if the tortoise does come out of
vals and of food types commonly eaten in the wild.
hibernation early, it has food and water available im-
Examples include feeding dog food to tortoises and
mediately. Bathing the tortoise immediately after wak-
 green iguanas, both of which are totally herbivorous in
ing in warm water, cleaning the nose, eyes and mouth
the wild but both of which will eat meat if offered it. Ihe
especially can also stimulate appetite, and no tortoise
resulting problems are as mentioned above, with excess
having recovered from hibernation should be allowed
 protein causing gout, excess calcium and vitamin D3
to re-hibernate that same winter. Finally, stomach tub-
causing soft tissue mineralisation and excess animal fat
ing with fluids and soluble carbohydrates, such as the
causing fatty liver syndrome (hepatic lipidosis) wherein
basic sugar and protein containing liquid food Critical
the liver cells are filled with fat deposits impeding their
Care Formula produced by Vetark Professional Ltd., or
function. Snakes also suffer from these conditions when
vegetable baby food porridges, early on in the course of
fed overly fatty laboratory rodents, or simply fed too
the problem can be useful.
often. A rough idea of feeding frequencies is given in
Table 20.1.
Visceral and articular gout
The aim should be a reptile which does not appear
Gout is a condition caused by the unique way that many
emaciated, but lean.
reptiles deal with the waste products of protein metabo-
lism. Most reptiles are uricotelic, i.e. the main excretory
Hypoglycaemia in crocodilians
product of protein metabolism is uric acid. Ihis com-
It has been reported that crocodiles kept in high density
pound is relatively insoluble in water, which has its ad-
conditions, or are otherwise stressed, are prone to hypo-
vantages as reptiles are therefore able to reduce the water
glycaemic fits (Scott, 1992). It is interesting to note that
lost in excreting it. Unfortunately, if the reptile becomes
 crocodiles' blood sugar levels vary throughout the year,
dehydrated, either acutely or chronically, or consumes
being lowest in the winter and highest in the summer. A
 diets with excessive protein levels, particularly a type of
rising blood sugar level appears to be the stimulus to eat,
protein called purines, or suffers kidney damage, then
as seems to be seen with Mediterranean tortoises after hi-
uric acid levels build up in the bloodstream. If allowed to 
bernation.
294 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Table 20.1 Feeding frequencies and food types for variou5
Snakes
reptile species.
It is important to note that it is illegal to feed live ver-
 tebrate prey to another animal in the United Kingdom.
Feeding frequencies and
Species
food types
All rodent prey fed to snakes and lizards must therefore
have been humanely killed frst. In addition,live prey may
Herbivores (e.g.
Daily grazing of food advised
damage the reptile if the latter is not hungry and does not
iguanas, tortoises)
kill the prey quickly.
Smmall insectivores
 Fed 2-3 tirmes weekly on live insect
To encourage anorectic snakes to eat, a number of
(e.g. leopard gecko5,
 prey, supplermented with mineral/
tricks may be enmployed including:
collared lizards)
vitamin5
*Warming the prey briefly before offering by heating it
Srmall carnivores (e.g
 Fed 2-3 tirmes weekly on rat pups.
fuzzies (furred baby mice) or pinkies
in a pot of hot water
garter snakes, corn
snakes)
(nude baby mice) up to adult mice
 Breaking the prey item open to release the scent of blood
accordling to size. Try not to feed
Teasing the snake by moving the dead prey item around
anything more than 50% the
the cage with forceps, to mimic live prey
maximum width of the snake
 Trying a variety of colours of prey - some snakes will
Medium carnivores
Fed 1-2 tirnes weekly, adult mice or
only take dark-furred rodents
(e.g.kingsnakes, rat
 smmall rats accordling to size. Try not
snakes)
to feed anything more than 50%
 To get a snake (such as a garter or water snake) used to
the maxirnum width of the snake
eating rodent prey after only eating fish or amphibians
(hog-nosed snakes), wipe the rodent to be offered with
Large carnivores (e.g.
Fed once weekly or fortnightly (the
the previously taken food item to transfer scent
boa constrictors.
larger the snake the less often} on
 Burmese pythons)
adult rats or smmall rabbits. Try not to
Ensure that there are plenty of areas to hide; some
feed anything more than 50% the
 boids and pythons like to consume their prey in a box
maxirnum width of the snake
or hide
+ Leave the prey in overnight because some species pre-
Environmental temperature and its
fer to hunt at night
effects on nutrition
* Choose the next smallest size of rodent, so if adult mice
Because reptiles and armphibians are ectothermic, i.e. they
were previously offered try fuzzies; if juvenile rats, try
rely on their surroundings to maintain their body tem-
adult mice, etc.
 perature, environmental temperature is important in all
NB: Ihe term 'pinkies' refers to nude neonatal rat and
aspects of husbandry
mice pups, fuzzies refers to week-old rat and mice pups
There is an optimum preferred temperature zone that
with a thin covering of fur, and “furries' refers to juvenile
will allow their enzymes and metabolic pathways to func-
rat and mice pups between 1 and 3 weeks of age which
tion at their optimum levels, so environmental temperature
have a soft but longer covering of fur.
will infhuence the rate of digestion of the food offered. It
may take 2-3 days for a rat consumed by a large boa con-
Refeeding syndrome
N
strictor to pass through its digestive system ifkept within its
If anorexia in a snake or other reptile has persisted for
preferred temperature zone of 25-30°C, but if kept 5-10°C
some time it is essential to rehydrate the patient before at-
cooler this will often slow down to 5-7 days, and if kept
tempting to feed. Indeed, initial feeding after this should
much lower than this, digestion may not occur before the
be started off at very low levels. Ihis is because excess
口N寸
prey item becomes rancid inside the snake. Similarly, if kept 
calories and proteins cause a rapid uptake of glucose
at too high a temperature, the reptile may not be stimulated
from the bloodstream into the cells, which takes potas-
53
to eat at all and dehydration and heat stress may set in.
sium and phosphorous with it. After a prolonged period
of anorexia, the whole body levels of potassium and phos-
A general guide to feeding
phorus can be reduced and therefore this can lead to a
reptiles
life-threatening hypokalaemia and hypophosphataemia
Fresh food should always be fed to reptiles. It should also
in the bloodstream which results in cardiac arrhythmias.
be remembered that at the increased temperatures of
The monitoring of blood phosphorus and potassium is
 most vivaria, the food offered will spoil very quickly and
therefore to be recommended when treating chronically
will need to be replaced frequently.
anorectic reptiles, whether carnivores or herbivores.
Reptile and Amphibian Nutrition 295
Herbivores
Sample diet for Mediterranean tortoises
The majority of the diet is to be cormposed of vegetable
toises, then be sure to soak the pellets thoroughly before
matter of a leafy nature such as dandelions, kale, wa-
feeding, otherwise they swell up inside the reptile causing
tercress, flat-leaved parsley, chicory and bok-choy. To
colic and bloat. Commercial pelleted diets are a useful ad-
this may be added peas, beans, hay or dried grass, fresh
 junct to the diet of herbivorous reptiles and many compa-
grass (not cut), grated carrot, grated pumpkin and sweet
nies now produce iguanid and chelonian diets which are
peppers.
well supplemented with minerals and vitamins and also
To this may be added small volumes of fruit such as
contain moderate levels of fbre for gut motility enhance-
apples, pears, melon, papaya, passion fruit, strawberries
ment. Any pelleted food should be thoroughly soaked in
and plums; flowers such as dandelions, nasturtiums and
water before feeding; otherwise, they can dramatically
rDses; and sprouted seeds such as mung beans, lentils and
swell inside the reptile. Ihis also increases water intake
chick peas.
which is important in many species.
For more tropical species, such as the red and yellow
The feeding of certain foods to herbivores should be
footed tortoises (Chelonoidis carbonaria and Chelonoi-
prohibited. Animal proteins are one, as are certain fruit 
dis denticulata), the amount of fruit and flowers may be
and vegetables. We have already discussed the problems
doubled.
of excessive volumes of largely water-containing vegeta-
For grassland species, such as leopard tortoises (Stig-
bles such as lettuce, cucumber and celery, the goitrogenic
mochelys pardalis), African spurred tortoises (Geochelone
properties of cabbage, kale, broccoli and cauliflower and
sulcata) and Indian starred tortoises (Geochelone elegans),
the anti-calcium effect of oxalate-containing plants such
a good provision of fresh uncut grass or good quality hay
as spinach, beetroot and rhubarb leaves. In addition,
is advised.
fruits such as banana can cause a sugar ferment in her-
For more omnivorous species, such as box turtles (e.g.
bivorous reptiles causing colic, as well as adhering to the
Terrapene carolina spp.), up to 50% of the above fruit and
mouthparts and encouraging local infection. Avocados
vegetable diet may be replaced with adult maintenance
have an extremely high fat content and should not be fed
dry dog foods (soaked), mealworms, crickets, earth-
to herbivorous reptiles due to potential secondary fatty
worms and even baby mice (pinkies). Juveniles of this
degeneration of the liver.
species tend to be more carnivorous than the adults.
 In all of these diets it is recommended that daily sup-
Sample diet for green iguanas
plementation with calcium lactate or gluconate be includ-
Pelleted soaked commercial food may be fed at around
ed, with a calcium/vitamin D supplement added once or
25% of daily intake. Ihe rest can be based on the follow-
twice weekly depending whether the tortoise is a juvenile
ing: Up to half of the plant material offered can be made
(higher requirement) or an adult (lower requirement).
of calcium-rich vegetables such as kale, dandelions, chic-
Diets for snakes and insectivorous species have been
ory, watercress, cabbage, flat-leaved parsley, basil, and
mentioned. The latter need calcium supplementation as
coriander. Ihe other half may be made up of other veg-
discussed in the section considering calcium as a macro-
etable matters such as peas, beans, carrots, sweet peppers,
 mineral which may either be dusted onto the insects, or
courgettes or marrows, cauliflower and florets and flowers
 pre-fed to them to load their digestive contents with the
of plants such as nasturtiums, dandelions and roses. To
calcium.
this mixture can be added small amounts of fruits such as
aples, pears, tomatoes, plums, strawberries, raspberries,
References
melon, passion fruit and papaya or fibrous foods such as
Donoghue, S. (1998) Nutrition of pet amphibians and reptiles.
Seminars in Avian and Exotic Pet Medicine, 7, 3.
bran cereals, brown bread and cooked brown rice
Donoghue, S. and Langenburg, J. (1996) Nutrition. Reptile
This combination should be thoroughly mixed so as
Medicine and Surgery (ed. D. Mader), PP. 148-174. W.B.
to prevent selective feeding, and to it should be added a
Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
supplement of calcium in the form of calcium lactate or
Frye, F. (1991) A practical guide for feeding captive reptiles.
gluconate, or a natural calcium source such as cuttlefish
Biomedical and Surgicat Aspects of Captive Reptile Husbandry,
Vol 1. Krieger Publishing, Malabar, FL.
or oyster shells. In addition, the use of a vitamin D/cal-
Kass, R.E., Ullrey, D.E. and Trapp, A.L. (1982) A study of calcium
cium supplement once or twice a week, particularly for
requirements of the Red-eared slider turtle (Pseudermys scripta
growing iguanas and egg-laying females, is advised.
elegans). Journal ofZoo Animal Medicine,13,62.
296 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Lawrence, K. (1987) Post hibernational anorexia in captive
Calvert, I. (2004) Nutrition. Manual of Reptiles (eds S. Girling &
Mediterranean tortoises (Testudo graeca and T. hermani).
P Raiti), 2nd edn, Pp. 18-39. BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
Veterinary Record, 120,87.
Calvert, I. (2004) Nutritional problems. Manual of Reptiles
Scott, PW. {1992) Nutritional diseases. Manual of Reptiles {eds
(eds S. Girling & P. Raiti), 2nd edn, Pp. 289-308. BSAVA,
PH. Beynon, M.PC. Lawton & J.E. Cooper), Pp. 138-152.
Quedgeley, UK.
BSAVA, Cheltenham, UK.
Donoghue, S. (2006) Nutrition. Reptile Medicine and Surgery(ed.
Wallach, J.D. and Hoff, G.L. (1982) Metabolic and nutritional
D. Mader), 2nd edn, Pp. 251-298. Saunders Elsevier, St Louis, 
diseases of reptiles. Non-infectious Diseases of Wildlife (eds G.L.
MO.
Hoff & J.W. Davis), Pp. 155-168. Iowa State Press, Ames, IA.
Girling, S. and Raiti (eds) (2004) BSAVA Manual of Reptiles, 2nd
edn. Black well Publishing, Oxford.
Further reading
McArthur, S. and Barrows, M. (2004) Nutrition. Medicine
Barten, S.L. (1996) Lizards. Reptile Medicine and Surgery (ed. D.
and Surgery of Tortoises and Turtles (eds A. McArthur, R.
 Mader), Pp. 47-60. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
Wilkinson, J. Meyer, C. Innis & S. Hernandez-Divers), PP.
Boyer, LH. (1996) Turtles, tortoises and terrapins. Reptile
73-86. Blackwell Publishing, Oxford.
Medicine and Surgery (ed. D. Mader), Pp. 6l-77. W.B.
Zimmerman, E. (1995) Reptiles and Amphibians: Care, Behaviour
Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
and Reproduction. TFM Publishing, Neptune City, NJ.
N
AM
REPTILES AND 
RT
Chapter 21
Common Reptile and Amphibian
Diseases
Skin disease
Scale rot
Ecdysis
Scale rot is a colloquial term for a range of condi-
 Ihe proces of ecdysis involves the forming of a new skin
tions affecting the reptile skin which result in severe
beneath the old one. Once this is complete, a series of
infections.
proteolytic enzymes and lymphatic fluid is secreted be-
tween the new skin layer and the overlying old one. Ihis
Septicaemic cutaneous ulcerative disease
lifts and separates the two, and makes the snake appear
Septicaemic cutaneous ulcerative disease (SCUD) is seen
dull and lacklustre with the eyes noticeably bluing (Fig-
 in aquatic chelonians. Citrobacter freundi has been impli-
ure 21.1). Ihis lasts for 5-7 days on average in the snake.
cated which, once it has gained access to the bloodstream,
Once complete, the fluid is reabsorbed, and the snake ap-
produces ulcers in the skin and loosening of scales with
pears to return to its normal hue. After a further 5-7 days
debilitation and, in many cases, death. Other bacteria
the skin is shed, in the case of the snake, in one whole go
such as Pseudomonas and Aeromonas are also involved
from the head end frst. It is initiated in snakes by rub-
(Figure 21.3).
bing the face on an abrasive surface to loosen the first
piece of skin (see Figure 21.2). The regularity at which the
Blister disease
process of ecdysis occurs depends on a number of factors
This is a form of scale rot seen in semi-aquatic species
including:
such as garter or water snakes. It can, however, occur in
1.Age of the reptile (younger animals shed more
 frequently as they are growing faster)
strate. Ihe outer layer of skin develops blisters of a clear
2. Nutritional status (high-protein and high-calorie diets
fluid which become secondarily infected with environ-
increase the frequency of ecdysis)
mental bacteria such as Aeromonas spp., Serratia spp., or
3. Seasonal influences such as daylight length, humidity,
Pseudomonas spp. These can progress to septicaemia. Oc-
 temperature, etc. may all have an effect depending on
casionally these conditions may involve a fungus such as
 the species involved.
Aspergillus spp.
When the separation fails to occur, whether in part or to-
tally, the condition is known as dysecdysis.
Abscesses
Dysecdysis
Reptile abscesses have recently been quoted as being
Dysecdysis is when ecdysis fails. It occurs in snakes, and
more accurately termed fbriscesses (Huchzermeyer &
 to a lesser extent, lizards.
Cooper, 2001). Instead of liquid pus, reptiles and birds
The causes of dysecdysis are many and varied, but can
form solid, caseous, dried pus surrounded by a thick shell
include any condition which can cause dehydration so
of fbrous tissue. This is due to the lack of lysozymes and
reducing lymphatic fluid available to separate the skin
the secretion of huge amounts of fbrin into the abscess
layers. If the reptile is malnourished, dysecdysis may oc-
(Figure 21.4). Ihese may form anywhere, but a common
cur due to a lack of proteolytic enzymes. Alternatively old
site in chelonians is the middle ear, causing a bulging of
scars, a lack of an abrasive surface in the vivarium upon
ae paai saod a '(e'i anii)  a a
which to start the process or severe ectoparasitism may
frequently Gram-negative species, although the presence
also cause dysecdysis.
of fungi has been well recorded.
298 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Figure 21.1 During the process of ecdysis in snakes, the eyes
appear to go cloudy due to secretion of lymphatic fluid between the
new and old specta cles.
Figure 21.3 SC UD in a red-eared terrapin, Trachemys soripta e/egans.
Figure 21.2 Ecdysis in a corn snake (Pantheroohis gurttatus gurtatus).
Erythema, petechiae and ecchymoses
Figure 21.4 Dysecdysis in a green iguana (iguana iguana).
These three conditions may all be present at the same
time or may appear individually.
Erythema is the reddening of skin tissues due to vascu-
 lar congestion beneath. It can be seen in reptiles as a pink
hue to the areas between scutes in the case of chelonians
(Figure 21.3) and crocodilians, or the more generalised
reddening of the skin seen in snakes. Erythema is often
531
suggestive of septicaemia.
 Petechiae are pin-point subepithelial haemorrhages.
REE
They can be seen in the mouth, where they are often as-
sociated with oral infection such as 'mouth rot: They may
be seen over the body suggesting septicaemia. Other con-
ditions producing petechiae include clotting deficiencies,
for example, consumption of rodent prey which has itself
consumed a warfarin-type poison.
Hgure 21.5 Aural abscess in a spur-thighed tortoise (Testuoo graeca).
Common Reptile and Amphibian Diseases 299
Ecchymoses are larger areas of haemorrhage, and may
been implicated in the transmission of Cowdria ruminan-
be caused by severe local infection disseminated intravas-
fium the cause of heart water disease in mammals. These
cular coagulation (DIC) or conditions mentioned above.
ticks are common on wild-caught imported reptiles
Overgrown beaks and claws
Blowfly myiasis
Overgrown beaks are common in chelonians, and are
Myiasis is a problem for any reptile kept in insanitary
often due to a lack of abrasive foodstuffs or abrasive sur-
conditions or those with diarrhoea. Members of the
faces from which to eat them.
blue bottle, black bottle and green bottle families are all
However, it should be noted that some species have
capable of laying eggs on a tortoise. In peak conditions
perfectly normal apparently long' claws. An example is
 these can hatch into larvae or maggots within 1-2 hours.
the male red-eared terrapin, which uses its claws as a dis-
These then burrow away from the light, into the body of
play aid to attract and mate the female.
the tortoise causing severe trauma, infections, shock and
ultimately death.
Pigment changes
An example of a physiologically normal colour change is
 Leeches
seen in the Chamaeleonidae which will often darken in co-
 Leeches tend not to be such a problem in the United
lour as they become stressed. Green iguanas often become
 Kingdom, but can affect aquatic species all over the world.
yellow brown in colour as they become stressed or unwell,
The family Annelidae are the most dangerous, and cause
bearded dragons often become dark coloured and many of
large wounds which continue to bleed after the leech has
these species will exhibit darkening at the site of an injec-
detached. Ihese may then become secondarily infected.
tion. Areas of previous trauma may become whitened.
They can also transmit haemoparasites, bacteria and vi-
ruses.
Ectoparasitic
Mites
Traumatic and spontaneous damage
 The snake mite, Ophioryssus natricisappears as red to dark-
Traumatic damage can be due to attacks by predators
coloured pin-head mites hiding under the overlapping
or other reptiles, for example, males fighting over a fe-
edges of scales. Ihey may be seen in water dishes in which
male. In some species, for example, green iguanas, the
the reptile has been bathing. Ihey can cause severe irrita-
male mounting the female during mating bites the shoul-
tion, pruritus and self-trauma, as well as causing anaemia
der area vigorously, causing open wounds. Dog attacks
and dysecdysis. In addition, they can transmit Aeromonas
are common in tortoises (Figure 21.6). In the United
spp. bacteria, which may cause septicaemia and viruses, 
 Kingdom, it is unlawful to feed live vertebrate prey to
for example, inclusion body disease (IBD). Other mites in-
 any animal; but invertebrate live prey can be offered and
clude the cloacal mites of aquatic turtles ofthe family Clo-
these can still cause trauma to a sick or anorectic reptile.
acarus spp. In addition, there is of course the non-parasitic
Unprotected heat sources frequently cause severe burns.
harvest mite or Neotrombicula autumnalis, which may be
In some chelonians, scutes may be seen to lift off, often
brought in on straw and hay bedding material. The adult
weeping clear fluid beneath them. Ihis is frequently as-
itself is not an irritant but the six-legged larval stage is and
sociated with underlying renal disease.
may cause the reptile to traumatise itself.
Iatrogenic causes of skin damage are also seen in some
reptiles such as chelonians. Ihis can occur after over-
Ticks
administration of vitamin A, which can cause sloughing
In the United Kingdom, Ixodes ricinus (the sheep or deer
of the epidermal layer on the head, neck and limbs, ex-
tick) and Ixodes hexagonous (the hedgehog tick) are seen.
 posing the underlying dermis.
In tortoises, these are naturally the areas around the neck
inlet and in front of the hind legs. Ihey may cause local
Tumours
damage and can transmit pathogens. These include bacte-
Fibrosarcomas and squamous cell carcinomas of the
ria (Staphylococcus aureus, the cause of tick pyaemia and
 head are seen in lizards and snakes. Melanomas are also
Borrelia burgdorferi, the cause of Lyme's disease) as well
 seen in pigmented species such as the bearded dragon
as haemoparasites and viruses. Some of the soft-bodied 
(Pogona vitticeps). Viral-induced fibropapillomas are
ticks (Amblyomma marmoreum and A.sparsum) have
frequently seen in green turtles (Chelonia mydas), where
300 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
(Pasmans et al., 2010) and is now thought to be due to the
bacterium Devriesea agamarum. Gram-negative bacterial
infections of the hind feet of Savannah monitor lizards
seems to be another common condition and is associated
with an overly abrasive and damp substrate leading to
foot abrasion and secondary infection (Stahl, 2003).
Fungal
The incidence of fungal infections in reptiles has been
quoted between 0.4% (Austwick & Keymer, 1981) and
4% (Jacobson, 1980). These include: Aspergius spp.
(Austwick & Keymer, 1981; Tappe et al., 1984; Girling.
2002; Girling & Fraser, 2009); Mucor spp. (Lappin &
Dunstan, 1992; Heatley et al., 2001); Paecilomyces spp.
(Heard et al., 1986; Schumacher, 2003; Diaz-Figueroa
et al.,2008); Candida albicans (Austwick & Keymer,
1981; Migaki et al., 1984); Fusarium spp. and Chrysospo-
rium spp. (Austwick & Keymer 1981; Schumacher 2003);
Sporothrix schencki, Pestalotia pezizoides and Geotrichum
candidum (Cheatwood et al., 2003); Beauveria bassiana
(Gonzalez Cabo et al., 1995); Penicillium griseofulvum
(Oros et al., 1996); Alternaria spp. (Rossi & Rossi, 2000);
Cryptococcus spp. (Hough, 1998); Scolecobasidium humic-
ola (Weitzman et al., 1985) and the primary fungal patho-
Figure 21.6 Dog bite wounds are common in juvenile tortoises
gen the Chrysosporium anamorph of Nannizziopsis vrie-
sii (CANV) in bearded dragons, brown tree snakes and
herpesviruses have been implicated. Another herpesvirus
chameleons (Pare et al., 1997; Nichols et al., 1999; Bow-
is a common cause of grey-patch disease' in this species,
man ef al., 2007; Abarca et al., 2009). CANV produces
where circumscribed papular grey lesions appear over the
the so-called 'yellow skin disease' of bearded dragons and
whole body. In addition, papillomata have been regularly
may be fatal to a wide range of reptiles (Figure 21.7).
reported in Lacertidae (sand, wall and emerald lizards),
 Many of these fungal infections appear to enter the rep-
occurring over the dorsum of the individual lizard.
tilian body via the skin (Austwick & Keymer, 1981). With
increasing use of antibiotic therapy in pet reptiles and the
Bacteria associated with skin problems
discovery of new fungal species associated with disease
Gram-negative bacteria can cause skin abscesses, septicae-
(e.g., CANV), the incidence of fungal disease appears to
mia and areas of skin sloughing. Others such as Mycobacte-
be on the increase (Fraser & Girling, 2004).
ria spp. may be seen associated with the appearance of clas-
sical tuberculous lesions. Ihe mycobacteria found are more
Viral
commonly environmental ones, for example, Mycobacteri-
There are more and more cases of viral associated disease
ON行
um marinum (Girling & Fraser, 2007) and Mycobacterium
being diagnosed in reptiles each day. Herpesviruses caus-
chelonae, rather than the human or cattle TB organisms.
ing grey patch disease have been found in turtles, pap-
S3
Dermatophilus congolensis has been associated with
illoma viruses in lizards, and pox viruses in caimans (a
skin disease in a number of lizards and snakes and
member of the family Crocodylia).
EE
D. cheloniae has been isolated from captive chelonians
(Masters et al., 1995).
Hereditary
 Dermabacter spp. related bacteria have been associated
1E
 Many species exhibit scale and skin abnormalities. Ihese
with a proliferative cheilitis syndrome in Agamid lizards
vary from cleftpalates, to failure of scales to develop at all.
(Koplos et al., 2000). Ihis has also been seen to cause
In addition, many colour variations have been specifically
sal au iano pue eeop aul punane suisal anieiaoid
bred for.
Common Reptile and Amphibian Diseases 301
are so-called "hot-rocks' when the thermostat breaks. Full
skin thickness burns and even death of the reptile are not
uncommon (Figure 21.8).
Hypovitaminosis A
Ihis is mainly seen in aquatic chelonians and chame-
leons. The presenting signs include ocular oedema, xe-
rophthalmia, middle ear abscessation, hyperkeratosis,
lethargy and anorexia. It is preferable that vitamin A
supplements should be given orally to minimise toxic-
ity. Values of 200 IU/30 g bodyweight have been quoted
dosed twice, 7 days apart (Harkewicz, 2001).
Hypervitaminosis A
This can occur if parenteral vitamin A is given in doses
exceeding 10,000 IU/kg. Initially it presents as dry skin,
but may progress to whole skin sloughing. Management
is as for thermal burns.
Hypovitaminosis C
Ui Hum se (t66h) aig Aq paodai uaaq s s
spontaneous splitting of the skin in anorexic/cachexic py-
thons and may be associated with a collagen defect. Injec-
tions of 10-20 mg/kg vitamin C per day are advised.
Figure 21.7 CANV fungal infection in a Boa constrictoris frequently
fatal.
Hypovitaminosis E
Hyperthyroidism
This has been reported in caimans and other reptiles
This has been diagnosed in green iguanas and corn
which eat marine fish. Ihe presence of free radicals in oily
snakes, although it is rare. It is associated with an in-
frozen marine fish can result in a relative vitamin E de-
creased turnover of skin and so an increase in ecdysis.
ficiency which can lead to steatites, skin sloughing, and
I may also be associated with loss of dorsal spines in
 necrosis of fat and secondary infections. Dietary supple-
iguanas, tachycardia, increased aggression, polyphagia
mentation with vitamin E at 1 IU/kg until resolution of
and weight loss overall (Hernandez-Divers et al., 2001).
signs is recommended.
Normal thyroid reference ranges are difficult to find, but
0.21-6.78 nmol/L have been reported for Calotes and
Sceloporus lizards.
Hypothyroidism
This has been reported in giant chelonia (Frye, 1991). It
may also be due to the presence of goitrogens in the diet
such as brassicas. Myxoedema and heart failure are the
most commonly seen clinical signs.
Thermal burns
Reptiles can sense pain but do not appear to respond to
thermal pain in the way that birds and mammals do; that
is, they do not remove themselves from the heat source
even when it is resulting in severe burns. Unprotected heat
Figure 21.8 Full skin thickness burns can be seen where heat lamps
lamps which allow reptiles close contact are dangerous, as
are left unprotected as in this monitor lizard.
302 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Biotin deficiency
Herpesvirus may also affect the central nervous system
Ihis may be seen in reptiles which consume large
and organs such as the liver, kidneys and gonads. Depres-
amounts of eggs, such as some snakes and monitor liz-
sion and neurological signs are possible.
ards. Unfertilised eggs contain avidin, an anti-vitamin to
biotin which may lead to a relative deficiency. Ihe main
Periodontal disease
 signs are neurological, but fracturing and splitting of ker-
This is particularly common in Agamidae and Chame-
atin structures such as scales and claws and beaks along
leonidae which possess acrodont teeth. Ihese teeth are
with abnormal sloughing may be seen. Removal of eggs
not replaced when lost during the course of the lizard's
from the diet results in a cure in most cases.
life. This is as opposed to pleurodont teeth (e.g., the
Iguanidae) where the teeth are continually replaced. If
Hypocalcaemia/hypovitaminosis D
inappropriate food is provided, such as sof fruit, which
This can result in shell deformities in chelonians. See the
adheres readily to the teeth and rots, periodontal disease
section on musculoskeletal diseases for further informa-
will develop. As the species with acrodont teeth cannot
tion. In addition, calcinosis cutis and circumscripta have
shed and replace the teeth, infection, often with osteomy-
been reported in reptiles with multifocal crusting and
elitis ensues.
thickened skin which can then ulcerate. Ihese two condi-
tions are often related to calcium imbalances - more often
Vomiting and regurgitation
hypercalcaemia, but also to areas of skin damage.
In snakes, regurgitation may simply occur due to rough
handing, particularly soon after the snake has eaten.
Digestive disease
Snakes will also regurgitate if fed, or force-fed and then
Oral (mouth rot)
kept at sub-optimal environmental temperatures. Lizards
'Mouth rot' is the colloquial term for stomatitis, com-
and chelonia rarely vomit.
 s  ad saa  n s an
chelonians.
Parasitic causes of vomiting and regurgitation
The causes are many and varied. It can be caused by
In snakes, one of the most important stomach diseases is
secondary infections with Gram-negative bacteria. The
cryptosporidiosis due to a single-celled parasite, Crypto-
initial cause of the damage can be rubbing of the snout on
sporidia serpentes, which invades the outer membrane of
vivarium glass, particularly in snakes. The use of opaque
cells lining the stomach. With time, it causes a thicken-
tape stuckto the outside of the glass helps the snake to 'see
ing of the stomach, narrowing the lumen and so reducing
it, preventing this injury.
its elasticity and digestive powers and causing vomiting.
Stomatitis may also be due to the overzealous force-
In lizards, cryptosporidiosis mainly affects the intestines,
feeding of anorectic reptiles, to other disease or stresses
making vomiting less likely. Cryptosporidiosis was impli-
leading to reduced immune system function. Uric acid
cated in an outbreak of vomiting in juvenile Hermann's
crystals deposited around the base of the teeth, due to
tortoises (McArthur et al., 2004). It is therefore currently
visceral gout and renal failure can allow infections to
thought that there is a lizard-, snake- and chelonian-
occur. Herpesvirus and iridovirus infections in terrestrial
specific form of Cryptosporidia spp.
tortoises are also a cause with oral ulceration and diph-
Diagnosis is made on clinical signs and demonstrat-
therisis. Lytic agent X - a suspected virus - has also been
 ing oocysts shed in the faeces or recovered from a stonm-
associated with upper digestive tract lesions in chelonia.
ach wash, or biopsy of the stomach wall. In snakes, the
ONG
Devriesea agamarum, a bacterium, has been reported in
course of the disease can vary from 4 days in severe cases
agamid lizards as a cause of proliferative cheilitis, peri-
to 2 years in chronic ones. Externally, the snake often
S3
cloacal disease and dermatitis.
shows signs of a mid-body swelling, due to the thickening
Diagnosis is made on impression smears and bacte-
of the stomach wall. IThe parasite is passed directly from
rial swabs of samples. A polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
one snake's faeces or regurgitated fluids to another. The
for diagnosing chelonian herpesvirus has been produced
condition is difficult to treat and frequently results in the
1E
at the RVC London, and reptile cell lines are available
death of the snake (Figure 21.9).
through the AHVLA Weybridge to attempt virus isolation.
Other forms of parasitism may cause vomiting or
Alternatively, electron microscopy of samples may aid
regurgitation in snakes. For example, Kalicephalus spp.
the diagnosis
(the snake hookworm), which may cause extensive
Common Reptile and Amphibian Diseases 303
Intestinal disease
Parasitic causes of intestinal disease
Snakes: Species involved include the hookworm
Kalicephalus sp.: ascarids; strongyles such as Strongy-
loides spp.; and tapeworms such as Bothridiurm spp. in
Entamoebiasis caused by the single-celled parasite
Entamoeba invadens can cause diarrhoea in snakes. Its
life cycle is direct; that is, spread directly from one rep-
tile to another. After incubating in the lining of the small
intestine, each infective cyst produces eight uninucleate
amoebae which invade cells lining the large intestine of
the same snake. The amoebae may also penetrate into the
 blood stream and so end up in the liver, causing necrotis-
ing hepatitis. Diagnosis is by finding the small amoebae
or cysts in the faeces (X 400 magnification is required).
Other single-celled parasites of snakes include the flag-
ellate family, (e.g., Trichomonas spp.). Symptoms again
include large bowel distension with fluid and gas, diar-
rhoea and increased thirst.
Chelonians: The ascarid family, for example, Angusti-
iis isou st (iual un s o-ii) dds uns
Oxyurid pinworms may be asymptomatic, but some
may be large enough to debilitate a tortoise, particularly
 prior to and subsequent to hibernation. Roundworms are
 passed directly from chelonian to chelonian in the faeces
thie stomach of snakes.
in the infectious egg form, and may be diagnosed by the
detection of these eggs in a faecal smear.
ulceration of the digestive system; ascarids; and in the
The most important group of intestinal parasites of
 python family, the tapeworm Bothridium spp., have been 
Chelonia is the flagellate family. Ihese include Trichoron-
reported.
as and Hexamita spp. Ihe symptoms produced are rapid
in onset and include anorexia, occasionally diarrhoea and
Bacterial and fungal causes of vomiting and
frequently, the passage of undigested food in the faeces.
regurgitation
There is often polydipsia, due partly to the inability of the
Bacterial and fungal infections, granulomas and abscesses
damaged intestines to absorb water, and partly, in the case
may also cause damage to the stomach, or pressure on it,
of Hexarmita parva, due to kidney damage, as this organism
and so lead to regurgitation or vomiting.
migrates up the ureters from the cloaca into the kidneys.
Diagnosis is made by viewing the very fast-moving organ-
Viral causes of vomiting and regurgitation
isms microscopically using × 400 magnification, although
Inclusion body disease, a retrovirus, has been associated
a fresh faecal specimen is required. Transmission is faeco-
with chronic regurgitation in boids although there are
oral. The prognosis may be extremely poor for any chelo-
usually other clinical signs such as respiratory disease and
nian severely parasitised by this organism, due to its ability
neurological disease.
to cause irreparable damage to the intestinal mucosa.
Another family of motile protozoa aflicting Chelonia
Tumours
are cilites such as Balantidium coli and Paramecium spp.
Stomach tumours, for exanmple, gastric adenomas and
They may be seen normally in the stool of healthy ani-
adenocarcinomas, have been reported and may cause
mals, but they may be present in such large numbers as to
swelling
cause weight loss and intestinal damage.
304 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Entamoeba invadens has caused large intestinal and
such treatment can clear a reptile permanently of the
hepatic disease in herbivorous chelonians. However, this 
bacte rium.
 condition is less common than in snakes.
Ae ad q pa aq Au ds v
As mentioned, Cryptosporidia spp. can affect the small
individuals, but during other disease processes, such as para-
intestine and stomach of chelonia, and has been impli-
sitism, or during periods of stress they can become oppor-
cated in pancreatitis as well.
tunistic pathogens. Other bacteria found in the normal di-
gestive system of reptiles can act as opportunistic pathogens,
Lizards: Oxyurid nematodes are common. Due to the di-
including many members of the E. col family, Pseudomonas
rect life cycle of these parasites, levels may become very
spp., Campylobacter sp, Clastridia spp., and Aeromonas spp.
Diagnosis is by finding the eggs in the faeces (Figure 21.10)
Fungal causes of intestinal disease
The coccidian family are also important parasites in
lizards, particularly geckos and chameleons. Clinical
Published reports of gastrointestinal fungal disease are
signs include anorexia, weight loss, diarrhoea, dysentery
rare, but fungal overgrowth appears to be a relatively
common finding. Documented cases of intestinal fungal
and general debilitation. Isospora amphiboluri is a cause
Overgrowth include Penicillium, Basidiobolus ranarum
of stunting and runting in bearded dragon neonates.
 Diagnosis is by finding the typically isosporean oocysts in
and Paecilomyces.
the faeces, and disease spread is direct.
Physical causes of intestinal disease
Intestinal cryptosporidiosis is a problem in geckos.
Foreign bodies are not uncommon in chelonians and liz-
Symptoms include weight loss, diarrhoea and anorexia
ards, which may consume stones, sand, soil or any other
 and typically affect young hatchlings that basically fail to
substrate present. Surgery may be required to remove
thrive. Ihe pathology has been described above.
some foreign bodies, although many may be passed with
Entamoeba invadens may also be seen in carnivorous
 the aid of oral liquid paraffin and fuid therapy.
lizards, producing colic and progressive weight loss with
Other physical obstructions include tumours within the
diarrhoea.
intestines. These are not uncommon, particularly in snakes,
and may present as a swelling, or produce symptoms such
Bacterial causes of intestinal disease
as vomiting, diarrhoea, constipation or anorexia.
In all species, but particularly snakes and chelonians,
members of the zoonotic family Salmonellae are com-
Lead poisoning
monly recovered. Current advice is that providing they
This has been reported in chelonian such as common
are not causing clinical disease, no antibiotics should
snapping turtles (Chelydra serpentina) and spur-thighed
be given. This is to prevent antibiotic resistance, and on
tortoises (Testudo graeca). Clinical signs included ileus,
a practical basis no one has satisfactorily proven that
anaemia, lethargy and renal failure. Radiography will
highlight larger lead particles.
Liver disease
N
8
Snakes
Possible causes of liver damage in snakes (Entarmoeba in-
W
vadens) have already been mentioned above.
Other parasitic causes include some forms of the coc-
口N寸
cidian family which gain access to the liver from the small
intestine via the bile ducts.
A herpesvirus and an adenovirus have been isolated
from damaged snake livers.
非
Chelonia
1E
 The protozoan Hexamita parva has been associated with
intestinal, renal and hepatic disease in Chelonia.
Hepatic lipidosis is common in tortoises fed inappro-
Figure 21.10 Oxyurid nematode infections are common in reptiles
and may be diagnosed by finding these classical eggs in the faeces.
priate high-fat diets. Fat becomes deposited within the
Common Reptile and Amphibian Diseases 305
liver cells themselves, enlarging the liver and, more im-
 portantly, severely affecting its function. This can lead to
jaundice, anorexia and death.
 Post-hibemation jaundice is often a tenmporary fnding
 in tortoises however it may persist, indicating liver damage
de to any one of the above or due to hepatitis from bacteria
such as Salmonella spp. and Aeromonas hydrophila. In addi-
tion some forms ofherpesviruses and iridoviruses have been
isolated from damaged tortoise and other chelonian livers.
The liver may become calcified due to over-supplemen-
 tation of the diet with calcium and vitamin D3.
Lizards
Bacterial hepatitis due to Salmonella spp., Aeromonas
Figure 21.11 Hepatic lipidosis is common in species such as the
1eJ pue jan!l pajnoloo uel aut aloN (dds euobod) uobejp papjeaq
spp. or Pseudormonas spp. has all been recorded. Ihese
deposits.
may or may not be associated with heavy worm burdens,
many of which may migrate through or to the liver, often
damage (McArthur et al., 2004). Reptiles are insulin resis-
carrying bacteria with them.
tant; therefore, insulin therapy is rarely effective. Ketoaci-
Viral hepatitis has been reported due to adenoviruses
dosis and hepatic lipidosis are often also present.
U uaas Aeiauaa si lI (dds vuosr) suogep papieaq u
Neoplasia of the digestive tract
young animals and often associated with coccidiosis result-
Neoplasia of the pancreas has been mentioned. Neoplasia
ing in poor thriving young. Serological tests are available
 of the stomach and intestines are not uncommon, par-
for detection of this disease as is a PCR test. Herpesviruses
ticularly in snakes. Hepatic neoplasia has been reported
have been associated with hepatitis as well as pneumonia
most frequently in chelonia. Onset tends to be gradual
in iguanids and agamids. Yellow-green urates may be seen
and unless the neoplasm involves an intestinal obstruc.
 in both snakes and lizards associated with hepatic dysfunc-
tion, may pass unnoticed until advanced.
tion due to the presence of increased levels of biliverdin.
 Hepatic lipidosis, or fatty liver syndrome, has been well
Respiratory disease
documented in lizards, particularly monitors and bearded
Signs of respiratory disease
dragons. This is frequently seen when fed inappropriate
Respiratory disease in reptiles is exacerbated by the lack
high-fat diets. In bearded dragons, the feeding of excessive
of a cough reflex as reptiles have no true diaphragm
amounts of insects to adults (which are supposed to be-
(Figure 21.12). Secretions pool in the dependent parts
come more herbivorous once they reach maturity) has also
 of the lungs and so make the course of the disease more
been implicated (Figure 21.11). In lizards with pre-ovula-
chronic and difficult to treat. Signs of respiratory disease
tory stasis, lipidosis occurs due to the high levels of circu-
are given in Table 21.1.
lating yolk lipids. Lipidosis can lead to jaundice, anorexia
and death. Ihe liver may become calcified due to over-
supplementation of the diet with calcium and vitarmin D3.
 Pancreatic diseases
Pancreatitis
This may be associated with bacterial infections as well
as herpesvirus disease and cryptosporidiosis in che-
lonia (McArthur et al., 2004). Frye (1999) describes a
 spontaneous autoimmune pancreatitis and diabetes mel-
litus in a Western pond turtle.
Diabetes mellitus
This has been reported in chelonia and is thought to be
Hgure 21.12 Mouth breathing and excess oral mucus are often seen
due to a reduction in insulin secretion due to pancreatic
in advanced cases of respiratory disease as in this boa constrictor.
306 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Table 21.1 Signs of respiratory disease in reptiles.
reptile, the larvae are reactivated and migrate to the
lungs where they can grow to several centimetres in
Common signs of
Less frequently seen signs
length, causing severe damage. They are generally only
respiratory disease in
of respiratory disease in
found in wild-caught specimens, due to the lack of na-
reptiles
reptiles
Mouth breathing
Hypopyon (pus in the anterior
tive prey to transmit the parasite in captivity.
· Intranuclear coccidiosis in the lungs has been reported
(particularly snakes)
charmber of the eye -
Excess mucus at nares
particularly chelonia)
in chelonia by biopsy, although a PCR test has been
 and mouth
 Abscess beneath the eye
developed (Garner et al., 2006).
Lethargy
spectacle
Anorexia
Bacterial causes
Examples of the bacteria seen in pneumonias include
Causes of respiratory disease
Aeromonas spp, Pseudomonas spp., Klebsiella spp, and
Parasitic causes
Pasteurella spp.
Entamoeba invadens can cause respiratory disease in
Mycoplasmas are regularly recovered from chelo-
snakes. Ihe commoner parasites though are nematodes.
nians with Herpesvirus infections, particularly Myco-
These are represented by:
plasma agassizii. One study suggested an incidence of
15.8% in UK tortoises (Soares et al.,2003). This may result
the snake, or be eaten. The worm then migrates through
in oedema and swelling of the neck and tissues between
body, often through the lungs as it develops, before fi-
neck and forelimbs in chelonian. M. agassizii-like my-
 nally ending up as the adult hookworm in the gut.
coplasma has also been identified as a cause of a prolif-
 The family Ascaridae: In carnivorous reptiles, asca-
erative interstitial pneumonia and tracheitis in Burmese
rid infection is frequently acquired via amphibian or
pythons (Penner et al., 1997). PCRs and culture have been
rodent prey, which acts as an intermediate/paratenic
used to diagnose mycoplasmal infections.
host. The worm larvae, once consumed, migrate
Chlamydophila spp. infections have also been reported
through the liver and lungs of the reptile.
particularly in snakes resulting in pneumonia
*Rhabdias spp. (lungworm of snakes): The snake ingests
the infective eggs from the faeces of other snakes, or
Bacterial sampling
the infective larvae may penetrate the skin of the snake
 Ihere are two main techniques involved in sampling bac-
as with Kalicephalus spp. Ihe larvae then migrate to
teria or parasites that cause pneumonias:
the lungs, where they all develop into adult female
· Lung wash: A sterile catheter is passed into the trachea
worms. Eggs are therefore produced by parthenogen-
of the reptile and may be done in the conscious animal
esis (female giving birth to female).
due to the lack of the cough reflex. Fractious animals
* Entomelas spp.(lungworm of lizards): The life-cycle is
may require sedation. Through this catheter, sterile
similar to the lungworm of snakes.
saline may be infused, at doses equal to 0.5-1 mL per
 Other less common parasitic causes of respiratory disease
100 g body weight, and immediately aspirated. This
in reptiles include:
 sample can then be cultured to identify the pathogen.
· Flukes (e.g., Dasymetra spp.), which live in the oral
 Sample collection may be enhanced by holding the
cavity and respiratory tract of snakes. Ihese parasites
reptile upside down whilst aspirating.
 are rarely pathogenic. Diagnosis is made by finding the
· Direct sampling: This involves taking a swab directly
AND
fluke eggs in the snake's faeces.
from the site of the problem. This may be done via
 Pentastomes, also known as 'tongue worms. These
laparotomy or endoscopy. In the case of Chelonia, the
53
are the adult stage of an arachnid organism related to
reptile may be anaesthetised, the shell overlying the
spiders and ticks, rather than a true worm. It uses the
pneumonic lesion aseptically prepared and a small
非
lungs of snakes, crocodiles or lizards as the final host,
 hole driled through to enable the bacteriological swab
shedding eggs which are coughed up and swallowed
to be passed.
and passed in the faeces. Ihese then are ingested by
an intermediate host such as rodents, or even humans,
Fungal causes
making this a zoonotic disease. Ihe larvae encyst in
Fungal infections of the respiratory tract are more com-
the intermediate host. If this is then consumed by the
monly seen in chelonians than in other species of reptile.
Common Reptile and Amphibian Diseases 307
The infections are due to saprophytic opportunistic en-
also exists and is the most useful in an acute outbreak as
vironmental fungi and so are often secondary to bacte-
serological conversion can take 6-8 weeks post infection
rial infections or traumatic injuries. Fungi associated
to occur. Histopathology may also demonstrate classical
with disease include Aspergillus, Paecilomyces, Candida,
eosinophilic intranuclear inclusion bodies.
Sporotrichum, Cladosporium and Penicilium spp.
Iridovirus: Iridoviral respiratory infections particularly
Ranavirus infections produced a severe, extensive necro-
Viral causes
Pararmyxovirus: Ihis virus is highly infectious, being
tizing ulcerative tracheitis, pneumonia, pharyngitis and
oesophagitis in an adult male Gopher tortoise (Gopherus
shed in respiratory secretions. It causes a haemorrhagic
polyphemus). In other animals, such as Testudo horsfieldii
pneumonia and viraemia which affects other organs as
and Terrapene carolina with iridovirus, no lesions were
well. Diagnosis is generally made at postmortem or by
described. It seems that amphibians are the reservoir host
serological analysis of blood samples for the PMV-3 and
as the Ranavirus isolated in cases of upper respiratory
PMV-7 strains (AHVLA Weybridge, United Kingdom).
 tract disease in chelonia is of amphibian origin. PCR and
Seroconversion does take 6-8 weeks to occur post infec-
neutralization tests are available (Westhouse et al., 1996).
tion, so false-negative results early in the course of the
disease are possible. Currently, two Ophidian and one
Hypovitaminosis A
Saurian paramyxovirus are known to exist, but probably
This has been reported in aquatic and semi-aquatic
many more await discovery.
carnivorous chelonia. Typical lesions of squamous
A paramyxovirus related to parainfluenza 2 (PI2) virus
metaplasia, periocular oedema and xerophthalmia, and
was recovered from the lungs of two Ottoman vipers
secondary bacterial infections of the gastrointestinal and
(Vipera xanfhena xanthena) with interstitial pneumonia
respiratory tract are seen.
(Potgieter et al., 1987).
Inclusion body virus: This retrovirus, which also causes
Trauma and respiratory tract disease in reptiles
digestive and CNS system diseases, has been associated
Trauma to the carapace of chelonians is a frequent cause
with pneumonia in snakes - primarily pythons and boas
on non-infectious lung disease. It is often associated with
There is no treatment. It is thought to be spread by aerosol
dog attacks, car accidents or lawnmower injuries.
and by the snake mite Ophionyssus natricis. Diagnosis is
Cardiovascular disease
made by biopsy of lung, liver, spleen or kidney tissue or
Congenital defects
occasionally it may be possible to see the characteristic
eosinophilic virion 'inclusions' in pneumocytes dislodged
These have been reported in a number of species and in-
 during a lung wash, particularly in boids in this author's
dlude atrial septal defects and valve dysplasias.
experience.
Cardiomyopathy
Herpes viruses: Ihis has been recorded in tortoises with
 Dilated cardiomyopathy has been reported, particularly
pper respiratory tract infections. Clinical signs include
in snakes (Barten, 1980; Wagner, 1989). Causes appear
lethargy, rhinitis, conjunctivitis, stomatitis and anorexia.
 to be similar to those described for birds and mammals.
Diphtheritic plaques may form inside the oral cav-
Management is as for congestive heart failure.
isou aul aq ol ieadde dds opnysal 'snbeudosao pue A1
susceptible with one serological study reporting 42.5%
Infectious disease
of spur-thighed tortoises and 18.5% of Hermann's were
Many pathogens which cause systemic illness and septi-
positive (Frost & Schmidt, 1997). Routes of transmission
caemia are responsible for cardiac damage. Damage can
are not fully understood but studies have shown success
be due to bacterial endocarditis causing micro-thrombi
via oral, aerosol and intramuscular routes. Any infected
to seed off into the rest of the body. Many of the Gram-
tortoise should be considered as infected for life and so
negative bacteria seen in reptiles, such as Aeromonas spp.
can spread herpesvirus particles even after resolution of
Salmonella spp. and Pseudomonas spp., are associated
clinical signs.
with heart disease. Diagnosis requires ultrasonography
Diagnosis is by serology or PCR. A serum neutralisa-
 and radiology to determine heart size and internal struc-
tion test was the first to be developed, but a more effective
ture. Electrocardiograms may also be helpful. Final proof
and sensitive ELISA now exists. A PCR real-time assay
of the organism involved depends on blood culture
308 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Chlamydial myocarditis has been reported in Puff ad-
Other haemoparasites
ders and mycoplasmosis has been reported in American
Trypanosomes, Schellackia spp, piroplasms (e.g., Sauro-
alligators. Mycobacteriosis has also been reported as a
plasma) have all been reported in reptiles and are nearly
cause of myocarditis.
always asymptomatic. Treatment is rarely needed.
Pneumonia often accompanies endocarditis and septi-
caemic situations in reptiles (Pees et al., 2010).
Nutritional disease
Hypoiodinism in chelonians has been associated with
Haemoparasites
cardiac disease and goitre. Ihe feeding of mineral-poor
Filarids
foods such as cucumber and lettuce or goitrogenic foods
The adults often live subcutaneously and release microfi-
such as brassicas (e.g., cabbage, Brussels sprouts), may
laria, microscopic young, which may be transmitted from
 lead to this.
reptile to reptile by mosquitoes and ticks. These parasites
 Oversupplementation with vitamin D3 and calcium
 may cause thrombi to develop in any of the major blood
 may lead to calcification of the tunica media of the major
vessels, causing ischaemic necrosis or cardiac damage.
arteries, causing a decrease in their elasticity and so in-
creased blood pressure. This may lead to heart failure or
Trematodes
aneur ysm for mation.
Other parasites such as trematodes have been isolated in
 Dietary deficiencies in vitamin E and/or selenium can
marine chelonia. Ihe adult fluke is not normally the prob-
lead to a condition known as white muscle disease, and
lem, but the eggs laid into the blood stream cause thrombi
can cause a dilated cardiomyopathy to develop. It may
to form and so block capillary beds.
occur due to a dietary deficiency, or to overfeeding with
high-fat foods, such as snakes fed overweight rodents or
Plasmodium and haemoproteus
fish, such as tuna and mackerel, which are high in polyun-
 In chelonia, the haermoparasite family Plasmodium spp.
saturates and increase the demand for vitamin E.
has been shown to cause haemolytic anaemia and mor-
tality. Ihey are transmitted by mosquitoes predomi-
Atherosclerosis
Aeu saozoudoin pue saiasoiaea sjuozss pue Auu
Ihis has been reported in green iguanas (Schuchman
be found in the peripheral blood. The gametocyte is the
& Taylor, 1970) and bearded dragons (Schilliger et al.,
most obvious stage, as it is refractile with pigment gran-
 2010) and may be a precursor to mineralisation of major
ules in the cytoplasm of white and red blood cells and
arteries.
thrombocytes.
Haemoproteus spp. are found as gametocytes in the
Neoplastic disease
cytoplasm of erythrocytes and have refractile pigment 
-dan Aueu u paodan Aiemaan uaaq aneq seamit
 granules. There is no known effective treatment for this
tiles, particularly in snakes. They are usually are tissue-
condition but it is not common in reptiles.
bound lymphomas but these may become leukaemic
over-spill cases with the presence of lymphoblast cells.
N
Haemogregarines
There is some suggestion that as with birds, some lym-
These are probably the most commonly seen group of
phomas are virus associated.
sporozoan haemoparasites in reptiles. They have an in-
 In addition, other tumours have been reported includ-
direct life-cycle with intermediate hosts which vary fronm
ing fibrosarcomas, mast cell tumours and chondrosar-
leeches and mosquitoes to mites and ticks. Ihe three most
comas in snakes (Schumacher et al., 1998; Schmidt &
commonly seen families include Haemogregarina (found
Reavill, 2010). Fibrosarcomas seem to have a predilection
in fresh water turtles, Testudo spp. tortoises, snakes and
for the right atrium.
some lizards), Hepatozoon (found in snakes predomi-
nantly) and Karyolysus (Old World lizards). Ihey diff-
Urinary tract disease
cult to differentiate between clinically. The gametocyte is
Renal disease and gout
found in the erythrocyte cytoplasm, often curling around
Aetiology
the nucleus or displacing it.
 Damage to kidney function in the average terrestrial rep-
Reptile haemogregarines rarely cause disease. Heavy
tile can lead to increasing blood levels of uric acid, the
infestations though have been associated with anaemia
main excretory product of protein metabolism. Uric acid
Common Reptile and Amphibian Diseases 309
is poorly water soluble, and so rapidly reaches its precipi-
13. Any systemic mycosis or local extension from a fun-
tation point whereby crystals form and come out of so-
 gal pneumonia may lead to infection of the kidneys.
lution. Ihis may occur in internal organs (visceral gout)
Penicillium griseofulvin, Geotrichum nigra and Collet-
and also the joints (articular gout).
Factors contributing to renal failure include:
with renal disease in chelonia.
1. Diets high in protein, fed to herbivores, automatically
14. Iatrogenic causes - certain nephrotoxic drugs such as
leading to excessive production of uric acid, the main
the aminoglycoside antibiotic family (e.g., gentami-
waste product of protein metabolism
cin, amikacin etc.), and the diuretic furosemide.
 2. Diets with excessive levels of vitamin D and calcium
15. If suffcient muscle bruising occurs, such as too firm
leading to calcification of sof tissue structures, such
a grasp of the patient when handling, then myoglobin
as the tunica media of the arterial walls, and the kid-
is released. Ihis causes damage to the kidney fltra-
neys themselves.
tion membrane.
 3. Diets low in vitamin A resulting in squamous meta-
Diagnosis of renal disease
plasia of the proximal tubules
4. Glomerulonephritis occurred in approximately 27%
Clinical signs can include lethargy, polydipsia, polyuria,
of kidneys examined in one survey (Zwart, 2006).
collapse, visceral and articular gout, obstipation due to
5. Flagellates such as Hexamita spp., Trichomonas spp.,
renomegaly pressing on the cloaca/rectum and dystocia
and Giardia spp. have been reported in chelonia,
(remember, the kidneys are in the pelvis in lizards and
snakes and lizards. Hexamita spp. are particularly
chelonia) and fluid retention with oedema (Figure 21.13).
damaging to the kidneys of chelonia.
Haematological parameters may alter with a leukocyto-
6. Entamoeba invadens has also been reported in snakes
sis in acute infectious renal disease. Chronic renal failure
where it often becomes systemic and so can cause ex-
may have a non-regenerative anaemia. Uric acid measure-
tensive areas of renal necrosis.
ment will allow an assessment of the severity of renal dam-
 7. Kidney flukes are found in Kingsnakes, and members
age with visceral gout starting when levels in the blood rise
of the Boidae. Ihey may block renal tubules, and in
above 1500 μmol/L. Remember though, that uric acid mea-
surement is not a sensitive indicator of early renal disease,
high enough quantities, cause kidney failure.
8. Coccidial parasites (e.g., Kossiella boae) in boids
as less than 25% of the renal mass has to be lef functioning
which parasitizes the collecting ducts and ureters. In-
before the uric acid levels wil rise significantly. Also any
tranuclear stages of coccidia have also been found in
carnivore that has eaten a meal recently will have elevated
chelonia causing tubular necrosis.
uric acid levels. In aquatic chelonia, urea is a consistent
9. Myxosporidia of the genus Myxidium have been re-
fraction of nitrogen and therefore may be of use. In terres
ported in the kidneys of chelonia but little is known
trial species urea is not a useful indicator of renal disease.
about their pathogenicity.
10. Microsporidia have also been reported in bearded
 dragons associated with infection of renal epithelial
cells.
11. Almost any bacteria found in the digestive system or
environment of the reptile has the potential to cause
renal disease if that reptile is stressed or debilitated
in any way (eg., Salmonella spp., Aeromonas spp..
Pseudomonas spp. and E. coli). In some chelonia, the
bacteria responsible for septicaemic cutaneous syn-
drome, Citrobacter freundii is also implicated. Myco
bacteria have also been associated with renal disease
in chelonia.
12. Inclusion body disease of snakes has been associated
with inclusions and damage to the kidneys with glo-
merulonephritis. Herpesvirus has been seen in chelo-
Figure 21.13 Chronic renal failure in a red-eared terrapin
nia causing the same.
(Trachemys scripta elegans) with tissue oedema and fluid retention.
310 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Calcium and phosphorus levels have been used as an
Reproductive tract disease
early indicator of renal disease in reptiles. Ihe product of
Egg-binding or post-ovulatory stasis
 calcium and phosphorus in mmol/L should be less than 9.
Dystocia is common in many species of reptile. It is asso-
If it exceeds this, and particularly if it exceeds 12, then
ciated with hypocalcaemia, however other causes include
metastatic mineralisation occurs and phosphate binders
malformed egs, fractured pelvic bones, cystic calculi,
should be used. Gamma-glutamyl transferase is found in
lack of nesting material or malnutrition of the female.
the brush border of the renal tubule and so is released
Dystocias can be difficult to diagnose in snakes, as
when damaged. At this stage there is not enough evidence
they tend to be relatively quiet creatures. This difficulty
to determine what is significant.
is exacerbated inthose species (e.g., garter snakes) which
 Potassium levels may significantly elevate in cheloni-
are viviparous (that is give birth to live young rather than
ans with renal disease.
-od ssa yonu si suams [euupqe Aue je u (s8a
 Urinalysis is less useful in reptiles than birds as there is
nounced. Any previous history of passing eggs, and then
usually post-renal modifcation of the urine in either the
the presence of a persistent caudally-located mass is of
urinary bladder (where present) or the rectum, as urine is
e jo auapiaa Aue 'uotpe ul 'aaisans Aai asnos
refluxed, and more water (and solutes) is absorbed. No urine
prolapse of the cloaca or distal reproductive tract can in-
sample will be sterile either. However, assessment for protein
dicate dystocia.
casts, haematuria and of course, for parasites is useful.
 In lizards, the patient may be obviously distended with
 Radiography demonstrating renalomegaly can aid di-
egs, and become progressively more moribund and
 agnosis. In lizards the kidneys should be within the pel-
lethargic (Figure 21.14). Many snakes can survive pro-
vis. In renalomegaly the cranial pole often projects into
longed periods of dystocia, but lizards are not so resilient
the caudal coelomic cavity and can be seen. Radiopaque
and dystocia may prove fatal within days.
dye may be injected intravenously to perform a urogram
Chelonia may show signs of discomfort and straining
(800-1000 mg/kg of aqueous iodine). Finally, loss of bone
or they may show no signs at all. Radiographs are often
density may occur with secondary hyperparathyroidism,
the only way to tell if a chelonian is gravid.
although there has to be a significant drop in bone density
for conventional radiographs to detect it.
Pre-ovulatory stasis
Ultrasound examination of kidney structure can also
A condition recorded in both lizards and Chelonia is pre-
be helpful to indicate overall increases
s in echogenicity
ovulatory stasis.
and size. It is particularly useful in chelonia where radiog-
This is when the ovaries produce follicles, which
 raphy is not useful in detecting changes in size. Ihe probe
is placed in front of the hindlimb and angled caudally
onto the inside of the carapace to examine the kidneys.
results in ovaries containing any where up to 30 or 40 yolks,
displacing all other coelomic organs (Figure 21.15). Over
-ap au sdead st spnq um se Asdoq pue Adossopug
finitive technique to determine the cause and severity of
time the affected reptile becomes anorectic and lethargic
renal disease in reptiles. Even then, they have their limita-
tions; in lizards, the kidneys are in the pelvis and may be
difficult to visualise due to the presence of the fat pads, and
in chelonians, their position on the dorsum of the internal
carapace means a rigid endoscope may find access diff-
NO
cult. Ultrasound-guided biopsy may also be attempted.
Bladder stones
These are common in reptiles - but obviously some rep-
tiles do not have a urinary bladder. Chelonia and lizards
such as the green iguana are the most commonly seen
species. Ihe stones are uric acid based and may form
around a nidus of bacteria, a refluxed egg in females or
a parasite. Ihey may reach significant sizes, resulting in
Figure 21.14 Post-ovulatory stasis/egg binding in a green iguana
 cystitis and cause considerable pain and discomfort.
(guana iguana).
Common Reptile and Amphibian Diseases 311
Figure 21.16 Oviduct prolapse in a Burmese python
(Python mo/urus bivittatus).
Figure 21.15 Pre-ovulatory stasis in a green iguana (lguana iguana)
Musculoskeletal disease
and often succumbs to secondary diseases (e.g., egg yolk
Metabolic bone disease (MBD)
coelomitis) and malnourishment. Ihe cause of the condi-
Aetiology
tion is not fully understood but is thought to be associated
This is common in young growing lizards and chelonia on
with a long-term absence of a male or a brief exposure to
a calcium-deficient diet, often in conjunction with vita-
a male after prior isolation. Radiographs show spherical,
 min D3/ultraviolet light deficiency. This results in nutri-
rather than oval densities in the abdomen without the
tional secondary hyperparathyroidism (NSHP).
characteristic thin walled part-calcified shell.
Clinically in lizards, an individual is often weak and le-
thargic, and unable to support its body ofthe ground. The
Yolk coelomitis
limbs are swollen due to fbrous thickening of the bones.
Ihis is often associated with pre-ovulatory stasis. Ultra-
Pathological fractures are common. Bowing of the lower
sonography and radiography may help in identifying the
 jaw is also common inlizards due to tongue muscle contrac-
cause. Clinical signs include lethargy, anorexia, coelomic
tion of softened bone. Hyperaesthesia may also be seen due
distension and diarrhoea. There may be evidence of hy-
to the hypocalcaemia manifested as twitching digits when
-asonal sumgoa eiaq u aseaiui ue euaaodiad
standing at rest and this may extend to the gastrointestinal
tosis, hypercalcaemia and azotaemia.
 tract with ileus and cloacal prolapses made more likely.
In chelonia, the disease is seen as a softening
Hemipenal and phallus prolapse
and pyramiding of the shell. Ihe plastron and carapace
This is often seen in weakened cachectic reptiles, or those
are weakened due to hypomineralisation, which allows
with gastrointestinal, urinary or cloacal disease which
the muscles to deform their structure. Ihis is particularly
results in persistent straining. In addition, many reptiles
obvious over the internal attachments of the fore- and
prolapse their phallus due to sexual frustration or due to
hindlimb where depressions are seen. In some chelonia,
infection or due to the formation of dried secretions (so-
for exanple, the softened shell allows the corners of the
called hemipenal plug) within the hemipene which are
carapace to roll upwards.
irritants.
Cholecalciferol source for most snakes and carnivorous
chelonians is entirely from their food. For most diurnal
Oviduct prolapse
insectivorous or herbivorous lizards and some chelonians
Ihis may be seen in female reptiles, as a result of con-
UVB (280-315 nm wavelength) and UVA (315-400 nm
ditions described for phallus prolapse in males, and as
wavelength) are necessary to activate the cholecalciferol
a consequence of dystocia/egg binding (Figure 21.16).
pathway.
Severe prolapses, which have been present for some time,
  pe as a sa 
Diagnosis of MBD
the prolapse via a coeliotomy, with the possibility of a sal-
Ionised calcium levels are a more accurate indicator of the
pingectomy at the same time.
bioavailable calcium than total. Values of 1.47 mmol/L
312 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
have been calculated as mean ionised calcium in green
Joint swelling
iguanas (Dennis et al., 2001). Hypocalcaemia, hyper-
This can be due to tumours, sepsis and articular gout. Sys-
phosphatemia and a Ca:PO ratio of less than 1:1 are all
temic or local mycobacteriosis due to M. marinurm has
early indicators of MBD. Studies have also looked at cal-
also been reported (Girling & Fraser, 2007)
citriol levels but these are currently diffcult to measure
 Outside of research institutes.
Autotomy (tail shedding)
Radiography has been used as a primary, although not
Autotomy, or spontaneous shedding of the tail with
subsequent regrowth, is seen in some Saurian species, for
very sensitive, tool for diagnosing MBD. Poor bone min-
eralisation, widening of the bone diameter and deformity
example, many geckos and iguanas. Ihese lizards have
 in the long axis of bones with kyphotic/scoliotic spines
fracture planes' in their tails which will allow a clean
break, with minimal bleeding, to occur should a preda-
may be seen.
tor (or over-zealous restraint) attack The tail will subse-
Prevention of MBD
quently regrow, but when it does, the coccygeal vertebrae
 Klaphake (2010) has described ultraviolet light provision
are replaced with a rod of cartilage, and the scale pattern
for reptiles to prevent MBD as follows:
is frequently much more haphazard (Figure 21.17).
1. Desert diurnal lizards/chelonians - high UVB levels
When treating such lizards, it is inmportant to avoid su-
(10% or full unfltered sun for 12 hours)
turing the skin of the lizard over the stump of the tail leff,
 2. Diurnal arboreal lizards or semiaquatic basking chelo-
as this may well prevent regrowth. Instead, the area should
nians - moderate UVB (5%, 12 hours)
be treated as an open wound with topical antiseptics such
3. Diurnal terrestrial lizards or chelonians
from
as dilute povidone-iodine. In iguanids, once the individ-
forests - low UVB (5%, 6 hours)
ual matures, autonomy often ceases. Ihis can occur over
4. Nocturnal lizards - low levels UVB (2%, 6 hours)
the age of 2.5-3 years in the green iguana, for example.
5. Snakes - dietary calcium and vitamin D is sufficient
 If the tail wound is very proximal, such as through the
Calcium supplementation should be provided for
area where the inverted hemipenes are situated in the
male species, or in species oflizard where autonomy does
little data exists to demonstrate in what form or how
 not occur (such as many species of Agamid lizards), rou-
much is necessary. For insectivores, gut-loading their
tine closure of the skin over the stump under a general
prey is preferred as this guarantees the reptile will get
anaesthetic is required.
the nutritional supplement. Commercially available
Neurological disease
insects need supplementation as most have inverted
Parasitic causes of neurological disease
Ca:PO ratios. Dietary deficiencies for herbivores in cal-
Acanthamoebic meningoencephalitis is a condition seen
cium can occur where large amounts of leaves contain-
primarily in snakes due to Entamoeba invadens. Fits and
ing oxalates (e.g., spinach and beetroot tops) that bind
calcium in the gut and prevent absorption are present.
opisthotonic seizures are seen. Treatment is generally
unsuccessful.
Fruit should be kept to a minimum as it contains little
or no calcium. Studies into shell pyramiding in chelo-
nia (Geochelone sulcata) showed that pyramiding was
more likely to occur in individuals kept under dry en-
vironmental conditions than those in more humid ones
ON行
with small variations occurring due to higher levels of
dietary protein. Ihis study showed no significant im-
S3
pact on pyramiding of the dietary Ca:PO ratio just to
add further confusion to the MBD debate!(Wiesner &
Iben, 2003).
Fractures
These may be pathological, as is seen in cases of MBD,
or truly they may be traumatic in origin. Repair of these
the haphazard arrangement of scales distal to the break and the
fractures depends on their cause; see chapter 22.
la ck of dorsal spines.
Common Reptile and Amphibian Diseases 313
Toxoplasma and Encephalitozoon infections have also
with opisthotonus and death in chameleons (Jacobson &
been reported as a cause of meningoencephalitis in reptiles.
Gardiner, 1990).
Bacterial causes of neurological disease
Nutritional causes of neurological disease
Bacterial abscesses/granulomas of the spinal cord or the
Hypocalcaemic collapse
brain may result in neurological disease. Ihese are usu-
This is commonly seen in gravid lizards, such as green
ally as a result of septicaemia which is common in rep-
iguanas, when the blood calcium levels drop too low. Ihe
tiles. Most are Gram negative in nature, but mycoplasma
female becomes flaccidly paralysed, and unresponsive.
and chlamydophilal organisms have also been reported as
Occasionally fine muscle tremors will be seen.
have Mycobacterial infections.
Middle ear infections in aquatic chelonia are common
Hypovitaminosis B
It is seen in primarily fsh-eating reptiles such as garter
and may result in peripheral vestibular disease. There is
snakes. Ihe thiaminases present in salt-water fish break
often an underlying vitamin A deficiency problem.
down the vitamin B present in the food leading to a
Fungal causes of neurological disease
functional deficit. Ihe presenting signs include opisthoto-
Migration of fungal disease from other body organs such
mus and a lack of a righting reflex.
as the lungs can involve the spinal column or disseminate
Biotin deficiency
into the central nervous system and cause neurological
This is seen in species fed mainly on unfertilised hen's
disease.
eggs that contain large amounts of the antibiotin vitanmin,
avidin. This produces a relative deficiency in biotin which
Viral causes of neurological disease
leads to muscle tremor and general weakness. Monitor
Paramyxovirus
lizards are commonly affected.
These have been reported in many species of snake. Ihe
virus causes haemorrhagic pneumonias but will also
Hypoglycaemia
cause neurological signs such as the loss of righting re-
This is a condition seen in crocodiles. It is unknown why
flexes. Ihere is no current treatment.
it occurs, but muscle tremor and weakness are seen.
Inclusion body disease
Environmental causes of neurological disease
This has been seen in boas and pythons, elapids and col-
This can occur due to freezing injuries. These are seen
ubrids. It is thought to be a retrovirus. In pythons, the
 in chelonians overwintering outside in the United King-
disease is severe with infectious stomatitis, pneumonia
dom. Frost damage causes blindness, vestibular disease
and neurological signs such as loss of the righting reflex,
and death. There is no treatment.
disorientation and blindness often followed rapidly by
death. In boas, the disease is fatal in young individu-
Toxic causes of neurological disease
als. In older patients, the disease produces more chronic
Pyrethrin/organophosphate poisoning
neurological signs with chronic anorexia, vomiting and
These are most likely to be associated with mite treat-
pneumonias. Neurological signs are milder with a loss
 ments. Overdose will result in opisthotonus, head tilts,
of ability to chew and swallow prey, and a loss of the
fits and death. Management with atropine in cases of
striking reflex. Diagnosis is currently based on biopsy
organophosphate poisoning may be successful but is
of affected organs, principally the liver, kidney, spleen 
Au u Adea aaiodns 'sases uaiad u os Aiaie
and oesophageal tonsils which will show classical
affected animals may be suffcient to allow recovery.
eosinophilic intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies. Early
in the course of the disease there may be a leucocytosis
Lead toxicosis
(WBC> 30 × 10"/L)
This has been reported in chelonians. It usually results
There is no treatment for this disease.
in gut stasis and liver/kidney problems, but may pres-
ent as neurological disease in reptiles. Treatment with
Other viruses
 10-40 mg/kg sodium calcium EDTA q12 hours has been
Chelonian herpesviruses have been associated with neu-
 used. See the section in digestive tract disease for more
rological disease. Adenoviruses have been associated
 details.
314 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
An overview of reptilian
female lizards with egg binding and young growing
biochemistry
reptiles with MBD. Calcium levels will increase up to
Blood for biochemical parameters is best collcted in a
fourfold in females producing eggs. Phosphorus levels
 heparinised container. This also applies for haematologi-
vary from 0.3 mmol/L to 1.8 mmol/L. Calcium to phos-
cal parameter measurements as Ca-EDTA often causes
phorus ratios of less than 1:1 have been used to indicate
lysis of reptilian red blood cells, particularly in chelonia.
early renal disease, and phosphorus levels are regularly
elevated in cases of renal dysfunction. Ionised calcium
Liver parameters
levels have been shown to be a more accurate assess-
There are no liver specific enzymes in reptiles. Levels of
ment of bioavailable calcium. Values of 1.47 mmol/L
 AST in excess of 150-200 IU/L are suggestive ofhepatocel-
have been calculated as a mean ionised calcium in green
 lular damage; but as there is much species variation and as
iguanas in one study with no variation with sex or age
AST is also found in the skeletal muscle, it is only a guide.
(Dennis et al., 2001).
Liver function may be assessed using bile acids. However,
studies have shown that in reptiles the 3 alpha-hydroxyl
bile acids isomer is important which is not the same as in
Total proteins
These are used to indicate general nutritional status, and
mammals (McBride et al., 2006). Creatinine kinase (CK)
and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels may be used to
liver function. Dry chemistry techniques are not accurate
for albumen and globulin levels. Values of total protein of
distinguish elevations of AST due to muscle (where both
30-80 g/L have been quoted as normal. Plasma protein
CK and LDH will be elevated) and liver (when only AST
electrophoresis results in reptiles are proving promising
or AST and LDH will be elevated) damage. In addition,
GLDH may be used to determine severe hepatic necro-
in diagnosing early inflammatory disease, as has been
documented in birds and mammals.
sis as may occur with herpesvirus/iridovirus infections in
chelonia and in post hibernational anorexia (PHA)
Other parameters
Renal parameters
B-hydroxybutyrate (BHB) may be used in chelonia to as-
Uric acid is used for diagnosing kidney failure in urico-
sess the severity of ketosis during PHA, and these may
telic species. Levels over 450 μmol/L suggest renal prob-
be found in the urine, causing it to become acidic in
lems, but in carnivores, recent meals will falsely elevate
nature (herbivorous reptile urine should be alkaline as
levels. With disease, uric acid levels will only be elevated
with marmmals). It is thought to be a good indicator of
if greater than 75% of the renal mass ceases to function
ketogenesis in reptiles and in desert tortoises (Gopherus
and so it is not a sensitive test. Blood levels in excess of
agassizii), plasma levels varied from 0.4-0.75 mmol/L
1000 μmol/L should be given a guarded prognosis, and
in times of significant rainfall (and food availability) but
those over 2000 μmol/L are invariably fatal.
increased to 2.0 mmol/L after two months of drought
Potassiumlevels exceeding 7 mmol/L should be given a
(Christopher et al., 1994). In contrast, ketogenesis did not
 guarded prognosis and those exceeding 9 mmol/L usually
appear to be important during hibernation.
die of cardiac failure.
Urea has been used in chelonia immediately after hi-
bernation to assess pre-renal dehydration. Creatinine ap-
Urinalysis
Urine pH may be measured to give an indication
 pears to be of no use in assessing renal function in reptiles.
of catabolism in herbivores, as well as looking for BHB
Glucose
to diagnose ketosis in PHA chelonia cases. Urine spe-
N
 Levels below 3 mmol/L are seen in the hypoglycaemic
cific gravity is likely to provide a sensitive indication of
主
syndrome of crocodiles. Fits, incoordination and weak-
hydration status (Gibbons, 2000).
ness are a common sign in malnourished reptiles, which
Specific gravity varies from 1.003-10.14 in most nor-
will also show low blood glucose levels. Diabetes melltus
mal reptiles (Innis, 1997). Uric acid crystals and bacteria
has been recorded in some species.
are normal findings, as urine is not sterile in reptiles ow-
1E
ing to the mixing of urine and faeces in the cloaca. The
Calcium and phosphorus
presence of renal casts indicates renal disease, although
 Total calcium levels vary between 2 and 5 mmol/L inmost
leukocytes and low numbers of erythrocytes are not un-
reptiles. Levels below 2 mmol/L can be seen in gravid
commonly seen in healthy reptiles.
Common Reptile and Amphibian Diseases 315
Diseases of amphibians
known cause of oedema disease in adult amphibians pro-
Bacterial
ducing a syndrome which resembles some viral conditions
Redleg
and dermatosepticaemia. Diagnosis is based on detection
 Redleg is caused by the bacteria Aeromonas spp. It pro-
ofthe bacteria either after culture or using PCR technology.
duces ulcerating red wounds, which give it its name
(Figure 21.18). The bacteria also cause a septicaemic
Chlamydiosis
syndrome with the amphibian becoming bloated and
The bacteria Chlamydophila spp. have been associated
developing renal and hepatic failure. Poor environmental
with disease in large Anurans including the European
conditions are often blamed.
common frog. Clinical signs including petechiation,
sloughing of the skin and abdominal swelling. Diagno-
Mycobacteria
sis is based on clinical signs, use of generic PCR tests on
Mycobacterial infections due to environmental species
swabs of affected areas for chlamydophilal organisms and
such as Mycobacterium marinum cause classical tubercu-
histopathology.
lous lesions mainly on the limbs or internal organs. The
affected amphibian loses weight rapidly,becoming emaci-
Fungal
ated. There is no effective treatment.
Chytridiomycosis
This is the single most inmportant fungal disease affect-
Flavobacterium
ing amphibians in the world today and has resulted in a
These Gram-negative, yellow pigment-producing bacte-
massive decline in amphibian numbers. Ihe organism is
ria are widely present in aquatic environments and are a
Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis and may be diagnosed
from a ventrum swab of the amphibian using a PCR test
offered by the Institute of Zoology, Regent's Park, Lon-
don. Ihe fungus produces skin ulceration, and invades
deeper tissues resulting in dehydration, secondary bacte-
rial infections and death.
Saprolegniasis
This is a common environmental fungal disease seen in
all aquatic species. It is seen classically as strands of white,
cotton wool-like material adhering to the skin surface.
The condition is worsened in warmer waters.
Phycomycosis
This is due to common moulds such as Mucor spp. These
 are often darkly pigmented. These moulds will often affect
amphibian eggs.
Viral
Herpesvirus
A herpesvirus in the North American leopard frog in-
duces a form of renal adenocarcinoma, known as Lucke's
renal tumour. The tumour grows during the warmer
 months, with the virus being shed in the spring to infect
other frogs. Renal failure occurs with chronic weight loss
and death. Ihere is no treatment for this condition.
Tadpole oedema virus
Again this is thought to be due to a Ranavirus in the fan-
Figure 21.18 Redleg in an Argentinean horned toad
(Ceratophrys omata).
ily Iridoviridae. As its name suggests it produces oedema
316 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
in affected tadpoles and internal haemorrhage. Ihere is
Bowman, M.R, Pare, J.A., Sigler, L., et al. (2007) Deep fungal
dermatitis in three inland bearded dragons (Pogona vitticeps)
no treatment.
caused by the Chrysosporium anamorph of Narnizziopsis
vriesii. Medical Mycology, 45(4), 371-376.
Spindly leg syndrome
Cheatwood, J.L., Jacobson, E.R., May, PG., et al. (2003) An
This has been associated with a Ranavirus in the family
outbreak of fungal dermatitis and stomatitis in free-ranging
Iridoviridae but other causes of this condition have also
population of pigmy rattlesnakes (Sistrurus miliarius barbouri)
been suggested, such as poor diet -particularly vitamin B
in Florida. Journat of Wilalife Diseases, 39(2), 329-337.
deficiencies. As its name suggests, it affects mainly young
Christopher, M.M., Brigmon, R. and Jacobsen, E. (1994)
Seasonal alterations in plasma beta-hydroxybutyrate and
 growing anurans by causing a failure in the development
related biochemical parameters in the desert tortoise
of the forelimbs. Once developed there is no treatment.
Gopherus agassizi. Compendium of Biochemical Physiology,
108, 303-310.
Parasitic
Dennis, PM., Bennett, R.A., Harr, K.E., et al. {200l) Plasma
Nematodes
concentration of ionized calcium in healthy iguanas. Journat
gf American Veterinary Medical Association, 219(3), 326-328.
The commonest nematode seen in anurans is the lung-
Diaz-Figueroa, O., Mitchell, M.A., Ramirez, S., Hananeh,
worm Rhabdias spp. In large numbers, this parasite may
W., Kim, D.Y. and Taylor, W. (2008) Paecilomyces lilacinus
 cause pneumonia. Ihe parasite has a direct life cycle.
pneumonia in a free-ranging Gopher tortoise, Gopherus
Other nematodes of the Strongyloides family may
polyphemus. Journal of Herpetologicat Medicine and Surgery,
parasitise the gut and coelomic cavity, with large burdens
18(2), 52-60.
Fraser, M.A. and Girling, S.J. (2004) Dermatology. BSAVA
resulting in poor growth and intestinal blockages.
Manual of Reptiles {eds S.J. Girling & P. Raiti), 2nd edn,
Pp. 184-198. BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
Protozoa
Frost, J.W. and Schmidt, A. (1997) Serological evidence for
Entamoeba ranarum: Can cause damage to the large in-
susceptibility of various species of tortoises to infections by
herpesvirus. Verh Ber Erkrg Zootiere, 38, 25-28.
testine of anurans, as well as the liver. Ihese may lead to
Frye, F. (1991) Biomedical and Surgical Aspects ofCaptive Reptile
weight loss, diarrhoea with blood, anorexia and dehydra-
Husbandry, Volume 1. Krieger Publishing, Malabar, FL.
tion. It can also cause nephritis with ascites and oedema
Frye, FL. (1999) Spontaneous autoimmune pancreatitis
of the limbs.
and diabetes mellitus in a Western pond turtle Cemrmys
m. marmorata. Proceedings of the Association of Reptilian and
Oodinium pilularis: Is a motile protozoan which affects
Amphibian Veterinarians, Columbus, OH, pp. 103-106.
many aquatic animals including amphibians. It damages
Garner, M.M, Gardiner, C.H., Wellehan, JEX., et al. (2006)
the skin, and in tadpole stages damages the gills leading to
Intranuclear coccidiosis in tortoises: nine cases. Vterinary
Pathology,43, 311-320.
anoxia. It is able to swim through the water from amphib-
Gibbons, PM. (2000) Urinalysis in Box Turtles. Proc ARAV Reno,
ian to amphibian and can therefore spread rapidly.
Nevada, 2000,pp. 161-165.
Girling, S.J. (2002) A fungal granuloma in a corn snake (Elaphe
Metabolic bone disease
guttata guttata) due to Aspergillus fumigatus associated with
a previously treated abscess. British Veterinary Zoological
Society ZooMed Bulletin, 2(1), 27-35.
urans). Ihere is often softening of the lower jaw which
Girling, S.J. and Fraser, M.A. (2009) Treatment of Aspergillus
bulges laterally, weakness and paralysis of the limbs, with
species infection in reptiles with itraconazole at metabolically
spontaneous fractures.
scaled dosages. Veterinary Record, 165(2), 52-54.
Girling, S.J. and Fraser, M.A. (2007) Systemic mycobacteriosis
in an Inland Bearded Dragon (Pogona vitticeps). Vterinary
AND
References
Record, 160, 526-528.
Abarca, M.L., Martorell, J., Castella, G., Ramis, A. and Cabanes,
Gonzalez Cabo, J.F., Espejo Serrano, J. and Barcena Asensio, M.C.
FJ. (2009) Dermatomycosis in a pet inland bearded dragon
(1995) Mycotic pulmonary disease by Beauveria bassiana in a
(Pogona vitticeps) caused by a Chrysosporium species related to
captive tortoise. Mycoses, 38(3-4), 167-169.
Narrizziopsis vriesii. Veterinary Dermatotogy, 20(4), 295-299.
Harkewicz, KA. (2001) Dermatology of reptiles: a clinical
Austwick, P. and Keymer, I. (1981) Fungi and Actinomycetes.
approach to diagnosis and treatment. Veterinary Clinics of
Diseases of the Reptilia (eds J.E. Cooper & O.F. Jackson),
North America: Exotic Animal Practice, 4, 441-461.
Pp. 93-231. Academic Press, San Diego, CA.
Heard, D.J., Cantor, G.H., Jacobson, E.R., et al. (1986)
Barten, S. (1980) Cardiomyopathy in a kingsnake (Lampropeltis
Hyalophomycosis caused by Paecilomyces lilacinus in an
calligaster rhombomaculata).Veterinary Medicine Small
Aldabran tortoise. Journat of the American Veterinary Medical
Animal Clinics, 75, 125-129.
Association, 189, 1143-1145.
Common Reptile and Amphibian Diseases 317
Heatley, JJ., Mitchell, M.A., Williams, J., Smith, JA. and Tully,
caused by the Chyrsosporium anamorph of Narnizziopsis
TN. (200l) Fungal periodontal osteomyelitis in a chameleon
vriesi(Apinis) Currah.Journal of Zoo and Wildlife Medicine,
Furcifer pardatis. Journal of Herpetotogical Medicine and
28(4), 443-453.
Surgery, 11(4), 7-12.
Pasmans, K., Hellebuyck, T., Haesebrouck, F. and Martel, A.
Hernandez-Divers, S.J., Knott, C.D. and MacDonald, J. (2001)
(2010) Dermatitis and septicaemia caused by Devriesea
Diagnosis and surgical treatment of thyroid adenoma-induced
agamarum: an overview including recent developments in
fo puanof (ouon ouonal euenat uaaia e u usiproifyradky
disease management. Proceedings of the Ist International
Zoo and Wildlife Medicine, 32, 465-475.
Conference on Reptile and Amphibian Medicine, Munich,
Hough, 1. {1998) Cryptococcosis in an Eastern water skink.
Germany Pp. 105-106.
Australian Veterinary Fournal, 76(7),471-472.
Pees, M., Schroff, S., Kiefer, I. and Krautwald-Junghanns, M.E.
Huchzermeyer, FW. and Cooper, J.E. (2001) Fibriscess, not
(2010) Ultrasonopgraphic examination of the heart and the
abscess, resulting from localised inflammatory response to
 great vessels in boid snakes and demonstration of a case of
infection in reptiles and birds. Veterinary Record, 147,515-516.
valvular insuffciency in a Burmese python (Python molurus
Innis, C.J. (1997) Observations on urinalysis of clinically normal
bivittatus). Proceedings of the Ist International Conference on
captive tortoises. Proceedings of the Association of Reptilian
Reptile and Amphibian Medicine, Munich, Pp. 21l-212.
and Amphibian Veterinarians, Houston, TX, Pp. 109-112.
Penner, J.D., Jacobson, E.R. and Brown, D.R. (1997). A novel
Jacobson, E.R. {1980) Mycotic Diseases of Reptiles. The
Mycoplasma sp. associated with proliferative tracheitis and
Comparative Pathology of Zoo Animals (eds R.J. Montali
pneumonia in a Burmese python (Python molurus bivittatus).
& G. Migaki), Pp. 283-290. Smithsonian Institution Press,
Journal of Comparative Pathology, 117, 283-288.
Washington, DC.
Potgieter, L.N, Sigler, R.E., and Russell R.G. (1987). Pneumonia
Jacobson, E.R. and Gardiner, C.H. (1990) Adeno-like virus in
in Ottoman vipers (Vipera xanthena xanthena) associated
oesophageal and tracheal mucosa of a Jackson's chameleon
with a parainfluenza 2-like virus. Journal of Widlife Diseases,
(Chameleo jacksonii). Veterinary Pathotogy,27,210-212.
23,355-360.
Klaphake, E. (2010) A fresh look at metabolic bone diseases in
Redrobe, S.P. & Frye, FL. (200l) Hepatic thrombosis and
reptiles and amphibians. Veterinary Clinics of North America:
other pathology associated with severe periodontal disease
Exotic Animal Practice, 13, 375-392.
in the Bearded dragon, Pogona vitticeps. Proceedings ARAV,
Koplos, P., Garner, M., Besser, T, Nordhausen, R. and Monaco, R.
Orlando, FL, Pp. 217-219.
(2000) Cheilitis in lizards of the Genus Uromastyx associated
Rossi, J. and Rossi, R. (2000) Fungal dermatitis in a large
with flamentous Gram positive bacterium. Proceedings of the
collection of Brazos water snakes, Nerodia harteri harteri
Association of Reptile and Amphibian Veterinarians,Pp. 73-75.
housed in an outdoor enclosure, and a possible association
Lappin, PB. and Dunstan, R.W. (1992) Difficult dermatologic
with slugs. Proceedings of the Association of Reptilian and
diagnosis. burnal of the Americar Veterinary Medicat
Armphibian Veterinarians (eds M.M. Willette & L.C. Boyer),
Association, 200, 785-786.
Pp. 81-83 Reno, Nevada.
Masters, A.M., Ellis, T.M., Carson, J.M., Sutherland, S.S. and
Schilliger, L., Lemberger, K., Bourgeois, A. and Charpentier, M.
Gregory, A.R. (1995) Dermatophilus cheloniae sp. nov. isolated
(2010) First case of atherosclerosis associated with pericardial
from chelonids in Australia. International Journal of Systemic
effusion in a Bearded dragon (Pogona vitticeps AHL 1926).
Bacteriology, 45, 50-56.
Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the Association of
McArthur, S.D., McLellan, L. and Brown, S. (2004)
Reptilian and Amphibian Veterinarians, Pp. 70-74.
Gastrointestinal system. Manual of Reptiles {eds S.J. Girling &
Schmidt,
R.E. and Reavill,
(2010)Metastatic
P. Raiti), 2nd edn, Pp. 210-229. BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
chondrosarcoma in a corn snake (Elaphe guttata). Proceedings
McBride, M., Hernandez-Divers, S.J., Koch, T., et al. (2006)
of the Ist International Conference on Reptile Amphibian
Axorpaq ee leipued-jsod pue aid jo uoenjaa Areuuaid
Medicine, Munich, Germany, p. 147.
bile acids in the Green Iguana {guana iguana). Journal of
Schuchman, S.M. and Taylor, D.O. (1970). Arteriosclerosis in an
Herpetological Medicine and Surgery, 16, 129-134.
iguana (Iguana iguana). Journal of the American Veterinary
Migaki, G., Jacobson, E.R. and Casey, H.W. (1984) Fungal
Medical Association, 157, 614-616.
diseases in reptiles. Diseases of Armphibians and Reptiles (eds
Schumacher, J. (2003) Fungal diseases of reptiles. Veterinary
G.L. Hoff & E.R. Jacobson), Pp. 183-204. Plenum Press,
Clinics of North America: Exotic Animal Practice, 6(2),
New York.
327-355.
Nichols, D.K., Weyant, R.S., Lamirande, E.W., Sigler, L. and
Schumacher, J.R., Bennett, A., Fox, L.E., et at. {1998) Mast cell
Mason, R.T. (1999) Fatal mycotic dermatitis in captive brown
tumor in an eastern kingsnake (Lampropeltis getulus getutus).
tree snakes (Boiga irregularis). Journal of Zoo and Wildlife
Journal of Veterinary Diagnostic Investigation, 10, 101-104.
Medicine, 30(1), 111-118.
Soares, JF., Chalker, VJ., Erles, K., Holtby, S., Waters, M. and
Oros, J, Ramirez, A.S., Poveda, J.B., Rodriguez, J.L. and
McArthur, S. (2003) Prevalence of Mycoplasma agassizi and
Fernandez, A. (1996) Systemic mycosis caused by Peniciliur
chelonian Herpesvirus in captive tortoise ( Testudo spp.) in the
griseofulvum in a Seychelles giant tortoise (Megachelys
United Kingdom. Proceedings of the Association of Reptilian
gigantean).Veterinary Record,139(12),295-296.
and Amphibian Veterinarians,p.91.
Pare, J.A., Sigler, L., Hunter, D.B., Summerbell, R.C., Smith, D.A.
Stahl, S.J. (2003) Pet lizard conditions and syndromes. Serminars
and Machin, L. (1997) Cutaneous mycoses in chameleons
in Avian and Exotic Pet Medicine, 12(3), 162-182.
318 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Tappe, J.P, Chandler, EW., Lui, S.K. and Dolensk, E.P. (1984)
Westhouse, R.A., Jacobson, E.R., Harris, R.K., et al. (1996).
Aspergillosis in two San Esteban Chuckwallas. Journal
 Respiratory and pharyngoesophageal iridovirus infection in
fthe American Veterinary Medicat Association, l8s{1l),
a gopher tortoise (Gopherus polyphemus). Journal of Wildlife
1425-1428.
Diseases, 32, 682-686.
Wagner, J. (1989) Clinical challenge case number one. Journat of
Wiesner, C.S. and Iben, C. (2003) Influence of environmental
Zoo and Wildlife Medicine, 20, 238-239.
humidity and dietary protein on pyramidal growth of
Weitzman, I., Rosenthal, S.A. and Shupack, JL. (1985)
carapaces in African spurred tortoises (Geochelone sulcata).
Acomparison between Dactylaria
gallopava
and
burnal ofAnimat Physiotogy and Animal Nutrition, 87,66-74.
Scolecobasidium humicola: first report of an infection in a
Zwart, P. (2006) Renal pathology in reptiles. Veterinary Clinics of
tortoise caused by S. humicola. Sabouraudia, 23(4), 287-293.
North America: Exotic Animal Practice,9, 129-159.
N
18
AM
 RepTILES AND 1
RT
Chapter 22
An Overview of Reptile and
Amphibian Therapeutics
FLUID THERAPY
the kidneys and heart, they cannot be removed and per-
Maintenance requirements
manent damage has been done.
The volume of water consumed daily varies from spe-
 Every reptile or amphibian has a fluid maintenance require-
cies to species as do the sources of water. Herbivorous
ment. Ihese losses, as for cats and dogs, occur in several
reptiles such as Mediterranean tortoises get the majority
ways; for example, urine output, insensible losses through
 of their daily fluid requirement from their diet. However,
respiration, panting (ie., gular fluttering) and salivation.
ae 'nin uaana al se ns 'saads siia ran
In most reptiles very little water is lost through the
used to living in tropical rainforest conditions where the
skin; reptiles have little to no true sweat glands. Amphib-
 relative humidity is 100%. Place this reptile into an arid
ians, however, will lose fluid readily across their semi-
vivarium and it will, with time, lose fluid through its skin
permeable skin membranes, and so need to remain close
if it is not also provided with daily misting of its tank.
to a water source for nearly all of their lives.
Many reptiles will not drink from water bowls, only tak-
Some reptiles will lose water through gular fluttering;
ing water from droplets onleaves in the wild; for example,
for example, members of the Crocodylia as well as many
desert-dwelling lizards.
many chameleons as well as the green iguana.
To add to this, whenever ectotherrmic species such as
 Reptiles are extremely good at conserving water. Most
reptiles are kept, it is important to take into account the
species are uricotelic, excreting uric acid instead of urea
environmental temperature requirements of that species.
as their main form of urinary protein waste product. Uric
If the reptile is not kept within its preferred optimum
acid requires very little water to be excreted with it, unlike
temperature zone (POTZ), then it cannot achieve its
preferred body temperature (PBT) and its internal physi-
ological processes will not operate at their optimal rates;
aquatic and semi-aquatic species of
excrete ammo
leading to ineffcient water usage and consumption. A list
nia and urea. In the case of totally aquatic amphibian spe
 of optimum temperature requirements can be found on
page in Table 22.1.
more terrestrialamphibian species
such as toads excrete
urea and one
rtwoma
acid
Maintenance
widely. A desert-
The effect of disease on
fluid requirements
Fluid loss may be rapid, due to water loss alone, for exam-
ple, with acute diarrhoea, thermal burns or vomiting. In
fluid intakes and outputs and therefore has ahigher main-
this case, the remaining extracellular fluid (ECF) becomes
tenance requirement.
reduced, but is still of the same composition (isotonic).
However, if a uricotelic reptile is deprived of water for
 Alternatively, fluid loss may be due to long-term anorexia,
 prolonged periods of time, uric acid waste will not be ex-
producing a reduction in electrolytes and creating
creted. This leads to a buildup of uric acid in the blood-
a hypotonic ECF Finally, water deprivation or oral trauma
stream. Once levels exceed 1200-1500 μmol/L of uric
 preventing drinking will lead to increases in the tonicity of
acid, precipitation of uric acid crystals occurs inside the
the ECF, and create a hypertonic dehydration
body, a condition known as 'visceral gout. Once uric acid
With any disease, the need for fluids increases, even
crystals are deposited in and around vital organs, such as
if no obvious fluid loss has occurred. Ihis is due to
Vterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets, Second Edition. Edited by Simon J. Girling. @ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
320 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Table 22.1 Exarmples of normal packed cell volumes (PCV) and
drying nature of gases used in anaesthesia. As many of
total blood proteins in selected species of reptiles.
these species are small in size, they have a large lung sur-
face area in relation to volume and hence a greater loss
Total
Species
PCV L/L
protein (g/L)
of fluid per unit time/per breath than larger animals. To
Exacerbate the situation, many patients are not able to
Green iguana (guana
0.25-0.38
28-69
(guana)
drink immediately after surgery, and so the period with-
out water or food intake may stretch to several hours. Fi-
Tortoise (Testudo spp.)
0.19-0.4
32-50
nally, some forms of surgery will lead to inappetance for a
Rat snake (Elaphe spp.)
0.2-0.3
09-0E
period, for example, oral surgery.
Boa constrictor (Boa
0.2-0.32
46-60
constrictor constrictor)
Electrolyte replacement
Other diseases, such as diarrhoea, will cause fluidloss and
a number of reasons. It may involve renal changes, such
metabolic acidosis due to the prolonged loss of bicarbon-
ate. This is often due to parasitism, such as amoebiasis, in
in water reabsorption by the collecting ducts so causing
snakes. Ihere may also be chronic losses of potassium, in
increased urine output. Or there may be reduced absorp-
cases of chronic diarrhoea, due to the reduced absorption
tion of water from the small or large intestine.
of this electrolyte by the large intestine.
Respiratory disease is common in reptiles, with in-
Snakes will vomit after a meal if stressed, and may
creased respiratory secretions being the result. Fluid loss
suffer from diseases of the stomach such as cryptospo-
via this route can be appreciable.
ridiosis, causing loss of fluid and hydrogen ions, and a
Another less obvious route is fluid and electrolyte loss
resultant metabolic alkalosis. Other reptiles such as tor-
through skin disease. Reptiles often suffer from serious
toises will rarely vomit, so the likelihood of fluid loss via
burns from unprotected basking lamps and faulty heaters.
this route is less common.
Not only will there be serious fluid and electrolyte loss via
Fluids used in reptilian practice
full-thickness skin burns but these reptiles will succumb
 to secondary skin infections from environmental bacteria
Lactated Ringer's/Hartmann's
such as Pseudomonas spp. Ihese produce lesions which
As with cats and dogs, lactated Ringer's solution is useful
resemble chemical or thermal burns, and leave large areas
as a general purpose rehydration and maintenance fluid.
of weeping exudative skin for further fluid loss.
I is particularly useful for reptiles and amphibians suffer-
Finally, we have to consider the need for fluid therapy
ing from metabolic acidosis, such as those described above
during other forms of medical therapy, such as antibi-
with chronic gastrointestinal problems, but can also be
otic treatment. Many bacterial infections in reptiles are
used for fluid therapy after routine surgical procedures.
caused by Gram-negative bacteria; therefore, the amino-
glycoside family of antibiotics (gentamicin, tobramycin,
Glucose/saline combinations
Glucose/saline combinations are useful for reptiles and
amikacin etc.) has been widely used for treatment. Ihis
family of antibiotics has several serious side effects. Ihe
amphibians, as they may have been through periods of
most serious of these is renal damage. Ihis can happen if
anorexia prior to treatment, and therefore may well be
there is reduced renal perfusion because of dehydration
borderline hypoglycaemic.
The renal damage so caused can be strong enough to kill
There is some evidence that in reptiles, and probably
ONG
even a healthy reptile.
amphibians, the isotonicity of the ECFs is lower than that
of mammals. Studies on non-marine reptiles suggest that
Post-surgical fluid requirements
isotonicity for the majority is 0.8% rather than the 0.9%
Causes of fluid loss include the possibility of intrasurgical
saline assumed for mammals. Because of this, a number
haemorrhaging. Ihis will call for vascular support with
of fluid combinations utilising the above two types of
an aqueous electrolyte solution or, in more serious blood
crystalloid support have been derived as follows:
losses (greater than 10% blood volume), colloidal fluids
+One-third each of 5% glucose with 0.9% saline, lactated
or even blood transfusions.
Ringer's solution and sterile water and
Even if surgery is relatively bloodless, there are inevi-
· Nine parts 5% glucose with 0.9% saline to one part
table losses via the respiratory route. This is due to the
sterile water.
An Overview of Reptile and Amphibian Therapeutics 321
Many texts still advise that straightforward, undiluted
necessary for one-off transfusions, but the same species
lactated Ringer's solution or 4% glucose with 0.18% saline
should be used each time; that is, green iguana to green
may be used, and glucose/saline solutions are particularly
iguana, boa constrictor to boa constrictor. Up to 2%
useful for amphibia, where the use of potassium-contain-
body weight as blood may be taken from healthy species
ing fluids should be avoided initially.
(Klingenberg, 1996), preferably into a pre-heparinised or
It is important that whatever fluid is administered, it be
citrate-phosphate anticoagulant-coated syringe before
warmed to the reptile or amphibian's PBT (approximately
immediately transfusing into the recipient.
30-35°C) before being given.
Oral fluids and electrolytes
Hypertonic saline
Oral fluid administration may also be used in reptile and
eaoday ainoe ym sadan ui pasn aq a s
amphibian practice for those patients experiencing mild
I works by rapidly drawing fluid from the cellular and
 dehydration, and for home administration. Many prod-
pericellular space into the circulation to support central
 lucts are available for cats and dogs, and may be used for
venous pressure. See Chapter 24 on reptile emergency
reptiles. However, as with the crystalloid fluids, it is ad-
and critical care medicine for further details of its use. It
Aaexde Aq sairosaa reno asal a oi aqesi
must be administered intravenously or intraosseously.
10%, otherwise their concentration will be greater than
the reptile's ECF and so water will move from the body
Protein amino acid/B vitamin supplements
into the gastrointestinal tract rather than the other way
Protein and vitamin supplements are useful
1for
around. Ihe inclusion of a probiotic/prebiotic with the
mtritional support. Products such as Duphalyte? (Fort
electrolytes may aid recovery by normalising gut flora
 Dodge) may be used at the rate of 1 mL/kg/day. They are
and digestion.
used to replace nutrients in cases where the patient is
malnourished or has been suffering from protein-losing
Calculation of fluid requirements
enteropathy, such as may occur with heavy parasitism, or
Huid requirements may be calculated as for cats and
a protein-losing nephropathy, as in renal failure. It is also
dogs. It is worth noting that a lot of the fluid intake is
a useful supplement for patients with hepatic disease or
normally consumed in food, for example, in the form of
severe exudative skin diseases, such as heater burns, in
fresh vegetation for herbivorous species. Ihis is difficult
which blood proteins will be reduced.
to take into consideration, and therefore it is safer to as-
 sume that the debilitated reptile will not be eating signifi-
Colloidal fluids
cant enough amounts for this to matter in the calculation.
Colloidal fluids have been used in reptilian practice when
 In any case, levels of fluid replacement rates have received
intravenous administration has been possible. This limits
relatively little research.
their usefulness, as some reptiles are just too small to gain
Frye (1991) recommends that levels of 20-25 mL/
full vascular access, although there is some evidence that
kg/day be used for hydration purposes in both reptiles
they may be used via the intraosseous route. They are used
and armphibians, and current literature suggests that rates
when a serious loss of blood occurs, in order to support
central blood pressure. This may be a temporary measure
The factor that limits the volume of fluids that
whilst a blood donor is selected, or, if none is available,
can be administered is that, although intravenous
the only means of attempting to support such a patient.
and intraosseous routes may also be used, most fluids are
Use of Hetastarch which has a larger colloid particle size
given intracoelomically to the debilitated reptile. Reptiles
and so stays in the circulation for up to 24 hours is pre-
aan iseideip annl ssassod pou op sunade pue
ferred where this is available. See Chapter 24 for shock
fore the thorax and abdomen are all interconnected in a
fluid therapy.
coelom. When fluids are placed in this cavity, it is equiva-
lent to giving intraperitoneal fluids to a mammal, but as
Blood transfusions
there is no diaphragm, these fluids can cause pressure to
Bood transfusions are indicated when the packed cell
build up on the lungs. Excessive fluids may severely com-
volume (PCV) has dropped below 0.05-0.1 L/L, and
 promise respiration.
they may be given via intravenous or intraosseous routes.
 Excessive fluids given intravenously or intraosseously
Cross-matching of blood groups does not appear to be
may also overload the circulation and cause pulmonary
322 Veterinary Nursing of ExoticPets
oedema. It can result in cardiac and renal overperfusion
of clear tubing on the catheter allows you to see when ve-
 and solute wash-out, with potassium in particular being
nous access has been achieved, as blood will flow back
excreted with the increased diuresis causing a hypokalae-
into this area without the need to draw back thus collaps-
mic crisis to develop. This may manifest itself initially as
ing the fragile veins.
an anorectic reptile, but will progress to cardiac arrhyth-
To make effective use of a butterfly catheter, it is advis-
 mias, coma and death.
able to flush it with heparinised saline prior to use to pre-
One can assume that 1% dehydration equates with a need
vent clotting. 25-27 gauge sizes are recommended. They
to supply 10 mL/kg fluid replacement in addition to the
may also be used to give intracoelomic fluids to reptiles,
maintenance requirements. It is also possible to make some
as the conscious patient may continue to move (particu-
qualitative assessment of the level of dehydration from the
larly a problem in snakes), without dislodging the needle.
elasticity of the skin. Although reptile skin is not as elastic
For larger patients, such as adult iguanas, monitor
as mammalian, it should be freely mobile and recoil, albeit
lizards and Crocodylia, 21-25 gauge over-the-needle
slowly, affer tenting particularly over the epaxial muscles in
Teflon-coated catheters can be used.
snakes, the thigh of lizards and antebrachium of chelonia.
Other factors to assess are the brightness of the corneas in
Hypodermic or spinal needles
 species with mobile eyelids. In those without mobile eyelids
Hypodermic needles are useful for the administration of
(e.g., snakes) the collapse of the spectacle (the clear fused
intraosseous, intracoelomic or subcutaneous fluids.
 eyelids) is suggestive of dehydration. Other assessments of
Intraosseous fluids may be the only method of central
thirst and urate output can be made over 24 hours.
It is possible to estimate the degree of dehydration of a
vascular collapse is occurring. The proximal femur, tibia
reptile patient as follows:
or humerus may be used. Entry can be gained using spinal
· 3% dehydrated - increased thirst, slight lethargy, de-
needles. These have a central stylet to prevent clogging of
creased urates
the lumen of the needle with bone fragments after inser-
· 7% dehydrated - increased thirst, anorexia, dullness,
tion. 23-25 gauge spinal needles are usually sufficient.
tenting of the skin with slow return to normal, dull
Straightforward hypodermic needles may also be used
 corneas, loss of turgor of spectacles in snakes
for the same purpose, although the risks of blockage are
· 10% dehydrated - dull to comatose, skin remains
higher. Hypodermic needles may also be used, of course,
tented after pinching, desiccating mucous membranes,
for the administration of intracoelomic and subcutane-
sunken eyeballs, no urate/urine output.
ous fluids. Generally 23-25 gauge hypodermic needles
The alternative is to compare PCVs and total pro-
are suffcient for the task.
tein levels to assess dehydration (Table 22.1), again with
1% increase in PCV suggesting 10 mL/kg fluid replace-
Pharyngostomy or oesophageal tubes
ments are needed (this assumes no anaemia in the patient).
Pharyngostomy tubes are often used in reptiles in order
It is inmportant not to exceed 25-30 mL/kg/day as a
to provide nutritional support in as stress-free manner as
maximum for reasons mentioned above, whatever the
is possible. They are also useful as a route for some fluid
level of dehydration of the patient. So rehydration of se-
administration, as only liquid formulas will pass through
verely debilitated reptiles may take days to weeks. As with
these narrow (3.5-6.5 French) tubes. It should be noted
avian patients, therefore, making good the fluid deficit
though that in severely dehydrated individuals there is a
may need to be split over several days.
real possibility that gut pathology may exist, so this route
ON行
may need to be supplemented by others. This route there-
Equipment for fluid
fore has limited use in facilitating fluid replacement, and
生
administration
is used mainly for nutritional support and rehydrating
Catheters
and replenishing the gut microflora.
Butterfly catheters are very useful for the small and fragile
vessels in these patients, as they have a short length of
Syringe drivers
tubing attached to the needle. If the syringe or drip set
For continuous fluid administration, as is required for
is connected to this piece of flexible tubing, rather than
intravenous and intraosseous fluid administration,
directly to the catheter, there is less chance of the catheter
syringe drivers are advisable. Their advantage is that
becoming dislodged if the reptile moves. Also, the piece
small volumes, such as a fraction of a millilitre may be
An Overview of Reptile and Amphibian Therapeutics 323
administered accurately per hour. An error of 1-2 mL
Routes of fluid administration in
in some of the smaller species dealt with over an hour
reptile
could be equivalent to over-perfusion of 50-100%! In
As with cats and dogs, the same medical principles
addition, it is almost impossible to keep gravity-fed drip
broadly apply with five main routes of administration
 sets running at these low rates without blockage every
available as follows:
few minutes.
· Oral
· Subcutaneous
Intravenous drip tubing
+Intracoelomic
 Particular fine drip tubing is available for attachment to
▪Intravenous
syringes and syringe-driver units. It is useful if these are
+ Intraosseous.
luer locking as this enhances safety and prevents discon-
 Table 22.2 gives the advantages and disadvantages of each
nection when the patient moves.
of the five routes.
Table 22.2 Acdvantages and disadvantages of various fluid therapies for reptiles and amphibian5
Route of fluid
 administration
Advantages
Disadvantages
 Oral
Minirnal stress with experienced handller
Stressful with inexperienced handler
 Physiological route for fluid intake
No use in cases of dligestive tract disease
Less risk of tissue trauma
May damage stomach if the stomach tube is
Home therapy possible
inserted too roughly
Rapid adrministration
Rehydration rates are slow
Risk of aspiration pneumonia
Limnited volumes may be administered at
any one tirne
Subcutaneous
Large volumes may be given at one time
May be uncomfortable for the patient
Rapid adrministration possible, minimnizing stress
Risk of muscle and subcutaneous tissue trauma
Uptake may be better than oral in cases of
Rates of rehydration poor if severely dehydrated
digestive tract dlisease
and peripheral vessels are collapsed
 Minimal risk of internal organ damage during
 Only isotonic or hypotonic fluids may be
adrninistration
adrministered
 Darkening of the skin at the injection site
particularly in lizards such as iguanas and
chameleons
Intracoelomic
Large volumes may be administered at one time
Large volumes may cause pressure on the lungs
increasing dosing interval5
(no diaphragm)
Uptake is faster than subcutaneou5
 Rehydration rates may still be slow in severe
Minimally painful route of administration
 cases of dehydration
Only isotonic or hypotonic fluids may be
adrministered
Increased risk of organ damage
Intravenou5
Rapid rehydration in even severely dehydrated
Size of reptile may prevent venous access
 patients is possible
Species of reptile (e.g.. snakes) may make
Colloidal and hypertonic fluids and blood
venous access difficult without minor surgery
TIlES AND
transfusions possible
Veins are mmore fragile than marmmmalian vessel5
 Use of intravenous catheters and syringe drivers
Increased skill levels and equipment required
 makes for accurate delivery
Intraosseous
 Rapid rehydration possible even with collapsed 
Not useful in the presence of infection
peripheral vasculature
(osteornyelitis) or mmetabolic bone disease
REP
 Colloidal and hypertonic fluids and blood
Sedation, local or general anaesthesia is required 
:
 transfusions possible
for catheter insertion
 Use of intraosseous catheters and syringe drivers
Tolerance rmay be poor in some species
makes for accurate delivery
Useful in smaller species or species where venous
 access is dlifficult
324 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Oral
Snakes
 The oral route is not useful for seriously debilitated ani-
mals, but is for those with pharyngostomy feeding tubes
in place, or if the owner or handler is experienced in
 stomach tubing. Mild cases of dehydration, where owners
wish to home treat their pet, are ideal. A stomach tube is
passed by restraining the snake's head gently but frmly,
sandap anauoi uapoom io ssed e Buasun uaul pue
sor to open the mouth. A lubricated feeding tube is then
passed through the labial notch (the area at the most ros-
tral aspect of the mouth without teeth) and to a depth of
 one third of the snake's length.
Lizards
10 saqni dois iuaieis ueiae no saqn (ueois) aea
straightforward feeding tubes can be used to administer
fluids directly into the oesophagus or stomach. The rep-
tile needs to be firmly restrained to keep the head and
oesophagus in a straight line. Ihe mouth is opened with a
plastic or wooden tongue depressor and the tube inserted
to a depth of one third to one half the torso length of the
reptile. Ihis method is often stressful for the reptile. Ihe
alternative is to syringe fluids into the mouth, but this
risks inhalation in a debilitated reptile. A pharyngostomy
tube may be placed for nutritional support, and so may be
used for fluid therapy.
Chelonians
An oesophagostomy tube may be implanted as described
below, and levels of 10 mL/kg at any one time can be ad-
ministered. Alternatively, a stomach tube may be inserted
Figure 22.1 Placement and depth of insertion of a stomach tube in
a chelonian.
each time it is needed. The feeding tube is first measured
from the tip of the extended nose to the line where the
pectoral and abdominal ventral scutes connect. It can
2. Surgically prepare the site with 0.25-0.5% povidone-
then be lubricated and passed after extending the head
iodine, being particularly scrupulous as reptile skin is
and gently prising the mouth open with a wooden or plas
notoriously dirty. In chelonians, the implantation site
tic speculum (Figure 22.1).
is the ventral aspect of the lateral neck, 3-4 cm caudal
to the angle of the jaw. In snakes and lizards it is the
Placement of oesophagostomy tubes: Oesophagostomy
N
ventrolateral aspect of the throat region, 5-10 cm cau-
tubes may be placed in any species of reptile, but are par-
dal to the angle of the jaw.
主
ticularly useful in chelonians which can retract its head
 3. A pair of curved haemostats is placed in through the
deep inside its shell, making repeated stomach tubing
 mouth and pushed laterally and ventrally, tenting the
impossible. It also significantly reduces the stress and
skin above them.
trauma of repeatedly passing a stomach tube in long-term
 4. A sharp incision is made with a scalpel blade, over the
anorectic reptile patients.
 point of the haemostats,through the skin and the un-
The steps for placement are as follows:
derlying muscle.
1. Sedation or anaesthesia is required and good analgesia
5. The tubing, preferably as large a diameter as will com-
post implantation.
fortably ft down the oesophagus (Foley catheters are
An Overview of Reptile and Amphibian Therapeutics 325
useful in tortoises), is grasped with the haemostats as
Subcutaneous
they protrude out through the incision, and then pulled
Snakes
into the pharynx and pushed down into the oesophagus.
 The lateral aspect of the dorsum of the snake, in the caul-
 NB: Ihe tube should be measured prior to implanta-
dal third of its body, is the ideal site for subcutaneous
tion so the depth of insertion is known. It is measured
fluid administration. IThis is a good technique for use for
in tortoises from the site of the tube incision to the mid-
routine post-operative administration of fluids to patients
portion of the plastron, halfway through the abdominal
undergoing minor surgical procedures such as skin mass
scutes. A further length should then be allowed, in order
removals. If positioned correctly, there is a lymph sinus
to attach the end of the feeding tube to the dorsal aspect
running lateral to the epaxial muscles on either side,
of the carapace.
just subcutaneously, which can be used for moderately
6. Once in place, two pieces of zinc oxide tape may be at-
large volumes. It may, however, still be necessary to use
tached to the tube close to the skin surface. Ihrough
severalsites.
this, sutures may be placed, attaching this to the skin
itself. The tube may then be attached to the midline
Lizards
cranial carapace in tortoises, or taped to the side of the
 The lateral thoracic area is easily used for smaller volumes
neck for snakes and reptiles, and a bung inserted (Fig-
of fluids at any one site. Ihere is a risk of the reptile devel-
ures 22.2a and 22.2b). Care of the tube is as for nasogas-
oping a darkened, pigmented area over the injection site,
tric tubes in cats and dogs, that is, plain water should be
particularly in chameleons.
flushed through the tube prior to administering food to
ensure correct placement. Ihis should also be done after
feeding to flush food debris out of the tube.
Chelonians
 The subcutaneous route is easily used for post-operative
fuids and mild dehydration in this species. Fluids may be
a
given in the area just cranial to the hind limbs, or in the
skin folds just lateral to the neck Relatively large volumes
may be given via this route.
Intracoelomic
Snakes
 The intracoelomic route is useful for more seriously dehy-
drated reptiles, as there is a greater vasculature at this site
for absorption. IThe needle or butterfly catheter is insert-
ed two rows of lateral scales dorsal to the ventral scutes
in the caudal third of the snake, but cranial to the vent.
The needle is inserted so that it just penetrates the body
(b)
wall, the plunger of the syringe is pulled back to ensure
no organ puncture has occurred and the fluids adrminis-
tered. If correctly inserted, there will be no resistance to
the injection.
Lizards
Because of the positioning necessary for administration,
the intracoelomic route may be a stressful method of fluid
administration. As for small mammals, the lizard should
be placed in dorsal recumbency with its head downwards
to encourage the gut contents to fall cranially and away
from the injection site. Ihe needle, preferably 25 gauge
Figure 22.2 (a) An oesophagostomy tube in place in an anorectic
leopard tortoise (Stigmochelys pardalis). (b) An oesophagostomy
or smaller, is advanced slowly to just pop through the
tube in place in an anorectic green iguana (iguana iguana).
abdominal wall in the lower right ventral quadrant. Ihe
326 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
syringe plunger should be pulled back to ensure that no
seen to beat against the ventral scale, approximately one
organ has been penetrated, and the fluids can be adminis-
quarter of its length from the snout. A 25-27 gauge over-
tered without any resistance.
the-needle catheter may be inserted between the scales,
ventrally, in a caudocranial manner at 30 degrees to the
Chelonians
body wall into the single ventricle. A bolus may be ad-
 The intracoelomic route can be used in tortoises up to a
ministered, or it may be taped, glued or sutured in place
maximum of 20-25 mL/kg/day only; otherwise, due to
for 24-48 hours.
the confines of the rigid shell, the fluids will place too
much pressure on the lung fields. Ihe area cranial to the
Lizards
hind limbs is used, that is, the same site as for subcutane-
The intravenous route can be difficult in small lizards, and
ous routes, but the chief difference is depth. Ihe concern
frequently requires sedation or anaesthesia. Several veins
with this route is that the bladder lies in this area, and
maybe tried.
if full may be punctured. The other route is the cranial
Cephalic vein: This is approached in the anaesthetised
access site. Ihis is located lateral to the neck and medial
lizard by performing a cut-down procedure on the cranial
 to the front limb and is more epicoelomic than truly in-
aspect of the middle of the antebrachium, perpendicular
tracoelomic. The needle is kept close and parallel to the
to the long axis of the radius and ulna. Ihe vessel may
plastron and a 3/4-inch needle may be inserted to the
then be catheterised using an over-the-needle catheter,
level of the hub.
which is then sutured in place. This technique is really
only useful for lizards over 0.25 kg in weight.
Intravenous
ugular vein: This vessel may be accessed via a cut-down
Snakes
technique in the anaesthetised or sedated lizard. An inci-
There are no major vessels for intravenous use in snakes
sion is made in a craniocaudal direction 2.5 cm caudal
which are easily accessible. If an intravenous route is to be
to the angle of the jaw. An over-the-needle catheter may
used, one of the following is required.
then be sutured in place.
Ventral tail vein: Ihis is more of a plexus of veins, and
Ventral tail vein: This is more of a plexus of veins. It is
may be accessed from the ventrum. Ihe needle is inserted
accessed from the ventral aspect of the tail and can be
midline, one-third of the tail length from the vent, and
performed in the conscious lizard. It is frequently only
advanced until it touches the coccygeal vertebrae at a
suitable for one-off bolus injections, and special care
90-degree angle. The needle is then retracted slightly
should be taken with species which exhibit autotomy
whilst drawing back on the syringe until blood flows into
(spontaneous tail shedding). The needle is inserted at
the hub. Fluids may then be given slowly.
90 degrees to the angle of the tail and advanced until it
Palatine vein: Ihis is present on the roof of the mouth
touches the coccygeal vertebrae. It is then withdrawn
as its name suggests, and is paired. Cannulation
slightly while drawing back on the syringe. When
N
may be performed with a 25-27 gauge butterfly catheter
blood flows into the syringe, the infusion may begin
although the snake has to be sedated or anaesthetised to
(Figure 22.3).
gain access.
Chelonians
hugular vein: Ihese can only be accessed in an anesthe-
There are two main intravenous routes: the dorsal tail
AND
tised or sedated snake. A full-thickness skin cut-down
vein and the jugular veins.
 procedure is performed 5-7.5 cm caudal to the angle of
S3
the jaw, two rows of scales dorsal to the ventral scutes.
Hugular vein: These may be accessed for catheter place-
The jugular vein can then be seen medial to the ribs. An
ment in the sedated or anaesthetised tortoise. The neck
over-the-needle catheter is best for this, and should then
is extended and the head tilted away from the operator
to push the neck towards him or her. Ihe jugular vein
be sutured in place.
RT
runs from the dorsal aspect of the eardrum along the
Intracardiac: Ihis site can be used in emergencies. The
more dorsal aspect of the neck (Figure 22.4). An over-
heart may be catheterised under sedation or anaesthesia
 the-needle catheter may be placed directly, or, in thicker
only. On turning the snake onto its back, the heart may be
skinned animals, a cut-down technique employed
An Overview of Reptile and Amphibian Therapeutics 327
Figure 22.5 Access to dorsal tail vein in chelonian for fluid
administration or blood sampling.
Figure 22.3 Basilisk restrained for ventral tail vein fluid
administration or blood sampling.
are a few access points to choose from. Hypodermic or
 spinal needles of 23-25 gauge sizes may be used.
Proximal fermur: Ihis may be accessed from the fossa
800
created between the greater trochanter and the hip joint.
This route may be difficult due to the 90-degree angle the
femur often forms with the pelvis.
Distal fermur: Ihis is relatively easy to access from above
the stifle joint. It does restrict the movement of the stifle,
but it is easier to bandage the catheter into this site and
access to the medullary cavity of the fenmur is certainly
easier via this route. Sedation or anaesthesia is required.
See below for the placement technique.
Praximal tibia: This again is possible inthe larger species.
Figure 22.4 Placement of a jugular catheter in a chelonian. Note
the taping of the drip tubing to the dorsal carapace midline and the
Anaesthesia and sedation is needed, and the spinal needle
attachment to the syringe driver.
or hypodermic needle may be screwed into the tibial crest
region in a proximodistal manner.
Dorsal fail veir: Ihis is more of a plexus of veins. Ihere-
fore it is often not possible to give large volumes of flu-
Placement of distal femoral intraosseous cafheters in
ids, and certainly not possible to place a catheter. Access 
      
is midline, on the dorsal aspect of the tail. Ihe needle is
of a distal femoral intraosseous catheter in a lizard is
inserted at a 90-degree angle until it hits the coccygeal
explained in detail below.
vertebrae. The needle is then pulled back, drawing back
1. Sedation or anaesthesia (local or general) is needed,
on the syringe at the same time, until blood flows into the
and in all cases it is advised that good analgesia is ad-
hub (Figure 22.5).
ministered.
 2. Surgically scrub the area overlying the craniolateral as-
Intraosseous
pect of the stifle joint using dilute povidone-iodine. It
Snakes
is important that placement of the catheter or needle is
 The intraosseous route is not possible in the snake.
performed as aseptically as possible.
3. Take a 20-23 gauge spinal or hypodermic needl and
Lizards
insert it through the ridge just proximal to the stifle
The intraosseous is a good route for smaller species of liz-
joint, screwing it into the bone in the direction of the
ards, where venous access is restricted or difficult. Ihere
long axis of the femur proximally.
328 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
angle of insertion parallel with the outer wall of the shell,
so entering the shell bone marrow cavity (Figure 22.7). In
larger, older species, the shell may be too tough to allow
penetration.
Proximal tibia: Ihis may be approached as for lizards.
The area is thoroughly scrubbed with 0.25-0.5% po-
vidone-iodine and the hypodermic or spinal needle is
screwed into the tibial crest in the direction of the long
axis of the tibia distally.
Routes of fluid administration in
amphibians
Cutaneous
The cutaneous route is unique to amphibians and makes
use of their semi-permeable skin. It can be used only with
mildly dehydrated amphibians, and should only involve
the use of dechlorinated, plain water. It should be warmed
to the amphibian's PBT and be well oxygenated before im-
mersing the patient. Absorption will occur across the skin
membranes.
Figure 22.6 Distal femoral intraosseous fluid administration in an
 inland bearded dragon (Pogona vitticeps).
4. Flush the needle with heparinised saline (the advan-
tage of a spinal needle is that it has a central stylet
which helps prevent it from becoming plugged with
bone fragments).
5. Tape the needle securely in place and apply an antibi-
otic cream around the site. It may be worthwhile ra-
diographing the area to ensure correct intramedullary
placement of the needle.
6. Once the needle or catheter has been correctly placed,
attach the intravenous tubing and bandage it securely
in place by wrapping bandage material around the leg 
of the patient.
5
-pq Aqqu au asqou o aessaau aq Aeu i 
AND
ing it to a splint to prevent dislodgement of the cath-
eter, which should now be attached to a syringe driver.
Chelonians
Two main intraosseous sites can be used.
Plastrocarapacial junction/pillar: This is the pillar of shell
which connects the plastron to the carapace. It is ap-
proached from the caudal aspect, just cranial to one of
the hind limbs. Ihe spinal or hypodermic needle (21-23
Figure 22.7 Intraosseous fluid administration via the
 gauge) is screwed into the shell attempting to keep the
plastrocarapacial pillars. Note the syringe driver in background.
An Overview of Reptile and Amphibian Therapeutics 329
Oral
dog, to an untried one, such as a snake. This is derived
This route can be used for hypotonic fluid therapy via
from the formula used to calculate the BMR which is:
a small feeding tube inserted orally. The danger is that
BMR = K( Wkg0.75)
trauma can easily occur during restraint and opening of
the amphibian's mouth during this procedure. In addi-
where K is a constant dependent upon the order of animal
tion, the process is moderately stressful.
being considered (K is 70 for placental mammals, 78 for
non-passerine birds and 10 for reptiles).
Intracoelomic
From this, it is possible to calculate an animal's specific
This is accessed in the right lower ventral quadrant
minimum energy cost (SMEC) as:
of the ‘abdomen. Ihe amphibian should be placed in
SMEC= K(Wkg0.75/Wkg) =K(Wkg-0.25)
dorsal recumbency and with its head down to allow
 coelom contents to fall away from the injection site.
This then allows you to calculate a SMEC dose for any
drug by dividing its known dose rate in mg/kg in a spe-
Intravenous
cies (say a human) by that species' SMEC. For example, if
In the larger anurans and some salamanders, the mid-
the dose rate of ceftazidime ina human being is 20 mg/kg.
line ventral abdominal vein may be used for bolus flu-  and that humans' SMEC is 24.2, then the SMEC dose is
ids or blood transfusions. The vessel lies midline, just  0.8. Iherefore, by simply balancing equations, if you then
below the skin surface and runs from the pubis of the
know the weight of your reptile (say a 2 kg iguana), you
pelvis to the xiphoid of the sternum. A 25-27 gauge
 can calculate its SMEC as:
insulin needle may be used to gain access, although the
Iguana SMEC = K(10) ×(2-0.25) = 8.4
vessel is very fragile and care should be taken not to
rupture it.
And therefore, the dose rate of drug required by multiply-
ing the iguana's SMEC by the SMEC dose as:
Treatment of reptilian diseases
8.4 × 0.8 = 6.72 mg/kg
As this text is aimed at the veterinary nurse or technician,
i is not intended to give exhaustive lists of treatments or
The next stage is to calculate the dose frequency. Again by
drug dosages, rather to give an idea of the treatments pos-
extrapolation from a known dose frequency in humans
sible and the techniques useful to aid recovery. For drug
 for the drug of three times per 24 hours, the SMEC fre-
dosages, the reader is referred to one of the many excel-
quency may be calculated as:
lent texts listed in the additional reading list at the end of
aa aa=aa 
this chapter.
=3/24.2 = 0.1
Metabolic scaling of drug dosages
Therefore to calculate the treatment frequency for the
Many drugs have not been evaluated in reptiles and
 q i s an  s no 
anmphibians; however, drug doses may (with care) be
SMEC frequency for the drug:
extrapolated from known doses in other species. How-
Dose frequency iguana = 8.4 × 0.1
ever, to do this, the differences in basal metabolic rate
= 0.84 times in 24 hrs
(BMR) or metabolism should be taken into consid-
eration (see Chapter 20). Reptiles have a much lower
which is equivalent to 1 dose (of 6.72 mg/kg) every
metabolic rate than mammals, and this is reflected by
28.6 hours.
the fact that they excrete drugs at slower rates. The en-
 The technique is crude, but does allow some attenmpt to
vironmental temperature at which the reptile or am-
 derive a dose more suited to the lower metabolic rate of
phibian is kept, due to their ectothermic nature, will
reptiles in comparison with mammals, when extrapolat-
also greatly affect its metabolic rate and hence excre-
ing drug doses.
tion of any drug administered. Therefore, dosages and
dose rates are often much lower in reptiles than in
Reptile dermatological disease therapy
mammals.
Table 22.3 highlights some of the treatments and thera-
A formula has been derived though to 'metabolically
 pies commonly used for the management of reptilian der-
scale' the dosage of a drug in a tested species, such as a
matological diseases.
330 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Table 22.3 Treatment of skin disease5
Diagnosis
Treatment
Ectoparasites
 Mites
Can spray environmental mixture of 0.5 mL iverrmectin + 1 L water with 1-2 mmL propylene glycol
to aid mixing to remove remaining mites
Fipronil has also been used topically, sprayed onto a cloth and wiped over the reptile
Tick5
Manual removal, ivermectin or fipronil on a cloth. Treat for secondary bacterial infection
Blowfly mniasis
 Manual removal, often under sedation, antibiosis and treatment of initiating cause
Leeches
Manual removal after applying lignocaine to leech
Dysecdysis 
1. Rehydrate patient
 2. Treat underlying cause
 3. Lukewarm water shallow bathing:; allow access to abrasive surfaces for snakes, e.g..
wet towel5
4. Retained spectacles in snakes may be rermoved carefully with viscous tear clrops and
moistened cotton buds
Scale rot
1. Isolate bacteria/fungi involved and obtain sensitivity
 2. Blisters treated topically dilute povidone-iodine, silver sulfadiazine/enilconazole washes
3. Parenteral antibiosis
4. Prevention geared to reducing substrate moisture and increasing hygiene
Abscesses and bacterial
Surgical therapy for most abscesses due to their fibrous nature. Requires debridement and
infections
-eng ane Aueu - Aasuas pue ainns uo paseg sisoigue suaiss ym sdasue leidon
negative infections; therefore fluoroquinolones and third-generation cephalosporins are
Useful.
 Devriesea agamarum require debriderment and application of topical doxycycline mixed in with a
 gel such as Orabase. Alternative treatment with ceftiofur at 5 mg/kg g24h has been effective
(Pasman5 et al., 2010)
 Erythema, ecchyrmoses and
Findling the cause of the condition which has lead to septicaemia
 petechiae
If anticoagulant poisoning is suspected, then injections of vitammin K 0.25-0.5 mg/kg
Fungal skin infections
Superficial infections may respond to enilconazole washes
 Most are deeper and require systermic medication with itraconazole at metabolically scaled doses
(Girling & Fraser, 2009)
Voriconazole has been shown to be effective against CANV in bearded dragon5
Viral skin infections
Some herpes virus infections may be treated with acyclovir topically or orally once daily at
 80 mg/kg (Stein, 1 996) Some have suggested three tirmes dlaily treatrment to be more effective
(McArthur et al., 2004)
N
Hyperthyroidisrm
 Case of the green iguana: a thyroid adenoma was surgically removed
(Hernandez-Divers et al., 2001)
Case of the corn snake: methirmazole wa5 used at 1-1.25 mmg/kg q24h for 30 d (Frye, 1991)
Therrnal burns
Managerment of large skin deficits using skin grafts or porcine xerograft patches (veterinary
ES AND
Biosiste Cook) or suturing granulation pads, e.g., Granuflex? over the wounds once infection
has been contained. Antibiotics suitable for Gramm-negative infections should be used
 5ysternically and topically (e.g. silver sulfadiazine). Repair of large skin deficits may take
up to 6 mo
REP
Reptile digestive tract disease
Reptile respiratory and cardiovascular
therapy
disease therapy
Table 22.4 highlights some of the treatments and thera
Table 22.5 highlights some of the treatments and thera-
pies commonly used for the management of reptilian di-
pies commonly used for the management of reptilian re-
gestive tract diseases.
spiratory and cardiovascular diseases.
An Overview of Reptile and Amphibian Therapeutics 33 1
Table 22.4 Treatment of digestive system disea5e5.
Diagnosis
Treatment
Oral diseases
 Mouth rot
Antibiosis based on culture and sensitivity
Necrotic tissue debrided under sedation/anaesthesia
Topical compounds containing silver sulfadiazine and frarnycetin are useful
Intralesion injections of antibiotic and vitarmin C advised (Frye, 1991)
Chelonian herpesvirus, use topical iodine washes and acyclovir ointrnent/systemic acyclovir
80 mg/kg 5.i.d-t.i.d
Periodontal disease
 Ultrasonic scaling of debris and calculus is advised. The use of antibiotics effective against Grarn-negative
bacteria is acdvised. The dliet should also be corrected
Stomach disease5
Neoplasia
Surgical excision
Granulomas (bacterial/
lles iot segoue pue busat suas pue ann snuena ahel o, uosixa leinins
fungal)
Nematodes
Ivermectin 0.2 mmg/kg once; repeat after 2 wk - NEVER USE IVERMECTIN IN CHELONIA AS IT IS LETHAL
 Or fenbendazole 50-100 mg/kg once and repeat after 2 wk
Cryptosporidiosi5
Metronicdazole orally at a dose of 260 mg/kg given twice 2 wk apart has been reported successful
Extreme care should be taken due to toxic reactions to this high dosage (Bone, 1992). In indigo 5nakes
Suisn pioe ot jalag Aqeqoid s! 1! ( dds sljadoiduen) saxeusbuis pue (dds sieion uoyouewug)
metronidazole as they are especially sensitive to its toxic side effects which include neurological sign5
and liver darmage
Paromomycin at 100 mg/kg daily for 7 d and then twice weekly for 3 mo wa5 also 5uccessful in
Gila monsters (Pare, 1997)
provision of easily digestible liquid foods has increased the success rates by reducing environmental
survival of the organism and speeding up the life cycle. Hospital enclosures should be dlisinfected 
between cases. Few disinfectants can be guaranteed, only ammonia (5%) and formol-saline (10%)
were considered effective at low temperatures by Cranfield and Graczyk (1 996). Most effective
enisap pue buizaa buneais weais sapnui al all aniseed aun budnsp jo poia
Intestinal diseases
Nematodes
See stomach diseases. NEVER USE IVERMECTIN IN CHELONIA AS IT IS LETHAL
Entarmoebiasis
Metronidazole 160 mg/kg orally once daily for 3 d. In indigo and kingsnakes reduced dose of
25 mg/kg q96h metronidazole plus iodoquinol at 25-50 mg/kg q24h can be used to minimise
metronidazole toxicity
Cryptosporidiosis
See section under 'Stomach diseases'
Coccidiosis
Sulfadlimidline, orally, 50 mg/kg once daily for 3 days. Clazuril at 2-3 ng/kg q48h on three occasions
has also been used
Toltrazuril diluted down to poultry concentrations for drinking water and dosed for 2 d has also
been used 
 Flagellates
 Flagellates may be treated using metronidazole as a single dose of 100-275 mg/kg orally (Cranfield &
TILES AND
Graczyk, 1996) - beware toxicity in indigo and kingsnake5
Liver disease5
 Entamoebiasis
See ‘lntestinal cliseases' above
Hepatic lipidosis
Hepatic lipidosis may be treated with supportive fluid and nutritional therapy. In addition, use of
REP
anabolic steroids at doses of 0.5-1 mg/kg orally every 7 days and the use of levothyroxine at 20 μg/
:
kg orally every 2 days may be helpful. In chelonians during this period the diet needs to be a high fibre
vegetarian one. It may be necessary to prevent hibernation if the problerm occurs in the autumn, and
the placement of a pharyngostomy tube for ease of food administration is advisable. The use of milk
thistle extract, inositol and L-carnitine in cases of liver disease also appear beneficial
332 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Table 22.5 Treatment of respiratory and cardiovascular system disease5.
Diagnosis
Treatment
Respiratory cisease
Nematodles
Ivermectin may be used at 0.2 mg/kg EXCEPT IN CHELONIA. Alternatively.
 fenbendazole and oxfendazole may be used (see intestinal disease treatrment,
Table 14.4)
Pentastones
Manual remmoval. Levarmisole has been used at 5 mg/kg
 Bacterial respiratory disease
Based on culture and sensitivity results. Lung washes may be used to collect sammples
and to flush out infection. Gramm-negative bacterial infections predominate;
therefore fluoroquinolones, arminoglycosides and third generation cephalosporin5
may be useful
Fungal respiratory disease
Itraconazole or voriconazole preferred as ketoconazole is ineffective against
Aspergilus spp. which are commonly found
Cardliovascular disease
Heart failure 
With litle information regarding suitable therapeutis, the following provides a
guide only:
1. Maintain at lowest extent of POTZ
2. Enrich local environment with oxygen
3. Minimise stress with minimmal handling
4. Withhold food (for the short terrm)
 5. Short-termn diuresis when signs of congestive failure are present - frusemnide
 2-5 mg/kg IV or IM 2-3x caily, (rmay also use hycrochlorothiazicde 1 ng/kg every
24-72 h)
6. Broad spectrum antimicrobial
 7. Parasiticidles (if suspect haemoparasites/microfilaria, or blood-sucking
ectoparasites/endoparasites)
8. Fluids (15-30 mL/kg/d)
9. Digoxin has been used at empirical cat and dog dosages for a case of dliagnosed
dilated cardiommyopathy in a python, but extrerme care should be taken with all of
these drugs as no proper studies have been performed to ascertain safe dosages
Fil ariasis
Nematode filariasis treatment attempted with ivermectin 0.2 mg/kg intrammuscularly.
Alternatives include raising the environmental temperature to 35-37°C for
24~48 h causing dleath of the adult worms.
Watch for signs of heat stress and dehydration at these termperatures.
 Other haernoparasites
e.g.. Plasmodium spp. (Girling & Raiti, 2004)
Quinacrine 20-100 mg/kg PO, every 48 h for 2 wk for haemogregarines in snake5
N
(Raiti, 2002)
Goitre
lodine 5upplement at 2-4 mg/kg orally once weekly (Stein, 1996)
Leukaemia
Vincristine (0.025 mg/kg intravenously once weekly), and prednisolone
(0.5-1 rng/kg once daily). Resistance can occur with this regirme and more success
ILES AND
has been achieved by adding in cyclophosphamide (10 mg/kg) and chlorambucil
(0.10.2 mg/kg per os once daily) (Willette et af., 2001). Doxorubicin has been
U5ed at 1 mg/kg intravenously once weekly for two treatrments, then once every
 2 wk for two treatrments and then once every 3 wk for two treatrments
1
(Rosenthal, 1994)
REP
Reptile urinary tract disease therapy
Treatment of renal disease
Table 22.6 highlights some of the treatments and thera-
Fuid therapy is an essential part of this (see above and
pies commonly used for the management of reptilian uri-
Chapter 24). In severely dehydrated reptiles, an initial
nary tract diseases.
fluid rate of 5 mL/kg/hour may be attempted for the first
An Overview of Reptile and Amphibian Therapeutics 333
Table 22.6 Treatrment for urinary tract dliseases.
Table 22.7 Treatrment for reproductive systerm disease5
Diagnosis
Treatment
Diagnosis
Treatment
 Renal disease
See text
Dystocia (post-
See text
ovulatory stasis)
 Urinary bladder stones 
Treatrent by surgical removal, or
if small enough via endoscope via
Pre-ovulatory stasis
Surgical ovariectomy
the cloaca. Antibiotic therapy often
Egg yolk coelomitis
Simil ar to the condlition in birds;
required due to concurrent cystitis
however, reptiles will often be
more tolerant of advanced dlisease
Surgical option is an ovariectomy
to prevent recurrence - also
1-3 hours. Beware of reptiles with hyperkalaemia that
allows debricderment and flushing
 potassium-containing fluids are avoided.
of the coelornic cavity. Covering
 If anuria is present, then diuretics such as furosemide
antibiotics with fluid therapy and
assist feeding also required
0 ( As n AIsn / g-)
mannitol (20% as 2 mL/kg intravenously q24h) can be
Hemipenal/phallus
If hermipene/phallus is non-reducible
prolapse
then amputation is advised
given.
Allopurinol can be given to reduce blood uric acid lev-
Oviductal prolapses
 Severe prolapses, which have been 
els (20 mg/kg orally q24h).
present for somme time may
necessitate emergency surgery. and
Bladder lavage, involving the cloacal insertion of a
replacement of the prolapse via a
Foley catheter into the bladder and lavage of its contents,
coeliotomy, +/- salpingectomy at 
offers possibilities for the stabilisation of hyperuricaemic,
the samme time
hyperkalaemic patients (Dantzler & Schmidt-Nielson,
1966). Bearing in mind the function of the lower urinary
nesting material such as damp sand or bark chippings for
tract, it should be possible to remove excess potassium
the female to dig into is also useful and maybe all that is
and uric acid, and to administer fluids (and possibly even
needed in uncomplicated cases, particularly in chelonia.
medications such as allopurinol) by this route.
Atenolol at 7 mg/kg orally with calcium gluconate has
Hypocalcaemia is a common finding with renal fail-
been used in chelonians followed by 1-3 IU/kg of oxyto-
ure and can cause seizures and tetany. Calcium gluconate
cin intramuscularly the following morning. Ihis protocol
therapy with 100 mg/kg q6h along with aluminium hy-
is continued daily, assuming eggs are produced, until all
droxide (15-45 mg/kg orally q24h) to reduce phosphate
eggs are out.
absorption is advised.
As with birds, the application of prostaglandin E gel to
In chronic renal failure, anabolic steroids
pue
 the oviduct sphincter per cloaca may help dilation if this
vitamin B injections may also be given to enhance appe-
is the cause of dystocia.
tite and stop catabolism and reverse anaemia.
Reptile reproductive tract disease therapy
Table 22.7 highlights some of the treatments and thera-
pies commonly used for the management of reptilian re-
productive tract diseases.
Treatment of dystocia (post-ovulatory stasis)
(Figures 22.8 and 21.15)
Medical treatment revolves around the administration
of oxytocin at 5-30 IU/kg intramuscularly or intracoe-
lomically (Stein, 1996). Prior to this, calcium gluconate
a 100 mg/kg, particularly in lizards and chelonia where
hypocalcaemia is a problem, is administered. In addition,
the use of sterile lubricants injected into the reproduc-
Figure 22.8 Heavily pregnant female green iguana with post-
ovulatory stasis. See Figure 21.15 for the intra-operative viev of this
tive tract via the cloaca may be helpful. The provision of
reptile.
 334 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Surgical methods include percutaneous aspiration of
Table 22.8 Treatrment of musculoskeletal disease5.
the egg contents by bringing the egg to the abdominal
wall, surgically scrubbing the skin surface and passing a
Diagnosis
Treatment
21 gauge needle through the body wall into the egg. The
Metabolic
See text 
needle should be attached to a syringe which should be
bone
disea5e
used to aspirate the yolk and albumen contents. Once
collapsed, the egg shells will often be passed of their own
Fractures
In cases of mmetabolic bone disease, it is better
to correct dliet and splint fractures than
accord.
repair surgically
Other methods include salpingotomy. In the case of
smakes, this means making very long incisions to ensure re-
Lizards 
For one forelimb fracture, bandage limb to
body wall (see Figure 22.9). For bilateral
moval of all of the eggs. In the case of chelonians, this means
humeral fractures, use a coaptation splint.
entering into the shell via the plastron by creating a trap door
 For one hindlimb fracture, bandage linb to
tail base. For dligital fractures ball bandlage
Reptile musculoskeletal system disease therapy
a5 for avian patients
Table 22.8 highlights some of the treatments and thera-
Chelonians
 Possible to bandage limmb into shell. This is
pies commonly used for the management of reptilian
Useful in cases of metabolic bone disease.
Spinal fractures should be splinted as neural
musculoskeletal system diseases.
control may be regained. All species may
require external coaptation or internal
Treatment of metabolic bone disease
surgical fixation to mend fractures 
Ihis is by correction of the dietary deficiency in calcium
Tail lo55
Young iguanids and geckos treat stump as an
and by ensuring that susceptible species are provided
 open wound and dress with topical silver
with ultraviolet artificial lighting on the inside of the vi-
sulfadiazine cream or iodine antiseptic (dilute)
varium. Injectable calcium should not be used for routine
For agamids or species not showing autonomy
 and older iguanids which lose this ability.
metabolic bone disease (MBD) cases as it is both pain-
suture the stump surgically
ful and if given intravenously, may cause fatal arrhyth-
mias. Injectable calcium should only be used if there is
evidence of hypocalcaemic tetany or collapse. Treatment 
23 mg/kg calcium gubionate orally twice daily plus sup-
should focus on dietary correction of calcium imbalance
portive therapy. Ihe first week after, repeat the vitamin D3
in combination with vitamin D3 provision (UV light or
injection, and assuming normalised blood calcium, give
dietary). Salmon calcitonin has been used once blood
the first salmon calcitonin injection and continue with
calcium levels have been corrected to encourage deposi-
the oral calcium. Ihe second week, just the calcitonin in-
tion of calcium in the bones. Doses of 50 IU per green
jection, is repeated plus the oral calcium (Mader, 2006).
iguana once weekly for 2 weeks have been quoted (Mader,
Unfortunately, some of the shell deformities seen in
chelonia are not correctable. Fractures are best repaired
to administer 400 IU/kg vitamin D intramuscularly plus
by splinting and dietary corrections.
ONV
53
11
非E
Figure 22.9 Bandaging a forelimb to the body wall as a conservative method of treating a humeral fracture in a lizard.
An Overview of Reptile and Amphibian Therapeutics 335
Internal fixation is not advised due to the fragility of
their prey is preferred as this guarantees the reptile will
the bones.
 get the nutritional supplement. Commercially available
insects need supplementation as most have inverted
Prevention of metabolic bone disease
calcium:phosphorus ratios. Dietary deficiencies for herbi-
 Klaphake (2010) has described ultraviolet light provision
vores in calcium can occur where large amounts of leaves
for reptiles to prevent MBD as follows:
containing oxalates (e.g., spinach and beetroot tops) that
1.Desert diurnal lizards/chelonians - high ultraviolet B-
bind calcium in the gut and prevent absorption. Ihe feed-
wave (UVB) levels (10% or full unfltered sun for 12
ing of fruit should be kept in check as most fruit contains
hours)
little or no calcium.
2.Diurnal arboreal lizards or semiaquatic basking
chelonians - moderate UVB (5%, 12 hours)
Reptile neurological system disease therapy
3.Diurnal terrestrial lizards  or
 chelonians
from
Table 22.9 highlights some of the treatments and thera-
forests - low UVB (5%, 6 hours)
da jo jua a r pasn auo sand
4.Nocturnal lizards - low levels UVB (2%, 6 hours)
neurological system diseases.
 5.Snakes - dietary calcium and vitamin Ds is suffcient
Calcium supplementation should be provided for
Treatment of amphibian diseases
 young growing lizards and chelonia in particular, but un-
 Table 22.10 highlights some of the treatments and thera-
fortunately little data exists to demonstrate in what form
pies commonly used for the management of amphibian
or how much is necessary. For insectivores, gut-loading
dise ases.
Table 22.9 Treatment of nervous system diseases.
Diagnosis
Treatment
Hypocalcaemic tetany
Over short terrm use calcium gluconate 100 mg/kg intrammuscularly. Over long term, adrninister
dietary calcium, vitammin D and UV-light supplermentation
Hypovitaminosis B
Over short term, thiamine injections 25 mg/kg once daily. Over the long term change to a
wann pooy jo bybw se te auweyn yrim puaalddns ao 'tap huiuieuon-aseueiy-uou
Biotin deficiency: over short term give a vitamin B complex by injection. Over long terrn
a s, uau paaun hupaa dos na apmd xald g u ym a au aaldanss
Hypoglycaemia
Oral adrministration of 3 g/kg glucose solution
Lead poisoning
10-40 mg/kg sodium calcium edentate every 12 h
Meningoencephalitis
 There are many causes: entamoebiasis - see section on treatment of intestinal diseases; viral causes, e.g..
inclusion body disease are not treatable; bacterial causes may be treated early on with antimicrobials
Table 22.10 Treatment of diseases of ammphibia.
Diagnosis
Treatment
Redleg
Enrofloxacin at 5 mg/kg orally daily. Tetracyclines, e.g., oxytetracycline, at 50 mmg/kg
Saprolegnia
 Dilute topical malachite green
AND
 Phycommycosis
 Phycomycosis: dlilute topical rmalachite green (not always successful) 
TILES
Parasitic nemmatodes
 Fenbendazole orally 50 mg/kg once, or ivermectin 0.2 mg/kg orally once
Protozoal diseases
Entamoeba ranarum in anurans treated with metronidazole at 100 mg/kg orally once
REP
Note: may be toxic
:11
Oodinium piluiaris treated with mild salt solutions of 0.4-0.6% for 2-3 d or a 0.15% formalin
dlip every 48 h are useful
 Metabolic bone dlisease
Dietary supplementation with calcium and vitamin disease Dg. Flaked fish foods also contain these
two nutrients
336 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
References
Mader, D. (2006) Metabolic bone disorders. Reptile Medicine
Bone, R.D. (1992) Gastrointestinal system. Mamual of Reptiles
and Surgery (ed. D. Mader), 2nd edn, Pp. 841-851. Saunders,
(eds PH. Beynon, M.PC. Lawton & J.E. Cooper), Pp. 101-116.
Elsevier, Philadelphia, PA.
BSAVA, Cheltenham, UK.
McArthur, S., McLellan, L. and Brown, S. (2004) Gastrointestinal
Cranfeld, M.R. and Graczyk, TK. (1996) Cryptosporidiosis.
disease. Manual of Reptiles {eds S.J. Girling & P. Raiti), 2nd
Reptile Medicine and Surgery (ed. D.R. Mader), Pp. 359-363.
edn, Pp. 210-229. BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
WB Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
 Pare, J. (1997) Treatment of cryptosporidiosis in gila monsters
Dantzler, W.H. and Schmidt-Nielson, B. (1966) Excretion in
(Heloderma suspectum) with paromomycin. Proceedings of
the fresh-water turtle (Pseudemys scripta) and desert tortoise
the Association of Reptilian and Amphibian Veterinarians,
(Gopherus agassizij). American Journal of Physiology, 210,
Houston, TX, Pp. 23-24.
198-210.
Pasmans, K., Hellebuyck, T., Haesebrouck, F and Martel, A.
Frye, FL. {199l) Infectious diseases. Biomedical and Surgical
(2010) Dermatitis and septicaemia caused by Devriesea
Aspects of Captive Reptile Husbandry, 2nd edn, Vol 1. Krieger
qgamarum: an overview including recent developments in
Publishing, Malabar, FL.
disease management. Proceedings of the Ist International
Girling, S.J. and Fraser, M.A. (2009) Treatment of Aspergillus
Conference on Reptile and Amphibian Medicine, Pp. 105-106.
species infection in reptiles with itraconazole at metabolically
Raiti, P (2002) Snakes. Manual of Exotic Pets {eds A. Meredith
scaled dosages. Veterinary Record, 165(2), 52-54.
&S. Redrobe), 4th edn, PP. 241-256. BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
Girling, S.J. and Raiti, P (2004) Appendix 2 A formulary of drugs 
Rosenthal, K. (1994) Chemotherapeutic treatment of a sarcoma
for use in reptiles. BSAVA Manual of Reptiles (eds S.J. Girling &
in a corn snake. Proceedings of the American Association of
P Raiti), 2nd edn, Pp. 352-356. BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
Zoo Veterinarians/Association of Reptilian and Amphibian
Hernandez-Divers, S.J., Knott, C.D. and MacDonald, J. (2001)
Veterinarians,p.46.
Diagnosis and surgical treatment of thyroid adenoma-induced
Stein, G. {1996) Reptile and amphibian formulary. Reptile
hyperthyroidism in a green iguana {guana iguana). Journat of
Medicine and Surgery (ed. D.R. Mader), Pp. 465-472. WB
Zoo and Wildlife Medicine, 32, 465-475.
Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
Klaphake, E. (2010) A fresh look at metabolic bone diseases in
Willette, M.M., Garner, M.M. and Drew, M. (2001)
reptiles and amphibians. Veterinary Clinics of North America:
Chemotherapeutic treatment of lymphoma in a king
Exotic Animal Practice, 13, 375-392.
cobra (Ophiophagus hannah). Proceedings of the American
Klingenberg, R.J. (1996) Therapeutics. Reptile Medicine and
Association of Zoo Veterinarians/Association of Reptilian and
Surgery (ed. D.R. Mader). WB Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
Amphibian Veterinarians,Pp. 20-24.
N
8
AND
53
REPTILI
RT
Chapter 23
Reptile Diagnostic Imaging
RADIOGRAPHY
day geckos, is very useful, although minor reduction in
Introduction
the quality of the radiographs will occur.
Chelonians may be easily positioned for horizontal
The rationale behind diagnostic imaging of reptiles and
beam radiography in the conscious state by balancing
avian patients is much the same as that behind any species
the mid part of the plastron on a block or small pile of
commonly seen in general practice. The main aims are to
upturned feeding bowls so as to lift all four feet off the
ensure the rapid detection of internal foreign bodies, the
jipuno.a
presence of growths, whether they be tumours, granulo-
Snakes may be constrained manually or encouraged
mas or abscesses, as well as the enlargement/reduction of
to crawl into a perspex or plastic tube, such as can be
 internal organs due to diseases. In addition, the detection
-pe oml seu stul iauaot padel sases atuas uol apeu
of gravidity and the confirmation of fractures are com-
vantages. One is that the snake is adequately restrained
 mon reasons for radiographing a patient.
enough to allow the handler to leave the snake whilst the
There are many considerations which need to be made
radiograph is being taken. Ihe second is that it ensures
prior to attempting to radiograph a reptile or avian pa-
the snake is stretched out and avoids the confusion of in-
tient. These include
terpretation which occurs in the coiled individual.
+ Is the patient an aggressive or even venomous species
Lizards such as the green iguana (Iguana iguana) may
and therefore will require anaesthesia or chemical se-
 present more diffculty to restrain physically. However,
dation to safely radiograph?
many will quieten down when placed into a dimmed
+ Is the patient in respiratory distress, and therefore the
environment. Alternatively, the use of a heavy towel to
stress of manual restraint or chemical restraint may be
re strain the iguana initially, long enough to gently close
too high to allow safe radiography?
the eyelids and apply firm but careful pressure to the
+ What is the area that is to be viewed? In the case of rep-
eyeballs through the eyelids, can be employed. This may
tiles in particular, the absence of a diaphragm makes
be maintained manually, or replaced by a ball of cotton
viewing the lung felds (which are situated generally
 wool over each eyelid and the whole wrapped in an elas-
in the dorsal coelom) almost impossible on normal
ticated bandage to keep the pressure on. Ihis process
lateral views, and horizontal x-ray
radiography
is known as the vagovagal reflex as the pressure on the
with a standing patient is required in lizards and che-
eyeballs stimulates the vagus nerve and consequently
lonians (see Figure 23.1). Snakes due to the p
leads to the reduction in respiration rate and heart rate,
fascia which holds the coelomic organs in place can be
so creating a semi-sedated condition. This is suffcient
radiographed in a conventional vertical beam for both
to allow the iguana to be placed in lateral recumbency
lateral and dorsoventral views.
for limb radiographs, etc., without the need for chemi-
+What is the size of the patient to be radiographed?
cal restraint. However, as soon as a loud noise or other
form of stimulation occurs, the effect is abolished and
Physical restraint
the iguana becomes alert again.
Many of the more docile reptiles will remain motionless
for long enough to take dorsoventral radiographs with-
Chemical restraint
out the need for chemical restraint. The use of perspex or
-od io saiads anissaie Aian io Aiessaau aq Aeu s
Even cardboard boxes to constrain the reptile,particularly
sonous ones. Ihere are many combinations of sedatives
if they are some of the smaller lizards such as anoles and
and anaesthetic regimes available to practitioners, and it
338 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
lung feld, making radiographic evaluation inpossible.
Instead, if the x-ray machine (and local safety protocols)
Tube
will allow, the head of the machine should be moved to
fire x-rays horizontally, so allowing the reptile to be im-
aged standing upright. Ihis is also extrermely useful in
cases of coelomic fluid effusion where fluid lines become
readily apparent.
In chelonia, an additional third view is recom-
mended. This is the craniocaudal view, again utilising
the horizontal beam x-ray. Ihis view allows comparison
of the right and left lung felds, which are situated in the
dorsal aspect of the shell, and is useful for diagnosing
one-sided lesions such as granulomas or focal pneumo-
nias (Figure 23.2).
Figure 23.1 Horizontal beam radiography is necessary in lizards
In snakes, it is advised that the snake be extended in
and chelonians to obtain anatomically correct views of the coelomic
cavity due to the absence of a true diaphragm.
form before radiography is performed, as the traditional
coiled-up view of a snake makes for poor interpretation of
internal organs and the position of lesions (Figure 23.3)
is inmpossible to go into them all at this time. However,
some of the more commonly used methods in this au-
thor's practice are as follows.
· Propofol - given intravenously or intraosseously at
5-10 mg/kg will produce a short plane of near surgical
anaesthesia, allowing radiography and minor surgical
procedures to be performed. It is advised that the rep-
tile is intubated and oxygenated during this time (and
this may require manual oxygenation) to prevent hy-
poxia. Duration of sedation is from 20 to 40 minutes.
Recovery times are 30-40 minutes on average.
α Ketamine - used at doses ranging from 22 to 44 mg/kg,
preferably the lower end of the range if radiography
is the most invasive technique intended. Duration of
deep sedation is from 2 to 20 minutes. Recovery may
take 1-4 days, particularly at the higher doses and in
debilitated patients.
Positioning
As with small mammals, the need is to obtain a three-
 dimensional view of the area under investigation. To ob-
tain this the traditional two views at right angles to each
N行
other are required.
However, although a dorsoventral view is performed as
for a small marmmal patient, a lateral view is often better
RE
performed in the standing patient as mentioned above.
This is due to the anatomy of the average reptile patient,
which does not possess a diaphragm separating the lung
RT
fields from the gastrointestinal system, so creating a com
Figure 23.2 Craniocaudal horizontal beam radiographs are an
mon cavity or coelom. Ihus, if placed in lateral recum-
ad ditional useful view to compare the right and left lung fields in
chelonians. Note that the tortoise is restrained by placing it on a
bency, the gut contents will fall dorsally and obliterate the
pedestal so its feet are clear off the ground.
Reptile Diagnostic Imaging 39
at 21°C. A positive contrast urocystogram may be seen
some 8-10 hours after oral administration as the aqueous
iodine is absorbed and excreted through the kidneys.
Lizards
Intravenous techniques have been used to determine
Figure 23.3 Right lateral view of a boa constrictor. Snakes do
 blood flow through the kidneys and may be used to assess
not have to undergo horizontal beam radiography due to the
the cardiovascular system. Doses of 0.5-1 mL/kg intrave-
fascia which holds body organs in place no matter what the
snake's orientation. Note the paired ribs along the whole body, the
mously have been used.
prominent lung and air sacs surrounding the heart shadow to the
ieft of the radiograph. As the lung moves caudally the radio-dense
stomach and liver can be seen ventral to it.
Snakes
As for chelonia, although gut transit times are even faster,
Positive contrast techniques
with stomach emptying occurring within 30-45 minutes.
Barium
Normal and abnormal
 Ihe use of barium sulphate is useful for positive contrast
radiographic findings
'adan me u ioeil [eusauise au jo Adeiaope
Chelonia
Chelonia
It is difficult to view many of chelonians' internal organs
The use of 5-7 mL of a 25-30% solution of barium, ad-
due to the density of their shell. However, the heart and
ministered by stomach tube, is useful for most Mediter-
liver may be seen on lateral views using horizontal beam
ranean tortoise species. Stomach emptying time may take
 radiography, and the liver shadow may be enhanced by
up to a day, and the gut transit time from mouth to cloaca
the use of positive contrast studies and lies in a dumb-bell
may take nearly a month! Barium studies are especially
shape across midline in the caudal part of the cranial half
useful in chelonians due to the lack of detail encountered
of the chelonian.
on plain radiographs.
Metabolic bone disease (MBD) will cause deformities
of the carapace and lucencies in the pelvis and pectoral
Lizards
girdle. Over-supplementation with vitamin D, and cal-
As for chelonia. Transit times are faster, particu-
cium may lead to renal and cardiovascular mineralisa
arly in insectivorous species such as geckos, and may
tion. Bladder stones and gravidity are most easily seen in
take 24-36 hours if kept at optimal temperatures. Useful
dorsoventral radiographs.
for highlighting foreign intestinal bodies in iguanas.
Lung felds are best assessed on the lateral horizon-
tal beam radiograph and the craniocaudal horizontal
Snakes
beam radiographs. Eggs are easily seen in gravid che-
As for chelonia, with doses of barium at 5 mL/kg, although
lonians, and the most useful view is the dorsoventral
transit times are much faster with gastric emptying occur-
(see Figures 23.4-23.6).
ring in 2-3 hours and full transit time taking 4-7 days. Air
Radiography may, of course, also be used to as-
may be injected into the stomach immediately after barium
sess whether intraosseous catheters are correctly sited
to create a positive contrast technique - useful when exam-
(Figure 23.7).
ining thickening of the stomach wall as is found with some
tumours, cryptosporidiosis and abscesses.
Lizards
Internal organs of most lizards are best viewed on the lat-
lodine-based contrast
eral horizontal beam radiographs. These allow good vi-
Useful where minimal irritation is required, such as when 
 sualisation of the dorsal lung fields and the liver shadow
 gut/intestinal surgery may be planned shortly after using
(Figure 23.8). Ihe dorsoventral view, due to the absence
positive contrast techniques.
of a diaphragm, results in superimposition of the lung
felds over the liver and digestive tract, making interpre-
Chelonia
tation difficult (Figure 23.9).
 Transit times are faster with stomach ermptying occurring
The caudal coelom is occupied by the gut, which may
in 1.5-4 hours and full gut transit time taking 3-8 hours
be extensive in herbivorous species such as the green
340 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
R
Figure 23.4 Dorsoventral view of a female gravid spur-thighed
Figure 23.6 Horizontal beam craniocaudal view of the tortoise in
tortoise (Testudo graeca) showing the outlines of seven eggs. Note
Figure 23.4. This view is useful for comparing the left and right lung
the radiolucent line across the plastron which is the plastral hinge
fields to pinpoint a lesion.
typical of this species which facilitates oviposition.
K
R
Figure 23.5 Horizontal beam lateral view of the tortoise in
Figure 23.7 Dorsoventral view of a spur-thighed tortoise (Testuoo
Figure 23.4. Note the dorsally situated lungs. The eggs are more
graeca) shovwing the correct placement of an intraosseous catheter
difficult to see in this viev as they are masked by the intestinal mass.
in the distal right femur.
iguana, and may contain gas. In insectivorous and more
horizontal beam radiographs or dorsoventral views. In
中N行
omnivorous species such as geckos and monitors, the gut
 other species (e.g., monitor lizards) the heart is more
may be smaller. Large fat bodies fll the ventral and caudal 
 caudally placed and so better seen. Ihe stomach of many
53
 abdomen in many lizards and may make outlining the gut
 lizards such as the green iguana is actually quite far cau-
more difficult in obese individuals. Ihe horizontal beam
dal (Figures 23.10 and 23.11). Loss of coelomic detail can
RE
radiograph may also be used to view the renal shadow,
be associated with coelomitis such as will occur due to a
.RT III:
which if enlarged projects cranially from the pelvis on the
perforated bowel (Figures 23.12 and 23.13).
dorsal surface of the coelomic cavity.
There are members of the order Geckonidae (Uropla-
The heart in lizards may be placed so far cranially that
tus and Phelsuma spp), which store calcium in specialised
it is hidden within the sternal plate (e.g., green iguanas
structures called endolymphatic sacs. These organs lie in
and bearded dragons) and so is not visible on either
the cervical area and are readily visible (Figure 23.14).
Reptile DiagnosticImaging
341
Figure 23.8 Horizontal beam lateral view of an inland bearded
Figure 23.11 Dorsoventral view of the green iguana in Figure 23.10
dragon (Pogona vitticeps) showing the lung fields.
showing again the foreign body located in the caudally situated
stoma ch.
Figure 23.12 Horizontal beam lateral viev of a green iguana
(lguana iguana) showing loss of caudal coelomic detail due to
coelomitis from a perforated bowel. Note the small stones in the
Figure 23.9 Dorsoventral view of the bearded dragon in
 Figure 23.8 showing the now obscured lung fields due to
stomach which have been pushed dorsally to the mid coelom by
the fluid in the coelomic cavity.
 superimposition of the digestive tract.
K
 Figure 23.10 Horizontal beam lateral view of a green iguana
(lguana iguana) showing the extensive lung fields and the presence
of a foreign body (an eraser) located in its caudally situated stomach
Figure 23.13 Dorsoventral view of the green iguana in 
lying on the ventral coelomic floor.
Figure 23.12.
342 Veterinary Nursing of ExoticPets
skeletal abnormality easily detected on radiography as ra-
diopaque uric acid crystals form in the joint spaces.
 In addition dorsoventral views allow the confirmation
of pre- and post-ovulatory stasis, two conmon reproduc-
tive diseases oflizards, particularly the green iguana. Pre-
anssil-os [enaqds o oi dn Aq umous st sis1is Aroea
densities in the cranial-mid coelom, and post-ovulatory
stasis is shown by more ovoidal soft-tissue densities with
very thin calcium cortices as reptile shells are poorly
mineralised in comparison to their avian counterparts
(Figure 23.15). Ihis radiographic view also allows visu-
Figure 23.14 Dorsoventral view of a Standings day gecko
(Phe/suma stanoing) demonstrating the calcium storage glands in
alisation of bladder stones in species possessing a urinary
the neck. This is a normal radiographic finding in this species.
bladder, such as the green iguana.
Some monitor lizards (Varanus indicus, V. prasinus,
a m uon  pa aq u 
V. gouidi) can be sexed radiographically because there is
dorsoventral radiographs being the most useful, and
by comparing soft-tissue density with bone density
calcification of the hemibacula of the hemipenises.
(Figure 23.15). Long bone deformities are common in this
Snakes
condition, as are swellings and flaring of the epiphyseal
The most useful view for snakes is the lateral radiograph
plates in cases of rickets due to vitamin D3 deficiencies
as the dorsoventral view is obscured by the ribs and spinal
(most commonly seen on the costochondral junctions of
column. However, both views are recommended to ob-
 green iguanas). Ihe exoskeleton often has a moth-eaten
tain a three-dimensional image.
appearance with MBD causing the ribs to appear more
 prominent. In lizards, demineralisation is followed by
 In the lateral beam radiograph, the lung felds are
fibrous tissue proliferation around the shafts of the long
clearly seen occupying the caudal half of the frst third
of the snake, with the heart shadow clearly outlined
bones. Folding fractures are common, particularly in
(Figure 23.3). Pneumonia and fluid lines are occasionally
chronic cases of MBD. Fractures in adult reptiles are most
commonly due to trauma.
seen (Figure 23.16). Caudal to the heart shadow lie the
liver shadow and stomach followed by the gall bladder
Infectious diseases of bones (osteomyelitis) are char-
acterised by lysis and soft-tissue swelling. With septic ar-
and small intestine. Blockages of the bowel may be seen
on plain radiographs if food material is held back, but de-
thritis, there is destruction of the epiphyses of the bones
which form the joint. Articular gout may be another
termining their severity often requires positive contrast
techniques as described above (Figure 23.17).
In the cranial half of the caudal third of the snake lie the
R
kidneys and reproductive organs along the dorsal surface
of the coelom. Radiolucent areas may represent follicular
N
8
activity, and regular ovoidal soft-tissue densities along the
caudal third of the snake may indicate gravidity. For live-
bearers, such as garter snakes and boa constrictors, it is
AND
53
TIL
REP
RT III:
Figure 23.15 Dorsoventral view of a female gravid green iguana
(iguana iguana) with metabolic bone disease. Note the faint outlines
au1 1le Apoq a4t 0t aouejeadde padollens e buinib s66a au1 j0
Figure 23.16 Lateral view of a Burmese python (Python mo/urus
h au ui san o asad au pue sag paseai o
bivittatus) with pneumonia. Note the increased radiodensity of the
bones (recent left femur and part healing left humerus).
lung field in comparison with the snake in Figure 23.3.
Reptile Diagnostic Imaging 343
Lizards are easy to examine by ultrasound, although the
high placement of the heart behind the sternal shield in
species such as the green iguana may make these organs
more difficult to visualise.
Snakes are again easy to examine by ultrasound, but
only from the ventral aspect as the presence of ribs along
their length prevents lateral or dorsal examination.
Normal and abnormal
ultrasound findings
Chelonia
Thoracic inlet
The thoracic inlet allows the heart to be visualised. As
with other reptiles (except the Crocodylia), there are two
Figure 23.17 Lateral iodine contrast view of a reticulated python
(Python reticu/atus) with an intestinal obstruction. Note the partial
atria and only one ventricle. Ihis may be seen midline,
blockage to the passage of the contrast to the right of the picture
on the floor of the plastron, and just cranial to this area
is the oval thyroid gland (Figure 23.18). Enlargement is
 possible to see the skeletons of the foetuses in this region
seen in the thyroid in cases of goitre such as overfeed-
when gravid. Ihe large intestine and rectum occupy the
ing of brassicas. Ihe atrioventricular valves appear hy-
ventral surface.
perechoic. It may be possible to examine some of the
liver behind the heart structure, allowing the assessment
ULTRASONOGRAPHY
of focal lesions such as abscesses, as well as general in-
creased density as will occur in mineralisation, gout and
Physical restraint
hepatic lipidosis. Ihe anechoic gall bladder is easily vis-
Ihis is the preferred method for ultrasound examination
ible in the right lobe.
as it allows easy positioning and the observation of gut
movements, which may not be possible in a sedated or
Inguinal inlet
anaesthetised reptile.
The inguinal inlets will allow the urinary bladder to be
examined, which can be an extensive bilobed structure.
Equipment
Bladder stones are not uncommon.
 The use of a hard work top area with a section cut out to
 allow the ultrasound probe to be applied to the dependent
side of the patient is preferred.
As far as the ultrasound equipment is concerned, the
preferred size of probe is a 7.5 MHz transducer, as most
necessary to use a 'standoff' (an acoustic coupling device)
in patients under 50 g in weight and the narrower snakes.
 A standoff may be cheaply made from a latex glove finger
flled with coupling gel, or more expensive purpose-built
aq A1 1  5'1 1ao sad 1n 'inoq aq A1 sao
necessary to use a 5 MHz transducer to see internal or-
3
gans such as the liver.
In chelonia, the heart and thyroid gland may be exam-
REI
ined via the thoracic inlet and the abdomen, particularly
the liver, reproductive tract and urinary bladder, may be
Figure 23.18 Two-dimensional echocardiogram sagittal view
examined via the inlet cranial to a hindlimb. Ihe rest of
from the right side of the neck in a leopard tortoise (Stigmochelys
PART
the shell obviously limits the amount of internal organs
pardalis). LAA, left aortic arch; MPA, main pulmonary artery:
RA, right atrium; V, ventricle. (Reproduced with permission from
examinable.
Girling & Raiti, 2004, @ BSAVA)
344 Veterinary Nursing of ExoticPets
 The kidneys appear homogenous in outline with a very
skeletons and beating hearts become visible. Pre- and
narrow hypoechoic medulla. Ihey are attached to the
 post-ovulatory stasis may be determined as described for
dorsal aspect of the caudal shell. Again, gout, abscesses
chelonia.
and enlargement may be visualised by changes in density
 In sexually monomorphic lizards such as Gila mon-
and outline.
sters (Heloderma suspectum) and prehensile-tailed skinks
The female reproductive tract can be visualised easily
(Corucia zebrata), the hemipenises can be identified in
when gravid. Ihere are two ovaries, suspended from the
the ventral tail base. They appear as elongated heteroge-
underside of the carapace, caudal to the lung feld and
neous structures compared to the surrounding hormog-
cranial to the kidneys. Pre-ovulatory stasis will present as
enous muscle tissue.
the 'cluster of grapes' effect with more than 10-15 follicles
in each ovary. From each ovary, a uterine body extends
Snakes
down to the cloaca, and it is here that shelled eggs and
The heart is situated in the caudal section of the first third
post-ovulatory stasis or gravidity may be determined.
of the length of the snake. Under sedation and in relaxed
Shelled eggs are readily apparent, with the lightly min-
snakes the heart apex beat may be seen moving the ven-
eralised shell, surrounding the hypoechoic albumen,
tral scutes. Again the heart is a three-chambered struc-
around the denser yolk.
ture (see Figures 23.19 and 23.20).
The liver is a short distance caudal to the heart and
Lizards
is an elongated structure of homogeneous echogenicity.
 The heart again is a three-chambered organ, and may be
Abscesses, tumours and gout crystals may all disturb this
found anywhere from the thoracic inlet in the case of the
homogeneity. Ihe gall bladder is a separate, hypoechoic
 green iguana, to the midsection of the body in the case of
spherical organ situated immediately caudal to the liver,
 many monitor lizards.
adjacent to the splenopancreas.
The liver sits on the ventral body wall just caudal to the
The kidneys are elongated flattened structures extend-
ribcage, and is a bilobed structure with the gall bladder
ing the proximal half of the caudal third of the snake.
and caudal vena cava appearing as hypoechoic structures
 The female reproductive system is again suspended
in the right lobe. Abscesses, gross enlargement and tu-
from the dorsal body wall, with the paired ovaries lo-
 mours as well as gout may be visualised.
cated cranial to the kidneys and caudal to the stomach.
The kidneys may be located in the pelvic region in spe-
Pre-ovulatory stasis is uncommon, but ultrasonography
cies such as the green iguana, or on the caudal coelomic
is useful to determine gravidity as the thin-shelled eggs
wall dorsally in species such as bearded dragons and cha-
meleons. As the kidneys enlarge due to inflammation or
growths, they will protrude out from the pelvis region and
be easier to examine. Gout crystals indicative of advanc-
ing renal failure appear as scintillating hyperechoic areas.
The bilateral fat pads extend cranially from the pelvis.
N
V18
In cachectic animals they are reduced in size and may
even be absent. Adipose tissue is hyperechoic compared
 to other coelomic organs and is divided into lobes by hy-
 perechoic septae. In obese animals the fat bodies extend
ON
to the liver and heart and can significantly interfere with
imaging of the coelomic cavity.
The female reproductive tract may be easily visualised.
 There are two ovaries, suspended from the dorsal body
RE
wall caudal to the rib cage, follicles appearing as echo-
genic densities, increasing in density as they mature. Eggs
have a hyperechoic rim. In viviparous lizards (e.g., blue-
Figure 23.19 Two-dimensional echocardiogram (midline long axis
or sagittal view) of a normal Burmese python (Python mo/urus
RT
tongue skinks - Teliqua scincoides), foetuses are identi-
bivittatus). CP, cavum pulmonale; CV, cavum venosum;
fied by their hyperechoic signals surrounded by anechoic
HS, horizontal septum; LAA, left aortic arch; PA, pulmonary artery:
RA, right atrium. (Reproduced with permission from Girling & Raiti
fluid and membranes. In the later stages of gestation, the
2004, @ BSAVA)
Reptile Diagnostic Imaging  345
septae consisting of pulmonary vasculature and smooth
muscle. Soft tissues do not emit high-contrast signals;
however, pre-ovulatory folicles and dystrophic calcifica-
 tion may be easily defined with CT images.
MRI scanning is useful as in other species for determi-
nation of soft-tissue growths within organs and may be
applied to reptiles in a similar manner.
Both techniques require that the reptile is com-
pletely immobilised, and therefore chemical restraint is
necessary.
RIGID ENDOSCOPY
This is a useful technique in lizards and particularly che.
Figure 23.20 Two-dimensional echocardiogram short axis view
lonia. Similar equipment to that used in avian patients is
demonstrating the normal echocardiographic anatomy of a Burmese
used; however, due to the absence of air sacs, it is more
python in Figure 23.19. CaVC, caudal vena cava approaching the
sinus venosus; LA, left atrium; LAA, left aortic arch; PA, pulmonary
'adan ui sainpanand sdossaiedet uad oi io
artery; RA, right atrium; RAA, right aortic arch. (Reproduced with
For this, the use of a positive pressure system to pump
permission from Girling & Raiti, 2004, @ BSAVA)
either carbon dioxide or room air into the coelomic cavity
are easily visualised. Hyperechoic reflections may be seen
and so separate the internal organs to aid visualisation is
in viviparous species such as the garter snake and boa
helpful. Snakes, due to their elongated nature and mul-
tiple internal connective tissue compartments, are not so
constrictor due to reflections from the ribs/skeleton of
suited to this modality.
the foetus.
The hemipenises may be seen as hyperechoic areas
Further reading
caudal to the vent and either side of midline. Ihe female
Frye, F. (1991) Biomedical and Surgicat Aspects of Captive Reptile
has no similar structure, and this method may be used to
Husbandry. Krieger Publishing, Malabar, FL.
sex snakes.
Girling, S and Raiti, P. (eds) (2004) BSAVA Manual of Reptiles,
2nd edn. Blackwell Publishing, Oxford.
MRIAND CT SCANNING
Mader, D. (2006) Reptile Medicine and Surgery, 2nd edn.
WB Saunders, St Louis, MO.
Both of these techniques are useful, particularly CT scan-
McArthur, S., Wilkinson, R. and Meyer, J. (2004) Medicine and
ning in chelonia due to its ability to penetrate the bony
Surgery of Tortoises and Turles,2nd edn. Blackwell Publishing,
shell without distortion, allowing examination of the in-
Raiti, P. (2004) Non-invasive imaging. Manual of Reptiles (eds
ternal organs. Normal chelonian lungs appear as radio-
S.J. Girling & P. Raiti), 2nd edn, Pp. 87-102. BSAVA,
lucent air-flled cavities with CT images, separated by
Quedgeley, UK.
NO
REP
T:
PART
Chapter 24
Emergency and Critical Care
Medicine of Reptiles
Triage
hypoxaemic damage. Most reptiles become bradycardic
Any reptile presented unconscious, fitting, with evidence
immediately before arrest, and if this is recognised, rapid
of head trauma or respiratory distress should be attended
administration of atropine at 0.02 mg/kg can be effective.
to immediately. Reptiles which are off colour and dull
Epinephrine may be given intravenously, intraosseously
should be moved into a quiet, warm (32-38°C) vivarium
or often more effectively intratracheally.
with supplemental oxygen if there is any evidence of
tachy/hyperpnoea and should be examined as soon as
D for drugs
See Table 24.1 for a list of commonly used ‘emergency”
possible.
drugs in reptiles. It should be noted that most sick rep-
Emergency protocol 'ABC'
tiles are borderline or fully septicaemic. They tend to be
A for airway and B for breathing
attacked by their own gut bacteria, which are generally
 It should be noted that the impetus for respiration in the
Gram negative in nature, and often contain the Salmo-
reptile is not the detection of raised PaCO levels as with
nella and Pseudomonad bacterial family. Therefore, a
mammals, but detection of a lowered PaOz. Ihis means
bacteriocidal antibiotic with good action against Gram-
that if 100% oxygen is administered to a reptile, it will in
negative bacteria should be used. Ihese include the fluo-
effect not want to breathe of its own accord!
roquinolones and third-generation cephalosporins. How
Intubation of reptiles is straightforward and should
ever, other injuries may be sustained such as dog attacks,
be attempted where there is any doubt over whether the
and so anaerobic bacteria may also be implanted into
reptile is breathing or not (Figure 24.1). Ihe glottis is
wounds (Figure 24.2).
 situated at the base of the tongue and is easily visualised,
Garter and water snakes, who are fed salt-water fish
particularly in snakes. The only problems encountered
which has been previously frozen, may suffer from a rela-
are that the glottis is held closed at rest-only opening for
tive deficiency of vitamin B, (thiamine), which can lead
inspiration so an introducer may need to be used to allow
to a neurological condition (similar to cerebrocortical
intubation. Positive-pressure ventilation is necessary and
necrosis in grain-gorged cattle) manifesting as an inabil-
should aim to allow a 30% increase in body diameter with
ity to right itself and continual star gazing. Injections of
snakes and lizards, equivalent to 10-12 cmHzO pressure
vitamin B, at 25-35 mg/kg may be effective if adminis-
da  a so  ea a e 
tered quickly, and sedation with midazolam/diazepam
tiles and may be dosed as for birds and mammals
Or anaesthesia may be necessary to prevent seizuring
(Figure 24.3).
C for cardiovascular
Cardiovascular and respiratory diseases are relatively
N
The prognosis for respiratory arrest without cardiac
common, and pneumonia or lung oedema may result.
arrest in reptiles is good. With intermittent positive-
Use of diuretics such as furosemide and hydrochlorothia-
pressure ventilation (IPPV) and 100% oxygen, reversal
zide may be helpful. Oxygen therapy can be used, but care
RE
 of any anaesthesia and administration of doxapram, re-
should be taken as the impetus for breathing in reptiles is
covery is likely.
alowered PaO, rather than an elevated PaCO, as in mam-
However,cardiac arrest in reptiles carries a worse prog
mals, therefore providing 100% oxygen for even short
nosis than for mammals. Ihis is partly due to the robust-
periods of time can stop
 breathing altogether. As reptiles
ness of the heart in most r
eptiles, meaning that should
do not have a cough reflex (no diaphragm) and are rela-
arrest occur, there is usually significant myocardial
tively easy to intubate, conscious intubation of collapsed
Emergency and Critical Care Medicine of Reptiles 347
Table 24.1 Commonly used emergency and recovery medications for reptile5.
Drug
Dosage
Notes
Adrenaline
0.05-0.5 mL depending on 
Use intratracheally after intubation and IPPV
 size of reptile
with 100% 0xygen
Allopurinol
10-50 mg/kg PO SID
Reduces uric acid production to aid
management of gout
 Calcium gluconate
100 mg/kg IM/SC/intracoelomically
Hypocalcaermic tetany especially in female
egg-bound green iguanas
Ceftazidime (Fortum@ Pfizer)
20 mg/kg SC/IM/V q72h
Broad-spectrum bacteriocidal third-
 generation cephalosporin; particularly
effective against Gram-negative bacteria
 Diazepam
0.2-0.5 mg/kg IM/IV
Muscle necrosis if given IM 
Doxapram
0.5 mg/kg PO/V
Intubate and use IPPV
Enrofloxacin
 5-10 mg/kg SID
Licensed antibiotic for reptiles. Useful
against Grarm-negative bacteria but not
against anaerobes. Can cause muscle
necrosis 
Furosemide
1-5 ng/kg
Diuretic but action not known
Hydrochlorothiazide
1 mg/kg
Diuretic
 Midazolam
0.2-0.5 ng/kg IM/V
Less likely to cause muscle necrosis
than diazepam
 Meloxicam
0.2-0.3 mg/kg IM/PO SID
 Beware use if already has renal damage
Oxytocin
Chelonians 10 IU/kg IM
Uterine muscle stirmulant. May be repeated
Lizards 5-20 IU/kg IM
on max of four occasions. Useful to
Snakes 20-40 IU/kg IM
administer calcium gluconate first 
Silver sulfadliazine cream
Topical on burns/wounds
 Effective crearm against Grarm-negative
(Flammazine@ Smith & Nephew)
bacteria and sorme fungi
Vitamin B1
 25-35 mg/kg IM/PO/SC
Thiamine deficiency (fish-eating snakes)
AND
REPTILES
PArt II: I
Figure 24.1 Intubation to secure an airway is important in any
Figure 24.2 Dog-attack wounds in terrestrial chelonians are
reptile where there is doubt over respiration.
common and may result in serious trauma and infections.
348 Veterinary Nursing of ExoticPets
Figure 24.3 Hypovitaminosis B, is common in garter snakes fed
previously frozen salt-water fish and may require sedation with
midazolam/diazepam or anaesthesia in addition to vitamin B1
injections to control seizuring and star-gazing neurological signs.
Figure 24.4 Placement of ECG leads in a snake. (Reproduced with
permission from Girling & Raiti, 2004, @ BSAVA )
reptiles can be performed and IPPV administered for a
short period.
 Lizards: cranial leads are placed on the skin of the ax-
 If cardiac arrest occurs, intubation and intratracheal
illa, forelimb or neck, caudal leads on the crural or
administration of epinephrine should be attempted.
popliteal fold.
Reptiles can cope with a degree of hypoxia beyond that
· Chelonians: cranial leads are placed on the cervical or
tolerated by mammals. IPPV after intubation is essential,
axillary skin folds and caudal leads on the skin fold
although chest massage in the case of lizards and moving
caudal to the hind limb.
limbs into and out of the shell in chelonians may also be
Reptile ECGs demonstrate a P wave, QRS complex and
successful, aiding the pumping of air into and out of the
T wave pattern familiar to cardiologists. An additional SV
lungs.
waveform preceding the P wave representing depolarisation
Many nutritional and husbandry diseases are common
of the sinus venosus has been described but is a rarely seen.
 in reptiles, including metabolic bone disease and hypo-
Normal ECG findings include pleomorphism of the P
calcaemic tetany in egg-bound mature lizards such as the
wave, which may be single, peaked or biphasic. Ihe QRS
aq   0l  a   
complex is often represented as a single R wave. Long
administered in an emergency. Some of these lizards may
repolarisation phases (longer QT and ST intervals) are
fit, and diazepam or midazolam may be administered
present.
(see Table 24.1).
Allometric scaling may be used for the prediction of
heart rate (HR = 33.4 × [Wtkg - 0.25], Sedgwick, 1991),
E for ECG
assuming the reptile is maintained at its optimal body
 ECG deflections are generally small and rates, of course,
temperature.
slow. Ihe rate is dependent on the external temperature
INT
the reptile is kept at.
Other useful drugs and
In snakes, lizards and chelonians, metal crocodile
techniques
clips with fled teeth may be used. Coupling gel or surgi-
Initial assessment of the collapsed reptile
RE
cal spirit is required to optimise contact, and prolonged
An initial assessment should be made of the reptile pa-
contact time is necessary to allow the gel to penetrate the
tient before it is removed from its carry cage/box. This
keratin skin layer.
should focus on the following points:
RT
· Snakes: a base-apex reading is taken with electrodes
1. Is it potentially hazardous/dangerous to the handler?
placed two heart lengths cranial and caudal to the
(e.g, male green iguanas, snapping turtles, aggressive
heart on the lateral aspect (Figure 24.4).
snakes and unlikely but possibly venomous)
Emergency and Critical Care Medicine of Reptiles 349
2. Is it mouth breathing and therefore in possible respira-
 disease. Clinical signs of this include: abnormal shaped
tory distress?
nare(s), sinking of the globe of the eye, swelling below
3. Is it a fragile species? (many geckos will shed their tails
the globe of the eye (the region of the infraorbital si-
very easily, as will many iguanas)
nus), discharge from the eye itself, swelling of the con-
4. Is it suffering from metabolic bone disease making it a
junctiva, corneal blemishes and in the case of snakes
risk to handle? (deformed limbs, shell, spine, etc., and
evidence of a retained spectacle.
inability to support its own weight in a lizard or chelo-
3. A detailed examination of the skin/shell. This may al-
(uasand st uopuo stu isassns Aeu uenu 
low you to see areas of retained slough (snakes should
 5. How large is the animal? (many larger species of tor-
shed in one complete go, lizards in small patches
toise are surprisingly heavy and strong, and snakes
and chelonians only in small patches from the limbs
longer than 3-4 feet require more than one handler to
and head/neck/tail). It will also allow any petechiae
avoid damaging the patient and putting the handlers at
or ecchymoses to be observed which may indicate
risk).
septicaemia. Abscesses appear as firm, inspissated sub-
Whilst examining the patient from a distance to ascer-
cutaneous masses.
tain if it is safe to handle, it is a good idea to question the
4. A detailed auscultation of the lungs and air sacs. The
 owner about the husbandry of the reptile at home, i.e.,:
lungs are best auscultated from the dorsum in che-
1. What do they feed it?
lonians and lizards. To improve sound conductivity,
2. Do they feed vitamin/ mineral supplements?
a damp towel/cloth may be placed over the reptile
3. Is there a UV lamp? (may not be necessary for most
 and the diaphragm of the stethoscope applied to this.
snakes but is necessary for most lizards and chelonians)
 Snakes are diffcult to auscultate owing to their long
4. What temperature range do they keep the vivarium at?
thin lungs.
5. What hides/cage furniture is present in the tank?
5. The heart is very difficult to auscultate, and it is
6. What humidity do they keep the vivarium at?
often preferable to use a Doppler probe to assess
7. Do they have any other reptiles/pets?
blood flow throughout the heart to determine heart
8. If a snake - when did it last shed its skin, and was it a
rate. Note that heart rate and sounds for reptiles
complete shed?
are significantly different from mammals owing to
the three-chambered heart (one ventricle and two
Detailed examination of the collapsed reptile
atria) and its different construction. In addition,
Manual restraint
environmental temperatures will significantly alter
This is covered in the section on anaesthesia and analgesia
heart rates.
6. A detailed examination of the limbs may be made. Pal-
Detailed examination
pate the long bones as metabolic bone disease is com-
1. An intra-oral examination using a mouth gag or a pen/
 mon producing fibrous dystrophy where the poorly os-
pencil to encourage the reptile to open its mouth (be
sified bone swells due to cartilage deposition making
careful with chelonians as they have powerful jaws).
the limb look fat and muscular. Palpation reveals, how-
This should allow a close examination of the tongue,
ever, that it is merely bone mass and not muscle. Shells
the roof of the mouth/nasal passages (there is no hard
of chelonians may be deformed and soft to touch.
palate in reptiles other than Crocodylia). The glottis
Mandibles of lizards may be bowed and malleable with
may also be visualised at the base of the tongue. Ab-
this condition as well.
normalities such as a discharge from the nasal pas-
7. A detailed examination of the vent and caudal coe-
sages, petechiae or haemorrhages in the mouth, an ab-
 lom should also be made. Many lizards have kidneys
normal or foul odour, and evidence of white or yellow
tucked into the pelvic area, and so these should not be
plaques on the mucosa should all be noted and if pos-
palpable in front of the iliac wings in a normal animal.
sible sampled with a swab dampened with sterile water.
 Snakes may be palpated by running a finger along the
 Note that many lizards have a two-coloured tongue,
ventrum to feel for masses or obstructions. Chelonians
e.g., the green iguana has a bright red tongue tip and a
are obviously difficult to palpate, although gentle bal-
pale pink body to the fleshy tongue.
lottement of eggs or masses by placing a finger cranial
2. A detailed examination of the nares and the eyes. This
to a hind limb and rolling the animal onto its side and
1 Aroienidsan iaddn Aue jo juassass ue moe [m
away again is possible.
350 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Monitoring and vital sign
assessment
Pulse assessment
This is best performed using a Doppler ultrasound probe.
It should be attached to the skin with a generous amount
of coupling gel. The main site of attachment is around the
outflow of the heart. This is located immediately caudal to
the neck inlet in chelonians, around the mid-point of the
first third of a snake (measured from the snout), or just in
front of the point of the shoulder in most lizards.
Cardiac and respiratory auscultation
It is difficult to auscultate reptiles owing to their scaly
skin. To aid the passage of sound, wrapping the reptile
Figure 24.5 Warming all reptiles to their preferred body
in a damp cloth first and applying the diaphragm of
temperature is an essential part of their critical care.
the stethoscope to the outside of the towel can improve
sound transference. Alternatively, a Doppler probe ap-
plied over the heart (base of the neck in most lizards
3. Meningoencephalitis (usually associated with Acan-
and chelonians and 20-30% of the snout-vent length
thamoeba invadens or Gram-negative bacteria)
 in snakes) can provide an assessment of blood flow
4. Inclusion body disease (a retrovirus, particularly prev-
which can give an indication of the intensity of flow
alent in pythons and boas).
and turbulence.
Blindness and head tilts may be seen in tortoises as-
The lungs of snakes are particularly challenging to
sociated with frost damage.
auscultate due to their long drawn out nature. Chelonian
Hypocalcaemic tremors are common in female igua-
lungs are situated in the dorsal aspect of the carapace, and
nas on low-calcium diets or where no ultraviolet light has
lizard lungs are encased in the ribcage.
been provided.
The heart is not possible to auscultate in the same way a
 Panniculus reflexes can be tested as for cats and dogs
bird's or mammal's heart can due to the slow rate at which
in snakes and lizards, although of course with less success
it beats and the fact that the heart is three-chambered
in chelonians!
(there is only one ventricle). Therefore, Doppler probes
should be used to gain an idea of cardiac output, strength
Pulse oximetry
and any variations in flow.
This is not so useful in reptiles as reptile haemoglobin
is significantly different to a mammalian. However,
Neurological assessment
trends of readings are of some help as with birds. The
This can be very diffcult in reptiles, particularly ifthey are
clips/probes may be applied to the vent, tongue (if an-
not within their preferred optimum temperature zone as
aesthetised) or in thin-skinned smaller reptiles, the
they will be sluggish and lethargic if too cold. All critically
extremities.
ill reptiles should be gradually warmed to their preferred
body termperature to assess them fully and to support
Blood biochemistry
ON
their normal physiological functions (Figure 24.5).
It should be noted that, as with birds, uric acid is the only
One of the commonest neurological problems is loss
useful indicator of renal function, although usually less
of the righting reflex in snakes, i.e., they continually flip
than one quarter of the kidneys need to be left function-
onto their backs. This may be associated with the follow-
ing before uric acid levels become elevated. Urea and
REI
ing conditions:
creatinine levels do not provide information on renal
1. Vitamin B, deficiency (garter/water snakes who are fed
function in reptiles.
 defrosted frozen fish as this contains large amounts of
As with birds, no one parameter is specific for liver
thiaminases)
damage, although AST is more useful than ALT.
2. Permethrin/organophosphate toxicity
(overzealous
A very rough guide to average plasma biochemistry
owners treating their snakes for mites)
values is provided in Table 24.2.
Emergency and Critical Care Medicine of Reptiles 351
Table 24.2 Broad range plasrma biochemistry values for reptiles.
 Parameter
Value
Notes
Total protein (g/L)
44-65
Albumin (g/L)
13-30
AST (IU/L)
20-80
Not liver specific, also found in muscle
CK (IU/L)
400-600
Only found in muscle
LDH (IU/L)
200-350
Not liver specific, also found in muscle including cardiac
Calcium (mmol/L)
2-3
May be elevated in female reptiles around egg production
 Phosphorus (mmol/L)
1-1.85
Glucose (rnrnol/L)
8-18
Budgerigars may be seen with glucagon-associated dliabetes mmellitu5;
birds of prey may be seen with hypoglycaemia associated with
exercise when malnourished - glucose levels usualy <2 mmol/L
Uric acid (μmol/L)
150-350
Gout (precipitation of uric acid) occurs when levels exceed 1500
May be transiently elevated in snakes irmmediately after a mmeal
Haematology
Volumes of water/true urine should be small in
All blood samples in reptiles should be collected in hepa-
a healthy reptile's dropping. If they are very watery,
rin as potassium EDTA lyses the red cells of many reptiles.
as opposed to diarrhoea, then this may indicate
As with biochemistry, values vary between species. Some
polyuria. Specific gravity of reptile urine is around
indication of PCV across reptile species has been given in
1.005-1.010.
Chapter 17. In general white cell counts are in the range of
 2-8 × 10°/L. During an infection, there is often no change
Monitoring and treatment of
in the overall white cell count and, therefore, creating a
acute hypovolaemia
blood smear is a vitally important diagnostic technique
Central venous and arterial pressure monitoring in rep-
The reptile equivalent of the neutrophil, as in birds, is
tiles is technically difficult to measure. Non-invasive
the heterophil.
blood pressure monitoring is also poorly understood in
Erythrocytes and platelets in reptiles are nucleated. The
reptiles, and some evidence suggests discrepancies be-
erythrocytes are rugby ball shaped with a similar shaped
tween invasive and non-invasive methods. Part of the
nucleus. Ihe platelets are oval and smaller. Other cells
problem is that reptiles are ectothermic, and this means
are similar to those seen in mammals except occasionally
the environmental temperature has significant effects
you may see a circulating plasma cell (type of lymphocyte
on systemic blood pressure. A study in green iguanas
which produces antibodies), particularly in the face of a
indicates that systolic mean blood pressure is 43 mm Hg
chronic infection. Also in snakes, large numbers of so-
and diastolic mean blood pressure is 29 mm Hg (Mosley
called 'azurophils (darkly basophilic staining monocytic
et al., 2004). In snakes there appears to be a relationship
cells) may indicate chronic infection.
between the size of the snake and its blood pressure: the
larger the snake, the higher the blood pressure (Mosley,
Urinalysis
2005).
This is less useful than for mammals owing to the faecal
Non-invasive methods can be applied as follows: in
contamination which occurs with reptile urine. However,
chelonians and lizards, a cuff may be placed at the most
it is important to look at the urates (white portion of the
proximal point on the forelimb and the Doppler probe
dropping) to se if there is any blood, or if the urates have
applied above the carpus on the ventral aspect to cover
turned mustard yellow or lime green. If the latter has oc-
the brachial artery. Ihe cuff is inflated as with mammals
curred, this is evidence of biliverdinuria, which in reptiles
to occlude blood flow and then deflated until flow oc-
 as in birds is an indicator of liver inflammation/damage.
curs which is the maximum systolic pressure. In snakes
 Biliverdin is the main excretory product of the liver as op-
the cuff is applied just caudal to the cloaca, and the
 posed to bilirubin in mammals.
 probe is applied to the ventral tail artery distal to this.
352 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
Various studies have suggested that indirect systolic pres-
sure varies from 30 to 63 mm Hg (Martinez-Jimenez &
Hernandez-Divers, 2007).
Reptiles can survive significant haemorrhage be-
cause of the rapid shift of interstitial fluids into the
circulation. However, this does not remove the need to
replace fluid or blood losses to stabilise blood pressure.
The amounts required can be assessed using blood
pressure and heart rate. Expected heart rates can be
calculated as mentioned in the section on ECGs above.
However, it is important that reptiles are maintained
at their preferred body temperature to accurately as-
sess this due to their ectothermic nature. Bolus admin-
istration of fluids should be attempted intravenously
or intraosseously until correction of blood pressure.
 is essential to aid the recovery of serious injuries such as this
Crystalloids are administered at a rate of 10 mL/kg and
full-thickness skin and muscle thermal burn in a bearded dragon
colloids, such as Hetastarch or Oxyglobin?, can be ad-
(Pogona vitticeos) due to a broken thermostat in a heated artificial
ale sasnioq omi io auo Aensn - Bx/Tu s ie paiaisiu
rock.
required. In larger species 5 mL/kg of 7.5% hypertonic
saline may be used once or twice to increase systolic
Remember that MER (metabolic energy requirement)
blood pressure.
is generally 1.5-2x the BMR (basal metabolic require-
ment), and if disease is present then this further amplifes
Calculation of fluid requirements for reptiles
the required calories (sepsis and burns for example may
Please see Chapter 22 for fluid therapy in reptiles.
increase MER by 2-3x).
Supportive therapy
Nebulisation
Ongoing medication
Achieving therapeutic levels of any antibiotic in in-
 Some antibiotics efective against Gram-negative bacte-
fected reptile lungs is difficult. The blood-air barrier is
ria include the third-generation cephalosporins, third-
thicker in reptiles than in mammals, plus reptiles have
 generation penicillins, aminoglycosides and fluoroqui-
a poorly developed or absent cough reflex. Add to this
nolones. It is important to note that many reptiles will
the fact that caseous, impenetrable purulent discharges
need to be on antibiotics for considerable periods of time
are common, and many of the most effective antibi-
(months rather than weeks) due to their often advanced
otics such as aminoglycosides are potentially toxic if
state of infection - once finally seen - and due to their
given in effective doses systemically, it can be seen that
slower metabolism.
a topical respiratory method such as nebulisation of a
 Ongoing fluid therapy is also very important whether
drug is attractive. Although the possibility exists that a
it be regular warm water baths in the mildly dehydrated
significant proportion of the drug could be absorbed
individuals, or intravenous/intraosseous fluids in the
across an inflamed respiratory epithelium, signs of
severely dehydrated ones as kidney failure is common.
e.g., aminoglycoside-related nephrotoxicity are not
ON
Analgesia is also vitally important where there are seri-
seen following aerosolised administration of these
ous injuries (Figure 24.6).
drugs. Other drugs suitable for nebulisation include
antiseptic-disinfectants (F10; Health & Hygiene Ltd.),
Critical care nutrition including calculation of
soluble steroids in inflammatory conditions, broncho-
RE
energy requirements
dilators and agents aimed at reducing the viscosity of
 Calculation of energy requirements can be made using
respiratory secretions.
the formula:
Assisted feeding techniques and foods
BMR =k X(weight [kg])0.75
For information on oesophagostomy tubes placement -
where k the constant is 10 for all reptiles.
please see Chapter 22. For initial emergency nutrition,
Emergency and Critical Care Medicine of Reptiles 353
as with birds, the use of products such as Vetark Pro-
to rehydrate the patient before attempting to feed. Ini-
fessional Ltd’s Critical Care Formula is useful to give
tial feeding after this should be started off at very low
simple sugars and amino acids. For further nutrition, the
levels: 50% of the requirement for the current weight
carnivorous species may be administered products such
of the reptile. Otherwise, excess calories and proteins
as Hills a/d or Virbac's Reanimyl, and the herbivores/
cause a rapid uptake of glucose from the bloodstream
 onmnivores may be given vegetable-based baby foods such
into the cells, which takes potassium and phosphorous
 as Milupa or Cow and Gate (avoid lactose-containing
with it. This can lead to a life-threatening hypokalaemia/
products).
hypophosphataemia. The monitoring of blood phos-
To encourage anorectic snakes to eat, a number of
phorus and potassium is therefore to be recommended
tricks may be employed including:
when treating chronically anorectic reptiles whether
1. Warming the prey before offering by heating it in a pot
carnivorous or herbivorous.
of hot water.
Tortoises can be stomach tubed by measuring from
2. Breaking the prey item open to release the scent of
the extended tip of the head to the caudal edge of the
blood.
large abdominal scutes on the plastron. Most tortoises
3. Teasing the snake by moving the dead prey item
of 2-3 kg may be stomach tubed with 10-15 mL of feed
around the cage with forceps, to mimic live prey.
at one time.
4. Try a variety of colours of prey, some snakes will only
Lizards may be gavaged liquid feed as for mammals, or
take dark furred rodents.
again tubed. It is important to use a mouth gag when tub-
5. To get a snake used to eating rodent prey after only eat-
 ing reptiles to prevent the tube being bitten in half.
ing fish (such as garter and water snakes) or amphib-
In all cases, feeding by stomach tube should be the last
ians (Hog-nosed snakes), wipe the rodent to be offered
thing you do to a reptile before putting it back into its
with the previously taken food item to transfer scent.
vivarium, otherwise the reptile will become distressed
6. Ensure that there are plenty of areas to hide; some
and regurgitate its feed.
boids and pythons like to consume their prey in a box/
hide.
Nursing of wounds
 7. Leave the prey in overnight, some species prefer to
Open wounds are generally of two main types in reptiles:
hunt at night.
thermal burns and infections. It is important therefore
8. Going to the next smallest size of rodent, so if adult
to ensure correct antibiotic coverage for these wounds.
mice were previously offered try fuzzies, if juvenile
As most reptile infections are due to Gram-negative
rats, try adult mice, etc.
bacteria, it makes sense to use fluoroquinolones and
The term 'pinkies' refers to nude neonatal rat and mice
third-generation cephalosporins.
pups, fuzzies' refers to week-old rat and mice pups with a
Povidone-iodine diluted to 1:30 with water may be
thin covering of fur and furries' refers to juvenile rat and
used to clean infected wounds. Topical medications such
mice pups of a few weeks of age (1-3) which have a soft
as silver sulfadiazine creams have good effcacy against
but longer covering of fur.
Gram-negative bacteria as does the use of topical eye
If the reptile will not eat, then most species of snakes
drops containing gentamicin. Where an infected wound
and chelonians may be stomach tubed relatively easily if
is present, daily changing of any dressings is advised.
they do not want to feed of their own accord.
Dressings which may be sutured to the skin around
In snakes, a dog urinary catheter is used and inserted
large wound deficits include Granuflex?, Melolin? and
to approximately the caudal end of the frst third of the
Veterinary BioSISt?. Ihe former should be used where
snake (roughly where the stomach lies). The volume
the infection is under control and is excellent for en-
given depends on the size of the snake with a 100 g garter
couraging granulation tissue to form.In many cases
snake getting a maximum of 4-5 mL and a 30 kg Burmese
this primary dressing is all that is required, particularly
python getting up to 100-200 mL.
when sutured to the patient as reptiles rarely remove
It is very important to ensure that in snakes in par-
dressings, the problem being, especially in snakes, that 
ticular, the patient is rehydrated before feeding high-
dressings are difficult to attach in the first place unless
protein meals. This is because of the refeeding syndrome
sutured.
which briefly is as follows: if anorexia in a snake or
Gels such as Intrasite or Nugel may be used to cover
other reptile has persisted for some time, it is essential
the surface of wounds and promote further healing.
354 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
References
Sedgwick, C.J. (1991) Allometrically scaling the database
Martinez-Jimenez, D. and Hernandez-Divers, S.J. (2007)
for vital sign assessment used in general anesthesia of
Emergency care of reptiles. Veterinary Clinics of North
zoological species. Proceedings: American Association of Zoo
America: Exotic Animal Practice, 10(2), 557-586.
Veterinarians, USA, Pp. 360-369.
Mosley, C. (2005) Anaesthesia and analgesia in reptiles. Serminars
in Avian and Exotic Pet Medicine, 14, 243-262.
Further reading
Mosley, C., Dyson, D. and Smith, D. {2004) The cardiovascular
Girling, S. and Raiti, P. (eds) (2004) BSAVA Manual of Reptiles,
dose-responsive effects of isoflurane alone and combined with
2nd edn. Blackwell Publishing, Oxford.
butorphanol in the green iguana (Iguanα iguana). Veterinary
Anaesthesia and Anaigesia,31,64-72.
N
18
AMPI
AND
REPTILES
PART III:I
Appendix 1
Legislation Affecting Exotic Pet
Species in the United Kingdom
Convention on lnternational
currently recommends subcutaneously in the left thigh
Trade in Endangered Species
region. IThe chip is to be implanted as soon as the plas-
(CITeS)
tral length of the tortoise exceeds 100 mm. New so-called
Broadly this is the list of endangered species around the
'mini' microchips are now available making implantation
world, categorised into
of smaller individuals possible.
· Appendix 1 contains those species highly endangered
 in which international trade is banned.
Health and Safety at Work
Act 1974
*Appendix 2 contains those species considered seriously
threatened in which trade is again banned or at least
It is important to remember that many wildlife cases carry
heavily controlled.
zoonotic diseases, such as Salmonella spp., rabies-related
· Appendix 3 contains those species which are at risk,
viruses in some wild bat populations, Yersinia pseudotu-
berculosis in many rodents and lagomorphs, chlamydio-
and in which international trade is restricted.
sis in many wild birds and psittacine species, etc. Many
In the United Kingdom, these lists are enforced by
species of exotic pet may be aggressive when stressed or
European Union Control of Trade in Endangered Species
laws or COTES regulations (Council Regulation 339/97
ill, and will readily turn on the handler. Unpleasant bites.
and Commission Regulation 939/97) wherein the species
scratches or worse can result.
are divided into four groups:
The veterinary nurse (and other members of staff) has
· Annex A includes species such as the Mediterranean
an obligation to avoid hazards and prevent accidents and
tortoises, for example, the Greek or spur-thighed tor-
accidental cross infection in the workplace. In addition,
toise (Testudo graeca). It also includes many endan-
the employer has an obligation to ensure that facilities
 gered species of native bird, such as the red kite.
and training of staff are sufficient to minimise the risks of
·Annex B includes all species under CITES Appendix 2
handling and treating these animals.
and some other species.
Welfare of Animals Act 2006/
· Annex C includes all species barring one or two under
Welfare of Animals (Scotland)
CITES Appendix 3.
Act 2006
· Annex D includes non-CITES species which are con-
sidered as needing protection by the European Union.
This is now the primary UKlegislation regarding the wel-
fare of animals in captivity. As such, it covers all of the
It is important to note that any person selling a species
species we deal with in this text but also deals with wild-
listed in Annex A must have a licence, as well as having
life cases during the time they are held in captivity for
some form of permanent identification of that individual
treatment or rehabilitation. It not only makes it an offence
to prove its identity.
 In the case of the Mediterranean tortoise species, the
to have treated any such captive animal cruelly, but also
vendor must have a licence to prove that the mother of
makes it an ofence to omit or do something which will
lead to suffering at some point in the future.
the hatchling is captive bred, or was obtained before the
regulations came into force. The hatchling must be sold
Protection of Animals
currently with a licence from the government and with
Act 1911-1964
an electronic identification chip that is to be implanted in
Under this legislation, it is an offence to treat a captive
a standard site. The British Veterinary Zoological Society
animal cruelly or to cause it unnecessary suffering. This
Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets, Second Edition. Edited by Simon J. Girling. @ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
356 Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets
ensures that all cases receive proper care and attention, 
ed Kingdom (as listed in Schedule 9 of the Act). With
and that their accommodation is of the correct dimen-
regard to UK wildlife, it also prohibits the release of
sions and provides suitable shelter from other animals
 so-called non-native species such as the grey squirrel,
as well as excessive noxious stimuli. Most of its points of
the sika deer and the Canada goose amongst others. Ihis
legislation have been reinforced or amended by the Ani-
makes treatment of such animals only sensible if they are
mal Welfare act 2006.
to then be kept in captivity for the rest of their lives.
Abandonment of Animals
Dangerous wild Animals Act 1976
Act 1960
as amended
Under this legislation, it is an offence to release any wild
This applies to the private keeping of species, other than
animal that is not in a fit state to survive in the wild.
those in pet shops, zoos, circuses or areas designated
Examples include release of birds of prey with foot inju-
under the Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986
ries or beak injuries, release of mammals with fractures
considered dangerous to public health and welfare and
etc. Most of its points of legislation have been reinforced
 listed in the legislation. Ihis includes all venomous spe-
or amended by the Animal Welfare act 2006.
cies of reptile as well as Crocodylia and some of the ratite
family of birds. It does not affect the veterinary profes-
Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981
sion's ability to treat these animals but does licence and
With regard to exotic pets, this legislation prohibits the
restrict private ownership and care to people deemed fit
release of non-native species into the wild in the Unit-
to do so.
Appendix 2
Useful Addresses
British Veterinary Zoological Society
Association of Avian Veterinarians
(This society welcomes veterinary surgeons, students, and
(Ihis association welcomes veterinary nurses/technicians
veterinary nurses alike)
and produces a quarterly peer-reviewed journal as well as
Mr. D.G. Lyon BVSc, MRCVS, Administrative Director
an annual conference)
Website: www.bvzs.org
Website: www.aav.org
British Chelonia Group
Association of Reptilian and Amphibian Veterinarians
Website: www.britishcheloniagroup.org.uk
(This association welcomes veterinary nurses/technicians
and produces a quarterly peer-reviewed journal as well as
Tortoise Trust
an annual conference)
Website: www.tortoisetrust.org
Website: www.arav.org
Forum: www.tortoisetrustforum.org
Rabbit Welfare Association & Fund
(Incorporating the British House Rabbit Association)
Website: www.rabbitwelfare.co.uk
A
anaesthetic monitoring
avian cholera 198
A,B,C
birds 164
avian influenza virus 200
birds 234
reptiles 280
avian leukosis/sarcoma virus
rabbits 122
 small mammals 45
196, 203
reptiles 345
anaesthetic supportive therapy
avian papillomatosis 188, 195
small mammals 126
birds 165
avian reovirus 196
 Abandonment of Animals Act 1960
reptiles 280
avian respiratory cycle 138
356
small mammals 44
avian skeleton 134
aberrant conjunctival overgrowth 68
analgesia
avian tuberculosis 195
abscesses (reptile) 297
amphibians 284
aviary flights 152
 acanthomoebic meningoencephalitis 312
birds 167
avipox virus 187, 197
acepromazine 40, 275
reptiles282
avocado toxicity (guinea-pigs) 78
 acidophilic macrophage pneumonia 70
small mammals 46
axial skeleton
 acute renal disease
Angiostrongylus vasorum 87
chinchilla 15
avian 202
Animal Welfare Act/ Animal Welfare Act
dipmunk 19
rabbit 65
(Scotland) 2006, see Welfare of
ferret 23
 adenovirus (bearded dragons) 305
Animals Act
gerbil/hamster 12
Aelurostrongylus abstrusus 87
anisodactyl 136
guinea-pig 14
air capillaries 137
Anseriformes 133
rabbit 3
air sacs 137, 138
antimuscarinic medications 40, 162
rat/mouse 8
catheterisation 164
antitrochanter 135, 136, 137
azurophil 262
mites 197
apendicular skeleton
tube placement 164
apterylae147
B
Aleutian disease 86
chinchilla 15
Balantidium coli78
alfaxalone 41, 276
chipmunk 19
barbering 69, 80
alula 134, 135, 147
ferret 24
beak 132
amphibian diseases 315
gerbil/hamster 12
behaviour
treatment 335
guinea-pig 15
chipmunk 33
ampulla coli4
rabbit 3
ferret 34
amyloidosis (rats/mice) 70
rat/mouse 8
gerbil/hamster 30
anaemia (avian) 201
Arcanobacterium pyogenes 85
guinea pig/chinchilla 32
anaesthetic circuits
arginine vasotocin (AVT) avian 142
marsupials 33
birds 164
Ascaridia columbae 193
rabbit 28
reptiles 279
Ascaridia platycerci 193
rat/mouse 29
small mammals 44
Aspergiltius spp./aspergillosis
benzocaine 284
anaesthetic equipment
birds 197, 199
 benzodiazepine premedicants 40,
amphibians 283
rats 70
162, 275
birds 165
reptiles 300
biochemistry
reptiles 279
Aspiculuris tetraptera 69
avian 206, 240
anaesthetic induction
Association of Avian Veterinarians357
reptile 314, 350, 351
amphibians 283
 Association of Reptile and Amphibian
biological parameters
birds 162
Veterinarians 357
birds 238
reptiles 276
atherosclerosis 64, 201
dipmunk 19
small mammals 41
Kdope
ferret 23
anaesthetic maintenance
rats 69
gerbil/hamster 12
amphibians 283
birds 188
guinea pig/chinchilla/degu 15
birds 163
Atoxoplasma (Isospora) sp 201
 marsupials 21
reptiles 277
atropine 40, 162, 275
rabbit 3
small mammals 43
autotomy 246, 312
rat/mouse 8
Veterinary Nursing of Exotic Pets, Second Edition. Edited by Simon J. Girling. @ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Index 359
bladder, urinary
calcium requirements
rat/mouse 9
ferret 24
birds 175
snakes 249
gerbil/hamster 13
reptiles 291
 carpometacarpal luxation 204
rabbit 5
small mammal 54
carprofen 46, 47, 168, 282
rat/mouse 9
Candida aibicans infection birds 188,
561 ds vodso.
blister disease 297
190, 191
casting (avian restraint) 159
bock perch 155
Capilaria aerophila 87
cataracts (rabbits) 67
bood feather 148
Capilaria obsignata 193
cavian type C leukaemia virus 78
bood sampling 
capillariasis 191, 193
cere 134
birds 161
capture (escaped avian patients) 160
cervical lymphadenitis 77
ferret 24, 39
carapace 255, 256, 257
cdhalaziferous region (avian) 145
gerbil/hamster 13, 39
carbohydrate requirements
guinea-pig/chinchilla 16, 39
birds 172
impaction 75
marsupials 22, 39
reptiles and amphibians 288
prolapse 75
rabbit 5, 39
small mammals 51
chelonian herpes virus 302, 306, 307
rat/mouse 9, 39
cardiomyopathy
chemical restraint
 snake 249
birds 201
amphibian 283
bood transfusion
chinchilla 81
avian 161
avian 166, 211
hamsters 76
reptilian 274
reptile 321
 marsupial 84
 small mammals 39
small mammals 92, 127, 128
reptiles 307
Cheyletiella parasitivorax 59, 77
 Blue fur disease 60
cardiomyopathy (ferrets) 87
Chirodiscoides caviae 77
Bordetella bronchiseptica 64, 78, 81, 86
cardiovascular disease
Chlamydophila
 Bornavirus of psittacine birds 192
amphibians
caviae 78
bow perch 155
treatment 189
muridarum 70
bowls 26, 29
avian 201
psittaci (birds) 189, 195, 197, 198
brachial artery (avian) 143
chinchilla 81
psittaci(chinchilla)82
brachial vein (avian) 143
treatment 105
SpP. (reptiles and amphibians) 315
bristle feathers 148
ferret 87
chlorine requirements
British Chelonia Group 357
treatment108
birds 176
British Veterinary Zoological Society
gerbil 73
 reptiles and amphibians 292
357
treatment 103
 small mammal 55
Bruce effect 11
guinea-pig 78
choanal slit 134, 137
bumblefoot 188
hamster 76
chromodacryorrhoea 68, 69
bumblefoot (treatment) 216
marsupial 84
chronic progressive nephrosis 71,
buprenorphine 47, 167, 282,284
treatments 107
76, 78
burns (reptiles) 301
rabbit 64
chronic renal disease
bursa of Fabricius 144
treatment 100
avian 202
butorphanol 47, 167, 275, 282, 284
rat/mouse 71
rabbit 65
treatment 102
reptiles 308
c
reptile 307
Chrysosporium anamorph of Nanizziopsis
caecocolic disease 80
treatment 189,332
vriesii (CANV) 300
caecotroph 5
cardiovascular support (rabbits) 123
chytridiomycosis (Batrachochytrium
caecum (rabbit) 4
cardiovascular system
dendrobatidis) 315
cage requirements
amphibian 264
cilia associated respiratory bacillus (CAR)
avian 150
avian 142
70
chinchilla 31
chelonia 258
CITES (Convention on the International
chipmunk 32
chipmunk 20
Trade of Endangered Species) 355
ferret 34
crocodylia 260
classification
gerbil/hamster 29
ferret 24
amphibian 262
guinea pig 31
gerbil/hamster 13
avian 132, 170
marsupial 33
guinea pig/chinchilla 16
reptiles 246, 286
rabbit 26
lizards 253
small mammal 3, 49
rat/mouse 28
marsupials 22
clavicles 134, 135
calamus 147, 148
rabbit 5
claws (avian) 147
360 Index
caviae 77
digestive system disease
avian 141
criceti 74
 treatment for
snake 248
merioni 72
birds 218, 219
Clostridium
dental disease
chinchillas 105
perfringens62
chinchilla 80
chipmunks 106
piliformae, see Tyzzer's disease
ferret 85
ferrets 107
spiriformiae 62
guinea-pig 77
gerbils 103
Cochiosoma spp 193
rabbit 61
 sd-
Coenurus serialis 59
dental formula
hamsters 103
colic 80
chipmunks 19
marsupials 106
compulsive egg laying treatment (avian)
ferrets 24
rabbits 99
204
gerbils/hamsters 12
rats/mice 102
 computed tomography (CT) scanning
guinea pigs/chinchillas 16
reptiles 331
120, 232, 345
mice 9
Diroflaria immitis 84,87
conjunctivitis (rabbits) 67
rabbits 3
distemper virus 85, 86
constipation (chinchillas) 80
rats 9
down feathers 147, 148
 contour feathers 147
dental layout (snakes) 246
 drug toxicities (small mammals) 294
 copper requirements
Dermabacter spp. 300
 561 su aed y
birds 177
Dermayssus gallinae 82, 185
 s  
small mammal 55
Dermatophius congolensis 300
dysecdysis 251, 297
coprodeum
Devriesea agamarum 302
dystocia
avian 141
diabetes mellitus
ferrets 89
reptile 248,253,257,
birds 197
guinea-pigs 79
258, 260
ferrets 88
coracoid 134, 135
guinea-pigs 79
E
Corynebacterium kutscheri 70, 75
hamsters 76
ear
COTES (Control of Trade in Endangered
reptiles 305
amphibian 263
Species) Regulations 355
diastema 4, 9, 12, 16, 19
avian 136
cranial nerves (avian) 132
diazepam 40,123, 162, 275
reptile 259
crop 139
digestive disease
ecchymoses 298
burns 191
avian 190
ecdysis 251, 297
161 uodu
chinchilla 80
ectoparasites
tubing 242
chipmunk 82
avian 185
Cryptococcus neoformans 83
ferret 85
treatment 216
ryptosporidiosis 83, 194, 302
gerbil 73
reptiles 299
Cryptosporidium
guinea pig 77
treatment 320
serpentes 302
hamster 75
 small mammals
wrairi 78
marsupial 83
treatment 99, 101, 102, 103, 104,
Ctenocephalides
rabbit 61
105, 106, 107
canis 68, 85
rat/mouse 69
ectoparasites (small mammals) 59, 68, 72,
felis 68, 85
reptile 302
74, 76,82, 83, 84
cutaneous epitheliomas, see hamster
digestive system
egg incubation (reptiles) 261, 270
papovavirus
amphibian 264
egg-binding (avian) 204
cystic ovarian disease (rodents) 73, 74,
avian 139
egg-binding/post ovulatory stasis (reptile)
76,77, 79
chelonia 257
310
cystitis - rabbits 64
chipmunk 19
egg-yolk coelomitis 204, 311
Cytodites nudus 197
crocodylia 260
Eimeria spp. 62, 193
ferret 24
electrocardiogram (ECG)
D
gerbil/hamster 12
birds 235, 236
 Dangerous Wild Animals Act 1976
guinea pig/chinchilla 16
rabbit 123
246, 356
lizards 252
reptiles 348
Dasymetra spp. 306
marsupials 21
 small mammal 127
degenerative radiculoneuropathy 72
rabbit 3
emergency airway access
Demodex
rat/mouse 8
birds 234, 235
aurati74
snakes 247
rabbits 122
Index 361
reptiles 346,347
 rat/mouse 11
small mammals 91
 small mammals 126
eye (avian) 136
maintenance requirements
emergency and critical care medicine
birds 209
birds 234
F
reptiles 319
rabbits 122
falcon herpes virus 195
small mammals 91, 92
reptiles 346
Falconiformes 133
post surgical requirement
 small mammals 126
fats and essential fatty acid requirements
reptiles 320
emergency and critical care monitoring
birds 171
birds 166, 209
birds 239
reptiles and amphibians 288
small mammals 91
reptiles 348, 350
small mammals 50
rabbit 124
srp Aouaa
feather cysts 189
reptiles 319
birds 235, 236
feather plucking 185
small mammals 91, 127
rabbits 123
folliculogenesis
treatment 217
reptiles 347
feather structure 147
avian 146
 small mammals 126
feathers 147
reptile 258
Encephalitozoan cuniculi 65,67
feeding frequencies (reptiles) 294
foramen of Panizzi 260
endocardiosis 87
femoral vein (avian) 144
fostering
endocrine disease
femur(avian) 136
chipmunk 33
ferret 88
fentanyl/fluanisone, see Hypnorm
ferret 35
treatment 108
fibre requirements
gerbil/hamster 31
gerbil 73
birds 172
guinea pig/chinchilla 32
62 81d-zauna
 reptiles and amphibians 288
marsupials 33
hamster 75
 small mammals 51
rabbit 28
treatment 103
fibroadenomas 72
rat/mouse 29
endocrine system (marsupials) 22
filo-plume feathers 148
fracture management
endoparasites
fitting (birds) 205
avian 221,222
avian 186, 193
Flavobacterium spp. 315
reptile 334
treatment 218
fleas
fractures
reptiles 302
ferret 85
birds 204
treatment 331
rabbit 59
guinea-pigs 80
small mammals 62, 69, 73, 75, 78, 81,
rabbits 66
rats/mice 68
83, 86
fluid administration
reptiles 312
treatment 99,102, 103, 104, 105,
equipment
fret marks 189
106, 107
birds 211
fur ring 80
endoscopy (birds) 232, 345
reptiles 322
fur slip 80
endotracheal intubation
small mammals 93
furcula 135
avian 164
routes for
fusus coli 4
rabbit 43
amphibians 328
reptile 278
birds 213
G
Entamoeba invadens 303,306,312
reptiles323
gabapentin 168
Entamoeba muris 69
small mammals 93
gallamine 276
Entamoeba ranarum 316
fluid requirements
gastric ulceration 86
entamoebiasis 303
calculations
gastro-intestinal tract innervation (avian)
Entomelas spp.306
birds 211
141
environmental enrichment (reptiles) 268
reptiles 321
gastropeges 246
environmental temperature and nutrition
small mammals 92
gauntlet 158
(reptiles) 294
fluid therapy
Giardia muris 69
 eosinophilic granulomatous pneumonia 70
birds 209
Giardia spp. 81, 83, 193
epilepsy (gerbils) 74
disease requirements
gills (amphibian) 263
erythema 298
birds 209
gizzard see ventriculus
Escherichia coli 81, 82, 85
reptiles 319
glaucoma (rabbits) 67
exophthalmos (rabbits) 68
small mammals 91
Gliricola porcelli 77
Aoe aa
 fluid types used in
glottis
guinea pig/chinchilla 19
birds 210
avian 134
rabbit 7
reptiles 320
reptile 247, 248, 252, 257,260
362 Index
glycopyrrolate 40, 123,162,275
hemipenal prolapse 311
gnatotheca 133
hemipenes 250
iliac vein
gout 205, 293, 308
hepatic lipidosis
common (avian) 144
Graphidium strigosum 62
chinchillas 81
internal (avian) 144
grey patch disease 300
ferrets 86
inclusion body disease (IBD) (snakes)
guinea pig poxvirus 77
rabbits 63
303,307,313
Gyropus ovalis 77
reptiles 305
infundibulum
hepatic lymphoma 86
avian 145
H
heptic lipidosis (birds) 196
reptile 250
haematological disease (avian) 201
Heterakis isolonche 193
ingluvitis 190
haematology
heterophil 149, 262
innominate artery 1, 24
avian 149, 240
Hexamita spp. 193, 303
insulinoma 88
ferret 25
Hippoboscidae 186
 integumentary sense organs 262
gerbil/hamster 14
Histomonas meleagriditis 193
intermittent positive pressure ventilation
guinea pig/chinchilla 18
Holomenopon spp. 186
(IPPV) 43, 165, 279
marsupials 23
hood 158
intestinal lymphoma 86
rabbit 7
hormonal skin disease (avian) 189
iodine requirements
housing
rat/mouse 11
birds 177
reptilian 262, 350
hospital (avian) 157
reptiles and amphibians 292
haematuria (rabbit) 65
I (da eds
ss jeuueu eus
haemochromatosis 195
Anseriformes 156
iridovirus (reptiles) 307
Haemodipsus ventricosis 59
Columbiformes 155
iris (avian) 136
haemoparasites
raptors 153
iron requirements birds 176
birds 201
reptiles 266
ischiadic artery (avian) 143
reptiles308
humerus (avian) 135
ischiadic nerve (avian) 132
hamster papovavirus 74
humidity requirements (reptiles) 267
isoflurane 42, 163, 277, 284
handling
hydronephrosis
Iospora amphiboluri 304
amphibian 283
rabbits 66
Ixodes ricinus 85
avian 158
rats/mice 71
dipmunk 38
hyperadrenocorticism
?
ferret 38
ferrets 85, 88
jess 153, 155, 158
gerbil/hamster 37
hamsters 75
jugular vein
guinea pig/chinchilla 38
hyperglycaemia goshawks 206
avian 144
rabbit 36
hyperoestrigenism (ferrets) 89
chinchilla/guinea pig 16
hyperthyroidism (reptiles) 301
rat/mouse 36
rabbit 6
reptiles272
Hypnorm 40
Harderian gland (avian) 136
hypocalcaemic paralysis
K
haustrae 4, 16
(chipmunk) 82
Katicephalus spp 302, 303, 306
Health & Safety at Work Act 1974
hypocalcaemic syndrome of African Grey
keel 135, 136
355
parrots 205
ketamine 41,163,275,276,277,283, 284
heart
hypocalcaemic tetany 313
kidney
amphibian 264
hypoglycaemia
anphibian 264
avian 142
crocodylia 293, 313
avian 141
ferret 24
raptors 205
chinchilla/guinea pig 16
gerbil/hamster 13
hypoiodinism chelonia 292, 308
dipmunk 20
guinea-pig/chinchilla 16
hypomotolity disorders (rabbit) 62
ferret 24
marsupials 22
hypothyroidism (reptiles) 301
hamster/gerbil 13
rabbit 5
hypovitaminosis B1 (snakes) 313
hypovitaminosis C guinea pigs 79
rabbit 5
rat/mice 9
rat/mouse 9
snakes 249
hypovolaemic shock
reptile 248, 253,257,260
heartworm, see Dirofilaria immitis
treatment
Klebsiella pneumonia 78,82,86
heat requirements reptiles 266
birds 241
Klossiella hydromyos 71
heavy metal toxicosis (birds) 190, 205
rabbit 124
Knemidocoptes spp. 185, 197
Helicobacter mustelae 86
reptiles 351
koilin 140
helminths (birds) 193
 small mammal 127
Kurloff cell 19
Index 363
L
crocodylia 260
medetomidine 41, 163, 275, 276, 277
labial notch 248
lizards 252
megabacteriosis, see Macrorhabdus
large intestine anatomy
 snakes 247
ornithogaster
 amphibian 264
lower respiratory tract (rabbit) 3
megoesophagus (ferrets) 85
avian 140
lower respiratory tract disease (avian)
melanoma 73, 74
chinchilla/guinea pig 16
197
meloxicam 46,47, 168, 282, 284
ferret 24
Lucke's renal tumour 315
metabolic bone disease
gerbil/hamster 12
lung wash 306
amphibian 316
rabbit 4
lungs
avian 205
rat/mouse 9
amphibian 263
reptile 311
reptiles 248, 253, 257, 260
avian 137
prevention 335
large intestine physiology - rabbit 5
rabbit 3
 metabolic scaling calculations 329
largeb intestine anatomy - chipmunk 20
reptile 247, 252, 257,260
Microsporum canis 60, 77,85
xU1
luteinising hormone (avian) 146
midazolam 40, 123, 162, 275, 277
avian 137
lymph heart 249
morphine 47, 282, 284
rabbit 3
lymph nodes (avian) 144
moulting 149
lateral ear vein (rabbit) 5
lymphatic system
mouse cytomegalovirus 70
lateral tail veins 9
 amphibian 264
mouse hepatitis virus 69, 70
Lawsonia intracellulare, see proliferative
avian 144
mouse pox virus (ectromelia) 68
ileitis
chelonia 258
mouth rot 302
lead poisoning
dhipmunk 20
MS-222 283
birds 196
crocodylia 261
musculoskeletal disease
treatment 224
ferret 24
avian 204
rabbits 65, 67
gerbil/hamster 13
chinchilla 82
reptiles 304, 313
guinea pig/chinchilla 17
chipmunk 82
leash 155
lizards 253
ferret 89
Leporarcus (Listrophorus) gibbus 59
rabbit 6
gerbil 74
Leporine dysautonomia 63
rat/mouse 10
guinea pig 79
Leptospira spp. 71, 84
snakes 249
hamster 76
leukaemia (reptiles) 308
lymphocytic choriomeningitis 71, 82
marsupial 84
lice
lymphoma (ferrets) 87
rabbit 66
avian 186
lymphosarcoma (guinea-pig) 77
rat/mouse 72
guinea-pigs 77
reptile 311
rabbit 59
M
musculoskeletal system
rats/mice 68
Macrorhabdus ornithogaster 191
amphibian 263
lidocaine 47, 168, 283
magnesium requirements birds 176
avian 132
Liponyssus bacoti 68
magnesium requirements reptiles and
chelonia 255
Listeria monocytogenes 77, 82
amphibians 292
chinchilla 15
liver
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 120,
chipmunk 19
amphibian 264
232, 345
crocodylia 259
avian 141
magnum
ferret 23
chinchilla/guinea pig 16
avian 145
gerbil/hamster 12
chipmunk 20
reptile 250
b1 8ld eauina
ferret 24
maintenance energy requirements (MER)
lizards 251
hamster/gerbil 12
avian 170
 marsupials 21
rabbit 5
reptilian 287
rabbit 2
rat/mouse 9
small mammals 49
rat/mouse 8
reptile 248, 249,252,253, 257, 258, 261
 mammary gland disease
snake 246
liver disease
rabbit 66
musculoskeletal system disease
avian 195, 196
rats/mice 72
treatment
ferret 86
manganese requirements
birds 221, 222
rabbit 63
birds 177
chinchillas 105
lower respiratory system
 small mammals 55
chipmunks 106
avian 137
mast cell tumour 85
gerbils/hamsters 103
chelonia 257
mastitis 66, 79, 89
D0r said-
364 Index
musculoskeletal system disease (Contirnued)
nitrous oxide 41, 163,277
Otodectes cynotis 84
 marsupials 107
Nocardia spp. 86
ovary
rabbits 101
notarium 135
avian 145
rats/mice 102
Notoedres spp.59, 68, 72, 74, 82
reptile 249
reptiles 334
nutritional osteodystrophy
oviduct
Mycobacteria spp.300
birds 205
avian 145
Mycobacterium avium 194, 195
marsupial 84
reptile 250
Mycobacterium marinum 312, 315
nutritional requirements
oviduct prolapse (reptile) 311
Mycobacteriurm tuberculosis 77
breeding (birds) 178
oviparous 250
Mycoplasma agassizi 306
debilitated birds 179
ovoviviparous 250
Mycoplasma putrmonis 69
debilitated small mammals 56
 owl herpes virus 195
mycoplasmosis (birds) 200
growth (birds) 178
oxyurid nematodes (reptiles) 304
mycosis fungoides 74
herbivorous reptiles 295
myiasis 59, 299
lactating small mammals 5
P
Myobia musculi 68
larger Psittaciformes 181
Pacheco's disease (psittacine herpesvirus)
Myocoptes musculinus 68
older bird 179
195
myxomatosis 60
racing Pigeons 183
palatal ostium 16
raptors 182
paleopulmonic lung 137
N
snakes 294
pancreas
nalbuphine hydrochloride 167
waterfowl 183
avian 141
nares {avian) 135
 young small mammals 55
dipmunk 20
nasoesophageal tube (rabbit) 126
ferret 24
neonatology
gerbil/hamster 13
hipmunk 20
obesity (reptiles) 293
guinea-pig/chinchilla 16
gerbil/hamster 14
ocular disease
rabbit 5
guinea-pigs/chinchillas 18
chinchilla 82
rat/mouse 9
marsupials 23
treatment 105
pancreatic disease
rabbit 7
ferrets 89
avian 197
rat/mouse 11
treatment 108
reptiles 305
neopulmonic lung 137
gerbils/hamsters 76
parabronchi137
Neotrombicula autumnalis 59, 82,83,299
guinea pigs 80
paramyxovirus
nephrocalcinosis 71
treatment 104
birds 200
nephron (avian) 141
marsupials 84
reptiles 307, 313
nervous system (avian) 132
rabbits
parietal eye 255
nest box 152, 153, 156
treatment 101
parthenogenic 254
neurological disease
rats/mice 72
Passalurus ambiguus 62
avian 205
treatment 102
Passeriformes 133
treatment 221, 223
oesophagostomy tubes (reptiles) 324
Pasteurella muttocida 60, 63,
chinchilla 82
oesophagus (avian) 139
67, 83
treatment 105
oil spill treatment 224
Pasteurella pneumotropica 70,74,75,
dipmunk 83
oil spills 190
78, 81
treatment 106
Oodinium pillularis 174
pasteurellosis (birds) 200
ferrets 89
Ophionyssus natricis 299
pecten oculi136
gerbils 74
ophthalmic disease (rabbits) 67
pelvic limb 137
guinea-pigs 80
oral cavity
pelvis (avian) 136
hamsters 76
avian 139
pentastomes 306
 marsupials 84
chipmunk 19
perches 150,153, 154, 156
treatment 107
ferret 24
periodontal disease (reptiles) 302
rabbits 67
gerbils/hamsters 12
Petauraiges rackae 83
treatment 101
guinea-pigs/chinchillas 16
petechiae 298
rats/mice 72
rabbit 3
phallus
treatment 102
rat/mouse 8
amphibian 264
reptiles 312
snakes 247
dhelonian 258
reptiles, 335
Ornithonyssus spp.185
crocodilian 261
Newcastle disease 200
osteoarthritis (rabbits) 66
phallus (avian) 145
Index 365
phosphorus requirements
prostatic disease 89
head 112
birds 176
Protection of Animals Act 1911-1964 355
thorax 110
reptile 291
protein and amino acid requirements
rodent and marsupials 113
 small mammal 54
birds 171
snakes 342
phycomycosis (amphibians) 315
reptiles and amphibians 287
 radiography positioning
pigeon herpesvirus 196, 197
small mammals 50
birds 226
pinwheel 205
proventricular impaction 192
reptiles 338
plastron 255, 256, 257, 259
proventriculitis 191
small mammals 110
Pneumocystis carinii 70
proventriculus 140
ranavirus
pneumonia virus (mice) 70
pseudoeosinophil (rabbit) 7
amphibians 315, 316
pneumonised bones 133, 135, 136
Pseudomonas aeruginosa 60
reptiles 307
pododermatitis
Psittaciformes 133
rat coronavirus, (see Sialodacryoadenitis
guinea pigs 77
 psittacine beak and feather disease 186
virus)
rats/mice 68
 psittacine proventricular dilatation
rectrices 147
polycystic disease (ferrets) 87
syndrome 192
redleg 315
polyoma virus 187
psittacosis (chlamydophilosis), see
refeeding syndrome 294
Polyplax spinosa 68
Chlamydophila psittaci
remiges 147
post-hibernation anorexia 292
Psoroptes cuniculi 59
Kiddns poonq jeua1 
post-operative care
pterylae 147
avian 142
avian 167
pubic bones (avian) 135
reptile249
reptile 281
pulmonary adenoma (guinea-pigs) 78
renal disease (rabbit) 65
 small mammal 56
pyelonephritis
renal physiology
post-ovulatory stasis (reptile) 171
ferrets 87
avian 142
potassium requirements
rabbits 65
lizards 253
birds 176
rats/mice 71
rabbit 5
reptile292
Pygostyle 135
snakes 249
 small mammal 54
pyometra 66,72,76, 82, 89
renal urolithiasis (birds) 204
powder feathers 148
Pyrethrin toxicity 313
 reproductive disease
poxvirus (rats/mice) 70
quarantine
birds 204
 pre-anaesthetic fasting
avian 157
chinchilla 81
birds 161
reptile 270
chipmunk 82
reptiles 275
ferret 89
 small mammals 40
R
gerbils 73
pre-anaesthetic medications
Rabbit snuffles 63
guinea-pig 79
avian 162
Rabbit Welfare Association
hamster 76
reptiles 275
and Fund 357
rabbits 66
small mammals 40
racing loft 156
rats/mice 72
 pre-anaesthetic preparation
Radfordia ensifera 68
reptiles 310
avian 161
radiography interpretation
reproductive physiology
reptiles 275
birds
avian 145
 small mammals 39
abnormal fndings 228
chelonia 258
preen gland 147
normal findings 227
chipmunk 20
prefemoral pores 252
species variations 230
rocodylia 261
preferred body temperature (PBT) 266
chelonia 339
ferret 25
preferred optimum temperature zone
ferret
gerbil/hamster 13
(POTZ)266,267
abdomen 115
guinea pig/chinchilla 18
pregnancy toxaemia 79, 89
 appendicular skeleton 117
lizards 254
pre-ovulatory stasis 310
axial skeleton 117
marsupials 22
probiotics 57
head 116
rabbit (female) 7
proctodeum
thorax 114
rabbit (male) 6
avian 141
lizards 339
rat/mouse 10
reptile 248, 253, 257, 258, 260
rabbit
reproductive system
proliferative ileitis 73, 86
abdomen 110
 amphibian 264
propatagium 136
i us rade 
avian 144
propofol41, 163,276, 277
axial skeleton 112
chelonia 258
366 Index
reproductive system (Continued)
restraint
guinea pig/chinchilla 18
dipmunk 20
 amphibians 283
marsupials 23
crocodylia 261
chelonia 273
rabbit 7
ferret 25
columbiformes 160
rat/mouse 11
gerbil/hamster 13
crocodylia 274
 sexual segments 248
guinea pig/chinchilla 17
lizards 272
Sialodacryoadenitis virus 68, 73
lizards 253
 parrots and cage birds 159
skin
marsupials 22
raptors 158
amphibian 264
rabbit 6
snakes 273
avian 146
rat/mouse 10
 toucans and hornbills 160
chelonia 259
snakes 249
waterfowl 160
chipmunk 21
reproductive system disease
retina (avian) 136
ferret 25
treatment
Rhabdiasspp 306, 316
gerbil/hamster 14
birds 220
Rhamphastidae 133
guinea pig/chinchilla 18
ferrets 108
rhamphotheca 133
lizards 255
guinea-pigs 104
rhinotheca 133
rabbit 7
hamsters 103
ribs {avian) 135
rat/mouse 11
reptiles 333
ringtail 69, 4
snakes 250
respiratory disease
Rodentotepis nana 73,75
skin disease
birds 197
birds 185
treatment 218, 219
s
treatments for birds 216
chinchilla 81
sacculus rotundus 4
chinchilla 80
dipmunks
Salmonella typhimurium 188,194
treatment 105
treatment 106
salmonellosis
chipmunk 82
ferret 86
ferret 86
treatment 106
treatment 108
guinea-pig 77
ferret 84
gerbil 73
hamsters 75
treatment 107
treatment 103
marsupial 83
gerbil 72
guinea-pig 78
rats/mice69
treatment 102
treatment 104
reptiles 304
guinea pig 76
hamster 75
saphenous vein (rabbit) 6
treatment 104
marsupial 83
saprolegniasis 315
hamster 74
treatment 106
Sarcoptes 59,72, 82, 84, 185
treatment 103
rabbit 63
scale rot 297
marsupials 83
treatment 100
scleral ossicles 136
treatment 106
rat/mouse 69
scurvy, see hypovitaminosis C
rabbits 59
treatment 102
scutes 246, 250, 251, 255, 256, 259
treatment 99
reptile 305
seizures (avian) 205
rat/mouse 68
treatment 332
selenium requirements (small mammal)
treatment 101
respiratory physiology
55
reptile 297
avian 138
semi-plume feathers 148
treatment 320
rabbit 2
sendai virus 70, 75, 78
skull
respiratory physiology and anatomy
 septicaemic cutaneous syndrome (SCUD)
avian 133
(reptiles) 274
297
chinchilla 15
respiratory system
sevoflurane 43, 163, 277
chipmunk 19
amphibian 263
ferret 23
sex determination
avian 137
avian 146
gerbil/hamster 12
chipmunk 19
chelonia 259
guinea-pig 14
ferret 24
rocodylia 261
rabbit 3
gerbil/hamster 12
lizards 254
rat/mouse 8
guinea pig/chinchilla 15
snakes 250
snake 246
marsupials 21
sexing
small intestine
rabbit 2
chipmunk 20
chipmunk 20
rat/mouse 8
ferret 25
ferret 24
snakes 246
gerbil/hamster 14
gerbil/hamster 12
Index 367
guinea-pig/chinchilla 16
Strigiformes 133
trachea
rabbit 4
substrate
avian 137
 rat/mouse 9
avian 153
reptile 247, 252, 257, 260
reptiles 248, 253, 257, 260
dipmunk 32
tracheal
 small intestine
ferret 34
bulla 137
 amphibian 264
gerbil/hamster 29
lung 247
avian 140
guinea pig/chinchilla 31
tramadol 47, 168, 282
d
marsupial 33
 Transmissible murine colonic hyperplasia
chinchillas 32
rabbit 26
69
chipmunks 33
rat/mouse 29
Treponema paraliscuniculi 60,66
ferrets 34
reptile 269
triage
 gerbils/hamsters 30
succinylcholine 276
birds 234, 237
guinea-pigs 31
suffrago joint 136
reptiles 346
rabbits 27
supportive therapy
trichofolliculoma (guinea-pig) 77
rats/mice 29
birds 241
Trichomonas muris 69
marsupials 33
rabbits 125
Trichomonas spp. 190, 303
sodium requirements
reptiles 352
Trichopytonmentagrophytes60,68,73,
birds 176
small mammals 127
74, 77, 80, 83, 85
reptiles and amphibians 292
supracoracoid muscle 135
Trichosomoides crassicauda 71
 small mammal 54
Syngamus trachea 197
Trichostrongylus retortaeformis 62
sour crop 191
synsacrum 135, 136
Trixicara caviae 76
spectacle 251
Syphacia muris 69, 73
Tyzzer's disease 69, 73
Spillopsyllus cuniculi 59, 85
Syphacia obvelata 69,73
spinal trauma (rabbits) 66
syrinx 137
U
spindly leg syndrome 316
ulcerative skin disease 189
splayleg (rabbits) 66
T
ultrasonography
spleen
tadpole oedema virus 315
birds
avian 144
taeniae 4, 16
abnormal fndings 232
chipmunk 20
tail degloving (gerbils) 73
normal fndings 231
ferret 24
tarsometatarsus 136
positioning 231
gerbil/hamster 13
Teflon toxicity 201
chelonian
guinea-pig/chinchilla 17
testes
normal and abnormal fndings 343
rabbit 6
avian 144
rat/mouse 10
reptile 249
abdomen 118
splenopancrease (reptile) 248
testicular cancer , 72, 85
thorax 118
split keel 189
tethers raptors 153, 154, 155
lizards
squamous cell carcinoma 85, 299
Theromyzon teslatum 197
 normal and abnormal findings 344
Staphylococcus aureus 60, 64, 68, 73,
thymus
rabbit
74, 82
avian 144
abdomen 117
Sernostoma tracheacolum 197
chinchilla/guinea pig 17
ocular 118
stomach
hipmunk 20
thorax 117
rabbit 4
ferret 25
reptiles
rat/mouse 9
gerbil/hamster 13
equipment 343
stomach
rabbit 6
positioning 343, 344, 345
 amphibian 264
rat/mouse 10
rodent and marsupial 119
avian 140
tibial vein (avian) 144
 small mammal
chinchilla/guinea pig 16
tibiotarsus 136
equipment 117
chipmunk 20
ticks 186, 299
positioning 117
ferret 24
tongue
snakes
hamster/gerbil 12
 amphibian 264
normal and abnormal findings 344
snake 248
avian 139
ultraviolet lighting (reptiles) 268
Sreptococcus pneumoniae 70, 78, 81,
reptile 247, 248, 252,
upper respiratory system
83, 86
257,260
avian 137
Streptococcus zooepidemicus, see cervical
Tortoise Trust 357
chelonia 257
lymphadenitis
toys (avian) 151
crocodylia 259
368 Index
upper respiratory system (Continued)
 marsupials 107
reptiles and amphibians 289
lizards 252
rabbits 100
 small mammal 52
snakes 246
rats/mice 102
vitamin K requirements
upper respiratory tract (rabbit) 2
reptiles 333
birds 174
upper respiratory tract disease (avian)
urolithiasis
 reptiles and amphibians 290
197
ferrets 88
small mammal 53
ureter
guinea pigs 78
vivarium requirements
avian 142
rabbits 64
amphibian 269
reptile 250
rats/mice 71
reptile 267
uricotelic 249
reptiles 310
viviparous 250
urinalysis
uropygial gland 147
volatile fatty acids 5
avian 240
uterine adenocarcinoma - rabbits 66
vomeronasal organ 248, 252
rabbit 64
uterus
rat/mouse 8
reptiles 314, 351
avian 145
urinary system
rabbits 67
W
anphibian 264
water requirements
avian 141
V
birds 170
dhelonia 258
vago-vagal reflex 272
reptiles and amphibians 286
hipmunk 20
venereal spirochaetosis 66
 small mammals 49
crocodylia 260
ventral abdominal vein 249, 253
weathering 153, 154
ferret 24
 ventral scent gland adenoma/
Welfare of Animals Act/Welfare of
gerbil/hamster 13
adenocarcinoma 73
Animals Act (Scotland) 2006 355
guinea pig/chinchilla 16
ventriculus 140
wet tail (see proliferative ileitis) 73
lizards 253
vermiform appendix 4
Whitten effect 11
marsupials 22
vertebral column (avian) 135
widowhood loft 156
rabbit 5
vestibular disease
Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 355
rat/mouse 9
gerbils 74
wing
snakes 248
rabbits 67
anatomy 135
urinary tract disease
rats/mice 72
paralysis 206
avian 202
viral diseases {avian) 66
tip oedema 190
chinchilla 81
viral haemorrhgic disease 64
wings 135
ferret 87
vaccination 296
gerbil 73
vitamin A requirements
X
guinea pig 78
birds 172
Xenopsylla cheopis 68
hamster 76
reptiles and amphibians 288
marsupial 84
xylazine 41,163, 275, 277, 284
small mammal 52
rabbit 64
vitamin B requirements
rats/mice 71
 complex requirements birds 174
reptile 308
yellow skin disease, see Chrysosporium
reptiles and amphibians 290
treatment for birds 221, 222
vitamin B complex requirements small
 anamorph of Nanizziopsis vriesii
urodeum (avian) 141
(CANV)
mammal 53
urodeum (reptile) 248, 249, 250, 253, 254,
vitamin C requirements
Yersinia pestis 68
257,258,260, 261
Yersinia pseudotubercutosis 77,
birds 175
urogenital system disease
82, 83
reptiles and amphibians 290
treatment for
small mammal 53
chipmunks 106
vitamin D requirements birds 173
Z
ferrets 108
reptiles and amphibians 289
zinc requirements small mammal 55
gerbils 103
small mammal 52
zinc poisoining (birds) 196
vitamin E requirements
zinc requirements birds 177
hamsters 103
birds 174
zygodactyl limb 136