Atlas of
Hematopathology
Morphology, Immunophenotype,
Cytogenetics, and Molecular Approaches
Faramarz Naeim
P. Nagesh Rao
Sophie X. Song
Wayne W. Grody
AP
小尾H宠物健康中心http：//ttahc.taobao.com
Atlas of Hematopathology
Morphology, Immunophenotype, Cytogenetics, and
Molecular Approaches
ELSEene&
technology books
ELSEVIER
Companion Web Site:
http://b0oksite.elsevier.c0m/9780123851833
Faramarz Naeim, P Nagesh Rao, Sophie X. Song. Wayne W. Grody
Resources
All figures from the book available as both PowerPoint slides and JPEG files.
Please note: Figures are password protected. Upon loggging into the site, you will be prompted
for a unique password from the text of the book.
textbooks.elsevier.com
ELSEVIER
ACADEMIC
PRESS
To adopt this book for course use, visit http://textbooks.eisevier.com.
Atlas of Hematopathology
Morphology, lmmunophenotype,
Cytogenetics, and Molecular Approaches
Faramarz Naeim M.D., FASCP
Professor Emeritus, David Geffen School of Medicine, UCLA
Director of Hematopathology
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine
VA Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System
Los Angeles, California
P. Nagesh Rao Ph.D., FACMG
Professor, Department of Pathology and Lab Medicine and Pediatrics
Director of Clinical and Molecular Cytogenetics Laboratories
David Geffen School of Medicine, UCLA
Los Angeles, California
Sophie X. Song M.D., Ph.D.
Associate Clinical Professor, Department of Pathology and Lab Medicine
Director of the Flow Cytometry and Bone Marrow Laboratories
David Geffen School of Medicine, UCLA
Los Angeles, California
Wayne W. Grody M.D., Ph.D., FACMG, FCAP, FASCP
Professor, Departments of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
Pediatrics, and Human Genetics
Director of Molecular Pathology Laboratories
David Geffen School of Medicine, UCLA
Los Angeles, California
AMSTERDAM · BOSTON · HEIDELBERG · LONDON · NEW YORK · OXFORD · PARIS
SAN DIEGO · SAN FRANCISCO · SINGAPORE · SYDNEY · TOKYO
ELSEVIER
Academic Press is an imprint of Elsevier
Academic Press is an imprint of Elsevier
32 Jamestown Road, London NW1 7BY, UK
225 Wyman Street. Waltham, MA 02451, USA
525 B Street. Suite 1800. San Diego. CA 92101-4495. USA
First edition 2013
Copyright @ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
Medicine is an ever-changing feld. Standard safety precautions must be followed. but as new research and
 dinical experience broaden our knowledge, changes in treatment and drug therapy may become necessary
or appropriate. Readers are advised to check the most current product information provided by the
manufacturer of each drug to be administered to verify the recommended dose, the method and duration
of administrations. and contraindications. It is the responsibility of the treating physician, relying on
experience and knowledge of the patient, to determine dosages and the best treatment for each individual
patient. Neither the publisher nor the authors assume any liability for any injury and/or damage to
 persons or property arising from this publication.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or
by any means electronic, mechanical. photocopying. recording or otherwise without the prior written
permission of the publisher Permissions may be sought directly from Elsevier's Science & Technology
Rights Department in Oxford. UK: phone (+44) (0) 1865 843830: fax (+44) (0) 1865 853333: email:
permissions@elsevier.com. Alternatively, visit the Science and Technology Books website at
www.elsevierdirect.com/rights for further information
Notice
No responsibility is assumed by the publisher for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a
matter of products liability, negligence or otherwise. or from any use or operation of any methods.
products. instructions or ideas contained in the material herein. Because of rapid advances in the medical 
sciences. in particular. independent verification of diagnoses and drug dosages should be made
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress
ISBN: 978-0-12-385183-3
 For information on all Academic Press publications
visit our website at elsevierdirect.com
Typeset by MPS Limited, Chennai, India
www.adi-mps.com
Printed and bound in United States of America
13 14 15 1610 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Working togcther to grow
librarics in devcloping coumtries
www.csevier.com |www.hook.adl.org | swww.sabre.org
ELSEVER  BOOsAlRSabre Foundaten
Contents
Preface.
.ix
Acknowledgments
.Xi
Structure and Function of Hematopoietic Tissues
2
Principles of Immunophenotyping.
.25
3
Principles of Cytogenetics
.47
4
Principles of Molecular Techniques..
.55
5
Morphology of Abnormal Bone Marrow..
.69
6
Reactive Lymphadenopathies.
.81
7
Bone Marrow Aplasia..
..99
Myelodysplastic Syndromes/Neoplasms—Overview.
.111
9
Myelodysplastic Syndromes/Neoplasms—-Classification..
.129
10
Myeloproliferative Neoplasms--Overview...
.149
11
Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia.
.155
12
Myeloproliferative Neoplasms Associated with JAK2 Mutation.
.167
13
Chronic Neutrophilic and Chronic Eosinophilic Leukemias
.183
14
Mastocytosis.
.189
15
Myelodysplastic/Myeloproliferative Neoplasms.
201
16
Hematologic Neoplasms Associated with Eosinophilia and PDGFRA,
PDGFRB, or FGFR1 Rearrangement.
.213
17
Acute Myeloid Leukemia—Overview
.219
vi
CONTENTS
18
Acute Myeloid Leukemias with Recurrent Genetic Abnormalities.
.227
19
Acute Myeloid Leukemia with Myelodysplasia-Related Changes..
.245
20
Therapy-Related Myeloid Neoplasms.
.251
21
Acute Myeloid Leukemia, Not Otherwise Specified.
.259
22
Myeloid Proliferations Related to Down Syndrome
.283
23
Lymphoblastic Neoplasms—B-Lymphoblastic Leukemia/Lymphoma.
.291
24
Lymphoblastic Neoplasms—T-Lymphoblastic Leukemia/Lymphoma.
.309
25
Acute Leukemias of Ambiguous Lineage.
.317
26
Mature B-Cell Neoplasms—Overview.
.325
27
Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia/Small Lymphocytic Lymphoma.
.335
28
B-Cell Prolymphocytic Leukemia.
.351
29
Lymphoplasmacytic Lymphoma/Waldenstrom's Macroglobulinemia
.357
30
Hairy Cell Leukemia.
.367
31
Splenic Marginal Zone Lymphoma.
.375
32
Nodal Marginal Zone Lymphoma.
.383
Extranodal Marginal Zone Lymphoma of Mucosa-Associated Lymphoid
Tissue (MALT Lymphoma).
.389
34
Follicular Lymphoma
.397
35
Mantle Cell Lymphoma
.411
36
Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphoma..
.427
37
Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphoma Subtypes
.439
38
Other Lymphomas of Large B Cells.
.449
39
Burkitt Lymphoma..
.465
40
Primary Cutaneous B-Cell Lymphomas
.473
41
 Plasma Cell Neoplasms
.481
CONTENTS
vii
42
Mature T- and NK-Cell Neoplasms—Overview
.503
43
Large Granular Lymphocytic Neoplasms and Related Disorders..
.509
44
T-Cell Prolymphocytic Leukemia.
.525
45
Adult T-Cell Leukemia/Lymphoma
..531
46
Hepatosplenic T-Cell Lymphoma..
..539
47
Enteropathy-Associated T-Cell Lymphoma
..547
48
Mycosis Fungoides and Sezary Syndrome
.553
49
Other Primary Cutaneous T-Cell Lymphoproliferative Disorders
.561
50
Angioimmunoblastic T-Cell Lymphoma.
.569
51
Anaplastic Large Cell Lymphomas.
..577
52
 Peripheral T-Cell Lymphoma, Not Otherwise Specified.
.587
53
Nodular Lymphocyte Predominant Hodgkin Lymphoma
.593
54
Classical Hodgkin Lymphoma
..601
55
Immunodeficiency Disorders
..613
56
latrogenic Immunodeficiency-Associated Lymphoproliferative Disorders
..621
57
Lymphocytopenia and Lymphocytosis
.627
58
Histiocytic Disorders
.635
59
Disorders of Dendritic Cells
.649
60
Granulocytic Disorders.
.663
61
Disorders of Red Blood Cells-Anemias
.675
62
Disorders of Megakaryocytes and Platelets
.705
63
 Post-Therapy Changes.
.715
Index.
.729
This page intentionally left blank
Preface
When the time approached for the second edition of the clinical aspects, morphology, laboratory findings, immu-
Hematopathology book, the editors decided for a major revi-  nohistochemical and flow cytometric results, cytogenetics 
sion in order to make the book more useful to the read-  and molecular studies, and differential diagnosis.
ers. They decided to create an Atlas of Hematopathology by
 This book offers important information to practicing
increasing the number of the images, whilst keeping the 
physicians and those in pathology and hematology train-
text concise and to the point. The most important and
ing, to help them to improve their diagnostic skills. It also
unique feature of this book is that it is comprehensive and
functions as a valuable referral book for researchers who
multidisciplinary:
work in hematology-related areas. The book consists of 63
chapters. The first 6 chapters are devoted to normal struc-
1. Comprehensive, because it covers both non-neoplastic hema-
ture and function of hematopoietic tissues, principles of
and tissues.
2. Multidisciplinary.
because in addition to demonstra-
ics, an overview of abnormal bone marrow morphology.
tion of conventional histpathology and cytopathology. it
and reactive lymphadenopathies. The remaining chapters
demonstrates results of other important complementary
 deal with various types of neoplastic and non-neoplastic
diagnostic tests, such as immunophenotyping (immunohis-
hematopoietic disorders. The hematopoietic neoplasms
tochemical stains and flow cytometry), karyotyping. FISH and
are classified according to the World Health Organization
DNA/molecular studies.
(WHO) Classification published in 2008, with minor
The explosion of new molecular, cytogenetic, and pro-
modifications.
teomic techniques applicable to pathology has not ren-
dered histologic examination obsolete, but rather offers
Faramarz Naeim, M.D.
powerful  ancillary  information to  facilitate differential
P. Nagesh Rao, Ph.D.
diagnosis, predict prognostic behavior, and help in the
selection of targeted molecular therapies. With this in
Sophie X. Song, M.D. Ph.D.
mind, we have constructed most chapters along the gen-
Wayne W. Grody, M.D., Ph.D.
eral format for each disease category to demonstrate
ix
This page intentionally left blank
Acknowledgments
The authors are thankful to Sunita Bhuta, M.D., Jennifer  UCLA Medical Center and USC Medical Center for pro-
Hsiao. MD, Gholamhossein Pezeshkpour, M.D., Ryan viding the opportunity to teach, to learn, and to exchange
Phan, Ph.D., Diana Tanaka-Mukai, CLS, and Jimin Xu,  ideas that are reflected in this book.
Ph.D. for their contribution to the collection of the images
The authors would like to thank Mara Conner, Megan
in this book.
Wickline, and Caroline Johnson of Academic Press for
We acknowledge all the residents, fellows, and staff
their assistance in the production of this book.
members at VA Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System,
Xi
This page intentionally left blank
Structure and
Function of
Hematopoietic Tissues
ture consisting of hematopoietic precursors and a com-
plex microenvironment that facilitates the maintenance of
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and supports the differ-
RegulatoryCytokines
entiation and maturation of the progenitors (Figure 1.1).
All differentiated hematopoietic cells including lympho-
cytes, erythrocytes, granulocytes, macrophages, and plate-
lets are derived from HSCs (Figure 1.2).
StemCel
The most primitive (pluripotent) HSCs express CD34
and are negative for CD38 and HLA-DR. These primitive
 cells, which include long-term repopulating stem cells, are
ECM
also characterized by low-level expression of c-kit receptor
(CDl17) and absence of lineage specific maturation mark-
ers. There is a spectrum of heterogeneity in the bone mar-
row stem cell pool: a continuum of cells with decreasing
capacity for self-renewal and increasing potential for dif
FIGURE 1.1 Cytokines released from accessory cells (AC) (e.g..
ferentiation. This trend is also associated with changes in
macrophages, T-cells) and stromal cells have a regulatory effect
immunophenotypic features. For example, the more mature
on stem cells. The extracellular matrix (ECM) and adhesion
commited stem cells, in addition to CD34, appear to
molecules (AM) support cell-cell, cell-matrix, and cell-cytokine
express CD38 and/or HLA-DR. The pluripotent HSCs com-
interactions.
prise about 1 per 20,000 of bone marrow cells, and only
a small fraction of them are active, whereas the remaining
 systems not only coexist but closely interact with each
 majority are in a "resting" phase, on call for action when
other. Stromal cells are composed of a heterogeneous
it is necessary. The HSCs reside in microenvironmental
cell population including adipocytes, fibroblast-like cells,
niches. These niches-—which are composed of stromal cells,
 endothelial cells, and osteoblasts. They produce a num-
ber of cytokines and a group of proteins that are involved
components of extracellular matrix (Table 1.1), and vari-
 in facilitating cell-cell interactions and presenting the
ous regulatory cytokines (Table 1.2) (Figure 1.1)—play
 Cytokines and growth factors to the hematopoietic pro-
an important role in the regulation of hematopoiesis and
 genitor cells. Stromal cells with their extracellular matrix
proliferation of the committed stem cells, leading to the 
make a fibrovascular mesh environment to home and
production of huge numbers of progenitor cells and dif-
 support the hematopoietic precursors. The thin-walled
ferentiated mature blood cells (Figure 1.2). Every day, an
venous sinuses are the most prominent vascular spaces in
estimated 2.5 billion red cells, 2.5 billion platelets, and 1.0
the bone marrow. They consist of an inner layer of endo-
billion granulocytes are produced per kilogram body weight
thelial cells supported by an outer layer of fibroblast-like
in normal conditions.
(parasinal, adventitial) stromal cells. They receive blood
 Bone marrow stromal cells are derived from pluripo-
from the branches of the nutrient artery and periosteal
tent stromal stem cells. In other words, two separate and
 capillary network. The nutrient artery penetrates the bony
distinct pluripotent stem cells are simultaneously at work 
 shaft, branches into the bone marrow cavity, and forms
in bone marrow: hematopoietic and stromal. These two
 capillary-venous sinus junctions. The periosteal capillary
Atlas of Hematopathology. DOl: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00001-2
@ 201 3 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
2
STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF HEMATOPOIETIC TISSUES
CFU-Meg
Meg
Platelet
GM-CSF
IL-6
1L-l1
BFU-E
EPO
+
Erythroblast
RBC
SF
3,EPO,GM-CSF
CFU-GM
Monoblast
Macrophage
1-3
Myeloid
IL-3,GM-CSF
M-CSF
Stem Cell
n-
Myeloblast
Neutrophil
IL-3
G-CSF
几-3
SF
IL-4
IL-3
GM-CSF
L-S
CFU-Eo
Eosinophil
IL-6
IL-1
Pluripotent
Sp
G-CSF
Stem Cell
IL-3
CFU-Baso
1-11
Basophil
IL-12
11.-4
IL-3
TPO
1L-2
11-4
IL-2
TCells
Lymphoid
Stem Cell
BCells
IL-4
precursors and various levels of cytokine interaction.
 Table 1.1
cell committed to non-lymphoid lineages, referred to as
 Major Components of Extracellular Matrix in Bone
CFU-GEMM. GEMM stands for granulocytes, erythrocytes,
Marrow
macrophages, and megakaryocytes. The most primitive
  si s    
Type
Comments
-as s pe s ym (-nia) n s-ssia
Collagen (reticulin)
 Consisting of various subtypes. Erythroid and
populations of erythroid colonies known as colony-forming
 myeloid precursors adhere to collagen types
units (CFU-E). This process requires a combination of cyto-
land VI
kines, such as erythropoietin (EPO), Steel factor (SF; c-kit
Fibronectin
 Attaches to early erythroid precursors and
ligand), and interleukin-3 (IL-3) (Figure 1.2). Proliferation
other hematopoietic and stromal cells
and maturation of CFU-E leads to the formation of eryth-
Hemonectin
 Myeloid precursors adhere to laminin.
roblasts, more mature erythroid precursors, and eventually
Regulates leukocyte chemotaxis.
enucleated reticulocytes and erythrocytes. The entire process
Proteoglycans
Components containing heparin sulfate,
 chondritin sulfate, and hyaluronic acid.
requires approximately 2 weeks. Except for newborns, only
Interact with laminin and type IV collagen and
erythrocytes and polychromatic erythrocytes (reticulocytes)
play a role in cytokine presentation and cell
 are released into the blood circulation.
differentiation
Myelopoiesis begins with the differentiation of a small
Thrombospondin
Interacts with collagen, fbronectin, and CD36
population of pluripotent stem cells to CFU-GEMM and
then to the committed primitive myeloid precursors, gran-
ulocyte/macrophage  colony-forming units  (CFU-GM).
network connects with the sinuses at the bone marrow
This process requires GM-CSF, SF, IL-3, and IL-6 (Figure
junction through the Haversian canals. The smaller venous
1.2). CFU-GM give rise to more mature colony-forming
units CFU-G, CFU-M, CFU-Eo, and CFU-Baso which in
connect together to form the comitant vein. The comitant
turn differentiate into neutrophils, macrophages, eosino-
vein and the nutrient artery run through the bone marrow
phils, and basophils, respectively (Figure 1.2). The neu-
cavity adjacent to one another in the same vascular canal
trophilic precursors in bone marrow consist of two major
(Figure 1.3).
compartments: mitotic and postmitotic. The mitotic com-
Erythropoiesis takes place in distinct anatomical foci
 partment consists of cells that are able to proliferate, such
referred to as "erythroblastic islands." These islands
are
as myeloblasts, promyelocytes, and myelocytes. The post-
rich in fibronectin and consist of erythroid precursors sur-
mitotic compartment includes metamyelocytes, bands,
rounding a central macrophage. They are usually away
 and segmented neutrophils, representing more differenti
from the bone trabeculae and are located subjacent to the
 ated cells with no proliferating capacity. The granulocytes
vascular structures. Erythropoiesis begins with the commit-
released from the bone marrow into the circulation con-
ment of a small pool of pluripotent stem cells to a primitive
 sist of two components: the marginating pool and the
BONE MARROW EXAMINATION
3
 Table 1.2
Regulatory Cytokines
Cytokine
Primary Effect
GM-CSF1
Granulocyte and macrophage colony fommation, functional enhancement of mature forms
G-CSF2
Granulocyte colony formation, functional enhancement of granulocytes
M-CSF {CSF-1}3
 Macrophage colony formation, functional enhancement of monocytes and macrophages
 Erythropoietin (EPO)
Erythropoiesis, possible enhancement of megakaryocyte proliferation
Thrombopoietin (TPO)
 Megakaryocyte proliferation, platelet production
Steel factor (c-kit ligand)
 Stem cell and mast cell proliferation
Interleukin {IL}-1
Promoter of hematopoiesis, inducer of other factors, B- and T-cell regulator, endogenous pyogen
 IL-2
T-cell growth factor, may inhibit G/M colony formation and erythropoiesis
IL-3 {MuIti-CSF}
G/M colony formation, syngeneic effects on EPO, eosinophil, mast cell and megakaryocyte colony
formation
IL-4 
B-cell proliferation, IgE production
IL-5 
 Eosinophil growth and B-cell differentiation
IL-6
B-cell differentiation, synergistic effects on IL-1 
IL-7
Development of B and T cell precursors
IL-8
Granulocyte chemotactic factor
IL-9
Growth of mast cells and T cells
 IL-10
 Inhibitor of inflammatory and immune responses
 IL-11
Synergistic effects on growth of stem cells and megakaryocytes
 IL-12
Promoter of T,1 and suppressor of T,2functions
 IL-13
B-cell proliferation, IgE production
 IL-14
High molecular weight B-cell growth factor
IL-15
 Activates T cells, neutrophils and macrophages
IL-16
Chemotactic factor for helper T cells 
 IL-17
 Promotes T cell proliferation, pro-inflammatory activities
IL-18
 Activates T cells, neutrophils, and fibroblasts
IL-19
 Member ofIL-10 family; transcriptional activator of IL-10
 IL-20
 Member of IL-10 family with epidermal function
 IL-21
Improves proliferation of T cells and B cells, and enhances natural killer (Nk) cytotoxic activities
IL-22
 Member ofIL-10 family; induces inflammatory responses
IL-23
 Activates autoimmune responses
IL-24
 Member ofIL-10 family; tumor suppressor molecule
IL-25
 Capable of amplifying allergic inflammation
IL-26
 Member ofIl-10 family; plays a role in mucosal and cutaneous immunity
TGF4-β
Suppresses BFU-E, CFU-5, and HPP-CFC
Interferons
Suppress BFU-E, CFU-GEMM, and CFU-GM
 TNF-α and -β
Suppress BFU-E, CFU-GEMM, and CFU-GM
PGE6-1 and -2
Suppress GFU-GM, GFU-G, and GFU-M
 Lactoferrin
Suppresses release of IL-1
lGranulocyte and macrophage colony-stimulating factor
2ranulocyte colony-stimulating factor
3Macrophage colony-stimulating factor
4Transforming growth factor
 STumor necrosis factor
oProstaglandin E
circulating pool. These two components are in equilib-  GM-CSF and IL-5 play a major role in the development
 ' 'i      e    s e     i  
hours and leave the circulation toward the inflammation  IL-10 regulate the basophilic development (Figure 1.2).
sites in the various tissues. Eosinophil and basophil mat-
 Monocytic maturation, assisted by GM-CSF and M-CSF,
ration appear to be analogous to neutrophil maturation,
, begins with the formation of monoblasts followed by pro-
though the involved regulatory cytokines are different.
.monocytes and monocytes. Monocytes are released into
4
 STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF HEMATOPOIETIC TISSUES
Periosteal Capillaries
Periosteal Artery
NutrientArtery
BONE
ComitantVein
FIGURE 1.3 Schematic of microvascular circulation in the bone
marrow.
Adapted from De Bruyn PPH. Structural substrates of bone marrow
FIGURE 1.4 Representative examples of glass slide preparations
function. Semin Hematol 1981; 18: 179.
of (A) bone marrow biopsy, (B) clot sections, (C) bone marrow
aspirate smear, and (D) touch preparation.
the marrow. The NK-cells demonstrate HLA-non-restricted
the circulation, and from there they travel into the various
cytotoxicity and release a variety of regulatory cytokines,
tissues and become different types of tissue macrophages
such as IL-1, IL-2, IL-4, and interferons
(histiocytes) and dendritic cells. Pulmonary alveolar mac-
rophages, hepatic Kupffer cells, pleural and peritoneal
macrophages, osteoclasts, Langerhans and interdigitating
dendritic cells in various tissues, and perhaps microglial
Bone Marrow Examination
cells in the central nervous system are all examples of cells
derived from a CFU-M.
Thrombopoiesis begins  with  maturation  of  CFU-
Bone marrow samples are obtained and prepared for
GEMM into a colony-forming unit with a high proliferating
 pathologic evaluation in different ways, such as biopsies,
response to cytokines (e.g., IL-1, IL-3, and IL-6) referred to
 dotted aspirated marrow particles, marrow smears, and
as the high proliferative potential-colony-forming unit-
touch preparations (Figures 1.4 and 1.5).
megakaryocyte (HPP-CFU-MK). The next step is forma-
 Bone marrow biopsy sections are evaluated for the esti-
tion of a burst-forming unit (BFU-MK) which is capable
 mation of bone marrow cellularity and for the identification
of producing numerous megakaryocytic colony-forming
 of pathological processes, such as primary hematologic dis-
units (CFU-Meg). This process is regulated by SF, IL-3,
 orders, granulomatosis, amyloidosis, fibrosis, osteosclerosis,
GM-CSF plus thrombopoietin (TPO) and IL-ll (Figure
and metastasis. Biopsy sections are routinely stained with
1.2). Maturation of CFU-Meg leads to the formation of
hematoxylin and eosin (H&E stain) (Figures 1.5 and 1.6).
megakaryoblasts, megakaryocytes, and eventually, plate-
In addition, in some laboratories sections are stained by the
 periodic acid Schiff (PAS) technique. Bone marrow cellular-
sinuses. In this location a portion of their cytoplasm enters
ity is defined as the percentage of the bone marrow areas
into the sinusoidal space to release platelets.
occupied by cells (% cellularity). Cellularity of the bone
Lymphopoiesis begins in the bone marrow with the
 marrow varies depending on the location of the marrow
committed lymphoid stem cells. The first step of differenti-
sample and the age of the individual. For example, bone
ation of the committed lymphoid stem cells appears to be
 marrow cellularity is higher in the vertebrae than in the pel-
the separation of B progenitor cells from non-B progenitor
vic bone, and higher in children than in the elderly. Bone
cells (T-cells and natural killer cells). This step is consid-
 marrow cellularity approaches 100% at birth, and continues
ered an "antigen-independent" process. The development 
 to decline approximately 10% for each decade of life. In a
of B progenitor cells is influenced by a number of regula-
 50-year-old healthy person, the average bone marrow cellu-
tory cytokines including IL-1, IL-2, IL-4, IL-10, and inter- 1
larity is about 50% (Figure 1.6).
feron gamma (Figure 1.2). The B-cell precursors in bone
 Bone marrow clot sections (particle sections) are pre-
marrow are known as hematogones. These cells are found
pared from aspirated bone marrow, and therefore are
in small numbers in normal bone marrow (usually 5- 10% 
devoid of bone trabeculae. They only represent cells and
in young children and 5% in adults), but may increase in
lesions that are released by aspiration (Figures 1.4 and
regenerating marrows.
1.5). Clot sections are routinely stained with H&E. Some
T-lymphocytes derive from the precursor lymphoid cells
laboratories may also use PAS stain.
in the marrow (pre-thymic phase) under the influence of
Bone marrow smears are prepared by smearing the
several cytokines, such as IL-1, IL-2, and IL-9, and then
aspirated marrow over the glass slides. Marrow smears are
migrate to the thymus for further maturation. A subclass
 usually stained with Wright's (or in some laboratories with
of large granular lymphocytes, natural killer (NK) cells,
Giemsa) stains (Figures 1.5-1.7). They are used primar-
appears to share a common progenitor cell with T-cells in 
 ily for cytological evaluations, cellular details, maturation
FIGURE 1.5 Bone marrow
preparations: (A) biopsy section, (B)
dot section, (C) aspirate smear, and
(D) touch preparation.
FIGURE 1.6 Bone marrow
cellularity declines with age. (A)
and (B), (C) and (D), and (E) and
(F ) are biopsy sections from
2-year, 55-year, and 75-year-old 
individuals, respectively.
6
STRUCTUREAND FUNCTION OFHEMATOPOIETICTISSUES
steps, differential counts, and assessment of the myeloid :
erythroid ratio (normal range: 2-3). Differential counts
reflect the percent of different hematopoietic cells in bone
marrow smears. At least 200 cells are counted by randomly
selected areas of a properly stained and adequately cellu-
lar marrow smear to calculate the differential count (Table
1.3). Marrow smears are also useful for special cytochemi-
cal stains and evaluation of the bone marrow iron stores.
Bone marrow touch (imprint) preparations are made
by gently touching (pressing) the glass slides over the
biopsy sample, and are routinely stained with Wright's
 and/or Giemsa stains (Figures 1.4 and 1.5). Touch prepara-
tions most often are not optimal for morphologic evalua-
tions, because their preparation creates significant artifacts.
However, they are the only source of cytologic evaluation
FIGURE 1.7 Bone marrow smear demonstrating myeloid cells at
when bone marrow aspiration fails to yield (dry tap).
various stages of maturation. Scattered erythroid precursors and
lymphocytes are also present.
Morphologic Characteristics
 Table 1.3
of Bone Marrow Cells
Approximate Ranges of Bone Marrow Differential
Count (%) in Healthy Persons
GRANULOCYTIC SERIES
Age
Cell Type
18 months
Adult
The granulocytic series includes neutrophilic, eosinophilic,
basophilic, and mast cell lineages. The morphologic steps in 
Myeloid
the maturation process of the granulocytic series consist of
 Myeloblast 
N/A
1-5
myeloblast, promyelocyte, metamyelocyte, band, and seg-
 Promyelocyte
1-2
1-8
mented cell (Figures 1.7-1.9). During this process, the ratio
 Neutrophilic Series:
Myelocytes
2-4
5-19
Metamyelocyte
8-16
13-22
Band/5egs
14-25
21-40
Eosinophilic Series
1.5-3.5
0.5-3
 Basophilic Series
<1
<1
 Monocytic Series
1-3
1-4 
 Erythroid
 Rubriblast 
<1
0.5-2
 Prorubricyte
0.5-1
1.5-6
 Rubricyte
4-10
5-25
Metarubricyte
<1
2-20
 Other
 Megakaryocyte
<1
0.5-2
Lymphocyte
40-42
3-20
 Plasma Cell 
<1
0.5-2
M:E Ratio
FIGURE 1.9 Bone marrow smear demonstrating myeloid cells at
4-5:1
3-3.5:1
various stages of maturation.
FIGURE 1.8 Left to right: myleoblast types I, Il, and Ill, and a promyelocyte.
MORPHOLOGIC CHARACTERISTICS OF BONE MARROW CELLS
7
of cytoplasm to nucleus increases, and cytoplasm accum-
(Figures 1.7 and 1.9). Myelocytes are positive for CD13,
lates lyzosomal granules that are non-specific at first (pri-
CD15, CD33, and MPO. They are negative for CD34,
 mary granules, azurophilic granules) and become specific 
CD117, and HLA-DR.
(secondary granules) later. The nuclear chromatin becomes
Metamyelocytes are slightly smaller than myelocytes
coarser and denser, and the nucleoli appear less prominent
 and are characterized by abundant granular cytoplasm
and indistinct. The nuclear shape gradually changes from 
 with predominance of specific granules, kidney-shaped or
round/oval to kidney-shaped and segmented forms.
indented nucleus, coarser chromatin, and lack of distinct
Myeloblasts are the earliest granulocytic precursors identi-
  s       
 CD13, CD15, CD16, CD33, and MPO.
-s o r  e a p e pe  
Bands and segmented cells are the end stage cells in
mic (N:C) ratio, a centrally located round or oval nudleus,
the granulocytic series and are distinguished by abundant
finely dispersed chromatin, and several nucleoli. Myeloblasts 
 cytoplasm with specific granules, lack of or sparse pri-
may show no cytoplasmic granules or variable numbers of
 mary granules, condensed nuclear chromatin with indis-
azurophilic cytoplasmic granules (Figure 1.8). Myeloblasts
tinct nucleolus, and nuclear lobulation or segmentation.
are positive for CD13, CD33, CD117, and HLA-DR and may
 Neutrophilic bands (stabs) are cells with bilobed nuclei
express CD34 and myeloperoxidase (MPO).
with no filament formation, and neutrophilic segmented
 Promyelocytes are overall larger than myeloblasts, rang-
cells (Segs) demonstrate up to five distinct nuclear lobules
ing from 13 to 25μm in diameter. They carry more cyto-
(segments) connected to one another by filaments (Figure
plasm and contain larger quantities of azurophilic granules
1.9). Neutophilic bands and segmented cells demonstrate
than myeloblasts. They depict a perinuclear pale area (a
 alkaline phosphatase activity and are positive for CD11b,
well-developed Golgi system) and a round or oval nucleus,
CD13, CD15, CD16, CD33, and MPO.
which is often eccentric. Highly granular myeloblasts and
Other granulocytic lineages, such as eosinophils and
promyelocytes share overlapping morphologic features,
basophils, undergo more or less similar differentiation
and therefore their distinction at times is difficult (Figures
 steps. Mature eosinophils, unlike segmented neutrophils,
1.7 and 1.8). In contrast to myeloblasts, promyelocytes are
usually have bilobed nuclei and are loaded with eosin-
negative for HLA-DR and CD34. Promyelocytes are positive
ophilc granules. Eosinophilic granules are larger than the
for CD13, CD15, CD33, and MPO, plus variable expression
 neutrophilic granules (Figure 1.10). Compared with neu-
of CD117.
trophils, eosinophils express brighter CD45, but dimmer
Myelocytes are smaller than promyelocytes and are
CD11b, CD16, and CD13. Mature basophils contain a
characterized by a reduced N:C ratio with ample granu-
 large number of coarse basophilic granules and show less
lar cytoplasm containing both primary and secondary
 nuclear segmentation than the neutrophils (Figure 1.10).
granules. At the myelocytic stage the production of pri-
 Therefore, compared with neutrophils, basophils reveal
mary granules stops and the synthesis of specific gran-
 much lower side scatter. Basophils are positive for CD13,
ules enhances. Myelocytes depict a round or oval nucleus 
and uniquely express CD22 while being negative for the
with coarse chromatin  and  often lack distinct nucleoli
other B-cell markers.
C
FIGURE 1.10 (A) A bone marrow smear showing granulocytic precursors including eosinophilic myelocytes (blue arrows) and a
basophil (red arrow). (B) An eosinophil and (C) a basophil are demonstrated in blood smears.
8
STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF HEMATOPOIETIC TISSUES
FIGURE 1.12 (A) Monocytic maturation, from left to right:
monoblast, promonocyte, monocyte, and macrophages. (B) Bone
marrow smear showing several monocytic cells.
HLA-DR, and non-specific esterase, and variably positive for
lysozyme. Monocytes are released from bone marrow into
the blood circulation, and from there they migrate out into
various tissues, and finally transform to soft tissue histiocytes
FlGURE 1.11 Bone marrow smears demonstrating mast cells with
(macrophages), which are positive for CD68. Iron is stored in
various amounts of cytoplasmic granules.
bone marrow macrophages as hemosiderin (insoluble aggre-
 sn (s  s  s  (
(potassium ferrocyanide) stains hemosiderin as dark blue
Mast cells appear to be closely related to the basophils 
cytoplasmic granules (Figure 1.13A).
by sharing certain characteristics, such as basophilic gran-
Dendritic cells (DC) are considered a subclass of his-
ules, IgE receptor, and histamine content. However, mast
 tiocytic lineage and are primarily involved in antigen pre-
cells live longer, are larger, have more abundant cytoplasm
 sentation to lymphocytes. Dendritic cells, except for the
than basophils, and their nucleus is round, oval, or spin-
 follicular dendritic cells (FDCs), are derived from bone
dle-shaped without segmentation. Mast cell cytoplasmic 
 marrow stem cells. These cells are divided into two groups:
granules are MPO negative and are more numerous and
 Langerhans cells (LCs) (Figure 1.13B) and interdigitating
more variable in appearance than the granules in baso-
 dendritic cells (IDCs). Based upon their immunopheno-
phils (Figure 1.11). Mast cells express CD117 and tryptase.
 type, five subsets of DC have been reported, with variable
Monocytes and macrophages are derived from the same
expression of CD1b/c, CD16, CD123, CD141 (BDCA-3),
committed stem cells (CFU-GM) as the granulocytic cells.
 and CD34. LCs are primarily located in the skin and are
The maturation process in this lineage starts from monoblast,
characterized by the ultrastructural Birbeck granules and
and then goes through promonocyte, monocyte, macrophage (his-
expression of CD1a, CD4, S100, HLADR, and Langerin
tiocyte), and multinucleated giant cell (such as osteodasts or
(CD207) (Figure 1.14). Unlike macrophages, LCs are nega-
giant cells in granulomas) (Figures 1.12 and 1.13). During
tive for CD68, non-specific esterase, and lysozyme. IDCs
the maturation process from monoblast to monocyte, nuclei
 are found in the lymphoid tissues and show immunophe-
become folded, nuclear chromatin becomes more con-
 notypic features similar to those of LCs, except for lack of
 densed, nucleoli disappear, and cytoplasm acquires lyso- (
 CDla and CD4 expression. The FDCs are derived from the
somal granules (Figure 1.12). Monocytes are positive for dim  mesenchymal cells in the follicular structures in the lymph
CD4, CD11b, CD13, CD14, CD15, CD33, CD36, CD64,  nodes and express CD21, CD23, and CD35 (Figure 1.14).
MORPHOLOGIC CHARACTERISTICS OF BONE MARROW CELLS
6
FIGURE 1.15 Bone marrow smear showing erythroid precursors of
(A) early and (B) intermediate stages of maturation.
B
FIGURE 1.13 (A) A bone marrow clot section with iron stain
becomes denser and pyknotic, and the nucleoli appear
showing iron-laden macrophages. (B) Bone marrow smear
less prominent and indistinct. The nucleus is eventu-
showing a Langerhans cell with abundant cytoplasm and
irregular cytoplasmic projections.
ally extruded from the cell, resulting in the development
of polychromatophilic erythrocytes, and then mature red
blood cells (RBCs) (Figures 1.15 and 1.16). Erythroid pre-
DendriticCells
cursors express several membrane-associated molecules,
such as CD36, CD71, CD235 (glycophorin), CD238 (Kell
CD1a+
MT) za pue (dno8 pooq ya) 0tza (dno8 pooq
Langerhans cells (LC)
CD68
blood group).
CD207+
Rubriblasts (erythroblast, pronormoblast) are the ear-
S100+
 liest morphologically distinguished erythroid precursors.
Bonemarrow
They express CD71 and CD117. They measure 15-30μm
Stem Cells
Interdigitating
in diameter and have a high N:C ratio with a deep blue
S100+
dendriticcells(IDC)
CD68+
non-granular cytoplasm and a perinuclear pale area (the
Golgi system). The nuclear chromatin is fine and one to
Follicular
two nucleoli are present. Prorubricytes (basophilic erythro-
Mesenchymal
blasts, basophilic normoblasts) are smaller and have more
Stem Cells
 condensed nuclear chromatin than rubriblasts. They depict
Follicular dendritic
CD21+
cells(FDC)
CD35+
dark blue cytoplasm and indistinct nucleoli. Prorubricytes
undergo three cell divisions and continue maturation to
FIGURE 1.14 Subtypes of dendritic cells and their origin.
form rubricytes (polychromatophilic normoblasts), and sub-
sequently metarubricytes (orthochromic normoblasts) which
are not able to divide but continue hemoglobin synthesis
ERYTHROID PRECURSORS
(Figure 1.16). Metarubricytes lose their nudei and become
During the maturation process in erythropoiesis, cells
polychromatophilic RBCs  (reticulocytes).  Reticulocytes
gradually become smaller, the N:C ratio decreases, cyto-
gradually lose their ribosomes (in 1-2 days) and become
plasm accumulates hemoglobin, the nuclear chromatin
mature RBCs. RBCs live for about 100-120 days.
10
 STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF HEMATOPOIETIC TISSUES
PLATELET PRECURSORS
cells. Lymphoblasts, the earliest morphologically identi
fable lymphoid cells, have a high N:C ratio with a nar-
 Megakaryoblasts (promegakaryoblasts, group 1 megakaryo-
row rim of dark blue non-granular cytoplasm, a round or
cytes) are the earliest morphologically identifiable platelet
oval nucleus with fine chromatin and one to two nucleoli.
precursors (Figure 1.17). Megakaryoblasts undergo endomi-
Mature lymphocytes are slightly larger than erythrocytes and
tosis (nudlear division without cytoplasmic division) once
are characterized by scanty blue cytoplasm, round nucleus,
- 1 dol d a pe  1
coarse chromatin, and inconspicuous nucleolus (Figure
 karyocytes). Endomitosis continues, cells become larger, the
1.18A). They may be of B- or T-cell origin. A variable pro-
nudear lobulation and volume increase, and the end result
portion of lymphocytes are larger with abundant cytoplasm
 is the formation of granular megakaryocytes (group II mega-
and cytoplasmic azurophilic granules. These large granular
karyocytes) which are able to release platelets (Figure 1.17).
lymphocytes (LGL) are more frequently identified in normal
Granular megakaryocytes are the largest hematopoietic cells
blood smears than bone marrow smears and often express
 in the bone marrow. The duration from formation of mega-
CD16, CD56, and/or CD57 (Figure 1.18b). They are of two
karyoblasts to platelet production is about 1 week. Platelets
types: NK-cells and cytotoxic T-cells. NK-cells are negative 
are released into the bloodstream with a proportion (approx-
for surface CD3 and show no T-cell receptor (TCR) gene
imately one-third) pooled in the spleen. Their average life
rearrangement but they are positive for CD2 and CD7, and
span is about 8-10 days. Cells from the megakaryocytic lin-
may express CD8. Cytotoxic T-cells express CD2, CD3, CD5,
ege express CD41, CD42, CD31, CD61, and factor VIII.
CD7, CD8 and show TCR gene rearrangement.
LYMPHOID LINEAGE
Lymphocytes, as is the case for the other hematopoietic
cells, are derived from the multipotent hematopoietic stem
B
FIGURE 1.17 The megakaryocytic lineage: (A) bone marrow
biopsy section demonstrating megakaryocytes (arrows), several
eosinophils, and numerous erythroid and myeloid precursors;
FIGURE 1.16 A bone marrow clot section (A, low power: B,
(B) bone marrow smear demonstrating megakaryocytes. A
megakaryoblast with cytoplasmic budding is demonstrated in
maturation.
the inset.
MORPHOLOGIC CHARACTERISTICS OF BONE MARROW CELLS
11
Prolymphocytes are larger than lymphocytes (more
Early forms of hematogones may morphologically resemble
cytoplasm and a larger nucleus), display a coarse chroma-
lymphoblasts but always coexist with more mature forms
tin, and often show a prominent nucleolus. They are either 
of lymphocytes. Heterogeneity is the key for distinguish-
of B- or T-cell origin (Figure 1.18c).
ing hematogones from lymphoblasts of acute leukemias
Activated lymphocytes are transformed B-, T, or 
by morphology as well as immunophenotype (Figures 1.19
NK-cells. These are large cells with abundant cytoplasm and 
 and 1.20). Hematogones display a distinctive pattern on
a highly polymorphic nuclear morphology (Figure 1.18d).
CD45 gating by flow cytometry (Figure 1.21).
They are more frequently identified in blood smears than
 Plasma cells are the end product of the B-cell lineage and
marrow smears.
are characterized by abundant dark blue cytoplasm, a peri-
Hematogones represent normal bone marrow precur-
nuclear pale area (Golgi system), and an eccentric nucleus
sor B-cells. These cells consist of a heterogeneous popula-
with coarse chromatin (cartwheel appearance) (Figure
tion of B-cell precursors at various stages of maturation.
1.22). Plasma cells may show small cytoplasmic vacuoles
The earlier forms (pro- and pre-B-cells) often express TdT,
(Mott or morula cells), or large eosinophilic cytoplasmic
CD34, CD10, CD19, and intracellular CD22. As these pre-
indlusions (Russell bodies) or nuclear inclusions (Dutcher
 cursors mature, they lose CD34 and TdT, while beginning
bodies) (Figure 1.23). Russell bodies and Dutcher bodies
expression of CD20 and ultimately surface light chains.
are more often seen in plasma cell disorders than in normal
plasma cells. The vacuoles and inclusions contain immu-
noglobulin. Rarely, ovoid-, angular-, or rod-shaped immu-
noglobulin crystals are found in plasma cells. Plasma cells
express CD38, CD138, and CD79, and sometimes are posi-
tive for CD19 and/or CD20.
Lymphoid aggregates are relatively common findings
in bone marrow sections, particularly in the elderly. They
are well-defined round or oval structures that are randomly
distributed in the marrow, usually in close association with
small blood vessels and apart from bone trabeculae. They
primarily consist of small mature lymphocytes comprising
a mixture of B- and T-cells (Figure 1.24). Scattered macro-
phages, eosinophils, and plasma cells may also be present
within or around the lymphoid aggregates.
C
OTHER BONE MARROW CELLS
FIGURE 1.18 Examples of various lymphoid cells: (A)
Osteoblasts are derived from a multipotent mesenchy-
mature lymphocytes, (B) a large granular lymphocyte, (C)
mal stem cell, a lineage different from that of the HSC.
prolymphocytes, and (D) a reactive lymphocyte.
These cells are elongated or oval cells that contain an
FIGURE 1.19 Several hematogones (arrows) are
present in this bone marrow smear.
12
 STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF HEMATOPOIETIC TISSUES
FIGURE 1.20 (A) An unremarkable bone marrow biopsy section showing progressive multilineage maturation. (B) A bone marrow
smear demonstrating hematogones (arrows) and an eosinophil. (C) Scattered CD20-positive B-cells. (D) Rare TdT-positive cells in a
SSC
R1
R2
R3
CD45
FIGURE 1.21 Flow cytometry. The CD45 gating display of a
bone marrow sample demonstrates aggregates of early (R1)
and intermediate (R2) and late hematogones plus mature
FIGURE 1.22 Bone marrow smear demonstrating several plasma
lymphocytes (R3).
cells (arrows).
eccentric round or oval nucleus and one or more nucleoli.
as individual or small clusters of cells (Figure 1.25).
Osteoblasts may resemble plasma cells, except that they
Osteoblasts release a number of matrix molecules and
are larger, their Golgi are not as close to the nucleus, and
 cytokines, such as collagen type 1, proteoglycans, osteoid,
their nuclear chromatin is finer than that of plasma cells.
GM-CSF, M-CSF, and IL-6.
Osteoblasts in biopsy sections are located along the bone
Osteoclasts are derived from CFU-M. They are mul-
trabeculae, and in bone marrow smears usually appear
tinucleated giant  cells  involved  in bone resorption  and
FlGURE 1.23 Plasma cells with inclusions: (A) a grape-like plasma cell (Mott cell), (B) plasma cells with cytoplasmic rod-like Ig crystals,
(C) cytoplasmic Ig inclusions (Russell bodies), and (D) Russell bodies (green arrow) and nuclear lg inclusions (Dutcher bodies) (blue 
arrows).
FIGURE 1.24 (A) A well-defined lymphoid aggregate is shown 
from a bonemarrow biopsysection.(B) Numerous small mature
FlGURE 1.25 Numerous osteoblasts are demonstrated in (A) a
lymphocytes are present in a bone marrow smear.
bone marrow biopsy section and (B) a bone marrow smear.
14
 STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF HEMATOPOIETIC TISSUES
B
FIGURE 1.26 (A) Numerous osteoclasts are demonstrated in a
bone marrow biopsy section. (B) An osteoclast with multiple
separated nuclei and finely granular cytoplasm is shown.
remodeling (Figure 1.26). They have abundant cytoplasm
which contains numerous azurophilic granules. They are
B
found along the bone trabeculae and may resemble mega-
FIGURE 1.27 Bone marrow smears showing adipose tissue and
karyocytes, except they have multiple separated nuclei that
stromal cells. A collapsed capillary (arrow), lined by endothelial
are uniform in size. Osteoclasts are frequently observed in
cells, is present in (B).
bone marrow of patients with hyperparathyroidism, chronic
renal failure, and Paget's disease.
Blood Smear Examination
Adipocytes (fat cells, lipocytes) are mesenchymal derived
cells with abundant fat-laden cytoplasm and a small
nucleus often pushed toward the cell membrane (Figure
Morphologic evaluation of blood smear is important in
1.27). Bone marrow adipocytes can be rapidly replaced by
 routine hematology work-up, because unremarkable CBC
hematopoietic tissue when there is a need for increased
    n  n
hematopoiesis.
reflect normal hematopoiesis. For example, in hereditary
Fibroblast-like cells and endothelial cells support the
spherocytosis, lead poisoning. or malaria, the CBC may
wall of the bone marrow sinuses and build the framework
 be within normal limits, but the peripheral blood smears
 of the marrow stroma that supports the hematopoietic cells.
show spherocytes, basophilic stippling, or RBC-containing
These are usually elongated or polygonal cells (15-30μm)
parasites, respectively. Blood smears should be thin, evenly
with variable amount of pale cytoplasm and round, oval, or
distributed over the glass slides and quickly air-dried and
folded nuclei. Their nudlear chromatin is fine and they may
 stained (Wright's stain is the most popular stain).
depict one or more nudleoli. Fibroblast-like cells support pro-
liferation of myeloid and lymphoid progenitor cells. They
RED BLOOD CELL MORPHOLOGY
 ssd A  t   ry aa a
 Endothelial cells are involved in the regulation of homing
 In normal conditions, red cells are relatively uniform in
and trafficking of the hematopoietic cells, as well as prolifera-
shape and size and contain no inclusions. They are nor-
 tion and differentiation of hematopoietic precursors (Figure
 mocytic (an average of 7-8μm in diameter) and normo-
1.27). They express CD31, CD34, and CD146 and carry vari-
chromic (the pale central area less than half of the RBC
ous receptors, such as receptors for IL-3, EPO, and SF
diameter) (Figures 1.28 and 1.29). One to two percent of
BLOOD SMEAR EXAMINATION
15
E
FIGURE 1.28 Blood smears demonstrating segmented neutrophils (A, B, and D), monocytes (B and C), a large granular lymphocyte (C),
a lymphocyte (D), an eosinophil (E), and a basophil (F). Platelets are present in (A), (B), and (D).
erythrocytes are larger and polychromatophilic (bluish-
exercise, emotional distress, menstruation, anesthesia, con-
red) (Figure 1.29). These represent reticulocytes. Except in
vulsive seizures, and electric shock may be associated with
newborns, nucleated red cells are not normally found in 
 a transient neutrophilic granulocytosis. This is due to the
peripheral blood.
 demargination of the neutrophilic granulocytes and their
release into the circulating pool. The presence of immature
leukocytes in the peripheral blood should be considered
LEUKOCYTE MORPHOLOGY
abnormal.
 In normal conditions, peripheral blood smears show vari-
ous proportions of neutrophilic segmented cells (Segs)
PLATELET MORPHOLOGY
and bands (stabs), lymphocytes, monocytes, eosinophils,
and basophils (Figure 1.28). The white blood cell (WBC)
 Platelets are the end products of the megakaryocytic lin-
count is in the range 3-10x103 cells/μL with a differen-
eage and are released into the circulation as cytoplas-
tial count shown in Table 1.4. Certain conditions such as
mic fragments of granular megakaryocytes. They are the
16
 STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF HEMATOPOIETIC TISSUES
or agglutinins (IgM or IgG) which are found in patients
with autoimmune disorders, chronic liver disease, or
malignancy may cause platelet aggregation.
Structure and Function of the
Spleen
The spleen represents the largest filter of the blood circula
tion in our body. In normal conditions, it weighs between
75 and 200 grams and has a deep indentation (the hilum)
where blood vessels enter and leave. The spleen is sur-
rounded by a fibrous capsule with many trabeculae radiat-
ing from the internal surface of the capsule into the splenic
 parenchyma. The splenic artery branches into the trabecu-
lar arteries, and these branches in turn give off smaller
branches that leave the trabeculae and are called central
arteries. Central arteries run through the splenic lymphoid
pe auoz ou au on puaixa pue (dnd anm) anssn
the red pulp. Therefore, the splenic parenchyma consists
of three distinct components: the white pulp, the marginal
zone, and the red pulp (Figures 1.30-1.32).
THE WHITE PULP
 The white pulp consists of lymphoid structures organized
in B- and T-cell zones (Figures 1.30-1.32). The T-cell zone
is represented by the periarteriolar lymphoid sheath, pri-
marily consisting of tightly packed lymphocytes and
the presence of interdigitating dendritic cells. The B-cell
FIGURE 1.29 (A) Blood smear showing polychromatophilic red
cells (black arrows) and a Howel-Jolly body (green arrow). (B)
zone consists of follicles, which are structurally similar to
Reticulocytes are demonstrated by a supravital stain (arrows).
the follicular structures in the lymph nodes (see lymph
node structure later). The follicles are separated from
         
Table 1.4
frequently contain germinal centers consisting of large
The Range of white Blood Cell Differential Counts
blast-like lymphocytes (centroblasts), smaller lympho-
 in Normal Adults
cytes (centrocytes), follicular dendritic cells, and scattered
Cell Type
Range (%)
macrophages.
Granulocytes
Segmented cells
33-72
THE MARGINAL ZONE
Bands
0-13
Eosinophils
9-0
The marginal zone is the transit area for cells that are leav.
Basophils
ing the bloodstream and entering the white pulp (Figures
0-3
16-48
1.30-1.32). However, a large number of cells, such as mac-
Lymphocytes
rophages, B-cells, and dendritic cells, reside in the mar-
Monocytes
1-13
 ginal zones in order to regulate and facilitate the back and
forth transit flow of cells between the blood and the white
smallest hematopoietic elements (measuring 2-4μm in
pulp. Marginal zone B-cells are medium- to large-sized
diameter), with a count ranging from 150,000 to 400,000/
cells with pale cytoplasm and irregular nuclei, resembling
μL (Figure 1.28). A rough estimate of the platelet count is
monocytes. That is why they were originally called mono-
calculated in wedge smear preparations by the number of
cytoid B lymphocytes. Because of the presence of vari-
platelets per oil-immersion fieldx20,000. Approximately
able amounts of cytoplasm, they show nuclear spacing in
7-2l platelets are found per 100x oil-immersion field in 
 sections and appear lighter in color and less dense than
an evenly distributed normal blood smear. Anticoagulants 
 the cells present in the mantle zone. The marginal zone
STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF THE SPLEEN
17
FIGURE 1.30 Schematic of a spleen
demonstrating the white pulp, the red
pulp, and the marginal zone.
Follicle:
Adapted from Greer JP, Foerster J, Lukens JIN,
B-cells
Margir
et al. Wintrob's Clinicat Hematology. 1 ith ed.
Williams & Wikins Lippincoft, 2004.
Red Pulp
WhitePulp
Trabecul
Trabecular artery
T-cell
Central artery
B-cells, unlike mantle cells, do not express CD5. They are
negative for CD10 and CD23, have mutated IgV genes and
express surface IgM and IgD.
The marginal zone is a place where the blood-borne
pathogens are challenged by the adaptive immune system.
Macrophages with their specific pattern-recognition recep-
tors can effectively take up the pathogens and also acti-
vate the marginal zone B-cells and dendritic cells. Entry of
 activated marginal zone B lymphocytes and dendritic cells
 into the white pulp initiates an adaptive immune response
 against the blood-borne pathogens. The marginal zone is
devoid of sinuses.
THE RED PULP
The red pulp consists of splenic cords and the sinusoi-
dal system (Figures 1.30-1.32). Cords are composed of
a meshwork of fibroblast-like cells supported by extra-
celluar matrix and reticulin fibers. They form cavernous
spaces with no endothelial lining and directly receive arte-
rial blood from terminal arterioles and arterial capillaries.
Numerous macrophages are present in the cords, which
are able to remove the damaged, abnormal, or aged blood
cells, while the blood passes through into the venous
sinuses. Unlike the cords, sinuses are lined by endothe-
lial cells. There are slit-like gaps between the endothelial
cells which allow blood cells to penetrate from the cordal
 space into the sinusoidal lumen. Abnormal RBCs, such as
sickle cells, or cells with inclusions, such as Heinz bodies,
 might not be able to pass through these gaps. The sinus
basement membrane consists of a network of contractile
thick and thin reticular fibers (stress fibers) running cir-
FIGURE 1.31 (A) white pulp and red pulp regions of the
 cumferentially and longitudinally, respectively. The net-
spleen are demonstrated in an H&E section. (B) Dual
immunohistochemical staining for CD3 (brown) and CD20 (red)
work is connected to the extracellular matrix of the splenic
demonstrates T- and B-cell areas, respectively.
 cord, and its contraction helps the blood to pass through
18
 STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF HEMATOPOIETIC TISSUES
FIGURE 1.32 (A) Low power microscopic view of the spleen demonstrates white and red pulp. (B) and (C) show higher power views of
the T- and B-cell regions, respectively. (D) Higher power view of the red pulp with numerous blood-containing sinuses.
the cords into the sinuses. The spleen has three major
zone—the cortex—and a deeper, centrally located zone, the
functions:
medulla (Figure 1.33). The cortex consists of a superficial
part, immediately located under the capsule, and a deeper
1. Micro-organisms and pathogens are removed by macrophages
part or paracortex.
in the spleen. Also, abnormal, damaged, and dysfunctional
blood cells are filtered and removed by macrophages when
 The following anatomical structures are recognized in a
blood passes through the spleen.
lymph node section (Figures 1.33 and 1.34).
2. The splenic white pulp is an important component of the cell-
mediated and humoral immune systems.
FOLLICULAR STRUCTURES
3. The splenic sinusoidal system serves as a big reservoir for
blood cells.
Follicular structures are the primary home of the B lym-
phocytes. The ones that are not yet exposed to antigens
are called primary follicles and consist of packed, uniform-
looking small mature lymphocytes. Secondary follicles
Structure and Function of the
have been already exposed to antigenic stimulation. They
have a pale central area, called germinal center, consisting
Lymph Nodes
of a mixture of large and small cells. The smaller uniform-
looking lymphocytes surrounding the germinal center are
Lymph nodes are the major components of the lymphatic
packed as a darkly stained crescent known as mantle zone
system and consist of round or oval structures located
(Figure 1.34). Lymphocytes of the mantle zones (mantle
along the major blood vessels, in peritoneum and medi-
cells) are B-cells consisting of a mixture of bone marrow-
astinum, and at the base of the extremities. They mea-
derived naive cells and lymphocytes previously exposed to
sure from several millimeters to around 1 cm in diameter
antigens. Mantle zone B-cells are positive for CD5, CD23,
and are surrounded by a fibrous capsule. Incoming lym-
and IgM.
phatic vessels penetrate the capsule and release their con-
Germinal centers are generated by the clonal expansion
tent into the subcapsular sinuses. Blood vessels enter and
of antigen-activated B-cells with the support of follicular
leave the lymph nodes through the hilum. Several fibrous 
 dendritic cells and helper T-cells (Figures 1.34 and 1.35).
trabeculae extend from the inner part of the capsule into
 In these centers, B-cells undergo somatic hypermutation
the lymph node parenchyma, forming a supporting mesh-
 and Ig isotype switch and eventually differentiate into
work and dividing the lymph node into many subsections.
memory cells or plasma cells. The clonal expansion and
The lymph node parenchyma is divided into a peripheral 
somatic hypermutation occurs at the base of the germinal
STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF THE LYMPH NODES
19
Capsule
PrimaryFollicle
Subcapsular Sinus
Afferent
High Endothellal
Lymphatic
Vanules
Paracortex
Artery
Mantie
Veln
Efferent
Secondary
Follicle
Gemminal
Lymphatic
Medullary Cord
Medullary Sinus
Afferent
Lymphatic
B
FIGURE 1.33 (A) Section of a normal lymph node demonstrating 
primary and secondary follicles, paracortex and medullary region.
(B) Schematic of a normal human lymph node.
(B) is adapted from Fajardo LF. Lymph nodes and cancer: A review. Front
Follcular helper T-cell
Germinal
Radiat Ther Oncol 1994; 28: 1-10.
Center
Apoptoticcel
Tingiblebody
center with the proliferation of the cells called centroblasts.
macrophage
ightZone
Centroblasts are large, non-cleaved cells with a vesicular
Follcular
nuclear chromatin and multiple distinct nucleoli usually
dendriticcell
located close to the nuclear membrane. They show fre-
Mantle cell
quent mitotic figures. The centroblast-concentrated area
of the germinal center is known as the dark zone. Scattered
Centrocyte
DarkZone
tangible body macrophages may be seen in this zone.
The dividing B-cells continue to differentiate to the cen-
Mitotic
trocytes. These cells, which are not in cell cycle anymore,
C
are concentrated toward the apex of the germinal center
in an area called light zone. Centrocytes consist of small
FIGURE 1.34 (A) Section of a normal lymph node demonstrating
lymphoid cells with scant cytoplasm, cleaved nuclei, dis-
primary and secondary follicles. (B) A secondary follicle with dark
persed nuclear chromatin, and inconspicuous nucleoli.
and light polarized zones. (C) Schematic of a secondary follicle
The centrocytes may eventually mature into plasma cells or
demonstrating cellular composition in the germinal center.
(C) is adapted from Liu YJet al. Folficular dendritic cefls and germina!
 memory cells. Numerous apoptotic cells and tingible body
centers. Int Rev Cytol 1996: 166: 139-179.
macrophages are present in the light zone (Figure 1.34).
Centroblasts and certrocytes express B-cell-associated
The light zone of the germinal center contains a rich
antigens, such as CD19, CD20, CD22, and CD79a. They
network of follicular dendritic cells (FDCs). FDCs are
are positive for CD10 and bcl-6, but negative for CD5 and
derived from the mesenchymal cells in the follicular
BCL-2 (Figure 1.36).
       
20
 STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF HEMATOPOIETIC TISSUES
The light zone also contains follicular helper T-cells (TFH),
which are positive for CD3, CD4, CD10, CD25, CD57,
CD69, CD95, OX40 (CD134), and CD40L (CD154) (Figure
159
1.36). In recent studies, expression of PD1 and CXCL13 has
been identified on TFH.
THE PARACORTEX
The paracortical area is the primary home of T-cells. These
cells slowly flow in the spaces provided by the paracortical
cords. The cords consist of a centrally located venule lined
by tall, cuboidal endothelial cells (high endothelial venules)
surrounded by narrow corridors outlined by reticular fibers
(Figure 1.37A). In these corridors T-cells interact with anti-
gens presented to them by the stationary IDCs. IDCs, unlike
FDCs, are derived from bone marrow stem cells and express
HLA-DR and S-100 protein (Figure 1.37B). The T-cells have
passed through the thymic developmental processes (post-
thymic T-cells) and are divided into helper and suppressor
T-cells. Helper T-cells are CD4-positive and release regula-
tory cytokines to facilitate the immune responses and are
divided into two major subtypes: (a) Th1 and (b) Th2 cells.
The Th1 cells secrete IL-2 and interferon y and provide help
to other T-cells and macrophages. On the other hand, the
Th2 cells secrete IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, and IL-10 and assist B-cells
in their antibody production. Suppressor T-cells express
 CD8 and are primarily involved in cytotoxic reactions. There
are more CD4-positive than CD8-positive T-cells in lymph
nodes.
THE MEDULLA
The medulla consists of medullary cords loaded with T-
and B-cells, plasma cells, and macrophages.
VASCULAR AND LYMPHATIC
STRUCTURES
The main artery, after entering the lymph node through
the hilum, branches and gives rise to numerous arteri-
oles that pass through the trabeculae and reach the cor-
tex. There, they make a capillary network. The capillaries
empty into the high endothelial venules in the center of
the cortical corridors. Venules join together and make
larger branches, extend from the cortex to the medulla,
and finally leave the hilum as veins. Afferent lymphatic
vessels penetrate the lymph node capsule and empty into
the subcapsular sinuses, which are connected to the cor-
FIGURE 1.35 High power views of a germinal center in a lymph
tical sinuses. The sinuses are lined by endothelial cells
node section demonstrating centroblasts and centrocytes with
the presence of mitotic figures (A, B, and C), follicular dendritic
which have no basement membrane. The sinusoidal
cells (B, arrows), and tingible body macrophages (C, arrows).
 n s  s si s
by fibrous septa covered by endothelial cells. Sinuses guide
They often appear in pairs, have round or irregular nuclei
the lymphatic flow from the capsule into the medulla
with dispersed chromatin, and often one small, centrally
 and eventually terminate to the efferent lymphatics at the
located nucleolus (Figure 1.35). FDCs are characterized by
hilum and leave the lymph node. Sinusoidal spaces are
expressing CD21, CD23, and CD35 (Figure 1.36)
loaded with macrophages.
EXTRAMEDULLARY HEMATOPOIESIS
21
FIGURE 1.36 Immunohistochemical stains of lymph node follicular structures. Follicular B-cells express CD20 (A, brown), CD10 (B) and
BCL-6 (C), and are surrounded by CD3+ T-cells (A, pink). Scattered CD3+, CD57+ and BCL-2+ cells are present within the germinal
centers (A, D, and E, respectively). CD21 + cells (F) represent a mesh of follicular dendritic cells.
Extramedullary Hematopoiesis
metastasis, Gaucher disease, osteopetrosis, and Paget disease,
Extramedullary hematopoiesis refers to hematpoiesis in
the rate of hematopoiesis in bone marrow is compromised.
locations other than the bone marrow medullary space.
In these conditions, as a compensatory mechanism, liver and
It is either physiological or pathological. Extramedullary
spleen, and sometimes other tissues, may become the source
hematopoiesis in the fetus is a physiological process which
of hematopoiesis (Figures 1.39 and 1.40). Extramedullary
consists of two steps: (1) primitive hematopoiesis which
hematopoiesis has also been observed in other tissues and
develops in the yolk sack during 2.5 to 8 weeks of fetal
organs, including lymph nodes (Figure 1.41), heart, respi-
life as a temporary red-cell-forming system, and (2) defini-
ratory system, gastrointestinal tract, kidney, adrenal gland,
tive hematopoiesis which is developed later to generate the
 breast, prostate gland, uterus, and mediastinum.
entire blood cells and involves the fetal liver (Figure 1.38),
Myelolipoma is a benign tumor of adrenal gland, usul-
spleen, and bone marrow.
ally an incidental autopsy finding. It consists of fat and
In a variety of pathological conditions, such as myelo-
hematopoietic precursors, resembling an ectopic bone
proliferative disorders, hemolytic anemias, bone marrow
marrow tissue (Figure 1.42).
22
 STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF HEMATOPOIETIC TISSUES
FIGURE 1.37 Lymph node paracortex: (A) high endothelial 
FIGURE 1.39 Extramedulary hematopoiesis in the liver of an adult
venules; (B) scattered S-100+ interdigitating dendritic cells.
patient with a history of primary myelofibrosis (A, low power; B,
highpower).
 FIGURE 1.38 Extramedulary hepatic erythropoiesis in a fetus.
FIGURE 1.40 Extramedulary hematopoiesis in the spleen of an
FIGURE 1.41Extramedulary hematopoiesis in thelymph node of
an adult patient with a history of primary myelofibrosis (A, low
power; B, high power).
power; B, high power).
FIGURE 1.42 Myelolipoma of the adrenal gland consisting of fatty tissue and clusters of hematopoietic cells (A, low power; B,
intermediate power; C, high power).
 STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF HEMATOPOIETIC TISSUES
Additional Resources
Allen CD, Okada T, Cyster JG: Germinal-center organization and cel-
 Maillard I, Fang T. Pear WS: Regulation of lymphoid development,
lular dynamics, Immunity 27:190-202, 2007.
differentiation, and function by the Notch pathway. Annu Rev
Balato A, Unutmaz D, Gaspari AA: Natural killer T cells: an uncon-
Immunol23:945-974, 2005.
ventional T-cell subset with diverse effector and regulatory functions,
Mebius RE, Kraal G: Structure and function of the spleen, Nat Rev
J Invest Dermatol 129:1628-1642, 2009.
Immunol 5:606-616, 2005.
Barreda DR. Hanington PC, Belosevic M: Regulation of myeloid
Mebius RE: Organogenesis of lymphoid tissues, Nat Rev Immunol
development and function by colony stimulating factors, Dev Comp
3:292-303, 2003.
Immunol 28:509-554, 2004.
 Metcalf D: Hematopoietic cytokines, Blood 111:485-491, 2008.
Cesta MF: Normal structure, function, and histology of the spleen,
O'Malley DP: Benign extramedullary myeloid proliferation, Mod
Toxicol Pathol 34:455-465, 2006.
Pathol 20:405-415, 2007.
Choi KD, Vodyanik M, Slukvin II: Hematopoietic differentiation and
Rothenberg ME: Eosinophils in the new millennium, J Allergy Clin
cells, Nat Protoc 6:296-313, 2011.
Immunol 19:1321-1322, 2007.
Seita J, Weissman IL: Hematopoietic stem cell self-renewal versus dif-
Foucar K: Bone marrow pathology. ed 2, Chicago, 200l, ASCP Press.
ferentiation, Wiley Interdiscip Rev Syst Biol Med 2:640-653, 2010.
Gatto D, Brink R: The germinal center reaction, J Allergy Clin Immunol
Shiohara M, Koike K: Regulation of mast cell development, Chem
126:898-907, 2010.
Immunol Allergy 87:1-21, 2005.
Geddis AE: Megakaryopoiesis, Semin Hematol 47:212-219, 2010.
Uston Pl, Lee CM: Characterization and function of the multifaceted
Hirose J, Kouro T, Igarashi H, et al: A developing picture of lympho-
peripheral blood basophil, Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand) 49:l125-
poiesis in bone marrow, Immunol Rev 189:28-40, 2002.
1135, 2003.
Hoffbrand AV, Pettit JE, Vyas P: Color atlas of clinical hematology. ed 4,
Van Lochem EG, van der Velden VHJ. Wind HK. et al:
2010, Mosby/Elsevier.
Immunophenotypic differentiation patterns of normal hematopoie-
Kassem M: Mesenchymal stem cells: biological characteristics and
sis in human bone marrow: reference patterns for age-related changes
potential clinical applications, Cloning Stem Cells 6:369-374, 2004.
and disease-induced shifts, Cytometry Part B 60B:1-13, 2004.
Kawamoto H, Minato N: Myeloid cells, Int J Biochem Cell Biol
Willard-Mack CL: Normal structure function, and histology of
lymph nodes, Toxicol Pathol 34:409-424, 2006.
36:1374-1379, 2004.
Liu K, Nussenzweig MC: Origin and development of dendritic cells.
Yona S, Jung S: Monocytes: subsets, origins, fates and functions, Curr
Immunol Rev 234:45-54, 2010.
Opin Hematol 17:53-59, 2010.
Principles of
Immunophenotyping
B-CELL-ASSOCIATED CD MOLECULES
Human Cell Differentiation
CD10
Molecules
CD10, also known as common acute lymphoblastic leukemid
antigen (CALLA), is a neutral endopeptidase which inac-
Human cell differentiation molecules (HCDM) is a new
tivates several peptides. It is expressed on hematogones
terminology coined by the 8th International Workshop
(normal precursor B-cells in bone marrow), normal germi-
 on Human Leukocyte Differentiation Antigens (HLDA) in
nal center B-cells, as well as neoplastic conditions such as
2004 to describe surface molecules associated with human
B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma, follicular lympho-
cell differentiation. These molecules have been character-
mas, Burkitt lymphoma, and some cases of diffuse large
ized in a series of international workshops studying a large
cell lymphoma, plasma cell myeloma, T-lymphoblastic
number of monoclonal antibodies. The antibodies have 
leukemia/lymphomas, and myeloid leukemias. This mole-
been grouped according to their patterns of reactivity and
 cule is abundantly expressed in kidney, particularly on the
are referred to as "clusters of differentiation" (CD). The 9th
 brush border of proximal tubules and on glomerular epi-
International Workshop on HLDA was held in Barcelona,
thelium. It is also present in granulocytes, fibroblasts, and
Spain, in March 2010 and brought the total number of
a variety of normal and neoplastic epithelial cells.
CD molecules to 363 (Table 2.1) (http://hcdm.org). These
molecules characterize human leukocytes as well as other
human cells such as endothelial, stromal, and epithelial
CD19
cells. They can be detected on the surface and/or inside
CD19 is a signal-transduction molecule that plays an
the cells.
important role in the regulation of development, acti-
 Monoclonal antibodies are routinely used for the diag-
vation, and differentiation of B-lymphocytes. It is one
nosis and classification of hematopoietic malignancies and
of the earliest lineage-restricted molecules expressed on
other hematologic disorders. However, it is important to 
 B-cells, and remains expressed throughout B-cell ontogeny.
remember the following facts.
Follicular dendritic cells also express CD19. This molecule
1. If not all, then by far the vast majority of the available mono-
is not expressed on normal T-lymphocytes, monocytic
donal antibodies raised against CD molecules are not tumor-
and granulocytic series, or erythroid precursors. However,
specific and react with non-neoplastic hematopoietic cells.
CD19 is occasionally expressed in patients with AML.
2. These molecules are mostly differentiation-associated and not
lineage-specific
 3. They may react with non-hematopoietic human cells.
CD20
Because of these facts, the results of immunophenotypic
 CD20 is a membrane-embedded surface molecule which
studies, by flow cytometry and/or immunohistochemi-
plays a role in the development and differentiation of B-cells
cal stains, should always be incorporated with clinical
into plasma cells. It appears after HLA-DR, TdT, CD19, and
information, morphology, and other available data, such
CD10 expression and before cytoplasmic μ chain appear-
as cytogenetics and molecular studies. The following are 
 ance in B-cell ontogeny. Similar to CD19, CD20 is a lineage-
examples of CD molecules most frequently used in diag-
restricted molecule and is expressed on B-cells throughout
nostic hematopathology at the present time.
B-cell differentiation prior  to terminal differentiation  of
Atlas of Hematopathology. DOl: ht://dx.doi.org/10.1016/978-0-12-385183-300002-4
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
26
 PRINCIPLES OF IMMUNOPHENOTYPING
 Table 2.1
The Human Cluster of Differentiation Molecules
CD
Molecule
Main Distribution
CD1a
T6/leu-6, R4, HTA1
Cortical thymocyte, LC, IDC
CD1b
R1
Cortical thymocyte, LC, IDC
CD1c
M241, R7
 Cortical thymocyte, LC, IDC
CD2
T11; Tp50; sheep red blood cell (SRBC) receptor; LFA-2;
Thymocyte, T, NK, thymic B cells
CD3
CD3 complex, T3, Leu4
Precursor T, thymocyte, T
CD4
OKT4, Leu 3a, T4
Helper T,thymocyte, M 
CD5
Tp67; T1, Ly1, Leu-1
Thymocytes, T,B subset
CD6
T12
Thymocyte, T, B subset
CD7
Leu 9, 3A1, gp40, T cell leukemia antigen 
Precursor T, T, NK
CD8
OKT8, LeuT, LyT2, T8
Cytotoxic T, NK
CD9
Drap-27, MRP-1, p24, leucocyte antigen MIC3
Patelet, early B, Eo, Baso, endothelial 
CD10
 CALLA membrane metallo-endopeptidase
Precursor B, B subset, G
CD11a
alpha L;LFA-1, gp180/95
All leukocytes
CD11b
alpha M;alpha-chain of C3bi receptor, gp155/95, Mac-1, Mo1
G, M, NK
CD11c
alpha X; α-chain of complement receptor type 4 (CR4); gp150/95
G, M, NK
CDw12
P90-120
G, M, NK 
CD13
Aminopeptidase N, APN, gp150, EC 3.4.11.2
G, M, endothelial, LGL subset 
CD14
LPS receptor
M, DC subset
CD15
Lewis X, CD 15u: sulphated Lewis X. CD 15s: sialyl Lewis X
G, Reed-Sternberg cells
CD16
Fc gamma R Illa,
 NK, G, M, macrophage
CDw17
LacCer, lactosylceramide
Patelet, G, M, B subset 
CD18
β2-Integrin chain, macrophage antigen 1 (mac-1)
Alleukocytes
CD19
Bgp95, B4
Precursor B, B
CD20
 B1; membrane-spanning 4-domains, subfamily A, member 1
Precursor B subset, B
CD21
C3d receptor, CR2, gp140; EBV receptor
FDC,B subset, T subset 
CD22
Bgp135; BL-CAM, Siglec2
Precursor B, B
CD23
Low affnity IgEreceptor; FceRll; gp50-45; Blast-2
B, DC, M
CD24
 heat stable antigen homologue (HSA), BA-1
Precursor B, B, G
CD25
 Interleukin (IL)-2 receptor α-chain; Tac-antigen
 Activated T,B, and M
CD26
Dipeptidylpeptidase IV; gp120; Ta1
Thymocyte, B, NK, Macrophage, activated T
CD27
T14, 5152
NK, thymocyte, B subset, T subset 
CD28
Tp44 
Thymocyte, T, PC
CD29
Integrin β1 chain; platelet GPlla; VLA (CD49) beta-chain 
Alleukocytes
CD30
 Ki-1 antigen, Ber-H2 antigen
M,activated B, T, and NK 
CD31
 PECAM-1; platelet GPlla'; endocam
Endothelial, platelet, leukocyte
CD32
Fc gamma receptor type Il(FcgRill), gp40
M, G, Eo, Baso, B, platelet
CD33
My, gp67, p67
Precursor G, G, M
CD34
My10, gp105-120
Hematopoietic progenitor cells, endothelium
CD35
 C3b/C4b receptor, complement receptor type 1 (CR1)
Erythroid, B, Eo, M, T subset
CD36
 platelet GPIV, GPIlb, OKM-5 antigen
Patelet, M
CD37
gp40-52
Mature B
CD38
T10: gp45, ADP-ribosyl cyclase
Early and activated hematopoietic cells, PC
CD39
 gp80, ectonucleoside triphosphate diphosphohydrolase 1
Leukocytes
CD40
Bp50, T NF Receptor 5
 B, DC,macrophage, endothelial 
CD41
platelet glycoprotein GPIlb
Platelet
CD42a
platelet glycoprotein GPIX
 Platelet 
CD42b
platelet glycoprotein GPlb-α 
 Platelet
CD42c
 platelet glycoprotein GPIb-β
 Platelet
CD42d
platelet glycoprotein GPV
 Platelet
CD43
 Leukosialin; gp95; sialophorin; leukocyte sialoglycoprotein 
Leukocytes
CD44
Pgp-1; gp80-95, Hermes antigen, ECMR-IIland HUTCH-.
Leukocytes
CD45
LCA, B220, protein tyrosine phosphatase, receptor type C
Leukocytes
(Continued)
HUMAN CELL DIFFERENTIATION MOLECULES
27
Table 2.1
The Human Cluster of Differentiation Molecules (Continued)
CD
Molecule
 Main Distribution
CD45RA
 Restricted T200; gp220; isoform of leukocyte common antigen
Naive T, B, M, NK
CD45RO
Restricted T200; gp180
Thymocyte, memory T, G, M
CD45RB
 Restricted T200; isofom of leukocyte common antigen
Tsubset, B, G, M
CD46
 Membrane cofactor protein (MCP)
Leukocytes
CD47
Integrin-associated protein (IAP), Ovarian carcinoma antigen OA3
Leukocytes
CD48
BLAST-1, Hulym3, OX45, BCM1
Leukocytes
CD49a
Integrin α1 chain, very late antigen, VLA 1a
Broad
CD49b
Integrin α2 chain, VLA-2-alpha chain, platelet gpla
 Broad
CD49c
 Integrin α3 chain, VLA-3 alpha chain
Broad
CD49d
Integrin α4chain, VLA-4-alpha chain
Broad 
CD49e
Integrin α5 chain, VLA-5 alpha chain
Broad
CD49f
Integrin α6 chain, VLA-6 alpha chain, platelet gplc
Broad 
CD50
ICAM-3, intercellular adhesion molecule 3
Leukocytes 
CD51
Integrin alpha chain, vitronectin receptor alpha chain
 Patelet, endothelial cell
CD52
Campath-1, HE5 
Thymocyte, B, T, NK, M
CD53
MRC 0X-44
B, T, M, NK, G
CD54
 ICAM-1, intercellular adhesion molecule 1 
B, T, M, G, endothelial cell 
CD55
 DAF, Decay Accelerating Factor
Broad
CD56
NKHI, Neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM)
NK, Tsubset, neuroendodermal cells
CD57
HNK1
NK, Tsubset, neuroendodermal cells 
CD58
 LFA-3, lymphocyte function associated antigen-3
Broad
CD59
MACIF, MIRL, P-18, protectin
 Broad
CD60
GD3 (CD60a), 9-0-acetyl GD3 (CD60b), 7-0-acetyl GD3 (CD60c)
Patelets, T subset 
CD61
 Glycoprotein Illa, beta3 integrin
 Platelets 
CD62E
E-selectin, LECAM-2, ELAM-1
 Endothelium
CD62L
L-selectin, LAM-1, Mel-14 
B, T, M, NK subset, G
CD62P
 P-selectin, granule membrane protein-140 (GMP-140)
Activated platelet, endothelium
CD63
LIMP, gp55, LAMP-3 neuroglandular antigen, granulophysin
 Activated platelets, G, M, endothelium
CD64
FcgR1, FcgammaR1
Precursor G, G, M, DC subset 
CD65
 Ceramide dodecasaccharide 4c, VM2
G, M
CD66a
 BGP, carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion molecule 1
 G, epithelium
CD66b
CGM6, NCA-95
5
CD66c
 nonspecific crossreaction antigen, NCA-50/90
 G, epithelium
CD66d
CGM1
G
CD66e
Epithelium
CD66f
 P5G, 5p-1, pregnancy specific (b1) glycoprotein
Myeloid cellines, placenta
CD68
 gp110, macrosialin
M, G, DC subset, Baso, Mast cell 
CD69
AlM, activation inducer molecule, MLR3, EA1, VEA
 Activated leukocytes
CD70
 CD27 ligand, Kl-24 antigen
Activated B and T
CD71
 Transferrin receptor
 Erythroid precursors, proliferating cells 
CD72
Lyb-2, Ly-19.2, Ly32.2
 Precursor B, B
CD73
Ecto-5'-nucleotidase
Bsubset, T subset
CD74
 MHC ClassIl associated invariant chain (li)
B, IDC, T subset
CD75
Lactosamines
B, activated T, macrophages, activated 
endothelium
CD75s
 Since HLDA7, CDw76 has been renamed CD75s
B, T subset 
CD77
 Pk blood group antigen; Burkitt's lymphoma associated antigen
Germinal center B
CD79a
MB-1; Igαx
 Precursor B, B, activated B
CD79b
B29;lgβ
 Precursor B, B, activated B
CD80
B7-1; BB1
Macrophages, activated Tand B
CD81
Target of an antiproliferative antibody (TAPA-1); M38
Broad
CD82
R2; 4F9; C33; IA4, kangai 1
Broad
CD83
HB15
IDC, LC
(Continued)
28
 PRINCIPLES OF IMMUNOPHENOTYPING
 Table 2.1
The Human Cluster of Differentiation Molecules (Continued)
CD
Molecule
Main Distribution
CD84
p75,GR6
CD84
CD85
ILT5; LIR3; HL9
 B, thymocytes, M, macrophages, platelets 
CD86
B7-2; B70
IDC, LC, B, and M subset
CD87
 Urokinase plasminogen activator-receptor (uPA-R)
Subsets ofT, NK, M,and G
CD88
C5a-receptor
G, M, DC
CD89
 Fca-receptor, IgA-receptor
 Precursor myeloid, G, M 
CD90
Thy-1
 Hematopoietic stem cell 
CD91
α2-macroglobulin receptor (ALPHA2M)
Broad
CDw92
p70
G, M
CDw93
GR11
G, M, myeloid blast, endothelium
CD94
kP43, killer cell lectin-like receptor subfamily D, member 1
NK, T subset
CD95
APO-1, Fas, TNFRSF6
Thymocytes, B and T subset
CD96
TACTILE (T cellactivation increased late expression)
 Activated NK and T
CD97
BL KDD/F12
DC, G, M, activated B and T
CD98
4F2, FRP-1
Activated leukocytes
660
MIC2, E2
Broad
CD100
SEMA4D
 Leukocytes, activated T, germinal center B
CD101
V7, P126
G, M, DC, activated T
CD102
ICAM-2
 M, platelet, endothelium
CD103
 Integrin alpha Esubunit, HML-1 
Intraepithelial lymphocytes, hairy cells
CD104
 Integrin beta 4 subunit, TSP-1180
Epithelium 
CD105
 Endoglin
 Endothelium, precursor B, activated M
CD106
VCAM-1 (vascular cell adhesion molecule-1), INCAM-110
 DC, activated endothelium
CD107a
 Lysosomal associated membrane protein (LAMP)-1
 Degranulated platelet, activated T
CD107b
Lysosomal associated membrane protein (LAMP)-2
 Degranulated platelet
CD108
GPl-gp80; John-Milton-Hagen (JMH) human blood group antigen
Erythroid 
CD109
Patelet activation factor; 8A3, E123
 Activated platelet, endothelium
CD110
Thrombopoietin receptor; c-mpl
Hematopoietic stem cells, platelets 
CD111
 PRR1, Nectin 1, Hve C1, poliovirus receptor related 1 protein
 34+ hematopoietic precursors
CD112
PRR2, Nectin 2, Hve B, poliovirus receptor related 2 protein
 34+ hematopoietic precursors
CDw113
PVRL3, Nectin3
Epithelium 
CD114
G-CSFR, HG-CSFR, CSFR3
M, platelets
CD115
M-CSFR, CSF-1, C-fms
M, macrophages
CD116
 GMCSF Ralpha subunit 
Myeloid cells
CD117
 SCFR, c-kit, stem cell factor receptor
 Hematopoietic stem cells, mast cells, plasma 
cells, AML blasts
CD118
LIFR
Broad
CD119
 IFN gamma receptor alpha chain
Broad
CD120a
TNFRI; TNFRp55
Broad
CD120b
TNFRII; TNFRp75
Broad
CD121a
Type IIL-1 receptor
Broad
CD121b
Type Il IL-1 receptor
Broad
CD122
 IL-2 receptor beta chain, p75
B, T, NK, M
CD123
IL-3 receptor alpha chain (IL-3Ra)
Hematopoietic precursors
CD124
 IL-4 Ralpha chain
Broad
CDw125
 IL-5 receptor alpha chain 
 Baso, Eo, activated B
CD126
IL-6 receptor alpha chain
T, M, activated B
CD127
 IL-7 receptor alpha chain, p90
 Precursor B, B, T
CD129
 IL-9 receptor alpha chain 
 Hematopoietic cells
CD130
gp130
Broad
CD131
Common βchain, low-affinity (granulocyte-macrophage)
 Precursor myeloid, precursor B, M, G, Eo
CD132
 Common gamma chain, interleukin 2 receptor, gamma
B, T, M, G, NK
(Continued)
HUMAN CELL DIFFERENTIATION MOLECULES
29
 Table 2.1
 The Human Cluster of Differentiation Molecules (Continued)
CD
Molecule
Main Distribution
CD133
 AC133, PROML1, prominin 1 
 CD34+ hematopoietic precursor
CD134
OX 40, TNFR5F4
Thymocyte, T
CD135
FLT3, STK-1, flk-2
 Precursor B, precursor myleomonocytic
CDw136
 Macrophage stimulating protein receptor, MSP-R, RON
Epithelium, M 
CDw137
 4-1BB, Induced by lymphocyte activation (ILA)
T,activated T 
CD138
Syndecan-1, B-B4
 Pasma cells, B subset, epithelium 
CD139
B, M, G
CD140a
alpha-platelet derived growth factor (PDGF) receptor
 Mesenchymal cells
CD140b
beta-PDGF receptor
 Mesenchymal cells, M, G
CD141
Thrombomodulin (TM), fetomodulin
Broad
CD142
Tissue factor, thromboplastin, coagulation factor ll
 Epithelium, M, endothelium
CD143
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), peptidyl dipeptidase A
Broad
CD144
VE-cadherin, cadherin-5
 Endothelium
CDw145
None
Endothelium
CD146
Muc 18, MCAM, Mel-CAM, s-endo
 Endotheilum, melanoma cells, activated T
CD147
 Basigin, M6, extracellular metalloproteinase inducer (EMMPRIN)
Leukocyte, erythroid, platelet, endothelium
CD148
 DEP-1, HPTP-n, protein tyrosine phosphatase, receptor type, J
G, M, T subset, DC, platelet
CD150
SLAM, signaling lymphocyte activation molecule, IPO-3
Thymocyte, B, DC, T subset, endothelium
CD151
 Patelet-endothelial tetra-span antigen (PETA}-3
 Patelet, endothelium, epithelium 
CD152
Cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen (CTLA)-4
Activated B and T
CD153
CD30 Ligand
Activated T and M
CD154
CD40 Ligand; TRAP (TNF-related activation protein)-1; T-BAM
Activated T
CD155
 Polio virus receptor (PVR)
M,neurons
CD156a
 ADAM-8, a disintegrin and metalloproteinase domain 8
G, M
CD156b
TACE, ADAM 17 snake venom like protease CSvP
Broad
CD157
BST-1 BP-3/IF7 Mo5
G, M, precursor B
CD158
killer cell lg-like receptor, three domains, long cytoplasmic tail 1
NK, T subset 
CD159a
killer cell lectin-like receptor subfamily C, member 1
NK
CD160
BY55, NK1, NK28
NK, T subset 
CD161
NKR-P1A, killer cell lectin-like receptor subfamily B, member 1 
NK, T subset
CD162
 Pselectin glycoprotein ligand 1, PSGL-1
T,M, G, B subset
CD163
GHI/61, D11, RM3/1, M130
M, macrophage, activated T
CD164
MUC-24, MGC 24, multi-glycosylated core protein 24 
M, epithelium, bone marrow stromal cells 
CD165
AD2, gp 37
Thymocyte, T, platelet
CD166
ALCAM, KG-CAM, activated leukocyte cell adhesion molecule
Epithelium, activated Tand M
CD167
Discoidin receptor DDR1 (CD 167a) and DDR2 (CD 167b)
 Epithelium
CD168
Thymocyte
CD169
 Sialodhesin, Siglec-1
 Macrophage
CD170
Siglec 5 (sialic acid binding Ig-like lectin 5)
Myeloid cells 
CD171
 Neuronal adhesion molecule, LI 
Neurons
CD172
 SIRP, signal inhibitory regulatory protein family member
leukocytes
CD173
Blood Group H2
Erythrocytes
CD174
Lewis Y blood group, LeY, fucosyltransferase 3
 Erythrocytes
CD175
 Tn Antigen (T-antigen novelle)
Carcinomas
CD176
Thomsen-Friedenreich antigen (TF)
Carcinomas
CD177
NB 1
CD178
FAS ligand, CD95 ligand
T, NK
CD179a
V pre beta
Precursor B
CD179b
Lambda 5
Precursor B
CD180
RP105, Bgp95
Mantle zone and marginal zone B
CD181
CXCR1, (was CDw128A)
Leukocytes
CD182
CXCR2, (was CDw128B)
Leukocytes
(Continued)
30
 PRINCIPLES OF IMMUNOPHENOTYPING
Table 2.1
 The Human Cluster of Differentiation Molecules (Continued)
CD
Molecule
Main Distribution
CD183
CXCR3 chemokine receptor, G protein-coupled receptor 9
T, CD34+ hematopoietic cells, DC subset, Eo,
CD184
 CXCR4 chemokine receptor, Fusin
M, T subset
CD185
CXCR5; Chemokine (C-X-C motif) Receptor 5, Burkitt lymphoma receptor  Broad 
CDw186
CXCR6; Chemokine (C-X-C motif) Receptor 6 
T, epithelium
CD191
CCR1; Chemokine (C-C motif) Receptor 1, RANTES Receptor
T, and NK subset
CD192
CCR2; Chemokine (C-C motif) Receptor 2, MCP-1 receptor 
M
CD193
CCR3; Chemokine (C-C motif Receptor 3, eosinophil eotaxin receptor
Eo, Baso, epithelium
CD195
 CCR5 chemokine receptor
T, M
CD196
CCR6; Chemokine (C-C motif) Receptor 6
DC and T subset
CD197
CCR7; (was CDw197) Chemokine (C-C motif Receptor 7
DC and T subset 
CDw198
CCR8; Chemokine (C-C motif) Receptor 8
Thymocyte, macrophage
CDw199
CCR9; Chemokine (C-C motif Receptor 9
Intestinal T cells
CD200
MRC OX 2
Broad
CD201
Endothelial protein Creceptor (EPCR)
Endothelium
CD202b
TIE2, TEK
 Endothelium, hematopoietic stem cell 
CD203c
E-NPP3, PDNP3, PD-1beta 
Mast cell, Baso
CD204
 MSR, SRA, Macrophage scavenger receptor
Macrophage
CD205
DEC-205
DC
CD206
Macrophage mannose receptor (MMR)
M, macrophage, endothelium 
CD207
Langerin
LC
CD208
DC-LAMP
IDC
CD209
DC-SIGN
DC subset
CD210
 IL-10 receptor
 B, T, NK, M, macrophage
CD212
IL-12 receptor beta chain
 Activated T and NK 
CD213a1
IL-13 receptor alpha 1
Broad
CD213a2
IL-13 receptor alpha 2
B, M
CDw217
IL-17 receptor
Broad
CDw218
IL-18R alpha 
CD220
Insulin Receptor
Broad
CD221
IGF I Receptor, type IIGF receptor 
Broad
CD222
Mannose-6-phosphate receptor, insulin like growth factor ll R
Broad
CD223
LAG-3 (lymphocyte activation gene 3)
Tand NK subset
CD224
 Gamma-glutamyl transferase, GGT
Broad
CD225
Leu-13, interferon-induced transmembrane protein 1
Broad
CD226
DNAM-1, DTA-1
T, NK, M, platelet, B subset 
CD227
 MUC1; episialin; PUM; PEM; EMA; DF3 antigen; H23 antigen 
Broad
CD228
 Melanotransferrin, p97
 Melanoma cells, endothelium 
CD229
Ly9
T, B
CD230
Prion protein, PrP(c), PrP(sc) abnormal form
Broad
CD231
TALLA-1, TM45F2
 Precursor T, neuroblastoma 
CD232
VESPR
Broad
CD233
 Band 3, AE1 (anion exchanger 1), Diego blood group antigen
RBC
CD234
 DARC, Fy-glycoprotein, Duffy blood group antigen
RBC
CD235a
Glycophorin A
RBC
CD235b
Glycophorin B
RBC
CD236
Glycophorin C/D
 RBC, stem cell subset
CD236R
Glycophorin C
RBC, stem cell subset 
CD238
 Kell blood group antigen
RBC, stem cell subset 
CD239
B-CAM, lutheran glycoprotein
RBC, stem cell subset
CD240CE
 Rh blood group system, Rh30CE
RBC
CD240D
 Rh blood group system, Rh30D
RBC
CD240DCE
 Rh30D/CE crossreactive mabs
RBC
(Continued)
HUMAN CELL DIFFERENTIATION MOLECULES
31
Table 2.1
 The Human Cluster of Differentiation Molecules (Continued)
CD
Molecule
Main Distribution
CD241
RhAg, Rh50, Rhassociated antigen
RBC
CD242
LW blood group, Landsteiner-Wiener blood group antigens
RBC
CD243
MDR-1, P-glycoprotein, pgp 170, multidrug resistance protein I
 Hematopoietic stem cell
CD244
2B4; NAIL; p38
NK, T subset 
CD245
p220/240, DY12, DY35
Tsubset
CD246
Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)
 Anaplastic large cell lymphoma 
CD247
Tcell receptor zeta chain, CD3 zeta
T, NK
CD248
TEM 1, Endosialin 
 Fibroblast, endothelium
CD249
Aminopeptidase A; APA, gp160
Epithelium
CD252
 OX40L; TNF (ligand) superfamily member 4, CD134 ligand 
T
CD253
TRAIL; TNF (ligand) superfamily member 10, APO2L
T
CD254
TRANCE; TNF (ligand) superfamily member 11, RANKL
T,M
CD256
APRIL; TNF (ligand) superfamily member 13, TALL2
 Osteoclast, B subset 
CD257
BLYS; TNF (ligand) superfamily, member 13b, TALL1, BAFF
B
CD258
LIGHT; TNF (ligand) superfamily, member 14
CD261
TRAIL -R1; TNFR superfamily, member 10a, DR4, APO2
Broad
CD262
 TRAIL-R2; TNFR superfamily, member 10b, DR5
 Broad
CD263
TRAIL-R3; TNFR superfamily, member 10c, DCR1
Broad
CD264
TRAIL-R4; TNFR superfamily, member 10d, DCR2
NK, T subset 
CD265
TRANCE-R; TNFR superfamily, member 11a, RANK
M, DC
CD266
 TWEAK-R; TNFR superfamily, member 12A, type Itransmembrane
Broad
protein Fn14
CD267
TACI; TNFR superfamily, member 13B, transmembrane activator and 
Lymphocytes
CAML interactor
CD268
 BAFFR; TNFR superfamily, member 13C, B cell-activating factor
B
CD269
 BCMA; TNFR superfamily, member 17, B-cell maturation factor
B
CD271
NGFR (p75); nerve growth factor receptor ( TNFR superfamily, member
Neurons 
CD272
BTLA; B and T lymphocyte attenuator
B, T subset
CD273
 B7DC, PDL2; programmed cell death 1 ligand 2 
Activated B and T
CD274
B7H1, PDL1; programmed cell death 1 ligand 1 
Broad 
CD275
B7H2, ICOSL; inducible T-cell co-stimulator ligand (ICOSL)
Broad
CD276
B7H3; B7 homolog 3
N/A
CD277
 BT3.1; B7 family: butyrophilin, subfamily 3, member A1
CD278
ICOS; inducible T-cell co-stimulator
Activated T
CD279
PD1; programmed cell death 1
Broad
CD280
ENDO180; uPARAP, mannose receptor, Ctype 2, TEM22
Macrophages
CD281
TLR1; TOLL-like receptor 1
Lymphocytes
CD282
 TLR2; TOLL-like receptor 2
Lymphocytes
CD283
 TLR3; TOLL-like receptor 3 
Lymphocytes
CD284
TLR4; TOLL-like receptor 4
Lymphocytes
CD289
TLR9; TOLL-like receptor 9
Lymphocytes
CD292
BMPR1A; Bone Morphogenetic Protein Receptor, type IA
Broad
CDw293
 BMPR1B; Bone Morphogenetic Protein Receptor, type IB
Broad 
CD294
CRTH2; PGRD2; G protein-coupled receptor 44,
Tsubset
CD295
 LEPR; Leptin Receptor
Patelets, G
CD296
 ART1; ADP-ribosyltransferase 1
G
CD297
ART4; ADP-ribosyltransferase 4; Dombrock blood group glycoprotein
RBC
CD298
ATP1B3; Na+/K+-ATPase beta 3 subunit
Broad
CD299
DCSIGN-related; CD209 antigen-like, DC-SIGN2, L-SIGN
DC
CMRF35 FAMILY; CMRF-35H
M, G,B and T subsets
CD301
 MGL; CLECSF14, macrophage galactose-type C-type lectin 
Macrophages
CD302
 DCL1; Type Itransmembrane C-type lectin receptor DCL-1
 Hodgkin lymphoma celine 
CD303
BDCA2; C-type lectin, superfamily member 11
DC subtype
(Continued)
32
 PRINCIPLES OF IMMUNOPHENOTYPING
Table 2.1
The Human Cluster of Differentiation Molecules (Continued)
CD
Molecule
 Main Distribution
CD304
BDCA4; Neuropilin 1
Broad
CD305
LAIR1; Leukocyte-Associated lg-like Receptor 1
B, T, NK 
CD306
LAIR2; Leukocyte-Associated lg-like Receptor 2
B, T, NK
CD307
IRTA2; Immunoglobulin superfamily Receptor Translocation Associated 
600
VEGFR2; KDR (a type I receptor tyrosine kinase)
Endothelium
CD312
EMR2 ; EGF-like module containing, mucin-like, hormone receptor-like
Lymphocytes
CD314
 NKG2D; Killer cell lectin-like receptor subfamily K, member 1
NK
CD315
CD9P1; Prostaglandin F2 receptor negative regulator 
Lymphocytes
CD316
 EWI2; Immunoglobulin superfamily, member 8
Lymphocytes
CD317
BST2; Bone Marrow Stromal cell antigen 2
Bone marrow stromal cells
CD318
 CDCP1; CUB domain-containing protein 1
Hematopoietic stem cell subset
CD319
CRACC; SLAM family member 7
Activated T
CD320
8D6; 8D6 Antigen; FDC
N/A
CD321
JAM1; F11 receptor
Epithelium, endothelium
CD322
JAM2; Junctional Adhesion Molecule 2
 Epithelium, endothelium
CD324
E-Cadherin; cadherin 1, type 1, E-cadherin (epithelial)
Epithelium
CDw325
N-Cadherin; cadherin 2, type 1, N-cadherin (neuronal)
 Neurons
CD326
Ep-CAM; tumor-associated calcium signal transducer 1
Epithelium
CDw327
siglec6; sialic acid binding lg-like lectin 6
 Cell-cell adhesion
CDw328
siglec7; sialic acid binding lg-like lectin 7
Cell-cell adhesion 
CDw329
siglec9; sialic acid binding lg-like lectin 9
Cell-cell adhesion
CD331
FGFR1; Fibroblast Growth Factor Receptor 1
Fibroblasts
CD332
FGFR2; Fibroblast Growth Factor Receptor 2 (keratinocyte growth factor 
 Fibroblasts
receptor)
CD333
 FGFR3; Fibroblast Growth Factor Receptor 3 (achondroplasia,
Fibroblasts
thanatophoric dwarfism)
CD334
 FGFR4; Fibroblast Growth Factor Receptor 4
Fibroblasts
CD335
 NKp46; NCR1, (Ly94); natural cytotoxicity triggering receptor 1
NK
CD336
NKp44; NCR2, (Ly95); natural cytotoxicity triggering receptor 2
NK
CD337
NKp30; NCR3
NK
CDw338
ABCG2; ATP-binding cassette, sub-family G (WHITE), member 2
Epithelium 
CD339
Jagged-1; Jagged 1 (Alagille syndrome)
Broad
CD351
FCAMR; Fc receptor, IgA,IgM, high affinity
Lymphocytes
CD352
 SLAMF6; SLAM family member 6
Lymphocytes
CD353
SLAMF6; SLAM family member 8
Lymphocytes
CD354
 TREM1; triggering receptor
Myeloid cells 
T-cells
CD355
CRTAM; cytotoxic and regulatory
T-cell molecule
CD357
 TNFRSF18; tumor necrosis factor receptor,
Broad 
member 18
CD358
TNFRSF21; tumor necrosis factor receptor, member 21
Broad
CD360
 IL-21R; interleukin 21 receptor
T, NK
CD361
EV128
Retrivirus-induced myeloid tumors
CD362
SDC2; syndecan 2
Epithelial cells 
CD363
S1PR1; sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor 1
Broad
Adapted from http://hcdm.org
IDC: interdigitating dendrite cell; LC: Langerhans cell; DC: dendritic cell; follicular dendrite cell; M: monocyte/macrophage; G: granulocyte; PC: plasma cell;
 Eos: eosinophil; Baso: basophil; RBC: red blood cell.
CD21
 B-cells to plasma cells. CD20 is expressed in a vast majority of
mature B-cell neoplasms and some cases of B-lymphoblastic
CD2l is a receptor for EBV, C3 complement components.
leukemia/lymphomas, plasma cell myelomas, Hodgkin lym-
CD21 along with CD19 and CD81 make a large signal-
phomas, T-cell neoplasms and AMLs.
transduction complex involved in B-cell activation. CD2l is
HUMAN CELL DIFFERENTIATION MOLECULES  33
expressed on mature B-cells and follicular dendritic cells, and  CD77
is lost upon activation. Follicular dendritic cell neoplasms,
CD77 is a glycosphingolipid Pk blood group antigen
some cases of mantle cell and marginal zone lymphomas,
which is also expressed on germinal center B lymphocytes.
as well as a proportion of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas
 It is strongly positive in Burkitt lymphoma and is weakly
express CD21.
expressed on some follicular center lymphomas.
CD22
CD79
CD22 is a member of the immunoglobulin gene super
CD79 in association with surface Ig constitutes the B-cell anti-
family. It is involved in the regulation of expression of
 gen receptor complex and plays a critical role in B-cell matura-
surface IgM on B-cells. Cytoplasmic CD22 is expressed
at the earliest stages of B-cell differentiation, along with
tion and activation. The pattern of CD79 expression on B-cells
CD19 and is present prior to the expression of CD20.
is dosely similar to that of CD19. CD79 consists of α and β
The majority of the precursor B-cells are also positive for
heterodimers. CD79a is expressed initially in the cytoplasm of
cytoplasmic CD22. Expression of surface CD22 precedes
 B-cells prior to cytoplasmic μ heavy chain expression, and later
Or accompanies expression of surface IgM and/or IgD in 
 on, affer the expression of surface Ig appears on the surface
 membrane. CD79a is usually negative in CLL cells and plasma
mature B-lymphocytes, but it is lost in plasma cells. The 
neoplastic cells in various proportions of B-cell malignan-
 cells, whereas CD79b is expressed in a significant proportion
cies, including B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphomas and of patients with CLL and some cases of plasma cell myeloma
expression of CD22 can be particularly strong in hairy
tion of B-cell neoplasms, but tumor cells in some cases of
cell leukemia and prolymphocytic leukemia. T-cells and
Tlymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma and AML may react
their malignant counterparts, except for rare cases, do not
 positively with CD79 monoclonal antibodies.
express CD22.
CD138
CD23
CD138 is a transmembrane sulfate proteoglycan which
functions as a receptor for cell-matrix interactions. Plasma
CD23 is an integral membrane glycoprotein involved in
 cells adhere to type 1 collagen through CD138 and are the
only hematopoietic cells that express this molecule. CD138
of B-cells, monocytes, follicular dendritic cells, platelets,
  n s   s 
and eosinophils. CD23 is expressed in chronic lympho-
suich as fibroblasts, endothelial cells, and stratified epithelia.
cytic leukemia (CLL), in some cases of follicular lympho-
mas, and primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma.
Tumor cells in mantle cell and marginal zone lympho-
CD5
mas do not typically express CD23. Plasma cell myeloma,
        
B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphomas, as well as T-cell
and myeloid malignancies are negative for CD23.
Associated CD Molecules."
CD24
CD103
CD103 is a membrane receptor involved in the activation
CD24 is a redundant co-stimulatory molecule in lymphoid
of intraepithelial lymphocytes. It is expressed in >9o% of
tissuies. It is expressed on immature and mature B-cells except
 intestinal intraepithelial lymphocytes and also found in
 plasma cells. This molecule, however, is not lineage-restricted
 intraepithelial lymphocytes of bronchial mucosa. In addi-
and is present on granulocytes and various benign and malig-
tion, expression of CD103 can be identified in certain
 types of B- and T-cell lymphoid malignancies, such as hairy
tidylinositol (GPI)-linked molecule, it is sometimes used
cell leukemia (B-cell), enteropathy-associated T-cell lym-
for the diagnosis of paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
phoma, and rare cases of adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma.
(PNH) in flow cytometric assays. Normal T-lymphocytes,
Dendritic cells in the skin, lymphoid tissues, and gastroin
monocytes, and erythroid precursors do not express CD24.
 testinal tract may express CD103.
CD35
Other B-Celf-Associated Markers
CD35 is a complement C3b/C4b receptor membrane-bound
glycoprotein. It is expressed on follicular dendritic cells, B-  FMC7. This molecule binds to a particular conformation of
and T-lymphocytes, erythrocytes, eosinophils, monocytes, the CD20 antigen. It is detected only when CD20 is expressed
and kidney podocytes. CD35 monoclonal antibodies are  at moderate to high intensities. FMC7 is often negative in
34
 PRINCIPLES OF IMMUNOPHENOTYPING
PAX5. The PAX5 gene encodes the B-cell lineage-specific
TCR
activator protein (BSAP), which is a member of the highly
conserved paired box (PAX)-domain family of transcrip-
a
B
tion factors. It plays a crucial role in B-cell development
and commitment of the bone marrow multipotent pro-
genitor cells to the B-lymphoid lineage. Therefore, PAX5
88
3人
is a useful pan B-cell marker, and antibodies to PAX5 are
commonly used for the diagnosis of B-lymphoid malig
 nancies, particularly precursor B-ALL. T-cell malignancies
 may sometimes reveal aberrant PAX5, and PAX5 is positive
in >90% classical Hodgkin lymphomas. Neuroendocrine
neoplasms and t(8;21 )-AML may also express PAX5.
ZAP-70 is a tyrosine kinase that plays a role in TCR-
mediated signal transduction. Intracellular expression of this
molecule is found in normal T-cells, NK cells, and some nor-
mal B-cells. It can also be found in precursor B-acute lympho-
blastic leukemia cells, and CLL cells, particularly in those CLL
cases with unmutated IgV genes. The positivity of ZAP-70 in
CLL appears to be associated with a poor prognosis.
Annexin-Al protein is highly expressed in differenti-
ated hematopoietic cells, including neutrophils, mono-
 cytes, mast cells, and lymphocytes, particularly T-cells. In
an immunohistochemical study of 5o0 B-cell neoplasms,
using a specific anti-annexin A-1 monoclonal antibody, the
CD3
expression of this protein was demonstrated in all cases of
FIGURE 2.1 Schematic of TCR complex.
hairy cell leukemia.
T-CELL-ASSOCIATED CD MOLECULES
excellent pan-T-cell marker and one of the earliest anti-
 ae o za ie seade q i saad p s
CD1
lymphocytes. Some of the T-lymphoid malignancies, par-
CD1 is a member of the immunoglobulin supergene fam-
ticularly peripheral T-cell lymphomas, may lose their CD2
ily consisting of MHC class I-like glycoproteins. So far, five
expression. On the other hand, some cases of AML may
distinct molecules of CD1 have been described: a, b, c, d,
aberrantly express CD2.
and e. The first three types have been extensively used in
 diagnostic hematopathology. CD1 molecules are expressed
on thymocytes. They are absent from mature peripheral
CD3
blood T-cells, but their cytoplasmic expression has been
CD3 is a complex structure composed of three different
observed in activated T-lymphocytes. High levels of CD1a
polypeptide dimmers: ye , Se , and Sg. CD3 in conjunc-
and, to a lesser degree, of CD1b and CDlc are present on 
tion with T-cell receptor (TCR) makes the TCR complex
the Langerhans cells. CDla is an excellent marker of corti-
(Figure 2.1). TCR molecules represent two different het-
cal thymocytes, which are often double positive for CD4
erodimers: αβ and y8. The vast majority of mature T-cells
and CD8 (see below). CD1c is expressed by the majority of
bear TCR αβ, whereas only about 5% of T-cells express TCR y&.
cord blood B-cells. A subset of mantle cells and follicular
The αβ T-cells are divided into CD4+ and CD8+ cells that
center B-cells also express CD1c. Follicular dendritic cells
are widespread and found in all hematopoietic and lym-
and monocytes/macrophages are CD1-negative.
phoid tissues, whereas y8 T-cells are negative for CD4 or
CD8, and are primarily found in the spleen and intestinal
mucosa. Surface membrane CD3 is a pan-T-cell marker
CD2
 and is expressed by thymocytes and all mature T-cells of
CD2 is a transmembrane molecule and a member of
 peripheral blood and lymphoid tissues. NK-cells do not
the immunoglobulin supergene family. The existence
 express TCR complex but usually show the cytoplasmic ε
of this molecule was originally discovered by the ability
 chain of CD3; hence, they are often positive for CD3 by
a   o n s  jo
 immunohistochemical studies where the anti-CD3 anti-
cytes (E-rosette receptor). CD2 plays an important role in
1 body is reactive against the cytoplasmic e chain of CD3.
T-cell activation, T- or NK-mediated cytolysis, apoptosis 
s B-cells, granulocytic series, and monocytes/macrophages are
in activated peripheral T-cells, and the production of cyto- 2
 all  CD3-negative. T-lymphoblastic leukemias/lymphomas
kines by T-cells. It is expressed by thymocytes, peripheral 2
 are positive for cytoplasmic CD3 expression, but often lack
T-cells, NK-cells, and a subset of thymic B-cells. CD2 is an
1  expression of surface CD3.
HUMAN CELL DIFFERENTIATION MOLECULES 35
CD4
but erythroid precursors are CD45-negative. CD45RA is
expressed on naive/resting T-cells and medullary thymo-
CD4 is a membrane glycoprotein and a member of the
 cytes, whereas CD45RO is detected on memory/activated
immunoglobulin supergene family and a co-receptor in
T-cells, cortical thymocytes, monocytes/macrophages, and
MHC class I-restricted T-cell activation. CD4 is the pri-
granulocytes.
mary receptor for HIV retroviruses. It is coexpressed with
CD8 on cortical thymocytes. Over 50% of the peripheral
blood T-cells and bone marrow cells are CD4+, represent-
T-Cell Receptor Molecules
ing the helper/inducer subtype. Monocytes/macrophages
and dendritic cells express dim CD4. The majority of post-
As mentioned earlier, TCR heterodimers, αβ and y8, in asso-
thymic T-cell neoplasms are CD4-positive.
ciation with CD3 make the TCR complex (Figure 2.1). The
vast majority of mature T-cells bear TCR αβ, and only about
5% of T-cells express TCR y8. The αβ T-cells are widespread
CD5
and are found in all hematopoietic and lymphoid tissuies,
whereas y8 T-cells are primarily found in the spleen and
CD5 is a signal transducing molecule interacting with TCR
 intestinal epithelium. NK cells do not express TCR; neither
and B-cell receptor (BCR). It is dimly expressed on early
 do the B-cells, monocytes/macrophages, or granulocytic
thymocytes and at moderate to high density on all mature
 cells. y8 T-cells are negative for CD4 and CD8.
T-lymphocytes. It is also expressed at dim density on a
small subset of mature B-lymphocytes (Bla cells), which is
expanded during fetal life and in several autoimmune dis-
Other T Celf-Associated Markers
 orders. Certain B-cell neoplasms, such as chronic lympho-
CD26 is a T-cell co-stimulatory molecule with dipeptidyl
cytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma and mantle
peptidase activity and is considered as a T-cell activation
cell lymphoma, express dim CD5.
molecule. CD26 expression is often lost in the Sezary cells.
CD246 or anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)
is
CD7
expressed by the neoplastic cells in a subpopulation of
anaplastic large cell lymphomas. ALK can be found nor-
CD7 is a transmembrane glycoprotein and a member of
mally in neurons, glial cells, and endothelial cells.
the immunoglobulin supergene family. It plays an impor-
tant role in T-cell and T-cell/B-cell interactions during
early lymphoid development. CD7 is the earliest T-cell-
CD MOLECULES ASSOCIATED WITH LARGE
associated molecule to appear in stem cells and pre-thymic
GRANULAR LYMPHOCYTES
stages and extends its expression all the way to the mature
T-cells. This molecule is also present on NK-cells. In addi-
CD16
tion, the pluripotent bone marrow stem cells may express
CD16 is involved in antibody-dependent cell mediated
CD7. A subpopulation of AML, particularly those with
cytotoxicity and is expressed on large granular lympho-
monocytic or megakaryocytic differentiation, may express
       () 
CD7. Lack of CD7 expression can be used for the detection
15-20% of the peripheral blood lymphocytes and a
of T-cell lymphoproliferative disorders, such as mycosis
 much smaller fraction (5%) of bone marrow lymphocytes
fungoides/Sezary syndrome and adult T-cell leukemia/
express dim CD16. CD16 is also expressed at moderate
lymphoma. However, normal and reactive T-cells often
levels on granulocytes, tissue macrophages, and subsets of
demonstrate variable degree of CD7 loss.
monocytes, eosinophils, and dendritic cells. CD16 expres-
sion is reduced or lost in PNH because of the structural
CD8
abnormality of anchor membrane protein, GPI.
CD8 is a cell surface glycoprotein and a member of the
CD56
on cytotoxic/suppressor T-lymphocytes and a subset of
CD56 is a member of the immunoglobulin supergene family.
 It functions as an adhesion molecule on neural and NK cells,
mocytes and 35-45% of the peripheral blood lymphocytes
 and a subset of T-cells. NK cells are divided into CD56 bright
express CD8. A subpopulation of NK-cells is also CD8+.
 and CD56 dim subgroups. The CD56 dim subset represents
about 90% of the NK cells, is CD16-positive, and contains
CD45RA and CD45RO
higher levels of granzyme A and perforin (molecules involved
      
These molecules represent two different isoforms of the  cells are CD16 dim or negative. CD56 is an excellent marker
CD45 cluster. CD45 is typically expressed in most hemato- for the detection of NK cells and T-LGL lymphoprolifera-
poietic cells (a pan-leukocyte marker). Hematopoietic blasts  tive disorders, but it is also expressed by plasmacytoid den-
and plasma cells often show a dim expression of CD45, dritic cells and neoplastic cells of some cases of plasma cell
36  PRINCIPLES OF IMMUNOPHENOTYPING
myeloma, AML, and ALL. Neuroectodermal tumors, such as  of renal proximal tubules and bile duct canaliculi may also
small cell carcinoma of lung neuroblastoma, medulloblas-  express CD13.
toma, and astrocytoma, are CD56-positive.
CD14
CD57
CD14 is a lipopolysaccharide-binding protein, which func-
tions as an endotoxin receptor. It is anchored to the cell
CD57 is a glycoprotein expressed on NK cells, T-cell sub-
 surface by linkage to GPI. CD14 is strongly positive in mono-
 sets, and some cells of neuroectodermal origin. The pro-
cytes and most tissue macrophages, but is weakly expressed
portion and absolute number of CD57-positive cells in
or negative in monoblasts and promonocytes. Myeloblasts
peripheral blood increases with age. In adults, CD57 is
and other granulocytic precursors do not express CD14, but
-ou pooa liadad a jo -ot Aq passadx
 s  o oo  e  sd
nuclear cells. Most of the CD57+ T-cells are of cytotoxic/
weakly express CD14. T-cells, dendritic cells, and platelets are
suppressor type. Only a small fraction of CD4+ T-cells
 CD14-negative. CD14 expression is reduced or lost in PNH
expresses CD57, and these appear to be associated with
because of the structural abnormality of GPI. Anti-CD14
chronic inflammatory conditions, such as tuberculosis,
monodlonal antibodies are frequently used for the identifica-
malaria, and AIDS. The CD57+, CD4+ T-cells constitute
 tion of leukemias with monocytic differentiation.
a major component of T-cells within the germinal centers
 and are known as follicular helper T-cells. Approximately
40% of the CD16-positive lymphocytes coexpress CD57.
CD15
The CD16+, CD57+ subset demonstrates strong cytotoxic
activities. The CD4+; CD57+ cells are increased in lym-
CD15 is a carbohydrate-based molecule expressed by the
phocyte predominance Hodgkin lymphoma and chronic
C granulocytic series past the myeloblast stage. A significant
inflammatory conditions. CD57 is a helpful marker for the
proportion of monocytes, a minority of macrophages/
detection of LGL disorders and is also positive in a wide 
 histiocytes, and a wide variety of epithelial cells and their
variety of tumors of neuroectodermal or mesenchymal
 malignant counterparts also express CD15. Erythroid pre-
origin.
cursors, B-cells, T-cells, and NK cells are CD15-negative.
Reed-Sternberg cells and activated T-cells may express
CD15.
Other NK-Associated Markers
CD33
eral new NK-associated markers including the following.
● CD158 or killer cell inhibitory receptor is expressed by NK
CD33 is a sialoadhesin molecule and a member of the
cells and T-cell subsets.
immunoglobulin supergene family. It is expressed by
 CD16l is expressed on most NK cells and a subset of CD4+/
myeloid stem cells (CFU-GEMM, CFU-GM, CFU-G, and
CD8+ T-cells (thymocytes).
 E-BFU), myeloblasts and monoblasts, monocytes/macro-
 CD335 was previously known as NKp46, NCR1, (Ly94). 0r
phages, granulocyte precursors (with decreasing expres-
natural cytotoxicity triggering receptor 1.
sion with maturation), and mast cells. Mature granulocytes
CD336 was previously referred to as NKp44, NCR2, (Ly95), 0r
         
natural cytotoxicity triggering receptor 2.
can be aberrantly expressed on some cases of plasma
● CD337 was previously known as NKp30, NCR3, or natural
cell myeloma. This molecule is not expressed in eryth-
cytotoxicity triggering receptor 3.
rocytes, platelets, B-cells, T-cells, or NK cells. CD33 is an
    n    n
GRANULOCYTIC/MONOCYTIC-ASSOCIATED CD
diagnosis of AML. However, approximately 10-20% of B
MOLECULES
lymphoblastic or T lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphomas
may aberrantly express CD33.
CD13
CD13 is a zinc-binding aminopeptidase expressed on
the surface of about 40% of myeloid precursors, mature gran-
CD64
ulocytic/monocytic cells and basophils. This molecule is also
 CD64 is a member of the immunoglobulin supergene
expressed on endothelial cells, bone marrow stromal cells, family and functions as an Fc gamma-receptor of IgG. It is
osteodlasts, some early erythroid precursors, a small propor-6
 expressed by monocytes/macrophages, myeloid precursors,
tion of LGLs, and some cases of plasma cell myeloma. CD13  and follicular dendritic cells. CD64 and CD14 together are
of acute myeloid leukemia. However, about 5-15% of acute  ers and are commonly used in flow cytometric studies to
HUMAN CELL DIFFERENTIATION MOLECULES 
37
   xa    n  as ss    e   se e i
monocytic marker than CD14. Langerhans cells, interdigi-  detection of Langerhans cell disorders.
tating dendritic cells, B-cells, T-cells, NK cells, and ery-
throid and megakaryocytic lineages are all CD64-negative.
Other Dendritic Cell-Associated Markers
CD68
S100 is a calcium-binding protein which regulates protein
kinase C-dependent phosphorilation. S100A is composed
ai s a o i e pe i e si i
of an alpha and beta chain and SlooB of two beta chains.
  so  s si n  a 
Immunohistochemical stains for Slo0 are positive in the
rophages as well as subsets of CD34-positive hematopoietic
 Langerhans cells, interdigitating dendritic cells, and their
stem cells, dendritic cells, neutrophils, basophils, and mast
corresponding neoplasms, as well as in Schwannomas,
cells. Activated T-cells and a proporion of mature B-cells
 ependymomas, astrogliomas, and malignant melanomas.
may also express CD68, which usually appears as a dot-like
or finely granular cytoplasmic positivity by immunohisto-
chemical techniques. Some non-hematopoietic cells, such
ERYTHROID-ASSOCIATED CD MOLECVLES
as epithelium of renal tubules, may show CD68 positivity.
CD71
Other Myeloid-Associated CD Molecules
CD71 is the transferrin receptor and is expressed on all
proliferating cells. It is also expressed by erythroid precur-
CD88 is a C5a receptor and is expressed by granulocytes,
 sors which need iron for the synthesis of heme molecules.
monocytes, mast cells, subsets of dendritic cells, as well as
CD71 in conjunction with glycophorin A (CD235A) is a
astrocytes and microglia.
helpful marker in the identification of erythroid precursors
CD1l4 is the receptor for granulocyte colony-stimulat-
in hematologic disorders.
ing factor (G-CSF). It is expressed by cells of the granulo-
 cytic lineage in all stages of differentiation and is found in
various proportions of monocytes, platelets, endothelial CD235
cells, and trophoblastic cells.
CD235 molecules represent glycophorins A and B, the two
CD115 is the receptor for macrophage colony-stimulat-
major sialoglycoproteins of the human erythrocyte mem-
ing factor (M-CSF) and is primarily expressed on cells of
brane, and are restricted to erythrocytes. These molecules bear
the monocyte/macrophage lineage.
 the antigenic determinants for the MN and Ss blood groups.
CD1l6 is α chain subunit of the GM-CSF receptor and is
Monodlonal antibodies against glycophorin A (GPA) are fre-
expressed by various myeloid cells including macrophages.
quently used in immunophenotypic studies for the identifica-
neutrophils, eosinophils, and dendritic cells.
tion of erythroid precursors in hematologic disorders.
DENDRITIC CELL-ASSOCIATED CD MOLECVLES
CD238
CD21
CD238 is the Kell blood group transmembrane protein
See page 32.
CD240
CD35
CD240 represents the C, E, and D antigens of the Rh
blood group system, the second most clinically significant,
See page 33.
and the most polymorphic, system of the human blood
groip.
CD123
expressed in a wide variety of hematologic malignancies  CD242 is an intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM4)
such as AML, precursor B-ALL, hairy cell leukemia, a subset  and represents the Landsteiner-Wiener (LW) blood group
cytoid dendritic cell neoplasms
disease.
CD207
Other Erythroid-Associated Markers
necessary for formation of the Birbeck granules in the  nophenotypic studies of erythroid precursors.
38   PRINCIPLES OF IMMUNOPHENOTYPING
MEGAKARYOCYTE/PLATELET-ASSOCIATED CD
assays express CD34. The uncommitted progenitor cells are
MOLECULES
CD38-negative, whereas the committed ones are CD38-
positive. In normal conditions, CD34-positive cells account
CD36
for about 1-2% of the total bone marrow cells. The TdT+
subset of precursor B-cells (hematogones) is also positive
CD36, also known as glycoprotein IV (gpIV) or glycoprotein
for CD34. Approximately 40% of AMLs and over 50% of
IlIb (gplllb), is one of the major glycoproteins of the plate-
ALLs express CD34.
let surface and serves as a receptor for thrombospondin.
identification of megakaryoblasts and immature megakaryo-
CD38
 Cytes in myeloproliferative disorders and myeloid leukemias.
CD38 is a multifunctional ectoenzyme widely expressed in
hematopoietic cells. It plays a role in the regulation of cell
CD42
activation and proliferation. It is expressed in committed
 hematopoietic stem cells and other hematopoietic precur-
         
 sors during early differentiation and activation. Very early
to the megakaryocytic lineage and platelets. This complex
erythroid and myeloid cells, precursor B-cells, thymocytes,
facilitates adhesion of the platelets to the subendothe-
activated T-cells, and NK cells express CD38. CD38 is also
lial matrices. Absence of the CD42 complex leads to the
expressed at high levels on plasma cells.
Bernard-Soulier syndrome. Anti-CD42 monoclonal anti-
 bodies are routinely used for identification of megakaryo-
blasts and immature megakaryocytes in myeloproliferative
0677
 disorders and myeloid leukemias.
The CD90 molecule is a member of the immunoglobulin
supergene family and is expressed by 10-40% of CD34+
CD41 and CD61
cells in bone marrow. The CD34+/CD90+ cells probably
represent the most primitive hematopoietic progenitor
CD41 (platelet glycoprotein IIb) and CD61 (platelet glyco-
 cells. CD90 is also expressed in fibroblasts and other stro-
protein IHla) form a calcium-dependent heterodimeric com-
mal cells.
plex. This glycoprotein complex (GPIIb-IIla) binds plasma
proteins, such as fibrinogen, fibronectin, von Willebrand
factor, and vitronectin, and plays a critical role in platelet
CD99
aggregation. Hereditary defects of the GPlIb-IIla receptor
CD99 is a transmembrane protein involved in homotypic
cause Glanzmann's thrombasthenia. Similar to CD42, anti-
cell adhesion, apoptosis, vesicular protein transport, and
CD41 and -CD6l monoclonal antibodies are frequently
used for identification of megakaryocytic precursors in
differentiation of T-cells. Its expression has been reported
in acute lymphoid leukemias, Ewing's sarcoma, Granulosa
myeloproliferative disorders and myeloid leukemias.
cell tumor, plus other tumors of neuroectodermal origin
CD110
CD117
CD110 or thrombopoietin receptor (TPO-R) is expressed
CD117 (c-kit) is a tyrosine kinase receptor and a member
on the megakaryocytes and platelets, as well as subsets of
hematopoietic stem cells, activated T-cells, and endothelial
most of the hematopoietic stem cells, CD34+ progenitor
cells.
cells, and mast cells. The majority of AML cells are CD117-
positive. Plasma cells may also express CDl17. CD117 is
Other Megakaryocyte/Platelet-Associated Markers
an excellent marker for the detection of mast cell disorders
and identification of myeloblasts in acute leukemias.
Factor VIlI is another useful megakaryocytic marker used
for identification of megakaryocytic precursors in myelo-
proliferative disorders and myeloid leukemias.
CD123
See page 37.
PRECURSOR-ASSOCIATED CD MOLECULES
CD34
Other Precursor-Associated Markers
CD34 is a transmembrane glycoprotein expressed on early T
 TdT (terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase) is a DNA
endothelial cells. Also, embryonic fibroblasts and some cells  as well as subset of precursor B-cells. Anti-TdT antibod-
      e              
 all pluripotent and committed stem cells in colony-forming  phoblastic leukemias/lymphomas plus  lymphoid blast
PRINCIPLES OF FLOW CYTOMETRY  39
A small proportion of AMLs is also TdT-positive.
CD59 expression is reduced or lost in patients with PNH
It is widely expressed on cells throughout the body, includ-
ing hematopoietic cells.
OTHER MARKERS ROUTINELY USED IN
HEMATOPATHOLOGY
Ki-67
CD11
Ki-67 is a proliferation-associated molecule. Its expression is
CDlla, b, and c are components of heterodimer CD1l/
upregulated during the S phase of the cell cycle and is maxi-
CD18 adhesion molecules. CDlla is a panleukocyte 
 mized during mitosis. Anti-Ki-67 antibodies are used for the
marker and is expressed by B- and T-lymphocytes, mono-
estimation of proliferating index in various malignancies
cytes, macrophages, neutrophils, basophils, and eosino
phils. CDllb is expressed by most of the granulocytes,
monocytes/macrophages, and NK cells, and subsets of B-
Immunoglobin Transcription Factors
and T-cells. CD1lc is highly expressed in monocytes/mac-
rophages, NK cells, and hairy cells.
Oct1, Oct2, and BOB.1/OBF.1. Oct1 and Oct2 and their co-
 activator BOB.1/OBF.1 regulate immunoglobulin gene tran-
scription. Antibodies raised against these molecules are used
CD30
for the characterization of certain types of B-cell lymphoid
malignancies, and also aid in distinction between classic
CD30 is a member of the tumor necrosis factor (TNF)
Hodgkin lymphoma (CHL) and nodular lymphocyte pre-
receptor family and appears to be involved in TCR-
mediated cell death. It is expressed by Reed-Sternberg
dominant Hodgkin lymphoma (NLPHL). Double positivity
cells and Hodgkin cells, neoplastic cells of anaplastic large
for Oct2 and BOB.1/OBF.1 is seen in L&H cells of NLPHL
cell lymphoma (ALCL), as well as activated lymphocytes,
but not in Hodgkin-Reed-Sternberg cells of CHL.
and monocytes. Some cases of embryonal carcinoma and
mixed germ cell tumors also express CD30.
Principles of Flow Cytometry
CD43
CD43 is a sialomucin transmembrane molecule expressed
 Flow cytometry is now considered an integral component
at high levels on all leukocytes except most resting B lym-
of diagnosis and management of hematolymphoid disor-
phocytes. In hematopathology, CD43 is often considered 
as a T-cell associated marker, because it is expressed by
ders. Availability of a vast number of antibodies against CD
molecules in high quality plus numerous fluorochrome-
over 95% of thymocytes and peripheral blood T-cells. But,
 conjugated forms, sophisticated multiparametric and user-
interdigitating dendritic cells, Langerhans cells, epithelioid
histiocytes, and multinucleated giant cells express CD43,
friendly flow cytometers, advanced software, improved
gating strategies, and use of "pattern recognition", which
whereas follicular dendritic cells and sinus histiocytes of
 is the gold-standard in data interpretation, have made flow
the lymph nodes are usually CD43-negative. CD43 may
be expressed in mantle cell lymphoma and other types
of B-cell lymphomas, mastocytosis, some cases of plasma
A flow cytometer is basically a particle analyzer. It
detects cell properties as a stream of single cell (or par-
cell disorders and blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neo-
ticle) suspension passes through a laser beam (Figure
plasms. Loss or defect of CD43 has been reported in lym-
2.2). The cell size, nuclear and cytoplasmic complexity
 phocytes of patients with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome.
(e.g., nuclear irregularity and cytoplasmic granularity),
along with membrane-associated, cytoplasmic or nuclear
CD55
molecules that are labeled by fluorochrome-conjugated
 antibodies, are measured by a set of optical detectors and
CD55 or decay-accelerating factor (DAF) binds C3b and
analyzed. A fluorochrome is a chemical which can absorb
C4b to inhibit formation of the C3 convertases. It is
energy from an excitation source (laser beam) and emit
anchored to the GPI in the cell membrane, and, therefore,
photons at a longer wavelength (fluorescence), which is
its expression is reduced or lost in patients with paroxysmal
captured by optical detectors of the flow cytometer. The
nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH). It is widely expressed on
current generations of flow cytometers are capable of
cells throughout the body, including hematopoietic cells
analyzing at least six parameters simultaneously: cell size
depicted by forward scatter (FSC) laser light, cell com-
CD59
d  ase (ss) rns ais a pi ad
antibodies conjugated to four different fluorochromes,
CD59 is also a GPI-anchored molecule and inhibits forma- defining at least six molecular characteristics of the target
tion of membrane attack complex (MAC), thus protecting cells (or particles) passing through the instrument.
40
PRINCIPLES OFIMMUNOPHENOTYPING
FlowCytometry
ExamplesofPatternRecognition-1
Cell Susp
Sheath Fluid
bnght CD20
nomal T-cells
D20
CD20
dimCD20
malT-cells
Laser
Det
Ab3-FL3
kappa
CD4
Ab4-FL4
Focalop
FIGURE 2.5 Examples of various antigen expression levels
FIGURE 2.2 A schematic overview of a 4-color/6-parameter flow
as determined by pattern recognition using proper internal
cytometer.
controls. Comparing with moderate CD20 expression by normal
polytypic B-cells, two subsets of abnormal B-cells are present
with either dim or bright CD20 (left). Similarly, normal T-cells
 express moderate level of CD3, but a subset of the CD4+ T-cells is
abnormal with dim CD3 (right).
G
G
OSS
ExamplesofPatternRecognition-2
HOMOGENEITYVS
SUBSETWITH
HETEROGENEITY
VARIOUSPOSITIVITY
FSC
CD45
ubsetA+only
subsetA+/B+
of (left) FSC/SSC and (right) CD45/SSC: E, erythroid precursors;
L, lymphocytes; B, blasts; M, monocytes; G, granulocytes; P, plasma
cells.
AgB
AgB
FIGURE 2.6 Examples of various antigen expression patterns.
A tight cluster represents a homogeneous expression profle,
whereas a widespread pattern indicates a more heterogeneous
nature of the antigen expression profle (left). In addition, subsets 
may coexist with different patterns of positivity (right), which can 
often be clearly illustrated using density plot.
CD45
FIGURE 2.4 Open gate displays by CD45 gating of flow cytometry
demonstrating variable locations of the neoplastic cells of a
and CD45 gate (CD45 versus SCC) (Figure 2.3). On the
plasma cell myeloma (A, red cluster), an acute lymphoblastic
CD45 gate, the hematolymphoid cells are separated into
leukemia (B, green cluster), and an acute myelomonocytic
rather distinct subgroups based on their differential expres-
leukemia (C, green and red clusters).
sion of CD45 plus side scatter characters. CD45 is strongly
-oo  s an p so  ssa
GATING
cytes, while platelets and erythroid precursors are CD45-
Gating refers to the selection of target cell populations in a
 negative. Blasts are dimly positive for CD45 in about 80%
given electronic window. Cells revealing similar electronic
of the acute leukemias, and plasma cells are CD45-negative
signals tend to cluster together in the same electronic win-
to CD45 dim. Hence, the CD45 gating strategy is very help-
dows. For example, in flow cytometric study of peripheral
fil in separating blast cells from non-blast cells, lymphoid
 blood lymphocytes that are small and non-granular tend to
 cells from non-lymphoid cells, and monocytes from gran-
cluster in the lower left section of the FSC versus SSC elec-
ulocytes (Figures 2.3 and 2.4). It also helps to distinguish
tronic window (Figure 2.3). Currently, the recommended
the normal patterns of expression from the abnormal ones,
basic gating strategy for analyzing hematolymphoid cells
especially when a combination of various gating strategies
includes a combination of the scatter gate (FSC versus SSC)
 is applied (Figures 2.5 and 2.6). Proper gating is a critical
PRINCIPLES OF FLOW CYTOMETRY
41
FITCBand Filter
PEBandFilter
FITC
PE
480
530
580
630
Fluorescence spillover
FIGURE 2.7 An example of fluorescence spillover between FITC
and PE.
Adapted from Wuiff s. Guide to Flow Cytometry, DakoCytomation.
step in data analysis and interpretation of the results in flow
cytometry.
CD4FITC
In order to utilize proper gating strategies and aim at
FIGURE 2.8 For monitoring compensation, in practice, two
the target populations, we strongly recommend correlation
mutually exclusive markers such as CD4 and CD8 are utilized in a
with microscopic review of the samples and the gathering
peripheral blood sample.
of as much clinical information as possible prior to the
selection of monoclonal antibodies and gating processes.
Counts
COMPENSATION
When multiple fluorochromes are used, there is often a fluo-
rescence interference due to the overlapping emission spec-
tra, which is most prominent in fluorochromes that emit at
10
103
10
103
10
adjacent wavelengths. For example, fluorescein isothiocya-
nide (FITC) and phycoerythrin (PE) emit at 520 and 576nm,
LPL
respectively. Since these two emission peaks are adjacent to
FIGURE 2.9 Histograms for a single parameter usually depict
each other, there is an overlap or spillover between the emit-
fluorescent intensity versus cell count. TdT-negative and TdT-
 positive samples are shown here on the left and right, respectively.
ted FITC and PE fluorochromes, even when the proper filters
are used to limit this overlap (Figure 2.7). The process of cor-
recting (subtracting) this fluorescence spillover is called com-
Histograms for a single parameter usually depict fluorescent
pensation. Current models of multiparametric multicolor
intensity versus cell counts (Figure 2.9). Dot and density
flow cytometers have a built-in automated compensation
plots provide simultaneous information for two parameters
 mechanism, which can be applied during both pre- or post-
(Figures 2.10 and 2.11). Contour histograms display the
acquisition stages of analysis. In practice, both manual and
data as a series of encircling lines correlating with cellular
automated(
 compensation adjustments 
requireproper
density and distribution (Figure 2.12). Most programs also
antibody-fluorochrome controls
allow comparative studies of multiple samples by simulta-
neously overlaying their single parameter histograms.
DATA ANALYSIS
QUALITY CONTROL AND QUALITY ASSURANCE
Modern multiparametric flow cytometers in conjunction
with powerful and user-friendly software programs offer
Similar to all other instruments in clinical laboratories, flow
great opportunities for hematopathologists, immunolo-
cytometry has its own quality control (QC) and quality assur-
gists, and researchers to rapidly acquire data and analyze
 ance (QA) issues. Many steps are involved in various aspects
the results on large cell populations. For example, one
of flow cytometry, such as the optimization of instrument
of the most popular current models is capable of process-
function, sample processing. acquiring and analyzing data,
ing 10,o00 cells (events) per second and detecting at least 
and reporting the results. Flow cytometers should be cali-
  i   r e  
brated with samples consisting of a mixture of blank and pre-
 nals) simultaneously. Software programs provide a variety
 defined fluorescence-labeled microbeads. The performance
of options for the evaluation and analysis of the signals,
of various components, suich as fluidics, optical filters, mul-
including data collection on logarithmic or linear scales,
tiplier tubes, and lasers, should be checked on a regular basis.
and different options for displaying histograms (Figures
 Standardized protocols for each step of the process should be
2.8 to 2.12). The logarithmic scale is the preferred scale
 implemented to ensure reliable results, including verification
for most immunophenotypic studies by flow cytometry.  of accuracy of the results with known samples.
42
PRINCIPLES OF IMMUNOPHENOTYPING
FL1+
FL1/FL2*
FL1
FL2
FSC
FIGURE 2.12 Counter histograms display the data as a series of
Negative
encircling lines correlating with cellular density (higher in the
FL2Dim
center) and cell clusters.
FIGURE 2.10 Two-parameter dot plot histograms depict four
quadrants. The lower left quadrant represents a negative cell
cluster, the upper left quadrant shows the cell population 
Enzyme
positive for one parameter, the lower right quadrant depicts cells 
positive for the second parameter, and the upper right quadrant 
represents cells that coexpress both parameters.
Secondary antibody
Primary antibody
Antigen
FIGURE 2.13 Schematic of immunohistochemical techniques
demonstrating direct and indirect immunoenzyme methods.
Adapted from Ramos-Vara JA. Technical aspects of
immunohistochemistry. Vet Pathol 2005; 42:405-426.
Principles of
Immunohistochemistry
CD45
CD15
Immunohistochemistry has become a routine staining tech-
nique in most pathology laboratories. Enzyme-conjugated
antibodies are used for the demonstration of antigens in tissue
sections, smears, and cytospin preparations. Horse radish per-
 oxidase and/or alkaline phosphatase are the most frequently
 used enzymes for signal generation. Sections from frozen or
fixed tissues are used. Archival tissue blocks are sectioned and
deparaffinized and then properly heated for epitope retrieval.
After blocking the endogenous peroxidase, the primary
antibody (1-5pg) is applied with proper incubation time
CD34
CD13
FIGURE 2.11 An example of two-parameter dot plot analysis
(30min) and then the enzyme-conjugated or biotinylated
showing (A) a population of CD45 dim blast cells expressing (B)
 secondary antibody is added (Figure 2.13). To amplify the sig-
CD10, (C) CD34, and (D) CD19.
nals, biotin-avidin-enzyme or biotin-streptavidin-enzyme
PRINCIPLES OF IMMUNOHISTOCHEMISTRY
43
Biotin-peroxidase
Avidin
Biotinilated
Secondary antibody
Primaryantibody
Antigen
FIGURE 2.14 Schematic of immunohistochemical techniques 
demonstrating an indirect method using biotin-avidin-enzyme
complexes.
Adapted from Ramos-Vara JA. Technical aspects of
immunohistochemistry.VetPathol2005;42:405-426.
FIGURE 2.16 (A) Dual immunohistochemical staining of a lymph
node section from a patient with B-cell lymphoma demonstrating
large numbers of B-cells (CD20-positive, pink) and scattered 
T-cells (CD3-positive, brown). (B) Dual kappa (brown) and lambda
(pink) staining shows a cluster of polyclonal plasma cells and
sheets of kappa-positive lymphocytes.
complexes are used (Figure 2.14). Currently, there are auto-
mated machines available for performing single or dual
immunohistochemical  stains
{Figure
2.15).Immuno
histochemistry provides information regarding pattern, inten-
sity, and location of antigen(s) in tissues and cells. It is used
in hematopathology for diagnosis and classification of leuke-
mias and lymphomas, and differential diagnosis of primary
hematopoietic neoplasms from non-neoplastic hematopoietic
disorders and metastatic tumors (Figures 2.16 to 2.19). For
example, most of the acute lymphoid leukemias are CD10,
TdT, and HLA-DR positive, whereas these markers are not
expressed in neuroblastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, or Ewing's
sarcoma.  Immunohistochemical  techniques  may  help  to
detect occult metastatic lesions, suich as metastatic breast car-
cinomas and neuroblastomas, or to identify their tissue of ori-
gin. For example, metastatic prostatic carcinomas are positive
FIGURE 2.15 (A) An H&E section of spleen demonstrating white
for prostatic acid phosphatase and prostate specific antigen
and red pulps. (B) Dual immunohistochemical stains showing
(PSA), and metastatic rhabdomyosarcomas may demonstrate
T (CD3-positive, brown) and B (CD20-positive, pink) cells.
myosin, desmin, or myoglobin expression.
44
PRINCIPLES OFIMMUNOPHENOTYPING
FIGURE 2.17 An H&E section of bone marrow biopsy from a patient with a residual CLL (arrow) and a secondary AML (A, low power;
B, high power). (C) The residual CLL cells express CD20; (D) the AML cells express MPO.
C
FlGURE 2.18 (A) and (B) demonstrating low and high power views of an H&E section of bone marrow biopsy from a patient with AML
(short arrow) and metastatic leiomyosarcoma (long arrow). (C) AML cells are MPO+; (D) leiomyosarcoma cells express myosin.
PRINCIPLES OFIMMUNOHISTOCHEMISTRY
45
FlGURE 2.19 A bone marrow biopsy section demonstrating osteosclerosis and fibrosis with the presence of vessel-like structures
(arrows) (A, low power; B, high power). These vessel-like structures are positive for cytokeratin with immunohistochemical stain
representing metastatic adenocarcinoma (C, low power; D, high power).
46
 PRINCIPLES OF IMMUNOPHENOTYPING
Additional Resources
Buchwalow IB, Bocker W: Immunohistochemistry: basics and meth-
Novo D, Wood J: Flow cytometry histograms: transformations, reso-
Ods, Berlin, 2010, Springer.
lution, and display, Cytometry A 73:685-692, 2008.
Carey JL, McCoy IP, Keren DF: Flow cytometry in clinical diagnosis,
Ramos-Medina  R  Montes-Moreno  S. Maestre  L, et  al:
ed 4, Chicago, IL, 2007, ASCP Press.
Craig FE, Foon KA: Flow cytometric immunophenotyping for hema-
 against cell-surface molecules in reactive and neoplastic lymphoid
tologic neoplasms, Blood 11l:3941-3967, 2008.
tissues, Immunol Lett 134:150-156, 201l.
Human Cell Differentiation Molecules. <http://hcdm.org/>.
Ramos-Vara JA: Technical aspects of immunohistochemistry.
Vet Pathol 42:405-426, 2005.
Matesanz-Isabel J, Sintes J, Llinas L, et al: New B-cell CD molecules,
Stetler-Stevenson M, Davis B, Wood B, et al: 2006 Bethesda
Immunol Lett 134: 104-112, 2011.
Intermational 
Consensus Conference on Flow Cytometric
Nguyen D, Diamond LW, Braylan RC: Flow cytometry in hematopa-
 Immunophenotyping of Hematolymphoid Neoplasia, Cytometry B
thology: a visual approach to data analysis and interpretation, ed 2.
72B:S3, 2007.
Totowa, NJ, 2007, Humana Press.
Principles
Cytogenetics
it gave the first direct evidence for a consistent DNA-
Introduction
associated change in tumor. More than 30,000 cases of
hematological malignancies with chromosome aberra-
Cancer is a genetic disease characterized by DNA changes
tions have since been reported, making it the most thor-
at either the nucleotide or chromosomal level, or both.
oughly cytogenetically investigated group of all neoplastic
 Malignancies can develop either from a genetic predisposi-
disorders. This is because hematological neoplasms can
be detected earlier, when the cells have fewer cytogenetic
tion followed by acquired somatic mutations, or from an
accumulation of somatic mutations that develop into a
changes, which are often simple and disease specific, in
cancer phenotype. At the chromosome level, these muta-
contrast to solid tumors, which are often diagnosed later
tions include changes in chromosome number, loss of het-
after multiple unbalanced and sometimes non-specific
erozygosity (LOH) brought about by whole chromosome
chromosomal aberrations have already taken place.
or segmental region loss, chromosomal rearrangements
A second major breakthrough in cytogenetics was the
(mainly balanced and unbalanced translocations, and
 development of microscopic staining techniques, generat-
inversions), and gene amplifications. Many of these abnor-
 ing a banding pattern along the length of the chromosomes.
malities are cytogenetically visible, but also sometimes
With this banding pattern, all individual chromosomes
cryptic (submicroscopic), and are often recurrent and
 could be identified, enabling the characterization of struc-
 tral changes in much greater detail. Consistent chromo
characteristic for a particular disease or disease subtype.
 Because specific chromosomal aberrations, especially in
some aberrations which are uncommon or extremely rare in
 hematological malignancies, provide diagnostic, prognos-
normal tissues are found in the different cells of a tumor,
tic, and/or treatment information for many cancers, they
and further karyotypic changes have been shown to occur
 during tumor progression. Modifications of culture meth-
are in many ways true biomarkers for human cancer.
Clear insights into the genetic basis of cancer were
ods to improve the yields of mitotically active (metaphase,
obtained in the 1950s and 1960s, when improved cell cul-
 prometaphase) cells and high resolution banding of elon-
ture and slide preparation techniques made it possible in
 gated chromosomes now allow for a more precise definition
1956 to accurately enumerate the number of human chro-
 of the rearrangements, as well as the identification of pre-
mosomes as 46. Chromosome analysis is usually carried
viously undetected abnormalities. Using these techniques,
out on cells in mitosis (cell division), when the chromo-
most tumor cells can be shown to have some chromosomal
somes become visible as distinct entities. After identifying
abnormality. For example, about 45-50% of acute leuke-
each chromosome in a cell by its characteristic size, posi-
 mias have an abnormal karyotype with a recurrent chro-
tion of the centromeres, and staining properties (e.g.
mosomal aberration, with 15% exhibiting three or more
G-banding), a karyotype displaying the full chromosome
cytogenetic abnormalities (complex karyotype). Possibly
complement of the cell can be prepared.
the best correlation between the presence of highly specific
The first specific chromosome abnormality observed
chromosomal changes and a subtype of leukemia is the
in a human tumor was seen in Philadelphia in 1960 by
15;17 translocation which is identified only in patients with
Nowell and Hungerford who found an unusually small
acute promyelocytic leukemia. Since in several leukemias
chromosome—the Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome—in
and lymphomas the karyotype determined at diagnosis is
the leukemic cells of patients with chronic myelogenous
 an independent prognostic indicator, it is imperative that
leukemia (CML). The discovery of the Ph chromosome
the cytogenetics analyses are completed prior to clinical man-
aroused considerable interest in cancer cytogenetics, as
 agement. The current status of WHO classification requires
Atlas of Hematopathology. DOl: htp://dx.doi.org/10.1016/978-0-12-385183-300003-6
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
48
 PRINCIPLES OF CYTOGENETICS
not only morphology but also immunophenotyping, cyto-
crisis and chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), a hyper-
genetics, and molecular studies for proper classification and
 cellular peripheral blood sample is appropriate. It is also
 prognosis. Because of the relative ease of obtaining bone 
 important to recognize that even a very dilute sample can
marrow (BM) or peripheral blood specimens from leukemia
 Overgrow and subsequently fail. Spleen tissue, or more
patients, it is possible to do serial sampling, which enables 
 rarely ascetic and pleural effusion, is also suitable for cyto-
the study of the karyotype patterns during the various stages 
 genetics study in some hematological disorders.
of the dinical course, such as at diagnosis, remission, and
Chromosome studies of malignant lymphomas are
relapse. This requires appropriate preparations and culturing
   s     
of the tissue sample. A number of techniques are available 
row may not always be involved in the early stages of
to evaluate the chromosomal aberrations in hematological
 the disease. But occasionally a bone marrow sample can
malignancies. It is very important to also recognize that more
 prove informative, particularly if there is some question as
modern molecular techniques such as FISH and gene muta-
tional studies may be more appropriate for certain disease 
success of a cytogenetics analysis mostly depends on the
conditions since standard karyotyping will provide results
 quality of material investigated. Therefore the key to suc-
s    s    
 cessful cytogenetics is to obtain cell-rich material derived
represent the malignant dones. Situations such as monitor-
from the middle part of the bone marrow. The tissue
ing disease status following therapy or bone marrow staging 
 must be drawn under sterile conditions with the aspira-
- q d pmny nq q a si 
 tion syringe coated with preservative-free heparin to avoid
        s
 clumping of blood components. Heparin is also added
ders, such as FISH or specific molecular methods with FISH
 to lymph node and spleen tissue after surgical removal.
being more sensitive for the detection of chromosomal aber-
Where there is a likelihood of a dry tap, especially in dis-
rations in the lymphoproliferative disorders.
eases such as primary or secondary myelofibrosis, or due
to faulty technique, a peripheral blood sample can be
sent as an alternative. However, unless there is a suffi-
cient number of blast cells in these samples, the abnormal
Cell Preparation
cone may go undetected. Care must also taken in sus-
 pected APL cases where clotting is possible and may cause
the sample to be unsuitable for culture and chromosome
Bone marrow cells from leukemia patients are an ideal source
analysis
of tissue for cytogenetics study of leukemias. The use of
A good-quality bone marrow aspirate or bore core
"direct" (same day harvest with no time in culture) prepara-
biopsy sample of 1-2mL is adequate in most cases,
tion to avoid selection during culturing has been considered 
1although less than this can be accepted if the marrow is
advantageous for obtaining an accurate picture of the chro-
 very cellular. The tissue drawing must be done under ster-
mosomal constitution of the leukemic cells. However, it has 
 ile conditions, since the chromosome analysis is in most
also been proven that short term (<24-48hrs) unstimulated
 cases preceded by short- or long-term cell culture which
culturing of leukemic bone marrow cells in vitro may uncover
mandates a high degree of sterility. It is also advisable to
both clonal abnormalities, and a greater number of abnormal
determine if the initial aspirate has bone spicules; and, if
cells than the "direct" method of preparation. Chromosomes
 a previous aspirate has been obtained, aspiration of a sec-
analysis of leukemic cells is not always possible by the "direct"
 ond sample after repositioning is recommended for cyto-
 method, because cases are often encountered in which only a genetics studies.
few to no mitoses are present or whose chromosomes show
The shorter the duration of time (<24hours) between
blurred outlines (poor morphology) with poor banding pat-
 collection and culture setup in the cytogenetics laboratory.
 terns. These metaphases are of inadequate quality for detailed  the greater the chances for a successful chromosome analy-
analysis even when there are enough mitoses. It must also be  sis with an accurate result. Every effort must be made to
noted that sometimes the 15;17 translocation characteristic
 ensure that the bone marrow or lymph node biopsy sam-
of acute promyelocytic leukemia is not observed in the direct 
 ples are set up in cultures with minimum delay. If a delay
 preparations but seen prominently in 24-hour cultured bone
 in the transportation of the sample is expected, the sample
marrow cells. Thus it is important that more than one culture
should preferably be collected and transferred to a tube
setup and harvest method be performed.
      
A prerequisite for chromosome analysis is dividing
 vative-free heparin in an appropriate basal medium, sup-
 or mitotic cells. Spontaneously dividing cells suitable for
plemented with serum and antibiotics. The sample must
chromosome preparations are found only in the rapidly
never be frozen, but can be stored at 4°C overnight or for
proliferating tissues of the body, such as the gonads and
up to 3 days. However, the cell viability is greatly reduced
bone marrow, or in tissues with malignancies. Bone mar-
 with time, yielding misleading or only normal karyotype
row is the tissue of choice for cytogenetics studies of most 
results. Disorders such as acute lymphoblastic leukemia
hematological conditions. However, in chronic disorders 
(ALL) and others with a high white cell count are particu-
where there is high white cell count, such as CML-blast
larly adversely affected by delays.
ANALYSIS
49
Same-day or "direct" cultures are often recommended
quinacrine derivatives (Q-bands); and centromeric stain-
for ALL, and sometimes for CML. Studies suggest that eryth-
ing (C-bands). The nucleolus organizer regions (NORs)
ropoietic cells divide rapidly in the first few hours of culture
located in the short arms of acrocentric chromosomes can
       
 be visualized by staining with silver nitrate (AgNO3).
observations, short cultures in erythroleukemia are more
likely to yield good results. However, in most cases a mini-
mum of 16-24hours of unstimulated culture is appropri-
ate. On the other hand, CLL and some ALL, which have B- or
Analysis
 T-cell phenotype, may need 3-5-day cultures with appropri-
ate mitogens, as well as having some unstimulated cultures.
Sometimes, in the case of poor response to the commonly
Chromosome analysis is performed on a microscope at 1000
used mitogens, TPA (12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate),
times magnification. With the development of image analy-
AmpliB-DSP-30 (synthetic deoxyoligonucleotide of 27 bases),
sis hardware and software, computer-aided chromosome
or EBV (Epstein-Barr virus) are used as stimulants in the cul-
analysis systems are in use; these have greatly reduced the
tures. Several laboratories supplement the regular media with
turn-around times, and the quality of the karyotyped images
a condition medium derived from cultures of a human uri-
is almost equal to that of photography. Bone marrow karyo-
nary bladder carcinoma cell line or other commercially avail-
 type analysis is often concentrated on cells with poor mor-
able media supplements, which are capable of stimulating
 phology where there is a mixed population. Selection of only
the proliferation and growth of the leukemic cells.
metaphases with good morphology can often lead to failure
The chromosomes of patients with ALL are particularly
 to detect cells from abnormal dlones. Twenty or more meta-
difficult, fuzzy and resistant to banding. Nevertheless, anal-
phase cells are usually analyzed. If the karyotype is found
ysis of direct preparations of these marrows has shown that
to be abnormal, then analysis of fewer than 20 cells can be
50-78% of these patients have chromosomal abnormalities
acceptable, but for a case to be reliably determined as cyto-
in their leukemic cells. But it is important to recognize that
 genetically normal, an analysis of at least 20 karyotypes from
more than one technique is necessary to assess accurately
a BM sample is required. Any chromosome abnormality is
the karyotypic constitution of the leukemic cells. Culturing
 considered clonal and therefore significant if it is present in
may, but does not always, reveal more cells with abnormal
 a minimum of two metaphase cells in the case of an identical
chromosomes than are seen in direct preparations.
structural aberration, or gain of the same structurally intact
chromosome (trisomy), or in at least three cells in the case of
 a missing chromosome (monosomy). Thus a clone is defined
as at least two cells with the same structural abnormality or
Banding Techniques
gain of the same chromosome, or at least three cells with the
loss of the same chromosome. The karyotype results are inter-
The standard cytogenetics banding method consists of
 Nomendlature (ISCN). For example, the normal male and
culturing a suspension of cells in mitogenic media for
 female karyotypes are designated as 46,XY and 46,XX, respec-
24-72hours. Then, dividing cells are arrested in meta-
 tively. An abnormal karyotype such as
phase by the addition of an inhibitor of the mitotic
46,XY,t(9;22)(q34;q11.2)
spindle, such as colchicine or vinblastine. The cells
are submitted to a hypotonic solution (e.g., KCl or Na
designates an abnormal male karyotype with a balanced
citrate), followed by dropping of cells on slides, enzyme 
translocation between chromosomes 9 and 22 at band 34
treatment, and staining with Giemsa stain (G-banding),
of the long arm of chromosome 9 and long arm of chro-
revealing characteristic banding patterns that are spe-
 mosome 22 at band 11.2. In contrast, a karyotype
cific for each chromosome. These banding patterns allow
47,XY,t(9;22)(q34;q11.2), +der(22)t(9;22)
for the assignment of homologous chromosomes, and
the identification of extra or of missing chromosomes
delineates an abnormal male karyotype not only with a
as well as of structural aberrations. For G-banding pat-
terns, pre-treatment of chromosomes by enzymes such
an additional chromosome that is derived from this trans-
as trypsin or pancreatin is required. The mechanism of
location, i.e., an extra Ph chromosome.
G-banding is not yet fully understood, but the chromo-
 There are two main types of cytogenetic aberrations in
somes express dark (AT sequences rich) and light (GC
human cancer:
sequences rich) G-bands. This is the most common and
1. Balanced chromosomal rearrangements (reciprocal transloca-
traditional banding technique used in a clinical setting.
fions, inversions) (Figures 3.1 and 3.2).
Other chromosome banding techniques used in standard
2. Gains or losses of whole chromosomes (aneuploidy), or part
cytogenetics laboratories to better define the chromosomal
 of a chromosome (segmental aneuploidy) and unbalanced
aberrations are: a technique to produce a reverse banding
rearrangements (Figures 3.3 and 3.4), resulting in deletions or
pattern (R-bands); a fluorescence banding technique using
duplications.
50
 PRINCIPLES OF CYTOGENETICS
FIGURE 3.1 Abnormal female
karyotype showing a balanced
 11:14 translocation and trisomy
12. The karyotype is designated as
47,XX,t(11;14)(q13;q32), + 12.
11
12
14
15
16
17
81
88
19
20
21
22
FIGURE 3.2 Abnormal male karyotype
with a paracentric inversion in the
long arm of one chromosome 3;
the region of inversion is shown by
nv(3)
arrows. The karyotype is 46,xY,inv(3)
(q21q26).
心
G
8
10
11
12
13
1-4
15
17
18
88
福
20
21
22.
These types of chromosomal aberrations typically cause
BALANCED REARRANGEMENTS
cell  overgrowth  through  over-expression/activation  of
Balanced rearrangements in cancer include transloca-
-a Aq no a pqu, e o Aq no aoo ue
 tions (exchange between two or more chromosomes) and
tion of a tumor suppressor gene. Identification of recur-
rent chromosomal aberrations has become very important
inversions (orientation change relative to the centromere,
within a single chromosome). These rearrangements often
in the diagnosis of soft tissue and hematologic tumors.
 result in chimeric cellular proteins that appear to disrupt
Especially, in some hematological malignancies, the iden-
tification of recurrent chromosomal aberrations is impor-
the normal function of critical genes involved in normal
 tant for diagnosis, prognosis, and therapy.
cell growth or differentiation, resulting in an abnormal
ANALYSIS
51
FIGURE 3.3 Abnormal male karyotype
with monosomy of chromosome
3, trisomy 12, and an unbalanced
translocation between the long arm
of chromosome 3 and the short
arm of chromosome 17 resulting
in the deletions of the short arm
 of chromosome 3 and distal 17p
福
segment. The karyotype is designated
as 46,XY, + 12,der(17)t(3;17)(q13;p13).
10
11
12
13
15
16
17
18
84
88
福
19
20
22
FIGURE 3.4 Abnormal complex male
karyotype with several aberrations 
including a terminal deletion of 
3q, an interstitial deletion of 13q,
and an unbalanced translocation
with unidentifable chromosomal 
segments at chromosomes 4q,
16p, and 20q, respectively, and ring
chromosome 7. The karyotype is 
written as 46,XY,del(3)(q21),add(4)
(q35), r(7),del(13)(q12q14),add(16)
(p13),add(20)(q13).
6
13
88
19
20
process. More than six hundred neoplasia-related recur-
fusion protein in the absence of physiologic activating sig-
rent balanced cytogenetic aberrations have been reported to
 nals, thereby promoting aberrant tyrosine kinase activity
date. Translocations and inversions, and in some instances 
 Balanced rearrangements can also result in the deregula-
cryptic inserions, usually cause cancer by fusing together 
tion of expression of normal genes. For example, in the
two distantly removed genes, resulting in aberrant hybrid 
reciprocal translocation t(8;14)(q24;q32), associated with
 gene expression. Currently, more than two hundred chime-
Burkitt lymphoma, the immunoglobulin gene (IGH@)
ric fusion genes responsible for human cancers have been 
 on band 14q32 drives the constitutive expression of the
reported in the literature. One classic example of an impor-
 gene encoding the MYC transcription factor on band 8q24.
tant translocation is the t(9:22) in CML. The t(9;22) results
Approximately 5o% of hematopoietic neoplasms acquire
 in aberrant expression of an oncogene (ABL1) that normally
translocations somatically; most of these are restricted to
functions in cellular proliferation, by coming under con-
 a single cell lineage (that in which the translocation origi-
trol of a constitutively expressed gene (breakpoint cluster
 nated) and are arrested in a particular stage of developmen-
region) (BCR). The resulting chimeric protein, BCR-ABL1,
tal maturation. On occasion more than one cell lineage is
contains the catalytic domain of ABL1 fused to a domain
affected (e.g., Mixed Lineage Leukemia gene-related malig-
of BCR that mediates constitutive oligomerization of the 
nancies), suggesting that the involved genes were affected
52
PRINCIPLES OF CYTOGENETICS
FIGURE 3.5 Abnormal male
hyperdiploid (near-tetraploid)
karyotype with four copies of all
autosomes except for chromosomes 8,
9, and 17, and copies of small marker
chromosomes of unknown origin. This
karyotype is written as 93, XY, +X, +Y,
-8, -9, -17, +4mar.
EL
20
10e
at the pluripotent stem cell stage. While balanced aberra-
(fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) (Figure 3.6 A,C),
 al jo aa a oi ai A aq a so
 multicolor FISH/spectral karyotyping on metaphase cells,
nancy the unbalanced translocations are often recognized
and comparative-array genomic hybridization techniques
as indicators of secondary tumor progression.
(CGH)), flow cytometry (FCM), and image cytometry
(ICM). FCM and ICM can measure the relative DNA con-
tent of the cell with respect to reference diploid cells.
Imbalances, i.e., aberrations that results in gain or loss
CHROMOSOMAL ANEUPLOIDY
of genetic material, are even more common than trans-
Chromosomal aneuploidy is extremely common in can-
location and inversions  in hematologic malignancies.
cers and can be either a primary or secondary event.
 These include amplifications, duplications, heterozygous
Chromosomal gains (whole or partial) are designated in or homozygous deletions, monosomies, and trisomies.
the karyotype with "+" or "add" and typically result in 
Amplifications (several extra copies of a chromosome
the over-expression of an oncogene. Despite the high fre-
 region), may occur in the form of supernumerary marker
quency of aneuploidy in cancer, the exact role of aneu-
 chromosomes (SMCs), double minutes, and homologous
ploidy in carcinogenesis is not very clear. Numerical
 staining regions (HSRs) and are a result of over-expression
aberrations including single or multiple chromosomal
 of one or more genes (Figure 3.6B). SMCs are small addi-
losses or gains as the sole karyotypic anomalies, are found
 tional chromosomes whose origins are not readily identi-
in approximately 15% of all cytogenetically abnormal
fiable by banding methodologies, and are designated as
hematologic neoplasms (Figure 3.5). Although relatively
"+mar" in the karyotype. Double minutes are specific types
frequent, numerical abnormalities have generally received 
 of SMCs that are characterized by a typical dumbbell shape.
less attention than the structural abnormalities, because
 and represent extra-chromosomal oncogene amplifica-
the simple reciprocal translocations are easily amenable
 tion. For example, MYCN gene amplification in the form of
to rigorous molecular analysis. The association of numeri-
 double minutes is commonly observed in neuroblastoma.
cal aberrations with hematologic disorders, although well
The Mixed Lineage Leukemia (MLL) gene is sometimes
established, also appears less disease specific. Trisomy
amplified in acute leukemia and can be easily visualized in
chromosome 8, monosomy of chromosome 7, and tri-
 interphase nuclei by FISH studies with MLL-specific probes
  n      
(Figure 3.6D). HSRs are amplified oncogenes within the
egories of leukemias both at initial presentation or as
 structure of a chromosome (Figure 3.7), and are desig-
secondary cytogenetic events. Roughly half of all numerical
 nated as "hsr" in the karyotype. MYC gene amplification
aberrations are trisomies. Other than trisomies for chro-
 on chromosome 8q24 in some AMLs is an example of an
mosomes 3, 8, 9, 11, 12, and 21, other autosomal triso-
 HSR that is typically detected with the FISH technique.
mies are infrequent in hematologic disorders. Aneuploidy
Chromosomal losses (whole or partial) are designated in
can be detected with the help of traditional metaphase
the karyotype by "-" or "del" and are thought to result in
cytogenetics (e.g., as in Figure 3.5), interphase cytogenetics 
S deletion (or decreased activity) of tumor suppressor genes.
CONCLUSIONS
53
LOSS OF HETEROZYGOSITY
chromosome or a large segment of a chromosome is lost,
the remaining chromosome or segment is often dupli-
Loss of heterozygosity (LOH), defined as the loss of one
cated. With complete duplication of the remaining genetic
parent's contribution to the cell, can be caused by dele-
 material, the karyotype may appear normal, even though
tion, gene conversion, mitotic recombination, or loss
 no normal genes are present. Though not easily detected
of a chromosome. LoH often occurs in cancer, where
by cytogenetic techniques, this duplication of the remain-
 the second copy of a gene (typically a tumor suppressor 
ing chromosome or segment has been shown using molec-
gene) has been inactivated by other mechanisms, such
 ular genetic techniques. At least in theory this type of LOH
as point mutation or hypermethylation. When a whole
can be detected cytogenetically using chromosome hetero-
morphisms, though it is not often pursued.
Conclusions
 Cytogenetics analyses can provide valuable and extremely
relevant information to establish the presence of a malig-
rant clone, determine the cell lineages in the disease
 process or clarify and confirm a diagnosis, provide prog-
nostic predictive features, and monitor response to treat-
ment and classification of neoplasms. However, it must
be noted that recent studies have recognized that in some
Ad , se ao   s
in AML, nucleotide-level mutations, which are undetect-
able by standard cytogenetics, have been discovered within
a growing list of genes such as FLT3 and can have impor-
 tant prognostic implications. The significance and useful-
ness of these will be discussed in the following chapters. A
D
 dlose relationship between the pathologist and the cytoge-
FIGURE 3.6 Identification of various chromosomal abnormalities
neticist is essential if maximum useful information is to be
by FISH. (A) Four copies of 11q13 (red) and 14q32 (green) loci.
produced from the cytogenetics studies of hematological
(B) Amplifcation of the ab/ oncogene (red), and normal two
disorders.
copies of the BCR locus. (C) Four copies of 9q34 (red) and 22q11.2
(green) loci. (D) Amplification of the MLL locus (yellow).
FIGURE 3.7 Abnormal male karyotype
with an HSR of an unknown
chromosomal region at the short arm
of chromosome 17.
R
114
13
17△
18
88
02
21
54
 PRINCIPLES OF CYTOGENETICS
Additional Resources
Ferguson-Smith MA: Cytogenetics and the evolution of medical
Mitelman F Cancer cytogenetics update, Atlas Genet Cytogenet Oncol
genetics,Genet Med 10:553-559,2008.
Haematot Available at <http://atlasgeneticsoncology.org/>
 Frohling S, Dohner H: Chromosomal abnormalities in cancer, N Engl
Mittelman F Database of chromosome aberrations in cancer. Cancer
IMed 359:722-734,2008.
Genome Anatomy Project (CGAP), 2005.
Heim S, Mitelman F: Cancer cytogenetics - chromosomal and molec-
Mitelman F Johansson B, Mertens F: The impact of translocations
ular genetics aberrations of tumor cells, edn 3. Hoboken, 2009.
and gene fusions on cancer causation, Nat Rev Cancer 7:233-245.
Wiley-Blackwell.
2007.
 International Society of Chromosome Nomenclature (ISCN) Shaffer
LG, Tommerup N, editors: An international system for human cyto-
genetic nomenclature, Basel, 2009, Karger.
Principles of Molecular
Techniques
Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization
advantages and applications: e.g., interphase FISH, com-
parative genome hybridization (CGH), fiber-FISH, and
multi-color FISH. These techniques are capable of detect-
Karyotype analysis depends primarily on classical chro-
ing aberrations of an intermediate size (<10kb to 5Mb),
mosomal banding techniques. It has the distinct advan-
are expected to be fast and provide an accurate analysis of
tage that the entire genome can be analyzed in a single
whole tumor genomes in a single experiment, and thus
experiment. In particular, it is useful for identifying whole
are now commonly used in cancer cytogenetics laborato-
chromosomes accurately and for identifying obvious chro-
ries today, for both diagnostic and research applications.
mosomal deletions, and translocations (low-resolution
The FISH technologies provide increased resolution for the
whole genome genome profile). However, karyotype stud-
elucidation of structural chromosome abnormalities that
ies are limited to actively dividing cells, and the resolu-
 cannot be resolved by more conventional cytogenetic anal-
tion is limited to chromosomal aberrations greater than
 yses, including submicroscopic deletions, cryptic or subtle
3-5 Mb in size. In addition, through several decades of
 duplications and translocations, complex rearrangements
clinical cytogenetics analysis of cancer cells, it has become
 involving many chromosomes, and marker chromosomes.
apparent that suboptimal collection, transport, and cul-
 The FISH procedure has been developed for the tagging
ture of clinical specimens can lead to inappropriate (e.g
of DNA and RNA with labeled nucleic acid probes, and is
normal) results. Poorly spread or contracted metaphase
a process whereby chromosomes or portions of chromo-
chromosomes, low mitotic activity, and highly rearranged
 somes are vividly painted with fluorescent molecules that
karyotypes with numerous marker chromosomes, com-
anneal to specific regions. This technique has been used
 mon in neoplastic cell preparations, are often diffcult to
widely for the identification of chromosomal abnormali-
interpret unambiguously. Furthermore, chromosome prep-
ties. The method enables enumeration of multiple copies
arations are labor-intensive and time-consuming and the
of chromosomes or detection of specific regions of DNA or
interpretation of cytogenetics findings requires extensive
RNA that represent associations with certain genetic char-
experience. Although automated karyotyping systems have
acteristics and infectious disease.
become available, analyzing metaphase spreads remains
The FISH methods widely employed in clinical labo-
time-consuming. Techniques such as polymerase chain
ratory studies involve hybridization of a fluorochrome
reaction (PCR) analyses have the advantage of greater sen-
sitivity, and they screen for a specific chromosome aber-
 can be applied to a variety of specimen types and can be
ration without the need for dividing cells. However, such
performed on non-dividing interphase cells. Recent devel-
molecular analyses are limited to known genetic changes,
opments have also allowed for the possibility of detec-
and do not allow the screening of the whole genome for
 tion by non-fluorescence methods of the probes: CISH,
other (secondary) alterations. Thus molecular cytoge-
or chromogenic in situ hybridization. Here the method
utilizes conventional peroxidase or alkaline phosphatase
between classical cytogenetics and molecular DNA tech-
reactions and the signals are observed under a bright-field
niques. The limitations of classical chromosome studies
 microscope. This can be used for most tissues, similar to
have been overcome by the introduction of fluorescence
the FISH application, but has been more prominently suc-
in situ hybridization (FISH), which offers a molecular
 cessful in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues. Like
dimension to cytogenetic analysis. Different and new FISH
the FISH technique, it may be used to evaluate aneuploidy.
technologies have emerged, each with their own particular
chromosome translocation, amplification, and deletions.
Atlas of Hematopathology.DOl: ht://dx.doi.org/10.1016/978-0-12-385183-3000048
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
56
 PRINCIPLES OF MOLECULAR TECHNIQUES
Del5g
Trisomy 8
(a) bs pue (uaaib) dg Aa paaiap bs yo uoaiea I't aai
 specific FISH probes.
FIGURE 4.2 FSH studies reveal three copies of a chromosome
8 centromere specifc probe in each cell (arrows), indicative of
trisomy 8.
Interphase nucleus assessment from uncultured prepara-
tions allows rapid screening for specific chromosome rear-
rangement or numerical abnormalities associated with
hematologic malignancies. Interphase analysis may also
be performed on fixed bone marrow cell suspension, par-
affin-embedded tissue sections, or disaggregated cells from
paraffin blocks, bone marrow, or blood smears, and touch-
preparations of cells from lymph nodes or solid tumors.
It is also commonly used when rapid or direct (i.e., with-
out culturing) results are needed, and can be performed
 on formalin fixed paraffin-embedded tissue sections. FISH
uses fluorescently labeled DNA probes, e.g., bacterial artifi-
cial chromosomes (BACs) hybridized to either metaphase
chromosomes or interphase nuclei, depending on the
application. However analytically powerful and diagnos-
tically useful interphase FISH may be, great care should
2p
2g
be taken in the interpretation of interphase hybridization
patterns. As a rule of thumb, FISH results should be inter-
 preted in conjunction with the neoplastic karyotype.
FIGURE 4.3 Subtelomere specifc FSH probes are demonstrated
Four different types of probes are commonly used, each
 in chromosomes 2.
with different ranges of applications.
1. Gene-specific probes target DNA sequences (Figure 4.1) pres-
Centromeres are usually A-T rich, whereas telomeres are
ent in only one copy per chromosome. They are used to
known to have repetitive TTAGGG sequences. Centromeric
identify chromosomal translocations, inversions, deletions,
probes are extremely useful for identifying marker chromo-
duplications and gene amplifications in interphase and meta-
somes and for detecting copy number chromosome abnor-
phase chromosomes. These probes are particularly useful
malities in interphase nuclei.
for screening of specific gene rearrangements in metaphase
 3. Sub-telomeric probes (Figure 4.3) are frequently used to iden-
spreads and interphase nuclei. For this purpose, the probes
tify subtle or submicroscopic chromosomal rearrangements.
cover the chromosomal breakpoints and can specifically iden-
The relative ease of performance and high resolution (0.5 Mb)
tify the genes involved in the chromosome alterations without
of such unique-sequence FISH analysis has made it popular to
the need for dividing cells. The same FISH experiments can
screen for whole arm chromosomal rearrangements, subtelo-
subsequently be used to assess the efficacy of therapeutic regi-
meric deletions and duplications, and marker chromosomes.
 mens and to detect residual disease with limited sensitivity of
 4. Whole-genome painting probes (WCP) (Figure 4.4) are com-
0.5-5%.
plex DNA probes that are generated by degenerate oligo-
2. Repetitive
2sequence probes (Figure 4.2) (alpha-satellite
nucleotide polymerase chain reaction (DO-PCR) or through
flow-sorting. WCP paints have high affinity for the whole
sented by short repetitive base-pair sequences that are present
chromosome along its entire length, with the exception of
in multiple copies (e.g., centromeric and telomeric probes).
the centromeric and telomeric regions. These probes are most
FLUORESCENCE IN SITU HYBRIDIZATION 
57
中
12
112
3
2
4.3
21.2
11.2
21.3
AT
22
21
31
22
32
223
33
21
34
13
B
FIGURE 4.5 FSH probes (B) for chromosome 13 (green) and 
FIGURE 4.4 Chromosome painting. (A) Translocations (arrows) are
dhromosome 21 (red) demonstrate trisomy 21 seen by standard
demonstrated by multicolor FISH technique. (B) Chromosome 7 is 
karyotype studies (A).
highlighted with single whole-chromosome paint.
1. Enumerating probe. The enumerating or counting probe
strategy, as its name implies, is useful for counting the num-
suitable for identifying genomic imbalances in metaphase
ber of a particular locus within the cell. Counting probes are
chromosomes, especially the complex chromosomal arrange-
used to detect gains or losses of whole or part chromosomes
ments observed in many cancers. Two variants of the WCP
(e.g, chromosomes 5. 7. 8, and 20 in MDS (Figures 4.5. 4.6
and 4.7), or deletions and duplications of genes involved in a
have been developed: multicolor-FISH (M-FISH) (Figure 4.4A)
and spectral karyotyping (SKY). WCP probes have been devel-
disease (e.g. TP53 and RB1 gene probes in myeloma). These
oped that paint all human chromosomes in different colors 
probes can be either BACs containing the gene or genes of
(48 paints). And WCP can also offer simultaneous detection
interest, or alpha-satellite repeat sequences specific for the
of each arm of all human chromosomes in a single hybridiza-
centromeric region of each chromosome. This strategy is also
tion. This technique is usually used in conjunction with chro-
useful for detecting cryptic deletions that may not be detect-
mosomal banding techniques for a more precise identification
able by classical metaphase chromosome analysis.
of chromosome aberrations. The two greatest limitations of
 2. Fusion probe. The fusion probe strategy is classically used to
WCP are the requirement for extensive knowledge of genetic
detect specific translocations or inversions, e.g. the t(9:22)
abnormality to enable the correct selection of the probes
in CML (Figure 4.8) and the t(15:17) in APL. BAC probes
(unless the full complement of paints is to be used), and lim-
mmplementary to chromosomal regions involved in the rear-
ited resolution (>5 Mb) to detect very small deletions, duplica-
rangements are labeled with two different fluorophores (e.g..
tions and translocations.
 ed and green) and analyzed under the microscope for sig-
nal overlap. Normal nuclei will have fwo red and fwo green
Three main probe strategies are utilized in FISH: (1)
signals. corresponding to the fwo normal (un-rearranged)
-a, (e) pue 'sqoid uoisny (z) 'saqod luaa
chromosomes, while nuclei with rearrangements will have
apart" "split" probes.
one or more yellow signals, corresponding to the overlap of
58
PRINCIPLES OF MOLECULAR TECHNIQUES
宏
70
11
自话
13
14
15
16
17
1
20
2
13
12
11.2
11.2
13:3
20
Del20q
中
FIGURE 4.6 Deletion of chromosome 20q (46,XX,del(20)(q11.2)) is demonstrated by (A) G-banded karyotyping and (B) FISH.
T(22,9)
A
11
FIGURE 4.7 (A) Metaphase and (B) interphase FSH showing
FIGURE 4.8 Break-apart or split probe signal patterns of MLL locus
BCR-ABL 1 fusion signals in CML.
(yellow) in abnormal cells.
FLUORESCENCE IN SITU HYBRIDIZATION 
59
to classic cytogenetic analyses, it has limitations. FISH will
 only answer the particular question being asked regard-
ing an exact probed locus. For example, cells probed with
a BCR-ABL1 fusion probe set may be positive for the
t(9;22), but trisomy 8 cells within the sample (often seen
in CML in transformation) would not be detected unless
a chromosome 8 enumerating probe set is used in the
112
probe mix. Similarly, an enumerating probe set consisting
only of the alpha satellite repeats from the chromosome
2
5 centromere will not detect a deletion of the long arm of
chromosome 5 (5q-). Physicians ordering tests should be
 mindful of the questions they are trying to address and
指
15
order FISH and/or karyotypes appropriately. FISH studies
213
0
may also be an integral component of the diagnostic work-
a
up if a specific genetic abnormality is suggested by histo-
LI
 pathology peripheral blood counts, or clinical parameters,
Normal
but when cytogenetic analysis fails or provides a normal
12
21
 karyotypic result. For example, it is recommended that all
-e or aq sio ie ps a r yo sas 
Abnormal
sis and molecular cytogenetic methods to determine the
initial clonal abnormalities and the FISH signal pattern,
 both for prognostic information and for follow-up studies.
When questions arise regarding which FISH test to order,
the laboratory should be consulted, as ordering a FISH
test without specifying the probe set is inappropriate. The
FIGURE 4.9 Demonstration of t(12;21). The fusion of E7V6 (red)
application of FISH further provides increased sensitivity.
and RuNx1 (green) genes demonstrates as a yellow spot by dual-
color FISH.
in that chromosomal abnormalities have been detected in
samples that appeared to be normal by conventional cyto-
 genetic analysis; for example, the chromosomally hidden
the red and green signals and suggestive of rearranged chro-
translocation was evidenced for the first time in 1995 with
mosomes. Dual-fusion strategies are used to reduce false-
   (i 1  o  
positive signals produced by artifactual overlap caused by
 RUNX1 gene fusion (Figure 4.9). While appearing to have
the three-dimensional structure of DNA compaction within
the nucleus. Dual-fusion approaches utilize probes that over-
tigations with probes specific for this gene rearrangement
lap the two reciprocal translocation breakpoints and result in
revealed this translocation to be present in 25% of all
two yellow fusion signals corresponding to the fwo derivative
chromosomes. This probe strategy is also useful to distinguish
pediatric B-cell ALL.
between variants, and identifying an extra Philadelphia chro-
CGH is a relatively new molecular technique for iden-
mosome in CML in accelerated phase.
tifying chromosomal gains and losses in a test sample
3. Break-apart or Split probe. The break-apart or split probe
(e.g, a patient sample) relative to a control sample. DNA
strategy (Figure 4.9) is essentially the opposite of the fusion 
is extracted from both the test and control samples and
probe strategy. and is most useful when a single locus is
digested with restriction enzymes or sonicated to break it
involved in several different rearrangements (translocations.
into short (v5oobp) fragments. The test and control sam-
inversions, deletions, etc.) involving multiple partners. For
 ples are differentially labeled with florescent dyes (e.g.
example, a dual-color FISH probe has been developed with
red and green), denatured, and hybridized to metaphase
probes at either side of the MLL gene breakpoint, resulting
chromosomes.(
in separation of the normally co-localizing signals if the MLL
Chromosomal regions that are equally
gene is rearranged. The advantage of this system is that it can
represented in the test and control samples will hybrid-
detect all recurrent and possibly novel MLL rearrangements in
ize equally to the chromosomes and produce an over-
a single experiment. The MLL gene locus is involved in >70
lapped color (e.g., yellow). A loss (deletion) is detected
recurrent translocations, all of which can be detected with the
when the control DNA fluoresces stronger within a region
 break-apart strategy. Two differently labeled BAC probes (e.g..
of the metaphase chromosomes, and a gain (duplication)
red and green) normally bind to a single locus and produce
is detected when the patient DNA fluoresces stronger. In
the overlapped signal color (e.g. yellow). When the locus of
array CGH (aCGH), the fluorescently labeled test and con-
interest is rearranged, the colors split apart. Normal nuclei will 
'sas vn jo ae ue on pazia ae saides jn
have two yellow (overlapped) signals, while nuclei with a rear-
e.g., BACs (Figure 4.10) or oligonucleotides (Figure 4.11),
rangement will have one yellow, one red, and one green signal.
rather than metaphase chromosomes. aCGH has a much
While FISH can provide rapid results, and is applicable 
higher resolution than classic metaphase CGH. Although
for various sample types that are otherwise not amenable
CGH and aCGH have been well established for use in
60
 PRINCIPLES OF MOLECULAR TECHNIQUES
Combined
previously unknown genomic regions of primary etiol-
ogy. However, with improvements in technology, software
analyses and database collection, CGH will be one of the
most useful techniques adopted by diagnostic laboratories.
Indeed, it would be interesting to see if aCGH enhances
the efficiency of detecting subtle changes such as par-
tial tandem duplication/amplification of the MLL gene
observed in AML. Furthermore, in chronic diseases such
Del 13q
 as MDS or CML, where a progressively evolving karyotype
ID13S319
relates to worsening prognosis that may be used in thera-
二
peutic decisions, array CGH would provide very useful
213
 comparative genome-wide information in sequential clini-
cal specimens.
13q141
FISH is also useful tool to monitor remission status
when clonal chromosome abnormalities have been iden-
33
34
tified at diagnosis and appropriate probes are available.
For CML, sequential FISH studies are particularly useful to
 determine changes in clinical status in response to therapy
and to assess for minimal residual disease. In patients with
sex-mismatched bone marrow transplants for whom graft
10.5005
rejection, marrow suppression, or disease relapse is a clini-
FIGURE 4.10 Whole-genome BAC-array CGH showing a deletion
of 13q.
cal consideration, monitoring with a FISH assay that com-
bines sex chromosome probes with or without probes to
detect the patient's clonal abnormality can be valuable for
graft assessment and to detect residual or recurrent disease.
Ollgonucleotidearray-CGHshowing deletion3p(arrows)
FISH may be performed on formalin-fixed paraffin-
embedded (FFPE) sections either by hybridizing directly to
unstained thin sections (2-4 μm) of tissue that have been
de-paraffinized, or thick sections of tissue from which
chrs
individual cell suspensions are made, to which standard
FISH techniques may then be applied. Sections must be
0.696
mounted on slides that will reduce the loss of tissue dur-
ing FISH-pretreatment processes. Buffered formalin (pH
0.000
7.0) is the best fixative for FISH hybridization. However,
251F
800:22
fixation in solutions that contain a heavy metal or picric
0:511
acid often results in unsuccessful FISH results. It is also
0.000
well established that decalcifying techniques commonly
25202900
used in bone marrow core biopsy sections often do not
1.0
yield good FISH signals and may be inappropriate for
obtaining cytogenetic results. There are also several other
 limitations to FFPE FISH including overlapping and trun-
3p22.1-p14.3(12.9MB)
cated cells, making assessment of individual cells diffcult
(Figure 4.12). Also improvements in the pretreatment,
FIGURE 4.11 Shift at42150000.55050000 bp: chromosome
3p22.1-p14.3 (12.9 Mb).
hybridization, optimal probe size, and post wash tech-
niques will alleviate the commonly encountered problems
such as background (non-specific binding) or absence of
 detecting copy number, submicroscopic gains and losses
probe signals. FISH on frozen-tissue sections will yield
in constitutional (inherited) disease, neither is currently
 good results if the slides are first slowly thawed at room
appropriately established as a stand-alone technology for
 temperature and then fixed in 10% buffered formalin.
diagnosis in cancer. One reason is that the CGH technique
There are only a few commercially manufactured probe
cannot detect balanced chromosomal aberrations (trans-
-p o u ry vai an Aq padde uaq aa ie si
locations and inversions), which are very common in can-
nostic testing. These FISH kits must meet the sensitivity
 cers, especially in hematological disorders. Also, because 
 s   in   
of tumor heterogeneity and general genomic instability.
vided by the manufacturer. The majority of probes used for
i.e., several clonal populations, CGH and aCGH do not
clinical FISH testing are considered to be analyte specific
       ( 
        
a new ASR probe is introduced in the laboratory, extensive
FLUORESCENCE IN SITU HYBRIDIZATION   61
indicating that the probe sequence from the ABL1 locus
is missing from the derivative chromosome 9 and is present
on the derivative chromosome 22 distal to the BCR locus.
The same rearrangement expressed in interphase FISH
nomenclature but using a dual-color, dual-fusion probe set
would be:
 indicating that each of the probes has been split apart
and juxtaposed by the translocation. The use of such pre-
cise ISCN nomenclature is valued by laboratories in the
initial diagnostic work-up and continued monitoring of
patients with a specific chromosome abnormality.  The
report must indicate any specific limitations of the assay.
FIGURE 4.12 A typical image of FISH analysis on an FFPE section
some of which may be described in the probe manufac-
showing overlapping truncated cells as demonstrated by variable
ture's package insert
signal patterns.
While interphase FISH analysis provides information
only on specific probes used and generally does not sub-
stitute for complete karyotype analysis, it may, under some
validation is needed, including specific validation of the
disease circumstances, be the preferred means of identify-
ing an abnormal clone, e.g., FISH with the ATM, CEP12,
probe itself (probe validation) and validation of the pro-
cedures utilizing the probe (analytical validation). Initially.
D13S319, and TP53 probe panel in B-cell CLL, discrimi-
it is important to become familiar with a probe's param-
nation of the inversion 16 or t(12;2l) in acute leukemia,
 or FISH for the diagnostic abnormality in post-therapy
eters, including signal intensity and pattern, and any cross-
hybridization that is likely to confound test results. Probe
patients who have hypocellular marrows. More recently, due
sensitivity, defined as the percentage of metaphases with
to the low proliferation rate of myeloma cells in vitro, which
the expected signal pattern at the correct chromosomal
results in normal karyotypes, and because of the patchy
location, should be established. Likewise, probe specific-
nature of the disease, conventional FISH has also been hin-
ity, the percentage of signals that hybridize to the correct
dered by normal cell contamination. However, these limi-
locus and no other location, must also be assessed. Probes
tations have been overcome by enriching the plasma cells
by using CD138 markers, which is followed by FISH analy-
   ss    
d ) s  s  
sis with disease specific panel of probes. This ensures that
larly if they are to be used for minimal residual disease
only the cells of interest are analyzed, and thus the results
assessment.
obtained are a more accurate reflection of the plasma cells.
FISH results should be interpreted within the broader
FISH has now become an invaluable tool in defin-
context of probe and analytical validation. The inter-
ing and monitoring acquired chromosome abnormali-
pretation of FISH results should include consideration
ties associated with hematologic and other neoplasias.
 of the reason for referral for testing and, when available,
The implementation of the technology into the routine
additional  laboratory  findings including  conventional
diagnostic laboratory requires rigorous attention to when
cytogenetic analysis, hematopathology, and immunophe-
it is appropriate to apply the technology, a very system-
notyping. When acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is the
atic approach to the validation of probes and technical
suspected diagnosis, FISH should be performed on a STAT
 procedures involved, the training of individuals who will
 perform the testing, and a comprehensive but plain and
 ment such as All-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA)-therapy.
simple means of reporting results.As the number of criti-
A system for FISH nomenclature, including both meta-
cal loci found to be involved in neoplastic chromosome
phase and interphase analysis, has been developed. While
rearrangements or numeric abnormalities continues to
the system may seem confusing to those not working
 expand, the diversity of FISH probes and unique probe sets
will undoubtedly improve. FISH has become an impor-
directly with chromosomes, correct nomenclature designa-
tions are important to convey the precise nature of a result.
tant means both for definition of the initial chromosome
For example, metaphase FISH ISCN nomenclature for a
 changes in a disease process, as well as a reliable means for
male patient with a 9;22 translocation resulting in fusion
the ongoing monitoring of response to therapy and dis-
of the BCR and ABL1 genes studied with conventional
ease remission.
banding and with a dual-color, single-fusion BCR/ABL1
Apart from the diagnostic approaches, FISH can be used
 probe set would be written:
as a research tool to refine the breakpoint regions of novel
chromosome abnormalities, which is often an essential
46,XY,t(9:22)(q34;q11.2).ish t(9;22)(ABL1 -;BCR+,ABL1 +)
step in the identification of new (partner) genes involved
62   PRINCIPLES OF MOLECULAR TECHNIQUES
in leukemogenesis. Recent progression of the Human
 before the seminal paper by Saiki et al. appeared in 1988.
Genome Project has facilitated the characterization of the
 Fundamentally  it merely  mimics replication of  DNA
translocation breakpoints using FISH. PAC/BAC resources,  in vivo, using essentially the same enzymes (DNA polymer-
 covering the entire genome are available and can be easily
 ases), but in a highly specific and exponential fashion. The
found using the databases of the University of California, 
 specificity results from the use of specific primer sequences
Santa Cruz (UcsC) (http://genome.uicsc.edu/), Ensembl  that are constructed to be complementary only to the tar-
(http://www.ensembl.org/), and the National Center for get gene or region of interest. The exponential amplifica-
 Biotechnology Information (NCBI) (http:/ /www.ncbi.nlm.
tion results from the use of a pair of primers which flank
nih.gov/genome/guide/human/). These clones can be used 
 the target region and hybridize to opposite strands of
to determine more precisely the breakpoint regions and to
 the DNA (Figure 4.13). Serving as start-sites for the poly-
search for genes involved in the translocations. The molec-
 merase reaction, they promote a bidirectional synthesis of
ular cytogenetics techniques are rapidly evolving with even 
 daughter strands that then become templates for the next
greater "high resolution" genome analysis being estab-
 round of replication. The replication cycles are controlled
lished and eventually used in a clinical setting. One such
 by alternate heating and cooling of the sample, denaturing
technology is whole-genome sequencing which has been
 the amplification products and then enabling the prim-
proven to identify cytogenetically invisible cryptic fusion
 ers (which are present in great excess) to re-hybridize and
 oncogenes in a clinically relevant time frame.
begin the replication again. Since each replication cycle
The genetic tools and strategies described briefly above
 doubles the number of template molecules, the products
have been applied to cancer for fewer than fifty years, but
 accumulate in exponential, rather than linear, fashion.
 A typical experiment encompasses about 30 cycles, per-
study and diagnosis of malignancy The importance of formed in a programmable heating/cooling instrument
cytogenetics in oncology is evidenced by the reclassifica-  called a thermal cycler, which produces amplification of
tion of certain hematological diseases by the World Health 
1 many million-fold. The precise timing and temperature
Organization, and the application of both classical and 
 settings will vary depending on the target sequence and
molecular cytogenetic methods to hematologic diseases
 application, but generally fall in the range of about 94°C
will be presented throughout this book.
for denaturation and 50-60*C for renaturation. The elon-
 gation step, in which the actual DNA synthesis occurs, is
run at 70-75°C. The reason it is not performed at physi-
ologic temperature is because in modern PCR the DNA
Polymerase Chain Reaction and
polymerases used are cloned from a variety of thermo-
philic microorganisms (e.g., Thermus aquaticus, source of
Related Techniques
so-called Taq polymerase) so that they do not degrade dur-
 ing each denaturation step.
It is impossible to overstate the degree to which the advent
 of nucleic acid amplification techniques, especially the
PRIMER DESIGN
polymerase chain reaction (PCR), has revolutionized the
For PCR to deliver the specificity desired, it is most impor-
molecular approaches to hematopathologic diagnosis and
tant that primer sequences be chosen carefully so they
molecular diagnostics generally. PCR and reverse transcrip-
   s   s  
tase PCR (RT-PCR) not only enable robust analysis of scant
 at the renaturation temperatures used. Primers are typi-
or degraded specimens, but they also allow for precise
cally about 18-25 nucleotides in length, and there are
quantitation of the analyte, fine dissection of a particular
 computer programs available on the internet to work out
 locus or sequence from among the over three billion nucle-
optimal base composition suich that the primers do not
otides of the human genome, and access to otherwise dif-
hybridize elsewhere or to themselves. For most clinical
ficult specimens such as formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded
 purposes, primers are designed to hybridize a few hundred
tissue biopsies. These techniques have largely replaced the
nucleotides apart in the target sequence, since replication
much more laborious and time-consuming Southern blot
      s  
(see below) for most, but not all, applications in hemato-
 long-range PCR protocols and commercial kits are avail-
pathology. At a more basic level, they have also replaced
able, allowing for amplification of targets many thousands
difficult DNA cloning procedures for many purposes,
of base pairs in length, but these are mostly reserved for
including the generation of DNA probes used in a variety
research purposes.
of downstream applications such as the Southern blot.
QUALITY CONTROL
BASIC TECHNIQUE
Given the awesome sensitivity of PCR, theoretically down
PCR is so simple in its conception that it is surpris-
to a single target DNA molecule, extreme care must be
ing no one in molecular biology happened to think of it 
 exercised to guard against the production of spurious
POLYMERASE CHAIN REACTION AND RELATED TECHNIQUES  63
contamination is detected by the running of a “no DNA"
or "no template" control tube in every PCR assay. This
tube contains all the requisite enzymes and nucleotides
do oi eidi ii ou iq 'ad i oeai ai 1
If any amplicon is observed in this sample after PCR, it
indicates a contamination problem with that run or with
one of the reagents. In addition, known positive controls
11
must be run with each assay, to demonstrate capability of
the PCR conditions and reagents to detect and amplify the
 desired target sequence when present.
M
PRODUCT ANALYSIS
For most applications, PCR is not an end in itself but
rather a first step in a subsequent assay. Once the desired
target has been amplified, it may be analyzed by hybrid-
ization with specific DNA probes in a dot blot format, by
size fractionation in agarose gel or capillary electrophore-
sis, by digestion with sequence-specific restriction endonu-
dleases, or by DNA sequencing. The choice of downstream
technique will depend on the nature of the disease process
being tested.
REVERSE TRANSCRIPTASE PCR
Certain disease applications, for example the detection of
the BCR-ABL translocation in chronic myelogenous leul-
kemia, involve detection and accurate quantification of
an RNA, rather than DNA, target. Since PCR uses DNA
polymerases which do not replicate or transcribe RNA,
amplification of such targets can only be accomplished by
first converting them to DNA. Fortunately, there are viral-
derived enzymes available that can do this, termed reverse
transcriptases (RT). Thus, amplification and study of RNA
FIGURE 4.13 Polymerase chain reaction scheme. The
targets utilizes the technique of RT-PCR, in which the first
oligonucleotide primers (rectangles) are designed to hybridize
step is reverse transcription, followed then by conventional
of interest. when hybridized, they serve as priming sites
PCR of the resulting DNA products.
for DNA polymerase replication of each strand. Alternate
heating and cooling allows for multiple cycles of denaturation,
rehybridization, and replication, increasing the amount of the
REAL-TIME PCR
target sequence exponentially.
As noted above, in most cases PCR amplification is but the
first step in an assay that then utilizes another method to
analyze or quantify the products. This is because conven-
tional thermal cyclers are closed systems in which ampli-
amplification products by contaminant target molecules.
fication proceeds without observation until it is finished
 In a clinical laboratory, these can come from other patient
 and the reaction tubes removed. In contrast, a newer gen-
specimens, from the operator himself, or from residual
eration of thermal cycler instruments can measure the
amplification products of a previous assay. In practice, it 
accumulation of amplicon as it occurs (i.e., in real time)
is this last source that is the most concerning, since these
by measuring the incorporation of a fluorescent label into
  s   e r  
the elongating products. These instruments can provide
genomic contaminants from an individual. A large num-
 very precise quantification of products and, by extrapola-
 ber of precautionary and preventative procedures have
tion, the amount of starting target material, in the sam-
been developed to guard against it, including one-way
ple; hence the technique is also called quantitative PCR
workflow from pre- to post-amplification areas, special
(qPCR). They are very useful for cancer applications in
dedicated pipettes, re-gloving, and degradation of residual
hematopathology designed to detect minimal residual dis-
s n s o     s
s, ease after therapy.
64
 PRINCIPLES OF MOLECULAR TECHNIQUES
RELATED AMPLIFICATION TECHNIQUES
Hind III
Bam H1
III u!H
A large number of innovations to the basic PCR technique
1
2
1
2
3
123
have been developed over the years to address particular
applications or to circumvent certain pitfalls. Included are
such techniques as nested PCR, whole-genome amplifica-
tion, inverse PCR, hot-start PCR, allele-specific PCR, cold
PCR, and many others. For the most part they are beyond the
scope of this chapter, but will be mentioned in the context
of particular disease applications where relevant elsewhere in
the book. In addition, a number of non-PCR amplification
J
J.
techniques have been developed over the years, such as Q-β
replicase, ligation chain reaction, etc., but for the most part
they have fallen by the wayside in favor of PCR, at least for
applications relevant to hematopathology (some are used in
JH
 molecular microbiology and genetics testing).
FIGURE 4.14 Southern blot analysis for lg gene rearrangements
of the lg heavy chain (Ju) and the joint region of the kappa light
chain (J).
Blotting Techniques
 In blotting techniques, unique segments of nucleic acid
technique is available. Detection of clonal gene rearrange-
sequences (DNA probes) are used to demonstrate the pres
ments in lymphocytic lesions is about the only remain-
ence of complementary sequence of DNA or RNA in the
 ing application for it, and even there, some laboratories
sample. Since the complementary target is composed of
have moved on to an approach using many PCR primer
hundreds or thousands of nucleotide bases, the reaction of
sets to encompass the same genetic region covered by the
the DNA probe to the target (hybridization) is the tightest
Southern blot.
and most specific intermolecular interaction.
NORTHERN BLOT
SOUTHERN BLOT
Northern blot is a technique basically similar to Southern
The DNA probes are labeled with a radioactive or non-
 blot, except that it is used to transfer RNA from a gel to a
radioactive signal moiety and are used as templates for
blot, instead of DNA.
 DNA. The DNA target is treated with restriction enzymes
(endonucleases) and the DNA fragments are separated
by gel electrophoresis (usually an agarose gel). The DNA
DOT BLOT
is then transferred to a membrane which is a sheet of spe-
The dot blot is similar to the other blotting techniques,
   si n a   
except it does not provide information regarding the size
copies of a single-stranded labeled DNA probe The probe
of the hybridized fragment. With this technique, extracted
hybridizes with its complementary DNA sequence of the
 DNA or RNA from the target specimen is spotted onto the
target sample to form a labeled double-stranded DNA
 filter without the prior electrophoresis and transfer steps.
molecule. The radiolabeled copy of the DNA probe is then
 In a reverse dot blot, it is the probe that is pre-bound to
detected by autoradiography (Figure 4.14). In non-radio-
the filter and then hybridized with the patient's (usually
active DNA labeling procedures, nucleotides (probes) are
PCR-amplified and colorimetrically tagged) DNA. The
conjugated with biotin or other protein binders such as
 probe configuration may be as lines (line blot) rather than
digoxigenin. Biotin binds specifically to the protein avi-
dots or circles.
din with a very high affinity. Avidin is a polyvalent protein
which can be linked to chromogenic enzymes, fluorescein
compounds, or electron dense particles. The advantage of
a radiolabeled probe over a non-radiolabeled probe is its
Microarray Techniques
higher sensitivity (5-10 fold), but its disadvantages are an
days, radiation hazard, and requirement for special proce-
The next generation of blotting techniques is a marriage of
dures for disposal of the radioactive contaminated wastes.
molecular biology and information technology: the micro-
In general, Southern blotting is a laborious, expensive, and
array. In contrast to a dot blot or Southern blot in which
time-consuming procedure, and most clinical laborato-
 'sd m e  a o  si a n
ries prefer to abandon it as soon as a suitable PCR-based
 rays enable the hybridization of hundreds or hundreds of
DNA SEQUENCING
65
thousands of target sequences simultaneously. Because it is
 restriction endonuclease digestion, and even PCR, are sur-
constructed at nanoscale using technology similar to that
rogate assays whose outcome depends ultimately on the
used to manufacture silicon-based computer chips, the ver-
inherent sequence of the target material but which do
 not ascertain that sequence directly. For this reason DNA
a reverse dot blot on a grand (and miniaturized) scale. The
sequencing is often referred to as the “gold standard" for
individual probes, in great numbers, are bound to the solid
molecular testing in the clinical setting.
support, while the specimen DNA (or RNA) is hybrid-
Like other techniques in molecular diagnostics, DNA
ized to them after being labeled with a fluorescent marker 
sequencing arose in the research setting to satisfy research
(Figure 4.15). A chip-reader instrument interprets these sig-
needs, and resulted in Nobel Prizes for its inventors.
nals and generates data output detailing which sequences
Initially cumbersome, the techniques have been refined
hybridized and which did not, as well as the intensity of
Over the years, recently under the impetus of the Human
hybridization (which relates to the relative amount of each
Genome Project which demanded extremely high through-
particular target sequence in the material being tested).
put, accurate, and inexpensive sequence analysis. The ben-
There are two basic kinds of microarrays: DNA arrays
efits of these innovations now spill over into the clinical
and RNA expression arrays. The former are used to detect
arena where sequencing previously considered a kind of
the presence of mutations, deletions, duplications, and
"last resort" methodology for special cases, is now routine
other sequence variants in the tested sample, while the
for a wide variety of applications.
latter are used to assay relative expression of hundreds or
thousands of genes, as for example in comparing tumor
 mRNA to that in a corresponding normal tissue. Depending
CHEMICAL METHODS
on how many probes are placed on the array, assays of
varying comprehensiveness can be developed, even to the
 Two basic approaches to sequencing were initially devel-
extreme of comprising the entire human genome.
oped and used, but one has now assumed dominance for
both manual and automated platforms. The chemical deg-
radation method, developed by Maxam and Gilbert, uses
various chemicals to cleave the double helix, based on their
DNA Sequencing
reaction with specific nucleotides. Sizing and aligning the
p n a soe ssoo a s 
mine at which point along the length of the helix each
In many ways DNA sequencing is the most definitive
nucleotide was positioned. This method has largely been
 molecular biology technique because it gets directly at the
abandoned for routine uses because of its technical diffi-
 genetic code of the specimen being analyzed, and that is
culty and the noxious nature of the chemicals required.
what is at the core of everything else, both biologically and
It has been supplanted by the chain termination
clinically. Other techniques, such as probe hybridization,
 method, developed by Sanger at about the same time. This
og,expressionratio
Correlation to average indolent profile
1.5
Reporter genes
FIGURE 4.15 Gene expression profiling in follicular lymphomas using a microarray technique. Results demonstrate two populations of
below the solid yellow line.
(From Glas AM, Kersten MU, Delahaye U, et al. Blood 2005; 105: 301-307, with permission.)
66
 PRINCIPLES OF MOLECULAR TECHNIQUES
one, too, is based on fragment sizes determining the posi-
 instruments which use capillary electrophoresis of fluores-
by degradation but by synthesis. Four DNA polymerase  The reactions are carried out in a single tube instead of four,
reactions are set up using the target sample as the tem-  and the various reactions are discriminated because each of
plate for replication. In each reaction tube, in addition to f
 the four dideoxynucleotides is labeled with a different-col-
the four regular nucleotide substrates, a dideoxynucleotide 
 ored fluorophore. These instruments provide more precise
 derivative is also added. When one of these is incorporated
 sizing, much higher throughput, and sophisticated software
for calling out and analyzing the sequence (Figure 4.16).
lication is halted at that point because the dideoxynucle-
otide lacks the 3'-hydroxyl group required for chemical
linkage to the next nucleotide that would otherwise be
LIMITATIONS OF SEQUENCING
added. Since the derivative nucleotides are present in the
  r i l  n    e 
as Na pepis pioe, ai aq Ae i am
random distribution whenever that nucleotide is required.
like any other technique, has its limitations and pitfalls.
This produces a complete spread of fragments whose size
 For many applications in which only one particular muta
is based solely on the positions of that particular nucleo-
tide in the original target material. If the fragments from
resent "overkill" in that it yields a tremendous amount of
each nucleotide reaction are separated on the basis of size
 extraneous data not relevant to the clinical question being
by electrophoresis, a "ladder" is created that reveals in
asked. Some of that data, moreover, can be of question-
 order, from shortest to longest, the nucleotide sequence.
able clinical relevance. Scattered throughout the genome
 of every human being are countless non-pathologic nucle-
otide substitutions, called polymorphisms. When they
SEQUENCE DETECTION AND ANALYSIS
occur within protein coding regions (exons), they appear
The electrophoresis formerly was done in a flat-bed (usul-
as missense mutations, causing the substitution of one
ally vertical) gel set-up, typically a long polyacrylamide gel,
amino acid for another in the gene product. If a sequenc-
using radioactive nucleotides that can be seen by autoradi-
 ing test reveals one of these changes that has not been seen
 ography of the dried gel after the run. But at present most 
 Or reported in the literature before, it can be very difficult
 clinical laboratories have moved to automated sequencing
g or impossible to decide whether it represents a pathologic
pl
ACG
1202
DE02
1002
050
0802
AOXT
GATCTTTC
CAATGCTGGT
SAGTGTTTGTT
CACAACGAGGATCATAATGCGAAAAATGA
AnalyzedData
Sque
the capture of a fluorescently labeled DNA fragment by the laser detector of the instrument, in order of size fractionation. Each
dideoxynucleotide in the reactions was labeled with a different-colored fluorophore, represented by the colors of the read-out and
nucleotide calls by the instrument. Note the heterozygous single nucleotide.
DNA SEQUENCING
S      
. as revolutionary in its own way as was the advent of PCR in
Certain physical attributes, such as its position within the
 the mid-1980s. The new technology is variously referred
protein and the biochemical nature of the amino acid sub-
,      s 
stitution, may help one to deduce its impact, though there
 sequencing (NGS). Instead of targeting a single locus as
are many exceptions to these rules. Correlation with phe-
 sequencing template and sizing the resulting replicated frag-
notype, and presence or absence of the change in other 
ments as in Sanger sequencing (producing about 200 nude-
affected or unaffected family members or the population
otides of sequence per run), NGS uses random primers to
at large can also be of help. Ultimately, functional studies
o, e  a aa a ss r, s 
of the altered gene in vitro may be needed, but these are
 gun" manner but with tremendous redundancy. The addition
 not applicable to the clinical laboratory.
of each suiccessive nucleotide to the synthesized products is
Aside from the clinical interpretation, even the detec-
captured in real time by various sensitive detection methods
tion of nucleotide substitutions in the heterozygous state
(depending on the instrument) which distinguish the four
may be problematic. Ironically, this seems to be more of
nudleotides. A huge series of "snapshots" are taken at micro-
an issue with automated sequencers than with manual
second/nanoscale and then analyzed and aligned by the com-
systems which depend more on the eye of the operator. A
puter software to generate the completed sequence. These
heterozygous substitution will appear on the automated
instruments are capable of sequencing billions of nudleo-
read-out as two differently colored peaks superimposed
tides per run, finally placing within practical reach the whole-
 at the same nucleotide position (Figure 4.16). For various
 genome sequence (3.3 billion nucleotides) of an individual.
technical reasons which are diffcult to control, the two
 One can choose to analyze the entire genome or just the cod-
peaks may not be of the same intensity, even though they
 ing regions (called whole-exon sequencing), the latter accom-
are supposedly present in equal amounts in the specimen.
 plished by an initial exon-capture step.
If one of the peaks is much smaller than 20-30% level, it
 Significantly, it is in the realm of hematopathology
  s      
 that some of the first medically relevant successes of NGS
out as homozygous for the other nucleotide. One way to
 have emerged, with unexpected gene mutations and rear-
guard against missing a heterozygous change in this way
 rangements being detected especially in acute myeloid
is to perform the sequencing in both directions (i.e., using
leukemia. Of course, the downside of this approach is
opposite strands of the same fragment as template) and
the acquisition of a tremendous amounts of data and
compare the read-outs. It is unlikely that the instrument 
 novel sequence variants which then have to be assessed
would miss the change both times.
and interpreted (similar to what was discussed above for
s  a p  s e
of magnitude). In addition, the detection of "off-target"
NEXT-GENERATION SEQUENCING
mutations, such as for later-onset hereditary disorders,
Over the last few years we have witnessed the advent of a
 raises ethical challenges surrounding test reporting and
powerful new variation on traditional Sanger sequencing.
informed consent.
68
 PRINCIPLES OF MOLECULAR TECHNIQUES
Additional Resources
American College of Medical Genetics, Standards and Guidelines
cytogenetic and FISH analyses—a rare occurrence, Leukemia 17: 1907-
for Clinical Genetic Laboratories, Section E: Clinical Cytogenetics.
1910, 2003.
Available at www.acmg.net
Saiki RK, Gelfand DH, Stoffel S, et al. Primer-directed enzymatic
Cline J. Braman JC, Hogrefe HH: PCR fidelity of Pfu DNA poly-
amplification of DNA with a thermostable DNA polymerase, Science
merase and other thermostable DNA polymerases, Nucl Acids Res
239:487-491, 1988.
24:3546-3551, 1996.
Sanger F, Nicklen S, Coulson AR: DNA sequencing with chain termi-
Davies JI, Wilson IM, Lam WL: Array CGH technologies and their
nating inhibitors, Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 74:5463-5467, 1977.
applications to cancer genomes, Chromosome Res 13:237-248.
Shaffer LG, Bejjani BA: Medical applications of array CGH and
2005.
the transformation of clinical cytogenetics, Cytogenet Genome Res
115:303-309, 2005.
otide microarrays, Molec Biotechnol 23:127-138, 2003.
Shanafelt TD, Geyer SM, Kay NE: Prognosis at diagnosis: integrating
 International Society of Chromosome Nomenclature (ISCN) Shaffer
molecular, biologic, insights into clinical practice for patients with
LG, Tommerup N, editors: An International System for Human
CLL, Blood 103:1202-1210, 2004.
Cytogenetic Nomenclature Basel, 2009, Karger.
Singh RR, Cheung KJ. Horsman DE: Utility of array comparative
genomic hybridization in cytogenetic analysis, Methods Mol Biol
Macleod RA, Kaufmann M, Drexler HG: Cytogenetic analysis of can-
730:219-234, 2011.
cer cell lines, Methods Mol Biol 73l:57-78, 2011.
Stratton MR: Exploring the genomes of cancer cells: progress and
Maxam AM, Gilbert W: A new method for sequencing DNA, Proc Natl
promise, Science 331:1553-1558, 2011.
Acad Sci UISA 74:560-564, 1977.
Ten-Bosch I. Grody WW: Keeping up with the next generation:
Nasedkina TV, Guseva NA, Gra OA, Mityaeva ON, Chudinov AV,
Zasedatelev AS: Diagnostic microarrays in hematologic oncology:
massively parallel sequencing in clinical diagnostics, J Molec Diagn
10:484-492, 2008.
applications of high- and low-density arrays, Mol Diagn Ther 13:91-
102, 2009.
Welch JS, Westervelt P, Ding L, et al. Use of whole-genome sequencing
Ravandi F Kadkol SS, Ridgeway J. Bruno A, Dodge C, Lindgren V:
to diagnose a cryptic fusion oncogene, JAMA 305:1577-1584, 2011.
Molecular identification of CBFbeta-MYHll fusion transcripts in an
Zordan A: Fluorescence in situ hybridization on formalin-fixed, par-
AML M4Eo patient in the absence of invl6 or other abnormality by
affin-embedded tissue sections, Methods Mol Biol 730:189-202, 2011.
Morphology of
Abnormal Bone
Marrow
material), and bone marrow hypoplasia. Gelatinous trans-
bone marrow lesions that will not be covered in the fol-
formation has been observed in various chronic debilitat-
lowing chapters. These lesions include gelatinous trans-
 ing conditions such as anorexia nervosa and other forms of
formation of bone marrow, bone marrow necrosis,
 severe starvation, as well as in malignancies, tuberculosis,
amyloidosis, granulomas, metastatic lesions, and finally.
 chronic renal failure, ulcerative colitis, and AIDS.
 bone and stromal changes.
The bone marrow involvement is often patchy, and the
gelatinous amorphous, glassy deposit appears as a light
reddish substance by H&E stain and reacts positively with
alcian blue and periodic acid Schiff (PAS) stains (Figure
Gelatinous Transformation
5.1). Bone marrow smears stained with Wright's stain
show a bluish-pink material mixed with adipocytes (Figure
5.1D). The reversal of gelatinous transformation has been
Gelatinous transformation of bone marrow is characterized
 observed in patients with anorexia nervosa when their
by fat atrophy, accumulation of hyaluronic acid (gelatinous
 nutritional status has been improved.
FIGURE 5.1 Gelatinous
transformation of fatty tissue.
Bone marrow biopsy section
(A, low power; B, high power)
demonstrating hypocellularity and
partial replacement of the bone
marrow fat by an eosinophilic
amorphous substance. (C) The
substance reacts positively with the
alcian blue stain. (D) Bone marrow
smear is hypocellular and shows
 increased cell debris.
85183-3.00005-7
70
MORPHOLOGYOFABNORMALBONEMARROW
      
Bone Marrow Necrosis
with extramedullary hematopoiesis or leukoerythroblasto-
sis (presence of immature erythroid and myeloid cells in
Extensive bone marrow necrosis is infrequent and is usually
the peripheral blood) and pancytopenia. The bone mar-
associated with hematologic disorders, such as leukemia,
row biopsy sections show coagulation or fibrinoid necro-
lymphoma, sickle cell anemia, bone marrow metastasis,
sis. Coagulation necrosis is more frequently observed and
 and infections. The cause of bone marrow necrosis could be
is characterized by the preservation of the overall archi-
attributed to the following factors:
tectural framework of the tissues and the skeleton of the
necrotic cells (Figure 5.2). Fibrinoid necrosis consists of
1. vascular occlusion caused by deformed red cells (sickle cell
the accumulation of an amorphous, granular cell debris
anemia), fbrin clot (disseminated intravascular coagulation,
and is more often associated with infections. Aspirated
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura), or vascular occlusion 
necrotic bone marrow contains pyknotic nuclei and
by fungi (such as mucormycosis) or tumor emboli;:
 blurred outlines of cells in a background of amorphous
2. inadequate blood supply. such as in severe anemia or
hyperparathyroidism;
 granular material.
3. infection, such as gram-positive and gram negative bac-
 Since hematologic malignancies and metastatic tumors
teria, Q fever, typhoid fever, tuberculosis, diphtheria, and
are frequent causes of bone marrow necrosis, the presence
histoplasmosis:
of necrosis in bone marrow samples of patients with a his-
 4. radiation and chemotherapy:
tory of malignant disease is highly suggestive of bone mar-
 5. release of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) in cancer patients.
row involvement. In such cases, additional sections and/or
samples are recommended.
Amyloidosis
Amyloid is an extracellular deposit which appears as a hya-
line, eosinophilic, amorphous material on H&E sections
(Figure 5.3). It predominantly consists of non-branching
fibrils composed of polypeptide chains. Amyloid is often
recognized by methyl violet and Congo red histochemical
stains. Amyloid deposits appear rose-pink by methyl vio-
let stain and red-orange by Congo red stain. When Congo
red stained tissue sections are viewed under a polarizing
gent deposit (Figure 5.4B). It is also possible to detect
loid components (anti-AA, anti-AL) by immunofluores-
cence or  immunohistochemical  techniques. Amyloid
deposits in bone marrow are observed in primary systemic
amyloidosis, associated with plasma cell dyscrasias (see
Chapter 41), and secondary to chronic inflammatory dis-
orders. Amyloid deposits are usually multifocal and are
found adjacent to or within the walls of small blood ves-
sels. Vascular amyloidosis may lead to ischemia and focal
bone marrow hypoplasia. Occasionally, bone marrow
involvement with amyloid is extensive.
Granulomas
B
Granulomas are aggregates of epithelioid histiocytes which
are frequently surrounded by lymphocytes, plasma cells,
FIGURE 5.2 (A) Low and (B) high power views of a bone marrow
biopsy section demonstrating coagulation necrosis. The shadow
and eosinophils. Multinucleated giant cells, which are the
of the necrotic cells is visible.
result of fusion of closely packed histiocytes, may also be
GRANULOMAS
71
frequent causes of bone marrow granulomas are myco- lymphomas, autoimmune disorders, Erdheim-Chaster 
       soo n s   
5.5-5.8). However, other infectious and non-infectious  responses may lead to the formation of granulomas (Box
conditions, such as viral infections (such as HIV and EBV),
5.1). Foreign body granulomas are occasionally seen
syphilis, Q fever, typhoid fever, Legionnaires' disease,
in bone marrow biopsies as the result of drug abuse or
FIGURE 5.5 Bone marrow granulomas. (A) A necrotizing
granuloma in a patient with tuberculosis. (B) A non-necrotizing 
FIGURE 5.3 (A) Low and (B) high power views of a bone marrow
biopsy section demonstrating amyloid deposits in the bone
granuloma in a patient with sarcoidosis.
marrow space and vessel walls.
FIGURE 5.4 Amyloidosis. (A) A sclerotic bone marrow blood vessel displays (B) an apple green birefringent deposit by Congo red stain.
72
 MORPHOLOGY OF ABNORMAL BONE MARROW
FIGURE 5.7 Leishmania donovani. (A) Bone marrow biopsy
section and (B) bone marrow smear demonstrating histiocytes 
 containing numerous organisms.
FIGURE 5.6 Bone marrow biopsy section (A, low power; B, high 
 power) and bone marrow smear (C) demonstrating Cryptococcus
neoformans.
prosthetic pelvic operations (Figure 5.10). The viral-associ
ated granulomas are usually small, rarely show multinucle-
 ated giant cells, and are non-necrotizing.
B
Bone marrow granulomas in Q fever consist of small
FIGURE 5.8 Bone marrow smears showing involvement with
 dlusters of epithelioid histiocytes radially arranged around
Histoplasma capsulatum (A, low power; arrows; B, high power).
GRANULOMAS
73
Box 5.1 Conditions Associated with Bone
Marrow Granulomas
Infections
Tuberculosis
Mycobacterium avium-intraceffutare
●Leprosy
 Infectious mononucleosis
 Cytomegalovirus
●Herpes zoster
AIDS
Mycoplasma
 Histoplasmosis
Cryptococcosis
 Brucellosis
Typhoid fever
● Legionnaire's disease 
·Qfever
● Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Sarcoidosis
Hematologic malignancies
●Hodgkin lymphoma 
●Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
●Plasma cell myeloma
Autoimmune disorders
Drug-induced
Phenytoin
B
●Procainamide
FIGURE 5.9 (A) Low and (B) high power views of a bone marrow
 Oxyphenbutazone
biopsy section from a patient with Erdheim-Chester disease
 Chlorpropamide 
FlGURE 5.10 (A) Low and (B) high power views of a bone marrow biopsy section from a patient with 8-year history of prosthetic pelvic
operation showing several cystic structures. These structures contain foreign material surrounded by multinucleated giant cells.
74
MORPHOLOGY OF ABNORMAL BONE MARROW
D
FlGURE 5.11 Small granulomas consisting of epithelioid histiocytes have been observed in the bone marrow of patients with viral
infections (such as HIV and EBV), syphilis, Q fever, typhoid fever, and Legionnaires' disease (A through D).
a fatty tissue containing fibrinoid necrosis (ring granulo-
mas) (Figure 5.11). The characteristic feature of bone mar-
row involvement in lepromatous leprosy is the presence of
dusters of foamy histiocytes containing lepra bacilli (dirty
vacuolated, fat-containing histiocytes in bone marrow sec-
tions, frequently observed in association with lymphoid
 aggregates and plasma cells (Figure 5.12).
Granulomas are best detected in bone marrow biopsy
sections. It is extremely difficult to detect them in bone
marrow smears. A careful search for granulomas is rec-
S     s  n
origin, mycobacterial or fungal infections, and in immu-
nocompromised patients. Special stains for mycobacterial
and fungal infections are recommended when a granu-
loma is detected in bone marrow samples.
Certain hematologic disorders, such as peripheral T-cell
lymphomas with histiocytic component and metastatic
carcinomas composed of cells with abundant cytoplasm
(renal cell carcinoma, hepatoblastoma, pheochromocy-
toma), may resemble granulomas.
Bone Marrow Metastasis
Bone marrow biopsy sections have a higher detection rate
 of metastasis than bone marrow clot sections or smears,
because metastatic tumor cells trapped in dense fbrosis
may not be aspirable. Also, cellular organization of tumor
cells such as glandular structures, rosette formations, and
tumor-associated stromal alterations such as fibrosis are
usually not detected in bone marrow smears. However,
it is highly recommended that all various types of bone
FIGURE 5.12 Lipogranulomas consist of small aggregates of
marrow slides, such as tissue sections, touch preparations,
vacuolated, fat-containing histiocytes in bone marrow sections
and smears, be thoroughly examined for the detection of
(A, low power; B, high power).
BONE MARROW METASTASIS
75
FIGURE 5.13 (A) Bone marrow biopsy section depicting
metastatic melanoma. (B) The melanoma consists of pigmented
and non-pigmented components.
metastatic lesions. Metastatic tumor cells tend to clump
together, are usually larger than erythroid and myeloid
precursors, and may show areas of necrosis (Figures 5.13-
5.15). Reactive changes such as fibrosis, or the presence of
macrophages, lymphocytes, plasma cells, and neutrophils,
may be seen within or adjacent to the metastatic sites. In
bone marrow smears, metastatic tumor cells are usually
well defined and in clusters, and are often detected at the
 periphery of the marrow particles.
Metastatic small round cell tumors (oat cell carcinoma,
neuroblastoma,
retinoblastoma,
rhabdomyosarcoma,
FIGURE 5.14 Metastatic neuroblastoma demonstrating clusters
 Ewing's sarcoma) may resemble hematopoietic blast cells.
of small round tumor cells. Bone marrow biopsy section: (A) low
However, they are usually larger than the hematopoietic
 power and (B) high power views. (C) Bone marrow smear.
blasts, often show significant nuclear pleomorphism, and
may also show characteristic morphologic structures, such
as organoid pattern (oat cell carcinoma) or rosette forma-
 microscopy, the presence of cellular catecholamines and
tion (neuroblastoma) (Figure 5.14C). In addition, small
neuroflaments by immunohistochemistry, and by demon-
cell tumors may demonstrate specific features by electron
stration of the outgrowth of neurites in tissue culture.
microscopy, immunophenotypic studies, molecular and
Presence of bone marrow fibrosis in patients with a his-
cytogenetic studies, or in vitro culture. For example, the
tory of malignancy is strongly suspicious for metastasis.
diagnosis of a metastatic neuroblastoma is facilitated by
Metastatic carcinomas, particularly of breast origin, are
the existence of specific cytoplasmic granules by electron
frequently associated with bone marrow fibrosis. Clusters
76
MORPHOLOGY OF ABNORMAL BONE MARROW
structure and function of the bone marrow stroma and the
surrounding bone trabeculae.
BONE CHANGES
Hematopathologists and hematologists may overlook the
bone changes when they review bone marrow biopsy sec-
tions. These changes are usually of two types: (1) associ-
ated with decreased bone formation (osteopenia) and (2)
associated with increased bone formation (osteosclerosis).
Conditions Associated with Osteopenia
The receptor activator of nudlear  factor-kappaB ligand
(RANKL) is a pivotal regulator of osteodast activity, and
its inhibition may lead to osteopenia and hypercalcemia.
Osteopenia (osteoporosis, osteolysis) is caused by various
conditions including circulatory disturbances, metabolic
deficiencies, endocrine imbalance or deficiency, dialysis,
inflammatory conditions, inactivity and immobilization, and
the expansion of bone marrow space caused by metastasis,
plasma cell myeloma, leukemia/lymphoma, and extensive
Alteration of RANKL activity has been reported in many of
these conditions, particularly plasma cell myeloma. In osteo-
porosis, the bone marrow space is expanded at the expense
of bone trabeculae. The bone trabeculae are thin and far
apart. In osteomalacia the osteoid is partially decalcified.
Conditions Associated with Osteosclerosis
Osteosclerosis is demonstrated in bone marrow biopsy
FIGURE 5.15 Bone marrow biopsy section demonstrating
sections by increased thickness of the bone trabeculae. It
metastatic mucoepidermoid carcinoma (A, low power; B, high
is observed in chronic idiopathic myelofibrosis, leukemias,
power).
metastatic cancers, Erdheim-Chester disease, and masto-
cytosis (Figure 5.16). Osteopetrosis, an inherited disease
and strands of tumor cells are offen trapped in a dense,
which occurs in both autosomal dominant and recessive
highly collagenized, fibrous tissue. Sometimes, fibrosis
forms, is also characterized by increased bone density.
may make the detection of small metastatic foci difficult. In
such cases, examination of additional tissue sections may
PREVIOUS BIOPSY SITE (REPAIR)
be helpful.  As mentioned earlier, metastatic carcinomas
composed of cells with abundant cytoplasm may resemble
The recovery to the damaged bone marrow following
 granulomas. Immunophenotypic studies on bone marrow
 biopsy is relatively fast and complete. However, occasion-
samples are useful in (l) distinguishing metastatic neo-
 ally, when several biopsy attempts are made at short inter-
plasms from primary bone marrow malignancies and reac-  vals, the biopsy may show features of tissue repair, such
tive proliferations, (2) classification of metastatic tumors
as neovascularization and proliferation of the fibroblasts
and their possible primary sites, and (3) detection of small,
(granulation tissue), edema, increased number of mac-
 occult metastatic lesions (see Chapter 2).
rophages, and evidence of new bone formation (Figure
5.17). In addition, fragments of necrotic bone or bone
marrow tissue may be still present. The reparative changes
may mimic myelofbrosis, granuloma, or Paget's disease.
Bone and Stromal Changes
BONE MARROW FIBROSIS
Bone marrow stroma and bone play an important role in 
 Bone marrow fibrosis is a common phenomenon and
support and regulation of hematopoiesis. However, patho-
is observed in various pathological conditions such
logical changes of hematopoiesis may significantly affect as myeloproliferative and myelodysplastic neoplasms,
BONE AND STROMAL CHANGES
77
Box 5.2 Conditions Associated with Bone
Marrow Fibrosis
Primary hematologic disorders
 Chronic myleoproliferative disorders
 Myelodysplastic syndromes
 Paroxysmal noctumal hemoglobinuria
 Aplastic anemia
Leukemias
 Lymphomas
 Plasma cell myeloma
Mastocytosis
● Gray platelet syndrome
Metastatic lesions
Lysosomal storage diseases
FIGURE 5.16 Bone marrow biopsy section from a patient with
 Inflammatory and repair processes
mastocytosis showing sclerotic bone trabeculae and areas of
bone marrow fibrosis.
 Granulomas
Osteomyelitis
+
 Autoimmune disorders 
 Following bone marrow necrosis
 Following bone marrow irradiation
 Previous bone marrow biopsy site
Metabolic disorders
 Osteomalacia
Osteopetrosis
 Chronic renal failure
● Primary hyperparathyroidism
Paget's disease
leukemias, lymphomas, mastocytosis, paroxysmal noctur-
nal hemoglobinuria, plasma cell myeloma, Gaucher's dis-
ease, granulomas, metastatic tumors, hyperparathyroidism,
chronic renal failure, osteopetrosis, autoimmune disor-
ders, and Paget's disease (Box 5.2) (Figures 5.18 and 5.19)
Fibrosis may be focal (e.g., fibrosis associated with chronic
renal failure or mastocytosis) or diffuse (e.g., fibrosis asso-
ciated with myeloproliferative disorders). Bone marrow
fibrosis is a non-clonal reactive process and is caused by
the release of fibroblastic growth factors by megakaryo-
cytes, platelets, histiocytes, and other cells.
VASCULAR CHANGES
Vascular inflammatory changes such as arteritis, arteriolitis,
and granulomatous vasculitis may involve bone marrow as
part of a systemic process (Figure 5.20). Similarly, athero-
sclerotic and thrombotic lesions may be detected in bone
marrow biopsy. Tumor emboli are the major sources of
B
bone marrow metastasis, and when they are extensive may
 cause microangiopathic hemolytic anemia. As mentioned
FIGURE 5.17 Bone marrow biopsy sections from previous biopsy
sites may show evidence of bone remodeling, granulation tissue
earlier, bone marrow amyloidosis may involve vascular
formation (A) and/or fibrosis (B).
 structures.
78
MORPHOLOGY OF ABNORMAL BONE MARROW
FIGURE 5.18 Bone marrow biopsy section from a patient with chronic renal failure demonstrating paratrabecular fbrosis, bone
 resorption and remodeling, and the presence of osteoclasts.
 FIGURE 5.19 Occasionally, autoimmune disorders may be associated with extensive bone marrow fibrosis: (A) low power and (B) high
power.
B
FIGURE 5.20 A vascular structure in a bone marrow biopsy section showing features of giant cell arteritis with a large multinucleated
giant cellin the sclerotic wall: (A) low power and (B) high power.
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
79
Additional Resources
Ataga Kl, Orringer EP: Bone marrow necrosis in sickle cell disease: a
Hong FS, Mitchell CA, Zantomio D: Gelatinous transformation of
description of three cases and a review of the literature, Am I Med Sci 
the bone marrow as a late morphological change in imatinib mesyl-
320:342-347, 2000.
ate treated chronic myeloid leukaemia, Pathology 42:84-85, 2010.
Bohm I: Gelatinous transformation of the bone marrow: the spec-
Janssens AM, Offner FC, Van Hove WZ: Bone marrow necrosis,
trum of underlying diseases, Am J Surg Pathol 24:56-65, 2000.
Cancer 88:1769-1780, 2000.
Chang KL, Gaal KK, Huang Q. Weiss LM: Histiocytic lesions involv-
Murugan P, Chandrakumar S, Basu D, Hamide A: Gelatinous trans-
ing the bone marrow, Semin Diagn Pathol 20:226-236, 2003.
formation of bone marrow in acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.
Comenzo RL: Primary systemic amyloidosis, Curr Treat Options Oncol
Pathology 39:287-288, 2007.
1:83-89, 2000.
Naeim F: Atlas of Bone Marrow and Blood Pathology. Philadelphia,
2001, WB Saunders.
Cotta CV, Konoplev S, Medeiros LJ, et al. Metastatic tumors in bone
 marrow: histopathology and advances in thebiology ofthe tumor cells
 Petruzziello F, Zeppa P, Catalano L, Cozzolino I, et al. Amyloid in
and bone marrow environment, Ann Diagn Pathol 10:169-192, 2006.
bone marrow smears of patients affected by multiple myeloma, Ann
Diebold J, Molina T, Camilleri-Broet S, et al. Bone marrow manifesta.
Hematot 89:469-474, 2010.
tions of infections and systemic diseases observed in bone marrow
trephine biopsy review, Histopathology 37:199-211, 2000.
This page intentionally left blank
Ve
Lymphadenopathies
I he reactive lymphadenopathies represent hyperplasia
 infectious diseases, these structural patterns may change
of different lymph node components and therefore dem-
during the disease process. For example, in many viral
onstrate particular structural patterns such as follicular
infections such as infectious mononucleosis, follicular
hyperplasia, paracortical hyperplasia, sinus histiocytosis,
hyperplasia is the predominant pattern in the early stages
granulomas, or a mixed pattern (Table 6.1). We should 
 of the disease, while paracortical hyperplasia becomes the
keep in mind that in many reactive conditions, particularly
 dominating feature in the more advanced stages.
Table 6.1
Follicular Pattern
 Patterns of Reactive Lymphadenitis
Pattern
Description
Examples
In follicular pattern, lymph node enlargement is primar-
 Follicular hyperplasia
 Enlargement of 
 Rheumatoid arthritis,
ily due to the increased number and size of the follicles.
 germinal centers,
 Castelman's disease,
follicles in variable
Early HIV infection,
ferent sizes and shapes and are surrounded by well-defined
 size and shapes,
Bacterial infections
mantle zones. Follicles occupy cortical, paracorical, and
 mantle zone present
even sometimes medullary zones, but they are usually sepa-
 Paracortical
 Expansion of
Infectious
rated from one another by interfollicular lymphoid tissue.
hyperplasia
 interfollicular areas,
 mononucleosis,
The expanded germinal centers show numerous tingible
increased high
Postvaccinal
body macrophages intermixed with centrocytes and centro-
endothelial venules,
 ymphadenitis, Drug-
blasts, and are characterized by the CD2l-positive follicu-
mostly T-cells
 induced
lar dendritic cell meshwork, and lack of BCL-2 expression
 Sinus pattern 
Expansion of
 Sinus histiocytosis,
sinusoidal spaces
 Rosai-Dorfman
(Figures 6.1 and 6.2). Mitotic figures and apoptotic bodies
with proliferation
disease, Wipple's
are frequent. Plasma cells may be present within the germi-
of histiocytes
disease, Monocytoid
 nal centers, occasionally in large numbers. Interfollicular
or monocytoid
 B-cell hyperplasia
areas often show vascular proliferation plus a mixture of
B-lymphocytes 
small lymphocytes, plasma cells, and immunoblasts, some-
Granulomatous
 Granulomas may be
Tuberculosis,
times with increased number of histiocytes and eosino-
 ymphadenitis 
of epithelioid type.
Sarcoidosis, Cat-
phils. Medullary plasmacytosis is a frequent finding. As
may show caseous
scratch disease,
discussed in Chapter 14, distinction of follicular hyperpla-
necrosis, or may be
 Fungal infections 
suppurative
sia from follicular lymphoma can sometimes be difficult.
The major distinguishing features between these two enti-
Mixed pattern
Dermatopathic
ties are summarized in Table 6.2. Castleman's disease, rheul-
ymphadenitis,
 Protozoal infections,
matoid arthritis, and various infections, such as syphilis,
 Lupus lymphadenitis,
 are often associated with follicular hyperplasia. The mor-
 Kikuchi's disease,
phologic features of rheumatoid arthritis and Castleman's
Kimura's disease
disease are briefly discussed here.
Atlas of Hematopathology. D0l: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00006-1
@ 201 3 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
82
 REACTIVE LYMPHADENOPATHIES 
FIGURE 6.1 (A) Follicular hyperplasia with the expansion of
germinal centers. (B) High power view of a germinal center
showing centrocytes, centroblasts, tingible body macrophages,
 and mitotic figures.
RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS
 Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune, chronic sys-
temic disorder affecting women more than men (male to
female ratio of about 1:3). Most patients are over 30 years
of age. The lymph node biopsy sections show prominent
follicular hyperplasia with sinus histiocytosis (Figure 6.3).
Increased plasma cells are frequently observed in the inter-
follicular regions. The lymphadenopathy in longstanding
FIGURE 6.2 Immunohistochemical studies of hyperplastic
follicles: (A) B-cells (CD20-positive, red) are the predominant
cells in the germinal centers, and T-cells (CD3-positive, brown)
Schiff (PAS)-positive hyaline material (negative for
are the predominant cells in the interfollicular areas. (B) Reactive 
Congo red stain) with partial or complete replacement of
follicles do not express BCL-2. (C) CD21 expression represents the
the lymphoid tissue.
meshwork of follicular dendritic cells.
FOLLICULAR PATTERN
83
Table 6.2
Morphologic Features Distinguishing Follicular
Lymphoma (FL) from Reactive Follicular Hyperplasia
(RFH)
FL
RFH
Follicles
 High density per unit area
Low density per unit area
Back to back or merging, often
Separated, with preservation of
with loss of mantle zone
mantle zone
Lack of polarity
Presence of polarity
Lack of tingible body
 Presence of tingible body
macrophages
macrophages
Monoclonal
Polyclonal
 Commonly BCL-2 positive
 Commonly BCL-2 negative
Low Ki-67 fraction
High Ki-67 fraction
Interfollicular Areas
 Presence of CD10 positive cells
Absence of CD10 positive cells
Presence of BCL-6 positive cells
Absence of BCL-6 positive cells
CASTLEMAN'S DISEASE
Castleman's disease, also known as angiofollicular hyper-
plasia or giant lymph node hyperplasia, consists of two
forms: (1) localized type and (2) multicentric type (Figures
6.4 and 6.5). The localized type of Castleman's disease is
much more frequent than the multicentric type, usually
involving mediastinum. Other sites such as axillary and
cervical lymph nodes, skeletal muscles, and pulmonary
parenchyma have been involved less frequently. There are
two morphologic variants of Castleman's disease: (1) hya-
line vascular type and (2) plasma cell type
Hyaline Vascular Type
The hyaline vascular type of Castleman's disease is the com-
mon variant accounting for over 90% of cases in one large
study. The lesion is characterized by abnormal germinal
centers, expanded mantle zones, and increased interfollicu-
lar vascularity. Germinal centers contain hyalinized vascular
structure and show increased number of follicular den-
large and bizarre. The mantle zone area is often expanded
and concentrically arranged, creating an "onion skin" pat-
tern (Figure 6.4B and C). The expanded mantle zones may
sometimes completely obscure the germinal centers. Blood
FIGURE 6.3 FOLLICULAR HYPERPLASIA IN A PATIENT WITH RHEUMATOID
ARTHRITIis. (A) low power, (B) intermediate power, and (C) high
vessels are prominent in the interfollicular areas, some with
power.
prominent endothelial cells (Figure 6.4D). Small lympho-
cytes and scattered plasma cells are found in between vas-
cular structures. The hyaline vascular type, because of the
84
REACTIVELYMPHADENOPATHIES
FIGURE 6.4 CAsTLEMAN's DIsEAsE, HYALINE vAscULAR TYPE. Lymph node biopsy sections demonstrate follicular hyperplasia and expansion
interfollicular areas. Immunohistochemical stains demonstrate (E) CD20+ B-cells and (F) CD21+ follicular dendritic cells in the follicular
structures.
FOLLICULARPATTERN
85
FIGURE 6.5 CAsTLEMAN's DisEAsE, MULTIcENTRic. Lymph node biopsy sections (A, low power; B, high power) demonstrate follicles with
marrow biopsy section, and (F) immunohistochemical stain for CD138 show plasmacytosis.
86
REACTIVE LYMPHADENOPATHIES
FIGURE 6.6 PLAsMA cELL vARIANT oF CAsTLEMAN's DIsEAsE. (A) Biopsy of left supraclavicular lymph node in a 53-year-old female reveals
marked nodal architecture expansion by interfollicular proliferation of plasma cells with a few residual follicles. (B) Some follicles
expansion of mantle zone areas, may resemble mantle cell is the abdomen, particularly in the small bowel mesentery.
lymphoma. Mantle cell lymphoma is monoclonal and dem-  Lymph node sections show follicular hyperplasia with a
 onstrates Ig light chain restriction, expresses BCL-1, and is well-defined mantle zone, surrounded by sheets of mature
usually devoid of hyalinized vessels.
plasma cells and scattered immunoblasts (Figure 6.6).
Vascular proliferation or hyalinization is usually absent. In
Plasma Cell Type
approximately 40% of cases, the plasma cells are monotypic
and express Ig lambda light chain. The plasma cell type
The plasma cell type of Castleman's disease is less fre-
 resembles other follicular hyperplasias, such as those asso-
quent  (1l0%)  and  is  often associated  with  polyclonal
ciated with RA, or other autoimmune disorders. Diagnosis
gamma globulinemia and increased serum levels of IL-6.
 of Castleman's disease of plasma cell type is a diagnosis of
Anemia and elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate are
 exclusion, when all other possible causes of follicular hyper-
frequent findings. The most frequent site of involvement
 plasia have been ruled out.
PARACORTICAL (INTERFOLLICULAR) PATTERN 
87
FIGURE 6.7 CMV LyMPHADENITis. (A) Biopsy of the submental lymph node shows prominent follicular hyperplasia and sinus proliferation
of monocytoid B-cells. (B) Focal follicular lysis is demonstrated. (C) Scattered large cells with intranuclear inclusions are present
(arrows). These cells often express CD15 (D) and CD30 (E), and show nuclear positivity for CMV (F) with immunohistochemical stains.
Paracortica! (lnterfollicular)
high endothelial venules. T-cells are the predominant cell
type, but there are variable numbers of B-immunoblasts
Pattern
and plasma cells. Infectious mononucleosis, CMV, post-
vaccinal lymphadenitis, and drug-induced hypersensitivity
 reactions often represent lymphadenitis with paracortical
Lymphadenitis with paracortical pattern is characterized
pattern (Figures 6.7 and 6.8).
by the expansion of the interfollicular areas with a mix-
ture of small lymphocytes, immunoblasts, and increased
88
REACTIVE LYMPHADENOPATHIES
FIGURE 6.8 INFecTlous MoNoNucLeosis. (A) Right neck mass of a 5 year-old boy shows distortion of the nodal architecture by prominent 
histiocytes, and plasma cells (B, low power; C, high power). Immunohistochemical stains highlight (D) numerous CD3+ T-cells and (E)
scattered CD20+ immunoblasts within the interfollicular areas, and (F) scattered EBV-EBER+ cells (arrows).
6.9). Pulmonary hilar lymph nodes in heavy smokers and
Sinus Pattern
elderly individuals contain a large number of sinus histio-
SISOLADOIISIH SNNIS
ments may be seen in the regional lymph nodes of tattooed
areas. Melanin-containing histiocytes are seen in dermato-
Sinus histiocytosis is a relatively common phenomenon
 pathic lymphadenitis (see below). Sinus histiocytosis is also
associated with a wide variety of infectious and inflam-
 noted in lysosomal storage diseases, hemophagocytosis (see
matory conditions. It is characterized by the expansion of
 Chapter 58) and postlymphangiography. Histiocytes express
 sinuses due to the increased number of histiocytes (Figure 
 CD68 and are strongly positive for lysozyme
SINUS PATTERN
89
FIGURE 6.9 SINus HIsTIocyTosis. Lymph node biopsy section
demonstrating dilatation of the sinusoids and presence of
numerous histiocytes (A, low power; B, high power).
SINUS HISTIOCYTOSIS WITH MASSIVE
LYMPHADENOPATHY
Sinus  histiocytosis  with massive lymphadenopathy
(Rosai-Dorfman disease) is a bilateral, painless, massive
cervical lymphadenopathy reported in patients under the
age of 20 years. An association with human herpes virus
6 has been reported in some cases. The affected lymph
nodes show a characteristic feature consisting of sheets
of large sinus histiocytes with abundant clear or foamy
cytoplasm containing numerous lymphocytes (or less
frequently other hematopoietic cells) (Figures 6.10 and
FIGURE 6.10 SINUS HISTIOCYToSIS WITH MASSIVE LyMPHADENOPATHy 
6.11). These lymphocytes appear intact. The active pen-
(RosAl-DoRFMAN DIsEAsE). Cervical lymph node showing dilated 
etration of cells into and through larger cells is called
sinuses containing numerous histiocytes. Focal area of necrosis
emperipolesis. Often, there is a marked thickening of the
is present (A, low power; B, high power). The histiocytes
demonstrate emperipolesis with the presence of numerous intact
capsule with pericapsular fibrosis. Focal areas of necro-
Iymphocytes inside their cytoplasm (C).
sis may be present. Histiocytes express CD68 and are
strongly positive for lysozyme. Involvement of extranodal
tissues, such as lung, skin, central nervous system, and
breast has been reported.
90
REACTIVE LYMPHADENOPATHIES
B
FIGURE 6.12 Lymph node section demonstrating hyperplasia of
monocytoid B-cells (A,low power; B, high power).
chromatin, and inconspicuous nucleoli. These cells express
B-cell-associated antigens and lack monocytic markers.
Monocytoid B-cell hyperplasia is often associated with
follicular hyperplasia. The differential diagnosis includes
 monocytic/histiocytic disorders, marginal zone B-cell lym-
phoma, hairy cell leukemia, and mastocytosis.
FIGURE 6.11 SINUs HstIocYToSIs wIth MasSIve LyMPHaDeNopAThy.
WHIPPLE'S DISEASE
(A) Lymph node biopsy section demonstrating sinus histiocytosis
with emperipolesis. (B) The histiocytes are CD68+ by
      
immunohistochemical stain. (C) Touch preparation demonstrates
caused by Tropheryma whippeli, most frequently involving
histiocytes with emperipolesis.
the gastrointestinal tract and mesenteric lymph nodes.
The affected lymph nodes show sinus histiocytosis.
Histiocytes show vacuolated cytoplasm and contain PAS-
MONOCYTOID B-CELL HYPERPLASIA
positive sickle-form particles. Tropheryma whippeli can be
Hyperplasia of monocytoid B-cells (marginal zone B-cells)
detected by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tech-
is predominantly sinusoidal, but it may also extend to
niques using species-specific sequences of the 16S ribo-
the paracortical areas (Figure 6.12). Monocytoid B-cell
somal RNA.
hyperplasia has been observed in toxoplasmosis, viral
infections, cat-scratch disease, and other non-specific lym-
LANGERHANS CELL HISTIOCYTOSIS
phoid hyperplasias. It is characterized by the presence of
dusters of medium to large cells with abundant pale cyto-
Langerhans cell  histiocytosis frequently affects  lymph
plasm, round or convoluted nuclei, moderately condensed
nodes in a sinus pattern (see Chapter 59 for more details).
GRANULOMATOUS LYMPHADENITIS
91
FIGURE 6.13 HEMoPHAGocYTIc HIsTIocYToSIs. Lymph node Section
demonstrating numerous hemophagocyting histiocytes (A, low
power; B, high power)
Langerhans cells are large mononuclear cells with abun-
dant cytoplasm, folded or grooved nuclei, and incon-
spicuous nucleoli. They express CD1, S100, and Langerin
(CD207), and demonstrate Birbeck granules in their cyto-
plasm by electron microscopy (see Chapter 59).
HEMOPHAGOCYTIC SYNDROMES
Hemophagocytic syndromes are discussed in Chapter 58.
Affected lymph nodes show sinus histiocytosis with evi-
dence of hemophagocytic activities (Figure 6.13).
FIGURE 6.14 SARcoIDosis. Lymph node section demonstrating
several clusters of epithelioid histiocytes in a patient with
sarcoidosis (A, B, and C: low, intermediate, and high power views,
Granulomatous Lymphadenitis
respectively).
Granulomas may appear in different morphologic configura-
SARCOIDOSIS
tions, such as clusters of epithelioid histiocytes (eg., sarcoid-
osis, fungal infections), with caseous necrosis (tuberculosis),
 Sarcoidosis is a multicentric granulomatous disorder of
or suppurative granulomas (e.g., cat-scratch disease, lympho-
granuloma venereum). Sarcoidosis and cat-scratch disease are
e so q as o 'soo o
briefly discussed here as examples of this category.
plasma cells, and less frequently by fibrosis (Figure 6.14).
92
REACTIVE LYMPHADENOPATHIES
nodes of patients with Hodgkin lymphoma, Crohn's dis
ease, Whipple's disease, fungal infections, or tuberculo-
sis. Therefore, morphologic diagnosis of sarcoidosis is
based on the exclusion of other granulomatous lesions.
Mediastinal and pulmonary hilar lymph nodes are the
most frequent sites of involvements in sarcoidosis.
CAT-SCRATCH DISEASE
Cat-scratch disease is caused by a small, gram-negative
bacterium, Bartonella henselae. The involved lymph nodes
often show follicular hyperplasia (particularly in early
stages), sinus histiocytosis, proliferation of monocytoid
B-cells, increased number of immunoblasts, and areas of
variable-sized central fibrinoid necrosis. In early stages,
the necrotic areas are small and contain variable num-
bers of neutrophils. The necrotic areas in advanced stages
are surrounded by palisading histiocytes, creating a stel-
late granuloma (Figures 6.15 and 6.16). The Warthin-
Starry silver stain facilitates the detection of the bacteria.
Most of the cases are found in patients under the age of
18 years. Axillary lymph nodes are the most frequent sites
of involvement. A history of exposure to cats is found in
almost all cases.
Mixed Pattern
B
Certain types of reactive lymphadenitis demonstrate a
combination of follicular, paracortical, and/or sinus pat-
terns. Examples are dermatopathic lymphadenitis, toxo-
plasmosis, lupus lymphadenitis, Kikuchi's disease, and
Kimura's disease.
DERMATOPATHIC LYMPHADENITIS
 Dermatopathic lymphadenitis is a reactive process often
associated with inflammatory skin disorders. The involved
lymph nodes show nodular expansion of paracortical
areas with pale-staining large cells consisting of histio-
Cytes and Langerhans cells (Figure 6.17). Some of the his-
tiocytes may contain melanin or hemosiderin pigments.
Histiocytes are strongly CD68 and lysozyme positive,
and Langerhans cells express CD1 and CD100. The nodu-
lar areas also contain scattered lymphocytes and plasma
FIGURE 6.15 CAT-sCRATcH DIsEAsE. Lymphadenitis with irregular
cells. The affected lymph nodes show sinus histiocyto-
areas of necrosis surrounded by palisading histiocytes (stellate
sis. Patients with mycosis fungoides may show regional
granulomas) (A, B, and C: low, intermediate, and high power
enlarged lymph nodes with morphologic features very
views, respectively).
similar to dermatopathic lymphadenitis. Therefore, detec-
tion of nodal involvement in early stages of mycosis fun-
goides without significant architectural effacement is very
Multinucleated giant cells may be present and may show
asteroid bodies. Granulomas are usually non-necrotizing
difficult and may require gene rearrangement studies.
but occasionally may show small central fibrinoid necro
sis. Sarcoid-like granulomas may be present in lymph
MIXEDPATTERN
93
FIGURE 6.16 CAT-scRATcH DisEAse. (A) Biopsy of the right cervical lymph node in a 2-year-old boy demonstrates early changes of the
disease with nodal architectural expansion by proliferation of follicles as well as interfollicular areas. (B) Many follicles are hyperplastic,
but a few contain regressed germinal centers. (C) Necrotic foci can be present, containing a mixture of apoptotic or necrotic debris,
histiocytes, and rare neutrophils. (D) Warthin-Starry silver stain, which is more likely to be positive in early stages of cat scratch disease,
highlights numerous extracellular bacilli, mostly in small clusters to large clumps.
expansion of paracortical areas with pale-staining large cells (A, low power; B, high power). The large cells consist of a mixture of
Langerhans cells and histiocytes, staining for S100 (C) and CD68 (D), respectively.
94
REACTIVE LYMPHADENOPATHIES
TOXOPLASMOSIS
The involved lymph nodes in toxoplasmosis show follicu-
lar hyperplasia with expanded germinal centers. Multiple
 clusters of epithelioid histiocytes are present in the para-
 cortical areas, adjacent to the follicles and within the ger-
minal centers (Figure 6.18). Multinucleated giant cells
are usually not present. The subcapsular and trabecular
sinuses are dilated and may contain numerous mono-
cytoid B-cells. Similar morphologic features have been
reported in enlarged lymph nodes of HIV-infected patients.
SYSTEMIC LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an immune-asso-
 ciated collagen-vascular disease affecting adolescents and
young adults, particularly females. Major clinical mani-
festations include arthralgia, serositis, abnormal renal
 functions, and neurologic symptoms. Generalized lymph-
adenopathy is present in about 12% of the patients.
Lymph nodes may show a wide spectrum of morphologic
changes including follicular hyperplasia and paracorti-
cal necrosis. The necrotic areas consists of an amorphous,
eosinophilic debris with apoptotic cells surrounded by
macrophages/histiocytes  and  lymphocytes  with  scat-
tered neutrophils and rare plasma cells (Figure 6.19).
Histiocytes may show abundant pale cytoplasm and/
or atypical nuclear features. Morphologic features of
SLE lymphadenitis may resemble Kikuchi's disease (see
below), except for the presence of lupus erythematosus
(LE) cells. An LE cell is a phagocyte that contains the dena-
tured nuclear material (hematoxylin body) of an injured
cell (Figure 6.19D inset).
KIKUCHI'S DISEASE
Kikuchi's disease is a necrotizing lymphadenitis affect-
ing young adults of particularly Asian descent. Women
are affected more than men. It is a self-limited localized
lymphadenitis, often involving cervical lymph nodes.
The characteristic morphologic features are patchy areas
of necrosis  with prominent karyorrhexis  (apoptosis)
and nuclear debris with or without coagulative necrosis.
Neutrophils are rare or absent. The apoptotic foci are pre-
 dominantly located in cortical and paracortical areas and
are surrounded by large histiocytes and immunoblasts.
These cells show some atypical features and may resem-
ble Hodgkin cells. Some phagocytic histiocytes may show
FIGURE 6.18 EPTHELIOID GRANULOMAS IN ToXOPLASMoSIS. CuSterS Of
eccentric nuclei (signet ring histiocytes) and others may
epithelioid histiocytes are present in the paracortical areas (A) as
show foamy cytoplasms. Follicular hyperplasia may be
well as within the follicles (B, arrows). (C) A higher power view of
the epithelioid granulomas.
present (Figure 6.20). Differential diagnoses of Kikuchi's
disease include Hodgkin lymphoma, systemic lupus ery
thematosus, and herpes simplex lymphadenitis.
FIGURe 6.19 Systemic Lupus
ERYTHEMATosus. Areas of necrosis are
present in the paracortex (A, low
power; B, high power) views. The
necrotic debris lacks neutrophils 
and is mixed with numerous 
histiocytes (C), some of which show
hematoxylin bodies (D, arrows). An 
LE cell is shown in the inset. Inset is
courtesy the Royal College London,
Department of Medicine.
FIGURE 6.20 KikuCHI's DIsEasE.
A large area of necrotic debris
replacing a signifcant proportion 
 of the lymph node is demonstrated
(A) with a residual germinal center
(B). The necrotic debris lacks
 neutrophils but contains a large
number of histiocytes with pale or
foamy cytoplasm, some of which
contain phagocytic debris (C and
D). Immunohistochemical studies
reveal many histiocytes expressing
strong CD68 (E) and weak
myeloperoxidase (F).
96
REACTIVE LYMPHADENOPATHIES
FlGURE 6.21 KiMuRA's DisEAse. Biopsy of cheek soft tissue mass in a 52-year-old Chinese male reveals prominent proliferation of reactive
with scattered eosinophils and numerous small lymphocytes (C). Numerous eosinophils are present, some of which spilled into the 
adjacent follicle (D).
KIMURA'S DISEASE
has a predilection for males of Asian descent. The involved
ymph nodes show follicular hyperplasia with the presence
Kimura's disease (eosinophilic hyperplastic lymphogranu-
 of numerous eosinophils in the follide, paracortex, sinusoids,
loma) is a rare form of chronic inflammatory disorder involv-
 and perinodal soft tissues (Figure 6.21). There is a distinct
ing subcutaneous tissue, predominantly in the head and neck
 IgE-positive dendritic network in the germinal centers.
region. It is frequently associated with regional lymphade-
nopathy and/or salivary gland involvement. This condition
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
/6
Additional Resources
Burke JS: Reactive lymphadenopathies, Semin Diagn Pathot 5:312, 1988.  His ED: Hematopathology, Philadelphia, 2007, Churchill Livingstone
Chen H, Thompson LD, Aguilera NS, et al: Kimura disease: A clinico-  Hunt JP, Chan JA, Samoszuk M, et al: Hyperplasia of mantle/
pathologic study of 2l cases, Am J Surg Pathol 28:505-513, 2004.
marginal zone B cells with clear cytoplasm in peripheral lymph
Dikov DI, Staikova ND, Solakov PT: Differential diagnosis of Kikuchi's
nodes: A clinicopathologic study of 35 cases, Am J Clin Pathol
disease and systemic lupus erythematosus lymphadenopathy:
116:550-559, 2001.
Clinicopathologic algorithm, Folia Med (Plovdiv) 42:34-36, 2000.
Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Vardiman JW, et al: Hematopathology..
Philadelphia, 2010, Saunders/Elsevier.
Ferry JA, Harris NL: Atlas of Lymphoid Hyperplasia and Lymphoma,
Philadelphia, 1997, WB Saunders.
Kakkar S, Kapila K, Verma K: Langerhans cell histiocytosis in lymph
Gaitonde S: Multifocal, extranodal sinus histiocytosis with massive
nodes. Cytomorphologic diagnosis and pitfalls, Acta Cytol 45:327-
lymphadenopathy: An overview, Arch Pathol Lab Med 13l:1l17-1121,
332, 2001.
2007.
Park HS, Sung MJ, Park SE, et al. Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease of 16 chil-
dren in a single center of Korea, Pediatr Allergy Immunol 18:174-178,
Gao Y, Chen Y, Yu GY: Clinicopathologic study of parotid involve-
ment in 2l cases of eosinophilic hyperplastic lymphogranuloma
2007.
[Kimura's disease), Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod
Tamir E: Cat scratch disease, Acta Dermatovenereol Croat 15:47, 2007.
102:651-658, 2006.
Westhoff TH, Loddenkemper C, Horl MP, et al: Dermatopathic
Henter JI, Tondini C, Pritchard J: Histiocyte disorders, Crit Rev Oncol
lymphadenopathy: A differential diagnosis of enlarged lymph nodes
Hematol 50:157-174, 2004.
in uremic pruritus, Clin Nephrol 66:472-475, 2006.
This page intentionally left blank
Bone Marrow Aplasia
Done marrow aplasia refers to those hematologic condi
Box 7.1 Classifcation of Bone Marrow
tions that are caused by a marked reduction and/or defect
Aplasia
in the pluripotent or committed stem cells, or the failure
of the bone marrow microenvironment to support hema-
Constitutional
topoiesis. The clinical outcome is anemia, leukopenia,
 Fanconi anemia
and/or thrombocytopenia. The term "aplastic anemia"
 Dyskeratosis congenita
Schwachman-Diamond syndrome
(AA) is a misnomer, because the patients, in addition to
Diamond-Blackfan anemia
 anemia, also suffer from leukopenia and thrombocytope-
Amegakaryocytosis
nia. In this chapter, constitutional and acquired AA, dys-
keratosis congenita, Shwachman-Diamond syndrome,
Acquired
Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA), amegakaryocytosis,
Idiopathic aplastic anemia
 Secondary aplastic anemia
and paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria are discussed
Chemical and physical agents
(Box 7.1). Bone marrow failure due to myelodysplastic
 Drugs and other chemicals
syndromes (MDS), leukemias, myelofibrosis, and other
 Radiation
disorders are discussed in the following chapters.
Infection
● Viral: hepatitis, EBV, HIV
 Others: tuberculosis, dengue fever
 Immunologic (humoral and/or cellular)
Fanconi Anemia
Metabolic (pancreatitis, pregnancy)
 Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
Fanconi anemia (FA) is the most common form of con-
Others
genital bone marrow aplasia. It is an autosomal reces-
 Hypoplastic myelodysplastic syndromes
sive or X-linked disorder with a prevalence of about 1 in
 Bone marrow replacement 
300,0o0 in most populations, but with much higher fre-
 Malignant neoplasms
quencies in the Afrikaner population of South Africa and
 Fibrosis
Ashkenazi Jews. Characteristic congenital malformations
Others 
associated with FA include generalized skin hyperpig-
mentation (cafe au lait spots), microcephaly, hypogonad-
squamous carcinoma of head and neck, gynecologic neo
ism, abnormality of fingers (Figure 7.1), and short stature,
plasms, and various other solid tumors, in patients with FA.
which are found in 60-70% of the affected children. FA
affects males more than females with a ratio of about
2:1. The congenital AA without physical abnormalities is
MORPHOLOGY
known as Eastern- Dameshek anemia.
 FA patients have an increased risk of developing clonal
 Bone marrow biopsy sections in early stages of the disease
bone marrow cytogenetic abnormalities, such as myelo-
fic changes but eventually become hypoplastic and depict
dysplastic syndrome (MDS) and/or acute myeloid lel-
marked hypocellularity with scattered foci of hematopoietic
kemia (AML). The actuarial risk of MDS and AML is over
ells, predominantly erythroid (Figure 7.2).
50% by the age of 40. This risk is higher in patients with
Often, there are increased proportions of plasma cells and
cytogenetic abnormalities. There is also an elevated risk of
lymphocytes.
Atlas of Hematopathology. D0l: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00007-3
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
100
BONE MARROW APLASIA
● Blood eamination is usually normal at birth. Usually.
microcytosis is the first detected abnormality. followed by
elevated levels of fetal hemoglobin, thrombocytopenia, and
neutropenia between the ages of 5 and 10 years.
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
● DNA testing of several of the FA genes is now available, con-
sisting of either gene sequencing or targeted mutation analy-
 un uon i t  t juuod a s ns s
Ashkenazi-Jewish population.
●Population-based carrier screening (i.e., for those couples with
no family history of the disorder) is offered in some centers
FIGURE 7.1 FANcoNI ANEMIA. The hands of this child show
for Ashkenazi Jews of reproductive age, in whom the carrier
symmetric abnormalities of the thumbs, resulting in their
frequency for mutations in the gene for FA type C is 1 in 90.
resemblance to fingers.
● Conventional karyotyping is performed by stimulating and cultur-
From Hoffbrand AV, Pettit JE, Vyas P. Color Atlas of Clinical Hematology.
ing lymphocytes from peripheral blood. Baseline breakage (with
4th edn. Mosby/Elsevier, Philadeiphia, 2010, with permission.
no DNA damaging agent) is recorded with age matched-controls.
followed by analysis for chromosome breaks, gaps, and other
aberrations for conditions supplemented with DNA-damaging
agents Mitomycin C (MMC) and Diepoxybutane (DEB).
● Individuals with FA will exhibit an increased rate of sponta-
neous chromatid/chromosome breaks, triradials, quadrira-
dials, and are hypersensitive to the clastogenic effect of DNA
Coss-linking agents. The increased rates of spontaneous
chromosomal breakage, and the radial forms distinguish FA
from other chromosomal breakage syndromes. The increased
sensitivity to DEB/MMC is present regardless of phenotype.
mngenital anomalies, or severity of the disease
Other Congenital Bone Marrow
Aplasias
DYSKERATOSIS CONGENITA
Dyskeratosis congenita (DC) is an X-linked recessive trait
which is characterized by bone marrow hypoplasia and a
triad of mucosal leukoplakia, nail dystrophy, and abnormal
skin pigmentation. About 20% of the patients may also suffer
pulmonary dysfunction characterized by reduced diffusion
capacity. The approximate median ages for the demonstra-
tion of somatic abnormalities and bone marrow failure are 8
and 10 years, respectively. Over 90% of the affected patients
are male. DC patients have a higher tendency to develop
MDS, AML, and skin and oropharynx cancer.
FIGURE 7.2 Bone marrow biopsy section from a patient with
Fanconi anemia demonstrating marked hypocellularity with
only small foci of hematopoietic cells: (A) low power and (B) high
Morphology
power views.
 Bone marrow becomes markedly hypoplastic with mor-
phologic features similar to those of FA.
 Bone marrow smears may show increased mast cells.
 There is evidence of hemophagocytosis, particularly in early
Molecular and Cytogenetic Studies
stages of the disease.
 These bone marrow morphologic features are not pathog-
● The dyskeratin gene (DKC1) at chromosome Xq28 is mutated.
nomonic for FA and are also observed in patients with
● Sequence analysis of this gene is available in a small number
acquired AA.
of laboratories.
OTHER CONGENITAL BONE MARROW APLASIAS
101
FIGURE 7.4 DIAMoND-BLACKFAN SYNDROME. Three-year-old boy
showing sunken bridge of the nose.
From Hoffbrand AV, Pettit JE, Vyas P. Color Atias of Clinica!
Hematology, 4th edn. Mosby/Eisevier, Philadeiphia, 2010, with
permission.
● Elevated levels of fetal hemoglobin are detected in up to 80%.
● Marked bone marrow hypoplasia (AA) is reported in 20-25%
of the cases.
Molecular and Cytogenetic Studies
B
● Mutations of a gene referred to as Shwachman-Bodian-
FIGURE 7.3 SHWAcHMAN-DIAMoND SYNDROME. Bone marrOW Smears
Diamond syndrome (SBDS) have been reported. Sequencing
show reduced number of neutrophils and bands: (A) low power;
of the SBDS gene is available in several reference laboratories.
(B) high power.
Cytogenetically, over 6% of the aberrations frequently involve
chromosome 7. typically in the form of an isochromosome 7q
[i(7)(q10)]. followed by del(20q) often occurring as a second-
●
 Telomere length can also be assayed to rule out the diagnosis.
ary event to i(7)(q10). The chromosomal aberrations can be
 This is especially important in the younger child presenting
transient and are not necessarily indicative of an imminent
with macrocytosis who may not yet exhibit the characteristic
transformation to MDS/AML.
cutaneous or oral manifestations of DC.
DIAMOND-BLACKFAN ANEMIA
SHWACHMAN-DIAMOND SYNDROME
Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA) is a pure red cell aplasia
Shwachman-Diamond  syndrome  or:
Shwachman-
predominantly demonstrated in infancy and early child-
Diamond- Oski syndrome is a rare autosomal disorder
hood. DBA is about 45% familial and is often associated
characterized by skeletal anomalies, short stature, pancre-
with physical anomalies, such as thumb malformations,
atic insufficiency, and progressive bone marrow hypoplasia
growth retardation, and craniofacial deformities (Figure 7.4).
and neutropenia (Figure 7.3). Patients are prone to infec-
tion, particularly caused by gram-negative organisms, such
as Haemophilus influenzae, or Staphylococcus aureus.
Morphology and Laboratory Findings
●Marked bone marrow erythroid hypoplasia (Figure 7.5)
Morphology/Laboratory Findings
 Macrocytic anemia and elevated fetal hemoglobin levels
 Increased erythrocyte adenosine deaminase activity.
● Neutropenia is the major hematologic feature of this disorder.
 DBA patients may eventually develop pancytopenia and aplas-
which is often intermittent or cyclic.
tic bone marrow.
102
BONEMARROW APLASIA
B
FIGURE 7.5 Bone marrow smears from a patient with pure red
FIGURE 7.6 AMEGAKARYocYTosis. (A) Bone marrow biopsy section
cell aplasia (Diamond-Blackfan syndrome) demonstrating lack of
 and (B) bone marrow smear showing lack of megakaryocytes.
erythroid precursors: (A) low power;: (B) high power.
Molecular and CytogeneticStudies
AMEGAKARYOCYTOSIS
● At least 9 different genes encoding ribosomal proteins (6 of
Congenital  amegakaryocytosis  (amegakaryocytic  throm-
the small subunit (RPS7. RPS10, RPS17. RPS19, RPS24, and
RPS26) and 3 of the large subunit (RPL5, RPL11, and RPL35a)
bocytopenia) is a rare disorder of infancy with markedly
have been associated with DBA. Currently it is possible to
reduced or absent megakaryocytes in bone marrow and
evaluate for 6 of these, and the presence of a gene mutation
therefore isolated thrombocytopenia. The cause of this
confirms the diagnosis of DBA. However, these mutations cur-
- au oi anp aq oi sieadde uaru aos u sapiosi
rently are found in only 50% of the patients.
tions of the thrombopoietin receptor gene, MPL, on chro-
●RPS19, the first one discovered, is the most frequently involved,
mosome 1p34. Clinical symptoms include bleeding into
with mutations found in approximately 25% of patients.
the mucous membranes, gastrointestinal tract, and skin.
● The genetics of the disorder are complicated by the absence
Absence of radial bones is observed in some of the patients
of family history in many cases, which could be due to either
(thrombocytopenia with absent radius, TAR syndrome).
sporadic incidence or a dominant gene with low penetrance.
● Testing for parvovirus B19 by PCR on bone marrow samples
may be performed as part of the differential diagnosis of red
MORPHOLOGY AND LABORATORY FINDINGS
cell aplasia in an infant.
● Chromosomal abnormalities involving the DBA (ribosomal
● Absent or rare megakaryocytes in bone marrow samples with
protein S19) region at 19q13, such as f(X;19), t(8;19). and
marked thrombocytopenia (Figure 7.6).
19q microdeletions have been reported. In addition, deletions 
● Approximately 50% of these patients may eventually develop
of chromosome 3q involving the coding region for RPL35a
AA and pancytopenia.
has also been observed.
● The serum concentration of thrombopoietin is elevated.
ACQUIRED APLASTIC ANEMIA
103
Molecularand CytogeneticStudies
● The autosomal recessive form of amegakaryocytosis is caused
 by mutations in the MPL gene.
Complete sequencing of the gene is available in select refer-
ence laboratories.
Acquired Aplastic Anemia
Acquired AA is characterized by severe bone marrow hypo-
cellularity and pancytopenia (anemia, leukopenia, and
thrombocytopenia). The term "acquired" refers to non-
congenital causative mechanisms which could be immu-
nologic, environmental, or unknown. The incidence of AA
is significantly higher (about fivefold) in the Far East than
in the West. Clinical manifestations of AA are non-specific
and are usually related to pancytopenia. Pallor, fatigue,
purpura and mucosal hemorrhage, and recurrent infec-
tions are common findings.
 Several studies support the destruction or suppression
of bone marrow stem cells by immune mechanisms as the
major contributing factors. Clonal expansion of cytotoxic
T-cells (T-large granular lymphocytic leukemia) may play a
role. Some patients have a history of exposure to a wide
spectrum of chemical and physical agents and various dis-
eases. However, since there is daily exposure to unlimited
and widespread chemicals, such as insecticides, fertilizers,
food additives, and herbal medicine, the exact causative
factor(s) is not detected in about 50-75% of AA patients.
Therefore, acquired AA is divided into two major cat-
egories: (1) idiopathic AA (with no known etiology) and
(2) secondary AA.
The outcome of untreated severe AA is very poor, with
 over 70% death rate within 1 year. Prognosis is also age-
dependent, with better outcome in patients under 49 years
than those over 60 years. The treatment of choice under the
age of 45 is hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) transplanta-
tion. But, only 25-30% of AA patients find proper donors.
 Immunosuppressive therapy is recommended for patients
Over the age of 45. Immunosuppressive agents include
ATG, corticosteroids, and cyclosporine. Hematopoietic
growth factors, such as G-CSF, have been added to the
 immunosuppressive regimen with some beneficial effects.
MORPHOLOGY AND LABORATORY FINDINGS
C
very
FIGURE 7.7 APLAsTc ANEMIA. Bone marrow biopsy sections (A, low
high proportion of fatty tissue and stromal cells
(Figure 7.7). All hematopoietic elements are decreased
The bone marrow smear shows fatty tissue and stromal cells.
but are morphologically normal. The bone marrow biopsy
sections show scaftered islands of hematopoietic cells ran-
domly distributed throughout the fatty marrow. These
islands are predominantly erythroid and contain very few
megakaryocytes. There is no evidence of a malignant infiltrate
or diffuse fibrosis.
104
BONEMARROWAPLASIA
●Bone marrow smears consist predominantly of adipo-
cytes and stromal tissue with scattered hematopoietic cells.
FR3
Occasionally, some of the aspirated smears may show cellu-
lar marrow particles, giving the wrong impression of a nor-
mocellular or even hypercellular marrow. For this reason,
bone marrow biopsies are preferred for the establishment of
the diagnosis of AA. Some bone marrow smears may show
increased proportion of lymphocytes, plasma cells, mac-
237-FR3
rophages, and mast cells. These cells either appear as well-
defined aggregates or are diffusely dispersed in the stroma.
 There may be evidence of hemophagocytosis, particularly in
early stages of the disease.
●Peripheral blood shows
pancytopenia
with
reduced
reticulocyte count. Anemia
a is usually normochromic and
FIGURE 7.8 Capillary electrophoresis readout of immunoglobulin
normocytic, but macrocytosis and anisocytosis may be
heavy chain gene rearrangement analysis in a patient with
present.  Neutrophils may show toxic  granulation.
The
aplastic anemia, showing only background signal and a few
lymphocyte count is normal or low. Occasionally, cytotoxic
 nonspecifie spurious signal peaks.
CD8+ T-lymphocytosis can be seen.
AA is defined as severe when:
1. bone marrow cellularity is <25% of normal cellularity for age
 in biopsy sections, or
2. bone marrow cellularity is <50% of normal cellularity for
age, with <30% hematopoietic cells, plus at least two of the
following:
a. absolute erythrocyte count <40,000/μL.
b. absolute neutrophil count <500/μL.
c. platelet count <20,000/μL.
When the criteria for severe AA are met and the absolute
neutrophil count is <200/μL, the patient is considered to
have a very severe AA.
85
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
88
富
 Because of its heterogeneous and non-genetic etiology.
20
21
there are no specific molecular tests for acquired AA.
FIGURE 7.9 A G-banded karyotype showing monosomy 7 (arrow)
Mutation testing of genes associated with the hereditary
in a patient with AA.
disorders, and PCR-based detection of implicated viruses,
 may be performed as part of the differential diagnostic
work-up.
● Sometimes these patients are evaluated for associated leul-
kemia or MDS, such as by clonal gene rearrangement analy-
sis, but the very low white blood cell counts can make this a
challenge (Figure 7.8).
● Approximately 4% of patients with AA show cytogenetic
abnormalities, such as 5q-, monosomy 7, and trisomy 6 or 8
(Figures 7.9, and 7.10).
 Patients with AA and abnormal cytogenetics have different
dlinical characteristics compared  with  AA patients with
normal cytogenetics. Patients with abnormal cytogenetics
are generally younger, and are associated with a higher
cumulative leukemic transformation rate and lower leukemic
transformation-free
survival.
Furthermore,
abnormal
cytogenetics is an independent predictor of a poor response to
FIGURE 7.10 FSH studies for chromosome 8 in interphase. Cells
immunosuppressive therapy.
demonstrating trisomy 8 (arrows).
PAROXYSMAL NOCTURNAL HEMOGLOBINURIA
105
and (3) subclinical PNH, in which patients have small PNH
Paroxysmal Nocturna!
dones but no evidence of hemolysis or thrombosis.
Hemoglobinuria
Classical PNH may affect patients at any age, but the
peak incidence is between 20 and 35 years. It is character-
ized by hemolytic anemia (often with hemoglobinuria),
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) is a rare
venous thrombosis, and bone marrow failure:
acquired stem cell disorder associated with a defect in cell
1. Acquired intravascular hemolysis demonstrated by hemo
membrane glycosyl phosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor due
globinemia, hemoglobinuria, hemosiderinuria, and negative
to mutation of the PIG-A gene. This defect leads to partial
direct antiglobulin (Coombs) test.
or complete loss of GPI-linked membrane proteins, such as
 2. Thrombosis of the relatively large veins in odd places, such as
CD14,CD16, CD24,CD48, CD52, CD55, CD58, CD59,
hepatic (Budd-Chiari syndrome), mesenteric, portal, or cere-
CD66, and CD73 (Table 7.1). Some of these proteins, such
bral veins. Venous thrombosis is the major cause of death in
as CD55 and CD59, play an inhibitory role in the activa-
PNH patients. Arterial thrombosis is rare.
tion of the complement system, and therefore their absence
 3. Bone marrow hypoplasia leading to pancytopenia.
leads to complement-induced lysis and hemolytic anemia.
The possible association between the PNH clone and
CD55, also known as decay accelerating factor (DAF), is
other primary bone marrow failure disorders such as AA,
expressed by all hematopoietic cells and is an inhibitor of
MDS, and hypocellular acute myeloid leukemia has been
C3 and C5 convertase. Similarly, CD59 is expressed by all
the subject of study for some time. Recent published results
hematopoietic cells. It is referred to as membrane inhibi-
 of large study series suggest that PNH clones can be found
tor of reactive lysis (MIRL) and inhibits complement mem-
in as many as 60-70% AA and 20-55% of MDS using high
brane attack complex by binding to the C8 component and
sensitivity flow cytometric studies. Identification of PNH
 prevents C9 from binding and polymerizing.
 dones may predict a good response to immunosuppressant
The International PNH Interest Group (I-PIG) has
in these patients, and therefore a better clinical outcome.
divided PNH into three main categories: (1) classical PNH
Management of PNH includes treatment of hemolytic
with hemolysis and thrombosis; (2) PNH in the setting of
 and non-hemolytic anemia with iron and folic acid sup-
other specified bone marrow disorders such as AA and MDS;
plementation, red blood cell transfusion, plus use of pred-
 nisone and androgen derivatives. Anticoagulation therapy
Table 7.1
is used for episodes of thrombosis. Hematopoietic stem
 Some ofthe GPl-Linked Proteins Deficient in
cell transplantation has been used with suiccess in recent
 Paroxysmal Nocturnal Hemoglobinurial
Comments
by the FDA for classical PNH. It is a humanized monoclo-
Molecule
CD
nal antibody against complement C5. This reagent is effec-
 Complement Regulatory Molecules
tive in controlling hemolysis, and results in improvement
DAF
CD55
Decay accelerating factor
in quality-of-life measures.
MIRL
CD59
 Membrane inhibitor of
reactive lysis
Enzymes
MORPHOLOGY AND LABORATORY FINDINGS
Ecto-5'-nucleotidase
CD73
Lymphocytes
 ADPribosyl transferase
CD157
T cells and neutrophils
 Bone marrow in most instances is markedly hypocellular and
presents morphologic features similar to those of AA (Figure
 Adhesion Molecules
7.11). However, some patients may show a normocellular or
 Blast-1
CD48
Leukocytes; binds CD24
even a hypercellular marrow. There is often erythroid prepon-
LFA-3
CD58
 All hematopoietic cells 
derance. Stainable iron is usually absent, primarily due to loss 
 Adhesion molecule 1 
CD66a
Granulocytes, epithelium
of iron secondary to hemoglobinuria and hemosiderinuria.
NCA-95
CD66b
Granulocytes
 Blood examination commonly reveals severe anemia with ele-
NCA-50/90
CD66c
 Granulocytes, epithelium
vated reticulocyte count and some degree of granulocytopenia
Carcinoembryonic antigen
CD66e
Epithelium
and thrombocytopenia. The leukocyte alkaline phosphatase
(LAP) score is reduced.
 Others
There is evidence of intravascular hemolysis by the presence
NA1/NA2
CD16
 Neutrophils and NK cells
of hemoglobinuria, hemosiderinuria. Plasma haptoglobulin
Campath-1
CD52
Lymphocytes and
levels are reduced and plasma lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)
monocytes
 levels are elevated.
BA-1
CD24
 B cells and granulocytes 
 For years, the diagnosis of PNH was based on the sensitivity
Thy-1
CD90
Stem cell subset, T cell 
of the red cells to lysis by complement. This was determined
subset
by the sucrose lysis screening test and the confirmatory Ham
1 Adapted from Hall C, Richards SJ, Hillmen P. The glycosyl
acid hemolysis test In the sucrose lysis test, the patient's
 phosphatidylinositol anchor and paroxysmal nocturnal
red cells are incubated with serially diluted isotonic sucrose
haemoglobinuria/aplasia model. Acta Haematol 2002; 108: 219-230.
solutions. Under these conditions the complement system is
106
BONE MARROW APLASIA
Box 7.2 Clinical Indications for PNH
Testing'
Intravascular hemolysis as evidenced by hemoglobinuria or ele-
vated plasma hemoglobin.
 Evidence of unexplained hemolysis with accompanying:
● Iron-deficiency, or
●Abdominal pain or esophageal spasm, or
Thrombosis, or
+ Granulocytopenia and/or thrombocytopenia.
Other acquired Coombs-negative, non-schistocytic, non-infectious
hemolytic anemia.
Thrombosis with unusual features:
Unusual sites
Hepatic veins (Budd-Chiari syndrome)
 Other intra-abdominal veins (portal, splenic, and splanchnic)
 Cerebral sinuses
FIGURE 7.11 PAROXYSMAL NOCTURNAL HEMOGLOBINURIA (PNH). Bone
●Dermal veins
marrow biopsy section from a patient with PNH, demonstrating
● With signs of accompanying hemolytic anemia (see above)
marked hypocellularity.
●With unexplained cytopenia.
 Evidence of bone marrow failure:
activated and the test is considered positive if there is evidence
of hemolysis. In the Ham test, the pH of serum is reduced to
● Suspected or proven aplastic or hypoplastic anemia
   o n   a 
 MDS/Refractory cytopenia with unilineage dysplasia
the PNH red cells. However, nowadays, immunophenotyping
Other cytopenias of unknown etiology after adequate work-up
by flow cytometry (see the following section) is considered the
standard procedure.
1Adopted and modifed from the ICCs Guidelines for the Diagnosis and
 Monitoring of Paroxysmal Nocturnal Hemoglobinuria and Related Disorders by
Flow Cytometry.
FLOW CYTOMETRY
Detection of GPI-anchor-deficient cells by flow cytome-
try is the established method of choice for diagnosis and
monitoring of PNH. The International Clinical Cytometry
Society (ICCs) has recently published consensus guide-
1%. Routine assays are critical in diagnosing and monitor-
oq lusspe 'a mo Aq sin HNn to sa
ing classical PNH in hemolytic and thrombotic patients,
routine and high sensitivity assays.
since the size of PNH clones in those patients is usually
 greater than 10%.
Clinical Indications for PNH Testing
●RBCs (Figure 7.12)
The RBC analysis is to distinguish and quantify the
According to the ICCS guidelines, there are several clini-
following:
cal indications for PNH testing (Box 7.2). The category of
Type  III
cells—complete absence of GPl-anchored
"evidence of bone marrow failure" is of particular interest
proteins;
since it is more frequently encountered in clinical practice
Type II cells-
s—partial loss of GPI-anchored proteins;
than is classical PNH
Type I cells—normal expression of GPl-anchored
proteins.
Sample Requirements
● Glycophorin A is used for gating RBCs, while CD59 or a
mmbination of CD55/CD59 is used for GPI-anchored
Peripheral blood is the preferred specimen, and the accept-
marker. The combined use of CD55 and CD59 is preferred,
able anticoagulants include EDTA, heparin, and ACD.
since rare cases of congenital CD55 or CD59 deficiency
have been reported that have no association with PNH.
Bone marrow should not be used other than in a research
●
 Testing RBC alone is inadequate in evaluation of PNH.
setting. It is recommended that blood samples are tested
since the size of PNH clones can be significantly underesti-
within 24-48 hours after collection.
mated as a result of hemolysis and/or transfusion.
●WBCs (Figure 7.13).
Routine Assays
● It is the best method for assessing the true size of PNH
clones.
The purpose of the routine assays is to detect and quantify
 Target populations include both neutrophils and mono-
cells lacking GPI-anchored proteins at a sensitivity level of
cytes. Lymphocytes are not suitable targets.
107
A.50,000events
B.500,000events
8
PNH clone
PNH clone
(0.61%)
(0.05%)
FSC-A
GPAFITC-A
CD59PE-A
CD24
Typel
GPA
FLAERFITC-A
TypeIl
CD69PE-A
APC-
A
FIGURE 7.12 Detection of PNH clones by routine RBC assay
CD15
using multiparametric flow cytometry. Combined gating of
light scatters (in log display) and Glycophorin A allows distinet
separation of RBCs from debris and background. Dual parameter
display (e.g., CD59 and Glycophorin A) is more sensitive than
single parameter display in distinguishing type I, Il, and Ill cells.
FLAERFITC-A
Washing in sample preparation plus use of density plots can
enhance the separation of those RBCs.
FIGURE 7.14 Detection of small PNH clones by high-sensitivity
assay is performed on WBCs by collecting 500,0o0 to 1 million
 granulocytes using live-gate. Small PNH clones form discrete
dusters revealing negative staining for both FLAER and CD24.
R2
PNHclone
SSC-A
R1+R2
(62%)
口
High-Sensitivity Assays (Figure 7.14)
hu
CD15APC-A
FLAERFITC-A
High-sensitivity assays are not required in diagnosis of clas-
sical PNH. Instead, they are useful in identifying small PNH
dones that are commonly associated with bone marrow fail-
CD45PerCP-Cy5-5-A
ure disorders like AA and MDS.
R3
R1+R3
A desired sensitivity level for high-sensitivity PNH assays is
0.01% according to the new PNH consensus.
 Technical challenges are similar to those seen in other rare-event
CD33PE-Cy7-A
FLAERFITC-A
analysis, ie, detection of minimal residual disease (MRD). [n
order to achieve this level of sensitivity, more events (eg. up to
1 million) are required and live-gate may be necessary.
FIGURE 7.13 Detection of PNH clones by routine WBC assay using
Multiparametric analysis is important, and several markers
multiparametric flow cytometry. Combined CD45 gating plus
CD15 vs. side scatter (R1 + R2) separates granulocytes from debris
are needed for gating target cell populations in addition to
and background, whereas CD45 gating plus CD33 vs. side scatter 
valuation of at least two GPl-anchored markers for each
(R1 + R3) distinguishes monocytes. At least two GPl-anchored
target.
proteins are needed for evaluating each target population. A
PNH clone in granulocytes demonstrates double negativity for
FLAER and CD24, while it is negative for both FLAER and CD14 in
MOLECULAR GENETICS AND CYTOGENETICS
monocytes.
●
Reported mutations in the PIG-A gene on chromosome Xp22
are numerous and heterogeneous, and are further complicated
by the presence of a pseudogene on chromosome 12: DNA
● FLAER (fluorescent aerolysin) is considered the single most
sequencing is not generally available for clinical testing.
useful reagent in detecting WBC PNH clones. It binds spe-
The gene mutations found in PNH are acquired, not inherited,
cifically to the GPI anchor, and is reliably absent from GP[-
so they will only be found in the abnormal cells.
 anchor-deficient neutrophils and monocytes.
Cytogenetic abnormalities in PNH usually occur in hemato-
● It is recommended that at least two GPl-anchored markers
poietic cells that are glycosyl phosphatidylinositol-anchored
including FLAER are used to assess PNH clones, and addi-
protein (GPI-AP)-positive. Various chromosomal aberrations
tional antibodies like CD45, CD33, and CD15 are helpful
have been reported in up to 24% of patients with PNH, includ-
 in gating the target populations.
ing monosomy 5, trisomy 6, trisomy 8, and monosomy 7.
108
BONE MARROW APLASIA
Table 7.2
 Differential Diagnoses in Bone Marrow Aplasia
 Disorder
Bone Marrow Morphology
Immunophenotype
Cytogenetics and Molecular
 Constitutional Aplasias
 Normo- to hypercellular at early
Non-contributory
Frequent chromosomal breakage,
stages, hypocellular marow at later
sometimes -7, mutations in causative
stages
genes
Acquired AA
Hypocellular marrow
Often increased cytotoxic T cells,
Sometimes 5q-, -7, +6, +8, viral PCR 
strong association with HLA-DR2
PNH
Hypocellular marrow
Loss of GPI-linked proteins, such as
 Mutations in pig-A gene
CD55 and CD59
Hypocellular MDS
 Hypocelluar marrow with signifcant
 Abnormal phenotypic patterns,
-7, +8, 5q-,20q-,and other
dysplastic changes, and sometimes 
sometimes increased CD34+ and/or
chromosomal aberrations
increased blasts
CD117+ cells
Hypoplastic AML
Hypocellular marrow with >20%
Increased CD45dim + cells expressing
Frequent chromosomal aberrations
blasts
 myeloid markers, often CD34 and/or
involving 11q, 16q, or t(15;17), t(8;11),
CD117
t(9;22), and others
Hypocellular hairy cell
Hypocelllar marrow with the
TRAP+,CD103+, CD25+, CD22+,
Not known
leukemia
 presence of hairy cells and often
CD11c+
evidence of fibrosis
AA. aplastic anemia; AML, acute myeloid leukemia: MDS. myelodysplastic syndromes: PNH paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria.
Differential Diagnosis
hypocellular hairy cell leukemia, may morphologically
 mimic AA (Table 7.2). Clinical history and information
 Morphologic features of bone marrow in advanced stages
regarding other clinicopathologic parameters are impera-
of constitutional marrow aplasias, acquired AA, and
tive for accurate diagnosis. It is important to remem-
PNH are indistinguishable. Also, other bone marrow
ber that a proportion of patients with constitutional or
lesions, such as hypocellular MDS, hypoplastic AML, and
acquired AA may eventually develop MDS or AML.
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
109
Additional Resources
Alter BP: Diagnosis, genetics, and management of inherited bone 
the management of bone marrow failure, Int I Hematot 84: ll8-122.
marrow failure syndromes, Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ
2006.
Program:29-39, 2007.
Nishio N, Kojima S: Recent progress in dyskeratosis congenita, Int J
Bagby GC, Alter BP: Fanconi anemia, Semin Hematol 43:147-156,
Hematol 92:419-424, 2010.
2006.
Richards SJ, Whitby L, Cullen MJ, et al: Development and evaluation
Borowitz MJ, Craig FE, Digiuseppe JA, et al: Guidelines for the diagnosis 
of a stabilized whole-blood preparation as a process control mate-
and monitoring of paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria and related 
rial for screening of paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria by Flow
disorders by flow cytometry, Cytometry Part B 78B:21l-230, 2010.
Cytometry, Cytometry Part B 76:47-55, 2009.
Galili N, Ravandi F Palermo G, et al: Prevalence of paroxysmal nocturnal
 Shimamura A: Clinical approach to marrow failure, Hematology Am
hemoglobinuria (PNH) cells in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes 
Soc Hematol Educ Program:329-337, 2009.
[MDS), aplastic anemia (AA), or other bone marrow failure (BMF) syn-
Sutherland DR, Kuek N, Azcona-Olivera J, et al: Use of a FLAER-
dromes: interim results from the explore trial, J Clin Oncol 27:15s, 2009.
based WBC assay in the primary screening of PNH clones, Am I Clin
Hoffbrand AV, Pettit JE, Vyas P: Color atlas of clinical hematology, ed 4,
Pathol 132:564-572, 2009.
Philadelphia, 2010, Mosby/Elsevier.
Young NS, Bacigalupo A, Marsh JC: Aplastic anemia: pathophysi-
Ito E, Konno Y, Toki T, Terui K: Molecular pathogenesis in Diamond-
ology and treatment, Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 16(1 Suppl):
Blackfan anemia, Int I Hematot 92:413-418, 2010.
S119-S125, 2010.
Nakao S, Sugimori C, Yamazaki H: Clinical significance of a small
Zhang Y, Zhou X, Huang P: Fanconi anemia and ubiquitination,
JGenet Genomics 34:573-580, 2007.
This page intentionally left blank
Myelodysplastic
Syndromesl
Neoplasms-Overview
suppression of bone marrow stem cells or deficient NK
a group of hematologic disorders characterized by clonal 
(natural killer) activities.
expansion of defective hematopoietic stem cells leading
There are two major categories of MDS: primary (with
to abnormal maturation and peripheral blood cytopenia.
 no known cause), and secondary or therapy-related (usu-
Clonality of the underlying marrow failure has been sup-
 ally post-chemotherapy or irradiation). The etiology and
ported by various molecular and cytogenetic techniques,
 pathogenesis of the primary MDS are not clearly under-
such as karyotyping (Table 8.1), X-chromosome inactiva-
stood. Some familial clustering has been reported, but
tion studies, and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
 no causative germline mutations have been identified.
analysis.
Clinical features of MDS represent bone marrow failure
-d ds e aq on sde s jo n
and cytopenia. Anemia, thrombocytopenia, and/or neutro-
cess with an initial genetic insult to the multipotent 
-a 'ond n se yns snds on pa  a
stem cells, leading to the development of an abnormal
 tion, bruising, and/or bleeding. But some patients may be
clone, which in some cases may eventually lead to acute 
 asymptomatic at diagnosis.
myeloid leukemia. Combined clinical and experimen-
 Primary or de novo MDS is usually a disease of the
tal data suggest that immune dysregulation mediated by
 elderly and is uncommon under the age of 50 years. The
expanded cytotoxic T-cell clones may result in an intrin-
 median age of onset is between 60 and 70 years with an
sic stem cell defect and suppression of normal hemato-
 estimated annual incidence of about 3.5-10 per 100,000
poiesis. Several reports have proposed that there may be
 in the general population. Therapy-related MDS (t-MDS)
an etiologic link between MDS and T-LGL type of lym-
 may arise at any age, usually 4-5 years after the initiation
phoproliferation (Figure 8.1). The abnormal clone is the
precursor of morphologically dysplastic and dysfunc-
Table 8.1
tional hematopoietic cells with a tendency to die pre-
Chromosomal Abnormalities in Myelodysplastic
maturely. Excessive apoptosis (programmed cell death)
Syndromes (MDS)
of the hematopoietic precursors, particularly at the early
Type of Abnormality
Chromosome
stages, has been proposed as the primary mechanism for
the bone marrow hypercellularity and peripheral cyto-
Gain/loss of chromosomal
monosomy 5,del(5)(q12 → 35)
 material
 (various breakpoints within
penia in patients with MDs. The overall transformation
 these bands,monosomy
rate to acute leukemia depends on the subtype of MDS,
7,del(7)(q11.2 → q36)(various
the presence or absence of chromosomal aberrations, and
breakpoints within these
types of these abnormalities.
bands),+8,del(9q),+11,del(11q).
The ineffective hematopoiesis in MDS may involve one
del(12)x(p11.2 → p13), del(13)
(q12q14),+15, monosomy
or several hematopoietic lines, resulting in anemia, throm.
17,del(17p),iso(17q), monosomy
bocytopenia, granulocytopenia, or pancytopenia. The lym-
20,del(20)x(q11.2 → q13),Trisomy
s s   a  a s o
21,lso(xq13),Loss of Y
evolution of acute leukemia at the later stages may be of
Translocations/inversions
t(1;7)(q10;p10),t(3;21)(q26.2;q22),
a lymphoblastic or biphenotypic type. The involvement of
ins(3;3)(q26.2;q21q26),inv(3)
the lymphoid lineage in the myelodysplastic process may
(q21q26.2),t(6;9)x(p23;q34), t(11;v)
(q23;v);t(12;v)(p13;v)
also cause immune dysfunction, such as cell-mediated
Atlas of Hematopathology. DOl: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00008-5
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
112
MYELODYSPLASTIC SYNDROMES/NEOPLASMS—OVERVIEW
of chemotherapy or radiation therapy. The percent of cyto-
intermediate 2 risk, and high risk. The major parameters
genetic aberrations and risk of transformation to acute
measured in the IPSS are percent blasts, nature of the chro-
leukemia are significantly higher in t-MDS than in the
mosomal aberrations, and the extent of cytopenia (Table
primary MDs (Table 8.2). A small proportion of MDS
8.3). These four groups show different survival rates and
patients, roughly 4-5%, may develop blast transformation
carry various risk levels for transformation to acute leuke-
in extramedullary sites (granulocytic sarcoma), particularly
mia. For example, the overall survival time for the low-risk
skin. Evolution of MDS to granulocytic sarcoma is associ-
group is about 5.7 years, intermediate 1 risk group approx-
ated with poor prognosis.
imately 3.5 years, intermediate 2 risk group about 1.2
According to the International  Prognostic Scoring
years, and high-risk group approximately 0.4 years.
System (IPsS) (Table 8.3), four distinctive risk groups are
At the present time, the only effective therapy avail-
defined in the MDS patients: low risk, intermediate 1 risk,
able for MDS is hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.
Other promising, newly developed therapeutic approaches
include the utilization of DNA methyltransferase inhibi-
tors, vascular endothelial growth inhibitors, and the use of 
Abnormal T-cells
thalidomide, arsenic trioxide, and anti-TNF-α.
Establishment of the diagnosis is based on a multidis-
D5
utilization of the accessory laboratory tests, such as immu-
nophenotyping, cytogenetic analysis, molecular genetic
CD7
CD2
studies, and in vitro colony growth assays.
In addition to the clonal forms of MDs, non-clonal
myelodysplastic changes have been observed in a variety of
conditions, such as severe inflammatory states, viral infec-
tions, autoimmune disorders, megaloblastic anemia, expo-
sure to arsenic, status post-chemotherapy, and endocrine
dysfunctions.
CD2
CD8
FIGURE 8.1 T-LGL-type CD8+ T-cells in MDS. Occasionally, abnormal
Morphologic Features-Overview
CD8+ T-cells similar to those seen in T-LGL can be found in
peripheral blood or bone marrow of MDS patients. The lymphocyte
gate displays show two abnormal subsets of CD8+ T-cells expressing
dim CD2, dim CD5, and dim to complete loss of CD7.
The ineffective hematopoiesis in MDS is demonstrated
one or more hematopoietic lines in the bone marrow and
 Table 8.2
peripheral blood.
Comparison of Chromosomal Aberrations between
● The bone marrow in patients with primary MDs is usually
 Primary and Secondary MDS
hyper- or normocellular, whereas patients with secondary
 MDS may show a variable marrow cellularity ranging from 5%
Abnormality
Primary MDS (%)
Secondary MDS (%)
o almost 100%. MDS bone marrow may show increased retic-
-5 or del(5q)
10-20
40
ulin fibers with a higher frequency in the secondary MDS.
-7 or del(7q)
10-15
30-50
● The bone marrow biopsy sections usually show some degree
Trisomy 8
15
10
of topographical alterations, such as the presence of erythroid
Loss of 17p
3
10
Table 8.3
 The International Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS) for MDS 1
Score
 Prognostic Variable
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
 % Blasts
<5
5-10
11-20
21-30
Karyotype2
Good
Intermediate
Poor
Cytopenia(s) 3
0-1
2-3
Adapted from Greenberg P, Cox C, LeBeau MM, etal Intenational scoring system for evaluating prognosis in myelodysplastic syndromes. Blood 1997; 89:
2079-2088. Risk groups are scored as: 0, low risk; 0.5 to 2, intermediate risk; ≥2.5, high risk.
 2Karyotype: Good = normal, -Y, del(5q),del(20q); Poor = complex (≥3 abnormalities),and chromosome 7 abnormalities; Intermediate = other
abnormalities.
²Cytopenia: HB < 10 g/dL; Neutropenia < 1500/μL; Platelets < 100 k/μL
MORPHOLOGICFEATURES—OVERVIEW
113
clusters next to the bone trabeculae, loss of sinusoidal orienta-
are required to be diagnostically significant. Presence of ALIP.
tion of megakaryocytes and their placement next to bone, and
    e a     
centrally located aggregates of myeloid precursors (Figure 8.2).
other hematologic conditions, such as myeloproliferative
●
 The morphologic appearance of aggregates of immature
disorders and status post-bone marrow transplantation or
myeloid cells is referred to as “abnormal localization of
chemotherapy.
immature precursors" (ALIP) (Figure 8.3). ALIP is defined as
 Signs of an inflammatory response, such as lymphoid aggre-
clusters of five or more myeloblasts and/or early immature
gates, areas of edema, extravasation of erythrocytes, increased
myeloid cells, located in the marrow tissue away from bone
mast cells, plasma cells, and macrophages, disrupted sinu-
trabeculae. More than three ALIP clusters per biopsy section
soids, and patchy or sometimes diffuse fibrosis are frequent
findings. Occasionally there is evidence of hemophagocytosis
and/or presence of sea blue histiocytes.
 The accurate assessment of dysplastic cytologic features in
blood and bone marrow smears depends on the quality of
the smear preparations. Slides should be made from a fresh
specimen and properly stained within preferably <2h of
Exposure to anticoagulants. The recommended threshold for
significant dysplasia is at least 10% for each hematopoietic
lineage.
B
FIGURE 8.2 (A) Bone marrow section from a patient with MDS
FIGURE 8.3 Hypercellular bone marrow biopsy section
demonstrating hypercellularity with paratrabecular localization of
(A) showing several clusters of immature cells, referred to
 as "abnormal localization of immature precursors" (ALIP).
Higher power views demonstrate (B) paratrabecular localization
The immunohistochemical stain (B) shows clusters of
Of erythroid precursors and (C) megakaryocytes.
myeloperoxidase-positive immature cells.
114
MYELODYSPLASTIC SYNDROMES/NEOPLASMS—OVERVIEW
B
FlGURE 8.5 Bone marrow smear from a patient with RA showing
 coarse PAS-positve cytoplasmic granules in erythroid precursors
(A and B) and a dysplastic megakaryocyte (B, arrow).
Ring sideroblasts are defined as nucleated red cells with five
 or more iron granules encircling at least one third of their
C
nucleus.
 FIGURE 8.4 Bone marrow smear from a patient with refractory
● In biopsy sections, erythroid colonies may be seen next to the
anemia (RA) showing dysplastic (A) multinucleated and
bone trabeculae.
(B) binucleated early erythroid precursors with vacuolated
● Blood smears show a wide variety of abnormal erythrocyte
cytoplasm. (C) Dysplastic late erythroid precursors with irregular
morphology. such as macro-ovalocytosis, microcytosis, schis-
or multilobated nuclei (arrows).
tocytosis, basophilic stippling. and the presence of teardrop
shaped red blood cells and Howell-Jolly bodies (Figure 8.7).
Occasionally, nucleated red blood cells are present.
DYSERYTHROPOIESIS
DYSGRANULOPOIESIS
● Dysplastic features of the erythroid precursors in bone mar-
row smears include megaloblastic changes, irregular nuclear
Granulocytic precursors may show abnormal variations
shape, nuclear fragmentation and budding, multinucleation,
in size, cytoplasmic granularity, and nuclear confguration 
nuclear bridging. cytoplasmic vacuolization, poor hemoglo-
(Figures 8.8 to 8.11). Abnormal staining of primary granules.
binization, presence of ring sideroblasts and periodic acid-
hypergranularity or hypogranularity, is commonly observed in 
Schiff (PAS)-positive cytoplasmic globules (Figures 8.4 to 8.6).
promyelocytes and myelocytes.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
115
FIGURE 8.6 Bone marrow iron stains in MDS patients often show
FIGURE 8.7 Peripheral blood smears showing marked
increased iron stores in histiocytes (A), or may demonstrate 
anisopoykilocytosis with the presence of schistocytes and tear
numerous ring sideroblasts (B).
drop forms, and scattered large hypogranular platelets (A and B).
A large hypogranular neutrophil is shown in (B).
●Irregular distribution of the cytoplasmic basophilia may be
present and the cytoplasm in the perinuclear area may stain
(micormegakaryocytes) are frequently seen (Figures 8.12 and
lighter than that in the periphery.
8.13) Sometimes, it is difficult to distinguish the mononuclear
● The more mature granulocytic cells may depict a marked varia-
micromegakaryocytes from stromal cells or macrophages.
● In biopsy sections, megakaryocytes may appear in clusters or
tion in size and decreased or absent secondary granules. There
may be coarse basophilic (pseudo-Chediak-Higashi) granules.
are located close to bone trabeculae.
● Nuclear hyposegmentation (pseudo-Pelger-Huet anomaly)
 Blood smears show pleomorphic platelets with the presence
 or hypersegmentation, and other forms of abnormal nuclear
of giant forms. They may show hypogranulation or abnor-
morphology, such as ring (doughnut-shaped) nuclei, may be
mal granules. Megakaryocytic fragments, bare megakaryocytic
present.
●
Eosinophils may be increased or show dysplastic changes.
such as abnormal nuclear segmentation or abnormal granula-
tion. Studies of bone marrow basophils on patients with MDS
Immunophenotype
are very limited. However, basophilia has been observed in
some MDS patients.
FLOW CYTOMETRY
ABNORMAL MEGAKARYOCYTES AND PLATELETS
 Although a large number of cases have been investigated
● Megakaryocytes may show multiple separated nuclei, hypo- or
 in many studies, no consensus is available on evaluating
hyperlobated nuclei vacuolated cytoplasm, and giant abnormal
MDS by flow cytometry. Several studies have proposed
cytoplasmic granules. Mono- and binuclear megakaryocytes 
8 scoring systems according to the relative significance of
116
MYELODYSPLASTICSYNDROMES/NEOPLASMS-OVERVIEW
B
FIGURE 8.8 Peripheral blood smears showing a hypersegmented
FIGURE 8.9 Peripheral blood smears showing a blast and an
and hypogranular neutrophil (A), and several hyposegmented 
abnormal cell with doughnut-shaped nucleolus (A) and a large
dysplastic monocyte (B).
neutrophils (B).
various myeloid abnormalities, which are determined by
Blast Enumeration
 comparison with normal myeloid cells using pattern rec-
Blast enumeration by MIFC should always be correlated
ognition. However, there are significant variations among
with morphologic findings.
these scoring systems, primarily because the choice of anti-
bodies and antibody combinations used in the MDS panel
● Myeloblasts may not always be positive for CD34 and/or
by different groups is highly variable. Until a standardized
CD117.
MDS panel is adopted, it is not possible to develop a con-
A combination of multiple gating strategies including
 sensus scoring system that can be universally applied.
 back-gating is often necessary for an accurate enumeration of
Nevertheless, multiple studies have demonstrated
blasts.
that 1
 multiparametric
 immunophenotyping by flow
 Compared with manual differential, where 500 cells are usu-
cytometry (MIFC) plays an important role in aiding the
ally counted, MIFC is a much more powerful tool in estimat-
diagnosis and classification of MDS in the context of mul-
ing the number of blasts, since at least 20,000 events/cells are
tidisciplinary correlations. In addition, some studies have
routinely analyzed.
suggested that results of MIFC may have prognostic impli-
If the blast count is higher by MIFC than by manual differen-
tial, the results of flow cytometry cannot be simply dismissed
 cations in certain risk groups of MDS patients.
and they should always be taken into account in the overall
MIFC is useful in diagnosis and cassification of MDS in
evaluation and classification of MDS.
primarily two areas: (1) blast enumeration and (2) detecting
Flow cytometric analysis can sometimes underestimate the
immunophenotypic aberrancies and dysmaturation patterns
number of blasts due to lack of marrow particles and/or
of blasts, myeloid cells, monocytes, and erythroid precursors.
hemodilution of the sample.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
117
FIGURE 8.10 Peripheral blood smears 
from patients with MDS showing
dysplastic neutrophils and monocytes.
FIGURE 8.11 Peripheral blood smears
from patients with MDS showing
dysplastic neutrophils and monocytes.
Immunophenotypic Aberrancies and Dysmaturation
though the blast count may be less than 5%. Common aber-
Patterns
rancies of myeloblasts include abnormal location by CD45
gating. cross lineage aberrancies of CD5, CD7, CD19, and
Proper recognition of immunophenotypic aberrancies and
CD56. as well as asynchronous expression of CD13/CD15/
dysmaturation patterns relies on a solid understanding of
CD33/CD34, plus expression of TdT (Figure 8.14).
the normal maturation patterns of myeloid, monocytic,
● Dysmaturation patterns of myeloid cells are highly vari-
 and erythroid cells in a given MDS panel.
able among different studies. Some of the more commonly
described ones include abnormal CD45 gating. reduced side
● Immunophenotypic aberrancies and dysmaturation patterns 
scatter, abnormal coexpression profile of CD11b/CD16/
include:
HLA-DR, loss of CD64, and loss of CD10 (Figure 8.15).
●cross-lineage aberrancies;
● Dysmaturation patterns of monocytes are not as well studied
● abnormal expression intensities:
as those of granulocytic precursors. In general, reduced anti-
● asynchronous expressions;
gen expressions (eg.. CD11b, 13. CD14, CD15. CD36, and
● abnormal location by CD45 gating:
HLA-DR) may be present in addition to cross-lineage aberran-
● abnormal clustering profiles.
dies (e.g. CD56 and CD2).
● The single most significant finding in predicting MDS by
Dysmaturation patterns of erythroid cells are rarely
MIFC, is the identification of abnormal myeloblasts, even
reported.
118
MYELODYSPLASTIC SYNDROMES/NEOPLASMS—OVERVIEW
FIGURE 8.13 Dysplastic megakaryocytes are frequent bone
marrow findings in patients with MDS: (A) a megakaryocyte with
FIGURE 8.12 (A) Clot section and (B) bone marrow smear
multiple separated nuclei; (B) a binucleated micromegakaryocyte
from a patient with 5q- syndrome, demonstrating numerous
(arrow);: (C) a mononuclear micromegakaryocyte (arrow).
 micromegakaryocytes. (C) Blood smear showing macrocytosis
and giant platelets (arrow).
● In general, the higher the number of dysmaturation patterns.
not pathognomonic of MDS and can be observed in a wide
the more likely the findings are meaningful and specific.
variety of non-clonal conditions, such as viral infections, post-
· With the exception of abnormal myeloblasts, especially
chemotherapy. heavy metal toxicity, and folate or vitamin B12
 those with multiple aberrancies, dysmafuration patterns are
deficiencies.
MOLECULAR STUDIES
119
FIGURE 8.14 Common immunophenotypic
aberrancies of abnormal myeloblasts in MDs. The
open gate display by CD45 gating shows abnormal
location of a discrete population of blasts. The
工
SS
CD7
CD7
blast-enriched gates demonstrate cross-lineage
aberrancies of the abnormal myeloblasts, which
S
include expression of CD7, CD5, CD56, CD19 
(partial, dim), and TdT.
CD45
CD2
CD5
D34
6L
D45
CD1
CD56
CD10
lcTdT
● Evaluation of the topographical alterations and estimation of
Open
the M:E ratio by using monoclonal antibodies against hemo-
gate
globin and/or glycophorin A molecules for erythroid precur-
SSC-H
CD11b
sors and myeloperoxidase for myeloid precursors.
 Detection of clusters of immature cells (ALIP) and estimation
of blast cell numbers by using blast-associated markers such
as CD34 and CD117.
 Screening for the presence of micromegakaryocytes and topo-
 graphical alterations of megakaryocytes by using monoclonal
CD45
CD16
antibodies against CD31, CD61, and factor VIII.
●
 Evaluation of the monocytic component of the bone marrow
by studying CD68 and lysozyme expressions.
●
[mmunohistochemical stains are also occasionally used to
valuate the nature of the lymphoid aggregates, which are
frequently observed in bone marrow biopsy sections of MDS
3
patients. Sometimes these aggregates are morphologically
atypical or located adjacent to the bone trabeculae, raising the
?
possibility of a lymphoproliferative disorder.
CD33
CD14
Molecular Studies
FIGURE 8.15 Dysmaturation patterns of myeloid cells in MDS.
Compared with their normal counterparts, myeloid cells in MDS
reveal a variable degree of dysmaturation patterns depending
 The diagnosis of MDS is typically based on clinical history
on the antibody panel used and disease subtypes. The open gate
display by CD45 gating demonstrates an abnormal location/
 and cell morphology in blood and bone marrow. Owing
clustering profile of myeloid cells. The myeloid-enriched gates show
to one or more genetic defects in precursor stem cells,
abnormal coexpression profile of CD1 1b and CD16, with many
these are not yet sufficiently well characterized to become
myeloid cells lacking both antigens, abnormal clustering profile of
targets for molecular diagnostic study. The predominant
D13 and CD33, plus complete loss of CD64 in a major subset.
 molecular technique used in MDS diagnosis is FISH, offen
used as a supplement to the important standard karyotypic
findings (see below). As already discussed, molecular tech-
IMMUNOHISTOCHEMICAL STUDIES
niques can be used to determine clonality of the underly-
Immunohistochemical stains on bone marrow biopsies of 
ing process, such as by characterization of polymorphic
patients with suspected MDS may provide helpful infor-
 markers on the active and inactive X-chromosomes (appli-
mation regarding the following matters.
cable only in females). However, this is primarily a
120
MYELODYSPLASTIC SYNDROMES/NEOPLASMS—OVERVIEW
research tool, not directly relevant to the clinical diagnosis
numerical or structural gains and losses and to complex
 Or management of a particular patient.
aberrant karyotypes (Table 8.1). The complex karyotypes
On the other hand, a number of individual point
are characterized by three or more chromosomal abnor-
mutations, deletions, or epigenetic alterations have been
malities (Figures 8.16 and 8.17) and show an extremely
observed in certain oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes,
umfavorable prognosis.
 and signaling factors. The most frequent are the following.
Bone marrow is the tissue of choice for chromosomal
-  ie   sd  sss
● Point mutations in N-ras (found in 15-20% of MDS cases).
 ing has a higher failure rate than marrow studies and rarely
Tandem duplication mutation in the FLT3 gene (5%).
● Promoter methylation of p15 (30-50%).
adds useful information beyond that available from the
●Inactivating and deletion mutations of p53 (5-10%).
marrow study.
Inactivation of p53 is of course a common occurrence in many
 There are no studies that suggest frequent assessment
types of cancer, but in MDs it appears to be an indicator of
 of chromosomal status in MDS for monitoring therapy. In
late stage or imminent progression to AML.
special situations in which chromosomal information is
● RUNX1/ RUNXT1 mutation screening is positive in 15% of
 desirable but a marrow examination is not required, such
MDS.
as measuring donor/host chimerism after stem cell trans-
Mutations of NRAS, MLL-PTD, NPM1, and JAK2V617F. and
plantation, FISH testing (see below) may be preferable.
missense mutations in RUNxT1 are also detected at low fre-
Given the important role cytogenetics information plays in
quencies, confirming MDS diagnosis.
● Mutations in NF1, the causative gene of neurofibromatosis
risk assessment, request for karyotype testing is an essen-
type 1, are found in some cases, which is of interest because
tial part of the initial evaluation.
Several
 recurrent and 
well-established   cytogenetic
the NF1 protein product is also involved in the RAS pathway.
 changes have been described in MDS, and the detection
Again, while these findings may have important impli-
 of these changes can greatly facilitate diagnosis, prognosis,
cations for our understanding of MDS pathogenesis and
follow up, and treatment of patients. Although chromo-
 progression, they are not necessary or routinely used as tar-
 somal abnormalities occur in almost half of de novo cases,
 gets for diagnosis.
SIW Arepuoas jo %so oi dn u! paaiasqo aie suoneaqe
Most chromosomal defects in MDS are non-specific, and,
with the exception of 5q-, none is specifically associated
with any FAB or WHO subtype.
Cytogenetics
Chromosomal deletions are the most common defects
observed in both de novo and secondary MDs. Deletions
Chromosomal changes occur in about 30-50% within
are generally interstitial, rather than terminal, and fre-
the diverse subtypes of MDS and are the strongest inde-
1 ue 1 'd1 1 oz 2  u  Aub
pendent prognostic indicators. These changes range from
(Figures 8.18 to 8.21).
balanced translocations to unbalanced karyotypes with
FIGURE 8.16 Complex
karyotype: 44,xX,der(2)t(2;14)
(q11.2;p11.2),del(5)(q13q33),del(7)
(q22q34),add(8)(q24),add(10)
(p13),+del(q12q14),-14,-15,
17,t(2;18)(q11.2;q21).
14
15
17
CYTOGENETICS
121
The most common of the chromosomal aberrations is
 anomalies, and accounts for up to 28% of all cytoge-
represented by the chromosome 5q interstitial deletion
 netic aberrations in MDS, with an overall frequency of
(critical region reported to be between bands 5q3l and
 approximately 15%. Prognosis of patients with primary
e pot  e aa s bg uia (bs
MDS and isolated del(5q) is favorable, but MDS patients
mality
 or accompanied by additional chromosomal
with 5q deletion and presence of one or more additional
FIGURE 8.17 Complex karyotype:
43,XX,der( 1;12)(q21;p11.2),-3,-5,-7,+8,
-12,-15,-17,-18,+3mars.
3
福
6
10
11
尚
13
14
15
16
17
18
38
20
21
22
7
9
10
11
12
8
88
9
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
+
A
B
FIGURE 8.18 (A) G-banded karyotype showing a deletion of 7q. (B) An ideogram of 7q with the two critical regions of deletion (arrows).
and a panel of interphase cells exhibiting 7q deletion by FlSH.
122
MYELODYSPLASTIC SYNDROMES/NEOPLASMS—OVERVIEW
FIGURE 8.19 G-banded karyotype with a
deletionof11q.
10
12
13
14
15
16
24
18
小
19
20
21
22
FIGURE 8.20 (A) G-banded karyotype
showing deletion of 20q, and (B) FiSH
 analysis demonstrating 20q deletion.
8
7
8
9
10
11
13
16
19
20
21
22
13
12
11.2
11.2
12
182
B
chromosomal abnormalities show an aggressive clinical
chromosomal abnormality in 1% of cases. it is more com-
course.
mon in secondary MDS, seen in up to 60% of the patients,
Monosomy 7/del(7q) has been observed in all MDS
 and is therefore considered a secondary event in the patho-
 subtypes, though it is much more common in advanced 
 genesis of the disease. Unlike the 5q-, there are multiple
forms (Figures 8.18 and 8.22). 7q-/-7 occurs as a sole
CYTOGENETICS
123
FGURE 8.21 G-banded karyotype showing
trisomy 13 and isochromosome 17q resulting
is deletion of 17p.
OE
护
11
358
36
14
16
北
8
20
21
22
8
10
11
12
13
14
15
18
17
18
19
20
21
22
A
FIGURE 8.22 (A) G-banded karyotype with monosomy 7. (B) The corresponding FISH studies.
7q22 and several in the region 7q31-7q35. Monosomy 7  an inferior response to chemotherapy and shorter survival
is the most common chromosomal defect in bone marrow
 than those with deletions in the 7q22 region.
 of patients with constitutional syndromes (e.g., Fanconi's
Deletion of long arm of chromosome 20 occurs in
anemia, type I neurofibromatosis, and severe congenital
5% of de novo and 7% of secondary MDs. This inci-
neutropenia) that predispose to myeloid disorders. Also, a
 dence might be an underestimation, since monosomy 20
recently described pediatric monosomy 7 syndrome pres-
 and unbalanced translocations involving chromosome
 ents with hepatosplenomegaly, leukocytosis, thrombocyto-
 20 occur as frequently as deletions. Although the critical
penia, male predominance, and an unfavorable outcome.
region seems to be 20q1l.2 to 20q12, deletions are rather
Patients harboring deletions in 7q3l to 7q36 regions have
large and involve most of the long arm of chromosome
124
MYELODYSPLASTIC SYNDROMES/NEOPLASMS—OVERVIEW
20. Patients with del(20q) as a sole abnormality are in
the low-risk MDS categories—refractory anemia  (RA)
and refractory anemia with ring sideroblasts (RARS) (see
Chapter 9)—whereas those presenting with this deletion
as a part of a complex karyotype (three or more abnor
malities in karyotypes) have a poor prognosis. Also, there
is evidence that late emergence of 20q- during disease
progression is an indicator of genomic instability and may
be associated with poor outcome. The smallest Critically
Deleted Region in the 20q deletion contains 19 genes.
But none of these have been found to be mutated or oth-
erwise directly implicated in myeloid diseases to date.
Occasionally a variant of the deleted 20q is observed. Here
a monosomy of chromosome 20 with small metacen-
FIGURE 8.23 A MDS karyotype with an isochromosome of
tric marker chromosome: 46,XX or XY,-20,+mar is seen.
 chromosome is a variant of del(20q) but associated with a poorer
The marker often represents an isoderivative of chromo-
prognosis.
some 20 [ider(20)(q10)del(20)(q1lq13)], a variant of del 
20q (Figure 8.23) and these patients have an unfavorable
prognosis.
hematological disorders. Trisomy 8 is more often associated
Deletion of the short arm of chromosome 17 encom-
with RARS and RAEB (Figure 8.24). Chromosome 3 rear-
passes not only simple deletions, but also unbalanced trans-
rangements, typically translocations or inversions of the long
locations, iso17q (Figure 8.21), and (rarer) monosomy 17.
arm, occur in 2-5% of patients with MDS (also in AML).
Del(17p) is rare in de novo MDs (7%), but occurs more
Chromosome 3 changes are frequently associated with -7/7q
frequently in secondary MDS. Despite its heterogeneity, all
and 5q-, and are associated with a short survival and a poor
of the above-mentioned aberrations of the short arm of chro-
response to chemotherapy. Aberrations within llq23 (the
mosome 17 lead to the loss of one p53 allele. Mutation or
MLL gene locus) are found in 5% of MDS patients. Further
submicroscopic deletion of the other p53 allele occurs in
karyotypic defects (eg., rearrangements of long arm of chro-
70% of the patients and causes inactivation of the TP53 gene.
 mosome 3) occur in 5-10% of de novo MDS cases
Isolated loss of the chromosome Y is observed in about
 Using cytogenetic abnormalities, MDS patients have been
10% of MDS patients. It also occurs in about 7% of elderly
 divided into three prognostic categories. Patients in the first,
 men without any hematological disorder. Therefore, MDS
low-risk category exhibit a normal karyotype, deletion of
diagnosis cannot be based on the presence of -Y alone.
long arm of chromosome 5 or 1l or deletion of 12p as a
However, loss of Y in the majority of cells can be a use-
 sole abnormality, or harbor an isolated deletion of the long
ful marker of disease burden, but likely has no bearing
arm of chromosome 20. Patients with trisomy 8 are catego-
on the mechanism of disease. When biological and clini-
rized as an intermediate-risk group. Finally, the presence
cal parameters point to an MDs diagnosis, loss of the Y
 of complex karyotypes, monosomy 7, deletion of the short
chromosome identifies patients with a favorable clinical
arm of chromosome 17, rearrangements involving chromo-
outcome.
some 3, indicate a high-risk group of MDS patients.
Interstitial deletions or balanced translocations involv-
About 12% of patients with MDS with normal cytoge-
ing band 12p13 are found in about 5% of patients with
netics progress to acute myeloid leukemia (AML), whereas
RAEB, mostly involving the ETV6 gene. These patients usu-
 50% of those with chromosomal changes will progress to
ally belong to an intermediate-risk cytogenetic category for
AML. Generally, therapy-related MDS (MDS-t) are much
MDS. However, recent studies suggest that 12p13 aberra-
 more aggressive clinically than primary MDS, and this
tions signify a clinical outcome similar to that of patients
 characteristic is reflected in the karyotypes. At least 80% of
included within the low-risk category.
 patients with t-MDS have chromosomally abnormal clones
A normal karyotype, monosomies,
trisomies,
in the marrow, and in a vast majority of cases these clones
unbalanced translocations are the next most common
contain multiple abnormalities. It is has also been estab-
aberrations, occurring in 15% of patients. The most com-
lished that even prognostically unfavorable aberrations can
mon monosomies in MDs involve chromosomes 5, 7, and
be observed in cases where morphology and immunophe-
Y. Deletions and monosomies cause loss of one allele of a
 notyping performed by highly experienced hematologists
 tumor suppressor gene with the subsequent submicrosco-
fail to diagnose MDS, emphasizing the value of karyotyp-
pic deletion of the second allele on the homologous chro-
 ing even when MDS is not detectable with cytomorphol-
mosome. This recessive mechanism inactivates the cell's
 ogy or immunophenotyping but is suspected from the
 ability to control the cell cycle, DNA repair, and apoptosis.
 clinical point of view, and underlines the need for cytoge-
Several other chromosomal aberrations are observed in
 netic analysis in all cases suspected of MDS.
MDS, but are not specific to the disease. Trisomy 8 occurs
Although balanced translocations are relatively com-
in 10% of all MDS cases, but can be found in other donal
mon aberrations in acute myeloid leukemias, they are
CYTOGENETICS
125
6
12
17
68
20
21
22
A
11.2
21.3
22
23
B
FIGURE 8.24 (A) G-banded karyotype with trisomy 8. (B) The corresponding FISH studies.
very rare in MDS, and very few such rearrangements are
 samples (fibrotic marrow) that contain too few cells for
observed in MDS: e.g., involving 3q26 (corresponding
routine karyotyping studies. Detection of chromosomal
to the zinc finger DNA binding protein, MDSi-EVI1).
aberrations within the interphase nuclei can be achieved
3q25.1 (the p53 regulator, MLF1), and 1p36 (PRDM16,
by hybridizing with an appropriate selection of probes
another zinc finger transcription factor). Other genes that
(Figures 8.18B, 8.20B, 8.22B, and 8.24B). The technique
are involved in rarer translocations include RUNX1, ETV6,
permits the direct correlation of cytogenetic and cytologic
MEL1, NUP98, and IER3. Many translocations in MDS
features (for example, trisomy 8 in a hypogranular neutro-
Occur in the setting of a more widely disturbed cytogenetic
phil), which enables cytologists to differentiate malignant
 profile, making it unclear if these represent disease-mod-
 from benign conditions in equivocal cases.
ifying changes or incidental rearrangements in a highly
A typical MDS FISH panel includes probes specific for
unstable genome. A balanced translocation between chro-
chromosomes 5/5q, 7/7q, centromere 8, and 20q. FISH
mosomes 6p and 9q is often considered a presumptive evi-
analyses in MDS occasionally reveal cryptic cytogenetic
 dence of MDS in patients with unexplained anemia.
 abnormalities that are not recognized on metaphase anal-
ysis. However, conventional cytogenetics and FISH should
be viewed as complementary because there are also abnor-
FISH AND OTHER TECHNOLOGIES
malities better detected by conventional cytogenetics than
Cytogenetic data can be obtained with FISH from non-
FISH. Reviews have shown that concurrent FISH studies
 dividing or terminally differentiated cells, or from poor 
confirmed the G-banding cytogenetic findings in >99% of
126 MYELODYSPLASTIC SYNDROMES/NEOPLASMS—OVERVIEW
cases, but also detected cytogenetic abnormalities in 25% of
 and spectral karyotyping (SKY), may allow for the com-
cases in which the conventional cytogenetics study failed.
 prehensive evaluation of these karyotypes. With these
An advantage of FISH is that one can combine this  methods, it is possible to analyze the origin of marker
method with cytology and/or immunohistochemistry to 
 chromosomes, reveal cryptic rearrangements, and deter-
examine the cytogenetic pattern of specific cell popula- 1
 mine recurrent breakpoints and the structure of derivative
tions to monitor the effects of therapy and to detect mini- chromosomes.
mal residual disease. Most of the studies using FISH for the
 Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array analysis
identification of lineage involvement in MDS indicate that,  showed that about 10-15% of MDS patients with appar-
in most cases, the pluripotent stem cell is not affected,  6
 ently normal karyotypes had regions of DNA (such as on
since the lymphoid cells usually do not contain the chro-
the long arm of chromosome 5) derived from only one
mosomal abnormality.
 parent, a phenomenon called Uniparental Disomy or
 Some of the MDS patients may have very complex chro-
 UPD. Such high resolution genomic analysis also exhib-
mosomal rearrangements, which corresponds to short sur-
 ited copy number changes in the abnormal cells such as
vival times and high rates of progression to AML. However.
 duplications and deletions, which often go undetected by
it is acknowledged that, because of the limitations of con-  standard cytogenetics or FISH analyses. The presence of a
cation of the abnormalities remain unresolved. Molecular
als who are born with constitutional uPD may have an
cytogenetics techniques such as multicolor FISH (M-FISH),
 increased risk for developing MDS.
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
¥127
Additional Resources
Bejar R, Ebert BL: The genetic basis of myelodysplastic syndromes,
Orazi A, Czader MB: Myelodysplastic syndromes, Am J Clin Pathol
Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 24:295-315, 2010.
132:290-305, 2009.
Cazzola M, Malcovati L: Myelodysplastic syndromes - coping with
 Orfao A, Ortuno F, de Santiago M, et al: Immunophenotyping of
ineffective hematopoiesis, N Engl I Med 352:536-538, 2005.
acute leukemias and myelodysplastic syndromes, Cytometry 58A:
Cazzola M, Malcovati L: Prognostic classification and risk assessment
62-71,2004.
in myelodysplastic syndromes, Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 24:
Saunthararajah Y, Molldrem JL, Rivera M, et al: Coincident myelo-
459-468, 2010.
dysplastic syndrome and T-cell large granular lymphocytic disease:
clinical and pathophysiological features, Br J Haematol l12:195-200,
Chu SC, Wang TF, Li CC, et al: Flow cytometric scoring system as a
diagnostic and prognostic tool in myelodysplastic syndromes, Leuk
2001.
Res 35:868-873, 2011.
Stetler-Stevenson M, Arthur DC, Jabbour N, et al: Diagnostic util-
Della Porta MG, Lanza F Del Vecchio L: Flow cytometry immuno-
 -us snsedsponau u sundouauounuui sau moy go 
phenotyping for the evaluation of bone marrow dysplasia, Cytometry
drome, Blood 98:979-987, 2001.
B Clin Cytom 80:201-211, 2011.
Tormo M, Marugan I, Calabuig M: Myelodysplastic syndromes: an
Greenberg P, Cox C, LeBeau M, et al: International Scoring System for
update on molecular pathology, Clin Transl Oncol 12:652-66l, 2010.
Evaluating Prognosis in Myelodysplastic Syndromes, Blood 89:2079-
van de Loosdrecht AA, Alhan C, Bene MC, et al: Standardization of
2088, 1997.
flow cytometry in myelodysplastic syndromes: report from the First
Huh YO, Medeiros LJ, Ravandi F, et al: T-cell large granular lympho-
European LeukemiaNet Working Conference on Flow Cytometry in
cyte leukemia associated with myelodysplastic syndrome: a clinico-
Myelodysplastic Syndromes, Haematologica 94: 1124- 1134, 2009.
pathologic study of nine cases, Am J Clin Pathol 13l:347-356, 2009.
van de Loosdrecht AA, Westers TM, Westra AH, et al: Identification of
Kern W, Haferlach C, Schnittger S, et al: Clinical utility of multipa-
distinct prognostic subgroups in low- and intermediate-1-risk myelo-
rameter flow cytometry in the diagnosis of 10l3 patients with sus-
dysplastic syndromes by flow cytometry,. Blood 1ll: 1067-1077, 2008.
pected myelodysplastic syndrome: Correlation to cytomorphology.
Vardiman JW, Thiele J. Arber DA, et al: The 2008 Revision of the
cytogenetics, and clinical data, Cancer 116:4549-4563, 2010.
WHO Classifcation of Myeloid Neoplasms and Acute Leukemia:
Kussick SJ. Fromm JR, Rossini A, et al: Four-color flow cytom-
Rationale and important changes, Blood 114:937-951, 2009.
etry shows strong concordance with bone marrow morphology
and cytogenetics in the evaluation for myelodysplasia, Am J Clin
Pathol 124:170-181, 2005.
This page intentionally left blank
yndromes/Neopl
Classifcation
lassification of MDS by the World Health Organization
 Table 9.1
(WHO) in 2008 includes the following
categories
WHO Classification of Myelodysplastic Syndromes 1
(Table 9.1):
Type
Blood Findings
Bone Marrow Findings
1. Refractory cytopenia with unilineage dysplasia (RCUID)
 Refractory cytopenia
 Cytopenia with
Unilineage dysplasia,
2. Refractory anemia with ring sideroblasts (RARS)
with unilineage
dlysplasia; No or
>10% of the cells;
3. Refractory cytopenia with multilineage dysplasia (RCMD)
dysplasia (RCUD)
rare blasts
<5% blasts; <15% ring
4. Refractory anemia with excess blasts-1 (RAEB-1)
sideroblasts 
5. Refractory anemia with excess blasts-2 (RAEB-2)
Refractory anemia
Anemia, abnormal
 Dysplastic
6. MDS associated with isolated del(5q)
with ring sideroblasts
 erythrocytes; No
erythropoiesis; ≥15%
7. MDS unclassifiable.
(RARS)
blasts
ring sideroblasts; <5% 
This morphologic classification correlates with clinical
blasts
 behavior, frequency and type of cytogenetic abnormalities,
Refractory cytopenia
 Bicytopenia or
Multilineage dysplasia;
with multilineage
pancytopenia;
<5% blasts; No Auer
and rate of transformation to acute leukemia (Tables 9.2
dysplasia (RCMD)
No or rare blasts;
rods; ±15% ring
and 9.3).
No Auer rods;
sideroblasts
No absolute
monocytosis
Refractory anemia
Cytopenia(s);
Unilineage or
with excess blasts-1
<5% blasts;
multilineage dysplasia;
Refractory Cytopenia with
(RAEB-1)
No Auer rods;
5-9% blasts; No Auer 
No absolute
rods
Unilineage Dysplasia
monocytosis
 Refractory anemia
Cytopenia(s);
Unilineage or
with excess blasts-2
5-19% blasts;
multilineage dysplasia 
Refractory cytopenia with unilineage dysplasia (RCUD) is
(RAEB-2)
Auer rods ±;
10-19% blasts; Auer
a low-risk MDS which includes three subclasses: (1) refrac-
No absolute
rods±
tory anemia (RA), (2) refractory neutropenia (RN), and (3)
monocytosis
refractory thrombocytopenia (RT). The recommended lev-
MDS associated with
 Anemia; Normal
Micromegakaryocytes;
els of cytopenia are: less than 10g/L hemoglobin, less than
isolated del(5q)
or increased 
Isolated del(5q); <5% 
platelets; No or
blasts; No Auer rods 
1500/μL neutrophil count, and less than 100,000/μL plate-
rare blasts
let count. However, a diagnosis of RCuD could be made
Myelodysplastic
Cytopenia; No or
<10% dysplasia in one
with levels above the recommended threshold when there
syndrome-
rare blasts
 or more lineages; <5%
is significant unilineage dysplasia and/or evidence of charac-
Unclassified (MDS-U)
blasts; No Auer rods; 
teristic cytogenetic aberrations.
Evidence of cytogenetic
RCUD accounts for about 10-20% of MDS cases, with
abnormalities
RA being the most frequent subtype. The vast majority of
1Adapted from Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, et al. WHO Classification
patients with RCuD fall into the low or intermediate risk
 of Tumours of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues. IARC Press, Lyon,
groups according to the International Prognostic Scoring
2008.
System (IPsS) and have good to intermediate cytogenetic
profiles. The 5-year progression rate to AML is about 2%.
Atlas of Hematopathology. DOl: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00009-7
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
130
MYELODYSPLASTIC SYNDROMES/NEOPLASMS—CLASSIFICATION
 Table 9.2
 Rate of Chromosomal Aberrations in MDS Subclasses
Common 
Subgroup
Alterations
Frequency (%)
RA (or RCUD}
5/d(5q)
30
-7/del(7q)
10-15
+8
20
RARS
+8
30
-5/(5q)
25
del(11q)
10
del(20q)
10-15
RAEB
-5/del(5q)
35-40
-7/del(7q)
+8
20
 RA, refractory anemia; RARS, refractory anemia with ring sideroblasts; RAEB,
A
refractory anemia with excess blasts; RCUD, refractory cytopenia with 
unilineage dysplasia.
Table 9.3
Survival and Rate of Transformation of MDS to Acute
Leukemia According to the WHO Subtypes 1
Median 
MDS
 Survival
Evolution
 Stratifcation by IPSS
Subtytpe
(years)
to AML (%)
Score (%)
RA (or
5.7
7.5
Low (57) Intermediate 1(33)
RCUD)
Intermediate 2 (10) High (0)
RARS
5.7
1.4
Low (96) Intermediate 1(4)
Intermediate 2 (0) High (0)
5q-
9.7
8
Low (61) Intermediate 1 (30)
 Syndrome
 Intermediate 2 (9) High (0)
RCMD
2.7
10
Low (55) Intermediate 1 (40)
FIGURE 9.1 REFRACToRY ANEMIA. Bone marrOw smears
Intermediate 2 (5) High (0)
 demonstrating dysplastic early binucleated erythroid precursors
RCMD-RS
2.6
13
Low (56) Intermediate 1 (36)
(A, arrows) and dysplastic late erythroid precursors with irregular
Intermediate 2 (8) High (0)
or lobated nuclei (B, arrows).
RAEB-1
1.5
21
Low (0) Intermediate 1 (33)
Intermediate 2 (55) High (12)
RAEB-2
0.8
34.5
Low (0) Intermediate 1 (0)
fragmentation or budding. cytoplasmic vacuolization, and
Intermediate 2 (25) High (73)
 abnormal hemoglobinization.
[ron stores are increased. Ring sideroblasts, if present, account
RA, refractory anemia; RAEB, refractory anemia with excess blasts; RARS,
for <15% of the nucleated red blood cells.
 refractory anemia with ring sideroblasts; RCMD, refractory cytopenia
● In the peripheral blood, red blood cells often show some degree of
with multilineage dysplasia; RCMD-RS, refractory cytopenia with
 anisopoikilocytosis with reduced polychromasia (reticulocytes).
 multilineage dysplasia and ring sideroblasts; RCUD, refractory cytopenia
with unilineage dysplasia.
● The granulocytic and megakaryocytic lines are either normal
or show minimal dysplastic changes.
1Adapted from Germing U, Gattermann N, Strupp C, Aivado M, Aul C.
(2000). Validation of the WHO proposals for a new classification of
Refractory Neutropenia (RN)
primary myelodysplastic syndromes: a retrospective analysis of 1600 
patients. Leuk Res 24, 983-92.
● RN is characterized by ≥10% dysplastic neutrophils in periph-
eral blood or bone marrow (Figure 9.2).
 Dysplastic changes include hyper- or hyposegmentation of the
MORPHOLOGY
neutrophils and/or hypogranulation.
● Lack of significant dysplasia in other lineages.
Refractory Anemia (RA)
Refractory Thrombocytopenia (RT)
●RA is characterized by anemia, dyserythropoiesis in >10% of ery-
throid precursors, and absent or very low percentage of blasts in 
● RT is characterized by ≥10% dysplastic megakaryocytes in at
bone marrow (<5%) and peripheral blood (<1%) (Figure 9.1).
least 30 observed megakaryocytes.
●
 Bone marrow is often hypercellular and frequently shows
 Mononuclear, hypolobated, binucleated micromegakaryocytes
erythroid preponderance. The degree of dysplasia in the
and megakaryocytes with separated nuclei are frequent find-
erythroid precursors varies and may include megaloblas-
ings (Figure 9.3).
tic changes, multinucleation, nuclear bridging, nuclear
●
Lack of significant dysplasia in other lineages.
REFRACTORY CYTOPENIA WITH UNILINEAGE DYSPLASIA
131
FIGURE 9.2 REFRACTORY NEUTROPENIA. Peripheral bloOd smears
demonstrating a hypolobated neutrophil (A) and a large 
hypersegmented, hypogranular neutrophil (B).
According to the WHO recommendations, in order
to establish a diagnosis of RCUD, all other causes of ery-
throid, neutrophilic, and megakaryocytic dysplasias should
be excluded. These include drug and chemical exposure,
immunologic disorders, viral infections, congenital abnor-
malities, and vitamin deficiencies. Also, there should be an
observation period of at least 6 months if cytogenetic and
molecular studies show no evidence of clonal disorder.
 Development of multilineage dysplasia and/or an increase
in the percent of blast cells are suggestive of progression of
the disease into a more aggressive type of MDS.
C
FIGURE 9.3 REFRACToRY THRoMBOcYToPENIA. Bone marrow biOpsy
 section demonstrating numerous micromegakaryocytes
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE (FIGURE 9.4)
(A, low power; B, high power). (C) The micromegakaryocytes are
● Blast enumeration of bone marrow by flow cytometry is less
highlighted by immunohistochemical stain for factor Vill.
than 5% and needs to be correlated with morphologic findings.
●
 There may be early changes with low number of dysmatura-
tion patterns in myelomonocytic cells.
[dentification of abnormal myeloblasts (<5%) expressing dis-
rete aberrancies is the single most significant finding in evalu-
ating dysmaturation patterns of myeloid cells.
132
MYELODYSPLASTIC SYNDROMES/NEOPLASMS-CLASSIFICATION
4%abnormal
H-O
myeloblasts
CD117
SS
CD45
CD34
3
CD1
?
CD33
CD5
FIGURE 9.4 Abnormal myeloblasts detected at early stages of MDS by flow cytometric studies. Although myeloblasts account for less than
 5% of the total, they reveal discrete immunophenotypic aberrancies with expression of very dim CD45, bright CD34, and dim CD7.
北
14
15
16
19
20
21
22
FlGURE 9.5 G-banded karyotype showing deletion 13q and trisomy 8.
Refractory Anemia with Ring
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
Sideroblasts
For detailed molecular and cytogenetic studies in MDS, see
Chapter 8. The most frequent cytogenetic abnormalities 
are partial deletions or loss of chromosomes 5, 7, and 20
 Refractory anemia with ring sideroblasts (RARS) is a low
and trisomy 8 (Figure 9.5).
risk MDS characterized by anemia, dyserythropoiesis, and
REFRACTORY ANEMIA WITH RING SIDEROBLASTS
133
FIGURE 9.7 REFRACTORY ANEMIA WITH RING SIDEROBLASTs. BONe MarrOW
smears reveal numerous dysplastic intermediate and late
erythroid precursors (A, arrows) and numerous ring sideroblasts
by iron stain (B).
presence of 15% or more ring sideroblasts in the bone
marrow nucleated red blood cells. Anemia is usually mod-
erate and may be associated with clinical symptoms such
as fatigue and pallor. RARS accounts for about 5-10% of
MDS cases, and the median age ranges from 65 to 70 years.
It has an indolent clinical course with 1-2% chance of
evolving to AML
MORPHOLOGY
C
● RARS is morphologically similar to RA except for the presence
FIGURE 9.6 REFRACTORY ANEMIA WITH RING SIDEROBLASTS.
of ≥15% ring sideroblasts. Ring sideroblasts are defined as
(A) Bone marrow biopsy reveals hypercellularity and erythroid
nucleated red cells with five or more iron granules encircling
preponderance. (B) Bone marrow smear shows erythroid 
at least one third of their nucleus (Figure 9.6). The iron gran-
ules are precipitated in the mitochondria, which are usually
precursors. (C) Numerous ring sideroblasts are present by iron
located around the nucleus.
stain.
● Evidence of dyserythropoiesis in >10% of erythroid precursors.
and absent or very low percentage of blasts in bone marrow
(<5%) and peripheral blood (<1%) (Figures 9.6 and 9.7).
134
MYELODYSPLASTICSYNDROMES/NEOPLASMS-CLASSIFICATION
4
1
83
20
21
22
FIGURE 9.8 G-banded karyotype demonstrating trisomy 15.
● Bone marrow is often hypercellular and frequently shows
Refractory Cytopenia with
erythroid preponderance. The degree of dysplasia in the ery-
throid precursors varies and may include megaloblastic
Multilineage Dysplasia
changes, multinucleation, nuclear bridging. nuclear fragmen-
 tation or budding. cytoplasmic vacuolization, and abnormal
hemoglobinization.
Refractory cytopenia with multilineage dysplasia (RCMD)
●Iron stores are increased with the presence of ≥15% ring
is characterized by the presence of dysplasia in two or
sideroblasts.
● In the peripheral blood, red blood cells often show some
degree of anisopoikilocytosis with reduced polychromasia
nias. It accounts for close to 30% of the MDS cases. The
(reticulocytes). A dimorphic pattern is common with a mix-
median age is between 70-75 years. RCMD has a more
ture of normochromic and hypochromic red cells.
aggressive clinical course than RCUD and RARS, with a
● There is no evidence of absolute monocytosis (monocyte
2-year rate of progression to AML of about 10%.
count <1000/μL).
● Lack of significant dysplasia in other lineages.
MORPHOLOGY (FIGURES 9.9 AND 9.10)
Ring sideroblasts are observed in other conditions such
 as congenital sideroblastic anemia, alcohol intoxication,
● Af least 10% of the precursor cells in two or more hematopoi-
exposure to lead, benzene, zinc and isoniazid, and copper
S po  au   m s s
insufficiency.
plastic changes is discussed in Chapter 8.
● Bone marrow is usually hypercellular and contains <5%
myeloblasts. Occasional blasts (<1%) may be present in the
peripheral blood.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
● Iron stores are often increased, and variable percentage of ring
sideroblasts may be present.
 Findings are similar to those seen in RCUD.
● There is no evidence of absolute monocytosis (monocyte
count <1000/μL).
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
 For detailed molecular and cytogenetic studies in MDS see
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
Chapter 9. The most frequent cytogenetic abnormalities
● Blast enumeration of bone marrow by flow cytometry is less
are partial deletions or loss of chromosomes 5, 7, and 20
than or equal to 5% and needs to be correlated with morpho-
and trisomy 8. Other cytogenetic abnormalities are listed
 logic findin gs.
in Table 9.2 in Chapter 9. Figure 9.8 shows a karyotyping
 There may be several dysmaturation patterns of myelomono-
image with +15, -Y.
cytic cells.
REFRACTORY CYTOPENIA WITH MULTILINEAGE DYSPLASIA
135
FIGURE 9.10 REFRACTORY CYTOPENIA WITH MULTILINEAGE DYSPLASIA.
FIGURE 9.9 REFRACTORY CYTOPENIA WITH MULTILINEAGE DYSPLASIA.
(A) Biopsy section shows numerous micromegakaryocytes.
Bone marrow smears from a patient with RCMD demonstrating
(B) Bone marrow smear depicts a mononuclear
erythroid dysplasia and hypogranular neutrophils (A, low power;
micromegakaryocyte. (C) Peripheral blood smear reveals
B, high power) and a micromegakaryocyte (C, arrow).
anisopoykilocytosis and a hypogranular neutrophil.
136
MYELODYSPLASTIC SYNDROMES/NEOPLASMS—CLASSIFICATION
Refractory Anemia with Excess
Blasts
Refractory anemia with excess blasts (RAEB) is character-
ized by multilineage dysplasia and increased myeloblasts
(5-19%) in the bone marrow and/or peripheral blood
(1-19%). RAEB accounts for about 30-40% of MDS cases,
 and it usually affects patients older than 50 years.
Refractory anemia with excess blasts is divided into two
groups: RAEB-1 and RAEB-2.
●RAEB-1 refers to the group with 5-9% blasts in the bone mar-
row and/or 2-4% blasts in the peripheral blood.
● RAEB-2 refers fo the group with 10-19% blasts in the
FIGURE 9.11 t(3;3) EVI1 rearrangement demonstrated by FISH.
bone marrow and/or 5-19% blasts in the peripheral
blood. The presence of Auer rods is a significant finding.
Arcording to the WHO recommendation, cases with 1% blasts
or fewer in the peripheral blood and <5% blasts in bone
marrow with Auer rods should be classified as RAEB-2.
RAEB is considered a high grade MDS, with a 25% and
33% chance of evolving to AML in RAEB-1 and RAEB-2,
respectively.
MORPHOLOGY
   o     fo    
eages show dysplastic changes. The spectrum of dysplastic
 changes is discussed in Chapter 8.
 Bone marrow is usually hypercellular, but in <15% of the cases
is hypocellular. It shows myeloid preponderance and left shift
8
with increased blasts accounting for 5-19% of the bone mar-
row cells (Figures 9.13 and 9.14). Auer rods may be present.
FIGURE 9.12 G-banded karyotype demonstrating deletion of 17p.
● Centrally located small aggregates of blasts, referred to as
ALIP, are often present in biopsy sections.
● Peripheral blood smears show multilineage dysplasia, myeloid
left shift, and the presence of 1-19% myeloblasts. Auer rods
may be present.
●Identification of abnormal myeloblasts expressing discrete
● There is no evidence of absolute monocytosis (monocyte
aberrancies is the single most significant finding in evaluating
count <1000/μL).
dysmaturation patterns of myeloid precursors.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE (FIGURES 9.15 AND 9.16)
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
For detailed molecular and cytogenetic studies in MDS see
Blast enumeration of bone marrow by flow cytometry is
between 5% and 19% and needs to be correlated with mor-
Chapter 8. The most frequent cytogenetic abnormalities
phologic findings.
are partial deletions or loss of chromosomes 5, 7, and 20
Usually there are multiple dysmaturation patterns of myelo-
and trisomy 8. Other cytogenetic abnormalities are listed
monocytic cells.
in Table 9.2 in Chapter 9. Figures 9.11 and 9.12 demon-
 Discrete phenotypic aberrancies of myeloblasts are easily seen,
strate t(3;3) and del(17p), respectively.
and cross-lineage aberrancies are common.
MYELODYSPLASTIC SYNDROME.UNCLASSIFIABLE
137
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
For detailed molecular and cytogenetic studies in MDS see
Chapter 8. The most frequent cytogenetic abnormalities
are partial deletions or loss of chromosomes 5, 7, and 20
and trisomy 8. Other cytogenetic abnormalities are listed
in Table 9.2 in Chapter 9. Figure 9.17 demonstrates +8
 and del(12p), and Figure 9.18 shows a complex karyotype
 abnormality.
Myelodysplastic Syndrome with
Isolated Del(5q)
Myelodysplastic syndrome with isolated del(5q) (5q-
syndrome) is characterized by anemia and isolated
del(5q31-33) chromosome abnormality. Anemia is us-
ally macrocytic. Platelet counts are normal or elevated, and
there may be a modest leukopenia.
5q- syndrome has female preponderance with a
median age of 65-70 years. Clinically, this disorder falls
into low grade MDS with less than 10% chance of evolving
to AML
MORPHOLOGY
● Bone marrow is usually hypercellular and shows numerous
micromegakaryocytes with mono- or hypolobated nuclei
dysplastic changes. Blasts are <5% and show no Auer rods.
B
● Blood smears show macrocytosis, mild leukopenia, and some-
fimes, occasional blasts (<1%).
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
Findings are similar to those seen in early stages of MDS
(RCUD, RARS, and RCMD), and blast enumeration of
bone marrow should be less than 5%.
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
Cytogenetic studies reveal del(5q31-33) (Figure 9.21).
Myelodysplastic Syndrome,
Unclassifable
FIGURE 9.13 REFRACTORY ANEMIA WITH EXCESS BLASTS (RAEB-1).
This term is recommended by the WHO for those MDS
(A) Bone marrow biopsy section demonstrating clusters of
cases that lack proper features to fall into one of the well-
immature myeloid cells known as ALIP (arrows). (B) Bone
defined, above-mentioned categories, such as RCUD,
marrow smear showing increased blasts (black arrows) and
 RARS, RCMD, and RAEB. This category refers to the cases
a micromegakaryocyte (green arrow). (C) A binucleated 
that: (1) are otherwise classifiable as RCUD or RCMD,
micromegakaryocyte is noted next to a myeloblast.
but with ≤1% blasts in peripheral blood, (2) cases
138
MYELODYSPLASTIC SYNDROMES/NEOPLASMS-CLASSIFICATION
FIGURE 9.14 REFRACToRY ANEMIA wITH EXcEss BLAsTs (RAEB-2). Bone marrow biopsy section demonstrating numerous dysplastic
megakaryocytes and micromegakaryocytes (A, low power; B, high power). Immunohistochemical stains for CD117 (C) and CD34 (D)
show numerous positive cells indicative of increased myeloblasts. Bone marrow smear (E, low power; F, high power) demonstrates
increased blasts. A mononuclear micromegakaryocyte is present (E, arrow).
MYELODYSPLASTIC SYNDROME, UNCLASSIFIABLE
139
18%abnormal
9%abnormal
工
工
CD34
myeloblasts
myeloblasts
CD
S
S
CD45
CD117
CD45
CD34
CD33
CD33
CD15
CD2
CD13
CD2
FIGURE 9.15 FloW CYtoMeTrY Of MYeloBLasTs IN RAEB-1.
FIGURE 9.16 FLOW CYTOMETRY OF MYELOBLASTS IN RAEB-2. The Open
The open gate display by CD45 gating (in light blue) shows
gate display by CD45 gating (in green) reveals excess and
abnormal location of excess blasts, accounting for 9% of the
abnormal blasts (18% of the total) with very dim expression
total. The blast-enriched gate displays (in purple) demonstrate
of CD45. The blast-enriched gate displays show abnormal
abnormal myeloblasts with asynchronous expression of CD13
myeloblasts with asynchronous expression of CD33 and partial
and CD33, plus cross-lineage aberrancy of CD7.
D15, plus cross-lineage aberrancy of CD7.
11
14
15
16
11
营文
19
20
21
22
FIGURE 9.17 G-banded karyotype demonstrating trisomy 8 and deletion of 12p.
140
FIGURE 9.18 A complex abnormal
karyotype in a case of MDS transformed
to AML, showing deletion 5q, monosomy
7, trisomy 8, monosomy 20, and
unbalanced translocation at 15p and 17p
resulting in trisomy 1q and deletion 17p.
respectively.
高
14
20
22
FIGURE 9.19 5o- sYNDRoME. This is characterized by the
presence of numerous micromegakaryocytes in the
bone marrow: (A) biopsy section and (B) bone marrow
smear.
OTHER TYPES OF MYELODYSPLASTIC SYNDROMES
141
福
deleted
B
B
Del5q
FIGURE 9.21 5Q- sYNDRoME. (A) G-banded female karyotype with
a deletion of 5q. (B) Ideogram of chromosome 5 showing the
commonly deleted region in the long arm (red bracket). FISH
studies on interphase cells show monosomy 5 (top right) and
deleted 5q (bottom right).
Other Types of Myelodysplastic
Syndromes
THERAPY-RELATED (SECONDARY) MDS
The development of MDS following cytotoxic chemother-
FIGURE 9.20 5Q- sYNDRoME. Numerous micromegakaryocytes are
  aq    e
present in the bone marrow biopsy section (A, low power; B, high
 and reported in the literature. The emergence of therapy-
power) and bone marrow smear (C).
related MDS (t-MDS) is usually associated with a long
latency period and is particularly seen following the use of
alkylating agents. The pathologic manifestations of t-MDS
otherwise classifiable as RCUD, but with pancytopenia,
are, in general, similar to those of primary MDS except for
and (3) cases with no significant dysplasia, but evidence
higher frequency of the following features:
of cytopenia and cytogenetic abnormalities typical of MDS
1. High-risk variants 
(Figures 9.22 and 9.23)
2. Bone marrow fibrosis
142
MYELODYSPLASTICSYNDROMES/NEOPLASMS-CLASSIFICATION
88
80
FIGURE 9.23 MDS, UNCLAssIFIABLE. G-banded karyotype
demonstrating trisomy 8 and deletion of 9q.
3. Bone marrow hypocellularity
4. Unclassifiable forms
5. Chromosomal aberrations
6. Transformation to acute leukemia.
t-MDS represents one spectrum of a broader syndrome
now designated as therapy-related AML and myelodysplasia
(see Chapter 12). It constitutes about 10-15% of the total
MDS cases. The interval between initiation of therapy and
the onset of MDS varies and depends on the type, dura-
 tion, and dose of the therapeutic agent(s). This period in
most studies ranges from 1 to 8 years, with a mean of 5
years. The topoisomerase II inhibitors may occasionally
cause MDs but more often are associated with de novo
AML without going through dysmyelopoiesis. Prolonged
environmental or occupational exposure to benzene and
 benzene-derivative compounds may also lead to MDS.
PEDIATRIC MDS (FIGURE 9.24)
Myelodysplastic syndromes are rare in children, account-
 ing for approximately 3-5% of all pediatric clonal hema-
tologic disorders. They may also present themselves
differently from the adult forms, particularly the MDS cat-
egories with <5% blasts. The following observations have
 been reported in pediatric patients with MDS:
1. Hematopoietic dysplasia is frequently observed in a variety of
mnditions, such as infection, metabolic disorders, and nutri-
fional deficiencies.
2. Neutropenia  and  thrombocytopenia are more frequently
observed than anemia.
3. The rate of cytogenetic aberrations in low risk MDS is
higher in children (about 65%) than in adults (20-30%).
FIGURE 9.22 MDS, uNcLAssIFIABLE. (A) Bone marrow biopsy section
Monosomy 7 is one of the most frequent findings.
shows presence of dysplastic megakaryocytes with multiple
4. The majority of the cases fall into the MDS/myeloproliferative
separated nuclei (arrows). (B) Bone marrow smear reveals a
categories (see Chapter 10), particularly in patients younger
blast cell (arrow).
than 5 years.
HYPOCELLULAR MDS
Hypocellular MDS accounts for about 5-10% of MDS
cases. It is usually therapy related and is often associated
OTHER TYPES OF MYELODYSPLASTIC SYNDROMES
143
FIGURE 9.24 PeDlATRlc MDs. Bone marrow biopsy section (A, low power, B, high power) is packed and demonstrates myeloid left
shift. Bone marrow smears (C to E) show myeloid left shift with erythroid dysplasia (C, arrows), and micromegakaryocytes (E, arrows).
Peripheral blood smear (F) demonstrates a myeloblast with an Auer rod (black arrow) and a dysplastic nucleated red cell (red arrow).
144
 MYELODYSPLASTIC SYNDROMES/NEOPLASMS—CLASSIFICATION
with more severe pancytopenia. Most investigators con-
sider the diagnosis of hypocellular MDS when bone mar-
changes in these conditions are often reversible upon
row cellularity is ≤25% of the age-matched normal range
elimination of the causative factors, and are not associated
(Figure 9.25). Aplastic bone marrow conditions (such as
with chromosomal aberrations. Representative examples of
aplastic anemia, Fanconi anemia, and paroxysmal noctur-
non-clonal MDS are briefly discussed below.
nal hemoglobinuria) and hypocellular variants of hairy
 cell and acute leukemias are in the list of differential diag-
nosis. Dysplastic hematopoiesis distinguishes hypocellu-
AUTOIMMUNE MYELODYSPLASIA
lar MDs from the bone marrow aplasia group, and blast
Myelodysplasia has been observed in a small proportion of
counts of <20% separate this entity from acute leuke-
 patients with autoimmune disorders. The dysplastic changes
mias. Dysplastic erythroid and myeloid cells are present in
 in these patients are not associated with chromosomal aber-
the blood smears and/or the bone marrow samples, and
 rations, and patients respond positively to immunosuppres-
abnormal megakaryocytes are often identified. Estimation
 sive therapy. These patients are usually pancytopenic, show
 of blast number is facilitated by immunophenotypic
 macrocytic anemia, with a variable marrow cellularity and
studies by using blast-associated markers, such as CD34
dysplastic morphologic changes similar to those of classic
and CD117.
MDS. Bone marrow blasts are under 5%.
MDS WITH FIBROSIS
HIV-ASSOCIATED MYELODYSPLASIA
Approximately 15% of MDS patients may demonstrate ↑
 Myelodysplastic changes observed in HIV-infected patients
a significant increase in bone marrow reticulin fibers may be related to HIV, secondary infections, or medica-
(MDS-F). The incidence of marrow fibrosis is higher in 
 tions. Compared with classical MDS, patients with HIV-
t-MDS. Also, most MDS-F cases fall into the RAEB cat-
 egory. Because of significant fibrosis, bone marrow aspira-
hypocellularity, plasmacytosis, and eosinophilia. In these
tion attempts may fail (dry taps) (Figure 9.26). Evidence of
patients the degree of anemia and erythroid dysplasia is
excess blasts could be demonstrated by immunohistochem-
 less severe, micromegakaryocytes are less frequent, blasts
+ o +t se s Aq ss i
are < 5%, no ring sideroblasts are present, and cytogenetic
cells. MDs-F is often associated with increased megakaryo-
 studies are normal.
cytes, including dysplastic forms. Figure 9.27 demonstrates
monosomy 7 and del(20q) in a patient with MDS-F.
PARANEOPLASTIC MYELODYSPLASIA
Dysplastic changes similar to those of MDS have been
 reported in rare patients with solid tumors, such as carci-
Non-Clonal Myelodysplasia
noma of colon, lung, kidney prostate, and stomach. The
cause of dysplastic changes is not clear but does not appear
 to be drug-related. Production and release of growth fac-
Non-clonal myelodysplastic changes have been observed
 tor-like proteins by the neoplastic cells is among the pos-
in a variety of conditions, such as autoimmunity, infec-
sibilities. Dysplastic changes are observed in both bone
tions, nutritional deficiencies, heavy metal intoxication,
 marrow and peripheral blood samples.
FIGURE 9.25 HypoceLLULAR MDs. Bone marrow biopsy section (A) and bone marrow smear (B).
NON-CLONAL MYELODYSPLASIA
145
and increased reticulin fibers shown by reticulin stain (C). Areas of sclerotic bone, erythroid clusters and megakaryocytic aggregates 
are demonstrated in (D, (E), and (F).
FIGURE 9.27 MDS wITH FIBRoSIs. G-banded
karyotype demonstrating monosomy 7 and
deletionof20q.
福
98
11
146
MYELODYSPLASTIC SYNDROMES/NEOPLASMS—CLASSIFICATION
MYELODYSPLASIA ASSOCIATED WITH HEAVY
 Table 9.4
METAL INTOXICATION OR DEFICIENCY
 Differential Diagnosis of MDS
There are occasional reports of myelodysplastic changes
 Disorder
Characteristics
induced by arsenic and uranium intoxication, or copper
Disorders with Dysplastic Erythropoiesis
deficiency. The dysplastic changes mimic RA or RCMD,
Congenital
Inherited disorders with marked erythroid
and are often associated with anemia or pancytopenia. It
 dyserythropoietic
dysplasia and unremarkable myeloid series
is also interesting to know that arsenic trioxide, which acts
anemias
 and magakaryocytes. Normal karyotypes 
through pro-apoptotic and anti-angiogenesis mechanisms,
 Megaloblastic anemia 
Reduced serum levels of folate or vitamin 
has been used to treat a variety of hematologic malignan-
B12. Nommal karyotype
cies, including RAEB.
 Disorders with ring
Observed in hereditary sideroblastic
sideroblasts
anemia (rare) and patients with pyridoxine
deficiency, zinc or alcohol toxicity, or as post-
MYELODYSPLASIA ASSOCIATED WITH
medication effect in some patients treated 
CHEMOTHERAPY OR IRRADIATION
with chloramphenicol, cycloserine, or anti-
tuberculosis drugs
Myelodysplastic changes in bone marrow are common fea-
Acute
Erythroid lineage accounts for >50% of the
tures of post-chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Bone mar-
erythroleukemia
bone marrow cells, and myeloblasts constitute
row is hypocellular and shows multilineage dysplasia and
≥20% of the non-erythroid component 
myeloid left shift, mimicking hypocellular MDS.
 Hyperplastic Bone Marrows with Myeloid Preponderance
Chronic
Peripheral blood cytosis, splenomegaly, no
myeloproliferative
significant dyserthropoiesis, t(9;22) in CML
disorders
Differential Diagnosis
Transient
A transient neonatal condition in Down
 myeloproliferative
syndrome; usually disappears in 4-6 weeks
disorder
Diagnosis of MDS is based on a multidisciplinary clini-
Acute myeloid
Blasts ≥20%; frequent balanced
copathologic approach. It is accomplished by obtaining
leukemias
chromosomal aberrations
adequate, pertinent clinical and environmental histories,
 Hypoplastic Bone Marrows
careful pathologic review of peripheral blood and bone
marrow, immunophenotyping, cytogenetic analysis, and
Aplastic anemias
 No increased blasts; no significant dysplastic
 changes; mutated genes in FA; mutated 
molecular genetic studies. It should be noted that a broad
 PIG-A gene in PNH with loss of GPI-linked
spectrum of hematologic disorders may mimic MDS,
proteins (CD55, CD59)
and should therefore be considered in the differential
Hypoplastic AML
Blasts ≥20%; frequent balanced
diagnosis (Table 9.4).
chromosomal aberrations
Nonclonal
Observed in viral infections, autoimmune
DISORDERS WITH DYSPLASTIC ERYTHROPOIESIS
myelodysplasia
disorders, paraneoplastic syndromes, heavy
 metal intoxication, and post-chemotherapy
Congenital  dyserythropoietic  anemias  are  hereditary
and -radiation therapy Normal karyotype
disorders with bone marrow erythroid hyperplasia and
marked dyserythropoiesis, such as megaloblastic changes,
Ring sideroblasts are seen in rare cases of hereditary
 and the presence of erythroid precursors with bi- and mul-
sideroblastic anemia, in patients with pyridoxine defi-
tilobular nuclei (see Chapter 6l). Bone marrow morpho-
ciency, zinc or alcohol toxicity, or as post-medication effect
logic features of congenital dyserythropoietic anemias may
in some patients treated with chloramphenicol, cycloser-
ine, or anti-tuberculosis drugs.
etic anemias, ring sideroblasts are usually absent, myeloid
Erythroleukemia shares many morphologic  features
and megakaryocytic lineages are unremarkable, and there
with RAEB and at times a distinction between these two
is no abnormal karyotype.
entities is difficult. However, in erythroleukemia, the ery-
Megaloblastic anemia may share morphologic features,
throid lineage accounts for >50% of the bone marrow
such as erythroid dysplastic and megaloblastic changes,
cells, and myeloblasts make up >20% of the non-erythroid
macrocytosis and neutrophilic hypersegmentation, with
component (see Chapter 21).
MDS. Megaloblastic anemia is characterized by low levels
 of serum folate or vitamin B12 and lack of ring sidero-
blasts. A mild myeloid left shift may be seen in the bone
HYPERPLASTIC BONE MARROWS WITH MYELOID
marrow of some cases of megaloblastic anemia, but in
PREPONDERANCE
such cases the blast cells are usually <5%. Cytogenetic and
molecular studies are normal in megaloblastic anemia (see
Myeloproliferative
 neoplasms (chronic myeloprolif-
Chapter 61).
erative disorders) may share overlapping bone marrow
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
147
findings with some variants of MDS, such as 5q- syn-
(deletions, monosomies, and trisomies), AMLs often show
drome, RCMD, and RAEB-1, either because of the presence
balanced (reciprocal) chromosomal changes, such as trans-
of micromegakaryocytes or myeloid left shift. The accel-
locations or inversions.
erated phase of chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML)
may mimic RAEB-2. However, in myeloproliferative neo-
HYPOPLASTIC BONE MARROWS
plasms, there is peripheral blood cytosis (thrombocytosis,
granulocytosis, erythrocytosis, or pancytosis), often with
Aplastic anemias, both acquired and constitutional forms,
evidence of leukoerythroblastosis (presence of immature
have features overlapping with those of hypocellular MDS.
myeloid and erythroid cells in the blood) and no sig-
Aplastic anemia usually lacks significant dysplasia or evi-
nificant dysplastic changes. Splenomegaly is a frequent
dence of increased blasts, but may occasionally show
clinical presentation in myeloproliferative disorders but 
chromosomal aberrations. Most of the acquired aplastic
rare in MDS.
anemias with cytogenetic abnormalities probably repre-
Transient 
myeloproliferative   disorder  associated
sent hypocellular MDS. Fanconi anemia is associated with
with Down syndrome is a neonatal condition which may
 FA complementary gene groups, and PNH shows evidence
 mimic RAEB or AML with increased blasts in bone marrow
of mutations of the PIG-A gene and loss of the expression
and the presence of blasts in peripheral blood. This condi-
of GPI-linked proteins, such as CD55 and CD59 on the
tion is transient and usually disappears within 4-6 weeks
hematopoietic cells (see Chapter 7).
(see Chapter 22)
Hypocellular AML shares many morphologic features
Acute myeloid leukemias with relatively low blast 
with hypocellular MDS except for the higher percent-
counts (20-25%) are at times difficult to distinguish from 
 age (>20%) of blast cells. Multilineage dysplasia is com-
RAEB-2, particularly when the blasts are dysplastic and do
 monly found in hypocellular MDs, but it may be present
not fall into the classical morphologic criteria defined for 
 or absent in hypocellular AML. Both lesions show frequent
normal blasts. Another challenge in estimating percent
 Cytogenetic abnormalities; AML often with balanced chro-
blasts in inadequate bone marrow aspirate smears (dry
mosomal changes and MDS with unbalanced chromo-
tap) due to fibrosis. In such cases, immunohistochemi-
 somal aberrations.
cal stains for CD34 and CD117 may help to estimate the
proportion of myeloblasts in the biopsy sections. For the
NON-CLONAL MYELODYSPLASIA
determination of percent blasts, the WHO recommends
500 and 200 differential counts for the bone marrow and
Non-clonal myelodysplastic changes are associated with
blood smears, respectively. Also, disorders with evidence of
 conditions such as viral infections, autoimmune disor-
recurrent or known AML-associated cytogenetic abnormal-  ders, paraneoplastic syndromes, heavy metal intoxication,
ities, such as t(8;21) and inv (16), should be considered as  and post-chemotherapy and -radiation therapy. Dysplastic
AML even if the blast count is < 20%. Both MDS and AML changes may be very similar to those of MDS. The clinical
show frequent cytogenetic abnormalities. Whereas in MDs history and lack of chromosomal aberrations help to dis-
 most aberrations are unbalanced chromosomal changes  tinguish this broad entity from MDS.
148
MYELODYSPLASTIC SYNDROMES/NEOPLASMS—CLASSIFICATION
Additional Resourses
Abel GA, Van Bennekom CM, Stone RM, et al: Classification of the
neutropenia and refractory thrombocytopenia, Leuk Lymphoma
51:1923-1926, 2010.
nosed patients, Leuk Res 34:939-941, 2010.
 Niemeyer CM, Kratz CP, Hasle H: Pediatric myelodysplastic syn-
 Boruchov AM: Thrombocytopenia in myelodysplastic syndromes and 
dromes, Curr Treat Options Oncol 6:209-214, 2005.
myelofibrosis, Semin Hematol 46(1 Suppl 2):S37-S43, 2009.
Polychronopoulou S, Panagiotou JP, Kossiva L, et al: Clinical and
Boultwood J, Pellagatti A, McKenzie AN, et al: Advances in the 5q-
morphological features of paediatric myelodysplastic syndromes: A
syndrome, Blood 116:5803-5811, 2010.
review of 34 cases, Acta Paediatr 93:1015-1023, 2004.
Garcia-Manero G:
：Prognosis of
myelodysplastic
syndromes,
Steensma DP, Hanson CA, Letendre L, et al: Myelodysplasia with
Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program:330-337, 2010.
fbrosis: A distinct entity?, Leuk Res 25:829-838, 2001.
Giagounidis AA, Aul C: The 5q- syndrome, Cancer T
Treat Res
Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, et al: WHO dassification of
142:133-148, 2008.
tumours of haematopoietic and lymphoid tissues, ed 4, Intermational
Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Vardiman JW, et al: Hematopathology.
Agency for Research on Cancer Lyon, 2008.
Philadelphia, 2010, Saunders/Elsevier.
Valent P. Orazi A, Busche G, et al: Standards and impact of
Komrokji RS. Zhang L, Bennett JM: Myelodysplastic syndromes
hematopathology in myelodysplastic syndromes (MDs), Oncotarget
dassification and risk stratification, Hematol Oncol Clin North Am
1:483-496, 2010.
24:443-457, 2010.
Yin CC, Medeiros LJ, Bueso-Ramos CE: Recent advances in the diag-
Marinier DE, Mesa H, Rawal A, Gupta P: Refractory cytopenias
nosis and cassifcation of myeloid neoplasms—comments on the
with unilineage dysplasia: A retrospective analysis of refractory
2008 WHO dassification, Int J Lab Hematol 32:461-476, 2010.
Myeloproliferative
Neoplasms--Overview
myeloproliferative disorders, CMPD) are a group of hema-
4. Essential thrombocythemia (ET)
tologic disorders distinguished by clonal expansion of
5. Mastocytosis
abnormal hematopoietic stem cells leading to a hypercel-
6. Chronic neutrophilic leukemia (CNL)
lular marrow with excessive terminal proliferation of the
7. Chronic
eosinophilic leukemia (CEL). not otherwise
specified
hematopoietic cells and peripheral blood granulocytosis,
8. Chronic myeloproliferative neoplasm, unclassifiable (CMPD-UI)
erythrocytosis, and/or thrombocytosis. This hyperprolifera-
tive process, in certain conditions, is associated with bone
marrow fibrosis and extramedullary hematopoiesis. The
extramedullary hematopoiesis along with excess seques-
tration of the hematopoietic cells in the spleen often leads
Morphology
to massive splenomegaly, one of the clinical hallmarks of
MPN. Hepatomegaly, though less frequent, may also be
Morphologic features shared by various types of MPN are
present.
briefly discussed below (Figures 10.1 and 10.2):
 The exact mechanisms of the myeloid proliferation in
these disorders are not well understood. The hypersensitiv-
ity of the affected stem cells to certain growth factors and/
or defective negative regulatory feedback mechanisms may
BONE MARROW
play a role. However, recent investigations suggest abnor-
● Hypercellular bone marrow with mono- or multilineage
malities in tyrosine kinase genes as the central core to the
hyperplasia, predominance of mature cells, and no significant
pathogenesis of myeloproliferative neoplasms. The classi-
 dyserythropoiesis or dysgranulopoiesis.
cal example of tyrosine kinase involvement in MPN is the
● Megakaryocytosis. often presenf in clusters with abnormal
fusion of ABL1 and BCR genes brought about by a recip-
morphology.
rocal chromosomal   translocation—t(9;22)(q34;q11.2),
 Dilated sinuses containing clusters of hematopoietic cells.
resulting in a smaller chromosome 22, the Philadelphia
 Frequent focal or diffuse marrow fibrosis.
chromosome (Ph')—in chronic myelogenous leukemia.
Frequent osteosclerosis.
● Frequent basophilia and/or eosinophilia.
Several tyrosine kinase genes, other than ABL1, have been
identified, such as ABL2, PDGFRA, PDGFRB, FGFR1, and
JAK2. Fusion of the PDGFRA, PDGFRB, and FGFRI genes
and an activating V617F mutation in the JAK2 gene have
BLOOD
been reported in a significant proportion of non-CML
myeloproliferative cases.
Granulocytosis, erythrocytosis, and/or thrombocytosis, often
with a leukoerythroblastic picture.
The WHO classification (Swerdlow et al., 2008) includes
the following categories in this group:
 Tear-drop-shaped erythrocytes.
Giant platelets.
1. Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML)
● Frequent basophilia and/or eosinophilia.
2. Primary myelofibrosis (with extramedullary hematopoiesis)
● Lack of significant dysgranulopoiesis.
(PMF)
●  Lack of toxic granulation in neutrophils.
Atlas of Hematopathology. DO1:http/dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00010-3
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
150
MYELOPROLIFERATIVE NEOPLASMS—OVERVIEW
FIGURE 10.1 Myeloproliferative neoplasms share many
morphologic features, such as bone marrow hypercellularity with
increased megakaryocytes (A), basophilia (B), and the presence of
FIGURE 10.2 Myeloproliferative neoplasms share many
giant platelets (C, arrow).
morphologic features, such as dilated sinuses containing 
dusters of hematopoietic cells (A), marrow fibrosis (B), and
leukoerythroblastosis (C).
CYTOGENETICS
151
but not always, mutually exclusive and therefore are frequently
Immunophenotype
used to distinguish benign from malignant processes.
Fusion of the BCR gene on chromosome 22 with the ABL
Immunophenotypic studies are of limited value, but are
oncogene on chromosome 9, which is the molecular coun-
sometimes helpful in monitoring of MPN patients in the
terpart of the microscopically visible Philadelphia chromo-
following areas:
some, is present in some form in all cases of CML, and is
essentially pathognomonic. It should not be present in other
 Blast enumeration and lineage assignment;
myeloproliferations.
●
 Identification of abnormal blasts with various aberrancies
 The fusion gene can be detected at extremely low levels by
including expression of cross-lineage markers;
real-time (quantitative) PCR, the technique used for monitor-
Detection of dysmaturation patterns of myeloid cells, similar
ing relapse in patients on anti-tyrosine kinase therapies.
to those seen in MDS.
 The test requires cellular RNA (not DNA) as starting material,
which means that specimens must be transported to the labo-
ratory without delay, owing to the lability of RNA.
 The non-malignant MPN are characterized by mutations in
Molecular Studies
the JAK2 kinase gene which, like the BCR-ABL1 fusion, confer
upon it heightened upregulation.
The two hallmark genetic alterations in myeloproliferative dis-
The predominant mutation, by far is V617F; a few other muta-
tions have been described in the gene but they are so infre-
orders are the BCR-ABL1 fusion gene (Figure 10.4) and muta-
quent that most laboratories do not routinely test for them.
  s a (e a    s
电
The mutation can be detected by a variety of allele-spe-
cific PCR and probe hybridization techniques, or by DNA
sequencing.
 The JAK2 mutation is most prevalent in PV (>90%). progres-
sively less so in ET (50%). PMF (50%), CMML, and CNL.
A small minority of these lesions will show mutations in the
600
MPL gene.
3500
20
Cytogenetics
 The spectrum of cytogenetic aberrations in MPN is heteroge-
6300
neous, ranging from numerical gains and losses to structural
150
changes including unbalanced translocations (Table 10.1).
2700
800
FIGURE 10.3 Detection of the JAK2 mutation by allele-specific
PCR followed by capillary electrophoresis of the amplification
products. A negative control sample (top) yields only the normal
PCR product peak, whereas a positive sample (bottom) yields
Table 10.1
both the mutant PCR product (arrow) and the internal control
Chromosomal Aberrations in Myeloproliferative
normal gene product.
Neoplasms (MPN)
Chromosome
Frequency
abnormality
(%)
Prognosis
Trisomy 1q
8
4q12 deletion (CHIC2)
 Response to imatinib
 5q32 aberrations (PDGF8)
 Response to imatinib
2
Monosomy 7
5
Trisomy 8
16
Good prognosis
2
 8p11 rearrangements (FGFR1)
 Poor prognosis
Trisomy 9
10
Unclear
1G1R2yellow
 12p aberrations
3
13q deletion
7
 Unclearto good if
9
22
 sole aberration
 20q deletion
9
poo5
FIGURE 10.4 BCR-ABL 1 fusion in CML demonstrated by FISH.
152
Table 10.2
Incidence of Chromosomal Abnormalities in Subtypes
 of Myeloproliferative Neoplasms (MPN)
Subtype
Frequency (%)
CML
95
PV
W
40
7-12
<3
11
 CIMF, chronic idiopathic myelofibrosis; CML, chronic myelogenous 
leukemia; ET, essential thrombocythemia; CEL, chronic eosinophilic
leukemia; PV, polycythemia vera.
 FIGURE 10.6 Karyotype with 13q deletion (arrow).
美鑫
8
10
11
12
14
15
16
17
18
88
8
19
20
21
Y
 FIGURE 10.5 Karyotype with 20q deletion (arrow).
RK
路品
18
17
88
88
● Chromosomal gains and losses rather than balanced translo-
21
FIGURE 10.7 Karyotype with 12p deletion (arrow).
cations appear to be common in MPN. Standard karyotyping 
along with a panel of FISH probes is important in establish-
ing the diagnosis and may provide very useful information for
disease outcome.
● Cytogenetic abnormalities in myeloproliferative neoplasms
other than CML occur at different frequencies ranging from
3% to 40%. depending on the subtype (Table 10.2). Compared 
with CML, the other MPN subtypes are more clinically and
cytogenetically heterogeneous. In fact, at least 27 different chro-
mosomal anomalies have been associated with MPN. LInlike
the "Philadelphia chromosome" in CML, there is no pathogno-
 monic chromosomal abnormality associated with the MPN.
● Chromosomal anomalies are found most frequently in PMF
 ia u saeoue saaum Ad q pamoog (os on dn)
12
CEL are so infrequent that cytogenetics can be omitted when
the diagnosis is clear.
98
88
● The most common chromosomal anomalies reported in MPN
14
15
16
17
8
()p (s'o1 am8) (e1b1b)(oz)p (zb:eb)(zz:6) ae
(id)(zi)p pue (eebeib)(s)p (9ol ama) (tibzib)
a) s + A go ssol (s'ot am) (bt)dnp (zrot amai)
88
10.9): +9 (Figure 10.10): and monosomy 7 (Figures 10.3 to
20
10.7). Only the t(9;22) or its variants is diagnostic of CML
(Figure 10.11). Relatively strong associations are observed for
FIGURE 10.8 Karyotype showing a tandem duplication of 1q
the del(13) in PMF and the del(20), +8, and +9 in PV.
(arrow).
CYTOGENETICS
153
251
33
11
2
13
15
16
17
88
19
20
21
22
A
B
11
3
82
HR
7A
FIGURE 10.11 Karyotype from a patient with CML demonstrating
FIGURE 10.10 Karyotype showing trisomy 9 (arrow).
three way translocation: t(2;9;22) (arrows).
154MYELOPROLIFERATIVENEOPLASMS-OVERVIEW
Additional Resources
Burke BA, Carroll M: BCR-ABL: a multi-faceted promoter of DNA
 Patnaik MM, Tefferi A: Molecular diagnosis of myeloproliferative
mutation in chronic myelogeneous leukemia, Leukemia 24:ll05-
neoplasms, Expert Rev Mol Diagn 9:481-492, 2009.
1112, 2010.
Rice KN, Jamieson CH: Molecular pathways to CML stem cells, Int J
Chen AT, Prchal JT: JAK2 kinase inhibitors and myeloproliferative
Hematol 9l:748-752, 2010.
disorders, Curr Opin Hematol 17: 110-116, 2010.
Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, et al: WHO dassification of
Foroni L, Gerrard G, Nna E, et al: Technical aspects and clinical
 tumours of haematopoietic and lymphoid tissues, ed 4, International
Agency for Research on Cancer, 2008, Lyon.
myeloid leukemia, Am J Hematol 84:517-522, 2009.
 Tefferi A, Skoda R, Vardiman JW: Myeloproliferative neoplasms: con-
Kantarjian H, Schiffer C, Jones D, Cortes J: Monitoring the response 
temporary diagnosis using histology and genetics, Nat Rev Clin Oncol
and course of chronic myeloid leukemia in the modern era of BCR-
6:627-637, 2009.
ABL tyrosine kinase inhibitors: practical advice on the use and inter-
Wadleigh M, Tefferi A: Classification and diagnosis of myeloprolifera-
pretation of monitoring methods, Blood 1ll:1774-1780, 2008.
tive neoplasms according to the 2008 World Health Organization cri-
Klco IM, Vij R, Kreisel FH, et al: Molecular pathology of myeloprolif-
teria, Int J Hematol 91:174-179, 2010.
erative neoplasms, Am J Clin Pathol 133:602-615, 2010.
Wadleigh M, Tefferi A: Classification and diagnosis of myeloprolifera-
tive neoplasms according to the 2008 World Health Organization cri-
 Kvasnicka HM, Thiele I: Prodromal myeloproliferative neoplasms:
teria, Int J Hematol 9l:174-179, 2010.
the 2008 WHO classification, Am J Hematol 85:62-69, 2010.
Oh ST, Gotlib J: JAK2 V617F and beyond: role of genetics and aber-
'sseidoau aaeiayoidoiaau jo sisauasoyied aul ul sueuiis ju
Expert Rev Hematol 3:323-337, 2010.
Chronic Myelogenous
Leukemia
hronic myelogenous leukemia (CML), also referred Splenomegaly is observed in 50-75% of patients.
to as chronic myeloid, chronic myelocytic, or chronic  Occasionally, the disease presents at the blast phase with-
granulocytic leukemia, was the first malignant disorder 
out prior clinical manifestation of the chronic phase.
reported in association with a chromosomal aberration,
 The diagnosis is established by the demonstration of
the Philadelphia chromosome (Ph'). CML has been at the
t(9;22)(q34;q11.2) (Ph') and/or BCR-ABL1  fusion.
forefront in the understanding of molecular mechanisms
 Transformation into accelerated or blast phase is usually
in  hematopoietic malignancies  and  targeted  treatment
 associated with marked splenomegaly, severe anemia, and/
approaches. It is characterized by clonal expansion of bone
 or marked thrombocytopenia.
marrow stem cells leading to selective granulocytic hyper-
Molecular targeted therapy is now the recommended
plasia with or without thrombocytosis.  Phl is a micro-
 therapeutic approach for CML. The most exciting break-
scopically visible short 22q resulting from an asymmetrical
 through in the treatment of CML has been the devel-
reciprocal  t(9;22)(q34;q11.2)  chromosomal  transloca-
 opment of imatinib mesylate (IM) or Gleevec? as an
tion. CML demonstrates an evolutionary process passing
oral therapeutic agent. IM binds to a cleft between the
through chronic, accelerated, and acute (blast transforma-
 N-terminal adenosine triphosphate binding domain and
tion) phases.
the C-terminal activation loop that forms the catalytic site
The t(9;22)(q34;q11.2) translocation creates a BCR-
 of the Abl tyrosine kinase, locking the protein into the
ABL1 fusion gene with three different principal protein
inactive conformation.
products, based on the sites of the breakpoints on chro
mosome 22. All three BCR-ABL1 protein products (p190
p2l0, and p230) demonstrate increased tyrosine kinase
activity which is not detected in normal hematopoietic
Morphology and Laboratory
cells. The effects of BCR-ABLl protein products include the
following.
Findings
1. Insensifivity of Ph' positive hematopoietic progenitor cells to
 growth-inhibiting regulatory cytokines
●Bone marrow sections are hypercellular with marked myeloid
2. Mitogenic activity of the BCR-ABL1 fusion proteins on hema-
preponderance and mild to moderate myeloid left shiff
topoietic cells
(Figures 11.1 to 11.3). The paratrabecular myeloid regions are
3. Resistance of Ph' positive hematopoietic cultured cell lines to
xpanded with less mature forms next to the bone trabeculae
apoptosis
and more mature forms closer to the center. Eosinophilia is a
4. Decreased adherence of Ph' positive hematopoietic pro-
frequent finding.
genitors to bone marrow stroma and fbronectin, leading to
increased circulation of myeloid cells.
ers. They often show dysplastic changes, including the pres-
CML represents between 15% and 20% of adult leul-
ence of numerous micromegakaryocytes ("dwarf" forms) as
kemias with a median age at diagnosis of about 50 years.
well as many large, bizarre, multilobulated forms.
● Scattered or clusters of pseudo-Gaucher cells or sea blue his-
The only known risk factor is exposure to ionizing radia-
tiocytes with abundant wrinkled cytoplasm are often present
tion. The disease is asymptomatic in over 30% of cases
(Figure 11.2). These cells in Wright's-stained bone marrow
and is only suspected by the elevated WBC counts on
smears may show abundant light blue cytoplasm; hence
routine blood examinations. Frequent clinical symptoms
include fatigue, pallor, night sweats, and weight loss.
fiocytes and pseudo-Gaucher cells are loaded with phagocytic
Atlas of Hematopathology. DOl: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00011-5
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
156
 CHRONIC MYELOGENOUS LEUKEMIA
D
FIGURE 11.1 CHRoNIc MYELoGENous LEukEMIA. Bone marrow biopsy section showing hypercellularity with marked myeloid preponderance
and increased megakaryocytes with numerous small forms (A, low power; B, high power). (C) Immunohistochemical stain for factor Vlll
shows numerous stained micromegakaryocytes. (D) Bone marrow smear demonstrating several micromegakaryocytes (arrow).
particles and cell membrane debris resulting from the
● Absolute basophilia and eosinophilia is common, and there
increased turnover of the bone marrow cells.
may be absolute monocytosis, but the monocytes in differen-
● There may be patchy or diffuse fibrosis along with osteoscle-
tial count are usually below 5%.
fosis. The extent of fbrosis to some degree correlates with the
2· Scattered nucleated red blood cells may be present. Platelet
number of megakaryocytes.
 count is normal or elevated but occasionally reduced during
● Bone marrow smears are highly cellular with an elevated
the chronic phase. Neutrophils and bands show reduced alka-
M:E ratio of usually >10:1. Eosinophils are increased,
line phosphatase activity by cytochemical stains—known as
and basophilia is a frequent feature but is usually <20%.
"leukocyte alkaline phosphatase (LAP) score"
Dysgranulopoiesis may be present but is not prominent. There
● Elevated levels of serum lactic dehydrogenase, uric acid, and
may be mild to moderate myeloid left shift, but myeloblasts
vitamin B12 are also frequently observed.
are usually below 10%.
Splenomegaly is common. The red pulp is diffusely expanded
● Blood smears show marked leukocytosis with a white blood
with infiltration of the cords and sinuses filled with mature
cell count of often >100.000/μL (Figure 11.3). The mor-
and immature myeloid cells (Figure 11.4). The malpighian
phologic findings of the myeloid cells mimic bone marrow
mrpuscles (white pulp) are reduced in size and number or are
with the presence of myeloid left shift and a wide spectrum
mmpletely absent.
of myeloid precursors, including myeloblasts and promy-
 The recent implementation of effective targeted therapy
elocytes. Similar to the bone marrow smears, myeloblasts
in blood smears are usually below 5%. Lsually, myelocytes
in CML, such as treatment with Gleevec?, (imatinib, nilo-
are more numerous than metamyelocytes (myelocyte
tinib) has created a necessity for follow-up bone marrow
bulge).
and molecular studies.
MORPHOLOGY AND LABORATORY FINDINGS
157
FIGURE 11.2 Bone marrow biopsy section showing aggregates 
FIGURE 11.3 Bone marrow smears of patients with CML appear
of pseudo-Gaucher cells (A, low power; B, high power, arrows).
cellular and show marked myeloid preponderance (A), and
Several sea-blue histiocytes are present in the bone marrow 
peripheral blood smears show marked leukocytosis with myeloid
smear (C, arrows and inset).
(B and C); basophils are often present (C).
The evaluation of post-therapy bone marrow samples
1. Frequent presence of non-diagnostic lymphoid aggregates.
shows progressive changes toward normal morphology.
sometimes paratrabecular, consisting of a mixture of B and T
However, the post-therapy bone marrow samples may
lymphocytes
show certain morphologic features such as:
 2. Frequent presence of histiocytic aggregates (pseudo-Gaucher cells)
158
 CHRONIC MYELOGENOUS LEUKEMIA
FIGURE 11.4 Splenomegalyis a frequent clinical finding in CML.
Splenic involvement is usually diffuse.
 Table 11.1
 Evolution of Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia (CML)1
Stage
Characteristics
Chronic
Leukocytosis (often >100,000/μL)
 Phase
Hypercelular marrow with marked myeloid
preponderance
Blasts <10%
Basophilia <20%
Eosinophila
 Megakaryocytosis with the presence of
 micromegakaryocytes
 Splenomegaly
Low LAP score
t(9;22)(q34;q11) and/or
 BCR-ABL 1 fusion by FISH
Accelerated
 Hypercellular marrow with myeloid left shift
FIGURE 11.5 Peripheral blood smear of a patient with CML-AP
 Phase
Blasts 10-19%
showing myeloid left shift with blasts (A and B, black arrows),.
Basophilia ≥20%
 Thrombocytopenia <100,000/μl,orthrombocytosis
basophils (A and B, green arrows), and an eosinophil (B, red arrow).
>1000,000/uL
Increasing WBC count
Increasing spleen size
1. The presence of 10-19% blasts in blood or bone marrow samples
 Additional cytogenetic abnormalities
2. Basophilia of >20%
Blast Phase
Blasts ≥20%
3. Persistent thrombocytopenia of <100,000/μL or thrombocyto-
 Sheets orlarge clusters of blasts in the bone marow biopsy
sis of >1,000,000/μL
Extramedulary tissue infltration by blast cells
 4. Progressive splenomegaly and/or increasing leukocyte count
>100,000/μL
Adapted from Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Stein H, Vardiman JW. Pathology and
Genetics: Tumors of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues. IARC Press,
5. Cytogenetic or molecular evidence of clonal evolution.
Lyon, 2001.
Increased marrow  f
fibrosis, marked megakaryocytosis
with the presence of large clusters or sheets of megakaryo-
 3. Bone marrow hypocellularity, particularly in cases with a long
cytes, and severe dysgranulopoiesis are also suggestive of
history of treatment. The degree of hypocellularity in some
CML-AP. CML-AP is a transient phase between the chronic
instances is so severe that the bone marrow biopsy sections
phase and the blast phase.
resemble aplastic anemia.
BLAST PHASE
ACCELERATED PHASE
Blast Phase (blast crisis, blast transformation) refers to the
Accelerated phase of CML (CML-AP) is often associated
evolution of CML into acute leukemia (CML-BP). Enhanced
with a decline in the patient's clinical condition along with
 proliferation and differentiation arrest, the characteristic fea-
 certain laboratory findings. The diagnosis of CML in accel-
tures of blast transformation in CML, seem to be dependent
erated phase according to the WHO recommendations
upon the cooperation of BCR-ABL1 with the TP53 (17p13)
is based on the presence of one or more of the following
 and RB1 (13q14) genes that appear to be directly or indi-
(Table 11.1) (Figure 11.5)
rectly dysregulated in this process. According to the WHO
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
159
FIGURE 11.6 Bone marrow biopsy section of a patient with a
history of CML showing increased blasts consistent with blast
transformation (A, low power; B, high power).
FIGURE 11.7 Bone marrow smear (A) and blood smear (B) of a
patient with CML in blast transformation showing numerous 
blasts and a few basophils (B).
recommendations, the diagnosis of CML-BP is made when
(Table 11.1) (Figures 11.6 and 11.7):
  ss      s
1. Blasts are >20% of bone marrow nucleated cells or peripheral
marrow fibrosis.
blood differential counts
2. Large foci or clusters of blasts are present in the bone marrow
biopsy sections
3. There is evidence of extramedullary tissue infiltration by blast
Immunophenotype
cells.
Extramedullary CML-BP may involve any tissue, but is fre-
FLOW CYTOMETRY
quently observed in spleen, lymph node, skin, and central
nervous system. Morphologic features are similar to other 
Multiparametric immunophenotyping by flow cytometry
 acute leukemic infiltrations. There is often the presence of
(MIFC) can be useful in diagnosis and monitoring of CML
immature eosinophils (eosinophilic myelocytes) which may
in the following areas:
 provide a hint that blasts are of myeloid lineage.
 Blast enumeration and lineage assignment
The blast cells in over 70% of CML-BP cases are of
[dentification of abnormal blasts with various aberrancies
myeloid (non-lymphoid) origin and express granulocytic,
including expression of cross-lineage markers
 monocytic-, erythroid-, and/or megakaryocytic-associated
Detection of dysmaturation patterns of myeloids, similar to
CD molecules in immunophenotypic studies. In close to
those seen in MDS/MPN
 30% of the CML cases, blast transformation is of lymphoid
Enumeration of basophils. Basophils are located at a
lineage or biphenotypic.
unique position by CD45 gating. which is similar to that of
160
CHRONIC MYELOGENOUSLEUKEMIA
CD56
OD13
CD2
CD22
CD45
CD56
CD13
CD2
CD22
B
FIGURE 11.8 (A AND B) FLow cYToMETRIc FINDINGs OF CML IN AccELERATED PHAsE. The CD45 gating reveals eXCess blasts (R1, 11% of the total)
at an abnormal location. In addition, there is a population of abnormal basophils (R2, 10% of the total) present at near-monocytic
region but with lower side scatter than normal monocytes. The excess and abnormal myeloblasts (the R1 gate, in green) express dim
brighter CD13, brighter CD33, moderate CD45, partial dim CD117, and aberrant partial dim CD7. Those abnormal basophils are also
positive for dim CD22.
particularly when there is no access to flow cytometry or
there is inadequate marrow aspirate (dry tap).
The following markers are frequently used: CD34 (blasts);:
Blasts
CD117 (myeloblasts); TdT (lymphoblasts); CD31, CD61, and
(63%)
factor VIlI for megakaryoblasts; glycophorin A and hemoglo.
bin A for erythroid precursors; myeloperoxidase; lysozyme
 and CD68 for granulocytic and monocytic lineages.
CD45
CD117
CD33
Molecular Studies
Detection of the BCR-ABL1 fusion gene is the hallmark of
CD11b
CD7
CD10
CML in diagnosis, monitoring and targeted therapy. While
 traditionally this has been done by cytogenetic analysis, and
FIGURE 11.9 FLOW CYToMETRIC FINDINGs Of CML IN BLAST PHase.
more recently molecular cytogenetic (FISH) testing, the most
The patient has a 10-year history of CML, presents with a WBC of
sensitive and quantitative approach is by molecular methods.
106,0o0, and is under consideration for a Ponatinib trial. The open
The sensitivity of classical cytogenetics is limited by the
gate display by CD45 gating shows excess blasts (63% of the total)
number of cells cultured to the number of metaphases
present at abnormal location. The density plots of the blast-enriched
counted. Moreover, about 5% of CML cases have t(9;22)
gate demonstrate abnormal myeloblasts expressing M1 1b (subset),
        
D13, CD33, CD34 (two subsets), and CD1 17 (two subsets), plus
cross-lineage aberrancies of dim CD5, dim M7, and partial dim CD19.
microscope and will thus be missed by this approach.
Molecular testing should be able to detect such "cryptic"
translocations and will therefore approach 1oo% sensitiv-
monocytes but with slightly lower side scatter. Basophils
ity for initial diagnosis.
express CD13. CD33. and dim CD22. Immature and
BCR stands for "breakpoint cluster region," reflecting the
abnormal basophils may also express CD117 and/or cross-
fact that the point of breakage at that site can occur over a
lineage aberrancies (Figure 11.8).
fairly broad region. The important rearrangements for clini-
Findings of CML-BP may be indistinguishable from
cal diagnosis are the major breakpoint (M-BCR), which
those of other acute leukemias (Figure 1l.9).
produces the p210 gene product and is found primarily in
CML, and the minor breakpoint (m-BCR) which produces
the p190 gene product and is typical of acute lymphoblas.
IMMUNOHISTOCHEMICAL STAINS
tic leukemia, more commonly seen in adult patients with
Immunohistochemical stains are helpful for the estima-
that disease. However, some overlap is seen in a minority
tion of blast counts and identification of their lineage,
of cases, owing to alternative splicing of RNA transcripts.
CYTOGENETICS
161
 treated patients obtained during periodic monitoring
01
can be used to assess minimal residual disease, relapse,
or development of resistance to the anti-tyrosine kinase
therapies (imatinib and its successors). (Very few treated
0.07-
patients, even if in apparent clinical and cytogenetic remis-
0.06-
sion, actually go down to undetectable BCR-ABL1 levels
with these sensitive assays).
Most relapses are due to either amplification of the
BCR-ABL1 fusion gene or, more commonly, the develop-
ment of point mutations affecting amino acid residues
at the site of binding of the drug or at more distal sites
19
5
causing allosteric effects. A total of about 20 such muta-
tions have been described, which can be detected by DNA
LightCycler Quantification Report
sequencing or microarray hybridization. Since certain
rD2
 mutations render either similar resistance or sensitivity to
 newer-generation drugs targeting the same protein, it will
be increasingly important to accurately genotype these
patients to guide management.
67282
ZLN-AMSOLTNS
28/69.6-1055
Cytogenetics
As described earlier, the Ph' chromosome was the first
recurrent cytogenetic rearrangement found in a hemato-
logic disease. Banding techniques developed during the
FIGURE 11.10 Data obtained from real-time PCR analysis of a
1970s allowed for the identification of the Ph' chromo-
series of patients with suspected, diagnosed, or treated CML
using the LightCycler instrument (Roche Molecular Diagnosties,
some as being derived from a translocation between chro-
Indianapolis, IN). (A) Amplification curves produced from
mosomes 9 and 22, t(9;22)(q34;q11.2) (Figure 11.11).
extracted cellular mRNA that was first reverse transcribed to
 The translocation was subsequently described as result-
ing in the fusion of the ABL1 proto-oncogene (a homo-
enter log phase at lower PCR cycle number had higher amounts
log of the Abelson murine leukemia virus oncogene) on
of starting BCR-ABL fusion mRNA. (B) Quantitative readout of data
from the LightCycler; specimens that are BCR-ABL negative show
chromosome 9q34 with a gene called BCR on chromo-
 indano moys op ingi iahet siyn woy inpod uoesydwe ou
some 22q1l.2. The ABL1 gene encodes a tyrosine kinase
from the control GAPDH gene target), whereas those specimens
 that phosphorylates several proteins involved in signaling
that are BCR-ABL positive show amplifcation products from
both genes. Quantitation of the BCR-ABL fusion gene is done
for cell proliferation, and the BCR gene encodes a 160 kDa
mathematically by comparing its amplifcation to that of the
phosphoprotein with kinase activity.
GAPDH control gene.
FISH or molecular techniques can be used to estab-
lish diagnosis in cases where the t(9;22) cannot be iden-
tified by standard karyotyping. CML-BP is often predicted
Most laboratories use a real-time PCR system that is
75-80% of patients develop additional chromosome aber-
both highly sensitive and highly quantitative for the BCR-
rations as the disease progresses.
ABL target (Figure 11.10). It is also capable, depending
Approximately 90-95% of patients present with the
upon how the primer pairs are chosen, of differentiating
t(9;22), whereas the remaining 5-10% of patients have
between the M-BCR and m-BCR forms, which can be of
 Cryptic or complex rearrangements but all of these cases
 great importance in the differential diagnosis (in a newly
eventually have evidence of BCR-ABL1 gene fusion. Variant
ascertained patient) of acute leukemia versus the blast cri-
translocations with deletions at the involved breakpoints
sis phase of CML.
signify a poorer prognosis, albeit controversial, than the
The breakpoint region on chromosome 22 spans such
more common t(9;22) (Figure 11.12).
a large area that it cannot be efficiently amplified from a
Abnormalities of chromosomes 8, 17, 19, and 22 are
  s  ss 'i i N 
most often observed in disease evolution (major route).
isolated to serve as the template; since it has had the large
These account for 7o% of patients with evolving disease.
intronic regions spliced out, it is of an amplifiable size.
Trisomy 8, isochromosome 17, trisomy 19, or an extra Ph1
The real-time PCR method is sensitive down to a level
chromosome (derivative chromosome 22), singly or in
of 1 CML cell in 1 million normal cells. It is also highly
 combinations are the most frequently observed secondary
quantitative, so that trends (upward or downward) in 
changes in blast crisis (Figure 11.13). The remaining 30%
162
CHRONIC MYELOGENOUS LEUKEMIA
FIGURE 11.11 (A) G-banded karyotype with
a classic t(9;22) showing the "Philadelphia"
chromosome. (B) Anideogram of
chromosomes 9 and 22 showing the FISH
probes for the ABL 1 and BCR loci. The FISH
panel shows cells with red ABL 1; green BCR,
 and yellow (fusion) signals.
11
12
3
36
14
16
17
i
20
21
22
1G1R2yellow
22
oib
S
12
B
8
88
13
15
10
18
2G2R
88
88
A
179
20
21
22
1G1R1YelloW
FIGURE 11.12 (A) G-banded karyotype showing a complex t(9;22;8) translocation with the " Ph?" chromosome. (B) Interphase FISH
analyses on these cells show one fusion signal (yellow) whereas the second fusion signal got rearranged on 9q and 8q subsequent 
to the initial 9;22 translocation. (C) Cells with a normal signal pattern (2 red, 2 green) and a cell with a deletion of the reciprocal 22:9
fusion signal (1 red, 1 green, 1 yellow).
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
163
城
13
14
17
18
88
88
en
20
21
22
B
FIGURE 11.13 (A) G-banded karyotype of CML-BP, with an extra Ph? chromosome, Trisomy 8, and isochromosome 17q. (B) FISH
shows three fusion signals (yellow) representing the additional Ph? chromosome. (C) Gains of additional "Ph? " chromosome during
development of imatinib resistance.
of patients with evolving disease develop various second-
response (CCyR) because there is almost no disease pro-
ary aberrations that may include trisomy 2l, loss of the Y,
 gression in patients in CCyR after 2-3 years of treatment.
monosomy 7 or 17, rearrangements of 3q, or others. Genes
Thus it is important that accurate and sensitive measure-
known to have roles in transformation include TP53, RB1,
ment  of  minimal residual disease be  established that
CDKN2A, INK4α, MINK, AML1, and EVI1, although their
could help to identify patients in early relapse, allowing
role in transformation is currently unknown.
changes in therapy that may decrease the rate of disease
In a minority (20%) of patients with CML, there are
 progression. It is recommended that a CCyR be confirmed
large deletions within the der(9q) with conflicting data
by bone marrow cytogenetics before relying exclusively
regarding the prognostic implications. The size of the dele-
 on molecular monitoring. Some practices follow patients
tion on 9q along with the reciprocal ABL1-BCR fusion
 serially with peripheral blood FISH analyses, doing a mar-
region is variable and the segmental loss houses not only
row when the FISH becomes negative. Thereafter, patients
the ABL1-BCR fusion, but also two micro-RNAs (miR-
are followed every 3-4 months with peripheral blood
219-2 and miR-199b). The identification of these miRNAs
Q-PCR.
presents an exciting possibility in that their loss from the
 chromosomal deletions could lead to increased target gene
expression, promoting CML proliferation and conferring a
poor prognosis.
Differential Diagnosis
 Monitoring, by molecular methods, of response is a crit-
ical feature of the management of CML, and international
consensus guidelines have been developed suggesting
The differential diagnosis includes leukemoid reactions
 therapeutic end points that should be achieved after spe-
- Ad s  N jo ss sao 
cific durations of therapy. It is generally accepted that, at
 sis, essential thrombocythemia, and chronic neutrophilic
a minimum, patients should attain a complete cytogenetic
leukemias.
164
CHRONICMYELOGENOUSLEUKEMIA
Leukemoid reaction refers to leukocytosis in excess of
Major clinicopathologic differences between MN sub-
50,0o0/μL with a left shift, caused by conditions other
types are presented in the next chapter, Table 12.2.
than a leukemic process (Figure 11.14). The major distin-
 guishing features between CML and leukemoid reaction
 are summarized in Table 11.2.
A
FIGURE 11.14 Leukemoid reaction. (A) Peripheral blood smear showing neutrophilia with (inset) toxic granulation. (B) Bone marrow
smear demonstrating myeloid preponderance. A neutrophil strongly positive for LAP is demonstrated in the inset.
 Table 11.2
Comparison of Pathologic Findings in CML and Leukemoid Reaction
CML
Leukemoid Reaction
 Peripheral Blood 
WBC
Usually >100,000/μL
Usually <50,000/μL
Granulocytes
 All stages of maturation
Almost all mature 
LAP score
Reduced
Elevated
Bone Marrow
M:E ratio
>10:1
<10:1
 Pseudo-Gaucher cells 
Frequent 
Less frequent
 Paratrabecular fat
Less frequent
Frequent
 Mast cells
Less frequent 
Frequent
Splenomegaly
 Marked
Variable
Cytogenetic/DNA
t(9;22)
 Present
Absent
 Ph' positive BCR-ABL I rearangement
 Present 
Absent
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
165
Additional Resources
An X, Tiwari AK, Sun Y, et al: BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase inhibitors in
 La Rosée P, Deininger MW: Resistance to imatinib: mutations and
the treatment of Philadelphia chromosome positive chronic myeloid 
beyond,Semin Hematol47:335-343,2010.
leukemia: a review, Leuk Res 34:1255-1268, 2010.
Perrotti D, Jamieson C, Goldman J. Skorski T: Chronic myeloid leu-
Bixby D, Talpaz M: Seeking the causes and solutions to imatinib-
kemia: mechanisms of blastic transformation, J Clin Invest 120:2254-
resistance in chronic myeloid leukemia, Leukemia 25:7-22, 2011.
2264, 2010.
Breccia M, Efficace F, Alimena G: Imatinib treatment in chronic
Rice KN, Jamieson CH: Molecular pathways to CML stem cells, Int I
myelogenous leukemia: what have we learned so far? Cancer Lett
Hematol 91:748-752, 2010.
300:115-121, 2011.
 Shah NP: Advanced CML: therapeutic options for patients in acceler-
Goldman JM: Chronic myeloid leukemia: a historical perspective,
ated and blast phases, I Natl Compr Canc Netw (Suppl 2) :S3l-S36,
Semin Hematol 47:302-31l, 2010.
2008.
Hochhaus A, Weisser A, La Rosee P, et al: Detection and quantifica-
 Sullivan C, Peng C, Chen Y, Li D, Li S: Targeted therapy of chronic
tion of residual disease in chronic myelogenous leukemia, Leukemia
myeloid leukemia, Biochem Pharmacol 80:584-591, 2010.
14:998-1005, 2000.
Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, et al: WHO classification of
Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Vardiman JW. et al: Hematopathology.
tumours of haematopoietic and lymphoid tissues, ed 4, Lyon, 2008.
Philadelphia, 2010, Saunders/Elsevier.
 International Agency for Research on Cancer.
Karbasian Esfahani M, Morris EL, Dutcher JP, et al: Blastic phase of
Valent P: Standard treatment of Ph+ CML in 20l0: how, when and
chronic myelogenous leukemia, Curr Treat Options Oncol 7:189-199,
where not to use what BCR/ABLl kinase inhibitor? Eur J Clin Invest
2006.
40:918-931, 2010.
This page intentionally left blank
Myeloproliferative
Neoplasms Associated
with JAK2 Mutation
 2. Minor criteria:
myeloproliferative neoplasms—polycythemia  vera (PV),
a. Hypercellular bone marrow for age with panmyelosis and
primary myelofibrosis (PMF), and essential thrombocy-
eythroid preponderance
themia (ET)—are strongly associated with JAK2 V617F
b. Senum erythropoietin below normal reference range
mutation, suggesting a common pathogenetic pathway
c. Evidence of in vitro endogenous (erythropoietin-independent)
for these disorders (Figure 12.1). The close relationship
erythroid colony formation.
between these three entities was first suggested by William
Diagnosis is established by the presence of both major cri-
Dameshek in 195l, who considered PV, PMF, and ET to be 
teria and one minor criterion, or the presence of the first
phenotypically related. He noted significant overlapping 
 major criterion with two minor criteria.
features between them. For example, patients with PV fre-
 One of the interesting current hypotheses in the patho-
quently show evidence of panmyelosis, and often develop
 genesis of PV is the presence of a defect in transcrip-
bone marrow fibrosis, leukoerythroblastosis, and progres-
tion regulation that affects cytokine receptor signaling. It
sive splenomegaly. Also, a small proportion of patients
shas been shown that the JAK2 gene plays an important
with ET may eventually develop bone marrow fibrosis with
 role in the EOP-EPO receptor signaling in erythropoie-
myeloid metaplasia.
sis. A unique clonal mutation in the JAK2 gene has been
reported, resulting in a valine to phenylalanine substitu-
tion at position 617, in 65-97% of PV patients.
V is more frequent in men than in women (about 2:1)
Polycythemia Vera
with a peak incidence around 70-80 years of age. Most
common complaints are non-specific and include head-
ache, weakness, and dizziness. Approximately 5-20% of
 Polycythemia vera (PV) is characterized by erythrocytosis
 the patients may complain of arthritis. Itching (particularly
or increased red blood cell mass with clinical symptoms
after a warm bath) and erythromelalgia (erythroderma
of hyperviscosity, increased risk of thrombosis, and vary-
with burning pain of extremities) are amongst the com-
ing degrees of thrombocytosis, leukocytosis, and spleno-
mon clinical presentations. The survival time for treated
 megaly. PV, similar to other myeloproliferative neoplasms,
patients usually exceeds 10 years. The major causes of
is the result of clonal expansion of a pluripotent stem cell
death are thrombosis, transformation to MDS or AML, sec-
with the involvement of the myeloid lineages and a vari-
 ondary non-hematologic malignancies, and hemorrhage.
able proportion of B lymphocytes. However, most T and
 Thrombosis is either venous or arterial and appears to
NK cells seem to be unaffected. The diagnosis of PV is
 be primarily related to the patient's blood hyperviscosity.
established by complex clinical, laboratory, and morpho-
Transformation to MDS or AML in most instances is related
logic features. The WHO (2008) recommended criteria for 
to chemotherapy. In one report the incidence of AML in PV
the diagnosis of PV are as follows.
patients was 1.5%, 10%, and 13% for phlebotomy, 32P, and
1. Major criteria:
a    
a. Elevated RBC mass >25% above normal range. of Hb
of patients may develop a secondary malignancy (carci-
>18.5 g/dL in men and >16.5 g/dL in women
noma, non-Hodgkin lymphoma). The current therapeutic
b. Presence of JAK2 V617F or other functionally similar muta-
 modalities include phlebotomy, IFN-α, anagrelide (a quin-
fions, such as JAK2 exon 12 mutation.
azolone derivative), and allopurinol
Atlas of Hematopathology. DOl: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00012-7
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
168
 MYELOPROLIFERATIVE NEOPLASMS ASSOCIATED WITH JAK2 MUTATION
HSC
ET
FIGURE 12.1 JAK2 mutation in myeloproliferative neoplasms.
HSC, hematopoietic stem cell; PV, polycythemia vera; ET, essential
thrombocythemia; and MF, primary myelofibrosis.
MORPHOLOGY AND LABORATORY FINDINGS
 Two distinct clinicopathologic phases have been described
polycythemic phase describes the earlier active phase of
the disease when the bone marrow shows panmyelosis
 and the blood displays erythrocytosis, sometimes in asso-
ciation with thrombocytosis and/or leukocytosis. The
spent phase refers to the later stage of the disease when
bone marrow is fibrotic or hypocellular, and there is evi-
 dence of extramedullary hematopoiesis, progressive sple-
nomegaly, and anemia. In addition, a transitional phase has
been described, referring to a process between these two
phases characterized by erythrocytosis and bone marrow
fibrosis. The morphologic features of the polycythemic and
spent phases are described below.
Polycythemic Phase (Figure 12.2)
● Bone marrow is hypercellular and shows panmyelosis.
Usually, there is marked erythroid preponderance and normo-
blastic erythropoiesis.
● Megakaryocytes are abundant and pleomorphic, and have a
tendency to appear in clusters and/or next to bone trabeculae.
 At this phase, in the majority of PV cases, the bone marrow
biopsies show no increase in reticulin fibers, though variable
degrees of fibrosis are present in about 30% of cases.
 No significant dysplastic changes are noted in the granulocytic
series and there is no evidence of increased myeloblasts. Basophilia
is a common fea ture, and eosinophilia is not infrequent
 Stainable iron is reduced or absent in the vast majority of cases.
FIGURE 12.2 Bone marrow biopsy section (top) and smear
● Peripheral blood shows increased red cell mass and elevated
(bottom) from a patient with PV demonstrating erythroid
hemoglobin levels (Hb >18.5g/dL in men and >16.5g/dL in
preponderance. The figure in the middle depicts hemoglobin A
by immunohistochemical stains. The inset shows a deeply stained 
women). Erythrocytes are usually normochromic and normo-
cytic, but sometimes are hypochromic and microcytic. The
polychromatophilic erythrocyte.
 presence of deeply basophilic reticulocytes has been described.
 Serum erythropoietin is below normal reference range, the
activity of red cell glycolytic enzymes is elevated, and the pro-
Spent Phase
portion of fetal hemoglobin is increased.
Spent phase is the late stage of PV. It is characterized by
 Often, there is evidence of leukocytosis and basophilia with
(Figure 12.3):
thrombocytosis and presence of giant, hypogranular platelets.
There may be mild myeloid left shift but blasts are not usually
● Normalization of erythrocytosis and then progression to
found.
anemia
● The LAP score is often elevated.
●Progressive splenomegaly
POLYCYTHEMIAVERA
169
MOLECULAR STUDIES
● A specific molecular marker for a number of MPD is a point
mutation in the JAK2 gene, V617F.
It is most frequently seen in PV, where some series find it in
>90% of affected patients.
 Testing for the mutation can be of help in the diagnosis of PV.
and in its differential diagnosis from other disorders such as CML,
chronic myelomonocytic leukemia, and MDS.
 Allele-specific PCR primers can be used to amplify both the
mutant region of the gene (if present) and a nearby invari-
ate portion of the gene (as an internal amplification control)
(Figure 12.4).
If more accurate quantitation is desired, one can use real-time
PCR incorporating melting-curve analysis (Figure 12.5).
+
The major diagnostic mutation is V617F in exon 14. Some
studies have identified four additional mutations located in
B
FlGURE 12.4Detection of theJAK2mutationby allele-specific
FIGURE 12.3 PoLycYTHeMIA vERA, sPENT PHasE. (A) Bone marrow
PCR followed by capillary electrophoresis of the amplification
biopsy section demonstrating sclerotic bone and marked
products. A positive sample (A) yields both the mutant PCR
fibrosis. (B) Blood smear showing tear drops (arrows), myelocyte,
product (arrow) and the internal control normal gene product,
metamyelocyte, and nucleated RBC.
whereas a negative sample (B) yields only the normal PCR
product peak.
●
Myelofbrosis and extramedullary hematopoiesis with a leuko-
erythroblastic blood picture
● Myelodysplastic changes, sometimes with increased blasts.
Sample
%V617F
%WT
PC-WT
0.16
99.84
There is some debate regarding the mechanism(s)
PC-VF
99.97
0.03
35775
0.27
99.73
involved in the evolution of PV to the spent phase. The origi-
35796
0.26
99.74
nal idea of the development of anemia in PV as the natural
35818
72.23
27.77
history of the disease due to bone marrow exhaustion has
35827
0.24
99.76
been challenged by the causative effects of chemotherapy.
35829
0.17
99.83
35851
0.28
99.72
hemorrhage, and deficiencies of iron, vitamin B12, or folic
35862
0.37
99.63
 acid. Similarly, the development of myelodysplasia and/or
35873
0.32
8966
35881
0.29
99.71
marrow fibrosis may be more secondary to therapy than a
35894
0.27
99.73
naturally occurring phenomenon. For example, the incidence 
35886
0.22
99.78
of myelofibrosis is higher in PV patients exposed to chemo-
therapy or radiation than in those treated by phlebotomy.
FIGURE 12.5 Tabular read-out of real-time PCR analysis with 
quantitation of target DNA templates containing either the V617F
mutation or the wild type sequence (reagents from Ipsogen,
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
Marseille, France). Mutant signals under 1% are considered to be
background noise. All the samples shown here are negative for
the mutation except for #35818 which shows the mutation in
described in the blood or bone marrow of PV patients.
about 72% of the cells in the specimen.
170
11
19
21
22
ecopiesof1q andlossofonecopy
exon 12, but they appear to be extremely rare and of uncertain
Primary Myelofbrosis
clinicopathologic value at this time.
CYTOGENETICS
Primary myelofibrosis (PMF) (chronic idiopathic myelo-
fibrosis, agnogenic myeloid metaplasia, or myelofbrosis
● A greater proportion of patients with advanced disease (spent
with myeloid metaplasia) is a clonal stem cell disorder
patients with early (polycythemic) stage (19%).
and a subtype of myeloproliferative neoplasms. It is char-
 The most common chromosomal anomalies are monosomy
'6 pue 8 jo saos yim '6+ pue 'g+ '(eibz'tlb)(oz)p/og
hyperplasia, bone marrow fibrosis, extramedullary hema-
often occurring together in the same clone. Additional abnor-
topoiesis, and marked splenomegaly.
malities observed include del(1p), del(3p), t(1:6)(q11.2:p21),
The etiology of PMF is not known. However, in a small
and t(1:7)(q10;p10) (Figure 12.6).
proportion of the cases, development of PMF has been
● In some patients with PV, a de novo leukemia or MDS develops:
linked to ionizing radiation, thorium dioxide, and petro-
in these patients, chromosomal anomalies are more similar to
leum derivatives such as toluene and benzene.
the secondary disease than those associated with untreated PV.
The incidence of PMF is approximately 1 per 100,000
 Other patients with Pv develop a chromosomally abnormal
with a median age of about 65 years. Men and women
done as a consequence of therapy. The most common chro-
are equally affected. Marked splenomegaly is the hall-
mosomal anomaly associated with therapy-related leukemia
 mark, particularly in advanced stages. Non-specific symp-
involves abnormalities of chromosomes 5 or 7 or both and
toms such as fatigue, weight loss, night sweats, and fever
in duplication 1q and loss of 7q.
are often present. Patients frequently show anemia with
●Almost all the PV patients who develop acute leukemia
abnormal (low or high) white cell and/or platelet counts.
in late disease stages have chromosomal abnormalities.
 Marked splenomegaly may lead to splenic infarction, por-
Trisomy 8 or 9 may persist in PV without further clonal evo-
tal hypertension, and thrombosis of the small portal veins.
lution or leukemia development for up to 15 years, whereas
Advanced age, anemia, and chromosomal abnormali-
other chromosomal abnormalities, such as
-7/7q-
 ties are considered poor prognostic indicators. Anemia in
-5/5q- or complex changes, may signal the terminal phase
 about 20% of the patients is severe (Hb <8 g/dL) and may
of the disease.
be due to several factors, such as reduced bone marrow
Use of FISH methods does not result in the detection of a
significantly increased incidence rate of the chromosomal
erythropoiesis, splenic sequestration and destruction of
red cells, autoimmune hemolysis, and/or bleeding.
abnormalities, nor does it reveal submicroscopic deletions in
    se oa
comparative genomic hybridization studies have revealed
urea, splenectomy, splenic irradiation, allogeneic or autologous
frequent abnormalities of chromosome 9p.
stem cell transplantation, and the use of antiangiogenic drugs.
PRIMARY MYELOFIBROSIS
171
MORPHOLOGY AND LABORATORY FINDINGS
● Megakaryocytes are atypical and often appear in clusters
around the sinusoids and/or bone trabeculae. Abnormal
Pathologic features consist of two fundamental compo-
nuclear lobulation, naked nuclei, and large bizarre forms are
nents: myelofibrosis and extramedullary hematopoiesis.
frequent findings. Micromegakaryocytes are often present.
Myelofbrosis appears to be a reactive process secondary
Megakaryocytes may show increased rate of emperipolesis
to the activation of bone marrow stromal cells, particularly
(entry of hematopoietic cells into megakaryocytic cytoplasm)
fibroblasts. The morphologic findings, such as bone mar-
      
row cellularity, extent of fibrosis, peripheral blood find-
by abnormal localization of P-selectin on the megakaryo-
ings, and extramedullary hematopoiesis, vary considerably
cytes, may cause megakaryocytic damage and release of the
in different stages of the disease. The evolutionary process 
growth factors leading to the activation and proliferation of
fibroblasts.
  q  o P  q  e 
There may be a myeloid left shift with a higher proportion of
two major phases: prefibrotic and fibrotic.
the intermediate cells and <10% myeloblasts.
PrefibroticStage
 Dilatation of bone marrow sinusoids is a common feature.
 The dilated sinusoids often contain aggregates of hematopoj-
Prefibrotic stage or cellular phase is the early stage of the
etic precursors, including dysplastic megakaryocytes.
disease, when bone marrow fibrosis is lacking or there is
 Lymphoid aggregates are present in up to 25% of cases.
 only a minimal amount of reticulin fibrosis (Figures 12.7
Osteosclerosis may be present.
and 12.8). At this stage:
Blood examination may reveal mild to moderate anemia,
leukocytosis, thrombocytosis, and presence of scattered tear-
● The bone marrow, similar to the other MPDs, is hypercellular
drop red cells. There may be mild leukoerythroblastosis (the
and displays panmyelosis.
presence of immature myeloid and erythroid cells).
B
FIGURE 12.8 (A) Bone marrow biopsy section of cellular phase
FIGURE 12.7 Bone marrow biopsy sections in cellular phase of
of PMF demonstrating a dilated sinus containing numerous
PMF showing dilated sinuses with clusters of hematopoietic cells
megakaryocytes and erythroid and myeloid precursors.
(A) and minimal amount of increased reticulin fibers (B, reticulin
(B) Numerous megakaryocytes are demonstrated by
stain).
immunohistochemical stain for factor Vill.
172
 MYELOPROLIFERATIVE NEOPLASMS ASSOCIATED WITH JAK2 MUTATION
B
FIGURE 12.9 Bone marrow smear from a patient with PMF
 demonstrating a megakaryocyte with emperipolesis (A,low
power; B, high power).
FIGURE 12.10 Bone marrow biopsy section from a patient with
 PMF demonstrating separation of hematopoietic cells by delicate
fibers (A) which are positive with reticulin stain (B).
FibroticStage
● The LAP score is often increased, and serum levels of lactate
dehydrogenase and uric acid may be elevated.
● The bone marrow in advanced stages of the disease is virtu-
● Significant dysplastic changes in myeloid series and
ally replaced by a dense fibrous tissue with markedly reduced
blasts >10% are suggestive of an accelerated phase.
cellularity, scattered trapped dysplastic megakaryocytes, and
Transformation to AML has been reported in over 5% of the
small islands of erythroid and myeloid precursors (Figures 
cases (Figure 12.14).
12.10 to 12.12).
● The bone marrow aspiration is usually unsuccessful and results
Extramedulfary Hematopoiesis
in a "dry" tap.
●Blood examination reveals leukoerythroblastic morphology
Extramedullary hematopoiesis is often observed in the
with the presence of immature myeloid and erythroid cells
spleen and liver (Figures 12.15 and 12.16), but is also
(Figure 12.13). Blasts may be present but are usually <5%.
 seen in other sites, such as lymph nodes (Figure 12.17),.
 Tear-drop-shaped red cells (dacrocytes) are commonly pres-
lung, serosal surfaces, urogenital system, skin, and retro-
ent, and anemia is a frequent finding.
 peritoneal and paraspinal spaces. In the spleen, the red
 There is often mild to moderate leukocytosis. Hypersegmented 
neutrophils may be present.
pulp is involved with the presence of erythroid, myeloid,
●The platelet count may be increased or reduced with abnor-
and megakaryocytic cells in the sinuses. The extent of red
mal forms present. Bare megakaryocytic nuclei and micro-
pulp involvement and the proportion of each hemato-
megakaryocytes are often detected.
poietic lineage vary from case to case, but megakaryocytes
PRIMARY MYELOFIBROSIS
173
B
FIGURE 12.11 Bone marrow biopsy section from a patient with
FIGURE 12.12 The advanced (fibrotic) stage of PMF is
 PMF demonstrating two distinct areas (A) adjacent to each other.
characterized by extensive fibrosis and reduced number of
One area is more cellular and less fbrotic (B) and the other area is
hematopoietic cells (A, low power; B, high power; C, reticulin
more fibrotic and less cellular (C).
stain).
174
nucleated red cells and a myeloblast (leukoerythroblastosis).
shift, increased blasts and micromegakaryocytes (B, intermediate and C, high power). There is an increase in reticulin fibers (D, reticulin
stain), and increased CD1 17+ cells (E). A myeloblast is shown in blood smear (F).
PRIMARY MYELOFIBROSIS
175
FIGURE 12.15 Extramedullary hematopoiesis in PMF. Section of
FIGURE 12.16 Extramedullary hematopoiesis in PMF. Section
spleen demonstrating numerous megakaryocytes and scattered
of liver demonstrating numerous megakaryocytes and
erythroid and myeloid precursors (A, low power; B, intermediate 
erythroid cells with scattered myeloid precursors (A, low power;
power; C, high power).
B, intermediate power; C, high power).
176
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
No pathognomonic  immunophenotypic  features have
been described in the blood, bone marrow, or other tissues
in patients with PMF.
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
● There are numerous reports showing an association between
JAK2 mutation V617F and BCR-ABL1-negative MPN.
The mutation has been found in about half of cases of MPE.
The proportion of cases of PMF with abnormal karyotypes
ranges from 30% to 75%, and distinct recurrent chromosomal
aberrations have been reported in 40-50% of patients. This
discrepancy is mostly due to difficulty in sampling adequate
numbers of quality metaphases from the few cells aspirated
from fibrotic marrow.
● The most common aberrations—del(13q) and transloca-
fions involving chromosome 13q14—likely interrupt the RB1
gene, an important tumor-suppressor gene in retinoblastoma.
osteosarcoma, and other solid tumors.
● Duplication of 1q, del(13q), del(20q). and trisomy 8 appear
in approximately two-thirds of patients, and rarer anomalies 
include trisomy 9 and del(12p).
● Isolated cases with balanced translocations mostly involving
chromosomes 1q and 12p with different partners have been
reported.
● Specific cytogenetic abnormalities in PMF are associated
with significantly different survival outcomes. Prognostically
favorable aberrations include 13q and 20q-. whereas
prognostically  unfavorable  abnormalities  include  12p-
and +8.
Essential Thrombocythemia
Essential thrombocythemia (ET), or primary thrombo-
cytosis, is a clonal stem cell disorder characterized by
protracted thrombocytosis in the peripheral blood and
increased number of megakaryocytes with atypical fea-
tures in the bone marrow. The thrombopoietic gene
(TPO) and its receptor c-MPL (myeloproliferative leuke-
mia virus oncogene) have been implicated in the patho-
genesis of ET (see Figure 12.1). Several approaches based
on X-linked DNA and transcript analysis have demon-
strated clonal involvement in the development of ET.
 However, more recent studies suggest heterogeneity in this
FIGURE 12.17 Extramedullary hematopoiesis in PMF. Section of
process, with the involvement of stem cells at different
a lymph node demonstrating numerous megakaryocytes and
levels and evidence of polyclonal hematopoiesis in up to
a mixture of erythroid and myeloid precursors (A, low power; B,
50% of cases.
intermediate power; C, high power).
ET is diagnosed by the exclusion of reactive thrombocy
tosis (Table 12.1), familial thrombocytosis, and other sub-
are commonly prominent. Similarly, sinuses are the main
 types of MPN. The WHO criteria for the diagnosis of ET
sites of extramedullary hematopoiesis in the liver and the 
 are presented in Box 12.1.
lymph nodes. The splenic cords and the hepatic paren-
The incidence of ET is approximately 2.5 per 100,000,
chyma may show various degrees of fibrosis.
with a median age of about 60 years. Women are affected
ESSENTIAL THROMBOCYTHEMIA
177
Table 12.1
Major Differences between Essential Thrombocytosis (ET) and Reactive Thrombocytosis (RT)'
Features
ET
RT
 Underlying disorder (inflammation, infection, malignancy, ischemia, tissue
No
Yes
damage)
 Digital or cerebrovascular ischemia
Yes
No
 Arterial or venous thrombosis
Increased risk
No
 Bleeding complications 
Increased risk
No
 Splenomegaly
May be present (40%)
No
Iron deficiency
No
 May be present
 Platelet function
May be abnormal
 Normal
Large atypical megakaryocytes
Yes
No
 Cytogenetic abnormalities
May be present
No
 Plasma IL-6
Low
High
 Plasma C-reactive protein
 Low or normal 
High
 Spontaneous colony formation 
Yes
No
1Adapted from Naeim F. Pathology of Bone Marrow, 2nd edn. Wiliams and Wilkins, Baltimore, 1988 and Schafer Al. Thrombosis. N Engl J Med
2004; 350: 1211-1219
Box 12.1 Criteria for the Diagnosis of Essential Thrombocythemia (ET)1
Positive Criteria
1. Sustained platelet count of ≥450,000/μl
 2. Megakaryocytosis with the presence of enlarged forms in the bone marrow
3. No significant increase or left shift in erythroid or myeloid lineages 
4. Evidence of JAK2v617F or other cytogenetic aberations
Criteria of Exclusion
 1. No evidence of other types of myeloproliferative neoplasms, such as polycythemia vera, primary myelofibrosis (lack of collagen fibrosis,
minimal or lack of reticulin fibrosis), CML (no Ph' or BCR-ABL I fusion gene)
 2. No evidence of myelodysplastic syndrome
 3. No evidence of reactive thrombocytosis (no underlying inflammation, infection, cancer or tissue damage; no iron deficiency and no history
of splenectomy)
1Adapted from Jaffe ES. Harris NL. Stein H. Vardiman JW. Pathology and Genetics: Tumors of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues. IARC Press Lyon. 2O01 and 
Swerdlow SH. Campo E. Harris NL. et al. WHO Classifcation of Tumours of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues. 4th edn. International Agency for Research on Cancer.
Lyon, 2008.
more than men, with a female to male ratio of about 2.
Hydroxyurea, anagrelide, interferon, and pipobroman
Up to 5o% of patients are asymptomatic. The remaining
are the agents most frequently used for the treatment of
patients may show splenomegaly (25-40%) and/or other
ET to reduce the platelet count and the risk of throm-
clinical symptoms such as headache, lightheadedness, syn-
bosis. The therapeutic use of JAK2 inhibitors is under
cope, erythromelalgia, transient visual disturbances, and
evaluation.
thrombohemorrhagic incidents (15-25%). A history of
 prior thrombosis has an adverse prognostic value. Some ET
patients with markedly elevated platelet counts may show
MORPHOLOGY AND LABORATORY FINDINGS
acquired von Willebrand deficiency with an increased
● The bone marrow is usually normocellular for age or moder-
tendency of bleeding. ET in approximately 2-4% of the
ately hypercellular, but occasionally hypocellular.
patients may transform to PV, PMF, or AML after a median
 The morphologic hallmarks are lack or minimal reticulin
follow-up of about 10 years. The criteria for post-ET myelo-
fbrosis and increased number of megakaryocytes, includ-
fibrosis are summarized in Box 12.2
ing large 0r giant forms (Figures 12.18 to 12.22). These
178
MYELOPROLIFERATIVE NEOPLASMS ASSOCIATED WITH JAK2 MUTATION
megakaryocytes may show hyperlobulated nuclei and/or
 Box 12.2 Criteria for Post-ET Myelofbrosis1
appear in clusters or diffusely dispersed. The megakaryocytic
dusters may be found around the sinusoids or close to the
Required Criteria
bone trabeculae.
● Documented previous diagnosis of ET
● Bone marrow smears show increased number of large
● Moderate to severe myelofibrosis
megakaryocytes and the presence of platelet aggregates.
Emperipolesis (internalization of hematopoietic cells) is a fre-
Additional Criteria (2 required)
quent finding in megakaryocytes (Figure 12.20B).
● Development of anemia
● There is no evidence of increased myeloblasts or significant
●Leukoerythroblastosis
dysplastic changes in the granulocytic or erythroid lineages.
● Progressive splenomegaly
Some cases may show marked erythroid preponderance mim-
 Increased serum LDH levels
icking PV.
● Development of two to three constitutional symptoms (>10%
Blood smears show marked thrombocytosis with variation in
weight loss in 6 months, night sweats, and/or unexplained
platelet size and the presence of giant forms (Figure 12.21B).
fever)
 Megakaryocytic fragments may be present. The white blood cell
munt is normal or slightly elevated with normal differential
1Adapted from Swerdlow SH. Campo E. Harris NL. et al. WHO Classifcation
munts or mild granulocytosis. Rarely, early granulocytic
of Tumours of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues. 4th edn. International
forms may be present. Red blood cells are normochromic
Agency for Research on Cancer. Lyon. 2008.
 and normocytic. Dacrocytes (tear-drop-shaped red cells) and
leukoerythroblastosis are not characteristic features of ET.
FIGURE 12.18 EssENTIAL THROMBOCYTHEMIA. BoNe marrOW
FIGURE 12.19. Bone marrow biopsy sections from a patient
biopsy section from a patient with ET demonstrating marked
megakaryocytes with no evidence of marrow fibrosis (A, low
and bizarre forms (A, low power; B, high power).
power; B, high power).
ESSENTIAL THROMBOCYTHEMIA
179
B
FIGURE 12.20 Numerous megakaryocytes are present in the
B
bone marrow smear from a patient with ET (A), one showing
emperipolesis (B, arrow).
FIGURE 12.21 Bone marrow biopsy section from a patient with ET
demonstrating a paratrabecular megakaryocytic aggregate (A) 
and platelet aggregates in blood smear (B).
 In summary, morphologic findings in ET are not spe-
cific and may be seen in reactive thrombocytosis as well as
● While no consistent chromosomal anomalies are associated
other subtypes of myeloproliferative neoplasms, particu-
with ET, a few aberrations have been observed in about 5-7%
larly PV and cellular phase of PMF.
of patients, such as der(1;15)(q10;q10), resulting in duplica-
tions of 1q.
● Chromosomal anomalies in ET may have developed as a con-
IMMUNOPHENOTYPIC STUDIES
sequence of therapy or as a de novo leukemic clone. However.
one group detected a low percentage (<10%) of trisomy 8
No pathognomonic immunophenotypic features have been
and/or Trisomy 9 in about 55% of their patients by FISH.
described in the blood or bone marrow of patients with ET.
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
● JAK2 V617F mutation is present in about 50% of ET patients.
The presence of jAK2 mutation in ET has been correlated with
a higher frequency of transformation of ET to PV in some
studies.
180
 MYELOPROLIFERATIVE NEOPLASMS ASSOCIATED WITH JAK2 MUTATION
Differential Diagnosis
At the beginning of Chapter 10 we displayed a long list
of morphologic findings shared by various types of MPN.
Diagnosis of a MPN subtype is based on the exclusion of
a wide variety of reactive conditions as well as other sub-
types of MPN. A summary of the distinctive features of
CMPD subtypes is presented in Table 12.2). Following are
pathologic features that may help to distinguish the four
 major different types of MPN: PV, CML, PMF, and ET.
A
BONE MARROW FINDINGS
Fibrosis is the hallmark of the advanced stage of PMF,
whereas it is absent or minimal in ET. Other types of MPN
may show various degrees of fibrosis. Development of
 marrow fibrosis in CML may indicate accelerated phase or
evolving blast transformation.
Megakaryocytes are commonly increased and show
abnormal morphology in various subtypes of MPN. Dwarf
forms or micromegakaryocytes are frequent in CML, giant
megakaryocytes with frequent emperipolesis are common
 in ET and PMF, and dysplastic clusters of megakaryocytes
are frequently found in the dilated sinusoids in early
stages of PMF.
Eosinophilia and basophilia are most common in
CML and least frequent in ET and PV. Progressive increase
FIGURE 12.22 Bone marrow biopsy sections from a patient with
 in basophils in CML patients is suggestive of AP.
ET demonstrating increased megakaryocytes, including large and 
bizarre forms (A, low power; B, high power).
Table 12.2
 The Major Clinicopathologic Features in Myeoplroliferative Neoplasms (MPN)1
Findings
PV
ET
PMF
CML
 Bone Marrow
 Hypercellularity
±
Variable
+++
X
Increased myelopoiesis
+
+
+++
Increased erythropoiesis
+
一
Increased megakaryocytes
+
+
+
 Fibrosis
Variable
 Minimal
+to +++
+
Osteosclerosis
+
+
 Peripheral Blood 
Increased WBC
+
++
+++
 Basophilia
+
++
 Eosinophila
X
 RBC abnormalities
干
干
+++
七
 Leukoerythroblastosis 
+++
+
 Thrombocytosis
+++
+
 Abnormal platelets 
+++
++
++
LAP (NAP) score
Elevated
Normal 
Elevated
Low
Others
Splenomegaly
+
++++
+++
Cytogenetics
+8, +9, del(20q)
+8,+9
+8, +9,del(20q)
t(9;22)
Molecular
JAK2
JAK2
JAK2
BCR-ABL1
1Adapted from Foucar K. Bone Marrow Pathology. 2nd edn. ASCP. 2001.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS181
PERIPHERAL BLOOD FINDINGS
Dacrocytosis is often associated with other red blood
cell morphologic abnormalities, such as anisopoikilo-
Leukoerythroblastosis is considered the morphologic hall-
 cytosis and the presence of schistocytes (fragmented red
mark of PMF, but it may also be seen in CML in chronic,
blood cells).
accelerated, or blastic phases. Leukoerythroblastosis is not
a feature of PV or ET.
Thrombocytosis is frequently seen in all types of MPN,
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
but its persistent elevation of >600,000/μL is more charac-
teristic of ET. Giant platelets and megakaryocytic fragments
Af the molecular level, the finding of a BCR-ABL1 fusion
gene can help to separate CML from the other MPN sub-
have been observed more frequently in ET than in the others.
 types. Conversely, detection of the JAK2 mutation can dis-
Granulocytosis is marked (>50,000/μL) and left-shifted
tinguish PV, ET, and PMF. Molecular methods that allow
with a significant number of myelocytes and metamyelocytes
 specific subtyping of the three BCR-ABL1 isoforms (p190,
in CML. It is mild to moderate, but often leff-shifted, in PMF,
p210, and p230) can assist in distinguishing ALL from
and less frequent in PV or ET.
the blast phase of CML, as well as rare conditions such as
Dacrocytes (tear-drop-shaped red blood cells) are
the morphologic indicators of bone marrow fibro-
chronic neutrophilic leukemia.
sis and, therefore, the most frequent finding in PMF.
182
Additional Resources
Abdel-Wahab Ol, Levine RL: Primary myelofbrosis: update on
Randi ML, Ruzzon E, Tezza F et al: JAK2V6l7F mutation is common
definition, pathogenesis, and treatment, Annu Rev Med 60:233-
in old patients with polycythemia vera and essential thrombocythe-
245, 2009.
mia, Aging Clin Exp Res 23:17-21, 2011.
Beer PA, Green AR: Pathogenesis and management of essen-
Rumi E, Elena C, Passamonti F: Mutational status of myeloprolifera-
tial thrombocythemia, Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program:
tive neoplasms, Crit Rev Eukaryot Gene Expr 20:61-76, 2010.
621-628,2009.
Tefferi A, Skoda R, Vardiman JW: Myeloproliferative neoplasms:
Charafeddine KM, Mahfouz RA, Zaatari GS, et al: Essential throm-
cntemporary diagnosis using histology and genetics, Nat Rev Clin
bocythemia with myelofibrosis transformed into acute myeloid leu-
Oncol 6:627-637, 2009.
kemia with der[1;15)(ql0;ql0): case report and literature review.
Tefferi A, Vainchenker W: Myeloproliferative neoplasms: molecu-
Cancer Genet Cytogenet 200:28-33, 2010.
lar pathophysiology, essential clinical understanding, and treatment
Fabris F Randi ML: Essential thrombocythemia: past and present,
strategies, I Clin Oncol 29:573-582, 2011.
Interm Emerg Med 4:381-388, 2009.
Vannucchi AM, Guglielmelli P: Advances in understanding and man-
Klco JM, Vij R, Kreisel FH, Hassan A, Frater JIL: Molecular pathol-
agement of polycythemia vera, Curr Opin Oncol 22:636-641, 2010.
ogy of myeloproliferative neoplasms, Am J Clin Pathol 133:602-
Wadleigh M, Tefferi A: Classification and diagnosis of myeloprolifera-
615, 2010.
tive neoplasms according to the 2008 World Health Organization cri-
Landolf R, Nicolazzi MA, Porfidia A, et al: Polycythemia vera, Inten 
teria, Int J Hematol 9l:174-179, 2010.
Emerg Med 5:375-384, 2010.
Zhan H, Spivak JL: The diagnosis and management of polycythemia
McMullin MF: The classification and diagnosis of erythrocytosis, Int J
vera, essential thrombocythemia, and primary myelofbrosis in the
Lab Hematol 30:447-459, 2008.
JAK2 V617F era, Clin Adv Hematol Oncol7:334-342, 2009.
Chronic Neutrophilic
and Chronic Eosinophilic
Leukemias
hronic neutrophilic leukemia and chronic eosino-
philic leukemia are rare subtypes of myeloproliferative
Box 13.1 Criteria for the Diagnosis of
neoplasms. The diagnosis of these two entities is based
Chronic Eosinophilic Leukemia, Nos1
on the exclusion of a long list of reactive and neoplastic
conditions.
Criteria
1. Persistent peripheral blood eosinophilia ≥1500/μL
2. Bone marrow eosinophilia
 3. Blasts <20% in blood or marrow.
Chronic Neutrophilic Leukemia
Exclusions
1. All causes of reactive eosinophilia secondary to allergic, para-
sitic, infections, pulmonary, and collagen vascular diseases.
Chronic neutrophilic leukemia (CNL) is characterized by
2. All neoplastic disorders with secondary, reactive eosinophilia,
persistent peripheral blood neutrophilia, bone marrow
such as T-cell lymphoid malignancies, Hodgkin lymphoma,
acute lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma, and mastocytosis.
hypercellularity, and hepatosplenomegaly. It is a rare con-
3. Neoplastic disorders for which eosinophils are a part of the
dition which shares many morphological features with
neoplastic clone, such as other chronic myeloproliferative neo-
leukemoid reactions, but unlike leukemoid reactions,
plasms, myelodysplastic syndromes, and acute myelogenous
CNL is not associated with fever, infection, inflamma-
leukemia.
tory process, or malignancy. In order to establish a diag-
4. Conditions associated with aberrant expression or abnormal
nosis of CNL, all other myeloproliferative disorders and
cytokine production of T lymphocytes.
 all causes of secondary (reactive) neutrophilia should be
5. Evidence of BCR-ABL 1 fusion or t(9;22)(q34;q11.2), t(5;12)(q31-
excluded.
35;p13), inv(16)(p13q22), or t(16;16x(p13;q22)
       
6. Rearrangement of PDGFRA, PDGFR8 or FGFR1.
tion studies of the X-linked hypoxanthine phosphoribo-
1 Jaffe Es. Harris NL. Stein H. et al. Pathology and Genetics: Tumors of Haema-
syl transferase gene and other probes. Also, reports of the
'Hs moiplams pue looz uon ssald buvl sanssll ploudusi pue palodon
evolution of PV into CNL and the transformation of CNL
Campo E. Harris NL. et al. WHO Classification of Tumours of Haematopoietic
to AML in certain cases support the clonal nature of this
and Lymphoid Tissues. 4th edn. IARC Press. Lyon. 2008.
disorder.
 CNL generally affects women and men over 60 years of
age. In most cases, the disease behaves aggressively with a
mean survival of <2 years. CNL has been frequently asso-
MORPHOLOGY (FIGURE 13.1)
ciated with plasma cell myeloma. The cause of death is
● Bone marrow is hypercellular with marked granulocytic hyper-
often cerebral hemorrhage or infection. Due to the rarity
plasia and an elevated M:E ratio approaching 10:1 or higher
of the disease, no standard therapeutic protocols are cur-
(Figure 13.1A). There is no evidence of increased blasts or
rently available. At the present time, allogeneic bone mar-
promyelocytes. Bone marrow fibrosis is infrequent.
row transplantation appears to be the only potential cure.
● The erythroid line is unremarkable, and megakaryocytes are
Certain drugs, such as hydroxyurea and IFN-α, may help to
either adequate or increased. No significant dysplastic changes
 control granulocytosis and splenomegaly.
are present.
Atlas of Hematopathology. DO1: http:/dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00013-9
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
184
CHRONIC NEUTROPHILIC AND CHRONICEOSINOPHILICLEUKEMIAS
● Blood smears show marked neutrophilia, usually >25,000/μL,
with a modest myeloid left shift and presence of scattered
(5-10%) myelocytes and metamyelocytes. Promyelocytes are
rare, and myeloblasts are commonly absent. Neutrophils may
show toxic granulation. The leukocyte alkaline phosphatase
(LAP) score is often elevated. Mild anemia and/or thrombocy-
topenia may be present.
 Splenomegaly and hepatomegaly are due to neutrophilic infil-
tration in the splenic red pulp and hepatic sinusoids and/or
portal areas.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPIC STUDIES
The immunophenotypic characteristics of the bands and
neutrophils in CNL are similar to those of normal neutro-
phils and bands. So far, no aberrant expression or signifi-
cant alteration of CD molecules have been reported.
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
· No consistent chromosomal anomaly has been associated
with CNL, and the primary genetic event is likely cryptic (sub-
microscopic). Chromosomal anomalies reported to date may
reflect secondary anomalies associated with chromosomal
volution in CNL.
 Sporadic reports of patients with trisomy 8, trisomy 9, del(20)
 u ('1 a)  os (i iib)
karyotypes are described in the literature.
● Some cases may demonstrate the JAK2 V617F mutation.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
CNL is a diagnosis of exclusion. All the conditions listed in
Box 13.1 should be excluded, such as all causes of physi-
ologic and reactive neutrophilia, all other subtypes of
chronic myeloproliferative neoplasms, myelodysplastic/
myeloproliferative neoplasms, and conditions associated
with rearrangement of PDGFRA, PDGFRB or FGFR1.
Chronic Eosinophilic Leukemia
Not Otherwise Specified
Chronic eosinophilic leukemia, not otherwise speci-
fied (CEL, NOS) is a rare subtype of chronic myeloprolif-
erative neoplasms characterized by clonal expansion of
eosinophilic precursors leading to myeloid left shift (blasts 
FIGURE 13.1 CHronIc NeutropHilic LeukemIa. (A) Blood sSmear
<20%) and a sustained eosinophilia in the peripheral
reveals neutrophilia with toxic granulation. (B) Bone marrow
biopsy section is hypercellular with myeloid preponderance, and
blood (≥1500/μL) (Box 13.1). Eosinophilic disorders with
(C) bone marrow smear shows marked myeloid preponderance
 no known etiology, lack of clonality, or increased blasts
with numerous middle and late stage myeloid forms.
fall into the category of "idiopathic hypereosinophilic syn-
drome" (IHES) (Figure 13.3). Neither CEL nor IHES dem-
onstrate Ph? chromosome (or BCR-ABL1 fusion gene), or
PDGFRA, PDGFRB, or FGFR1 rearrangement.
 CHRONIC EOSINOPHILIC LEUKEMIA, NOT OTHERWISE SPECIFIED
185
FIGURE13.2 G-banded karyotype
showing trisomy 21.
14
17
18
CEL and IHES involve men much more frequently
than women (M:F ratio about 9:1). They are usually
detected between the ages of 20 and 50 years and are rare
in children. The most common clinical symptoms include
fatigue, cough, dyspnea, myalgia, angioderma, rash, fever.
and rhinitis. The release of eosinophilic granules may
damage the endocardium and the endothelial cells and
lead to thrombus formation and emboli. Endocardial
thrombosis and fibrosis may cause insuffciencies of the
 mitral or tricuspid valves.
MORPHOLOGY
● The bone marrow is hypercellular and shows eosinophilic
hyperplasia. Eosinophil counts may range from 10% to 70%
of the bone marrow nucleated cells, with a mean of about
 30%. The maturation of eosinophils and myeloid cells is pro-
 gressive but often left-shifted with increased blasts (>5% and
电
<20%).
● Eosinophils may show dysplastic changes such as nuclear
hypersegmentation or hyposegmentation, cytoplasmic vacu-
olization or hypogranularity, and/or abnormal eosinophilic
granules. Charcot-Leyden crystals are frequent findings. These
ystals are colorless, long hexagonal, double-pointed, or nee-
dle-like lysophospholipase containing structures which are
formed from the breakdown of eosinophils. However, both
have been observed in cases of reactive eosinophilia.
 Myelofibrosis may be present but is not common.
●
00
●
 The peripheral blood shows absolute eosinophilia (≥1500/μL).
often with moderately elevated leukocyte count (between
 FIGURE 13.3 IoIOPATHIC HYpeReoSINoPHIlIC SYNDROMe. Bone
20,000 and 30,000/μL), with eosinophils accounting for
 marrow biopsy section (A and B) and blood smear (inset) of a
30-70% of the differential counts.
patient with IHES.
●Eosinophilic infiltration may also be present in the
(Adapted from Naeim F. Atias of Bone Marrow and Blood Pathology.
extramedullary sites. The site of infiltration usually shows
Saunders, 2001; by permission.)
186
CHRONIC NEUTROPHILIC AND CHRONIC EOSINOPHILIC LEUKEMIAS
some degree of fibrosis, often with the presence of Charcot-
 MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
Leyden crystals.
No specific molecular or cytogenetic abnormalities have
been associated with CEL, NOS. All myeloid and lymphoid
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
 neoplasms with eosinophilia and abnormalities of PDGFR
A, PDGFR B, and FGFR1 are discussed in Chapter 16.
● The eosinophils show different characteristic features than the
 neutrophils by flow cytometry. They appear as distinct clusters
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
in the CD45 and scatter gate displays, and their intensity of
expression of myeloid-associated markers is different from
CEL, NOS is a diagnosis of exclusion. All the conditions
neutrophilic granulocytes.
listed in Box 13.1 should be excluded, such as all causes
● A number of CD molecules are expressed on eosinophils, such
of reactive eosinophilia, myelodysplastic syndromes, acute
       
(IL-5 receptor alpha chain),. and CD193 (chemokine recep-
myeloid leukemias, all other subtypes of chronic myelo.
tor 3), but these molecules are not eosinophil-specific and are
proliferative neoplasms, and conditions associated with
also expressed by other leukocytes.
BCR-ABL1 fusion or t(9;22)(q34;q11.2), (5;12)(q31-
● Blast enumeration by flow cytometry or immunohistochemical
35;p13), inv(16)(p13q22), 0r t(16;16)(p13;q22), and
stains may be helpful in blood samples, bone marrow
 rearrangement of PDGFRA, PDGFRB, or FGFR1.
aspirates, or biopsy sections.
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
187
Additional Resources
 Dincol G, Nalcaci M, Dogan O, et al: Coexistence of chronic neutro-
Reilly IT: Chronic neutrophilic leukaemia: A distinct clinical entity?
philic leukemia with multiple myeloma, Leuk Lymphoma 43:649-651.
Br I Haematol 1l6:10-18, 2002.
2002.
Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, et al: WHO cassification of
Elliott MA, Dewald GW, Tefferi A, et al: Chronic neutrophilic leuke-
tumours of haematopoietic and lymphoid tissues, ed 4, International 
mia (CNL): A clinical, pathologic and cytogenetic study, Leukemia
Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, 2008.
15:35-40, 2001.
 Tefferi A, Gotlib J. Pardanani A: Hypereosinophilic syndrome and
Elliott MA: Chronic neutrophilic leukemia and chronic myelo-
donal eosinophilia: Point-of-care diagnostic algorithm and treat-
monocytic leukemia: WHO defined, Best Pract Res Clin Haematol 19:
 ment update, Mayo Clin Proc 85:158-164, 2010.
571-593, 2006.
Wadleigh M, Tefferi A: Classification and diagnosis of myeloprolifera-
Elliott MA: Chronic neutrophilic leukemia: a contemporary review,
tive neoplasms according to the 2008 World Health Organization cri-
Curr Hematol Rep 3:210-217, 2004.
teria, Int I Hematol 91:174-179, 2010.
Gotlib J: Eosinophilic myeloid disorders: New dassification and
novel therapeutic strategies, Curr Opin Hematol 17: 117-124, 2010.
This page intentionally left blank
Mastocyt
astocytosis refers to an abnormal proliferation of mast
Table 14.2
cells in one or multiple organs. It covers a wide spectrum of
Major Mast Cell-Derived Mediators and their Effects
dlinicopathologic disorders from localized to systemic and
 in Systemic Mastocytosisl
mastocytosis are the result of clonal expansion of mast cells.
Mediators
Clinicopathologic Effects
Mast cells are derived from the hematopoietic stem cells.
Histamine
Vascular instability, urticaria,
 The committed mast cell progenitors express CD13, CD34,
headache, edema, flushing, gastric
and CD117 (c-kit) and are detectable in the bone marrow
hypersecretion, abdominal pain,
bronchial constriction, diarrhea
and peripheral blood. Mast cells are distinguished from
other granulocytic cells by their unique phenotypic and
 Heparin 
Coagulation abnommalities, bleeding 
functional properties (Tables 14.1 and 14.2). Mast cells pro-
Tryptases
Fibrosis, angiogenesis, tissue
duce a substantial amount of histamine and heparin and
remodeling, degradation of matrix
express surface IgE receptor. In contrast to basophils and
molecules, bone resorption 
other granulocytic cells, mast cells have a significantly lon-
tPA
Hyperfibrinolysis
ger in vivo life span ranging from several months to years.
VEGF
Increased angiogenesis, edema 
Mastocytosis has been associated with the somatic c-kit
PGD2
Edema, urticaria, flushing, bronchial
mutation at codon 816, substituting valine to aspartate
constriction
(Figure 14.1). Activated mutated c-kit along with increased
Bfgyf
Fibrosis, osteosclerosis, angiogenesis 
production of stem cell factor (SCF) may play a role in
TNF-αx
 Activation of endothelial cells, vascular
the pathogenesis of systemic mastocytosis. Genetic factors
instability
d-INL
 Fibrosis, abnormal bone remodeling.
osteopenia
 Table 14.1
Interleukins (IL-1, -2, -3, -5, 
 Eosinophilia, bone marrow
Immunophenotypic Features of Mast Cells 
-6, -9, -10, -11, -13, GM-CSF}
 lymphocytosis, myeloid hyperplasia,
Mast Cells
activation of stromal cells,
fibrosis
CD
 Normal
 Neoplastic
 Basophils
Monocytes
Chemokines {MCP-1, MIP-
 Leukocyte activation, accumulation
CD2
+
1α,others)
of lymphocytes, monocytes, and 
CD13
+
eosinophils
X
CD14
+
1Adapted from Valent P, Akin C, Sperr WR, et al. Diagnosis and treatment 
CD15
+
 of systemic mastocytosis: state of the art. Br J Haematol 2003; 122:
CD25
+
X
695-717.
一
CD33
+
+
+
+
CD34
CD45
+
+
+
 appear to play an important role in childhood mastocyto-
CD117
+
+
sis, based on a report of 25% of congenital mastocytosis in
IValent P, Akin C, Sperr WR, et al. Diagnosis and treatment of systemic
pediatric cases and concordant symptoms of mastocytosis
 mastocytosis: state of the art. Br J Haematol 2003; 122: 695-717.
observed in monozygotic twins.
Atlas of Hematopathology. DO1: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00014-0
@ 201 3 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
190
MASTOCYTOSIS
FIGURE 14.1 Detection of the D816V c-kit mutation in systemic
mastocytosis by DNA sequencing. (A) Positive case showing
heterozygous signal at nucleotide position 103 (arrow).
FIGURE 14.2 Mast cells. Wright-stained bone marrow smears
(B) Negative control, showing only wild type sequence at same
demonstrating mast cells with abundant cytoplasm containing 
position (double line).
variable amounts of small deeply basophilic granules (A, B,
and C).
MORPHOLOGY AND LABORATORY FINDINGS
191
are faintly eosinophilic in the H&E sections and variable in
Morphology and Laboratory
amount.
Findings
 The granules in some mast cells are sparse and difficult to
detect. The hypogranular mast cells may demonstrate an
abundant pale cytoplasm resembling histiocytes, monocytoid
Mastocytosis is demonstrated as multifocal clusters or dif-
B-cells, or hairy cells.
fuse infiltration of mast cells in the skin, bone marrow,
●The spindle-shaped mast cells may mimic fibroblasts.
 Mast cell infiltration is often associated with various degrees
spleen, liver, gastrointestinal tract, and other tissues.
of fbrosis and presence of inflammatory cells, such as lym-
● Mast cells in smears stained with Wright's or Giemsa stains
phocytes and eosinophils (Figures 14.4 and 14.5).
are very distinct and appear as medium- to large-sized cells
Bone marrow biopsy sections often show multiple mast cell
with abundant cytoplasm loaded with small deeply baso-
aggregates. These aggregates may be either paratrabecular.
philic granules, often masking the nucleus (Figure 14.2). The
interstitial, or both (see Figures 14.3 to 14.5). Paratrabecular
nuclei are round, oval, or spindle-shaped and show a dense
infiltrates may show extensive fibrosis and osteosclerosis with
chromatin. Some mast cells may be hypogranular or appear
immature. Binucleated or multinucleated mast cells may be
identified by the Giemsa stain or immunohistochemical stains
present.
for tryptase or CD117 (Figures 14.6 and 14.7).
● Mast cells in the H&E-stained sections appear as medium-
 Mastocytosis may be a part of a clonal primary hematopoietic
sized cells with variable amounts of granular cytoplasm
disorder, such as myelodysplastic syndrome, chronic myelo-
and a round, oval, or spindle-shaped nucleus with con-
 proliferative disorder, or acute myeloid leukemia.
densed chromatin (Figure 14.3). The cytoplasmic granules
FIGURE 14.3 SYSTEMICMASTOCYTOSIS.
Bone marrow biopsy section
demonstrating interstitial (A,
low power; B, high power) and
paratrabecular (C, low power;
D, high power) clusters of mast
cells resembling histiocytes or
fibroblasts. These clusters are
positive with Giemsa stain (E) and
show expression of tryptase by
immunohistochemical stain (F).
192
MASTOCYTOSIS
FIGURE 14.5 Bone marrow biopsy section demonstrating areas
with dense fibrosis (A, low power; B, high power). (C) Mast cells
FIGURE 14.4 A cluster of mast cells mixed with lymphocytes and
appear as clusters of CD117-positive elongated cells.
histiocytes is present next to bone (A, low power; B, high power).
Mast cells show expression of CD117 by immunohistochemical 
technique (C).
MORPHOLOGY AND LABORATORY FINDINGS
193
FIGURE 14.7 Systemic mastocytosis. Bone marrow biopsy section
showing paratrabecluar fibrosis (A). Numerous tryptase-positive
cells are present in the fibrotic area (B, low power; C, high power).
● Splenic involvement in mastocytosis usually consists of infl-
 tating mast cells randomly distributed in the red pulp or
 appearing in aggregates adjacent to the white pulps or trabec-
uwae. The mast cell clusters are often associated with variable
C
amounts of fibrosis and are mixed or surrounded by lympho-
cytes, plasma cells, and/or eosinophils.
FIGURE 14.6 Bone marrow involvement in systemic mastocytosis.
 In the liver, mast cells are found in the sinuses and/or portal
Extensive paratrabecular fbrosis and some osteosclerosis are
areas with focal areas of fibrosis (Figure 14.8).
present (A, low power; B, intermediate power; C, high power).
● The involved skin demonstrates aggregates of atypical mast
ells infiltrating into the papillary dermis and extending into
the reticular dermis in compact aggregates to large sheets
(Figure 14.9).
194
MASTOCYTOSIS
Because of a wide spectrum of morphologic features, it
is highly recommended that additional accessory studies
be performed, such as cytochemical stains, immunopheno-
typing, and molecular analysis to establish the diagnosis of
mastocytosis.
Immunophenotypic Studies
● Mast cells express CD13, CD33, CD45, CD68, CD117. and
typtase and are negative for CD14, CD15, CD16, and MPO
(Figures 14.4, 14.5, and 14.7).
● In addition, the neoplastic mast cells may show aberrant
Kxpression of CD2, CD25, and CD30 (particularly in aggres-
sive mastocytosis and mast cell leukemia).
Molecular and Cytogenetic
Studies
The hallmark of systemic mastocytosis (SM) at the molecu
lar level is somatic c-kit mutations. The following charac-
teristics pertain.
● The most common mutation is reported at codon 816, substi-
μuting valine to aspartate and designated D816V.
● It is found in almost all cases, though is only considered one
of the “minor criteria" for diagnosis.
● This variant can be detected by allele-specific or restriction
B
endonuclease-treated PCR or by DNA sequence analysis (see
Figure 14.1).
Ongoing clinical trials are exploring small-molecule inhibitor
targeting of the mutant c-kit enzyme (it is resistant to imatinib).
Rarely, SM is seen in association with neoplasms with FIP1L1/
PDFRA fusion and eosinophilia. However, this does not mean
that FIPiL1/PDGFRA is a molecular marker of SM. In rare
cases, both mutants (FIP1L1/PDGFRA and KIT D816V) are
detectable.
Classifcation
Mast cell diseases are divided into two major clinical enti-
ties: (1) cutaneous mastocytosis and (2) systemic mastocy-
tosis. The WHO criteria for the diagnosis of mastocytosis
are presented in Box 14.1.
FIGURE 14.8 MASTOCYToSIS INVOLVING THE LIVER. FibrOSiS and
infltration of the inflammatory cells are noted in the expanded
portal areas: (a) low power and (b) intermediate power views.
Cells with elongated or spindle-shaped nuclei represent mast
cells: (c) high power view.
CLASSIFICATION
195
FIGURE 14.9 CuTANE0US
MASTocYTosis. Wrist skin biopsy
of a 3-year-old girl demonstrates
 aggregates of atypical mast cells
involving the papillary dermis
 and extending into the reticular
dermis in compact aggregates
to large sheets (A, low power;
B, intermediate power; C, high 
power). The mast cells contain
oval, elongated, or spindle-shaped
nuclei, dense chromatin, and 
dispersed coarse granules within
the cytoplasm. Giemsa stain reveals
coarse metachromic granules in
the atypical mast cells (D), and 
immunohistochemical stains
are positive for CD117(E) and
tryptase (F).
Box 14.1 WHo Criteria for the Diagnosis of Cutaneous and Systemic Mastocytosis1
Cutaneous Mastocytosis
Mast cell infiltrates in a multifocal, solitary, or diffuse pattern in skin biopsies, with typical clinical findings.
Systemic Mastocytosis
Major criterion
 Multifocal infiltrates of mast cells (≥15 mast cells in each aggregate) in one or more extracutaneous sites confirmed by tryptase immunohisto-
chemistry or other special stains.
Minor criteria
 1. More than 25% of mast cells are spindle-shaped or atypical in extracutaneous infiltrates in biopsy sections and/or smear preparations.
2. Detection of KiT mutation at codon 816.
3. Co-expression of CD117, CD2, and/or CD25 by the infltrating mast cells.
 4. Persistent total serum tryptase levels >20 ng/ml in cases not associated with clonal myeloid disorders.
1 Adapted from Jaffe ES. Harris NL. Stein H. et al. Pathology and Genetics: Tumors of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues. IARC Press Lyon. 2001 and Swerdlow SH.
Campo E. Harris NL. et al. WHO Classification of Tumours of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues. 4th edn. International Agency for Research on Cancer. Lyon, 2008.
196
MASTOCYTOSIS
CUTANEOUS MASTOCYTOSIS
Box 14.2 WHO Classification of Systemic
Cutaneous mastocytosis consists of mast cell disorders
Mastocytosis (SM)1
limited to skin without evidence of systemic involvement,
such as elevated levels of serum tryptase, bone marrow
Indolent systemic mastocytosis (ISM)
infiltration, or organomegaly. There are four major clinico-
Systemic mastocytosis with associated clonal, hematological
pathologic subtypes:
non-mast cell lineage disease (SM-AHNMD)
Aggressive systemic mastocytosis (ASM)
●urticaria pigmentosa
● Extracutaneous mastocytoma
 cutaneous mastocytoma
diffuse cutaneous mastocytosis
●Mast cell sarcoma (MCS)
●Mast cell leukemia (MCL)
●telangiectasia macularis eruptiva perstans.
The diagnosis is made based on the clinical presentation
1Adapted from Jaffe ES. Harris NL. Stein H. et al. Pathology and Genetics
Tumors of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues. IARC Press. Lyon. 2001
and by a skin biopsy demonstrating significant increase
and Swerdlow SH. Campo E. Harris NL. et al. WHO Classification of Tumours
         
of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues. 4th edn. International Agency for
field), which are particularly found around vascular
Research on Cancer. Lyon. 2008.
structres.
Urticaria Pigmentosa
SYSTEMIC MASTOCYTOSIS
Urticaria pigmentosa (uP) is the most common mast cell
disorder in children and adults. The KIT point mutation
       n
in pediatric and adult UP appears to be different from the 
 The increased mast cells are found in extracutaneous sites,
mutation of codon 816 observed in SM. There are reports 
 with or without skin involvement. The frequently involved
of mutations in codon 839 and codon 516 in pediatric and 
 extracutaneous sites include bone marrow, liver, spleen,
adult UP, respectively. The cutaneous lesions are usually
 lymph nodes, and gastrointestinal tract.
small yellow-tan to reddish-brown macules or papules.
The WHO requirements (2008) for the diagnosis
Plaque-like lesions may also occur. The upper and lower 
 and classification of SM are demonstrated in Boxes 14.1
extremities are the most frequently affected sites. The face,
and 14.2.
palms, and soles are not involved. Most of the affected
 Clinical manifestations of mastocytosis are the result of
children are under the age of 1 and rarely show systemic
 two different mechanisms: (1) mediator release from mast
involvement. UP-associated pruritis is exacerbated by a
 cells and (2) growth and infiltration of the mast cells in
variety of stimulants, such as change in temperature, spicy
various organs.
food, or local friction.
A wide variety of mediators are released from mast
cells, resulting in clinical symptoms such as headache,
flushing, pruritis, hypotension, and diarrhea (Table
Cutaneous Mastocytoma
14.2). The growth and infiltration of mast cells in vari-
Cutaneous mastocytoma of skin is typically a solitary
ous organs may lead to organomegaly as well as organ
lesion occurring in early childhood, usually before 6
dysfunction, leading to ascites, cytopenia, malabsorption,
 and pathologic fractures. The organopathy-related clinical
months of age. The trunk and wrist are frequent sites of
involvement. Large clusters or sheets of mast cells are pres-
 symptoms are referred to as C-findings, whereas organo-
 megalies without any evidence of organopathy are termed
ent in the papillary and reticular dermis.
B-findings. SM has been divided into the following catego-
ries (Box 14.2).
Diffuse Cutaneous Mastocytosis
Diffuse cutaneous mastocytosis is a childhood disorder
usually occurring before the age of 3. The skin is diffusely
indolent Systemic Mastocytosis
infiltrated but is relatively smooth. It may show increased
Indolent systemic mastocytosis (ISM) refers to cases with
thickness and/or a yellowish-brown color. The maculopap-
relatively low burden of mast cells and therefore to an
ular lesions are usually absent.
indolent clinical course and good prognosis. The majority
of patients with ISM have UP and show evidence of sys-
temic involvement but lack C-findings. ISM accounts for
Telangiectasia Macularis Eruptiva Perstans
aq 3u NSI Jo sdAqs 03 NS Jo sa5 Ie Jo 0<
Telangiectasia macularis eruptiva perstans is a rare cuta-
described: smoldering systemic mastocytosis (SSM) and iso-
neous mast cell disorder mainly occurring in adults. It is 
s lated bone marrow mastocytosis (BMM). In SSM, B-findings
characterized by tan-brown macules with telangiectasia but
          
no blisters or pruritis.
involvement (Table 14.3).
CLASSIFICATION
197
Table 14.3
 Comparison of B- and C-Findings in Subtypes of Systemic Mastocytosisl
ISM
Findings
Typical ISM
BMM
SSM
SM-AHNMD
ASM
MCL
 B-Findings
 Hepatomegaly
+
+
Splenomegaly
±
+
士
 Lymphadenopathy
±
Tryptase >200 ng/ml
+
士
+
C-Findings
Anemia (Hb <10 g/dL)
±
+
+
Thrombocytopenia (<100x109/L)
+
+
 Neutrophil count <1x109/L
+
 Ascites or portal hypertension 
+
+
Hypersplenism
+
Malabsorption with weight loss
+
 Osteolysis
+
 Others
 Urticaria-pigmentosa-like lesions 
+
+
+
+
 Elevated serum LDH
干
+
 Abnormal coagulation
+
+
ASM, aggressive systemic mastocytosis; BMM, isolated bone marrow mastocytosis; ISM, indolent systemic mastocytosis; MCL, mast celeukemia; SM-
AHNMD, systemic mastocytosis with associated clonal hematological non-mast cell lineage disease; SSM, smoldering systemic mastocytosis.
Systemic Mastocytosis with Associated Clonal
immature mast cells. The pattern of bone marrow infiltra-
Hematological Non-Mast Cell Lineage Disease
tion is usually interstitial. Mast cells comprise >20% of the
nucleated cells in bone marrow smears and ≥10% of the
 Systemic mastocytosis with associated clonal hematologi-
 leukocyte differential counts in peripheral blood (Figure
cal non-mast cell lineage disease (SM-AHNMD) is mas-
14.12). Prognosis is extremely poor, with an estimated sur-
tocytosis associated with acute myeloid leukemias, acute
vival of 6-12 months.
lymphoid leukemias, myelodysplastic syndromes, chronic
myeloproliferative disorders, or lymphoma (Figures 14.10
and 14.11).
Other Types of Systemic Mastocytosis
Extracutaneous mastocytoma is an extremely rare lesion
Aggressive Systemic Mastocytosis
consisting of an accumulation of mature mast cells in
extracutaneous sites, such as the lung.
     
Mast cell sarcoma is another extremely rare lesion con-
ized by the presence of organ-function impairment
 sisting of an infltrating growth of atypical and/or imma-
 and C-findings, leading to an aggressive clinical course.
tre mast cells with a potential of distant metastasis or
C-findings include (1) anemia, thrombocytopenia, and/
progression to a leukemic phase.
or leukopenia, (2) hepatomegaly with ascites or por-
 In general, the therapeutic approaches depend on the
tal hypertension, (3) splenomegaly with hypersplenism,
clinical symptoms and extent of the disease. Mediator-
(4) malabsorption and weight loss, and (5) osteolysis
related symptoms are treated with drugs that interfere
and pathologic fractures (Table 14.3). Less than 50% of
with mediator production/release or mediator functions,
patients in this category show UP lesions. The KIT muta-
such as histamine and leukotriene antagonists, glucocor-
tion in codon 816 is the typical molecular finding.
ticoids, cromylin sodium, and aspirin. In addition to the
 anti-mediator drugs, patients with cutaneous mastocyto-
Mast Cell leukemia
sis may receive psoralen and ultraviolet-A. Cytoreductive
drugs such as interferon-α, cytosine arabinoside, cladrib-
Mast cell leukemia is a rare condition characterized by dif-
 ine, vincristine, and doxorubicin are preserved for patients
      j  
who have clear signs of aggressive disease.
198
MASTOCYTOSIS
FIGURE 14.11 MASTOCYTOSIS IN A PATIENT WITH ACUTE MYELOGENOUS
LEUKEMIA. Bone marrow smear consisting of a mixture of
myeloblasts and mast cells (A and B).
Differential Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis includes two major categories:
(1) disorders with similar clinical manifestation but lack
of histologic evidence of cutaneous mastocytosis or SM
and (2) disorders associated with increased mast cells or
elevated serum tryptase (Table 14.4).
Disorders with similar clinical manifestation but lack
of histologic evidence of cutaneous or systemic mastocy-
tosis include anaphylaxis (may show elevated serum trypt-
ase during but not in the period between the acute events),
FIGURE 14.10 MaSTOCYTOSIS IN A PATIENT WITH MYELODYSPLASTC
angioedema, carcinoid syndrome, pheochromocytoma,
sYNDroMe. Bone marrow biopsy section showing paratrabecular
and Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. All these disorders except
fibrosis. The bone marrow is hypercellular with the presence of
numerous micromegakaryocytes (A and B, arrows). Numerous 
 acute episodes of anaphylaxis lack elevated serum tryptase
spindle cells are positive for CD117 in the fibrotic area (C).
 or urinary histamine.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
199
Table 14.4
Differential Diagnosis of Mastocytosis
Categories
Examples
 Similar clinical manifestations
 Anaphylaxis, angioderma,
 but lack of histologic evidence
 carcinoid syndrome,
of cutaneous or systemic 
 pheochromocytoma, Zollinger-
mastocytosis
Ellison syndrome
 Associated with increased mast
 Basal cell carcinoma, melanoma,
cells
 lymphoma, helminth infection 
 Associated with elevated serum
Acute myelogenous leukemia,
 tryptase but lack of mastocytosis 
 myelodysplastic syndrome,
chronic myeloproliferative
disorders
 Morphologic overlap
 Basophilic leukemia, histiocytic
 disorders, bone marrow
metastasis, disorders associated
with paratrabecular bone marrow
 fibrosis, such as chronic renal
failure
 Disorders associated with increased mast cells or ele-
vated serum tryptase consist of reactive conditions asso-
ciated with mastocytosis or hematopoietic malignancies
associated with elevated serum tryptase but lack of masto-
cytosis. Reactive mast cell hyperplasia has been observed
in various conditions, such as basal cell carcinoma, mela-
 noma, and lymphomas. Elevated serum tryptase levels
have been reported in a variety of clonal myeloid disor-
ders, such as acute myeloid leukemia, myelodysplastic syn-
dromes, and chronic myeloproliferative disorders. Also,
FIGURE 14.12 (A) Bone marrow smear of a patient with mast
some patients with myelodysplastic syndrome may show
 cell leukemia showing numerous mast cells. (B) Mast cell in a
c-kit mutation.
peripheral blood smear.
200
MASTOCYTOSIS
Additional Resources
Akin C: Molecular diagnosis of mast cell disorders: a paper from
Patnaik MM, Rindos M, Kouides PA, et al: Systemic mastocytosis:
the 2005 William Beaumont Hospital Symposium on Molecular
a concise clinical and laboratory review, Arch Pathol Lab Med 131:
Pathology. I Mot Diagn 8:412-419, 2006.
784-791, 2007.
Amon U, Hartmann K, Horny HP, et al: Mastocytosis - an update,
Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, et al: WHO dassification of
J Dtsch Dermatol Ges 8:695-71l, 2010.
tumours of haematopoietic and lymphoid tissues, ed 4, Lyon, 2008.
Arock M, Valent P: Pathogenesis, classification and treatment of mas-
International Agency for Research on Cancer.
tocytosis: state of the art in 2010 and future perspectives, Expert Rev
Valent P, Cerny-Reiterer S, Herrmann H, et al: Phenotypic hetero-
Hematol 3:497-516, 2010.
geneity, novel diagnostic markers, and target expression profles in
Arredondo AR, Gotlib J, Shier L, et al: Myelomastocytic leukemia
  e  'sn i    r
versus mast cell leukemia versus systemic mastocytosis associated
Haematol 23:369-378, 2010.
with acute myeloid leukemia: a diagnostic challenge, Am J Hematol
Valent P, Sperr WR, Akin C: How I treat patients with advanced sys-
85:600-606, 2010.
temic mastocytosis, Blood 116:5812-5817, 2010.
Horny HP, Sotlar K, Valent P: Differential diagnoses of systemic mas-
Vano-Galvan S, De la Hoz B, Nunez R, Jaen P: Indolent systemic mas-
tocytosis, Isr Med Assoc J 12:185-187, 2010.
a review, Pathobiology 77:169-180, 2010.
Yamada Y, Cancelas JA: FIP1L1/PDGFR alpha-associated systemic
Ozdemir D, Dagdelen S, Erbas T: Systemic Mastocytosis, Am J Med
mastocytosis, Int Arch Allergy Immunol 152(Suppl 1):10l-105.
Sci 342:409-415, 2011.
2010.
Myelodysplasticl
Myeloproliferative
Neoplasms
The
 myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative  neoplasms
Chronic Myelomonocytic
(MDS/MPN) are a group of hematologic disorders distin-
guished by clonal expansion of abnormal hematopoietic
Leukemia
stem cells that share clinicopathologic features of both
MDS and MPN. They are characterized by hypercellular
bone marrows with excessive terminal proliferation of
Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML) is a clonal
hematopoietic disorder characterized by both dysplastic
one or more hematopoietic lineages as well as dysplas-
and proliferative features including persistent monocyto-
tic changes. This combination of proliferation and dys-
sis (>1000/μL) of at least 3 months, bone marrow hyper-
plasia may lead to increased production of one or more
 cellularity with myeloid preponderance, myelomonocytic
lineages (cytosis) and decreased production of other
 dysplasia and left shift with <20% blasts (including pro-
lineages simultaneously.  Myeloid preponderance and
monocytes) in the peripheral blood or bone marrow.
 n s    n s 
Cytogenetic and molecular studies are negative for Ph1
cells are <20% in the bone marrow and/or the periph-
 and/or BCR-ABL1 fusion (Box 15.1).
eral blood samples. According to the WHO classification,
these disorders are divided into the following major
 CMML is a disease of the elderly, with a median age of
about 70 years. It affects men more than women, with a
groups:
male:female ratio of 1.5-3:1 and an estimated incidence
 1. Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia
of about 4 per 100,000 per year. Childhood CMML is rela-
2. Atypical chronic myeloid leukemia
tively infrequent.
3. Juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia
Clinical manifestations are related to anemia, throm-
4. MDS/MPD, unclassifiable
bocytopenia, and splenomegaly Some patients may
Box 15.1 Diagnostic Criteria for Chronic Myelomonocytic Leukemia 1
1. Peripheral blood monocytosis greater than 1000/μl
2. Less than 20% blasts in the peripheral blood or the bone
3. No Ph1 or BCR-ABL 1 fusion gene
4. No PDGFRA or PDGFRB rearrangement
5. Dysplastic myelopoiesis. If myelodysplasia in minimal or absent:
a. Presence of an acquired clonal cytogenetic abnormality, or
b. Persistent monocytosis for at least 3 months and 
. Exclusion of all other causes of monocytosis 
1Adapted from Jaffe ES. Harris NL. Stein H. et al. Pathology and Genetics: Tumors of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues. IARC Press. Lyon. 2001 and Swerdlow
SH. Campo E. Haris NL. et al. WHO Classifcation of Tumours of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues. 4th edn. International Agency for Research on Cancer.
Lyon. 2008.
Atlas of Hematopathology.DOl: htp//dx.doi.org/10.1016/978-0-12-385183-300015-2
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
202
MYELODYSPLASTIC/MYELOPROLIFERATIVE NEOPLASMS
demonstrate autoimmune disorders, such as vasculitis,
MORPHOLOGY AND LABORATORY FINDINGS
 pyoderma, and idiopathic thrombocytopenia. Others may
Bone marrow biopsy sections are mostly (> 75%) hypercel-
develop skin infiltration and serous effusions. The reported
lular and display myeloid preponderance and left shift with
unfavorable prognostic factors include low hemoglobin
increased number of immature myelomonocytic precursors
levels, low platelet counts, high percentage of marrow
(Figure 15.1). Bone marrow fibrosis is reported in about one-
as aaa (/o<) sis (t<) sis
third of patients.
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and β2-microglobulin levels,
 Aggregates of monocytic and/or plasmacytoid dendritic cells
and abnormal cytogenetics.
have been observed in the bone marrow biopsy sections of
Approximately 15-30% of CMML patients progress
patients with CMML (Figure 15.2).
to acute leukemia. Evidence of erythrophagocytosis has
been suggested as an indicator of evolving blast transfor-
mation. The median survival is about 2 years. Therapeutic
approaches include conventional chemotherapy, such as
hydroxycarbamide (hydroxyurea) and allogeneic bone
marrow transplantation (BMT). The therapeutic trial of
farnesyl transferase inhibitors (inactivating RAS protein)
has opened an avenue in the area of targeted biological
therapy.
A
FIGURE 15.2 Monocytic nodules have been observed in
FIGURE 15.1 CHRONIC MYELoMONOCYTIC LEUKEMIA (CMML).
bone marrow biopsy sections of patients with CMML. (A, low
Bone marrow biopsy section from a patient with CMML
power; B, high power) (H&E stains). The arrows in (A)
demonstrating a hypercellular marrow with myeloid
indicate the monocytic/histiocytic nodule. (C) The nodule
preponderance (A). The immunohistochemical stain for CD68
(arrowed) is highlighted by immunohistochemical stain
shows numerous positive monocytic/histiocytic cells (B).
for CD68.
CHRONIC MYELOMONOCYTICLEUKEMIA
203
● The bone marrow smears often show dysplastic changes in the
leukocytes/μL are considered to be of myeloproliferative sub-
monocytic and the granulocytic series, such as bizarre mor-
type (Figure 15.5). However, significant clinical or biological
differences between these two groups are debatable. There are
mic hypo- or hypergranularity. The morphologic identification
often various degrees of anemia and/or thrombocytopenia.
of monocytic precursors is much easier in bone marrow aspi-
 Mild eosinophilia and/or basophilia are present.
rate smears than in biopsy sections (Figure 15.3). The total
 Monocytes and granulocytes are dysplastic (Figure 15.6) and
number of myeloblasts, monoblasts, and promonocytes is <
often lef-shifted, with myelomonocytic blasts and promono-
20%. Auer rods may be detected in some cases.
cytes >5% and <20% of the leukocyte differential count.
● Erythroid dysplasia such as megaloblastic changes, irregular
The serum lysozyme levels are elevated. Also, elevated serum
nuclei, nuclear fragments, and ring sideroblasts are frequently
levels of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and β2-microglobulin
observed. Micromegakaryocytes are often presenf.
have been reported in some cases.
● The peripheral blood reveals monocytosis of >1oo0/μL. In
Extramedullary involvement is observed in the spleen and
 most instances the monocyte count is between 1000 and 5000/
sometimes in the liver and the lymph nodes. There seems to
μL, but occasionally ift may exceed 50,000/μL (Figure 15.4).
be a correlation between elevated WBC and splenomegaly.
CMML was divided into two myeloproliferative and myelodys-
The myelomonocytic cells infiltrate into the splenic red pulp
plastic subtypes based on the WBC count. Cases with >13.000
and hepatic and lymph node sinuses.
FIGURE 15.3 (A) Bone marrow smears in patients with
CMML demonstrate increased number of monocytes and
promonocytes with dysplastic features. (B) Blood smears 
FIGURE 15.4 Blood smear from a patient with CMML
reveal monocytosis with atypically featured monocytes and
demonstrating monocytes with vacuolated cytoplasm (A, low
hypogranular neutrophils.
 power; B, high power).
204
MYELODYSPLASTIC/MYELOPROLIFERATIVENEOPLASMS
电
B
GOD
FIGURE 15.5 Dysplastic monocytes and granulocytes are often
present in the blood smears of patients with CMML. Neutrophils
may be hypersegmented, hyposegmented, and/or hypogranular
(A, low power; B, high power).
FIGURE 15.6 Blood smear from a patient with CMML
demonstrating a hypogranular, hypersegmented neutrophil (A)
and a hypogranular, hyposegmented neutrophil (B).
Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia has been divided
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE AND
 into two subtypes in the WHO classification (2008):
CYTOCHEMICAL STAINS
● CMML-1: Blasts plus promonocytes are <5% in the peripheral
FlowCytometry
blood and <10% in the bone marrow (see Figure 15.5).
●CMML-2:
Multiparametric immunophenotyping by flow cytometry
● Blasts plus promonocytes are between 5% and 19% in the
(MIFC) plays important roles in diagnosing and monitor-
peripheral blood and/or between 10% and 19% in the
ing CMML (Figure 15.8).
bone marrow (Figure 15.7).
● There is presence of Auer rods irrespective of blast plus pro-
● Neoplastic monocytes in CMML are phenotypically mature
monocytes with respect to coexpression of CD14 and CD64.
monocyte count.
In addition, they express other monocytic markers like dim
CD4, CD11b, CD11c, and CD36.
CHRONIC MYELOMONOCYTICLEUKEMIA
205
 Neoplastic monocytes in CMML display a unique clustering pro-
file of CD14 and CD64 coexpression, which is often broader or
 Neoplastic monocytes often show cross-lineage aberrancies of
CD56 and/or CD2.
 They also demonstrate reduced expression of multiple and vari-
ous antigens, including CD11b, CD13, CD15, and HLA-DR.
Granulocytes of CMML can reveal dysmaturation patterns
similar to those seen in MDS/MPN.
 Blast enumeration is helpful in distinguishing CMML-1 from
CMML-2, as well as in determining transformation of CMML
to AML. When the transformation occurs, AML displays
variable features of monocytic differentiation (e.g., acute
myelomonocytic leukemia, acute monoblastic leukemia, or
acute monocytic leukemia) (Figure 15.9).
Distinction between CMML and AML with monocytic
differentiation can be difficult sometimes, since blasts in
this group of AMLs may be negative for both CD34 and
CD1i7. In addition to clinical history and morphology.
careful evaluation of the CD14/CD64 coexpression pro-
file can be invaluable. In contrast to CMML, monocytes in
AML with monocytic differentiation (even in acute mono-
cytic leukemia) are phenotypically immature without com-
plete coexpression of CD14 and CD64.
Immunohistochemistry and Cytochemica!
Stains (Figure 15.10)
●[mmunohistochemical (IHC) studies are less sensitive in
identifying monocytic differentiation than are MIFC and cyto-
chemistry. The most helpful monocytic markers by IHC stud-
B
ies are CD68, CD163, and lysozyme.
Cytochemical stains, such as MPO and non-specific esterase,
FIGURE 15.7 CMML-2. Bone marrow smear demonstrating
are sometimes useful for estimation of the granulocytic and
myeloid left shift with increased promonocytes and blasts.
monocytic components and the lineage confirmation of the
(B) Blood smear showing a myeloblast and several vacuolated
blast cells.
promonocytes.
FIGURE 15.8 IMMUNOPHENOTYPIC FEATURES OF CMML
DETECTED BY MULTIPARAMETER FLOW CYTOMETRY. A 75-year-
old gentleman presents with a longstanding history
of transfusion-dependent anemia and more recent
pancytopenia. Open gate density plot display reveals 
H3
monocytosis by CD45 gating. The monocytes (R2)
account for 35% of the total. Lymphocytes are shown
in R1. Compared with the internal controls of the open
gate displays, the monocytes demonstrate significantly
reduced CD15, reduced CD11b and HLA-DR, plus a more
spread-out coexpression profile of CD14 and CD64. In 
addition, there is aberrant and partial expression of CD2
and CD56. Interestingly, an abnormal T-cell subset is
present expressing dim CD2 and dim CD7.
CD11b
206
 MYELODYSPLASTIC/MYELOPROLIFERATIVE NEOPLASMS
FIGURE 15.9 FLOW CYTOMETRIC FEATURESOF TRANSFORMATION
 OF CMML-2 TO ACUTE MONOBLASTIC LEUKEMIA. Compared with
findings seen in Figure 15.8, transformation of CMML
H-OSS
has occurred in this case with characteristic phenotypic
CD117
features of acute monoblastic leukemia. The density
CD1
plots of the blast-enriched gate demonstrate blasts that
are negative for both CD34 and CD117, but positive for
CD13, CD14 (one subset), CD15 (heterogeneous), CD33
CD34
(bright), CD45 (dim to moderate), CD56 (uniform), and
CD45
CD56
CD64 (bright).
3
CD64
CD
CD15
CD33
CD14
多
FIGURE 15.11 Trisomy 8 (arrow) in a patient with chronic
myelomonocytic leukemia.
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
● At the molecular level, K-RAS and N-RAS mutations are reported
in approximately 50% of the CMML cases. There is also a report
of elevated levels of survivin in patients with CMML.
● Approximately 20-40% of patients with CMML show cytoge-
netic abnormalities including trisomy 8 (Figure 15.11). -7/
five copies of chromosome 8, trisomy of chromosome 19.
    os o os
 been reported in occasional cases.
●Fusion of the ETV6 and PDGFR β genes [t(5:12)(q33;p13)] has
been demonstrated in the CMML subtype with eosinophilia.
FIGURE 15.10 Immunohistochemical stains on bone marrow 
biopsy sections for lysozyme (A) and myeloperoxidase (B) in a
patient with chronic myelomonocytic leukemia.
ATYPICAL CHRONIC MYELOID LEUKEMIA
207
Box 15.2 Criteria for the Diagnosis of Atypical Chronic Myeloid Leukemia
 Peripheral blood granulocytosis (wBC ≥13,0o0/μl) with left-shift and presence of ≥10% immature forms (promyelocytes, myelocytes
metamyelocytes)
 Prominent dysgranulopoiesis
 No Ph1 or BCR-ABL I fusion gene
 No rearrangement of PDGFRA or PDGFRB
No or minimal absolute monocytosis (<10% of leukocytes)
 No or minimal absolute basophilia (<2% of leukocytes)
 Bone marrow hypercellularity with myeloid preponderance, left shift and dysgranulopoiesis, with or without other hematopoietic
dysplasias
 Less than 20% blasts in the peripheral blood or in the bone marrow.
1Adapted from Jaffe ES. Harris NL. Stein H. et al. Pathology and Genetics: Tumors of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues. IARC Press. Lyon. 2001 and Swerdlow
SH. Campo E. Harrs NL et al WHO Classication of Tumours of Hamatopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues. 4th edn International Agency for Research on Cancer.
Lyon, 2008
presence of abnormal megakaryocytes is frequently observed
Atypical Chronic Myeloid
There is no evidence of monocytosis.
Leukemia
● Some cases may show increased reticulin fibers.
● The peripheral blood shows elevated WBC, usually ranging
from 30,000 to 90,000/μL, but in occasional cases exceeding
Atypical chronic myeloid leukemia (aCML) is a clonal
100,0o0/μL. The leukocytosis is primarily due to the increased
hematopoietic disorder characterized by both dysplastic and
number of neutrophilic granulocytes which are also leff-
 proliferative features, including persistent granulocytosis
shifted. Granulocytic precursors account for about 10-20%
with left shift, bone marrow hypercellularity with dysplastic
or more of the leukocytes, but myeloblasts are always <10%
hematopoiesis, and myeloid preponderance.
and often range from 0% to 10%. Dysplastic granulopoiesis,
Cytogenetic and molecular studies are negative for Ph
as mentioned earlier, is always presen t.
● There is a variable degree of anemia which may be associated
and BCR-ABL1 fusion gene (Box 15.2).
with abnormal morphology, such as anisopoikilocytosis and/
Atypical CML is a disorder of older adults with appar-
or macrocytosis. Thrombocytopenia is a frequent feature
ently no sex predominance. The incidence of aCML is not
The overall morphologic features mimic those of CML,
yet established. Clinical manifestations, similar to those
of CMML, are related to anemia, thrombocytopenia,
except for more significant dysplasia, lack of basophilia,
and splenomegaly. The median survival is <2 years with
and no absolute monocytosis and basophilia.
  e  a   
Therapeutic approaches include conventional chemother-
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE AND CYTOCHEMICAL
apy, such as hydroxycarbamide. Allogeneic BMT is poten-
STAINS
tially curative for eligible patients.
● No specific immunophenotypic features have been described
for aCML.
MORPHOLOGY (FIGURE 15.12)
● The leukocyte alkaline phosphatase (LAP) score is variable
and ranges from low to high depending on the case.
● The bone marrow biopsy and clot sections are hypercellular
and show myeloid preponderance and left shift.
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
● The bone marrow smears show an elevated M:E ratio, often
>10:1, with dysgranulopoiesis and left shift Hyposegmentation
Atypical CML is negative for Philadelphia (Ph') chromo-
(pseudo Pelger-Huet) or hypersegmentation of the neutrophils.
some and shows no evidence of BCR-ABL1 rearrangement.
bizarre nuclear morphology of granulocytic precursors, and
A high frequency of RAS mutations is reported in BCR-
cytoplasmic hypo- or hypergranulation are frequently noted
ABL1 negative CML
● Myeloblasts range from 1% to 10% but occasionally may
reach up to 19%. Dyserythropoiesis with or without the
208
MYELODYSPLASTIC/MYELOPROLIFERATIVE NEOPLASMS
FIGURE 15.12 ATypicAL CML. Bone marrow biopsy section of a 65-year-old man demonstrating marked hypercellularity with myeloid
preponderance and left shift (A, low power; B, high power). Peripheral blood smear reveals marked granulocytosis with frequent 
immature forms (C, low power; D, high power). Dysgranulopoiesis is demonstrated by hyposegmented nuclei, abnormal chromatin
pattern, and abnormal cytoplasmic granules.
Juvenile Myelomonocytic
million children at risk, accounting for <2% of hemato-
logic malignancies in children. The majority of patients are
Leukemia
under the age of 4 years with a male:female ratio of about
2:5. Splenomegaly, hepatomegaly, lymphadenopathy, and
Juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML) is a clonal
skin rashes are noted in >90%, 80%, 70%, and 35% of the
hematopoietic disorder of early childhood characterized
 patients, respectively.
by hepatosplenomegaly, granulocytosis, and monocyto-
The cutaneous manifestations include neoplastic
sis with left shift and dysplastic changes, elevated hemo-
infiltration, eczema, xanthoma, and cafe-au-lait spots
globin F levels, and frequent skin involvement. JMML
(Figure 15.13). IMML shows a high frequency (7-14%) of
shares considerable pathologic features with CMML. The
association with neurofibromatosis type 1. The progno-
WHO criteria for the diagnosis of JMML are presented in
3 jo reaa  ui na s pae iq rood si sis
Box 15.3.
appear to do better than older children. Elevated hemoglo-
 Juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia is a rare early child-
bin F levels (>15%) and low platelet counts (<33,000/μL)
hood disorder with roughly 0.6 new cases per year per
are amongst the unfavorable prognostic indicators.
JUVENILE MYELOMONOCYTIC LEUKEMIA
209
Box 15.3 Criteria for the Diagnosis of Juvenile Myelomonocytic Leukemia'
 Peripheral blood monocytosis >10o0/μL
 Presence of myeloid blasts and promonocytes in the peripheral blood and/or the bone marrow; less than 20% of the differential counts.
No Phl or BCR-ABL1 fusion gene.
 Plus two or more of the following:
● Elevated levels of hemoglobin F for age
●Presence of immature granulocytes in the peripheral blood
●WBC>10,000/μL
● Clonal chromosomal aberrations
● Hypersensitivity of myeloid precursors to GM-CSF in vitro
1Adapted from Jaffe ES. Harris NL. Stein H. et al. Pathology and Genetics: Tumors of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues. IARC Press. Lyon. 2001 and Swerdlow SH.
Campo E. Harris NL, et al. WHO Classifcation of Tumours of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues. 4th edn. International Agency for Research on Cancer Lyon, 2008.
neurofibromatosis type 1, and similar frequency of RAS
gene mutation. Also, monosomy 7 is the most frequent
chromosomal abnormality in JMML. However, children
with JMML who lack monosomy 7 often display elevated
levels of hemoglobin F. It seems that infantile monosomy
7 is a subtype of JMML.
MORPHOLOGY AND LABORATORY FINDINGS
(FIGURE 15.14)
● The bone marrow samples are cellular and display myeloid
 preponderance and left shift with increased number of imma-
re myelomonocytic precursors. However, the total number
of myeloblasts, monoblasts, and promonocytes is <20%. Auer
 rods are not present.
● Dysplastic changes are frequently observed in the mono-
 cytic and the granulocytic series, such as bizarre morphology.
nuclear hyper- or hyposegmentation, and cytoplasmic hypo-
FIGURE 15.13 JUVENILE CHRONIC MYELOID LEUKEMIA. EcZeMatoid
or hypergranularity.
facial rash and lip bleeding in an 8-month-old infant.
● Erythroid dysplasia is often minimal or absent. Megakaryocytes
(Courtesy of Professor JM Chesselis).
may be reduced or show some degree of dysplastic changes
From Hoffbrand AV, Pettit JE, Vyas P. Color Atias of Clinicat Hematotogy. 4th
 including presence of micromegakaryocytes.
edn. Mosby/Elsevier, Philadelphia, 2010, by permission.
● Eosinophilia and basophilia are rare.
● The peripheral blood reveals monocytosis and granulo-
cytosis. The average leukocyte count is about 30,000/μL.
Monocytes and granulocytes are leff-shifted and dysplas-
Allogeneic BMT is the only available cure with an
fic with the presence of metamyelocytes, myelocytes, pro-
approximately 50% 5-year event-free survival rate. Recent
myelocytes, and promonocytes. Myeloid blast cells and
reports on the effects of zoledronic acid (ZOL), a blocker
promonocytes are often <5% but never >19% of the leuko-
of RAS activity, are promising.
cyte differential count.
The entity infantile (childhood) monosomy 7 syndrome
电
There is offen some degree of anemia and/or throm-
shares most of the clinicopathologic features of JMML.
bocytopenia.  Anisopoikilocytosis  and   macrocytosis   are
Both disorders affect children at early ages (often <l year
old), show male predominance, show an association with
present.
210
MYELODYSPLASTIC/MYELOPROLIFERATIVE NEOPLASMS
FIGURE 15.14 JUVENILE MYELOMONOCYTIC
LEUKEMIA.Bone marrow core biopsy
section reveals a markedly hypercellular
marrow (A, low power) with
preponderance of myelomonocytic
precursors (B, intermediate power)
and eosinophilia (C, high power).
Bone marrow smear shows myeloid
preponderance with moderate
hematogone hyperplasia and no
evidence of increased blasts (D). An
abnormal, vacuolated monocyte is 
D
shown in blood smear (E), and non-
specific esterase stain highlights
increased number of monocytic
precursors (F).
● The serum lysozyme levels are elevated. The hemoglobin
 MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
F levels are elevated, the glucose-6-phosphatase activity is
increased, and there is a high incidence of antinuclear (50%)
● Mutations of RAS, NF. and PTNPll genes are frequently
and anti-IgG (40%) antibodies. There may be evidence of
detected in patients with JMML. Quantitative measurements
polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemia.
of RAS and PTPNll have been made by an allele-specific
 Extramedullary involvement is a frequent feature with the
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay called TaqMan, and
infiltration of myelomonocytic cells in the dermis, the lung
increased levels have been correlated with relapse of IMML in
parenchyma, the hepatic sinusoids, and the splenic red pulp.
 transplanted patients.
●Methylation of pl5. which is a frequent finding in
patients with MDS (78%). is a rare event (17%) in [MML
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE AND CYTOCHEMICAL
pa tients.
STAINS
 Cytogenetic aberrations are often non-specific. Monosomy of
chromosome 7 is the most frequent cytogenetic abnormality.
Immunophenotypic  features by multiparametric  flow
along with deletion 7q (Figure 15.15), trisomy 8, and trisomy
cytometry are similar to those seen in CMML, as described
21. Rare cases with t(3:12) (q21;p13) or t(3;15)(q21; q26)
above.
have also been reported.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
211
Differential Diagnosis
The myeloproliferative/myelodysplastic neoplasms show
 significant overlapping morphologic features among them-
selves and with CML. CML patients are usually younger
 and show much more severe leukocytosis than patients
with CMML or aCML. Basophilia is a common feature
13
14
15
16
in CML but not present in CMML or aCML. Dysplastic
myelopoiesis is a characteristic feature of aCML, CMML,
A
and JMML, whereas it is insignificant in CML. Monocytosis 
19
20
is the hallmark of CMML and JMML and is lacking in CML
and aCML. Ph' and/or BCR-ABL1 fusion gene are present
in CML but absent in aCML, CMML, and JMML. JMML is
a disease of early childhood (usually under the age of 4)
and is commonly associated with skin rashes and elevated
hemoglobin F levels. There is a high frequency (7-14%)
 of neurofibromatosis type 1 in JMML patients. The major
clinicopathologic features of CMML, aCML, and JMML
 are compared with one another and with those of CML in
Table 15.1.
B
FIGURE 15.15 Monosomy 7 (arrows) in a child with JMML:
(A) karyotype and (B) FISH.
Table 15.1
 Clinicopathologic Features of Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia (CML), Atypical Chronic Myeloid Leukemia (aCML),
 Chronic Myelomonocytic Leukemia (CMML), and Juvenile Myelomonocytic Leukemia (JMML)1
Features
CML
aCML
CMML
JCML
Average age (years)
46
57
72
<4
Male:Female
>1
>1
>1
>1
 Splenomegaly
+++
++
+
Blood
 Average leukocyte count
>100,000/μL
60,000/μL
35,000/μL
30,000/μL
 Absolute monocytosis
Often no
Often no
Yes
Yes
 Basophilia
Often yes
No
No
No
Myeloid precursors
+++
++
++
++
LAP
 Reduced
Variable
Variable
Variable
 Anemia
 Present
 Present
 Present
 Present 
 Elevated Hb F
No
No
No
Yes
 Patelet count 
Variable
Reduced
Reduced
Reduced
Bone Marrow
 Cellularity
Increased
Increased 
Increased
Increased
 Myeloid preponderance
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
 Myeloid left shift 
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Monocytosis
No
No
Yes
Yes
 Significant dysplasia
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
1Adapted from Martiat P, Michaux JL, Rodhain J. Philadelphia-negative (Ph-) chronic myeloid leukemia (CML): comparison with Ph+ CML and chronic
myelomonocytic leukemia. Groupe Frangais de Cytogenétique Hematologique. Blood 1991; 78: 205-201 and Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Stein H, et al. Pathology
and Genetics: Tumours of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues. IARC Press, Lyon, 2001
212
MYELODYSPLASTIC/MYELOPROLIFERATIVE NEOPLASMS
Additional Resources
Bennett IM: The myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative disorders: The
 Loh ML: Recent advances in the pathogenesis and treatment of
interface, Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 17:1095-1100, 2003.
juvenile myelomonocytic leukaemia, Br J Haematol 152:677-
Beran M: Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia, Cancer Treat Res
687.2011.
142:107-132, 2008.
Orazi A, Germing U: The myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative neo-
 Emanuel PD: Juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia and chronic myelo-
 plasms: myeloproliferative diseases with dysplastic features, Leukemia
monocytic leukemia, Leuhemia 22:1335-1342, 2008.
22:1308-1319, 2008.
Oscier D: Atypical chronic myeloid leukemias, Pathol Biol (Paris)
Foucar K: Myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative neoplasms, Am J Clin
Pathol 132:281-289, 2009.
45:587-593, 1997.
Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, et al: WHO classification of
Germing U, Strupp C, Knipp S, et al: Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia
in the light of the WHO proposals, Haematologica 92:974-977, 2007.
tumours of haematopoietic and lymphoid tissues, ed 4, International
Agency for Research on Cancer Lyon, 2008.
Hall J, Foucar K: Diagnosing myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative neo-
plasms: laboratory testing strategies to exclude other disorders, Int J
Vardiman IW: Myelodysplastic syndromes, chronic myeloprolifera-
Lab Hematol 32:559-571, 2010.
tive diseases, and myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative diseases, Semin
Diagn Pathol 20:154-179, 2003.
Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Vardiman IW, et al: Hematopathology.
Philadelphia, 2010, Saunders/Elsevier.
Vardiman IW: Myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative diseases, Cancer
Treat Res 121:13-43, 2004.
Jager R, Kralovics R: Molecular pathogenesis of Philadelphia chro-
mosome negative chronic myeloproliferative neoplasms, Curr Cancer
Drug Targets 1l:20-30, 2011.
Hematologic Neoplasms
Associated with Eosinophilia
and PDGFRA, PDGFRB, Or
FGFR1 Rearrangement
1 diverse group of hematologic disorders may dem-  aberrant tyrosine kinase. The clinical importance of these
onstrate eosinophilia, such as acute myeloid leukemias,
disorders is that the tyrosine kinase inhibitors, such as
acute lymphoid leukemias, chronic myeloproliferative neo-
imatinib (Gleevec), may play an important role in their
plasms, myelodysplastic neoplasms, and Hodgkin's lym-
 treatment.
phoma (Box 16.1). Eosinophilia may be part of a clonal
hematologic neoplasm or may represent a reactive, non-
dlonal process.
This chapter reviews the hematologic neoplasms that
Myeloid and Lymphoid Neoplasms
are associated with clonal eosinophilia and the rear-
rangement of platelet-derived growth factor receptor α/β
Associated with PDGFRA
(PDGFRA, PDGFRB) or fibroblast growth factor recep-
Rearrangement
tor 1 (FGFR1), resulting in a fusion gene encoding an
PDGFRA rearrangement is associated with a cryptic inter-
stitial del(4)(q12) (Figure 16.1) or rearrangements of the
Box 16.1 Clinical Conditions Associated
4q12 such as t(4;10)(q12;p11.2). This is a rare entity and
with Eosinophilia1
may clinically present itself in the following forms:
Primary
● Chronic eosinophilic leukemia (CEL) (most common)
1. Clonal
●
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
a. Acute myeloid leukemias
● T-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma (T-ALL)
b. Acute lymphoid leukemias
●Both AML and T-ALL.
c. Myelodysplastic neoplasms
d. Chronic mylroproliferative neoplasms
 e. Myelodysplastic myeloproliferative neoplasms
f. Hematologic neoplasms associated with PDGFRA, PDGFRB.
or FGFR1
2. Non-clonal (Idiopathic): Hypereosinophilic syndrome
Secondary
CHIC2
1. Infectious
a. Parasitic infections (most common)
b. Bacterial or viral infections (rare)
Det4q12
 2. Non-infectious
a. Drugs and toxins (such as sulfa, toxic oil syndrome)
b. Allergy and autoimmune disorders (such as asthma,
eosinophilie fascitis)
C. Malignancies (such as metastatic cancer, Hodgkin lymphoma)
d. Endocrinopathies (such as Addison disease)
elp aseasip ui wbipeied mau y eudouisa poola Alagal woy pandepy,
sifcation. diagnosis. and treatment. Mayo Clin Proc 2005: 80: 75-83.
FIGURE 16.1 Deletion of the 4q12 region as identified by
three-color FISH.
Atlas of Hematopathology. DOl: http:/dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00016-4
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
214
HEMATOLOGIC NEOPLASMS ASSOCIATED WITH EOSINOPHILIA AND PDGFRA, PDGFR8, OR FGFR1 REARRANGEMENT
Patients with CEL and PDGFRA rearrangement may
demonstrate systemic symptoms such as pruritis, restrictive
cardiomyopathy (due to endomyocardial fibrosis), pulmo-
nary fibrosis, gastrointestinal distress, and/or splenomegaly.
 The disease may eventually transform to acute leukemia.
Patients usually respond well to treatment by tyrosine
kinase inhibitors, but some may develop resistance.
MORPHOLOGY AND LABORATORY FINDINGS
       o
features consistent with CEL, AML, or T-ALL (Figure 16.2).
 There is marked eosinophilia, including some early forms.
Dysplastic changes such as clumping of eosinophilic granules,
presence of primary granules, and nuclear hypersegmentation
may be present, and there may be areas of necrosis.
B
B
FIGURE 16.3 (A and B) Bone marrow biopsy sections from
FlGURE 16.2 Bone marrow smear (A) and biopsy section (B) from
a patient with mastocytosis and eosinophilia (H&E stain).
 a patient with AML and eosinophilia.
(C) Giemsa stain demonstrating the mast cells.
MYELOIDNEOPLASMSASSOCIATEDWITHPDGFRBREARRANGEMENT
215
●
Charcot-Leyden crystals may be present.
Myeloid Neoplasms Associated
●
 There may be evidence of mastocytosis with or without a KIT
mutation (Figure 16.3).
with PDGFRB Rearrangement
● The peripheral blood shows absolute eosinophilia (≥1500/
μL) (Figure 16.4).
 Serum tryptase and/or vitamin Bz levels may be elevated.
This entity is characterized by t(5;12)(q33;p13) with for-
mation of an ETV6-PDGRFB fusion gene (Figure 16.5).
The clinical manifestation mimics chronic myelo-
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
monocytic leukemia (CMML), CEL, or unclassifiable
There are no specific immunophenotypic aberrancies of
myeloproliferative  neoplasm   with eosinophilia.  This
CEL. Immunophenotypic features of the other subtypes are
 entity was considered a subtype of CMML (CMML with
similar to these seen in AML or T lymphoblast leukemia.
eosinophilia).
Patients often show splenomegaly. Hepatomegaly is
rare, and skin infiltration and cardiomyopathy may be
present. Patients usually respond well to treatment by tyro-
sine kinase inhibitors
MORPHOLOGY AND LABORATORY FINDINGS
● The bone marrow is hypercellular with myeloid preponder-
ance and eosinophilia. Similar to CMML, the bone mar-
row may show myeloid left shift with increased immature
granulocytic and monocytic series and dysplastic changes
(Figure 16.6).
 Increased spindle-shaped mast cells and areas of fibrosis may
be present.
● The peripheral blood shows an elevated WBC count with
eosinophilia, and often neutrophilia and monocytosis. The
eosinophils, neutrophils, and monocytes are left shifted and
dysplastic.
●Senum tryptase levels may be elevated.
FIGURE 16.4 Blood smear demonstrating hypersegmented
eosinophils.
百
16
17
12
R
20
FIGURE 16.5 t(5;12)(q33;p13) in a patient with myeloid neoplasm associated with PDGFRB
non-specific.
216
HEMATOLOGIC NEOPLASMS ASSOCIATED WITH EOSINOPHILIA AND PDGFRA, PDGFR8, OR FGFR1 REARRANGEMENT
in this translocation, and therefore different diffusion genes
are generated with FGFR1. The clinicopathologic manifesta-
tions range for CEL to AML, ALL, or bilineage acute leukemia.
The prognosis is poor, and so far, no established treatment
 protocol with tyrosine kinase inhibitors is available.
MORPHOLOGY
● The bone marrow is hypercellular and demonstrates myeloid
preponderance and eosinophilia. In the case of CEL, the bone
marrow blasts are <20%. CEL may eventually transform to an
acute phase demonstrating ≥20% blasts. In cases presenting
as AML, ALL, or bilineage leukemia, a significant proportion
of bone marrow cells (>20%) consist of myeloblasts, lympho-
blasts, or both populations, respectively.
● The peripheral blood shows eosinophilia (>1500/μL).
Neutrophilia and monocytosis may be present. Leukocytes
may show dysplastic changes. In the case of AML, ALL, or
bilineage leukemia, blasts may be present in the peripheral
blood.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
There are no specific immunophenotypic aberrancies of
CEL. Immunophenotypic features are similar to those seen
in AM, ALL, or bilineage leukemia.
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
 o n    
chromosomal rearrangements  involving the  fibroblast
growth factor receptor 1 tyrosine kinase gene on chro-
FIGURE 16.6 Bone marrow smears of a patient with myeloid
 mosome 8p11.2. Translocations involving more than 10
neoplasm associated with PDGFRB rearrangement (previously
known as CMML with eosinophilia).
 partner loci have been identified. These abnormalities dis-
rupt the FGFR1 and various partner genes, and result in
 the creation of novel fusion genes and chimeric proteins.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
The latter include the N-terminal portion of the partner
genes and the C-terminal portion of FGFR1. The most
Findings of multiparametric flow cytometry (MFC) are simi-
common partner is ZNF198 on chromosome 13q12. The
lar to those observed in CMML, as described in Chapter 15.
 other common sites are 9q33, 6q27, and 22q11.2, among
others.
Myeloid and Lymphoid
Neoplasms Associated with FGFR1
Rearrangements
This entity consists of a variety of hematologic neoplasms
demonstrating 8p11.2  translocation  and
rearranged
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
217
Additional Resources
Gotlib J: Molecular classification and pathogenesis of eosinophilic
Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, et al: WHO dassification of
disorders: 2005 update, Acta Haematol 114:7-25, 2005.
tumours of haematopoietic and lymphoid tissues, ed 4, Intermational
Huang Q. Snyder DS, Chu P, et al: PDGFRA rearrangement leading
Agency for Research on Cancer Lyon, 2008.
to hyper-eosinophilia, T-lymphoblastic lymphoma, myeloprolifera-
Valent P: Pathogenesis, classification, and therapy of eosinophilia
tive neoplasm and precursor B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia,
and eosinophil disorders, Blood Rev 23:157-165, 2009.
Leukemia 25:371-375, 2011.
Vladareanu AM, Muller-Tidow C, Bumbea H, et al: Molecular mark-
Jackson CC, Medeiros LJ, Miranda RN: 8pll myeloproliferative syn-
 ers guide diagnosis and treatment in Philadelphia chromosome-
drome: A review, Hum Pathol 41:461-476, 2010.
negative myeloproliferative disorders, Oncol Rep 23:595-604,
Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Vardiman IW, et al: Hematopathology.
2010.
Philadelphia, 2010, Saunders/Elsevier.
Wadleigh M, Tefferi A: Classification and diagnosis of myeloprolifera-
Rathe M, Kristensen TK, Moller MB, et al: Myeloid neoplasm
tive neoplasms according to the 2008 World Health Organization cri-
with  prominent eosinophilia and 
PDGFRArearrangement
teria, Int J Hematol 91:174-179, 2010.
treated with imatinib mesylate, Pediatr Blood Cancer 55:730-732,
2010.
This page intentionally left blank
Acute Myeloid
Leukemia-Overview
Icute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a group of hematopoi-
Box 17.1 WHo Classifcation of Acute
etic neoplasms derived from the bone marrow precursors
Myeloid Leukemia (AML) and Related
of the myeloid lineage. The neoplastic process is the result
Precursor Neoplasms
of clonal proliferation of an aberrant, committed stem cell
at the level of CFU-S or later stages of differentiation, lead-
AML with recurrent genetic abnormalities
ing to the accumulation of immature forms without or
1. AML with balanced translocations/inversions
with limited maturation. Other terms used for AML include
a.AML with t(8;21)
b. AML with abnormal eosinophils and inv(16) or t(16;16)
acute non-lymphoid leukemia (ANLL), acute myelogenous
C.
 Acute promyelocytic leukemia with t(15;17) or variants
leukemia, and acute myeloblastic leukemia. The current
d. AML with t(9;11)
WHO classification under "AML and related precursor neo-
e. AML with t(6;9)
plasms" consists of the following categories (Box 17.1).
f. AML with inv(3) or t(3;3)
g. AML with t(1;22)
1. AML with recurrent genetic abnormalities
 2. AML with gene mutations
2. AML with myelodysplasia-related changes
3. AML, therapy-related
AML with myelodysplasia-related changes
4. AML not otherwise specified
1. Following myelodysplastic syndrome or myelodysplastic/
5. Myeloid sarcoma
myeloproliferative disorder
6. Myeloid proliferations related to Down syndrome
 2. Without antecedent myelodysplastic syndrome
7. Blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm
Therapy-related AML
In this book, items 1 through 6 are discussed in Chapters
1. Alkylating agent-related
 2. Topoisomerase type llinhibitor-related 
18 to 22. The blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm
 3. lonizing radiation therapy
is moved to Chapter 56, where dendritic cell disorders are
4.Others
discussed.
The etiology of AML is not clearly understood. It has
AML not otherwise specified
been demonstrated that environmental factors and family
 1. AML minimally differentiated
background play important roles in the development of
2. AML without maturation
 AML. Three major environmental insults have been impli-
 3. AML with maturation
cated in the increased incidence of AML: (1) ionizing radi-
4. Acute myelomonocytic leukemia 
 5. Acute monoblastic and monocytic leukemia
 ation, (2) chemotherapeutic agents, and (3) occupational
 6. Acute erythroid leukemia
exposure to chemicals.
 7. Acute megakaryoblastic leukemia
Ionizing radiation induces DNA damage leading to
 8. Acute basophilic leukemia 
chromosomal breaks which may cause mutations, dele-
 9. Acute panmyelosis with myelofibrosis
tions, and translocations. The extent of this damage
Myeloid sarcoma
 depends on the type of radiation, the amount and rate of
Myeloid proliferations related to Down syndrome
absorption, distribution of the absorbed energy in the tis-
 Blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm 
sue, and the intervals between the radiation exposures.
1 Adapted from Swerdlow SH. Campo E. Harris NL. et al. WHO Classification of
tors are amongst the most potent chemical factors in the
Aouaby ieuoeuaul sanssll pioududun pue palodoewaeh jo sunour
for Research on Cancer. Lyon 2008 and Jaffe ES. Harris NL. Vardiman JW. et al.
development of acute leukemia and make up the bulk of
Hematopathology. Saunders/Elsevier. Philadelphia. 2010.
the subcategory of therapy-related AMLs (t-AML) in the
Atlas of Hematopathology. DOl: ht://dx.doi.org/10.1016/978-0-12-385183-300017-6
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
220
0ACUTEMYELOIDLEUKEMIA—OVERVIEW
WHO classification (see Chapter 20). Also, immunosup-
extramedullary involvement may be the very first present-
 pressive therapy in transplant patients and in patients with
ing symptom.
immune-associated disorders may increase the risk of AML.
Cytogenetic results are the most informative indica-
Occupational exposure to petroleum products (such as 
 tors of prognosis. The favorable karyotypes include t(8;21),
benzene), insecticides, and other organic solvents increases 
t(15;17), and inversion 16q/t(16q). Karyotypes with adverse
the risk of AML. Cigarette smoking, particularly in individ-
uals over the age of 6o, has shown a twofold increase in
 and abnormalities involving 3q. These aberrations are often
the risk of AML.
other monosomies, accompanied by other anomalies and
Certain familial disorders are associated with a higher
thus complex karyotypes with three or more chromosomal
risk of AML. There is a 10- to 20-fold increased chance of
 e  n d a  s
leukemia, particularly AML, in patients with Trisomy 21
course of chemotherapy (>15% blasts in the bone marrow)
(Down syndrome). A significant proportion of AMLs in 
also indicates poor prognosis. Five-year survival for the favor-
these patients is of megakaryoblastic subtype.
able prognostic category has been reported as to be 70%
The incidence of AML is also high in inherited disor-
with a 33% chance of relapse, whereas the figures for the
 ders with defective DNA repair, such as Bloom's syndrome,
 poor prognostic category are 15% and 78%, respectively
Fanconi's anemia, Wiscott-Aldrich syndrome, neurofibro-
 matosis, Kostmann's syndrome (infantile agranulocytosis),
and Diamond-Blackfan anemia.
 Leukemogenesis, similar to most other cancer develop-
Morphology
ments, appears to be a multistep process involving struc-
tural and functional changes in a cascade of genes leading
to the clonal expansion of defective stem cells. These
Acute myeloid leukemia refers to neoplasm of non-lym-
genetic alterations often include mutations of oncogenes
phoid hematopoietic progenitor cells. Therefore, it consists
and/or loss of tumor suppressor genes. The specific genetic
  s s ds no
events in the process of leukemogenesis are not currently
such as myeloblasts, promyelocytes, monoblasts, pro-
well understood, though it has been suggested that at
monocytes, erythroblasts, and megakaryoblasts. In general,
least two mutations are required: one leading to a prolif-
myeloblasts are the most predominant precursor cells in
erative advantage and the other causing impairment of
 AML categories. The requirement for the diagnosis of AML
the maturation process (the "double-hit" hypothesis). The 
 is the presence of 20% or more blast cells in the bone mar-
following examples represent the multistep concept of leu-
row or blood differential counts. In addition to myelo-
kemogenesis in AML.
blasts, "blast" counts in certain categories of AML include
In the chronic phase of chronic myeloid leukemia
 monoblasts, megakaryoblasts, promonocytes, or promy-
(CML), leukemic cells show t(9;22) resulting in the BCR-
elocytes (Figures 17.1 to 17.6). Erythroblasts are excluded
ABL1 fusion gene. As CML progresses to the accelerated
from the blast count, but are an important component of
phase and then blast transformation, additional genetic
erythroleukemia, an AML subtype (see Chapter 21).
abnormalities, such as mutation of TP53 (a tumor suppres-
 In certain conditions, such as in the category of AML
sor gene), evolve.
with recurrent genetic abnormalities, the requirement for
The high frequency of AML in patients with MDS
 ≥20% blasts is sidestepped, and the presence of cytoge-
strongly supports the double-hit hypothesis for leukemo-
 netic abnormalities even with <20% blasts is sufficient for
genesis. MDS represents the first step or the first hit with
the diagnosis of AML.
frequent detectable chromosomal aberrations, including 
●Myeloblasts are large cells with scanty blue cytoplasm, round,
5/del(5q). -7/del(7q), and +8. Evolution to AML, often
oval or irregular nuclei, fine chromatin and multiple promi-
with additional molecular and/or cytogenetic changes,
nent nucleoli. The cytoplasm may contain no granular or vari-
depicts the final stage or the second hit.
able numbers of azurophilic granules (Figure 17.1)
 A significant proportion of AMLs are associated with
 Promyelocytes are overall larger and carry larger quantities
specific recurrent cytogenetic abnormalities such as t(8;21 ),
of azurophilic granules than myeloblasts. They depict a well-
inv(16)/t(16;16), t(15;17), t(9;11), t(6;9), inv(3q)/t(3;3)
developed Golgi system and a round or an oval nucleus,
and t(1;22) (see Chapter 18).
which is often eccentric. The granular myeloblasts and pro-
 The overall incidence of AML is about 3 per 100,000
myelocytes share overlapping morphologic features, and.
persons per year. The median age for AML onset is
therefore their distinction at times is difficult (Figure 17.2).
60 years, with a male to female ratio of about 1. The clinical
below).
symptoms are primarily related to cytopenias and include
 Monoblasts are large cells with a variable amount of blue or
weakness, fatigue, recurrent infections, and hemorrhagic
 grey-blue cytoplasm. The cytoplasm may be vacuolated and/
episodes, such as gum bleeding or ecchymoses. Bone
or contain a few fine azurophilic granules. The nucleus is
 pain is infrequent. Extramedullary infiltration (chloroma,
round, irregular or convoluted with fine chromatin and one or
 granulocytic sarcoma) is occasionally seen, particularly in
more prominent nucleoli (Figure 17.3). Morphologic distinc-
AMLs with monocytic differentiation. On rare occasions,
tion between myeloblasts and monoblasts may be difficult;
MORPHOLOGY
221
FIGURE 17.3 AcUTE MoNoBLAsTIc LEUKEMIA. Bone marrow smear
demonstrating numerous monoblasts with cleaved nuclei and
 prominent nucleoli.
B
FIGURE 17.1 Blood smear (A) and bone marrow smear
(B) demonstrating myeloblasts from a patient with acute myeloid
leukemia, without maturation.
FIGURE 17.4 AcUTE MoNocYTIc LEUKEMIA. Blood smear
demonstrating numerous promonocytes with abundant
 Cytoplasm, convoluted nuclei and fine nuclear chromatin.
cytochemical stains and immunophenotypic studies are help-
ful to distinguish them (see below).
● Promonocytes are medium to large cells with variable amount
of grey-blue cytoplasm. The cytoplasm may be vacuolated
and/or contain a few fine azurophilic granules. The nucleus
is convoluted and shows fine chromatin. Nucleoli are often
inconspicuous or small (Figure 17.4).
 Erythroblasts are large cells with dark blue non-granular cyto-
plasm, often showing a perinuclear pale Golgi system. The nucleus 
is round with a thick nuclear membrane, fine nuclear chromatin,
 Megakaryoblasts are small to large cells with a small amount
of dark blue, non-granular cytoplasm, round nuclei, and fine 
chromatin. Cytoplasmic blebs may be present (Figure 17.6).
FIGURE 17.2 AcUTE PRoMYELocYTIc LEUKEMIA. Bone marrow smear
● Leukemic myeloblasts and promyelocytes, may contain
demonstrating numerous promyelocytes with abundant
Auer rods (Figure 17.7). Also, Auer rods may be occasionally
cytoplasmic granules.
present in the neoplastic monoblasts and promonocytes.
222
ACUTE MYELOID LEUKEMIA—OVERVIEW
 FIGURE 17.5 Bone marrow smear demonstrating numerous
pronormoblasts (erythroblasts).
FIGURE 17.7 Bood smears (A and B) showing myelobalsts with
Auer rods.
FIGURE 17.6 AcUTE MEGAKARYOBLASTIC LEUKEMIA. BlOOd sMear
certain stains are still being used in the differential diagno-
demonstrating several megakaryoblasts.
sis and the classification of acute leukemia.
In general, the bone marrow biopsy/clot sections are
MYELOPEROXIDASE STAIN
hypercellular and show diffuse infiltration of the bone
 marrow by immature myeloid cells. Occasionally, the bone
Myeloperoxidase (MPO) is a lysosomal enzyme present
marrow is hypocellular. Blood examination may reveal
in granulocytic and monocytic cells (Figure 17.8). MPO
anemia, leukopenia, and/or thrombocytopenia. Myeloid
 is expressed in neutrophilic and eosinophilic lineages in
left shift is a common feature, and often a variable number
all stages of maturation, but in basophils it is more often
 of blasts are present. However, in some cases, at the time
detected in the immature forms. The mature basophils are
of bone marrow diagnosis, the peripheral blood smears 
usually negative for MPO. The intensity of MPO staining
may show no evidence of blast cells (aleukemic leukemia).
is less in monocytes than in granulocytes. Erythroid pre-
cursors and lymphocytes are MPO-negative. A peroxidase
isoenzyme has been detected by electron microscopy in
the dense tubular system of platelets and megakaryo-
Cytochemical Stains
cytes, but, by conventional techniques, these cells are
MPO-negative.
Myeloperoxidase activity declines rather rapidly. Air
Most special cytochemical stains have been replaced by
 dried unstained smears should be stored at cool tempera-
immunophenotyping in most laboratories. However, 
ture, in the dark, and be used within 1-2 weeks.
CYTOCHEMICAL STAINS
223
FIGURE 17.9 Bone marrow smears subject to cytochemical stains.
(A) Sudan Black B stain shows dense darkly stained cytoplasmic
granules in myeloid cells. (B) Dysplastic erythroid precursors
 show coarse PAS-positive cytoplasmic granules.
FIGURE 17.8 Immunohistochemical (A) and cytochemical
(B) stains for MPO demonstrating numerous MPO-positive cells.
megakaryocytic leukemia show coarse PAS-positive cyto-
 plasmic granules.
SUDAN BLACK B STAIN
Sudan Black B is a lipophilic dye that stains the granulo-
ALPHA-NAPHTHYL BUTYRATE ESTERASE
cytic series. The pattern of reactivity of Sudan Black B in the
Alpha-naphthyl butyrate esterase, also known as non-specific
granulocytic series is similar to that of MPO (Figure 17.9A).
esterase (NSE), is a monocytic marker (Figure 17.10A). This
Monocytes are either negative or weakly positive with this
 stain is helpful in distinguishing acute leukemias with mono-
stain. Lymphocytes, erythroid cells, megakaryocytes, and 
cytic differentiation, as well as histiocytic lesions. However,
platelets are usually Sudan Black B-negative. Unlike MPO,
lymphoblasts, erythroblasts, and megakaryoblasts may
Sudan Black B is stable, and therefore archival cytologic
 also show a few punctuate cytoplasmic-positive granules.
 materials could be used for staining. Sudan Black B stain
Granulocytic series are negative for an NSE stain. NSE activity
does not work in paraffin sections.
is fluoride-sensitive.
PERIODIC ACID-SCHIFF REACTION
NAPHTHOL AS-D ACETATE ESTERASE
Periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) reaction in hematopoietic  Naphthol AS-D acetate esterase is demonstrated in all
cells is primarily due to the presence of cytoplasmic gly-  stages of maturation in the granulocytic and monocytic
diffuse, fine PAS-positive granules, whereas dysplastic ery- may also show a few punctuate cytoplasmic-positive gran-
 s  n i           
in acute lymphoid leukemia, monocytic leukemia, and  in monocytes but not in granulocytes.
224
ACUTE MYELOID LEUKEMIA—OVERVIEW
 Table 17.1
Consensus Reagents for initial Evaluation of
Hematologic Neoplasms 1
Lineage
Primary Reagents
B-cells
CD5, CD10, CD19, CD20, CD45, K/L
T-and NK-cells
CD2, CD3, CD4, CD5, CD7, CD8, CD45,
CD56
Myelomonocytic
CD7, CD11b, CD13, CD14, CD15, CD16,
CD33, CD34, CD45, CD56, CD117,
HLA-DR
Myelomonocytic (limited)
CD13, CD33, CD34, CD45
Plasma cells
CD19, CD38, CD45, CD56
A
Adapted from Wood BL, Arroz M, Barnett D, et al. 2006 Bethesda
Intermational Consensus recommendations on the immunophenotypic
analysis of hematolymphoid neoplasia by flow cytometry: optimal
reagents and reporting for the flow cytometric diagnosis of hematopoietic
neoplasia. Cytometry B Clin Cytom 2007; 72(Suppl 1): S14-522.
● Lineage assignment to distinguish AML from other types of
acute leukemias, and to assign the leukemia to the proper sub-
categories, such as myeloblastic, monoblastic, erythroblastic.
or megakaryoblastic
 [dentification of phenotypic aberrancies to discriminate normal
versus abnormal myeloblasts. This distinction is essential and
serves as the molecular basis for the detection of residual dis-
ease and minimal residual disease (MRD). In addition, certain
 phenotypic aberrancies may have prognostic significance (e.g..
B
aberrant CD56 with worse prognosis) and/or immunopheno-
typic-genotypic implications: e.g. concurrent aberrancies of
FIGURE 17.10 (A) Bone marrow smear showing numerous
monocytic cells positive for an NSE stain. (B) Granulocytes
CD56 and CD19 with AML t(8;21 ).
stain for naphthol As-D chloroacetate. A monocyte with a few
Phenotypic aberrancies include (see also Chapter 8):
cytoplasmic granules is present (arrow).
● Coss-lineage aberrancies
●
 abnormal expression intensities
 asynchronous expressions of maturation molecules
NAPHTHOL AS-D CHLOROACETATE
●
abnormal location by CD45 gating
 Naphthol AS-D chloroacetate is primarily expressed in the
● abnormal clustering profiles.
granulocytic series (Figure 17.10B) and mast cells. Other
hematopoietic elements are essentially negative, though
ANTIBODY PANEL
some monocytes, megakaryocytes, lymphoid and erythroid
cells, and their leukemic counterparts may show a weak
No standardized antibody panel is currently available that
reaction. Naphthol AS-D chloroacetate is very stable and is
can be used universally by different flow cytometry labo-
demonstrated in archival cytologic materials and paraffin-
 ratories with various instrumentations and in diverse prac-
embedded tissue sections.
tice settings. Nevertheless, the 2006 Bethesda International
Consensus recommendations on the immunophenotypic
analysis of hematolymphoid neoplasia by flow cytometry
have proposed a panel of antibodies that can be used for
Immunophenotypic Studies
 initial screening of hematolymphoid disorders (Table. 17.1).
Additional lineage-associated markers and markers for
detecting common cross-lineage aberrancies to consider are:
Multiparametric immunophenotyping by flow cytometry
(MIFC) is an integral component of the current diagnos-
● Myeloid—myeloperoxidase (MPO)
tic work-up in acute myeloid leukemias for the following
Monocytic—CD4, CD11c, CD36, CD64, or Lys0zyme (by IHC)
 Erythroid-Glycophorin A, CD36 and CD71
reasons:
”
 Megakaryocytic—CD41 and CD61, plus CD31 and factor VIII
● Blast enumeration to confirm the presence of >20% blasts
(by [HC)
in bone marrow or blood at diagnosis and to evaluate post-
Common cross-lineage aberrancies—CD2, CD5, CD7, CD19.
treatment samples for residual disease
and CD56
CYTOGENETICS
225
CD45neg andmoderate to bright blasts
Molecular Studies
(20%ofALs)
CD45dimblasts
Activating mutations in FLT3, a tyrosine kinase, have
(80%ofALs)
emerged as important changes in some cases of AML
(found in about 3o%), and hopeful targets of anti-kinase
therapy as has worked so successfully in CML. The muta-
 tions also confer a less favorable prognosis.
CD45
● FLT3 mutations are of two types: point mutations, usul-
ally involving codon 835, and internal tandem duplications
(ITD). They are usually detected by some form of allele-
CD45
specific PCR.
Less common mutations occurring in other genes include
CD45
CD45
NPM1, CEBPA, c-KIT. and IDH1. These mutations can have
either synergistic or opposite prognostic effects with the FLT3
FIGURE 17.11 Variations of blasts by CD45 gating. Blasts can
mutations.
demonstrate various locations by CD45 gating. In about 80%
of the acute leukemias, blasts express dim CD45 (left middle
histogram). In the remaining 20% of cases, the blasts can be
either CD45 negative (upper let), or CD45 positive at dim to
moderate (lower left and right) to bright (upper right) levels.
Cytogenetics
MIFC DIAGNOSTIC PERILS AND PITFALLS
鲁
 Blast enumeration can be affected by various factors (e.g., dry tap.
 A large variety of molecular genetic and cytogenetic abnormal-
hemodilution, etc.) and needs to be correlated with morphology.
ities have been reported in AML.
(21's1) 10 '(91'91) (91)a1! (1:8) 41m 7y J0 s1s0u81a
The occurring. recurrent and more specific abnormalities
does not require a blast count of >20%.
include [t(8;21)(q22;q22): (RUNX1/RUNXT1) )]. [t(15:17)
 Blasts may be present at variable locations by CD45 gating
(191) 10 (61)(91  ) 1)
(Figure 17.11).
(p13;q22): (CBFβ /MYH11)]. [t(9:11)(p21:q23): MLLT3-MLL].
Not all myeloblasts coexpress CD34 and CD117. Some myelo-
(') 10 (79z61zb)(e)au] [1z1N-yaa :(tebszd)(69)
blasts can be negative for both CD34 and CD117.
(q21;q26.2): RPN1-EVI1], and [t(1;22)(p13:q13): RBM15-
●
 Phenotypic changes or switches may occur during or after therapy.
MKL1 ] and 1lq23 ( MLL ) abnormalities (see Chapter 18).
● A combined approach for immunophenotyping is essential to
The
non-specific
abnormalities  include
translocations,
include MIFC, cytochemistry, and immunohistochemistry.
trisomies, monosomies, deletions, and other structural changes
●
 Interpretation of MIFC results should always be in the context
of all other chromosomes which are described later with each
of multidisciplinary correlations.
AML subtype.
226
ACUTEMYELOIDLEUKEMIA—OVERVIEW
Additional Resources
Bacher U, Schnittger S, Haferlach T: Molecular genetics in acute
Orazi A: Histopathology in the diagnosis and classifcation of acute
myeloid leukemia, Curr Opin Oncol 22:646-655, 2010.
 myeloid leukemia, myelodysplastic syndromes, and myelodysplastic/
Betz BL, Hess JL: Acute myeloid leukemia diagnosis in the 2lst cen-
myeloproliferative diseases, Pathobiology 74:97-114, 2007.
tury, Arch Pathol Lab Med 134:1427-1433, 2010.
Peters JM, Ansari MQ: Multiparameter flow cytometry in the diagnosis and
Falini B, Tiacci E, Martelli MP, et al: New classification of acute
management of acute leukemia, Arch Pathot Lab Med 135:44-54, 2011.
myeloid leukemia and precursor-related neoplasms: changes and
Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, et al: WHO Classification of
unsolved issues, Discov Med 10:281-292, 2010.
Tumours of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues, ed 4, Lyon,
Heerema-McKenney A, Arber DA: Acute myeloid leukemia, Hematol
 2008, International agency for research on cancer.
Oncol Clin North Am 23:633-654, 2009.
Vardiman JW, Thiele J. Arber DA,et al: The 2008 revision of the
Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Vardiman JW.
et al: Hematopathology.
World Health Organization (WHO) classifcation of myeloid neo-
Philadelphia, 20l0, Saunders/Elsevier.
plasms and acute leukemia: rationale and important changes, Blood
114:937-951, 2009.
Kern W, Bacher U, Haferlach C, et al: The role of multiparameter
flow cytometry for disease monitoring in AML, Best Pmact Res Clin
Watt CD, Bagg A: Molecular diagnosis of acute myeloid leukemia,
Haematol23:379-390, 2010
Expert Rev Mol Diagn 10:993-1012, 2010.
 Motyckova G, Stone RM: The role of molecular tests in acute myelog-
Yin CC, Medeiros LJ, Bueso-Ramos CE: Recent advances in the diag-
enous leukemia treatment decisions, Curr Hematol Malig Rep 5:
nosis and classification of myeloid neoplasms-comments on the
109-117, 2010.
Acute Myeloid Leukemias
18
with Recurrent Genetic
Abnormalities
Several specific chromosomal translocations, inver-
AML with Chromosomally
sions, and gene mutations have been identified in AML
patients, with significant prognostic values. Some of these
Balanced Rearrangements:
genetic abnormalities are strongly associated with specific
Translocations/Inversions
morphologic features, such as association of acute pro-
myelocytic leukemia with t(15;17) or association of acute
myelomonocytic leukemia  with abnormal eosinophils
AML WITH t(8;21)(q22;q22);
with t(16;16) or inv(16). In this chapter we will discuss
(RUNX1-RUNX7T7)
two major categories with recurrent genetic abnormali-
ties: (a) AML with balanced translocations or inversions
Acute myeloid leukemia with t(8;21)(q22;q22) is a bal-
(Table 18.1) and (b) AML with gene mutations.
anced translocation in which RUNX1 (transcription fac-
tor 1), previously called AML1 gene, on the long arm of
Table 18.1
chromosome 2lq22, fuses with the RUNX1T1 gene (also
 Major Characteristics of Acute Myeloid Leukemias
named MTG8, ETO, or CBFA2T1) on the long arm of chro-
with Balanced Translocations/lnversions
mosome 8q22. This fusion results in an RUNX1-RUNX1T1
Cytogenetic/Molecular
Predominant
clinical
Morphology
Remarks
 activating the expression of the anti-apoptosis gene BCL-2.
Alteration
 AML with maturation
Favorable
AML with t(8;21) accounts for 5-10% of AMLs and
t(8;21)q22;q22);
involves both children and adults. The average age for adults
RUNX1-RUNX1T1
(AML-M2)
prognosis
is about 30 years, which is significantly lower than the aver-
t(15;17)(q24;q21);
Acute promyelocytic
Favorable
leukemia 
age age for other types of AML. It has a favorable prognosis
PML-RARA
prognosis
 in adults, but the clinical outcome is poor in children.
inv(16)(p13.1q22) or
Acute myelomonocytic Favorable
t(16;16)(p13.1;q22) or
leukemia with
prognosis
del (16)(q22);CBFB-
abnormal eosinophils
Morphology
MYHII
t(9;11)(p22;q23);
 AML with monocytic
Intemmediate
 The morphologic features in a significant proportion of AML
MLLT3-MLL
dlifferentiation
prognosis
with t(8;21) are similar to those described in the category of 
t(6;9)(p23;q34);
Variable
Poor prognosis
AML with maturation (Figure 18.1) (see Chapter 21).
DEK-NUP214
●
 The myeloblasts are large with variable amount of blue cyto-
inv(3)(q21q26.2) or t(3;3)
Variable, often with 
 Poor prognosis
plasm, and often indented nuclei. Azurophilic cytoplasmic
(q21;q26.2); RPN1-EVI1
multilineage dysplasia
granules are often present, and some blasts may contain
t(1;22x(p13;q13);
Megakaryoblastic
 Guarded,
large granules mimicking cytoplasmic granules seen in the
RBM15-MKL1
responding to
Chediak-Higashi syndrome.
curent therapy
 Auer rods are frequent and also may be detected in the more
mature myeloid forms.
t(9;22) (q34;q11.2);:
Variable
 Poor prognosis 
 Promyelocytes, myelocytes, metamyelocytes, bands, and seg-
BCR-ABL1
mented neutrophils are present and often show dysplastic
t(8;16)x(p11.2;p13.3);
AML with monocytic
Variable
changes.
KAT6A/CREB8P
dlifferentiation and
Eosinophilia is common, and some cases may show increased
erythrophagocytosis
bone marrow basophils and/or mast cells.
Atlas of Hematopathology. D01: http:/dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00018-8
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
228
 ACUTE MYELOID LEUKEMIAS WITH RECURRENT GENETIC ABNORMALITIES
CD45
CD117
CD56
CD13
CD10
CD64
FIGURE 18.2 FloW CYToMeTrY ResULTs 0F AML wITh t(8;21)(q22;q22).
Open gate display by CD45 gating reveals excess blasts (10%
of the total, circled). Density plots of the blast-enriched gate (in
blue) show abnormal myeloblasts, which are positive for CD13,.
CD33, CD34 (bright), CD45 (dim), CD117, and HLA-DR In addition,
there are distinct cross-lineage aberrancies of CD56 and partial
dim CD19, which are characteristic of this entity. The concurrence
of CD19 and CD56 aberrancies should raise a high index of
suspicion for AML with t(8;21), even though the blast count may
be less than 20%.
Molecular and Cytogenetic Studies
● The molecular detection of RUNXl-RUNXiT1 fusion is usu-
FIGURE 18.1 ACUTE MYELOID LEUKEMIA WITH MATURATON. BOne
tase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). It is important to
marrow smears (A, low power; B, high power) of a patient
know that some patients who have remained in continuous
remission for a long period may still show RUNX1-RUNX1T1
(see Figure 18.3).
mRNA in their leukocytes by RT-PCR techniques. The clini-
cal significance of the persistence of RUNX1-RUNX1T1 is not
dear. However, the detection of RUNX1-RUNX1T1 fusion by
itself may not indicate relapse or active disease.
The characteristic cytogenetic finding is the t(8;21)(q22;q22)
●Approximately 7% of AML cases with t(8;21) show morphologic
(RUNX1-RUNX1T1)(Figure 18.3A). Complex translocations,
involving
three or
more
chromosomesalong
with
These patients depict peripheral blood monocytosis with
chromosomes 8 and 21, have also been reported in occasional
the presence of immature forms and increased myeloblasts.
cases. In some cases, the t(8;21) rearrangement is cryptic, and
monoblasts, and promonocytes in their bone marrows.
mn go undetected by standard karyotyping. In such cases, FISH
Rare cases of AML with t(8;21) may show blast counts of
(Figure 18.3B) or RT-PCR methods are required to establish the
<20% in their blood and bone marrow.
fusion RUNX1-RUNX1T1 rearrangement.
immunophenotype
ACUTE PROMYELOCYTIC LEUKEMIA WITH
Most cases demonstrate a characteristic phenotype (Figure 18.2)
t(15;17)(q24;q21)
which may show features overlapping with those seen in AML
Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is one of the vari-
with maturation.
ants of AML associated with t(15;17)(q24;q21.2) (PML-
● Aberrancies of CD56 and partial dim CD19 expression are
RARA) or other forms of chromosomal rearrangements
common.
involving the retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) gene.
Blasts often reveal bright CD34, moderate to bright CD13.
This translocation leads to the production of PML- RARA
dim CD33, plus CD117 and HLA-DR
fusion protein, which is less sensitive to retinoic acid. This
● MPO is positive; TdT is sometimes weakly positive.
reduced sensitivity to retinoic acid may lead to persistent
AMLWITHCHROMOSOMALLYBALANCEDREARRANGEMENTS:TRANSLOCATIONS/INVERSIONS
229
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
A
19
20
21
22
demonstrated by FISH (arrows).
transcriptional repression, and therefore prevention of fur-  increased expression of annexin II receptor on leukemic
ther differentiation of promyelocytes.
promyelocytes. Annexin II receptor binds plasminogen
APL accounts for 5-10% of all AMLs and is primar-
 and increases plasmin formation.
ily seen in young adults and middle-aged patients, but it
Acute promyelocytic leukemia is one of the favorable
may occur at any age. Clinical symptoms are related to
types of AML. Favorable prognostic factors include age
complications of cytopenia and disseminated intravascu-
under 30 years, initial leukocyte count <10,000/μL, and
lar coagulopathy (DIC). Weakness/fatigue, infection, and
 platelet count >40,000/μL. There are studies suggesting that
hemorrhagic episodes are often complications of ane-
the expression of CD56 on the leukemic promyelocytes,
mia, granulocytopenia, and thrombocytopenia, respec-
 methylation of p15 kinase inhibitor gene, and variant trans-
tively. DIC is either present at diagnosis or detected soon 
locations such as t(11;17)(q23;q21.2) (ZBTB16-RARA) are
after chemotherapy. DIC is a serious complication which
associated with less favorable prognosis.
may lead to cerebrovascular or pulmonary hemorrhage in
All-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) is a highly effective thera-
up to 40% of patients. The risk is reported to be higher
 peutic agent. It accelerates the terminal differentiation of
in the microgranular variant of APL. Three major factors
leukemic promyelocytes and induces clinical remission.
may contribute to the mechanism of DIC: (1) release of
 For complete molecular remission and long-term survival,
tissue factor which is involved in the activation of factor a combination of ATRA and cytotoxic chemotherapy is
 ( (         ()    
which activate factor X independent of factor VlI, and (3)  not respond to ATRA
230
ACUTE MYELOID LEUKEMIAS WITH RECURRENT GENETIC ABNORMALITIES
FIGURE 18.4 AcUTE PRoMYELocyTIc LEukEMIA, HYPERGRANULAR. Bone marrow biopsy Sections (A, low power; B, high power) are hypercellular
and show sheets of promyelocytes with abundant granular cytoplasm. Immunohistochemical stain for MPo is strongly positive (C).
A promyelocyte is depicted in blood smear (D), and numerous highly granular promyelocytes are demonstrated in bone marrow 
Morphology
●Peripheral blood smears often show leukocytosis with the
presence of atypical promyelocytes.
·Bone marrow biopsy sections are hypercellular and show clus-
ters and/or sheets of immature myeloid cells with abundant
Two morphologic variants of APL have been described:
granular cytoplasm and nuclear spacing.
APL  with  hypergranular promyelocytes and  APL  with
231
FIGURE 18.5 AcUTE PROMYELOCYTIC LEUKeMIA,
FAGGoT cELLs. Blood smear (A), bone marrow smear
(B) and marrow clot section (C) demonstrating 
several promyleocytes with bundles of Auer rods
(arrows).
microgranular (hypogranular) promyelocytes. The hyper-
Hypogranular APL
granular variant, according to the literature, accounts for
Hypogranular promyelocytes show abundant cytoplasm with
about 75-80% of APLs. However, in our experience at
lack of or sparse azurophilic granules. The azurophilic gran-
the UCLA Medical Center and the VA Greater Los Angeles
ules appear finer than the granules seen in the hypergranular
Healthcare System, we have seen more cases of the micro-
variant (Figures 18.6 and 18.7).
 granular variant than the hypergranular type.
 Auer rods and faggot cells may be present, but not so frequent
 as in the hypergranular subtype.
●
The nuclei are predominantly bilobed, but folded and
Hypergranuiar APL
mnvoluted forms are often present, mimicking monocytic
●Hypergranular promyelocytes have a cytoplasm heavily loaded
features. The nuclear chromatin is fine, often with prominent
with azurophilic granules, which are ofen coarser and more
nucleoli.
numerous than the ones seen in normal promyelocytes
A small proportion of bone marrow cells may consist of
(Figures 18.4 and 18.5). Auer rods are often present and in
myeloblasts, hypergranular promyelocytes, and small hyperba-
some cells appear in bundles (faggot cells) (Figure 18.5).
sophilic promyelocytes.
 Nuclei are usually round or oval but may appear irregular.
A marked elevation of leukocyte count is seen more frequently
folded, or dumbbell-shaped. The densely packed granules
in the microgranular variant than in hypergranular APL
may obscure the visibility of the nuclei.
● The hypergranular promyelocytes are the predominant cells in
the marrow, but smaller promyelocytes with basophilic cyto-
Immunophenotype
plasm and fewer azurophilic granules and microgranular pro-
myelocytes are also present.
 Blasts and promyelocytes express heterogeneous CD13, bright
●
 Myeloblasts are fewer than promyelocytes and average around
homogenous CD33, often partial CD15 and CD64, and bright
10% of the bone marrow cells.
intracellular MPO (Figure 18.8).
232
 ACUTE MYELOID LEUKEMIAS WITH RECURRENT GENETIC ABNORMALITIES
C
FIGURE 18.7 ACUTE PROMYELOCYTIC LEUKEMIA, HYPOGRANULAR. Bone
marrow biopsy section (A, low power; B, high power) and
bone marrow smear (C) showing clusters of minimally granular
promyelocytes with folded or convoluted nuclei.
FIGURE 18.6 ACUTE PROMYELOCYTIC LEUKEMIA, HYPOGRANULAR.BlOOd
smear (A, low power; B, high power) showing hypogranular
● They often express CDl17, but show absent or partial weak
promyelocytes with folded or convoluted nuclei. Bone marrow
expression of CD34 and HLA-DR.
biopsy section (C) reveals a packed marrow consisting of cells 
with abundant finely granular cytoplasm and round, irregular, or
 In microgranular variant APL, the neoplastic cells are often posi-
tive for CD34 and aberrant CD2. Side scatter is low (Figure 18.9).
folded nuclei.
● CD56 aberrancy can sometimes be present, which may predict
adverse outcome.
AMLWITHCHROMOSOMALLYBALANCEDREARRANGEMENTS:TRANSLOCATIONS/INVERSIONS
233
protein (Figure 18.10) and is observed in over 90% of APLs.
The t(11;17)(q23;q21.1) variant represents fusion of the RARA
gene with the ZBTB16 or PLZF (promyelocytic leukemia zinc
finger) gene and is seen in about 1% of APLs (Figure 18.11).
PLZF protein is expressed in myeloid lineages and its expres-
sion is downregulated during differentiation.
●
Another rare variant, t(11;17)(q13;q21.1). involves the
CD117
CD45
CD14
NuMA1 (nuclear matrixmitotic apparatus protein) gene fusion
with the RARA gene. Translocation of (5:17)(q35:q21.1) is
also another rare variant reported, which involves the nucleo-
phosmin (NPM1) gene. This gene plays a role in the regula-
fion of ribosomal nuclear processing and its transport. Other
infrequently reported genetic abnormalities include complex
four-way variant rearrangements that also involve the signifi-
CD33
FSC-H
CD45
cant 15q22 and 17q11.12 breakpoints leading eventually to
the clinically relevant t(15;17).
FIGURE 18.8 FLOW CYToMETrIC FNDINGs IN AcUTE ProMYELoCytIC
LEUKEMIA. Open gate displays of density plots illustrate characteristic
routinely performed for the detection of PML-RARA fusions
findings of APL, including unique positions by CD45 gating and
either to establish the diagnosis of promyelocytic leukemia or
light scatter gate (in blue, circled). The blasts (promyelocytes) are
to rule out or monitor residual disease after therapy. 97% of
positive for CD13 (heterogeneous), CD15 (partial; not shown), CD33
(bright, tight cluster), CD45 (dim), CD117, and bright intracellular
APL patients have a PML-RARA fusion on the der(17). 7% are
myeloperoxidase. They are negative for CD34 and HLA-DR. The
oyptic insertions or complex rearrangements. The dual-color
blasts in APL are typically negative for HLA-DR, and generally show
RARA “breakapart" FISH probe is designed to detect most
rearrangements involving the 17q21.1 band.
no coexpression of CD15 and CD34.
AML WITH inv(16)(p13g22) or t(16;16)(p13;g22)
or del(16)(q22)
Acute myeloid leukemia with inv(16)(p13q22) or t(16;16)
(p13;q22) is one of the variants of AML characterized by
OSS
fusion of the CBFB and MYHll genes. The fusion protein
inhibits the function of the AML1-CBFB transcription fac-
CD117
CD15
tor leading to the repression of transcription. This leukemia
CD45
displays myelomonocytic differentiation with the presence
of abnormal eosinophils. It accounts for about 10% of all
AMLs and mostly occurs in middle-aged patients. This leul-
kemia is associated with a favorable prognosis with a com-
plete remission rate of >90%. A combination of cytotoxic
drugs, such as daunorubicin and cytarabine with or without 
CD64
CD36
CD2
 mitoxantrone, has been used for induction therapy.
FIGURE 18.9 FLOW CYTOMETRIC FINDINGS IN HYPOGRANULAR ACUTE
 PROMYELocYTIc LEuKEMIA. The immunophenotypic patterns of APL
Morphology
can be atypical, as often seen in cases with hypogranular variant.
The open gate displays of density plots demonstrate that all blasts
● Bone marrow biopsy and clot sections usually are hypercellu-
are positive for both CD34 and CD117, plus many are also positive
lar with myeloid preponderance and left shift, and increased
for CD15. In addition, there is a partial expression of HLA-DR.
blasts. There is often evidence of eosinophilia.
Cross-lineage aberrancy CD2 and partial expression of erythrocyte/
Bone marrow smears show myeloid left shift, increased num-
monocyte-associated marker CD36 are also noted in this case.
ber of immature myelomonocytic cells, and the presence of
atypical eosinophilic precursors (Figures 18.13 and 18.14).
Molecular and Cytogenetic Studies
 Myeloblasts, monoblasts, and promonocytes usually account for
≥20% of the total marrow cells, but occasionally may be less.
● The genetic hallmark of APL is a translocation involving the
Eosinophils usually constitute >5% of marrow differential
RARA gene. Four major translocations with the involvement of
counts and appear to be a part of the leukemic clone. Some
the RARA gene have been associated with APL. These include:
of the eosinophilic promyelocytes, myelocytes, and metamy-
●
t(15;17)(q24;q21.1);(PML;RARA)
 elocytes contain large purple-violet, or basophilic granules in 
t(11;17)(q23;q21.1):(ZBTB16;RARA)
addition to eosinophilic granules. These atypical granules are
●
t(11:17)(q13:q21.1);:(NUMA1;RARA)
rarely found in more mature eosinophils.
●1
t(5:17)(q35;q21.1):(NPM1;RARA).
 Blood smears may show eosinophilia with the presence of
●The most common translocation is t(15:17)(q24;q21.1),
blasts and promonocytes. Absolute monocytosis is a frequent
which is associated with the expression of PML-RARA fusion
finding.
234
ACUTE MYELOID LEUKEMIAS WITH RECURRENT GENETIC ABNORMALITIES
403
7
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
18
88
19
20
21
22
X
B
5
1
14
6
8
9
10
12
13
14
15
16
18
88
19
20
21
22
FIGURE 18.11 G-banded karyotype showing t(11;17) (q23:q21)(arrows).
235
0.11
01
09
0.08
007-
0.02-
0.01-
0.01-
20
5
FIGURE 18.12 RT-PCR technique demonstrating a positive
signal (the blue curve) in a patient with PML-RARA fusion (acute
promyelocytic leukemia). Other curves are positive controls.
The flat green and blue lines are negative controls.
In rare cases of AML with inv(16)(p13q22) or t(16;16)
(p13;q22), the atypical eosinophils may not be present, or
instead of both myeloid and monocytic differentiation, the
acute leukemia may represent only myeloid or only mono-
cytic features.
Immunophenotype and Cytochemical Stains
(Figure 18.15)
● Blasts demonstrate complex immunophenotype with vari-
able expression of myeloid (CD13, CD15, CD33, CD65, and
MPO) as well as some monocytic markers (CD4, CD11b.
CD11c, CD14, CD36, and CD64 by MIFC, plus CD68 and
lysozyme by [HC).
 Subset of blasts is positive for CD34 and CD117.
●
Aberrant expression of CD2 is common.
● The cytochemical stains show strong MPO positivity for the
 granulocytic lineage and variable degrees of diffuse cytoplas-
mic NSE staining for the monocytic population. The abnor-
mal eosinophils may be weakly positive for naphthol As-D
chloroacetate esterase.
Molecular and Cytogenetic Studies
C
●CBFB-MYH11 fusion with inv(16)(p13q22) or t(16;16)
FIGURE 18.13 Bone marrow biopsy section (A) and bone marrow
(p13;q22) is the characteristic genetic feature of this leukemia
smear (B and C) from a patient with acute myelomonocytic leukemia
(Figures 18.16 and 18.17).
●The fusion transcript is detected by RT-PCR. Karyotyping and
with atypical eosinophilia and inv(16)(p13q22). Atypical eosinophils
 contain a mixture of eosinophilic and basophilic granules (arrows).
FISH studies reveal chromosome 16 pericentric inversion or
translocation between the two chromosome 16s. Because of
the difficulty of identifying the inversion in chromosomes
AML WITH t(9;11)(p22;11q23)
with poor morphology. FISH with the CBFB probe is recom-
mended for confirmation.
AML with t(9;11)(p21.3;q23) MLLT3-MLL usually repre-
 Other associated cytogenetic abnormalities include trisomies
sents acute leukemias with monocytic differentiation, such
8, 21, and 22, as well as loss of the Y-chromosome.
as acute myelomonocytic or acute monocytic leukemias.
236
CD15
CD64
FIGURE 18.15 FLOW CYTOMETRIC FINDINGS 0F AMML WITH inv(16)
(p13q22). Open gate displays show excess blasts by CD45 gating
FIGURE 18.14 Bone marrow smear from a patient with acute
myelomonocytic leukemia with atypical eosinophilia and inv(16)
with heterogeneous dim to moderate expression of CD45. A
(p13q22). Atypical eosinophils contain a mixture of eosinophilic
subset of the blasts coexpresses CD34 and CD117. The blasts are 
 positive for CD13 (rather uniform), dim CD33, plus (not shown)
and basophilic granules (arrows and inset).
CD1 1b, CD38, HLA-DR, and partial intracellular myeloperoxidase.
The blasts are negative for CD14 and CD64,
but positive for lysozyme by immunohistochemical studies.
11
12
5
17
R
2
11.2
FIGURE 18.16 A t(16;16) is demonstrated by karyotyping (A) and FISH analysis (B) in a patient with acute myelomonocytic leukemia
with atypical eosinophilia.
AMLWITHCHROMOSOMALLYBALANCEDREARRANGEMENTS:TRANSLOCATIONS/INVERSIONS
237
B
售
19
20
21
22
X
FIGURE 18.17 Karyotype of bone marrow cells in a patient with acute myelomonocytic leukemia demonstrating inv(16)(p13q22) and 
trisomy 22.
Myeloid leukemias with t(9;11) account for about 2%
 of adult and 10% of pediatric AML cases, and in general
have a poor prognosis.
Morphology
·Monocytic differentiation is the morphologic hallmark of
AMLs with t(9:1l). Most cases fall into the category of acute
myelomonocytic or acute monocytic leukemia with increased
numbers of monoblasts and/or promonocytes in the
bone marrow or peripheral blood (Figure 18.18) (see
Chapter 21).
● Monoblasts have variable amounts of blue cytoplasm with no
or few azurophilic granules or vacuoles. The nuclei are round
or slightly indented or folded. The nuclear chromatin is finely
dispersed, and one or more prominent nucleoli are present
A
(Figure 18.18A).
+
 Promonocytes have more abundant cytoplasm which is less
basophilic. They may contain few cytoplasmic azurophilic
granules or vacuoles. The nuclei are irregular, folded, or con-
voluted with fine nuclear chromatin and often inconspicuous
nucleoli (see Figure 18.18B).
 a ae ss   so m o o
lular with myeloid preponderance with increased blasts and
 myelomonocytic precursors.
Immunophenotype and Cytochemical Stains
● The monoblasts and promonocytes express CD4 (dim).
CD1lc, and CD14. CD34 and CD117 are usually negative.
●
Myeoblasts often express CD13. CD33. and CD117 and
may express CD34. CD36, CD64, and HLA-DR are usually
B
expressed on both myeloblasts and monocytic precursors.
FIGURE 18.18 Acute myeloid leukemias associated with 11q
●
 Immunohistochemical stains, such as MPO, lysozyme, and 
 abnormalities often show monocytic differentiation. (A) An
CD68 are used for the evaluation of the bone marrow myelo-
aggregate of monoblasts is demonstrated in bone marrow smear.
monocytic component.
(B) Blood smear shows several promonocytes.
238
● The cytochemical stains show strong MPO positivity for the
● Multilineage dysplasia is a frequent finding, particularly dys-
granulocytic lineage and various degrees of diffuse cytoplas-
eythropoiesis and dysmyelopoiesis.  Micromegakaryocytes
mic NSE staining for the monocytic population.
may be present.
● Bone marrow and/or peripheral blood basophilia (>2%) is
often present.
Molecular and Cytogenetic Studies
● Ringed sideroblasts may be present.
● Peripheral blood smears may show anisopoikilocytosis, nucle
● The gene involved in the translocation of 1lq23 is the MLL
ated RBCs. hypogranular neutrophils. and hypogranular
(also known as ALL1 or HRX) gene. Over 73 different trans-
platelets.
locations involving the MLL gene have been reported in both
acute myeloid and lymphoid leukemias.
● The rearrangement of 1lq23 is common in patients with acute
Immunophenotype
myelomonocytic and acute monocytic leukemias, particularly
● No specific immunophenotypic features.
in children. These leukemias are of acute lymphoblastic type
 Blasts express myeloid-associated antigens CD13. CD15.
or AML with monocytic differentiation.
CD33, and MPO.
●The translocation (9:11)(p22:q23) (MLLT3;MLL) (Figure 18.19) or
 Most cases are positive for CD34 and CD117.
t(10:11)(p12:q23) (AF10;MLL) have been reported in association
●TdT can be positive.
with adult myeloid leukemias.
Molecular and Cytogenetic Studies
AML WITH t(6;9)(p23;q34)
●The chromosomal translocation (6;9)(p23:q34) (Figure
Acute myeloid leukemia with t(6;9)(p23;q34) (DEK-
18.20) is a rare translocation associated with a poor prognosis
and has distinct clinical and morphologic features. This trans-
NUP214) accounts for about 1% of the AML cases and is
location t(6:9) results in a chimeric fusion gene between DEK
often associated with multilineage dysplasia and baso-
(6p23) and CAN/NUP214 (9q34).
philia. Prognosis is poor, particularly in patients with ele-
Prevalence of FLT3-ITD is as high as 70% among patients
vated WBC counts and increased bone marrow blasts.
with t(6:9) AML, and patients with t(6:9) AML and FLT3-ITD
mutations usually have higher white blood cell counts, higher
Morphology
bone marrow blasts, and significantly lower rates of complete
remission.
● AML with t(6:9) may represent a variety of morphologic
features  except  for promyelocytic  and megakaryoblastic
subtypes. Myelomonocytic AML (AML-M4) and AML with
AML WITH inv(3)(g21g26.2) or t(3;3)(g21;g26.2)
maturation (AML-M2) are the most frequent forms (see
Figures 18.1 and 18.20),
AML with inv(3)(q21q26.2) or t(3;3)(q21;q26.2) (RPN1-
●
 Bone marrow biopsies show variable cellularity with myeloid
EVI1) is rare and accounts for 1-2% of AML cases (Figure
left shift and increased blasts. Occasional Auer rods may be
3.2 and Figure 18.21). It is commonly reported in adults
present. Erythroid preponderance is a frequent feature
and is frequently observed in patients with a history of
MDS. Some patients may demonstrate hepatosplenomeg-
aly. Prognosis is poor.
营目
FIGURE 18.19 Karyotype of bone marrow cells in a patient with
acute myelomonocytic leukemia with t(9;11)(p22;q23) and loss of
 chromosome Y.
FGURE 18.20 G-banded karyotype showing t(6;9)(p23;q34).
239
Morphology
● Blood smears may show anisopoikilocytosis with the presence
of tear drop forms, hypersegmented and/or hypogranular
●AML with inv(3)(q21q26.2) or t(3;3)(q21:q26.2) displays a vari-
neutrophils, and bare megakaryocytic nuclei.
ety of morphologic features except for the promyelocytic type.
●
 Bone marrow biopsies may show variable cellularity with
 myeloid left shift and increased blasts. Micromegakaryocytes
Immunophenotype
are often present.
● Bone marrow may show increased eosinophils. basophils.
● Blasts are generally positive for CD13, CD33, CD34, CD38,
and/or mast cells.
and HLA-DR.
● Anemia is a frequent finding. but platelet count may be nor-
Aberrant expression of CD7 is sometimes detected.
mal or elevated. In some cases thrombocytosis may exceed
电
Occasional
cases  display  megakaryocytic  differentiation-
1,000,000/μL.
associated antigens CD41 and CD61.
ACUTE MEGAKARYOBLASTIC LEUKEMIA WITH
t(1;22)(p13;g13)
t(1;22)(p13;q13) (RBM15-MKL1) AML is of megakaryo-
cytic lineage and reported in children less than 3 years
old (most frequently in the first 6 months of life) without
Down syndrome (Figure 18.22). Hepatosplenomegaly is
a frequent finding, and extramedullary involvement may
be present without bone marrow involvement. Originally.
this was considered an aggressive disease with poor prog-
nosis, but recent therapeutic approaches have improved
the outcome.
Morphology (Figure 18.23)
● Blast cells in the bone marrow or peripheral blood predomi-
nantly consist of megakaryoblasts with a small amount of
FIGURE 18.21 FISH demonstrates t(3;3)(q21;q26.2).
dark blue, non-granular cytoplasm and often cytoplasmic
FIGURE18.22 G-banded karyotype
with t(1;22)(p13;q13) in a patient with 
acute megakaryoblastic leukemia.
科
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
7
18
19
20
21
22
X
Y
240
blebs, round or slighty irregular nucleus, fine nuclear chroma-
fin, and inconspicuous nucleoli.
● Bone marrow biopsy sections are usually hypercellular and
may show clusters of megakaryocytes and areas of fibrosis.
Micromegakaryocytes are common.
● No signifcant dysplastic changes are present in the erythroid
and myeloid lineages.
 Some cases may exhibit extramedullary involvement (myeloid
sarcoma) without evidence of bone marrow involvement.
Immunophenotype
● Blasts are positive for megakaryocytic associated antigens
CD41 and CD61, as well as CD13, CD33, and CD36.
Blasts are negative for CD34, HLA-DR, and MPO.
● Aberrant expression of CD7 is common.
OTHER TYPES OF AML WITH RECURRENT
TRANSLOCATIONS
AML with t(9;22)(q34;q 1 1.2)
AML with t(9;22)(q34;q11.2) (BCR-ABL1) often repre-
sents blast transformation of CML. However, a very small
proportion of these leukemias (<1%) are de novo without
clinical history of CML. These cases are different from blast
transformation of CML by demonstrating less frequent
basophilia and splenomegaly. All the morphologic varia-
tions described in the American-French-British (FAB) clas-
sification may apply to AML with t(9;22), except for acute
promyelocytic leukemia (see Chapter 21).
AML with t(8;16)(p 1 1.2;p 13.3)
AML with t(8;16)(p11.2;p13.3) (KAT6A-CREBBP) is a rare
leukemia characterized by myelomonocytic or monocytic
features and erythrophagocytosis (Figures 18.24 and 18.25).
AML with t(8;16) may be therapy-related or de novo. It may
ao aq Po 10 3e Ae 1e 1n30
AML with Gene Mutations
A significant proportion of AMLs with normal cytogenet-
ics demonstrate gene mutations. The gene mutations are
FIGURE 18.23 ACUTE MEGAKARYOBLASTIC LEUKEMIA ASSOCIATED
divided into two categories (Table 18.2):
wITH t1;22)(p13;q13). (A) Bone marrow biopsy section
1. Mutations that lead to proliferation or survival advantage
demonstrates fibrosis with increased immature cells and several
micromegakaryocytes. (B) Reticulin stain shows increased
without affecting differentiation, such as fms-related tyrosine
reticulin fibers. (C) Two megakaryoblasts with cytoplasmic blebs
kinase 3 (FLT3) and KIT mutations.
 are present in blood smear.
2. Mutations that impair hematopoietic cell differentiation and
programmed cel death (apoptosis), such as nucleoplasmin 1
(NPM1 ) and CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-α (CEBPA)
AML WITH GENE MUTATIONS
241
FIGURE 18.24 G-banded karyotype
showing t(8;16)(p11;p13) in a patient
with acute monoblastic leukemia.
11
5
12
6
17
8
tC
20
21
3
hypercellular with numerous blast cells. Bone marrow smear (C, low power; D, high power) demonstrates clusters of blasts, one of
which (arrow) shows erythrophagocytosis.
242
 ACUTE MYELOID LEUKEMIAS WITH RECURRENT GENETIC ABNORMALITIES
 Table 18.2
Table 18.3
 Mutated Genes which Occur Recurrently in
 Features Distinguishing Acute Promyelocytic
 Cytogenetically Normal AMLs!
Leukemia from Acute Monocytic Leukemia
 Gene Symbol
Gene Name
Chromosome
Features
AML-M3
AML-M5
NPM1 (NPM, B23)
 Nucleophosmin (nucleolar 
5q35
 Azurophilic granules 
More frequent 
Less frequent
phosphoprotein B23,
Auer rods
Frequent 
Rare
numatrin)
 MPO stain
Strong
Weak
FL73 (STK1, FLK2.
 Fms-related tyrosine kinase 3
13q12
NSE
 Negative/weak
Strong
CD135)
CD4
Negative
Often positive
MLL {ALL-T, HRX,
Myeloid/lymphoid or mixed-
11q23
CD14
Negative
 Positive
HTRX1, CXXC7.
lineage leukemia (trithorax
HAD-DR
Negative
 Positive
TRX1, MLL1A)
homolog, Drosophila)
BAALC
 Brain and acute leukemia gene,
8q22.3
cytoplasmic
CEBPA (CEBP)
CCAAT/enhancer binding
19q13.1
 protein (C/EBP), alpha
ERG
v-ets erythroblastosis virus E26
21q22.3
● In children, a wider range of morphology has been reported
 oncogene-like (avian)
 including myelomonocytic AML, AML without differentiation,
IAdapted from Krzysztof Mrozek, Guido Marcucci, Peter Paschka, et al.
and erythroleukemia.
e ui saeu ussadxaaaa pue suo  aueaan e
acute myeloid leukemia with normal cytogenetics: are we ready for a
prognostically prioritized molecular classification? Blood 2007; 109: 431-448.
Immunophenotype
The FLT3 and KIT mutations are the most common
●
 Blasts express myeloid-associated antigens CD13, CD33, and
MPO.
forms of mutations and are involved in a garden variety
 Occasionally express monocytic markers.
of morphologic subtypes of AML. Approximately 30%
Blasts are negative for CD34.
of AMLs with normal karyotypes show FLT3 mutations.
In general, AMLs associated with FLT3 mutations dem-
onstrate shorter remission duration and shorter over-
all survival. KIT mutations are frequently found in AML
AML WITH MUTATED CEBPA
associated with t(8;2l) and AMLs associated with 1lq23
CEBPA mutations are detected in about 13% of adults and
translocations. Table 18.2 shows genes whose mutations
up to 20% of children with AML and normal karyotypes.
recurrently occur in cytogenetically normal AML
CEBPA mutations lead to a smaller isoform that inhib-
its the wild-type CEBPA tumor suppressor protein. AML
patients with CEBPA mutations and no other molecular/
AML WITH MUTATED NPM?
cytogenetic aberrations have a favorable prognosis.
NPM1 mutation is one of the most frequently recurring
genetic abnormalities in both adult and pediatric patients
with AML. It is found in approximately 50% of adult AML
Morphology
and 20% of childhood AML with normal karyotypes.
● Bone marrow is hypercellular and shows myeloid left shift
Approximately 40% of NPM1-mutated cases may also
with increased blasts.
show FLT3 mutation. Patients with NPM1 mutation and
 AMLs with and without differentiation are the most commonly
lack of FTL3 mutation have a favorable prognosis.
associated morphologic subtypes. AMLs with myelomonocytic
or monocytic differentiation are less common.
Morphology
Immunophenotype
 Bone marrow is markedly hypercellular with myeloid left shift
and increased blasts.
● In adults, the predominant morphology associated with
 Blasts in most cases are positive for CD34 and HLA-DR.
NPM1 mutation is AML with monocytic differentiation
●
 Blasts in more than half of the cases show aberrant expression
(AML-M4 and AML-M5).
of CD7.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
243
Acute promyelocytic leukemia, particularly the micro-
Differential Diagnosis
 granular variant, may mimic acute leukemias with mono-
cytic differentiation. The leukemic promyelocytes, unlike
Cytogenetic aberrations and gene mutations are the main
monocytic cells, often show several Auer rods, are strongly
pathognomonic markers in AMLs with recurrent genetic
MPO- and Sudan Black B-positive, and do not express
abnormalities. However, certain morphologic and immu-
CD4, CD14, or HLA-DR (Table 18.3). Acute myeloid leul-
nophenotypic features are helpful in distinguishing these
kemia with inv(16)(p13q22) or (16;16)(p13;q22) depicts
leukemias (Table 18.1). For example, a significant propor-
myelomonocytic  differentiation  with  the  presence of
tion of AMLs with t(8;2l) demonstrate morphologic fea-
abnormal eosinophils. Most of the acute leukemias with
tures of AML with maturation (AML-M2) (see Chapter 21).
11q23 (MLL) abnormalities are morphologically of myelo-
monocytic or monocytic types.
 244ACUTE MYELOID LEUKEMIAS WITH RECURRENT GENETIC ABNORMALITIES
Additional Resources
Bacher U, Schnittger S, Haferlach T: Molecular genetics in acute
Lion T, Haas OA: Acute megakaryocytic leukemia with the t(l;22)
myeloid leukemia, Curr Opin Oncol 22:646-655, 2010.
(p13:q13), Leuk Lymphoma 1l:15-20, 1993.
Bernstein J, Dastugue N, Haas OA, et al: Nineteen cases of the t[ l;22)
Lugthart S, Groschel S, Beverloo HB, et al: Clinical, molecular, and
(p13;ql3) acute megakaryblastic leukaemia of  infants/children
prognostic significance of WHO type inv(3)(q21q26.2) / t(3;3)
and a review of 39 cases: report from a t(1;22) study group.
(q2l:q26.2) and various other 3q abnormalities in acute myeloid
Leuhemia 14:216-218,2000.
leukemia, I Ctin Oncol 28:3890-3898, 2010.
Chandra P, Luthra R, Zuo Z, et al: Acute myeloid leukemia with
Mardis ER, Ding L, Dooling DJ, et al: Recurring mutations found
by sequencing an acute myeloid leukemia genome, N Engl J Med
361:1058-1066, 2009.
therapy-related cases, Am I Clin Pathol 133:686-693, 2010.
Odenike O, Thirman MJ, Artz AS, et al: Gene mutations, epigenetic
Chi Y, Lindgren V, Quigley S, et al: Acute myelogenous leukemia with
dysregulation, and personalized therapy in myeloid neoplasia: are we
t[(6:9)(p23:q34) and marrow basophilia: an overview, Arch Pathol Lab
there yet?, Semin Oncol 38:196-214, 2011.
Med 132:1835-1837, 2008.
Pedersen-Bjergard J, Philip P, Ravn V, et al: Therapy-related acute
Chou WC, Dang CV: Acute promyelocytic leukemia: recent advances 
nonlymphocytic leukemia of FAB type M4 or M5 with early onset
in therapy and molecular basis of response to arsenic therapies, Curr
'ua aeiedas e adhioiey [euou e io (szb'izd) (1l6) pue
Opin Hematol 12:1-6, 2005.
JClin Oncol 6:395-397, 1988.
Delaunay J. Vey N, Leblanc T, Fenaux P, et al: Prognosis of
Peterson LF Boyapati A, Ahn EY, et al: Acute myeloid leukemia with
inv(16)/t(16;16) acute myeloid leukemia (AML): a survey of 110
the 8q22;21q22 translocation: secondary mutational events and
cases from the French AML Intergroup. Blood 102:462-469, 2003.
alternative t[8;21) transcripts, Blood 110:799-805, 2007.
Gaidzik V, Dohner K: Prognostic implications of gene mutations
Reiter A, Lengfelder E, Grimwade D: Pathogenesis, diagnosis and
in acute myeloid leukemia with normal cytogenetics, Semin Oncol
monitoring of residual disease in acute promyelocytic leukaemia.
35:346-355, 2008.
Acta Haematol 112:55-67, 2004.
Grimwade D, Mistry AR, Solomon E, et al: Acute promyelocytic
 Scholl C, Schlenk RF, Eiwen K, et al: The prognostic value of MLL-AF9
detection in patients with t(9;11)(p22;q23)-positive acute myeloid
145:219-235, 2010.
leukemia, Haematologica 90:1626-1634, 2005.
Hernandez IM, Gonzalez MB, Granada I, et al: Detection of inv(16)
Sperr W, Valent P: Biology and clinical features of myeloid neoplasms
and t(16;16) by fluorescence in situ hybridization in acute myeloid
with inv(3)(q21q26) or t[3;3)(q21q26), Leuk Lymphoma 48:2096-
leukemia M4Eo, Haematologica 85:481-485, 2000.
2097, 2007.
Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Vardiman JW, et al: Hematopathology.
Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, et al: WHO Classification of
Philadelphia, 20l0, Saunders/Elsevier.
Tumours of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues, ed 4., Lyon,
Mr6zek K, Marcucci G, Paschka P, et al: Clinical relevance of muta-
2008, International Agency for Research on Cancer.
tions and gene-expression changes in adult acute myeloid leukemia
von Lindern M, Fornerod M, Soekarman N, et al: Translocation t(6;9)
in acute non-lymphocytic leukaemia results in the formation of a
tized molecular classification?, Blood 109:431-448, 2007.
DEK-CAN fusion gene, Baillieres Clin Haematol 5:857-879, 1992.
Larson RA, Williams SF, Le Beau MM, et al: Acute myelomonocytic
Wong KF, Siu LL: Acute myeloid leukaemia with variant t(8;21)
leukemia with abnormal eosinophils and inv(16) or t[16;16) has a
(q22:q22) as a result of cryptic ins(8;21), Pathology 43:180-182, 2011.
favorable prognosis, Blood 68:1242-1249, 1986.
Acute Myeloid Leukemia
19
with Myelodysplasia-
Related Changes
lcute myeloid leukemia with myelodysplasia-related
changes is defined in the WHO classification as an acute
leukemia with the presence of >20% myeloid blasts in
bone marrow or blood and evidence of: (a) multilineage
dysplasia, (b) arising from previous MDS or MDS/MPN, or
(c) MDS-related cytogenetic abnormalities.
Acute myeloid leukemia with multilineage dysplasia
is a disease of the elderly with a median age of 60 years.
Patients often demonstrate severe pancytopenia with a
 poor response to chemotherapy.
Morphology (Figures 19.1 to 19.4)
● The presence of >20% blasts and significant multilineage dys-
plasia are the diagnostic hallmarks for this category.
●
 mous pue reaadau ansn are suons jo pue adog
myeloid left shift with increased blasts.
● Dysplastic changes occur in more than one lineage with ≥50
cells in each lineage affected. Dysplastic changes may precede
the development of acute leukemia but remain as a part of the
picture.
●Megakaryocytic
dysplasia
isa dominant
feature.
Micromegakaryocytes with hypogranular cytoplasm, hypolo-
bated nuclei, and/or mono- or binucleated forms are promi-
nent. Large bizarre megakaryocytes may also be present.
●
Neutrophilic series are often hypogranular and hyposeg-
mented or may show abnormal segmentation.
● Erythropoiesis may appear megaloblastic or show nuclear
budding or  fragmentation. Ring sideroblasts may be
present.
B
● Blood examination usually reveals pancytopenia. Blasts are
often present in various numbers and dysplastic changes may
FIGURE 19.1 AcUTe MYELOID LEUKEMIA WITH MYELODYSPLASIA-
RELATED CHANGEs. Bone marrow smears (A and B) demonstrating
be more obvious in the peripheral blood smears than the 
dysplastic immature myelomonocytic cells and binucleated
bone marrow smears.
micromegakaryocytes (arrows).
Atlas of Hematopathology. DOl: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00019-x
@ 201 3 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
246
a
FIGURE 19.2 (A) Bone marrow biopsy section reveals excess blasts and aggregates of immature myelomonocytic precursors. (B)
Immunohistochemical studies for myeloperoxidase highlight excess myeloblasts. (C and D) Bone marrow aspirate smears demonstrate 
myeloid left-shift, excess blasts and dysplastic megakaryocytes including disjointed nuclei and micro forms.
Immunophenotype
Molecular and Cytogenetic Studies
 Multiparametric immunophenotyping by flow cytometry
● No recurrent cytogenetic changes have been reported in this
  jo ad sn l pe hsop un as st
group. Various recurrent and common aberrations normally
the follow areas:
observed in MDS and MPN such as -5/5q-, -7/7q- del(11q)
(Figure 19.5), del(12p)., del(20q) (Figure 19.6), and trisomy 8. 9.
● Blast enumeration
11, 19, and 21 have been observed.
 Phenotypic characterization of blasts
● Other translocations. such as t(1:7)(q10;p10), t(3;21)(q26;
 Identification of myelomonocytic dysmaturation
q21) and t(6:9)(p23;q34). have been also occasionally
 Therapeutic follow-up and detection of minimal residual disease
observed. There is a great amount of genetics heterogene-
● Immunophenotypic-genotypic correlation.
ity manifested in the karyotypes of this group. Lsually they
 The immunophenotypic pattern of the myeloblasts var-
exhibit numerous non-specifc (monosomies, deletions) and 
ies and there are no specific findings that are diagnostic of
sometimes random chromosomal aberrations, in addition to 
AML with myelodysplasia-related changes.
those commonly seen in myelodysplasia.
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
247
FIGURE 19.3 Bone marrow biopsy section (A, low power; B, intermediate power) is markedly hypercellular and demonstrates excess 
blasts and dysplastic megakaryocytes. (C) Aggregates of blast cells and scattered eosinophils are shown in a high power view. (D)
Megakaryocytes are highlighted by immunohistochemical stain for Factor Vll. (E) Immunohistochemical stain for CD117 confirms
excess blasts. (F) Reticulin stain highlights mild to moderate increase in reticulin fibrosis.
248
ACUTE MYELOID LEUKEMIA WITH MYELODYSPLASIA-RELATED CHANGES
D
FIGURE 19.4 (A) Peripheral blood smear demonstrates thrombocytopenia and a myeloblast. (B and C) Bone marrow aspirate smears reveal
erythroid dysplasia, including bi- and multinucleated forms (arrows) and dysgranulopoiesis such as hypogranulation, Pseudo Pelger-Huet
 anomaly, and clumped nuclear chromatin. (D) Myeloblasts are increased and are highlighted by cytochemical stain for myeloperoxidase.
11
2
AM
20
21
22
B
FIGURE 19.5 G-banded karyotype (A) and FISH analysis (B) showing del(1 1q) in a patient with AML and myelodysplasia-related
changes.
 DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
249
7
8
10
11
12
88
13
15
16
17
18
A8
BR
20
21
22
C
FIGURE 19.6 G-banded karyotype (A) with FISH analysis (B) showing del(20q) in a patient with AML and myelodysplasia-related
changes. (C) A normal cell with two red dots representing 20q.
● Because of this genomic instability. the possibility of
Differential Diagnosis
distinguishing AML with multilineage dysplasia from other
subtypes based on gene expression profiling has been
suggested.
Acute  myeloid  leukemia with  myelodysplasia-related
More recently the technique of next-generation DNA
changes is distinguished from refractory anemia with
sequencing has been applied to these malignancies for dis-
    s   ()  s
 covery of additional distinguishing gene mutations. Such
bone marrow and/or peripheral blood. It has morpho-
studies have revealed:
logic overlapping features with acute erythroid leukemia
·AML1/RuNX1 point mutations in a subset of less differenti-
(erythroid/myeloid), but unlike erythroid  leukemia,  in
 ated cases of AML with myelodysplasia-related changes
this leukemia the bone marrow erythroid component is
These mutations act by both inhibiting cellular differentiation
 not >5o%. The requirement of significant multilineage
 and enhancing proliferative activity
dysplasia of >50% of the affected cells distinguishes this
● A considerable prevalence of IDH1 gene mutations, particu-
leukemia from most other types of AML.
larly in those cases with normal karyotype.
250
 ACUTE MYELOID LEUKEMIA WITH MYELODYSPLASIA-RELATED CHANGES
Additional Resources
Bagby GC, Meyers G: Myelodysplasia and acute leukemia as late
 Miyazaki Y, Kuriyama K, Miyawaki S, et al: Cytogenetic heterogeneity
complications of marrow failure: future prospects for leukemia
 of acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) with trilineage dysplasia: Japan
prevention, Hematot Oncol Clin North Am 23:361-376, 2009.
Adult Leukaemia Study Group-AML 92 study, Br J Haematol 120:
Haferlach T, Schoch C, Loffler H, et al: Morphologic dysplasia in de
56-62, 2003.
novo acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is related to unfavorable cyto-
 Pedersen-Bjergaard J, Christiansen DH, Andersen MK, et al: Causality
genetics but has no independent prognostic relevance under the con-
 of myelodysplasia and acute myeloid leukemia and their genetic
ditions of intensive induction therapy: results of a multiparameter
abnormalities, Leukemia 16:2177-2184, 2002.
analysis from the German AML Cooperative Group studies, J Clin
Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, et al: WHO dassification of
Oncol 21:256-265, 2003.
Jacobs P, Wood L: Myelodysplasia and the acute myeloid leukaemias.
International Agency for Research on Cancer.
Hematology 7:325-338, 2002.
Yin CC, Medeiros LJ, Bueso-Ramos CE: Recent advances in the diag-
Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Vardiman JW. et al: Hematopathology.
nosis and classification of myeloid neoplasms-comments on the
Philadelphia, 2010, Saunders/Elsevier.
2008 WHO dassification, Int J Lab Hematol 32:461-476, 2010.
20
Therapy-Related
Myeloid Neoplasms
I herapy-related myeloid neoplasms (t-MN) represent
Alkylating Agent/Radiation
a spectrum of progressive clonal myelogenous disorders
which are evolved following cytotoxic chemotherapy and/
Related Myeloid Neoplasms
or irradiation. These include therapy-related AML (t-AML)
therapy-related MDS (t-MDS), and therapy-related MDS/
Alkylating agent / radiation-related AML has a latency
MPN (t-MDS/MPN). The reason for chemotherapy or
period of about 5-7 years and is usually (>70%) preceded
irradiation  is usually a primary malignancy  However.
by MDs. The average time for progression from MDS to
approximately 5% of patients with t-MPN have no prior
 AML is about 5 months. The occurrence rate appears to be
 dependent on the age of the patient and the total accumula-
autoimmune disorders.
tive dose of the chemotherapeutic agents and/or radiation.
The latency period between the initiation of chemo-
The latency period between the diagnosis of the pri-
therapy and/or irradiation and the development of t-MPN
mary disease and the occurrence of t-AML appears to be
ranges from several months to several years. Overall, the
longer in the younger patients and patients who have been
latency period is shorter in patients treated with topoi-
 treated with alkylating agents for non-malignant condi-
somerase II inhibitors than in those treated with alkylat-
tions, such as autoimmune disorders. The overall median
ing agents or radiation, and longer in younger patients and
latency period for the entire t-AML patient population is
patients with a non-malignant primary diagnosis.
approximately 65 months with a median survival of about
The primary feature separating t-MDS (or t-MDS/MPN)
7 months. Patients with chromosomal deletion of 5 and/
from t-AML is the percent blast count, which is <20%
or 7 have a shorter median survival time than those with
in t-MDS (or t-MDS/MPN) and >20% in t-AML. Some
chromosomal translocations.
patients, particularly those treated with topoisomerase II
inhibitors, may bypass the MDS phase (Table 20.1).
MORPHOLOGY (FIGURE 20.1)
Table 20.1
● The characteristic morphologic features are dysplastic hemato-
 Clinicopathologic Features of Therapy-Related AML
poiesis and increased blasts (including promonocytes). Blasts
Alkylating
Topoisomerase Il 
are <20% in t-MDS and >20% in t-AML.
Features
Agents
Inhibitors
● Dysplastic changes are usually multilineage and involve
myeloid, erythroid, and megakaryocytic series. Hypogranulation
 Latency period
5-7 years
<5 years
and abnormal segmentation of the granulocytic cells, mega-
 Preceded by MDS
 Often present
Often absent
loblastic changes in the erythroid series, ring sideroblasts, and
AML subtype
Variable
 Mostly monocytic;
micromegakaryocytes are frequent findings.
sometimes promyelocytic
or other types
Most t-AML cases correspond to AML with maturation
(AML-M2), but a minority of the cases fit into acute myelo-
Cytogenetics
Deletions: often
Translocations: t(9;11); 
monocytic (AML-M4). acute monocytic (AML-M5). acute
del(5) and del(7)
t(6;11); t(15;17); t(8;21);
erythroleukemia (AML-M6), or acute megakaryocytic leuke-
t(3;21); t(6;9)
Molecular findings
mia (AML-M7) (See Chapter 21).
AML1/RUNX1
AML 1/RUNX1 mutations
●
 Bone marrow is often hypercellular, but in about 25% of cases
mutations
Poor
is hypocellular. Bone marrow fibrosis may be present in one-
 Ginical outcome
Favorable
fourth of the cases. Basophilia is sometimes present.
Atlas of Hematopathology. DOl: http//dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00020-6
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
252
THERAPY-RELATED MYELOID NEOPLASMS
FIGURE 2O.1 THERAPY-RELATED AML IN A PATIENT WITH A HIsToRY oF HoDGKIN LYMPHoMA.Bone marrow biopsy demOnstrating hypercellularity
with increased blasts (A). Bone marrow smear (B, low power; C, high power) showing dysplastic erythropoiesis and increased blasts.
Blasts are positive for MPO (D), CD117 (E) and CD34 (F) by immunohistochemical stains.
TOPOISOMERASE IINHIBITOR-RELATED AML
253
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
● Over 90% of alkylating agent / radiation-related AMLs show
donal chromosomal aberrations, most frequently involving
loss of all or part of chromosome 5, chromosome 7, or both.
Balanced chromosomal translocations are rare and mostly
involve 11q23 or 21q22 (Figure 20.2). Some reports show an
association between radiation t-AML and t(15:17) or inv(16).
The karyotypes are often complex (Figure 20.3) with non-
donal or single cell aberrations and not consistently observed
in consecutive follow-up studies.
 These treatment-related aberrations are frequently seen in
addition to those seen in primary myeloid malignancies.
 Radiotherapy-related AML cases have been associated with
88
A
3
acquired AML1/RUNX1 mutations.
FIGURE 20.2 G-banded karyotype showing t(9;11) and trisomy 8
in a patient with therapy-related AML.
Topoisomerase ll Inhibitor-
Related AML
Topoisomerase II inhibitor-related  AML generally has a
shorter latency period than the alkylating agent-related neo-
plasms, ranging from 1 to 3 years. An antecedent myelodys-
plastic phase is usually lacking. Anthracyclines, doxorubicin,
 etoposide, epipodophyllotoxins, and teniposide are among
the major drugs targeting DNA topoisomerase II. The median
survival time is longer for topoisomerase II inhibitor-related
1
AML than for alkylating agent-related AML. Balanced translo-
17
cations are frequent cytogenetic abnormalities.
MORPHOLOGY (FIGURE 20.4)
● Myelodysplastic features are infrequent and in most instances
the disease presents itself as a de novo AML.
The most common morphologic features are those of acute
FIGURE 20.3 G-banded karyotype showing a complex karyotype
myelomonocytic or acute monocytic leukemias (see Chapter
involving chromosomes 5, 7, 8, 13, 17, and 21 in a patient with 
21). but some cases may present morphologic and cytogenetic
therapy-related AML.
features consistent with acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL).
● The peripheral blood may show anemia or pancytopenia with
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
anisopoikilocytosis and leukoerythroblastic features and pres-
ence of blast cells. Dysplastic changes may be noted in the
 See immunophenotypic features of APL, acute myelo-
myeloid cells and/or platelets.
monocytic leukemia, and acute monocytic leukemia
(Chapters 18 and 21).
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
Flow cytometry is important in enumerating and deter-
● Topoisomerase [I inhibitor-related AML is commonly associ-
mining phenotypic patterns of the blasts, as well as detect-
ated with complex chromosomal aberrations and transloca-
ing dysmaturation patterns of myelomonocytic cells.
fions, particularly involving llq23 and the MLL gene (Figures
The immunophenotypic pattern of the blasts in t-AML
20.5 and 20.6). The 11q23-associated cytogenetic changes
is similar to that seen in various subtypes of AML, NOS
include del(11q23), (6:11)(q26-27:q23), t(9:11)(p22:q23),
(Chapter 21).
(10:11)(p12:q23), and t(11:19)(q23;p13.1).
254
THERAPY-RELATED MYELOID NEOPLASMS
凸
FIGURE 2O.4 THERAPY-RELATED AML IN A 2O-YEAR-OLD MALE WHO HAD A HISTORY OF ANAPLASTIC LARGE CELL LYMPHOMA STATUS CHEMOTHERAPY 3
YEARs PREviousLy. Marrow core biopsy section shows extensive fibrosis (A) with excess blasts in small abnormal clusters (B). Many
of the blasts are spindle-shaped, containing smooth to slightly irregular nuclei, dispersed chromatin, and prominent nucleoli (C).
Immunohistochemical stain for CD34 highlights numerous blasts (D).
● Other cytogenetic abnormalities such as t(15;17)(q22:q11-
Differential Diagnosis
u (+22)(6:9) (2:2)(1) (2:92)(1) (1
t(8:16)(p1l:p13) have also been reported in topoisomerase [I
inhibitor-related AMLs.
● Occasionally, the chromosomes exhibit homogeneous
The differential diagnosis of the therapy-related myeloid
neoplasms  includes various morphologic categories  of
staining regions (hsr) or double minutes (dm) at various
genomic sites and represent amplifications of the MLL locus
AML (see Chapter 2l) as well as AML with myelodysplasia-
(Figures 20.7 and 20.8).
 related changes. The most distinguished feature is a history
● As in radiation-associated AML, RUNXl gene mutations have
 of cytotoxic or radiation therapy.
been found in topoisomerase-associated AML cases.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
255
11
12
17
18
21
20, and 21 in a patient with therapy-related AML.
LSI MLL(11q23-YelloW)DC,BAR
LSI MLL(11q23-YelloW) DC,BAR
B
FIGURE 20.6 FISH analysis (A and B, yellow dots) showing MLL rearrangement in a patient with therapy-related AML.
256
THERAPY-RELATED MYELOID NEOPLASMS
11
14
16
17
18.
19
20
21
22
+
 patient with therapy-related AML.
LSIMLL(11q23-YelloW)DC,BAR
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
257
Additional Resources
Borthakur G, Estey AE: Therapy-related acute myelogenous leukemia
Qian Z, Joslin IM, Tennant TR, et al.: Cytogenetic and genetic path-
and myelodysplastic syndrome, Curr Oncol Rep 9:373-377, 2007.
ways in therapy-related acute myeloid leukemia, Chem Biol Interact 
Czader M, Orazi A: Therapy-related myeloid neoplasms, Am I Clin
184:50-57, 2010.
Pathol 132:410-425, 2009.
Sill H, Olipitz W, Zebisch A, Schulz E, Wolfler A: Therapy-related
myeloid neoplasms: pathobiology and clinical characteristics, Br J
Godley LA, Larson RA: Therapy-related myeloid leukemia, Semin
Pharmacol162:792-805,2011.
Oncol 35:418-429, 2008.
Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, et al.: WHO classification of
Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Vardiman IW, et al.: Hematopathology.
tumours of haematopoietic and lymphoid tissues, ed 4, Lyon, 2008,
Philadelphia, 2010, Saunders/Elsevier.
International Agency for Research on Cancer.
Joannides M, Grimwade D: Molecular biology of therapy-related leu-
Wong KF, Siu LL: Acute myeloid leukaemia with variant t[8;21)
kaemias, Clin Transl Oncol 12:8-14, 2010.
(q22:q22) as a result of cryptic ins(8;21), Pathology 43:180-182, 2011.
Kwong YL: Azathioprine: association with therapy-related myelo-
Yin CC, Medeiros LJ, Bueso-Ramos CE: Recent advances in the diag-
dysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid leukemia, J Rheumatol 37:
485-490, 2010.
2008 WHO dassification, Int J Lab Hematol 32:46l-476, 2010.
This page intentionally left blank
Acute Myeloid
Leukemia, Not
Otherwise Specifed
AML, not otherwise specified (AML-NOS) represents
AML-M0 accounts for <5% of all AMLs in most
acute myeloid leukemias that are excluded from all pre-
reported studies. The affected individuals are usually older
viously described subclasses. Lineage differentiation and 
than 60 years, and the male to female ratio is about 2. The
the extent of maturation of the leukemic cells are dis-
 prognosis is poor with a median survival of <6 months.
tinguishing features in this category. Differentiation and
The coexpression of CD7 and CD56 has been associated
maturation are evaluated based on morphological, immun-
with poorer prognosis in patients younger than 46 years in
ophenotypic, and cytochemical characteristics. This category
some reports.
includes most of the AML subtypes defined by the French-
American-British (FAB) cdassification, including MO, M1,
M2, M4, M5, M6, and M7 variants plus acute basophilic
MORPHOLOGY
 leukemia and acute panmyelosis with myelofbrosis (Table
21.1). AML-NOS subtypes often show characteristic flow
The leukemic blasts (>20% of bone marrow or blood differ-
ential counts) lack features of morphologic differentiation.
cytometric patterns that are helpful for distinguishing them
They are often medium-sized with scant non-granular baso-
from each other (Figure 21.1)
philic cytoplasm, round or slighty irregular nuclei, fine chro-
The WHO diagnostic criterion for acute myeloid leuke-
matin, and one or more prominent nucleoli (Figure 21.2).
mia is the presence of 2o% or more blast cells in the bone
● Myeloblasts with cytoplasmic granules are absent or extremely
marrow or blood differential counts. Myeloblasts, mono-
rare (<3%), and Auer rods are not present.
blasts, promonocytes, and megakaryoblasts are included
 Special cytochemical stains, such as MPO, Sudan Black B, and
in the “blast" counts. The WHO recommends counting
NSE, are negative (<3% blasts show positive staining).
of 5o0 nucleated cells on the bone marrow smears and/or
 Bone marrow is usually hypercellular and packed with the
200 on the blood smears in order to establish a diagnosis
leukemic blast cells, but remnants of normal hematopoietic
of AML.
ells may be noted. The presence of residual normal maturing
Clinical symptoms are the result of bone marrow
ing AML with maturation (AML-M2).
involvement and extramedullary infiltration by the leuke-
Blood smears often show variable numbers of blast cells.
mic cells. Fatigue, fever, bleeding disorders, and organomegaly.
Various degree of anemia, thrombocytopenia or pancytopenia
especially hepatosplenomegaly, are among frequent clinical
are present.
manifestations.
The distinguishing features between AML with minimal dif-
ferentiation and AML with maturation are lack of granular
myeloblasts, absence of Auer rods, and negative cytochemical
staining in the former.
AML, Minimally Differentiated
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
Minimally differentiated AML (AML-MO) is defined as an
AML with no morphologic or cytochemical evidence of
Expression of antigens that are associated with early hemato-
myeloid differentiation based on conventional light micro-
poiesis including CD34, CD38, and HLA-DR;
scopic examinations. The myeloid lineage in this category
Expression of CD13 and/or CD117, and sometimes CD33:
Common expression of intracellular TdT;
is established by immunophenotypic characteristics and/or
Variable presence of cross-lineage aberrancies;
ultrastructural studies.
● Lack of mature myeloid markers or monocytic antigens;
Atlas of Hematopathology. DOl: http//dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00021-8
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
260
ACUTE MYELOID LEUKEMIA,NOT OTHERWISE SPECIFIED
 Table 21.1
Classifcation of Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML), Not Otherwise Specified
Type
FAB Classification
Defi nition
Immunophenotype
 AML with minimal differentiation 
AML-MO
Blasts lack morphologic and cytochemical 
CD13+, CD33±, CD38+, CD117+,
 evidence of myeloid lineage
CD34+, HLA-DR+, and TdT±; MPO-
 AML without maturation
AML-M1
 Blasts are MPO+, SBB+ by cytochemistry
CD13+, CD33+, CD38+,CD117+,
and ≥90% of non-erythroid cells
CD34+, HLA-DR+, and MPO+ (partial);
CD15-
 AML with maturation
AML-M2
Blasts are MPO+, SBB+ by cytochemistry
CD11b±, CD13+,CD15+, CD33+,
 and ≥20% of non-erythroid cells are
CD65±, CD38+,CD117±,CD34±,
 maturing myeloid cells
MPO+
Acute myelomonocytic leukemia
AML-M4
 Blasts consist of myeloblasts, monoblasts,
CD13+, CD15+,CD33+, CD65+,
and promonocytes (total of ≥20%), and 
CD38+, CD117+, CD34±, HLA-DR+
 ≥20% to 79% of monocytic lineage
(most), MPO+ (partial); Plus one or
more monocytic markers
Acute monoblastic/monocytic
AML-M5
Monoblasts/promonocytes ≥20%, and
CD13+, CD15+, CD33+ (bright),
leukemia
≥80% of marrow cells with monocytic
CD65+, HLA-DR+, CD117±; CD34-;
features
 Plus two or more monocytic markers 
 Acute erythroid leukemia 
AML-M6
Erythroid/myeloid
≥50% marrow cells are erythroid, and ≥20%
 Immature erythroid cells are CD36±,
of non-erythroid cells are myeloblasts
CD71+, CD235 (GPA) ±, CD117±
Pure erythroid
≥80% marrow cells are pronormoblasts
Myleoblasts are CD13+, CD33+,
and/or early basophilic pronormoblasts 
CD117+, CD34±
Acute megakaryoblastic leukemia
AML-M7
≥20% blasts; ≥50% of blasts are
CD7+ (often), CD36+, CD41+, CD61+,
megakaryoblasts 
Factor VIlI+, CD38+, CD13±, CD33±;
CD117-,CD34-
Acute basophilic leukemia
≥20% of blasts show basophilic
CD11b+, CD13+, CD33+, CD123+,
differentiation
CD22±, CD34±; MPO-, CD117-
 Acute panmyelosis with
 Fibrosis with increased number of immature
 CD34+; one or more myeloid markers;
myelofbrosis
myeloid, erythroid, and megakaryocytic
MPO-
cells
● Lack of intracellular MPO in most cases;
● Immunohistochemical stains are negative for CD68, CD3.
and CD20, but may show focal positive reaction for MPO in
the blast population.
S
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
M3
been reported in AML-M0 patients.
M2
Cytogenetic aberrations are variable and have been reported
M4/M5
in 50% of cases. Trisomy 4, 8, 11, 13, and 14 and monosomy
7 are among the most common reported abnormalities.
M/L
● Cases with t(11;12)(q23;q24) and del(20q) (Figure 21.3) are
M6
reported less frequently.
CD45
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
ALL, AML without maturation, acute monoblastic leuke-
H
mia, acute megakaryoblastic leukemia, and, occasionally.
FIGURE 21.1 Diagram of CD45 gating display by flow cytometry
large cell lymphoma are amongst the list of differential
demonstrating features of AML-NOS subtypes: M/L, myeloblast/
diagnoses.
lymphoblast; M, AML minimally differentiated (M0) or AML
The blast cells in minimally differentiated AML express
M2, acute myeloid leukemia with maturation; M3, acute
myeloid-associated markers (such as CD13, CD33, and
promyelocytic leukemia; M4/M5, acute myelomonocytic and
CD117) and show <3% positivity for MPO and Sudan
acute monocytic leukemia; M6, erythroleukemia; H, hematogones.
Black B in routine cytochemical stains.
AML WITHOUT MATURATION
261
AML without Maturation
AML without maturation (AML-Ml) is defined as an acute
leukemia with no significant myeloid maturation and
>90% blast cells in the non-erythroid population. The
myeloid origin of blast cells is confirmed by positive (≥3%)
staining for MPO and/or Sudan Black B by cytochemi-
cal techniques, as well as expression of myeloid-associated
 markers by immunophenotypic analysis.
AML without maturation accounts for 10-15% of all
AMLs and is rare in children. The prognosis is poor, par-
ticularly in those with marked leukocytosis and increased
circulating blasts.
A
MORPHOLOGY
The morphologic features of the blast cells overlap with
those described in AML with minimal differentiation
except for:
● The presence of blast cells with cytoplasmic azurophilic
granules.
+
 Positive MPO and/or Sudan Black B cytochemical staining in
>3% of the blast cells (Figure 21.4). Auer rods are not present.
 Similar to most other AMLs, bone marrow is hypercellular and
packed with blasts. Variable degrees of marrow fibrosis may be
present in a minority of the cases.
Blood smears often show variable numbers of blast cells.
Various degrees of anemia, thrombocytopenia, or pancytope-
FIGURE 21.2 MINIMALLY DIFFERENTIATED AML (AML-MO). BoNe marrOW
nia are present.
smear showing numerous blast cells with scant non-granular
basophilic cytoplasm, round or slightly irregular nuclei, fine
chromatin, and one or more prominent nucleoli (A, low power;
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
B, high power).
 Expression of at least partial intracellular MPO:
●
 Expression of one or more other myeloid-associated antigens
(CD13, CD33, CD117):
Expression of CD34 and HLA-DR:
Variable presence of cross-lineage aberrancies:
●
Lack of mature myeloid markers, e.g., CD15 or CD65:
●
General lack of monocytic markers (CD14 or CD64).
品
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
 There are reports suggesting a reciprocal exchange between
D12S158 at 12p13.3 and the MYH11 gene at 16p13 in AML-
M1 leukemia.
 Cytogenetic aberrations are variable and include both numeri-
cal (aneuploidy) abnormalities and translocations. Trisomy 11
(Figure 21.5). trisomy 13, and trisomy 14, as well as t(11:19)
(1)(11) ()(11) (1))
and
FIGURE 21.3 G-banded karyotype showing del(20q) in a patient
der(16), t(16;20)(p13;p11.2) have been reported in this leuke-
with AML-MO.
mic subtype.
262
 ACUTE MYELOID LEUKEMIA, NOT OTHERWISE SPECIFIED
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis of AML without maturation
indudes ALL, minimally differentiated AML, acute mono-
blastic leukemia, and acute megakaryoblastic leukemia.
The blast cells in AML without maturation express myeloid-
associated markers (such as CD13, CD33, and CD117) and
show ≥3% positivity for MPO and Sudan Black B cytochem-
ical stains.
AML with Maturation
AML with maturation (AML-M2) is defined as an acute
leukemia with >20% blast cells in the bone marrow and/
or peripheral blood and evidence of granulocytic matura-
tion. The maturing non-blast granulocytic cells account for
≥10% and monocytic cells <20% of the bone marrow cells.
The myeloid origin of blast cells is confirmed by positive
(≥3%) staining for MPO and/or Sudan Black B, as well as
expression of myeloid-associated markers by immunophe-
notypic studies.
AML with maturation accounts for about 1o% of all
AMLs and occurs in both children and adults. It is the
most frequent AML in children. The ones with t(8;2l) have
a more favorable prognosis in adults (see Chapter 18).
but the clinical outcome for children and cases with other
types of chromosomal aberrations is poor.
B
MORPHOLOGY
FIGURE 21.4 AML wITHoUT MATURATIoN (AML-M1). Bone marrow
● The bone marrow biopsy sections are often hypercellular and
smear (A) and blood smear (B) showing numerous blast cells
packed with blasts. Occasionally, bone marrow may appear
with scant non-granular basophilic cytoplasm, round or slightly
normocellular or hypocellular. Variable degrees of marrow
irregular nuclei, fine chromatin, and one or more prominent
fibrosis may be present in a minority of cases.
nucleoli.
The myeloblasts are large, often with indented nuclei and
basophilic cytoplasm. Numerous myeloblasts show cytoplas-
mic azurophilic granules, and some contain larger granules
mimicking cytoplasmic granules seen in the Chediak-Higashi
syndrome (Figure 12.6). Auer rods are frequent and may also
be detected in the more mature myeloid forms.
●Promyelocytes, myelocytes, metamyelocytes, bands, and seg-
mented neutrophils are present and often show dysplastic
changes.
● Eosinophilia is common, and some cases may show increased
bone marrow basophils and/or mast cells.
● Blood smears often show variable numbers of blast cells.
Various degrees of anemia, thrombocytopenia, or pancytope-
nia are present.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE (FIGURE 21.7)
Expression of MPO;
FIGURE21.5 G-banded karyotype showing trisomy 11 and 
 Expression of one or more other myeloid-associated antigens 
del(9q) in a patient with AML without maturation.
(CD11b, CD13, CD15, CD33, and CD65):
AML WITH MATURATION
263
B
FIGURE 21.6 AML wiTH MATURATloN (AML-M2). Bone marrow smear (A, low power; B, high power) showing numerous blasts mixed with
more mature myeloid cells and erythroid precursors. Arrow shows a blast with Chediak-Higashi-like granules.
● Variable expression of CD34 and/or CD117:
●Variable presence of cross-lineage aberrancies.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis includes refractory anemia
with excess blasts, acute promyelocytic leukemia, and
CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
acute myelomonocytic leukemia. Immunophenotypic
Reported cytogenetic abnormalities incude t(2;9)(q14;p12),
 and cytogenetic studies are helpful to achieve a defini-
t(5;11)(q35;q13) (Figure 21.8), t(10;11)(p13;q14), t(8;19)
tive diagnosis. Blast cells in AML with maturation often
-uea pue (e1d-11d)(z1)p (e1dz 11d)(91's) (e1b:zzb)
express CD13, CD33, and/or CD117 and lack CD14
ous complex translocations.
expression.
264
 ACUTE MYELOID LEUKEMIA, NOT OTHERWISE SPECIFIED
FIGURE 21.7 FLOW CYTOMETRIC ANDINGS IN A PATIENT WITH
AML wITH MATURATION (AML-M2). Open gate displays using
density plots reveal excess and abnormal myeloblasts
(40% of the total; circled), which are positive for CD13
H-OSS
(not shown), CD15, CD33 (moderate to bright), CD34,
blasts
CD45 (dim to moderate), CD64 (partial; not shown),
(40%)
CD117, HLA-DR (partial; not shown), plus intracellular
myeloperoxidase, and TdT. Since myeloid maturation is
part of the leukemic process, there is some continuity of
CD45
CD15
the phenotypic patterns between the myeloblasts and
CD117
maturing myeloid cells. It can be best appreciated in this 
case on the displays of FSC-H vs. SSC-H, CD15 vs. CD33,
as well as intracellular MPO vs. CD79a.
H-OSS
CD
FSC-H
ICMPO
lcTdT
males than in females. Similar to other acute leukemias, clini-
cal symptoms are the result of bone marrow involvement
and extramedullary infltration by the leukemic cells. Fatigue,
fever, bleeding disorders, gingival hyperplasia, lymphade-
nopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, and skin involvement are
 among frequent clinical findings. As mentioned earlier (see
Chapter 20), patients with inv(16) have a favorable prog-
nosis, and those with translocation of 1lq23 fall into the
 category of leukemias with intermediate survival rate. Some
6
10
11
studies show a correlation between the expression of CD56
 by the leukemic cells and severe fatal hyperleukocytosis in
88
patients with acute myelomonocytic leukemia. Successful
16
treatment with NUP98-HOXD11 fusion transcripts and moni-
toring of minimal residual disease in patients with acute
 myelomonocytic leukemia has been reported.
20
22
FIGURE 21.8 Translocation of 5;11 in a patient with AML with
MORPHOLOGY (FIGURES 21.9 TO 21.11)
 maturation.
 r   s   o 
packed with immature myelomonocytic cells. Nuclear spacing
is often present due to abundant cytoplasm of the monocytic
Acute Myelomonocytic Leukemia
cells. Variable degrees of marrow fibrosis may be present in a
minority of cases. Monocytic nodules may be present.
● Bone marrow smears show myeloid left shift and increased
Acute myelomonocytic leukemia (AML-M4) is defined as
number of immature myelomonocytic cells.
an acute leukemia with increased immature granulocytic
Myeloblasts show scant-to-moderate amounts of dark blue cyto-
and monocytic cells. Myeloblasts, monoblasts, and pro-
plasm, some of which contain various numbers of azurophilic
monocytes account for ≥20% of the total bone marrow
 granules. Auer rods may be present. The nuclei are usually round
or oval, but they may be irregular. The nuclear chromatin is fine.
nucleated cells and/or peripheral blood differential counts.
and multiple prominent nucleoli are often present.
More than 20%, but less than 80% of the bone marrow
● Monoblasts are usually larger than myeloblasts (>40 μm).
cells are of monocytic lineage
with abundant dark to light blue cytoplasm and scaftered fine
Acute myelomonocytic leukemia accounts for about
azurophilic granules. The nucleoli are round, oval or folded,
5-10% of all AMLs. The median age is around 50 years, but
 and the nuclear chromatin is fine. There is often a single large
it may occur at any age. The incidence is slightly more in
nucleolus, but multiple prominent nucleoli may be present.
ACUTE MYELOMONOCYTIC LEUKEMIA
265
have abundant light blue to gray cytoplasm. Scattered cyto-
plasmic azurophilic granules and/or cytoplasmic vacuoles
may be present. The nuclei are delicately folded or convo-
 luted, often with a cerebriform pattern. The nuclear chromatin
is fine, and nucleoli are present but not prominent. Bone mar-
cytes, monoblasts, and myeloblasts.
●  Peripheral blood smears show absolute monocytosis (often
>50oo/μL) with the presence of promonocytes, left shifted
granulocytic series, and various numbers of circulating blasts
(see Figures 21.10B and 21.11C).
[n a significant proportion of patients (5-35%), there is evi-
dence of extramedullary leukemic infiltration, such as involve-
ment of skin, mucosal membranes, lymph nodes, liver, and/or
spleen.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE AND CYTOCHEMICAL
STAINS
 Presence of more than one blast subset, best viewed by density
FlGURE 21.9 Promonocytes are counted as blast cells in myeloid
plot display:
leukemias and are prominent in acute myelomonocytic and
Variable expression of CD13, CD15, CD33, and CD65, plus
monocytic leukemias.
MPO:
FIGURE 21.10 AcUTE MYELoMoNocYTIc LEUKEMIA (AML-M4). Bone marrow smear (A) and blood smear (B) demonstrating a mixture of
myloblasts and monoblasts. Cytochemical stains for non-specific esterase (C) and MPo (D) show numerous positive cells.
266
ACUTE MYELOIDLEUKEMIA,NOT OTHERWISESPECIFIED
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
 The differential diagnosis of acute myelomonocytic leuke-
mia includes chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML),
AML with maturation, acute promyelocytic leukemia,
and acute monocytic leukemia. The diagnosis of acute
myelomonocytic leukemia is established by demonstra-
tion of the sum of >20% myeloblasts and monoblastic/
 promonocytes in the bone marrow or peripheral blood. It
is distinguished from the microgranular variant of acute
promyelocytic leukemia by the expression of NSE, CD4,
CD14, and HLA-DR and by the absence of t(15;17) (see
Table 20.1)
Acute Monoblastic and Acute
Monocytic Leukemias
Acute monoblastic and acute monocytic leukemias (AML-
M5) are acute leukemias in which ≥80% of the leukemic
cells are of monocytic lineage consisting of monoblasts,
promonocytes, and monocytes. When monoblasts are the
major cellular component (>80% of the leukemic cells)
the term acute monoblastic leukemia (AML-M5a) is used,
majority of the leukemic cells, the condition is referred to
B
as acute monocytic leukemia (AML-M5b)
FIGURE 21.11 AcUTE MYELoMoNocYTIc LEUkEMIA. (A) Bone marrow
Acute leukemias of monocytic lineage account for about
smear depicts myeloid left shift with increased immature 
3-6% of all AMLs. The median age is around 50 years, but
myelomonocytic cells and blasts. (B) Blood smear shows several
it may occur at any age. The incidence is higher in men than
blasts and immature monocytic cells.
-ds i (a' none si on  n ael m 
toms are the result of bone marrow involvement and extra-
medullary infiltration by the leukemic cells. Fatigue, fever.
bleeding disorders, gingival hyperplasia, lymphadenopathy.
●Expression of one or more monocytic markers (CD4, CD11b,
CNS involvement, and hepatosplenomegaly are among the
CD11c, CD14, CD36, CD64, CD68, CD163, and lys0zyme):
frequent symptoms. In one major study, the monocytic type
 Blast subset expression of CD34 and/or CD117:
● Variable presence of cross-lineage aberrancies;
(M5b) had a better clinical outcome than the monoblas-
● Lack of HLA-DR in a small number of cases, which is of partic-
tic type (M5a) with a reported 3-year disease-free survival of
uar interest in distinguishing them from APL by morphology
28% and 18%, respectively. In another study, the complete
and immunophenotype;
remission rate and disease-free survival did not differ signif-
 Cytochemical stains show strong MPO positivity for the gran-
cantly between patients with M5a and those with M5b.
ulocytic lineage (see Figure 21. 10D) and various degrees of dif-
fuse cytoplasmic NSE staining for the monocytic population
(see Figure 21.10C)
MORPHOLOGY
● The bone marrow biopsy sections are often hypercellular
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
and packed with blasts and immature myelomonocytic cells.
Nuclear spacing is present due to abundant cytoplasm of the
● Mutations in the TET2 gene have been associated with myelo-
monocytic cells. Variable degrees of marrow fibrosis are noted 
moncytic leukemias.
in a minority of cases.
●A number of non-specific cytogenetic abnormalities have been
●Monoblasts usually show abundant dark to light blue cyto-
reported in acute myelomonocytic leukemias. These include
plasm with no or a few scattered fine azurophilic granules
dup(1)(p31.2p36.2).
t(1:3)(p36;q21),
t(8;12)(q13:p13),
(Figures 21.12 and 21.13). The nucleoli are round, oval, or
t(9;21)(q13;q22), and t(6:7)(q23;q35)
folded, and the nuclear chromatin is fine. There is often a
ACUTE MONOBLASTIC AND ACUTE MONOCYTIC LEUKEMIAS
267
A
B
FIGURE 21.12 AcUTE MoNoBLAsTIc LEUKEMIA. Bone marrow smear
demonstrates numerous blast cells with abundant blue
cytoplasm, round nuclei, fine chromatin, and one or more
prominent nucleoli (A). Similar blast cells are present in the
peripheral blood smear (B).
single large nucleolus, but multiple prominent nucleoli may
be present. Auer rods are rare.
●
Promonocytes have abundant light blue to gray cytoplasm
(Figures 21.14 and 21.15). Scattered cytoplasmic azurophilic
granules and/or cytoplasmic vacuoles may be present. The
nuclei are delicately folded or convoluted, often with a cere-
briform pattern. The nuclear chromatin is fine and nucleoli
are present but not prominent.
●
Granulocytic precursors account for <20% of the bone mar-
row non-erythroid nucleated cells.
The peripheral blood smears show absolute monocytosis
(often ≥50o0/uL) with the presence of monoblasts, pro-
monocytes, and monocytes (see Figures 21.12B and 21.15).
The proportion of monocytes and promonocytes in blood
C
smears may sometimes be much greater than that of blast
cells, whereas in bone marrow smears the difference is not so
FIGURE 21.13 AcUTE MoNoBLAsTIc LEUKEMIA. Bone marrow smear
demonstrates sheets of blast cells with variable amounts of blue
marked.
● Extramedullary infiltration by leukemic cells is relatively com-
cytoplasm, round or irregular nuclei, fine chromatin, and one or 
more prominent nucleoli (A, low power; B, high power). Blasts 
mon, such as involvement of gum, skin (Figure 21.16). central
are strongly positive for non-specifc esterase (C).
nervous system, lymph nodes, liver, and/or spleen.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE AND CYTOCHEMICAL
 Expression of at least two or more monocytic markers (CD4,
CD11b, CD11c, CD14, CD36, CD64, CD68, CD163, and lys0-
STAINS
zyme),. often with aberrant expression of CD56 (Figures 21.17
● Expression of CD13, CD15, CD33 (often bright) and CD65:
and 21.18):
268
ACUTE MYELOID LEUKEMIA, NOT OTHERWISE SPECIFIED
FIGURE 21.15 AcUTE MoNocyTIc LEukeMIA. Blood smear showing
numerous promonocytes (A, low power; B, high power).
Common expression of CD117:
Frequent absence of CD34;
●
 Expression of HLA-DR in nearly all cases:
●
Variable presence of cross-lineage aberrancies:
● Cytochemical stains show strong diffuse cytoplasmic NSE
staining. Monoblasts are usually MPO-negative, but promono-
cytes may show a weak positive reaction.
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
C
Reported cytogenetic abnormalities and affected genes
include:
FIGURE 21.14 AcUTE MoNocYTIc LEUKEMIA. Bone marrow smear
showing increased number of promonocytes with scattered
blasts: (A, low power; B, high power). The majority of blast cells 
1;MLL).
t(11;20)(p15;q11.2)
(NUP98-TOP1),
ins(X;11)
stain for NSE (C).
(q24;q23q13) (Septing6-MLL). (5:11)(q31;q23q23) (MLL/GRAF).
ACUTE ERYTHROID LEUKEMIAS269
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis of acute monoblastic leukemia
(AML-M5a) includes ALL, minimally differentiated AML,
AML without maturation, acute megakaryoblastic leuke-
mia, and large cell lymphoma.
Acute monocytic leukemia (AML-M5b) should be
distinguished from  chronic myelomonocytic  leukemia
(CMM), acute myelomonocytic leukemia, and microgran-
ular variant of acute promyelocytic leukemia. Leukemic
cells of monocytic/monoblastic origin may express NSE,
lysozyme, CD4, CD14, CD64, and/or CD68.
Acute Erythroid Leukemias
Acute erythroid leukemia (AML-M6) is defined as a sub-
type of AML-NOS with predominance of erythroid precur-
sors. 50% or more of bone marrow nucleated cells should
be of erythroid origin. Acute erythroid leukemia is divided
into two morphologic categories:
1. Erythroleukemia, consisting of myeloblasts and erythroid
precursors (AML-M6a);
2. Pure erythroid leukemia (AML-M6b).
Acute erythroid leukemia accounts for less than 5% of all
AMLs. The vast majority (>90%) are of erythroid/myeloid
(AML-M6a) subtype. The median age is around 57 years,
ranging from 20 to 80 years. The incidence is higher in men
than in women (male to female ratio is about 2:1). A signif-
icant proportion (up to 50%) of acute erythroid leukemia
represents either therapy-related or myelodysplasia-related
AMLs. Severe anemia, usually with granulocytopenia and/
or thrombocytopenia, are common features. Acute erythroid
leukemia is an aggressive disease, but the erythroid/myeloid
-a ad a n aa  saop (e-) aag
throid leukemia type (AML-M6b). In one report the average
survival time for the AML-M6a was 30 months compared
with 3 months for the AML-M6b.
MORPHOLOGY
 In general, multilineage dysplasias, particularly dyserythro-
poiesis, are common bone marrow features. These include
megaloblastic changes, nudlear budding and fragmentation,
multinudlearity, and basophilic stippling in the erythroid pre-
FIGURE 21.16 Dermal infiltration of leukemic cells in a
crsors. Hypogranulation, abnormal nuclear segmentation,
patient with acute monocytic leukemia (A, low power; B, high
power). Many of the leukemic cells are positive for CD68 by
and giant forms may be present in the granulocytic series.
immunohistochemistry (C).
Micromegakaryocytes  and  megakaryocytes  with  separated
270
ACUTEMYELOIDLEUKEMIA,NOTOTHERWISESPECIFIED
SSC-
SS
CD64
9
CD45
S
CD34
CD14
HLA-DR
$
CD11b
lcCD79a
CB
CD56
CD13
CD15
A
B
CD16
IcMPO
FIGURE 21.17 FLow cYToMETRIc ANDINGs IN A PATIENT wITH AcUTE MONoBLAsTIC LEUKEMIA. Open gate displays by density plots show eXCeSs
and abnormal myeloblasts (72% of the total, circled) within the monocytic region on CD45 and scatter gate displays. The blast-
 enriched displays demonstrate abnormal myeloblasts expressing CD1ib (partial), CD13, CD15, CD33 (bright), CD38 (not shown), CD45
 negative for CD34 and intracellular myeloperoxidase.
OSS
FSC
CD14
CD56
FIGURE 21.18 Flow cytometric studies reveal a large population of monocytic cells which are positive for CD14 and negative for CD34
and CD117. They also aberrantly express CD56.
nudei are not infrequent. Erythroid leukemia is divided into
are often present. Various numbers of nucleated red blood
two subcategories according to the WHO dassification.
cells and blasts are often present.
The WHO requirements for the diagnosis of eryth-
Erythroleukemia (Erythroid/Myeloid, AML-M6a)
roleukemia leave significant overlapping features with
refractory anemia with excess blasts (RAEB). If we follow
This subtype is defined by at least 5o% of the bone mar-
the WHO requirements, a simple calculation tells us that
  o      
any bone marrow sample with dysplastic changes, >50%
myeloblasts in the non-erythroid component (Figures
and <80% erythroid precursors, and 5-10% myeloblasts
21.19 and 21.20).
in the total bone marrow cells gating may be qualified for
● Bone marrow biopsy sections are usually hypercellular with
the diagnosis of acute erythroleukemia. For example, a
custers or sheets of immature cells and a marked reduction in
bone marrow sample with 79% erythroid precursors and
the normal hematopoietic components.
5% myeloblasts in the total bone marrow cells, or a bone
The erythroid series are dysplastic and left shifted, but are usu-
marrow sample with 51% erythroid precursors and 10%
ally found in all stages of maturation.
myeloblasts should be diagnosed as erythroleukemia,
Some of the myeloblasts may show cytoplasmic granules.
whereas a bone marrow sample with 49% erythroid pre-
Occasionally, Auer rods may be present.
cursors and 15% myeloblasts is called RAEB II and not an
 Bone marrow iron stores are often increased, and ring sidero-
blasts may be presen t.
acuteleukemia!
This problem with the diagnostic criteria for acute
Blood smears show anisopoikilocytosis with the presence of
schistocytes, tear-drops, and macrocytes. Basophilic stippling
erythroleukemia has been raised in the literature. Further
is present. Granulocytic series may show hypogranulation
dlinical investigations are needed for clarification of the
and hyposegmentation. Giant and/or hypogranular platelets
status of erythroleukemias with low myeloblast counts.
ACUTE ERYTHROID LEUKEMIAS
271
FIGURE 21.19 ERYTHROID/MYELOID LEUKEMIA (ERYTHROLEUKEMIA, AML-
FIGURE 21.20 ERYTHROID/MYELOID LEUKEMIA (ERYTHROLEUKEMIA,
M6A).Bone marrow smears show erythroid preponderance and
left shift with increased myeloblasts (top, low power; bottom,
AML-M6A). (top) Bone marrow biopsy section showing
hypercellular marrow with increased immature cells. (bottom)
high power).
Bone marrow smear shows erythroid preponderance and left 
shift with increased myeloblasts. Inset shows an erythroid
precursor with coarse PAS-positive cytoplasmic granules.
Pure Erythroid Leukemia (AML-M6b)
This category is defined as a disorder with >80% of bone
 marrow nucleated cells consisting of erythroid precursors
●Erythroblasts are negative for cytochemical MPO, Sudan black B,
(Figures 21.2l, and 21.22).
and NSE stains, but often show globular or coarsely granular
cytoplasmic PAS positivity.
● These cells are predominantly early erythroblasts (pronormo-
blasts) with dark blue cytoplasm, round nuclei, fine nuclear
Myeloblasts:
chromatin, and one or more prominent nucleoli.
Variable expression of CD13, CD33, CD34, and CD117:
鲁
 The cytoplasm often contains poorly demarcated vacuoles.
Variable presence of cross-lineage aberrancies;
Evidence of dyserythropoiesis and/or megaloblastic changes
Myeloblasts may show positive reactions for MPO and Sudan
 is often present.
black B by cytochemical stains.
Pure erythroid leukemia is far less frequent than the
erythroleukemia (erythroid/myeloid) type.
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
● Acute erythroid leukemia shares many cytogenetic features
IMMUNOPHENOTYPIC STUDIES AND
with MDs (see Chapters 8 and 9). Partial loss or monosomy
CYTOCHEMICAL STAINS
of chromosomes 5 and 7 is the most frequent chromosomal
aberration reported in acute erythroid leukemias, followed by
Erythroblasts:
abnormalities of chromosomes 8, 16, and 21.
● Asynchronous or aberrant expression intensity of CD36.
. ● Some of the cases of pure erythroid leukemia are found to
CD71, and CD235a (Glycophorin A or GPA) (Figure 21.23):
carry the BCR-ABL1 fusion gene, but no specifc molecular
Lack of GPA in subset;
 abnormalities are yet correlated with this disorder.
● Occasional expression of myeloid markers CD13 and/or CD117:
●Complex chromosomal abnormalities are frequent findings.
272
 ACUTE MYELOID LEUKEMIA, NOT OTHERWISE SPECIFIED
日
C
FIGURE 21.22 PURE ERYTHROID LEUKEMIA (AML-M6B). (A) BiOpSy
 FIGURE 21.21 PuRE ERYTHROID LEUKEMIA (AML-M6B). BiopSy Section 
section reveals a markedly hypercellular marrow with sheets of
blasts and immature cells. (B) Immunohistochemical stain for 
reveals a markedly hypercellular marrow with sheets of blasts
hemoglobin A shows numerous positive cells. (C) MPO stain is
and immature erythroid cells (A, low power; B, high power). Bone
marrow smear shows erythroid preponderance with increased 
negative.
erythroblasts (C).
ACUTE MEGAKARYOBLASTIC LEUKEMIA
273
FIGURE 21.23 FLOW CYTOMETRIC ANDINGS IN ACUTE
ERYTHROLEUKEMIA (ERYTHROID/MYELOID). OpeN gate diSplays
illustrate erythroid preponderance (69% of the total)
18%of
and excess myeloblasts (18% of the total or 59% of the
59%of
non-erythroid cells) by CD45 gating. The myeloblasts
coexpress CD34 and CD117 with cross-lineage aberrancy
SS
of partial dim CD7. The erythroids are immature,
expressing CD36, CD71 (dim to moderate), and 
Glycophorin A (a subset).
CD45
CD117
CD15
CD36
GPA
CD2
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
children have Down syndrome. In children with Down
syndrome, the incidence of AMKL is 46-fold greater than
The feature distinguishing acute erythroleukemia (AML-
 in the normal age group, accounting for at least 50% of
M6a) from RAEB is the proportion of the erythroid com-
 the AML cases in patients with Down syndrome. AMKL has
ponent in the bone marrow. In AML-M6a, 50% or more
also been associated with mediastinal germ cell tumors in
bone marrow nucleated cells are of erythroid lineage,
young adult males. Hepatosplenomegaly is rare in adults
and >20% of the non-erythroid population consists of
but frequently observed in children, particularly in asso-
myeloblasts.
ciation with t(1;22). This translocation has distinctive
AML with myelodysplasia-related changes should also
be included in the differential diagnosis. According to the
extensive bone marrow fibrosis with clustering of leukemic
WHO recommendation, if >50% of the myeloid or mega-
blasts mimicking metastatic tumors (see Chapter 18).
karyocytic lineages show dysplasia, the case should be clas-
sified as AML with myelodysplasia-related changes.
Pure erythroid leukemia (AML-M6b) should be dis-
tinguished from megaloblastic anemia. The erythroid left
MORPHOLOGY
shift and dysplastic changes are not so severe in megalo-
 Bone marrow fibrosis, and as a consequence, dry tap (failure
blastic anemia as in pure erythroid leukemia. Besides, in
of bone marrow aspiration) is a common feature. Bone mar-
megaloblastic anemia, there is often evidence of vitamin
row cellularity varies depending on the extent of fibrosis, but
B12 or folate deficiency, whereas serum levels of vitamin
there is evidence of increased blast cells, either in clusters or
 B12 and folate are normal or elevated in pure erythroid leu-
as diffuse interstitial infiltration. There is also evidence of
kemia. The differential diagnosis of pure erythroid leuke-
increased megakaryocytes with dysplastic morphology.
mia also includes ALL, minimally differentiated AML, AML
 Megakaryoblasts are the predominant component of the blast
population in the bone marrow and/or peripheral blood
without maturation, and acute megakaryoblastic leukemia.
(Figures 21.24 to 21.26A). They are markedly pleomorphic,
ranging from small, round cells with scanty cytoplasm and
inconspicuous nucleoli resembling hematogones, to large
ells with abundant cytoplasm and prominent nucleoli. They
Acute Megakaryoblastic Leukemia
often display cytoplasmic blebs or pseudopods and may
appear in clusters mimicking metastatic tumors (see Figures
21.24D, and 21.26A).
Acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL, AML-M7) is
 Peripheral blood smears show circulating micromegakaryocytes,
defined as an AML in which megakaryoblasts account for
megakaryocytic fragments, atypical giant platelets, and blasts.
≥50% of the total blast cells. Similar to the other types
Red blood cells may show anisopoikilocytosis and scattered tear-
of AML, total blasts comprise >20% of the bone marrow
drop shapes. Granulocytes may show dysplastic changes, such
nucleated cells or peripheral blood differential counts.
as hypogranulation and abnormal segmentation of their nuclei.
AMKL represents 3-5% of the AMLs. It occurs in all
Leukoerythroblastosis is uncommon.
Since megakaryoblasts may resemble hematogones, lym-
years old and adults. A significant proportion of affected
phoblasts, non-granular myeloblasts, or metastatic tumors
274
ACUTE MYELOID LEUKEMIA, NOT OTHERWISE SPECIFIED
D
FIGURE 21.24 AcUTE MEGAKARYoBLAsTIc LEuKEMIA. Bone marrow biopsy sections show large clusters of immature cells with areas of
fibrosis and increased megakaryocytes (A, low power; B, high power). Reticulin stain reveals marked reticulin fibrosis (C). Blood smear
demonstrates megakaryoblasts with cytoplamic blebs (D).
and do not react with a specific cytochemical stain, it is often
● Negativity of other myeloid markers, including MPO;
necessary to perform immunophenotypic and/or ultrastruc-
● Absence of CD34 and/or CD117:
tuiral studies to be able to assign their megakaryocytic lineage.
● Negative or dim CD45:
●Negative HLA-DR.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE AND CYTOCHEMICAL
 No conventional cytochemical stain is specific for mega-
STAINS
karyoblasts. However, megakaryoblasts may show:
The  immunophenotypic  features of megakaryoblasts
● Diffuse and/or globular PAS reaction and punctuate NSE
include (Figure 21.26B):
staining.
● Expression of CD41, CD61, Factor VIII;
● MPO and Sudan Black B are negative, but ultrastructural cyto-
 Expression of CD36 and CD38:
chemical staining or immunostaining reveals expression of
Very common aberrancy of CD7:
platelet peroxidase.
● Variable expression of CD13 and CD33:
● Megakaryoblasts also express acid phosphatase.
ACUTEMEGAKARYOBLASTICLEUKEMIA
275
FIGURE 21.25 AcUTE
MEGAKARYOBLASTIC LEUKEMIA
TRANSFORMED FROM ESSENTIAL
THROMBOcYTHEMIA. Core biOpSy
sections reveal a markedly
hypercellular marrow with fibrosis
 and increased blasts, as well as 
many abnormal megakaryocytes
in large aggregates to focal sheets 
(A). The abnormal megakaryocytes
are prominent in some areas (B)
with hyperchromatic nuclei, and 
are admixed with scattered blasts.
Myelopoiesis and erythropoiesis are
significantly reduced. In many areas,
megakaryoblasts and immature
megakaryocytes are abundant 
(C), and are admixed with clusters
to aggregates of myeloblasts.
Immunohistochemical studies for
CD31 (D) highlight the immature 
megakaryocytes, including 
megakaryoblasts, while CD34 (E)
and CD117 (not shown) reveal 
 excess myeloblasts in clusters to
aggregates. The blasts are negative 
for myeloperoxidase (F).
OSS
CD
CD45
CD117
CD2
CD36
CD41a
B
CD61
FIGURE 21.26 AcUTE MEGAKARYoBLAsTIc LEUKEMIA. (A) Blood smear demonstrating numerous blast cells of various sizes, some with
blood. The CD45 gating open display reveals a predominant population of megakaryoblasts (marked region; 60% of the total) that
is CD45 negative to dim positive. The megakaryoblasts are positive for CD36 (major subset), CD38 (partial), CD41a, CD61, and CD71
(partial), plus cross-lineage aberrancy CD7 (dim). They are negative for CD34 and CD117.
276
ACUTEMYELOIDLEUKEMIA,NOTOTHERWISESPECIFIED
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
● Mutations or altered expression of the megakaryoblastic leu-
kemia protein-1 (MKLl) gene are found in some cases of
megakaryoblastic leukemia and are felt to be involved in the
pathogenesis.
● Mutations in the GATAl gene are also frequently seen.
● [n addition to trisomy 21 in Down syndrome, chromosomal
aberrations, such as -7/7q-. -5/5q-. and trisomy 8 have
been reported.
● Other chromosomal aberrations include abnormalities of
3q21-26, 17q22, 11q14-21, and 21q21-22.
● Occasional cases of highly complex chromosomal abnormali-
fies have been reported.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis of AMKLs includes primary
myelofibrosis, minimally differentiated AML, AML without
maturation, ALL, acute panmyelosis with myelofibrosis,
 and metastatic tumors. The presence of megakaryoblastic
dlusters embedded in the fibrotic bone marrow may mimic
metastatic carcinoma, non-Hodgkin lymphoma, neuro-
blastoma, or rhabdomyosarcoma.
The diagnosis of AMKL is suggested by certain clinico-
pathologic features, such as Down syndrome, myelofibrosis
with no or minimal leukoerythroblastosis, and/or presence
of megakaryoblasts in the peripheral blood. The diagnosis is
confirmed when at least 50% of the total blast population is
of megakaryocytic origin evidenced by the presence of plate-
let peroxidase (PPO) by electron microscopy and/or expres-
sion of CD41, CD42, CD61, and factor VIII.
B
Acute Basophilic Leukemia
Acute basophilic leukemia (ABL) is a rare type of AML
with basophilic differentiation. It represents less than 1%
of all AMLs. ABL is either de novo or the result of basophilic
blast transformation in CML. It occurs at any age includ-
ing infancy. Clinical findings include anemia, skin rashes,
hepatosplenomegaly, and gastric ulcers
MORPHOLOGY (FIGURE 21.27)
● Bone marrow biopsy sections appear hypercellular with large
custers or sheets of blast cells and marked reduction in the
normal hematopoietic components. There may be dysplastic
erythropoiesis. A variable degree of reticulin fibrosis is often
C
present, particularly in advanced stages of the disease.
●Blasts show a high nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio with variable
 FIGURE 21.27 AcUTE BAsoPHILic LEUKEMIA. (A) Bone marrow biopsy
amounts of cytoplasm containing coarse basophilic granules.
section. (B and C) Bone marrow smears.
The nuclei are round, oval, or bilobed with a fine chromatin
and one or more prominent nucleoli. Scattered mature baso-
phils are often present.
OTHER TYPES OF ACUTE MYELOID LEUKEMIA
277
● Blood smears usually show the presence of blasts with baso-
MORPHOLOGY (FIGURE 21.28)
philic granules and mature basophils. Anisopoikilocytosis and
thrombocytopenia may be present.
● Bone marrow fibrosis is one of the morphologic hallmarks. It
● Electron microscopy reveals characteristic feafures of baso-
often leads to unaspirable bone marrow (dry tap) and inad-
philic granules
equate marrow smears. The bone marrow cellularity varies
depending on the extent of fibrosis. The megakaryocytes are
us lunun saonourou snsendsap mous pue paseau
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE AND CYTOCHEMICAL
size and non-lobulated and/or hypolobulated nuclei.
● There is evidence of increased blast cells, either in clusters or
STAINS
as diffuse interstitial infiltration. The majority of the blast cells
● Expression of myeloid markers CD13, and CD33; but lack of
are of non-megakaryocytic origin.
MPO:
● Peripheral blood smears may show absent-to-mild anisopoi-
 Common expression of CD22:
kilocytosis with macrocytes and occasional teardrop shapes
Common expression of CD11b and CD123:
Granulocytes may show dysplastic changes, such as hypogran-
1
Variable expression of CD34 and HLA-DR; but negative
ulation and abnormal segmentation of their nuclei. Abnormal
platelets may be present. Circulating blasts are variable, rang-
CD117:
Variable cross-lineage aberrancies:
ing from a few to a frank leukemic picture.
1
 The cytoplasmic basophilic granules may stain with toluidine
blue but are usually negative for MPO and NSE.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE AND CYTOCHEMICAL
STAINS
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
● The majority of the blast cells express CD34, often with one or
 No specific chromosomal aberration is known for ABL.
more myeloid-associated markers, such as CD13, CD33, and/
There are sporadic reports of abnormalities of deletion of
or CD117 and cytoplasmic MPO (see Figure 21.28E and F):
12p, t(6;9)(p23;q34) and t(X;6)(p11;q23). Cases of bas0-
● Only a minority of blast cells express platelet-associated mol-
philic transformation in CML show t(9;22)(q34;q11.2).
ecules, such as CD41, CD42, or CD61
 Cytochemical stains may show presence of MPO-positive blast
cells.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
 Differential diagnosis includes blast transformation of CML,
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
certain subtypes of AML with basophilia, paricularly the
Monosomy 7 and loss of 5q or 7q are the most frequent chro-
ones associated with t(6;9) or abnormalities of 12p, and
mosomal aberrations in this condition. Also, interstitial dele-
Occasional cases of ALL with coarse azurophilic granules
tion of the long arm of chromosome ll has been reported.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Acute Panmyelosis with
 As mentioned earlier, this entity shares many overlapping
features with AMKL, such as bone marrow fibrosis, unaspi-
Myelofbrosis
rable marrow, dysplastic megakaryocytes, and the presence
of megakaryoblasts. However, unlike AMKL, in APMF the
Acute panmyelosis with myelofibrosis (APMF), previously
majority of the blasts are of non-megakaryocytic origin.
referred to as acute myelofibrosis, acute myelosclerosis, or acute
The differential diagnosis also includes primary myelofi-
myelodysplasia with myelofibrosis, is an acute leukemia with
brosis, minimally differentiated AML, AML without matu-
 panmyeloid proliferation, increased blasts, and bone mar-
ration, ALL, and metastatic tumors.
row fibrosis.
This entity shares significant overlapping features with
AMKL, such as bone marrow fibrosis, unaspirable marrow,
dysplastic megakaryocytes, and the presence of megakaryo-
Other Types of Acute Myeloid
blasts. However, in AMKL, megakaryoblasts comprise the
Leukemia
predominant proportion of the blast population, whereas
in APMF the majority of the blasts are of non-megakaryo-
cytic origin.
HYPOPLASTIC ACUTE MYELOID LEUKEMIA
APMF is a rare type of AML often presenting with
marked cytopenia. Splenomegaly is minimal or absent.
 Hypoplastic acute myeloid leukemia or hypocellular acute
It has an unfavorable prognosis with a median survival of
myeloid leukemia is a leukemic condition characterized
<1 year in some reports
by marked bone marrow hypocellularity. The etiology and
278
ACUTEMYELOID LEUKEMIA,NOTOTHERWISESPECIFIED
FIGURE 21.28 PANMYELosis. Blast cells are present in the blood smear (A) and bone marrow touch preparation (B). Bone marrow biopsy
section (C) is hypercellular and demonstrates numerous megakaryocytes and excess blasts. Reticulin stain (D) shows diffuse marrow 
fibrosis, with scattered and small clusters of cells which are positive for CD117 (E) and MOP (F).
pathogenesis of this leukemia are not known, but bone average cellularity in the normal matching age group. Blast
marrow toxicity may play a contributing role. This type of  cells are prominent and account for >2o% of the bone
leukemia tends to involve elderly people, primarily men.  marrow cells (Figure 2l.29). They display scant-to-moder-
                   
OTHERTYPESOFACUTEMYELOIDLEUKEMIA
279
nuclear chromatin, and one or more prominent nucleoli.
In most studies, blast cells appear to be of myeloid origin
by the presence of cytoplasmic azurophilic granules, Auer
rods, positive reactions for MPO, Sudan Black B, or expres-
sion of myeloid-associated molecules, such as CD13, CD33,
 and CDl17. The differential diagnoses include aplastic ane-
 mia and hypocellular MDS. Diagnosis is made based on the
 presence of ≥20% blasts in a hypocellular marrow.
MYELOID SARCOMA
Myeloid sarcoma (granulocytic sarcoma, chloroma) refers
to extramedullary tumors of myeloid precursors. The term
"chloroma" was originally used in response to the green
color of the tumor due to the presence of myeloperoxi-
dase (MPO) in the tumor cells. Myeloid sarcoma is usul-
ally associated with CML in blast crisis, or de novo AML. It
either develops during the active phase of the disease or
represents relapse without evidence of recurrent disease in
the blood or the bone marrow. The most frequent sites of
involvement include skin, lymph nodes, respiratory sys-
tem, gastrointestinal tract, CNS, and subperiosteal struc-
tures of the skull, ribs, vertebrae, and pelvis. The incidence
of myeloid sarcoma is higher in children than in adult
patients with AML.
Myeloid sarcomas are composed of various proportions
of immature and mature myeloid cells (Figure 2l.30).
Myeloblasts, monoblasts, and immature myelomonocytic
cells are the predominant cell types, though a proportion
of megakaryocytic and erythroid precursors may also be
present. Megakaryocytic and erythroblastic sarcomas are
extremely rare.
Myeloid sarcoma may resemble lymphomas or non-
hematopoietic malignancies. The presence of immature
eosinophils is a distinctive feature of myeloid sarcomas.
Tumor cells in these lesions express myeloid-associated
molecules in the biopsy sections, such as MPO, NES, and/
 or lysozyme. Flow cytometric studies demonstrate a popu-
lation of CD45 dim cells expressing CD13, CD33, CD34,
CD64, CD117, and MPO, indicating a myeloblastic popu-
lation. The presence of monoblasts/promonocytes is dem-
 onstrated by CD4, CD14, CD64, and CD68 expression.
C
FIGURE 21.29 HYPOPLAsTIC ACUTE MYELoID LEUKEMIA. Bone MarrOW
biopsy section showing hypocellularity and increased blasts 
(A, low power; B, high power). Immunohistochemical stain for
CD34 reveals numerous positive cells (C).
280
ACUTEMYELOID LEUKEMIA,NOTOTHERWISESPECIFIED
effacement of the nodal architecture (A) by predominantly a sinusoidal infiltration of large neoplastic cells in sheets. These large
neoplastic cells (B) contain irregular to folded nuclei, dispersed chromatin, prominent nucleoli, and moderate to abundant granular
cytoplasm. Apoptotic bodies, mitoses, and tingible body macrophages are easily seen. Immunohistochemical studies demonstrate 
that the neoplastic cells are positive for myeloperoxidase (C), CD15 (D) and partially express CD68 (E) and lysozyme (F).
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES281
Additional Resources
Amadori S, Venditti A, Del Poeta G, et al: Minimally differentiated
McGrattan P, Alexander HD, Humphreys MW, et al: Tetrasomy 13 as
Aa i-o  e ) i  a
the sole cytogenetic abnormality in acute myeloid leukemia Ml with-
with poor prognosis, Ann Hematol 72:208-215, 1996.
out maturation, Cancer Genet Cytogenet 135:192-195, 2002.
Audouin J, Comperat E, Le Tourneau A, et al: Myeloid sarcoma: clini-
Roy A, Roberts I, Norton A, Vyas P: Acute megakaryoblastic leukae-
cal and morphologic criteria useful for diagnosis, Int J Surg Pathol
mia (AMKL) and transient myeloproliferative disorder (TMD) in
11:271-282, 2003.
'sisauasouaynal pronau jo japou das-nu e auoapuis umo
Br J Haematol 147:3-12, 2009.
Avni B, Rund D, Levin M, et al: Clinical implications of acute myeloid
leukemia presenting as myeloid sarcoma, Hematol Oncol 30:34-40.
 Santos FP, Bueso-Ramos CE, Ravandi F: Acute erythroleukemia: diag-
2012.
nosis and management, Expert Rev Hematol 3:705-718, 2010.
Berger R, Le Coniat M, Flexor MA, Leblanc T: Translocation t(10:11)
Scharenberg MA,
Chiquet-Ehrismann  R,  Asparuhova  MB:
involving the MLL gene in acute myeloid leukemia: importance of
Megakaryoblastic leukemia protein-1 (MKLl): increasing evidence
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis, Ann Genet 39:147-
for an involvement in cancer progression and metastasis, Int J
151, 1996.
Biochem Cell Biol 42:1911-1914, 2010.
Campidelli C, Agostinelli C, Stitson R, et al: Myeloid sarcoma: extra-
 Sun T, Wu E: Acute monoblastic leukemia with t(8:16): a distinct
medullary manifestation of myeloid disorders, Am J Clin Pathol
'aial au go maiaai pue as e jo jodai ua sioouedoiu
132:426-437, 2009.
Am J Hematol 66:207-212, 2001.
Gougounon A, Abahssain H, Rigollet L, et al: Minimally differenti-
Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, et al: WHO dassification of
ated acute myeloid leukemia (FAB AML-M0): prognostic factors and
tumours of haematopoietic and lymphoid tissues, ed 4, Lyon, 2008,
treatment effects on survival-a retrospective study of 42 adult cases,
International Agency for Research on Cancer.
Leuk Res 35:1027-1031, 2011.
Thiele J. Kvasnicka HM, Schmitt-Graeff A: Acute panmyelosis with
Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Vardiman JW, et al: Hematopathology.
myelofbrosis, Leuk Lymphoma 45:681-687, 2004.
Philadelphia, 2010, Saunders/Elsevier.
van't Veer MB: The diagnosis of acute leukemia with undifferentiated
King JA, Nye DM, O'Connor MB, et al: Acute myelogenous leukemia
 Or minimally differentiated blasts, Ann Hematol 64:16l-165, 1992.
(FAB AML-M1) in the setting of HIV infection and G-CSF therapy: a
Yin CC, Medeiros LJ, Bueso-Ramos CE: Recent advances in the diag-
case report and review of the literature, Ann Hematol 77:69-73, 1998.
nosis and classifcation of myeloid neoplasms-comments on the
Latif N, Salazar E, Khan R, Villas B, Rana F: The pure erythroleukemia:
2008 WHO dassification, Int J Lab Hematol 32:461-476, 2010.
a case report and literature review, Clin Adv Hematol Oncol 8:283-290.
Zuo Z, Polski JM, Kasyan A, et al: Acute erythroid leukemia, Arch
2010.
Pathol Lab Med 134:1261-1270, 2010.
Masood A, Holkova B, Chanan-Khan A: Review: erythroleukemia: clin-
ical course and management, Clin Adv Hematol Oncol 8:288-290, 2010.
This page intentionally left blank
Myeloid Proliferations
Related to Down
Syndrome
atients with Down syndrome (trisomy of chromosome
show cytoplasmic blebbing or coarse cytoplasmic azurophilic
21) have a 10- to 20-fold higher relative risk for leukemia.
granules. Early erythroblasts (pronormoblasts) are often meg-
Approximately 10% of neonates with Down syndrome
aloblastic and show a dark blue, non-granular cytoplasm with
(DS) develop a transient abnormal myelopoiesis (TAM),
a perinuclear pale area. Some patients may show basophilia.
which regresses spontaneously in the vast majority of the
Leukocytosis may occasionally, exceed 100,000/μL. As usually
cases. However, about 20% of the affected neonates will
observed in this age group. late stage nucleated and polychro-
matic red cells are present.
eventually develop acute myelogenous leukemia (AML)
before age 5. The vast majority of the AML cases in DS
● Bone marrow shows myeloid preponderance and left shiff
with increased number of blasts, predominantly mega-
patients are of megakaryoblastic subtype. Mutation of the
karyoblasts. Erythroid and megakaryocytic dysplasia is often
GATA-1 gene on the X chromosome, encoding for the ery-
present.
throid/megakaryocytic transcription factor GATA-1, has
 Liver biopsies may show extramedullary hematopoiesis with
been reported in both TAM and DS-associated megakaryo-
predominance of megakaryocytes and blasts. Hepatocellular
blastic leukemia.
necrosis and areas of fibrosis may be present.
+
 Splenomegaly is often associated with necrosis, extramedul-
(Figure 22.2C).
Transient Abnormal Myelopoiesis
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE (FIGURE 22.3)
DS-related transient abnormal myelopoiesis (TAM) occurs
●Immunophenotypic features of TAM by multiparametric flow
in about 10% of neonates with Ds. The affected neo-
cytomeuy (MFC) are indistinguishable from those seen in
nates are usually under 1 month old (average age about
AML associated with Down syndrome.
1 week) and may demonstrate asymptomatic leukocy-
Blasts commonly express CD33, CD34, CD38, CD117. plus
tosis to massive organomegaly and fatal liver failure. The
doss-lineage aberrancies of CD7 and CD56.
clinicopathologic manifestations of TAM usually disap-
In addition, there is variable expression of CD13. CD36.
pear spontaneously after several weeks (usually less than
CD41, and CD61.
3 months). A small proportion of patients may eventually
●HLA-DR is negative or partially expressed.
develop AML.
● Myeloperoxidase is usually negative.
MORPHOLOGY (FIGURES 22.1 AND 22.2)
● Blood smears show leukocytosis with myeloid left shift and
the presence of blast cells. Blast cells are predominantly of
megakaryocytic and erythroid origin. Megakaryoblasts may
Atlas of Hematopathology. DOl: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00022-x
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
284
 MYELOID PROLIFERATIONS RELATED TO DOWN SYNDROME
 FIGURE 22.1 DOWN SYNDROME-ReLATeD TrANSIENT ABNORMaL
MYELopolesis. Blood smear (A) demonstrating numerous blast 
cells. Bone marrow biopsy section (B) and smear (C) show
 myeloid left shift with increased blasts.
FIGURE 22.2 DOWN SYNDROME-RELATED TRANSIENT ABNORMAL
MYELopolesis. Blood smear (A, low power; B, high power)
demonstrating several blast cells. Section of spleen (C) shows
small clusters and scattered blasts.
DS-ASSOCIATED MYELOID LEUKEMIAS
285
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
● Sequence analysis of the GATA1 gene is performed in a small
blasts
number of clinical laboratories if desired.
SSC-
(70%)
 The acquired mutations involved in DS-associated transient
 MPD should not be confused with inherited mutations in the
 same gene that cause thrombocytopenia (not associated with
CD45
CD15
Down syndrome).
CD117
●Trisomy 21 (Figure 22.4).
● The presence of additional cytogenetic findings is consistent
with an increased risk for developing subsequent AML.
DS-Associated Myeloid Leukemias
CD64
CD41
CD2
Approximately 20% of DS patients with TAM will develop
AML. This occurs usually in the first 3 years of their life.
FIGURE 22.3 FLOW CYTOMETRIC FINDINGS IN AN INFANT WITH DOWN
Typically, evolution to AML is preceded by a prolonged
SYNDROME-RELATED TRANSIENT ABNORMAL MYELOPOIESIS. OpeN gate 
 myelodysplastic-like period. Approximately 10% of chil-
density plot by CD45 gating reveals 70% blasts that are CD45 dim.
dren with DS develop MDS (Figure 22.5), acute mega-
Density plots of the blast-enriched gate (in blue) demonstrate
that the blasts express CD7, CD15 (partial), CD33, CD34
karyoblastic leukemia (Figure
22.6), or minimally
(heterogeneous, partial), CD38, CD117, and HLA-DR (partial).
differentiated AML (Figure 22.7).
FIGURE 22.4 (A) Constitutional trisomy 21
(47,XX,+21) by karyotype in DS-TMD. (B) FISH
demonstrates three copies of 21q (green
signals).
11
R
品品
艺业
A
B
286
MYELOID PROLIFERATIONS RELATED TO DOWN SYNDROME
FIGURE 22.5 REFRACTORY
ANEMIA WITH EXCESS BLASTS
TYPE2INAPATIENTWITHDOWN
 SYNDrome. Bone marrow biopsy
section (A, low power; B, high
power) is hypercellular and 
demonstrates increased blasts.
Immnuohistochemical stain for
CD34 (C) reveals numerous positive
cells, and bone marrow smear
(D) shows erythroid dysplasia and
increased blasts.
FIGURE 22.6 DowN SYNDROME-ASSoCIATED AcUTE MEGAKARYOBLASTIC LEUKEMIA. Bone marrOw Smear (A, low pOwer; B, high pOwer)
demonstrating numerous blasts, some with cytoplasmic blebs (nubs, arrows). A megakaryoblast is present in the blood smear (C, arrow).
DS-ASSOCIATED MYELOID LEUKEMIAS
287
blasts
(77%)
CD117
CD45
CD2
CD56
FSC-H
CD13
blasts
(77%)
CD41a
CD45
CD36
OSS
CD61
B
HLA-DR
FIGURE 22.7 DOWN SYNDROME-ASSOCIATED ACUTE MYELOID
FIGURE 22.8 FLOW CYTOMETRIC FINDINGS IN A PATIENT WITH DOWN
LEUKEMIA MINIMALLY DIFFERENTIATED. Bone marrow biopSy Section
SYNDROME-ASSoCIATeD ACUTe MEGAKARYOBLASTIC LEUKeMIA.
(A, low power; B, high power) demonstrating sheets of blast cells
Open gate displays (in blue) illustrate excess blasts (77% of the
with fine nuclear chromatin and prominent nucleoli.
total) that are positive for CD45 (dim to moderate). (A) Density
plots of the blast-enriched gate (in magenta) show that the blasts 
are abnormal with cross-lineage aberrancies of CD7 and CD56.
The acute leukemia in the vast majority of cases is
These abnormal blasts are positive for CD13 (partial), CD33,
of the megakaryoblastic type. The DS-associated acute
megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL) is characterized by
enriched gate (in magenta) show that the blasts are also positive
for CD11b (partial, dim), CD36, CD38, CD41a (heterogeneous),
favorable prognosis, no CNS involvement, and fewer cyto-
CD61, and CD71. They are negative for HLA-DR.
 genetic abnormalities than those in non-Ds children.
The event-free survival rate for DS-AMKL patients is
about 80%. Almost none of the AML cases occurring in
DS children older than 5 years are AMKL, and they do not
 There is evidence of dysplastic changes in the erythroid and
megakaryocytic series, such as megaloblastic changes and
show favorable prognosis. The event-free survival rate in
this group of children is considerably worse and is about
presence of micromegakaryocytes.
Hepatic and splenic infiltration by blast cells is a frequent
15-20%.
feature.
MORPHOLOGY
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE (FIGURE 22.8)
 Morphologic features range from MDS to a fulminant AML
Flow cytometric features are generally similar to those
which. in most instances, is of the megakaryoblastic type
described above in TAM. Blasts in DS-AMKL demonstrate:
(AMKL) (see Figures 22.5 to 22.7).
Morphologic features of DS-associated AMKL are very similar
Expression of CD41, CD61, Factor VIII;:
to the TMD (see above). Blasts in the blood and/or the bone
Expression of CD36 and CD38:
marrow account for ≥20% of the differential counts.
鲁
 Highly common aberrancy of CD7 and variable CD56:
288
FIGURE 22.9 DOWN SYNDROME-ASSOCIATED ACUTE
MEGAKARYOBLASTICLEUKEMIA. (A) G-banded
karyotype showing tetrasomy 21(48,xX,+21,+21).
(B) FISH demonstrating four copies of 21q (green 
signals).
20
A
B
● Variable expression of and sometimes absent CD34 and/or
frequently have trisomies 8, 11, and 21, dup(1p). del(6q).
CD117:
aosouo go Aos y (bt)p pue '()dnp '(d)
● Negativity for MPO and usually lack of HLA-DR;
 21 from a child with DS-AML is demonstrated in Figure 22.9.
●Negativity for or dim expression of CD45.
● Translocations commonly seen in non-DS AML, such as
t(8;21). t(15:17). inv(16), 11q23 rearrangements, are rare in
patients with Ds. For DS children older than 4 years of age
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
who develop AML, the cytogenetic features, molecular biology
fndings. and response to therapy signifcantly diverge from
● Factors associated with Ds leukemogenesis include somatic
those in younger patients, and are similar to the ones found in 
mutations in the chromosome X-linked hematopoietic fac-
tor, GATA1, which are specific and have been detected almost
non-DS patients with AML
uniformly in all DS-AMKL and TAM cases and not detected in
remission DS marrows, non-ML cases nor DS-ALL cases. The
GATA1 protein has altered transactivation activity, likely con-
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
tributing to the uncontrolled proliferation of megakaryocytes.
● The acquisition of GATA1 mutations is likely an early step in
There are significant overlapping clinicopathological fea-
 tures between DS-associated TAM and AMKL. The major
a multistep process of leukemogenesis and is thought to arise
prenatally. based on several studies including their detection
differences are that TAM is transient and is seen at an
in fetal tissues.
earlier age (usually in the first month of infancy), while
● The cytogenetics of DS AML cases differs significantly from 
AMKL is not transient and develops a few years later, often
non-DS patients with AML. DS children with AML more
 preceded by a prolonged MDs-like syndrome
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
289
Additional Resources
Avet-Loiseau H, Mechinaud F, Harousseau JL: Clonal hematologic
Kanezaki R, Toki T, Terui K, et al: Down syndrome and GATAl muta-
disorders in Down syndrome: A review, J Pediatr Hematol Oncol
tions in transient abnormal myeloproliferative disorder: mutation
17:19-24, 1995.
Lange BJ, Kobrinsky N, Barmard DR, et al: Distinctive demography.
4638, 2010.
biology, and outcome of acute myeloid leukemia and myelodysplas-
Kruger B: Transient myeloproliferative disorder associated with tri-
tic syndrome in children with Down syndrome: Children's Cancer 
somy 21, Neonatal Netw 26:7-19, 2007.
Group Studies 286l and 2891, Blood 91:608-615, 1998.
Kurahashi H, Hara J. Yumura-Yagi K, et al: Transient abnormal
Crispino JD: GATAl mutations in Down syndrome: implications for 
 myelopoiesis in Down's syndrome, Leuk Lymphoma 8:465-475, 1992.
 Malinge S, Izraeli S, Crispino JD: Insights into the manifestations.,
disorder and acute megakaryoblastic leukemia, Pediatr Blood Cancer
 outcomes, and mechanisms of leukemogenesis in Down syndrome.
44:40-44, 2005.
Blood 113:2619-2628, 2009.
Dixon N, Kishnani Ps, Zimmerman S: Clinical manifestations of
hematologic and oncologic disorders in patients with Down syn-
drome, Am I Med Genet C Semin Med Genet 142C:149-157, 2006.
This page intentionally left blank
Lymphoblastic Neoplasms-
B-Lymphoblastic
Leukemia/Lymphoma
ymphoblastic neoplasms are leukemias or lympho-
lymphoma is defined by the presence of <25% blasts in
mas of precursor lymphoid cells—blast cells committed
the bone marrow and evidence of a mediastinal mass or
to lymphoid differentiation. Clinically, they are divided
lymphadenopathy.  Lymphadenopathy  and cutaneous
into two major categories: lymphoblastic lymphoma (LBL)
involvement are the most frequent presentations. Skin
and acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Typically, LBL
 lesions may be multifocal.
represents a neoplastic process primarily involving extra-
 The presenting clinical symptoms are often non-specific
medullary lymphoid tissues with or without bone marrow
 and secondary to bone marrow/lymphoid tissue infiltra-
involvement, and ALL primarily involves bone marrow
 tion and pancytopenia, such as fever, bleeding, bone pain,
(≥20% blasts) with or without extramedullary lesions.
 and lymphadenopathy.
Since LBL and ALL share considerable clinicopathologic
 Favorable prognostic factors include:
features, and present similar biological properties, they are 
●Age younger than 1 or older than 10 years;
considered the same disease. In the WHO classification,
● White blood cell count in normal range or >50,000/μL;
LBL and ALL are lumped together as precursor lymphoid
●Hyperdiploidy: >50 chromosomes in the karyotype:
neoplasms and are divided into two major categories:
●t(12;21)(p13;q22.3) (ETV6-RUNX1 fusion).
1. B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma
 The overall response to therapy is significantly better in
2. T-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma.
children than in adults. The current 5-year survival rate for
 B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma
{B-ALL/LBL)
B-ALL in children is approaching 85%, but nearing 95% in
 may initially present itself as acute lymphoblastic leuke-
children with favorable prognostic factors.
mia (ALL) with bone marrow and/or blood involvement,
B-ALL/LBL disorders are divided into two major
or lymphoblastic lymphoma (LBL) with the involvement
categories:
of the lymphoid and/or other extramedullary tissues. In a
 1. B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma with recurrent genetic
significant proportion of cases, however, both bone mar-
abnormalities
row and extramedullary tissues are involved. ALL and LBL
 2. B-lymphoblastic
leukemia/lymphoma.
not otherwise
are regarded as different clinical presentations of the same
 specified.
disease. Common clinical presentations in B-ALL patients
 In general, both categories share similar morphologic
include anemia, thrombocytopenia and/or granulocyto-
 and cytochemical features.
penia with variable leukocyte counts, frequent bone pain,
and organomegaly. Patients with B-LBL without leukemia
 mostly are asymptomatic and demonstrate limited lymph-
adenopathy, particularly in the head and neck regions.
The incidence of B-ALL in the United States approaches
Common Morphologic and
3 per 100,000. The peak incidence is between 2 and 5
Cytochemica! Features
years of age, affecting boys more than girls. Acute lympho-
blastic leukemia/lymphoma is the most common form
of cancer in children, comprising about 30% of all child-
The bone marrow biopsy and clot sections are usually hyper-
cellular and are diffusely infiltrated by sheets of uniformly
40% of childhood lymphomas are of the precursor B-cell
appearing blast cells (Figures 23.1 to 23.3). These cells have
type. B-lymphoblastic lymphoma is uncommon in adults
scanty basophilic cytoplasm with round, oval, or indented
and accounts for <1% of lymphomas. Lymphoblastic
nuclei, finely dispersed nuclear chromatin, and prominent or
Atlas of Hematopathology.DOl: htp://dx.doi.org/10.1016/978-0-12-385183-3.0023-1
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
292
LYMPHOBLASTIC NEOPLASMS—B-LYMPHOBLASTIC LEUKEMIA/LYMPHOMA
C
FIGURE 23.1 Bone marrow biopsy section (A), bone marrow
smear (B) and blood smear (C) demonstrating lymphoblasts in a
child with B lymphoblastic leukemia.
FIGURE 23.2 B LYMPHoBLASTIC LEUKEMIA.Bone marrOw biopsy
section (A) and bone marrow smear (B, low power; C, high power)
demonstrating sheets of lymphoblasts.
 indistinct nucleoli. Mitotic figures are variable, but often easily
anemia. The hypoplastic marrow contains a variable number
detectable.
of lymphoblasts (Figure 23.4) and may eventually become
Occasionally. ALL patients may initially present with a
packed with lymphoblasts with an obvious acute leukemia
hypoplastic marrow and pancytopenia mimicking aplastic
picture.
COMMON MORPHOLOGIC AND CYTOCHEMICAL FEATURES
293
FIGURE 23.4 Bone marrow biopsy section from a patient with
FIGURE 23.3 Bone marrow smear demonstrating the hand-mirror
hypoplastic lymphoblastic leukemia (A, low power; B, high
variant of lymphoblastic leukemia (A, low power; B, high power).
 power). Immunohistochemical stain shows numerous TdT
PAS stain (C) shows coarse cytoplasmic PAS-positive granules.
positive cells (C).
 Bone marrow necrosis may be present in some cases. Necrosis
● Bone marrow fbrosis and osteoporosis are sometimes pres-
is usually of the coagulative type with the preservation of the
ent. Fibrosis may be mild or extensive, focal or diffuse, and
basic outline of the necrotic cells.
may lead to unsuccessful bone marrow aspiration (dry tap). It
Bone marrow smears and touch preparations show numerous
is more frequent in B-ALL than in T-ALL.
blast cells which are often small with scanty non-granular blue
294
LYMPHOBLASTIC NEOPLASMS—B-LYMPHOBLASTIC LEUKEMIA/LYMPHOMA
 Table 23.1
 Recurrent Genetic Abnormalities, Immunophenotype, and Prognosis In B-Lymphoblastic Leukemia/Lymphomas
Cytogenetics
Genes
Frequency
Immunophenotype
Prognosis
t(9;22)(q34;q11.2)
BCR-ABL1
25%, adults; 3-5%, children CD10+, CD19+, CD22+,icCD79a+,TdT+, CD9+,CD34+,CD20±. Poor
and often CD13+ and/or CD33+
t(4;11)(q21;q23)
AFF1/MLL1
5%, children
CD19+, CD22+,icCD79a+, TdT+,CD9+, CD34+,CD15+, CD10-,
Poor
CD24-
t1;19)(q23;p13.3)
PBX12/TCF3
6%, children
CD10+, CD19+, CD22+,icCD79a+, TdT+, CD9+, CD20±, CD34-
Poor3
t(12;21)(p13;q22)
ETV6/RUNX1
 25%, children; 3-4%, adults 
CD10+, CD19+, CD22+,icCD79a+, TdT+, CD34+, CD20±, CD9-
 Favorable
Hyperdiploid 
20-25%
CD10+, CD19+,CD22+,icCD79a+, TdT+, CD9+,CD34+,CD20±,
Favorable
CD45-
Hypodiploidy
5%
CD10+, CD19+, CD22+,icCD79a+, TdT+, CD9+, CD34+, CD20± 
Poor
Alternative designations:
ALL Or HRX
2PRL
3The unbalanced form is associated with favorable prognosis.
cytoplasm, fine chromatin, and indistinct nudei (see Figures 
B-LYMPHOBLASTIC LEUKEMIA/LYMPHOMA
23.1 and 23.2). But less frequently the blast cells are larger
WITH t(9;22)(q34;g1 1.2)
and more pleomorphic, show variable amounts of cytoplasm
which may display vacuolization or azurophilic granules
B-ALL/LBL
with t(9;22)(q34;q11.2)
(BCR-ABL1)is
(5-10% of the cases), and one or more prominent nucleoli.
observed in <5% of children and about 25% of adults. It is
Some cases may show cytoplasmic tails (pseudopods) referred
the most frequent genetic rearrangement in adult ALL. The
to as hand-mirror cells (see Figure 23.3).
 prognosis is poor both in children and adults.
● [n a small proportion of patients with ALL (4-7%), particu-
larly in children, lymphoblasts contain coarse azurophilic
Immunophenotype (Figure 23.5)
granules.
● Lymphoblasts may also be present in the peripheral blood
●
Blasts express CD10, CD19, CD34, intracellular CD22 and/or
smears in variable numbers (see Figure 23.1C). They account
CD79a, plus TdT.
for the majority of leukocytes in patients with WBC >10,000/
 There are often myeloid aberrancies including CD13, CD15.
μL. Approximately 20% of patients at the time of diagnosis
and CD33; but CD117 is typically absent.
present with a leukocyte count exceeding 50,000/μL.
鲁
CD25 is highly associated with this entity. However, it is not
● Anemia, granulocytopenia, and/or thrombocytopenia are
routinely included in the acute leukemia panels by many flow
common features.
cytometry laboratories.
 The involvement of lymph nodes and other tissues is usually
diffuse with the total or partial effacement of normal architec.
Molecular and Cytogenetic Studies
ture and morphologic features, similar to those described ear-
●The t(9;22) can be easily identified by standard karyotyping
lier in the bone marrow biopsy sections.
● Lymphoblasts may show coarse purple cytoplasmic granules
by BCR-ABL1 FISH probe set commonly used in CML diagno-
with PAS cytochemical stains (see Figure 23.3C)
probe (BCR-ABL1 Extra Signal) which identifies the m-bcr
breakpoint-related rearrangement (Figure 23.7).
● Molecular studies of BCR-ABL1 fusion in t(9;22) reveal two
distinct subgroups giving rise to two types of fusion proteins:
185-190kDa and 210 kDa. [n some cases t(9:22) is complex
B-Lymphoblastic Leukemia/
and involves additional rearrangements (Figure 23.6).
● Approximately 25-30% of adult ALL patients show BCR-
Lymphoma with Recurrent
ABL1 rearrangement similar to that observed in CML. The
breaks usually occur within the major-bcr region (referred to
Genetic Abnormalities
as M-bcr) of the BCR gene and the juxtaposition to the ABL1
gene, leading to a chimeric gene which encodes for a 210kDa
fusion protein (p210).
This is a group of B-ALL/LBL that are characterized by
 [n children and approximately 50-70% of adults with t(9;22).
recurrent genetic abnormalities and are associated with
the breakpoint occurs further downstream in the BCR gene,
distinctive clinical and biological properties (Table 23.1).
-odo ab nasd ou saop doo sn iau u
This fusion gene encodes smaller fusion proteins ranging from
logic or cytochemical features.
185 to 190kDa (p185)
295
Blasts
Blasts
(53%)
工
(53%)
CD19
CS
DSS
CD45
FSC-H
CD10
Kappa
口
?
CD117
CD15
IcMPO
CD45
magenta) reveal excess abnormal blasts (53% of the total) (with two subsets). A major subset of the blasts is negative for CD45, while the
minor one expresses dim CD45. (A) Density plots of the blast-enriched gate (in blue) show abnormal B lymphoblasts expressing CD34
(partial, dim), plus intracellular CD79a and TdT.
FIGURE 23.6 A complex 4-way translocation: 46,XX,
t(9;22;16;19)(q34;q11.2;p13.3;q13.1).
品
M
13
● At the molecular level, the BCR-ABL1 fusion event is usually
 The BCR-ABL1 quantity detected can be expressed as an abso-
detected quantitatively and extremely sensitively by real-time
lute value or, more commonly, in relative terms, compared with
RT-PCR (Figure 23.8).
the mRNA of a standard "housekeeping" gene such as G6PDH.
●
 The expanse of the breakpoint cluster region in ALL (as well as
Sensitivities of BCR-ABL1 mRNA per 10,000 or 100,000 control 
in CML) is too large to be covered reliably by a DNA-targeted
 gene mRNAs allow a rough extrapolation of the number of leu-
primer set. Instead, the target chosen is the BCR-ABL1 fusion
kemic cells relative to normal cells in the specimen.
transcript, from which long introns have been spliced out to
Sensitivities at this level are suitable for detection of minimal
yield a target of more manageable size. Naturally, this RNA-
residual disease in treated patients and monitoring of tumor
based test requires a reverse transcriptase (RT) step in order to
 loads over long-term therapy.
generate a DNA target which can then be amplified by PCR.
296
LYMPHOBLASTICNEOPLASMS—B-LYMPHOBLASTICLEUKEMIA/LYMPHOMA
B-LYMPHOBLASTIC LEUKEMIA/LYMPHOMA
WITH t(v;11g23)
This is a group of B-ALL/LBL that show translocation
between the MLL gene and other genes, such as (4;11)
(q2l;q23) (AFF1-MLL). It accounts for about 5% of acute
abnl
leukemias and is the most common leukemia in infants
under age 1(Figure 23.11). Lymphomatous manifestations
are infrequent. The prognosis is poor. Patients have a high
leukocyte count, often >200,000/μL.
Immunophenotype (Figure 23.10)
FIGURE 23.7 FISH on interphase nuclei with the mBCR-ABL 1 ES
Dual Color Translocation Probe showing one green (native BCR),
five for CD10.
 one large orange (native ABL1), one smaller orange (ES) and one
● Posifive for CD19, CD34, intracellular CD22 and/or CD79a,
fused orange/green (20IGIF) signal pattern in the Ph-positive 
plus TdT.
abnormal cells.
 Common myeloid aberrancies, especially CD15.
FIGURE 23.8 RT-PCR analysis of a series of patients
showing presence of the bcr-ab/ fusion mRNA target,
using the Roche LightCycler instrument. In general,
the lower the PCR cycle number (x-axis) at which
the amplification reaches its logarithmic phase,
0.07-
the higher the amount of starting bcr-ab/ target
sequence in the specimen. Very late-rising and/or 
05
low-rising signals should be interpreted with caution.
-00
0.02-
0.01
0.01
a-
LinearHegrotin
30-
Cosing Poirts
S0=-2906
28-
Intococx=32.06
824
Emer=0.217
22-
1=-1.00
20-
0.5
1.5
FIGURE 23.9 Bone marrow clot
section (A) and smear (B) from
 a case of acute lymphoblastic
leukemia with t(4;11). The blasts are
of various sizes and show scanty
cytoplasm.
297
FIGURE 23.10 FLOW CYTOMETRIC FINDINGS 0F B-ALL/
LBL wTH t(4;11). Open gate density plot display by
CD45 gating (in blue) reveals excess blasts (89% of the
blasts
total) that are CD45 dimly positive. Density plots of the
(89%)
 blast-enriched gate (in purple) demonstrate that the
SS
B-lymphoblasts express CD19, CD22 (partial, dim), CD34,
CD38 (not shown), plus intracellular CD79a and TdT(not 
shown). In addition, there are myeloid aberrancies of
partial CD13 and CD15. The blasts are negative for CD10,
CD45
CD10
CD22
which is a characteristic feature seen in this subgroup of
B-ALL/LBL.
CD117
CD15
IcCD3
FIGURE 23.11 (A) G-banded karyotype of bone marrow
of a patient with acute lymphoblastic leukemia
demonstrating t(4;11)(q21;q23). (B) FISH analysis of bone
marrow of a patient with acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
The left image represents a normal control, and the
curved arrows on the right image indicate 11q23 (MLL)
rearrangement.
A
B
Molecuiar and Cytogenetic Studies
an unfavorable prognosis with a high relapse rate, although
children 2-9 years old appear to have a much better prognosis.
● Rearrangements of 1lq23 are found in 70-80% of infant leul-
The t(4:l1)(q2l:q23) forms a fusion between genes AFF1
kemias. In children older than 1 year the MLL gene rearrange-
(4q21), a transcription factor, and MLL (1lq23) (Figure 23.11)
ments incidence is approximately 5%.
and includes portions of the 5' region of MLL and variable
t(4:11)(q21:q23) is the most common translocation involving
portions of AFF1. The breakpoints in MLL are usually in a bcr
11q23 (2%), and can be detected by conventional cytogenetics,
8.3 kb region between exons 5 and 11.
FISH, RT-PCR, or Southern blot techniques. It is associated with
298
LYMPHOBLASTIC NEOPLASMS—B-LYMPHOBLASTIC LEUKEMIA/LYMPHOMA
FIGURE 23.12 G-banded karyotype of bone marrow
 of a patient with acute lymphoblastic leukemia with
t(11;19)(q23;p13.3).
15
16
17
20
FIGURE 23.13 G-banded karyotype of bone 
marrow of a patient with acute lymphoblastic
leukemia exhibiting a loss ofY and t(9;1 1)(p23;q23).
10
11
12
e
16
17
19
2
22
X
 Cryptic, can be detected by karyotype, and can be confirmed by
●The fusion gene is transcribed into a hybrid mRNA, which can
FISH with the 11q23 "split" probe analysis.
be detected by RT-PCR techniques for establishing the diagno-
●Other abnormalities involving 1lq23 include t(9:11)
sis or monitoring the residual disease.
(p22;q23) (AFF1-MLL fusion), and deletions of 11q23 which
t(11:19)(q23;p13.3) is the second most common 11q23 rear-
are common in Adult ALL (Figures 23.13 to 23.15).
rangement and also associated with unfavorable prognosis
● Because over 80 gene-partners are associated with the MLL
(Figure 23.12). This translocation results in a fusion between
 gene, it is typically recommended to use an MLL “split" probe
the MLL (1lq23) and the ENL (eleven-nineteen-leukemia pro-
 to screen MLL-related rearrangements. (Figure 23.14 B).
tein at 19p13) or the MLLT1 gene, and although somewhat
B-LYMPHOBLASTICLEUKEMIA/LYMPHOMAWITHRECURRENT GENETICABNORMALITIES
299
FIGURE 23.14 (A) G-banded karyotype of bone
marrow of a patient with acute lymphoblastic
leukemia demonstrating del(11q23). (B) FISH 
 analysis of dual-color MLL probe showing split
signals consistent with 11q23 rearrangement.
3
10
12
13
14
15
16
17
A
19
20
FIGURE 23.15 G-banded karyotype of bone
marrow of a patient with acute lymphoblastic
leukemia demonstrating t(10;11)(q22;q23).
10
9
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
静
19
20
21
22
X
300
LYMPHOBLASTICNEOPLASMS—B-LYMPHOBLASTICLEUKEMIA/LYMPHOMA
B-LYMPHOBLASTIC LEUKEMIA/LYMPHOMA
signals without the ETV6-RuNX1 fusion, indicative of the
WITH t(12;21)(p13;q22)
tion (12p-) (Figure 23.18A) or ETV6 gene amplification.
The t(12;21) leads to the fusion of the TEL1 (ETV6) gene
● It is important to recognize the distinction between polysomy
on chromosome 12 with the RUNX1 (AML1) gene on
21 (often seen in high hyperdiploidy (Figure 23.18B) with
chromosome 2l. This translocation is one of the most fre-
good prognosis) and RUNX1 amplification (Figure 23.19)
 quent genetic abnormalities in childhood ALL, accounting
for about 25% of cases. It is less frequent in adults, occur-
are clustered, numbering greater than five or more copies.
 ring in 3-4% of patients with B-ALL/LBL. The disease has a
B-LYMPHOBLASTIC LEUKEMIA/LYMPHOMA
favorable prognosis with a cure rate of >90%.
WITH t(1;19)(q23;p13.3)
Immunophenotype (Figure 23. 16)
The t(1;19)(q23;p13.3) leads to a chimeric gene as the
result of the fusion of the PBX1 and trancription factor 3
●Blasts express CD10, CD19, CD34, intracellular CD22 and or
CD79a, plus TdT.
(TCF3, formerly E2A) genes (Figure 23.20). This transloca-
 Myeloid aberrancies are common, especially CD13.
tion is primarily seen in children and accounts for about 6%
 Characteristically absent CD9 and CD20.
of B-ALL cases. The prognosis is poor, but modern therapeu-
tic modalities have improved the clinical outcome.
Molecular and Cytogenetic Studies
Immunophenotype
●Despite its high frequency, because of the similarity of the size
●Blasts resemble pre-B-cell immunophenotype with presence of
and banding pafterns of 12p and 21q. the t(12;21) goes unde-
tected by routine karyotyping. Therefore, RT-PCR or FISH are
cytoplasmic μ heavy chains.
the recommended techniques for the detection of this translo-
 Blasts also express CD10, CD19, intracellular CD22 and or
cation (Figure 23.17)
CD79a, plus TdT.
 The dual-color dual-fusion FISH probes, in addition to finding
There is typically strong expression of CD9.
the expected 12;21 translocation, can also detect extra RuNX1
 Expression of CD34 is variable or absent.
FIGURE 23.16 FLOW CYTOMETRIC FINDINGS OF B-ALL/ LBL
wITH t12;21). Open gate density plot by CD45 gating (in
blasts
blue) illustrates excess blasts (72% of the total) that are
CD45 negative. Density plots of the blast enriched gate
(72%)
工
(in magenta) show abnormal B lymphoblasts expressing
CD10 (bright), CD19, CD22 (partial), CD34, plus
intracellular CD79a (dim) and TdT. Blasts were negative
for CD20 (not shown). Negativity for CD20 and CD9 is
typical for this subgroup.
CD45
CD117
CD45
CD19
CD10
CD22
lcCD3
B-LYMPHOBLASTIC LEUKEMIA/LYMPHOMA WITH RECURRENT GENETIC ABNORMALITIES
301
8
4
213
23
24.
FIGURE 23.19 FISH analysis of bone marrow of a patient with
acute lymphoblastic leukemia demonstrating ETV6 (green 
signals) and amplification of RUNxT1 (red signals and inset).
12
21
B-LYMPHOBLASTIC LEUKEMIA/LYMPHOMA
WITH t(5;14)(q31;q32)
FIGURE 23.17 FISH analysis of bone marrow of a patient with acute
B-lymphoblastic   leukemia/lymphoma   with
t(5;14)
lymphoblastic leukemia demonstrating t(12;21)(p13;q22) (arrows).
(q31;q32) (IL3-IGH@) is a rare disease (<1% of ALL
cases) reported both in children and adults. One of the
morphologic characteristic features of this disorder is the
presence of a reactive eosinophilia in the bone marrow
 and peripheral blood (Figure 23.21).
Del12p
Immunophenotype
 There are no specific findings, and blasts are usually posi-
tive for CD10 and CD19.
Molecuiar and Cytogenetic Studies
● The t(5:14) may be the sole anomaly or accompanied by
FIGURE 23.18 FISH analysis of bone marrow of a patient with
other anomalies and can be detected by karyotype studies
acute lymphoblastic leukemia demonstrating (A) deletion of E7V6
only. This translocation with the break in the promoter region
[del(12p13)] and (B) polysomy (five copies) of RUNx1 (red signals).
of IL3 and in the IH region of IGH@ results in the over-
Expression of IL3.
Molecuiar and Cytogenetic Studies
● Two forms of t(1:19) have been reported: a reciprocal t(1:19)
B-LYMPHOBLASTIC LEUKEMIA/LYMPHOMA
translocation and an unbalanced form written as der(19)
WITH HYPERDIPLOIDY
t(1:19)(q23;p13) (see Figure 23.20). This translocation
Hyperdiploidy (chromosomes >46) is reported in up
is one of the more common chromosomal abnormalities
(5%) in B-cell precursor ALL and results in a fusion between
to 50% of children with B-ALL, but it is far less frequent
PBX1(1q23) and the TCF3 (E2A)(19p13) genes
in adult patients. Hyperdiploidy is divided into two sub-
● t(1:19) can be demonstrated by conventional cytogenetics,
categories: (1) hyperdiploidy with ≤50 chromosomes
FISH, or RT-PCR.
(between 46 and 50 chromosomes) and (2) hyperdiploidy
302
LYMPHOBLASTICNEOPLASMS-B-LYMPHOBLASTICLEUKEMIA/LYMPHOMA
FIGURE 23.20 G-banded karyotype of bone marrow
of a patient with acute lymphoblastic leukemia
demonstrating der(19)(1;19)(q23;p13.3).
品
16
17
18.
四
20
22
       
(Figure 23.22). B-ALL patients with hyperdioploidy have
an excellent prognosis with a cure rate of >9o%.
Immunophenotype (Figure 23.24)
● Blasts are positive for CD10, CD19, CD34, intracellular CD22
and or CD79a, plus TdT.
●Negative to very dimly positive for CD45.
●Myeloid aberrancies are common.
Molecular and Cytogenetic Studies
● Patients with hyperdiploidy of >50 chromosomes exhibit
karyotype with numbers typically ranging from 50 to 70 chro-
mosomes. There is no gain of specific chromosomes that is
common to all hyperdiploidy, although the most common
chromosomal additions include chromosomes 21 (often mul-
tiple copies), 4, 6, 10, 14, 17, 18, 20, and X. Hyperdiploidy
indicates favorable prognosis, particularly in association with
trisomy of chromosomes 4, 6, and 10 (see Figure 23.22B)
 Other structural aberrations, sometimes observed in hyperdip-
apnpus (prodipirady-opnasd se o, paaan) sadkiore piol 
duplication of 1q. deletion of 6q and isochromosome 17q.
 and have no known prognostic impact.
88
● Hyperdiploidy is commonly detected by conventional karyo-
 type studies, although these can be complemented with tar-
geted FISH probe analyses.
B
B-LYMPHOBLASTIC LEUKEMIA/LYMPHOMA
WITH HYPODIPLOIDY
FlGURE 23.21 (A) Bone marrow biopsy section of a patient with
B-acute lymphoblastic leukemia and eosinophilia. (B) G-banded
This condition refers to B-ALL/LBL cases with chromosome
karyotyping shows t(5;14)(q31;q32).
numbers of <45 and DNA index of <1 (Figure 23.23). It
accounts for about 5% of ALL cases. Several reports indi-
 cate poor prognosis in association with hypodiploidy in
both children and adult patients with ALL.
B-LYMPHOBLASTIC LEUKEMIA/LYMPHOMA WITH RECURRENT GENETIC ABNORMALITIES 
303
FIGURE 23.22 (A) Hyperdiploid karyotype
(62,XX, +X,+X,+2,+5,+8,+9,+10,+12,+
13,+16,+18,+20,+21 × 3,+22. (B) FISH
 analysis demonstrating gains (4 copies) of
chromosomes 4, 10, and 17.
AY
1》1
R29
7
9
10
11
12
36
13
14
15
17
18
一
19
20
21
22
X
Chromosome4
Chromosome 10
Chromosome 17
FIGURE 23.23 Karyotype 33,X,-X,-2,-3,-4, -4,-6,
-7,-15,-15, -17,-20, -22,-22.
14
15
16
17
20
21
304
LYMPHOBLASTIC NEOPLASMS—B-LYMPHOBLASTIC LEUKEMIA/LYMPHOMA
FIGURE 23.24 FLOW CYTOMETRIC FINDINGS OF B-ALL/LBL
WITH HYpERDIpLoIDY. The blasts account for about 56% of
the total analyzed events on the open gate density plot
blasts
display by CD45 gating (in green), revealing two distinct
工
(56%)
subsets: one is negative for CD45, while the other is
SS
very dimly positive for CD45. Density plots of the blast-
enriched gate (in red) also demonstrate two discrete
subsets of B-lymphoblasts with variable levels of CD19
and CD22. The blasts are also positive for CD10, CD20 
CD45
CD117
CD45
(partial, dim), CD34, as well as intracellular CD79a (not
shown) and TdT. In addition, there is aberrant myeloid 
expression of partial CD13 (not shown).
CD10
CD22
Kappa
Immunophenotype
● Common myeloid aberrancies with CD13. CD15, and CD33:
●Negativity for surface light chains.
Immunophenotypic findings are similar to the above
(hyperdiploid B-LBL). There are no specific features.
Molecular and Cytogenetic Studies
● B-ALL/LBL, not otherwise specified is not associated with
Molecuiar and Cytogenetic Studies
recurrent genetic abnormalities except for IGH@ rearrange-
● Near haploid karyotypes show a number below 30 with a typi-
ment which has been detected in the vast majority of the
cases. Because they are precursor B-cell lesions, they often
cal diploid range of 23-28 chromosomes.
 The loss of specific chromosomes is not random; it appears
will not have completed the full ontological sequence of
●
that some chromosomes are preferentially retained (chromo-
rearrangements, from heavy to light chain. In such cases one
somes 6, 8, 10, 14, 18, 21, X) (see Figure 23.23)
may see rearrangement of the heavy chain genes (IGH@) but
 Occasionally, these cases also exhibit a diploid chromosome
not of the light chains (IGK@ or IGL@). Therefore, a greater
number which is actually a duplication of the near-haploid 
proportion of these clonal cases will be detected if one uses
done and can be indistinguishable from a normal 46
probes or primers specific for the IGH region.
chromosome karyotype.
+
The older Southern blot methods, using DNA probes typically
directed at the I-region genes of the IGH region, have largely
been replaced by PCR approaches. However, as this region
is quite large, it cannot be covered comprehensively by most
B-Lymphoblastic Leukemia/
series of PCR primer pairs, so some rearrangements in other
areas will go undetected (false negatives).
● Also, antibodies can further diversify themselves through
Lymphoma, Not Otherwise Specified
somatic hypermutation of the variable genes, and if any of
these changes occur at a primer hybridization site, they can fur-
This term is used for B-ALL/LBL cases that are not associ-
ther reduce the efficiency and sensitivity of the assay. For these
ated with recurrent genetic abnormalities except rearrange-
reasons., many laboratories perform an initial screen by PCR,
ment of the IGH@ gene.
but if that is negative, reflex fo the Southern blot procedure.
Most PCR approaches detect 70-80% of B-cell neoplasms.
● Presence of a clonal population will produce a predominant
Immunophenotype (Figure 23.24)
(or at least visible) DNA pattern (peak) above the background
polyclonal signal (Figure 23.25).
 Expression of CD10, CD19, intracellular CD22 and or CD79a.
● A significant proportion of B-ALL/LBL, in addition to IGH@
plus TdT;
rearrangement, also demonstrates T-cell receptor (TCR) gene
Variable expression of CD34;
Expression of CD20 in some cases, and the expression inten-
rearrangement.
sity is almost always partial and dim;
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
305
FIGURE 23.25 PCR analysis for immunoglobulin heavy chain
clonality. Results are shown for the framework 1 primer set only,
illustrating a clonal peak (arrow) superimposed on a polyclonal
A
background population, a pattern often seen in leukemia
specimens.
Differential Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis of B-ALL includes hematogone
hyperplasia; T-ALL; various types of acute myeloid leuke-
mia, such as minimally differentiated AML, AML without
maturation, and megakaryoblastic leukemia; and meta-
static small round cell tumors, such as neuroblastoma.
B
Hematogones account for 5-l0% of the bone mar-
row cells in children and <5% of the bone marrow cells
in adults, but they may be increased. Hematogone hyper-
hematogones (arrows). (B) Immunohistochemical stain for TdT on
plasia is seen in various conditions, such as iron defi-
 a bone marrow biopsy section demonstrating scattered positive
ciency anemia,  immune-associated thrombocytopenia,
cells representing hematogones.
and following cytotoxic chemotherapy (Figure 23.26).
The distinction of hematogones from B lymphoblasts in
 Immunophenotypic analysis by MFC is the most critical
BALL represents one of the most common challenges in
 and indispensable method in distinguishing hematogones
the practice of hematopathology. For example, in evalua-
from B-lymphoblasts, because of the dynamic and unique
tion of post-therapy effects of BALL, sometimes it can be
immunophenotypic patterns of hematogones. They can
extremely difficult to determine residual or minimal resid-
be arbitrarily divided into three stages of development
ual disease versus normal regenerative marrow, since both
based upon their flow cytometric features (Figure 23.27),
hematogones and residual BALL cells may display blastic
representing early, intermediate, and late precursors. As
morphology, and express CD34, CD10, CD19, and TdT.
 the B-cells mature from early to late precursors, they show
However, hematogones are normal bone marrow B-cell
 increased expression of CD19 and CD45. The early precur-
precursors and hence, by definition, consist of a heteroge-
 sors also express TdT and CD34, both of which are lost in
neous group of B-cells that are at various stages of develop-
the intermediate forms. At the intermediate stage, coex-
ment and maturation. Therefore, despite the similarities,
 pression of CD10 and CD19 is most discrete and promi-
there are distinct morphologic as well as immunopheno-
 nent, plus CD20 begins at a partial and dim level without
typic features which set hematogones apart from BALL
 surface light chains. The late precursors lose CD10, and
cells, the abnormal B-cell precursors.
acquire CD20 at moderate intensity along with expression
of surface kappa or lambda light chains.
306
LYMPHOBLASTIC NEOPLASMS—B-LYMPHOBLASTIC LEUKEMIA/LYMPHOMA
FIGURE 23.27 CHARacTeRIsTIC IMMUNopHENoTypIC
Compositionof Hematogonesby CD45Gating
 PATTERNS OF HEMATOGONE HYPERPLASIA BY FLOW
CYToMETRy. Density plots of open gate displays (in red
and blue) demonstrate the dynamic heterogeneity of
The"Kentucky”Sign
late
hematogones. By CD45 gating (in red), hematogones 
precursors
are comprised of early (very low side scatter; CD45 very
intermediate
 dim), intermediate (higher side scatter; CD45 dim to
early
moderate), and late (CD45 moderate but slightly dimmer
CD45
(map outline of Kentucky)
than mature T-cells) normal B-cell precursors. They form
a unique pattern by CD45 gating, which is called by
 some the "Kentucky" sign, because of their resemblance
early
ediate
late
to the shape of the State of Kentucky. The hematogones
iu oi buposre sdnobgns ui Alaseedas pareidsip ae
CD19
stage of maturation and development. As the normal
B-cell precursors mature, the expression of CD19 is
 increased to normal levels. CD10 is most prominent in
the intermediate precursors, and disappears gradually
CD10
CD10
CD10
in the late precursors. Expression of both CD34 and
TdT is similarly present only in the early precursors,
which should account for less than one third of the total
number of hematogones.
early
intermediate
late
P
CD45
CD45
CD45
CD19
CD10
CD10
CD45
Morphologically, the early and some intermediate pre-
express myeloid-associated markers, such as CD13, CD33,
cursors of hematogones can resemble lymphoblasts, but
 and CD117, and may show positive cytochemical staining
they are always admixed with more mature lymphocytes
for MPO and Sudan Black B.
within the same areas. In contrast to the lymphoblasts
 Metastatic round cell tumors are negative for lymphoid-
 of residual BALL, the ones in hematogones are dispersed
 and myeloid-associated CD molecules, and positive for
throughout the marrow and should not form large clusters
 markers that are expressed by the primary tumor.
- no ( n a  si  i ao sa)
The differential diagnosis of B-lymphoblastic lymphoma
  n ,    's
includes T-lymphoblastic lymphoma, Burkitt lymphoma,
 by hematogones can be highlighted by immunostains for
blastoid variant of mantle cell lymphoma, granulocytic sar-
CD34 and TdT.
coma, and metastatic small round cell tumors. Burkitt and
B-ALL is distinguished from T-ALL based on immuno-
blastoid mantle cell lymphomas are TdT negative and have
phenotypic and cytogenetic characteristics. Blasts in AML
characteristic cytogenetic abnormalities.
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
307
Additional Resources
Hoffbrand AV, Pettit JE, Vyas P: Color Atlas of Clinical Hematology.
ed 4, Philadelphia, 2010, Mosby/Elsevier.
phoblastic leukemia, Genes Chromosomes Cancer 48:637-660, 2009.
Onciu M: Acute lymphoblastic leukemia, Hematol Oncol Clin North
 Harrison CJ: Cytogenetics of paediatric and adolescent acute lympho-
Am 23:655-674, 2009.
blastic leukaemia, Br J Haematol 144:147-156, 2009.
Cox CV, Blair A: A primitive cell origin for B-cell precursor ALL? Stem
Teitell MA, Pandolf PP: Molecular genetics of acute lymphoblastic
Cell Rev 1:189-196, 2005.
leukemia, Annu Rev Pathol 4:175-198, 2009.
Hutter JI: Childhood leukemia, Pediatr Rev 31:234-241, 2010.
Harrison CJ, Haas O, Harbott J, et al: Detection of prognostically
Jabbour EJ. Faderl S, Kantarjian HM: Adult acute lymphoblastic leu-
relevant genetic abnormalities in childhood B-cell precursor acute
kemia, Mayo Clin Proc 80:1517-1527, 2005
lymphoblastic leukaemia: recommendations from the Biology and
 Diagnosis Committee of the International Berlin-Frankfurt-Munster
Cobaleda C, Sanchez-Garcia I: B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia:
study group, Br J Haematol 151:132-142, 2010.
towards understanding its cellular origin, Bioessays 31:600-609, 2009.
van Dongen JI. Macintyre EA, Gabert JA, et al: Standardized
Peters JM, Ansari MQ: Multiparameter flow cytometry in the diag-
ao  ss a uoin  ia e
nosis and management of acute leukemia, Arch Pathol Lab Med 135:
aberrations in acute leukemia for detection of minimal residual
44-54, 2011.
disease Report of the BIOMED-1 Concerted Action: investigation
Digiuseppe JA: Acute lymphoblastic leukemia: diagnosis and detec-
of minimal residual disease in acute leukemia, Leukemia 13:1901-
1928, 1999.
27:533-549, 2007.
Haferlach T, Kern W, Schnittger S, et al: Modern diagnostics in acute 
leukemias, Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 56:223-234, 2005.
This page intentionally left blank
Lymphoblastic Neoplasms-
T-Lymphoblastic Leukemia/
Lymphoma
blast cells may appear pleomorphic with variable amounts of
initially present itself in a leukemic phase with bone mar-
cytoplasm, or may show convoluted nuclei.
row and/or blood involvement, or as a lymphoma with
 Mitotic figures are more frequently observed in T-ALL than in
the involvement of the lymphoid and/or other extramed-
B-ALL.
● Bone marrow fibrosis and osteoporosis may be present.
ullary tissues. However, in a significant proportion of
cases, both bone marrow and extramedullary tissues are
Fibrosis may be mild, extensive, focal or diffuse, and may lead
to unsuccessful bone marrow aspiration (dry tap). It is less fre-
involved.
quent in T-ALL than in B-ALL, however.
Precursor T-cell neoplasms constitute about 15% of
 Large areas of bone marrow necrosis are infrequent Necrosis
ALLs in children and 25% in adults. Approximately 2% of
is usually of the coagulative type with preservation of the basic
adult non-Hodgkin lymphomas are of the precursor T-cell
outline of the necrotic cells.
type. Most patients are adolescent or young adults, and
 Similar to B-lymphoblastic leukemia, bone marrow smears
there is male preponderance. The vast majority of patients
and touch preparations show numerous blast cells that are
are at stages IlI or IV at the time of diagnosis. Anterior
often small with scanty non-granular blue cytoplasm, fine
mediastinal mass and/or peripheral lymphadenopathy
chromatin pattern, and indistinct nuclei. In a minority of
is detected in 50-75% of cases. Cervical, supraclavicular,
cases, the blast cells are pleomorphic and may show azuro-
and axillary lymph nodes are frequent targets. Extranodal
philic granules.
● Lymphoblasts may also be present in peripheral blood smears in
tissues such as skin, testicle, or bone are involved less fre-
variable numbers (Figure 24.1C). They account for the majority
quently. A high frequency of CNS involvement has been
of leukocytes in patients with WBC >10,000/μL. Anemia, granu-
noted in patients with T-ALL. The overall prognosis of pre-
locytopenia, and/or thrombocytopenia are common features.
cursor T-cell neoplasms is worse than that of their B-cell
● Involvement of the lymph nodes and other tissues is usually
counterparts. So far, no clear-cut correlation has been
 diffuse with total or partial effacement of the normal architecture
found between the prognosis and the immunophenotypic
and morphologic features similar to those described earlier in
or cytogenetic results. Therapeutic modalities include con-
the bone marrow biopsy sections. In some cases, the high rate of
solidation with high dose chemotherapy and autologous
 tumor cell turnover and necrosis may stimulate the macrophages.
or allogeneic stem cell transplantation.
These macrophages with abundant pale, vacuolated cytoplasm.
and phagocytic cell debris are dispersed throughout  the
lymphomatous lesion, creating a "starry sky" pattern.
Morphology
Immunophenotype and
The morphologic features of T-ALL and T-LBL are
very similar to those of B-ALL and B-LBL (see Chapter 23)
Cytochemical Stains
● Bone marrow biopsy and clot sections are usually hypercellu-
lar and are diffusely infiltrated by sheets of uniform appearing
 In general, immunophenotypic features of T-ALL and
blast cells (Figure 24.1).
T-LBL by multiparametric flow cytometry include:
● Blast cells have scanty cytoplasm with round, oval. or
indented nuclei, finely dispersed nuclear chromatin, and
 Expression of intracellular CD3 in all cases; however, surface
prominent or indistinct nucleoli. In some cases, the leukemic
CD3 is only observed in some cases.
Atlas of Hematopathology. D0l: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00024 3
@ 201 3 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
310
LYMPHOBLASTIC NEOPLASMS—T-LYMPHOBLASTIC LEUKEMIA/LYMPHOMA
FIGURE 24.1 T-AcuTE LYMPHoBLAsTc LEukEMIA. Bone marrow biopsy section showing sheets of blast cells with irregular nuclei (A, low
power; B, high power). Blood smear demonstrates three blasts with scanty dark blue cytoplasm and irregular or cleaved nuclei (C).
Numerous TdT-positive cells are present by immunohistochemical stain (D).
●TdT positivity in many but not all cases.
● Cortical Tcell type: positive for CD1a, cytoplasmic CD3.
● Highly frequent aberrancies of pan-T-cell markers CD2, CD5.
plus double positivity of CD4, and CD8. The early cortical
and CD7. These aberrancies include abnormal intensities
T-ALL/LBL is the most common type.
(dim or bright), abnormal subsets, abnormal clustering pro-
 Late cortical blast cells: begin to show single positivity for
files, and partial or complete loss of antigens.
either CD4 or CD8 (Figure 24.2).
● Variable expression of CD1a, CD4, CD8 and CD34 (See Table
 Medullary T-blasts: positive for surface CD3, are negative
24.1). Double positivity of CD4/CD8 is not uncommon,
for CD1a, and are either CD4+ or CD8+.
which, however, is not specific for T-ALL or T-LBL.
Common myeloid aberrancies with expression of CD13.
CD15, CD33, 0r CD117.
● A small proportion of cases may express other cross-lineage
aberrancies like CD20 or CD79a. Expression of CD10 may be
Cytogenetic and Molecular Studies
present, but is not specific for this entity.
● No lineage-specific cytochemical stains
 are available for T
lymphoblasts. They may show focal acid phosphatase or NSE
● Several translocations involve common genomic sites with
genes MYC, TAL1, LMO1, LMO2. and HOX11, located
reactivity.
● Based upon their immunophenotypic resemblance to various
stages of T-cell maturation, T lymphoblasts can sometimes be
respectively.
divided into several subcategories (Table 24.1):
 Precursor T-cell neoplasms show rearrangements of either or
 Pro- to pre-T-cell type: positive for TdT, CD7, and cytoplasmic
both TRA@/TRD@ and TCL1A at 14q32.
Other abnormalities (Table 24.2) include del(6q) (Figure
CD3. CD34 may be positive, as well as CD2 and or CD5. The
neoplastic cells are mostly double negative for CD4 and CD8
24.5A and B), del(9p) (Figure 24.6), and trisomy 8.
(Figures 24.2 and 24.3)
CYTOGENETIC AND MOLECULAR STUDIES
311
Table 24.1
Molecular Abnormalities, and Immunophenotype, in 
Subtypes of T Lymphoblastic Leukemia/Lymphomas'
SC-H
blasts
Type
Molecular Features
Immunophenotype
(61%)
D34
 Early pro-T-cell ALL 
 Aberrant over-
CD4-,CD8-,cCD3+,
 expression of LYL1
CD7+, CD34+,TdT+
 transcription factor
Early cortical T-cell 
Aberrant over-
CD4+, CD8+,cCD3+,
ALL
expression of TLX1
CD7+, CD1a+.
CD45
CD56
(HOx11)transcription
CD10+, TdT+
factor
Late cortical T-cell 
Aberrant
CD4+,and/or CD8+,
ALL
Overexpression of
cCD3high, CD7+,
 transcription factor
CD1a+, TCRα/β
 Medullary T-cell ALL
Unknown
CD4+ or CD8+,
CD5
CD5
sCD3+, TCRα/β.
CD1a-
I Adapted from Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Vardiman JW, et al. Hematopathology.
Saunders/Elsevier, Philadelphia, 2010.
CD2
CD7
blasts
blasts
D8
?
CD1a
CD4
CD45
BM
IcCD3
blasts
lcTdT
MP
IcMPO
CD45
CD7
cyCD3
CD5
CD8-) NEGATIive. Open gate density plot by CD45 gating (in blue)
reveals 61% blasts that are CD45 dim to moderate. The blast-
enriched gate is intentionally widened to include some mature
T-cells as internal controls. Density plots of the blast-enriched 
 gate (in magenta) demonstrate abnormal Tlymphoblasts, which
M2
are positive for CD5 (dim), CD7 (bright; major subset), CD34,
CD2
TdT
CD56 (partial), plus intracellular CD3 (dim) and TdT. The blasts 
are negative for CD1a, CD2, surface CD3, CD4, CD8, as well as
TCR alpha/beta and gamma/delta (not shown). The phenotypic
FIGURE 24.3 Flow cytometric analysis of bone marrow from
a patient with early pro-T-ALL demonstrating a population of 
features of the abnormal T-lymphoblasts are intermediate
CD45+ blast cells expressing CD2, CD5, CD7, and cytoplasmic
between those of prothymocytes and subcapsular thymocytes.
CD3 (cyCD3), and TdT. The blasts were negative for CD4, CD8, and 
CD1a (not shown).
312
LYMPHOBLASTIC NEOPLASMS—T-LYMPHOBLASTIC LEUKEMIA/LYMPHOMA
Table 24.2
 Recurrent Cytogenetic Abnormalities in Precursor
T-Lymphoblastic Neoplasms
工
blasts
Chromosomal Aberrations
Affected Genes
(87%)
1
t(1;7)(p34;q34)
LCK/TRB@
S
t(1;14)(p32;q11.2)
TAL 11/ TRA@ or TRD@
t(7;10)x(q34;q24)
TRB@/HOX112
t(7;19)(34;p13)
TRB@/LYL1
CD45
CD45
t(8;14)(q24;q11.2)
MYC/TRA@
t(11;14x(p15;q11.2)
LMO1/TRA@ or TRD@
t(11;14)x(p13;q11.2)
LMO2/TRA@ or TRD@
inv( 14)(q11.2q32)
TRA@ or TRD@/TCL 1A
del(1p32)
TAL1
del(6q)
CD5
del(9p)
CDKN2A/CDKN28
+8
Alternative designations: HOX11, SCL, or TCL5; 2TAN.
CD2
CD7
●Other aberrations such as t(10;14)(q24;q11.2) resulting in an
upregulation of TLX1 (HOX11) is reported to be associated
with a favorable prognosis. In contrast, high risk of early fail-
uwe is common in the TAL1- and LYL1-positive groups.
80
D
● Gene expression studies indicate activation of a subset of the
S
citical genes—HOX11, TAL1, LYL1, LMO1, and LMO2—in a
much larger fraction of T-ALL cases than those harboring acti-
vating chromosomal translocations.
● Activating point mutations in NOTCH1 in more than 50% of
CD3
CD4
all T-ALL cases, is consistent with its being one of the central
players in T-ALL pathogenesis.
 Extrachromosomal (episomal) amplification of ABL1 has
been observed in 5-6% of T-ALL and benefits from treatment
alpha/beta
with imatinib. However, this aberration is not detectable by
mnventional cytogenetics. The activation of tyrosine kinase by
D3
the formation of episomes is due to a cryptic fusion between 
NUP214 and ABL1 and can be identified by FISH analysis with
the ABL1 DNA probe. This fusion is associated with increased 
HOX expression and deletion of CDKN2A (9p-).
Generation of T-cell receptor molecules in T-cells ocurs by
TCRgamma/delta
IcCD79a
much the same mechanism as generation of immunoglobulin
molecules in B-cells. Therefore, clonality of T-cell malignan-
cies can be demonstrated by examining the rearrangement
FIGURE 24.4 FLOW CYTOMETRIC FINDINGS OF T-ALL/LBL, LATE CORTICAL.
Open gate density plot by CD45 gating (in green) reveals 87%
patterns of the T-cell receptor (TCR) genes, in much the same
blasts that are CD45 dim to moderate. The blast-enriched gate
way as is done with the immunoglobulin genes in B-cell
is intentionally expanded to include a small number of mature
lesions (Figure 24.8). TCR rearrangements are somewhat more
T-cells as internal controls. Density plots of the blast-enriched gate
complicated, however, and there are advantages and disad-
(in purple) show abnormal T lymphoblasts, which are positive for
vantages to the various target loci available. For example, the
CD1a, CD2, CD4 (partial), CD5 (dim), CD7 (heterogeneous), CD10
TCR-p genes produce a wider range of rearrangements and
(not shown), plus intracellular CD3 and TdT. The blasts are negative 
thus are more informative, but the region is so large that a
for CD8, surface CD3, as well as TCR alpha/beta and gamma/delta.
high number of PCR primer sets are required to span it. The
The phenotypic features of the T lymphoblasts resemble those of
TCR-y region, in contrast, is smaller and easily encompassed
late cortical thymocytes.
by a small number of primer sets, but the limited number
of potential rearrangements increases the chance of the arti-
 Approximately 30% of cases of T-ALL/LBL show translocations
fact known as pseudoclonality. in which amplification of a
) (1) 11  (4)  
specimen in which T-cells are scant will produce an apparent
 )11) (1(11   
t(7:14)(q34;q11.2) (Figure 24.7).
malignant nor clonal (Figure 24.9).
RAREVARIANTSOFLYMPHOBLASTICLEUKEMIA/LYMPHOMA
313
218
212
K
7
22
22.3
2
11
12
6
Del6q
13
14
5
10
17
40
19
20
2Z
X
A
FIGURE 24.6 G-banded karyotype
demonstrating 46, XY,del(9)(p21).
←
10
11
12
数鱼
司
13
74
15
16
17
18
9
20
21
22
lymph nodes, and sometimes other organs, such as liver
Rare Variants of Lymphoblastic
and spleen. In this condition, unlike the blastic plasmacy-
Leukemia/Lymphoma
toid dendritic cell neoplasms (see Chapter 59), the skin is
not involved and the neoplastic cells are negative for CD4,
but express CD7. CD2, CD5, HLA-DR, and CD34 are pos-
"CD4-/CD56+ IMMATURE NK-CELL NEOPLASM"
itive is some cases. CD3 and TdT are negative, as well as
 myeloid and B-lymphocyte-associated markers.
Rare cases of CD56+ lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma
are reported. These cases involve both bone marrow and
314
LYMPHOBLASTICNEOPLASMS-T-LYMPHOBLASTICLEUKEMIA/LYMPHOMA
FIGURE 24.7 G-banded karyotype of bone
marrow of a patient with acute T-lymphoblastic
leukemia with t(7;14)(q34;q11.2).
岁
10
11
12
16
17
品
20
21
22
Differential Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis of precursor T-cell neoplasms
 includes hematogone hyperplasia, B-ALL/LBL, a variety of
acute myeloid leukemias (such as minimally differentiated
 AML, AML without maturation, and megakaryoblastic leul-
kemia), and metastatic small round cell tumors (such as
neuroblastoma).
FIGURE 24.8 Dual color TCR alpha/delta FISH"split" probe
Hematogones represent the normal bone marrow pre-
showing rearrangement of 14q11.2 in T-ALL.
 cursor B-cells (see Chapter 23). The earlier hematogones
         i
markers.
T-ALL is distinguished from B-ALL based on immuno-
 phenotypic and cytogenetic characteristics. Blasts in AML
2000
express myeloid-associated markers, such as CD13, CD33,
and CD117, lack cytoplasmic CD3 expression, and may show
 positive cytochemical staining for MPO and Sudan Black B.
The differential diagnosis of T-lymphoblastic lym-
phoma includes B-lymphoblastic lymphoma, Burkitt
lymphoma, blastoid variant of mantle cell lymphoma,
myeloid sarcoma, and metastatic small round cell tumors.
FIGURE 24.9 Pseudoclonality pattern in a TCR-y PCR assay of a
Burkitt and blastoid mantle cell lymphomas are TdT nega-
lesion with scant numbers of T-lymphocytes. One hint that the
tive, express B-cell-associated CD molecules, and have
pattern represents a pseudoclonality artifact rather than true
characteristic cytogenetic abnormalities (see Chapter 23).
clonality is the absence of background polyclonal "noise" in
Metastatic round cell tumors are negative for lymphoid-
addition to the strong pseudoclonal peaks.
 and myeloid-associated CD molecules, and positive for
markers that are expressed by the primary tumor.
"THYMIC LYMPHOBLASTIC T/NK-CELL
LYMPHOMA"
Rare cases of mediastinal lymphoblastic lymphoma have
been reported in children and young adults. The blastic
tumor cells express CD56, cCD3, CD2, CD7, CD34, CD38,
HLA-DR, and TdT, and are negative for surface CD3, CD5,
CD16, CD57, CD30, and CD117. There is no evidence of
TCR or IGH gene rearrangement.
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
315
Additional Resources
Burkhardt B: Paediatric lymphoblastic T-cell leukaemia and lym-
Liang X, Graham DK: Natural killer cell neoplasms, Cancer
phoma: One 0r two diseases? Br J Haematol 149:653-668, 2010.
112:1425-1436, 2008.
Chiaretti S, Foa R: T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia, Haematologica
Meijerink JP: Genetic rearrangements in relation to immunopheno-
94:160-162, 2009.
type and outcome in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia, Best Pract
Ferrando AA: The role of NOTCH1 signaling in T-ALL, Hematology Am 
Res Clin Haematol 23:307-318, 2010.
Soc Hematol Educ Program 353-36l, 2009.
Onciu M: Acute lymphoblastic leukemia, Hematol Oncol Clin North
Gaiser T, Haedicke W, Becker MR: A rare pediatric case of a thymic
Am 23:655-674, 2009.
cytotoxic and lymphoblastic T/NK cell lymphoma, Int J Clin Exp
 Pear WS, Aster JC: T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma: a
Pathol3:437-442, 2010.
human cancer commonly associated with aberrant NOTCHl signal-
Graux C, Cools J, Michaux L, et al: Cytogenetics and molecular genet-
ing, Curr Opin Hematol 1l:426-433, 2004.
- n an   s   go 
 Peters JM, Ansari MQ: Multiparameter flow cytometry in the diag-
phoblast, Leukemia 20:1496-1510, 2006.
nosis and management of acute leukemia, Arch Pathot Lab Med 135:
Hagemeijer A, Graux C: ABLl rearrangements in T-cell acute lympho-
44-54, 2011.
blastic leukemia, Genes Chromosomes Cancer 49:299-308, 2010.
Pitman SD, Huang Q: Granular acute lymphoblastic leukemia: a case
Hoelzer D, Gokbuget N: T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma and T-cell
report and literature review, Am I Hematol 82:834-837, 2007.
acute lymphoblastic leukemia: a separate entity? Clin Lymphoma
van Dongen JI. Langerak AW, Briggemann M, et al: Design and stan-
Myeloma (Suppl 3):S214-S221, 2009.
dardization of PCR primers and protocols for detection of clonal
Hoffbrand AV, Pettit JE, Vyas P: Color atlas of clinical hematology, ed
immunoglobulin and T-cell receptor gene recombinations in suspect
4, Philadelphia, 2010, Mosby/Elsevier.
lymphoproliferations: report of the BIOMED-2 Concerted Action
BMH4-CT98-3936, Leukemia 17:2257-2317, 2003.
Hutter JI: Childhood leukemia, Pediatr Rev 3l:234-241, 2010.
Van Vlierberghe P, Pieters R, Beverloo HB, et al: Molecular-genetic
Ichinohasama R, Endoh K, Ishizawa K, et al: Thymic lymphoblastic
insights in paediatric T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia, Br J
lymphoma of committed natural killer cell precursor origin: a case 
Haematol 143:153-168, 2008.
report, Cancer 77:2592-2603, 1996.
Jabbour EJ. Faderl S. Kantarjian HM: Adult acute lymphoblastic
leukemia, Mayo Clin Proc 80:1517-1527, 2005.
This page intentionally left blank
Acute Leukemias of
Ambiguous Lineage
I he addition of cytochemical and immunophenotypic
Group for the Immunologic Classification of Leukemia
techniques to the standard morphologic evaluation of 
(EGIL) for the lineage assignments in acute leukemias.
        
● Myeloid Lineage: Myeloperoxidase (cytochemistry. flow
of acute leukemias with ambiguous lineage assignment.
cytomety, or immunohistochemistry). For monocytic differen-
According to the WHO classification, these leukemias fall
fiation at least two of the following markers: NSE, lysozyme,
into the following categories (Figure 25.1).
CD11c, CD14, and CD64.
1. Acute undifferentiated leukemia (AUL) which lacks sufficient
 B-Cell Lineage: Strong CD19 expression with:
evidence (such as morphologic, cytochemical, and immuno-
● Strong coexpression of at least one of the following markers:
phenotypic features) of lineage differentiation.
CD79a, cytoplasmic CD22, and CD10, or
2. Mixed phenotype acute leukemia:
● Weak CD19 expression with strong coexpression of at least
 two of the following markers: CD79a, cytoplasmic CD22.
a. Acute bilineage (or multilineage) leukemia which repre-
sents an acute leukemia with more than one population of
and CD10.
blast cells. The total number of blasts from both lineages
TCell Lineage: Cytoplasmic CD3 (with an intensity approach-
should be ≥20% of marrow or blood cells.
ing that of normal T cells) or surface CD3.
b. Acute biphenotypic (multi-phenotypic) leukemia in which
the population of leukemic cells coexpress more than one
lineage-specific marker, such as a combination of myeloid-
specific and lymphoid-specific, or B- and T-specific mol-
 ecules. In rare occasions, the leukemic blasts may express
Acute Undifferentiated Leukemia
a combination of myeloid-, B-cell- and T-cell-associated
markers.
Acute undifferentiated leukemia (AUL) is defined as a
The following WHO criteria for lineage assignment in
leukemia with no morphologic, cytochemical, or specific
acute leukemia with ambiguous lineage have replaced
immunophenotypic features of lymphoid or myeloid dif-
the scoring system which was proposed by the European
ferentiation. AUL is extremely rare and probably accounts
for <l% of acute leukemias.
MORPHOLOGY
● Bone marrow is often hypercellular with increased number of
uniform, undifferentiated immature cells.
 Blasts consist of primitive undifferentiated cells with scant dark
blue cytoplasm, no cytoplasmic granules or Auer rods, round
or oval nucleus and fine nuclear chromatin (Figure 25.2). The
nucleoli are often conspicuous, but in some cases are promi-
nent. Blasts account for >20% of the bone marrow or periph-
MI+L
eral blood differential counts.
● Blood examination may show anemia, thrombocytopenia.
Undifferentiated
Bilineal
Biphenotypic
and/or leukopenia.
FIGURE 25.1 Scheme of clonal development of acute leukemias
 Of undifferentiated, bilineal, and biphenotypic types.
Atlas of Hematopathology. DOl: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00025-5
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
318
 ACUTE LEUKEMIAS OF AMBIGUOUS LINEAGE
SSC
FSC
CD45
CD34
CD19
CD117
CD41
CD10
CD14
FIGURE 25.3 FLoW CYTOMETRIC FINDINGs OF UNDIFFERENTIATeD ACUTE
 LEUkEMIA. The CD45-dim gate reveals a prominent population
of blasts that are dimly positive for CD45. In addition, the blasts
express CD34 and partial CD7, but are negative for CD3, CD5,
CD10, CD13, CD14, CD19, CD33, CD41, CD64, and CD117. The
blasts are negative for CD4 and CD56 (not shown).
● Variable expression of myeloid or lymphoid associated
antigens can be seen, such as CD7. CD13 or CD33.
 and CD19, but the expression is insuffcient for lineage
assignment.
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
·By definition these leukemias are “undifferentiated" and
therefore would not be expected to exhibit B-lymphoid.
T-lymphoid, or myeloid markers. However, this can be a mat-
 ter of semantics, dependant upon which markers one is using
to arrive at such definitions. While protein markers may be
absent based on immunophenotypic methods, a cell of pre-B
lineage, for example, might show rearrangement of the immu-
noglobulin genes by sensitive PCR methods.
● Nevertheless, these leukemias are too rare to make any gener-
alizations about particular molecular findings that might give
a clue as to cell of origin.
● No recurrent or specific cytogenetic abnormalities are noted
by karyotyping or FISH.
FIGURE 25.2 UNDIFFERENTIATED ACUTE LEUKEMIA. Bone MarrOW biOpSy
section (A) and marrow smear (B, low power; C, high power)
demonstrating undifferentiated blasts (see Figure 25.3).
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
 If only a limited panel of antigens is tested, morphologic
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE (FIGURE 25.3)
and immunophenotypic features can overlap with those
● Blasts do not express lineage-specific antigens.
seen in blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell (BPDC) neo-
 Blasts are commonly positive for dim CD45.
plasm. Other differential diagnoses include ALL, AML,
 Blasts are often positive for antigens that are associated with
 minimally differentiated and without maturation, pure
early hematopoiesis, such as CD34, CD38, HLA-DR, and occa-
 erythroid leukemia, and megakaryoblastic leukemia.
sionally TdT.
MIXED PHENOTYPE ACUTE LEUKEMIA
319
B
FIGURE 25.4 AcUTE BILINEAL LEUKEMIA. Bone marrow (A) and 
peripheral blood (B) smears show two distinct populations of
FIGURE 25.5 AcUTE BILINEAL LEUKEMIA. BoNe marrow (A) and
leukemic blast cells (larger and smaller).
peripheral blood (B) smears show two distinct populations of
leukemic blast cells (larger and smaller).
Mixed Phenotype Acute Leukemia
with 1lq23 abnormalities or the t(9;22) (Philadelphia
chromosome). The B-cell/myeloid phenotype is the most
 frequent subtype.
Mixed phenotype acute leukemia (MPAL) includes the fol-
lowing subtypes: (a) acute bilineal (or multilineage) leuke-
 mia consisting of more than one population of blast cells,
MORPHOLOGY
and (b) acute biphenotypic (multi-phenotypic) leukemia
Acute bilineal leukemia may consist of two distinct morpho-
in which the blast population coexpresses more than one
logic populations of blast cells. In most cases these two pop-
lineage-specific marker, such as a combination of myeloid-
ulations represent lymphoid and myeloid lineages (Figures
specific and lymphoid-specific, or B- and T-specific mol-
25.4 and 25.5)
ecules. In rare instances, the leukemic blasts may express 
 Lymphoblasts are usually smaller with scant cytoplasm, no
a combination of myeloid-, B-cell- and T-cell-associated
cytoplasmic granules, and less prominent nucleoli, while
blasts of myeloid origin (myeloblasts, monoblasts) are larger
markers, or represent a combination of (a) and (b).
with more abundant cytoplasm, variable amounts of cytoplas-
 Biphenotypic acute leukemias probably represent less 
mic granules, and prominent nucleoli.
than 10% of all acute leukemias. The bilineal acute leuke-
The bilineal nature of an acute leukemia may not be distin-
mias are less frequent. Mixed phenotype acute leukemia
guished on a morphologic basis, but the two populations of
can occur at any age, but is more frequent in adults. They
blast cells demonstrate distinct cytochemical and immuno-
usually have an aggressive clinical course, particularly those 
phenotypic properties (see below).
320
ACUTE LEUKEMIAS OF AMBIGUOUS LINEAGE
Large Cells
SmallCells
CD10
CD10
FSC
cCD79a
cCD79a
CD45
TaT
LP1
FIGURE 25.6 AcUTE BILINEAL LEUKEMIA. Flow cytometric studies
reveal two distinct populations of large and small blast cells (left
panel). The large blasts (right panel, in purple) express myeloid-
associated antigens, while the small blasts (right panel, in red)
reveal features seen in B lymphoblastic leukemia.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE AND CYTOCHEMICAL STAINS
Bilineal Acute Leukemia (Figure 25.6)
● Two distinct populations of blasts can be detectable by either
common gating strategies (e.g., CD45 gating and scatter gat-
 ing) or selected back gating approaches of target populations.
 Each population expresses antigens of one specific lineage.
● Both blastic populations can also express non-lineage specifc
markers, such as CD34, CD38, HLA-DR, etc.
● The combination of lymphoid and myeloid phenotype bilin-
eal acute leukemia is more common than that of B- and T-cell
phenotype.
● The presence of two populations of blast cells in bilineal acute
 leukemia is often synchronous; both populations of blast cells
are present at the same time. In rare instances, there may be
fwo simultaneous neoplastic processes in fwo separate sites.
For example, the bone marrow may be involved with ALL and
the CNS infiltrated by AML
●Asynchronous bilineal acute leukemias are more frequently
reported and are those in which one lineage switches to
another during the disease process. The predominant pattern
in most studies is ALL switching to AML in relapse. The fre-
quency of lineage switch in relapse is about 7%. Lineage switch
may represent relapse of the original clone or development of
FIGURE 25.7 ACUTE BIPHENOTYPIC LEUKEMIA (MYELOID/B-LYMPHOID).
a second new clone. An increased risk of development of AML
Bone marrow smear shows blast cells with variable amount of
has been reported in patients with ALL who receive intensive
non-granular cytoplasm (A). These cells are myeloperoxidase-
chemotherapy. particularly in patients with 1lq23 abnormali-
positive (B, cytochemical stain; C, immunohistochemical stain).
ties or those with t(9;22) (Philadelphia chromosome).
The blast cells show a mixed phenotype (myeloid/B-lymphoid) by
● There are also occasional reports of switching from bilineal to
flow cytometry; see Figure 25.8).
biphenotypic acute leukemias and vice versa.
 Cytochemical stains such as MPO, Sudan Black B, and NSE are
helpful in distinguishing blasts of myeloid origin. Myeloblasts 
are often MPO and Sudan Black B positive and monoblasts/
promonocytes usually express NSE.
MIXED PHENOTYPE ACUTE LEUKEMIA
321
blasts
blasts
(94%)
(25%)
CD45
CD117
CD15
CD45
CD117
CD15
cTdT
CD1
CD15
CD22
IcMPO
CD2
IcMPO
CD45
FIGURE 25.8 FLOW CYTOMETRIC FINDINGS OF ACUTE BIPHENOTYPIC LEUKEMIA
 FIGURE 25.10 FLOW CYTOMETRIC FINDINGS OF ACUTE BIPHENOTYPIC
(MYELoID/B-LYMPHoID). Open gate display by CD45 gating (in green)
LEUKEMIA (MYELoID/T-LYMPHoID). Open gate display by CD45 gating 
reveals excess blasts (25% of the total) that are dimly positive
(in blue) shows excess abnormal blasts (94% of the total) that
for CD45. The blast-enriched gate (in magenta) demonstrates 
are CD45 dimly positive. Density plots of the blast-enriched
abnormal blasts expressing both B- and myeloid-lineage-specific
gate (in magenta) demonstrate that the blasts express T-lineage
markers. The positive B-lineage antigens include CD19 (moderate
markers CD2, CD5 (partial, dim; not shown), CD7, and intracellular
to bright), CD22 (dim), and intracellular CD79a. The positive
CD3. In addition, the blasts are positive for myeloid antigens 
myeloid markers include CD11b (not shown), CD13 (dim), CD15
(partial), CD33, and intracellular myeloperoxidase (partial).
myeloperoxidase is further confirmed by immunohistochemical
studies. The blasts are also positive for CD34, HLA-DR (partial; not
shown), and intracellular TdT.
Biphenotypic Acute Leukemia (Figures 25.7 to 25.10)
 Blasts express antigens that are specific for more than one
lineage.
● Common forms indude mixed B- and myeloid or T- and
 myeloid biphenotypes.
● Rarely, blasts may express B- and T-cell biphenotype, or mixed 
B-, T-, and myeloid triphenotype.
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
 Based on molecular and cytogenetic studies, we can divide
mixed phenotype acute leukemias into two major groups:
1. Mixed phenotype acute leukemia with recurrent genetic
abnormalities
 2. Mixed phenotype acute leukemia, otherwise not specified.
Mixed Phenotype AcuteLeukermia with Recurrent
Genetic Abnormalities
●
These include:
●MPAL with t(9;22)(q34:q11.2) (BCR-ABL1)
MPAL with t(v;1lq23) (MLL rearranged)
● MPAL B/myeloid, not otherwise specified
● MPAL T/myeloid, not otherwise specified.
B
● Translocation of 1lq23 and the t(9:22) are the most frequent
FIGURE 25.9 ACUTE BIPHENOTYPIC LEUKEMIA (MYELOID/T-LyMPHOId). 
cytogenetic abnormalities observed in biphenotypic and bilin-
Bone marrow smear shows blast cells with scanty cytoplasm (A).
eal acute leukemias of B-precursor/myeloid type.
These cells show coarse PAS-positive cytoplasmic granules (B).
 More than 70 partner genes have been identified in associa-
The blast cells show a mixed phenotype (myeloid/T-lymphoid by
fion with 11q23 translocations, such as t(4;11). t(9:11). and
flow cytometry; see Figure 25.10).
t(11;19) (Figures 25.11 and 25.12).
322
ACUTELEUKEMIAS OF AMBIGUOUSLINEAGE
FIGURE 25.11 A karyotype with deletion of
1 1q23 and trisomy 10 in a biphenotypic acute
leukemia.
88
00
20
FIGURE 25.12 Karyotype with a t(11;19)
(q23;p13) and dup 1q in a biphenotypic acute
leukemia.
13
14
17
88
19
20
22
● The Philadelphia chromosome may be a part of a complex set
● Since a small proportion of T-cell leukemias can show sec-
of cytogenetic abnormalities, such as combination of t(9;22)
ondary rearrangement of immunoglobulin genes, and vice
and del(7) or t(2:9;22) (Figure 25.13).
versa for B-cell leukemias, care must be taken not to overcall a
●The T-precursor/myeloid biphenotypic or bilineal acute leukemias
 biphenotypic diagnosis based on such findings.
(e'tzb:szd)(zt'e) pue (ezb:teb)(st's) im peposse aq Aeu
Cydin A1 and HOxA9 gene expression have also been
 Also, in some cases trisomy 10 has been reported in associa-
reported in these lesions.
tion with acute biphenotypic leukemia (see Figure 25.11).
●
 Some cases of acute biphenotypic leukemia may show com-
plex chromosomal aberrations (Figure 25.14).
IgH and TCRG clonal gene rearrangements may both be seen
Mixed Phenotype Acute Leukemia, Otherwise
in biphenotypic acute leukemias.
Not Specifed
 However, unlike the markers identifed by flow cytometry or
immunohistochemistry, it is not possible by PCR to distinguish
 In this category the blast cells show coexpression of
whether these gene rearrangements are present in two distinct
myeloid-specific and lymphoid-specific molecules, but lack
sets of malignant cells, as opposed to coexisting in the same cells.
recurrent genetic abnormalities.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
323
10
11
12
13
14
16
17
18
显营
0品
20
21
22
FIGURE 25.13 A karyotype with a three-way t(2;9;22) in a biphenotypic acute leukemia.
11
12
00
囍品
13
14
15
16
17
18
88
68
19
20
21
X
Y
FIGURE 25.14 A complex karyotype in a biphenotypic acute leukemia: 46,XX,t(4;7)(p12;p11.2),t(6;7)(q13;q36),add(7)(p12),inv(10) 
with aberrant expression of myeloid-associated markers.
Differential Diagnosis
Bilineal acute leukemias may show morphologic evidence
 of two separate leukemia populations, such as larger and
The diagnosis of biphenotypic acute leukemia is estab-
lished by immunophenotypic studies. These leukemias
 dence of two populations of blast cells distinctly express-
should be distinguished from AMLs with aberrant expres-
 ing molecules representing more than one hematopoietic
sion of lymphoid-associated markers and from ALLs
lineage.
324ACUTE LEUKEMIAS OF AMBIGUOUS LINEAGE
Additional Resources
Al-Seraihy AS, Owaidah TM, Ayas M, et al: Clinical characteris-
Nishiuchi T, Ohnishi H, Kamada R, et al: Acute leukemia of ambigu-
tics and outcome of children with biphenotypic acute leukemia.
Ous lineage, biphenotype, without CD34, TdT or TCR-rearrangement,
Haematologica 94:1682-1690, 2009.
Interm Med 48:1437-1441, 2009.
Bené MC: Biphenotypic, bilineal, ambiguous or mixed lineage:
Owaidah TM, Al Beihany A, Iqbal MA, Elkum N, Roberts GT:
strange leukemias1 Haematologica 94:891-893, 2009.
Cytogenetics, molecular and ultrastructural characteristics of biphe-
Gerr H, Zimmermann M, Schrappe M, et al: Acute leukaemias of
notypic acute leukemia identified by the EGIL scoring system,
ambiguous lineage in children: characterization, prognosis and ther-
Leukemia 20:620-626, 2006.
apy recommendations, Br J Haematol 149:84-92, 2010.
Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, et al: WHO dassification of
Gluzman DF Nadgornaya VA, Sklyarenko LM, et al: Immunocytochemical 
tumours of haematopoietic and lymphoid tissues, ed 4, Lyon, 2008.
markers in acute leukaemias diagnosis, Exp Oncol 32:195-199, 2010.
International Agency for Research on Cancer.
Naghashpour M, Lancet J. Moscinski L, et al: Mixed phenotype
van den Ancker W, Terwijn M, Westers TM, et al: Acute leukemias
of ambiguous lineage: diagnostic consequences of the WHO 2008
lymphoid type: a first case report, Am I Hematol 85:451-454, 2010.
dassification, Leukemia 24:1392-1396, 2010.
Mature B-Cell
Neoplasms--Overview
/ature B-cell neoplasms comprise a wide spectrum of
lymphoid malignancies representing clonal proliferation
Box 26.1 The WHO Classifcation of Mature
of B-lymphocytes at various stages of maturation, from the
B-Cell Neoplasms
early naive B-cells to the end-stage mature plasma cells.
These disorders may primarily involve bone marrow and
 Chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma
peripheral blood (leukemia), lymphoid or extramedul-
 B-cell prolymphocytic leukemia
lary tissues (lymphoma), or both. They comprise >85% of
 Splenic marginal zone lymphoma
 Splenic lymphoma/leukemia, unclassifable
all lymphoid malignancies. As shown in Box 26.1, based
 Hairy cell leukemia
on the WHO classification, mature B-cell neoplasms are
 Lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma
divided into several categories. Diffuse large B-cell and fol-
 Heavy chain disease
licular lymphomas are the most frequent types of mature
 Plasma cell neoplasms 
 B-cell lymphomas (Table 26.1).
Extranodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma of musosa-
Mature B-cell neoplasms represent about 4% of all can-
associated lymphoid tissue
cers. They are more common in men than in women and
 Nodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma
are more frequent in adults than in children, with a steady
+
 Follicular lymphoma
increase in incidence with age. In general, the lymphoid
 Primary cutaneous follicle center lymphoma
malignancies in children are more commonly extranodal
 Mantle cell lymphoma
than nodal, and clinically more aggressive.
 Diffuse large B-celymphoma (DLBCL), not otherwise specified
The Ann Arbor staging system originally developed for
+
 T-cell/histiocyte-rich large B-cell lymphoma
the staging of Hodgkin lymphoma has been extended to
+
 Primary DLBCL of the CNS
 non-Hodgkin lymphoid malignancies. This staging system
 Primary cutaneous DLBCL, leg type
is based on the location(s), number of involved sites, and
●EBV positive DLBCL of elderly
presence or absence of systemic symptoms (Table 26.2).
● DLBCL associated with chronic inflammation
Since in the majority of cases of non-Hodgkin lymphoma
 Primary mediastinal (thymic) large B-cell lymphoma
the disease is disseminated at the time of diagnosis, the
 Intravascular large B-cell lymphoma
 ALK positive large B-celymphoma 
staging system is less useful in non-Hodgkin lymphoma
than it is in Hodgkin lymphoma. An international prog-
Plasmablastic lymphoma
 Large B-cell lymphoma arising in HHv8-associated multicentric
nostic index (IPI) has been proposed for patients with
Castleman disease
non-Hodgkin lymphoma. This scoring system is based on
 Primary effusion lymphoma
the following factors, which were found to show a reverse
 Burkitt lymphoma/leukemia
correlation with relapse-free survival:
 B-cell lymphoma, unclassifiable, with features intermediate
Age >60 years
 between DLBCL and Burkitt lymphoma
Elevated serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)
● B-cell lymphoma, unclassifable, with features intermediate
 Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance
between DLBCL and classical Hodgkin lymphoma
status 2
 Ann Arbor clinical stages Ill or IV
● Number of involved extranodal disease sites >1.
2-92000 5-581585-21-0-8269/910101/81010pxp//dn4 100 801o41ed01e02H 10 sey
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
326
MATURE B-CELL NEOPLASMS-—OVERVIEW
 Table 26.1
 Frequency of Mature B-Cell Lymphomas1
Mantlecell
lymphoma
Germinal Center
Type of Lymphoma
Approximate Frequency
31%
Marginalzone
 Diffuse large B-cell
ALL/ABL.
lymphoma
Follicular
22%
Follicular
MALT
8%
lymphoma
Mature T-cell (except ALCL2)
8%
CLL/SLL3
7%
Burkitt
Mantle cell
6%
 Mediastinal large B-cell 
2.5%
Nal
Large cell
ALCL
2.5%
Iymphoma
Plasma cel eoplasm
Burkitt
2.5%
 Nodal marginal zone
2%
 Lymphoplasmacytic
1%
CLLSUL
PL
Others
7.5%
Adapted from Jaffe ES, Hars NL, Stein H, et al. Pathology and Genetics:
FIGURE 26.1 Scheme of B-cell differentiation and associated 
 Tumors of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues. IARC Press, Lyon, 
B-cell leukemias/lymphomas.
2001 and The Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma Classification Project. A clinical
evaluation of the International Lymphoma Study Group classification of
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Blood 1997; 89: 3909-3918.
 ZAnaplastic arge cellymphoma.
3chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma.
Table 26.2
 The Ann Arbor Staging for Lymphomas 
Stage  Criteria
Involvement of a single node region, or a single
 extralymphatic organ or site (Stage 1E)
 Two or more involved lymph node regions on the same
side of diaphragm, or with localied involvement of an
extralymphatic organ or site (lE)
Lymph node involvement on both sides of the diaphragm,
 or with localized involvement of an extralymphatic organ or
site (llE), or spleen (lls), or both (lIES)
IV
Presence of diffuse or disseminated involvement of one or 
 more extralymphatic organs, with or without associated
lymph node involvement.
 Systemic Symptoms
A
Asymptomatic
Presence of fever, sweats, orweight loss >10% of body weight 
Morphology
Lymphoid malignancies have extremely diverse morphologic
features. This diversity, to some degree, correlates with the
stage of their maturation. The precursor B-cell goes through
several maturation and evolutionary steps, such as naive lym-
phocyte, mantle cell, B-immunoblast, centroblast, centrocyte,
marginal zone B-cell, and plasma cell, and each step depicts
some characteristic morphologic features (Figure 26.1)
In general, mature B-lymphoid malignancies show two
major patterns of lymph node involvement: follicular and
FIGURE 26.2 Lymph node sections demonstrating follicular
diffuse (Figure 26.2).
(A) and diffuse (B) patterns of lymphomatous involvement.
MORPHOLOGY
327
B
FIGURE 26.3 Bone marrow biopsy sections showing paratrabecular (A) and nodular (B) patterns of lymphomatous involvement.
FIGURE 26.4 Bone marrow biopsy sections showing interstitial infltrate by ClL cells (A) and hairy cells (B).
 Bone marrow involvement may appear in different trabeculae (Figure 26.3A). Nodular involvement consists
patterns, such as diffuse, paratrabecular, nodular, inter-  of well-defined non-paratrabecular aggregates (nodules)
stitial, or mixed. Diffuse involvement is defined as sheets  of lymphoma cells (Figure 26.3B). Interstitial involvement
of space-occupying lymphoid cells without formation of is demonstrated by infiltration of lymphoma cells into the
well-defined nodular aggregates.  Paratrabecular disease  fatty tissue without obvious obliteration of the bone mar-
328
MATURE B-CELL NEOPLASMS—OVERVIEW
FlGURE 26.5 Sections of spleen showing expansion of the white pulp in a case of marginal zone B-cell lymphoma (A, low power;
B, high power).
FIGURE 26.6 Sections of spleen demonstrating diffuse involvement of the red pulp in a patient with hairy cell leukemia (A, low power;
B, high power).
Lymphomatous involvement of the spleen may consist
● Diagnostic pitfalls include scenarios where kappa/lambda
of white pulp expansion, or diffuse red pulp infiltration, or
ratio may be normal. For example, monotypic B-cells are
both (Figures 26.5 and 26.6)
admixed in a polytypic background (Figure 26.7), or there are
dual monotypic B-cell populations (Figure 26.8).
●Cross-lineage aberrancies can be present (Figure 26.9).
Immunophenotype
● Characteristic immunophenotype of various subtypes of
mature B-cell neoplasms is summarized in Table 26.3.
     o 
● Mature B-cell neoplasms express surface or intracellular light
limited value in sub-classification. Multidisciplinary correla-
chain restriction. They are negative for markers seen in early
fion is essential in diagnosis and prognosis.
B-cell precursors such as CD34 and TdT.
● Identification of monotypic B-cells through pattern recogni-
fion is the single most important immunophenotypic finding.
while kappa/lambda ratio is not.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
329
SSC-H
Lambda
SSC-
CD5
FSC-H
Kappa
FSC-H
CD7
large
large
Lambda
D20
CD20
CD8
?
Kappa
Kappa
CD19
CD4
FIGURE 26.7 MIXED MONOTYPIC AND POLYTYPIC B-CELLS DETECTED BY FLOW
FIGURE 26.9 FLOW CYTOMETRIC ANDINGS OF MATURE B-CELL NEOPLASM 
cYToMETRY. Open gate density plot (in light blue) of a lymph node 
WITH cROss-LINEAGE ABERRANCIEs. This is a case of diffuse large B-cell
sample reveals small and large lymphocytes by the scatter gate. The
lymphoma. Open gate density plot display of the scatter gate
small lymphocytes (in green) contain polytypic B-cells. However, the
 reveals predominantly large lymphoids. Density plots of the
large-lymphoid-enriched gate (in purple) reveals a monotypic B-cell
Iymphoid-enriched gate reveal monotypic B-cells expressing CD19,
population expressing surface kappa light chain restriction. The
bright CD20, and surface lambda light chain restriction (not shown).
kappa tolambda ratio of all B-cells in this case is normal at close to 3:1.
The large neoplastic B-cells demonstrate cross-lineage aberrancies
with T-lineage associated markers CD7 (partial, dim), and CD8 (dim).
Table 26.3
CD19
 Typical Immunophenotypic Features of Mature B-Cell
Neoplasms
Immunophenotype
 Type of Lymphoid 
Malignancy
Positive
Negative
CLL/SLL
D5, CD19, CD23
①10, FMC7, CD103,
CD5
CD5
BCL-1
Mantle cell
D5, CD19, BCL-1
D10, CD23, BCL-6
 Marginal zone
①19, CD20, CD79a 
D5, CD10, CD23, BCL-1
Follicular
①10, CD19, CD20,
D5, CD43, BCL-1
CD20
BCL-2, BCL-6
 Lymphoplasmacytic
D19, CD20, CD22,
D5, CD10, CD23, BCL-1
?
CD79a
 Hairy cell 
①19, CD11c, FMC7,
D5, CD10, CD23
CD25, CD103
Prolymphocytic
D19, CD20, CD22,
①10, and usually CD5
Kappa
Lambda
①79a, variable
CD23
Burkitt
D10, CD19, CD20,
①5, CD23, CD34, TdT,
22, BCL-6, Ki67
BCL-2
FIGURE 26.8 DUAL MONOTYPIC B-CELL POPULATIONS DETECTED BY FLOW
CYToMETRy.Density plots of lymphoid-enriched gate demonstrate
near 100%
a prominent population of abnormal B-cells expressing dim CD5,
dim CD19, moderate CD20, and CD23. The abnormal B-cells are
divided into two subsets by surface light chain expressions. One
expresses surface kappa light chain restriction, while the other
shows lambda restriction. The kappa to lambda ratio again is
within normal limits, at approximately 1:1.
330
MATURE B-CELL NEOPLASMS—OVERVIEW
Cytogenetics and Molecular
 Table 26.4
Major Genetic Features of Small Mature B-Cell
Studies
Lymphoid Malignancies
Type of Lymphoid 
Chromosomal
 Malignancy
Abnormalities
The major common cytogenetic abnormalities observed in
Genes
mature B-cell lymphoid neoplasms are shown in Table 26.4.
CLL/SLL
del(17)x(p13)
TP53
Mostly recurrent reciprocal translocations involve the
del(11)(q22)
ATM
constitutively active immunoglobulin genes, e.g., IGH@
Trisomy 12
at 14q32 (Figures 26.10 and 26.1l), and oncogenes such
del(13)(q12q14)
??R61
as CCND1, BCL2, BCL6, MYC, and PAX5. These can be
Mantle cell
t(11;14)(q13;q32)
CCND1-IGH@
seen in >90% of the cases of Burkitt lymphoma, mantle
 Marginal zone
cell lymphoma and follicular lymphoma. In contrast, dif-
Splenic
del(7)(q22-32)
       
 Extranodal
Trisomy 3
geneous and often complex aberrations with multiple
t(11;18x(q21;q21)
BIRC3-MALT1
breakpoints and translocations along with various numeri-
Follicular
t(14;18)x(q32;q21)
IGH@-BCL2
cal abnormalities (gains and losses). The karyotypes can
 Lymphoplasmacytic
t(9;14)(p13;q32)
PAX5-IGH@
be obtained from cultured tissues and exhibit both simple
Hairy cell 
 Non-specific
and complex patterns that include these translocations.
 B-Prolymphocytic
14q32 abnormalities
IGH@
Other chromosomal aberrations such as trisomies, mono-
del(11)(q22)
ATM
somies and deletions/duplications also occur but less
Burkitt
t(8:14)(q24;q32)
MYC-IGH@
frequently.
t(2;8)(p12;q24)
IGK@-MYC
Most of the chromosomal translocations are better
t(8;22)(q24;q11.2)
MYC-IGL@
 detected by the FISH technique with specific probes that
identify the fusion signal pattern and with increased sensi-
tivity and specificity, especially in bone marrow specimens
FIGURE 26.10 Karyotype showing del(7q) and t(9;14)
in B-cell lymphoma.
FIGURE 26.11 (A) FISH with dual
color IGH@-BCL2 probes showing
reciprocal fusion signals. (B) FISH with
the MYC rearrangement "breakapart"
probe showing split signals.
IGH@-BCL2
MYC
fusion
split
A
signals
B
signals
CYTOGENETICS AND MOLECULAR STUDIES
331
FIGURE 26.12 EXAMPLEs OF IMMUNOGLoBULIN GENE CLONALITY ANALYSIS BY PCR. (A) Negative study shOwing Only a polyclonal amplicOn pattern
with framework primers 1 (blue), 2 (black), and 3 (green). (B) Clonal peak (arrow) superimposed on a background polyclonal "smear"
produced with the framework 1 primer set.
and paraffin-embedded sections. The t(14;18) translo-
JH
CP
cation of IGH@-BCL2 may be also detected by either
EcoRi
BamH
Hindil
EcoRIBamHI
Hindili
Southern blot or PCR.
Rearrangements of the ALK and NFKB2 genes are
MW
CP
CP
MW
CP
CP
CP
involved in anaplastic large cell lymphoma and cutaneous
T-cell lymphoma, respectively, and can been seen by karyo-
type and FISH.
 The most common tumor suppressor gene involved in
lymphoid malignancies is TP53, the deletion of the 17p13
band which is more commonly cryptic and therefore easily
detected by the FISH technique.
 In addition to karyotype analysis/classical cytogenetics,
and multicolor metaphase and interphase FISH, other genet-
ics techniques such as array-CGH, SNP analysis, and gene
FIGURE 26.13 SOUTHERN BLOT ANALYSIS FOR CLONALITY 0F
expression profiles have also contributed to the diagnosis and
IMMUNOGLOBULIN GENE REARRANGEMENTS IN A B-CELL LYMPHOMA.
classification.
Control (human placental) DNA (C) and patient (P) DNA
 The hallmark of B-cell leukemia/lymphoma diagno-
were digested with three different restriction endonucleases
(EcoRl, BamHl, and Hindll) and hybridized with either the JH
sis by gene rearrangement studies is the demonstration of
immunoglobulin heavy chain probe (left blot) or the CTβ T-cell
clonal patterns of rearrangement in the DNA of the immul-
receptor probe (right blot) and subjected to autoradiography.
 noglobulin loci. Most malignant lesions are assumed to be
Non-germline, rearranged bands are seen in the patient's DNA
clonal, having descended from a transforming event in a
 JH probe only; no rearranged bands are seen on the CTβ blot,
single progenitor cell, and the specimen should therefore
consistent with clonal B-cell origin.
exhibit a single predominant rearrangement pattern, one
present at sufficiently high proportion to stand out from
the background polyclonal "smear" (Figure 26.12).
To determine if a second (synchronous or metachronous)
Southern blot analysis was the first method devised for detec-
lesion represents the same or a different (new) clone;
 tion of immunoglobulin gene rearrangements, and, in contrast
 To detect or monitor minimal residual disease (MRD) after
to most other areas of the molecular pathology laboratory, it has
initial therapy.
yet to be entirely replaced by more modern PCR-based methods
 Though one may generally assume that lymphocytes
(Figure 26.13). The reason is that PCR cannot cover such a large
with rearranged immunoglobulin heavy chain genes are
gene family comprehensively, and will therefore miss between
 B-cells, a small percentage of T-cell malignancies may sec-
10% and 50% of clonal neoplasms. Reflex-testing by Southern
 ondarily rearrange their immunoglobulin genes, and vice
blot in such cases will usually be informative.
versa. In cases where doubt persists as to cell of origin, the
Gene rearrangement studies in B-cell lesions are per-
 analysis of J-kappa rearrangements may be informative,
formed for several purposes:
since these are more specific (though less sensitive) for
● To distinguish malignant (clonal) lesions from reactive (non-
B-cell malignancies.
dlonal, polyclonal) lesions;
●
 To determine likely cell of origin (B-cell versus T-cell) of the
lesion;
332
MATURE B-CELL NEOPLASMS—OVERVIEW
1. Morphologic features in many instances are not sufficient to
Differential Diagnosis
separate the B-cell from the T-cell disorders. Some subcat-
egories of small mature B-cell malignancies, such as follicu-
lar lymphoma, marginal zone B-cell lymphoma, and mantle
The presence of a wide variety of mature lymphoid malig-
ell lymphoma, may morphologically mimic one another.
nancies and numerous subcategories makes their accurate
Therefore, it is highly recommended that immunophenotypic.
diagnosis and classification very challenging. In spite of
cytogenetic, and molecular studies be part of the routine diag-
significant clarification in diagnostic criteria and classifi-
nostic work-up of lymphoid malignancies.
cation, advances in technology, and availability of acces-
2. Node-based lymphomas should be distinguished from gar-
sory tools in numerous diagnostic centers, there is still
den varieties of reactive lymphadenopathies, such as follicular
evidence of significant discordance amongst pathologists
hyperplasia, viral infections, and drug-induced lymphadenitis.
in the diagnosis and classification of lymphoid malignan-
3. Cutaneous lymphoid malignancies may mimic a variety of
cies. Some general practical points helpful in differential
inflammatory dermal lesions.
 diagnosis of mature lymphoid neoplasms are presented as
4. Burkitt lymphoma/leukemia should be distinguished from
B- and T-cell lymphoblastic leukemias/lymphomas.
follows.
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
333
Additional Resources
Aukema SM, Siebert R, Schuuring E, et al: Double-hit B-cell lympho-
Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Vardiman IW, et al: Hematopathology.
mas, Blood 117:2319-2331, 2011.
Philadelphia, 2010, Saunders/Elsevier.
Bench AJ, Erber WN, Follows GA, et al: Molecular genetic analysis of
Jafe ES: The 2008 WHO dassification of lymphomas: implications
haematological malignancies Il: Mature lymphoid neoplasms, Int J
for clinical practice and translational research, Hematology Am Soc
Lab Hematol 29:229-260, 2007.
Hematol Educ Program:523-531, 2009.
Burg G, Kempf W, Cozzio A, et al: WHO/EORTC classification of
Kurtin Pl: Indolent lymphomas of mature B lymphocytes, Hematol
cutaneous lymphomas 2005: histological and molecular aspects,
Oncol Clin North Am 23:769-790, 2009.
JCutanPathol32:647-674,2005.
Lenz G, Staudt LM: Aggressive lymphomas, N Engl I Med 362:1417-
Carbone A, Gloghini A, Aiello A, et al: B-cell lymphomas with fea-
1429, 2010.
genesis to pathology, Hum Pathol 4l:62l-631, 2010.
Lones MA, Raphael M, Perkins SL, et al: Mature B-cell lymphoma in
children and adolescents: International group pathologist consensus
Dadi S, Le Noir S, Asnaf V, et al: Normal and pathological V(D)J
recombination: Contribution to the understanding of human lym-
28:568-574, 2006.
phoid malignancies, Adv Exp Med Biol 650:180-194, 2009.
Philip K, Schuuring E: Molecular cytogenetics of lymphoma: where
Good DJ, Gascoyne RD: Classification of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma,
do we stand in 2010? Histopathology 58:128-144, 2011.
Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 22:781-805, 2008.
Roullet M, Bagg A: The basis and rational use of molecular genetic
Hartmann EM, Ott G, Rosenwald A: Molecular biology and genetics
testing in mature B-cell lymphomas, Adv Anat Pathol 17:333-358.
of lymphomas, Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 22:807-823, 2008.
2010.
Hsi ED, Mirza I: Update in the pathologic features of mature B-cell
Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, et al: WHO dassification of
and T/NK-cell leukemias, Semin Diagn Pathol 20: 180-195, 2003.
tumours of haematopoietic and lymphoid tissues, ed 4, Lyon, 2008,
Hsi ED: The leukemias of mature lymphocytes, Hematol Oncol Clin
International Agency for Research on Cancer.
North Am 23:843-871, 2009.
Walsh SH, Rosenquist R: Immunoglobulin gene analysis of
Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Stein H, et al: Classification of lymphoid neo-
mature B-cell malignancies: reconsideration of celular origin
and potential antigen involvement in pathogenesis, Med Oncol
112:4384-4899, 2008.
22:327-341, 2005.
This page intentionally left blank
Chronic
Lvmo
ohocvtic
Leukemia/Small
-ymphocyi
Lymphoma
hronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lym-
 aggressive clinical course. In general, presence and extent of
phoma (CLL/SLL) is a lymphoproliferative disorder of
lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, hepatomegaly, anemia,
small, mature B-lymphocytes primarily involving periph-
and thrombocytopenia are the major clinical parameters
eral blood, bone marrow, and lymph nodes. The neo-
that correlate with prognosis (Table 27.1). Several biomark-
plastic B-cells typically coexpress CD5 and CD23 and
ers, such as expression of CD38 and ZAP-70, unmutated
lack expression of CD10, FMC7, and CD79b. CLL/SLL is
IGVH (VH) genes, del( 1lq22.3), and del(17p13.1) are indic-
divided into two overlapping categories:
ative of aggressive clinical course in CLL/SLL (see below).
Several treatment modalities are available for the patients
1. CLL, primarily involving bone marow and peripheral blood
with CLL/SLL. The therapeutic approaches are mainly based
with or without lymph node involvement. The diagnosis
requires an absolute B-lymphocytosis of ≥5000/μL sustained for 
on the patient age and physical status, stage of the disease,
at least 3 months. If absolute monoclonal B-lymphocyte count is
 and cytogenetic findings. A "watch and wait" approach may
<500o/μL the term monoclonal B lymphocytosis is used. Bone mar-
be chosen for patients in early stage of disease or low risk
 row examination is not necessary for the diagnosis of CLL
 category, whereas patients with advanced or high risk dis-
2. SLL, primarily involving lymph nodes with or without bone
ease usually receive treatment. Alkylating agents, purine
marrow involvement and no peripheral blood lymphocytosis 
 analogs, and monoclonal antibodies (such as rituximab)
(non-leukemic).
are frequently utilized in the therapeutic protocols.
CLL/SLL is the most common type of leukemia in
Western countries, accounting for about 40% of all lell-
kemias in patients above 65 years of age. This disorder is
Table 27.1
extremely rare under the age of 30 years, but about 20%
of patients are diagnosed under the age of 55 years. The
Prognostic Factors in Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia/
male to female ratio is about 2:1. Although the presence
Small Lymphocytic Lymphoma'
of familial aggregates of CLL has been well documented,
Factor
Low Risk
High Risk
the mode of inheritance is not known. There is a sevenfold
Gender
 Female
Male
increase in risk of CLL in first-degree relatives.
Cinical stage
Approximately 25% of patients are free of symptoms,
Binet
A
C
and the CLL is an incidental finding during a routine blood
Rai
Ill and IV
examination. About 5-10% of patients show systematic
Lymphocyte morphology
 Typical
 Atypical
symptoms, such as weight loss, fever, night sweats, and/or
Bone marrow involvement
Non-diffuse 
Diffuse
extreme fatigue. Physical examination may reveal lymphade.
Elevated levels of serum
Not present
 Present
nopathy, splenomegaly, and hepatomegaly in approximately
β2-macroglobulin and CD23
85%, 50%, and 14% of patients, respectively. Autoimmune
CD38 expression
Negative
 Positive
complications, primarily hemolytic anemia and thrombo-
ZAP-70
Negative
 Positive
cytopenia, occur in up to 25% of CLL/SLL patients.
IgVh gene status
Mutated
Unmutated 
The natural history of CLL/SLL is extremely variable,
Cytogenetics
Nomal or
del(17p13} or
with survival times ranging from 2 to 20 years. Overall, the
del(13q14)
del(11q22.3)
response rate to therapy and survival is better in women
Adapted from Oscier D, Fegan C, Hillmen P, et al. Guidelines on the
than in men. Also, patients with atypical morphologic
diagnosis and management of chronic lymphocytic leukaemia.
and/or immunophenotypic features tend to have a more
Br J Haematol 2004; 125: 294-317.
Atlas of Hematopathology. DOl: htp://dx.doi.org/10.1016/978-0-12-385183-3.0027-9
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
336
CHRONIC LYMPHOCYTIC LEUKEMIA/SMALL LYMPHOCYTIC LYMPHOMA
Morphology
nucleoli, and scanty non-granular cytoplasm (Figure 27.1). A
smaller proportion of lymphoid cells (<10%) consist of pro-
lymphocytes. Prolymphocytes are larger than lymphocytes
The blood smears show evidence of absolute lymphocy-
with more abundant cytoplasm and a prominent nucleolus.
tosis with >90% of lymphocytes consisting of small cells
 Smudge and basket cells are frequently present, particularly
 with round nucleus, coarse chromatin, indistinct or absent
in cases with high lymphocyte count (Figure 27.1B and C).
These cells are degenerated and damaged lymphocytes.
FIGURE 27.1 CHRoNIc LyMPHocYTIc LEUKeMIa.Blood smear (A)
FIGURE 27.2 Bone marrow biopsy section (A and B) and 
bone marrow smear (C) showing involvement with chronic
demonstrating lymphocytosis with the presence of smudge cells
lymphocytic leukemia.
(B, arrows) and a basket cell (C).
MORPHOLOGY
337
FIGURE 27.3 Bone marrow biopsy section demonstrating 
interstitial lymphoid infiltrate in a patient with chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (A, low power; B, high power).
The requirement for the diagnosis of CLL on blood
examination is an absolute B-lymphocytosis (with coex-
pression of CD5 and CD23) of >5000/μL. About 30%
of patients with CLL show a white blood cell count
>100,000/μL
Approximately 15% of CLL patients show atypical mor-
phologic features, such as increased proportion of pro-
lymphocytes (PL) (>10% but <55%), or presence of
lymphocytes with cleaved nuclei, or lymphoplasmacytic
morphology (see below).
The pattern of involvement in bone marrow biopsy sec-
tions is interstitial, nodular, diffuse, or a combination of
FIGURE 27.4 Lymph node section of a patient with chronic
these (Figures 27.2 and 27.3). The diffuse pattern is usu-
lymphocytic leukemia demonstrating proliferating centers or
pseudofollicles (A and B, pale areas) consisting of a mixture of
ally seen in the advanced stages of the disease. The lym-
Iymphocytes, prolymphocytes, and paraimmunoblasts (C).
phoid infiltrates consist of small, round lymphocytes with
scattered prolymphocytes and larger cells called para-
immunoblasts. The lymphocyte count in bone marrow
Characteristically, there are ill-defined paler areas with the
smears in CLL is usually >30% of the bone marrow cells.
predominance of prolymphocytes and paraimmunoblasts
The affected lymph nodes show architectural efface-
(Figure 27.4). These areas are called proliferation centers or
ment with a diffuse infiltration by small lymphocytes.  pseudofollicles. Pseudofollicules are less frequently observed
338
CHRONIC LYMPHOCYTIC LEUKEMIA/SMALL LYMPHOCYTIC LYMPHOMA
B, high power).
in the bone marrow and spleen. In some cases, there is a
CLINICAL CORRELATIONS
predominance of atypical lymphoid cells, such as lym-
The expression of CD38 and/or ZAP-70 is associated with
 phocytes with irregular nuclei or lymphoplasmacytic cells.
 an aggressive clinical course.
These cases may mimic mantle cell or lymphoplasmacytic
lymphoma (see below). In some cases, Reed-Sternberg-
● CD38 is an ectoenzyme 45kD transmembrane glycoprotein
like cells may be present (Figure 27.5). The lymph node
which appears to contribute to proliferative potential of B-CLL
involvement in some cases is mostly inter-follicular with
cells, enhancing clinical aggressiveness of the disease.
 preservation of the lymphoid follicles (inter-follicular pat-
 ZAP-70 (zeta-chain associated protein of 70 kD) is an intracel-
lular tyrosine kinase which is involved in TCR signaling and is
tern) (Figure 27.6).
 The white pulp is the primary site of involvement in the
expressed in B-CLL cells that possess unmutated IgVh genes.
The expression of ZAP-70 is moderate in normal T- and bright
spleen, but the red pulp is also frequently involved (Figure
in NK-cells and predominantly negative in normal B-cells.
27.7). Hepatic infiltration is usually in the portal areas
Therefore, in order to determine the expression level of ZAP70
(Figure 27.8).
by neoplastic B-cells, it is important to use the patient's T- and
NK-cells as internal positive controls, as well as the patient's
normal B-cells (CD19+/CD5-) as internal negative control.
ZAP-70 is considered positive when it is expressed by at least
20% of the CLL cells (Figure 27.12).
Immunophenotype
Characteristic immunophenotypic pattern by multipara-
 metric flow cytometry (MFC) includes (Figure 27.9):
Cytogenetic and Molecular Studies
● Dim to moderate expression of B-cell-associated antigens
(commonly CD19, heterogeneously dim CD20, dim CD22,
 In most CLL cases (>60%) karyotype is normal, but the
and dim or negative CD79a):
abnormalities tend to increase in frequency and incidence
 Negativity of FMC7:
during the course of the disease (Figure 27.13).
Coexpression of dim CD5 and CD23:
Chromosomal translocations are rare in CLL. Loss of
● Dim surface or intracellular light chain restriction.
Immunohistochemical studies  show (Figures
27.10
 possibility.
and 27.11):
Among patients with abnormal karyotypes, as many as
● Coexpression of CD20, CD23, dim CD5 and BCL-2:
65% have one chromosome abnormality, 25% have two
 Negativity of BCL-1;
abnormalities, and the remainder (1o%) have more com-
Variable negativity of markers that are dimly expressed as
plex abnormalities.
detected by flow cytometry.
Deletion 13q14/monosomy 13 is the most common
finding (36-50%), and is believed to be a primary event in
CYTOGENETIC AND MOLECULARSTUDIES
339
FIGURE 27.6 SMALL LYMPHOcYTIC LYMPHOMA wITH PRIMARY INVOLvEMENT OF INTER-FOLLICULAR AREAs. There are areaS Of fbrOsis with SeVeral well-
preserved germinal centers (A, low power; B, high power). The tumor cells in the inter-follicular areas show a dim expression of CD20,
while the follicular B-cells are strongly CD20+ (C). The cells in the inter-follicular areas express CD23 (D), CD5 (E), and BCL-2 (F).
FIGURE 27.7 Splenic involvement with CLL demonstrated by lymphoid infiltration and areas of fibrosis (A, low power; B, high power).
340
CHRONIC LYMPHOCYTIC LEUKEMIA/SMALL LYMPHOCYTIC LYMPHOMA
FlGURE 27.8 Hepatic involvement with CLL demonstrated by portal
lymphoid infiltration and fibrosis (A, low power; B, high power).
SSC-H
FSC-H
CD22
CD23
CD19
FIGURE 27.10 Immunohistochemical stains of bone marrow
biopsy section from a patient with CLL. (A) Dual staining
FMC7
Kappa
IcKappa
demonstrating sheets of CD20+ cells (red) and scattered CD3+
cells (brown). The tumor cells also express CD5 (B) and CD23 (C).
FIGURE 27.9 CHARACTERISTIC PHENOTYPE OF CLL BY FLOW CYTOMETRY.
Density plots of the lymphoid-enriched gate show abnormal B-cells,
which are positive for CD5 (dim), CD19, CD20 (heterogeneous,
B-CLL, as it is present in most tumor cells and is frequently
dim), CD22 (dim), CD23, and expressing no surface light chains.
the sole abnormality (Figure 27.14).
 Cytoplasmic light chain staining reveals the monotypic nature of
The second most common abnormality, and the most
these abnormal B-cells with intracellular kappa light chain restriction.
common abnormality to be detected by conventional
CYTOGENETIC AND MOLECULAR STUDIES
341
A
FIGURE 27.11 SMALL LYMPHocyTic LYMPHoMA. Lymph node section demonstrating a diffuse process with numerous proliferation centers
CD5 (E) and ZAP-70 (F) are diffusely expressed except for the follicular B-cells.
cytogenetics, is trisomy 12 (11-21%) (Figure 27.15).  course of CLL because it is typically identified in a minor-
Trisomy 12 usually displays an excess of large lympho-  ity of the tumor cells. Trisomy 12 is predominantly associ-
cytes identifying the CLL mixed-cell-type variant of the FAB ated with unmutated VH genes and seems to be associated
classification. Trisomy 12 may be a secondary event in the  with advanced or atypical cases of CLL.
342
CHRONICLYMPHOCYTICLEUKEMIA/SMALLLYMPHOCYTICLYMPHOMA
Less frequent primary aberrations include 14q32 rear-
rangements (up to 21%), 11q22.3 deletion (9-15%), and
a 17p13 deletion (7-12%) (Table 27.2 and Figures 27.16
and 27.17).
Other less frequent chromosome abnormalities also
yZAP-70
occur (e.g., complex karyotypes). A chromosome 6q dele-
 FIGURE 27.12 Fow cytometric analysis of ZAP-70. A large population
tion occurs in 7% of all CLL patients (as a primary event
of B-cells are CD5-positive, CD3-negative, and coexpress CD19 and 
in 4%) and represents a cytogenetic and clinicobiological
ZAP-70.
FIGURE 27.13 A set of four representative
panels of Bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC)-
chromosomal genomic Hybridization microarray
9p21deletion
(BAC-CGH) results obtained with DNA probes from
 selected genomic regions considered important 
in hematopoietic and lymphoid neoplasms in four
cases of Cll. panels A and B show A loss of 13q14
11q22del
 regions (arrows) when compared with the diploid
13q14del
13q14del
 (normal) vertical line; panel C shows A loss of the
9p21 locus (arrow); and panel D represent A case
with A deletion of the 11q22 locus (black arrow).
three of these four cases (A, B, and D) also showed A
cryptic deletion of the 8q24 (MYC) locus (red arrow).
FIGURE 27.14 (A) Bone marrow karyotype
 Of a patient with ClL demonstrating 
46,XX,del(13)(q12q14). (B) FISH analysis
demonstrating deletion of 13q14 (red 
signals), and normal signals for 13q34
(aqua), chromosome 12 (green).
11
88
14
46
17
88
电器
A
20
21
22
Del(13)（q14)
13
B
CYTOGENETIC AND MOLECULAR STUDIES
343
FIGURE 27.15 (A) Bone marrow karyotype and
(B) FISH of a patient with CLL demonstrating
trisomy 12.
A
RL
21
22
Table 27.2
FISH performed in conjunction with conventional cyto-
genetics is the method of choice. FISH techniques are more
 Correlation between Cytogenetic Abnormalities and
sensitive for the detection of clinically significant chromo-
 Survival in CLL/SLL
some abnormalities than standard chromosome analysis.
Cytogenetics
Frequency
Survival (Years)
All molecular cytogenetic techniques (i.e., FISH, a-CGH)
6q-
~4%
~3
have increased the detection rate of CLL to 80%.
del(17p13)
% 2~
E~
The recommended FISH panel for CLL detection con-
del(11q22)
~10% 
~6
sists of 11q22.3 (ATM gene), 13q14 (D13S319), the cen-
Trisomy 12
~15%
~9
tromere of chromosome 12 (D12Z3), and 17p13.1 (7P53
13q-
>50%
>12
gene). In addition, the 6q2i(MYB) probe and CCND1/ 
IGH@ t(11;14) can be added.
The mutational status of the IGVH genes divides CLL
 into two major subtypes: mutated and unmutated.
entity that exhibits a distinct phenotypic and hematologic
profle. Patients with del(6q) usually present with a rela-
●
 Most CLL patients exhibit clonal rearrangement of the immu-
 noglobulin heavy chain genes. However, such studies are usul-
tively high WBC count, classical immunophenotype, and
CD38 positivity, which are associated with acceleration
pathologic examination.
to the more aggressive prolymphocytic leukemia (PLL).
1
 Approximately 45% of CLL patients show no evidence of VH gene 
Therefore, del(6q) patients require immediate therapy to
 mutation (unmutated). In general, these patients have an aggres-
achieve remission.
sive clinical course and advanced disease stage. This determination
Chromosomal aberrations are not always detected in
requires DNA sequencing and is not widely available at present.
CLL patients' B-cells, as B-CLL cells are unresponsive to
The unmutated group shows a strong association with overexpres-
most lymphocyte mitogens (low mitotic index) and are
sion of ZAP-70 protein, which could be detected by flow cytom-
extremely difficult to maintain in culture.
ety or immunohistochemisty (see Figures 27.11F and 27.12).
344
CHRONICLYMPHOCYTICLEUKEMIA/SMALLLYMPHOCYTICLYMPHOMA
北
13
5
16
18
38
19
20
2
A
ATM
p53
B
FIGURE 27.16 (A) Bone marrow karyotype of a patient with CLL showing 46,XX,del(1 1 )(q22.1). (B) FISH analysis exhibiting deletion of
11q22 (loss of ATM-green signals).
 Atypical immunophenotypic pattern by MFC (Figure 27.21)
Variants of CLL/SLL
indudes:
Moderate to bright expression of B-cell-associated antigens
ATYPICAL CLL
(commonly moderate to bright CD20):
●Variable positivity of FMC7:
Approximately 15% of CLL patients show atypical mor-
● Variable or lack of coexpression of CD5 and CD23:
phologic or immunophenotypic features. The atypical
 Bright surface light chain restriction;
morphologic features include (Figures 27.18 to 27.20):
● Positivity of CD10 and other aberrancies.
·Presence of lymphocytes with cleaved or inregular nuclei
(>10% of the lymphoid cells):
● Increased proportion of prolymphocytes (>10% but <55%).
MU HEAVY-CHAIN DISEASE
Cases with prolymphocytes >55% fall into the category of
B-cell prolymphocytic leukemia.
Mu heavy-chain disease is a rare condition. Patients gener-
●Plasmacytic
 differentiation
with
 lymphoplasmacytic
ally present clinicopathologic features similar to those of CLL.
morphology.
There is mature lymphocytosis often with infiltration of the
VARIANTSOFCLL/SLL
345
8
10
80
16
14
15
16
20
21
22
14
152
22
23
22.3
11
17
B
FIGURE 27.17 (A) Bone marrow karyotype and (B) FISH analysis demonstrating del(17)(p11.2).
boeo
B
FIGURE 27.18 Blood smear of a patient with ClL demonstrating a mixture of lymphocytes and prolymphocytes (A, low power;
B, high power).
346
CHRONIC LYMPHOCYTIC LEUKEMIA/SMALL LYMPHOCYTIC LYMPHOMA
FIGURE27.19 Blood (A) and bone marrow (B) smears of a patient
FIGURE 27.20 Lymph node biopsy section of a patient with SLL
with ClL demonstrating atypical lymphocytes with irregular and 
demonstrating atypical lymphoid cells with irregular and folded
folded nuclei.
ruclei (A, low power; B, high power).
bone marrow, liver, and spleen, with the presence of vacul-
olated plasma cells. Lymphadenopathy is not a prominent
clinical feature. A defective mu chain is detected in serum.
H-OSS
Transformation of CLL to a
FSC-H
CD22
CD10
More Aggressive Disease (Richter
Syndrome)
 Development of a high grade non-Hodgkin lymphoma in
patients with CLL was first described by Richter in 1928.
CD23
CD23
Kappa
The term Richter syndrome was later applied to the trans-
formation of CLL to a wide variety of more aggressive lym-
FIGUre 27.21 Atypical phenotype of Cll By Flow cytometry. Density
phoid malignancies, such as large cell lymphoma (Figures 
plots of the lymphoid-enriched gate show monotypic B-cells
27.22 and 27.23), prolymphocytic leukemia, lympho-
that are positive for CD5 (partial, dim), CD10, CD19, CD20 (mainly
blastic lymphoma, Hodgkin lymphoma, and plasma cell
moderate to bright), CD22 (moderate), CD23, FMC7, and bright 
myeloma. The incidence of Richter syndrome in CLL is 
surface kappa light chain restriction.
347
FIGURE 27.22 RicHTER sYNDRoME. Bone marrow biopsy section from a patient with CLL demonstrating a focal area (arrow) of
transformation to large cell lymphoma (A, low power; B, high power).
FIGURE 27.23 RicHTER sYNDRoME. Lymph node biopsy section from a patient with CLL demonstrating a mixture of lymphocytes and
CD23 (E) and CD5 (F).
348
CHRONICLYMPHOCYTICLEUKEMIA/SMALLLYMPHOCYTICLYMPHOMA
FIGURE 27.24 Karyotype of a CLL patient
showing complex chromosomal aberrations
including +7, +9, +12, and deletion 13q,
compatible with ClL in transformation.
11
16
一
88
21
FIGURE 27.25 Complex karyotype with t(11;14).
monosomy 13, 17 and other non-specifc 
aberrations in a case of transformation of CLL to
B-prolymphocytic leukemia.
福
13
about 5-10%, with prolymphocytic leukemia being the
most frequent type of transformation. The transformed
cells may arise from the original CLL clone or may rep-
 resent a new neoplastic clone, and the sequence-specific
Del13q14
quantitative PCR methods discussed earlier can be used
to distinguish between these two possibilities. The exact
mechanism(s) of this transformation is not well under-
 stood. Multiple genetic abnormalities such as TP53 muta-
tion, deletion of retinoblastoma gene (13q14), increased
copy number of MYC, and decreased expression of MYB
 gene have been described. Trisomy 12 and 1llq aberra-
FIGURE 27.26 FISH with a CLL probe panel containing the 13q14
tions are more frequent in Richter syndrome than in
region probe (red), 13q34 region probe (aqua) and centromere
the 0verall CLL population  (Figures 27.24 to 27.26).
12 (green), exhibiting monosomy 13.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
349
Table 27.3
 Comparison of lmmunophenotypic and Cytogenetic
Features in CLL/SLL, LPL, and MCL
CLL/SLL
LPL
MCL
Immunophenotype
CD5
+
+
ZL
CD10
CD19
+
+
+
CD20
Dim
+
+
CD22
Dim
+
+
CD23
+
(wp} 
CD79b
一
+
+
FMC7
X
+
BCL-1
+
FIGURE 27.27 Karyotype of transformed CLL with 46,XX,del(7)
( 4:z)(611)(21)( 1 1'())
Cytogenetics
del(17p13)
del(6q21-23)
t(11;14)
del(11q22)
Trisomy12
Some cases my show complex chromosomal aberrations
del(13q14)
(Figure 27.27).
CLL/SLL, chronic lymphocytic leukemia /small lymphocytic lymphoma; LPL,
In most instances, transformation is associated with the
development of systemic symptoms, such as fever, weight
lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma; MCL, mantle cell lymphoma.
loss, and night sweats, and/or a rapid organomegaly, such
as increased lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, and/or
hepatomegaly. The site of transformation is usually lymph
Monoclonal B-cell expansion in the elderly is a condi-
node or bone marrow, and occasionally extranodal/extra-
tion reported in about 3.5% of healthy individuals above
medullary sites, such as the skin, gastrointestinal tract, and
 65 years of age with no evidence of absolute lymphocytosis
central nervous system. Richter transformation is associ-
 or history of lymphoid malignancy. The immunopheno-
ated with a rapid clinical deterioration and a low response
typic features of these monoclonal B-cells could be divided
rate to therapeutic strategies.
into two major groups: CLL-like and non-CLL-like. The CLL
like phenotype is characterized by CD19+, CD23+, CD5+,
FMC7-, and CD10-. The CD20 expression may be dim (typ-
ical) or strong (atypical). This phenotype has been observed
Differential Diagnosis
 in up to 13.5% of healthy relatives of patients with CLL.
 The non-CLL-like phenotype is characterized by CD19+,
CD20+, CD23-, CD5-, FMC7+, and CD10-. This phen0-
The differential diagnosis comprises conditions associated
with absolute peripheral blood lymphocytosis, increased
undetermined significance (MLUS) by some investigators.
proportion of CD5+ B-cells, and the presence of a mono-
Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) and lymphoplasmacytic
clonal population of B-cells.
lymphoma (LPL) share overlapping morphologic features
Chronic polyclonal B-cell lymphocytosis is a rare
with CLL. The neoplastic cells in MCL express bcl-1 pro-
reactive lymphoproliferative disorder often observed in
tein and are usually negative for CD23. The cytogenetic
middle-aged women with a history of heavy smoking. The
hallmark for MCL is t(11;14)(q13;q32) (see Chapter 35).
absolute blood lymphocyte count ranges from 40o0 to
The immunophenotype of LPL is characterized by lack of
20,000/μL with the presence of activated and binucleated
expression of CD5, CD10, and CD23, and expression of
lymphocytes (see Chapter 57). The majority of the lym-
 surface and cytoplasmic IgM. A significant proportion of
phocytes are B-cells. These cells, unlike CLL cells, are poly-
patients with LPL show del(6q21-23) (see Chapter 29). A
 clonal and lack CD5 expression.
comparison of immunophenotypic and cytogenetic fea-
CD5+ B-lymphocytes comprise a subset of the B-cells
tures in CLL/SLL, LPL, and MCL is presented in Table 27.3.
 in normal individuals. In most studies, they account for up
Transformation to Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) should
to 25% of the B-cells in the blood and the bone marrow
 be considered when there is presence of Reed-Sternberg-
(mean of about 12%). The expression of CD5 is dim on
like cells. As mentioned above, rare cases of CLL/SLL may
the normal B-cells but brighter on the CLL cells. The rec-
show scattered Reed-Sternberg-like cells which are inter-
ommended cutoff point for the detection of residual CLL
 spersed with sheets of small, round lymphocytes; whereas,
in a treated patient is >25% CD5+ B-cells in the periph-
in transformation to HL, Reed-Sternberg cells are found
eral blood or in the bone marrow samples.
in a discrete region with typical HL background.
350
 CHRONIC LYMPHOCYTIC LEUKEMIA/SMALL LYMPHOCYTIC LYMPHOMA
Additional Resources
Bertilaccio MT, Scielzo C, Muzio M, et al: An overview of chronic
Klein U, Dalla-Favera R: New insights into the pathogenesis of
lymphocytic leukaemia biology. Best Pract Res Clin Haematol 23:
chronic lymphocytic leukemia, Semin Cancer Biol 20:377-383, 2010.
21-32,2010
Lanasa MC: Novel insights into the biology of CLL, Hematology Am
Caporaso NE, Marti GE, Landgren O, et al: Monoclonal B cell lym-
Soc Hematol Educ Program:70-76, 2010.
phocytosis: clinical and population perspectives, Cytometry B Clin
Matutes E, Attygalle A, Wotherspoon A, et al: Diagnostic issues in
Cytom 78(Suppl 1):S115-S119, 2010.
chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL), Best Pract Res Clin Haematol
Chanan-Khan A, Kipps T, Stilgenbauer S: Clinical roundtable mono-
23:3-20, 2010.
graph. New alternatives in CLL therapy: managing adverse events.
Matutes E, Wotherspoon A, Catovsky D: Differential diagnosis in
Clin Adv Hematol Oncol 8(Suppl):1-15, 2010.
chronic lymphocytic leukaemia, Best Pract Res Clin Haematol 20:
Cramer P, Hallek M: Prognostic factors in chronic lymphocytic leu-
367-384, 2007.
kemia-what do we need to know?, Nat Rev Clin Oncol 8:38-47, 201l.
 Molica S: A systematic review on Richter syndrome: what is the pub-
Crowther-Swanepoel D, Houlston RS: Genetic variation and risk of
lished evidence?, Leuk Lymphoma 51:415-421, 2010.
chronic lymphocytic leukaemia, Semin Cancer Biol 20:363-369, 2010.
Montserrat E, Moreno C: Genetic lesions in chronic lymphocytic leu-
Damle RN, Calissano C, Chiorazzi N: Chronic lymphocytic leukae-
kemia: clinical implications, Curr Opin Oncol 2l:609-614, 2009.
mia: a disease of activated monoclonal B cells, Best Prmct Res Clin
Scarfo L, Dagklis A, Scielzo C, et al: CLL-like monoclonal B-cell
Haematol 23:33-45, 2010.
lymphocytosis: are we all bound to have it?, Semin Cancer Biol 20:
Goldin LR, Slager SL, Caporaso NE: Familial chronic lymphocytic
384-390,2010
leukemia, Curr Opin Hematol 17:350-355, 2010.
Wierda WG, Chiorazzi N, Dearden C, et al: Chronic lymphocytic
leukemia: new concepts for future therapy. Clin Lymphoma Myeloma
leukemia, I Clin Oncol 29:544-550, 2011.
Leuk 10:369-378, 2010.
B-Cell Prolymphocytic
MENCU
Leukemia
phoproliferative disorder characterized by the clonal pro-
liferation of prolymphocytes, primarily involving blood,
bone marrow, and spleen. Prolymphocytes are medium-
sized cells with variable amount of light basophilic cyto-
plasm, round, oval or indented nucleus, moderately
condensed chromatin, and a prominent nucleolus (Figure
28.1). In prolymphocytic  leukemia, prolymphocytes
account for >55% of the lymphoid cells. B-cell leukemias
with prolymphocytic morphology are divided into three
groups:
1. De novo B-PLL
 2. Prolymphocytic leukemia evolved from the transformation of 
CLL (see Chapter 27)
3. Leukemic phase of mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) with pro-
lymphocytic morphology and evidence of t(i1:14) (see
Chapter 35)
B-PLL accounts for about 1% of all chronic lymphoid
leukemias. It tends to affect elderly patients, usually >60
years old. The male to female ratio is >1. The characteris-
tic features of B-PLL include a markedly elevated lympho-
cyte count, often > 100,000/μL, massive splenomegaly, and
minimal or no peripheral lymphadenopathy. Anemia and
thrombocytopenia are frequent findings. Serous effusions
and central nervous system involvements are infrequent.
B-PLL has an aggressive clinical course with a median sur-
vival time of about 3 years. A complete response to alem-
tuzumab (anti-CD52 antibody) has been recently reported
in a patient with B-PLL. Transformation of B-PLL to dif-
       
FlGURE 28.1 Prolymphocytes in the blood smear of patients with
B-prolymphocytic leukemia (A and B). Some prolymphocytes show
observed.
cytoplasmic granules (A, green arrow) or inclusions (A, black arrow).
● There is a marked peripheral blood lymphocytosis (usually
Morphology
>100,000/uL) with the presence of >55% prolymphocytes.
  a o   a sr
CLL cells (Figure 28.1). In most cases, they display a round
●Peripheral blood, bone marrow, and spleen are the major sites
nucleus with moderately condensed chromatin and promi-
 of involvement.
nent nucleolus. In rare cases, however, the nucleus is irregular
Atlas of Hematopathology. DO1: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00028-0
@ 201 3 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
352
B-CELL PROLYMPHOCYTIC LEUKEMIA
FIGURE 28.2 PRoLYMpHocYTic LEukEMIA. Bone marrow biopsy section shows a paratrabecular lymphoid aggregate consisting of
shows large numbers of prolymphocytes (C, low power; D, high power).
or indented, and there may be more than one prominent
nucleolus (Figure 28.2). Occasionally, a small proportion of
Immunophenotype
prolymphocytes may show cytoplasmic granules or inclusions
(see Figure 28.1, arrows).
 Bone marrow biopsy sections often show a diffuse infiltration
     om
by the neoplastic prolymphocytes. Bone marrow smears show
include:
clusters or sheets of prolymphocytes (see Figure 28.2).
+
Variable expression of B-cell associated antigens;
· Splenic involvement is a frequent finding. Both white and
Often moderate to bright CD20, and variable positivity of
red pulps are extensively infiltrated by prolymphocytes. The
FMC7:
white pulp is markedly expanded and the red pulp is diffusely
Commonly altered or absent coexpression profile of dim CD5
or patchily involved, often creating a mixture of diffuse and
and CD23 present in typical CLL;
nodular patterns. Some of the extended white pulp nodules 
 Commonly absent CD10;
may show smaller lymphoid cells in the center surrounded by
●
Usually bright surface light chain restriction;
 larger cells in the periphery.
● Common positivity of CD38.
● Lymph node involvement, although rare, is diffuse, with the
effacement of nodal architecture and predominance of pro-
lymphocytes (Figure 28.3).
CYTOGENETIC AND MOLECULAR STUDIES
353
CD19
CD19
SSC
FSC-H
CD22
CD38
SWE
CD23
CD5
Lambda
FIGURE 28.4 FLOW CYTOMETRIC FINDINGS 0F B-PROLYMPHOCYTIC
LEUKEMlA. Open gate density plot display by the scatter gate
 (in blue) reveals a prominent population of predominantly
intermediate-sized lymphocytes. Density plots of the lymphoid-
enriched gate (in purple) show monotypic B-cells expressing
CD19, CD20 (moderate to bright), CD22, CD23, FMC7, and surface
lambda light chain restriction. CD38 is often positive in PLL, as 
seen in this case. The neoplastic B-cells are negative for CD5 and
①10 (not shown).
88
22
FIGURE 28.3 Lymph node biopsy section demonstrating a diffuse
FIGURE 28.5 Karyotype of a case of B-prolymphocytic leukemia 
showing deletions of 6q and 11q (arrows): 46,xY,del(6)
process with predominance of prolymphocytes (A, low power;
B, high power). Prolymphocytes are present in the peripheral 
(q21q25),del(1 1)(q21).
blood smear (C).
Cytogenetic and Molecular Studies
Several  studies report  karyotypic  abnormalities  involv-
ing 17p13 (TP53) or 8q24 (MYC). (Figures 28.6 and 28.7.
respectively).
Loss of heterozygosity at 17p13 has been reported in 53%
● t(11;14)(q13;q32) frequently reported in PLL in most
instances, is now considered to represent the leukemic phase
of B-PLL patients. Other reported cytogenetic abnormalities
of a subtype of MCL (see Chapter 35).
include del(6q), and t(8;14).
 B-PLL will usually show clonal immunoglobulin gene rear-
●Trisomy 12. del(11)(q22.3), and del(13)(q14). typically
common in CLL/SLL, are reported in B-PLL (Figure 28.5).
rangements just like the other B-cell malignancies.
However, some of these cases may represent the PLL transfor-
mation of CLL/SLL.
354
B-CELLPROLYMPHOCYTICLEUKEMIA
Del (13q)
Del(17p)
B
FIGURE 28.6 (A) Complex composite karyotype in a case of B-prolymphocytic leukemia showing abnormalities of chromosomes
(p11.2),+ 1 ~4mar. (B) FISH analysis demonstrates deletions of 13q14 and 17p13 (7P53 gene) loci.
 leukemic cells morphologically mimic prolymphocytes.
Differential Diagnosis
But the hairy cells are positive for tartrate resistant acid
phosphatase (TRAP) and express CD103, whereas B-PLL
The differential diagnosis of B-PLL is with atypical CLL
cells are negative for TRAP and CD103.
(CLL/PLL), hairy cell leukemia (HCL) variant, MCL, and
As briefly discussed above, the neoplastic cells in a
splenic marginal zone B-cell lymphoma. The characteristic
 group of patients with splenomegaly and markedly ele-
feature of B-PLL is >55% prolymphocytes in the periph-
vated peripheral blood lymphocyte count show morpho-
eral blood lymphocyte count, whereas in CLL the prolym-
 logic features identical to prolymphocytes with cytogenetic
phocytes account for less than 55% of the lymphoid cells.
evidence of t(1l;14). These disorders were originally
The immunophenotype of CLL/PLL in most instances is 
considered as B-PLL, but now most investigators con-
similar to that of CLL, showing coexpression of CD5 and
sider these as a variant of splenic mantle cell lymphoma.
CD23 and lack of FMC7, whereas the leukemic cells in de
Splenic marginal zone B-cell lymphomas, similar to B-PLL,
novo B-PLL lack CD5 and CD23 expression, but express
usually show massive splenomegaly, but the peripheral
FMC7. Splenomegaly, similar to B-PLL, is one of the clini-
 blood lymphocyte count is usually much lower and the
cal hallmarks of HCL. But lymphocyte count in HCL is
neoplastic cells are morphologically different from pro-
low, normal, or modestly elevated. In a variant of HCL,
lymphocytes (see Chapter 31).
DIFFERENTIALDIAGNOSIS
355
F
10
11
12
1
13
15
16
17
88
46
02
21
22
A
MYC-IGH@
fusionsignals
B
(q13q23). (B) FISH analysis exhibiting IGH@-MyCfusion signals (arrows) consistent with t(8;14)(q24;q32).
356
B-CELL PROLYMPHOCYTIC LEUKEMIA
Additional Resources
Absi A, Hsi E, Kalaycio M: Prolymphocytic leukemia, Curr Treat
 Krishnan B, Matutes E, Dearden C: Prolymphocytic leukemias, Semin
Options Oncol 6:197-208, 2005.
Oncol 33:257-263, 2006.
Bench AJ, Erber WN, Follows GA, et al: Molecular genetic analysis of
Matutes E, Wotherspoon A, Catovsky D: Differential diagnosis in
haematological malignancies Il: mature lymphoid neoplasms, Int J
chronic lymphocytic leukaemia, Best Pract Res Clin Haematol 20:
Lab Hematol 29:229-260, 2007.
367-384, 2007.
 Del Giudice I, Osuji N, Dexter T, et al: B-cell prolymphocytic leuke-
 Robak T, Robak P: Current treatment options in prolymphocytic leu-
mia and chronic lymphocytic leukemia have distinctive gene expres-
kemia, Med Sci Monit 13:RA69-80, 2007.
sion signatures, Leukemia 23:2160-2167, 2009.
Ruchlemer R, Parry-Jones N, Brito-Babapulle V. et al:
Dungarwalla M, Matutes E, Dearden CE: Prolymphocytic leukae-
B-prolymphocytic leukaemia with t(1l;14) revisited: a splenome-
mia of B- and T-cell subtype: a state-of-the-art paper, Eur J Haematol
galic form of mantle cell lymphoma evolving with leukaemia, Br J
80:469-476, 2008.
Haematol 125:330-336, 2004.
Hoffbrand AV, Pettit JE, Vyas P: Color atlas of clinical hematology.
ed 4, Philadelphia, 2010, Mosby/Elsevier.
Lymphoplasmacytic
Lymphoma/
Waldenstrom's
Macroglobulinemia
Lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma (LPL) is a clonal mature
B-cell lymphoproliferative disorder consisting of small
lymphocytes, plasmacytoid lymphocytes, and plasma
cells. Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia (WM) is defined
as an LPL with any level of monoclonal IgM serum pro-
tein. The primary site of involvement is bone marrow.
Lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly are reported in
 5-30% of patients, but involvement of other tissues is rare.
LPL/WM is a rare disorder accounting for 1-1.5% of
lymphoid malignancies. The median age is about 65 years.
with <1% of patients under 40 years of age. The male
to female ratio is about 1.5 Clinical symptoms include
fatigue, bleeding, and hyperviscosity-related neuropathy.
such as headache, vertigo, blurring or loss of vision, dip-
lopia, or ataxia. Bone pain is rare and <5% of the patients
have lytic bone lesions. Cryoglobulinemia, autoimmune
hemolytic anemia and/or thrombocytopenia, and coagu-
lopathies may occur. Amyloidosis and erythematous urti-
carial skin vasculitis (Schnitzler syndrome) have been
reported in some LPL/WM patients.
Factors associated with high risk include age >65 years,
hemoglobin <11.5 g/dL, platelet count <100,000/μL, serum
α2-microglobulin level >3 mg/L, and serum IgM parapro-
tein >7 g/dL.
A variety of therapeutic regimens are available, includ-
ing rituximab (anti-CD20) and combination chemother-
 apy with or without rituximab.
Morphology and Laboratory
Findings (Figures 29.1 to 29.5)
● Bone marrow biopsy sections show a nodular or diffuse infil-
FIGURE 29.1 Bone marrow biopsy section (A, low power; B, high
tration of the marrow by lymphocytes, plasmacytoid lym-
power) demonstrates aggregates of lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate.
phocytes, and plasma cells in various proportions. Scattered
Bone marrow smear (C) shows a mixture of lymphocytes,
prolymphocytes and immunoblasts are usually present.
plasmacytoid lymphocytes, and plasma cells.
Atlas of Hematopathology. DOl: http:/dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00029-2
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
358
LYMPHOPLASMACYTIC LYMPHOMA/WALDENSTROM'S MACROGLOBULINEMIA
FIGURE 29.2 Bone marrow biopsy section (A, low power; B, high power) demonstrates a paratrabecular lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate.
● The mixed lymphoplasmacytic population is more clearly
● The lymph node biopsy sections show a diffuse involvement
demonstrated in the bone marrow smears, which may also
with sheets of lymphocytes admixed with plasmacytoid lym-
show increased number of mast cells. Plasma cells may show
phocytes and plasma cells. Dutcher and/or Russell bodies may
[g-containing nuclear inclusions (Dutcher bodies) or cytoplas-
be present. The sinuses are offen preserved and open with
mic inclusions (Russell bodies) (Figure 29.6).
scattered histiocytes engulfing immunoglobulin molecules.
● Circulating neoplastic cells may be seen in peripheral
Transformed lymphoid cells are relatively few and are dis-
blood smears. some with plasmacytoid 
features,
buf
 persed throughout the lesion, but proliferation centers, char-
lymphocyte count is not as high as observed in CLL. The
acteristic of CLL/SLL, are often lacking.
red blood cells show rouleaux formation or evidence of
● Some cases of LPL are associated with amyloidosis (Figure 29.7).
agglutination (cryoglobulinemia) (see Figures 29.3C and
● Splenic involvement is often diffuse, with the infiltration of
29.4C and D)
both white and red pulps.
● Moderate to severe anemia is noted in up to 80% of patients.
● Transformation to diffuse large B-cell lymphoma may occur in
Presence of monoclonal IgM with serum levels often >3 g/dL
about 10-15% of cases (Figure 29.8).
(75% kappa light chain restricted).
CYTOGENETIC AND MOLECULAR STUDIES
359
shows circulating plasma cells and red cell rouleaux formation.
Immunophenotype
Cytogenetic and Molecular Studies
Immunophenotypic features by MFC (Figure 29.9)
● Deletion of 6q21-q23 is the most common chromosomal aber-
include:
ration in LPL/WM, reported in 40-70% of patients (Figure 29.11).
●
 Some [PLs may show t(9:14)(p13:q32) (Figure 29.12), which
● Expression of B-cell associated antigens at various intensities;
results in the fusion of the PAX5 and IGH@ genes. PAX5
● Usually moderate to bright expression of CD20, with associ-
encodes B-cell-specific activator protein (BSAP), which is an
ated expression of FMC7:
important regulator of B-cell proliferation and differentiation.
●
 Surface light chain restriction;
 Other reported chromosomal abnormalities include trisomies or
●
Common positivity for CD38, as well as partial or dim CD25:
structural aberrations of chromosomes 10, 11, 12, 15, 20, and 21.
●
Variable expression of CD23:
 The LPL/WM cells show clonal rearrangement of immuno-
●
 Often lack of CD5 and CD10, though partial expression of
globulin heavy and light chains with somatic mutation of the
either or both markers may be seen sometimes.
V-region genes.
Immunohistochemical studies are more useful than
Documentation of somatic V-region hypermutation, a prop-
flow cytometry in identifying the component of mono-
erty particularly of more mature B-cells that have passed
typic plasma cells, which are positive for CD138, express-
through the germinal center, requires subcloning and
ing restricted cytoplasmic  light and/or heavy  chains
sequencing studies, which are not routinely available in most 
dinical molecular pathology laboratories.
(Figures 29.8 and 29.10). IgM is most common, followed
 Mutation of the TP53 tumor suppressor gene has also been
by IgG. Expression of IgA is rare, and IgD is typically
described in some cases.
negative.
360
FIGURE 29.4 LYMPHoPLAsMAcYTIc LYMPHoMA wITH RED cELL AGGLUTINATIoN. Bone marrow biopsy Section (A, low power; B, high power) shows 
a lymphoid aggregate primarily consisting of atypical lymphocytes with scattered plasma cells. Blood smear (C, low power; D, high
power) demonstrates red cell agglutination and atypical lymphocytes (arrows).
Differentia! Diagnosis
presented in Chapter 28. Unlike CLL cells, the neoplastic
cells of LPL are negative for CD5 but CD23 and may express
CD138. The major distinguishing features of MCL are CD5+,
The differential diagnosis of LPL includes small B-cell lym-
bcl-1+, CD23-, and presence of t(11;14). LPL cells are CD5
phomas, such as CLL/SLL and MCL, plasma cell myeloma,
and monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance
del(6q2l-23). Plasma cell disorders comprise predomi-
(MGuS). The immunophenotypic and cytogenetic features 
 nantly of plasma cells, rarely involve lymph nodes or spleen,
of LPL/WM, CLL, and mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) are 
 and usually show a non-IgM monoclonal serum paraprotein.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
361
FIGURE 29.5 LYMPHoPLASMAcYTIC LYMPHoMA wITH MACROPHAGE-LIKE PLASMA CELLs. Bone marrOw biopSy Section (A) demonstrates a
lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate.
(B, white arrows) may be present in lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma.
362
LYMPHOPLASMACYTICLYMPHOMA/WALDENSTROM'S MACROGLOBULINEMIA
FIGURE 29.7 LYMPHoPLAsMAcYTIc LYMPHoMA wITH AMYLoIDosIs. Bone marrow biopsy section (A, low power; B, intermediate power; C, high 
 power) demonstrating interstitial and vascular deposits of amyloid. These deposits are positive with Congo red stain (D). Bone marrow
 smears show a mixture of lymphocytes, plasmacytoid lymphocytes, and plasma cells (E), and there are lymphoplasmcytic cells in the 
peripheral bloodsmear(F).
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
363
FIGURE 29.8 TrANSFORMATION 0F
LYMPHOPLASMACYTICLYMPHOMATO
DIFFUSE LARGEB-CELL LYMPHOMA.BONe
 marrow biopsy section (A, low
power; B, intermediate power;
C high power) demonstrating
aggregates of large lymphoid
cells with round nuclei, open
chromatin, and prominent nucleoli,
surrounded by lymphoplasmacytic
cells. The larger cells show weaker
CD20 (D) and stronger IgM (E)
expression than the smaller 
lymphoplasmacytic cells. The
 plasmacytic component is positive
for CD138 (F).
CD20
CD
FSC-H
CD22
Kappa
CD19
CD19
CD5
CD10
CD38
FIGURE 29.9 FLow cYToMETRIc ANDINGs OF LYMPHoPLAsMAcYTIc LYMPHoMA. Density plots of the lymphoid-enriched gate (in blue) reveal a
CD19, CD20 (moderate), CD22, CD23 (partial), and CD38 (partial), but negative for CD5 and CD10.
364
FIGURE 29.10 IMMUNoHISToCHEMICAL FINDINGs IN A CASE oF LYMPHoPLAsMAcYTIC LYMPHoMA. BoNe marrOw biOpSy SectiOn (A) demOnstrating 
 a lymphoplasmacytic infltrate. These cells express CD20 (B) and BCL-2 (C), are lambda light chain restricted (D), and show rare kappa
DIFFERENTIALDIAGNOSIS
365
88
11
1
24
2：
A
B
6
FIGURE29.11 G-banded karyotype (A) and FSH analysis (B) demonstrating del(6)(q13q25) in a patient with lymphoplasmacytic
Iymphoma.
26
9
10
12.
14
10
17
FIGURE 29.12 Karyotype showing del(7q) and t(9;14) in a patient with lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma.
366 LYMPHOPLASMACYTIC LYMPHOMA/WALDENSTROM'S MACROGLOBULINEMIA
Additional Resources
Ansell SM, Kyle RA, Reeder CB, et al: Diagnosis and management of
Lin P, Molina TJ, Cook JR, et al: Lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma and
Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia: mayo stratification of macroglob-
other non-marginal zone lymphomas with plasmacytic differentia-
ulinemia and risk-adapted therapy (mSMART) guidelines, Mayo Clin 
tion, Am J Clin Pathol 136:195-210, 2011.
Proc 85:824-833, 2010.
McMaster ML, Caporaso N: Waldenstrom macroglobulinaemia and
Borgonovo G, d'Oiron R, Amato A, et al: Primary lymphoplasmacytic
IgM monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance: emerg-
lymphoma of the liver associated with a serum monoclonal peak of
ing understanding of a potential precursor condition, Br J Haematol
IgG kappa, Am J Gastroenterol 90:137-140, 1995.
139:663-671, 2007.
Fonseca R, Hayman S: Waldenstrom macroglobulinaemia, Br J
 Morice WG, Chen D, Kurtin PI, et al: Novel immunophenotypic fea-
Haematol 138:700-720, 2007.
tures of marrow lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma and correlation with
Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia, Mod Pathol 22:807-816, 2009.
Garcia-Sanz R,(
OcioEM:
Novel
treatment
regimens
for
Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia, Expert Rev Hematol 3:339-350.
Neparidze N, Dhodapkar MV: Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia:
2010.
recent advances in biology and therapy, Clin Adv Hematol Oncol 7:
 Kristinsson SY, Koshiol J, Goldin LR, et al: Genetics- and immune-
677-681, 2009.
related factors in the pathogenesis of lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma/
 Stone MJ: Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia: hyperviscosity syn-
Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia, Clin Lymphoma Myeloma 9:
drome and cryoglobulinemia, Clin Lymphoma Myeloma 9:97-99,
23-26, 2009.
2009.
Kurtin Pl: Indolent lymphomas of mature B lymphocytes, Hematol
Treon SP, Hatjiharissi E. Merlini G: Waldenstrom's macro-
Oncol Clin North Am 23:769-790, 2009.
globlinemia/lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma, Cancer Treat Res 142:
Lin P, Mansoor A, Bueso-Ramos C, et al: Diffuse large B-cell lym-
211-242, 2008.
phoma occurring in patients with lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma/
Vijay A, Gertz MA: Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia, Blood 109:
Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia: clinicopathologic features of 12
5096-5103, 2007.
Cases, Am I Ctin Pathol 120:246-253, 2003.
Vitolo U, Ferreri AJ, Montoto S: Lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma-
Lin P. Medeiros LI: Lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma/waldenstrom
Waldenstrom's
macroglobulinemia, Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 67:
macroglobulinemia: an evolving concept, Adv Anat Pathol 12:
172-185, 2008.
246-255, 2005.
Hairy Cell Leukemia
Iairy cell leukemia (HCL), or leukemic reticuloendo-
rate, and are usually older than the patients with spleno-
theliosis, is an indolent mature B-cell lymphoid leukemia
 megaly. Therapeutic modalities include interferon alpha,
characterized by the proliferation of medium-sized lym-
purine analogs such as pentostatin (2'-DCF) and cladrib-
phocytes with cytoplasmic "hairy" projections, involv-
ine (2-CdA), splenectomy, and rituximab (anti-CD20)
ing blood, bone marrow, spleen, and occasionally other
therapy
tissules.
HCL is relatively rare and accounts for about 2% of all
lymphoid leukemias. The median age is about 55 years
with a marked male predominance: male to female ratio
Morphology
is 3-5:1. Clinical symptoms are mostly related to spleno-
 megaly and pancytopenia and include abdominal fullness
 or discomfort, fatigue, weight loss, fever, bruising, and
Hairy cells are larger than mature lymphocytes and show
abundant pale blue cytoplasm, often with ill-defined bor-
bleeding. Splenomegaly is present in about 80% of HCL
der (Figure 30.1). Cells with characteristic elongated (hairy)
cases. Hepatomegaly is observed in 20-30% of patients,
cytoplasmic projections are frequently identified. The nuclei
but lymphadenopathy is not a major clinical feature and is
are round, oval, folded, indented, or dumbbell-shaped. The
found in 10-20% of patients. Table 30.1 gives a summary
nuclear chromatin is condensed but finer than the CLL cells.
of the clinical and laboratory findings in HCL
Rare cells may show prominent nucleoli. The hairy cytoplas-
HCL is an indolent leukemia with an overall 12-year
mic projections are easily detected in phase contrast micros-
survival rate of >85%. There are reports indicating that
 copy. or in scanning and transmission electron microscopy.
HCL patients without splenomegaly tend to remain free
● Peripheral blood examination in most patients reveals pan-
from significant neutropenia, have an excellent survival
cytopenia with the presence of various proportions of hairy
ells. Only about 10% of patients show leukocytosis, and
in such cases, the hairy cells account for the majority of the
leukocytes. Occasionally, leukocytosis exceeds 100,000/μL.
 Table 30.1
Monocytopenia is one of the characteristic features of HCL.
Clinical and Laboratory Findings in Hairy Cell
● Bone marrow involvement is usually interstitial or diffuse
Leukemia (HCL)
with patchy, densely cellular areas composed of neoplastic
Finding
cells (Figures 30.2 to 30.4). The HCL cells are relatively uni-
Frequency
form with abundant clear cytoplasm and round, oval, or irreg-
Physical findings
uar nuclei, often without prominent nucleoli or presence of
 Splenomegaly
80%
mitotic figures. The presence of abundant cytoplasm creates a
Hepatomegaly
20-30%
nuclear spacing or "fried egg" pattern. Nodular involvement
 Petechiae and ecchymosis 
30%
is rare. In most cases, the bone marrow is hypercellular with
Lymphadenopathy
10-20%
a cellularity of >50-90%. Buf occasionally, the bone marrow
may appear markedly hypocellular simulating aplastic anemia
 Laboratory findings
(Figure 30.5).
Anemia
85%
● Bone marrow biopsy sections often reveal moderate to
Thrombocytopenia
80%
marked increase in reticulin fibers leading to unsuccessful
 Neutropenia
80%
bone marrow aspiration (dry tap) (see Figure 30.4C). The
Monocytopenia
80%
reticulin fibers tend to surround the individual or small clus-
Hypergammaglobulinemia
20%
ters of tumor cells.
Atlas of Hematopathology. D0l: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0- 12-385183-3.00030-9
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
368
HAIRYCELL LEUKEMIA
FIGURE 30.1 HAIRY cELL LeukEMIA. Peripheral blood smear demonstrates neoplastic cells with cytoplasmic hairy projections (left).
The inset shows a hair cell positive for tartrate resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP). Features of scanning (right top) and transmission 
(right bottom) electron microscopy are demonstrated.
From Naeim F. Pathology of Bone Marrow, 2nd edn. Williams & Wiikins, Baltimore, 1997 and Naeim F. Cytoskeletal redistribution of surface
membrane receptors in hairy cell leukemia. Am J Clin Pathol 1980; 74:660-663; by permission.
 FIGURE 30.2 (A) Bone marrow biopsy section demonstrates an interstitial leukemic infiltrate. The tumor cells show nuclear spacing and
 a "fried egg" pattern (inset). (B) Bone marrow smear shows numerous tumor cells, some with cytoplasmic projections.
MORPHOLOGY
369
FIGURE 30.3 Bone marrow biopsy section demonstrates an interstitial leukemic infltrate (A, low power; B, high power). These cells are
positive for CD20 (C) and DBA.44 (D) by immunohistochemical stains.
stain shows increased reticulin fibers (C), and the tumor cells express DBA.44 by immunohistochemical stain (D).
● In the vast majority of cases, diagnosis of HCL is made by exami-
 Splenic involvement is one of the characteristic features of
nation of bone marrow biopsy sections. On rare occasions, par-
HCL, and splenomegaly is one of the most prominent clinical
ticularly when the bone marrow involvement is focal, the initial
features. However, about 20% of patients may lack significant
biopsy sections may not be diagnostic and deeper cuts or addi-
splenomegaly. HCL infiltrates red pulp cords and sinusoids in
tional bone marrow biopsies are required.
a diffuse pattern (Figure 30.6). Scattered red blood cell lakes
370
HAIRY CELL LEUKEMIA
B
FIGURE 30.5 The hypocellular variant of hairy cell leukemia
may mimic aplastic anemia in bone marrow biopsy sections.
Interstitial or focal hairy cell infiltration is sometimes overlooked
(A, low power; B, high power).
From Naeim F. Pathology of Bone Marrow, 2nd edn. Wiliams &
Wiikins, Baltimore, 1997, by permission.
surrounded by hairy cells are often present (Figure 30.7). The
white pulp is atrophic, and occasional small normal lymphoid 
aggregates may be present.
HCL involves the liver in up to 50% and the lymph nodes in
about 15% of cases. The hepatic infiltration is both portal and
sinusoidal and the lymph node involvement is usually para-
cortical (Figure 30.8). Involvement of other fissues, such as
skin and lung. is rare.
Immunophenotype and
Cytochemical Stains
Immunophenotypic features by MFC (Fig. 30.9) include:
● Expression of B-cell associated antigens with bright CD20 and
CD22:
 Expression of moderate to bright FMC7 and CD1lc, and
 FIGURE 30.6 Splenic infiltration in hairy cell leukemia is diffuse
CD123:
(A) and involves the red pulp (B), with the presence of red blood
●Bright surface light chain restriction;
 cell lakes (C). The infiltrating hairy cells are positive for tartrate
resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) by immunohistochemical
stain (D).
 MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
371
FlGURE 30.7 Splenic infiltration in hairy cell leukemia is diffuse and involves the red pulp, with the presence of red blood cell lakes
(A, low power; B, high power).
FIGURE 30.8 (A) Lymph node biopsy
section showing diffuse infiltration 
by hairy cells. (B) Liver biopsy
demonstrating infltration of the portal 
 areas and sinuses by the leukemic cells.
●
Coexpression of CD25 and CD103;
Common lack of CD5, CD10, and CD23, though any of these
three antigens can sometimes be detected.
Immunohistochemical studies are useful in aiding
the diagnosis of HCL, which is positive for Annexin Al,
DBA.44 (CD72), CD123, TRAP and dim cyclin D1 (see
Figures 30.3D, 30.4D, and 30.6D). Annexin A1 is most
FSC-H
CD45
Kappa
specific, and it is not seen in other B-cell lymphomas.
Together with CD20, it can be used to distinguish HCL
from HCL-variant and splenic marginal zone lymphoma.
CD19
Molecular and Cytogenetic Studies
FMC7
CD11c
CD103
● While it has generally been thought that no specific cytoge-
netic or molecular aberrations are associated with HCL, a
FIGURE 30.9 FLOW CYTOMETRIC FINDINGS OF HAIRY CELL LEUKEMIA. CD19
recent genome-wide analysis revealed frequent mutation in
backgating reveals an abnormal population of B-cells on the scatter
the BRAF gene, the same V600E mutation commonly seen in
gate and by CD45 gating (in red; circled). Compared with normal
lymphocytes, the abnormal B-cells demonstrate increased forward
mlon cancer and melanoma.
scatter, relatively high side scatter, and bright CD45. Although these
Clonal translocations involving the 14q32.3 (IGH@) have been
D45 and scatter characteristics resemble those of monocytes, true
described.
monocytes are often significantly reduced in HCL (monocytopenia).
电
Abnormalities of chromosome 5. most commonly trisomy 5
Density plots of the B-cell enriched gate (in green) reveal that
and interstitial deletions of band 5q13, have been observed in
the neoplastic B-cells are positive for CD11c (bright), CD19, CD20
up to 40% of cases in one study.
(bright, not shown), CD22 (bright, not shown), FMC7 (moderate),
Deletion of the TP53 (17p13-) occurs with a high incidence.
and express surface kappa light chain restriction. In addition, there 
As a disease of B-cells, HCL shows clonal immunoglobulin
is coexpression ofCD25 and CD103. The neoplastic B-cells are
gene rearrangements.
negative for CD5, CD10, and CD23 (not shown).
372
HAIRY CELL LEUKEMIA
SCC
FSC
FMC7
CD103
C
FIGURE 30.10 HAIRY CELL LEUKEMIA, MORPHOLOGIC VARIANT.
Bone marrow smear (A, low power; B, high power) shows
 prolymphocyte-like hairy cells. These cells are TRAP-positive (C).
From Naeim F. Pathology of Bone Marrow, 2nd edn. Wiliams &
CD45
CD110
CD103
Wilkins, Baltimore, 1997, by permission.
FIGURE 30.11 Hairy cell LeukeMIa, ImmunopheNotypic varlant.
 Blood smear demonstrating numerous medium to large lymphocytes
● Most HCL cases show mutation of the VH genes and express
with abundant cytoplasm and typical hairy projeetions (A, low power: 
activation-induced cytidine deaminase, a molecule essential for 
B, high power). These cells are B-cells and express CD20 (bright).
somatic mutation and isotype switch. Lnlike most other B-cell 
①22, CD11c (bright), and FMC7, but are negative for CD25 and 
①103(C).
neoplasms, HCL frequently expresses multiple Ig isotypes.
(HCL-V). These patients are usually older than typical HCL
HCL Variants
patients, show more equal distribution of male to female
ratio (1.6:1), often demonstrate more massive spleno-
megaly and have a more aggressive clinical course. Most
A small proportion of patients with HCL (approximately
 Japanese patients with HCL (HCl-Japanese variant) show
10%) may present atypical clinicopathologic features
 marked lymphocytosis with leukemic cells negative for
 DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
373
 Table 30.2
 Clincopathologic Comparison of HCL, HCL-V, SMZL, and SRPL
Features
HCL
HCL-V
SMZL
SRPL
 Male : female ratio
5
1.6
0.5
1.6
Media age (years)
55
71
52
77
 Splenomegaly
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
 Pattern of splenic involvement
 Diffuse, red pulp
Diffuse, red pulp
Patchy, white pulp
 Diffuse, red pulp
 Pattern of bone marrow involvement
 Mostly interstitial
 Mostly interstitial
 Mostly intrasinusoidal
 Interstitial or intrasinusoidal
Lymphocytosis
 Mild to moderate
High (≥30,000/μL)
Mild to moderate
Moderate
 Neutropenia
Yes
No
No
No
Monocytopenia
Yes
No
No
No
FMC7
 Bright
 Bright
 Bright
 Bright
CD22
 Bright
 Bright
Moderate
 Bright
CD11c
Bright
 Bright
 Moderate
CD25
 Bright
+
Faint
CD103
Bight
+/-
Negative
CD123
Bright
Negative
+
 Annexin A1
 Positive
Negative
Negative
Negative
HCL, hairy cell leukemia; HCL-V, hairy cell leukemia variant; SMZL, splenic marginal zone lymphoma; SRPL, splenic diffuse red pulp small B-celymphoma.
Adapted from Traverse-Glehen A, Baseggio L, Callet-Bauchu E, et al. Hairy cell leukemia-variant and splenic red pulp lymphoma: a single entity? Brit J
Haematol 2010; 150: 108-127.
CD25 expression, and weakly positive for TRAP stain. The
Differential Diagnosis
pathologic features of HCL variants include:
 Hairy cells with prominent central nucleoli, mimicking pro-
The differential diagnosis of HCL includes splenic mar-
lymphocytes (Figure 30.10):
ginal zone lymphoma (SMZL), PLL, and atypical CLL/SLL
Hairy cells with multilobated nuclei;
(Table 30.2). HCL involves the splenic red pulp in a dif-
 Blastic variant with cytoplamic projection and TRAP positivity:
fuse pattern with atrophy of the white pulp, whereas SMZL
●
 Atypical immunophenotype, such as lack of coexpression of
CD25 and CD103 (Figure 30.11). plus CD123-, Annexin A-
involves the white pulp and often has a nodular pattern.
Bone marrow fibrosis and interstitial infiltration are common
and/or TRAP-;
●
Lack of monocytopenia;
features of HCL, whereas in SMZL bone marrow fibrosis is
●
 High peripheral blood lymphocyte count (often ≥30,000/μL):
 infrequent and intrasinusoidal infiltration is the characteristic
 Subtle bone marrow infltrate with infrequent bone marrow
feature. Unlike SMZL cells, HCL cells are TRAP+ and express
fibrosis.
CD25, CD103, CD123, and Annexin A1. The diagnosis of
 HCL-V is more challenging because of the atypical morphol-
HCL-V in the current WHO classification is categorized
ogy or lack of CD25, CD 103, or TRAP positivity.
under "splenic B-cell lymphoma/leukemia, unclassifiable".
374
HAIRY CELL LEUKEMIA
Additional Resources
Cannon T, Mobarek D, Wegge J, et al: Hairy cell leukemia: current
hybridisation: a series of 13 cases and review of the literature, Eur J
concepts, Cancer Invest 26:860-865, 2008.
Haematol 84:17-25, 2010.
Cawley JC, Hawkins SF: The biology of hairy-cell leukaemia, Curr
Ravandi F: Hairy cell leukemia, Cin Lymphoma Myeloma 9(Suppl 3):
Opin Hematol 17:341-349, 2010.
S254-259, 2009.
 Dunphy CH: Reaction patterns of TRAP and DBA.44 in hairy cell leuke-
Riccioni R, Galimberti S, Petrini M: Hairy cell leukemia, Curr Treat
mia, hairy cell variant, and nodal and extranodal marginal zone B-cell 
Options Oncol 8:129-134, 2007.
lymphomas, Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol16:135-139, 2008.
Robak T: Hairy-cell leukemia variant recent view on diagnosis, biol-
Fanta PT, Saven A: Hairy cell leukemia, Cancer Treat Res 142:193-209,
Ogy and treatment, Cancer Treat Rev 37:3-10, 2011.
2008.
Grever MR, Lozanski G: Modern strategies for hairy cell leukemia,
Sharpe RW, Bethel KJ: Hairy cell leukemia: diagnostic pathology.
Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 20: 1023-1049, 2006.
J Clin Oncol 29:583-590, 2011.
Jaffe ES. Harris NL, Vardiman IW, et al: Hematopathology.
Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, et al: WHO Classification of
Philadelphia, 2010, Saunders/Elsevier.
Tumours of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues, ed 4, Lyon,
2008, International Agency for Research on Cancer.
Johrens K, Stein H, Anagnostopoulos I: T-bet transcription factor
detection facilitates the diagnosis of minimal hairy cell leukemia infl-
Swords R, Giles F: Hairy cell leukemia, Med Oncol 24:7-15, 2007.
trates in bone marrow trephines, Am JI Surg Pathol 31:1l81-1l85, 2007.
Went PT, Zimpfer A, Pehrs A-C, et al: High specificity of combined
Nordgren A, Corcoran M, Saaf A, et al: Characterisation of hairy
TRAP and DBA.44 expression for hairy cell leukemia, Am J Surg
 cell leukaemia by tiling resolution array-based comparative genome
Pathol 29:474-478, 2005.
Splenic Marginal Zone
Lymphoma
Splenic marginal zone lymphoma (SMZL), or splenic
Morphology
lymphoma with villous lymphocytes, is a B-cell neoplasm
of small- to medium-sized lymphocytes presumably aris-
ing from the marginal zone of the splenic white pulp.
 The spleen is enlarged, with a median weight of 1750g. The
Characteristic features include splenomegaly, bone marrow
cut surface usually shows multiple gray-tan nodules of various
infiltration with sinusoidal pattern, moderate peripheral
sizes. Diffuse involvement is rare.
blood lymphocytosis with the presence of villous lympho-
 In the early stages of involvement, the splenic sections show
enlarged white pulps with the expansion of marginal zones
cytes, and a relatively indolent course.
merging into one another. In the center of the nodules, usually
There are two other types of marginal zone-related lym-
there is a remnant of a germinal center surrounded by mantle
phomas: nodal marginal zone lymphoma and extranodal
cells and expanded marginal zones (Figures 31.1and 31.2).
marginal zone lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid
 s e  s m rs are sn 
tissue (MALT) type. These two entities are discussed sepa-
ular nuclei. The cells surrounding mantle cells in the marginal
rately in Chapters 32 and 33, respectively.
zone are larger with more dispersed nuclear chromatin and
SMZL accounts for about 1-2% of all non-Hodgkin
abundant pale cytoplasm. Some of these cells resemble mono-
lymphomas. The median age is 65 years with a male to
cytes (monocytoid B-cells). Admixed with these cells are scat-
female ratio ranges from 1:1 to 1:2. Moderate to mas-
tered centroblasts and immunoblasts. There is infiltration of
sive splenomegaly is a common feature. Hepatomegaly is
neoplastic cells into the red pulp (Figures 31.3 and 31.4).
observed in some patients, but peripheral lymphadenop-
● In later stages, eventually, the white pulp expansion and red
pulp infiltration create sheets of neoplastic cells, making the
athy is rare. Patients usually develop mild to moderate
separation of white and red pulps unclear.
degrees of anemia, thrombocytopenia, and neutropenia 
● The hilar splenic lymph nodes are commonly involved. The
which could be attributed to bone marrow infiltration
peripheral lymph nodes are affected less frequently. There is
and splenic sequestration. Most patients show absolute
partial effacement of nodal architecture with infltrating neo-
lymphocytosis. Serum immunoglobulin studies reveal a
plastic nodules. Some of the nodules may contain a central
small IgM or IgG spike, usually <3g/dL in about half of
reactive follicle. Sinuses are usually spared. Some cases may
cases.
show complete effacement of the nodal architecture.
Autoimmune conditions such as autoimmune hemo-
 Bone marrow is commonly involved. The pattern of involve-
lytic anemia, immune thrombocytopenia, lupus antico-
ment is intrasinusoidal, interstitial, nodular, paratrabecular, or
agulants, rheumatoid arthritis, and biliary cirrhosis have
a combination of these (Figures 31.5 and 31.6). The intrasinu-
soidal pattern is highly characteristic of SMZL.
been observed in association with SMZL
SMZL is considered a low-risk lymphoma with an
● The bone marrow smears show the presence of atypical small-
to medium-sized lymphocytes with abundant cytoplasm,
indolent clinical course. The overall survival is >70%
round or irregular nuclei, and condensed chromatin (see
at 10 years, with a complete remission rate of 80%. The
treatment strategies include no therapy, splenic irradia-
villous cytoplasmic projections, which are often polar.
tion, splenectomy, chemotherapy, and treatment with
● There is usually a moderate peripheral blood lymphocytosis
anti-CD20.
with various proportions of atypical lymphoid cells. These
ells are morphologically similar to those described in the
bone marrow smears and may or may not show polar villous
Atlas of Hematopathology. DOl: htp://dx.doi.org/10.1016/978-0-12-385183-3.00031-0
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
376
SPLENIC MARGINAL ZONE LYMPHOMA
FIGURE 31.1 Splenic marginal zone B-cell lymphoma
FIGURE 31.2 (A) Splenic marginal zone B-cell lymphoma showing
demonstrating expansion of marginal zone of the white pulps in 
expansion of the marginal zone into the splenic red pulp. (B) The
the spleen (A, low power; B, high power).
high power view shows monocytoid lymphocytes with variable
amounts of cytoplasm.
projections (see Figure 31.6C). Those without villous projec-
fions may appear plasmacytoid. Scaffered larger cells with
● Common lack of CD5 and CD10, though partial expression of
prominent nucleoli may be present.
either or both markers can be seen.
● The liver is involved in the majority of cases. The portal tracts
are the predominant sites of infltration. Skin, pleura, and soft
By immunohistochemical studies, the neoplastic cells
fissue involvements have been rarely reported.
express surface IgM and sometimes IgD and show posi-
●Transformation to large cell lymphoma occasionally occurs.
tivity for B-cell-associated markers, such as CD19, CD20,
CD79a, FMC7, and PAX5. They are negative for BCL-1 and
BCL-6, but express BCL-2. CD43 and TRAP are usually
negative, while the results for DBA.44 staining are variable.
Immunophenotype
Immunophenotypic features by MFC (Figure 31. 7) include:
Cytogenetic and Molecular Studies
●
 Expression of B-cell associated antigens at various intensities;
●
Usually moderate to bright expression of CD20, and associ-
ated expression of FMC7:
● Allelic loss of chromosome 7q (deletions or unbalanced trans-
●
 Common surface light chain restriction;
location of 7q22-32) and dysregulation of the CDK6 gene
 Absent coexpression of CD25 and CD103:
have been reported in up to 30% of SMZL. The critical region
●Lack of or partial expression of CD23;
appears to be 7q32.1→q32.3 (Figure 31.8).
CYTOGENETIC AND MOLECULAR STUDIES
377
FIGURE 31.3 Splenic marginal zone B-cell lymphoma
FIGURE 31.4 Splenic marginal zone B-cell lymphoma
demonstrating expansion of the white pulps and infiltration into 
demonstrating expansion of the white pulps and infltration into 
the splenic red pulp (A, low power; B, intermediate power; C, high 
the splenic red pulp (A, low power; B, intermediate power; C, high 
power).
power).
378
SPLENICMARGINALZONELYMPHOMA
FlGURE 31.5 Bone marrow involvement in SMZL is often sinusoidal (A, low power; B, high power). Immunohistochemical stains show
clusters of CD20+ cells within the sinusoids (C).
From Naeim F. Pathology of Bone Marrow, 2nd edn. Wiliams & Wiikins, Ba ltimore, 1997, by permission.
FIGURE 31.6 Bone marrow involvement in SMZL: (A) biopsy section, (B) bone marrow smear, and (C) blood smear. Some lymphocytes
show polar cytoplasmic projections (arrows).
OTHER SPLENIC B-CELL LYMPHOMAS
379
FIGURE 31.7 FLOW CYTOMETRIC FINDINGS OF SPLENIC MARGINAL ZONE
B-cELL LYMPHoMA. Density plot of the open scatter gate (in
magenta) detects an abnormal population of B-cells verified
by CD19 backgating. The B-cell enriched gate (in blue)
demonstrates that the neoplastic B-cells are positive for 
CD11c (bright), CD19, CD20 (moderate; not shown), CD22
(bright), FMC7 (not shown), and surface lambda light chain
restriction. In addition, there is partial expression of CD10
and CD23. The neoplastic B-cells are negative for CD5, as
FSC-H
Lambda
Lambda
well as CD25 and CD103.
CD10
CD5
CD103
88
Y
FIGURE 31.8 Karyotype showing deletion 7q in splenic marginal
FIGURE 31.9 Karyotype with a deletion of 7q, t(9;14) and t(14;19).
zone B-cell lymphoma.
 Deletion of 7q is mostly associated with SMZL and sometimes
seen as a marker of tumor progression or transformation to a
 more aggressive lymphoma. t(9;14) is associated with a low-grade
 mature B-cell phenotype with plasmacytic differentiation.
● Abnormalities of 14q32 (IGH@). have also been reported in
SMZL in the forms of t(6;14) and t(9:14) (Figure 31.9).
 o 55 -0     9 
(more frequently identified by interphase FISH), while tri-
somy 12/12q is seen in 20-30% of cases (Figure 31.10).
these cases have been categorized as "splenic B-cell lym-
●
 Abnormalities of the TP53 gene are reported in about 17% of
phoma/leukemia, unclassifiable". The two well-defined
patients and is associated with aggressive disease.
examples of this category are hairy cell leukemia variant
●
 Most SMZL cases have been associated with multiple somatic
(HCL-V) and splenic diffuse red pulp small B-cell lym-
IgVH region hypermutations, but a subset without mutations 
 phoma. HCL-V is discussed in Chapter 30; here, we briefly
has been identified that may have a different clinical course.
 discuss splenic diffuse red pulp small B-cell lymphoma.
SPLENIC DIFFUSE RED PULP SMALL B-CELL
Other Splenic B-Cell Lymphomas
LYMPHOMA
Rare cases of splenic diffuse red pulp small B-cell lym-
Rare cases of splenic mature B-cell lymphoma/leuke-
phoma have been reported characterized by diffuse
mia have been reported that do not fall into the classical
monomorphous infiltration of the red pulp by cells
splenic marginal zone lymphoma, hairy cell leukemia,
resembling marginal zone B-cells. There is absence of
CLL/SLL, PLL, or LPL. In the current WHO classification,
white pulp involvement, and some cases may show
380
 SPLENIC MARGINAL ZONE LYMPHOMA
《《》II
98
A
B
interphase nuclei.
reactive hyperplastic follicles within the white pulp. BoneS
 splenic white pulp and often displays a nodular pattern,
marrow is often involved with sinusoidal pattern. The
whereas HCL diffusely involves the red pulp with atrophy
tumor cells express DBA-44. The peripheral blood smears 
of the white pulp. Bone marrow fibrosis and interstitial
may show circulating tumor cells with cytoplasmic pro-
infiltration are common features in HCL, whereas in SMZL
jection (villous cells).
marrow fibrosis is infrequent and intrasinusoidal infiltra-
tion is the characteristic feature. Unlike SMZL cells, HCL
cells are TRAP-positive and express CD25 and CD103.
Differential Diagnosis
 Overall, SMZL cells are larger and have more abundant
cytoplasm than the neoplastic cells in LPL. The IgM serum
levels are usually <3g/dL in SMZL, and >3g/dL in LPL.
The differential diagnosis of SMZL includes HCL, LPL,
 SMZL cells express IgM and IgD, whereas LPL cells are
 MCL, FL, and CLL/SLL. A summary of morphologic, imm-
only IgM-positive. The primary cytogenetic abnormali-
nophenotypic, and cytogenetic characteristics of SMZL,
ties in SMZL are deletions of 7q and trisomy 3, whereas
HCL, and LPL is presented in Table 31.1. SMZL involves the
 del(6q) is the most frequent cytogenetic aberration in LPL.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
381
 Table 31.1
 Morphologic, immunophenotypic, and cytogenetic characteristics of LPL, SMZL, and HCL
Features
LPL
SMZL
HCL
 Spleen
 Primary involved area
White pulp
White pulp
Red pulp
 Pattern
 Nodular
Nodular
Diffuse
 Bone marrow
 Nodular, diffuse, or interstitial 
 Mostly intrasinusoidal
Mostly interstitial
Cytology
 Small lymphocytes, plasmacytoid 
 Medium-sized lymphocytes, polar 
Medium-sized lymphocytes, hairy 
lymphocytes, and plasma cells
villous projections 
projections
Immunophenotype
IgM+, CD19+, CD20+, CD22+,
IgM+, IgD+, CD19+, CD20+, CD22+,
IgM+,CD19+, CD20+, CD22+,
CD79+,FMC7+, CD23±,CD5-,
CD79a+,CD5-,CD10-,CD23-,
CD79a+,FMC7+,CD11c+, CD25+,
CD10-,CD25-,CD103-, TRAP-
CD25-, CD103-,TRAP-
CD103+, TRAP+, CD123+, Annexin
A1+, CD5-,CD10-,CD23-
Cytogenetics
del(6q)(40-60%)
del(7)(q31-32) (40%)
？
t(9:14)(p13;q32) (750%)
Trisomy 3/3q (30-50%)
HCL, hairy celleukemia; LPL, lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma; SMZL, splenic marginal zone lymphoma.
The neoplastic cells in mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) are
express CD10 and bcl-6. The cytogenetic hallmark of FL is
usually smaller, and unlike SMZL cells they express CD5
t(14;18)
and bcl-1. MCL has a much higher frequency of periph-
CLL/SLL primarily consists of small mature lympho-
 eral lymphadenopathy than SMZL. The cytogenetic hall-
Cytes with scanty cytoplasm. These cells, unlike SMZL cells,
mark of MCL is t(11;14). The neoplastic cells in follicular
 coexpress CD5 and CD23, are usually negative for FMC7,
lymphoma (FL) consist of a mixture of smaller centrocytes
show dim expression of CD20, CD22, and CD79a, and
and larger centroblasts. These cells, unlike SMZL cells,
have different cytogenetic profiles (see Table 31. 1).
382
 SPLENIC MARGINAL ZONELYMPHOMA
Additional Resources
Dogan A, Isaacson PG: Splenic marginal zone lymphoma, Semin
 Bcell lymphomas simulating splenic marginal zone lymphoma,
Diagn Pathol 20:121-127, 2003.
Histopathology 33:230-239, 1998.
Kanellis G, Mollejo M, Montes-Moreno S, et al: Splenic diffuse red pulp
Sagaert X, Tousseyn T: Marginal zone B-cell lymphomas, Discov Med
small B-cell lymphoma: revision of a series of cases reveals characteris-
10:79-86, 2010.
tic clinico-pathological features, Haematologica 95:1122-1l29, 2010.
Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, et al: WHO Classification of
Kansal R, Ross CW, Singleton TP, et al: Histopathologic features of
Tumours of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues, ed 4, Lyon,
splenic small B-cell lymphomas: a study of 42 cases with a definitive 
2008, International Agency for Research on Cancer.
diagnosis by the World Health Organization classification, Am J Clin 
Thieblemont C, Davi F, Noguera ME, et al: Non-MALT marginal zone
Pathol 120:335-347, 2003.
lymphoma, Curr Opin Hematol 18:273-279, 2011.
Molina TJ. Lin P, Swerdlow SH, et al: Marginal zone lymphomas with
 Traverse-Glehen A, Baseggio L, Bauchu EC, et al: Splenic red pulp
plasmacytic differentiation and related disorders, Am J Clin Pathol
lymphoma with numerous basophilic villous lymphocytes: a distinct
136:211-225, 2011.
clinicopathologic and molecular entity? Blood 11l:2253-2260, 2008.
 Mollejo M, Algara P, Mateo MS, et al: Splenic small B-cell lymphoma
 Traverse-Glehen A, Baseggio L, Salles G, et al: Splenic marginal zone
with predominant red pulp involvement a diffuse variant of splenic
 B-cell lymphoma: a distinct clinicopathological and molecular entity.
marginal zone lymphoma? Histopathology 40:22-30, 2002.
Recent advances in ontogeny and classification, Curr Opin Oncol
Piris MA, Mollejo M, Campo E, et al: A marginal zone pattern may
23:441-448, 2011.
be found in different varieties of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: the
Zucca E, Bertoni F, Stathis A, et al: Marginal zone lymphomas,
morphology and immunohistology of splenic involvement by
Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 22:883-901, 2008.
32
Nodal Marginal Zone
Lymphoma
Nodal marginal zone lymphoma (NMZL) is a primary
Bone marrow involvement is reported in <50% of cases. It
lymph node disease with morphologic and immunophe-
usually consists of non-trabecular lymphoid aggregates or an
notypic features similar to those of splenic marginal zone
interstitial infiltrate. Peripheral blood involvement is rare and
lymphoma (SMZL) and extranodal marginal zone lym-
s   g     s
phoma (EMZL) of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue
to medium lymphocytes.
(MALT). Therefore, diagnosis of NMZL requires absence of
a primary extranodal or splenic involvement.
NMZL is a rare disease and accounts for <2% of all lym-
Immunophenotype
phoid malignancies. The median patient age is about 55,
with a male to female ratio of 1:3-6. A pediatric variant
exists. The prognosis is favorable, with a 5-year survival
Immunophenotypic features by MFC (Figure 32.5) include:
rate approaching 80%.
 Expression of B-cell associated antigens at various intensities;
Common surface light chain restriction;
●
 Partial or dim expression of CD25 can be present;
Morphology
 Absent coexpression of CD25 and CD103;
Common lack of CD5, CD10, and CD23, though partial
expression of one or more of these antigens, can be seen.
See Figures 32.1 to 32.4.
By immunohistochemical studies, BCL2 is positive, and
IgD is expressed in occasional cases. Cyclin D1 and BCL6
● The involved lymph nodes show an interfollicular expansion
by the neoplastic cells. The follicles may be absent or pres-
are negative.
ent. The residual follicles are reactive, regressed, or colonized
by neoplastic cells. The presence of a follicular dendritic cell
meshwork is suggestive of follicular colonization.
● Tumor cells are pleomorphic and usually consist of a mixture
Molecular and Cytogenetic Studies
of marginal zone cells (monocytoid B-cells and cells similar
to centrocytes), plasma cells and plasmacytoid cells, and scat-
tered centroblast-like cells. Monocytoid cells or plasmacytoid
● As this is a B-cell neoplasm, clonal rearrangements of the
cells may be the predominant cell type.
immunoglobulin genes are common.
● There seems to be an association between the presence of
 No specific cytogenetic abnormalities have been identified.
reactive follicles and the amount of monocytoid B-cells.
A few studies have reported trisomies of chromosome 3. 7. or
●Eosinophilia may be present, which often correlates with plas-
      s  
macytoid differentiation.
studies on interphase nuclei and rarely by karyotype studies.
Atlas of Hematopathology. DOl: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00032-2
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
384
NODAL MARGINAL ZONE LYMPHOMA
FIGURE 32.1 NoDAL MARGINAL ZONE LYMPHoMA. Lymph nOde biOpsy
FIGURE 32.2 Lymph node biopsy section showing effacement 
section demonstrating partial effacement of nodal architecture
of nodal architecture with the expansion of interfollicular areas
with the expansion of interfollicular areas consisting of lighter 
 consisting of lighter and darker areas (A, low power). There is a
 and darker areas (A, low power). There is a heterogeneous
heterogeneous lymphoid infltrate consisting predominantly of
lymphoid infiltrate consisting of monocytoid B-cells, centrocyte-
 monocytoid B-cells (B, intermediate power; C, high power).
like cells, and centroblast-like cells (B, intermediate power;
C, high power).
 DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
385
FIGURE 32.3 Lymph node biopsy section demonstrating partial effacement of nodal architecture with the expansion of interfollicular
areas consisting of lighter and darker areas (A, low power). Remnants of follicular structure are present, some of which show colonization
Pediatric Nodal Marginal Zone
Differential Diagnosis
Lymphoma
The differential diagnosis includes reactive conditions
Pediatric NMZL, unlike the adult type, shows a high male
cytic lymphoma (LPL), follicular lymphoma with marginal
to female ratio (up to 20:1 under age 16). Asymptomatic
zone differentiation, and CLL/SLL with interfollicular pat-
localized lymphadenopathy, mostly in the head and neck
tern (Table 32.1). As mentioned earlier, secondary lymph
region, is a common clinical presentation. It has an indo.
node involvements in splenic and extranodal marginal
lent course with a low recurrence rate after therapy.
zone lymphomas may mimic NMZL
The affected lymph nodes show marked interfollicu-
lar expansion by the marginal zone cells. Similar to adult
 Monocytoid B-cell hyperplasia is noted in lymphadenopathies
NMZL, the neoplastic cells are pleomorphic and consist
associated with toxoplasmosis, cytomegalovirus, and HIV
infections. The reactive monocytoid B-cells are found in sub-
of a mixture of monocytoid cells, centrocyte-like cells,
capsular and medullary sinuses, and, unlike cells in NMCL,
and plasma cells with scattered centroblast-like cells. Most
they lack BCL-2 expression.
cases show follicular expansion, some with progressive 
The distinction between NMZL and LPL is sometimes chal-
transformation of germinal centers.
         
386
 NODAL MARGINAL ZONE LYMPHOMA
D
B-cells, and scattered plasma cells (A,low power; B, intermediate power; C, high power). Bone marrow smear demonstrating a cluster
of atypical medium to large lymphoid cells mixed with scattered small lymphocytes (D).
sinuses are often preserved and the lymphoid infiltrate is
more monotonous; whereas, in NMZL, sinuses are often
 effaced and the neoplastic infiltrate is more heterogeneous.
H-OSS
●In follicular lymphoma with marginal zone differentia-
 - jo  rema ue aq paps ar si ar 'uo
 ginal zone cells. These cells, unlike follicle center cells, which
 express CD10 and BCL-6, are often negative or weakly positive
FSC-H
CD10
for CD10 and BCL-6 (see Chapter 34).
Lambda
● CLL/SLL with interfollicular pattern is distinguished from
NMZL by more monotonous morphology. the presence of
 proliferating centers (pseudofollicles). and coexpression of
CD19
CD5 and CD23 (see Chapter 27).
FMC7
CD5
CD4
FIGURE 32.5 FLOW CYTOMETRIC FINDINGS OF NODAL MARGINAL ZONE
LYMPHoMA. Open gate density plot (in blue) reveals a prominent 
population of B-cells (circled), confirmed by CD19 backgating.
The neoplastic B-cells are positive for CD19 (dim), CD20 (dim),
CD22 (dim), CD25 (dim), FMC7 (partial), and surface lambda light 
chain restriction. They are negative for CD5, CD10, and CD23.
DIFFERENTIALDIAGNOSIS
387
Table 32.1
Differential Diagnosis of Nodal Marginal Zone Lymphoma (NMZL)1
Features
NMZL
LPL
Secondary MZL
FL
CLL/SLL
Morphology
Plasmacytoid differentiation
++
+
±
Lymph node sinuses effaced
+
+
+
X
 Paraprotein spike
+
 Dutcher bodies 
+
 Monocytoid cells 
+
++
 Immunophenotype
CD43
+
+
CD5
+
IgD
士
+
CD23
一
+
BCL6/CD10
+
Cytogenetics
+3, +7, +18
del(6q)
t(11;18)
t(14;18)
del(13q), del(11q).
del(17p), +12
CLL/SLL, chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma; FL, follicular lymphoma; LPL, lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma.
1Adapted from Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Vardiman JW, et al. Hematopathology. Saunders/Elsevier, Philadelphia, 2010.
388
NODAL MARGINAL ZONELYMPHOMA
Additional Resources
Campo E, Miquel R, Krenacs L, et al: Primary nodal marginal zone 
Remstein ED, James CD, Kurtin Pl: Incidence and subtype specific-
lymphomas of splenic and MALT type, Am J Surg Pathol 23:59-68,
ity of API2-MALT1 fusion translocations in extranodal, nodal, and
1999.
 splenic marginal zone lymphomas, Am J Pathol 156:1183-1188.
 Dierlamm J, Wlodarska I, Michaux L, et al: Genetic abnormalities in 
2000.
marginal zone B-cell lymphoma, Hematol Oncol 18: 1-13, 2000.
 Rizzo KA, Streubel B, Pittaluga S, et al: Marginal zone lymphomas in
Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Vardiman IW. et al: Hematopathology.
children and the young adult population; characterization of genetic
Philadelphia, 2010, Saunders/Elsevier.
aberrations by FISH and RT-PCR, Mod Pathol 23:866-873, 2010.
McLellan M, Hasserjian R, Emerick K: Marginal zone B-cell lym-
Salama ME, Lossos IS, Warnke RA, et al: Immunoarchitectural pat-
phoma of the head and neck: a rare case and review, Laryngoscope
terns in nodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma: a study of 5l cases,
120(Suppl 4):S165, 2010.
Am J Clin Pathol 132:39-49, 2009.
Nathwani BN, Anderson JR, Armitage JO, et al: Marginal zone B-cell 
Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, et al: WHO Classifcation of
lymphoma: A clinical comparison of nodal and mucosa-associated
Tumours of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues, ed 4, Lyon.
lymphoid tissue types. Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma Classification
2008, International Agency for Research on Cancer.
Project, I Clin Oncol 17:2486-2492, 1999.
Extranodal Marginal Zone
Lymphoma of Mucosa-
Associated Lymphoid Tissue
(MALT Lymphoma)
Extranodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma of mucosa-
Morphology
associated lymphoid tissue (MALT lymphoma) is a neo-
plastic B-cell infiltrate that involves marginal zones of
reactive follicles and extends into the interfollicular areas.
 In general, the involved tissues show a lymphomatous infil-
The neoplastic B-cells typically infiltrate epithelial tissues
frate on a background of chronic inflammation. The infiltrate
(e.g, mucosal epithelium and skin), forming lympho-
starts around the reactive follicles and spreads into the sur-
epithelial lesions. The infiltrating cells are polymorphic,
munding areas.
● The MALT lymphoma cells are polymorphous, consisting
consisting of a mixture of small lymphocytes, marginal
of various proportions of small lymphocytes, marginal zone
zone (centrocyte-like) cells, monocytoid B-cells, and often
(centrocyte-like) cells, monocytoid B-cells, and plasma cells
plasma cells. Scattered immunoblasts and centroblast-like
(Figures 33.1 to 33.5). Scattered and variable number of blast
cells are also present.
ells (immunoblasts or centroblast-like) are present. [f the
A strong association has been found between MALT
blasts form large sheets, then a diagnosis of large cell lym-
lymphoma and certain autoimmune disorders and infec-
 phoma should be made.
tions, such as Sjogren syndrome, Hashimoto thyroiditis,
● Occasional follicles may show “colonization" by marginal
hepatitis C virus infection, Helicobacter pylori gastritis, and
zone or monocytoid B-cells.
Borrelia afzelii infection of skin
● The epithelial tissue is characteristically infiltrated by the neo-
plastic cells, forming lymphoepithelial lesions (see Figure 33.1).
MALT lymphoma accounts for about 5% of all non-
Hodgkin lymphomas. The most frequent site of involve-
A lymphoepithelial lesion is defined as an infiltrative aggre-
gate of ≥3 neoplastic cells in the epithelium, with distortion
ment is stomach (50%), followed by lung (14%), salivary
or destruction of the epithelial structure.
glands (14%), ocular adnexa (12%), skin (11%), thyroid
● Gastric MALT lymphoma is strongly associated with H. pylori
(4%), and breast (4%). There is a slight female predomi-
gastritis. The lymphomatous involvement may be focal or
nance. Symptoms are related to the site of involvement,
extremely florid (see Figures 33.1 and 33.2).
such as abdominal pain (peptic ulcer disease) in the case 
● In cases with salivary gland involvement a history of chronic
of gastric lymphoma, or Sjogren syndrome in the case of
sialadenitis (such as Sjogren's syndrome) is often present. The
salivary gland involvement. Systemic "B" symptoms are
presence of lymphoepithelial lesions is a characteristic feature
infrequent. Involvement of multiple mucosal sites at the
(see Figures 33.3 and 33.4).
time of initial diagnostic workup has been reported in up
 Lymph node or bone marrow involvement is reported in up
to 25% of cases in some studies. Peripheral blood is usually
to one-third of patients.
not involved in initial stages.
MALT lymphomas have a high rate of complete remis-
sion, with 80% survival rate at 10 years. The therapeutic
approaches include a variety of combinations of antibiot-
ics, surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy, though univer-
sally accepted optimal therapeutic regimens based on the
results of controlled studies have not yet been established.
Atlas of Hematopathology. DOl: htp://dx.doi.org/10.1016/978-0-12-385183-300033-4
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
390
FIGURE 33.1 MALT LYMPHoMA. Lymphoepithelial lesions in the
case of gastric MALT lymphoma (A,low power;
B, intermediate power; C, high power).
FIGURE 33.2 IMMUNOHISTOCHEMICAL STAINS IN MALT LYMPHOMA.
Cytokeratin stain highlights glandular structures infltrated by
lymphocytes (A). The infiltrating lymphocytes are predominantly
CD20+ (red stain) (B, intermediate power; C, high power).
MORPHOLOGY
391
FIGURE 33.3 MALT LYMPHoMA, sALivARY GLAND. A massive lymphoid infltrate and fibrosis is demonstrated in (A), with a higher power 
view (B) showing entrapped salivary glands. Plasma cells account for a significant proportion of the neoplastic cells, some of which
demonstrate Russell bodies (C and D, arrows). An aggregate of monocytoid B-cells is demonstrated (E). Touch preparation shows a
relatively pleomorphic lymphoid population with variable amount of cytoplasm (F).
392
FIGURE 33.4 IMMUNoHIsTocHEMICAL FEATUREs oF MALT LYMPHoMA, SALIVARY GLAND. Glandular structures are pOsitive for cytokeratin (A). The
CD138 (D), and the neoplastic cells are IgM+ (E) and express kappa light chain (F).
Immunophenotype
· Occasional partial expression of CD23.
By immunohistochemical studies, neoplastic B-cells
express CD20, BCL-2, and IgM (less frequently IgA and IgG)
Flow cytometric features of MALT include (Figure 33.6):
and often lack expression of CD5, CD10, and CD23 (see
● Expression of B-cell associated markers af various intensities;
Figures 33.4 and 33.5). In some cases, monotypic plasma
Surface light chain restriction;
cells can be seen with light chain restriction. Staining for
 Monotypic B-cells are commonly admixed with reactive B-cells;
BCL1 should be negative.
● Often lack of CD5 and CD10 expression;
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
393
FIGURE 33.5 ORBITAL MALT LYMPHoMA. Large aggregates of monocytoid B-cells are demonstrated (A), admixed with scattered plasma 
expression of CD20 (D) and BCL-2 (E). The plasma cell component is CD138+ (F).
 FIGUre 33.6 Flow cytometric findings of malt lymphoma.
Lymphocyte-enriched gate contains mainly monotypic B-cells
mostly
(CD19 dim), which are admixed with some reactive B-cells (CD19
moderate). The neoplastic B-cells are positive for CD19 (dim).
-OSS
CD20 (not shown), CD22, FMC7, and surface lambda light chain 
 restriction. They are negative for CD5, CD10, and CD23.In the
background, there are variable expressions of CD10 and CD23,
which are attributed to the reactive B-cells.
Lambda
CD23
FMC7
CD10
394
EXTRANODAL MARGINAL ZONE LYMPHOMA OF MUCOSA-ASSOCIATED LYMPHOID TISSUE (MALT LYMPHOMA)
FIGURE 33.7 (A) 46,XX,t(11;18)(q21;q21)
(BIRC3-MALT1) positive karyotype in MALT
Lymphoma. (B) FISH with a dual-color
(BIRC3-green; MALT1-red) probe showing
two fusion signals consistent with t(11;18).
21
13
45
16
17
豆
20
A
BIRC3-MALT1Fusion
B
FIGURE 33.8 48,XY,t(1;14)(p22;q32),
+3,- 18,+iso(18)(q10)x2 in MALT lymphoma.
3
个
个
10
11
12
16
17
18
●A less frequent non-random translocation is t(1:14)(p22:q32)
Cytogenetic and Molecular Studies
(BCL10-IGH@), seen in association with gastric and lung
MALT lymphomas (Figure 33.8).
● The most common cytogenetic abnormality is a t(11;18)
+
 These two translocations have not been observed in SMZL or
(q21;q21) (BIRC3-MALT1) observed in about 25-35% of cases
 nodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma.
(Figure 33.7).
 Histological transformation of MALT lymphoma to large cell
 Trisomy 3 is the most common numerical cytogenetic abnor-
lymphoma has been associated with t(6;14)(p21;q32), indicating 
●
 mality in MALT lymphoma, reported in up to 60% of cases.
the alteration of cyclin D3 expression (CCND3) in this process.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS395
● Important negative findings are lack of involvement of the B-cell lymphomas. MALT lymphoma is distinguished from
BCL-1 and BCL-2 genes, and absence of t(11;14)(q13;q32)
Helicobacter pylori gastritis, lymphoepithelial sialadenitis,
and t(14;18)(q32;q21).
and Hashimoto thyroiditis by the presence of destructive
●
Occasional cases may show BCL-6 rearrangements involving
lymphoid infiltration of the epithelium and evidence of
chromosome 3q27.
● At the molecular level, most cases will show clonal immuno-
 studies or genetic analyses. Features distinguishing MALT
globulin rearrangements by standard assays, while BCL-2 gene
 rearrangement will be negative.
lymphomas from other small B-cell lymphomas are simi-
lar to those previously discussed for SMZL and NMZL
(see Chapters 31 and 32).
Differential Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis of MALT lymphoma includes a
variety of reactive lymphoproliferative disorders and small
396
Additional Resourses
Heeren JH, Croonen AM, Pijnenborg IM: Primary extranodal mar- S
[  A e a '1   u 's nua
 ginal zone B-cell lymphoma of the female genital tract: a case report 
 zone B-cell lymphoma MALT-type in a patient with rheumatoid
and literature review, Int J Gynecol Pathol 27:243-246, 2008.
arthritis, Med Oncol 27:826-832, 2010.
Kurtin Pl: Indolent lymphomas of mature B lymphocytes, Hematol
Stathis A, Bertoni F, Zucca E: Treatment of gastric marginal zone lym-
Oncol Clin North Am 23:769-790, 2009.
phoma of MALT type, Expert Opin Pharmacother 1l:2141-2152, 2010.
O'Rourke JL: Gene expression profiling in Helicobacter-induced
 Stefanovic A, Lossos IS: Extranodal marginal zone lymphoma of the
MALT lymphoma with reference to antigen drive and protective
ocular adnexa, Blood 114:501-510, 2009.
immunization, I Gastroenterol Hepatol 23(Suppl 2):S151-S156, 2008.
Voulgarelis M, Moutsopoulos HM: Mucosa-associated lymphoid tis-
Piris MA, Arribas A, Mollejo M: Marginal zone lymphoma, Semin
sue lymphoma in Sjogren's syndrome: risks, management, and prog-
Diagn Pathol 28:135-145, 2011.
nosis, Rheum Dis Clin North Am 34:921-933, 2008.
Ruskoné-Fourmestraux A, Fischbach W, Aleman BM, et al: EGILS
Zucca E, Dreyling M: ESMO Guidelines Working Group Gastric
consensus report: Gastric extranodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma 
marginal zone lymphoma of MALT type: ESMO clinical recom-
of MALT, Gut 60:747-758, 2011.
mendations for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. Ann Oncol
Sagaert X, Tousseyn T: Marginal zone B-cell lymphomas, Discov Med
20(Suppl 4): 113-114, 2009.
10:79-86, 2010.
Zullo A, Hassan C, Andriani A, et al: Primary low-grade and high-grade
gastric MALT-lymphoma presentation, J Clin Gastroenterol 44:340-344,
Sagaert X, Van Cutsem E, De Hertogh G, et al: Gastric MALT lym-
 phoma: a model of chronic inflammation-induced tumor develop-
2010.
ment, Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 7:336-346, 2010.
34
Follicular Lymphoma
Morphology
ollicular lymphoma (FL) is the second most common
lymphoma in North America and western Europe and is a
neoplasm of follicle center B-cells consisting of a mixture
The involved lymph nodes show effacement of the nodal
of centrocytes and centroblasts. The pattern of lymph node
architecture with a neoplastic lymphoid infiltrate displaying a
involvement is at least partially follicular. Other terminol-
predominantly follicular pattern (Figures 34.1 and 34.2). The
ogies used for this lesion are follicle center lymphoma and
follicular center cell lymphoma.
FL accounts for 20% and 35% of the non-Hodgkin lym-
phomas in western Europe and the United States, respec-
tively. It is the most common type of indolent lymphoma
in Western countries. The median age at diagnosis is about
60 years with slight female predominance.
Painless peripheral lymphadenopathies in the cervical,
axillary, and inguinal regions are the major clinical presen-
tations. Mediastinal and hilar lymph nodes, bone marrow,
spleen, and liver are also frequently involved. Involvement
of the central nervous system is rare. Systemic "B" symp-
toms are present in about 20% of cases, and rare patients
 may present primary extranodal disease involving skin or
other tissues. The clinical course is variable and primarily
depends on the stage and grade of the disease (see below)
The median survival is 7-10 years for patients with grade 1
or 2 and stage III to IV diseases.
The adverse prognostic factors for FL according to the
international prognostic index (IPI) include:
●Age >60 years.
Stage III or IV.
Hemoglobin level <12 g/dL,
●
 Number of involved nodal areas >4, and
● Elevated senum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)
Therapeutic modalities range from involved field radio-
therapy for stages I and II to combination chemotherapy
for advanced stages. Rituximab has also been added to the
therapeutic regimens, particularly in relapsed or refractory
lymphomas. Autologous and allogeneic stem cell trans-
plantations have been attempted for patients with recur-
rent FL, though limitations such as high recurrence rate
FIGURE 34.1 FoLlicULar LymPHoMA, LymPh NoDe. (A) Low power
view demonstrating back-to-back follicles of various sizes and
and risk of secondary MDS still exist. An anti-idiotype vac-
remnants of mantle zones. (B) High power view showing a mixed
cination in FL is under evaluation.
population of centrocytes and centroblasts.
Atlas of Hematopathology. D01: http:/dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00034-6
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
398
FOLLICULAR LYMPHOMA
located nucleolus, and ill-defined pale cytoplasm. These cells
xpress CD21 and CD23.
● Areas of diffuse involvement may be present. The neoplastic
cells are usually present in the interfollicular areas and are
easily identified by immunohistochemical stains, expressing
CD10 and BCL-6. Discrete clusters of marginal zone monocyt-
oid B-cells may be present in about 10% of cases.
● Primary extranodal involvements. such as gastrointestinal
tract, lung. or other tissues, show similar morphologic features
(Figures 34.3 to 34.5) (see below).
● Bone marrow involvement is observed in 40-45% of cases
and is typically paratrabecular (Figures 34.6 and 34.7). The
lymphomatous aggregates usually do not show follicular
mnfiguration and consist of a mixture of centrocytes and
entroblasts. There may be discordance between morpho-
logic findings of the involved bone marrow and the lymph
node in the same patient. In such cases, the grade of bone
marrow involvement is often less than that of the involved
lymph node.
● Peripheral blood involvement is a frequent finding with the
presence of atypical lymphoid cells with nuclear clefts or
notches (see Figure 34.7B).
 The pattern of involvement is divided into four catego-
ries: (a) follicular, (b) follicular and diffuse, (c) minimally
follicular, and (d) diffuse (Table 34.1).
The following grading system has been recommended
for FLs based on the proportion of centroblasts per high
power microscopic field (hpf) (Table 34.2) (Figures 34.8
and 34.9): grade 1, 0-5 centroblasts/hpf; grade 2, 6-15
centroblasts/hpf; grade 3>15 centroblasts/hpf. Grade 3
consists of two subcategories: 3A when centrocytes are
present, and 3B when solid sheets of centroblasts are
present.
According to the WHO recommendations, variations
FIGURE 34.2 FoLLICULAR LYMPHOMA, LYMPH NODE. (A) Intermediate
in the pattern or grading observed in different areas of
power view demonstrating back-to-back follicles with loss of
 the involved tissue should be mentioned in the pathology
mantle zones. (B) High power view showing a mixed population
of centrocytes and centroblasts.
report.
neoplastic follicles are densely packed against one another.
often ill-defined, and show loss of polarity plus obliteration
Immunophenotype
or depletion of mantle zones.
● The involved follicles show no polarity or tingible body mac-
rophages and consist of various proportions of centrocytes
Flow cytometric findings include (Figure 34.10):
and centroblasts interspersed with T-cells and follicular den-
dritic cells.
Expression of B-cell associated antigens at variable intensities
● Centrocytes are small- to medium-sized, show scant pale cyto.
including often bright CD20:
plasm, irregular (angulated, twisted, convoluted) nucleus, and
Surface light chain restriction;
inconspicuous nucleoli. Centrocytes are the predominant cells
Coexpression of CD10 in most cases; but lack of CD10 in
in the majority of the cases.
some cases of grade 3 FL;
 Centroblasts are large transformed cells with a small amount
Variable expression of CD23:
of basophilic cytoplasm, round, oval, or slightly irregular
Common expression of CD38:
nuclei, vesicular chromatin, and one to three nucleoli located
●Lack of CD5 expression.
dlose to the nuclear membrane. In some cases, centroblasts
By immunohistochemical studies (Figures 34.11 to 34.13):
may show significant atypical features, such as hyperchromatic
 or markedly irregular nuclei.
 BCL2 characteristically stains neoplastic B-cells, though it can
 Follicular dendritic cells (FDC) are also large and have a
be negative in about half of grade 3 FL cases.
round nucleus and a vesicular chromatin, but, unlike centro-
Positivity of CD10 or positivity of BCL6 in conjunction with
blasts, they can be present in pairs or show double nuclei.
MUIM1
 negativity   defines  germinal  center  B-cell  like
FDC contain bland and dispersed chromatin, a small centrally
phenotype.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
399
FIGURE 34.3 FoLLicULAR LYMPHoMA, sALIvARY GLAND. Nodular infiltration of the salivary gland by a lymphomatous process (A, low power;
the adjacent skeletal muscle (D), and the lymphoid infiltrate is positive for CD20 (E) and BCL-6 (F).
400
FOLLICULARLYMPHOMA
FIGURE 34.4 FoLLicULAR LYMPHoMA, SToMAcH. Nodular infiltration of the gastric mucosa by a lymphomatous process (A, low power). The
andBCL-6(F).
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
401
FIGURE 34.5 FoLLIcULAR LYMPHoMA, SMALL INTEsTINE. Nodular infiltration of the intestinal mucOsa by a lymphomatous prOcess
(A, low power; B, intermediate power). The neoplastic cells consist primarily of centrocytes (C, high power) and infiltrate glandular
structure, mimicking MALT lymphoma (D, high power). The neoplastic cells are positive for CD20 (E) and BCL-2 (F).
402
FOLLICULAR LYMPHOMA
Presence of scattered CD10+ and/or BCL-6+ cells in interfollic-
'te aee pue et'te aa aas) panou uanar si sare rem
BCL6 positivity is important in cases where CD10 may be
negative.
Ki67 proliferation index is usually low in grade 1 and grade 2
FL, but higher in grade 3 FL. However, occasional cases of
 index. These cases are thought to behave more aggressively
than their low Ki67 counterparts.
● Combined use of CD21 and CD23 can highlight the follicular
dendritic meshwork.
● CD43 may be positive in some cases of high grade FL.
Cytogenetic and Molecular Studies
● The most common chromosomal translocation observed in
over 80% of FL is the t(14;18)(q32;q21) (Figure 34.14). There
have also been complex translocations described involving a
third chromosome breakpoint in addition to 14q32 and 18q21.
This translocation places the BCL-2 gene on chromosome
18 next to the IGH@ heavy chain locus on chromosome 14,
resulting in the over-expression of bcl-2 which confers a sur-
vival advantage to the B-cells. In some patients, a subsequent
genetic event involving a gene for cell proliferation (e.g. RAS)
may transform indolent disease into a more aggressive lym-
phoma. The BCL-2 protein is not normally expressed in ger-
minal center cells.
● Variant translocations have also been described such as
  ) (1  ()1
IGK@ or IGL@ genes.
● In addition to conventional cytogenetics and FISH, t(14;18)
can also be detected by molecular methods using Southern
blot, qualitative PCR testing. or quantitative (real-time) PCR
(Figure 34.15). Recent studies have shown prognostic correla-
fion with the level of BCL-2 fusion genes using quantitative
PCR methods.
 Most cases demonstrate a pattern of translocation involving
the major breakpoint region (MBR) of the BCL-2 gene with a
smaller proportion involving the minor cluster region (MCR).
Primers specific for MBR and MCR are required for detection
of each.
●About 25% of cases involve other breakpoints that will
not be detected by either primer set and require additional
custom primers. That is one reason why the cytogenetic
        (  s
molecular test.
t(14:18) is not specific for FL and has been found in 15-20%
of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and MALT lympho-
FIGURE 34.6 Bone marrow section of a patient with follicular
mas. Most FL patients, in addition to t(14;18), show clonal
lymphoma showing paratrabecular lymphoid infiltrates
evolution events leading to additional chromosomal aberra-
consisting of a mixture of centrocytes and centroblasts (A, low
ftions, such as trisomies of 7. 8, 12, 18, or abnormalities of 3q,
power; B, intermediate power; C, high power).
6q, 13q. and 17q (Table 34.4). 3q27 aberations involving the
BCL-6 gene is observed in about 15% of the cases.
VARIANTSOFFOLLICULARLYMPHOMA
403
B
lymphocytes with irregular or cleaved nuclei.
 Table 34.1
 Patterns of Involvement in Follicular Lymphoma
Variants of Follicular Lymphoma
Pattern
 Follicular Proportion
 Follicular
>75%
PEDIATRIC FOLLICULAR LYMPHOMA
 Follicular and diffuse
25-75%
Focally follicular
<25%
Pediatric FL is characterized by a high male to female
Diffuse
0%
ratio, involving cervical lymph nodes (Waldeyer's ring) or
testis, and by grade 3A morphology. The tumor cells are
positive for B-cell-associated markers and express CD10,
BCL-6, and CD43. BCL-2 is often negative, and usually
there is no evidence of t(14;18). In general, the prognosis
Table 34.2
is favorable.
 Grading of Follicular Lymphoma
Grading
Definition
Grade 1
0-5 centroblasts/hpf!
PRIMARY INTESTINAL FOLLICULAR
Grade 2
6-15 centroblasts/hpf
LYMPHOMA
Grade 3
>15 centroblasts/hpf
Duodenum is the most common site of extranodal FL (see
3A
Centrocytes present 
3B
Figure 34.5). It often presents as multiple small polyps,
Solid sheets of centroblasts 
and may cause biliary obstruction. Morphologic, imm-
140× objective (18 mm of view ocular); count 10 field and divide by 10.
 nophenotypic, and genetic features are similar to those of
 Adapted from Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, et al. WHO
nodal FL. IgA expression is present in a significant propor-
Classification of Tumours of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues,
4th edn. International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, 2008.
tion of cases. The disease in most instances is localized and
 the prognosis is excellent.
● A more aggressive variant of FL (grade 3B) is less frequently
INTRAFOLLICULAR NEOPLASIA (IN SITU
associated with t(14;18). but often carries the t(3:14)
(q27:q32) involving the BCL-6 oncogene.
FOLLICULAR LYMPHOMA)
 17p13 abnormalities involving the TP53 gene are often associ-
Interfollicular neoplasia refers to a rare condition in which
ated with transformation.
one or more follicles in an otherwise structurally well-
● It should be kept in mind that follicular lymphomas have a
preserved and normal-appearing lymph node show strong
high false-negative rate (approaching 50%) on immunoglob-
ulin gene rearrangement studies performed by PCR, due to a
positivity for BCL-2 protein. This strong BCL-2 expression
high incidence of somatic hypermutation which interferes
is sometimes associated with a monomorphous cell popu-
with hybridization of the PCR primers.
lation in the follicle(s). The significance of this finding is
● Gene expression profiling is beginning to be applied to FL and 
 not clear, but further clinical evaluation to rule out FL else-
may be useful in diagnosis in future.
where in the patient is recommended.
404
FOLLICULAR LYMPHOMA
FIGURE 34.8 FL GRADE 1. Lymph node section demonstrating
FIGURE 34.9 FL GRADE 3. Lymph node section demonstrating
follicular lymphoma grade 1, predominantly consisting of 
follicular lymphoma grade 3, predominantly consisting of
centrocytes (A, low power; B, intermediate power; C, high power).
 centroblasts (A, low power; B, intermediate power; C, high
power).
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
405
Differential Diagnosis
SSC
The major differential diagnosis includes reactive follicul-
lar hyperplasia, follicular colonization in marginal zone
lymphomas, mantle cell lymphoma, nodular lymphocyte
 predominant Hodgkin lymphoma, and nodular sclerosis
FSC-H
CD10
CD38
dlassical Hodgkin lymphoma.
 In reactive follicular hyperplasia (RFH), reactive follicles 
are usually separated by interfollicular areas, are surrounded
by a mantle zone, show polarity, contain tingible body mac
rophages, and lack bcl-2 expression. In FL, the neoplastic
follicles are often back to back or merging, show minimal or
od jo ss m o siade z  o
CD23
FMC7
Lambda
34.3). There is evidence of interfollicular infiltration by the
FIGURE 34.10 FLOW CYToMETRIC FINDINGs 0F FOLLICULAR LYMPHOMA.
 presence of CD10 and bcl-6 positive cells in these areas.
Lymphocyte-enriched gate demonstrates monotypic B-cells.
Follicular colonization in marginal zone lymphomas
Compared with occasional normal B-cells in the background,
 may mimic FL. However, the clinical setting and immuno-
the neoplastic B-cells are positive for CD10, CD19 (dim), CD20
(bright), CD22 (dim), CD38, FMC7, and with surface lambda light
phenotypic features (CD10-, BCL-6-) are different from
chain restriction. They are negative for CD5 and CD23.
those of FL (CD10+,BCL-6+).
FIGURE 34.11 FoLLicULAR LYMPHoMA MIMIcKING FoLLIcULAR HYPERPLASIA. (A) Follicular structures are Separated from One another with a rim
of mantle cells resembling reactive follicles. (B) Higher power view demonstrates lack of tingible body macrophages and some degree
of fbrosis. (C) Dual immunohistochemical staining for CD3 (brown) and CD20 (red) shows predominance of CD20+ cells within the
follicles. These cells are positive for CD10 (D) and BCL-2 (E). CD21 stain shows a meshwork of interfollicular dendritic cells (F).
406
FOLLICULARLYMPHOMA
D
 FIGURE 34.12 BoNE MARRow LYMPHoMATous INvoLvEMENT IN FL. (A) Lymphoid aggregate with expansion into the surrounding fatty tissue.
The CD20+ cells also express CD10 (C) and bcl-2 (D).
CD10 (C) and BCL-6 (D). There are also scattered CD10+ and BCL-6+ cells outside the follicles in the interfollicular areas.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
407
 Table 34.3
Features
FL
RFH
 Follicles
Back to back or merging, often with loss of mantle zone
 Separated, with preservation of mantle zone
Lack of polarity
 Presence of polarity
Lack of tingible body macrophages
 Presence of tingible body macrophages
 Monotypic
 Polytypic
Commonly BCL-2 positive
Mostly BCL-2 negative
 Low or variable Ki-67 fraction
High Ki-67 fraction
 Interfollicular Areas
Presence of cD10 positive cells
Absence of CD10 positive cells
Presence of BCL-6 positive cells
Absence of BCL-6 positive cells
Rare cases of mantle cell lymphoma with nodular or
 However, the aytpical centrocytes/centroblasts express
follicular patterns may simulate FL (see the Chapter 35).
CD45, CD10, CD20, and BCL-6, and are negative for
Neoplastic cells in mantle cell lymphoma are small and
CD15 and CD30.
monomorphous with lack or rare centroblasts. Unlike
Distinction between FL and nodular lymphocyte-
FL cells, they express CD5 and BCL-1 and lack CD10
predominant Hodgkin lymphoma may occasionally be
expression.
challenging. In general, the large cells in nodular lym-
Cases of FL with interfollicular sclerosis may be asso-
 s  i  sd ae  
for BCL-2 and often express EMA, and follicles are larger
centroblasts mimicking Hodgkin cells. Such cases resem-
 and variable in shape; whereas, in FL, neoplastic cells are
ble nodular sclerosis classical Hodgkin's lymphoma.
BCL-2+, and follicles are smaller and more uniform.
408
FOLLICULAR LYMPHOMA
21
11
3
10
40
FIGURE 34.15 BCL-2 FUSION GENE QUANTITATION BY REAL-TIME PCR.
Patient 1 is positive for BCL-2, demonstrating amplification of
the target with mid-log point at about cycle 30 (light blue curve).
Patient 2 is negative for BCL-2, demonstrating no amplification
of this target (red curve). The dark gray curves represent
amplifcation of the control reference gene in the specimens, tPA,
confirming that there are no inhibitors of PCRin the specimen.
G
Table 34.4
 Cytogenetic Abnormalities in Follicular Lymphoma1
 Abnormalities
Frequency
Structural
t(14;18)(q23;q21}
78%
IGH
3q27 rearrangements
16%
17p-2
15%
del(6)(q23-26) 2
13%
del(6xq11-q15)
13%
De(1xq12-q21)
13%
Del(1)(p21-p22)
10%
Del(10x(q22-q24)
10%
Numerical
+X
21%
+7
20%
+18
20%
+12 and dup 12q
10%
1Adapted from Tilly H, Rossi A, Stamatoullas A, et al. Prognostic value of
 chromosomal abnormalities in follicular lymphoma. Blood 194; 84:
1043-1049.
2Associated with a worse prognosis.
FIGURE 34.14 (A) Karyotype and (B) FISH analysis of lymphoma
cells from a patient with follicular lymphoma demonstrating
47,XY, +12,t(14;18)(q32;q21) and /GH-BCL-2fusion.
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
409
Additional Resources
Agrawal R, Wang J: Pediatric follicular lymphoma: a rare clinicopath-
Relander T, Johnson NA, Farinha P, et al: Prognostic factors in follicu-
ologic entity, Arch Pathol Lab Med 133:142-146, 2009.
lar lymphoma, J Clin Oncol 28:2902-2913, 2010.
Carbone A, Gloghini A, Santoro A: In situ follicular lymphoma:
 Solal-Celigny P. Cahu X, Cartron G: Follicular lymphoma prognos-
pathologic characteristics and diagnostic features, Hematol Oncol
tic factors in the modern era: what is clinically meaningful? Int J
30:1-7, 2012.
Hematol 92:246-254, 2010.
Carbone A, Santoro A: How I treat diagnosing and managing "in
Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, et al: WHO dassification of
situ" lymphoma, Blood 117:3954-3960, 2011.
tumours of haematopoietic and lymphoid tissues, ed 4, Lyon, 2008,
Hayashi D, Lee JC, Devenney-Cakir B, et al: Follicular non-Hodgkin's 
International Agency for Research on Cancer.
lymphoma, Clin Radiol 65:408-420, 2010.
Tan D, Horning SJ: Follicular lymphoma: clinical features and treat-
Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Vardiman IW, et al: Hematopathology.
ment, Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 22:863-882, 2008.
Philadelphia, 2010, Saunders/Elsevier.
Wrench D, Montoto S, Fitzgibbon J: Molecular signatures in the diag
Kenkre VP, Kahl BS: Follicular lymphoma: emerging therapeutic strat-
nosis and management of follicular lymphoma, Curr Opin Hematol
egies, Expert Rev Hematol 3:485-495, 2010.
17:333-340, 2010.
Luminari S, Cox MC, Montanini A, et al: Prognostic tools in follicu-
Yamamoto S, Nakase H, Yamashita K, et al: Gastrointestinal follicular
lar lymphomas, Expert Rev Hematol 2:549-562, 2009.
lymphoma: review of the literature, J Gastroenterol 45:370-388, 2010.
This page intentionally left blank
Mantle Cell Lymphoma
lantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is an aggressive B-cell
meshwork of follicular dendritic cells is usually present.
neoplasm consisting of a monotonous small to medium-
Hyalinized small vascular structures are frequently present.
sized mature lymphocytes with scant cytoplasm and
 The cytologic features in typical MCL cases consist of monot-
slightly irregular nuclei. MCL lacks centroblasts and immu-
onous small to medium-sized lymphocytes with scant cyto-
noblasts. The characteristic cytogenetic features of MCL
plasm, slightly irregular nucleus, condensed chromatin,
is t(11;14)(q13;q32) with the fusion of BCL1 (CCND1)-
and inconspicuous nucleoli (see Figure 35.1C and 35.2C).
Centroblasts and immunoblasts are typically absent, though
IGH@ genes.
entroblasts may be present in remnants of germinal centers.
MCL accounts for 5-10% of non-Hodgkin lympho-
● In some cases, a proportion of the neoplastic cells may show
 mas in the United States and Europe. The median age is
more abundant cytoplasm and appear like monocytoid
around 60 years with a male to female ratio of about 3:1.
B-cells. The neoplastic cells in occasional cases may mimic
Lymphadenopathy (stage IHI or IV), splenomegaly, hepato-
CLL/SLL with small lymphocytes, round nucleus, and con-
 megaly, and bone marrow involvement are the major clini-
densed chromatin.
cal features and about 30% of the patients show systemic
A prolymphocyte-like variant with marked leukocytosis mim-
"B" symptoms. In general, MCL is considered an aggressive
icking PLL has also been described. These patients usually
lymphoma with a median survival of 3-5 years. But, rare
have splenomegaly and demonstrate clinicopathological fea-
fures very similar to those of PLL, except for the demonstra-
indolent types have been reported. Patients with periph-
tfion of t(11;14).
eral blood involvement, high mitotic figures, blastoid vari-
The blastoid variant is an aggressive form, and the neoplastic
ants, and complex cytogenetic abnormalities show a more
ells resemble lymphoblasts, with dispersed chromatin, prom-
aggressive clinical course. Therapeutic modalities such as
inent nucleoli, and high mitotic figures (Figures 35.4 and
combination chemotherapy and rituximab may improve
35.5) (Table 35.1).
the response rate, but without cure in most cases.
● The pleomorphic variant consists of large cells with variable
amount of cytoplasm and cleaved or oval nucleus (Figure
35.6).
Bone marrow infiltration is reported in 50-80% of the cases.
The pattern of involvement is often a combination of nodular.
Morphology
interstitial, and paratrabecular. Isolated paratrabecular infiltra-
tions are rare (Figures 35.7 and 35.8).
The neoplastic cells may also be present in the peripheral
● The affected lymph node shows effacement of the nodal
blood in various numbers creating a condition mimicking
architecture with an infiltrative process with pathologic
CLL.
features that may include diffuse, vaguely nodular, man-
The spleen is affected in 30-50% of the cases, with the pri-
e zone, or rarely follicular patterns, or a combination of
mary involvement of the white pulp. The white pulp nodules
these (Figures 35.1 to 35.3). Most commonly. the involved
are expanded and often are merged, sometimes surrounding
lymph node shows transitional areas between diffuse and
the residual germinal centers. The extent of splenic red pulp
nodular patterns, but occasionally a follicular pattern is pre-
involvement is variable (Figure 35.9).
dominant. In the mantle zone pattern, the neoplastic cells
+
The most common clinical presentation of gastrointestinal
expand the mantle zone area surrounding a germinal center.
involvement in MCL is lymphomatous polyposis with the pres-
This pattern is more common in spleen. A prominent
 ence of multiple intestinal lymphoid polyps.
Atlas of Hematopathology. DOl: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00035-8
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
412
MANTLE CELL LYMPHOMA
● [n "in situ" mantle cell lymphoma, the lymphoma involve-
ment is limited to the inner mantle zone, and lymphoma cells
express cyclin D1 (BCL-1), CD5, and are weakly BCL2+ (see
below).
Immunophenotype
Flow cytometric findings include (Figures 35.10 and 35.11):
● Expression of B-cell associated antigens at variable intensities;
● Surface light chain restriction;
Coexpression of dim CD5:
● Absent to variable expression of CD23:
● Absent to occasional expression of CD10;
● In contrast to CLL, FMC7 and CD38 are commonly positive:
● [n aggressive variants, CD5 can be negative and there may be
expression of CD10 and/or BCL6 by immunohistochemical
stains (see Figure 35.11).
By immunohistochemical studies, neoplastic B-cells
express CD5, IgM, and IgD. Cyclin D1 (BCL1) can be
detected in nearly all cases, and BCL2 is always positive
(see Figures 35.2 to 35.9). Ki67 proliferation index is low
in cases other than blastoid/pleomorphic variants.
Cytogenetic and Molecular Studies
The characteristic cytogenetic alteration in MCL is the
t(11;14)(q13;q32) (Figure 35.12), seen in 0ver 95% of cases
when combined with conventional cytogenetics and FISH.
This translocation is extremely rare in other lymphomas.
Blastoid variants, in addition to t(11;14)(q13;q32), may
show complex chromosomal aberrations (Figure 35.13).
This translocation it has been detected in occa-
sional atypical cases of CLL associated with an aggres-
sive clinical course, as well as some cases of PLL, but it is
likely that these cases represent atypical forms of MCL.
Approximately 5% of patients with plasma cell myelomas
also show t(11;14) (see Chapter 41).
The main feature of MCL is overexpression of cyclin
Dl, which is due to the translocation of 1lq13 (BCL1
or CCND1) to the 14q32-heavy chain locus (IGH@).
The over-expression induces increased cycling of the cells,
but studies have shown that this is probably not the sole
FIGURE 35.1 MANTLE CELL LYMPHoMA. Lymph node Section
oncogenic feature.
demonstrates expansion of mantle zones with remnants of
The breakpoints on 1lq13 (CCND1) occur along a wide
follicular structures (A, low power; B, intermediate power). The
region, with only 35% of these within a restricted region
neoplastic lymphoid cells are monomorphic and show scattered
mitotic figures (C, high power).
(major translocation cluster, MTC), limiting the usefulness
CYTOGENETIC AND MOLECULARSTUDIES
413
FIGURE 35.2 MANTLE cELL LYMPHoMA. Lymph node section demonstrates expansion of mantle zones with remnants of follicular 
and irregular nuclear borders (C, high power). These cells are positive for CD20 (D), CD5 (E), and BCL-1(F) by immunohistochemistry.
The germinal center is CD20+, shows scattered CD5+ cells, and is negative for BCL-1.
414
MANTLECELLLYMPHOMA
FIGURE 35.3 MANTLE cELL LYMPHoMA. A lymph node section demonstrates sheets of small lymphocytes in a hyalinized fibrotic stroma 
(C, CD20+ red, CD3+ brown) and express CD5 (D) and BCL-1 (E). A meshwork offollicular dendritic cells express CD21 (F).
CYTOGENETIC ANDMOLECULARSTUDIES
415
FIGURE 35.4 MANTLE cELL LYMPHoMA, CLAsSICAL BLAsToID vARIANT. Sheets of neoplastic cells demonstrating variable amount of vacuolated 
cytoplasm, irregular nuclei with finely dispersed chromatin, and prominent nucleoli (A, low power; B, intermediate power; C, high 
power). Tumor cells express CD20 (D, CD20+ red, CD3+ brown), CD5 (E) and BCL-1 (F).
416
MANTLECELLLYMPHOMA
FIGURE 35.5 MANTLE cELL LYMPHoMA, CLAssIcAL BLAsToID VARIANT. Sheets of neoplastic cells are displayed in bone marrow biopsy Section 
(A). Bone marrow (B) and blood (C) smears show numerous blast cells with dark blue vacuolated cytoplasm, round or irregular nuclei,
finely dispersed chromatin, and prominent nucleoli. These cells express CD20 (D, CD20+ red, CD3+ brown), CD5 (E) and BCL-1 (F).
INDOLENT VARIANT OF MCL
417
 Table 35.1
Some studies have shown mutations of the TP53 or
its over-expression to occur in the aggressive variants of
Cytologic Variants of Mantle Cell Lymphoma'
MCL, where the effect of over-expressed cyclin D1 may be
Variant
Characteristics
enhanced by loss of cyclin-CDK inhibition due to the TP53
Typical
 Small to medium size lymphocytes with
mutation.
scant cytoplasm, slightly irregular
Structural  and  numerical  centrosome abnormalities
nucleus and condensed chromatin
have been described to take place at a much higher fre-
Aggressive variants
quency in MCL than in other lymphoma subtypes, result-
 Blastoid
Cells resembling lymphoblasts with high
 ing in near-tetraploid karyotype, especially among blastoid
mitotic figure (>10/10 hpf)
variants.
 Pleomorphic
 Pleomorphic large cells with variable
Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) and FISH
 amount of cytoplasm, cleaved or oval
studies have identified a characteristic profile of chromo-
nucleus. Nucleoli may be prominent
somal changes in MCL that differ from other lymphomas.
 Other variants
 The most frequent chromosomal imbalances are gains of
CLL-like
Small lymphocytes with scant cytoplasm,
chromosomes 3q (49-70%), 8q (22-30%), and 12q (20-
round nucleus, and condensed 
30%), and the most frequent losses of chromosomes 1p
chromatin
Marginal-zone-like
 Prominent foci of medium size cells with
(%1-22) 11 (%1-91) d6 (%-22) b9 (%-)
abundant pale cytoplasm, resembling
and 13q (41-69%).
 monocytoid B-cells or prolymphocytes.
DNA amplifications and the high degree of polyploidy
The pale areas may resemble
(tertaploidy) have been reported to be higher in the blastoid
 proliferation centers seen in CLL/SLL
variants (35-80%) than in the common variant of MCL.
Adapted from Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, et al. WHO Classification of 
Several cell-cycle related genes are known to be dereg-
Tumours of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues. IARC Press, Lyon, 2010.
ulated when typical MCLs are compared with blastoid
MCLs. For example, the CDK4 gene is upregulated in the
blastoid MCL. CDK4 cooperates with cyclin D1 in the pro-
of a PCR-based assay. Thus t(ll;14) can primarily be
 gression through the Gl/S checkpoint.
detected by cytogenetics studies. FISH is now considered
Other cytogenetic abnormalities that differ when com-
the technique of choice for identifying the t(11;14) during
paring typical and blastoid MCL are deletions of TP53 and
the diagnostic workup.
 p16 (9p21) in the latter. Tumor cell proliferation has been
PRAD1, located approximately 120kb downstream
 shown to be associated with decreased survival time and is
of the MTC breakpoint, was first identified in studies on
predictive of blastoid transformation.
parathyroid adenomas with inversion in chromosome 11,
and was considered the putative oncogene deregulated by
t(11;14). The PRAD1 sequence was recognized as having a
high degree of homology with cyclins, and the new mem-
Indolent Variant of MCL
ber in that gene family was renamed CCND1 encoding for
the cyclin D1 protein.
In t(1l;14), the coding region of CCND1 is structurally
Some cases of MCL show an indolent clinical course and
intact, but the chromosomal rearrangement positioning
may not need treatment at diagnosis. The characteristic
the CCND1 gene adjacent to the enhancer region of the
features of indolent MCL include a non-nodal leukemic
immunoglobulin heavy chain gene results in upregulation
disease, hypermutated IGVH genes, evidence of t(1l;14),
of CCND1 and in increased expression of the cyclin D1
and negative SOX11 protein expression. CD5 expression is
protein.
variable. Figures 35.14 to 35.16 depict a 63-year-old man
In normal lymphoid cells, the RNA and protein lev-
with peripheral blood lymphocytosis for several years. The
els of cyclin Dl are extremely low or absent. Although
 ad o    o  n
the oncogenic mechanism of cyclin D1 is not completely
splenomegaly. Flow cytometric studies on the peripheral
understood, the constant expression of cyclin D1 has an
 blood showed a monoclonal B-cell population negative
important role in the pathogenesis of MCL because cyclin
for CD5, CD10, and CD23. The bone marrow biopsy sec-
Dl promotes the progression of cells through the main
 tions showed an extensive lymphoid infltrate expressing
commitment checkpoint in G1- to S-phase of the cell cycle.
CD20, BCL-1, and BCL-2. FISH studies revealed t(1l;14)
Although MYC mRNA over-expression has been found
(q13;q32).
in a subset of MCLs, no structural gene alterations of MYC
seem to be involved in the pathogenesis of MCL.
418
MANTLECELLLYMPHOMA
FIGURE 35.6 MANTLE cELL LYMPHoMA, PLEoMoRPHIc vARIANT. Bone marrow biopsy section demonstrating lymphomatous involvement by an
aggregate of pleomorphic atypical lymphoid cells (A, low power; B, intermediate power; C, high power). The neoplastic cells express 
CD20 (D), CD5 (E) and BCL-1 (F).
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
419
Differential Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis includes reactive lymphadenopa-
thies, CLL/SLL, FL, PLL, marginal zone lymphomas, diffuse 
large B-cell lymphoma, and acute leukemias.
Reactive lymph nodes such as some cases of follicular
hyperplasia and Castleman's disease may mimic MCL with
 nodular or mantle zone patterns. In these conditions, the
 nodal architecture is relatively preserved, and lymphocytes
usually do not show irregular nuclei and do not express
BCL-1. There is also lack of monoclonality or t(1l;14).
There are overlapping cytologic features between CLL/
SLL and MCL. Also, the vaguely nodular patterns in MCL
and the pseudo-follicles in CLL/SLL may resemble one
another. Unlike CLL, the neoplastic cells of MCL are mono-
morphic and lack prolymphocytes and paraimmunoblasts,
usually lack the expression of CD23, express FMC7, CD79a,
and BCL-1 nuclear protein, and demonstrate t(1l;14).
The vague nodular pattern in MCL may mimic follicu-
lar pattern in FL. Unlike FL, the neoplastic cells of MCL
lack centroblasts and immunoblasts, do not express CD10,
are negative for t(14;18), express CD5, and demonstrate
t(11;14).
MCL with monocytoid B-cell morphology may simulate
 marginal zone lymphomas of the spleen, lymph node, or
extranodal sites. Marginal zone B-cells lack the expression
of CD5, CD10, and CD23, and are negative for t(1l;14)
The reported cases of PLL with t(1l;14) are now consid-
ered prolymphocytoid variant of MCL.
 Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, particularly the subtype
that expresses CD5, may be confused with the pleomor-
FIGURE 35.7 BoNe MArRoW InvolveMEnT With MaNTlE CEll LyMPHoMA.
phic MCL, but these cases are negative for t(1l;14).
(A) Bone marrow biopsy section demonstrating an atypical
Blastoid MCL may also mimic acute lymphoid or
paratrabecular lymphoid aggregate consisting of small to
myeloid leukemias. The neoplastic cells in blastoid MCL
medium-sized lymphocytes with irregular nuclei. (B) Bone
marrow smear showing mature lymphocytes with round to
are negative for CD34, TdT, and CD117 and express CD5
slightly irregular nuclei. Scattered prolymphocyte-like cells are 
and BCL-1 in addition to B-cell-associated markers. There
present.
is evidence of t(11;14) and/or CCND1 rearrangement.
420
MANTLECELLLYMPHOMA
FIGURE 35.8 Bone marrow biopsy section demonstrating involvement with mantle cell lymphoma (A, low power; B, intermediate
power). Immunohistochemical stains show tumor cells expressing CD20 (C, red) and BCL-1 (D). Bone marrow smear (E) shows 
 numerous atypical lymphoid cells, and blood smear (F) demonstrates a small lymphocyte with irregular nucleus.
 DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
421
with tingible body macrophages (starry sky pattern) (A, low power). The tumor cells are predominantly medium to large cells with
 open nuclear chromatin and prominent nucleoli (B, high power). These cells express CD20 (C) and CD5 (D).
SS
CD45
CD5
Kappa
FSC-H
CD10
CD5
CD22
CD38
FMC7
CD10
FIGURE 35.10 FLoW CYToMETRIC FINDINGS of MANTLe cELl LyMPHoMA.
FMC7
CD38
Kappa
Lymphocyte-enriched gate (circled on CD45 open gate) shows 
predominantly monotypic B-cells, which are positive for
FIGURE 35.11 FLOW CYTOMETRIC FINDINGS OF MANTLE CELL LYMPHOMA
CD5 (dim), CD19, CD20, CD22, CD25 (dim; not shown), FMC7
 COEXPREssING CD5 AND CD10. Lymphocyte-enriched gate reveals
(partial), CD38 (partial), and expressing surface kappa light chain
 mostly monotypic B-cells. The neoplastic B-cells are positive for CD5 
restriction. They are negative for CD10 and CD23.
(dim), CD10, CD19, CD20, CD22 (dim), CD38, FMC7 (partial), and 
expressing surface kappa light chain restriction. They are negative 
for CD23.
422
MANTLE CELL LYMPHOMA
FIGURE 35.12 (A) Karyotype of mantle cell lymphoma
showing the characteristic 46, XY,t(11;14)(q13;q32), and
an iso(17q). (B) FISH analysis exhibits dual-fusion signals
consistent with t(1 1;14)/IGH@-CCND fusion.
2
16
17
R
18
A
2
22
x
Abnormal
Normal
B
FIGURE 35.13 A karyotype of a blastoid variant of mantle
cell lymphoma showing t(1 1;:14) (green arrows) with
'1d41 pue be1 b6 jo suonalap pue bg os!'1 Awosouou
K&
3
1
&8
61
67
22
DIFFERENTIALDIAGNOSIS
423
C
FIGURE 35.14 INDoLENT MANTLE cELL LYMPHoMA. Bone marrow biopsy section (A, low power; B, intermediate power) and bone marrow
power) shows several atypical medium-sized lymphocytes with slightly irregular nuclei.
FIGURE 35.15 INDoLENT MANTLE cELL LYMPHoMA. Immunohistochemical stains of the bone marrow biopsy sections show the neoplastic
cells expressing CD20 (A), BCL-1 (B) and BCL-2 (C). Only scattered cells are positive for CD5 (D).
424
MANTLECELLLYMPHOMA
FIGURE 35.16 Mantle cell Lymphoma FFPE section showing cells (arrows) with a yellow (IGH@-CCND1) fusion signals positive for
t(1 1:14).
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
425
Additional Resources
Carbone A, Santoro A: How I treat diagnosing and managing “in
Ondrejka SL, Lai R, Kumar N, et al: Indolent mantle cell leukemia:
situ" lymphoma, Blood 117:3954-3960, 2011.
clinicopathologic variant characterized by isolated lymphocytosis,
Dreyling M, Hoster E, Bea S, et al: Update on the molecular patho-
 interstitial bone marrow involvement, kappa light chain restriction.
genesis and clinical treatment of Mantle Cell Lymphoma (MCL):
and good prognosis, Haematologica 96:1121-1l27, 2011.
minutes of the 9th European MCL Network conference, Leuk
Perez-Galan P. Dreyling M, Wiestner A: Mantle cell lymphoma:
Lymphoma 51:1612-1622, 2010.
biology pathogenesis, and the molecular basis of treatment in the
Espinet B, Solé F Pedro C, et al: Clonal proliferation of cyclin
genomic era, Blood 117:26-38, 2011.
Di-positive mantle lymphocytes in an asymptomatic patient: an
Pileri SA, Falini B: Mantle cell lymphoma, Haematologica 94:1488-1492,
early-stage event in the development or an indolent form of a mantle 
2009.
cell lymphoma? Hum Pathol 36:1232-1237, 2005.
Ruskoné-Fourmestraux A, Audouin J: Primary gastrointestinal tract
Fernandez V, Salamero O, Espinet B, et al: Genomic and gene expres-
mantle cell lymphoma as multiple lymphomatous polyposis, Best
sion profiling defines indolent forms of mantle cell lymphoma.
Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol 24:35-42, 2010.
Cancer Res 70: 1408-1418, 2010.
Williams ME, Connors JM, Dreyling MH, et al: Mantle cell lym-
Hartmann EM, Ott G, Rosenwald A: Molecular outcome prediction
phoma: report of the 20l0 Mantle Cell Lymphoma Consortium
in mantle cell lymphoma, Future Oncol 5:63-73, 2009.
Workshop.Leuk Lymphoma52:24-33,2011.
Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Vardiman JW, et al: Hematopathology.
Williams ME, Dreyling M, Winter J, et al: Management of mantle cell
Philadelphia, 2010, Saunders/Elsevier.
lymphoma: key challenges and next steps, Clin Lymphoma Myeloma
 Nodit L, Bahler DW, Jacobs SA, et al: Indolent mantle cell lymphoma
Leuk 10:336-346, 2010.
with nodal involvement and mutated immunoglobulin heavy chain
Xu W, Li JY: SOXll expression in mantle cell lymphoma, Leuk
genes, Hum Pathol 34:1030-1034, 2003.
Lymphoma 51:1962-1967, 2010.
This page intentionally left blank
Diffuse Large B-(
Cel
Lymphoma
iffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most
Box 36.1 WHO Classification of Diffuse
common non-Hodgkin lymphoma in North America
Large B-cell Lymphoma'
and western Europe,
： consisting of large neoplastic
B-lymphocytes diffusely  infiltrating the involved tissues.
Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, not otherwise specified
(DLBCL, NOS)
The neoplastic B-cells have a nudlear size more than twice
the size of small lymphocyte, or ≥ a macrophage nucleus.
 Common morphologic variants
 DLBCL is vastly heterogeneous with numerous subtypes and
Centroblastic
Immunoblastic
disease entities (Box 36.1). However, these subtypes and dis-
 Anaplastic
ease entities account for a minority of the DLBCL cases. The
 Rare morphologic variants
remaining majority of the cases are referred to as DLBCL,
Molecular subgroups
not otherwise specified (NOS). In this chapter DLBCL, NOS
Gemminal center B-cell-like (GBC}
is discussed. The subtypes and other disease entities are dis-
Activated B-cell-like (ABC}
 cussed in the following chapters.
 Immunohistochemical subgroups
DLBCL, NOS accounts for about 30% of all non-Hodg-
 CD5-positive DLBCL
kin lymphomas. The median age is about 64 years. The
Gemminal center B-cell-like (GCB)
male to female ratio is slightly >1. Most patients pres-
●Non-germinal center B-cell-like (non-GCB)
ent with a rapidly enlarging mass, usually in the neck or
 Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma subtypes (see Chapter 37)
 abdomen. Extranodal involvement is observed in up to
 T-cell/histiocyte-rich large B-cell lymphoma
40% of the patients, involving gastrointestinal tract, skin,
 Primary DLBCL of the CNS
CNS, bone, testis, liver, spleen, lung, and other organs.
+
 Primary cutaneous DLBCL, leg type (see Chapter 40)
Approximately 2o% of patients are at stage 1 and about
 EBV positive DLBCL of the elderly
40% show disseminated disease at the time of diagnosis.
Bone marrow involvement is seen in 10-20% of cases.
Other lymphomas of large B-cells (see Chapter 38)
Approximately 30% of patients show systemic "B" symp-
 Primary mediastinal (thymic) large B-cell lymphoma
+
 Intravascular large B-cellymphoma 
toms. A significant proportion of DLBCLs are the result of
transformation of less aggressive lymphomas, such as CLL/
● DLBCL associated with chronic inflammation
● Lymphomatoid granulomatosis
SLL, LPL, SMZL, MALT lymphoma, and FL.
●ALK-positive LBCL
 DLBCL, NOS is considered an aggressive lymphoma.
 The International Prognostic Index (IPI) is highly predic-
 Plasmablastic lymphoma
+
 Large B-cell lymphoma arising in HHv8-associated multicentric
tive of patients' clinical outcome. The clinical parameters
Castleman disease
used in the IPI include age >60, elevated serum LDH,
● Primary effusion lymphoma
ECOG performance status >2, stage II or IV, and number
of involved extranodal sites >1. The 5-year survival rate is
Borderline cases
 26% and 73% for the high and low risk IPI groups, respec-
 B-cell lymphoma, unclassifable, with features intermediate
tively. Other adverse prognostic factors include expression
between DLBCL and Burkitt lymphoma (see Chapter 39)
of CD5 and survivin protein. Survivin is the product of
 B-cell lymphoma, unclassifable, with features intermediate
the BIRC5 gene and is an inhibitor of apoptosis. A gain in
between DLBCL and classical Hodgkin lymphoma (see Chapter 38)
different regions of chromosome 3q has been associated
1From Swerdlow SH. Campo E. Harris NL. et al. WHO Classification of Tumours
with shorter survival. On the contrary, expression of bcl-6
of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues International Agency for Research
on Cancer Lyon, 2008.
Atlas of Hematopathology. DOl: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00036-x
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
428
 DIFFUSE LARGE B-CELL LYMPHOMA
FIGURE 36.1 DiFFusE LARGE B-cELL LYMPHoMA. Lymph node section (A, low power; B, intermediate power; C, high power). The neoplastic
cells express CD20 (D, red), CD79a (E), and a high percentage of Ki-67 (F).
nuclear protein has been reported to correlate with longer
large atypical neoplastic cells, often with areas of necrosis
overall suurvival.
(Figure 36.1). [nterfollicular or sinusoidal patterns are infre-
Therapeutic regimens include combination chemother-
quent. Occasionally, tumor cells may form cohesive aggregates
apy (e.g., CHOP) with or without involved feld radiation
mimicking metastatic carcinoma. The involved lymph nodes
for early stages, and CHOP or other alternative combina-
may show coexisting low grade lymphoma, such as CLL/
tion chemotherapy regimens with or without rituximab,
SLL, FL, MZL, or nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin
or autologous transplantation in advanced or recurrent
lymphoma.
The most common extranodal primary site is the gastrointesti-
disease.
nal tract, but skin, CNS, bone, spleen, liver, and other organs
may be involved. Extranodal involvement is interstitial with
formation of a mass and destruction of the normal structures.
often with mucosal ulceration.
Morphology and Laboratory
● Bone marrow involvement can be interstitial or sinusoidal,
diffuse, or nodular (Figures 36.2 and 36.3). The neoplas-
Findings
fic cells may mimic clusters of megaloblasts or metastatic
carcinoma.
Peripheral blood smears may show the presence of neoplastic
· The involved lymph nodes show  partial  or  total  efface-
large cells (see Figures 36.2F and 36.3B). The serum LDH
ment of the nodal architecture, with diffuse infiltration of
levels are elevated in about half of cases.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
429
FIGURE 36.2 SINUsOIDAL PATTERN OF BONE MARROw INVOLVEMENT BY DIFFUSE LARGE B-CELL LYMPHOMA. Bone MarrOWw biOpSy SectiOn deMOnStrating
clusters of large atypical lymphocytes in the sinusoidal spaces (A, low power; B, intermediate power; C, high power). These clusters are
CD20+ (D). Bone marrow smear (E) shows large atypical cells mimicking erythroblasts. Blood smear (F) shows a large blastic lymphoid cell.
Several morphologic variants have been described includ-
● Anaplastic. This variant consists of atypical, large cells with
ing centroblastic, immunoblastic, and anaplastic types.
bizarre pleomorphic nuclei, some of which may resemble
Reed-Sternberg cells (Figures 36.6 and 36.7). In some cases.
● Centroblastic. This variant is the most frequent type and con-
the neoplastic large lymphoid cells are spindle-shaped, mim-
sists of medium- to large-sized cells with scant amphophilic/
icking sarcoma (Figure 36.8). or appear in large clusters,
basophilic cytoplasm, round or oval nucleus, fine nuclear
resembling metastatic carcinoma. Sinusoidal pattern has been
chromatin, and several nucleoli bound to the nuclear mem-
observed.
brane (Figure 36.4). Multilobated (>3 lobes) centroblasts may
be present, and sometimes may create a polymorphic appear-
ance. Some cases may show a mixture of centroblasts and
immunoblasts.
●Immunoblastic. This variant comprises about 10% of DLBCL
Immunophenotype
and represents diffuse lymphomas with >90% immunoblasts.
Immunoblasts are large cells with abundant basophilic cyto-
plasm, round or oval nucleus, fine chromatin, and a promi-
 Flow cytometric findings include:
nent central nucleolus (Figure 36.5). Plasmacytoid features
may be present. This variant is commonly seen in immune-
 Expression of B-cell associated antigens at variable intensities;
compromised patients.
● Occasional absence of one or two B-cell antigens;
430
 DIFFUSE LARGE B-CELL LYMPHOMA
Expression of CD30 may be seen in cases with anaplastic
features.
 Ki67 proliferation rate is usually high, and can sometimes
ceed 90%
Molecular and
Cytogenetic Studies
Numerous chromosomal aberrations, point mutations,
and deletions have been described in DLBCL, suggesting
a heterogeneous genetic background. Because of complex
karyotypes noted in DLBCL, it is often best detected by
conventional cytogenetics, which, despite its low resolu-
tion, represents a genome-wide method by which many
structural and numerical abnormalities can be detected
simultaneously.
Clonal karyotypic abnormalities are reported in 90% of
DLBCL. The most commonly involved breakpoints are 14q32
(IGH@), 3q27(BCL6), and 18q21(BCL2). Other frequent
chromosomal abnormalities incude 1p36, 1p22, 8q24, 3q21,
9p, and 6q21 chromosomal bands (Figures 36.14 to 36.17).
Translocations involving the locus for BCL6 at 3q27 are
found in v40% of cases.
Rearrangements of MYC (8q24) can be found in 5-20%
of these cases. However, karyotype, FISH, and array-CGH
studies show DBLCL with a t(8;14) commonly exhibit a
higher degree of genomic aberrations (highly complex
karyotype) than Burkitt lymphomas with t(8;14), and thus
the two diseases can be distinguished based on the karyo-
FIGURE 36.3 Bone marrow (A) and blood (B) involvement in a
type abnormalities.
patient with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.
 In more than half of cases, additional abnormalities,
most commonly the t(14;18), are observed. These "dou-
ble-hit" or “dual-hit" lymphomas often have complex
cytogenetic alterations (Figures 36.18 and 36.19), includ-
● Surface or intracellular light chain restriction detectable in
ing occasional breakpoints at 3q27/BCL6 ("triple-hit"
about two-thirds of cases;
lymphomas)
 Coexpression of CD10 in most cases of germinal center B-cell-
However, overexpression of the bcl-2 protein is found
like (GCB) (Figure 36.9);
 in 25-50% of cases, suggesting other mechanisms for the
Absent CD10 in non-germinal center B-cell-like
cases
 bcl-2 overexpression.
(non-GCB) (Figure 36.10):
Translocations affecting the immunoglobulin gene sites
Coexpression of CD5 in less than 10% of the de novo cases
(Figures 36.11 and 36.12), and rarely in DLBCL arising from
at 14q32 (IGH@),. 22q11.2 (IGL@), and 2p12 (IGK@)
 also have been identified. These include t(14;18)(q32;q21),
CLL/SLL (Figure 36.13). Patients with CD5+ DLBCL show
higher incidence of CNS involvement and poor prognosis.
Unlike Blastoid mantle cell lymphoma, CD5+ DLBCL is
t(3;22)(q27;q11.2) (Figure 36.20), and other rearrange-
negative for BCL-1.
ments involving 14q32.
Immunoglobulin heavy chain clonality can be demon-
By immunohistochemical studies:
strated by PCR studies (Figure 36.21).
Genomic profiling studies show two major subgroups:
● The GCB subgroup is categorized by (1) expression of CD10
(a) characteristic features of germinal center B-cells (GCB)
in >30% of the neoplastic cells, and (2) negative CD10, but
positive BCL6 plus negative MUIM1 (see Figures 36.1, 36.4,
and (b) a profle similar to the activated B-cells (ABC).
Gene profling studies of GCB, ABC, and mediastinal large
and 36.7).
All other cases are regarded as the non-GCB subgroup.
B-cell lymphoma, demonstrated significant differences
● Neoplastic large B-cells are negative for BCL1, but positive for
 in the frequency of particular chromosomal aberrations.
BCL2 in about half of cases.
DLBCL-GCB frequently display t(14;18), deletions of 17p
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
431
 consisting of medium- to large-sized cells with round or oval nucleus, fine nuclear chromatin, and several nucleoli (A, low power;
B, high power). The neoplastic cells express CD20 (C, red), CD79a (D), kappa (E) and BCL-6 (F).
432
 DIFFUSE LARGE B-CELL LYMPHOMA
 o s  ()  o soe  ()
whereas the group of DLBCL-ABC exhibit frequent trisomy
3, gains of chromosomes 3q and 18q2l-q22 , and losses
of chromosome 6q, 9p (CDKN2A).
Differential Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis includes Burkitt lymphoma, T-cell
lymphomas consisting of large cells, pleomorphic variant
of mantle cell lymphoma, anaplastic plasma cell tumors,
myeloid sarcoma, and non-hematopoietic malignancies.
The centroblastic variant of DLBCL may show overlap-
ping morphologic features with Burkitt lymphoma. In gen-
eral, the expression of Ki67, CD10, and p53 is higher in the
neoplastic cells of Burkitt lymphoma than in the DLBCL
cells. Burkitt cells are BCL-2-negative (see Chapter 39).
Tumor cells in the pleomorphic variant of mantle cell
lymphoma usually have scant cytoplasm, and inconspicu-
ous nucleoli and express BCL-1 and CD5. Anaplastic large
Sxa a e o ro asod ae s 
AKL, CD2, and/or CD5. Anaplastic plasma cells are usually
CD138+ and CD20-. Blasts in myeloid sarcoma express
myeloid-associated markers, such as myeloperoxidase and
are negative for CD20. Reed-Sternberg and Hodgkin cells
in classical Hodgkin lymphoma express CD15 and CD30
and are negative for CD45. Non-hematopoietic malignan-
cies usually show a cohesive growth pattern and are nega-
B
tive for CD45 and CD20.
FIGURE 36.5 DLBCL, IMMUNoBLASTIC TYPE. Lymph node Section
demonstrating diffuse large cell lymphoma, immunoblastic
type (A, low power; B, high power). Immunoblasts are large cells
with abundant basophilic cytoplasm, round or oval nucleus, fne
chromatin, and a prominent central nucleolus.
DIFFERENTIALDIAGNOSIS
433
FIGURE 36.6 DLBCL, ANAPLAsTIc TYPE. Lymph node section (A, low power; B, high power) and touch preparation (C) demonstrating 
resemble Reed-Sternberg cells. The neoplastic large cells are positive for CD20 (D), BCL-2 (E), and EBV-EBER (F).
434
DIFFUSE LARGE B-CELL LYMPHOMA
FIGURE 36.7 DLBCL, ANAPLASTIC TYPE. Bone marrow biopsy section
FIGURE 36.8 SARcoMA-LIKE VARIANT oF DLBCL. Bone marrOw biopsy
demonstrating lymphomatous involvement in a patient with
 section demonstrating a sarcoma-like variant of anaplastic large
anaplastic large B-cell lymphoma (A, low power; B, high power).
B-cell lymphoma consisting of spindle-shaped, atypical large
Anaplastic cells are demonstrated in bone marrow smear (C).
lymphocytes (A, low power; B, intermediate power; C, high
power).
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
435
SSC
CD19
CD
DSS
FSC-H
CD45
CD10
FSC-H
CD10
CD38
CD22
D5
CD19
CD20
CD38
Kappa
Lambda
CD45
Kappa
Kappa
FIGURE 36.9 FLOW CYTOMETRIC FINDINGS OF DIFFUSE LARGE B-CELL
AGURE 36.10 FLOW CYTOMETRIC FINDINGS 0F DIFFUSE LARGE B-CELL
LYMPHOMA, GERMINAL CENTER B-CELL-LIKE. On Open gate density
LYMPHOMA, NON-GERMINAL CENTER B-cELL-UKE. Large-lymphOcyte-enriched
displays (in magenta), B-cells highlighted by CD19 backgating, are
gate (in blue) demonstrates predominantly monotypic B-cells, which
large cells and show dim to moderate expression of CD45 in two 
 are positive for CD19, CD20 (bright), CD22, CD38 (partial), CD45 (dim),
subsets. In addition, the large abnormal B-cells are positive for
and with surface kappa light chain restriction. They are negative for
D10, CD19, CD20, CD22, CD38, and express no surface light chains.
M10. (lmmunohistochemical studies showed the large neoplastic
(Immunohistochemical studies showed the large neoplastic B-cells 
 B-cells expressing MUM1 and BCL2).
positive for BCL-6).
FIGURE 36.11 CD5+ DIFFusE LARGE B-cELL LYMPHoMA.Bone marrow biopsy section (A, intermediate power; B, high power) showing large
 atypical cells with variable amount of cytoplasm and irregular nuclei. Two large atypical cells are demonstrated in the peripheral blood 
smear (C). The neoplastic cells express CD20 (D), and CD5 (E), but are negative for BCL-1 (F).
436
DIFFUSE LARGE B-CELL LYMPHOMA
H-OSS
8
FSC-H
CD10
CD2
CD22
Kappa
Lambda
FIGURE 36.12 FLOW CYTOMETRIC FINDINGS 0F DIFFUSE LARGE B-CELL
 FIGURE 36.14 Karyotype of a case of DLBCL demonstrating
LYMPHoMA, CD5-posITIvE. Large-lymphocyte-enriched gate (in
 complex chromosomal aberrations including t(14;18) and 3q27
 magenta) reveals almost exclusively monotypic B-cells. The large
rearrangement.
 neoplastic B-cells are positive for CD5 (bright), CD10, CD19, CD20 
(bright), CD22 (dim), and expressing surface kappa light chain 
 restriction. (lmmunohistochemical stains for BCL 1 were negative).
H-OSS
FSC-H
CD5
FMC7
10
17
88
8
68
70
FIGURE 36.15 Karyotype exhibiting 3q27 rearrangement in a case
of DLBCL.
CD10
Kappa
CD5
FIGURE 36.13 FLoW CYToMETRIC FINDINGS 0F CLL TRANSFoRMED T0
DLBCL.Intermediate-sized and large-lymphocyte-enriched gate
(in magenta) shows predominantly monotypic B-cells, which are 
positive for CD5 (dim), CD19, CD20, CD22 (partial), CD23, FMC7,
and expressing surface kappa light chain restriction. In addition,
there is an aberrant expression of partial CD7. The neoplastic
 B-cells are negative for CD10.
FIGURE 36.16 FISH with the dual color BCL6 probe showing
"spilt" signals (red arrow) consistent with 3q27 rearrangements,
 and amplification (green arrows).
DIFFERENTIALDIAGNOSIS
437
Del6q
B
FIGURE 36.17 Losses in 6q (A, red signals) and gains in 18q (B) are common in DLBCL.
11
9
个“个
15
16
4
88
20
X
22
FIGURE 36.18 A "dual hit" DLBCL lymphoma with both t(8;14) and 
FIGURE 36.20 A DLBCL (germinal-center subgroup) karyotype:
t(14;18) along with deletion 6q.
47,XX,t(3;22)(q27;q11.2),+ 11.
6300
5400
4500
3000
900
3500
0
B
FlGURE 36.21 Immunoglobulin heavy chain clonality study in a
patient with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma using PCR (framework
3 primer set results shown). (A) Clonal peak at 100 bp at the time
B
of initial diagnosis. (B) The results at start of relapse. An amplicon
FIGURE 36.19 FISH with the dual color IGH@-BCL2(A) and IGH@-
peak of the same size is seen, suggesting that this is a recurrence 
MYC(B) in a "dual hit" DLBCL positive for t(14;18) and t(8;14).
of the initial clone, though this time there is a more prominent
Arrows point to cells with fusion signals.
background polyclonal population.
438
3DIFFUSELARGEB-CELLLYMPHOMA
Additional Resources
Bellan C, Stefano L, Giulia de F et al: Burkitt lymphoma versus diffuse large
chemotherapy with or without rituximab, Ann Oncol 22:1601-1607.
B-cell lymphoma: a practical approach, Hematol Oncol 28:53-56, 2010.
2011.
Carbone A, Gloghini A, Aiello A, et al: B-cell lymphomas with fea-
Murawski N, Zwick C, Pfreundschuh M: Unresolved issues in diffuse
tures intermediate between distinct pathologic entities: from patho-
large B-cell lymphomas, Expert Rev Anticancer Ther 10:387-402, 2010.
genesis to pathology, Hum Pathol 4l:621-631, 2010.
 Nitsu N: Current treatment strategy of diffuse large B-cell lympho-
Chan WJ: Pathogenesis of diffuse large B cell lymphoma, Int J
mas, Int J Hematol 92:231-237, 2010.
Hematol 92:219-230, 2010.
Salaverria I, Siebert R The gray zone between Burkitt's lymphoma
Ennishi D, Takeuchi K, Yokoyama M, et al: CD5 expression is poten-
 and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma from a genetics perspective, J Clin
tially predictive of poor outcome among biomarkers in patients
Oncol 29:1835-1843, 2011.
with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma receiving rituximab plus CHOP
Slack GW, Gascoyne RD: MYC and aggressive B-cell lymphomas,
therapy, Ann Oncol 19:1921-1926, 2008.
Adv Anat Pathol 18:219-228, 2011.
Flowers CR, Sinha R, Vose JIM: Improving outcomes for patients with
Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, et al: WHO cassifcation of
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, CA Cancer J Clin 60:393-408, 2010.
tumours of haematopoietic and lymphoid tissues, ed 4, Lyon, 2008,
Jaffe ES: The 2008 WHO classification of lymphomas: implications
International Agency for Research on Cancer.
for clinical practice and translational research, Hematology Am Soc
Tzankov A, Zlobec I, Went P, et al: Prognostic immunophenotypic
Hematol Educ Program:523-53l, 2009.
s r  in a a  u ss 
Miyazaki K, Yamaguchi M, Suzuki R, et al: CD5-positive diffuse large
 emphasis on rational determination of cut-off scores, Leuk Lymphoma
Aq paean suaned Lee u Apms aapadsonan e euoydu lia-a
51:199-212, 2010.
Diffuse Large B-Cell
Lymphoma Subtypes
Lhe
WHO classification of DLBCL includes four
● The background small lymphocytes (Tcells) may show mild
subtypes:
atypical features including irregular nuclear shape or slightly
larger size.
1. T-cell/histiocyte-rich large B-cell lymphoma,
●Variable numbers of histiocytes are often present:; plasma cells
2. EBV+ DLBCL of the elderly.
and eosinophils are rare or absent.
3. primary DLBCL of the CNS, and
 Splenic involvement consists of multiple micronodules, and
4. primary cutaneous DLBCL, leg type.
the lymphoma exhibits the same cellular composition as seen
In this chapter, categories 1-3 are discussed. Primary
in the lymph node.
cutaneous DLBCL, leg type is discussed in Chapter 40.
 Bone marrow involvement is patchy or nodular with similar
 morphology as described for the involved lymph nodes.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
T-Cell/Histiocyte-Rich Large
● Flow cytometry has limited value in diagnosing THRLBCL,
B-Cell Lymphoma
because of the low quantity of the large neoplastic B-cells
mmpared with the abundance of T-cells and histiocytes in the
background. In addition, the cellular integrity of these large
T-cell/histiocyte-rich large B-cell lymphoma (THRLBCL)
neoplastic B-cells is more likely to be compromised during the
is a variant of DLBCL characterized by scattered large
staining and washing process in seting up MFC assays. It is
B-cells interspersed in a background of small reactive
rare that a discrete large neoplastic B-cell population can be
T-lymphocytes and often variable numbers of histiocytes.
detected by MFC in THRLBCL.
THRLBCL is primarily a nodal disease, reported in mid-
● In contrast, immunohistochemical studies are more useful in
dle-aged men and accounting for about 10% of DLBCLs. It
phenotypic analysis of THRLBCL (Figures 37.1 to 37.3). The
 is an aggressive nodal lymphoma, often found in advanced
large neoplastic cells express CD45 plus pan B-cell antigens,
 and stain for CD20 and PAX 5 is strong. They are also positive
stages (IlI or IV) at diagnosis. Splenomegaly is noted in
about 25% of patients. Bone marrow involvement is fre-
for BCL6 and offten positive for BCL2.
 Staining for CD30 may highlight scattered large cells in some
quent (30-60%).
cases (Figure 37.3C). but CD15 is negative. In the back-
ground, there are numerous CD3-positive T-cells and CD68-
MORPHOLOGY
positive histiocytes.
● The lymph node involvement is usually diffuse, but, in rare
cases, focal vague nodularity can be present. The lymphoid
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
infiltrate is polymorphic, consisting of scattered individually
dispersed large B-cells (<10% of total cells) in a background
Because of the paucity of neoplastic cells (<5%) in a back-
of small T-lymphocytes (Figures 37.1 and 37.2) and histio-
ground of reactive T cells and histiocytes, it is diffcult to per-
cytes. The large neoplastic B-cells do not form aggregates or
form routine genetic studies.
sheets.
 Somatic mutations of the immunoglobulin heavy chain genes
●The large B-cells show morphologic features of centroblasts or
are common.
immunoblasts, or may appear anaplastic and pleomorphic.
 Rearrangements of BCL6 can be detected by FISH in about
sometimes resembling Reed-Sternberg cells (Figure 37.3).
half of the cases.
Atlas of Hematopathology. DOl: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00037-1
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
440
DIFFUSELARGE B-CELLLYMPHOMA SUBTYPES
● Translocations involving the 14q32 (IHG@) region, e.g,
t(9: 14)(p13;q32), are a recurrent abnormality.
 Array-CGH studies have identified frequent genomic imbal-
ances such as duplications of Xp/Xq, 4q, and 18q, and dele-
tions of 17p.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis includes reactive lymphoid hyper-
plasia, dlassical mixed cellularity Hodgkin lymphoma, nodu-
lar lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin lymphoma (NLPHL),
peripheral T-cell lymphoma, and lymphomatoid granuloma-
tosis. A summary of distinguishing features is presented in
Table 37.1.
 In reactive lymphoid hyperplasia the lymph node archi-
tecture is completely or partially preserved, the large reac-
tive lymphoid cells often appear in focal aggregates, and
depict polytypic staining for Ig light chains.
The Reed-Sternberg cells and their variants in mixed
cellularity Hodgkin lymphoma express CD15 and CD30
and are negative for CD45, whereas the large cells in
THRLBCL express CD20 and CD45 but are negative for
CD15 and mostly negative for CD30.
Unlike THRLBCL, the large B-cells in NLPHL are pre-
dominantly located within vague lymphoid nodules, and
often surrounded by CD57+ T-cells. They also express
EMA. The lymphoid nodules demonstrate a rich follicular
dendritic meshwork as demonstrated by positive CD21 or
CD23 immunohistochemical stains.
In peripheral T-cell lymphomas the large cells express
pan-T-cell markers and the smaller lymphoid cells are
B
more atypical and pleomorphic than the T-cells seen in
THRLBCL. T-cell receptor (TCR) gene rearrangement stud-
ies are positive.
Similar to THRLBCL, large atypical B-cells in lympho
matoid granulomatosis are found in a background of reac-
tive T cells, but they are almost always positive for EBV,
and the lesion is extranodal.
EBV+ Diffuse Large B-Cell
Lymphoma of the Elderly
EBV-associated DLBCL occurs in patients older than
C
50 years without any known history of immunodeficiency
FIGURE 37.1 T-CELL/HISTIOCYTE-RICH LARGE B-CELL LYMPHOMA. Bone
or lymphoma. Other well-defined clonal EBV-associated
marrow biopsy section demonstrating scattered large cells mixed
disorders, such as primary effusion lymphoma, lym-
with a large number of small lymphocytes (A, low power; B, high
power). Large cells are CD20-positive and small cells are CD20-
phomatoid granulomatosis, plasmablastic lymphoma,
negative (C).
and DLBCL associated with chronic inflammation, are
excluded from this category.
EBV+ DIFFUSE LARGE B-CELL LYMPHOMA OF THE ELDERLY
¥441
FIGURE 37.2 T-cELL/HIsTIocYTE-RIcH LARGE B-cELL LYMPHoMA. Lymph node biopsy section demonstrating a diffuse lymphomatous process 
(A, low power) with scattered large cells, some mimicking Hodgkin cells (B, intermediate power; C, high power). Small lymphocytes are
predominantly CD3+ (D), and large cells express CD20 (E) and Pax5 (F).
The disease shows slight male preponderance (M:F
● The large cells may appear as centroblasts, immunoblasts,
ratio 1.4) with a median age of about 70 years. Extranodal
anaplastic, or Reed-Sternberg-like. Areas of necrosis are often
involvement is a common feature frequently affecting skin,
present.
stomach, lung, and tonsils. It is an aggressive disease, with
unfavorable prognostic factors including "B" symptoms
and age >70 years.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE (FIGURES 37.4 TO 37.6)
MORPHOLOGY (FIGURES 37.4 TO 37.6)
· Flow cytometry has limited utilities since monotypic B-cells
may not be detectable, especially in the polymorphous
● The affected lymph nodes and/or extranodal tissues show
subtype.
architectural effacement by a diffuse lymphoid infiltrate con-
·By immunohistochemical studies, the neoplastic cells stain for
sisting of either monotonous sheets of atypical large cells, or
pan B-cell markers including CD20, PAX5, and CD79a. BCL2,
polymorphous infiltrate of mixed large atypical lymphocytes.
CD10, and BCL6 are often negative, but MuM1 positivity is
small lymphocytes, plasma cells, and histiocytes.
mmmon.
442
 DIFFUSE LARGE B-CELL LYMPHOMA SUBTYPES
FIGURE 37.3 T-CELL/HISTIOCYTE-RICH
LARGE B-CELL LYMPHOMA; SAME CASE AS
FIGURE 37.2. Lymph node biopsy
section demonstrating scattered
Hodgkin/Reed-Sternberg (HRS)-
like cells in a background of small
lymphocytes (A). Both small and
large cells express CD45 (B). Large
cells, similar to HRS cells, express 
CD30 (C), BOB.1 (D), Oct.2 (E) and
fascin (F).
Table 37.1
 Differential Diagnosis of T-Cel/Histiocyte-Rich Large B-Cell Lymphoma (THRLBCL)
Pathology
Morphology
Immunophenotype
 Molecular/Cytogenetics
THRLBCL
 Effacement of nodal architecture;:
Large cells CD20+, CD45+; small cells 
IGH@ gene rearranged; no
 predominantly diffuse pattem,
CD3+,CD45+
evidence of TCR rearrangement;
scattered large cells in a background
rarely EBV+
of smallT-cells and histioctyes
 Reactive lymphoid
 Preserved nodal architecture, large 
Large cells are a mixture of CD3+ and
 No evidence of IGH@ or TCR gene
hyperplasia 
cells often in aggregates
CD20+ cells
 rearrangements
Mixed cellularity
 Effacement of nodal architecture;
 RS cells and variant are CD15+, CD30+,
No evidence of IGH@ or TCR gene 
 Hodgkin lymphoma
 presence of Rs cells and variants 
CD45-
 rearrangements; frequently EBV+
 Nodular lymphocyte
Effacement of nodal architecture 
Large cells are CD20+, EMA+ and are 
 No evidence of IGH@ or TCR gene
 predominant
 with a nodular pattern and large
 sumrounded by CD57+ T-cells; rich 
 rearrangements; rarely EBV+
Hodgkin lymphoma 
cells within nodules 
follicular dendnitic mesh (CD21+, CD23+)
Peripheral T-cell
 Effacement of nodal architecture;
Large cells are CD3+, CD20-
 May show TCR rearrangement;
lymphoma
atypical small lymphocytes
usually EBV-
 Lymphomatoid 
 Extranodal involvement; scattered 
Large cells CD20+, CD45+; small cells
IGH@ gene rearranged; commonly
 granulomatosis
large cells in a background of small
CD3+,CD45+
EBV+
T-cells 
RS, Reed-Stermnberg.
EBV+ DIFFUSELARGE B-CELL LYMPHOMA OF THE ELDERLY443
FIGURE 37.4 EBV-POsITIvE DIFFUsE LARGE B-cELL LYMPHOMA OF THE ELDERLY, LYMPH NoDE INVOLvEMENT. LyMph nOde biOpSy Of a 79-year-old man 
demonstrating a diffuse lymphoma (A), primarily consisting of large atypical lymphoid cells (B, intermediate power; C, high power).
These cells express CD20 (D), and some are positive for CD30 (E) and EBV-EBER (F).
● Staining for CD30 is variably positive, while CD15 is negative.
e. ● Molecular studies will exhibit clonal IGH@ gene
[n cases with plasmablastic features, cytoplasmic Ig is often
rearrangements.
detectable, though CD20 can be negative.
 EBV positivity is demonstrated using combined methods of
IHC for LMP1 and in-situ hybridization for EBV-EBER.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The pleomorphic subtype with the presence of Reed-
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
Sternberg-like cells may mimic classical Hodgkin lym-
●There are very few reports of EBV-associated DLBCL with spe-
phoma. Unlike classical Hodgkin lymphoma, the EBV+
 DLBCL more frequently involves extranodal tissues, often
cific genetic abnormalities.
 Translocations involving the 3q27 (BCL6) region can be iden-
shows areas of necrosis, and the atypical large cells are
tified by FISH studies.
EBV+, CD20+, CD45+, and lack expression of CD15.
444
 DIFFUSE LARGE B-CELL LYMPHOMA SUBTYPES
FIGURE 37.5 EBV-PosITIvE DLBCL oF THE ELDERLY, THYRoID INvoLvEMENT. Thyroid biopsy Of a 73-year-old wOman demonstrate a diffuse
lymphoid infiltrate consisting of mixed small and large atypical lymphocytes (A, low power; B, intermediate power; C, high power). The
majority of the lymphoid cells express CD20 (D). Numerous cells are also positive for Kl-67 (E) and EBV-EBER (F).
Primary DLBCL of the CNS
 and there is a slight male preponderance. About 50-80%
of patients show some neurological symptoms.
Primary DLBCL of CNS includes large B-cell lymphomas
primarily affecting intracerebral and intraocular tissues.
MORPHOLOGY
Intravascular large B-cell lymphomas, large B-cell lympho-
 mas of the dura, AIDS-associated large B-cell lymphomas,
There is a diffuse infiltration of affected tissue often with
and secondary CNs lymphomas are excluded from this
perivascular involvement (Figure 37.7). The neoplastic
category.
cells resemble centroblasts, often mixed with reactive small
These tumors are relatively rare (about 1% of all non-
lymphocytes, macrophages, astrocytes, microglial cells,
 Hodgkin lymphoma). The median age is around 60 years
 and areas of necrosis.
 PRIMARY DLBCL OF THE CNS
445
FIGURE 37.6 EBV-PosITIvE DLBCL oF THE ELDERLY, coLoN INvoLvEMENT. Colon biopsy from a 75-year-old man demonstrating a large cell
lymphoma (A, low power; B, intermediate power; C, high power). Numerous large cells are positive for Pax-5 (D), p63 (E), and EBV-LMP (F).
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
 MFC findings reveal abnormal or monotypic large B-cells,
S; ● FISH studies show BCL6 gene rearrangements, along with
similar to those described previously in Chapter 36.By
gains of 18q21.
IHC studies, the large neoplastic B-cells express pan B-cell ● Other aberrations include deletions of 6q, and gains of
antigens, as well as commonly BCL2. CD10 is positive in a
12q.22q.
small fraction of cases, while BCL6 positivity is more com- ● Negative for t(8:14), t(11;14). or t(14;18).
mon. MuM1 is positive in the vast majority of cases.
446
DIFFUSE LARGE B-CELL LYMPHOMA SUBTYPES
FIGURE 37.7 PRIMARY DIFFusE LARGE B-cELL LYMPHoMA oF CNS. Brain sections demonstrate a perivascular and parenchymal infiltrate of
 medium to large atypical lymphoid cells (A, low power; B and C, intermediate power; D, high power).
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
447
Additional Resources
Abramson JS: T-cell/histiocyte-rich B-cell lymphoma: biology, diag-
Gerstner ER, Batchelor TT: Primary central nervous system lym-
nosis, and management, Oncologist 1l:384-392, 2006.
phoma, Arch Neurol 67:291-297, 2010.
        
Gualco G, Weiss LM, Barber GN, et al: Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
Neurol 22:675-680, 2009.
involving the central nervous system, Int I Surg Pathot 19:44-50, 2011.
Aki H, Tuzuner N, Ongoren S, et al: T-cell-rich B-cell lymphoma:
Hofscheier A, Ponciano A, Bonzheim I, et al: Geographic variation
a clinicopathologic study of 2l cases and comparison with 43 cases
in the prevalence of Epstein-Barr virus-positive difuse large B-cell
of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, Leuk Res 28:229-236, 2004.
lymphoma of the elderly: a comparative analysis of a Mexican and a
Castillo JI. Beltran BE, Miranda RN, et al: Epstein-barr virus-positive 
German population, Mod Pathol 24:1046-1054, 2011.
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma of the elderly: what we know so far,
Preusser M, Woehrer A, Koperek O, et al: Primary central nervous
Oncologist 16:87-96, 2011.
system lymphoma: a clinicopathological study of 75 cases, Pathology
Dojcinov SD, Venkataraman G, Pittaluga S, et al: Age-related EBV-
42:547-552, 2010.
Shimoyama Y, Oyama T, Asano N, et al: Senile Epstein-Barr virus-
a spectrum of reactive lymphoid hyperplasia and lymphoma, Blood
associated B-cell lymphoproliferative disorders: a mini review, I Clin
117:4726-4735, 2011.
Exp Hematopathol 46:1-4, 2006.
El Weshi A, Akhtar S, Mourad WA, et al: T-cell/histiocyte-rich B-cell
Soussain C. Hoang-Xuan K: Primary central nervous system
lymphoma: clinical presentation, management and prognostic fac-
lymphoma: an update, Curr Opin Oncol 2l:550-558, 2009.
tors: report on 6l patients and review of literature, Leuk Lymphoma
Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, et al: WHO dassification of
48:1764-1773, 2007.
tumours of haematopoietic and lymphoid tissues, ed 4, Lyon, 2008.
Fraga M, Sanchez-Verde L, Forteza J, et al: T-cell/histiocyte-rich large
International Agency for Research on Cancer.
 B-cell lymphoma is a disseminated aggressive neoplasm: differential
diagnosis from Hodgkin's lymphoma, Histopathology 4l:216-229.
Wong HH, Wang J: Epstein-Barr virus positive diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma of the elderly, Leuk Lymphoma 50:335-340, 2009.
2002.
This page intentionally left blank
38元
Other Lymphomas of
Large B Cells
In this chapter we discuss a group of B-cell lymphomas
 The affected patients usually show a bulky anterior medi-
that in the current WHO classification are classified as  astinal mass originating in the thymus. Superior vena
"other lymphomas of large B-cells" These include:
cava syndrome is reported in over half of cases. Relapses
are often extranodal involving liver, gastrointestinal tract,
●Primary mediastinal (thymic) large B-cell lymphoma
Intravascular large B-cell lymphoma
CNS, and other organs. Event-free 10-year survival is about
 50%. Therapeutic regimens include CHOP or other alter-
●
 DLBCL associated with chronic inflammation
●
Lymphomatoid granulomatosis
native combination chemotherapy regimens followed by
ALK-positive LBCL
either involved field or modified mantle field radiation
●
Primary effusion lymphoma
therapy.
● Plasmablastic lymphoma
● Large B-cel lymphoma arising in HHV8-associated multicentric
Castleman disease.
MORPHOLOGY (FIGURES 38.1 AND 38.2)
Also, HHV8- and EBV-associated germinotropic lympho-
 The involved tissue is diffusely infiltrated by large cells with
proliferative disorder and B-cell lymphoma, unclassifiable
variable amount of cytoplasm, which is often pale or clear.
with features intermediate between DLBCL and classical
The nuclear features may resemble those of centroblasts or
Hodgkin lymphoma are briefly discussed in this chapter.
large centrocytes, often with the presence of large cells with
multilobated nuclei.
●Immunoblast-like cells may be dominant in a minority of
cases. Reed-Sternberg-like cells may be present, as well as scat-
fred eosinophils. Mitotic figures are frequent. Rare cases may
Primary Mediastinal (Thymic)
 depict spindle-shaped morphology.
 Sclerosis is a common feature separating solid nests of tumor
Large B-Cell Lymphoma
ells by thick hyalinized bands of connective tissue.
Primary mediastinal (thymic)  large  B-cell  lymphoma
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
(MLBCL) is a distinct clinicopathologic subtype of DLBCL
Flow cytometric results are similar to those in other DLBCLs.
primarily involving the thymus. The major bulk of
 By immunohistochemical studies, the neoplastic cells express
tumor at the time of diagnosis is confined to the anterior
B-cell antigens, such as CD19, CD20, CD22, and CD79a. [n
mediastinum.
addition, they are positive for CD45, plus commonly posi-
Primary MLBCL constitutes about 7% of DLBCLs and
five for CD30, as well as CD23 and MUM1. CD15 may be
2.4% of all non-Hodgkin lymphomas. Women are more
detected in rare cases. The neoplastic cells variably express
affected than men, and the median age is around 40 years
BCL2 and BCL6, but expression of CD10 is less common.
Atlas of Hematopathology. DOl: htp://dx.doi.org/10.1016/978-0-12-385183-300038-3
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
450
 OTHER LYMPHOMAS OF LARGE B CELLS
FIGURE 38.1 PRIMARY MEDIAsTINAL B-cELL LYMPHoMA. Aggregate of neoplastic large cells with areas of necrosis are separated by thick
bands of hyalinized connective tissue (A, low power; B, intermediate power; C, high power). A field devoid of necrosis is shown 
(D). Higher power view shows large cells with variable amount of clear cytoplasm (E). Some cells mimic lacunar cells (arrows). The
neoplastic cells express CD20 (F).
CYTOGENETIC AND MOLECULAR STUDIES
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
● While cytogenetic testing is not as informative here, the most
The differential diagnosis of MLBCL includes nodular
frequent chromosomal abnormalities are gains of chromo-
sclerosis Hodgkin lymphoma, thymic neoplasms, and
somes 9p21 and 2p16.
other mediastinal masses, such as seminoma and anaplas-
 The gains of 2p16 are due to the frequent amplification of the
tic large cell lymphoma. The neoplastic cells of MLBCL
REL gene.
express B-cell-associated markers and CD45, and lack
● Immunoglobulin gene rearangement studies are usually
expression of CD15, cytokeratin, and T-cell-associated
positive, (Figure 38), but BCL-2, BCL-6, and MYC genes lack
markers (Table 38.1).
rearrangements.
● MAL, a gene that encodes a protein associated with lipid rafts in
the T-cells and epithelial cells, is over-expressed in most cases.
INTRAVASCULAR LARGE B-CELL LYMPHOMA
451
FIGURE 38.2 PRIMARY MEDIASTINAL
B-CELLLYMPHoMA.Aggregate of
 atypical neoplastic large cells
embedded in a fibrous stroma
(A and B) express CD20 (C), BCL-2
(D), CD30 (E) and Ki-67 (F).
Intravascular Large B-Cell
Lymphoma
1213
Intravascular large B-cell lymphoma (IVLBCL) is a rare and
aggressive variant of extranodal large B-cell lymphoma
21
characterized by the presence of aggregates of large to
medium-size neoplastic B-cells within the lumens of small
to medium-sized blood vessels. The lack of expression of
adhesion molecules, such as CD29 (beta 1 integrin) and
CD54 (ICAM-1), in some cases of IVLBCL suggests that the
intravascular pattern is secondary to a defect in homing
31
receptors in the tumor cells.
322
IVLBCL is an aggressive systemic disorder. Clinical
82.3
 symptoms are mostly secondary to the occlusion of the
14
small to medium-sized vessels in various organs. Clinical
FIGURE 38.3 FISH analysis of neoplastic cells in a patient with 
manifestations may include skin lesions, neurological
primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma consistent with IGH@
 symptoms, nephritic syndrome, and disseminated intra-
gene rearrangement.
vascular coagulation (DIC). Hepatosplenomegaly, anemia,
452
OTHER LYMPHOMAS OF LARGE B CELLS
 Table 38.1
 Differential Diagnosis of Primary Mediastinal (Thymic) Large B-Cell Lymphoma (MLBCL)
Pathology
Major Morphology
 Immunophenotype
Other Remarks
 MLBCL
Large cells with clear cytoplasm, sclerosis 
CD45+, CD19+, CD20+, CD22+, CD10-,
Rearranged IGH@
CD30+,CD23+
NSHL, syncytial type
 Dense sheets of large cells, numerous
CD45-,CD30+,Fascin+,PAX5+ CD15±,
eosinophils, sclerosis, areas of necrosis
CD20±; EBV+ in 35% ofthe cases
 Thymic carcinoma
Cohesive growth pattem, desmoplastic stroma,
Cytokeratin+, CD45-, CD20-
may depict squamous differentiation 
Seminoma
Round nuclei, glycogen+
CD45-, CD117+,placental alkaline
Almost exclusively in
 phosphatase+
males
ALCL
Large pleomorphic anaplastic cells, hallmark
Pan-T±,CD30+, CD43+, ALK±, EMA±
Rearranged TCR
cells
 NSHL, nodular sclerosis Hodgkin lymphoma; ALCL, anaplastic large cell lymphoma.
FIGURE 38.4 INTRAVASCULAR LARGE
B-CELL LYMPHoMA. Aggregates of 
large atypical lymphoid cells are in
the lumen of blood vessels (A, low 
power; B, intermediate power;
C, high power). The neoplastic cells
express CD20 (D), BCL-2 (E) and
Ki-67 (F).
E
and thrombocytopenia are reported in over 70% ofI
 MORPHOLOGY
 patients. A correlation has been reported between CD5+,
● The presence of aggregates of large to medium-size neoplas-
CD10- phenotype, and poor prognosis in patients with
IVLBCL.
tfic B-cells within the lumens of small to medium-sized blood
vessels (Figure 38.4).
DIFFUSE LARGE B-CELL LYMPHOMA ASSOCIATED WITH CHRONIC INFLAMMATION
453
Table 38.2
Immunophenotypic Features of Intravascular Large
B-cell Lymphoma'
Phenotype
% Positive
CD5
38
CD10
13
CD19
85
CD20
96
CD23
4
名8
Bcl-2
91
个
Bcl-6
26
MUM1/IRF4
95
Bcl-1
0
 k chain
71
入chain
18
FIGURE 38.5 A karyotype of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma:
EBER (EBV)
0
(p15.3;q22),del(8)(q13q22), add(1 0)(q22),t(14;16)(q32;q22).
1Adapted from Murase T, Yamaguchi M, Suzuki R, et al. Intravascular large
 B-cell lymphoma (IVLBCL): a clinicopathologic study of 96 cases with 
special reference to the immunophenotypic heterogeneity of CD5.
Blood 2007; 109: 478-485.
● The neoplastic cells show a vesicular nucleus and prominent
Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphoma
nucleoli, resembling centroblasts or immunoblasts.
 The intravascular tumor clusters may be associated with fibrin
Associated with Chronic
thrombi, and/or palisade along the vessel wall resembling
angiosarcoma.
Inflammation
● The presence of neoplastic cells in peripheral blood is
uncommon.
This rare subtype of DLBCL is associated with EBV and
longstanding chronic inflammation. It usually involves
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
bone marrow, pleural space or other body cavities.
The neoplastic cells are positive for B-cell-associated mark-
DLBCL associated with chronic pleuritis (pyothorax-
ers, such as Ig. CD19, CD20, CD22, and CD79a. They
associated lymphoma) is often observed in tuberculous
are commonly positive for BCL2, MUM1, and sometimes
pleuritis. It is a male-predominance disorder with a male
BCL6. Expression of CD5 is more common than CD10
to female ratio of about 12:1. The average age is around 70
(Table 38.2).
years. It is found more in Japan than in Western countries.
 Other EBV-associated longstanding chronic inflamma-
tions, such as chronic osteomyelitis, chronic cutaneous
CYTOGENETIC AND MOLECULAR STUDIES
lcer, or metallic implantation, may occasionally lead to
EBV-associated DLBCL.
● No recurrent cytogenetic abnormalities have been reported.
●
show clonal IGH@ gene rearrangement (Figure 38.5).
MORPHOLOGY
The involved tissue shows diffuse and destructive infiltra-
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Differential diagnosis includes acute leukemias, carcino-
lar to conventional DLBCL cells.
matosis and angiosarcoma. The neoplastic cells in ALL
often express TdT and CD34, whereas cells in IVLBCL are
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
negative for TdT and CD34. AML cells may show some
cytoplasmic granularity and express myeloid-associated
Immunohistochemical studies show neoplastic cells posi-
markers, such as MOP, CD13, CD33, and CD117. In car-
tive for CD20 and CD79a in most cases, while some cases
cinomatosis, the neoplastic cells are CD45- and cytokera-
display loss of CD20 and/or CD79a, with plasmacytic dif-
tin+. The tumor cells in angiosarcoma express CD34 and
ferentiation expressing MUM1 and CD138. CD30 can
are CD20-negative.
be positive. Occasionally, T-cell antigens can be variably
454
OTHERLYMPHOMAS OF LARGEB CELLS
positive.  EBV-positivity  can be demonstrated by  in situ
 suspended in pleural fluid, which express CD30, CD138,
hybridization studies.
and IRF4/MUM-1, and are often negative for CD20. On the
other hand, pyrothorax-associated lymphoma forms solid
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
masses expresses CD20 and is negative for CD138.
Non-hematopoietic neoplasms are negative for CD45
Most cases will demonstrate clonal immunoglobulin gene
and express their associated specific markers.
rearrangements, often with a background polyclonal gene
rearrangement signal produced from the inflammatory
infiltrate.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Lymphomatoid Granulomatosis
The differential diagnosis includes primary effusion lym-
phoma, anaplastic types of plasma cell neoplasms, and
Lymphomatoid granulomatosis is a rare, extranodal,
angiocentric
 lymphoproliferative   disorder  consisting
oma, carcinoma, sarcoma).
of large, EBV-positive B-cells in a background of poly-
Primary effusion lymphoma occurs in HIV-infected
morphous reactive cells, predominantly consisting of
patients, with large pleomorphic, plasmablastic tumor cells,
T-lymphocytes. It is an EBV-associated lymphoproliferative
FIGURE 38.6 LYMPHoMAToID GRANULoMATosis. Lung biopsy section demonstrates a dense polymorphic, angiocentric lymphoid infiltrate
(A, low power; B, intermediate power; C, high power). Numerous large cells are CD20-positive (D) and some express CD30 (E) and/or
EBV-EBER(F).
LYMPHOMATOID GRANULOMATOSIS455
disorder developed under an immunodeficiency setting.
identical in different sites. Establishment of clonality in the
such as HIV infection, X-linked lymphoproliferative syn-
 grade I lesions may not be conclusive.
drome, methotrexate therapy, allogeneic organ transplan-
Most cases show EBV infection demonstrated by EBER or other
tation, or Wiscott-Aldrich syndrome.
EBV-specific markers using either in situ hybridization or PCR.
Lymphomatoid granulomatosis is usually observed in
 The EBV infection in some cases is clonal.
adult males. The most common sites of involvement in order
of frequency are lung skin, kidney, liver, and brain. Other
sites, such as upper respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts,
spleen, and lymph nodes are occasionally affected. Clinical
symptoms are related to the involved organ, with respiratory
symptoms being the most common presentation. The cinical
course, particularly for grades II and III (see below), is often
aggressive. However, some patients may show a fluctuating
clinical course with occasional spontaneous remission.
MORPHOLOGY (FIGURES 38.6 AND 38.7)
Lymphomatoid granulomatosis is an  angiocentric and
angiodestructive polymorphous lymphoproliferative pro-
cess characterized by the presence of a small number of
EBV-positive large B-cells in a background of inflammatory
cells. The large EBV-positive cells resemble immunoblasts,
but bizarre large cells with multilobated nuclei or Reed-
Sternberg-like cells may be present. The inflammatory
component consists of mixed small lymphocytes, plasma
cells, immunoblasts, and histiocytes, with scattered eosin-
ophils and rare neutrophils.
This lymphoproliferative
disorder characteristically
infiltrates into the vascular structures and may cause vascul-
lar damage, fibrinoid necrosis, and ischemic changes in the
surrounding tissues.
There are three histological grades:
● Grade I consisting of a polymorphous lymphoid infiltrate
with absent or rare large, immunoblastic, EBV-positive lym-
phocytes (<5/hpf).
●
Grade Il consisting of a polymorphous lymphoid infiltrate
with moderate numbers of large, immunoblastic, EBV-positive 
lymphocytes (5-20/hpf). Necrosis is often present.
Grade IIl is considered a variant of DLBCL and consists
of numerous large. immunoblastic, and EBV-positive
lymphocytes (>50/hpf). In some areas, these cells may appear
in clusters or small sheets. Necrosis is often extensive. Large
bizarre cells with multilobed nucleus and Reed-Sternberg-like
cells are often present.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
● The EBV-positive large cells are positive for CD20 and CD5.
●
Expression of CD79a and CD30 is variable, but CD15 is nega.
tive. Background reactive lymphocytes are commonly CD4-
positive T-cells.
CYTOGENETIC AND MOLECULAR STUDIES
FIGURE 38.7 LYMPHoMATOID GRANULOMAToSIS. LUNg tiSSUe
● No recurrent chromosomal abnormalities have been reported.
demonstrating interstitial lymphoid infiltrate and fibrosis
There is evidence of clonal IGH@ gene rearrangement in
(A, low power; B, intermediate power). The infiltrate is polymorphic
most grade IIl and Ill cases. The clonal population may not be
consisting of small and large lymphoid cells (C, high power).
456
 OTHER LYMPHOMAS OF LARGE B CELLS
Table 38.3
 Differential Diagnosis of Lymphomatoid Granulomatosis (LG)
Pathology
Major Features
Immunophenotype
Other Remarks
LG
Angiocentric, scattered or clusters of
Large cells CD20+, PAX5+,
Large cells EBER+
large cells in a polymorphic background 
CD79a+
of inflammatory cells, predominantly
T-cells
Post-transplant LPD
 History of immune-suppression,
Predominant cells expressing
EBV±
abundant B-cells
 pan-B-cell markers
DLBCL with chronic inflammation
Associated with a history of chronic
Large cells CD20+, PAX5+,
Large cells EBV+
 inflammation, usually pleural-based 
Extranodal T/NK-cell lymphoma
Angiocentric, predominantly atypical
CD3+, CD56+
EBV+, Rearranged TCR
T-cells
Qassical HL
 HRS cells in a polymorphic background 
HRS cells CD15+, CD30+, CD45-
EBV±
of inflammatory cells
Wegener granulomatosis
Patchy necrosis surrounded by palisading
 Non-specific
 granulomas; inflammatory infltrate
 contains neutrophils
HL, Hodgkin lymphoma; HRS, Hodgkin/Reed-Sternberg; LPD, lymphoproliferative disorders.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
●In addition, they are positive for CD138 and EMA, with only
occasional weak staining for CD45.
The differential diagnosis of lymphomatoid granuloma-
Cytoplasmic Ig and light chain restriction is common.
tosis includes a garden variety of reactive and neoplastic
The neoplastic cells are negative for B- or T-cell lineage-associ-
lymphproliferative disorders including post-tranplant lym-
ated antigens, and CD30 is usually negative.
phoproliferative disorders, DLBCL with chronic inflamma-
tion, extranodal T/NK-cell lymphoma, classical Hodgkin
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
lymphoma, and Wegener granulomatosis. Table 38.3
shows the major clinicopathologic differences between
● FISH and PCR studies show the most commonly observed
these entities.
cytogenetic abnormality of ALK-positive DLBCL, t(2:17)
   e  ()   (
2p23.
● ALK-positive DLBCL with t(2:5)(p23;q35) involving ALK on
ALK-Positive Large B-Cell
2p23 and nucleophosmin on 5q35, as seen in the majority of
 T/null anaplastic large cell lymphomas, have also been rarely
Lymphoma
reported.
●These cases are negative for EBV.
ALK-positive LBCL is a rare, aggressive subtype of DLBCL.
It tends to appear in children (30%) and young adults. The
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
median age is about 35 years with a male to female ratio
of 3:1. Patients are usually at the advanced stages (Ill or
includes DLBCL with sinusoidal pattern, anaplastic large
IV) at the time of diagnosis, and the prognosis is poor.
cell lymphoma (see Chapter 51), and plasmablastic lym-
phoma (see below)
MORPHOLOGY
 The neoplasntic cells are large and may show centroblastic or
immunoblastic morphologic features
Primary Effusion Lymphoma
鲁
 Sinusoidal infiltration is a common feature, and sometimes a
cohesive growth pattern may be seen, mimicking metastatic
carcinoma.
Primary effusion lymphoma (PEL) is a rare variant of large
cell lymphoma characterized by malignant serous effu-
sions without detectable tumor masses. Rare cases may
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
show solid organ involvements, such as skin and heart. It
● The neoplastic cells express ALK with a unique cytoplasmic
has been primarily observed in AIDS patients and is asso-
granular pattern.
ciated with human herpes virus 8 (HHV8). However, rare
PRIMARYEFFUSIONLYMPHOMA
457
cases of HHV-8-negative PEL have been reported. The
majority of cases are also co-infected with EBV. Pleural,
pericardial, and peritoneal cavities are the most frequent
sites of involvement.
Most patients are men. Clinical symptoms are second-
ary to the effusions. Most patients do not respond to con-
ventional chemotherapy and have a short survival time,
usually <6 months.
MORPHOLOGY
● Cytocentrifuge slide preparations of the lymphomatous effu-
sions show large neoplastic cells with immunoblastic, plas-
mablastic, and/or anaplastic features (Figures 38.8 and 38.9).
These cells have a variable amount of basophilic cytoplasm. A
paranuclear hof may be present.
●
 Nuclei are round or irregular and show prominent nucleoli.
Binucleated or multilobated nuclei may be present, and some
tumor cells may resemble Reed-Sternberg cells.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
Flow cytometric features (Figure 38.10) include:
●Negative to dim expression of CD45.
●
Expression of CD38 and/or CD138.
●
 Absence of B-cell-associated antigens, including CD19, CD20,
and CD79a.
●Absence of surface or intracellular light chain restriction.
 By IHC studies, the neoplastic cells are also positive for
EMA and CD30. They are positive for HHV8, plus EBV-
EBER. In the solid form of PEL, variable expression of
CYTOGENETIC AND MOLECULAR STUDIES
● Complex karyotypes are observed. Recurrent chromosome
aberrations include: partial trisomies 12, trisomies 7. and
aberrations of 1q21 -25.
●
 Although the tumor cells often lack the expression of mem-
brane or cytoplasmic Ig. the Ig genes are rearranged and 
mutated, so molecular studies are more appropriate here than
in many of the other B-cell lymphomas. However, mutations
affecting PCR primer hybridization targets can cause false-
negative results.
● Some cases may also show TCR gene rearrangement. In these
situations, additional clonality testing using I-k gene PCR may
be helpful.
●
 HHv8 viral genomes are detected in virtually all patients, and
most cases show EBV infection demonstrated by EBER using
either in situ hybridization or PCR.
FIGURE 38.8 PRIMARY EFFUSION LYMPHOMA. Pericardial effusion
demonstrating large plasmablastic cells with dark blue cytoplasm
and irregular nuclei mixed with red cells and inflammatory cells 
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
(A, low power; B, high power). The plasmablastic cells express 
①138 (C).
 The differential diagnosis includes secondary involvement
of body cavities with anaplastic plasma cell myeloma, sub-
types of DLBCL, anaplastic large cell lymphoma, and met-
astatic non-hematopoietic tumors (Table 38.4).
458
 OTHER LYMPHOMAS OF LARGE B CELLS
FIGURE 38.9 PriMarY EFfusIoN LyMPHoMa.
Peritoneal fluid demonstrating large
plasmablastic cells with dark blue
cytoplasm and round orirregular nuclei
(A). These cells are EBV-EBER+ (B),
HHV8+ (C) and EMA+ (D).
FIGURE 38.10 FLOW CYTOMETRIC FINDINGS 0F
PRIMARY EFFUSION LYMPHoMA. Open gate density
displays (in blue) demonstrate a predominantly
large cell population that is partially and very
工
dimly positive for CD45. These large cells are
positive for CD30 and CD38, but negative for
CD3, CD15, CD19, CD22, as well as surface
 (not shown) and intracellular light chains.
CD45
CD38
CD15
FSC-H
lcLambda
CD22
 Table 38.4
 Differential Diagnosis of Primary Effusion Lymphoma (PEL)
Pathology
Major Features
Immunophenotype
Other Remarks
PEL
Anaplastic/plasmablastic morphology.
Pan-B-,CD30+,CD138+, EBV+,
Rearranged IGH@
 rare solid organ involvement 
HHV-8+
Anaplastic plasma cell myeloma
Primary bone marrow involvement 
Pan-B-,CD30-,CD138+, clgG+ or
Rearanged IGH@,
clgA+, CD117+, CD56±
t(11;14), aneuploidy
LBCL arising in HHv8+ multicentric 
 Lymph node and splenic involvement 
Pan-B±,CD30±,CD138-, clgMA,
Rearranged IGH@
Castleman disease
EBV+, HHV-8+
HHV8/EBV+ germinotropic
Lymph node, preserved architechure,
IRF4/MUM1+, CD10-, CD20-,
Favorable prognosis
 ymphoproliferative disorder
plasmablasts in germinal centers 
CD79a-,BCL-2- and BCL-6-
 Metastatic non-hematopoietic 
 Primary solid tissue involvement 
CD45-, expression of specific
 No IGH@ rearrangement
non-hematopoietic marker, such as 
 cytokeratin, 5100 or others
PLASMABLASTIC LYMPHOMA
459
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE (FIGURE 38.13)
Plasmablastic Lymphoma
The neoplastic cells express CD38, CD138, MUIM1, and are
variably positive for CD79a. In addition, they are commonly
Plasmablastic lymphoma is a rare type of DLBCL with
positive for EMA and CD30.
morphologic features of plasmablasts, commonly reported
Cytoplasmic Ig and light chain restriction is often observed.
in HIV-infected patients. This entity does not include pri-
They are negative to occasionally weak positive for CD45.
mary effusion lymphoma, ALK+ large B-cell lymphoma,
CD20, and PAX5. Ki67 proliferation rate is greater than 90%.
and  HHV8+  germinotropic  lymphoproliferative  disor-
EBV-EBER is positive in most cases, while HHV8 is consis-
der. This tumor typically involves the oral cavity of AIDS
tently negative.
patients, though extra-oral cases have also been reported.
The extra-oral sites include nasal cavity, lung, gastrointes-
CYTOGENETIC AND MOLECULAR STUDIES
tinal tract (including the anus), skin, bone, and soft tissue.
No recurrent cytogenetic abnormalities have been reported.
In addition to HIV-infected patients, plasmablastic lym-
However, plasmablastic transformation is highly associated
phoma has been reported in organ transplant recipients,
with MYC translocation along with IGH@ partners. In addi-
patients with autoimmine diseases, and individuals with.
fion, this finding can be observed in both de novo plasmablastic
out immunodeficiency. The disease occurs predominantly
ymphoma and in the plasmablastic transformation of a lower
in men and has a poor prognosis
 grade plasma cell neoplasm, including plasma cell myeloma.
The Ig genes are clonally rearranged.
MORPHOLOGY (FIGURES 38.11 AND 38.12)
●
 HHv8 viral genomes are detected in virtually all patients.
●Most cases show molecular markers of EBV infection.
● There is a diffuse infltrate of large cells resembling immu-
noblasts or atypical immature plasma cells with variable
amounts of basophilic cytoplasm, often with paranuclear hof.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The nucleus is often eccentric, round, or irregular, with open
The differential diagnosis includes  anaplastic plasma-
nuclear chromatin and one or several prominent nucleoli.
 Starry sky pattern with tingible body macrophages, numer-
cytoma, LBCL arising in HHV8-associated multicentric
Castleman disease (see below), primary effusion lym-
ous mitotic figures, and the presence of variable numbers of
mature lymphocytes and plasma cells are frequent features
phoma (see above), and Burkitt lymphoma.
FIGURE 38.11 PLAsMABLAsTIC
LymPhoMA IN A PatIeNT WIth AIDS.
Aggregates of plasmablasts are
present (A,low power; B, high 
power). These cells express CD138
(C) and Ig lambda light chain (D).
460
 OTHER LYMPHOMAS OF LARGE B CELLS
FIGURE 38.12 PLASMABLASTIC LYMPHOMA IN
A PATIENT wITH AIDS.Fibroadipose tissue
of breast is infiltrated by large clusters
of plasmablasts and scattered tingible
body macrophages (A, low power; B,
 intermediate power; C, high power).
The plasmablasts are positive for
EBV-EBER (D).
Large B-Cell Lymphoma Arising
● They are variably positive for CD20, and sometimes CD38.
but negative for CD79a, CD138, and EBV-EBER.
in HHV8-Associated Muiticentric
Castleman Disease
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
● The karyotypes are commonly normal. Some rare non-specific
pue '(zizb)() '(z'td:z'td)(9:1) se yns suoaqe
This rare category of LBCL arises in a background of multicen
del(8)(q12q22) have been reported.
tric Castleman disease and is associated with HHV8 and HIV.
 Most cases should demonstrate clonal immunoglobulin gene
Patients demonstrate enlarged lymph nodes, splenomegaly.
rearrangements.
highly aggressive lymphoma with poor prognosis.
fion or PCR
MORPHOLOGY
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Two morphologic subtypes have been described. HHV8+
Differential diagnosis includes all categories of LBCL
multicentric Castleman disease:
which have a plasmablastic morphology, are associated
● Lymph node and splenic sections show hyalinization of the
with immunodeficiency, and are positive for HHV8 and/or
germinal centers with expansion of the manfle zone.
HIV (see Table 38.4)
 Scattered or clusters of large plasmablastic cells are presenf within
the mantle zone. These cells have abundant dark blue cytoplasm,
eccentric nucleus, and one to two prominent nucleoli.
HHV8- and EBV-
HHV8+ plasmablastic lymphoma:
● Small sheets of plasmablasts with partial or complete efface-
Associated Germinotropic
ment of nodal or splenic architecture.
● In addition to the splenic involvement, neoplastic infiltrate
Lymphoproliferative Disorder
may be present in the liver, lung, and/or GI tract.
 Occasionally tumor cells may appear in the peripheral blood
This is a rare, localized, nodal disorder which has been
(leukemic phase).
reported in HIV seronegative patients. The overall nodal
architecture is preserved and there is no feature of
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
Castleman disease. The germinal centers are expanded
● The plasmablasts demonstrate nuclear expression of LANA-1
and partially or totally replaced by clusters of plasma-
antigen, and strong expression of cytoplasmic IgM with
 blasts. The plasmablasts are positive for IRF4/MUM1 but
lambda light chain restriction.
negative for CD10, CD20, CD79a, BCL-2, and BCL-6.
HHV8-ANDEBV-ASSOCIATEDGERMINOTROPICLYMPHOPROLIFERATIVEDISORDER
461
FIGURE 38.13 PLASMABLASTIC LYMPHOMA; SAME
CAsE As FIGURE 38.11. The plasmablasts express
CD138 (A), lambda light chain (B), MUM1 (C)
and Ki-67(D).
of large pleomorphic cells with round or convoluted nuclei and one or several nucleoli (A, low power; B, intermediate power;
o aaisod ae siseigeuseid aul (a) oza pue (a) sa buissaidxa auoz aueu e Aa papunons ane siseigewseid aul (amod yoy '
IRF4/MUM1 (F) but negative for CD10, CD20, CD79a, BCL-2, and BCL-6 (not shown).
462
 OTHER LYMPHOMAS OF LARGE B CELLS
A
FlGURE 38.15 The "Inside-out follicle" pattern. The plasmablasts are at the periphery and surround centrally located small lymphocytes
(A,intermediate power; B, high power). The plasmablasts express MUM1 (C))
They show a polyclonal or oligoclonal pattern of Ig gene 
and classical Hodgkin lymphoma. These tumors often
rearrangements on PCR. The disorder responds well to
 appear as an anterior mediastinal mass. Superior vena
radiation or chemotherapy.
caval syndrome and/or respiratory distress are among clin-
Figures 38.14 and 38.15 present a germinotropic lym-
ical symptoms.
phoproliferative process in a patient with a history of nod-
The tumor consists of sheets of large pleomorphic cells
ular sclerosis Hodgkin lymphoma. However, the lesion
diffusely infiltrating a fibrous stroma (Figure 38.16). Some
was negative for both EBV and HHV8.
of the pleomorphic cells resemble lacunar or Hodgkin
cells. Necrotic areas are frequently present, and there may
be scattered eosinophils, lymphocytes, and histiocytes.
The neoplastic cells express CD20, CD79a, CD15, and
B-Cell Lymphoma, Unclassifiable
CD30 and are often positive for PAX5, OCT-2, and BOB.1.
ALK and CD10 are generally negative.
with Features Intermediate
between DLBCL and Classica!
Hodgkin Lymphoma
This title refers to the B lineage lymphomas that show
 Overlapping clinicopathologic features between DLBCL
B-CELL LYMPHOMA, UNCLASSIFIABLE, WITH FEATURES INTERMEDIATE BETWEEN DLBCL AND CLASSICAL HODGKIN LYMPHOMA
463
FIGURE 38.16 B-CELL LYMPHOMA WITH FEATURES INTERMEDIATE BETWEEN DLBCL AND CLASSICAL HoDGKIN LYMPHOMA. LyMph NOde SeCtiON deMONStrating
464OTHERLYMPHOMAS OFLARGEB CELLS
Additional Resources
Ascoli V, Lo Coco F, Torelli G, et al: Human herpesvinus 8-associated
Hutchinson CB, Wang E: Primary mediastinal (thymic) large B-cell
primary effusion lymphoma in HIV-patients: a clinicopidemiologic
lymphoma: a short review with brief discussion of mediastinal gray
variant resembling classic Kaposi's sarcoma, Haematologica 87:339-
zone lymphoma, Arch Pathol Lab Med 135:394-398, 2011.
343, 2002.
Jaffe ES, Wilson WH: Lymphomatoid granulomatosis: pathogenesis,
Beltran B, Castillo J. Salas R, et al: ALK-positive diffuse large B-cell
pathology and clinical implications, Cancer Surv 30:233-248, 1997.
lymphoma: report of four cases and review of the literature, I Hematol
Katzenstein AL, Doxtader E, Narendra S: Lymphomatoid granulo-
Oncol 27:2-11, 2009.
matosis: insights gained over 4 decades, Am J Surg Pathol 34:e35-48.
Brimo F Michel RP, Khetani K, et al: Primary effusion lymphoma: a
2010.
 series of 4 cases and review of the literature with emphasis on cyto-
Loong F, Chan AC, Ho BC, et al: Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma asso-
morphologic and immunocytochemical differential diagnosis, Cancer
dated with chronic inflammation as an incidental fnding and new
111:224-233, 2007.
clinical scenarios, Mod Pathol 23:493-501, 2010.
Castillo J. Pantanowitz L, Dezube BJ: HIV-associated plasmablastic
Lundell RB, Weenig RH, Gibson LE: Lymphomatoid granulomatosis,
lymphoma: lessons leamed from ll2 published cases, Am J Hematol
Cancer Treat Res 142:265-272, 2008.
83:804-809, 2008.
Nakashima MO, Roy DB, Nagamine M, et al: Intravascular large
Castillo JI. Reagan JL: Plasmablastic lymphoma: a systematic review.
B-cell lymphoma: a mimicker of many maladies and a diffcult and
Scientifc WorldJourmal 1l:687-696, 2011.
often delayed diagnosis, I Clin Oncol 29:e138-140, 2011.
Chan JK: Anaplastic large cell lymphoma: redefining its morphologic
 Oschlies I, Burkhardt B, Salaverria I, et al: Clinical, pathological and
spectrum and importance of recognition of the ALK-positive subset,
 genetic features of primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphomas and
Adv Anat Pathol 5:281-313, 1998.
mediastinal gray zone lymphomas in children, Haematologica 96:262.
Chen YB, Rahemtullah A, Hochberg E: Primary effusion lymphoma,
2011.
Oncologist 12:569-576, 2007.
 Pervez S, Khawaja RD: Mediastinal lymphomas: primary mediastinal
Copie-Bergman C, Niedobitek G, Mangham DC, et al: Epstein-Barr
(thymic) large B-cell lymphoma versus classical Hodgkin lymphoma,
virus in B-cell lymphomas associated with chronic suppurative
histopathologic dilemma solved? Pathol Res Pract 206:365-367.
inflammation, I Pathol 183:287-292, 1997.
2010.
D'Antonio A, Addesso M, Memoli D, et al: Lymph node-based dis-
Ponzoni M, Ferreri AJ, Campo E, et al: Definition, diagnosis, and
ease and HHV-8/KSHV infection in HIV seronegative patients: report
 management of intravascular large B-cell lymphoma: proposals and
of three new cases of a heterogeneous group of diseases, Int J Hematol
perspectives from an international consensus meeting. J Clin Oncol
93:795-801, 2011.
25:3168-3173, 2007.
Du MQ, Diss TC, Liu H, et al: KSHV- and EBV-associated germinotro-
Rafaniello Raviele P, Pruneri G, Maiorano E: Plasmablastic lym-
pic lymphoproliferative disorder, Blood 100:3415-3418, 2002.
 phoma: a review, Oral Dis 15:38-45, 2009.
Eros N, Karolyi Z, Kovacs A, et al: Intravascular B-cell lymphoma, J
 Steidl C, Gascoyne RD: The molecular pathogenesis of primary medi-
Am Acad Dermatol 47(Suppl 5):S260-S262, 2002.
astinal large B cell lymphoma, Blood 118:2659-2669, 2011.
Ferreri AJ, Campo E, Seymour JF et al: International Extranodal
Sukpanichnant S, Sivayathorn A, Visudhiphan S, et al: Multicentric
Lymphoma Study Group (IELSG). Intravascular lymphoma: clinical
Castleman's disease, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, and Kaposi's sar-
presentation, natural history, management and prognostic factors in
coma: a rare simultaneous occurrence, Asian Pac J Allergy Immunol
a series of 38 cases, with special emphasis on the 'cutaneous variant'.
20:127-133, 2002.
Br J Haematol 127:173-183, 2004.
Van Roosbroeck K, Cools J. Dierickx D, et al: ALK-positive large
Gitelson E, Al-Saleem T, Smith MR Review: lymphomatoid granu-
 B-cell lymphomas with cryptic SEC31A-ALK and NPMl-ALK fusions,
lomatosis: challenges in diagnosis and treatment, Clin Adv Hematol
Haematologica 95:509-513, 2010.
Oncol 7:68-70, 2009.
Zinzani PL, Piccaluga PP: Primary mediastinal DLBCL: evolving
Hsi ED, Lorsbach RB, Fend F et al: Plasmablastic lymphoma and
 biologic understanding and therapeutic strategies, Curr Oncol Rep
related disorders, Am I Clin Pathol 136:183-194, 2011.
13:407-415, 2011.
Burkitt Lymphoma
Burkitt lymphoma in the 2001 WHO classification was
K
mmmon clinical presentation is abdominal mass involving
divided into three major categories: "Classical"; "Atypical
stomach, distal ileum, cecum, and/or mesentery. Bone mar-
Burkitt/Burkitt-like"; and "Burkitt lymphoma with plas-
row, peripheral blood, kidney testis, ovary breast, and CNS
macytoid appearance" In the current WHO classification
may be involved.
电
 lmmunodeficiency-associated BL is primarily observed in
(2008), the non-classical variants are referred to as "B-Cell
lymphoma, unclassifiable, with features intermediate
patients with HIV infection. Post-ransplant-associated BL is
 less frequent. This form more often involves lymph nodes but
between diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and Burkitt lym-
 may involve bone marrow and peripheral blood presenting as
phoma" (see below).
acute leukemia.
A rapidly growing mass and elevated serum LDH lev-
els are characteristic features of BL. Approximately 70%
 of patients are in advanced stages of the disease at diag-
Burkitt Lymphoma
nosis. BL is considered to be a highly aggressive tumor.
Involvement of the bone marrow and CNS, tumor size
Burkitt lymphoma/leukemia (BL) is a highly aggres-
>10cm diameter, and elevated serum LDH are con-
sive mature B-cell lymphoid malignancy consisting of
sidered poor prognostic factors. Response to intensive
endemic, sporadic, and immunodeficiency-associated
combination  chemotherapy  with complete remission
variants. All variants demonstrate chromosomal rear-
 approaches 90% in early stages and 60-80% in advanced
rangements involving the MYC oncogene and share mor-
 stages of the disease. Allogeneic bone marrow transplan-
phologic and immunophenotypic features, but differ in
tation has been utilized in patients not responding to
chemotherapy.
clinical and geographic presentations. The male to female
ratio is about 2-4:1 in all three forms. The endemic and
sporadic forms are most common in children, and affected
children with the endemic form are younger than patients
MORPHOLOGY
with the sporadic form.
The involved tissues are diffusely infiltrated by sheets of
● Endemic Bl occurs in equatorial Africa. It is the most com
monotonous medium-sized neoplastic lymphoid cells.
mon childhood malignancy in this region with a peak inci-
The typical (classical) cytologic features are uniformity high
dence at 4-7 years. There is some correlation between the
nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio, basophilic and often vacuolated
incidence of endemic BL and geographical distribution of
cytoplasm, round nucleus with clumped chromatin and rela-
endemic malaria. The disease usually presents as a mass in the
fively clear parachromatin, and multiple centrally located
jaw or facial bones and spreads to other extranodal sites, such
nucleoli.
as bone marrow, peripheral blood, meninges, testis, ovary.
● Mitotic figures are numerous as well as a high rate of apop
kidney, and breast.
 tosis. Scattered macrophages with abundant pale cytoplasm-
● Sporadic Bl is seen all over the world, accounting for about
mntaining cell debris are present, creating a "starry sky"
1-2% of all lymphomas in the United States and western
pattern (Figure 39.1).
Europe. It occurs mainly in children and young adults and
 BL may infltrate bone marrow and/or peripheral blood and
represents 30-50% of all childhood lymphomas. The most
present a leukemic picture (Figure 39.2)
Atlas of Hematopathology. DOl: http:/dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00039-5
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
466
BURKITTLYMPHOMA
B
FIGURE 39.1 BuRKITT LYMPHoMA. Lymph node section
FIGURE 39.2 BURKITT LYMPHoMA.Bone marrow smear showing
demonstrating a difuse infiltration by monomorphic lymphoid 
cells with high nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio, basophilic cytoplasm,
 monomorphic neoplastic lymphoid cells with high nuclear to
round nucleus with clumped chromatin and relatively clear
 cytoplasmic ratio, basophilic vacuolated cytoplasm, and round
 parachromatin, and multiple centrally located nucleoli. Scattered 
nuclei (A, low power; B, intermediate power; C, high power).
macrophages with abundant pale cytoplasm-containing cell 
debris are present, creating a "starry sky" pattern (A, low power;
B, intermediate power; C, high power).
BURKITT LYMPHOMA
467
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE AND CYTOCHEMICAL
STAINS
MFC findings (Figure 39.3) demonstrate germinal center
CD1
B-cell like features with:
● Expression of pan B-cell markers, and often bright CD20.
CD45
CD10
Kappa
 Expression of CD10 and CD38.
 Moderate to bright surface light chain restriction; and
● Lack of expression of TdT and CD34.
H-OSS
By immunohistochemical studies (Figure 39.4), the
 neoplastic cells also express BCL6 and IgM. BCL2 is usul-
ally negative, though patchy and weak staining may be
seen in some cases. Ki67 proliferation rate is nearly 100%.
FSC-H
CD38
CD45
EBV is positive in a subset of cases. Special stain Oil Red O
FIGURE 39.3 FLOW CYTOMETRIC FINDINGS OF BURKITT LEUKEMIA/LYMPHOMA.
highlights cytoplasmic lipid vacuoles (Figure 39.5).
Open gate density displays (in blue) reveal that B-cells verified by
CD19 backgating, are predominantly intermediate to large, and
express moderate to bright CD45. The B-cell-enriched-gate (in
CYTOGENETIC AND MOLECULAR STUDIES
magenta) demonstrates monotypic B-cells with germinal center B-cell
The genetic hallmark of BL is translocation of MYC at
bright), CD38, HLA-DR, and express bright surface kappa light chain 
chromosome 8q24 commonly with the IGH@ heavy
restriction. The neoplastic B-cells were negative for TdT.
chain region on chromosome 14 [t(8;14)(q24;q32)]
FIGURE 39.4 BURkITT LYMPHOMA:
IMMUNOHISTOCHEMICAL STAINS. The 
tumor cells express CD10 (A), CD20
(B), Ki67 (C), and bcl-6 (D).
FIGURE 39.5 Touch preparation
of a lymph node involved with
Burkitt lymphoma. (A) Wright's 
stain demonstrates tumor cells with
vacuolated cytoplasm. (B) Oil red O stain
shows numerous orange-red dot-like 
deposits within the cytoplasmic vacuoles.
Naeim F. Pathology of Bone Marrow.
2nd ed. Williams &Witkins, Battimore,
1977,by permission.
468
BURKITT LYMPHOMA
88
88
88
17
Ac
2
&8
A"
B
FIGURE 39.7 (A) Karyotype showing t(8;22)(q24;q11.2) and a loss
of the Y-chromosome (arrows).(B) FISH with the dual-color dual
fusion MYC(red) and IGH@ (green) probes showing split MYC
signals but no t(8:14) fusions in a patient with Burkitt lymphoma.
chain switch region and inside the MYC gene. The het-
erogeneity of the molecular breakpoints makes this trans-
and therefore cytogenetics or FISH is preferred.
The lack of complex genetic alterations in addition to a
B
MYC translocation is consistent with a "true" Burkitt lym-
phoma. The presence of an additional translocation as
FIGURE 39.6 (A) Karyotype demonstrating 46,XY,t(8:14)(q24;q32)
found in other types of B-NHL (such as involving BCL2.
and (B) FISH analysis with split MYC signals in a patient with
Burkitt lymphoma.
BCL6, and/or CCND1), or a complex karyotype with mul-
tiple gains and/or losses, represent another type of B-NHL
or a secondary transformed lymphoma.
(Figure 39.6), but less frequently, it may involve IGK@ on
It is important to note that a MYC translocation is not
chromosomes 2 (kappa) and 22 (IGL@), t(2;8)(p12:q24),
specific for BL, but is also seen in a subset of morphological
and t(8;22)(q24;q11.2) (Figure 39.7). These specific rear-
 DLBCL, follicular lymphoma, or mantle cell lymphoma.
rangements can be identified by standard karyotyping or
However, the cytogenetic profile of the "true" BL core sub-
by FISH with dual-color dual-fusion translocation probes
set is different from that of other B-NHL cases with a MYC
or with generic dual-color MYC "split" probes (Figure
translocation. The latter usually represents transformed dis-
39.8). The karyotypes in adults and children with BL
ease and therefore may harbor a non-IGH@/MYC break-
exhibit a core set of aberrations (a cytogenetic detection
point or additional translocations (e.g., involving BCL2 or
of an IGH@/MYC translocation and absence of translo-
CCND1), as well as a higher number of numerical aberra-
cations of BCL2, BCL6, and/or CCND1) and with minor
tions as part of a complex karyotype. In "true" BL, gains of
 Cytogenetic differences.
 1q, 7, and 12 are found as common recurring events, and
In endemic cases the breakpoint on chromosome 14
less frequently deletions of 6q, 17p, or 13q.
involves the joining region of the Ig heavy chain, and the
 Morphologic BL without a confirmed MYC transloca-
breakpoint on chromosome 8 lies outside the MYC gene;
 tion is very rare and shows genetic differences from the
whereas in sporadic BL the breakpoints are in the heavy
core subset.
B-CELL LYMPHOMA, UNCLASSIFIABLE, WITH FEATURES INTERMEDIATE
469
All lymphoma cases that, in addition to a MYC trans-
location, have one or more translocations involving
18q21/BCL2, 11q13/CCND1 or 3q27/BCL6 are regarded as
"double-hit" (DH) lymphomas as per the WHO 2008 clas-
sification. However, double-hit BL (BL IGH@/MYC DH)
should not be considered as "true" BL.
Cytogenetic analysis is very important in BL diagnos-
tic work-up as it provides the information on the many
58
relevant genetic abnormalities such as the partner of the
MYC translocation, the presence or absence of additional
A
A
translocations, and presence or absence of other structural
abnormalities.
Mutation of the BCL6 gene has been reported in
25-50% of cases. Most endemic cases and 25-40% of
 cases associated with AIDS contain the EBV genome.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis includes B acute lymphoblastic
leukemia/lymphoma and DLBCL. Precursor B-cell neo-
plasms are often TdT+ and CD34+ and lack the expres-
sion of membrane Ig heavy or light chains, whereas BL
cells are negative for CD34 and TdT and express mem-
brane Ig. Some cases of BL are borderline and share
some of the morphologic features of DLBCL by demon-
strating larger cells or an admixture of centroblast- or
immunoblast-like cells. Also, a minority of DLBCL cases
may demonstrate t(8;14) and MYC rearrangement (Table
39.1).
B-Cell Lymphoma, Unclassifiable,
with Features Intermediate
Between Diffuse Large B-Cell
Lymphoma and Burkitt Lymphoma
FIGURE 39.8 Complex chromosomal abnormalities with MYC
rearrangement. (A) Karyotype demonstrating 46,XY,+3,der(6)
t(3:6)(q21;q25),t(8;14)(q24;q32),del(11)(q13q23),r(16)(p13.3q24),
This title refers to the B-lineage lymphomas that show
and three color FISH analysis showing (B) MYC-IGH@ fusion
overlapping clinicopathologic  features  between DLBCL
signals (red/green or yellow), (C) three copies of BCL6 or trisomy
and Burkitt lymphoma. Some of these cases in the previ-
3q, and (D) deletion of 11q (API2).
ous WHO classification were referred to as Burkitt-like
 Table 39.1
 Major Pathologic Features of Burkitt Lymphoma (BL), Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphoma (DLBCL) and Intermediate BL/DLBCL1
 Lymphoma
Morphology
Ki-67
BCL-2 expression  Molecular/Cytogenetic
BL
 Monotonous round, small 
+%06<
Negative
MYC rearrangement, t(8;14), t(2;8), t(8;22)
to medium-size cells
Intermmediate BL/DLBCL
 Small to medium-size cells, 
Often >90% +,
 Common MYC rearrangement plus 
sometimes mixed with
sometimes <90% +
a complex karyotype, BCL2 or BLC6
large cells 
rearrangement
DLBCL
Large cells 
Rare >90% +,
 Rare MyC rearrangement, common
common <90% +
 BCL2 or BCL6 rearrangement
1Adapted from Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Hars NL, et al. WHO Classification of Tumours of Haematopcietic and Lymphoid Tissues.International Agency for
Research on Cancer, Lyon, 2008.
470
BURKITT LYMPHOMA
FIGURE 39.9 B-CELL LYMPHOMA
WITH FEATURES INTERMEDIATE BETWEEN
DIFFUSE LARGE B-CELL LYMPHOMA AND
BURKITT LYMPHoMA. ThyrOid tissUe
demonstrating a lymphomatous
process consisting of medium
to large blastic cells resembling
centroblasts or immunoblasts
(A, low power; B, intermediate 
power; C, high power). These cells
strongly express CD10 (D), BCL-6
(E) and Ki67 (F). Cytogenetic studies
showed complex chromosomal
aberrations, including t(8;14)
(see Figure 39.8).
lymphoma. These cases commonly show starry sky pattern
with the presence of tingible body macrophages, frequent
mitotic figures, and numerous apoptotic cells.
These cases could morphologically be divided into two
groups:
Tumors consisting of smaller Burkitt-like cells and larger
immonoblastic or centroblastic cells (Figure 39.9).
Tumors consisting of cells similar to the classical Burkitt
ymphoma cels but lacking the immunophenotypic or
24
cytogenetic features typical of Burkitt lymphoma.
 The neoplastic cells express pan-B markers and surface
IG, and are positive for BCL2. Ki67 expression is high,
ranging from 50% to 100% of the cells.
About 35-50% of the cases show MYC translocation
which is either with IG genes or represent other translo-
FIGURE 39.10 Complex karyotyping abnormalities including both
(bz4 4o uo2!np pue (1zb:zb)(811) pue (z'4 1b:1tzb)(z2:8)
cations (Figure 39.10). BCL2 rearrangement is noted in
about 15% of the cases. BCL6 rearrangement may occur
but is less frequent.
Pathologic features of BL, DLBCL and intermediate
BL/DLBCL are shown in Table 39.1.
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
471
Additional Resources
Aldoss IT, Weisenburger DD, Fu K, et al: Adult Burkitt lymphoma:
Nagy N, Klein G, Klein E: To the genesis of Burkitt lymphoma: regu-
advances in diagnosis and treatment, Oncology (Williston Park)
lation of apoptosis by EBNA-l and SAP may determine the fate of
22:1508-1517, 2008.
Ig-myc translocation carrying B lymphocytes, Semin Cancer Biol
Bellan C, Stefano L, Giulia de F, et al: Burkitt lymphoma versus dif-
19:407-410, 2009.
fuse large B-cell lymphoma: a practical approach, Hematol Oncol
 Orem J, Mbidde EK, Lambert B, et al: Burkitt's lymphoma in Africa,
28:53-56, 2010.
a review of the epidemiology and etiology. Afr Heatth Sci 7:166-175.
Biko DM, Anupindi SA, Hernandez A, et al: Childhood Burkitt lym-
2007.
phoma: abdominal and pelvic imaging findings, AIR Am I Roentgenol
Perkins AS, Friedberg IW: Burkitt lymphoma in adults, Hematology
192:1304-1315, 2009.
Am Soc Hematol Educ Program:341-348, 2008.
 Brady G, Macarthur GJ, Farrell Pl: Epstein-Barr virus and Burkitt lym-
Rowe M, Kelly GL, Bell Al, et al: Burkitt's lymphoma: the Rosetta
phoma, Pbstgrad Med I 84:372-377, 2008.
Stone deciphering Epstein-Barr vinus biology, Semin Cancer Biol
Carbone A, Gloghini A: AIDS-related lymphomas: from pathogenesis 
19:377-388, 2009.
to pathology. Br J Haematol 130:662-670, 2005.
i s  az  a   'l 
Forteza-Vila J. Fraga M: Burkitt lymphoma and diffuse aggressive 
and diffuse large B-cell. lymphoma from a genetics perspective, I Clin
B-cell lymphoma, Int J Surg Pathol 18(3 Suppl):133S-135S, 2010.
Oncol 29:1835-1843, 2011.
Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, et al: WHO classification of
Jaffe ES: The 2008 WHO classification of lymphomas: implications
for clinical practice and translational research, Hematology Am Soc
tumours of haematopoietic and lymphoid tissues, ed 4, Lyon, 2008,
Hematol Educ Program:523-531, 2009.
International Agency for Research on Cancer.
Kenkre VP, Stock W: Burkitt lymphoma/leukemia: improving prognosis.
Clin Lymphoma Myeloma 9(Suppl 3):S231-S238, 2009.
This page intentionally left blank
Primary Cutaneous
B-Cell Lymphomas
 rimary cutaneous B-cell lymphomas are in general less
● The fumor cells are admixed with variable numbers of reactive
aggressive than their counterparts involving lymphoid tis-
T-cells and scattered histiocytes. Plasma cells, eosinophils, and
sues. They represent about 25% of primary cutaneous lym-
neutrophils are rare.
phomas. The major subtypes of primary cutaneous B-cell
lymphomas include follicle center lymphoma, marginal
zone lymphoma, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma-leg type,
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
and plasmacytoma.
 The neoplastic cells are positive for B-cell associated markers
(CD20, PAX5, and CD79a), as well as BCL6.
CD10 is often positive in cases with follicular growth pattern,
but negative in cases with more diffuse infiltrate.
 BCL2 is negative to variably positive. However, strong coex-
Primary Cutaneous Follicle Center
pression of CD10 and BCL2, should raise consideration for
Lymphoma
nodal FL involving skin.
●
 CD5 as well as CD43 are negative, and MlIM1 is negative in
most cases.
Primary cutaneous follicle center lymphoma (PCFCL) is
the most common B-cell lymphoma of skin. It occurs in
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
adults, with a slight male preponderance and an average
age of about 65 years. The neoplasm consists of various
Lack of the t(14;18) that is commonly observed in nodal fol-
proportions of centrocytes and centroblasts depicting a
licular type lymphoma.
follicular, follicular and diffuse, or diffuse pattern.
 PCR techniques detect clonal rearrangement of immunoglob-
Head, neck, and upper back are the most frequent sites
ulin genes in approximately half of cases.
Gene-expression studies of PCFCL show profiles similar to
of involvement. The involved area usually consists of a
centrally located large nodule with satellite smaller nod-
that of germinal center B-cell (GBC)-like diffuse large B-cell
ules. The tumor is often localized, with an estimated 5-year
lymphomas.
survival rate approaching 100%. Therapy includes excision
and radiation.
uncommon.
MORPHOLOGY (FIGURE 40.1)
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
● The infiltrate is usually in mid dermis and consists of a mix-
The differential diagnosis for cases of PCFCL with follicular
ture of centrocytes and cenfroblasts arranged in follicular.
 pattern includes cutaneous lymphoid hyperplasia, primary
follicular and diffuse, or diffuse paftern. The number of cen-
troblasts can be quite variable.
cutaneous marginal zone lymphoma (PCMZL), and second-
● Follicular structures are irregular and variable in size, often
ary cutaneous follicular lymphoma. Cutaneous lymphoid
separated by fibrosis. Occasionally, neoplastic cells break out
hyperplasia is observed in a variety of conditions, such as,
of the follicle and surround aggregates of small non-neoplas-
autoimmune disease, drugs, tattoos, infections, or arthro-
tic lymphocytes (inside-out follicles).
 pod bite. It may mimic cutaneous lymphomas, particularly
Atlas of Hematopathology. DOl: http:/dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00040-1
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
474
PRIMARY CUTANEOUS B-CELL LYMPHOMAS
FIGURE 40.1 PRIMARY CUTANEOUS
FOLLICULAR CENTER LYMPHOMA. Skin
biopsy demonstrating a dermal
lymphoid infiltrate with a patchy
distribution and nodular structure
(A, low power; B, intermediate
power; C, high power). The infltrate
consists of mixed centrocytes and
centroblasts expressing CD20 (D)
and BCL-2 (E). CD23 demonstrates
a meshwork of follicular dendritic
cells (F).
primary cutaneous marginal zone lymphoma (PCMZL).
 seen on the trunk and upper extremities, presenting as one
PCFCL with diffuse pattern should be distinguished from
 or several red papules, plaques, and/or nodules. Patients
primary cutaneous large B-cell lymphoma. The reactive fol-
have no “B" symptoms, nor elevated serum LDH, or
licles present in PCMZL lack expression of BCL2 protein,
microglobulins.
whereas follicles in PCFCL variably express BCL2.
PCMZL is an indolent disease with a 5-year survival
approaching 100%. There is usually an excellent response
to local treatment such as irradiation, interferon, and ste-
Primary Cutaneous Marginal Zone
roids. Extracutaneous relapse has been reported in up to
30% of patients.
Lymphoma
MORPHOLOGY (FIGURE 40.2)
Primary cutaneous marginal zone lymphoma (PCMZL)
is the second most common B-cell lymphoma of skin,
The cutaneous infiltrate is located in the dermis, often
extending into the subcutaneous tissue. It consists of various
accounting for about 25% of all primary cutaneous B-cell
proportions of cenfrocyte-like cells, monocytoid B cells, lym-
lymphomas. The neoplastic cells, similar to extracutaneous
phoplasmacytoid cells, and plasma cells.
marginal zone lymphomas, consist of various proportions 
Reactive germinal centers are often present, and there may be
of centrocye-like cells, monocytoid B cells, lymphoplasma-
follicular colonization (infiltration of neoplastic B-cells into 
 cytoid cells, and plasma cells.
the germinal center).
The average patient age is about 50 years, and women
Variable amounts of reactive T-cells are often admixed with
 are more affected than men. PCMZL is more frequently
the tumor cells
PRIMARY CUTANEOUS MARGINAL ZONE LYMPHOMA
475
FIGURE 40.2 PRIMARY CUTANEOUS
MARGINAL ZONE LYMPHOMA. Skin 
biopsy demonstrating a dermal
lymphoid infiltrate extending into
the deep dermis (A, low power; B,
intermediate power; C, high power).
The lymphoid infltrate consists of
various proportions of centrocyte-
like cells, monocytoid B-cells (D),
and plasma cells (E). Follicular
colonization may be present (F).
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE (FIGURE 40.3)
● Genetic abnormalities associated with aberrant BCL10, such as
t(1: 14)(p22;q32) translocation and rearrangement of BCL10 have
● The neoplastic lymphocytes are positive for B-cell antigens as
been reported in 5% of extranodal MZL. Aberrant nuclear BCL10
well as BCL2, but negative for CD5, CD10, BCL6, and CD23.
has been detected in 36% of PCMZL cases.
●
 The residual reactive germinal center B-cells are negative for BCL2.
Other chromosomal aberrations observed at various fre-
●
 A monotypic component of plasma cells is detectable in most
quencies in both PCMZL and MALT lymphomas are: t(3:14)
cases, where the plasma cells are positive for CD79a, CD138.
(p14.1:q32) (IGH@-FOXP1 fusion), trisomy 3. and trisomy 8.
MUM1, and light chain restriction.
●
Ig class switching is often evident with expression of IgG, IgA.
Or IgE.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
●
 When follicular colonization is present, disrupted follicular
dendritic cell meshworks are highlighted by CD21 and CD23.
The differential diagnosis of PCMZL includes cutane-
ous lymphoid hyperplasia and PCFCL. There are sig-
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
nificant overlapping clinicopathologic features between
cutaneous lymphoid hyperplasia and PCMZL. However,
● The t(11;18)(q21;21) translocation, which results in the fusion
establishment of monoclonality or rearrangement of IG
of the BIRC3 (baculoviral IAP repeat-containing 3, an apopto-
 genes, presence of sheets of marginal zone cells, and aggre-
sis inhibitor) and MALT1 genes, found in up to half of cases of 
MALT lymphomas (extranodal MZL of MALT-type) is virtually
 gates of monotypic plasma cells are in support of diag-
never detected in PCMZL.
nosis of PCMZL. The reactive follicles present in PCMZL
The t(14;18)(q32;q21) (IGH@-MALT1) fusion can be detected
lack expression of BCL2 protein, whereas follicles in
in both PCMZL and MALT lymphomas.
PCFCL express BCL2.
476
PRIMARY CUTANEOUS B-CELL LYMPHOMAS
FIGURE 40.3 PRIMARY CUTANE0US
MARGINAL ZONE LYMPHOMA, THE SAME
CAsE. Skin biopsy demonstrating a
lymphoid infiltrate extending into
the deep dermis (A,low power),
and showing various proportions
of centrocyte-like cells, monocytoid
B-cells and plasma cells (B, high
power). The lymphoid infiltrate is
strongly positive for CD20 (C) and
BCL-2 (D). The plasma cells express
CD138 (E) and kappa light chain (F).
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
Primary Cutaneous Diffuse Large
The immunophenotypic features are similar to those of DLBCL
B-Cell Lymphoma-Leg Type
with non-germinal center B-cellike. The neoplastic large
cells express B-cell-associated antigens, BCL2 and MUM1.
Expression of BCL6 is variable, but CD10 is negative.
Primary
 cutaneous diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
Expression of CD30 can be seen sometimes, while CD15 is nega-
 s r oq r a s ad -(r)
tive. In cases where plasmablasts or immunoblasts are prominent,
appears as erythematous, or bluish-red nodule(s). These
the neoplastic cells may lack CD20, and show cytoplasmic Ig.
lesions are offen ulcerated and may eventually expand to
The Ki67 proliferation rate is usually greater than 60%. EBV
extracutaneous sites. It has an unfavorable prognosis with a
may be positive in some cases.
5-year survival rate of about 50%.
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
MORPHOLOGY (FIGURE 40.4)
A great majority of these fumors show chromosomal abnor-
● Diffuse infiltration of large monomorphic cells in the dermis. The
malities including gains of 18q (can cause BCL2 over-expres-
infiltrating cells resemble centroblasts or immunoblasts. Some
auapiaa on 'de 'b9 jo sassol pue dz pue (s'ot aimaig) (uois
cases may show compartmentaliza tion by connective tissue.
of t(14;18).
 Epidermotropism is absent, but neoplastic cells may extend
The genetic expression profle is similar to that of activated
to the dermal-epidermal junction, particularly in ulcerated cases.
B-cells. Translocation of MYC, BCL6, and IGH@ reported.
PLASMACYTOMA
477
FIGURE 40.4 DIFFUSE LARGE B-CELL
LYMPHOMA-LEG TYPE. Skin biOpSy
demonstrating a lymphoid infltrate
extending into the upper dermis 
with lack of epidermotropism
(A, low power). The infiltrate
consists of sheets ofimmunoblast-
 like cells with several mitotic figures
present (B, intermediate power;
C high power). The tumor cells
express CD20 (D), MUM1 (E) and a
high Ki67 (F).
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis includes the diffuse form of
PCFCL, and non-hematopoietic tumors of skin such as
ctaneous adenexal tumors and melanomas. Diffuse
PCFCL is a neoplasm consisting of centrocytes and centro-
blasts usually expressing BCL6, CD10, and a meshwork of
CD21. These cells are negative for MUM-1/IRF4
Plasmacytoma
B
Cutaneous plasmacytoma (Figure 40.6) is a rare plasma
FIGURE 4O.5 DIFFUSE LARGE B-CELL LYMPHOMA-LEG TYPE. TriSOmy
 18/18q as identified by karyotype (A) and FISH probes specific
cell neoplasm that occurs without evidence of plasma cell
to 18q (B).
-  o s s re  i 
478
PRIMARY CUTANEOUS B-CELL LYMPHOMAS
FIGURE 40.6 CUTANEOUS PLASMACYTOMA.
Skin biopsy showing a dermal 
plasmacytic infiltrate (A, low power;
B, intermediate power; C, high 
power). The plasma cells express
①138 (D) and lambda (E) and are
negative for kappa (F).
nodules. They are effectively treated with excision and
pleomorphic cells with anaplastic nuclei. The tumor
radiation therapy.
cells show monotypic expression of Ig light chains and
The plasmacytic infiltrate may consist of a mono-
are often positive for CD79a, CD38, and CD138 (see
morphic population of typical plasma cells or highly
Chapter 41).
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
479
Additional Resources
Breton AL, Poulalhon N, Balme B, et al: Primary cutaneous marginal
of bluish-reddish multicolored rainbow pattern, J Clin Oncol
zone lymphoma as a complication of radiation therapy: Case report 
29:e497-e498, 2011.
and review, Dermatol Online I 16:6, 2010.
Kempf W, Sander CA: Classification of cutaneous lymphomas - an
Dalle S, Thomas L, Balme B, et al: Primary cutaneous marginal zone 
update, Histopathology 56:57-70, 2010.
lymphoma, Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 74:156-162, 2010.
Richmond HM, Lozano A, Jones D, et al: Primary cutaneous follicle
Dijkman R. Tensen CP, Buettner M, et al: Primary cutaneous
center lymphoma associated with alopecia areata, Clin Lymphoma
follicle center lymphoma and primary cutaneous large B-cell
Myeloma 8:121-124, 2008.
lymphoma, leg type, are both targeted by aberrant somatic hyper-
 Senff NJ, Noordijk EM, Kim YH, et al: European Organization for
mutation but demonstrate differential expression of AID, Blood
107:4926-4929, 2006.
Research and Treatment of Cancer and Intermational Society for
Cutaneous Lymphoma consensus recommendations for the manage-
Espinet B, Garcia-Herrera A, Gallardo F, et al: FOXPl molecular cyto-
ment of cutaneous B-cell lymphomas, Blood 112:1600-1609, 2008.
 aiel snoaueino Arewd ui sasleue uoissaidxa uiaioid pue snaua
B cell lymphoma, leg-type, Histol Histopathol 26:213-221, 2011.
 Tristano AG: Extramedullary orbital and cutaneous plasmacytomas.
Am I Hematol 77:203-204, 2004.
Fitzhugh VA, Siegel D, Bhattacharyya PK: Multiple primary cutaneous
plasmacytomas, J Clin Pathol 6l:782-783, 2008.
Willemze R Primary cutaneous B-cell lymphoma: classification and
treatment, Curr Opin Oncol 18:425-431, 2006.
Golling P. Cozzio A, Dummer R, et al: Primary cutaneous B-cell lym-
phomas - clinicopathological, prognostic and therapeutic characteri-
Willoughby V, Werlang-Perurena A, Kelly A, et al: Primary cutane-
sation of 54 cases according to the WHO-EORTC classification and
ous plasmacytoma (posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorder.
the ISCL/EORTC TNM classification system for primary cutaneous
plasmacytoma-like) in a heart transplant patient, Am J Dermatopathol
lymphomas other than mycosis fungoides and Sezary syndrome, Leuk 
28:442-445, 2006.
Lymphoma 49: 1094-1103, 2008.
Zhao J. Han B, Shen T, et al: Primary cutaneous diffuse large B-cell
Huang CT, Yang WC, Liu YC, et al: Primary cutaneous diffuse
lymphoma (leg type) after renal allograft: case report and review of
large B-cell lymphoma, leg type with unusual clinical presentation
the literature, Int J Hematol 89:113-117, 2009.
This page intentionally left blank
Plasma Cell Neoplasms
known as monoclonal gammopathies, plasma cell dys- and immunofixation, have been used to detect ihe spe-
crasias, or paraproteinemias, consists of several clini-
cific class or subtype of monoclonal Ig in these disorders
copathologic entities. They are all characterized by a
(Figures 41.2 and 41.3). The following categories are dis-
single class of immunoglobulin (Ig) product, referred to
cussed in this chapter (Box 41.1).
as "M-component" (monoclonal component), present in
Monoclonal  gammopathy of undetermined significance
serum and/or urine protein electrophoresis (Figure 41.1).
(MGUS)
 In addition to protein electrophoresis, other more sensitive 
+
 Plasma cell myeloma (PCM) and variants
 Plasmacytoma and variants
●
 Monoclonal Ig deposit diseases
●Light and heavy chain diseases.
Albumin
Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia  (lymphoplasma-
cytic lymphoma) is discussed in Chapter 29.
(+)
Beta
Gamma
Alpha,Alpha
antihuman
B
anfilgG
Gamma
C
antilgA
Albumin
D
antiIgM
anti kappa
anti lambda
Beta
Alpha,Alpha
FlGURE 41.2 Serum immunoglobulin electrophoresis with a panel
of IgG, IgA, IgM, kappa, and lambda antibodies demonstrating an 
lgG/kappa spike. Wells 1-7 contain control serum (odd number)
B
or patient serum (even number).
FIGURE 41.1 Schematics of serum protein electrophoresis:
From Bossuyt X, Bogaerts A, Schiettekatte G, et al. Serum protein
(A) demonstrates a normal profile, and (B) shows a spike in the
electrophoresis and immunofxation by a semiautomated
gamma region.
electrophoresis system. Clin Chem 1998;44: 944-949.
Atlas of Hematopathology. DOl: http/dx.doi.org/ 10. 016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00041-3
 2013 ElsevierInc. All rights reserved
482
PLASMA CELL NEOPLASMS
Box 41.2 Clinicopathologic Features of
MGUs According to the International
Myeloma Working Group
1. Serum M-protein level <3 g/dl
2. Bone marrow monoclonal plasma cells <10%
3. No evidence of other B-cell lymphoproliferative disorders 
4. No evidence of organ or tissue impairment or bone lesions
ELP
G
A
M
K
of monoclonal gammopathies. multiple myeloma and related disorders: a
report of the International Myeloma working Group. Br J Haematol 2003: 121:
749-757.
 FIGURE 41.3 Immunofixation analysis of a serum demonstrating 
IgA-kappa monoclonal gammopathy.
Courtesy of Eugene Dinovo, Ph.D., Department of Veterans
Affairs, Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System.
MGUS eventually develop plasma cell myeloma or other
B-lymphoproliferative disorders. The cumulative probabil-
ity of progression of MGUS to PCM or other lymphopro-
liferative disorders in one large study was 12% at 10 years,
Box 41.1 Classification of Plasma Cell
25% at 20 years, and 30% at 25 years. MGUS and plasma
Neoplasms
cell myeloma represent different time points along the
1. Monoclonal  gammopathy  of  undetermined  significance
same disease spectrum, and, so far, no molecular or cyto-
(MGUS)
genetic test can reliably distinguish them.
 2. Plasma cell myeloma
The incidence of MGUS increases by age. The prevalence
a. Asymptomatic myeloma (smoldering myeloma)
of MGUS is about 3% in individuals older than 50 and
 b. Symptomatic myeloma
 5% in those older than 70 years. It affects more African-
C. Non-secretory myeloma
Americans than Caucasians. MGUS is usually an inciden-
d. Plasma cell leukemia
tal finding detected by elevated total protein concentration
3. Osteosclerotic myeloma (POEMS syndrome)
on a routine blood test, followed by demonstration of
4. Plasmacytoma
a monoclonal spike by serum protein electrophoresis.
 a. Solitary plasmacytoma of bone
 Plasma cells are usually <l0% of the bone marrow cells.
b. Extramedullary plasmacytoma
A higher percentage of plasma cells in bone marrow is a
 5. Immunoglobulin deposition diseases 
predictor of progression of MGUS to a more aggressive
a. Primary amyloidosis
b. Light and heavy chain deposition disease
B-lymphoproliferative disorder.
MORPHOLOGY AND LABORATORY FINDINGS
● Bone marrow plasma cells in biopsy sections and smears are
Monoclonal Gammopathy of
modestly increased and account for <10% of the total bone
marrow nucleated cells (Figure 41.4).
Undetermined Significance
● Evidence of serum M-component which is IgG in about 75%.
IgM in 15%, and IgA in 10% of cases.
Small quantities of Ig light chains may be detected in the
The term monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined
uwine (Bence-Jones protein) in about 25% of patients.
significance (MGUS) stands for a clinical condition
defined by the presence of monoclonal Ig production
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
without evidence of plasma cell myeloma, amyloido-
sis, Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia, or other related
 Flow cytometric features include:
plasma    cell
 or lymphoproliferative
disorders (see
Monotypic plasma cells coexpressing CD38 and CD138, with
Box 41.2). Several other terms have been used for this con-
intracellular light chain restriction;
 dition, such as idiopathic, asymptomatic, non-myeloma-
Common aberrant expression of CD56:
tous, cryptogenic, and benign monoclonal gammopathy.
Negativity of CD19:
The term benign monoclonal gammopathy is inappro-
Difficulty in detecting intracellular light chain restriction
priate, because a significant proportion of patients with
when polytypic plasma cells are present in background.
PLASMACELL MYELOMA483
Immunohistochemical studies are more useful than
MFC in plasma enumeration. However, it may be difficult
to demonstrate light chain restriction when the monotypic
plasma cells are admixed with polytypic ones.
Plasma Cell Myeloma
Plasma cell myeloma (PCM) [multiple myeloma (MM),
myelomatosis, Kahler's disease] is a multifocal bone-mar-
 row-based plasma cell neoplasm with the production of
monoclonal Ig, often associated with bone destruction and
osteolytic lesions, hypercalcemia, and anemia. PCM has
been divided into the following clinicopathologic entities:
● Asymptomatic myeloma (smoldering myeloma)
鲁
Symptomatic myeloma (or symptomatic plasma cell
myeloma)
 Non-secretory myeloma
●Plasma cell leukemia.
Asymptomatic (Smoidering) Myeloma
 Smoldering myeloma (SM) represents the point of transi-
tion from MGUS to PCM without anemia, skeletal lesions,
hypercalcemia, or renal insufficiency. The serum M-protein
level is ≥3 g/dL, and clonal plasma cells are ≥10% of bone
marrow cells but <30% (see Box 41.3). These patients do
not need treatment but should be followed up closely.
because many of them eventually become symptomatic.
Symptomatic PcM
Symptomatic PCM, or myelomatosis, is characterized
by monoclonal proliferation of plasma cells in the bone
marrow and an M-protein production (Figure 41.5). This
neoplastic proliferation leads to bone destruction and
pathological fractures, particularly in the spine and ribs.
Box 41.3 Criteria for Asymptomatic
Myeloma (Smoldering Myeloma) 1
●Serum M-protein ≥3 g/dL
FIGURE 41.4 MONOCLONAL GAMMOPATHY OF UNDETERMINED
 Bone marrow clonal plasma cells ≥10%
SIGNIFicANce. Bone marrow smear (A) and biopsy section (B)
demonstrate modest plasmacytosis. Plasma cells show kappa
● No related tissue or organ impairment or symptoms
light chain restriction (brown) by dual immunohistochemical
1The International Myeloma Working Group. Criteria for the classification 
stains (C).
of monoclonal gammopathies. multiple myeloma and related disorders: a
report of the International Myeloma working Group. Br J Haematol 2003: 121:
749-757.
484
 PLASMA CELL NEOPLASMS
Table 41.1
 Myeloma-Related Organ or Tissue Impairment'
Impairment
Criteria
Elevated serum calcium levels
 >0.25 mmol/L above the upper
 limit of nomal or >2.75 mmol/L
Renal insufficiency
Creatinine >173 mmol/L
Anemia
 Hemoglobin 2 g/dL below the
 lower limit of normal or <10 g/dL
Bone lesions
 Lytic lesions or osteoporosis with
compression fractures
 Others: symptomatic
 hyperviscosity, amyloidosis,
recurrent bacterial
infections
joueysse a  ea dno buyom ea leueuaul a
 monoclonal gammopathies, multiple myeloma and related disorders: a
121: 749-757.
Box 41.4 Criteria for the Diagnosis of Plasma
Cell Myeloma Set by the International
Myeloma Working Group 1
●M-protein in serum and/or urine
●Bone marrow clonal plasma cells or plasmacytoma2
● Related organ or tissue impairment (end organ damage,
 including bone lesions)3
1The International Myeloma Working Group. Criteria for the classification
of monoclonal gammopathies. multiple myeloma and related disorders: a
report of the International Myeloma working Group. Br J Haematol 2003: 121:
749-757.
2Immunophenotypic studies demonstrate monoclonal population of abnor-
mal plasma cells.
3Some patients may have no symptoms but show evidence of organ or tissue
impairment.
critical criterion for symptomatic myeloma is the evi-
dence of organ or tissue impairment manifested by ane-
mia, hypercalcemia, lytic bone lesions (Figure 41.6),
 renal insuffciency, hyperviscosity, amyloidosis, or recur-
the IMwG, no level of serum or urine M-protein and no
 minimal percentage of clonal bone marrow plasma cells
are required. The adverse prognostic factors in plasma cell
myeloma are shown in Box 41.5.
FIGURE. 41.5 PLAsMA cELL MYELoMA. Bone marrow biopsy section
(A) and bone marrow smear (B) demonstrate numerous plasma
Non-Secretory Myeloma
cells. Blood smear shows rouleaux formations (C).
Non-secretory myeloma (Figure 41.7) accounts for 1-5% of
 all myelomas and is characterized by the absence of detect-
Anemia, hypercalcemia, and renal insufficiency are other
 able M-protein in the serum and urine. However, utilization
common features (Table 4l.1).
of more sensitive techniques, such as serum-free light chain
The criteria for the diagnosis of PCM proposed by the
 assay, may significantly reduce the number of these cases.
International Myeloma Working Group (IMWG) are
 The reports on non-secretory myelomas suggest a lower
shown in Box 41.4. According to the IMWG, the most
 incidence of renal failure and hypogammaglobulinemia,
PLASMA CELL MYELOMA
485
Plasma Cell Leukemia
Plasma cell leukemia (PCL) is a rare event, which is char-
acterized by the presence of >2000/μL of circulating
plasma cells and/or ≥20% of the white cell differential
count (Figure 41.8).
 Plasma cell leukemia is divided into two categories: pri-
mary and secondary.
● Primary plasma cell leukemia constitutes about 60% of cases
and is manifested de novo without evidence of previous history
of PCM.
 Secondary plasma cell leukemia accounts for the remaining
40% and represents leukemic transformation in patients with
a history of PCM.
Patients  with primary 
plasma cell leukemia are
younger, have fewer lytic bone lesions and smaller
A
amounts of serum M-protein, demonstrate higher inci-
dence of hepatosplenomegaly, and show a longer survival
than patients with secondary plasma cell leukemia. The
immunophenotype of primary plasma cell leukemia is
frequently IgD, IgE, or light chain only, but clonal gene
rearrangement studies targeting the IgM region will be
sufficient to establish a monoclonal plasma cell disorder
if needed.
B
MORPHOLOGY AND LABORATORY
FIGURE 41.6 (A) Skull X-ray of a patient with plasma cell myeloma
FINDINGS
demonstrating punched out lytic lesions. (B) Gross specimen
● Bone marrow biopsy sections are usually hypercellular and
of vertebrae showing several foci involved with plasma cell
show clusters or sheets of plasma cells (Figure 41.9).
myeloma (arrows).
(Figure 41.10)
The plasma cell infiltrates are more often focal lesions/patchy
Box 41.5 Adverse Prognostic Factors
than diffuse, and therefore repeated biopsies may be required
 to establish the diagnosis. Prominent osteoclastic activity may
in Plasma Cell Myeloma'
be evident, adjacent to the bony trabeculae.
Age ≥70 years
 The cytologic features of plasma cells may vary from normal-
 Serum albumin <3 g/dL
appearing mature plasma cells to immature and anaplastic
 Serum creatinine ≥2 mg/dL
forms (Figures 41.5, 41.9, 41.11, and 41.12).
●
 Plasmablasts show a high nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio, deep
Beta-2 microglobulin >4 mg/L
 Plasma cell labeling index ≥1%
blue cytoplasm, with or without perinuclear hof, round or
Grculating plasma cells >10 per 50,000 mononuclear cells
irregular nucleus, fine chromatin, and one or several promi-
 Serum calcium ≥11 mg/dL
 Platelet count < 15,000/μL
plasma cells may be present.
Cells with cherry-red, round cytoplasmic (Russell bodies) or
Hemoglobin <10 g/dL
nuclear inclusions (Dutcher bodies) (Figure 41.14), as well
Cytogenetics: t(4;14)(p16;q32.3), t(14;16)(q32.3;q23), del 17p13
as cytoplasmic crystals (Figure 41.15) may be present. Some
(locus of p53), non-hyperdiploidy
plasma cells may appear like grapes and demonstrate numer-
1Adapted from Kyle RA. Gertz MA. Witzig TE, et al. Review of 1027 patients with
ous round Ig-containing cytoplasmic structures (Mott or
newly diagnosed multiple myeloma. Mayo Clin Proc 2003: 78: 21 -33.
Morula cells) (Figure 41.16).
●
 Occasionally, plasma cell myeloma may mimic lymphplas-
macytic lymphoma ("lymphoid appearing myeloma") by
morphology and expression of CD20 
(Figure 41.17). But,
lower median percentage of bone marrow plasma cells,
the neoplastic cells are positive for IgG and often show BCL-1
higher incidence of neurological presentation, and lon-
Expression and evidence of t( 1l;14).
 ger survival than the secretory myelomas. The therapeutic
 The blood smears may show Rouleaux formation of the red
approaches for non-secretory myeloma are similar to those
blood cells or the presence of plasma cells in various propor-
for symptomatic PCM.
tions (Figure 41.18). In plasma cell leukemia, the circulating
486
 PLASMA CELL NEOPLASMS
FIGURE 41.7 NON-SECRETORY MYELOMA.
Blood smear (A) shows lack of red
cell rouleaux formations. Bone
 marrow smear (B) and biopsy
section (C) demonstrate clusters of
plasma cells. These cells are CD138+
(D), but lack expression of IgG (E).
In (F, dual staining), kappa light 
chain (red) is negative and rare cells
show lambda (brown) light chain 
expression.
plasma cells account for >20% of the differential counts and
An international staging system has been proposed
>2000/uL absolute counts
based on the serum beta-2 microglobulin (β2M) and
● Over 95% of patients with PCM show an M-protein in the
serum albumin levels:
serum or urine at the time of diagnosis. Approximately 50%
of patients with PCM show IgG and 25% IgA M-proteins.
● Stage I: Serum β2M <3.5mg/L and serum albumin ≥3.5g/dL
About 20% demonstrate only monoclonal light chain
● Stage II: Neither stage I nor stage II
production. IgD and IgM PCM are rare. Bence-Jones protein is
●Stage IIl: Serum βB2M ≥5.5 mg/L.
detected in the urine of about 75% of patients. Approximately
Conventional  radiologic studies  reveal lytic bone
20% of patients show hypercalcemia. The serum beta-2
lesions, osteoporosis, or fractures in about 80% of patients
microglobulin may be elevated.
at diagnosis.
PLASMA CELL MYELOMA
487
FIGURE 41.8 PLASMA CELL LEUKEMIA.(A) Blood smear demonstrating
 FIGURE 41.9 PLAsMA cELL MYELoMA. Bone marrow biopsy section
circulating plasma cells. (B) Bone marrow biopsy section showing 
demonstrating a paratrabecular aggregate of plasma cells 
plasmacytic infiltration with (C) the expression of CD138.
(A, low power; B, high power). Bone marrow smear shows clusters 
Of plasma cells (C).
488
PLASMA CELL NEOPLASMS
B
FIGURE41.10 Hypocellular plasma cell myeloma with interstitial
infltration of plasma cells around fatty tissue (A, low power;
B, high power).
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
Compared with immunohistochemical studies, flow
cytometry tends to underestimate the number of malig-
 nant plasma cells. However, it is a more sensitive measure
 in identifying their phenotypic aberrancies. The immuno-
phenotypic features of plasma cell myeloma (Figure 41.19)
by MFC include:
● Coexpression of CD38 (bright) and CD138:
● Intracellular light chain restriction;
● Aberrant expression of CD56 in greater than 60% of cases,
FIGURE 41.11 PLAsMA cELL MYELoMA. Bone marrow biopsy
which, however, is commonly absent in plasma cell leukemia
section demonstrating a large population of plasma cells (A).
(Figure 41.20):
Immunohistochemical stains show expression of CD138 (B) and 
Variable expression of myeloid aberrancies including com-
kappa light chain (C) by the plasma cells.
monly CD117, as well as CD13, CD15, and CD33:
● Negativity to variable positivity of CD45:
 Occasional and partial positivity of CD20;
unstable and is degradable rapidly. Light chain restriction
 Rare positivity of partial or dim CD19:
can be detected in the vast majority of cases, and heavy
● Often express CD79a.
chain restriction may be demonstrable. Expression of
Immunohistochemical stain for CD138 is the preferred
cyclin D1 (BCL1) is seen in some cases, which correlates
method of plasma cell enumeration. But this molecule is 
with t(1l;14) by cytogenetic/FISH studies.
FIGURE 41.12 PLAsMA ceLL MYELoMA. Bone marrow biopsy section (A) and bone marrow smear (B) demonstrate numerous large, atypical
plasma cells with abundant cytoplasm, irregular nuclear borders, and prominent nucleoli.
FIGURE41.13 PLAsMABLAsTIc MYELoMA. Bone marrow smear demonstrating cells with variable amount of blue cytoplasm, round nuclei
with finely dispersed chromatin, and a single prominent nucleolus (A, low power; B, high power).
FIGURE41.14 PLAsMA cELL MYELoMA. Bone marrow biopsy section demonstrating plasma cells with nuclear inclusions (Dutcher bodies,
black arrows) and cytoplasmic inclusions (Russell bodies, green arrows) (A, low power; B, high power).
490
PLASMA CELL NEOPLASMS
FIGURE41.15 PLAsMA cELL MYELoMA. Bone marrow smear
demonstrating plasma cells with cytoplasmic needle-like
immunoglobulin crystals (A, low power; B, high power).
CYTOGENETIC AND MOLECULAR STUDIES
By classical cytogenetics, only one-third of myeloma
FIGURE 41.16 PlasMA CEll MYeloMa WIth cYtoplasMIc vacUoLes.
patients have a complex abnormal karyotype. The remain-
(A) Bone marrow biopsy section, (B) immunohistochemical stain
ing two-thirds show normal karyotypes. However, the
for lg kappa light chain, and (C) bone marrow smear.
 observed normal karyotypes are often derived from the
From Naeim F.Pathology ofBone Marrow,2nd edn.Williams&
Wikins, Baltimore, 1997, by permission.
other non-neoplastic hematopoietic cells, rather than from
abnormal plasma cells because these cells fail to grow in
culture.
Samples may fail to grow because of the low prolifera-
should be repositioned during aspiration, rather than sim-
tive capacity of the myeloma cells.
ply continuing to withdraw marrow from the initial punc-
It may not be possible to obtain abnormal metaphases,
ture site, to ensure that adequate numbers of abnormal
because of inadequate quality of the bone marrow aspi-
 cells are submitted to the laboratory.
rates received for cytogenetic studies. Aspirates frequently
The biological transition of normal plasma cells to
contain very few plasma cells compared with the corre-
MGuS/SM to multiple myeloma consists of several
 genomic changes that are often overlapping and repre-
the number of tumor cells in a given specimen largely
 sent a series of oncogenic events. Karyotypic instability has
 depends on the level of local bone marrow infiltration and been detected as a major pathogenetic factor. Identification
the degree of sample dilution by blood. For this reason, it of aggressive disease biology is achieved through analysis
is essential that the first few mililiters of the bone marrow  of bone marrow plasma cells, including metaphase cytoge-
drawn be sent for cytogenetic analysis. Also, the needle  netics and FISH studies.
PLASMACELLMYELOMA
491
FIGURE41.17 LyMPHoiD ApPEARING MYELoMA. A plasma cell myeloma mimicking lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma is demonstrated. Bone
marrow clot section (A) shows a large number of lymphoid appearing cells. Bone marrow smear (B) depicts a mixture of plasma cells,
lesions, and elevated IgG. Cytogenetic studies revealed t(11;14).
492
PLASMA CELL NEOPLASMS
FSC-H
CD38
CD45
CD56
lcKappa
IcLambda
FIGURE 41.2O FLOW CYTOMETIC FINDINGS OF PLASMA CELL LEUKEMIA.
Plasma-cell-enriched gate of a peripheral blood sample
demonstrates a prominent population of abnormal plasma
cells, which are positive for CD38, CD117 (partial), CD138, and
 intracellular lambda light chain restriction (dim). The abnormal
plasma cells are negative for CD45 and CD56.
 Because of the low proliferative activity early in the
disease, results from conventional cytogenetics are often
limited, with most showing a normal karyotype. About
 30-40% of new patients demonstrate an abnormal karyo-
genetic changes are seen among almost all patients at the
level of MGUs. The presence of an abnormal karyotype
generally correlates with an elevated plasma cell labeling
index and tumor burden, suggestive of advanced disease
status. The karyotypes, when seen, are commonly com-
FIGURE41.18 Red cell rouleaux formation and aggregate of
plex and unstable, presenting with both numerical and
plasma cells in a peripheral blood smear of a patient with plasma 
structural aberrations. It should also be noted that some of
cell leukemia (A, low power; B, high power).
the well-established structural abnormalities, like t(4;14)
(p16;q32), are cryptic and therefore go undetected by ro-
tine cytogenetics.
These limitations have been overcome by the luise of
 FISH probes on interphase nuclei, which are now a com-
SSC-H
CD1
mon and important adjunct to routine karyotyping. A fur-
ther improvement in the yields of interphase FISH results
is now achieved by enriching the bone marrow plasma
FSC-H
CD38
CD45
cells by auto-magnetic activated cell sorting with anti-
CD138 immunobeads. The development of interphase
FISH (iFISH) on sorted CD138 plasma cells, allows for the
assessment of chromosomal abnormalities regardless of
the number of plasma cells and the low proliferative rate
(Figure 4l.2l). Thus with the iFISH techniques one can
detect trisomies of the odd number chromosomes that are
CD56
lcKappa
IcLambda
FIGURE 41.19 FLOW CYTOMETIC FINDINGS 0F PLASMA CELL MYELOMA. On
FISH with probes targeted to detect specific aberrations
open scatter gate (in green), a plasma-cell-enriched population
with established clinical significance is now routinely
is highlighted and confirmed by CD38/CD138 backgating. The
used in PCM (MM) studies, along with traditional meta-
plasma cells (positive for both CD38 and CD138) are abnormal,
phase chromosome studies. Both studies can also be used
m '/1 la pue (asgns abel gsa iueage buissadxa
intracellular kappa light chain restriction. A small subset of the
to monitor the therapeutic response or to help direct ther-
monotypic plasma cells is negative for CD45, while the remaining
apy. In addition, results obtained from both techniques
demonstrates dim to moderate positivity of CD45.
appear to be independent prognosticators at diagnosis,
PLASMA CELL MYELOMA
493
as well as providing complementary information for gen-
 The hypodiploid group is associated with poorer overall sur-
erating models for risk stratification. However, cytogenet-
vival, and the abnormal clones seen in this group include hypo-
ics or FISH cannot distinguish MGUS from smoldering
diploidy, pseudodiploids, and/or near-tetraploid variants, and
myeloma.
are almost always associated with structural aberrations (Figure
The expansion of malignant monoclonal plasma cells with
41.24). The near-tetraploid karyotypes appear to be 4n duplica-
 tions of cells having pseudodiploid or hypodiploid karyotypes.
numerical and structural chromosome aberrations has per-
The hyperdiploid group shows a consistent set of trisomies and
 mitted the delineation of hyperdiploid and non-hyperdiploid
fewer structural aberrations. The most frequently lost chromo-
somes are 13, 14, 16, and 22.
imately equally distributed. The correlations between chro-
电
 Both hyper- and hypodiploid clones also exhibit in addition to
mosomal aberrations and risk groups are detailed in Box 41.6.
the numerical gains and losses, primary IGH@ translocations. For
Numerical aberrations leading to a hyperdiploid or
example, 10% of hyperdiploid PCM show IGH@ rearrangements.
hypodiploid  karyotype are  present  in  approximately
 The non-hyperdiploid group typically displays chromosomal
50-60% of precursor and multiple myeloma tumors.
rearrangements and deletions, and karyotypes typically
have translocations involving the immunoglobulin heavy
● The hyperdiploid group is characterized by gains of the odd
  io a bth e so () u
number chromosomes 3, 5. 7. 9, 11, 15, 19, or 21, and associ-
non-hyperdiploid subgroups also appear to show different
ated with a better prognosis (Figures 41.22 and 41.23)
molecular signatures, methylation patterns, and prognosis.
Primary translocations involving the IGH@ locus
(14q32) or one of the IGL loci (k at 2p12 or  at 22q11) have
been reported to occur early in the pathogenesis of PCM
FIGURE41.21 A panel of images showing clusters of CD138-
enriched plasma cells with abnormal signal patterns: (A) gains
of chromosomes 1, and 15: (B) gains of chromosome 9 and 
17p(TP53); (C) FGFR3-IGH@ fusion consistent with t(4;14), and
(D) gains of 16q (MAF).
Box 41.6 Risks Groups Based on
FIGURE 41.22 A complex hyperdiploid karyoytpe with both
Cytogenetic Abnormalities Identifed by
 numerical and structural abnormalities and IGH@ (14q32)
Conventional Karyotyping and FiSH
rearrangement in plasma cell myeloma.
High risk
+
Hypodiploidy
●Del(17p)
t(4;14), t(14;16), t(14;20), t(8;14)
Karyotype del(13)
 1p/1q abnormalities
● Complex abnormal karyotype
Standard risk
Hyperdiploidy
Trisomy 3, 5, 7,9, 11, 15, 19
●Del(13q) (FISH)
Low risk
B
t(11;14), t(6;14}
FIGURE 41.23 PLAsMA cELL MYELoMA. Complex signal patterns
Normal karyotype
frequently observed by FISH in plasma cell myeloma with
hyperdiploidy: (A) chromosome 5, and (B) chromosome 7.
494
 PLASMA CELL NEOPLASMS
(Figure 41.25), whereas secondary translocations occur later 
involving an Ig^ locus are rare, occurring in only 1-2% of
and are involved in tumor progression. Most primary trans-
MM tumors and HMCLs.
locations are simple reciprocal translocations and juxtapose
There are seven translocations that appear to represent
an oncogene and one of the immunoglobulin enhancers on
primary oncogenic events involving oncogenes and the
the derivative 14 translocated chromosome, resulting in the
IGH@ locus and seen in approximately 40-50% of MM
dysregulated or increased expression of an oncogene. These
tumors (Tables 41.2 and 41.3). These can be divided into
translocations are mediated by errors in one of three B-cell
mainly three recurrent IgH translocation groups as follows.
specific DNA modification mechanisms: IGH switch recom-
1. CYCLIN D: 11q13 (Cyclin D1) (15%): 12p13 (Cyclin D2)
bination, errors in somatic hypermutation, and, rarely, VDJ
(<1%): 6p21 (Cyclin D3) (2%).
recombination.
      
Large studies from several different groups show that
3.MAF: 16q23 (c-MAF) (5%): 20q12 (MAFB) (2%): 8q24.3
the prevalence of IgH translocations increases with disease
(MAFA) (<1%).
stage: about 50% in MGUS or SM, 55-70% for intramed-
ullary PCM, 85% in PCL, and >90% in human myeloma
 ing mutation) and possibly c-MAF, the consequences of
cell lines (HMCL). These IGH@ translocations can be effi-
these translocations have not been adequately confirmed
ciently detected by FISH analyses.
The incidence of light-chain translocations (k, 2p12 or
as essential for maintenance of the tumor and/or as thera-
peutic targets.
, 22q1l) is far less, with about 10% being found in MGUS
Virtually all PCM and MGUS tumors have cyclinD dys-
and 20% in advanced myeloma and HMCL. Translocations
 regulation, suggesting an early and unifying pathogenetic
 Table 41.2
 Chromosomal Regions and Genes as Translocation
Partners with 14q32 (IGH@) in MM/MGUS, with known
frequencies
34
 Region
Gene(s)
4p16
FGFR3. WHSC1 (15%)
4p13
ARHH
6p23-25
1RF4
88
6p21
CCND3(15-20%)
8q24
MYC
11q13
CCND1
16q22-q23
MAF (5-10%)
H6
2
18q21
BCL2
20:
22
20q11-q13
MAFB
FIGURE41.24 Bone marrow karyotype in a patient with plasma
cell myeloma demonstrating hypodiploidy with 30,X,-X,-3, -4,
-5,-6,-7,-10,-11,-12,-13,-14, -15,-17,del(17)(p13),-18,
-20,-21,-22.
 Table 41.3
Frequency of Recurrent Chromosomal Aberrations
 in Myeloma
 Alterations
Percent
 Recurrent and Primary Cytogenetic Abnormalities
Hyperdiploidy
50-60
t(4:14)
15
t(11;14)
20
t(14;16)
3
t(14;20)
1
Monosomy 13 or 13q
45
del(17p)
8
Genome Instability Markers
Gains of 1q
35
Deletion 1p
30
FIGURE 41.25 IgH PCR study of an extramedullary plasmacytoma
Gains of 5q
50
 showing a prominent clonal peak (framework 1 primer set) amid
Deletion 12p
10
a weaker polyclonal background.
PLASMA CELL MYELOMA
495
event. The most frequent translocation is t(1l;14)
frequent is the MAFB (20q12) translocation—the reciprocal
(q13;q32) which is found in about 15% of both MGUS
t(14;20)(q32;q12). The prognostic outcome is assumed to be
and PCM (Figure 41.26), and appears to be associated
the same as for the t(14;16).
with a favorable outcome and is therefore regarded as
t(4;14)(p16;q32) (MMSET/FGFR3;IGH@) is the second
neutral with regard to prognosis. Its prevalence is >40%
 most common translocation and is seen less frequently in
in primary amyloidosis (AL), suggesting that there is a
MGUS/SM than in PCM (Figure 41.28). This translocation
  s   d (trtn 
 involves two protein-coding genes—Wolf-Hirschhorn syn-
minimum MGuS tumor mass and usually is not detected
 drome candidate 1 gene (WHSC1), or multiple myeloma
by conventional serum electrophoresis, so that it is not 
 SET domain (MMSET), and fibroblast growth factor recep-
detected in the absence of pathological deposits.
tor 3 (FGFR3), an oncogenic receptor tyrosine kinase—at
 Tumors with translocations affecting any of the three MAF
the 4p16 band. The MMSET is dysregulated and a third
genes show a distinctive gene expression profile. Many of the
 of the t(4;14) translocation patients do not express the
 genes that are upregulated in these tumors are thought to
FGFR3, because this translocation is often seen as an
 be shared targets for all three MAF transcription factors. The
unbalanced rearrangement, with a loss of the derivative
t(14;16)(q32;q23) translocation involves the IGH@ (14q32)
chromosome 14. It is unknown whether the loss of FGFR3
locus and c-MAF (16q23) locus and is found in 6-7% of
expression is a primary or a secondary event, or even
patients with MM (Figure 41.27), with a lower incidence
whether dysregulation of FGFR3 is critical in pathogenesis.
in MGUS/SMM and is associated with poor outcome. Less
However, the dysregulation of MMSET in the t(4;14) PCM
 group suggests an important role for dysregulated MMSET
in the initiation and maintenance of the disease.
The t(4;14)(p16;q32) is only detectable by FISH or
RT-PCR methods. Cells with the t(4;14) also commonly
exhibit a loss of chromosome 13 and other deletions, and
 this has universally been associated with poor survival.
In late disease stages, the complex karyotypes can
include combinations of two translocations from the
 groups of multiple primary aberrations along with several
secondary aberrations. In some of these cases, one of the
translocations clearly is secondary, since it is found in only
a subset of tumor cells, or is presumptively secondary since
it is a complex translocation or insertion. These rare exam-
ples suggest that the three groups of translocations have
复
the potential to complement one another.
88
Secondary translocations, sometimes involving an Ig
locus, can occur at any stage of myelomagenesis. Two
FIGURE41.26 A pseudo-hypodiploid complex karyotype with an
loci, MYC and IGH@, are more commonly involved
d1 pue 1 awosowous pue 'st Auosouow '(tl: l) pasueequn
abnormality along with other aberrations.
in the development of secondary translocations. Other
8
88
FIGURE41.27 Bone marrow karyotype in a patient 
FIGURE 41.28 FISH with the dual color IGH@-FGFR3 probes shows
with plasma cell myeloma demonstrating 45,XX,t(2; 11)
normal, fusion, and fusion with secondary abnormalities (extra
(p11.2;p11.2),-10,t(14;16)(q32;q23).
copies of 4p and 14q32).
496
PLASMA CELL NEOPLASMS
abnormalities observed as part of the secondary aber-
 Deletion 17p13, resulting in the heterozygous loss or
rations include the loss or deletion of chromosome 13,
 inactivation of the tumor-suppressor TP53 gene, is an indi-
deletions and/or amplifications of chromosome 1, and
cator of very poor prognosis. It is more commonly identi-
deletion of the TP53 locus at chromosome 17p13.
fied by interphase FISH studies (n10%) and is considered
Translocations involving the MYC gene (8q24)
are
to be a late event. Deletion 17p patients (see Figure 41.29)
absent or very rare in MGUS. But heterogeneous transloca-
have more aggressive disease, a higher prevalence of extra-
tions involving MYC are seen in 15% of MM tumors, 44%
medullary disease, and overall shorter survival. It is rarely
of advanced tumors, and nearly 90% of Myeloma Cell
seen as a sole abnormality but frequently seen in sub-
Lines, and are noted commonly as part of complex rear-
clones along with other chromosomal aberrations.
rangements or insertions, sometimes involving three dif-
Cytogenetic abnormalities t(4;14), t(14;16), t(14;20),
ferent chromosomes.
 17p deletion, and high (>3%) proliferation index iden-
Most MYC gene rearrangements involve the IGH@
tify a subgroup of about 25% of patients with aggressive
 locus and are thought to represent a very late progression
(high risk) disease who are unlikely to do well with con-
event that occurs at a time when MM tumors are becom-
ventional therapy, and in whom alternative (experimental)
ing less stromal-cell-dependent and/or more proliferative.
 approaches can therefore be justified.
MYC translocations are rare in primary PCL.
10-20% of the secondary translocations involv-
ing the IGH@ locus in MGUS and PCM do not involve
MYC or any one of the seven recurrent partners. These
rearrangements are complex, unbalanced, and occur with
similar frequencies in hyperdiploid and non-hyperdip
loid tumors (whereas the recurrent or primary transloca-
tions occur predominantly in non-hyperdiploid tumors)
Thus, most of them are likely to represent secondary
Ig translocations that can occur at any stage of tumorigen-
esis, including MGUS.
Nearly 50% show chromosome 13 aberrations; most
(85%) exhibit monosomy 13, with 15% showing a dele-
tion of the 13q14 (Figures 41.29 and 41.30)
While earlier studies associated monosomy and/or
del(13q) with a poor prognosis, there is recent evidence
to suggest that the prognostic relevance is more associated
with other genetic aberrations. Monosomy 13 is more fre-
A
quently seen in association with t(4;14)(p16;q32), suggest-
 ing that chromosome 13 deletions may play an important
role in the clonal expansion of myeloma tumors.
16
17
B
FIGURE 41.30 (A) Karyotype abnormalities include monosomy
20
FIGURE41.29 Bone marrow karyotype in a patient with plasma
cell myeloma demonstrating 46,xX,del(13)(q13q22).
identify a complex three-way t(14;16)(q32;q23).
PLASMACYTOMA
497
DNA-based techniques, such as array comparative
genomic hybridization (AACGH) have identified ihe role
Box 41.7 Characteristics of Plasmacytoma
of the NFkB pathway in myeloma.
of Bone and Extramedullary Sites'
ACGH studies also identify chromosome 1 aberrations
No M-protein in serum or urine2
as the most common structural aberrations in PCM and
+
 Solitary bone or extramedullary tumor of monoclonal plasma
mostly involve interstitial or terminal deletions of 1p and
cells
whole-arm gains or amplification of 1q, particularly the
lq21 locus. Deletions of 1p are associated with a poor
 Bone marrow not consistent with plasma cell myeloma
?
 Normal skeletal survey
prognosis.
● No related organ or tissue impairment 
The 1q arm, particularly the 1q12→q23 region, con-
tains a large number of possible candidate genes that show
1The International Myeloma Working Group. Criteria for the classification
of monoclonal gammopathies. multiple myeloma and related disorders: a
amplification and/or deregulated expression  important
report of the International Myeloma working Group. Br J Haematol 2003: 121:
in myeloma. The whole-arm segments of 1q translocate
749-757.
randomly to non-homologous chromosomes—"jumping
2 A small amount of M-component may be present in some cases.
translocations" of 1q. Such instability likely offers prolifer-
ative advantage during tumor progression, and thus ampli-
fication of lq is associated with poor prognosis.
SOLITARY PLASMACYTOMA OF BONE
It is important to note that post-therapy PCM may also
exhibit chromosome anomalies that are typical of MDS
 Solitary plasmacytoma of bone is a rare condition and
such as +8, 5q-,7q-, 1l1q- and 20q-.
accounts for about 3-5% of the plasmacytic neoplasms.
Gene-expression  profiling (GEP)
）of bonemarrow
The median age is around 55 years and the male to
plasma cells is a powerful alternative way to identify cyto-
female ratio is about 2:1. It often involves the axial skel-
genetic abnormalities and provides insights into other bio-
eton, particularly thoracic vertebrae and ribs. Involvement
logical processes such as cell proliferation. GEP analysis
 of distal bones, particularly below the knees or elbows, is
can accurately classify patients into high risk and low risk
extremely rare. Bone pain at the site of the lesion is one
groups with favorable or unfavorable prognosis and identi-
 of the most common presenting symptoms. Infltration of
fies patients with high risk PCM more efficiently than does
the tumor cells into the surrounding soft tissue may result
 conventional testing.
in a palpable mass. Radiologic studies show no evidence
of additional lesions. Morphologic and immunopheno-
typic features are identical to those of PCM, but no serum
or urine M-protein is detected, and there is no evidence
Osteosclerotic Myeloma
 of anemia, hypercalcemia, renal insuffciency, or other
 organ or tissue impairment. Multiple solitary plasmacyto-
mas without evidence of PCM occur in up to 5% of cases.
Osteosclerotic myeloma, or POEMS syndrome, is char-
 Approximately half of patients with solitary plasmacytoma
      
of bone eventually develop PCM. Plasmacytomas of >5 cm
(P), organomegaly (O), endocrinopathy (E), monoclo-
diameter have a greater chance of conversion to PCM.
nal plasma cell disorder (M), and skin changes (S).
 Radiotherapy is the treatment of choice.
Other frequent features include sclerotic bone lesions,
Castleman disease, papilledema, serous effusions, and
thrombocytosis.
EXTRAMEDULLARY PLASMACYTOMA
The bone marrow biopsy sections show sclerotic
 Extramedullary plasmacytoma is a monoclonal plasma cell
bone and a monoclonal population of plasma cells.
neoplasm that arises outside the bone marrow. The most
Plasmacytosis is usually modest (median 5%), but the
frequent site of involvement is the upper respiratory tract,
bone marrow is often hypercellular with myeloid prepon-
including the nasal cavity and sinuses, nasopharynx, and
derance, increased megakaryocytes, and thick bone tra-
  ' a  ss o  An  '
beculae. The M-protein is typically small and sometimes
 gastrointestinal tract and urinary tracts, thyroid, male and
undetectable by routine serum protein electrophoresis.
female reproductive systems, parotid gland, lymph nodes,
testicles, and central nervous system (Figures 4l.3l and
41.32). The diagnosis is made based on the monoclonality
Plasmacytoma
of the plasma cell tumor and lack of evidence for PCM and
serum or urine M-protein. IgA is the most frequent immu-
 nophenotype, but again it is IgM that is typically assessed
Plasmacytoma is a solitary neoplasm of plasma cells
 at the molecular level for monoclonality. Approximately
involving bone or extramedullary sites. Plasmacytoma
 15% of the patients may eventually develop symptom-
demonstrates identical morphologic and immunopheno-
atic PCM. Surgery and/or radiation are the treatments of
typic features to those of PCM (Box 41.7).
choice.
498
 PLASMA CELL NEOPLASMS
FIGURE 41.31 SoLITARY
PLASMACYTOMA OF CONJUCTIVA. BiOpSy
section demonstrating a large
aggregate of plasma cells (A, low
power; B, intermediate power).
Immunohistochemical stains for
①138 (C) and kappa light chain 
(D) demonstrate a monoclonal
population of plasma cells.
Courtesy of G. Pezeshkpour, M.D.,
Department of Pathology, VA Greater
Los Angeles Heaithcare System.
disorder, and in about 10% of cases it is associated with
Deposition Diseases
symptomatic PCM.
In approximately 75% of cases, the fbrillary pro-
Monoclonal  immunoglobulin deposition diseases  are
tein is derived from the variable region of lambda light
 chain. The kappa light chain is involved in the remaining
monoclonal gammopathies characterized by the depo-
sition of Ig-derived proteins in the organs and tissues,
25%. There appears to be a correlation between the site
causing impairment of their function. These disorders
of involvement and the involved variable region of the
are divided into two major groups: (1) disorders with the
light chain. For example, the amyloid deposit in patients
deposition of fibrillary proteins (primary amyloidosis),
with dominant renal involvement is often derived from
and (2) disorders with the deposition of an amorphous,
V lambda IV, whereas in patients with dominant car-
non-fibrillary protein, known as monoclonal light and
diac involvement the amyloid deposit is derived from V
heavy chain deposition diseases.
lambda II or III.
Morphology and Laboratory Findings
PRIMARY AMYLOIDOSIS
"Amyloidosis" is a general term referring to a heteroge-
● The diagnosis of amyloidosis is based on biopsies obtained
from the affected organs. Liver and kidney biopsies are
 neous group of disorders characterized by the extracellular
positive in over 90% of cases, followed by abdominal fat pad
deposition of fbrillary proteins with antiparallel beta-
aspirate and biopsies of rectum, bone marrow (Figure 41.33).
pleated sheet configuration on X-ray diffraction. These
and skin.
● A serum or urinary monoclonal protein can be detected in
intense yellow-green fluorescence by thioflavine T and by
over 85% of patients, using immunofixation techniques. Also,
binding to Congo Red stain, leading to apple green bire-
a protein known as serum amyloid P component (SAP) is
fringence under polarized light. The major categories of
detected by scintigraphy in patients with primary amyloidosis.
amyloidosis include (1) primary amyloidosis, (2) second-
ary amyloidosis, (3) dialysis-related amyloidosis, (4) heri-
Molecuiar and Cytogenetic Studies
table amyloidosis, and (5) senile amyloidosis (Table 41.4).
Primary amyloidosis (AL) refers to a specific type of
Monosomy of chromosome 18 is the most common
amyloidosis in which the fibrillary protein is derived from
 abnormality in primary amyloidosis followed by t(1l;14)
monoclonal Ig light chains. Primary amyloidosis is con-
(q13;q32) and del(13q14). The most frequent clini-
sidered a variant of monoclonal plasma cell proliferative 
 cal symptoms in primary amyloidosis are (1) nephrotic
DEPOSITION DISEASES
499
FIGURE 41.32 PLASMABLASTIC
 PLASMACYTOMA OF TESTIS. BiOpSy
section (A, low power;
B, intermediate power; and C, high 
power). The neoplastic cells express
D138 (D), lambda light chain
(E, red) and Kl67 (F).
 Table 41.4
Major Categories of Amyloidosis!
 Amyloid Protein
Precursor
 Clinical Status
AL
Ig light chain
 Primary amyloidosis, local or systemic, associated
with monoclonal plasma cell disorders
AA
Apolipoprotein AA
 Secondary amyloidosis, systemic, associated with
chronic infections
Aβ2M
Beta-2 microglobulin
Hemodyalysis, systemic
AApoAl, AApoAll, AGel, ALys, ACys,
Apolipoprotein Al and All, gelsolin lysozyme,
Familial, systemic
others
crystatin C, and others 
Ab, APro, ATTR, AMed
Ab protein precursor, prolactin, transthretin,
Senile, local or systemic
lactadherin
Adapted from Buxbaum JN. The systemic amylcidoses. Cur Opin Rheumatol 2004; 16: 67-75.
syndrome with or without renal insufficiency, (2) cardio-
involvement, and circulating plasma cells v1% correlate
myopathy, (3) peripheral neuropathy, (4) hepatomegaly.
 with poor prognosis.
and (5) macroglossia. Elevated serum β2 microglobulin
The actuarial survival for 810 patients studied at the
and bone marrow plasma cells 10%, dominant cardiac
Mayo Clinic was 51% at 1 year, 16% at 5 years, and 4.7%
500
PLASMA CELL NEOPLASMS
 Table 41.5
Comparison between Primary Amyloidosis and Light
Chain Deposition Disease
Type
lg
Deposition
Congo Red
 Primary amyloidosis
 Light chain,
 Fibrillary
 Positive
(AL}
often 入
Light chain
 Light chain,
 Non-fibrillary
Negative
deposition (LCDD)
often k
mutations have been reported, practical testing is usu-
ally limited to a subset of the more common ones found
A
in  Mediterranean  populations.  Technical  approaches
 include DNA sequencing and allele-specific DNA probe
hybridization.
MONOCLONAL LIGHT AND HEAVY CHAIN
DISEASES
Light Chain and Heavy Chain Deposition Disease
The light chain deposition disease (LCDD) and heavy
chain deposition disease (HCDD) are clinical variants of
monoclonal plasma cell disorders characterized by the
deposition of abnormal light chain, heavy chain, or both
in the tissues or organs. The deposits, unlike primary amy-
loidosis, are not fibrillary, do not bind Congo Red, and
do not contain SAP. LCDD is more common than pri-
B
mary amyloidosis and often consists of kappa light chain
FIGURE 41.33 PRIMARY AMYLoIDosIs. Bone marrow biopsy section
(Table 41.5). The primary defect in LCDD appears to be
(A, low power; B, high power).
mutations in the Ig light chain variable region, with pre-
dominant involvement of V kIV of kappa light chain.
Deletion of the CH1 constant domain and point muta-
at 10 years. Progression to PCM is rare, and in one large
 tion of variable regions of the heavy chain are the primary
study it was reported in only 0.4% of the patients between
events in HCDD. These events lead to premature secretion
10 and 81 months. Therapeutic approaches include che-
of heavy chain binding protein and increased tendency
motherapy, such as melphalan with or without prednisone
for tissue deposition. HCDD of IgG1 and IgG3 isotypes
is associated with reduced complement activities. Many
or dexamethasone, and stem cell transplantation.
The most common form of heritable amyloidosis is famil-
 Organs may be involved, including kidneys, liver, heart,
ial Mediterranean fever, an autosomal recessive autoinflam-
nerves, and blood vessels. Approximately 85% of cases
matory disorder characterized by periodic fevers, abdominal
show a detectable serum M-component
 pain (peritonitis), pleuritis, arthritis, pericarditis, and skin
rash. It is most prevalent in individuals of Armenian descent,.
Heavy Chain Diseases
in whom the carrier frequency approaches 1 in 7, but is
also found in Arabs, Jews, Persians, Italians, and Greeks.
The heavy chain disease is a monoclonal lymphoplasma-
In addition to the periodic attacks of pain and fever, the life-
cytic disorder characterized by the production of incom-
threatening complication of the disease is amyloid depo-
    e   s  
sition, particularly in the kidneys. However, this form of
binding sites for light chains. There are three major catego-
amyloidosis is to be distinguished from the others discussed
ries of heavy chain diseases: α, Y, and μ.
here since it is neither related to plasma cell proliferation nor
The α heavy chain disease (aHCD, Mediterranean
is it composed predominantly of Ig protein components.
lymphoma) is considered a variant of MALT-type lym-
Differential diagnosis is made by the clinical his-
phoma. It occurs in older children and young adults and
tory and genetic testing. The causative gene, MVFV, will
is associated with gastrointestinal symptoms, such as mal-
often demonstrate mutations in the homozygous or 
absorption, intestinal obstruction, and diarrhea. αHCD
compound heterozygous state. Since over 60 different
is the most frequent heavy chain disease, with most
 DEPOSITION DISEASES 
501
reported cases being from the Middle East, North and
G
South Africa, and the Far East. The pathologic features
 are more or less similar to those described in MALT lym-
phoma, depicted by a mucosal infiltrate of centrocyte-like
lymphocytes and plasma cells. An abnormal heavy chain
protein is detected in the serum of 20-90% of patients.
Antibacterial therapy may completely resolve the disease
in early stages. Some cases may eventually transform to
large B-cell lymphoma. Despite the similar ethnic appel-
lation, this disorder has nothing to do with familial
Mediterranean fever, which is not a B-cell disorder, with
molecular studies demonstrating mutation of the MEFV
gene (Figure 41.34).
The  heavy chain disease (yHCD, Franklin disease)
 is a rare condition presenting with lymphadenopathy.
splenomegaly, and  hepatomegaly,  with  lymphoplasma-
cytic infiltration similar to lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma.
Immunofixation studies may show the presence of
serum IgG without light chain. Some patients may dem-
onstrate autoimmune disorders or chronic lymphocytic
leukemia.
 The μ heavy chain disease is a rare lymphoproliferative
disorder with clonal IgM molecules with defective variable
region. Clinically, it resembles chronic lymphocytic leuke-
mia and is often associated with hepatosplenomegaly. The
bone marrow is infiltrated by mature small lymphocytes
admixed with vacuolated plasma cells. Lymphadenopathy
is unusal.
3
4
B
FIGURE41.34 (A) DNA sequencing gel showing heterozygosity
for the V726A mutation in the 2 MEFVgene of a patient with
familial Mediterranean fever (the second mutation was M694V).
The red dots mark the nucleotide position showing both T
(normal) and C(mutant).(B) Reverse hybridization strips using 
allele-specific oligonucleotide probes directed against the most
prevalent mutations in the MEFV gene associated with familial
Mediterranean fever. Patient #3 is homozygous for mutation 
K695R (single arrow), and patient #4 is compound heterozygous
for mutations P369S and E148Q (double arrows).
502
 PLASMA CELL NEOPLASMS
Additional Resources
Albarracin F, Fonseca R: Plasma cell leukemia, Blood Rev 25:107-112.
expression, cytokine networks, and the bone marrow microenviron-
2011.
ment, Recent Results Cancer Res 183:39-86, 2011.
Anderson KC: New insights into therapeutic targets in myeloma,
Korde N, Kristinsson SY, Landgren O: Monoclonal gammopathy
Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program:184-190, 2011.
of undetermined significance (MGUS) and smoldering multiple
myeloma (SMM): novel biological insights and development of early
Buxbaum J: Mechanisms of disease: monoclonal immunoglobulin
deposition. Amyloidosis, light chain deposition disease, and light
treatment strategies, Blood 117:5573-5581, 2011.
and heavy chain deposition disease, Hematol Oncol Clin North Am
Landgren O, Kyle RA, Rajkumar SV: From myeloma precursor disease
6:323-346, 1992.
log saunoddo pue sidauos snsousep mau emnaau adnu c
Dimopoulos M, Kyle R, Fermand JP, et al: Consensus recommenda-
early intervention, Clin Cancer Res 17:1243-1252, 2011.
tions for standard investigative workup: report of the International
Lorsbach RB, Hsi ED, Dogan A, et al: Plasma cell myeloma and
Myeloma Workshop Consensus Panel 3, Blood 117:470l-4705, 2011.
related neoplasms, Am J Clin Pathol 136:168-182, 2011.
Ge F Bi LJ, Tao SC, et al. Proteomic analysis of multiple myeloma:
Ma ES, Shek TW, Ma SY: Non-secretory plasma cell myeloma of the
current status and future perspectives, Proteomics Clin Appl 5:30-37.
true non-producer type, Br I Haematol 138:56l, 2007.
2011.
Moehler T, Goldschmidt H: Therapy of relapsed and refractory mul-
Giralt S: Stem cell transplantation for multiple myeloma: current
tiple myeloma, Recent Results Cancer Res 183:239-271, 2011.
and future status, Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program:19l-196.
Palumbo A, Anderson K: Multiple myeloma, N Engl I Med 364: 1046-
2011.
1060, 2011.
Hamidah NH, Azma RZ, Ezalia E, et al: Non-secretory multiple
 Roussel M, Facon T, Moreau P, et al: Firstline treatment and mainte-
myeloma with diagnostic challenges, Cin Ter 16l:445-448, 2010.
nance in newly diagnosed multiple myeloma patients, Recent Results
Hillengass J. Moehler T, Hundemer M: Monoclonal gammopathy
Cancer Res 183:189-206, 2011.
 and smoldering multiple myeloma: diagnosis, staging, prognosis.
Sawyer IR: The prognostic significance of cytogenetics and molecular
management, Recent Results Cancer Res 183: 113-131, 2011.
profiling in multiple myeloma, Cancer Genet 204:3-12, 2011.
Klein B, Seckinger A, Moehler T, et al: Molecular pathogenesis of
multiple myeloma: chromosomal aberrations, changes in gene
Mature T- and NK-Cell
NeoplasmsOverview
the cortex. Approximately 65% of the thymic cortical
T-Cells
T-cells retain their expression of TdT. Lymphocytes with
higher receptor (TCR/CD3) affinity for self major histo-
T-cells are derived from pluripotent hematopoietic
compatibility complex (MHC) molecules are selected to
stem cells in the bone marrow. The precursor T-cells
proceed, and those with low affinity are eliminated by
(CD34+, TdT+, CD1a-/+, IcCD3+, CD5+, and CD7+)
apoptosis. The T-cells that are selected on class I MCH
leave the bone marrow and enter the thymus for fur-
become CD4-CD8+ (cytotoxic), and those which are
ther maturation and functional development. This matu-
selected by class II MHC become CD4 + CD8- (helper).
ration process starts from the subcapsular zone of the
The thymic medulla contains a mixture of helper (CD4+)
thymus and extends to the thymic cortex and then thy-
and cytotoxic (CD8+) T-cells. Approximately 60-70%
mus medulla (Figure 42.1). In the subcapsular zone,
of the T-cells are CD4+ and 30-40% CD8+. Medullary
the precursor T-cells
 T-cells do not express TdT.
(prothymocytes) proliferate and
rearrange their TCRa chains. They express TdT, CDla,
The CD4+ T-cells differentiate into Th1, Th2, and Th17.
IcCD3, CD5, and CD7, but are negative for CD4 and
The Th1 cells produce IL-2, INF-y, and lymphotoxin. Th2
CD8 (double negative). When the T-cells enter the cor-
cells produce IL-4, IL-5, IL-9, IL-13, and GM-CSF, and
Th17 cells produce IL-6 and IL-17.
positive) and rearrange their TCRβ chains. Therefore, the
Approximately 90-95% of the circulating T-cells carry
structure of surface TCR/CD3 complex is completed in
TCRaβ receptors. The remainder 5-10% develop a TCR
receptor with Y and & chains. A small proportion of y8
T-cells is generated in the thymus, but a larger proportion
Thymus
is made in the GI tract. The proportion of y8 T-cells in the
Bone Marrow
GI tract and skin is about 25-30%. The y5 T-cell are nega-
Subcapsular Zone
tive for CD4 and CD8 (double negative).
Abnormal expression of T-cell-associated markers is a fre-
TdT+,CD1a+/,lcCD3+
TdT+,CD1a+/-IcCD3+,CD5+,
quent finding in T-cell neoplasms (Figure 42.2). For exam-
CD7+,CD4-CD8-TCRαrearranged
CD5+,CD7+
ple, loss of CD7 is a common feature in mycosis fungoides/
Sézary syndrome and adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma,
CD26 expression is lost in mycosis fungoides/Sezary syn-
drome, and coexpression of CD4 and CD8 is noted in a
TdT+/-IcCD3+,CD5+,CD7+
Precursor T-Cell
proportion of T-prolymphocytic leukemias, and peripheral
CD4+,CD8+,TCRαβ rearranged
T-cell lymphoma, NOS.
Clonality in T-cell neoplasms is established by dem-
Medulla
onstration of TCR rearrangement and cytogenetic abnor-
malities (Figure 42.3). The most frequent cytogenetic and
abnormalities include loss or addition of 4q, 5q, 6q, 7q,
CD3+,CD5+
CD3+,CD5+
8q, 9q, 10q, 12q, 13q, 17q, and X, and trisomy 3 and 5.
CD7+,CD4+
CD7+,CD8+
Isochromosome 7q is associated with hepatosplenic T-cell
lymphoma (Figure 42.4), t(14;14)(q11;q32) (7CL1A-TCL1B)
FIGURE 42.1 Scheme of T-cell differentiation.
is reported in T-prolymphocytic leukemia (Figure 42.5),
Atlas of Hematopathology. D0l: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00042-5
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
504
MATURE T- AND NK-CELL NEOPLASMS—OVERVIEW
SS
CD45
CD7
CD2
B
CD3
CD7
CD4
FIGURE 42.2 ABERRANCIES OF MATURE T-CELL NEOPLASMS DETECTED
BY FLow cYToMETRY. Identification of distinct T-cell aberrancies
by MFC is important in evaluating mature T-cell neoplasms. In
general, various aberrancies can be detected, and here are some
examples of abnormal mature T-cells. (arrows) (A) Dim expression
of CD45; (B) Coexpression of dim CD3 and CD56; (C) Bright CD2
and complete loss of CD7; (D) Bright CD5 and complete loss of
CD7: (E) Partial dim expression of CD2 and loss of CD5; (F) Partial
dim expression of cD8.
and a garden variety of translocation of the ALK gene on
chromosome 2p23 is observed with other genes in anaplas-
tic large cell lymphoma (Figure 42.6). Clonal integration of
HTLV-1 is detected in adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma. In
 T-cell malignancies, often the karyotype can be very complex
involving multiple genomic regions (Figure 42.7)
NK-cells
Natural killer (NK) cells are a subtype of T-cells and play
a critical role in host defense against invading infectious
pathogens and malignant transformation. NK-cells origi-
 nate in the bone marrow from hematopoietic progenitor
 cells and migrate to the peripheral blood, spleen, lymph
 nodes, and other tissues. They are characterized by express-
ing CD56 with or without CD16. They do not develop a
complete TCR/CD3 complex receptor, and thus do not
express surface CD3. But activated NK-cells express the
cytoplasmic ε and  chains of CD3.
Two
types
of
NK-cells
are
recognized:
(1)
CD56brightCD16- and (2) CD56dimCD16+. The CD56bright
CD16- subset is primarily concentrated in lymphoid tissue,
secretes cytokines to help coordinate adaptive immunity.
and is the major subtype recruited to sites of inflamma-
C
tion and malignancies. In general, neoplastic proliferation
FlGURE 42.3 Time-course of T-cell receptor-y clonality studies by
of this subtype leads to an aggressive clinical course. The
 PCR in a patient recently diagnosed and then treated for T-cell
CD5gdimCD16+ subset constitutes about 90% of NK-cells,
leukemia. (A) PCR profle at time of initial diagnosis, showing only
donal peaks. (B) Same study on a specimen from 2 weeks later,
 primarily circulates in peripheral blood, and demonstrates
still showing the clonal signals but now with a background of
potent cytotoxicity. Colonal proliferation of this subtype is
recovering polyclonal (non-malignant) cells. (C) Results 1 month
usually associated with a chronic indolent clinical course.
later, now showing only a polyclonal pattern.
NK-CELLS
505
22
21
15
14
13
12
1
11.2
8
12
+
8
2
31
17
32
33
35
36
B
7
20
22
FIGURE 42.4 (A) Karyotype and (B) FISH study of tumor cells in a patient with hepatosplenic lymphoma demonstrating 46,XX,iso(7)(q10).
88
!
VV
6
2
5
高
A
21
22
FIGURE 42.5 Karyotype of tumor cells in a patient with
T-prolymphocytic leukemia, demonstrating t(14;14)(q11;32).
differentiate into CD5gdim NK-cells under certain condi-
m
tions. NK-cells account  for 5-25% of peripheral blood
lymphocytes.
 Morphologically, NK-cells are considered a variant of
large granular lymphocytes—medium to large cells with
abundant cytoplasm and azurophilic cytoplasmic granules.
Large granular lymphocytes (LGL) are of two major types:
(1) NK-type and (2) T-type (Figure 42.8). The neoplasms
of NK-cells do not express surface CD3, are often positive
2
B
for CD56, and show germline TCR, whereas, tumors of
FIGURE 42.6 (A) Section of karyotype demonstrating t(2;5)
T-LGL express surface CD3, are often CD56-, but express 
 (p32;q35) in a patient with anaplastic large cell lymphoma.
CD16 and CD57 (Figure 42.9), and show TCR gene
(B) FISH with ALK (2p23) dual-color, breakapart rearrangement
rearrangement.
 probe shows split signals.
506
MATURET-AND NK-CELL NEOPLASMS—OVERVIEW
NK-cell neoplasms show germline TCR, but may dem-
onstrate clonal cytogenetic abnormalities, such as deletion
of 6q, 7q, 7p, or 1lq. Clonal integration of EBV is frequent.
Classifcation
Mature T- and NK-cell neoplasms represent a wide spec-
trum of lymphoid malignancies developed from clonal
proliferation of mature T- and NK-cells. These disorders
may involve bone marrow and peripheral blood (leuke-
mia), lymphoid or extramedullary tissues (lymphoma).
or both. Mature T- and NK-cell neoplasms comprise 15%
of all lymphoid tumors. They are divided into three major
clinicopathological groups:
FIGURE 42.7 Complex karyotype abnormalities observed in a
patient with peripheral T-cell lymphoma.
● Leukemic or disseminated, such as T-cell prolymphocytic
 leukemia, T-cell large granular lymphocyte leukemia, chronic
lymphoproliferative disorders of NK-cells, aggressive NK-cell
leukemia, and adult T-cell lymphoma/leukemia;
● Nodal, such as peripheral T-cell lymphoma, NOS, angio-
Large Granular Lymphocytes
immunoblastic T-cell lymphoma, and anaplastic large cell
lymphoma:
● Extranodal, such as hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma, extrano-
dal NK/T-cell lymphoma of nasal type, enteropathy-type T-cell 
NKCells
TCells
lymphoma, mycosis fungoides/Sezary syndrome, primary
sCD3-
sCD3+
dtaneous anaplastic large cell lymphoma, subcutaneous pan-
cCD3+
cCD3+
niculitis-like T-cell lymphoma, and other primary cutaneous
CD16+
GermlineTCR
lymphomas.
CD57+
TCRaβ+
The current WHO classification of mature T- and
CD56strong
CD56m
TCRrearranged
CD16-
CD16+
 NK-cell neoplasms is presented in Table 42.1. The neo-
plsms in order of frequency are: peripheral T-cell lym-
FIGURE 42.8 Subtypes of large granular lymphocytes.
phoma, NOS (about 30%); angioimmunoblastic T-cell
lymphoma (18.5%); ALK+ and ALK- anaplastic large
cell lymphoma (12%); extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma
of nasal type (about 10.5%); adult T-cell leukemia/
lymphoma (about 9.5%); and enteropathy-type T-cell
lymphoma (about 5%).
SSC-H
T- and NK-cell neoplasms show significant geographi-
cal variations in their incidence. For example, adult T-cell
leukemia/lymphoma is more frequent in Japan and the
Caribbean basin, or extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma,
FSC-H
CD2
CD2
nasal type is much more frequent in Hong Kong than
Europe and North America. Enteropathy-associated T-cell
lymphoma most commonly is seen in people of Welsh or
Irish descent.
Diagnosis of T- and NK-cell neoplasms, similar to the
 other hematopoietic/lymphoid tumors, requires a multi
disciplinary approach based on a combination of morpho-
CD2
CD56
CD16+CD56
logic evaluation, immunophenotyping, molecular analysis,
FIGURE 42.9 MATURE NK-CELL NEOPLASM DETECTED BY FLoW CYTOMETRY.
and cytogenetic studies.
Open scatter gate (in blue) highlights a neoplastic NK-cell
enriched population, which is defined by CD2 backgating. The
neoplastic NK-cells are positive for CD2 (bright), CD16 (dim).
and CD45 (not shown), but negative for CD3, CD7, and CD56. In
addition (not shown), they are negative for CD4, CD5, and CD8.
CLASSIFICATION
507
Table 42.1
 Classifcation of T- and NK-cell Neoplasms
WHO Classification
Predominant Immunophenotype
Molecular/Cytogenetics
 T-cell large granular lymphocytic
CD3+, CD8+,TCRαβ++, CD16+, CD57+
Rearranged TCR
 leukemia 
 Chronic lymphoproliferative disorders
sCD3-,cCD3+,CD8±, CD16+,CD56±,CD57±
None
of NK-cells
 Aggressive NK-cell leukemia 
CD2+,sCD3-,cCD3+, CD56+, CD16±
del(6xq21q25)
 Extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma,
CD2+,sCD3-,cCD3+, CD56+, CP+1,EBV+
del(6X(q21q25), i(6)(p10)
 nasal type
T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia
CD3+, CD4+ or CD4+/CD8+, CD7+, TCRαβ++, TCL1+
Rearranged TCR, t(14;14)(q11;q32),.
del(11q)
Adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma
CD2+,CD3+,CD4+, CD5+, CD7-,CD25+, FOXP3+
 Rearranged TCR, HTLV-1
 Hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma 
CD3+, TCRy8+, CD4-,CD5-,CD8±, CD56±, TA-1±
Rearranged TCR, i(7)(q10)
 Enteropathy-associated T-cell
CD3+,CD7+,CD8-, CP+, CD4-, CD5-,CD103
Rearranged TCR, 1q+, 5q+
 lymphoma
 Mycosis fungoides
CD2+, CD3+,CD4+, CD5+, CD7-
Rearranged TCR, STAT3 activation
 Sezary syndrome
CD2+, CD3+,CD4+, CD5+, CD7-,CD26-
Rearranged TCR, deletion of 1p, 6q, 10q,
17p,19
 Subcutaneous panniculitis-like T-cell 
TCRαβ+, CD8+, CP+,CD56-
 Rearranged TCR
lymphoma
 Primary cutaneous CD30+ T-cell
CD3+,CD4+,CD30+, CD8-,CP+
Rearranged TCR
 lymphoid disorders
 Primary cutaneous y8 T-cell lymphoma 
TCRy8+,βF1-,CD3+, CD56+, CP+, CD4-,CD5-,
Rearranged TCR
CD8-
 Angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma
CD3+, CD4+, CD7±, CD8-,CD10+, PD1+,CXCL13+
Rearranged TcR, 3+, 5+, and X+
 Anaplastic large cell lymphoma.
CD30+,ALK+, EMA+, CD3±, CD2±, CD4±, CD5±, CP+
t(2;5)(p23;q35); ALK-NPM, other variants
ALK-positive
 Anaplastic large cell lymphoma.
CD30+, ALK-, CD43+, CD3±, CD2±, CD4±, CD5±, CP+
Rearranged TCR, lack of t(2;5)(p23;q35)
ALK-negative
 Peripheral T-cell lymphoma, NOS
CD3+,CD4+,CD5±, CD7±, CD8-, TCRαβ++
Rearranged TcR, chromosomal gains and
losses
 EBV+ T-cell lymphoproliferative
EBV+,CD2+, CD3+, CD56-, TIA-1+
Rearranged TCR
 disorder of childhood
Cytoplasmic proteins.
508
3MATURET-ANDNK-CELLNEOPLASMS—OVERVIEW
Additional Resources
Alam R, Gorska M: 3: Lymphocytes, J Allergy Clin Immunol
Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Vardiman IW. et al: Hematopathology.
111(2 Suppl):S476-S485, 2003.
Philadelphia, 20l0, Saunders/Elsevier.
Balato A, Unutmaz D, Gaspari AA: Natural killer T cells: an uncon-
Liang X, Graham DK: Natural killer cell neoplasms, Cancer l12:
ventional T-cell subset with diverse effector and regulatory functions,
1425-1436, 2008.
I Invest Dermatol 129:1628-1642, 2009.
Rolink AG, Massa S, Balciunaite G, et al: Early lymphocyte develop-
Chaplin DD: Overview of the immune response, J Allergy Clin
ment in bone marrow and thymus, Swiss Med Wkly 136:679-683.
Immunol 125(2 Suppl):S3-S23, 2010.
2006.
de Leval L, Gaulard P: Pathology and biology of peripheral T-cell
Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, et al: WHO classification of
lymphomas, Histopathology 58:49-68, 2011.
tumours of haematopoietic and lymphoid tissues, ed. 4, Lyon, 2008,
Dunleavy K, Piekarz RL, Zain J. et al: New strategies in peripheral
International Agency for Research on Cancer.
T-cell lymphoma: understanding tumor biology and developing
novel therapies, Clin Cancer Res 16:5608-5617, 2010.
Large Granular
Lymphocytic Neoplasms
and Related Disorders
According to the WHO, the large granular lymphocytic
5-25% of the peripheral blood lymphocytes and are
 neoplasms and related disorders are classified as follows:
characterized by abundant cytoplasm with azurophilic
1. T-cell large granular lymphocytic (T-LGL) leukemia
granules (Figure 43.1). The azurophilic granules contain
2. Chronic
 lymphoproliferative
disorders
of
NK-cells
cytolytic components, such as perforin and granzymes.
(Provisional Entity)
 sie s  d  e si 
3. Aggressive NK-cell leukemia
creating pores in the plasma membrane of the target cells.
 4. Extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type.
Granzymes are proteases that induce apoptosis in virus-
infected cells.
The LGLs are divided into two major categories: T-cell
and NK-cell. The T-LGL cells typically express CD3,
T-Cell Large Granular Lymphocytic
CD8, CD16, CD57, and show TCR gene rearrangements,
whereas the NK-cells express CD56, are negative for sur-
Leukemia
face CD3, may express CD8 and CD16, and do not show
TCR gene rearrangement (see Figure 42.8 in Chapter 42).
The neoplastic LGL disorders are characterized by persis-
T-cell large granular lymphocytic (T-LGL) leukemia is a
 si 1  (s 9) 
 chronic lymphoproliferative disorder characterized by persis-
evidence of infiltration of various organs, such as upper
 tent T-cell large granular lymphocytosis (usually >2000/μL),
respiratory tract, bone marrow, spleen, and liver.
anemia and or neutropenia. There is a strong association with
There are two types of NK-cells:
rheumatoid arthritis.
● The CD5GbrighiCD16- subset is primarily concentrated in
T-LGL leukemia accounts for 2-3% of mature T-cell leul-
 kemias and represents the vast majority of leukemias with
lymphoid tissue, secretes cytokines to help coordinate adap-
large granular lymphocytes. The median age is around 60
tive immunity, and is the major subtype recruited to sites of
years with only 10% of patients younger than 40 years.
eration of this subtype leads to an aggressive clinical course.
The clinical symptoms are primarily related to the patient's
● The CD56dimCD16+ subset comprises about 90% of the
 neutropenia and anemia, such as recurrent infections,
NK cells, primarily circulates in peripheral blood and 
demonstrates potent cytotoxicity. Colonal proliferation of this
 patients are asymptomatic at the time of diagnosis. T-LGL
subtype is usually associated with an indolent clinical course
leukemia has been frequently observed in association with
(see Figure 42.8 in Chapter 42).
connective tissue diseases, primarily rheumatoid arthritis.
Reactive (non-clonal) large granular lymphocytosis is
Rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibodies, and cir-
a relatively frequent phenomenon and has been observed 
culating immune complexes are detected in 40-60%
in a variety of conditions, such as viral infections, colla-
 of patients. Rheumatoid arthritis has been reported in
gen vascular disorders, myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS),
about 25% of patients with T-LGL leukemia. Many of
non-Hodgkin lymphomas, hemophagocytic syndrome,
these patients present the triad combinations of neutro-
and in patients with solid tumors. However, in some cases
penia, rheumatoid arthritis, and splenomegaly (Felty's
of MDS an abnormal population of CD8+ T-LGL cells is
syndrome). Other associated disorders include B-cell lym-
detected by flow cytometry, which is clonal by PCR, and
phoid malignancies, non-Hodgkin lymphoma, thymoma,
 may play a critical role in the development of MDS.
monoclonal gammopathies, and MDS.
Atlas of Hematopathology. D0l: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00043-7
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
510
FIGURE 43.2 T-CELL LARGE GRANULAR LYMPHOCYTIC LEUKEMIA. Peripheral
blood smear shows large lymphocytes with abundant cytoplasm
FIGURE 43.1 Large granular lymphocytes. Cytoplasmic granules
 and variable numbers of azurophilic cytoplasmic granules
in LGL cells are usually clearly visible (A) but are sometimes
(A and B).
difficult to detect (B).
T-LGL leukemia is considered a chronic and indo-
● Granulocytopenia is observed in over 80% of patients, with
 lent disorder with reported median survival of >10 years.
approximately half of the patients demonstrating <500/μL abso-
lute neutrophil counts. Neutropenia is attributed to different pos-
However, patients with severe neutropenia, "B" symptoms,
sible mechanisms, such as induction of apoptosis in neutrophils 
and CD56+ tumor cells have a less favorable prognosis
by Fas ligand secreted by the leukemic LGL cells, bone marrow
 and require treatment. Therapeutic approaches include
 infiltration, splenomegaly, or an autoimmune process.
low-dose chemotherapy with methotrexate, cyclophospha-
+
Anemia is observed in about half of patients, which may be
mide, or cyclosporin as single agents or in combination
with prednisone.
mechanisms of anemia include an autoimmune process, sple-
nomegaly, bone marrow infiltration, or pure red cell aplasia.
T-LGL leukemia is reported as the most common underlying
MORPHOLOGY
cause of the pure red cell aplasia. The inhibition of erythroid
mlony-forming units (CFLI-E) and burst-forming units (BFLI-E)
● T-LGL leukemia typically shows a persistent (>6 months) abso-
by the T-LGL leukemic cells has been observed in patients with
lute large granular lymphocytosis of >2000/μL (Figure 43.2).
pure red cell aplasia.
● The total lymphocyte count in most patients is modestly ele-
 Moderate thrombocytopenia may be present, due to an auto-
vated (5000-10,000/μL), but in about one-fourth of the cases
immune process, bone marrow infiltration, or secondary to
it is within normal limits. In a minority of patients (about
splenomegaly.
 5%), the absolute LGL count is <1000/μL, or the large lym-
 The bone marrow is involved in about 90% of cases. The pat-
phocytes lack cytoplasmic azurophilic granules, despite their
tern of leukemic infiltration is usually interstitial and/or sinu-
CD3, CD16 and CD57 coexpression.
soidal (Figure 43.3).
T-CELLLARGEGRANULARLYMPHOCYTICLEUKEMIA
511
FIGURE 43.3 T-CELLLARGE GRANULAR
LYMPHOCYTIC(T-LGL) LEUKEMIA.
Peripheral blood smear shows
large granular lymphocytes (A).
Bone marrow biopsy section
demonstrates a hypercellular
marrow with the presence of
scattered lymphocytes and plasma
cells (B, low power; C, high power).
Immunohistochemical stains reveal
small aggregates and scattered cells 
expressing CD3 (D), CD8 (E) and
granzyme B (F).
● Involvement of the spleen is a common feature, with infiltra-
Rare variants of CD4+ mature T-cell phenotype (Figure 43.4B)
tion of the red pulp. often associated with white pulp hyper-
 Or gamma/delta T-cells (Figure 43.4C).
plasia secondary to the presence of an autoimmune condition
Immunohistochemical
studies
demonstrate
the
(Felty's syndrome).
following.
The liver infiltration may involve portal and sinusoidal areas.
Involvement of the lymph nodes and other organs is unusual.
Most cases show a mature post-thymic phenotype and typi-
cally express CD3, CD8, TCR-αβ. CD16, CD57, CD122 (IL-2
receptor-β).
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
The fumor cells are positive for cytotoxic granule markers
Multiparametric flow cytometry (MFC) features of T-LGL
TIA-1 and granzyme B.
 A minor subtype is characterized by the expression of CD4.
leukemia include:
CD26, CD56, 0r TCR-6.
● Cytotoxic mature T-cell phenotype in the vast majority of
The CD56+ cases are often associated with a more aggressive
cases, with expression of CD8, surface CD3, and T-cell recep-
clinical course.
tor alpha/beta (Figure 43.4A):
 Several monoclonal antibodies are raised against the TCR
●
 Pan T-cell aberrancies with variably reduced expression of
variable domain and are available for immunophenotypic
CD5 and or CD7:
analysis of TCR. Of these, monoclonal antibodies against the
Expression of CD16 and CD57 in the vast majority of cases
Vβ 13.1 region have been reported to be highly associated
● CD56 positivity in some cases
with T-LGL leukemia.
512
AbnormalT-cells
CD56
CD16+CD56
CD8
/del
8
CD7
CD57
TCRalpha/beta
A
FIGURE 43.4A FLow cYToMETRIc FINDINGs oF T-LGL LEUKEMIA, cD8 PosITvE. Lymphocyte-enriched gate of peripheral blood reveals mostly
abnormal T-cells (arrows). Compared with the background normal T-cells, the neoplastic T-cells display aberrant phenotype with
positivity of CD2 (dim), CD3, CD5 (dim), CD7 (partial and dim), CD8, CD16 (dim), CD56 (small subset), CD57, and expression of TCR
alpha/beta.
Abnormal T-cells
H-OSS
FSC-H
CD56
CD4
CD5
CD7
CD57
TCRalpha/beta
B
FIGURE 43.4B FLow cYToMETRIc FINDINGs OF T-LGL LEUKEMIA, cD4 PosITvE. Open Scatter gate (in purple) of peripheral blood highlights T-cell
enriched population (circled), which is verified by CD3 backgating. Most of the T-cells are abnormal (arrows), expressing CD2, CD3,
 are negative for CD8, CD16, and CD25 (not shown).
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
● Most T-LGL leukemia cases will manifest a normal karyotype.
Fewer than 10% of cases will exhibit karyotypic abnormalities,
● The T-LGL leukemia cells show TCR-β and/or TCR- chain
which include trisomies of chromosomes 3. 8. and 14,
rearrangement by Southern blot or PCR. TCR-β probes are
deletions of chromosomes 6 and 5q, and 14q (Figure 43.8).
used for Southern blot analysis (Figure 43.5), whereas the
TCR-y region is most often used as the primary PCR target
(Figures 43.6 and 43.7) because it is much smaller and thus
easier to amplify with just a few primer sets.
CHRONIC LYMPHOPROLIFERATIVE DISORDER OF NK CELLS 
513
FIGURE 43.4C FLOW CYTOMETRIC FINDINGS 0F T-LGL
LEUKEMIA WITH EXPRESSION OF GAMMA/DELTA. MOSt
 Of the T-cells are abnormal (circle and arrows),
expressing CD2 (dim), CD3 (bright), CD7 (dim),
CD16 + 56 (partial), CD57 (major subset), and 
Gao
TCR gamma/delta. They are negative for CD4,
CD5,and CD8.
CD2
CD7
CD4
CD16+56
CD57
TCRgamma/delta
C
BamHI
HindIII
EcoRI
2
C
2
C
2
FIGURE 43.6 Clonal TCRG gene rearrangementin T-LGL
leukemia . Discrete clonal PCR peaks are demonstrated above
the polyclonal background smear in two of the four TCRG gene
FIGURE 43.5 Clonal TCRB gene rearrangement in T-LGL leukemia
regions targeted (Group 1 and Altvy, arrows).
detected by Southern blotting using the TC β probe. Non-
germline, rearranged hybridization bands are seen with two of
the three restriction enzymes used (BamHl, Hindll, arrows), which
is suffcient to diagnose T-cell clonality.
Splitsignals
2222
Chronic Lymphoproliferative
Disorder of NK Cells
Chronic  lymphoproliferative  disorder  is  character-
31
ized by a persistent NK-cell lymphocytosis (>2000/μL,
32
>6 months) with an indolent clinical course. In the vast
14
majority of patients, there are no clinical symptoms and
FIGURE 43.7 T-cell receptor gene rearrangement confirmed by
NK-lymphocytosis is  an  incidental finding.  However, 
a dual-color TCR-α/8 FISH probe at 14q11.2 in an interphase
anemia, neutropenia, peripheral neuropathy, nephrotic 
nucleus.
514
LARGE GRANULARLYMPHOCYTICNEOPLASMSAND RELATEDDISORDERS
FIGURE 43.8 Karyotype of tumor cells in a patient with T-cell large
 granular leukemia showing an interstitial deletion of 14q.
syndrome, and/or splenomegaly have been observed in
rare instances. The neoplastic nature of this disorder is
uncertain.
Asymptomatic patients are followed with no specific
 medication, and the minority of symptomatic patients
receive immunosuppressive therapy. In rare instances,
transformation to an aggressive phase occurs, but such
cases lack EBV association.
MORPHOLOGY
FIGURE 43.9 CHRoNIC LYMPHoPRoLIFERATIVE DISORDER. (A, B) Peripheral
Persistent large granular lymphocytosis (>2000/μL). The
 blood smear showing large granular lymphocytes.
large granular lymphocytes show abundant cytoplasm
with azurophilic granules (Figure 43.9).
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
CD5
SS
 MFC studies (Figure 43.10) demonstrate:
● Absent surface CD3 expression;
CD45
CD2
CD7
 Expression of CD16 and common expression of dim CD56: 
● Aberrant expression profiles of CD2. CD7. and CD57.
compared with normal NK-cells.
只
In addition to the above features, immunohistochemi-
cal studies are positive for cytotoxic granule markers TIA1
 and granzyme B.
CD8
CD16+CD56
TCR alpha/beta
FIGURE 43.10 FLOW CYTOMETRIC FINDINGS OF CHRONIC LYMPHOPROLIFERATVE
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
DISORDER OF NK-CELLS WITH CONCURRENT ABNORMAL T-CELL SUBSET.
Lymphocyte-enriched gate (in magenta) of peripheral blood shows 
●Vast majority of the cases show normal karyotype.
mostly neoplastic NK-cells (arrows), positive for CD2, CD16+56 (dim),
 Gene rearrangement studies for TCR and IGH@ are negative.
and CD45; but negative for MD7, CD8, and surface CD3. In addition
EBV is negative.
to the neoplastic NK-cells, a smallsubset (circles) ofthe T-cells is
 X-chromosome inactivation studies may suggest clonality in
abnormal, expressing CD2, CD3 (bright), CD5 (dim), CD7 (dim), CD8
female patients.
(dim), CD16/D56 (dim), and TCR alpha/beta (dim). Molecular studies
have revealed clonal T-cell gene rearrangement several times over
the years, which led to the misinterpretation of T-LGL leukemia in the 
past, overlooking the neoplastic NK-cells.
AGGRESSIVE NK-CELL LEUKEMIA
515
Aggressive NK-Cell Leukemia
Aggressive  NK-cell leukemia is characterized by sys-
temic proliferation of LGLs of NK type (NK-LGL), strong
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) association, and an aggressive
clinical course.
It affects younger individuals with a median age of
about 40 years. The disease presents with fever, night
sweats, weight loss, anemia or pancytopenia, and often
massive hepatosplenomegaly. Multiorgan failure is the
major cause of death, with a survival of <l year in most
instances. Chemotherapy has not been effective.
MORPHOLOGY
● The peripheral blood shows an absolute lymphocytosis
(usually >10,000/μL) with increased proportion of LGLs.
These cells have abundant light blue cytoplasm containing
azurophilic granules (Figure 43.1l). The nuclei are round,
chromatic. The nuclear chromatin is condensed and nucle-
oli are indistinct. The amount and size of the azurophilic
granules are variable. According to some observers, these
cells are slightly larger than the normal LGLs seen in the
peripheral blood.
●
 Anemia is common and usually severe, and thrombocytope-
nia is frequent. [n contrast to T-LGL leukemia, severe neutro-
penia is less common.
● Bone marrow is almost always infiltrated by the neoplastic
cells. The involvement is diffuse, focal, interstitial, or sinu-
soidal (Figure 43.12). The infiltrating lymphoid cells may
be mixed with normal hematopoietic cells and are some-
times difficult to detect. The neoplastic cells may appear
B
pleomorphic with large immature forms (Figure 43.13).
Scattered reactive histiocytes may be present, some showing
hemophagocytosis.
● The extramedullary infltrations may mimic exiranodal NK/T-
cell lymphoma of the nasal type (see below) and often show vas-
cular involvement (angiocentric pattern) and areas of necrosis.
● Most patients show splenic and hepatic involvement, often
with massive hepatosplenomegaly. The leukemic infiltration
in the spleen involves the red pulp.
●Other frequently involved organs
include
the liver.
gastrointestinal tract, and lymph nodes. The cerebrospinal and
 peritoneal fluids may be involved.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
MFC findings (Figure 43.14) are:
●Negative for surface CD3:
鲁
Positive for CD2 and CD56:
FIGURE 43.11 AGGREssIvE NK-cELL LEUKEMIA. Peripheral bloOd 
Commonly positive for CD16 and occasionally positive for
(A, B) and bone marrow (C) smears demonstrating large granular
CD11b, but often negative for CD16 and CD57.
lymphocytes.
516
 LARGE GRANULAR LYMPHOCYTIC NEOPLASMS AND RELATED DISORDERS
● Evidence of EBV infection in clonal episomal form has been
observed in the majority of cases, and EBNA-1 and EBER-1
can be detected by in situ hybridization techniques.
● The non-random cytogenetic abnormalities noted include:
gains of chromosomes 1p. 6p. 8, 11q, 12q, 17q, 19p. 20q, and
Xp. losses of 6q (mostly q21→q25 by FISH). 7p. 11q. 13q. and
17p (Figure 43.16).
● A possible involvement of 8p22-p23, due to translocations
involving 8p23, has been reported in NK-cell neoplasms, with
the partner chromosomes being 8q13, 17q24, and 1q10.
Extranodal NK/T-Cell Lymphoma,
Nasal Type
 Extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type is character-
ized by strong EBV association and angiocentric infltra-
tion, leading to vascular destruction and necrosis. The
nasopharynx is the most common site of involvement, but
 other extranodal organs such as skin, gastrointestinal tract,
testis, and soft tissues may be affected.
Extranodal NK/T-cell lymphomas are more prevalent in
Asia and Central and South America, and predominantly
affect males in the fifth decade of their age. They are clini-
cally divided into two categories: nasal and non-nasal
● The nasal NK/T-cell lymphomas occur in the nose and the
upper respiratory and oral cavities, including nasopharynx,
paranasal sinuses, tonsils, and larynx. Symptoms are local and
may include nasal obstruction, bleeding, or destruction and
perforation of the hard palate. These tumors are locally inva-
sive but infrequently show distant metastasis. Less than 10%
of patients demonstrate bone marrow involvement.
C
● The non-nasal NK/Tcell lymphomas are often multifocal,
and dissemination occurs in the early stage of the disease.
FIGURE 43.12 BoNE MARRoW INVoLveMEnT IN A PAtIENT WitH
The primary sites of involvement include the skin, digestive
AGGREssIvE NK-CELL LEUKEMIA. An interstitial atypical lymphoid
system, spleen, and testis. Nodal involvement is rare.
infiltrate is noted (A). The tumor cells are highlighted by a TIA-1
histochemical stain (B and C). The inset of (A) shows two LGL cells
 In general, the non-nasal tumors are more aggressive
by touch preparation.
a Adeiau on Aood puodsan pue sadi ieseu a ue
Adapted from Naeim F. Pathology of Bone Marrow, 2nd edn.
therapeutic approaches include radiation and combination
Williams & Wikins, Baitimore, 1997, by permission.
chemotherapy. The reported complete remission rate for
early stages of the disease ranges from 60-80% for radio-
therapy and 40-60% for chemotherapy, but about 50% of
the patients may show relapse within the first year.
 In addition to the expression of the above phenotypic
features, immunohistochemical studies show positivity of
MORPHOLOGY
cytotoxic granule markers TIA1 and granzyme B (Figure
43.15). EBV-EBER is positive by in-situ hybridization
● The lymphomatous infiltrate is polymorphic with a diffuse
studies.
or patchy involvement and an angiocentric and angiodestruc-
tive growth in over 85% of cases (Figures 43.17 to 43.19). The
ulceration of the overlying epithelium is common and may
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
 be associated with atypical hyperplasia of the adjacent epithe-
 lium, mimicking squamous cell carcinoma.
● As NK-cells develop from progenitor lymphocytes and do not
● The neoplasm consists of a mixture of small to large atypical
express either immunoglobulins or T-cell receptors, this lesion
 lymphoid cells with variable amount of cytoplasm and irregu-
does not demonstrate clonal T- or B-cell gene rearrangements.
 lar nuclei. The predominant infiltrating lymphoid cells may
EXTRANODAL NK/T-CELL LYMPHOMA, NASAL TYPE 
517
FIGURE 43.13 AGGRESSIVE NK-CELL
LEUKEMIA. Bone marrow biopsy
section showing an interstitial and
sinusoidal infiltration by large,
 pleomorphic cells (A, low power; 
B, intermediate power;
C, high power). Bone marrow
(D, intermediate power; E, high 
power) and blood (F, high power)
 smears demonstrate large.
pleomorphic cells with prominent 
 nucleoli and cytoplasmic granules.
F
OpenGate
LymphGate
Large LymphGate
be large or small. The larger cells may show prominent nucle-
oli. The lymphomatous infiltrate is often heavily admixed
with inflammatory cells, such as lymphocytes, plasma cells,
eosinophils, and histiocytes.
● Focal or confluent coagulative necrosis is common, offen
FSC-H
CD3
CD3
with the presence of apoptotic bodies. Some of the fumor
ells, particularly in cytologic preparations (such as touch
preparation). may show cytoplasmic azurophilic granules.
CD5
OSS
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
MFC findings (Figure 43.20) are:
CD45
CD2
CD2
● Negative for surface CD3;
FIGURE 43.14 FloW CYtoMeTrIc FINDiNGs 0f AGGRessIvE NK-ceLL
●Positive for CD2 and CD56 in most cases, with occasional
LEUKEMIA. Open gate density displays (in red) of bone marrow aspirate
positivity for CD7:
demonstrate a prominent population of neoplastic NK-cells (arrows)
● Negative for CD16 and CD57.
that are intermediate-sized to large with increased side scatter and
expression of bright CD45. These characteristics are verified by MD56 
In addition to the expression of above-mentioned
backgating. The neoplastic NK-cells are positive for M2 (bright) and
markers, immunohistochemical studies are positive for
 CD56 (heterogeneous), but negative for surface CD3 as well as CD5
cytotoxic granule markers TIA1, granzyme B, and perforin.
and CD7.
518
FIGURE 43.15 AGGRESSIVE NK-CELL
LEUKEMIA.Bone marrow biopsy
section showing infiltration by
large, pleomorphic cells (A) and
expressing CD2 (B), granzyme B
(C), and TA-1 (D).
EBER-1 can be detected by in situ hybridization techniques.
Although the in situ hybridization technique will demonstrate
the presence of EBV RNA in essentially all of the tumor cells.
proof of clonality. in the absence of clonal TCR gene rear-
angements, requires examination of Southern blot patterns
(fingerprints) of the EBV genome. PCR approaches should 
be used with caution, given the high frequency of latent EBV
infection in the general population.
 Array-CGH studies show that recurrent regions characteristic
of the extranodal NK/T lymphoma, nasal-type group. were
gains of 2q, and loss of 1p. 2p. 4q, 5p. 5q, 6q, and 11q (Figure
968
43.21).
FIGURE43.16 A karyotype of an aggressive NK-cell leukemia
EBV-Associated T/NK-Cell
exhibiting gains and losses of several chromosomes, in addition
to the many structural aberrations that are commonly observed 
Lymphoproliferative Disorder of
(arrows).
Children and Young Adults
EBV is positive in all cases, and EBV-EBER is the stain of
EBV-associated   T/NK-cell  lymphoproliferative disorder
choice.
(EBV-T/NK LPD) of children and young adults is a rare dis-
order associated with high morbidity and mortality, which
is more prevalent in East Asians and Native Americans
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
from Central and South America. The disease has a wide
● The neoplastic cells do not demonstrate TCR gene
 spectrum of clinical presentation from indolent to aggres-
rearrangements.
sive course, and has been subdivided by the chronic active
● Evidence of EBV infection in clonal episomal form has been
EBV infection (CAEBV) Study Group (2008) into the fol-
observed in the vast majority of cases, and EBNA-1 and lowing categories
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
519
FIGURE 43.17 ExTRANODAL NK/T-CELL LYMPHOMA, NASAL TYPE. This is 
FIGURE 43.18 ExTRANODAL NK/T-CELL LYMPHOMA, NASAL TYPE. This 
characterized by angiocentric and angiodestructive infiltration 
is characterized by an angiodestructive process leading to
(A, low power; B, high power). The vascular infiltration involves all 
 obstruction and necrosis (A, low power; B, high power).
layers of the vascular wall
● Category Al: polymorphic LPD without clonal proliferation
The neoplastic T-cells in the involved organs, such as
of EBV-infected cells;
liver, spleen, or lymph nodes, show variable morpho-
Category A2: polymorphic LPD with clonality:
logic features from case to case, ranging from small round
·(
Category A3: monomorphic LPD (T-cell or NK-cell lym-
phoma/leukemia) with clonality:
(Figure 43.22). Hemophagocytosis is often a prominent
●
Category B: monomorphic LPD (Tcell lymphoma） with
feature. The tumor cells are CD2+, CD3+, CD8+, TIA1+,
clonality and fulminant course.
EBV-EBER+ and CD56-. Rare cases may show coexpres-
Categories Al, A2, and A3 appear to represent a con-
 sion of CD4 and CD8. The TCR gene is rearranged, and the
tinuous spectrum and are considered equivalent to CAEBV.
 neoplastic cells carry type A EBV.
Category B is the exact equivalent of infantile fulminant
EBV-associated T-LPD, or, according to the WHO classifica-
tion (2008), systemic EBV-positive T-cell lymphoprolifera-
tive disease of childhood.
Differential Diagnosis
Systemic EBV-positive T-cell lymphoproliferative disease
of childhood is a rare, rapidly progressive disease with sep-
sis and multisystem failure leading to death. It has clini-
The clinicopathologic features of T-LGL leukemia, chronic
copathologic overlapping features with aggressive NK-cell
leukemia.
NK-cell leukemia, and extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma are
520
SSS
CD45
CD3
CD3
CD2
CD7
FIGURE 43.20 FLOW CYTOMETRIC FINDINGS 0F EXTRANODAL NK/T-CELL
LYMPHoMA, NAsAL TYPE. Open gate display (in blue) of nasal tissue
by CD45 gating demonstrates a prominent cell population that is
positive for CD45 (moderate to bright) with highly variable side
scatter. These cells are neoplastic NK-cells, expressing CD2 and
CD56 but negative for surface CD3 plus CD5 and CD7.
FIGURE 43.19 Extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type is
characterized by angiocentric and angiodestructive infiltration
(A, low power; B, intermediate power; C, high power).
28
summarized in Table 43.1. T-LGL leukemia, chronic lym-
88
phproliferative disorder of NK cells, and aggressive NK-cell
 FIGURE 43.21 Karyotype of tumor cells in a patient with
leukemia should be distinguished from secondary, reactive
 extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type demonstrating
large granular lymphocytosis and NK cell lymphocytosis.
46,XY,del(6)(q21).
The reactive T-LGL expansions have been reported in auto-
immune connective tissue disorders, inflammatory skin
disorders, lymphomas, hemophagocytic syndrome, and
a variety of viral infections, such as EBV, HIV, and CMV.
 The differential diagnosis for extranodal NK/T-cell lym-
Reactive large granular lymphocytosis is polyclonal and is
phomas of nasal type includes CD56+ T-cell lymphomas,
not associated with chromosomal aberrations.
such as hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma and other periph-
Increased number of circulating NK-cells has been
eral T-cell lymphomas. The CD56+ T-cell lymphomas are
observed in patients with viral infection, solid tumors,
negative for EBV, express surface CD3 and TCR, and show
MDS, and atomic bomb survivors.
evidence of TCR gene rearrangement.
DIFFERENTIALDIAGNOSIS
521
A
FIGURE 43.22 SysTEMIc EBV+ T-cELL LYMPHoPRoLIFERATIvE DIsEAsE oF cHILDHooD. Lymph node Section shows necrOsis with a perivascular 
(C), CD8+ (D), and EBER+ (E). Hemophagocytic histiocytes are present in the bone marrow aspirate (F).
Adapted from Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Vardiman JW, et al. Hematopathology. Saunders/Eisevier, Phiadeiphia, 2010, by permission.
522
LARGE GRANULARLYMPHOCYTICNEOPLASMSAND RELATEDDISORDERS
Table 43.1
 Clinicopathologic Features of T-LGL Leukemia, CLNK, ANKCL, and ENK/T
Features
T-LGL Leukemia
CLNK
ANKCL
ENK/T
Median age (years)
60
60
40
50
Male:Female
1
>1
Association
 Rheumatoid 
None
EBV
EBV
 arthritis
Immunophenotype
SCD3+, CD8+,
cCD3ε+, CD16+,
cCD3e+, CD56strong,
cCD3ε+, CD56strong,
TCR+, CD16+,
TCR-, CD56dim/-
TCR-,CD16±
TCR-,CD16-
CD57+
Prognosis
Indolent 
Indolent 
Aggressive
Aggressive
ANKCL, aggressive NK-celleukemia; CLNK, chronic lymphoproliferative disorder of NK cells; ENK/T, extranodal 
NK/T-cellymphoma, nasal type; T-LGL, T-cell large granular lymphocytic.
NK-cell enteropathy is an entity reported in rare cases
phenotype
(CD56+/TIA-1+/Granzyme
B+/cCD3+),
with a benign NK-cell lymphoproliferative disorder mim-
which do not invade the glandular epithelium. T-cell
icking intestinal lymphoma. The patients show vague gas-
 receptor-y gene rearrangement and EBV-encoded RNA
trointestinal symptoms with lesions involving stomach,
in situ hybridization are negative. The patients do not
duodenum, small intestine, and colon. Biopsies reveal
develop progressive disease and do not need aggressive
a mucosal infiltrate of atypical cells with an NK-cell
chemotherapy
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
523
Additional Resources
Al-Hakeem DA, Fedele S, Carlos R, et al: Extranodal NK/T-cell lym-
Mansoor A, Pittaluga S, Beck PL, et al: NK-cell enteropathy: a benign
phoma, nasal type, Oral Oncol 43:4-14, 2007.
NK-cell lymphoproliferative disease mimicking intestinal lymphoma:
cinicopathologic features and follow-up in a unique case series.
Chen YH, Chadburn A, Evens AM, et al: Clinical, morphologic.
immunophenotypic, and molecular cytogenetic assessment of CD4-/
Blood 117:1447-1452, 2011.
CD8-y& T-cell large granular lymphocytic leukemia, Am I Clin Pathol
Ohgami RS, Ohgami JK, Pereira IT, et al: Refining the diagnosis of 
136:289-299, 2011.
T-cell large granular lymphocytic leukemia by combining distinct
management, Br J Haematol 152:273-283, 201l.
25:1439-1443, 2011.
Ohshima K, Kimura H, Yoshino T, et al: CAEBV Study Group.
Fortune AF Kelly K, Sargent J, et al: Large granular lymphocyte leu-
kemia: natural history and response to treatment, Leuk Lymphoma
Proposed categorization of pathological states of EBV-associated
51:839-845, 2010.
T/natural killer-cell lymphoproliferative disorder (LPD) in children
and young adults: overlap with chronic active EBV infection and
Gualco G, Domeny-Duarte P, Chioato L, et al: Clinicopathologic and
 infantile fulminant EBV T-LPD, Pathol Int 58:209-217, 2008.
molecular features of 122 Brazilian cases of nodal and extranodal
Rezk SA, Huang Q: Extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type
NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type, with EBV subtyping analysis, Am J
Surg Pathol 35:1195-1203, 2011.
extensively involving the bone marrow, Int J Clin Exp Pathol 4:713-
717, 2011.
Hervier B, Rimbert M, Maisonneuve H, et al: Large granular lympho-
Rodriguez-Pinilla SM, Barrionuevo C, Garcia J, et al: Epstein-Barr
cyte leukemia with pure red cell aplasia associated with autoimmune
 polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy: an unfortu-
vinus-positive systemic NK/T-cell lymphomas in children: report of
six cases, Histopathology 59: 1183-1193, 2011.
itous association? Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol 23:947-949, 2010.
Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Vardiman JW, et al: Hematopathology.
Sevilla DW, El-Mallawany NK, Emmons FN, et al: Spectrum of child-
Philadelphia, 2010, Saunders/Elsevier.
hood Epstein-Barr virus-associated T-cell proliferations and bone
marrow findings, Pediatr Dev Pathol 14:28-37, 2011.
Lamy T, Loughran TP Jr: Clinical features of large granular lympho-
cyte leukemia, Semin Hematol 40:185-195, 2003.
Spears MD, Harrington AM, Kroft SH, et al: Immunophenotypic sta-
bility of T-cell large granular lymphocytic leukaemia by flow cytom-
Lamy T, Loughran TP Jr: How I treat LGL leukemia, Blood 117:2764-
etry, Br J Haematol 151:97-99, 2010.
2774, 2011.
Yok-Lam K: The diagnosis and management of extranodal NK/T-cell
Liu X, Loughran TP Jr: The spectrum of large granular lymphocyte
lymphoma, nasal-type and aggressive NK-cell leukemia. J Clin Exp
leukemia and Felty's syndrome, Curr Opin Hematol 18:254-259,
Hematop 5l:21-28, 2011.
2011.
This page intentionally left blank
T-Cell Prolymphocytic
Leukemia
and aggressive lymphoproliferative disorder of post-thymic
T-cells characterized by a high peripheral blood lympho-
cyte count and infiltration of the bone marrow, spleen,
liver, lymph nodes, and skin.
T-PLL  is a rare T-cell lymphoproliferative disorder
often presented with hepatosplenomegaly and gener-
alized lymphadenopathy. Most patients are older than
50 years. The peripheral lymphocyte count is markedly
elevated (usually >100,000/μL), commonly associated
with anemia and thrombocytopenia. Skin infiltration
and serous effusions may be observed. In general, T-PLL
has an aggressive clinical course with a median survival
of <1 year, though occasional cases have shown spon-
taneous remission. An indolent form of T-PLL has also
been reported with t(3;2)(q21;q11.2) and elevated serum
β2-microglobulin. Combination chemotherapy, and more
recently treatment with monoclonal anti-CD52 antibod-
ies (CAMPATH-1H, alemtuzumab), and allogeneic stem
cell transplantation have been used with some responses.
Morphology
T-PLL refers to a group of mature T-cell leukemias with
a diverse morphology but similar clinical outcome. The
observed morphologic variations include:
● Cells with typical prolymphocytic features; medium-sized lym-
phocytes with variable amount of non-granular basophilic cyto-
B
plasm, round, oval, or inregular nucleus, coarse chromatin, and
 FIGURE 44.1 T-proLyMPHocYTc LeukeMIA. Blood (A) and bone 
a single prominent nucleolus (Figure 44.1). T-prolymphocytes
 marrow (B) smears demonstrating numerous prolymphocytes.
often show cytoplasmic blebs (Figure 44.2). The prolympho-
cytic morphology accounts for about 70% of cases.
 Small lymphocytes often with irregular nuclei and indis-
tinct nucleolus. This morphologic subtype was previ-
● Approximately 5% of cases may show lymphoid cells with
ously referred to as T-CLL, but now it is included in T-PLL
because of similar biological behavior. It constitutes about
 There is marked peripheral blood lymphocytosis. usually
25% of cases.
>100,0o0/μL, and often with anemia and thrombocytopenia.
Atlas of Hematopathology. DOl: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00044 9
@ 201 3 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
526
T-CELL PROLYMPHOCYTIC LEUKEMIA
Immunophenotype
MFC findings demonstrate:
● Peripheral T-cell phenotype negative for CD34. CDla
'IPL IO
● Variably aberrant expression profile of CD2, CD3, CD5, and
CD7:
● Expression of CD4 in most cases (Figure 44.5):
● Double CD4/CD8 positivity in about 25% of cases (Figure
44.6), a relatively unique feature observed in T-PLL;
● Expression of CD8 in occasional cases (Figure 44.7).
In addition to the above-mentioned markers, immuno-
histochemical studies show overexpression of TCL1.
Cytogenetic and Molecular Studies
Analogous to the immunoglobulin (IGH@) receptor loci
that are frequently affected by translocations in B-cell lym-
phomas, the T-cell receptor (TCR) gene loci are targeted by
chromosomal breakpoints involving various translocation
partners.
 Classical cytogenetic studies reveal complex karyotypes
FIGURE 44.2 T-PROLYMPHocYTIc LEUKEMIA. BloOd (A) and bone
and some recurrent chromosomal abnormalities, the most
marrow (B) smears demonstrating numerous prolymphocytes
frequent being t(14;14)(q11.2;q32) (Figure 44.8), inv(14)
with cytoplasmic blebs.
(q11.2q32),t(X;14)(q28;q11.2),i(8)(q10)
and
t[8;8)
(p12;q11.2)
T-cell receptor (TCR)-α/6 genes located in 14q11.2
are involved in most of the chromosomal abnormalities
in cases of T-PLL. The TCL-1 oncoprotein is expressed in
 approximately 70% of T-PLL patients. T-PLL patients show
the translocation t(X;14)(q28;q11.2) (Figure 44.9), which
results in rearrangement of the MTCP-1 gene (a member of
the TCL-1 gene family) located at Xq28.
The i(8)(q10) chromosome is another common find-
ing in T-PLL. The genes identified in the 8q rearrangement 
breakpoints include PLEKHA2, NBS1, NOV and MYST3
(Figure 44.10).
The TCL1 and MTCP1 loci rearrange with the TCR-α/8
chain locus or, less commonly, with the TCR-β chain locus
on chromosome 7 [t(7;14)(q35;q32.1)], leading to their
activation.
Mutations in the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM)
 gene, located in the 1lq22-23 chromosomal region have
FIGURE 44.3 Peripheral blood smear of a patient with 
T-prolymphocytic leukemia demonstrating prolymphocytes
been associated with inactivation or significantly reduced
mimicking Sezary cells.
expression of the ATM protein, which is believed to func-
tion as a tumor suppressor (Figure 44.10). Aberrations of
the ATM gene, are known to also play a role in malignant
● The bone marrow is commonly infiltrated in a diffuse or nod-
 transformation of T-cells in patients with T-PLL.
ular pattern. Splenic infiltration consists of involvement of
 In the commonly deleted region on chromosome 11q,
both white and red pulps (Figure 44.4). The skin is affected
in about 20% of cases, with dense infiltration of the dermis
recurrent microdeletions targeting the microRNA 34b/c
without epidermal infiltration. The involved lymph nodes are
and the transcription factors ETS1 and FLI1 have been
diffusely infiltrated, primarily in the paracortical areas. The
observed.
remnants of follicular structures may be present.
CYTOGENETIC AND MOLECULAR STUDIES
527
FIGURE 44.4 sPLENIc INvoLvEMENT IN A PATIENT wITH T-pROLYMPHocYTIc LEUKEMIA. There is a diffuse infltration of the red pulp by the tumOr
() /a pue (3) ta (a)  ') za ssadxa sllao sow ayl (amod yhy 'g amod mol ') sll
H-OSS
CD5
面
FSC-H
CD2
CD7
CD3
CD2
CD7
OD3
CD4
CD4
CD4
CD4
CD8
TCRalpha/beta
FIGURE 44.5 FLOW CYTOMETRIC FINDINGS OF T-CEL PROLYMPHOCYTIC
FIGURE 44.6 FLOW CYTOMETRIC FINDINGS 0F T-CELL PROLYMPHOCYTIC
LEUKEMIA, cD4 posImve. Lymphocyte-enriched gate of peripheral 
LEUKEMIA, cD4/cD8 DoUBLE posITIve. Lymphocyte-enriched gate
blood reveals predominantly abnormal T-cells. Compared with 
of peripheral blood demonstrates a distinct and prominent 
normal T-cells in the background, the neoplastic T-cells display
 population of double positive T-cells expressing surface CD3,
M4, dim CD8, and TCR alpha/beta. These abnormal T-cells 
(homogeneously bright), CD7 (bright), and CD25. They are
display dim to moderate expression of CD2, plus heterogeneous 
negative for surface CD3, CD8, as well as TdT and TCR alpha/beta
loss of CD5 and CD7.
Or gamma/delta (not shown).
528
T-CELL PROLYMPHOCYTIC LEUKEMIA
CD5
CD5
CD8
CD2
CD7
18
CD57
88
CD16+CD56
TCR alpha/beta
FIGURE 44.7 FLOW CYTOMETRIC FINDINGS OF T-CELL PROLYMPHOCYTC
 FIGURE 44.9 Karyotype of tumor cells in a patient with
LEUKEMIA, cD8 posITive. Lymphocyte enriched gate of peripheral 
T-prolymphocytic leukemia showing complex abnormalities
blood reveals near exclusively abnormal T-cells, which are
including deletion 13q, and t(X;14)(q28;q11.2).
 positive for CD2 (dim), CD3 (major subset), CD5, CD7 (bright). 
CD8, and TCR alpha/beta. The neoplastic T-cells are negative for
CD16/CD56 and CD57, as well as CD4 (not shown).
In addition, a small subset of these neoplastic T-cells shows loss
of CD3.
A
↑
 FIGURE 44.10 Karyotype of tumor cells in a patient with
Ao
T-prolymphocytic leukemia with complex abnormalities
FIGURE 44.8 Karyotype of tumor cells in a patient with
 including del(1 1q), and isochromosome (8q).
T-prolymphocytic leukemia with 46,XX,t(14;14)(q1 1.2;q32).
immunophenotyping (light-chain restriction) as ancillary
Other   chromosomal  abnormalities  less  frequently
evidence of clonality.
 described are deletions or translocations of 6q, 12p, 13q,
The Southern blot method will pick up a greater pro-
17p and monosomy 22 (Figures 44.11 and 44.12).
portion of clonal rearrangements because it is capable of
At the molecular level, the rearrangements of TCR and
 surveying a larger span of the target gene region. Most lab-
the involvement of TCL1, MTCP1-B1, and ATM genes are
 oratories use a probe directed to the constant region of the
common findings. ATM mutations have been detected
beta-chain genes (Tcβ).
in over half of T-PLL cases, suggesting that ATM acts as a
Unlike the JH region targeted in B-cell lesions, the
tumor suppressor gene. Unfortunately, the ATM gene
TCR-β region is very large and complex, and to cover it
is extremely large, and detection of mutations, which
 adequately (i.e., with a pick-up rate approaching that of
 requires extensive gene sequencing, is not routinely avail-
 Southern blot) requires use of a large number of primers.
able for this purpose.
A common compromise is to target the TCR-y locus,
TCR gene rearrangements are detected in the same
which has far fewer V and J genes, and thus a less complex
 general manner as for immunoglobulin gene rearrange-
array of rearrangements needs to be detected. However, the
ments in B-cell malignancies. They are often of more
relatively more limited number of TCR-y rearrangements
crucial importance to the case, however, since one does
 can produce a type of false-positive result known as pseu-
not have the advantage of surface immunoglobulin
doclonality: if the total number of T-cells in the submitted
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
529
K
+
17
88
FlGURE 44.12 Karyotype of tumor cells in a patient with
FIGURE 44.11 Karyotype of tumor cells in a patient with
T-prolymphocytic leukemia demonstrating 45,XY,add(1)
T-prolymphocytic leukemia demonstrating 46,XY,del(6)
'()()(z4)()'(z4)(1 '()
(q13q23),del(1 1)(q21).
specimen is scant, preferential amplification of a small
morphology  or cerebriform  nuclei.  B-prolymphocytic
 number of them that happen to have the same rearrange-
leukemia and prolymphocytic variant of mantle cell lym-
ment pattern can give the appearance of a clone when
phoma are of B-cell lineage with their own characteristic
there really is none. Pseudoclonal PCR signals can some-
 immunophenotypic features. The neoplastic cells of Sézary
times be distinguished from true clonal signals by their
 syndrome (SS) often lack CD7 expression, whereas T-PLL
lower intensity, lack of reproducibility, and paucity or
 cells are typically CD7 positive. The tumor cells of adult
absence of background polyclonal signal.
T-cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATL) may mimic the cerebri-
form variant of T-PLL, but, unlike T-PLL cells, they are pos-
 itive for human T-lymphotropic virus type I (HTLV-1).
Differential Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis includes all  leukemic lym-
phoproliferative disorders  that  have  prolymphocytic
530
T-CELL PROLYMPHOCYTIC LEUKEMIA
Additional Resources
Dearden CE, Khot A, Else M, et al: Alemtuzumab therapy in T-cell
 Krishnan B, Matutes E, Dearden C: Prolymphocytic leukemias, Semin 
prolymphocytic leukemia: comparing efficacy in a series treated
Oncol 33:257-263, 2006.
intravenously and a study piloting the subcutaneous route, Blood
Matutes E, Brito-Babapulle V, Swansbury J, et al: Clinical and labo-
118:5799-5802, 2011
ratory features of 78 cases of T-prolymphocytic leukemia, Blood
Dearden  CE:  T-cell prolymphocytic
leukemia, Clin Lymphoma
78:3269-3274, 1991.
Myeloma[Suppl 3):S239-S243, 2009.
Ravandi F, O'Brien S, Jones D, et al: T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia: a
Dearden CE: T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia, Med Oncol 23:17-22,
single-institution experience, Clin Lymphoma Myeloma 6:234-239, 2005.
2006.
 Thorat KB, Gujral S, Kumar A, et al: Small cell variant of T-cell pro-
Dungarwalla M, Matutes E, Dearden CE: Prolymphocytic leukae-
mia of B- and T-cell subtype: a state-of-the-art paper, Eur J Haematol
Lymphoma 47:1711-1713, 2006.
80:469-476, 2008.
Tse E, So CC, Cheung WW, et al: T-cell prolymphocytic leukaemia:
Khot A, Dearden C: T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia, Expert Rev 
 spontaneous immunophenotypical switch from CD4 to CD8 expres-
Anticancer Ther 9:365-371, 2009.
sion, Ann Hematol 90:479-481, 2011.
Adult T-Cell Leukemia/
Lymphoma
Idult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATL) is an HTLV-I-
 nucleoside analogs, topoisomerase inhibitors, interferon
associated peripheral T-cell lymphoid malignancy often 
 anti-CD25, and zudovudine are among the therapeutic
presenting as an acute leukemic onset and aggressive clini-
possibilities.
cal course.
The geographic areas with highest prevalence of HTLV-I
include Japan, Africa, Caribbean islands, South America,
and the southern part of the United States. Patients are
Morphology
adults with a median age of about 50 years with male to
female ratio of about 3:2. Clinical symptoms may include
hypercalcemia, lytic bone lesions, cutaneous lesions simu-
 The neoplastic cells in the peripheral blood and bone marrow
lating mycosis fungoides (MF), lymphadenopathy, pul-
smears are pleomorphic, ranging from medium-sized to large.
monary lesions, and hepatosplenomegaly. Hypercalcemia
with variable amount of amphophilic or basophilic non-gran-
is observed in over 70% of the cases during the clinical
ular cytoplasm, and hyperlobated (clover leaf) or convoluted
course, which appears to result from osteoclastic prolifera-
 nuclei. The nuclear chromatin is condensed and nucleoli may
tion and increased bone resorption. ATL cells have been
be present (Figure 45.1).
shown to express receptor activator of nuclear factor-kap-
 Multinucleated anaplastic giant cells with convoluted or cere-
paB (RANK) ligand which plays a role in differentiation
briform nuclei and cells resembling Reed-Sternberg cells may
of hematopoietic precursors to osteoclasts. There are four
be seen in tissue infiltrations.
types of clinical presentation:
 A small proportion of blast-like cells with dispersed chroma-
tin and prominent nucleoli are usually present.
1. Acute onset, which is the most common type and occurs in
 Bone marrow involvement is usually patchy (Figures 45.2 and
approximately 60% of cases. It has an aggressive clinical
45.3) and is often associated with osteoclastic activities, lead-
course with 4-year survival rate of 5-12%.
 ing to hypercalcemia.
2. The lymphomatous type represents about 20% of cases and is
The involved lymph nodes show diffuse infiltration with
characterized by prominent lymphadenopathy and no blood
effacement of nodal architecture and proliferation of endothe-
involvement but also aggressive clinical course.
lial venules (Figure 45.4).
3. The chronic type, constituting about 15% of the cases,
+
 Skin infiltration usually involves the upper dermis, with fre-
with skin lesions and absolute lymphocytosis but no
quent epidermal involvement and formation of tumor cell
hypercalcemia.
aggregates resembling Pautrier microabscesses (Figure 45.5).
4. The smoldering type, representing 5% of cases, with nor-
Other sites of involvement include lung. pleura (Figure 45.6).
mal blood lymphocyte counts and <5% circulating neoplas-
liver, spleen, gastrointestinal tract, and CNS.
tic cells and frequent skin or pulmonary lesions. There is no
hypercalcemia.
Approximately one quarter of cases of chronic or smol-
dering types eventually progress to an acute phase. This
transition is often associated with specific changes on gene
Immunophenotype
expression profiling.
The clinical outcome in most cases is very poor, with a
median survival of <1 year despite advances in chemother-
 MFC features (Figures 45.7 and 45.8) include:
apy. Combination chemotherapies such as cyclophospha-
mide, adriamycin, vincristine, and prednisone (CHOP),
● Moderate to bright expression of CD25:
Atlas of Hematopathology. DOl: htp//dx.doi.org/10.1016/978-0-12-385183-300045-0
@ 201 3 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
532
ADULT T-CELL LEUKEMIA/LYMPHOMA
● Variably aberrant expression of CD2, CD3, and CD5:
Absent CD7 in most cases.
In addition to the above-mentioned markers, immu-
nohistochemical studies are positive for FOXP3 (see
Figure 45.3F). CD30 can be expressed in large trans-
formed cells, but ALK and cytotoxic granule markers are
negative.
Molecular and Cytogenetic Studies
HTLV-I has been implicated in the development of ATL.
FIGURE 45.1 Blood smears showing atypical medium-sized
Jo %) IAIH Aq paa snd jo uonendodqns y
to large cells with amphophilic or basophilic non-granular
 males, 2% of females) eventually develop ATL after a long
cytoplasm and hyperlobated (clover leaf) nuclei.
latent period.
FIGURE 45.2 ADULT T-CELL LEUKEMIA,
ACUTE oNsET. Blood (A) and bone
marrow (B) smears demonstrating
large, atypical lymphoid cells
with lobulated nuclei. Bone
marrow biopsy section (C) shows
scattered interstitial infiltration
of large, atypical lymphoid cells 
with irregular nuclear border and 
prominent nucleolus (arrows).
Immunohistochemical stains
highlight clusters of the large
atypical lymphocytes expressing
CD2 (D), CD3 (E) and CD4 (F).
 MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
533
FIGURE 45.3 AdULT T-CELL LEUKEMIA,
CHRONIc VARIANT. Bone marrow
biopsy section demonstrating
patchy infiltration of bone marrow
by atypical lymphoid cells in 
large aggregates (A, low power;
B, intermediate power; C, high
power). Medium-sized atypical 
lymphoid cells with indented or
convoluted nuclei are present
 in the bone marrow smear (D).
Immunohistochemical stains are
strongly positive for CD5 (E) and
FOXP3 (F).
The transmission of HTLV-I from infected cells to non-
 Recent reports suggest that the HTLV-I HBZ gene may
infected cells is via cell-cell interaction which is appar-  play an important role in the regulation of viral replication
ently facilitated by ICAM-1 (CD56). The infected cells
s and proliferation of infected T-cells.
enter the human body through three major routes: (1)
The neoplastic cells demonstrate TCR gene rearrange-
sexual transmission, (2) breast feeding. and (3) paren-
 ments with clonally integrated HTLV-I.
teral transmission. The HTLV-I TAX gene plays an impor-
The detection and clonal pattern analysis of HTLV-I are
tant role in leukemogenesis of the infected cells. The Tax
quite specialized and are available only in selected refer-
protein (p40) induces proliferation and inhibits apopto-
ence laboratories. The deletion of the p16 (multiple tumor
sis of the HTLV-I infected cells. However, ATL cells do not
 suppressor 1) gene and the mutation of the p53 gene have
always need TAX expression; TAX transcription has been
been reported. HTLV-1 gag/pol mRNA has been detected
detected in only 34% of ATL cases by RT-PCR. Therefore,
by real-time PCR (Figure 45.9)
multistep genetic and epigenetic changes are implicated
There is no distinct karyotypic or molecular genetic
in ATL leukemogenesis. For example, mutation of p53,
abnormality in ATL. Cytogenetic analyses often show
deletion of p16, and upregulation of TSLC1 genes are
 complex karyotypes with various aberrations, particularly
reported in ATL.
in the leukemic forms. The karyotypes exhibit a number
The aberrant methylation of certain genes such as
 of breaks and multiple numerical rearrangements, aneu-
Ss
 ploidy, hypotetraploidy, derivative chromosomes, bal-
in ATL.
anced and unbalanced, translocations, and deletions.
534
ADULT T-CELL LEUKEMIA/LYMPHOMA
FIGURE 45.5 ADULTT-CELLLEUKEMIA/LYMPHOMA.BlOOd Smear
(A) demonstrates atypical lymphocytes with lobulated nuclei.
Skin biopsy section (B) shows a dense lymphoid infiltrate 
involving the upper dermis with prominent epidermotropism.
FIGURE 45.4 ADULT T-cELL LEuKEMIA/LYMPHoMA. Lymph node biopsy
section demonstrating diffuse infltration by medium-sized to
large atypical lymphocytes with highly irregular or lobulated
nuclei (A, low power; B, intermediate power; C, high power).
FIGURE 45.6 Pleural effusion in a patient with adult T-cell
leukemia/lymphoma demonstrating numerous medium-sized
to large atypical lymphocytes with highly irregular or lobulated
nuclei. Several eosinophils are also present.
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETICSTUDIES
535
chromosome 14 anomalies at q11.2 and at 7q35, the site of
the TCRB gene region, seem to be specific to ATL.
Recurrent abnormalities include trisomies of chromosomes
H-OSS
3. 8, 9, 21, and X, monosomies of chromosomes 4, 10, and
22, and abnormalities of chromosomes 6 and 14q (at 14q11.2
and 14q32 breakpoints) (Figures 45.10 and 45.11).
●
 Of these abnormalities, involvement of 7q. 13q. 14q. and
FSC-H
CD4
CD4
i(18) have been indicated to be specific for T-cell leukemias/
lymphomas including ATL (Figure 45.12).
Gains of 14q32 are common and may be a recurrent specific
 abnormality in ATL.
Aggressive forms display more genomic aberrations than
chronic forms.
 The number of chromosomal imbalances correlates with
CD7
CD52
TCR alpha/beta
dinical outcome. Different genomic profiles are observed
when analyzing material from different sites or material taken
FIGURE 45.7 FLOW CYToMETRIC ANDINGs 0F ADULT T-CELL LEUKEMIA/
at different time points in the same patient, suggestive of
LYMPHoMA, AcuTE oNsET. Lymphocyte-enriched gate of pleural 
donal evolution.
effusion shows a prominent population of abnormal T-cells in a
background of occasional reactive T-cells. The neoplastic T-cells 
are positive for CD3, CD4, CD5 (bright), CD25 (bright), CD52, and
TCR alpha/beta, but display complete loss of CD7.
CD56
CD4
CD4
00
6色
16
17
20
FIGURE 45.10 Adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma karyotype with
CD5
CD7
TCRalpha/beta
trisomy X and inv(14).
FIGURE 45.8 FLOW CYTOMETRIC ANDINGS OF ADULT T-CELL LEUKEMIA/
LYMPHoMA, cHRoNIc vARIANT. Lymphocyte-enriched gate of bone
marrow reveals predominantly abnormal T-cells, which are
positive for CD2, CD3, CD4, CD5 (dim), CD25, CD56 (major
subset), and TCR alpha/beta. The neoplastic T-cells demonstrate
complete loss of CD7.
M
729Uninf
SLB-1
729ACHneo
PBLACH
gag/pol
RT:
十
+
+
十
M
729Uninf
MoT
729pH6neo
PBLpH6
gag/pol
RT:
+
+
+
FIGURE 45.9 Detection of HTLV-1 gag/pol mRNA by real-time 
RT-PCR. SLB-1, PBL-ACH, and 729ACHneo represent HTLV-1 cell 
lines. Cell line 729 is a negative control.
Adapted from Li M, Green PL. Detection and quantitation of HTL V-1
20
21
and HTLV-2 mRNA species by real-time RT-PCR. J Virol Methods.
FIGURE 45.11 Karyotype of a patient with Adult T-cellleukemia/
142:159-68, 2007, by permission.
lymphoma demonstrating trisomy X and inv(14).
536
ADULT T-CELLLEUKEMIA/LYMPHOMA
Differential Diagnosis
The neoplastic cells in peripheral blood and bone mar-
row smears may mimic Sezary cells and may share the
same immunophenotypic features (expressing CD4 and
pan-T-cell markers except CD7). In general, nuclear
convolution in Sezary cells is more delicate and finer
than in the neoplastic ATL cells. In all ATL cases, the
neoplastic cells are positive for HTLV-I, whereas most
 patients with SS are HTLV-I negative. Also, the median
age for ATL is lower than that of MF/SS. Hypercalcemia
and lytic bone lesions are frequent findings in ATL but
absent in MF/SS.
FIGURE45.12 Karyotype of a patient with Adult T-celleukemia/
 The tissue infiltrates in ATL may contain anaplastic large
lymphoma showing 46,XY,i(8)(q10),add(10)(q24),del(11)
cells and/or Reed-Sternberg-like cells mimicking anaplas-
(q21),inv(14)(q1 1.2q32),del(16)(q22).
tic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) or Hodgkin lymphoma.
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
537
Additional Resources
Aifantis I, Raetz E, Buonamici S: Molecular pathogenesis of T-cell leu-
Miyagi T, Nagasaki A, Taira T, et al: Extranodal adult T-cell leukemia/
kaemia and lymphoma, Nat Rev Immunol 8:380-390, 2008.
lymphoma of the head and neck: a clinicopathological study of nine
Dasanu CA: Newer developments in adult T-cell leukemia/lym-
ases and a review of the literature, Leuk Lymphoma 50:187-195.
phoma therapeutics, Expert Opin Pharmacother 12: 1709 -1717, 2011.
2009.
Ishida T, Ueda R: Antibody therapy for adult T-cell leukemia-lym-
Takahashi T, Tsukuda H, Itoh H, et al: Primary and isolated adult
phoma, Int J Hematol 94:443-452, 2011.
T-cell leukemia/lymphoma of the bone marrow, Intern Med 50:2393-
2396, 2011.
 Mahieux R, Gessain A: Adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma and HTLV-1,
Curr Hematol Malig Rep 2:257-264, 2007.
Yasunaga J. Matsuoka M: Human T-cell leukemia virus type I induces
adult T-cell leukemia: from clinical aspects to molecular mecha-
Matutes E: Adult T-cell leukaemia/lymphoma, I Clin Pathol 60:1373-
nisms, Cancer Control 14:133-140, 2007.
1377, 2007.
Yoshida M: Molecular approach to human leukemia: isolation and
 Meijerink IP: Genetic rearrangements in relation to immunopheno-
 characterization of the frst human retrovinus HTLV-1 and its impact
type and outcome in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia, Best Pract 
 On tumorigenesis in adult T-cell leukemia, Proc Ipn Acad Ser B Phys
Res Clin Haematol 23:307-318, 2010.
Biol Sci 86:117-130, 2010.
This page intentionally left blank
Hepatosplenic T-Cell
Lymphoma
lepatosplenic lymphoma is a rare extranodal periph-
● Scattered abnormal cells may be seen in the peripheral blood
eral T-cell lymphoma characterized by sinusoidal infiltra-
(Figure 46.4A), A fulminant leukemic picture can occur.
tion of liver, spleen, and bone marrow. In most reported
Leukemic cells may be large with blastic features.
cases, the neoplastic cells represent the TCR-y8 T-cell sub-
There are other variants of y8 T-cell lymphomas which
type, though rare cases express TCR-αβ.
mostly involve extranodal tissues, such as skin, subcutane-
 Hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma is a rare disease, account-
 Ous tissue, or intestine, which are not considered as hepa-
ing for about 5% of all peripheral T-cell lymphomas. The
tosplenic lymphoma.
median age is about 35 years, with a male to female ratio of
around 3:1. Splenomegaly and thrombocytopenia are com-
mon, followed by hepatomegaly, anemia, and leukopenia.
Lymphadenopathy and extranodal involvements other than
Immunophenotype
those mentioned above are rare. There appears to be an asso-
ciation between incidence of hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma
and the use of infliximab, adalimumab, and AZA/6-MP in
 MFC features (Figure 46.5) include:
patients with inflammatory bowel disease.
 Expression of CD3 and TCR gamma/delta:
 Hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma has an aggressive clini-
 Rare variant of TCR alpha/beta type (Figure 46.6):
cal course with a median survival of about 16 months.
Double negativity of CD4/CD8, but some cases with partial
Combination chemotherapy is the common therapeutic
dim expression of CD8:
approach, often with unsatisfactory results. Rare patients
● Variable aberrancies of CD2 and CD7, and common loss of CD5:
respond to interferon-alpha.
● Expression of CD56 in some cases.
 In addition to the above-mentioned markers, immu-
 nohistochemical studies are positive for TIA1 (see Figure
Morphology
        
● The neoplastic lymphoid cells are usually monomorphic,
medium sized, with moderate amount of cytoplasm, round to
Molecular and Cytogenetic Studies
slightly irregular nuclei, condensed chromatin, and inconspic-
uous nucleoli. Occasional cases may show a highly pleomor-
phic cell population.
The neoplastic cells typically show TCR gene rearrangement by
● Liver infiltration is sinusoidal with various degrees of portal
Southern blotting or PCR techniques (Figure 46.7).
tract involvement (Figure 46.1).
●
 In situ hybridization studies for EBV are negative.
●
The pattern of infiltration in the spleen is diffuse with the
 The most frequent cytogenetic abnormalities observed are
involvement of the red pulp (Figures 46.2 and 46.3).
extra copies of 7q. mostly in the form of isochromosome
 Lymph node involvement is rare.
7q, and trisomy 8. Isochromosome 7q is currently viewed as
● Bone marrow involvement is reported in 75-100% of cases.
a pathognomonic genetic alteration in hepatosplenic T-cell
The lymphoid infiltration is often subtle and sinusoidal
lymphoma and can therefore serve as a diagnostic tool for this
(Figure 46.4). Occasionally, the number of histiocytes is
entity (Figure 46.8). Also, del(13)(q12q14) has been reported
increased, with features of hemophagocytosis.
in patients with hepatosplenic lymphoma (Figure 46.9).
Atlas of Hematopathology. DOl: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00046-2
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
540
HEPATOSPLENIC T-CELL LYMPHOMA
FIGURE 46.2 HePATOSPLENIC T-CELL LyMPHOMA WITH THE INVOLVEMENT
OF sPleNIc ReD pULp. (A, low power; B, high power).
FIGURE 46.1 HepATIC INVOLVeMENT WIth HEpAToSPleNIC T-CELL
LYMPHoMA. Patchy lymphoid infiltration is evident in a liver with
fatty degeneration (A, low power; B, intermediate power; C, high 
power).
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
541
FIGURE 46.3 HEPATOSPLENIC T-CELLLYMPHOMA wITH DIFFUsE INVOLvEMENT OF SPLENIC RED PULP.(A,loW pOWer; B, high pOWer). The NeOplastic
cells present in the sinusoidal spaces express CD7 (C).
542
HEPATOSPLENIC T-CELL LYMPHOMA
FIGURE 46.4 HepATosPLENIc T-cELL LYMPHoMA. Blood (A) and bone marrow (B) smears show atypical lymphocytes. Bone marrow
 involvement is often sinusoidal (C) demonstrated by accumulation of CD3+ (D), CD56+ (E), and TA1+ (F ) cells.
 MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
543
control
control
DNAmarker
Negative-1
Negative-2
Negative-1
Negative-2
Positive
mark
Patient
Patient
Positive
DNA
FSC-H
TCRgamma/delta
CD4
CD5
CD7
700
500
700
500
CD2
CD2
CD16+CD56
300
300
FIGURE 46.5 FLOW CYTOMETRIC ANDINGS 0F HEPATOSPLENIC T-CELL
LYMPHoMA, GAMMA/DELTA TYPE. Open gate Scatter display (in blue)
100
which is verified by CD3 backgating. The lymphocyte-enriched-
100
gate (in magenta) contains mostly abnormal T-cells (arrow) that
are positive for CD2 (bright), CD3, CD7 (dim), CD16/CD56 (bright),
TCR-Gamma
TCR-Delta
 and TCR gamma/delta. The neoplastic T-cells are double negative
 FIGURE 46.7 Southern blot analysis demonstrating TCRG and
for CD4 and CD8, with complete loss of CD5.
Iymphoma.
Courtesy of Ryan Phan, Ph.D, Department of Pathology. VA Greater
Los Angeles Heaithcare System.
H-OSS
CD3
FSC-H
CD2
CD4
CD5
CD7
CD57
TCRalpha/beta
FIGURE 46.6 FLOW CYTOMETRIC ANDINGS 0F HEPATOSPLENIC T-CELL
LYMPHoMA, ALPHA/BETA TYPE. Open gate scatter display (in blue)
reveals a prominent population of T-cells that are intermediate-
sized to large, which is verified by CD3 backgating. The T-cells 
display abnormal phenotype expressing CD2, CD3, CD7, CD8 
(partial, dim), CD16 + 56, CD57 (partial), and TCR alpha/beta.
There is lack of expression of CD4, CD5, and TCR gamma/delta.
544
HEPATOSPLENIC T-CELL LYMPHOMA
11
0
楼
4
15
16
17
A
20
22
21
12
11.2
21
22
31
32
35
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
545
品
F
11
12
14
15
16
17
18
20
21
22
features (CD56 and TIA1 expression). However, neoplastic
Differential Diagnosis
 cells of hepatosplenic lymphoma are surface CD3+, CD4-,
CD8-, CD5- and granzyme B-, and in many cases dem-
The differential diagnosis includes neoplasms of large
 onstrate isochromosome 7q.
TLGL leukemia cells are CD3+ and may occasionally
granular lymphocytes, such as aggressive NK-cell and
T-LGL leukemias. Aggressive NK-cell leukemia and hepa-
express TCR-p6, but unlike lymphoid cells of hepatosplenic
lymphoma are CD5+, CD57+, and CD56-.
 pattern (sinusoidal involvement) and immunophenotypic
546
 HEPATOSPLENIC T-CELL LYMPHOMA
Additional Resources
Beigel F Jurgens M, Tillack C, et al: Hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma
 Mandava S, Sonar R, Ahmad F et al: Cytogenetic and molecular char-
in a patient with Crohn's disease, Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol
acterization of a hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma: report of a novel
6:433-436, 2009.
chromosomal aberration, Cancer Genet 204: 103-107, 2011.
Belhadj K, Reyes F Farcet JP, et al: Hepatosplenic gammadelta T-cell
 Minauchi K, Nishio M, Itoh T, et al: Hepatosplenic alpha/beta T cell 
lymphoma is a rare clinicopathologic entity with poor outcome:
lymphoma presenting with cold agglutinin disease, Ann Hematol
report on a series of 21 patients, Blood 102:4261-4269, 2003.
86:155-157, 2007.
Gaulard P Belhadj K, Reyes F: Gammadelta T-cell lymphomas, Semin
Taguchi A, Miyazaki M, Sakuragi S, et al: Gamma/delta T cell lym-
Hematol 40:233-243, 2003.
phoma, Intern Med 43:120-125, 2004.
Humphreys MR, Cino M, Quirt I, et al: Long-term survival in two 
Tripodo C, Iannitto E, Florena AM, et al: Gamma-delta T-cell lym-
patients with hepatosplenic T cell lymphoma treated with interferon-
phomas, Nat Rev Clin Oncol 6:707-717, 2009.
alpha, Leuk Lymphoma 49:1420-1423, 2008.
Weidmann E: Hepatosplenic T cell lymphoma: a review on 45 cases
Kotlyar DS, Osterman MT, Diamond RH, et al: A systematic review of
 since the frst report describing the disease as a distinct lymphoma
factors that contribute to hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma in patients
entity in 1990, Leukemia 14:991-997, 2000.
with inflammatory bowel disease, Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 9:36-41,
2011.
Lu CL, Tang Y, Yang QP, et al: Hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma: clini-
copathologic, immunophenotypic and molecular characterization of
17 Chinese cases, Hum Pathol 42:1965-1978, 2011.
Enteropathy-
Associated T-Cell
Lymphoma
Enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma (EATL) is a rare
lymphocytes and broadly infiltrate in the submucosa and
intraepithelial T-cell intestinal lymphoma consisting of a
muscularis propria (Figure 47.3).
cal lymphocytes.
Most patients are over 60 years of age, with a male to
Immunophenotype
female ratio of about 1. Patients have a history of celiac
disease and present with symptoms of malabsorption,
 MFC findings (Figure 47.4) include:
 abdominal pain, and occasionally evidence of intestinal
perforation. The clinical outcome is usually poor with fre-
Expression of CD3;
Variably aberrant profile of CD2 and CD7:
quent recurrences.
Absent CD4 and CD5:
 Expression of CD8 and CD56 uncommon in EATL;
●
 Expression of CD8, CD56, and TCR beta in monomorphic
form (type II EATL) tumors.
Morphology
By immunohistochemical studies (Figure 47.5), the neo-
plastic cells:
● The most frequent site of involvement is the jejunum, buf
Are positive for cytotoxic-associated proteins, such as TIA1
other parts of small intestine or gastrointestinal tract, such
and granzyme B;
as stomach and colon, may be involved. The tumor is often
Express CD3, CD7, TCR-8, and CD103;
multifocal and appears as ulcerating nodules. The mesenteric
Are negative for CD4 and CD5.
 The monomorphic (type II EATL) tumors may express CD8
lymph nodes are usually affected.
The neoplasm consists of a pleomorphic lymphoid infil-
and/or CD56.
trate. There is a predominance of atypical medium sized to
[n most cases, some proportion of tumor cells are also
large lymphoid cells with variable amount of pale cytoplasm,
positive for CD30.
round or irregular vesicular nuclei, and prominent nucle-
oli (Figures 47.1 and 47.2). Anaplastic large cells or multi-
nucleated giant cells may be present, mimicking anaplastic
Molecular and Cytogenetic Studies
large cell lymphoma. The infiltrate commonly is mixed with
inflammatory cells, such as histiocytes and eosinophils. Areas
of necrosis are often present. Granulomas may be present.
· The TCR genes, most commonly Y and 8. are clonally
● The histology of the non-involved mucosa, remote from the
neoplasm, commonly shows evidence of villous atrophy and
rearranged.
Cypt hyperplasia, features associated with celiac disease.
Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at chromosome 9p21 with a
deletion of the CDKN2a gene (Cyclin-dependent kinase inhib-
●
 The lymph node involvement may be intrasinusoidal or para-
itor 2A or pl6) is seen in almost a fifth of the cases.
cortical, or both. Areas of necrosis are often presenf.
● Gains of chromosome 9q33-q34. 7q31, 5q33-34, and 1q
● A monomorphic variant (type II EATL) has been described
have been identified by CGH studies. Deletions of 6p24.
in which the tumor cells are slightly larger than normal
7p21, 17p. and 17q are also reported.
Atlas of Hematopathology. DOl: http:/dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00047-4
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
548
ENTEROPATHY-ASSOCIATED T-CELL LYMPHOMA
FIGURE 47.1 ENTEROPATHY-ASSOCIATED T-CELL LYMPHOMA OF SMALL
FIGURE 47.2 ENTEROPATHY-ASSOCIATED T-CELL LYMPHOMA OF SMALL
INTEsTINe. Diffuse infiltration of mucosa and submucosa by
INTEsTINe. Diffuse infiltration of mucosa and submucosa with
atypical, pleomorphic lymphocytes. Numerous anaplastic large
large lymphoid cells. The neoplastic cells are blastoid with large
rucleus, open nuclear chromatin, and one prominent nucleolus 
power).
(A,low power; B, intermediate power; C, high power; D,high
power, oil emersion).
 DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
549
FIGURE 47.3 TypE Il EATL. Enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma of small intestine demonstrating a diffuse infltration of atypical,
monomorphic lymphocytes in the mucosa and submucosa (A, low power; B, intermediate power; C, high power).
Differential Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis includes inflammatory bowel
CD25
CD4
TCRalpha/beta
disorders and other types of lymphomas, particularly dif-
fuse large B-cell lymphoma and anaplastic large cell lym-
phoma. Inflammatory bowel diseases primarily consist of
polymorphic inflammatory cells, without infiltrating clus-
GQ3
ters or sheets of atypical neoplatic lymphoid cells. They
do not show TCR rearrangement and lack chromosomal
aberrations.
CD2
CD45
CD56
In EATL, the intestinal mucosa remote from the
FIGURE 47.4 FLOW CYToMETrIC ANDINGs OF ENTeROpATHy-AsSoCIATED
involved area commonly shows evidence of villous atro-
T-cELL LyMPHoMA. Lymphocyte-enriched gate of an abdominal wall 
 phy and crypt hyperplasia, features associated with celiac
mass reveals near exclusively abnormal T-cells, which are positive
disease. Also the tumor cells commonly express CD103
for CD3, CD7 (bright), CD8 (partial, dim), CD25 (partial), CD45,
and TCR-y&, whereas, anaplastic large cell lymphoma
CD56, and TCR alpha/beta. The neoplastic T-cells demonstrate
lacks these expressions and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
complete loss of CD2 and CD5. They are also negative for CD1a,
CD4, and CD57.
expresses pan B-cell-associated markers.
550
 FIGURE 47.5 IMMUNOHISTOCHEMICAL STUDIEs IN A PATIENT wITH ENTEROPATHY-AsSOCIATED T-CELL LYMPHOMa. Sections Of affected sSmall intestine 
demonstrate expression of CD2 (A), CD3 (B), CD30 (C), TIA-1 (D), Ki67 (E) and EBV-EBER (F).
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
551
Additional Resources
Chan JK, Chan AC, Cheuk W, et al: Type II enteropathy-associated
Jaffe ES. Harris NL, Vardiman JW, et al: Hematopathology.
Philadelphia, 2010, Saunders/Elsevier.
T-cell receptor expression, Arm J Surg Pathol 35: 1557-1569, 2011.
Sieniawski MK, Lennard AL: Enteropathy-associated T-cell lym-
Chandesris MO, Malamut G, Verkarre V, et al: Enteropathy-associated
phoma: epidemiology, clinical features, and current treatment strate-
T-cell lymphoma: a review on clinical presentation, diagnosis, thera-
gies, Curr Hematol Malig Rep 6:231-240, 2011.
peutic strategies and perspectives, Gastroenterol Clin Biot 34:590-605.
van de Water JM, Cillessen SA, Visser OJ, et al: Enteropathy associ-
2010.
ated T-cell lymphoma and its precursor lesions, Best Pract Res Clin
Delabie J, Holte H, Vose IM, et al: Enteropathy-associated T-cell lym-
Gastroenterol 24:43-56, 2010.
phoma: clinical and histological findings from the international
Zettl A, deLeeuw R, Haralambieva E, et al: Enteropathy-type T-cell
peripheral T-cell lymphoma project, Blood ll8:148-155, 2011.
lymphoma, Am J Clin Pathol 127:701-706, 2007.
Ferreri AJ, Zinzani PL, Govi S, Pileri SA: Enteropathy-associated T-cell
lymphoma, Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 79:84-90, 2011.
This page intentionally left blank
48
Mycosis Fungoides
and Sezary Syndrome
(M), and blood (B). The overall 5-year survival for MF
      m
has been reported as 87%, compared with 33% for SS.
course and skin manifestations ranging from patches to
Therefore, transformation from MF to SS is indicative of
plaques and tumor formation. Sézary syndrome (Ss) is a  poor prognosis.
dlosely related neoplasm which is associated with cutane-
Transformation to CD30+ large cell lymphoma is rela-
ous involvement, erythroderma, and circulating neoplastic
  s  s     
cells in the peripheral blood.
the cumulative probability of transformation to large cell
lymphoma was 39% in 12 years, with a median time inter-
val of 1-6.5 years after diagnosis of MF. Transformation to
CD30+ large cell lymphoma is associated with an aggres-
sive clinical course. In one study, the median survival was
Mycosis Fungoides
3 years in transformed MF patients compared with 14
years in untransformed patients.
Mycosis fungoides is an epidermotropic T-cell lymphoma
 Treatment includes a broad spectrum of options. The
with the infiltration of upper dermis resulting in patches.
topical therapeutic measures, such as nitrogen mustard,
plaques, and nodules. The vast majority of the cases are of
carmustine, electron beam therapy, and phototherapy, are
 helper T-cell phenotype.
used for the early stages of the disease. Systemic chemo-
MF is the most common primary cutaneous T-cell lym-
therapy, alone or in combination with topical therapy, is
phoma accounting for about 45% of lymphomas present
 used in advanced stages of the disease. Purine and pyrimi-
 dine analogs are the primary chemotherapy agents.
in the skin. The peak age is 55-60 years, with a male to
female ratio of about 2:1. MF usually presents as indolent
cutaneous erythematous scaly patches or plaques, often
MORPHOLOGY
with pruritus, mimicking common skin disorders, such
as eczema or psoriasis. These lesions may wax and wane
 Skin biopsies in early stages of patch formation demon-
S n sd aaa A pe siaa A 
 strate a perivascular infltrate of lymphohistiocytic cells
tumor formation, erythroderma, and the infiltration of the
 with scattered atypical lymphocytes in the upper dermis.
neoplastic cells into the circulation (SS).
 Epidermotropism characterized by the presence of single
Extracutaneous involvement is relatively uncommon in
 or linear arrangement of haloed lymphoid cells in the
the early stages of the disease but becomes more frequent
sd aq n  no A sia a jo ia les
in the advanced stages, comprising 8% in the plaque stage
(Figure 48.1).
 compared with 30-40% in the erythrodermatous stage.
The atypical cells are usually medium to large size with
The regional lymph nodes are the most frequent sites
variable amount of cytoplasm and convoluted (cerebri-
of involvement followed by lungs, spleen, and liver. The 
 form) nuclei.
clinical staging is based on the extent of cutaneous lesions
 In the stage of plaque formation, the rete ridges are elon-
(T) and the involvement of the lymph nodes (L), viscera
gated, epidermotropism is more pronounced, and aggregates
Atlas of Hematopathology. DOl: ht://dx.doi.org/10.1016/978-0-12-385183-300048-6
@ 201 3 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
554
MYCOSIS FUNGOIDES AND SEZARY SYNDROME
FIGURE 48.1 MYcosIs FUNGOIDEs, EARLY STAGE. Skin biOpSy Section
FIGURE 48.2 MYcosIs FUNGoIDEs. Skin biopsy section
 demonstrating an upper dermis lymphohistiocytic infiltration
 demonstrating epidermotropism and the presence of
with evidence of epidermotropism (A, low power; B, intermediate 
lymphocytes within the epidermis (A, low power; B, high power).
power).
 of atypical cells referred to as "Pautrier microabscesses" may
Transformation to large CD30+ T-cell lymphoma is
be present in the epidermis (Figures 48.2 and 48.3). Pautrier
characterized by formation of microscopic nodules of large
microabscesses are characteristic of MF, but are observed in
transformed cells or >25% large cells in the neoplastic
only about one-third of the patients.
infiltrate. Elevation of serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)
In more advance stages, dermal infiltration expands,
and β2-microglobulin are predictive of transformation.
with tumor formation and an increased proportion of
a a (t ) s 1 p 
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
motropism may disappear.
Lymphadenopathy  is frequent in advanced
cases
Immunophenotypic features (Figures 48.5 and 48.6) include:
(30-40%) and is divided into three categories as follows.
● Mostly phenotype of mature T-helper cells with expression of
● Category 1: Dermatopathic lymphadenitis with no atypical,
CD4 and TCR-αβ:
cerebriform lymphocytes (no involvement).
● Expression of pan-T-cell antigens CD2, CD3, and CD5, often
 Category 2: Dermatopathic lymphadenitis with early involve-
with variably aberrant patterns:
ment and scattered atypical, cerebriform lymphocytes.
Common loss of CD7, especially within the epidermotropic
Category 3: Partial or complete effacement of
nodal
lymphocytes:
architecture with diffuse infiltration of atypical, cerebriform 
● Common expression of CD25 (IL-2 receptor-α) with variable
lymphocytes.
patterns;
MYCOSIS FUNGOIDES
555
B
FIGURE 48.3 MYcosIs FUNGoIDEs. Skin biopsy section
demonstrating aggregates of atypical lymphocytes within the 
epidermis (Pautrier microabscesses) (A, low power; B, high
power). The inset shows a large, atypical lymphocyte with
convoluted nuclei (Sezary cell) in the peripheral blood smear.
● Occasional CD8 phenotype, which is more common in pedi-
atric cases;
●
Lack of expression of CD26;
●
Expression of CD158.
●
Cytotoxic granule associated proteins may be detected in
 advanced stages of MF.
CYTOGENETIC AND MOLECULAR STUDIES
● Patients with cutaneous T-cell lymphoma commonly show a
wide variety of clonal or non-clonal numerical and structural
chromosomal aberrations in their blood or skin cultures.
FIGURE 48.4 MYCOSIS FUNGOIDES, ADVANCED STAGE. Skin biOpSy
●
 The neoplastic blood cells have a low mitotic index, and stim-
section demonstrating areas of fbrinoid necrosis and massive
ulation with phytohemagglutinin and interleukin (IL-2, [L-7)
lymphoid infiltration of dermis (A, low power; B, intermediate 
is used.
 power). The infiltrate is pleomorphic, consisting of atypical small
to large lymphocytes showing irregular nuclear borders (C, high
● Although standard karyotyping studies of MF are difficult, the 
power).
probability of detecting an abnormal clone correlates with the
dlinical stage, with 50% exhibiting abnormal chromosomes.
556
MYCOSIS FUNGOIDES AND SEZARY SYNDROME
-OSS
FSC-H
CD25
CD4
CD7
CD2
TCRalpha/beta
FIGURE 48.5 FLow CYToMETRIC ANDINGs 0F MYCoSIS FUNGoIDEs. Open 
scatter gate (in purple) demonstrates small to intermediate-sized
lymphocytes (circled). The lymphocyte-enriched-gate (in blue)
reveals mostly abnormal T-cells, which express CD2, CD3 (dim),
CD4, CD5, CD25, and TCR alpha/beta (dim). These neoplastic
T-cells demonstrate complete loss of CD7 expression.
● No recurrent or specific abnormality has been found in MF.
leading to a hypothesis of genetic instability.
● The most common structural abnormalities involve chromo-
somes 1p36, deletion 2q. 6. 7, 4, deletion 9p. 9q34, 10q. 12,
14, 15. 17q24, 19p. and most common numerical abnormali-
ties involve chromosomes 11, 21, 22, 8, 9, 15, 16, 17.and 19
in descending order of frequency.
● DNA content analysis of skin tumor cells shows evidence of
aneuploidy in up to one-third of patients (Figure 48.7). DNA
ing that chromosomal imbalances are usually associated with
hypotetraploidy
●The MF cells show TCR gene rearrangement.
● Additional ERBB2 (Her2/neu) gene copies and inactivation of
CDKN2A/p16 have been reported in MF cells.
B
VARIANTS OF MF
Over fifteen variants of MF have been described. Here, we
briefly describe three clinically significant types, folliculo-
tropic MF, pagetoid reticulosis, and granulomatous slack skin.
Compared with classical MF, folliculotropic MF has a more
aggressive clinical course and unfavorable prognosis, while
the latter two have excellent prognosis.
Folliculotropic MF is a rare condition characterized by
the infiltration of atypical MF cells in the hair follicles. The
primary sites of involvement are head and neck, and the
lesions may be associated with alopecia.
 Pagetoid reticulosis is characterized by interepidermal
 growth and expansion of the MF cells. Pagetoid reticulo-
sis is usually localized and has an excellent prognosis. The
 epidermal infiltrate is patchy, diffuse, or band-like and is
FIGURE 48.6 MYcosIs FUNGoIDEs. Skin biopsy Section
often associated with reactive inflammatory cells such as
 demonstrating Pautrier microabscesses (A) and expressing CD3
lymphocytes and eosinophils. The immunophenotype is
(B) and CD4 (C).
CD4+ and often CD30+
SEZARY SYNDROME
557
considered the disseminated (leukemic) phase of MF
Criteria for the diagnosis of SS are:
● An absolute Sezary cell count of ≥10o0/μL;
An expanded CD4:CD8 ratio of >10 or evidence of a T-cell
done;
● Immunophenotypic abnormalities, such as loss of one or
 more T-cell-associated antigens.
Clinical features include erythroderma, palmar and
plantar hyperkeratosis, and generalized lymphadenopathy.
 Pruritis and alopecia may be present. SS is an aggressive
disease with a 5-year survival rate of 10-20%.
MORPHOLOGY
● The Sezary cells have a variable amount of non-granular
cytoplasm and show the characteristic delicately convoluted,
erebriform nucleus with condensed chromatin and incon-
spicuous nucleoli (Figures 48.8B inset and 48.8A). These cells
may vary in size, with the smaller forms referred to as Lutzner
cells.
 The skin biopsies may resemble MF or may be non-diagnostic.
Epidermotropism may be absent.
 Lymph nodes show effacement of nodal architecture and
heavy infiltration of relatively monotonous Sezary cells.
 Bone marrow involvement, if present, is often sparse and
interstitial (Figure 48.8).
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
 Immunophenotypic features are similar to those of MF
and include (Figure 48.9):
● Expression of CD2, CD3, CD5, and TCR-aβ with variably
 aberrant patterns:
CD4 in most cases;
Characteristic absence of CD7 and CD26:
FIGURE 48.7 HyPERDIPLoIDY IN MF. DNA content analysis by flow
Common expression of CD25:
cytometry demonstrates a hyperdiploid population (green
● Uncommon phenotypes of CD8, double positive, or double
arrow=diploid, red arrow=hyperdiploid).
negative.
CYTOGENETIC AND MOLECULAR STUDIES
Granulomatous slack skin is an extremely rare type
involving major skin folds, such as axilla and groin. It con
Chromosome aberrations are detectable by conventional cyto-
sists of granulomatous formation with clonal infltration
genetic analysis in up to 60% of cases with PB involvement
of CD4+ T-cells.
(Figure 48.10)
 The most frequent genetic lesions include monosomy 10.
losses of 10q and 17p. gains of 8q24 and 17q. and diverse
structural alterations involving these regions.
Expression patterns in regions of genomic imbalance show
Sezary Syndrome
that a large number of genes are deregulated, and may play a
causative role.
Overall, chromosomal instability is characteristic of this lym-
Sézary syndrome (SS) is characterized by cutaneous T-cell
phoma and related to a poor prognosis, but no specific abnor-
lymphoma, erythroderma, presence of atypical cerebri-
malities that may be directly involved in development of the
form lymphocytes (Sezary cells) in the peripheral blood,
disease have yet been found.
and lymphadenopathy. In general, Sézary syndrome is
558
 MYCOSIS FUNGOIDES AND SEZARY SYNDROME
FSC-H
CD25
CD4
CR
CD7
CD57
TCRalpha/beta
FIGURE 48.9 FLow CYToMETRIC FINDINGs oF SEZArY SYNDRoME. Open
scatter gate density display (in green) of peripheral blood
highlights a prominent population of intermediate-sized to 
large lymphoid cells. These lymphoid cells are predominantly
 abnormal T-cells (in purple) displaying double positivity of CD4
 and CD8. In addition, the neoplastic T-cells are positive for CD3,
CD5 (homogeneous clustering profile), CD7, CD25 (partial),
CD16+56 (partial), and TCR alpha/beta.
FIGURE 48.8 SEzARY SYNDRoME. Several Sezary cells with
convoluted nuclei are demonstrated in the blood smear (A).
Bone marrow biopsy section (B) and smear (B, inset) show an
aggregate of atypical lymphocytes with irregular nuclei.
Adapted from Naeim F. Pathology of Bone Marrow, 2nd edn.
Williams & Wikins, Baitimore, 1997, by permission.
FIGURE 48.10 Karyotype of a patient with Sezary Syndrome
showing deletion 6q and 17p: 48,XY,+der(3)t(1;3)
● CGH studies show chromosome imbalances in greater than
Differential Diagnosis
50%: losses at 1p. 17p. 10q, and 19; gains at 4q, 18, and 17q.
1p33-36 and 10q26 may represent regions of minimal recur-
rent deletion.
 The differential diagnosis of MF includes a garden variety
 The MF cells show clonal TCR gene rearrangement.
 Since the molecular target may be a relatively small number 
of benign reactive skin disorders, such as psoriasis, eczema,
of T-cells in a skin biopsy, care must be taken to assure opti-
parapsoriasis, drug reactions, contact dermatitis, and
mal sampling of the lesion. Some laboratories have resorted
photodermatitis.
 to laser-capture microdissection to address this problem.
These distinctions can be quite challenging and often
●Adding to the technical challenge is the fact that most of these
 settled only by the results of TCR gene rearrangement
specimens are received in the molecular pathology laboratory
 studies. As most referred skin biopsies will be paraffin-
already formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded. In that case
 embedded, PCR analysis is the primary approach for these
there is no recourse to Southern blotting if the PCR study
lesions, since formalin-fixed tissue does not yield DNA of
turns out negative.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
559
Table 48.1
high enough quality for Southern blot analysis to be reli-
able. However, it is in this setting that the potential for
Clinicopathologic Features of T-prolymphocytic
Leukemia (T-PLL), Adult T-cell Leukemia/Lymphoma 
false-positive results due to spurious amplification of a
(ATL), and Mycosis Fungoides (MF)
small number of T-lymphocytes in the specimen (pseudo-
clonality) comes to the fore. In our laboratory, we include
Features
T-PLL
ATL
MF
a disclaimer to this effect when the skin biopsy contains
Median age (years)
>50
50
55-60
only scattered or scant T-lymphocytes and/or when we see
Male:Female
？
1.5
2
 an isolated clonal spike in the PCR profile in the absence
 Association
ATM1
HTLV-1
Unknown
 of any polyclonal background signal; this is a hint that the
 Skin involvement
15%
15%
100%
signal may be artifactual.
 Immunophenotype
CD3+,
CD3+, CD4+,
CD3+, CD4+,
MF should be distinguished from other primary cuta-
CD4+,
CD7-
CD7-, CD26-
 neous lymphomas. MF and SS share overlapping mor-
CD7+,some
phologic and immunophenotypic features with ATL (see
CD4+/CD8+
Chapter 45). ATL occurs in a younger age group and is
 Overall prognosis
Aggressive
Aggressive
Indolent 
associated with HTLV-1 (see Table 48.1) The neoplastic
1Ataxia telangiectasia gene.
cells in a minority of T-PLL cases may be Sezary cell-like
(see Chapter 44). The T-PLL cells are usually CD7+.
560
 MYCOSIS FUNGOIDES AND SEZARY SYNDROME
Additional Resources
Dobbeling U: The molecular pathogenesis of mycosis fungoides and
Lenane P, Powell FC, O'Keane C, et al: Mycosis fungoides—a review
Sézary syndrome, G Ital Dermatol Venereol 143:385-394, 2008.
of the management of 28 patients and of the recent literature, Int J
Fraser-Andrews EA, Mitchell T, Ferreira S. et al: Molecular stag-
Dermatol 46:19-26, 2007.
ing of lymph nodes from 60 patients with mycosis fungoides and
Sezary syndrome: correlation with histopathology and outcome sug-
Meyerson Hl: Flow cytometry for the diagnosis of mycosis fungoides,
gests prognostic relevance in mycosis fungoides, Br I Dermatol 155:
G Ital Dermatol Venereol 143:21-41, 2008.
756-762, 2006.
Mobs M, Knott M, Fritzen B, et al: Diagnostic tools in Sézary syn-
Galper SL, Smith BD, Wilson LD: Diagnosis and management of
drome, G Ital Dermatol Venereol 145:385-391, 2010.
mycosis fungoides, Oncology (Williston Park) 24:491-501, 2010.
Olsen E, Vonderheid E, Pimpinelli N, et al: Revisions to the stag-
ing and cassification of mycosis fungoides and Sezary syndrome: a
Gerami P, Rosen S, Kuzel T, et al: Folliculotropic mycosis fungoides:
an aggressive variant of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, Arch Dermatol
proposal of the Intermational Society for Cutaneous Lymphomas
(ISCL) and the cutaneous lymphoma task force of the European
144:738-746, 2008.
Organization of Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC), Blood
Hristov AC, Vonderheid EC, Borowitz MJ: Simplified flow cytomet-
110:1713-1722, 2007.
ric assessment in mycosis fungoides and sézary syndrome, Am J Clin
Pathol 136:944-953, 2011.
Olsen EA, Rook AH, Zic J, et al: Sézary syndrome: immunopathogen-
esis, literature review of therapeutic options, and recommendations
Humme D, Lukowsky A, Sterry W: Diagnostic tools in mycosis fun-
for therapy by the United States Cutaneous Lymphoma Consortium
goides, G Ital Dermatol Venereol 145:375-384, 2010.
(USCLC). JAm Acad Dermatol 64:352-404, 2011.
Hwang ST, Janik JE, Jaffe ES, et al: Mycosis fungoides and Sézary syn-
Prince HM, Whittaker S, Hoppe RT: How I treat mycosis fungoides
drome, Lancet 371:945-957, 2008.
and Sézary syndrome, Blood 114:4337-4353, 2009.
Kempf W, Ostheeren-Michaelis S, Paulli M, et al: Granulomatous
Reddy K, Bhawan J: Histologic mimickers of mycosis fungoides: a
mycosis fungoides and granulomatous slack skin: a multicenter study
review, J Cutan Pathol 34:519-525, 2007.
of the Cutaneous Lymphoma Histopathology Task Force Group of
Vaughan J. Harrington AM, Hari PN, et al: Immunophenotypic sta-
the European Organization For Research and Treatment of Cancer
bility of sezary cells by flow cytometry: usefulness of flow cytometry
(EORTC), Arch Dermatol 144: 1609-1617, 2008.
in assessing response to and guiding alemtuzumab therapy, Am I Clin.
Kim EJ. Lin J. Junkins-Hopkins JM, et al: Mycosis fungoides and
Pathol 137:403-411, 2012.
sézary syndrome: an update, Curr Oncol Rep 8:376-386, 2006.
Zinzani PL, Ferreri AJ, Cerroni L: Mycosis fungoides, Crit Rev Oncol
Lansigan F, Choi J. Foss FM: Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, Hematol
Hematol 65:172-182, 2008.
Oncol Clin North Am 22:979-996, 2008.
Other Primary Cutaneous
T-Cell Lymphoproliferative
Disorders
 Extension into subcutaneous tissue may be present.
Primary Cutaneous CD30-Positive
 A rare “pyogenic" variant has been described with numerous
T-Cell Lymphoproliferative Disorders
neutrophils.
Immunophenotype
Primary cutaneous CD30-positve T-cell lymphoprolifera-
tive disorders are divided into two major subtypes: (1) pri-
 Immunophenotypic features include (Figure 49.2):
mary cutaneous anaplastic large cell lymphoma, and (2)
Common expression of CD4 T-helper cell phenotype, and
lymphomatoid papulosis.
positivity for CD30:
●
Variable loss of pan-T-cell antigens;
● Common expression of cytotoxic granule associated proteins
PRIMARY CUTANEOUS ANAPLASTIC LARGE
TIA1, granzyme B, and perforin:
CELL LYMPHOMA
●Absent ALK, EMA, and CD15.
Primary cutaneous anaplastic  large cell lymphoma
       )
Molecular and Cytogenetic Studies
>75% of the tumor cells express CD30. This entity should
i a  s () s s
be distinguished from transformation of mycosis fungoi-
des to CD30+ large cell lymphoma, and secondary cutane-
 Ous involvement in systemic ALCL.
LYMPHOMATOID PAPULOSIS
Most patients show solitary skin lesions presenting as
Lymphomatoid papulosis (LyP) is a chronic papular or
nodules or papules which may be ulcerated. Multifocal
nodular skin lesion consisting of large anaplastic lym-
skin lesions are observed in about 20% of cases, and
phoid cells embedded in an inflammatory background,
extranodal involvement may occur in about 10% of cases.
 Spontaneous regression has been observed.
and often a central necrosis. The disease is recurrent and
C-ALCL usually occurs in elderly patients with a median
shows spontaneous regression with the disappearance of
the individual lesions in 3-12 weeks. The male to female
age of about 60 years. The male to female ratio is about
ratio is about 2.5:1. Most patients under age 19 are males
  si sal 1 rg sisd a 't-1
 and most over age 19 are females and have a high inci-
with a 5-year survival rate of over 90%, compared with
 dence of thyroiditis. Approximately 20% of patients may
50% for generalized cutaneous ALCL. The conventional
develop or show coexisting T-cell cutaneous lymphoma or
treatment for localized lesions is excision with or without
radiation. Combination chemotherapy is recommended
Hodgkin lymphoma. LyP has an excellent prognosis.
for disseminated skin disease.
Morphology (Figure 49.3)
Morphology (Figure 49.1)
● In early stages, there is perivascular and patchy dermal infil-
● There is dense dermal infiltration with clusters or sheets of
 tration of large atypical lymphoid cells mixed with variable
anaplastic large cells, surrounded by lymphocytes. Numerous
 numbers of inflammatory cells. The atypical cells may be mul-
Reed-Sternberg-like cells and/or multinucleated giant cells
 finucleated or resemble Reed-Sternberg cells.
may be present.
● In advanced stages, there are sheets or large clusters of
● Epidermal involvement is rare and may be associated with
monotonous large atypical cells admixed with a small number
ulceration.
of inflammatory cells.
Atlas of Hematopathology. D0l: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00049-8
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
562
FIGURE 49.1 PRIMARY CUTANEOUS
ANAPLASTIC LARGE CELL LYMPHOMA. Skin
ulceration with extensive infltration
of dermis and subcutaneous tissue
by pleomorphic large cells (A to F
from low to high power).
 There are three morphologic types:
● The profile of the clonal rearrangement by PCR can be used to
distinguish primary LP lesions from metastases of other T-cell
● Type A: Clusters of CD30 positive large cells are found in a
lymphomas.
background of inflammatory cells.
Type B: Small atypical lymphoid cells with convoluted nuclei
infiltrate upper dermis and epidermis (dermatotropic), resem-
bling mycosis fungoides. This type is uncommon.
●
Type C: Sheets or large clusters of large atypical CD30-positive 
Subcutaneous Panniculitis-Like
cells with scattered inflammatory cells.
T-Cell Lymphoma
Immunophenotype
Immunophenotypic features include:
Subcutaneous panniculitis-like T-cell lymphoma is a rare
lymphoma which involves subcutaneous fat without der-
● Type A and type C lesions: Large atypical cells have pheno-
typic features similar to those seen in C-ALCL (see above):
mal or epidermal infiltration, leading to erythematous or
● Type B: CD4 T-cell phenotype but lack of CD30:
violaceous nodules, plaques, or both.
The clinical manifestation of subcutaneous pannicu-
Molecuiar and Cytogenetic Studies
litis-like T-cell lymphoma is variable, ranging from indo-
lent course to a rapidly fatal hemophagocytic process.
● TCR gene rearrangement has been reported in about 60% of cases.
The systemic hemophagocytosis is characterized by fever,
CUTANEOUS 8 T-CELL LYMPHOMA
563
FIGURE 49.2 PRIMARY CUTANE0US
ANAPLASTIC LARGE CELL LYMPHOMA, 
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE. The neOplastic
cells express CD2 (A), CD3 (B),
D4 (C), CD5 (D), and CD30 (F) by
immunohistochemical stains. They
are negative for CD7 (F).
hepatosplenomegaly, lung infiltration, liver dysfunction,
● Mature cytotoxic T-cell phenotype with expression of CD3.
 coagulation abnormalities, and pancytopenia. This hemo-
CD8, and TCR-αβ:
phagocytic syndrome may develop before or during the
● Expression of cytotoxic markers TIA1, granzyme B, and
manifestation of T-cell lymphoma.
perforin;
Local radiation therapy and/or systemic chemotherapy
●Negativity for CD56.
are used. The 5-year survival rate has been reported as 80%
in a recent study.
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
MORPHOLOGY (FIGURES 49.4 AND 49.5)
The tumor cells in most patients show clonal TCR gene
rearrangement.
● The subcutaneous infiltrate consists of a mixture of small.
medium to large atypical cells with areas of necrosis. The neo-
plastic T-cells have a tendency to rim around adipocytes.
●The infiltrate often contains reactive histiocytes which may
Cutaneous Y8 T-Cell Lymphoma
show hemophagocytosis.
Cutaneous y6 T-cell lymphoma was previously considered
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
a subtype of subcutaneous panniculitis-like T-cell lym-
Immunophenotypic features include:
phoma, accounting for 25% of cases. Morphologic features
564
FIGURE 49.3 LYMPHoMAToID PAPULosIs. Skin biopsy demonstrates
Reed- Sternberg-like cells (arrows) (A, low power; B, high power).
are similar to those of subcutaneous panniculitis-like,
except that dermal and epidermal involvement may be
present. Cutaneous y6 T-cell lymphoma is a more aggres-
sive disease than subcutaneous panniculitis-like T-cell lym-
phoma. The disease has a poor prognosis with a median
survival of less than 2 years.
The neoplastic cells are of TCR-y8 type, positive for
CD2, CD3, and CD56, with strong expression of cytotoxic
 markers. They are mostly negative for both CD4 and CD8,
though some cases may be positive for CD8. The tumor 
 FIGURE 49.4 SUBCUTANEOUS PANNICULITIS-LIKE T-CELL LYMPHOMA. SkiN 
cells are also negative for CD5 with variable loss of CD7.
biopsy (A, low power; B, high power). The infltrating lymphocytes
Southern blot analysis using the TCR-β probe is negative
are CD3+ (C).
in these cases, but PCR analysis for TCR-y will usually be
informative. However, negativity for TCR-β clonality alone
cannot always be used to infer y& origin.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS  565
FIGURE 49.5 SUBCUTANE0US
PANNICULITIS-LIKE T-CELL LYMPHOMA.
Subcutaneous fatty tissue shows
 infltrate (A,low power; B, high 
power).
Primary Cutaneous Aggressive
Epstein-Barr Virus-Associated
Epidermotropic CD8+ Cytotoxic
Hydroa Vacciniforme-Like
T-Cell Lymphoma
Cutaneous Lymphoma of Childhood
Primary cutaneous aggressive epidermotropic CD8+ cyto-
Hydroa-like cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (hydroa-like
 n     n i
CTCL) is a rare EBV-associated T-cell lymphoma of child-
disseminated eruptive skin lesions (papules, nodules, hood presenting as cutaneous rash characterized by
tumors) with epidermal infltration of CD8+ cytotoxic edema, blisters, ulcers, crusts, and scars, resembling hydroa
T-cells and an aggressive clinical course. Tumor cells vary  vacciniforme. It is seen mainly on the face and sometimes
from small to large, show pleomorphic or blastic nuclei, on the extremities.
and express CD3, CD8, βF1, plus cytotoxic proteins. The
 The lesion consists of T-cell infiltration of the skin
neoplastic cells are negative for CD4, with variable loss of  and subcutis with variable exocytosis and angiocentric-
CD2, CD5, and CD7. There is evidence of clonal TCR gene  if
 ity (Figure 49.7). There is often ulceration of the overlying
rearrangement.
epidermis. The neoplastic cells are small to medium size,
often with no significant atypia or increased mitosis. They
are either cytotoxic T-cells or NK-cells and express EBV-
EBER. Cases with cytotoxic T-cell phenotype show TCR
Primary Cutaneous CD4+ Small/
gene rearrangement.
Medium T-Cell Lymphoma
This cutaneous lymphoma consists of a pleomorphic
Differential Diagnosis
small to medium sized lymphocytes, often appearing as
a solitary lesion on the face, neck, or upper trunk (Figure
 The main distinguishing morphologic, immunopheno-
49.6). Unlike MF, there is absence of patches. There is a
typic, and molecular/cytogenetic features of different types
 dense nodular infiltration of the dermis with a tendency to
of primary cutaneous T-cell lymphomas are summarized
extend into the subcutis. Epiderrmotropism may be focally
in Table 49.1. The differential diagnosis of primary cuta-
present.
neous T-cell lymphomas also includes a garden variety of
The neoplastic cells express CD3 and CD4, with vari
benign reactive skin disorders and secondary cutaneous
able loss of pan-T-cell markers. They are negative for CD8,
lymphomas.
CD30, plus cytotoxic proteins. The TCR genes are clonally
rearranged.
566
FIGURE 49.6 PRIMARY cUTANEoUs CD4+ T-cELL LYMPHoMA. Skin biopsy section demonstrating a patchy dermal lymphoid infiltration
consisting of small to medium sized lymphocytes (A, low power; B, intermediate power; C, high power). The lymphocytes are positive 
for CD3 (D), and CD4 (E), and negative for CD8 (F).
 DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS 
567
Table 49.1
Differential Diagnosis of Primary Cutaneous T-Cell
Lymphomas
Immuno-
Molecular/
Type
Morphology
 phenotype
Cytogenetics
Mycosis
 Patches, plaques,
D3+,CD4+,
TCR
fungoides
tumors,
βF1+,
 rearranged
epidemotropism,
CD7-,
Pautrier
CD8-
microabscesses,
cells with
cerebriform
nuclei
C-ALCL?
 Often solitary tumor
CD3+,CD4+,
TCR
with ulceration,
CD30+,
 rearranged
pleomorphic
CD8-,
infiltrate of
EMA-,
large atypical
ALK-
cells, including
multinucleated
forms
SPTCL2
Subcutaneous
CD3+,CD8+,
TCR
nodules,
βF1+,
 rearranged
tumor cells rim
CD8-
individual fat
 cells, prominent
apoptosis
y8 T-cell
Subcutaneous,
CD3+,
TCR-y
lymphoma
 demal,
CD56+,
rearranged
epidermal,
TCR-y-1+,
tumor cells rim
CD4-,
individual fat
CD8-
 cells, prominent
apoptosis
CD8+ aggressive
 Pagetoid
①3+,CD8+,
TCR
 epidermotropic 
epidermotropism,
βF1+,
 rearranged
adenexal
CD4-,
destruction
CD5-,
CD56-
CD4+ small/
 Solitary or
CD3+,CD4+,
TCR
 medium T-cell
localized lesions,
βF1+,
rearranged
ymphoma
monotonous
CD8-
 demal infltrates
of small to
medium sized
lymphocytes
IC-ALCL, cutaneous anaplastic large cell lymphoma.
2SPTCL, subcutaneous panniculitic T-celymphoma.
 Adapted from Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Vardiman JW, et al. Hematopathology.
 Saunders/Elsevier, Philadelphia, 2010.
FIGURE 49.7 HYDROA VACCINIFORME-LIKE T-CELL LYMPHOMA. Small to
medium sized lymphoid cells infltrate the dermis (A). Infiltrate
extends into subcutaneous tissue (B). Nearly all lymphoid cells are 
EBV-EBER+ (C).
From Jaffe ES,Harris NL, Vardiman JW, et al.Hematopathology.
Saunders/Eisevier, Philadeiphia, 2010, by permission.
568
OTHER PRIMARY CUTANEOUS T-CELL LYMPHOPROLIFERATIVE DISORDERS
Additional Resources
Akilov OE, Pillai RK, Grandinetti LM, et al: Clonal T-cell receptor 
Kadin ME: Pathobiology of CD30+ cutaneous T-cell lymphomas,
β-chain gene rearrangements in differential diagnosis of lympho-
J Cutan Pathol 33(Suppl 1): 10-17, 2006.
matoid papulosis from skin metastasis of nodal anaplastic large-cell
Kagaya M, Kondo S, Kamada A, et al: Localized lymphomatoid papu-
lymphoma, Arch Dermatol 147:943-947, 2011.
losis, Dermatology 204:72-74, 2002.
Barrionuevo C, Anderson VM, Zevallos-Giampietri E, et al: Hydroa-
Morimura S, Sugaya M, Tamaki Z, et al: Lymphomatoid papulosis
like cutaneous T-cell lymphoma: a clinicopathologic and molecular
showing y8 T-cell phenotype, Acta Derm Venereol 91:712-713, 201l.
 genetic study of 16 pediatric cases from Peru, Appl Immunohistochem
Mol Morphol 10:7-14, 2002.
 Ohmatsu H, Sugaya M, Fujita H, et al: Primary cutaneous CD8+ aggres-
sive epidermotropic cytotoxic T-cell lymphoma in a human T-cell
 Belloni-Fortina A, Montesco MC, Piaserico S, et al: Primary cutaneous 
leukaemia vinus type-1 carrier, Acta Derm Venereol 90:324-325, 2010.
case report and literature review, Acta Derm Venereol 89:74-77, 2009.
Parveen Z. Thompson K: Subcutaneous panniculitis-like T-cell
lymphoma: redefinition of diagnostic criteria in the recent World
Beltraminelli H, Leinweber B, Kerl H, et al: Primary cutaneous CD4+
Health Organization-European Organization  for Research and
small-/medium-sized  pleomorphic  T-cell  lymphoma:  a cutane-
Treatment of Cancer classification for cutaneous lymphomas, Arch
ous nodular proliferation of pleomorphic T lymphocytes of unde-
PatholLab Med 133:303-308,2009.
termined significance? A study of 136 cases, Am J Dermatopathol
31:317-322, 2009.
Plaza JA, Ortega P, Lynott J, et al: CD8-positive primary cutaneous
Cetinozman F. Jansen PM, Willemze R: Expression of Programmed
anaplastic large T-cell lymphoma (PCALCL): case report and review of
this unusual variant of PCALC, Am J Dermatopathol 32:489-491, 2010.
Death-1 in primary cutaneous CD4-positive small/medium-sized
pleomorphic T-cell lymphoma, cutaneous pseudo-T-cell lymphoma,
Querfeld C, Khan I, Mahon B, et al: Primary cutaneous and systemic
and other types of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, Am J Surg Pathol
anaplastic large cell lymphoma: clinicopathologic aspects and thera-
36:109-116, 2012.
peutic options, Oncology (Williston Park) 24:574-587, 2010.
 Diamantidis MD, Myrou AD: Perils and pitfalls regarding differential
Rosen ST, Querfeld C: Primary cutaneous T-cell lymphomas,
diagnosis and treatment of primary cutaneous anaplastic large-cell
Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program:323-330, 513, 2006.
lymphoma, ScientifcWorldJoumal 1l: 1048-1055, 2011.
Shunmugam M, Chan E, O'Brart D, et al: Cutaneous y& T-cell
Garcia-Herrera A, Song IY, Chuang SS, et al: Nonhepatosplenic y8
lymphoma with bilateral ocular and adnexal involvement, Arch
i ix asaee jo uas e uasaidai sed la
Ophthalmol 129:1379-1381, 2011.
lymphomas with a mainly extranodal presentation, Am J Surg Pathol
Sim JH, Kim YC: CD8+ lymphomatoid papulosis, Ann Dermatol
35:1214-1225, 2011.
23:104-107, 2011.
Go RS, Wester SM: Immunophenotypic and molecular features, clini-
Tripodo C, lannitto E, Florena AM, et al: Gamma-delta T-cell
cal outcomes, treatments, and prognostic factors associated with sub-
lymphomas, Nat Rev Clin Oncol 6:707-717, 2009.
cutaneous panniculitis-like T-cell lymphoma: a systematic analysis of
Wang Y, Li T, Tu P, et al: Primary cutaneous aggressive epider-
156 patients reported in the literature, Cancer 10l:1404-1413, 2004.
 motropic CD8+ cytotoxic T-cell lymphoma clinicaly simulating
Gormley RH, Hess SD, Anand D, et al: Primary cutaneous aggres-
pyoderma gangrenosum, Clin Exp Dermatol 34:e261-e262, 2009.
sive epidermotropic CD8+ T-cell lymphoma, J Am Acad Dermatol
Xu Z, Lian S: Epstein-Barr vinus-associated hydroa vacciniforme-like
62:300-307,2010.
cutaneous lymphoma in seven Chinese children, Pediatr Dermatol
Guitart J. Querfeld C: Cutaneous CD30 lymphoproliferative disor-
27:463-469, 2010.
 ders and similar conditions: a clinical and pathologic prospective on
Yamane N, Kato N, Nishimura M, et al: Primary cutaneous CD30+
a complex issue, Semin Diagn Pathol 26:131-140, 2009.
anaplastic large-cell lymphoma with generalized skin involvement
Jaffe ES. Harris NL, Vardiman JW, et al: Hematopathology.
and involvement of one peripheral lymph node, successfully treated 
Philadelphia, 20l0, Saunders/Elsevier.
with low-dose 0ral etoposide, Clin Exp Dermatol 34:e56-e59, 2009.
Jang MS, Baek JW, Kang DY, et al: Subcutaneous panniculitis-like
Yip L, Darling S, Orchard D: Lymphomatoid papulosis in children:
T-cell lymphoma: successful treatment with systemic steroid alone,
experience of five cases and the treatment efficacy of methotrexate,
IDermatol 39:96-99, 2012.
Australas J Dermatol 52:279-283, 2011.
50
Angioimmunoblastic
T-Cell Lymphoma
Ingioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma (AITL) is a
A garden variety of autoimmune disorders have been
peripheral T-cell lymphoma characterized by generalized  observed in association with AITL, such as autoimmune
lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, anemia, hyper-
 hemolytic anemia, polyarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis,
gammaglobulinemia, and a polymorphic infiltrate involv-
 autoimmune thyroiditis, and vasculitis. Single agent che-
ing germinal center T-helper (GC-Th) cells and follicular 
 motherapy (steroids or methotrexate) and various com-
dendritic cells.
binations of chemotherapeutic regimens have been tried,
AITL accounts for about 2% of all non-Hodgkin lympho-
with an overall discouraging outcome and a 5-year survival
mas. The peak incidence is between the sixth and seventh
rate of 30-35%.
decades with no significant sex predilection and wide geo-
graphical distribution. The clinical presentation often mim-
S ,   s so  
and generalized lymphadenopathy.  Hepatosplenomegaly
Morphology and Laboratory
has been reported in 50-70% of patients. Around 50%
of patients complain of pruritus and/or show skin rashes
Findings
(Table 50.1).
The involved lymph nodes display partial or total efface-
 Table 50.1
Clinical Features and Laboratory Findings in 
predominantly involving paracortical areas. The lymph
 node sinuses are usually well preserved. The following
Angioimmunoblastic T-Cell Lymphoma (AITL)
morphologic variations appear to correspond to the vari-
Frequency (%)
(tos oi I'os sainig) asasip aul jo saseis sno
 Symptoms and signs
B symptoms
68-85
· In the early stages of the disease, there is preservation of nodal
 Generalized lymphadenopathy
L6-t6
architecture, follicular hyperplasia, poorly developed mantle
70-73
zones, and expanded paracortex with a polymorphic infiltrate
Splenomegaly
consisting of lymphocytes, eosinophils, plasma cells, macro-
Hepatomegaly
52-72
phages, transformed large lymphoid blasts, occasional Reed-
 Skin rash
48-58
Sternberg-like cells, and vascular proliferation with abundant
 Effusions
23-37
endothelial venules.
Laboratory findings
● In more advanced stages, the normal architecture is almost
Anemia
40-57
mmpletely lost, except for occasional depleted follicles show-
Hypergammaglobulinemia
50-83
ing concentrically arranged follicular dendritic cells. In some
66-77
cases proliferation of the follicular dendritic cells may extend
Autoantibodies
70-74
beyond the follicles. A polymorphic infiltrate with numerous
Elevated LDH
 transformed blast cells and vascular proliferation are present.
Bone marrow involvement
61
● In the late stages of the disease (the most commonly observed
 Qonal cytogenetic aberrations, such as +3, +5,
70
 morphology), there is complete effacement of nodal archi-
and +x
tecture, prominent proliferation of follicular dendritic cells.
TCR rearrangement
~100
extensive vascular proliferation, and, in many cases, perivas-
Adapted from Dogan A, Attygalle AD, Kyriakou C. Angioimmunoblastic
alar collections of atypical medium-sized to large lymphoid
 T-cell lymphoma. Br J Haematol 2003; 121: 681-691
cells with clear or pale cytoplasm.
Atlas of Hematopathology. DOl: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00050-4
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
570
ANGIOIMMUNOBLASTIC T-CELL LYMPHOMA
A
F
FIGURE 5o.1 ANGloIMMUNoBLAsTIc T-cELL LYMPHoMA. Lymph node section showing effacement of nodal architecture with the presence
The large cells with clear cytoplasm are follicular center CD10+ T-cells (D). Large aggregates of CD4+ T-cells (E) and CD21+ follicular
dendritic cells (F) are demonstrated.
● Bone marrow, spleen, liver, skin, and lung are the most fre-
Immunophenotype
quent extranodal sites of involvement (Figures 50.5 and 50.6).
The involvement of the extranodal sites is often non-specific
and consists of a polymorphic infltrate mimicking an inflam-
 MFC features include (Figure 50.7):
matory process.
● Laboratory findings include anemia or pancytopenia, hyper-
● Characteristic expression of normal  TFH (follicular helper
gammaglobulinemia, circulating autoantibodies, and elevated
T-cell) phenotype with positivity of CD10:
serum LDH (see Table 50.1).
●Expression of CD4;
● Expression of pan-T-cell markers with variable aberrancies.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
571
FIGURE 50.2 ANGIOIMMUNOBLASTIC T-CELL LYMPHOMA. LyMph NOde
FIGURE 50.3 ANGIOIMMUNOBLASTIC T-CELL LYMPHOMA. LyMph nOde
section demonstrating aggregates of plasma cells (arrow)
section demonstrating hypervascularity and presence of medium
and clusters of large cells with clear cytoplasm (A). Plasma cell
to large cells with clear cytoplasm (A, low power; B, intermediate 
aggregates express CD138 (B), and consist of a mixed population
power; C, high power).
of kappa+ (brown) and lambda+ (red) cells (C).
572
ANGIOIMMUNOBLASTICT-CELL LYMPHOMA
FIGURE 50.4 ANGIOIMMUNOBLASTIC T-CELL LYMPHOMA. Lymph nOde
FIGURE 5O.5 ANGIOIMMUNOBLASTICT-CELLLYMPHOMA. The deteCtiOn
section demonstrating predominance of large cells with clear
of bone marrow involvement is often challenging.Ill-defined 
cytoplasm (A, low power; B, intermediate power; C, high power).
polymorphic aggregates of lymphocytes, plasma cells,
eosinophils and histiocytes may be detected in biopsy sections (A,
intermediate power; B, high power) or bone marrow smears (C).
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
573
FIGURE 50.6 ANGI0IMMUNOBLASTIC
T-CELL LYMPHoMA OF THE SKIN. ExteNsive
infiltration of the dermis by a
pleomorphic and vascular tumor (A,
low power; B, intermediate power;: 
C high power). Numerous large
cells with abundant clear cytoplasm
are present (D and E), and there are 
high endothelial venules (F).
By immunohistochemical studies, the neoplastic cells
are positive for additional TFH markers, such as BCL6,
CD5
PD1, and CXCL13. Staining for CD21, CD23, and CD35
highlights expanded follicular dendritic meshworks. EBV
 staining by in situ hybridization studies is commonly
positive.
CD2
CD7
CD10
Molecular and Cytogenetic
Studies
CD4
CD2
TCRalpha/beta
● TCR rearrangement studies reveal clonal rearrangement in
FIGURE 5O.7 FLOW CYTOMETRIC ANDINGS OF ANGIOIMMUNOBLASTIC T-CELL
over 75% of cases (Figure 50.8).
LYMPHoMA. Lymphoid-enriched gate of axillary lymph node reveals
 The affected lymph nodes in approximately 10% of cases
mostly abnormal T-cells expressing CD4 (arrow) but negative for 
surface CD3, in a background of occasional reactive T-cells. The 
may show an expanded monoclonal B-cell population, often
neoplastic T-cells are positive for CD2, CD5 (moderate to bright),
in association with increased number of EBv-infected large
CD10 (partial), CD57 (partial), and TCR alpha/beta (partial). They
B-cells. This phenomenon is considered secondary to EBV stim-
display dim CD7 expression.
ulation and not reflective of the primary malignant process.
574
ANGIOIMMUNOBLASTIC T-CELL LYMPHOMA
control
● Approximately 70% of AITL patients show clonal chromosomal
aberrations. The most frequent recurrent abnormalities include
marker
 s x     o  os
ve-2
Table 50.1). Other frequently observed recurrent cytogenetic
Negative
ositive
abnormalities are gains of 1lq13, 19, 22q, and rearrangements 
Patier
NA
of 1p, 3p. 14q.
O
Differential Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis includes various viral infections
700
and collagen vascular disorders. Bone marrow biopsy
and fine needle aspiration or needle core biopsy of the
300
enlarged lymph node usually do not yield a definitive
diagnosis. Diagnosis is achieved by the morphologic exam-
ination of the entire lymph node.
100
FIGURE 50.8 Southern blot analysis demonstrating TCRB gene 
rearrangement in a patient with angioimmunoblastic T-cell
Iymphoma.
Courtesy of Ryan Phan, Ph.D., Department of Pathology. VA Greater
Los Angeles Heathcare System.
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
575
Additional Resources
Alizadeh AA, Advani RH: Evaluation and management of angioim-
Grogg KL, Morice WG, Macon WR: Spectrum of bone marrow find-
munoblastic T-cell lymphoma: a review of current approaches and
ings in patients with angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma, Br J
future strategies, Clin Adv Hematol Oncol 6:899-909, 2008.
Haematol 137:416-422, 2007.
de Leval L, Gisselbrecht C, Gaulard P: Advances in the understand-
lannitto E, Ferreri AJ, Minardi V, et al: Angioimmunoblastic T-cell
ing and management of angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma, Br J
lymphoma, Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 68:264-271, 2008.
Haematol 148:673-689, 2010.
Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Vardiman IW. et al: Hematopathology.
Dogan A, Attygalle AD, Kyriakou C: Angioimmunoblastic T-cell
Philadelphia, 2010, Saunders/Elsevier.
lymphoma, Br J Haematol 121:681-691, 2003.
Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, et al: WHO classifcation of
Dunleavy K, Wilson WH, Jaffe ES: Angioimmunoblastic T cell lym-
tumours of haematopoietic and lymphoid tissues, ed 4, Lyon, 2008,
phoma: pathobiological insights and clinical implications, Curr Opin 
 International Agency for Research on Cancer.
Hematol14:348-353, 2007.
Zaki MA, Wada N, Kohara M, et al: Presence of B-cell clones in T-cell
Gaulard P, de Leval L: Follicular helper T cells: implications in neo-
lymphoma, Eur J Haematol 86:412-419, 2011.
plastic hematopathology. Semin Diagn Pathol 28:202-213, 2011.
Good DJ, Gascoyne RD: Atypical lymphoid hyperplasia mimicking
lymphoma, Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 23:729-745, 2009.
This page intentionally left blank
Anaplastic Large Cell
Lymphomas
Anaplastic large cell lymphomas (ALCL) are a group of
and soft tissues. Approximately 10% of patients may show
T-cell malignancies consisting of large anaplastic, CD30+
bone marrow involvement.  Leukemic presentation is
cells with pleomorphic and often horseshoe-shaped nuclei
iuncommon.
and abundant cytoplasm. The tumor cells have a tendency
       
to grow cohesively in the lymph node sinuses, mimicking
ALK-negative ALCL, with a 5-year overall survival rate
metastatic tumors. These neoplasms are divided into two
ranging from 70% to 90% compared with 15% to 37% in
major groups:
ALK-negative patients. Factors associated with poor prog-
 nosis include involvement of mediastinum, spleen, lung.
1. Anaplastic large cell lymphoma, ALK-positive.
 2. Anaplastic large cell lymphoma, ALK-negative
or liver, CD56 expression, and small cell variant.
Multi-agent chemotherapy and autologous or allogeneic
bone marrow transplantation are among the routine thera-
peutic approaches. Anti-CD30 therapy and vaccination
 against ALK protein are under investigation.
Anaplastic Large Cell Lymphoma,
ALK-Positive
MORPHOLOGY
The affected lymph nodes are partially or totally effaced
due to the infiltration of the tumor cells that often have
Anaplastic large cell lymphoma, ALK-positive is associated
a tendency to grow cohesively in the sinuses, resem-
with translocation of the ALK gene and expression of ALK
bling metastatic tumors (Figure 51.1). The tumor cells
protein. This translocation in over 80% of cases is t(2;5)
are usually admixed with inflammatory cells which pre-
(p23;q35), creating a hybrid gene as the result of fusion of
dominantly
the NPM1 (nucleophosmin) gene on chromosome 5 with
y consist of histiocytes and plasma cells.
 Sclerotic thick capsule and well-formed fibrous bands are
the ALK gene on chromosome 2. The NPM1-ALK protein
infrequent.
activates the antiapoptotic PI3K-Akt pathway and a num-
Three major morphologic variants have been described:
ber of signal transducers and activators of transcription
(1) common type, (2) small cell variant, and (3) lympho-
proteins which are all important in cellular transforma-
histiocytic variant.
tion. The oncogenic properties of NMP1-ALK have been
supported by in vivo studies in experimental animals. The
● The common variant (7o% of cases) is characterized by the pre-
remaining <20% of ALK+ ALCL cases demonstrate trans-
 dominance of large pleomorphic cells with abundant clear
locations that result in the fusion of the ALK gene with
to light blue cytoplasm, often eccentric, horse-shoe, kidney.
other genes (see below).
shaped, or multilobulated nuclei, and multiple small nucle-
oli. The large cells which have a horse-shoe or kidney-shaped
ALCL, ALK+ constitutes about 10-20% of lympho-
nucleus next to the Golgi area are called the "hallmark cells."
mas in children and approximately 3% of all non-
because they are detected in almost all morphologic types.
Hodgkin lymphomas in adults. The vast majority of
the ALK+ ALCLs occur in patients under 30 years of age.
The neoplastic cells may demonstrate cytoplasmic vacuoles
in touch preparations. The multilobulated cells may show
The male to female ratio is about 6:1. Approximately
pseudonuclear inclusions (doughnut cells) due to invagina-
70% of patients present with constitutional symptoms
tion of the nuclear membrane (Figures 51.2 to 51.7).
Al sis ui ae ue (sso niam pe laa  Aso)
● The small cell variant (5-10% of cases) consists of a mixture of
Extranodal involvement includes skin, bone, lung, liver.
large. medium-sized, and small pleomorphic cells. Small and
@ 201 3 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
578
ANAPLASTIC LARGE CELL LYMPHOMAS
as large numbers of reactive histiocytes. Hemophagocytic
macrophages may be present. The abundance of histiocytes
may mask the neoplastic cell population in the H&E stains.
but immunohistochemical stains for CD30 and ALK help to
identify the tumor cells.
Other morphologic variants, such as Hodgkin-like
pattern with the presence of Reed-Sternberg-like mul-
tinucleated cells, sarcomatoid form with large, bizarre
spindle-shaped tumor cells, and giant cell-rich type with
numerous multinucleated giant cells, have been reported.
An involved lymph node may show more than one
morphologic pattern of involvement (composite pattern).
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
MFC characterization may be difficult due to fragility of
the large neoplastic cells. When neoplastic cells can remain
intact after processing and staining, variable T-cell aber-
rancies are commonly detected (Figure 51.8). By immu-
nohistochemical studies, the large neoplastic cells are (see
Figures 51.3, 51.5 and 51.6):
●Positive for CD30 with membrane and Golgi staining:
● Positive for ALK with variable staining patterns (cytoplasmic,
nuclear, or both):
Variably positive for EMA in most cases;
● Negative for CD3 in more than 75% of cases;
Commonly positive for CD2, CD4, and CD5; CD8 phenotype
is rare;
● Variably positive for CD45 and strongly positive for CD25:
●Variably positive for TIA1 and granzyme B;
● Positive for CD43 and clusterin in most cases;
●Negative for EBV.
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
Most cases of ALCL demonstrate clonal TCR rearrangements
and the NPM1-ALK fusion gene.
● EBV sequences are not detected.
● The NPM1-ALK fusion is associated with a reciprocal balanced
t(2:5)(p32:q35) (Figure 51.9).
● This translocation is the most common ALK-related chro-
mosomal aberration, accounting for about 75% of all ALK-
positive cases of ALCL. It is most readily and sensitively
detected by FISH, but PCR-based molecular testing. similar to
that used to detect the BCR-ABL1 fusion in CML, can be done.
The remaining 25% show a variety of ALK-related rear-
rangements including t(1:2)(q25:p23) [TPM3-ALK]., t(2:3)
-l (')(1) (01' ) [7-l (1652)
FIGURE 51.1 ANAPLASTIC LARGE CELL LYMPHoMA. Lymph node Section
ALK], t(X;2)(q11-12:p23) [MSN-ALK], and inv(2)(p23q35)
demonstrating sinusoidal involvement. Horse-shoe (hallmark)
(Table 51.1).
cells (arrow) and Hodgkin-like cells are present (A, low power;
● The t(2:5) is commonly observed as part of a complex karyo-
B, intermediate power; C, high power).
 type, with various structural and/or numerical anomalies (+7.
+9, and +X).
medium-sized cells are predominant, depicting a clear cyto-
The expression of ALK in hematologic neoplasms is largely
plasm and an irregular nucleus (fried egg cells). The large neo-
limited to ALCL tumors of T- or null-cell immunophenotype.
plastic cells tend to cluster around small vessels.
Because multiple chromosomal regions are involved in the
The lymphohistiocytic variant (5-10% of cases) consists of small
franslocations with the 2p23 (ALK locus). the rearrange-
and large neoplastic cells including "hallmark" cells as well
  e  e    s
ANAPLASTIC LARGE CELL LYMPHOMA, ALK-POSITIVE 
579
FIGURE 51.2 ANAPLASTIC LARGE CELL
LYMPHoMA. Lymph node section
demonstration a diffuse infltration 
with highly anaplastic large cells in
a background of lymphocytes and 
histiocytes. Hodgkin-like cells are present
(B-E). A hallmark cell (green arrow)
and a wreath cell (black arrow) are 
demonstrated (F).
FIGURE 51.3 Immunohistochemical
stains show anaplastic large cells
expressing ALK (A), CD30 (B), EMA
(C), and granzyme B (D).
580
ANAPLASTIC LARGE CELL LYMPHOMAS
FlGURE 51.4 Gastric involvement with anaplastic large cell
FIGURE 51.5 ANAPLASTIC LARGE CELL LYMPHOMA. H&E (A) and
lymphoma (A, low power; B, intermediate power; C, high power).
immunohistochemical stains demonstrating expression of
CD30 (B), and ALK (C). Arrow shows a Reed-Sternberg-like
binucleatedcell.
ANAPLASTIC LARGE CELL LYMPHOMA, ALK-POSITIVE
581
The neoplastic cells express CD2 (D), CD4 (E), and CD30 (F).
● Recent studies of gene expression profiling of systemic ALCL
"breakapart " FISH probe (Figure 51.11). The ALK over-expres-
have revealed differences between the ALK-positive and the
sion is detected by immunohistochemical stains with anti-
ALK-negative subgroups. The ALK-positive tumors showed
ALK antibodies. ALK-positive staining in the classic t(2:5) is
Over-expression of BCL6. PTPN12. CEBPB. and SERPINA1
detected in nucleolus, nucleus, and cytoplasm, whereas other
genes, whereas CCR7, CNTFR, IL22, and IL21 genes were over-
translocations lead to only cytoplasmic staining.
expressed in the ALK-negative group.
582
ANAPLASTIC LARGE CELL LYMPHOMAS
FIGURE 51.7 Lymph node sections
(A and B) and touch preparations (C and
 D) demonstrating anaplastic large cell
lymphoma.
+
CD5
31
A
CD2
CD7
10
3&
86
CD3
 FIGURE 51.9 Karyotype of an anaplastic large cell lymphoma with
 a reciprocal t(2;5)(p23;q35)(arrows) resulting in NPM1-ALK fusion.
CD25
CD4
FIGURE 51.8 FLOW CYTOMETRIC FINDINGS OF ANAPLASTIC LARGE CELL
LYMPHoMA. Lymphoid-enriched gate of a neck mass shows a
discrete population of abnormal T-cells, which are positive for 
CD2 and CD5 (arrow), as well as CD25. They are negative for CD3,
88
28
CD4, and CD8, revealing complete loss of CD7 expression.
88
58
名品
88
花
20
21
22
FIGURE 51.10 Karyotype of tumor cells of a patient with anaplastic
large cell lymphoma demonstrates 46,XY,t(2;3)(p23;q21).
 DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
583
Table 51.1
Splitsignals
 Chromosomal Aberrations in ALK-Positive Anaplastic
Large Cell Lymphomal
Involved
ALK Protein
Aberrations
Genes?
Expression
Frequency (%)
二
t(2;5)(p23;q35)
ALK-NPM
Nuclear, diffuse
84
cytoplasmic
t(1;2x(q21;p23)
TPM3-ALK
Diffuse 
13
Nomal
Abr
cytoplasmic
t(2:3)(p23;q21)
ALK-TFG
Diffuse
1
FIGURE 51.11 ANAPLSTIC LARGE CELL LYMPHOMA. FISH with ALK(2p23)
cytoplasmic
 dual-color, breakapart rearrangement probe shows split signals.
t(2;17)
ALK-CLTC
Granular
<1
(p23;q23)
cytoplasmic
t(2;17)
ALK-AL017
Diffuse
<1
● lInlike ALK+ ALCL, the small cell variant has not been
(p23;q25)
cytoplasmic
reported.
t(X;2)
MSN-ALK
 Membrane
<1
(q11-12;p23)
 staining
t(2;19)
ALK-TMP4
Diffuse
<1
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
(p23;p13.1)
cytoplasmic
●
 Staining for CD30 is strong and uniform.
t(2;22}
ALK-MYH9
Diffuse
<1
●
Most cases express one or more T-cell-associated markers, such
(p23;q11.2)
cytoplasmic
Diffuse
as CD2, CD3, and CD4; CD8 expression is less frequent.
inv(2)(p23;q35)
ALK/ATIC
1
●
A significant proportion of cases may be positive for EMA,
cytoplasmic
TIA1 and granzyme B.
Adapted from Kutok JL, Aster JC. Molecular biology of anaplastic
EBV and ALK are is negative.
lymphoma kinase-positive anaplastic large-cell lymphoma. J Clin
Oncol 2002; 20: 3691-3702, and Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Vardiman JW, et al.
Hematopathology. Saunders/Elsevier, Philadelphia, 2010.
GENETICS AND MOLECULAR FINDINGS
 TCR genes are clonally rearranged in most cases.
chromosome 17; ATIC, 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleotide
formyltransferase /IMP cyclohydrolase; CLTC, clathrin heavy chain; MSN,
Complex chromosomal abnormalities have been found to be
moesin; MYH9, myosin heavy chain 9; NPM, nucleophosmin; TFG, TRCK
associated with poor prognosis.
fusion gene; TPM, tropomyosin.
Borderline Cases
Anaplastic Large Cell Lymphoma,
ALK-Negative
There are reports of cases with morphologic features of
ALCL, but coexpression of CD15 and CD30, resembling
ALCL, ALK-negative consists of large anaplastic, pleomor-
classical Hodgkin lymphoma (Figure 51.12). These cases
phic CD30+ cells, often with the presence of hallmark
are either ALK-positive or ALK-negative. There is a debate
cells. The tumor cells have a tendency to grow cohesively
whether CD15+ CD30+ T-cell lymphomas should be con-
sidered a subtype of ALCL or peripheral T-cell lymphoma,
in the lymph node sinuses, mimicking metastatic tumors.
These tumors are morphologically similar to the ALCL,
not otherwise specified. Occasional cases of ALCL may
ALK-positive variant, except that they do not express ALK
express PAX-5 (Figure 51.13).
protein and are not associated with translocation of the
ALK gene.
 The peak incidence of ALK- ALCL is in individuals 40-65
Differential Diagnosis
years old with a male to female ratio of about 1. Extranodal
involvement is less frequent than in ALCL, ALK+.
ALK-negative ALCL is more aggressive that ALK+ ALCL,
All large cell CD30+ neoplasms should be included in the
with a 5-year overall survival rate ranging from 15% to
differential diagnosis (Table 51.2). ALCL may share some
37% compared with 70% to 90% in ALK+ patients.
Sclerotic thick capsule and well-formed fibrous bands
which are frequently seen in Hodgkin lymphoma are
MORPHOLOGY
infrequent in ALCL. The Reed-Sternberg cells are CD45-,
 Morphologic features are similar to those of ALCL, ALK+ with
CD15+, CD30+, and ALK-, and may express CD20 and/
pleomorphic, anaplastic tumor cells, presence of the hallmark 
 Or show EBV positivity, whereas the neoplastic cells of
cells, and sinusoidal growth pattern.
ALK+ ALCL demonstrate ALK gene translocation, are
584
ANAPLASTIC LARGE CELL LYMPHOMAS
FIGURE51.12 Lymph node biopsy section demonstrating a borderline neoplasm sharing features with anaplastic large cell lymphoma
 mitotic figure (yellow arrow). The neoplastic large cells express CD45 (C), CD4 (D), CD15 (E) and CD30 (F).
CD45+, CD15-, EMA+, and express one or more pan-T-
 Sinusoidal involvements in the lymph nodes and bone
 cell markers. The diagnosis of ALCL, ALK-negative is more marrow of patients with ALCL may mimic metastatic car-
challenging because of the lack of specific immunopheno-
cinoma. Metastatic carcinomas are cytokeratin+ and
typic, molecular, or cytogenetic markers.
CD45-, whereas ALCLs are cytokeratin- and CD45+
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
585
FIGURE 51.13 A case of anaplastic
large cell lymphoma of tongue 
expressing CD30 and PAX5. H&E
(A, low power; B, high power)
and immunohistochemical stains
showing expression of CD2 (C),
CD30 (D), PAX5 (E), and lack of
expression of ALK (F).
Table 51.2
Differential Diagnosis of Anaplastic Large Cell Lymphoma (ALCL)1
Entity ?
Morphology
Immunophenotype
Molecular/Cytogenetics
ALCL, ALK+
Hallmark cells, sinusoidal growth CD30+, ALK+, EMA+, CD43+,
 TCR rearranged, rearrangement of
Pan-T±, TIA1±, granzyme B±
ALK gene
ALCL, ALK-
Hallmark cells, sinusoidal growth
CD30+, ALK-,EMA±,CD43+,
TCR rearranged, no ALK 
Pan-T±, TIA1±, granzyme B±
translocation
DLBCL, ALK+
Hallmark cells, sinusoidal growth 
CD30-, CD138+, ALK+,EMA+,clgA+,
(GHrearanged, t(2;17)(p23;q23)
CD20-,CD79a-, CD3-
 DLBCL, anaplastic
Anaplastic large cells
CD20+, CD79a+, CD30±,EMA±,
IGHrearanged, no ALK
ALK-
translocation
 PTCL, NOS,predominantly 
Pleomorphic cells 
Pan-T+, CD30±,EMA±, ALK-,
TCR rearranged, no ALK
large cells 
BCL-2+, TIA-1±
translocation
 Hodgkin lymphoma
Reed-Sternberg cells
CD15+, CD30+,CD45-,ALK-,
Non-specific
CD20±,EBV±
 Metastatic carcinoma
Atypical cohesive cells, often
Cytokeratine+, CD45-, CD30±
No TCR or IGH rearrangement
with sinusoidal growth
1Adapted from Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Vardiman JW, et al. Hematopathology. Saunders/Elsevier, Philadelphia, 2010.
 2DLBCL, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma; PTCL, NOS, peripheral T-cell lymphoma, not otherwise specified.
586
ANAPLASTICLARGE CELLLYMPHOMAS
Additional Resources
Jewell M, Spear SL, Largent J, et al: Anaplastic large T-cell lymphoma
phoma, Blood 10:2259-2267, 2007.
and breast implants: a review of the literature, Past Reconstr Surg
Barry TS. Jaffe ES, Sorbara L, et al: Peripheral T-cell lymphomas
128:651-661, 2011.
eXpressing CD30 and CD15, Am J Surg Pathot 27:1513-1522, 2003.
Kutok JL, Aster JIC: Molecular biology of anaplastic lymphoma
Cheng M, Ott GR: Anaplastic lymphoma kinase as a therapeutic tar-
kinase-positive anaplastic large-cell lymphoma, J Clin Oncol 20:3691-
3702, 2002.
 get in anaplastic large cell lymphoma, non-small cell lung cancer and
neuroblastoma, Anticancer Agents Med Chem 10:236-249, 2010.
Medeiros LJ, Elenitoba-Johnson KS: Anaplastic large cell lymphoma,
Feldman AL, Law ME, Inwards DJ, et al: PAX5-positive T-cell anaplas-
Am J Clin Pathol 127:707-722, 2007.
tic large cell lymphomas associated with extra copies of the PAX5
Nguyen IT, Condron MR, Nguyen ND, et al: Anaplastic large cell
gene locus, Mod Pathol 23:593-602, 2010.
lymphoma in leukemic phase: extraordinarily high white blood cell
Gorczyca W, Tsang P, Liu Z, et al: CD30-positive T-cell lymphomas
cunt, Pathol Int 59:345-353, 2009.
co-expressing CDl5: an immunohistochemical analysis, Int J Oncol
 Summers TA, Moncur IT: The small cell variant of anaplastic large cell
22:319-324, 2003.
lymphoma, Arch Pathol Lab Med 134:1706-1710, 2010.
Gustafson S, Medeiros LJ, Kalhor N, et al: Anaplastic large cell lym-
Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, et al: WHO classifcation of
phoma: another entity in the differential diagnosis of small round
tmours of haematopoietic and lymphoid tissues, ed. 4, Lyon, 2008.
blue cell tumors, Ann Diagn Pathol 13:413-427, 2009.
International Agency for Research on Cancer.
 s ey l uag s a ' 
ten Berge RL, Oudejans JI, Ossenkoppele GJ, et al: ALK-negative sys-
Anaplastic large-cell lymphoma, Semin Diagn Pathol 28:190-201,
temic anaplastic large cell lymphoma: differential diagnostic and
2011.
prognostic aspects—a review, I Pathol 200:4-15, 2003.
Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Vardiman JW, et al: Hematopathology.
Younes A: CD30-targeted antibody therapy, Curr Opin Oncol 23:587-
Philadelphia, 2010, Saunders/Elsevier.
593, 2011.
Peripheral T-Cell
Lymphoma, Not
Otherwise Specifed
1
eripheral T-cell lymphoma, not otherwise specified
 variety of morphologic features have been described, but
(PTCL, NOS) includes all the T-cell lymphomas that are 
in most cases the predominant cells are medium-sized
not included in the well-defined clinicopathologic entities
to large with irregular nuclei. The nuclei are hyperchro-
previously described in this book. PTCL, NOS is predomi-
 matic or vesicular with prominent nucleoli. Mitotic figures
nantly nodal and constitutes the most common T-cell lym-
are frequent. Large cells with clear cytoplasm and Reed-
phoma in Western countries.
Sternberg-like cells may be present. Vascular proliferation
 PTCL, NOS is the most frequent peripheral T-cell lym-
 is frequently noted.
The infiltrating neoplastic cells are often mixed with
T-cell lymphomas. It occurs in middle-aged to elderly
inflammatory cells, such as small lymphocytes, eosino-
patients, with a median age of 54 years and a male to
 phils, and histiocytes. Histiocytes may appear in aggregates
female ratio of about 1-2:1. Most patients are in advanced
 or may show hemophagocytosis.
stages (stage Il/IV) at diagnosis. Extranodal disease, B
 Three major morphologic variants have been described
symptoms, and elevated LDH are frequent findings and are
 in the WHO classification: (1) lymphoepithelioid, (2) fol-
associated with unfavorable prognosis. Other risk factors
licular, and (3) T-zone.
include age >60 years and a decline in performance status.
The most frequent involved extranodal sites are bone mar-
● The lymphoepithelioid variant (Lennert lymphoma) is char-
row, spleen, liver, Waldeyer ring, and skin (Table 52.1).
acterized by the presence of numerous small aggregates of
Four prognostic groups have been identified:
epithelioid histiocytes mixed with a lymphocytic infiltrate
predominantly consisting of small lymphocytes with slightly
● Group 1 with no risk factors and 5-year survival rate of about
irregular nuclei (Figure 52.1). Scattered larger lymphocytes
60%;
with clear cytoplasm may be present. The pattern of lymphoid
● Group 2 with one risk factor and 5-year survival rate of abouf
infiltration is diffuse but less frequently may be interfollicular.
50%;
Vascular proliferation and presence of inflammatory cells are
 Group 3 with two risk factors and 5-year survival rate of 35%:
mmmon features.
● Group 4 with three or four risk factors and 5-year suurvival rate
● The follicular variant demonstrates aggregates of atypi-
of about 20%.
Cal neoplastic T-cells forming interfollicular aggregates. This
Molecular and immunophenotypic studies have dem-
pattern simulates follicular lymphoma or nodular lympho-
cyte predominant Hodgkin lymphoma. Most cases contain
onstrated that p53 mutation and over-expression of p53
medium to large cells with abundant pale cytoplasm.
protein correlate with treatment failure and unfavorable
● The T-zone variant is characterized by the expansion
prognosis. In general, PTCL, NOS is an aggressive disease 
of interfollicular spaces as the result of infiltration of
with a poor response to therapy and frequent relapses.
predominantly   small-  to  medium-sized  lymphocytes
(Figure 52.2). Lymphoid follicles are usually well preserved
or even hyperplastic. Clusters of lymphoid cells with clear
cytoplasm are often present and scattered Reed-Sternberg-
Morphology
like cells may be present. There is vascular proliferation with
predominance of high endothelial venules. Inflammatory
cells, such as eosinophils, plasma cells, and histiocytes, are
The normal nodal architecture is often effaced with a dif-
commonly present.
fuse infiltration of neoplastic lymphoid cells. A garden
Atlas of Hematopathology. DOl: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00052-8
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
588
FIGURE 52.2 PERIPHERAL T-CELL LYMPHOMA, T-ZONE VARIANT. This
FIGURE 52.1 PeRIPHERAL T-CELL LYMPHOMA, LYMPHoepITHELIOID CELL
demonstrates a mixture of small to large lymphocytes (A and B)
VARIANT (LENNERT LYMPHoMA). Epithelioid histiocytes are mixed with
and the presence of lymphoid cells with clear cytoplasm (C).
 infiltrating lymphocytes in small (A) or large (B and C) clusters.
Bone marrow involvement shows focal or diffuse
 with inflammatory cells and may show increased reticulin
infiltration of bone marrow with atypical, often pleo-
fibers.
morphic cells. Focal infiltrates are usually non-paratra-
 Splenic infiltrates are often patchy and may primarily
becular. The infiltrates are highly vascular, are admixed
 involve the periarterial T-cell zones or extend to the red pulp.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
589
Cutaneous
 involvement is frequent
and
may
 Occasional aberrant expression of B-cell-associated markers
appear as diffuse or nodular patterns with or without
CD20 or CD79a;
epidermotropism.
●Lack of follicular T-helper (FTH)-associated markers.
Immunophenotype
Molecular and Cytogenetic Studies
Immunophenotypic features include (Figure 52.3):
●
 Approximately 90% of patients with PTCL, NOS show clon-
ally rearranged TCR genes, and 70-90% demonstrate cytoge-
 Pan-T-cell aberrancies with variable loss of CD5 and/or CD7:
netic aberrations.
 Expression of TCR-β:
A novel t(5:9)(q33;q22). that creates a fusion gene between
●
Common CD4 phenotype; but CD8, double positive, or dou-
ITK and SYK genes, has been reported in 17% of PTCL, NOS.
ble negative in some cases;
Complex karyotypes consistent with clonal evolution are a
 Expression of CD56 and/or cytotoxic markers in some cases;
frequent finding. Breaks involving the TCR loci are common.
● Positivity of CD30 in some cases, but rare expression of CD15:
The chromosomes most frequently altered in structural aber-
rations are 1, 6, 2, 4, 11, 14, and 17. Additionally. trisomies of
 3 or 5 and an extra X-chromosome are also common.
●
 CGH studies have found recurrent losses on chromosomes 5q.
 s yuaay (t a) bt pu bzt 't 'de 'b
found on chromosome 7q.
High-level amplifications of 12p13 have been observed
in a few PTCL-l cases with cytotoxic phenotype. These
results suggest that certain genetic alterations may indeed
CD25
CD4
CD1a
exist in PTCL, NOS, but definitive clinicopathologic sub-
 groups have not yet been identified and, thus far, a variety
of molecular and cytogenetic findings do not allow for a
consistent model for pathogenesis to be constructed.
CD7
CD7
TCRalpha/beta
Differential Diagnosis
FIGURE 52.3 FLOW CYTOMETRIC FINDINGS OF PERIPHERAL T-CELL
LYMpHoMA. Lymphoid-enriched gate of a neck lymph node reveals
predominantly abnormal T-cells, which are double positive 
The differential diagnosis includes a variety of reactive
(circled) for CD4 (dim) and CD8 (heterogeneous). In addition,
lymphadenopathies, ALCL, AITL, and Hodgkin lymphoma
the neoplastic T-cells are positive for CD2, CD3, CD5 (bright),
(Table 52.l). Presence of clusters of epithelioid histio-
Cytes in the lymphoepithelioid cell (Lennert) variant may
complete loss of CD7 expression, and are negative for CD1a.
5↑
10
12
6
13
15
16
17
18
身
A9
19
20
21
22
Y
A
B
590
PERIPHERAL T-CELLLYMPHOMA, NOT OTHERWISE SPECIFIED
Table 52.1
simulate toxoplasmosis, sarcoidosis, or other types of
granulomatous lymphadenitis. The follicular variant may
Differential Diagnosis of Peripheral T-Cell Lymphoma,
mimic follicular lymphoma or nodular lymphocyte pre-
Not Otherwise Specified (PTCL, NOS)
 dominant Hodgkin lymphoma. The interfollicular expan-
Large
sion and the presence of inflammatory cells in the T-zone
HRS-Like
Epitheliod
 Molecular/
variant may mimic T-zone hyperplasia. Cases with the
Entity
T-Cells
Cells
Histiocytes
Cytogenetics
presence of anaplastic large cells or the presence of Reed-
PTCL,
 Atypical,
May be
Often
 Rearranged 
Sternberg-like  cells
s  may  resemble  T-cell/histiocyte-rich
NOS
pleomorphic
 present,
 present,
TCR
large B-cell lymphoma, ALCL. Vascular proliferation and
express
prominent
1-ued
in Lennert
polymorphous infiltrate are among the overlapping fea-
 markers
type
tures between PTCL, NOS and AITL.
Cassical
 Small, no
CD15+,
Variable
IGH
HL
atypia
CD30+,
reamangement
CD45-,
not routinely
EBV±
detected 
NLPHL
Small, no
CD15-,
Variable
IGH
 atypia,.
CD30-,
rearangement
 interfollicular
CD45+,
 not routinely
CD57+
CD20+,
detected 
EMA+
THR-
 Small, no
CD15-,
Abundant
 Rearranged IGH
LBCL
 atypia
CD30-,
CD45+,
CD20+
AITL
Atypical,
Mostly
Variable
 Rearranged 
some
reactive
TCR
with clear
B-cells,
cytoplasm
CD30+,
 and CD10+
EBV+
ALCL
Atypical,
T-cells,
Variable
 Rearranged 
 pleomorphic
CD30+,
ALK. TCR
ALK±
Reactive
 Small and
Mostly
Variable
No TCR or IGH
nodes
large
reactive
 reanrangement
B-cells,
CD30+,
EBV±
AITL, angioimmunoblastic T-cellymphoma; ALCL, anaplastic large cell 
lymphoma; HL, Hodgkin lymphoma; HRS, Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg;
NLPHL, nodular lymphocyte predominant HL; THR-LBCL, T-cel/histiocyte 
rich large B-cellymphoma.
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
591
Additional Resources
de Leval L, Gaulard P: Pathology and biology of peripheral T-cell
 Roncolato F, Gazzola A, Zinzani PL, et al: Targeted molecular therapy
lymphomas, Histopathology 58:49-68, 2011.
in peripheral T-cell lymphomas, Expert Rev Hematol 4:551-562, 2011.
Foss FM, Zinzani PL, Vose JM, et al: Peripheral T-cell lymphoma,
 Savage KJ, Ferreri AJ, Zinzani PL, et al: Peripheral T-cell lymphoma-
Blood 117:6756-6767, 2011.
 '   7   3 
Howman RA, Prince HM: New drug therapies in peripheral T-cell 
 Savage KJ: Update: peripheral T-cell lymphomas, Curr Hematol Malig
lymphoma, Expert Rev Anticancer Ther 1l:457-472, 2011.
Rep 6:222-230, 2011.
Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Vardiman JW. et al: Hematopathology.
Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, et al: WHO classifcation of
Philadelphia, 2010, Saunders/Elsevier.
tumours of haematopoietic and lymphoid tissues, ed. 4, Lyon, 2008,
Piccaluga PP, Agostinelli C, Gazzola A, et al: Prognostic markers in
 International Agency for Research on Cancer.
peripheral T-cell lymphoma, Curr Hematol Malig Rep 5:222-228,
2010.
- h a e a ' oo '  d 
phoma study group. peripheral T-cell lymphoma classification: the
matter of cellular derivation, Expert Rev Hematol 4:415-425, 2011.
This page intentionally left blank
Nodular Lymphocyte
Predominant Hodgkin
Lymphoma
which are used to assess risks of primary treatment failure
Overview of Hodgkin Lymphoma
and possible intensified treatment in advanced stage HL
patients. They include sex, age, stage, hemoglobin, WBC,
Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) is a clonal B-cell neoplasm as
lymphocyte count, and serum albumin.
demonstrated by the detection of clonal immunoglobulin
Treatment of HL is one of the great success stories in
(Ig) V-gene rearrangements in isolated tumor cells using
 modern medicine, and about 80-90% of patients in all
microdissection- and single-cell polymerase chain reaction
stages achieve long term survival. The current under-
(PCR) techniques. It is recognized by the current WHO
 standing of the appropriate therapy is established on the
classification as a malignant lymphoma with unique clini-
basis of recent results of many large randomized clinical
copathologic features. In general, HL affects more often
trials with focus on maximizing effectiveness while mini-
young adults, with a median age of 38 years at diagnosis.
mizing toxicity. For limited stage HL, treatment involves
It primarily involves lymph nodes commonly found in the
brief, combined modality chemotherapy only augmented
supradiaphragmatic areas, and the neoplastic tissue com-
with involved field irradiation if an early complete
response is not achieved. Patients with advanced stage
prises a minor population of large pleomorphic neoplastic
cells—Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg (HRS) cells, plus their 
 HL require an extended course of chemotherapy without
variants—that are admixed with an inflammatory back-
radiation therapy. High dose chemotherapy and irradia-
ground (Figures 53.1 and 53.2).
tion plus autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplan-
The incidence of HL is about 3 per 100,000 in western
tation can be an effective treatment for patients with
 relapsed or refractory HL. In addition to chemotherapy
Europe and the United States and is consistently lower
than that of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). It accounts
 and radiotherapy, some studies suggest that immuno-
for about 10-15% of all lymphomas in Europe and the
therapy including monoclonal antibodies plays a positive
United States. The median age at diagnosis is 38 years,
 role in the treatment of HL. Results of targeted immu-
and the male to female ratio is slightly >1. Patients with
 notherapy using anti-CD30 chimeric receptors bound to
a history of infectious mononucleosis (IM), AIDs, or 
EBV-specific cytotoxic T-cells may help in achieving com-
autoimmune diseases have higher incidence of the dis-
 plete remission in certain cases.
ease. Most HL patients present with asymptomatic lymph
Based upon its clinical behaviors, as well as morpho-
node enlargement in the supradiaphragmatic regions.
logic, immunophenotypic, and genotypic profiles, HL
 is divided into two entities of nodular lymphocyte pre-
Systemic symptoms with fever, night sweats, and weight
loss are reported in about 30% of cases. Approximately
dominant HL (NLPHL) and classical HL (CHL) with
50% of patients have advanced stage disease at diagnosis.
the following subtypes according to the current WHO
Splenic involvement is seen in about 20%, whereas bone
classification:
marrow is involved in about 5% of HL cases.
● Nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin lymphoma
Staging of HL is based on the Ann Arbor system with
(NLPHL)
the addition of definition of bulky disease which is cur-
 Classical Hodgkin lymphoma
rently favored by the maximum diameter of the largest sin-
● Nodular sclerosis classical Hodgkin lymphoma (NSHL)
gle tumor mass. A limited-stage HL is usually defined by
Mixed cellularity classical Hodgkin lymphoma (MCHL)
non-bulky stage IA or IIA disease, and a cure rate of >90%
Lymphocyte-rich classical Hodgkin lymphoma (LRCHL)
can be expected regardless of prognostic factor model.
●  Lymphocyte-depleted  classical   Hodgkin 
1 lymphoma
Seven independent prognostic factors have been identified,
{LDHL).
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
594
 NODULAR LYMPHOCYTE PREDOMINANT HODGKIN LYMPHOMA
FIGURE 53.1 Reed-Sternberg cells (thick arrow
and inset) and Hodgkin cells (thin arrow) in a
background of lymphocytes, plasma cells, and
histiocytes.
with an estimated 5o0 new cases each year in the United
States. NLPHL is a monoclonal B-cell lymphoma charac-
terized by nodular pattern, presence of sparse large pleo-
morphic lymphoid (LP) cells (or popcorn cells, HRS cell
variants) admixed with abundant B-lymphocytes that
reside in an expanded meshwork of follicular dendritic
cells. It most commonly presents as limited nodal disease
involving peripheral lymph nodes above or below the
diaphragm.
Patients with NLPHL are typically asymptomatic and
present with localized peripheral lymphadenopathy fre-
quently involving the cervical and axillary regions. Less
than 20% of cases may demonstrate stage II or IV dis-
ease. Bulky disease and mediastinal involvement are rare.
Compared with classical Hodgkin lymphoma (see Chapter
 54), NLPHL is a more indolent disease with more frequent
relapse, but good response to therapy, and overall more
favorable prognosis. It is male predominant with a male
to female ratio of 3-4:1 and has two peaks in age distri-
bution: one that of children and the other that of 30- to
FlGURE 53.2 Classic Reed-Sternberg cells are large binucleated
40-year-old adults.
cells with prominent round nucleoli and perinucleolar halos
The treatment of NLPHL with standard HL proto-
displaying an "owl-eye" appearance: (A) bone marrow biopsy
section and (B) bone marrow smear.
cols leads to complete remission in >95% of patients.
Prognosis is worse in advanced stage patients. A very small
proportion (2-7%) of NLPHL transforms to DLBCL,
which appears to have a more indolent course and more
Nodular Lymphocyte Predominant
 favorable prognosis than de novo DLBCL.
Hodgkin Lymphoma
MORPHOLOGY
Nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin lymphoma
● Nodal architecture is partially to completely effaced by the
(NLPHL) is a distinct but rare subtype of HL. It constitutes
neoplastic infltrate, which, by definition, demonstrates af
5-7% of all HL cases in the United States and Europe,
NODULARLYMPHOCYTE PREDOMINANT HODGKIN LYMPHOMA595
FIGURE 53.3 NoDULaR LyMPHocYTE PredoMINant
HoDGkIN LymPhoMa. (A) Low power view of a
lymph node section demonstrating a nodular
pattern. (B) High power view showing a
lymphocyte predominant (LP) or"popcorn" cell
(arrow) in a background of small lymphocytes.
follicles, follicular hyperplasia, and progressive transformation
popcorn, and hence the name "popcorn" cells. These cells
of germinal centers can be present simultaneously within the
have abundant basophilic cytoplasm, a vesicular nuclear chro-
Jymph node that is involved.
matin, and usually multiple small nucleoli.
● The neoplastic nodules are usually large and poorly defined
 A follicular dendritic cell meshwork can be highlighted within
and comprise a minor population of scattered popcorn or
the neoplastic nodules using special stains.
lymphocyte predominant cells (LP cells, formerly called L &
When diffuse areas are present, they predominantly com-
H cells), which are admixed with occasional single or clus-
prise T-cells as well as histiocytes with occasional LP cells.
ters of histiocytes plus abundant small lymphocytes that
Neutrophils, eosinophils, and plasma cells are not commonly
are typically B-cells (Figure 53.4).
seen. According to the current criteria, the detection of one nod-
● The LP cells are large and pleomorphic and often contain a
ule showing the typical features of NLPHL in an otherwise dif-
single nucleus with folding and multilobation, resembling
fuse growth pattern is sufficient to make the diagnosis of NLPHL.
596
NODULARLYMPHOCYTEPREDOMINANT HODGKIN LYMPHOMA
FIGURE 53.4 NoDULAR LYMPHocYTE PREDoMINANT HoDGKIN LYMPHoMA. Lymph node Section demonstrates a nodular pattern (A, low power:
stains show a predominance of CD20+ (red) cells inside the nodules, surrounded by CD3+ (brown) cells (D, low power; E, high power).
The LPcellsexpressEMA (F).
NODULAR LYMPHOCYTE PREDOMINANT HODGKIN LYMPHOMA
597
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
The immunophenotypic features of LP cells include:
 Positivity of CD45 and B-cell associated antigens including
CD20, CD22, PAX5, and CD79a;
Coexpression of B-cell transcription factors OCT-2 and BOB.1: 
Expression of EMA in about 50% of cases (see Figure 53.4):
●
Other positive staining for immunoglobulin light and heavy
chains, CD75, BCL6, plus Ki67:
●
 Nearly always negative staining for CD15 and CD30, with
 only weak CD30 positive LP cells in rare cases;
●Negative for EBV-EBER.
The background shows (Figure 53.5):
CD3+ and/or CD57+ T-cells ringing LP cells;
 Follicular dendritic meshworks that can be highlighted by
CD21 and/or CD23 staining:
●
Large lymphoid nodules with predominance of small B-cells
 plus T-cells of germinal center phenotype;
●
Cells negative for CD8 and cytotoxic granule markers;
●
Occasional double positive T-cells (CD4+/CD8+).
CYTOGENETIC AND MOLECULAR STUDIES
● There are only few reported cytogenetic and molecular muta-
tions in NLPHL, including common rearrangements of
the BCL-6 gene predominantly with the IGH@. along with
monosomy 13.
● Because of the scattered nature of the neoplastic cells admixed
with non-neoplastic cells in HL, standard clinical molecular
diagnostic assays (gene rearrangement clonality studies, etc.)
are not valuable or, if performed, are usually negative because
of the dilution effect of the background cell population.
  sse  o ss   o
diagnosis between HL and NHL.
● As noted at the start of this chapter, single-cell and microdis-
section PCR techniques have been used to prove the B-cell
origin of neoplastic cells (Figure 53.6), but this is a research
modality and of largely academic interest.
●
 Rearrangements of BCL-6 are usually detected by immunohis-
tochemical techniques rather than molecular tests, whereas
the other chromosomal changes are best detected by cytoge-
netic techniques.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis of NLPHL includes T-cell/
histiocyte-rich large B-cell lymphoma (T/HRLBCL), lym-
phocyte-rich classical Hodgkin lymphoma, and follicular
lymphoma (Table 53.1).
T-cell/histiocyte-rich
large  B-cell  lymphoma
[T}
FIGURE 53.5 NoDUlAr LymPhoCYTE pRedoMiNaNT hodGkin LyMPHoMa.
HRLBCL). Although NLPHL and T/HRLBCL are two dis-
Lymph node section (A) demonstrating CD21+ meshwork of
tinct lymphomas requiring different clinical management,
follicular dendritic cells (B), and CD57+ T-cells surrounding the
LP cells (C).
598
NODULARLYMPHOCYTEPREDOMINANTHODGKIN LYMPHOMA
RhoH/TTF
Pax5
 Table 53.1
Differential Diagnosis of Nodular Lymphocyte
Predominant Hodgkin Lymphoma (NLPHL)
Tumor Cells
Molecular/
Entity
Morphology
 Immunophenotype 
Cytogenetic
NLPHL
At least
CD45+,CD20+,
No TCR or IGH
G261A
G1425C
C1436G
 partially
EMA±,Oct-2+,
 rearrangement 
FIGURE 53.6 MICRODISSECTION AND MUTATIONAL ANALYSIS OF A 
nodular,
BOB.1+, BCL6+,
 by routine
REPREsENTATIvE PATIENT wITH NLPHL. ElectropherOgram showing 
LP-type HRS 
CD15-,CD30-
techniques
mutations of the RhoH/TTF and PAX5 genes in microdissected
cells
LP cells.
T/HRLBCL
Diffuse
CD45+,CD20+,
IGH rearranged,
From Liso A, Capello D, Marafoti T, et al. Aberrant somatic
pattern,
OCT-2+,BOB.1+,
hypermutation in tumor celils of noduiar-lymphocyte-predominant
scattered
EMA±,CD15-,
and classic Hodgkin lymphoma. Blood 2006; 108: 1013-1020, by
large cells
permission.
LRCHL
Diffuse or
CD15+,CD30+,
No TCR or IGH
 nodular
CD45-,EMA-,
 rearrangement
growth
CD20±,EBV±
by routine
techniques
they share overlapping morphologic and immunopheno-
Nodular
CD20+,CD10+,
IGH rearranged,
typic features. Some studies suggest a biologic continuum
growth,
BCL2+,CD45+,
t(14;18)
between NLPHL and T/HRLBCL, which implies that they
mixture of
CD15-, CD30-
(q32;q21}
may represent different spectrums of the same disease.
centrocytes
 Both lymphomas may have concurrent nodular and dif-
and
fuse growth patterns, though, by definition, at least partial
centroblasts
nodular pattern has to be present for NLPHL. The immu-
 FL, follicular lymphoma; LRCHL, lymphocyte-rich classical Hodgkin
nophenotypic profile of LP cells cannot be clearly distin-
lymphoma; T/HRLBCL, T-cell/histiocyte-rich large B-cell lymphoma.
guished from that of the neoplastic cells in T/HRLBCL.
However, immunophenotypic studies of the background
composition are helpful, with common findings of abun-
neoplastic cells in LRCHL differs from that of the LP cells.
dant small B-cells and a prominent follicular dendritic
 The neoplastic cells in LRCHL show immunophenotypic
cell meshwork along with CD3+ CD4+ CD57+ T-cells
 features of HRS cells in other subtypes of CHL, including
in NLPHL, while lack of small B-cells but abundance of
expression of CD30, CD15, Fascin, and EBV-LMP positivity
CD8+ T-cells and histiocytes in T/HRLBCL.
in about 50% of the cases. Unlike NLPHL, T-cell rosettes
Lymphocyte-rich
classical
Hodgkin
lymphoma
around the neoplastic cells generally do not express CD57
(LRCHL). NLPHL
 and LRCHL
 cannot 
 be distinguished
in LRCHL
morphologically or clinically. LRCHL frequently presents 
 Follicular Lymphoma. Follicular lymphomas consist of
with a nodular growth pattern and a background of abun-
a mixture of centrocytes and centroblasts in various pro-
dant small lymphocytes.
. The neoplastic cells in LRCHL
portions. The neoplastic cells are monoclonal and express
sometimes display cytologic features of LP cells seen in
 s ,   o  i
NLPHL. However, the immunophenotypic profile of the
 absent.
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
599
Additional Resources
Eberle FC, Mani H, Jaffe ES: Histopathology of Hodgkin's lym-
 Schmitz R, Stanelle J, Hansmann ML, et al: Pathogenesis of classical
phoma, Cancer J15:129-137, 2009.
and lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin lymphoma, Annu Rev Pathol
Fanale MA, Younes A: Nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin's 
4:151-174, 2009.
lymphoma, Cancer Treat Res 142:367-38l, 2008.
Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, et al: WHO classification of
Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Vardiman JW, et al: Hematopathology.
tumours of haematopoietic and lymphoid tissues, ed. 4, Lyon,2008,
Philadelphia, 2010, Saunders/Elsevier.
International Agency for Research on Cancer.
Lee Al, LaCasce AS: Nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin
Tsai HK, Mauch PM: Nodular lymphocyte-predominant hodgkin
lymphoma, Oncologist 14:739-751, 2009.
lymphoma, Semin Radiat Oncol 17:184-189, 2007.
Liso A, Capello D, Marafioti T, et al: Aberrant somatic hypermuta-
tion in tumor cells of nodular-lymphocyte-predominant and classic 
Hodgkin lymphoma, Blood 108:1013-1020, 2006.
This page intentionally left blank
54
Classical Hodgkin
Lymphoma
lassical Hodgkin lymphoma (CHL) constitutes about 
the cervical, mediastinal, axillary, and para-aortic regions
95% of all HL cases in the United States and Europe. CHL
 Primary extranodal involvement is rare.
is a clonal B-cell lymphoma characterized by the prolif-
There is an increased risk of developing CHL in siblings
eration of a minor population of mononuclear Hodgkin
One study has reported a high risk of CHL development in
and multinudleated Reed-Sternberg (HRS) cells admixed
 monozygotic twins.
with an abundance of reactive infiltrate including various
CHL is divided into four major subclasses:
inflammatory cells. The diagnostic (classic) Reed-Sternberg
●Nodular sclerosis CHL
cell is a large binucleated cell with prominent round nucle-
●Mixed cellularity CHL
oli and perinucleolar halos displaying an "owl-eye" appear-
Lymphocyte-rich CHL
ance (Figures 54.1 and 54.2). Reed-Sternberg cell variants
● Lymphocyte-depleted CHL
and mononuclear Hodgkin cells may display particular
morphologic features in certain subclasses, such as “lacul-
nar" cells in nodular sclerosis HL. The HRS cells typically
express CD15 and CD30 and are negative for CD45.
Nodular Sclerosis Classica!
CHL has a bimodal age distribution in industrialized
countries. The first peak is in early adulthood (15-35 years),
Hodgkin Lymphoma
and the second peak is in patients >55 years old. The male
to female ratio is about 1.5:1. CHL is rare in children. CHL
Nodular sclerosis CHL (NSCHL) is the most frequent sub-
     
type of CHL. It accounts for 50% to 80% of all CHL cases in
Western countries, with a peak incidence ranging from 15 to
 35 years. The male to female ratio is about 1:1, and the most
frequent site of lymph node involvement is mediastinum
(80%). Bone marrow involvement is noted in about 5% of
cases. The prognosis is better than for other types of CHL.
MORPHOLOGY
● Lymph node sections show irregular nodules of different sizes
separated by collagen bands (Figure 54.3). These bands often
depict birefringence under polarized light. The extent of fibro-
sis varies from case to case, from a minimal amount to exten-
sive obliterating sclerosis. The cases with minimal amount of
fbrosis are referred to as "cellular phase" of NSCHL.
 The nodules show variable numbers of "lacunar cells" in a
background of inflammatory cells consisting of lymphocytes.
plasma cells, neutrophils, and eosinophils. Lacunar cells are
a variant of HRS cells characterized by abundant pale cyto-
plasm, lobulated nuclei, and small nucleoli. In formalin-
FIGURE 54.1  Reed-Sternberg cells (thick arrows) and Hodgkin cells (thin
fixed tissues the cytoplasm of these cells shrinks and the cells
arrows) in a background of lymphocytes, plasma cells, and histiocytes.
appear to be placed in lacunae (Figure 54.4).
@ 2013 ElsevierInc. All rights reserved
602
CLASSICAL HODGKIN LYMPHOMA
FIGURE 54.2 REED-STERNBERG AND HODGKIN
CELLS IN CLASSICAL HODGKIN LYMPHOMA (CHL). The
cells express: (A) CD15 and (B) D30. They
may also express EBV-encoded RNA (C).
From Naeim F. Pathology of Bone Marrow,
2nd edn. Williams & Wikins, Baitimore,
1997, by permission.
 FIGURE 54.3 NoDULar scLerosIs cHl. (A) Low power view of lymph
node section demonstrating a nodular pattern with numerous 
FIGURE 54.4 NoDULAR scLERosIs cHL. Nodules are separated by
thick collagen bands and contain numerous lacunar cells (A, low
 ypiyt Ag papunouns sainpou sseidoau aye u! slles seunsel
 collagen bands. (B) High power view showing lacunar cells (black 
power; B, high power). Inset demonstrates a lacunar cell.
arrows) and Reed-Sternberg cells (green arrows) mixed with
Iymphocytes and other inflammatory cells.
NODULAR SCLEROSIS CLASSICAL HODGKIN LYMPHOMA
603
FIGURE 54.5 NoDULAR scLERosIs cHL, sYNcYTIAL TYPE. Nodules are separated by thick collagen bands and primarily consist of large
aggregates of lacunar cells (A, low power; B, intermediate power; C, high power). The neoplastic cells express CD15 (D) and CD30 (E).
but are negative for CD45 (F).
● In a minority of the cases, the lacunar cells appear in large
●Positive for either OCT-2 or BOB.1 (not both) in about 90%
aggregates. These cases are referred to as "syncytial variant"
of cases;
(Figures 54.5 and 54.6).
●Posifive for CD20 in 30-40% of cases; staining is usually
●
Areas of necrosis and histiocytic reactions may be present,
weaker than that of the background reactive B-cells;
simulating necrotizing granuloma.
 Positive for IRF4/MlIM1 in the vast majority of cases;
●
Negative for EMA and ALK.
 Staining for EBV-EBER is positive in some cases of nodular
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
sclerosis CHL, but less frequent than in mixed cellularity CHL.
Similar to NSCLH, the HRS cells and their variants are (see
Figures 54.5 and 54.6):
● Negative for CD45;
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
● Positive for CD30 in nearly all cases, with membrane and
 Conventional cytogenetics and FISH mostly show numeri-
Golgi staining pattern;
 cal abnormalities i.e. aneuploid or hyperdiploid karyotype;
●
 At least focally positive for CD15 in about 80% of cases
●
Positive for fascin and PAX5 in the vast majority of cases
however, no recurrent aberrations are observed in any sub.
(>90%);
type of CHL.
604
CLASSICAL HODGKIN LYMPHOMA
FIGURE 54.6 NoDULAR scLERosis cHL, sYNcYTIAL TYPE. Aggregate of large atypical cells with prominent nucleoli (A and B) expressing
CD30 (C) and fascin (D).
The IGH breakpoints have been involved in some HRS cells in
CHL. The frequent partner regions are 2p16 (REL), 3q27 (BCL6),
and 8q24 (MYC). 16p13 (C2TA). 17q12, and 19q13 (BCL3)
CGH studies show frequent copy number alterations such as
gains of 2p. 9p. 16p. 17q, 19q, 20q, and losses of 6q, 11q, and
13q. However, cytogenetic studies often yield a normal karyo-
type because of the rare and scaffered neoplastic cells.
● Combination of FISH and immunophenotyping have shown
HRS to have complex karyotypes with multiple complete and
segmental gains and losses (Figure 54.7).
A
Mixed Cellularity Classical
Hodgkin Lymphoma
Mixed cellularity CHL (MCCHL) is the second most fre-
quent subtype of CHL, accounting for about 25-30%
 of CHL. It is more commonly seen in developing coun-
C
tries and has a frequent association with EBV infection
FIGURE 54.7 Comparative genomic hybridization studies showing
and HIV/AIDS. There is no bimodal age distribution, the
recurrent copy number changes (imbalances) found in HRS cells of 53
 median age is about 40 years, and the male to female ratio
classic Hodgkin lymphoma samples(A).The composite frequency plot 
summarizes the relative frequencies of chromosomal gains as red 
is about 1:1.
bars to the right and losses as green bars to the left aligned to each
Mediastinal involvement is infrequent. The spleen,
of the 22 autosomes. FISH interphase (B) and metaphase (C) showing 
bone marrow, and liver are involved in about 30%, 10%,
increased number of ABCC1 loci signals (red) on 16p.
and 3% of cases, respectively.
Adapted from Steid! C, Telenius A, Shah SP,et al. Genome-wide copy
number analysis of Hodgkin Reed-Sternberg cels identifes recurrent
imbalances with correlations to treatment outcome. Blood 2010; 1 16:
418-427, by permission.
MIXED CELLULARITY CLASSICAL HODGKIN LYMPHOMA
605
FIGURE 54.8 MIxED cELLULARITY cHL. (A) Numerous Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg cells are found in a background infltrate
predominantly consisting of lymphocytes. (B) A classical Reed-Sternberg cell (arrow).
MORPHOLOGY
●The lymph node architecture is typically effaced, though some
cases may show interfollicular involvement. Scattered classical
HRS cells are present in an inflammatory background (Figures
54.8 to 54.11).
● The inflammatory component consists of various proportions
of lymphocytes, histiocytes, plasma cells, eosinophils, and
neutrophils. Histiocytes can form granuloma-like aggregates
●
 The pattern of involvement is diffuse, but sometimes vaguely
nodular. There are no thickened fibrous capsules or broad
collagen bands dividing the involved lymph node.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
The HRS cells and their variants are (see Figures 54.10 and
54.11):
●Negative for CD45;
●
Positive for CD30 in nearly all cases, with membrane and
Golgi staining pattern; 
 At least focally positive for CD15 in about 80% of cases;
●
Positive for fascin and PAX5 in the vast majority of cases (>90%):
Positive for either OCT-2 or BOB.1 (not both) in about 90%
of cases;
Positive for CD20 in 30-40% of cases; staining is usually
weaker than that of the background reactive B-cells;
●
Positive for IRF4/MlIM1 in the vast majority of cases;
●
 Negative for EMA and ALK.
●
Staining for EBV-EBER is most frequently positive in this sub-
type of CHL, in about 75% of the cases.
B
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
FIGURE 54.9 MIxED cELLULARITY cHL. NumeroUs Hodgkin and
No recurrent cytogenetic aberrations have been reported in
Reed-Sternberg cells are found in a background consisting of
LRCHL.
lymphocytes, eosinophils, and histiocytes (A and B).
606
CLASSICALHODGKINLYMPHOMA
FIGURE 54.10 MixED ceLLuLARITY cHL. Lymph node section shows a thick fbrotic capsule and interfollicular involvement with numerous
Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg cells (A, low power; B, intermediate power; C, high power). These cells express CD15 (D), CD30 (E), and
fascin (F).
LYMPHOCYTE-RICH CLASSICAL HODGKIN LYMPHOMA
607
FIGURE 54.11 MIxED ceLLuLARITy cHL. Lymph node section shows an histiocyte-rich area with several Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg cells
(A, low power; B, high power) expressing CD15 (C), CD30 (D), and fascin (E). Scattered cells are positive for EBV-EBER (F).
MORPHOLOGY (FIGURE 54.12)
Lymphocyte-Rich Classica!
● The most frequent morphologic pattern of growth is nodular
Hodgkin Lymphoma
with total or partial effacement of nodal structures. The nod-
ules consist of small lymphocytes with scattered HRS cells and
lack of eosinophils or neutrophils. Nodular structures may
Lymphocyte-rich classical Hodgkin lymphoma (LRCHL) is
mntain small, regressed germinal centers. The HRS cells are
a rare subtype of CHL which has clinical and morphologic
usually outside the germinal centers.
features overlapping with those of NLPHL. Occasionally,
Diffuse LRCHL consists of a diffuse background of small
the neoplastic cells can resemble LP cells seen in NLPHL,
ymphocytes and scattered HRS cells. Lymphocytes in some
but their immunophenotypic features are different. There
cases are mixed with histiocytes.
is often nodular, but sometimes diffuse growth pattern of
lymph node involvement with scattered HRS cells admixed
with small lymphocytes. Eosinophils and neutrophils are
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
not present.
 Although there are clinical and morphologic overlaps between
The median age ranges from 30 to 50 years with a male
NLPHL and LRCHL, their immunophenotypic features are
to female ratio of about 2.5:1. Most patients show local-
different.
ized disease with no "B" symptoms. Mediastinal involve-
The HRS cells and their variants in LRCHL have similar immu
ment is rare. The prognosis is excellent.
nophenotype to those in the other subtypes of CHL
608
CLASSICAL HODGKIN LYMPHOMA
pattern, frequently with atrophic germinal centers. The tumor cells are found in the expanded mantle zones of these B-cell nodules.
(B) Immunohistochemistry for CD20 highlights the nodular pattern with a predominance of B cells. (C) A classic Reed-Sternberg (RS)
cell is indicated by the arrow. (D) Immunohistochemistry for CD15 reveals strong positivity of the neoplastic cells, including a classic
binucleate RS cell.
Adapted from Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Vardiman JW, et al. Hematopathology. Saunders/Eisevier, Philadeiphia, 20 10, by permission.
● The small lymphocytes in the nodules represent the expan-
years with a male to female ratio of about 2.5:1. LDCHL
sion of the mantle zone area and express IgM, IgD, CD20, and
shows a diffuse growth pattern with abundant HRS cells
CD5 (see Figure 45.12D).
LDCHL is an aggressive tumor and usually presents in
● The regressed or ill-defined follicles are highlighted by a mesh
advanced stage and with "B" symptoms. Retroperitoneal
of CD21+ follicular dendritic cells.
lymph nodes are the most frequent site of involvement
● In the diffuse subtype, small lymphocytes are of T-cell type
often with the involvement of the bone marrow and other
and express CD3.
intra-abdominal organs.
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
MORPHOLOGY
Conventional cytogenetics and FISH show aneuploidy
and hyperdiploidy; however, no recurrent aberrations are
· The pattern of involvement is diffuse with preponderance of
observed in any subtype of CHL (see above)
HRS cells. HRS cells may sometimes appear in aggregates and
display sarcomatoid appearance (Figure 54.13),
● The background contains relatively few small lymphocytes.
● [n some cases, diffuse fibrosis may be present (Figure 54.14)
Lymphocyte-Depleted Classical
Hodgkin Lymphoma
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
 The HRS cells and their variants are:
Lymphocyte-depleted    classical   Hodgkin   lymphoma
●Negative for CD45;
(LDCHL) is the least common subtype of CHL and is ● Posive for CD30 in nearly all cases, with membrane and
more frequently seen in developing countries and in per-
Golgi staining pattern;
sons with HIV/AIDS. The median age ranges from 30 to 40
● Af least focally positive for CD15 in about 80% of cases;
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
609
FIGURE 54.13 LYMPHocYTE-DEPLETED cHL. Lymph node sections
demonstrating numerous HRS cells mixed with scattered
lymphocytes.
From Naeim F. Pathology of Bone Marrow, 2nd edn. Wiliams &
Wilkins,Baltimore,1997,by permission.
● Positive for fascin and PAX5 in the vast majority of cases
(>90%);
●
Positive for either OCT-2 or BOB.1 (not both) in about 90%
of cases:
●Positive for CD20 in 30-40% of cases; staining is usually
weaker than that of the background reactive B-cells;
●Positive for IRF4/MLIM1 in the vast majority of cases;
●Negative for EMA and ALK.
Staining for EBV is positive in most HIV+ cases.
FIGURE 54.14 LYMPHocYTE-DEPLETED CHL. Bone marrow Section
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
demonstrating focal involvement with scattered HRS cells in a
background of fibrosis and inflammatory cells (A, low power; B,
 No recurrent cytogenetic aberrations have been reported in
intermediate power; C, high power).
any subtype of CHL.
From Naeim F. Pathology of Bone Marrow, 2nd edn. Williams &
Wilkins, Baitimore, 1997, by permission.
NLPHL and LRCHL. The HRS cells in LRCHL express
Differential Diagnosis
CD15, CD30, are CD45-negative, and may show EBV infec-
 tion, whereas the neoplastic cells in NLPHL are negative for
CD15 and CD30, and express pan-B-cell markers, EMA and
The differential diagnosis includes nodular lymphocyte
CD45 (Table 54.1). LRCHL should be distinguished from
predominant Hodgkin lymphoma (NLPHL), various sub-
T-cell/histiocyte-rich large B-cell lymphoma (T/HLBCL). T/
 HLBCL is diffuse, and the neoplastic cells are embedded in
athies, and non-hematopoietic malignancies. There are 
a mixture of T-cells and histiocytes and express pan-B-cell
significant overlapping clinicopathologic features between
markers and CD45, whereas LRCHL is nodular, the HRS
610
CLASSICAL HODGKIN LYMPHOMA
Table 54.1
 Differential Diagnosis of Classical Hodgkin Lymphoma (CHL)
Entity
Architecture
 Neoplastic Cells
Phenotype
Genotype
TH
N5
Nodular
HRS cells, lacunar cells 
CD15+,CD30+,
 Mostly polyclonal,
MC
Diffuse
HRS cells
CD20±,Fascin+,
 minority B-cell clone 
LR
Often nodular, with
HRS cells
PAX5+, CD45-,OCT-
 expanded mantle
2+ or BOB.1+, EMA-,
 zones in the nodules
ALK1-
LD
 Diffuse, sometimes 
 Abundant HRS cells
EBV±
with fibrosis
 Other lymphomas
 NLPHL
Nodular, small B-cells 
LP(L&H) cells 
CD20+,CD79a+,
Polyclonal
and CD4+/CD57+
CD45+, BOB.1+ and
T-cells in the
OCT-2+,EBV-,
nodules
CD15-,CD30-
T/HRLBCL
Diffuse with
 Scattered large atypical
CD20+,CD79a+,
 Reairanged IGH
abundant T-cells
lymphocytes, Rs-like 
EMA+, CD45+, CD15-,
 and/or histiocytes
cells
CD30-,EBV-
ALCL
Diffuse or sinus
Anaplastic large cells,
CD30+,CD15±,
Rearanged TCR/ALK
pattern 
hallmark cells, Rs-like 
CD45+,CD2+,CD4+,
cells
EMA+, ALK1±, LMP-
1-,CD20-,PAX5-
ALCL, anaplastic large cell lymphoma; LD, lymphocyte-depleted; LR, lymphocyte-rich; MC, mixed cellularity; NLPHL, nodular 
lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin lymphoma; NS, nodular sclerosis; T/HRLBCL, T-ce/histiocyte-rich large B-cell lymphoma.
1Adapted from Jaffe ES, Harris ML, Vardiman JW, et al. Hematopathology. Saunders/Elsevier, Philadelphia, 2010.
cells are surrounded by mantle cells and express CD15 and
cells, expression of ALK1 and CD45, and TCR rearrange-
CD30 and are CD45-negative (see Table 54.1).
ment distinguish them from CHL (see Table 54.1)
Primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma (PMLBCL)
Reactive lymphadenopathies, such as infectious mono-
may show sclerosis and contain cells resembling lacul-
nucleosis, may demonstrate scattered Rs-like cells. These
nar cells or RS cells. The neoplastic cells in PMLBCL may
cells express CD20, may express CD30 and LMP-1, but are
express CD30, and CD15, and may mimic the syncytial
usually negative for CD15. Metastatic carcinoma or mela-
variant of NSCHL.
 noma may mimic the syncytial variant of NSCHL. Tumor
Neoplastic cells in anaplastic large cell lymphoma
cells of metastatic carcinoma are cytokeratin+ and CD45-,
(ALCL) express CD30 and morphologically may mimic
and melanoma cells are S-100+ and CD45-.
HRS cells, but their cohesive growth pattern, hallmark
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
611
Additional Resources
Advani R: Optimal therapy of advanced hodgkin lymphoma,
Jaffe ES. Harris NL, Vardiman JW, et al: Hematopathology.
Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program:310-316, 2011.
Philadelphia, 2010, Saunders/Elsevier.
Blum KA: Upcoming diagnostic and therapeutic developments in
Kuppers R: The biology of Hodgkin's lymphoma, Nat Rev Cancer
classical Hodgkin's lymphoma, Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ
9:15-27.2009.
Program:93-100, 2010.
Mani H, Jaffe ES: Hodgkin lymphoma: an update on its biology with new
Eberle FC, Mani H, Jaffe ES: Histopathology of Hodgkin's lym-
insights into classification, Clin Lymphoma Myeloma 9:206-216, 2009.
phoma, Cancer I 15:129-137, 2009.
Steidl C, Connors IM, Gascoyne RD: Molecular pathogenesis of
Farrell K, Jarrett RF: The molecular pathogenesis of Hodgkin lym-
 Hodgkin's lymphoma: increasing evidence of the importance of the
phoma, Histopathology 58:15-25, 2011.
microenvironment, J Clin Oncol 29:1812-1826, 2011.
Fraga M, Forteza I: Diagnosis of Hodgkin's disease: an update on his-
 Steidl C, Telenius A, Shah SP, et al: Genome-wide copy number anal-
topathological and immunophenotypical features, Histol Histopathol
ysis of Hodgkin Reed-Sternberg cells identifes recurrent imbalances
22:923-935, 2007.
with correlations to treatment outcome, Blood 1l6:418-427, 2010.
This page intentionally left blank
Immunodefciency
Disorders
ADA, RAG1, and RAG2. However, the advent of next-gen-
Primary Immunodefciency
eration sequencing and whole-exon analysis now allows
Syndromes
for genome-wide testing for all of the immune deficiency
genes, both known and unknown.
Newborn screening for SCID is starting to be imple-
The primary immunodeficiencies are rare congenital disor
mented, using a test for T-cell receptor excision circles
ders with defective function of the immune system leading
(TRECs) in DNA extracted from routine newborn screen-
to increased susceptibility to infection, autoimmunity, and
ing blood spots.
 development of malignant neoplasms. The primary immu-
Adenosine deaminase deficiency (ADD) is a subtype of
nodeficiencies include different subtypes representing
 SCID and accounts for about 5o% of the autosomal reces-
T-cell (cellular) or B-cell (humoral) defects or combined
 sive forms. ADD is characterized by a marked decline in
deficiencies (Table 55.1).
the absolute number of both T- and B-cells in the periph-
The T-cell defects are characterized by opportunistic
eral blood and reduced number of hematogones and
viral and pneumocystis infections, whereas B-cell imm-
 plasma cells in the bone marrow.
nodeficiencies usually lead to bacterial infections. In this
 The typical symptoms of SCID are recurrent viral and
section, severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID),
bacterial infections, chronic diarrhea, and failure to thrive
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS), DiGeorge syndrome,
in newborns. These findings are associated with lack of
agammaglobulinemia, ataxia telangiectasia, and X-linked
thymic shadow on chest X-ray studies. In some cases, clini-
lymphoprolifeerative syndrome are briefly discussed as
 ap s ias Aq paiap aq  sns i
examples of primary immunodeficiencies.
the protective effects of the maternally derived antibodies.
About 1-5% of SCID patients develop lymphoid malig-
nancies, such as primarily non-Hodgkin luymphomas.
SEVERE COMBINED IMMUNODEFICIENCY
Rare cases are EBV-associated
SYNDROMES
Severe combined immunodeficiency syndromes (SCID)
WISKOTT-ALDRICH SYNDROME
consist of a heterogeneous group of disorders primarily
arising from molecular T-cell defects leading to develop-
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS) is a rare congenital dis-
 mental and functional disturbances of T-cells and some-
 order characterized by the triad of immunodeficiency.
times natural killer (NK) cells or B-cells (Table 55.2).
eczema, and abnormal platelets (thrombocytopenia, small 
There are two different modes of inheritance: X-linked
platelets, and platelet dysfunction) (see Chapter 58).
and autosomal recessive. The X-linked form is associated
Mutation of the WASP gene located on the chro-
with the mutation of the gamma chain of the IL-2 receptor
mosome Xp1l.22-23 is the primary molecular defect.
gene (IL2RG) and is characterized by reduced numbers of
Numerous mutations have been reported, mostly found
circulating T- and NK-cells and normal numbers of B-cells.
in exons 1 and 2. These mutations lead to the absence or
However, B-cells do not mature to plasma cells, leading to
 aberrant expression of the WAS protein in lymphocytes
a virtually non-existent serum immunoglobulin in these
 and megakaryocytes. Lack of WAS protein expression may
 patients. Other variants of SCID are listed in Table 55.2.
lead to decreased platelet size and defective T-cell and
Of the many possible genes involved in SCID and platelet function.
related disorders, targeted DNA sequencing to detect
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS) is an X-linked reces-
mutations is available for selected ones, such as IL2RG,
 sive disorder primarily involving males with an average age
Atlas of Hematopathology. DOl: ht://dx.doi.org/10.1016/978-0-12-385183-300055-3
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
614
IMMUNODEFICIENCY DISORDERS
 Table 55.1
Table 55.2
 Primary Immunodeficiency Syndromes Associated 
Gene Defects and Blood Lymphocyte Alterations
with Defective Lymphocytes'
in Certain Subtypes of Severe Combined 
T-Cell Defects
Immunodeficiency (SCID)
SCID
Subtype
Gene
CD4
CD8
B
NK
 Reticular dysgenesis 
AR
 X-Linked, common
IL2RG
十
N
Alymphocytosis
AR
RAG-1; RAG-2
y-chain
 Deficit of T and NK cells 
 X-linked; AR 
Y-chain-IL-2R; Jak3
 Janus kinase 3
JAK3
十
N
 PNP deficiency
AR
PNP
IL-2 receptor-α (CD25)
L2RA
N
 Omenn syndrome
AR
5'-nucleotidase?
IL-7 receptor-αx
IL7RA
↑
N
N
T-celf activation defects (CID)
(CD127}
HLA deficiency class-
AR
TAP2
CD3 complex
CD3D
个
↑
N
N
HLA deficiency class-ll 
AR
CIITA/RFX5
Recombinase
RAG1,RAG2
个
个
↑
N
CD3 deficiency
AR
ye CD3
activating genes
Zap-70 deficiency
AR
Zap-70
 Adenosine deaminase 
ADA
↑
↑
↑
 Calcium influx
AR
？
MHC class Il
MHCID
N
N
N
K
deficiency
Zeta-associated
ZAP70
N
N
N
 Defect in IL-2 synthesis 
AR
？
protein
Defects in DNA repair
Protein tyrosine
PTPRC
十
N
(CD45)
Ataxia telangiectasia
AR
ATM
phosphatase
 Boom syndrome
AR
BLM
IAdapted from Bonilla F. Combined immune deficiencies. UpToDate 2007.
 Nijmegen syndrome
AR
NBS
Xeroderma
AR
 7 complementation
 pigmentosum 
groups (XPA to G)
Approximately, 10-20% of WAS patients develop lym-
Others
phoid malignancies, 75% being large B-cell lymphomas.
Wiskott-Aldrich
X-linked; AR
WASP; ?
Hodgkin lymphoma accounts for less than 5% of the
syndrome
tumors.
 DiGeorge syndrome
Sporadic
del(22g11), TBX1
The differential diagnosis includes immune-associ-
 Hyper-lgM syndrome 
X-linked; AR
CD40 L; ?
 ated thrombocytopenia, other primary immunodeficien-
B-Cell Defects
cies,
 myelodysplastic syndromes, and hematopoietic
 Lymphoproliferative
 X-linked; AD
7; fas
 malignancies.
syndrome
Bruton
 X-linked 
btk
 agammaglobulinema
DIGEORGE SYNDROME
Common variable
Sporadic
？
DiGeorge syndrome (Ds) is a rare congenital immunode-
 immunodeficiency
ficiency disorder characterized by the deletion of 22q11.2,
lgA deficiency
 AD; AR; sporadic
？
developmental abnormalities of the third and fourth pha-
IgG subclass deficiency
AR
？
-oda pue eieidoda on hu 'sanod pea
Hyper lgE syndrome
AR
?
 parathyroidism, and midline cardiac defects. The suggested
Adapted from Ten RM. Primaryimmunodeficiencies. Mayo Clin Proc 1998; 
criteria for definitive diagnosis of DS consist of reduced
73: 865-872
numbers of total T-cells plus the presence of at least two of
 AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; btk, Bruton tyrosine
the following three findings:
kinase; CID, combined immunodeficiency; PNP, purine nucleoside 
phosphorylase; SCID, severe combined immunodeficiency; WASP,
1. Deletion of chromosome 22q11.2 (Figures 55.1 and 55.2)
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein.
2. Hypocalcemia
 3. Congenital cardiac defects.
Up to 9o% of patients with DS show microdeletion of
of about 2l months at diagnosis. An autosomal dominant
22q1l.2, and about 75% of the patients demonstrate con-
mode of inheritance has also been reported in some families,
 genital heart disease including tetralogy of Fallot, ventricu-
and complete sequencing of the WAS gene is available in a
lar septal defect, or interrupted aortic arch. As testing for
number of specialized laboratories to detect the mutations.
the 22q11.2 deletion by fluorescence in situ hybridization
Clinical manifestations include bleeding secondary to
(FISH) has become more widespread (see Figure 55.2), the
thrombocytopenia and abnormal platelet function, recur-
range of cardiac defects associated with the syndrome has
rent infections, autoimmune manifestations, and eczema.
expanded. This region of the chromosome contains about
The platelet counts are often <50,000/μL, and platelet size
30 genes, including the TBXl gene. In a small number of
is usually half the normal. There is an inverse correlation
affected individuals without a chromosome 22 deletion,
between the severity of the clinical manifestations and the
mutations in the TBX1 gene are thought to be responsible
 detectable levels of the WAS protein in the peripheral blood.
for the characteristic signs and symptoms of the syndrome.
PRIMARY IMMUNODEFICIENCY SYNDROMES
615
11
20
21
FIGURE 55.1 The characteristic karyotypic abnormality in DiGeorge syndrome is an interstitial deletion of 22q11.2 region (arrow shows
the deleted 22q).
Some centers have begun checking for the deletion
CD19+ or CD20+ cells), and recurrent bacterial and viral
in almost every patient with even an isolated congenital
infections. An atypical form of X-linked agammaglobulin-
heart defect, and the diagnostic yield has been significant.
emia has been reported with less severe lymphopenia and
Discovery of the deletion can then raise alertness to the
hypogammaglobulinemia.
possibility of other immunologic and endocrine complica-
The clinical presentations of the autosomal recessive vari-
tions (which are not present in all cases).
ant are similar to those of the X-linked variant except for
The deletion can also be detected in the context of a
the lack of BTK mutation and for manifestation of the
whole-genome scan for copy number variants (CNVs)
disease in both genders. The autosomal recessive type is
using array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH).
caused by mutations in several genes that regulate B-cell
The parents should also be tested to distinguish de novo
development, such as IGHM, CD179B, CD79A, BLNK, and
from inherited deletions, and to distinguish benign CNVs
LRRCB genes.
from pathologic deletions and insertions.
 Despite much work aimed at identifying the causative
gene(s) in the deleted critical region, targeted molecular
ATAXIA TELANGIECTASIA
testing for mutations is not yet routine.
Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is an autosomal recessive disease
 characterized by immunodeficiency, ataxia, oculocutane-
AGAMMAGLOBULINEMIA
ous telangiectasia, defective DNA repair, and increased
Agammaglobulinemia is one of the primary humoral
susceptibility to ionizing radiation. The severity of immu-
immunodeficiencies and consists of two congenital types:
nodeficiency is variable and may affect both B and T cells.
X-linked and autosomal recessive.
All AT patients show mutation of the ATM gene located on
The X-linked variant (Bruton agammaglobulinemia)
chromosome 11q22-23.
affects boys, with clinical manifestations between 6 and
 Patients demonstrate thymic atrophy and hypoplasia of
18 months of age. This disorder is caused by mutation in
 the follicles in the lymph nodes. There is peripheral blood
a tyrosine kinase gene called BTK (Bruton tyrosine kinase)
lymphopenia predominantly involving the T-cells. There is
 mapped at Xq21.
progressive loss of cerebellum Purkinje cells.
Complete sequencing of the BTK gene to detect these
Approximately 10% of homozygote
AT patients
variants is available in several reference laboratories. The
eventually develop leukemia, lymphoma, or non-lym-
BTK product is a signal transduction molecule expressed in 
phoid malignancies. Development of T-cell leukemia/
B-cells and other hematopoietic cells.
lymphoma, particularly T-prolymphocytic leukemia, is
Affected patients show  profound hypogammaglobu-
frequent. Hodgkin lymphoma accounts for about 10% of
linemia, reduced number of peripheral blood B-cells (<1% 
 AT-associated malignancies.
616
IMMUNODEFICIENCY DISORDERS
 Box 55.1 Diagnostic Criteria for X-Linked
Lymphoproliferative syndrome (XLP)
Definitive
Male patient with lymphoma, immunodefciency, aplastic anemia,
lymphohistiocytic disorder or fatal EBV infection, and mutation in
the SAP gene.
Probable
Male patient with lymphoma, immunodeficiency, aplastic ane-
mia, and lymphohistiocytic disorder or fatal EBV infection. Patient
has maternal cousins, uncles or nephews with a history of similar
disorder.
Possible
Male patient with lymphoma, aplastic anemia, or lymphohistio-
cytic disorder, resulting in death, following EBV infection.
1 Seemayer TA. Gross TG. Egeler RM. et al. X-linked lymphoproliferative dis-
ease: twenty-five years after the discovery. Pediatr Res 1995: 38: 471-478.
and Gaspar HB. Sharif R. Gilmour KC. et al. X-linked lymphoproliferative dis-
ease: clinical. diagnostic and molecular perspective. Br J Haematol 2o02: 119:
A
585-595.
Telomere shortening and fusions, with normal telomerase
 activity, have been observed in peripheral blood lymphocytes
of AT patients, especially in pre-leukemic T-cell clones.
X-LINKED LYMPHOPROLIFERATIVE SYNDROME
X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome (XLP) is a rare
inherited immunodeficiency characterized by lymphocyto-
 sis, dysgammaglobulinemia, fatal infectious mononucleo-
sis (IM), or lymphoma usually developing in response to
infection with EBV.
 XLP is a rare X-linked inherited disorder affecting boys,
with age of onset ranging from 2 to 19 years. The most
common clinical presentation is a fatal IM following EBV
infection which has a very high mortality rate and a sur-
vival rate of <5%. However, in approximately one third of
affected patients, EBV infection is not fatal. These patients
eventually develop dysgammaglobulinemia and/or lym-
B
phoma. The definitive diagnostic criteria include a male
 patient with lymphoma, immunodeficiency, aplastic ane-
FIGURE 55.2 FISH analysis demonstrating a normal metaphase
(A) and an abnormal metaphase (B) with the 22q11.2 deletion
mia, lymphohistiocytic disorder or fatal EBV infection, and
(arrow) in a patient with DiGeorge syndrome.
mutation in the SAP gene (Box 55.1).
 The treatment of choice is allogeneic hematopoietic stem
cell transplantation. Antiviral agents, such as aciclovir or
 foscarnet, high dose immunoglobulin, immunosuppressive
AT is caused by mutations in the ATM gene. The gene is
drugs, interferons α and y, and HLH 94 have been tried with
quite large, so testing for mutations by DNA sequencing is 
 debatable outcomes. The HLH 94 (an anti-histiocytic regi-
not routine for primary diagnosis, which is largely based
 men) has been shown to induce long term remissions.
 on clinical features and functional DNA repair assays.
Karyotyping of peripheral lymphocytes from AT homo-
Morphology and LaboratoryFindings
Zygotes shows  non-random  chromosomal  rearrange-
ments, preferentially involving chromosomal breakpoints 
● The most common pathologic finding is a massive systemic
at 14q11.2, 14q32, 7q35, 7p14, 2p12, and 22q11.2, and
lymphohistiocytosis associated with a clinical picture of fatal
correlate with the regions of the T-cell and B-cell receptor
IM. The proliferating cells are EBV-infected B-cells and cyto-
gene complexes.
toxic T-cells along with histiocytes.
HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCYVIRUS/ACQUIRED IMMUNODEFICIENCY SYNDROME617
● The lymphohistiocytic proliferation involves lymph nodes as  the world, whereas HIV-2 is virtually homologous to the
well as other tissues such as bone marrow, brain, heart, and simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) and is primarily
kidney, and is accompanied by hemophagocytosis and dys- detected in West Africa.
regulated cytokine release resulting in extensive tissue dam-
HIV infection is usually through three major routes:
age. such as hepatic necrosis and profound bone marrow
sexual intercourse (70-80%), exposure to contaminated
hypoplasia.
blood (5- 10%), and prenatal transmission (5- 10%). Viral
● Abnormal production of serum immunoglobulin is a com-
penetration of mucosal epithelium is followed by infec-
mon finding and is often associated with a defective cellular
tion of CD4+ T-cells, dendritic cells, and macrophages,
immune function, presenting a picture of common variable
immunodeficiency. The degree of hypogammaglobulinemia
poa pue sapou qd a on peaids sunbasans y
ranges from moderately decreased levels of IgG to severe
(viremia). The entry to the CD4+ cells is mediated by the
panhypogammaglobulinemia.
chemokine receptor CCR5. Patients homozygous for a
●
Approximately 35% of the affected children develop
32-base pair deletion in CCR5 are resistant to HIV infec-
lymphoma, usually of B-cell type. Lymphoma is often
 tion, whereas heterozygous-infected individuals may have
extranodal and involves ileocecum, central nervous system,
 a less aggressive clinical course. The heterozygote fre-
liver, and kidney. Burkitt lymphoma is the most frequent
 quency in the general population is about 10%.
subtype (53%) followed by immunoblastic lymphoma (12%)
HIV infection is divided into several stages advancing
and follicular lymphoma (12%). HL is rare.
from viral transmission to primary (acute) HIV infection,
seroconversion, clinical latent period, early symptomatic
stage, and finally to AIDS. The primary HIV infection is
Molecuiar and Cytogenetic Studies
characterized by acute non-specific flu-like symptoms, such
● Mutations in two X-linked genes, SAP and XIAP, have been
 as fever, headache, sore throat, myalgia/arthralgia, diarrhea,
reported in XLP patients. SAP (SH2D1A), the most commonly
nausea/vomiting, and lymphadenopathy. Clinical latent
affected gene, is located in the Xq25 region and encodes a sig-
 period refers to the 6-month asymptomatic period (except
naling lymphocyte activation molecule (SLAM)-associated
lymphadenopathy) after seroconversion. In this period, HIV
protein.
is trapped by the follicular dendritic cells in the lymphoid
● SLAM has a number of functions including regulation of T-cell
  s     
cytotoxicity, T-cell/B-cell co-stimulation, and induction of
interferon-y in the Th1 cells. SAP mutations probably result in
called "AIDS-related complex," is associated with a number
the defective T- and NK-cell responses and dysregulated cyto-
of clinical symptoms and opportunistic infections, such as
fever, chronic diarrhea, oral leukoplakia, peripheral neu-
kine release.
● Mutation in the XIAP (or BIRC4) gene has been recently
ropathy, thrombocytopenia, herpes zoster infection, vaginal
reported in some patients with XLP who showed no evidence
andidiasis, and cervical dysplasia.
of SAP mutation. XIAP encodes the X-linked inhibitor of
The most frequent clinical presentation associated
apoptosis.
● XIAP-deficient patients with XLP have low numbers of NK-
esophageal candidiasis, wasting, and Kaposi sarcoma. The
 spectrum and natural course of these complications has
differentiation of NK-cells.
changed dramatically with the advent of anti-retroviral
therapy
Numerous drugs have been approved by the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of HIV infec-
Human Immunodeficiency Virus!
tion, including nucleoside analogs, protease inhibitors,
and fusion inhibitors. Nucleoside analogs are nucleoside
Acquired Immunodefciency
reverse transcriptase inhibitors, such as azidothymidine
Syndrome
(AZT), zalcitabine (ddC), and stavudine (d4T). Examples
of protease inhibitors are ritonavir (Norvir), indinavir
(Crixivan), and saquinivir (Invirase). Fuzeon (Enfuvirtide)
The human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)/acquired
 is the first approved fusion inhibitor drug.
out the world. AIDS is associated with lymphocytopenia
and defective cell-mediated immunity leading to recur-
MORPHOLOGY AND LABORATORY
rent infections, Kaposi sarcoma, lymphoma, and cervical
FINDINGS
cancer. All HIV-positive patients with a CD4 cell count
● The peripheral blood reveals lymphopenia (often <500/μL)
of <200/μL are considered to have AIDS regardless of the
with a reversed CD4:CD8 ratio (Figure 55.3). Scattered reac-
 presence or absence of clinical symptoms.
ftive lymphocytes may be present. Pancytopenia is observed
AIDS is an HIV-induced illness with a broad spectrum
in over 5o% of cases. Anemia is common and is usually nor-
of clinical manifestations. There are two strains of HIV:
mocytic normochromic, with decreased reticulocyte count
HIV-1 and HIV-2. HIV-1 was discovered first and is wide
and elevated serum iron and ferritin levels. Mild to moderate
spread in the United States, Europe, and other parts of
neutropenia is a common feature and approximately 30% of
618
IMMUNODEFICIENCY DISORDERS
patients demonstrate monocytopenia. Thrombocytopenia is
preponderance and left shift, and mild to severe dysplastic
frequent and in some cases is autoimmune associated (ITP-
changes in one or more hematopoietic lines. An increased fre-
like syndrome)
quency of naked megakaryocyte nuclei has been observed in
 HIV antibodies are raised against various viral components,
bone marrow samples (biopsy sections and marrow smears)
such as envelope glycoproteins GP-120 and GP-41 and core
of patients with AIDS. A polyclonal lymphoplasmacytosis is
protein p24. These antibodies are detected by a variety of tech-
mmmon, sometimes with reactive lymphocytes and imma-
fure plasma cells (Figure 55.4). CD4+ cells are reduced, par-
Western blot, radioimmunoassay, and immunofluorescence.
ticularly those of the CD45RA-negative phenotype, whereas
Many patients show positive HIV serology (seroconversion)
the proportion of CD8+ cells is increased, especially the
within 4-10 weeks after exposure to the virus, and >95% are
HLA-DR+/CD45RA+ subtype. Reticulin fibrosis and gelati-
seroconvert within 6 months.
nous transformation of bone marrow may be present.
● Bone marrow specimens from AIDS patients reveal a nor-
● The affected lymph nodes show a variety of morphologic
mocellular to hypercellular marrow, often with myeloid
changes. Florid follicular hyperplasia is the most frequent
pattern, particularly at the early stages of the disease (Figure
55.5) Numerous, large, irregular follicles with expanded
germinal centers (GC), numerous mitotic figures, and tin-
gible body macrophages are present. Mantle zones are often
10%
ill-defined or effaced. The interfollicular areas show promi-
nent vascularity and a mixed cellular component consisting
of plasma cells, immunoblasts, histiocytes, lymphocytes, and
monocytoid B-cells. The CD4:CD8 ratio is reversed. Sinus
64%6
histiocytosis is a frequent feature and may be associated with
hemophagocytosis. In the later stages of the disease, there is
evidence of lymphoid depletion by reduced number of the
ymphoid follicles, decreased number of lymphocytes in the
CD3
CD8
interfollicular areas, and the presence of amorphous eosino-
FIGURE 55.3 Flow cytometry of peripheral blood demonstrating a
philic deposits and/or fibrosis. The affected lymph nodes may
population of CD3+ lymphocytes (absolute count = 980/μL) with 
show signs of opportunistic infection, Kaposi sarcoma, or
 reversed CD4:CD8 ratio (CD4 orange and CD8 green).
lymphoma.
Immunohistochemical stains for kappa light chain (C) and lambda light chain (D) demonstrate a polyclonal plasma cell population.
IDIOPATHIC CD4+ T-LYMPHOCYTOPENIA
619
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
HIV RNA levels are detected in early stages of viremia by
a sensitive reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) assay.
The quantitative RT-PCR assay, now performed at high
throughput using FDA-approved reagents, is especially use-
ful for monitoring residual viral load in patients on anti-
retroviral therapy.
HIV-ASSOCIATED LYMPHOMAS
Advances in anti-retroviral HIV treatments have significantly
reduced the incidence of lymphomas in AIDS patients. In
a population study the risk of development of a lymphoid
malignancy in AIDS patients was reported as 113-fold, 7.6-
fold, and 4.5-fold for non-Hodgkin lymphoma, Hodgkin
lymphoma, and plasma cell myeloma, respectively. Active
anti-retrovrial therapies have also changed the incidence of
lymphoma subtypes, with an increased proportion of dif-
fuse large B-cel lymphoma (DLBCL) and reduced incidence
of Burkitt lymphoma (BL).
Most HIV-associated lymphomas are aggressive, are of
B-cell type, and frequently involve extranodal tissues. The
CNS, GI tract, bone marrow, and liver are the most frequent
extranodal sites. Unusual sites of involvement include body
cavities, bile duct, oral cavities, appendix, kidney, and lung.
EBV or HHV8 infection is a frequent finding.
According to the WHO classification, HIV-associated
lymphomas are divided into three major categories:
● Lymphomas that are also seen in immunocompetent patients.
such as DLBCL (see Chapter 36). BL (see Chapter 39), extra-
nodal marginal zone lymphoma (see Chapter 31), plasma
ell myeloma (see Chapter 41) and Hodgkin lymphoma (see
Chapters 53 and 54).
Lymphomas occurring more specifically  in  HIV-positive
patients, such as primary effusion lymphoma, plasmablastic
lymphoma, and lymphoma arising in HHV8-associated multi-
entric Calstleman disorders (see Chapter 38).
 Lymphomas arising in HIV patients as well as other immuno
deficient states, such as post-transplant-associated lymphopro-
liferative disease (see Chapter 56).
ldiopathic CD4+
T-Lymphocytopenia
FIGURE 55.5 Lymph node biopsy section from a patient with AIDS
demonstrating overall preservation of nodal architecture and
Idiopathic CD4+ T-lymphocytopenia is a condition char-
expansion of follicular structures (A). Some of the follicles lack the
mantle zone area (bare follicles) (B). Some of the macrophages
acterized by acquired immunodeficiency, depletion of
contain melanin pigments (dermatophatic) (C).
CD4+ lymphocytes, and opportunistic infections without
 evidence of HIV infection. These patients have an overall
better prognosis than patients with AIDS, and a propor-
tion of them may show a spontaneous regression. The
peripheral blood absolute CD4+ count is usually <300/μL
620
IMMUNODEFICIENCY DISORDERS
Additional Resources
Aloj G, Giardino G, Valentino L, et al: Severe combined immunodefi-
McCusker C, Warrington R: Primary immunodeficiency, Allergy
ciencies: new and old scenarios, Int Rev Immunol 3l:43-65, 2012.
Asthma Clin Immunol 7(Suppl 1):S1l, 2011.
Bassiri H, Janice Yeo WC, Rothman J, et al: X-linked lymphoprolif-
McDonald-McGinn DM, Sullivan KE: Chromosome 22qll.2 deletion
erative disease (XLP): a model of impaired anti-viral, anti-tumor and 
syndrome (DiGeorge syndrome/velocardiofacial syndrome), Medicine
humoral immune responses, Immunol Res 42:145-159, 2008.
(Baltimore) 90:1-18, 2011.
Blundell MP, Worth A, Bouma G, et al: The Wiskott-Aldrich syn-
Mesti T, Setina TJ, Vovk M, et al: Eleven years of experience with
drome: The actin cytoskeleton and immune cell function, Dis Markers
AIDS-related lymphomas at the Institute of Oncology Ljubljana, Med
29:157-175, 2010.
Oncol 29:1217-1222, 2012.
Borte S, Wang N, Oskarsdottir S, et al: Newborn screening for pri-
Niehues T, Perez-Becker R, Schuetz C: More than just SCID—the
mary immunodeficiencies: beyond SCID and XLA, Ann N Y Acad Sci
 phenotypic range of combined immunodeficiencies associated with
1246:118-130, 2011.
mutations in the recombinase activating genes (RAG) 1 and 2, Clin
Bouma G, Burns
SO. Thrasher AJ: Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome:
Immunol 135:183-192, 2010.
Immunodeficiency
resulting
from defective cell migration and
Pai SY, Notarangelo LD: Hematopoietic cell transplantation for
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome: advances in biology and future directions 
790, 2009.
for treatment, Immunol Allergy Clin North Am 30: 179-194, 2010.
Brower V: AIDS-related cancers increase in Africa, I Natl Cancer Inst 
Perlman SL, Boder Deceased E, Sedgewick RP. et al: Ataxia-
103:918-919, 2011.
telangiectasia, Handb Clin Neurol 103:307-332, 2012.
Cleland SY, Siegel RM: Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome at the nexus of
 Puck JM: The case for newborn screening for severe combined immu-
autoimmune and primary immunodefciency diseases, FEBS Lett
nodeficiency and related disorders, Ann N Y Acad Sci 1246: 108-117.
585:3710-3714, 2011.
2011.
 Dezube Bl: Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome-related Kaposi's
Rezaei N, Mahmoudi E, Aghamohammadi A, et al: X-linked lym-
sarcoma: clinical features, staging, and treatment, Semin Oncol
pe aun Aq payida uouo snaua e auoipus anniaoidoud
27:424-430, 2000.
 of infection, immunodeficiency and lymphoma, Br J Haematol
Gatti R: Ataxia-Telangiectasia. In Pagon RA, Bird TD, Dolan CR,
152:13-30, 2011.
Stephens K, editors: Gene reviews, Seattle (WA),
1993-1999,
 Scambler Pl: 22qll deletion syndrome: a role for TBX1 in pharyngeal
University of Washington, Seattle. [updated 2010]
and cardiovascular development, Pediatr Cardiol 3l:378-390, 2010.
Kurisu S, Takenawa T: The WASP and WAVE family proteins, Genome
Sissolak G, Sissolak D, Jacobs P: Human immunodeficiency and
Biol 10:226, 2009.
Hodgkin lymphoma, Transfus Apher Sci 42: 131-139, 2010.
 Lederman MM, Margolis L: The lymph node in HIV pathogenesis.
Tripathi AK, Misra R Kalra P, et al: Bone marrow abnormalities in
Semin Immunol20:187-195, 2008.
HIV disease, I Assoc Physicians India 53:705-710, 2005.
Luo L, Li T: Idiopathic CD4 lymphocytopenia and opportunistic
Utsuki S, Oka H, Abe K, et al: Primary central nervous system lym-
infection—an update, FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol 54:283-289,
 phoma in acquired immune deficiency syndrome mimicking toxo-
2008.
plasmosis, Brain Tumor Pathol 28:83-87, 2011.
latrogenic
mmunodefciency-Associated
Lymphoproliferative Disorders
In this chapter, post-transplant lymphoproliferative dis-
Table 56.1
orders and lymphoproliferative disorders associated with
WHO Categories of Post-transplant Lymphoproliferative
immunosuppressive medications in autoimmune disor-
Disorders (PTLD))
ders are discussed.
Type
Major Characteristic Features
Early lesions
 Reactive plasmacytic
 Preserved nodal architecture,
hyperplasia
increased plasma cells and rare
Post-Transplant
immunoblasts
IM-like lesions2
Preserved nodal architecture,
Lymphoproliferative Disorders
 paracortical expansion with
numerous immunoblasts
 Polymorphic PTLD
 Destructive infiltrates consisting
Post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorders (PTLD) are
 of a mixture of small and large
benign or malignant lymphoid disorders which develop
ymphoid cells and plasma
cells. Scattered atypical cells,
after solid organ or bone marrow allogeneic transplanta-
areas of necrosis, and frequent
tion. They represent a complex group with a wide spec-
mitotic figures may be present.
trum of clinicopathologic features ranging from lymphoid
Rearrangement of lg or presence of
hyperplasia to full blown lymphoma. The World Health
 EBV genome. Lack of mutations of
MYC, RAS, and TP53 genes
Organization (WHO) classification defines four major cat-
Monomorphic PTLD
 Destructive infltrates of
egories (Table 56.1):
monomophic atypical lymphoid
●Early lesions
 cells consistent with lymphoma.
●Polymorphic PTLD
Most frequent B-cell types 
Monomorphic PTLD
are diffuse large B-cell, Burkitt 
●
 lymphoma, and plasma cell 
 Classical Hodgkin lymphoma type PTLD.
myeloma. Rearrangement of
The major risk factors for the development of PTLD are
Ig or presence of EBv genome.
immunosuppression and EBV infection. EBV infection is
Mutations of MYC, RAS, and TP53
documented in 50-80% of patients with PTLD. The more
genes may be present.
 Most frequent T-cell type is peripheral
severe the immunosuppression the greater is the risk for
T-cell lymphoma, not otherwise
PTLD. The incidence of PTLD is significantly higher in
specifed. TCR gene rearrangement
 EBV-seronegative patients than in EBV-seropositive ones,
and up to 25% clonal EBV
because of the higher risk of EBV infection in recipients
genome
who have no pre-transplant immunity to EBV.
Gassical Hodgkin
 Presence of HRS cells and 
Other risk factors include age of recipient under 25
 ymphoma type PTLD
 morphology consistent with CHL; 
years, fewer HLA matches, and history of pre-transplant
EBV+.
malignancy. The risk of PTLD is highest in the first year of
1Adapted from Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Stein H, et al. Pathology and Genetics:
 the post-transplant period.
Tumors of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues. IARC Press, Lyon, 
The incidence of PTLD in solid organ transplants is
2001, and Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, et al. WHO Classifcation of
Tumours of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues. International Agency
highest in intestinal and multiorgan transplants, rang-
for Research on Cancer, Lyon, 2008.
ing from 11% to 33%, followed by 2-9% for lung, 2-6%
 ZIM, infectious mononucleosis.
Atlas of Hematopathology. DOl: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00056-5
 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
622
for heart, 1-3% for kidney, and 1-2% for liver transplan-
MORPHOLOGY
tations. The incidence of PTLD in bone marrow allograft
There are four morphologic subtypes of PTLD: (1) early
recipients is about 1%, except for those who receive HLA-
lesions, (2) polymorphic PTLD, (3) monomorphic PTLD,
mismatched or T-cell-depleted bone marrow or are treated
by immunosuppressive drugs for graft versus host disease.
and (4) classical Hodgkin lymphoma type PTLD.
In this group of patients, the risk of PTLD is up to 20%.
Patients typically demonstrate local or generalized
lymphadenopathy, sometimes with graft dysfunction or
other organ failures due to extranodal lymphoid infiltrate.
Early Lesions
EBV-negative and late-occurring cases have a higher ten-
 dency to be monomorphic. The therapeutic approaches
Early lesions consist of plasmacytic hyperplasia and infectious
mononucleosis-like disorders (Figure 56.1). These lesions
include reduction in immunosuppression, antiviral ther-
mainly occur in oropharynx and lymph nodes.
apy. chemotherapy and/or radiation therapy (for the
They are characterized by preservation of the nodal structures,
treatment of monotypic PTLD and HL). A significant pro-
open sinuses, and residual reactive follicles with diffuse
portion of early PTLD lesions and polymorphic forms may
interfollicular proliferation of plasma cells, transformed cells.
regress by the reduction of immunosuppression. The over-
and immunoblasts mixed with T-cells. Immunoblasts are
all prognosis is poor, particularly in monomorphic PTLD.
mmmonly positive for EBV.
FIGURE 56.1 AN EARLY LESION OF POST-TRANSPLANT LYMPHoPROLIFERATIvE DIsoRDER. H&E stain showing plasmacytic hyperplasia. (A, low pOwer;
kappa+ (E) and lambda + (F) plasma cells.
POST-TRANSPLANTLYMPHOPROLIFERATIVEDISORDERS623
Polymorphic PTLD
·  In some cases, the affected organs may show both polymor-
phic and monomorphic infiltrates in the same tissue section.
● Polymorphic PTLD lesions represent a diffuse infiltrative pro-
Monomorphic PTLD should be classified according to the
cess leading to the effacement of nodal architecture and/or
WHO guidelines for the classification of lymphomas.
destructive extranodal tissues.
 B-cell NHLs are much more common than T-cell NHLs. The
● The infiltrate is polymorphic and consists of a mixture of
most frequent subtype is DLBCL (Figure 56.4) followed by
lymphocytes, plasma cells, transformed lymphocytes, and
Burkitt lymphoma.
immunoblasts (Figure 56.2). Scattered atypical immunoblasts 
saa e (t oi t) sa s ae sa  ●
may resemble RS cells. Necrotic areas may be present, often
the entire spectrum of T- and NK-cell tumors. Peripheral T-cell
associated with histiocytes and neutrophils. Some cases may
ymphoma, NOs is the most frequent type followed by hepa-
show frequent mitosis.
tosplenic T-cell lymphoma.
     n    
Monomorphic PTLD
polymorphic and monomorphic infiltrates in the same
fissue section, and at the molecular level they often evolve
· Monomorphic PTLD demonstrates significant architectural
  ) o  d 
alteration, monomorphic features, and cellular atypia consis-
finally to monoclonal when a particular clone achieves
tent with the diagnosis of lymphoma (Figure 56.3).
predominance.
FIGURE 56.2 PosT-TRANSPLANT LYMPHoPROLIFERATIvE DIsORDER, POLYMoRPHIC TYPE. Lymph nOde biopsy Sections demOnstrating effaceMent
of nodal architecture by a diffuse polymorphic infiltrate consisting of mixed lymphocytes, plasma cells, histiocytes, transformed
lymphocytes, and immunoblasts (A, low power; B, intermediate power; C, high power). The large transformed lymphocytes express
CD20 (D), CD30 (E), and EBV-EBER (F).
624
FIGURE 56.3 PosT-TRANSPLANT LYMPHoPROLIFERATIvE DISORDER, MoNoMoRPHIc TYPE. Lymph nOde Section demOnstrating total effacement of
nodal architecture by a diffuse infiltrate consisting of monomorphic large atypical lymphocytes (diffuse large B-cell lymphoma)
(A,lowpower;B,highpower).
上
FIGURE 56.4 ANAPLAsTIC DIFFUSE LARGE B-CELL LYMPHoMA IN A POsT-TRANSPLANT PATENT. (A, low pOWer; B, high pOWer). The NeOplastic Cells
express PAX5 (C), CD30 (D), and Ki67 (E), and are positive for EBV-EBER (F).
OTHERIATROGENICIMMUNODEFICIENCY-ASSOCIATEDLYMPHOPROLIFERATIVEDISORDERS
220
260
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis includes infectious and other
ing a lymphomatous process, IGH or TCR gene rearrange-
ments, and extensive EBV infection are in favor of PTLD.
Distinction between different categories of PTLD, particu-
larly between polymorphic and monomorphic variants, is
 often diffcult. The major morphologic, immunopheno-
typic, and molecular genetic differences between the PTLD
subtypes are presented in Table 56.1.
FIGURe 56.5 An ExamplE 0f 0liGoCloNal post-TransplanT
Otherlatrogenic
LYMPHOPROLIFERATIVE DISORDER BY PCR ANALYSIs. The NUMber Of
clonal peaks (lgM heavy chain) is too great to be considered
Immunodefciency-Associated
monoclonal, but they are discreet enough to represent several
clonal subsets (oligoclonal proliferation).
Lymphoproliferative Disorders
These include lymphoproliferative disorders (LPD) that
Classical Hodgkin Lymphoma Type PTLD
are associated with immunosuppressive drugs in non-
· CHL type PTLD is uncommon and is characterized by the
transplant patients, such as patients with autoimmune
presence of Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg (HRS) cells. The
diseases (rheumatoid arthritis, dermatomyositis, Crohn's
HRS cells typically express CD15 and CD30, may be EBV+.
disease, psoriasis). The immunosuppressive drugs include
 and lack CD45 expression.
methotrexate and antagonists of TNFα (such as infiximab,
● The common morphologic type is mixed cellularity CHL
adalimumab, and etanercept). Methotrexate is the best
 known and the first drug reported in association with LPD.
 Rheumatoid arthritis patients who develop LPD typically
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
have a longstanding disease and have been treated with
Given the complexity of PTLD, its transient and evolving
methotrexate for an average of 3 years. The therapy dura-
tion for development of LPD is significantly shorter in
nature, and our incomplete understanding of the under-
patients treated with antagonists of TNFα (averaging 6-8
lying biology, caution must be observed to avoid over-
weeks).
interpretation of clonal gene rearrangement studies. Serial
The morphologic spectrum of LPD associated with
testing is often necessary to clarify the diagnosis.
immunosuppressive drugs is similar to those of PLTD (see
 Cytogenetic abnormalities are identifed mostly in monomor-
above), including polymorphic, monomorphic (NHL),
phic B- and T-PTLDs
and CHL types. In patients treated with methotrexate,
●
Clonal abnormalities commonly seen are trisomies of chro-
DLBCL, CHL, and polymorphic lymphoplasmacytic infil-
mosomes 9 or 11, rearrangements of the 3q27 locus involving
trate are reported in 35-60%, 12-25%, and 15% of LPD
the BCL6 gene, 8q24 involving MYC, and the 14q32 region
cases, respectively. There is a strong association between
mapping to the IGH@ locus.
 Crohn's disease treated with infliximab and hepatosplenic
 MYC rearrangement and T-cell-associated chromosomal abnor-
T-cell lymphoma, particularly in young patients.
malities correlated with poor outcome and short survival.
Monomorphic PTLD often shows clonal IGH@
A significant proportion of patients with methotrexate-
●
gene
rearrangement and/or EBV genome, frequently of type A, and
   o   
mutations of oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes, such as
regression after withdrawal of drug therapy. The majority
MYC, RAS, and TP53 are also identified.
of LPD regressions have occurred in EBV+ patients
626
Additional Resources
Albrecht J. Fine LA, Piette W: Drug-associated lymphoma and pseu-
Kfoury HK, Alghonaim M, Al Suwaida AK, et al: Nasopharyngeal
dolymphoma: recognition and management, Dermatol Clin 25:233-
T-cell monomorphic posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorders
244, 2007.
 and combined IgA nephropathy and membranous glomerulonephri-
 Blaes AH, Morrison VA: Post-transplant lymphoproliferative disor-
ture review, Transplant Proc 42:4653-4657, 2010.
ders following solid-organ transplantation, Expert Rev Hematol 3:35-
44,2010.
Smith EP: Hematologic disorders after solid organ transplantation,
Evens AM, Roy R, Sterrenberg D, et al: Post-transplantation lymphop-
Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program:281-286, 2010.
roliferative disorders: diagnosis, prognosis, and current approaches to
Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, et al: WHO dassification of
therapy, Curr Oncol Rep 12:383-394, 2010.
tumours of haematopoietic and lymphoid tissues, ed 4, Lyon, 2008,
Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Vardiman IW. et al: Hematopathology.
International Agency for Research on Cancer.
Philadelphia, 2010, Saunders/Elsevier.
Yagi T, Ishikawa J, Aono N, et al: Epstein-Barr vinus-associated post-
Jagadeesh D, Woda BA, Draper J, et al: Post transplant lymphopro-
transplant lymphoproliferative disorders after allogeneic peripheral
liferative disorders: Risk, classification, and therapeutic recommenda-
blood stem cell transplantation for Hodgkin-like adult T-cell leuke-
mia/lymphoma, IntI Hematol95:214-216, 2011.
tions, Curr Treat Options Oncol 13:122-136, 2012.
Lymphocyt
topenia and
Lymphocytosis
Lymphocytopenia
characterized by fever, oropharyngitis, lymphadenopathy.
 and lymphocytosis with the presence of atypical lympho-
 Lymphocytopenia, or lymphopenia (absolute total blood
cytes in the peripheral blood
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) primarily spreads through
lymphocyte count <1500/μL), is one of the hallmarks of
saliva (kissing), by infecting the epithelial cells of the
the primary and acquired immunodeficiency syndromes
oropharynx. The virus is replicated in the epithelial cells
(AIDS) (see Chapter 56). It also occurs in a wide variety of
 and released in the lymphoid-enriched surrounding
conditions, such as aplastic anemia, tuberculosis, zinc defi-
environment, infecting B-cells through the EBV recep-
ciency, systemic lupus erythematosus, sarcoidosis, Hodgkin
tor CD21 (CR2, C3d receptor). The entry of EBV into the
lymphoma (HL), toxic shock, and renal failure (Box 57.1)
 B-lymphocytes causes polyclonal B-cell proliferation. The
Administration of glucocorticoids, antithyomcyte globulin,
EBV-transformed B-cells are able to induce a massive T-cell
and anti-CD20 antibody  (rituximab), cancer chemo-
proliferation, primarily CD8+ and CD45RO+ cytotoxic
therapy, and radiotherapy, and thoracic duct drainage are
T-cells.
 frequently associated with lymphocytopenia.
 EBV infects over 90% of the human population world-
wide, but the vast majority of primary EBV infections are
 not clinically detected. Symptoms often begin with mal-
Lymphocytosis
aise, headache, and fever followed by lymphadenopa-
thy and pharyngitis. Lymphadenopathy usually involves
posterior cervical chains but could become systematic.
Lymphocytosis refers to increased number of peripheral
 It peaks in the first week and then gradually disappears
blood lymphocytes, >4500/μL, in individuals older than
 within 2-3 weeks. Other clinical findings include sple-
12 years of age. The absolute lymphocyte count in chil-
 nomegaly, neurologic symptoms such as facial palsies or
dren <12 years may be as high as 8000/μL in normal con-
 meningoencephalitis, hepatitis, acute renal failure, and
ditions. Lymphocytosis is a common finding in most viral
hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. IM is usually a self-
 infections, certain bacterial infections, X-linked lympho-
 limited disease and clinical symptoms disappear within
proliferative disease (see Chapter 56), post-splenectomy.
3 to 4 weeks. However, EBV infection in patients with
thyrotoxicosis, certain lymphoid malignancies, and a num-
 X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome may be fatal or
particularly in viral infections, is associated with the pres-1
rare cases of fatal T-cell lymphoproliferative disorders have
ence of large, activated, or atypical lymphocytes. Atypical
been reported in association with EBV infection
lymphocytosis is one of the characteristic features of infec-
Supportive therapy is the recommended approach
tious mononucleosis (IM) but has also been observed in
 in treating patients with IM. Administration of antiviral
other viral infections, such as cytomegalovirus (CMV), var-
drugs, such as aciclovir, helps to protect people from EBV
icella-zoster, rubella, and hepatitis.
infection but has no effect on curing the infection.
INFECTIOUS MONONUCLEOSIS
Morphology and Laboratory Findings
 Infectious mononucleosis (IM) is the clinical mani- ● Lymphocytosis (>4500/μL) with the presence of more than
festation of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection and is
 10% atypical lymphocytes is the characteristic morphologic
Atlas of Hematopathology. DOl: ht://dx.doi.org/10.1016/978-0-12-385183-3.0057-7
@ 201 3 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
628
LYMPHOCYTOPENIA AND LYMPHOCYTOSIS
 Box 57.1 Conditions Associated with
Box 57.2 Conditions Associated with
Lymphocytopenia
Lymphocytosis'
● Immunodeficiency syndromes
●Lymphoid malignancies
Primary
 Virus-associated lymphocytosis
Secondary
 EBV (infectious mononucleosis)
Autoimmune diseases, such as
●CMV
 Systemic lupus erythematosus
● HIV-1
 Rheumatoid arthritis
Hepatitis
 Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
 Influenza 
Crohn's disease
Measles
 Sjogren's disease
Mumps
 Cytotoxic drugs, such as
Rubella
 Epirubicin
Varicella
Methotrexate
 Lymphocytosis associated with other infectious agents
 Paclitaxel 
Babesia microti
 Purine nucleoside analogs
 Bartonella henselae (cat scratch fever)
Corticosteroids
 Bordetella pertuss(Whooping cough)
 Antibodies, such as
Brucella
+
CAMPATH-1H
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
+
 Rituximab
puob pusnidoxo
 Antithymocyte globulin
Treponema pallidum (syphilis)
Immunoregulatory molecules, such as
 X-linked lymphoproliferative disease
 Thymodulin
 Chronic polyclonal B-cell lymphocytosis
 Thymostimulin
 Polyclonal immunoblastic proliferation 
 Interferons
+
 Idiopathic lymphocytosis
Other drugs, such as
 Lymphocytosis associated with hypersensitivity reactions
Calcitonin
 Acute serum sickness
 Carbamazepine
 Drug-induced (e.g., ceftriaxone or carbamazepine)
 Cimetidine
 Stress-induced lymphocytosis
 Opioids
 Cardiac emergencies 
Bone marrow hypoplasia, such as
 Sickle cell anemia
+
 Aplastic anemia
+
 Status epilepticus
 Hematopoietic malignancies
 Cancer chemotherapy and radiation therapy
Other conditions associated with lymphocytosis
Other conditions
 Autoimmune disorders
 Exposure to silica
 Cigarette smoking
Zinc deficiency
 Post-splenectomy
 Toxic shock
 Thyrotoxicosis
 Renal failure
1Adapted from Hofbrand A.V. Pettit. and Vyas P: Color atlas of clinical
 Thoracic duct drainage
鲁
hematology. 4th ed. Mosby/Eslevier. 2010.
 Advanced malignancies
Tuberculosis
tingible body macrophages and plasma cells (Figure 57.4). Reed-
Sternberg-like cells may be present. Other morphologic findings
feature of EBV infection. Atypical lymphocytes are large, pleo-
include small areas of necrosis, reactive follicles, dilated sinuses
morphic cells with abundant shady gray-blue cytoplasm with
containing polymorphous lymphoid cells, and the presence of a
or without vacuoles (Figures 57.1 to 57.3). They may show
polymorphous lymphoid infiltrate in the perinodal tissue.
scalloping of the cytoplasmic membrane around red blood
The heterophil antibody test is positive, indicating the presence
cells. The nucleus is round, oval, or irregular; the chromatin is
 of cross-reacting antibodies to antigens from phylogenetically
dlumped; and the nucleoli are often small or inconspicuous.
unrelated species, such as sheep (Paul-Bunnell test), equine
 Anemia, granulocytopenia, and thrombocytopenia may occur.
(Monospot test), ox, and goat red blood cells.
and leukocyte alkaline phosphatase (LAP) activity tends to be low.
 Bone marrow examination reveals lymphocytosis with the
Immunophenotype
presence of atypical lymphocytes. Small granulomas may be
present, and there may be evidence of hemophagocytosis.
● The atypical lymphocytes represent activated lymphocytes that
 The affected lymph nodes show expansion of paracortical regions
are predominantly CD8+, CD45RO+, and HLA-DR+.
with a population of polymorphous lymphoid cells ranging
The EBV-transformed immunoblasts are also present in the
  s  o  s 
paracortical regions.
LYMPHOCYTOSIS
629
B
FIGURE 57.1 Blood smear from a patient with infectious 
mononucleosis demonstrates large, pleomorphic atypical
F
(activated) lymphocytes with abundant cytoplasm, round,
oval, or irregular nucleus, and dense chromatin. The cytoplasm
FIGURE 57.2 Blood smear from a patient with infectious
demonstrates some degree of basophilia and scalloping of the
mononucleosis demonstrates large, pleomorphic atypical
cytoplasmicmembranearounderythrocytes.Somecellsshow
(activated) lymphocytes with abundant basophilic cytoplasm,
cytoplasmic granules.
round, oval, or irregular nucleus, and dense chromatin. One
cell (A) shows scalloping of the cytoplasmic membrane around 
erythrocytes.
A
B
FIGURE 57.3 Blood smear (A) and pleural efusion (B) from a patient with infectious mononucleosis showing immunoblasts and
atypical lymphocytes.
630
LYMPHOCYTOPENIA AND LYMPHOCYTOSIS
FIGURE 57.4 Lymph node biopsy section from a patient with infectious mononucleosis demonstrating expansion of paracortical
regions with a population of polymorphous lymphoid cells ranging from small lymphocytes to large immunoblasts (A, low power;
B, intermediate power; C, high power). These cells are predominantly CD3+ (D), mixed with scattered CD20+ (E) and EBV-EBER+ (F.
arrows) cells.
·The Reed-Sternberg-like cells may express CD30 and are alsoMolecular and Cytogenetic Studies
positive for CD45, but negative for CD15 and EMA
 Specific antibodies against EBV antigens such as viral capsid
EBV-encoded RNA (EBER) can be detected in the trans-
antigen (VCA), EBV nuclear antigen (EBNA), and early antigen 
 formed cells by molecular techniques, such as PCR assays
(EA) are detected (Figure 57.4F).
and in situ hybridization in the atypical lymphocytes.
LYMPHOCYTOSIS
631
Differential Diagnosis
Reports of familial occurrences further support underly-
 ing genetic defects in this disorder. These individuals have
Lymphocytosis with the presence of atypical lymphocytes
absolute lymphocytosis ranging from 5000 to 15,000/
is found in a variety of conditions. Approximately 10% of
μL, with the presence of binucleated and/or atypical lym-
patients with the clinical symptoms of IM (atypical lym-
phocytes (Figure 57.5). There is a polyclonal increase in
phocytes, fever, pharyngitis, and lymphadenopathy) are
serum IgM levels with no lymphadenopathy or spleno-
EBV-negative, and the condition is caused by other infec-
megaly. The polyclonal B-cells express pan-B-cell mark-
tious agents, such as toxoplasmosis, CMV, human herpes
ers such as CD19, CD20, and CD22 and show lack of or
virus 6 (HHV-6), and hepatitis B. Some drugs such as phe-
dim expression of CD5, CD10, and CD23. They may also
nytoin, carbamazepine, isoniazid, and minocycline may
express FMC7, CD1lc, and CD25. In spite of its polyclonal
also cause atypical lymphocytosis. The diagnosis of EBV
 nature and benign clinical behavior, PPBL, in some cases,
infection is confirmed by heterophil and/or specific EBV
has been associated with multiple bcl-2/Ig gene rearrange-
antibody tests or the identification of EBV by molecular
ments and chromosomal abnormalities such as +i(3q),
studies, such as PCR assays. However, one must exercise
del (6q), and +8, respectively.
caution in interpretation of PCR results, given the high
 proportion of healthy EBV carriers in the population.
BONE MARROW BENIGN LYMPHOID
AGGREGATES
STRESS-INDUCED LYMPHOCYTOSIS
 Benign lymphoid aggregates (lymphoid nodules, lym-
A transient atypical absolute lymphocytosis with lympho-
phoid follicles) are relatively frequent in bone marrow
cyte counts of up to 13,000/μL has been observed in adult
 sections. They appear to be more frequent in older individ-
patients with cardiac emergencies, trauma, status epilep-
ticus, or sickle cell anemia crisis. The absolute lympho-
uals and in women. The presence of lymphoid aggregates
in younger individuals usually indicates an underlying
cytosis in these cases is usually the result of the increased
numbers of B-, T-, and NK-cells.
cause, such as autoimmune disorder, drug reaction, or viral
infection (Box 57.3). Benign lymphoid aggregates have
also been reported in association with aplastic anemia,
PERSISTENT POLYCLONAL B-CELL
myeloproliferative disorders, myelodysplastic syndromes,
mastocytosis, and HL and non-HL.
LYMPHOCYTOSIS
Lymphoid aggregates consist of small, well-defined
Persistent (chronic) polyclonal B-cell   1
lymphocytosis
dlusters of mature lymphocytes that are sometimes
(PPBL) is a rare condition that has been reported in young
mixed with scattered plasma cells, eosinophils, mast
to middle-aged women. An association with heavy smok-
 cells, or histiocytes (Figure 57.6). Lymphoid aggregates
ing and HLA-DR 7 has been reported, suggesting that
 are usually interstitial, surrounded by fat or hematopoi-
both environmental and genetic factors are involved.
etic cells. They are usually distant from bone trabeculae.
Box 57.3 Conditions Associated with
Benign Lymphoid Aggregates in the Bone
Marrow
Autoimmune disorders
● Rheumatoid arthritis
 Systemic lupus erythematosus 
 Autoimmune hemolytic anemia
Idiopathic thrombocytopenia
● Hashimoto thyroiditis 
?
 Myelodysplastic syndromes
?
 Myeloproliferative disorders
+
 Mastocytosis
 Aplastic anemia
FIGURE 57.5 Binucleated lymphocytes and lymphocytes with
+
 Lymphoid malignancies
lobated nuclei are frequently seen in patients with persistent
Viral infections
(chronic) polyclonal B-cell lymphocytosis.
Drugs
+
From Naeim F. Atlas of Bone Marrow and Blood Pathology. WB
Unknown
Saunders, Philadeiphia, 2001, by permission.
632
LYMPHOCYTOPENIA AND LYMPHOCYTOSIS
Table 57.1
Features of Benign and Malignant Lymphoid
Aggregates in Bone Marrow Sections
Malignant Lymphoid
Benign Lymphoid Aggregates
Aggregates
 Often well-defined and 
 Usually irregular and infiltrating 
 circumscribed
 into the adjacent marrow
Usually interstitial
 Frequently paratrabecular
Infrequent cellular atypia
 Common cellular atypia
Germinal centers may be present 
 Germinal centers are not present
 Polymorphous lesions lack R5
Presence of R5 cells and variants
 cells and RS variants
in Hodgkin lymphoma 
Lack of significant fibrosis
May be associated with
significant fibrosis
 B-cells in aggregates are usually
 Malignant B-cells often express 
A
negative for bcl-2, CD5, CD10,
bcl-2 and may also express
and CD23
CD5, CD10, or CD23
No evidence of monoclonality by
 Non-Hodgkin lymphomas often
immunophenotypic,
show evidence of
molecular, and/or cytogenetic
 monoclonality
studies
a low power microscopic field, or if an aggregate exceeds
0.6 mm in its greatest dimension. Reactive polymorphous
lymphohistiocytic lesion refers to aggregates consisting of
a mixture of lymphocytes, histiocytes, and other inflam-
matory cells. These lesions may be large, ill-defined, and
paratrabecular.
 Differentiation of benign lymphoid aggregates from
lymphomatous involvement in the bone marrow is at
FIGURE 57.6 Benign lymphoid aggregates in bone marrow.
      s
Biopsy sections demonstrating lymphoid aggregates (A and B).
 gates are often well defined, lack an infiltrative pattern, are
one with a germinal center (B).
not paratrabecular, and are primarily composed of small,
mature lymphocytes with round nuclei and condensed
chromatin. They consist of a mixture of B- and T-cells with
Approximately 5% of lymphoid aggregates may show
no evidence of monoclonality based on immunopheno-
germinal centers. The presence of germinal centers may
 typic, molecular, and/or cytogenetic studies. The B-cell
indicate reaction to a marked or prolonged immuno-
component of the lymphoid aggregates is negative for
logic stimulation. The term lymphoid nodular hyperplasia is 1
 bcl-2 and usually lacks the expression of CD5, CD10, and
used when four or more lymphoid aggregates are seen in(
CD23.
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
633
Additional Resources
Casassus P, Lortholary P, Komarover H, et al: Cigarette smoking-
Reimer P, Weissinger F Tony HP, et al: Persistent polyclonal B-cell
related persistent polyclonal B Lymphocytosis: a premalignant state,
lymphocytosis—an important differential diagnosis of B-cell chronic
Arch Pathol Lab Med 11l:1081, 1987.
lymphocytic leukemia, Ann Hematol 79:327-331, 2000.
Gandhi AM, Ben-Ezra JM: Do Bcl-2 and survivin help distinguish
Thiele J, Zirbes TK, Kvasnicka HM, et al: Focal lymphoid aggregates
benign from malignant B-cell lymphoid aggregates in bone marrow 
(nodules) in bone marrow biopsies: differentiation between benign
biopsies? I Clin Lab Anal 18:285-288, 2004.
hyperplasia and malignant lymphoma—a practical guideline, I Clin
Groom DA, Kunkel LA, Brynes RK, et al: Transient stress lymphocy-
Pathol 52:294-300, 1999.
tosis during crisis of sickle cell anemia and emergency trauma and
Troussard X, Cornet E, Lesesve JF, et al: Polyclonal B-cell lymphocyto-
 medical conditions. An immunophenotyping study, Arch Pathol Lab
 sis with binucleated lymphocytes (PPBL), Onco Targets Ther 1:59-66.
Med 114:570-576, 1990.
2008.
Gulley ML, Tang W: Laboratory assays for Epstein-Barr vinus-related
 Troussard X, Valensi F, Debert C, et al: Persistent polyclonal lympho-
disease, I Mot Diagn 10:279-292, 2008.
cytosis with binucleated B lymphocytes: a genetic predisposition, Br J
Klein G, Klein E, Kashuba E: Interaction of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)
Haematol 88:275-280, 1994.
with human B-lymphocytes, Biochem Biophys Res Commun 396:
Vouloumanou EK, Rafailidis PI, Falagas ME: Current diagnosis and
67-73, 2010.
management of infectious mononucleosis, Curr Opin Hematol 19:14-
Luzuriaga K, Sullivan JL: Infectious mononucleosis, N Engl I Med
20, 2012.
362:1993-2000, 2010.
Opeskin K, Burke M, Firkin F: Bone marrow lymphoid aggregates
simulating histological features of non-Hodgkin lymphoma in Felty
syndrome, Pathology 37:82-84, 2005.
This page intentionally left blank
58
Histiocytic Disorders
listiocytes/macrophages are derived from monocytesa group of disorders caused by deficiencies of lysosomal
and play an important role in the regulation of immune  enzymes necessary for the degradation of glycolipids and
functions. They are involved in different aspects of host :
 glycoproteins (Box 58.1). GD results from deficiency of
defense and tissue repair, such as phagocytosis, cyto-
 the lysosomal enzyme glucocerebrosidase (or acid beta-
toxic activities, regulation of inflammatory and immune 
 glucosidase). The deficiency is secondary to mutations in
responses, and wound healing. Disorders of monocytes
the glucocerebrosidase gene located on chromosome 1q2l.
and histiocytes/macrophages are divided into three major
The glucocerebrosidase deficiency leads to accumu-
categories: (1) functional defects, (2) reactive responses,
lation of glucocerebroside and other glycolipids in the
and (3) neoplastic proliferations. Functional defects are
 macrophages, leading to organomegaly, osteopenia, and
mostly hereditary, such as lysosomal storage diseases.
cytopenia.
 Reactive disorders are non-neoplastic conditions associ-
There are three types of GD. All three types share sple-
ated with hypoplasia, hyperplasia, or hyperactivation of the
nomegaly, hepatomegaly, bone marrow involvement, ane-
monocytic/histiocytic system. Neoplastic disorders are the 
mia, and skeletal changes. They differ in the presence or
result of clonal proliferation of monocytic/histiocytic cells.
lack of neurologic manifestations, type of mutation, ethnic
In this section the following entities are discussed as 
predilection, and clinical outcome (Table 58.1).
examples of monocytic and histiocytic disorders:
Type 1 GD accounts for about 90% of patients with GD and
● Functional disorders
is predominantly seen in the Ashkenazi Jewish population.
●Gaucher disease (GD)
The disease may occur at any age, but about 70% of patients
●Niemann-Pick disease (NPD)
are diagnosed by the age of 20 years. Hepatosplenomegaly is
●Chediak-Higashi syndrome (CHS)
mmmon and there is no neurologic manifestation. A mild-to-
● Reactive responses
moderate degree of anemia and thrombocytopenia is present.
● Monocytopenia and monocytosis
mainly due to hypersplenism. The clinical course is variable
●Histiocytic proliferations
with an overall more rapid progression in children than in
●Hemophagocytic histiocytosis
adults.
● Neoplastic disorders
● Type 2 GD is the rarest form and is also known as acute neu-
● Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (see Chapter 15)
ronopathic GD or infantile cerebral GD. It usually occurs in
●Acute myelomonocytic leukemia (see Chapter 21)
the first year of life and is characterized by extensive visceral
●Acute monocytic leukemia (see Chapter 21)
involvement and rapidly progressive neurologic deterioration,
●Histiocytic sarcoma.
including oculomotor dysfunction and bulbar palsy. The aver-
age survival is <12 months.
 Type 3 GD is a subacute or chronic neuropathic form with a
later onset and more variable course than type 2 GD.
Gaucher Disease
Diagnosis is confirmed by the demonstration of
reduced glucocerebrosidase  activity  in  peripheral  leu-
Gaucher disease (GD) is an inherited autosomal recessive
kocytes and/or the presence of mutation by molecular
inborn error of metabolism resulting in the accumulation
 genetic studies.
of glucocerebroside (glucosylceramide) in macrophages.
Enzyme replacement therapy with recombinant glu-
GD is the most common lysosomal storage disease, occur-
cocerebrosidase (imiglucerase) is the treatment of choice
ring in about 1 in 75,0o0 births worldwide, mostly affect-
for most symptomatic type 1 patients. Substrate reduction
    s   
 therapy, such as treatment with miglustat, is used for those
Atlas of Hematopathology. DOl: htp://dx.doi.org/10.1016/978-0-12-385183-300058-9
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
636
HISTIOCYTIC DISORDERS
Table 58.1
Box 58.1 Lysosomal Storage Diseases
Classification of Gaucher Disease
Sphingolipidoses
Features
Type 1
Type 2
Type 3
●Gaucher disease
Onset
variable
First year
Childhood
● Niemann-Pick disease
● Farber disease
Anemia
+
+
+
Thrombocytopenia
Fabry disease
一
 Krabbe disease
Splenomegaly
+
+
+
 Metachromatic leukodistrophy
Hepatomegaly
+
+
+
 GM1 gangliosidosis
Bone marrow
● GM2 gangliosidosis (Tay-Sachs disease).
involvement
 Skeletal changes
+
+
Neurologic
Mucopolysaccharidoses
+
+
● Mucopolysaccharidosis I (Hurler disease)
manifestations
Mutations
N370S
Diverse
●Hunter disease
L444P
 Ethnic predilection 
 Sanflippo disease
Ashkenazi
None
 Norbottnian,
Morquio disease
Jews
 Sweden
 Progression
5low
 Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome
Rapid
Variable
●Multiple sulfatase deficiency
Glycoproteinoses
● Gaucher cells are found in the spleen, liver, bone marrow, and
 Sialidosis
other tissues. Bone marrow biopsy sections demonstrate focal.
Fucosidosis
interstitial, or diffuse accumulation of Gaucher cells, some-
 Mannosidosis
times associated with fibrosis (Figure 58.2). Accumulation of
●Asparty-glycosaminuria
Gaucher cells is also present in the splenic red pulp in virtu-
ally all patients see (Figure 58.1). Gaucher cells are also found
Mucolipidoses
in the centrilobular and portal areas of the liver, sometimes in
Mucolipidosis Il
association with hepatic fibrosis.
●Pseudo-Hurler polydystrophy
● Liver enzymes, serum angiotensin converting enzyme, and
● Mucolipidosis IV
acid phosphatase levels may be elevated.
Others
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE AND SPECIAL STAINS
Cystinosis
 Pompe disease 
● The Gaucher cells are glucocerebroside-laden macrophages
Wolman disease
and therefore demonstrate expression of monocyte-associated
markers such as CD45, lysozyme, and CD68 by immunohis-
Adapted from Naeim. F. Pathology of Bone Marrow. Znd edn. Williams & Wilkins.
 tochemical stains.
Baltimore. 1998.
● They are typically negative for CDla and S-100 protein.
● The Gaucher cells are PAS-positive and demonstrate a strong
acid phosphatase activity, which is usually resistant to tartaric
acid inhibition.
patients who cannot afford the high expense of enzyme
replacement therapy. Miglustat is an inhibitor of glycosyl-
 They are also Sudan Black B and non-specific esterase (NSE)
ceramide synthesis and reduces glycolipid accumulation.
positive.
Splenectomy and bone marrow transplantations are other
alternative therapeutic approaches.
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
● The deficiency is secondary to inheritance of recessive muta-
tions in both alleles of the glucocerebrosidase gene.
MORPHOLOGY AND LABORATORY FINDINGS
● Three major mutant alleles account for >90% of alleles in
Ashkenazi-Jewish patients: N370S, L444P , and 84GG. The
● The morphologic features are characterized by the accumula-
N370s mutation typically causes relatively mild, or even
fion of glucocerebroside molecules in macrophages, known as
asymptomatic, adult-onset disease.
Gaucher cells. Gaucher cells have abundant cytoplasm contain-
ing a large amount of hydrophobic glucocerebroside in bilay-
ered membranous sheets, and for this reason the cytoplasm 
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
appears striated, like wrinkled paper (Figure 58.1).
●
 By electron microscopy, Gaucher cells reveal spindle- or rod-
The differential diagnosis includes those conditions that
shaped, membrane-bound cytoplasmic inclusions consisting
are associated with splenomegaly and cytopenia, such
of numerous small, tubular structures measuring 13-75 nm in
 as leukemia, lymphoma, collagen vascular diseases, and
diameter.
other lysosomal storage diseases. The diagnosis of GD is
GAUCHERDISEASE
637
FlGURE 58.1 GAucHER DisEAsE. Section of spleen demonstrates diffuse infiltration of the red pulp by Gaucher cells (A to D from low
power to high power). PAS stain shows accumulation of glucocerebroside molecules in membrane sheets creating cytoplasmic
striation (D, inset).
C
FIGURE 58.2 GAucHER DisEAsE. Bone marrow section demonstrates interstitial infltration by Gaucher cells: (A) H&E; (B) PAS stain. Bone
marrow smear (C) shows one Gaucher cell characterized by abundant cytoplasm with striation.
638
HISTIOCYTIC DISORDERS
usually made by the detection of Gaucher cells in bone
difficulties, and loss of motor skills with a progressive clini-
marrow and is confirmed by the reduced leukocyte gluco-
cal decline and death within 2-3 years. Type 1A is caused by
cerebrosidase activity and molecular genetic studies.
mutations of the SMPD1 gene (Table 58.2).
● Type 1S is a chronic non-neuronopathic form of NPD which
is characterized by hepatosplenomegaly, short stature, delayed
skeletal maturation, and ocular abnormalities. The affected
Niemann-Pick Disease
children usually survive into their adulthood. In type 1S the
 SMPD1 enzyme activity is partially preserved.
Type 2S represents abnormalities of intracellular transport of
Niemann-Pick disease (NPD) represents a group of auto-
cholesterol and its sequestration in lysosomes. This functional
somal recessive disorders which are associated with tissue
defect is the result of mutations in NPC1 and NPC2 genes (see
accumulation of sphingomyelin, splenomegaly, and mani-
Table 58.2). Most patients demonstrate neurologic disease
festation of variable degrees of neurologic defects.
with a late infantile or juvenile onset. Cerebellar involvement.
NPD is divided into three major types: 1A, 1S, and 2S.
dystonia, ophthalmoplegia, and seizures are among the
neurologic manifestations.
●Type lA is the acute neuronopathic form (formerly known as
type A) and the most common type of NPD, with the highest
There is no effective treatment for NPD. Cholesterol-
incidence among Ashkenazi Jews. The affected children, usu-
lowering drugs reduce the hepatic free cholesterol levels
ally <1 year of age. present with hepatosplenomegaly, feeding 
but do not change the clinical course. Bone marrow trans-
plantation does not reverse the neurologic symptoms.
 Table 58.2
 Major Classes of Niemann-Pick Disease (NPD)
MORPHOLOGY AND LABORATORY FINDINGS
NPD
Gene
Chromosome
● The characteristic morphologic feature of NPD is the presence
Type 1A
Sphingomyelin
11p15(SMPD1}
of foamy cells in various tissues secondary to the duplication
phosphodiestase 1 gene 
and expansion of the sphingomyelin-laden lysosomal system.
Type 15
Sphingomyelin
11p15 (SMPD1)
The expansion of lysosomal structure may eventually lead
 phosphodiestase 1 gene
to the total occupation of the cytoplasmic space, creating a
Type 25
Niemann-Pick C1 gene (NPC1)
18q11.2-12, 14q24.3
foamy appearance of the affected cells, known as "Niemann-
 or Niemann-Pick C2 gene
Pick cells" (NP cells) (Figure 58.3).
(NPC2)
FIGURE 58.3 NiEMANN-PIcK DIsEAsE. Section of spleen demonstrates diffuse infiltration ofthe red pulp by finely vacuolated histiocytes (A to
D from low power to high power).
CHEDIAK-HIGASHI SYNDROME
639
● By electron microscopy the NP cells are loaded with lyso-
in the centrilobular and portal areas of the liver and lymph
somes, which may appear as membrane-bound wavy concen-
node sinuses.
tric structures or homogenous (washed out or lucent) deposits.
Decreased
serum
HDL,
increased serum LDL,
and
●
NP cells include macrophages (in the spleen, bone marrow.
 hypertriglyceridemia are frequent laboratory findings.
and lymph nodes), endothelial cells, neurons, Schwann cells.
and retinal cells.
 Bone marrow biopsy sections reveal focal, interstitial, or dif-
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE AND SPECIAL STAINS
fuse accumulation of the NP cells (Figure 58.4). The accumu-
lation of NP cells is also present in the splenic red pulp (see
+
 The NP cells accumulating in the hematopoietic tissues such
Figure 58.3) in virtually all patients and may be demonstrated
as bone marrow, spleen, and lymph nodes are sphingomyelin-
laden macrophages and therefore demonstrate expression of
monocyte-associated markers such as CD45, lysozyme, and
CD68 by immunohistochemical stains.
●
They are typically negative for CD1a and S-100 protein. The
NP cells are Sudan Black B and NSE positive, and contain
lipopigment which stains intensively with iron hematoxylin.
●
Cresyl violet and PAS stains are either negative or weakly
 positive. Filipin and BC theta stains are helpful in demonstrating
unesterified lysosomal cholesterol droplets in the fibroblast cell
culture or neurons by fluorescence or confocal microscopy.
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
●
 Niemann-Pick disease has been associated with mutations
in three different genes: sphingomyelin phosphodiesterase 1
4
(SMPD1), Niemann-Pick C1 (NPC1), and Niemann-Pick C2
gene (NPC2) (see Table 58.2).
 Mutations of SMPDl are most prevalent in Ashkenazi Jews.
with three mutations—R496L, L302P, and fsP330—accounting
for >90% of the type 1 cases.
● These mutations lead to deficiency of SMPD enzyme and
accumulation of lysosphingomyelin in the macrophages and
neural tissues. Lysosphingomyelin is believed to be toxic to
the neivous system.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis includes neurologic disorders
 and conditions that are associated with hepatosplenomeg-
aly. Diagnosis is established by morphologic findings in
biopsy sections, use of special stains (such as Filipin and
 BC theta stains), and molecular genetic studies demon-
strating mutations of SMPD1, NPC1, or NPC2.
Chédiak-Higashi Syndrome
Chediak-Higashi syndrome (CHS) is a rare autoso-
mal recessive disorder characterized by severe immune
FIGURE 58.4 NIEMANN-PICK DISEAsE. Bone marrow biopsy section
demonstrates clusters of finely vacuolated histiocytes (A, low
power; B, high power). Two large vacuolated histiocytes are
FIGURE 58.5 CHEDIAK-HIGASHI SYNDROME. CytOplasmic granUles Of
shown in bone marrow smear (B, inset). The histiocytes are
variable sizes are present in neutrophils (A), monocytes (B), and
positive for CD68 (C).
Iymphocytes (C).
640
HISTIOCYTIC DISORDERS
been described, and molecular genetic testing by full-gene
sequencing is available in a few selected laboratories
The morphologic hallmark of CHS is the presence of
giant cytoplasmic granules in various cells. These granules
include lysosomes (such as monocytes, granulocytes, cyto-
toxic T-, and NK-cells) (Figures 58.5 and 58.6), melano-
somes (melanocytes), and cytoplasmic granules in Schwann
cells. The platelets contain abnormal dense bodies.
Clinical features are presented in early childhood and
reflect the functional defects in leukocytes, melanocytes,
platelets, and Schwann cells, and consist of recurrent pyo-
genic infection, partial oculocutaneous hypopigmentation,
coagulation defect with petechiae, bruising, and mucosal
bleeding, and neurologic disturbances, such as peripheral
neuropathy and dysfunction of the spinal tract and cer-
ebellum. The evolution to an "accelerated phase" has been
reported in some cases characterized by T-cell lymphocytosis
and hemophagocytic histiocytosis (Figure 58.7). An associa-
tion between EBV infection and accelerated phase has been
observed, suggesting that the hemophagocytic lymphohis-
tiocytosis (HLH) is EBV-induced. The treatment of choice is
bone marrow transplantation, which improves leukocyte and
platelet defects and immunologic problems (Figure 58.8)
Monocytopenia and Monocytosis
Monocytopenia is less frequent than monocytosis and
occurs in aplastic anemia, hairy cell leukemia, severe ther-
mal injuries, and treatment with corticosteroids. Decreased
monocyte blood count has also been reported in patients
with rheumatoid arthritis (RA), systemic lupus erythema-
tosus (SLE), and AIDS. Cyclic neutropenia may be associ-
ated with intermittent monocytopenia.
Monocytosis is observed in a wide variety of conditions
such as chronic and subacute infections, collagen vascular
disorders, hematologic and non-hematologic malignancies,
hemolytic anemia, and idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
(Box 58.2). Certain drugs such as chlorpromazine, ampicillin,
and tetrachloroethane may also induce monocytosis.
Reactive Histiocytic Proliferations
FIGURE 58.6 CHEDIAK-HIGASHI SYNDROME. Bone marrow biopsy
Reactive histiocytic proliferation is often associated with
section (A, low power; B, high power) and bone marrow smear (C)
other inflammatory cells such as lymphocytes, plasma cells,
demonstrating cytoplasmic granules of variable sizes are present
in the myeloid precursors (green arrows). A myeloblast (C, red
eosinophils, and neutrophils. The reactive histiocytes may be
arrow) shows hemophagocytosis.
diffusely intermixed with other inflammatory cells or may
appear as aggregates of cohesive (epithelioid) histiocytes
deficiency, partial albinism, bleeding tendencies, and
standing alone or accompanied by other inflammatory cells,
recurrent bacterial infections. The defective gene, LYST, is
 making granulomas (see Chapter 5). Reactive histiocytic
 proliferations may be secondary to infectious diseases, auto-
Multiple different LYST mutations in CHS patients have
 immune disorders, or malignancies, or may be idiopathic
REACTIVE HISTIOCYTIC PROLIFERATIONS
641
FIGURE 58.7 CHEDIAK-HIGAsHI sYNDRoME IN AccELERATED PHAsE. Blood smear demonstrates several white cells with cytoplasmic granules (A).
FIGURE 58.8 ALLOGENEIC BONE MARRow TRANsPLANTATION IN CHEDIAK-HIGASHI sYNDROME. BloOd smear prior to transplantation demOnstrates
INFECTIONS
nodes infected with Toxoplasma gondi and occasionally
 may contain the microorganism. Protozoan-laden epithe-
A wide variety of infections cause histiocytic proliferation,
 lioid histiocytes are identified in the bone marrow, lymph
predominantly in epithelioid clusters or granulomatous
nodes, and other tissues of patients with leishmaniasis.
formation (see Chapter 5). For example, mycobacterial
infections, syphilis, leprosy, Q fever, cat-scratch fever, and
AUTOIMMUNE DISORDERS
fungal infections typically cause granulomatous formation
in the bone marrow, lymph nodes, and other tissues. Small
Alutoimmune disorders such as SLE and RA are some-
clusters of epithelioid histiocytes are present in the lymph 
times associated with lymphadenopathy and increased
642
HISTIOCYTIC DISORDERS
hemophagocytosis (see below). In the peripheral T-cell
Box 58.2 Conditions Associated with
lymphoma of Lennert type, neoplastic T-cells are mixed
Monocytosis'
with  sheets or aggregates of epithelioid histiocytes.
Infections
Carcinomas metastatic to lymph nodes may be associated
with sinus histiocytosis.
Tuberculosis
Syphilis
● Subacute bacterial endocarditis
IDIOPATHIC
 Cytomegalovirus infection
Sarcoidosis, Kikuchi disease, Erdheim-Chester disease,
● Disseminated candidiasis
●Others
and sinus histiocytosis with massive lymphadenopathy
are examples of reactive histiocytic proliferations with no
Inflammatory and immune-associated disorders
known etiology (see Chapter 6).
●Myositis
● Temporal arteritis
● Polyarteritis nodosa
Sarcoidosis
● Rheumatoid arthritis
● Inflammatory bowel diseases
Sarcoidosis is a rare granulomatous disorder, more preva-
 Alcoholic liver disease
lent in Blacks than in Caucasians and in women than in
●Others
men. Mediastinal and pulmonary hilar lymph nodes are
most frequently affected, but other tissues and organs such
Hematologic disorders
as the bone marrow, liver, spleen, and lungs may also be
● Neoplastic disorders
affected. The affected tissues show multiple well-defined
 Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia
● Acute myelomonocytic and acute monocytic leukemias
granulomas  consisting of  epithelioid  histiocytes and
multinucleated giant cells without significant necrosis
●Lymphoma
(Figure 58.9). The multinucleated giant cells may contain
● Plasma cell myeloma
● Non-neoplastic conditions
asteroid bodies.
● Hemolytic anemia
 Chronic neutropenia
Kikuchi Disease
Post-splenectomy
+1
Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
Kikuchi disease is a rare histiocytic necrotizing lymph-
●Others
adenitis, more frequently seen in Asia than in Western
Non-Hematopoietic malignancies
countries. It is more prevalent in young adult women. The
affected lymph nodes show discrete or confluent eosino-
Drug-induced
 Chloropromazine
philic areas consisting of phagocytic and non-phagocytic
●Ampicillin
histiocytes, lymphocytes, immunoblasts, eosinophils, and
plasma cells with rare or absent neutrophils (Figure 58.10).
● Glucocorticoids
●Others
1Adapted from Naeim. F. Pathology of Bone Marrow. Znd edn. Wiliams &
Erdheim-Chester Disease
Wilkins. Baltimore. 1 998.
Erdheim-Chester disease is a rare condition character-
ized by a symmetrical sclerosis of lower extremities and
involvement of many organs and tissues, including the
histiocytic proliferations. In SLE, affected lymph nodes
lung, kidney, orbit, skin, pericardium, and retroperito-
neum. The affected tissues show aggregates or sheets
show follicular hyperplasia and areas of necrosis in para-
cortical areas (see Chapter 6). Necrotic areas are sur-
of lipid-laden histiocytes and scattered multinucleated
rounded by histiocytes and other inflammatory cells. The
Touton giant cells (lipid-laden histiocytes in which mul-
enlarged lymph nodes in RA show follicular hyperplasia,
tiple nuclei are grouped around a small island of cyto-
sinus histiocytosis, interfollicular plasmacytosis, and depo-
plasm) (Figure 58.11).
sition of PAS-positive, Congo-red-negative hyaline material.
Sinus Histiocytosis with Massive Lymphadenopathy
TUMOR-ASSOCIATED
(Rosai-Dorfman Disease)
Histiocytes are one of the prominent background inflam- Rosai-Dorfman disease is a rare condition affecting chil-
matory cells in Hodgkin lymphoma. They may also  dren and young adults. It is characterized by massive, bilat-
appear as discrete epithelioid aggregates or granulo- eral, painless, cervical lymphadenopathies, sometimes
mas. Histiocytic proliferation is also frequently observed with extranodal involvement such as the skin, bone, upper
in T-cell malignancies, sometimes associated  with respiratory tract, or central nervous system. The cortical
HEMOPHAGOCYTIC LYMPHOHISTIOCYTOSIS643
FIGURE 58.9 SARcoIDosis. Lymph node section
demonstrating several clusters of epithelioid
histiocytes (A, low power; B, high power).
 Multinucleated giant cells with asteroid bodies
are present (C and D, arrows).
and medullary sinuses of the affected lymph nodes are
markedly dilated and filled with large histiocytes with
abundant, pale, vacuolated cytoplasm. These histiocytes
show evidence of emperipolesis by containing intact lym-
phocytes, and less frequently, plasma cells, neutrophils, or
erythrocytes (Figure 58.12)
IATROGENIC
Lymphangiogram-associated lipogranuloma, prosthetic- or
implanted-induced foreign body reactions are among the
examples of iatrogenic histiocytic proliferations
Hemophagocytic
Lymphohistiocytosis
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) is character-
ized by proliferation of reactive histiocytes with evidence
of hemophagocytic activities. The hemophagocytosis is
either associated with an underlying genetic disorder or
secondary to an underlying infection, autoimmune, or
neoplastic process.
The primary underlying pathophysiologic mechanism
in HLH appears to be related to cytokine abnormali-
ties, leading to uncontrolled accumulation of activated
T-lymphocytes and histiocytes.
The initial signs and symptoms of HLH may simulate
FIGURE 58.10 KikUcHI DisEAsE. A large area of necrotic debris
systemic infection, hepatitis, or encephalitis. The most
replacing a significant proportion of the lymph node is
demonstrated (A). The necrotic debris lacks neutrophils but
common clinical signs include fever and hepatomegaly
contains a large number of histiocytes (B).
(90%), splenomegaly (80%), neurologic symptoms
644
HISTIOCYTIC DISORDERS
B
FIGURE 58.12 SINUs HIstIoCYToSIS WITH MasSIvE LyMPHaDeNopATHy.
Lymph node biopsy section demonstrating sinus histiocytosis
with emperipolesis (A, low power; B, high power).
protocol, which includes an induction therapy by dexa-
methasone and etoposide, followed by cyclosporine and
dexamethasone. With this protocol, the reported over-
all 3-year survival is about 55%. Hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation is the treatment of choice.
There are four major subtypes of hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis:
●Familial HLH
●  Infection-associated HLH
● Hemophagocytosis associated with autoimmune and immu-
nodeficiency disorders
FIGURE 58.11 ERDHEIM-CHEsTER DIsEAsE. Skin biopsy demonstrating
● Cancer-associated HLH.
aggregates of lipid-laden histiocytes and scattered multinucleated
Touton giant cells (lipid-laden histiocytes in which multiple nuclei
Familial HLH is an autosomal recessive disorder affect-
are grouped around a small island of cytoplasm) (A, low power; 
ing infants from birth to 18 months of age, caused by
B, intermediate power; C, high power).
mutations in the PRF1, UNC13D, and STX11 genes.
Infection-associated HLH has been reported in a wide
(45%), and lymphadenopathy (40%). The clinical out-
variety of viral and bacterial infections including EBV,
come is poor, and delay in therapy may lead to irrevers-
CMV, parvovirus, herpes simplex, varicella zoster, measles,
ible multiorgan failure and death. The recommended 
 HIV, tuberculosis, gram-negative bacteria, as well as fungal
treatment is based on the guidelines provided by HLH-94
 and parasitic infections.
HEMOPHAGOCYTIC LYMPHOHISTIOCYTOSIS
645
Hemophagocytosis associated with autoimmune and
MORPHOLOGY AND LABORATORY FINDINGS
immunodeficiency disorders has been observed in SLE,
RA, polyarteritis nodosa, pulmonary sarcoidosis, Sjogren's
HLH is usually a systemic disorder involving various organs
syndrome, and a wide variety of immunodeficiency con-
with predilection of bone marrow, spleen, liver, and lymph
ditions such as X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome,
nodes (Figures 58.13 to 58.17). Other sites of involvement
 include meninges, lungs. gastrointestinal tract, thymus gland,
Kawasaki disease, and Chediak-Higashi syndrome.
Cancer-associated HLH has been reported primarily in
and genitourinary system. Cutaneous manifestations are rare.
The involved tissues show increased number of a mixture of
T-cell lymphoid malignancies as well as NK-cell leukemias
lymphocytes and histiocytes in focal, interstitial, sinusoidal,
and B-cell lymphomas.
FIGURE 58.13 HeMoPHAGocYToSIs. Bone
marrow biopsy (A to C) demonstrating
extensive hemophagocytosis.
Immunohistochemical stain for
CD68 shows numerous positive
hemophagocytic histiocytes (D).
FIGURE 58.14 HEMOPHAGOCYT0SIS.
Bone marrow biopsy (A) and smear
(B, C) demonstrate hemophagocytic
histiocytes containing erythroid cells
(A, B, arrows) and platelets (C, arrow).
Immunohistochemical stainfor CD68
shows a positive hemophagocytic
histiocyte (D, arrow).
646
HISTIOCYTIC DISORDERS
FIGURE 58.15 Erythrophagocytic histiocytes in bone marrow
smears.
or diffuse patterns. The histiocytes show abundant finely
granular or vacuolated cytoplasm. The nucleus is bland.
round, oval, or cleaved, and the nucleoli are inconspicu-
ous. Numerous histiocytes show hemophagocytosis, which
is predominantly erythrophagocytosis, and also includes
phagocytosis of other hematopoietic cells such as platelets.
neutrophils, and lymphocytes. There is a lack of significant
cytologic atypia, and mitotic figures are absent or rare.
● Bone marrow appears to be the best tissue resource for the
establishment of the diagnosis. However, in some cases,
repeated bone marrow samples are required to document
hemophagocytosis.
●Other
laboratory
findings
include
cytopenia,
hypertriglyceridemia,   and/or   hypofibrinogenemia.
low
or absent NK-cell activity, and elevated serum ferritin
concentration and soluble CD25 (Box 58.3). Elevated plasma
levels of interferon gamma (IFN-y ). tumor necrosis factor
alpha (TNF-α), interleukin (IL)-1, IL-2, [L-6, IL-10, [L-12, and 
IL-18 have been reported in patients with HLH.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE AND CYTOCHEMICAL
STAINS
● Histiocytes are of the non-dendritic cell type and therefore
express CD68 and lysozyme, and are negative for CDla and
S-100 by immunohistochemical stains.
FIGURE 58.16 Hemophagocytosis in spleen (A, low power;
● They also show positive reactions for NSE, acid phosphatase.
B, intermediate power; C, high power).
 and alpha-1-antitrypsin.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
HLH clinically may mimic multiple organ failure syndrome
Mutations in the PRF1, UNC13D, and STX1l genes are
incuding respiratory, cardiovascular, hepatic, and renal fail-
 most frequently reported in the familial type. Molecular 
ures. The CNS involvement may simulate encephalitis, and
genetic testing is available.
pancytopenia may suggest bone marrow failure or leukemia.
HISTIOCYTIC SARCOMA
647
Box 58.3 Diagnostic Criteria for
Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis
(HLH)1
Major Criteria
 High fever for ≥7days
Splenomegaly
 Cytopenia involving ≥1 cell lines 
●Hypertriglyceridemia or hypofibrinogenemia
●Hemophagocytosis
Minor Criteria
+
(A) Low or absent NK-cell activity
?
 (B) Serum ferritin level >500 μg/L
●(C) Soluble CD25 >2400 U/mL
Diagnosis of HLH requires all five major criteria, or four major
criteria plus (A), or four major criteria plus (B) and (C).
1 Adapted from Henter Jl. Elinder G. Ost A. Diagnostic guidelines for hemo-
phagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. The FHL Study Group of the Histiocyte
Society. Semin Oncol 1 991: 18: 29-33.
 demonstrated by electron microscopy. Clinical manifesta-
tions and the presence of numerous hemophagocytic histio-
cytes separate HLH from other histiocytic disorders such as
lysosomal storage diseases.
Histiocytic Sarcoma
Histiocytic sarcoma is a rare extramedullary malignant
 neoplasm demonstrating morphologic and immuno-
phenotypic features of mature tissue histiocytes with lack
of expression of lymphoid and dendritic-cell-associated
markers. Acute myeloid leukemias with monocytic dif-
ferentiation are excluded. Extranodal involvement is fre-
quent. The infiltrating tumor cells show a diffuse growth
pattern composed of large cells with abundant eosino-
philic cytoplasm, round or irregular nuclei with vesicular
chromatin, and one or more distinct nucleoli. Some cases
may show significant pleomorphism with focal areas of
spindle cells or the presence of multinucleated giant cells,
and/or evidence of hemophagocytosis. Histiocytic sarcoma
may resemble diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, anaplastic
FIGURE 58.17 Hemophagocytosis in lymph node (A, low power;
large cell lymphoma, carcinoma, or melanoma.
B, high power). Immunohistochemical stain for CD68 shows a
Immunohistochemical stains show strong positivity for
positive hemophagocytic histiocyte (C, arrow).
CD68 and CD163. Lysozyme stain may be weakly positive
Most HLH cases are associated with underlying causes such
 and there may be focal positivity for S-100 protein. Flow
as infection, autoimmune disorder, or lymphoid malignan-
cytometric studies reveal a group of cells expressing CD45,
cies. HLH is distinguished from Langerhans cell histiocytosis 
CD4, CD11c, CD14, CD64, and HLA-DR. CD33 and CD34
(see Chapter 59) by the presence of numerous hemophago-
 are negative.
cytic cells, expression of NSE, lysozyme, and CD68, and lack
 Histiocytic sarcoma is an aggressive disease with a poor
of expression of CDla and S-100. No Birbeck granules are
 response to chemotherapy.
648
HISTIOCYTIC DISORDERS
Additional Resources
Abdulsalam AH, Sabeeh N. Bain Bl: Bone marrow aspirate in
Risma K. Jordan MB: Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis: updates
Chediak-Higashi syndrome, Am I Hematol 87:100, 2012.
and evolving concepts, Curr Opin Pediatr 24:9-15, 2012.
Filipovich AH: The expanding spectrum of hemophagocytic lympho-
Rosenbaum AI, Maxfeld FR: Niemann-Pick type C disease: molecu-
histiocytosis, Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 1l:512-516, 2011.
lar mechanisms and potential therapeutic approaches, I Neurochem
116:789-795, 2011.
Hughes D: Gaucher disease: hematologic and oncologic implica-
tions, Clin Adv Hematol Oncol 9:771-772, 2011.
 Roy A, Kar R, Basu D, et al: Clinico-hematological profile of Chediak-
Introne WJ. Westbroek W, Golas GA, et al: Chediak-Higashi
Higashi syndrome: experience from a tertiary care center in south
India, Indian J Pathol Microbiol 54:547-551, 2011.
Syndrome. In Pagon RA, Bird TD, Dolan CR, Stephens K, editors:
Gene reviews [Intermet]. Seattle [WA), 1993-2009. [updated 2010]
Schuchman EH: Acid sphingomyelinase cell membranes and human
University of Washington, Seattle.
disease: lessons from Niemann-Pick disease, FEBS Lett 584:1895-1900.
Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Vardiman IW. et al: Hematopathology.
2010.
Philadelphia, 2010, Saunders/Elsevier.
Shi Y, Griffn AC, Zhang PJ, et al: Sinus histiocytosis with mas-
Janka GE: Familial and acquired hemophagocytic lymphohistiocyto-
sive lymphadenopathy (Rosai-Dorfman Disease): A case report and
review of 49 cases with fine needle aspiration cytology. Cytojourmal
sis, Annu Rev Med 63:233-246, 2012.
8:3-5, 2011, February 12.
Maleszewski JI. Hristov AC, Halushka MK, et al: Extranodal Rosai-
Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, et al: WHO classification of
Dorfman disease involving the heart: report of two cases, Cardiovasc
Pathol 19:380-384, 2010.
tumours of haematopoietic and lymphoid tissues, ed 4, Lyon, 2008,
International Agency for Research on Cancer.
Mistry PK, Cappellini MD, Lukina E, et al: A reappraisal of Gaucher
Weitzman S: Approach to hemophagocytic syndromes, Hematology
disease—diagnosis and disease management algorithms.
AmI
Am Soc Hematol Educ Program:178-183, 201l.
Hematol 86: 110-115, 2011.
Zimran A: How I treat Gaucher disease, Blood 1l8:1463-147l, 2011.
Munoz J. Sanchez BE, Wang D: Histiocytic sarcoma of the thyroid,
Am J Hematol 87:531, 2012.
Disorders of
Dendritic Cells
endritic cells (DC) are primarily involved in anti-
Dendritic Cells
gen processing and antigen presentation to the B- and
T-lymphocytes. There are three major subclasses of den-
dritic cells: Langerhans cells (LC), interdigitating dendritic
CD1a+
Langerhans cells (LC)
CD68+
cells (IDC), and follicular dendritic cells (FDC). LC and
CD207+
IDC, similar to histiocytes/macrophages, are derived from
S100+
hematopoietic stem cells, whereas FDC are derived from
Bonemarrow
mesenchymal cells in the follicular structures of the lymph
Stem Cells
nodes (Figure 59.1). The immunophenotypic features of
Interdigitating
S100+
 DC subtypes are compared with those of histiocytes/mac-
dendritic cells (IDC)
CD68+
rophages in Table 59.1.
Follcular
Mesenchymal
Stem.Cells
Follicular dendritic
CD21+
CD35+
cells(FDC)
Langerhans Cell Histiocytosis
FIGURE 59.1 Origin and immunophenotypic features of subtypes
of the dendritic cells.
Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH), previously referred
to as histiocytosis X, is a neoplasm of Langerhans den-
Table 59.1
dritic cells characterized by the expression of CDla and
Immunophenotypic Features of Macrophages/
S-100 and the presence of ultrastructural cytoplasmic
Birbeck granules. LCH represents a wide variety of clini-
Histiocytes and Subclasses of Dendritic Cells
cal manifestations with their specific terminology such
 Markers
MP
LC
IDC
FDC
as eosinophilic granuloma (solitary bone or extraosseous
CD1a
一
lesions), HandSchuller-Christian (multifocal, unisystem)
一
CD4
+
disease, Letterer-Siwe (multiple organ system) disease, and
CD21
±
Hashimoto-Pritzker (spontaneously resolving) syndrome
+
CD35
±
+
(Table 59.2).
CD45
+
 The LC proliferation appears to be clonal, but it is still 
CD68
+
 not clear whether this clonal proliferation is induced by
CD207
environmental conditions (viruses, cytokines) or genetic
X
(Langerin)
 predisposition, or both. The significance of human herpes
HLA-DR
+
+
+
virus-6 (HHV-6) or EBV infections in the pathogenesis of
5-100
一
+
+
LCH is still not clear.
FcR
+
+
LCH is primarily a disease of childhood and early adult-
Lysozyme
+
hood with a male to female ratio of 3-4:1. People from
NSE
+
the northern Europe are more commonly affected. The
FcR, Fc IgG receptors; FDC, follicular dendritic cell;IDC, interdigitating
disease is rare in Afro-Americans. Bone is the most fre-
dendritic cell; LC, Langerhans cell; MP, macrophage/histiocyte; NSE,
quent site of involvement, usually presenting as a lytic
non-specific esterase.
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
650
 DISORDERS OF DENDRITIC CELLS
Table 59.2
 Clinical Classification of Langerhans Cell Histiocytosis
(LCH)'
Type
Clinical Features
 Unifocal
Single site of involvement, most 
commonly bone; Older children
and adults; Good prognosis
Multifocal single system
Multiple sites of involvement,
 most commonly bone; Young
children; Intermediate prognosis
Multifocal multisystem
 Multiple involved sites in more
than one organ system; Most
commonly bone, skin, liver,
spleen and lymph nodes;
Children <2 years of age;
 Poor prognosis
Congenital self-healing
 Multiple skin lesions involving
 neonates and infants; Self-healing 
involution
 Pulmonary LCH
Young adult smokers; Indolent,
 progression to pulmonary fibrosis
1Proposed by the Histiocyte Society (Favara BE, Feller AC, Pauli M,
et al. Contemporary classification of histiocytic disorders. The WHC
Committee On Histiocytic/Reticulum Cell Proliferations. Reclassifcation
Working Group of the Histiocyte Society. Med Pediatr Oncol 1997;
29: 157-166), and adapted from Hicks J, Flaitz CM. Langerhans cel
histiocytosis: current insights in a molecular age with emphasis on
dlinical oral and maxilfacial pathology practice. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral
Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 2005; 100(2 Suppl): 542-566.
FIGURE 59.2 MULTISYSTEM LANGERHANS CELL HISTIOCYTOSIs. Skull of an
lesion of the skull (Figure 59.2), which may be painful
infant seen radiographically (A) and at necropsy (B) shows the
or asymptomatic. Other frequent sites of bone involve-
typical osteolyticlesions in the vault.
ment include femur, ribs, vertebra, and humerus. The skin
From Hoffbrand AV, Pettit JE, Vyas P. Color Atias of Clinical
sded ysd on uq se rde s u sis
Hematology, 4th edn. Mosby/Eisevier, Philadeiphia, 2010, by
and may mimic congenital neuroblastoma or leukemia.
permission.
Hepatosplenomegaly and lymphadenopathy are the major
The involved tissues are focally or diffusely infiltrated by the
clinical presentations of multisystem LCH. Lung lesions
IC, often with increased eosinophils. Multinucleated giant cells
are associated with heavy smoking and are frequently
and areas of necrosis may be present (Figure 59.4A). In older
observed in young adults. There is an association between
chronic lesions, cellular elements are replaced by fibrosis.
multisystem LCH and acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
Bone marrow smears or tissue touch preparations may show
Different therapeutic approaches have been proposed.
the presence of large histiocytic cells with abundant gray-blue
Recommendations for unifocal osseous lesions include
surgical curettage or excision, radiation or single agent che-
times with dendritic cytoplasmic projections (Figure 59.4C).
 motherapy, or combination of all. For pediatric multisys-
 Electron microscopy demonstrates the characteristic cytoplasmic
tem disease, combination chemotherapy, such as LCH-1
Birbeck granules. These granules are rod shaped, often with an
 expanded end, resembling a tennis racket (Figure 59.5). These
protocol (vinblastine versus etoposide in combination
with intravenous steroids), LCH-2 protocol (vinblastine,
structures consist of superimposed and zippered membranes.
A protein known as “Langerin" (CD207) (see Table 59.1) is
oral prednisone, and mercaptopurine with or without eto-
constitutively associated with Birbeck granules.
poside), and LCH-3 protocol (vinblastine and prednisone
with or without methotrexate), is recommended.
The most common single sites of involvement include
bone, skin, or lymph nodes. Multisystem disease presenta-
tion may include the liver, spleen, bone marrow, lung, and
MORPHOLOGY
 the endocrine, gastrointestinal, and central nervous systems.
● In H&E sections, LC appear as large cells with abundant
eosinophilic or pale cytoplasm, grooved, folded, indented.
IMMUNOHISTOCHEMISTRY
or convoluted nuclei with fine chromatin, and inconspicuous
nucleoli (Figures 59.3 and 59.4). Mitotic figures are rare and
The major immunophenotypic characteristics of LCH are sim-
hemophagocytosis is infrequent.
ilar to those of normal LC and are shown in Table 59.1.
LANGERHANS CELL HISTIOCYTOSIS
651
B
FIGURE 59.3 LANGERHANs cELL HIsTIocYTosis. Bone marrow biopsy
section demonstrates diffuse infiltration of large mononuclear
cells with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm. Scattered
eosinophils are present (A, low power; B, high power).
● The expression of CDla and CD207 (Langerin) is considered
the immunophenotypic hallmark of LCH.
●
 Langerhans cells are positive for CD4, S-100 protein (Figure
59.6), and HLA-DR, and are negative for CD21 and CD35.
They may aberrantly express CD52.
●
 The extracutaneous lesions appear to consist of less mature
LCH cells. and express CD14 and CD68 in addition to
CDla and Langerin, whereas the skin lesions consist of
more mature LCH and lack expression of CD14 and CD68.
●
 CD45 and lysozyme are weakly positive and CD15. CD30.
CD33, CD34, and MPO are negative.
C
FIGURE 59.4 LANGERHANs CELL HISTIocYTosIs. Bone marrow biopsy
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
section (A and B) demonstrates diffuse infiltration of large
● It has been suggested that aberrant expression of certain che-
 mononuclear cells with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm.
       m
 Numerous eosinophils and scattered multinucleated giant cells 
 may play a role in the pathogenesis of LCH.
are present(A). Bone marrow smear shows several large cells with
abundant finely vacuolated cytoplasm (C).
 An association between HLA and LCH has been reported. For
example, HLA-DRB1 was frequently found in Nordic patients
with unisystem LCH, whereas HLA-Cw7 and HLA-DR4 were
found more prevalent in Caucasian LCH patients with solitary
bonelesions.
652
 DISORDERS OF DENDRITIC CELLS
FIGURE 59.5 Electron micrograph of a Langerhans cell with
Birbeck granules. A tennis racket-like structure is also displayed.
Courtesy of Sunita Bhuta, M.D., Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, UCLA Medical Center.
●Altered cellular biology in LCH is also evident by the overex-
pression of Bcl-2, Ki-67, TGF-bR1, p53, RB, p16, and p21.
   ss  s l o  [oo
X-linked polymorphirc DNA probes.
● There is an association between LCH and monosomy 7. Loss
of heterozygosity at 9p21, 17p. and 22q has been reported in
patients with LCH.
● In addition, several molecular cytogenetic abnormalities have
been reported in patients with LCH, such as gains in copy
number of 2q, 4q, and 12.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis includes a garden variety of
histiocytic disorders such as lysosomal storage diseases,
HLH (see Chapter 58), and granulomatous disorders.
Hepatosplenomegaly and lymphadenopathy may raise the
possibility of leukemia/lymphoma. Expression of CDla
and Langerin and the presence of ultrastructural Birbeck
granules are diagnostic features for LCH. LCH is distin-
guished from LC sarcoma by the lack of atypical cytologic
features such as pleomorphic, hyperchromatic nuclei,
prominent nucleoli, or numerous mitotic figures
FIGURE 59.6 LANGERHANs cCELL HISTIOcYTosIs. Bone marrow biopsy
section demonstrates a diffuse infiltration by the Langerhans
cells (A, H&E stain). These cells show expression of S-100 by
immunohistochemical stain (B, low power; C, high power).
Langerhans Cell Sarcoma
Langerhans cell sarcoma is a rare neoplasm of LC char-
 as eosinophils, are lacking or minimal. The neoplastic cells
i    a  s
 in most cases, similar to LCH, express CDla, Langerin, and
59.7). These features include hyperchromatic and pleo- S-100 protein and demonstrate the ultrastructural Birbeck
morphic nuclei, prominent nucleoli, and high mitotic fig-
 granules. They may also aberrantly express CD31 or CD56
ures (usually >5/hpf ). Associated inflammatory cells, such
The Ki-67 index is usually high. Langerhans cell sarcoma
BLASTIC PLASMACYTOID DENDRITIC CELL NEOPLASM
653
Blastic Plasmacytoid Dendritic
Cell Neoplasm
  ,  a  a 
Hematodermic Neoplasm" in the literature and "Blastic
NK-cell lymphoma" in the 2001 WHO classification.
However, additional studies have suggested a plasmacy-
toid dendritic cell origin for this tumor. In the 2008 WHO
dlassification the term "Blastic Plasmacytoid Dendritic Cell
Neoplasm" was used for this disorder.
Blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell (BPDC) neoplasm
is a rare disease affecting patients at any age, ranging from
8 to 96 years, with a median age of 65 years. The male
to female ratio is about 3:1. The most frequent site of
 involvement is skin, which is affected in >90% of patients.
The cutaneous lesions are usually purple and solitary or
localized at the beginning but become multiple with time.
They may appear as nodules, patches or bruise-like areas
(Figure 59.8). A leukemic presentation with circulating
blasts is reported in about 60%, and splenomegaly and/
or lymphadenopathy are reported in about 60% of cases.
 Other sites of involvement include the liver, lung, and cen-
tral nervous system. Approximately 10-20% of patients
with BPDC neoplasm simultaneously show or eventually
develop a secondary hematopoietic malignancy, which is
often acute myelomonocytic leukemia.
Combination chemotherapy  may achieve complete
remission, but in most patients the disease relapses
between 3 and 18 months. The overall reported 2-year sur-
vival rate is about 25%.
MORPHOLOGY
 The neoplastic cells are blastic with variable amount of weakly
basophilic, non-granular cytoplasm with round, oval, or
deaved nuclei, fine chromatin, and multiple prominent nucle-
oli (Figure 59.9). The cytoplasm may show peripheral micro-
vacuoles or pseudopods. The tumor cells may vary in size
from small to large, and in some cases consist of a mixture of
small and large blastic cells.
●
The skin involvement is usually multifocal, with the presence
of nodules, plaques, and/or brise-like areas. Large clusters
of monomorphous cells are present in the dermis and hypo-
dermis with infiltration of the cutaneous appendages (Figure
59.10). A single-file infiltration may be present in some areas.
The epidermis is spared and there is no evidence of angiocen-
FIGURE 59.7 Lymph node section demonstrating clusters of
trism or angiodestruction.
large, atypical pleomorphic cells (A, low power; B, high power)
The blood and bone marrow are other frequent sites of
expressing S-100 (C). The lesion may represent Langerhans cell
involvement (Figure 59.11). The bone marrow is involved in
sarcoma.
>80% of cases, showing focal or diffuse infiltration by the
blastic tumor cells. Circulating blast cells are detected in about
60% of patients, ranging from 1% to >90% of the leukocyte
has been reported in both children and adults. It is char-
counts.
acterized by multisystem involvement and poor progno-
● The affected lymph nodes usually show a diffuse infiltration
sis. The involved organs include bone, skin, spleen, liver,
of neoplastic cells and partial or total effacement of nodal
lymph nodes, and lung.
architecture (Figure 59.12)
654
DISORDERS OF DENDRITIC CELLS
C
 and/or plaques or bruise-like areas (C and D).
(A) Courtesy of Dr. Jennifer Hsiao, VA Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System.
· CD68 is positive in about 50% and TdT is positive in about
25% of cases.
The majority of cases are negative for other T-, NK-cell, B-cell,
and myeloid-associated markers; but positivity of CD2 or CD5
or CD7 may be observed occasionally.
·Most of these immunophenotypic features (coexpression
of CD4, CD43, CD45, TCL1, HLA-DR, CD123, and CD68).
along with the exception of CD56, are shared with the
plasmacytoid dendritic cells, suggesting a lineage relationship.
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
these neoplasms.
● Approximately 65% of cases are associated with cytogenetic
abnormalities, which are often complex. Six major recurring
FlGURE 59.9 Blood smear from a patient with blastic
abnormalities have been reported: deletions of 12p13 and
plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm demonstrates numerous 
6q23. monosomy 9. monosomy 15, and abnormalities of
pleomorphic blastoid mononuclear cells, with non-granular blue
chromosomes 5q (Figure 59.14).
cytoplasm, round or convoluted nuclei, fne nuclear chromatin
 and prominent nucleoli.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
The differential diagnosis includes primary and sec-
● The major immunophenotypic features of BPDC fumors are
ondary cutaneous lymphomas/leukemias such as nasal
 presented in Table 59.3. These cells characteristically express
type T/NK-cell lymphoma, aggressive NK-cell leukemia/
CD4, CD56, CD43, CD45 (dim to strong). TCL1, HLA-DR,
lymphoma, mycosis fungoides, acute myelomonocytic
and CD123 (Figure 59.13).
leukemia, and acute ambiguous leukemias. The main
INTERDIGITATING DENDRITIC CELL SARCOMA  655
FIGURE 59.10 BLASTIC PLASMACYTOID
DENDRITIC CELL NEOPLASM. There iS a
heavy infltration of the immature
neoplastic cells in the dermis and
surrounding skin appendages
(A, low power; B,intermediate
power; C, high power). These cells
express CD4 (D), CD56 (E), and
CD43 (F).
distinguishing features between the BPDC neoplasm and  (Table 59.4). When BPDC primarily involves bone mar-
the cutaneous nasal type T/NK lymphoma are the lack of row and blood without skin lesions, it can be misinter-
angiocentric and angiodestructive lesions, TIA-1 expres-  preted as acute leukemia of ambiguous lineage due to lack
sion, and EBV genome in the BPDC neoplasms. The of lineage-associated markers. Staining for CD68, plus
NK-cell tumors offen show cytoplasmic granules and 
 strong staining for CD123 and TCL1, along with positiv-
are mostly CD4-, CD8+, and TIA1+, whereas BPDC
 ity of CD4 and CD56, may be invaluable in making the
neoplasm is CD4+, CD8-, and also negative for TIA1.
distinction.
Mycosis fungoides is distinguished from BPDC neoplasm
by epidermal involvement (Pautrier abscesses) and CD3+,
CD56- immunophenotype.
Cutaneous infiltrations of myelomonocytic leukemias
may  show  significant  overlapping  immunophenotypic
Interdigitating Dendritic Cel!
features with BPDC neoplasms by expressing CD4, CD56,
Sarcoma
CD68, and HLA-DR. However, TCL1 is expressed in 90%
of the BPDC neoplasms and <20% of the acute myeloid
leukemias, and most myeloid-associated markers, such as
Interdigitating dendritic cell (IDC) sarcoma is an
CD13, CD14, and CD15, are negative in BPDC neoplasms
extremely rare neoplasm consisting of cells with
656
 DISORDERS OF DENDRITIC CELLS 
FIGURE 59.11 BLASTIC PLASMACYTOID
DENDRITIC CELL NEoPLASM. BloOd smear
shows a blast cell with non-granular
blue cytoplasm, irregular nuclear
border, fine nuclear chromatin, and 
visible nucleoli (A). There is a diffuse
 interstitial infltration of bone marrow 
(B, low power; C, high power). The 
infltrating cells are negative for CD3 
(brown) and CD20 (red) (D), but express 
D4 (E) and CD56 (F).
FIGURE 59.12 BLASTIC PLASMACYTOID 
 DENDRITIC CELL NEoPLASM. Lymph node
section demonstrating a diffuse 
infiltrating process (A, low power; 
B, high power) with neoplastic cells
expressing CD43 (C) and CD56 (D).
INTERDIGITATING DENDRITIC CELL SARCOMA
657
Table 59.3
64%
Immunophenotypic Features of Blastic Placmacytoid
Dendritic Cell Neoplasms'
Markers
Results
CD4
+
CD56
+
CD123
+
CD43
+
CD45
CD13
CD45
+ (often dim)
HLA-DR
+
%466
50%
23
CD4
TCL1
+
CD1
CD68
±
CD7
CD2
CD36
CD38
IPL
HLA-DR
CD3
CD117
FIGURE 59.13 FlOW CYToMETrY 0F BloOD SAMPLE 0F A PATIENT WitH 
CD1a
一
BLASTIC PLASMACYTOID DENDRITIC CELL NEOPLASM. TuMOr Cells eXpreSS
0
D45 (dim) , CD123, HLA-DR, CD56 (partial), and CD4 (partial).
CD5
CD8
CD16
CD57
a storiform pattern (Figure 59.15). These cells have a variable
TIA-1
一
amount of cytoplasm with indistinct cell borders, a vesicular
CD10
nuclear chromatin, and a distinct nucleolus.
CD19
●
A variable degree of cytologic atypia may be present. Lisually.
1
CD20
mitotic figures are low (<5/hpf ) and there is lack of necrosis.
Residual follicular structures are often present.
CD79a
Ultrastructural features of the neoplastic cells are elongated
CD13
interdigitating  cell
processes and lack of well-formed
CD14
desmosomes. Scattered lysosomes are seen, but Birbeck
CD15
granules and melanosomes are absent.
CD33
MOP
CD34
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
1Adapted from Petrella T, Bagot M, Willemze R, et al. Blastic NK-cell
lymphomas (agranular CD4 + CD56+ hematodermic neoplasms): a
● Interdigitating dendritic cell tumors express S-100, vimentin,
review. Am J Clin Pathol 2005; 123: 662-675, and Leroux D, Mugneret F,
and HLA-DR and lack expression of CD1a, CD21, CD35, and
Callanan M, et al. CD4(+), CD56(+) DC2 acute leukemia is characterized 
pan-B- and pan-T-cell markers (Table 59.1).
by recurrent clonal chromosomal changes affecting 6 major targets:
The neoplastic cells may show weak positive reactions for
a study of 21 cases by the Groupe Frangais de Cytogenetique 
CD45, CD68, or lysozyme.
Hematologique. Blood 2002; 99: 4154-4159.
 They are negative for CD30, CD34, epithelial membrane anti-
gen (EMA), and myeloperoxidase (MPO).
spindle-shaped nuclei and immunophenotypic features
Ki-67 is expressed in about 10-20% of the fumor cells.
similar to those of the IDC. Lymphadenopathy is the most
frequent clinical finding and may present as localized or
 generalized. Sites of extranodal involvement include skin,
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
intestine, spleen, and soft tissues. This disorder has been
No recurrent molecular or cytogenetic abnormalities have
reported in patients aged from 8 to 77 years, but most
patients are adults with a median age of over 50 years.
been reported.
Clinical outcome is usually aggressive.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
MORPHOLOGY
The differential diagnosis of IDC sarcoma includes follicu
●The involved lymph nodes often show paracortical infiltra-
lar dendritic cell sarcoma, histiocytic sarcoma, thymoma,
tion of elongated cells with ovoid or spindle-shaped nuclei in 
 and pleomorphic large cell lymphoma. The neoplastic
658
 DISORDERS OF DENDRITIC CELLS
X
B
10
11
12
88
73
14
15
16
17
18
&品
19
20
21
22
A
B
FIGURE 59.14 BLASTIC PLASMACYTOID DENDRITIC CELL NEOPLASM (AGRANULAR CD4+, CD56+ HEMATODERMIC LEUKEMIA). (A) RepreSentatiVe R-baNded 
recurrent anomalies.
From Leroux D, Mugneret F, Callanan M, et al. CD4(+) CD56(+) DC2 acute leukemia is characterized by recurrent clonal chromosomal
changes affecting 6 major targets:a study of21 cases by the Groupe Frangais de Cytogenetique Hematologique. Biood 2002;99:4154-4159.
by permission.
Table 59.4
 Differential Diagnosis of Dendritic Cell Disorders 
Entity1
Major Morphology
Immunophenotype
Others
IDC sarcoma
Whorled or storiform pattern
5-100+,CD21-,CD35-,
Lack of desmosomes
CD1a-
FDC sarcoma
Whorled or storifomm pattern
5-100-, CD21+, CD35+,
Presence of numerous
desmosomes
 BPDC neoplasm
Blastic cells infltrating skin, bone
CD4+, CD56+, CD123+,
Variety of cytogenetic
marrow, blood
CD43+
 abnormalities
Langerhans cell histiocytosis
Abundant cytoplasm, oval indented nuclei 
5-100+, CD1a+,CD207+
Presence of Birbeck granules
Langerhans cell sarcoma
 Peomorphic/anaplastic cells, high
5-100+, CD1a+,CD207+
Presence of Birbeck granules
 mitotic figures
 Histiocytic sarcoma
Abundant cytoplasm, eccentric
CD4+, CD14+, CD68+,
Numerous lysosomes,
 pleomorphic/anaplastic nuclei
CD163+
 lack of Birbeck granules
Thymoma
 Presence of Hassalls corpuscles
Cytokeratin+
 Presence of desmosomes 
Anaplastic large cell lymphoma
Sinusoidal pattern, hallmark cells 
CD30+,ALK±,
Rearranged ALK TCR
Myeloid sarcoma
 Monomorphic population, immature
MPO+, CD33+, CD13+,
Variety of cytogenetic
eosinophilic
CD15+
abnormalities
 Malignant melanoma
 Pleomorphic cells, cytoplasmic pigments 
5-100+, HMB45+, melan
Presence of melanosomes
A+
'BPDC, blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell; FDC, flicular dendritic cell;IDC, interdigitating denditic cell. 
cells of IDC sarcoma do not express CD2l, CD35, or CD1a
Lymph nodes are the most frequent site of involvement.
and do not react with the typical B- and T-cell associated
 Extranodal involvement has been reported in about 25%
monoclonal antibodies.
of cases, primarily affecting intra-abdominal organs. It is a
disease of young and middle-aged adults, usually with an
indolent clinical course, high recurrent rate, and low risk
of metastasis
Follicular Dendritic Cell Sarcoma
MORPHOLOGY
Follicular dendritic cell (FDC) sarcoma is an extremely rare
 The neoplastic cells have a variable amount of cytoplasm with
neoplasm consisting of cells with spindle-shaped nuclei
indistinct cell borders, a vesicular nuclear chromatin, and
and immunophenotypic features similar to those of FDC.
a small distinct nucleus (Figure 59.16). A variable degree of
FOLLICULAR DENDRITIC CELL SARCOMA
659
FIGURE 59.15 Alymph node-based 
lesion showing sheets of spindle
cells in a storiform pattern, highly
suggestive of interdigitating 
dendritic cell tumor (A, low power;
B, intermediate power; C, high
power). Tissue blocks were not 
 available forimmunohistochemical
stains.
FIGURE 59.16 F0LLICULAR DENDRITIC
CELL TuMor. Sheets of tumor cells
with spindle to oval nuclei and 
relatively abundant cytoplasm in a
vascular stroma (A, low power; B,
intermediate power; C, high power).
Glass slide from CAP, PIP-D 2007,
Case # 2007-33. Neoplastic cells
were reported to be positive for
CD21, CD35, and clusterin.
660
DISORDERS OF DENDRITIC CELLS
●Ki-67 staining is usually <25%.
be present. Mitotic figures are usually ≤10/hpf, but occasional
● CD1a, CD30, CD34, cytokeratin, and lysozyme are negative.
cases with >30/hpf have been reported.
● The neoplastic cells form fascicles and whorls, and/or demon-
strate a storiform pattern. Residual follicular structures or lym-
phoid tissues are often present.
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
●An ultrastructural feature of the neoplastic cells of FDC sarcoma
 No recurrent molecular or cytogenetic abnormalities have
is the presence of long. cytoplasmic processes connected by
been reported.
numerous cell junctions and mature desmosomes. There is lack
of Birbeck granules. Lysosomes are rare
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
The differential diagnosis of follicular dendritic cell sar-
● Immunophenotypic features include the expression of CD21.
coma includes interdigitating dendritic cell sarcoma, thy-
CD23, and CD35, as well as HLA-DR and vimentin.
moma, spindle cell carcinoma, malignant melanoma,
●The tumor cells may variably express S-100 protein, EMA, and
and myeloid sarcoma. FDC neoplasms express CD2l and
CD68.
CD35 and are negative for cytokeratin, and CD1a
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
661
Additional Resources
Bannon M: Langerhans cell histiocytosis: an orphan disease, QIM 
 Kairouz S, Hashash J., Kabbara W, et al: Dendritic cell neoplasms: an
104:87-88,2011.
Overview, Am J Hematol 82:924-928, 2007.
Cota C, Vale E, Viana I, et al: Cutaneous manifestations of blastic
Martins PN, Reddy S, Martins AB, et al: Follicular dendritic cell sar-
plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm—morphologic and phenotypic
 coma of the liver: unusual presentation of a rare tumor and literature
variability in a series of 33 patients, Am J Surg Pathol 34:75-87, 2010.
review, Hepatobiliary Pancreat Dis Int 10:443-445, 2011.
Crooks B, Grenier D: Langerhans cell histiocytosis: a complex recur-
Minkov M: Multisystem Langerhans cell histiocytosis in children: cur-
rent disease, Paediatr Child Health 15:69-70, 2010.
rent treatment and future directions, Paediatr Drugs 13:75-86, 2011.
Fonseca R, Yamakawa M, Nakamura S, et al: Follicular dendritic cell 
Nakayama M, Takahashi K, Hori M, et al: Langerhans cell sarcoma
sarcoma and interdigitating reticulum cell sarcoma: a review, Am J
of the cervical lymph node: a case report and literature review, Auris
Hematol 59:161-167, 1998.
Nasus Larynx 37:750-753, 2010.
Gaertner EM, Tsokos M: Derringer GA, et al: Interdigitating dendritic
Ng-Cheng-Hin B, O'Hanlon-Brown C, Alifrangis C, et al: Langerhans
cell sarcoma: a report of four cases and review of the literature, Am J
cell histiocytosis: old disease new treatment, QIM 104:89-96, 2011.
Clin Pathol 115:589-597, 2001.
Perez-Ordonez B, Rosai J: Follicular dendritic cell tumor: review of
Garabedian L, Struyf S, Opdenakker G, et al: Langerhans cell histio-
the entity, Semin Diagn Pathol 15:144-154, 1998.
cytosis: a cytokine/chemokine-mediated disorder? Eur Cytokine Netw
Rauh MJ. Rahman F, Good D, et al: Blastic plasmacytoid den-
22:148-153, 2011.
dritic cell neoplasm with leukemic presentation, lacking cutaneous
Garnache-Ottou F Feuillard J, Saas P: Plasmacytoid dendritic cell
involvement case series and literature review, Leuk Res 36:8l-86.
leukaemia/lymphoma: towards a well defined entity? Br J Haematol
2012.
136:539-548, 2007.
Wang H, Cao J, Hong X: Blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm
Herling M, Jones D: CD4+/CD56+ hematodermic tumor: the fea-
without cutaneous lesion at presentation: case report and literature
tures of an evolving entity and its relationship to dendritic cells, Am J
review, Acta Haematol 127:124-127, 2012.
Clin Pathol 127:687-700, 2007.
Wu Q. Liu C, Lei L, et al: Interdigitating dendritic cell sarcoma
Hollingsworth J, Cooper WA, Nicoll KD, et al: Follicular dendritic cell
involving bone marrow in a liver transplant recipient, Transplant Proc
 s   i e  
42:1963-1966, 2010.
cal features and diagnostic pitfalls, Pathology 43:67-70, 2011.
 Zhou ZY, Sun RC, Yang SD, et al: Interdigitating dendritic cell tumor
Jegalian AG, Facchetti F, Jaffe ES: Plasmacytoid dendritic cells: physi-
of the lymph node in the right submaxillary region: a case report and
ologic roles and pathologic states, Adv Anat Pathol 16:392-404, 2009.
review of the literature, Int J Surg Pathol 19:88-92, 2011.
This page intentionally left blank
Granulocytic Disorders
tive non-neoplastic granulocytic disorders or granulocytic
abnormalities associated with primary bone marrow disor-
ders. It includes topics such as morphologic and functional
abnormalities, neutropenia, neutrophilia, eosinophilia, and
basophilia.
Morphologic Abnormalities
 FIGURE 60.1 Toxic granulation and Dohle body (arrow) in
neutrophils.
TOXIC GRANULATION
This term is used to describe the presence of purple to dark-
blue granules, resembling primary granules in segmented
neutrophils, bands, and metamyelocytes (Figure 60.1). They
are lysosomal granules, contain myeloperoxidase, and show
increased alkaline phosphatase activity. Toxic granules indi-
cate a shortened maturation time and activation of a post-
mitotic neutrophilic pool. They are found in infections and
acute inflammations, and they are often associated with
Dohle indusion bodies.
FIGURE 60.2 Neutrophils showing Dohle-body-like inclusions
(arrows) in May-Hegglin anomaly.
DOHLE INCLUSION BODIES
Dohle bodies are round, oval, elongated, or triangular,
 blue, gray-blue, or gray-green cytoplasmic inclusions (see 
eosinophils, basophils, and monocytes (Figure 60.2). May-
Figure 60.1, arrow). They are RNA-containing structures
Hegglin anomaly is a member of a group of rare, autosomal
apparently derived from rough endoplasmic reticulum.
dominant disorders characterized by thrombocytopenia,
Dohle bodies are found in activated post-mitotic neutro-
 giant platelets, and Dohle-body-like inclusions. It is associ-
philic series, including metamyelocytes, bands, and seg-
 ated with mutations in the MYH9 gene mapped to chromo-
 mented neutrophils. They are frequently associated with
some 22q12.3-q13.2. It has variable clinical manifestations
toxic granulation and are found in infections, burns, trau-
 including sensorineural deafness, cataracts, and nephritis.
 mas, and drug toxicity.
ALDER-REILLY ANOMALY
MAY-HEGGLIN ANOMALY
 Alder-Reilly anomaly is characterized by the presence of
May-Hegglin anomaly is a hereditary condition in which
 dense azurophilic granules (resembling toxic granules)
Dohle-body-like inclusions are found in neutrophils,
in neutrophils, eosinophils, basophils, and, sometimes,
Atlas of Hematopathology. DO1: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00060-7
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
664
GRANULOCYTIC DISORDERS
FIGURE 60.3 Alder-Reilly anomaly is characterized by the
 presence of dense azurophilic granules (resembling toxic
granules) in neutrophils (A), lymphocytes (B), and monocytes (C).
FIGURE 60.4 (A) A late promyelocyte loaded with Auer rods.
(B) A hypogranular, hypersegmented neutrophil.
lymphocytes and monocytes (Figure 60.3). This anomaly
is seen in patients with mucopolysaccharidosis (Hurler's
 and Hunter's syndromes) and myelodysplastic syndromes.
Alder-Reilly anomaly has been reported in association
with a mutation of the myeloperoxidase structural gene.
CHEDIAK-HIGASHI GRANULES
B
Chediak-Higashi syndrome (CHS) is a rare autosomal
FIGURE 60.5 Bone marrow biopsy section (A) shows sheets of
recessive disorder characterized by severe immune defi-
eosinophils. Bone marrow smear (B) demonstrates eosinophilic
 ciency partial albinism, bleeding tendencies, and recurrent
precursors with basophilic granules, and blood smear (inset)
bacterial infections (see Chapter 58). The morphologic
shows eosinophils with hypersegmented nuclei.
hallmark of CHS is the presence of giant, blue, Or green-
ish gray cytoplasmic granules in various cells, including
monocytes, granulocytes, cytotoxic T-cells, NK-cells, mela-
ATYPICAL EOSINOPHILS AND EOSINOPHILIC
nocytes, and Schwann cells.
GRANULES
In certain conditions, such as a subtype of acute myelo-
monocytic leukemia with inversion of chromosome
AUER RODS
16[inv(16)(p13q22)], and rare cases of chronic myelog-
Auer rods are rod-like cytoplasmic indlusions found in
enous leukemia, eosinophils contain atypical basophilic
 myeloid precursors in patients with acute myeloid leukemia
granules (Figure 60.5). In hypereosinophilic syndrome,
(Figure 60.4A). They are formed from the fusion of primary
and
eosinophilia associated
with abnormalities
 granules and therefore are myeloperoxidase-positive.
PDGFRA, PDGFRB, or FGFR1 genes, eosinophils may show
hypersegmentation (Figure 60.5, inset).
ABSENCE OR REDUCTION OF CYTOPLASMIC
NEUTROPHILIC GRANULES
ABNORMAL NUCLEAR MORPHOLOGY
Absence or reduced numbers of cytoplasmic granules are
Pelger-Huet anomaly is an autosomal dominant disorder
characteristic features of granulocytic cells in myelodys-
 characterized by defective nuclear segmentation (hypo-
plastic syndrome (Figure 60.4B). A selective defect in lac-
segmentation) in neutrophils (Figure 60.6). An asso-
toferrin gene expression has been reported in association
ciation has been reported between this entity and LBR
with neutrophil-specific granule deficiency.
(lamin B-receptor) gene mutation located at chromosome
FUNCTIONAL ABNORMALITIES
665
Neutrophil nuclear hypersegmentation (more than five
lobes) is observed in megaloblastic anemia, chronic infec-
tion, myelodysplastic syndrome, iron deficiency, hypogo-
nadism, and chronic myelogenous leukemia (Figure 60.7).
Functional Abnormalities
Functional abnormalities of granulocytes are of two major
types:
● Intrinsic defects, such as chemotactic disorders, adhesion
defects, and myeloperoxidase deficiency:
● Extrinsic disorders, such as abnormalities of opsonizing
systems due to abnormal complements and/or complement
defects.
Chediak-Higashi syndrome demonstrates both morpho-
logic and functional abnormalities in a variety of hemato-
poietic and non-hematopoietic cells (see Chapter 58).
In this section, the following intrinsic defects are briefly
discussed: myeloperoxidase deficiency, chronic granuloma-
tous disease, and leukocyte adhesion deficiency.
MYELOPEROXIDASE DEFICIENCY
Myeloperoxidase (MPO) deficiency is the most common
intrinsic granulocytic functional deficiency. It is an auto-
somal recessive inherited disorder involving the MPO gene
located at 17q23. MPO plays a critical role in the microbi-
cidal activity of neutrophils. Activated neutrophils release
B
MPO into the phagolysosomes or the extracellular spaces.
FIGURE 60.6 Blood smears (A,B) demonstrate Pelger-Huet
MPO, hydrogen peroxide, and chloride ion make up the 
anomaly characterized by defective nuclear segmentation 
(hyposegmentation) in neutrophils.
MPO deficiency has been observed in patients with clonal
hematopoietic disorders, such as myelodysplastic syn-
drome and acute myeloid leukemia. The MPO deficiency
in these patients is often due to discrete chromosomal
 aberrations involving the MPO gene.
CHRONIC GRANULOMATOUS DISEASE
Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) is characterized by
the deficiency of respiratory burst oxidase and inability to
manufacture superoxide (O2-) for the formation of micro-
bicidal oxidants. CGD is an inherited disorder. It is either
FIGURE 60.7 Neutrophil nuclear hypersegmentation (more
X-linked or autosomal recessive. The X-linked CGD almost
than five lobes) is observed in megaloblastic anemia and other
exclusively involves men, except in rare homozygosity con-
conditions such as chronic infection, myelodysplastic syndrome,
ditions or when there is a coexistent inactivated normal
hypogonadism, and chronic myelogenous leukemia.
gene. The autosomal-recessive CGD occurs with equal fre-
quency in male and female.
1q41-43. The acquired hyposegmentation of the neutro-
Neutrophils and other phagocytes (such as eosinophils
phil nucleus, also called pseudo-Pelger-Huet anomaly.
 and monocytes) use an NADPH oxidase to generate super-
has been observed in sepsis, myelodysplastic syndromes,
 Oxide. The NADPH oxidase complex consists of five sub-
myeloproliferative disorders, some leukemias/lymphomas,
 units. Two subunits, gp91-PHOX and p22-PHOX , form the
and patients with solid organ transplantation
heavy and light chains of the cytochrome b 558 (CYBB)
666
GRANULOCYTIC DISORDERS
and are membrane-associated (membranes of secretory
vesicles and granules). The three remaining subunits, p40-
PHOX , p47-PHOX , and p67-PHOX, are cytosolic com-
CD11/CD18
PSGL-1
ponents. The gene encoding gp91-PHOX is located on the
X-chromosome. Mutation of this gene occurs in approxi-
Normal
Present
Present
mately 70% of patients with CGD. The remaining 30% of
cases are caused by mutations of autosomal genes encod-
ing p22-, p47-, and p67-PHOX subunits. Genetic testing by
DNA sequencing of the genes is available.
LADI
Absentorll
Present
Patients with CGD suffer recurrent bacterial and fun-
gal infections often presenting as pneumonia, abscesses
(skin, soft tissues, and organs), suppurative lymphadeni-
tis, osteomyelitis, bacteremia, and fungemia. The sever-
ity of infection and the recurrence rate are variable, and
LADI
Present
Defective
 the onset of clinical manifestations may range from early
infancy to adulthood. The X-linked variant is seen in the
younger population with a mean age of 3 years compared
with about 8 years for the autosomal recessive forms.
LADIII
Defective
Present
 The diagnosis of CGD is based on the demonstration
of defective respiratory burst oxidase in neutrophils. The
conventional laboratory test is the nitroblue tetrazolium
FIGURE 60.8 Altered surface phenotype in leukocyte adhesion
(NBT) test, in which the oxygen produced in the course of
deficiency. Expression of CD11/CD18 integrins and p-selectin
a respiratory burst reduces the yellow, water-soluble tetra-
glycoprotein-1 in various types of leukocyte adhesion
zolium dye to an insoluble deep-blue pigment. In normal
deficiencies.
conditions, at least 95% of neutrophils show positive reac-
tion. The NBT test should be confirmed by DNA sequenc-
ing of the patient's PHOX genes.
A
B
LEUKOCYTE ADHESION DEFICIENCY
WT
Wr
DE
Leukocyte adhesion deficiency (LAD) syndromes are auto-
Patlent
somal recessive disorders characterized by defective adhe-
sion, binding and/or rolling of the leukocytes on the sites
of microbial invasion. These adhesion/rolling defects are of
Father
three major types: LAD I, LDA II, and LAD III (Figure 60.8).
LAD I syndromes are caused by impairment of expression
LADIl Patient
 of the leukocyte adhesion molecules (integrins). Integrins
represent a family of glycoproteins, each composed of α and
β subunits (CD11/CD18). The α subunit, CD11, represents
FIGURE 60.9 A single nucleotide deletion in position 588 (G588) in 
three different types of glycoprotein: CDlla, CDllb, and
the GDP-fucose transporter gene of a patient with LAD Il.
(A) Chromatograms show a partial sequence for the GDP-fucose
CD1lc, respectively, for LFA-1 (expressed on all leukocytes),
transporter gene from a healthy donor, the LAD Il patient, and both
glycoprotein Mac-1, and p150/90 (both are expressed on
parents. Note that G588 is absent in the patient, while both parents 
monocytes, neutrophils, and NK-cells). The β subunit, CD18,
are heterozygotes in this position (overlaid sequence). (B) Partial
is shared in all integrins. LAD I is relatively rare. Its clinical
primary sequence of the gene and the predicted protein region in 
which the deletion is found. A shift in the open-reading frame alters
outcome is often severe and includes recurrent or unresolved
 localized or systemic infections. The frequently reported clini-
representation of the predicted structure of the transporter.
 cal manifestations are delayed separation of the umbilical
Adapted from HidaigoA,MaS,PeiredAJ,et al.Insightsintoleukocyte
cord, recurrent bacterial infections, periodontitis, absence of
adhesion defciency type 2 from a novel mutation in the GDP-fucose
pus formation, and impaired wound healing. Due to the lack
transporter gene. Blood 2003; 101: 1705-1712, by permission.
of adhesion molecules and impaired mobilization of the leu-
kocytes into the extravascular sites, these patients often have
marked peripheral blood leukocytosis (5-20 times normal
Mild to moderate cases are treated by antibiot-
values).
ics, and severe cases require bone marrow or stem cell
 The diagnosis is established by flow cytometry dem-
transplantation.
onstrating lack or marked reduction of the expression of
LAD II syndromes are extremely rare and are caused by
integrins (CD11/CD18). DNA sequencing will identify
defective fucosylated carbohydrate ligands for p-selectin gly-
relevant gene mutations.
coprotein-1 (PSGL-1) (Figure 60.9). The primary defect is
NEUTROPENIA
667
in fucosylation of macromolecules, particularly at the stage
of transport of fucose to the Golgi apparatus. This defect
results in the lack of expression of certain glycans, such as
CD15a (SLex) and H-antigen (Bombay blood group) in these
 patients. LAD II patients have less severe and fewer infection
episodes than LAD I patients. This syndrome has been asso-
ciated with mental retardation, short stature, microcephaly.
depressed nasal bridge, and delayed motor development in
affected children. Other findings are leukocytosis (mainly
neutrophilia), and Bombay blood group. CD15a expression is
lacking on the leukocytes by flow cytometry.
LAD II (previously called LAD I variant) is extremely
rare and is characterized by a defect in integrin activation.
 The structure and expression of CD1l and CD18 appear to
 be intact. Clinical symptoms are similar to those of LAD I.
The prognosis is poor, and bone marrow transplantation is 
the treatment of choice.
Neutropenia
 Neutropenia refers to peripheral blood absolute neutro-
phil count (ANC) of <1500/μL. Neutropenia is considered
mild when ANC is between 1000 and 1500/μL, moderate
when ANC is between 500 and 1000/μL, and severe when
ANC is <500/μL. Severe neutropenia is also referred to as
 agranulocytosis (Figure 60.10). Three major mechanisms are
 involved in the development of neutropenia:
 Reduced-production or ineffective granulopoiesis:
 [ncreased destruction or utilization of neutrophils;:
●A shift from the circulating to the marginal pool.
B
Neutropenia is either acquired or congenital. Infections
 FIGURE 60.10 AGRANULocYTosIs. Bone marrow biopsy section
and drugs are the most common etiologic factors in
(A) and smear (B) demonstrate absence of late-stage granulocytic
acquired neutropenia. Other contributing causes include
cells and sparse immature myeloid forms.
primary immune deficiencies, bone marrow disorders, and
congenital factors (Box 60.1).
● Drugs or their metabolites may be the source of haptens or
antigens. causing antibody production and drug-antibody
interactions with neutrophils and their destruction. Antithyroid
POST-INFECTIOUS NEUTROPENIA
dugs, clozapine, and sulfasalazine are among the drugs that
 Post-infectious neutropenia is the most common type of
muld cause severe neutropenia.
neutropenia and is caused by relocation and accumula-
A list of the drugs which may induce neutropenia is
tion of granulocytes from circulation into the infected sites
presented in Box 60.2. Drug-induced neutropenia is often
and/or destruction by circulating antibodies. Severe forms
associated with severe infectious complications.
of neutropenia have been reported in hepatitis B, EBV, and
HIV infections.
NEUTROPENIAASSOCIATEDWITHPRIMARY
IMMUNE DISORDERS
DRUG-INDUCED NEUTROPENIA
 Neutropenia associated with primary immune disorders
Drug-induced neutropenia is the second most common
 is caused by antineutrophil antibodies which are either
type of neutropenia and is caused by two possible mecha-
autoimmune or alloimmune. The mechanism of neutro-
nisms: drug-induced cytotoxicity and immune-mediated.
phil destruction is either through complement-mediated
● Drug-induced cytotoxicity affects protein synthesis or cell
 neutrophil lysis or by splenic sequestration of opsonized
replication in the granulocytic precursors and is usually
neutrophils. Immune-associated neutropenia includes iso-
dose-dependent.
immune neonatal neutropenia secondary to transplacental
668
GRANULOCYTIC DISORDERS
Box 60.1 Major Causes of Neutropenia
 Box 60.2 Major Drugs with Potential Risk of
Infectious-associated
Severe Neutropenia'
Drug-induced
Antidepressant and psychotropic drugs
 Immune-associated 
Clozapine
● Isoimmune neonatal neutropenia
● Phenothiazines
 Chronic autoimmune neutropenia
 Meprobamate
 Transfusion neutropenia
 Tricyclic and tetracyclic antidepressants
 Chronic idiopathic neutropenia
+
● Transfusion reactions 
 Antithyroid drugs
 Methimazole
Non-immune chronic idiopathic
 Carbimazole
 Associated with hematologic disorders
● Propylthiouracil
●Myelodysplastic syndromes
 Anti-inflammatory drugs
 Aplastic anemia
●Leukemia
● Sulfasalazine
 Bone marrow replacement by fibrosis or metastasis
●Gold salts
●Hypersplenism
●Penicillamine
 Phenylbutazone
 Congenital neutropenia
 Dipyrone
 Kostmann syndrome
●Phenacetin
● Congenital cyclic neutropenia
Antihistamines; H2-receptor blockers
 Associated with other congenital anomalies
Cimetidine
● Shwachman-Diamond syndrome
●Ranitidine
● Cartilage-hair hypoplasia 
 Antibacterial and antifungal drugs
Associated with functional abnormafities
Chloramphenicol 
 Chediak-Higashi syndrome
Sulfonamides
●Myelokathexis
·Vancomycin
 Cephalosporin
Other types of neutropenia
●Amphotricin B 
 Acquired cyclic neutropenia 
●Flucytosine
●Neutropenia due to nutritional deficiencies
●Sulfametoxazole
 Neutropenia associated with endocrine disorders
Antimalarial drugs
Lazy leukocyte syndrome
● Amodiaquine
● Chloroquine
●Quinine 
 Cardiovascular drugs
IgG antineutrophil antibodies, chronic autoimmune neu-
 Propranolol
tropenia primarily occurring in children younger than 4
Dipyridamole
 years, transfusion reactions, complement activation, pure
 Digoxin
white cell aplasia due to antibody-mediated GM-CFU
Antianhythmic drugs
inhibitory activity, or antibodies to G-CSF.
ACE inhibitors
Anticonvulsants
NON-IMMUNE CHRONIC IDIOPATHIC
 Carbamazepine
NEUTROPENIA
Phenytoin
 Ethosuximide
Non-immune chronic idiopathic neutropenia is an acquired
 Valproate
 syndrome with no underlying autoimmune disease, nutri-
Diuretics
tional deficiency, drug-association, or clonal bone marrow
Thiazides
disorders. The clinical course is usually benign and neutro-
Acetazolamide
 penia is an incidental laboratory finding. with no history of
 infection or other symptoms.
●Furosemide
● Spironolactone
Others
NEUTROPENIA ASSOCIATED WITH
●Aminoglutethimide
BONE MARROW DISORDERS
● Chlorpropamide
Tolbotamide
Neutropenia associated with bone marrow disorders
1Adapted from Greer JP. Foerster J. Lukens JN. et al: Wintrobe's Clinical
include aplastic anemia, myelodysplastic syndromes, leu-
Hermotology. 1 1th ed. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. 2003.
kemias, and post-chemotherapy neutropenia.
NEUTROPHILIA
669
Box 60.3 Major Causes of Neutrophilia
Reactive
Acute infections
 Chronic inflammations
 Cigarette smoking
●Exercise
● Stress
●Drugs
+
 Bone marrow stimulation
 Non-hematopoietic malignancies
FIGURE 60.11 MYELoKATHExis. Bone marrow aspirate showing
●Heatstroke
and abnormal separation of nuclear lobes.
●Others
Adapted from Hoffbrand AV, Pettit JE, Vyas P. Color Atias of Clinical
Primary
Hematology,4th edn. Mosby/Eisevier, Philadeiphia, 2010, by
permission.
Hereditary neutrophilia
● Down syndrome
● Leukocyte adhesion deficiency
+
 Chronic myeloproliferative disorders
+
Others
CONGENITAL NEUTROPENIAS
Congenital neutropenias consist of two major forms: cyclic
neutropenia and severe congenital neutropenia.
Cyclic neutropenia is characterized by oscillation of
peripheral neutrophil counts, from <5o0/μL to near nor-
infections and dysmyelopoietic features in the bone marrow.
 mal range, with approximately 3-week intervals. The con-
including defects in the synthesis of primary and specific
genital form is autosomal dominant and is associated with
granules and premature cell lysis.
mutations in the neutrophil elastase gene, ELA2. There are
Neutropenia has also been associated with lazy leuko-
also acquired forms of cyclic neutropenia that have been
cyte syndrome, bone marrow stem cell disorders (such
reported in various conditions, such as chronic myelog-
as aplastic anemia, leukemias, and myelodysplastic syn-
enous leukemia, large granular lymphocytosis, and hype-
drome, in cobalamin deficiency), and hereditary disorders,
reosinophilic syndromes.
such as dyskeratosis congenital, reticular dysgenesis, and
Severe congenital neutropenia refers to various con-
      s s
genital syndromes, including: infantile agranulocytosis
is an extremely rare condition characterized by severe nell-
(Kostmann syndrome), Shwachman-Diamond-Oski syn-
tropenia, defective neutrophil chemotaxis, and impaired
drome, myelokathexis, CHS, and congenital dysgranulo-
random mobility of granulocytes.
poietic neutropenia.
● Kostmann syndrome is an autosomal recessive agranulocy-
tosis of infancy characterized by frequent, severe infections,
mostly due to staphylococci and streptococci. Bone marrow
Neutrophilia
often reveals myeloid hypoplasia and maturation arrest at the
promyelocyte stage.
 Shwachman-Diamond-Oski syndrome represents a triad of
Neutrophilia refers to an increase in the absolute number
neutropenia, pancreatic insufficiency, and metaphyseal dyspla-
of neutrophils in the peripheral blood (absolute neutro-
sia. Patients are usually under 10 years of age with a history of
phil count >7500/μL in adults). Since neutrophils account
recurrent infection and steatorrhea. Neutropenia appears to be
for the majority of the circulating leukocytes (about 60%),
secondary to increased apoptosis in the bone marrow.
in most instances, white blood cell (WBC) counts of over
●
Myelokathexis is an extremely rare form of chronic, child-
11,000/μL represent neutrophilia. There are two major
hood neutropenia with recurrent infections. The bone mar-
causes for neutrophilia:
The dysplastic changes incude nuclear hypersegmentation,
A reactive response to ongoing processes, such as infection,
cytoplasmic vacuolization, and hypogranularity
(Figure
inflammation, smoking, stress, medication, or malignancy:
60.11j. One possible mechanism for neutropenia is defec-
 Primary abnormalities in the regulation of bone marrow neu-
tive release and prolonged retention of neutrophils in the
tophil production (Box 60.3).
bone marrow. Myelokathexis has been reported in association
with accelerated apoptosis and defective expression of bcl-x
in granulocytic precursors. It is considered a part of WHIM
(warts, hypogammaglobulinemia, infections, myelokathexis)
REACTIVE NEUTROPHILIA
syndrome.
Congenital
 dysgranulopoietic neutropenia  is a  rare
Acute infections commonly cause various degrees of nell-
autosomal recessive disorder characterized by repeated severe
trophilia due to the release of segmented neutrophils
670
GRANULOCYTIC DISORDERS
FIGURE 60.13 EFFECT 0F G-cSF THERAPy. Bone marrow biopsy Section
(A) and smear (B) show myeloid preponderance and left shift.
Blood smear (C) reveals granulocytosis.
and EBV infections, may also cause neutrophilia. Reactive
neutrophilia is often associated with the presence of toxic
 granulation, Dohle bodies, cytoplasmic vacuoles, and ele-
vated levels of leukocyte (neutrophil) alkaline phospha-
FIGURE 60.12 LEuKEMoID REAcTIoN. Blood smears demonstrate
numerous neutrophils and bands (A), neutrophils and monocytes
tase (LAP) (see Figure 60.12C). Leukemoid reaction refers to
(B), and alkaline phosphatase-positive neutrophils (C).
leukocytosis in excess of 50,000/μL with a left shift, caused
by conditions other than a leukemic process.
and bands from the bone marrow and marginating pool
Chronic inflammations, such as rheumatoid arthritis,
(Figure 60.12). Acute bacterial infections, such as pneu-
Kawasaki disease, and inflammatory bowel disorders are
mococcal, staphylococcal, or leptospiral infections, are the
 often associated with neutrophilia. Neutrophilia in these
most frequent causes of infection-induced neutrophilia.
 conditions is in part due to the release of cytokines, such
Certain viral infections, such as herpes complex, varicella,
as TNF-α, G-CSF, GM-CSF, IL-6, and IL-8.
NEUTROPHILIA
671
FIGURE 60.14 Leukemoid ReactI0N
IN A PATENT WITH UNDIFFERENTIATED
CARCINoMA.Blood smear
demonstrates marked neutrophilia
(A, low power; B, high power).
Bone marrow smear shows an
elevated M:E ratio (C), and bone
marrow biopsy section reveals
marked hypercellularity with
myeloid hyperplasia (D, low
power; E, high power). Section of
tumor demonstrates a mixture of
undifferentiated carcinoma cells
and neutrophils (F).
Cigarette smoking is usually associated with elevated leul-
Other causes of neutrophilia include bone marrow stim-
kocyte count and neutrophilia (up to 25%), which may last
ulation (such as in hemolytic anemia or immune thrombo-
as long as 5 years affter quitting smoking. The exact mecha-
cytopenia), non-hematologic malignancies (Figure 60.14),
nism of smoking-induced leukocytosis is not known.
heatstroke, and post-splenectomy.
 Stress-associated neutrophilia appears to be related to
the redistribution of neutrophils from the marginating
PRIMARY NEUTROPHILIA
pool into the circulating pool, probably due to reduction
in neutrophil adhesion by the release of epinephrine.
Primary neutrophilia is due to primary abnormalities in 
Post-operative neutrophilia and leukocytosis during acute
the regulation of bone marrow neutrophil production,
myocardial infarction are considered stress-related. Exercise-
such as hereditary neutrophilia, myeloproliferative neo-
induced neutrophilia is probably due to a combination of
plasms (see Chapter 10), myeloproliferative/myelodys-
increased plasma epinephrine levels and a change in the car-
plastic neoplasms (see Chapter 15), transient abnormal
diac output, leading to the redistribution of neutrophils from
myelopoiesis in Down syndrome (see Chapter 22), and
 the marginating pool into the circulating pool.
 leukocyte adhesion deficiency.
 Delayed leukocytosis in exercise is probably due to the
Hereditary neutrophila is a rare autosomal disor
release of leukocytes from the bone marrow. Medications
der characterized by chronic neutrophilia (ranging from
20,000 to over 100,000/μL), splenomegaly, elevated LAP,
lithium, recombinant colony-stimulating factors (Figure
and widened dipole of the skull. Neutrophil function is
60.13), and all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) are associated with
normal, but affected individuals may demonstrate bleed-
neutrophilia.
ing complications due to platelet dysfunction.
672
 GRANULOCYTIC DISORDERS
SPURIOUS NEUTROPHILIA
Box 60.4 Conditions Associated with
Spurious neutrophilia is a falsely elevated peripheral blood
Eosinophilia²
neutrophil count resulting from various causes. Formation
of precipitated cryoglobulin particles may result in erro-
Parasites
neous elevated WBC and/or platelet counts. Also, platelet
Protozoan infections
clumps may be counted as leukocytes by automated cell
 Pneumocystis, toxoplasmosis, amebiasis, malaria
counters.
Metazoan infections
Nematodes, trematodes, cestodes, arthropods
Allergic and autoimmune disorders
Hay fever, asthma, angioneurotic edema, urticaria, serum sickness,
allergic vasculitis, pemphigus vulgaris, dermatitis herpetiformis,
Eosinophilia
ulcerative colitis, regional enteritis
Hematopoietic disorders
Eosinophilia is defined as an absolute peripheral blood
Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphomas, mycosis fungoides, acute
eosinophil count exceeding 600/μL. It is observed in a
myeloid leukemia, chronic myeloproliferative disorders, plasma
wide variety of conditions including allergic and inflam-
cell myeloma, Langerhans cell histiocytosis, familial hemophago-
matory processes, protozoan and metazoan infections,
cytic lymphohistiocytosis
immunodeficiencies and autoimmune disorders, chronic
Solid tumors
myeloproliferative disorders, leukemias and lymphomas,
Carcinomas, brain tumors, melanoma
and certain non-hematopoietic malignancies (Box 60.4)
Others
A hypereosinophilic syndrome has been reported in
Immunodefciency syndromes, sarcoidosis, chronic renal disease,
association with the luise of tryptophan derivatives. It is
peritoneal dialysis, pleural effusion, radiotherapy, splenectomy
characterized by peripheral blood eosinophilia and sclero-
derma-like features, including muscle tenderness, fatigue,
 sm ua puz mo ag yo Aod d wn wy pandez
Wilkins. Baltimore. 1998.
edema, arthralgia, nephropathy, rash, cough, and dyspnea.
Tryptophan derivatives have been used for the treatment
of insomnia and depression.
 Eosinophilia is reported in association with a variety
Basophilia
of solid tumors, such as bronchogenic carcinoma, medul-
lary carcinoma of the thyroid gland, and transitional cell
carcinoma of the bladder. A garden variety of hematopoi-
Basophilia is defined as an absolute peripheral blood baso-
etic malignancies, such as chronic myelogenous leukemia,
 phil count exceeding 200/μL. It may occur in a wide variety
acute lymphoblastic leukemia, acute myeloid leukemia,
 of infections or inflammatory and autoimmune conditions,
and Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphomas, may demon-
such as tuberculosis, chickenpox, smallpox, influenza, ulcer-
strate eosinophilia in the involved tissues and peripheral
ative colitis, and rheumatoid arthritis. Other conditions
blood.
associated with basophilia include irradiation, iron defi-
 A subtype of acute myelomonocytic leukemia is associ-
ciency, hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus, chronic myelo-
ated with atypical eosinophilia and chromosomal aberra-
proliferative disorders, and myelodysplastic syndromes.
tions involving 16q22 (see Chapter 18). A diverse group of
 Certain subtypes of acute myeloid leukemia, such as acute
hematologic neoplasms are associated with eosinophilia
 promyelocytic leukemia, acute myeloid leukemias with
and PDGFRA, PDGFRB, or FGFR1 rearrangement (see
t(6;9) or t(3;6), and aberrations of chromosome 16, may
Chapter 16).
demonstrate bone marrow basophilia.
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
673
Additional Resources
-iagiad aqi guiziugosai pue supueisiapun os peasuanloh 'y elalo
Lin CT, Hsu KF, Jao SW, et al: Leukemoid reaction with metachro-
huet anomaly, Am J Clin Pathol 137:358-366, 2012.
nous tumors, Rev Esp Enferm Dig 103:384-385, 2011.
Dinauer MC: Disorders of neutrophil function: an overview, Methods
Lin HC, Chai CY, Su YC, et al: Leukemoid reaction resulting from
Mol Biol 412:489-504, 2007.
ganulocyte colony-stimulating factor producing urothelial carci-
Ghandi MK, Howard MR, Hamilton Pl: The Alder-Reilly anomaly in
noma of the renal pelvis, Kaohsiung I Med Sci 23:89-92, 2007.
association with the myelodysplastic syndrome, Clin Lab Haematol
Mitre E, Nutman TB: Basophils, basophilia and helminth infections,
18:39-40,1996
Chem Immunol Allergy 90:141-156, 2006.
Hanna S, Etzioni A: Leukocyte adhesion deficiencies, Ann N Y Acad
Nauseef WM: Lessons from MPO defciency about functionally
Sci 1250:50-55, 2012.
important structural features, Ipn I Infect Dis 57:S4-S5, 2004.
Hansen NE, Karle H, Andersen V, et al: Neutrophilic granulocytes in
 Savoia A, Balduini CL: MYH9-related disorders. In Pagon RA, Bird
acute bacterial infection. Sequential studies on lysozyme, myeloper-
TD, Dolan CR, Stephens K, editors: GeneReviews {Intermnet]. Seattle
oxidase and lactoferrin, Clin Exp Immunol 26:463-468, 1976.
(WA), 1993-2008, [updated 2011] University of Washington, Seattle.
Introne WJ, Westbroek W, Golas GA, et al: Chediak-Higashi syn-
 Snyder MC, Lauter CB: Eosinophilic and neutrophilic leukemoid
drome In Pagon RA, Bird TD, Dolan CR, Stephens K, editors:
reaction in a woman with spindle cell sarcoma: a case report, I Med
GeneReviews [Internet]. Seattle [WA). 1993-2009. [updated 2010]
Case Reports 4:335, 2010.
University of Washington, Seattle.
van de Vijver E, Maddalena A, Sanal O, et al: Hematologically impor-
Kang EM, Marciano BE, DeRavin S, et al: Chronic granulomatous dis-
tant mutations: Leukocyte adhesion deficiency (frst update), Blood
Cells Mol Dis 48:53-61, 2012.
Clin Immunol127:1319-1326,2011.
Vandenberghe P, Beel K: Severe congenital neutropenia, a genetically
Kunishima S. Yoshinari M, Nishio H, et al: Haematological char-
heterogeneous disease group with an increased risk of AML/MDS.
acteristics of MYH9 disorders due to MYH9 R702 mutations, Eur 
Pediatr Rep 3(Suppl 2):e9, 2011.
JHaematol 78:220-226, 2007.
Kyono W, Coates TD: A practical approach to neutrophil disorders.
Pediatr Clin North Am 49:929-971, 2002.
This page intentionally left blank
Disorders of Red Blood
Cells-Anemias
Inemia, a dedine in blood hemoglobin (Hb) level, is
 general, the ranges of Hb, Hct, and RBC counts are higher
caused by three major mechanisms: (1) blood loss, (2) inef-
in smokers and in people who live in an air-polluted envi-
ficient erythropoiesis, and (3) increased red blood cell (RBC)
ronment or at high altitudes, and are lower in women,
destruction. These mechanisms are often associated with
Afro-Americans, and the elderly.
certain morphologic features reflecting the size (normocytic,
 Morphologic variations are often associated with certain
microcytic, or macrocytic) or the Hb content (normochro-
 categories of anemias. The following are examples.
mic, hypochromic, or hyperchromic) of the erythrocytes
● Microcytic, hypochromic RBCs are seen in iron deficiency ane-
Four RBC indices are measured by automated hematol-
mia, thalassemia, and lead poisoning (Figure 61.1A)
 Ogy instruments in clinical laboratories. These indices cor-
Macrocytic RBCs are observed in folate or vitamin Biz
relate with the size, hemoglobin content, and degree of
deficiencies, liver disease, hypothyroidism, and newborns
anisocytosis (red blood cells of unequal size) in the RBCs.
(Figure 61.1B).
They include (Table 61. 1):
Target cells are often associated with thalassemia and iron
deficiency anemia (Figure 61.2A).
● Mean corpuscular volume (MCV) calculated as: Hct (%) ×
10/RBC count (million/μL) where Het is hematocrit, the pro-
 Stomatocytes are seen in hereditary conditions, liver diseases.
and electrolyte imbalances (Figure 61.2B).
portion of blood volume occupied by packed RBC. MCV indi
 Spur cells (acanthocytes) may be present in a β-lipoproteinemia.
cates average RBC volume.
liver diseases, and anorexia nervosa (Figure 61.3A).
●
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH) calculated as: Hb
 Burr cells (echinocytes) are found in uremia, pyruvate kinase
(g/dL) × 10/RBC count (million/μL). MCH indicates average
(PK) deficiency, and acute blood loss (Figure 61.3B).
amount of Hb per RBC.
● Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC) cal-
culated as: Hb (g/dL) × 100/Hct (%). MCHC indicates the
Table 61.1
average concentration of Hb per RBC
Red Blood Cell (RBC) Values and Related Parameters in
● Red cell distribution width (RDW), which indicates the degree
Healthy Adults i, 2
of anisocytosis.
 Parameter
Men
Women
Both
Biochemical analyses such as measurement of serum
iron, iron-binding capacity, ferritin, folate, and vitamin B12
RBC count, million/μL 
5.2 ± 0.7
4.6 ± 0.5
levels, RBC enzyme assays, and Hb electrophoresis pro-
Hemoglobin (Hb), g/dL
15.7 ± 1.7
13.8 ± 1.5
vide valuable information regarding the cause of anemia.
Hematocrit (Hct), % 
46.0 ± 4.0 
40.0 ± 4.0
Molecular genetic studies add additional dimensions to
Reticulocytes, %
1.6 ± 0.5
1.4 ± 0.5
the understanding, classification, and treatment of certain
Mean corpuscular volume
88.0 ± 8.0
(MCV), fL
anemias, particularly the hereditary variants.
 Routine examination of the peripheral blood plays a key
Mean cell hemoglobin (MCH),.
30.4 ± 2.8
pg/RBC
role in the diagnosis and classification of anemias. It pro-
 Mean cell Hb concentration 
34.4 ± 1.1
vides basic information regarding RBC counts, morphol-
(MCHC), g/dL of RBC
 ogy and indices, Hb and hematocrit levels (Table 61.1).
 Red cell volume distribution
13.1 ± 1.4
The WHO criteria for anemia are: <13 g/dL and <12g/dL
width (RDW), %
of Hb for men and women, respectively, or more than two
Adapted from Butler E, Lichtman MA, Coller BS, et al. Williams'
 standard deviations (SD) below the mean of normal range
Hematology, 6th edn. McGraw-Hil, New York, 2001.
in an age- and sex-matched representative population. In
 Zvalues = mean ± standard deviation.
Atlas of Hematopathology. DO1: http:/dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00061-9
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
676
DISORDERS OF RED BLOOD CELLS—ANEMIAS
A
 FIGURE 61.2 Blood smears demonstrating target cells (A) and 
stomatocytes (B).
B
FIGURE 61.1 (A) Blood smear demonstrating microcytic
● Reticulocytes (polychromatophilic RBCs) account for about
hypochromic erythrocytes in a patient with iron deficiency
0.5-1.5% of RBCs and are primarily increased in conditions
anemia. (B) Macro-ovalocytes in a patient with megaloblastic
associated with elevated production of bone marrow
anemia. A late stage nucleated red cell with abundant cytoplasm
eythropoiesis, such as hemolytic anemias (Figure 61.5).
 is present (inset, arrow).
Erythrocytes may demonstrate a variety of cytoplasmic
inclusions. The following are examples.
● Basophilic stippling is seen in lead poisoning. impaired
Hb synthesis.
alcoholism, and megaloblastic anemias 
(Figure 61.6A).
● Crenated red cells are characterized by blunt projections
 [ron particles (Pappenheimer bodies) are noted in myelodys-
evenly distributed over their surface (Figure 61.3C). They are
plastic syndrome (MDS), congenital dyserythropoietic anemia.
caused by faulty drying of the blood smear, change in pH, or
and post-splenectomy (Figure 61.6B).
excess EDTA.
 Erythrocytes may contain remnants of DNA (Howell-Jolly
● Fragmented RBCs (schistocytes) are seen in microangiopathic
bodies), such as in megaloblastic anemia or after splenectomy
 hemolytic anemias such as disseminated intravascular coagu-
(Figure 61.7A).
lopathies, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, and severe 
 Cabot rings are inclusions observed in pernicious anemia or
burns (Figure 61.4A).
lead poisoning (Figure 61.7B).
● Teardrop-shaped erythrocytes (dacrocytes) are seen in bone
● Heinz bodies (precipitated abnormal Hb structures) and Hb
marrow fibrosis, thalassemia syndromes, and hemolytic ane-
Hinclusions are visible by supravital stains (Figure 61.8).
mias (Figure 61.4B).
● RBCs may also contain variety of microorganisms (Figure 61.9).
PURE RED CELL APLASIA
677
A
FIGURE 61.4 Bood smears demonstrate fragmented red cells
(schistocytes) (A, arrows) and teardrop red cells (dacrocytes) (B,
arrows).
Although peripheral blood is the most informative sam-
ple in the diagnosis and classification of anemias, bone
marrow examination, in certain conditions, provides addi-
tional valuable information such as bone marrow cellu-
larity, myeloid:erythroid (M:E) ratio, estimation of stored
iron, and presence or lack of bone marrow replacement by
fibrosis, inflammatory processes, or primary or secondary
malignancies. In general, anemia caused by blood loss or
RBC destruction is associated with bone marrow erythroid
hyperplasia and reticulocytosis, whereas anemia due to
ineffective erythropoiesis is characterized by reticulocyto-
penia and a bone marrow which may be hypo-, normo-, or
hypercellular.
 In this chapter, most anemias, especially those associ-
FIGURE 61.3 Blood smears demonstrate acanthocytes (A) with
ated with significant bone marrow changes, are discussed.
irregularly spaced, thorn-like projections, echinocytes (B) with 
Anemias secondary to pluripotent hematopoietic stem cell
 evenly spaced pointed projections, and crenated red cells (C) with 
blunt projections evenly distributed over the surface. Crenated
disorders, such as aplastic anemia, chronic myeloprolif-
red cells are usually caused by faulty drying of the blood smear,
erative disorders, and myelodysplastic syndromes, are dis-
change in pH, or excess EDTA (shrinkage of the erythrocytes).
cussed in earlier chapters.
678
DISORDERS OF RED BLOOD CELLS—ANEMIAS
口
FIGURE 61.6 (A) Blood smear showing basophilic stippling 
 FIGURE 61.5 Polychromatophilic red cells (reticulocytes ) (A,
(arrows), polychromatophilic red cells, and teardrops. (B) Dark,
arrows) contain ribosomes, which are demonstrated by supravital
angular bodies of various sizes on Wright-stained smear are
stains (B, arrows).
Pappenheimer bodies (iron particles). The inset is iron stain.
FIGURE 61.7 Blood smears demonstrate Howell-Jolly bodies (A, arrows) and a Cabot ring (B, arrow).
Courtesy of Diana Tanaka-Mukai, Clinical Laboratories, UCLA Medical Center.
PURE RED CELL APLASIA
679
Pure Red Cell Aplasia
Pure red cell aplasia (PRCA) is a rare condition character-
ized by severe anemia, lack of reticulocytes, and marked
reduction or virtual absence of erythroid precursors in the
bone marrow.
There are two forms of PRCA: congenital and acquired.
 Congenital PRCA or Diamond-Blackfan anemia appar-
ently represents a heterogeneous group and has been observed
 in both autosomal recessive and dominant forms. A signifi-
cant proportion of these patients show mutations on chro-
mosomes 19q or 8p. The 19q mutation involves the RPS19
gene, encoding the ribosomal protein S19, suggesting that a
 defect in ribosome biogenesis plays a role in the pathogenesis
A
of Diamond-Blackfan anemia. Diamond-Blackfan anemia is
a disease of early infancy, with over 90% of cases diagnosed
within the first year of life. Males and females are equally
affected. The disease is sporadic in about 35% of cases, but
autosomal recessive and dominant forms have been reported
Diamond-Blackfan anemia demonstrate physical abnormali-
ties such as short stature, microcephaly, dleft palate, atrial or
ventricular septal defect, and/or urogenital abnormalities.
Spontaneous remissions have been reported in up to 25% of
patients. Therapeutic approaches include corticosteroid and
metoclopramide therapy, blood transfusion, and bone mar-
row transplantation.
Acquired PRCA may be drug-induced or associated
with a wide variety of clinical conditions such as viral
B
infections, autoimmune disorders, and lymphoid malig-
d o  e  r x) s
FIGURE 61.8 Heinz bodies are unstable Hb precipitates attached 
to red cell membrane visible by supravital stains (A, arrows).
Hemoglobin H, appears as small, evenly dispersed deposits (like a
golf ball), visible by supravital stains (B).
Courtesyof Diana Tanaka-Mukai Clinical Laboratories,UCLA
Box 61.1 Conditions Associated with
Medical Center.
Acquired Pure Red Cell Aplasia'
 Lymphoproliferative disorders
NK-cell- or T-LGL-mediated
 B-cell lymphoproliferative disorders 
 Myelodysplastic syndromes
 Myeloproliferative disorders
Viral infections (parvovirus B19, viral hepatitis, HIV)
 Drugs (phenytoin, chloramphenicol, zidovudine)
 Immunologically mediated 
 Autoimmune hemolytic anemia
 Rheumatoid arthritis
Systemic lupus erythematosus
ABO-incompatible stem cell transplantation
Antibody against erythropoietin
 Thymoma and other cancers 
Pregnancy
FIGURE 61.9 Blood smears demonstrate ring and schizont forms
● Idiopathic
of malaria.
1Adapted from Fisch P. Handgretinger R. Schaefer HE. Pure red cell aplasia. Br J
Courtesy of Diana Tanaka-Mukai, Clinical Laboratories, UCLA
Haematol 2000: 111: 101 0-1022.
Medical Center.
680
MORPHOLOGY AND LABORATORY FINDINGS
● Patients usually have a profound anemia which is often
macrocytic. White blood cell (WBC) and platelet counts are
umaffected.
● Most patients show an elevated red cell adenosine deaminase
activity and may also demonstrate an increased proportion of
fetal Hb for age and an increased expression of the I antigen.
● Bone marrow specimens of patients with PRCA show vari-
able cellularity with markedly elevated M:E ratio due to severe
eythroid depletion and rare late erythroid progenitor cells
(Figure 61.10). The erythroid cells may appear dysplastic.
Parvovirus-associated aplasia is often characterized by promi-
nent megaloblastic changes and the presence of giant rubri-
blasts (gigantoblasts) (Figures 61.11 to 61.13). These giant
 ells are characterized by dark basophilic cytoplasm and large
vesicular nuclei with fine chromatin and prominent nucleoli.
They may demonstrate viral inclusions.
● The bone marrow granulocytic and megakaryocytic lines are
unremarkable and show progressive maturation. No signifi-
cant changes are noted in the lymphocytic and plasmacytic
population, except when the underlying cause is a lymphop-
roliferative process.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The major distinguishing features of Diamond-Blackfan
anemia are family history and the manifestation of the dis-
PRCA is often transient and is mostly seen in individuals
older than 1 year.
FIGURE 61.10 Bone marrow smears of a patient with pure red cell
Congenita! Dyserythropoietic
aplasia (A and B) showing marked myeloid preponderance and
occasional erythroid precursors.
Anemias
Congenital dyserythropoietic anemias (CDAs) are a group
myelodysplastic syndrome. B19 parvovirus-induced PRCA
 of rare congenital anemias characterized by ineffective eryth-
can occur in various conditions such as sickle cell (SC)
ropoiesis and dysplastic changes in erythroid precursors.
anemia, post-organ transplantation, congenital immuno-
 Originally, there were three wellestablished CDA types-
deficiency syndromes, and lymphoproliferative disorders.
I, II, and III (Table 61.2)—but several new variants such as
The erythroid progenitor cells are targeted by B19 parvovi-
A   Pda aaq aa l Pe  A 'Ai sada
rus via the red cell receptor globoside (blood group P anti-
 gens). The majority of immunologically mediated PRCAs
are caused by antibodies which either inhibit erythropoi-
CONGENITAL DYSERYTHROPOIETIC ANEMIA
esis and Hb synthesis, or bind complement and have direct
TYPEI
cytotoxic effects on erythroblasts. Large granular lympho-
proliferative disorders, thymoma, and HIV infection are
Congenital dyserythropoietic anemia type I is a rare auto-
among other causes of PRCA. The therapeutic approaches
 somal recessive disorder manifested in various ages,
include treatment of the underlying disorder and support-
ranging from infancy to adulthood. It is characterized
ive therapy.
by variable degrees of anemia with mild to distinct mac-
 Transient erythroblastoma of childhood is a temporary acquired
rocytosis, moderate hyperbilirubinemia, iron overload,
      
 and often splenomegaly. Congenital malformations such
topenia usually observed in children <1 year old. It is mostly
 as presence of sixth toe, ventricular septal defect, short
idiopathic or in some cases autoimmune related.
stature, and hip dysplasia have been reported in up to
CONGENITALDYSERYTHROPOIETICANEMIAS
681
FIGURE 61.11 PURE RED cELL APLASIA CAUsED BY PARvovIRUs B19 INFECTIoN. Bone marrow biopsy Section demonstrates myeloid preponderance,
eosinophilia, and scattered giant early erythroid precursors (arrows) (A, low power; B, high power). A parvovirus-positive cellis shown by
immunohistochemical stain(C).
FIGURE 61.12 PARvoviRus B19 INFEcTloN. Bone marrow biopsy section demonstrates several early erythroid cells with nuclear inclusions 
(arrows) (A, low power; B, high power). Several parvovirus-positive cells are shown by immunohistochemical stain (C).
682
DISORDERS OF RED BLOOD CELLS—ANEMIAS
one-third of cases. The majority of the patients demon-
 strate mutations of the CDAN1 gene.
Patients with CDA type I show a significant positive
response to recombinant interferon-α2 treatments.
Morphology and LaboratoryFindings
● The bone marrow is hypercellular with marked erythroid
hyperplasia and dysplasia. Dysplastic changes are mostly con-
fined to the middle and late stages of erythroid maturation and 
include nuclear irregularity, double segmented nuclei, binucle-
ation with nuclei of different sizes, textures, and stainability
(Figures 61.14 and 61.15). Pairs of normoblasts attached by a
chromatin bridge may be present. There are also mild to mod-
erate megaloblastic changes. Iron stores are increased.
● Electron microscopy reveals widening of the nuclear mem-
brane pores with vacuolization and disintegration of nuclear
chromatin ("Swiss cheese" appearance).
The peripheral blood shows anemia with Hb levels ranging
from 6.5 to 13g/dL. Anisocytosis, poikilocytosis, and macro-
cytosis are common features with a normal to slightly elevated
reticulocyte count (1-5%). Basophilic stippling. Howell-Jolly
bodies, and Cabot rings may be present. Some cases may
show elevated HbA2 levels and/or unbalanced globin chain
synthesis with increased a:β ratio.
● The serum levels of haptoglobin are low, bilirubin is high, and
iron is normal to elevated.
CONGENITAL DYSERYTHROPOIETIC
ANEMIA TYPE I
Congenital dyserythropoietic anemia type II is an auto-
somal recessive disorder also known as hereditary erythro-
B
blastic multinuclearity with a positive acidified serum lysis test
FIGURE 61.13 Bone marrow smear (A, B, and inset) demonstrates 
(HEMPAS) (Table 61.2). CDA type II is the most common
several large erythroblasts in a patient infected with parvovirus B19.
type of CDA with over 300 cases reported. The extent of
 anemia varies from mild to severe. Hyperbilirubinemia
 and consequent gallstone formation are frequent findings,
Table 61.2
and over two-thirds of patients show splenomegaly. There
 Features of the Major Types of Congenital
is about 20% chance of development of hepatic cirrhosis.
Dyserythropoietic Anemia (CDA)'
 The major causative gene is CDAN2, and genetic testing is
Features
Type I
Type Il
Type Ill
available.
 Therapeutic approaches include supporive therapy.
Inheritance
Autosomal
Autosomal
Autosomal
recessive
recessive
dominant or
such as RBC transfusion, and splenectomy if severity of
recessive
anemia compromises patients' performance.
Gene;
CDAN1;
CDAN2;
CDAN3;15q22
chromosome
15q15.1-3
20q11.2
Normocytic
Morphologic and Laboratory Findings
Red cells
Macrocytic
Large macrocytic
Erythroblasts
Megaloblastic;
 Nomoblastic; 
Megaloblastic;
● The bone marrow is hypercellular and shows erythroid hyper-
nuclear
binucleated
 Giant mono-or 
plasia with dysplastic changes in middle to late stage normo-
chromatine
cells
 multinucleated
blasts. A significant proportion of these cells (10-30%) show
bridges
cells
bi- or multilobated nuclei and many are binucleated.
Ham test
Negative
Usually
Negative
● Overdestruction of erythroid precursors and increased cell
 positive
debris often lead to the accumulation of macrophages and
Glycosylation
Some
 Markedly
Some
the presence of pseudo-Gaucher cells or sea-blue histiocytes.
abnormalities
abnormal
abnormalities
There is increased iron stores.
Adapted from Wickramasinghe SN, Wood WG. Advances in the 
：
 Electron microscopy reveals an excess of smooth endoplasmic
reticulum parallel to the cell membrane of the normoblasts
Haematol 2005; 131: 431 -446.
("double membrane" appearance).
CONGENITAL DYSERYTHROPOIETIC ANEMIAS
683
FIGURE 6 1.14 CONGENITAL DYSERYTHROPOIETIC ANEMIA. BONe
marrow biopsy (A) and smear (B and C) demonstrate numerous 
C
FIGURE 61.15 CoNGENITAL DYSERYTHROPOETIC ANEMIA. BoNe MarrOW
nuclei.
smear (A, B, and C) shows double segmented nuclei, the 
segments differ in size (black arrows). A dysplastic, multilobated 
erythroid precursor is shown in (C) (green arrow).
● Peripheral blood smears show varying degrees of anisopoi-
CONGENITAL DYSERYTHROPOIETIC
kilocytosis, often with a normal MCV. Occasional basophilic
stippling or teardrops may be present.
ANEMIA TYPE III
● The RBCs of most patients are lysed in the acidifed
Congenital  dyserythropoietic  anemia  type II is  an
serum lysis test (Ham test) by normal sera but not by the
extremely rare condition and has been observed in both
patient's own serum. Band 3 and 4.5 glycoproteins are under-
glycosylated, although there may be overglycosylation of 
familial and sporadic forms (Table 61.2). The familial
glycolipids.
form is autosomal dominant. CDA type Il is characterized
鲁
 There is a progressive elevation of serum ferritin levels
by a mild to moderate macrocytic anemia, bone marrow
684
 DISORDERS OF RED BLOOD CELLS—ANEMIAS
erythroid hyperplasia, and the presence of dysplastic, giant
 erythroid precursor cells with one or multiple nuclei. The
Box 61.2 Common Causes of Macrocytosisl
erythrocytes may react with anti-I and/or anti-i sera, but
Newborn
serum acid test is negative. Linkage analysis and recombi-
 Alcoholism
nation studies in a Swedish family have suggested a gene
 Reticulocytosis
(CDAN3) located in the region of chromosome 15q22.
Folate deficiency
Cobalamin (vitamin B z) deficiency
Liver disease
OTHER TYPES OF CONGENITAL
 Hypothyroidism
DYSERYTHROPOIETIC ANEMIA
 Myelodysplastic syndromes
Several forms of CDA other than types I, II, and II have
 Aplastic anemia
been reported. These briefly include the following.
 Hairy cell leukemia
 Acute leukemia
● CDA group IV is characterized by severe transfusion-depen
● Drugs
dent anemia since birth with absence of precipitated protein
Chemotherapeutic (e.g., cyclophosphamide, methotrexate)
in erythroblasts.
 Antiviral (e.g., zidovudine, stavudine)
● CDA group V represents patients with congenital ineffective
Hypoglycemic (metformin)
erythropoiesis with insignificant dysplasia, mild anemia, and
 Antimicrobial (e.g., sulphamethoxazole, valacyclovir)
elevated unconjugated bilirubin.
 Diuretics (triamterene)
● CDA group Vl is characterized by marked congenital
 Anticonvulsant (e.g., phenytoin, primidone)
macrocytosis and folate- and vitamin Biz-independent
megaloblastic erythropoiesis with mild anemia.
● Anti-inflammatory (sulphasalazine)
1Adapted from Aslinia F. Mazza Jl. Yale SH. Megaloblastic anemia and other
Causes of macrocytosis. Clin Med Res 2006: 4: 236-241
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis  includes all  congenital and
acquired anemias known to be associated with dyserythro-
poiesis, such as β-thalassemia, hereditary sideroblastic ane-
mias, PK deficiency anemia, myelodysplastic syndromes,
to abnormal purine or pyrimidine metabolism, or inhibi-
 megaloblastic anemia, parvovirus B19 infection, arsenic
tion of DNA polymerization. The major etiologic factors in
poisoning, and severe iron deficiency anemia. Diagnosis
 megaloblastic anemia are:
of CDA should be considered when the reticulocyte count
 does not correlate with the degree of anemia in a patient
which lead to folate (folic acid) or cobalamin (vitamin Biz )
with erythroid hyperplasia or when there is unexplained
deficiencies:
 hyperbilirubinemia or iron overload.
Congenital or acquired defects of purine or pyrimidine
metabolism.
Folate Deficiency
Macrocytic Anemias
Folate is primarily absorbed through the upper third of
the small intestine and is transported to the cells mainly
Macrocytic anemias are a group of anemias in which the
as 5-methyl tetrahydrofolate (5M-THF). THF is required in
 the methylation of deoxyuridine monophosphate (dUMP)
mia is caused by various disorders such as folate and vitamin
to deoxythymidine monophosphate (dTMP) in the pres.
B12 deficiencies, alcoholism, liver disease, hypothyroidism,
ence of thymidylate synthetase. Folate deficiency leads to
and myelodysplastic syndromes (Box 61.2). In general, mac-
retardation of DNA synthesis and delay in cell prolifera-
rocytic anemia can be divided into two major categories: (1)
tion. The end result is inappropriate enlargement of the
megaloblastic anemias and (2) non-megaloblastic anemias.
cells (megaloblasts), which contain more than the normal
 In this chapter, megaloblastic anemias are discussed
amount of DNA but not enough for cell division. Folate
deficiency is caused by decreased intake, malabsorption,
MEGALOBLASTIC ANEMIAS
excess loss, increased requirements, drug effects, and met-
abolic defects (Box 61.3). The major cause of folate defi-
Megaloblastic anemias are a group of anemias charac-
 ciency is dietary. Folate is heat labile and is present in
terized by megaloblastic erythropoiesis and macrocyto-
- various green vegetables, yeast, mushrooms, kidney, and
sis. The underlying defect in megaloblastic anemia is a  liver. A potentially fatal megaloblastic anemia due to a
 decline in the rate of DNA synthesis, leading to a delay rapid tissue folate depletion has been observed in associa-
in cell division in all proliferating cells. This defect is due  tion with nitrous oxide (NzO) anesthesia.
MACROCYTIC ANEMIAS
685
Box 61.3 Major Causes of Folate
Box 61.4 Major Causes of Vitamin B12
Defciency'
Deficiency
Decreased intake
Impaired absorption
●Malnutrition (e.g., poverty, old age, alcoholism)
Gastric origin
 Special diet (e.g., goat's milk)
● Pemicious anemia
●Hyperalimentation
 Zollinger-Ellison syndrome
+
● Gastrectomy, partial or total
Malabsorption
Gluten-induced
Intestinal origin
+
 Tropical sprue 
● lleac disease or resection 
 Other diseases of small intestine
 Blind loop syndrome
 Chronic tropical sprue
Excess loss of folate
 Fish tapeworm
 Dialysis
●Drugs (e.g., metformin)
 Congestive heart failure
Inadequate diet
Metabolic defects
Increased requirement
Congenita!
 Pregnancy
+
 Transcobalamin ll deficiency
 Premature infants
● Homocystinuria and methylmalonic aciduria 
 Excessive marrow turnover (e.g., hemolytic anemia)
● Hereditary orotic aciduria
 Inflammatory diseases (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis, exfoliative
● Lesch-Nyhan syndrome
dermatitis)
Cancers
Acquired
●Anesthesia with nitrous oxide
Drugs
●Drug-induced
● Folate antagonists (e.g., methotrexate)
Others (e.g., congenital R-binding deficiency)
Anticonvulsants
+
Barbiturates
1Adapted from Naeim F. Pathology of Bone Marrow. 2Znd edn. Williams &
Wilkins. Baltimore. 1998.
Congenital defects
 Congenital folate malabsorption
Dihydrofolate reductase deficiency
● Homocysteine methyltransferase deficiency
1Adapted from Naeim F. Pathology of Bone Marrow. 2nd edn. Williams &
specific receptors. The IF is then separated from vitamin
Wilkins. Baltimore. 1998.
B12, and the free vitamin Bi2 is absorbed. The absorbed
vitamin Bi2 enters the portal circulation and binds to trans-
cobalamins, mainly transcobalamin II. IF deficiency leads
to magaloblastic anemia. Megaloblastic anemia secondary
Vitamin B2Deficiency
to IF deficiency is known as pernicious anemia.
Pernicious anemia is either congenital or acquired. The
Vitamin B,2 is involved in the conversion of 5M-THF to
congenital form is a rare disorder characterized by muta-
THF, which is required for the methylation of dUMP to
tions in the IF gene localized on chromosome llq13 and
dTMP. Vitamin B,2 deficiency, similar to folate deficiency.
lack of IF production. In congenital IF deficiency, gas-
leads to disturbance of DNA synthesis, and consequently.
tric acid secretion and mucosal cytology are normal. The
megaloblastic anemia. Vitamin B,2 is heat resistant and is
acquired pernicious anemia, in most cases, is an autoim-
abundant in animal proteins. The most common cause of
mune disorder characterized by chronic atrophic gastritis
vitamin B,z deficiency is impaired intestinal absorption.
and reduced IF production due to the presence of autoan-
 Other less frequent causes include inadequate intake and
 tibodies against gastric parietal cells.
metabolic defects (Box 61.4).
Unlike folate deficiency, vitamin Bi2 deficiency may
In the digestive system, vitamin B,2 attaches to salivary
be associated with neurologic symptoms. These symp-
and gastric vitamin B,2 binders (R binders; haptocorrins)
toms result from degenerative changes of the dorsal and
 The R-vitamin-B12 complexes are broken when exposed
lateral columns of the spinal cord (subacute combined
to pancreatic enzymes, and the R binders are digested. The
 system disease) and have been attributed to the impair-
released vitamin B,2 binds to intrinsic factor (IF), a glyco-
ment of myelin synthesis, as a result of the accumulation
protein secreted by the gastric parietal cells. The IF-vitamin-
 of methylmalonyl CoA or impairment of methyl group
B,2 complex is then carried to the ileum, where it binds to
metabolism
686
DISORDERSOF RED BLOOD CELLS-ANEMIAS
Disturbance of Purine and Pyrimidine Metabolism
The defects of purine and pyrimidine metabolism are either
 acquired or congenital. The major causes of acquired defects
are antimetabolite drugs (purine and pyrimidine analogs).
Hereditary orotic aciduria and  Lesch-Nyhan syndrome
represent the congenital deficiencies. Hereditary orotic
aciduria is an autosomal recessive disorder of pyrimi-
dine metabolism characterized by orotidylic decarbox-
ylase deficiency. Lesch-Nyhan syndrome is an X-linked
disorder caused by a deficiency of hypoxanthine-guanine
phosphoribosyltransferase.
Morphology and Laboratory Findings
● Bone marrow sections and smears are hypercellular and reveal
A
erythroid hyperplasia. There is often a shift to the left with
numerous megaloblasts. Megaloblastic erythroid precursors
are larger than their normal counterparts, show asynchronous
nuclear and cytoplasmic maturation, display coarser nuclear
chromatin, and have more cytoplasm relative to the size of the
nucleus (Figures 61.16 to 61.18).
 The megaloblastic features are more striking in the intermedi-
ate and late stages of erythroid maturation, demonstrated as
unevenly speckled nuclear chromatin and abundant hemoglo-
bin-containing cytoplasm. Final condensation of chromatin
(pyknosis), which is seen in late orthochromatic normoblasts,
is either delayed or fails to occur Dysplastic changes such as
nuclear fragmentation and nuclear irregularity or lobulation
are common. The megaloblastic changes and the erythroid left
shift may simulate an acute leukemic proces, particularly in
H&E sections, where clusters of immature erythroid cells with
 open nuclear chromatin and prominent nucleoli are found.
B
● The granulocytic series are also affected and show nuclear-
cytoplasmic asynchrony with the presence of giant metamy-
elocytes and bands and hypersegmented neutrophils.
● Mild to moderate myeloid left shift is a common feature.
 Megakaryocytic lineage may display nuclear hypersegmentation.
 Peripheral   blood   ecxamination   reveals  pancytopenia 
with
increased MCV of usually >1l15fL. Blood smears show aniso-
phils (5 nuclear segments in >5% of neutrophils or more than 6
 nuclear segments in >1% of neutrophils). Other features include
basophilic stippling. Howell-Jolly bodies, and occasionally Cabot
rings. In severe cases, numerous nucleated RBCs are present.
Coincident iron deficiency or thalassemia can mask macrocytosis.
● In the case of folate deficiency, there is reduced concentration
of serum and RBC folate. Pregnancy, alcohol intake, and cer-
tain anticonvulsant drugs may cause a decrease in serum levels
despite adequate tissue stores. Hemolysis may falsely elevate
serum folate levels due to high concentration of folate in RBCs.
 Different laboratory methods are used for the measurement
FIGURE 61.16 MEGALoBLAsTIc ANEMIA. Bone marrow Smear
of serum vitamin Biz levels. Serum vitamin Bz levels may be
demonstrating megaloblastic erythroid precursors (A and B) with
falsely low in pregnancy, use of oral contraceptives, congenital
a giant band (B, arrow). A hypersegmented neutrophil (arrow)
and a binucleated erythroid precursor are shown in (C).
deficiency of serum haptocorrins (R binders), and plasma cell
myeloma. The Schilling test is performed to evaluate vitamin
Bz absorption and to distinguish various causes of its reduced
● With the administration of folate or vitamin Biz. reticulocyte
absorption, such as pernicious anemia/gastrectomy, iliac dis-
count will be increased in 3-4 days, followed by a fall in
ease, or intestinal bacterial overgrowth.
MCV and a rise in Hb levels within 10 days. Hypersegmented
● Serum methylmalonic acid levels are elevated only in patients
neutrophils disappear in 10-14 days, and Hb levels return to
with vitamin Bz deficiency.
normal within 8 weeks
MACROCYTICANEMIAS
687
erythroid precursors (A, low power; B, high power). Bone marrow smear shows numerous megaloblasts and scattered late erythroid 
precursors with irregular nuclei (C).
FIGURE 61.18 MEGALoBLAstic ANEMIA. Bone marrow smear demonstrates erythroid preponderance with a high proportion of
megaloblasts (A, low power; B, high power). An unevenly hemoglobinized erythroid cell is indicated by arrow (B). Blood smear shows
macro-ovalocytes and a hypersegmented neutrophil (B, inset).
left shift in bone marrow biopsy sections may sometimes
DifferentialDiagnosis
resemble acute leukemia. Immunophenotypic studies and
Megaloblastic changes are observed in various conditions 
 review of the bone marrow smears will help to identify
such as myelodysplastic syndromes, erythroleukemia,  the erythroid nature of the immature cells. Coexistence of
CDA, parvovirus infection, and following chemotherapy.n
megaloblastic anemia with microcytic anemias, such as
 In these conditions, serum folate and vitamin Bi levels  iron deficiency anemia or thalassemia, may mask macrocy-
 are elevated or within normal limits. Increased number  tosis, but hypersegmented neutrophils and giant bands are
of early erythroid precursors and the presence of myeloid  still present.
688
DISORDERS OF RED BLOOD CELLS-—ANEMIAS
Microcytic Anemias
Microcytic anemias are anemias with red cells smaller than
normal (MCV <80 fL). The most common cause of micro-
cytic anemia is iron deficiency, followed by thalassemias.
 Anemia of chronic disease, sideroblastic anemia, copper
deficiency, and zinc intoxication may also be associated
A
with microcytic anemia.
IRON DEFICIENCY ANEMIA
 Iron deficiency anemia (IDA) is the most common anemia
worldwide. The highest frequency of IDA is seen in women
of reproductive age, pregnant women, and premature
infants. Major causes of IDA are inadequate dietary intake,
blood loss, hemoglobinuria, iron malabsorption, renal
dialysis, or inability of erythroid precursors to utilize iron.
● Inadequate dietary intake is seen in infants fed milk withouf
supplementary iron. [ron is low in milk and milk products,
and prolonged (>6 months) breast or bottle feeding without
二
iron supplementation may lead to IDA.
●Blood loss, particularly chronic bleeding. is one of the major
causes of iron deficiency in adults. Chronic gastrointesti-
nal bleeding due to peptic ulcer, gastritis, ulcerative colitis,
amebiasis, hiatus hernia, esophageal and gastric varices, and
cancers is the most common cause of IDA in men and post-
menstrual women. Bleeding of the genitourinary tract, such
as hematuria, hemoglobinuria (eg. paroxysmal nocturnal
hemoglobinuria, PNH), menstruation, and menorrhage often
leads to the depletion of iron store. Similarly, IDA is observed
in respiratory tract blood loss secondary to infection, epi-
staxis, idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis, and Goodpasture
syndrome.
● Iron deficiency is associated with the depletion and disappear-
ance of hemosiderin and ferritin from bone marrow and other
+
storage sites, and decreased concentration of several iron-con-
FIGURE 61.19 IRoN-DEFicIENcY ANEMIA. Pallor of conjunctival mucosa 
taining proteins such as Hb, myoglobin, cytochrome C, cyto-
(A), fissuring and ulceration at the corners of the mouth (B), and 
chrome oxidase, and xanthine oxidase.
glossitis with flattening and loss of papillae (C).
● Approximately 1-2mg/day iron is absorbed through the
From Hoffbrand AV, Pettit JE, Vyas P. Color Atias of Clinical Hematology.
digestive system. Iron absorption is retarded by phosphate
4th edn.Mosby/Eisevier,Philadeiphia,2010,by permission.
and phytates from cereals and is enhanced by vitamin C.
Meat, eggs. and liver are rich in iron. All vegetables except
legumes and all fruits are either poor in iron or contain
contractions during pregnancy, and possibly an increased
unabsorbable iron chelates.
rate of premature births have been reported in patients
Symptoms and signs of anemia such as pallor, fatigue,
with iron deficiency. Most of the symptoms subside a few
headache, paresthesia, and burning sensation of the oro-
days after initiation of iron therapy. The reticulocyte count
pharyngeal mucosa are often preceded by the depletion
reaches its peak at about 1-2 weeks and then gradually lev-
of iron stores (Figure 61.19). There is a poor correlation
 els off. The Hb level begins to improve after 2 weeks and
between the severity of the symptoms and the blood Hb
usually comes back to normal levels after 2 months of ade-
 level, suggesting that some of the symptoms are caused by
quate iron therapy.
 a deficiency of iron-containing enzymes or proteins rather
than by a low concentration of Hb. Pica (appetite for sub-
stances not considered as food, such as clay or dirt) and
Morphology and Laboratory Findings
s p    (   
● Bone marrow examination often reveals mild to moderate
Impaired learning ability and growth in children,
hypercellularity with erythroid preponderance. Erythroid pre-
defects in cell-mediated immunity and bactericidal func-
alrsors, particularly intermediate and late normoblasts, are
tion of leukocytes, increased frequency of premature
small and show scanty, ragged rims of poorly hemoglobinized
MICROCYTIC ANEMIAS
689
Table 61.3
Laboratory Findings in Iron Deficiency Anemia
Parameter
Results
Hemoglobin
<13 g/dL in men; <12 g/dL in women
MCV
<80fL
 Serum iron
<75 μg/dL in men; <65 μg/dL in
women
Transferrin {TIBC)
>450μg/dL
Transferrin saturation
<16%
Serum ferritin
<10μg/L
Erythrocyte protoporphyrin
>7 μg/dL RBC
 Bone marrow iron stain
 Markedly reduced or negative
Table 61.4
Clinicopathologic Features of Common β-Thalassemia
Syndromes'
Thalassemia
Thalassemia
Thalassemia
Features
Trait
Intermedia
Major
Genetic
Heterozygous,
 Heterozygous,
Homozygous,
with one
with more than
two β-globin
mutated
 one mutation in
 genes affected
β-globin gene
β-globin genes,
one of which
is partially
defective
FIGURE 61.20 IroN DEFIcIENcY ANEMIA. Bone marrow smear shows 
Clinical
Mild microcytic
 Moderate
late erythroid precursors with ragged rims (A, arrows). Blood
Severe
 anemia; no
smear demonstrates hypochromic microcytic red cells (B).
anemia,
transfusion-
other clinical
splenomegaly.
dependent 
symptoms
 and iron overload
anemia,
splenomegaly,
cytoplasm (Figure 61.20A). These morphologic findings are
iron overload,
bone
not consistent and do not correlate with the severity of ane-
deformities
mia. Bone marrow hemosiderin (demonstrated by Prussian
1Adapted from Rund D, Rachmilewitz E. Beta-thalassemia. N Engl J Med 
blue stain) is reduced or absent. However, lack of stainable
iron has been noted in patients with chronic myelogenous
2005; 353: 1135-1146.
leukemia and myelofbrosis.
●
 Peripheral blood examination in the early stages of IDA reveals
mild anisocytosis with slightly elevated red cell distribution
width (RDW) and decreased MCV (<80fL) (Figure 61.20B). [n
anemia. The defect in globin chain production leads to a
more severe forms of IDA, erythrocytes are clearly microcytic
and hypochromic and show pronounced anisocytosis with the
change in the proportion of the Hb classes, which consists
presence of target cells. The RDW is markedly elevated, and the
of HbA (α2 P2), HbA2 (α2 62 ), and HbF (α2 Y2), constitut-
MCV, MCH, and Hb levels are significantly lower than the nor-
ing >95%, >3%, and <2% of the Hb molecules in normal
mal range. There may be evidence of thrombocytosis.
adults, respectively. The globin gene clusters are located on
 Serum iron and ferritin levels are low and serum transferrin
chromosomes 11 and 16, respectively (Figure 61.21), and
or total iron-binding capacity (TIBC) is elevated, as is the
encode globin subunits specific for the embryonic, fetal,
concentration of erythrocyte protoporphyrin (Table 61.3).
and adult developmental stages. In normal conditions,
Serum ferritin is invariably low in IDA, but it is elevated
a balance is maintained between α- and β-cluster
in anemia of chronic disease, sideroblastic anemia,
and
 gene expression so that functional Hb tetramers are
thalassemia (Table 61.4).
assembled.
In thalassemia this balance is lost. The reduction in
the synthesis of certain globin chain(s) leads to relative
THALASSEMIA SYNDROMES
excess of the non-affected globin chain(s), causing Hb
Thalassemia syndromes are a group of disorders caused
instability and hemolysis. The thalassemia syndromes are
by inherited defects in the synthesis of one or more of
divided into β, 5, β8, and α. 5-Thalassemia has no clinical
the globin chains and are characterized by a microcytic  significance.
690
DISORDERS OF RED BLOOD CELLS—ANEMIAS
Chromosomell
a2Y2
HbE
HbA
HbA2
HbH
HbBart's
Fetus
Aduir.
Pathologie
FlGURE 61.21 Hb genes are located on chromosomes 11 and 16.
Normal and abnormal Hb structures are demonstrated.
β-Thaiassemia
β-Thalassemia is the result of impaired production of
β-chains of HbA, leading to excess α-globin chains. The
excess α-globin chains are unstable and precipitate in the
erythrocytes (Heinz bodies) leading to the disruption of
cell membrane and hemolysis. The abnormal β-globin
gene expression is primarily the result of point mutations,
but it may also be due to deletion of long stretches of
nucleotides, or substitution of a small number of nucleo-
tides within or close to the β-globin gene. More than 200
point mutations have been reported, but ethnic-specific
mutations allow for practical testing using more limited
FIGURE 61.22 THALAssEMIA MAJoR. (A) Prominent maxilla and
panels. The principal techniques used are DNA sequencing
widening of the bridge of the nose. There is also marked bossing 
 of the frontal and parietal bones. (B) Lateral radiograph of the
and allele-specific probe hybridization.
skull showing the typical "hair-on-end" appearance, with thinning
β-Thalassemia
a syndromes are widespread in
the
 of the cortical bone and widening of the marrow cavity.
Mediterranean basin, Middle East, and southeast Asia with
From Hoffbrand AV, Pettit JE, Vyas P. Color Atlas of Clinica!
 a spectrum of clinical manifestations ranging from a very
Hematology, 4th edn. Mosby/Eisevier, Philadeiphia, 2010, by
mild asymptomatic anemia to severe transfusion-depen-
permission.
dent anemia. These syndromes are divided into three main
categories: (1) β-thalassemia minor, (2) β-thalassemia
● β-Thalassemia intermedia refers to patients with intermediate
major, and (3) β-thalassemia intermedia (Table 61.4).
severity. These patients usually have a compound heterozygous
● β-Thalassemia minor, also known as β-thalassemia frait,
thalassemia consisting of more than one mutation.
refers to heterozygous status when only one β-globin gene is
Therapeutic approaches are based on the severity of
affected. Patients with β-thalassemia trait are asymptomatic
the clinical manifestations and the thalassemia subtype.
and may show mild anemia, usually detected as an inciden-
tal finding by a routine blood examination. Anemia may get
Patients with β-thalassemia minor usually do not need
worse during stressful conditions, such as severe infection or
any specific treatment. Most patients with β-thalassemia
pregnancy. The Hb levels are about 9-11 g/dL, but the MCV
intermedia need transfusion therapy, which can be delayed
and MCH are markedly reduced.
by splenectomy in certain patients. Iron chelation ther-
●β-Thalassemia major refers to patients who are homozygous
 apy may be indicated. Therapy for β-thalassemia major
and have no ability for effective production of β-globin. The
includes chronic 
 hypertransfusion, splenectomy, iron
disease, also known as Cooley's anemia, usually starts during
chelation, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, and
the first year of life with profound transfusion-dependent ane-
 molecular therapy.
mia (Hb as low as 2.5-6g/dL). hepatosplenomegaly, compli-
cations of iron overload, and skeletal deformities due to bone
Morphology and Laboratory Findings
marrow expansion (Figure 61.22). Endocrinopathies, particu-
 larly hypogonadism, are frequent complications as the result of
 In general, symptomatic patients show a hypercellular bone
chronic anemia and iron overload. Children with β-thalassemia
marrow with marked erythroid hyperplasia and left shiff
major are at risk for parvovirus B19-induced aplastic crisis.
with some megaloblastic features (Figure 61.23). The iron
MICROCYTIC ANEMIAS
691
prot
2
S
111食1
Type
AA2
AS
SS
AC
AE
SC
AS
AD
B
FIGURE 61.24 Hemoglobin electrophoresis in cellulose acetate,
demonstrating different types of hemoglobin. S and D, and Az.
C, and E run together. Agar gel separation is usually used to
separate the bands (see Figure 61.25).
From Hoffbrand AV, Pettit JE, Vyas P. Color Atias of Clinica!
Hematology, 4th edn. Mosby/Eisevier, Philadeiphia, 2010, by
permission.
prominent, and there is a variable degree of poikilocytosis.
target cell formation, and basophilic stippling. Nucleated
RBCs are often present. The WBC count is usually elevated but
the platelet count is within normal limits.
Heinz bodies may be detected in the affected RBCs using
supravital stains such as methyl violet.
FIGURE 61.23 β-THALAssEMIA MAJoR. Blood smears showing target 
 The serum iron and ferritin levels are elevated. The transferrin
cells and abnormal nucleated red cells (A, B). Bone marrow smear
saturation rate (ratio of serum iron to transferrin) is also high.
shows erythroid hyperplasia (C).
Sera of the affected patients usually demonstrate increased
mncentration of indirect (unconjugated) bilirubin, elevated 
levels of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and reduced haptoglo-
bin concentration, all indicative of hemolysis.
stores are increased with abundant iron-laden macrophages.
One of the characteristic features of β-thalassemia major
Scattered macrophages may contain phagocytosed normo-
(β0-thalassemia) is elevated levels of fetal Hb. The proportion
blasts. The polychromatophilic normoblasts are poorly hemo-
of HbA, to HbA is also elevated. Hb electrophoresis (alkaline
globinized, show ragged cytoplasm, and contain precipitated
cellulose acetate and acidic citrate agar) is the most widely
α-globin chains. Severely affected patients may show masses
used method for diagnosis of hemoglobinopathies (Figures
of erythroid colonies in the thoracic or pelvic bone marrow
 e s s   i p t1
spaces, causing spinal cord compression or other symptoms.
performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) provide higher
● The peripheral blood shows marked microcytic hypochro-
sensitivity and specificity Isoelectric focusing provides
mic anemia with low MCV and MCH, and elevated RDW
excellent resolution but lacks quantitative accuracy and is
and reticulocyte count (see Figure 61.23). Anisocytosis is
labor intensive.
692
DISORDERS OF RED BLOOD CELLS—ANEMIAS
CitrateAgarpH6.0
Hb
●HbBart's (hydrops fetalis), or α0-thalassemia, with no functional
α-gene. This is the most severe form of α-thalassemia. HbBart's
binds oxygen with high affnity and cannot release it to tissues.
+
The affected fetuses have severe anemia leading to congestive
heart failure with anasarca and capillary leak (hydrops). This
AC
condition is incompatible with extrauterine life.
The therapeutic approaches for α-thalassemias are simi-
AS
lar to those discussed for β-thalassemias.
Morphologyand Laboratory Findings
FIGURE 61.25 Citrate agar hemoglobin electrophoresis (pH 6.0)
demonstrating separation of A, C, and S bands.
  e s s    
Modifed from the internationalCommitteefor Standardization
marrow with marked erythroid hyperplasia and left shift. The
in Hematology. Simple electrophoretic system for presumptive
polychromatophilic normoblasts are poorly hemoglobinized
identifcation of abnormal Hbs.Blood 1978; 52: 1058-1063,by
and show ragged cytoplasm. The iron stores are increased with
permission.
 abundant iron-laden macrophages.
● The peripheral blood shows marked microcytic hypochro-
mic anemia with low MCV and MCH and elevated RDW and
reticulocyte count. Anisocytosis is prominent, and there is a
α-Thaiassemia
variable degree of poikilocytosis, target cell formation, and
basophilic stippling. Nucleated RBCs are often present. The
α-Thalassemia results from deletion of one or more
WBC count may be elevated but the platelet count is within
α-globin genes (see Figure 61.21). The single α-globin
normal limits.
 gene deletion appears to be the most common mutation
● Red cells may contain HbH (tetramers of β-globin chains).
worldwide. The α-globin gene deletion, similar to other
which are precipitated when exposed to oxidants such as the
types of hemoglobinopathies, is believed to be protec-
supravital stains methylene blue and brilliant cresyl blue.
tive against malaria infection. The non-deletion mutations
 HbH precipitates are small, evenly dispersed deposits creating
Sd       s
a golf ball appearance (see Figure 61.8B),
ing defect, RNA translation defect, and post-translational
The serum iron and ferritin levels are elevated. The transfer-
instability. The deficiency in α-chain production results in
rin saturation rate (ratio of serum iron to transferrin) is also
high.
the accumulation of excessive y- and/or β-globin chains in
 Hb electrophoresis, HPLC, and molecular genetic studies are
α-thalassemia which may lead to the formation of unstable
used for the diagnosis of thalassemia syndromes and other
homotetramers β4 (HbH) and y4 (HbBart's). Genetic test-
hemoglobinopathies (see Figures 61.24 and 61.25).
 ing is available to distinguish the different α-gene dosages.
 The severity of clinical manifestations and anemia in
α-thalassemia correlates with several factors, such as the
Other Thalassemia Variants
affected gene (α, or α2), the total number of the affected
 In addition to the classical hereditary α- and β-thalassemias,
d-globin genes, and the extent of functional loss resulting
 from specific mutations. For example, the α2-globin gene is
there are reports of acquired HbH disease associated with
expressed at 2.6-fold higher levels than the α-globin gene
myelodysplastic syndromes  and  myeloproliferative disor-
ders. There are also variants of β-thalassemia associated
and therefore plays a more significant clinical role.
with other structural abnormalities of β-globin chain, such
There are four types of α-thalassemia:
as HbS, HbC, and HbE. 8β-Thalassemia is the result of dele-
● Silent carrier with three functional a-genes. This type is prev-
 tions of the 5- and β-globin genes or crossover between part
alent in the Mediterranean basin, Middle East, India, south-
of the 8 locus on one chromosome and part of the β-locus
east Asia, and Indonesia and affects approximately 30% of
on the complementary chromosome. The Sβ-gene crossovers
Afro-Americans. The affected individuals are asymptomatic
s     e 
and display unremarkable hematologic parameters except for
a borderline low MCV and MCH. The HbAz concentration is
pairing during meiosis, resulting in a Sβ-fusion gene. The
 gene product is an abnormal hemoglobin called Hb Lepore.
normal. The diagnosis is usually made by molecular genetic
studies.
● α-thalassemia trait with two functional α-genes. These patients
 have no clinical symptoms but display mild anemia. The MCV
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
and MCH are low and the HbAz concentration is normal. [f
The differential diagnosis of microcytic anemias, in addi-
affects approximately 3% of Afro-Americans.
tion to IDA and thalassemia syndromes, includes ACD,
● HbH disease with only one functional α gene. This disorder is
sideroblastic anemia, and anemias due to copper defi-
associated with the precipitation of β-globin chain tetramers.
leading to red cell membrane damage and hemolysis. Patients
ciency and zinc toxicity. The patient's clinical history and
suffer from moderate to severe anemia and often demonstrate
 presentation help to distinguish these different categories.
hepatosplenomegaly. Diagnosis is made by demonstration of
IDA is the only microcytic anemia with reduced serum
HbH (see Figure 61.8B).
ferritin and reduced or absence of the bone marrow iron
SICKLE CELL DISEASE
693
Table 61.5
Laboratory Findings in Microcytic Anemias
Serum lron
TIBC'(Transferrin)
% Saturation
Serum Ferritin
Marrow lron Stain
Iron Deficiency
↑(<10%)
Absent
Chronic Disease
↑
↓or N
↑
↑
Sideroblastic
↑or N
↑ + ringed 
 sideroblasts
Thalassemia
↑ or N
↑ or N
个
ITIBC, total iron-binding capacity.
stores (Table 61.5). The proportion of HbA, and fetal Hb is
elevated, and Heinz bodies are present in β-thalassemias,
and the presence of HbH is the hallmark of α-thalassemia.
Sickle Cell Disease
Sickle cell (SC) disease consists of a family of hereditary
hemoglobinopathies caused by mutations in the β-globin
chain gene. It includes HbS (sickle β-globin), HbC, and
HbE disorders. HbD disease is the result of either β- or
α-chain gene mutation. Sickle cell anemia is a homozy-
gous state which represents the most severe form of the
disease in this group, resulting from the inheritance of
HbS from both parents.
● The HbS mutation is a single base change in the DNA codon
(GAG to GTG), which results in the substitution of the amino
B
acid valine for glutamic acid at the sixth amino acid position
in the β-globin chain. Deoxygenated HbS molecules align in
FIGURE 61.26 SICKLE CELL ANEMIA WITH "HAND-FOOT" SYNDROME. There
liquid crystals (tactoids) and distort the erythrocytes into rigid
 is marked shortening of the right middle finger (A), and the toes
sickle shapes. Reoxygenation disassembles the tactoids, and
show irregularities in length (B).
the erythrocytes become discoid and flexible again. Repeated
From Hoffbrand AV, Pettit JE, Vyas P. Color Atlas of Clinica!
sickling and unsickling is associated with red cell membrane
Hematology.4th ed, Mosby/Elsevier, Philadelphia, 2010, by
changes such as changes in the membrane phospholipid com-
permission.
position and perturbation of the interaction between mem-
brane phospholipids and cytoskeletal proteins. These changes
The prevalence of HbS is greatest in Africa, with a het-
eventually lead to the inability of the erythrocytes to switch
from sickle shape to discoid shape. The irreversible SCs have
erozygote frequency of about 20%. In Afro-Americans, SC
a short intravascular lifespan and, because of their rigid shape,
trait occurs in approximately 8% of the population. There
may block small vascular structures, leading to ischemia and
is a high prevalence of HbS in areas of the world where
endothelial cell damage.
malaria is epidemic. Heterozygous SC patients appear
● In HbC, glutamic acid in the sixth position of the β-globin
to be more resistant to malaria infection, particularly
chain is replaced by lysine. The HbC-containing erythrocytes
Plasmodium falciparum, than are normal persons.
are more rigid than normal red cells and may form rod-like
 The clinical symptoms of SC anemia in affected infants
Crystals in hypoxic conditions. Erythrocyte damage and frag-
are usually manifested 8-10 weeks after birth. Prior to this
mentation may lead to the formation of microspherocytes.
period, the newborn is protected by the high concentra-
●
HbD involves either the βglobin or aglobin chain. In the
tion of HbF in the erythrocytes. Patients have a steady-
βglobin chain variant, glutamate is substituted for lysine
state course that is intermittently interrupted by a sudden
at the 12lth position, and in the α-globin variant, also known
as HbG Philadelphia, asparagine is replaced by lysine at the
increase in severity (crisis). The most common cause of
68th position. Several other variants of HbD have been
 SC crisis is vaso-occlusive events leading to ischemia and
reported.
subsequent infarction of the affected tissues (frequently
HbE is the result of a β-chain mutation in which glutamine is
bone and spleen) (Figure 61.26). This type of crisis is
substituted for lysine at the 26th position.
usually associated with severe pain in the bones, chest,
694
DISORDERSOF RED BLOOD CELLS-ANEMIAS
and abdomen. Other crisis-related clinical complications
may be secondary to bone infarcts, such as irregularities in the
include the development of aplastic, megaloblastic, or
size of fingers and toes, partial vertebral collapse, or avascul-
hemolytic anemia.
lar necrosis of the pelvis. The femoral shafts, which in normal
Affected children often demonstrate growth retarda
mnditions are not actively involved in hematopoiesis, may
tion and skeletal abnormalities. Retinal damage, cerebro-
become active. Extramedullary hematopoiesis may occur.
Blood examination in patients with homozygous SC anemia
vascular accidents, leg ulcers, renal papillary necrosis, and
reveals anemia with a normal MCV, an Hb level ranging from
recurrent infections are common complications. Dactylitis
5 to 11g/dL, and reticulocytosis (5-15%). There is anisopoi-
- qh '1 a araq (san e siay u ued ane)
kilocytosis with the presence of SCs, target cells, and nucleated
tration <7 g/dL, and leukocytosis in the absence of infec-
RBCs (Figure 61.27).
tions are considered predictors of an adverse outcome.
+
 HbC disease is often associated with the presence of rod-like
Other forms of SC disease and related disorders such
oystals (Figure 61.28).
as SC trait, HbSC, HbC, HbD, HbE, HbS-β-thalassemia,
 Serum indirect bilirubin and lactate dehydrogenase levels are
 and HbC-β-thalassemia cause either no symptoms or mild
elevated, and senum haptoglobin and creatinine concentra-
 symptoms with slight to moderate anemia.
fions are low.
 The therapeutic approaches include treatment with
Fetal Hb is slightly to moderately elevated.
hydroxyurea to increase HbF levels, blood transfusion, iron
A simple, inexpensive SC test has been traditionally used for
the screening of patients suspicious of SC disease. This test is
chelation therapy, administration of antibiotics for preven-
based on the principle that reducing agents, such as sodium
tion and treatment of infections, and anticoagulation ther
metabisulfte, are able to induce precipitation of Hbs in eryth-
apy to prevent or treat vaso-occlusive events. Bone marrow
rocytes and cause sickling.
transplantation may be effective in selected patients.
● Diagnosis of SC disease is established by the demonstra-
fion of HbS on hemoglobin electrophoresis, by HPLC, and
MORPHOLOGY AND LABORATORY FINDINGS
by molecular genetic studies. In alkaline Hb electrophoresis.
HbS moves more slowly than HbA and occupies a position
● In general, patients with clinical symptoms show a hypercel-
between HbA and HbAz. HbC and HbE move more slowly
lular bone marrow with marked erythroid hyperplasia and
than HbS, whereas HbD has a similar mobility to that of HbS.
left shift. The extensive erythroid response and bone marrow
These variations are further delineated by an agar gel electro-
 overgrowth may lead to skeletal deformities. Bone deformities
phoresis at an acid pH.
B
FIGURE 61.27 SicKLE ceLL ANEMIA. Blood smear demonstrates numerous sickle cells and target cells (A and B).
FIGURE 61.28 HeMoGLoBIN c DisEAsE. Blood smear shows rod-like hemoglobin C crystals (A, low power; B, high power).
ERYTHROCYTE MEMBRANE SKELETON DEFECTS
695
● Molecular studies such as DNA sequencing or allele-specific
 probe hybridization are widely available to distinguish among
the various β-globinopathies.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Family history, clinical manifestations, and evidence of
HbS establish the diagnosis. Bone marrow samples during
SC crisis may be markedly hypoplastic or may show evi-
dence of parvovirus B19 infection.
Other Hemoglobinopathies
FIGURE 61.29 Schematic model of red cell membrane
demonstrating vertical and horizontal interactions of various
So far, over 800 different mutations have been reported in
cytoskeletal components.
human Hb genes. The majority of Hb mutations are clini-
Adapted from Tse WT, Lux SE. Red blood cell membrane disorders. Br
cally asymptomatic and have been discovered in conjunc-
JHaematol 1999: 104: 2-13.
tion with large population studies. The most prevalent
mutations, thalassemia syndromes and HbS and related
disorders, are discussed above. Here we briefly discuss
comprising of α- and β-spectrin, ankyrin, protein 4.1,
unstable hemoglobins.
protein 4.2 (pallidin), and actin (Figure 61.29). The
membrane skeleton proteins interact with the integral
membrane protein band 3 (anion exchanger, AE1) and
UNSTABLE HEMOGLOBINS
glycophorin C to provide erythrocyte integrity and deform-
 ability. The genes of the major erythrocyte membrane pro-
Mutations of the globin chains may result in the formation
teins have been mapped and cloned, and structural and
of Hb molecules that are less soluble and have increased
functional domains in each protein have been character-
tendency to precipitation in the erythrocytes, leading to
ized. Mutations of these genes are associated with erythro-
red cell membrane damage and hemolysis. The intracel-
lular Hb precipitates are detected by supravital stains as
cyte membrane skeleton defects.
dark globular aggregates called Heinz bodies. Over 250
unstable Hb molecules have been identified. Patients with
HEREDITARY SPHEROCYTOSIS
unstable Hb demonstrate a broad spectrum of clinical
manifestations ranging from normal Hb levels to severe
Hereditary spherocytosis (HS) is the most common cause
anemia. Jaundice and splenomegaly may be present. In
of hemolytic anemia of non-immune nature and is char-
some cases, high oxygen affinity may cause polycythemia.
acterized by the presence of numerous spherocytes in the
Bone marrow is usually hypercellular and shows erythroid
 peripheral blood (Figure 61.30A). The incidence of HS is
 preponderance. Anisopoikilocytosis and reticulocytosis are
significantly higher in northern European countries than in
frequent peripheral blood morphologic findings. The most
other parts of the world. The autosomal dominant form is
frequent type of unstable Hb in the West is HbKoln, which
the most frequent type, accounting for approximately 75%
is characterized by mild anemia, reticulocytosis, spleno-
of cases. The disease is caused by defective erythrocyte mem-
megaly, and pigmenturia.
brane skeletal proteins in vertical interactions (see Figure
61.9), demonstrated by reduced β-spectrin (dominant) or
4.1, and reduced or unstable ankyrin production (Table 61.6).
The clinical manifestation of HS may range from no
Erythrocyte Membrane Skeleton
symptoms to severe anemia. Most patients show mild to
Defects
moderate anemia, mild jaundice, and a palpable spleen
with a family history of anemia involving one or more
siblings or parents. The peripheral blood smears reveal
A group of hereditary hemolytic anemias are caused by
spherocytosis with a variable degree of reticulocytosis. The
defects in erythrocyte membrane skeleton. These disorders
MCHC and RDW are elevated. The RBCs show increased
are relatively common and are characterized by abnormal
osmotic fragility. Occasionally, HS is complicated by aplas-
shape and decreased deformability of the red cells.
tic crisis caused by parvovirus B19 infection. Patients with
The red cell membrane consists of a lipid bilayer, inte-
severe HS are treated with folic acid supplementation,
gral membrane proteins, and a complex skeletal protein 
blood transfusion, and splenectomy.
696
DISORDERS OF RED BLOOD CELLS—ANEMIAS
hereditary pyropoikilocytosis (HPP), is characterized by severe
hemolytic anemia, jaundice, splenomegaly, and marked sphe-
rocytosis and poikilocytosis. HPP is found predominantly in
the black population. Elliptocytosis may provide resistance
against malaria. Similar to HS, patients with severe HE are
treated with folic acid supplementation, blood transfusion,
and splenectomy.
● Spherocytic HE (hereditary ovalocytosis) is associated with
munder erythrocytes that show increased osmotic fragil-
ity. It is an autosomal dominant disorder observed only
in Caucasians. There is mild to moderate hemolysis with
splenomegaly.
population of Malayan aborigines in southeast Asia and it
is also known as Melanesian ovalocytosis. It is characterized
by spoon-shaped erythrocytes with absent or mild clinical
manifestations.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis of HS includes autoimmune
hemolytic anemia (AIHA) and unstable hemoglobinopa-
thies. HS patients are negative for Coombs test and lack
Heinz bodies. Elliptocytosis and poikilocytosis have been
associated with a garden variety of hematologic disor-
ders such as IDA, thalassemia syndromes, megaloblastic
anemia, myelofibrosis, and myelodysplastic syndromes.
Elliptocytes in these conditions, however, are generally
below 60% of the red cells. Definitive diagnosis of HS
or HE is established by identification of the underlying
B
molecular defects of the erythrocyte membrane skeletal
proteins.
FIGURE 61.30 Blood smears demonstrate spherocytes (A) and
elliptocytes (B).
OTHER MEMBRANE-ASSOCIATED
ERYTHROCYTE ABNORMALITIES
HEREDITARY ELLIPTOCYTOSIS
Acanthocytosis and Echinocytosis
Hereditary elliptocytosis (HE) presents a diverse group
Acanthocytes, or spur cells, are red cells with multiple
 of hemolytic anemias characterized by the presence of
irregularly shaped and randomly distributed cytoplasmic
numerous oval, elliptical, or elongated erythrocytes in
 projections (see Figure 61.3A). These abnormal erythro-
the peripheral blood (Figure 61.30B). The prevalence is
cytes are seen in αβ-lipoproteinemia, amyotrophic chorea
  a  s     i
(chorea acanthocytosis), McLeod syndrome (Kell antigen
in the regions where malaria is endemic, such as Africa
defects), cystic fibrosis, anorexia nervosa, severe liver dis-
and southeast Asia. The disorder is associated with defec-
ease, and hypothyroidism. These disorders appear to cause
tive erythrocyte membrane skeletal proteins in horizontal
 Overexpansion of the outer half of the membrane bilayer
interactions, demonstrated by defective self-association of
and formation of the irregular projections. Acanthocytes
subunits or altered spectrin dimer-dimer association, and/
should be distinguished from echinocytes (burr cells).
or deficiencies of glycoprotein C, protein 4.1, or protein
Echinocytes are erythrocytes with evenly distributed
4.2 (Table 61.6). HE has been divided into three major
pointed projections (see Figure 61.3B). Echinocytosis is
 s () '  ()  
 observed in uremia, liver disease, hypomagnesemia, hypo-
and (3) stomatocytic type.
phosphatemia, post-chemotherapy, and in athletes after
● Common HE is mostly reported as an autosomal dominant
 heavy physical exercise. Crenated red cells are cells with
disorder with no clinical symptoms or mild to moderate
 evenly distributed blunt projections, usually a common
anemia. Jaundice, splenomegaly, and reticulocytosis may be
laboratory artifact caused by blood storage, contact with
present in some cases. An autosomal recessive variant of HE,
glass, or elevated pH (see Figure 61.3C).
697
 Table 61.6
Major Abnormalities of Skeletal Proteins of the Red Blood Cell Membranel
Gene Product
Chromosome
 Phenotypic Features
Defect
cx-Spectrin
1q22-25
HS (recessive)
Spectrin 30-75% normmal; abnormal proteolytic domain
HE/HPP
 Defective α-subunit self-association; abnormal proteolytic
domain
 β-5pectrin
14q23-24.2
HS (dominant)
Spectrin 60-85% nommal; impaired binding to protein 4.1
HEc
Diminished spectrin tetramer self-association; impaired
 binding to ankyrin
Ankyrin
8p11-21.1
H5
Spectrin 50% normal; unstable ankyrin
 Protein 3
17q21-17qter
Acanthocytosis
Reduced ankyrin binding
 Protein 4.1
1p32-1pter
HEc
 Partial or total 4.1 deficiency
 Protein 4.2
15q15
HEs
4.2 deficiency; decreased ankyrin stability
Glycophorin C
2q14-21
HEc
Weakened 4.1 association with membrane
1Adapted from Davies KA, Lux SE, McGuire M, et al. Clinical disorders of the erythrocyte membrane skeleton. Hematol Pathol 1988; 2: 1-14.
HE。 hereditary elliptocytosis, common type; HE, hereditary elliptocytosis, stomatocytic type; HPP, hereditary pyropoikilocytosis; HS, hereditary
 spherocytosis.
Stomatocytosis
clinical syndromes, some of which demonstrate hemo-
Stomatocytes are cup- or bowel-shaped erythrocytes which
lytic anemia of non-spherocytic type. The most promi-
nent erythrocyte enzyme deficiencies, glucose-6-phosphate
in blood smears appear as cells with a wide slit or stoma
dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency and pyruvate kinase
(mouth-like) area of central pallor (see Figure 6l.2B)
(PK) deficiency, are briefly discussed here.
The stomatocyte shape is the result of the decreased ratio
of the surface area to the volume in the erythrocytes. The
increased red cell volume in almost all cases is due to
increased permeability Stomatocytes are trapped and con-
GLUCOSE-6-PHOSPHATE DEHYDROGENASE
sequently hemolyzed in the microvasculature of spleen
DEFICIENCY
and other organs.
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency results
Stomatocytosis is either hereditary or acquired. Hereditary
stomatocytosis is an autosomal dominant genetic disor-
from a wide variety of mutations in the G6PD gene located
on X chromosome (Xq25). Over 350 mutations of G6PD
der leading to the increased permeability of the red cells
 have been defined. G6PD is an enzyme essential for basic
to sodium. The increased permeability to sodium in some
 cellular functions, including protection of red cell proteins
studies was associated with a deficiency of the erythrocyte
from oxidative damage. G6PD activity is necessary for the
membrane protein stomatin (band 7.2b). Hemolytic anemia
generation of NADPH, which is utilized for glutathione
with stomatocytosis (up to 40-60%), elevated reticulocyte
reduction. Reduced glutathione restores soluble Hb. G6PD
count, elevated serum bilirubin levels, and reduced serum
leading to Hb instability and precipitation as Heinz bod-
characteristic features of hereditary stomatocytosis. Acquired
ies. There are three clinical variants of G6PD deficiency
stomatocytosis is usually manifested in adults. It has been
associated with (1) acute intermittent hemolytic anemia,
observed in alcoholism, chronic liver disease, malignancies,
(2) chronic hemolysis, and (3) no obvious risk of hemo-
and cardiovascular disorders.
lysis. The geographic distribution of G6PD deficiency
Overlaps closely with the prevalence of malaria, suggest-
ing that G6PD deficiency may play a protective role against
malaria.
Hemolytic Anemia Secondary to
The vast majority of G6PD-deficient patients do not
 demonstrate hemolysis if they are not suffering from infec-
Erythrocyte Enzyme Deficiencies
tion or are not exposed to oxidants. Drugs, fava beans, and
viral or bacterial infections are the most common induc-
Numerous enzymes are involved in RBC metabolic activi-
ers of hemolysis in G6PD-deficient patients (Box 61.5).
ties such as the Embden-Meyerhof glycolytic pathway, the
 During the hemolysis, red cells are normocytic normo-
Rapoport-Leubering shunt, and the pentose phosphate
chromic or may show some degree of anisocytosis and
pathway. These metabolic activities maintain the structural
poikilocytosis. Supravital stains may show Heinz bodies
and functional activities of the erythrocytes. Erythrocyte
(see Figure 6l.8A). Removal of the Heinz bodies by the
enzyme deficiencies are associated with a wide variety of
patient's spleen may form "bite" red cells (Figure 6l.31).
698
 DISORDERS OF RED BLOOD CELLS—ANEMIAS
transfusion. Folate supplementation is provided in those
Box 61.5 Examples of Substances Known
 patients with chronic hemolysis.
to Induce Hemolysis in Patients with G6PD
Deficiency
PYRUVATE KINASE DEFICIENCY
Acetanilide 
Pyruvate kinase (PK) deficiency is an autosomal recessive
 Aspirin, high dose
disorder with clinical manifestations of non-spherocytic
Dimercaprol
hemolytic anemia in homozygotes or double heterozy-
Fava beans
gotes. PK is involved in the conversion of phosphoenol-
 Isobutyl nitrate
pyruvate to pyruvate and the generation of ATP in the
 Methylene blue
Embden-Meyerhof pathway. Erythrocyte PK is synthesized
 Naphthalene
under the control of the PK-LR gene. So far, over 150 PK-
Nitrofurantoin (Furadantin)
Pamaquine
LR mutations associated with non-spherocytic hemolytic
 Pentaquine
anemia have been reported. PK-deficiency is distributed
+
 Phenacetin
worldwide, but it is more prevalent in people of northern
+
 Phenilhydrazine
Europe, China, and the Amish community in Pennsylvania.
Primaquine
The severity of hemolysis in PK-deficient patients is
+
 Sulfacetamide
highly variable and may range from a mild, fully compen-
 Sulfanamide
sated hemolysis with no anemia to chronic, severe, life-
 Sulfapyridine
threatening hemolytic anemia. The red cell morphology is
Toluidine blue
unremarkable or may show variable degrees of anisopoi-
Vitamin K (water-soluble analogs)
kilocytosis and reticulocytosis. Splenomegaly is a frequent
finding. Severe cases may develop clinical complications,
such as chronic jaundice, development of gallstones, folate
deficiency, and transient aplastic anemia crisis, often due
to parvovirus B19 infection. Quantitative PK enzyme
assays establish the diagnosis. Molecular diagnostic meth-
ods are not in routine laboratory use, due to the large
number of mutations and their low prevalence.
Immune-Mediated Hemolytic
Anemia
Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia is the most com-
mon form of acquired hemolytic anemia. It is caused
by a variety of antibodies against antigens expressed or
attached to the patient's red cell membrane. These include
autoantibodies, antibodies against transfused red cells
FIGURE 61.31 In G6PD deficiency, removal of the Heinz bodies by
erythrocytes, and drug-antibody complexes.
the patient's spleen may form "bite" red cells.
AUTOIMMUNE HEMOLYTIC ANEMIA
 Spherocytosis is not evident. The hemolytic episode stim-
Altoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA) is the most com-
ulates erythropoiesis and leads to bone marrow erythroid
 mon type of acquired hemolytic anemia and is caused by
hyperplasia and peripheral blood reticulocytosis. Similar 
the destruction of RBCs by autoantibodies directed against
to other hemolytic anemias, serum bilirubin level is ele-
erythrocytes
vated and serum haptoglobin concentration is reduced.
 The cause of autoimmune hemolytic anemia is most
G6PD activity is assessed by a fluorescent screening test or
 often unknown (idiopathic). However, several etiologic
by quantitative spectrophotometric analysis.
factors have been proposed for AIHA, such as altered self-
Patients with G6PD deficiency are instructed to
antigen, abnormalities in antigen presentation, B-cell
avoid drugs and substances that may induce hemolysis.
hyperactivity,  and  abnormalities in suppressor T-cell
 Patients who develop severe hemolysis may require blood
 number and/or function. One or a combination of these
IMMUNE-MEDIATED HEMOLYTIC ANEMIA
669
Box 61.6 Classifcation of Autoimmune
Hemolytic Anemia
Serologic Classification
+
 Warm autoantibody (agglutinin): antibody with enhanced
activity at 37oC
 Cold autoantibody (agglutinin): antibody with enhanced activ-
ity at <37
● Mixed warm and cold autoantibodies
 Classification based on etiology
● Idiopathic
 Inassociation with
Lymphoproliferative disorders
 Other malignancies (e.g, ovarian carcinoma)
Autoimmne disorders (e.g., SLE, ulcerative colitis)
Infections (e.g., mycoplasma, EBV)
Drugs (e.g., α-methyldopa)
The efficacy of red  cell-macrophage interactions
depends on a number of factors such as the IgG subclass,
the antibody concentration, and the concentration and
subclass of Fc receptors on the macrophages. IgG, and
IgG are the most predominant Ig subtypes in macro-
phage-induced AIHA. Splenic macrophages play an impor-
tant role in the extravascular destruction of the red cells in
autoimmune conditions.
B
Various conditions may initiate the autoantibody pro-
FIGURE 61.32 AUTOIMMUNE HEMOLYTIC ANEMIA. (A) Sderal jaUndice.
 duction and development of AIHA, such as viral infections
From Hoffbrand AV, Pettit JE, Vyas P. Color Atias of Clinical
(usually in children), collagen vascular diseases (especially
Hematology. 4th ed, Mosby/Eisevier, Philadeiphia, 2010, by permission.
(B) Blood smear demonstrating polychromatophilic red cells (black 
systemic lupus erythematosus), lymphoid malignancies,
arrows) and microspherocytes (green arrows).
prior allogeneic blood transfusion or stem cell transplanta-
tion, and certain drugs, particularly those used in the treat-
ment of lymphoid malignancies (Box 61.6).
immunologic aberrations, in association with environmen-
tal and genetic factors (drugs, infections, malignancies),
Autoimmune hemolytic anemia with
warm-react-
ing antibodies occurs at any age, but the majority of the
lead to an autoimmune hemolytic disorder (Figure 6l.32).
 patients are over age 40, with a peak incidence at around
 Autoimmune hemolytic anemia is divided into two major
 age 70. Clinical features are highly variable, ranging from
categories based on the nature of the antibodies (aggluti-
 a very mild chronic anemia with no clinical symptoms to a
nins): (1) warm-reacting antibodies and (2) cold-reacting
 severe acute form with jaundice, splenomegaly, and hepa-
antibodies (Box 61.6).
tomegaly. Most cases have a mild clinical course.
Warm-Reacting Antibodies
Morphology and Laboratory Findings
Warm-reacting antibodies (warm agglutinins) primar-
 Peripheral blood examination shows various degrees of aniso-
ily represent IgG antibodies that react with red cell mem-
poikilocytosis, spherocytosis, reticulocytosis, and the pres-
brane proteins at body temperature. The IgG-coated red
ence of nucleated red cells. In severe cases, peripheral blood
 cells adhere to the Fc receptors of the tissue macrophages
monocytes  may  occasionally  show erythrophagocytosis.
-o q ro sia Aq ra ap ae e
Granulocytosis and thrombocytosis may occur, and some
 somal enzymes released during antibody-dependent cellu-
severe cases may demonstrate a leukoerythroblastic blood
picture.
lar cytotoxicity. Erythrophagocytosis is either complete or
●
 The bone marrow shows erythroid hyperplasia.
incomplete. Incomplete erythrophagocytosis leads to the
Demonstration of IgG and/or complement bound to the
formation of spherocytes. The red cell destruction occurs
patient's erythrocytes is a diagnostic test for AIHA. The use
in tissues and therefore is called extravascular hemolysis.
of polyclonal antiglobulin reagent (Coombs test), which
Approximately 2-3% of patients with severe AIHA demon-
contains antibodies against IgG and complement com-
strate erythrocyte-bound IgA.
ponents, is a routine screening procedure. In the direct
004
DISORDERS OF RED BLOOD CELLS—ANEMIAS
high-grade B-cell lymphomas are among the neoplasms
that are frequently associated with cold agglutinins.
Autoimmune hemolytic anemia with cold-reacting
antibodies (cryopathic hemolytic syndromes) is caused
by autoantibodies which have enhanced activities below
37°C and usually below 20°C. These syndromes account
for about 30% of AIHA. Two major syndromes are recog-
nized in this group: cold hemagglutinin disease and parox-
ysmal cold hemoglobinuria.
● Cold hemagglutinin disease (CHAD) is characterized by a
A
positive DAGT due to the presence of complement (C3d and
C4d) and high-titer anti-erythrocyte antibodies with maxi-
mum erythrocyte agglutination at 0-15*C. In cold weather.
cold-reacting antibodies bind to erythrocytes and medi-
ate complement fixation with cooler peripheral circulation,
 Intravascular hemolysis is associated with anemia, hemoglo-
binuria, and hemosiderinuria. Acrocyanosis and splenomegaly
may be present. Sometimes, CHAD develops as a complica-
tion of EBV or Mycoplasma pneumoniae, lasting for 1-3 weeks.
In such cases, the cold-reacting antibodies are polyclonal IgM,
and often demonstrate anti-I or anti-i activities. A chronic
form of CHAD exists, which is associated with lymphoprolif-
erative disorders and is characterized by the presence of mono-
FlGURE 61.33 Blood smears demonstrate red cell rouleaux
donal IgM kappa with anti-I specificity in the serum.
formation (A) and agglutinated red cells (B and inset).
● Paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria (PCH) is a rare form of
AIHA which has been characterized by episodes of massive
intravascular hemolysis and hemoglobinuria in children
when exposed to cold. The disease appears to be secondary
antiglobulin test (DAGT). or direct Coombs test, the
to a number of viral infections (such as measles, chickenpox,
patient's red cells are examined for the presence of bound
mumps, and influenza) or congenital and tertiary syphilis.
[g or complement. In the indirect antiglobulin test, the
Qinical features include fever, muscle pains, headache,
patient's serum is screened for the presence of autoantibod-
vomiting, diarrhea, urticaria, and acrocyanosis. The antibody
ies. The Coombs test can be quantitated by methods such
responsible for the hemolysis is of the IgG class, usually with
as enzyme-linked immunoabsorbent assay (ELISA) or other
immunoassay techniques. Monospecific antisera are used for
low temperature.
further characterization of the autoantibody and the nature
of the hemolytic process.
The therapeutic approaches in AIHA include blood
transfusion, administration of corticosteroids, splenec-
tomy, and the use of cytotoxic drugs, singly or in combina
Cold-Reacting Antibodies
tion based on the severity of the anemia and its duration.
Cold-reacting antibodies (cold agglutinins) in general con-
Plasma exchange or plasmapheresis has been used in some
sist of IgM antibodies that react with red cell membrane
 patients with warm-reacting antibodies.
polysaccharides (such as I and i antigens) at temperatures
below body temperature. Cold agglutinins are not very
Differential Diagnosis
effective in extravascular hemolysis, because macrophages 
and other cytotoxic cells of the immune system do not
Spherocytosis, reticulocytosis, and positive antiglobulin
carry IgM receptors. The red cell destruction is primarily
(Coombs) tests are characteristic laboratory features of
due to complement fixation and happens within the blood
 AIHA. AIHA is distinguished from hereditary spherocytosis
vessels (intravascular hemolysis) (Figure 61.33). The IgM
by lack of a family history and positive antiglobulin tests.
autoantibodies at low temperature activate the comple-
Alloantibody hemolytic anemia, sometimes observed in
ment cascade and bind the erythrocyte membrane, causing
 recipients of organ transplants, may mimic AIHA. Patients
small holes in the red cell membrane and consequently
with PNH, similar to patients with CHAD, demonstrate
hemolysis. Two major causes of cold agglutinin are infec-
hemoglobinuria. However, in PNH patients, flow cyto-
tions and lymphoid neoplasms (Box 61.6). The most
metric studies for CD55 and CD59 show reduced or lack
frequent infections associated with cold agglutinin pro-
 of expression of these antigens in blood cells, as well as
duction are Mycoplasma pneumoniae and EBV. Chronic lym-
 positive acidified serum test and sucrose hemolysis test,
phocytic leukemia, Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia, and
whereas all these studies are negative in CHAD.
ACQUIRED NON-IMMUNE HEMOLYTIC ANEMIAS
701
OTHER IMMUNE-MEDIATED HEMOLYTIC
ANEMIAS
Antibody
Drug—Hapten
Hemolytic Transfusion Reactions
Hemolytic transfusion reactions occur when the recipient's
Membrane protein
plasma contains antibody against the transfused red cells.
 In rare cases, it also happens when plasma with high titer
Red Cell
of antibody is transfused to a patient whose erythrocytes
carry the relevant antigen.
Antibody-drug
Transfusion reactions may take place during or imme-
complex
diately after transfusion or may be delayed 6-8 days after
transfusion. Immediate transfusion reactions are typically
DrugO
the result of ABO incompatibilities. Rapid intravascular
hemolysis may lead to hemoglobinuria and jaundice, and
Red Cell
 may be complicated by disseminated intravascular coagu-
lopathy (DIC) and renal failure. Fever, chill, chest pain,
dyspnea, hypotension, rigors, vomiting, and diarrhea are
DrmigO
among the initial clinical features. Delayed transfusion
reactions occur in previously immunized patients. Rh
TCell
BCell
incompatibility is a classical example of this kind of reac-
tion. The red cell destruction in delayed reactions is pre-
Membrane Antigen
dominantly extravascular with a positive DAGT. Common
Red Cell
features are anemia, fever, jaundice, and spherocytosis
FIGURE 61.34 Schematic demonstration of possible mechanisms
of drug-induced hemolytic anemia.
Hemolytic Disease of the Newborn
Hemolytic disease of the newborn is the result of interac-
 ( ) so    
Acquired Non-Immune Hemolytic
incompatible fetal red cells in fetal circulation. ABO and
Rh incompatibilities are the first and second most com-
Anemias
mon causes, respectively. The ABO type is less severe and
occurs predominantly in group A or B infants and group
O mothers. Rh-related hemolysis is more severe and may
A wide variety of conditions may lead to an acquired non-
lead to intrauterine death or hydrops fetalis
immune hemolytic anemia. Examples include mechanical
trauma and heat, drugs and other chemicals, infections,
and hypersplenism.
Drug-induced Immune Hemolytic Anemia
Certain drugs may initiate an immune-mediated red cell 
HEMOLYSIS INDUCED BY MECHANICAL
destruction. Three possible mechanisms have been sug-
TRAUMA AND HEAT
 gested for drug-induced immune hemolysis.
Traumatic injury to the erythrocytes may cause red cell
●
 Drug (or one of its metabolites) acts as a hapten and binds to
fragmentation and hemolysis. Erythrocyte fragmentation
the red cell membrane to generate antibodies. The antibody-
has been observed in patients with cardiac valve prosthe-
coated red cells are then subject to extravascular clearance by
sis,t
 thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, malignant
the phagocytic system (Figure 61.34A). Penicillin and other
cephalosporins are examples.
hypertension, generalized vasculitis, and carcinomato-
● A drug-antibody complex formed in plasma leads to comple-
sis (Figures 61.35 and 61.36). Traumatic hemolysis and
ment activation at the erythrocyte surface and, consequently.
hemoglobinuria have also been reported soon after walk-
red cell hemolysis (Figure 61.34B). Examples are quinine.
ing or running long distances, bongo-drumming, or karate
phenacetin, para-aminosalicylic acid, and sulfonamides. This
exercise. Thermal damage is often associated with sphero-
mechanism has been challenged.
 Cytosis and generation of microvesicles.
●
Certain drugs, such as a-methyldopa, initiate the formation of
autoantibodies against red cells (Figure 61.34C). Approximately
10-25% of patients on long term α-methyldopa therapy develop
HEMOLYSIS CAUSED BY DRUGS AND
IgG anti-red cell antibodies, though <1% may develop overf
OTHER CHEMICALS
hemolytic anemia. Possible mechanisms include inhibition
of suppressor T-cell activation by methyldopa or interaction of
Drug-induced hemolysis unrelated to enzyme deficien-
methyldopa metabolites with red cell peptides to form antigens.
cies is reported in various conditions such as exposure to
702
DISORDERS OF RED BLOOD CELLS—ANEMIAS
FIGURE 61.36 Blood smear shows schistocytes and punched
Out red cells in a patient with severe burn (A, low power; B, high 
FIGURE 61.35 Microangiopathic changes. Blood smears 
power).
demonstrate numerous schistocytes (A)and several helmet cells
(B, arrows).
(Streptococcus pyogenes). Activation of macrophages in some
viral or bacterial infections may lead to extensive erythro-
arsenic hydride or nitrobenzene derivatives, copper, certain
 phagocytosis and anemia. Malaria, particularly Plasmodium
nitrites, and naphthalene. Acute alcoholism may be asso-
falciparum, may cause hemolysis.
ciated with stomatocytosis and a transient hemolytic epi-
 sode. Patients with alcohol-induced fatty liver may develop
HYPERSPLENISM
a syndrome (Zeive syndrome) characterized by episodes of
hypercholesterolemia, hypertriglyceridemia, and hemoly-
One of the main functional roles of the spleen is to serve
sis. Venoms of certain species of snakes, bees, spiders, and
 as a filter by removing foreign materials, cell debris, and
wasps may cause hemolysis.
defective blood cells. This is accomplished by the passage
of a proportion of splenic blood supply through the non-
endothelialized, macrophage-containing spaces present in
HEMOLYSIS CAUSED BYINFECTIONS
the red pulp, functioning as a filter bed. In splenomegaly.
As discussed earlier, infection may initiate or provoke
the proportion of the blood channeled through the red
hemolytic episodes in patients suffering from red cell
 pulp and the filter bed increases, causing an inappropriate
enzyme deficiencies or hemoglobinopathies, presum- 
 sequestration of both normal and abnormal blood cells,
ably due to the generation of oxidant substances. Certain
particularly red cells, because of their limited, self-suffi-
 cient metabolic resources. The increase in splenic seques-
        s  s o r   si i 
 phospholipases (Clostridium perfringens) and hemolysins  caused by congestion rather than by an infiltrative process.
OTHERTYPES OF ANEMIA703
alimentation. Excessive and chronic administration of zinc
Other Types of Anemia
 may also cause copper deficiency. Copper deficiency is asso-
ciated with microcytic anemia and neutropenia. The ery-
ANEMIA OF CHRONIC DISEASE
throid precursors in the bone marrow are often vacuolated.
Anemia of chronic disease (ACD) is an anemia associ
Vitamin Deficiencies
ated with chronic infections, chronic inflammations, and
malignancies, as well as a number of other conditions such
Vitamin A and Vitamin Bg deficiencies may lead to micro-
as severe trauma, cardiovascular disorders, and diabetes
cytic, hypochromic anemia. Vitamin B2 (riboflavin) may
mellitus. Hepcidin appears to play an important role in
cause pure red cell aplasia. Anemia associated with vita-
iron metabolism and pathogenesis of ACD. Hepcidin is
min C deficiency is usually normochromic and nor-
an acute phase protein, a regulator of iron absorption in
mocytic. Vitamin E deficiency, a common deficiency in
the small intestine and iron release from macrophages.
patients with cystic fibrosis, is usually associated with
Increased hepcidin production has been observed in
 abnormal red cell morphology and hemolysis.
patients with ACD. Recent studies suggest that IL-6 induces
production of hepcidin.
ACD is characterized by a mild to moderate anemia,
Anemia of Chronic Renal Failure
reduced absolute reticulocyte count, modest shortening of
A complex process is involved in anemia of chronic renal
the erythrocyte lifespan, a low serum iron-binding capac-
failure, consisting of a decline in erythropoietin produc-
ity, an increased bone marrow iron store, and relatively
tion, the suppressive effects of uremia on erythropoiesis,
ineffective erythropoiesis. Anemia is usually normocytic
 and plasma inhibitors of heme synthesis. Anemia is usually
and normochromic, but it may be microcytic and hypo-
normochromic and normocytic with a normal or reduced
chromic. Elevated levels of serum IL-6, fibrinogen, and
reticulocyte count. Echinocytosis is often present. The bone
C-reactive protein, as well as increased erythrocyte sedi-
 marrow is normo- to hypocellular and may show severe ery-
mentation rates, are frequently noted. An acute variant
 throid hypoplasia and fibrosis around bone trabeculae.
of ACD has been reported in patients with major trauma.
myocardial infarction, and sepsis.
The  differential diagnosis includes microcytic and
Anemia Associated with Marrow infitration
refractory anemias (see Table 6l.5). ACD, unlike IDA,
(Myelophthisic Anemia)
shows reduced serum total iron-binding capacity (TIBC)
and increased bone marrow iron stores. ACD is distin-
Metastatic carcinomas, particularly carcinoma of the lung.
guished from refractory and sideroblastic anemias
breast, and prostate, are the most common causes of bone
by
reduced serum TIBC, lack of significant dysplastic changes,
marrow infiltration. Other causes of bone marrow infil-
and absent ringed sideroblasts.
tration are hematopoietic malignancies, marrow fibrosis,
lysosomal storage diseases, and inflammatory processes
such as granulomas. The infiltrative process disrupts the
DEFICIENCY ANEMIAS OTHER THAN
bone marrow's microenvironment and reduces hemato-
VITAMIN B12 AND FOLATE
poietic activities. Myelophthisic anemia is often associated
with anisocytosis and poikilocytosis, presence of teardrop
Copper Deficiency
red cells and leukoerythroblastosis. Bone marrow biopsy
Anemia of copper deficiency has been described in mal-
 sections are the most reliable source for the diagnosis of
nourished children and in patients receiving parenteral 
 marrow infiltration.
704
 DISORDERS OF RED BLOOD CELLS—ANEMIAS
Additional Resources
Andres E, Federici L, Affenberger S, et al: B12 deficiency: a look
Kaferle J, Strzoda CE: Evaluation of macrocytosis, Am Fam Physician
beyond pernicious anemia, J Fam Pract 56:537-542, 2007
79:203-208, 2009.
Aslinia F, Mazza JI. Yale SH: Megaloblastic anemia and other causes
yap iaddo un eiuadanau pue eaue uo aepn i yoiezn
of macrocytosis, Clin Med Res 4:236-241, 2006.
dency, Curr Opin Hematol 19:58-60, 2012.
Barros MM, Blajchman MA, Bordin JO: Warm autoimmune hemo-
Lechner K, Jager U: How I treat autoimmune hemolytic anemias in
 Aoloiqounui aun supueisiapun u ssaond zuaan cenuaue s
adults, Blood 116:1831-1838, 2010.
and the treatment, Transfus Med Rev 24: 195-210, 2010.
Lipton IM, Ellis SR: Diamond-Blackfan anemia: diagnosis, treatment,
Berentsen S: Cold agglutinin-mediated autoimmune hemolytic ane-
and molecular pathogenesis, Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 23:261-282.
mia in Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia, Clin Lymphoma Myeloma
2009.
9:110-112, 2009.
Mousa SA, Qari MH: Diagnosis and management of sickle cell disor-
Cappellini MD, Fiorelli G: Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase defi-
ders, Methods Mol Biol 663:291-307, 2010.
ciency, Lancet 371:64-74, 2008.
Munoz M, Garcia-Erce JA, Remacha AF: Disorders of iron metabolism.
Eber S, Lux SE: Hereditary spherocytosis-defects in proteins that
 Part Il: iron deficiency and iron overload, I Clin Pathol 64:287-296,
connect the membrane skeleton to the lipid bilayer, Semin Hematol
2011.
41:118-141, 2004.
Peters M, Heijboer H, Smiers F, et al: Diagnosis and management of
Galanello R, Origa R: Beta-thalassemia, Orphanet J Rare Dis 5:1l-12,
thalassaemia, BMJ 344:e228, 2012.
2010.
Gallagher PG: Hereditary elliptocytosis: spectrin and protein 4.1R,
Rachmilewitz EA, Giardina Pl: How I treat thalassemia, Blood
118:3479-3488, 2011.
Semin Hematol 4l:142-164, 2004.
Galloway M, Hamilton M: Macrocytosis: pitfalls in testing and sum-
Rees DC, Williams TN, Gladwin MT: Sickle-cell disease, Lancet
mary of guidance, BMJ 335:884-886, 2007
376:2018-2031, 2010.
Ganz T: Hepcidin and iron regulation, 10 years later, Blood 117:4425 -4433.
Renella R, Wood WG: The congenital dyserythropoietic anemias.
2011.
Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 23:283-306, 2009.
Garratty G: Drug-induced immune hemolytic anemia, Hematology Am 
Sankaran VG, Nathan DG: Thalassemia: an overview of 50 years of
Soc Hematol Educ Program:73-79, 2009.
clinical research, Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 24: 1005-1020, 2010.
Harteveld CL, Higgs DR: Alpha-thalassaemia, Orphanet J Rare Dis
 Sawada K, Fujishima N, Hirokawa M: Acquired pure red cell aplasia:
5:13-14, 2010.
updated review of treatment, Br J Haematol 142:505-514, 2008.
Hoffbrand AV, Pettit JE, Vyas P: Color Atlas of Clinical Hematology.
Sawada K, Hirokawa M, Fujishima N: Diagnosis and management of
4th edn., Philadelphia, 2010, Mosby/Elsevier.
Hoffman PC: Immune hemolytic anemia—selected
topics,
2009.
Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program:80-86, 2009.
Tavazzi D, Taher A, Cappellini MD: Red blood cell enzyme disorders:
Iolascon A, Perrotta S, Stewart GW: Red blood cell membrane defects,
an overview, Pediatr Ann 37:303-310, 2008.
Rev Clin Exp Hematol 7:22-56, 2003.
Vlachos A, Ball S, Dahl N, et al: Diagnosing and treating Diamond
 Iolascon A, Russo R, Delaunay I: Congenital dyserythropoietic ane-
 Blackfan anaemia: results of an international clinical consensus con-
mias, Curr Opin Hematol 18:146-151, 2011.
ference, Br J Haematol 142:859-876, 2008.
Iolascon A, Russo R, Esposito MR, et al: Congenital dyserythropoietic
 Zanella A, Bianchi P, Fermo E: Pyruvate kinase deficiency, Haematologica
anaemias: new acquisitions, Blood Transfus 9:278-280, 2011.
92:721-723, 2007.
Disorders of
Megakaryocytes
and Platelets
Adult
TARpatients
Cord blood
Megakaryocytic Hypoplasia
controls
controls
A1A2
P6P4C1C2
Megakaryocytic hypoplasia is one of the features of con-
genital or acquired aplastic anemia. A lack or markedly
Mp1
(10i)
reduced production of megakaryocytes without bone mar-
row aplasia is rare and has been associated with prolonged
Mp1
administration of prednisone, estrogens, interferon, and
(90min)
chlorothiazide. Chronic alcoholism and certain infectious
diseases, such as measles, varicella, infectious mononu-
deosis, and cytomegalovirus, have been associated with
←GPIIb
megakaryocytic hypoplasia. Amegakaryocytosis has also
been reported in patients with thymic aplasia.
GPIb
CONGENITAL MEGAKARYOCYTIC
FIGURE 62.1 Western blot analysis of Mpl, GPllb, and GPlbα
expression in platelets from normal adult controls, newborns, and
HYPOPLASIAS
TAR syndrome patients. Platelet lysates (20 μg) were separated
Congenital megakaryocytic hypoplasias are rare conditions
by SDS-PAGE and probed with polyclonal antibodies against Mpl,
characterized by thrombocytopenic purpura. Two major 
GPllb, and GPlba.
From Letestu R, Vitrat N, Masse A, et al. Existence of a differentiation
subtypes have been described: (1) congenital amegakaryo-
blockage at the stage of a megakaryocyte precursor in the
cytic thrombocytopenia (CAMT) and (2) congenital throm-
thrombocytopenia and absent radi (TAR) syndrome. Blood 2000; 95:
bocytopenia with absent radii (TAR). CAMT is associated
1633-1641, by permission.
with an impaired response to thrombopoietin (TPO) due
to the presence of mutations in the TPO receptor, MPL.
Serum TPO levels are elevated. Thrombocytopenia may be
persistent with fast progression into pancytopenia (CAMT I)
Megakaryocytosis
 or transient and less severe (CAMT II).
The TAR syndrome is associated with bilateral aplasia of
the radi, cardiac and/or renal malfunctions, and dysmega-
Megakaryocytosis and thrombocytosis are associated with
karyocytopoiesis characterized by cells blocked at early
 acute infections, iron deficiency, diabetes mellitus, and
stages of megakaryocytic differentiation. Thrombocytopenia
post-splenectomy status. Post-splenectomy thrombocytosis
is usually severe and is sometimes associated with a tran-
 is typically a transient event. Peripheral destruction of plate-
sient leukemoid reaction. Platelets may demonstrate abnor-
lets in conditions such as autoimmune-associated throm-
mal function and impaired Mp1 expression (Figure 62.1).
bocytopenic purpura and drug-induced thrombocytopenia
Bone marrow examination reveals a marked decrease in the
leads to megakaryocytosis secondary to bone marrow com-
number of megakaryocytes (Figure 62.2).
 pensation. Bone marrow metastasis is a frequent cause of
Atlas of Hematopathology. DOl: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00062-0
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
706
reactive megakaryocytosis due to either the release of TPO.
like substances from tumor cells or the increased expression
of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, such as tenascin.
Megakaryocytosis is associated with a garden variety
of primary bone marrow disorders, such as myeloprolif-
erative disorders, myelodysplastic syndromes, and acute
megakaryoblastic leukemia (Figures 62.3 to 62.5). Unlike
reactive megakaryocytosis, these conditions are often asso-
ciated with significant dysplastic changes and arrangement
of megakaryocytes in clusters or sheets.
Hereditary thrombocythaemia (HT) is an inherited auto-
somal dominant disorder caused by mutations within the
 genes encoding TPO or MPL (TPO receptor) genes.
Thrombocytopenia
 Thrombocytopenia is due to either impaired platelet pro-
duction or increased platelet destruction. Impaired plate-
let  production  is caused  by  congenital  and  acquired
aplastic anemias, paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria,
congenital amegakaryocytosis, bone marrow metastasis,
myelofbrosis, drugs, radiation, certain infections, and malnu-
 trition. Increased platelet destruction may occur by two major
mechanisms: (1) immunologic and (2) non-immunologic.
AUTOIMMUNE THROMBOCYTOPENIC PURPURA
FIGURE 62.2 Bone marrow biopsy section of a child with TAR syndrome 
Autoimmune thrombocytopenic purpura (AITP), also
demonstrating markedly decreased megakaryocytes (A and B).
known as idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP), is
THROMBOCYTOPENIA
707
FIGURE 62.4 Bone marrow biopsy section from a patient with
FIGURE 62.5 Biopsy section (A) of a patient with myelodysplastic
essential thrombocythemia demonstrating hypercellularity with
syndrome showing numerous micromegakaryocytes. Bone marrow
large aggregates of megakaryocytes (A, low power; B, high power).
 smear (B) demonstrates a binucleated micromegakaryocyte.
an antibody-mediated thrombocytopenia. In a vast major-
AITP has two clinical presentations: acute and chronic:
ity of these cases, antiplatelet antibodies are against plate-
let membrane glycoproteins. Glycoprotein (GP) IIb-IIla
 Arute AlTP is predominantly observed in children between the
ages of 2 and 9 years. It is one of the most common causes of
(CD41/CD61) is the most frequent target. Autoantibodies
thrombocytopenia in children and is often preceded by a his-
against GPIb-IX (CD42a) and GPV (CD42d) have also
tory of viral infection, such as chickenpox, rubella, or rubeola.
been reported. The autoantibodies are typically of the IgG
vaccination for the measles, mumps, or chickenpox viruses may
class and can cross placenta, causing fetal thrombocyto-
occasionally lead to AITP. It is characterized by a severe onset of
penia in pregnant patients. A T-cell-mediated cytotoxic-
thrombocytopenia leading to petechiae, purpura, as well as gas-
ity has been suggested as an alternative mechanism in
trointestinal and/or genitourinary tract hemorrhages. Intracranial
patients who do not demonstrate detectable autoantibod-
bleeding is rare. In approximately 80% of affected children, the 
ies. Molecular parody between GPIIb-IIla and HIV proteins 
thrombocytopenia resolves spontaneously within 6-12 months.
 may play an important role in the pathogenesis of throm-
Chronic AlTP occurs in adults. usually between 20 and
bocytopenia in patients with AIDS.
50 years of age. The female to male ratio is about 3:1.
AITP is often associated with other autoimmune disorders
Overall, thrombocytopenia is less severe, and the chance
of spontaneous remission is less frequent than for the acute
such as systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis,
form of AITP. Clinical manifestations may vary from scattered
systemic sderosis, Hashimoto thyroiditis, ulcerative colitis,
petechiae to purpuric and ecchymotic lesions, epistaxis, and
Crohn disease, biliary cirrhosis, myasthenia gravis, and per-
even intracranial bleeding.
nicious anemia. Other diseases such as sarcoidosis, lympho-
proliferative disorders, Gaucher disease, IgA deficiency, and
AITP in children is usually self-limiting with spontane-
panhypo-gammaglobulinemia may demonstrate AITP.
ous remission. In adults, <lo% of patients may achieve
708
 DISORDERS OF MEGAKARYOCYTES AND PLATELETS
spontaneous remission. In life-threatening forms, treatment
Two different mechanisms have been proposed for
includes platelet transfusion and intravenous immunoglob-
heparin-induced thrombocytopenia:
 ulin. Patients with mild to moderate thrombocytopenia are
● A direct heparin-platelet interaction leading to platelet activa-
treated with corticosteroids, followed by splenectomy in
tfion, aggregation, and clearance (HIT type [I):
non-responders or in patients who relapse.
Approximately 2% of HIT is immune mediated.
Morphology and Laboratory Findings
Antibodies raised against heparin-platelet surface mem-
 brane complexes trigger platelet activation and aggrega-
● Examination of the peripheral blood reveals thrombocy-
tion, and eventually immune clearance of the affected
topenia with marked variation in the shape and size of the
 platelets. Platelet aggregates may cause emboli in both the
platelets. The platelet count may reach <30,000/μL with pro-
longation of bleeding time.
arterial and venous circulation.
 Rarely patients may also demonstrate an autoimmune hemo-
lytic anemia (Evans syndrome).
lron deficiency anemia may occur due to chronic or excessive
NEONATAL IMMUNE-MEDIATED
bleeding.
THROMBOCYTOPENIA
● Bone marrow examination reveals megakaryocytosis. dif-
 Neonatal immune-mediated thrombocytopenia is caused
fusely   dispersed  between 
other
 hematopoietic
cells.
 Micromegakaryocytes and giant megakaryocytes are often
when maternal antiplatelet antibodies cross the pla-
present. Some megakaryocytes may show more basophilic and
centa and bind to fetal platelets. Antiplatelet antibody
less granular cytoplasm with no platelet budding.
production in the mother is due to either feto-maternal
● The clinical use of antiplatelet antibody studies for the diag-
incompatibility in platelet antigens  (neonatal alloim-
nosis of AITP is controversial. In several studies, the rate of
mune thrombocytopenia) or maternal AITP. Alloimmune
positive results for antiplatelet antibody tests ranged from
thrombocytopenia is caused by maternal IgG antibodies
49% to 66% in patients with AITP and 7% to 28% in patients
 raised against fetal platelets. The most common cause of
with non-immune thrombocytopenia.
neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia is feto-maternal
incompatibility in human platelet alloantigens (HPA)-1a,
Differential Diagnosis
accounting for 50-90% of cases. The risk of maternal sen-
sitization correlates with the maternal human leukocyte
Differential diagnosis includes all conditions associated
 antigen (HLA) type and appears to be confined to HLA-
with thrombocytopenia, such as congenital thrombo-
B8 and -DR3 mothers. Affected children present with
cytopenia, infections, primary bone marrow @
disorders,
   r   
drugs, and disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC).
orrhages at birth or soon after delivery. Intracranial hemor-
EDTA-dependent agglutinins may also cause 
plate-
rhage may occur in up to 25% of the affected neonates.
let  clumping and platelet satellitism around
leko-
Thrombocytopenia  may
persistfor2-3
weeks
cytes, and therefore a reduction in the platelet count
with a platelet count of around 30,000/μL or lower.
(pseudo-thrombocytopenia).
Thrombocytopenia  associated  with  maternal  AITP  is
observed in up to 50% of neonates born to mothers with
DRUG-INDUCED IMMUNE THROMBOCYTOPENIA
AITP. The maternal IgG autoantibody crosses the placenta
 and binds to fetal platelets. Thrombocytopenia may last
The most common cause of drug-induced thrombocy-
for 1-6 months. The incidence of spontaneous abortion is
topenia is immune mediated with two major proposed
increased in mothers with AITP.
mechanisms:
● The drug or its metabolites bind to a plasma protein, and anti-
POST-TRANSFUSION PURPURA
bodies are generated against the drug-protein complexes.
● The drug binds to one or more components of the platelet
 Post-transfusion purpura is caused by platelet alloantigenic
membrane and induces a structural change. This drug-platelet
incompatibilities between the recipient and the donor.
complex provokes antibody production.
It is usually manifested 7-10 days after blood or platelet
Platelet membrane glycoproteins such
1 as GP1b-IX
transfusion. Alloantibodies are usually against HPA-1a.
(CD42a) and GPIIb-IIIa (CD41/CD61) are the primary
It is most commonly observed in recipients with specific
targets. Quinine, quinidine, sulfonamides, organic arseni-
HLA class II phenotypes, particularly in those who are
cals, sulfisoxazole, ranitidine, rifampin, alpha methyl-
HLA-DR3-positive.
dopa, para-aminosalicylate, heparin, and gold salts are
among the drugs that have caused immune-mediated
THROMBOTIC THROMBOCYTOPENIC PURPURA/
thrombocytopenia.
HEMOLYTIC UREMIC SYNDROME
Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) arises in
10-20% of patients receiving unfractionated heparin. HIT
 Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) and hemolytic
is frequently associated with thromboembolism.
uremic syndrome (HUS) are overlapping acute syndromes
THROMBOCYTOPENIA
709
FIGURE 62.6 THROMBoTIc THRoMBocYToPENIc PURPURA. Blood smear showing fragmented red cells (A). Platelet/fibrin thrombus formation
in small vessels (A, low power; B, high power).
with abnormalites  in multiple organ systems.  Neurologic
enteroviruses, and ECHO virus. Reports of the hereditary
abnormalities are the dominant clinical features in TTP, and
forms of TTP/HUS suggest a genetic predisposition in the
acute renal failure is the main clinical manifestation in HUs.
 pathogenesis of this disorder in some patients.
The peak incidence of TTP is in the third decade, while HUS
Plasma exchange is the treatment of choice for all but
is observed primarily in infancy and early childhood.
minimally affected patients. Other therapeutic approaches
The characteristic clinicopathologic features of TTP/
include administration of corticosteroids, intravenous
HUS are fluctuating neurologic symptoms (more in TTP)
 immunoglobulin, and antiplatelet aggregation agents.
acute renal failure, and diarrhea (more in HuS), fever,
 microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, and thrombocytope-
Morphology and Laboratory Findings
nia with purpura, but usually not severe bleeding.
Several etiologic factors have been postulated, which are
● Blood smears demonstrate moderate to severe anemia with
primarily related to endothelial cell damage. Abnormalities
anisopoikilocytosis, schistocytosis, and reticulocytosis (Figure
62.6A). Nucleated red cells are often present Thrombocytopenia
of endothelial cell function, such as defects in prostacy-
clin metabolism, and deficiency of plasminogen activator,
is marked and in some patients is >20,000/μL.
 The most prominent histologic finding is disseminated plate-
have been demonstrated in some patients with TTP. There
let/fibrin thrombi in the capillaries and arterioles of various
is a close association between TTP and collagen vascular
tissues, such as brain, kidney pancreas, adrenal glands, and
disorders such as systemic lupus erythematosus, rheuma-
heart (Figure 62.6B,C). Microthrombi are rarely detected in
toid arthritis, Sjogren syndrome, and polyarteritis nodosa.
bone marrow biopsy sections.
Certain viruses and bacteria such as HIV, coxsackie A and
B, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, and Legionella pneumophila have
Differential Diagnosis
 been associated with TTP. HUS is strongly associated with
Escherichia coli O157: H7, which produces the Shiga-like
Differential diagnosis includes conditions that are associ-
toxins Stx-1 and Stx-2. These toxins damage endothelial
 ated with hemolysis and thrombocytopenia, such as Evans
cells and cause increased release of inflammatory media-
 syndrome (autoimmune hemolytic anemia and thrombo-
tors by these cells. Other microorganisms reported in asso-
 cytopenia), DIC, systemic lupus erythematosus, microan-
ciation with HuS are Pneumococus pneumoniae, Yersinia  giopathic hemolytic anemia in patients with disseminated
pseudotuberculosis, Salmonella typhi, varicella, coxsackie
 cancers, and paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
710
 DISORDERS OF MEGAKARYOCYTES AND PLATELETS
OTHER CONDITIONS ASSOCIATED WITH
manifestations usually include easy bruisability, pete-
THROMBOCYTOPENIA
chiae, epistaxis, and gingival bleeding, and less frequently
 gastrointestinal bleeding and hematuria. In older female
A wide spectrum of clinical conditions are associated with
patients, menorrhagia is common and can be severe.
thrombocytopenia, such as infections, glomerulonephritis,
Episodes of severe bleeding are usually associated with
renal transplant rejection, renal vein thrombosis, DIC, giant 
 trauma and surgical procedures such as tonsillectomy.
cavernous hemangioma, burns, snake bites, aortic valvu-
appendectomy, and splenectomy but also occur during
lar disease, and primary pulmonary hypertension. Certain 
 dental extractions and menses.
drugs such as hematin, protamine sulfate, bleomycin, and
Quality care for BSS patients involves both prophylac-
heparin can have direct damaging effects on platelets and  t
 tic and therapeutic measures. Effective prophylaxis requires
cause thrombocytopenia. Administration of antithymocyte
 good dental hygiene, educating patients how to locally
globulin may cause thrombocytopenia, possibly due to the
 control nosebleeds, and frequent follow-up for premeno-
formation of immune complexes. Splenomegaly may cause
pausal women. Platelet transfusion is the only broadly
 thrombocytopenia due to sequestration of the platelets.
 and consistently effective therapy for severe bleeding.
Infusions of recombinant factor Vlla (rFVlla), also known
as NovoSeven?, have been found to be effective in many
platelet function disorders and are therefore increasingly
Qualitative Disorders of Platelets
being employed.
and Megakaryocytes
Morphology and Laboratory Findings
Analogous to the quantitative disorders just discussed,
● Platelet counts typically are only mildly decreased (80,000-
100,0o0 platelets/μL) but can vary substantially and even be
qualitative defects of platelet function result in a hemor-
normal. Because electronic cell counters frequently underesti-
rhagic diathesis that most commonly manifests as muco-
mate the actual platelet count in patients with macrothrom-
cutaneous bleeding. The qualitative disorders of platelet
bocytes and therefore yield an artificially low mean platelet
function can be divided and discussed within the context
volume (MPV), a manual platelet count should be performed
of two broad categories based on whether they are inher-
 in patients suspected of having the BsS or one of the other
ited and present at birth or are acquired after birth and
disorders accompanied by giant platelets (Figure 62.7).
manifest at some point later in life. Although acquired
● In peripheral blood smears from patients with the BSS.
defects are by far more common, we first discuss the inher-
giant platelets up to 20μm in diameter are frequently
ited disorders.
observed and can constitute up to 80% of the entire platelet
population.
● Lltrastructurally, platelets have rounded shapes (instead of the
 normal discoid structure) with an abundant supply of gran-
BERNARD-SOULIER SYNDROME
ules distributed throughout the cytoplasm (Figure 62.8). The
The Bernard-Soulier syndrome (BSS), previously known as
hemorrhagic thrombocytopathic dystrophy, is an inherited
 increased ploidy.
autosomal recessive hemorrhagic disorder characterized
● Flow cytometric analysis of platelets from suspected patients.
by a prolonged bleeding time, macrothrombocytes (i.e.,
using monoclonal antibodies specific for the component pro-
 giant platelets) and thrombocytopenia, with counts rang-
teins GPIb, GPIX, and GPV is a rapid diagnostic strategy to
sozoiaau ue snozouou are oum seniapun Anua
ing between 20,000 and 100,000 platelets/μL. The BSS is
for this disorder.
extremely rare and is associated with deficient and/or dys-
functional platelet membrane glycoprotein (GP) complex
known as GPIb-IX-V, which is the main receptor for vWF.
Molecular and Cytogenetic Studies
The platelets from these patients display abnormalities in
● GPIba , GPIbβ . GPIX, and GPV are encoded by four distinct
adhesion due to an inability to interact with vWF.
genes—GP1 BA, GP1BB, GP9, and GP5, respectively—which are
The GPIb-IX-V complex is the major link between the
expressed solely within the megakaryocyte/ platelet lineage
 platelet plasma membrane and the underlying actin cyto- ● A wide variety of distinct loss-of-function genetic defects asso-
skeleton, via an intermediate interaction with filamin.
ciated with the BSs have been reported. Genetic testing by
 Because these interactions restrict the mobility of the spec-
DNA sequencing is available.
trin-based membrane skeleton, the loss of an actin fila-
ment attachment to the plasma membrane explains the
Differential Diagnosis
large size of BsS platelets as well as their fragility, both of
which likely contribute to the thrombocytopenia observed
 The differential diagnosis indludes May-Hegglin anom-
in patients with this disorder
aly, DiGeorge syndrome, and gray platelet syndrome.
In most of these patients, the bleeding symptoms mani-
Diagnosis of BsS is based on macrothrombocytopenia, pro-
fest shortly after birth or during early childhood. Clinical
 longed bleeding time, defective ristocetin-induced platelet
711
agglutination (RIPA), and low or absent platelet levels of
the GPIb-IX-V complex (CD42a-d) by flow cytometry.
GLANZMANN THROMBASTHENIA
Glanzmann thrombasthenia (GT) is a rare autosomal
recessive inherited disorder characterized by recurrent
 mucocutaneous bleeding, a prolonged bleeding time, and
lack of platelet aggregation. GT is caused by a deficiency
and/or dysfunction of the αlIbβ3 integrin, a heterodi-
meric platelet membrane protein also known as GPlIb-IHla
(CD41/CD61).
GPIIb-IIla is expressed exclusively by megakaryocytes
and platelets and is essential for both initiating and propa-
gating thrombus formation. Activated αlIbβ3 is essential
for thrombus growth as well, because it is also the princi-
 pal receptor for plasma fibrinogen and VwF, the soluble
proteins required for continued deposition of platelets via
aggregation.
Patients typically manifest moderate to severe mucocu-
taneous bleeding, with purpura, epistaxis, gingival hem-
orrhage, and menorrhagia being the most common at
presentation. However, there is considerable variability in
the associated bleeding diatheses, even in patients with
the same gene abnormality, with some manifesting only
easy bruisability and others severe, life-threatening hem-
orrhages.
 Although  genitourinary  and   gastrointestinal
hemorrhages also occur, deep-visceral, intra-articular, and
intramuscular bleeding is rare.
Platelet transfusion is the treatment of choice for severe
FIGURE 62.7 Blood smear demonstrates giant platelets (A and B).
bleeding episodes, but some patients become refrac-
tory due to alloimmunization, presumably because they
cm
lack pre-existing tolerance to the wild-type allele of either
A
B
the αlIb or β3 subunit of GPIIb-IIla, the mismatched
antigen(s) of the HLA system, or both. Although rFVIla
infusion may represent a therapeutic alternative to platelet
transfusion, especially in those with antiplatelet antibod-
ies, it evidently is not effective in all patients.
Morphology and Immunophenotype
● Platelet counts and platelet morphology in patients with GT
 are typically normal.
● Because GT is caused by a deficiency of GPlIb-la (CD41/
CD61), Flow cytometric analysis of platelets from suspected
patients show reduced or lack of expression of CD41/CD61.
FIGURE 62.8 ELECTRON MICROSCOpY OF PLATELETS IN THE BERNARD-SOULIER 
response to all physiologic agonists used in aggregometry.
SYNDRoME (BSS). (A) A normal discoid platelet showing both
including adenosine diphosphate (ADP), collagen, epineph-
α-granules (α-g) and the open canalicular system (ocs). (B) A normal
nine, arachidonic acid, and thrombin.
platelet after thrombin stimulation showing its rounded form, dark
central mass (cm) of contractile protein, protruding pseudopods,
but no granules. (C) A giant platelet from a BSS patient that
is rounded in shape and has abundant granules distributed
Molecuiar and Cytogenetic Features
throughout the cytoplasm. (D) A giant platelet from a May-Hegglin
● The allb and β3 subunits are encoded by the single copy
anomaly patient that is similarly in appearance except for the
cytoplasmic zones rich in entangled membranes (em).
genes ITGA2B and ITGB3, respectively. ITGA2B mutations are
From Michelson AD. Platelets, 2nd edn (Figure 57.1), Academic Press,
somewhat more common than mutations in the ITGB3 locus.
Amsterdam,2007,by permission.
Genetic testing for both genes is available.
712
 DISORDERS OF MEGAKARYOCYTES AND PLATELETS
Differential Diagnosis
dense granules. Platelets are normal in size and show
unremarkable ultrastructural features, except for a marked
Platelets from GT patients are normal in size, show absence
decline or absence of dense granules.
or markedly impaired aggregation, and agglutinate in
Patients demonstrate a mild to moderate bleeding dia
the RIPA assay, whereas platelets from BSS are unusually
 thesis such as easy bruising, epistaxis, gingival bleeding.
large and, despite aggregating normally in response to all
and menorrhagia. The bleeding time is prolonged and
agonists, do not agglutinate in the RIPA assay. The May-
in vitro platelet function studies reveal absence of the sec-
Hegglin anomaly and Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome are asso-
 ond wave of aggregation with either ADP or epinephrine
ciated with abnormally large platelets and abnormally
 and an impaired aggregation response to collagen. Dense
small platelets, respectively.
 granule deficiency has been associated with a number of
other congenital abnormalities such as Hermansky-Pudlak
WISKOTT-ALDRICH SYNDROME
syndrome (oculocutaneous albinism and increased ceroid
 in the monocytic/histiocytic system), Chediak-Higashi
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS) is an X-linked con-
syndrome, WAS, and congenital thrombocytopenia with
genital disorder characterized by severe thrombocytope-
absent radii (TAR) syndrome.
nia, immunodeficiency, recurrent infections, and eczema.
The Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASP) structural
gene (WASP) resides at Xp11.22-23. About 300 WASP
ALPHA-GRANULE DEFICIENCY
mutations have been discovered, including single-base
Platelet α-granule deficiency, gray platelet syndrome or
substitutions, deletions, insertions, and splice-site muta-
α-storage pool disease, is caused by the reduction or absence of
tions. Genetic testing by full-gene sequencing is available.
platelet α-granules (Figure 62.9). The affected patients have
The WASP appears to play critical roles in signal trans-
a history of a bleeding diathesis and demonstrate a mild
duction and in regulating cytoskeletal reorganization.
 thrombocytopenia. Platelets appear grayish in blood smears
Approximately 40% of patients with WAS demonstrate an
stained with Wright's stain. Ultrastructural studies reveal
associated autoimmune disorder. Hemolytic anemia, vas-
 absence or markedly reduced numbers of α-granules in the
culitis, nephritis, and inflammatory bowel disorders are
affected platelets. The basic defect seems to be the inabil-
the most frequently encountered.
ity of megakaryocytes to transfer endogenously synthesized
Thrombocytopenia is usually severe and <50,000/μL.
proteins into α-granule precursors. The affected patients
Platelets are small (about half the average size of normal
show a prolonged bleeding time and variable responses in
platelets) and are associated with functional defects and
platelet aggregation studies. The most consistent finding is
shortened survival. A variant of WAS with milder clinical
impairment of thrombin-induced aggregation.
presentation exists, which is referred to as X-linked throm-
bocytopenia (XLT).
Disorders of Platelet Secretion and
Granule Defciencies
These disorders fall into two major categories: (1) defi-
ciencies in the platelet granules or their contents and (2)
defects in the ability of platelets to release their contents.
Platelets contain dense granules, α-granules and vesi-
 des. Platelet dense granules contain serotonin, pyrophos-
phate, calcium, ADP, and ATP. Platelet α-granules contain
numerous proteins such as fibrinogen, platelet factor 4,
platelet-derived growth factor, β-thromboglobulin, factor
V, VWF, and high-molecular-weight kininogen. Platelet ves-
icles contain acid hydrolases and are involved in the ara-
chidonic acid pathways and thromboxane Az production.
DENSE GRANULE DEFICIENCY
Dense granule deficiency (or S-storage pool disease) is
FIGURE 62.9 Blood smears demonstrate markedly hypogranular
characterized by marked decrease or absence of platelet 
platelets (arrows).
ACQUIREDPLATELETDISORDERS713
ABNORMALITIES IN PLATELET ARACHIDONIC
ingestion may enhance prolongation of the bleeding time
ACID PATHWAYS
in patients who take aspirin.
Abnormalities of arachidonic acid pathways are extremely
rare and are of two major types: (1) defect in the release of
Beta-Lactam Antibiotics
arachidonic acid from phospholipids and (2) deficiencies
Beta-lactam antibiotics, such as penicillin and cephalo-
of cyclooxygenase or thromboxane synthetase. Affected
sporin derivatives, may prolong bleeding time and induce
patients are usually adults and often demonstrate mild to
abnormal platelet aggregation. These antibiotics seem to
moderate hemorrhages. Severe bleeding is rare.
interfere with the function of platelet membrane integ
Formation of thromboxane A2 is one of the major
rins, such as GPIIb-IIla and GPla-Ila. The effect is dose and
responses of platelets during activation. Thromboxane A2
duration dependent.
is necessary for platelet secretion during the stimulation of
platelets with ADP, epinephrine, and low concentration of
collagen and thrombin. Thromboxane Az is also a potent
Others
vasoconstrictor.
 Excessive garlic ingestion may induce platelet dysfunction
and inhibits cyclooxygenase activity. Long-term dietary
supplementation with marine oils reduces the platelet con-
tent of arachidonic acid and may cause abnormal platelet
Acquired Platelet Disorders
 aggregation and slight prolongation of the bleeding time.
 Dextran may slightly prolong the bleeding time without
DRUG-INDUCED DISORDERS
it has been used for the prevention of post-surgical throm-
Many commonly used drugs are known to affect platelet
boembolic complications.
function. Although some of these agents were developed
lism because of their ability to inhibit specifically one (or
 more) of the several distinct molecular events required
PATHOLOGIC CONDITIONS
for normal platelet function, and therefore to impair pri-
Cardiopulmonary Bypass
mary hemostasis, most were developed for clinical indica-
tions unrelated to their hemostatic effects and were found
 Prolonged bleeding time, abnormal platelet aggregation,
subsequently to non-specifically inhibit platelet function.
1.and thrombocytopenia are some of the common features
 s s a s     s    (  s
extensively and are well established, they will be discussed  F
 Bypass procedures also enhance thrombin and ADP gen-
only briefly here. However, because much of our knowl-
eration and complement activation. Mechanical trauma
edge in this area on drugs from the latter, much larger
 from the bypass pump may also degranulate platelets.
group comes from in vitro studies performed on platelets
exposed to one pharmacologic agent at a time, the over-
all impact on the hemostasis system in vivo has not been
Chronic Renal Faifure
established for most of them. Furthermore, the clinical rel-
Uremia may lead to platelet dysfunction and abnormal
evance of this knowledge is not clear since most patients
 aggregation. Bleeding time is often prolonged, and there
are administered more than one drug simultaneously.
 may be bleeding manifestations such as purpura, epistaxis,
menorrhagia, gastrointestinal bleeding, and hematuria.
ing aspirin and other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs), are among the most commonly used
medications
Hematologic Disorders
Abnormal platelet function and morphology may occur in
association with myelodysplastic syndromes, myeloprolif-
Aspirin
erative disorders, and acute myeloid leukemia. Abnormal
Aspirin irreversibly inactivates cyclooxygenase and thereby
inhibits production of thromboxane Az from arachi-
 secretion in response to ADP, epinephrine, and collagen, and
donic acid and impairs platelet secretion. The end result  reduced platelet procoagulant activity. Morphologic changes
 is defective platelet aggregation and prolonged bleeding include abnormal shapes, giant forms, and hypogranularity.
4 days after administration of aspirin is stopped. Ethanol  phology and severe platelet dysfunction has been reported.
714
 DISORDERS OF MEGAKARYOCYTES AND PLATELETS
Additional Resources
Bain BJ, Bhavnani M: Gray platelet syndrome, Am J Hematol 86:1027.
Hodgson K, Ferrer G, Pereira A, et al: Autoimmune cytopenia in
2011.
chronic lymphocytic leukaemia: diagnosis and treatment, Br J
Ballmaier M, Germeshausen M: Congenital amegakaryocytic throm-
Haematol 154:14-22, 2011.
bocytopenia: clinical presentation, diagnosis, and treatment, Semin 
Islam MS, Alamelu I: Morphological and electron microscopic char-
Thromb Hemost 37:673-68l, 2011.
acteristics of grey platelet syndrome, Br I Haematol 152:1-5, 2011.
Blanchette V, Bolton-Maggs P: Childhood immune thrombocytope-
Jalas C, Anderson SL, Laufer T, et al: A founder mutation in the MPL
nic purpura: diagnosis and management, Hematol Oncol Clin North
 gene causes congenital amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia (CAMT) in
Am 24:249-273, 2010.
the Ashkenazi Jewish population, Blood Cells Mot Dis 47:79-83, 2011.
Blundell MP, Worth A, Bouma G, et al: The Wiskott-Aldrich syn-
Lanza F: Bernard-Soulier syndrome (hemorrhagiparous thrombocytic
drome: the actin cytoskeleton and immune cell function, Dis Markers 
dystrophy). Orphanet I Rare Dis 1:46-48, 2006.
29:157-175, 2010.
McCrae K: Immune thrombocytopenia: no longer 'idiopathic', Cleve
Cleland SY, Siegel RM: Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome at the nexus of
Qin J Med 78:358-373, 2011.
autoimmune and primary immunodeficiency diseases, FEBS Lett
Nurden AT, Fiore M, Nurden P, et al: Glanzmann thrombasthenia: a
585:3710-3714, 2011.
review of ITGA2B and ITGB3 defects with emphasis on variants, phe-
Di Paola I. Johnson J: Thrombocytopenias due to gray platelet
notypic variability, and mouse models, Blood 118:5996-6005, 2011.
syndrome or THC2 mutations, Semin Thromb Hemost 37:690-697.
Nurden P, Nurden AT: Congenital disorders associated with platelet
2011.
dysfunctions, Thromb Haemost 99:253-263, 2008.
Franchini M, Favaloro EJ, Lippi G: Glanzmann thrombasthenia: an
 Pham A, Wang I: Bernard-Soulier syndrome: an inherited platelet dis-
update, Cin Chim Acta 41l:1-6, 2010.
order, Arch Pathol Lab Med 131:1834-1836, 2007.
Geddis AE: Congenital amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia, Pediatr
Tai HM: Pathophysiology of thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura,
Blood Cancer 57:199-203, 2011.
Int J Hematol91:1-19, 2010.
George IN, Aster RH: Drug-induced thrombocytopenia: pathogen-
White JG: Platelet granule disorders, Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 4:337-377.
esis, evaluation, and management, Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ
1986.
Program:153-158, 2009.
Zipfel PF, Heinen S. Skerka C: Thrombotic microangiopathies: new
Gunay-Aygun M, Huizing M, Gahl WA: Molecular defects that affect
insights and new challenges, Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens 19:372-378,
platelet dense granules, Semin Thromb Hemost 30:537-547, 2004.
2010.
Post-Therapy Changes
I he complex and multidisciplinary therapeutic approaches
 that are currently used in a significant proportion of hema-
Box 63.1 Applications of Hematopoietic
tologic disorders are offen associated with post-therapy
Stem Cell Transplantation
pathologic changes. In this chapter, we briefly discuss
and demonstrate some of the most frequent post-therapy
Allogeneic/Syngeneic Transplants
 changes in these disorders.
 Aplastic anemia 
Leukemias/lymphomas
 Plasma cell myeloma
 Paroxysmal noctumal hemoglobinuria
 Myelodysplastic syndromes
Changes Associated with
 Autoimmune disorders
 Congenital disorders
Hematopoietic Stem Cell
 Primary immunodeficiencies
Transplantation
 Metabolic disorders 
 Hemoglobinopathies
 Fanconi's anemia
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is
Hereditary lymphohistiocytic hemophagocytosis
based on the principle of replacing the hematopoietic
Autologous Transplants
stem cells and restoring hematopoiesis in patients who
Leukemias/lymphomas
receive myeloablative  high-dose chemotherapy and/
+
 Plasma cell myeloma
or radiation therapy for the treatment of neoplastic dis-
 Solid neoplasms
+
orders or in patients who have defective hematopoiesis
(Box 63.1). The source of the stem cells for transplanta-
tion is the patient's own cells (autologous transplant), or
cells from another person who is an identical twin (syn-
geneic transplant) or who is HLA compatible with the
Box 63.2 Complications of Hematopoietic
patient (allogeneic transplant). The stem cells are har-
Stem Cell Transplantation
vested form the donor's bone marrow, peripheral blood,
or umbilical cord blood. Few patients have an identical
 Graft rejection or failure
 Graft-versus-host disease
twin donor, and fewer than 3o% of the patients have
 Veno-occlusive liver disease
an HLA-compatible sibling. Therefore, the vast major-
 Post-transplant immunodeficiency
ity of stem cell transplants are allogeneic with unrelated
+
 Opportunistic infections
donors being the source of stem cells. The major com-
+
 Interstitial pneumonitis
plications of stem cell transplantation (particularly allo-
 Infertility
geneic) include infection, veno-occlusive liver disease,
 Recurrent malignancy
graft-versus-host disease (GVHD), recurrent malignancy,
 Post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder
post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder, and graft
 Secondary malignancies
rejection/failure (Box 63.2).
Atlas of Hematopathology. DOl: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385183-3.00063-2
@ 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
716
POST-THERAPY CHANGES
FIGURE 63.2 Post-TraNsplaNT BoNE Marrow, 1-3 weeks. Biopsy
Erythroid clusters (A and B) are often far from bone trabeculae, while
myeloid clusters are usually close to the bone trabeculae (C and D).
From Naeim,F.Atias of Bone Marrow and Blood Pathology.
W. B. Saunders, Philadelphia, 200 1, by permission.
fatty tissue and are often concentrated in paratrabecular
areas (Figure 63.2). Megakaryocytes are rare. Dysplastic
changes and left shift are often present in both lineages
and evidence of hematogone regeneration. Sometimes, the
presence of immature myeloid cells or hematogones may
mimic residual/relapse disease in transplanted patients
B
with the diagnosis of AML or ALL, respectively.
Bone marrow samples obtained 4-8 weeks after trans-
plantation show increasing cellularity with large clusters
of hematopoietic cells composed of mixed-lineage cellular
elements (Figures 63.3 and 63.4). Dysplastic changes and
myeloid/erythroid left shift are minimal. Along with the
improved bone marrow cellularity, peripheral blood dis-
plays a progressive increase in hemoglobin levels and in
white cells and platelet counts. Platelets are the last cellular
elements to come back to normal. Normocellularity is usu-
ally achieved 8-12 weeks following transplantation.
Engraftment can be established even earlier by molecu-
C
lar studies, using DNA fingerprinting methods to distin-
FIGURE 63.1 PoST-TRANSPLANT BONE MARROW, 1-3 WEEKs. BiOpsy
guish donor from recipient cells in either bone marrow or
sections (A and B) are hypocellular and show foci of hematopoietic
peripheral blood specimens. In earlier days this was done
cells. Bone marrow smears (C) are usually hypocellular and display
by Southern blot, using restriction-fragment-length poly-
scattered and small clusters of hematopoietic cells.
From Naeim, F. Atias of Bone Marrow and Blood Pathology. W. B.
morphism (RFLP) markers. Now it is typically done by
Saunders,Philadeiphia,2001, by permission.
 PCR analysis of short tandem repeat (STR) polymorphisms,
which provide a wider source of targets and more rapid
turnaround time (Figures 63.5 and 63.6). The sensitivity is
POST-TRANSPLANT BONE MARROW CHANGES
down to 1-5% donor or recipient cells in mixed-cell (chi-
During the first week after stem cell transplantation the
 meric) specimens. With bone marrow specimens, it is not
bone marrow appears markedly hypocellular. There may
advisable to pursue any lower sensitivity because there are
       s
usually non-neoplastic stromal elements present which
edema and an increased number of foamy histiocytes.
would give the appearance of residual recipient DNA.
Occasional hematopoietic precursors and scattered lym-
 In situations where the donor and recipient are of
phocytes and plasma cells are present (Figure 63.1).
 opposite gender, a FISH study with chromosome XX/
 Bone marrow samples obtained between 1 and 3 weeks 
XY-specific probes can also establish engraftment success.
after  transplantation  reveal regenerating  hematopoietic
A quantitative analysis of 200-500 nuclei with xX/XY mis-
cells with scattered well-defined clusters of erythroid cells 1
 match signal patterns can provide an estimate of engraft-
within the fatty tissue, usually away from bone trabeculae.
 ment (Figure 63.7). The ability of FISH to screen large
In contrast, granulocytic precursors tend to spread around 
 numbers of cells with fluorophores for sex chromosomes
717
FIGURE 63.3 PosT-TraNspLaNT BoNE MaRrow, 4-8 wEEKs. Biopsy
sections show increased cellularity, which at early stages appears
patchy (A). The bone marrow cells are distributed more evenly at
later stages (B, clot section; C, smear).
C
From Naeim, F. Atlas of Bone Marrow and Blood Pathology.
W. B. Saunders, Philadeliphia, 2001, by permission.
FIGURE 63.4 PoST-TRANSPLANT BONE MARROW, 4-8 WEEKS. Smears
show myeloid and erythroid left shift with dysplastic changes 
(A and B). There is often evidence ofincreased hematogones (C).
From Naeim, F.Atlas of Bone Marrow and Blood Pathology.
permits reliable detection of residual recipient hematopoi-
W. B. Saunders, Phiiadeiphia, 2001, by permission.
esis with sensitivity of <1%.
d   nd s  s 
formed after a standard 48 hour culture. Interestingly.
breakpoints involved in these aberrations do not appear
while the majority of the cells are chromosomally normal,
to be cancer-related and the non-recurring balanced rear-
multiple unrelated clonal abnormalities in host bone mar-
rangements are also not commonly seen in therapy-related
row cells after allogeneic stem cell transplantation can be 
leukemia. It is possible that these chromosomal anomalies
seen (Figure 63.8). These cells could be transient with no 
 are non-constitutional but most likely represent stable stem
apparent effect on normal hematopoiesis. In addition, the 
cell damage resulting from cytotoxic therapy (Figure 63.9).
718
POST-THERAPY CHANGES
00
B
B
FIGURE 63.5 BONE MARROW ENGRAFTMENT ANALYSIS USING A SERIES 0F
FIGURE 63.6 BONE MARROW ENGRAFTMENT ANALYSIS USING A SERIES 0F
THREE SHORT-TANDEM REPEAT POLYMORPHISMs. (A) Recipient DNA befOre
THREE SHORT-TANDEM REPEAT POLYMORPHISMs. (A) Recipient DNA befOre
transplant; (B) donor DNA; (C) recipient DNA from blood after
transplant; (B) donor DNA; (C) recipient DNA from blood after
transplant. The post-transplant specimen completely matches
transplant. In this case the post-transplant specimen exhibits
 the donor DNA genotype, indicating successful engraftment and 
genotypic elements of both the donor and recipient samples,
no residual recipient cells down to the level of sensitivity of the
indicating partial engraftment with residual recipient cels still
assay.
 present (mixed chimerism). The proportions are about 55% donor
DNA,45% recipient.
Graft failure (5-20% in patients transplanted for aplas-
tic anemia) is a complication that may follow bone mar-
row engraftment. The bone marrow cellularity declines
and there may be some non-specific changes, such as fat
necrosis, increased proportion of lymphocytes and plasma
cells, and presence of foamy histiocytes.
Donor cell-derived leukemia/MDS is a rare event that
has been reported in allogeneic bone marrow transplant
patients as a secondary neoplasm. AML and MDS are the
most frequent types followed by ALL, T-LGL, and CLL.
The  most commonly  reported cytogenetic  abnormali-
ties are monosomy 7, del(7q), rearrangements of 1lq23
involving the MLL gene region and AML1 locus at 2lq22.
The 1lq23 aberrations are more common in HSCT patients
who have been exposed to topoisomerase II inhibitors or
alkylating agents. Donor cell leukemia can be confirmed
by karyotype studies. Figure 63.10 demonstrates a case of a
32-year-old female diagnosed with paroxysomal nocturnal
hemoglobinuria and with a normal bone marrow karyo-
FIGURE 63.7 A panel of interphase cells from a sex-mismatch bone
marrow transplant patient showing a mixture of Xx (red) and XY
showed trisomy 11 and t(11;21)(q23;q22) in all her donor
(red/green) signal pattern, consistent with partial engraftment.
719
71
8
17
移
Y
7
9
86
68
allogeneic transplantation.
brother's cells. In another case (Figure 63.11) a 55-year old
female was diagnosed with AML characterized by t(8;21)
(q22;q22). Two years after transplant, she relapsed and
developed pancytopenia with a t(11;19)(q23;p13) and
trisomy 2l in all male donor cells. Both were DCL associ-
ated with sex-mismatched bone-marrow transplants with
 chromosomal aberrations involving the MLL (1lq23) gene
locus.
The mechanisms of the leukemic transformation
 of previously healthy donor HSCs is not well known.
Oncogenesis of donor cell leukemia is probably a mul-
tifactorial process. It is also possible that an undetected
品品
malignant clone was present within the donor at the
22
time of donation, or that healthy donor HSCs might
FIGURE 63.9 A non-clonal abnormal metaphase cell from a
cultured HSC post-transplant, exhibiting hyperdiploid karyotype
have a genetic premalignant potential.
with gains and losses of chromosomes (arrows), reflecting
genomic instability.
720
POST-THERAPY CHANGES
1
Post Chemotherapy and
Irradiation Changes
1
The morphologic changes of the bone marrow after chemo-
therapy and/or irradiation are the result of rapidly progres-
sive cellular death and a transient ineffective hematopoiesis.
These changes include marked hypocellularity, fibrinoid
necrosis, edema, dilated sinuses, multilobulated adipocytes,
new bone formation, mild to moderate increase in reticulin
fibers, and increased number of macrophages, frequently
with phagocytic particles (Figures 63.12 and 63.13).
Morphologic evidence of post-therapy bone marrow
regeneration usually appears 1-2 weeks after therapy.
      is
der(1l)
than megakaryocytes. Myeloid precursors are usually adja-
cent to bone, whereas erythroid clusters are far from bone
trabeculae and are surrounded by fatty tissue. Rapid bone
marrow regeneration is often associated with left-shifted
hematopoiesis and increased hematogones.
Radiation and/or chemotherapy  effects  on lymph
nodes include rapidly progressive tumor necrosis with
 marked depletion of the lymphocytic population and
le(ll)
FIGURE 63.10 A metaphase cell (top) from a female recipient
showing trisomy 11 and an unbalanced t(11;21)(q23;q22) in
the donor cells (long arrow, Y-chromosome), consistent with
donor cell leukemia. A subsequent FISH analysis on the same
cell (below) with the MLL dual-color "spilt" probe confirms the
trisomy 11 and the unbalanced t(11;21).
A!1
C
B
R
FIGURE 63.11 A partial karyotype (A) showing a balanced t(11;19) 
FIGURE 63.12 Post-chemotherapy bone marrow sections are
from a female recipient and confirmed by dual color MLL gene
hypocellular with areas of necrosis, scattered hematopoietic
FISH probe on an interphase (B) and the male (donor) metaphase 
precursors, stromal tissue, and minimal amount of fat (A, low
cell, consistent with donor cell leukemia (C).
power; B, high power).
CYTOKINE-ASSOCIATED BONE MARROW CHANGES
721
B
FIGURE 63.13 Bone marrow biopsy sections after chemotherapy
or irradiation are hypocellular and may demonstrate necrosis,
edema, and increased number of histiocytes (A). Higher power
view (B) shows hemophagocytic histiocytes.
edema (Figure 63.14). Plasma cells, histiocytes/macro-
phages, stromal cells and vascular structures remain intact.
Scattered endothelial and stromal cells may show atypical
features, particularly in post-radiation. Post-therapy lymph
node regeneration, based on experimental animal studies,
begins first with the collection of cortical lymphocytes fol-
Cytokine-Associated Bone
Marrow Changes
C
The production of hematopoietic cells is regulated by a
FIGURE 63.14 LyMPH NoDE BIopSY SECtIoN Of A PATIENT RECEIviNG
group of hematopoietic cytokines. These cytokines initiate
various cellular responses, such as proliferation, differen-
CHEMOTHERAPY FOR ADENOCARCINOMA OF COLON. There is Marked
lymphoid depletion with lack of follicular structures, increased 
tiation, maturation, survival, and functional activities (see
 proportion of histiocytes, and no evidence of metastasis (A, low
Table 1.2 in Chapter 1). These regulatory activities can be
power; B, intermediate power; C, high power).
multilineage or lineage-specific. Some of these cytokines,
such as erythropoietin, granulocyte colony-stimulating fac-
Erythropoietin (EPO) is a renal cytokine which inhibits
tor (G-CSF), and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimu- t
the apoptosis of erythroid progenitor cells, allowing their
lating factor (GM-CSF), have been used in routine clinical
proliferation and maturation. EPO production is stimu
use to stimulate hematopoietic cell production.
lated by hypoxia or decline in levels of hemoglobin. EPO
722
POST-THERAPY CHANGES
FIGURE 63.15 BoNE MARRow EFFEcTs oF G-csF THERAPy. Marrow smears show myeloid left shift with dysplastic and hypergranular myeloid
precursors (A, low power; B, high power). A hypergranular promyelocyte and a neutrophil with heavy toxic granulation are shown in
blood smear (C).
has been widely utilized in anemia of chronic diseases and
 MDS. EPO therapy is associated with erythroid hyperplasia
Changes Associated with
in the bone marrow, and increased reticulocyte count and
hemoglobin/hematocrit levels in the peripheral blood.
Application of Monoclona!
Granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) is pro-
Antibodies
 duced by bone marrow stromal cells, macrophages, endo-
thelial cells, fibroblasts, and astrocytes and is expressed on
hematopoietic progenitor cells, endothelial cells, neurons,
During the past decade and so, the Food and Drug
and glial cells. G-CSF regulates proliferation, differen-
Administration (FDA) has approved several monoclonal
tiation, and survival of hematopoietic progenitor cells. It
 antibodies for the treatment of various cancers. Clinical tri-
expands circulating pools of neutrophils, mobilizes hema-
 als of monoclonal antibody therapy have been carried on
topoietic stem cells in the peripheral blood, and enhances 
 almost every type of cancer, particularly in hematologic
neutrophil phagocytic function. It has been used to facili-
malignancies (Table 63.1).
tate recovery after bone marrow transplantation and cancer
Two types of monoclonal antibodies are used in cancer
chemotherapy, to increase peripheral blood progenitor cells 
treatments: (1) naked monoclonal antibodies and (2) con-
for harvesting, and to treat severe congenital neutropenia.
 jugated monoclonal antibodies.
Granulocyte-macrophage  colony  stimulating  factor 
Naked monoclonal antibodies are those without any
(GM-CSF) shares significant overlapping functional fea-
 drug or radioactive material attached to them. They are the
tures with G-CSF In addition, it accelerates production of
 most commonly used antibodies at this time. Some naked
monocytes and eosinophils, and increases the release of
monoclonal antibodies attach to malignant cells and
pro-inflammatory cytokines. GM-CSF is produced by macro-
act as a marker for the body's immune system to destroy
phages, endothelial cells, fibroblasts, bone marrow stromal
them, such as anti-CD20 monoclonal antibodies ritux-
cells, lymphocytes, mast cells, and eosinophils.
imab (Rituxan) or ofatumumab (Arzerra) and anti-CD52
Bone marrow changes following G-CSF and GM-CSF ther-
monoclonal antibody alemtuzumab (Campath) (see Table
apy usually consist of increased cellularity, myeloid prepon-
 63.1). Others attack the specific cellular components that
derance and left shift, and often various degrees of dysplastic
 are functionally important for the growth or survival of the
changes and cytoplasmic hypergranularity (Figures 63.15 and
 cancer cells, such as bevacizumab (Avastin) which targets
63.16). GM-CSF therapy may lead to marked eosinophilia.
VEGF protein.
CHANGES ASSOCIATED WITHIMATINIB MESYLATE (GLEEVEC) THERAPY
723
left shift (A, low power; B, high power). Neutrophils with heavy toxic granulation are shown in blood smear (C).
 Table 63.1
In general, monoclonal antibody therapy, alone or in
Examples of Monoclonal Antibodies Used to Treat
conjunction with chemotherapy, reduces the tumor mass
Hematologic Malignancies
and may help to achieve molecular remission. Rituximab
has become the treatment of choice in a significant pro-
 Antibody Name
 Trade Name 
Antigen  Used to treat
portion of B-cell lymphoid malignancies, in combination
 Rituximab
Rituxan
CD20
Non-Hodgkin
with CHoP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincris-
 lymphoma, B-cell type
tine, and prednisone) therapy. However, approximately
Ofatumumab
Arzerra
CD20
 Chronic lymphocytic
20% of patients with B-cell lymphoma treated with ritux-
leukemia
imab demonstrate a CD20-negative disease in relapse. It
Alemtuzumab
Campath
CD52
B- and T-cell
is important to repeat immunophenotypic studies in the
 malignancies
biopsy specimens, such as bone marrow, obtained for the
 Ibritumomab 
 Zevalin
CD20
Non-Hodgkin 
tiuxetan
 lymphoma, B-cell 
establishment of relapse diagnosis.
(radiolabelled)
type
Tositumomab
Bexxar
CD20
Non-Hodgkin
 [f the lymphoid infiltrate is CD20-negative but expresses CD3
(radiolabelled)
 lymphoma, B-cell type
it signifies a non-neoplastic T-cell response.
Gemtuzumab
Mylotarg
CD33
 Acute myeloid 
●
 If the lymphoid infiltrate is CD20+ it signifies relapse.
ozogamicin
leukemia
● If the lymphoid infiltrate is CD20-negative but expresses PAx5
(radiolabelled)
and/or CD79a it indicates a CD20-negative relapse.
Conjugated monoclonal antibodies are those joined
to a radioactive particle or a toxin to destroy the cancer
cells. Examples of radiolabelled antibodies are ibritu-
Changes Associated with Imatinib
momab tiuxetan (Zevalin) and tositumomab (Bexxar)
Mesylate (Gleevec) Therapy
used for the treatment of some cases of non-Hodgkin lym-
phoma. Gemtuzumab ozogamicin (Mylotarg) comprises
an immunotoxin, calicheamicin, attached to an anti-CD33
Imatinib mesylate (Gleevec) binds to a cleft between the
antibody, and was used for treatment of AML, but further
N-terminal adenosine triphosphate binding domain and
studies did not support its effectiveness.
the C-terminal activation loop that forms the catalytic site
724
POST-THERAPY CHANGES
iv(3)
(2:3
B
T(3;4)
T(3;21)
C
D
FIGURE 63.18 FISH analysis on metaphases of TKI Resistant CML
BC Patients with EV1-dual-color "breakapart" 3q26.2 probe.
The red and green probes lie on either side of EV1, so when it 
is rearranged the signals will appear split red or green. (A) inv(3)
(p21;q26.2) showing a deletion of the 5' region of the EV1 locus;
(B) t(2;3)(p23;q26.2) showing the break occurring in the 5' region
of the EVi1 locus; (C) t(3;4)(q26.2;q31) split signals of the 3q26.2
dual-color probe showing rearrangement at the 5' EV1 locus to
4q31 band; and (D) t(3;21)(q25.2;q22.1) triple-color EV1 probe
showing a translocation of the 5' Ev1 gene region translocated
B
to 21q (green).
 FIGURE 63.17 BoNE MarRoW EfFects 0F GleevEc THeRapy. BiOpsy
section shows clusters of pseudo-Gaucher cells (A, low power;
B, high power).
MOLECULAR AND CYTOGENETIC CHANGES
of the Abl tyrosine kinase, locking the protein into the inac-
The standard molecular method for monitoring Gleevec
tive conformation. It is the treatment of choice for chronic
 treatment is the quantitative BCR-ABL fusion gene assay.
myelogenous leukemia (CML), but it has also been used
performed using real-time PCR. This method is sensi-
in treating hypereosinophilic syndromes associated  with
tive down to 1 CML cell in 100,000 normal cells (or even
PDGFRA, PDGFRB, or FGFR1 rearrangements and kit-positive
lower).
gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST). In CML the patients'
The amount of BCR-ABL mRNA is given as a ratio to
complete response to imatinib therapy is about 98%, with
the mRNA of an internal control gene, or as an absolute
89% 5-year survival rate and about 17% relapse rate.
 Evaluation of post-imatinib therapy bone marrow sam-
amount based on international standards.
 If the BCR-ABL concentration begins to trend upward
ples shows progressive changes toward normal morphol-
in a patient on imatinib, it usually indicates the beginning
ogy. However, the post-therapy bone marrow samples may
of relapse due to selection of an imatinib-resistant clone
show certain morphologic features including:
of CML cells. The mechanism of resistance is the occur-
● Frequent presence of non-diagnostic lymphoid aggregates.
rence of point mutations in the region of the fusion gene
sometimes paratrabecular, consisting of a mixture of B- and 
that codes for the imatinib binding site in the fusion pro-
T-lymphocytes;
tein. Methods are available to detect these mutations, of
● Frequent presence of histiocytic aggregates (pseudo-Gaucher 
which about 20 are recurring in numerous patients (Figure
cells) (Figure 63.17):
 Bone marrow hypocellularity, particularly in cases with a long
generation tyrosine kinase inhibitor drugs, while others
history of treatment. The degree of hypocellularity in some
instances is so severe that the bone marrow biopsy sections
are sensitive. Thus, the test can be used to guide medical
resemble aplastic anemia.
management.
MINIMAL RESIDUAL DISEASE 
725
Limited reports exist regarding Philadelphia chromo-
Immunoglobulin (Ig) and T-cell receptor (TCR) gene
some-negative, chromosomally abnormal cells arising dur-
   se r    n n       
imatinib, it is expected that Ph-positive cells will decrease 
 detection in remission. However, this technology is suscep-
in numbers as the drug is being administered. As these 
tible to false-negative results due to clonal evolution dur-
cells are eliminated, the Ph-negative leukemic progenitors ing natural history of the disease, leading to relapse with
expand selectively, a sign of genomic instability, and by  a clone different from the original one in some cases. The
clonal evolution present as cytogenetically unrelated clones.
 PCR quantitative methods have sensitivities ranging from
Although approximately 3% of responders to ima-
1×10-2 to 1x10-4.
tinib develop new clonal chromosomal abnormalities in
Real-time
quantitative
 polymerase
chain
reaction
Ph-negative cells, there are reports of Ph-negative acute lell-
(RQ-PCR) measures specific sequences of DNA, and reverse
kemia in Ph-positive CML patients treated with imatinib,
transcription PCR (RT-PCR) measures specific sequences of
despite the presence of a cytogenetic response and without 
mRNA. Since viable tumor cells are the source of mRNA,
secondary chromosomal abnormalities. The appearance of 
the target RNA sequences may correlate with the rate of cell
 additional chromosomal abnormalities in Ph-negative cells,
proliferation. A sensitivity of 1x10-4 to 1x10- is achiev-
a phenomenon affecting 5% to 10% of patients may signify
able by these techniques. Molecular remission is defined as
risk for developing treatment-associated myelodysplastic
the failure of the detection of tumor cells in three sequential
syndrome, but longer follow-up is needed. These abnormali-
samples, one month apart, by the most sensitive molecular
ties include monosomy 7 which rapidly transforms to AML.
method available.
The reported frequency of additional chromosomal
● Chronic myelogenous leukemia. Quantitative PCR (Q-PCR)
abnormalities is around 5% in CML chronic phase, and
has largely replaced cytogenetic or FISH studies in closely
this increases to 50-80% in advanced phases. While
monitoring CML patients' response to treatment and detec-
the onset of new clonal chromosome abnormalities  in
tion of emerging tyrosine kinase inhibitor-resistant clones
Ph-negative cells during treatment has been described,
(Figure 63.19). Patients who achieve less than 1-log reduction
their origin and clinical significance remain to be clari-
3 months post-therapy have only a 13% chance of achiev-
fied. Patients who do not respond to imatinib therapy will
ing major molecular response (MMR) compared with >70%
progress to the blastic phase (BP), usually through the
patients who have a greater depletion af 3 months. MMR is
accelerated phase.
defined as 3-log tumor reduction.
Acute myeloid leukemia. Q-PCR for the detection of MRD
in AML is largely limited to the fusion genes secondary to
chromosomal aberrations. such as PML-RARA in t(15:17)
(q22:q21), RUNX1-RUNX1T1 in t(8;21)(q22:q22), and CBFB-
MYH11 in inv (16)(p13.1q22) or t(16;16)(p13.1:q22). These
Minimal Residual Disease
studies may help to predict the risk of relapse in treated leuke-
mic patients. For example, it has been shown that in patients
with acute promyelocytic leukemia (PML) (Figure 63.20).
Recent advances in technology have improved the specific
those with MRD ≥1x10-3 have 10-fold higher chance of
relapse in 5 years than those with MRD <1x10-3.
cells in patients who were considered to be in remission
 Acute lymphoid leukemia. Early clearance or low levels of
by clinical and/or morphologic standards. These advanced
MRD are favorable prognostic indicators in childhood ALL,
techniques are able to detect malignant cells at10-4 to 10-5
  ro pa  e n go sa  
sensitivity at subclinical levels, a condition referred to as
are often associated with a high-risk of relapse. Two main cat-
"minimal residual disease"
egories of targets are used for Q-PCR:
The following methods are used for the detection of
Gene fusion events. such
asBCR-ABL1[t(9;22)
(q34:q11.2)]. TCF3-PBX1 [t(1:19)(q23:p13.3)]. and ETV6-
minimal residual disease (MRD).
RUNX1 [t(12;21)(p13;q22)].
The clonal rearrangement of immunoglobulin (Ig) and
T-cell receptor (TCR) genes.
CYTOGENETICS AND MOLECULAR STUDIES
●
 Chronic lymphocytic  leukemia.  Molecular  detection  of
Various literature data show that interphase FISH is more
MRD in CLL is based on the identification of DNA sequences
sensitive than conventional cytogenetics and may poten-
that are unique to CLL cells in a patient, such as rearranged
tially be useful for monitoring patients who have achieved
immunoglobulin gene components including variable (V).
diversity (D), and joining (I) regions. RQ-PCR techniques can
 analysis. However, because established response categories
generate very sensitive results by using specific primers for each
CLL clone. Fortunately, somatic hypermutations are low (2%)
are based on conventional cytogenetics and because FISH
 in CLL, and therefore do not play a significant role in changing
does not detect other clonal chromosomal abnormalities,
the primer binding sites which would cause PCR failure. [t
conventional testing remains the recommended approach
should be noted that these sequence-specific techniques are
for establishing complete cytogenetic response.
highly specialized and not available in most centers.
726
POST-THERAPYCHANGES
E011
Standards
Standards
0.1
0.09
Control
Control
Threshold
0.09
0.00-
0.01%
0.00-
Threshold
Patient
Patient
0.07
007-
0.01%
0.05%
40.37%
0.04
0.03-
0.02-
10
B
FIGURE 63.19 RT-PCR STUDIES ON A PATIENT WITH CHRONIC MYELOGENOUS LEUKEMIA BEFORE (A) AND AFTER (B) THERAPY. The leVel Of BCR-ABL fUSiON is
dramatically reduced from 40.37% (A) to 0.05% after therapy (B), but it is still above the threshold level of 0.01%, indicating minimal
residual disease.
Courtesy of Jimin Xu, Ph.D., Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, VA Greater Los Angeles Heaithcare System.
Patient
Control
45.5%
0.09
Standards
0.09
Standards.
Threshold
0.01%
Control
10
Threshold
0.01%
80.04
Patient
0.03
0.83
S0.01%
0
2.01
B
FIGURE 63.2O RT-PCR STUDIES ON A PATIENT WITH ACUTE PROMYELOCYTIC LEUKEMIA BEFORE (A) AND AFTER (B) THERAPY. The leVel Of PML -RARA fuSiOn is
dramatically reduced from 45.5% (A) to <0.01% after therapy (B), below the threshold level.
MINIMAL RESIDUAL DISEASE
727
MULTIPARAMETRIC FLOW CYTOMETRY (MFC)
 Reference the original diagnostic histograms whenever pos-
sible for visual comparison of LAIPs.
Recent technical advancement has enabled multiparamet-
ric assays, and 6-8 color MFC is now commonly applied
rancies that may help distinguish abnormal from normal blasts.
 in clinical practice. Multiparametric flow cytometry (MFC)
Report level of MRD as well as real-time sensitivity.
is now considered, along with PCR analysis, the most
Figures 63.21 to 63.23 illustrate examples of MRD
important test for MRD detection. The molecular basis
detection by MFC.
for identifying MRD by MFC is expression of abnormal or
leukemia-associated immunophenotypes (LAIPs) by leul-
kemic cells. It is also known as phenotypic aberrancies,
which have been described previously in Chapter 17 (AML
overview).
13
Using the approach of pattern recognition, a sensi-
tivity level of 10-4 to 10-5 can be achieved by multipara-
metric assays. Results in the literature have demonstrated
prognostic significance of MRD detected by MFC, and
CD117
CD15
CD33
suggested that the level of MRD post-induction or post-
 consolidation may predict relapse-free survival and overall
MRD(0.3%)
survival.
 i  s  p  
 in achieving the desired sensitivity level. However, the fol-
 lowing are considerations that may be helpful in setting up
CD117
CD15
CD33
the MRD assays and interpreting results by MFC.
FIGURe 63.22 Mrd of Acute Myeloid leukemiA Detected By mfc.
 Design proper panels to maximize the frequency of common
phenotypic aberrancies using the least number of tests.
marrow (upper panel, in blue), a small population of abnormal
Set up at least 1 million cells per tube, and collect minimally
myeloblasts (0.3% of the total) is identified in the post-therapy
50-100 events per target population (leukemic cell popula-
sample (lower panel, in magenta), revealing similar phenotypic
tion) utilizing live gate of target populations.
patterns as those seen previously with expression of CD13 (tight
duster), CD15 (partial), CD33 (heterogeneous), CD34 (bright and
tight cluster), and CD117.
8
福
CD5
CD23
Kappa
CD45
CD10
CD33
ICTdT
MRD(1%)
MRD(0.02%)
只
CD5
CD23
Kappa
CD45
CD10
CD33
IcTdT
FIGURE 63.21 MINIMAL RESIDUAL DISEASE (MRD) OF MANTLE CELL
 FIGURE 63.23 Mrd of B LymPHoBLastic LeukeMIA DETecTed BY mfc.
LYMPHoMA DETECTED BY MFc. Compared with the original diagnostic
 Compared with the diagnostic histograms of the pre-therapy
histograms (upper panel, in blue) of mantle cell lymphoma, a
 marrow (upper panel, in blue), a minute population of abnormal 
small population of neoplastic B-cells (1% of the total) is detected 
 Blymphoblasts (0.02% of the total) is detected in the post-
in the post-therapy sample (lower panel, in magenta), displaying 
therapy sample (lower panel, in magenta), demonstrating 
identical patterns with expression of CD5 (dim), CD19, CD20
identical phenotypic patterns to those observed previously with
(bright), CD23 (partial), FMC7, and surface kappa light chain
expression of CD10, CD19, CD34, intracellular TdT, plus aberrant 
restriction.
①13 (partial) and (D33 (partial).
728
POST-THERAPY CHANGES
Additional Resources
Al-Mawali A, Gillis D, Lewis I: The role of multiparameter flow
Liu YJ, Grimwade G: Minimal residual disease evaluation in acute
cytometry for detection of minimal residual disease in acute myeloid
myeloid leukaemia, Lancet 360:160-162, 2002.
leukemia, Am J Clin Pathol 131:16-26, 2009.
Shook D, Coustan-Smith E, Ribeiro RC, et al: Minimal residual
 Bruggemann M, RaffT, Flohr T, et al: Clinical significance of minimal
disease quantitation in acute myeloid leukwmia, Clin Lymphoma
residual disease quantifcation in adult patients with standard-risk 
acute lymphoblastic leukemia, Blood 107: 11l6-1123, 2006.
Tobal K, Newton J, Macheta M, et al: Molecular quantitation of mini-
Buccisano F, Maurillo L, Del Principe Ml, et al: Prognostic and ther-
mal residual disease in acute myeloid leukemia with t(8;2l) can
apeutic implications of minimal residual disease detection in acute 
identify patients in durable remission and predict clinical relapse.
myeloid leukemia, Blood 119:332-341, 2012.
Blood 95:815-819, 2000.
Campana D: Minimal residual disease in acute lymphoblastic leuke-
Uhrmacher S. Erdfelder F, Kreuzer KA: Flow cytometry and poly-
mia, Educ Prog Am Soc Hematol 7-12, 2010.
Campana D: Role of minimal residual disease monitoring in adult 
chronic lymphocytic leukemia, Adv Hematol 1-ll, 2010.
and pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia, Hematol Oncol Clin
van der Velden V, Cazzaniga G, Schrauder A, et al: Analysis of
North Am 23:1083-1098, 2009.
minimal residual disease by Ig/TCR gene rearrangements: guide-
Campana D: Minimal residual disease in acute lymphoblastic leuke-
lines for interpretation of real-time quantitative PCR data, Leukemia
mia, Semin Hematol 46: 100-106, 2009.
2l:604-611, 2007.
Congdon CC: The destructive effect of radiation on lymphatic tissue,
Wang E, Hutchinson CB, Huang Q. et al: Donor cell-derived leuke-
Cancer Res 26:1211-1220, 1966.
 mias/myelodysplastic neoplasms in allogeneic hematopoietic stem cel
transplant recipients: a clinicopathologic study of 10 cases and a com-
Guerrasio A, Pilatrino C, De Micheli D, et al: Assessment of minimal
 prehensive review ofthe literature, Am J Clin Pathol 135:525-540, 2011.
residual disease (MRD) in CBFbeta/MYHll-positive acute myeloid
leukemias by qualitative and quantitative RT-PCR amplification of
Wiseman DH: Donor cell leukemia: a review, Biol Blood Marrow
fusion transcripts, Leukemia 16: 1176-1178, 2002.
Transplant 17:771-789, 2011.
ex
Note: Page numbers followed by "f", "t", and "b" refer to figures. tables. and boxes respectively.
A
myeloperoxidase 223. 223f
NPM1 mutation 242
naphthol AS-D acetate esterase 223
t(3:3)(q21:q26.2)
 ABL, see Acute basophilic leukemia
naphthol AS-D chloroacetate 222f. 224
immunophenotype 239
Abnormal localization of immature precursors
α-napthyl butyrate esterase 223, 224f
morphology 239
[ALIP} 113f
 periodic acid-Schiff reaction 223. 223f
t[6:9][p23:q34)
Acanthocyte 677f
Sudan Black B 223. 223f
immunophenotype 238
Acanthocytosis G96
cytogenetics overview 225-226
molecular/cytogenetic studies 238
 ACD, see Anemia of chronic disease
differential diagnosis 242t. 243
morphology 238
aCML, see Atypical chronic myeloid leukemia
Down syndrome
t(8:21)(q22:q22)
 Acquired aplastic anemia
 differential diagnosis 288
immunophenotype 228. 228f
 dinical features 103-105
forms of leukemia 285-289
molecular/cytogenetic studies 228, 229f
molecular/cytogenetic studies 104-105. 104f
immunophenotype 287-288. 287f
morphology 227-228. 228f
morphology 103-104. 103f
molecular/cytogenetic studies 288, 288f
t{8:16)(p11.2:p13.3) 240, 241f
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, see
morphology 286f. 287.287f
t(9:11)(p22:q23)
Human immunodeficiency virus 
flow cytometry overview 223f. 224-225
immunophenotype 237-238
Acute basophilic leukemia (ABL)
mastocytosis 198f
molecular/cytogenetic studies 238. 238f
differential diagnosis 277
 minimal residual disease detection 725
morphology 237. 237f
immunophenotype 277
 molecular studies 225
t[(9:22)(q34:q11.2) 240
molecular/cytogenetic studies 277
morphology 220-222. 221f. 222f
t(16:16)(p13:q22)
morphology 276-277. 276f
 myelodysplasia-related changes
immunophenotype 235
overview 276-277
differential diagnosis 249
molecular/cytogenetic studies 235
 Acute bilineal leukemia, see Mixed phenotype
immunophenotype 246
morphology 233-235
acute leukemia
molecular/cytogenetic studies 246-249.
therapy-related neoplasms
Acute erythroid leukemia (AML-M6)
248f
 chemotherapy or radiation therapy
classification 269-273
morphology 245-246. 245f. 247f. 248f
immunophenotype 253
differential diagnosis 273-274
myelodysplastic syndrome progression 130t
molecular/cytogenetic studies 253. 253f
immunophenotype 271. 273f
not otherwise specifed, see also Acute
morphology 251-253. 252f
molecular/cytogenetic studies 273-276
 basophilic leukemia: Acute erythroid
dinicopathologic features 251t
morphology
 leukemia: Acute megakaryoblastic
differential diagnosis 254
erythroleukemia 270. 271f
 leukemia; Acute monoblastic
 topoisomerase inhibitor therapy
pure erythroid leukemia 271. 272f
 leukemia: Acute monocytic leukemia:
immunophenotype 253
Acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL)
Acute myelomonocytic leukemia:
 molecular/cytogenetic studies 253-254.
differential diagnosis 276
Acute panmyelosis with myelofbrosis
256f
immunophenotype 274-276. 275f
AML with maturation
morphology 253. 254f
molecular/cytogenetic studies 276
differential diagnosis 264-266
Acute myelomonocytic leukemia (AML-M4)
morphology 273-274, 274f. 275f
immunophenotype 262-263. 264f
differential diagnosis 277
t{1:22)(p13:q13) 239-240. 239f. 240f
molecular/cytogenetic studies 263. 264f
immunophenotype 277
Acute monoblastic leukemia (AML-5a)
morphology 262. 263f
molecular/cytogenetic studies 277
classification 266-269
AML without maturation
morphology 277. 278f
differential diagnosis 269
 differential diagnosis 262
overview 263
immunophenotype 267-268. 270f
immunophenotype 261
Acute panmyelosis with myelofibrosis (APMF)
molecular/cytogenetic studies 268-269
 molecular/cytogenetic studies 261-262.
differential diagnosis 277
morphology 266-267. 267f
262f
immunophenotype 277
Acute monocytic leukemia [AML-5b]
morphology 261, 262f
molecular/cytogenetic studies 277
classification 266-269
classification 260t
morphology 276-277. 276f
differential diagnosis 269
hypoplastic acute myeloid leukemia 271.
overview 276-277
immunophenotype 267-268
279f
overview 277
molecular/cytogenetic studies 268-269
minimally differentiated disease
Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL]
morphology 266-267. 268f
differential diagnosis 260
overview 228-233
 Acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
immunophenotype 259-260
t(5:17)(q35:q21.1);(NPM1;RARA) 233
CEBPA mutation 242-243
molecular/cytogenetic studies 260, 261f
t{11:17)(q23:q21.1);(PLZF;RARA) 233
classifcation 219. 219b
morphology 259. 261f
t(11:17)(q13:q21.1):(NuMA;RARA) 233
 cytochemical stains
myeloid sarcoma 279. 280f
t{15:17)(q22:q21.1)
729
730
INDEX
Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL)
morphology 583.584f. 585f
Basophil, bone marrow cell characteristics 7
(Continued)
Anaplastic large cell lymphoma, anaplastic
Basophilia 672
immunophenotype 231-233. 233f
lymphoma kinase-positive (ALCL.
B-cell, markers
molecular/cytogenetic studies 233. 234f
ALK+)
CDs 25-33
morphology
borderline cases 483
miscellaneous markers 33-34
hypergranular form 230f. 231
clinical features 577-583
 B-cell lymphoma, unclassifiable
hypogranular form 231, 232f
differential diagnosis 583-584. 585t
features intermediate between diffuse
t{15:17)(q22:q21.1):(PML;RARA) 233
immunophenotype 578. 579f. 580f. 582f
Jarge B-cell lymphoma and Burkitt 
Acute undifferentiated leukemia (AUL)
inv(2)(p23q35) 578
lymphoma 469-470. 470f
classification 317f
molecular/cytogenetic studies 578-583.
features intermediate between diffuse
differential diagnosis 318
582f. 583t
 large B-cell lymphoma and classical
immunophenotype 318. 318f
morphology 577-578. 578f. 579f. 582f
Hodgkin lymphoma 462
 molecular/cytogenetic studies 318
t(1:2)[q25:p23) [TPM3-ALK] 578
B-cell prolymphocytic leukemia (B-PLL)
morphology 317-318. 318f
t[(2:3) (p23:q21) [TFG-ALK] 578
classification 351
Adipocyte, bone marrow cell characteristics 14.
t[2:17)(p23:q23) [CLTC-ALK] 578
differential diagnosis 354
14f
t[(X:2)(q11-12:p23) [MSN-ALK] 578
immunophenotype 352-353. 353f
Adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma [ATL)
Anaplastic lymphoma kinase [ALK)-positive
molecular/cytogenetic studies 353-354, 353f.
 dinical features 531
Jarge B-cell lymphoma
354f. 355f
differential diagnosis 536
dinical features 456
morphology 351-352. 351f. 352f
immunophenotype 531-532. 535f
differential diagnosis 456
BCL-1 413f 414f. 415f. 416f. 418f. 435f
molecular/cytogenetic studies 532-536, 535f.
immunophenotype 456
BCL-2 364f. 408f. 451f. 452f 474f
536f
molecular/cytogenetic studies 456
BCL-6 470f
morphology 531. 532f. 533f. 534f
morphology 456
 Bemard-Soulier syndrome (BSS)
Agammaglobulinemia 615
 Anemia of chronic disease (ACD) 703-704
cinical features 710-711
 Aggressive natural killer cell leukemia
Anemia. see specific diseases
differential diagnosis 710-711
 dinical features 515-516
Aneuploidy. cytogenetics 52. 52f. 53f
molecular studies 710
differential diagnosis 519-522. 522t
Angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma (AITL)
morphology 710. 711f
immunophenotype 515-516. 517f
dinical features 569. 569t
 Beta-lactam antibiotics. platelet dysfunction 713
 molecular/cytogenetic studies 516. 518f
 differential diagnosis 574
 Biphenotypic acute leukemia, see Mixed
morphology 515. 515f. 516f. 517f
immunophenotype 570-573. 573f
 phenotype acute leukemia
 AIHA, see Autoimmune hemolytic anemia
molecular/cytogenetic studies 561. 574f
 BL, see Burkitt lymphoma
AITL, see Angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma
morphology 569-570. 570f. 571f. 572f
Blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell (BPDC)
 AITP, see Autoimmune thrombocytopenic
Annexin-A1
neoplasm
purpura
B-cell marker 34
dinical features 653-655, 654f
 ALCL, ALK+, see Anaplastic large cell
hairy cell leukemia 369f
differential diagnosis 654-655, 658t
lymphoma, anaplastic lymphoma
 APL, see Acute promyelocytic leukemia
immunophenotype 654. 655f. 656f. 657t
kinase-positive
APME, see Acute panmyelosis with myelofibrosis
molecular/cytogenetic studies 654. 658f
Alder-Reilly anomaly. granulocyte 663-664.
Arachidonic acid. platelet metabolism 713
morphology 653-654. 654f
664f
Aspirin, platelet dysfunction 713
Blood smear
 ALIP, see Abnormal localization of immature
AT, see Ataxia telangiectasia
 leukocyte morphology 15. 15f
precursors
 Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) G15-616
platelet morphology 15-16. 16f 
ALK, see Anaplastic lymphoma kinase
ATL, see Adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma
red blood cell morphology 14-15
 Alkaline phosphatase 670f
Atypical chronic myeloid leukemia (aCML)
white blood cell counts 16t
 Amegakaryocytosis
diagnostic criteria 207b
 B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma ( B-ALL/
 dinical features 102
differential diagnosis 211, 211t
LBL)
molecular/cytogenetic studies 103
molecular/cytogenetic studies 207
dinical features 291
morphology 102-103. 102f
morphology 207. 208f
differential diagnosis 305-306, 306f
AMKL, see Acute megakaryoblastic leukemia
owerview 207-208
hyperdiploidy-associated disease
AML, see Acute myeloid leukemia
Auer rods. granulocyte 664. 664f
immunophenotype 302. 305f
 AML-5a, see Acute monoblastic leukemia
 AUL. see Acute undifferentiated leukemia
 molecular/cytogenetic studies 302. 303f
 AML-5b, see Acute monocytic leukemia
 Autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AlHA]
 overview 301-302
AML-M4, see Acute myelomonocytic leukemia
classification 699b
hypodiploidy-associated disease 
AML-M6, see Acute erythroid leukemia
 dinical features 698-701. 699f
 immunophenotype 304
Amyloidosis
cold-reacting antibodies 700. 700f
 molecular/cytogenetic studies 304, 304f
bone marrow 70. 71f
 differential diagnosis 700
overview 302-304
classification 499t
warm-reacting antibodies 699-700
morphology overview 291-294. 292f. 293f
 differential diagnosis 500t
Autoimmune thrombocytopenic purpura
not otherwise specifed
molecular/cytogenetic studies 498-500
(AITP)
immunophenotype 304. 305f
 morphology and laboratory findings 498.
dinical features 706-708
 molecular/cytogenetic studies 304-305.
499f
 differential diagnosis 708
305f
owerview 498-500
morphology 708
recurrent genetic abnormalities
Anaplastic large cell lymphoma, anaplastic
 immunophenotype 286f. 294
 lymphoma kinase-negative
 molecular/cytogenetic studies 294-296.
borderline cases 483
B
295f. 296f
dinical features 583
B-ALL/LBL, see B-lymphoblastic leukemia/
overview 294-304, 294t
differential diagnosis 583-584. 585t
lymphoma
t(1:19)(q23:p13.3)
immunophenotype 583
Banding techniques 49
immunophenotype 300-301
molecular/cytogenetic studies 583
Basket cell 336f
 molecular/cytogenetic studies 301. 301f
INDEX
731
t(5:14)(q31:q32)
previous biopsy site 76. 77f
 T-cell large granular lymphocytic leukemia
immunophenotype 301
radiation therapy effects 720-721. 721f
513f
molecular/cytogenetic studies 301. 302f
regulatory cytokines 1f. 3t
T-cell polymphocytic leukemia 527f
t(5:14)(q31:q32)
stromal changes 76-79
T-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma 311f.
immunophenotype 301
 transplantation, see Hematopoietic stem cell
312f
molecular/cytogenetic studies 301. 302f
transplantation
CD3
t{12:21)(p13:q22)
vascular changes 77.78f
acute undifferentiated leukemia 318f
immunophenotype 300. 301f
BPDC neoplasm, see Blastic plasmacytoid
adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma 532f. 535f
molecular/cytogenetic studies 300
dendritic cell neoplasm
aggressive natural killer cell leukemia 517f
t(12:21)(p13:q22)
B-PLL, see B-cell prolymphocytic leukemia
anaplastic large cell lymphoma 582f
immunophenotype 300. 301f
Break-apart probe 59
 blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm
molecular/cytogenetic studies 300
BSS. see Bemard-Soulier syndrome
657f
t(v:11q23)
Burkitt lymphoma (BL). see also B-cel]
chronic lymphoproliferative disorder of
immunophenotype 296-297.297f
 Jymphoma, unclassifable
natural killer cells 514f
molecular/cytogenetic studies 297-300.
dinical features 465-469
emnteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma
297f. 298f. 299f
differential diagnosis 469, 469t
543f. 549f
morphology 296-300. 296f
immunophenotype 467. 467f
extranodal natural killer cell/T-cell 
BOB.1 442f. 463f
molecular/cytogenetic studies 467-469. 468f.
lymphoma. nasal type 520f
Bone, biopsy and repair 76. 77f
469f
follicular lymphoma 405f. 406f
Bone marrow
morphology 465-467.466f
hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma 542f. 543f
accessory cells 1f
Burr cell, see Echinocyte
infectious mononucleosis 88f. 630f
amyloidosis 70. 71f
mantle cell lymphoma 414f. 415f. 416f
aplasia, see also specific diseases
 mature natural killer cell neoplasm 506f
classification 105t
c
mycosis fungoides 556f
differential diagnosis 108. 108t
Cabot ring 676. 678f
nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin 
 benign lymphoid aggregates 631-632. 631b.
C-ALCL, see Primary cutaneous anaplastic large
lymphoma 596f
632f. 632t
 cell lymphoma
overview 34. 34f
cells. see also specific cells
Cardiopulmonary bypass. platelet dysfunction 
 peripheral T-cell lymphoma, not otherwise
adipocyte 14. 14f
713
specifed 589f
basophil 7
Castleman's disease, see also Large B-cell
 primary cutaneous anaplastic large cell
counts Gt
 lymphoma arising in human
lymphoma 563f
dendritic cell 8. 9f
herpesvirus-8-associated multicentric
 primary cutaneous CD4+ small/medium
endothelial cell 14
Castleman disease
T-cell lymphoma 566f
eosinophil 7
hyaline vascular type 83-86. 84f
primary effusion lymphoma 458f
hematogone 11. 11f. 12f
multicentric 85f
Sezary syndrome 558f
lymphocyte 10
plasma cell type 86. 86f
subcutaneous panniculitis-like T-cell
macrophage 8. 9f
Cat-scratch disease. granulomatous
lymphoma 564f
mast cell 8. 8f
Jymphadenitis 92. 92f. 93f
 T-cell arge granular lymphocytic leukemia
megakaryoblast 10. 10f
CD1
511f. 512f 513f
metamyelocytte 7
overview 34
 T-cell polymphocytic leukemia 527f
monocyte 8. 8f
 T-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma 311f
CD4
myeloblast 7
CD1a, enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma
adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma 532f. 535f
myelocyte 6f. 7
549f
 blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm
 neutrophilic bands 7
CD2
655f. 656f. 657f
osteoblast 11-12. 13f
acute megakaryoblastic leukemia 275f
enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma 549f
osteoclast 12-14. 14f
adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma 532f
hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma 543f
plasma cell 11, 12f. 13f
aggressive natural killer cell leukemia 517f.
mature B-cell neoplasms 329f
prolymphocyte 11. 13f
518f
mycosis fungoides 556f-553f
promyelocyte 6f. 7
anaplastic large cell lymphoma 582f. 585f
overview 35
rubriblast 9. 9f. 10f
angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma 573f
 peripheral T-cell lymphoma, not otherwise
 segmented cells 7
bilineal acute leukemia 321f
specifed 589f
chemotherapy effects 720-721. 720f. 721f
 chronic lymphoproliferative disorder of 
 primary cutaneous anaplastic large cell
cytokine therapy effects 721-722. 722f
natural killer cells 514f
lymphoma 563f
examination
chronic myelomonocytic leukemia 205f
 primary cutaneous CD4+ small/medium
biopsy sections 4
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma 436f
T-cell lymphoma 566f
dot sections 4
 enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma
Sezary syndrome 558f
glass slide preparations 4f. 5f
543f. 549f
T-cell/histiocyte-rich large B-cell lymphoma
smears 4-6. 6f
extranodal natural killer cell/T-cell
441f
touch preparation 6
 lymphoma. nasal type 520f
 T-cell large granular lymphocytic leukemia
extracellular matrix components 2t
hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma 543f
512f
fbrosis 76-77. 77b. 77f 78f
mastocytosis 195b
 T-cell polymphocytic leukemia 527f
gelatinous transformation 69. 69f
mature natural killer cell neoplasm 506f
CD5
granuloma 70-74. 71f. 72f. 73b.73f. 74f
overview 34
 acute undifferentiated leukemia 318f
metastasis 74-76. 75f. 76f
 peripheral T-cell lymphoma, not otherwise
adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma 535f
microvascular circulation 1-2. 4f
specified 589f
aggressive natural killer cell leukemia 517f
monoclonal antibody therapy effects
 primary cutaneous anaplastic large cell
anaplastic large cell lymphoma 582f
722-725. 723t, 724f
lymphoma 563f
angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma 573f
necrosis 70. 70f
small lymphocytic lymphoma 340f
atypical CLL 346f
732
INDEX
CD5 (Contimued)
hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma 543f
B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma with
B-prolymphocytic leukemia 353f
mature B-cell neoplasms 329f
BCR-ABL1 fusion 295f
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma 436f
myelodysplastic syndrome 112f
B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma with
enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma 549f
overview 35
t[4:11} 297f
extranodal natural killer cell/T-cell
T-cell large granular lymphocytic leukemia
chronic myelomonocytic leukemia 205f. 206f
 lymphoma, nasal type 520f
511f. 512f. 513f
classical Hodgkin lymphoma 602f. 603f.
follicular lymphoma 405f
T-cell polymphocytic leukemia 527f
606f. 607f 608f
 germinotropic lymphoproliferative disorder
T-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma 311f.
cytomegalovirus lymphadenitis 87f
461f
312f
hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma 543f
hepatosplenic T-cel lymphoma 543f
CD10
minimal residual disease 727f
lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma 363f
acute undifferentiated leukemia 318f
myeloid sarcoma 280f
MALT lymphoma 393f
 angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma 573f
owerview 36
mantle cell lymphoma 413f. 416f. 418f. 421f.
atypical CLL 346f
paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria 107f
423f
bilineal acute leukemia 320f
 primary effusion lymphoma 458f
mature B-cell neoplasms 329f
B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma with
CD16
minimal residual disease 727f
BCR-ABL1 fusion 295f
 chronic lymphoproliferative disorder of
 mycosis fungoides 556f
B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma with
natural killer cells 514f
myelodysplastic syndrome 119f
hyperplody 305f
mature natural killer cell neoplasm 506f
owerview 26t-32t, 33.35
B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma with
overview 35
 primary cutaneous anaplastic large cell
t[4:11} 297f
 paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
lymphoma 563f
B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma with
deficiency 105t
Richter syndrome 347f
t{12:21} 301f
Sezary syndrome 558f
Sezary syndrome 558f
Burkitt lymphoma 467f
T-cell large granular lymphocytic leukemia
smallymphocyticlymphoma 339f
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma 435f. 436f
512f. 513f
small lymphocytic lymphoma 340f
follicular lymphoma 400f. 405f. 406f
CD19
T-cell large granular lymphocytic leukemia
lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma 363f
acute myeloid leukemia 228f
 512f. 513f
mantle cell lymphoma 421f
acute undifferentiated leukemia 318f
T-cell polymphocytic leukemia 527f
nodal marginal zone lymphoma 386f
angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma 573f
T-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma 311f.
overview 25. 26t-32t, 42-43
atypical CLL 346f
312f
peripheral T-cell lymphoma, not otherwise
B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma with
CD7
specifed 589f
BCR-ABL1 fusion 295f
acute erythroleukemia 273f
CD11, overview 39
hyperplody 305f
acute megakaryoblastic leukemia 275f
CD11b
t[4:11} 297f
acute undifferentiated leukemia 318f
 acute monoblastic leukemia 270f
t{12:21} 301f
adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma 535f
 acute myelomonocytic leukemia 236f
B-prolymphocytic leukemia 353f
 aggressive natural killer cell leukemia 517f
chronic myelomonocytic leukemia 205f
Burkitt lymphoma 467f
 anaplastic large cell lymphoma 582f
 Down syndrome-associated acute
chronic myelogenous leukemia 160f
angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma 573f
 megakaryoblastic leukemia 287f
 diffuse large B-cell lymphoma 435f
bilineal acute leukemia 321f
CD11c
follicular lymphoma 405f
 chronic lymphoproliferative disorder of
hairy cell leukemia 371f. 372f
hairy cell leukemia 371f
natural killer cells 514f
 splenic marginal zone lymphoma 379f
lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma 363f
chronic myelogenous leukemia 160f
CD13
MALT lymphoma 393f
chronic myelomonocytic leukemia 205f
 acute monoblastic leukemia 270f
mantle cell lymphoma 421f
 Down syndrome-associated acute
 acute myeloid leukemia 228f. 264f
mature B-cell neoplasms 329f
megakaryoblastic leukemia 287f
 acute myelomonocytic leukemia 236f
minimal residual disease 727f
enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma 549f
acute undifferentiated leukemia 318f
 myelodysplastic syndrome 119f
extranodal natural killer cell/T-cell
B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma with
nodal marginal zone lymphoma 386f
lymphoma. nasal type 520f
BCR-ABL1 fusion 295f
overview 25
hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma 542f. 543f
B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma with
 primary effusion lymphoma 458f
mature B-cell neoplasms 329f
t[4:11} 297f
small lymphocytic lymphoma 340f. 341f
 mature natural killer cell neoplasm 506f
chronic myelogenous leukemia 160f
 splenic marginal zone lymphoma 379f
mycosis fungoides 556f
 Down syndrome-associated acute
CD20
megakaryoblastic leukemia 287f
atypical CLL 346f
overview 35
minimal residual disease 727f
B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma with
 peripheral T-cell lymphoma, not otherwise 
myelodysplastic syndrome 139f
BCR-ABL1 fusion 295f
specified 589f
overview 36
B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma with
Sezary syndrome 558f
CD14
hyperplody 305f
T-cell large granular lymphocytic leukemia
 acute myelomonocytic leukemia 236f
 blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm
51 2f. 513f
acute undifferentiated leukemia 318f
656f
T-cell polymphocytic leukemia 527f
B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma with
Burkitt lymphoma 467f
T-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma 311f.
hyperplody 305f
Castleman's disease 84f
312f
chronic myelomonocytic leukemia 205f.
classical Hodgkin lymphoma G08f
CD8
206f
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma 429f. 431f.
adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma 535f
overview 36
433f. 435f. 436f
 chronic lymphoproliferative disorder of
CD15
follicular lymphoma 400f. 401f. 406f
natural killer cells 514f
 acute monoblastic leukemia 270f
 germinotropic lymphoproliferative disorder
 chronic lymphoproliferative disorder of
acute myeloid leukemia 264f
461f
natural killer cells 514f
acute promyelocytic leukemia 233f
hairy cell leukemia 369f. 372f
enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma 549f
bilineal acute leukemia 321f
infectious mononucleosis 88f. 630f
INDEX
733
intravascular large B-cell lymphoma 452f
paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria 105t.
minimal residual disease 727f
lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma 363f. 364f
107f
myelodysplastic syndrome 138f
MALT lymphoma 393f
CD25
overview 38
mantle cell lymphoma 413f. 414f. 415f. 416f.
adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma 535f
CD35
418f 420f 421f 423f
anaplastic large cell lymphoma 582f
 follicular dendritic cell sarcoma 659f
mature B-cell neoplasms 329f
enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma 549f
overview 33
nodal marginal zone lymphoma 386f
hairy cell leukemia 371f
CD36
nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin
mastocytosis 195b
acute erythroleukemia 273f
lymphoma 596f
mycosis fungoides 556f
acute megakaryoblastic leukemia 275f
overview 25-32
nodal marginal zone lymphoma 386f
Down syndrome-associated acute
plasmablastic lymphoma 459f
peripheral T-cell lymphoma, not otherwise
 megakaryoblastic leukemia 287f
 post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorders
specifed 589f
owerview 38
623f
Sezary syndrome 558f
CD38
 primary cutaneous follicle center lymphoma
splenic marginal zone lymphoma 379f
 acute megakaryoblastic leukemia 275f
474f
T-cell polymphocytic leukemia 527f
acute monoblastic leukemia 270f
 primary cutaneous marginal zone lymphoma
CD26, overview 35
acute myelomonocytic leukemia 236f
476f
CD30
B-prolymphocytic leukemia 353f
 primary mediastinal (thymic) large B-cell
 anaplastic large cell lymphoma 579f. 580f.
Burkitt lymphoma 467f
lymphoma 451f
585f
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma 435f
Richter syndrome 347f
 classical Hodgkin lymphoma 602f. 603f.
Down syndrome-associated acute
small lymphocytic lymphoma 339f. 341f
604f. 606f. 607f
 megakaryoblastic leukemia 287f
T-cell/histiocyte-rich large B-cell lymphoma 
cytomegalovirus lymphadenitis 87f
follicular lymphoma 405f
440f. 441f
enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma 543f
lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma 363f
CD21
overview 39
MALT lymphoma 393f
B-prolymphocytic leukemia 353f
 post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorders
owerview 38
Castleman's disease 84f
623f. 624f
plasma cell leukemia 492f
follicular dendritic cell sarcoma 659f
 primary cutaneous anaplastic large cell
 plasma cell myeloma 492f
follicular lymphoma 405f
lymphoma 563f
 primary effusion lymphoma 458f
nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin
 primary effusion lymphoma 458f
CD41
lymphoma 597f
 primary mediastinal (thymic) large B-cell
 acute megakaryoblastic leukemia 275f
overview 32-33
lymphoma 451f
acute undifferentiated leukemia 318f
CD22
T-cell/histiocyte-rich large B-cell lymphoma
Down syndrome-associated acute
atypical CLL 346f
442f
megakaryoblastic leukemia 287f
 bilineal acute leukemia 321f
 CD31, acute megakaryoblastic leukemia 275f
 mantle cell lymphoma 421f
B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma with
CD33
overview38
hyperplody 305f
acute monoblastic leukemia 270f
CD42. overview 38
t[4:11} 297f
acute myeloid leukemia 228f. 264f
CD43
t(12:21) 301f
acute myelomonocytic leukemia 236f
 blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm
B-prolymphocytic leukemia 353f
acute promyelocytic leukemia 233f
655f. 658f
chronic myelogenous leukemia 160f
acute undifferentiated leukemia 318f
overview 39
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma 435f. 436f
 chronic myelogenous leukemia 160f
CD45
follicular lymphoma 405f
chronic myelomonocytic leukemia 206f
acute erythroleukemia 273f
hairy cell leukemia 372f
Down syndrome-associated acute
acute monoblastic leukemia 270f
 megakaryoblastic leukemia 287f
acute myeloid leukemia 228f. 264f
MALT lymphoma 393f
minimal residual disease 727f
acute myelomonocytic leukemia 236f
 mantle cell lymphoma 414f. 421f
 myelodysplastic syndrome 139f
acute promyelocytic leukemia 233f
nodal marginal zone lymphoma 386f
overview 36
acute undifferentiated leukemia 318f
overview 33
 paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria 107f
aggressive natural killer cell leukemia 517f
 primary effusion lymphoma 458f
CD34
bilineal acute leukemia 320f. 321f
small lymphocytic lymphoma 340f
acute erythroleukemia 273f
B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma with
 splenic marginal zone lymphoma 379f
acute megakaryoblastic leukemia 275f
BCR-ABL1 fusion 295f
CD23
acute myeloid leukemia 228f. 252f. 254f.
hyperplody 305f
atypical CLL 346f
264f
t[4:11) 297f
B-prolymphocytic leukemia 353f
acute myelomonocytic leukemia 236f
t{12:21} 301f
follicular lymphoma 405f
acute promyelocytic leukemia 233f
Burkitt lymphoma 467f
acute undifferentiated leukemia 31 8f
chronic lymphoproliferative disorder of
MALT lymphoma 393f
 B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma with
natural killer cells 514f
mantle cell lymphoma 421f
BCR-ABL1 fusion 295f
 chronic myelogenous leukemia 160f
minimal residual disease 727f
 B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma with
chronic myelomonocytic leukemia 206f
nodal marginal zone lymphoma 386f
hyperplody 305f
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma 435f
overview 33
 B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma with
 Down syndrome-associated acute
 primary cutaneous folicle center lymphoma
t{12:21} 301f
 megakaryoblastic leukemia 287f
474f
 B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma with
emnteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma 549f
Richter syndrome 347f
t[4:11} 297f
extranodal natural killer cell/T-cell
small lymphocytic lymphoma 339f. 340f.
chronic myelogenous leukemia 160f
 lymphoma, nasal type 520f
341f
chronic myelomonocytic leukemia 206f
minimal residual disease 727f
 splenic marginal zone lymphoma 379f
Down syndrome-associated acute
myelodysplastic syndrome 139f
CD24
megakaryoblastic leukemia 287f
overview 35
overview 33
hypoplastic acute myeloid leukemia 279f
 plasma cell leukemia 492f
734
INDEX
CD45 (Contirued)
CD66. paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
overview 37
plasma cell myeloma 492f
deficiency 105t
CD138
primary effusion lymphoma 458f
CD68
angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma 572f
T-cell/histiocyte-rich large B-cell lymphoma
 acute monocytic leukemia 269f
Castleman's disease 85f. 86f
442f
dermatopathic lymphadenitis 93f
cutaneous plasmacytoma 478f
T-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma 311f.
hemophagocytosis 645f. 647f
lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma 364f
312f
myeloid sarcoma 280f
MALT lymphoma 393f
CD48. paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
Niemann-Pick disease 639f
overview 26t-32t. 33
deficiency 105t
overview 37
 plasma cell leukemia 487f. 492f
CD52
sinus histiocytosis 90f
plasma cell myeloma 488f. 492f
adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma 535f
CD71
plasmablastic lymphoma 461f
 paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
 acute erythroleukemia 273f
plasmacytoma 496f. 498f
deficiency 105t
 acute megakaryoblastic leukemia 275f
 post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorders
CD55
 Down syndrome-associated acute
622f
acute megakaryoblastic leukemia 275f
 megakaryoblastic leukemia 287f
 primary cutaneous marginal zone lymphoma
owerview 39
owerview 37
476f
 paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
 CD73. paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
CD157
deficiency 105t
deficiency 105t
 paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
CD56
CD77, overview 33
deficiency 105t
 acute monoblastic leukemia 270f
CD79. overview 33
 primary effusion lymphoma 457f
acute myeloid leukemia 228f
CD79a
CD207. overview 37
aggressive natural killer cell leukemia 517f
 bilineal acute leukemia 320f
CD235. overview 37
 blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm
 diffuse large B-cell lymphoma 431f
CD238. overview 37
655f. 656f. 657f
CD88, overview 37
CD240. overview 37
 chronic lymphoproliferative disorder of
CD90
CD242. overview 37
natural killer cells 514f
owerview 38
CD246. overview 35
chronic myelomonocytic leukemia 205f. 206f
paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
CDA. see Congenital dyserythropoietic anemia
 Down syndrome-associated acute
deficiency 105t
CEBPA. acute myeloid leukemia mutation and
 megakaryoblastic leukemia 287f
CD99. overview 38
features 242-243
enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma 549f
CD103
Cell proliferation 50-52
extranodal natural killer cell/T-cell
hairy cell leukemia 371f
CEL, NOS, see Chronic eosinophilic leukemia.
lymphoma, nasal type 520f
overview 33
not otherwise specified
hepatosplenic T-cel lymphoma 542f. 543f
CD110. overview 38
CFU, see Colony forming unit
mature natural killer cell neoplasm 506f
CD114, overview 37
CGD, see Chronic granulomatous disease
myelodysplastic syndrome 119f
CD115
CGH, see Comparative genomic hybridization
owerview 35-36
acute myeloid leukemia 228f
CHAD, see Cold hemagglutinin disease
plasma cell leukemia 492f
overview 37
Chediak-Higashi granules 664
plasma cell myeloma 492f
CD117
Chediak-Higashi syndrome (CHS) G39-640.
Sezary syndrome 558f
 acute erythroleukemia 273f
639f. 640f. 641f
T-cell large granular lymphocytic leukemia
acute megakaryoblastic leukemia 275f
 Chemotherapy, see Acute myeloid leukemia:
 512f. 513f
 acute monoblastic leukemia 270f
 Bone marrow: Myelodysplastic
CD57
acute myeloid leukemia 247f. 252f. 264f
syndromes
enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma 549f
acute myelomonocytic leukemia 236f
Chromosomal aneuploidy 52. 52f. 53f
hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma 543f
 acute promyelocytic leukemia 233f
 Translocations, see Chromosomes: Cytogenetics 
nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin
acute undifferentiated leukemia 318f
Chromosomes, see also Cytogenetics, specific
lymphoma 597f
B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma with
aberrations and diseases
overview 36
BCR-ABL1 fusion 295f
anaplastic large cell lymphoma 583t
Sezary syndrome 558f
hyperplody 305f
del 7q 365f
T-cell large granular lymphocytic leukemia
 bilineal acute leukemia 321f
del(13)(q12q22) 545f
51 2f. 513f
 chronic myelogenous leukemia 160f
dup 15q 322f
CD58. paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
chronic myelomonocytic leukemia 206f
i(7](q10) 101
deficiency 105t
 Down syndrome-associated acute
inv(2)(p23q35) 578
CD59
megakaryoblastic leukemia 287f
inv(16)(p13:q22)
 acute megakaryoblastic leukemia 275f
mastocytosis 192f. 195b. 195f. 198f
immunophenotype 235
overview 39
minimal residual disease 727f
molecular/cytogenetic studies 235. 236f.
paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria 105t.
 myelodysplastic syndrome 138f
237f
107f
owerview 38
morphology 233-235
CD61
panmyelosis 278f
iso{7}(q10} 544f
 Down syndrome-associated acute
plasma cell leukemia 492f
isolated del(5q) 121-122. 141f
 megakaryoblastic leukemia 287f
 plasma cell myeloma 492f
mature B-cell neoplasms 330t
owerview 38
CD120
monosomies.see specifc monosomies
CD64
B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma with
t[(1:2)[q25:p23) [TPM3-ALK] 578
acute monoblastic leukemia 270f
t[4:11} 297f
t(1:19)(q23:p13.3)
acute myeloid leukemia 264f
t{12:21) 301f
immunophenotype 300-301
acute myelomonocytic leukemia 236f
owerview 37
 molecular/cytogenetic studies 301, 301f
acute undifferentiated leukemia 318f
CD123
t(1:22)(p13:q13) 239-240. 239f. 240f
chronic myelomonocytic leukemia 205f. 206f
 blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm 
t(2:3) (p23;q21) [TFG-ALK] 578
owerview 36-37
657f
t[(2:9:22) 323f
INDEX
735
t[(2:17)(p23:q23) [CLTC-ALK] 578
CFU-M 2-3
t(3:3)(q21:q26.2)
variants
CFU-Meg 4
 immunophenotype 239
 atypical chronic lymphocytic leukemia
Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH)
morphology 239
344. 345f 346f
59-60, 60f
t(5:14)(q31:q32)
mu heavy-chain disease 344-346
Congenital dyserythropoietic anemia (CDA)
immunophenotype 301
Chronic lymphoproliferative disorder of natural
 differential diagnosis 684
molecular/cytogenetic studies 301, 302f
killer cells (CLNK)
groups 684
t(5:17)(q35:q21.1);(NPM1;RARA) 233
dinical features 513-515
overview 680-684. 682t
t[6:9)(p23:q34)
diffrential diagnosis 519-522. 5221
type 1 680-682. 683f
 immunophenotype 238
immunophenotype 514. 514f
type Il 682-683
molecular/cytogenetic studies 238 
molecular/cytogenetic studies 514-515
type I11 683-684
morphology 238
morphology 514.514f
 Copper defciency anemia 703
t(8:16)(p11.2:p13.3) 240, 241f
Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML)
Cutaneous B-cell lymphoma, see Diffuse
t(8:21)(q22:q22)
cytogenetics 161-163. 162f, 163f. 164f
 large B-cell lymphoma-leg type:
immunophenotype 228. 228f
differential diagnosis 163-164. 164t, 211,
 Plasmacytoma: Primary cutaneous
molecular/cytogenetic studies 228, 229f
211t
follicle center lymphoma: Primary
morphology 227-228.228f
flow cytometry 159-160. 160f
 cutaneous marginal zone lymphoma
t[(9:11)(p22:q23)
immunohistochemistry 160
Qutaneous yo T-cel lymphoma
immunophenotype 237-238
minimal residual disease detection 725
dinical features 563-564
molecular/cytogenetic studies 238. 238f
molecular studies 160-161. 161f
differential diagnosis 565. 567t
morphology 237. 237f
morphology and laboratory fndings
immunophenotype 562
t[(9:22)(q34:q11.2) 240
accelerated phase 158. 158f
molecular/cytogenetic studies 562
t{11:17)(q13:q21.1);(NuMA;RARA) 233
blast phase 158-159. 159f
morphology 561-562. 564f
t{11:17)(q23:q21.1);(PLZF;RARA) 233
overview 155-159. 156f. 157f
Cutaneous mastocytosis, see Mastocytosis
t{(11:19)(q23:p13) 322f
stages 158t
Qutaneous T-cell lymphoprolifative disorders.
t(12:21)(p13:q22)
Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML)
see Cutaneous y& T-cell lymphoma:
 immunophenotype 300. 301f
cylogenetics 206-207, 206f
Epstein-Barr virus-associated hydroa
molecular/cytogenetic studies 300
diagnostic criteria 201b
vacciforme-like cutaneous lymphoma
t[(15:17)(q22:q21.1);(PML;RARA) 233
differential diagnosis 211, 211t
 of childhood: Lymphomatoid
t(15:17)(q22:q21.1)
flow cytometry 204-205. 205f. 206f
 papulosis; Mycosis fungoides; Primary
immunophenotype 231-233.233f
immunohistochemistry 205-206. 206f
cultaneous aggressive epidermotropic
molecular/cytogenetic studies 233. 234f
 morphology and laboratory findings
CD8+ cytotoxic T-cell lymphoma;
morphology
202-204, 202f 203f. 204f. 205f
 Primary cutaneous anaplastic large cell
hypergranular form 230f. 231
overview 201-207
 Jymphoma: Primary cutaneous CD4+
hypogranular form 231. 232f
Chronic neutrophilic leukemia (CNL)
small/medium T-cell lymphoma:
t(16:16)(p13:q22)
diagnostic criteria 183b
 Sezary syndrome; Subcutaneous
immunophenotype 235
differential diagnosis 184
 panniculitis-like T-cell lymphoma
molecular/cytogenetic studies 235
molecular/cytogenetic studies 184. 185f
Cytogenetics. see also Chromosomes. specifc
morphology 233-235
morphology 183-184. 184f
diseases
T-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma 312t
overview 183-184
acute myeloid leukemia, see Acute myeloid
trisomies, see specifc trisomies
Chronic renal failure
leukemia
t(v:11q23)
anemia 703
banding techniques 49
immunophenotype 296-297.297f
platelet dysfunction 713
cell preparation 48-49
molecular/cytogenetic studies 297-300.
CHS. see Chediak-Higashi syndrome
chromosome analysis
297f. 298f. 299f
 Classical Hodgkin lymphoma, see Lymphocyte-
aneuploidy 52. 52f. 53f
morphology 296-300. 296f
 depleted classical Hodgkin 
balanced rearrangements 50-52. 51f
t{X;2)(q11-12:p23) [MSN-ALK] 578
 Jymphoma: Lymphocyte-rich classical
loss of heterozygosity 53
Chronic eosinophilic leukemia, not otherwise
Hodgkin lymphoma; Mixed cellularity
overview 49-53. 50f
specifed (CEL, NOS)
 classical Hodgkin lymphoma;
chronic myelogenous leukemia 161-163.
differential diagnosis 184
 Nodular sclerosis classical Hodgkin
162f. 163f. 164f
immunophenotype 186
lymphoma
chronic myelomonocytic leukemia 206-207.
molecular/cytogenetic studies 184
CLL/SLL, see Chronic lymphocytic leukemia/
206f
morphology 185-186. 185f
 small lymphocytic lymphoma
chronic neutrophilic leukemia 184. 185f
overview 184-187
CLNK, see Chronic lymphoproliferative
essential thrombocytocythemia 179-180
Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD)
 disorder of natural killer cells 
hairy cell leukemia 371-372
665-666
 CML, see Chronic myelogenous leukemia
historical perspective 47-48
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small
CMML, see Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia
 juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia 210-211.
lymphocytic lymphoma (CLL/SLL)
CMV, see Cytomegalovirus
211f
dinical features 335
CNL, see Chronic neutrophilic leukemia
lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma 359-360.
differential diagnosis 349. 349t
Cold hemagglutinin disease (CHAD) 700
365f
immunophenotype and clinical correlations
Cold-reacting antibodies 700. 700f
mastocytosis 194
338.342f
Colony forming unit (CFU)
mature B-cell neoplasms 330-331. 330t. 331f
 minimal residual disease detection 725
CFU-Baso 2-3
minimal residual disease detection 725-727.
molecular/cytogenetic studies 338-344. 340f.
CFU-E 2
726f
342f. 343f. 344f
CFU-Eo 3-4
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue
CFU-G 2-3
lymphoma 394-395. 394f
340f. 341f
CFU-GEMM 2-4
myelodysplastic neoplasms 151-154. 151t,
prognostic factors 335t
CFU-GM 2-3. 8
152f. 152t. 153f
736
INDEX
Cytogenetics, see also Chromosomes. specific
Dohle body, granulocyte G63. G63f
Erythropoietin (EPO). bone marrow effects
diseases [Contimued]
 Dot blot. principles 64
721-722
myelodysplastic syndromes 120-127. 120f.
Down syndrome
Essential thrombocytocythemia (ET)
121f 122f 123f. 124f
acute myeloid leukemia
diagnostic criteria 177b
nodal marginal zone lymphoma 383-385
 differential diagnosis 288
differential diagnosis 180-182. 180t
polycythemia vera 170. 170f
forms 285-289
molecular/cytogenetic studies 179-180
splenic marginal zone lymphoma 376-379.
immunophenotype 287-288. 287f
morphology and laboratory findings
379f. 380f
molecular/cytogenetic studies 288. 288f
177-179. 178f 179f
Cytokines, see specific cytohines
morphology 286f. 287, 287f
myelofbrosis criteria 178b
Cytomegalovirus (CMV). lymphadenitis 87f
chronic neutrophilic leukemia 185f
overview 176-180
transient abnormal myelopoiesis
ET. see Essential thrombocytocythemia
immunophenotype 283-285. 285f
 Extramedullary hematopoiesis
D
molecular/cytogenetic studies 285. 285f
overview 21. 22f. 23f
 Dacrocyte, see Teardrop
morphology 283. 284f
primary myelofbrosis 172-176. 175f. 176f
 Drug-induced hemolytic anemia 685. 700f. 701
 Extranodal natural killer cll/T-cel lymphoma.
DBA44 369f
DC. see Dendritic cell; Dyskeratosis congenita
Dutcher body 11. 13f
nasal type
Dendritic cell (DC)
Dyskeratosis congenita (DC)
dinical features 516-518
bone marrow cell characteristics 8. 9f
 dinical features 100-101
immunophenotype 517-518. 520f
CD markers 37. 649t
 molecular/cytogenetic studies 100-101
molecular/cytogenetic studies 518. 520f
disorders, see Blastic plasmacytoid dendritic
morphology 100
morphology 516-517. 519f. 520f
 cell neoplasm: Follicular dendritic cell
sarcoma; Interdigitating dendritic cell
E
F
sarcoma; Langerhans cell histiocytosis:
Langerhans cell sarcoma
EBV-T/NK LPD, see Epstein-Barr virus-
 FA, see Fanconi anemia
subtypes 649f
associated T-cell/natural killer cell
Factor VIll 38. 156f. 171f
 Dermatopathic lymphadenitis 92. 93f
lymphoproliferative disorder of
Faggot cell 231f
DGS. see DiGeorge syndrome
children and young adults
Fanconi anemia (FA)
 Diamond-Blackfan anemia
Echinocyte 675. 677f. 696
 dinical features 99-100. 100f
dinical features 101-102. 101f
Elliptocyte 696. 696f
molecular/cytogenetic studies 100
molecular/cytogenetic studies 102
EMA 596f
morphology 99-100. 100f
morphology 101-102. 102f
Emperipoiesis G44f
Fascin 442f. 606f. 607f
 Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL)
Endothelial cell., bone marrow cell
FDC. see Follicular dendritic cell
classifcation 427. 427b
characteristics 14
FGFR1 rearrangement
differential diagnosis 432
Enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma
immunophenotype 216
immunophenotype 429-430.435f. 436f
dinical features 547
molecular/cytogenetic studies 216
molecular/cytogenetic studies 430-432. 436f.
differential diagnosis 549
morphology and laboratory findings 216
437f
immunophenotype 547. 549f. 550f
overview 216-217
morphological variants 429, 431f. 432f. 433f.
molecular/cytogenetic studies 547-549
Fibrosis. see also specijfic diseases
434f
morphology 547. 548f. 549f
bone marrow 76-77. 77b. 77f 78f
morphology and laboratory findings 
Enumerating probe 57. 59
myelodysplastic syndrome 144. 145f
428-429, 428f 429f. 430f
Eosinophil
 FISH, see Fluorescence in situ hybridization
subtypes, see Epstein-Barr virus-associated
atypical granules 664, 664f
5q-myelodysplastic syndrome
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma:
 bone marrow cell characteristics 7
immunophenotype 137
Primary diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
Eosinophilia
morphology 137. 140f. 141f
of the central nervous system: T-cell/
associated conditions 213b
overview137
histiocyte-rich large B-cell lymphoma
causes 672. 672b
 FL, see Follicular lymphoma
 Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma associated with
EPO, see Erythropoietin
 Flow cytometry, see aiso Immunophenotype.
chronic inflammation
Epstein-Barr virus, see Epstein-Barr virus-
specific diseases
dinical features 453-454
associated diffuse large B-cell
acute myeloid leukemia, see Acute myeloid
differential diagnosis 454
lymphoma: Germinotropic
leukemia
immunophenotype 453-454
lymphoproliferative disorder:
chronic myelogenous leukemia 159-160.
molecular/cytogenetic studies 454
 Infectious mononucleosis
160f
morphology 453. 454f
Epstein-Barr virus-associated diffuse large B-cell 
chronic myelomonocytic leukemia 204-205,
 Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma-leg type
lymphoma
205f. 206f
 dinical features 476-477
cinical features 440-444
compensation 41. 41f
differential diagnosis 477
differential diagnosis 443
data analysis 41, 41f, 42f
immunophenotype 476
immunophenotype 441-443
gating 40-41, 40f
molecular/cytogenetic studies 476-477. 477f
molecular/cytogenetic studies 443
instrumentation 33-34, 40f
morphology 476. 477f
morphology 441. 443f. 444f. 445f
mature B-cell neoplasms 328-330. 329f. 329t
DiGeorge syndrome (DGS) 614-615. 615f. 616f
 Epstein-Barr virus-associated hydroa
minimal residual disease detection 727. 727f
DLBCL, Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
vacciforme-like cutaneous lymphoma
myelodysplastic syndromes 115-119. 119f
DNA microarray principles 64-65. 65f
of childhood 565. 567f
 paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
DNA sequencing
Epstein-Barr virus-associated T-cell/natural
fndings 106-107. 107f
chemical sequencing G5-66
killer cell lymphoproliferative disorder
quality contro] 41
 detection and analysis 66
of children and young adults (EBV-T/
 Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), see
limitations 66-67, G6f
NK LPD) 518-519. 521f
also specifc diseases
next-generation sequencing 67
 Erdhein-Chester disease, reactive histiocytic
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues
owerview 65-68
proliferation 642, 644f
60. 61f
INDEX
737
myelodysplastic syndromes 121f. 122f. 123f.
Kimura's disease 96. 96
Hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma
124f. 125-126
sarcoidosis 91-92. 91f
dinical features 539
principles 55-62
systemic lupus erythematosus 94. 95f
differential diagnosis 545
probes 56-59. 56f. 57f. 58f
toxoplasmosis 94. 94f
immunophenotype 539. 543f
FMC7. B-cell marker 33
Granzyme B 511f. 518f
molecular/cytogenetic studies 539-545,. 543f.
Folate deficiency 684. 685b
GT, Glanzmann thrombasthenia
544f. 545f
Follicular dendritic cell (FDC) 19-20. 20f
morphology 539. 540f. 541f. 542f
 Follicular dendritic cell sarcoma
Hereditary elliptocytosis (HE) 696
dinical features 658-661
H
Hereditary spherocytosis (HS) 695. 696f
differential diagnosis 658t. 660
Hairy cell 327f
Histiocyte 641f 644f. 645f. 646f. 647f. see also
immunophenotype 660
Hairy cell leukemia (HCL)
 Reactive histiocytic proliferations
morphology 658-660. 659f
 dinical features 367t
Histiocytic sarcoma 646-647
Follicular lymphoma (FL)
differential diagnosis 373. 373t
HIV, see Human immunodeficiency virus
dinical features 397
ee-oze adaouudounuu
HL, see Hodgkin lymphoma
differential diagnosis 405-407, 405f. 407t
molecular/cytogenetic studies 371 -372
HLH. see Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis
grading 403t, 404f
morphology 367-370. 368f. 369f. 370f
Hodgkin cell 601f. 602f. 605f
immunophenotype 398-402. 405f
variants 372-373. 372f
Hodgkin lymphoma (HL), see also Nodular
intrafollicular neoplasia 403
HCL, see Hairy cell leukemia
 Jymphocyte predominant Hodgkin
molecular/cytogenetic studies 402-403. 408f.
HE, see Hereditary elliptocytosis
lymphoma
408t
Heavy chain deposition disease 
classical Hodgkin lymphoma, see
morphology
alpha heavy chain disease 500-501. 500f
 Lymphocyte-depleted classical
bone marrow 402f
gamma heavy chain disease 501
Hodgkin lymphoma: Lymphocyte-
lymph node 397f. 398f
mu heavy chain disease 344-346. 501
 nich classical Hodgkin lymphoma:
overview 397-398
Heinz body 641f. 679f. 698f
 Mixed cellularity classical Hodgkin
salivary gland 399f
Hematogone, bone marrow cell characteristics
 Jymphoma; Nodular sclerosis classical
small intestine 401f
11, 11f 12f
Hodgkin lymphoma
stomach 400f
Hematopoiesis
classification 593-594
 pediatric lymphoma 403
erythropoiesis 2
epidemiology 593
 primary intestinal lymphoma 403
extramedullary hematopoiesis, see
Reed-Sternberg cell 594f
Fusion probe 57-59
 Extramedullary hematopoiesis
staging 593
lymphopoiesis 4
treatment 593
myelopoiesis 2-4
Horse-shoe cell 578f
G
overview 1. 2f
Howell-Jolly body 676. 682. 686
Gaucher disease (GD)
thrombopoiesis 4
HS, see Hereditary spherocytosis
classification 636t
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
HTLV-l, see Adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma
dinical features 635-638
 bone marrow changes after transplant
Human cell differentiation molecules, see also
differential diagnosis 636-638
716-719, 716f 717f 718f. 719f. 720f
specific CDs and cells
immunophenotype 636
complications 684b
overview 25-39
molecular studies 636
indications 715b
table 26t-32t
morphology 636. 637f
Hemoglobin. see also Thalassemia syndromes
Human herpesvirus-8. see Germinotropic
G-CSF, see Granulocyte colony-stimulating
genes G90f
 Jymphoproliferative disorder; Large
factor
unstable hemoglobins 695
 B-cell lymphoma arising in human 
GD, see Gaucher disease
Hemoglobin A 691f. 692f
herpesvirus-8-associated multicentric
Gelatinous transformation. bone marrow 69. 69f
Hemoglobin C 691f. 692f. 694f
Castleman disease
Germinotropic lymphoproliferative disorder
Hemoglobin D 691f. 692f
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
cinical features 460-462
Hemoglobin H 679f
dinical features 617-619
morphology 454. 462f
Hemoglobin S 691f
lymphoma association and classification 619
Glanzmann thrombasthenia (GT)
Hemolytic anemia, see also Autoimmune
molecular/cytogenetic studies 619
 dinical features 711-712
 hemolytic anemia
morphology 617-618. 618f. 619f
differential diagnosis 712
drug-induced hemolytic anemia 700f. 701
myelodysplasia 144
 immunophenotype 711
hypersplenism 702
HUS, see Hemolytic uremic syndrome
molecular studies 711-712
infection 702
Hypocellular myelodysplastic syndrome 
morphology 711
thermal hemolysis 701. 702f
142-144.144f
Gleevec. see Imatinib mesylate
 transfusion reaction 701
Hypoplastic acute myeloid leukemia 271. 279f
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency
traumatic hemolysis 701, 702f
697-698. 698b, 698f
Hemolytic disease of the newborn 701
Granule deficiency
Hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) 708-710
neutrophil 664. 664f
Hemophagocytic histiocytosis.
IDA, see Iron deficiency anemia
platelets
lymphadenopathy 91. 91f
IDC sarcoma, see Interdigitating dendritic cell
 dense granule deficiency 712
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis ( HLH)
sarcoma
α-granule deficiency 712
classification 644
Idiopathic CD4+ T-lymphocytopenia 619
Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF).
cinical features G43-647
Idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome (IH ES)
bone marrow effects 722. 722f
diagnostic criteria 647b
185f
Granuloma, see also specific diseases
differential diagnosis 646-647
 IHES, see Idiopathic hypereosinophilic
bone marrow 70-74. 71f. 72f. 73b. 73f. 74f
immunophenotype 646. 647f
syndrome
 Jymphadenitis
molecular studies 646
IM, see Infectious mononucleosis
cat-scratch disease 92. 92f. 93f
morphology 643-647.645f. 646f
Imatinib mesylate (Gleevec). bone marrow
Kikuchi's disease 94, 95f
Hemophagocytosis 646f. 647f
effects 722-725.724f
738
INDEX
Immunohistochemistry. see also
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma overview
 primary cutaneous marginal zone lymphoma
Immunophenotype. specific diseases
429-430. 435f. 436f
475. 476f
chronic myelogenous leukemia 160
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma-leg type 476
 primary diffuse large B-cell lymphoma of the 
chronic myelomonocytic leukemia 205-206.
Down syndrome transient abnormal
central nervous system 445
206f
myelopoiesis 283-285. 285f
primary effusion lymphoma 457. 458f
Langerhans cell histiocytosis 650-651. 652f
enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma 547.
primary mediastinal (thymic) large B-cell
myelodysplastic syndromes 119
549f.550f
lymphoma 449-450
principles 42-43, 42f. 43f. 44f 45f
Epstein-Barr virus-associated diffuse large
refractory anemia with excess blasts 136- 137.
Immunophenotype. se also Flow cytometry:
B-cell lymphoma 441-443
139f
Immunohistochemistry
extranodal natural killer cell/T-cell
refractory anemia with ringed sideroblasts 134
acute basophilic leukemia 277
lymphoma nasal type 517-518. 520f
refractory cytopenia with multilineage
acute erythroid leukemia 271. 273f
 5q-myelodysplastic syndrome 137
dysplasia 134-136
acute megakaryoblastic leukemia 274-276.
follicular dendritic cell sarcoma 660
 refractory cytopenia with unilineage dysplasia
275f
follicular lymphoma 398-402. 405f
(RCUD) 131-132. 132f
acute monoblastic leukemia 267-268. 270f
Gaucher disease 636
Sezary syndrome 557. 558f
acute monocytic leukemia
Glanzmann thrombasthenia 711
splenic marginal zone lymphoma 376. 379f
acute myeloid leukemia
hairy cell leukemia 370-371
T-cell large granular lymphocytic leukemia
Down syndrome 287-288, 287f
hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis 646.
511-512, 512f. 513f
 myelodysplasia-related changes 246
647f
T-cell polymphocytic leukemia 526. 527f 
overview 223f. 224-225
immunophenotype 267-268
T-cell/histiocyte-rich large B-cell lymphoma
t{3:3)(q21:q26.2) 238-239. 239f
infectious mononucleosis 628-630. 630f
439
t[(6:9)(p23:q34) 238
intravascular large B-cell lymphoma 453.
T-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma
t[(8:21)(q22:q22) 228. 228f
453t
309-310. 311f. 311t
t{9:11)(p22:q23) 237-238
Langerhans cell histiocytosis 650-651. 652f
Immunosuppresants. lymphoproliferative
t[16:16)(p13:q22) 235
Jarge B-cell lymphoma arising in human
disorder induction 625
therapy-related neoplasms 253
herpesvirus-8-associated multicentric
 Infectious mononucleosis (IM]
 topoisomerase inhibitor therapy 253
Castleman disease 460
dinical features 627-631
acute myelomonocytic leukemia 277
 Jymphocyte-depleted classical Hodgkin
differential diagnosis 631
acute panmyelosis with myelofbrosis 277
lymphoma 608-609
immunophenotype 628-630. 630f
acute promyelocytic leukemia 231-233, 233f
lymphocyte-rich classical Hodgkin
lymphadenopathy 88f
acute undifferentiated leukemia 318. 318f
lymphoma 607-608
molecular studies 630
adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma 531-532.
lymphomatoid granulomatosis 455
morphology 627-628. 629f
535f
lymphomatoid papulosis 562
 Interdigitating dendritic cell sarcoma
 aggressive natural killer cell leukemia
dinical features 655-658
515-516. 517f
364f
differential diagnosis 657-658, 658t
anaplastic large cell lymphoma
mantle cell lymphoma 412. 421f
immunophenotype 657. 657f. 659f
 anaplastic lymphoma kinase-negative 583
mast cell 189t
morphology 657
 anaplastic lymphoma kinase-positive 578.
mastocytosis 194
Interleukins
579f. 580f. 582f
mature B-cell neoplasms 328-330, 329f. 329t
Thelper cell secretion 20
anaplastic lymphoma kinase 456
mixed cellularity classical Hodgkin
 thrombopoiesis role 4
angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma
lymphoma 605. 607f
types and functions 3t
570-573. 573f
mixed phenotype acute leukemia 320-321.
 Intravascular large B-cell lymphoma
B-cell prolymphocytic leukemia 352-353.
320f. 321f
dinical features 451-453
353f
 monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined
differential diagnosis 453
 blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm
significance 482-483
immunophenotype 453. 453t
654.655f. 656f 657t
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue
molecular/cytogenetic studies 453. 453f
B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma
lymphoma 378f. 392
morphology 452-453, 452f
hyperdiploidy-associated disease 302. 305f
mycosis fungoides 554-555. 556f
Iron deficiency anemia (IDA)
hypodiploidy-associated disease 304
myelodysplastic neoplasms 151
dinical features 688-689
not otherwise specified 304. 305f
myelodysplastic syndromes 115-119. 119f
differential diagnosis 692-693, 693t
 recurrent genetic abnormalities 286f. 294
Niemann-Pick disease 639
laboratory fndings 689t
t(1:19)(q23:p13.3) 300-301
nodal marginal zone lymphoma 378f. 383
morphology 688-689. 689f
t(12:21)(p13:q22) 300, 301f
nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin
Isochromosome 7q 539
t(5:14)(q31:q32) 301
lymphoma 597.597f
t[v:11q23) 296-297. 297f
nodular sclerosis classical Hodgkin 
chronic eosinophilic leukemia, not otherwise
lymphoma 603. 604f
specifed 186
 paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
 JAK2 mutation, see Essential
chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small
106-107, 107f
thrombocytocythemia:
lymphocytic lymphoma 338. 342f
PDGFRA rearrangement 215
Myelodysplastic neoplasms:
chronic lymphoproliferative disorder of
PDGFRB rearrangement 216
 Polycythemia vera: Primary
natural killer cells 514, 514f
peripheral T-cel lymphoma, not otherwise
myelofibrosis
chronic myelogenous leukemia 159-160.
specifed 589.589f
JMML, see Juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia
160f
plasma cell myeloma 487f. 488. 492f
Juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML)
 chronic myelomonocytic leukemia 204-206.
plasmablastic lymphoma 459. 461f
dinical features 208-211, 209f
205f. 206f
 primary cutaneous anaplastic large cell
differential diagnosis 211. 211t
autaneous y8 T-cell lymphoma 562
lymphoma 561. 563f
molecular/cytogenetic studies 210-211. 211f
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma associated
 primary cutaneous follicle center lymphoma
morphology and laboratory findings
with chronic inflammation 453-454
473
209-210, 210f
INDEX
739
K
Lymph node
morphology 411 -412, 412f. 413f. 414f. 415f.
follicular structures 18-20. 19f. 21f
416f. 419f. 420f
Kahler's disease, see Plasma cell myeloma
medulla 20
variants 415f. 417t, 418f. 419f. 421f 423f
Ki-67 39, 443f. 461f. 467f. 470f. 477f 498f.
paracortex 20, 22f
Marginal zone. spleen 16-17. 17f. 18f
550f. 624f
vascular structures 20
 Mast cell
Kikuchi disease
Lymphocyte. bone marrow cell characteristics
bone marrow cell characteristics 8. 8f
 granulomatous lymphadenitis 94. 95f
10
immunophenotype 189t
reactive histiocytic proliferation 642. 643f
Lymphocyte-depleted classical Hodgkin 
Kimura's disease granulomatous lymphadenitis
mediators 189t
 Jymphoma (LDCHL)
 Mast cell leukemia 197
96. 96f
dinical features 608-609
 Mast cell sarcoma 197
c- Kit, mutation in mastocytosis 190f
differential diagnosis G09-610, G10t
Mastocytosis
immunophenotype 608-609
classification 194-198. 196b
molecular/cytogenetic studies 609
L
cutaneous mastocytosis 195f. 196
morphology 608, 609f
diagnostic criteria 195b
LAD, see Leukocyte adhesion deficiency
Lymphocyte-rich classical Hodgkin lymphoma
differential diagnosis 198-199. 199t
Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH)
(LRCHL)
immunophenotype 194
classification 650t
dinical features 607-608
molecular/cytogenetic studies 190f. 194
dinical features 649-652
differential diagnosis 609-610. 610t
morphology and laboratory findings 190f.
differential diagnosis 652. 658t
immunophenotype G07-608
191-194, 191f. 192f 193f. 194f. 198f.
immunohistochemistry 650-651, 652f
molecular/cytogenetic studies 608
199f
molecular/cytogenetic studies 651 -652
morphology 607. 608f
owerview 189
morphology 650. 650f. 651f. 652f
Lymphocytopenia, associated conditions 627.
systemic mastocytosis 196-198. 197t
Langerhans cell sarcoma 652-653. 653f
632t
 Mature B-cell neoplasms
Large B-cell lymphoma arising in human
Lymphocytosis, see also Infectious
classification 325b
herpesvirus-8-associated multicentric
 mononucleosis: Persistent polyclonal
differential diagnosis 332-333
Castleman disease
B-cell lymphocytosis
frequency by type 326t
dinical features 460
associated conditions 627-633. 629f
immunophenotype 328-330. 329f. 329t
differential diagnosis 460
 benign lymphoid aggregates in bone marrow
molecular/cytogenetic studies 330-331. 330t.
immunophenotype 460
631-632. 631b, 632f 632t
331f
molecular/cytogenetic studies 460 
stress-induced lymphocytosis 631
morphology 326-328. 326f. 327f. 328f
morphology 460
Lymphomatoid granulomatosis
staging 325-326. 326t
Large B-cell lymphoma, see Anaplastic
dinical features 454-456
 May-Hegglin anomaly. granulocyte G63. 663f
 lymphoma kinase-positive large
differential diagnosis 456. 456t
 MCCHL, see Mixed cellularity classical Hodgkin
B-cell lymphoma: B-cell lymphoma.
immunophenotype 455
lymphoma
unclassifable: Diffuse large B-cell
 molecular/cytogenetic studies 455-456
 MCL, see Mantle cell lymphoma
lymphoma: Diffuse large B-cell
morphology 455. 455f
 MDN, see Myelodysplastic neoplasms
 lymphoma associated with chronic
Lymphomatoid papulosis (LyP)
 MDS. see Myelodysplastic syndromes
 inflammation: Germinotropic
dinical features 561-562
 Mediastinal (thymic) large B-cel lymphoma.
lymphoproliferative disorder:
immunophenotype 562
see Primary mediastinal (thymic) large
 Intravascular large B-cell lymphoma:
molecular/cytogenetic studies 562
B-cel lymphoma
Large B-cell lymphoma arising in
morphology 561-562. 564f
Medulla. lymph node 20
human herpesvirus-8-associated
Lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma (LPL)
MEFV 500f
multicentric Castleman disease;
clinical features 357
 Megakaryoblast. bone marrow cell
Lymphomatoid granulomatosis:
differential diagnosis 360
characteristics 10. 10f
 Plasmablastic lymphoma: Primary
immunophenotype 359. 363f. 364f
 Megakaryocytic hypoplasia 705. 705f. 706f
effusion lymphoma: Primary
molecular/cytogenetic studies 359-360. 365f
 Megakaryocytosis 705-706. 706f. 707f
mediastinal (thymic) large B-cell
morphology and laboratory fndings
 Megaloblastic anemia. see Folate deficiency:
lymphoma
357-358. 357f. 359f. 361f. 362f
Vitamin B12 deficiency
LCH, see Langerhans cell histiocytosis
Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia 357
Metamyelocytte, bone marrow cell
LDCHL, see Lymphocyte-depleted classical
LyP. see Lymphomatoid papulosis
characteristics 7
Hodgkin lymphoma
Lysosomal storage diseases
Metastasis. bone marrow 74-76. 75f. 76f
Leukocyte adhesion defciency (LAD) 666-667.
classification 636b
Methotrexate. lymphoproliferative disorder
666f
Gaucher disease. see Gaucher disease
induction 625
Leukoerythroblastosis 174f
 Niemann-Pick disease, see Niemann-Pick
 MF. see Mycosis fungoides
Light chain deposition disease 500. 500t
disease
 MGUS. see Monoclonal gammopathy of
LOH. see Loss of heterozygosity
undetermined significance
Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) 47. 53
 Microcytic anemia
LP cell 597f. 598f
M
differential diagnosis 692-693. 693t
LPL. see Lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma
Macrocytosis
iron deficiency anemia
LRCHL, see Lymphocyte-rich classical Hodgkin
anemias. see specifc diseases
clinical features 688-689
 lymphoma
causes 684b
Jaboratory fndings 689t
Lymphadenopathies
Macrophage. bone marrow cell characteristics
morphology 688-689. 689f
follicular pattern 81-87. 83t
8.9f
thalassemia syndromes
 granulomatous lymphadenitis 91-92
Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL)
hemoglobin genes 690f
mixed pattern 92-97
dinical features 411
α-thalassemia 692
overview of patterns 81t
differential diagnosis 419
B-thalassemia 689t, 690-692. 690f. 691f
paracortical pattern 87
immunophenotype 412. 421f
rare variants 692
sinus pattern 88-91
molecular/cytogenetic studies 412-417, 422f
Micromegakaryocyte 135f. 143f. 156f. 245f
740
INDEX
Minimal residual disease (MRD)
cytogenetics 151-154. 151t, 152f. 152t. 153f
 Natural killer [NK) cell, see also specific
flow cytometry 727. 727f
immunophenotype 151
neoplasms cell
molecular/cytogenetic studies 725-727. 726f
JAK2 mutation diseases 167
 aggressive natural killer cell leukemia
 Mixed cellularity classical Hodgkin lymphoma
molecular studies 151
 clinical features 515-516
(MCCHL)
morphology 149-151. 150f
immunophenotype 515-516. 517f
cinical features 604-607
Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS), see also 
 molecular/cytogenetic studies 516. 518f
differential diagnosis 609-610, 610t
specific symdromes
morphology 515. 515f. 516f. 517f
immunophenotype 605. 607f
acute myeloid leukemia progression 130t
CD markers 35-36
molecular/cytogenetic studies 605
chromosomal abnormalities 1llt. 112t
 chronic lymphoproliferative disorder
morphology 605. 605f. 606f
classification
clinical features 513-515
Mixed phenotype acute leukemia ( MPAL)
autoimmune myelodysplasia 144
immunophenotype 514. 514f
 biphenotypic acute leukemia 320f. 321. 321f
fbrosis type 144. 145f
 molecular/cytogenetic studies 514-515
classification 317f
human immunodeficiency virus-associated
morphology 514. 514f
differential diagnosis 323
myelodysplasia 144
 Epstein-Barr virus-associated T-cell/natural
immunophenotype 320-321, 320f. 321f
hypocellular myelodysplastic syndrome
killer cell lymphoproliferative disorder of
morphology 319-320. 319f
142-144. 144f
children and young adults 518-519. 521f
not otherwise specified 322
isolated del(5q) 121-122. 141f
extranodal natural killer cell/T-cell
recurrent genetic abnormalities 321-322.
overview 129. 129t
lymphoma nasal type
322f. 323f
 paraneoplastic myelodysplasia 144
 clinical features 516-518
MLBCL, see Primary mediastinal (thymic) large
pediatric myelodysplastic syndrome 142.
immunophenotype 517-518. 520f
B-cel lymphoma
143f
 molecular/cytogenetic studies 518. 520f
MLL 256f
 refractory anemia with excess blasts
morphology 516-517. 519f. 520f
 Monoclonal antibody therapy. bone marrow
136-137
morphology 505
effects 722-725. 723t. 724f
refractory anemia with ringed sideroblasts 
neoplasm classification 506. 507t
 Monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined
132-134
types 482
significance (MGUS)
refractory cytopenia with multilineage
 Necrosis. bone marrow 70. 70f
dinical features 482-483. 482b
dysplasia 134-136
 Neonatal immune-mediated thrombocytopenia
immunophenotype 482-483
refractory cytopenia with unilineage
708
morphology 482. 483f
dysplasia 129-132
 Neutropenia
Monocyte
secondary myelodysplastic syndrome
agranulocytosis 667f
 bone marrow cell characteristics 8. 8f
141-144
causes
CD markers 36-37
toxicity and exposures 146
 bone marrow disorders 668
Monocytoid B-cell hyperplasia.
unclassifed 113f 137-141, 142f
drugs 667. 668b
lymphadenopathy 89f. 90
cytogenetics 120-127.120f 121f 122f. 12f.
infection 667
Monocytopenia 640
124f
 non-immune chronic idiopathic
Monocytosis
differential diagnosis 146-148. 146t
neutropenia 668
associated conditions 642b
flow cytometry 115-119. 119f
overview 668b
overview 640
fluorescence in situ hybridization 121f. 122f.
 primary immune disorders 667-668
Monosomy 7 140f. 211f
123f 124f. 125-126
 congenital disease 669
Monosomy 13 494f
immunohistochemistry 119
Neutrophil
Monosomy 20 140f
International Prognostic Scoring System
functional abnormalities 665-667
Monosomy Y 422f
112t
morphologic abnormalities
Mott cell 11. 13f
mastocytosis 198f
Alder-Reilly anomaly 663-664. 664f
 MPAL, see Mixed phenotype acute leukemia
molecular studies 119-120
Auer rods 664, 664f
MPO. see Myeloperoxidase
morphology
 Chediak- Higashi granules 664
MRD. see Minimal residual disease
dyserythropoiesis 114. 114f 115f
 Dohle bodies 663. 663f
 Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT)
dysgranulopoiesis 114-115, 116f. 117f
granule defciency 664, G64f
lymphoma
 megakaryocyte and platelet abnormalities
 May-Hegglin anomaly 663. 663f
cinical features 389
115. 118f
Pelger-Huet anomaly 664-665. 665f
differential diagnosis 395
overview 112-115. 113f
toxic granulation 663. 663f
immunophenotype 378f. 392
survival 130t
Neutrophilia
molecular/cytogenetic studies 394-395. 394f
Myeloid sarcoma 279. 280f
causes 669b
f565 5765 9165 5065 765-685 48010yd10u
Myelokathexis 669. 669f
 primary neutrophilia 671
 Multiple myeloma, see Plasma cell myeloma 
Myelolipoma, extramedullary hematopoiesis
reactive neutrophilia 669-671. 670f. 671f
MUM1 461f. 462f. 477f
21. 23f
spurious neutrophilia 672
Mycosis fungoides (MF)
Myeloperoxidase (MPO)
 Niemann-Pick disease (NPD)
dinical features 553-557. 559t
acute myeloid leukemia staining 223. 223f
classification 638t
differential diagnosis 558-559. 567t
deficiency in granulocytes 665
dinical features 638-639
immunophenotype 554-555. 556f
 Myelophthistic anemia 703
differential diagnosis 639
molecular/cytogenetic studies 555-556. 557f
immunophenotype 639
morphology 553-554. 554f. 555f
molecular studies 639
variants 556-557
N
morphology 638-639. 638f. 639f
Myeloblast 7. 640f
Naphthol AS- D acetate esterase. acute myeloid
NK cell, see Natural killer cell
Myelocyte, bone marrow cell characteristics
leukemia staining 223
 NLPHL, see Nodular lymphocyte predominant 
6f. 7
Naphthol AS-D chloroacetate, acute myeloid 
Hodgkin lymphoma
Myelodysplastic neoplasms (MDN), see also
leukemia staining 222f. 224
NMZL, see Nodal marginal zone lymphoma
specific diseases
α-Napthyl butyrate esterase, acute myeloid
Nodal marginal zone lymphoma (NMZL)
classifcation 129, 129t. 149
leukemia staining 223. 224f
 dinical features 383
INDEX
741
differential diagnosis 385-388. 387t
morphology and laboratory fndings
Polycythemia vera ( PV)
immunophenotype 378f. 383
214-215. 214f 215f
cytogenetics 170, 170f
molecular/cytogenetic studies 383-385
overview 213-215
molecular studies 169-170. 169f
morphology 383. 384f. 385f
PDGFRB rearrangement
morphology and laboratory findings
 pediatric disease 385
immunophenotype 216
overview 168-169
 Nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin 
 morphology and laboratory fndings
polycythemic phase 168. 168f
Jymphoma (NLPHL)
215-216. 215f 216f
spent phase 168-169. 169f
dinical features 594-599
overview 215-216
overview 167-170
differential diagnosis 597-598. 598t
PEL, see Primary effusion lymphoma
 Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
immunophenotype 597. 597f
Pelger-Huet anomaly, granulocyte 664-665.
 miscellaneous techniques 64
molecular/cytogenetic studies 597. 598f
665f
molecular studies, see specific diseases
morphology 594-595. 595f. 596f
 Periodic acid-Schiff reaction (PAS), acute 
 primer design 62
 Nodular sclerosis classical Hodgkin lymphoma
myeloid leukemia staining 223, 223f
principles 62-64. 63f
(NSCHL)
 Peripheral T-cell lymphoma, not otherwise
 product analysis 63
dinical features 601 -604
specifed (PTCL, NOS)
quality control 62-63
differential diagnosis 609-610. 610t
differential diagnosis 589-590. 590t
real-time polymerase chain reaction G3
immunophenotype 603. 604f
immunophenotype 589. 589f
 reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
molecular/cytogenetic studies 603-604. 604f
molecular/cytogenetic studies 589. 589f
reaction 63
morphology 601-603. 602f. 603f
morphology 587-589. 588f
 Post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorders
Northern blot. principles 64
 prognostic groups 587
(PTLD)
 NPD, see Niemann-Pick disease 
Pernicious anemia. see Vitamin B12 deficiency
classification 621t
NPM1. acute myeloid leukemia mutation and
Persistent polyclonal B-cell lymphocytosis 631
dinical features 621-625
features 242
Philadelphia chromosome, see Chronic
molecular/cytogenetic studies 625. 625f
 NSCHL., see Nodular sclerosis classical Hodgkin
 myelogenous leukemia
morphology
lymphoma
Plasma cell. see also specific neoplasms
 classical Hodgkin lymphoma type 625
bone marrow cell characteristics 11. 12f. 13f
early lesions 622-623. 622f
lymphoplasmaytic lymphoma/
monomorphic type 623-625. 624f
0
Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia
 polymorphic type 623. 623f
Oct1 39
357f 358f. 360f
PRCA, see Pure red cell aplasia
Oct2 39. 442f 463f
MALT lymphoma 391f. 393f
Previous biopsy site, bone marrow 76. 77f
Open canalicular system 711f
neoplasm classification 482b
Primary cutaneous aggressive epidemotropic
Osteoblast., bone marrow cell characteristics 
 post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder
CD8+ cytotoxic T-cell lymphoma 565.
11-12. 13f
622f. 623f
567t
Osteoclast, bone marrow cell characteristics
 primary cutaneous marginal zone lymphoma
Primary cutaneous anaplastic large cell
12-14. 14f
476f
Jymphoma (C-ALCL)
Osteopenia, associated conditions 76
Plasma cell myeloma ( PCM)
dinical features 561
Osteosclerosis. associated conditions 76
bone effects 485f
differential diagnosis 565. 567t
Osterosclerotic myeloma 497
diagnostic criteria 484b
immunophenotype 561. 563f
immunophenotype 487f. 488. 492f
molecular/cytogenetic studies 561
molecular/cytogenetic studies 490-497.
morphology 561. 562f
P
493b, 493f 494f. 494t, 495f
Primary cutaneous CD4+ small/medium T-cell
p63 445f
morphology 484f. 485-486. 488f. 489f. 490f
 Jymphoma 565. 566f. 567t
Panmyelosis. see Acute panmyelosis with
prognostic factors 485b
Primary cutaneous follicle center lymphoma
myelofibrosis
types
(PCFCL)
Pappenheimer body 676. 678f
asymptomatic 483-485.483b
dinical features 473-474
Paracortex. lymph node 20. 22f
non-secretory 484-485. 486f
differential diagnosis 473-474
Paraimmunoblast 337f
 plasma cell leukemia 485
immunophenotype 473
Paraneoplastic myelodysplasia 144
symptomatic 483-484
molecular/cytogenetic studies 473
Paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria (PCH) 700
 Plasmablastic lymphoma
morphology 473. 474f
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH)
dinical features 459-460
 Primary cutaneous marginal zone lymphoma
dinical features 105-108
differential diagnosis 459
(PCMZL)
deficient membrane proteins 105t
immunophenotype 459. 461f
dinical features 474-476
flow cytometry findings 106-107. 107f
molecular/cytogenetic studies 459
differential diagnosis 475
molecular/cytogenetic studies 107-108
morphology 459. 459f
immunophenotype 475, 476f
morphology 105-106. 106f
 Plasmacytoma
molecular/cytogenetic studies 475
 testing indications 106. 106b
bone 497, 497b
morphology 474-475. 475f
Parvovirus B19. pure red cell aplasia 681f 682f
cutaneous 477-478, 478f
 Primary diffuse large B-cell lymphoma of the
 PAS, see Periodic acid-Schiff reaction
extramedullary plasmacytoma 496f. 497.
central nervous system
Pax5 34. 441f. 445f 463f. 585f. 624f
498f
cinical features 444-447
 PCFCL, see Primary cutaneous follicle center
Platelet, see also specijfic disorders
immunophenotype 445
lymphoma
CD markers 38
molecular/cytogenetic studies 445-447
 PCH, see Paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria
drug-induced disorders 713
morphology 444. 445f. 446f
PCM, see Plasma cell myeloma
dysfunction in pathological conditions 
Primary effusion lymphoma ( PEL)
PCMZL, see Primary cutaneous marginal zone
713-714
dinical features 456-459
lymphoma
morphology 15-16. 16f
differential diagnosis 457, 458t
PCR, see Polymerase chain reaction
PMF, see Primary myelofibrosis
immunophenotype 457. 458f
PDGFRA rearrangement
PNH, see Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
molecular/cytogenetic studies 457
immunophenotype 215
Poems syndrome, see Osterosclerotic myeloma
morphology 457. 457f. 458f
742
INDEX
Primary mediastinal (thymic) large B-cell
molecular/cytogenetic studies 137. 139f. 140f
red pulp 17-18. 17f. 18f
lymphoma (MLBCL)
morphology 136. 137f. 138f
white pulp 16. 17f. 18f
cinical features 449-451
overview 136-137
 Splenic diffuse red pulp small B-cell lymphoma
differential diagnosis 450. 452t
 Refractory anemia with ringed sideroblasts
379-380
immunophenotype 449-450
(RARS)
 Splenic marginal zone lymphoma (SMZL)
molecular/cytogenetic studies 450. 451f
immunophenotype 134
cinical features 375
morphology 449, 450f. 451f
molecular/cytogenetic studies 134. 134f
differential diagnosis 380-381. 381t
Primary myelofibrosis ( PMF)
morphology 133-134. 133f
immunophenotype 376. 379f
molecular/cytogenetic studies 176
overview 132-134
molecular/cytogenetic studies 376-379. 379f.
morphology and laboratory findings 
 Refractory cytopenia with multilineage
380f
extramedullary hematopoiesis 172-176.
dysplasia (RCMD)
morphology 375-376. 376f. 377f. 378f
175f. 176f
immunophenotype 134-136
variants 372-373. 372f
fbrotic stage 172. 172f. 173f 174f
molecular/cytogenetic studies 136. 136f
Stomatocytosis 697
overview 171-176
morphology 134.135f
Subcutaneous panniculitis-like T-cell
prefbrotic stage 171-172. 171f. 172f
overview 134-136
lymphoma 562-563. 567t
overview 170-176
 Refractory cytopenia with unilineage dysplasia
 Sudan Black B. acute myeloid leukemia staining
Prolymphocyte. bone marrow cell
(RCUD)
223. 223f
characteristics 11. 13f
immunophenotype 131-132. 132f
 Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
 Promyelocyte. bone marrow cell characteristics
molecular/cytogenetic studies 132. 132f
 granulomatous lymphadenitis 94. 95f
6f.7
morphology 130-131. 130f. 131f
 Systemic mastocytosis, see Mastocytosis
Pseudofollicle 337f
overview 129-132
Pseudo-Gaucher cell 157f. 724f
Rheumatoid arthritis ( RA), lymphadenopathy
 PTCL. NOS, see Peripheral T-cell lymphoma.
82. 82f. 83f
T
 not otherwise specifed
Richter syndrome 346-349. 347f. 348f. 349f
T-ALL/LBL, see T-lymphoblastic leukemia/
PTLD, see Post-transplant lymphoproliferative
Rosai-Dorfman disease 89. 89f. 90f. 642-643.
lymphoma
disorders
644f
 TAM, see Transient abnormal myelopoiesis
Pure red cell aplasia (PRCA)
Rouleaux formation 484f. 492f. 700f
Target cell 676f
 differential diagnosis 680
Rubriblast, bone marrow cell characteristics 9.
T-cel]
morphology 680. 680f
9f. 10f
CD markers 34-35
parvovirus B19 infection 681f, 682f
Russell body 11. 13f. 255f. 489f
differentiation 503-504. 503f
types and causes 679-680, 679b
neoplasms, see also specific neoplasms
PV. see Polycythemia vera
s
classification 506, 507t
Pyruvate kinase deficiency 698
cytogenetics 504f. 505f
S-100 37. 653f
flow cytometry 504f
Sarcoidosis
receptor rearrangement 504f. 513f
R
 granulomatous lymphadenitis 91-92. 91f
 T-cell/histiocyte-rich large B-cell lymphoma
RA, see Rheumatoid arthritis
reactive histiocytic proliferation 642. 643f
(THRLBCL)
Radiation therapy see Acute myeloid leukemia:
SCD. see Sickle cell disease
differential diagnosis 440. 442t
 Bone marrow: Myelodysplastic
Schistocyte 676. 677f
immunophenotype 439
syndromes
 Schwachman-Diamond syndrome
molecular/cytogenetic studies 439-440
RAEB, see Refractory anemia with excess blasts
 dinical features 101
morphology 439. 440f. 441f. 442f
RARA. acute promyelocytic leukemia
 molecular/cytogenetic studies 101
T-cell large granular lymphocytic (T-LGL)
translocations 233
 morphology 101
leukemia
RARS. see Refractory anemia with ringed
 SCID. see Severe combined immunodeficiency
dinical features 509-513
sideroblasts
syndromes
differential diagnosis 519-522. 522t
RCUD, see Refractory cytopenia with unilineage
Severe combined immunodeficiency syndromes
immunophenotype 511-512. 512f. 513f
dysplasia
(SCID)
molecular/cytogenetic studies 512-513. 514f
 Reactive histiocytic proliferations
gene mutations 614t
morphology 510-511. 510f. 511f
autoimmune disease 641-642
overview 613
T-cell polymphocytic leukemia [T-PLL)
Erdhein-Chester disease 642. 644f
Sezary cell 526f. 555f. 558f
clinical features 525
iatrogenic causes 643
 Sezary syndrome
differential diagnosis 529
infection 641
dinical features 557-558
immunophenotype 526. 527f
Kikuchi disease 642. 643f
differential diagnosis 558-559
molecular/cytogenetic studies 526-529.
Rosai-Dorfman disease 642-643. 644f
immunophenotype 557. 558f
528f
sarcoidosis 642. 643f
molecular/cytogenetic studies 557-558. 558f
morphology 525-526. 525f. 526f
tumor association 642
morphology 557. 558f
T-cell receptor-8 (TCR-y8) 513f. 539, 545
Red blood cell
Sickle cell disease (SCD)
TCR-yo. see T-cell receptor-po
anemia, see specific diseases
dinical features 693-695. 693f
TdT, see Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase
 counts in healthy adults 675t 
differential diagnosis 695
Teardrop 675. 682-683.703
 cytoskeleton structure and gene defects 695f.
morphology 694-695. 694f
 Telangiectasia macularis eruptiva perstans 196
1269
Sinus histiocytosis. lymphadenopathy 88-89.
Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT).
inclusions 640f. 641f
89f. 90f
 precursor-associated marker 38-39
morphologic variants 637f. 638-639. 638f
 SLE, see Systemic lupus erythematosus
 Thalassemia syndromes
morphology 14-15
 Smudge cell 336f
differential diagnosis 692-693. 693t
Red pulp. spleen 17-18. 17f. 18f
SMZL, see Splenic marginal zone lymphoma
hemoglobin genes G90f
Reed-Sternberg cell 594f. 602f. 605f
Southern blot. principles 64. 64f
rare variants 692
Refractory anemia with excess blasts ( RAEB)
Spleen
α-thalassemia 692
immunophenotype 136-137. 139f
marginal zone 16-17. 17f. 18f
β-thalassemia 689t. 690-692. 690f. 691f
INDEX
743
THRLBCL, see T-cell/histiocyte-rich large B-cell
Toxic granulation. granulocyte G63. 663f
differential diagnosis 687
 lymphoma
Toxoplasmosis. granulomatous lymphadenitis
morphology 686-687. 686f. 687f
Thrombocytopenia
94.94f
owerview 685
associated conditions 710
T-PLL, see T-cell polymphocytic leukemia
syndromes 686
autoimmune thrombocytopenic purpura
TPO, see Thrombopoietin
cinical features 706-708
Transfusion
differential diagnosis 708
post-transfusion purpura 708
morphology 708
 hemolytic anemia 701
Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia. see
hemolytic uremic syndrome 708-710
Transient abnormal myelopoiesis (TAM). Down 
 Lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma
 neonatal immune-mediated
syndrome
Warm agglutinins. se Warm-reacting antibodies
 thrombocytopenia 708
morphology 283.284f
Warm-reacting antibodies 699 -700
 post-transfusion purpura 708
immunophenotype 283-285.285f
WAS, see Wiscott-Aldrich syndrome
 thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
 molecular/cytogenetic studies 285. 285f
Whipple's disease. lymphadenopathy 90
708-710. 709f
Trisomy 3 380f
White pulp. spleen 16. 17f. 18f
Thrombopoietin (TPO) 4
Trisomy 8 140f. 142f. 153f 206f
Wiscott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS) 613-614, 712
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP)
Trisomy 9 153f
708-710, 709f
Trisomy 10 322f
Trisomy 15 134f
X
TIA-1 550f
T-LGL Jeukemia see T-cell large granular
Trisomy 18 477f
 X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome (XLP)
 Jymphocytic leukemia
Trisomy 21, see Down syndrome
dinical features 616-617
T-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma (T-ALL/
TTP see Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
diagnostic criteria 616b
LBL)
molecular/cytogenetic studies 617
dinical features 309
u
morphology 616-617
differential diagnosis 314
 XLP. see X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome
immunophenotype 309-310. 311f. 311t
Urticaria pigmentosa 196
molecular/cytogenetic studies 310-313. 312t.
z
313f
morphology 309, 310f
V
ZAP-70
rare variants 313-314
Vitamin B12 deficiency
B-cell marker 34
Touton giant cell G44f
causes 685b
small lymphocytic lymphoma 342f