Scott
Miller
Griffin
Muller&Kirk's
SMALL ANIMAL
DERMATOLOGY
6th Edition
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
SAUNDERS
An Imprint of Elsevier
The Curtis Center
 Indcpcndcncc Square West 
 Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19106
Lbrary of Congress Cataloging-in-Publlcatlon Data
Muller, George H.
[Small animal dermatology]
Muller & Kirk's small animal dermatology.--6th ed./Danny W. Scott. Wiliam H.
Miler, Jr., Craig E. Grifin.
p. cm.
1SBN-13: 978-0-7216-7618-0  ISBN-10: 0-7216-7618-9
1. Dogs—Diseases. 2. Cats—Diseases. 3. Pets—Diseases.
4. Veterinary dermatology. I. Kirk, Robert Warren, 1992-. Il. Scott, Danny
W. l. Miler, William Hi.(William Howard), 1948-
IV. Grifin. Craig E. V. Title
SF992.S55 M85 2001 636.089'65dc21
00-030093
ISBN-13: 978-0-7216 7618-0
ISBN-10: 0.7216-7618-9
Acquisitions Editor: Ray Kersey
Book Designer: Jonel Sofian
Production Manager: Norman Stellander
Manuscript Editor: Carol DiBerardino
Illustrarion Specialist: Lisa Lambert
Copyright @ 2001, 1995, 1989, 1983, 1976, 1969 by Saunders
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduccd or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system.
without permission in writing from thc publisher.
complete your request on-line via the Elscvier homcpagc (http://www.elsevier.com), by selecting Support and
contact' and then 'Copyright and Pcrmission'.
Printed in China.
Last digitis thc print numbcr:9 8765
Preface and
Acknowledgments
Each time we gear up to do another edition of Snall Animal Dermatology, we optimisti-
cally—-yet with the trepidation bon of familiarity—tell ourselves that this rewrite will be
less involved, less time consuming, less intimidating than the last. After all . : : we just
did a total rewrite for the previous edition . . . so this one couldn't possibly be as
extensive
.could it?
Well, once again we have found the task daunting - . . just shy of stifling. In fact, for
the first time in the history of the book, we came in 6 months late. Oof! One convenient
explanation for our struggles and tardiness — one that admittedly attempts to defiect some
o noo qps u pu ps rp r au  aq  joud
selves—is the staggering amount of new information that has surfaced in the last 5 years
in the field of veterinary derimatology. Good examples of this prordigious proliferation
include the more than 70 “new" conditions described herein, and the numerous veterinary
dermatology textbooks published during this time span (see Chap. 22).
 In veterinary medicine, very littlc information is available concerning the demograph
ics of canine and feline skin disorders. It has been estimated that between 20% and 75%
of the small animals seen in the average practice have skin problems as a chief or
concurrent owner complaint.1-s A 1978 Ralston Purina Company survey indicated that
25% of all small animal practice activity was involved with the diagnosis and treatment of
problems with the skin and haircoat.6 A nationwide survey by the Alpo Company in 1985
of 2540 small animal practitioners in the United States revealed that skin disorders were
the most common reason for patient visits to the veterinarian's offce. Dermatologic
disorders accounted for 18.8% of the dogs and 15.2% of the cats exainined at a university
teaching hospital.s
Using data gathered from 17 North American veterinary teaching hospitals for the
year 1983, Sischo and associates reported that the 10 most commonly diagnosed canine
skin disorders were, in decreasing order of frequency, flea bite hypersensitivity, skin
cancer, bacterial pyoderma, seborrhea, allergy, demodicosis, scabies, immune-mediated
noted in the frequency of those skin diseases in the various geographic regions studied. A
survey conducted in 1981 by the American Academy of Veterinary Dermatology revealed
the most common feline dermatologie dlisorders to be, in decreasing order of frequency.
parasitic dermatoses, miliary dermatitis, eosinophilie granuloma complex, endocrinologic
toses, seborrheic conditions, ncoplastic tumors, and autoimmune dermatoses.10
During a l-ycar period at a university teaching hospital,8 the most common dermato-
ses in dogs and cats were as follows:
Dogs-
-bacterial foliculitis and furunculosis (25.3% of the cases), atopy (12.7%), food
hypersensitivity (4.7%), flea bite hypersensitivity (3.4%), hyperadrenocorticism
(3.4%), and hypothyroidism (2.7%).
Cats -—
-abscesses (18.5%), otodectic mange (12.9%), cheyletiellosis (8.1%). fea bite
hyperscnsitivity (6.5%), atopy
(5.6%), fea infestation (4.9%), neoplasia (4.9%),
and food hypersensitivity (4%)
vi · Preface and Acknowledgments
Clearly, dermatology is a “big ticket item" in small animal practice; bacterial infec-
tions, ectoparasitisms, allergies, fungal infections, and neoplasia are common problems.
We cannot overstate our appreciation for those who have contributed to this sixth
edlition of Small Animal Dermatology. We couldn't have done it without you! Held up for
special praise and recognition are those who have 
 given so nuch in terms of love,
patience, and support during this production: Kris,
, Travis, and Tracy (DwS); Kathy,
Steven, Julia, and Andrew (WHM); and Laura, Trevor, Kyle, and Taylor (CEG). And last,
but not least, we sincerely thank the whole crew at W.B. Saunders Company --especially
Ray Kersey --for their patience, support, and terrific effort.
And now , : . it's time to open up our labor of love for your scrutiny. In the words
of Bob Seger (and the Silver Bullet Band, of course), we invite you to *Turn the Page.
● REfErENCES
1. Schwartzman RM, Orkin M: A Comparative
7. Alpe Veterinary Panel. Dermatological problems
Study of Skin Diseases of Dog and Man. Charles 
head
" '   d 
C Thomas. Springfeld, CT, 1962.
1985.
2. Ihrke PJ., Franti CE: Breed as a risk factor asso-
8. Seott Dw, Paradis M: A survey of canine and
ciated with skin diseases in dlogs seen in northen
feline skin disorders seen in a university practice:
California. Calif Vet 39:13, 1985.
Small Animal Clinic, University of ‘Montrcal,
3. Neshitt Gll: Canine and Feline Dennatology: A
Saint-Hyacinthc, Quebec (1987-i988). Can Vet J
Systematic Approach. Lea & Febiger, Philadel-
31:830,1990.
phia, 1983.
9. Sischo WM, et al: Regional distribution of 10
4. Willinson GT: Color Atlas of Small Animal Der-
common _skin diseases in dogs. J Ain Vet Med
matology. Williams & Wilkins, Baltimorc, 1985.
Assoc 195:752,1989.
 5. Grant Dl: Skin Diseascs in the Dog and Cat.
10. Nesbift CH: Incidence of feline skin disease: a
Blackwell Scientife Publications, Oxford, 1986.
suvey. Proc Am Acad Vet Dermatol, Las Vegas,
6. Ralston Purina Company. An Introduction to the
1982.
Sutrition of Dogs and Cats. Veterinary Lcarming
Systems, Trenton, NJ, 1989.
D. W. Scott
W. H. Miller, Jr.
C. E.Griffin
The Last Time
The grcatest professional honor I have ever received was being asked to join "the book."
Yo! George Muller . .
. . the legendary father of "the book"
.. and Bob Kirk ...
the
most famous veterinarian on the planet. I mean . . . I had contributed bits and pieces to
the second edition . . . but now I was coauthor of "the bible."
S  i  e e s a  , n se  as
I could do no less. "The book" is an enormous commitment, an awesome responsibility.
When it is to be “rebom," it demands your all: all your knowledge, all your experiencc, all
your sifting and analysis of our vast literature, all your energy. Getting “the book" ready
for its next viewing is all about enthusiasm, conviction, dedication, perseverance, several
very short or sleepless nights, curtailed family time, a number of “Advil moments" and,
when it is done, a feeling of having given all you had . . . of mumbness.
 p oq on su hi  e oq a, op n s i im   ou I
. and
I love this book too much to do anything less than give it the very best there is. So, this
will be my last edition. It has becn a grcat ride, a true honor and blessing to be associated
with "the book." And Ray Kersey with W.B. Saunders and my wife, Kris, have been with.
me for the whole 25 years. As much as it aches to say good-bye : :
.. it is time. I am
comforted in the knowledge that—in Bill and Craig—Small Anirnal Dermatology will be
 left in knowledgeable, experienced, dedicated, and loving hands.
And now I arm reminded of a great old song by Mick and the boys, which I havc
often found myself humming as I worked on this sixth edition!
The Last Time
(Mick Jagger and Keith Richard, 1965)
Thanks, George. Thanks, Bob. Thanks, Ray. Thanks, Kris. Thanks, Bill. Thanks, Craig.
Thanks to everyone out there. May "the hook" be with you!
Danny
Ithaca, Ncw York—2000
NOTICE
followed, but as new research and clinical experience grow, changes in treatment and drug
therapy become. necessary or appropriate. The authors and ecditors of this work have
carefully checked the generic and trade drug names and verified drug dosages to ensure
that dosage information is precise and in accord with standards accepted at the time of
publication. Rcaders arc advised, howevcr, to check thc product information currently
provided by thc manufacturer of each drug to be administered to be ccrtain that changes
have not been made in the recommended dosc or in the contraindications for administra-
Recommended dosages for animals are sometimes based on adjustrnents in the dosage
that would be suitable for hurnans. Some of the drugs mentioned here have been given
experimentally by the authors. Others have been used in dosages greater than those
recommended by the manufacturer. In these kinds of cases, the authors have reported on
their owm considerable experience. It is the responsibility of thosc adrninistering a drug.
relying on their professional skill and experienee, to determinc the dosages, the best
treatment for the patient, and whether the benefits of giving a drug justify the attendant
risk. The editors cannot be responsible for misuse or misapplication of the material in this
work.
THE PUBLISHER
ix
Structure and Function of the
Skin
A7 hat a glorious organ it is! The skin is the largest and most visible organ of thc
 body and the anatonic and physiologic barrier hetween animal and environment.
It provides protection from physical, cheimical, and microbiologic injury, and its sensory
coponents perceive heat, cold, pain, pruritus, touch, and pressure. In addition, the skin 
is synergistic with internal organ systems and thus refects pathologic processes that are
either primary elsewhere or shared with other tissues. Not only is the skin an organ with
its own reaction patterns; it is also a mirror refecting the milieu interieur and, at the same
timc, the capricious world to which it is cxposcd.
. The skin, hair, and subcutis of a
newborn puppy represent 24% of its body weight.180
 By the time of maturity, these structures constitute only 12% of body weight.
● GENeraL FUNCTIoNS AND ProPerTIeS Of The SKIN
The general functions and properties of animal skin are as follows*:
1. Enclosing barrier. The most important function of skin is to make possible an
 intermal environment for all other organs by maintaining an effective barrier to
the loss of water, electrolytes, and macromolecules.
 2. Environmental protection. A corollary function is the exclusion of external injuri-
 ous agents —chemical, physical, and microbiologic— from entrance into the inter-
nal environment.
 3. Motion and shape. The fexibility, elasticity, and toughness of the skin allow
motion and provide shape and form.
 4. Adnexa production. Skin produces keratinized structures such as hair, claws, and
the hormy layer of the epidermis.
 5. Temperature regulation. Skin plays a role in the regulation of body temperature
through its support of the hair coat, regulation of cutaneous blood supply, and
swcat gland function,
 6. Storage. The skin is a reservoir of electrolytes, water, vitamins, fat, carbohydrates,
proteins, and other materials.
7. Indicator. The skin may be an important indicator of general health, intermal
disease, and the effects of substances applied topically or taken intermall. It
contributes to physical and sexual identity.
 8. Inmunoregulation. Keratinocytes, Langerhans cells, and lymphocytes together
 provide the skin with an immunosurveillance capability that effectively protects
against the development of cutaneous neoplasns and persistent infections.
 9. Pigmentation. Processes in the skin (melanin formation, vascularity, and keratini-
zation) help determine the color of the coat and skin. Pigmentation of the skin
heips prevent damage from solar radiation.
10. Antimicrobial action. The skin surface has antibacterial and antifungal properties.
*See referenccs 57, 65. 102, 150, 166, 172, 180, 187, and 196.
2 · Structure and Function of the Skin
11. Sensory perception. Skin is a primary sense organ for touch, pressure, pain, itch,
heat, and cold.
12. Secretion. Skin is a secretory organ by virtue of its epitrichial (apocrine), atrichial
(eccrine), and sebaceous glands.
14. Vitamin D production. Vitamin D is produced in the skin through stimulation by
solar radiation. In the epidermis, vitamin Ds (cholecalciferol) is formed from
S     d    
light.6s The vitamin D-binding protein in plasma translocates vitamin D, from
the skin to the circulation. Vitamin D, is then hydroxylated in the liver to 25-
hydroxyvitanin Ds and again hydroxylated in the kidney to form 1,25-dihydroxyvi-
tamin Ds. which is important in the regulation of epidermal proliferation and
differentiation.6. 96
· ONTOGENY
Skin is a complex multicellular organ in which endoderm, neural crest, and ectoderm
contribute to form a three-dimensional unit in a spatially and temporally defned manner.
Skin morphogenesis involves the action of multiple genes in a coordinated fashion. Horn-
eobox genes are a gene fanily that encode information critical for normal embryologic
development and that likely play a very important role in the development of skin adnexa,
pigment system, and stratified epithelium during embryogencsis.1s1
Epithelial-mesenchymal interactions regulate tissue homeostasis, the balanccd regula-
tion of proliferation and cifferentiation maintaining normal tissue architecture and func-
tion,u Multiple circuits of reciprocal permissive and instructive effects exist between
cpithelial and mesenchymal cells and extracellular matrices.
       e   s   
derimis containing loosely arranged mesenchymal cells embedded in an interstitial
(the basal cell layer, or stratum germinativum, and the outer periderm), three layers (the
stratum intermedium forms between the other two layers), and then into arn adult-like
origin) become identifiable during this period of ectodermal maturation.
 Dermal devclopment is characterized by an increase in the thickmess and numher of
fbcrs, a decrease in ground substance, and the transition of mesenchymal cells to fibro-
blasts. This process of building a fiber-rich matrix has been referred to as a ripening of
of Type III collagen compared with the skin of an adult, which contains a large propor-
subcutis fron spindle-shaped mesenchymal precursor cells (prelipoblasts) in the second
half of gestation.
germs), which give rise to hair follicles, sebaceous glands, andl epitrichial (apoerine) sweat
glands417Hairgermsnitallyconsistofanareaofrowdingofdeeplbasophiel
in the basal layer of the epidermis. Subsequently, the areas of crowding become buds that
protrude into the dermis. Beneath each bud lies a group of imesenchyinal cells, frorn
which the dermal hair papilla is later formed.
As the hair peg lengthens and develops into a hair foliclc and hair, threc bulges
appear. The lowest (deepest) of the bulges develops into the attachment for the arrector
pili muscle; the middle bulge differentiates into the sebaceous gland; and the uppermost
bulge evolves into the epitrichial sweat giand, Thesc appendages devclop on thc ental sidc
of primary hair follicles: secondary hair follicles develop on the extal side. In general, the.
first hairs to appear on the fetus are vibrissae and tactile or sinus hairs that develop on
the chin, eyebrows, and upper lip as wlite, slightly raised dots on otherwise sinooth, bare
Structure and Function of the Skin * 3
caudally.
Atrichial (ecerine) sweat gland germs also begin as areas of crowding of dccply
basophilic cells in the basal layer of the epidermis. They initially differ from hair gerrms
only slightly by being narrower and by showing fewer mesenchymal cells at their base.
Cell interaction plays a central role in the formation of skin appendages.lMorpho-
several new adhcsion molecule families that mediate cell-to-cell and cell-to-substrate adhe-
sion have bccn identified: (1) neural cell adhesion 1nolecules (N-CAM), which belong to
the immnnoglohnlin (IgG) gene superfamily; (2) cadherins, which mediate adhesion in the
presence of calcium; (3) tenascin, which is a unique matrix molecule similar to thc
  s    ()   a o 
integrins, which serve as cellular receptors for fbronectin, collagen, and other cxtraccllular
diferent acdhesion molecules are cxpressed and are involved in different functions: induc-
tion, mcsenchymal condensation, epithelial folding, and cell death.
organize in situ from dermal mcsenchymal cells into single-layered endothelial tubes.
Branches from large subcutaneous nerve trunks cxtend into the dermis and organize into
 deep and superficial plexuses relatcd to thc vascular plexus.
● GROSS ANatOMY AND PhYSIOLOGY
At each body orifice, the skin is continuous with the mucous mernbrane located there
(digestive, respiratory, ocular, urogenital). The skin and haircoat vary in quantity and
quality among species, among breeds within a species, and among individuals within a
breed; they also vary from one area to anothcr on the body, and in accordance with agc
and sex.
 In general, skin thickness decreases dorsally to ventrally on the trunk and proximally
inguinal, and perianal areas. The reported averagc thickness of the general body skin of
thickest over the dorsolateral aspects of the body and thinnest ventraly, on the lateral
surface of the pinnae, and on the undersurface of the tail.
Thc skin surfaces of haired mammals are, in general, acidic. The pH of norimal feline
 zi ssn  i '' o g e  i o pod oq s us o pe
dynamic study of skin surface pH in dogs, t5s the following observations were made: pH
values varied at different sites on the skin and varied from day to day: males had
significantly highcr pH values than females on all sites; spayed females had significantly
higher pllI values at all sitcs than intact females; black Labrador retrievers had significantly
higher pH values than ycllow Labrador retrievers, and Labrador retrievers and miniature
ers. Clearly, skin surface pH appears to vary with site, day, coat color, sex, gonadal status,
and breed. In addition, it has been reported that the skin surface pH of an excited dog
can incrcase by greater than 1 unit within 1 minute.132
The metabolism of the skin is not well understood. All of the enzyines of the
glycolytic pathway and those of the tricarboxylic acid cycle have been demonstrated in
skin, but actual glucose metabolism seems to be anomalous.l9. 65. 72. 98. 180 Glucose is
 preferentially metabolized to lactate, rather than fully oxidized to CO,. The skin is an
active site of fatty acid metabolism (see Chap. 3).
Studies of the surface markings of the muzzle and nose have shown that there are
 individual, genetically detcrmined differences similar to those of human fingertips.166 It
has been suggested that imprints ("fingerprints") of thcsc special skin areas (termed
labiograms or nasolabiograms) could be used for the identification of animals.
4 · Structure and Function of the Skin
Hair
Hair, which is characteristic of mammals, is inportant in thermal insulation and sen-
sory perception and as a barrier against chemical, physical, and microbial injury to the
temperature correlates closely with its length, thickness, and density per unit area, and
with' the medullation of individual hair fbers. In general, haircoats composed of long, fine,
poorly medullated fibers, with the coat depth increased by piloerection, are the most
efficient for thernal insulation at low environmental temperatures. Coat color is also of
some importance in thermal regulation; light-colored coats are more cfficient in hot, suny
weather. The glossiness of the haircoat is important in refecting sunlight. Transglutami-
nase is a marker of early anagen hair follicles, and it is important in the protein cross-
diameter of thc hair shaft is largcly dctermined by the volume of the hair matrix epithe-
lium, and the final length of the hair shaft is determined by both the rate of hair growth
and the duration of anagen.
 Both primary (outercoat, guard) and secondary (undercoat) hairs are medullated in
dogs and cats; thus, the term lanugo, meaning nonmedulated, is incorrect when applied to
nonfetal dogs and cats. In cats, secondary hairs are far more numerous than primary hairs
(10:1 dorsally, 24:1 ventrally).172 The hairs of the cat have been divided into three types
based on gross appearance: (1) guard hairs (thickest, straight, evcnly tapered to a fine tip),
(2) awn hairs (thinner, possessing subapical swelling below the hair tip), and (3) down
fiber is determined by the shape of the hair follicle, with straight follicles producing
straight hairs and curly follicles producing curly hairs.166. 17
 In general, no new hair folicles are forimed after birth. Puppies do not actuall “lose"
their puppy coat; rather, they gain an adult coat. Puppies have simple hair follicles that
to 60 degrees) in relation to the epidermis. The direction of the slope of the hairs, which
varies from one region of the body to another, gives rise to the hair tracts.177 'rhe study of
hair tract pattems is called trichoglyphics. The true significance and the origin of hair
include minimal irmpediment to forward motion and the ability of water to fow off the
body to the ground without soaking the haircoat, which would reduce its thermal-insulat-
ing properties.
Adult shorthaired cats produced a yearly amount of hair growth of 32.7g/kg.7 Dogs
 produced 60 to 180 g/kg. depending on the brced.137
Hair Cycle
Analysis of the factors controling or inffuencing hair growth is complicated by evolution-
ary history. The pelage changes as a mammal grows, and that of the adult often differs
markedly from that of the juvenilc, reHecting different requirements for heat regulation,
camoufage, and sexual and social comnunication. In addition, the cyclic activity of the
hair folicles and the periodic molting of hairs have provided a mechanism by which the
pelage can be adapted to seasonal changes in armbient temperature or environmental
background. This mechanism is influenced by changes in the photoperiod, which acts
through the hypothalamus, hypophysis, and pineal gland, altering levels of various hor-
mones (including melatonin, prolactin, and those of gonadal, thyroital, and adrenocortical
origin) and modifying the inherent rhythms of the hair follicle.
Hair growth cycles involve the repeated induction of hair folicle anlagen and their
concurrent downward growth and invasion through the dermis.25, 20s Signals controlling
hair follicle induction, development, regression, and reactivation have not been identified;
however, multiple growth factors or their receptors (e.g., EGF, transforming growth factor
[TGFl-βl, TGF-β2, neurotrophin-3) have been localized to hair follicles and the sur-
rounding mesenchyme. These growth factors control cellular proliferation and collagenase
Structure and Function of the Skin * 5
release from cultured hair follicles. In addition, an interplay between class I major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) cxpression, chondroitin proteoglycans, and activated
macrophages is involved in the regulation of hair growth, especially during the catagen
phase.4,62°
Ncural mechanisms of hair growth control in 1nice have revealed that the sensory and
autonomic innervation of hair foflicles, the substance P content of skin, and the cutaneous
source and a target of neurotrophins, and neuropharinacologic manipulations alter hair
cycling. The trophic effects of cutaneous nervcs on follicular growth arc cxcrted via.
regulation of vascular tone (nutrient and oxygcn supply), neuropcptide stimulation of
receptors on follicular keratinocytcs and dermal papilla fibroblasts, and modulation of
macrophagc and mast cell activitics. In dogs, hair growth retardation (folieular atrophy)
has occurred after experimental sectioning of peripheral nerves and dorsal roots.loo How-
ever, peripheral nerve damage can also induce inereased hair growth, as seen in the
unilateral hypertrichosis (*hemitrichosis") following major unilateral thoracic surgery in
dogs.100
Hairs do not grow continuously but rather in cycles (Fig. 1 -1). Each cycle consists of
a growing period (anagen), during which the follicle is actively producing hair, and a
resting period (telogen), during which the hair is retained in the follicle as a dead (or
club) hair that is subsequently lost. There is also a transitional period (catagen) between
these two stages. It is often stated that certain breeds of dogs, such as poodles, Old
English sheepdogs, and schnauzers, have continuously growing hair coats,Iso but there has
been no scientific investigation that would substantiate such a statement. The relative
duration of the phases of the cycle varies with the age of the individual, the region of the
body, the breed, and the sex, and it can be modified by a variety of physiologic and
pathologic factors.
The hair cycle, and thus the haircoat, are controlled by photopcriod, ambient temper-
aturc, nutrition, hormones, gencral state of health, genetics, and poorly understood intrin-
and cytokines produced by the follicle, the dermal papilla, and other cells (lymphocytes,
b
d
e
FIGURE I-I. The hair cycle. a, Anagen: During this growing stage. hair is produced by mitosis in
bulb. The hair above this will becoine a "chub." c, Catagen: The distal follicle becoines thick and
corugated and pushes the hair outward. d, Telogen: This is the resing stage. The dennal papilla
separates and an epithelial strand shortens to form a sccondary germ. c, Farly anagen: The sccondary
genn grows down to enclose the dermal papila and a new hair bulb forms. The old "club" is lost. f.
Anagen: The hair elongales as growth continues.
6 · Structure and Function of the Skin
maerophages, fibroblasts, mast cells) in the immediate environment. In cats, there was no
effect of repeated clipping on hair growth.75
Hair replacement in dogs and cats is mosaic in pattern because neighboring hair
follicles are in different stages of the hair cycle at any onc time. Replaccmcnt is unaf-
fected by castration; it responds predominanfly to photoperiod and, to a lesser extent, to
amhient temperature. Dogs and cats in tenperate latitudes such as the northern United
States and Canada may shed noticeably in the spring and fall. Hair follicle activity, and
thus hair growth rate, are maximal in summer and minimal in winter. For example, up to
 50% of hair follicles may be in telogen in the summer, but this proportion may increase
to 90% in the winter. Maximum hair follicle inactivity is reached earlier in female cats
than in male cats.75 Catagen hairs always constitute a small proportion of the total number
of hairs, usually accounting for 4% to 7% of the total.3 sao Many dogs and cats exposed to
several hours of artificial light (e.g., animals houscd indoors) shed, sometimes profusely,
continuously as single hairs.171
Hair grows until it attains its preordained length, which varies according to body
region and is genetically determined; it then enters the resting phase, which may last for a
considerable amount of time. Each region of the body has its owm ultimate length of hair
tive coat lengths of various breeds and is genetically determined. In mongrel dogs, it was
shown that hair growth rates varied at different sites anid that the speed of growth was
related to the ultimate length of the hair in each particular site.6s For example, in the
shoulier region, where ultimate hair length was about 30 mm, the average rate of hair
growth was 6.7 mm/wk, whereas in the forehead region, which had ultimate hair length of
about 16 mm, the growth rate was 2.8 mm/wk. Other investigators have reported daily
hair growth rates in dogs of 0.04 to 0.18 mm (Greyhound)2s, 3a and 0.34 to 0.40 mm
(beagle).2 In the cat, daily hair growth rate has heen reported to be 0.25 to 0.30 mm17 or
62 to 289 μg/crm2. 75
 Because hair is predominantly protein, nutrition has a profound effect on its quantity
and quality (see Chap. 17). Poor nutrition may produce a dull, dry, brittle, or thin haircoat
with or without pigmentary disturbances.
Under conditions of ill heaith or generalized disease, anagen may be conisiderably
shortened; accordingly, a large percentage of body hairs may be in telogen at one time.
Because telogen hairs tend to be more casily lost, the animal may shed excessively.
Disease states may also lead to faulty formation of hair cuticle, which results in a duil
Iustcrless hair coat. Severe illness or systemic stress may cause many hair follicles to enter
synchronously and precipitously into telogen. Shedding of these hairs (telogen delluxion;
see Chap. 1l) thus occurs sirnultaneously, often resulting in visible thinning of the coat or
actulal alopecia.
The hair cycle and haircoat are also affected by hormonal changes.28. 6s. 7o. 19 In
general, anagen is initiated and advanced and hair growth rate is accelerated by thyroid
hormones and growth hormone. Conversely, excessive amounts of glucocorticoids or estro-
 gens inhibit anagen and suppress hair growth rate. Dermal papila cells, which are a
mesenchymal component of thc hair bulb, are considered to play a fundamental role in
the induction of epithelial differentiation. These cells are morphologically and functionally
diferentiated from dermal fibroblasts and are thought to be the primary target cells that
respond to hormones and mediate growth-stimulating signals to the follicular epithelial
cells. 4. 84
 Obviously, the details of the regulation of hair follicle cycling and growth are extraor-
dinarily cormplex and still poorly understood. The factors that control the hair follicle cycle
are, in gencral, different from the factors that control hair follicle strmuchure. Altcrations in
factors (e.g., hornones) controlling the hair follicle cycle result in follicular atrophy.
Alterations in factors (e.g, morphogens) that control hair follicle structure result in follicu-
lar dysplasia.
Hair growth is a confusing subject that needs much research. It should be remem-
bered that the haircoat of pet aniimals is a cosmetic or ornamental feature. Every effort
Structure and Function of the Skin * 7
should be made to minimize procedures (clipping and shaving) that may affect the
animal's appearance for many weeks. Although generalizations can be misleading, normal
may take as long as 18 months.1so Occasionally, an uncxplained and cxtremely frustrating
failure to regrow hair in an area of skin occurs, usually following clipping and surgical
genization, or occasionally telogenization, of the hair fllicles. This frustrating follicular
arrest disappcars spontaneously in 6 months to 2 years after clipping (see Chap. I1).
Attention has been focused on the usefulness of hair analysis as a diagnostic
 uuq u sisuu pue ssop isu Aq pazusoi m si li sr ve m
cine that mineral and trace eleiment analysis of hair samples is not a clinically useful tool
 in the assessment of nutritional status. The reasons for variability and unreliability include
environmental effects (topical agents, geographic location, occupational exposures), differ-
ing hair growth rates (hcalth, drugs, age, sex), and lack of standardization in analysis
techniques. Until and unless adequate scientific documentation of the validity of such
multielement analysis is performed, it is necessary for both health professionals and the
 public to be aware of the very limited value of hair analysis and of the potential to be
confused and misled by it. Scientifically oriented nutritionists do not use hair analysis as a
primary method of detecting nutritional problems. Cautious consumers and health profes-
sionals should regard practitioners who rely solely on this test with suspicion.216
Stnall (0.16 to 0.42 mm in diameter), hairless, knoblike structurcs arc present in the
- udepe-mos se as sped yi asu osi i e' sap pue so jo us pn
norcceptors.
Cell proliferation kinetic values have been established for the hair follicle epithelium
pulse-labeling injections of tritiated thymidine, examination of skin biopsies, and autoradi-
ographs. The basal cell labeling index was 1.46 ± 0.78% in beagles and 1.07 ± 0.42% in
Cocker spaniels.
Hair Colors and Types
DOG
Although hair types in dogs are extremely dliverse, various authors have atternpted to
classify thcm on the basis of color, length, type of bristle, and characteristics of the
medulla and cortex.1so Hair types among dogs can be divided into normal (intermediate
length), short, and long coats.
Normal Coat
The nornal coat is typified by that seen in the German shepherd, the Welsh corgi, and
wild dogs such as wolves and coyotes. It is composed of primary hairs (coarse guard hairs
or bristles) and secondary hairs (fine hairs or undercoat). A high proportion of the hairs,
by number but not by weight, are secondary hairs.
The noxt two classes of hair coats are also made up of primary and secondary hairs,
but the relative sizes of the hairs and their numbers vary markedly from those of the
normal coat.
Short Coat
The short coat can be classified as coarse or fine. The coarse short coat is typified by the
ud jo yr hns e sq  jo o s sn  jo  pe a
hairs and a much lesscr growth of secondary hairs. The total wcight of hair is lower, and
the secondary hairs, especially, weigh less and are fewer in numher than tlhose in the
normal coat. The fine short coat is exemplified by boxers, dachshunds, and miniature
pinschers. This type of coat has the largest number of hairs per unit area. The secondary
s azis u panpan ane shey Areuud a pue 'pedoaaep lm pue snoounu ane suey
compared with those of the normal coat.
8 · Structure and Function of the Skin
Long Coat
The long coat can also be arranged into two subdivisions: the fine long coat and the
woolly or coarse long coat. The fine long coat is found in the Cocker spaniel, the
Pormeranian, and the Chow Chow. This coat has a greater weight of hair per unit area
than does the normal coat, except in the toy breeds (in which the weight of the hair inay
he less because it is finer). The woolly or coarse long coat is found in the poodle and in
the Bedlington terrier and the Kerry blue terrier. Secondary hairs make up 70% of the
total weight of these coats and 80% of the number of hairs; cornpared with other
secondary-type hairs, these are relatively coarse. The threc breeds mcntioncd have less
tendency to shed hair than do many breeds.
The genetic aspects of coat color in dogs constitute a complex subject.lis 1so Pigmen-
tation in individual hairs may be uniforn throughout the length of the shaft, or it may
light, the heavy body is pigmented brown or black, and the base is a light yellow or red-
brown. Pigment cels in the bulb of the hair deposit pigment in or between the cortical
and medullary hair cells. The amount of pigment deposited in the hair and its location
black-brown pigment is called eumelanin, and the yellow-red pignent is called pheomel.
anin. In addiion, the melanocytes of the follicle may or may not produce pigment
throughout the period of growth. In black hair, pigment production obviously remains
active throughout the period.
CAT
 Thc colors and types of hair coat in cats have been studied in some detail.152 155. 213 A self
(solid) cat is a single color throughout. No patterning, shading, ticking, or other variation
of color is observed, although it is common for kittens to have slightly tabby 1narkings and
genetically tabbies, possessing the Abyssinian, mackerel, or blotched tabby genes, or a
combination of two of these types. Solid white is dominant over all colors but may be
associated with various abnorinalities; for example, white cats with blue cycs often have
cochlear degeneration and deafness.
The tabby is the basic type of cat, the wild type from which all others evolved. The
complex tabby coloration arises from two component patterns governed by two separate
bluish base and black tip separated by yellow banding. The tabby genes determine
whether a cat lhas narrow, vertical, gently curving stripes (mackerel), larger patches
(blotch), or an Abyssinian pattern,
Tipped hair coats are characterized by hairs that have colored tips (e.g, blue, red,
greatest in the smokes and least in the chinchillas (silver). Pointed hair coats are charac-
terized by pale-colored hair on the body with darker hairs on the extremities or points
(nose, ears, feet, tail). Points arise through a temperature-dependent mechanism present
in breeds such as Siamese, Himalayan, Balinese, and Birman. In these breeds, the dark
 s       i   
hair is light colored; with low temperatures, it is darker. Thus, kittens are light at birth,
and cats kept indoors or in tropical climates are lighter than those kept outdoors or in
cold climates. Infammation and hyperemia result in more lightly colored new hair. The
 poor peripheral circulation that accompanies senility and shaving to rcmovc hair often
result in more darkly colored new hair.
Multicolored coats include the tortoiseshell and piebald spotting patterms.The arche-
typal tortoiseshell is a patchwork of black and orange, but there is range of color variation
anong torties. The hair may be chocolate (chestnut), cinnamon, blue, or lilac (lavender) in
the nonorange areas. The tortoiseshell pattern occurs in females or in males with two X
chroinosoimes. White spotting in piebald cats varies in degree from white gloves on the
feet, a nose smudge, or a white bib, to extensive white over most of thc body.
Structure and Function of the Skin · 9
The Maltese dilution, which dilutes black to blue (gray), orange to cream, and seal-
point (Siamese) to bluc-point, is inherited as an autosomal recessivc trait.151 In non-
Maltese cats, small melanin granules of uniform shape and sizc arc scattered uniformly
throughout the cortcx and medulla of the hair shaft, hair follicle epithelium, and epider-
mis. In the skin and hair from Maltese dilution cats, a nonuniform distribution of very
large, iregularly sized and shaped inelanin granules results from the clumping of smail
granules.
 In a typical shorthaired cat, the longest primary hairs average about 4.5 cm in length.
By contrast, the silky coat of a good show cat has primary hairs that may excced 12.5 cin
in length. The shorthair is the fundanental wild type and is dominant to the others.
Various nutant hair coat types havc occurred that have been perpetuated as a breed
characteristic. The rex mutant is characterized by curly hairs and occurs in two major
breeds, the Devon rex and thc Cormish (German) rex. The Cormish rex lacks primary
hairs, and the Devon rex has primary hairs that resemble secondary hairs. Cornish rcx
whiskers are often short and curly, but Devon rex whiskers are often absent or stubbled.
 In some Devon rexes, the coat is completely absent on the chest, belly, and shoulders, a
fault inany breeders try to elininate. Cornish and Devon rexcs may partially or completely
molt, especiall during estrus or pregnancy, resulting in a symmctric alopecia that may be
mistaken for an endocrine dermatosis.54 These breeds are occasionally recommended as
hypoallergenic cats to humans with animal dander hypersensitivities, but there appears to
be no scientific documentation for this claim.
The wire-hair mutation, seen in the American wirehair, is characterized by a coat that
looks and feels wiry because it is coarse, crimped, and springy. All hairs are curled in an
irregular fashion, and thc awn hairs resemble a shepherd's crook,
that cats with solid black, black and white, or gray tabby coats tended to have good
personalities, to handle stress well, and to make excellent pets. By contrast, calicos were
There are a number of cutaneous patterns or lines that are evoked to explain certain
the areas of distribution of the main cutancous ncrve stems. Langer's lines reflect the
course of blood vessels or lymphatics. Blaschko's lines form the pattern assumed by many
different nevoid and acquired skin diseases. Blaschko's lines refect a mosaic condition
deriving either from a single mutated clone of cells originating from a postzygotic muta-
tion or from an X-linked mutation made evident by lyonization.154 These lines follow a V-
shape over the spine, an S-shape on the abdomen, an axial distribution on the lirmbs, and
a wavy pattern down the forehead, over and below the eyes, over the upper lip, and
behind the car. Tension lines are determined by muscle action, connective tissue ibcr
orientation and traction, and gravity.82
Footpads
The canine and feline footpad is a specialized area of integument.13l. 166 1so The thick
epidermis protects against mechanical trauma, and the large fat deposits provide shock-
 absorbing elasticity. A copious nerve supply provides an important sensory function. Nu-
     s e d s s  sna
 running and clirnbing and may also be important in scent marking.
+ MIcrOSCopIC AnaTomY And PhYSIoLoGY
The microscopic anatomy and physiology of the skin of dogs and cats have been the
subjects of numcrous studies.*
*See references 77, 102, 117, 119, 135, 156, 166, 168, 170, 172. 180, 187, 188, 202, and 215.
I0· Structure and Function of the Skin
Epidermis
The outer layer of the skin, or epiderinis, is composed of multiple layers of cells defincd
by position, shape, polarity, morphology and state of differentiation of the keratinocytes
(Figs. 1-2, 1-34, 1-4, 1-5, and 1-6; sec also Fig. 1-16). There are four distinct cell
types within the epidermis: keratinocytes (about 85% of the epidermal cells), melanocytes
(about 5%), Langerhans' cells (3% to 8%), and Merkel's colls (about 2%), which arc
associated with tylotrich pais,.5s 180, 2For purposes of identilication, crtain areas of th
epidernis are classilied as layers and are named, from inner to outer, as follows:
   (s )  ss (q )  
granulosum), clear layer (stratum lucidum), and horny layer (stratum corneum). In gen-
eral, the epidernis of cats and dogs is thin (two to threc nucleated coll layers, not
counting the horny layer) in haired skin, ranging from 0.1 to 0.5 mm in thickness or in
nasal planum (see Fig. I -5), where it may measure 1.5 mm. The surface of the footpad
cpidermis is smooth in cats but papillated and irregular in dogs. Rete ridges (projections
FIGURE I-2. A, Nornal canine
 skin. B, Normal feline skin. Note the
thin epidermis and conpound hair fol-
licle arrangement of both species.
B
FIGURE I-3. A, Normal canine skin (H & E stain). B, Elastin (black) and colagcn (pink) fibers (AOG stain). C, Mucin
(bluc) separating dermal collagen bundles (pink) (H & E stain). D, Melanin 
mles (black) in keratinocyles and melano-
of outer root sheath keratinocytes. G, Trichilemmal keratinization (red) of central hair follcle (H & E stain). H, Basement
membrane zone(violet)(PAS stain).
I2 · Structure and Function of the Skin
FIGURE I-4. A, Histologic section
of canine footpad. Notc papillated sur-
face. B、 Ilistologic section of feline
footpacl. Note simootlh surface.
Structure and Function of the Skin · I3
FIGURE I-5. Histologice section of
the nasal planum. Note the thick epider.
mis, dense stratum corneum, and rcte
ridlges.
of the epidermis into the underlying dermis) are not found in the normal hair-bearing
skin of cats and dogs. Rete ridges, however, may be found in normal footpad and nasal
planum epidermis and in the lightly haired scroturm (see Fig. 1-6).
BASAL LAYER
The stratum basale is a single row of columnar to cuboidal cells resting on the basement
 membrane zone that separates the epidermis from the dernis (see Figs. 1-5, 1-7, and
1-10).65 163. iso Most of these cells are keratinocytes, which are constantly reproducing and
pushing upward to replenish the epidermal cells above. The daughter cells move into the
outer layers of the epidermis and are ultimately shed as dead horny cells. Mitotic figures
and apoptotic keratinocytes are occasionally seen, especially in areas of skin with thicker
and functional heterogenicity in basal keratinocytesi, some populations serve primarily to
anchor the epidermis, and others serve a proliferative and reparative (stcm cell) function.
of the hair folicle (site of attachment of the arrector pili muscle) are the presumed sites
Hemidesmosomes are junctional complexes distribnted along the inner aspect of basal
keratinocytes,whose major role is epidermal-derma adhesions, 1s0 The linkage of the
keratin intermediate filament (cytokeratin) network to the hemidesmosome and the basal
keratinocyte plasmna membrane involves several components, including the plaque proteins
bullous pemphigoid antigen I (BPAG I or BP 230) and plectin, the transmermbrane proteins
defects in the hemidesmosome-anchoring filament components are known to produce vari-
ous forms of epiderrnolysis bullosa, and autoabs to some of the components are involved in
thc pathogenesis of pemphigoid and bullous systemic lupus erythematosus 24a 12s
Integrins are a large family of cell surface adhesive receptors.o, is3 These cell surface
glycoproteins are important in cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions, and also act as signal
transducers through which extracellular and intracellular compartments can infuence and
modify cach other. Each integrin consists of a heterodimer of an α and a β subunit,
confined to the basal layer. The integrin subunits that are most abundant in the epidermis
are Q2, α3, β1, α and β4. Examples of keratinocyte integrin functions include: αsβ1, which
14 · Structure and Function of the Skin
FIGURE I-6. Iistologic section of
canine scrotal skin. Note muscle bundles
(arrou).
mediates keratinocyte adhesion to fibronectin; αzβ1, which mediates keratinocyte adihesion
to collagens type I and IV and laminin; aβ, which is a receptor for epiligrin and is
involved in adhesion to laminin; αβs, which mediates keratinocyte adhesion to vitronectin;
and αsβ4, which mediates keratinocyte adlhesion to laminin (see Table 1-2).10
MELANOCYTES AND MELANOGENESIS
Melanocytes, the second type of cell found in the hasal layer of the epidermis, are also
found in the outer root sheath and hair matrix of hair follicles, in the ducts of sebaceous
and sweat glands, and to a lesser extent in the superficial dermis." Traditionally, melano-
cytes are divided structurally and functionally into two compartments: epiderinal and
(H & E) and because they undergo artifactual cytoplasmic shrinkage during tissue pro-
 u a          s o  r 
and migrate into the epidermis in early fetal life. Although melanocytes are of nondescript
appearance, with special stains, they can be shown to have long cytoplasmic extensions
*See references 51, 65, 77, 111, 150, 172, 180, and 206.
Structure and Function of the Skin * I5
FIGURE I-7. A, Dendritic inelanocytes (arru) in the basal layer of the epidennis. B, Mclanocytes ("clear
cxells")(arrouhead) in the stratum basale.
I6 · Structure and Function of the Skin
FIGURE I-8. Pigmented epithelium from nasal planum. Note how melanin granules are often clusteredl in
"caps" dorsal to keratinocyte nuclei.
(dendrites) (see Fig. 1-7A) that weave ainong the keratinocytes. There is an intimate
relationship between melanocytes and keratinocytes in wlhich hoth cells interact and exist
 as epidernal symhionts in a functional and structural unit called the epidermal melanin
unit6115013Utrastructurally,elanocytes arecharactrizedbytpicalintracytoplac
(see Fig. 1-9). Most of the melanin pigment in skin is located in the basal layer of the
epidermis, but in dark-skinned animals, melanin may be found throughout the entire
and (I ) n u on pep sde, se prs uo e sanns
a photoprotective localization.
 Although the melanocyte accounts for only a small proportion of the epidermal cels,
it has a variety of important functions: (l) a cosmetic enfity, participating in protective
coloration and in sexual attraction; (2) a barier against ionizing radiafion, especially
important in protection against ultraviolet light (UVL); (3) a scavenger of cytotoxic radi-
cals and intermediates; and (4) a participant in developmental and infammatory proc-
esses6, l,150Althoughmelanin absorbs UVL over a broad spectrum, including UVA and
UVB, it is not a particularly efcient absorber of UVL. It probably photoprotects in other
ways, possibly as a quencher of free radicals generated in response to UVL.
Melanin pigments are chiefly responsible for the coloration of skin and hair. Skin
 pigmentation is considered to consist of two components. Constitutive pigmentation is the
pigmentation that is genetically determined in the absence of stimulatory infuences.
Facultative pigmentation is that which occurs with various stimuli (e.g., UVL, infamna-
tion, hormones).
Melanins embrace a wide range of pigments, including the brown-black eumelanins.
yellow or red-brown pheomelanins, and other pigments whose physicochermical natures
are intermediate between the two. Phcomelanins differ from eumelanins by contain-
ing a high proportion of sulfur. Despite the different properties of the various melanins,
Structure and Function of the Skin ·17
they all arise from a common metabolic pathway in which dopaquinome is the key inter-
mediate.57,65,67
 Melanogenesis takes place exclusively witlhin melanocytcs and on the specialized or-
conversion of tyrosine to dopa. Tyrosinase is the rate-limiting enzyne in the melanin
pathway. It is a copper-containing enzyme, is found exclusively in melanocytes, and is thus
a good specific marker for these cels. Tyrosinase is an unusual enzyme in that it has three
distinct catalytic activities. The most critical is its tyrosine hydroxylase activity, converting
tyrosine to dopa. However, it is also able to use dopa or' 5,6-dihyroxyindole (DHI) as
substrates for oxidase activities. Mutations in the tyrosine structural gene are responsible
for several types of albinisim.11
 Once dopa is formed, it can spontaneously autooxidize to dopaquinone without tyrosi-
nase (though at slower rates), and continue through the melanin pathway to dopachrome,
5,6-ihydroxyndole2-carboxylic acid (DHICA),DHI, and indole-56-quinone., 5 An-
Other melanocyte-specific enzyne is dopachrome tautormerasc, which converts dopachrorme
to DHICA lil'15o This conversion requires the presence of iron.
The determination to produce eumelanins or pheomelanins is under genetic con-
tr 5, 150f suhydry groups are available,pmelanins are produedIthasn
proposed that the "switching" of melanin synthesis is mainly controlled by the levels of
tyrosinase, with high levels producing eumelanins and low levels producing pheomela-
nins.111
Marnmalian pigmentation is regulated at many different developmental, cellular, and
the skin have characteristic basal levels of funetion that are particular to each individual,
they are highly responsive ccls that continually sainpie their environment and modulate
their lcvels of proliferation and melanogenesis. Classically, melanin production was
thought to be under the control of genetics and melanocyte-stinulating hormone (MSH)
from the pituitary gland565, 67.150,16 Themain pigmenting hormones from the pituitary
gland include α-MSH (α-melanocortin), adrenal cortical stimulating hormone (corticotro-
pin), and βlipotropic hormone (βlipotropin)l 150 These hormones are derived from a
larger precursor mnolecule, proopiomelanocortin. However, the role of these hypophyseal
origin hornones in physiologic and pathologic pigmentation in mammals is largely un-
kmown. At present, interest focuses on the theory that melanogenesis and melanocyte
 proliferation and differentiation are mostly regulated locally in paracrine and autocrine
fashion,
Mclanocytes express a number of cell surface receptors (e.g., intercellular adhesion
molecule 1 [ICAM-i]) that allow interaction with other cells in their environment, includ-
ing keratinocytes, Langerhans cel, fbroblasts, lymphocytes, and macrophagesll,150, 206
They express receptors for and respond to (modifying their proliferation, differentiation,
and melanogenesis) growth factor (e.g., β fibroblast growth factor) hormones, interferons,
interleukins, eicosanoids, retinoic acid, vitamin Ds, and a host of other cytokines. In fact,
melanocytes are able to produce some of these themselves, thus acting in an atocrine
manner. Melanocytes themselves secrete several cytokines (e.g., interleukin-8 [IL-8]) and
participate in infammatory and immunologic reactions. Many of the precursors and inter-
mediates of the melanin biosynthetic pathway are cytotoxic and could contribute to
celular injury and inamation.It can be appreciated that a highly complex interaction
exists between the cellular components of the epidermis, their respective immune cyto-
kines, and the inflammatory mediators released in response to injury.
α-MSHI is a neuroimmunomodulatory and anti-infammatory peptide that is synthe-
sized and released by keratinocytes, Langerhans' cells, fbroblasts, and endothelial cells, as
fied on these cells. α-MSH can, hence, modulate keratinocyte proliferation and differenti-
ation, and endothelial cell and fbroblast cytokine and collagenase production. It also
downregulates the production of proinflainmatory cytokines and accessory molecules on
antigen-presenting cells (monocytes and macrophages). α-MSH is an antagonist of IL-1.
an important cytokine in the cutaneous immune response. Thus, α-MsH is part of a
I8 · Structure and Function of the Skin
 mediator network that modulates cutancous infammation and hyperproliferative skin dis-
 eases. This may he far more important than any effect it has on skin pigmentation.
Melanogenesis takes place in membrane-bound organelles called melanosomes,1, 65.196
designated stages I through IV according to maturation (Fig. 1-9). It is often stated that
the ultrastructiral hallmark of the melanocyte is the melanosome. However, it is rnore
melanosomes inay be found in keratinocytes and other phagocytic cells.u Melanosomes
FIGURE I-9. Melanocyte. N, nucleus of melanocyte; artows, inelanosomes; C, collagen in the
dennis:asterisk,basal lamina (X10000). 1nsets: Mclanosomes in different stages of development:
SeharaburgLever G: Histopathology of te Skn, 7th ed JB. Lippinctt Co, Philadelphia, 1990,
p861.)
Structure and Function of the Skin · I9
 originate from the Golgi apparatus, where the tyrosinase enzyme is formed. Stage I
melanosomes contain no melanin and are electron lucent. As melanin is progressively laid
down on protein matrices, inelanosomes become increasingly electron dense. At the same
time, they migrate to the periphery of the dendrites, where transfer of melanin to
adjacent epiderinal cells takes place. Transfer involves the endocytosis of the dendrite tips
of the incorporated Stage IV' melanosomes by the adjacent keratinocytes. Melanocytes
eject melanosomes into keratinocytes by a unique biologic transfer process called cytocri-
nia.6s Dermal melanocytes are often referred to as continent melanocytes, because they do
not transfer melanosomes as do the epidermal or secretory melanocytes. Skin color is
dotermined mainly by the number, sizc, type, and distribution of melanosomes.
At present, therc are no histochemical stains that can be performed on routinely
processed skin biopsy specimens that exclusively stain melanin.i Argentaffn stains rely
on the ability of melanin to reduce silver from a silver solution (e.g., silver nitrate).
Examples of argentaffin stains include Fontana-Masson and Gomori's methenamine silver.
s  d e p se asu rs oe s as
are similar to argentaffin stains, but use an external silver reducer to produce elemental
silver. An example of an argyroplil stain is Grimelius’ stain. Argyrophil stains also stain
nerves, reticulum, and elastic fibers.
MERKEL'S CELLS
Merkel's cells are dendritic epidermal clear cells confined to the basal ccll layer, or just
below, and occur predominently in tylotrich pads and hair folicle epithelium.* These
specialized cells (slow-adapting nechanoreceptors) contain a large cytoplasmic vacuole that
displaces the cell nucleus dorsally, and their long axis is usually parallel to the skin surfacc
(Fig. 1- 10). They possess desmosomes and characteristic dense-core cytoplasmic granules
and paranuclear whorls on electron microscopic examination (Fig. 1-ii). Merkel's cells
also contain cytokeratin, neuroflaments, and neuron-specific enolase, suggesting a dual
epithelial and neural differentiation. Current evidence suggests that Merkel's cells are
functions, such as infuencing cutaneous blood fow and sweat production (via the release
 of vasoactive intestinal peptide), coordinating keratinocyte proliferation, and maintaining
and stimulating the stem cell population of the hair folicle (hence controling the hair
cycle).65.206
SPINOUS LAYER
The stratum spinosum (prickle cell layer) is composed of the daughter cells of the stratum
basale.65, 170, 172, 1s8, 202 In haircd skin, this layer is one or two cells thick. The stratum
spinosum becomes much thicker at the footpads, nasal planum, and mucocutaneous
philic to eosinophilic, nucleated, and polyhedral to fattened cuboidal in shape. The
(prickles), which are more proininent in nonhaired skin (Fig. 1 -12).
structires: desmosomes, hcmidesmosomes, adherens junctions, and focal adhesions (Table
1-1).i1o. 193 Hemidesmosomes and focal adhesions arc located on the basal surface of basal
cells and mediate adhesion to the underlying extracellular matrix, whercas desrmosomes
and adherens junctions mediate adhesion between keratinocytes in all epidermal layers.
Gap junctions serve primarily as intercellular routes of chernical comnunication.l10
Because of the research efforts directed at defining the pathomechanism of pemphi-
 gus, much has been leamed concerning the structure and chemical composition of epider-
mal desmosormes.65. 10 Desinosomes are presently kmown to consist of keratin intermediate
*See references 65, 69, 77, 110, 169, 170, 172, 173, 180, and 206.
 20 · Structure and Function of the Skin
FIGURE I-I0. Merkel's cells (arrow)
in a tylotrich pad.
flaments and their attachment plaques, the keratinocyte plasma membrane, and the
 desrmosomal core (desimoglea), which is interposed between two adjacent keratinocyte
plasina membranes. Numerous desmosomal plaque proteins (desmoplakins I and II, plak-
oglobin, plakophilin) and desmosomal core glycoproteins (desmogleins I, I, III and' des-
mocollins I, 11, 111) have been characterized. The immunohistochemical staining pattern
seen with human pemphigus foliaceus antibody is identical to that seen with an antibody
dlirected at desmoglein I (desmosomal core glycoprotein).
Proteins of the plakoglobin (plakoglobin, β-catenin), vinculin (vinculin, α-catenin), and
ezrin (talin, radixin) farmilies are found at desmosomal and adherens junction attach-
ments.io
The keratinocyte cytoskeleton consists of three types of cytoplasimic filaments: cytoker-
atin, actin, and rmicrotubules (tubulin).1o These flaments function in the orientation,
polarization, organelle sorting, motility, shape change, signal transduetion, and structural
resilience of keratinocytes.
Ultrastructurally, keratinocytes are characterized by keratin intermediate filaments
(cytokeratin, tonofiaments) and desmosomes (Fig. 1 -13),51. 65. 110 Calcium and calmodulin
are crucial for desmosome and hemidesmosome formation. At least three keratinocyte-
tration-dependent) of calcium-calmodulin interactions: caldesmon, desmocalmin, and spec-
trin.os Immunohistochemically, keratinocytes are characterized by the presence of
e      d  e sa a  s
subfarmily (Type I keratins, cytokeratins 9-20) and one chain from the neutral-basic sub-
Structure and Function of the Skin· 2l
FIGURE I-I I. Merkel's cell. N, nucleus of a Merkel's cell; asterisk indicates basal lamina; M,
imitochondria; arrows indicate specifc granules of the Merkel's cell; D with pointer, desinosoine
between the Merkel cell and a keratinocyte (K); C, collagen with cross-striation (X20,000). Inset:
specific membrane-bound granules at higher magnification (X 75.000). (From Lever WT, Schaum-
burg-Lever C: Histopathology of the Skin, 7th ed. J.B. Lippincott Co, Philadelphia, 1990, p, 863.)
22 · Structure and Function of the Skin
FIGURE I-I2. Prickle cells from footpad showing intercellular bridges (high
power).
   d   a     
epithelia and in the same epithelia at various stages of differentiation or proliferation.
nurmber of workers have published electrophoretic patterns of proteins isolated from the
keratins of a variety of animals and, on the basis of observed differences in banding
patterns, have suggested that the technique might be useful as an aid to taxonomy, animal
classification, and identification.65 The keratinocytes of the stratun spinosuin synthesize
lainellar granules (keratinosomes, membrane-coating granules, Odlund bodies), which are
important in the barrier function of the epidermis (see Epidermopoiesis and Keratogene-
sis in this chapter).65.110
Keratinocytes are phagocytic (erythrocytes, mclanin, melanosomes, ceilular fragments,
latex beads, inorganic substances).24
LANGERHANS' CELLS
Langerhans' cells are mononuclcar, dendritic, antigen-presenting cells located basally or
suprabasally (Fig. 1-14)65 123. 124, 126. 136. 206 They are epidermal clear cells that, like
*See references 24a, 56, 85, 110, 148, 185, and 190-193.
● Table 1--1
 CoMpONEnTS Of ADHESIOn STRUCTures
ADHESION
TRANSMEMBRANE
FUNCTION AND
STRUCTURE
PROTEINS
 PLAQUE PROTEINS
FILAMENTS
LOCATION
Hemidesmosome
06β4 integrin BPAGII
Plcctin, BPAG1
Cytokeratin
Cell-substratc adhesion;
(collagenu Type
 basal cells and basal
XVI1)
membrane
Focal adhesion
β integrins (α2β
Talin, vinculin, α-ac-
Actin
Cell-substrate, basal
α3β，α5β!
tinin. paxillin, zykin
cells
Desinosome
Desinosoinal cadherins
Plakoglobin; desmu-
Cytokeratin
Cell-cell adhesion; all
Dsg I, 11, IHI
plakin I, II, IV;
keratinocytes
Dsc I, 11. 1I1
dlesmocalmin; plak-
 ophilin
Adherens junction
Classic cadhcrins
Plakoglobin,α- and β
Actin
Cell-cell adlhcsion; all
(E- and P-cadherins)
catenin, α-aetin,
keratinocytes (p-cad-
vinculin
herin in basal cells
only)
BPAG. bullous pemphigoid antigen; Dsg = desmoglein: IDse = desmowollin.
Structure and Function of thc Skin · 23
FIGURE I-I3. Squarnous cell. N, mncleus; NU, mucleolus; T, tonofilaments; D, desmosome; M,
rnitochondria (×12,500). Inset: Desmosomes at higher magnification (X100,000). A desmosome con-
necting wo adjoining keratinocytes consists of nine lines: five electron-dense lines and four electron-
single electron-dense linein the center of the desmosome (smallusterisk) is thc intercelular contact
layer. The two electron-dense lines between thc interccllular contact layer and the two attachument
plaques represent the cell surface coat together withi the outer leaflet of the trilaminar plasma
inembranc of each keratinocyte (arrows). The tvo inner electron-lucid lines adjacent to the interclu-
lar contact layer represent intercellular cement. The two ruter clectron-lncid lines are the central
of the Skin, 7th exd. J. B. Lippincott Co, Philadelphia, 1990, p. 858.)
24 · Structurc and Function of the Skin
FIGURE I- I4. Epidermal Langerhans' cell. They appear as suprabasilar epidermal “clcar clls" (arrow) in
this hiopsy frorn au atopic dog.
Merkel's cells, do not stain for melanin with dopa. The histochemical and immunopheno-
ing cats and humans--have characteristic intracytoplasmic organelles (Birbeck's or Lan-
gerhans granules), which are observed by means of electron microscopy (Fig, 1-15).65. 126
However, the Langerhans' cells studied in dogs have inconsistently contained these gran-
tennis racketlikein appearanceThey form byinvagination of the plasmamembrane and
Or
bound antigen, thus providing the morphologic description of the mechanism by which
the surface.1 Langerhans' cells are aureophilic (ie., they stain with gold chloride). Unlike
Langherhans' cells in humans, those in dogs and cats are S-100 protein and ATPase
negative. They have Fc fragiment (Fe)-IgG and cormplement 3 (C3) receptors, high affinity
receptors for IgE, and they synthesize and express antigens associated with the immune
response gene. In the dog, Langerhans' cells are CDla,b,c, CDlla,c, CD18, CD45.
ICAM-1, MHC class I, and vimentin positive.1, 124, 136 They are CD4 and CD90 (Thy-1)
negative, which distinguishes them from dermal dendrocytes. In the cat, Langerhans' cells
are CDia, CD4, CDi8, and MHC class II positive.126 'These cells are of bone marrow
origin, of monocyte-histiocyte lineage, and serve antigen-processing and alloantigen-stimu-
lating funetions. Following ultraviolet light exposure, epidernal Langerhans' cells are
decreased in density and altered inorphologically, resulting in an immunosuppressive
known to depress Langerhans' cell mumbers andl fuinetion as well as other cutaneous and
systemic irnmune responses.6 The areas of photoimmunology and photocarcinogenesis are
rcceiving much attention, especially because they are relevant to the pathogenesis of skin
 jo r a    sn p s s u sns grn
cells per unit of skin varies from one area of skin to another in thc samc individual,
Structure and Function of the Skin · 25
FlGURE I- I5. Electron ricrograph of an epidermal Langerhauns' cell. (From Elder D,
et al: Lever's Histopathology of the Skin, 8th ed. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia, 1998, p
1021.)
cmphasizing the necd to usc adjacent norinal skin as a control whcn counting Langerhans'
cells in skin lesions.65,123, 125, 126 
THE SKIN AS AN IMMUNOLOGIC ORGAN
The epidermis functions as the most peripheral outpost of the immune system (see Chap.
 8). Langerhans' cells, keratinoeytes, epidermotropie T lymphocytes, and draining periph-
26 · Structure and Function of the Skin
FIGURE I-I6. Ilomy layer (1),
granular layer (2), and prickle cell layer
(3) from the nasal planun (high power).
eral lymph nodes are thought to form collectively an integrated systerm of skin-associated
presentation of antigen; they also induce cytotoxic T lymphocytes directed to allogeneic
and modified self-determinants, produce IL-1 and other cytokines, contain nurnerous
enzymes, and are phagocytic.65,110. 196
The keratinocyte also plays an active rolc in epidlermal immunity 65. 10. 1o6 Keratino-
cytes (1) produce IL-1, (2) produce various cytokines (e.g., IL-3, prostaglandins, leukotri-
immune response gene in a variety of lymphocyte-mediated skin diseases (presumably as a
result of interferon-y secretion by activated lymphocytes).8s.10 19
Gamma and delta T lymphocytes are rare in nornal caninc skin but common in
various immune-mediated and inflammatory dermatoses.29
GRANULAR LAYER
The stratum granulosum is variably present in haired skin; it ranges from one to two cells
thick inareashereitccurs.70.12s22Innonhairedskinorat theinfudibuu
hair follicles, the stratum granulosum may be four to eight ceils thick (Fig. 1-16). Cells in
this layer are fattenod and basophilic, and they contain shrunken nuclei and large, deeply
basophilic keratohyalin granules in their cytoplasm (see Fig. 1-3E). Keratohyalin granules
tural protein proflaggrin, which is the precursor of filaggrin and is synthesized in the
straturm granulosum. The function of keratohyalin granules is incormpletely understood, but
it is thought to be concerned with keratinization and barrier function. The sulfur-rich
o a  rod n se pi q s s ur jo 
cell envelopc. Filaggrin has at least two functions. First, it aggregates, packs, and aligns
keratin filaments and produces the matrix between the keratin filaments in the corneo-
cytes. Second, it is a source of free amino acids, which are important for the normal
hydration of the stratum corneum.
Loricrin is synthesized in the stratun granulosum in association with keratohyalin
 granules and is involved in the binding of keratin filaments together in the cormeocyte and
Structure and Function of the Skin · 27
FIGURE I-I7. Stratum lucicdum (ar
row) in footpad epithelium.
 in anchoring them to the cross-linked envelope.l5o Another ultrastructural feature that
characterizes granular cells are clustered lamellar granules at the rnargins of the ceils.
 In rodents, two morphologic forms of keratohyalin granules occur. o The P-F granule
 is irregularly shaped and contains proflaggrin, whereas the L-granule is smaller, rounded.
and contains loricrin.
CLEAR LAYER
oz ist s oe's peap jo iae u indu pazuax Ay e si umpn uns a
This layer is anuclear, homogeneous, and hyaline like, and it contains refractile droplets
and a semifuid substance called eleidin (Fig. 1-17). It differs histochemically from the
stratum corneum by being rich in protein-bound lipids. Thc stratum lncidun is hest
developed in the footpads; it is less developedl in the nasal planum and is ahsent from all
other areas of normal skin. The stratum luciduin has also been called the straturn
conjunctun.
HORNY LAYER
The stratum corneum is the outer layer of terminally differentiated keratinocytes that is
constantly being shed.107. 170. 172. 1ss. 202 It is a multilayered zone of corne0cytes suspended
in an extracellular lipid matrix, often likened to a series of bricks (cormeocytes) bonded by
mortar (lipids),o This layer, which consists of Hattened, anuclear eosinophilic cells (cor-
28 · Structure and Function of the Skin
neocytes), is thicker in lightly haired or glabrous skin (see Figs. 1-4, 1-5, 1-7B, and 1 -
16). Its gradual desquamation is normally balanced by proliferation of the basal cells,
which maintains a constant epidermal thickness. Corneocytes contain a variety of humec-
tants and natural sunscreens that are synthesized frorm proteins.150
 The terminally differentiated corneocyte has a highly specialized structure in the cell
beneath the plasma membranc of stratified epidermal cells, cells of the inner root sheath
and medulla of the hair folliclc, and the cuticle of the claw. The corneocyte has no true
cell mermbrane because it contains no phospholipids. Cell envelope formation is associated
with the increased activity of calcium-dependent epidermal or hair follicle transglutami-
nases that catalyze the cross-linking of soluble and particulate protein precursors into
synthesized in the stratum spinosum include involucrin, keratolinin, pancormulin, comifin,
and loricrin.65. 103. 107. 10. 150. 1ns The impermeable cormifed envelope provides structural
support to the cell and resists invasion by microorganisms and deleterious environmental
p s  p  oe s n s  n
 In routinely processed sections, the stratum corneum varies in thickness from 3 to 35
μm in cats and from 5 to 1500 μm in dogs. However, clipping and histologic preparation
involving fixation, dehydration, and paraffin embedding resuit in the loss of about one half
of the stratum corneum. The stratum corneum of canine truncal skin, when measured in
cryostat sections, was found to have a mean thickness of 47 cell layers that measured 13.3
and processing.5l, 116, 127
Transglutaminases are a superfamily of enzymes that are important in apoptosis,
keratinization, and hair folicle formation.7α Two members of the superfamily--keratino-
cyte transglutaminase and epidermal transglutaminase —mediate the sequential cross-link-
ing of the cormified cell envelope precursor proteins, such as involucrin, cytostan A, elafin,
and loricrin. Transglutaminases are chiefy expressed in the stratum granulosum and upper
transglutaminase expression is one cause of ichthyosis in humans.78
 Topographic studies have shown that the epidermal surface varies from gently undu-
lating on the densely haired skin of the back to heavily folded on the skin of the
abdomen.6, 170 The hairs arise from the follicle infundibula, which are seen as pits in the
skin. At their bases, the hairs tend to be joincd by amorphous matcrial that can also be
seen around the squames adhering to hairs. The surface of the stratum corneum is
film that tends to conceal the structure of the squames and their intercelular junctions.
Globular masses that are partially concealed by this film can be seen. On closer examina-
tion, the surface can be seen to be composed of hexagonal cells and an amorphous 
substance that appears to be oozing to the surface of the margins of the cells. The bases
of the hair follicle infundibula are sealed by an amorphous substance (sebaceous and
cutaneous lipids) and squames. No evidence was found to suggest that scbum fows from
the hair pore to the interfollicular region, which suggested that rubbing and grooming
were important in spreading this emulsion over the skin. Hair growth may be important inl
"pushing" the sebum out of the pilar canal. Recent microautoradiographic studies of the
disposition of topical fipronil in dogs have shown that sebum does, indced, inove over the
epidermal surface.3 It has been suggested that the thinner, more compact canine stratum
corneum with less intercellular lipid material—compared with other species— may par-
species.
Lipids play an important role in the differentiation, structure, and function of the
tion, beginning with large amounts of phospholipids and ending with predominantly
ceramides, cholesterol, and fatty acids. Epidermal surface lipids originate from maturing
corneocytes, which contain about six times the amount of intracellular lipid as keratino-
 cytes in the stratum basale. Ski surface lipids of cats and dogs were studied by thin-layer
Structurc and Function of the Skin · 29
chromatography and fomnd to contain more sterol esters, free cholesterol, cholesterol
esters, and diester waxes but fewer triglycerides, monoglycerides, free fatty acids, mones-
cats and dogs are inainly of epidermal origin, whereas those of humans are mainly of
sebaceous gland origin. Skin surface lipids can be studied qualitatively by various extrac-
tion techniques (e.g., sebutape) or quantitatively using the lipometer or sebumcter.*
The stratum comeum contains antigenic or superantigenic material normally seques-
tered from the immune system that induces T lymphocyte activation when released
following wounding and in disease.71 This T lynphocyte activation and resultant inflamma-
tory response may play a role in a range of skin pathologies.
EPIDERMOPOIESIS AND KERATOGENESIS
Normal epidermal homeostasis requires a finely tuned balance between growth and differ-
entiation of keratinocytes. This balance must be greatly shifted in the direction of prolifer-
ation in response to injury and then must return to a state of homeostasis with healing. In
addition, epidermal keratinocytes have important functions as regulators of cutaneous
immunity and inflammation.
The most important product of the epidermis is keratin (from the Greek keratos,
meaning "horn"), a highly stable, disulfide bond-containing fibrous protein. This sub-
stance is the major barrier between animal and environment, the so-called miracle wrap of
the body. Prekeratin, the fibrous protein synthesized in the keratinocytes of the stratum
basale and stratum spinosum, appears to be the precursor of the fully differentiated
(skin) and hard keratins (hair, claw) and α-keratins (skin, hair) and β-keratins (scale,
feather).150
 The epidermis is ectodermal in origin and normally undergoes an orderly pattern of
proliferation, differentiation, and keratinization.6 The factors controlling this orderly epi-
dermal patterm are incompletely understood, but the protein kinase C/phospholipase C
important in coupling extracellular signals to essential biological processes such as the
immune response, infammation, differentiation, and proliferation.s Among the intrinsic
factors known to play a modulating role in these processes are the dermis, EGF, fibroblast
growth factors, insulin-ike growth factors, colony-stimulating factors, platelet-derived
growth factor, TGFs, neuropeptides, interleukins, fumor necrosis factor, epidermal cha
lone, epibolin, interferons, acid hydrolases, arachidonic acid metabolites, proteolytic en-
Zymes (endopeptidases and exopeptidases or peptidases), and various horrnones (particu-
of hormones and enzymes that can induce, increase, or both induce and increasc the
activity of the enzyne ornithine decarboxylase.5 This enzyme is essential for the biosym-
thesis of polyamines (putrescine, spermidinc, and sperrnine), which encourage epidermal
proliferation. Numerous nutritional factors are also known to be important for normal
There are four distinct cellular events in the process of cornification65: (1) keratiniza-
tion (synthiesis of the principal fibrous proteins of the keratinocyte); (2) keratohyalin
synthesis (including the histidine-rich protein flaggrin); (3) the formation of the highly
cross-linked, insoluble stratum corneum cornified cell envelope (including the structural
protein involucrin); and (4) the generation of neutral, lipid-enriched intercellular domains,
resulting from the secretion of distinctive lamellar granules. The lanellar granules are
synthesized primarily within the keratinocytes of the stratum spinosum and are then
displaced to the apex and periphery of the cell as it reaches the stratum granulosum (Fig.
1-18). They fuse with the plasma membrane and secrete their contents (phospholipid,
*See 1eferences 37, 65, 114, 139, 140, 142, 183, and 205.
30 · Structure and Function of the Skin
FIGURE I-I8. Lamellar granules. (From Goldsmith LA. ed: Physiology, Biochemuistry, and Molecular Biology of the
Skin, 2nd ed. Oxford University Press, New York, 1991. Courtesy of K. Holbrook.)
ceramides, free fatty acids, hydrolytic enzymes, and sterols). Intercellular lipids then
undergo substantial alterations and assume an integral role in the regulation of stratum
corneum barrier function and desquamation.
Epidermal lipids directly or indirectly infuence the proliferative and biochemical
events in normal and diseased skin and mediate interactions between the “dead"” stratum
lipid composition and structure occur as cells migrate through the epiderrmis. Ceramides
are the most important lipid component for lamellar aramgement in the stratum corneum
   n  a s a p  q  p
porated into the ceramides. Arachidonic acid is bound to the phospholipid in cell mem-
branes and is the important precursor of eicosanoids. The cicosanoids are vital for epider-
mal homeostasis and the pathogenesis of inflammatory dermatoses, Lipids are important in
barrier function, stratum corneum water-holding, cohesion and desquamation of cormeo-
cytes, and control of epidermal proliferation and differentiation.
 The main changes in epidermal lipid composition are the replacement of phospholip-
ids by ceramides, an increase in frec sterols, and a large increase in free fatty acids at thc
 outer epidermal layers with a much more stable, waxy, impermeable lipid barrier. Cera-
Structure and Function of the Skin · 31
 mides play a crucial role in plasticizing the horny layer to allow stretching and bending by
fuidizing the barrier lipids.
The clinical importance of epidermal lipids in disorders of keratinization is illustrated
by the following examples: (l) the scaling and poor barrier function due to abnormal
lamellar granules, defective ceramides, and deranged eicosanoid production associated
with esscntial fatty acid deficiency; (2) the scaling and poor barrier function due to the
loss of ceramides, cholesterol, faty acids, waxes, and sterols associated with exposure to
solvents and detergents; (3) the poor desquamation due to the steroid sulfatase defect and
resultant increased accumulation of cholesterol sulfate associated with recessive X-linked
ichthyosis of humans; (4) the scaling and abnormal lipid packing due to a defect in
phytanic acid oxidase production in Refsum disease humans; (5) the hyperkeratosis and
defective lamellar granules in Harlequin ichthyosis of humans; and (6) the scaling and
 poor barrier function due to the inhibition of epidermal cholesterol synthesis seen with
Tritiated thymidine labeling techniques have shown that the turnover (cell renewal)
time for the viable epiderimis (stratum basale to stratum granulosum) of dogs is approxi-
mately 22 days.13 Clipping the hair shortened the epidermal turnover time to approxi
mately 15 days.14 Surgically induced wounds in the skin of normal dogs greatly increased
epidermal mitotic activity.22 Epidermal turnover time in seborrheic Cocker spaniels and
Irish setters was approximately 7 days.15
The growth characteristics, differentiation, cell surface markers, and morphology of
antigens, and deposit faminin and Type IV collagen,2lo The use of cultured canine kerati-
nocytes should provide a useful model for in vitro studies of epidermal kinetics, the
 pathogenesis of various dermatologic diseases, and the cutaneous effects of various phar-
macologic agents.
CUTANEOUS ECOLOGY
The skin forms a protective barrier without which life would be impossible. This defense
has three components: physical, chemical, and microbial.65 Hair forms the first physical
line of defense to prevent contact of pathogens with the skin and to minimize external
physical or chemical insult to the skin. Hair may also harbor microorganisms.
The stratum cormeum forms the basic physical defense barrier. Its thick, tightly
packed keratinized cells are permeated by an emulsion of sebum, sweat, and epidermal
  s o    eo s     i  s
physical barrier. In addition to its physical properties, the emulsion provides a chemical
barrier to potential pathogens. Water-soluble substances in the emulsion include inorganic
salts and proteins that inhibit microorganisms. Sodium chloride and the antiviral glycopro-
tein interferon, albumin, transferrin, complement, glucocorticoid, and immunoglobulins
tion, and sebum is constantly being decomposed by resident fora into free fatty acids,
some of which kill bacteria and fungi.35 In the normai skin of dogs, (1) IgG and IgM are
(2) IgM is found at the basement membrane zone of the epidermis (Fig. 1-i9), hair
follicles, and sebaceous glands; (3) IgA is found in the epitrichial sweat glands (suggesting
that it functions as a cutaneous secretory immunoglobulin); and (4) C3 is found in the
detected at the basement membrane zone of the nasal planum.9s The polymeric immuno-
globulin receptor, secretory component, is expressed and synthesized by keratinocytes and
the secretory and ductal epithelium of sweat glands.so This receptor can interact with IgA
and IgM; this interaction may be a mechanism for protecting the skin from microbial
agents and foreign antigens.
 A relationship exists between the acidity of the skin surface ("acid mantle" of the skin
 surface) and its antimicrobial activity.35 The buffer capacity of the skin surface against
32 · Structure and Function of the Skin
FIGURE I-I9. IgM at the
basement membrane zone of nor-
mal canine nasal plamum.
external and internal acidifying and alkalinizing effects depends on several buffering
systems, ineluding lactic acid in sweat, amrnonia in sweat, and amino acids. In general.,
inflammation causes the skin surface pll to switch from acid or neutral to alkaline. Skin
surface pH is typically measured by a glass electrode technique (plH meter).35
The single factor with the greatest influence on the fora is the degree of hydration of
the stratun corneum.31, v3. 65 Increasing the quantity of water at the skin surface (increased
ambient temperature, increased relative humidity, or occlusion) enormously increases the
nunber of nicroorganisms. In general, the moist or grcasy areas of the skin support the
water content appears to be important in the regulation of epidermal growth, keratiniza-
tion, and permeability.31 Studies of skin hydration are typically conducted with an evapori-
meter and a corncometer.52
 The equilibrium between keratin and water is essential for keratinized tissues to fulfll
their role correctly.*2 The stratum cormeium can increase its thickmess by over 100% by
taking up water. By comparison hairs can only inerease their thickness by about 15%. This
difference may be explained by the rclatively low concentration of cystine in stratum
 corneum compared with that of hairs,52 Transepidermal water loss (TEWL) represents the
water vapor evaporating from the skin surface, and refects the integrity of the stratum
cormeun.21. 52 A characteristic of healthy skin is that the relationship between TEWL and
hydration (water-holding capacity) remains directly proportional. In pathologic skin, the
correlation between TEWL and stratum corneum water content shows an inverse relation-
ship due to danaged skin barrier function or alterations in keratinization (increased
TEWL, decreased hydration).
 In dogs, haseline skin hydration was different at different sites and lower in dry skin
than in normal skin.32 In normal Newfoundlands, the relative humidity of the coat was
about 50% on the rump, chest wall, and lateral thigh, and about 70% beneath thc tail and
on the ventral neck.? No differences in relative huumidity were scen with different coat
 colors or between males and females, but relative humidity heneath the tail and on the
ventral neck did increase with age.3 In dogs subjected to artificial heat or bright sunshine,
mean skin temperature incrcased from about 35°C to about 39°C, and the water content
of the coat almost doubled.34
The normal skin microfora also contributes to skin defense, Bacteria and, occasion-
all, ycasts and flamentous fungi are located at the skin surface, in the superficial layers of
Shucture and Function of the Slin · 33
the epidermis (especially in the intercellular spaces of the stratum corneum), and in the
infundibulum of hair follicles.143. 164 The normal Hora is a mixture of bacteria that live in
symbiosis. The fora may change with diffcrent cutaneous environments, which include
      i    d   s
relationship between the host and the microorganisms enables bacteria to occupy micro-
bial niches and inhibit colonization by invading organisms. Interactions between cutaneous
inicrobes may be classified as followsi43.
tions by one organism that arc unfavorable for another. Proposed mcchanisms
include consumption of nutrients, gcneration of unfavorable redox potential or pH,
Occupation of tissue receptors, or production of inhibitors (enzymes, antibiotics, or
bacteriocins).
 2. Reciprocal cnhancement ("synergism"). Nutrients, such as anino acids, made avail-
able by the actions of one organism may allow “cross-feeding" by others. A possible
exanple of this phenomenon is the frequent finding of incrcased populations of
both Staphylococcus intermedius and Malassezia pachydermatis in lesional skin.
3. Neutral association.
The keratinocyte synthesizes various antimicrobial peptides (e.g., cathelicidins and β-
defensins), which form a barrier for innate host protection against microbial pathogens
(bacteria, fungi, viruses, protozoa),59 These peptides also appear to function in regulating
cell proliferation, extracelluar matrix production, and cellular immune responses.
Some organisms arc believed to live and multiply on the skin, forming a permanent
population; these organisms arc known as residents, and they may he reduced in number
but not eliminated by degerming nethods.65. 143. 164 The resident skin fora is not spread
out evenly over the surface but is aggregated im mierocolonies of various sizes. Other
microorganisms, called transients, are merely contaminants acquired from the environment
and can be removed by simple hygienic measures. A third class of organisms, whose
behavior falls between that of residents and transients, has been caled the nomads.143. 164
 These organisms are able to colonize and reproduce for short periods of time and can
take advantage of changes in the microenvironment of the skin surface. Thus, they
frequently become cstablished and proliferate on the skin surface and deeper.
Most studies of the normal microbial fora of the skin of cats and dogs have been
strictly qualitative. The skin is an exceedingly effective environmental sampler, providing a
 n   sso j sos le o s am   
tive studies allow the researcher to makc a reliable distinction between resident and
transient bacteria. It is still controversial as to which microorganisms are truly residents on
canine and feline skin, because most studies have been short term and have failed to
describe the dynamice situation.164
 In cats, most studies indicate that Micrococcus spp, coagulase-negative staphylococci,
α-hemolytic streptococci, and Acinetobacter spp. are normal residents of the skin (see.
s s    su jo s   
lans was isolated most frequently and is prohably a normal resident. S. capitis, S. epider-
midis, S. haemolyticus, S. hominis, S. sciuri, and S. warneri were isolated primarily from
household cats as opposed to cattery cats, suggesting that cats acquire thcse spccies of
staphylococci through human contact. Of the coagulase-positive staphylococci, S. aureus
cats. Cats may be asymptomatic carriers of the dermatophyte Microsporum canis as well
(see Chap. 5).172
 In dogs, most studies indicate that Micrococcus spp, coagulase-negative staphylococci,
Chap. 4),iso Coagulase-negative and coagulase-positive staphylococci (especially S. epider-
midis, S. xylosus, and S. interrmedius) are rcgularly isolated from the skin and haircoat of
normal dogs, and there are no significant quantitative or qualitative differences in the
staphylococci of skin and hair or between species of staphylococci and body site.l64. 1∞ The
34 · Structure and Function of the Skin
anal, nasal, and oral mucocutaneous regions are also important sites of S. intermedius
 carriage.164, 1s0 In fact, it has been suggested that, perhaps, S. intermedius is a resident of
acnes can also be found on the skin surface and in the hair follicles of dogs in suffcient
numbers to be considered part of the normal canine fora.l64 In addition, it is well known
that many saprophytic fungi—including M. pachydermatis, Altermaria spp., Aspergillus
cats (see Chap. 5).160
 Recent studies in normal dogs revealed the following: (l) the highest population sites
the skin surface and in hair folicles, and could be considered to be residents; and (3)
grarm-negative aerobes were present on the skin surface, in hair follicles, and at higher
counts on proximal hair shafts, indicating that they could be residents,164 Interestingly, S.
intermedius was present in higher numbers on distal versus proximal hair shafts, but the
organism was also present in higher numbers in the hair follicle versus the skin surface.164
This suggests the possibility of two populations of S. intermedius.
EPIDERMAL HISTOCHEMISTRY
Histochemical studies of normal cat and dog epidermis have demonstrated distinct oxida-
 ur  or rat zs'o s a pdaa si  u  a 
strong reactions to nonspecific esterases were demonstrated, especially in the stratum
 granulosum. Oxidative enzymes that were deinonstrated included cytochrome oxidasc,
drogenase, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide phos-
phate, nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide, and monoamine oxidase. Hydrolytice enzymes
that were demonstrated included acid phosphatase, arylsulfatase, β-glucuronidase, and
leucine aminopeptidase. Positive reactions for cholinesterases were not observed. Thus,
the enzyme pattern of normal cat and dog epidermis shows only limited similarities to that
of humans, especially regarding esterase distribution.
BASEMENT MEMBRANE ZONE
Basement membrane zones are dynamic structures that undergo constant remodeling
and are the physicochemical interface between the epidermis and other skin structures
(appendages, neural, vascular, smooth muscle) and the underlying or adjacent connective
tissue (dermis).56. 65 150. 1s3 196 This zone is important in (1) anchoring the epidermis to
the dermis, (2) maintaining a functional and proliferative epidermis, (3) maintaining
tissue architecture, (4) wound healing, (5) functioning as a barrier, and (6) regulating
nutritional transport between epithelium and connective tissue. Basement membranes
zation, migration, and differentiation. The baserment membrane zone is often poorly
differentiated in H & E preparations, but it stains nicely with periodic acid-Schiff stain
 pe us  jo sae pauu u sd is si i eoz s si ot'(H 1 y oas)
comprises only the fbrous zone of the sublamina densa area and is about 20 times thicker
than the actual basal lamina.
Ultrastructurally, the basement membrane zone can be divided into thc following
four components, proceeding from epidermis to dermis (Fig. 1-20): (1) the basal cell
plasma membrane, (2) the lamina lucida (lamina rara), (3) the lamina densa (basal lamina),
and (4) the sublamina densa area (lamina fibroreticularis), which includes the anchoring
fbrils and the dermal microfbril bundles. The first three components appear to be
variety of glycoproteins and other macromolecules. Presently recognized basement mem-
brane zone components, their localization, and their presumed functions are listed in
Structure and Function of the Skin · 35
FIGURE I-20. Epidermal-der-
mal junction. H, hemidesimosome;
LL, lamina lucida. Anchoring fbrils
(AF) form a meshwork beneath the
lamina densa. A dlermal macrofibril
bundle (DMB) extends from the
basal lainina (BL) into the derinis
(X49,700). Inset: Sub-basal lamina
fibrous components of the epider-
mal-dermal junction. Anchoring fi-
brils (arrowj with a central, asym-
metric, cross-banded section. AF,
interlocking meshwork of anchor-
ing filbrils (×86,000). (From Brig-
dermal-dermal junetion.
JInvest
Dermatol 65:71-84, 1975.)
OMB
d p a n p   s  o , n
reflects functional differences. The involvement of the basement membrane zone in many
important dernatologic disorders (pemphigoid, epidermolysis bulosa, and lupus erythema-
tosus) and wound healing has prompted most of the current research interest.
Dermis
The dermis (corium) is an integral part of the body's connective tissue system and is of
that takes the stresses of movement and maintains shape. The insoluble fibers are colla-
 gens and elastin, and the major soluble macromolecules are proteoglycans and hyaluronan.
The fibrous components resist tensile forces, whereas the soluble macrormolecules resist or
dissipate compressive forces.
 In areas of thick-haired skin, the dermis accounts for most of the depth, whcreas the
epidermis is thin. In very thin skin, the decreased thickness results from the thinness of
the dermis. The dermis is coinposed of fbers, ground substance, and cells (Fig. 1-2l). It
 36 · Structure and Function of the Skin
● Table 1-2
 CHaRACTERISTICS OF BASEMENT MEMBRANE ZONE
COMPONENTS
·..·..·.........
COMPONENT
LOCALIZATION
FUNCTION
Bullous pemphigoid antigens
Basal cell hemidesinosome and
Adherence
lamina lucida
Cicatricial pemphigoid antigen
Lamina lucida
Adherence
Laminin I
Lamina lucida (partly lamina
Adherencc, promote keratinocyte: proliferation
densa)
and differentiation
Laminin 5
Basal cell hemidesmosome and
Adherence
(nicein/kalinin/epiligrin)
lamina lucida
Laminin 6
Lamina lucida
Adherenec
Nidogen (entactin)
Lamina lucida (partly lamina
Adherence (link laminin and type IV colagen)
Lamina densa and anchoring
densa)
Type IV collagen
Adherence, networling
plaques
Type V collagen
Lamina densa (partly lamina
？
lucida)
Heparan sulfate
Lamina densa
Networking, filtration
Chondroitin-6-sulfate
Lamina densa
Networking, filtration
Fibronectin
 Lamina densa and lamina lu-
Networking
cida
Fpidermolysis bullosa acquis-
Sublamina densa (partly lam-
Adherence
ita antigen
ina densa)
Type Vl collagen
Sublamina densa
Stabilization of connective tissue
Linkin
Sublamina densa
Stabilization of connective tissue
Fibrillin
Sublamina densa
Stabilization of connective tissue
Tenascin
Sublamina densa
Stabilization of connective tissne
Type VII collagen
Anchoring fbrils
Anchoragc
AF1
Anchoring fibrils
Anchorage
AF2
Anchoring fibrils
Anchorage
also contains the epidermal appendages, arrector pili muscles, blood and lymph vessels,
 and nerves. Because the normal haired skin of cats and dogs docs not have cpidcrmal rete
ridges, dermal papillae are not usually seen. Thus, a true papillary and reticular dermis, as
 deseribed for humans, is not present in cats and dogs. The terms superficial and deep
dermis are preferred. The dermis accounts for most of the tensile strength and elasticity
of the skin; it is involved in the regulation of cell growth, proliferation, adhesion, migra-
tion, and differentiation, and it modulates wound healing and the structure and fuction
of the epidermis.5. iso The dermis of scrotal skin is unique in that it contains numerous
large smooth muscle bundles (see Fig. 1-6). Most of the dermal cxtraccllular matrix
(fibers and ground substance) is _synthesized by fibroblasts, which respond to a variety of
stimuli such as growth factors elaborated by keratinocytes, inflammatory cells, and fibro-
blasts themselves.23. 50
DERMAL FIBERS
The dermal fibers are formed by fibroblasts and are collagenous, reticular, and elastic.
Collagenous fibers (collagen) bave great tensile strength and are the largest and most
numerous fibers (accounting for approximately 90% of all dermal hbers and 80% of the
dermal extracellular matrix) (see Figs. 1-3B and 1-26). They are thick bands composed
 of multiple protein fibrils and are differentially stained by Masson's trichrome. Collagen is
a family of related molecules whose diverse biological roles include morphogenesis, tissue
gen contains two unusual amino acids-- hydroxylysine and 4-hydroxyproline whosc Ievels
in urine have been used as indices of collagen turnover. Reticular fbers (reticulin) are
tected best with special silver stains. Elastin fibers are composed of single fine branches
that possess great elasticity and account for about 4% of the dermal extraccllular matrix,
Structurc and Function of the Skin · 37
FIGURE I-21. Normal dermis.
Collagen bundles and oxccasicomal f-
broblasts (arrow).
They are well visualized by Verhoeff's and van Gieson's clastin stains (see Fig. 1-3B). The
linked amino acids (desmosine and isodesmosine) that are not found in other mammalian
proteins, and microfbrils, which are composed of fbrillin and typeVI collagen.6s Io The
remarkable strength of elastic fihers is derived from the umusual cross-linking of desmo-
 sine and isodesmosine. The precursor to elastin is tropoelastin.
 There are numerous (at least 17) genetically and structurally different types of colla-
predominate in the dermis and account for approximately 87%, 10%, and 3%, respec-
tively, of the dermal collagen. Type VI collagen is present as microfibrils and has pre-
be dlistributed uniformly throughout the dermis. Types III and V collagen are also concen-
trated around blood vessels. Types IV (lamina densa) and V (larmina lucida) collagen are
found in the baserment membrane zone, and Type VlI collagen is found in the anchoring
fbrils of the basement membrane zone. Types Xll and XiV collagen are called fibri
associated collagens with interrupted triple helices (FACIT), and at present, their function
is unclear. The biosynthesis of collagen is a complex process of gene transposition and
translation, intracelular modifcations, packaging and secretion, cxtracellular modifcations,
and fibril asseimbly and cross-linking. Collagen abnormalities may result from genetic
defects; from deficiencies of vitamin C, iron, and copper; and fron β-aminopropionitrile
poisoning (lathyrism). Collagen synthesis is stirmulated by ascorbic acid (vitamin C),
TGF-β, IL-1, insulin-like growth factor 1 (soinatomedin C), insulin-like growth factor 2,
superoxide generating systems, and bleomycin.6 Collagen synthesis is inhibited by glu-
cocorticoids, retinoids, vitamin D, parathormone, prostaglandin E2, interferon-, D-peni-
cillamine, and minoxidil.
destruction by their capacity to synthcsize and release collagenase. Dermal fbroblasts arc
the major source of skin collagenase under normal conditions of remodeling as well as in
cosinophils, and macrophages can release a variety of protoolytic enzymes, including
collagenase, and contribute to local connective tissue destruction in discase. Other degra-
dative enzyines produced by fbroblasts, polymorphonuclear leukocytes, and rmacrophages
inelude gelatinase (gelatin), stromelysins, and lysosomal hydrolases (fibroncctin, proteogly
cans, and glycosaminoglycans).
 In general, the superficial dermis contains fine, loosely arranged collagen fibers that
38 · Structure and Function of the Skin
are irregularly distributed and a network of fine elastin fibers. The deep dermis contains
thick, densely arranged collagen fibers that tend to parallel the skin surface and elastin
fibers that are thicker and less nunerous than those in the superficial dermis. In the
superfcial dermis, elastic fibers, known as elaunin fbers, are organized in an arcade-like
arrangement.65 From these fibers, still thinner elastic fbers, called oxytalan fbers, ascend
almost vertically to terminate at the dermoepidernal junction and anchor to the basement
 membrane. Elaunin and oxytalan fbers are composed of microfbrils/elastin and microf-
 brils, respectively.15o Elastases are proteolytic enzyrnes capable of degrading elastic fbers,
and a variety of tissues and cells (including fibroblasts) are capable of producing elastolytic
are the most potent, and they readily degradc elastic fibers in disease states.
adhesion molecules (LFA-1, ICAM-1); and are antigen-presenting cells. They are phago-
cytic, variably factor XIIla- and CD34-positive, and show ininunophenotypic variation
depending on their location (subepidermal, perivascular, periadnexal, superficial versus
 deep derimal, and so forth). In dogs, dermal dendrocytes are CD1, factor Xilla, MHC
class Il, and Thy-1 positive.136
DERMAL GROUND SUBSTANCE
The ground (interstitial) substance is a viscoelastic gel-sol of fbroblast origin composed of
glycosaminoglycans (formerly called mucopolysaccharides) that arc usually linked in vivo to
proteins (proteoglycans). These substances play vital roles in the epidermis, basement
membrane, dernis, and hair folicle development and cycling 2, 6, Is The major proteo-
glycans and glycosaminoglycans include hyaluronate and heparin sulfate in the epidermis
(synthesized by keratinocytes); heparin sulfate and chondroitin-6-sulfate in the baserment
memhrane; and hyaluronic acid, dermatan sulfate, chondroitin-6-sulfate, chondroitin-4-
sulfate, versican, syndecan, decorin, glypican, and serglycin in the dermis.
 The ground substance fills the spaces and surrounds other structures of the dermis
 but allows electrolytes, nutrients, and cells to traverse it in passing from the dermal
vessels to the avascular cpidermis. The proteoglycans and glycosaminoglycans are extracel-
 lular and membrane-associated macromolecules that function in water storage and homeo-
stasis; in the selective screening of substances; in the support of dermal structure (resist
compression; iluricaton; and in collagenrillgenesis, rientation, rowth, and df
cntiation. Although glycosaminoglycans and proteoglycans account for only about 0.1% of
the dry weight of skin, they can bind over l00 times their own weight in water.
Fibronectins are widespread extracellular matrix and body fuid glycoproteins capable
 produced by many cells, including keratinocytes, fbroblasts, endothelial cells, and histio-
 cytes. The fibronectins rmnoderate cell-to-cell interaction and cell adhesion to the substrate,
and they modulate microvascular integrity, vascular permcability, basement nembrane
assembly, and wound healing. Fibronectin has been implicated in a variety of cell func-
tions, including cell adhesion and morphology, opsonization, cytoskeletal organization,
oncogenic transformation, cell migration, phagocytosis, hemostasis, and embryonic differ-
entiation. Fibronectins are present in the dermis, especially perivascularly and perineur.
ally, and within the lamina lucida and lamina densa of the baserment membrane.
Tenascin is a large glycoprotein that is prominently expressed at epithelial-mesenchy.
and wound healing.
H & E stain) are often seen in normal feline and canine skin, especially around append-
ages and blood vessels (see Fig. 1-3C). In the Chinese Shar pei, however, large amounts
of mucin are normally found throughout the dermis, which could be confused with
pathologic mucinosis (myxedema) in other hreeds and species.
Structure and Function of the Skin · 39
DERMAL CELLULAR ELEMENTS
 1-21) and dermal dendrocytes are present throughout. Dermal dendrocytes are predomi-
nantly perivascular antigen-presenting cells. In dogs, they are CD1, CDil, CD18, CD45,
ICAM-l, and MHC class II positive. They are also CD4 and CD90 (Thy-1) positive,
which distinguishes them from Langerhans' cells. Melanocytes may be seen near superfi-
cial dermal blood vessels, especially in dark-skinned dogs. They may also be seen around
 the hair bulbs in darkly colored dogs, especially Doberman pinschers and black Labrador 
retrievers.
 Mast cells (Fig. 1-22) are most abundant around superficial dermal blood vessels and
 appendages. In dogs and cats, many mast cells are easily recognized with routine H & E
stain. The method of fixation greatly infuences the number of mast cells seen, with
routine forrmalin fixation resulting in 33% less mast cells stained as compared to Carnoy's
or Mota's solutions.18a 57a. 203a In cats, the cells have a fried-egg appearance, with the
lightly stained intracytoplasmic granules giving the cytoplasm a stippled appearance. In
both' species, the mast cells are more easily recognized with special stains such as tolui-
 dinc blne and acid orcein-Giemsa. In general, normal cat skin contains 4 to 20 mast cells
 per high-power microscopic field around superficial dermal blood vessels; nornal dog skin
contains4t12cellsperhighpowermicrosopicfeld72s.20Inboththedog47and
 j r  d   s   q  s n i 
cutaneous mnast cells yielded per gram of skin was about 2.3 × 105, and the total
dogs, special stains revealed about 60 to 81 mast cels/mm2,18 and 200 mast cels/mm2,
respectively.2osa Toluidine blue stain detected significantly fewer mast cells than stains for
tryptase or chymase. Three mast cell subtypes are distinguished in normal canine skin
based on their content of mast cell-specific proteases: those that contain tryptase (T-mast
cells), those that contain chymase (C-mast cells), and those that contain both (TC-mast
(ells).102a.203a
 e     a       
canine skin include neutrophils, eosinophils, lymphocytes, histiocytes, and plasma cells. In
dogs, lymphocytes in normal skin are T cells (CD3+) and more commonly α/β receptor
positive than y/8 receptor positive.29
Hair Follicles
Hair follicle morphogenesis is a complex process that occurs during the development of
the skin, as part of the hair cycle, when skin repairs superficial wounds, and in response
of collaborative interactions. At each stage, the participating cells have different pheno-
typic properties and produce different products.
the innermost rcgion of the hair, is composed of longitudinal rows of cuboidal cells, or
cells fattened from top to bottom. The cells are solid near the hair root, but the rest of
completely cormified, spindle-shaped cells, whose long axis is parallel to the hair shaft.
Thesecells containthepigent that gives thehairits color.Pigmentmay alsobe present
in the medulla, but there it has little influence on the color of the hair shaft. In general,
the cortex accounts for one-sixth to one-third of the width of the hair shaft, and it
contributes the most to the mechanical properties of hair fibers. The cuticle, the outer-
most layer of the hair, is formed by fat, cornified, anuclear celis arranged like slate on a
roof, with the free edge of each cell facing the tip of the hair. Secondary ("down") hairs
*Sco references 4, 51, 65, 167, 170, 172, and 177.
40 · Structure and Function of the Skin
FIGURE I-22. Mast cells. A, Cal
dennal mast cells are often clustered
near blood vessels (arrouchead). They
pur souereadde s pau. u aay
tinct in H & E stained skin. B, Dog
dermal mast cells are also found in
association with blood vessels (ar-
rouhead), usually not in clusters, and
their cytoplasmic granules are so
deeply stained as to often obscure
the nucleus.
Structure and Function of the Skin · 4l
A
B
FIGURE I-23.Layers of hair shaft. A, White hair froun nonnal cat. One layered outer cuticle has a serrated or
shingle-like apcaranee. The mididle cortex layer is thicker and whitc. The inner mcdulla layer is dark and thick. B.
Section of hair shaft (arrou) within hair folicle of nornal dog as seen in H & E stained tissue.
 have a narrower medulla and a more prominent cuticle than do primary hairs, and lanugo
hairs have no medulla. In the cat, the profle of the hair shaft is distinctly serrated.
Computer-assisted evaluation of cuticular patterns as sccn with scanning electron micros-
copy has suggested that such methodology may bc useful for differentiating between
lar cels, as an exocellular secretion, or from thc outer portion of cuticular cell mem-
branes.177
Hair follicles are usually positioncd at a 30- to 60-degree angle to the skin surface.
  -r  e      so  
cluster consists of two to five large primary hairs surrounded by groups of smaller,
secondary hairs. One of the primary hairs is the largest (central primary hair), and the
remaining primary hairs are smaller (lateral primary hairs). Each primary hair has seba-
ceous and sweat glands and an arreetor pili muscle (Fig. 1 -25). Secondary (down) hairs
may be accompanied only by sebaceous glands. The primary hairs generally emerge
independently through separate pores; the secondary hairs emerge through a corminon
pore. From five to 20 secondary hairs may accompany each primary hair. Hairs are
 present in groups of 100 to 600/cm? in the dog, with two to 15 hairs per group.1s0 In cats,
The hair follicle has five major components: the dermal hair papilla, the hair matrix,
the hair itself, the inner root shcath, and the outer root sheath. The pluripotential cells of
the hair matrix give rise to the hair and the inner root sheath. The outer root sheath
For dcscriptive purposes, the anagen hair folicle is dlivided into these three anatonic
segments (sec Fig. 1-25): (l) the infundibulum, or pilosebaccous rcgion (the upper
portion, which consists of the scgment from the entrance of the sebaceous duct wherc
trichilermmal keratinization begins] to the skin surface); (2) the isthrmus (the niddle
portion, which consists of the segment between the entrance of the sebaceous duct and
the attachmcnt of the arrector pili muscle [where the trichohyalin granule-containing
cellular portion of the inncr root sheath begins]); and (3) the inferior seginent (the lowest
portion, which extends from the attachiment of the arrector pili muscle to the dermal hair
papilla). The infundibulum and isthrmus constitute the permanent portion of the hair
folicle, whereas the inferior segment is transitory. Dogs have no anatomic stnicturc
analogous to the human hair follicular bulge (attachment site of arrector pili rmuscle).
Studies in thc dog suggest that stem cels are distributed throughout the follicular infun-
dibulun and isthmus, rather than being concentrated in the bulge arca as they are
thought to be in humans.43
42 · Structure and Function of the Skin
FIGURE I-24. A, Three multiple
hair follicle units (high power). B, Three
apopilosebaceous complexes, each show-
ing primary and secondary hairs, seba-
ceous and epitrichial glands, and arrec-
tor pili muscles (high power).
             
a
fattened, single layer of overlapping cells that point toward the hair bulb and interlock
with the cells of the hair cuticle), (2) the Huxley layer (one to three nucleated cells thick),
     jo        
eosinophilic cytoplasmic granules called trichohyalin granules (see Fig. 1 - If). Trichohy-
alin is a major protein component of these granules, which are morphologic hailrmarks of
the inner root sheath and medullary cells of the hair follicle. Trichohyalin functions as a
keratin-associated protein that promotes the lateral alignment and aggregation of parallel
bundles of intermediate filaments in inner root sheath cells.65、 144 The expression of
trichohyalin is not unique to the hair follicle; it is found to occur normally in a number of
other epithelial tissues, where it is closely associated with the expression of flaggrin, the
major keratohyalin granulc protein. The inner root sheath keratinizes and disintegrates
when it reaches the level of the isthmus of the hair follicle. The prime function of the
 inner root sheath is to mold the hair within it, which it accomplishes by hardening in
Structure and Function of the Skin·43
FIGURE I-25. Anatomy of hair follcle. Dog.
a uoy seo (mouito saddn) unngpungug sl
skin surface to the entry of the sebaceous gland
duct. The isthmus (midlle arrou) goes from the
sebaceous gland duct to the altachment of the ar-
rector pili rnusclc. The inferior segment (louver ar-
row)goes from the attachmcnt of the arrector pili
muscle to thebulb.
 advance of the hair. The amino acid citrulline occurs in high concentrations in hair and
trichohyalin granules; it has been used as a marker for hair follicle differentiation. The
telogen hair follicle contains no inner root sheath nor inferior segment.
The outer root sheath (see Fig. I-26) is thickest near the epiderrnis and gradually
decreases in thickness toward the hair bulb. In its lower portion (from the isthmus of the
hair follicle downward), the outer root sheath is covered by the inner root sheath. It does
not undergo keratinization, and its cells have a clear, vacuolated cytoplasm (glycogen). In
the middle portion of the hair follicle (isthmus), the outer root sheath is no longcr
hyalin granules are not formed) (see Fig. 1 - Ig). In the upper portion of the hair follicle
(infundibulum), the outer root sheath undergoes keratinization in the same fashion as
occurs in thie surface epidermis. The innermost cell layer of the outer root sheath is a
special single-cell layer, located just outside of Henle's layer, whose pattern of cell differ.
entiation and keratinization is ultrastructurally and immunohistochemically different from
that of the main layer of the outer root sheath.1s The cells are distinctly fattened and
lack lamellar bodies.
The outer root sheath is surrounded by two other prominent structures: a basement
membrane zone, or glassy membrane (a downward refection of the epidermal basement
meinbrane zone), and a fibrous root sheath (a layer of dense connective tissue). Perifollic-
ular mineralization of the basement membranc zone has been described in healthy toy
44 · Structure and Function of the Skin
FIGURE I-26. Hair follicle and hair shaft lay-
ers.Dog.Vacuolated (glycogen) outer root sheath
(long biack arrono). Inner root sheath (short black
arrow).Cortex of hair shaft (small white triangie).
Central nedulla of hair shaft (large white trian-
gle).
brecds of dogs and must be differentiated from the perifollcular mineralization seen in
dogs with naturally occuring or iatrogenic Cushing's syndrome.
The dermal hair papilla is continuous with the dermal connective tissue and is
covered by a thin continuation of the basement membrane. The inner root sheath and
hair grow from a layer of plump, nucleated epithelial ceils that covcr the papilla. These
in the embryogenesis and subsequent cycling of hair follicles is well known. 42 6s Addi-
tionally, the morphology of thte dermal papilla changes throughout the hair growth cycle,
 e  si s      a  a n  
of changes in the amount of extracellular matrix within the papilla. In the anagen hair
follicle, dernal papilla volume is proportional to the volume of the hair. Just below the
dermal papilla is a fihroclastic cushion (Aaro-Perkins corpuscle).
The hair follicles of animals with straight hair are straight, and those of animals with
curly hair tend to be spiral in configuration. Follicular folds have bcen described in the
hair folicles of animals. These structures represent multipie (1 to 23) corrugations of the
inner root sheath, which project into the pilar canal immediately below the sebaccous
duct opening. Thcse folds are believed to be artifacts of fixation and processing because
they are not seen in unprocessed sections cut by hand.172. 177
 s ss s    e sq  j s ps o
tylotrich hairs.65 172 17. 1s0 Sinus hairs (vibrissae, whiskers) are found on the muzzle, lip.
eyelid, face, and throat, and on the palmar aspect of the carpus of cats (pili carpalis,
carpal gland). These hairs are thick, stiff, and tapered distally. Sinus hairs are character-
ized by an endothelium-lined blood sinus interposed between the external root sheath of
the folicle and an outer connective tissue capsule (Fig. 1-27). The sinus is divided into a
supcrior, nontrabecular ring (or annular) sinus and an inferior, cavermous (or trabecular)
Structure and Funetion of the Skin · 45
B
FIGURE I-27. A, Hair follicle of sinus hair of cat in longitudinal scction, scmidiagrarmmatic (× 150):
a hair: b, epidermis; c, outer; d, inner layer of the dermal foficle; e, the blood sinus (this sinus has been
differentiated into a nontrabecular annular sinus f, into which projects the sinus pad g); h, hair papilla; i,
glassy membrane of the follicle, k, outer root sheath; 1. inner root sheath; m, sebaceous glandis. B, Tactile
hair from upper lip of dog showing blood sinus (high power). (A,Fron Trautrann A,Fiehiger ]:
Fundamentals of the Histology of Domestie Animals. Cormell University Press, Ithaca, NY, 1952, p 342.)
sinus. A cushion-like thickening of mesenchyme (sinus pad) projects into the annular
sinus. The cavernous sinuscs are traversed by trabeculae containing many nerve fibers.
Skeletal muscle fihers attach to the outer layer of the follicle. Pacirnian corpuscles are
situated close to the sinus hair follicles. Sinus hairs are thought to function as slow-
 adapting mechanoreceptors.
Tylotrich hairs are scattered among ordinary body hairs. The hair foliclcs arc larger
than surrounding follicles and contain a single stout hair and an annular complcx of
neurovascular tissue that surrounds the follicle at the level of the sebaccous glands.
Tylotrich hairs are thought to function as rapid-adapting mcchanorcccptors. Each tylotrich
follicle is associated with a tylotrich pad (haarschciben, touch corpuscle, touch dome, hair
disk, tactile hair disk, tactile pad, hederiform ending, or Pinkus corpuscle, Igo dome,
Iggo-Pinkus dome, or Eimer's organ) (see Figs. 110 and 1-28). Tylotrich pads are
FIGURE I-28. Tylotrich pad in
cat skin. Merkel's cells (arrou) at
basement membrane zone.
46 · Structurc and Function of the Skin
cornposed of a thickened and distinctive epidermis underlaid by a convex area of fine
coinective tissue that is highly vascularized and well innervated. Unmyelinated nerve
fibers end as flat plaques in association with Merkel's cells, which serve as slow-adapting
touch receptors.
the hair follicle bulb (Fig. 1-29). Hair matrix cells are often heavily 1nelauized and show
mitotie activity. The anagen hair follicle extends into the deep dermis and often into the
subcutis. Anagen has been divided into six stages: Stages I through IV, referred to as
proanagen (differentiation); Stage V, referred to as mesanagen (transition to rapid growth):
and Stage VI, referred to as metanagen (posteruptive bair elongation).4 17
Mu
FIGURE I-29. Anagen hair fol-
licle. Longitudinal section of a sec-
ondary hair follicle at anagen stage,
from the saddle region of a 28-
month-old bcagle. The bulb (Bb)
extends into the subeutaneous fat
(SF). The _spindle-shaped dermal
papilla (DP) extends towardl the
medulla of the hair (Mu); the basc.
of the dermal papilla is comtinuons
with the connective tissue (CT) of
the hair follicle. The dermal papilla
is surounded by the matrix cells
(Mx) of the bulb (Bb). The basal
MX
cells of the rnatrix are colummar
(BC). The lower partl of the bulb
contains undifferentiated  matrix
cells (UC) (×350, H & E). (F1om
Al-Bagdadi FK, Titkemeyer CW,
DP
Lovell JE: Histology of the hair cy-
cle in male beagle dogs. Am J Vet
Bb
Res 40:1734. 1979.)
BC
Structure and Function of the Skin · 47
FIGURE I-30. Catagen. Longitudlinal section of a hair follicle at catagen stage from the
saldle region of a 2-week-old beagle. The dermal papilla (DP) is oval in shape. The: muclei arc?
crowded and the matrix cells (Mx) that lorler the dennal papilla Have lost their orientation.The
glassy membrane (GM) is thick and straight at the up
undulating (two black unlabeled arrous in the lower part of the picture) (X395, H & E). (From
Al-Bagdadi FK, Titkeimcyer CW, Lovell JE: Histology of tlne: hair cycle: in male beagle dogs. An
J Vet 1Res 40:1734, 1979.)
48 * Structure and Function of the Skin
The catagen hair folicle is characterized by retraction toward the surface; a thick-
ened, irregular, undulating basement membrane zone; an increased nurmber of apoptotic
keratinocytes; a thickened basement membrane zone between the hair inatrix and the
dermal papilla; a smaller bulb; and an ovoid or round dermal papilla (Fig. 1-30). The
catagen folicle epithelium is shortened in length and reduced in volume lost from the
position of the hair bulb to just below the entry of the sebaceous duct--the volume
reduction accomplished largcly by the process of apoptosis. The TGF-β pathway is in-
volved in the induction of catagen, and caspases play essential roles in the cxecution of
replacement of the inner root sheath by trichilemmal keratinization.3 Melanogenesis
ceases, the proximal hair shaft is depignented, and mitotic activity stops. As the folicular
epithelium is lost, the adventitial collagen and neurovascular network of the follicle con-
denses along the tract of the pre-existing anagen folicle. This specialized adventitial
structure, the foliculur stile, is probably required to direct precisely the downward growth
of the new follicular epithelium as the follicle reenters anagen.
The telogen hair follicle is reduced to about one third of its former length and is
characterized by the small derrnal papila that is separated from the matrix cells, no hair
bulb, the lack of melanin and mitotic activity, and the absence of the inner root sheath
and the presence of club (brushlike) hair (Figs. 1-3l and 1-32).
Hair follicles show four morphological pattcrns of kcratinization4, so: (1) infundibular
(like epidermis, with basketweave orthokeratosis and keratohyalin granules), (2) trichilcm-
rr u o          
granules), (3) hair matrix or trichogenic (as cortex of hair shaft, characterized by rctention
of nuclear outlines [ghost cells), (4) inner root sheath and hair shaft medullary (compact
sn saurs upeyouon pai pur noo odousoa o, Aeiaianq pia ury anbedo pue
in HIenle's and Huxley's layers).
A hair plucked in anagen shows a larger expanded root that is moist and glistening.
often pigmented, and square at the end (see Chap. 2). A hair plucked in telogen shows a
    o  e r   sd a  
shown to migrate to the cpidermis within 72 hours following ultraviolet radiation.6 Thus,
the hair follicle is a specialized immunologic compartment of the skin that serves as a
reservoir to repopulate the epidermis. This follicular reservoir paradigm is also seen
following thermal injury and in vitiligo, in which folicular keratinocytes and melanoeytes
rcplenish epidermal cell populations.
Sebaceous Glands
Scbaccous (holocrine) glands are sirnple or branched alveolar glands distributed through-
canal in the infundibulun (pilosebaceous follicle). Sebaceous glands are largest and most
numerous near mucocutaneous junctions, in the interdigital spaces, on the dorsal ncck and
rump. on the chin (submental organ), and on the dorsal tail (tail gland, supracaudal organ,
preen gland). The submental organ (chin gland) also contains large nerve fibers, so it may
serve tactile and scent-marking functions.i66 Sebaceous glands are not found in the foot-
pads and nasal planum.
 Sebaceous lobules are bordered by a basement membrane zone, on which there sits a
single layer of deeply basophilic basal cells (called reserve cells) (Fig. 1--33). These cells
become progressively more lipidized and eventually disintegrate to form sebum toward the
center of the lobule. Sebaceous ducts are lined with squamous epithelium,
The oily secrction (scbum) produced by the sebaceous glands tends to keep the skin
soft and pliable by foriming a surface emulsion that spreads over the surfacc of the
stratum corneum to retain noisture and thus naintain proper hydration. The oil film also
spreads over the hair shafts and gives them a glossy sheen. During periods of illness or
malnutrition, the haircoat may become dull and dry as a result of inadequate sebaceous
gland function. In addition to its action as a physical barrier, the sebum-sweat emulsion
forins a chemical barrier against potential pathogens (see Cutaneous Ecology in this
Shucture and Function of the Skin · 49
ORS
CH
G
DP
FIGURE I-3l. Telogen. Longitudinal secion of a main hair follicle at telogen stage from
thc saddll region of a 3-month-old beagle, The dermal papilla (DP) is separated from the
basc of the club hair (CH). The cells of the outer root sheath (ORS) lack glycogen granules.
The glassy nermbrane (GM) is thick and PAS positive. The hair folicle at this stage is
surrounded by connective tissue that separates the follicle: from the adlipuse tissue (X400).
q    r  o  a      
dogs. Am J Vet Rcs 40:1734, 1979.)
50 · Structure and Function of the Skin
KF
  ( s    (       yo  s
between the cclls of the omuter root sheath (ORs). These keratinized fbers give the cluh hair a brushlike
TPe
aramee (X 465, H & E). (From Al-Bagdadi FK, Titkemeyer CW, Lovell JE: Ilistology of the hair cycle in
61 s s
FIGURE I-33.
Canine seba-
ceous gland lobules.
Structure and Function of the Skin · 5!
chapter). Freshly liberated sebum contains predominantly triglycerides and wax esters.? In
ria (Propionibacterium spp., Staphylococus spp.), which results in the production of fatty
acids. Many of sebum's fatty acid constituents (linoleic, myristic, oleic, and palmitic acids)
are known to have antimicrobial actions. Sebum rmay also have pheromonal properties.94
Sebaceous glands have an abundant blood supply and appear to be innervated. Thcir
secretion is thought to be under hormonal control, with androgens causing hypertrophy
and hyperplasia, and estrogens and glucocorticoids causing involution. The skin surface
lipids of cats and dogs have been studied in some detail and are different from those of
humans (see Horny Layer in this chapter). Enzyme histochemical studies have indicated
that all mammalian sebaceous glands contain succinate acid dehydrogenase, cytochrome
0xidase, and a few esterases.135
Sweat Glands
Because of invcstigations into the physiology and ultrastructiral aspects of sweat produc-
tion by sweat glands, it has been suggcstcd that the apocrine and eccrine sweat glands
are more accurately called the epitrichial and atrichial sweat glands, respectively.9 We
have adopted thc suggcsted terminology for this book.
EPITRICHIAL SWEAT GLANDS
Epitrichial sweat glands are generally coiled and saccular or tubular and are distributed
throughout all haired skin.* They are not present in footpads or nasal planum. These
glands are located below the sebaceous glands, and thcy usually opcn through a duct into
the pilary canal in the infundibulum, above the sebaceous duct opening. Epitrichial swcat
glands tend to bc larger in arcas where hair folliclc density is lower. Thcy arc largest and
 most numerous near mucoentaneous junctions, in interdigital spaces, and over the dorsal
ncck and rump. The secretory portions of cpitrichial swcat glands consist of a single row
of Hattened to columnar epithelial (secretory) cells and a single layer of fusiform myoepi-
thelial cells (Figs. 1-34 and 1 -35). The epitrichial sweat gland excretory duct is lined by
two cuboidal to fattened epithelial cell layers and a luminal cuticle but no myoepithelial
 cels,s In general, epitrichial sweat glands do not appear to be innervated.' Epitrichial
*See references 65, 93, 94, 141, 170, 172, 180, and 188.
FIGURE I-34. Section through coiled
 p eams ola jo ool
power).
52 · Structure and Function of the Skin
FIGURE I-35.
Epitrichial
gland
showingsecretory
epithelium(high
power).
Enzyme histochemical studies have dernonstrated alkaline phosphatase and acid phos-
phatase in epitrichial sweat gland secretory epithelium.57, 120, 13s Immunohistochemical
studies show that the acini and ducts of canine epitrichial sweat glands are positive for
cytokeratin; associated myoepithelial cells are positive for both cytokeratin and S-100
protein.55
 po ai si se pe s   s  s  ss s
ATRICHIAL SWEAT GLANDS
Atrichial (merocrine) sweat glands are found only in the footpads.172. 1s0. ss 202 These
glands are small and tightly coiled, and they are located in the deep dermis and subcutis
of the footpads. Secretory coils consist of a single layer of cuboidal to columnar epithelial
cells and a single layer of fusiform myoepithelial cells (Fig. 1-36). The intradermal
FIGURE ↓-36. Atrichial sweat glands
from canine footpad (high power).
Structure and Function of the Skin · 53
portion of the excretory duct consists of a double row of cuboidal cpithelial cells. Thc
excretory duct opens directly to thc footpad surfacc.
 Enzyme histochemical studies have demonstrated cytochrome oxidase, succinate and
other dehydrogenases, phosphorylases, and alkaline phosphatase in atrichial sweat
SWEATING AND THERMOREGULATION
The skin of cats and dogs does not possess the extensive superficial arteriovenous shunts
of humans and swine that are designed to disseminate heat in hot weather. Carnivores
also lack atrichial sweat glands in the hairy skin.
The froquency of swcating and the circumstances under which sweating occurs in cats
and dogs are unclear. Some authors have stated that the dog shows great variation in the
degree of epitrichial sweating that takes place and that some breeds (especially German
shepherds, Labrador retrievers, and other large breeds) may show visible sweating in the
is occasionally seen in certain febrile and cxcited dogs.141 Still others have reported the
absence of epitrichial sweating in dogs subjected to severe generalized tcrmperature stress
and in dogs that were struggling violently.41 Atrichial sweating may bc secn on the
footpads of excited or agitated cats and dogs.1s0
In dogs, localized epitrichial sweating can be produced by local heat applications and
by the intradermal injection of various sympathomimetic (epinephrine, norepinephrinc)
and parasympathormimetic (acetylcholine, pilocarpine) drugs.6. 7 40. 36.141 Because responses
to all of these can be blocked by atropine, the final physiologic stimulus appears to be
cholinergic. It has also been reported that asphyxiation or the intravenous injection of
epinephrine or norepinephrine has produced generalized epitrichial sweating in dogs.s6
Because these responses could not be blocked by adrenal 1medullectomy but were blocked
by sympathetic denervation of skin, it was concluded that canine epitrichial sweating is
prinarily regulated by neural mechanisms and that humoral mechanisms play a subsidiary
role. One group of researchers concluded——on the basis of available local and systemie
pharmacologic data, local and generalized therrmal responses, hypothalamic stinulation,
directly innervated and had litle, if any, thermoregulatory importance.20. 41 It was also
suggested that because the only physiologic stimulus noted to produce epitrichial sweating
consistently in dogs was copulation, epitrichial sweating in dogs served a predominantly
pheromonal function.4l
 Atrichial sweating from the footpads of cats and dogs can be provoked by cholinergic
stimuli and, less so, by adrenergic stimuli.172. 1s0. 194 Atropine blocks glandular responses to
these agents. Feline atrichial sweat contains lactate, glucose, sodium, potassium, chloride,
and bicarbonate, and it differs from that of humans in that it is hypertonic and alkaline
and contains much higher concentrations of sodiun, potassium, and chloride.26 58 188
Mechanisms to Conserve Heat
When the cnvironmental temperature falls, the body attempts to reduce heat loss by
vasoconstriction in the skin and erection of the hairs to improve the insulating qualities of
the skin and coat. The external temperature at which the heat-retaining mechanisms are
no longer able to maintain a constant body temperature and at which heat production has
 to bc increased is known as the criticail temperature. Normal dogs with intact pelage have
a critical temperature of 14°℃ (57°F); when their coats are shaved off, however, they have
a critical temperature of 25*C (77F)1so Thick subcutaneous fat also acts as efficient
insulating material. Nonfasting animals have a lower critical temperature than fasting
individuals; therefore, the former are better able to tolerate a low environmental tempera-
ture. When the aforementioned mechanisms of heat conservation are no longcr cffective
in preventing a fall in body tenperature, an inerease in heat production begins. A rapid
54 · Structure and Function of the Skin
increase in heat production is accomplished mainly by shivering. In normal dogs, shivering
begins when the rectal temperature falls 1°℃.
Mechanisms to Dissipate Heat
Heat is regularly lost froin the body by radiation, conduction, and convection; vaporization
of water from the skin and respiratory passages; and excretion of urine and feces. The
excretory losses are relatively unimportant in heat dissipation. Ordinarily, 75% of the heat
loss is attributable to radiation, conduction, and convection. The efficiency of these mech-
 anisms varies with the external temperature and humidity, and it is modifed further by
the animal's vasomotor and pilomotor responses. These responses become ineffective at
higher temperatures, when heat loss by vaporization of water from the skin and lungs
becormes more inffuential, Because they do not produce an abundance of atrichial sweat,
  ra po s ae a  ae  da  so p s
respiratory passages. In dogs, as the environmental temperature rises ahove 27° to 29°C
(81° to 84°F), the rate of breathing also rises, but the depth of breathing (tidal volume) is
changes. At a rectal temperature of 40.5*℃ (105*F), the dog is in danger of thermal
imbalance; at 43°C, collapse is immincnt.
The rectal temperature of the cat begins to risc at an environmental temperature of
32°℃ (90°F), but as the respiratory rate increases, the tidal volume is only slightly re-
duced. As a result, the cat is more susceptible to a lowering of its blood CO, level (ie., to
rcspiratory alkalosis). The cat possesses an additional compensatory mechanism; a hot
environrnent, or sympathetic stimulation, produces a copious fow of watery saliva from
the subhmaxillary gland. The cat spreads this on its coat for additional water vaporization,
and cooling results. Similar stimulation in dogs produces only a scanty secretion of thick
The problem of temperature regulation in dogs and cats is often complicated by the
physical condition of the coat and by the environmental temperature. Breeds with heavy
coats intended for cold climates sometimes suffer when they are moved to regions of high
temperatures. The problem is greatly accentuated by a matted, unkempt coat that stifes
air circulation through the hair. Proper grooming greatly increases the comfort of these
animals.
Specialized Glands
Specialized glands include the circumanal (perianal) glands, the glands of the external
auditory canal (see Chap. 19), and thc anal sacs (see Chap. 19), as well as the tail gland.
The circumanal (perianal) glands are present at birth and develop from ducts that
originate from the inner and outer perianal sides of the external root sheath of hair
folicles,s3. 121 These glands are also found in the skin of the prepuce and dorsal and
ventral aspects of the tail. These glands are positive for cytokeratin.199.200
The tail gland (supracaudal gland, preen gland) of the dog is an oval-shaped area
located on the dorsal surface of the tail over the ffth to seventh coccygeal vertebrae,
about 5 cm distal to the anus.1o1. iso This gland is consistently present in wild Canidae; it is
regarded as an atavism in dogs, howcver, because it is somewhat different in structure, is
lacking in function, and is clearly visible in only about 5% of all normal male dogs. The
stiff, coarse hairs, each of which emerges singly from its follicle. The surface of the skin
may be yellow and waxy from the abundant secretion of the numerous large glands in the
area. This secretion may aid in olfactory species recognition, This area of the tail may be
severely affected in seborrheic skin diseases and may also develop hyperplasia, cystic
degeneration, infection, adenoma, and adenocarcinoma.
Histologically, the canine tail gland is composed predominantly of hepatoid cells,
which are identical to those in the hepatoid (perianal, circumanal) glands. The glandular
Structure and Function of the Skin · 55
ducts empty into hair follicles. The tail gland and the circumanal glands are dependent on
testosterone and form a topographic-ethnologic unit.
glands that run the entire length of the dorsal surface of the tail.i72, 1ss Excess accumula-
tion of glandular secretion in this area is called stud tail.
Arrector Pili Muscles
Arrector pili muscles are of mesenchymal origin and consist of smooth muscle with
and are largest in the dorsal neck and rump. Arrector pili muscles originate in thc
(see Figs. 1-25 and 1-37). Branching of these muscles is often seen in the superficial
dermis. Arrector pili muscles are about one fourth to one half the diameter of central
primary hair follicles in most haired skin areas but arc of cqual diamcter in the dorsal
lumbar, dorsal sacral, and dorsal tail areas.
These muscles receive cholinergic innervation and contract in response to epinephrine
and norepinephrine, producing piloerection. Arrector pili muscles probably function in
therinoregulation and in the emptying of sebaceous glands.
FIGURE I-37. Arrector pili. Dog. Arrector pili
musclc originates in supericial dermis (upper ar-
roo) and inserts on the hair follicle (tlower arrow).
56 · Structure and Function of the Skin
Blood Vessels
The microcirculation of skin is a rather complex and dynamic system that is important for
skin metabolism and temperature regulation, and is an important part of the organ's
defense systern against invaders. Cutaneous blood vessels are goncrally arrangod in three
deep plexus is found at the interface of the dermis and subcutis. Branches from this
plexus descend into the subcutis and ascend to supply the lower portions of the hair
follicles and the epitrichial sweat glands. These ascending vessels continue upward to feed
the middle plexus, which lies at the level of the sebaceous glands. The middie plexus gives
off branches to the arrector pili muscles, ascending and dcscending branches that supply
the middle portions of the hair follicles and the sebaceous glands, and ascending branches
to fed the superficial plexus. Capillary loops that are immediately below the epidermis
emanate from the superficial plexus and supply thc epidermis and upper portion of the
hair follicles.
The microcirculatory bed is composed of three segments: arterioles, arterial and
venous capillaries, and venules.22 Electron microscopy is necessary to identify these differ-
ent segments of the microvasculature defnitively. The arterioles consist of endothelial
the resistance vessels in skin. Arterial and venous capillaries lack surrounding smooth
muscle cells. The najority of superficial dermal vessels are postcapillary venules, which are
thc most physiologically reactive segmeint of the microcirculation and arc also the site
where infiarmmatory cells migrate from the vascular space into tissues and where endothe-
 Blood vessel endothelial cells are mesenchymal in origin and characterized (l) ultras-
tructurally by a peripheral baserment membrane and intracytoplasmic Weibel-Palade bod-
ies (rod-shiaped tubular strictures enveloped in a continuous single membrane); (2) by
their possession of factor VIII (von Willebrand) antigen, plasminogen activators, and
prostaglandins; (3) by CD31 (platelet cndothelial cell adhesion molecule [PECAM]); and
(4) by being phagocytic.3 65. 1so Endothelial cells are strategically located between intravas-
cular and tissue compartments, and serve as key regulators of leukocyte traffcking.64
Selectins (E- and P-selectin) and members of the immunoglobulin superfamily (ICAM-1,
vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 [VCAM-l]) are upregulated on endothelial cells on
inflammatory stimulation and mediate rolling, adhesion, and transmigration of leukocytes
from the blood stream. Angiogenesis (new vessel forrmation) is controlled, at least in part,
Arteriouenomus anastomoses are normal connections between arteries and veins that
ylotrich pa
Middle plexus
Deep plexus
Adipose tissue
FIGURE I-38. Schcmatic section of skin of the dog, showing tylotrich pad (epidermal papilla,
harscheiben) and blood vessels (veins in black). (Modified from Evans HF: Miller's Anatomy of the
Dog, 3rd cd. W.B. Saumders Company, Philadelphia, 1993.)
Structure and Function of the Skin · 57
FIGURE I -39. Superficial der-
mal blood vessels. Dog. Occasional
mast cells and lymphocytes may be
seen (arrou).
allow arterial blood to enter the venous circulation without passing through capillary
beds,51. 65. 180 Because of the size and position of these anastomoses, they can alter
circulation dynamics and the blood supply to tissues. They occur in all areas of the skin
but are most common over the extremities (especially the legs and ears). These anastomo-
ses occur in all levels of the dermis but especially in the deep dermis.
Arteriovenous anastomoses show considerable variation in structure, ranging from
simple, slightly coiled vessels to such complex structures as the glomus, a special arterio-
venous shuint located within the deep dermis. Each glomus consists of an arterial segment
and a venous segment (Fig. 1-40). The arterial segment (Sucquet-Iloyer canal) branches
from an arteriole. The wall shows a single layer of endothelium surrounded by a baseiment
membrane zone and a tunica media that is densely packed with four to six layers of
glomus cells. These cells are large and plump, have a clear cytoplasm, and resemble
epithelioid cells. Glomus cells are generally regarded as modified smooth muscle cells.
The venous segment is thinly walled and has a wide lumen.
Arteriovenous anastomoses are associated with thermoregulation. Constriction of the
shunt restricts and dilatation enhances the blood fow to an area. Acetylcholine and
histamine cause dilatation; epinephrine and norepinephrine cause constriction.
 Pericytes, which vary from fusiform to clublike in appearance, are aligned parallel to
like and myosin-like flaments, and they are important in regulating capillary flow. The
 origin of pericytes is uncertain.
Veil cels are fat, adventitial, fibroblast-ike cells that suround all dermal microves-
sels,22 51, 6 Although their exact function and nature are undeterimined, the fact that they
stain for factor Xifla indicates that they are a component of the derinal dendrocyte
 system. Unlike pericytes, which are an intcgral componcnt of the vascular wall and are
enmeshed in the mural basement membranc material, veil cells are entirely external to
 mast cells are usually present in the space hetween the vascular wall and the surrounding
veil cells.22
Laser Doppler fowmetry is an excellent noninvasive technique for the measurement
caused by various drugs, chemicals, and allergens relatcd to blood fow. Through the
58 · Structure and Function of the Skin
FIGURE I-40. Glomus. (From Elder D, ed:
Lever's Histopathology of the Skin, Sth ed. Lip-
pincott-Raven, 1998, Plhiladelphia.)
measurement of blood fow, the pathophysiology of various skin diseases can be verified
 and certain treatments can be partially monitored
Lymph Vessels
The skin is confronted by a specialized set of pathogenic organisms and environmental
colection of lymphatics and lymphoid and dendritic cels to deal with these special
deInands.
Lymphatics arise from capillary networks that lie in the superficial dermis and sur-
round the adnexa.51. 65 16 The vessels arising from these networks drain into a subcutane-
ous lymphatic plexus. Lymph vessels are not usually seen above the middle dermis in
routine histologic preparations of nornal skin.
The lymphatics are essential for nutrition because they control the true microcircula-
removal of tissue fuid are important for proper function. The lymphatics are the drains
that take away the debris and excess matter that result from daily wear and tear in the
skin. They are essential channels for the roturn of protein and cells from the tissues to the
blood stream and for linking the skin and regional lymph nodes in an immunoregulatory
such as solvents, topical medicaments, injected vaccines and drugs, and products of
inflammation.
 Skin has a noncontractile initial lymphatic collector system that drains into contractile
collector lymphatics.161 Initial lymphatics havc an attenuated endothclial layer, discontinu-
ous basement membrane, and noncontiguous cell junctions. Lymph formation depends on
the periodic cxpansion of the initial lymphaties, whereas compression leads to the empty-
ing of the initial lymphatics into the contractile collector lymphatics, which have snooth
muscle, exhibit peristalsis, and carry lynph toward the lymph nodes. Expansion and
 compression of collecting lymphatics is achieved by periocic tissue rmotions such as pres.
sure, pulsations, arteriolar vasomotion, skin massage, and muscle motion.145 161
 In general, lymph vessels are distinguished from blood capillaries by (1) possessing
wider and more angular lumina, (2) having fatter and more attenuated endothelial cells,
(3) having no pericytes, and (4) containing no blood (Fig. 1-41). However, even the
slightest injury disrupts the wall of a lyrnphatic or blood vessel or the intervening connec-
tive tissue. Consequently, traumatic fistulae arc commonplace. These account for the
common observation of blood flow in the lymphatics in inflamed skin.
Nerves
 Cutaneous nerve fbers havc sensory functions, control the vasomotor tonus, and regulate
the secretory activities of glands. They also exert a number of important effector func-
Structure and Function of the Skin · 59
FIGURE I-4l. Lymphatic vessels (ar-
row). Note angular outline and absence of
intravascular blood cells.
tions, including the modulation of multiple infammatory, proliferative, and reparative
Cutaneous processes.5. 77 147, 201 Cutaneous nerves are in close contact with dermal vessels,
mast cells, fibroblasts, keratinocytes, and Langerhan's cell. Neuropeptides released by
release of cytokines such as IL-1), mast cells (producing potent proinflarnrmatory cytokines
such as TNF-α), and endothelial cells (upregulating VCAM-1 expression and causing
secrction of IL-8). Such neuropeptides include substance P, neurokinin A, calcitonin
 gene-related peptide, vasoactive intcstinal peptide, neuropeptide Y, somatostatin, and
pititary adenylate cyclase activity peptide. In addition, skin epithelium can generate
neurotrophins, thus infuencing the dcvelopment, sprouting, and survival of nerve fibers.
 In general, cutaneous nerve fbers are associated with blood vesscls (dual autonomic
innervation of arteries) (Fig. I-42), various cutaneous end organs (tylotrich pad [see Figs.
1-10 and 1-43], Pacini's corpuscle [Fig. 1-44], Meissner's corpuscle), sebaceous glands,
hair follicles, and arrector pili muscles. The fibers occur as a subepidermal plexus (sce
Fig. 1-43).ss Free nerve endings evcn penetrate the epidermis. The motor inervation of
skin is attributable to sympathetic fibers of the autonomic nervous system. Although they
are ordinarily considered somatic sensory nerves, the cutaneous nerve trunks carry myeli-
 nated postganglionic sympathetic fibers. Under the light microscope, small cutaneous
nerves and free nerve endings can be demonstrated satisfactorily only by methylene blue
staining, metallic impregnation, or histochemical techniques.
 In addition to the important function of sensory perception (touch, heat, cold, pres-
sure, pain, and itch), the dermal nerves promote the survival and proper functioning of
the epidermis (i.e., the so-called trophic infuences).
The area of skin supplied by the hranches of one spinal nerve is known as its
OVERVIEW OF CUTANEOUS SENSATION
The skin is a major sensory surface. Signals about extermal events and about the internal
state of the skin are sent to the central nervous system by an array of rcceptor endings.
Thermoreceptors fall into two categories: cold units, which are excited by falling skin
temperatures, and warm units, which are excited by rising skin temperatures.65 Cold units
have C axons and A axons. Cold unit nervc terminals are branches of a small myelinated
60 · Structure and Function of the Skin
FIGURE I-42. Dog skin. Large
nerve fber (arrow) to the right of
a deep dermal arteriok.
Primaryhair
Dermis
FIGURE I-43. Nerve supply of the canine skin. a dermal nervc nctwork; b, hair folicle network; c,
specialized end organs.
Structure and Function of the Skin · 6 I
FIGURE I-44. Cat skin. Two
Pacini's corpuscles. Note typical
"onion skin" appcarance.
 axon, ending in a smallinvagination in the basal cells of the epidermis.6s 76. s Warm units
also have C axons and A axons, but no morphologic nerve terminal has been identified.
Four types of sensitive mechanoreceptor units with A axons are present in most
 skin regions.6s Pacinian corpuscle units are extremely sensitive to simall high-frequency
vibrations, deep pressure, and very rapid transients.6s, is Rapidly adapting units, which
arise from Meissner (Wagner-Meissner corpuscle, Dogicl's end-bulb, or Ruffini's end-
bulb) or Rufini corpuscles, arc primarily sensitive to the velocity of skin movement and
touch.65. 77, iso In hairy skin, there are many afferent units that are excited by hair
movement and have both A β and A 8 axons. Thesc axons provide the major tactile input
  o     s p p  s  o
a ao pxa asrn (i) sss n o o pns aq o s pn a a
movement of large guard or tylotrich hairs (G and T'hair units), and (2) those excited by
movement of all hairs, but especially by the fine down hairs (D hair units).65, iso The units
 driven from large hairs nearly always have A β axons; those driven frormn down hairs have
A 8 axons. G and T hair units are activated by rapid hair movements, and D hair units
respond to slow movements. An additional class of units activated by static deHection of
hairs is associated with large sinus hairs such as vibrissae.65. 66 Finally, a characteristic class
 of unit with an unmyelinated axon, the C mechanoreceptor, is frequcntly cncountered in
cat haired skin.65. 1so'Slowly adapting Type I endings frorm Merkcl's cell complexes signal
about steady pressure.6s 8l 10 Slowly adapting Type II units, which arc associated with
Ruffini endings,30. 6 show directional sensitivity in response to skin stretch and 1may play a
proprioceptive role.
Most nociceptor units fall into two categories: A 8 high-threshold mechanoreceptor
units with A 8 axons, and polymodal nociceptor units with C axons.6 The latter afferents
are classic pain receptors, responding to intense mechanical and therinal stimuli and to
irritant chemicals. C-polymodal nociceptor units are involved with hyperalgesia and itch.
 They are responsible, through the local release of vasoactive agents, for the fare around
skin jnjuries.65, 18n. 197
PRURITUS
Pruritus, or itching. is an unpleasant scnsation that provokes the desire to scratch.65 1s80. 196
It is the nost common symptom in dermatology and may be due to spcciie dermatologic
62 · Structure and Function of the Skin
diseases or may be generalized without clinically evident skin disease. Pruritus may bc
sharp and welf localizcd (epicritic), or it may be poorly localized and have a buming
quality (protopathic).
 The skin is richly endowed by a network of sensory nerves and receptors (see Fig. 1--
43). The sensory nervcs subserve hair follicles as wcll as encapsulated structures such as
Pacini's, Meissner's, and Ruffni's corpuscles.6 In addition, sensory nerves may end as free
nerve endings, referred to as penicillate nerve cndings. The penicillate endings arise from
the terminal Schwann cell in the dermis as tuftlike structures and give rise to an arboriz-
ing network of fne nerves, and they terminate either subepidermally or intraepidermally.
These unmyelinated penicillate nerve endings are limited to the skin, mucous memhranes,
and cormea.
 Although several morphologically distinct end organs have been described, a specific
end organ for pruritus has not been found. There is a clear association between C-
 polymodal nociceptor activation and itch that appears to involve a subpopulation of spe-
cific itch afferent fibers.05. 197
On the basis of the properties of afferent units, somatosensory activity can be suhdi-
vided into mechanoreceptors, thermoreceptors, and nociceptors. The nociceptors ar
involved in itch and pain. Nociceptors are supplied by A 8 and C fibers. The A & fibers
logic), well-localized, pricking itch (epicritic itch). The C fbers (nonmyelinated) conduct
morc slowly (2 m/sec) and suhserve inpleasant, diffuse burning (pathologic) itch (proto-
pathic itch). Both fibers enter the dorsal root of the spinal cord, ascend in the dorsal
column, and cross to the lateral spinothalamie tract. From there, they ascend to the
thalamus and, via the internal capsule, to the sensory cortex. There, the itch sensation 
 may be modlifed by emotional factors and competing cutaneous sensations.
At present, it has not been possible to isolate a universal mediator to explain pruritus,
but a host of chemical mediators have been implicated Table 13）6.17179However, the
pathophysiology of pruritus is complicated and poorly understood for most diseases in
most species. The relative importance of these putative mediators and modulators of
 pruritus in any given specics, disease, or individual is rarely known.
For ycars it has been stated, on the basis of studies perforimed in humans, that
p s pe sp  snd po sro jd s a ae s 
that histamine is relatively uninportant. Although there is no evidence to support the
that histamine and leukotrienes are important, and more so in cats than in dogs (see
Chap. 8) 178, 179
pain, touch, hcat, and cold) can magnify or reduce the sensation of pruritus by selcctivcly
acting on the gate-control system. For instancc, pruritus is often worse at night because
other sensory input is low. Although the mechanisms involved herc arc not clear, it has
been suggested that stressful conditions may potentiate pruritus through the release of
various opioid peptides (ccntral opinergic pruritus),ss Various neuropeptides, such as en-
● Table 1-3 MEDIATORS AND MODULATORS OF PRURITUS
HISTAMINE
PROTEASES
PEPTIDES
Eieosanoids
Kallkrein
Bradykinin
Leukotrienes
Cathepsins
Neuropeptides (opioids)
Prostaglandins
Trypsin
Substance P
Serotonin
Chymotrypsin
Vasoactive intestinal peptidc
Platelet-activating factor
Fibrinolysin
Leukopeptidases
Plasminl
Microbial proteases
Structure and Function of the Skin · 63
FIGURE I-45. Dog skin. Nor-
mal adiposc: tissine.
kephalins, endorphins, and substance P, have been demonstrated to participate in the
regulation of such cutaneous reactions as pruritus, pain, fushing, pigmentary changes, and
infammation.65
Subcutis
The subcutis (hypodermis) is of mesenchymal origin and is the deepest and usually
thickest layer of the skin.* However, there is no subcutis in some areas for functional
reasons (e.g., lip, cheek, eyelid, extemal ear, and anus); in these areas, the dermis is in
direct contact with musculature and fascia. Fibrous bands that are continuous with the
fibrous structures of the dermis penetrate and lobulate the subcutaneous fat into lobules
of lipocytes (adipocytes, or fat cells) (Fig. 1-45) and form attachments of the skin to
underlying fibrous skeletal components such as fascial sheets and periosteum. The superfi-
cial portion of the subcutis projccts into thc overlying dernis as papillae adiposac (Fig. 1-
46); these structures surround hair follicles, sweat glands, and vasculature to assist in
protecting thcsc structures from pressure and shearing forccs. The subcutis is about 90%
triglyceride by weight, and it functions (l) as an cnergy reserve, (2) in thermogcnesis and
insulation, (3) as a protective padding and support, and (4) in maintaining surface con-
tours. It is also important as a steroid reservoir and as the site of steroid mctabolism and
estrogen production. The mature lipocyte is dominated by a large lipid droplet that leaves
only a thin cytoplasmic rim and pushes the nucleus to one side.
The walls of arterial and venous capillaries present in fat are much thinner than those
prcscnt in thc dermis, and veil cells are not always present.2 In addition, therc are no
lymphatics present in fat lobules.162 The thickness of the subcutis is inverscly proportional
to blood fow, with slow circulation promoting lipogenesis and fast circulation promoting
lipolysis.tz As a result of these factors, fat is particularly susceptible to disease processes
and, with even minor injury, damage occurs in the absence of an efficient systen for
removing the damaged tissue.
*See referonces 160, 162, 166, 170. J72, 180, 188, and 202.
64 · Structure and Function of the Skin
INTERMEDIATE FILAMENTS
Intermediate filaments are major cytoskelctal protcins. Inmunohistochemical studies of
tissues from norinal dogs and cats have demonstrated typical mammalian staining patterns
for cytokeratin, vimentin, desmin, and neurofilament.46,4f, 16s, 19s
Senility
 Mechanisticaly, aging appears to result, in part, from genetically predetermined programs,
and in part, frorm endogenous and exogenous wear and tear, with both processes ex-
pressed at the cellular and molecular levels.214
Senile changes have been reported in the skin of aged dogs and cats.152 The hair of
 some dogs was dull and lusterless, with areas of alopecia and callus formation over
         r     d s
n s pe d a sop aos jo ss p sd a s o
to become malformed and brittlc.
Histologically, one may see orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis of the epidermis and hair
follicles, the latter often being atroplic and containing no hairs. Atrophy of the epidermis
 d  s  r    s  a 
Dermal changes may include decreased cellularity, fragmentation and granular degenera-
tion of collagen bundles, and occasional diminution and fragnentation of clastic fibers.
The solar elastosis (basophilic degeneration of elastic fibers) that characterizes aging
human skin is not usually seen in aged dogs and cats. It is probable that thc dcnse
 haircoat of dogs and cats protects therm from the danaging effects of ultraviolet light.
Variable changes may be seen in the glands of the skin, including cystic dilatation of
epitrichial sweat glands and large, yellow, refractile granules in the secretory cells of the
epitrichial sweat glands. Arrector pili muscles become morc cosinophilic, fragmented, and
vacuolated (Fig. 1 -47).
Extensive studies in humans have demonstrated the following changes in senile skin:
(1) epidermal atrophy, decreased adherence of corneocytes, and Hattening of the dermo-
epidermal junetion; (2) decreased numbers of melanocytes and Langerhans' cels; (3)
Stucture and Function of the Skin · 65
FIGURE I-47. Arrector pili in
nonmal skin frorn 9-year-old dog.
Note numerous, variably sized,
randomly scattered clear vacuoles
within muscle section.
dermal atrophy (relatively acellular and avascular) and altered dernal collagen, elastin, and
glycosaminoglycans; (4) atrophy of the subcutis; (5) attenuation of the eccrine and apo-
crine glands and decreased sebaceous gland secretion; (6) reduction of hair folicle density;
(7) thinning, ridging, and lusterless nail plates; (8) decreased growth rate of the epidermis,
hair, and nails; (9) delayed wound healing; (10) reduced dermal clearance of fuids and
foreign materials; (1l) compromised vascular responsiveness; (12) diminished eccrine and
(15) and impairment of the cutaneous immune and infarnmatory responscs. Clinical
correlates in humans of thesc intrinsic aging changes of the skin include alopecia, pallor,
xerosis (dry skin). increased incidence of henign and malignant neoplasms, increased
susceptibility to blister formation, predisposition to injury of the dernis and underlying
tissues, increased risk of wound infections, and thermoregulatory clisturbances.65 Wounds
 in aged beagles and boxers healed less rapidly than in young dogs.16
Heterozygosity
 lost.73a Loss of heterozygosity has been docunented or postulated to be causative in
various neoplasms (basal cell carcinoma, melanoma, squamous cell carcinoma), benign nevi
(hamartomas), and a variety of dermatoses characterized by pronounced segmental occur-
rences.
● REFERENCES
1. Affolter VK, Moore PF: Canine histiocytic prolifera-
4. Alhaidari Z, von Tschamer C: Anatomic ct physiolo-
tive diseasc. Proe Annu Menmh Meet Am Acad Vet
gie du folieule pileux chez les canivores domes-
Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 15:79, 1999.
tiques. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 32:18l, 1997.
2. Al-Bagdadi FA, et al: Hair follicle cycle and shedding
5. Ansel JC, ct al: Interactions of the skin and nervous
in male beagle dogs. Am J Vet Res 38:611, 1977.
systeni. J Invest Dermatol Symp Proe 2:23, 1997.
3. Al-Bagdadi FA, ct al: Histology of the hair cycle in
6. Aoki T: Stinulation of the swcat glands in the hairy
male beagle dogs. Aim J Vet Res 40:1734, 1979.
 skin of dogs by adrenaline, noradrenaline, acetylcho-
66 · Structurc and Function of the Skin
line, rmccholyl and pilocarpine. | Invest Dermatol 24:
31. Chesney CJ: Water: its form, function and imporlancr.
545, 1955.
in the skin of domestie animals. J Small Anim Pract
7. Aoki T, Wada M: Functional activity of the sweat
34:65, 1993.
glands in the hairy skin of the dlog. Science 114:123,
32. Chesney CJ: Measurerment of skin hydration in nor-
Inal dogs and in dogs with atopy ur a scaling derma-
8. Arbiser JL: Angiogenesis and the skin: A primer. J
tosis. J Small Anim Pract 36:305, 1995.
Am Acad Denmatol 34:486, 1996.
33. Chesney CJ: Mapping the canine skin: a study of coat
9. Badawi II, et al: Morphogenesis of the cutaneous
relative humidity in Kewfoundland dogs. Vet Derna-
vasculaturc in fetal dogs. Assiut Vet Med J 18:30,
tol 7:35, 1996.
1987.
34. Chesney CJ: The microclimale of the canine coat:
10. Badawi H, el al: Histogencsis of the pilosebaceous
The effects of heating on coat and skin temperature
apparatus in dogs. Assiut Vet Medi J 18:38, 1987.
antdl relative humidity. Vet Derinatol 8:183, 1997.
11. Bailey CS,ct al: Cutaneous inervation of the thorax
35. Chikakane K, Takahashi Il: Measurement of skin pH
and abdonen of the dog. Am J Vet Res 45:1689.
and its significance in cutaneous disases. Clin Derma-
1984.
tol 13:299, 1995.
12. Bailcy CS, et al: Spinal nerve root origins of the
36. Chuong CM, et al: Adhesion moleeules in skin devel-
cutanieous nerves of the canine pelvie lmb. Ain J Vet
upment: Morphogenesis of feather and hair. Ann Y
Res 49:115, 1988.
Acad Sci 642:263, 1991.
13. Baker BB, et al: Epidermal cell renewal in the dog.
37. Clarys P, Barel A: Quantitative evaluation of skin sur-
Am J Vet Res 34:93, 1973.
face lipids. Clin Dermatol 13:307, 1995.
14. Baker BB, et al: Epidermal cell roncwal in dogs after
38. Cochet P, ct al: Skin distribution of fpronil hy mi-
clipping of the hair. Am J Vet Res 35:445, 1974.
croautoradiograpby following topical administration to
15. Baker BB, Maibach HI: Epidermal cell renewal in
the beagle dog. Eur J Drug Metal Pharmacokinet 22:
seborrheie skint of dogs. Am J Vet Res 48:726, 1987.
211, 1997.
16. Baker KP: Senile changes of dog skin. J Simall Anirn
39. Comben N: Observations on the mode of growth of
Pract 8:49, 1967.
the hair of the clog. Br Vet J 107:231, 1951.
17. Baker KP: Hair growth and replacement in the cat.
40. Cotton DWK, van Hlasselt P: Sweating on the hairy
Br Vet J 130:327, 1974.
surface of the beagle. J Invest Dermatol 59:313.
18.Bcadlston DL,et al: Chymasc and tryptase staining
1972.
of norual felinc skin and of feline cutaneous mast
41. Cotton DwK, et al: Nature of the sweat glands in the:
cell tumors. Vet Allergy Clin Lmmunol 5:54, 1997.
hairy skin of the Beagle. Dermatologica 150:75, 1975.
ISa. Becker AB,et al: Mast cell hcterogeneity in dog
42.ConchmnRtal:Proteoglycansand gloprotins
skin. Aual Rec 213:477, 1985.
in bair follicle development and cycling. Am NY
19. Bell RL, et al: Oxidative metabolism in perfuscd sur-
Acad Sci 642:243, 1991.
viving dog skin. J Invest Dermatol 3l:13, 1958.
43. Couchman JR, ct al: Fibronectin-cell interactions. J
20.Bell M, Montagna W: Innervation of sweat glands in
Invest Dermatol 94:7s, 1990.
horses and dogs. Br J Dennatol 86:160, 1972.
44. Cox HU, et al: Distribution of stapbylococcal species
21. Berardlesca E, Borroni G: Instrumental evaluation of
on clinically hcalthy cats. Aim J'Vet Res 46:1824,
cutaneous liydration. Clin Dermatol 13:323, 1995.
1985.
22. Berardesca E, et al: Bioenginccring of the Skin: Cuta-
45. Crecdille KM, et alk: The usc of hair plueking to assess
neous Blood Flow and Eiytheua. (CRC Press, Boca
camine hair follicle regeneration: Inplications for the
Raton, FI, 1995.
bulge activation hypothesis. Proc Annu Memb Meet
23. Bernstein EF, Uitto J: The effect of photodamage in
Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 14:
dernal extracellular matrix. Clin Dermatol 14:143,
119, 1998.
1996.
46. De Las Mulas JM, tet al: lanmuohistochenical distri-
24. Boiron G, ct al. Phagocytosis of erythrocytes by hu-
bution of vimentin. desmin. glial fibrillary acidic pro-
man and animal epidermis. Dermmatologica 165:158,
tein and neuroflament proteins in feline tissues. J Vet
1982.
Med A 4l:1. 1994.
24a. Borradori L、 Sonnenberg A: Stmucturc and function
 47. Dc Las Mulas JM, et al: Immunohistochcmical distri-
of henmidesmosomcs: More than simple adhesion
butionofkeratn proteins in felne tissues. J Vet Med
complexcs. J Invest Dennatol 112:411, 1999.
A 41:283, 1994.
25.BotchkarevVA, et al: Neurotrophin-3 involvenent in
47a. De Los Monteros AE, ct al: Coordinate expression
the regulation of hair follicle morphogenesis. J Invest
of cytokeratins 7 and 20 in feline and canine carcino-
Dermatol 11l:279, 1998.
mas. Vet Pathol 36:179, 1999.
 26. Brusilow Sw, Munger B: Comparativc plhysiology of
47b. DeMora F, et al: Canine cutaneous mast cell disper.
swcat. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 110:317, 1962.
sion and histamine secretory characterization. Vet Im-
27. Burchill SA: Regulation of tyrosinase in hair folicular
nunol Inumunopathol 39:421, 1993.
melanocytes of the mouse during the synthesis of
48. Devriese LA, ct al: Ilentification and characterization
eumelanin and phaeomelanin. Ann NY Acad Sci 642:
of staphylococci isolatcd from cats. Vet Microbiol 9:
396, 1991.
279, 1984.
28. Butler WF, Wnght Al: llair growth in the grey.
49. Draize HH: The determination of the pH of thuc skin
hound. J Small Anim Pract 22:655, 1981.
of inan and common laboratory animals. J Invest
29. Cannon AG, et al: Gamma delta T cells in normal
Dermatol 5:77, 1942.
and discased canine skin. In: Kwoclika KW, et al
50. Dunstan RW: A pathormcchanistie approach to dis-
(eds). Advances in Veterinary Dermatology I. But-
eases of the hair follicle. Br Vet Dermatol Study Grp
terworth-Heinnemann, Boston, 1998, p 137.
17:37, 1995.
 30. Chambcrs MR, et al: The stricture anti function of
51.
Elder D, et al: Laver's Histopathology of the Skin
the slowly adaptingtyeIlechanoreceptor in hairy
VIII. Lippincott-Raven Publishers, Philadelphia, 1997.
skin. Q J Exp Physiol 57:417, 1972.
52. Elsner P, et al: Biocnginccring of the Skin: Water
Structure and Function of the Skin · 67
and the Stratum Comeum. CRC Press, Boca Ratom,
74. Hekinatpanah J: Organization of tactile dermatomes,
FL, 1994.
Cl through L4 in cat. J Neuropliysiol 24:129, 1961.
52a. Emerson JL. Cross RF: The distribution of mast
75. llendriks WH, et al: Seasonal hair growth in the
cells in normal canine skin. Am J Vet Res 26:1379,
adult domestic cat (Felis catus). Comp Biochem Phy-
1965.
sio 116A:29, 1997.
 53. Eun HIC: Evaluation of skin blood How by laser
76. llensel H: Thermoreception and Temperature Regu-
Doppler fownetry. Clin Dermtol 13:337, 1995.
lation. Academice Press, New York, 1981.
54.Feininan JM: The Rex cat: A inutation for thc
77. Hobson DW: Dermal and Ocular Toxicology. Funda-
masses. Vet Med (SAC) 78:1717, 1983.
mentals and Methods. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL,
 55. Ferrer L, et al: Immunocytochemical demonstration
1991.
 of intermediate flament proteins, S-100 protein and
78. Ilohl D, et al: In vitro and rapid in situ transglutami-
CEA in apocrine sweat glands and apoxenine
gland
nasc assays for congenital ichthyoses--a conparative
derived lesions of the dog. I Vet Med A 37:569, 1990.
shudy. J Invest Dermatol 110:268, 1998.
 56. Fine JD: Strueture and antigenicity of the skin base-
79.
Ilolbrook KA, Minanmi Sl: Hair follicle embryogenesis
 ment membrane zone. J Cutan Pathol 18:40l, 1991.
in the human. Characterization of events in vivo and
57. Fitzpatrick TB, et al: Dernatology in Gcncral Medi-
in vitro. Amn NY Acad Sci 642:167, 1991.
cine, 3rd ed. McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York.
1993.
tors. J Invest Denrmatol 94:74s, 1990.
37a. Foster AP: A study of the number and distribution
 81. Iggo A, Muir AR: The structure and function of a
of cutaneous mast cells in cats with disease not affect-
slowly adapting touch corpuscle in hairy skin. J Phy-
ing the skin. Vet Dermatol 5:17, 1994.
siol 200:763, 1969.
58. Foster KA: Coroposition of the seeretion fror the
82. Irwin Dl1CG: Tension lines in the skin of the dog. J
ecerine swcat glancls of the cat's foot pad. J Plhysiol
Small Anim Pract 7:593, 1966.
184:66, 1966.
83. Isitor GN, Weinman DE: Origin and early develop-
59. Callo RI, lHuttner KM: Antimicrohial peptides: An
mcnt of canine circumanal glands. Am J Vet Res 40:
cinerging concept in cutanconus biology. J Invest Der-
487, 1979.
matol 111: 739, 1998.
84. Itum S, et al: Mechanismn of action of androgen in
60. Canot C: Les techniques peroxydase-antipcroxydase
dermal papilla cells. Ann NY Acad Sci 642:385, 1991.
ct immunofluorescence directe appliquce a la detec.
S5. Jvanyi D, ct al: Patterns of expression of feline: cyto-
tion d'inununoglobulines et de conplement C3 dans
keratins in healthy epithclia and marnrmary carcinoma
la peau saine du chien. Proc CEDAC 7:14, 1991.
cells. Am J Vet Res 53:304, 1992.
61. Garthwaite G, et al: Location of immunoglobulins and
86.Iwabuchi T: Goneral sweating on the hairy skin of the
complement (C3) at the surface and within the skin
dlog and its raechanism. J Invest Dennatol 49:61,
of dogs. J Comp Pathol 93:185, 1983.
1967.
62. Cibson WT, et al: Immunology of the hair follicle.
 87. Iwasaki T: An electron microscopic study on secrctory
Ann NY Acad Sci 642:291, 1991.
process in canine apoerine sweat gland. Jpn J Vet Sci
63. Gillian AC, et al: The human hair folicle: A reservoir
43:733, 1981.
88. Iwasaki T: Electron mieroscopy of the canine apo-
late epidernis after UVB exposure. J Invest Derinatol 
crine sweat duct. Jpn J Vet Sei 45:739, 1983.
110:422, 1998.
89. Iwasaki T, ct al: Expression of basement memhrane
64. Gocbcler M, et al: The chemokinc repertoire of hu-
macromolecules and integrin receptors by keratino-
man dermal microvascular endothelial cells and its
tytes during canine wound hcaling. In: Kwoclka KW,
regulation by infannatory cytokines. J Invest Derma-
et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Derimatology III.
tol 108:445, 1997.
Bulterworth-Heineinann, Boston, 1998, p 339.
65. Goldsimith LA (ed): Physiology, Biochenistry, and
90. JIwaskai T, et al: Immunomapping of haserment mein-
brane zone macromolecules in canine salt-split skin. J
versity Press, New York, 1991.
Vet Med Sei 59:39l, 1997.
66. Gottschaldt KM, et al: Functional characteristics of
 91. Jackson R: The lines of Blashko: A review and recon-
 mechanoreceptors in sinus hair follicles of the cat. J
sideration. Br J Dermatol 95:349, 1976.
Physiol 235:287, 1973.
92. Jenkinson DM, Blackburn PA: The distribution of
67. Guaguere E, et al: Troubles de la piguentation mela
nerves, moroamine oxidasc and cholinesterase in the
nique des carmivores lre partie: Elements de physin-
skin of the dog and cat. Res Vet Sci 9:521, 1968.
pathologie. Point Vet 17:549, 1985.
93. Jenkinson DM: Myoepithelial cells of the
sweat
68. Gunaratnam P, Willinson GT: A study of normal hair
glands of domestic animals. Res Vet Sci 12:152, 1971.
growth in the dog, J Small Anin Pract 24:445, 1983.
94. Jenkinson DM: Sweat and schbaccous glands and their
function in domestic animals. In: von Tscharner C.
digungen in der Unbeharten Nascnhaut der Katze.
Halliwell REW (eds): Advances in Veterinary Derma-
Bibl Anat 19:210, 1981.
tology 1. Bailiere Tindall, Philadelphia, 1990. p 229.
70. Hale PA: Periodic hair shedding by a normal bitch. J
95. Kalaher KM, et al: Direct immunofluorescence tcst-
Sumall Anim Pract 23:345, 1982.
ing of irormal feline nasal planum and footpad. Cor-
71.Hales IM,Camp RD: Potent T cellstimulatory mate
nell vet 80: 105, 1990.
96. Kang S, et al: Pharmacology and molecular action of
Iormal human skin. J Invest Dermatol 110:725.1998.
retinoids and vitamin D in skin. J Invest Derrnatol
72. 1lalprin KM, Chorw DC: Metabolic pathways in pcr-
Synp Proe 1:15, 1996.
fused dog skin. J Invest Dermatol 36:431, 1961.
 97. Karasek MA: Mechanisins of angiogenesis in normal
73. Headington JT. Cerio R: Dendritie cells and the der-
and dliseased skin. Int J Dermatol 30:831, 1991.
mis: 1990. Am J Dermatopathol 12:217, 1990.
98. Kcaley T, et al: Interimediary metabolism of the hu-
73a. Happle R: Loss of heterozygosity in human skin. J
man hair follicle, Ann NY Acad. Sci 642:301, 1991.
Am Acad Dermatol 41:143, 1999.
99. Kitchell RL, et al: Electrophysiologie studies of the
68 · Structure and Function of the Skin
cutaneous nerves of the thoracic limb of the dog. Am
dendntie cels present in dog cpidernis are equiva-
J Vet Res 41:6l, 1980.
lent of hunan epidermal Langerhans cells. Eur J
100. Kobayashi S, et al: Experimental studies on the hermi-
Dermatol 3:148, 1993.
trichosis and the nervous influences on the hair
124. Marchal T, et al: Iminunophenotypic and ultrastruc-
growth. Acta Neuroreg 18:169, 1958.
tural evidence of Langerhans x:ll origin of the canine
101. Konig M, et al: Micromorphology of the circumanal
cutaneous histocytoma. Acta Anat 153:189, 1995.
glands and the tail gland area of dogs. Vlams Dier-
125. Marchal T, et al: Quantitative assessment of feline
geneesk Tijdschr 54:278, 1985.
epidermal Langerhans cclls. Br J Dermatol 136:961,
102. Kral F, Schwarizman RM: Veterinary and Compara-
1997.
tive Dernatology. J.B. Lippincott Co, Philadciphia,
126.
Marchal ISA, et al: Immunophenotypic characteriza-
1964.
tion of feline Langerhans cells. Vet Immunol Immu-
102a. Kube P, et al: Distribution, density, and heterogene-
nopathol 58:1, 1997.
ity of canine nast cell depending on fixation tech-
[27. Mason IS, ILloyd DH: Scanning electron microscopi-
niques. Histoclen Cell Biol 110:129, 1998.
cal studies of the living cpidermis and stratum cor-
103. Kubilus J, et al: Involuerin-like proteins in non-pri-
peum in dogs. In: Ihrke P], ct al (eds): Acdvances in
mates. J Invest 1Dermatol 94:210, 1990.
Vetcrinary Dermatology I1. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
I04. Kuhn RA: Organization of tactile denmatomes in cat
1993, p 131.
and monkey. I Neurophysiol 16:169, 1953.
128. McMillan JR, et al: Hemidesmosomes show abnormal
105. Kwochkn KW: Differential diagnosis of feline miliary
association with the keratin flanent nerwork in junc-
dermatis. In Kirk RW (ed): Curent Veterinary
tional forms of epidermolysis hullosa. I Invcst Derma-
Therapy. 9th ed. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia,
tol 110:132, 1998.
1986, p. 538.
129. Meyer W, Neurand K: The distribution of enzymes in
106.Kwochka KW, Bademakers AM:Cell proliferation of
the epidermis of the domestie cat. Arch Dernatol
cpidennis,hair folicles,and sebaceous glands ofea
Res 260:29, 1977.
gles and cocker spanicls with healthy skin. Ain J Vet
130. Meyer W, Neurand K: Zur Leuzinaminopeptidase-
Res 50:587, 1989.
aktivitat in normaler und geschadigter Katzenhaut.
107. Kwochka KW: The structure and funetion of epider-
Zentrabl Vetarinarmed [B] 24:601, 1977.
mal lipids. Vet Dermatol 4:151, 1993.
131.
Meyer W, et al: Zur Struktur und Funkten der Fuss-
108. Laue EB, et al: Stem cells in hair follicles. Cytoskcle-
ballen der Katzc. Kleintierpraxis 35:67, 1990.
tal sludies. Aum NY Aead Sei 642:197, 1991.
132.
Meyer W, Neurand K: Comparison of skin pH in
109.Lavker RM,et al: Hair follicle stem cells: Their loca-
domesticated and laboratory nammals. Arch Denna-
tion, role in hair cyele, and involvement in skin tumor
tol Res 283:16, 1991.
fornation. J Invest Dermatol 101:16s, 1993.
133. Meyer W, et al: A cornputer-assisted rmethod for the
110. Leigh IM, et al: The Keratinocyte Handbook. Can-
 determination of hair cuticula pattems in nammals.
bridge University Press, New York, 1994.
Berl Munch Tierarztl Wochenschr 110:8l, 1997.
111. Lovine N: Pigmentation and Pigmentary Disordlers.
134. Miller S]. et al: Re-epithelialization of porcine skin by
CRC Press, Boca Raton, FI, 1993.
the sweat apparatus. j 1nvest Dermatol 110:13, 1998.
112. Lichti U: Hair follicle transglutaminases. Ann NY
135. Montagna W: Comparative anatomy and physiology of
Acad Sci 642:82, 1991.
tlhie skin. Arch Dermatol 96:357, 1967.
113. Lighnter VA: Tenascin: does it play a role in cpider-
136.
. Moore PF, et al: The use of immunological reagents
mal morphogenesis and lomeostasis? J luvest Derma-
in defining the pathogenesis of canine skin diseases
tol 102:273, 1994.
involving prolifcration of leukocytes. In: Kwochka
114. Lindholm JS, ct al: Variation of skin surface lipid
KW, et al (ods). Advances in Veterinary Dernatology
composition_among mammals. Comp Biochem Phy-
III. Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p 77.
siol [B]. 69:75, 1981.
137. Mundt HCl, Stafforst C: Production and composition
115. Little CC: The Iuheritance of Coat Color in Dogs.
of dog hair. In: Edney ATB (ed): Nutition, Malnutri-
Comstock Publishing Associares, Ithaca, NY, 1957.
tion and Dieteties on the Dog and Cat. British Veter-
116. Lloyd DII, Garthwaite C: Epiderinal structure and
inary Association and Walthan Centre for Pet Nutri-
surfacc topography o canine skin.Res Vet Sci 33:99,
tion, London, 1987, p 62,
1982.
138. Nestle FO, Nicoloff BJ: A fresh morphological and
117. Lovoll JE, Getty R: The hair follicle, epidermis, der-
functional look at dermnal dendritic cells. J Cutan
mis, aid skin glanls of the dog. Am J Vet Res 18:
Pathol 22:385, 1995.
873, 1957.
139. Nicolaides N, et al: The skin surface lipids of nan
118. Luger TA, ct al: The role of α-elanocyte-stimulating
compared with those of eighteen species of animals. J
hormone in cutaneous biology. J Invest Dcrmatol
Invest Der1matol 51:83, 1968.
Symp Proe 2:87, 1997.
140. Nicolaides N, et al: Diesterwaxcs in surface lipicds of
119. Lyne AG, Short BF: Biology of the Skin and Hair
animal skin. Lipids 5:299, 1970.
Growth. American Elsevier Publishing Co., New
York, 1965.
and distribution. Am J Vet Res 14:448, 1953.
120.Machida II, et al: Histochemical and pharmacological
142. Nikkari T: Comparative chernistry of seburn. J lnvest
properties of the sweat glands of the dog. Am J Vet
Dermatol 62:257, 1974.
Rcs 117:566, 1966.
143. Noble WC: The Skin Microfora and Microbial Skin
121.
Maita K,Ishida K: Stucture and leveloprncnt of the
Disease. Cambridge Univcrsity Press, Cambridge, En-
perianal glandi of the dog. Ipn J Vet Sci 37:349, 1975.
gland, 1993.
122.1
Maaning TO, et al: Cutaneous laser-Doppler vekoci-
144. O'Guin WM, Manabe M: The role of trichohyalin in
uetry in nine animal species. Ain J Vet Res 52:1960,
hair folicle differentiation and its expression in non-
1991.
follicular epithelia. Ann NY Acad Sci 642:51, 1991.
123. Marchal T,et al: CD18 Birheck granule containing
145. Ohashi T, et al: Effects of vibratory stimulation and
Structure and Function of the Skin · 69
mechanical massage on micro- and lymuph-cireulation
dernis, dermis, subcutis) of the dog. Onderstepoort J
in the acupuncture points hctween the paw pads of
Vct Res 46:105, 1979.
anesthetized dogs. Recent Advanees in Cardliovascular
171.
Schwarz R, et al: Sinus haarwechsel ist nicht gleich
Diseases. Osaka National Cardiovascular Center.
Fellharwcchscl Histologische Untersuchungen am
Osaka, 1991, p 125.
Sinushaarfollikel der Katze. Kleintierpraxis 42:517,
146. Orentreich N, Selmanowitz VJ: Levels of biological
1997.
functions with aging. Trans NY Acad Sei 31:992,
172. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1900-1978: A mono-
1969.
graph. J Am Auim Ilosp Assoc 16:331, 1980.
l47. Paus R, et al: Neural mechanisms of hair growth
173. Scott SW: Feline dermatology 1979- 1982: Introspec-
control. I Invest Dermatol Symp. Proc 2:6l, 1997.
tive retrospcctions. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:537,
148.Peaston AE, et al: Evaluation of comnrnercially avail-
1984.
able antibodies to cytokeratin. Intermediate filaments
174. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1983-1985: "The sc-
and laminin in normal cat pinna. J Vet Diagn Invost
cret sits." J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:537, 1984.
4:306, 1992.
175. Scott DW, et al: Pitfalls in immunofuorescence tcst-
149.Pitelkow MR: Growth factors in eutancous biology
ing in canine dermatology. Cornell Vet 73:131, 1983.
and disease. Adv Dermatol 7:55, 1992.
176. Scott DW, et al: Pitfalls in immunofuorescence test-
150.Prestley CC: Molecular Aspects of Dermatology.
ing in dlermatology. Il. Pemphigus-like antibodies in
John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1993.
the cat, and direct immunofluorescence lesting of
151. Prieur Dj, Collier LL: The Maltese dilution of cats.
normal dog nose and lip. Comell Vet 73:275, 1983.
Feline Pract 14:23, 1984.
177. Scot DW: The biology of hair growth and its distr.
152. Queinnec B: Nomenclaturcs des robes du chal. Rev
bances. In: von Tschamer C, Halliwell REw (eds):
Med Vet 134:349, 1983.
Advances in Veterinary Dermatology 1.BailiereTn-
 e e sd pe roo seo  yy 
dall, Philadelphia, 1990, p 3.
1988, p 58.
178. Scott DW, Miller WH Jr: Nonsteroidal anti-inflanma-
154. Restano L, et al: Blashko lines of thc fax: A step
tory agents in the management of caine allergie pru-
closer to completing the map. J Am Acad! Dermatol
nitus. J s Afr Vet Assoc 64:52, 1993.
39:1028,1998.
179. Scott DW, Miller WH Jr: Medical managerment of
155. Robinson R: Genetics for Cat Breeders. Pergarnon
allergie pnuritus in the cat, with cmphasis on feline
Press, Oxford, England, 1977.
atopys6093
180. Scott DW, et al: Muller and Kirk's Small Aninal
Pathology of  the_
Skin.
Blackwell
Scientifie
Dorrmatology V. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, 1995.
Publications, Oxford, England, 1965.
181. Scott GA, Goldsmith LA. Homeobox genes and skin
157. Roy WE: Role of the sweat gland in eczema in dogs.
development: A review. J Invest Dermatol 101:3,
 J Am Vet Med Assoc 124:51, 1954.
1993.
158. Ruedisueli FL, et al: The measurement of skin pH in
182. Seaman WJ, Chang SHl: Dermal perifolicular miner-
normal dogs of different breeds. In: Kwochka KW, et
alization of' toy poodle bitches. Vet Pathol 21:122,
al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology
11l.
1984.
Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p 521.
183.
.Sharaf DM, ct al Skin surface lipids of the dog.
159. Rutmer D, et al: Merkel cell carcinoma. J Am Acad
Lipids 12:786, 1977.
Dermatol 29:143, 1993.
184. Sheretz EC: Misuse of hair analysis as a dliagnostic
160. Ryan TJ. Curri SB: The structure of fat. Clin Derma-
tool. Arch Dennatol 121:1504, 1985.
tol 7:37, 1989.
185. Smack DP, et al: Keratin and keratinization. J Am
161. Ryan TJ, Mortiner PS: Cutaneous lymphatic systcn.
Acad Dermatol 30:85, 1994.
Clin Dermatol 13:417, 1995.
J86. Soma T, et al: Analysis of apoptotic cell death in
162. Ryan TJ: Lyinphatics and alipose tissue. Clin Denua-
      s  
tol 13:493, 1995.
Dermatol 111:948, 1998.
163. Ryder ML: Seasonal changes in the coat of the cat.
187. Spearman RIC: The Integument. Cambridge Univer-
Res Vet Sei 21:280, 1976.
sity Press, London, England, 1973.
164. Saijonmaa-Koulumies LE, Lloyd DH: Colonization of
188. Strickland JH, Calhoun ML: The integumentary sys-
the canine skin with bacteria. Vet Dermatol 7:153,
tem of the cat. Am J Vet Res 24:1018, 1963.
1996.
189. Sutcr MM, et al: Extracellular ATP and sorne of its
165. Sandusky GE, ct al: Immunoeytocheinical study of
analogs induce transient rises in cytosolie frcc calciurm
tissue from clinically normal dogs and of neoplasms
in individual canine keratinocytes. J Invest Dermatol
nsing keratin monoclonal anitbodics. Am J Vet Res
97:223, 1991.
52:613,1991.
190. Suter MM, et al: Monoclonal antiboxdies: Cell surface
166. Schummer A,et al: The Circulatory Systen, thc Skin,
rmarkers for canine keratinocytes. Am J Vet Res 40:
and the Cutaneous Organs of the Domestic Mam-
1367, 1987.
mals. Verlag Paul Parey, Berlin, 1981.
191. Suter MM, et al: Keratinocyte differentiation in the
167. Schwarz R: 1larwachstum und Haarwechseleine
dog. In: von Tscharner Cl, Halliwell REW (eds): Ad-
Zusatzliche funktonelle Beanspruchung der Haut-
vances in Veterinary Dermatology 1. Baillicre Tindall,
Philadclphia, 1990, p 252.
praxis 37:67, 1992.
192. Suter MM, et al: Comparison of growth and differen-
168.
Schwarz. R, et al: Die gesunde Haut von Hund und
tiation of normal and neoplastic canine keratinocyte
Katze. Kleintierpraxis 37:67. 1992.
cultures. Vet Pathol 28:131, 1991.
169.
 Schwarz R, et al: Die gesunde Hlaut von llund und
193. Suter MM, et al: Keratinocyte biology and pathology.
Katze. Kleintierpraxis 26:395, 1981.
Vet Dermatol 8:67, 1997.
170. Schwarz R, et al: Micromorphology of the: skin (epi-
194. Takahashi Y: Functional activity of the eccrine sweat
 70 · Structure and Function of the Skin
glands in thce toc-pads of the dog. Tohoku J Exp Med
204. Whalen LR. Kitchell RL: Electrophysiologic studies
83:205, 1964.
of the cutaneous nerves of the head of the dog. Am J
195. Tanaka T, et al: The innermost cells of the outer root
Vet Bcs 44:615, 1983.
sheath in human anagen hair folicles undergo spe-
205.
Wheatley VR, Sher DW: Studies of the lipidls of dog
cialized keratinization inediated by apoptosis. J Cutan
skin. 1. The chemical composilion of dog skin lipids. ]
Pathol 25:316, 1998.
Invest Dermatol 36:169. 1961.
196. Thoday AJ, Friednann PS: Seientihe Basis of Derma-
epidlermis: Langerhans cells, Merkel cells and mela-
stone, New York. 1986.
nocytes. Vet Dernatol 6:1, 1995.
197. Tuckett RP, Wei JY: Responsc to an itch-producing
207.
Wilkie JSN, ct al: Morphometric analyses of' the skin
substance in the cat. I. Cutaneous receptor popula-
of dogs with atopic dermatitis and correlations with
tious with unuyelinated axons. Brain Res 413:95,
cutaneous and plasma histamine and total serum IgE.
1987.
Vet Pathol 27:179, 1990.
198. Vos JII, et al: An immunohistochemical study of ca-
208.Willinson JE. ct al: Long-terrn cultivation of canine
nine tissues with vimentin, desmin, glial flillary
keratinoeytes. J Invest Dermatol 88:202, 1987.
acidic protein, and neuroflament antisera. Zentralbl
 209. Wilkinson JE, et al: Ultrastructure of cultured canine
Veterinarmed [A] 36:561, 1989.
oral keratinocytes. Am J Vet Res 50:116l, 1989.
199. Vos Jll, et al: The keratin and vimentin distribution
210.Wilkinson JE, ct al: Antigcn cxprcssion in cnltured
patlers in the cpithclal structursof the caninc anal
oral keratinoeytes from dogs. An J Vet Res 52:445,
region. Anat Rec 234:391, 1992.
1991.
200. Vos, JH. et al: The expression of keratins, vinentin,
 211. Winkelmann RK, Schunit RW: Cholinesterase in the
neuroflarnent proteins, smooth muscle actin, neuron-
skin nf the rat, dog, cat, guinea pig and rabbit. J
specifle enolase, andl synaptophysin in tumors of the
Invest Denmatol 33:i85, 1959.
specific glands in the canine anal region. Vet Pathol
212.
Winstanley EW: The rate of mitotic division in regent
30:352, 1993.
erating epithelium in the dog. Res Vet Sci 18:144,
 201. Wallengren J: Vasoactive peptides in the skin. J Invest
1975.
Dernatol Symp Proc 2:87, 1997.
213.
Wright M, Walrer S: The Book of the Cat. Surmrnit
202. Webb AJ, Calhoun MI.: The mieroscopie anatomy of
Boxks, New York, 1980.
the skin of mongrel dogs. An ↓ Vet Res 15:274, 1954.
214.
Yaar M: Molecular mechanisms of skin aging. Adv
203. Weinlberg WC, et al: Modulation of hair follicle cell
Dermatol 10:63, 1995.
215. Yager JA, Scott DW: The skin and appendages. In:
growth factors. Ann NY Acacd Sei 642:281, 1991.
203a. Welle M, at al: Distriution, density and heterogene-
imals, 4th ed. Vol 1. Acadlemic Press, New York, 1993,
ity of canine and bovine skin mast cells depending on
p 531.
fixation techniques. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Ad-
216, Zlotkin SH: Hair analysis. A useful tool or a waste of
vanues in Veterinary Dernatology lll, Butterworth-
money? Int J Dermatol 24:161, 1985.
lIeinentau, Boston, 1998, p 488.
Chapter
Diagnostic Methods
● the SYSTeMatIc ApproaCh
 Skin diseases are unique in medicine becausc the lesions and the symptoms are external
and potentially visible to the owmer and practitioner. This difference offers several unique
opportunitics for the practitioner. The progression of skin lesions and diseases can offen
be determined with a good history. Incomplete histories may eventually be amended
because the chronic, recurrent nature of many diseases allows the practitioncr to instruct
 clients in what observations they should try to make. The cducated client may then add
relevant information about the course of the disease. The physical cxamination reveals the
gross pathologic lesions that arc prcsent for direct examination. With no other organ
 system is this great amount of information so readily available.
To benefit optimally from these opportunities, the clinician uses a systematic ap-
proach; this greatly increases the probability of determining the correct diagnosis in the
most cost-effective manner. Ideally, a thorough examination and appropriate diagnostic
procedures are acomplished the first time that the patient is secen and before any
masking treatment has been initiated. However, in practicc, many clicnts arc reluctant to
 spend money on diagnostic tests, particularly for the initial occurrence of a problem. This
makes a thorough history and physical exainination even more inportant, because they
often are the only tools available for arriving at a differential diagnosis.
At the frst visit, it is important to establish the client's reliability as a historian and
observer. The least expensive tool available to the practitioner is the education of the
client about signs and symptoms to look for. The clinician can develop a better relation-
ship with clients and gain valuablc information by training clients in what they should
observe and watch for, especially if there is a poor response to treatment or a recurrence.
Spending some tine educating the client in the value of this information often leads to
 better acceptance of the costs associated with future treatment.
A rational approach to the accurate diagnosis of dermatologic diseases is presented in
Table 2- 1.
● records
Recording historical facts, physical examination findings, and laboratory data in a system-
atic way is particularly important for patients with skin disease. Many dernatoses are
chronic, and skin lesions may be slow to change. For this reason, inany practitioners use
outline sketches of the patient, which enable the clinician to draw the focation and the
extent of lesions.
Figure 2-1 is a record form for noting physical examination and laboratory findings
  r    s     s  n
a systematic manner. It also enables one to apply pertinent dcscriptivc tcrms, savcs time,
and cnsurcs that no important information is omitted. This forin details only dermatologic
data and should be used as a supplement to the general history and physical examination
record. A special dermatologic history forin is also useful, especialy for patients with
allergics and chronic diseascs (Fig. 2-2).
71
72 · Diagnostic Methods
●Table 2-I
StepS tO A DErMAtOLoGIC DIAGNOSIS
MAJOR STEP
KEY POINTS TO DETERMINE OR QUESTIONS TO ANSWER
Chief conplaint
Why is the client seeking veterinary care?
Signalment
Record the animal's age, breed, sex, and woight
Dermatologie history
Obtain data about the original lesion's location, appcarance, onset, and
ratc of progresson. Also dctermine thc degree of pruritus, contagion
to other aninals or people, and possible seasonal ineidence, Helation-
ship to dict antl cnvionincntal factors and the response to previons
medieations are also important
 Previous meclical history
Medica history that does not directly seem to relate should also be
reviewed
Client credibility
 Deterimine what the clients initially noticed that indicated a problem.
Repeat questions and ask in a different way to determine low certai
the clients are and whether they understand the questious
Plhysical examination
IDetermine the distribution pattern and the regional location of lesions.
Certain patterns are diagnostically significant
Closely examine the skin to identify prinary anrd secondary lesions
Determine skin and hair quality (e.g. thin, thick, turgid, elastic, dull,
oily, or dry)
Ohserve the configurations of speciic skin lesions and their relationship
to cach other
Differential diagnosis
Differential diagnosis is developed on the basis of the preceding data.
The ust likely diagnoses are recorded in order of probability
Diagrostie or tlherapeutic plan
A plan is presented to the client. The client and the clinician together
then agree on a plan
Diaguostie and laloratory aids
Simple and inexpensive olice dliagnostic procedures that confirm or nule
out any of the most likely (first three or four) differential diaguostic
 possibilities should be done
More complex or cxpensive diagnostic tests or proceclues are then rec-
 ommendedl
Clients may elect to forgo these tests and pursue less likely dlifferential
dagnostic possibilties in atpts t savemoney.Often,this approah
is not cost effective when the expense of inefficient medications and
repeated cxamination is considered
'T'rial therapy
Clients may elecl to purse a therapeulic trial instead of diagnostic:
proeecdures. Trial therapies should be sceleetcd so that further dliagnos-
tic information is obtained. Gcncrally, glucocorticoids and progesta-
tional drugs are not acceptable lecause litte diagnostie information is
obtainecl
Narrowing tlhe differential liagnosis
Plan additional tests,vbservations of therapeutie trials, and rc-cvaluations
 of signs and synptoms to narrow the list and provide a defnitive
diagnosis
 The disadvantage of the forms is that many chronic cases have tremendous variations
in the type of lesions and their distribution, making a map confusing. For exanple, how
would onc draw thc following alopecia lesion? A io-cm plaque in thc flank fold has a
central (8-cin) zone of lichenification, hyperpigmentation, alopecia, and crusts. The outer
(2-cm) margin is alopecic and has a papular dermatitis with mild hyperpigmentation of
lattice configuration. Peripheral to thc plaquc arc occasional papules and pustules. Rcprc-
senting several different lesions on a small diagram is diffeult or, if done, is often
unreadable.This can make a diagram unsatisfactory to use.Therefore,the authors have
found that bricf written descriptions of lesions in various hody regions are preferable to
dliagrams in complicated cases.
· HIiSTOrY
General Concepts
The pet's disease is like an unsolved mystery in which the client is the witness to what has
occurred and the veterinarian is the rletective who must ascertain what the client ob-
Diagnostic Methods · 73
Dermatology
DISTRIBUTION OFLESIONS
Weight:
PRIMARYLESIONSCheck
Patra
Purpura
esale
式
Licess
SECONDARY LESIONS(Chack)
Cret
Alopecia
Erythema
Eroicn
Colarettey
cer
Fissure
Hpe-pignena-ion
Hypopigmeatation
HEerkoratoia
Hyperhidrcsis
ication
Comodc
Ventral
Dorsal
SKIN CHANGESCck)
Thick
OTHERFINDINGS
reased Lasiry
Pinnal-Paisl Reex
HAIR COAT CHANGES(Chek
Lymsh Naios
Alopecia
Hsreinchom
Cral
DCo
OlyCea:
Ancgenital
Casy Eylatien
Primasy Hairs
ocondary Haizi
Footpads
Hair Cart
Bota
S
ciate Hair Lon
CONFIGURATION OFLESIONSICheck
Follicular
LABORATORY
Linear
Grorpea
Linular
Fungal Culrure
PRURITUS Checki
Woods Light
Hair Examinatloa
Gromt
MA
Moderae
Citology:
Lsipaal
CUTANEOUSPAINICheck
Savere
DLAGNOSIS/DIFFERENTLAL
PARASITESCheck)
FLecs
Flea Dint
Ticks
Ear Mitus
Ciher:
FIGURE Z-I. Dermatology examination sheet.
74 · Diagnostie Methods
PATIENT HISTORY
Client Name:
 Pet's Name:
Chief Complaint:
 Age of pet when acquired:
Age of pet now:
How long has your pet had this problem?
 Is there a time when the problem is less severe or the itching is less intense?
What was the problem like initially and where did it start?
Normal skin, just itchy
Rash
Redness
Hair Loss
Pimples
Nose
Neck
__Tail
Back legs
Around eyes
Back
Front legs
Back paws
Ears
Rump
_Front paws
Chest
Ahdomen
Groin
Has it spread?
Yes
No If so, to what sites:
Does your pet scratch, chew, lick, or rub any of the follwing areas?Please check all that apply:
Nose
Neck
_Tail
Back legs
Around eyes
Back
Front legs
Back paws
Ears
Rump
Front paws
_Chest
Abdomen
Groin
Comments:
Other pets in envirorment? State how many:
Dogs
_Cats
_Birds
Rabbits
_Rodents
_Large/farm animals - what type?
Do any other pets have skin problems? Describe:
Do any people in the household have skin problems?
s
No
Describe:
Amount of time pet spends:
_% indoors
% outdoors
Are symptoms any worse?
indoors
shoopino
morning
night
 Do any relatives of your pet have skin problems that you are aware of?
Yes
No
Describe:
Do you use routine flea control?
Yes
ON
What types of products to you use? Brand:
Powders
Dips
_Sprays
_Collars
Baths
Do you use insecticides in your home?
Yes
ON
Please list any medications/injections your pet has had for this problem?
Did they seem to help? If so, which one(s)?
What is your pet's regular diet?
 Does your pet do any of the following?
Cough
Sneeze
Runny eyes
Vomit
Diarrhea
Limp
Drink excessively
Urinate excessively
Has your pet ever had an ear infection?
Yes
No
 Is your pet's appetite normal?
Yes
No
Has it changed recently?
Yes
No
Additional Comments:
FIGURE 2-2. Dermatology history sheet.
Diagnostic Methods *77
● Table 2-3
Breed predilection for non-neoplastic
SkIn DISEaSeS (sTroNg clinICaL
ImpresSIoN)
BREED
DISEASE
Abyssinian cat
Follicnlar dysplasia
Idiopathie cerurminous otitis extera
 Psychogenic dermatitis or alopecia
Hypothyroidism
Airedale
Adult-onset demodicosis
Atopy
lDemodicosis
Follicular dysplasia, fank
Akila
Pemphigus foliaccus
Sehaceous adenitis
L veodermatologic syndromr
Baseuji
Im mnnoproliferative enteropathy
Bassei hound
Atopy
Malassezia dermatitis
Seborrhea, primary
Skin fold intcrtrigo
Beagle
Atopy
Demodicosis
Immunoglobulin A (IgA) deficiency
Belgian sheepdog (Belgian Tervuren)
 Sebaceous adenitis
Vitiligo
 Berger de Beauce
Epidermolysis bullosa
Borz0i
Hypothyroidism
Boston terrier
Atopy
Denodicosis
Facial fold intertrigo
Hyperadrenocorticisn
Patterned alopecia
Tail fold intertrigo
Boxer
Atopy
Demodicosis
Follicular dysplasia (flank)
Ilyperadrenocorticism
Hypothyroidism
Muzzle furunculosis, bacterial
Pedal furunculosis, bactcrial
Sertoli cell syndrorne
Solar dermatitis (white dogs)
Sterle pyogranmloma syudrome
Stermal callus
 Brittany spanicl
Complement deficicney
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Hypothyroidism
Bullmastiff and Mastiff
Follicultis and furunculosis, bacterial
Bull tenier
Atopy
Furunculosis, scarring and bacterial
Lethal acrodermatitis
Solar dermatitis
Zine-responsive dermatosis
Cavalier King Charles spanicl
Syringohydronclia
Chesapeake Bay retriever
Atopy
 Folliculitis and furunculosis, baeterial
Chihuahua
Denodicosis
Pinnal thrombovascular necrosis
Chow Chow
Adrenal sex hornone abnormalities
 Pemphigus foliaceus
Color dilution alopecia
Demodicosis
Hypusomatotropism
Hypothyroidism
Uveodermatologic syndrome
Tabte continued on folowing puge
78 · Diagnostic Methods
● Table 2-3
breed predilection for non-neoplastic
Skin DISEaSEs (StrONg ClinICaL
IMPRESSION) Continued
BREED
DISEASE
Collie
 Bullous pemphigoid
Dermatomyositis
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Nasal furunculosis, bacterial
 Pemphigus crythcmatosus
Pyotraunatie dernatitis
 Sertoli cell syndrome
Systenic lupus erythermatosus
Vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosis
Curly-coated retricvers
Follicular dysplasia
Dachshund
Acanthosis nigricans
Alopecia areata
Color dilution alopecia
Demodicosis
Foliculitis and pedal furunculosis, bacterial
Hyperadrenocorticism
Hypothyroidis1n
Juvenile cellulitis
Linear IgA pustular dermatosis
Malassezia dermatitis
Nodular panniculitis(sterile)
Patterm alopecia (ears)
Patterm alopecia (vontral)
Pemphigus foliaceus
Sterile pyogranuloma syndrome
Stemal callus
Vasculitis (idiopathic)
Dalmatian
Atopy
Demodicosis
Dnig reactions
Folliculitis and furunculosis, bacterial
Solar dermatitis
 Doberman pinscher
Acral furuneulosis, bacterial
Acral lick dermatitis
Color dilution alopecia
Demodicosis
 Drug reaction (sulas)
Flank sucking
Follicular dysplasia
Folliculitis and pedal furuneulosis, bacterial
Hypothyroidism
Muzzle lurunculosis, bacterial
Vitiligo
IDogue de Bordeaux
Hereditary footpad hyperkeratosis
Stcrile pyogranuloma syndrome
Englisl bulldog
Atopy
Demodicosis
Facial fold intertrigo
Folliculitis and pedal furunculosis, bacterial
Follicular dysplasia (flank)
Hypothyroidism
Malassezta dormatitis
 Muzzle furunculosis, bacterial
Sterile pyogranuloma syndrome
Tail fold intertrigo
German shepherd
Atopy
Cellulitis (folliculitis and furunculosis), bacterial
Collagen disorder of footpacds
Contact hypersensitivity
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Diagnostic Methods ·75
served. As this information is extracted, the vcterinarian becomes the lawyer to dcterrmine
whether the client is a crediblc or qualificd witness. Obtaining a thorough history and
being attentive to clues from the client are skills that must be practiced and devcloped by
 junction with a thorough dermatologic examination is helpful for another practical reason:
This is often when the veterinarian initially establishes her or his credibility as a profes-
sional with the client. In veterinary dermatology, the client-veterinarian relationship is
often important for a successful outcome. Because many chronic diseases necessitate
lifelong control and can be frustrating for client and veterinarian alike, it is critical for the
client-veterinarian relationship to start well. If the veterinarian is thorough and obtains the
most infornation possible from thc history and the dermatologic examination, the client is
more likely to recognize the cffort and expertise of the veterinarian. These clients are
often morc agrceable to pursuing diagnostic tests or trial therapies if the inforrnation from
the initial cxhaustive examination is not sufficient for a diagnosis. Cursory examinations
lcave a sense of insecurity in some clients, making thiem reluctant to follow recoinimenda-
tions based on such examinations.
Owner's Chief Complaint
The owner's chief complaint, or chief cause of concerm, is often one of the major signs
initially uscd in cstablishing a differential diagnosis. Addressing the client's chief complaint
 is an imporlant step in achieving satisfaction of clients and obtaining their confidence and
often initiates a favorable client-veterinarian relationship. Other findings not directly re-
lated to the chief complaint may be uncovered. Although these aditional findings are
inportant to discuss, the client's chief complaint must always be addressed.
Age
 pxs rq s oa u suaq n si duxa od s sr
 Allergies tend to appear in more mature animals, probably because repeated exposure to
the antigen must occur and the immune response has to occur before clinical signs
age, and most neoplasms develop in mature to older patients. Most of the agcs listed in
Table 2-2 refer to the usual age at the beginning of the discasc, not ncccssarily the age
at which the animal presents.
Breed
 Breed predilection determines the incidence of soime skin disorders (Table 2-3)9. 10 For
example, primary seborrhea is common in Cocker spaniels; acanthosis nigricans usually
in intact males is found in Chow Chows: adrenal sex hormone imbalances occur in
 Pomeranians; dernatornyositis is found in Shetland sheepdogs (shelties) and collies; zinc-
responsive dermatosis occurs in Siberian huskies and Alaskan malamutes; and many of the
Welsh) sccm to be particularly predisposcd to allergic skin disease. Sec Chapter 20 for a
review of breed predilections for cutaneous neoplasms.
In a study of dogs in northern California conducted at the University of California at
Davis, 3l breeds were found to be at elevated risk for skin diseases, including Doberman
pinschcr, Irish setter, Dalmatian, Dachshund, Golden retriever, various terricr brccds,
Shar pei, Chow Chow, and Akita.? In thc same study, dccreascd risk of skin discasc was
found for dogs of mixed breeding and for 12 purcbrcd brceds, including St. Bernard,
standard Poodle, beagle, Basset hound, German shorthaired pointer, Afghan hound, and
Australian shepherd.
76 · Diagnostic Methods
●Table 2-2
Skin DIseaSe WIth FreQuent AGe-relateD
Onset (strong clinIcal ImpressIon)
AGE
DISEASE
 Younger than 6 months
 Alopecia universalis
Black hair follicle dlysplasia
Canine muzzle furunculosis
Cutaneous asthenia
Demodicosis
Dermatomyositis
Dermatophytosis
Ectodcrmal defect
Epidermolysis bullosa
Hypotrichosis
Ichthyosis
Impetigo
Juvenile cellulitis
Lymphedema
Other congenital hereditary defects
Pituitary dwarfism
Tyrosinemia
Viral papillomatosis (oral)
1 to 3 years
Allergie diseases, special aty
auas esdrdy eu
Color dilution alopecia
Hyposomatotropism in the mature dog
Primary idiopathic seborrhea
 Older than 6 years
Cushing's dlisease
Feminization with testicular tunor
Neoplasims
Senile dlogs
Alopecia
Decubital ulcer
Necrolytic migratory erythema
Thin, fragile skin
Sex
The sex of the patient affects the incidence of certain problems. Obviously, male feminiza-
tion with testicular tumors occurs only in male animals. Other sex-related problems occur
(e.g, circumanal adenomas are seen almost exclusively in male dogs). In adldition, sex-
related behaviors may affect the incidence of certain diseases, such as abscesses in fighting
tomcats. One should determine whether the patient is sexually intact; in intact females, it
should be determined whether the skin problem bears any relationship to the estrous 
cycle.
Color
The color of an animal may also be related to certain problems--most notablc is the
association of solar dermatitis and squamous cell carcinoma of the pinna in white-eared
cats. In addition, solar dermatitis, actinie keratoses, solar-related hermangioma, hemangio-
sarcoma, and squamous cell carcinoina occur in white-skinned, thinly haired regions of
 dogs, particularly in white bull terriers, Staffordshire bull terriers (pit bull terriers), boxers,
Dalmatians, beagles, Whippets, and Great Danes.
Coat color may also relate to disease, as in color dilution alopecia. Although it is mosl
commonly described in Doberman pinschers, this hair disorder occurs in any breed that
has diluted coat colors and may occur in piebald breeds as welliba The color of the eyes
 and coat may be helpful in diagnosis, as in yellow-eyed, “smoky” Persian cats with the
Chediak-Higashi syudrome. Also, an association between positive intradermal skin test
results and coat colors was observed in normal cats.4a
Text continued on page 82
Diagnostic Methods·79
●Table 2-3
breed predilection for Non-neoplastic
SkIn DISEaSES (STrONG CLInICaL
IMPRESSION) Continued
BREED
DISEASE
Gernan shepherd Continued
Erythema multiforme
Fanilial vasculopathty
Flea bite hypersensitivity
Fly dermatitis of ear tips
Food hypersensitivity
I upoid onychodystrophy
 Insect- or arachnid-related eosinophilic furunculosis (facc)
Medullary trichomalacia
Metatarsal fistulae
 Mucocutancous bacterial pyoderma
 Nasal furunculosis, baeterial
Otitis exterma
 Pemphigus erythematosus
Pituitary dwarfism
Pythiosis
Seborrhea: primary
Systernic lupus erythematosus
Vitiligo
Golden retriever
Acral furunculosis, bacterial
Acral lick dermatitis
Atopy
 Folliculitis and furunculosis, bacterial
Hypothyroidism
Juvenile cellulitis
Nasal hypopigmentation
Pyotraumatie dermatitis
Pyotraumatic folliculitis and furunculosis, bacterial
Stenile pyogranuloma syndrome
Trichoptilosis
Cordon setter
Atopy.
Ilypothyroidism
Juvenile cellulitis
Great Dane
Acral furunculosis, bacterial
 Acral lick dernatitis
Callus formation, hygroma
Demodicosis
Hypothyroidism
Muzzle furumculosis, bacterial
Pedal furunculosis, bacteria!
Solar dermatosis in Harlequin
Sterile pyogranuloma syndromc
Great Pyrenees
Demodicosis
Pyotraumatic dermatitis
Greyhound
Drug reactions
Vasculopathy
Himalayan cat
Cheyletiellosis
Dermatopbytosis (Microsponum canis)
Idiopathic facial dermatitis
Primary sehorrhea
Irish setter
Acral furunculosis, bacterial
Adoy
Acral liek dermatitis
Color dilution alopecia
Folliculitis and furunculosis, bacterial
Granulocytopathy
Hypothyroidism
Seborrhea,primary
Irish water spaniel
Follicular dysplasia
Iliopathic onyehodystrophy
Inish wolfhound
Elhow hygrona
Hypothyroidisin
Table continued on folloving page
 80 · Diagnostic Methods
●Tahle 2-3
Breed predilection for non-neoplastic
SKin DISEaSes (StRoNG ClinICaL
IMPRESSION) Continued
BREED
DISEASE
Keeshond
Adrenal hyperplasia syndrome
Hypogonadism of intact male
Hyposomatotropism
Hypothyroidism
L abrador retriever
Acral furunculosis, bacterial
Acral lick dermatitis
Atopy.
Fanilial nasal byperkeratosis
Folliculitis and furunculosis, bacterial
Food hypcrscnsitivity
Pyotraumatie dermatitis
Seborrhea, primary
Waterline disease (Malassezia dernatitis?)
Lhasa apso
Atopy
Injection reaction
Malassezia dermatlitis
Malanute
Demodicosis
Hypothyroidism
Zinc-rosponsive dermatosis
Newfoundland
Foliculitis and furunculosis, bacterial
Hypothyroidism
Penphigus foliaceus
Pyotraumatic dermnatitis
Old English sheepdog
Atopy
Demodicosis
Drug reactions
Pedal furunculosis, bacterial
Pekingese
Facial fold intertrigo
Injection reactions
Sertoli cell syndrome
Persian cat
Cheyletiellosis
Dermatophytosis
Facial fold intertrigo
Hair mats
 Idiopathic facial derrmatitis
Seborrhea,primary
Pointcrs
Acral mutilation
Demodicosis
Epidermolysis bullosa
Exfoliative cutancous lupus crythematosus
Follicular dysplasia (fank)
Nasal and muzzle folliculitis
Pomeranians
Adrenal sex hormone abnormalities
Hyposomatotropistn
Injection reactions
Poodlc
Ectodermal defect
Epiphora
Hyperadrenocorticism
Hyposomatotropism
Hypothyroidism
Injection reactions
Otitis cxterna
Sehaceous adenitis (standard)
Portuguese water dog
Follicular dysplasia
Pug
Atopy,
Facial fold and tail fold intertrigo
 x
Hypotichosis
Rhodesian Ridgeback
 Dermoid sinus in midline of back
Rottweiler
Folliculitis and furunculosis, bacterial
Follicular lipidosis
Follicular parakeratosis
Idiopathic vasculitis
Vitiligo
Diagnostic Methods · 81
Tahle 2-3
BREed preDIlecTION foR NoN-nEopLastic
SKIN DISEaSES (STRONG CLINICaL
IMPRESSION) Continued
BREED
DISEASE
pafourns
Adrenal hyperplasia syndrome
Hlyposormatotropism
Sebaceous adenitis
Uveodermatologic syndrome
Schipperke
Penphigus foliaceus
Shar pei
Atopy
Demodicosis
Fold intertrigo
Folliculitis, bacterial
Food bypersensitivity
Hypothyroiclism
Idliopathic nucinosis
IgA dcficiency
Schnauzcr, miniature
Atopy
Aurotrichia
Drug reactions
Follicular dysplasia (Hank)
Hypothyroidism
Pseudohernaphroditism
Sehnauzer comedo syndrome
Subcormeal pustular dematosis
Superficial suppurative necrolytie dermatitis
Shetland sheepdog
Dermatomyositis
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Drug reactions
Folliculitis, bacterial
Scrtoli cell syndrome
Systermic lupus crythematosus
Vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus
Shih tzu
Atopy
Malassezia dermatitis
Siamese cat
Food hypersensitivity
Hypotrichosis
Periocular leukotrichia
Psychogenic dlormatitis or alopecia
Vitiligo
Siberian husky
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Eosinophilic granuloma
Folicular dysplasia
Hypogonadism in intact male
Idiopathic onyehodystrophy
Uveodermatologic syndrome
Zinc-responsive denmnatosis
Spaniels (Cocker and Springer)
Acral rnutilation (English Springer)
Atopy (American Cocker)
Cutaneous asthenia (English Springer)
Hypothiyroidism
Idiopathic onychodystrophy (Springer)
Lip fold intertrigo
Malassezia dermatitis
Otitis extema (cspccially proliferative)
Psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatosis (English Springer)
Seborrhea, primary
Vitamin A-responsive dermatosis (Cocker)
St.Bermard
Acral lick dermatitis
 Folliculis and furunculosis, bacterial
Pyotraumatic dermatitis
Terriers
Caim
Atopy, Sertoli cell syndrorne
Irish
Hereditary footpad hyerkeratosis
Table continued on following page
82 + Diagnostic Methods
 Tahle 2-3
breed predilectlon for Non-neoplastic
SKIN DISEASES (STRONG CLINICAL
IMPRESSION) Continued
BREED
DISEASE
Jack Russell
Atopy
Demodicosis
Dermatophytosis (Trichophyton mentagrophytes, var. erinarei)
Vasculitis
 Kerry blue
Footpad keratoses (corns)
Otitis externa
Spiculosis
Scottish
Atopy
Demodicosis
Folliculitis and furunculosis, bacterial
Hereditary nasal pyogranuloma and vasculitis
West Highland white
Atopy
Denmodicosis
Epidermal dysplasia
Jchthyosis
Malassezia dermatitis
Sehorrhea, primary
Wire-haired fox
Atopy
Yorkshire
Color dilution alopecia
Dermatophytosis (M. canis)
Injection reaetions
Melanoderma and alopecia
Traction alopecia
Vizsla
Sebaceous adenitis
Weimeraner
Demodicosis
Muzzle furunculosis
Sertoli cell syndrome
Sterle pyogranuloma syndrome
Whippet
Ictiopathic onychodystrophy
Medical History
The clinician should obtain a complete medical history in all cases.3 In practice, two levels
of history are taken. The first level includes those questions that are always asked, and this
level is often heiped by having the client fill out a history questionnaire before the
examination (see Fig. 2-2). Often, the answers on these forms will change if the client is
questioned directly, so thesc form answers should be reviewed and not relied on as
 initially answered. The first level should initially include questions about previous illnesses
and problems. The second level in history taking relates to more specific questions that
relate to specific diseases. These morc pertinent questions are usually asked once the
 practitioner has examined the animal and is developing a differential diagnosis or has at
least established what some of the problcms are. However, it is vital to use a systematic,
 detailed method of examination and history taking so that important infornation is not 
overlooked. A complete history takes a lot of time to obtain and usually is a major
a u op s s d u d xa p a po p
the time to collect a thorough history for the problem. Learning which historical questions
are most important for specific problems and being certain to collect this information
 becomes critical. For example, the number of normal bowel movements per day is helpful
if assessing the possibility of food hypersensitivity and is an important question to ask in
 perennially pruritice dogs but not for dogs with nonpruritic, endocrine appearing alopecia.
Often, the history is completed during the examination and once the initial differential
diagnosis is determined.
The clinician who can draw out a complete history in an unbiased form has a valuable
o srmue sns pou op u  o pusaid susno ay  puodu si I s
Diagnostic Methods · 83
tend to shut off discussion. Some owners purposely or unconsciously withhold pertinent
facts, especially about neglect, diet, previous medication, or other procedures they think
may not be well received by the examining veterinarian. Other pertinent information may
be left out because some owners are not aware of what is normal. They may not know
how much licking or chewing it takes to consider a dog's behavior abnormal. Therefore,
they may not supply valuable information because they do not perceive the information to
attribute the observation to some other, unrelated cause (e.g, paw licking that the client
 interprets as behavior to obtain attention and does not list as a problem in the history).
 The clinician must become skilful at extracting all the relevant history and observa-
tions, regardless of the client's perception of their importance. The skilful clinician is ever
tuned to listen for side comments by the client or by the children. These may be veritable
"pearls" of information in a mass of trivia. They also help to establish the client's accuracy
and credibility.
 Next, the following information about the skin lesions should be obtained frorm the
tendency to progression or regression, factors affecting the course,'and previous treatment
(home, proprietary, or pet shop remedies used, as well as veterinary treatment). In
addition, treatments of other problems should bc determined and recorded. The relation-
ships between all treatments and the onset of or changes in the disease should be
recorded and a possible drug reaction considered. Drug reactions are diagnosed only
when they are suspected, and because they may mimic any disease, the history aids in
arriving at this diagnosis.
Almost all aninals with skin disorders have been bathed, dipped, sprayed, or treated
with one or more medications, and the owner may be reluctant or unable to disclose a
complete list of previous treatments. It is important that the types of medication and the
dates of application are completely divulged, because a modification of pertinent signs
may haveresulted.
 Although the patient cannot relate subjective findings (symptoms such as itching,
burning sensation, and pain), it is possible to determine the degree of pruritus reasonably
well. The presence and severity of pain may also be evaluated in some cases by the
patient's response to stimuli: Exhibiting shyness, pulling away, exhibiting skin twitching.
 Pruritus is one of the most common presenting complaints and, in many cases, is a
hallmark of allergy. The prescncc, location, and degree of itching are important criteria in
the differential diagnosis of many skin diseases. The owner's idea of the intensity of
itching,however, may vary considerably from that of the veterinarian.Consequently,it is
helpfuil to ask questions, “How many times daily do you see your dog scratch? "Does it
itch in many sites, or just a few?" "Does it shake its head?" "Does it lick its paws?" *Does
it lick the front legs or other areas?" *Does it roll on its back or rub its chin, ears, or body
against things? It is often helpful to have the client initially grade the itching on a scale
of 1 to l0, because many diseases associated with pruritus are chronic. The range is
categorized as follows: Zero is no itching at all, I being very mild, and 10 as bad as the
pet has ever itched. This level can be recorded and asked again as therapies or diagnostic
procedures are tried to help determine how the pet's problem changes over time. Also, by
having the answers to the previous questions asked about the pruritus, there is a record of
how severe the problem is and the symptoms seen when the owner indicates a level of
itching. Over time, the client's perceptions may change, and this approach allows that 
change to be determined and documented. It is also very helpful to determine, when
possible, whether the pruritus involves initially normal-appearing skin (an itch that rashes,
typical of allergy), or whether skin lesions precede or appear at the same time as the
pruritus (a rash that itches).
 Many times, owners disassociate other probierns that their pet is having. For example,
a dog is presented for paw licking and groin pruritus. The dog has also had multiple ear
p sed au jo sd peu auou auo su pnq sre mag isd au p suo
84 · Diagnostic Methods
groin. The owners may not mention the ear problems, the itching, or treatments for the
ears unless they are specifcally asked about them because they assume it is not important
or it is an unrelated problem.
The same types of specific questions are helpful when discussing diets, because the
owner often states the typical feedings and leaves out treats and supplements. A more
representative answer is often secured if one asks, “What did your pet eat yesterday, or
during the past 48 hours?" Also: *What treats does your pet receive and what supplernents
    se   s   n pe  o
edible toys.
 Because contact iritants or allergens are important contributors to or causes of skin
disease, it is necessary to inquire about the animal's environment. Does it live in an
apartment or is it outdoors in the felds and forests? Does it sleep in a doghouse or in the
owner's house? If it sleeps in the house, in what room does it sleep and is there
carpeting? If it sleeps in a person's bedroom, does it sleep on the Hoor or on the bed?
Are there feather pillows or comforters or wool blankets? If the pct sleeps in a doghouse,
in a garage, or outside, does the bedding consist of straw, wool blankets, or some other
throughout the night?
If the pet is boarded or hospitalized, do the synptoms improve? If the pet travels, do
the symptoms improve while traveling or while in other homes? Symptoms that resolve in
 also be asked, depending on the clnical suspicions of possible diseases. Questions regard-
ing changes in water consumption, appetite, weight, and urination or defecation hahits
should be included in history taking.
 In dctermining contagion, one should inquire about the skin health of other animals
on the premises. The presence of skin disease in the people living with the paticnt may
also be highly significant in some disorders (scabies, cheyletiellosis, and dermatophytosis).
At this point, the clinician usually has a general idea of the problem and is ready to
proceed with a careful physical examination. In some cases, the clinician may want to
come back to the medical history if further examinations indicate a more serious or
underlying systemic disease.
· PHYSICAl EXaMINATION
General Observations
A good exarmination necessitates adequate lighting. Norrmal daylight without glare is best,
lut any artificial light of adequate candlepower is sufficient if it produces bright, non--
color-changing, uniform lighting. The lamp, should be adjustable to illuminate all body
areas. A combination loupe and light provides magnification of the field as well as good
illumination.
Before the clinician concentrates on the individual lesions, the entire animal should
always be observed from a distance of a couple of meters to obtain a general impression
of abnormalities and to observe distribution patterms.
 Does the, pet appear to be in good health? Is it fat or thin, unkempt or wcll
groomed? Is the problem generalized or localized? What is the distribution and configura-
tion of the lesions? Are they bilaterall symmetric or unilaterally irregular (Fig. 2-3)? Is
the hair coat shiny or dull, and if it is' dull, what is the patterm of those changes? Is it an
appropriate color and pattern of colors for its breed? Are coat changes in quality or color
lifelong. or did they develop before or after the symptoms for which the pct is presented?
To unswer some of these questions, the clinician must examine the patient more
closely. The dorsal aspect of the body should be inspected by viewing it from the rear, as
Diagnostic Methods · 85
BilaterallySymmetricLesions
AsymmetricDistributionPattern
A
Ventral
Dorsal
B
Ventral
Dorsal
FIGURE 2-3. A, When a line is drawn from the tip of the nose to the end of the tail and the distribution of the lesions 
is relatively the same on the right and left sides, the pattern is called bilaterally symmetric. Most such skin disorders have
an intermal cause, and the skin refects intermal discase. Examples are hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticisn, Sertoli's cell 
tumor, and autoirnrmune diseases such as pemphigus foliaceus. Allergies may also present symmetric lesions. B, When a line
oap uo aso o ut sou a apis auo uo suos an pue   yo puaa o asu  jo dn aq r up s
are examples of disorders that cause asymmetric lesions.
elevated hairs and patchy alopecia may be more obvious from that angle. Then, the head.
the lateral trunk, and the extremities should be observed. Next, the clinician should
complete a thorough dermatologic examination.
Dermatologic Examination
 After an impression is obtained fron a distance, the skin should be examined more closely
and palpated.3 It is important to examine every centimeter of skin and visible mucous 
membranes. Many subtle clues are located where the client is unaware of problems. The
authors have seen many cases in which ventrally located lesions and interdigital, paronych-
ial, and oral lesions went unobserved by a veterinarian. These lesions may add valuable
rolling animals on their sides or back. All the paws must be picked up or handled so that
the ventral interdigital skin is also examined.
Many observations need to be made. What is the texture of the hair? Is it coarse or
fine, dry or oily? Does it epilate easily? A change in the amount of hair is often a
dramatic finding, although subtle thinning of the hair coat should also be noted. Alopecia
is a partial or complete lack of hair in areas where it is normally present. Hypotrichosis
inplies partial hair loss and is a forn of alopecia. Is the thinning diffuse, or are there
e  s   r   j s e r s
Hypertrichosis is excessive hair, and although the condition is rare in animals, it usually
has hormonal or developmental causes.
The texture, elasticity, and thickness of the skin should be determined and inpres-
sions of heat or coolness recorded. It is easier to find skin lesions in some breeds than in
others, depending on the thickness of the coat. Additionally, there is variation in an 
animal's coat density in different body areas, with skin lesions often being discerned more
86 * Diagnostic Methods
 r a d io pd sn u at 'o sur pe srds ui aie
heavily hared areas to observe and palpate lesions that are present but obscured.
When abnormalities are discovered, it is important to establish their morphologic
features, confguration, and general distribution. The clinician should try to appreciate the
dlifferent lesions and their patterns. Together, they often represent the natural history of
the skin disease.
Morphology of Skin Lesions
The morphologic characteristics of skin lesions, together with their history, are an essential
 logic history are often the only guidelines if laboratory procedures cannot be performed or
do not yield useful inforrmation. The clinician must learn to recognize primary and
secondary lesions. A primary lesion is the initial eruption that develops spontaneously as a
direct reflection of underlying disease. Secondary lesions evolve from primary lesions or
are artifacts induced by the patients or by extermal factors such as trauma and medica-
tions. Primary lesions (pustules, vesicies, papules) may appear quickly and then disappear
rapidly. However, they may leave behind secondary lesions (such as focal alopecia, epider-
mal colarettes, scaling, hyperpigmentation, and crusts), which may be more chronic and
give clues about the presence of previous primary lesions. Therefore, the identification
and the characterization of both primary and secondary lesions are important.
Careful inspection of the diseased skin frequently reveals a primary lesion, which may
suggest a limited differential diagnosis. For example, pustules most commonly represent a
bacterial pyoderrma, whereas sterile pustular diseases occur infrequently. Close inspection
of primary lesions may also reveal elusive differences. In assessing the subtle morphologic
features of lesions, the clinician may find it helpful to focus on individual lesions and
examine them minutely with good light and a hand-held lens or a head loupe with 4- to
6-power magnification. This may allow better identification (e.g., whether pustules are
follicular or nonfollicular).
Later, through regression, degeneration, or traumatization, it may change in forn and
 become a secondary lesion. Although classic descriptions and textbooks refer to lesions as
primary or secondary, some lesions can be either (e.g., alopecia can be primary [from
endocrine disorders] or seconlary [from chewing because of pruritus]). Follicular casts,
scales, pigment changes, crusts, and comedones may also be primary or secondary. In
some conditions, such as primary sehorrhea and zinc-responsive dermatosis with secondary
bacterial pyoderma, crusts may appear in the same animal as both primary and secondary
lesions.
Secondary lesions may also be informative. A ring of orthokeratotic scaling usually
follows a point source of infammation, either a papule or a pustule.This is also true of
simall focal circular areas of alopecia. Hyperpigmentation that has a lattice-like or lacelike
 confguration generaly reflects an area of previous infammation such as erythenatous
macules, papules, and pustules. Yellow- to honey-colored crusts usually follow the rupture
and drying of pustules. In many cases, however, the significant lesion must be differenti-
ated from the mass of secondary debris. Variations of lesions and their configurations are
cornmon, because early and advanced stages coexist in most skin diseases. The ability to
discover a characteristic lesion and understand its significance is an important aspect of
IMastering dermatologic diagnoses.
The following illustrations can help the clinician identify primary and secondary
lesions. Also, the character of the lesions may vary, implying a different pathogenesis or
cause. The definitions and exainples in Figures 2-4 to 2-24 explain the relationship of
skin lesions to canine and feline dermatoses.
· Primary lesions
Macule or patch (Fig. 2-4)
Papule or plaquc (Fig. 2-5)
Diagnostic Mcthods + 87
FIGURE 2-4. Macule —a cireumscribed, nonpalpable spot up to 1 cm in diameter and
characterized by a changc in the color of thc skin. Patch—-a macule larger than I cm in size.
d   s r d ps  r n  o
patches in endocrine or postinflammatory hyperpigmentation, hypopigmentation, and vitiligo.
acute derrnatitis, lentigo, and pigmented nevi. (The photograph illustrates lentigo.) Types of
macules are as follows: purpurableeding into the skin (these are usually dark red but change
—pinpoint macules that are rnuch smaller than 1
cm in diameter and are caused by hemorrhage; and ecchymoses--patches laurger than I cm inl
diameter that are caused by hemorrhage.
Pustule (Fig. 2-6)
Vesicle or bulla (Fig. 2-7)
Wheal (Fig. 2-8)
Nodule (Fig. 2-9)
Tumor or cyst (Fig. 2-10)
*Lesions that may be primary or secondary
Alopecia (Fig. 2-11)
Scale (Fig. 2-12)
Crust (Fig. 2-13)
Follicular casts (Fig. 2- 14)
Comedo (Fig. 2-15)
Pigrmentary abnormalities (Figs. 2-16 and 2-17)
·Secondary lesions
Epidermal collarette (Fig. 2-18)
Scar (Fig. 2-19)
Excoriation (Fig. 2--20)
Erosion or ulcer (Fig. 2-21)
Fissure (Fig. 2-22)
Lichenifcation (Fig. 2-23)
Callus (Fig. 2-24)
 Two special techniques of close examination of the skin, although infrequently used,
are noteworthy:
88·Diagnostic Methods
FIGURE 2-5, Papule—a small, solid elevation of the skin up to 1I cm in diacter that can
always be palpated as a solid mass. Many papules are pink or red swellings produced by tissue
infltration of infianmatory cells in the dermis, by intraepidermal and subepiderimal edema, or
e sxr   r io 
erythematous papules seen in scabies and fea bite bypersensitivity. In the tlog, another com-
mon causc of papules is superficial bacterial follicultis. (Photograph illustrates contact hyper-
sensitivity.) Plaque—a larger, fat-topped elevatiou forined by the extension or coalition of
papules. A plaque that is made up of closcly packed, projecting elevations often covered by
crists is called a vegetation.
1. Diascopy is performed by pressing a clear piece of plastic or glass over an ery-
theinatous lesion. If the lesion blanches on pressure, the reddish color is due to
vascular engorgeinent. If it does not, there is hemorrhage into the skin (petechia
or ecchymosis) (Fig. 2-25A and B).
 o s  e n a e  d e  p s s s a
ulcer or erosion or even on normal skin.l8a It is positive when the outer layer of
the skin is easily rubbed off or pushed away. It indicates poor cellular cohesion, as
found in the pemphigus complex, toxic cpidcrinal necrolysis (Fig. 2-26), and
erythema multiforme major.
Configuration of Lesions
The configuration of skin lesions may be helpful in establishing a differential diagnosis
(Fig. 2-27).3 Some diseases often have lesions present in certain configurations, and
although exceptions exist, recognizing the pattern of lesions adds information for decision
making. Lesions may be single, such as the solitary dermatophytosis lesion and a foreign-
body reaction. Multiple lesions are most commonly seen in skin diseases of dogs and cats.
When lesions are linear, extermal forces such as scratching, being scratched by some-
thing, and having something applied to the skin are often responsible. In other cases,
linear lesions may reflect the involvement of a blood or lymphatic vessel, a dermatome, or
a congenital malformation. Diffuse areas of involvement tend to suggest a metabolic or
systemic reaction, such as endocrine disorders, keratinization, and immunologic or hyper-
 sensitivity disorders. Annular lesions are often associated with peripheral spreading of a
disease. Common cxamples of annular lcsions are superficial spreading bacterial folliculitis
DiagnosticMethods·89
FIGURE 2-6. Pustule—a small, circumserihed clevation of the epidermis that is flld with
pus. Pustules may bc intraepidermal, subepiderrmal, or follicular in location. Their color is
usually yellow but Imay be green or red. Most commonly, pustules prirmarily contain neutrophils
sterile eosinophilic pustulosis). Size and color may be clues to the cause of the condition.
iatrogenic Cushing's disease, imrnune-suppressed cases, or pernphigus foliaceus. Larger green
pustules imply gram-negative infections or marked toxie changes. Examples are aene, folliculitis,
and the pustules found on the abdomen of puppies with irnpetigo. (Photograph illstrates
nonfollicular pustules from subcorneal pustular dermatosis.) Abscess—a demarcated fuctuant
lesion resulting from a dermal or subcutaneous accunulation of pus. The pus is not visible on
the surface of the skin until it drains to the surface. Abscesses are larger and deeper than
pustules.
and dermatophytosis. Coalescing lesions occur when multiple lesions are present and
spread so that they overlap.
Different Stages
A e on ouodde isa sin woy ssrd sus pnu sh pe ass uis v
developed state and, in many cases, to a chronic or resolved stage. The distribution, the
configuration, and the histologic appearance of lesions change. The cvolution of lesions
should be deternined either by obtaining the history or by finding different stages of
lesions on the patient. Papules often develop into vesicles and pustules, which may
rupture to lcave erosions or ulcers and finally crusts. An understanding of these progres-
sions helps in the diagnostic process.
 As lesions develop in specific patterns, they also involute in characteristic ways. The
velop into a pustule and then a crust or crusted erosion. It may then spread peripherally,
 pustules or crusts on the margins and central alopecia. The fully developed lesions could
appear as a large alopecic patch with a central area of hyperpigmentation and multifocal
erythematous macules, pustules, or crusts intermittently along the leading margin; this
lesion could then appear arciform. Scaling may also occur at the leading margins of
90·Diagnostic Methods
FIGURE 2-7. Vesicle-a sharply cireumscribed elevation of the epidermis flled with clear
fuid. It can be intraepidermal or subepidermal. Vesicles are rarely seen in dogs and cats
because they are fragile and transient. They occur in viral or autoimmune dermatoses, or in
dermatilis caused by irritants. Vesicles are lesions up to l cm in diameter; those with a
diameter greater than l cm are called bullae. (Photograph illustrates several vesicles caused by
a chemical irritant.)
infammation. The healing phase of a chronic lesion may appear as a patch of alopecia and
hyperpigimentation with no other primary or secondary lesions because they have sponta-
neously resolved or responded to therapy.
Because diseases and their lesions are evolutionary, the clinician must attempt to
learn about all of the stages. The recognition of the different stages as well as the lesions 
becomes important whcn selecting areas to sample for diagnostic tests.
Distribution Patterns of Skin Lesions
The areas of skin involved with lesions or affected by symptoms of the disease help in
deterrmining the differential diagnosis because most skin diseases have a typical distribu-
tion.3 It is important to emphasize that the accurate determination of the distribution
necessitates detection of all changes in the haircoat or the skin, the location of symptorms
related to the disease, and the location of all primary and secondary lesions. An adequate
determination of the distribution pattern can be achieved only by a thorough history and
dermatologic examination; cursory exaininations are often incomplete.
The study of skin diseases involves understanding the primary lesions that occur as
well as the typical distribution patterns. Diseases less commonly present with atypical
patterns. The combination of the type of lesions present and their distribution is the basis
for developing a differential diagnosis. The distribution pattern may be very helpful by
allowing clinicians to establish the differential diagnosis based on the region involved when
animals have lesions and symptoms confined to certain regions (Table 2-4). In some
instances, this regional pattern is such a major feature that it is a required aspect of the
disease. The best examples are otitis externa, pododermatitis, and nasal dermatitis. Actu-
ally, these terms refer to skin disease of a specifc region, give little more information, and
 certainly are not specific diagnoses.
Diagnostic Methods·9l
FIGURE 2-8. Wheal—a sharply circumscribed, raised lesion consisting of edema that
pink elevated ridges or round edemalous swellings that only rarcly have pseudopods at thcir
periphery. They blanch on diascopy (viewing the sken through a glass slide that is presed
called angioedema. Examples of wheals are urticaria, inscct bitcs, and positive rcactions to
allergy skin tests. (Photograph illustrates urticaria.)
FIGURE 2-9. Nodule-a circumscribed, solid elevation greater than 1 cm in diameter
infltration of infammatory or neoplashic cells into the dermis or subcutis. Deposition of fibrin
or crystalline material also produces nodules. (Photograph illustrates panniculitis.)
92· Diagnostic Methods
FIGURE 2-I0. Tunor—a large mass that may involve any structure of the skin or
subcutaneous tissue. Most tumors are neoplastic or granulomatous in origin. (Photograph
illustrates pilomatrixoma.) Cyst-- an epithelium-lined cavity containing Huid or a solid mate.
rial.It is a smooth,well-circumsribedfuctuant to solidmass.Skin cysts are usually linedby
adnexal epitheliuin (hair follicle, sebaceous, or epitrichial) and flled with comifed cllilar
debris or sebaceous or epitricehial secretions.
FIGURE 2-II. Alopecia is loss of hair and may vary from partial to complete. It may be primary,
such as alopecia with endocrine disorders and follicular dysplasias, or it can occur secondary to trauma
Diagnostic Methods · 93
FIGURE 2-I2. Scale—an accurmulatiom of loose fragments of the homy layer of the skin
(comified cells). The corneocyte is the final product of epiderrmal keratinization. Nornal loss
the loss in larger fakes. Flakes vary greatly in consisiency; they can appcar branny, fine,
powdery, faky, platelikc, greasy, dry, loose, adhering, or nitlike. The color varies frorn white,
silver, yellow, or browm to gray. (Photograph illustrates seborrhea.) Seales may be the primary
leionsinecasfclrltnaeciaoliulrdsiamaryidpathi br
rhea, and ichthyosis. They are common secondary lesions in chronie infarnmation.
 Table 2-4 lists areas or parts of the body along with the common skin diseases that
are most frequently localized or especially severe in thosc areas. The chart is useful in the
differential diagnosis. However, the clinician must also be aware that other diseases may
occiur in these regions and that diseases that often affcct a certain rcgion can also occur
 clsewherc and not involve the typical region. Therefore, regional evaluations aid in ranking
differential diagnostic possibilities: they do not determine the diagnosis.
In many instances, the patterning that skin diseases take is unexplained. Recently,
a on eu aq a pr saaa a je u und an p su
development of the many patterns used to diagnose skin diseases.
Differential Diagnosis
A differcntial diagnosis is dcvcloped on the basis of a compilation of the preceding
information. The possible diagnoses should be considercd in their proposed likely order of
Developing a Diagnostic or Therapeutic Plan
Laboratory tests or therapies can be recommended on the basis of tentative diagnosis and
 differential diagnosis. If a strong tentative diagnosis is not determined from the history
and the physical exanination, the approach should be directed at the two or three most
likely diagnoses. Client-veterinarian interaction is critical at this point. The client decides
what is going to be done, but his or her decision is based on the clinician's recommenda-
tions. Therefore, the client needs to know the tentative or possible diagnoses, as well as
expected costs and anticipated results of the diagnostic or therapeutic options proposed.
Diagnostic tests and laboratory procedures are useful whenevcr a definitive diagnosis
94· Diagnostic Methods
FIGURE 2-13. Crust is forned when dried exudlate, serum, pus, bloxod, colls, scales, or
merlications adhere to the suface. Unusually thick crusts are found in hairy arcas because the
dried material tends to adhere more tightly than in glabrous skin. Cnust nay be primary as in
prinary seborrhea and zine-rcsponsive dermatosis, or seconlary as in pyoderma, fly strike, or
traumatic wounds, furunculosis, fy stike derumatitis, and vasculitis.oney-colored crusts are
more conumonly infectious in nature; thicker dry yellow crusts are morc typieal of scabies and
zinc-responsive dennatosis. Tightly adherent crusts are typical in zine-responsive dermatosis
and meerolytie migratory erythema, and they also oecur in some cases of seborrhea.
 cannot be made from the case history and clinical cxamination alonc.a Laboratory proce-
durcs may confrm many clinical diagnoses and provide a logical basis for successful
therapeutic management. They slhould be recommended on the basis of the most likely
-ard aq o isn papuuoai no pasasns rui oq pou pous pue sisou
sive. The cost cffectiveness of cach test should also be considered. In practice, it is often
unacceptable to recommcnd numerous tests to screcn for the long list of possible diagno-
ses in any given case. lnstead, the results of recommended tests should confirm or mule
 out the diagnoses that thc clinician deems most likely.
● LaboraTorY Procedures
Surface Sampling
The lesions and pathologic changes of a skin disease are often readily available for studly,
 y as ss a on sse o s o ps a ss  go  e 
deal of information may be obtained by studying microscopically materials collected from
the hair and skin. Skin scraping, obtaining an acetate tape impression, and fea combing
are all techniques to find microscopic ectoparasites. Hairs may be removed, and exudates
Imay be collected and examined microscopically. Most of thcse techniques may be done in
 practice and study rnay be necessary to maximize the benefits of many tests. The effort to
Text contimued on page 101
Diagnostic Methods · 95
FIGURE 2-I4. Follicular cast--
an accumulation of keratin and fol.
licular matenial that adheres to the
hair shaft extending above the sur-
face of the follicular ostia. It is a
primary lesion in vitarmin A-respon-
sive dermatoses. primary scborhea
and sebaceous adenitis. (Photograph
llustrates har cpilated fron a dog
with schaccous adenitis; the clunps
of matcrial at the base of multiple
hairs are the casts.) Follicular casts
may be secondary lesions in demo-
dlectie inange and dermatophytosis.
FIGURE 2--I5. Comedo—a dilated hair follicle filled
with comifed cells and sebaceous material. I is the ini-
tial lesion of feline acne and may predispose the skin to
bacterial folliculitis. A comedlo may he produced second-
ary to selorrheie skin dliseasc, to occlusion with greasy
Inedications, or to the administration of systemic or topi-
cal corticosteroids. (Photograph illustrates comedomes of
the skin ou the tail of a dog.) When comedones are
present, diseases of the hair folicle should be considered
snch as infection with IDcnodex ancd derrmatophytosis.
Counedones may be primary lesions in feline acne, vita-
min A-responsive dermatosis, Sclinauzer comedo syn-
droine, Cushing's diseasc, sex hormone dermatoses. and
Sorne idliopathie selorrhea ctisorders.
96 · Diagnostic Methods
FIGURE 2I6. Abnonnal pigmentation—skin coloration caused by a variety of
pigments but most cornnonly melanin, whieh is responsible for many skin colors:
black—-melanin present throughout the epidernis (lentigo); blue melanin within
toma); gray--ciffusc dermal melanosis or superficial dermal melanosis from pig-
ment incontinencc; tan, brown, black—various shades of normal skin color in
brccds arc dne to melanin; brown-hemochromatosis is due prirmarily to melanin,
not hermosiderin. Other pigments arc as follows: red, purple—hemorrhage in the
skin is red at first, becoming dark purple with time (bruises); yellow-green-
accumulations of hile pigments (icterus). In hypopiginentation (hypomelanosis),
ary, as in postinfanmatory change. (Photograph demonstrates Rottweiler
with
leukoderma and leukotrichia.) Leukoderma is a general term for white skin,
whereas vifligo refers to a specific disease. Lack uf piginent in hair is called
leukotrichia or achrornotrichia.
FIGURE 2-I7. Ilyperpigmen-
tation
(hypermelanosis,  rmelano-
oxcasionally, dermal melanin. Melano-
-radns oq u punoy aq Ae saseyd
ficial
dermis.
(Postinflammatory.
chronic, traumatic, and endoerine
skin lesions.) Excess pigment in hair
is called melanotrichia. (Photograpl
ilustrates postinfanmatory byper-
pigmentation.) The pattem of hyper-
inining the etiology, Endoerine
fuse, whcreas postinflainmatory
hy-
perpigmentation has a latticework
appearance.
Diagnostie Methods·97
FIGURE 2-I8. Epidermal collarette—a special type of scale arranged in a circular rin
of loose keratin flakes or peeling keratin. It represcnts the remnants of the roof of a vesicle,
bulla pustule,or apleor thhprkratois caused by a point soure of infammat s
follicnlitis.)
FIGURE 2-I9. Scar—an area of fbrous tissue that has replaced the darnagcd dermis 
suhcutaneous tissne. Scars are the remuants of trauma or dermmatologic lesions. Most scars in
skinned dogs scars can be alopecic and hyperpiginented. Sears are olserved following severc
98 · Diagnostic Methods
FIGURE 2-20. Excoriation—erosions or ulcers caused by scratclhing, biting, or nubbing.
Excoriations are self-produced and usually result from pruritus; they invite secondary bacterial
infection. They are often partly recogoized by their linear pattern. (Photograph illustrates
bnear excoriations on the side of a dog with scabies.)
FIGURE 2-2l. Erosion--a shallow cpidermal de-
  s  d ju sa i io
and cousequentlyhealswithout scaring:itgenerally
results Irom epidermal discases and sef-infieted
traunaUlcerthere is a rcak in the continuity of
the epidermis, with exposure of the underlying der-
te oj pamban st ssod otoued daop v su
thc cdge: Is it undermined. fibrotic and thickened
The finness of the ulcer depth anti the type of
exudate in the crater should also be noted. A scar is
often left after an ulccr hcals. Exarnples are feline
indolent leer, svre e pyderma,ad al.
(Photograph illustratcs vesicular cutaneous lupus cry-
thematostis in a shelty.)
Diagnostic Methods · 99
FIGURE 2-22. Fissure-a lin-
ear cleavage into the epidermis, or
through the epidermis into
the
dermis, caused by disease or in-
jury. Fissures may be single or
multiple tiny cracks or large clefts
sCveTal
centimeters  kong.
They
have shaiply defined margins and
nay be dry or moist and straight,
curved, or branching. They ocur
when the skin is thick and inelastic
andthen subjected to sudden
swelling  from" inflanmation
Or
trauma, especially in regions of fre-
quent movement. Exarnples are
found at car nargins, and at oclr-
lar, nasal, coral, and anal mucocuta-
neous borders. (Photograph illus-
tratcs two fissures in a footpad.)
FIGURE 2-23. Lichenification—-a thickening and hardening of the skin characterizedl by
an exaggeration of the superficial skin markings. Lichenification areas often result froin
Occasionally, Malassezin are found with these losions. Examples are the axillae in acanthosis
nigricans. (Photograph illustrates the axilla of a dog with chronic atopic dermatitis. The
licheniication here is a resull of rubbing.)
I00·Diagnostic Methods
F1GURE 2-24. Calus—a thickened, rough, hyperkeratotic, alopecic, often lichenifed
plaque that develops on the skin. Most commonly, calluses occur over bony prominences and
tesult fro pressure and chronc lowgrade friction. (Phtograph illustrates an elbow callus)
FIGURE 2-25. A. Abdomen of dog with drug-
induced vasculitis and purpura. B, Erythema fails
to blanch with diascopy, confirning dermal hem-
orrhage,
Diagnostic Methods ·I01
FIGURE 2-26.Photograph: illustrates a case
of toxic  epidermal necrolysis(drug-induced)
and the presence of Nikolsky's sigu.
leam these techniques is well worth the time. The altermatives are not to obtain this
 inforimation, to do other morc expensive and time-consuming tests, or to scnd samples to
 a laboratory, which adds cost and time delays.
SKIN SCRAPING
 Skin scraping is one of the most frequently used tests in veterinary dermatology and is
recommended anytime the differential diagnosis ineludes microscopic cctoparasitie dis-
cases. Its purpose is to enable the clinician to find and to identify small and microscopic
ectoparasites. It is important to realize that, although testing may accurately confirm
ss or pe assp r uo sdp si n no  r as s ss
siveness of sampling. Skin scraping is most commonly used to verify or rule out the
diagnosis of dernodectic mange. It is also cormmonly used to try to establish the diagnosis
of sarcoptic mange, Cheyletiela infestation, and some other ectoparasitic diseases, al-
 though it does not effectively rule out these diagnoses. The equipment needed to perforn
a skin scraping is mineral oil, a scalpel blade (with or without a handle) or a curet,
microscope slides, coverslips, and a microscope.
cnhanced if the technique of scraping is adapted to the specific parasite that the clinician
sn   r si s o  s j p   o s
for sarcoptic mites. Cheyletiella, Dermanyssus, cat fur mites, and car mites each necessi-
tate a slightly different scraping technique.
No matter which type of seraping is made, a consistent, orderly examination of the
collected material should be done until a diagnosis is made or all the collected material
has been examined. It is easiest to start the examination at one end of the scraped
material mixed with oil and move the microscope stage straight across the slide in either a
horizontal or a vertical direction. At the end of the slide, the examination moves over one
feld of vision and goes back in the opposite direction. This is continued back and forth
until all of the scrapcd material on the slide has been examined.
 The following discussions elaboratc on the spccial techniques needed to enhance the
effectiveness of scraping for specific parasites.
Examination for Parasites
● Demodectic Mites. Generally, multiple scrapings froin new lesions should be
obtained. The affected skin should be squeezed between the thumb and the forefinger to
extrude the mites from the hair folliclcs. The obtained material is scraped up and placed
on a microscope slide. It is helpful to apply a drop of mineral oil to the skin site being
scraped, or to the scalpel blade or curet, to facilitate the adherence of material to the
blado. Thcn, additional material is obtained by scraping the skin more deeply until
I02·Diagnostic Methods
A
annular
sinale
C
qrouped
D
serpiqinous
linear
F
arciform
iris(centralhealing)
G
FIGURE 2-27. Confguraticon of skin lesions. A, 'The anunular configuration has a clcar or lcss involved
center and is found in superficial spreading bacterial follculitis, local sehorhea, demodicosis, and dermratophy.
tosis. B, Single lesions are typifed by feline aene, acral lick dermatitis, cysts, and many turnors. C, Polyeyelic
configurations often result from the coufuence of lesionis or a spreading process. Exaruples are supericial
spreadinghacterilfoliulitisdiosisrytramatideaiisDupedlsonsarestef
the result of new foci developing aroundl an old lesion, They are seen in folliculitis, insect bites, contact
dermatitis, and calcinosis cntis. E, Serpiginous lesions develop as a result of spreading, such as in canine scabies
or demodicosis. They may also occur as a result of the conffuence and partial resolution of polyeyclic lesions. F,
Lincar configurations are best typificd by the lincar form of eosinophilie granloma of cats or by contact with
iritant matcrials strcakcd along the skin. G.Arciform lesions usualy result from the partial resolution of
polyeyclie lesions such as spreading follculitis, but they nay result from spreading, as in canine scabies and
demodicosis. H, Central-healing (target) configurations are produced when the skin heals belhind an aclvancing
front of a disease process. It is typical of certain dermatophytoses, demodicosis, and bacterial folliculitis.
Diagnostic Methods·103
● Tahle 2-4
 regIoNal dIagnoSis of Non-neOPLastic
DERMATOSES
REGION
COMMON DISEASE
LESS COMMON DISEASE
Ilead
Atopy
Feline leprosy
Demodicosis
Juvenile cellulitis
Dermatophytosis
Pemphigus crythematosus
Facial fold intertrigo
Pemphigus foliaceus
Feline food hypcrscnsitivity
Sporotrichosis
Folliculitis, bacterial
Sterile pyogranuloma syndrome
Seabies, feline
Systemc lnpus crythematosus
Vasculitis
Zinc-responsive dennatosis
Ear
Atopy
Alopecia, pattern
Food hypersensitivity
Cold agglutinin disease
Demodicosis
Frustbite
Dernatomyositis
Melanoderma and alopecia of Yorkshire
Dermatophytosis
territers
Fly dermatitis
 Pinnal thrombovascular nccrosis
Otitis extema (see Chap. 19)
Solar dermatitis, fcline
Otodectic mange
Sterle eosinophilie pinmal foliceulitis
Seabies, feline and canine
Trombiculiasis
Seborrhea, marginal (pinna)
Vasculitis and vaseulopathy
Eyelid
Chalazion
Lupus erythematosus
Demodicosis
Derimatoinyositis
Dermatophytosis
Distichiasis
Entropion
Folliculitis, bacterial
Hordeolun
Seborrhcic blepharitis
Trichiasis
Nasal planum
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Contaet derrnatitis
Drug eruption
Dermatophylosis ( Microsporun persicolor)
Erythema multiforme
Hercxditary nasal pyograuuloma and vascu-
Nasodigital hyperkeratosis
litis (Scottish terriers)
Pemphigus erythematosus
Spurotrichosis
Pemphigus foliaceus
Sterile pyogramuloma syncrome
Uveodermatologic syndrome
Vitiligo
Lip
Demodicosis
Candidiasis
Indolent ulcer, felinc
Contaet dermatitis (plastic, rubber)
Lip fold intertrigo
Juvenile cellulitis
Lupus erythematosus
Mucocutaneous bacterial pyoderma
Muzzle furunculosis. bacterial
Oral papillomatosis canine
Uveodermatologic syndrone
Vitiligo-like lesions
Oral cavity (mucosal lesions)
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Bullous pephigoid
Eosinophic granuloma, canine and
Canditdliasis
fcline
Pemphigus vulgaris
Eosinophilie plaque, feline
Systemic lupus erytleinatosus
Erosions, chemical
Thallotoxicosis
Erosions, viral, felinc
Erythema multiforme
Fusospirochetal stomatitis
Gingival hypertrophy
Indolent ulcer, feline.
Marginal gingivitis, ulcerative, de-
tal
Plasma cell stomatitis
Vegetative glossitis (foreign body)
Mucocutaneous junctions
Epitheliotropic lynphoma
Bullous pemphigoid
Erythema multiforme
Candliliasis
Mucocuitaneous pyoderma
Pemphigus vulgaris
Systenie lupus erythermatosus
Phaeohyphoycosis
Table continued om folowing page
104 · Diagnostic Methods
● Table 2-4
reGIonal dIagnoSis Of NoN-NeoPlastic
DERMATOSES Continued
·····
REGION
COMMON DISEASE
LESS COMMON DISEASE
Mucocutaneous junctions
Vitiligo
Thalotoxicosis
Contined
Toxic epidernal necrolysis
Vesicular cutaneous lupus erythe-
matosus (collie and Shetland
sheepdlog)
Chin
Demodicosis
Dermatophytosis
Eosinophilic granuloma, feline
Malassezia dermatitis
Furunculosis, bacterial
Juvenile cellulitis
Neck
Atopy, feline
Contact dermatitis (collars)
Dermoid sinus
Ulcerative dermatitis with linear
Flea bite hyperscnsitivity, felne
subepidernal fibrosis, feline
Injection reactions
Food hypersensitivity, feline
Malassezia dermatitis
Lower chest
Follieulitis, bacterial
Contact dermatitis
Stermal callus
Pelodera dermatitis
Axilla
Acanthosis nigricans
Bullous pemphigoid
Atopy
Contact dernatitis
Folliculitis, bacterial
Erythera multiforme
Food hypersensitivity
Pemphigus vulgaris
Malassezia dermatitis
Vesicular cutameous lupus erythe-
matosus (collie and Shetland
sheepdog)
Back
Atopy
Calcinosis cutis
Comedo syudrome, Schnauzers
Cheyletiellosis
 Flca bite hypersensitivity
Pediculosis
Folliculitis, bacterial
Food hypersensitivity
Hypothyroiclism
Psychogenic dermatitis or alopecia,
feline
Seborrhea, primary
Demodicosis, generalized
Hyperestrogenism, female
Folliculitis, bacterial
Hyposomatotropism
Hyperadrenocorticism
Panniculitis, sterile
Hypothyroiclism
Sterile cosinophilic pustulosis
Sebaceous adenitis
Subeorneal pustular dermatosis
Vitamin A-responsive dermatosis
Ahdomen
Atopy, feline
Bullus pemphigoid
Eosinophilic plaque,feline
Calcinosis cutis
Feline symmetric alopecia
Contact dermatitis (ventral abdo-
Folliculitis, bacterial
men)
Food hypersensitivity, feline
Erythema multiforme
Hyperadrenocorticism
Hookworm dermatitis
Impetigo
Mycobacteriosis, atypical, feline
Linear prepucial erythema
Pelodera dermatitis
Panniculitis, sterile
Vesicular cutaneous lupus erythe-
Psychogenic alopecia and dermati-
matosus (collie and Shetland
tis, feline
sheepdog)
Solar dlermatitis, dog
Tromhiculiasis
Tail
Feline symmetric alopecia
Cold agglutinin disease
Flea bite hypersensitivity
Dermatomyositis
Hyperplasia of tail gland, stud tail
Frosthite
Mechanical irritation (tail suckers)
Vasculitis
Psychogenic dermatitis or alopecia,
feline
Diagnostic Methods ·* 105
Table 2-4
 REGIONaL DIAGNOSIS OF NON-NEOPLaSTIC
DERMATOSES Continued
REGION
COMMON DISEASE
LESS COMMON DISEASE
Tail Continued
Pyotraumatic derrnatitis
Tip of tail trauma
Anus
Anal sac disease
Bullous pcmphigoid
Malassezia dermatitis
Food hypersensitivity
Pemphigus vulgaris
Perianal gland hyperplasia
Legs
Acral furumculosis, bacterial
Decubital ulcers
Acral lick dermatitis
Feline leprosy
Contact dermatitis
Lymphangitis, bacterial, fungal
Demodicosis
L ymphedema
Dermatophytosis
Pelodera dernatitis
Elhow calluis
Elbow callus pyodlerima
Eosinophilicgranulomafle
Hlygroma
Metatarsal fistulae, German shep-
herd
Scahies, canine
Paws
Atopy
Acral mutilation
Demodicosis
Collagen clisease of German shep-
Dermatophytosis
herd footpads
 Digital pad hyperkeratosis
Contact dermatitis
Food hyperscnsitivity
Hookworn dermatitis
Interdigital foreign bodios
Leishmaniasis
Malassezia dermatitis
Mycetonma
Pemphigus foliaceus
Necrolytic migratory erythema
Plasma cell pododermatitis, Feline
Pelodera dermatitis
Phacohyphomycosis
Trauma
Tyrosinemia
Trombiculiasis
Vitiligo (pads)
Zinc-responsive dernatosis
Claws
Hyperthyroidism, feline
Arteriovenous fistula
Lupoid onychodystrophy
Bullous pemphigoid
Paronychia
Leishmaniasis
Bacterial
Onychoinycosis
Feline leukemia
Pemphigus foliaceus
Pemphigus vulgaris
Trauma
Systemie lupus erythematosus
Vasculitis
Vitiligo
capillary bleeding is produced. It is important that true capillary bleeding is obtained and
area in cases of pododermatitis. Plcase note that the Chinese Shar pei breed presents an
unusual situation in which mites may bc confined to the deep follicle, and even with good
scrapes characterized by capillary bleeding, false-negative results may occur, In addition,
skin scrapings may be negative in dogs with chronic demodectic pododermatitis, wherein
the paws are swollen, fbrotic, and granulomatous. Hair pluckings may reveal mites in
ae sis us au ao us aa pnd q pnus pe ss asn jo o
diagnostic in some cases.
Generally, two or three drops of mineral oil are added to the usual amount of scraped
material on the microscope slide. The oil is mixed with the scraped rnaterial to obtain an
even consistency. Placing a coverslip on the material to be examined ensures a uniforn
layer that is more readily examined. Lowering the condenser or closing the iris diaphragm
 causes more light diffraction and contrast, resulting in easier recognition of the mites.
Diagnosis is made by demonstrating multiple adult mites, finding adult mites froin
I06 · Diagnostic Methods
 multiple sites, or finding immature forms of mites (ova, larvae, and nymphs). When dogs
are fractious or sites are difficult to scrape, another tcchnique may be used. Hairs from
the affected area can be plucked, placed in mineral oil on a slide, and cxamined. When
the findings are positive, this technique precludes the need for deep skin scrapes. Hlow-
ever, negative results of hair plnck examinations should not rule out the presence of
Demodex.
It seems that skin scraping is a straightforward, easy laboratory procedure; however,
the authors have cncountered referred demordlicosis cases in which false-negative skin
scraping findings led to misdiagnosis or skin scrapings were not performed. Skin scrapings
are advised in most cases of canine pyoderma and scaling and folicular disorders, because
 generalized demodicosis may be the primary disease, Skin serapings should be performed
whencver Dermodex infection is among the primary differential diagnostic possibilities, the
clinician is not certain of the diagnosis, or the dog does not adequately respond to the
initial therapy. Dogs typically harbor only one species of mite, Demodex canis, whereas
cats have two species, D. cati (which resembles the canine mite) and a second species that
is short and squat, D. gatoi.
 Scrapings taken from a normal dog, cspecially from the face, may contain an occa-
sional adult mite. If one or two mitcs are observed, repeated scrapings should be done.
Multiple positive results of scrapings from different sites should be considered abnormal.
 Observing whether the mites are alive (mouthparts or legs moving) or dead is of prognos-
tic value while the animal is being treated. As a case of generalized Demodex infestation
responds to treatment, the ratio of live to dead mites decreases, as does the ratio of eggs
and larvae to adults. If this is not occurring, the treatment rcgimen should be re-
evaluated,
· Canine Scabies Mites. Canine sarcoptic mites, Sarcoptes scabiei (var. canis), re--
side within the superfcial epidermis. However, because small umbers of mites are
usually present, it is difficult to fnd one. Multiple superficial scrapings are indicated, with
emphasis on the pinnal margins and elbows. Skin that has not been excoriated, preferably
skin with rcd raised papules and yellowish crusts on top, should be scraped. The more
scrapings are performed, the more likely is a diagnosis. However, even with numerous
scrapings, scabies cannot be ruled out because of negative rcsults.
Extensive amounts of material should be accumulated in the scrapings and spread on
microscope slides. Double-sized coverslips are sometimes useful. Alternativcly, a sccond
microscope glass slide may be used instead of a normal coverslip to compress the thick
crusts. The clinician examines each field until a mite is found or all material has been
examined; one mite is diagnostic. Dark brown, round or oval fecal pellets or ova from
adult mites, if found, are also diagnostic. In difficult cases, it may be useful to accumulate
an even larger amount of hair and keratin debris from scrapings. The material is placed in
a warm solution of 10% potassiuin hydroxide (KOH) for 20 minutes to digest keratin, and
the mixture is then stirred and centrifuged. Mites are thus concentrated and can often be
picked off the surface film and identified with a microscope.
● Feline Scabies Mites. The feline scabies mite, Notoedres cati, is much easier to
find than the canine mite; otherwise, the diagnostic techniques described for canine
scabies are appropriate. The best place to scrape is the head, the face, or the ears, in
areas with crusts and scales.
● Cheyletiella Mites. Cheyletiella mites are relatively large compared with scabies
mites and may even be seen with a magnifying glass. They look like small white scales
that move, which is why the disease has been called "walking" dandruff. To examine for
them microscopically, the clinician may obtain superficial scrapings, which are not as
accurate as acetate tape impressons or fea-combing specimens. These mites may be
dlifficult to demonstrate in some cases, especially in cats.
· Chigger Mites. The most common chigger mite is Eutrombicula alfreddugesi.
These mites can be seen with the naked cye, especially on the concave surface of the
 pinna. They appear as bright orange objects adhering tightly to the skin or centered in a
Diagnostic Methods ·107
attachment to the skin. They are often found around the external orifice of the ear canal
but are not present in the canal. Thcy should he covered with mineral oil and picked up
with a scalpel blade. A true skin scraping is not needed. Iowever, when removed from
the host for microscopic examination, they should immediately be placed in mineral oil, or
they may crawl away. Only thc larval form is pathogcnic, and these mitcs have only six
legs.
● Poultry Mites. Dermanyssus gallinae is a mite that attacks poultry, wild and cage
birds, and dogs and cats, as well as humans. It is red whcn cngorged with blood;
otherwise, it is white, gray, or black. When the animal shows evidence of itching and the
history indicates exposure to bird or poultry housing, a skin seraping for this mite is
to find the mites is at excoriated sites.
The clinician collects the debris, scales, and crusts that harbor the mites. The materi-
als are placcd on a microscope slide, and sevcral drops of inineral oil are added. The slide
is covered with another glass slide instead of a coverslip. The two slidcs are squeezed
together firmly to crush any crusted material. The acetate tape method of collection may
be used successfully.
● Cat Fur Mites. Lynxacarus radousky are inites that attach themselves to the
external aspect of the hair shafts and therefore may be demonstrated microscopically by
scarching for salt-and-pepper hairs. The mites are usually located along the topline. A true
supericial skin seraping can be made if the mites are suspected to be on the skin, but
plucking affected hairs and exainining them in a mineral oil preparation is usually diagnos-
tic. The acetate tape impression method can also be used.
· Ear Mites. Otodectes cynotis mites are usually located in the external ear canal of
dogs and cats. However, they may also be found on the skin, especially around the head,
the neck, the rump, and the tail, They may be found by superficial seraping or acetate
tape methods, such as described for Cheyletiella mites, and identified by microscopic
examination.
ACETATETAPEIMPRESSION
This alternative to skin scraping has been recommended to find superficial ectoparasites
such as Cheyletiella mites, poultry mites, and cat fur mites. Clear, pressure-sensitive
acetate tape (Scotch No. 602 [3M Co.] is a good type) is pressed to the hair surface and
to the skin adjacent to parted hairs or in shaved areas. Superficial scales and debris are
 collected when one suspects cheyletiellosis or poultry mites. The tape is then stuck with
pressure on a microscope slidc and examined.
FLEA COMB AND FLOTATION
The recovery of Cheyletiella mites is cnhanced with the llea-combing method. In this
technique, large areas of the body are combed and the collected scale and debris are put
in a fecal fotation solution, Material and scale that fall on the table or on a sheet of paper
placed under the patient during cormbing should also be added to the fotation solution. A
coverslip is applied to the surface of the Hotation solution, is allowed to stand for l0
 minutes, and then is transferrcd to a microscope slide and examined.
Debris Examination or Flotation
During cxamination of a pet, scabs and debris may readily be collected on thc table
surface. This may be enhanced by briskly rubbing the pet's skin and hair coat while tht
animal is standling on the table or over a piece of paper. This material may be collected
and examined directly or mixed with a fecal fotation solution. Direct examination may
find otherwise undetccted Hea dirt, flca egs, or rarely, mites. Suspect fHea dirt may be
placed on moistened whitc paper or cotton and willdissolve to an orange-red stain.
I08 · Diagnostic Methods
Hair Examination
 Plucking hairs from the skin and examining them under the rmicroscope is referred to as
trichography and is helpful for diagnosing self-inlicted alopecia, dermatophytosis, color
 dilution alopecia, nutritional or congenital hair dysplasias, trichomycosis axillaris, trichor-
rhexis nodosa, trichoptilosis, trichomalacia, pili torti, anagen defluxion, telogen defuxion,
endocrine alopecia, and pigmentary disturhances of hair growth. Hair examination may be
beneficial in sorne cases of demodicosis or Malassexia dermatitis. Trichography is per
formed by grasping a small numbcr of hairs with the fingertips or rubber-covered hemo-
stats, epilating them conpletely, laying them in the sane orientation on a microscope
slide with mineral oil, and examining them with the low-power ohjective of the micro-
scope. If abnornalities are detected during scanning, closer exanination is nccessary to
categorize the defect. It is important to epilatc hairs in the direction they exit the skin so
as to minimize traumatic artifacts.
Hairs will have either an anagen or telogen root (bulb). Anagen bulbs are rounded,
smooth, shiny, glistening, and often pigmented and soft, so the root may bend (Fig. 2--
28A). Telogen bulbs are club- or spear-shaped, rough-surfaced, nonpigmented, and gener-
ally straight (see Fig. 2-28B). Catagen hairs are rarely seen and have bulbs intermediate
in appearance between anagen and telogen bulbs (see Fig. 2-28C). A normal hair shaft is
uniform in diameter and tapers gently to the tip (sce Fig. 2-28D). Straight-coated anirnals
have straight hair shafts, whereas curly- or wavy-coated animals have twisted hair shafts.
All hairs should have a clearly discermible cuticle and a sharply demarcated cortex and
 pe o p a u sp uid rh (f pe r- sg aa e
 of animal but should not vary greatly from one hair to the next in regions where the coat
color is the same.
Normal adult animals have an adrmixture of anagen and telogen hairs, the ratio of
 s o o a  p s  s  s n
 sg an i  pp aq r oi sn on  a ( 
approximately 100 hairs. Because no wellestablished normal values are available, the
authors rarely compute this ratio. However, estimation of this ratio can be valuable. No
normal animal should have all of its hairs in telogen (see Fig. 2-28E); therefore, this
finding suggests a diagnosis of telogen defuxion or follicular arrest (see Chap. 11).
Inappropriate numbers of telogen hairs (e.g., mostly telogen during the summer, when the
0 (i deu s) uu e jo ssus e sns (ogog audde aq pnous on
endocrine and metabolic disease (see Chap. 10).
 Examination of the hair shaft follows bulbar evaluation. Hairs that are inappropriately
curled, misshapen, and malformed (see Fig. 2-28P) suggest an underlying nutritional or
metabolic disease or congenitohereditary abnormality (see Figs. 2-28H and X) (see Chap.
12). Hairs with a normal shaft that are suddcnly and cleanly broken (see Fig. 2-28G) or
longitudinally split (trichoptilosis, see Fig. 2-28S) indicate external trauma from excessive
licking or scratching or too vigorous grooming. Breakage of hairs with abnormal shafts can
be seen in color dilution alopecia (see Figs. 2-28M and N) and other congenitohereditary
disorders (see Chap. 12), trichorrhexis nodosa (see Figs. 2-28Q and R) (see Chap. 11),
trichomycosis axillaris (see Chap. 4), anagen defluxion (see Fig. 2-28F), (see Chap. 11).
alopecia areata (see Fig. 2-28T) (see Chap. 9), trichomalacia (see Figs. 2-28U and V)
(sce Chap. 11), and dermatophytosis (see Fig. 2-28O). Hairs from normal color-diluted
 animals must not be mistaken for a disease entity (see Figs. 2 -28K and L). Abnormalities
 in hair pigmentation that are not associated with color dilution alopecia have not been
well studied. When unusual pigmentation is observed, external sources (e.g, salivary
staining, chemnicals and topical medications, sun bleaching) or conditions that infuence the
transfer of pigment to the hair shaft (e.g., drugs, nutritional imbalances, cndocrine disor-
ders, and idiopathic pigmentary disorders) must be considered. Hair casts are usually scen
in diseases associated with follicular keratinization abnormalities, such as sebaccous adeni-
tis (see Fig. 2--28w), dermodicosis, primary seborrhea, follicular dysplasia, and endoerinop-
athies. These conditions should not be confused with louse nits (see Fig. 2-28Y) or
Cheyletiella eggs (see Fig. 2-28Z).
Diagnostic Methods · 109
C
G
H
FIGURE 2-28. A, Anagen hair bulb from a cat. Note that the bulb is rounded, pigmented, and bent to
one sile. B, Telogen hair bulbs from u cat. The proximal cnds of both the primary (large) and secondary
(small) hairs are pointed and lack pigment. C, Catagcn hair bulh from a dog The bulb is intermediate in
 point. E, Uniforn telogenization of hairs from a cat with telogen deHuxion. F, Anagen defuxion. Note tht
area of transient methabolic arrest and the structural defect that is susceptible to fracture (arrow). C, Broken
ends. Cleanly fractured hairs from a cat with psychogenic alopecia. H, Shaft disorder of Abyssinian cats. Note
the onion-shaped swelling at the tip of the hair.
lustration continued on folloucing page
K
M
FIGURE 2-28 Continued. I, Primary hair shaft from a white cat. The single-layered outer cuticle covers
thehairhaft shngleie fahn.Thnpigmentd corexistheilyrThelargest.rk enal
layer is the medulla. J, Secondary hair shaft from same white cat; same magnification. K, Hair frou a
uormal blue point Siamese cat. Thc Maltese dilution geue is responsible for diluting black to blue (gray)
and orange to cream, It results in the irregular clumping of melanin (arrou), but does not change the
normal anatomy of the hair shaft. L, Hair from a nornal color diluted dog (Weimeraner). Note that
melanin clumps vary in size and shape and are dispersed irregularly. They do not, however, change the
anatoiny of thehair shaft.M,Hair from a dog Doherman pinscher)with color dilution alopecia.Note how
shaft anatomy. N, Close-up of another hair from dog in M. Note how the huge melanin clump has breachcd
the surface of the hair shalt. This arca is now weakened and breakage can occur at this site. O, and Og.
Hairs from a dog with dermatophytosis placed in mineral oil. O, One hair (arrow) is normal in appearance
near the arrow, but bccomes thickened and irregular (fuzzy) in ontline as you follow it to the right. Also
note two other infected hairs below the arrowed hair, in the center of the field. Higher magnification of
such an area shows an irregular hair shaft whose anatomy has been obliterated by the presence of
arthroconidia(arrow).
Diagnostic Methods · Ill
FIGURE 2-28 Continued. P, Nutritional deficiency. Misshapen and malformed hairs. Q, Trichorrhexis
nodosa. Note modular area in the center of the hair shaft where breakage will occur. R, Trichorrhexis
(split ends) in a dog. Note the distal end is split longitudinally through the hair shaft. T, "Exclamation
point" hair of alopecia areata. U, Medullary trichomalacia in a dog. Note focal thickening of hair shaft
(arrow) associated with a loss of medullary definition and longitudinal lamellar splitting. V, Another hair
shaft from same dog as inUat higher magnification.Affcted area ofhairis undergoing longitudinal
lamellar splitting (arrot). W, Hair cast. Prominent casts of keratosebaceous debris surrouinding numerous
hair shafts.
llustration continuedon follotvingpage
112 · Diagnostic Methods
X
FIGURE 2-28 Continued.X, Pili torti. Note 360-
deyree twist of hair shaft on its long axis (arrow). Y,
Louse nit. Note the nit is operculated and that most of
the side of the nit is attached to the hair shaft. Z,
Cheyletiella egg, Note that the egg is not operculated,
and is ouly attached to the hair at one end.
Z
Cytologic Examination
An enormous amount of vital diagnostic data can be obtained by microscopic examination
 of stained material, such as smears of tissues or fuids, during a clinical examination.ll It is
 posible to accomplish this with minimal equipiment and in less than 5 minutes. Thc cost
is much less than that for a yeast culture, bacterial culture and susceptibility testing, or
biopsy. Although the same information as obtained by these inore expensive tests is not
really gathered, microscopic examination often supplies suffcient data to narrow a differ-
ential diagnosis and develop a diagnostic plan.
The type of infammatory, neoplastic, or other celular infiltrate; the relative amount
 of protein or mucin; and the presence of acantholytic keratinocytes, yeasts, and bacteria
can be determined by cytologic evaluation. It is the most cominon and most rewarding
office test performed by the authors. The equipiment includes a clean mieroscope slide, a
 coverslip, a stain, and a microscope.
SPECIMEN COLLECTION
Materials for cytologic examination can be gathered by a variety of techniques. Those
most comimonly used by the authors include direct smears, impression smears, swab
smears, scrapings, and fine-nccdle aspiration. In most situations, clipping the hair should
be the only preparation of the surface. Serubbing and applying alcohol or disinfectants are
used only in areas where a fine-needle aspirate of a mass lesion is to be done.
Direct smears are usually perforned for fuid-containing lesions. A sinall amount of
 material is collected with the corner of a slide, the tip of a needlc, or another sharp-cdged
object. The material is then smeared on the microscope slide. Smears shouldl he made
gently to minimize disruption of cell (Fig. 2-29B).
nique is also used after removing crusts, expressing fuid from lesions, or gently opening.
C
FIGURE 2-29. A, Nondegenerate neutrophils in sterile pus. B, Degeneratc neutrophils and mclear stream-
ing in pus from a dog with staphylococcal foliculitis. Note that most ncutrophil muclei are swollen and pale-
staining (short arrow), and many are streamed (long arrone). C, Close-up of another feld from B. Most
neutrophils are degenerate (nuclei lightly staincd and swollen) and many cntain coei (short arrow). Erythro-
cytes are also present (long arrow). D, Phagocytosed cocci. E, Phagocytosed 1ods. F, Sterile pyogranuloma.
Macrophages, nondegenerate neutrophils, and no ricroorgarisns. G, Infectious pyogranuloma Irom a dog.
larger,swolelighty stainedandofn sreamed degeneatneurophil uclei to the rightH,Stl
Pyogranuloma. Nondegenerate neutrophils, no mocroorganisms, and ncutroplhagcxytosis (arrouxs).
Illustration continuedonfoltovingpage
|14·DiagnosticMethods
FIGURE 2-29 Continued. 1, Sterile panniculitis. Nondegenerate neutrophils, no microorganisms, and macro-
phagcs containing numerous fat droplets. J, Eosinophils from a dog with sterile eosinophilic pustulosis. K, Pus
   a d j ss  ae  i      s
generate neutrophils frorn an atopic cat. M, Eosinophil and basophil (arrouw) from a fca-hypersensitive cat. N,
Malassezia budding yeasts. O, Mast cells fron a canine mast cell tumor. P, Lymphocytes from a dog with
lymphosarcoma.
Diagnostic Methods * I15
R
S
FIGURE 2-29 Continued. Q. Swab from normal skin. Four squames are folded or rolled (back arroc).
Others are faintly stained, lay Hat, and contain imelanin granules (uhite arrow). R, Swab from normal skin.
Nucleated keratinocyte contains numerous melanin granules. S, Same field as Q. white arow indicates squame
containing two large, dark staining keratohyalin granules. T, Swab froun a dog with otitis externa. There are
degenerate neutrophils, nuinerous rodlike bacteria, and a pseudohypha of Candida albicans (white arrow).
the surface of papules, pustules, or vesicles. The microscope slide is pressed directly
against the site to be examined.
 Swab smears are most often used to obtain specimens from draining tracts or sinuses,
ear canals and interdigital webs, and dry crusty-surfaced lesions. The cotton-tipped appli-
cator is moistened and inserted into the tract, the sinus, or the ear canal. For dry lesions
and interdigital wehs, the moistened cotton tip is rubbed briskly over the skin' surface.
After the lesion has been sampled, the cotton tip is rolled over the surface of the
 microscope slide.
 Scrapings are used to sample undermeath crusts, vesicles, and peeling stratum cor-
neum. They may also be used to collect more cells from the cut surface of surgically
removed biopsy specimens. The skin is seraped with a scalpel blade held at a 15- to 90-
degree angle to the surface, The coilected material is then gently wiped onto the surface
of a microscope slide.
Fine-needle aspiration is most conmonly used to sample nodules, tumors, and cysts,
although pustules, vesicles, or bullae may also be sampled this way. Fluid-flled lesions can
be aspirated with 20- or 22-gauge needles and a 3-ml syringe. Firm lesions should be
aspirated with 20-gauge needles and 6- or l0-ml syringes to obtain better suction. Fibrotic
Il6 · Diagnostic Methods
or dense masses may necessitate the use of an l8-gauge needle to get an adequate
sample. The needle is introduced into the lesion, and then suction is gently applied by
  asu si h  as  jn rd a 
lesions, and the material within the needle is sufcient. In mass lesions, the plunger is
withdrawn one half to three fourths of the syringe volume. Suction is then interrupted
while the needle is redirected into another area of the mass. Suction is again applied, and
this procedure is repeated for a total of three or four times. Suction is then released, and
the needle is withdrawn from the lesion. The syringe and the needle are then separated,
air is introduced into the syringe, the needle is reattached, and the contents of the needle
and hnb are expeled onto the surface of a glass slide. The material is then streaked across
the surface with another glass slide or the needle.
STAINS
Collected materials are allowed to dry on the slide. Oily, waxy, or dry skin samples
collected by direct impression or moistened cotton applicators should always be heat-fixcd
before staining. After the specimens are heat-fixed and dried, the slide is stained and
examined microscopically. The stains of choice in clinical practice are the modifed
Wright's stain (Diff Quik) and new methylene blue. Diff Quik is a quick and easy
Rormanovsky-type stain. It gives less nuclear detail than the supravital stains such as new
methylene blue stain. However, it allows better differentiation of cytoplasmic structures
and organisins. Because this is most commonly what the practitioner is interested in with
 non-neoplastic skin diseases, the Diff Quik stain is preferred by the authors. When a
neopiasm is suspected, two slides may be made and both stains used. A Gram stain is
 occasionally used to acquire more information on the identity of bacteria.
CYTOLOGIC FINDINGS
The first step one takes to learn cutaneous cytology is the evaluation of normal skin.
Direct impressions or swab smears should be taken from normal dogs and cats. It is
valuable to sample several different cutaneous sites that are often saimpled in clinical
cases. The ear canals, ventral neck, axila, and interdigital areas are good sites to select to
demonstrate a variety of normal differences. These samples are dried, stained, and exam-
ined. Normal structures one will find include squames (angular, anuclear keratinocytes)
(lig. 2-29Q), occasional nucleated keratinocytes, wax and lipid from ear canals, and
suriace debris. Occasionally, free melanin granules may be seen, but these usually are
seen within keratinocytes (see Fig. 2-29R). Melanin granules should not be mistaken for
bacteria. Keratohyaline granules may also be found in keratinccytes, particularly nucleated
keratinocytes that come from the stratum granulosum of the epidermis (see Fig. 2-29S).
Evaluation of healthy skin sites also allows the practitioner to visualize and appreciate the
incidence of normal surface bacteria and yeast.
 Cytologic stucly is helpful in distinguishing between bacterial skin infection and bacte-
rial colonization, to deterrmine the relative depth of infection, to determine whether the
pustule contains bacteria or is sterile, to discover yeasts and fungi. to identify various
cutaneous neoplasms, or to find the acantholytic cells of the pemphigus diseases (see Fig.
2-29K).
Bacteria are a frequent finding in impression smears from skin and can be seen as
Although identification of the exact species of bacteria is not possible with a stain (as it is
in a culture), it is possible to distinguish cocci from rods (see Fig. 2-29D and Fig. 2-
 29E) and often to institute appropriate and effective antibiotic therapy without performing
a culture and antibiotic susceptibility testing. Generally, when cocci are seen, they are
 u s  f od r e pr d si o
 jo sq   zi'o  s s p  h rd s  s
Diagnostic Methods · II7
are found, a condition of bacterial overgrowth is present and may contribute to pruritus
and disease. Although the bacteria are not a primary etiology or causing an infection, they
as ae d  a oe aee pe pn a oq 
symptoms.
It is also possible to ohtain some clies as to the type of bacterial pyoderma or the
underlying condition.? In general, deep infections have fewer bacteria present, with the
vast majority being intracellular. In addition, deep infections have a mixed cellular infl-
trate with large numbers of histiocytes, macrophages, lyrnphocytes, and plasma cells. The
presence of these cells suggests that longer term antibiotic therapy is necessary. Large
numbers of intracellular and extracellular cocci arc seen more commonly in cases of
ing's disease.2
 Direct impression smears are one of the most effective methods for detecting the
presence of Malassezia (see Fig, 2-29N). Although Malassezia pachydermatis is an inhabi-
Sua aq puy on ap si is an so pe sop puu isou ui uys an jo u
direct impression smears and usually only 1 or 2 yeasts (rarely morc than 20) are found
when l-cm? sections of slide are exanined (see Chap. 5).6l In a study done on skin with
lesions, the presence of more than one yeast organism per high-power microscopic field
was associated with certain diseases, such as seborrhea, or with previous antibiotic therapy
(see Chap. 5).62 Although the presence of more than one or two yeast per high-power
field is not diagnostic of Malassezia dermatitis, the authors believe that this indicates that
yeasts are present in abnormally high nunbers and may be contributing to the pathologic
changes seen. The yeast Candida albicans is a dimorphic fungus with the tissue infective
form developing pseudohyphae. Because this organism in the yeast form may be a
contaminant and is not indicative of infection, histopathology is the preferred method of
confirming infection. On direct examination of infected and not contaminated tissue, a
mixture of budding yeast and pseudohyphae will be seen (see Fig. 2-29T).
 s -  7  )    7  )
mononuclear cells? If eosinophils are present, any extracellular bacteria seen probably
represent colonization—not infection—-and most likely an ectoparasitic or allergic disease
is the primary problern. This finding can be especially helpful when evaluating dogs with
suspected atopy or food hypersensitivity, because the presence of eosinophils strongly
with allergic skin discase frcquently havc tissuc cosinophilia and smaller numbers of
basophils (see Fig. 2-29M). If large numbers of eosinophils are scen in combination with
degenerateneutrophils andintracllular bactria,frunculosis ismost lely present fe
keratin and hair shafts serve as endogenous foreign bodies). It must be emphasized that
eosinophils may be less numerous than expected or completely absent in infammatory
exudates from animals receiving glucocorticoids.
If neutrophils are present, do they exhibit degenerative or toxic cytologic changes,
which suggest infection (see Figs. 2-29A to C)? If bacteria and infammatory cells are
found in the same preparation, is there phagocytosis? Are the bacteria ingested by
  p s a a  ae  su p
giant cells (see Figs. 2-29F to H)? Are there 1many bacteria, but few or no inflammatory
cells, none of which exhibit degenerative cytologic changes or phagocytosis? Whcn macro-
phages containing numcrous clear cytoplasmic vacuoles are present, one should consider
the possibility of a lipophagic granuloma such as is seen with panniculitis and foreign-body
reactions (see Fig. 2-291).
Less comnmonly, cytologic examination allows the rapid recognition of unusual infec-
tions (infections due to Actinomycetes, mycobacteria, Leishmania, and subcutaneous and
deep mycoses); or sugests (1) sterile pustular dermatoses (pemphigus, sterile eosinophilic
pustulosis, and subcormeal pustular dermatosis); (2) autoimmune dermatoses (pemphigus)
(see Fig. 2-29K); and (3) neoplastic conditions (see Fig. 2-29O and 2-29P).
A synopsis of cytologic findings and their interpretation is presented in Table 2-5.
Cytomorphologic characteristics of neoplastic cells are presented in Table 2-6.
118 · Diagnostic Methods
 Table 2-5
CytoLoGIc DIaGnoSis From Stained*
SMEARS
FINDING
DIAGNOSTIC CONSIDERATIONS
Neutrophils
Degenerate
Bacterial infection
Noudegenerate
Sterile inflarmmation (e.g., canine allergy, pemphigus, subeor-
 (ssp snd ai reu sp resnd p
tants, foreign-body reaction
Eosinophils
Ectoparasitisin, endoparasitisn, fcline allergy, furunculosis, eo-
sinophilic granuloma, feline eosinoplilie plaque, mast cell
tumor, peinphigus, sterile eosinophilie folliculitis, sterile eo-
sinophilie pustulosis
Basophils
Ectoparasitsmndoparasitisn,fline ly
Mast cells
Eetoparasitism, feline allergy, mast cell tuor (poorly staincd
with Diff Quik)
 Lymphocytes, macrophages, and plasma cells
Granulomatous
Infectious (especially furuneulosis) versus sterile (e.g, foreign
 body, sterile grannloma syndromc, mctatarsal fistulae, and
sterilc pannicalitis)
Pyogranulomatous ( many neutrophils too)
Same as for granulomatous
Eosinophilic granulomatous
Furunculosis, ruptured keratinous cyst, eosinophilic granulorma
Plasina cells
Plasma cell poloxdermatitis, plasnacytorna
Acanthocytes
Few
Any suppurative dlermatosis
Many
Permphigus, dermatophytosis
Bacteria
Intracellular
Infection
Extracellular only
Colonization
Yeastt
Pcanut shaped
Malassezia or rarely Candida dermatitis
Fungi
Fungal infection
Spores, hyphae
Atypical or monomorphous cell population
Clumped and rounded
Epithelial neoplasm 
Individual, rounded, and numerous
Lymphoreticular or mast cell neoplasm
Individual, rounded or elongated, and
Mesenchymal neoplasm
sparsc
"Diff Quik or new mnethylene blue.
+Commonly seen, rarely pathogenic.
Culture and Examination for Fungi
 Identification of fungi that have been isolated provides important information for case
 management and for public health decisions (see^Chap. 5). When agents causing subcuta-
 neous or deep mycoses are suspected, the samples should be sent to a veterinary labora-
cially the agents of subcutaneous and deep mycoses, creates airborne health hazards.
● Tahle 2--6
CYtoMorpholoGIc CharacterIstics
SuGGEstive of MaliGnaNcy
GENERAL FINDINGS
NUCLEAR FINDINGS 
CYTOPLASMIC FINDINGS 
Pleomorphism (variable cell
Markcd variation in size
Variable staining intensity, sometimes
forms)
Coarsely clumped, sometimcs jagged
ddark bluc
Variable muclens to cytoplasm
chromatin
 Discrete, punctate vacuoles
ratios
Nuclear molding
Variable amounts
Variable staining intensity
Peripheral displacement by cytoplas-
mic secretions or vacuoles
Prominent, occasionally giant,or an-
gular nacleoli
Diagnostic Methods * I19
Additionally, examinations of the mycelial phase should be carried out in biological safety
cabinets. For these reasons, the authors recommend that, in the general practice setting.
fungal assessments be limited to direct tissue microscopic examination and culturing for
dermatophytes. For other suspected fungal infections, samples should he collected and
sent to an appropriate laboratory.
  sd und s oou d pe snns  rue n
lesion are the best way to obtain a culture specimen. Pieces from the margin and the
center of lesions, as well as any different-appearing lesions, should be submitted for
laboratory analysis. Tissue samples may be placed in a bacteriologic transport medium and
should rcach the laboratory within 12 hours, although up to 24 hours is permissible.
Refrigeration may be helpful to preserve some fungi but Aspergilus spp. and Zygomycetes
are sensitive to cold. When these organisms are suspected, the sample should be kept at
room temperatire.
 Direct examination for most nondermatophyte fungal organisms is acceptable, as
described urder Cytologic Examination in this chapter. In gencral, the Diff Quik stain is
suitable for many fungi, espccially yeasts and Histoplasma capsulatun. Periodic acid--
Schiff stain is useful but beyond the level of most general practice setings. India ink
mixed with tissue fuid outlines the capsule of yeast and has bccn useful for identifying
Cryptococcus neoformans. Clearing samples with 10% KOH as discussed for dermiato-
phytes under Direct Examination in this chapter may help identify hyphae of other fungi.
When collecting samples for hyphal examination, one should not use gauze or cotton
swabs because fibers may be mistaken for hyphae.
EXAMINATION FOR DERMATOPHYTES
 In contrast to the case for other mycotic diseases, suspectcd cases of dermatophytosis and
the cause of a dermatophytosis, proper specimen collection and isolation and correct
identification of dermatophytes are necessary.
Wood's Lamp Examination
One aid in spccimen collection is the Wood's lanp examination. Thc Wood's lamp is an
ultraviolet light with a light wave of 253.7 nm that is filtered through a cobalt or nickel
filter. The Wood's lamp should be turned on and allowed to warm up for 5 to 10 minutes,
because the stability of the light's wavelength and intensity is temperature dependent. The
animal should be placed in a dark rooin and examined under the light of the Wood's
lamp. When exposed to the ultraviolet light, hairs invaded by M. caris may result in a
yelow-green fuorescence in 30% to S0% of the isolates. Hairs should be exposed for 3 to
5 minutes, because some strains are slow to show the obvious yellow-green color. The
fuorescence is due to tryptophan metabolites produced by the fungus. These metabolites
are produced only by fungi that have invaded actively growing hair and cannot be elicited
from an in vitro infection of hair. To decrease the number of false-positive results, it is
imperative that the individual hair shafts are seen to fuoresce. Fluorescence is not present
in scales or crusts or in cultures of dermatophytes. Other less common derrmatophytes that
may fuoresce include Microsporum distortum, M. audouinii, and Trichophyton schoen-
Leinit.
 Many factors influence fuorescence. The use of medications such as iodine destroys
it. Bactcria such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Corynebacterium minutissinum may
fuoresce but not with the apple green color of a dermatophyte-infected hair. Keratin,
soap, petroleum, and other medication may fuoresce and give false-positive reactions. If
the short stubs of hair produce fuorescence, the proximal end of hairs extracted fron the
follicles should fHuoresce. These Huorescing hairs should be plucked with forceps and used
for inoculation of fungal medium or for microscopic examination.
Specimen Collection
Accurate specimen collection is necessary to isolate derrnatophytes. Hair is most com-
rnonly colected for the isolation of dermatophytes. In rare cases of Trichophyton spp.
|20 · Diagnostic Methods
infection, particularly those characterized by extensive scarring, and in all cases of Micros-
porum persicolor infection, the hyphae may only be present in the stratum corneum.2 In
these cases, superficial scrapings and not just hair should be sampled. When a Wood's
lamp examination is positive, hairs that fuoresce are selected and removed with a forceps
 or a hemostat. When the Wood's lamp examination is negative, another means of collect-
ing infected hair for culture is the toothbrush (MacKenzie) method. A sterile toothbrush
is gently brushed through the animal's coat to accumulate hair and keratin debris. The
toothbrush is then gently pressed onto the surface of the culture medium, The technique
 o sro s  re o a p u  kasa d s
canis.
Hair may also be collected from the margins of lesions. Whenever possible, one
should select newly formed or actively expanding lesions that have not been recently
 medicated. The margins, as well as adjacent areas, are sampled. One should look for hairs
that are broken or misshapen and associated with infammation, scale, or crust. In long-
haired breeds, the hairs can be shaved so that only 0.5 to 1 crm protrudes above the skin.
However, if hairs are to be sampled from a lesion for fungal culture, it is valuable to clip
excessive hair and gently clean the area. Patting the lesion clean with 70% alcohol-
impregnated gauze or cotton and then letting it air dry decreases the occurrence of
contaminants. The hairs obtained by these methods can be used for culture or micro-
scopic examination. Some scales may also be collected, but one should avoid putting
exudates or medications on the medium.
Claws
Claws and pads are frequently heavily contaminated with microorganisms and may have
transient dermatophytes present. Therefore, before ciaws and pads are sampled, they need
to be prepared with 70% alcohol scrubs. Material frorn within the claw or the concave
aspects should be collected whenever possible. The distal portion of the claws should be
removed and discarded and samples then collected from the reinaining claw. An alterna-
tive is to avulse or elevate pieces of claw and obtain the sample by scraping the concave
aspect of the claw.
Hair, scale, and claw collected from suspected lesions can be placed onto culture
medium and into mineral oil or clearing solution on a microscope slide for direct examina-
tion. Scrapings should never be placed in closed containers such as screw-capped tubes,
which increase moisture and encourage the growth of contaminating bacteria and thus
make it more difficult to isolate the dermatophytes. If the samples are to be transported
and not immediately used, they may be placed in a clean enivelope or a pill vial.
Direct Examination
The clinician should practice direct examination to become adept at identifying dermato-
phytes. Even the experienced clinician does not always obtain a diagnosis in cases of
dermatophytosis. A negative direct examination finding does not rule out a diagnosis of
 dermatophytosis. Because most infections in animals are caused by ectothrix dermato.
 phytes, clearing the hairs is not as necessary as it is for infections involving humans. The
authors use only mineral oil to suspend hair with suspected dermatophytes. Others recom-
 ss  a  ss e ay r a n    p
claw material may first be cleared by placing the specimens in several drops of 10% to
 20% KOH on a microscope slide. A coverslip is added, and the slide is gently heated for
15 to 20 seconds. One should avoid overheating and boiling the sample. Alternatively, the
 preparation may be allowed to stand for 30 rminutes at room temperature. An excellent
result is obtained if the mount is placed on the microscope lamp for gentle heating. The
 preparation is ready for examination in 15 to 20 minutes, and the structures are better
preserved.
The following formula caled chlorphenolac has been recommended as a replacement
for the KOH solution in the digestion process to clear keratin: 50 g of chloral hydrate is
added to 25 ml of liquid phenol and 25 ml of liquid lactic acid. Several days may pass
before the crystals go into solution, but when they do, no precipitate forms. The slide can
Diagnostic Methods ·121
be read almost immediately after hair and keratin are added to this chloral hydrate-
 phenol-lactic acid solution.
 Examination of cleared, mineral oil -suspended, or stained scrapings from mycotic
lesions may reveal yeasts, conidia, hyphae, or pseudohyphae. To find dermatophyte-in-
fected hairs, one should look for fragmented picces of hair that are larger in diameter
than most hairs present (see Fig. 2-28O). Generally, it is best to look near the hair buibs
irregular, or fuzzy in outline, and the clear definition between cuticle, cortex, and medulla
is lost. It is also important to remember that dernatophytes do not form macroconidia in
tissue. Any macroconidia seen represent saprophytes and have no lmown clinical signifi-
 3 μrm), septate, and variable in length and degree of branching. Older hyphae are usually
wider and may be divided into beadlike chains of rounded cells (arthroconidia).
 n a s p a 'se as  ss  s p 
dermatophytes 1nay be identical to one another and necessitate isolation and culture for
identification.
 In an ectothrix invasion of hair, hyphae may be seen within the hair shaft, but they
grow outward and show a great propensity to form arthroconidia in a mosaic pattern on
the surface of the hair. Large conidia (5 to 8 μm) in sparse chains outside the hairs arc
seen in Microsporum gypseum and M. tanbreuseghemi infections. Intermediate-sized
verrucosum, and T. equinum infections.
An endothrix infection is characterized by conidia formation within the hair shaft; the
hair cuticle is not broken, but the hairs break off or curl. Endothrix invasion is rarely seen
in animals but is typical of Trichophyton tonsurans infections in humans. The clinician
should practice to develop the technique of direct examination for fungi. The best way to
learn this technique is to find a highly Wood's lamp- positive M. canis infection in the cat.
A large volume of positive hairs should be collected and kept in a loosely closed pill vial.
Every few days, some hairs should be removed and examined until the affected hairs are
rapidly recognized. After this is done, affected hairs should be mixed with normal hairs
and the process repeated several times during the succeeding weeks. This type of practice
 greatly improves one's ability to locate dermatophyte-infected hairs by microscopic exami-
nation.
FUNGAL CULTURE
Sabouraud's dextrose agar and dermatophyte test medium (DTM) are traditionally used in
clinical veterinary mycology for isolation of fungi; however, other media are available,
although rarcly used in general practice. DTM is essentially a Sabouraud’'s dextrose agar
containing cycloheximide, gentamicin, and chlortetracycline as antifungal and antibacterial
the medium, with alkaline metabolites turning the medium from yellow to red (see Fig.
2--30A). When the protein is exhausted, the dermatophytes use carbohydrates, giving off
acid metabolites. The mediuin changes from red to yellow. Most other fungi use carbohy-
qa u p o  e nd ar o   ao sud pue sy sm
should be examined daily for the first 10 days. Fungi such as Blastomyces dermatitidis,
Sporothrix schenckii, H. capsulatum, Coccidioides immitis, Pseudoallescheria boydi, and
 some Aspergillus species may cause a change to red in DTM, so microscopic examination
is essential to avoid an erroneous presumptive diagnosis.
  e h n s  a  d s  s
 Organisms sensitive to cycloheximide include Cryptococcus neoformans, many members of
tation, and inhibit the growth of some pathogens. Therefore, it is valuable to place part of
the specinen on plain Sabouraud's dextrose agar. ln some cases, identification is more
I22 · Diagnostic Methods
readily obtainable from the sample inoculated onto Sabouraud's dextrose agar. For this
rcason, a double plate containing one side of DTM and one of Sabouraud's dextrose agar
has gained favor anong many dermatologists. When bottles containing DTM are used, it
mayibe difficult to get a toothbrush onto the medium surface. When bottles are used, it is
 Skin scrapings, claws, and hair should be inoculated onto Sabouraud's dextrose agar
and DTM. Desiccation and exposure to ultraviolet light hinder growth. Therefore, cultures
should be incubated in the dark at 30°C with 30% humidity. A pan of water in the.
incubator usually provides enough humidity. Cultures should be incubated for 10 to 14
days and should be checked daily for fungal growth. Proper interpretation of the DTM
culture necessitates recognition of the red color change simultaneously with visible myce-
lial growth. False-positive results occur most commonly when the cultures are not ob-
scrved frequently. As a saprophytc grows, it cventually turms the media red, thus empha-
sizing the importance of corelating the initial mycelial growth with the color change.
Figure 2-30 illustrates the gross colony morphologic patterns of some common fungi.
IDENTIFICATION OF FUNGI
If a suspected dermatophyte is grown on culture, it should be identified. This necessitates
collection of macroconidia from the mycelial surface. Generally, the colony needs to grow
may provide adequate macroconidia, in some cases the colonies on the Sabouraud's
dextrose agar may need to be sampled to find them. In occasional cases, especially with
Trichophyton spp., no macroconidia are found. Subculturing these colonies on Sabou-
raud's dextrose agar or potato dextrose agar may facilitate sporulation. Alternatively, the
sample may be sent to a diagnostic laboratory for identification.
The macroconidia are most readily collected by gently applying the sticky side of clear
d n si s   u s e  n (    nm
onto several drops of lactophenol cotton blue that is on the surface of a microscope slide.
A coverslip is placed over the tape and sample, and this is examined by mieroscopy.
Salient facts useful in identifying the thrce major dcrmatophytes (Figs. 2--30 and 2-
3l) are briefy described in the next section.
● Microsporum canis. These lesions may show a yellow-green fluorescence. Hairs that
fuoresce should he plucked for culture or microscopic examination. Examination of a
 KOH preparation may reveal arthrospores present in masses on the hair shaft.
    a  o- s as o -o on 
becomes more powdery, has a central depressed area, and may show radial folds. The
pigment on the undersurface of the colony is yellow-orange, becorming dull orange-brown.
On potato dextrose agar, the pigment is lemon yellow.
Microscopic Morphology. M. canis usually forms abundant spindle-shaped macro-
 conidia with thick echinulate walls. The echinulations (spines) are more pronounced at the
terminal end, which often forms a knob. The macroconidia are composed of six or more
cells (see Fig. 2-31A). One-ceiled microconidia may be seen. Conidia develop hest on
rice agar medium and poorly or not at all on Sabouraud's dextrose agar.
Diagnostic Criteria. The distinctive macroconidia and the lemon yellow pigment are
characteristic of M. canis.
● Microsporum gypseum. Fluorescence is rare and, if present, is dull. The arthro-
spores on hair shafts are larger than those of M. canis.
Colony Morphology. Colonies are rapid growing, with a fat to granular texture and
time. The undersurface pigmentation is pale yellow to tan.
Microscopic Morphology. Echinulate macroconidia contain up to six cells with rela-
tivcly thin walls (see Fig. 2-31B). The abundant ellipsoid macroconidia lack the terminal
knob present in M. canis. One-celled microconidia may be present.
Diagnostic Methods ·I23
H
FIGURE 2-30. Fungal colonics. A, Seven-day culture of M. canis. Lftside, plain Sabouraud's dextrose agar:
albicans. H, Gross colony of Altermaria. (A, C, E, H, courtesy C. Pinello. B, D, F, G, courtesy P. Jacobs.)
124 · Diagnostic Methods
Microsporum canis
Sporeson hair
Micro-
Macro
dlia
inorqanized
Microsporum gypseum
Sporesonhair
Micrdia
FIGURE 2-31. A, Characteristic microscopic
morphology of M. canis B, characteristic micru-
scopie morphology of M. gypseum C, characteristic
microscopie rnorphology of T. meniagrophytes. The
macroconidia and spirals are rnicruscopic strt-
tures. The lhair shafts are much larger.
sparse,iarge
Trichophyton mentaqrophytes
Coiled
Sporeirs
Micro-
spirals
conidia
02019
Diagnostic Criteria. The abundant ellipsoid macroconidia and fat to granular tex-
ture of the colony are definitive features.
chains of arthroconidia may be observed on hair.
Colony Morphology. Colony morphologic characteristics are variable. Most zoophilic
   s d  n m e  o  e d s
30D). The color of the undersurface is usualy brown to tan, but may be dark red. The
anthropophilic form produces a colony with a white cottony surface.
Microscopic Morphology. The zoophilic forin of T. mentagrophytes produces glo-
bose microconidia that may be arranged singly along the hyphae or in grapelike clusters.
Macroconidia, if present, are cigar-shaped with thin smooth walls (see Fig. 2-31C). Some
strains produce spiral hyphae, which may also be seen in other dermatophytes but are
most characteristic of Trichophyton. Samples that show this change should be submitted
to a diagnostic: laboratory for identification.
Diagnostic Criteria. The colony morphologic characteristics, spiral hyphae, macro-
conidia, and microconidia are useful for identifying T. mentagrophytes. When grown on
forned by T. rubrum. Strains of T. mentagrophytes are more apt to be urease positive
Diagnostic Methods ·I25
than is T. rubrum. Because T. rubrum may be incorrectly identifed as T. mentagrophytes,
the above-mentioned differential features are important.
Examination for Bacteria
In general practice, cytologic examination is the primary method used to identify the
 presence of pathogenic bacteria. Unusual lesions, nodular granulomatous lesions, and
draining nodules should also be cultured. Bacterial culture and susceptibility testing are
 not routinely cost effective for the initial work-up of the case with a suspected bacterial
 pyoderma. Cytologic examination is the initial test of choice, and if intracellular cocci are
seen, empirical antibiotic therapy for coagulase-positive staphylococci is warranted. When
cytologic study reveals rod-shaped organisms, or when cocci are seen but appropriate
empirical therapy is ineffective, bacterial culture and susceptibility testing are indicated.
Veterinarians frequently take specimens for bacterial culture but infrequently grow and
identify the cultures in their own practice. S
Specimens should be collected for culture,
 provide prompt, accurate identification and antibacterial susceptibilities.
 The selection of appropriate lesions for culturing is critical. Moist erosions and many
crusts may be contaminated by bacteria, and cultures are not routinely recommended for
these lesions. In cases with pustules, an intact pustule should be opened with a sterile
needle. The pus collected on the needle should be transferred to the tip of a sterile swab.
Papules may also be superficially punctured, and a relatively serous droplct of pus may be
 obtained. These superficial papular and pustular lesions should not bc prepared at all,
because negative cultures may result. With superficial cultures, a positive culture does not
    s     d 
than one type of organism is identied on cytologic examination, as is common in cases of
otitis, the laboratory should be so informed. This allows documentation of the intracellular
location of bacteria, which confirms their role in eliciting an inflammatory response. In
cases with furuncles, needle aspirates may be taken and cultured. When plaques, nodules,
and fistulous tracts are to be cultured, the surface is disinfected and samples are taken
aseptically by skin biopsy. The skin sample is placed in a culture transport medium and
submitted to the laboratory, where it should be ground and cultured.
When unusual bacterial diseases such as mycobacteriosis, bacterial pseudomycetoma,
 actinomycosis, actinobacillosis, and nocardiosis are suspected, unstained direct smears and
tissue biopsy specimens should be submitted. The laboratory should be informed of the
suspected disorder.
 Deep lesions, cellulitis, and nodular lesions may also be cultured for anaerobic bacte-
ria. Again, tissue biopsy is preferred, and special transport media or equipment is neces-
n s n r ss ai s p y ss
Biopsy and Dermatohistopathologic Examination
maximization of the potential benefits of this tool necessitates enthusiastic, skilled team-
work between a clinician who has carefully selected, procured, and prescrved the speci-
 mens and a pathologist who has carefully processed, perused, and interpreted the speci
 mens. When the clinician and the pathologist truly work together, the skin biopsy can
this, skin biopsies are often not performed or are done relativcly late in thc diagnostic
work-up. In other cases, the skin biopsy findings are unrewarding because of poor speci-
Imen selection, poor technique, or both. In many dermatologic cases, the differential
diagnosis primarily includes diseases that can be diagnosed only by biopsy or other
nonhematologic or serum laboratory tests. Yet, the authors see numerous cases in which a
variety of hematologic tests and cultures have been performed when the biopsy is the
 most cost-effective test to recornmend to the client.
126 · Diagnostic Methods
When the condition presented is not readily recognized, the skin biopsy is often the
most informative test. Skin biopsy should not be regarded as merely a diagnostic aid for
the dificult case or for the case that can be diagnosed only by biopsy. It is also helpful in
establishing the group of diseases to consider. Even without a defnitive diagnosis, a
biopsy usually helps guide the clinician in the appropriate diagnostic direction. It provides
a permanent record of the pathologic changes present at a particular time, and knowledge
of this pathologic finding stimulates the clinician to think more deeply about the basic
cellular changes underlying the disease. Symptomatic therapies may also he directed on
the basis of cytologic findings.
Although biopsies are helpful, it is still important for the clinician to remembcr that
they only add information. The diagnosis is usually made by the clinician, who correlates
all the relevant findings of a case, not by the pathologist. The biopsy contributes to those
findings; it does not rcplace a thorough history, physical examination, or other ancillary
test results. Excellent textbooks on veterinary dermatopathology are now available.24. 51. 5
WHEN TO BIOPSY
There are no definite rules on when to perform a skin biopsy. The following suggestions
are offered as general guidelines. Biopsy should be performed on (l) all obviously neo.
   ae () i nsad e () ssl so ps n 
likely to have the major diseases that are most readily diagnosed by biopsy (e.g, follicular
dysplasia, zinc-responsive dermatosis, sebaceous adenitis, dcrmatomyositis, and immune-
mediated skin disease); (4) a dermatosis that is not responding to apparently rational
serious; (6) vesicular dermatitis; and (7) any suspected condition for which the therapy is
expensive, dangerous, or sufficiently time consuming to necessitate a definitive diagnosis
before beginning treatment.
In general, skin biopsy should be performed within 3 weeks for any dermatosis that is
not responding to what appears to be appropriate therapy. This early intervention (1)
adiministration of topical and systemic medicaments, excoriation, and secondary infection
and (2) allows more rapid institution of specifie therapy, thus reducing permanent disease
sequelae (scarring, alopecia), the patient's suffering, and needless cost to the owner. Anti-
inflammatory agents can dramatically affect the histologic appearance of many dermatoses.
The administration of such agents, especially glucocorticoids, should optimally be stopped
q as   s  a    g n a o
imperative to eliminate these secondary infections with appropriate systemic antibiotic
therapy before biopsies are perforned.
WHAT TO BIOPSY
lesions and subtle changes that they suspect will show diagnostic changes. They are
already aware of what histopathologic changes are helpful in making a diagnosis. They also
know what types of changes may be expected to be found with certain clinical lesions. For
example, pigrmentary incontinence is a helpful histopathologic feature of lupus erythemato-
sus. The clinician who knows this, and also knows that slate blue depigmenting lesions
have that color because of dermal melanin (often from pigmentary incontinence), selects
clinician knew the pathogenesis of that lesion,
a   si ado e ss see no  u e i as  
specimens from the unusual areas, not just those typical of the suspected disease. It is also
secondary complications. Many clinicians perform biopsy of secondary bacterial pyoderma
Diagnostic Methods·I27
lesions but not noninfected areas in cases with underlying allergy or keratinization disor-
ders.
 The histologic examination of the full spectrum of lesions present gives more informa-
tion than does the examination of one lesion or stage. Therefore, the clinician should take
multiple sainples and obtain specimens from a variety of lesions. When primary lesions
are present, a sample of at least one should be submitted to the laboratory. Fluid-filed
present, should be sampled as soon as possible. If the suspected disease historically has
pustules, having the patient return may allow sampling of the most appropriate lesions. In
other cases, the patient may be hospitalized and be examined every 2 to 4 hours to find
early intact lesions for biopsy. Most diseases that can be diagnosed by dermatopathologic
exainination have early, fully developed, and late changes. The greater the number of
characteristic changes recognized, the more accurate the diagnoses are, and by selecting a
clinician obtains biopsy specimens from the spontaneous primary lesions (macules, pap-
ules, pustules, vesicles, bullae, nodules, and tumors) and secondary lesions. Examination of
crusts may sometimes add as much information as a biopsy of a papule. A greater number
of biopsy specimens maximizes resuls. However, in practice, clinicians are usually limited
to three to five sarmples. Most laboratories charge the same fee for one to three biopsy
  s o n si   s  u ns s
attempts. One should try to pay attention to what lesions are selected and what specimens
give the best results. With practice, the clinician becomes more adept at selecting inform-
but it can help the clinician to achieve some proficiency in the art of maximizing the
benefits of skin biopsy.
INSTRUMENTS REQUIRED
lidocaine; a selection of punch biopsies of different sizes; Adson thumb forceps; iris or
small, curved scissors; formalin vials; needlles and suture material; needle holders; wooden
'seseo isou noy papaau si peun zuaundinha a aie sped aznes pue isiossndop onguon
Occasionally, scalpel handles, blades, and large formalin vials may also be necessary.
HOW TO BIOPSY
In general, a 6-nm biopsy punch provides an adequate specimen. Four-millimeter
punches are reserved for difficult sites such as near the eye, on the pinna, and on the
nasal planum and foot pads of cats and small dogs. It is imperative not to inelude any
d  s ss  d   s u jo 
tissue block, rotatior in the wrong direction may result in failure to section the pathologic
portion of the specimen. In general, when a punch biopsy specimen is received at the
laboratory, it is cut in half through the center. Therefore, a macule, pustule, papule, or
small lcsion should be centered in the biopsy specimen. If the lesion is to one side, only
growth of the hair. In many laboratories, only half of the specimen is sectioned and
processed; the other half is saved in case problems occur and new sections or blocks are
needed. So even with deeper cuts, if the wrong half is blocked, the lesion may not be
present. The clinician must also realize that, after fixation, erythema and color changes arc
and pustules may no longer be grossly visible. The biopsy punch should be rotated in only
one direction so as to minimize shearing artifacts.
It is important for the clinician to compare the pathologist's report with the descrip-
tion of the clinical lesion. If a pustule was observed clinically and the pathologist's report
128 · Diagnostic Methods
 does not describe a pustule, it may have been missed. If a biopsied lesion is missed or the
tissue is interpreted as normal, the clinician should explain this to the pathologist and
obtain deeper sections to find the lesion.
lt is also important for the clinician to be aware of what changes occur in the
specimen after the biopsy. Autolysis starts to occur almost immediately after removal of
the biopsy specinen. Therefore, it is important to place the newly acquired samples into
appropriate fxatives (10% neutral phosphate buffered formalin) immediately. This should
be done for each sample; one should not wait until all samples are taken before placing
them in formalin. Punch biopsy specimens left under a hot surgery light have microscopi
cally observable damage in less than 5 minutes.19
 Secondary bacterial infections frequently complicatc canine and, to a lesser extent,
feline dermatoses. The histopathologic changes induced by bacterial infection can obliter-
ate the changes associated with the underlying disease proccss. Thus, it is important to
treat secondary infections hefore biopsies are performcd.
 Glucocorticoid therapy can drastically alter inffammatory conditions and can rapidly
deplete tissue eosinophils. Thus, It is important to stop glucocorticoid therapy for 2 to 3
weeks (oral) or 6 to 8 weeks (repository injections) before biopsying.
Excisional biopsy with a scalpel 'is often indicated (1) for larger lesions; (2) for
vesicles, bullae, and pustules (the rotary and shearing action of a punch may damage the
lesion); and (3) for suspected disease of the subcutaneous fat (punches often fail to deliver
discased fat).
Skin biopsy is usually easily and rapidly accomplished using physical restraint and local
anesthesia. The sites are gently clipped (if needed). Clippers should not touch the skin
surface, especially when disorders of keratinization are suspected, because the surface
keratin can be removed. The veterinarian is carefiul not to remove surface keratin, and the
surfacc is left untouched or gently cleaned by daubing or soaking with a solution of 70%
alcohol. The sites should not be prepared with other antiseptics (e.g., iodophors). Under
no circumstances should biopsy sites be scrubbcd. Such cndeavors remove important
surface pathologic changes and creatc iatrogenic inflammatory lesions. Sites that are being
licked or scratched by the animal can have traumatic artifacts.
After the surface has air dricd, the desired lesion is undermined with an appropriate
amount, usually 1 to 2 ml, of local anesthetic (1% to 2% lidocaine) injected subcutane-
ously through a 25-gaugc needle. An exception to this procedure is 1nade when disease of
the fat is suspected, in which case ring blocks, or regional or general anesthesia should be
used, because injection into fat distorts the tissues. The local injection of lidocaine stings,
and some animals object strenuously. The desired lesion is then punched or excised,
including the underlying fat. In one study,26 1% lidocaine was found to be superior to 1%
lidocaine with epinephrine or a prilocaine cream applied topically.
coagulase-positive Staphylococcus) and grarn-negative (including Pseurdomonas) bacteria,
mycobacteria, and fungi?1 Bicarbonate and epinephrine do the same.5l Thus, if a culture
is' going to be obtained from the biopsy specimen, it is advisable to use a ring block, or
regional or general anesthesia.
 Great care should be exercised when manipulating the biopsy specimen, avoiding the
use of forceps and instead using tiny mosquito hemostats, Adson thumb forceps, or the
syringe nccdle through which the local anesthetic was injected. One cruciate (crisscross)
suture effectively closes defects produced by 6-nm biopsy punches. One or two simple
 interrupted sutures may also be placed.
COMPLICATIONS OF SKIN BIOPSY
d  sxa q rs  ae a as s e s
biopsy on patients with bleeding disorders, including patients taking aspirin and anticoagu-
lants. The adninistration of such medication should be stopped, if possible, for I to 2
weeks before biopsy. Problems with wound healing should be anticipated in patients with
hyperadrenocorticism and hypothyroidism, in patients with various collagen defects (such
Diagnostic Methods · 129
as cutaneous asthenia), and in patients taking glucocorticoids or antimitotic drugs. The
administration of such drugs should be stopped 2 to 3 weeks before biopsy, if possiblc.
Wound infections are rare.
Caution should be exercised when injecting lidocaine, which may contain epinephrine,
ncar extremities (ear tips, digits, and so forth); into patients with impaired circulation,
cardiovascular disease, or hypertension; or into patients recciving phenothiazines, β-adre-
nergic receptor blockers, monoamine oxidase inhibitors (e.g., anitraz), or tricyclic antide-
pressants. Finally, one should be careful of the total amount of lidocaine injected into
small kittens and puppies, because it can produce myocardial depression, muscle twitch-
ing, neurotoxicity, and death. One should not exceed a dose of 0.5 ml per kitten or puppy.
 Seizures have been induced when 0.5 ml of lidocaine has been injected subcutaneously on
the head of sinall dogs or kittens.
WHAT TO DO WITH THE BIOPSY SPECIMEN
Skin biopsy specimens should bc gcntly blotted to remove artifactual blood. In most
instances, the fixativc of choice is i0% neutral phosphate buffered formalin (100 1ml of
40% formaldehyde, 900 inl of tap water, 4 g of acid sodium phosphate monohydrate, and
6.5 g of anhydrous disodium phosphate). It is not stable and oxidizes to formic acid, which
can be sccn histologically by the formation of acid hematin in blood cells. Also, the ratio
 of formalin to tissue is important, with a minimun of l0 parts formalin to l part tissue
being necessary for adiequate rapid fixation. Freezing should also be avoided; this somc-
times occurs when samples are mailed in the winter months. 9 Freezing can be prevented
by adding 95% ethyl alcohol as 10% of the fixative voluinc, or by allowing at least 12
hours of fixation before cold exposure.
Fixation in formalin also causes sample shrinkage, which is not a problem with 4-mm
punch biopsy specimens. Larger punch biopsy specimens and elliptic excisions should be
placed subcutis side down on a piece of wooden tongue depressor or cardboard to
minimize the artifacts induced by shrinkage. They should be gently pressed flat for 30 to
60 seconds to facilitate adherence. Placing the specimens on a flat surface allows proper
anatomic orientation and prevents potentially drastic artifacts associated with curling and
folding. The specimen and its adherent splint are then immcrsed in fixative within I to 2
Minutes, because artifactual changes develop rapidly in room air.
 Also, formalin rapidly penetrates only about 1 cm of tissue. Samples larger than 1 cin
when large nodules and tumors are excised and submitted for histopathologic evaluation.
The last critical consideration is deciding where to send a skin biopsy specimen.
Obviously, the clinician wants to send it to someone who can provide thc most informa-
tion. The choices should be ordered as follows: (1l) a veterinary pathologist specializing in
     e      
dermatohistopathology, (3) a general veterinary pathologist, and (4) a physician dermato-
pathologist with a special interest in comparative dermatopathology.
The clinician frequently does not provide adequate information concerning skin bi-
diagnosis is more likely (and the patient is best served) whcn both mcmbcrs of the team
do thcir part. A concise description of the history, the physical exarmination findings, the
results of laboratory exarninations and therapeutic trials, and the clinician's differential
 diagnosis should always accompany the biopsy specimen.
TISSUE STAINS
Hematoxylin and eosin (H & E) stain is most widely used routinely for skin biopsies. In
the laboratory of tvo of the authors (DWS and WHM), acid orcein-Giemsa (AOG) stain
is also used regularly for skin biopsies. The routine use of AOG markedly reduces the
need for ordering special stains (Table 2-7). Table 2-8 contains guidelines for the use of
various spocial stains,
130 · Diagnostic Methods
●Table 2-7
STAInING CHaRACTERISTICS OF VaRIOUS
Cutaneous components with acid
OrCEIn-GIeMSA STAIN
TEST COMPONENT
COLOR
Nuclei
Dark blue
Cytoplasm of keratinocytes
Blue-purple
Cytoplasm of smooth muscle cells
Light blue
Keratin
Blue
Collagen
Pink
Elastin
Dark brown to black
Mast cell granules
Purple
Some acid’ mucopolysaccharides
Purple
Melanin
Dark green to black
Hemosiderin
Yellow-brown to green
Eryturocytes
Green-orange
Eosinophil granules
Red
Cytoplasm of histiocytes. lympho-
Light blue
cytes, and fbrocytes
Cytoplasm of neutrophils
Clear lo light bhue
Cytoplasm of plasrma cells
Dark blue to gray-blue
Amyloid
Sky blue to gray-blne
H lyaline
Pink
Fibrin and fibrinoid
Green-blue
Keratohyalin
Dark blue
Trichohyalin
Red
Bacteria, fungal spores, and hyphae 
Dark blue
Serum
Light blue
ARTIFACTS
 Even the best dermatohistopathologist cannot read an inadequate, poorly preserved,
errors in site selcction, preparation, technique in taking and handling and fixation and
 be cognizant of thesc potentiaily disastrous distortions.
● Table 2-8
 StaininG CharacteristIcs of varIous
Substances with SpecIal StaIns
STAIN
TISSUE AND COLOR
van Gieson's
Mature collagen-red; immature collagen, keratin, muscle, and nerves-
yellow
Masson trichrome
 Mature collagen-blue; immature collagen, keratin, musclc, and nerves-
red
Verhoeff's
Elastin and nuclei-black
Gomori's aldehyde fuchsin
Elastin, sufated acid mucopolysaccharides, and certain epithelial mucins-
purple
Oil red O*
Lipids-dark red
Sudan black B*
Lipids-green-black
Scarlet red
Lipids- red
Gomori's or Wilder's reticulin
Reticulin, melanin, and nerves-dark brown to black
Periodic acid-Schiff
Glycogen,eutral mucopolysaccharidesungi and tissuc drisd
Aleian blue
Acid mucopolysaccharides-blue
Hale's colloidal iron
Acid mucopolysaccharides-blue
Toluidine blue
Acid mucopolysacchanides and mast cell granules-purple
Gomori's methenamine silver
Fungi and melanin-black
Gram's or Brown-Brrmn
Gram-negative bacteria-red
Fite's modifed acid-fast
Acid-fast bacteria-red
 Fontana's ainmoniacal silver nitrate
 Premelanin and melanin-black (hemosilerin usually positive too, but less
intense)
*Require frozen sections of formalin-fixed tissue.
Diagnostic Methods · [31
FIGURE 2-32. Electrodlesicca-
tion. Note how epicderimal keratino-
cytes are vertically elongated, giv-
ing the appearance of standing at
attention.
1. Artifacts due to improper site selection include excoriations and other physico-
chemical effects (e.g., maceration, infammation, necrosis, and staining abnormali-
ties caused by topical medicaments).
 2. Artifacts due to improper preparation include infammation, staining abnornalitics,
and removal of surface pathologic changes (from surgical scrubbing and the use of
antiseptics), as well as collagen separation, pseudoedema, and pseudosinus forma-
tion (due to intradermal injection of local anesthetic).
 3. Artifacts due to improper technique in taking and handing include pseudovesicles,
 pseudoclefts, and shearing (caused by a dull punch or poor technique); pseudopa-
pilomas or pseudonodules, pseudoslerosis,pseudosinuses, pseudoysts,and l
ules of sebaceous glands within hair follicles, on the skin surface, or both (squeeze
artifacts due to intervention with forceps); marked dehydration, elongation, and
polarization of cells and cell nuclei (due to electrodesiccation) (Fig. 2-32); and
intercellular edema, clefts, and vesicles (due to friction).
ration, intracellular edema, and fractures (due to autolysis); shrinkage, curling, and
folding (due to failure to use wooden or cardboard splints); intracellular edema,
subepidermal vacuolar alteration, and multinucleate epiderimal giant cells (from
freezing); forrmalin pigment in blood vessels and extravascular phagocytes (due to
the use of nonbuffered formalin); hardening, shrinkage, and loss of cellular detail
(from alcohol in the fixative); poor staining and soft, easily displaced, and distorted
dration during tissue processing); pseudoacanthosis (in tangential sections associ-
ated with poor orientation of the specimen); and dermoepidermal separation and
displacement of dermal tissues into epidermis (attributable to cutting scctions from
dermis to epidermis).
● The vOcabularY Of dErmatOhISTOpaThOlOGY
Dermatopathology is a specialty of medicine requiring many hours of training and many
more of experience to rmaster. It is beyond the scope of this book to train the student
adequately in both dermatology and dermatopathology. However, because dermatopatho-
 logic examination is the single most valuable laboratory aid to the derinatologisf, it is
important to understand the vocabulary of the dermatopathologist.
 Derrmatohistopathology has a specialized vocabulary, because many of the histopatho-
logic changes are unique to the skin. Unfortunately, as is true of most sciences, the
132 · Diagnostie Methods
FIGURE 2-33. Marked orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis in a dog with ichthyosis
 derrnatologic and general medical literatures abound with confusing and sometimes inap-
propriate dermatohistopathologic terms. The following discussion of terms is based on an
amalgamation of such considerations as precision of definition, descriptive value, popular
usage, historical precedent, and diagnostic significance in dermatohistopathology27. 50.4
Epidermal Changes
HYPERKERATOSIS
Hyperkeratosis is an increased thickness of the stratum corneum. It may bc absolute (an
actual increase in thickness, which is most common) or relative (an apparent increase due
to thinning of the underlying epidermis, which is rare). The types of hyperkeratosis are
further specifed by the adjectives orthokeratotic, or anuclear (Fig. 2-33), and parakera-
totic, or nuclcated (Fig. 2-34). Orthokeratotic and parakeratotic hyperkeratoses are com-
monly, but less precisely, referred to as orthokeratosis and parakeratosis, respectively.
 Other adjectives commonly used to describe further the nature of hyperkeratosis inelude
basketweave (e.g., dermatophytosis and endocrinopathic conditions) (Fig. 2-35A), compact
(e.g., chronic low-grade trauma and cutaneous horns) (see Fig. 2-35B), and larminated
(e.g, ichthyosis) (see Fig. 2-35C). Hyperkeratosis is usually found in conjunction with
epidermal hyperplasia. If it occurs without epidermal hyperplasia, disorders of keratiniza-
tion, comeocyte adhesion, or endocrine dermatoses should be considercd.
Orthokeratotic and parakeratotic hyperkeratosis may be seen as alternating layers in
the stratum corneum. This observation implies episodic changes in epidermopoiesis. If the
changes arc generalized, the lesions appear as horizontal layers. If the changes are focal.
the lesion is a vertical defect in the stratum corneum, Orthokeratotic and parakeratotic
hypcrkcratosis are coinmon, nondiagnostic findings in virtually any chronic dcrmatosis.
zinc-responsive dermatosis, lethal acrodermatitis, Malassezia dermatitis, some vitamin A-
responsive dernatoses, thallotoxicosis, generic dog food dermatosis, necrolytic migratory
erythema, hereditary nasal hyperkeratosis of Labrador retrievers, and occasionally, derina-
tophytosis and dermatophilosis.Parakeratotic hyperkeratosis that targets hair folicles sug
gests follicular inflammatory diseases and congenital folicular parakeratosis of Rottweilers
Diagnostic Methods ·133
FIGURE 2-34. Marked parakeratotic
hyperkeratosis in a dog with necrolytic mi-
gratory erytheima.
epidermal pallor suggests zinc-responsive dermatosis, lethal acrodernatitis, thallotoxicosis,
and necrolytic migratory erythema.
Focal parakeratotic hyperkeratosis overlying epidermal papillae (parakeratotic “caps")
 ts si (abs, red sa ae ad p ns  rm 
primary idiopathic seborrheic dermatitis and zinc-responsive dermatoses of dogs (Fig.
2-36).
Diffuse orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis suggests endocrinopathies, nutritional deficien-
cies, secondary seborrheas, and developmental abnormalities (ichthyosis, epidermal nevus,
follicular dysplasia, and color dilution alopecia). Orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis that is dis-
proportionately severe in hair follicles (Fig. 2-37) suggests vitamin A-responsive derma-
tosis, vitamin A deficiency, acne, Schnauzer comedo syndrome, follicular dysplasia, seba-
ceous adenitis, actinic follicular keratosis, comedo nevus, and follicular cyst.
HYPOKERATOSIS
The decreased thickness of the stratum corneun, called hypokeratosis, is much less
common than hyperkeratosis and reflects an exceptionally rapid epidermal turnover time,
decreased cohesion between cells of the stratum corneum, or both. Hlypokeratosis may be
found in seborrheic and other cxfoliative skin disorders, and in feline paraneoplastic
|34· Diagnostie Methods
FIGURE 2-35. A, Basketweavc orthokcratotic hyperkeratosis in a cushingoid cat. B. Compact orthokeratotic hyper.
keratosis in a cutaneous horm form a cat. C, Laminated orthoke ratotic byperkeratosis in an ichthyotie cat.
alopecia. It may also be produced by excessive surgical preparation of the biopsy site or
by friction and maceration in intertriginous areas.
HYPERGRANULOSIS AND HYPOGRANULOSIS
The terms hypergranulosis and hypogranulosis indicate, respectively, an increase and a
decrcasc in the thickness of the stratum granulosum. Bothi entities are common and
nondiagnostic. Hypergranulosis may be scen in any dermatosis in which there is epidermal
hyperplasia and orthokeratotie hyperkeratosis (Fig. 2-38). Hypogranulosis is often secn in
dermatoses in which there is parakeratotie hyperkeratosis and is most easily appreciated in
the footpads and the nasal planum.
HYPERPLASIA
An increased thickness of the noncornified epidermis due to an increased number of
epidermal cells is called hyperplasia. The term acanthosis is often used interchangeably
stratum spinosum and may be due to hyperplasia (true acanthosis, which is the 1most
common) or hypertrophy (pseudoacanthosis, which is uncommon). Epidermal hyperplasia
cpidermis that appear to project dowuward into the underlying dermis). Rete ridges are
not found in normal-haircd skin of dogs and cats. Mitotic figures, virtually never seen in
normal epidermis, are common in hyperplastic lesions.
The following adjectives further specify the types of epidermal hyperplasia: (1) irregu
Diagnostic Methods · I35
FIGURE 2-36. Zinc-responsive dernatosis in a
dog. Note squirting Papilla (lower arrow) with
parakeratotic cap (upper arrou).
configuration; (2) regular--approximately evenly thickened epiderinis (Fig. 2-39); (3)
psoriasiform— approximately evenly elongated rete ridges, which are clubbed, fused, or
both at their bases (Fig. 2-40), often with thinning of the suprapillary cpidermis, which
may contain microabscesscs and be parakeratotic; (4) papillated —digitatc projections of
the epidermis above the skin surface (Fig. 2-4l); and (5) pseudocarcinomatous (pseudo-
epitheliomatous)—-extreme, iregular hypcrplasia, which may include increased mitoses,
squamous eddies, and horn pearls, thus resembling squamous cell carcinoma; however,
These five forms of epidermal hyperplasia may be seen in various combinations in the
same specimen.
 Epidermal hyperplasia is a common, nondiagnostic feature of virtualy any chronic
inflammatory process. The five types are generally useful descriptively but have little
specific diagnostic significance. Pseudocarcinomatous hyperplasia is most cormmonly associ-
ated with underlying dermal suppurative, granulomatous, or neoplastic proceses and with
epidermal nevi, prinary seborrhea, and zinc-responsive dermatosis. Psoriasiform hyperpla-
sia is most comrmonly seen with epitheliotropie lymphoma, psoriasiform-lichenoid derma-
 chronic allergy and acral lick dermatitis).
HYPOPLASIA AND ATROPHY
Hypoplasia is a decreased thickness of the noncornified epidermis due to a decrease in
the number of cells. Atrophy is a decreased thickness of the noncormified epidermis due
I36 · Diagnostic Methods
FIGURE 2-37. Disproportiomatc: hair folile
orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis in a dog with vitamin
A-responsive dermatosis.
to a decrease in the size of cells (Fig. 2-43). An early sign of epidermal hypoplasia or
atrophy is the loss of the rete ridges in areas of skin where they are normally present (i.e.,
in the nonhaired skin of dogs and cats).
Epiderimal hypoplasia and atrophy are uncommon in skin diseases of dogs and cats
 but are occasionally seen with hormonal (usuailly hypcradrenocorticisn, rarely hypothyroid-
issn), developmental (cutaneous asthenia, feline acquired skin fragility), and inffammatory
(discoid lupus erythematosus, traction alopccia, dermatormyositis, vaccine-induced vasculi-
tis) dermatoses.
NECROSIS, DYSKERATOSIS, APOPTOSIS, AND ONCOSIS
The term necrosis refers to the death of cells or tissues in a living organism and is judged
is often used synonymously with necrosis but actually implies a separation of tissue due to
the death of cells (e.g., toxic cpidermal necrolysis). Nuclear changes indicative of necrosis
hyperchromatism), and karyolysis (nuclear ghosts), With all three necrotic nuclear
changes, individual kcratinocytes are characterized by loss of intercellular bridges and
cytoplasmic changes of condensation, intense eosinophilia, loss of structure, and fragmen-
outlines but loss of coll detail) or caseation (complete loss of all structural details, the
tissue being replaced by a granular material containing nuclear debris).
In fact, cll death and necrosis are different.29. 3Cell death— defined functionally by
the point of no return—occurs long before necrosis, and is not detectable histologically.
DiagnosticMethods·I37
FIGURE 2-38. Hypergranulosis in a dog with ich-
thyosis.
 Necrosis refers to changes that occur secondary to cell death by any mechanism (e.g..
apoptosis, oncosis), and is histologically visible.
Epiderinal necrosis may be focal as a result of cutaneous adverse drug reaction (Fig.
2-44), microbial infections, or various lichenoid dermatoses (e.g, erythema multiformc),
or it may be generalized as a result of physicochemical trauma (primary irritant contact
dermatitis, burms, freezing, and thallotoxicosis), interference with blood supply (vasculitis,
thromboembolism, subepidermal bullae, and dense subepidermal cellular infiltrates), or an
immunologic mechanism (toxic epidermal necrolysis and erythema multiforme). So-called
"satellite cell necrosis" (satellitosis) is actually a misnomer.29, 3 It is really satellite cell
apoptosis. Individual apoptotic keratinocytes are seen in association with contiguous (satel-
lite) lymphoid cells (Fig. 2-45). Satellitosis can be seen in a number of interface dermati-
tides, including erythema multiforme, lupus erythematosus and graft-versus-host disease.
The termn dyskeratosis is used to indicate a premature and faulty keratinization of
individual cells. The term is also used, although less commonly, to indicate a general fault
in the keratinization proccss and thus in the state of the epidermis as a whole. Dyskcra-
totic cells are characterized by eosinophilic, swollen cytoplasm with normal or condensed,
 dark-staining nuclei. Such cells are difficult or impossible to distinguish from apoptotic or
whether the rest of the epithelium is thought to be keratinizing or necrosing. No one has
been able to define the term "dyskeratosis" consistently, in a way satisfactory to everyone,
simply because the original concepts on which the designation' was based were faulty.49
138 · Diagnostic Methods
FIGURE 2-39. Regular epidermal hyperplasia in a dog with atopy.
Most of the keratinocytes previously referred to as being dyskeratotic were actually apop-
 sro,s r qe s  
tholytic dermatosis (Grover's disease)— and are also seen in warty dyskeratoma, squamous 
cell carcinoma, and keratoacanthoma.49
Apoptosis is a form of intentional suicide based on a genetic mechanism.29. s3 Pro-
 grammed cell dleath and apoptosis are not identical, but genetic programming is involved
fies the fixed time for physiologic cell suicide. In apoptosis, genetic programming specifies 
FIGURE 2=40. Psoriasiform epidermal hyperplasia in a dog with atopy.
Diagnostic Methods ·I39
FIGURE 2-4l. Papillated epidlernal hyperplasia in a dlog with zinc-responsive dermatosis.
the weapons (the means) to produce instant suicide. Apoptosis can be activated by many
stimuli: growth factors, cytokines, hormones, inimune system, viruses, and sublethal dam-
age to celis. Apoptotic keratinocytes are common features of interface dermatoses (Fig. 2--
46), but they may be seen in small munbers (up to six in a section through a 6-mm punch
specimen) in virtually any hyperplastic cpidcrmis. Apoptotic keratinocytes are rarely seen
(one or two in a section through a 6-mm punch specimen) in normal epidermis. However,
FIGURE 2-42. Pseudocarcinormatous epidermal hyperplasia in a dog with acral lick der-
matitis.
I 40 · Diagnostic Methods
apoptotic keratinocytes are numerous in the catagen and early telogen hair follicle epithe-
target the basal cell layer, and noncycle phase-specific agents affecting all epithelial
layers.
Apoptotic keratinocytes undergo a series of morphologic changes: the cel shrinks,
becomes denser and more eosinophilic, and loses its nornal contacts; nuclear changes
include pyknosis, margination of chromatin, and karyorrhexis; the cell emits processes
("buds") that often contain nuclear fragments and organelles, and that do not swell; these
buds often break off and become apoptotic bodies, which may be phagocytoscd by
macrophages or neighboring cels, or remain free. Therc is no swelling of mitochondria or
other organelles. Synonyms for apoptotic keratinocytes include Civatte bodies (when in
for apoptotic bodies include “colloid", “hyaline”, “filamentous"”, and “ovoid” bodies. Apop-
tosis may be more specifically detected in routinely processed and fixed skin specimens by
the terrminal uridinyl transferase nick end labeling (TUNEL) method.13
Oncosis is cell death as a result of overwhelming damage (e.g., ischemia, toxins,
chemical injury), and is characterized by cellular swelling, organelle swelling, blebbing
(blister-like cell membrane structures that do not contain cell organelles, and that may
 swell and rupture) and inereased membrane permeability.29, 3 Oncosis and necrosis induce
 an inflammatory response, whereas apoptosis does not.
INTERCELLULAR EDEMA
 Intercellular edema (spongiosis) of the epidermis is characterized by a widening of the
intercellular spaces with accentuation of the intercelular bridges, giving the involved
epidermis a spongy appearance (Fig. 2-47). Severe intercellular edema may lead to
rupture of the intercellular bridges and the formation of spongiotic vesicles within the
Iment membrane zone in some areas, giving the appearance of subepidermal vesicles.
Intercellular edema is a common, nondiagnostic feature of any acute or subacute
hair follicles, may be seen with feline eosinophilic plaque, feline eosinophilic granuloma,
Diagnostic Methods ·I4l
FIGURE 2-44. Full-thickncss nccrosis of the epi-
dermis and outer root shcath of a hair folicle in a
dog with erylhema muliforme.
FIGURE 2-45. Satelltosis (satellitc cell apoptosis) in a dog with crythema multiformc.
Note the lyruphocyte attached to an apoptotic keratinocyte (arrou).
142·Diagnostic Methods
FIGURE 2-46. Two apoptotic: basal epidermal cels and a thickencd bascment membrane
zone in a dog with systemic lupus erythematosus.
seborrheic dermatitis, Malassezia dermatitis, zinc-responsive dermatoses, and thallotoxi-
cosis. Spongiosis of the upper one half of the epidermis, which is overlaid by marked
diffuse parakeratotic hyperkeratosis, is seen in necrolytic migratory erythema. Spongiosis
of the upper half of the epidermis with superficial epidermal necrosis may be seen with
contact irritant dermatitis.
INTRACELLULAR EDEMA
 Intracellular edema (hydropic degeneration, vacuolar degeneration, and ballooning degen-
eration) of the epidermis is characterized by increased cell size, cytoplasmic pallor, and
displacement of the nucleus to the periphery of affected cels (Fig. 2-48). Severe intracel-
lular edema may rcsult in reticular degeneration and intraepiderinal vesicles.
Intracellular edema is a common, nondiagnostic feature of any acute or subacute
inflanmatory derinatosis. Caution must be exercised not to confuse intracellular edema
with freezing artifact (Fig. 2-49), delayed fixation artifact, or the intracellular accumula-
tion of glycogen that is seen in the outer root sheath of normal hair follicles and results
from epidermal injury. In addition, one can see individual keratinocytes with condensed,
 pyknotic nuclei surrounded by a clear vesicular space and a rim of homogeneous cyto-
plasm in a number of dermatoses.al These epidermal “clear cells" are artifacts due to
 Occlusion, moisture in intertriginous areas, and other unkmown factors.
RETICULAR DEGENERATION
 Heticular degeneration is caused by severe intracellular edema of epidermal cells in which
the cells burst, resulting in multilocular intraepidermal vesicles in which septa are formed
by resistant cell walls (Fig. 2-50). It may be seen with any acute or subacute inflamma-
 tory dermatosis but especially dermatophilosis and acute contact derimatitis.
BALLOONING DEGENERATION
epidermal cells and characterized by swollen eosinophilic to lightly basophilic cytoplasm
           a 
Diagnostic Methods ·|43
FIGURE 2-47. Spongiosis in a dog
with contact dermatitis. There is also lym-
phocytie exocytosis.
 loss of cohesion resulting in acantholysis (Fig. 2-51). Ballooning degeneration is a specific
feature of viral infections.
HYdROPIC DEGENERATION
Hydropic degeneration (liquefaction degeneration or vacuolar alteration) of the basal epi-
dermal cells describes intracellular edema restricted to cells of the stratum basale (Fig. 2-
 52). This process may also affect the basal cells of the outer root sheath of hair folicles.
Hydropic degencration of basal cells is usually focal but, if severe and extensive, may
result in intrabasal or subepidermal clefts or vesicles owing to dermo-epidermal separa-
tion. Hydropic degeneration of basal ceils is an uncommon finding and is usually associ-
ated with lupus erythematosus, idiopathic lichenoid dermatoses, adverse cutaneous drug
reactions, toxic epidermal necrolysis, erythema multiforme, dermatomyositis, thymoma-
associated exfoliative dermatitis of cats, various vasculopathies, and lichenoid keratoses.
ACANTHOLYSIS
A loss of cohesion between epidermal cells, resulting in intraepidermal clefts, vesicles, and
bullae (Fig. 2-53), is known as acantholysis (dyshesion, dermolysis, or desrmorrhexis). Free
epidermal cells in the vesicles are called acantholytie keratinocytes or “acanthocytes" (Fig.
144 · Diagnostic Methods
FIGURE 2-48. Intracellular cdema (arrou) in a dog with contact dermatitis)
FIGURE 2-49. Freezing artifact. Note that
keratinocytes are vacuolated at all levels of the
epidermis and hair follcle outer root sheath with
no acompanying intercellular edcma, cxocytosis
of infammatory cels, or dermal infarnmation.
Diagnostic Methods ·145
FIGURE 2-50. Reticular degeneration in a dog with contact dermatitis.
 2-54). This process may also involve the outer root sheath of hair follicles and glandular
ductal epitheliurm. Acantholysis is further specified by reference to the level at which it
Occurs (e.g., subcorneal, intragranular, intraepidermal, and suprabasilar). Acantholytic kera-
tinocytes are rounded, their nucleus is inorphologically normal, and their cytoplasm is
norrmally stained or hypereosinophilic.
Acantholysis is most comrnonly associated with the pemphigus complex due to autoan-
tibodies against desmoglein or other cellular adhesion molecules. However, other causes
of acantholysis are severe spongiosis (with any acute or subacute infammatory dermatosis),
FIGURE 2-5 1. Hyperplasia and balloning degcneration of the epidermis and intracyto-
plasmic inclusions (arrow) in a cat with feline poxvirus infection.
146 · Diagnastic Methods
FIGURE 2-52. Hydropic degeneration of epidermal basal cells in a dog with dermato-
Inyositis. (Frorm Scott IDW, Schultz RD: Epidermolysis hullosa simplex in the eollie dog. J Am
Vet Med Assoc: 171:72l, 1977.)
(Courtesy A. A. Stannard.)
Diagnostic Methods · I47
ballooning degeneration (in viral infection), protcolytic enzymes released by neutrophils
(in bacterial and fungal dermatoses32 and subcorneal pustular dermatosis) or eosinophils
(in sterile eosinophilic pustulosis), developmental defects (benign familial pemphigus), and
neoplastic transformation (squamous celf carcinoma, actinic keratosis, and warty dyskera-
toma).
EXOCYTOSIS AND DIAPEDESIS
The term exocytosis refers to the migration of infammatory cells, erythrocytes, or both
through the intercellular spaces of the epiderrmis (Fig. 2-55). Exocytosis of infammatory
cells is a common, nondiagnostic feature of any infammatory dermatosis. When the
condition involves eosinophils in combination with spongiosis, it is often referred to as
eosinophilic spongiosis and may be seen in ectoparasitism, pemphigus, pemphigoid, sterile
eosinophilic pustulosis, eosinophilic plaque, eosinophilie granuloma, hypereosinophilic syn-
interfacc dermatoses (e.g, lupus erythematosus), Malassezia dermatitis, atopy, contact
giant cells are rarely seen within the epidermis (e.g., adverse cutaneous drug reaction).
Diapedesis occurs when erythrocytes are present in the intercellular spaces of the
epidermis. Diapedesis of erythrocytes implies foss of vascular integrity and may be seen
whenever superficial dermal inflammation and yascular dilatation and engorgement are
pronounced or when vasculitis or coagulation defects occur. These intraepidermal erythro-
cytes can be phagocytosed by keratinocytes.16
CLEFTS
      o    se  ss s 
epidermis or at the dermoepidernal junction. Clefts may be caused by acantholysis or
hydropic degeneration of basal cells (Max Joseph spaces; Fig. 2-56). However, they may
also be caused by mechanical trauma and tissue retraction associated with obtaining.
fixing, and processing biopsy specimens.
I48 · Diagnostic Methods
FIGURE 2-55. Exocytosis of leukocytes through the
Artifactual dermoepidermal separation is fairly commonly observed at the margin of a
 biopsy specinen. In general, only tissue weakened through the dermoepidermal junction
will separate in this manner during processing. Thus, this “usable artifact" may be valid
cvidcncc of basal cell or basement membrane damage. Spurious separation is character
ized by clefting at different anatomic sites within the same speciinen (Fig. 2-57) and
 evidence of tissue trauma (e.g., torn cytoplasim and fibers, bare cellular nuclei).
FlGURE 2-56. Intrabasal cleft (arrow) in a dog with dermatomyositis.
Diagnostic Mcthods · 149
FIGURE 2-57. Artifactual clefts.
Inflammatory dermatosis in a dog.
Arhfactual clefts oxcur in numer-
ous  dircctions (horizontally
and
vertically). at numerous levels (su-
prabasila, intraepidermal, dermo-
epidermal), and are associated with
ripping and tearing of cells (cyto-
plasmic, mclear).
MICrOvESICles, VeSIcles, And bUlLae
Mierovesicles (Fig. 2-58), vesicles, and bullae are microscopic and macroscopic, fuid-
filled, relatively acellular spaces within or below the epidernis. Vesicles and bullae are
often loosely referred to as blisters. These lesions inay be caused by severe intercellular or
intracellular edema, ballooning degeneration, acantholysis, hydropic degeneration of basal
cells, subepidermal edema, or other factors resulting in dermoepidermal separation (e.g,
the autoantibodies in bullous pemphigoid). Microvesicles, vesicles, and bullae may thus be
further described by their location as subconeal, intragranular, intraepidermal, suprabasi-
lar, intrabasal, or subepidermal. When these lesions contain larger numbers of infamma-
lory cells, they are referred to as vesicopustules.
MICROABSCESSES AND PUSTULES
Microabscesses and pustules are microscopic or macroscopic intraepidermal and subepi-
dermal cavities filled with infammatory cells (Fig. 2-59), which can be further described
on the basis of location and cell type as follows:
FIGURE 2-58. intraepidernal
microvesicle in a dog with food hy-
persensitivity.
I50 · Diagnostic Methods
illustrates microabscesses containing many eosinophils located within the epidermis. (Courtesy J.
D.Conroy.)
1. Spongiforn pustule (of Kogoj) (Fig. 2-60) is a multilocular accumulation of neu-
s   s o   s    
network. It is seen in microbial infections and occasionally in canine subcorneal
aandns eoiadns pue sisoeap iensnd yal ea sismap rensnds
necrolytic dermatitis of Schnauzers.
2. Munro's microabscess (Fig. 2-61) is a small, desiccated accunulation of neutro-
FIGURE 2--60. Spongifonn inicroabscess in the epidermis of a dog with staphylococcal
folliculitis.
Diagnostic Methods·I51
FIGURE 2-6l. Munro's microabscess in the super-
ficial epidermis of a dog with schxorrheie dernatitis.
phils within or below the stratum corneum, which is seen in microbial infections,
seborrheic disorders, and psoriasiformn-lichenoid dermatosis of English Springer
spaniels.
 3. Pautrier microabscess (Fig. 2-62A) is a small, focal accumulation of abnormal
Iymphoid cells, which is seen in epitheliotropic lymphomas.
4. Eosinophilic microabscess (see Fig. 2-59) is a lesion seen in ectoparasitisim, eosino-
philic granuloma, eosinophilic plaque, eosinophilic foliculitis, sterile eosinophilic
pustulosis, bullous pemphigoid, the pemphigus complex, feline allergy, canine
atopy, contact hypersensitivity, and with Malassezia dermatitis.
5. Small spongiotic foci containing normal mononuclear cells (see Fig. 2--62B) are
  s    oe  s 
 canine atopy, some or alf of these cells may be Langerhans? cells.
HYPERPIGMENTATION
Hyperpigmentation (hypermelanosis) refers to excessive amounts of melanin deposited
within the epidermis and often concurrently in dermal nelanophiages. Hyperpigmentation
may be focal or diffuse and may be confined to the stratun basale or present throughout
all epiderinal layers (Fig. 2-63). It is a comrnon, nondiagnostie fnding in chronic infam-
matory and hormonal dermatoses as well as in some developmental and neoplastic disor-
insults. Increased melanin may be present in the epidermis (within keratinocytes) and/or
 dermis (within melanophages). The pathomechanism is unclear but could include epider-
mal injury and melanin fallout through a damaged basement mermbrane. Interferons
I52 · Diagnostic Methods
FlGURE 2-62. A, Pautrier microabscess in the lower epidermis of a dog with epithelio-
tropic lymphoma. B,Small intraepidernal microabscoss containing lynphocytes and Langer-
hans' cells in an atopic dog.
stimulate melanin formation by melanocytes and may be a key mechanism in cutaneous
glands with extrusion of linear melanotic casts into hair follicle lumina is scen with
follicular dysplasias or endocrinopathies (Fig. 2-64).14
HYPOPIGMENTATION
Hypopigmentation (hypormelanosis) refers to decreased amounts of melanin in the epider-
Inis (Fig. 2-65). The condition may he associated with congenital or acquired idiopathic
Diagnostic Methods·153
cans.
FIGURE 2-64. Sebaceous gland melanosis in
a dog with cyclic folicular dysplasia. Mclanin
-s au u sdin ou paeuun ae sanueis
haceous duct (arrow).
154 · Diagnostic Methods
FIGURE 2-65. Epidermal hy-
ponelanosis in a dog withi vitiligo.
Normal epidermis (right) is heavily
melanized, whereas vitiliginous epi-
derrmis (left) is alnost devoid‘of
melanin.
defects in melaninization (e.g., leukoderma and vitiligo), the toxic effects of certain chemi-
cals (e.g., monobenzyl ether of dihydroquinone in rubbers and plastics) on melanocytes,
inflammatory disorders that affect melaninization or destroy melanocytes, hormonal disor-
ders, and dermatoses featuring hydropic degeneration of bhasal cells (e.g, lupus erytherma-
tosus). In the hypopigmented dermatoses asociated with hydropie degeneration of basal
cells, the underlying superfcial dermis usually reveals pigmentary incontinence.
CRUST
The consolidated, desiccated surfacc mass called crust is composed of varying combina-
tions of keratin, serum, cellular debris, and often microorganisms. Crusts are further
FlGURE 2-66. Serocellular crust in a cat with prinary irritant contact dermatitis.
Diagnostic Methods ·155
FlGURE 2-67. Acantholytic ke-
Tatinocytes (arrow)in surface crust
of a dog with pemphigus foliaceus.
mostly blood, (3) cellular —nostly inflammatory cells, (4) serocellular (exudative)—a mix-
ture of serum and infammatory cells (Fig. 2-66), and (5) palisading --alternating hori-
losis and dermatophytosis).
Crusts merely indicate a prior exudative process and are rarely of diagnostic signif-
cance. However, crusts should always be closely scrutinized, because they may contain the
following important diagnostic clues: (1) dermatophyte spores and hyphae, (2) the fla-
ments and coccoid elements of Dermatophilus congolensis, and (3) large nunbers of
acantholytic keratinocytes (in pemphigus complex) (Fig. 2-67). Bacteria and bacterial
colonies are common inhabitants of surface debris and are of no diagnostic significance
(Fig. 2-68).
The presence of yeast in surface debris is Inore difcult to interpret. Yeasts (M.
pachydermatis) are occasionally seen in surface debris and may he of no diagnostic
significance.41. 4 However, the pathologist and the clinician should always carefully con-
sider the potential importance of yeast in contributing to derinatitis. Histopathologically,
FIGURE 2-68. Microcolony of
cocci (arrou) in a surface crust of
a cat with atopy.
I56 · Diagnostic Methods
keratosis, spongiosis, and lymphocytic exocytosis is a reaction pattern that strongly suggests
that these organisms are contributing to the clinical dernatitis.30
DELLS
Dells are small depressions or hollows in the surface of the epidermis. They are usually
 associated with focal epidermal atrophy and orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis. Dells may be
EPIDERMAL COLLARETTE
The term epidermal collarette refers to the formation of elongated, hyperplastic rete
ridges at the lateral margins of a pathologic process that appear to curve inward toward
the center of the lesion. Epidermal collarettes may be seen with neoplastic, granuloma-
tous, and suppurative dermatoses.
HORN CYSTS, PSEUDOHORN CYSTS, HORN PEaRLS, AND
SQUAMOUS EDDIES
Horn cysts (keratin cysts) are multiple, small, circular cystic structures that are surrounded
by fattened epidermal cells and that contain concentrically arranged lamellar keratin.
Horn cysts are featurcs of hair follicle neoplasms and basal cell tumors. Pseudohorn cysts
are illusory small cystic structures formed by the irrcgular invagination of a hyperplastic,
hyperkeratotic epidermis. They arc scen in numerous hyperplastic or neoplastic epidermal
dermatoses.
Horn pearls (squamous pearls) are focal, circular, concentric layers of squamous cells
showing gradual keratinization toward the center, often accompanied by cellular atypia
and dyskeratosis. Horn pearls are features of squamous cell carcinoma and pseudocarci-
nomatous hyperplasia.
sis, or central keratinization, Squainous eddies are features of numerous neoplastie and
hyperplastic epidermal disorders.
EPIDERMOLYTIC HYPERKERATOSIS
Epidernolytic hyperkeratosis (granular degeneration) is characterized by (l) perinuclear
clear spaces in the upper epidermis, (2) indistinet cellboundaries formed either by lightly
staining material or by keratohyalin granules peripheral to the perinuclear clear spaces, (3)
a markedly thickened stratum granulosum, and (4) orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis. It is seen
in certain types of ichthyosis, epidermal nevi (Fig. 2-69), actinic keratoses, seborrheic
keratoses, papillomas, keratinous cysts, and squamous cell carcinoma.
MAST CELLS IN THE EPITHELIUM AND AT THE BASEMENT
MEMBRANE ZONE
Mast cells are frequently seen within the epidermis and the outer root sheath of the hair
are most conmonly found in diseases of allergic or immune-mediated origin, especially
ately below the basement membrane zone in biopsy spccimens from dogs with Malassezia
derimatitis (Fig. 2-71)30 and rarely in other infammatory dermatoses.15
Dermal Changes
COLLAGEN CHANGES
following: (1) hyalinization —a loss of fibrillar structure and amorphous change leading to
DiagnosticMethods·I57
rlalTievus
 confuence and an increased eosinophilic, glassy, refractile appearance, as seen in chronic
inflammation, vasculopathies, and connective tissue diseases; (2) fbrinoid degeneration-
deposition of or replacement with a brightly eosinophilic fibrillar or granular substance
philic, complete loss of structural detail, as seen in microbial infcctions and ischemia: (4)
lar appearance, and frayed edges of collagen fibers, rarely seen in canine and felinc
dermatoses; (5) dystrophic mineralization —deposition of calcium salts as basophilic,
amorphous, granular material along collagen fibcrs (Fig. 2-72), as seen in hyperadreno-
FIGURE 2-70. Epidermal mast cells (arroes) in a cat with fea bite hypuersensitivity
158 · Diagnostic Methods
FIGURE 2-7l. Linear alignment of mast cells
(arrouo) at the basement membrane zone in a
dog with Malassezia dermatitis (AOG stain).
FIGURE 2-72. Dystrophic min-
eralization of collagen bundles in a
dog with hyperadrenocorticism.
Diagnostic Methods · 159
corticism; (6) atrophy —
-thin collagen fibrils and decrcased fibroblasts, with a resultant
decrease in dermal thickmess, as seen in hormonal dermatoses; and (7) dysplasia-
disorganization and fragmentation of collagen bundles (Fig. 2-73), as seen in cutaneous
asthenia and feline acquired skin fragility.
A fame figure (Fig. 2-74) is an area of altered collagen surrounded by eosinophils
eosinophilic material. This material is variable in shape, from annular to oval, to a
radiating configuration resernbling the spokes of a wheel ("starburst" appearance), Some
collagen fibers within these areas appear normal, whereas others appear partially or wholly
swollen, irregular or fuzzy in outline, and granular in consistency. The eosinophilic mate-
rial itself yaries from amorphous to granular. In the granular areas, one can see a
transition from intact eosinophils, to eosinophil granules and nuclear debris, to completely
amorphous material. Trichrome-stained sections show the collagen fibers to be normal in
ness seen in the H & E-stained sections are due to the coating of collagen fibers with
 the eosinophilic material. In humans, clectron microscopic studies have revealed no colla-
gen degeneration in fame figures.52 Immunolluorescence testing identifies eosinophil ma-
jor basic protein in the amorphous material surrounding and coating collagen fibers.2 It is
, o se   s s   e e  
degeneration," "necrobiotic collagen," or “collagenolysis" actually contained Hame figures.
 Such conditions include feline and canine eosinophilic granuloma, insect and arthropod
reactions, sterile eosinophilic pustulosis, and eosinophilic panniculitis.
ELASTIN CHANGES
Atrophy of elastin fibers is seen in dogs with pituitary dwarfism, adult-onset hyposormato-
tropism, and chronic hyperglucocorticoidism.
FIGURE 2-73. Collagen dysplasia in a dog
with cutaieous asthenia. Note how collagen buni-
dles yary greatly in sizc and appcar lisorganized
and fragmented.
160·Diagnostic Methods
FlGURE 2-74. Flame figure. Collagen fibers arc surrounded antl coatedi by granular
material from eosinophils.
Solar elastosis appears in II & E-stained sections as a tangle of indistinct ampho-
philic fibers, often in linear bands running approximately parallel to the surface epidermis,
within the superficial dermis. With Verhoeff's or AOG stain, the tangled, thickened,
elastotic material is clearly seen (Fig. 2-75). Solar elastosis is a rare manifestation of
ultraviolet light -induced skin damage in dogs and cats.
DERMAL DEPOSITS
Amnyloid appcars in HI & E-stained sections as a hyaline, amorphous, lightly eosinophilic
material that tends to displace or obliterate normal structures.
Lipid deposits occur in the dermis in xanthomatosis. In H & E-stained sections,
lightly eosinophilic, feathery deposits separate the collagen bundles to form small “lakes"
of lipid (Fig. 2-76).
Cholesterol clefts may be seen in xanthomatosis, panniculitis, and ruptured follicular
cysts. They appear as clear spaces in needle or spicule shapc (Fig. 2-77).
FIGURE 2-75. Solar elastosis in a dog. A, Tangled, elastotic material (arrow) is oxccasionally seen in H & E-stained
sections. B, Elastotic material (black) is fagrant. in AOG-slained sections.
DiagnosticMethods·I61
FIGURE 2-76.Lipid lakes (ar-
row) in a xanthorma from a cat.
FIBROPLASIA, DESMOPLASIA, FIBROSIS, AND SCLEROSIS
The term fibroplasia refers to the formation and development of fibrous tissue in in-
creased amounts and is often used synonymously with granulation tissue. The condition is
characterized by a fibrovascular proliferation in which the blood vessels with prominent
endothelial cells are oriented roughly perpendicular to the surface of the skin (Fig. 2-78).
The new collagen fibers, with prominent fibroblasts, are oriented roughly parallel to the
surface of the skin. Edema and inflanmatory cclls are constant featurcs of fibroplasia.
Desmoplasia is the term usually used when referring to the fibroplasia induced by neo-
plastic processes.
Fibrosis is a later stage of fbroplasia in which increased nurmbers of fbroblasts and
collagen fibers are the characteristic findings. Little or no inflammation is present. Align-
ment of collagen fibers in vertical streaks seen as elongated, thickened parallel strands of
collagen in the superficial dermis, pcrpcndicular to the epidermal surface, is found in
chronically rubbed, licked, or scratched skin, such as that seen with acral lick derrmatitis
and hypersensitivity reactions. Sclerosis (scar formation) may be the end point of fbrosis,
FIGURE 
2-77.
Cholesterol
clefts (arrow) peripheral to a rup-
tured follicular cyst from a dog.
162 · Diagnostic Methods
FIGURE 2-78. Fibroplasia subsequent
to vascular infarct in a dog.
 in which thc inereased numbers of collagen fbers have a thick, eosinophilic, hyalinized
 appearance, and the number of fibroblasts is greatly reduced.
PAPILLOMATOSIS, VILLI, AND FESTOONS
Papillonatosis refers to the projection of dermal papillae above the surface of the skin,
epidermal byporplasia, papillomatosis is also seen with chronic inflammatory and neoplas-
tic dermatoses. Papillomatosis and papillate epidermal hyperplasia are often associated
with primary seborrhea and zinc-responsive dermatoses.
Villi are dermal papillae, covered by one or two layers of epidermal cells (Fig. 2-79),
Am e s sd u s are a q r aa e o pd i
dyskeratoma and occasionally in actinic keratosis and squamous cell carcinorma.
Festoons are dermal papillae, devoid of attached epidermal cells, that project into the
 and drug-induced pemphigoid.
PIGMENTARY INCONTINENCE
Pigmentary incontinence refers to the presence of melanin granules that are free within
the subepidermal and perifollicular dermis and within derrnal macrophages (melanopha-
DiagnosticMethods·I63
FIGURE 2-79. Vilin a cat with pcmphigus vulgaris.
 sp r sd n m s aq  a  (oa ) (
of basal cells (lichenoid dermatoses, lupus erythematosus, dermatomyositis, and erythema
multiforme). Interestingly, it was seen in 29% of the biopsy specimens from dogs with
 Malassezia dermatitis."0 In addlition, melanophages may be seen, especially in a perivascu-
lar orientation, in chronic infammatory conditions in which melanin production is greatly
increased.
EDEMA
 Dermal edema is recognized by dilated lymphatics (not visible in nornal skin), widened
 spaces between blood vesscls and perivascular collagen (perivascular edema), or widened
FIGURE 2-80. Pigmentary incontinence inl at dog with ctiscoid lupus erythematosus.
164 · Diagnostic Methods
FIGURE 2-81. Dermal edema
in a dog with staphylococcal follic-
ulitis. Collagen bundles in left half
of photograph are separated by in-
terstitialedema(compare
with
compact collagen bundles in lower
right comer), and dermal lymphat-
ics  are  dilated  and   flled  with
frothy edema (arrow).
spaces between large areas of dernal collagen (interstitial edema) (Fig. 2-81). The dilated
lymphatics and widened perivascular and interstitial spaces may or may not contain a
lightly eosinophilic, homogeneous, frothy-appearing substance (serum). 'A scattering of
vacuolated macrophages may be seen in the interstitium in chronic severe dermal edema.
 Dermal edema is a common, nondiagnostic feature of any inflammatory dermatosis.
Severe cdema of the superficial derrmis may result in suhepidermal vesicles and bullae,
necrosis of the overlying epidermis, and predisposition to artifactual dermoepidermal
separation during the handling and processing of biopsy specimens. Severe edeina of the.
superficial dermis may result in a vertical oricntation and stretching of collagen fibers,
 producing the gossamer (weblike) collagen effect seen with erythema multiforme and
severe urticaria.
MUCINOSIS
Mucinosis (myxedema, mucoid degeneration, myxoid degeneration, or mucinous degenera-
material that separates, thins, or replaces dermal collagen fibrils and surrounds blood
vessels and appendages in sections stained with H & E (Fig. 2-82). Only small amounts
of mucin are ever visible in normal skin, mostly around appendages and blood vessels.
Mucin is more easily demonstrated with stains for acid mucopolysaccharides, such as
Hale's iron and Alcian blue stains. Mucinosis may be seen as a focal (usually perivascular)
change in numerous inflammatory, neoplastic, and developmental dermatoses. Diffuse
mncinosis may be seen with hypothyroidism, acromegaly, lipus erythematosus, dermato-
 Mucin may also be seen in the epidermis and hair folicle outer root sheath in cats
and dogs with' alopecia mucinosa, in feline dermatoscs associated with numerous eosino-
phils (e.g., eosinophilic plaque, eosinophilic granuloma, allergies) (Fig. 2-83), and in dogs
with discoid lupus erythematosus.
GRENZ ZONE
This marginal zone of relatively normal collagen separates the epidermis from an underly.
ing dermal alteration (Fig. 2-84). A grenz zone may be seen in neoplastie and granuloma-
tous disorders.
Diagnostic Methods·165
FIGURE 2-82. Dernal muceinosis (arrouw) and scattered mast cells in a Chincs
seSharpci
with idiopathic mucinosis.
PAPILLARY MICROABSCESSES
Small neutrophilic microabscesses may occasionally be seen in the dermal papillae of
biopsies from animals with vasculitis, bullous peinphigoid, epidermolysis bullosa acquisita,
systcmic lupus crythcmatosus, and cutaneous adverse drug reaction.
Follicular Changes
 Folicular cpithclium is affccted by most of the histopathologic changes described for the
epidermis. Folicular (poral) keratosis, plugging, and dilatation arc common featurcs of
such diverse conditions as infammatory, hormonal, and developmental dermatoses. Follic-
ular hyperplasia and hypertrophy may be seen in chronic inflammatory dermatoses or in
FIGURE 2-83. Lakes of cpicler-
rmal mucin (arroc) in a eat with an
eosinophilic plaque.
I66 · Diagnostic Methods
FIGURE 2-84. Grcnz zone of superli-
cial dermal collagen{arrou)separating(p-
idermis from underlying ncoplasia.
nevoid lesions. Excessive trichilemmal keratinization (Hame follicles) is seen with endo.
crine and developmental disorders (Fig. 2-85).39 Trichilermmal keratin is brightly eosino-
philic and amorphous, and the tiered “tongues" of excessive keratin give the impression of
a fickering flame. Perifolliculitis, mural folliculitis, luminal folliculitis, and furunculosis
(penetrating or perforating folliculitis) refer to varying degrees of follicular inflainmation.
A cell-poor follicular necrosis may be seen in ischeinic states and drug reactions. Follicular
atrophy (Fig. 2-86) refers to the gradual involution, retraction, and occasionally miniaturi-
zation that are characteristic of horrnonal and nutritional dermatoses.
Hair follicles should be exainined closely to deterinine the phase of the growth cycle.
Telogenization, a predominance of telogen hair follicles, is characteristic of hormonal
dermatoses and states of telogen deffuxion associated with stress, disease, and drugs.
Catagenization ("catagen arrest") is seen with endocrinopathies, follicular dysplasias, and
so-called post-clipping alopecia. Follicular dysplasia refers to the prescnce of incompletely
or abnormally forrmed hair follicles and hair shafts, and is seen in developmcntal abnor-
malities such as follicular dysplasia, color dilution alopecia, and black hair follicle dysplasia.
Dysplastic hair folicles are prirnary hair follicles, wherein the infundibular region is
dilated and filled with concentrically arranged orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis.20, 34. 46 One or
more secondary hair follicles or sebaceous ducts are flled with orthokeratotic hyperkerato-
sis and extend into the subjacent dermis, giving the appearance of tentacles or toes (Fig.
Diagnostic Methods · 167
FIGURE 2--85. Flame follicle (excessive tri-
chilemmal keratinization) in a dog with hypo
thyroidism.
FIGURE 2-86. Follicular atro
phy in a dog with hypothyroidisin.
Follicles are telogenized and hy-
perkeratotic, and have receded into
the superficial dermis.
I68 · Diagnostic Methods
FIGURE 2-87. Dysplastic hair follicle in a
dog with cyclic follicular dysplasia. Note how
mis below the dilated, hyperkeratotic infiundibu-
lum, resembling tentacles or toes.
 of cats, sex hormone dermatoses, nutritional deficiencies, and genetic hypotrichoses.
Perifollicular melanosis (Fig. 2-88) is a common finding in canine demodicosis and
 basement imembrane zone and subsequent transepithelial elirmination of mineral is seen in
the calcinosis cutis of hyperadrenocorticism and as a senile change in dogs, especially
noninflamed hair folicles in dogs (Fig. 2-90) almost always indicates the presence of
clinically relcvant bacterial or yeast infection.41
Glandular Changes
Sebaceous and epitrichial (apocrine) sweat glands may be affected in various dermatoses.
Sebaceous glands may be involved in many suppurative and granulomatous inflammations
(sebaceous adenitis). In dogs and cats, an idiopathic granulomatous sebaceous adenitis may
be characterized by complete absence of sebaceous glands in the late stages. They inay
become atrophie (reduced in number and size, with pyknotic nuclci predominating) or
cystic in hormonal (Fig. 2-9lA and B) and developmental dermatoses, in occasional
 oe  s ss  as e e p sssnd  
 come hyperplastic in chronic inflammatory dermatoses, sebaceous gland nevi, and senile
nodular sebaceous hyperplasia. Remarkable hyperplasia and dysplasia of sebaceous glands is
Diagnostic Methods·169
FlGURE 2-88, Perifollicular melanosis in a dog with generalized demodicosis
FIGURE 2-89. Perifolicular fbrosis in canine
dernatoinyositis.
I70 · Diagnostic Methods
FIGURE 2-90. Microcolonies of cocci in hair
fullicle of a dog with: staphylococcal folliculitis.
seen in dogs with a rare idiopathic greasy skin condition. Sebaceous gland atrophy and
 poq a yo ere a on pieaan m psssse isnon a seme isnu eisdidn
which the skin specimen was taken. Sebaceous gland melanosis may be seen in dogs with
endocrinopathies or follicular dysplasias.
Epitrichial (apocrine) sweat glands are commonly involved in suppurative and granulo-
matous dermatoses (hidradenitis) (Fig. 2-92A). In one study,44 the presence of suppura-
bacterial foliculitis, furunculosis, or both, even when hair follicles in the specimens were
FIGURE 2-91. Normal vcrsus atrophic caniue sebaceous glands. A, Normal canine sebaceous gland. Note thc
sehocytes are well-lipiclized and their nuclei are norrmal. B, Atrophic sebaceous gland in a tlog with hyperadrenoeorti-
cism. Note that the sebocytes are poorly lipidized and their nuclei are pyknotie.
DiagnosticMethods·I71
has led to the accunulation of macrophages containing brownish-green granular to globular material (arrou). D, Epimrich-
ial sweat gland necrosis in a cat with herpesvirus infection.
not infamed. Periapocrine accumulation of plasma cells is commonly seen in acral lick
dermatitis, chronic infections, and lichenoid dermatoses. The epitrichial sweat glands may
become dilated, flled with secretion, or cystic in many inflarnmatory (sce Fig. 2-92B),
developmental, and hormonal dcrmatoses; in apocrine_ cystomatosis; and with senile
changes. The light microscopic recognition of epitrichial sweat gland atrophy is moot,
because dilated epitrichial secretory coils containing fattened epithelial cells are a feature
of the normal postsecretory state. Damage to epitrichial sweat glands that allows leakage
of secretion into the surrouncling dermis is often accompanied by an accumulation of
macrophages that contain a brown-green granular to globular material (see Fig. 2-92C).
A cell-poor epitrichial sweat gland necrosis may be seen in druig reactions, feline herpesvi-
rus dermatitis (see Fig. 2-92D), and in ischemic states (vasculitis, vasculopathy).
YascularChanges
Cutaneous blood vessels exhibit a number of histologic changes, including dilatation
(ectasia), endothelial swelling, endothelial necrosis, hyalinization, fibrinoid degeneration,
vasculitis, thromboembolisin, and extravasation (diapedesis) of erythrocytes (purpura).
Subcutaneous Fat Changes
The subcutaneous fat (panniculus adiposus or hypodermis) is subject to the conncctive
granulomatous dermatoses. In addition, subcutaneous fat may exhibit its own infammatory
changes (panniculitis or steatitis) without any significant involvernent of the overlying
I72·Diagnostic Methods
FIGURE 2-93. Fat neerosis in dogs. A, Fat microcysts separated by amorphous areas of necrosis. B, Variably sized
and shaped fat microcysts in the center of a pyogranuloma.
dermis and epidermis. This occurs in sterile nodular panniculitis, feline nutritional steati-
tis, infectious panniculitis (especially atypical mycobacteriosis and bacterial and dermato-
phytic pseudomycetoma), bacterial endocarditis, subcutaneous fat sclerosis, and erythema
nodosum. Subcutaneous fat may atrophy in various hornonal, infammatory (wucher atro-
phy), and idiopathic dermatoses. Fat micropseudocyst formation and lipocytes containing
radially arranged ncedle-shaped clefts are seen with subcutaneous fat sclerosis.
Fat necrosis (Fig. 2-93A) may develop whenever an inflammatory reaction involves a
fat lobule. There are three different morphologic expressions of fat necrosis: (1) microcys-
n s      (  )   
 microcysts that are often at the center of pyogranulonas, seen in many panniculitides; (2)
hyalinizing fat necrosis —the lipocytes are converted into a feathery, eosinophilic amalgam
trapping scattered fat microeysts, as seen in lupus erythematosus panniculitis and rabies-
 induced vaccine reactions; and (3) mineralizing fat necrosis-—the deposition of irregular,
granular, basophilic material, often in the peripheral cytoplasm of necrotic lipocytes, as
seen in pancreatie panniculitis and some cases of traumatic panniculitis.
Miscellaneous Changes
● Thickened Basement Membrane Zone. Thickening of the basement membrane
Zone appears as focal, linear, homogeneous, eosinophilic bands below the stratum basale
on light microscopic examination (Fig. 2-94). The basement membrane zone is better
demonstrated with periodic acid-Schiff stain. Thickening of the basement meinbrane
 zone is a feature of lichenoid dermatoses, especially lupus erythematosus.
· Subepidermal Vacuolar Alteration. Suhepidermal vacuolar alteration is charac-
FIGURE Z-94. Focal thickening of the basement imein-
brane zone (arrow) in a dog with systemic lupus erythema-
tosu1s.
Diagnostic Mcthods·173
FIGURE 2-95. Subepidermal
vacuolar altcration ("bubblies") in a
dog with systemie lupus erytherma-
tosus.
terized by multiple small vacuoles within or immediately below thc basernent membrane
zone, giving the appearance of subepidermal bubbles (Fig. 2-95). These “subepidermal
bubblies" are seen in bullous pemphigoid, epidermolysis bullosa acquisita, lupus crythema-
q p q ose a  s pu sig n a isnno pue s
are edematous and contain dilated vessels and when the overlying epidermis is also
edematous and often contains exocytosing lenkocytes and parakeratotic scale (see Fig. 2-
36). Squirting papillae are a feature of seborrheic dermatitis and zinc-responsive dermato-
ses.
· Dysplasia. The term dysplasia refers to a faulty or abnormal development of
individual cells, and it is also commonly used to describe abnormal development of the
epidermis (Fig. 2-96) or hair folliclc as a whole. Dysplasia may be a feature of neoplastic,
tinocytes that are atypical in size, shape, and staining characteristics, and whosc polarity
has been disrupted.
FIGURE 2-96.Epidermal dys-
plasia in a cat witli actinic kerato-
sis. Note how keratinocyles vary in
staining intensity, size, and shape.
spA st Aod xpue
rupted.
174· Diagnostic Methods
FlGURE 2-97. Nests of neoplastic: mtel-
anocytes in a cat with mclanocytoma.
● Anaplasia. Anaplasia (atypia) is a feature of neoplastic cells, in which there is a loss
 of normal differentiation and organization.
● Metaplasia. Metaplasia refers to a change in the type of mature cells in a tissue
into a form that is not normal for that tissue (e.g., osseous metaplasia in the skin of a
patient with hyperadrenocorticism). Through metaplasia, a given cell may exhibit cpithe-
lal, mesothelial, or mesenchymal characteristics, regardless of the tissue of origin.
● Nests. Nests (theques) are well-circumscribed clusters or groups of cells within the
epidernis or the dermis (Fig. 2-97). Nests arc seen in some neoplastic and hamartoma-
tous dermatoses, such as melanomas and melanocytomas.
● Lymphoid Nodules. Lymphoid nodules are rounded, discrete masses of primarily
mature lymphocytes (Fig. 2-98). They are often found perivascularly in the deep dermis,
the subcutis, or both. Lymphoid nodules are most commonly recognized in association
with immune-mediated dermatoses, dermatoses with tissue eosinophilia, and panniculitis.38
niculitis, and some feline mast cell tumors.
 Multinucleate Epidermal Giant Cells. Multinucleate epidermal giant cells are
found in viral infections and in a number of nonviral and non-neoplastic dermatoses
characterized by epidermal hyperplasia, chronicity, or pruritus. Multinucleated keratinocy-
Diagnostic Methods · I75
FIGURE 2-98. Lymphoid nodule in a cat with idiopathic sterile pannicnulitis.
tic giant cells ("syncytial” cclls) are a unique feature of an FeLV-associated dermatitis in
cats (Fig. 2-99).
● Squamatization. Squamatization refers to the replacement of the normally cuboid
or columnar, slightly basophilic basal cpidermal cells by polygonal or fattened, eosino-
philie keratinocytes. It may be seen in lichenoid tissue reactions.
· Transepidermal Elimination. Transepidermal elimination is a mechanism _by
which foreign or altered constituents can bc rermoved from the dermis (Fig. 2- 100). The
process involves unique morphologic alterations of the surface epidermis or the hair
follicle's outer root sheath, which forms a channel and thercby facilitates extrusion. Trans-
epidermal elimination may be seen in foreign-body reactions, calcinosis cutis, calcinosis
circumseripta, and perforating dermatitis of cats.
● Dunstan's Blue Line. The overlying stratum cormeum is lifted and subtended at
FIGURE 2-99. Multinucleated
keratinocyte giant cells (arrouw) in a
cat with FeI.V dermatosis.
176 · Diagnostic Methods
FIGURE 2-I00. Transepidcnmal climi-
nationof mineral throughthe outer rool
sheath of a hair follicle in a dog with spon-
taneous hyperadrenocorticism.
its point of attachment to the underlying epidermis by degenerate nuclear debris and
staphylococci (Fig. 2-10l). As such, the stratum corneum seems to be separating in the
direction of a “bluc line.” This is most commonly seen in superfcial staphylococcal
infections.
Confusing Terms
NECROBIOSIS
Necrobiosis is the degeneration and death of cells or tissue, followed by replacement.
Examples of necrobiosis are the constant degeneration and replacement of epidermal and
 granulorna and in human granuloma annulare, necrobiosis lipoidica, and rheumatoid and
pseudorheumatoid nodules. The use of the term necrobiosis to describe a pathologic
      o e  si 
be discouraged. It is better to use the more specific terms described under Collagen
Changes in this chapter.
Diagnostic Methods ·177
FIGURE 2-I01. Dunstan's blue
line. A dark line of degenerate nn-
clear debris and cocci (arrou) sep-
arates the stratum corneum from
the underlying epidermis.
NEVUS AND HAMARTOMA
A nevus is a circumscribed developmental defect in the skin. Nevi may arise frorn any
skin component or combination of components. Nevi are hyperplastic. The term nevus
should never be used alone but always with a modifier such as epidermal, vascular.
sebaceous, and collagenous.
Hamartoma literally means a tumor-like proliferation of normal or embryonal cells. A
harnartoma is a macroscopic hyperplasia of normal tissue elements, and the term is often
 on pn aq au  n an 'r su  aiss p
plastic disorders in any tissue or organ system, whereas the terin nevus is restrictcd to the
skin.
Cellular Infiltrates
Dermal cellular infltrates are described in terms of (1) the types of cells present and (2)
the pattern of cellular infltration. In general, celular infiltrates are either monomorphous 
(one cell type) or polymorphous (more than one cell type). Further clarification of the
 philic, eosinophilic, and plasmacytic.
Cellular infiltrations usually have one or more of the following basic patterns: (1)
 perivascular (angiocentric—-located around blood vessels), (2) perifolicular and periglan-
follicles and glands), (3) lichenoid (assuming a bandlike configuration that parallels the
overlying epidermis and surrouds epidermal appendages), (4) nodular (occurring in basi-
cally well-defined groups or clusters at any site), and (5) interstitial or diffuse (scattered
lightly or solidly throughout the dermis). The types of cells and patterns of infiltration
 present are important clues in the diagnosis of many dermatoses.
· DErMATOLOGIC dIAGNOSIS bY HISTOPaThOLOGIC
PATTERNS
With patterm analysis, one first categorizes inflarmmatory dcrmatoses by their appearance
(pattern) on the scanning ohjective of the light microscope and then zeroes in on a
specific diagnosis, whenever posible, by the assimilation of fine details gathered by low-
and high-power scrutiny. Patterm analysis has revolutionized veterinary dermatohistopathol.
I78 · Diagnostic Methods
ogy and made the reading of skin biopsy specimens much simpler and more rewarding
histologic method, pattern analysis works only when clinicians supply pathologists with
adequate historical and clinical information and biopsy specimens imost representative of
 the dermatoses being sampled.
 In a retrospective study of skin biopsies from cats with infammatory dermatoses,43
pattern analysis was shown to be a useful technique. The specifie clinical diagnosis was
established in about 40% of the cases and was included in a reaction pattern-generated
differential diagnosis in another 50% of the cases. A single reaction pattern was found in
75% of the cases, and mixed reaction patterns (two or three different patterns) in 25% of
the cases. Mixed reaction patterns were usually caused by single etiologic factors or by a
coexistence of two or three different dermatoses.
 It is important to remember thiat many infammatory dermatoses are characterized by
a continuum of acute, subacute, and chronic pathologic changes.45. 5 In other words, the
lesions have “lives." For example, three very dissimilar lesions—cellulitis, eosinophilic
plaque, and plasma cell pododermatitis--have somewhat similar developmental stages.
tuate as difuse dermatitides. Thus, the histopathologic pattern seen in the biopsy speci-
men from one of thesc conditions is, in part, dependent on the evolution or “age” of the 
lesion,
 It is also important to realize that some patterns of infammation are more important
somewhere in virtually all inflammatory lesions: After all, the infarmmatory cells usually
have to exit the blood vessels in order to get to where the cutaneous action is! But, the
question is: are those perivascular cells going somewhere more important, somewhere
more diagnostic? Is there a more important infammatory reaction pattern being forimed?
Hence, one can always find perivascular accumulations of infanmmatory cells underlying an
cpidermal pustule, or peripheral to a dermal nodule. However, the more important or the
more diagnostic patterns are those of intraepidermal pustular dermatitis and the nodular
dermatitis.
Perivascular Dermatitis
 In perivascular dermatitis, the predominant infammatory reaction is centered on the
superficial or deep dermal blood vessels, or both. Perivascular dermatitis is subdivided into
three types on the basis of accormpanying epidermal changes: (1) pure perivascular derma-
 e pe s d  sp rd s 
dermatitis (Fig. 2-102A). The usual causes are hypersensitivity reactions (to inhalants,
dietary constituents, drugs, contact allergens, and so forth), ectoparasitisms, dermatophyto-
sis, nutritional deficiencies, seborrheic disorders, and contact dematitis. Deep perivascular
dermatitis (see Fig. 2--l102B) is less common and may be seen with systemic disorders
and canine systemic histiocytosis) or severe local reactions (vasculitis, discoid lupus erythe-
matosus, cellulitis, eosinophilic plaque, plasma cell pododermatitis, and tick bite reactions).
 In the cat, the most common causes of deep perivascular dermatitis are hypersensitivity
disorders (inhalant, food, fea).43
 of representing ectoparasitism or endoparasitism. In the cat, tissue cosinophilia is com-
monly seen with hypersensitivity disorders (reactions to inhalants or dietary constituents).43
Focal areas of epidermal edema, eosinophilic exocytosis, and necrosis (epidermal “nib-
bles") suggest ectoparasitism. Numerous eosinophils are also seen in the hypereosinophilic
syndrome and occasionally in Malassezia dermatitis and zinc-responsive derrmatoses.
Diagnostic Methods ·I79
FIGURE 2-I02. Perivascular derinatitis. A, Superficial perivascular dennatitis in a dog with atopy. B, Deep perivascu
lar dermatitis (arroto) in a cat with atopy.
athy, nutritional deficiencies, developmental abnornalities (ichthyosis, follicular dysplasia,
 epidermal nevus, and color dilution alopecia), and secondary seborrheic disorders. Dispro-
syndromc, follicular dysplasia, sebaccous adenitis, comedo nevus, and follicular cyst. Dif-
responsive dermatosis, generic dog food dermatosis,ectoparasitism, Malassezia dermatitis,
lethal acrodermatitis, some vitamin A-responsive dermatoses, thallotoxicosis, necrolytic
Imigratory erythema, and occasionally, dermatophytosis and dermatophilosis.
tism, seborrheic disorders, dermatophytosis, and dermatophilosis. When parakeratotic caps
are combined with papillary squirting, seborrheic dermatitis is lkely. Perivascular dermato-
ses accompanied by vertical streaking of collagen, sebaceous gland hyperplasia, or both
suggest chronic pruritus (rubbing. licking, or chewing), such as that seen with hypersensi-
tivity reactions and acral lick derinatitis.
PURE PERIVASCULAR DERMATITIS
The most likely diagnoses include hypersensitivity rcactions (to inhalants, dietary constitu-
ents, or drugs), urticaria, and dermatophytosis.
SPONGIOTIC PERIVASCULAR DERMATITIS
Spongiotic perivascular dermatiis is characterized hy prominent spongiosis and spongiotic
vesicle formation. Severe spongiotic vesiculation may cause blowout of the basernent
membrane zone, resulting in subepidermal vesicles. The epidermis frequently shows vary-
ing degrees of hyperplasia and hyperkeratosis. The most likely diagnoses include hypersen-
sitivity reactions, contact dermatitis, ectoparasitisms, dermatophytosis, Malassexia dermati-
tis, dermatophilosis, viral infection, and eosinophilie plaque. Diffuse spongiosis, in which
the outer root shcath of thc hair folicle is also involved, suggests eosinophilic plaque,
180 · Diagnostic Methods
tosinophilic granuloma, primary seborrhea, Malassezia dermatitis, and zinc-responsive der-
matosis. Marked spongiosis and intracellular edema of the upper one half of the epidermis
 u    s    
thema.
HYPERPLASTIC PERIVASCULARDERMATITIS
Hyperplastic perivascular dermatitis is characterized by varying degrees of opidermal
hyperplasia and hyperkeratosis, with little or no spongiosis. This is a common, nondiagnos-
tic, chronic dermatitis. It is frequently seen with hypersensitivity reactions, contact derma-
titis, diseases of altered keratinization, ectoparasitisms, indolent ulcer, and acral lick der-
matitis. Psoriasiform pcrivascular dermatoses are unusual and inay represent chronic
contact dermatitis, chronic hypersensitivity reactions, acral lick dermatitis, psoriasiform-
lichenoid dermatosis of English Springer spanicls, necrolytic migratory erythema, and
 dermatophytosis. The most common cause of psoriasiform perivascular dermatitis in dogs
 is epitheliotropie lymphoma.
Interface Dermatitis
 In interface dermatitis, the dermoepidermal junction is obscured by hydropic degenera-
tion, lichenoid cellular infiltrate, or both (Fig. 2- 103),36 Apoptotic keratinocytes, satellite
cell apoptosis and pigmentary incontinence are commonly seen. The hydropic type of
interface dermatitis is scen with cutaneous adverse drug reactions (including fixed drug
reaction), lupus crythematosus, toxic epidermal necrolysis, erythema multiforme, dermato-
myositis, hereditary lupoid dermatosis of German shorthaired pointers (exfoliative cutane-
 ous lupus erythematosus), idliopathic ulcerative dermatosis of collies and Shetland shccp-
dlogs (vesicular cutaneous lupus erythcmatosus), graft-versus-host reactions, hereditary
 nasal hyperkeratosis of Labrador retrievers, and actinic dermatoses. The reactions seen
with toxic epidermal necrolysis, dermatomyositis, thymoma-associated exfoliative derrmatitis
of cats, and various vasculitides and vasculopathies are often only mildly inffammatory
("cell-poor").
The lichenoid type is seen with drug eruptions, lupus erythematosus, pemphigus,
pemphigoid, erythema multiforine, Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome, idiopathic lich-
enoid dermatoses, lichenoid keratoses, aetinic keratoses, psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatosis
of English Springer spaniels, contact reactions to plastic, and cpitheliotropic lymphoma.
The bandlike celular infiltration of lichenoid tissue reactions consists predominantly of
lymphocytes and plasma cells. If nearby ulceration or secondary infections exist, numerous
nentrophils may be present. Canine rmucocutaneous pyoderma often has a lichenoid
infaminatory component but lacks hydropic degeneration and apoptosis, and contains
numerous neutrophils and suppurative epidermitis. Uniquely, the lichenoid infltrate of
uveodermatologic syndrome has numerous large histiocytes, which contain lightly sprinkled
melanin. A lichenoid tissue reaction with many eosinophils suggests an insect or arthropod
bite reaction (e.g, scabies and cheyletiellosis) or a drug eruption. Smal numbers of
eosinophils are also a fcature of psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatosis of English Springer
s sssns   q a  s   n sss
crythematosus and dermatormyositis.
Vasculitis
Vasculitis is an infammatory process in which infammatory cels are present within and
around blood vessel walls and there are concomitant signs of damage to the blood vessels
(e.g., degeneration and lysis of vascular and perivascular collagen, swelling and necrosis of
endlothelial cells, extravasation of erythrocytes, thrombosis, effacement of vascular architcc-
ture, and fibrinoid degeneration) (Fig. 2-104). Vasculitides are usually classified on the
basis of the dominant infammatory cell within vessel walls, the types being neutrophilic,
eosinophilic, and lymphocytic. This appearance, of course, can be greatly modified by
duration of the lesion. Fibrinoid degeneration is rare in canine and feline cutaneous
vasculitides. Biopsy specinens from animals with vasculitis sometimes do not reveal visu-
Diagnostic Methods · I8I
FIGURE 2-I03. Interfacc der-
Imatitis. A, Hlyrdropic interface_der-
matitis in a dog with systemie lupus
erythematosus. B. Lichenoid irnter-
face dermatitis_ in a dog with irlio-
Pathie hchenoid dematitis.
ally inflamed vessels but rather some of the signposts of vasculitis (Table 2-9). Serial
sections or repeated biopsy may be necessary to visualize the actual vasculitis.
Neutrophilic vasculitis, the most comrmon type, may be leukocytoclastic (associated
with karyorrhexis of neutrophils, resulting in “nuclear 'dust"). This pattern is seen jn
connective tissue disorders (fupus erythermatosus, rheumatoid arthritis, and dermatoinyosi-
tis), allergic reactions (adverse cutaneous drug reactions, infections, and reactions to
toxins), polyarteritis nodosa, canine staphylococcal hypersensitivity, Rocky Mountain spot-
ted fever, and canine leishimaniasis; hereditary nasal pyogranuloma and vasculitis of Scot-
tish terriers; as an idiopathic disorder; and occasionally with plasma cell pododermatitis.
thrombophlebitis from intravenous catheters causing_ thromboembolism. Exceptions to
these rulcs may be seen, such as in the case of allergic vasculitides, which may be
lenkocytoclastic or nonleukocytoclastic. Vascular throinbosis can occur in dogs receiving
glucocorticoid therapy.
 Iymphocytic vasculitis is rare, and may bc seen in acdverse cutaneous drug reactions,
vaccine-induccd panniculitis, lupus erythematosus, dermatomyositis, familial vasculopathy
I82 · Diagnostic Methods
FIGURE 2-I04. Vasculitis. Leukocytoclastic vasculitis in a dog with idiopathic cutane-
ous vasculitis.
of German shepherds, and as an idiopathic disorder. Lymphomatoid granuloinatosis is
characterized by vascular damage associated with atypical, pleomorphie lymphoid cells.
Eosinophilic vaseulitis is very rare, and is seen with insect- and arthropod-induced
lesions, feline cosinophilic granuloma, food hypersensitivity, and mast cell tumor.
By tradition, leukocytes are not found in the walls of arterioles and large venules,
their presence being prima facie evidence of vasculitis. However, in a recent study,47
eosinophils were found in the walls of large dermal and sihcutaneous venules or veins in
21.4% and 38.9%, respectively, of the cats with eosinophilic granuloma and eosinophilic
 plaque (Fig. 2- 105). In two cats with eosinophilic plaque, eosinophils were also present in
the walls of deep dermal arterioles. No histologic or clinical evidence of vasculitis was 
present in these cats.
Interstitial Dermatitis
Interstitial dermatitis is characterized by the infiltration of cells between collagen bundles
(in the interstitial spaces) of the dermis (Fig. 2-106).45s The infltrate is poorly circum-
scribed, is mild to moderate in intensity, and does not obscure the anatomic features of
the skin. In dogs, most interstitial dermatoses are superficial and associated with infections
 or infestations, whereas those in the cat are usually superficial and deep and associated
●Table 2-9
HIStOPaThOLOGIC SIGNPOSTS OF
CUtaNEOUS YASCULITIS4?
* Large numbers of leukocytes within the vessel wall, especially if the vessel is an arteriole or large venule.
 If tie vessel is a postcapilary venule,there are disproportiouately more leukocytes within the wallthan in the
acdjacent dlermis.
· Intramural or perivascular hemorrhage, intense edema, and fbrin deposition.
- The presence of leukocytoclasis within thc vessel wall.
· Some cvidencc of damage to the vessel wall beyond edema and endothelial cell prorinence.
· Evidence of cutaneous infarction.
·Atrophic changes in hair follcles, adnexal glands, and epidermis, refecting chronic ischcmia.
Diagnostic Methods · 183
FIGURE 2-I05. Nunerous eo-
sinophils in the wall of a deep der-
mal arteriole of a cat with an eosino-
philie plaque. No vasculitis is pres-
ennt.
FIGURE 2--I06. Interstibial derimatitis il
p ao russdy poogqm eo e
the anatomic structures  are sill  readily
identified. There arc also focal arcas of mu-
ral folliculitis.
184 · Diagnostic Methods
FIGURE 2-I07. Interstilial der-
matitis in an atopic cat. Interstitial
accumulation of predominantly eo-
sinophils and lymphocytes.
with allergies (Fig. 2-107) and ectoparasites.15 When the superficial dernis is primarily
involved and the overlying epidermis is normal, urticaria is likely. When the superficial
dermis is primarly involved and the epidernis is hyperplastic, the most likely causes are
staphylococcal infection (numerous neutrophils), dermatophytosis (numerous neutrophils),
yeast dermatitis (numerous lymphocytes), and ectoparasitisim, especially scabies and Hea
involved, likely diagnoses include bacterial or fungal infection (numerous neutrophils,
macrophagcs, or both), early eosinophilic plaque (numerous eosinophils), and early plasma
 cell pododermatitis (numerous plasina cells).
Nodular and Diffuse Dermatitis
Nordular dermatitis denotes discrete clusters of cells. Such dermal nodules are usually
multiple but may occasionally be large and solitary (Fig. 2-108). In contrast, diffuse
109).
 Granulomutous inflammation represents a heterogeneous pattern of tissue reactions in
 response to various stimuli. There is no simple, precise, universally accepted way to define
 granulomatous infammation. A commonly proposed definition of granulomatous inflamma-
tion is as follows: a circumscribed tissue reaction that is subacute to chronic in nature and
   a          i  
 predominant cell type. Thus, granulormatous dermatitis may be nodular or diffuse, but not
all nodular and diffuse dermatoses are granulomatous. Nongranulomatous diffuse dermato-
scs include eosinophilic plaque, plasma cell pododermatitis, and cellulitis. Pseudolym-
phoma (insect or arachnid bites; drug reactions; idiopathic) is an example of a nongranu-
 Heutrophils are frequently called pyogranulomatous. The most common causes of nodular
 Pyogranulomatous dermatitis in dlogs are furunculosis and ruptured keratinous cysts.
CELL TYPES
Nodular dermatitis and diffuse dermatitis are often associated with certain unusual inflam-
 matory cell types.
Foam cells are histiocytes with elongated or oval vesicular muclei and abundant, finely
Diagnostic Methods·I85
FIGURE 2-I08. Nodular dcrnatiis. Denmal nodule with Derodex umites in the center in a
dlog with generalized demodicosis.
granular, eosinophilic cytoplasm with ill-defined cell borders, They are called epithelioid
because they appear to cluster and adjoin like epithelial ceils (Fig. 2 -110).
three morphologic forrns: (l) Langhans-type (nuclei form a circle or semicircle at the
 periphery of the cell), (2) foreign body-type (nuclei are scattered throughout the cyto-
plasm), and (3) Touton-type (nuclei form a wreath that surrounds a central, homogeneous,
armphophilic core of cytoplasm, which is. in turn, surrounded by abundant foamy cyto-
FIGURE 2-I09, 1iffuse dermatitis. Diffusc granulomatous dermatis in a dog with sarcoi-
dal idliopathic granulomas.
186·DiagnosticMethods
FIGURE 2-II0.Dermal gran1l-
loma in a  cat.  Histixytcs have
a  voluminous,  stippled cytoplasm
with often ill-delined cell horle:rs.
FIGURE 2-IlI. Multinucleate histiocytic giant cells are often prescnt in cutaneous granulomas or chronic
inflammations localized around foci af irritation. However, one should understand that identification of any one.
lype of giant cellis not diagnostic alone. Several types may be found in a single scction, and all are “foreign
material. A, Touton-type giant cell There is a couplete ring of nuclei around a grounl-glass center, and all are
enclosed within a vacuolated cytoplasm. Thc photornicrograph is from a human xanthona. (Courtesy J. D.
'uyset susasiot e u posue sl yanu jo uu piaduad au on yua ad-surare1 'a (ao
Diagnostic Methods ·I87
FIGURE 2-Il2. Derinal ab-
scess (neutrophils) inl a dog.
plasm). In general, these three forms of giant cells have no diagnostic specificity, although
numerous Touton-type cells are usually seen with xanthomas.
CHARACTERIZATION
 Certain general principles apply to the examination of all nodular and diffuse dermatitides.
The proceses that should be used are (l) polarizing foreign material, (2) staining for
bacteria and fungi, and (3) culturing. In general, microorganisms are most likely to be
found near areas of suppuration and necrosis.
Nodular and diffuse dermatitis may be charactcrizcd by predominantly neutrophilic,
histiocytic, eosinophilic, or mixed cellular infltrates. Neutrophils (dermal abscess) (Fig. 2-
112) often predominate in dermatoses associated with bacteria, inycobacteria, actinomy-
 cetes, fungi, Prototheca, and foreign bodies. Histioeytes may predominate (Fig. 2- 113) in 
FIGURE 2-|I3. Graulormatous
dematitis in a dog.
188 · Diagnostic Methods
FIGURE 2-I14. Pyogranuloma-
tous dermatitis in a dog.
the chronic stage of any of the entities just listcd, in xanthomas, in canine histiocytosis 
(cutaneous and systemic), and in the sterile pyogranuloma-granuloma syndrome. Eosino-
phils may predorninate in feline and canine eosinophilic granuloma, in certain parasitic
dermatoses (insect and arachnid bite reactions, diroflariasis, and dracunculiasis), and in
locations where hair follicles have ruptured. Mixed cellular infltrates are most commonly
neutrophils and histiocytes (in pyogranuloma) (Fig. 2 -114), eosinophils and histiocytes (in
eosinophilic granuloma), or a combination.
 Plasma cells are common componcnts of nodular and diffuse dermatitis (Fig. 2-115)
of dogs and cats and are of no particular diagnostic significance. They are cornmonly seen
 around glands and follicles in chronic infections. Periapocrine accumulations of plasma
cells are also commonly secn in acral lick dernatitis and lichenoid dermatoses. Hyperac-
tive plasma cells may contain eosinophilic intracytoplasmic inclusions (Russell bodies).
FIGURE 2-ll5. Plasina cells
and smaller nurnbcrs of neutrophils
chronicbaclerial  infection.  One
plasma cell contains large intracy-
ies)(arrow).
Diagnostic Methods * 189
FIGURE 2-II6. Tuberculoid granu-
loma. (From Ackerman AB: Histologic
Diagnosis_of Infammatory  Diseases.
Lea & Febiger, Philadclphia. 1978,
p 398.)
These accumulations of glycoprotein are largely globulin and may be large enough to push
the cell nucleus eccentrically.
Granulomas may be subclassified as tuberculoid, sarcoidal, and palisading. Tuberculoid
 granulomas have a central zone of neutrophils and necrosis surrounded by histiocytes and
epithelioid cells, which are, in turn, surrounded by giant cells, followed by a layer of
lymphocytes, and finally an outer layer of fbroblasts. These are seen in tuberculosis,
atypical mycobacteriosis, feline leprosy and, rarely, leishmaniasis and protothccosis (Fig.
 2-116). Sarcoid granulomas have “naked" epithelioid cells (unaccompanied by surround-
ing inflammation and fibrosis), as seen in foreign body reactions, idiopathic canine sarcoi-
dal granuloma, and histiocytosis of Bemesc mountain dogs (Fig. 2- 117). In palisading
granulomas, the histiocytes are aligned like staves around_a central focus of collagen
degeneration (in canine and feline eosinophilic granuloma [Fig. 2-118]); fbrin (in rheu-
matoid nodule); lipids (in xanthoma); or parasite, fungus, or other foreign material (e.g..
calcium, as in dystrophic caleinosis cutis and caleinosis circumscripta [Fig. 2- 1l9]). Gran-
ulomas and pyogranulomas that track hair follicles and result in large, vertically oriented
(sausage-shaped) lesions are typical of the sterle pyogranuloma-granuloma syndrome.
Reactions to ruptured hair follicles are a comrmon cause of nodular and diffuse
pyogranulomatous dermatitis, and any such dermal process should be carefully serutinized
for keratinous and epithelial debris and should be serially sectioned to rule out this
possibility.
 Nongramulomatous nodular and diffuse dermatitis can be a feature of infectious agents
(cellulitis or abscess), feline eosinophilic plaque, feline plasma cell pododermatitis, farmilial
vasculopathy of German shepherd dogs, pseudolymphomas (Fig. 2-120), and necrotizing
dermatoses (e.g., burms, spider bites, vasculopathies).
Intraepidermal Vesicular and Pustular Dermatitis
Vesicular and pustular dermatitides show considerable microscopic and macroscopic over-
lap, because vesicles tend to accumulate leukocytes early and rapidly. Thus, vesicular
190 · Diagnostic Methods
FIGURE 2-II7. Sarcoidal granu-
loma. (From Ackerman AB: Histologic
Diagnosis of Inflammatory Diseases.
Lca & Febiger, Philadelphia, 1978.
P408.)
dermatitides in dogs and cats frequently appear pustular or vesicopustular, hoth macro-
scopically and microscopically.
 Intraepidermal vesicles and pustules (Fig. 2- 121) may be produced by interccllular or
intracellular edema (in any acute to subacute dermatitis reaction), bailooning degeneration
(in viral infections), acantholysis (due to the autoantibodies of pemphigus, the proteolytic
enzymes from neutrophils in microbial infections and subcormeal pustular dermatosis, the
protcolytic enzymes from eosinophils in sterile eosinophilic pustulosis, and substances
released by some dermatophytes*2), and hydropic degeneration of basal cells (in lupus
erythematosus, erythema multiforme, toxic epidermal necrolysis, dernatomyositis, and
drug eruptions). It is useful to classify intraepidermal vesicular and pustular dermatitides
as to their anatomic level of occurrence within the epidermis (Table 2- 10).
Subepidermal Yesicular and Pustular Dermatitis
Subepidermal vesicles and pustules (Fig. 2-122) may be formed through hydropic degen-
eration of basal cells (in lupus erythematosus, erythema multiforme, dermatomyositis, drug
goid, drug eruption, and epidermolysis bullosa), severe subepidermal edema or cellular
infiltration (especially in urticaria, cellulitis, vasculitis, ectoparasitism, and dermal erythema
multiforme), and severe intercelular edema, with blowout of the basement membrane
tory changes are inportant diagnostic clues (see Table 2-10). Caution is warranted when
examining older lesions, because re-epithelialization may cause subepidermal vesicles and
 pustules to assume an intraepidermaf location. Such re-epithelialization is usually recog-
 nized as a single layer of fattencd, elongated basal epidermal cells at the base of the
vesicle or pustule.
Diagnostic Methods·I9I
FIGURE 2-II8. Palisading granuloma.
(F1om Ackenman AB: Histologic Diagnosis
of Inflammatory Diseases. Lea & Febiger,
Philadelphia, 1978, p 416.)
FIGURE 2-I19. Foreign-body gran-
uloma. (From Ackerman AB: Histologic
Diagnosis of Infammatory Diseases. Lea
& Fcbigcr, Philadclphia, 1978, p 436.)
I92 · Diagnostie Methods
FIGURE 2-I20. Lymphocytes
and smaller numbers of histiocytes
in a dog with insect bite pseudolyin-
phorna.
Perifolliculitis, Folliculitis, and Furunculosis
Perifoliculitis denotes the accumulation of inflammatory cells around a hair follicle,
wherein the follicular epithelium is not invaded (Fig. 2-123).2s Dense perifoliculitis may
bc sccn in infectious hair follicle disorders, leishmaniasis, and sebaceous adenitis.
Mural folliculitis occurs when the wall of the follicle is targeted, and the lumen is
 spared.'5 Four major subdivisions of mural flliculitis are recognized.
1. Interface mural folliculitis. As in interface dermatitis, pathologic changes (hydropic
degcneration, keratinocyte apoptosis, lymphocytic exocytosis) tend to target the
outermost (basal) cell layer (Fig. 2-124). Perifollicular inflarnmation rnay be cell-
poor (hydropic) or cell-rich (lichenoid). Diseases to cousider include lupus erythe-
FIGURE 2- I21. Intraepidermal pustular clermatitis. Large subcormeal pustule in a dog with
pemphigus foliaceus.
Diagnostic Methods·193
● Table 2-10
 HIsTopathOlogIc claSsIfIcatIon OF
INtrAEPidERMAL AND SUBEPIDERMAL
 PuSTuLar AND vESICULaR dISEaSES
ANATOMIC LOCATION 
 OTHER HELPFUL FINDINGS
Intraepiderrmal
Subcorneal
 Mierobial infection
Neutrophils, microorganisns (bacteria, fungi), ± mild acantholysis,
focal necrosis of epidermis, ± follicular involvement
Canine subcorneal pustular derrnatosis
Neutrophils, ± moderate acantholysis
Canine sterile cosinophilic pustulosis
Eosinophils, ± follcular involvenent
 Pemphigus foliaceus
Marked acantholysis, neutrophils and/or eosinophils, ± follicular in-
volvement, ± lichenoid infltrate.
Canine linear IgA pustular dermatitis
Neutrophils, ± mild acantholysis 
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Neutrophils, ± mild acantholysis, interface dermatitis
Leish maniasis
Neutrophils, ± mieroorganism
Superficial suppurative necrolytic der-
 Neutruphils, epithelial necrosis
imatitis of Schnauzer
Intragranular
Pemphigus foliaceus
Marked acantholysis, granular "cling-ons," neutrophils and/or cosino-
phils,
6, ± follicular involvenment
 Pemphigus erythematosus
 phils, ± lichenoid infiltrate, ± follicular involvement 
Introepidermal
Pemphigus vegetans
Marked acantholysis, eosinophils, papilloatosis
Benign familial pemphigus
Acantholysis at all levels
Epitheliotropic lymphoma
Atypical lyinphoid cells, Pautrier microabscesses
Viral dermatoscs
Balfooning degeneration, ± inclusion bodies, ± acantholysis
Spongiotic dernatitis
goid, canine sterile eosinophilie pustlosis
Necrolytic migratory erythema
Diffuse parakeratosis, marked edema of upper epidermis 
Suprabasilar
 Pemphigus vulgaris
 Marked acantholysis, ± follieular involvement 
intrabasa!
Lupus crythematosus
Intcrface dermatitis, ± thickened basement membrane zone,
± derinal mucinosis
Dermatomyosilis
Interface dermatitis. ± thickened basement mernbrane zone,
± dermal mucinosis,  perifollieular fibrosis 
Erythema multiforme
Iterface dematitis, marked single-cll apoptosis of keratinocytes at
 all levels of epidernis
Toxic epidermal necrolysis
Fullthickess coagulation necrosis of epidermis, ittle or no inflam
mat ion
Graft-versus-host disease
 Interface derrnatitis
Hereditary lupoid dermatosis (exfolia-
 Interface dermatitis
tive cutaneous lupus erythematosus)
of German shorthaired pointer
Idiopathic ulcerative dennatitis (vesicu-
Interface dermnatitis
lar cutaneous lupus erythematosus)
of collie and Shetland sheep dog
Subepidermal
Bullous peinphigoid
Subepidermal vacuolar alteration. variahle infammation, often eosin-
ophils
Epidernolysis bullosa acquisita
Ncutrophils
Canine limear IgA bullous derinatosis
Ncutrophils
Mucous membrane pemphigoid
Noninflammatory
Epidermolysis bullosa
Little or no inflammation, ± hydropic degeneration
Lupus erythermatosus
Interface dermatitis, ± thickened basement membrane zone,
± dermal mucinosis,  perifollicular fibrosis 
Erythema multiforme
Interface dernatitis, narked single-cell necrosis of keratinocytes
Severe spongiosis
Toxic epidermal necrolysis
Burms
Sevcrc subcpidermal edema/cellular in-
filtrate
194 · Diagnostic Methods
FIGURE 2-I22. Subepidermal vesicular dermatitis. Subepidcrmal vesicle in a dog with
bullous pemphigoid.
matosus, erythema multiforme, cutaneous adverse drug reaction, demodicosis, thy-
moma-associated exfoliative dermatitis in cats, dermatophytosis, graft-versus-host
disease, and various vasculitides and vasculopathies (dermatonyositis, rabies vac-
cine reaction, etc.).
2. Infiltrative mural folliculitis. The follicle wall is infiltrated by lymphocytes and
histiocytes in the absence of hydropic degeneration and apoptosis (Fig., 2-125)
The differential diagnosis includes sebaceous adenitis, pseudopelade, feline idio-
pathic lymphocytic mural foliculitis, cutaneous adverse drug reaction, and early
epitheliotropic lymphoma. Concurrent mucinosis of the outer root sheath is typical
of alopecia mucinosa. In dogs, an idiopathic (possibly drug-related) granulomatous
degencrative folliculopathy is characterized by massive infiltration of lymphocytes,
histiocytes, and multinucleate giant cells,
3. Necrotizing mural folliculitis. An usually eosinophil-dominated inflammation causes
explosive rupture of follicles, with hemorrhage, and severe dermal mucinosis and
e psp jo r, os ss  a (on-a  sa
walls. The most common causes are arthropod- and insect-related damage (e.g..
feline mosquito bite hypersensitivity, and canine eosinophilic folliculitis and furun-
culosis). A relatively cell-poor or neutrophil-dominated necrotizing mural folliculitis
may be a rare manifestation of cutaneous adverse drug reaction, and Inay also be
seen in feline herpesvinis derinatitis and ischemic states.
4. Pustular mural folliculitis. Microabscesses and pustules form adjacent to the follic-
ular stratum corneum, producing subcorneal or intragranular follcular pustules
(Fig. 2-127). The most cornmon causes are pemphigus foliaceus or pemphigus
erythematosus (neutrophils or eosinophils with acantholytic keratinocytes) and ster-
ile eosinophilic pustulosis.
Luminal folliculitis irmplies the acumulation of inflammatory cells within the superfi-
cial or deep aspects of the lumcn (Fig. 2-128). This is, by far, the most cormmon
histologic type and is usually associated with infectious agents: bacteria, dermatophytes,
and Demodex mites. These folliculitides are dominated by neutrophils. Rare causes in-
clude Pelodera nematodes, sterile eosinophilic pustulosis, and sterile eosinophilic pinnal
folliculitis. Focal areas of eosinophilic foliculitis may be seen in biopsy specinens frorn
cats with atopy, food hypersensitivity, or fea bite hypersensitivity.43
Diagnostic Methods · I95
FIGURE 2-I23. Perifolliculitis. Perifol-
licular pyogranulomas in a dog with visceral
leishmaniasis.
Furunculosis (penetrating foliculitis) signifies follicular rupture (Fig. 2-129). It most
commonly occurs as a result of luminal folliculitis and less commonly as a result of
 necrotizing mural folliculitis. Furunculosis results in pyogranulomatous inffammation of the
surrounding dermis and, occasionally, subcutis. When furunculosis is seen consecutively in
three or more follicles (the “domino" effect), dermatophytosis (especially kerion) is the
most likely diagnosis. Furunculosis is usually associated with moderate numbers of eosinj-
 phils, presumably a foreign body-type reaction to free keratin and hair shafts. When
eosinophils are the dominant cell, an antecedent necrotizing (eosinophilic) mural folliculi-
tis is the cause.
s  sd q a sa p s sa ro s e,  s
numbers.
Perifollicular fbrosis is seen with chronic folliculitides, derimatomyositis, and chronic
sebaceous adenitis. Perifollicular melanosis can occasionally be seen with numerous follicu-
litides, but is most characteristic of canine demodicosis.18
 Follicular infammation is a common microscopic finding, and one must always be
cautious in assessing its importance. It is a common secondary complication in pruritic
 dermatoses (e.g., hypersensitivities and ectoparasitism), hormonal derimatoses, and disor-
196 · Diagnostic Methods
FIGURE 2-I24. Interfacc mural folliculitis in
a dog with generalized demodicosis. Hydropic
degeneration and apoptosis of basal keratinocytes.
ders of keratinization. Hence, a thorough search (histologically and clinically) for underly
ing causes is mandatory.
Fibrosing Dermatitis
Fibrosis marks the resolving stage of an intense or insidious infammatory proces, and it
occurs mainly as a consequence of collagen destruction. Fibrosis that is histologically
to collagen in the superficial dennis only do not usually result in scarring, whereas
virtually all ulcers that extend into the deep dermis inexorably proceed to fbrosis and
clinical scars.
 Fibrosing dermatitis (Fig. 2-13l) follows severe insults of many types to the dermis.
Thus, fbrosing dermatitis alone is of minimal diagnostic value other than for its testimony
process, such as furunculosis, vascular disease, foreign material, lymphedema, lupus ery-
thematosus, dermatomyositis, acral lick dermatitis, and morphea. In cats, an uncommon
chronic ulcerative dermatitis is characterized by linear subepidermal fibrosis, which ex-
tends peripheral to the ulcer.
Panniculitis
The panniculus is commonly involved as an extension of dermal infammatory processes,
especially of suppurative and granulomatous dermatoses. Likewise, there is usually some
deep dermal involvement in virtually all panniculitides.
Panniculitis is conveniently divided'on an anatomic basis into the lobular type (pri-
Diagnostic Methods · I97
FIGURE 2-I25. Infltrative mural folliculitis
in a dog with a cephalexin cutaneous adverse
drug reaction.Iymphocytes infiltrate_follicular
outer root sheath in the absence of hydropic de-
generation and apoptosis of basal kcratinocytcs.
marily involving fat lobules), the septal type (primarily involving interlobular connective
tissue septa), and the diffuse type (both anatomic areas involved) (Fig. 2- 132). Patterns of
 all three patterns may be seen in a single lesion from the same patient.37 Neither does the
 cytologic appearance (pyogranulomatous, granulomatous, suppurative, eosinophilic, lym-
phoplasmacytic, or fibrosing) appear to have much diagnostic or prognostic significance.37
Most panniculitides, regardless of the cause, look histologically similar.
In dogs, diffuse panniculitis is the most common pattern, and septal panniculitis is
most often found in cats. As with nodular and diffuse dermatitis, polarization, the use of
special stains, and cultires are usually indicated. Septal panniculitis is seen with vasculi-
tides and erythema nodosum. A rare form of canine panniculitis, one associated with lupus
lymnphoplasinacytic septal to lobular panniculitis, with septal vasculitis, numerous lymphoid
nodules, mucinosis, and often an overlying interface dermatitis. Similar microscopic lesions 
occur at the sites of previous vaccinations (especially rabies) or drug injections. Feline
subcutaneous fat sclerosis is characterized by marked septal fibrosis, fat micropseudocyst
formation, and lipocytes that contain radially arranged, needle-shaped clefts.
Atrophic Dermatosis
Atrophic derrmatosis is characterized by varying degrees of epithelial and connective
tissue atrophy (Fig. 2-133). Disorders in this catcgory are endocrine, nutritional, and
developmental derrmatoses; telogen defuxion; and postclipping folicular arrest. Endocrine
dermatoses are the most common and show variable combinations of the following histo-
pathologic changes: diffuse orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, epidermal atrophy, follicular
keratosis, follicular atrophy, telogenization or catagenization of hair follicles, excessive
198 · Diagnostic Methods
FIGURE 2-126. Necrotizing mural folliculitis
in a cat with mosquito bite hypersensitivity. Ne-
crotie follicular epithelium and eosinophis sur-
round an empty pilar canal.
trichilemrnal keratinization (Hame follicles), epithelial melanosis, and sebaceous gland atro-
 atrophic dermatoses and refect the common occurrence of secondary bacterial infection,
seborrhea, or both with these disorders. Findings suggestive of specifc endocrinopathies
include diffuse mucinosis (hypothyroidisrn), dystrophic mineralization (hyperadrenocorti-
cism). hypertrophied or vacuolated arrector pili musclcs (hypothyroidisin), decreased
 dermal elastin (hyposomatotropism and hyperadrenocorticism), dermal atrophy (hyper-
adrenocorticism and hyposomatotropism), and absence of arrector pili muscles (hyper-
adrenocorticism). Adrenal sex hormone abnormalities seem to produce a unique combina-
 tion of atrophic dermatosis and follicular dysplasia.
Findings suggestive of nutritional disorders include misshapen, corkscrew hairs and
small hairs. Developinental disorders such as follicular dysplasias, and color dilution alope-
cia are characterized by variable degrees of follicular dysplasia and anomalous deposition
of melanin. The various follicular dysplasias produce dysplastic hair shafts, but endocrinop-
defuxion, and thallotoxicosis. These should not be confuscd with the twisted, malacic hair
shafts seen in biopsy specimens from cats with allergies and psychogenic alopecia (the
"twang sign" of the hair pulling cat), nor the eosinophilic, amorphous, “infarcted hairs"
seen with vasculopathies. Miniaturization of hair follicles and hair shafts may be seen in
nutritional disorders, genetic hypotrichoses, pattern baldness, paraneoplastic alopecia, and
sex hormone derrmatoses. Telogen defuxion is characterized by diffuse telogenization of
hair follicles, with no other signs of cutaneous atrophy. Postclipping follicular arrcst is
characterized by diffuse catagenization or telogenization of hair follicles, with no other
A pa aq ari ee erao as oo a u arone soo ja suis
Diagnostic Methods·199
FIGURE 2-I27. Pustular mural folliculitis in
a dog with pemphigus foliaceus. Intramural mi-
croabscess at base of follicle is filled with neutro-
phils and acanmtholytic kcratinocytcs. Pilar canal is
not involved.
follicular atrophy, dysplastic hair shafts, or “orphaned" cutaneous glands and arrector pili 
musclcs. In the chronic stage, granulomatous sebaceous adenitis may have complete
absencc of sebaceous glands, a feature that is not seen with endocrine, nutritional, and
 most devclopmental dcrmatoses. The acquired skin fragility syndrome of cats is character-
ized by striking atrophy, attenuation, and disorganization of dermal collagen.
Mixed Reaction Patterns
Because skin diseases have a pathologic continuum, relecting various combinations of
acute, subacute, and chronic changes, and because animals can have more than one
dermatosis at the same time, it is common for one or tvo biopsy specimens from the
conmon to see an overall pattcrn of perivascular dermatitis (due to hypersensitivity
reactions or ectoparasitism) or atrophic dermatosis (duc to erndocrinopathy) with a subor-
dinate, focal patterm of folicultis, furunculosis, or intraepidernal pustular dermatitis (due
to secondary bacterial infection). Likewise, one can find multiple patterns from one or two
biopsy specimens from an animal with a single disease (e.g, vasculitis, difusc necrotizing
 dermatitis, and fibrosing dermatitis in a patient with necrotizing vasculitis). Mixed reaction
patterns (two or three patterns) were found in about 25% of the biopsy specimens from
cats with inflammatory dermatoses.43
Invisible Dermatoses
eased skin that appear normal under thc microscope. Because normal skin is rarely
included in biopsy specimens in clinical practice, one must assume that some evidence of
200 ·Diagnostic Methods
F1GURE 2-I28. Louminal folliculitis in a dog
with sterile eosinophilic pustulosis.
FIGURE 2-I29. Furwnculosis. Folicular rupture in a dog with staphylococcal furun-
c'ulosis.
Diagnostic Methods · 201
FIGURE 2-130. Bulbitis in a dog with alope-
cia areata.
dermatoses are clinically cvident skin diseases that show a histologic picture resembling
nornal skin.'7 Technical problems must be eliminated, such as sampling errors that occur
when normal skin on an edge of the biopsy specimen has been sectioned and the diseased
tissue has been left in paraffn.
When confronted with an invisible dermatosis, the dermatohistopathologist should
 consider the following possible disordlers and techmiques for detecting them: dermatophy-
sd   jo p sin ( r  r s  si
cluding lentigo and vitiligo; amorphous deposits in the superficial derrnis (Congo red stain
for amyloid deposits); urticaria; urticaria pigmentosa (toluidine blue stain for 1mast cells);
 connective tissue disorder (cutaneous asthenia); and various nevi.
Conclusion
 A skin biopsy can be diagnostic, confirmatory, and helpful, or it can be inconclusive,
depending on the dermatosis; the selection, handling, and processing of the specimen; and
the skill of the histopathologist.
The dermatopathologist has no right to make a dliagnosis of nonspecific dermatitis or
 inflarmation. Every biopsy specimen is a sample of some specific process, but the visible
chauges may be noncharacteristic and may not permit a diagnosis.
The clinician should never accept the terins "nonspecific changes" and "nonspecific
dermatitis." Many pathologic entities that are now well recognized were once regarded as
nonspecific. Recourse to serial sections (the key pathologic changes may be focal), spccial
stains, second opinious, and further hiopsies may be necessary.
202 · Diagnostic Methods
FIGURE 2-I3I. Fibrosing dermatitis. Der-
mal fibrosis aftcr follicular rupture in a dog
with staphylococcalfurunculosis.Note Or-
 phaned sebaceous gland and pigmcntary incon-
tinence (orrotv).
 A recent study in human dlermatopathology assessed the utility of deeper sections and
special stains.28 Deeper sections provided diagnostic information in 37% of the cases in
which they wcre ordcrcd. Speciaf stains contributed to the diagnosis in 2l% of the cases
for which thcy were ordered.
● SPecIAL PRocEdUreS
 In the past decade, a number of techniques have been developed for studying biopsy
specimens. These techniques were usually advanced to allow the identification of special
cell types. Examples of such procedures include immunofluorescence testing, electron 
microscopy, enzyme histochemistry, and immunocytochemistry.
 Immunofluorescence testing is not routinely done in veterinary medicine (see Chap.
9).1
 Biopsy specimens for immunofuorescence testing must be carefully selected and
either snap frozen or placed in Michel's fixative. Electron microscopy is best performed
-osy aazug p e u pxy (r u  z o 1) sds rs 
chemistry is pcrformed on frozen sections or on tissues fixed in 2% paraformaldehyde,
 dehydrated in acetone, and embedded in glycol methacrylate (Table 2-11). Immunocyto-
chemistry may be performed on formalin-fixed, routinely processed tissues (e.g., inmuno-
Diagnostic Methods ·203
B
FlGURE 2-I32. Panniculitis. A, Lobular panniculitis in a cat
with idiopathic slerile panniculitis. B, Septal pannieulitis inl a cat
wilh idiopathic sterilc pannieulitis.
FIGURE 2- 133. Atrophic dermatosis in a dog with hyposomatotropisrm
204 · Diagnostic Methods
● Table 2-11
ExaMPles or MarkeRs for the
IdentificatIon Of cEll types 
MARKER
............
CELL TYPE
 Enzyme Histochemical
α-Naphthyl acetate esterase
Monocyte, histiocyte, Langerhans' cell, plasma cell
Chloroacetate esterase
 Neutrophil, mast cell
Acid phosphatase
Monocyte, histiocyte, plasma cell
Alkaline phosphatase
 Neutrophil, endothelial cell
β-Glucuronidase
Histiocyte, T lymphocyte, plasma cell
Adcnosine triphosphatase
Histiocyte, plasma cell, B lymphocyte, endothelial cell
5'-Nucleotidase
Endothelial cell
Nonspecife esterase
Monocyte, histiocyte, Langerhans' cell
Lysozyme
Monocyte, histiocyte
α-Antitrypsin
Monocyte, histiocyte, mast cell
Chymase
Mast cell
Tryptase
Mast cell
Dipeptidyl pepticdase II
Mast cell
Immunohistochemical
Cytokeratin
Squamous and glandular epithelium, Merkel's cell
Vimentin
Fibroblast, Schwann cell, eudothelial cll, myoepithelia cell, lipocyte,
smoothsltalslastellamcela
lynphocyte, uonocyte, histiocyte, Langerhans' cel
Desmin
Skeletal muscle, snooth muscle
Neurofilament
Axon cell bodies, dendrites
 S1.00 protein
 Melanocyte, Schwann cell, myoepithelial cell, sweat gland acini and ducts,
lipocyte, macrophage
Myoglobin
Skeletal muscle
 Factor VInl-related anti-
Endothelial cell
geln
Peanut agglutinin
Histiocyte
Myelin basic protein
Schwann cell
Neuron-specific enolase
Schwaun cell, Merkel's cell 
Collagen IV
Bascnent membrane
Laminin
 Basement membrane
CDla
Langerhans' cell, dendritic cells
CD1b
Dendritic cells
CDlc
Dendnitic cells
CD3
T lynphocytes
CD4
1lelper T lymphocytes, dendritic cell, neutrophils
CD8
Cytotoxic T lyinphocytes
CD1la
All leukocytes
CD11b
 Monocytes, granulocytes
CD1le
Monocytes, macrophages, granulocytes, dendritic cells
CD18
All leukocytes
CD21
Blymphocytes
CD31
Endothelial cell
CD44
Lymphocytcs, monocytes, granulocytes
CD45
All leukocytes
CD49
T lyuphocytes, romocytes, granulocytes
CD54
ICAM-1
CD79
B lymphocytes
peroxidase methods) or on frozen sections (e.g., lymphocyte markers), depending on the
substance being studied (see Table 2--11).
having an impact on many different aspects of medicine.s In the realm of infectious
 agents, these nucleic acid probes aro enhancing diagnostic capabilities, avoiding the need
of culturing infectious agents for the purpose of diagnosis, allowing earlier detection of
infection, and permitting the detection of latent infections.
Diagnostic Methods · 205
FIGURE 2-I34. Mixed reaction
in a dog with atopy and secondary
staphylococcaldermatitis. IHyper-
plastie, superficial,  lymphocytic
perivascular dermatitis on the left
(atopy) and intraepidermal neutro-
philic pustular dermatitis on the
right (staphylococcal infection).
● REFERENCES
General
12. Columbo S: Quantitative evaluation of cutaneous bac-
1. Alhaidari Z: Les lesions elementaires dermatologiques.
teria in normal dlogs and dogs with pyoderma by cyto-
Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 23:101, 1988.
logical evaluation. Doctoral Thesis, Faculty of Veteri-
 2. Griffin CEG: Unpublished observations.
nary Medicine, Milan, Italy, 1997.
3. Scott DW: Examination of the integumentary system.
Biopsy and Dermatopathologic Examination; The Vo-
Vet Clin North Am Simall Anim Pract 1l:499, 1981.
cabuiary of Dermatohistopathology
4. Shearer D: Laboratory diagnosis of skin discasc. In
Pract 13:149, 1991.
13. Andreoletti O, et al: Identification de Tapoptosce cnta-
4a. Bevier DE: The reaction of feline skin to the intra-
née chez le chien et le chat par méthode TUNEL:
 dermal injection of allergenic extracts and passive cuta-
Etude preliminaire sur coupes histologiques apres in-
neous anaphylaxis using serum from skin test positive
clusion en paralline. Rev Med Vet 148:78l, 1997.
cats. In: Von Tscharner C, Flalliwell RFw (eds): Ad.
14. Bagladi MS, et al: Sebaceous gland 1nelanosis in dogs
vances in Veterinary Dermatology. Vol. 1. Bailliere
with endocrine skin disease or follicular dysplasia: A
Tindall, Philadelphia, 1990, p 126.
retrospective study. Vet Dermatol 7:85, 1996.
15. Beningo KE, et al: Subepidermal linear alignment of
Age
mast cells in inllammatory dermatoses of the dog. Vet
 5. Bourdcau P: Dermatologic du jeune carnivore. Point
Dermatol 11: 13, 2000.
Vet 21:439, 1989.
16. Boiron G, et al: Phagocytosis of erythrocytes by hunan
6. Bourdcan P: Elements de dernatologie du chien et du 
and animal epidermis. Deruatologica 165:158, 1982.
 chat vieillessants. Point Vet 22:255, 1990.
16a. Brignac MM, et al: Microscopy of color mutant alo-
7. Foil CS: The skin. In: Hoskins JD (cd): Vcterinary
pecia. Proc Am Acad Vet Domatol Am Coll Vet Der.
matol 4:14, 1988.
359.
16h, Brown WM. Stcnn KS: Homeobox genes and the
8. Haliwell REw: Skin diseases of old dogs and cats. Vet
patterning of skin diseases. J Cutan Pathol 20:289,
Rec 126:389, 1990.
1993.
Sa. Jaworsky C: The molecular diagnosis (of infection. ]
Cutan Pathol 20:508, 1993.
17. Brownstein MH, Rabinowitz AD: The invisible derma-
toses. J Am Acad 1Dermatol 8:579, 1983.
Breed
18. Cayatte SM, el al: Perifollicular melanosis in the dog.
 9. Ihrke PJ, Franti CE: Breed as a risk factor associated
Vet Dermatol 3:165, 1992.
with skin diseases in dogs scen in northern Califormia.
18a. Doubleday Dw: Who is Nikolsky and what does his
Calif Vet 39:13, 1985.
sign mean. J Am Acad Dermatol 16:1054, 1987.
10. Scott Dw, Parardis M: A survey of canine and feline
19. Dunstan RW: A user's guide to veterinary surgical pa-
skin dlisorders seen in a university practice: Sinal Ani-
thology lahoratories or, why do I still get a diagnosis of
mal Clinic, University ol Montreal, Saint-Hyacinthe,
chronic dermatitis even when I take a perfect biopsy?
Vet Clin North Ain Sinall Anin Pract 20:1397, 1990.
Quebec (1987-1988). Can Vet J 31:830, 1990.
20. Dunstan RW: A pathomechanistic approach to diseases
Cytologic Examination
of the hair follicle. Br Vet Dennatol Study Grp 17:37.
11. Penan V, et al: Cytology of the Dog and Cat. Ameri-
1995.
can Animal Hospital Association, South Bend, IN,
21. Fairley RA: Collagenolysis: *lt ain't easy being pink."
1979.
Vet Pathol 28:96, 1991.
 206 · Diagnostic Methods
22. Fermandez. CJ, et al: Staining abnormalities of dermal
38. Scott DW: Lymphoid nodules in skin biopsies from
dogs, cats, and horses with non-neoplastic denmatoses.
dermatoses of horses and cats as demonstrated with
Cornell Vet 79:267, 1989.
Masson's trichome stain. Vet Dermatol 1l:43, 2000.
39. Scott IDW: Excessive trichilemumal keratinization (fame
follicles)in endocrine skin disorders of the dog. Vct
What's old, what's new, what's borrowed, what's use-
Dermatol 1:37, 1990.
ful. Semin Vet Med Surg Small Anim 2:162, 1987.
40. Scott Dw: Epidermal masl cells in the cat. Vet Der-
24. Gross TL, et al: Veterinary Dermatopathology. A Mac-
matol 1:65, 1990.
roscopic and Microscopic Evaluation of Canine and
41. Scott DW: Bacteria and 
yeast on the surface aund
Feline Skin Disease. Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis,
1992.
dogs with non-neoplastic dermatoses. Cornell Vet 82:
25. Gross TL, et al: An anatomical classification of follicu
371,1992.
litis. Vet Dermatol 8:147, 1997.
42. Scott DW: Bacteria and yeast on the surface and
 26. Henfrey Jl, et al A conparison of three local anaes-
within nom-inflamed bhair follicles of skin biopsies from
thetic techniques for skin biopsy in dogs. Vet Dermatol
cats with non-neoplastic dcrmatoses. Cormell Vet 82:
2:21, 1991.
379,1992.
26a. Jang SS, Biberstein EL: Laboratory diagnosis of fun-
43. Scott DW; Analyse du type de reaction histopatholo-
gal and algal infections. In: Greene CE (ed): Infectious
gique dans le diagnostie des dernatoses infammatoires
Diseases of the Dog and Cat. W.B. Saunders Co, Phil-
chez le chat: Etude portant sur 394 cas. Point Vet 26:
adlelphia, 1990, p 639.
57, 1994.
26h.Kennis RA: Quantitation and topographical analysis of
44. Scott DW: Suppurative inflammation of apocrine sweat
Malassezia orgarusms in normal canine skin. Proc Am
-onor y sop ap u (snmuaperpt aneunddns) spue
Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 9:23, 1993.
spective clinicopathological analysis of 100 cases. Vet
27. Lcidcr M, Rosenblum M: A Dictionary of Dermatolog-
Dermatol 6:75, 1995.
ical Words, Terns, and Phrases. McGraw-Hill Book
45. Scott DW: La dermatite interstitielle chez le chien et
Co, New York, 1968.
le chat: Ltude retrospective sur la signification de cette
28. Maingi CP, Helin KF: Utility of deeper sections and
 modalite de reaction histopathologique. Med Vet Que-
special stains for dermatopathology secimens. J Cutan
hec 26:16, 1996.
Pathol 25:171, 1998.
46. Scott DW: Les agregats de melanine dans lappareil
29. Majno G, Joris I: Apoptosis, oncosis, and necrosis. A11
pila-sebace: Signification en dermatohistopathologie du
ovcrview of cell death. Am J Pathol 146:3, 1995.
chat. Med Vet Quebec 28:38, 1998.
30. Mauldin EA, et al: Malassezia derimatitis in the dog: A
47. Scott DW: Eosinophils in the walls of large dermal
retrospective histopathological and inrnunopathological
study of 86 cases (1990- 1995). Vet Dermatol 8:191,
from cats with eosinophilic granuloma or cosinophilic
1997.
plaque. Vet Derinatol 10:77, 1999.
31. Mehregan AIl; Clear epidermal cells: An artifact. J
 48. Seaman W], Chang SH: Dermal perifollcular minerali-
Cutan Pathol 7:154, 1980.
zation of toy poodle hitches. Vet Pathol 21:122, 1984.
32. Parker WM, Yager JA: Trichophyton dennatophyto
49. Steffeu C:'Dyskeratosis and the dyskeratoses. Arn J
sis—-a disease easily confused with pemphigus erythe-
Dermatopathol 10:356, 1988.
matosus. Can Vet J 38:502, 1997.
50. Teifke JP, et al: Aussagekraft und Moglichkeiten der
 32a. Plant JD, et al: Factors associated with and preva-
histopahologischen  IDiagnostik  bei  tassespezifischen
lence of high Malassezia pachydermatis numbers on
Hauterkrankungen. Tierarztl Prax 26:247, 1998.
dog skin. J Am Vet Med Assoc 201:879, 1992.
51. Williams BJ, et al: Antimicrobial effects of lidocaine,
33. Haskin CA: Apoptosis and cutaneous biology. J Am
bicarbonate, and epinephrine. J Am Acad Dermatol 37:
Acad Dermatol 36:885, 1997.
662, 1997.
 34. Rothstcin E, ct al: A retrospective study of dysplastic
52. Wood C, et al: Eosinoplhilic infiltration with Hame fig-
ures. Au J Dermatopathol 8:186, 1988.
follicular dysplasia syndromes or endocrine skin dis-
ease. Vet Dermatol 9:235, 1998.
linitations. Can Vet J 29.969, 1988.
 35. Scott DW: Histopathologic findings in the endoerine
54. Yager JA、 Scott DW: The skin and appendages. In:
skin disorders of the dog. J Ain Anim Hosp Assoc 18:
Jubb KVP, et al (eds): Pathology of Domestie Animals
173, 1982.
IV, Vol. 1. Acadeinic Press, New York, 1993, p 531.
36. Seodt DW: Lichenoid reaction in the skin of dogs:
55.Yager JA, Wilcock BP: Color Atlas and Text of Surgical
Clinicopathologic correlations. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
Pathology of the Dog and Cat. Dermatopathology and
20:305, 1984.
Skin Turmors. Wolfe Publishing, London, 1994.
37. Scott DW, Anderson WI: Panniculitis in dogs and cats:
A retrospcctive analysis of 78 cases. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 24:551, 1988.
Dermatologic Therapy
● care of NorMal Skin And HaIrcoaT
The veterinarian is vitally conccrned with the health of the patient's skin and is often
consulted by clients regarding preventive care as well as optimal maintenance of the
 normal skin and haircoat. Most commonly, questions about the healthy pet's skin and hair
relate to nutrition, skin and coat supplements, ectoparasite control (see Chap. 6), bathing.
and shedding. Additionally, the veterinarian may be queried about optimal grooming.
Many veterinary practices offer medicated baths and dips as well as routine bathing.
Although the skin refects the animal's general health, many vigorous, healthy, normal
pets have unkempt haircoats —- mainly because of neglect or the client's lack of knowledge
regarding proper grooming. Kceping the haircoat free from mats and removing the
and secondary bacterial infection. Therefore, it is valuable for the veterinarian to be
 Because most veterinarians are not groomers, questions regarding grooming and
especiaily haircut styles are usually handlcd more appropriately by a qualified groomer.
Styles change, and variations in clipping can cnhancc or mask aspects of conformation that
affect the animal's appearance. These nuanccs of style are the province of owners, breed-
ers, handlers, and cormmercial grooming cstablishments. However, most clients expect
veterinarians to know about basic grooming and bathing. Much of the following dis-
cussion is presented as background for studcnts or information that can be transmitted to
clients.6, 148,172
Basic Nutrition and the Skin
Nutritional factors that infuence the skin are exceedingly complex (see Chap. 17). The
skin and haircoat utilize a rmajor part of the nutritional requirements of dogs and cats.
Modifications of nutrition, therefore, may have visible effects on the skin and haircoat.
Nutritional modifcations are utilized in two ways in relation to skin and haircoat. The
first is the basic diet and additional supplements given to normal or diseased animals that
are designed to produce a high-quality haircoat. The second is nutritional therapy or
treatment wherein diets and supplements are given for a specific disease or problem. In
many situations, these treatments entail high doses that most likely have metabolic or
pharmacologic effects other than just meeting nutritional requirements. In most cases
(other than those discussed in Chap. 17), the success of these treatments is probably not
related to nutritional deficiency. The most common ingredients of the diet that seem to
benefit the quality of the skin and haircoat are the protein level and fatty acids, with some
effect coming from the vitamins and minerals.
 The skin and hair are the organs that utilize the most protein from the diet. When
there is a deficiency of protein, the haircoat is one of the first organs affected (sce Chap.
17). However, protein deficiency is rare in domestic pets, particularly if a commercial food
is used. Some breeders recominend supplementing diets with extra protein sources, but
the need for this has not been well documented.
Aiaua paenuouoo e se aqena are pe lop ou jo ped quodun ue ai seg
207
208·DermatologicTherapy
source. If there is too little total fat (less than 5% of dry matter) or linoleic acid (less than
   s  si i nd ro s s  e (r  1
mended for many years as dietary supplcments to improve the sheen and luster of the
hair.1. 51 Fatty acids as therapeutic agents are discussed in Chapters 8 and 14. It is now
impossibic for the small animal clinician to practice without some knowledge of fatty
acids.
 Fatty acids are long carbon chains with a methyl group at one end. Polyunsaturated
fatty acids have multiple double bonds. The numeric forrmulas used to identify fatty acids
give the number of carbon atoms, followed by the number of double bonds, then the
location of the first double bond from the methyl group. Therefore, the formula for
linoleic acid (18:2N-6) means there are 18 carbons and 2 double bonds, with the first
 Occuring at the sixth carbon atom from the methyl end of the molecule.
The fatty acids thiat have the first double bond three carbon moleculcs away from thc
methyl group are the omega-3 (N-3) series. The omega-6 (N-6) series of polyunsaturated
fatty acids have the first double bond six carbons from the methyl group. These two
complete series of fatty acids cannot be synthesized by dogs and cats, and therefore the
   e        e  
cutaneous homeostasis are linoleic acid (18:2N-6) and linolenic acid (18:3N-3) in the dog.
In thc cat, arachidonic acid (20:4N-6) is also an essential fatty acid. Dihomo-gamma-
linolenic acid (DGLA) (20:3N-6) and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) (20:5N-3) can be
synthesized in the animal from linoleic acid and linolenic acid, respectively.
The synthesis of fatty acids involves the action of various desaturase enzymes, which
insert double bonds into the chain. Other enzymes called elongases add additional carbon
molecules to the existing chain. The presence of these specific enzymes varies in differcnt
 groups or species of animals and may differ among individuals with certain diseases.
The best example of this is A-6-desaturase deficiency in atopic humans. Also, the skin
is deficient in desaturase enzymes. Therefore, when linoleic acid, r-linolenic acid (18:3N-
6), or DGLA accumulates locally, it cannot be metabolized to arachidonic acid locally.
competitive inhibition, in addition to the effects of their metabolic byproducts, is thought
 m    n  e n  a  
involvos modification of leukotriene and prostaglandin synthesis and activity. Fatty acids
are also important for other reasons, however.
 Fatty acids arc valuable components of cell membranes but also have an extracelular
function in the skin. They are responsible for the luster of the normal haircoat and the
smoothness of the skin. Linoleic acid is particularly important becanse only it supplies the
proper conditions for the water permeability functions of the intercellular lipid bilayer of
the skin (sce Chap. 1).
Metabolic byproducts are irmportant in promoting or inhibiting infam mation. This is
especially true of arachidonic acid metabolites. Arachidonic acid is stored in cells in an
unavailable form until it is released by the action of phospholipase Ag. Arachidonic acid
  d   r     ar s
reactions (mast cells, neutrophils, eosinophils, lymphocytes, rmonocytes, macrophages, kera-
tinocytes, and vascular endothelial cells).
The effects of prostaglandins on the skin include alteration of vascular permeability,
potentiation of vasoactive substances such as histamine, modulation of lymphocyte func-
other. The effects of leukotrienes on the skin are to alter vascular permeability, activate
neutrophils, modify lymphocyte function, and cause potent neutrophil and eosinophil
chemotaxis.5o Manipulation of fatty acid metabolisrm by using the shared enzyme system to
competitively inhibit forination of some of these substances seems possible.
It was shaown that dogs with seborrhea sicca have abnormally low cutaneous lcvels of
linoleic acid.27 Additionally, thiese dogs have increased levels of cutaneous oleic acid. Oleic
acid is thought to be substituted in phospholipid membranes when there is a relative
deficiency of linoleic acid. However, serum linoleic levels in the seborrheic dogs were
Dermatologic Therapy · 209
normal and thie dogs were not receiving a diet deficient in essential fatty acids. Despite
normal serum levels, treatment with oral sunflower oil reversed the cutaneous abnormali-
ties. Sunfower oil, which is 78% linoleic acid, was added to the diet at 1.5 m/kg/day.27
Saffower oil is also a good source of linoleic acid and has been recommended at 0.5 ml/
kg/day.211
 Another interesting study showed that seborrheic dogs have abnormal transepidermal
water loss, and this may be corrected by topical application of linoleic acid.26 The sugges-
tion that topical application nay be more effective than oral administration was raised.
Studies to determine the most efficacious, cost-effective, and client-acceptable way to treat
dogs with dry skin deficient in linoleic acid are awaited. The dose used in the study of
topical application would have made dogs too greasy for most clients.
Now that the value of linoleic acid in the diet is well established for seborrhcic dogs,
it is important that clinicians counsel clients accordingly. Besides the possibility of adding
linoleic acid sources to the diet, the proper handling of dog food should also be consid-
ered. Overcooking foods may decrease the levels of linoleic acid. Allowing rancidity to
occur by improper or prolonged storage or inadequate levels of antioxidants is another
consideration.
 In general, dry foods should be kept at room temperature, out of direct light, and in
non-lipid-perrmeable or nonabsorbing containers. Dry foods should not be stored open
for longer than I month. To ensure adequate levels of linoleic acid, suppiementation with
5 ml (l tsp) of sunfower or saffower oil per 240 ml (8 oz) dry dog food should be
sufficient. This may not be effective in cases of maldigestion, malabsorption, or abnormal
fatty acid metabolism. Interestingly, it has also been shown that age and breed differences
in fatty acid metabolism may also effect the response to any diet.192
 Somc of the prernium dog food cormpanies have recognized the value of these fatty
acids and now incorporate them in the diets. Besides their effect on the rmanagement of
 r r     n rs    a sip re  sd
haircoat. The optimal ratio of N6 to N3 fatty acids to minimize production of the
inflammatory mediator LTB4 has been found to be between 5:1 and 10:1.19s This level
also appears to improve coat quality and yields a much higher total intake of N-3 fatty
acids than is usually achieved by supplements.
 Fatty acid supplementation is generally thought to be relatively benign. Caution is
warranted, however. Aggravation of pancreatitis has been described,6 and cutaneous
xanthomas developed in cats fed excessive fat.2o1 Obesity is another problem encountered
with higher fat diets and fatty acid supplementation. Diarhea is infrequent., There had
been soine concern about platelet abnormalities and bleeding disorders with diets high in
 omega-3 fatty acids, but this has not been supported by current research.19
Many owners inquire about vitamin and mineral supplements. It appears that most
commercial foods have adequate levels. Vitamins A, C, and E have all been recommended
to treat a nurnber of diseases, but these vitamins have not been shown to improve
haircoat quality in normal animals. The National Research Council has published guide.
lines for maintenance, which all the commercial foods meet. Litle is known about what
level is required for optimal skin and hair quality. This has led to many anecdotal claims
and products on the market. Mineral therapy is also often recommended to clients. Sulfur,
 once believed to be an effective Hea repellent, was shown not to be efficacious.17s
 Many of the newer supplements contain novel sources for the vitarmins, minerals, and
other micronutrients that may irnprove skin and haircoats. With other organ systems, we
learned the value of some of these supplements, such as glucosamine and chondroitin
sulfatc for joints and fiber and fermentable fiber for gastrointestinal disease and diabetes
mellitus. Othcrs, such as the claim that sulfur is a fea repellent, are not true. Some of the
supplements contain a variety of phytonutricnts that may be beneficial for overall health,
not just the skin and haircoat. There is some evidence that some of these supplements
may promote improved immune responses and protect against ultraviolet radiation and
skin cancer,3 123 Phytonutrients and antioxidant ingredients now being recommended for
skin and haircoat include grape seed extract and B-carotene. We need to keep an open
mind about supplements for skin disease and investigate these newer claims. The authors
210 · Dermatologic Therapy
look forward to the day when we can make accurate statements regarding many of these
newer supplements.
Routine Grooming Care
Dog and cat breeds have many different coat types, so generalization about groorming
details is difficult.16. 172 A few important principles can be emphasized—the most critical
day  ans  p si r jo s e ua ao go rn n 
minutes grooming regularly than many hours sporadically.
Excessive shedding of hair into the house environment is greatly decreased by routine
grooming. Products have been marketed that claim to reduce shedding. Substantiation of
these claims appears to relate more to the instructions for use than to thc active ingredi-
ents. Recommended use of these products involves extensive brushing before and after
each weekly bath. Properly performed brushing, 15 to 30 minutes weekly, greatly de-
creases the amount of hair shed into the environment, regardless of which shampoo is
used.
Because the client must be motivated to perform grooming regularly, making it easy
is important. If proper facilities, effective tools, and a cooperativc paticnt are combined,
the task of grooming becomes tolerable or even enjoyable. A solid, convcnicnt tablc with a
nonskid surface and a groorning post with a ncck or body sling are helpful. Groorning is
facilitated if perforrmed in a quiet area without distractions. A grooming stand with a chair
is helpful but not necessary.
 The proper grooming tools should be clean and in good repair. Comb, brush, claw
clipper and fle, towels, cotton balls, and cotton-tipped swabs (Q-Tips) are the vital
inplements needed for most breeds. Shampoo, hair-conditioning rinses, car-clcaning solu-
tion, and fea dips are also necessary. Specialized tools (discussed later) are essential for
grooming and conditioning some coats.
Thc animal and its training can greatly affect the ease of groorming. Regular habits of
 good behavior during grooming. estabished early in life, result in cooperation. Most
   a   a a d  
If timc and expense are likely to be obstacles, one should not choose a pet from a
 longhaired, wiry, or woolly coated breed, but instead select a short-coated animal that is
easy to groom. An owmer should perform simple daily or weekly grooming chores but
should periodically take advamtage of a professional grooming service. The grooming needs
of five typical coat types are discussed later.
Cleaning the Skin
The normal skin surface film contains excretory products of skin glands and keratinocytes,
these, together with altered or abnormal fatty acids, serum, red blood cells, proteinaceous
exudates, degenerating inflammatory cells, and the byproducts of their degradation as well
d o s e jo  s   pg a   s
health, the skin and coat should be groomed to minimize these accumulations. If proper
skin and coat care is neglected, skin irritation may result or accumulations of debris may
adversely affect a skin disease that is already present.
PREPARATION FOR BATHING
clipped or fled to keep them short. With frequent filing, the quick recedes and the claw
can be maintained properly. Also, one should check between the toes for foreign objects
and remove hair under the foot between the pads. Care should be exercised when using
scissors hetween pads. Clippers are safer because they are less apt to produce lacerations.
Dernatologic Therapy · 21I
If the dog's coat is unkempt and severely matted, the tags and mats should be cut out
before they are wet; otherwise, the mats becoine set and are more difficult to remove.
 The anal sacs should be palpated and expressed, if necessary, before bathing so any
soilage can be removed during the bath. One should place cotton over the anus and, with
the thumb on one side of the anus and the fingers on the other side, press forward and
together to express the sacs. A more complete expresson of sac contents can be per-
s ons  sa o i  o   e   
The cars should also rcccive attention and care before the animal is bathed. The ears
are carefully examined as well as cleaned and dried thoroughly, if necessary (see Chap.
19). Some terriers and poodles may have large amounts of hair growing in the ear canals,
Excessive hair should bc plucked from the external ear canal in dogs prone to ear
process of plucking may cause irritation in normal ears and should be used only when it is
deemed necessary on the basis of the history and cxamination of the ear canal. Antibacte-
rial and anti-inflammatory medication should be instilled in the ear canal after the pluck-
ing is complete and the canal is clean and dry. Pledgets of cotton may be placed firmly in
each ear before bathing to block the entrance of soap and water. After the bath, 'the
cotton is removed or, if none was applied, a drying agent is put into thc ear canal.
In the past, it has been recommended to apply ointments or oils to eyes as a
protection against inadvertent entry of irritants. This should not be done because the oil
vehicle makes rinsing an irritant from the eye more difficult. This is especially true of
an oil or an ointiment. Nothing should be applied to the eyes, and if an irritant (e.g., dip
sm ysg y pasuu aq  pnus i a a sraua (deos pu
HAIR CARE PRODUCTS
● Shampoos. Shampoos should remove external dirt, grime, and sebum and leave
the hair soft, shiny, and easy to comb. To accomplish this, they should lather well, rinse
freely, and leave no residue. Optimally, they would remove soil rather than natural oils,
but the natural oils are removed to varying degrees. For some animals, this may require
the use of oil or conditioning rinses. Some shampoos still have a soap base, but most
shampoos are surfactants or detergents with a variety of additives that function as thicken-
ers, conditioners, lime soap dispersants, protein hydrolysates, and perfumes. Dozens of
products are on the market.
Many clients are familiar with pH-balanced shampoos for human use. The same
promotion of pH adjusting for canine shainpoos has been recommended. The canine skin
is approxinately neutral with a pH of 7 to 7.4, which is different from that of human skin.
Therefore, human pH-adjusted shampoos are not optimal for canine use. Theoretically
pH products temporarily affect the electrostatic charges in the surface lipid bilayer and
could alter the normal barrier effect. However, the clinical relevance or the documenta-
tion of alterations in barrier function related to the pH of a shampoo is lacking in
veterinary medicine.
 Soap shampoos work well in soft water. In hard water, they leave a dulling filn of
calcium and magnesium soap on the hair unless special lime-dispersing agents are added
to bind calcium, magnesium, and heavy metal ions.
Dctergent sharmpoos are synthetic surfactants or emulsifying agents, usually salts of
lauryl sulfate. Sodiuin lauryl ether sulfate (sodiuin laureth sulfate) is less irritating than
sodium lauryl sulfate. If dogs or cats seem to be irritated by most shampoos, trying a
shampoo with sodium laureth sulfate may prove worthwhile. Such sharmpoos do not react
esp su deos r s u ys q o pu a nq 'rm pr m
is partially overcome by various additives.
 Satisfactory detergents to use as shampoos for normal coats tend to dry the coat and
contain few additives to counter the detergent effect. Conditioners should be used after
detergents. Glycol, glycerol esters, lanolin derivatives, oils, and fatty alcohols are consid.
ered superfattening or emollient additives that prevent the cormplete removal of natural
212 · Dermatologic Therapy
 oils or tend to replace them. They also give the hair more luster and, as lubricants, make
it casier to comb.
· Conditioners. Hair conditioners have four main purposes: (1) to reduce static
electricity so that coarse hair does not snarl or becorie fyaway, (2) to give body to limp
or thin hair, (3) to supply fatty acids or oil to coat the hair and skin, and (4) to deliver
medication to the skin and hair surface in a vehicle that will not be completely rinsed
away or renmoved. Normal hair maintains relativc clcctric neutrality with a slight negative
charge. However, if clean, dry hair is in a low-humidity environment or is brushed
excessively, it picks up increased negative electric charges. Adjacent hairs that are similarly
 charged repel one another and produce the condlition known as fyaway.
Conditioners or cream rinses are cationic (positively charged) surfactants or ampho-
 e  e  r   s   s 
component that adds a filn to provide luster. Thus, these products make hair lie fat and
 s as   r a a d pu p  aq a q
Protein conditioners, or body builders, contain oil and protein hydrolysates. Oils add
slight advantage in hair with a dried, cracked, outer cuticle layer, but the effect is actually
minimal. Only a thin flm is added, so hair is not strengthened. If the protein is added to
a shampoo rathcr than used separately, most of it is washed away during rinsing, further
reducing the effect.
● Oil Rinses. Oil rinses are used after a bath to replenish and restore the natural
oils removcd by the shampooing. These products are emollients that add luster and
improvc thc combability of the haircoat. They may decrease dry Haky skin and dry flakes
within the haircoat. Oil rinses are primarily oils that require dilution or they will leave the
 directly on the haircoat. The cssential fatty acids are often incorporated into these prod-
ucts and are absorbed percutaneously.
BATHING
The dog is placed in a raised tub and is wet completely with warm water. A shower spray
 hose makes bathing easier and rinsing inuch faster. A bland nonmedicated, moisturizing.
o on pe si oos a siop is o pasn s pmus oods od o
neck and topline of the dog. More water is added, and a vigorous lather is worked up.
 Sorme owners apply excessive amounts of shampoo when the product is applied right from
the bottle. This is wasteful and can lead to skin irritation because it is difficult to rinse the
heavy concentration of shampoo. Predilution of the shaimpoo in 5 to 10 parts of water can
help to eliminate this problem.
The lather should be rubbed into short-hairod dogs but squeezed into long coats
because rubbing may mat the long hair excessively. One can work a small rubber brush
back and forth through the coat to clean the skin and remove any foreign materials from
the hair. In some short-coated breeds, especially Doberman pinschers and Dalmatians,
washing against the normal hair growth may induce postbathing folliculitis.
The dog's face should be washed and rinsed carefully. Gently placing a finger over
 a as no  p r sq p ps saa a sday sa a
entering the eyes. A washcloth is also useful to control lather and keep soap from the
dog's eyes.
The entire coat is rinsed thoroughly. A second lather and rinse may be needed to
wash the dog until the water runs off clear. Thorough rinsing is essential. If the outer coat
is rinsed but soap is left close to the skin, irritation results. This is most common in areas
that tend to be overlooked or difficult to rinse, such as heavily feathered caudal thighs and
 axillary, groin, periscrotal, ventral tail, and interdigital areas. The haircoat should be rinscd
until clear, detergent-free water rims off.
 ln general, except when short-coated breeds are washed or unless medicated sham-
Dermatologic Therapy ·213
 poos necessitating longer contact times arc used, the rinsing takes longer than the clean-
rinses are not recommended, cxcept for special problerns. However, a small amount of
dog or cat coat conditioner or oil can be added to water for the last rinse and adds gloss
to the coat. Flea dips also are necessary in some cases and usually can be mixcd with the.
conditioner.
 The coat should be squeezed to eliminate water and the dog wrapped in a towel and
lifted frorn the tub to a table. All animals should be protected from chilling and hypother-
mia during a bath and for several hours alterward, until thoroughly dry. Short-coated dogs
can be toweled almost dry and then lightly brushed and kept confined or calm until dry.
 Dogs with medium-length and long coats may be blotted with towels until only damp
and then brushed. Alternatively, they may be placed in a stream of warm air and the coat
can be combed, brushed, and Hluffed as needed to accomplish the desired effect.
The frcquency of a grooming routine depends on the breed and the individual
aninal's nceds. In normal dogs not geting dirty, the bathing may be as infrcquent as
 nu o o oqu s  ro p eu o rd so sq m n
require rmuch more frequent bathing, as often as weekly. If normal dogs are bathed
frequently, once monthly or more frequently, conditioners or oil rinses are advisable. The
frequency of bathing needed in dogs with skin discase is generally much greater than with
normal dogs.
 Dry baths are somctimes used to avoid the drying infuence of water baths, especially
arc dustcd into the coat and then thoroughly brushed out. With careful application, the
coat is left relatively clean and lustrous. However, dry baths are good for only a quick
cosmetic clean-up. Powder cleaners are actually inefficient: They dry the coat and increase
its static electricity. They should not be used for routine cleaning because thcy do not
replace bathing. Shampoo and water baths are still the most effective way to clcan thc.
coat thoroughly.
Special Grooming Problems
MATS
Mats can usually be tcascd apart and conbed out if they are small, Simall mats behind the
ears and under the legs can be cut off. Larger mats can be slit with a seissors, a knife, or
a rmat and taugle splitter and then teased apart with one or two teeth of a coinb. A mat
and tangle splitter slices mats so they can be removed more easily, leaving some hair, as
 compared with clippers, which remove all hair. Some badly neglected long-coated cats or
dogs may have an almost complete covering of felt matting. The only solution to some of
these unfortunate cases is general anesthcsia and complete, close clipping. Extrcmc carc is
nccessary to avoid cutting or irritating the skin. Sometimes, the teeth of a comb can be
Kaes aq ueo eu su s os pis e se saiss o us a pue u su uaq padd
scissored away.
TAR ORPAINT
Tar or paint embedded in the coat may be diffcult to reinove. Small deposits should be
allowed to hardcn and then cut off. Tar masscs can be soaked in vegetable oil or an
emollient oil with a surfactant for 24 hours (and bandaged if needcd) to soften the tar,
and then the entire rmass can be washed out with soap and water. Dawn (Procter &
Gamble) dish soap was found to be good for removing oil in the haircoat of otters
affected by an oil spill.so One should never use paint removers or organic solvents such as
kerosene, turpentine, and gasoline to remove tar or paint. They are irritating and toxic and
tmay produce severe caustic burns. Ether may be used carefully for small areas. Clipping
thc tar or paint-coatcd hair is often the simplest procedure if the cosmetic appearance is
not paramount.
 214· Dermatologic Therapy
GUM
 Gum may be more easily removed if first hardened by rubbing with ice and then stripped
 Or pulled out. l1s
ODORS
Odors about a coat usually originate from places such as the mouth, thc cars, the fect,
and the perineum. These areas should be checked and washed carefully. Most detcrgents
remove the typical odors that dogs pick up. In many cases, the odor is an indlication of
skin disease (often, superficial bacterial pyoderma or Malassezia dermatitis) that may not
be noted by the owner. In other cases, excessive lipid accumulation is present and
degreasing agents such as benzoyl peroxide and tar may be useful.
dilute chlorophyll solution or dlilutc sodium hypochlorite (in a white animal only). Highly
scented dressings and sprays arc objectionable to 1nany pcople and do not reliably rmask
odors. Rarely, dogs are prcsented for severe body odor that seems to emanate frorn their
entire bordy. Physical examination fails to reveal any visible abnormalities. Typically, thesc.
dogs' 1nalodor responds transiently (24 hours) to a variety of shampoos and rinses. We
have had the best results with long-term once-daily antibiotic therapy with lincomycin,
erythromycin, or cephalosporins. Somc dogs respond better with twice-wcckly vinegar-
water (equal parts of cach) rinscs, but the faint odor of vinegar disturbs some owmers. The
cause of this condition is unknown, and it is lifelong.
remedies have deseribed such methods as baths in soap and water followed by a rinse in a
dilute ammonia-water solution (5 to 10 ml ↓1 to 2 tspl of aimmonia in 1 L [1 qt] of water),
vinegar and water, tonato juice, and even toothpaste. We have seen all of these used with
some success, though time and multiple applications may be needed. A commercial
product, Skunk Odor Eliminator (The Branton Co., Dallas, Tx), has heen recommended,
though, again, multiple applications may be required.115
CLIPPING
Clipping is beneficial when topical treatment will be used. Clipping, perrnits thorough
cleaning, adcquate skin contact, and a more economical application of the desired medica-
ment. In many cases, complete removal of the coat may be preferred, but usualy,
clipping the local area suffices. This should be done neatly to avoid disfiguremcnt. If the
hair over the involved area is clipped closely (against the grain with a No. 40 clippcr)
while a border around this is clipped less closely (with the grain), thc regrowth of hair
Inore quickly blends the area into the normal coat pattern.
o s e o o ra a  p aq se prs 
is cspccially important when treating show animals or those with long coats, such as
Yorkshire terriers, Old English sheepdogs, and Afghan hounds. The corded breeds such as
 Pulis and Komontdors take years to regrow clipped cords; therefore, clipping should be
avoided unless absolutely necessary. All needless clipping should be avoided. During
clipping, a vacuum cleaner can be used to remove alf loosc hair and debris. Shanpo0
therapy may be an acceptable altermative to clhpping in some cases. It may remove surface
lipids and clean the skin and hair enough that topical dips arc able to be effectively
applied to the skin surface. In other cases, the desired active ingredients rmay be incorpo-
rated into the shampoo fonnulation.
Comments on Grooming Cats
 In general, the grooming implernents used for dogs serve adequately for cats.76. 146 How-
ever, special applications are outlined here. There is absolutely no substitute for routinc
daily grooming or for grooming every second or third day. Cats detest bathing and
Dermatologic Therapy · 215
dematting and can be most resentful of rough treatment. Even when cats are petted,
Many of them slip away afterward to rearrange their haircoat thoroughly by licking and
groorming thcmselves.
GROOMING NEEDS OF VARIOUS COAT TYPES
From the grooming standpoint, cats have three types of coats-the shorthaired, singlc
coat; the shorthaired, double coat; and the long coat.
The shorthaired, single coat is typified by Siamese, Burmese, Havana brown, Rex,
Korat, and domestic shorthaired cats. These cats can be bathed in shampoo and water.
quickly dried to avoid chilling, and brushed and combed against the coat to remove dead
hair. Final brushing follows the directior of natural hair growth. A finc mctal comb and
natural boar bristle brush are the only implements needed.
The shorthaired, double coat is typified by Abyssinian, Manx, Russian blue, and
guard hair gives the coat its color, and the densc, short undercoat provides warnth. Both
sets of hair are essential in these breeds. The basie coat care of this group is similar to
that used for single coats except that caution must be employed bccause overgrooming
can destroy the coat. Loss of the long guard hairs may give the coat a patchy or moth-
eaten appearance.
The longhaired coat is typifed by Persians and Ilimalayans. Several sizes of metal
combs and a boar bristle brush are necessary for grooming these breeds. Thc kittens
should be started with grooming at 4 wccks of age.
 Older kittens and adults can be bathed with mild shampoo and water. Thcy can be
placed on a slanted window screen in a tub. Cats fccl secure on the wire and stay put, yet
air blower. This Huffs the coat and gives it body. One should not bathe cats frequently
 and not within 2 weeks preceding a show. Cats alinost never require bathing.
Mats tend to forn behind the ears and under the chin, the legs, and the tail. The
skin under the mat becomes irritated. Mats can be prevented by daily combing and
brushing.
Some breeders dry-clean the coats with powder or talc sprinkled into the coat and
carefully brushed out with a motion up and away from the body. This is rarely a
satisfactory grooming method. If powder is left in the hair, it resembles unsightly dandruff
and is higbly objectionable.
The ruff or tail of a longhaired cat is never clipped. The eyes and nasal area should
be cleaned to renove exudates that may accumulate.
SPECIAL FELINE GROOMING PROBLEMS
 A cat's claws shouid be clipped only if necessary. They soon grow out again and are honed
sharply.
Cats' ears are much less prone to infection than are dogs' cars, but they should always
be checked and cleaned if needed. Young cats are especially predisposed to ear mite
infections.
 The large supracaudal organ on the dorsal surface of the tail is a mass of hyperactive
sebaceous glands that may cause trouble if neglected. Breeders call the problem stud tail,
although it occurs in both sexes. A waxy, unsightly accuunulation builds up in the area if
proper hygiene is neglected. The exudate can be removed by applying powder to soak it
up, by applying a thin oil to soften it, or by sponging the area with alcohol or detergents
as solvents. The oil can usually be brushcd or washed off with shampoos satisfactorily.
Periodic cleaning should prevent any future problem.
● CLIENT COMPLIANCE
The succcssfil treatment of skin disorders depcnds to a large cxtcnt on the client. In
addition to supplying the historical information needed for diagnosis, the client adminis-
216 · Dermatologic Therapy
ters most prescribed therapies. The successful management of many derrmatologic diseases
necessitatcs long-terrm or lifelong therapy, often involving more than one medicament.
The client must also give the mcdications correctly at the proper intervals and for thc
 proper duration.
 Many animals have been referred to us after the correct diagnosis was inade, appro-
priate treatment was recommended, but treatment failed because of improper execution
by the owner. Excellent diagnosticians often have poor results if they arc not able to
interact with clients effectively hecause this often leads to failure in compliance. These
failures may ocur for a variety of reasons. Understanding the possible reasons for poor
coinplianice, recognizing when treatment failures occur, and developing corrective mca-
sures is an art that the successful clinician develops.
The reasons for poor client compliance include the following:
1. Failure of the client to understand the importance of giving the treatment
 2. Lack of education of the client regarding the proper treatment 
 3. Improper frequency of or interval betwccn mcdication applications 
4.
 Faulty application, which can take multiple forrms (Table 3-1)
5. Inadequate duration of therapy
6. Client's lack of time or labor-intensive treatment
7.1
Disagreeable cosmetic appearance or odor of treatment
8. Perceived danger of treatment
 9. Premature discontinuation of treatment because of perceived lack of efficacy
10. Discontinuation of treatment because it was too difficult or not tolerated by
the pet
Many of these problems are avoidable if the clinician or the veterinary assistants ade-
quately explain the treatment plan.
 It is important to 1make the client aware of potential probleins, and these possible
difficulties should be discussed before clients leave the office. We encounter nuinerous
cascs wherein the clients have unuscd trcatiments at home. This is particularly true of Hea
products: Becausc the trcatment was too labor-intcnsive or thc treatment appeared inef-
fcctive, the client discontinued it,
The successful clinician trics to prevent these treatment failures. For example, if
clicnts do not or cannot dlip their cats, a fea collar, although normally considered less
effective than a properly applied dip. becomes relatively more eficacious. The best fea
dip ever invented never works sitting on a shelf. Some clients may not readily admit that a
treatment will le too difcult or unacceptable, and therefore alternatives may not he
offered.
Anothcr major factor influencing client conpliance is the use of multiple therapeutic
● Table: 3-1
ReaSoNS for ImpRoPer treatment
ApplicatiON
REASON
EXAMPLES
Incorrect dosage
Not giving the prescribed dose
lruproperly diluting topical products
Adding to food bowl, resulting in incomplete intake
Interactions with other substanecs
Giving drugs witha food that should be given on an enpty
stomach
Incorrect frequency
Giving TID drugs with breakfast lumch and dinner and not
closer to q8h
Improper duration
Not leaving shampoo on long eriough
Failure to apply the proper site
Dipping for scabies but not treating the cars and face
Application that docs not reach the skin
Faling to have dip penetrate the haireoat
sad par- paeoi u j a s non
 Failure to understand the application
Rinsing dips out of the haircoat
ineth1od
Dermatologic Therapy · 217
agents. Often, the best management of a dermatologic disease, particularly a chronic one,
is a therapeutic regimen or plan that entails the use of mnltiple products. This makes
education of thc client more difficult and time-consumning as well as potentially more
confusing. Despitc these problems, the best long-term control is often achieved by using
such a plan versus a single medicanent.
 Particularly with chronic skin problems, the cducation of the client regarding their
pet's discase becomes crtical. Over the life of thc pet, many different therapies may be
requircd and changes in the disease or secondary manifestations are likely. The client
nceds to be educated about the likely course of the disease as well as the need for follow-
up and therapeutic modifications. The importance of maintenance therapy must be em-
phasized.
● toPIcal TheraPY
Topical therapy has always played a large rolc in dermatology because of the obvious
o pasn sa ae eoi sd  u s i  st  s sns pe  o e
treating localized lesions and cctoparasite infestations. In the last 15 years, topical applica-
tions have becomc even more prominent and continue to fourish in treating skin disease.
Undoubtedly, this growth in topical therapy refects multiple factors, which may include
(1) thc development of more products, better delivery systems, and active ingredients, (2)
the reduction in systemic absorption or effects and adverse reactions, and (3) the recogni-
s s  j a a  se ss p anne  jo 
diseases. These factors are also the advantages that topical therapy offers to the clinician
and the pet owner.
There are disadvantages, however. In general, topical therapy is much more time-
consurming and labor-intcnsivc than systemic therapy. Understanding the proper use and
application of topical therapy is also irnportant, and therefore client education and client
compliance become harder to achieve. Localized adverse roactions not seen with systemic
therapy may occur, most commonly irritant reactions,
Topical therapy is often adjunctive, and it may significantly inerease the cost of the
overall therapeutic plan. Some topical agents may he so costly that their use is limited to
localized lesions. On the other hand, appropriatc topical therapy may greatly reduce the
need for systemic therapy. The clinician needs to consider the potential benefits and
disadvantages, the client's preferences, and the patient's needs when dcciding on the use
of topical therapy.
When a clinician elects to use topical therapy, several factors must bc considered.
 First and foremost is, What is the purpose or desired result of the topical therapy? Is this
the sole therapy, or is it adjunctive to other nontopical therapies? What type of delivery
system hest facilitates obtaining the desired result? What active ingredients are uscd for
Table 3-2 lists the most cornmon delivery systems and formulations of active ingredients
used in veterinary dermatology. The amount of use for each type of product relative to
the others is based solely on our opinions and clinical impressions.
Factors That Influence Drug Effects on the Skin
Topical medications consist of active ingredients incorporated in a vehicle that facilitates
application to the skin. In sclecting a vehicle, one must consider the solubility of the drug
in the vehicle, the rate of releasc from the vehicle, the ability of the vehiclc to hydrate
the stratum corneum, the stability of the active agent in the vehicle, and the interactions
(chemical and physical) anong the vchicle, the active agent, and the stratum corncum.
The vehicle is not always inert and many have important therapeutic effects.
When topical medications are used, one basic question is whether the drug penetrates
the skin and, if so, how deeply. Absorption varies highly, and most drugs penctrate only
1% to 2% after 16 to 24 hours.8. 54 However, cven in the same vehicle, similar drugs may
——-x双双
ANTIMYCOTIC ANTIPARASITIC
XXxX
y used: XXX = commonly used and effceacious
ANTIPRURITIC ANTIBACTERIAL
X
ANTISEBORRHEIC
EMOLLIENT
X
OOSSH
ASTRINGENT
oSn 10
一
 on conditioncrs
● Tahle 3-2
FORMULATIONS
aioo
eave
218
Dermatologic Therapy · 219
vary dramatically in thcir absorption.53 This was cxemplified in a study with three organo-
phosphate insccticides applied topically in three different vehicles.70 with only one or-
ganophosphate (parathion) of the three tested, the vehicle dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)
inereased absorption from 4% to 5% up to 15% to 30%. In some cases (c.g., insecticides).
the absorbability grcatly influences the potcntial for side effects.
 Clinical cfficacy and absorption are not synonymous: absorption is only one factor in
efficacy. Somc drugs in an insolublc form in the vehicle have only a surface effect. Once
absorbed, a drug must also interact with specific receptors before an action will result.
The drug's affinity for the receptors as wcll as local factors that effect this drug-rcceptor
interaction are also important.s Absorption of drugs through the skin involves many
variables. There are physicochemical factors related to the topical formulation and biologi
cal factors.? The physicochemical factors involve the interactions between the drug and
the vehicle, the drug and the skin, and the vehicle and the skin. Sorne of these factors are
 determined by the concentration of the drug, the drug's movcment between the vehicle
and the skin, the diffusion coefficient, and the local pH.
1. The concentration of the drug and its solubility in the vehicle affects absorption.
The package label gives the percentage of drug concentration, not the perccntage
of solubility. In addition to concentration, the solubility of the drug and the
 solubilizing capacity of the vehicle affect drug absorption. In general. poor solubil-
ity and excessive solubilizing capacity dccrcasc the rate of absorption.8 Usually,
ointment vehicles for topical corticostcroids increasc solubility and drug delivery, so
systemic effects after topical use are more common -— and potentially dangerous.
2. The drug must move from the vehicle through the skin barier to be effctive. The
solubility of thc drug in the horny layer relative to its solubility in the vehicle is
described by the partition coeffcient. The concentration of the drug in the barrier,
not in the vehicle, is what determines the diffusion force. Increased lipid solubility
3. The diffusion coeffcient is a measure of the extent to which the barrier interferes
with the drug's mobility. The stratum corncum is unsurpassed as an unfavorable
 environment for drug penetration. Physical disruption of the epidermal barrier by
the use of lipid solvcnts, keratolytic agents, or cllulosc-tape stripping of the top
layers of celis incrcascs the potential for absorption. In some cases, thc vchicle
itself may he able to diffuse through the stratum corneum and carries any dis-
solved drug with it. IDMSO facilitates cutaneous penetration of somc substances.
molecular size results in poor mobility and poor absorption.
4. The pH of the drug's local environment may also affect absorption by altering the
amount of drug in its unionized form. Many drugs arc cither weak acids or bascs
and occur in an ionized and unionized form. In general, the unionized form is
more readily absorbed; this amount may change as the local pH is altered.16
The active ingredient of the drug Inay interact with all other cornponents in the
formulation. In practice, the adrlition of other ingredients or the mixing of ingredients on
the skin such as ear cleanser followed by an ear treatment may alter the drug's effect.
Drug effects may be altered by interactions between the drug and the new drug or its
vehicle, or by interactions between the new drug or vehicle and the original vehicle.
tion, changes in pH, allowing decormposition of the drugs by altering the stabilizing effects
of the vchicle, and altering the concentration of the drug. We have seen cases in which
 1% miconazole lotion is mixed in equal amounts with another ear product and fails to
eliminatc Malassezia from an ear canal. The unaltered l% miconazole is then uscd alone
and is effeetivc.
 Temperature and hydration of the skin can affcct the interaction among the drug, the
vehicle, and the skin. Hydration probably plays a grcater role than temperature in affect-
ing absorption. In general, perneability to drugs increases as the hydration of the stratum
corneurn increases.s.9
 220 · Dermatologic Therapy
 Biological factors also affect drug absorption. The body region treated greatly infu-
ences absorption. In humans, the amount of hydrocortisone being absorbed varicd tre-
mendously, jin descending order, on the scrotum, the forehcad, the forearm, and the
plantar foot.5t Age is an irmportant factor, with newlorns experiencing greater absorption
than adolescents, who experience grcatcr absorption than adults. Obviously, the health and
condition of the skin is important because infamed, abraded, or otherwise damaged skin
often absorbs more drug. Blood fow also affects absorption. Greater blood How favors
 increased systemic absorption.
Hydrotherapy
Water is often overlooked as a therapeutic agent, especially when it is applied with a
shampoo, as a rinse, or as a component of many lotions. Hydrotherapy may be used to
moisten the stratum corneum, to dry out the epicdermis, to cool or heat the skin, to softcn
surfacc crusts, and to clean the skin. Increased effects occur by adding other agents
(topical active agents, see p. 226).
Water may be applied as a wet dressing or in baths. Frequent periodic renewal of wet
dressings (15 minutes on, several hours off) prolongs the effect, but if more continuous
  n  s  a   s o o a
temperature rises, and undesirable maceration occurs. This is less likely if thc wet dress-
ings arc left open.
Hlydrotherapy can hydratc or dchydrate the skin, depending on how it is managed.
1 og rur un pue snu gr ro sssduo ozne dp so jo uone 
hour promote evaporation of water from the gauze and fron the subadjacent skin surface
and are drying to the underlying tissues. If water is maintained on the skin surface
constantly by wet towels, soaks, or baths, the skin hydrates as water is taken up by keratin
and hair. If a film of oil is applied immediately after soaking (occlusivc rinses), evaporation
 Of water (transpiration) is hindered and the skin retains moisture.
The water may be cool or above body temperature. Whirlpool baths, with or without
detergents and antiseptics added, make gentle, effective cleaning possible. These treat-
ments nay be used to remove crusts and scales, to clean wounds and fistulae, to rehy-
drate skin, to recduce pain and pruritus, and to provide prophylaxis for patients prone to
decubital problems, urine scalds, and other ill. Ten to 15 minutes of thcrapy oncc or
twice daily is adequate. The patients should be toweled and placed in an air stream drier
to dry. Other topical medications can be applied later, if needed.
In hydrotherapy, moisture is the specific agent, and various aditives change its
actions only slightly but add their own effects. Astringents, antipruritics, moisturizers,
parasiticides, and antibiotics are common additives. In general, water treatinent rermoves
erusts, bacteria, and other debris and greatly reduces the possibility of secondary infection.
 m p q p  jo ss a se p a sd 
antipruritic. It also softens keratin. The suppleness and softness of the skin are due to its
water content, not to the oils on thue surface:.172 Dryness of the skin is recognized when
any one of the following is present: roughness of the surface, scaliness, infexibility of the
horny layer, and fissuring with possible inflammation.
Normal skin is not a waterproof covering but is constantly losing water to the
environment by transpiration. This loss depends on body temperature, environmental
temperature, and relative humidity. The stratum corneum, composed of corneocytcs and
an intercellular matrix lipid bilayer, is the major deterrent to water loss. Thc lipids of this
 se s o a s si p srd   a 
migrate to the stratum cormeum and from sebum. Dry skin nay result from excessive
transpiration of water.
Sebum on the skin or extermally applied lipid filns tend to make the surface feel
smoother. The fexibility of keratin is directly related to its imoisture content. The amount
 of water that the hormy layer receives from the epidermis and the transepidermal loss are
corneum partially depends on the environment, especially the relative humidity. Water
Dermatologic Therapy · 221
content of the homy layer can be increased by applying occlusive dressings or agents to
prevent loss, by adding water with baths or wet dressings, or by using hygroscopic
medications to attract watcr.
Topical Formulations
Active medications may be applied to the skin by a variety of delivery systems. These
different delivery systerns include, but are not limited to, the following formulations:
shampoos; rinses; powders; lotions; sprays; creams, emulsions, and ointments; and gels.
 u   s p s sr  ro  
 consider when selecting a topical medication. Besides incorporating active ingredients,
each type of formulation contains ingredients that act as the vehicle for delivering the
effects, making the overall forrmulation more or lcss desirable.
 In general, vehicles contain ingredients to adjust the pH, stabilize the active agents,
 prolong the effects of the active ingredients, promote the delivery of the active agents to
the skin surface or into or through the stratum comeum, and make the product cosmeti-
  s e   f s  a  d a
variety of factors, most notably the surface area to be treated, the need for residual
activity, the presence of hair in the area to be treated, and the nature of the lesion (e.g..
moist or dry).
 Thc active ingredients are often available in a variety of different formulations and
 delivery systems. in general, they have the same basic activity regardless of the formula-
tion, but their ease of use, cost, and efficacy for the desired purpose are affected by the
formulation and the method of application. The following categories of activc agents are
used: astringents, or drying agents; enollients and moisturizers; antiseborrheics; antipruri-:
tics; antibacterials; antifungals; antiparasitics; anti-infammatory agents; and ultraviolet
sereens. The following discussion describes first the different delivery systems and then
the types of active ingredients.
SHAMPOOS
Medicated shampoos contain additional ingredients that enhance or add other actions to
that of the shampoo.21s With most shampoo formulations, thc active drugs have a limited
contact time because they arc removed during the rinsing of the shampoo base. Some
 medicaments may have enough opportunity for effect or for limited absorption during a
prolonged shampoo, and their addition may be justified (e.g., insecticides, salicylic acid,
sulfur, tar, and antiseptics). Medicated shampoos are valuable in that they may be used
for diseases involving large areas of the body or localized lesions.
Newer formulations of shampoos have been developed that utilize sustained-release
microvesicle technology. In one, the microvesicles have an outer lipid membrane and
contain water (Novasomes, EVSCO). The lipid membrane binds to hair and skin and has
a long-term moisturizing ceffect as the microvesicles break down (Fig. 3- lA and B). This
counteracts the drying that may occur with some medications and is therapeutic for dry
skin. However, the active medication is not incorporated and will still be rinsed away.
 The second microvesicle technology (Spherulites, Virbac) actually incorporates differ-
ent ingredients, such as salicylic acid and suifur, chlorhexidine, ethyl lactate, benzalkonium
chloride, oatmeal extract, glycerin, and urea, into multiple layers of these microvesicles.
Also, these microvesicles have multiple (10 to 1000) layers that slowly break down (Fig.
3-1C). With the breakdown of each layer, the active ingredients and the surfactants that
make up these layers are released onto the hair and skin. The microvesicles can be made
with different charges on the exterior, and by making them positively charged they bind
the microvesicles called spherulites. Besides supplying the outer cationic surface, chitosan-
ide is an active mnoisturizing agent and is hygroscopic.
Effcacy is determined by proper use as well as active ingredients. It is imperative
222·Dermatologic Therapy
FIGURE 3-I. A, Novasome attacled to canine hair shaft. B, Scanning electron micrograph of a novasorme showing the
Scanning clectron micrographs showing sphenulitcs atlached to hair shafts. (Figures courtesy EVsCO and Virbac.)
that products be applied properly, left on for suffcient contact time, and then properly
rinsed. Education of the client regarding their use is an important element and time well
spent. The client should be instructed to use a clock to determine the correct contact
time because subjective assessments are often inadequate. Contaet time starts after the
shampoo is applied, not when the bath begins. More severely affected regions should be
the first areas to be shampooed. Sometines, problem areas benefit frorn a second lather-
ing before the final rinse.
Pharmaceutical companies provide a multitude of medicated shampoos, which often
have specific indications and contraindications. It is important to become familiar with a
few (perhaps one of each type) and to thoroughly understand the ingredients and their
concentration and actions. Choosing the mildest or most client-pleasing shampoo that
 produces the desired actions often increases compliance. Strong shampoos can be harmful
as well as helpful.
The clinician must evaluate the whole animal when selecting active ingredients, and
some animals may benefit frorn the sinultaneous use of different products. Although one
shampoo may be recommended for the whole body, another shampoo may be applied to a
more localized region. The case of an Irish setter with icliopathic seborrhea with truncal
scaling, dry coat, and localized patches of comedones with pyoderma and alopecia on the
ventral chest is an example. A topical antiseborrheic containing sulfur and salicylic acid
may be preferred for most of the body but may not be potent enough for the ventral
Dermatologic Therapy · 223
region. A benzoyl peroxide shampoo may be used on just the ventral thorax because of its
superior antibacterial and folicular flushing effect.
 Certain principles should be kept in mind when using medicated shampoos:
1. Clipping the haircoat. Clipping the haircoat and keeping the haircoat short may be
critical fo the proper use and imaximal benefit of the product.
 2. Premedicated shampoo bathing. It is often a good idea to rernove grease, debris,
detergent. In this way, the medicated shampoo is better able to contact the skin,
 3. Contact time. The shampoo should be allowed to remain in contact with the skin
for 10 to 15 minutcs. This allows the active ingredients to be effective and allows
    s  s  s  jo   
time lathering is fnished and, for some owners, may be best measured with an
actual timer.
 4. Explanation/demonstration. It is important to explain, und perhaps demonstrate,
the entire process of shampooing. This incudes application and removal of the
product.
Medicated shampoos are often classified on the basis of their primary activity or
function,
1. Emollients and moisturizers are often present in hypoallergenic shampoos and
 Many better-quality cleansing shampoos for normal skin and haircoat. They are
      r a     sd  n
slightly dry or scaly haircoats. Ingredients that inoisturize are fatty acids and lipids,
urea, glycerin, colloidal oatmeal, and chitosanide.
 2. Antiparasitic shampoos are commonly used, but they are generally not as effica-
cious as antiparasitic rinses (see Chap. 6). Their main use is for quick reinoval of
feas in puppies, kittens, and debilitated animals. They are often ineffective for
adequate long-term fea control. The most coimnmon ingredients are pyrethrins and
 synthetic pyrethroids.
 3. Antiseborrheic shampoos usually contain salicylic acid, sulfur, tar, and selenium
 sulfide in various combinations and strengths. They are indicated in keratinization
defects (for details, see Chap. 14). They are also indicated in any other disorder
associated with excessive scaling of the skin.
4. Antibacterial shampoos contain disinfectants or antibiotics such as chlorhexidine,
benzoyl peroxide, iodine, ethyl lactate, bcnzalkonium chloride, triclosan, and sulfur.
Other ingredients with less effect include quaternary ammonium compounds and
 phenols (both not to be used in cats), alcohols, and parabens. These products are
indicated whenever there is superficial bacterial infection (sce Chap. 4 for discus-
sions of their specific use). A common indication for long-term use is in the
allergic dog that is still prone to recurrent folliculitis even though the pruritus is
controlled with the allcrgy therapy. In these situations, nonirritating, nondrying
shampoos with antibacterial agents are often beneficial if used regularly.
5. Antinycotic shampoos contain disinfectants or antifungal agents such as chlorhexi-
dine, sulfur, selenium sulfide, miconazolc, and ketoconazole (see Chap. 5). They
are used mainly as adjunctive therapy for dermatophytosis (to achieve a quick
decrease of contagion) and Malassezia dermatitis. They are not effective in treating
dermatophytosis.4 They have been recommended as_ sole therapy for Malassezia
dermatitis.o They may be used alone, as adjunctive therapy, or as a preventive to
decreasc the recurence rate. A product that combines two active ingredients (2%
chlorhexidine and 2% miconazolc) has been reported to have increased efficacy as
a sole therapy.111
6. Antipruritic or anti-infammatory agents, such as 1% hydrocortisone, 0.01% fuo-
cinolone, 2% diphenhydraminc, 1% pramoxine, colloidal oatmeal, and moisturizers,
are found in a variety of shampoo formulations (see Chap. 8). In general, they are
 224 · Dermatologic Therapy
adjunctive treatments and are not effective as the sole therapy unless they are used
 on e pou a si asn go a u s s a on I 
The topical fuocinolone shampoos have been shown not to be systemically ab-
sorbed in the dog. 10,Is1 Controlled studies of their efficacy are lacking.
RINSES
 Rinses are made by mixing concentrated solutions or soluble powders with water. They
are usually poured, sponged, or sprayed onto the animal's body. Similar to the case with
shampoos, they may be used to treat large areas of the body. Rinses are generally a cost-
effective and efficacious method to deliver topical active ingredients such as moisturizers,
antipruritic agents, parasiticides, and antifungal agents.
Rinses that dry on the pet's skin leave a residual layer of active ingredients and
therefore have more prolonged effects than application by shampoo therapy. Rinses are
often used after a medlicated or cleaning shampoo. If the active ingredient to bc applied is
lipid dispersed, shampooing may remove the normal surface lipids and decrease the
longevity of the active ingredients. In these situations, adding a small amount of safflower
oil or lipid-containing moisturizer may help to prolong the effect. This is most commonly
 recommended for lipid-soluble (petroleum distillate -based) parasiticidal agents.
 Rinses are our preferred method of delivery for most topical medications other than
POWDERS
i e ui us an on pe ae ieu spos o o oo paand ae sipao
film. In some cases, they are made to be added to water for use as a rinse, to liquids to
form “shake lotions," or to ointments to form pastes. Some powders (talc, starch, zinc
oxide) are inert and have a physical effect; other powders (sulfur) are active ingredients
that have a cheimical or antimicrobial effect. Powders are used to dry the skin and to cool
and lubricate intertriginous areas. Most often, powders are used with parasiticidal agents
(Hea powders) and locally with anti-inflammatory agents (Neo-Predef powder, Pharmacia
& Upjohn). Some powders may contain antimicrobials for use on localized lesions and,
although not yet available in the United States, an enilconazole powder has shown prom-
ise for the treatment of dermatophytosis.
The affected skin should be cleaned and dried before the powder is applied. Powder
buildup or caking should be avoided, but if it occurs, wet compresses or soaks can gently
remove the excess, On long-coated animals, a fine powder is used as a retention vehicle
for insecticides and fungicides. Powders dry the coat and skin and may accumulate in the
environment, making them less desirable for whole-body use. Some owners find powders
irritating to their own respiratory mucosa. We use powders infrequently and prefer other
delivery systems.
LOTIONS
Lotions are liquids in which medicinal agents are dissolved or suspended. Some are
essentially liquid powders because a thin film of powder is left on the skin when the
liquid evaporates. Lotions tend to be more drying (because of their water or alcohol base)
than liniments, which have an oily base. Newer fotions tend to use more propylene glycol
and water with less or no alcohol. Drying, cooling lotions contain alcohol, whereas sooth-
ing, moisturizing lotions usually do not. These medications tend to be cooling, antipruritic,
and drying (depending on the base).
Lotions are vehicles for active ingredients such as 1% hydrocortisone with aluminum
acetate (Hydro-B 1020, Butler; Hydro-Plus, Phoenix), 0.1% betamethasone valerate (Beta-
trex, Savage), 1% hydrocortisone (Curticalm, DVM), 1% pramoxine (Rclief, DVM), 1%
diphenhydramine with calamine and camphor (Caladryl, Parke-Davis), malaleuca, and aloc
vera. The liquid preparations can be applied repeatedly, but they should not be allowed to
Dermatologic Therapy · 225
build up. In general, lotions are indicated for acute oozing dermatoses and are contraindi-
cated in dry, chronic conditions. Thcy are most often used to deliver localized treatment
with astringents and antipruritic, anti-infammatory, and antifungal agents. They occasion-
ally carry ultraviolet screens and antiseborrheic agents.
SPRAYS
A variety of topical lotions are available in pump spray bottles. Most commonly, they are
used when relatively larger body areas are to be treated and whcn the product needs to
be applied to only the haircoat or small, nonhaired areas. Rinses may also he applied by
pump spray bottes, but if skin contact is needed, thorough soaking through the haircoat is
required. Sprays are most commonly used with emollients or moisturizers that are lightly
lent activity), and antipruritic agents for local lesions. Newer sprays have antimicrobial
activity such as 4% chlorhexidine.
 Antipruritic sprays contain agents such as 1% hydrocortisone (Cortispray, DVM), 2%
diphenhydramine (Histacalm, Virbac), 1% pramoxine (Relief, DVM; Dermal Soothe,
EVSCO), hamamelis extract with menthol (Dermacool, Virbac), and tar (LyTar, DVM).
Sprays are also frequently used to apply astringents and anti-infammatory agents, such as
1% hydrocortisone with aluminum acetate. Occasionally, sprays are used for antifungal
agents and the application of ultraviolet scrcens to the inguinal region. Sprays are valuable
for local application to interdigital wehs, ventral paws, and concave pinnae.
CrEaMS, EmULSIoNS, ANd OInTmENtS
 Creams and ointments lubricate and smooth skin that is roughened. They form a protec-
tive covering that reduces contact with the environment. Certain occlusive types may
reducc water loss. They also transport medicinal agents into follicular orifices and keep
drugs in intimate contact with the horny layer. Creams and ointments are mixtures of
grease or oil and water that are emulsified with high-speed blenders. Emulsifiers, coloring
agents, and perfumes are added to improve the physical characteristics of the product.
Pastes are highly viscous ointments into which large anounts of powder are incorporated.
Although pastes may be tolerated on slightly exudative skin (the powder takes up water),
 in general, creams and ointments are contraindicated in oozing areas.
A wide variation in characteristics of the products is determined by the relative
amount and melting point of the oils used. This can be illustrated by comparing cold
cream and vanishing cream. Cold cream is mostly oil with a little water. The oils have a
low melting point, so when the water evaporates a thick, greasy film is left on the skin. A
vanishing cream, on the other hand, is mostly water with oils that have a high melting
point. When the water evaporates, a thin film of fat is left on thc skin. This waxlike film
does not feel greasy, Urea added to creams also decreases the greasy fccl and, as a
bygroscopic agent, helps to moisturize the stratum corneum.
Enulsions are oily or fatty substances that have been dispersed in water. As a group.
they have a composifion between that of lotious and ointments. Emulsions are thicker
than lotions but thinner than ointments. They are similar to creams, which for the most
 part have replaced the use of emulsions in small animal practice. Emulsions are of two
types: oil dispersed in water and water dispersed in oil. Although both types are used as
vehicles, the former dilutes with water, loses water rapidly, and thercfore is cooling. The
latter type dilutcs with oil and loses its water slowly. In both cases, after the water
evaporates, the action of the vehicle on the skin is no different from that of the oil and
emulsifying agent alone. Thus, the characteristics of the residual film are thosc of the oily
phase of the vehicle.
 These bases are commonly used as vehicles for other agents. They have the advantage
of easy application, give mechanical protection, and arc soothing, antipruritic, and soften-
ing. The more oily creams and ointments tend to be occlusive, which facilitates hydration
of the stratum corneun and often increases penetration of incorporated active ingredients.
226 · Dermatologic Therapy
The disadvantage of their use in the hairy skin of animals is that they are occlusive,
greasy, heat-retaining, and messy, and they may produce a folliculitis because of occlusion
of pilosebaceous orifices. These types of medication should be applied with gentle mas-
sage several times daily to maintain a thin flm on the skin. Thick films are wasteful,
occlusive, and messy to surroundings. An obvious flm of ointment left on the skin surface
means that too much has been applied.
Water-washable ointment bases such as polyethylene glycol (Carbowax 1500) can be
readily removed with water. Oily bases are not freely water washable. It is important for
the clinician to understand the uses and advantages of these types of bases because the
total effect on the skin is caused by the vehicle as well as its active ingredient.
Hydrophobic oils (e.g, mineral oil and sesame oil) nix poorly with water. They
spread easily, and are often incorporated into emulsion-type vehicles. Because they are
hydrophobic, it is difficult for water to pass through a film of these oils, and they are
occlusive. They retain heat and water, and thick flns of the more viscid forms are messy
and may get on articles in contact with the pet.
Hydrophilic oils are miscible with water. They contain many polar groups, and those
oils with the greatest number are most soluble in water. Although they are ointments only
in terms of their physical characteristics, the polyethylene glycols are alcohols that are
readily miscible with water. Polyrncrs with a molecular weight greater than 1000 are solid
al room temperature, but a slight rise in body temperature causes melting to form an oily
film. (Carbowax 1500 is such a product.) It mixes with skin exudates well, is easily washed
off with water, and is less occlusive than other bases.
The use of creams, emulsions, and ointments is limited to localized, relatively small
lesions. Most commonly, they are used with antimicrobial, anti-infammatory, and ultravio-
let radiation-blocking agents. They are often the most efficacious delivery system for
areas needing moisturization or keratolytic effects, but their application is usually limited
 to localized areas such as nasal planum, paws, and elbows.
GELS
Gels are topical formulations composed of combinations of propylene glycol, propylene
 gallate, disodiumethylenediamine tetra-acetate, and carboxypolymethylene, with additives
to adjust the pHl. They act as a clear, colorless, thixotropic base and are greasclcss and
water-miscible. The active ingredients incorporated in commercially used bascs of this
type are completely in solution.
rubbed into the skin completely and do not leave the skin with a sticky feeling. Gels are
    sd   s  s  d e
the skin and are not messy. Most commonly, they are used for localized lesions for which
 antimicrobial or antiseborrheic effects are desired.
 The most common ingredient is benzoyl peroxide for areas of bacterial pyoderma and
follicular hyperkeratosis (such as acne) or areas of comedones. (Examples of gels used in
veterinary medicine with benzoyl peroxide are OxyDex, DVM; Pyoben, Virbac). However.
because they are cosmetically tolerated better than creams and ointments, their use is
expanding to include virtually any ingredient that can be stabilized in a gel forrm. KeraSolv
(DVM) is a keratolytic, humectant gel for hyperkeratotic conditions such as nasal hyper-
keratosis.
Topical Active Agents
ASTRINGENTS
 Astringents precipitate proteins and generally do not penetrate deeply. These agents are
drying and decrease exudations. They are indicated in acute, subacute, and some chronic
exudative dermatoses.
Dermatologic Therapy · 227
Vegetable astringents include tannins from oak trees, sumac, or blackberries. They are
tannic acid, 4% salicylic acid, and 1% benzocaine in 70% alcohol) is a potent astringent
and should not be used more than once on the same lesion (it may cause irritation or
sloughing). Witch hazel (hamamelis) contains tannins that are astringent and anti-inflarn-
matory and that decrease bleeding
 Alurminun acetate solution (Burow's solution) is available commercially as Domeboro
(Bayer). It is drying, astringent, antipruritic, acidifying, and mildly antiseptic. The solution
is usually diluted 1:40 in cool water, and soaks are repeated three times daily for 30
minutes. (One packet of powder, or one tablet, is added to 0.5 L [1 pt] or 1 L [1 qt] of
water.) It is tolerated better than tannins and does not stain. It tends to be used more
frequently than other astringents.
Acctie acid in a 0.25% to 0.5% solution (e.g., 1 part vinegar with 9 parts water) is also
 an effective astringent, acidifying, and drying agent.
Silver nitrate 0.25% solution may be applied to moist, weeping, deuuded areas as an
antiseptic, coagulant, and stimulating agent. It should be used frequently and sparingly. It
stains the skin.
15 ml [1 tbsp] of crystals per 1 L [1 qt of water) may be applied in fresh preparations for
 soaks or irrigations. It is astringent, antiscptic, and antimicrobial and toughens and stains
the skinl.
EMOLLIENTS AND MOISTURIZERS
Emollients are agents that soften, lubricate, or soothe the skin; moisturizers increase the
water content of the stratum corneum. Both types of drugs are useful in hydrating and
softening the skin. Demulcents are high-molecular substances in aqueous solution that
coat and protect the skin (e.g., glycerin, propylene glycol).
Many of the occlusive emollients are actually oils (saffower, sesame, and mineral oil)
or contain lanolin. These emollients decrease transepidermal water loss and cause moistur-
ization. These agents_work best if applied immediately after saturation of the stratum
corneum with water. For maxinal softening, the skin should be hydrated in wet dressings,
dried, and covered with an occlusive hydrophobic oil. The barrier to water loss can be
further strengthened by covering the local lesion with plastic wrap under a bandage.
 Nonocclusive emollients are rclatively ineffective in retaining moisture.
1. Vegetable oils —olive, cottonseed, corn, and pcanut oil
2. Animal oils —lard, whale oil, anhydrous lanolin (wool fat), and lanolin with 25% to
30% water (hydrous wool fat)
 3. Hydrocarbons—-paraffn and petrolatum (mineral oil)
4. Waxes—white wax (bleached beeswax), yellow wax (beeswax), and spcrmaceti
Hygroscopic agents (humectants) are moisturizers that work by being incorporated
into thc stratum cormeum and attracting water. These agents, such as propylene glycol,
glycerin, colloidal oatmeal, urea, sodium lactate, carboxylic acid, and lactic acid, may also
 e    se o p ro o s  e 
veterinary spray and rinse formulations, which are more effective than sharnpoo bases. A
liposome-based hurmectant technology (Hlydra-Pearls cream rinse, Evsco) was shown to be
superior to a traditional humectant ermollient (Humilac, Virbac) for the treatment of dry
skin in dogs.169
ANTISEBORRHEICS
 The seborrheic complex comprises important and somewhat common skin dliseases, such
as primary seborrhea (in Cocker and Springer spanicls, Irish setters, and Doberman
pinschcrs), secondary seborrhea (accompanying atopy, seabies, and demodicosis), Schnau-
zer comedo syndrome, and tail gland hyperplasia.sf Topical antiseborrheic therapy is the
228 · Dermatologic Therapy
 primary mode of treatment for these diseases. Other primary scaling disorders such as
benefit frorm adjunctive therapy with antiseborrheics, which speed the response to the
primary trcatment.
Antiseborrheics can be applied as ointments, creams, gels, and lotions, but the most
popuiar form for hairy skin is the antiseborrheic shampoo or the humectant rinse. Antise-
borrheics are commercially available in various combinations. The clinician must decide
which combination of drugs to use and needs to know each drug's actions and concentra-
tions. Ideal therapeutic response depends on the correct choice, but individual patient
variation does occur. For dry and scaly seborrhca (seborrhea sicca), a diferent preparation
is needed than for oily and grcasy seborrhea (sehorrhea oleosa). Emollients, for instance,
are useful in dry seborrhea but are not good degreasers. Benzoyl peroxide, on the other
 aa us   i  e o o aq u in  ssp 
14 for details).
ANTIPRURITICS
Antipruritic agents attempt to provide temporary relief from itching but are not usually
satisfactory as sole therapy becausc of their short duration of effect. Pruritus is a symptom
of many discases, and most antipruritic topical therapies are directed at the sensation, not
the cause. As such, they are still useful symptomatic treatments while waiting to alleviate
the primary disease or when the cause cannot be determined. As adjunctive therapy or for
  s   q   d o s p s
 listed here have other actions and are discussed elsewhere in this chapter. Table 3-3 lists 
some veterinary nonsteroidal, topical, antipruritic agents. In general, antipruritics give
relief from itching by means of six methods:
1. Decreasing the pruritic load by depleting. removing, or inactivating pruritic media-
tors. For example, astringents denature proteins and high-potency corticosteroids
deplete cutaneous mast cells. Shampoos or cleaners can also remove surface irri-
tanits, bacteria, pruritogenic substances, and allrgens that are on the surface of the
skin waiting to be absorbed and to contribute to the pruritic load.
2. Substituting some other sensation, such as heat and cold, for the itch. This may
 d  s a   od a r a d o
old, but if the heat is high enough and is applied for a suffcient duration, the
increased itching or burning sensation abates and induces a short-term antipruritic
effect. Cooling tends to decrease pruritus. Examples of such agents are menthol
0.12% to 1%, camphor 0.12% to 5%, thymol 0.5% to 1%, heat (warm soaks or
baths), and cold (ice packs) or cool wet dressings.
 3. Protecting the skin from external infuences such as scratching, biting, trauma,
temperature changes, humidity changes, pressure, and irritants. This can be done
 4. Anesthetizing the peripheral nerves by using local anesthctics such as pramoxine,
benzocaine, tetracaine, lidocaine, benzoyl peroxide, and tars. These products gener-
ally have short actions, and in cases of chronic pruritus, resistance often occurs.
Pramoxine has antipruritic effects that appear to be from a mechanism other than
its anesthetic effect.21s Pramoxine has also been added to bydrocortisone for addi-
tive antipruritic effects in people and in veterinary medicine is available with
colloidal oatmeal (Relief shampoo and creme rinse, DVM; Dermal Soothe sham-
poo and cream rinse, EVSCO; Resiprox leave on lotion, Virbac).
5. Raising the pruritic threshold by coling or moisturizing the skin. Dry skin lowers
the pruritic threshold, and the effective use of emolients and moisturizing agents,
by reducing the dry skin.
6. Using specific biochermical agents, such as topical glucocorticoids, antihistarmines,
and moisturizers.
Dermatologic Therapy ·*229
● Table 3-3
USEFUL NONSTEROIDAL TOPICAL AGENTS FOR
PrurItIc doGs and cats
ACTIVE INGREDIENTS
PRODUCT
OR ACTION
FORM
MANUFACTURER
Spot Application
Caladryl
1% diphenhydramine
Lotion
Parke-Davis
hydrochloride, 8%
calamine, canphor
Dermacool
Hamamelis extract,
Spray
Virbac
inerthol
Domeboro
Alumintum sulfate, cal-
Soak
Miles
cium acctatc
2% diphenhydramine
Spray
Virbac
Histacalm
Ice
Water--cold
Pack
Nature!
PTD Lotion
2% henzoyl alcohol,
Lotion
Veterinary Prescription
0.05% benzalkoniun
chloride, Hanamelis
distillatc
 Relief, Dernal Soothe,
1% pramoxinc
 Spray, lotion
DVM, EVSCO, Virbac
Resiprox
Totai Body Applicotion
 Allergroom
Moisturizing, hypoal-
Shampoo
Virbac
lergenic
Hy-I yt*efa
Moisturizing, hypoal.
Shampoo
DVM
lergenic
Epi-Soothe
Colloidal oatmcal
Shampoo
Virbac
Histacalm
2%diphenhydramine
Shampoo
Virbac
Hydra-Pcarls cream rinse
Humectant, hypoaller-
Rinse
EVSCO
genic
Hy-Lyt*efa
Moisturizing, hypoal.
Rinse
DVM
lcrgenic
Water
Water
Soak
Nature!
Aveeno
Colloidal oatmcal
Soak
Rydelle
Epi-Soothe
Colloidal oatmeal
Soak
Virbac
Relief, Dermal Soothe,
1% pramoxine
Shampoo, rinse
DVM, EVSCO, Virbac
Resiprox
Most potent glucocorticoids, adiministered systemically and topically, are helpful be-
cause of thcir anti-inflammatory effect, but they are not without risk (see p. 232) 182
Hydrocortisone 0.5% to 2% is safest for topical use and could be considered an antipruri-
tic agent becausc it has mild anti-inflammatory effects at these concentrations. The fuori-
nated corticosteroids are more potent and penetrate botter but with grcater risk
of
systemic absorption and both local or systemic adverse effects. Antihistamines adminis-
tered systemically are occasionally useful, but when applied topically, they have even less
efficacy. They may be helpful as a component of a combination product, such as 1%
diphenhydramine with calairine and camphor (Caladryl, Parke-Davis). Some topical anti-
histamines were shown to cross the stratum corneum and may exert their antihistaminic
tffect after topical application. 12. 7
 Topical anesthetics may be partiaily effective, but they may be toxic (causing methem-
oglobinemia) orhave
 sensitizing   potentials
(phenol 0.5%; tetracaineandlidocaine
 0.5%).40. 216 Also, their duration of effect is short and becomes even less when used
frequently and repetitively. Veterinary products with these types of agents are Histacalm
shampoo, Resihist leave on lotion, and Histacalm spray (Virbac-2% diphenhydramine);
1% pramoxine shainpoos, sprays, rinses, and leave on lotions (DVM, EVSCO, and Virhac);
Dermal Soothe shampoo and cream rinse (EVsCO— 1% pramoxine); and Derrmacool
(Virbac—hamamelis extract and mcnthol).
Cool wet dressings are often helpful, and in general, any volatile agent provides a
cooling sensation that might be palliative. This is the basis for using menthol (l%), thymol
(1%), and alcohol (70%) in antipruritic medications. In addition, menthol has a specifc
230· Dermatologic Therapy
action on local sensory nerve endings. Cool water baths alone or accompanied by Burow's
solution (aluminum acetate) soaks (Domeboro, Bayer) or colloidal oatmeal (Aveeno, Ry-
delle; Epi-Soothe, Virbac) may be helpful for hours to days.
Pramoxine is a local anesthetic that is chemically different from traditional “caines"
(benzocaine, lidocaine, procaine),24 It has low sensitization and irritation potcntials, and
does not produce the methemoglobinemia and the severe side effects that can be noted
with the misuse of “caines" in dogs and cats.40 216 Pramoxine was shown to be useful in
the management of pruritus in dogs with atopic conditions.173a
ANTIMICROBIAL AGENTS
 No group of drugs is employed more widely than antimicrobial agents. Anytime the skin is
abnormnal, the potential develops for secondary microbial infections or overgrowth, These
agents are therefore often used as prophylaxes even when pyoderma is not present. The
terminology used to describe the actions of drugs on microbes is somcwhat confusing
because of discrepancies between strict definitions of terrms and their general usage.
Antiseptics are substances that kill or prevent growth of microbes (the term is used
especially for preparations applied to living tissue). Disinfectants are agents that prevent
infection by destruction of microbes (the term is used especially for substances applied to
inanimate objects). Antiseptics and disinfectants are types of germicides, which are agcnts
that destroy imierobes. Germicides may be further defined by the appropriate use of terms
such as bactericide, fungicide, and virucide.
 In a discussion of such heterogeneous compounds as antimicrobials, some method of 
classification is desirable. Because the compounds are so varied with respect to chemical
structure, nechanism of action, and use, too strict a classification may be more confusing
than elucidating. The following discussion is a compromise.
 The antiseptic agents are listed with brief comments so that their purposes can be
appreciated when they are recognized as ingredients in proprietary formulations. The use
of some of these agents is described clscwhere in the text (see Chaps. 4 and 5).
● Alcohols. These act by precipitating proteins and dehydrating protoplasm. They are
bactericidal (not sporicidal), astringent, cooling, and rubefacient. However, they are irritat-
ing to denuded surfaces and are generally contraindicated in acute inffammatory disorders.
Seventy pcrcent ethyl alcohol and 70% to 90% isopropyl alcohol arc the most effcctive
concentrations and are bactericidal within 1 to 2 minutes at 30°℃.
● Propylene Glycol. This is a fairly active antibacterial and antifungal agent. A 40%
to 50% concentration is best. It and polyethylene glycol are primarily used at concentra-
tions of less than 50% as vehicles for other powerful antimicrobial agents. In dilute
solution, propylene glycol has few humectant properties because it is hygroscopic. In a
60% to 75% solution, it denatures and soluhilizes protein and is keratolytic.
● Phenols and Cresols. Agents such as hexachlorophene, resorcinol, hexylresorcinol,
thymol, and picric acid act by denaturing microbial proteins. They are also antipruritic and
soinewhat antifungal. They rmay he added at low levels as preservatives in some products.
At higher antimicrobial levels, they are irritating, toxic (hexachlorophene),138 and currently
have few legitimate uses on the skin, Phenols and cresols are contraindicated in cats.
● Chlorhexidine. Chlorhexidine is a phenol-related biguanide antiseptic and disinfec-
tant that has excellent properties: It is highly effective against many fungi, viruses, and
most bacteria, except perhaps some Pseudomonas and Serratia strainis.2s It appears that a
 2% to 4% concentration of chlorhexidine is needed for a good anti-Malassezia effect. It is
 Jonirritating, rarely sensitizing, not inactivated by organic matter, and persistent in action;
furthcrmore, it is effective in shainpoo, ointment, surgical serub, and solution formulations
containing 1% to 4% concentrations of chlorhexidine diacetate or gluconate. A 0.05%
dilution in water is an effective, nonirritating solution for wound inrigation. This agent is
safe for cats.
· Halogenated Agents
Iodine. This is one of the oldest antimicrobials. Elemental iodine is the active agent
(its mechanism is unkown). It is rapidly bactericidal, fungicidal, virucidal, and sporicidal.
Dermatologic Therapy · 23I
Older products such as tincture of iodine (2% iodine and 2% sodium iodide in alcohol)
and Lugol's iodine solution (5% to 7% iodine and 10% potassiun iodide in water) are
irritating and sensitizing, especially in cats, and should no longer be used.
Currently, the only commonly used iodines are the “tamed" iodines (iodophors)
because of their lower level of irritation or sensitization. Povidone-iodine (Betadine, Pur-
due-Frederick) —iodine with polyvinylpyrrolidone, which slowly releases iodine to tis-
sues —has a prolonged action (4 to 6 hours), is nonstinging and nonstaining. and is not 
impaired by blood, serum, necrotic debris, or pus. A study using a povidone-iodine
shampoo showed efficacy, although less than that of henzoyl peroxide as a prophylactic
agent against Staphylococus intermedius.92 Polyhydroxydine (Xenodine, VPL) at 1% is
reportedly superior in efhcacy to povidone-iodine solutions or tincture of iodine against
gram-positive and gram-negative organisms. Even tamed iodines can be drying to the skin,
staining to light-colored haircoats, and especially irritating to scrotal skin and the exteral
ear.
Sodium Hypochlorite and Chloranines. These are effective bactericidal, fungi-
cidal, sporicidal, and virucidal agents. Their action is thought to be due to liberation of
hypochlorous acid. Fresh preparations are needed. Sodium hypochlorite 5.25% (Clorox,
Clorox) diluted 1:10 with water (modifed Dakin's solution) is usually well tolerated. The
 presence of organic material greatly reduces the solution's antimicrobial activity. It is most 
often recommended as an antifungal agent or disinfectant. It can be irritating to cats.
liberation of nascent oxygen (e.g., 3% hydrogen peroxide used in dilute water solution). It
has limited usefulness for skin disease, although it is used as an ear-fushing agent and for 
cleaning minor skin wounds, partly for its effervescent activity.
s e   e  e e s d ss
This agent stings and stains, and it is inhibited by organic material. The staining is
particularly a problem.
 Benzoyl peroxide is a potent, broad-spectrum antibactcrial agent that has keratolytic,
interact with hydroxy and sulfoxy groups, double bonds, and other substances. This allows
the benzoyl peroxide to disrupt microbial ceil membranes. Benzoyl peroxide is metabo-
lized in the skin to benzoic acid, which lyses intercellular substance in the stratum
corneum to account for its kcratolytic effect. It is iritating in 10% of the dogs and 25% of
the cats treated.
Benzoyl peroxide is available as a 5% gel and a 2.5% or 3% shampoo (OxyDex, DVM;
SulfOxydex, DVM; Pyoben, Virbac; Benzoyl-Plus, EVSCO), which is an excellent adjunct
tion, it was superior to chlorhexidine, complexed iodine, and triclosan for prophylaxis
against S. intermedius.92 It is often recommended in seborrheic disorders, particularly
cases that are greasy or have follicular plugs, follcular casts, or comedones.
o  g a) sug po au o os n ou ps 
10% gel) on animals because stability may be compromised and the higher concentrations
are more often irritating. Even at 2.5% or 3% concentrations, it is drying and occasionally
irritating, especially in dogs with dry skin and/or allergic skin disease. Repackaging should
be avoided because improper packaging may affect stability of the product. A commercial
benzoyl peroxide shampoo containing liposome-based humectant technology (Benzoyl-Plus
benzoyl peroxide shampoo, EVsCO) can be used even on dogs with dry skin without
exacerbating the dryness.168 Controlled release of benzoyl peroxide fron a microsphere
Other side effects of 2.5% to 3% benzoyl peroxide include bleaching of hair and
clothing. It has skin tumor- promoting activity in laboratory rodents, but no skin tumor-
initiating activity has been documented in any other species.168
● Surface-Acting Agents. These agents in the form of emulsifiers, wetting agents,
232 · Dermatologic Therapy
or detergents act by altering energy relationships at interfaces, thus disrupting or damag.
ing cell membranes. They also deiiature proteins and inactivate enzymes. The most
especially benzalkonium chloride. Benzalkonium chlonide is a broad-spectrum antibacterial
agent (not effective against Pseudomonas spp.). However, anionic soaps inactivate it, and it 
is toxic to cats, producing skin and muscle necrosis.158
Silver salts precipitate proteins and interfere with bacterial metabolic activities. They
are antibacterial and astringent but irritating, staining, stinging, and escharotic (e.g, silvcr
nitrate 0.5%). Silver sulfadiazine is usefiul to treat superficial hurns. At 1% concentration,
it was effective and superior to sodium hypochlorite for the treatment of experimentally
at 0.1%, allowing for the dilution of the thick cream to a much more liquid lotion.127
ANTI-INFLAMMATORY AGENTS
Cold dressings are among the simplest and safest agents that reduce inflammation. How.
ever, topical glucocorticoid preparations are used most commonly and effectively to re-
duce infammation. There is little evidence to suggest that they have caused dissemination
 Of cutaneous infections, but if they are used in the presence of known infections, specific
 antibacterial or antifungal agents should be added to the preparation. The basic hydrocor-
tisone molecule or synthetic analogs thereof are modified by halogenation, methylation,
acetylation, esterification, and/or double-bond induction in an effort to enhance the thera-
peutie cffcct and reduce side effects. Generic products may not always be equivalent to
proprietary products (Tahle 3-4).44
 In high concentration, in abraded and infamed skin, or under occlusive dressings.
these corticosteroids are absorbed. They rarely produce serious untoward clinical effects if
used in the short term. Moriello and colleagues,iz2 however, found that short-term (7-day)
application of topical otic products (Panalog, Fort Dodge; Tresadern, Merial) can ad-
versely affect the adrenocortical response to exogenous corticotropin (adrenocorticotropic
hormone [ACTHl). Marked adrenocortical suppression was still present 14 days after
therapy was discontinued. These products also produced elevations in routinely monitored
activity).
Similarly, Zenoble and Kemppainen220 reported that the daily application of triamcino-
lone, fuocinonide, or betamethasone to the skin of normal dogs for 5 days produced
suppression of adrenocortical responses to ACTH, which pcrsisted for 3 to 4 weeks after
the last application. Verheijen and coworkers showed that topical betamethasone-17-valer-
ate and resocortol butyrate were absorbed and suppressed adrenal response to corticotro-
phin-releasing factor,1s9 However, the onset, degree of suppresson, and duration was
greater with the betamethasone-17-valerate.
 When a 1% hydrocortisone leave-on conditioner was applied twice weekly for 6 weeks
to normal dogs, no changes in hematologic, biochemical, or cortisol response to exogenous
responses to ACTH was determined, suggesting a greater absorption of the product
through inflamed skin, Finally, Glaze and colleagues6 reported that daily application of
ophthalmic preparations containing glucocorticoids also suppressed adrenocortical re-
 sponses to ACTH and produced elevations in hepatic enzyme activity in normal dogs. It
may be concluded that topical glucocorticoids should not be considered innocuous drugs
(Table 3-5).160
Local effects, including atrophy, scaling, comedones, alopecia, and pyoderma, may
from the topical application of triamcinolone acetonide, fuocinolone acetonide, and beta-
methasone valerate.6s They maintain a “reservoir" pool in the skin, enough that a once-
daily application may sufice to continue the topical effect. Topical glucocorticoid therapy
should follow principles similar to those used for systermic therapy. That is, potent drugs
should be administered twice daily to stop infarmmation, then tapered to once daily;
Dermatologic Therapy · 233
● Table 3-4
RELATIVE ANTI-INFLAMMATORY POTENCIES OF
SELECTED TOPICAL GlUCOCORTICOIdS*
AGENT
BRAND NAME
MANUFACTURER
Group 1
Betamethasone dipropionate, 0.5% crean, ointment
Diprolene
Schering-Plough
 Clobetasol propionate, 0.05% creain, ointinenl
Temovate
Claxo Dem
Diforasone diacetate, 0.5% ointment
Psorcon
lDermik
Group !I
Betamethasone dipropionate, 0.5% ointent
Diprosone
Schcring-Plough
Desoximetasone, 0.25% cream, ointment
Topicort
Hoechst-Roussel
Fluocinonide, 0.05% cream, ointment
Lidex
Dernik
Group !l
Betamethasone valerate, 0.1% ointment
Valisone:
Schering-Plough
Triamcinolone acetonide, 0.5% crean
Kenalog
Westwood-Squibb
Group IV
 Fluocinolone acetonide, 0.025 ointment
Symalar
Syntex
 Fluocinolone acetonide, 0.01 solution
Synotict
Fort Dodge
Triamcinolone acetonide, 0.1% cream
Vetalogt
Fort Dodge
Group V
Betamethasone valerate, 0.1% cream, lotion
Valisone
Schering-Plough
Fluocinolone acetonide, 0.025% crcam
Synalar
Syntex
Triamcinolone acetonide, 0.1% cream, lotion
Kenalog
Westwood-Squibb
Group VI
Desonide, 0.05% crea1n
Tridesilon
Miles
Fluocinolone acetonide, 0.01% shampoo
FS shanpoo
IHill
Group Vll
Dexamethasone, 0.1% creatn
Decaderm
MSD
Dexa1nethasone, 0.04% spray
Decaspray
MSD
Hydrocortisone, 1 and 2.5% cream, ointment 
Hytone
Dermik
Hydrocortisone, 1% spray
Cortisprayt
DVM
Hydrocortisone, 1% spray
Dermacool-HCt
Virbac
Aeds %T 'osp
Hydro-Plust
Phoenix
Hydrocortisone, 1% spray
Hydro-10 mistt
I3utler
Hydrocortisone, 1% spray
PTD-HC+
VRx
Hyurocortisone,1% shanpoo
Cartisoothet
Virbac
IHydrocortisone, 1% leave on lotion
Resicortf
Virbac
*Group I is most potent: Group VII is least potent.
IVeterinary label.
finally, if the drugs are still effective and long-term treatment is expected, the treatment is
changed to less potent topical agents for maintonance therapy, and alternate-day adminis-
tration is used whenever possible. Twice-weekly applications may suffice in some cases,
People handling thesc medications should wear gloves to prevent exposure and toxic
effects.
The fuorinated steroids are more potent, penetrate better, and thus are more effec-
 provides brand name examples.
MISCELLANEOUS TOPICAL AGENTS
● Sulfur. Medicinal use of sulfur is as old as Hippocrates." Lime sulfur (sulfurated
lime) is prepared by boiling a suspension of sublimated sulfur, lime (Ca [OH]),
and
agent. At low concentrations, sulfur is keratoplastic, whereas higher concentrations are
keratolytic (H,S breaks down keratin). It is synergistic in this respect with salicylic acid.
Sulfur is antifungal and antibacterial, presumably by conversion to pentathionic acid and
H,S (this conversion can be accomplished by cutaneous bacteria and by keratinocytes).
Lime sulfur was more effective than chlorhexidine, captan, povidone iodine, and
234 · Dermatologic Therapy
● Tablc 3-5
Effects of Glucocorticoids on
AdrenoCortical FunCtion In dogS
DURATION OF
SUPPRESSION
ROUTE OF
AFTER TREATMENT
DRUG
PROTOCOL
ADMINISTRATION
STOPPED
Purenteral Administration
Dexamethasone
0.2 mg/kg once
IV
32 hr
Dcxamethasone socdiu phosphate
0.1 mg/kg once
IV
<24 hr
Dexamethasone alcohol
 1 mg/kg once
IM
48 hr
Dexamethasone 21-isonicotinate
 0.1 mg/kg once
IM
10 days
Dexamethasone 21-isonicotinate
1 mg/kg once
IM
4wk
Methylprednisolone acetate
2.5 mg/kg once
IM
5 wk
Methylprednisolone acetatc
4 mg/kg once
IM
9 wk
Methylprednisolone acetate:
0.56 mg/kg once
SC
3wk
Triamcinolone acctonide
0.22 mg/kg once
IM
4 wk
Triamcinolone acetonide
0.22 mg/kg/day for 8 days
P)
2 wk
Topical Administrotion
Betamethasonc valerate
1.36 mg/kg/day for 5 days
Skin ointunent
4 wk
Dexamethasone
0.03 mg/kg/day for 8 wk
Ophthalnic drops
2 wk
Dexamethasonc
0.31 mg/kg/day for 3 wk
Otic drops
3 wk
Fluocinonide
shtpg xoy epayu s90
 Skin ointment
4 wk
Prednisolone acetate
0.75 mg/kg/day for 4 wl
Ophthalnic drops
2wk
Triamcinolone acetonide
1.36 mg/kg/day for 5 days
Skin ointment
4 wk
Triamcinolone acetate
0.31 mg/kg/day for 3 wk
Otic drops
3 wk
IV = intravenously; IM = imtramuscularly SC =
subcutaneously; PO = orally.
From Scott Dw: Rational usc of glucocorticoids in dermatology. In: Bonagura JD, Kirk RW (eds): Kirk's Current Veterinary
Theruapy XI1, 1995, p. 578.
ketoconazole shampoo in inhibiting Microsporum canis growth from infected cat hairs.215
 Its parasiticidal activity is thought to be due to IH,S and polythionic acid. Lime sulfur is
inexpensive and nontoxic (Lyin Dyp, DVM). Side effects include occasional excessive
drying and/or irritation of the skin. Cosmetic drawbacks include a disagreeable odor
(rotten eggs), termporary yellow staining of light haircoats and skins, staining of clothing
 and other materials, and tarnishing of jewelry.
● Vitamin A Acid. A 0.05% concentration of retinoic acid (tretinoin [Retin-A,
Rochel) is popular in human dermatology (used for treating acne, decreasing wrinkles,
and treating ichthyosis). It is relatively expensive but has been used in dogs and cats for
 acne and sone localized keratinization disorders.
The effectiveness of topical tretinoin for the treatment of the effects of photoaging is
well documented. The gel form at 0.0l% concentration is initially used because it is less
irritating than the 0.025% concentration. It increases the epidermal turnover time, reduces
conedolytic.203 In animal models it prevents corticosteroid-induced skin atrophy.155 Local
irritation is a significant problem for many people and cats (e.g, with Retin-A). A miero-
sphere formulation (Retin-A-MICRO) is now available that iritates much less in humans.
Synthetic retinoids are also becoming available as topical formulations. Adapalene
 r  r os r r  a  si ( )
clear retinoic acid receptors and causes less irritation than retinoic acid. It also inhibits
new topical formulation. It is a novel acetylenic retinoid that is being evaluated as a 0.1%
and 0.05% gel formulation.30 As a topical therapy it appears to have minimal systemic
ahsorption, with no adverse systemic signs yet reported.
 Tazarotene acts on retinoic acid receptors and results in downregulation of keratino-
cyte proliferation, differentiation, and inflammation.45. 107 It does this by a combination of
effects, including the induction and activation of new genes, downregulation of APl (a
proinflammatory genetic factor), and antagonizing the effects of interferon-y. It has been
 shown to be cffective for acne and psoriasis while having no adverse systemic reactions.
Dermatologic Therapy · 235
● Urea. Urea has hygroscopic and keratolytic actions that aid in normalizing the
cream or an ointment base has a softening and moisturizing effect on the stratum
corneum and makes the vehicle feel less greasy. It acts as a humectant in concentrations
a result of the solubilization of prekeratin and keratin and the possible breakage of
hydrogen bonds that keep the stratum cormeum intact. It also promotes desquamation by
dissolving the "intercellular substance."
 A hypoallergenic, 1noisturizing shampoo (Allcrgroom, Virbac) contains 5% urea free
 and in spherulites. Humilac (Virbac) contains both urea and lactic acid, and it can be used
as a spray or rinsc. To make a rinse, 5 capfuls of Humilac are added to 1 L (1l gt) of
water. The mixture is rinsed over the dog's coat and allowed to dry. KeraSolv (DVM)
contains 6% salicylic acid, 5% urea, and 5% sodium lactate. It is a potent keratolytic used
● α-Hydroxyacids 2% to 10%. These include lactic, malic, citric, pyruvic, glutamic,
plastic, and being able to delay terminal differentiation and to reduce the intercellular
cohesion forces of the stratum corneum. Lactic acid and sodium lactate can absorb up to
30 times their weight in water.13a
● Fatty Acids. These acids are keratolytic and fungistatic. Examples are caprylic
 propionic, and undecylenic acids. The best of these (although it is wcak) is undecylenic
acid (e.g., Desenex). Topical fatty acids are also used to treat essential fatty-acid defi-
ciency. Topical sunfower oil, which is high in linoleic acid, decreased transepidermal
water loss in seborrheic dogs.26
● Propylene Glycol. This agent is primarily used as a solvent and a vehicle.ss s6 At
higher concentrations (>75%), it occasionally causes iritation or sensitization. It is an
excellent lipid solvent and defats the skin; however, its chief value is probably the ability
reliable antibacterial agent and has antidermatophyte and anticandidal properties. For
most dermatologic cases, it can be used in concentrations of 30% to 40%. Propylene
  s    (o  s t h p
concentrations are particularly helpful in hyperkeratotic conditions, and 75% propylene
( d s) se ss  i a s s p
vehicle. When exposed to the air, concentrated solutions take in water to become hy-
 drated at 67%. Stronger concentrations tend to cross the skin barrier better. DMSO
penetrates skin (within 5 minutes), mucous mermbranes, and the blood-brain barrier, as
well as cell, organelle, and microbial membranes. Unlike most solvents, DMSO achieves
penetration without membrane damage. lt facilitates absorption of many other substances
across mcmbranes, especially corticosteroids, On a cellular level, DMSO and steroids exert
a synergistic effect.
 DMSO has properties of its own as a cryoprotective, radioprotective, anti-ischemic,
anti-infamrmatory (free-radical scavenger, decreases prostaglandin synthesis, stabilizes lyso-
somal membranes), and analgesic (blocks C fibers) agent. It also has variahle antibacterial,
antifungal, and antiviral properties, depending on the concentration (usually 5% to 50%)
and the organism involved. It decreases fibroplasia.
Although its mechanisin of action is incompletely understood, the systemic toxicity
and teratogenicity of this solvent in its purc form are considered low. Toxicity may be of
concerm, depending on the dose, the route of administration, the species, and the individ-
ual animal's reaction. Impurities or combinations with other agents may make DMSO
dangerous as a result of its ability to enhance transepidermal absorption. Industrial forms
of DMsO should never be used for medical purposes because the contained impurities
are absorhed and may be toxic. Well-known minor side effects includc a garlic-like odor,
increased warmth and/or pruritus (histamine release, exothermic with water), and dehydra
tion (too hygroscopic).
236 · Dermatologic Therapy
 Potental uses might include topical application to cutaneous ulcers, burns, insect
bites, interdigital granulomas, open wounds, and skin grafts; reduction of exuberant granu-
lation tissue; and treatment of acral lick dermatitis. One formula showm to be safe and
useful contains Burow's solution, hydrocortisone, and 90% DMSO.172 Equal parts of 90%
DMSO and Hydro-B 1020 (1% hydrocortisone and 2% Burow's solution in a water and
m sd aq ri ap pne si  au  are (asa o aua
pyotraumatic derrmatitis and acral lick dermatitis. Application of the 90% gel can hasten
the resolution of calcinosis cutis (see Chap. 10)
● Aloe Vera. Much of the information on aloe vera is anecdotal.7 174 There are over
 300 species of Aloe plants, and they differ in chemical composition with the species,
climate, and growing conditions. The terms aloe, aloe vera, aloin, and aloe extract refer to
the end products of different methods of extracting juice from Aloe plants. The result of
this nonuniformity of collction or extraction is a wide difference between the contents,
consistency, and appearance of different products. Likewise, interpreting and comparing
various studies is often impossible.
Alce vera contains a large number of organic compounds and inorganic elements:
anthraquinones (e.g., anthracene, emodin), saccharides (e.g., glucose, cellulose, mannose),
enzymes (e.g., oxidase, lipase), vitamins (e.g, niacinamide, C, E, A), amino acids, and
histamine production), antiprostaglandin activity, and protease inhibitor activity. In vitro
studies indicate that aloe vera inhihits the growth of Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, and Trichophyton mentagrophytes.
Anecdotal reports indicate that aloe vera is useful for the treatrment of pain, pruritus,
fungal jnfections, bacterial infections, insect bites, burns, and exuberant granulation tis-
Sue.7,126.174
● Acetic Acid. Acetic acid is a potent antibacterial agent: A 5% solution (e.g.
vinegar) kills coagulase-positive staphylococci in 5 minutes, and a 2.5% solution (e.g., one
solution kills Malassezia pachydermatis (see Chap. 5). Acetic acid may also be used in ears
(0.25% to 0.5% solution) as a ceruminolytic, astringent, and acidifer (see Chap. 19).
● Melaleuca Oil. Melaleuca oil ("tea tree oil") is extracted from the leavcs of the
"tea tree" (genus Melaleuca),2oo It has proven antibacterial (e.g., coagulase-positive staphy-
lococci) and fungicidal (e.g., Candida albicans, T. mentagrophytes) properties. Melaleuca
 oil is marketed for use on dogs, cats, and ferrets in skin care products for cleaning.
healing, and relieving pruritus. Claims are also made that it is a deodorizer, detangler, and
external parasite repellent. The inappropriate or excessive application of melaleuca oil to
the skin may result in toxicosis: hypersalivation, inccordination, weakmess, hypothermia,
and hepatic injury.
● Colloidal Oatmeal. Colloidal oatmeal is useful in the management of dry skin and
 pruritus by virtue of its demulcent, humectant, and antipruritic properties. It is incorpo-
rated into a number of veterinary shampoos. It may also be used as a rinse or soak by
adding 1 to 2 tablespoons (15 to 30 rnl) of the powder (Epi-Soothe, Virbac; Aveeno,
Rydelle Laboratories) to 1 gallon (4 L) of water. Colloidal oatmeal can leave a residue in
the haircoat as well as in the bathtub. The bathtub can become slippery.
● Topical Sunscreens. A dense haircoat protects most small animals from excessive
 d o  d i s a sp s u s o as
ultraviolet radiation damage. However, whenever nonpigmented, unhaired skin is exposed
to sunlight, solar damage may occur. Predisposed areas include the ear tips in white cats,
the glabrous abdomen in Dalmatians and bull terriers, and hairless areas. Some animals
respond with hyperpigmentation, whereas other animals do not expezience hyperpigmenta-
tion but may incur sunburn or solar dermatitis.
Protection from the sun can be attained by staying indoors from 10 AM to 4 PM, by
du pue ssu pu pe d dn umq o ssd e us  uu
atosis), and by using topical or oral sunscreensTopical sunscreens may act physically or
Dermatologic Therapy · 237
chermically. In chemical screens, aminobenzoic acid or benzophenonc derivatives act to
ahsorb ultraviolet rays. They are clear, cosmetically acceptable lotions or gcls.
Physical sunscrcens include chemicals such as zinc oxide and titanium dioxide, which
reflect and scatter light by forming an opaque barrier. These barrier typcs are available in
many colors ( Bulfrog brand), including black, which some owners prefer for use on noses.
They also are water-resistant and are not as casily removed by the pet. These agents are
 messy, especially in long haircoats. Topical sunsereens are rated for cficiency by a sun
protection, and 15 or higher gives blockage. For use in anirnals, water-resistant sunscreens
with an SPF of 15 or greater should be used. These numbers arc only guides, because the
 Usually, sunscrecn nccds to be applied three or four times a day for grcatest effec-
tiveness. Photodecomposition is a problcm, and titanium dioxide or zinc oxide sunscreens
misconception is that if the amimal licks the area after application, the sunscrcen is
[ e si  (o s ia) soa d  g  s s  
problem_ with chernical blockers because these products are ahsorbed into the skin and
 pool within the straturn corncun to produce a reservoir of protection. Chemical blockers
are 1Hot effective if no epithelium is present (e.g., on ulcers).
● phYSICaL TheraPY
The use of heat, cold, light, and radiation therapy for the treatment of skin disorders is
 not new, but advances have made the therapies more specific and more effective. Freez-
ing, hcat, clectricity, and laser light are presented as surgical techniques at the end of this
chaptcr.
Photochemotherapy
 Photochemotherapy uses light waves to excite or increase the energy of a photosensitive
drug that causes a selectivc cytotoxic effect on tumors. Thc initial drug used in veterinary
medicinc is a hematoporphyrin derivativc porfimcr sodium (Photofrin-V, QLT Photothera-
peutics) is7 The drug has a much greatcr afinity for tumor tissuc than for surrounding
nine (Porphyrin products). It is reported to have thc advantages of less cutaneous photo-
sensitization and better light absorption for the wavelengths commonly used in this
which can penetrate as 1much as 1 to 2 cm. The light source is a laser system that
produces a red laser bean that passes through low-attenuation fiberoptie tracts. These are
about 20 minutes, and repeated exposures are no problem. Patients should be kept out of
sunlight for 3 to 4 weeks as they are systemically photoscnsitized.
Approximately 50% of tumors respond completely, and an additional 30% show partial
noma, fbrosarcoma, mast cell tumor, adamantinoma, and synovial cell sarcona. Mixed
responses occurred in animals with squamous cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, leiomyosar-
 coma, and hemangiopericytorna.
Hyperthermia
Local current-field radiofrequency is used to produce enough heat in a local superficial
area to cause tissue necrosis. Two groups have used a tenperature of 50°C for 30 to 60
scconds to trcat feline tumors.63 s7 The heat was controlled to affect only the tuinor and 2
to 3 mm of surrounding norrmal tissuc. Results were much better with lesions less than 5
238· Dermatologic Therapy
mm in diamcter by 2 mm deep. In these cases, approximately 70% of the tunors
 'sr a  pss aed o pe ue pu pssrn Ap
mas, fbrosarcomas of cats, and circumanal gland tumors of dogs. There were no serious
side effccts. This therapy should not be used on the pinna of the ear hecause it may cause
necrosis and sloughing.
Hypertherinia has also bcen used for topical treatment of localized dermatophytosis.
By using the same system and producing heat of 50°C for 30 seconds in an area 4 mm
deep by 1 cm in diameter, succcssful results were achieved after only one treatment. For
large lesions, the heat probe was moved sequentially to lew areas of 1 em in diameter
until the whole lesion was treated. Fluorescenice disappeared within 48 hours, and healing
was complete in 2 to 6 weeks. Hyperthermia was considered the treatment of choice for
bersome, is finpractical with widespread lesions, and has not been corroborated by other
investigators.
 Heat is also used in electrosurgical procedures such as fulguration to destroy tissue.
Radiation Therapy
 Radiation therapy has important benefits in the treatment of skin tumors, carefully se-
lected cases of feline indolent ulcer, and canine acral lick dermatitis. Because not all cells
as carcinoma cells, basal cells of the hair papilla, and vascular endothelial cells, arc
damaged more easily than thosc of the remaining skin. X-ray beams that are filtered
because of their short wavelengths. Radliation delivered at about S0 kV with little or no
filtration (0.5 mm of aluminum) has longer wavelengths, and its cncrgy is dissipated
superficially
 Before considering radiation therapy for a patient, the clinician must be certain of the
following:
1. The treatment has good potential for benefit and little potential for harm.
therapy of choice. For indolent ulcers and acral lick dermatitis, radiation therapy is
generally a treatment of last resort.
3. Relative cost of this therapy is accptable.
 4. The number and frequency of treatments is acceptable.
5. Proper, safe equipment and facilities are available so that
a.
 The exact dose can be administered.
b. The patient can be anesthetized or restrained for therapy without cxposure of
personnel.
c. Proper shielding of unaffected parts is provided.
6. Adequate records are kept for future reference.
If these points can be accomplished, radiation therapy may be considered. Such cases
should be referred to a radiologist who specializes in radliation therapy.
● BROAD-SPECTRUM SYSTEMIC THERAPIES
Systemic Nonsteroidal Antipruritic or Nonsteroidal
Anti-lnflammatory Agents
u i  sip  n od e  d o si  ad u
microbial or parasitic. In other cases, even though a specifc cause (e.g, scabies) is
determined, symptomatic antipruritic or anti-infammatory therapy may be desired.9 Sys-
temic glucocorticoids are most commonly prescribed. However, although glucocorticoids
Dermatologic Therapy · 239
are highly effectivc in managing these cases and many hypersensitivity disorders, the
frequent occurrence of side effects of variable severity stinulates continual invcstigations
for altermative drugs or methods that will allow an avoidance or reduction in the dose of
glucocorticoid,18 41.110. 160.16, 167
Reasons for electing nonsteroidal agents include (l) unacceptable acute or chronic
virus or feline immunodeficiency virus infections), (3) patients with infectious diseases
(viral, fungal, and bacterial), (4) patients with other diseases in which glucocorticoids may
be contraindicated (diabetes melitus, pancreatitis, renal disease, and neoplasia), and (5)
pet owners who do not want to use glucocorticoids in their animals. A variety of unrelated
nonsteroidal drugs may be used.
Scott and Buergeri6 used a supplement that contained omega-3/omega-6 fatty acids
(DcrmCaps, DVM), three different antihistamines (chlorpheniramine, diphenhydramine.
hydroxyzine), an antibiotic (erythromycin), and aspirin in an open study of nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory agents in the management of 45 cascs of canine pruritus. Thirty-two
dogs had atopy or fea-bite hypersensitivity, and 13 dogs had idiopathic nonseasonal
pruritus. As a group, the six drugs controllcd itching in 40% of the cases, ard there was 
inprovernent in another 15%. However, sidc cffects occurred in 46% of cases, being
severe enough in 33% of thc dogs to prompt halting of treatment with one or rnore of the
drugs. Cood to moderate improvement of pruritus was obtained for each rnedication (see
Table 3-5).
Subscquent sturlies, several of which were placebo-controlled and double-blind stud-
ics, show that options other than systemic glucocorticoids are available. Other agents with
reported anti-inflammatory effect have been tried with limited success on allergic dogs.
The majority of work has evaluated three main classes of drugs: antihistamines, fatty
acids, and psychotropic agents. Bccausc antihistarmines function primarily in allergic dis-
eases, they are covered in Chapter 8. Psychotropic drugs, which can also be useful in
managing allergic pruritus, are primarily used to treat psychogenic disease and are covered
in Chapter 15.
Fatty Acids
Fatty acids, as previously discussed, are an important part of the norrnal diet. By control.
ling the relative levels of omega-6 to omega-3 in the total diet, the development of
infamnatory nediators in neutrophils and other organs may be modifed. Two studies
utilizing these omega-6/omega-3 ratios of 5:1 showed similar results, with over 40% of
atopic or allergic pruritic dogs experiencing good results.151. 171
Thc use of supplements for treating pruritic inflammatory discases and crusting dis-
cases inogs and catshasbeenthe subject ofmultiple openand controlled studies5.
ment of pruritus and inflammation associated with a variety of diseases, though predomi-
nantly allergic.
relates to metabolic byproducts of fatty acid metabolisrm. Supplements usec for pruritus
usually contain one or both of y-linolenic acid and EPA. y-Linolenic acid is found in
relatively high concentrations in evening primrose, borage, and black currant oils. It is
elongated to DGLA, which directly competes with arachidonic acid as a substrate for
cyclooxygcnasc and 15-lipoxygenase. The result of DGLA metabolism is the formation of
prostaglandin E1 and 15-hydroxy-8,11,13-eicosatetraenoic acid, both of which arc thought
to have anti-inlammatory effects.211
EPA, which is usually supplied by using cold water rnarine fsh oils, also competcs as
a substrate for cyclooxygenase andl 5- and 15-lipoxygenase. The metabolism of EPA by the
taenoic acid. These two products are thought to inhibit leukotrienc B4, which is a potent
240·DermatologicTherapy
pro-inflammatory mediator. This mechanisn was reviewed by White,21l and Figure 3-2
demonstrates the interactions of y-linolenic acid, EPA, and arachidonic acid.
 Consumption of a diet enriched in N-3 (omega-3) fatty acids reduced delayed-type
hypersensitivity responses, decreased production of prostaglandin E2, and resulted in
increased postvaccinal total lymphocyte count in aged Beagle dogs.72 An omega-3 fatty
 acid -enriched diet had no long-term negative effect on wound healing in dogs.148a
Another area that still needs investigation is the importance or effect of combining
        s     
manufacturers and authorsol have claimed that the right combination of cofactors maxi-
 mizes the beneficial effects. Controlled studies to determine this and what cofactors are
In one double-blind study, a fatty acid product containing cofactors was no more
-ps pno y oes su snn yons q use ie an s
p uaq nu ose su nond e An ns s un mo papn are sai
Cell Membrane
PGE
ALA
6D·
*13=HODE
PLA2
个
CO
18:4n=3
15LO
AA
15LO
△6D·
E
E
GLA
DGLA
*15=HETE
LA
/EPO
Borage
22:4n=3
(BlackCurrant)
5LO
15LO
△5D·
*12=HETE
*PGE2
15LO
Co
no
--15=HETrE
—EPA(tishoil·...>product
15=HETrE-
20:5n=3
(strongly competes
W
withAAforthe
15=HPETE-
15=HETE
5LOenzyme)
LTB5
LTB
22:5n=3
LTA
CDE
△4D
W
DHA
*LTB4
II
22:6n=3
III
1
FIGURE 3-2. I, N-6 fatty acid metabolism witlh produetion of anti-inflammatory cicosanoids. Il, Arachidonic acid
cascadewithprodutionfproammatoryeicosanidsl3fattyacidmetaboliswithproluctionofani-lamma
tory cicosanoids. 13-HODE, 13-hydroxyoctadecadienoic acid; PG, prostaglandin; E, elongase; △-6-D, A-6-dlesaturasc; LA,
lnoleic acid;GLA,inolenic acid:EPO,eveing prose oilDGLA,diomolinolenic acid;AA,arachidonic acid;
ALA,αlnolenic acid;EPA,cosapntaoic acidDHA,docosahexcnoicacidDESdesatrasePLA2phspholipas
A2:CO, cyelooxygenase; LO,lipoxygenase; HETE, hydroxyeicosatetraenoic aid; 1IPETE, hydroperoxycicosatetraenoic
acidHEPE,hydroxyeisapntaenoic acid;15-HFTrE,5-hydoxy-811-iosatiaenoic acid,LT,lenkotriene.d
catces arachidonic acid-derived eicosanoids identified in infarmmatory skin discase:→ indicates inhibitory or anti-inAam-
matory cicosanoid (number of slash lincs indicates degree of inhibition）. (From Wlaite P:Essential fatty acids: Use in
management of canine atopy. Comp Cont Edue 15:45l, 1993.)
Dermatologie Therapy · 241
deterrmined. Although some dogs and cats show a favorable rcsponsc within 1 to 2 weeks,
an adequate therapeutic trial might necessitate 9 to 12 weeks.
The risks and side effects of fatty acid supplcmentation are few. The most serious,
although rarely reported, side effect is pancreatitis.94 With large doses, weight or diarrhea
may also increase. With supplements containing fish oil, some clients have reported an
unpleasant odor or increascd eructation ("fish breath").
Pentoxifylline
Pentoxifylline (Trental, Hoechst-Roussel) is a methylxanthine derivative that produces a
variety of physiologic changes at the cellular level.i47 Inmunomodulatory and rheologic
effcts incude ncreasedleukocyte formability and chemotaxis decreased platelet aggre
gation, decreased leukocyte responsiveness to interleukin-1 (IL-1) and tumor necrosis
factor (TNF)-α, decreased production of TNF-α from macrophages, decreased production
of IL-1, IL-4, and IL-12, inhibition of T- and B-lyinphocyte activation, and decreased
natural killer cell activity. It also has been shown to inhibit T-cell adherence to keratino-
cytes.24 In humaus, these effects are beneficial in the treatment of peripheral vascular
disease, vasculitis, and contact hypersensitivity.
Pentoxifylline also has been used for a variety of infammatory diseases such as
necrobiosis lipoidica, granulorma annulare, and brown recluse spider bites. The drug also
affects wound healing and connective tissue disorders through increased production of
collagenase and decreased production of collagen, fibronectin, and glycosaminoglycans. In
humans, the drug has been used to treat scleroderma. Pentoxifylline has been used in
veterinary medicine for the treatment of canine familial dermatomyositis7l and allergic
contact dermatitislo and in some atopic dogs. We have used it successfully in pinnal
thrombovascular necrosis, ear-nargin dermatosis, vasculitis, rabies vaccine -related alope-
cia, erythema multiforme, and idiopathic mucinosis of the Chinese Shar Pei. Anecdotal
reports indicate that pentoxifylline may be useful in dogs with lupoid onychodystrophy,
vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus, acral lick dermatitis, Greyhound vasculopathy,
and metatarsal fistulae of German Shepherds. 173a
Pentoxifylline is available in a 400-mg coated tablet. It is usually dosed at 10 mg/kg
 po a      a    a s    s
dog. Once therc is a favorable response, whichi may take I to 3 months, the dose may be
tapered to q12h or q24h, Sone cases rcquire the qSh dosing to remain cffective.
Side effects are mininal and usually consist of vomiting and diarrhea. Therc is an
 ancclotal report of thrombocytopenia.143a
Synthetic Retinoids
Retinoids refer to all the chemicals, natural or synthetic, that have vitamin A activity.
Synthetic retinoids are primarily retinol, retinoic acid, or retinal derivatives or analogs.
They have been developed with the intent of anplifying certain biological effects while
being less toxic than their natural precursors. More 'than 1500 synthetic retinoicds have
been developed and evaluated . 139 Retinoids are usually classified as being first genera-
tion (e.g, tretinoin, isotretinoin), second generation or monoaromatic (e.g., etretinate,
acitretin), or third generation or poiyaromatic (c.g., adapalenc, tazarotene).209*
Different synthetic drugs, al classed as synthetic retinoids, may have profoundly
different pharrnacologic effects, side effects, and disease indications. The existence of
different types of receptors, dimers, response elements, and intermediary proteins means
activate multiple pathways are likely to be associated with a high incidence of adverse
effccts.29 With all the retinoid research being conducted, there will undoubtedly be many
new diseoverics and uses in the near future. To date, the biggest deterrent to their use is
expense.
 Naturally occurring vitamin A is an alcahol, all-trans retinol. It is oxidized in the hody
242· Dermatologic Therapy
to retinal and retinoic acid. Each of these compounds has variable metabolic and biologi-
cal activities, although both are important in the induction and maintenance of normal
 growth and differentiation of keratinocytes. Only retinol has all the known functions of
vitamin A.
 Two compounds have been used clinically the most in veterinary dermatology: isotre-
tinoin (13-cis-retinoic acid [Accutane, Roche]), synthesized as a natural metabolite of
B o si a      a  
available but is mentioned becausc rnany of the studies in veterinary medicine used it. It
has been replaced by acitretin, which is a carboxylic acid, metabolically active metabolite
of etretinate. Acitretin is less toxic owing to a shorter terminal elimination half-life of 2
trace amounts up to 3 years after cessation of therapy.35
 Retinoids function by entering cels and being transported to the nuclei, where they
interact with specific gcne regulatory rcceptors. The natural vitamin A works at the
cellular level by binding first to the cell mcrmbrane then transferring through thc ccllular
cytoplasm by spccific proteins, cllular retinol binding protein, and celular retinoic acid
binding protein. There are nuclear retinoid receptor molecules that transfer the retinoids
through the nucleus.
There are two main muclear receptor families: the retinoic acid receptors and the
retinoid X receptors.106 They both have at least three members for a minimum of six
different nuclear receptors. These receptors can function as heterodimers, hoinodirers, or
in conjunction with other nuclear receptors such as thosc for vitaimin D, and thyroid
 sq ae sn jo s aau s on a r p sl n
that may act by a unique mechanism and has been called inverse agonists. Another
factors, which results in less production of other proteins. This is thought to be a
Mechanism responsible for some of the anti-infammatory effects.
Some of the different tissue and individual scnsitivity for toxic effects may relate to
the relative and absolute levels of the cellular and nuclear binding proteins present in the
target cells. Once thesc genetic changes are made, the cells may alter their growth and
differentiation by altering the expression of growth factors, keratins, and transglutami-
nases.13s Another method of action relates to an anti-infanmatory effect in epithelial
 structures by the downregulation of nitrites and TNF-α.!1
All retinoids have variable antiproliferative, anti-infammatory, and immunomodulatory
elfects. Because of their numerous pharmacologic effects, retinoids are being used in the.
manageiment of numerous diseases in humans. The long list includes such diverse diseases
as aene, gram-negative folliculitis, hidradenitis suppurativa, the ichthyoses, multiple forms
of psoriasis, a variety of cutaneous neoplasrrs, epidermal nevi, subcorneal pustular derma-
tosis, discoid lupus erythematosus, lichen planus, cutaneous sarcoidosis, Darier's disease,
 and acanthosis nigricans.s, 13s The biological effects of retinoids are numerous, but their
ability to regulate proliferation, growth, and differentiation of epithelial tissues is their
major benefit in dermatology.ll However, retinoids also affect proteases, prostaglandins,
huinoral and cellular immunity, and cellular adhesion and communication.iss In general,
thc rcsponse of established skin cancers to retinoids is clisappointing. with remissions
being uncommon, incomplete, and of short duration.9 Retinoids enhance wound healing
by stimulating fibroblasts to produce various chemicals (e.g., TGF-B)
 Isotretinoin is usually dosed at I to 3 mg/kg q24h and appears to be indicated in
diseases that require alteration or normalization of adnexal structures, although some
epiderinal diseases may respond.s0 Diseases in which isotretinoin has been reported to be
ceous adenitis (particularly early in the disease in Poodles and Vizslas or shorthaired
thoma,90 1s9. 213 and sebaceous gland hyperplasias and adenomas.13 Isotretinoin has been
ineffective for primary idiopathic seborrhea of Cocker spaniels and Basset hounds and
Dermatologic Therapy ·243
cpidermal dysplasia of West Highland white terriers,52 o0. 139 It was also ineffective in the
 o s re iopo m s q s 
of isotretinoin in the dog and cat appears to be less of a problem than in humans.0.39 In
the dog, conjunctivitis, hypcractivity, pruritus, pedal and mucocutaneous junction ery-
thema, stiffness, vorniting, diarrhea, and keratoconjunctivitis may occur. Laboratory abnor-
malities that are generally not asociated with clinical signs include hyperriglyceridemia,
hypercholesterolcimia, and inereased levels of alanine aminotransferase, aspartate amino-
transferase, and alkaline phosphatase.00 139 In cats, conjnctivitis, darrhea, anorexia, and
vorniting have been the major side effects.67. 90, 139 These side effects may be transient or
self-limited with discontinuation or decrease in dose of the drug. With long-tcrm usc,
skeletal abnormalities, including cortical hypcrostosis, periostcal calcification, and long
Etretinate was believed to be indicated for disorders of epithelial or follicular devel-
 opment or keratinization. Most coinmonly, etretinate was given at 1 1ng/kg q24h. Etretin-
spaniels,6. 90 139 1 Golden retrievers, Irish setters, and some mixed breeds. It has not
been effective in West Highland white terriers, Basset hounds, or collies.90. 130 However,
one of us (C.E.G.) saw some partial responses in West Highland white terriers after
secondary Malassezia dermatitis was controlled. Although the use is more controversial,
etretinate may also be effective in sebaceous adenitis.6. 139 One study on 30 dogs with
sebaceous adenitis showed etretinate to be as effective as isotretinoin (about 50% of the
cases responding), and there was no brced difference in response.214 Some cascs that fail
 to respond to one retinoid respond to the other.
Ichthyosis has also been reported to respond to etretinate. In dogs, solar dermatosis 
and squamous cell carcinoma were reported to improve,fo, 139 Follicular dysplasias such as
color dilution alopecia may also respond, with less scaling and partial hair growth.65 
Keratoacanthomas may also rcspond, although il appcars that isotrctinoin is more cffec-
tive. In humans, acitretin is considcred as cfficacious as ctretinate. IIowever, this has not
bcen documented in dogs and cats. It is more cxpensivc than etrctinatc and, at this time,
is being dosed the same or at one half the recormmended dose of etretinate. Acitretin
(Soriatane, Roche) must be given with food or absorption is highly variable.20s
Toxicity with etretinate is similar to that with isotretinoin. In humans, etretinate is
considered safer for long-term use because of a lower propensity for producing skeletal
abnornalities. However, it is considered more of a teratogen and should be used only in
spaycd femalcs, nonbrceding males, or female dogs that will not be used for breeding.
gram, chemistry profle, and urinalysis. This is repeated in 1 to 2 months and, if no
problems are detected, repeated only as deemed necessary. 139, 140
animals are receiving low-fat diets, it is suggested that dogs being given etretinate may
 not readily stored in fat; therefore, it has less potential for post-treatment teratogenicity.135
However, in humans there is sone conversion to etretinate, producing some, though
probably less, risk.
Cyclosporine
Cyclosporine (Sandimmune, Novartis) is a fat-soluble cyclic polypeptide metabolite of the
transplantation rcjcction.12s In animal models, it has been used with similar excellent
results.210 It is bcing used for a wide variety of dermatologic diseases in humans such as
atopic dermatitis, psoriasis, lichen planus, pyoderma gangrenosum, epidermolysis bullosa
acquisita, actinic derrmatitis, and chronic hand cczema.6o, 5s It has also been evaluated for
244· Dermatologic Therapy
the treatment of immune-mediated skin diseases and epitheliotropic lymphoma in ani-
Most clinicians use the microermulsified capsule or solution forrns of cyclosporine (Neoral,
poq as ao amd pue nq proqe are sd ss sq (prea
levels.
sporine blocks IL-2 transcription and T cell responsiveness to IL-2, leading to impaired T-
armplification signals for macrophage and inonocyte activation. The production of other
cytokines, including IL-3, IL-4, IL-5, TNF-α, and IFN-α may be irnpaired. In these ways,
cyclosporine inhibits mononuclear cell function, antigen presentation, mast cell and eoxin-
ophil production, histaminc and prostlaglandin relcasc from mast cells, neutrophil adlher-
ence, natural killer cell activity, and growth and differentiation of B cells. It has also heen
suggested that a mechanism of action in the treatinent of atopic dermatitis involves the
 inhibition of mast cell degranulation by affecting the interaction betwecn mast cells and
ncrves.190 Cyclosporine also directly inhibits histamine releasc from dog mast cels.55
  o   jo   e o sn
(daily doses of 20 to 30 mg/kg) may experience gingival hyperplasia and papillomatosis,
vomiting, diarrhea, bacteriuria, bacterial skin infection, anorexia, hirsutism, involuntary
shaking, nephropathy, bone Imarrow suppression, and lymphoplasinacytoid dermato-
esssqes
to have only minor side effects (primarily soft feces), although they may be more suscepti-
ble to viral infectionsM. 144 1s Cyelosporine should probably be stopped at least 4 weeks
 prior to intradermal skin testing, 13a
The clinical indications for cyclosporinc therapy are organ transplantation and inhibi-
tion of delayed-type bypersensitivity reactions of many immune-mediated diseases. It is
used in pemphigus foliaceus and immune-mediated myasthenia gravis, thyroiditis, neuritis,
uveitis, and arthritis. Initial studies in clogs and cats with immunologic dermatoses such as
pemphigus foliaceus, pemphigus erythematosus, and discoid lupus erythematosus bave
sebaceous adenitis (see Chap. 18). Cyclosporinc has been ineffective in the treatmcnt of
canine and feline epithcliotropic lynphoma (mycosis fungoides),144 Recent reports indicate
that cyclosporinc is effective or the treatment of canineperianalfstulaIt isbeing
cvaluated for the treatment of canine atopic dermatitis.12s
The oral dosage for dogs and cats is 5 to 10 mg/kg daily, the dose for cats being
divided and given twice daily,93 1s Blood concentrations achieved after a specific dose vary
determined by differences in absorption, distribution, and metabolism. Absorption may be
enhanced by administration with a fatty meal. Frequent drug monitoring is needed to
maintain blood cyclosporine concentrations in an effective range yet avoid toxicities. After
a response 0ccurs, tapering to as low as 10 mg/kg every 48 hours may be effective.144
Because this is an cxpensive drug, the reduction to the lowest effective levels is usually
irnportant. Additionally, the expcnsc and marginal eficacy usually limit its use to cases of
trcatment failure with or adverse reaction to alternative treatiments.
itraconazole, fuconazole, erythroinycin, methylprednisolone, and allopurinel) potentiate
cyclosporine toxicity. When ketoconazole was given to normal dogs (average dose 13.6 mg/
kg/day) that had targeted blood levels of cyclosporine (average daily dose 14.5 mg/kg), the
cyclosporine doses could be reduced by an avcrage of 75%, resulting in a 57.8% savings in
the cost of therapy 3 Clinical applications of this "synergy" are awaited.
Glucocorticoid Hormones
Glucocorticoid hornones have potent effects on the skin, and they profoundly affect
immunologicandiammatoryactivit45160205Thydctlrinrectlyafft
 Dermatologic Therapy · 245
leukocyte kinetics, phagocytic defcnses, cell-mediated immunity, humoral immunity, and
the production of infammatory mediators. The major effects thought to be important in
 counteracting allergic inflainmatory reactions are presented in Table 3-6 and have been
reviewed., i59, 205 In addition, fibroblastic activity is rcduced, synthesis of histamine is
delayed, and complement is inhibited. Antibody production is not stopped but may be
decreased, especially autoantibody titers.
 At pharmacologic levols, glucocorticoids increase the production of lipocortin-l, which
is thought to cause a reduction in the action of phospholipase Ag on cell membranes,
the more clinicaly relevant actions in decreasing infammation. High doses of glucocorti-
 soine allergic dogs glucocorficoids may suppress IgE production at therapeutie protocols
used by some veterinarians.3s. 114
Glucocorticoid response to infammatory stimuli is nonspecific: It is the same whether
it is a response to infection, trauma, toxin, or irmmune complex deposition. The drug must
reach the local site of inflammation to be effective, and the degree of response and
ceilular protection from injury is proportionate to the concentration of glucocorticoid in
the infamed tissue. Thus, dosages and dose intervals should vary with the patient's
specific needs.
Several other factors influence the tissue glucocorticoid effect. One is the relative
 potency of the drug. Synthetic cormpounds made by adding methyl or fuoride groups to
the basic steroid molecule increase the potency and the duration of action. Another factor
is the cffect of protein binding. Only free glucocorticoid is metabolically active. Many
synthetics are poorly protein-bound, which partly explains their relatively high potency at
low doses.
Corticosteroid-binding globulin is a specific glycoprotein that binds glucocorticoids,
 sn go s     m  e s  m
adninistered, its capacity is exceeded, and albumin becomes the protein used for binding.
Animals with low serum albumin levels have a lower binding capacity, and the excessive
unbound glucocorticoid becomes freely available, increasing toxicity,66. 15s In addition, the
route of administration and water solubility affect the duration of action. Oral glucocorti-
coids, given as the free base or as esters, are rapidly absorbed. Parenteral glucocorticoids
are usually esters of acetate, diacetate, phosphate, or succinate. Acetate and diacetate are
relatively insoluble, resulting in slow release and prolonged absorption. The phosphates
and succinates are water-soluble and are rapidly absorbed. As a result, parenteral gluco-
● Table 3-6
ANTI-INFLAMMATORY ACTIONS OF
Glucocorticoids
Effects on eosinophils
 Decrease formation in bonc: marrow
I nduce apoptosis and inhibit prolongation of eosinophil sur-
vival and function from I13 and IL-5
Effects on lymphocytes and monocytes
Reduce number of lymphocytes and 1nonocytes that bear low-
affinity IgE and IgG receptors
Dcerease serum immunoglohulin levels
Decrease all lymphocyte subpopulations
Decrease lymphocyte production of Il.-l, -2, -3. -4, -5, -6. and
IFN-Y
Inhibit release of IL-1l and TNF-α frorn moxnoeytes
Effects on mast cells
May decrease number of mast cells
Effects on neutrophils
Decreased chemotaxis, adhercnce, and enzyme secretion
Inhibition of phospholipasc Ag
Decrease production of arachicdonie acid 1netabolites
Decrease produetion of platelet-activating factor
Decreased vascular permcability
Mechanism imkmown
Reversal of reduced β-adrenergic re-
sponsivcness
receptors expressed on cell surface
IL = interleukin; TNF = tumor necrosis factor; IFN = interferon.
 246 · Dermatologic Therapy
corticoids produce continuous low levels of glucocorticoid for days (water-soluble) or
weeks (water-insoluble). The effect produces significant adrenal suppression, a problem
effects if present in excess or at the wrong time. In addition, adverse effects may relate to
the numerous other effects that glucocorticoids have on carbohydrate, protein, and lipid
metabolism. It is imperative to make an accurate diagnosis so that the need for, type.
cluration, and level of glucocorticoid therapy can be determined. Except in the case of
hypoadrenocorticism, glucocorticoids do not correct a primary deficiency but act sympto-
matically or palliatively. The anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive actions desired for
one therapeutic need may facilitate the establishment or spread of concomitant infections
 or parasitic diseases.
 Animals treated with glucocorticoids tend to experience bacterial infections of the skin
ticoids on phagocytosis and cell-mediated immunity, increased susceptibility to fungal
 infections and intracellular pathogens is to be expected.37
INDICATIONS
The major indications for glucocorticoid therapy are hypersensitivity derrmatoses (Hea-bite
contact dermatitis (irritant or hypersensitivity reactions), and immune-mediated dermato-
ses (pemphigus, pemphigoid, and lupus erythematosus). They are occasionally used in
d  ps sas a p  su ns s s  
ter 18. Whenever possible, their use should be short term (less than 3 months).
p s e a  e  d    ss
ses, and thc clinician must control or minimize other predisposing. precipitating, and
complicating factors to keep the glucocorticoids in their proper perspective, which is to
use therm (1) as infrequently as possible, (2) at as low a dose as possible, (3) in alternate-
day regimens whenever possible, and (4) only when other lcss hazardous forms of therapy
have failed or could not be employed.81, s3 160. 161
ADMINISTRATION
For dermatoses, glucocorticoids are usually administered orally, by injection (intramuscu-
larly, subcutaneously, intralesionally, and intravenously), topically, or in some combination
thereof In any given patient, the decision as to which route or routes to employ depends
on various factors.
 Of the systermie routes, oral administration is preferred because (1) it can be more
            
drug can be rapidly withdrawn if undesirable side effects occur) and (2) it is the only safe,
therapeutic, physiologic way to administer glucocorticoids for more long-term ther-
Injectable glucocorticoids are usually administered intramuscularly or subcutaneously.
clinicians administer them subcutaneously. The reasons purported for choosing the subcu-
taneous route are (l) there are few patient objections (and fewcr pet-owner crises) and
(2) it is clinically as effective as intramuscular administration.160
There is a theoretical preference for using the intrarmuscular route in the obese
patient because subcutaneous deliveries could be sequestered in fat tissue.However,the
 n      u     r 
decrease the occurrcnce of local atrophy. Although this problem may be more common in
humans, it also occurs in the dog. Local areas of alopecia, pigmentary changes, and
cpidermal and derinal atrophy are more commonly induced by subcutaneous injection.
These reactions are noninfammatory and atrophic in contrast with most other injection
Dermatologic Therapy · 247
reactions. Yorkshire and Silky terriers, Lhasa apsos, Poodles, and Shih tzus may be
 predisposed to this rcaction.67
 An excellent injectable anti-inflammatory glucocorticoid is methylprednisolone acetate
(Depo-Medrol, Pharmacia & Upjohn). Clinically, dogs are given doses of 1.1 mg/kg and
cats are given 20 mg/cat or 5.5 mg/kg, subcutaneously or intramuscularly, and the effect
may last for 1 week to 6 months. Othcr commonly used injectable glucocorticoids are
presented in Table 3-7.
 Intralesional injections of glucocorticoids are often thought of as local, intracutaneous
therapy, devoid of any systemic effect. Intralesional therapy is employed for solitary or
multiple cutaneous lesions, but it has systeinic effects, some of which can he serious. The
 major indications for intralesional use are acral lick dermatitis, histiocytomas, sterile granu-
 lomas, eosinophilic granulomas, feline indolent ulcers, and proliferative otitis exterma. In
 general, triamcinolone acetonide is the glucocorticoid of choice for intralesional therapy.
 Intravenous use for dermatologic indications is primarily limited to regirnens of pulse
therapy for immune-mediated dermatoses. In addition to the intravenous route, high
 dosages are used. In a study, dogs were hospitalized and given 1l mg/kg of methylpred-
nisolone sodium succinate intravenously in 250 ml of 5% dextrose and water during a 1-
therapy include immediate symptomatic relief, avoidance of the side effects that accom-
 or discontinue thc use of oral glucocorticoids after the pulse therapy. The side effects
occurring with intravenous pulse therapy, such as cardiac arrhythmias, pancreatitis, diabe-
1not
routinely observed, to limit this form of therapy to animals with severe disease.37. 78. 212
CHOOSING A GLuCOCORTICOId
The choice of a glucocorticoid may be difficult. One cannot establish a single rule or set
 of rules that applies to all patients with a given glucocorticoid-responsive dermatosis.
Factors that must be considered include the duration of therapy, the personality of the
 patient, the personality and reliability of the owner, the response of the patient to the
● Table 3-7
INJECTable GlucoCOrtIcoidS for uSe In
prurItIc DoGs And cats
MANUFACTURER'S REGIMEN
AGENT
BRAND NAME
COMPANY
Dose
Route
Betamethasone
Betasone
Schering-Plough
0.2-0.4 mg/kg in dog
IM
Dexamethasone:
Azim
Schering-Plongh
-0
IM
0.125-0.5 mg/cat
IM
Dexamethasone
Generic
Many
0.25-1 mg/dog
IM
0.125-0.5 mg/cut
IM
Flumethasone
Flucort
Fort Dodge
0.06-0.25 mg/dog
 IM or SC
ju 710-500
IM or SC
Methylprednisolone
Depo-Medrol
 Pharrmacia & Upjohn
2-40 mg/dog
IM
10-20 mg/cat
1M
Triamcinolone
Vetalog
 Fort Dodge
0.1-0.2 my/kg in dog
IM o1 SC
0.1-0.2 mg/kg in cat
IM or SC
 Prednisone
 Meticorten
Schering-Plough
0.5-2.2 rmg/kg q24h
IM
in dog
0.5-2.2 mg/kg q24h
IM
in cat
Ceneric
Many
0.5 mg/kg q24h
IM
IM = intramuscular; SC = subeutaneous.
248 + Dermatologic Therapy
 drug, the response of the patient's disease to the drug, and other considerations specific to
the patient or the disease.
The personality of the patient can significantly infuence the choice of glucocorticoid;
witness the attempts to administer pills to the obstreperous cat that is a blur of fur, fangs,
and claws. Likewise, the reliabity of the owner can be the deciding factor: There are
term use even in these situations, the risk of injectable glucocorticoids overrides these
drawbacks.
 The clinician leams, by history or personal experience, that some glucocorticoids do
not seem to work as well as others in certain patients. However, the claim that injectable
 glucocorticoids are needed in some cases and that oral glucocorticoids are not effective is
rarely accurate. In the majority of these cases, ineffective oral dosages were used or
tapered too fast. A common rmistake is to give an injection, then go immediately to a low
alternate-day oral dose.67. 160 In somc cases, the problern probably reflects dosage, absorp-
tion, and metabolic differences.
As a corolary, the clinician notes that, in some patients, a glucocorticoid that was
previously satisfactory apparently loses its effectiveness. For example, in an atopic dog that
initially did well when given prednisolone, the prednisolone seemed to lose its effect.
Subsequently, the dog responded well to equipotent doses of orally administered triamcin-
olone. In most cases, after a variable length of time, the clinician is able to return to
managing the atopy successfully with prednisolone. This well-recognized but poorly under-
tachyphylaxis, the real problem is the development of concurrent disorders.64, 160 In such
cases, secondary bacterial pyoderma, Malassezia dermatitis, increased exposure to feas or
reactions to ongoing topical therapy are often the reasons for failure of previously effective
glucocorticoid regimens.
 Finally, the clinician may discover, by history or personal experiencc, that a patient
can reccive certain glucocorticoids without sigmificant adverse effects but not other gluco-
corticoids. Hence, a dog may experience colitis or behavioral changes with prednisolone
but not with methylprednisolone, dexarmethasone, or triamcinolone. In some cases, switch-
ing to methylprednisolone or triamcinolone may have a relative steroid-sparing effect. A
lower dose than the prednisolone equivalent nay be effective for that diseasc in that
animal. In some cases, signs of iatrogenic Cushing's disease or marked liver enzyme
men.64
THERAPEUTIC DOSAGE
Optimal therapeutic doses have not been scientifically determined for any canine or feline
dermatosis. Presently espoused anti-infammatory, antipruritic, antiallergic, or immunosup-
pressive glucocorticoid doses have been determined through years of clinical experience.
Moreover, it is imperative to remember that every patient is unique and that glucocorti-
 coid therapy must be individualized. Recommended glucocorticoid doses are only guide.
lines.
The two most commonly used oral glucocorticoids are prednisolone and prednisone.
For all practical purposes, these two drugs are identical (the choice of one or the other is
usualy based on cost). However, prednisone must be converted in the liver to predniso-
lone, the active form. Dosage recommendations in this text are based on prednisolone
ages of other oral glucocorticoids.
Physiologic doses of glucocorticoids are those that approximate the daily cortisol
(hydrocortisone) production by normal individuals. In dogs, daily cortisol produetion has
Dermatologic Therapy · 249
●Table 3-8
Relative potency and Activity Of oral
GlucocortIcoids
EQUIVALENT DOSE
 DURATION OF EFFECT
ALTERNATE-DAY
DRUG
(mg)
(h)
THERAPY
Short-Acting
Cortisone
25
8-12
NAS
Hydrcortisone
20
8-12
NAS
Intermediate-Acting
Prednisone
5
24-36
P
Prednisolonc
5
24-36
P
Methylprednisolone
4
24-36
Long-Acting
Flumethasone:
1.3
36-48
A
Triamcinolone
0.5
36-48
Dexamethasone
0.5
36-54
Betamethasone
0.4
36-54
I May be uisefil on every-third-day reginen.
pharmacologic dose of glucocorticoid, no matter how large or small, rmay suppress the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. 160 165, 181
Clinicians usually talk in terms of anti-infamnatory versus immunosuppressive doses
of glucocorticoids. A commonly used anti-infammatory (as in allergic dermatoses) induc-
such as the dog with fea bite hypersensitivity that has numerous feas, a higher dosage of
lowered as rruch as possible and optimally ends up at less than 0.25 to 0.5 mg/kg every
48 hours. For inmune-mediated diseases, the initial dosage is usually 2.2 mg/kg q24h. If
h  9'g se q s on pas aq  s assn o sh a
Many clinicians (D.w.s., W.H.M.; see also ref. 69) adrninister oral glucocorticoids
only once daily and find no loss of clinical efficacy but a definite reduction in side effects.
A commonly used iuununosuppressive maintenance dosage for dogs is 1.1 mg of predniso-
Jone per kilogram every other morning.
 In general, compared with dogs, cats require about twice the dose of glucocorticoid
orally for induction (anti-inffammatory: 2.2 mg/kg/d; immunosuppressive: 4.4 mg/kg/d) and
their decreased number of glucocorticoid receptors.1% It is probable that the diurnal
rhythm of dogs and cats is not dramatic, and timing dosages to morning or evening hours
is less important than was previously thought. It is important, however, to maintain the
 24-hour altermate-day freedom from medication so that adrenal suppression and chronic
side effects are minimized.
REGIMEN
Glucocorticoid regimens vary with the nature of the dermatosis, the specific glucocorticoid
being administered, and the use of induction versus maintenance therapy.
In general, dermatoses necessitating anti-inflammatory coses of oral glucocorticoid
 need smaller doses and shorter periods of daily induction therapy to bring about remission
compared with dermatoses necessitating immunosuppressive doses. Anti-infammatory in-
duction doses are usually given for 2 to 6 days, whereas immunosuppressive induction
doses are often administered for 4 to 10 days. Initially, the doses are given every 24 hours
al si asop Ap peio an 'uu sip t on 7 iog su zi Aaa u pe pp io
 no paseaop  a sss jo suis pun panoo si s sou i ia
remission. After this point, tapering to maintenance therapy begins.
250·Dermatologic Therapy
Maintenance therapy with oral glucocorticoid is best accomplished with prednisolone,
often effective in managing prcdnisone-responsive cases at doses of approximately 10% to
20% of the prednisone dose (on a milligram basis).66, 16o According to the standard
published glucocorticoid potency equivalency, this is a significant steroid-sparing effect.
However, because triamcinolone suppresses the hypothalarmic-pituitary-adrenal axis for 24
to 48 hours, it is hest given every 72 hours.
tion therapy is given as a single massive dose, usually every other morning for dogs and
every other evening for cats. Some clinicians (D.W.S. and W.H.M.) begin alternate-day
gradually reduce one alternate-day dose until no drug is given, whereas the other alter.
dose is reduced by 50%, every I to 2 weeks, until the lowest satisfactory maintenance
dose is achieved. This regimen does not eliminate adrenal atrophy, but the atrophy is less
 severe and its onset is delayed. It is the only dosage system that should be used for long-
term therapy of steroid-responsive diseases in small animals.
In some animals, alternate-day glucocorticoid therapy can be extended to every third
 or fourth day. Rarely, anti-infammatory alternate-day glucocorticoid therapy with the
 preferred prednisolone, prednisone, or methylprednisolone is not successful. In these
cases, the clinician has three therapeutic options (assuming that glucocorticoid therapy is
all that can be done):
1. Administer prednisolone, prednisone, or methylprednisolone daily, informing the
owner of the inevitability of iatrogenic hyperglucocorticoidism.
2. Switch to a more potent oral glucocorticoid on an alternate-day basis.
3. Switch to injectable glucocorticoids.
Although the more potent oral glucocorticoids are usually satisfactory for altermate-day
therapy unless given at low doses, they do not spare the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
axis (because of potency and duration of effect). They may occasionally be employed with
few or no significant side effects, especially in cats, 160Clnically, the most satisfactory
agents in this respect appear to be triamcinolone and dexamethasone. Because of factors
related to the patient and the owner, not the disease, some animals may be satisfactorily
 managed with only injectable glucocorticoids.
Intramuscular or subcutaneous glucocorticoid therapy is usually fine for acute, short-
 term diseases that necessitate a single injection. Additionally, animals that need only three
for dermatoses that need long-term maintenance therapy, injectable glucocorticoids are
usually not satisfactory. It has becn shown that a single intramuscular injection of methyl.
prednisolone acetate (Depo-Medrol, Pharmacia & Upjohn) is capable of altering adreno-
cortical function in dogs for at least 5, and up to 10, weeks.s1 In other studies, a single
intramuscular injection of triaimcinolone acetonide (Vetalog, Fort Dodge) was capable of
altering adrenocortical function in dogs for up to 4 weeks.&2. 160
lntralesional injections of glucocorticoids are usually repeated every 7 to 10 days until
the dermatosis is in remission (usually two to four treatinents) and then given as needed.
SIDE EFFECTS
The side effects associated with systemic glucocorticoid therapy in dogs are numer-
ous.161 165 In contrast, cats apear relatively tolerant to this therapy, although they inf
pinnae, alopecia, thin and easily torm skin, and diabetes mellitus. Rare cases may even
involve steroid hepatopathy.149
Because of the diverse effects of glucocorticoids on protein, lipid, and carbohydrate
metabolism: endocrine function; fuid balance; and host defense mechanisms, it is ex-
 pected that glucocorticoids are associated with many side effects. Sequelae may appear
Dermatologic Therapy · 25 I
with any duration or form of glucocorticoid therapy. In rnost cases, the side effects with
short-tcrm therapy may also occur with long-term therapy but are not generally major
hcalth problems. The exceptions are the acute sequelae of high-dose therapy. These
(or equipotent doses of other glucocorticoids).
In a study published in 1998, 105 dogs with neurologic injury were treated with
prednisolone sodium succinate at 30 mg/kg IV q6h for 36 hours.39 In this group of dogs,
none of the serious side effects was seen, suggesting that the incidence is relatively low.
One third of the dogs did experience less severe complications, including diarrhea and
melena in 10%, and lower percentages experienced vomiting, hematochezia, anorexia, and
hematemesis. In other studies, dogs given 15 to 30 ng/kg methylprednisolone sodium
succinate intravenously developed gastric hemorrhage which was not prevented by miso-
prostol.143b.143c
The other side effects that are not rclated to treatment duration include polyuria,
polydipsia, polyphagia (which may lead to weight gain), behavioral changes (depression,
hyperactivity, and aggression), panting, and diarrhea. Most of these side effects are some-
what dose-related. However, the disease being treated may not be controllable at a dosage
that docs not produce the undesired results. In general, these side effects are mininized
types of glucocorticoid may also eliminate these sequelae. About 30% of the dogs treated
with anti-inflammatory doses of prednisone or prednisolone experience side effects that
are sufficiently undesirable to necessitate stopping treatment. This percentage drops to
about I0% when methylprednisolone is used.
 Long-terim therapy is associated with many more side effects, particularly side effects
leading to poor health or disease. Of major concern is the increased risk of infections. A
variety of bacterial infections may occur, but the mnost cormmon are bacteriuria, pyoderma,
septicemia, and respiratory infections. Prolonged distention of the bladder with dilute
urine likely contributes to the increased incidence of urinary tract infections in dogs on
long-term glucocorticoid therapy. Generalized demodicosis or Malassezia dermatitis may
also occur. Common cutancous and subcutaneous changes include dry pcor coat, dry scaly
skin, fat redistribution, and an increase in lipomas or their sizc. In more susceptible dogs
or dogs rcceiving higher dosages, alopecia, thin skin, hypotonic skin, calcinosis cutis,
atrophic remodeling of scars, comedones, and milia-like folicular cysts may occur alone or
in combination.
Osteoporosis, muscle atrophy, and weak ligaments may result from the glucocorticoid
effects of protein catabolisn, fbroblast inhibition, and decreased intestinal calcium absorp-
tion. Although no studies have documented an association, it has been suggested that dogs
receiving long-term glucocorticoid therapy are at higher risk for ligament damage, particu-
muscle was attributed to glucocorticoid therapy in one dog.141
The alteration in metabolism may lead to hyperlipidemia and steroid hepatopathy.
tes mellitus, decreased thyroid hormone synthesis, and increased parathyroid hormone
regimers are uncommon in dogs, occurring in less than l0% of the animals treated.
However, with imrmunosuppressive regimens, the frequency and the severity of glucocorti-
coid sidc effects escalate alarrningly and less than 50% of the dogs so treated can be
 It must be emphasized that alternate-day therapy with prednisolone is not a pan-
acea.22 Occasionally, some dogs cannot be suiccessfully managed with such therapy without
in serun protein levels, receptor levels, or absorption, metabolism, or clearancc of gluco-
corticoid in those individuals. Additionally, individual variation is occasionally dramatic in
252· Dermatologic Therapy
degrees of iatrogenic hyperglucocorticoidism occur after as little as 3 weeks to as long as 7
years of therapy, and (2) calcinosis cutis or full-blown Cushing's syndrome may be an
individual dog's only manifestation of hyperglucocorticoidism. 159 161. 16
Although clinically effective doses of systemie glucocorticoids in cats are usually twice
polyphagia, a tendency for weight gain, depression, and diarrhca occasionaily occur. Signif-
icant iatrogenic hyperglucocorticoidism has been produced in cats only after the weekly
subcutaneous administration of methylprednisolone acetate for 10 weeks. Cats rarely expe-
rience typical iatrogenic Cushing's syndrome with fewer doses.5s Obviously, such therapy
would never be either employed or indicated in clinical situations.
Significant side effects after intralesional glucocorticoid therapy have not been re-
ported in dogs and cats. Local cutaneous atrophy and local infammatory reactions (pre-
sumably due to crystalline material left at the injection site) are rare. These side effects,
as well as panniculitis, sterile abscesses, necrosis, and pigmentary disturbances, are well
rccognized in humans.57 181. 186
A potentially much more signifcant side effect of intralesional therapy is systemic
hyperglucocorticoidism.160. 172 Normal dogs given subconjunctival injections of methylpred
days.172 Aditionally, dogs that received intracutaneous or subconjunctival injections of
skin test allergens for up to 4 weeks. The health significance of such findings in dogs is
unknown. Certainly, such medications could influence interpretation of results of hemato-
logic, adrenal function, and intradermal allergy skin tests.
EVALUATION
Evaluation of the results during glucocorticoid therapy is important. When appropriate
 systermic anti-infammatory glucocorticoid therapy is given to an otherwise healthy dog or
cat, the risks are minimal. The risks associated with immunosuppressive doses are of
threatening diseases, which will probably be trcated for the rest of the animal's life.
 Significant concurrent dysfunction of major organ systems also drastically increases thc
risks. Some owners balk at the expense, the risk, 'the unpleasant side effects, or the
complex therapy protocol, and they refuse treatment. Occasionaly, the clinician may be
forced to choose between using drugs that may not be in the aninal's best long-term
interest or performning euthanasia at the owner's request.
When long-term systeinic therapy is started, owners should be instructed to observe
check-up is advised every 6 to 12 months. Periodic urinalysis and urine cultures may be
needed to recognize urinary tract infections that are not clinically apparent. Serum chem-
 Marked suppression indicates that other attempts at lowering the dosagc shouid be made
day steroid therapy usually have mildly to moderately suppressed adrenocortical responses
to ACTH and elevated serum alkaline phosphatase levels but are otherwise clinically
normal.
Interferons
Interferons are a family of regulatory proteins that can act on a variety of different cell
types and profoundly affect a number of biological functions, including host defense
mechanisms against viral and bacterial infections; cel proliferation, dlifferentiation, and
functional activation; antitumor effects; IFN-y immunomodulation; monocyte and macro-
 phage activation; cytotoxic T cell activation and differentiation; stimulation of MHC I and
p pap pue 'usoqeau pidy jo uonensar uonnpond apoqnre ho a uoissadxa 
Dermatologic Therapy · 253
indirect activation of numerous cytokines,145a In humans, various recombinant products
(IFN-α-2a [Roferon-A, Roche]; IFN-α-2b [Intron-A, Schering]; IFN-B-1b [Betaseron,
epitheliotropic lymphoma to atopy, discoid lupus crythematosus, and chronic granuloma-
tous disease.
In dogs and cats, anecdotal reports indicate that IFN-α-2a (Roferon-A) and IFN-α-2h
 are being tried in a number of dermatologic conditions. 56a These include multiple papillo.
mas in young and old dogs and cats, herpesvirus dermatitis in cats, idiopathic facial
derrmatosis of Himalayan and Persian cats, epitheliotropic lymphorma in dogs, and recur-
rent bacterial pyoderma in dogs. Some cases of feline indolent ulcer have responded, but
cosinophilic plaques and eosinophilic granulomas have not.
The standard dilution procedure is as follows: 3 million IU into 1 L of sterile saline
gives a solution of 3000 IU/ml, which can be frozen for l year. Ten milliliters of this
solution added to l L of sterile saline gives a solution of 30 IU/ml, which can be stored
(not frozen) in the refrigerator for several months. This solution may be given orally or
subcutaneously. Doses for dogs vary from 1 to 1.5 million IU/m? BSA to 1 to 3 million
IU/dog/day or 3 times weekly. The dose for cats is 60 to 120 IU/cat/day. Little factual
 information is available on the irmmunologic and therapeutic effects of interferons in dogs
and cats.
 In humans, side effects arc usually mild and reversible, with fulike symptoms being
the most common.215 Side effects are not reported in dogs and cats.
Melatonin
The hormone melatonin is synthesized in the pineal gland from L-tryptophan. It is most
readily known and often studied in reptilian and amphibian species. Melatonin is involved
in the neuroendocrine control of photoperiod-dependent molting and/or pelage color in
    s         
nervous system to alter secretion of melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH) and/or pro-
lactin. Melatonin secretion is tied to the photoperiod, with the greatest production during
shortest.132
When melatonin was administered orally to normal dogs, blood levels were signifi-
cantly increased for 8 hours.9 In female dogs, there was a significant decrease in blood
levels of estradiol, testosterone, and dehydroepiandrosterone. In male dogs, there was a
significant decrease in blood levels of estradiof and 17-OH progesterone. Blood levels of
prolactin and thyroid hormone were unaffected.
There is an inverse relation with circulating prolactin levels and the secretion of
MSH.132 Melatonin and prolactin levels may be involved in the seasonal growth of winter
haircoats and spring molt in mammalian species such as mink, i which implants of
melatonin have been used to artificially induce early winter coat production.
The original uses for melatonin in veterinary dermatology go back to the 1960s, when
it was recommended for the treatment of acanthosis nigricans.i42 However, melatonin has
recently received attention because of possible effects on a variety of canine hair growth
disorders. The beneficial effects of melatonin for the treatinent of chronic recurrent flank
recurrent fank alopecia, nine dogs were treated, three with two subcutaneous injections of
melatonin (12.5 mg) in soybean oil at 2-week intervals and six dogs with 36 mg of
melatonin subcutaneous implants. All nine dogs failed to cxperience the typical recurrence
 of alopecia.130
In canine pattern baldness, 1l dogs all had improved hair growth after melatonin
therapy. Seven dogs received subcutaneous implants, but four dogs were treated orally
with 5 mg q24h for 30 days.131 We and others have noted varying responses to oral
melatonin treatment with these diseascs. In addition, cases with pinnal alopecia, suspected
adrenal sex hormone imbalance, or alopecia associated with excessive trichilemmal keratin-
 t  o   s n
254 · Dermatologic Therapy
Melatonin is available in nonprescription form as a dietary supplement at most health
food stores, often in 3-mg tablets. Only licensed products have guaranteed purity. Cap-
sules can be 1nade from melatonin crystalline powder (Sigima Chemical Company). Oral
melatonin has a short half-life, and empirical protocols call for 3 to 6 mg/dog q8h. The
relative efficacy of oral versus injectable or subcutaneous implant therapy still needs to be
evaluated. Injectable melatonin is available from Rickards Research Foundation (Cleve-
land, OH). Constant-release implants with 2.5 mg or 12 mg are available from Wildlife
Pharmaceuticals (Fort Collins, CO).132 Some dogs receiving subcutaneous implants experi-
ence sterile abscesses or granulomas.
 ORAL SUNSCREENS
   a       ss a
radicals and stabilize membranes. They have not been proved to prevent sunburn in
humans but have been useful in cases of light-induced dermatosis.102. 150 A β-carotene
derivative has been used in cats and dogs to reduce phototoxicity (see Chap. 16). Cantha-
sources. The safety of this product has been challenged. Side effects include orange-
brown skin, brick-red stools, crystalline gold deposits on the retinae, orange plasma, and
lowered amplitudes on electroretinograms. The usual maximal dosage for humans is 25
mg/kg daily, but some companies recommend four 30-mg capsules once daily (Golden
Tan, Orobronze). In toxicity studies of dogs, the long-term and short-term lethal dose is
 greater than 10,000 mg/kg.
● SKIN SURGERY
-dap mou  p re s no pd p r aq rn s u
ments have arisen, from skin biopsies for diagnosis to cryosurgery for specialized proce.
dures. It is essential to know what equipment is nceded and to be able to use the
discussed in this chapter. Biopsy techniques arc covered in Chapter 2.
Dermatologists recomnend plastic surgery for the correction of anatomic defects
causing dermatoses of facial, tail, vulva, and lip folds. Skin grafting (pinch, strip, mesh,
and pedicle grafts) is useful to repair defects of skin of the extremities when tumors or
lesions such as acral lck dermatitis have been removed surgically. Plastic repair of ear
faps and the extermal ear canal may be helpful in correcting associated dermatologic or
cosmetic problems. Plastic surgery techniques are not discussed in this chapter, but
information on them can be found in references. 13, 177 183
Cold Steel Surgery
Excision of small tumors and other lesions is a minor procedure that can often bc
 performed on an outpatient basis but is usually better performed if the animal is held in
the hospital for several hours. This enables the practitioner to use tranquilization, seda-
tion, or general anesthesia as needed to promote control and relaxation of the patient.
Cases requiring extensive surgery with plastic repair procedures and grafts need an oper-
 ating room with complete aseptic routine. Even minor cases, however, must be handled
with proper preparation, sterile instruments, and other measures to accorplish a scrupu-
lously clean operation.
d  s  ro  s sa o  
forms minor techniques on skin that is relatively hairless; therefore, the cosmetic effects
are crucial. Most procedures appear complex because avoidance of scarring is a primary
consideration. In veterinary dermatology, the clinician should, of course, avoid disfigure-
ment, but because of the dense pelage, small scars are relatively unimportant.
Dermatologic Therapy · 255
With any surgical procedure, it is necessary to clip the hair closely, wash the unbro-
ken skin surface carefully until it is clean using a surgical scrub solution such as l%
chlorhexidine diacetate (Nolvasan, Fort Dodge) or 0.75% povidone-iodine (Betadine, Pur-
due Frederick), and rinse thoroughly. The skin is defatted by wiping the surface in a
circular fashion from the center outward, using sterile swabs soaked in 70% alcohol. The
skin can then be sprayed or swabbed with 0.5% solution of chlorhexidine diacetate or, as
a second choice, 1% solution of povidone-iodine. The surgical site is then ready to drape.
 If a mast cell tumor is suspected, one should avoid a rough surgical preparation, which
 could trigger the release of vasoactive substances.
 Basic instruments needed for skin surgery are in the average emergency or spay pack.
 The following additional instruments are useful for the delicate work in many skin surgical
procedures:
1. Bard-Parker handles and blades, Nos. 10, 1l, and 15
 2. Small curved mosquito hemostats
3. Allis tissue forceps
4. Skin hooks (sharp single prong)
5. Iris forceps (mouse-toothed)
6. Olsen-Hegar needle holder with suture scissors
7. Skin punches, sizes 1 to 9 mm
8. Small automatic skin retractor
The lesions should be outlined by elliptic scalpel incisions that extend through the
skin. The specimen or lesion is dissected free from the underlying tissue with scissors,
 s sie   r  sn   h oq ro s
 oriented parallel to the tension lines. For closure, nylon sutures such as Vetafl produce
good approximation with minimal scarring. Many quality suture materials are available,
and the exact selection is a matter of personal preference. Swaged-on needles can further
reduce the chance of infection and result in smaller scars. In routine cases with small
incisions, the sutures can be removed in 10 to 14 days.
Cryosurgery
Cryosurgery is the controlled use of freezing temperatures to destroy undesirable tissue
while doing minimal damage to surrounding healthy tissue, In general, cryosurgery is the
 si no   n s s  s r s so
does not cure where a blade does not cure, but it is sometimes more convenient.
 The anal and oral areas are preferred sites for cryosurgery, and it is indicated in
 selected cases of acral lick dermatitis. Specific conditions in which cryosurgery may be
indicated include perianal fistulae, oral timors, rectal tumors, nasal mucosal tumors, tail
gland hyperplasia, feline indolent ulcers, and acral lick dermatitis. In the nasal, oral, and
rectal areas, where surgical access and hemostasis are diffcult, cryosurgery has advantages.
s ps o  pni q noo  s   o ss s u
cryosurgery offers a favorable alternative to skin grafting. For readers who are seriously
The discussion of cryosurgery includes basic principles, freezing agents, cryosurgical
units, and dermatologic indications.
BASIC PRINCIPLES
The Iethal effect of subzero temperatures on cells depends on five factors:
1. Type of cell being frozen
2. Rate of freezing
3. Final temperature (must be at least - 20°C)
4. Rate of thawing
 5. Repetition of the freeze-thaw cycle
256· Dermatologic Therapy
Cell damage is more severe with rapid freezing, slow thawing, and three freeze-thaw
cycles. A final temperature of - 70°C is reached at the surface of the probe with nitrous
oxide cquipment so that it can cool only a limited mass of tissue below the required
 20°℃, thereby restricting its application to small, superficial lesions. A final temperature
of - 185°C can be rcached at the tissue junction using liquid nitrogen. This enables the
forming of a larger ice ball of tissue and allows larger areas to be effectively frozen.
A spray of liquid nitrogen is the most effective way to freeze large tumor masses, but
this technique poses the greatest potential hazard if used carelessly. One advantage is that
-up e pu us i aq isy tazo aq u ss e po Aud jo asq a
eated area extending 3 to 5 mm beyond the visible edge. The remaining tissues within
this frozen “stockade" can be treated by spraying in ever-decreasing circles. Used with
care, the spray may prevent the escape of malignant cells into the circulation, and it
cnablcs the operator to form supcricial, solid frozen plaques on the surface without
damaging deeper structures. In contrast, a probe must frecze a hemisphere as deep as the
 r sur dap a e son ou n on  si i s i
tissues to be frozen to monitor the effect and to prevent cxccssive damage to normal
tissue.
 In human dermatology, it is common to apply liquid nitrogen with an ordinary cotton
applicator stick, which is dipped into the container of liquid and touched to the lesion,
frequently a small tumor or wart. The applicator stick is touched intermittently to the
 lesion until the desired area and depth are frozen. Dermatologists with experience in
using this method get good results. The pain is minimal and well tolerated without local
 anesthesia by most patients.
Many soft tissues, especially glandular tissues, are particularly susceptible to freezing.
On the other hand, bone, fascia, tendon sheath, perineurium, and the walls of large blood
vessels are fairly resistant. A knowledge of rclative tissue susceptibility is of great practical
importance.
  s    s   o e  og
 s  s s o oi q e p ao sn nsn  ou o s o
Freezing is accomplished much more rapidly during the second and third freeze because
circulation to the targct area has been compromised.
When a cell mass is frozen and left to die in situ, mermbrane lipoprotein complexes, and
hence antigen-antibody complexing and receptor sites, are inevitably disrupted or altered.
They are probably not totally destroyed, The nucleus may remain relativcly intact. Thus,
for a short timc, antigenicity may be enhanced. Enough antigen is released systemically to
produce a strong specifie imrmunologic response that may kill escaped cells of the same
tumor species.
After cryosurgery of canine skin tissue, histopathologic changes occur in an orderly
progression of edema, erythena, infltration of infammatory cells, tissue necrosis, slough-
 ing, repair by granulation, and re-epithelialization.25
ADVANTAGES
Cryosurgery has the following aclvantages:
1. Lesions can be removed in areas where the skin is so tight or the lesion so large
that closure with sutures is impossible. Large lcsions of acral lick dermatitis or
tumors on the lower portions of the leg arc cxamples.
2. In cases in which conventional excision surgery would produce shock or excessive
in old or debilitated patients. Scarring is slight, and the cosmetic effect is good.
normal tissue. Chances of tumor cells spreading from premalignant lesions are
reduced.
 4. Cryosurgery has a possible immunotherapeutic effect on malignant neoplasms.
Dermatologic Therapy · 257
DISADVANTAGES
Cryosurgery has the following disadvantages:
1. The surgeon performing cryosurgery must be experienced and needs postgraduate
training. Without specialized knowledge and skill, undesirable sequelae can result.
2. The necrosis and sloughing of frozen tissue are visually unpleasant and malodorous
for 2 to 3 weeks after cryosurgery.
 3. Regrowth of depigmented, white hair on the surgery site somctimcs leaves a
cosmetic defect.
4. Vital structures surrounding the frozen lesion may be damaged. This applies espe-
cially to blood vessels, nerves, tendons, ligaments, and joint capsulcs. For cxample,
anal sphincter is damaged. Freezing of bone can result in pathologic fractures.
 5. Large blood vessels frozen during cryosurgery for tumor removal may start bleed-
ing 30 to 60 minutes later, when postoperativc attention has ben relaxed, or
several hours later when the anirmal is at home. Air embolism is possible if sprays
are used on opcn vessels.
6. Cryosurgery is contraindicated for mast cell tumors.
FREEZING AGENTS
dioxide and Freon have also beeu used, although not commonly by veterinarians.
Liquid nitrogen is the most popular freezing agent in cryosurgery. It is a clear,
colorless, odorless liquid. It is not fammable and produces a temperature of --195.8°℃
(-320.5°F). It can usually be obtained frorn the medical supply companies that sell
oxygen or from welding gas suppliers. Liquid nitrogen is delivered in variously sized
vacuum-insulated Dewar's Hasks. It can casily be poured from the Hask into the cryosurgi-
cal unit. When simall quantities are sufficient, physicians keep liquid nitrogen in ordinary
quart insulated (Thermos) bottles that are reflled as needed by the supplier. If not
nitrogen can be kept active for a limited time. Usualy, 1l month is the maximum if the
original container is opened several times.
Nitrous oxide is the second most popular freezing agent and is most effective for
removing small tumors (less than 3 cm) or for treating superficial skin lesions. It requires
cryosurgical units specifically designed for its usc. Applied with prohes, it produces a
temperature of - 89°C (- 138°F). Although it is more expensive on a per-unit basis than
liquid nitrogen, there is no waste and nitrous oxide is readily available in veterinary
hospitals that use gas anesthesia (halothane, nitrous oxide, and oxygen). Onc large tank
can be used for many months because it is usually connected directly to the unit and is
 I1ot poured, as is liquid nitrogen.
CRYOSURGICAL UNITS
Cryosurgical units deliver the freezing action by spray or probe. Some units (smaller,
pue Aends yoq aay sn iauo su ses au keadis on pausisp ane (san piu-pu
 probe attachments.
 Some cryosurgery units deliver gas to a probe that is held against the tissue or
inserted into crevices, fistulae, or other tracts to be destroyed. Cryoprobes use the Joule-
Thompson effect: Rapid expansion of the gas under pressure provides low freezing tem-
peratures. This is the method used with nitrous oxide. A great variety of probes are
available, each for a different purpose. They can be round, fat, curved, pointed, or needle
sharp. A special probe has evcn been devised for anal sac destruction.
There is a trend toward the use of the spray units. Some units look like modifed
insulated (Thermos) bottles with a spraying tip at the top. A mixture _of liquid and
vaporized liquid nitrogen is sprayed directly on the area to be treated. Different spray
258· Dermatologic Therapy
devices deliver different mixtures of liquid nitrogen, vapor, and liquid. This can vary from
Jo aad a iuy a p %y pe oda %se on pb %s pue io %1
liquid in the spray, the lower the temperature and the deeper the freeze.
DERMATOLOGIC INDICATIONS
Cryosurgery differs in many ways from cold steel surgery and electrosurgery. Although it
has specific uses, it is never a total replacement for conventional surgery. Proponents of
cryosurgery believe that it has an excellent place in small animal practice, but knowledge,
skill, and expericnce are necessary for best results. Detractors may have used the tech-
nique for the wrong conditions or without proper training, consequently experiencing poor
results or complications. Some clinicians were once enthusiastic about cryosurgery but
now use it less frequently. As improved units are manufactured, some designed especially
for veterinary surgery, the practitioner will find it easier to select the proper cryosurgical
apparatus and use it effectively.
 Podkonjak reported a series of dermatologic problems treated with cryosurgery. The
success rate after one treatment was 86%, and after one or more treatments, 93%. Cases
included melanoma, squamous cell carcinoma, fbrosarcoma, papiloma, basal cell tumor,
hemangiorna, histiocytoma, and trichoepithelioma. Also treated were follicular cysts, non-
healing ulcers, granulation tissue, proliferative tissue in the external ear canal, tail gland
hyperplasia, perianal fistulae, and circumanal adenomas.137
● Tumors. Cryosurgery does not and should not replace conventional surgery. How-
ever, scalpel surgery is difficult or impossible to use in some situations.
● Oral Cavity. Access to the oral cavity by mcans of conventional surgical instru-
ments may be difficult, and hemorrhage may be hard to control. Cryosurgery is a simple
and more effective method of therapy. It is an alternative in treating recurrent turmors for
Oral cavity squamous cell carcinomas may respond well to cryosurgery, Gingival epulis can
be frozen, and sloughing occurs without the need for hemostasis.
● Anal Area. The main advantage of cryosurgery in managing anal tumors, especially
circumanal adenomas, is that it involves less risk of damaging the anal sphincter or the
vital anal nerve supply. In general, though, careful cold steel surgery is stillthe preferred
method of removing circumanal adenomas.
● Acral Lick Dermatitis. Cryosurgery is indicated in acral lick dermatitis when the
lesion is so large that the skin cannot be stretched for suturing after surgical excision. Skin
grafting has been used successfully, but only by practitioners highly skilled in plastic
surgery. It is diffhcult to keep dogs from damaging the grafted area because it is their
favorite place to lick. Freezing the large lick lesion destroys the thickened skin, which is
then replaced by granulation tissue that is covered by normal epithelium from the wound
margins.
 Because cryosurgery temporarily deadens the sensory nerves, there is less licking and
less chance of recurrence at the same site for up to 6 months. Care must be taken not to
freeze the underlying bone. To have complete control of the depth of freezing, it is
essential to insert thermocouples under the lesion. After the lesion heals, the resulting
scar and white hair are seldom objectionable in these difficult cases. Regrettably, recur-
rences are the rule, usually within 6 to 12 months.
● Multiple Perianal Fistulae. Perianal fistulae may be difficult to treat, but the use
of cyclosporine is encouraging though expensive. Alternatively, favorable results have been
level of popularity in the late 1970s, but some veterinary surgeons are now returning to
the use of surgical excision. The number of lengthy cryosurgical procedures (two or more)
and the frequent recurrences of fistulae are two reasons that cryosurgery has lost favor. In
addition, the occurrence of anal strictures is high.
Anal sac removal is always recommended before cryosurgery. However, the anal sac
area is usually diffcult to see because of surrounding scar and granulation tissue. Every
Dermatologic Therapy · 259
 attempt must be made to avoid the cormplication of fecal incontinence, which can be a
 greater problem.
Laser Surgery
 Laser surgery is highly successful in some branches of medicinel79 and is rapidly finding a
 n     si  p   a i 
the stimulated emission of radiation. Laser light, in contrast with regular light, is charac-
terized in three different ways. It is monochromatic, meaning it is a wavelength of one
color. It is coherent, meaning all the light waves are traveling in the same parallel
direction and in phase. It is intense, which means the number of photons delivered to a
surface area is great,
 Multiple types of lasers are available and usually named for the dye or mineral used
to elicit the light, but only two are being reported with any frequency in the United
 States. The argon pumped dye laser is more versatile in the wavelength of light that may
apy. This type of laser has limited availability at certain specialty centers. The carbon
dioxide (CO) laser is the most widely used type of laser in medicine worldwide. The CO2
laser is gaining acceptance in the veterinary feld, and a model for veterinarians has been
developed (Accuvet, Luxar). Its cost is low enough that some moderate- to high-volume
When a laser light is directed at a tissue it is either absorbed, refected, scattered, or
  a n   s    si   a 
molecules in the absorbing tissue. This results in the majority of uses in the creation of
heat. The tissue destruction that results from the rapid and high heat formation is called
photothermolysis. The CO, laser emits a beam of light at "10,600 nm, which is the
 e s r     s a a  
component of cells, they are heated and removed layer by layer. When the temperature of
the tissue rises, different effects 0ccur. At 43° to 45°C, cells heat up and die; at 60°C,
there is protein denaturation and coagulation; at 80*C, collagen denaturation and mem-
brane permeabilization occur; at 90° to 100°C, carbonization and tissue buming occur; and
at 100°C, vaporization and ablation occur.17, 125
 In veterinary dermatology, laser therapy has bcen reported to be uscful in removing a
variety of skin tumors, particularly of the eyelid, pinna, and tail.21 In some situations it
greatly speeds the time of surgery and results in improved cosmetic effect and decreased
especially when there are multiple lesions such as sebaceous hyperplasia/adenomas.
 Laser therapy has also been reported to be helpful for certain cases of feline indolent
digital granulomas, onychectomy, ear canal ablation, fox tail removal, chronic stomatitis,
and interdigital abscess removal and sterilization.2l Multiple hemangiomas and hemangio-
sarcomas from solar dermatitis are readily vaporized, alowing rapid and minimally invasive
surgery (Fig. 3-4).
Advantages of laser surgery are less pain (the nerve endings are sealed during the
cutting), less bleeding (due to sealing of small vessels and the ability to cause coagulation
by defocusing and lower power emission), and less tissuc destruction. The laser light also
sterilizes the surgical incision site except for viral particlcs, and the surgical field can be
sterilized by defocusing the beam, an advantage in contaminated lesions such as foreign
body removal. These advantages result in less postoperative swelling and inflammation.
 Disadvantages are limited to the cost of the equipment and safety requireinents. The
 disadvantages of the safety requirements are readily overcome with training.
Electrosurgery
Just as heat cautery was replaced by electrocautery, the latter has been improved on by
modern electrosurgery.13. i77 However, electrocautery equipment is still used to destroy
 260 · Dermatologic Therapy
FIGURE 3-3. laser surgery retnoval of a nasal
 planum, which is accomplished in 15 minutes with
mininal bleeding and postoperative pain. This cat
would eat later that day. This photograph is 6 days
after surgery.
tissue and to control hcmorrhage by means of specialized tips that are heated to a bright
cherry-red, producing incandescent heat. The healing of tissue after the use of electrocau-
tery is like that after a third-degree burn. This is not discussed further because the newest
electrosurgical units are more efficient. High-frequency electrosurgical units are capable of
cutting, cutting and coagulation, desiccation, fulguration, and coagulation. An electrosurgi-
The main advantages of electrosurgery are (1) reduction of surgery time, (2) reduction
of total blood loss, (3) ease of coagulation when ligature application is diffcult, and (4)
reduction of foreign material left in the wound. The disadvantages are (1) improper use,
leading to greater tissue damage, (2) presence of necrotic tissue within a wound, (3) delay
e sp ot on dn pm ar jo qns at a pani () sy pm u
 surgery, (5) decreased resistance to infection, (6) greater scar width on the skin, and (7)
inability to suture most electrosurgical wounds.
FIGURE 3-4. Rernoval of hemangioima in solar dermatitis by laser surgery. A, Before surgery. B, Afer surgery.
Vaporization can be done with: no bleeding or suhuring required.
Dermatologic Therapy · 261
Thc greatest practical use of electrosurgery is for the removal of srmall pedunculated
gingival or skin tumors. Howcver, the procedure frequently makes histopathologic inter-
pretation of the rmass impossible. Broad-based tumors are best removed with a blade.
Next in yalue is hemostasis during both conventional surgery and electrosurgery. The
newest clectrosurgical units gcncrate currents that perform cutting and coagulation func-
tions simultaneously.
MECHANISMS AND INSTRUMENTATION
causing pain or muscle contractions, whereas the tissues and fuid of the body have
electric impedance. Low frequencies (30o0 Hz) result in pain and muscle contractions. At
1noderate frequencies (3000 to 5000 Hz), heat is produced, which causes tissue dainage.
Heat production is directly related to the power and concentration of the current deliv-
ered, the duration of application to the tissue, and the resistance of the tissue.
With a biterminal electrosurgical unit, current passes from the unit to the active
electrode in the handpiece and through the body. The current is conducted over a large
surface area, which reduces resistance and current density, and it leaves the patient
 n  on sa p ad  nd o aon (iu ae r
pos-roe n asd aa  paa pe assd se are se aa Ps ned
sponges to prevent secondary heating and burns.
The waveform of the current produced by the electrosurgical unit determines the
tissue effect. Continuous, undanped sine waves are used for cutting but have poor
hemostatic qualities. Interrupted or damped sine waves have poor cutting properties but
achieve excellent hemostasis. Modulated, pulsed sine waves procuce simultaneous cutting
and coagulation.
 An electric unit that produces a square wave was developed. When the waves are
continuous, cutting without coagulation is possible; when the pulses of square waves are
interrupted, coagulation without cuting results; and when a combined waveform is pro-
 duced, both cutting and coagulation are possible.
The currents are generated by a spark gap, by radlio tubes. or by battery-operated
clectrolysis machines. The machines range from inexpensive office units to high-priced
hospital models. A unit in thc mediuin price range is practical and versatile enough for
use in most veterinary hospitals. Two main types of current are used: spark gap and
electronic currents. These are converted from ordinary ll0-V house current by a high-
frequency generator in the electrosurgical unit. In all cases, it is mandatory for the patient
to be grounded to the machine.
TECHNIQUES
machine by increasing the frequency of successive wave trains.
· Cutting Without Coagulation, Of any electrosurgical method, cutting without
coagulation makes an incision with the least damage to surrounding tissue. It can be done
in relatively nonvascular tissues. When simultaneous hernostasis is needed, however, a
combination of cutting and coagulation gives the most satisfactory results.
● Desiccation. Electrodesiccation is the application of a monopolar electric current
(short spark) of high frequency and high tension to diseased or neoplastic tissue. The
tissue is dried up by the current.
 In dermatology, electrodesiccation can be combined with curettage. If a biopsy is
required, the lesions can first be removed surgically by shaving the dome-shaped portion
above the skin level (shave biopsy). This can be done with a scalpel blade held parallel to
the skin or with small curved scissors with the convex surface toward the skin. The tissue
rcrmaining below the surface is then destroyed by desiccation and removed by curettage.
262· Dermatologic Therapy
 Such electrodesiccation and curettage are especially useful for removing many sebaceous
adenomas, circumanal adenomas, fihrovascular papillomas, nevi, actinic keratoses, sebor-
rheic keratoses, and small basal cell tumors.
● Coagulation. Electrocoagulation is used to seal small blood vessels by boiling the
vessels' endothelial cells with the current from the ball-like probe.
()  a p  si ao  e po s n ae ar
directly to the small blood vesscl until the vessel wall shrinks and the hemorrhage is
stopped by the tissue coagulation. The other method is to grasp the small blood vessel
with a hemostat, which is then touched with the electrode (a fat probe is best), and turn
on the current with the foot switch. It is important to be sure that a good seal of the
coagulation of the vessel walls.
● Fulguration, Electric fulguration is the destruction of tissue by electric sparks
generated by a high-frequency current. Direct fulguration occurs when the metal point of
the probe is connected to the uniterminal of the high-frequency wit and a spark of
electricity is directed to the tissue to be treated. Electrosurgical units capable of fulgura-
tion usually have a special probe into which the handpiece is inserted. Some units use the
same handpiece, whereas others have special fulguration handpieces that cannot be
plugged into cutting or coagulation plugs. Fulguration is used for destruction of superficial
warts and tumors. Without the need to touch the lesion, the current dehydrates and
 coagulates the tissue at the same time. This tissue does not need curettage but is allowed
to slough. Most fulguration probes have a sharp point.
· Electrolysis. Electric epilation of hair can be performed with battery-operated
units or electrosurgical units thiat can be used at low power. The probe must be a special
tiny wire of such small diameter that it can be introduced into the hair follicle. With skill
and experience, and under magnification, epilation can be accomplished. A too-low cur-
rent allows epilated hair to grow back, whereas a current that is too high or an application
that is too long can cause scarring. This method has heen used for the removal of cilia in
trichiasis and distichiasis (eyelid diseases —see Chap. 19).
Radiosurgery
The next generation beyond electrosurgery is radiowave surgery or radliosurgery. This form
 of surgery utilizes high-frequency radiowaves around 4 million hertz (4 MHz) and does
not require a grounding plate (Elman Surgitron, Ellman). However, a passve electrode is
placed beneath the pafient in the area of the surgery to act as an antenna to focus the
Multiple settings for different types of current ailow some selection in the tissuc
effects produced. Also, the power setting is variable and needs to be set so that there is
smoothest cutting with no sparking. Tissue damage is minimized when fully rectified and
fully filtered current is utilized because there is liftle lateral heat spread to adjacent tissue.
However, for better hemostasis, only fully rectified current may be used and will cause
 coagulation as wel as cutting. Parially rectified current is mainly used for coagulation and
hemostasis.
Advantages over cold steel surgery are that cutting is accoinplished without pressure
 being required, hemostasis with fully fltered current effectively seais vessels under 2 mm
 in diameter, and the incision site and electrode tip are sterilized. Radiosurgery equipment
is available at lower costs than laser equipment. Practice is required to develop a tech-
i po se a sa m q sp ns  su  a
 surgery over cold steel surgery become obtainable.
Disadvantages of this type of surgery include the risk for combustion of volatile gasses
and liquids (thus alcohol is contraindicated as a prepping solution or near the antennae),
radiosurgery should not be used to cut cartilage or bone, and there is risk if this
technique is used near an unshiclded pacemaker—persons or pets with such devices
should not be in the vicinity.2 Smoke and an unpleasant odor may be produced, but this is
Dermatologic Therapy · 263
minimized with the use of a vacuum smoke evacuator. Tissue burming is possible, espe-
cially if the equipment is improperly used. Adequate training and practice make this a
 useful surgical option.
Indications described for veterinary dermatology include cutaneous biopsy (but sam-
ples should only be taken with the fully rectified and fully filtered current) and removal of
cutaneous neoplasims, For small or pedunculated tumors, a loop electrode is available that
makes the procedure rapid.
· ALTERNATIVE THERAPIES
 Interest in so-called alternative therapies is increasing among pet owners. Unfortunately,
little in the way of scientific evaluation is available in the veterinary dermatology literature.
We encourage clinicians who use these modalities to design, perform, and publish mean-
ingful clinical trials. We have so much to learn about these “natural" remedies.
Acupuncture
Acupuncture can be defned as the insertion of very fine needles into specific, predeter-
mined points on the body to produce physiologic responses., 153 15+ In addition to needles,
many other methods are used to stimulate acupuncture points, including acupressure,
moxibustion, cupping, applying heat or cold, ultrasound, aquapuncture, electrostimulation,
implantation, and laser use. The Intermational Vcterinary Acupuncture Socicty (IVAS, PO
Box 2074, Nederland, CO 80466-2074) conducts courses, seminars, and intermnational
veterinary acupuncture congresses, and it is responsible for the accreditation of veterinary
acupuncturists throughout the world.
 In dogs, acupuncture has been reported to be useful in various dermatologic condi-
tions, especially acral lick derimatitis and other psychodermatoses.5 104, 153 154
Holistic Medicine (Herbal Medicine, Homeopathy)
Holistic health involves the use of herbs and other natural substances,36. 43. 3. 217 A list of
holistic veterinarians can be obtained from the American Holistic Veterinary Medical
Association (2214 Old Emmerton Road, Bel Air, MD 2l0l5), which also publishes a
veterinary journal. We are aware of no well-designed clinical studies using this modality in
veterinary dermatology.
 In Asian and some European countries, many herbal products are in routine use for
various dermatoses in humans.23 s Examples include Calendula (from Calendula offcin-
alis, the marigold flower, which contains flavonoids and saponins that have anti-inflamma-
burns, diaper rash, minor wounds, leg ulcers; chamomile (from Matricaria recutita, the
 daisy fower family, containing oxides, Havonoids, and matricin that inhibit cyclooxygenase,
lipoxygenase, and histamine release) — available in ointiment or cream for various dermati-
tides, including atopic dermatitis and a 10-herb product ("decoction") taken by mouth
and shown to be effective for atopic dcrmatitis in double-blinded, placebo-controlled
studies.23. 89
 There have been a number of anecdotal reports on the use of a multiaction herbal
dara, Azadirachta indica, and Eucalyptus globus. These are claimed to have antibacterial,
antifungal, antiparasitic, anti-infammatory, antipruritic, and wound-healing properties. The
product is recommended for bacterial pyoderma, dermatophytosis, scabies, demodicosis,
insect bites, acral lick dermatitis, pyotraumatic dermatitis, wounds, maggots, burms, nasal
solar dermatitis, papillomatosis, and so forth. Unfortunately, published trials are not inter-
pretable.
264·Derrnatologic Therapy
● GENE THERaPY
s 'see uodo un ssas us yen o pasn aq aepos a adnrani sn
 sd  s e   s   d  sa  
 diseases that could be treated in this manner, including diseases without a clear genetic
basis (polygenic discases).
the genes are directly introduced into the skin, and (2) the ex vivo approach, wherein
target cells (e.g.. keratinoeytes) are cultured from biopsy specimens, the desired gene is
inserted into the cultured clls, and the genetically modified cells are then grafted back
 onto the donor.202 Genes may be introduced by chemical (DNA transfection), physical
(microprojectiles, direct injection), or biological (retrovirus, adenovirus) techniques.
● wounds
Healing
Veterinary dermatologists perform minor surgical procedures and manage ulcers and
other skin defects. Therefore, a basic understanding of wound healing is essential. In
addition to the discussion that follows, more in-depth information can be found in the
references.34,47, 94. 95, 184
Wound healing is divided into three overlapping serics of events: (l) inflammation, (2)
S e  srd s as n x () pn  ss a
uum, and they may overlap considcrably. An incised wound begins to heal by 5 to 8 days,
with re-establishment of epidermal continuity and a proliferation of connective tissue from
the papillary layer of the dermis. Thus, healing occurs in a “dished,” or inverted, configu-
ration until the production of underlying connective tissue pushes the epithelium up into
 an everted position, (The major cell, matrix, and mediator components of wound healing
are presented in Table 3-9.)
In the infammatory stage, the immediate reaction to a full-thickness skin loss is for
● Tablc 3-9 MajOr CoMPONents oF WOund HeaLiNg
CELLS
MATRIX
ENZYME CASCADES/MEDIATORS
inflammation
Neutrophils
Fibrin
Hlagemen factor pathways
Endothielial cells
Fibronectiu
Coagulation
Mast cells
Fibrinolysis
 Platelcts
Complement
New Tissue Formation
Keratinocytes
Fibrin
PDGF
Macrophages
Fibronectin
FGF
EGF
Endothelial cells
Collagen Types I or III 
TGF-α
Fibroblasts
Hyaluronic acid
TGF-β
Matrix Remodeling
Keratinoeytes
 Basement membranes
TGF-β
Endothelial cells
Laminin
Collagenase
Fibroblasts
Type IV collagen
Othcr protcases
Heparin sulfate
Type VI collagen
Clycosidases
Chondroitin sulfate
Dermatan sulfate
PDCF = platelet-derived growth factor; FGF = fibroblast growth factor; EGF = epidermal growth factor: TGF = translorming
growtln factor.
Dermatologic Therapy ·265
the normal elasticity of skin and muscle tension to enlarge and distort the defect. Vessels
contract and constrict for 5 to l0 minutes to limit heinorrhage to the injured area,
resulting in more widespread leakage of plasma constituents. Infiltrating neutrophils at-
tempt to clear the area of foreign particles, especially bacteria. Peripheral blood
monocytes are progressively attracted, are activated, and become macrophages, Macro-
phages, like platelets, produce growth factors critical for the initiation of granulation tissue
formation. Blood vessel disruption leads to extravasation of blood constituents. Platelet
agregation and blood coagulation initiate the early phase of inflammation. Clot formation
within vessel lumina affects hemostasis and, within the surrounding connective tissue,
provides a substrate for cell migration into the wound space. Mediators released as a
conscquence of blood coagulation, complement pathways, and cell activation (or death)
 cause the influx of inflammatory leukocytes and increase the permeability of undamaged
adjacent vesseis.
 As the inflammation progresses, the infiltrate changes from primarily neutrophils to
having large numbers of macrophages. The macrophages play an important part in the
late stages of infammation to help with the phagocytosis, debridement, and initiation of
the changes that promote growth and granulation tissue formation, The mechanisms
dispose of microorganisms, foreign material, and devitalized tissue and set the stage for
wound repair.
 The new tissue formation stage procceds quickly when clots, necrotic tissue, and
other barriers to healing are removed from the wound. During this stage, the following
processes occur: re-epithelialization, fibroplasia and wound contraction, and neovasculari
to the fifth day. In open wounds, evidence of these processes is recognized as granulation
tissue. Fibroblasts are most active in a wound for 14 to 21 days, and they advance along
lines of fibrin within a clot and along capillaries that are growing into a wound. At first,
the fbrin, fbroblasts, and new collagen fibers are vertically oriented in a wound, but after
about 6 days they are horizontally oriented.
 The fibroblasts secrete various glycoproteins that constitute the ground substance,
aligned parallel to the surface of the wound. Colagen synthesis by the fibroblasts begins
 on the fourth or fth day, and the tiny fibrils bond together into larger fibers that become
cver stronger and less soluble. As sufficient collagen is formed, the number of fibroblasts
in the wound decreases, marking the end of the repair stage. Elastic fibers play little part
in wound repair, which explains the lack of scar elasticity.
Capillary infiltration of the healing wound is important to ensure optimal oxygen
supply for the fibroblasts. Without optimal oxygen tension, fibroblasts cannot adequately
   r ro d  e a s  o a
that appears in open wounds 3 to 6 days after injury. In small wounds, this occurs
 beneath a scab and is not visible. The proliferating capillaries form loops, or *kmuckles,"
that give the wound a granular surface. The new vessels anastomose freely and differenti-
ate progressively into arterioles and venules. Lymphatic vessels develop in a similar
manner but a little later in the healing process.
Epithelial proliferation and migration are the first obvious signs of rebuilding and
repair. Re-epithelialization of the epidermal defect begins within 24 hours after injury and
continues during granulation tissue formation, Peripheral epidermal and infundibular hair
follicle keratinocytes participate in the repair. An intense epidermal reaction occurs up to
5 mm back from the wound edge, and the number of epidermal cell layers dramatically
increases. The cells lose their firm attachment to the underlying dermis, and they fatten
and extend outward and downward over the incised dermis in a leapfrog fashion.
 In sirmple wounds with clean, close approximation of edges, the defect may be
covered hy epithelium in 24 hours. In larger wounds, granulation tissue must form before
wound epithelialization can start and the process may take days or even weeks to com-
plete.Ifhair follcles are damaged, they participate in healing because the ends of the cut
follicles are deep in the dermis and closer to the depth of the wound. The new epithe-
lium has a smooth undersurface with weak attachment to the connective tisuc, so it is
easily traumatized and may be knocked from a healing wound. With the passage of timc,
 266 · Dermatologic Therapy
 new sebaceous glands and hair follicles may regenerate by differentiation of migrating
cells.
Wound contraction is the reduction in size of an open wound as a result of centripe-
tal movement of the whole-thickness skin that surrounds the lesion. Contraction can be
useful in loose skin because it decreases the size of the wound that must be covered
with epithelium. Over joints and in areas of tight skin, contractures can cause deform-
ities. Contracture takes place between 5 and 45 days after injury. It is thought to
s   e s  u si  a n d e  n
they align themselves along the lines of contraction. They are also capable of producing
collagen.
 The matrix remodeling stage is a period of consolidation, strengthening, and remodel.
ing of the wound. In a fresh wound, a lag phase occurs (4 to 5 days), during which there
is little gain in wound strength. The initial strength is due to the fibrin clot, adhesive
forces of epithelialization, coagulation of protein in the wound, and ingrowth of capillaries,
fihroblasts, and collagen fibrils. The amount of collagen increases rapidly during the first 3
weeks of healing and then reaches a state of equilibrium. Over a long time, maturation 
and rernodeling take place by cross-linkage and changes in the physical weave of the
collagen fibers. The strength of skin and fascia increases but always remains 15% to 20%
weaker than surrounding normal tissue. All repair activity is confined to an area within
approximately 15 mm of the wound.
u sy pasei pre xud sieadde pue ieo pue einsa si anssn inos e
Occurs, the scar becomes white, hard, and fattened.
The following general factors are often considered to enhance or hasten wound
healing: young age, administration of anabolic steroids, administration of topical and
systemic vitamin A, ambulation of the patient, warm environment, and general good
health. Ultrasound therapy has heen reported to benefit wound healing when connective
    s h o u si 
stimulates fibroblast and collagen production and enhances vascularization of granulation
tissiie.
Wound healing is stimulated by maintaining a favorable environment at the wound
site. This includes the removal of toxic exudate, maintenance of a moist but bacteria-free
environment, access to oxygen, and prevention of trauma. Much research clearly shows a
 moist environment is much superior to the dry environment often created with the old
tions on what creates a favorable environment, the pharmaceutical industry has developed
a wide variety of new wound materials that have been called interactive dressings.193
These interactive dressings come in several forms, such as polymeric flms, polymeric
ctssod snrqy pue ned pe spy ssy sp ns  su
the wound will bc 50% healed) is much faster but the long-term response is similar to
that with more traditional approaches. Therefore, the additional cost would seem most
appropriate in animals at greater risk for poor wound healing, such as old or debilitated
dogs and cats. As the costs for these new materials decrease, they may find a place for
routine use in veterinary medicine.
ss p srs e  p a a r p se  o
related factors, denervation, the presence of foreign bodies, infection, devitalized tissue,
 increased catabolic rate, movement of the wound, neoplasia, tissue anoxia, radiation and
cytotoxic drugs, seromas and hematomas, edema, cold temperatures, excessive trauma, and
exposure during surgery. Nutritional deficiencies (especiall of vitamins A, K, E, and C;
the B complex; and zinc) are also detrimental to wound healing.
MANAGEMENT
● Epidermal Abrasions. Margins of an abraded area are shallow and usually involve
only the epidermis. Centrally, the defect may extend into the dermis. Initially, the injury
Dermatologic Therapy · 267
fills with a blood clot and necrotic debris that dehydrate to form a scab. The epidermal
adnexa may be injured, but they remain and regenerate. In partial-thickness wounds, they
are the major source for re-epithelialization. Thc only care needed is initial gentle clean-
ing, allowing the scab to form, and protection from infection and trauma while the
epidermal cells slide under the scab to re-epithelialize the exposed dermis.
● Contaminated Wounds. The early time after a wound is called the “golden pe-
riod"-an interval of about 6 hours during which prophylactie antibiotics are effective.
The first aid for wounds should involve only covering the wound with moist, dry, clean,
nonadhering material to control bleeding and to minimize contamination until defnitive
care can be provided. Nearly all topical antibiotics, except bacitracin, retard experimental
wound healing.84
Proper care may require sedation or anesthesia, if allowed by the status of the
patient. Otherwise, fushing the wound with 1% lidocaine or using regional anesthesia may
tive for only up to 3 hours after trauma; therefore, systemic agents should be given first.
One of the cephalosporins and gentamicin provide broad, effective coverage. The wound
  t ro oi (f a se ) aa s p  p aq 
contarmination while the area is prepared for surgery. Mineral oil or petroleum jelly can
be applied to clippers to cause the hair to adhere to the blades while the area is being
clipped. A vacuum is used to collect and direct debris away frorn the wound.
The skin is prepared with chlorhexidine surgical scrub and gently cleaned with alcohol
wipes. The clinician should then thoroughly irrigate the wound with large volumes of
sterile saline or chlorhexidine solution 0.05% to remove the gel and all foreign particles
such as hair, dirt, and clotted blood. It has been reported that 0.05% chlorhexidine can
cause a retardation of experimental wound healing,$4 but the clinical significance of this in
dogs and cats is unknown.
 Chlorhexidine is preferred to povidone-iodine solution because it has a wide spectrum
of antibacterial effectiveness, immediately reduces the bacterial flora, and has a residual
effect as a result of binding to the stratum corneum so tightly that it cannot be removed
with alcohol.s5 In the 0.05% dilution, it is nonirritating and does not delay healing.
Systemic absorption, toxicity, and inactivation by organic matter are not a problem. How-
ever, if the tympanic membrane is ruptured, chlorhexidine solution should be used cau-
tiously in the external ear canal because it may cause ototoxicity.
Clay is by far the most deleterious of the soil contaminants. Pressure lavage (10 psi)
applied with an 18-gauge needle and 30-ml syringe, or 70-psi pulsating pressure lavage, as
provided with a dental water pick, may be used to decontaminate the wound. These
pressures have not been found to spread infection.
 The wound can then be draped and explored for special problems. Layered debride-
Iment and sharp dissection are used to remove devitalized or severely traumatized tissue.
The wound is closed with properly placed sutures to approximate skin and to obliterate
dead spaces. Proper placement of drains, if needed, and bandaging as appropriate com-
plete the initial treatment.
 For treatment of wounds with impaired healing rates, the use of products containing
zinc oxide and cod liver oil or hydrogel-polyurethane wound dressings have been recom-
mended.84
● Decubital Ulcers, Debilitated, paralyzed patients have poor circulation, and their
immobility allws pressure between bony prominences and their bedding to restrict circu-
lation further to a local tissue area. The area becomes red, and a punched-out ulcer
develops later. The ulcer may have a gray fibrous coating with surrounding necrotic tissue.
Prevention via frequent turning, gentle massage, fexion of muscles and joints, and
placing the patient on a waterbed is most important. After it has developed, the ulcer is
treated by cleaning with 0.05% chlorhexidine solution to remove necrotic tissue, pus, and
debris. The ulcer should bo covered with moist occlusive bandages or a nonadherent flm
and protected from pressure by “doughnut" rings or bandage rolls. Although mild antibac.
terial dressings are often useful initially, the application of a live yeast ceil derivative and
phenylmercuric nitrate in shark liver oil (Preparation H, Whitehall) ointment increases
268 · Dermatologie Therapy
lubricates and protects the ulcer. When the patient becomes mobile, the ulcers heal
spontaneously.
● referencEs
1. Ackerman I.: Nutritional supplements in canine der-
 20. Brayton CF: Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), a review.
matoscs. Can Vet J 28:29, 1987.
Cornell Vet 76:61, 1986.
 2. Ackerrman LJ: Dermatologic applications of radiowave
21. Breen PT: Lasers in dernnatology. In: Kirk RW (ed):
   d () s
Current Veterinary Therapy X. W.B. Saunders Co,
1997
Philadelphia, 1989, p 580.
3. Agrawal AK: Therapentic: efficacy of a herbal gel for
22. Brockus Cw, et al: Effect of altermate-day predniso.
skin affectiors in dogs. Indlian Vet J 74:417, 1997.
lone administration on hypophyseal-adrenocortical ac-
 4. Alpo Pet Center: Canine Nutrition and Feeding Man-
tivity in dogs. Am J Vet Res 60:698, 1999.
agcmcnt. Alpo Pet Foods, Inc., Allentown, 1984.
23. Brown DJ, Dattner AM: Phytotherapeutie approaches
 5. Altman S: Acupuncture therapy in small animal prac.
to comumon dennatologie conditions. Arch Dermatol
tice. Comp Cont Edue 19:1233, 1997.
134:1401, 1998.
6. American Kenncl Club: The Complete Dog Book,
24. Bnymzeel I, et al: Pentoxifylline inhibits T-cell adher-
17th cd. Howell House, New York, 1985.
ence to keratinocytes. J invest 1Dermatol 104:1004,
7.Andorson BC: Aloe vera juice: A veterinary medica
1995.
ment? Comp Cont Edue 5:S364, 1983.
25. Bushby PA, et al: Microscopic tissue alterations fol.
8. Andreassi L: Biocngincering of the skin, Cin Derma-
lowing, cryosurgery of canine skin. J Arn Vet Med
tol 13:289, 1995.
Assoc 173:177, 1978.
9. Arndt KA, et al: The pharmacology of topical therapy.
26. Campbell KL, Kirkwood AR: Effect of topical oils om
In: Fitzpatrick TB. et al (eds): Dermatology in Gen-
transepiderinal water loss in dogs with seborrhea
eral Medicine, 4th ed. McGraw-Hill Book Co., New
sicca. In: lhrke, PJ, et al (eds): Advances in Veteri-
York, 1993, p 2837.
nary Dermatology. Vol 2. Pergamon Prcss, Now York,
9a. Ashley PF, et al: Fffect of oral melatonin atlininis-
1993, p 157.
tration on sex hormone, prolactin, and thyroid hor-
27. Campbell KL, et al: Effects of oral sunfower oil on
serum and cutaneous fatty acid concentraion profles
Assoc 215:111, 1999.
 in seborrheic dogs. Vet Dermatol 3:29, 1992.
10. Beale KM, et al: A sturly of long term administration
 28. Carloti DN, Maffart P: La chlorhexidine, revuc hib-
of FS shampoo in dogs.Proc Annu Menb Meet Am
liographique. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 31:553,
Acad Vet Dermatol Ain Coll Vet Dermatol 9:36,
1996.
1993.
29. Chandraratna RAS: Rational design of rcccptor-sclec-
11. Becheral PA, ct al: CD23 mediated nitric oxide syn-
tive retinoids. J Am Acad Dermatol 39(part 2):S124,
thase pathway induction in human keratinocytes is
1998.
inhibited by retinoie acid derivatives. J Invest Derma-
30. Chandraratna RAS: Tazarotene: The first receptor-se-
tol 106:1182, 1996.
lective topical retinoid for the treatment of psoriasis. J
12. Benstein JE, et al: Inhibition of histarmine induced
Arn Acad Derinatol 37(Suppl 2, Part 3):S12, 1997.
pruritus by topical tricyclic antidepressants. J Am
 31. Chastain CB, Ganjam VK: Clinical Encloerinology of
Acad Denmmatol 5:582, 1981.
Companion Animals. Lea & Febiger, Pliladelphia,
13. Bojrab MJ: Current Techniques in Small Animal Sur-
1986.
gery, 3rd ed. Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia, 1990.
32. Chastain CB, Graham CL: Adrenocortical supprcssion
14. Bond R, Lloyd DH: A double blind cornparison of
in dogs on daily and altemate day predrisolone ad.
olive oil and a combination of evening prinrose oil
ministration. Am J Vet Res 40:936, 1979.
and fish oil in the management of chronic atopy.Vet
 33. Chew BP, et al: Importance of B-carotene nutrition in
Bec 131:558, 1992.
dog and cat: Uptake and immunity. In: Reinhart GA,
15. Bond R, Lloyd DH: Randormized single-blind com-
Carey DP (eds): Recent Advances in Canine and Fe-
parison of an evening primrose oil and fsh oil combi-
line Nutrition I1. Orange Frazer Press, Wilmington,
nation and concentrates of thesc oils in the manage-
OH, 1998, p 513.
ment of canine atopy. Vet Dermatol 3:215, 1992.
34. Clark RAF: Cutaneous wound repair. In: Goldsmith
16. Boothe DM; Topieal drugs: Component interactions,
LA (ed): Physiology, Biochemistry, and Molecular Bi-
vehicles, and the. consequences of alteralions. Derma
ology of the Skin II. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
tol Rep 6:1, 1987.
1991.
17. Boulnois JL: Photophysical processes in recent medi-
35. Clark TP: Pharmmacodynamics drug.action and interac-
cal laser developinents: A review. Lasers in Medical
tion. In: Dowling PM, et al (eds): Clinical Pharmacol.
Science I. Bailliere Tindall, Philadelphia, 1986, p 48.
Dgy: Principles and Practice.Westen Veternary Con.
18. Bourdean P, Paragon BM: Alternatives aux corti-
ference, ILas Vegas, 1998, p 5.
coides en dcrmatologie des carnivores. Rev Med Vet
 36. Climer J: Herbal inedlicine. Cat Fancy, June 1990,
168:645, 1992.
P 36.
19. Bourdleaux MK, et al: The effets of varying dietary
37. Cohn LA: (Glucocorticoids as immunosuppressive
n-6 to n-3 faty acid ratios on platelet reactivity, coag-
agents. Semin Vet Med Surg 12:150, 1997.
ulation sereening assays, and antithrombin IIl activity
38. Croxtall JD, et al: Lipocortin 1 and the control of
in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 33:235, 1997.
cPLA2 activity in A459 cells: Glucocorticoids block
Dermatologic Therapy * 269
EGF stimulation of cPLA2 phosphorylation. Biochern
61. Grcenc JA, Knecht CD: Electrosurgery: A review.
Pharmacol 52:351, 1996.
Vet Surg 9:327, 1980.
39. Culbert LA, et al: Complications associated with high-
 62. Gregory CR, et al: Response to isoantigens and mito-
dose prednisolonc sodium succinate therapy in dogs
gens in the cat: Effects of cyclosporine A. Am J Vet
with neurological injury. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 34:
Res 48:126, 1987.
129, 1998.
63. Gricr Rl, et al: Hyperthermic treatment of superf-
39a. Dahlinger J, et al: Efect of ketoconazole on cyclo-
cial tumors in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 177:227,
1980.
40. Davis JA, et al: Benzocaine-induced methemoglobine-
64. Griffn CE: Canine atopice disease. In: Griffn CE, et
mia attributed to topical applicalion of the anesthctic
in several laloratory anirnal species. Ain J Vet Res 54:
Year Book, St. Louis, 1993, p 99.
1322, 1993.
65. Griffin CE: Open forum—-Etretinate—-How is it be-
41. DeBoer DJ、 et al: Inability of short-dhuration treat-
ing used in veterinary dermatology? Derm Dialog
ment with a 5-lipoxygenase inhibitor to reduce clinical
Spring-Sunmer, 1993.
signs of canine atopy. Vet Dermatol 5:13, 1994.
66. Criffn CE: Systemic glucocorticoid therapy in veteri-
42. DeBoer DJ, Morielo KA: Inability of topical treat-
Hary medicine. Presentation at the American Acad-
rmcnt to infuence the course of experinental feline
eny of Veterinary Dermatology, New Orleans,
dermatophytosis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:439, 1995.
March, 1986.
43. De-Hui S, et al: Manual of Dernatology in Chinese
67. Griffn CE: Unpublished observations.
Medicine. Eastland Press, Seattle, 1995.
68. Cross TL, et al: Subepidermal bullous dermatosis due
43a. Draelos ZD; New developments in cosmetics and
to topical corticosteroid therapy in dogs. Vet Derna-
skin care products. Ady Dermatol 12:3, 1997.
tol 8:127. 1997.
44. Drake LA, et al: Guidelines of carc for the use of
69. Guaguere E, et al: Eficacite clinique de la methyl-
topical glucocorticoids. J Am Acad Dermatol 35:615,
prednisolone dans le traitement _symptomatique des
1996.
dermatoses allergiques du chien, Prat Med Chir Anim
45. Duvie M, et al: Molecular mechanisms of tazarotene
Comp 31:171, 1996.
action in psoriasis. J Am Acad Dermatol 37(Suppl 2.
70. Gyrd-Hansen N, et al: Percutaneous absorption of
Part 3):S18, 1997.
organophosphorus insccticides in pigs The influence
46. duVivier A, Stonghton RB: Tachyphylaxis to the ac-
of different vehicles. J Ver Pharmacol Ther 16:174,
tion of topically applied corticosteroids. Arch Derma-
1993.
tol 111:581, 1975.
71. Ilargis AM, Mundel AC: Familial canine dermato-
47. Dyson M: Advances in wound healing physiology:
myositis. Comp Contin Educ 14:855, 1992.
The comparative perspctive. Vet Dernatol 8:227,
72. Ilall JA, et al: Effect of dietary n-6-to-n-3 fatty acid
1997.
 p  n p po o uo o
48. Elis CN, Voorhees J: Etretinate therapy. J Am Acad
counts,andT-cellsubopulations in aged dogAm J
Dermatol 16:267, 1987.
Vet Res 60:319, 1999.
49. Elson ML. The role of retinoids in wound healing. J
73. Harvey RG: A comparison of evening primrose oil
Am Acad Dermatol 39(Part 3):S79, 1998.
 and sunfower oil for the management of papulocrus-
50. Evans AG, et al: A trial of 13-cis-retinoic acid for
tous dermatitis in cats. Vet Rec 133:571, 1993.
treatrment of squamous cell carcinoma and preneo-
74. Harvey RG: Effect of varying proportions of evening
plastic lesions of the head in cats. Ain J Vet Res 46:
primrose oil and fish oil on cats with crusting derma-
2553, 1985.
tosis ("'miliary dermatitis"). Vet Rec 133:208, 1993.
51. Fadok VA: Nutritional therapy in vetcrinary dermatol-
75. Harvey RG: Management of felinc miliary dermatitis
by supplementing the diet with cssential fatty acids.
IX. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1986, p 591.
Vet Rec 128:326, 1991.
 52. Fadok VA: Treatment of canine idiopathic seborrhea
76. Helgren JA: Splish splash. Cat Fancy. May 1991.
with isotretinoin. An J Vet Rcs 47:1730, 1986.
p 32.
 53. Fledman RJ, Maibach Hl: Regional variation in per-
77. Humplhreys F, Shuster S: The effect of topical dime-
cutaneous penetration of Cl4 cortisol in inan. J In-
thindene maleate on wheal reactions. Br J Clin Phar-
vest Dermatol 48:181, 1967.
macol 23:234, 1987.
54. Franz Tj: Kinetics of cutaneous drug penetration. Int
78. Jeffers JG: Diabetes mellitus induced in a dog after
J Dermatol 22:499, 1983.
administration of costicosteroids and methylpredniso-
 55. Garcia G, el al: Inhibition of histainine release from
lone pulse therapy. J Am Vet Med Assoc 199:77.
dispersed canine skin mast cells by cyclosporine A,
1991,
rolipram and salbutauol but not dexamethasone or
 79. Kannon GA, Garrett AB: Moist wound healing with
sodium cromoglylate, Vet Dermatol 9:81, 1998.
occlusive dressings: A clinical review. Dcrmatol Surg
56. Glaze MR, et al: Ophthalmic corticosteroid therapy:
21:583, 1995.
Systemic effccts in the dog. J Am Vel Med Assoc
 80. Kely L: Veterinary technician in EXXON Valdez.
192:73, 1988.
 cleanup. Personal communication, 1998.
 57. Goette DK, Odom RI3: Acdverse effects of corticoste.
roids. Cutis 23:477, 1979.
the dog after a single dose of methylprednisolone
 58. Goldsmith LA: Propylene glycol. Int J Dermatol 17:
acctate. Am J Vet Res 42:822, 1981.
703, 1978.
82. Kemppainen RJ, et al;: Adrenocortical suppression in
 59. Goldyne ME: leukotrienes: Clinical significance. J
the dog given a single intramuscular dose of predni-
Am Acad Dermatol 10:659, 1984.
sone or triamcinolone acetonide. Am J Vet Res 42:
60. Granlund H, et al; Long-term follow-up of eczerma
204, 1982.
patients trealed with cyclosporine. Acta Dermatol Ve-
83. Kcmppainen RJ: Principles of glucocorticoid therapy
nereol 78:40, 1998.
in nonendocrinc disease. In: Kirk Rw (ed): Current
270 + Dermatologic Therapy
Veterinary Therapy IX. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadlel-
I05. Maibach HI, Stoughton RB: Topical corticosteroids.
phia, 1986, p 954.
Med Clin North Am 57:1253, 1973.
84. Kietzmann  M: Improvemenl and retardation of
106. Manglesdorf DJ, et al: The retinoid receptors. In:
wound healing: Effects of pharmacological agents in
Span HG, et al (eds): The Retinoids: Biology, Chem-
laboratory animal studies. Vet Dermatol 10:83, 1999.
istry, and Medicine. New York, Raven Press, 1994,
85. Kietzmann M, et al: Untersuchungen Zur Verrag.
p319.
lichkeit, Wirkmg im epidermalen Stoffwechsel und
107. Marks R: Pharmacokinetics and safety rcvicw of taza-
Metabolisierung von  Benzoylperoxid  beim Hund.
rotenc. J Am Acad Dermatol 39(Part 2):S134, 1998.
Kleinterpraxis 35:31, J990.
108. Marks SL, Song MD, ct al: Clinical cvaluation of
S6. Kiununen T, Koskcla M: Antibacterial and antifungal
etretinate for the treamtent of canine solar induced
squamous cell carcinoma and preneoplastie lesions. j
1,3-butylene glycol in titro. Acta Dermatol Venerecl
Ain Acad Denmatol 27:1l, 1992.
71:148, 1991.
109. Marsell R, et al: Use of pentoxifyllirue in the treat-
 87. Kobay MJ, and Jones BR: Local current yield radio-
mcnt of allergic contact reactions to plants of the
frequeney hyrerthrermia for the treatment of superf-
Commelinceae family in dogs. Vet Derrmatol S:121,
cial skin tumors in cats. N Z Vet J 3l:173, 1983.
1997.
88. Kech IIJ, Verclli A: Workshop report 3: Shampoos
110. Mason KV: Clinical and pathophysiologic aspects of
and other topical therapies. In: Ihrke PJ, et al (eds):
parasitic skin ciseases. In: Ihrke PJ. et al (eds): Ad-
Advarnces in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol 2. Perga-
mon Press, Oxlord, 1993, p 409.
Press, New York, 1993, p 177.
S9. Koo J, Arain S: Tradlifional Chinese medicine for thc
111. Mason KV, Atwell R; Clinical effcaey trials on a
treatnent of dermatologic disorders. Arch Dermatol
elhlorhexidine/miconazole shampoo for the treatmenl
134:1388, 1998.
of seborrheic dermuatiis associated with all over-
S9a. Koo J, et al: Advances in psoriasis therapy. Ady Der-
growth of Malassezia pachyderwuatis and coccoid bae-
matol 12:47, 1997.
teria. Proc Eur Soc Vet Dermatol 12:222, 1995.
90. Kwochka KW: Retinoids and vitamin A therapy. In:
112. Mathews KA, et al: Cyclosporine treatment of peri-
Griffn CE, et al (eds);: Current Veterinary Dermatol-
 anal fistulas in dogs. Can Vet J 38:39, 1997.
ogy. Mosby Year Book, St. Louis, 1993, p 203.
113. Mathews KA, Sukhiani HIR: Randomized controlled
91. Kwochka KW: Symptomatie topical therapy of sealing
trial of cyclosporine for treatment of perianal fistulas
disorders. In: Grifin CE, et al (eds): Current Veteri
in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 21l:1249, 1997.
Hary Dermatology. Mosby Year Book, St. Louis, 1993,
114. MeColl C: Oral presentation. In: Proceedlings of the
p 191.
Anerican Academy  of Velerinary Derrmatology,
92. Kwochka KW, Kowalski JS: Prophylactic effcacy of
American College of Veterinary Dermatology, San
Antonio, 1998.
termedius in togs. A1m J Vet Res 52:115, i991.
115. McDonough S: Grooming. In: Kunkle GA (ed): Fe-
93. Latimer KS, et al: Effects of cyclosporin A adminis-
linc Dermatology. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 25:767, 1995.
1986.
116. Miller D: Know How to Groom Your Dog. Pet Li-
94. Loes MJ, et al: Factors infucncing wound healing:
brary Ltd., New York, 1990.
Lessons fron military wound management. Comp
117. Miller WH, Jr: Fatty acid supplements as anti-infam-
Contin Educ 11:8550,1989.
matory agents. In: Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary
95. Lees MJ, et al: Second-intention wound healing.
Therapy X. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1989, p
Comp Contin Educ 11:857, 1989.
563.
96. Levine N: Role of retinoids in skin cancer treatment
118. Miller WH Jr: Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents
and prcvention. J Am Acad Dermatol 39(Part 3):S62,
in the management of canine and feline pruritus. In:
1998.
Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy X. W.B.
97. Lichtenstcin J, et al: Nonsteroidal anti-infammatory
Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1989, p 566.
 drugs: Tleir use in dermatology. Int J Dermatol 26:
119. Miller WH Jr, Scott DW: Medical management of
80, 1987.
chronic pruritus. Comp Contin Edue 16:449, 1994.
98. Lim KK, ct al: Cyclosporine in the treatment of der-
120. Miller WH Jr、 et al: Eficacy of DVM Derm Caps
matologic disease: An update. Mayo Clin Proc 7l:
Liquid in the managenent of allergic and infamma-
1183, 1996.
tory dermatoses of the cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
99. Lin AN, et al: Sulfur revisited. J Aim Acad Dennatol
29:37,1993.
18:553, 1988.
121. Miller WH Jr, et al: Investigation on thie antipruritic
100. Lloyd DH, Thomsett LR: Essential fatty acid supple-
cffects of ascorbic acid given alone and in combina-
mentation in the treatment of carnine atopy: A prelim-
e  sop o nspe a e m un
inary study. Vet Dermatol 1:41, 1989.
skin diseasc. Canine Pract 17(5):11, 1992.
101. Lloyd DH: Essential fatty acids and skin disease. J
122. Moriclo KA, et al: Adrenocortical suppression associ-
Small Anim Pract 30:207, 1989.
ated withi topical otic adninistration of glucocorticoids
102. Lober CW: Cantlhaxanthin: The “tauning" pill. J Aim
in dogs. J Aim Vet Med Assoc 193:329, 1988.
Acad Dermatol 13:660, 1985.
123. Mukhtar H, et al: Green tea and skin: Anticarcino-
103. Logas ID, Kunkle GA: Double-blinded crossover study
genic effects. J Invest Dermatol [02:3, 1994.
with marine oil supplementation containing high-dose
124. Mulnix JA: Corticosteroid therapy in the dog. In: Pro-
eicosapentaenoie acid for thc trcatment of canine
ceedings of the American Animal Hospital Association
pruritic skin disease. Vet Dermatol 5:99, 1994.
Annual Meeting, Boston, 1977.
104. Looney AL., Rothstein E: Use of acupuncture to treat
125.
. Nelson JS, Bems Mw: Basic laser pbysies and tissue
psychoderrmalosis in the dog. Canine Pract 23(5):18,
interactions. Contemp Dermatol 2:3, 1998.
1998.
126. Northway RB: Experinental use of aloc vcra extract
Dermatologic Therapy · 271
in clinical practice. Vet Med Small Anin Clin 7l:196,
mediated dlisease and epitheliotropic lymphorna. J Am
1975.
Anim Hosp Assoc 25:377, 1989.
127. Noxon JO, et al: Miniral inhibitory concentration of
145. Roscnkrantz W: Immunomodulating drugs in derma-
silvcr sulfadiazine on Pseudomonas aeruginosu and
tology. In: Current Vetcrinary Therapy
yX: Small Ani-
Staphylococcus intermedius isolates from the ears of
Imal Practice. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1989,
dogs with otitis externa. Proc: Am Aead Vet Dermatol
P 570.
Ain Coll Vet Dermatol 13:72, 1997.
145a. Ruszczak Z, Schwartz. RA: Interferons in dermatol-
128. Olivry T: Personal communication, 1999.
ogy. Adv Dermatol 13:235, 1998.
129. Page EH, et al: Cyclosporine A. J Am Acad Dermatol
146. Salzberg K: Tools and techmiques for home grcoming.
14:785, 1986.
Cat Fancy, May 1994, p 48.
130. Paradis M: Canine recurrent flank alopecia: Treat-
147. Samlaska CP, et al: Pentoxifylline. J Am Acad Derma-
ment with melatonin. Proc Am Acad Vet Dermatol
tol, 30:603,1994.
Am Coll Vet Dermatol 1l:49, 1995.
148. Saunders B: IIow to Trim, Groom, and Show Your
131. Paradis M: Melatonin in the treafruent of canine pat-
Dog. Howell House, Ncw York, 1967.
term baldness. In: Kwochka KW, ct al (eds): Advances
148a. Scardino MS, et al: The effects of omega-3 fatty acid
in Veterinary Dermatology II1. Butterworthi-Hcinc-
diet enrichment on wound hcaling. Vet Dermatol 10:
mann, Boston, 1998. p 511.
283, 1999.
132. Paradis M: Mclatonin therapy in canine alopecia. In:
149. Schaer M, Ginn PE: latrogenie Cushing's syndrome
Bonagura J (ed): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy
dso y uy I seo e u Aeddu poas pre
XI1. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 2000, p 546.
Assoc 35:48, 1999.
133. Pathak MA: Sunscreens, topical and systemic ap-
150. Schauler S, Ippen H: Photodermatoses and light pro-
tection. Int J Dermatol 21:241, 1982.
hil effects of solar radiation. J Am Acad Dermatol 7:
151. Schick RO, et al: Effcacy of an ormega-3 fatty acid
adjusted diet in pruritic dogs. Proc Eur Soc Vet Der-
285,1982.
134. Peaston AE, et al: Photodynamic therapy for nasal
matol 12:245,1995.
and aural squainous cell carcinoma in cats. J Am Vet
152. Schleimer RP: Glucocorticosteroids. In: Middleton E,
Med Assoc 202:1261, 1993.
et al (eds): Allergy Principlcs and Practice. Mosby
135. Peck GL, DiGiovanna JJ: The retinoids. In: Freed-
Year Book, St. Iouis, 1993.
berg IM, et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's Dernatology in
 153. Schoen AM; Problems in Veterinary Medicine: Veter-
inary Acupuncture. J.B. Lippineott, Philadelphia,
Gcneral Medicine V. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1999,
p 2810.
1992.
135a. Pedersen NC: A review of immunologic diseases in
154. Schoen AM: Veterinary Acupuncture: Ancient Art to
the dog. Vet Inmuno! Immunopathol 69:251, 1999.
Modern Medicine. American Veterinary Publications,
136. Pitcairn R: Dr. Pitcairn's Complete Cuide to Natural
Goleta, Califonmia, 1994.
155. Schwartz E, et al: In vivo prevention of corlicoste-
Health for Dogs and Cats. Rodale Press, Inc, New
roid-induced skin atrophy by tretiuoin in the hairless
York, 1995.
137. Podkonjak KR: Veterinary cryotherapy-
mouse is acconpanied by nodulation of collagen, gly-
—2. Vet Med
(Small Animal Clinician) 77:183, 1982
102:241, 1994.
138. Poppenga RH, et al: Hexachlorophene toxicosis in a
156. Schwartzman RM: Topical dermatologic therapy. In:
litter of Doberman pinschers. J Vet Diagn Invest 2:
Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy VI. W.B.
129, 1990.
139. Power HT, Ihrke P]: Synthetic retinoids in veterinary
Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1977, p 506.
156a. Schwassman M: Uses of interferon. Derm Dialogue,
dermatology. Vet Clin North Ain Simall Anim Pract
Winter, p 9, 1999.
20:1525, 1990.
157. Scott DW: Clinical assessment of topical benzoyl per-
140. Power HT: Personal communication.
oxicle in trcatmcnt of canine skin diseases. Vet Med
140a. Recs C: Pentoxifylline (Trental). Derm Dialogue,
(Small Animal Clinician) 74:808, 1979.
Winter, p 10, 1999.
158. Scott DW: Foline dermatology
y 1900-1978. J Am
141. Rewerts JM, et al: Atraumatic rupture of the gas-
Anim Hosp Assoc 16:331, 1980.
trocnemius after corticosteroid administration in a
159. Scott DW: Hyperadrenocorticism. Vet Clin North Am
dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 210:655, 1997.
Small Anim Pract 9:3, 1979.
142. Rickards RA: A new trcatment for canine melanosis.
160. Scott DW: Rational use of glucocorticoids in derma-
Mod Vet Pract 47:38, 1966.
tology. In: Bonagura J (ed): Kirk's Current Veterinary
143. Rinkardt NE, et al: The effects of prednisone and
Therapy XII. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1995.
azathioprinc on circulating immunoglobulin levels and
161.
Scott Dw: Systemic glucocorticoid therapy. In: Kirk
lymphocyte subpopulations in normal dogs. Can J Vet
RW (ed): Current
Veterinary Therapy VIl. W.B.
Res 63:18, 1999.
Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1980, p 988.
143a. Rosenbaum M: Cyclosporine. Derm Dialogue, Surm-
162. Seott DW: Topical
cutancous mcdicinc,or "Now
1ner, p 5, 1999.
what should I try?" Proc Am Anim Hosp Assoc 46:89,
I43b. Rohrer CR, et al: Gastric hemorrhage in dogs given
1979.
high doses of inethylprednisolone sodium succinate.
163. Scott DW, Buerger RG: Nonsteroidal anti-inHamma-
Am J Vet Res 60:977, 1999.
tory agents in the managcment of canine pruritus. J
143c. Rohrer CR, et al: Eficacy of misoprostol in preven-
A1n Anim Hosp Assoc 24:425, 1988.
   s   s po 
164. Scott DW, Cayatte SM: Failure of papaverine hydro-
doses of methylprednisolone sodium succinate.Am J
chloride and doxycycline hyclate as antipruritic agents
Vet Res 60:982, 1999.
in pruritic dogs: Results of an open clinical trial. Can
144. Rosenkrantz Ws, et al: Clinical cvaluation of cyclo-
Vef J 34:164, 1993.
sporine in aninal moxdels with cutaneous immunc-
165. Scott DW, Creen CE: Iatrogenie secondary adreno-
 272 · Dermatologic Therapy
cortical insufficiency in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Asscoc
therapy. Vet. Med. (Small A1imal Clinician) 78:1693,
10:555, 1974.
1983.
166. Scott DW, Miller WH Jr: Medlical management of
188. Thomas ML: Development of a bacterial model for
allergic pruritus in thc cat, with emphasis on feline
canine otitis extera. Proc Annu Memh Meet Am
atopy. J S Afr Vet Assoc 64:103, 1993.
Acad Vet Dermatol Au Col Vct Dennatol 6:28,
167. Scott DW, Miller WH Jr: Nonsteroidal anti-infamma-
1990.
tory agents in the management of canine allergic pru-
189. Thomas RC, et al: Efects of a 1% hydrocortisone
ritus. J S Afr Vet Assoc 64:52, 1993.
168. Scott DW, et al: A clinical study on the effect of two
rameters, adrenal function testing and cutaneous re-
commercial veterinary benzoyl peroxide shampoos in
dogs. Canine Pract 19.7, 1994.
Dermatol 10:109, 1999.
169. Scott DW, et al: A clinical study on the eficacy of
190. Toyoda M, Morohashi M: Morphological assessment
two commercial veterinary emollients (Micro Pearls
of the cffects of cyclosporine A on mast cell-ncrve
and Humilac) in the managerment of winter-time dry
relationship in atopic dermatitis. Acta Dermatol Ve-
skin in dogs. Corncll Vet 81:419, 1991.
nerol 78:321, 1998.
170. Scott DW, et al: Comparison of the clinical effcacy
191. Trettien A: Workshop Report 13: Shampoos and
of two commercial fatty acid suppleinents (EfaVet
other topical therapy. In: Von Tscharner C, Halliwell
and DVM Derm Caps), evening primrose oil. and
REW (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol
cold water marine fish oil in the management of aller-
1. Baillierc-Tindall, Philadelphtia, 1990, p 434.
gic pruritus in dogs: A double-blinded study. Cornell
192. Turek JI, Hayek MG: Effect of omega-6/ornega-3
Vet 82:319, 1992.
171. Scott DW, et al: Effect of an omega-3/omega-6 fatty
 geriatric dogs. In: Rcinhart GA, Carey DP (eds): Re-
acid containing commercial lamb and rice diet on
cent Advances in Canine and Feline Nutrition Il.
Orange Frazer Press, Wilmington, 1998, p 305.
pnritus in atopic dogs: Results of a single-blinded
study. Can J Vet Res 61:145, 1997.
193. Turner TD: Interaction dressings used in the manage-
d sansso u yo
172. Scott DW, et al (eds): Muller and Kirk's Small Ani-
mal Dermatology, 5th ed. W.B. Saunders Co, Phila-
in veterinary practice. Vet Dermatol 8:235, 1997.
194. Uthappa D, Sharma BN: Clnical eficacy of a herbal
delphia, 1995.
173. Scott DW, et al: Observations on the immunopathol-
gel for skin disorders in dogs. Indian Vet J 20:231,
ogy and therapy of canine pemphigus and pemphi-
1996.
195. Vaden SL: Cyclosporine and tacrolirmus. Semin Vet
goid, J Aun Vet Med Assoc 180:48, 1982.
Med Surg 12;161, 1997.
173a. Scott DW, et al: A clinical study on the effcacy of
196. Vanden Broek AHM, Stafford WL: Epidcrmal and
the mauagement of prwritus in atopic dogs. Canine
 hepatic glucocorticoid receptors in cats and dogs. Res
Vet Sei 52:312, 1992.
Pract 25:15, 2000.
197. Vaughan C, et al: Photoinstability of UVA sun protcc-
174. Shelton RM: Aloc vera: Its cheimical and therapeutic
tion products. Am J Cosmetic Surg 14:1423, 1997.
properties. Int J Dermatol 30:679, 1991.
198. Vanghn DM, et al: Evaluation of dietary n-6 to n-3
175. Shroot B: Pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics
of topical adapalene. J Am Acad Dermatol 39(Part 3):
fatty acid ratios on leukotriene B synthesis in dog skin
and neutrophils. Vet Dermatol 5:163, 1994.
S17, 1998.
199. Verheijen F, et al: Adrenocortical suppression in dogs
176. Silver RJ, et al: Multi-center clinical evaluation of an
and rats after topical administration of betametha-
ayurvedic topical herbal formulation for veterinary
sone-17-valerate and resocortol butyrate. In: Kwochka
dermatopathies. J Am Holistic Vet Med Assoc 17:33,
1998.
177. Slatter DH (ed): Textbook of Small Animal Surgery.
I11. Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, I998, p 481.
200. Villar D, et al: Toxicity of melaleuca oil and related
2nd ed. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1993.
N seo pre shop uo Xreodo pdde so enuss
178. Song M: Fleas and Flea Control. The Professonal
Hum Toxicol 36:139, 1994,
Library Series. AAHA, Denver, CO, 1993.
 201. Vitale CB, et al: Diet-induced alterations in lipid me-
[ a  ss    s 1
tabolism and associated cutaneous xanthoma forma-
A1n Acad Dermatol 34:1, 1996.
tion in 5 cats. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advanccs
180. Stewart Lj. ct al: Isotetinoin in the treatment of
in Veterinary Dermatology I11. Butterworth-Heine-
sebaceous adenitis in two Vizslas. J Am Anim Hosp
mann, Boston, 1998, p 241.
Assoc 27:65, 1991.
202. Vogel JC, et al: Gene therapy for skin diseases. Adv
181. Stors FJ: Use and abusc of systemic corticosteroid
Dermatol 1l:383, 1996.
therapy. J Am Acad Dermatol 1:95, 1979.
203. Wehster GF: Topical tretinoin in acne therapy. J An
182. Surber C, et al: Topical corticostervids. J Ain Acad
Acad Dermatol 39(Part 3):S38, 1998.
Dermatol 32:1025, 1995.
204. Weiss JS. Shavin JS: Adapalene for the treatrment of
-e rus u suy pun u sap iis ums cl
acne vuigaris. J Ant Acad Dernatol 39(Part 3):S50,
mal practice: Current status and lines of develop-
1998.
ment. Vet Dermatol 8:249, 1997.
 205. Werth VP, Lazarus GS: Systemic glucocorticoids. In:
Freedberg IM, et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's Dernatology
ment and Reconstnnction in the Dog and Cat. W.B.
in General Medicine V. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Saunders Co, Philadelphia,1980.
1999, p 2783.
185. Swaim SF, Lee AH: Topical wound medications: A
 206. Wester RC, et al: Controlled releasc of benzoyl per-
revicw, J Am Vet Med Assoc 190:1588, 1987.
s d     n
186. Tarvin G, Lenehan T: Personal communication, 1993.
 poa y r I  dn an 
187. Thoma RE, et al: Phototherapy: A promising cancer
720, 1991,
Dermatologic Therapy · 273
207. Wicgand UW, Chou RC: Pharmacokineties of oral
Annu Memb Mcet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll
isotretinoin. J Am Acad Dermatol 39(Part 3):S8.
Vet Dermatol 7:101, 1991.
1998.
214. White SD, et al: Sebaceous adenitis in dogs and re-
208. Wiegand LW, Chou RC: Pharmacokineties of acitre-
sults of treatment with isotretinoin and etretinate:30
tin and etretinate. J Ain Acad Derinatol 39(Part 3):
cases (1990-1994). J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:197,
S25. 1998.
1995.
209. Withrow S} (ed): Syrnposium on cryosurgery. Vet Clin
215. White-Weithers N, Medlleau L: Evaluation of topica!
North A1m Small Anim Pract 10:753, 1980.
therapies for the treatmcnt of dermatophyte-infected
209a. White GM: Acne therapy. Adv Dermatol 14:29.
hair from dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 3l:
1999.
250, 1995.
210. White JV: Cycylosporin: Prototype of a T-cell selec-
216. Wilkie DA, Kirby R: Methemoglobinemia associated
tive immunosuppressant. J Am Vet Med Assoc IS9:
with dermal application of benzocaine! cream in a cat.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 192:85, 1988.
566, 1986.
217, Winter WG: The Holistic Veterinary Handbook.
211. White P: Essential fatty acids: Use in management of
Calde Press, Lakeville, MN, 1997.
canine atopy. Comp Contin Educ 15:451, 1993.
218.Wolf R: Soaps, shampoos, and detergents: A scientife
212. White SD, et al; Corticosteroid (methylprednisolone
soap opera. Clin Dermatol 14:1, 1996.
soxliurn succinate) pulse therapy in five dogs with au-
toimmune skin disease. J Am Vet Med Assoc 19l:
experimentally incuced pruritus in humans. J Am
1121, 1987.
Acad Dermatol 37:278, 1997.
213.White SD, et al: lsotretinoin and etretinate in the
220. Zenoble RD, Kemppaainen HJ: Adrenocortical sup-
treatment of benign and malignant cutaneous neopla-
pression by topically applied corticosteroids in healthy
sia and in sebaceous adenitis of longhaired dogs. Proc
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 191:685, 1987.
Chante:
Bacterial Skin Diseases
· cuTaneoUS baCTerIoLOGY AnD NormaL
DEFENSE MECHANISMS
The skin forms a protective barrier without which life would be impossible. The defense
has three components: physical, chemical, and microbial.133 173, 237
Hair forms the first line of physical defense to protect against the contact of patho-
gens with tskinHarmayalshabrbactriaspciallystaphyoci61252
However, the rclatively inert stratum corneum forms the basic physical defense layer. Its
tightly packed keratinized cells are permeated by an emulsion of sebum, sweat, and
intercellular cement substance. The emulsion is concentrated in the outer layers of kera-
tin, where some of the volatile fatty acids vaporize, leaving a fairly impermeable superficial
effective physical barrier. The ermulsion provides a chemical barrier to potential pathogens
antibacterial properties. Water-soluble substances in the emulsion include inorganic salts
 and proteins that inhibit bacteria.
The skin is viewed as an immune organ that plays an active role in the induction and
maintenance of immune responses, which can be beneficial or detrimental.290 Specific
components include epidermal Langerhans’ cells, dermal dendrocytes, keratinocytes, skin-
seeking T lymphocytes, mast cells, and thc endothelium of postcapillary venules. Various
cytoknes, complement, and immunoglobulins IgA, IgG, IgG, IgGeas IgG2. IgG2e IgM,
and IgE are found in the emulsion layer and contribute to the skin's immunologic
functio172.72520Manyindividual cmponents of this cmlicated systemhaveantim
crobial effects, so the normal skin should be viewed as an organ that is resistant to
infection.
The normal skin microflora also contributes to skin defense mechanisms. Bacteria are
located in the superficial epidermis and in the infundibulurn of the hair follicles, where
sweat and sebum provide nutrients.172, 252, 253 The normal flora is a mixture of bacteria that
live in symbiosis, probably exchanging growth factors. The Hora may change with different
cutaneous environments. These are affected by factors such as heat, pH, salinity, moisture,
the microorganisms enables bacteria to occupy microbial niches and to inhibit colonization
by invading organisms. In addition, many bacteria (Bacillus spp., Streptococcus spp., and
Staphylococcus spp.) are capable of producing antibiotic substances, and some bacteria
can produce enzymes (e.g., β-lactamase) that inhibit antibiotics.241
Bacteria cultured from normal skin are called normal inhabitants and are classified as
resident or transient, depending on their ability to multiply in that habitat.5s. is0 Residents
successfully multiply on normal skin. A variety of studies have been performed to identify
the normal fora of the skin of dogs and cats. Site and temporal variation have been
observed, but differences in methodology make direct comparison of the various studies
dlificult. In general, most studies report the following findings on resident and transient
organisms.
274
Bacterial Skin Diseases · 275
Resident Organisms
Micrococcus spp: coagulase-negative staphyiocoi, especilly Staphylococcus epidermidis
and S. xylosus; a-hermolytic streptococci; Clostridium spp.; Propionibacterium acnes; Aci-
netobacter spp.; and various gram-negative aerobes are considered normal residents of the
bacterial Aora. Micrococcus spp, gram-negative aerobes, Bacillus spp., and Staphylococcus
intermedius are found on norinal hairs.125 The staphylococci are found distally, whcrcas
the gram-negative organisms are found more proximaly 125 Micrococcus spp., Propionibac-
terium acne, streptococci, Bacilus spp., and S. intermedius arc found in the hair follicle.
 In the past, there was debate as to whether S. intermedlius belonged in the list of
    s     i e g   
strains of S. intermedius on their body.109, 125,241. 242 Probably, one or more of these strains
(e.g., the follicular population) should be considered a resident.
a opnd q o n sictsgshop p pue u jouu ee pu
resident flora of these regions. From these sites, it can be spread to other regions of the
body (e.g. hair shafts, to sites of infection, to other dogs in the houschold, and to contact
humans)io9. 123, 128 If the mucosal population is climinated with topical antibiotics, the
cutaneous population drops markedly 29 These data suggest that S. intermedius be consid
ered a part of the transient Hora of the dog's skin.125. 192
neonatal period.? The number of organisms at any one body site vary regionally, with
moist areas (chin, interdigital web, and abdomen) typically more heavily colonized.
The resident fora of cats includes Micrococcus spp.; coagulase-negative staphylococci,
including both Staphylococcus aureus and S. intermedius, are also commonly isolated fron
frequency of isolation of coagulase-negative (Staphylococcus capitis, S. epidermidis, Staph-
ylococcus haemolyticus, Staphylococcus hominis, Staphylococcus sciuri, and Staphylococcus
warneri) and coagulase-positive (S. aureus and S. intermedius) organisms compared with
sq  paasen q a sa as ir sns sen nn u ss s
Transient Organisms
Transient organisms may be cultured from the skin but are of no significance unless they
become involved in a pathologic process as secondary invaders. These organisms do not
multiply on the normal skin of most animals. Transients of the dog include Escherichid
coli, Proteus mirabilis, Corynebacterium spp. Bacillus spp., and Pseudomonas spp.,
whercas β-hemolytic streptococci, E. coli, P. mirabilis, Pseudomonas spp., Alcaligenes spp.,
negative other than S. sirnulans) are found in the cat.
The primary cutaneous pathogen of dogs, and probably cats, is S. internedius, a
coagulase-positive species. DNA fingerprinting of different isolates shows that, although all
isolates share a significant identity, there are many different strains of S. intermedius.
Multiple different strains can be found on the same individual.19. 130. 259 Isolates fron
normal or infected dogs produce a variety of substances, including the enterotoxins (A, B,
C, D), toxic shock protein, protein A, and the hemolysins.94. io1. 124 Exfoliative toxin,
frequently isolated from S. aureus and Staphylococcus hyicus, is not produced by S.
intermedus The toxins, especially protein A and enterotoxin C, infuence bacterial
binding by upregulating adhesion molecules on keratinocytes but appear to influence the
host most by acting as superantigens that upregulate the local cutancous and immunologic
the bacterium, inhibiting its ability to be phagocytized and increasing its ability to ad-
here.161. 192
276 * Bacterial Skin Diseases
There has been speculation about the means by which only a small number of a vast
array of bacteria in the environment are able to colonize or infcct the skin. The potent
cleaning forces of dilution, washout, drying, and desquamation of surface cells prevent
many organisms from colonizing the skin. It is now recognized that bacterial adhesion is a
 process infuenced by both the host and the organisn. Bacteria possess surface adhesion
 molecules, which influence their ability to bind to keratinocytes. For staphylococci, tei-
choic acid and protein A appear to be most important surface adhesion molecules.124
These molecules bind to host surface receptors (e.g, fibronectin and vitronectin) to
 prevent the bacteria from being brushed from the skin.
Adhesion is increased with increasing time, temperature, and concentration of bacteria
complex), more bacteria adhere to the skin because more binding sites are available. Some
atopic dogs bind more bacteria, which could inerease the likelihood of infection. However,
an increased binding ability does not equate with increased pathogenicity or virulence. To
date, a specific virulence factor for S. intermedius has not been identified.39 195, 240, 242
Other organisms from the transient group are pathogenic in rare cases.7. 87. 179. 23
Gram-negative organisms tend to fourish in moist, warm areas and to predominate when
medications depress the gram-positive Hora.192,24 Cats infrequently experience pyoderma
but commonly have subcutaneous abscesses. Because these are often from bitc wounds,
the nouth fora of the cat is an irmportant factor. It includes Pasteurella multocida,
β-hemolytic streptococci, Corynebacterium spp., Actinomyces spp., Bacteroides spp., and
terna, subcutaneous abscesses, paronychia, and other skin infections4. 10
 Anaerobic bacteria are usually abundant in gastrointestinal secretions; therefore, fecal
contamination is a cause of soft tissue infections due to these organisms. Anaerobic
bacteria isolated from dog and cat infections include Actinomyces spp, Clostridium
 other soft tissue wounds, but they may also be cultured from more superficial pyoderma,
otitis, or stomatitis cases.0
Antibacterial susceptibility for obligate anaerobic bacteria has been rated as fol-
carbenicillin, chloramphenicol, clindamycin, and metronidazole; 75% to 90% are sensitive
t0 cephalosporin, lincomycin, and penicillin G (except Bacteroides spp., which are resistant
p ai o as are e o o  p e d 
erythromycin; and less than 25% are susceptible to gentamicin and the fluoroquino-
lones,145
 Staphylococci are among the nost resistant of the non-spore-forming organisms.
They resist dehydration, are relatively heat-resistant, and tolerate antiseptic medications
better than the vegetative forms of most bacteria. Their toxins may cause tissue necrosis at
the point of infection. Repeated injections of heat-killed staphylococci protect rabbits
against otherwise fatal doses of S. aureus. Bacterins may be valuable in combating chronic
infections in dogs and cats.
The numbers of resident bacteria on the skin tend to vary among individuals; some
aninals have many organisms, whereas others have few. The number per individual may
remain constant, unless disturbed by antibacterial treatment or changes in climate. More
bacteria are found on the skin in warm, wet weather than in cold, dry weather.237 Moist,
intertriginous areas tend to have large numbers, and individuals with oily skin have higher
counts. Total counts of acrobic organisns on normal skin ranged from 100° to 103
Disease states influence the species and numbers of bacteria present. In seborrheic
and in most other bacterial infections of the skin. In patients with various dermatoses
increased numbers of resident bacteria are found in all areas of the skin, not just in the
affected areas.15s, 242 Compared with dogs that are normal, dogs with dermatoses have a
Bacterial Skin Diseases · 277
more prolific growth of aerobic organisms, a greater number of sites carrying coagulase-
positive staphylococci, and a higher number of gram-negative microorganisms. Thus, these
animals are heavily colonized with potentially pathogenic bacteria, a fact to considcr when
providing basic thcrapy for the primary dermatosis.
Microorganisms isolated from an intact lesion such as a pustule are evidence of
infection, not colonization. Colonization means that a potential pathogen is living on the
skin or in a lesion but that its presence is causing no reaction in the host. The problein in
evaluating a pyoderma culture is to separate secondary colonization from secondary infec-
tion. The presence of many degenerate neutrophils and phagocytosed bacteria is direct
evidence of a host reaction and is compatible with infection. Infection can be determined
by direct smears of lesion exudates, which may be more informative than cultures.
· SKIN INFECTIONS
The staphylococcal organisms, the primary isolates from skin infections in dogs and cats,
are not particularly virulent; thus, any skin infection should be considered a sign of sone
underlying cutaneous, metabolic, or immunologic abnormality. Bacterial pyoderma is very
common in dogs, but rare in humans. The reasons for this are not known, but could
include anatomic and physiologic factors. The failure to detcct differences in pathogenicity
of S. intermedius isolates has suggested that host factors, such as poorly developed
epidernal defenses, are important.lsis Caninc skin is characterized by a rclativcly thin,
and a higher pH. Traditionally, skin infections are classified as either primary or secondary
to refect the absence or the presence of an underlying cause.
Secondary infections are by far the most common and result from some cutaneous,
immunologic, or metabolic abnormality. Secondary infections may involve organisms other
than staphylococci, tend to respond slowly or poorly to treatiment if the underlying
problem is ignorcd, and recur unless the cause is resolved. Virtually any skin condition
described in this text can predispose to infection, but allcrgic, seborrheic, or follicular
disorders are the most common causes of infection. Intcrcstingly, infection appears to be
relatively uncommon in the autoimmune disorders.2s This may be due to the presence of
high cutaneous levels of eytokines, which have antimicrobial properties.
Allergic dogs are especiall prone to infections because of the damagc thcy do to
their skin while itching. the cortieosteroids that they often receive, and possibly some
immunologic abnormalities associated with their allergic predisposition.1s3 when their skin
becomes infected, the level of pruritus increases quickly and does not respond well to
corticosteroid administration. Antibiotic treatment resolves the lesions of infection and
reduces, but does not eliminate, the pruritus.
 Seborrheie amimals have greatly inereased numbers of bacteria on thcir skin surfacc,
which can colonize an epidermal or follicular defeet and cause infection. They also
contribute to the alteration of the surface lipid layer to one that can induce infammation.
In this situation, the patches of seborrheic dermatitis cause the animal to itch and induce
true infection in these areas. Superficial infections result in significant scaling during their
development and resolution. It can sometimes be difficult to decide whether the sebor-
rhea induced the infection or vice versa. Scaling caused by infection decreases quickly
with antibiotic therapy. If seborrheic sigas are still pronounced after 14 to 21 days of
antibiotic treatment, the animal should be evaluated for an underlying seborrheic disorder.
Follicular infammation, obstruction, degeneration, or a combination of these predis-
poses the follicle to bacterial infection. InHammatory causes are numerous, but demodi-
cosis and dermatophytosis are most commonly implicated. Folicular obstruction occurs as
part of generalized seborrhea, in focal seborrheic disorders (e.g, feline acne and Schnau-
zer comedo syndrorme), sebaceous adenitis, follicular dysplasias and other congenital disor-
ders of the follicle, and endocrine disorders. Follicular degencration can be caused by all
of these conditions plus alopecia areata. In cases of folicular infection, examination of skin
serapings for demodicosis and evaluations for dermatophytes (e.g., trichogram and fungal
culture) are always recommended. After those tests, the skin biopsy is most useful because
278 · Bacterial Skin Diseases
 pathologic changes are too deep to be appreciated with the naked eye. The inflammation
associated with the secondary bacterial infection can mask some of the histologic features
of the predisposing disease; thus, it is best to resolve the infection first and then perforn
the skin biopsy.
The most common metabolic causes of skin infection are hypothyroidism and hyper-
adrenocorticism (iatrogenic or spontaneous), but diabetes melitus, other endocrine skin
disorders, and other systemic metabolic problems (e.g., byperlipidemia) must also be
considered. These disorders predispose to infection by their impact on the animal's
immune system and the changes they induce in the hair follicle. In most instances, the
number of infected follicles is small compared with the number that are visually abnormal
(e.g,hyperkeratotic andhairless), so the index of suspicion for anunderlyingmetabolic
disorder should be high.
The classification of primary infection is more problermatic. Primary infections are
described as those that occur in otherwise healthy skin, are staphylococcal with rare
exception, and are cured by appropriate antibiotic therapy. This definition overlooks the
tendency for the infection to recur. It is common to examine a dog for a skin infection
 and find no historical or physical abnormality to explain the infection. Is this a primary
infection, an infection secondary to some trausient insult to the skin, or an infection
secondary to some as yet undefined underlying problem? The key to the primacy of the
infection is its tendency to recur. Infections that resolve with no residual skin disease and
considered primary infections. If the infection recurs early, the animal has some subclini-
cal skin disease or an immunologic abnormality.
· IMMUNODEFICIENCIES
 Immunodeficiencies are classified as either primary or acquired. Primary immunodefcien-
cies are congenital and are usually inherited. In these animals, infections develop early in
life for no apparent reason. Although German shepherd pyoderma tends to have a genetic
basis, the defect is not expressed until adulthood. Infections of the respiratory, gastrointes-
tinal, urogenital, and integumentary systems are most common. In some cases, the skin
infection follows a known insult (e.g., fea bites) but is far out of proportion in severity to
the insult. Depending on the nature and severity of the immumodeficiency, the infection
immunodeficiencies have been described in dogs, and those with associated skin infection
are listed in Table 4-1.
One of the most common primary immunodeficiencies diagnosed in dogs is selective
 IgA deficiency.4! Caution is warranted because wide variation in serum IgA levels is seen
their own reference ranges rather than rely on values found in the literature or provided
by the manufacturers. If the animal is not IgA deficient, a cell-mediated deficiency is most
likely.54a
IgA and IgG deficiencies were described in Rottweiler puppies that had bacteral
pyoderma subeutaneous ahscesses, and demodicosis74b In additon, these puppies had a
d u sa p anss pror as r u   toa jo an
cell development.
Acquired irnunodeficiencies are common complications of many serious systemic
illnesses.52. 60. 66. 155. 265a Because the immunodepression follows the underlying disease,
there is no age, breed, or sex predilection for these acquired immunologic disorders. The
best-known examples of acquired inmunodeficiency disease are associated with viral infec-
tions, especially feline immunodeficiency virus, and leishmaniasis. In most other condi-
tions, the signs of the primary illness predominate and precede those of the immunode-
pression. Examples in which the skin looks normal or nearly so before the infection
include adult-onset demodicosis (see Chap. 6), hypothyroidism (see Chap. 10), and hyper-
adrenocorticism (see Chap. 10). Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor deficiency was de-
Bacterial Skin Diseases · 279
●Table 4-1
 PrIMaRY IMMUNODEFICIeNCIeS OF DOGS
DISEASE
BREED INVOLVED
 MECHANISMS OF DEFECT
REFERENCES
Phagocytic Defect
Cyelic hematopoiesis
Collie, Pomeranian, Cocker
Blockade of bone marrow
58
spaniel
Bactericidal defect in neu-
release
Granulocytopathy
 Doberman pinscher, Irish 
35, 67, 230
setter, Weimaraner
Granulocytopathy
Irish setter
Rexduced granulocytc ad-
108, 269
herence
Humoral Defect
Complement deficiency
 Brittany spaniel
Absence of C3
30
Transient hypogamma-
Many
Delayed development of
105
globulinernia
functioning humoral sys-
Selective IgM deficiency
tem
 Doberman pinscher
Low IgM levels
225
Selective IgA deficiency
Many
Lrow IgA levels
41,75,77,225
CelMediated Defect
Bull terer, Weimaraner,
T-cell dysfunction
100, 146, 204, 234
others
Combined Immunodeficiency
Basset hound, Cardiyan
B-cell and T-cell dlysfunc-
104, 120a,147,
Welsh corgi
tion
227
Ig = immunoglobulin.
scribed in a Rottweiler with chronic neutropenia and recurrent infections of the skin and
ears,166i
● TrEaTMENT OF SKIN INFECTIONS
Satisfactory resolution of a skin infection necessitates that the cause of the infection be
identifed and corrected and that the infection receive proper treatment. If the cause of
the infection persists, either the response to treatment is poor or the infection recurs
 shortly after treatment is discontinued. If the cause is resolved but inappropriate treat-
 ment for the infection is given, the infection persists and worsens.
 Skin infections can be treated topically, systemically, surgically, or by some combina-
tion of these. Most infections of dogs and cats are too widespread or too deep to be
d a  r a r s q  n rn r p
 more comfortable and hasten its response to antibiotics. Topical treatment can take
considerable time and effort on the owner's part and can irritate the skin if the products
are too harsh. Surgery alone can be useful with focal lesions or can be perforned as an
 adjunct to other treatments. Management must be individualized.
Topical Treatment
 Topical treatments are used to reduce or eliminate the bacterial population in and around
d osspnssuearee
 importance because it allows direct contact of the active ingredient with the organism and
promotes drainage. Agents commonly used include chlorhexidine, povidone-iodine, ethyl
lactate, benzoyl peroxide, and various antibiotics, especially fusidic acid, mupirocin, and
bacitracin.*
Infections restricted to the skin surface (e.g., impetigo) or intact hair follicles may be
effectively treated with topical agents alone. When the number of lesions is small and they
 gels or antibiotic formulations receive widest use. The benzoyl peroxide gels marketed to
veterinarians contain 5% active ingredient, which can be irritating, especially with re-
*See references 14, 49, 112, 113, 164, 175, 216.
280 * Bacterial Skin Diseascs
 peated application. In most instances, antibiotic preparations are nonirritating. In most 
cases, transdermal absorption of the agent is limited, but frequent application over wide
areas should be avoided.
Many potent antibacterial agents are availablc in topical form.40, 81a, 239,276, 2s2 The nost
commonly used are mupirocin, fusidic acid, neomycin, gentamicin, bacitracin, polymyxin
B, and thiostrepton. Important considerations for some of these agents are as follows: (1)
mupirocin and fusidic acid are more effective than other topical agents for treatment
staphylococcal pyodermas, (2) mupirocin has poor activity against gram-negative infections,
(3) neomycin has more potential for allrgic sensitization than do most topicals, and
susceptibility is variable for gram-negative organisms, and (4) polymyxin B and bacitracin
in combination may be effective for gram-negative as well as gram-positive organisms;
however, they are rapidly inactivated by puruient exudates and do not penetrate well.
 Mupirocin is particularly useful because of its ability to penetrate the skin and its very low
incidence of adverse reactions. Potentiation of topical antibiotics with EDTA.Tris is cur-
rently being studied, especially in thc treatment of ear disease, and is likely to increase
Often, topical antibiotics are formulated with other ingredients, most commonly glu-
cocorticoids. There are numerous antibiotic-steroid coinbinations (Gentocin spray. Oto-
max, Tresaderm, and Panalog). These are occasionally indicatcd in chronic, dry, licheni-
fied, secondarily infected dermatoses (seborrhea complex and allergic dermatoses) and
pyotraumatic dermatitis and are commonly indicated in otitis externa. Several clinical and
bacteriologic trials in humans and dogs showed that these antibiotic-steroid combinations
werc superior to either agent alone.
Widespread superficial infections are best treated with antibacterial shampoos.49, 175, 216
The manipulation of the skin during its application and the vehicle of the shampoo
rermoves tissue debris, which allows better contact between the antiseptic and the bacteria.
When four commercial antibacterial shampoos were studied, none could completely steril-
ize the skin but all sigmificantly reduced the bacterial population.1t64 Benzoyl peroxide was
the most effective, followed by chlorhexidine acetate. Another study demonstrated equal
effcacy of benzoyl peroxide and ethyl lactate, with fewer adverse reactions to the latter.14
Mixtures of acetic and boric acid are also effective.24
Product selection depends on the preferences of the owner and the clinician and the
condition of the animal's skin. Animals with underlying hypersensitivity disorders or “sensi-
tive" skin (e.g., Shetland sheepdogs) should be bathed with nonirritating or mininally
shampoo selection should be re-evaluated in 10 to 14 days because the skin will be much
different then.
A thorough bath with a l0- to 15-minute shampoo contact time is indicated at
the beginning of treatiment. The timing to the next bath depends on the severity of the
infection, the cause of the infection, and the speed of the aninal's response to the
antibiotics used. Some clinicians request that the client bathe the animal at a set interval,
typically every third to seventh day, whereas other clinicians give the client guidelines for
when a bath is indicated and let the client decide when to bathe. If the client is not
overzealous, the latter method is most appropriate because it treats the animal on the
basis of its needs.
 In the case of deep draining infections, the hair in the area must be clipped to
prevent the formation of a sealing crust and to allow the topical agents to contact the
diseased tissues. Although shanpooing is beneficial, soaks are more appropriate at the
 onset of treatment. Hydrotherapy loosens and removes crusts, decreases the number of
surface bacteria, promotes epithelialization, and helps to lessen the discomfort associated
with the lesions. With warm-water soaks, the vascular plexus opens, which may allow
 better distribution of the systemic antibiotic. For widespread infection, tub soaks with or
iodine are added for additional antibacterial activity. Chlorhexidine has been most effec-
tive but may retard wound healing.167
If there are draining lesions on a foot or distal limb, the area can be soaked in a
Bacterial Skin Diseases · 28I
bucket. For lesions higher up on the limb, a newborn disposable baby diaper is a useful
aid. The outer plastie layer protects the house while the high absorbency pad holds the
soaking solution next to the skin. For these lesions, a mildly hypertonic drawing solution
of magnesium sulfate (2 thsp/qt or 30 ml/L of warm water) can be beneficial. Because
hydrotherapy hydrates the epithelium, excessively soaked skin maccratcs casily and may
crease. When drainage is slight after a soak, the frequency of soaking should be decreased
S   g o o si os p  ps s
Systemic Antibiotics
Systemic antibiotic agents are used for bacterial skin diseases that are not treatable with
topical therapy.32. 47. 46 Because the overwhelming majority of canine skin infections are
caused by S. intermedius, antibiotics that affect these bacteria and concentrate in the skin
are of primary interest34.6. 83 Occasionally, Proteus spp., Pseudomonas spp., and E. coli
are involved as secondary invaders in dceper soft tissue infections. In cats, the primary
bacteria are P. multocida and β-hemolytic streptococci 120. 24s Thus, the penicillins and
ampicillins are frequently effective antibiotics for cats with nonstaphylococcal infections.
aa p sip a ts an n si s oe a a
veterinary dermatology, namely the penicillins,129 sulfonamides,42 macrolides and lincos-
amides,210 cephalosporins,196 and fuoroquinolones,144 should be studied before they are
used. Proper antibiotic use necessitates that the antibiotic inhibit the specific bactcria.
preferably in a bactericidal manner. Bacteriostatic drugs may also be effective as long as
 en os s motu e s pnous p au 'son po  soq a
produces littlc effect on organisms of the natural flora of the skin or the intestinal tract
(for oral medications). The antibiotic should be inexpensive, should be easily given
(orally, if it is to be prescribed for home use) and absorhed, and should have no adverse
effects.
 The most important factors infuencing the effectiveness of antibioties are the suscep-
tibility of the bacteria and the distribution to the skin in effective levels of activity at the
infection site. Only about 4% of the cardiac output of blood reaches the skin, compared
with 33% that reaches muscle.17 This variation is refected in the relative distribution of
antibiotics among organs. In studies of the different regions of skin, the levels of penicil-
Ievels reached about 40%, of the peak serum levels in dogs.17 Cephalexin levels in dog
skin are only 20% to 40% of those in plasma.152
Although the epidermis is relatively avascular, studies of skin infections showed that
the systemic route of therapy is better than the topical route for all but the most
superficial infections. The stratum cormeum is a major permeability barier to effective
topical drug penetration, These facts led to the inescapable conclusion that the skin is one
of the most diffcult tissues in which to obtain high antibiotic levels. Factors that may
reduce the effectiveness of a therapeutic plan are the following:
 1. The organism is resistant to the antibiotic and, because most S. interrnedius orga-
nisms produce β-lactamase, antibiotics resistant to this substance should be sc-
lected.
 2. The dosage is inadequate to attain and then maintain inhibitory concentrations in
the skin.
 3. The organism may be surviving inside macrophages, where it is not exposed to the
effect of most antibiotics.
 4. The organism is within a necrotic center or protected by a foreigm body such as a
hair fragment.
 5. The organism is walled off by dense scar tissue.
6. The duration of therapy is inadequate to eradicate the infection.
Over the years, multiple studies on the in vitro susceptibility of S. intermedius from
282 · Bacterial Skin Diseases
instances, in vivo results parallel the in vitro ones, but not always. In the disparate cases,
the conflicting results may be due to pharmacokinetic problems or because the wrong
organism was cultured. As noted earlier, it is possible to isolate two or more different
strains of S. intermedius from the same dog and each can differ in its antibiotic suscepti-
bility. Another consideration is the pH of the skin and its influence on susceptibility data.
As the pH increases from 7.2 to 8.5, the in viro susceptibility of S. intermedius changes
in vitro results usually correlate well regardless of the pH of the skin, this pH infuence
probably is of little clinical concern.
The early susceptibility studies focused on the data collected during the years of the
study and often compared the susceptibility data from dogs that had or had not received
previous antibiotic treatments. In general, these studies indicated that previous antibiotic
use usually induced in vitro resistance to macrolides, lincosamides, and potentiated sulfa
drugs. More recent studies have reported data from the same institution over many years
to see if the resistance pattern changed. If S. intermedius used plasmid transfer for
 resistance, the organism should become more resistant with time.
Unlike the pattern of increasing resistance in human S. aureus, S. intermedius is
really no different in its susceptibility now than it was in the 1980s.19, 130,161, 174, 192,207,209,
excellent sensitivity (see later) in 1980 is just as likely to be effective in 2000. In one
study, previous antibiotic use in a dog did not increase the resistance to potentiated sulfas
and lincomycin.62 Our case material also confirms this.255-257 With litle exception,266
canine S. intermedius has not become more resistant to antibiotics over the years, which
allows the clinician to select an antibiotic on an empirical rather than cultural basis. In
general, methicillin-resistant strains of S. aureus and S. intermedius are rarely isolated
from dogs.1oea, 213a An exception would be a report from Spain wherein an unparalleled
28% of S. intermedius isolates from dogs were resistant to methicillin.223
In most clinics worldwide, S. intermedius from dogs is almost uniformly (>95%)
sensitive to the various fuoroquinolone antibiotics, amoxicilin clavulanate, oxacillin, and
first-generation cephalosporins. Although each fuoroquinolone and cephalosporin has its
own unique feature, in vitro susceptibility to one typically indicates susceptibility to the
others.261 Enrofoxacin may be two to four times more active against S. intermedius than
diloxacin, marbofoxacin, and orbifoxacin.224a Azithromycin and clarithromycin probably
clindamycin, tylosin, erythromycin, and chloramphenicol have a very good efficacy
(>75%), whereas potentiated sulfonamides are still problermatic. In some studies, these
drugs have excellent suscepibility while others show only 50%efficacy.161, 174218,223 In a
similar fashion, there is poor sensitivity of S. intermedius in the United States to ampicil-
lin, amoxicillin, and the tetracyclines, whereas doxycycline or ampicillin is much more
effective in Australia or the United Kingdom, respectively.29, 174 Other regional variations
are also reported.
s  o ss  l o n a s r n
cocci show excellent sensitivity to oxacillin, cephalosporin, chloramphenicol, enrofoxacin,
erythromycin, potentiated sulfonarmides, and amoxicillin clavulanate; good susceptibility to
clindamycin; fair susceptibility to tetracycline; and poor susceptibility to penicillin and
amoxicillin,50, 64,198,19,215,280
With the stability in antibiotic susceptibility of S. intermedius, the routine and regular
use of the bacterial culture and susceptibility test is not indicated. If exudative cytology
indicates an infection with coccoid organisms, it is safe to assume that the organism is S.
intermedius with whatever pattern of susceptibility it maintains in that practice area.
Multiple strains of S. intermedius with differing resistance spectra can often be found on
an individual dog.174 Thus, the value and validity of antibiotic susceptibility tests on single
isolates need to be questioned. If the animal has a history of drug intolerance or allergy.
 m an aa si ro isd ar u p pas a e  psar ou s
significant variation in the daily cost of antibiotics, culture and susceptibility testing may
be indicated.
Bacterial Skin Diseases · 283
In addition to the susceptibility of the organism, various owner and animal factors
enter into the equation during antibiotic selection. Antibiotics are either time-dependent
or concentration-dependent in their action. Time-dependent drugs must be given at their
specified interval of administration for maximal effcacy. The total dose administered is
more important for the concentration-dependent drugs. It would be ill advised to dispense
oxacillin, a time-dependent drug to be administered three times daily, when the dog's
0wner works 12-hour shifts. The owner could administer the drug three times daily, but it
would not be at the 8-hour intervals needed. Macrolides tend to be gastric irritants and
would be poor choices in a dog who vormits easily. Such factors as cost, taste of medica-
tion, and ease of administration all enter the picture when a drug is selected and may
"force" the clinician to use a drug he or she may not ordinarily use.
The depth of the staphylococcal infection also influences drug selection. Deep infec-
tions require protracted courses of treatment, can respond less favorably to certain drugs.
than more superficial infections, and tend to become fibrotic. Twelve-week courses of
antibiotics are not unusual in treating some infections in dogs. At the time of this writing.
a 12-week course of fuoroquinolone would cost the owner about $150 more than would
treatment with a generic cephalosporin. Assuming that there was no medical indication for
the selection of the fuoroquinolone, the cephalosporin would be a wiser drug choice.
Long courses also make the use of sulfonamide drugs more risky. These drugs, especially
when used for long periods, are known to cause keratoconjunctivitis sicca,2 can induce
hypothyroidism (see Chap. I0), and are a common cause of adverse cutaneous drug
reactions268 (see Chap. 9).
 Deeper infections may not respond as favorably as supericial infections. For example,
in one study, doxycycline was effective in 53% of canine superficial infections and in only
14% of deep infections.29 Finally, deep infections tend to be fibrotic and the organism
 may assurme an intracellular location where many drugs cannot reach it. For intracellular
organisms, the fuoroquinolones, lincosamides, and chloramphenicol are better choices.
With significant fibrosis, antibiotic penetration can be poor. Co-administration of rifampin
and a β-lactamase-resistant antibiotic may result in cure when the antibiotic alone is of
little use.5. 46 However, rifampin should not be used casually because it is expensive and
can cause hepatotoxicity.
Antibiotic selection is not so straightforward when the empirically selected antibiotic is
not effective or when the infection recurs shortly after treatment is discontinued. If the
empirically selected antibiotic has only good susceptibility, most clinicians empirically
select another drug with excellent susceptibility. If this new drug fails to be effective, one
must carefully evaluate whether the owner is complying with the treatment regimen and
whether the skin is truly infected. If no reason for this poor response can be found,
 susceptibility testing is mandatory.
More commonly, the clinician is faced with the problem of antibiotic selection in
recurring infections. Most studies show that drugs with excellent susceptibility (amoxicilin
clavulanate, oxacillin, cephalosporin, and fuoroquinolones) maintain their efficacy in recur-
rences but that the in vitro susceptibility to the other antibiotics decreases and becomes
unpredictable. Some clinicians empirically select one of the excellent drugs, whereas other
clinicians perform susceptibility testing in all cases. Either position can be argued, and
each case should be managed on its own merits.
If cytologic study shows a mixed infection, susceptibility testing is mandatory because
the sensitivity of nonstaphylococcal organisims is not always predictable. If all organisms
are susceptible to a safe, reasonably inexpensive drug, that drug should be used. Occasion-
ally, no one drug fits the susceptibility profle of all organisns or the singular drug is too
toxic or expensive for long-term use. If the infection contains S. intermedius, as most do,
the initial antibiotic selection should be aimed at that organism. Eradication of the
staphylococcal component may make the microenvironment unfavorable for the growth of
the other organisms. If the antistaphylococcal antibiotic improves but does not resolve the
infection, alternative drugs must be used.
After an antibiotic has been selected, it should be dispensed at the corect dosage,
administered at the appropriate dosage interval, and be used for a suffcient period.
284 · Bacterial Skin Discascs
 Dosages for the antibiotics routinely used in treating staphylococcal infections are givcn in
 recommended dosage. In our experience, the use of the manufacturer's dosage is satisfac-
dosages. For example, some references indicate that the dosage of amoxicillin-clavulanate
should be 22 mg/kg instead of the manufacturer's dose of 13.75 mg/kg.iss When the
cffcacy of these two drug dosages was compared, no statistical differcnce in the rate of
 cure could be detected.1 Other studies have shown that the cure rate of deep infections
with cephalexin is inereased when thc dosage is increased from 15 mng/kg every 12 hours
 dosage of cephalexin in deep infections and do not appreciate a difference in the rate of
The most commonly recognized cause of the inability to resolve a skin infection, or of
its relapse days after the treatment is discontinued, is an insufficient course of treatment.
Although textbooks and clinical experience can suggest appropriate courses of treatment,
each animal responds at its own rate and must be treated until its infection is resolvcd.
Resolution means that al lesions have healed both on the surface and in the deeper
tissues. Surface healing is easy to determine by visual inspection, but deep healing is
Imuch more diffcult to assess and necessitates palpation of the lesions and regional lymph
nodes.
Intercurrent corticosteroid administration confounds the problem greatly. Corticoster-
oids decrease visual and palpable inflammation, which is the key sign in determining when
an infection is resolved. An infarmed hair follicle is still infected, whereas one that looks
and fecls normal is probably healed. With concurrcnt corticosteroid use, it is impossible to
● Table 4-2 ANTIBIOTIC DOSAGES
...................
ANTIBIOTIC
DOSAGE
REFERENCES
Narrow-Spectrum Agents
Erythromycin
15 mg/kg q8h
210
Clindamycin
5 mg/kg q12h
1, 122, 169, 210, 217、257
11 mg/kg q24h
Linconycin
15 mg/kg q8h
1,23,122,210
22 mg/kg q12h
Tylosin
10-20 mg/kg q12h
127,255, 256
 Broad-Spectrurm Agents
Azithromycin
5-15 mg/kg q12h
139, 258
Clarithromyein
5-10 mg/kg q12h
271
Amoxicilli-clavulanate
13.75 mg/kg q12h
1, 129, 169, 177
Oxacillin
22 mg/kg q8l
129
Cefadroxil
1, 196
22 mg/kg q24h (C)
Cephalexin
22 mg/kg q8-12h
10, 45a, 107, 112, 115, 196
Chloramphenicol
50 1ng/kg qsh (D)
2. 3
50 ng/cat q12h (C)
Diloxacin
5,--10 mg/kg ql2h
1, 224a
Enrofloxacin
5 mg/kg q24h
83, 144, 214,224a, 272
Marbofloxacin
2.0 mg/kg q24h
48,144, 224a
Orbifoxacinl
2.3 mg/kg q24h
1,144,224a,261
'Trimethoprim-sulfadiazine
15-30 mg/kg q12h
42,200
Trimethoprin-sufamethoxazolc
15-30 mg/kg q12h
42, 200
Ormctoprim-sulfadinethoxine
55 mg/kg (day 1)-27.5 mg/kg q24h
42, 254
Bacquilopril-sulfadimethoxine
Bysu oe-(z T sfup) sysui os
33,42
q48h
Miscelianeous Agents
Doxycycline
5 mg/kg (day 1)-2.5 mg/kg q12h
29
Rifampicin
5-10 mng/kg 24h
5,46
(D) = dog; (C) = cat.
Bacterial Skin Diseases · 285
 determinc whether the antibiotic resolved the inHammation, and therefore the infection,
or whether the corticosteroid is masking thc infection. If an individual animal requires
both antibiotics and corticosteroids, the corticosteroid adrninistration should be discontin-
ued at least 7 days before the final evaluation of the infection.
 In infections of the intact hair folicle, decp tissues rarely become infamed enough to
be detected by palpation, so infection could still be present when the surface has hcaled.
To prevent relapses because of this inapparent infection, it is recommended that antibiotic
treatment be continued for 7 days after surface healing. In deeper infections, surface
healing is misleading and antibiotic treatment must be continued after the dermal infam-
 mation is gone. Deep lesions always heal on the surface well before the deep infection is
resolved. Because some small, nonpalpable nidi of infection can persist even when the
tissues feel normal by palpation, antibiotic treatment should he continued for 7 to 21 days
after the tissues retur to apparent normalcy. Thc time to resolution dictates the length of
postnormalcy treatinent.
Ideally, the clinician should re-examine all animals to deternine when true healing
has occurred. This is impractical in many instances and is not absolutely necessary in the
case of more superficial infections. As long as the owner is an astute observer and treats
the animal after clinical normalcy is present, most infections can be resolved without re-
examination. Re-examination is rnandatory for animals with deep infections. Owners can-
not tell when the deep infection is resolved and always underestimate the need for
antibiotics. Some clinicians schedule examinations every 14 days, whereas other clinicians
examine the animal only when the owner reports that the lesions have healed. The
approach is individualized for best results.
 Deep infections are problematic for both the client and the clinician. With follicular
rupture and damage to the dermal tissues, the infammation tends to be pyogranuloma-
tous and endogenous foreign bodies (keratin, hair shafts, and damaged collagen) are
usually found in the dermis. During the first 2 to 4 weeks of antibiotic treatrncnt, the
s si n fr usai sdos aede  re ap sdu o
at this point, any ground gained is lost because it is unlikely that the deep infection is
resolved. The rapid initial improvement is duc to the resolution of the pyogenic cormpo-
more slowly. As long as there is slow, steady improvement, the antibiotic administration
should bc continued, even if the course of treatment approaches 12 weeks or longer, With
long-term treatment, most lesions resolve compietely, but the healing of some lesions
reaches a certain point and improves no further. In these cases, the tissues never returm
to palpable normalcy because of resultant fbrosis, the presence of sterile endogenous
foreign bodies in the dermis, or walled-off nidi of infection.
Skin biopsies can be both helpful and misleading. If infection is apparent, thc nced
for additional treatment is documented. If no infection is visible, the question remains as
to whether some infection is present in areas that do not undergo biopsy. If the lesion
does not improve at all with 2 to 3 weeks of additional antibiotic treatment, one must
assume that the infection is resolved and stop treatment. If infection is present, the lesion
begins to worsen again in 2 to 21 days.
 Relapses are conmon in skin infections, either because the current infection was not
treated appropriately or because the underlying cause of the infection was not identified
or resolved. The tirming to relapse is important. If new lesions appear within 7 days of the
terinination of treatment, it is likely that the infection was not resolved. More intense
treatment is necessary. If the relapse occurs weeks to months after the last treatment, the
animal has some underlying problem that must be resolvcd.
No discussion of antibiotics would be complete without mentioning some of the anti-
jnfammatory and immunomodulatory properties inherent to some of these agents: macro-
lides (inhibit leukocyte chemotaxis, IL-i, and lymphocyte blastogenesis), trimethoprim
(inhibits leukocyte chenotaxis), tetracyclines (numerous effects, see Chap. 3), and fuoro-
quinolones (inhibit IL-l, leukotriene, and TNF-α synthesis; inhibit granulomatous infam-
mation).96a,25a, 274a These effects can be beneficial, but may also be misleading.
286 · Bacterial Slin Diseases
Management of Chronic Recurrent Skin Infections
Despite diligent diagnostic and therapeutic measurcs, some dogs have recurrent or nearly
constant skin infections. The infection responds to prolonged treatment but recurs within
weeks of drug withdrawal. Some of these dogs have a documented immunodeficiency,
whereas other dogs appear normal with the currently available tests or cannot be tested.
 Poorly managed or poorly responsive allergic skin diseases must also be considered. The
allergic pruritus damages the skin and predisposes to infection. This is especially true if
corticosteroids are being used.
 Immunomodulation can be considered in dogs with an immunodeficiency. The hope
is that this type of treatment will make the animal's immune responsiveness more normal.
It does not make a normal immune system hyper-responsive, so it has little or no benefit
when the skin infections are due to weak skin and not a weak immuine system. Thesc
treatments cannot resolve any pre-existing infection, but it is hoped that they can prevent
 or minimize further relapses.165.204
completely resolved. If the animal has received a sufficient course of treatment with the
immunomodulator by the time that the infection is resolved, the administration of the
antibiotic is discontinued at that point while that of the modulator is continued. The
success of treatment depends on the time to, and severity of, any relapse. If no relapses
occur, treatment was a complete success. Because it is diffcult to normalize the immune
system completely, many animals that undergo successful treatment do have other epi-
sodes of infection, but these are widely spaced, are less scvere, and respond rapidly to
antibiotic therapy. In many dogs, no response to immunomodulators oecurs.
Chemical modulation with levamisole or cimetidine has received attention for treat-
ment of recurrent skin infections, but no published reports offer specific details on thc
eficacy of either product,80, 165 Levamisole, when administered at 2.2 mg/kg every other
day, is thought to modulate the cellmediated immune system and may be of some benefit
in approximately 10% of dogs with idiopathic recurrent infections.41' At this dosage, side
effects are rare but include adverse cutaneous drug reaction, gastrointestinal irritation
(vomiting and diarrhea), and blood dyscrasias. Because histamine receptors are found on
the cell surface of many mononuclear cells, histamine can affect cellular function.20
Cimetidine, an H-receptor antagonist, may inhibit histamine-influenced immunosuppres-
sion. For dogs, dosages between 6 and 10 mg/kg every 8 hours are suggested and side
effects are rarely reported. If either of these drugs helps to prevent relapses, it is
continued for the life of the patient at the dosages indicated above. The cost of the
cimetidine may be prohibitive, especially in large dogs.
s   a  ir      
dogs with recurrent bacterial pyoderma.246e The recommended doses are 1 to 1.5 milion
IU/m? BSA or 1 to 3 million IU/dog, given orally or subcutaneously, daily or twice weekly
(see Chap. 3).
Various bacterial products have received wide use in dogs with recurrent pyodermas.
Autogenous staphylococcal bacterins, S. aureus phage lysate (Staphage Lysate [SPL, Del-
mont Laboratories]) and P. acnes (Immunoregulin [Immunovet]) are the most conmonly
used preparations, The exact mechanism of action of these products in dogs is unknown,
but it seems to focus on improving cell-mediated immunity with subsequent impact on
determine which is most effective. Placebo-controlled studies with SPL and Immunoregu-
lin have been conducted, but none with autogenous products has been reported.
Autogenous staphylococcal vaccines are prepared from cultures taken from the dog's
skin and thus contain the speciic strain of S. intermedius causing the infection. Most of
the reports on the efficacy of autogenous bacterins involve small numbers of dogs and are
experience a good to excellent response to the bacterin. In a pilot study of 13 dogs with
idiopathic recurrent pyoderma published in 1997, 9 (69%) showed a good-to-excellent
response.70 Anaphylaxis can occur with these products.
Bacterial Skin Diseases · 287
Immunoregulin is licensed for intravenous use only and can cause a necrotizing
dermatitis if it is given subcutaneously or intranuscularly. It is given every third to fourth
day for 2 weeks, then weekly until the condition is resolved or stabilizes. Maintenance
doses are given as needed, usually once monthly. When 28 dogs with recurrent skin
infections were given cither Immunoregulin or a placebo for 12 weeks, the rate of cure in
the Immunoregulin-treated group was much better: 80% versus 38.5%.21 Because the
dogs were given antihioties concurrentiy with the inmunomodulator and details on re-
lapses were not available, it is dificult to determine the efficacy of the prodinct.
SPL was first developed for use in humans and contains conponents of S. au-
reus. 78-80. 165. 234 It is licensed for use in dogs by subcutaneous injection. Dosage schedules
        o     
s d e           o s
is seen to the 0.5-ml dosage, gradual increases to 1.5 ml (the maximum dosage suggested
by the manufacturer) may improve the responses. When 21 dogs with recurrent superficial
Pyoderma were given either SPL or a placebo for 18 weeks, 10 of 13 dogs (77%) given
the SPL had a good response, whereas 3 of 8 (46%) in the placeho group had a good
ss aq oi paodai arom ae nq 'suon suanbasns aau pp saps a asuos
severe with the SPL treatment and could resolve spontaneously.
This information suggests that immumomodulation may be of some beneft in carefully
selected cases. If the recurrent infections are due to skin disease and not immunodefi-
ciency, response beyond that occurring with a placebo should not be cxpccted. These
agents are expensive and not innocuous; thus, casual use should be discouraged. Because
cats rarely have recurrent skin infections other than abscesses associated with fighting, no
data are available on the safety and efficacy of these products in cats. One of us (w.Ii.M.)
has treated one cat with SPL given at 0.5 ml once weekly, and results were positive withi
no adverse reactions,
When the dog's recurrent pyoderma is due to an uresolvable skin disease, usually anl
allergic disorder, or does not respond to immunomodulation, control can usually be
insufficient and may be detrimental if the shaimpoos irritate or macerate the skin. Antibi-
otics are necessary. Because the drug is given for a prolonged period, only drugs with a
wide margin of safety should be used. Most cases are treated with a cephalosporin,
oxacillin, amoxicillin clavulanate, or a fuoroquinolone. Macrolides and lincosamides are
safe for long-term administration, but bacterial resistance usually precludes their use.
Antibiotics can be administered to these dogs on a recurrent episodic basis or contin-
ually. If the interinfection interval is 2 months or longer, episodic administration is most
appropriate. At the frst sign of infection, the drug is given at fulltherapeutic evels until
the infection is resolved and then for an additional 7 to 14 days. When the infections
recur shortly after the drug administration is discontinued, long-term treatment is indi-
cated.165 The dog is frst treated with the full therapeutic dosages for 7 to 14 days after
clinical remission, and then therapy is changed to a suboptimal or pulse regimen. No data
suggest that one method is more effective or less likely to cause side effects, so the
 protocol selected should be tailored to the patient's needs. The pulse method involves the
administration of full therapeutic dosages for 7 days, with none given for the next 7 days.
 Depending on the animal's response, thc interval with no treatment could be cxtended to
10 to21days.
A variety of suboptimal protocols are used. To clarify the discussion, let us say that
the full therapeutie dosage of the drug of choice for the patient is 500 mg every 12 hours.
After the infection is resolved, some investigators administer 500 mg every 24 hours,
whereas others administer 500 mg every 12 hours every other day and one investigator
administers 500 mg q12h for 2 consecutive days each week.22 If the patient's infection
does not recur, additional reductions may be indicated. The investigators who use once-
daily therapy often reduce the daily dosage to 250 mg or maintain the 500-rng dosage but
administer it less often (e.g., every 48 or 72 hours). when the drug is not administered
daily, the treatment interval is cxtended to every third or fourth day. After the lowest
288 · Bacterial Skin Diseases
level of treatment is determined, the animal is maintained with that protocol for life or
until it becomes ineffective.
surprisingly few side effects. Concerns for the development of resistant staphylococci,
plasmid transfer of resistance to other organisms, superinfections with yeast or other
fungal organisms (with the possihble exception of Malassezia), or drug intoxications have
undertaken only as a last resort.43
● SURFACE BACTeRIAL INfECTIONS
moist dermatitis, is a superficial, ulcerative inflammatory process caused by trauma (see
Chap. 16). The other pattern, pyotraumatic folliculitis, is a deep suppurative folliculitis 
(see later discussion). Intertrigo, or skin fold dermatitis, is a surface irritation and inflam-
mation caused by frictional trauma of skin rubbing against skin (see Chap. 16).
● SUPeRFICIaL BACTeRIaL INFeCTIONS
(SUPERFICIAL PYODERMAS)
 pe sa a   s q i sd 
litis, and dermatophilosis.
Impetigo
Inpetigo is characterized by nonfollicular subcorneal pustules that affect sparsely haired
areas of the skin.
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Impetigo is a bacterial disease that is invariably caused by coagulase-positive Staphylococ-
cus organisrms. It affects young dogs before or at the time of puberty. It is not contagious.
Many cases in puppies occur for no apparent reason, whereas in other puppies the
infection is secondary to parasitism, viral infections, a dirty environment, or poor nutrition.
Bullous impetigo is most often associated with hyperadrenocorticism, diabetes mellitus,
hypothyroidism, or other debilitating diseases, and in these cases other bacteria such as
Pseudomonas spp. and E. coli may be present.3
A superficial pustular dermatitis has been described in kittens in association with
 overzealous "mouthing” by the queen. Cultures revealed P. multocida or β-hemolytic
streptococci.248
CLiNICAL FEATURES
Small superficial pustuies that do not involve hair follicles are found primarily. but not
exchusively, in the glabrous areas of the inguinal and axillary regions in dogs (Fig. 4-1A).
They are not painful and rupture easily, leaving a peripheral epidermal collarette or
honey-colored crust adherent to the skin. Pruritus is uncommon and, if present, usually
indicates follicular involvement and, therefore, not a true impetigo. This is a relatively
benign problem that often heals spontaneously and may be noted only incidentally.
.In
kittens, lesions are found mostly on the back of the neck, the head, and the withers. In
bullous impetigo, the nonfollicular pustules are large and faccid (Fig. 4-1B), and large
sheets of superficial epidermis may he seen to peel away. Coagulase-positivc staphylococci
are usually cultured from the lesions. Diagnosis is made by the history and the clinical
FIGURE 4-I, A, Multiple erythematous papules, pustules, and erusts on the abdomen of a dog with impetigo.
y.C,Mucocutaneouspyo-
derma. Muliple fistulae are visible. D, Lateral thorax of a Shar Pei with superficial folliculitis. Note the moth-
290 · Bacterial Skin Diseases
appearance and by docurmentation of the bacterial cause by direct smears and stains or by
cultures of the pustular exudate. Histopathologic findings show nonfollicular subcorneal
 pustules (Fig. 4-2). Bacteria may or 1nay not be visible within the pustules.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
 sd r    a  s si a 
the lesions are few and widely separated, topical antibiotic or antibacterial crcams or
cally, the lesions are too numerous to make this form of therapy practical, and bathing
with antibacterial shampoos, such as chlorhexidine, ethyl lactate, and benzoyl peroxide, is
indicated. The skin of puppies and kittens is easily iritated, and benzoyl peroxide should
  s e  r    s e    s
  fn q ss s s   s oe o    s
10- to 14-day coursc is usually sufficient unless there is an intercurrent superficial folliculi-
tis. It is desirable to check health management procedures to eliminate debilitating factors
that may have infuenced the onset of the disorder.
 Impetigo-like lesions in unusual locations (e.g. facial) in puppies or in mature dogs
necessitate more careful consideration and may carry a more guarded prognosis because
immunosuppression and other serious disorders mentioned earlier may be involved in thc
 pathogenesis. Bullous impetigo usually responds rapidly to the administration of appropri-
ate antibiotics and treatment of the underlying disease.
Mucocutaneous Pyoderma
Mucocutaneous pyoderma occurs in dogs and affects primarily the lips and perioral
 skin.142 Its etiology is unknown.
CLINICAL FEATURES
Dogs of any age, breed, or sex can be affected. German shepherd dogs and Cerman
shepherd crosses may be at greater risk. The first noticeable change is symmetric swelling
and erythema of the lips (Fig. 4-3), especially at thc commissures. Crusting follows and
FIGURE 4-2. Staphylococcal impetigo in a dog. Note nonfollicular subcormeal pustule.
Bactcrial Skin Diseases · 29I
FIGURE 4-3. Mucocutaneous
pyoderma. Involvement of most of
the lower lip. The crusting has
becn rcmoved to show the erosionl
and depiginentation.
can lead to fissuring and erosion (see Fig. 4-lC). Exudate may be present beneath the
crusts, cspecially ventral to the lips. Similar lesions may be at the eyelids, the nares, the
vulva, the prepuce, or the anus. Depigrmentation of the lips can occur in chronic cases.
The lesions are tender, and the dogs rub the areas and resent examination and
palpation of the area. Mucocutaneous pyoderina does not originate in lip folds but can 
coexist with lip fold dermatitis.
DIAGNOSIS
 Mucocutaneous pyoderma is visually distinctive.142 Differential diagnostic possibilities in-
clude discoid lupus erythematosus, lip fold intertrigo, zinc-responsive dermatosis, early
pemnphigus foliaceus or erythematosus, and adverse cutaneous drug reaction.
Diagnosis is confirmed by clinical exarmination and skin biopsy. Histopathologic study
shows epidermal hyperplasia with superficial pustulation and crusting (Fig. 4-4). In the
 dermis, a dense, predominately plasmacytic, lichenoid dermatitis is visible. Neutrophils are
also prominent in the infamed dermis, and pigrmentary incontinence may be striking (Fig.
4-5). However, the dermal-epidermal interface is not obscured, and hydropic degenera-
tion is minimal to absent. Similar but milder infammatory changes may be detectable
around appendages in biopsy specimens of haired skin.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The condition responds to topical or systemic antibacterial therapy. For topical treatment,
the surrounding hairs should be clipped and then the areas gently washed with benzoyl
peroxide or some other suitable antibacterial shampoo. After the' lesions are cleaned,'a
light film of an antibacterial ointment is applied. Mupirocin is particularly effective. The
areas are treated daily for 14 days and then once to twice weekly. In severe cases,
systemic antibiotics are necessary for 3 to 4 weeks.
After the lesions have resolved, treatment can be discontinued, but relapses are
common. For relapsing cases, normalcy can be maintained by an individualized topical
program or, more rarely, maintenance adrministration of systemic antibiotics.
Superficial Bacterial Folliculitis
A common clinical presentation is infection confined to the superficial portion of the hair
follicle.
292 · Bacterial Skin Diseases
FIGURE 4-4. Mucocutaneous
perplasia and surface crusting.
FIGURE 4-5. Mucocutaneous pyoderna. Lichenoid der-
matitis with plasma cell, neutrophils, and pigmentary ineon-
tinence.
Bacterial Skin Diseases · 293
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
 In most cases, superficial folliculitis in dogs is caused by S. intermedius, although other
staphylococcal species and other bacteria may be involved. Organisms may be introduced
by local trauma, by bruising or scratching, or as an infection resulting from contamination
due to dirty coats or poor grooming, seborrhea, parasitic infestation (especially demodi-
cosis), hormonal factors, local irritants, or allergies. The three most common etiologic
agents in canine folliculitis are staphylococci, dermatophytes, and demodectic mites. Su-
perficial folliculitis may progress to deep folliculitis, furunculosis, and even cellulitis.
 Folliculitis may or may not be pruritic, and if it is pruritic, its intensity can vary. It is
not clear why these two types of foliculitis exist or even if the two syndromes (pruritic
and nonpruritic) are separate dermatoses. The clinical lesions, described histopathologic
findings, and levels of antistaphylococcal IgE antibodiesl1s are identical for both types, the
omly difference between the two being the pruritus. A few cases may be due to bacterial
hypersensitivity (so-called pruritic superficial pyoderma).2 Because staphylococcal follicu-
e snisusrdy s sspap ond  os sneq pue und aq ue s
ectoparasitisms) are frequently complicated by secondary staphylococal folliculitis, it is
crucial and apt to ask, “Is it a rash that itches or an itch that rashes?" Often, the answer is
deterinined only by training the client to observe the skin before and during the next
recurrence.
CLINICAL FEATURES
The primary feature of folliculitis, regardless of the cause, is a tiny, infammatory pustule
pg o  aq a ad r u r s   us u e r
because pustular lesions are transient in dogs and cats, especially when the patient is
      sd   s   
not be crusted; epidermal collarettes; hyperpigmentation, excoriation; and alopecia (see
Fig. 4-1D to F). Annular areas of alopecia, crythema, scaling, crusting, and hyperpigmen-
tation-—the so-called bull's eyc or target lesions (see Fig. 4- 1G)—are highly suggestive,
but many vesicular and highly infammatory processes that begin from a point (e.g.
have a fairly unique presentation. Infected areas are hairless and hyperkeratotic with
minimal inflammation (Fig. 4-6). Dalmatians may develop bronzing of the hairs in areas
of folliculitis.
 Superficial foliculitis has neither a specific distribution pattern nor a characteristic
clinical presentation. Because staphylococcal infections are typically secondary to extermal
or internal skin damage, the localization of the infection depends on the predisposing
cause. With external trauma (e.g., laceration, feas), the infection is initially localized in the
area of trauma. With underlying systemic disorders, truncal lesions predominate. In either
d    e     n s    
In chronic cases, most of the skin can be involved.
 The clinical lesions depend on density and length of the hairs in the involved area. In
relatively glabrous areas, the papulopustular lesions described above are easily seen. In
haired skin, these lesions are not appreciated unless the hair is clipped away. In short-
coated dogs, the first sign of superficial folliculitis is a dishevelnent of the coat in the
involved area, with small groups of hairs tufting together and rising above the skin's
surface. These early lesions are often confused with urticaria. With time, the hairs fall out
of the infected folicles and the dog is left with multiple, small areas of alopecia (see Fig.
4-1ID). The exposed skin is usually infamed, but in the Shar Pei and dogs with darkly
pigmented skin, the hairless areas look nonreactive, which can lessen the sugestion of
bacterial folliculitis.
With increasing chronicity, the alopecic areas enlarge to_ give the dog a moth-eaten
         n  s  
confused with dermatophytosis and a varicty of other conditions. Careful inspection of the
 periphery of the hairless area usually shows an inflamed epidermal collarette and more
 294 · Bacterial Skin Diseases
FIGURE 4-6.Superficial follicu-
liis. Instead of the classic papular
lesions, the English bulldog often
develops partial hair loss and byper-
keratosis, mimicking that seen in
democdicosis, dermatophytosis, and
nutritioral disorders.
typical lesions of superficial folliculitis. In chronic cases, the coalescencc can be so ad-
annular appearance of the alopccic areas and the discrete horders between alopccic and
Superficial folliculitis in long-coated dogs is much inore insidious, especially when the
lesions are not pruritic. The first sign is usually a loss of luster of the hairs in the involved
area with increased shedding. The area may or may not be seborrheic. With time, the
 scaling increases or becomes apparent and the hair loss increases so that the hypotrichosis
is obvious. Coincidental with the increasing hair loss is the recognition of underlying skin
lesions. Collies and Shetland sheepdogs can have large, approximately symmetric areas of
alopecia over the trunk resembling endocrine hair loss. Careful inspection of the margins 
 of the alopecic areas reveals erythema, scaling, and epidermal collarettes.
a crusted papular eruption (miliary dermatitis), which is clinically indistinguishable from
the other crusted papular lesions of cats. Some cats have annular areas of alopecia.
 scaling, and crusting over the hcad and neck (see Fig. 4-IH), which is more cormmonly
produced by dcrmatophytosis or demodicosis.
DIAGNOSIS
With adequate visualization of the lesions, the clinical diagnosis of superficial folliculitis is
usually straightforward. The papular or pustular lesion has a follicular orientation. Because
most cases of superfcial folliculitis in the dog are staphylococcal in origin, it is likely that.
the patient being examined has a pyoderma. However, this is not absolute bccause
follicular inflamimation (folliculitis) also occurs in a number of conditions, including demo-
dicosis, dermatophytosis, and a variety of immune-medliated skin disorders such as pen-
 phigus foliaceus. To confuse the issue further, an inflamed hair folicle is easily infected
such that secondary staphylococcal folliculitis is commonly superimposed on some other
folliculopathy.
 To confrm the diagnosis of hacterial superficial folliculitis, diagnostic tests must be
 performed. Skin scrapings and fungal techniques (hair examination and fungal culture)
Bacterial Skin Diseases · 295
should be performed to rule out the other common causes of folliculitis, and exudative
cytologic specimcns should he evaluated. The pus should contain cocci, neutrophils in
If no exudate is available or if the cytologie examination shows bacterial infection but
the distribution and nature of thelesions suggests that the infection was caused by some
other inffammatory folliculopathy, skin biopsies are necessary to define the problem. The
histopathologic study of bacterial folliculitis shows a neutrophilic exudate within the hair
withi the infected follicles. If a biopsy is performed on chronic nonpustular lesions, one
often finds superficial, suppurative interstitial dennatitis, perifolliculitis, perifollicular fibro-
sis, and/or intraepidermal neutrophilic microabscesses. In the foliculitis of English bull-
dogs, the predominant alteration is marked follicular and surface hyperkeratosis, papillo-
matosis, and interstitial to periadnexal inflammation (Fig. 4-8).
Because skin infections rarely occur spontaneously in dogs and cats, the diagnostic
effort should not stop at the identification of staphylococcal folliculitis. The nost impor-
d pn s  pn us a s , si p q on  ya
cxanination become important here. If there is any evidence of antccedent pruritus or
skin discase before the pyoderma develops, the diagnostic cffort nccds to continuc to
define the underlying cause of the infection. In many cases, especially when the pyoderma
is chronic and the lesions are pruritic, the history and the physical examination arc of
minimal use. Here, one is faced with the choice of performing other diagnostie tests (e.g.
routine laboratory screening, endocrine testing. and allergy testing) or sinply treating the
infection appropriately.
Obviously, the spccifics of the casc dictate the best course of action, but if the animal
has never been adequately treated for a superficial staphylococcal folliculitis, it is probably
best to resolve the infection. It is not unusual for dogs with chronic widespread superficial
folliculitis to returm to clinical normalcy and remain normal after the infection is resolved.
Ohviously, the cause of the pyoderma in those cases was transient. If the animal's
uninfected skin is abnornal or if the pyoderma recurs within 3 months of the cessation of
treatment, the aninal has sone other disease that must be diagnosed and treated to
prevent further relapses. Careful review of the history and the physical examination
findings after antibiotic treatment directs the diagnostic effort.
FIGURE 4-7. Staphylococcal folliculitis in a dog. Note cellular exudate within hair follicle.
296 · Bacterial Skin Diseases
FIGURE 4-8. Superficial folliculitis in an English bulldog
Marked luminal hyperkeratosis. papillomatosis, and periad-
nexal inflammation.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
A superficial folliculitis in an immunologically normal animal heals fairly rapidly with a
typical course of treatment of 21 to 28 days. In thc case of recurrent infections, it is not
uncommon for the lesions to heal more slowly, so longer courses of treatment can be
expected.
Dermatophilosis
 Dermatophilosis (cutaneous streptotrichosis) is an actinomycetic disease that produces a
supericial, crusted dermatitis caused by Dermatophilus congolensis. It is rare in small
animals,2. 44. 5, 203
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
The organism is a gram-positive coccus that has rarely been found in the environment and
therefore is thought to come from only carrier animals, usually farm animals.9, 4, 203 The
clinical disease often develops shortly after the rainy season begins and is uncommon in
dry climates. Moisture that releases the infectious zoospores is an essential initiating
factor. Affected animals usually have skin defects from ectoparasites, minor trauma, mac-
eration, infammation, or infection. Thus, the organism is usually a secondary invader that
is easily found by stained smears or cultures. These are motile organisms that eventually
 e n d     se  r   s
for several years, The motile cocci are chemotactically attracted to carbon dioxide diffus-
ing frorm the surface of the skin. There, they germinate to produce a filament that invades
 the living epidermis and proliferates within it, causing the production of typical crusts.171
Bacterial Skin Diseases · 297
CLINICAL FEATURES
 Dermatophilosis is a rare disease in small animals, but it may be more common than is
realized in moist, warm climates such as northern Australia, New Zealand, and the
southeastern United States. It should be suspected in cases of acute moist dermatitis,
chronic folliculitis, seborrheic dermatitis, and other crusted dermatoses in which excessive
ao pue se cos v ssieo pue tee shop yoe on pou uoq sey iI suasaid si ansio
report suggests that the fox is the only natural canine host.231
Lesions may involve all parts of the hairy or glabrous skin, and in cats, the organism
has bcen isolated from soft tissue fistulae and granuloinatous lesions of the lymph nodes,
the mouth, and the bladder. With skin lesions, the crusts are usually concentrated on the
dorsal back and over the scapula and lateral thigh. The face, the ears, and the feet may
also be affected, and pain is evident because the animals appear to be unhappy and are
disinclined to move around.
Local lesions may start as erythematous papules and pustules, with crusts that occa-
sionally thicken and expand to several centimeters in diameter. They may be isolated,
circular lesions or may coalesce into larger areas. The classic lesion is an exudative,
purulent dermatitis below raised tufts of hair and crusts. In early lesions, these crusts and
the embedded hairs are easily removed ("paintbrush" lesions) to reveal greenish pus on an
oval, bleeding, ulcerated surface. The healing lesions are characterized by dry crusts,
scaling, hyperpigmentation, and alopecia.
DIAGNOSIS
The purulent exudate or crushed crusts can be madc into a direct smear and stained with
Giemsa's, Wright's, or Gram's stain or Diff Quik, The organisms can be diffcult to
identify but appear as two to six parallel rows of gram-positive cocci that look like railroad
tracks (Fig. 4-9).
 For isolation and culturc of the organisms, crusts are ground with sterile distiled
water and let stand for 30 minutes. The inoculum is taken from the top of the water
 mixture and placed in antibiotic-enriched (polymyxin B) media. Many media, such as
FIGURE 4-9. Dermatophilosis. Note branching chains of cocci ("railroad tracks") character-
istic of D. congolenwis in this direct smear of pus.
298 · Bacterial Skin Diseases
blood agar, are satisfactory, but Sabouraud's agar and MacConkey's agar shouid be
avoided. Growth of a rough colony (later bccoming sinooth) ocurs in 3 days, but orga-
nisms are small at first and may be missed in the midst of contaminants.
Skin biopsy of the affected skin is diagnostic and is especially useful in chronic cases,
in which the exudative cytologic findings are often negative. Histopathologic study shows a
crust of orthokeratotic-parakeratotic hyperkeratosis and leukocytes. Organisms are usually
      e r   a   
Giemsa, or Brown-Brenn stains.
Differential diagnosis should include seborrheic dermatitis, pustular dermatitis (impe-
tigo, subcorneal pustular dermatosis, and pemphigus foliaceous), acute moist dermatitis,
staphylococcal folliculitis, dernodicosis, dermatophytosis, and zinc-responsive dermatosis.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
With elimination of the primary inciting factors, many cases of dermatophilosis resolve
spontaneously. This involves removing the moisture, parasites, or trauma that may be
present.
The Dermatophilus organism should be eliminated froin the skin. Because it does not
disposal are essential. Daily soaks with povidone-iodine or lime-sulfur solution given for 1
week and repeated weekly for 3 to 4 weeks are helpful. The systemic use 0f antibiotics is
 most effective and should be the primary focus of treatinent. The organism is usually
sensitive to ampicillin, cephalosporin, cloxacillin, lincomycin, tetracycline, tylosin, and high
doses of penicillin. It is resistant to erythromycin, novobiocin, sulfonamides, polymyxin B,
and low doses of penicillin. Positive cultures can often be ohtained from the skin of
healed animals for 7 to 8 inonths and up to 15 months, an important factor in recurrence
of the disease.2
· DEEP bACTERIAL INFECTIONS (DEEP PYODERMAS)
Deep pyodermas are serious bacterial infections that involvc tissues dceper than the hair
   s s e   s    e
 systemic signs of ilness and often heal with scarring.
 Deep pyodermas do not occur spontaneously in normal dogs and cats. There is always
a cause of the infection, and successful treatment mandates the identification of the
predisposing problem. When the infection remains localized to a small area, external
trauma (e.g., laceration, penetrating wound, animal bite, and foreign body) is the most
likely cause. When lesions are discrete but widely disseminated over the body, involve an
entire region of the body (e.g, the rump), or are generalized, the animal has some
additional disease that must be identifed.
Deep skin infections are generally the continuation of a superficial infection or super-
ficial foliculitis. The infection goes deeper into the folicles and breaks through the
follicular wall to produce furunculosis and infection of the dermis and subcutis. The
infection follows tissue planes and rmay extend to the surface, producing multiple fistulae,
or move deeper to invade subcutaneous and fatty tissues, producing cellulitis and pannicu-
litis. The terminology for the condition depends on the location of the rnost obvious
lesion, which nay be called foliculitis and furunculosis, dermal fistulae, or cellulitis and
 panniculiis. Virtually any disease discussed in this text can be complicated by a decp
staphylococcal infection.
 In most instances, the infection remains confined to the hair follicle or progresses
deeper at a gradual pace. In some cases, the progression is explosive. Factors that
predispose to deep pyoderma include host immunoincompetence, severe follicular or
dermal damage done by the primary disease (e.g., severe demodicosis), trauma (pressure,
intense licking or chewing, and scratching) to the infected area, and inappropriate treat-
Bacterial Skin Diseases · 299
 ment of a superficial infection with an ineffcient antibiotic, a corticosteroid, or both. In
addition, many infections have distribution patterms that refect areas of the body most
subject to surface trauma. The hasic pathogenesis of several common clinical syndromes is
the same: deep folliculitis, furunculosis, and cellulitis; pyotraumatic folliculitis; nasal follic-
ulitis and furunculosis; muzzle folieulitis and furunculosis; pedal foliculitis and furunculo-
sis; German shepherd dog folliculitis, furunculosis, and cellulitis; acral lick furunculosis;
anaerobic cellulitis; and subcutaneous abscesses.
Deep Folliculitis, Furunculosis, and Cellulitis
Deep folliculitis is a follicular infection that breaks through the hair follcle to produce
furunculosis and cellulitis.
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Folliculitis and furunculosis start as a surface or follicular infection of bacterial, fungal, or
  a  r-a  g   s 
infection (see Chap. 5, Fig. 5-4A and B), adverse cutaneous drug reactions, endocrine
abnormalitics, seborrhea, and immunosuppression. Bacteria present are usually S. tnterme-
dius, but deep skin infections are more apt to have secondary infections from Proteus
spp., Pseudomonas spp., and E, coli.
Histologic examination of biopsy samples may be useful in understanding the mecha-
nism, etiology, and state of development of the foliculitis and furunculosis syndromc.
often a secondary devclopment, a thorough search for an underlying cause is mandatory.
 Folliculitis associated with hacteria, fungi, or parasites is usually suppurative initially. The
Dccasional case associated with atopy, food hypersensitivity, or seborrheice dermatitis is
usually spongiotie and mononuclear. Any chronic folliculitis, especially if there is furuncu-
losis, can become granulomatous or pyogranulomatous (Fig. 4 -10).
Furunculosis, regardess of cause, is usually associated with a tissue eosinophilia,
FIGURE 4-t0. Staphylococcal furunculosis in a dog. Note follicular rupture with resultant
pyogranulomatous dermal reaction around hair follicle.
300 · Bacterial Skin Diseases
which is assumed to suggest the presence of a foreign body (keratin or hairs). When tissue
eosinophilia is secondary to infectious furunculosis, the neutrophil is the predominant
intraluminal and intramural leukocyte and is present in similar numbers to the eosinophil
in the perifollicular dermal inflammation. When the eosinophil is the predominant cefl in
all these sites, the etiology is probably not infectious and the likely causes are insect/
arachnid-related damage or other sterile eosinophilic follicular dlisorders. The absence of
tissue eosinophilia with furunculosis usually implies immunosuppression, especially that
due to concurrcnt glucocorticoid therapy or demodicosis.
CLINICAL FEATURES
 The nature of the initial lesions depends on the number of follicles involved in the area,
the depth and severity of the follicular involvement, and various host factors, espocialy its
immunocompetence. Infection of one or a few contiguous folliles induces discrete papu-
lar lesions of varying size, whereas simultaneous involvement of many follicles causcs
 poorly demarcated areas of alopecia, tissue swelling, and infammation. The severity of the
infection can he estimated by the coloration and size of the lesions. Large dark red to
violescent lesions are more severely involved (see Fig. 4-12D) than those that are smallcr,
more superficial, or more pinkish (Fig. 4-11H).
The progression of the initial lesions varies. Papular lesions soften to form deep
pustules that ulcerate centrally and usually crust over. Before ulceration, hemorrhagic
bullae may be present. Vibrissal follicles, which are infected, hemorrhage early in the
course of infection before more classic changes occur. The larger lesions become more
infamed, become darker, and usually develop one or more fistulae that discharge exudate
to the surface, where it crusts. Some of the severely infected larger areas become necrotic
before fistulae develop and are irregular ulcers in the skin, which may or may not crust. If
the infected area is traumatized (by pressure or pruritus), the speed and severity of
progression is accelerated and the normal perilesional skin often bccomes involved.
Lesions of folliculitis and furunculosis can occur wherever there are hair follicles biut
tend to bc most common over pressure points or on the trunk. In short-coated dogs, the
Icsions described earlier are easily recognized. In long-coated dogs, the long hairs sur-
rounding the infection entrap the exudate and tissue debris and encourage the develop-
ment of large crusted lesions. The severity of the skin lesions in these crusted regions
cannot be appreciated until the hair and crust are removed.
Bacterial follicuhitis and furunculosis are rare in the cat (Fig. 4-12A). When they
appear, folicular papules and pustules are usually located on the face and head (see Fig.
41H) or over the dorsum in a fea bite hypersensitivity pattern. Cultures from these
lesions have most commonly grown staphylococci, both coagulase-positive and coagulase-
negative, and occasionally β-hemolytic streptococci and P. multocida. Feline chin folliculi-
 tis and furunculosis may occur as a secondary infection complicating cases of feline acne
(see Chap. I4).
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Although bacteremia and sepsis are apparently uncormmon sequelae of a deep pyoderma,
these serious debilitating infections necessitate careful, thorough, long-term treatment.
Identifcation and resolution of the underlying cause is essential for a complete response.
Most animals require a minimum of 4 to 6 weeks of treatment to resolve the visible
lesions. Resolution of palpable lesions may necessitate treatment for 12 weeks or longer.
Because of the seriousness of these infections, many investigators continue antibiotic
administration for a full 21 days after clinical healing.
Pyotraumatic Folliculitis and Furunculosis
Clinicians have long recognized that not all cases of pyotraumatic dermatitis (acute moist
dermatitis or hot spots) respond to therapy rapidly and completely, One study reported a
FIGURE 4-II. Folliculitis—deep Pyocdermas. A, Pyotraumatic folliculitis and furunculosis on the check and neck
Springer spaniel with deep folliculitis and furunculosis.
FIGURE 4-I2. A, Furunculosis of the chin in a cat with feline acne. B、 Muzzle furunculosis in a dog. C, Acral
furunculosis in a dog. D, Severe pyogranulomatous furunculosis and fistulae on the hock of a dog. E, Draining abscess
Bacterial pseudomycetoma (botryomycosis) on dog trunk. Area has been clipped to show nodules and draining tracts.
H, Canine bacterial pseudomycetoma. Gram's stain of cutaneous discharge shows a tissue grain containing clumps of
gram-positivecoci.
Bacterial Skin Diseases · 303
series of cases and discovered that they could be classified histologically into two
superficial, ulcerated, inflammatory process of undetermined cause and pathogenesis (true
pyotraumatic dermatitis or acute moist dermatitis) that responded readily to simple clean-
ing and corticosteroid administration (see Chap. 16, Fig. 16-17F).
tive and necrotizing foliculitis and occasional furunculosis (see Fig. 4-llA). Clinically,
this type of lesion is thickened, plaquelike, and surrounded by satellite papules and
pustules. Lesions are especially common on the cheek and the neck. Numerous gram-
positive cocci were present in the deep follicles, and panniculitis and hidradenitis with a
neutrophilic infiltrate were common. The authors of this study speculated that the follicu-
litis was merely a complicating factor in some cases of pyotraumatic dermatitis. Alterna-
s a      aq u o   
There was a strong tendency for young dogs to be affected; this pattern was observed in
70% of the Golden retrievers and St. Bernards presumed to have pyotraumatic dermatitis
but in only 20% of all other breeds. Labrador retrievers and Newfoundlands are also
commonly affected. These cases represent true local pyodermas.
Treatment of pyotraumatic foliculitis should include early administration of a systemic
antibiotic effective against S. intermedius. It should be continued for 7 to 10 days beyond
clinical cure. Local clipping, cleaning, and applying agents such as Burrow's solution,
chlorhexidine soaks, and calamine lotion daily are often helpful. Elizabethan collars may
be indicated, but chemical sedation or analgesia is rarely necessary. Glucocorticoid admin-
istration is contraindicated.
Nasal Folliculitis and Furunculosis
Bacterial nasal follicultis and furunculosis (nasal pyoderma) is an uncommon, painful,
localized deep infection of the hridge of the nose and the area around the nostrils (see
Fig. 4-llB and C). It is most common in the German shepherd, Bull terrier, collie,
 Pointer, and hunting-type (dolichocephalic) breeds. The cause is unknown, but the disor-
der may start from rooting or other local trauma. The onset is rapid, and the condition is
progressive until treatment is initiated. Initially, a small number of papules or pustules 
appear on the bridge of the nose. Because the lesions are either painful or pruritic, the
anirmal traumatizes the area, expanding the number of lesions and area of involverment.
The differential diagnostic possibilities can be extensive, depending on the number
and size of the lesions and the degree of self-trauma. With multiple, coalescent, crusted
papular lesions, the prirmary differential diagnostic possibilities include pemphigus (foli-
aceus or erythematosus), lupus erythematosus, drug eruption, and dermatomyositis. When
lesions are more discrete and papular to nodular, the primary differential diagnosis is nasal
eosinophilic folliculitis and furunculosis. Other differentials include foreign body, other
furuncular disorders (demodicosis; dermatophytosis, especialy that due to Trichophyton
juvenile cellulitis.
 Clinical management should include a careful consideration of underlying causes,
especially if the examination of smears and cultures are negative for bacteria or fungi. The
bacterial infections are usually secondary. Appropriate systermic antibiotics should be given
 in full dosage for 7 to 10 days beyond clinical cure. Centle topical therapy with wet soaks 
using Burrow's solution or chlorhexidine, three times daily for 10 minutes, is excellent.
This must be applied gently to prevent further trauma to the tender, infamed tissues. The
use of Elizabethan collars and sedation are rarely needed to alleviate pain and prevent
self-induced trauma during the first few days of treatment.
Muzzle Folliculitis and Furunculosis
This is a chronic inflammatory disorder of the chin and lips of young dogs (canine acne)
characterized by deep foliculitis and furunculosis (see Fig. 4-12B). It is almost exclusively
304 · Bacterial Skin Diseases
a disorder of short-coated breeds, such as boxers, Doberman pinschers, English bulldogs,
Great Danes, Weimaraners, Mastiffs, Rottweilers, and German shorthaired pointers.
The causc of this syndrome is unknown, but it is clear that bacterial involvement is
secondary. The initial lesions are hairless follicular papules of varying size, which histo-
 pathologically are characterized by marked follicular keratosis, plugging. dilatation, and
antibiotics. With time, the papules enlarge, ulcerate, and may discharge a seropurulent
exudate. At this stagc, suppurative foliculitis or furunculosis is present and antibiotic
treatment often improves but does not completely resolve the problem.
We speculate that local trauna and possibly some undetermined genetic predisposi-
tion play a central role in the development of the initial sterile lesions. Many short-coated
dogs do not have muzzle foliculitis, even among the breeds predisposed to this disorder.
Those who do may be more genetically susceptible to the disorder. During play, puppies
d s  sssr
underlying skin, but short hairs offer little protection and could break off below the skin's
surface, infaining the folicle and leaving the pilar canal open to bacterial invasion.
Further trauma aggravates the condition and effectively seals off the pilar canal such that
 sterile or secondarily infected furunculosis occurs. After one infected furuncle develops,
more can be expected.
Treatment depends on the severity and the chronicity of the problem. Early on, the
 lesions are few and are sterile. With modification of behaviors that traumatize the chin
(e.g, chewing bones and chasing balls over carpeted surfaces) and frequent cleanings, the
 process can be arrested and the lesions heal slowly. Benzoyl peroxide products (shanpoo
or gel) are commonly used for cleaning because they also reduce the surface bacterial
population and keep the hair follicle open. The chin is first treated daily and then
1as
needed. These products should not be overused because they can be iritating and
increase the follicular infammation. If the gel is used, the owmer should be cautioned that
the product can bleach carpets, furniture, and other fabrics. In cases that continue to
worsen despite these measures, corticosteroids can be beneficial. If the lesions are not too
deep, a potent cream or gel (e.g, betamethasone valerate) applied three or four times
daily rapidly dcreases the follicular inflarmmation, For cases of deep lesions, we find that
fuocinolone in dimethyl sulfoxide (Synotic) is beneficial. After the follicular infammation
is resolved, the use of the steroid should be gradually decreased and stopped.
Advanced cases are usually infected and necessitate a long (4- to 6-week) course of an
to
traumatize, and endogenous foreign bodies (e.g., keratin and hair shafts) are typically
found deep in these lesions, the antibiotic treatment does not resolve the entire condition.
 After the infection is resoived, the use of topical corticosteroids may be necessary to
prevent new lesions.
Rarely, a dog is presented for bleeding from the muzzle. Close inspection of the area
will show that the hemorrhage is coming from the vibrissal follicles. Aside from the
hemorrhage, the follicles usually appear normal and documentation of the infection is
difficult without a skin biopsy. Unless some other reason for the hemorrhage (e.g..
cutaneous amyloidosis [see Chap. 9], bleeding dyscrasia) is apparent, treatment for infec-
tion is indicated.
Pedal Folliculitis and Furunculosis
Pododermatitis (interdigital pyoderma) is an infammatory, multifaceted disease complex
CAUSEANDPATHOGENESIS
The cause of this disease is often unknown, but in no cases are the resulting lcsions cysts.
The disease is complex and may be frustrating to diagnose and treat.is Focal etiologie 
Bacterial Skin Discases · 305
factors include foreign bodies (e.g., foxtails, awns, thorms, wood slivers, and seeds) and
local trauma. When a single foot is affected, a foreign body, local injury, or neoplasia
should be suspected, especialy if there is only one interdigital fistula. Arteriovenous
fistulae and lymphedema are rare causes of pododermatitis. The feet are subject to great
 rori   os    n jo su pea
dogs commonly have bruises from stones, stubble, and briars. Animals working in sticky
substances may accumulate masses of sand, stone, tar, and hair that initiate injury. Contact
with irritant cheinicals, fertilizers, or weed killers may also cause trouble. Clipper burns
from grooming procedures, irritation from housing on wire or rough stones, and infam-
mation from contact, inhalant, or food hypersensitivities have all initiated pododermatitis.
Any of these factors may lead to intense licking, which accentuates the irritation.
Fungal infections associated with pododermatitis include dermatophytosis, Malassezia
dermatitis, candidiasis, mycetoma, phaeohyphormycosis, sporotrichosis, blastomycosis, and
cryptococcosis. These are uncommon but should be suspected in cases that are refractory
to usual antibiotic therapy. Bacterial infections are always secondary and can include a
wide variety of organisms. Bacterial hypersensitivity may be a complication (see Chap. S).
Parasitic pododermatitis is particularly common, with demodicosis being its most
troublesome cause. Every case of chronic intcrdigital pyoderma must be evaluated care-
fully for demodectic mites, Biopsy may be necessary to confirm the diagnosis of parasitic
pododermatitis in chronically infamed and fibrosed feet. It is often Imissed by other
diagnostie techniques (e.g., skin scrapings). Other parasites involved may include Pelodera
strongyloides, Ancylostoma spp., and Uncinaria stenocephala. Ticks and chiggers favor the
interdigital webs and may initiate inflammation.
Psychogenic dermatitis may be manifested as excessive licking of the feet by high-
strung, nervous animals, especially Poodles, terriers, and German shepherds.
Sterile pyogranulomas may occur on the feet. The cause is unknown, but they are
most common in smooth, short-coated breeds such as English bulldogs, Dachshunds,
Grcat Danes, and boxers (see Chap. 18), Osteomyelitis or local neoplasms more character-
istically involve a single foot.
Cases of pododerimatitis that involve several feet, are recnurrent or refractory to
 treatments, and are nonpruritic may be caused by an inherited or acquired immunodefi-
ciency. Pododermatitis may also be the only clinical sign of hypothyroidism or demodicosis
with secondary suppression of cell-mediated immunity. One report suggested that the fat
foot and the scoop-shaped web of breeds such as the Pekingese and some terriers
predispose the arca to folliculitis and pedal dermatitis.283
Cases of pododermatitis with significant footpad involveiment (hyperkeratosis and ul-
ceration) may have an autoimmunc basis (pemphigus, pemphigoid, or lupus erythemato-
sus) or may be a manifestation of adverse cutaneous drug reaction, zinc-responsive derma-
titis, necrolytic migratory erythema, or canine distemper.
 In spite of all these possibilitics, a substantial number of cases are idiopathic, recur-
 rent bacterial infections. These can be exceedingly frustrating to manage.
CLINICAL FEATURES
 Pododermatitis may affct dogs of any age, sex, or breed, but males of short-coated
breeds, such as the English bulldog, Great Dane, Basset hound, Mastiff, Bull terrier,
boxer, Dachshund, Dalmatian, Gcrman shorthaired pointer, and Weimaraner, are more
commonly represented. Longer-coated breeds that are commonly affected include the
German shepherd, Labrador retriever, Golden retriever, Irish setter, and Pekingese. The
front feet are more often affected, but one or all four feet may be involved.
 Affected tissue may be red and edematous with nodules, ulccrs, fistulae, hemorrhagic
 bullae, and a serosanguineous or seropurulent exudate (see Fig. 4-11D), The feet may be
 grossly swollen (see Fig. 4-llE). Pitting edema of the metacarpal and metatarsal areas
can be marked. The skin may be alopecic and moist from constant licking, and varying
degrees of pain, pruritus, and paronychia may be present. The pain may produce lame-
306 · Bacterial Skin Diseases
 ness. In some cases, the interdigital nodules are nontender and unresponsive to treatment
and may be scars from previous lesions. Although the regional lymph nodes are enlarged.
other systemic signs are rare.
DIAGNOSIS
 A careful history and physical examination findings provide the diagnosis of pododermati-
tis. Because of the complex pathogenesis, all cases for which a cause is not quickly and
easily discerned should undergo multiple skin scrapings, exudative cytologic study, fungal
culture, and a representative skin biopsy. The direct smear may provide early clues of the
cause by establishing the presence or the absence of neutrophils or phagocytosed bacteria
and their staining propery or by showing large numbers of eosinophis, mycetoma or
also be needed to identify bony changes and opaque foreign bodies. An evaluation of the
immune status is sometimes indicated and should include hemogram, serum immunoglob-
lin quantitation, and evaluation of the thyroid and adrenal glands.
Histopathologic studies are essential to document foreign bodies (including free hair
shafts or keratin in the tissue), bacteria, parasites, fungi, and neoplasia and to evaluate the
cellular response. Special stains may be needed. In general, the histologic response is that
of perifolliculitis, folliculitis, or furunculosis; with the last, a nodular to diffuse pyogranu-
lomatous infammation is common. Contrast radiography studies are needed to document
arteriovenous fistulae and lymphedema.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
 Pododermatitis can be a frustrating problem because it is often self-perpetuating. Lesions
heal with scarring, which makes the foot more susceptible to future infections. Delays in
treatment of the infection and its cause increase the scarring potential, so the diagnostic
and therapeutic effort should be maximal in these cases.
 sre p a su i ot or r ss nog p are s  
until the drainage stops. Magnesiun sulfate is particularly effective. Antibiotic treatment is
prolongcd, and 8- to 12-week courses are not unusual. Palpation is critical in monitoring
these patients because the surfaces of these lesions heal weeks before the deep lesions are
resolved. Lesions that are tender on palpation are likely still infected. As long as dermal
lesions are present and are becoming smaller, treatment should be continued.
 scarring of the digital and interdigital skin and may have sterile dermal granulomas due to
endogenous foreign bodies. Protection of the foot via restricting the animal's activity or
having the animal wear boots can help prevent future infections. Focal areas of scarring or
individual dermal granulomas may be amenable to surgical removal.
 organisms, are resistant to medical treatment alone. Surgical debridement of all the
devitalized tissue may make medical treatrment more effective. In severe cases, fusion
q uea inaso pf ae sip a pue pan s ass ie ya u Asedopod
beneficial.265
German Shepherd Dog Folliculitis, Furunculosis, and Cellulitis
This is a familial, irnmunologically mediated deep pyoderma of German shepherd dogs or
which resolve slowly and recur frequently. Either there is no definable cause of the
well out of proportion to the stimlus.
Bacterial Skin Diseases · 307
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
This condition has been studied extensively. Early work demonstrated a familial predispo-
sition (possibly autosomal recessive). Affected dogs either had some underlying skin dis-
ease (e.g., allergic skin disease, hypothyroidism) or a cell-mediated immunoincompetence.
Recent studies have shown convincing evidence of immunodeficiency in all dogs
studied. Affected dogs have an increased number of CD8+ and decreascd numbers of
            
herds23 75.105 the significance of this finding is unknown. Immunopathologic studies of
s  s e    d d    s 
numbers of IgG, IgM, and IgA-bearing β-lymphocytes and plasma cells.76 However,
German shepherd dogs had markedly fewer T lymphocytes than other breeds. German
shepherds with bacterial pyoderma had the same number of Langerhans' cells in skin
biopsy specimens as other breeds with bacterial pyoderina.74a
 The striking and seemingly inappropriate magnitude of inflammation seen in this
condition has led some authors to speculate that the heritable defect in these dogs is 
associated with an exaggerated tissue response to staphylococcal bacteria, characterized by
an inappropriate release of cytokines and other inflammatory mediators.14la
infection until middle age, they must have some degree of inmunocompetence. With an
insult to their skin (e.g, fea bite hypersensitvity) or immune system (e.g, hypothyroid-
ism), they decompensate and experience a disproportionately severe pyoderrma. Some dogs
decompensate for no known reason, which suggests that the immunodeficiency can
the other dogs may remain infection-free if the triggering disease is resolved.
CLINICAL FEATURES
The disease almost exclusively affects middle-aged German shepherd dogs and is not sex-
specific or infuenced by gonadal status. A familial history is occasionally given. In most
dogs, the lesions are pruritic, and the pruritus usually stops after the infection is resolved.
The distribution patterm is typical, with the rump, back, ventral abdomen, and thighs
being affected in all cases. Some animals have more generalized lesions spreading to the
chest and the neck. The front legs, the head, and the ears are usually much less involved.
Lesions are initiall follicular in origin with clusters of papules, pustules, erosions, and
crusts followed by ulcers, fistulae, furunculosis, alopecia, and hyperpigmentation (see Fig.
4-11F and G). Early lesions may be surrounded by strikingly erythematous halos. The
lesions in haired skin are heavily crusted and the presence, depth, and severity of the
 infection in these areas cannot be appreciated until the crusts are removed. There may be
a great deal of excoriation from the pruritus. Lesions may develop rapidly, forming
confuent plaques of ulcerated, friable, necrotic skin. Some animals have secondary sebor-
rhea, and cellulitis is evident in deeper infections. Peripheral lymphadenopathy is com-
mon, Animals with the disorder are usually in general good health, although there may be
weight loss, poor appetite, and pyrexia. The lesions are usually painful, especially when
the crusts are removed.
 rd jo ss a  s pe   as  j  a
 and exacerbation. This is usually produced by improper selection or inadequate dosage of
antibiotics and inadequate duration of treatment, the concurrent use of corticosteroids, or
failure to resolve predisposing factors.
DIAGNOSIS
 The physical examination, coupled with exudative cytologic study, confirms the diagnosis
of deep pyoderma but does not document this syndrome. The diagnosis of this syndrome
308 · Bacterial Skin Diseases
is confirmed by the exclusion of other causes of deep pyoderma (e.g., demodicosis, allergy,
ehrlichiosis), by the disproportionate severity of the infection if the dog has not received
corticosteroids, or by repeated rclapses.
All routine diagnostie tests are indicated in these dogs, as is an evaluation for thyroid
infection, an evaluation for allergy should be performed. When all of thcse are deter-
mined to be noncontributory, an immunocompetency evaluation should be considered.
 Skin biopsies are useful to deterimine underlying causes and to document the severity
s or  e       ss  s
revealed foliculitis, furunculosis, and cellulitis as the most common findings.157. 23i Perifol.
licular pyogranulomatous infammation was cormmon, which supports the idea of the
u r  ps ss do m eo  o q 
of eosinophils expected in furunculosis.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Because many cases have an intercurrent allergic disorder or hypothyroidism, every effort
should be made to identify and resolve this triggering event. If the predisposing disease is
ignored, the animal's response to treatment will be poor or the infection will recur shortly
after thc antibiotics are withdrawm.
Clipping and topical therapy are esential in this disease. Twice-daily soaks or the use
of whirlpool baths helps to remove any crusts, improves drainage, and makes the patient
more comfortable. Long-term antibiotic adininistration is necessary, with 6- to 10-week
courses not uncommon.22. 154 It is inperative that the drug be given at the corect dosage
and frequency during and after clinical cure has occurred. Because these dogs are prone
t0 experience disproportionately severe infection, premature termination of therapy guar-
antees a severe relapse. Some authors consider enrofoxacin (5 to 10 mg/kg q24h) to be
the antibiotic of choice.141x Enrofoxacin is concentrated within infammatory cels and is
uninpeded by granulomatous infammation, fibrosis, and purulent debris. In addition, thc
effectiveness of enrofloxacin may be partially explained by its anti-inflammatory properties.
With resolution of the infection and the triggering, event, many of these dogs stay
infection-free for long periods. The owners must be made aware that their dog is suscep-
q s  ro  sop a  sa  'sg s  
corrected, and the owners should be instructed to seek prompt attention whenever any
skin lesions occur.
 Some dogs experience relapse each time that antibiotics are withdrawn, These dogs
probably have a cell-mediated immunodeficiency204. 234 and may respond to immunomodu.
lation. Chronic antibiotic therapy can maintain these dogs for long periods.22 Anecdotal
reports indicate that pentoxifylline may be a useful therapeutic adjunct, presumably due to
 its anti-inflammatory properties (see Chap. 3).
Acral Lick Furunculosis
Acral lick dermatitis (see Chap. 15) is well recognized in dogs and has a variety of causes.
Cytologic or histologic evidence of infection is found in many cases, especially those with
an ulcerated surface. What is unclear is whether the infection preceded the dog's licking
 of the area or was superimposed on some undlerlying condition.
CLINICAL FEATURES
Acral lick lesions are typically found on the distal portion of a front limh hut can occur on
a hind leg or on multiple limbs. The clinical appearance varies with the chronicity of the
lesion and the amount of trauma to the area. Typically, the lesion is firm, raised, hairless.
hyperpigmented at the periphery, and eroded or ulcerated centrally (scc Fig. 4- 12C). In
some cases, there is significant tissue destruction with exposure of underlying tendons or
bone.
Bacterial Skin Diseases · 309
DIAGNOSIS
 Infection should be suspected in all acral lick lesions, especially if the surface is ulcerated.
This suspicion can be confrned by biopsy or, in many cases, by exudative cytologic
examination. For correct cytologic evaluation, the surface of the lesion shouid be scrubhed
to remove all debris and surface bacteria. After the surface has dried, the lesion is
squeezed firmly between the thumb and the forefinger until drops of seropurulent (or
serohemorrhagic exudate appear on the surface. This material is examined cytologicaly.
This is painful, so the dog may need to be muzzled or tranquilized.
 In many cases, evidence of infection (e.g., intracelular bacteria within phagocytic
cells) is found, and staphylococci are the primary organisms. In some cases, gram-negative
discharge expressed by manual pressure can be misleading because it may contain con-
taminating but not infecting organisms.
In some cases, no bacteria are visible cytologically or no exudate can be expressed. In
these cases, infection can be proved or disproved by biopsy or by a therapeutic trial with
antibiotics. If the latter course is chosen, a broad-spectrum drug should be used for a
minimum of 30 days before response is estimated.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
In acral lick furunculosis, the clinician is faced with the problem of deterimining the cause
of the infection and the treatment of a deep. fibrosing infection. With solitary lesions, the
cause of the infection is often a transient insult to the skin, which is not evident when the
animal is presented for treatment. Unless the history, physical examination findlings, and
exudative cytologic study suggest some underlying problen, it may be best to resolve the
infection first and then to determine whether the diagnostic effort should go forward.
With lesions on multiple limbs, transient trauma can be discounted and a complete
diagnostic evaluation should be performed, especially for allergy or hypothyroidism.
Soaks, cspecially with magnesium sulfate, and prolonged courses of antibiotics are
necessary in acral lick furunculosis. The minimal course of treatment is 8 weeks, and some
cases necessitate many months of treatment. Because of the need for long-term treatment,
potentiated sulfonarmide drugs should not be used. Most clients notice remarkable inm-
 e si s a i ra n  pe s g    
better or that the rate of improvement is much slower. Because these lesions are fbrotic
at the onset of treatment, antibiotice administration should not be expected to resolve the
lesion completely. Treatment is continued until no further improvement is detected by the
clinician, not the client, and then for an additional 2 weeks. If, at the end of the
treatment, the area is more fibrotic and hairless or if the animal continues to traumatize
the area, the diagnostic effort must go forward.
 The key to successful management of acral lick furunculosis is early and vigorous
intervention. The more chronic the infection, the poorer the prognosis for a complete
resolution. Large lesions heal incompletely and are covered by a thin, hairless, fragile
epithelial layer. Because these lesions are often found over joints or in areas that are
traumatized during normal activities, the area probably will be danaged in the future,
which could trigger another infection. If there is significant tissue destruction at first
presentation or after the infection is resolved, amputation of the limb may be indicated.
Aerobic Cellulitis
Cellulitis is a severe, deep, suppurative infection in which the areas of infection are poorly
contained and spread laterally.2 Depending on the cause of the cellulitis, there may be
extensive edema and the overlying skin is often friable, darkly discolored, and devital-
ized.34, 5 The weakened tissues may be sloughed.
 In companion animals, most cases of focal aerobie celulitis follow wounding and are
3[0 · Bacterial Skin Diseases
diagnosed and treated accordingly. With more diffuse disease, deep extension of staphylo-
coccal folliculitis and furunculosis is most likely. Rarely, one isolates an unusual (e.g.
s o o  ss s  o  a e rs s
than those with staphylococci. In these cases, the question to be answered is whether the
organism caused all of the damage or whether sone other skin disease is prcsent that is
being secondarily infected by the bacterium. Each case must be evaluated on its own
 merits. Once these unusual bacteria are infecting deep tissues, aggressive antibiotic treat-
ment are needed.
Anaerobic Cellulitis
 Lesions of anaerohic cellulitis in companion animals tend to be more rapidly progressive
and severe than their aerobic counterparts. Anaerobic cellulitis typicall' follows bite
wounds, traumatic puncture wounds, or foreign body introduction but can be a sequela to
surgery, trauma, burns, or malignancy,69, 226 Poor management of indwelling catheters can
predispose to Serratia infection.13 In humans, diabetes melltus, corticosteroid administra-
tion, or immunodebciency predisposes to anaerobic infection, and these factors are proba-
 bly important in animals.
Anaerobic infections are characterized by rapid progression, poor demarcation, mas-
sive tissue edema and swelling, and necrosis (see Fig. 4-12F). The wounds often, but not
d s e si a o fi  a p rs pd e aau a
be produced and cause profound systemic signs.
The presumptive diagnosis of anaerobic cellulitis can be confirmed by the presence of
the clinical signs described. Exudative cytologic examination that yields neutrophilic and
polybacterial findings is supportive. Anaerobes commonly isolated from dogs aud cats are,
these anaerobes are susceptible to metronidazole, chloramphenicol, and amoxicillin clavu-
lanate. Aside from Bacteroides spp, near-uniform susceptibility to ampicillin or clindamy.
cin can be expected. Facultative anaerobes are of morc concerm because the susceptibility
 of these organisms can be limited and unpredictable.
 Surgery is indicated to drain the exidate, remove necrotic tissue, and remedy tissue
Systemic antibiotics should be administered until the infection is resolved and then for an
additional 7 to 14 days. Drugs of choice include metronidazole, chloramphenicol, and
amoxicillin clavulanate.
SubcutaneousAbscesses
Subcutaneous abscesses are uncommon in dog but occur frequently in cats. In dogs.
abscesses can be due to bite wounds, abscessed teeth, or foreign bodies (see Figs. 4-12E
and 4-l3), whereas bite wounds are most common in cats. P. multocida is the most
be involved include S. intermedius, β-hemolytic streptococci, and various anaerobes, in-
cluding Fusobacterium spp, Bacteroides spp., Clostridium spp, Peptostreptococcus spp.
when it is punctured during a cat fight. The wound is small and seals rapidly; a local
infection develops in 2 to 4 days. Some bite wounds are handled weil by the cat's normal
defense mechanisms. Those that abscess are most commonly found around the tail base
and the neck and shoulders.
Abscess from bite wounds is one of the most common cat diseases handled in a small
animal practice. Untreated, the abscess may rupture, drain, and heal over 2 to 3 weeks.
However, the treatment of choice is liberal surgical drainage and thorough fushing of the
area with saline or chlorhexidine solution together with systemic antibiotics for 5 to 7
Bacterial Skin Diseases · 311
FIGURE 4-I3. Facial abscess secondary to a tooth rot
abscss.
days. P. multocida with rare exception is susceptible to the penicillins (penicillin, amoxicil-
 lin, amoxicillin clavulanate), and these are the drugs of choice in known bite wounds. If
there is a poor response to the initial medication or the abscess is not due to a bite
wound, cytologic or cultural procedures should be taken to identify the offending
organism.
Castration of intact male cats has been a helpfil preventive measure, resulting in
either rapid or gradual decline in fighting and roaiming behavior to 80% to 90% of the
 cats so treated.20 Recurrent or nonhealing feline abscesses should prompt a consideration
 of immunosuppression (feline leukemia virus infection or feline immunodeficiency virus
infection), and other infectious agents (Actinomyces spp., Nocardia spp, Yersinia pestis,
and mycobacteria), mycoses, or sterile panniculitis. Many anaerobic organisms can
be
-s sus usdoh pe dooi-sr sssose a u pun
sion follows in this chapter) have been isolated from cats with chronic subcutaneous
abscesses.
Rhodococus (Corynebacterium) equi and Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis have
organ involvement can occur with either organism, especially if the cat is immunosup-
 pressed. Cytologically, a pyogranulomatous reaction is visible with gram-positive coccoid to
coccobacillary bacteria within clear cytoplasmic spaces in macrophages. Treatment is best
determined by culture and susceptibility testing, but amoxicillin clavulanate is usually
effective.
Bacterial Pseudomycetoma
Bacterial pseudomycetoma (cutaneous bacterial granuloma or hotryomycosis) is a chronic,
suppurative, granulormatous disease caused by nonbranching bacteria. They form grains of
because it is misdiagnosed or overlooked. The causative bacteria are usually coagulase-
positive staphylococci, but in some cases other bacteria, alone or associated with staphylo-
312 · Bacterial Skin Diseases
cocci, may be responsible. There may be Pseudomonus spp., Proteus spp., Streptococus
found.274
Most cases are initiated by local trauma from bites or other wounds, and some are
 associated with a foreign body. There may also be muscle or bone involvement. The
granuloma develops because a delicate balance exists between the virulence of the orga-
nisms and the response of the host. The host is ablc to isolate and contain the infection
but is unable to eradicate it. This may also be a type of bacterial hypersensitivity, or thc
 grain formation may be associated with the formation of a polysaccharide slime coatingis1
n e  s  ia n  o q  a m
antigcn-antibody reaction on the surface of the microorganisms.
Clinically,the lesions appear as frm, solitary or multiplenodules with draining fistule
(see Fig. 4-12G). The purulent cxudate may have small white granules similar to grains
of sand (see Fig. 4-12H). Special bacterial and fungal stains are necessary to differentiate
the granules from those found in actinoinycosis, nocardiosis, or mycetoinas.
Histopathologically, there is a nodular to diffuse dermatiis and/or panniculitis, with
-oy jo an snnuerod on snun e Aq ppunons sanun ans
cytes, plasma cells, lymphocytes, neutrophils, and multinucleate histiocytic giant cells (Fig.
4-14). The edges of the bacteria masses (granules) may show clubbing and rmay stain
          a a
dcmonstrated with Gram's tissue stain or Brown-Brenn stain (Fig. 4- 15).
Differential diagnosis must includc actinomycosis, nocardiosis, cumycotic mycetoma,
 systemic mycoses, dermatophytic pseudornycetoma, foreign body reactions, and chronic
bacterial abscesses. Because of the variable prognoses and therapeutic formats, a specife
diagnosis is inperative.
a  sn   u  s   s as
rule. Therapy for isolated lesions is complete surgical excision because the granulomatous
mass is relatively impermeable to antibiotics.5. 274 with large numbers of lesions, cotreat-
ment with rifarmpin and β-lactamase-resistant antibiotic may bc effective.
Mycobacterial Granulomas
tuberculosis and M. lepraemurium, which do not multiply outside vertebrate hosts; faculta-
tive pathogens, which normally exist as saprophytes in the environment but sporadically
cause disease; and environmental saprophytes, which almost never cause disease.2. I0
 Mycobacteria and the disease syndromes they cause can be further classified as follows:
1. True tuberculosis mycobacteria. M. tuberculosis, both bovine and human types,
cause small animal tuberculosis in endemic areas. They are photochromogenic and
slow growers, and if injected into guinea pigs, cause death in 6 to 8 weeks;
opportunistic mycohacteria do not (see discussion that follows).
2. Leprosy nycobacteria. M. lepraemurium causes rat leprosy, which is possibly trans-
mitted to small animals. It is scotochromogenic and grows with great difficulty in
the laboratory. Many acid-fast organisms are usually found in histologic sections
(see Feline Leprosy in this chapter).
 3. Opportunistic mycobacteria. These can be divided into groups according to their
rate of growth and pigment production. Onc group of slow-growing orgauisms
(longer than 7 days) is nonchromogenic and pathogenic only to) cold-blooded
animals. Another group of slow-growing mycobacteria of this group include M.
kansasi, M. marinum, M. ulcerans, and M. avium and are facultative pathogens,
opportunistic, group include M. fortuitum, M. chelonei, M. thermoresistible, M.
necessitating a careful search. They are often found in small vacuoles in the
granulomatous tissue (see Opportunistic Mycobacterial Granulomas in this chap-
Bacterial Skin Discases · 313
FIGURE 4-I4. Baclerial 
psetl-
domycetoma.Pyogranulomatous
dermatitis with'multipletissue
grains.
ter). Natural water may be teaming with saprophytic mycobacteria, including some
that are facultative or opportunistie pathogens. These can produce infection after
contarmination when predisposing factors are present. In attempts to isolate and to
identify individual species, decontamination of saprophytes from cultures, differen-
tiation by biochemical tests, and immunodiffusion analysis are difficult.2
In one cat with cutaneous mycobacteriosis, the histopathological findings resetnbled
fibrosarcoma, and no granulomatous inflammation was scen.202a
FIGURE 4-15. Bacterial psei
domycetoma. Same sample uinder
Brown-Brenn stain. Thc: clusters of
cocci are visible.
314 · Bacterial Skin Diseases
TUBERCULOSIS: M. TUBERCULOSIS AND M. BOVIS
 The incidence of “true" tuberculosis in dogs and cats decreased with the decrease of the
 disease in humans and cattle but may be becoming more prevalent owing to an increasing
experience a high degree of exposure.2. 50, 59. 2 15la 170 Animals that live where there are
large numbers of people (restaurants or public places), have close contact with an infected
owner (e.g., sleeping in the sick person's room), or are fed a variety of unprocessed meat
or milk from areas of endemic disease have an increased chance of infection. Although
both dogs and cats are susceptible to both M. tuberculosis and M. bovis, there appears to
be a higher incidence of M. bovis infection in cats.,sz The predominant lesions in small
animals are respiratory and digestive, but there can be some skin lesions. In cats, clinical
signs may be insidious, and because diagnostic tests are unreliable, epidemiologic data are
of questionable validity.248.260
 Clinical Features
Cutaneous lesions are single or multiple ulcers, abscesses, plaques, and nodules. Nodules
may be in the skin or adherent to subcutaneous tissues. They fail to come to a head and
 ae s   n e  sd     n  
common on the head, the neck, and the limbs. Patients usually appear sick; they have
anorexia, weight loss, fever, and lymphadenopathy.2, 50, 59, 82
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is by history, physical examination, radiography, biopsy, culture, bacill Cal-
mette-Guerin (BCG) or purified protein derivative (PPD) test (in dogs),2 serologic testing.
or lymphocyte blastogenesis test (in cats).156 Biopsy specimens may show a nodular-to-
diffuse dermatitis due to pyogranulomatous infammation (with necrosis and caseation),
 organisms. Smears or biopsy do not differentiate between true tuberculosis and opportun-
istic mycobacterial granulomas. Injection of cultures into guinea pigs causes death in 6 to
 8 weeks, but not if the organism is nontuberculous.
 BCG or PPD (250 tuberculin units/0.1 ml) prepared for humans can be used to test 
dogs for tuberculosis, Intradermal injection (0.1 ml of PPD or 0.1 to 0.2 ml of BCG) is
best performed on the inner surface of the pinna and is read at 48 to 72 hours (no
sooner). Erythema that resorbs by that time is a negative test result. Severe erythema with
central necrosis progressing to ulceration at 10 to 14 days is significant. Ulceration after 18
 a u sun si sn su so u u n Ku s n o
TUBERCULOSIS: UNNAMED VARIANT
Multiple cases of tuberculosis caused by an organism with cultural characteristics betweenl
M. tuberculosis and M. bovis have been reported in the cat.31, 116
Clinical Features
Affected cats typically experience nonhealing, nodular skin lesions on the face, chest wal.
legs, base of tail, or perineum.l16 Historically, many involved cats are hunters and the
distribution of the lesions supports wounding as the route of inoculation. The nodules may
 or may not ulcerate, and the regional lymph nodes enlarge. Involvement of lungs and
disease.
Diagnosis
Differentiation of this disorder frorn true tuberculosis or the other mycobacterial disorders
to be discussed requires culture or polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis.138
Bacterial Skin Diseases · 315
TUBERCULOSIS: M. AVIUM
 M. avium is a slow-growing environmental saprophyte. Dogs and cats were thought
and within an individual family of miniature Schnauzers?3 suggests a genetic predisposition
with immunologic manifestations.
Clinical Features
Affected animals may present for signs of respiratory and/or gastrointestinal diseasc,
 generalizcd lymphadenopathy, or nodular skin disease with regional lymphadenopathy.
Diagnosis
Because the organisms tend to be numerous, they may be visible in aspirates of masses, in
white blood cels in the peripheral blood and bone marrow, and in various tissues.16. 263 In
 specimens stained with Wright's stain, the organism is rod-shaped, refractile, and nonstain-
ing. Acid-fast stains are needed to highlight the organisn. Differentiation of this organism
from other mycobacterial species requires culture or PCR.
Clinical Management of Tuberculosis
 Dogs and cats with true tuberculosis can be a point source of infection for humans and
other animals and should be destroyed. The public health significance of the unnamed
variant is unkmow, Because M. avium is abumdant in the environment, treatment of
infected animals is reasonable provided that all contact individuals are immunologically
 normal and excellent hygiene is practiced.
Most details on the treatment of M. avium tuberculosis are found for the cat.l16. 17
 For maximurn efficacy, the intercurrent use of two, preferably three, drugs is suggested
for a minimum of 6 to 9 months. Classic drug combinations involve the use of rifampicin
(10-20 mg/kg q12-24h), isoniazid (10-20 mg/kg q24h), and ethambutol (15 mg/kg
q24h). Other potentially useful drugs include clarithromycin (5-10 mg/kg q12h), clofazi-
mine (2-8.5 mg/kg q24h), doxycycline (10 mg/kg q12h), enrofoxacin (5 mg/kg q24h,
provided M. avium is not being treated), and dapsone (2 mg/kg q24h). Again, two or
three of these alternative drugs should be used simultaneously.
The course of treatment is long and should be continued long after all clinical signs of
 disease are resolved.
FELINE LEPROSY
 Feline leprosy is a granulomatous, nodular, cutaneous infection with an acid-fast organism
that is impossible to culture.
Cause and Pathogenesis
Since its recognition, feline leprosy has been known to be caused by a mycobacteriurm,
 but specific identification of the causative organism was delayed because of cultural
difficulties. Transrnission studies with fresh tissues from affected cats into rats and mice
supported the role of M. lepraemurum as the etiologic agent.2. 243 In 1997, PCR gene
sequencing identified M. lepraemurium as the causative agent in four of eight cats with
presumptive leprosy.13s In one of the four remaining cases, co-infection with M. avium
and M. chitae was documented. Two other cats were infected with a species that most
closely resembles M. malmoense. If these data are substantiated in other studies, more
details on such factors as the mode of transmission can be ascertained.
The disease has been reported in New Zealand, Australia, Great Britain, France, Italy,
the Netherlands, the United States, and Cauada. Typically, clinical disease has a long
incubation period with recognition of disease during winter after exposure during sum-
316· Bacterial Skin Diseases
mer.184 Live M. leprae (leprosy baeillus of humans) has been found in mosquitos, feas,
and ticks, and these vectors may be inportant in the feline disease.
Clinical Features
Lcsions are single or multiple cutaneous nodules, which may or may not be ulcerated.
 Losions are most common on the head or extremities. There nay be abscesses or fistulae
 y o s  ou p aq (i ) u o sis o ns 
found on the nasal, buccal, and lingual mucosae. Regional lymphadenopathy is common,
 although without local pain or systemic illness. There is no sex prevalence, but two thirds
 of cases occur in cats I'to 3 years of age.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is confirmed on the basis of history, physical examination results, and the
finding of acid-fast bacili in direct smears and biopsy specimens (Ziehl-Neelsen stain or
Fite-Faraco nodification). Tissue homogenates should be cultured on the surface of 1%
Ogawa egg yolk medium? and also inoculated into guinea pigs to eliminate the diagnosis
of tuberculosis. Specific icdentification requires PCR sequencing from tissue specimens.
Histopathologic examination may reveal two types of reactions. One is the tuberculoid
response with caseous necrosis and relatively few organisms, and the organisms are often
only in the areas of necrosis. These epithelioid granulomas are usually surrounded by
zones of lymphocytes, which are also commonly aggregated around vesscls (Fig. 4-17).
Ps po paso a e si (sda snd i go dg os a
sheets of large foamy macrophages containing significant numbers of acid-fast bacilli. The
organisms are clustered in globi in a parallel stacking arrangement. Multinucleate histio-
cytic giant cells often contain bacili, and lymphocytes and plasma cells may surround
vessels (Fig. 4-18). Many polymorphonuclear leukocytes may be present and may cause
the lesion to resemble a pyogranuloma.
 Differential diagnostic considerations include tuberculosis; granulomas due to oppor-
tunistic mycobacteria or foreign bodies; mycotic infections such as kerion, mycetoma, and
phaeohyphomycosis; chronic bacterial infection; and neoplasms such as mast cell tumors,
carcinomas, and lymphoreticular tumors.
Clinical Management
Although lesions may resolve spontancously,232 surgical excision is the treatment of choice
when there are solitary or circumscribed lesions. When surgery fails or is impractical,
chemotherapy with dapsone, rifanpin, or clofazimine may or may not be successful (see 
discussion of opportunistic mycobacteria).
CANINE LEPROSY
In the l970s, a nodular skin disease of dogs from Zimbabwe was reported that had many
similarities to feline leprosy. Affected anirmals usually had lesions on their head or extremi-
ties and were healthy beyond their skin; they had easily visible mycobacterium in biopsy
samples, but cultural and transmission work faled to identify the organism; and surgical
treatment was curative. A study published in 1998 on 45 dogs from Australia sheds rnore
light on the disorder.185
Cause and Pathogenesis
Although mycobacteria are easily visible in tissue samples, cultures are always negative.
those of feline leprosy are not, one or more unusual species of mycobacteria are probably
causal. PCR gene sequencing is needed to identify the organism.
The data from the Australian study have many similarities to data concerning thc
feline disorder. The majority (84%) of affected dogs have lesions on their head and/or
pinna, 93% of dogs have a short coat, and the majority of dogs experience their lesious in
fall or winter. These data suggest that the organism is transmitted by biting fies.
Bacterial Skin Diseases·317
FIGURE 4-I6. A, Ulcerated lesion of feline leprosy on the face of a cat. (Courtesy of C.T. Willinson.) B,
(Courtesy G.A. Kunklc.) D, Atypical mycobacteriosis (with pamiculitis) on the abdomen of a cat. E, Feline atypical
diosis (with panniculitis) in a cat.
318 · Bacterial Skin Diseases
FIGURE 4-I7. Granulomatous inflainmation of dermis in a cat. Epidermis intact (H & E
stain). (Fron Schiefer B, et al: A discase recscmbling feline lcprosy in western Canada. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 165:1085,1974.)
FIGURE 4-I8. Histiocytes with foamy cytoplasm and giant ccils (H & E stain). (Fro
Sehiefer B, et al: A disease rosemhling fcline leprosy in western Canada. J Am Vet Med Assoc
165:1085,1974.)
Bacterial Skin Diseases · 319
Clinical Features
Affected dogs usually are short-coated and have one or more asymptoimnatic nodules on
their head, especially on the pinna, varying in size from several inillimeters to 5 cm in
   o r s r r   s  
are no systeinic signs of illness.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is confirned on the hasis of history, physical examination results, and the
finding of acid-fast bacilli in direct smears and hiopsy specimens. Histopathologic findings
include pyogranulomatous dermatitis and panniculitis with variable numbers of multinucle-
includes the sterile pyogranuloma syndrome, granulomas due to foreign bodies or other
infectious agents, and neoplasms such as mast cell tumors, histiocytic tunors, or lym-
phoma.
Clinical Management
Surgical excision of individual lesions is curative. Beyond surgery, treatment recomimenda-
tions are difficult to make because spontaneous resolution of lesions is reported. In the
Australian study, six dogs underwent self-cure whereas 13 were reported cured with either
doxycycline (n = 8) or amoxicillin clavulanate (n = 5). Some of the cures attributed to
the drugs may have been spontaneous remissions.
OPPORTUNISTIC MYCOBACTERIAL GRANULOMAS
Opportunistic mycobacterial granulomas (atypical mycobacterial granulomas) in dogs and
cats can be caused by several atypical mycobacteria that are facultative pathogens. The
diseasc is charactcrizcd by chronicity, resistance to antibiotics and antituberculosis drugs,
and possible spontaneous rosolution.
 Cause and Pathogenesis
 out so  o  s s o  d o
terium fortuitum, M.chelonei,M.phlei, M.xenopi, M.thermoresistible,and M. smeg
matis.* Because M. fortuitum and M. chelonei share several metabolic characteristics and
are facultative pathogens that produce similar clinical signs, they may be called the M.
fortuitum-chelonei complex. The disease bas been reported most commonly in cats (per-
haps because infection may be introduced through cat bite wounds), but cases in dogs
have been recorded.2. 106. 110. 11. 162. 267
These mycobacteria are ubiquitous, free-living organisms that are usually harmless and
are commonly found in nature. They are found in the soil, but they especially favor water
tanks, swimming pools, and sources of natural water.1s0 After injury or injection, anirnals
history of cases of these granulomas in humans commonly cites instances of the disease
after a contaminated injection or an infected wound.
Clinical Features
After contarminated injection, infection of a wound, or other trauma, the lesion develops
slowly during a period of weeks. The course is prolonged, and lesions often have been
with ulcers and draining fistulae (scc Fig. 4- 16B and C).
Lesions can occur anywhere but are most common in the cat in the caudal abdoininal
 or inguinal region1ss (see Fig. 4-16D) or in the lumbar region. The lesions may or may
not be painful, and regional lymph nodes are not always enlarged, With solitary lesions,
systemic illncss, such as fever and anorexia, is rarely observed, and the animal feels well
*Scc refercnccs 2, 88, 111, 15la, 162, 186, 191, 205, 264, 267, 270, 277, 284.
320 · Bacterial Skin Diseases
One cat with a co-infection with an atypical mycobacterium and a Nocardia spp. had
apparently rare, this case demonstrates that animals with granulomatous disorders should
have a complete and thorough evaluation.
Diagnosis
 Diagnosis is confirmed by finding acid-fast organisms in smears, cultures, or biopsy speci-
mens (see Fig. 4-9E). The organism is often diffcult to demonstrate. Smears made from
fine-needlc aspirates of closed lesions are more likely to contain detectable organisms than
 qei moaenn ssdues nss o sn t s e
take weeks, and should be made on blood agar, Lowenstein-Jensen medium, or Stone-
identification may be complex, the laboratory handling the cultures should be informed
that a rmycobacterial infection is suspected.
Histopathologic examination may be helpful. There is nodular to diffuse dermatitis,
panniculitis, or both due to pyogranulomatous infammation. Stains such as Ziehl-Neelsen
or Fite-Faraco modification should be used, and a careful search may be needed to find
Organisms (see Fig. 4- 16E). They are often clumped in the center of a clear vacuole and
surrounded by clusters of neutrophils within the mature granulomal6s (Fig. 4-19), Alcohol
processing in_paraffin embedding may cause the acid-fast organism to stain poorly.277
Using rapid Ziehl-Neelsen stain or snap-freezing the formalin-fixed tissues with subse-
quent acid-fast stain enables the bacilli to be seen.
Clinical Management
 The prognosis in opportunistic mycobacterial infection is always guarded, especially when
the lesions are large or multiple. Although spontaneous resolution of lesions can occur
after months to years of disease, most cases need treatment. In early cases wherein the
lesion is small, wide surgical excision with removal of all subjacent fat may be curative.
to resolve the infection and an appropriate chemotherapeutic agent should be used long-
term after surgery.
 Opportunistic mycobacteria do not respond to antitubercular drugs, and susceptibility
to conventional antibiotics varies among and within the various species of organisms.2
FIGURE 4-19. Atypical myco-
bacteriosus, Acid-fast organisms in
the center of a clear vacuole in pyo-
granulornatous panniculitis. (Cour-
tesy T.L.Gross.)
Bacterial Skin Diseases · 321
Drug selection for each case should be based on cultural data. In the absence of individ-
ual susceptibility data, a response to tetracyclines, clarithromycin, or enrofloxacin may
occur.2. 191. 196a 264 The most successful antibiotics in cats appear to be doxycycline (5 mg/
kg q12h) or enrofoxacin (5 to 20 mg/kg q24h)1la Clofazimine (2 to 8.5 mg/kg q24h PO)
can be effective. Side effects to this drug are infrequent, include orange-red discoloration
of the skin, corneal pigmentation, gastrointestinal distress, pruritus, seborrhea sicca, and
are dose-related117, 15ia, 201, 28
To be successful, the chemotherapeutic agent is needed for months. The drug should
 be administered until all clinical signs of disease are visually and palpably gone and then
for an additional 4 to 6 weeks.
Actinomycosis
by Actinomyces organisms. A. odontolyticus, A viscosus, A. meyeri, and A. hordeovulneris
of penetrating wounds, especially those involving foreign bodies such as awns and
It takes from months to 2 years for signs to develop after the injury; however, organisms
can be found in the exudate within 2 weeks. The typical clinical lesion is a subcutaneous
swelling or abscess of the head or neck, thoracic, paralumbar, or abdominal region (see
Fig. 4-16F). The lesion is usually tender and may 0r may not have draining tracts.
Paralumbar lesions are usually a direct extension from retroperitoneal involvement. Other
forms include osteomyelitis and empyema. Draining tracts (mycetoma-like) may discharge
a thick, yellowish-gray or thin, hemorrhagic, foul-smelling exudate that rmay or may not
contain yellow sulfur granules.
Diagnosis is by anaerobic culture (may require 2 to 4 weeks), direct smears of fine-
needle aspirates, and biopsy using special stains (Gram's, Brown-Brenn, or Gomori's
methenamine silver). No method is completely reliable, and cytologic study appears to be
most effective.153 Histopathologic examination reveals nodular to diffuse dermatitis, pan-
(o i) uopuuun snonsod io aemdns o onp moq no s
se  sseo jo og ae un ssd e (s ns) s ns
are basophilic and often have a clubbed, eosinophilic periphery (Hoeppli-Splendore mate-
rial) (see Fig. 4- 16G). The gram-positive, non-acid-fast, flamentous, occasionally beaded
organisms (Fig. 4-21) are found within the granules, but they are not easily visible in
ordinary H & E preparations. Actinomycosis must be differentiated from nocardiosis, a
disease that it closely resembles.
The most successful treatrment involves surgical excision or debulkment with a long
course of antibiotics. High-dose penicillins (e.g-, penicillin, amoxicillin, oxacillin) are
fective include clindamycin, erythromycin, cephalosporins, chloramphenicol, and tetracy-
cline.15ls, 275 The treatment must continue for at least l month after complete remission
and usually lasts 3 to 4 months. Prognosis is guarded, with relapses reported to vary frorm
15% to 42%.153
Actinobacillosis
Actinobacillosis is a rare disease of several animal species caused by Actinobacillus ligni-
eresi.2 It resembles actinomycosis in many of its cutaneous manifestations, but the causa-
tive organism is a gram-negative, aerobic coccobacillus that does not survive for a long
time outside the host animal. It is a commensal organism found in the mouth of many
animals, and clinical lesions often follow bite wounds or injuries around the face and
 Clinical features include single or multiple thick-walled abscesses of the head, neck,
 322 · Bacterial Skin Diseases
FIGURE 4-20. Actinomycosis in a dog. Notc focal pyogranuloina with two tissue grains
(arrows).
mouth, and limbs.4s They discharge a thick, white to green, odorless pus with soft yellow
granules. Diagnosis is based on aerobic cultures of pus, direct smears, or biopsy of
affected tissues.
 Histopathologic examination reveals a nodular to diffuse dernatitis, pamniculitis, or
both due to suppurative or pyogranulomatous inflarmmation. Tissue grains (sulfur granules)
are usually present. The grains are basophilic and usually surrounded by eosinophilic
Hoeppli-Splendore material. Special stains (Gram's or Brown-Brenn) are required to
demonstrate the gram-negative organisms.
 Clinical management includes surgical extirpation or drainage and curettage. Sodium
iodide (20 mg/kg or 0.2 ml/kg of 20% solution, orally ql2h) and high doses of streptomy-
cin or sulfonamides have been suggested for therapy. The organism is also usually sensi-
FIGURE 4-2l. Actinomycosis.
Gram-positive, non--acid-fast, fla-
mentous organisms.
Bacterial Skin Diseases · 323
tive to tetracycline and chloramphenicol. Thc course is long, and the prognosis is
guarded.45
Nocardiosis
Nocardiosis is a rare disease characterized by, Pyogranulomatous and suppurativc in-
fection of the skin or the lungs or by widespread dissemination, It is caused by Nocardia
caviae, are cornmon soil saprophytes that produce infcction by wound contanination,
inhalation, and ingestion, particularly in immunocormpromised animals. Nocardia are gram-
positive, partially acid-fast, hranching filamentous aerobes. Except for N. brasiliensis, their
geographic distribution is worldwide.
Nocardia nova was isolated in pure culture from cats with cutaneous swelling and
draining tracts.13sa N. noca, N. asteroides, and N. farcinica previously formed the N.
asteroides complex. The distinguishing characteristics that separate these three species are
the types of cell wall mycolic acids and the antimicrobial susceptibility patterns. The
authors speculated that N. nova may be the main spccies affecting cats.
 Clinical features are indistinguishable from those seen in actinomycosis and include
cellulitis, ulcerated nodules, and abscesses that often develop draining sinuses (see Fig. 4-
16H). Lesions typically occur in arcas of wounding, especially on the limbs and feet, and
are often accompanied by lymphadenopathy. Cats often have lesions on thc vcntral abdo-
men that resemble panniculitis or opportunistic mycobactcrial infection. Pyothorax rnay be
prcsent along with other systcmic signs, such as weakness, anorexia, fever, depression, and
and infuence the animal's renal function.196a
Diagnosis is by direct smear of fine-needlc aspirates, aerobic culture, and biopsy.
Histopathologic study reveals nodular to diffuse dcrmatitis, panniculitis, or both, withi or
without tissue grains (Fig. 4-22). Special stains (Gram's and Brown-Brenn) are needed to
demonstrate organisms. Nocardia spp. can be distinguished from Actinomyces spp. be-
cause they are partially acid-fast (with modified Fite-Faraco stain) and usually branch at
right angles (Fig. 4-23). When branched and beaded, the organisms appear similar to
Chinese characters.
Clinical managerment includes surgical drainage of infected tissues, but antibacterial
therapy is mandatory. Nocardial organisms show varying suscepibility to antibiotics, and
the correlation between in vivo and in vitro results varics.2. 151u. i53 For instance, N. noca is
FIGURE 4-22. Nocardliosis. Tts-
sue grain in pyogramulomatous der-
matitis.
324 · Bacterial Skin Diseases
FIGURE 4-23. Nocardiosis. Par-
tially acid-fast, flamentous organisms
that tend to branch at right angles.
susceptible to the macrolides, and often to the penicillins, while N. asteroides is resistant
to ampicillin, but not amoxicilin clavulanate. If at all possible, susceptibility data should
be developed for each case. If the organism cannot be isolated, drugs that can be effective
ampicillin alone or in combination with erythromycin, clarithromycin, cephalosporins,
chloramphenicol, tetracyclines, and various parenteral drugs.i5la Treatment must be con-
 tinued for at least 1 month after clinical remisson. Prognosis is guarded.
● MISCELLANEOUS BACTERIaL INFecTIONS
Streptococcal and Staphylococcal Necrotizing Fasciitis
 A streptococcal toxie shock syndrome with a rapidly progressive course has been described
 in seven dogs.202 Group C streptococci, especially S. canis, are responsible for the disor-
necrotizing fascitis. With the necrotizing fascitis, the wound is disproportionately painful,
with significant local heat and swelling. As the infected exudate travels along fascial planes,
 the fascia, fat, and overlying skin become necrotic.
 It is unclear why the streptococci in these cases became so toxic to their host dogs. Hf
a subset of the streptococcal population is developing virulence, additional cases will be 
Of clinical expansion of one or more highly virulent strains of S. canis.$7a Most strains of S.
canis from dogs with these syndromes are positive for M protein and streptolysin O,
   s  o  s a   
when a dog has a rapidy progressive, intensely painful wound with deep necrosis. After
initiated until the culture results are available. Histopathologic findings include severe
 necrosis and suppuration and extensive edema and hemorhage of the dermis and subcu-
tis. Thrombosed blood vessels, with or without vasculitis, and colonies of cocci within the
necrotic exudate are visible. The area of fascitis requires debridement. With aggressive
treatment, the disorder may not be fatal.
Cellulitis and toxic shock was recently reported in a dog in association with Staphylo-
Bacterial Skin Diseases · 325
coccus intermedius infection.1osa This is not surprising, given the abilty of some strains of
S. intermedius to produce one or more exotoxins similar to those that produce toxic shock
in humans. 134a
Brucellosis
 Brucellosis is a systermic hacterial infection caused by Brucella canis.2 Despite widespread
dissemination in the body, systemic signs of illness are rare, as are skin lesions. Brucellosis
may produce a secondary scrotal dermatitis (see Fig. 8-1iD) resulting from the animal's
licking the skin over painful epididymitis and orchitis.244 Some cases may involve necrosis
of the testis, with severe infammation of the entire scrotum, and draining ulcers. B. canis
has been isolated from the exudate.244
 B. canis has also been isolated from a 15-month-old female laboratory Beagle with
chronic exudative lesions that resernbled acral lick dermatitis.72 During a period of 16
months, expanding painfui lesions developed on both hocks and the dorsum of the right
carpus. The lesions were hyperemic, edematous, and granulomatous, with an irregularly
pitted surface. A sanguinopurulent exudate was present, and the regional lymph nodes
were enlarged. Histologic examination revealed dermal, subcutaneous, and tendinous
edema; pronounced lymphoid nodules; a prominent infltration of macrophages, plasma
cells, and lymphocytes; and seattered neutrophils. The enlarged lymph nodes were charac-
terized by sinusoid histiocytosis and meduillary cord _plasmacytosis. These fndings are
oras q paodns si ssu uu g o asuodsa anssn u yo pe
exanination findings and confirmed by culture.18
 Treatment of canine brucellosis should not be undertaken lightly because the infec-
tion can spread to humans and is not easily eradicated in the dog.? Affected dogs should
be removed frorm breeding programs and neutered if possible. Although the organism
shows in vitro sensitivity to tetracyclines, chloramphenicol, aminoglycosides, spectinomycin,
rifampin, arnpicilin, sulfonamides, and the quinolones, relapses are common when a
specific drug is used individually for a single course of treatment. The highest rate of
fuoroquinolones and the aminoglycosides and sulfonamides has been demonstrated.
Plague
Plague is an acute, febrile, infectious disease that has a high mortality rate and is caused
by the gram-negative organism Yersinia pestis, a bipolar coccobacilus of the family En-
terobacteriaceae.? It is a facultative anaerobic, nonmotile, non-spore-forming organism
that cannot penetrate unbroken skin but can invade mucous membranes. Plague occurs in
three forms: bubonic, pneumonic, and septicemic.93. 96 The nost common is bubonic
and neck). The septiceimic and pneumonic forms are more serious because they may be
undiagnosed until it is too late for effective treatment.
The incubation period is 1 to 3 days if the organism is ingested or inhaled, 2 to 6
days if the organisms enter through a fea bite, a skin wound, or a mucous membrane.
The course is fulminating and can lead to death. Plague exists in every continent except
Australia.2 There have been outhreaks in all states of the United States west of the Rocky
 Mountains, including Hawai. Rodents and cats are highly susceptible, dogs are less 
cially prairie dogs, rock and ground squirrels, and rats.2 93
Plague typically is transmitted by feas or by ingestion of infected animals. Diamanus
 montanus and four less common rodent-hosted feas are the primary vectors. The com-
 mon dog and cat feas are not normally involved.238
An epizootic plague can develop if susceptible rodents come in contact with the
Yersinia organisms, causing a massive die-off in the rodent colony. The sick rodents
become easy prey for cats, dogs, or other carnivores, and the feas seek new hosts. Cats
 can spread the infection to humans by transmitting infected feas mechanically, by bring-
328 · Bacterial Skin Diseases
Based on susceptibility data, the dog was treated with clindamycin for 20 days with
complete resolution of the infestation,
Melioidosis
Melioidosis is an infectious nodular skin disorder of dogs and cats in Southeast Asia,
northern Australia, and the South Pacific caused by Burkholderia pseudomallei.2 The
organism is a soil saprophyte, and infection occurs by inhalation, arthropod bite, or wound
 contamination. Affected animals have multiple small skin nodules that will rupture. Sys-
temic involvement is also possible. Diagnosis is by culture, PCR techniques, or immuno-
histochemistry. Treatment involves surgical drainage of large lesions and protracted
courses of antibiotics. Oral drugs that can be effective include tetracycline, chlorampheni-
col, amoxicillin clavulanate, and potentiated sulfonamides.
Pseudopyodermas
There is a group of dermatoses of variable etiology that are not pyodermas, although they
resemble them. The group includes the following:
1. Callus pyoderma (see Chap. 16)
2. Juvenile cellulitis (see Chap. 18)
 3. Other pyoderma-like dermnatoses
a. Acne (see Chap. 14)
b. Intertrigo (fold dermatitis) (see Chap. 16)
c. Linear IgA pustular dermatosis (see Chap. 9)
d. Sterile panniculitis (see Chap. 18)
e. Pemphigus erythematosus (see Chap. 9)
f. Pemphigus foliaceus (see Chap. 9)
h. Sterile pyogranuloma syndrome (see Chap. 18)
i.
Subcorneal pustular dermatosis (see Chap. 18)
 j. Eosinophilic facial folliculitis and furunculosis (see Chap. 8)
● rEFERENCES
General
9. Ambrose NC, et al: Preliminary characterization of
1. Arrioja-Dechert A (ed): Compendium of Veterinary
extracellular serine proteases of Dermatophits comgo-
Products, 5th ed. North American Compendiums,
lensis isolates frm catle, sheep,and orse M
Inc., Port Huron, 1999.
cro 62:321, 1998.
2. Greene CE: Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat,
10. Angarano DW, MacDonald JM: Efficacy of cefadroxil
 2nd ed. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1998.
in the treatment of bacterial dermatitis in dogs. J Am
3. Scott DW, Miller WH Jr, Griffn CE: Muller and
Vet Med Assoc 194:57, 1989.
Kirk's Small Animal Dermatology, 5th ed. W.B. Saun-
11. Appel MJG: Lyue disease in dogs and cats. Comp
ders Co., Philadelphia, 1995.
Cont Educ 12:617, 1990.
12. Appel MJG,et al: Expermental lyme disease in dogs
Specific
produces arthritis
 and persistent infection. J Infect 
4. Aarestrup FM, Jacobsen MJ: Bakteriel paronychia
Dis 167:651, 1993.
(klovolds-hetaendelse) hos kat forarsaget of Staphylo-
13. Armstrong JP: Systemic Serratia marcescens infec-
coccus felis. Dansk Vet 76:1066, 1993.
tions in a dog and a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 184:
5. Ackerman L: Cutaneous bacterial granuloma (botry-
1143, 1984.
omycosis) in five dogs: Treatment with rifampin. Mod
14. Ascher F, et al: Controlled trial of ethyl lactate and
Vet Pract 68:404, 1987.
benzoyl peroxide shampoos in the management of
6. Allaker RP, et al: Occurrence of Staphylococcus inter-
canine surface pyoderma and superficial pyoderma.
medus on the hair and skin of norimal dogs. Res Vet
In: von Tscharner C, Halliwell REw (eds): Advances
Sci 5:174, 1992.
7. Allaker RP, et al: Colonization of neonatal puppies by
London, 1990, p 375.
staphylococci. Br Vet J 148:523, 1992.
15. Aucoin DP: Intracellular-intraphagocytic dynamics of
8. Allaker RP, et al: Population sizes and frequency of
fuoroquinolone antibiotics: A coniparative review.
staphylococci at mucocutaneous sites in healthy dogs.
Comp Cont Ed 18:9, 1996.
Vet Rec 130:303, 1992.
16. Awad-Masalmeh VM, et al: Bakteriologische Untersu-
Bacterial Skin Diseases · 329
chungen zur Pyodermie des Hundes Therapeutischen
36. Buchanan AM, Seott ∫L: Actinormyces hordeooulneris,
a canine pathogen that prxduces L-phase variants
75:232, 1986.
spontaneously with coincident calcium deposition. Am
17. Ayliffe TR: Penetration of tissue by antibiotics. Br Vet
JVet Res 54:2552, 1984.
Dermatol Newsl 5:233, 1980.
37.
Buchanan AM,et al: Nocardia asteroides recovery
18. Baldi PC, et al: Diagnosis of canine brucellosis by
from a dog with steroid- and antibiotic-unresponsive
detection of serum antibxodies against and 18kDa cy-
idiopathic polyarthritis. J Clin Microbiol 18:702, 1983.
toplasmic protein of Brucella spp. Vet Micro 57:273,
38. Buck GE, et al: Isolation of a corynebacterium from
1997.
beagle dogs affected with alopccia. Am J Vet Res 35:
19. Barrs VR, et al: Antimicrobial susceptibility of various
297, 1974.
 staphylococci isolated from various disease conditions
 39. Burkett C, Frank LA: Cormparison of producion of
   s s r  s 
Staphylococcus intermedius exotoxin among clinically
1995.
20. Barthold SW, et al: Serclogic response of dogs natl-
and dogs with a single episode of pyoderma. J Am
rally cxposed to or vaccinated against Borrelia burg-
Vet Med Assoc 213:232, 1998.
dorfet infection. J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:1435,
40. Burrows AK: Residual antimicrobial action of 2% mu-
1995.
pirocin ointment (Bactoderm). Proc Annu Memb
21. Becker AM, et al: Propiontbacterium acnes inmuno-
Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol
therapy in chronic recurent canine pyoderma. J Vet
10:35, 1994.
Intern Med 3:26, 1989.
41. Campbell KL, et al: Immunoglobulin A defcieney in
22.Bell A: Prophylaxis of German shepherd recurent
the dog. Canine Pract 16:7, 1991.
furunculosis (German shepherd dog pyoderma) using
42. Campbell KL: Sulphonamides: Updates on use in vet-
cephalexin puise therapy. Aust Vet Practit 25:30,
erinary medicine, Vet Dermatol 10:205, 1999.
1995.
43. Caprile KA: Maintenance antibacterial agents in. re-
23. Benard P, et al: Diffusion cutanee de la lincomycine:
current pyoderma. Vet Med Rep 2:297, 1990.
Observations chez un chien par autohistoradiograhie.
44.
Carakostas MC, et al: Subcutaneous dermatophilosis
Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 30:415, 1995.
in a cat. J Ain Vet Med Assoc I85:675, 1984.
24. Benson CE: Susceptibility of selected otitis externa
45. Carb AV, Liu SK: Actinobacillus lignieresit infection
pathogens to indivicual aud mixtures of acetic and
in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 154:1062, 1969.
boric acid. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet
45a. Carli S, et al: Absorption kinetics and bioavailability
 Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 14:12l, 1998.
of cephalexin in dogs after oral and intramuscular
25. Berg JN, et al: The occurrence of anaerobic bacteria
administration. J Vet Pharmacol Therap 2:308,
in. diseases of the dog and cat. Am J Vet Res 40:877,
1999.
1979.
46. Carlotti DN, Atanu A: Treatment of 13 cases of
26. Berg JN, et al: Clinical models for anaerobic bacterial
chronie decp pyoderua with rifampin in dogs. Proc
Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol 13:120,
of clindamycin and lincomycin. Am J Vet Res 45:
1997.
1299, 1984.
47. Carloti DN, Leroy S: Actualites en antibiotherapie
27. Berg JN, et al: Identification of the major coagulase-
cutanée systemique chez le chien. Prat Med Chir
positive Staphylococcus spp. of dogs as Staphylococ-
Anim Comp 30:263, 1995.
Cus interrmedius. A1n J Vet Res 45:1307, 1984.
48. Carloti DN, et al: Utilisation de la marbofloxacine
28.Bere SLt alAquatitative studyof theeft
dans le traitement des pyodermites du chien, Prat
tribrissen on canine tear production. J An Anim
Med Chir Anim Comp 30:281, 1995.
Hosp Assoc 31:236, 1995.
49. Carlotti DN, Maffart P: La chlorhexidine: revue bib-
 29. Bettenay SV, et al: Doxycycline hydrochloride in the
liographique. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 31:553,
treatment of canine pyoderma. Aust Vet Pract 28:14,
1998.
1996.
50. Carpenter JL, et al: Tuberculosis in fve basset
30. Blum JR, et al: The clinical manifestations of a genet-
ically determined deficicncy in the third component
hounds. J Aim Vet Med Assoc 192:1563, 1988.
of complement in the dog. Clin Immunol Immunopa-
 51. Carro T, et al: Subcutaneous abscesses and arthritis
thol 34:304, 1985.
caused by a probable bacterial L-form in cats. J Am
31. Blunden AS, Smith KC: A pathological study of a
52. Cerundolo R, et al: Recurrent deep pyoderma in
Vet Med Assoc 194:1583, 1989.
 e a   e u o 
with cultural characteristics between Mycobacterium
German shepherd dogs with underlying ehrlichiosis
tuberculosis and M. bovis. Vet Rec 138:87, 1996.
and hyperglobulinemia. Vet Dermatol 9:135, 1998.
32. Boothe DM: Avoiding antibiotic failures in your skin
 53. Chabanne L, et al: Lyinphocyte subset abnormalities
patients. Comp Cont Ed 19:101, 1997.
 in German shepherd dog pyoderma (GSP). Vet Im-
 33. Bourdeau P: Treatment of canine pyodermas with an
munol Immunopathol 49:189, 1995.
oral long-acting association: baquiloprim + sulpha-
 54. Chambers ED, Severin GA: Staphylococcal bacterin
dimethoxine (Zaquilan). In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds):
for treatment of chronic staphylococcal blepharitis in
Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth
the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 185:422, 1984.
Heinemann, Oxford, 1998, p 541.
54a. Chammas PPC, Hagiwara, MK: Evaluation of neu-
34. Breitschwerdt EB: Lahboratory diagnosis of tick-trans-
trophilic function (chemotaxis, phagocytosis and mi-
mitted dliseases in the dog. In: Kirk RW, Bonagura
crobicidal activityinhealthydogs anddogssuffering
JD (eds): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XI. W.B.
from recurrent deep pyoderna. Vet Immunol Immu
Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1992, p 252.
nopathol 64:123, 1998.
 35. Breitschwerdt EB, et al: Rhinitis, pneumonia, and de
54b. Charles J, et al: Cytology and histopathology of ca-
fective neutrophil function in the Doberman pinscher.
nine leproid granuloma syndrome. Aust Vet f 77:799,
Am J Vet Res 48:1054, 1987.
1999.
330 · Bacterial Skin Diseases
55. Chastain CB, et al: Dermatophilosis in two dogs. J
74b. Day MJ: Possible immunodeficiency in rclated rott-
Am Vet Med Assoc 169:1079, 1976.
weiler dogs. JI Small Anim Pract 40:561, 1999.
56. Chesney CJ: The mieroclimate of the canine coat:
75. Day MJ, Penhale WJ: Serum immunoglobulin A con-
The effect of heating on coat and skin temperanure.
ccntrations in rorrmal and diseased dogs. Res Vet Sci
and relative humidity. Vet Dennatol 8:183, 1997.
45:36, 1988.
57. Christensen GD: Coagulase-negative staphylococci
76. Day MJ: An immunopathological study of deep pyo-
saprophyte or parasite? Int J Dermatol 22:463, 1983.
derma in the dog. Res Vet Sci 56:18, 1994.
58. Chusid MJ, et al: Defective polymorphouuclear leu-
77.Day MI: Inhcritance of serum autoantibody,reducd
kocyte metabolism and function in canine cyclic neu-
serim IgA, and autoimmune disease in a breeding
tropenia. Blood 46:921, 1975.
colony. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 53:207, 1996.
59. Clerex C, et al: Tuberculosis in dogs: A case report
78. DeBoer DJ, et al: Evaluation of comunercial staphylo-
and review of the literature.J Am Anin Hosp Assoc
coccal bacterin for management of idiopathic recur-
28:207, 1992.
rent suporficial pyoderrma in dogs. Am J Vet Res 51:
60. Clerex C, et al: Nonresponsive generalized bacterial
636,1990.
infection associated with systemic lupus erythemato-
79. DeBoer DJ, et al: Clinical and immunological re-
sus in a Beauceron. J Am Anin Hosp Assoc 35, 220.
sponses of dogs with recurrent pyoderma to injection
1999.
of staphylococcus phage lysate. In: von Tscharner C,
61. Cohen ND, et al: Clinical and epizootiologic charac-
Halliweli REW (eds): Advances in Veterinary Derma-
teristics of dogs seropositive for Borrelia burgdorferi
tology, Vol 1. Bailliaere-Tindall, London, 1990, p 335.
in Texas: 1ll0 cases (1988). J A1n Vet Med Assoe 197:
S0. DeBoer DJ. Pukay BP: Rccurrent pyoderma and im-
893, 1990.
munostimulants. In: lhrke PY, Mason IS, White SD
62. Conceicao IG, ct al: Identification of bacterial Hora
(eds): Actvances in Veterinary Dermatology. Vol 2.
and antimierobial staphylococcal sensitivity fron ca-
Pergaimon Press, Oxford, 1993, p 443.
nine pyoderma in Brazil. In: Kwotchka KW, et al
S1. DeBoer Dj: Management of chronie and recurrent
(eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III. But-
pyoderma in the dog.
. In: Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's
terworth Heinemann, Oxford, 1998, p 546.
Current Veterinary Therapy XI1. W.B. Saunders Co.,
63. Cox IU, et al: Antimicrobial susceptibility of coagu-
Philadelphia, 1995, p 611.
lase positive staphylococci isolated from Louisiana
8la. Degim IT, et al: In vitro percutaneous absorpton of
dogs. Am J Vet Res 4:2039, 1984.
fusicdic acid and betamethasone-17-valerate across ca-
64. Cox HU, Hoskins JD: Distribution of staphylococcal
nine skin. J Small Anim Pract 40:515, 1999.
species on clinically healthy cats. Am J Vet Res 46:
82.deLise GW,et alreort of tuberulosisn cats n
1824, 1985.
New Zealand, and the examination of strains of My-
65. Cox HU, et al: Species of Staphylococcus isolated
cobacterium bouis by DNA restriction endonuclease
from animal infections. Corell Vet 74:124, 1984.
analysis. N Z Vet J 38:10, 1990.
66. Cox HU, Schmeer N: Protein A in Staphylococus
 83. DeManuelle TC, et al: Determination of skin concen-
intermedius isolates from dogs and cats. Am J Vet
uy eupd m shop u uoxooa jo uogen
Res 47:1881, 1986.
Vet Res 59:1599, 1998.
67. Couto CG, et al: In citro immunologic features of
84. Denerolle P, et al: Gennan shepherd dog pyoderma:
weinaraner dogs with neutrophil abnormalitics and
A prospective study of 23 cases. Vet Dermatol 9:243,
recurrent infections. Vet Immnnol Immunopathol 23:
1998.
103, 1989.
85. Dcvriese LA: ldentification and characterization of
68. Couto CC: Patterns of infection associated with im-
staphyloxcocci isolated from cats. Vet Mierobiol 9:279,
munodcficiency. In: Kirk RW, Bonagura, JD (eds):
1984.
Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XIW.B. Saunders
86. Devricsc LA, DePelsmaecker K: The anal region as a
Co., Philadelphia, 1992, p 223.
main camier site of Staphyloxoccus intermedius and
69. Crowe DT, Kowalsla J: Clostridial celulitis with lo-
Streptococcus canis in dogs. Vet Rec 121:302, 1987.
calized gas formation in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
87. Devriese LA, Haesebrouch F: Streptococcus suis in-
169:1094, 1976.
fection in horses and cats. Vet Rec 130:300, 1992.
70. Curtis C, Lloyd D: Treatment of canine idiopathic
87a. DeWinter LM, Prescott JF: Relatedness of Strepto-
recurrernt pyoderma. Vet Rec 140:587, 1997.
cocus canis froun streptococcal toxic shock syndrome
71. Davenport DJ, Johnson GC: Cutaneous nocardiosis in
and necrotizing fascitis. Can J Vet Res 63:90, 1999.
a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 188:728, 1986.
87b.DeWinter LM, et al: Virulence of Streptococcus
7la. Davis RM: Use of orally adninistered chitin inhibi-
canis from canine streptococcal toxic shock syndrone
tor (lufenuron) to control fea vectors of plague on
 and necrotizing fascitis. Vet Microbiol 70:95, 1999.
ground squirrels in Califormia. J Med Entomol 30:
88. Donnclly TM, et al: Diffuse cutaneous granulornatous
562, 1999.
lesions associated with acid-fast bacilli in a cat. J
72. Dawkins BG, et al: Pyogranulomatous dermatitis asso-
 Small Anirm Pract 23:99, 1982.
ciated with Brucella canis infection in a dog. J Ain
89. Donohue DF, Brightman AH: Cervicofacial Actino)-
Vet Med Assoc 181:1432, 1982.
myces viscosus infection in a Brazilial Fila: A case
73. Davidson EB: Managing bite wounds in dogs and
report and literature review. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
cats: Part I. Comp Cont Ed 20:811, 1998.
31:501, 1995.
74. Davidson EB: Managing bite wounds in dogs and
90. Dow SW, et al: Anaerobie bacterial infections and
cats: Part I1. Comp Cont Ed 20:974, 1998.
response to treatment in dogs and cats: 36 cases
74a. Day MJ: Expression of major histocompatibility
(1983-1985). J Am Vct Med Assoc 189:930, 1986.
conplex class 1l molecules by dermal inflammatory
 91. Dow SM, Jomes RL: Anaerobic infections. Part I:
cells, epidermal Langerhans' cells and kcratinocytes in
Pathogenesis and clinical significance. Comp Cont
canine dermatological disease. J Comp Pathol l15:
Edue 9:711, 1987.
317, 1996.
92. Eggcrs JS, et al: Disseminated Mycobacterium aciun
Bacterial Skin Diseascs · 331
infection in three miniature schnauzor litter mates. [
terial skin infections in two dogs. Vet Pathol 20:117,
Vet Diag Invest 9:424, 1997.
1983.
 93. Eidson M, et al: Clinical, clinicopathologic, and path-
l12. Guaguere: E, Picard G: Utilization de la cefalexine et
ologic features of plague in cats: 119 cases (1979-
du laetate dethyle dans le traitement des pyodernites
1988). J Am Vet Med Assoc 199:1191, 1991.
canines. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 25:547, 1990.
94. Edwards VN, ct al: Characterization of the canine
113. Guaguere E: Topical treatment of canine and feline
type C enterotoxin produced by Staphylococcus inter-
pyoderna. Vet Dermatol 7:145, 1996.
114. Guaguere E, et al: Utilisation de la cfalexine dans Ie
1997.
traitement des pyodermitcs canines: Conparaison de
95. Elkins AD: Hyperbaric uxygen therapy: Potential vet-
leffcacite de differentes posoligies. Prat Med Chir
crinary applications. Comp Cont Ed 19:607, 1997.
Anim Conp 33:237, 1998.
 96. Emerson jK: Plague. Canine Pract 12:43, 1985.
115. Guaguere E, et al: Cephalexin in the treatment of
96a.Esterly NB, ct al: The effeet of antimierobial agents
canine pyoderma: Comparison of two dosc rates. In:
on leukocyte chemotaxis. J Invest Dermatol 70:51,
Kwochka KW, et al (cxds): Acvanees in Veterinary
1978.
 Dermatology II1. Buttervorth Hleinemann, Oxford,
97. Fadok
VA: Granulomatous dermatitis in dogs
1998, p 547.
and cats. Scmin Vet Med Surg Simall Anim 2:186,
116. Gunn-Moore DA, et al: Feline tuberculosis: A litera-
1987.
ture review and discussion of 19 cases caused by an
98. Fairley RA, Fairley NM: Rhodococcus equi infcction
nusual mycobactenial variant. Vet Rec 138:53. 1996.
in cats. Vet Dermatol 10:43. 1999.
117. Gunn-Moore DA, Shaw S: Mycobacterial disease in
99.Farca AM, et al: Potntiaing efect ofEDTATis 
the cat. In Pract 17:493, 1997.
the activity of antibiotics against resistant bacteria as-
117a. Hall JA, et al: Comparison of three commercial ra-
sociated with otitis, dermatitis, and cystitis. J Small
dial immunodiffusion kits for thc mcasurement of ca-
Anin Pract 38:243, 1998.
nino serum irmmunoglobulins. J Vet Diagn lnvest 7:
100. Farrow BRH, et al: Pneumocystis pneumonia in the
559, 1995.
dog. J Comp Pathol $2:447, 1972.
118. Ialliwell REW, Gorman NT: Veterinary Clinical Im-
101. Fehrer SL, et al: Identification of protein A from
munology. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1989,
Staphylococcus intermedius isolated from canine skin.
p 253.
Am J Vet Res 49:697, 1988.
119. Hardie EM, Barsanti JA: Treatment of canine actino-
102. Feingold Ds: Gangrenous and crepitant cellulitis. J
mycosis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 180:537, 1982.
Am Acad Dermatol 6:289, 1982.
120. Hart BL, Barrett RF: Effects of castration on fight-
103. Feingold DS: Bacterial adhcrencc, colonization, and
ing, roaining, and urine spraying in adult male cats. J
pathogenicity. Arch Derimatol 122:161, 1986.
Am Vet Med Assoc 163:290. 1973.
104. Felsburg PJ, et al: Canine X-linked severe combined
120a. Hartnett BJ, et al: Bone inarrow transplantation for
immunodeficiency. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 69:
canine Xlinked severe combined inmunoxdeficiency.
127, 1999.
Vet limmunol Immunopathol 69:137, 1999.
105.Felsburg PJ: Primary imrmunodeficiencies. In: Kirk
121. Harvey RC, et al: Distribution of propionibacteria on
RW, Bonagura JD (eds): Kirk's Current Veterinary
dogs: A preliminary report of the findings on Il dogs.
Therapy XI. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1992. P
J Small Anim Pract 34:80, 1993.
448.
122. Harvey HG, et al: A comparison of lincomycin hydro-
l05a. Foster SF, et al: Chronic pneumonia caused by My-
chloride and clindamycin hydrochloride in the treat-
cobacterium thermoresistibie in a cat. J Small Anim
 Iment of superficial pyoderma in dogs. Vet Rec 132:
Pract 40:433, 1999.
351, 1993.
106. Fox LE, et al: Disseuminated subeutaneous Mycobac-
123. Harvey RG, Nobel WC: Aspects of nasal, oropharyn-
terium fortuitum infoetion in a dog. J Am Vet Med
geal and anal carriage of Staphylococcus intermedius
Assoc 206:53, 1995.
in normal dogs and dogs with pyoderma. Vet Derma-
107. F'rank LA, Kunkle GA: Comparison of the efficacy of 
tol 9:99, 1998.
cefadroxil and generic and proprietary cephalexin in
124. Harvey RG: Aspects of the interaction between the
the treatment of pyoderma in dogs. J Am Vet Med
skin and staphylococci. In: Procccdings of the North
Assoc 203:530, 1993.
American Veterinarians Conference, 1998, p 79.
108. Giger U, et al: Defciency of leukocyte surface glyco-
125. Harvey RG, Lloyd DH: The distribution of bacteria
  e u s nT Pe IvaT ro sd
    r n
nes) on the hair, at the skin surface and within the
Blood 69:1622, 1987.
hair follicles of dogs. Vet Dermatol 6:79, 1995.
108a. Girard C, Higgins R: Staphylococcus intermedius
126. Harvey RG, Noble WC: A tenporal study counparing
cellulitis and toxic shock in a dog. Can Vet J 40:501,
the carriage on Staphylococcus intermedius on normal
1999.
 dogs or atopic dogs in clinical remission. Vet Derma-
109. Goodaere R, et al: An epideimiologic study of Staphy-
tol 5:21, 1994.
lococcus internedlus strains isolated from dogs, their
127.1
Harvey RC: Tylosin in the treatiment of canine super-
owners, and veterinary surgeons. J Anal Appl Pyroly-
ficial pyoderma. Vet Rec 139:185, 1996.
sis 44:49, 1997.
128. Harvey RC, et al: Nasal carriage of Staphylococus
109a. Gortel K, et al: Methicillin resistance among staphy-
intermedius in humans in contact with dogs. Microb
lococci isolated from dogs. An J Vet Res 60:1526,
Ecol Health Dis 7:225, 1994.
1999.
129. IIarvey RG, Hunter PA: The properties and use of
110. Crooters AM. et al: Systeinic Mycobacterium smeg-
penicillins in the veterinary field with special refer-
matis infection in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:
ence to skin infeclions in the dog and cat. Vet Der-
457, 1995.
matol 10:177, 1999.
1ll. Gross TL, Connelly MR: Nontuberculous nycobac-
130. Hessclbarth J, et al: Characterization of Staphylococ-
 332 · Bacterial Skin Diseases
Cus intermedius from healthy dogs and cases of super-
rium avium complex infection with clofazimine and
ficial pyoderma by DNA restrictive endonuclease pat-
doxycycline in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:457,
terms. Vet Microb 41:259, 1994.
1995.
131. Hesselbarth J, et al: Shudies on the production of an
150. Keane DP: Chronic abscesses in cats associated with
exfoliative toxin by Staphylococcus intermedius.]Vet
an orgauism resembling mycoplasma. Can Vet J 24-
Med B 41:411. 1994.
289, 1983.
132. Higgins R, Paradis M: Abscess caused by Corynebac-
151. Keane KA, Taylor DJ: Slime-producing Staphytococ-
teriam exyui in a cat. Can Vet J 21:63, 1980.
cus species in canine pyoderma. Vet Rec 130:75.
133. Hill PB, Morielo KA: Canine pyoderma. J Am Vet
1992.
Med Assoc 204:334, 1994.
15la. Kennis RA, Wolf AM: Chronic bacterial skin infec-
133a.Hirsh DC, Jang SS: Antimicrobial susceptibility of
tions in cats. Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 2l:1108,
Nocardia noua isolated from five cats with nocar-
1999.
diosis. J A1n Vet Med Assoc 215:815, 1999.
152. Kietzinann M, ct al: Vertraglichkeif and Pharmakoki-
134. Ilinton M, et al: The antibiotic resistance of patho-
netik von Cefalexin (cefaseptin dragees) bein Hund.
genic staphylococci and streptococi isolated from
Kleintierpraxis 35:390, 1990.
dogs. J Small Anim Pract 19:229, 1978.
153. Kirpensteijn J, Fingland RB: Cutaneous actinomycosis
134a. Ilirooka EY, et al: Enterotoxigenicity of Staphylococ-
and nocardiosis in dogs: 48 cases (1980-1990). J Am
cus intermedius of canine origin. Int J Food Micro-
Vet Med Assoc 201:917, 1992.
biol 7:185, 1988.
154. Koch HJ, Peters S: Antimicrobial therapy in German
135. Hirsch DC, et al: Changes in prevalence aud suscep-
tibility of obligate anacrobes in clinical veterinary
study. Vet Dermatol 7:177, 1996.
practice. J Ain Vet Med Assoc 186:1086, 1985.
155. Krakowaka S: Acquired immunodeficiency diseases.
136. Horwitz L, Ihrke PJ: Canine seborrheas. In: Kirk RW
In: Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (eds): Kirk's Current Vet-
(ed): Current Veterinary Therapy VI. W.B. Saunders
erinary Therapy XI. w.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia.
Co., Philadelphia, 1977.
1992, p 453.
137. Hoskuyama S, et al: Isolation of obligate and faculta-
       
 tive bacteria from subcutaneous abscesses. J Vet Med
 Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 8:683, 1978.
Sei 58:273, 1996.
157. Krick SA, Scott DW: Bacteral folliculitis, furunculo-
137a. Hughes MS, et al: Disseminated Mycobacteriurn
sis, and ceulitis in the German shepherd: A retro-
genavense infection in an FIV-positive cat. J Feline
spective analysis of 17 cases. J Am Anim Hlosp Assoc
Med Surg l:23, 1999.
25:23,1989.
138. Hughes MS, et al: Deternination of the etiology of
158. Kristensen S, Krogh HV: A study of skin diseases in
s
dogs and cats. IIMicrofora of theskin of dogs with
j Clin Microbiol 35:2464, 1997.
chronic eczema. Nord Vet Med 30:223, 1978.
139. Hunter RP, et al: Pharmacokinetics, oral availability
159. Kristensen F, Aalbaek B: Sarinfektian med Rhodococ-
and tissue distribution of azithromycin in cats. J Vet
cus equi hos en kat. Dansk Vet 75:969, 1993.
Pharmacol Ther 18:38, 1995.
160. Krogh HF, Kristensen S: A study of skin diseases in
140. Igimi S, et al: Staphylococcus felis, a new species
dogs and cats. Nord Vet Med 28:459, 1976.
from clinical specimens frorn cats. lnt J Syst Bacteriol
161.
Kruse H, et al; The antimierobial susceptibility of
39:373, 1989.
Staphylococcus species isolated from canine dermati-
141. Ihrkc PJ: Antibacterial therapy in dermatology. In:
tis. Vet Res Commun 20:205, 1996.
162. Kunkle GA, et al: Rapidly growing mycobacteria as a
Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1986, p 566.
cause of cutaneous granulomas: Report of five cases.J
141a. lhrke PJ. DeManuelle TC: Cerman Shepherd dog
Am Anim Ilosp Assoc 19:513, 1983.
pyoderma: An overview and antimicrobial manage-
163. Kunkle GA: New considerations for rational antibiotic
ment. Compend Cont Edue Pract Vet 21 (Suppl): 44.
therapy of cutaneous staphylococcal infection in the
1999.
dog. Semin Vet Med Surg Small Anim 2:212, 1987.
142. Ihrke PJ, Gross TL: Canine mucocutaneous pyo-
derma. In: Bonagura JD (cd): Kirk's Current Veteri-
four antibacterial shanpoos against Staphylococcus in-
nary Therapy XIl. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia,
termedius in dogs. Am J Vet Res 52:115, 1991.
1995, p 618.
165, Kwochka KW: Recurent pyoderma. In: Griffin CE,
143. Thrke PJ, Gross TL: Couference in Dermatology, No.
Kwochka KW, MacDonald JM (eds): Current Veteri-
1. Vet Dermatol 4:33, 1993.
nary Derinatology. Mosby Year Book, St. Louis, 1993,
144. Ihrke PJ, et al: The use of fuoroquinolones in veteri-
P3
nary dermatology. Vet Dermatol 10:193, 1999.
166. Latimer KS, et al: Disseminated Mycobacterium au-
145. Jang SS, et al: Organisms isolated from dogs and cats
um complex infection in a cat: Presumptive diagnosis
with anaerobic infections and susceptibility to selected
by blood smear examination. Vet Clin Pathol 26:85,
antimicrobial agents. J Am Vet Med Assoc 210:1610,
1997.
1997.
166a. Lanevschi A, et al: Granulocyte colony-stimulating
146. Jezyk PF, et al: Lethal acrodermatitis in bull terriers.
factor deficiency in a Rottweiler with chronic idio-
J Am Vet Med Assoc 118:833, 1986.
pathic neutropenia. J Vet Intern Med 13:72, 1999.
147.J
Jezyk PF, et al: X-linked severe combined immunode-
167. Lee AH, et al: Effects of chlorhexidine diacetate,
ficiency in the dog. Clin Immunol Immunopathol 52:
providone iodine, and polyhydroxydine on wound
173, 1989.
healing in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoe 24:77, 1988.
148. Jordon HL, et al: Disscminated Mycobacterium au-
168. Lewis DT, et al: Experinental reproduction of feline
um coroplex infection in three Siarmnese cats. J Am
5:189, 1994.
149. Kaufman AC, et al: Treatment of isolated Mycobacte-
Bacterial Skin Diseases · 333
clavulanated/ainoxycilin in the treatiment of canine su-
19la. Masom IS: Pathogenesis of canine pyoderna. Proc
perficial pyodermas. Vet Hec 144:662, 1999.
 d   r s 1  1
170. Liu S, et al: Canine tuberculosis. J Am Vet Med
192. Mason IS, et al: A review of the biology of canine
Assoc 177:164, 1980.
skin with respect to the conmensals Staphylococus
171. Lloyd DHi, Jenkinson DM: The effect of climate on
internedius, Demodex canis, and Malassezia pachy-
experimental infection of bovine skinwithDermat-
dermatitis. Vet Dermatol 7:119, 1996.
philus congolensis. Br Vet J 136:122, 1980.
193. Mason IS, Lloyd DH: The rolc of allergy in the
172. Lloyd DH: Skin surface immumity. Vet Dernatol
development of canine pyorderma. J Sinall Anim Pract
News 5:10, 1980.
30:216, 1989.
173. Lloyd DIl: The cutaneous defense mechanisms. Vet
194. Mason IS, Lloyd DH: Scanning electron microscopic
Dermatol News 1:9, 1976.
studies of the living epidermis and stratum corneun
174. Lloyd DH, ct al: Scnsitivity to antibiotics amongst
in dogs. In: Ihrke PJ. Mason IS, White: SD (eds):
cutaneous and mncosal isolates of canine pathogenic
staphylococci in the U.K., 1980-96. Vet Dermatol 7:
mon Press, Oxford, 1993, p 131.
171, 1996.
195. Mason IS, Lloyd DH: The macroscopic and micro-
175. Lloyd H, Reyss-Brion A: Le peroxide de benzoyle:
scopic effects of intradermal injeetions of cnde and
Efficacite clnique et bacteriologique dans le traite-
purifed staphylococcal extracts on canine skin. Vet
ment des pyodermites chroniques. Prat Med Chir
Dermatol 6:197, 1995.
Anim Comp 19:445, 1984.
176. Lloyd DH, et al: Carriage of Staphylococcus interne-
cological basis of clinical use in veterinary dernatol-
duus on thc ventral abdomcn of clinically normal dogs
ogy. Vot Derrmatol 10:187, 1999.
and those with pyoderma. Vet Dermatol 2:16i,
196a.
Mealey K, et al: Hypercalcenia associated with
1991.
granulomatous disease in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc
177. Lloyd DH, et al: Treatment of canine pyoderma with
215:959, 1999.
co-amoxyclav: A comparison of two dose ratcs. Vet
197. Medleau I, ct al; Frequency and antimierobial sus-
Ree 141:439, 1997.
ceptibility of Staphylococxus spp. isolated from canine
178. Lloyd DII. et al: Fluoroquinolone resistance in
pyodermas. Am J Vet Res 47:229, 1986.
Staphylococcus intermedius.Vet Dermatol 10:248,
198.
Medeau L, Blue JL: Frequency and antimicrobial
1999."
179. Loncarevie S, et al: A case of canine cutanecus lister-
line skin lesions. J A1n Vet Med Assoc 193:1080,
iosis. Vet Dermatol 10:69, 1999.
1988.
180. Lotti T, Hartmann G: Atypical mycobacterial infec-
199. Medleau IM, ct al: Superficial pyoderma in the cat:
tious: A diffcult and emerging group of infectious
Diagnosing an uncoiminon skin disorder. Vet Med 86:
dermatoses. Int J Dermatol 32:499, 1993.
807, 1991.
181. Love DN, et al: Antimicrobial susceptibility patterns
200. Messinger LM, Beale KM: A blinded comparison of
of obligatcly anacrobic bacteria from subcutaneous
the efficacy of daily and twice daily trimethoprim-
abscesses and pyothorax in cats. Aust Vet Pract 10:
168, 1980.
therapy in the treatment of canine pyoderna. Vet
182. Love DN, et al: Characterization of strains of staphy-
Derinatol 4:13, 1993.
lococci from infections in dogs and cats. J Small Anim
 201. Michaud AJ: The use of clofazimine as treatment for
Pract 22:195, 1981.
Mycobacterium fortuiturn in a cat. Feline Pract 22:7,
183. McEwan NA: Bacterial aclherence to canine comeo-
1994.
cytes. ln: von Tscharmer C, Hallwell REW (eds):
202.Miller CW,et al: Streptococcal toxc shock syndrorne
Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol 1. Baillia-
in dogs. J Ain Vet Med Assoc 209:1427, 1996.
ere-Tindall, London, 190, p 454.
202a, Miller MA, et al: Infammatory pseudotumor in a cat
184. Mclntosh Dw: Feline leprosy: A review of forty-four
with cutaneous mycobacteriosis. Vet Pathol 36:161,
cases from western Canarda. Can Vet J 23:291,1982.
1999.
I85. Malik R, et al: Mycobacterial nodular granulomas af.-
203. Miller Rl, Ladis PW: Probable derTnatophilosis in
fecting the subcutis and skin of dogs (canine leproid
two cats. Aust Vet J 60:155, 1983.
granulomna syndrome). Aust Vet J 76:403, 1998.
204.
Miller WH Jr: Deep pyoderma in two German shep-
186. Malik R, et al: Diagnosis and treatment of pyogranu-
herd dogs associated with a cell-mediated immunode-
s psdsn
ficiency. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27:513, 1991.
tis in cats. J Small Anim Pract 35:524, 1994.
205. Monroe WE, Chickering WR: Atypical mycobacterial
187. Malik R, et al: Localised Corynebacterium pseudotu-
infections in cats. Comp Cont Educ 10:1043, 1988.
berculosis infection in a cat. Aust Vet Practit 26:27,
206.Morales CA,et al: Antistaphylococcal antibodies in
1996.
dogs with recurrent staphylococcal pyoderna. Vet Im-
188. Manders
SM:‘
Toxin-mediated
streptotoccal
and
mnol Immunopathol 42:137, 1994.
staphylococcal disease. J Am Acar Dermratol 39:393,
207. Muller RS, et al: Antibiotie sensitivity of Staphylococ-
1998.
cus intermedius isolated from canine pyodenma. Aust
189. Manning
g TO: Canine pododermatitis. Dermatol Rep
Vet Practit 28:10, 1998.
2:1, 1983.
208. Mundell ACC: The use of clofazininc in the trcat.
190. Marino DJ, Jaggy A: Nocardiosis: A lterature review
ment of three cases of feline leprosy. In: von Tschar-
with selected case reports in two dlogs. J Vet Int Mcd
ner Cl, Halliwell REW (cds): Advances in Veterinary
7:4, 1993.
Dernatology, Vol 1. Baillere-Tindall Iondon, 1990,
191. Mason KV, Willinson GT: Rcsults of trcatment of
p 451.
altypical mycobacteriosis. In: von Tscharner C, Halli-
209. Noble WC, Kent LE: Antibiotic resistancc in Staphy-
well REw (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatol-
lococcus intermedius isolated froun cases with pyo-
ogy, Vol I. Bailie-Tindall, London, 190, p 452.
derma in the dog. Vet Derimatol 3:71, 1992.
334 · Bacterial Skin Diseases
210. Noli C, Boothe D: Macrolides and lincosaimides. Vet
227. Pullen RP, et al: X-linked severe combincd immuno-
Dermatol 10:217, 1999.
deficieney in a family of Cardigan Welsh corgis. J Am
211. Nomis JM, Love DN: The isolation and enurneration
Anim Hosp Assoc 33:494, 1997.
of three feline oral Porphyromonas species from sub-
228. Raychaudhuri SP, Raychaudhuri SK: Relationship be-
cutaneous abscesses in cats. Vet Microbiol 65:115,
tween kinetics of lesional cytokines and secondary in-
1999.
fection in infammatory skin disorders: A hypothesis.
212. Oluoch AO, et al: Trends of bacterial infexctions in
Int J Dermatol 32:409, 1993.
dogs: Characterization of Staphylococcus intermeditus
229.Reinke SI, et al: Histopathologic fcatures of pyo-
isolates (1990- 1992). Canine Pract 21:12, 1996.
traumatic dermatiis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 190:57,
213. Orloski KA, Eidson M: Yersina pestis infection in
1987.
thre dogs.J AmVet Med Assoc 207:316,1995.
230. Benshaw HW, et al: Canine gramulocytopathy syi-
213a. Pak Sl, et al: Characterization of methicillin-resistat
drome. Arm J Pathol 95:731, 1979.
Staphylococcus aureus isolated from dogs in Korea. J
231.
Richard JL. 'et al: Experimentally inuced canine der-
Vet Med Sci 61;1013, 1999.
matophilosis. Am J Vet Res 34:797, 1973.
 214. Paradis M, et al: Effcacy of enrofoxacin in the treat-
232. Roccabianca P, et al: Feline leprosy: Spontaneous re-
ment of camine bacterial pyoderma. Vet Dermatol 1:
mission in a cat. J Am Anin Hosp Assoc 32:189,
123, 1990.
1996.
215. Patel A, ct al: Antirmierobial resistance of feline staph-
233.
Rosenkrantz. WS: Pseudomonas qeruginosa necrotizing
ylococci in south-eastern England. Vet Derinatol 10:
dermatitis, vasculitis, and panniculitis in the cat. Proc
257, 1999.
Annu Memb Meet Aun Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll
216. Paul JW, Gordon MA: Effcacy of a clhlorhexidine
Vet Dermatol 14:77, 1998.
surgical scrub cornpared to that of hexachlorophene
234. Rosser E]: Geriman shepherd dog pyoderma: A pro-
and providone-iodine. Vet Med 73:573, 1978.
spective study of 12 dogs. J Am Anin llosp Assoe 33:
217. Pechereau D, et al: Abccs sous-cutanes ct plaics in-
355, 1997.
fectees chez le chat: Bacteriologie et effcacite cli-
235.
Rosser Ww; Bubonic plague. J Am Vet Med Assoc
nique de la clindamycine. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp
191:406, 1987.
30:99, 1995.
236. Roth JA, et al: Improvement in clinical condition and
218. Pellerin [L, et al: Epidemiosurveillance of antiniero-
bial coipound resistance of Staphylococcus interme-
hormone treatment of immunodeficient dwarf dogs.
dius clinical isolates fron canine pyodermas. Comp
Aim J Vet Res 45:1151, 1984.
Immunol Microbiol Infect Dis 21:1i5, 1998.
237.Roth RR. James WD: Microbiology of the skn.J An
219. Petersen A, et al; Frequency and antimicrobial sus-
Acad Denmatol 20:369, 1989.
ceptibility of Staphylococcus intermedius and Pseuco
238.
Ryan CP: Selected arthropod-bome diseases: Plague,
monas aeruginosa isolated from dogs over a six year
lyme dlisease, babesiosis.
Vet Clin North Am Small
period (1992-1997). Proc Annu Memb Meet Am
Anim Pract 17:179, 1987.
Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol l4-35,
 239, Saijonmaa-Koulumics IF, ct al: Elimination of Staph-
1998.
 220. Phillips WE, Kloos WE: Identification of coagulase-
inent with fusidlic acid. J Small Anim Pract 39:341,
posilive Staphylococcus intermedius and Staphylococ-
1998.
cus hyicus subspp. hyicus isolated from veterinary
240. Saijonmaa-Koulumies LE、 J.loyd DH: Adherence of
clinical specirnens. J Clin Microbiol 14:671, 1981.
Staphylococus internedius to canine corenocytes in
221.Philips WE, Williams BJ: Antimicrobial susceptibilty
vitro. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in Vet-
patterns of canine Staphylococcus intermedius isolatces
erinary Dermatology
y Il. Butterworth Heinemann,
from veterinary clinical specimens. Am J Vet Res 45:
Oxford, 1998, p 540.
2377.1984.
241. Saijonmaa-Konlumies LE, Lloyd DH: Carriage of
222. Pickler ME: Gaseous gangrene in a dog: Successful
bacterial antagonists towards Staphylococcus interme-
treatment using hyperbarie oxygen and conventional
dius on caine skin and mucosal surfaces. Vet Der-
treatment. J Ain Anim Hosp Assoc 18:807, 1982.
matol 6:187, 1995.
223. Piniz S, ct al: In vitro activity of fiftecn antimierobial
242. Sajonmaa-Koulumies LE, Lloyd Dll: Colonization of
agents against methicillin-resistant and methieillin-sus-
the canine skin with bacteria. Vet Dermatol 7:153,
ceptible Staphylococcus intermedius. ] Vet Pharinacol
1996.
Ther 19:118, 1996.
243. Schiefer HB, Middleton DB: Experimental transimis-
224. Piriz S, et al: Comparative in viro activity of 11 beta-
sion of a feline mycohacterial skin disease (feline lep-
lactam antibiotics against 9l Staphylococcus interme-
rosy). Vet Pathol 20:460, 1983.
dlius strains isolated from staphylococcal dermatitis in
244. Schoeb TR, Morton R: Serotal and testicular changes
dogs. J Vet Medi B 42:293, 1995.
in canine brucellosis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 172:598,
224a. Piro F, ct al: Bactericidal and inhibitory activity of
1978.
enrofoxacin and other fuoroquinolones in sinall ani-
 245. Schultz RD: Basic veterinary imimunology and a 1e-
view. Vet Clin North Ain Simall Anin Pract S:569,
21(Supp):19, 1999.
1978.
225. Plechner AJ: IgM deficiency in two Doberrnan pinclh-
246. Schwarz S, Noble WC: Aspects of bactenial resistance
ers. Mod Vet Pract 60:150, 1979.
t0 antimicrobials used in veterinary dennatologic
225a. Plewig G, Schopf E: Anti-infammatory effects of
practice. Vet Dermatol 10:163, 1999.
 i  s    e n
246a. Schwassman M: Uses of interferon. Derm Dialogue,
matol 65:532, 1975.
Winter 1999, p 9.
226. Price PM: Pyoderma caused by Peptostreptococcus te-
247. Scott DW: Canine pododermatitis. In: Kirk RW (ed):
tradus in a pup. J Am Vet Med Assoc 198:1649.
Current Veterinary Therapy VII. W.B. Saundlers Co.,
1991.
Philadelphia, 1980.
Bacterial Skin Diseases · 335
248. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1900-1980: A mono-
268. Trepanier L: Delayed hypersensitivity Tcactions to
graph. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:331, 1980.
sulphonamides: Syndromes, pathogenesis, and 1man-
249.
Scott DW: Feline derrmatology 1979-1982: Introspec-
agement. Vet Derimatol 10:241, 1999.
tive retrospections. J A1n Anim IIosp Assoc 20:537.
269. Trowald-Wigh A, et al: Icukocyte adhesion protein
1984.
deficieney in Irish setter dogs. Vet lmmunol Immuno-
250. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1983-1985: The se-
pathol 32:261, 1992.
cret sits. J Am Anim Hosp Assoe 23:255, 1987.
270. van Dongen AM, et al: Atypical mycobacteriosis in a
 251. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1986 to 1988: Looking
cal. Vet Q 18:347, 1996.
to the 1990s thrmgh the eyes of many counselors. J
271. Vilmanyi F, et al: Clarithromycin pharnacokinetics
Am Anfn Hosp Assoc 26:515, 1990.
after oral administration with or without fasting in
252. Scott DW: Bacteria and ycast on the surfacc and
crossbred beagles. J Sinall Anim Pract 37:535, 1996.
within non-inflamed hair follcles of skin biopsies
from dogs with non-neoplastic dermatoses. Cornell
centration of ciprofoxacin after oral adninistration of
Vet 82:379, 1992.
the dnug to healthy dogs. Am J Vet Res 51:896, 1996.
253. Scott Dw: Bacteria and ycast on the surface and
within non-inflamed hair follicles of skin biopsies
cies from abscesses in a cat following bite wounds
from cats with mon-neoplastic dermatoses. Conell Vet
from a dog. J Vet Diag Invest 7:154, 1995.
82:371,1992.
274. Walton DK, et al: Cutancous hacterial granuloma
254. Scott DW, et al: The conbination of ormetoprim and
(botryoanycosis) in a dog and cat. J Am Anim Hosp
sulfadimethoxine in the treatment of pyoderma due to
Assoc 19:537, 1983.
Staphylococcus intermedius infection in dogs. Caninc
274a. Webster GF: New antibioties: A dennatologist's
Pract 10:29, 1993.
guide. Adv Dermatol 11:105, 1996.
255. Scott DW, et al: Efficacy of tylosin tablets for the
275. Welsh O, ct al: Amikacin alone and in conhination
treatment of pyoderma due to Staphylocoxcus inter-
with trimethoprim-sulfamcthoxazole in the treatment
merius infechion in dogs. Can Vet J 35:617, 1994.
of actinomycotic mycetoma. J Am Acad Dermatol 17:
256. Scott Dw, et al: Further studies on the effcacy of
443, 1987.
tylosin tahlets for the treatment of pyoderma due to
276. Wermer AH, Russell AD: Mupirocin, fusidic acid, and
Staphylococcus internedius infection in dogs. Can Vet
bacitracin: Activity, action, and clinical uses of three
J 37:617, 1996.
topical antihiotics. Vet Dermatol 10:225, 1999.
257. Scott DW, et al: Ffficacy of clinlarnycin bydrochlo-
277. White SD, et al: Cutaneous atypical mycobacteriosis
ride capsulcs for the treatment of deep pyoderina dure
in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoe: 182:1218, 1983.
to Staphylococcus intermedius in dlogs. Can Vet J 39:
278. White SD, et al: Occurrence of S. aureus on the
753, 1998.
clinically normal canine hair coat. Am J Vet Res 44:
258. Shepard RM, Falkner FC: Pharnacokinetics of azith-
332,1983.
romycin in rats and dogs. J Antinierob Chemother
279. Whitc SD: Pododernatitis. Vet Dermatol 1:1, 1989.
25:49,1990.
280. White SD: Pyoderma in 5 cats. J An Anin Hosp
259. Shimizu A, et al: Genomic DNA fingerprinting, using
Assoc 27:141, 1991.
pulsedi-field gel electrophorcsis, of Staphylococcus in-
281. White SD: Systemic treatment of bacterial skin infec.
termedius, isolated frorm dogs. An J Vet Res 57:1458,
tions of dogs and cats. Vet Derinatol 7;133, 1996.
1996.
 282. White SD, et al: Felinc acnc and results of treatment
 260. Snider WR: Tuberculosis in canine and feline popula-
with mupirocin in an open clinical trial: 25 cases. Vet
tions: Review of the literature. Am Rev Respir Dis
Dermatol 8:157, 1997.
104:877, 1971.
 283. Whitney JC: Some aspects of interdigital cysts in the
261. Spring M, et al: Antibacterial activity of marbofoxa-
dog, J Small Anim Pract 11:83, 1970.
cin: A new Huoroquinolone for veterinary usc against
284.Willense T,et al: Mycobacterium thermoresistibie:
canine and feline isolates. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 18:
284, 1995.
21:854, 1985.
262. Stevenson K, et al: Feline skin granuloma associated
 285. Wisselink MA, et al: Immunologic aspccts of German
with Mycobacterium avium. Vet Rec 143:109, 1998.
shepherd pyoderna. Vet Iunuol Irmmunopathol 19:
263. Stewart IJ, ot al: Cutancous Mycobacterium avium
67, 1988.
infection in a cat. Vet Dermatol 4:87, 1993.
286. Wisselink MA, et al: German shepherd pyoderma: A
264. Studdert VP, Hughes KL: Treatment of opportunistic
genetic disorder. Vet Q 1l:161, 1989.
mycobacterial infections with enrofloxacin in cats. J
287.
Wisselink MA, et al: Deep pyoderma in the Cerman
Am Vet Med Assoc 201:1300, 1992.
shepherd dog.IAm Anin Hosp Assoc 21:773,1985.
 265. Swaim SF, ct al: Fusion podoplasty for the treatment
288. Woldehiwet Z, Jones JJ: Species distribution of coagu-
of chronic fibrosing interdigital pyoderma im the dog.
lase-positive staplylococci isolated from dogs. Vet Rce
J Am Anim Ilosp Assoe 27:264, 1991.
126:485, 1990.
265a.Toinan M,et al: Secondary immunodeficiency in
289. Von Tscharner C: Personal comimunication, Bad
dogs with enteric, dermatologic, infectious or parasitic
Kreuznach, Germany. 1988.
diseascs. J Vet Med B 45:32i, 1998.
290. Yager JA: The skin as an immune organ. In: Ihrke PJ.
266. Tomlin J, et al: Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
Mason IS, White SD (cds): Advances in Veterinary
aureus infection in 1l dogs. Vct Rce 144:60, 1999.
Dermatology, Vol 2. Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1993,
p3.
dog: Diagnosis of seplicemia by microscopic evalua-
291. Yowvich JC, Read RA: Nasal actinornyces infection in a
tion of blood. J Am Anim Hosp Assox 26:359, 1990.
cat. Aust Vet Practit 25:114, 1995.
Chapter
Fungal Skin Diseases
· CUTANEOUS MYCOLOGY
only a few have the ability to cause disease in animals. The great majority of fungi are
reported to be aniznal pathogens.
A mycosis (pl. mycoses) is a disease caused by a fungus. A dermatophytosis is an
infection of the keratinized tissues, claw, hair, and stratum comeum that is caused by a
species of Microsporum, Trichophyton, or Epirdermophyton. These organisms—dermato-
phytes -are unique fungi that are able to invade and maintain themselves in keratinized
tissues. A derrmatomycosis is a fungal infection of hair, claw, or skin that is caused by a
nondermatophyte, a fungus not classifed in the genera Microsporum, Trichophyton, or
Epidermophyton.
 Dermatophytosis and dermatomycosis are different clinical entities. Fungi, however,
are not nearly as common a cause of skin disease as supposed; inany dermatoses are
misdiagnosed as "fungus infections" on the basis of clinical presentation. On the other
hand, many true fungal infections are probably not diagnosed because of the variability of
clinical presentations.
General Characteristics of Fungi
The term fungus includes yeasts and molds. The kingdom of Fungi is recognized as one
of the five kingdoms of organisms. The other four kingdoms are Monera (bacteria and
blue-green algae), Protista (protozoa), Plantae (plants), and Aniralia (animals).1-3. 9. 10
Fungi are eukaryotic achlorophyllous organisms that may grow in the form of a yeast
(unicellular), a mold (multicellular-filarmentous), or both. The cell walls of fungi consist of
chitin, chitosan, glucan, and mannan and are used to distinguish the fungi from the
 Protista. Unlike plants, fungi do not have chlorophyll. The kingdom of Fungi contains five
divisions: Chytridomycota, Zygomyeota, Basidiomycota, Ascornycota, and Fungi Imperfecti
or Deuteromycota.
Fungi have traditionally been identified and classified (1) by their method of produc-
ing conidia and spores, (2) by the size, shape, and color of the conidia, and (3) by the
colony and sometimes by physiologic characteristics). Thercfore, it is important to under-
stand the terms that describe these characteristics.
A single vegetative flainent of a fungus is a hypha. A number of vegetative flaments
are called hyphae, and a mass of hyphae is known as a mycelium. Hyphae are septate if
they have divisions between cells or sparsely septate if they have many nuclei within a
cell. This latter condition is known as cenocytic. The term conidlium (pi. conidia) should
Aeuoas so  un io pndod enxs ue o uo psnq
organisms. A conidiophore is a simple or branched myceliun bearing conidia or conidi-
ogenous cells. A conidiogenous cell is any fungal cell that gives rise to a conidium.
(Moderm taxonornists also may use sexual reprodnction charactcristics and biochemical and
immunologic methods for identification.) There are six major types of conidia: blastoco-
336
Fungal Skin Diseases · 337
nidia, arthroconidia, annelloconidia, phialoconidia, poroconidia, and aleuriconidia. More
detailed information about fungal taxonomy can be found in other texts. 1-3. 9. 10
 Changes in the scientifc names resulting from recent taxonomic studies have caused
somc confiusion regarding the names of pathogenic fungi. Soine disease names have been
based on geographic distribution or have been created by the indiscriminate lumping
together of dissimilar discases. We attempt to name diseases on the basis of a single
distribution and current taxonomy. Mycotic diseases arc divided into three categories:
superficial, subcutaneous, and systemic. The first category contains the most common
fungal diseases in veterinary dermatology.
Characterization of Pathogenic Fungi
Fungi that are pathogennic to plants are distributed throughout all divisions of fungi, but
those that are pathogenic to animals are found primarily in the Fungi Imperfecti and the
Ascomycota.1-3.9.10
A ycast is a unicellular budding fungus that forms hlastoconidia, whereas a mold is a
flamentous fungus. Some pathogenic fungi, such as Histoplasma capsulatun, Coccidioides
immitis, Sporothrix schencki, and Blastomyces dermatitidis, are dimorphic. Dimorphic
fungi are capable of existing in two different morphologic forms. For example, at 37°℃
(98.6°F) in enriched media or in vivo, B. dermatitidis exists as a yeast, but at 30°℃ (86°F)
it grows as a mold. C. immitis is unique in that at 37°C (98.6°F) or in tissue, spherules
containing cndospores are formed. Some fungi such as Aspergillus forin true hyphae in
fungal growth in tissue is the presence of granules (grains) that are organized masses of
hyphae in a crystalline or amorphous matrix. These granules are characteristic of the
mycotic infection mycetoma and are thc result of interaction between thc host tissue and
the fungus.
At one time, numerous fungi were thought to he pathogens. Today, with the in-
creased use of broad-spcctrum antibiotics and immunosuppressive therapy, the presence
of chronic immunosuppressive diseases (e.g., feline leukermia virus [FeLV] and feline
immunodeficiency virus [FIV] infections), and improved mycologic techniques, many fumgi
source, (2) number of colonies isolated, (3) species, (4) whether the fungus can be
repeatedly isolated, and most important (5) the presence of fungal elemcnts in the tissue.
A fumgus isolated from a normal sterile site, such as a biopsy specimen, warants
a y ans  w posi sn as p  ud e se s r
skin, where it may be an airborne contaminant. The nuimber of colonies isolated should
influence the decision as to whether an organism is a contaminant or a pathogen. One
isolated colony of Aspergillus may have resulted from an airborne conidium that Hoated
into a plate, whereas a Petri dish filed with Aspergillus fumigatus could represent a
 pathogen. Colonies that are not visible on the streak line of the agar should be considered
contaminants. Certain species of fungi are definitely recognized as pathogens, however, so
dermatitidis, H. capsulatum, C. immitis, and Cryptococcus neoformans. Another indication
s ae  aros aaa aq  sg s a  si ad p r
 In order to confirm that a fungus is a cause of a mycosis, the fungal structures observed
in tissue or a direct smear must correlate with the fungus identified in culture.
Although gross colonies of dermatophytes are never black, brown, or green, organisns
 in fungal cultures are properly identified hy medical laboratory clinicians who have exper-
tise in such matters. Detailed information on the cultural growth of three common
dernatophytes (Microsporum canis, Microsporum gypseum, Trichophyton mentagrophytes)
and commonly isolated fungal contaminants is available in other texts.i. 2. 9. 10
338 · Fungal Skin Diseases
● Table 5-1
SAPROPHYTIC FUNGI ISOLATED FROM THE
HaIRCOaT AND SKIN Of NORMaL
DoGS AnD CatS
Ahsicdia
Cephalosporium
Geotrichum
Rhlzopus
Acrenomiur
Chaetoniumn
Gliocladium
Rhodotorula
Alternaria
Chrysosporium
Gymnascella
Scopulariopsis
Anixiopsis
Cladosporium
Malassezla
Stermphylium
Arthrinium
Diheterospora
Malbranchea
Trichocladium
Arthroderna
Doratomyces
Mucor
Trichoderma
Aspergillus
Drechslera
Puecilornyces
Trichosporon
Aureobasidium
Epicoccum
Penicillium
Trichothecium
Beauveria
Fusarium
Pestalotia
Ulocladlium
Botrytis
Geomyces
Phoma
Verticilliam
Candida
NORMAL FUNGAL MICROFLORA
Dogs and cats harbor many saprophytic molds and yeasts on their haircoats and skin
 j ss a s   g sn fo  s a (ii )
naria, Aspergillus, Aureobasidium, Chrysosporium, Cladosporium, Mucor, Penicillium, and
Alternaria, Aspergillus, Chrysosporium, Cladosporium, Mucor, Penicillium, Rhodotorula,
repeated transient contamination by airborne fungi or by fungi in soil. Cats infected with
FeLV and/or FIV have a greater diversity of fungi isolated from their skin and mucosal
surfaces.13a
 Dermatophytes are also isolated from the haircoats and skin of normal dogs and cats.*
 It is likely that dermatophytes isolated from normal dogs and cats—such as M. gypseum,
T. mentagrophytes, Trichophyton rubrum, Trichophyton terrestre—simply represent re-
cent contamination from the environment. For instance, it is not unheard of to isolate a
for a skin disease (e.g., pododermatitis) wherein these dermatophytes are playing
no
pathogenic role. This is particularly true in outdoor animals. Dermatophytes, especially M.
Greece.?4 In one study, anthropophilic dermatophytes were isolated from about 10% of
the stray cats in various animal shelters, indicating that cats can mechanically carry human
 pathogens.6 M. canis, however, is undeniably present as a persistent infection in many
asymptomatic or inapparently infected cats. 1
Culture and Examination of Fungi
Proper specimen collection, isolation, culture, and identification are necessary to deter-
mine the cause of a fungal infection. Detailed information on these important techniques
is presented in Chapter 2.
· sUPerFICIaL MYcoSEs
The superficial mycoses are fungal infections that involve superficial layers of the skin,
hair, and claws. The organisms may be dermatophytes such as Microsporum and Tricho-
phyton, which are able to use keratin. However, other fungi such as Candida (Monilia)
*Scc references 13, 15, 24, 26, 49, 65, 68, 88-90.
↑See references 13, 15,26,43, 65,68,88.90
Fungal Skin Diseases · 339
 Malassezia (Pityrosporum). and Trichosporon (piedra) may also produce superficial
mycoses.
Dermatophytosis
CAUSE ANDPATHOGENESIS
The dermatophytcs that most frequently infect animals are Microsporurn and Trichophy-
ton. These genera can be divided into three groups on the basis of natural habitat:
 geophilic, zoophilic, and anthropophilic. Geophilic dermatophytes, such as M. gypseum,
normally inhabit soil, in which they decormpose keratinous debris. Zoophilic dermato-
phytes, such as M. canis, Microsporun distortum, and Trichophyton equinum, have be-
 come adapted to animals and are only rarcly found in soil. Anthropophilic dermatophytes,
such as Microsporum audouini, have become adapted to humans and do not survive in
soil.
however, great variation in the proportion in which these three fungi occur in different
 parts of the world.* The incidence and prevalence of dermatophytosis vary with the
climate and natural reservoirs. In a hot, humid climate, the incidence is higher than in a
cold, dry climate. In one study, there was a strong positive correlation between the
frequency of isolation of M. canis and higher relative humidity.* M. canis was isolated
from 4% of the cats in various animal shelters in the southeasterm United States (Florida)
but in none of the shelter cats sarmpled in the northern United Statcs (Wisconsin).cs
The frequeney of isolating M. canis from shelter cats is significantly correlated with
d
coat of normal dogs living in urban areas, whereas M. gypseum, T. mentagrophytes, and T.
terrestre were the most conmonly isolated from the hair coat of normal dogs living in
rural areas.24 It has been reported that the seasonal incidence of dermatophytosis in dogs
evident in Spain27 or the United Kingdom.8a The incidence may also depend on the
climate and on the amount of time the animal spends outdoors and thus is more exposed
In general, the incidence for dogs in the northern hemisphere can be surmmarized as
follows: (1) M. canis is high in the period from October to February and low from March
y mol pue iaqwaaon on Anf woy poad a ui yay si unasdhe w (7) raquadog o
December to June, (3) T. mentagrophytes is present all year, with a peak occurring in
 November and December. In general, the incidence for cats can be summarized as
follows: (1) M. canis varies little all year, (2) M. gypseum and T. mentagrophytes are
seldom reported in cats, but a slight increase imay occur during the summer and fall
months. Other fiungi reported to cause dermatophytosis in cats and dogs are listed in
Table 5-2. Rarely, dermatophytosis in dogs and cats is caused by simultaneous infection
with two different fungi.20. 21.25
Dermatophytes are transmitted by contact withi infected hair and scales or fungal
elements on animais in the environment, or on fomites3 4.6 Combs,brushes, clipes,
bedding, transport cages, and other paraphernalia associated with the grooming, move-
ment, and housing of animals are all potcntial sources of infection and rc-infection. M.
no n s gs   sa    o aq  ss
and multiple-cat househoids nay introduce organisms.66 The source of M. canis infections
*See references 13. 24, 26, 27, 29, 49, 87-89.
340 · Fungal Skin Diseases
● Table 5-2
 DerMatophYtes IsolateD frOM
DoGS and Cats
··......................
DERMATOPHYTE
HOST*
SOURCE
Epidermophytonfoccosum
B
A
Microsporum audouinii (M. langerwnii, M. ricalieri)
B
M.canis (M.equinum, M.felineum, M.lanosum, M.obesum)
B
7
M. cookei
B
5
M. distortun
8
M.equinam
D
Z
M.ferrugineum
D
A
unanfW
B
B
G
M.nanum
B
M. perstcolor
B
Z
M. vanbreuseghemii
B
G
Trichophytonajelloi (Keratinomyces ajeli)
B
G
T.equinum
B
Z
T.erirnacei(T.mentagrophytes var,erinacei)
B
Z
T. gallinae (M. gallinoe, A. gallinae)
B
Z
T.megninii
B
T. mentagrophytes (T. asteroides, T. canimum, T. felineum, T. granalosum.
B
Z
T. gypseum, T. quinckeanun)
T.rubrum (T. malticolor, T. purpureum)
B
A
T. schoenleini (A. schoenleini)
B
T.sini
D
Z,G
T. terrestre
B
G
T. tonsurans (T. accuminatum, T. cerebriforme, T. crateriforme, T. epilans,
B
A
T.fumatum,T.plicate,f. sabouraudi,T.sulfureum)
T. verrucosum (T. alhum, T. discoides, T. faviforme, T. ochraceum)
B
Z
T. ciolaceum (T. glabrum, T. kagewuense, T. vinosum)
B
"B = dog and cat; D = dog.
fA = anthropophilie; G = gcophilie; Z = zoophilic.
identification of the fungal species or subspecies. For example, most T. mentagrophytes 
infections are associated with exposure to rodents or their immediate environment. M.
exposed to it by digging and rooting in contaminated areas. In Greece, M. gypseum was
isolated from 7.2% of the dogs with dermatophytosis, 4% of the clinically normal dogs
(especiaily the paws), and 32.6% of the soil samples."4 However, rooting did not seem to
Microsporum persicolor is a natural resident and occasional pathogen of mice and voles,
and contact with these rodents (hunting. rural animals) is the source of infection.
 by contact with infected humans. Hair shiafts containing infectious arthrospores may
remain infectious in the environment for many months-—for example, up to 18 months in
the case of M. canis.13. 43 66. 90 The foors of 50 private veterinary clinics were cultured,
and M. canis, T. terrestre, M. gupseum, and T. mentagrophytes were grown from 30%,
22%, 10%, and 4% of them, respectively.53 Thus, the veterinarian's clinic could bc the
source of infection!
       o     
yielded conficting results, with positive cultures in 0% to 36% of cats attending veterinary
clinics, 0% to 27% of healthy pet cats, 6% to 35% of pet cats at cat shows, and 0% to
88% of stray cats.° Such differences presumably relate to differences in environment and
*See references 13, 26, 27, 37, 40, 63, 68, 88, 90.
Fungal Skin Diseases * 34I
carriage of arthrospores and hyphae on the haircoat, acquired cither directly from an
infected cat or indircctly from a contaminatcd environment.
When an animal is exposed to a derrmatophyte, an infection may be established.
Mechanical disruption of the stratum cormcum appears to be important in facilitating the
and endothrix infections. The ectothrix fungi produce masses of arthrospores on the.
surface of hair shafts, whereas endothrix fingi do not. Fungal hyphae invade the ostium of
hair follicles, proliferate on the surfacc of hairs, and migrate downward (proxinally) to the
hair bulb, during which time the fungus produces its own keratinolytic enzyrnes (kerati-
 s       r  n  ae  s
keratogenous zone (Adamson's fringe) is reached. At this point, the fungus either estah-
lishes an equilibrium between its downward growth and the production of keratin or it is
expelled.
 Spontaneous resolution occurs when infected hairs enter the telogen phase or if an
 infammatory reaction is incited. When a hair enters telogen, keratin production slows and
 stops; because the dermatophyte requires actively growing hairs for survival, fungal growth
also slows and stops. Infectious arthrospores may remain on the hair shaft but re-
infection of that particular hair follicle does not occur until it re-cnters anagen.
     i        
larged until 6 to 8 weeks post inoculation, then dccreased in size and healed by 12 to 14
weeks post inoculation. Toothbrush culturcs commonly remained positive unitil 1 to 2
weeks after clinical resolution. Hence, infection spontaneously resolved in 2/2 to 3
months. Intcrestingly, cats who were able to groorn thenselves typically had lesions only
on the head and pinna, whereas collared cats experienced more widespread lesions,
indicating that grorming behavior can linit the development of lesions.40 Clipping of the
haireoat of infected cats sometimes leads to a worsening of clinical signs within 7 to 10
days after clipping.7l This emphasizes the importance of skin trauma in the spread of
infection.
Cutaneous inflammation is due to toxins produced in the stratum corneum that
provoke a sort of biological contact dermatitis.6. 13, 43 Host factors are poorly documented,
but the host's ability to mount an infarmmatory rcsponse plays a critical role in determin-
ing the type of clinical lesions produced and in terminating the infection. Dermatophyte
infections in healthy dogs and cats are often self-limiting. Conversely, the relatively poor
infammatory response of most typical feline dermatophyte lesions produced by M. canis
attests to the cat's relative tolerance of this fungus and probably accounts for the high rate
it has been shown that T. rubrum and T. mentagrophytes produce substances (espe-
cially mannans) that diminish cell-mediated immune responses and indirectly inhibit stra-
tum corneun turnover.31 These effects could predispose the animal to persistent or
recurrent infections. M. canis has been shown to possess multiple enzynatic propcrtics,
which can vary according to the strain of fungus.42 7s The keratinase from M. canis is an
α-chymotrypsin-type serine proteinase.42 Strains of M. canis with α-chynotrypsin aetivity
may be associated with more infammation and pruritus.42 Trichophyton spp. can produce
 i  a  se  a  s 
As with many infectious diseases, young animals are predisposed to acquiring sympto-
matic dermatophyte infections.34956.sThis is patlydue toadelyindevelopment of
adequate host immunity. However, differences in biochemical properties of the skin and
skin scrctions (especially sebum), the growth and replaceinent of hair, and the physio)-
logic status of the host as related to agc may also play a role. Local factors, such as thie
mechanical barrier of intact skin and the fungistatic activity of sebum caused by its fatty
acid content, are deterrents to fungal invasion.
Natural and experimental infections have been shown to incite various forms of
hypersensitivityintheirhosts.13.434579.91.9M.canis containsnuerous antigensandM
 canis -infected cats have antibodies against several of these,92 When M. canis glycoprotein
342 * Fungal Skin Diseases
 antigens or mycelial suspensions of M. canis were given by intradermal injection or skin
    p  o    o sn s
hypersensitivity reactions. By comparison, the control cats did not experience delayed-type
hypersensitivity reactions and, uncommonly (20% of animals), experienced immediate
hypersensitivity reactions.32, 93
There is no correlation between circulating antibodies and protection. Cats that had
recovered from previous M. canis infections experienced either no clinical lesions or
lesions that were more inflammatory and transient (25 days) than those in M. canis-naive
against fungal infection. This is corroborated by the incrcased incidence of fungal infec-
tions in patients with various acquired or inherited forms of immunosuppression, such as
munosuppressive drug therapy (such as glucocorticoids) also lead to an increased inci-
important in the establishment and spread of dermatophytosis in catteries and multiple-cat
households.30.66
 Genetic infuences probably play an important role in the transmission and clinical
coursc of feline derrmatophytosis?7 The common belief that long-haired cats are morc
commonly affected than are shorthaired cats may reflect less efficient grooming of the
haircoat or genetic breed predispositions (e.g., Persians and Himalayans),37
CLINICAL FINDINGS
When clinicians rely on clinical signs alone, dermatophytosis (ringworm, tinea) is greatly
 overdiagnosed, especiall in dogs. In most studies of slkin diseases in dogs and cats, the
incidence of dernatophytosis is low, accounting for only 0.26% to 5.6% of all cases
versity of Sao Paulo in Brazil, where dermatophytosis accounted for about 30% of all
 s  ps s  si  i s s e
litis and demodicosis, mimie the classic ringworm lesion. On the other hand, dernatophy-
tosis is a diagnosis that is often missed because of the protean nature of the dermatologic
findings 13, 28, 37, 40 43
Because the infection is almost always folicular in dogs and cats, the most consistent
 patients may experience the classic ring lesion with central healing and fine follicular
papules and crusts at the periphery. However, signs and symptoms are highly variable and
depend on the host-fungus interaction and, therefore, the degree of infammation. Pruri-
tus is usuall minimal or absent; however, it is occasionally marked and suggests an
ectoparasitism or allergy. This is especially true with “miliary dermatitis-like” M. canis
infections in cats and Trichophyton and M. persicolor infections in dogs. In addition,
dermatophytosis may be complicated by secondary bacterial (usually staphylococcal) infec-
tion. In vitro studies have shown that dermatophytes can produce antibiotic substances
and encourage the development of penicillin-resistant staphylococci.16. 50
Dog
Dogs more ofen exhibit the clasic anular areas of perpherally expanding alopecia, scal,
crust, and follicular papules and pustules (Fig. 5-1A to D). However, less common
 syndromes are frequent enough that dermatophytosis should be considered in the differ-
*See references 17, 19, 28, 29, 40, 49, 56, 86.
Fungal Skin Diseases · 343
ential diagnosis of any annular, papular, or pustular eruption. Symmetric nasal or facial
folliculitis and furunculosis, mimickng autoimmune skin disease (e.g., pemphigus erythe
matosus or foliaceus), may be caused by a dermatophyte, especially T. mentagrophytes
(Fig. 5-2; also see Fig. 5-1E and F) and M. persicolor (Fig. 5-3). Trichophyton infec-
tions may also present as folliculitis and furunculosis affecting one paw or one leg (see
Fig. 5--1G). These infections often scar significantly.
A seborhea-like eruption with greasy scale may occur with generalized infections.
The dermatophyte kerion is a boggy, exudative, variably well-circumseribed, nodular type
gypseum or T. mentagrophytes infections and occurs most cormonly as a solitary lesion
on the face or a distal limb (see Fig. 5-1H). Onychormycosis is rarell; it is usually
associated with T. mentagrophytes and may present as an asymmetric (one digit or
multiple digits on one paw) paronychia or onychodystrophy. Widespread collarettes, ery-
thema, and scales without hair follicle involvement was produced by Trichophyton ajellot
infection in a dog.23 Severe dermatophytosis and dermatophytic pseudomycetoma with
marked lymph node involvement was reported in a young Yorkshire terrier in association
with M. canis infection.52
 In general, the nature of the dermatophyte cannot be determined from the clinical
most cornmonly on the face, pinnae, paws, and tail.
Whereas dermatophytosis is usually a disease  of young animals (<l year
 o un s se m  e   s s e  za e(o
and nostrils may occur. Extensive dermatophytosis in older dogs may be associated with
concurrent immunosuppressive diseases (e.g, cancer, hyperadrenocorticism) or inappropri-
seem to be susceptible to severe forms of dermatophytosis associated with M. canis
infection. In Europe, it has been reported that dermatophytosis occurs more commonly in
the Jack Russell terrier (especially sylvatic), Yorkshire terrier (especially M. canis), and
gypseum infections in one study.29
Cat
 Feline dermatophytosis most often appears as one or more irregular or annular areas of
alopecia with or without scales (see Fig. 5-4C and D).13, 28, 37, 4s Hairs in these areas often
appear broken and frayed. Folicular hyperkeratosis may result in exaggerated hair follicle
openings or comedoformation.The alopeciamaybe severe and widepread, acompanid
by little evidence of inflammation. Cats occasionally have more infammatory areas of
5-4E and F). The so-called miliary dermatitis, which is characterized by an often pruritic,
widespread, papulocrustous dermatitis, is an uncommon manifestation of dermatophytosis
that is usually caused by M. canis, Recurring chin folliculitis resembling feline acne or a
dermatitis of the dorsal tail resermbling “stud tail" may occur.13, 30 Onychomycosis is rarel2;
 it is usually caused by M. canis and may present as an asymmetric (one digit, or multiple
digits on one paw) paronychia or onychodystrophy (see Fig. 5-4G). Generalized sebor-
condition is usually due to M. canis.
Widespread, pruritic, exfoliative erythroderma occasionally occurs in association with
d o  (  s  so  (g  ) s 
very erythematous, indurated, eroded lesions within 48 hours that resemble eosinophilic
plaques,3 Dermatophyte kerion reactions occasionally occur in the cat, as do cases of
otitis externa due to M. canis.13 Dermatophytic pseudomycetoma has been reported only
 in Persian cats; it is characterized by one or more subcutaneous nodules that are often
FIGURE 5-1. See legend on opposite page
344
Fungal Skin Diseases · 345
FlGURE 5-2. Extensive facial dermatitis in a dlog caused
by T. mentagrophytes.
FIGURE 5-3. Chronic facial der-
matitis with areas of hyperpigmcnta
tionanddecpigmentation ina dlog
caused by M. persicolor. (Courtesy
D. (Carlotti.)
FIGURE 5- I. Dermatophytosis. A, German shepherd puppy with annular inflammatory lesions below thc cyc and cranial
to the pinna caused by M. canis. (Courtesy B. Farrow.) B, Pointer puppy with well-cireumseribed areas of alopecia and
resembling pyotraumatie dermatis on a Poodle caused by M. canis. D, Crusted folliular papules and pustules on the
bridge of the nose of a dog caused by M. persicolor. (Courtesy D. Carlott.) E, Colle with a erusting, erosive, alopecie
dermatitis on the bridge of the nose caused by T. nentagrophytes. F, Coonhound with a highly infarnmatory nasal
dermatitis caused by T. mentagrophytes. C, Severe pododermatitis in a Beagle caused by T. mentagrophytes. H, Kerion on
the digit of a dog causcd hy M. gypseun. Note the pinpoint draining tracts.
FIGURE 5-4. Dermatophytosis. A, Chronic widespread dermatitis in an old dog caused by T. mentagrophytes.
Siamese cat caused by M. canis. D, Multiple annular areas of alopecia and grayish crusts on the face of a cat
leukonychia,and onychorrhexis in a cat caused by M. canis. H, Generalized exfoliative erythroderma in a Persian
cat caused by M. canis. (Courtesy C. Wilkinson.)
Fungal Skin Diseases · 347
ulcerated and discharging. The nodules occur most commonly over the dorsal trunk or tail
base (Fig. 5-5A and B). These cats may have more typical, superficial dermatophyte
lesions on other areas of the body, or they may be clinically normal except for the
nodules.42a 52 56. 61l, 64 Lesions of M. canis infections in a hypotrichotic Rex cat were
characterized by annular areas where hairs were darker and longer than normal.&3
 In general, the nature of the dermatophyte cannot be deterinined from the clinical
Generalized dermatophyte infection is more common in cats than in dogs.13. 49 As with
Himalayans, are predisposed to this infection.27, 30. 49. s6s9
Zoonotic Aspects
 Prior to the 1990s, about 30% of all cases of Microsporum infections and about 15% of all
cases of dermatophytosis (tinea) in humans were reported to be caused by M. canis, the
vast majority of these infections being acquired from cats.13, 8s However, a 1998 report
indicated that M. canis was isolated from only 3.3% of the cases of dermatophytosis in
humans in the United States.94 M. canis continues to be the most common dermatophyte
 s n psa s yo o   s  sq  p
asymptomatic infected cats acquire the infection.3 In about 30% to 70% of all households
with infected cats, at least one person in the household becomes infected.13, 40. 55
The cutaneous changes with animal-origin dermatophytosis in humans are variable
and most commonly occur on areas of the body that contact infected animals, such as the
persicolor, T. mentagrophytes) are rarely, if ever, transrmitted from dogs and cats to
humans.
DIAGNOSIS
  r r e    s r s r 
clinical appearance of the disease. Because most infections are folicular, the primary
differentiaf diagnoses are staphylococcal folliculitis and demodicosis. In dogs, staphylococ-
cal folliculitis is much more common than dermatophytosis.13, 43. 86 In fact, the following
adage is useful regarding dogs: *If it looks like ringworm, it is probably not! It is probably
staphylococcal folliculitis." In cats, however, dermatophytosis is more common than demo-
dicosis and staphylococcal folliculitis. Other causes of annular areas of alopecia, crusts, and
variable infammation include pemphigus foliaceus and erythematosus, Pelodera dermatitis.
flea bite hypersensitivity, food hypersensitivity, seborrheic dermatitis, subcorneal pustular
dermatosis, and the various sterile eosinophilic folliculitides. Although alopecia areata and
pseudopelade produce annular areas of alopecia, the alopecic skin appears otherwise
normal Dermatophyte kerions may resemble other infectious or foreign-body granulomas,
acral lick dermatitis, or neoplasms such as histiocytoma, mast cell tumor, and lymphoma.
Dermatophytic pseudomycetoma rnust be differentiated from other infectious or foreign-
body granulomas, sterile panniculitis, and various neoplasms.
History-taking may be of limited value unless exposure is known to have occurred;
this is so because clinical dermatophytosis is so variable and the incubation period is
 n ro s u   s s o no ss p
breeding establishments, pet shops, or animal shelters may have a high incidence of
infection. Evidence for contagion—in other animals or human contacts—should be
sought,
Fungal tests are useful in diagnosis. These tests are described in detail in Chapter 2.
Wood lamp examination for fuorescence causes only certain strains of M. canis, M.
audouini, M. distortum, and Trichophyton schoenleini to produce a positive yellow-green
348·Fungal Skin Diseases
FIGURE 5-5. Dermatophytosis and yeast infections. A, Ulcerated nodules (dermatophytic pseudomyce-
toma) over the back of a cat due to Trichophyton sp. B, Close-up of lesion in A. C, Annular erytherma and
scaling with a slightly raised papulovesicular bxorder in a human caused by M. canis. D, Candidiasis in a dog.
Legend continued on opposite page
Fungal Skin Diseases · 349
color on infected hairs.13 Only about 50% of M. canis infections fuoresce." Several
important pitfalls exist in the use and interpretation of the Wood lamp results (see
Chap. 2).
Microscopic examination of plucked hairs and scraped scales may reveal hyphae and
arthrospores in 40% to 70% of the cases, and it is definitive evidence of dermatophytosis
(Fig. 5-6A) (see Chap. 2)13. 17 27, 28, 43. 66 M. persicolor and Epidermophyton floccosum do
not invade hairs and could be called true epidermophytes.13, 1,20.,22
 e isn o r   s ss p r   n 
however, because dermatophytes may he cultured from the haircoat and skin of normal
cats and dogs as well as those with nonfungal skin diseases. These dermatophyte isolates
hunting dogs and M. gypseum).
27 In addition, some M. canis isolates do not produce the initial red color change on
dermatophyte test medium.27, 6, 78 Culturing asymptomatic cats and dogs requires using a
brush (toothbrush, hairbrush, surgical scrub brush) or carpet square method (see
persicolor.
 Biopsy fndings are as variable as the clinical lesions, and they are not as sensitive as
culture.7, i3, 43 On the other hand, when the true signilicance of a cultural isolation is
questioned, demonstration of the organism in biopsy specimens is definitive proof of true
infection. Histopathologic examination is most useful in the nodular forms of dermatophy-
tosis—the kerion and pseudomycetoma. It may be impossible to culture the organism in
such cases by collecting hair and scales. The most comrmon histopathologic patterns
observed in dermatophytosis are (l) perifolliculitis, folliculitis, and furunculosis (see Figs.
5-6B, 5-7, and 5-8), (2) hyperplastic or spongiotic superficial perivascular or interstitial
dermatitis with prominent parakeratotic or orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis of the epidermis
and hair follicles, and (3) intraepidermal pustular dermatitis (suppurative, neutrophilic
epidermitis). When hair folicles are serially damaged by necrotizing and pyogranuloma-
tous infammation (the “domino effect") (see Fig. 5-8), dermatophytosis is the most likely
diagnosis, and every hair shaft must be inspected for the presence of fungal hyphae and
arthroconidia, which are often sparse in number.
In cats, M. canis infections may be associated with a hydropic interface folliculitis/
dermatitis pattern wherein fungal elements are few (Fig. 5-9). In M. persicolor infections,
fungal hyphae are found only in the surface keratin (Fig. 5-10)is. 29 Dermatophytic
od n sn n  u  p si e
tous panniculitis and dermatitis wherein the fungus is present as broad (25 to 4.5 uan),
hyaline, septate hyphae, chainlike pseudohyphae, and large (12 μm) chlamydospore-like
cells within granules (pseudogranules) (Figs. 5-11, 5- 12, and 5- 13).
In dogs with Trichophyton spp. infection, the reaction pattern can include marked
epidernal and/or follicular acantholysis with or without concurrent lichenoid interface
*See refcrcnces 9, 13, 17, 28, 38, 56, 66, 89.
Field.）E,Candidiasis in a dog.Multiple whtsh gray,mucoid plaques onmarkedly erythematous interdigital sknF,
Malai drmttisNot thsyti,greasyrytheatousdermatisinaPoodle.CourtsyKMason.Mas
lichenification,and yellowish crusts inthe axilla and on the medial forearm.H,Malassezia dermatitis in interriginous areas
of an English bulldog. Note moist, erythematous, alopecic dermatitis of the ventral neck.
350 · Fungal Skin Diseases
B
FIGURE 5-6. A, M. canis-infected dog hair in mineral oil. Anatomy of hair is destroyed and
arthroconitlia are numerous. B, Folienlarly oriented inflammation in a cat with dernatophytosis.
dermatitis, thus being easily confused with pemphigus erythematosus or foliaceus (Fig.
5-14)23, 76. 80 In such cases, fungal elements may only be present in surface and follicular
 inllammatory, biopsy findings often reveal enormous numbers of arthrospores and hyphae
associatcd with infected hairs, minimal lymphohistiocytic perivascular dermatitis or n0
and spherical to ovoid arthrospores may be present in and around infected hairs, in hair
follicles, and within the strahim corneum of the surface epidernis. The number of fungal
Fungal Skin Diseases · 35|
FIGURE 5-7. M. canis in a cat. Note arthro-
conidia surrounding hair shaft (AOG stain).
FIGURE 5-8. Kcrion. Severe pyo-
granulomatous furunculosis. Five con-
secutive pilosebaceous units are se-
352 · Fungal Skin Diseases
FIGURE 5--9. A, Cell-poor hy.
dropic interface dermatilis associated
with M. canis infection in a cat. Pileo-
sebaceous units are not involved. B,
rou).
FIGURE 5-I0. M. persicolor in-
fection in a dog. Fumgal hyphae in
surface keratin (PAS stain).
Fungal Skin Diseases · 353
FIGURE 5-II. Subcutaneous dermatophytosis in a cat (Trichophyton sp.). Diffuse paoniculitis with
tissue grains.
elements present is often inversely proportional to the severity of the inflammatory re-
sponse.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Dermatophytosis in healthy dogs and shorthaired cats often undergocs spontaneous remis-
sion within 3 months.13 43. 5s. 71 Animais with generalized dermatophytosis, however, usuaily
FIGURE5-I2.Close-up of pannicu-
litis in Figure 5-ll. Note numerous
tissuc grains (arrow).
354 · Fungal Skin Diseases
FIGURE 5-|3. Subcutaneous dermatophytosis (Trtchophyton sp.). Nunerous hyphae with bul-
bous dilatations (GMS stain),
(but not always)58 60 66 require aggressive therapy. Even longhaired cats can undergo
(especially M. persicolor and Trichophyton spp.) in dogs does not spontaneously resolve
T. mentagrophytes infection in cats resolved spontaneously.13
a o psa o Ae sd a u on () oe an jo s 
dermatophyte infection (by the correction of any nutritional imbalances and concurrent
disease states and by the termination of systemic anti-inflammatory and immunosuppres-
sive drugs), (2) to reduce contagion (to the environment, other aninals, and humans), and
(3) to hasten resolution of the infection.1s, 2x, 3s A critical feature of clinical management is
the treatment of all dogs and cats in contact with the infected animal and treatment of
the environment. 13. 28, 30. 38, 41, 43. 6.71
Topical Therapy
Every confirned case of dermatophytosis should receive topical therapy.13. 28, 38. 41, 43. 53
pnus u g  cr'ss e sus  g) ue m e g pd st 
be gentle (using scissors or No. 10 clipper blade) so as to avoid traumatizing the skin
and encouraging the spread of infection.7 Longhaired animals should be clipped en-
of infected hairs.28, 3, 69 71 Owners should be warned that the lesions may worsen 7 to 10
grooming parlors are strongly advised against extensive clipping of infected animals on the
horne, where the environment is already contaminated. Clipping should be performed in
an area of the home/cattery/shelter that is easy to disinfect.
Creams and lotions are available for use on focal lesions, and these are typically
applied every 12 hours, to include a 6-cm margin of clinically norinal skin, if possible. A
wide variety of topical antifungals is available, and there is no particular advantage of one
 product over another (Table 5-3). For highly infamed lesions, a product containing
Fungal Skin Diseases · 355
FIGURE 5-I4. T. mentugro-
phytes infection in a dog. A, lnter-
face dermatitis with intracorneal
pus and cellular crust. B, Close-up
of surface crust in A. Note nurner-
row). C, Close-up of surface kera-
tin. Note sparse fungal hyphac
(arrow) (PAS stain).
356 · Fungal Skin Diseases
● Table 5-3
 Products for the topical treatment of
SUpeRFICIal MYCOSES
PRODUCT
INDICATION*
Spot Treatrment
Amphotericin B 3% cream, lotion
Fungizone (Apothecin)
C,M
Chlorhexidine 4% spray
ChlorhexDerm Maximum (DVM)
C,D,M
Clotrimazole 1% cream, lotion 
Lotrimin (Schering)
C,D,M
Clotrimazole 1%/betamethasone 0.1% cream
Lotrisone (Schering)
C,D,M
Clotrimazole: 1%/hetamethasone 0.3%/genta-
Otomax (Schering)
C,D,M
micin ointnent
Miconazole 2% cream, 1% lotion, 1% spray
Conofite (Mallinckrodt)
C,D,M
Miconazole 2% spray
Miconazole Spray (EVSCO)
C,D,M
Naftifine 1% cream, gel
Naftin (Allergan)
C,D
Nystatin cream
Mycostatin (Squibb)
C,M
Nystatin/triamcinolone cream, ointment
Panalog (Solvay)
C,M
Terbinafine 1% cream
Lamisil (Novartis)
C,D
Thiahendazole 4% dexamethasone
Tresaderm (Mcrck Ag Vet)
C,D,M
Shampoost
Chlorhexidine 2%
ChlorhexiDerm (DVM)
C,M
Chlorhexidine 2%
Seba-Hex (EVSCO)
C,M
Chlorhexidine 2%
Hexadene (Allerderm/Virbac)
C,M
Chlorhexidine 4%
ChlorhexiDerm Maxi (DVM)
C,M
Miconazole 2%
Dermazole (Virhac)
C,M
Miconazole 2%
Miconazole (EVSCO)
C,M
Sulfur 2%/Benzoyl peroxide 2.5%
Sulf/OxyDex (DVM)
C,M
Rinses
Acetic acid 2.5%
(Vinegar: Water)
C,M
Enilconazole 0.2%
lmaverol (Janssen)
C,D,M
Lime sulfur 2%
LymDyp (DVM)
C,D,M
C
= candidiasis; D = dermatophytosis; M =Malassexia dermatitis.
glucocorticoid in combination with antifungal agents may hasten resolution of clinical
disease. However,
, because the glucocorticoid can be absorbed systemically, it is not
recommended in the treatment of very young kittens and puppies or pregnant queens and
bitches. Clipping and spot-treatment of dogs with focal lesions is usually curative.13. 29, 43, 58
 For dogs and cats with multifocal or generalized skin involvement, antifungal rinses
(dips) are indicated. Cats that have focal lesions should also be given this treatrment
because they inevitably have or soon will have widespread to generalized infected hairs
allowed to dry on the skin. Rinses should be applied twice weekly. Lime sulfur 2% and
enilconazole 0.2% are the most effective.25. 29. 38. 41. 71. 95 Shampoos are less desirable
because (1) they have no residual action and (2) the physical act of their application and
Iemoval may macerate fragile hairs and increase the release and dispersal of infective
spores into the coat, thus increasing the likelihood of spreading the infection and of
human exposure.69, 71 T
Topical medicaments are continued until two or preferably three
fungal cultures at weekly intervals are negative.7l See page 409 for details on topical
antifungal agents.
 Local hyperthermia was reported to be effective therapy for focal dermatophyte
lesions in dogs and cats.5l However, such therapy is not rcadily accssible, it requires
chemical restraint, and it is impractical for multifocal or generalized disease.
Systemic Therapy
 Dogs and cats that have multifocal lesions, all longhaired animals, and those in multiple
animal settings should receive systemic antifungal therapy. Animals that are not respond-
ing to topical therapy after a' 2- to 4-week course of treatment should also receive
Fungal Skin Diseases * 357
● Table 5-4
products for the sYsteMic treatment of
Superficial Mycoses
PRODUCT
DOSE (mg/kg)
INTERVAL
Griseofulvin
Microsized*
25-60
q12h
Ultramicrosizedt
2.5-15
q12h
Fluconazolet
10-20
Itraconazole{
10
q24h
20
q48h
Ketoconazole
10
q24h
20
"Fulvicin U/F (Schcring).
+Gris-PEG (Herbert).
Diflucan (Roerigy)
Sporanox (Janssen).
[Nizoral (Janssen).
 as s po   s   e e(  a os
frequency protocols vary widely. Side effects are uncommon and generally mild in dogs;
they may be more common and potentially sevcrc in cats, however, Anecdotal reports
indicate that Persians, Himalayans, Siamese, and Abyssinians may be predisposed to side
effects3041.6butwehavenotexerienced thisideffcts areesecially severe incts
with FIV infection, so griseofulvin probably should be avoided in these cats.3s. 41. 58. 66
 Griseofulvin is a teratogen and must never be used during the first two thirds of preg-
nancy. It is advisable to not use recently treated males for breeding.? See page 410 for
 details concerning the use of griseofulvin in dogs and cats.
Ketoconazole is effective in the treatment of dermatophytoses in dogs and
cats. 3, 28, 29, 43, 58, 59 However, ketoconazole is not labeled for use in dogs and cats in the 
United States, and most veterinarians reserve this drug for cases in which griseofulvin
and a report has indicated that about 50% of the M. canis isolates from cats showed in
vitro resistance to ketoconazole,sl such concerns and in vitro findings have not been
on the use of ketoconazole in dogs and cats.
 Itraconazole is effective for the treatment of dermatophytoses of dogs and cats.28. 54,
 may be useful when griseofulvin resistance or toxicity are encountered or when animals
 cannot tolerate ketoconazole. See page 413 for details concerning the use of itraconazole
in dogs and cats.
 Ift is important to remember that systemic antifungal therapy does not rapidly reduce
 contagion and is always to be used in conjunction with clipping and topical antifungal
 m a   re     so    isg
technique, are negative,36, 71 This usually requires 4 to 20 weeks of therapy. The successful
treatment of infected claws always requires systemic antifungal agents (usually for 6 to 12
months) or onychectomy.13, 43. 58
 Dermatophytic pseudomycetorma in cats is often frustrating to treat. Lesions usually
recur after wide surgical excision, and griseofulvin and ketoconazole are often ineffective
*See references 28, 30, 41, 43, 58, 66, 69.
fSee references 13, 28, 38, 41, 43, 58, 66.
358 · Fungal Skin Diseases
cured after l0 months of treatiment with itraconazole, and another cat's disease was
controlled after 18 months.58. 6l A young Yorkshire terrier with derrmatophytic pscudomy-
cetoina with multiple lymph node involvement associated with M. canis infection did not
respond to griseofulvin, ketoconazole, or itraconazole.52
Anecdotal reports indicate that terbinafine is effective and safe for the treatment of
dermatophytosis in dogs and cats (see page 415 for details).
Vaccination
Fungal vaccines (lyophilized, modificd live fungus) have been successful in Europe in the
  e    s p   ssp  o m
canis vaccine (Fel-O-Vax MC-K, Fort Dodge Laboratories) was released for the treatment
and prevention of dermatophytosis in cats. To date, there is still no published scientific
information on this product, and we do not recommend it. We as well as others?4 have
received anecdotal reports from cat breetders that, when the commercial M. canis vaccine
was used, cats that already were clinically infected often experienced a worsening of
clinical signs and that allegedly uninfected cats in the same cattery "broke" with clinical
    s  s    ss
Moriello and associates70 and DeBoer and colleagues32 have conducted extensive
studies with a killed M. canis vaccine in laboratory cats. Intradermal injections produced
immediate- and delayed-type hypersensitivity reactions in cats with active M. canis infec-
tions and those that had recovered from M. canis infections but not in nornal unexposed
cats.2. 7 In placebo-controlled studies, cats given the killed M. canis vaccine had high
[n  ppod aso o rs) (in  qo s w- jo sa
derrmatophytosis when inoeulated with M. canis or when an M. canis-infected cat was
hn e ss m aa p ou asand si aran uy o  o p
kiled M. canis vaccine has any preventive or therapeutic properties!
 Chronic and recurring cases of dermatophytosis are usually associated with (l) inap-
propriate therapy, including wrong drug or wrong drug dosage; inadequate duration of
s  te n o a     a n  o a a
 in the house; and failure to treat the environment, (2) underlying diseases (e.g, hyperad-
resistant strain of dermatophyte is theoretically possible but extremely rarely documented.
Trichophyton spp. infections in dogs may be diffcult to clear with griseofulvin.76
Management of Catteries and Multiple-Cat Households
The elimination of dermatophytosis in a cattery or other multiple-cat facility requires the
separation of carriers from noncarriers, the treatment or destruction of infected animals,
and the institution ofmeasures to prevent re-infection of the premises28 30. 66 Successful
 elimination of dermatophytosis requires aggressive systemic and topical therapy, interrup-
decontamination, and the testing and isolation of future cattery or houschold members.
Such control programs are complicated by the cost of medical cxpenses, by the loss of
revenue from the sale of cats and kittens, by the time commitment and effort required,
uao si reag s a a jo uonna oy on asup suud jo rj ou aq pu
the most difficult obstacle to overcome.
M. canis is the dernatophyte involved in almost all cattery and irultiple-cat household
phytes have been responsible for cattery dermatophytosis when the cats were housed in
screened porch buildings or outdoorruns3In cateries whereM.canis infectionhasbeen
 present for over 60 days, the dermatophyte can be isolated from coat brushings of all cats,
whether they have clinical lesions or not.4s,66. 89
Fungal Skin Discases · 359
depopulation of the cattery or household, decontarination of the facility, and repopulation
with only animals that test negative on three consecutive brush cultures performed at 2-
week intervals. Most breeders reject this bocause of the loss of their gene pool. The
topical medications, systemic therapy, and environmental clean-up. The colony is isolated.
and breeding and showing are interrupted. The third option is to treat only the kittens.
tion, from Moriello's excellent article.66
Specific Recommendations for the Treatment of Infected Catteries
+ Treatment of Cats
1. Perform toothbrush fungal cultures on all cats in the cattery and all animals in the
household.
 2. Isolate any animals that are found to be free of M. canis. These animals should be
bly be found to be infected with M. canis when recultured.
 3. Isolate the cattery. Cats should not be sold, shown, or sent on breeding loans. New
4. Clip the entire haircoat of all cats, especially those of longhaired cats. Be sure that
all whiskers are clipped. Clipping should be performed in a room that is easy to
decontaminate. The infected hairs should be burmed or transferred to a plastic
biohazard bag and autoclaved prior to disposal.3s The individual performing the
to human. Clipping should be repeated cvery month until the infection is elimi-
nated.
 are preferred). Ideally, cats should he treated twice a week. The haircoat should be
kept short.
 6. Initiate oral griseofulvin therapy in all nonpregnant queens and kittens older than
12 weeks of age. Topical therapy should be continued. Monitoring complete blood
counts and platelet counts in all cats, and especially in Persians, Himalayans,
Abyssinians, and Siamese cats, is highly recommended. Many clients refuse to have
precautionary blood work performed because of the cost. Be sure to warn clients
clearly of thc potential for toxicity.
 7. The duration of treatment varies and may last from weeks to months (at least 12 to
16 weeks).3s Continue treatment until all cats are culture-negative, using the tooth-
brush technique three times at weekly intervals. False-positive cultures can occur
 in cats that are clinicaly recovered, and cured of dermatophytosis, if they are living
in a contaminated environment.38, 71
 8. If a griseofulvin-resistant strain is suspected, confrm that the client is administer-
ing the griseofulvin correctly. If so, submit an M. canis culturc for griseofulvin,
ketoconazole, and itraconazole sensitivity tcsting. It may be necessary to contact
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to locate the appropriate labora-
tory for performance of the testing.
● Environmental Decontamination. The critical role of premise disinfection in
eradication of M. canis from an endemic cattery or household cannot be overempha-
sizeds. 71 Even when a regular disinfection schedule was employed, the environment
became severely contaminated (foors, walls, all inanimate objects in room).36 This proba-
bly explains why all cats in such environments became culture-positive: They are con-
stantly being contaminated from their environment. Whether such cats are truly infected
by or only passively carrying M. canis is irrelevant because the presence of fungal ele-
ments on the haircoat is a potential human health hazard.
360 · Fungal Skin Diseases
1. M. canis spores remain viable in the environment for up to 18 months. All
nonporous surfaces should be thoroughly vacuumed and disinfected, including al
foors, walls, countertops, windowsills, and transport vehicles. Sodium hypochlorite
0.5%, when added to a suspension of M. canis arthrospores for 5 minutes, pre-
vented fungal growth on culture media.54 Sodium hypochlorite 0.5%, when added
     s g      
only after 8 “treatments."5 When 10 disinfectants were tested at various dilutions
as single applications to a surface contaminated with M. canis-infected cats' hairs
and spores, only undiluted bleach (5.25% sodium hypochlorite) or 1% formalin
were able to inactivate infected cat hairs within 2 hours.72 Enilconazole was effec-
tive within 8 hours.72 When 14 disinfectants were repeatedly applied to isolated M.
canis-infected cats' hairs, stabilized chlorine dioxide (Oxygene, Oxyfresh USA,
Spokane, WA), glutaraldehyde and quaternary ammonium chloride (GPC 8, Solo-
mon Industries, Cocoa, FL), potassium monoperoxysulfate (Virkon, S. Durvet, Blue
Springs, MO), and a 0.525% sodium hypochlorite were the most effective.72 Undi-
luted bleach is corrosive and irritating and cannot be safely used in homes or
catteries. Because of its human health hazards, formalin solution is not recom-
mended for routine use in disinfecting premises. Enilconazole sprays and “foggers"
have beenused successfullyinEuroe28
2. Destroy all bedding, rugs, brushes, combs, and the like.
3. Rugs that cannot be destroyed or removed should he washed with an antifungal
 sso      r    
cleaning of carpets has been recommended as a method of decontamination. To
lill fungal spores, the temperature of the water being forced into the carpets must
be at least 43.3°C (1l0°F). Five do-it-yourself machines were tested to determine
whether this was possible. To reach a temperature of 43.3°C (110°F) at the carpet
level, the water charmber had to be illed with water exceeding 76.6°C (170*F). In
a household situation, achieving this required boiling water to reach this tempera-
ture. Unfortunately, the temperature of the water rapidly cooled in the clean water
reservoir, and within 15 minutes of flling the chamber, the temperature of the
    s  u  o   q 
of carpets may therefore not be a reliable method of killing M. canis unless an
antifungal disinfectant such as chlorhexidine or sodium hypochlorite is added to the
water.
4. All heating and cooling vents should be vacuuned and disinfected. Fumaces
should be cleaned with high-power suction equipment by a commercial company.
Furmace filters should be changed weekly.
5.
The cattery should be vacuumed daily, preferably twice daily. Do not use fans.
6. Cages should be disinfected daily.
7.
 Remind the cattery owner to disinfect all portable cages, automobiles, and so forth.
8. Do not let the cats roam freely in the house or cattery.
● Treatment of Kittens Only. In some situations, a cattery owmer may be unable or
unwilling to treat the entire cattery. If the owner is interested only in producing kittens
that are not infected with M. canis, an alternative strategy is available. Although this
strategy is not ideal, it is a reasonable alternative to depopulation and to the sale of M.
canis -infected kittens to the public.
1. Isolate breeding and pregnant queens from the remainder of the cattery.
2. Clip the haircoat of the queens.
 3. Treat the qucens topically with lime sulfur or enilconazole dips twice weekly.
4. After the kittens are born, begin oral griseofulvin therapy in queens. Although
griseofulvin is contraindicated in pregnant quecns, some feline practitioners have
routinely begun administering griseofulvin during the last week of pregnancy and
have not observed any ill effects.
5. Wean the kittens as soon as possible, preferably by 4 weeks of age, and isolate
Fungal Skin Diseases * 36I
them from all other cats. Some cattery owners choose to separate the kittens from
the queens at birth and to raise them in isolation.
6. When the kittens are 4 weeks of age, culture all of them with a sterile toothbrush,
have been reported to be safe in young kittens. If the fungal culture indicates that
the kittens are infected, begin oral griseofulvin therapy. Oral griseofulvin is not
recommended for use in kittens less than 12 weeks of age, although there is no
specific product label contraindication to this practice; it has, however, bcen used
in kittens as young as 6 to 8 weeks of age without any ill effects, 13, 2x The potential
for griseofulvin toxicity should be thoroughly explained to the owmer.
7. Kittens should not be sold until at least one, and preferably two, negative fungal
cultures have been obtained.
● Monitoring Response to Therapy. Response to therapy in both cats and kittens
is best monitored via fungal culturing. The toothbrush culturing technique is recom-
mended. It is critical that the brushing he aggressive during this period. During treat-
 ment, the number of infective spores decreases, and if the individual sampling is not
Wood lamp to monitor therapy because this device is much less reliable than culturing.
● Preventive Measures. The prevention of the introduction or re-introduction of M.
canis into a cattery requires the isolation of any new cats, the isolation of cats returning
from shows or breeding loans, and periodic culturing of the entire colony. Cats entering
or re-entering the cattery should be cultured for M. canis and kept in isolation until the
results are obtained. It is suggested that these cats be dipped or washed with one of the
 previously mentioned products during this isolation period to minimize contamination of
the cattery in the event that they are infected. It is dificult to decontaminate the
environment, and re-infection is possible. Ideally, there should be no visitors to the cattery
so that introduction of the organism from clothing or other fomites can be prevented.
Cat shows present a tremendous threat to an M. canis--free cattery because it is
extremely difficult to prevent re-infection and to prevent exposure to spores.3s The cats
should be groomed in an area free of other cats, if possible, and no grooming equipment
from other exhibitors should be used. The cat carriers should be covered when cats are
not being exainined by the judges.
Candidiasis
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Candida spp. yeasts are normal inhabitants of the alimentary, upper respiratory, and
Candida parapsilosis, are isolated from the ears, nose, oral cavity, and anus of clinically
normal dogs and dogs with candidiasis.97105Candida tropicalis, Candida pseudotropicalis,
Candida krusei, Candida stellatoidea, and Candida guiliermondi are occasionaly found.
Candidu species cause opportunistic infections of skin, mucocutaneous areas, external ear
canal, and claws. Factors that upset the normal endogenous microfora (prolonged antibi-
otic therapy) or disrupt normal cutaneous or mucosal barriers (maceration, burns, indwell-
body, further spread of infection correlates with cell-mediated immunocompetence and
neutrophil function.101. 102 Immunosuppressive disease states (diabetes melitus, byperad-
renocorticism, hypothyroidism, viral infections, cancer, inherited immunologic defects) or
 spp. producc acid proteinases and keratinases (degrade stratum corneum) and phospholi-
pases (penetration of tissues).102
 Candidiasis has been reported under the following names in earlier literature: candi-
dosis, moniliasis, and thrush.
362 · Fungal Skin Diseases
CLINICAL FINDINGS
Dog
Candidiasis is a rare disease with a distinct predilection for mucous membranes (see Fig.
 5-5D), mucocutaneous junctions, or areas in which moisture may persist and macerate
the skin, such as the exteral ear canal and lateral pinnae, intertriginous areas, the
clawbed,and interdigital areas (see Fig.55E）.97,0-102Pruritusmay be intense.102 On
mucous membranes, the lesions appear as foul-smelling, nonhealing ulcers covered with
thick, whitish gray plaques with erythematous borders.13. 102 On the skin, lesions
are initially papular and pustular and evolve into oozing erythematous plaques and
ulcers.90. 100, 102, 104
 Candida infection should always be suspected in a dog with erythema and oozing
 affecting one or two paws when there has been no response to antibiotics and glucocorti-
coids.99 Solitary or locally grouped lesions may resemble pyotraumatic dermatitis or staph-
ylococcal infection.0015 In two ogs,the lesions were more hyperkeratotic and crusted,
enced three nodules on the neck and lateral thighs associated with Candida zeylanoides
after injections of calcium gluconate.103 Candidiasis isolated to the clawbeds is rare.1l
 Candidiasis rarely presents as a mucocutaneous ulcerative disorder.13
Cat
 Candidiasis involving the skin is extremely rare in cats. Lesions include erythema, ero-
sions, ulcers, crusts, and oozing in intertriginous areas, paws, and mucocutaneous junc-
cles and ulcers of the mucocutaneous areas of the nose, lips, prepuce, and anus, as well as
the oral cavity, after 2 weeks of tetracycline therapy for an upper respiratory infection.8
 Nystatin therapy was curative.
DIAGNOSIS
The differential ciagnosis for localized forms of candidiasis includes pyotraumatic dermati-
tis, staphylococcal infection, and intertrigo. Mucocutaneous candidiasis must be differenti-
ated from immunologic diseases (e.g., pemphigus vulgaris, bullous pemphigoid, epider-
molysis bullosa acquisita, systemic lupus erythematosus, erythema multiforne), drug
eruptions, necrolytic migratory erythema, thallium poisoning, epitheliotropic lymphoma,
and other unusual infections (leishmaniasis, protothecosis, phaeohyphomycosis). Cytologic
examination of direct smears reveals suppurative infammation and numerous yeasts (2 to
6 μm in diameter) and blastoconidia (budding cell)1-3, 9. 10. 1ol, 102 Pseudohyphae may
occasionally occur.Incontrast withMalasseiapachydermatisCandida sppshownarow
ed sa s apu suug asdoa cr sug  pe as
yeasts and blastoconidia are present in the keratin of the surface epidermis and infundibu-
lar portion of hair follicles (Fig. 5-15). Pseudohyphae and true hyphae may also occur.
Candida species grow on Sabouraud's dextrose agar at 25° to 30°C. The API 20C system
 is a convenient and reliable system for identification.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
 Correction of predisposing causes is fundamental. Excessive rnoisture must be avoided.
For localized lesions, clipping. drying, and topical antifungal agents are usually effective.
Useful topical agents include nystatin (100,000 U/g), azoles (2% miconazole, 1% clotrima-
zole), 3% amphotericin B, gentian violet (1 : 10,000 in 10% alcohol), and potassium per-
 daily until lesions are completely healed (1 to 4 weeks).
Oral, widespread mucocutaneous, and generalized lesions require systemic antifungal
therapy.ol. 1o2 Although intravenous amphotericin  is effective, ketoconazole or itracona-
Fungal Skin Diseases · 363
FIGURE 5-I5. Candidiasis in a dog. Numerous yeasts and
pseudohyphae in hair folliclc. (Courtesy M. Pichler-Schick.)
zole administered orally is the drug of choice.1o1, 1o2 Therapy should be continued for 7 to
10 days beyond clinical cure (2 to 4 weeks).
Malassezia Dermatitis
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Malassezia pachydermatis (M. canis, Pityrosporum pachydermatis, P. canis) is a lipophilic,
non-lipid-dependent, nonmycelial saprophytic ycast that is commonly found on normal
and abnormal skin, in normal and abnormal ear canals, on mucosal surfaces (oral, anal),
and in the anal sacs and vagina of normal dogs and cats.13. 113, 134. 135. 133、138a 139, 146
 M. pachydermatis can be isolated from the skin of 3-day-old puppies.56 It is possible that
mucosal carriage plays a role in skin colonization and infection through licking and
grooming. Topical treatments of Basset hounds with Malassezia dermatitis produced signif-
icantly reduced population sizes and frcquency of isolation of M. pachydermatis from the
skin and the oral cavity.125 This might indicate that oral carriage refects contamination of
thc mucosae by constant seeding from a reservoir of the yeast on the skin. Alternatively.
reduced yeast counts in the mouth could have resulted from a dircct antiyeast effect by
transfer of the topical agent to the oral mucosae by licking.
Recent advances in electroploretic karyotyping have shown that the genus Malassezia
restricta, M. slooffae, and M. synpodialis) and one non-lipid-dependent species (M.
pachydermatis).106, 1os. 135, 136 Malassezia sympodialis and M. globosa have been isolated
from the slkin and external ear canal of healthy cats.l1s. 122 In one study, Malassezia spP
were isolated more frequently from cats infected with FeLV and/or FIV i3
The diversity of M. pachydernatis isolates from a wide variety of hosts was investi-
gated, and seven types or strains (sequevars), Ia through Ig, were identified.105a 137, 13. 146a
364 · Fungal Skin Diseases
The predominant sequevar, type Ia, appeared to be ubiquitous, whereas type Id was
exclusively recovered from dogs. None of the seven sequevars correlated with isolation
from healthy skin or a particular lesion (otitis externa or dermatitis). In addition, this study
indicated that the skin of a given animal may be colonized by more than one type of M.
pachydermatis. A recent shudy identifed a strain that was different from the seven
previously described and two isolates that more closely resembled M. furfur.10a
Malassezia pachydermatis is a commensal on canine and feline skin and in the
external ear canal. It is thought to have a symbiotic relationship with commensal staphylo-
cocci, wherein the organisms produce mutually beneficial growth factors and microenvi-
ronmental alterations that are mutually beneficial.ias, 146 Hence, it is not surprising that
dogs with Malassezia have increased numbers of S. intermedius on their skin12, i3 and
frequent concurrent staphylococcal pyodermas126. I3 Trypsin-sensitive proteins or glyco
proteins on yeast cell walls are important for adherence to canine cormeocytes, and
mannosyl-bearing carbohydrate residues on canine corneocytes serve as ligands for adhes-
however.119 124 Enhanced adherence of M, pachydermatis to comeocytes does not appear
to he important in the pathogenesis of Malassezia dermatitis in Basset hounds.120
Because M. pachydermatis does not invade subcorneally, dermatitis is hypothesized to
result from infammatory and/or hypersensitivity reactions to yeast products and anti-
been shown that M. pachydermatis isolated from dogs with derrmatitis and otitis exterma
produces proteases, lipases, lipoxygenases, phosphatases, phosphohydralases, glucosidase,
galactosidase, leucine arylamidase, urease, and zymosan.loa, 130, i38, 145 146 These substances
could contribute to the pathogenesis, inflammation, and pruritus of Malassezia dermatitis
through proteolysis, lipolysis, alteration of local pH, eicosanoid release, and complement
activation. Malassezia strains froin healthy dogs contain significantly greater amounts of C4
esteraseactivity.oRa
 ns  si  so sd  po su nd a
cxterna or Malassezia dermatitis were investigated by gel electrophoresis.12s A number of
protein bands were identified, and there were no statistical differences in terns of the
number of protein bands and their molecular weight values between isolates from the ear
or the skin. Neither is there any clear association between the particular protein(s)
expressed and the origin of theMalasszia strain (eg,normal versus infected dogs.a
Western immunoblotting identifed 14 bands of immunoreactivity, and there were signifi-
cantly more bands in Basset hounds with Malassezia dermatitis than in healthy Basset
hounds, Beagles, and Irish setters. 108a
Histologically, Malassezia dermatitis is often characterized by prominent exocytosis of
lymphocytes (CD3-positive) and a subepithelial accumulation of mast cells, which suggest
atopic dogs without concurrent Malassezia dermatitis did not react. In humans, concerns
have been raised over the number of in vitro cross-reactions between commercial house
 isp asoq ioy sensns a asnt zsr'infnf  pue sionxa usiane a is
cultures usually contain human skin scales, M. furfur organisms might be in the mite
cultures. However, cross-reactivity between M. pochydermatis antigens and house dust
mite or mold antigens was not found.148
Hypersensitivity to Malassezia antigens is also thought to be important in atopic
humans.140. 146 The levels of M. pachydermatis -specific IgG (by enzyme-linked immuno-
ELISA) in atopic dogs -- with or without concurrent Malassezia dermatitis—than in nona-
 Many predisposing factors have been hypothesized to allow the cornmensal M. pachy-
dermatis to become a pathogen.126, 134,13s 144 46 Increased humidity is probably important
because Malassezia seens to be more common in humid climates (e.g, summer) and in
Fungal Skin Diseases · 365
certain anatomic locations (e.g., ear canals, skin folds). Skin folds were thought to be the
predisposing factor in 16% to 28% of the canine cases in two studies.126. i34 Increased
availability of yeast nutrients and growth factors are also probably important: hormonal
alterations of the quantity and quality of sebum, “seborrheic" skin (keratinization disor-
ders), increased populations of commensal symbiotic staphylococci.
Immunologic  dysfunction—-especially   as  concerns  cell-mediated  immunity  and
secretory IgA---could play a role in the pathogenesis of M. pachydermatis infec-
tion.126. 134 1i4. 146 Chronic glucocorticoid therapy could have a precipitating role here.
blastogenic response to M. pachydermatis antigen than did Basset hounds with Malassezia
dermatitis.123 Serum titers of M. pachydermatis-specific IgG and IgA (measured by
  a s   s  e s sg  r
healthy Basset hounds and Beagles, suggesting that serum antibody responses confer no
protection against Malassezia infection.i23 widespread Malassezia dermatitis in cats has
carcinoma.132 As mentioned previously, hypersensitivity to M. pachydermatis antigens
likely plays an important role in many dogs.
Genetic predisposition would appear to be important because certain breeds-- espe-
cially the West Highland white terrier, Basset hound, American Cocker spaniel, Shih Tzu,
English setter, and Dachshund —-are at significantly increased risk for Malassezia dermati-
tis,115, 138, 146, 151
It is commonly stated that Malassezia dermatitis in dogs is usually secondary to an
ongoing skin disorder, predominantly hypersensitivity diseases (especially atopy),. kcratini-
zation defects ('seborrhea"), recurrent bacterial pyodermas, and endocrine diseases (espe-
dermatitis in two large studies had dermatoses that preceded the occurrence of yeast
infection.134. 146 However, the signifcance of these “underlying”diseases remains to be
delineated.16 In one study, the prevalence of atopy, primary keratinization defects, and
endocrinopathies in dogs with Malassezia derinatitis was comparable with that in dogs
seen for dermatologic disease, in general. 15
 It has been shown that numbers of cutaneous M. pachydermatis are sigmificantly
 greater in the groin, interdigital spaces, ear canals, and directly under the tail base of
atopic dogs than in normal dogs.1o, 110, 15 In addition, normal dogs are significantly more
than did atopic dogs without interdigital erythema.157 It is certainly possible that any
dermatosis that results in disruption of the stratum cormneum barrier- be that mechanical
as a response to pruritus or biochemical as a result of keratinization, endocrinologic, and
'snid pue suere pizasspe 0i psodxa aq on sapeoseo Aot
It has been suggested that canine Malassezia dermatitis is often associated with prior
bacteria.
CLINICAL FINDINGS
Dog
Malassezia derrmatitis is common in dogs.* It occurs in dogs of any age, sex, and breed.
The following breeds are predisposed: West Highland white terricr, Basset hound, Ameri-
can Cocker spaniel, Shih Tzu, English setter, and Dachshund.115, 138, 146. 151 The dermatitis
often begins in the summer or highly humid months, which also correspond to the allergy
season (pollens, molds), and then persists into winter. Over 70% of the dogs have
*See references 5, 126, 129, 134, 138, 143, 144, 146.
366 · Fungal Skin Diseases
concurrent dermatoses, especially allergies, keratinization defects, endocrinopathies, and
bacterial pyodermas. 134, 146
 us p  s o aa si e is  e si s
(exfoliative erythroderma) are erythermatous, greasy or waxy, scaly (yellow or slate gray).
and crusty. They often have an offensive, rancid, or yeasty odor (Fig. 5-16A; see Fig.
 5-5F, G, and H). Chronic cases can have marked lichenification and hyperpigmentation.
 Regional dermatitis occurs on the ears, lips, muzzle, interdigital spaces, ventral neck,
and erythematous macules and patches may coalesce into serpiginous tracts. Some dogs
may have a contact dermatitis-like disease, with remarkably well-demarcated ventral
distribution ("waterline disease"). Others have a papulocrustous dermatitis resembling
superficial staphylococcal infection or interdigital furuncles ("cysts"), Malassezia paronychia
and/or claw infections produce red-brown discoloration of paronychial hairs or claws (see
Fig. 5-16B)133 Occasionally, the dog is presented for so-called frenzied fts of nose and
lip scratching with the front paws. Otitis externa associated with Malassezia infection is
discussed in Chapter 19.
 Remember that most dogs with Malassezia dermatitis have concurrent dermato-
ses.126, 134, 14, 146 In addition, about 40% of the dogs with Malassezia dermatitis have 
concurrent staphylococcal pyoderma.126. 134
Cat
Malassezia dermatitis (M. pachydermatis) is rarely reported in cats; when found, it may be
associated with a black and waxy otitis extema (see Chap. 19), recalcitrant feline chin
acne, refractory paronychia, and a generalized crythematous, scaly to waxy dermatitis
adenocarcinoma.l3z Malassezia sympodialis was consistently isolated from the ears of a
group of cats with mild otic pruritus and mild to moderate accumulations of yellow to
brown cerumen in the extermal ear canals.ll8 Signs of inflammation were not present. M.
furfur was isolated from the ears in one of 33 normal cats.128a
Zoonotic Aspects
Malassezia pachydermatis has been cultured from the blood, urine, and cerebrospinal
fuid of low-birth-weight neonates that were receiving intravenous lipid emulsions in an
intensive care facility.i27 An identical strain of M. pachydermatis was cultured from one
health worker and pet dogs. These problems were terminated when handwashing proce-
dures were enforced.
DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis is extensive and includes atopy, food hypersensitivity, fea bite
hypersensitivity, drug eruption, superficial staphylococcal foliculitis, demodicosis, feline
acne, scabies, acanthosis nigricans, contact dermatitis, seborrheic dermatitis, and epitheli-
Malassezia dermatitis is often associated with one or more of the potential differential
diagnoses. Malassezia derrmatitis should be considered a factor in any scaly, erythematous,
greasy to waxy, pruritic dermatitis in which other differential diagnoses have been elimi-
soesp
antibiotics, antiseborrheic shampoos, insecticides, miticides).
The most useful and readily available tool for the clinician presented with a suspected
case of Malassezia dermatitis is cytologic examination.126, 134, 138 144, 146 Sarmples of surface
cotton swab on the skin surface, pressing a piece of clear cellophane tape onto lesional
skin several times, or pressing a section of a clean glass microscope slide on the skin.13, 134,
1M4.16 It is not clear which of these methods is the best, and each has its own benefits and
FIGURE 5-16. Miscellaneous fungal infections. A, Malassezia dermatitis in a dog, Alopecia, erythema, and
yellowish brown, crumbly surface debris. B, M. pachyderrmatis infection of dog's claw. The red-brown discoloration
of the distal and proximal claw is caused by the infection. The normal area of claw in between represents the time
period when the dog was being treated with ketoconazole. C, Phaeohyphomycosis in a cat. Truncal nodule that is
multifocally ulcerated.D,Phaeohyphomycosis in a dog.Thc uleerative dermaitis on the ventral abdomen and
medial thighs is more or less symmetric. (Courtesy K. Kwochka.) E, Phaeohyphomycosis in a cat. Numerous
greenish brown fungal lementsin granulomatous dermaitis.F,Pythiosis in a dog,Swollen paw withmultipe areas
of necrosis and ulceration. (Courtesy D. Chester.) G, Ulcerated nodules over the lumbosacral area of a dog with
pytlhiosis. (Courtesy C. Foil) H, Sporotrichosis in a Dalmatian. Widely scattered crusted plaques (hair has been
clipped around each lesion).
367
368 · Fungal Skin Diseases
FIGURE 5-17. Malassezia dermatitis in a cat. A, Alopecia,
anal region. (Courtesy D. Carloti.) B, Malassezia paronychia in a
cat. (Courtesy C. Tieghi.)
shortcomings. Superficial scrapings are reliable but can be dificult to perform in certain
areas (interdigital spaces, facial folds). Tape strips are good where the skin surface is fat
and not overly waxy or greasy. Direct impression with a glass slide is good for fat surfaces
interdigital spaces, and facial folds. In normal dogs, impression smears, skin scrapings, and
superior to swabs.109. 157 Still others have found tape stripping to be unsatisfactory.134
Results of a study on dogs with Malassezia pododermatitis indicated no statistically signifi-
 cant difference between the numbers of yeasts recovered with superficial scrapings, tape
strippings, and direct impressions.l1o7 However, swabs were significantly inferior to the
other three techniques.1w
FIGURE 5-I8. Malussezia cler-
matitis in a cat. Patchy alopecia,
scaling, crusting. and accumulations
of dark brown waxy debris on rmedial
surface of forearm.(Courtesy D.
Carlotti.)
Fungal Skin Diseases · 369
Whichever method is used, all material is transferred to a glass slide, heat-fixed (not if
cellophane tape has been used!), and stained for cytologic examination. Heat fixing can be
avoided by using a dircct stain such as New Methylene Blue. One looks for yeasts that are
round to oval or the classic peanut shape. Malassezia pachydermatis is characterized by
monopolar budding of daughter cells from one site on the cell wall, formation of a
and a diameter of 3 to 8 urm.13s Yeasts are often visible in clusters or adhered to
keratinocytes (Fig. 5- 19). Malassezia sympodialis has a more rounded, bulbous shape and
a narrower-based monopolar budding, and it is smaller than M. pachydernatis.
The full diagnostic value of cytologic examination remains to be determined. An
extensive study of normal dog skin sampled by impression smears, skin scrapings, and
swabs revealed that most specimens contained less than 10 organisms/1.25 cm2 (0.5 in2) of
sample (median value of one organism per sample).139 Another study of normal and
r s ss  s s s  s jo s p
that normal skin had less than one organism/high-power field (HPF), whercas affected
skin had less than one organism/HPF (80% of samples) or one to three organisms/HPF
(20% of samples).151
 Other investigators consider that Molassezia dermatitis is more likely when greater
than 10 organisms are visible in 15 randomly chosen oil-inmersion mieroscopic fields
(1000×) using tape strip samples,1o9 when an average of greater than or equal to four
organisms are visible per oil-immersion microscopic field,134 when an average of greater
greater than two organisms/HPF (400x) are found with any of the commonly used
sampling techniques.146
Swabs taken from claw beds revealed the following: an average of 0.44 organisms/oil-
with pedal pruritus; and an average of 7.9 organisims/oil-immersion field in dogs with
atopy, pedal pruritus, and red-brown staining of claws and/or paronychial skin.133 Further
 FIGURE 5-19. Superfcial skin scraping from a dog with Malassezua dernatitis. Numerous budding yeasts
amongthe squarnes.
370 · Fungal Skin Diseases
confusion is added by the following findings: M. pachydermatis numbers are significantly
larger (1) on healthy Basset hounds than on healthy Irish setters,120 (2) in the ears of
laboratory Beagles than in the ears of pet dogs of several breeds,57 (3) on pet Beagles
 In addition, population size and frequency of isolation of M. pachyderrmatis vary on
different body sites.l. 12l Clearly, there is great variability in diagnostic criteria used and
 significant differences between breeds and body sites.
 Skin biopsy findings in dogs are characterized by a superficial perivascular-to-intersti-
   a s    g ) d 
histiocytes, and plasma cells. Eosinophils, neutrophils, and mast cells are common. Yeasts
(  o) o jo  aoe  y  no as   
They are randormly distributed. Eosinophilic epidermal microabscesses may be visible in
about 14% of cases, and mast cells are linearly aligned at the dermoepidermal junction in 
about 47% of cases (Fig. 5-23)146 Signs of concurrent bacterial infection (suppurative
epidermitis and folliculitis) are common.134, 146
Uncommonly, yeasts may be visible in association with suppurative folliculitis and
pyogranulomatous furunculosis (especially chin and feet) (Fig. 5-24). In cats, one may see
a hydropic interface dermatitis wherein lymphocytes and eosinophils are the dominant
infammatory cells. It must be remembered that yeasts are occasionally visible on the
surface of biopsies from numerous canine and feline dermatoses and yet play no known
must always be assumed to be possibly pathogenic.
The inajority of intraepithelial and dermal lynphocytes in dogs with Malassezia der-
matitis are CD3-positive (T cells),146 Immunofluorescence testing revealed inmunoglobu-
FIGURE 5-20. Malassezia dermatis in a dog. Supericial interstitial dermatitis with parakeratotic byperker-
atosis, spongiosis, and lymphocytic exocytosis.
Fungal Skin Diseases · 371
FIGURE 5-Zl. Malassezia dermatitis in a dog. Epider-
Inal hyperplasia, spongiosis, and exocytosis of lymphocytes.
 lin deposited in the intercellular spaces or basement membrane zone in 10% and 23%,
respectively, of the cases examined.146
u si hl  e  ill oao o Ase insn si sond ss
lipid-dependent, it grows well on routine Sabouraud's dextrose agar at 32° to 37°℃.
However, some strains of M. pachyderrnatis do show poor growth on unsupplemented
media.114 An atmosphere containing 5% to 10% carbon dioxide significantly increased the
frequency of isolation and colony counts on Sabouraud's dextrose agar but not on modi-
fied Dixon's agar.l17 The lipid-dependent Malassezia spp. will not grow on Sabouraud's
dextrose agar and require alternative, supplemented media111213sModifed Dion's
SPP.
are
commensal organisims, their isolation in culture is of little or no practical diagnostic
value.107,146
UItimately, the diagnosis of Malassezia dermatitis rests on the response to antiyeast
findings wherein various surface sampling techniques demonstrated little or no yeast, yet
hypersensitivity nature of this disease in some patients.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The treatment of Malassezia dermatitis is individualized according to severity and various
dog and owner considerations. Although topical therapy is often effective, this can be
difficult in large dogs, in dogs with long or thick haircoats, in obstreperous dogs, or for
372 · Fungal Skin Diseases
FIGURE 5-22. Malassezia dermalitis in a dog. Budding yeasts in surface keratin (arrow).
clderly or physically challenged owners. A combination of topical and systemie thierapy
would be the most rapidly and totally effective.
Focal areas of Malassezia dernatitis (e.g., skin fold) may be casily treated with
d os ens o  u u p re jo ne nds p a
(Dermazole, Miconazole Shampoo), chlorhexidine 3% (Hexadene) or 4% (Chlorhexi-
Derin Maxinum), and combinations of 2% iniconazole and 2% chlorhexdine are
excellent shampoos. If the animal is very greasy, waxy, and scaly, these shampoos should
FIGURE 5-23. Malassezia der-
matitis in a dog. Iincar alignmcnt of
junction (AOG stain).
Fungal Skin Diseases · 373
FIGURE 5-24. A, Malassezia dernatitis in a dog. Suppurative luminal folliculitis and follicular keratosis. B, Close-up
of A. Note mumerous yeast bodies in follicular keratin (arrou).
be preceded by a keratolytic degreasing shampoo. Alternatively, selenium sulfde 1%
shampoo is keratolytic, degreasing, and antiyeast all in one. For stubborn cases,
twice-weekly shampoos can be followed by leave-on rinses such as lime sulfur 2%
(LynDyp), acetic acid 2.5% (one part water:one part vinegar), or enilconazole 0.2%
(Imaverol),126, 134. 138. 144 146 Enilconazole is not licensed for use in the United States.
Wherein topical therapy is unsuccessful or undesirable, the oral azoles are effec-
PO.13, 133 134, 13s, 146 Itraconazole and fuconazole are effective but expensive. Griseofulvin
 and the allylamine antifungals are not effective.
Dramatic clinical improvement occurs within 7 days with combined systemic and
topical therapy, within 7 to 14 days with systemic therapy alone, and within 14 days with
topical therapy alone. Therapy should be continued for 7 to 10 days beyond clinical cure.
An average duration of treatment wouldi be 4 weeks.
Because most cases of Malassezia dermatitis are associated with concurrent dermato-
ses, recognition and control of these possible predlisposing factors may be critical to
success and prevention of recurrent yeast infections. Additionally, concurrent staphylococ-
cal infections are frequent and require specific antibiotie therapy.
Recurrent cases of Malassezia dermatitis are not uncommon. If the recurrences are
 infrequent, they can be treated as described earlier. Frequent recurrences may require
the administration of “maintenance” topicals (shampoos and/or rinses) on a once- or twice-
weekly basis or even oral ketoconazole every 3 days.
The development of ecologically based forms of therapy and prophylaxis, such as th
use of inhibitors of the in vivo adherence process are highiy desirable2 However, given
374 · Fungal Skin Diseases
the apparent yariability anomg strains of M. pachydermatis, it may prove diffcult to find a
universal inhibitor of adherence 124. 138
 Atopic dogs with Malassezia dermatitis showed immediate skin test reactivity to M.
 pachydernatis antigens, whereas atopic dogs without Malassezia dermatitis had negative
skin test reactions.lis This, in conjunction with the lack of cross-reactivity with mold and
house dust antigens, suggests that imrmunotherapy with M. pachydermatis antigens may be
a useful therapeutic measure in the future.148
 Surgical removal of a thymoma resulted in spontaneous remission of exfoliative der-
matitis associated with M. pachydermatis in a cat.131
Piedra
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
 Piedra is an asymptomatie fungal infection of the extrafollicular portion of the hair shaft
caused by Piedraia hortae ("black piedra") and Trichosporon beigeli ("white piedra").4
White piedra has been described in a dog.159 Whitc piedra is most common in the
temperate climates of South America, Europe, Asia, Japan, and the southern United
States. The source of the infection is unknown, and direct transmission is thought to be
rare.
CLINICAL FINDINGS
White piedra was reported in an 1l-year-old black Cocker spaniel.150 The dog had white-
to-gray concretions on and encircling the hair shafts around the lips (Fig. 5-25). The
"nodules" were soft to the touch. The animal was otherwise healthy.
DIAGNOSIS
The dlifferential diagnosis includes trichorrhexis nodosa, trichomycosis axillaris, hair casts,
and various developmental defects of hair shafts. Microscopic examination of affected hairs
shows nodules up to a few millimeters in dianeter on and encircling the hairs shafts (Fig.
5-26). These nodules may result in a weakening and breakage of infected hair shafts.
diameter) may be visible. Trichosporon beigeli (T. cutaneum) grows readily on Sabou-
raud's dextrose agar at 25*C but is inhibited by cycloheximide.
FIGURE 5-25. Piedra in a dog.
White concrctions on the hairs of a
   
Pereiro-Miguens.)
Fungal Skin Diseases * 375
FIGURE 5-26. Piedra in a dog
White material encircling hair shafts.
(Courtesy of M. Pereiro-Migucns.)
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
 In humans, the condition is cured by shaving off the hair.4 Spontaneous remissions are
common.
Rhodotorula Dermatitis
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
 Rhodotorulu sp. are normnal inhabitants of the skin, ear canal. and alimentary tract.1 2 158
These yeastlike fungi are opportunistic pathogens of inmunosuppressed patients.
CLINICAL FINDINGS
Rhodotorula dermatitis appears to be extremely rare. One cat had erythematous dermatitis
with adherent brown-red, doughy crusts on the nasal planum, nostrils, bridge of the nose,
 periocular region, and one digit (Fig. 5-27).15s Rhodotorula mucilaginosa was isolated in
culture. The cat was positive for FeLV and FIV.
DIAGNOSIS
Biopsy revealed an interstitial dermatitis with ovoid, yeastlike organisms in the dermis.15s
 Rhodotorula spp. grow on Sabouraud's dextrose agar.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
A cat treated with ketoconazole orally for 4 months was still in remission 18 months
later.158
· SUBcUtaNEoUS MYCoSeS
The subcutaneous (intermediate) 1nycoses are fungal infections that have invaded the
viable tissues of the skin.1-6. 9, 1o These infections are usually acquired by traumatic
inplantation of saprophytic organisms that normally cxist in soil or vegetation. The lesions
are chronic and, in most cases, rermain localized. The terms used to refer to the subcuta-
376 · Fungal Skin Diseases
FIGURE 5-27. Rhodotorula der-
matitis in a cat. A, Alopecia, ery.
thema, and crusting on the nose and
muzzle. (Courtesy P. Bourdeau.) B,
Alopecia and erythema of digit.
(Courtesy P. Bourdeau.)
neous mycoses have been contradictory, confusing, and frequently changing. The term
chromomycosis includes subcutaneous and systemic diseases caused by fungi that develop
of the fungus in tissues. In phaeohyphomycosis, the organisrn appears as septate hyphae
and yeastlike cells. In chromoblastomycosis, the fungus is present as large (4 to 15 μm in
diameter), rounded, dark-walled cells (sclerotic bodies, chromo bodies, Medlar bodies).
 A mycetomu is a unique infection wherein the organism is present in tissues
granules or grains.3 5. 6. 10 Mycetomas may be eumycotic or actinomycotic. The etiologic
as
agents of eumycotic mycetomas are fungi, whereas actinomycotic mycetomas are caused
by members of the Actinomycetales order, such as Actinomyces and Nocardia, which are
bacteria (see Chap. 4). Eumycotic mycetomas may be caused by dematiaceous fungi
(black-grained mycetomas) or nonpigmented fungi (white-grained mycetoma). Pseudomy-
cetomas have differences in granule formation and are caused by dermatophytes (derma-
tophytic pseudomycetoma) or bacteria such as Staphylococcus (bacterial pseudomycetoma
or botryomycosis).
The term hyalohyphomycosis has been proposed to encompass all opportunistic infec-
tions caused by nondematiaceous fungi (at least 19 genera), the basic tissue forms of these
Fungal Skin Diseases · 377
being hyaline hyphal elements that are septate, branched or unbranched, and nonpig-
mented in tissues.5. 10. 233
no longer exists. Pythiosis (oomycosis) and zygomycosis are now the preferred terins for
phycomycosis. Members of the genus Pythium are properly classifed in the kingdom
Protista and in_the phylum Oomycetes. The phylum Zygomycota includes the orders
-ou oq apnou oh pasn si ssoy man au serouooug pe saon
mycosis and entomophthoromycosis.
Eumycotic Mycetoma
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
The fungi causing eumycotic mycetoma in dogs and cats are ubiquitous soil saprophytes
   o  sor s    o i  
and Central America, India, and southern Asia. The disease is rare in the United States
and Europe. The most commonly reported fungus causing eumycotic mycetoma in the
United States is Pseudoallescheria boydii.
CLINICAL FINDINGS
The three cardinal features of eumycotic mycetoma (maduromycosis) are tumefaetion,
draining tracts, and grains (granules) in the discharge.3. 5. 10. 16 Lesions are usually solitary
and occur most commonly on the limbs and face (Fig. 5-28A and B). Early papules
evolve into nodules that are often painful. As lesions enlarge, they develop draining tracts
that exude a serous, purulent, or hemorrhagic discharge. As some fistulas heal, scar tissue
develops and forms the hard, tumor-ike mass that characterizes mycetoma. Grains present
in discharge vary in color, size, shape, and texture, depending on the particular fungus
involved (Fig. 5-29). Black- or dark-grain mycetomas are usually associated with Curru-
mycetomas are usually caused by Pseudoallescheria (Allescheria, Petriellidium) boydii and
muscle, joint, or bone. Pyogranulomatous panniculitis in a dog was caused by Phialemon-
ium curvatum.162
DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis includes infectious and foreign-body granulomas and neoplasms.
Cytologic examination of aspirates or direct smears reveals pyogranuloinatous infammation
with occasional fungal elements. Fungi are easily seen by squashing and examining grains.
Biopsy findings include nodular to diffuse, pyogranulomatous to granulomatous dermatitis
and panniculitis. Fungal elements are present as a grain (granule, thalus) within the
inflammatory reaction (Fig. 5-30). The grains (0.2 mm to several millimeters in diameter)
are irregularly shaped, often taking a scalloped or scroll-like appearance, and consist of
broad (2 to 6 μm in diameter), septate, branching hyphae, which often form chlamydo-
 punch biopsies are the preferred material for culture (see Chap. 2).
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Wide surgical excision is the treatment of choice.163. 164 In some cases, amputation of an
affected limb is necessary. Any attempt at antifungal chemotherapy should be based on in
vitro susceptibility testing of the isolate.4, 164 Medical therapy is often unsuccessful. Keto-
 378 · Fungal Skin Diseases
FIGURE 5-28. A, Mycetoma foot
in a dog. (Courtesy D.'Chester.) B,
Mycetoma due to Torula sp. in a cat.
 sa nssn   s
sociated with draining tracts over the
hip. (Courtesy K. Thoday.)
FIGURE 5-29. Mycetoma due to
Torula sp. in a cat. Glass slide with
wad of hair and crust to the right,
and pus containing black tissue
grains to the left. (Courtesy K. Tho-
day.)
Fungal Skin Diseases · 379
FIGURE 5-30. Mycctoma in a dog. Note numerous tissuc grains within a pyogranuloma.
conazole and itraconazole havc cnjoyed erratic success.4. 164 Treatment must he continued
for 2 to 3 months past clinical cure.
Phaeohyphomycosis
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
 Phaeohyphomnycosis (chromomycosis) is caused by a number of ubiquitous saprophytic
fungi found in various soils and organic materials.1. 17o Infection occurs via wound contami-
 nation. These fungi have thc characteristic of forming pigmented (dematiaceous) hyphal
elements (but not grains) in tissues.
CLINICAL FEATURES
Dog
(Brachycladlium spiciferum, Drechslera spiciferum), Phialemonium obovatum,Pseudomi-
crodochium suttonii, and Xylohypha bantiana (Cladosporium trichoides, C. banti-
anum)1. 167, 70, 173, 174Solitary subcutaneousnodules, oftenuleratd,may occuroccasion-
 ally, especially on extremities. However, widespread nodular or necrotizing and ulcerative
infections have been reported.170.174. 183
Cat
 Phaeohyphomycosis is unconmon in cats. Fungi isolated include Bipolaris spiciferum
(Brachycladium spiciferum, D. spiciferum), X. bantiana (C. trichoides, C. bantianum), X
emmonsit,Exophiala jeanselmei (Phialophora gougeroti),Exophiala spinifera,Moniliella
suaveolens, Phialophora verrucosa, Alternaria alternata, Cladophialiophora sp.,Dissitimu-
lesions are solitary and affect the paw, leg, head (especially the nose, cheek, and pinna),
or trunk (see Fig. 5-16C). Slow-growing. firm to fuctuant, dermal to subcutaneous
380 · Fungal Skin Diseases
nodules are visible. The lesions may be blue-gray, perhaps owing to the pigmented nature
 of the fungi. Ulceration and draining tracts may occur. Disseminated infection is rare.170
DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis includes infectious granulomas, sterile granulomas, foreign-body
 granulomas, and neoplasms. In dogs with widespread mucocutaneous and footpad le-
sions,173 the differential diagnosis includes immunologic diseases (pemphigus vulgaris,
bullous pemphigoid, epidermolysis bullosa acquisita, systemie lupus erythematosus, ery-
thema multiforme), drug eruptions, necrolytic migratory erythema, thallium poisoning.
epitheliotropic lymphoma, and other unusual infections (leishmaniasis, protothecosis, can-
didiasis).
 Cytologic examination of aspirates or direct smears reveals granulomatous to pyogran-
ulomatous infammation. Pigmented fungal hyphae may be visible (Fig. 5-31). Biopsy
findings include nodular to diffuse, granulomatous to pyogranulomatous dermatitis and
 m g on g) pq se asad ae s aug sn (e-g ) sd
diameter), often irregular, pigmented, septate, branched or unbranched hyphae with occa-
sional chlamydoconidia and numerous round to oval, pigmented yeast forins (Medllar
bodies, so-called copper pennies) (see Fig, 5-16E).3 Although P. curvatum is a dematia-
ceous fungus,9 it was not visible in H & E-stained biopsy specimens from a dog with
35°℃, and punch biopsies are the preferred material for culture.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Wide surgical excision of solitary lesions may be curative, but recurrence at the same site
agent, but the response is unpredictable. This may be due to differing susceptibilities of
FIGURE 5-3l. Direct simear from a cat with phaeohyphoinycosis. Pigmented fungal hypha within a
macrophage.
Fungal Skin Diseases · 38I
FIGURE 5-32. Phaeohyphomy-
cosis in a cat. Nodular pyogranuloma-
tous dermatitis and pannieulitis con-
taining numerous pignented fungal
elements.
the fungi involved, and differences in the therapeutie protocols that have been used to
datc. Drugs should be chosen on the basis of in vitro susceptibility testing. The preferred
treatment would be surgical excision followed by chemotherapy.25s Ketoconazole has been
Flucytosine has been used successfully and unsuccessully, alone or in combination with
ketoconazole or arnphotericin B.170. 172. 176. 160 Amphotericin B has been used successfully
or unsuccessfully, alone or in combination with fucytosine,170, 172 176 One cat was success-
fully treated with itraconazole (given for 6 wccks bcyond clinical cure), but relapsed 2
months later.167a In hunans, itraconazole, cryosurgery, and local application of heat have
also bccn curative in some cases.4
Pythiosis
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Pythium spp. are aquatic organisms that rely on aquatic plant or organic substance for
their normal life cycle.1. 2,18s,191 They are not true fungi. The motile zoospore stage shows
chcmotaxis toward damaged plant or animal tissues. Once in the vicinity of their host, the
         s   s
 organisms then develop germ tubes in the direction of the affected tissues that allow for
 penctration and invasion. Animals become infected by standing in or drinking stagnant
water, and damaged skin appears to be a prerequisite for infection. Environmental condi-
tions are probably the Inost infuential factors goverming the occurrence of pythiosis, Thus,
most cases occur during the summer and fall in tropical and subtropical areas of the world
(especially Australia, India, Thailand, and Costa Rica). In North America, cases are re-
ported from the southerm United States cxclusively, particularly from the Gulf Coast
region.
Pythium insidiosum (P. gracile, Hyphomyces destruens) is the species isolated from
the literature: phycomycosis, hyphomycosis, and oomycosis.
CLINICAL FINDINGS
Dog
 Large-breed, male, young dogs are most commonly affected (hunting and outdoor dogs
382 · Fungal Skin Diseases
Lesions may be solitary or inultiple, and they are typically confined to one area of the
body, especially the legs (see Fig. 5-16F), face, and tail head (see Fig. 5-16G). Ulcerated
nodules develop, often rapidly, into large, firm to boggy masses with ulceration and
draining tracts. The discharge is usually a mixture of pus and blood. The lesions arc oftcn
extremely pruritic, and self-mutilation can be severe. Early lesions on the limbs may
ence of the limb. Rarely, dogs experience locally invasive (skeletal) or disseminated infec-
tion,188, 191
Cat
    s    s ris   si 
tracts on the limbs (Fig. 5-33) and ventrai abdominal areas. Other cats have large
subcutaneous masses on the distal limb with no involvement of the overlying integument.
DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis includes infectious granulomas, foreign-body granulomas, acral
lick dermatitis, and neoplasms. Cytologic examination of aspirates or direct smears reveals
ous; however, fungal elements occur only occasionally. Biopsy findings include nodular to
diffuse, granulomatous to pyogranulonatous dermatitis and panniculitis with numerous
eosinophils. Infammation is centered on foci of necrosis and amorphous eosinophilic
spaces (hyphal “ghosts") (Fig. 5-34) or slightly basophilic granular material.
Hyphae are 4 to 6 μm in diameter, occasionally septate, irregularly branching, with
nonparallel sides (Fig. 5-35). Fungal elements are most common and are most numerous
within foci of necrosis. Hyphae are often surrounded by eosinophilic “sleeves" of the
Splendore-Hoeppli phenomenon. Fungal elements stain very well with Gomori methen-
amine silver (GMS) but not with periodic acid-Schiff (PAS). Hyphae occasionally invade
blood vessels (especially arteries), whereupon thrombosed vessels may he prominent.
Pythium spp. grow rapidly at 25° to 37°℃ on blood agar and Sabouraud's dextrose agar,
and wedge biopsies are the preferred material for culture. Special water culture tech-
niques that induce diagnostic zoospore formation are time-consuming and somewhat unre-
liable,185, 1ss. 191 It is advisable to submit specimens to veterinary diagnostic laboratories,
where the microbiologist is more likely to be familiar with Pythium spp. Pythium antigen
can be demonstrated in sections of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues by an indi-
FIGURE 5-33. Feline pythiosis.
Ulcerated moclule with draining tracts
over the hock. (Courtesy C. Foil.)
Fungal Skin Diseases · 383
FIGURE 5-34. Pythiosis. Ilyphae are unstained
"ghosts" in Il & E stained specimens. (From Triscott
thiosis. J Cutan Pathol 20:267, 1993. @ 1993 Munks-
gaard Intermational Publishers Ltd., Copenhagen,
Denmark.)
FIGURE 5-35. Canine pythiosis. Numerous hyphae in a Pyogranulomatous dermatis. (Courtesy
C. Foil.)
384 · Fungal Skin Diseases
rect immunoperoxidase technique.i91 An agar gel ininunodiffusion test used to detect
precipitating antibodies in serum was negative in infected dogs.19 A recently developed
ELISA test, which appcars to he sensitive and specific, may prove to be a useful serodiag-
nostic test in the future.191
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Wide surgical cxcision is the treatment of choice, but recurrence is not uncommon,1ss. 191
Amputation of an affected limb may be necessary. The arteries in thc proxinal end of an
amputated limb, as well as the regional lymph node, shouldi be examined for evidencc of
metastasis. Because Pythum spp. do not share cell wall characteristics with true fungi.
antifungal chemotherapy agents (amphotericin B, ketoconazole, fucytosine) have heen
oomycetes pathogenic to plants, was used topically in a few dogs without success.!91
rexia).
Zygomycosis
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
nal, respiratory, or cutaneous via wound contamination. In humans, a compromised im-
factors have not been identified in most instanccs.
There are two orders of Zygomycctcs that causc dlisease: (l) Mucorales, which in-
cludes thc genera Rhizopus, Mucor, Absidia, and Mortierella and (2) Fntomophthorales,
which ineludes the genera Conicdiobolus and Basidiobolus. Infections caused by fungi from
the order Mucorales were previously called mucorrnycosis and those associated with thc
 older reports of phycomycosis in dogs and cats were likely zygorycosis.1s9
CLINICAL FINDINGS
 Zygomycosis appears to be rare in dogs and cats, and most infected anirmals have had fatal
gastrointestinal disease.18 Skin lesions may be solitary or multiple; are usually nodular,
had a rapidly enlarging raised, ulcerated lesion in the hard palate.184 Another dog had a
 nonhealing bite wound in the neck caused by Absidia corymbifera.186
DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis includes numerous infectious granulomas, foreign-body granulo-
mas, and neoplasms. Cytologic examination of aspirates or direct smears revcals pyogranu-
 ments may be visualized. Biopsy findings include nodular to diffuse, pyogranulomatous to
granulomatous dermatitis and panniculitis containing numerous eosinophils. Infamnation
is centered on amorphous eosinophil material that occasionally contains either clear spaces
-r ree odosq aus ro (ssoue, ydy) ary pus Aod susida
rial representing hyphal protoplasm.
Vascular invasion and hematogenous spread is more cormmon in mucormycosis than in
entomophthoromycosis (Fig. 5-37). Hyphae are broad (6 to 25 μm in diaineter), occa-
surrounded by eosinophilic “sleeves" of the Splendore-Hoeppli phenomenon. Fungal ele-
ments are most commonly found and are most abundant within foci of necrosis. Fiungal
Fungal Skin Diseases · 385
FIGURE 5-36.Zygomycosis in a
Bauosompou pano
(Conrtesy T. Mamming.)
elements stain well with GMS but variably with PAS. Zygomycetes grows on Sabouraud's
Biopsy specimens submitted for culture should not be ground or macerated because this
may destroy the organisn. Cyclohcximide nay inhibit fungal growth.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The susceptibility of the Zygomycetes to antimycotic agents is variable and largely un-
or debulking may be followed by chemotherapy as dictated by in vitro susceptibility tests
FIGURE 5--37. Zygomycosis in a
dog. Fungal clerments invading wall
and orcladling lurmen of subcutanieous
artery. (Courtesy T. Manning.)
386 · Fungal Skin Diseases
itraconazole (10 mg/kg q12h),184 whereas itraconazole (4 mg/kg ql2h) produced no re-
sponse in another dog.19
Sporotrichosis
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Sporotrichosis is caused by the ubiquitous dimorphic fungus Sporothrix schenckii, which
 contamination. Glucocorticoids and other immunosuppressive drugs are contraindicated in
dogs or cats with sporotrichosis.193, 195, 16 These drugs should be avoided both during and
after treatment of the disease because immunosuppressive doses of glucocorticoids have
been reported to cause a recurrence of clinical sporotrichosis as long as 4 to 6 months
 after apparent clinical cure.195
CLINICAL FINDINGS
Dog
Sporotrichosis is uncommon to rare. The disease is often related to puncture wounds from
thons or wood splinters.15. 196 This is presumably why the disease is more common
in hunting dogs.195 The cutaneous form of sporotrichosis is the most commonly re-
e  sq ps snd p su g 
crustedandalpcicareas arereentpallnthadpnaeand truk
Figs. 5-16H and 5-38A). Some lesions have a verrucous appearance. Nodules may
ulcerate or develop draining tracts (see Fig. 5-38B).
Jesions are neither painful nor pruritic, and affected dogs are usually healthy other.
wise. The cutaneolymphatic form is characterized by a nodule on the distal aspect of one
may be firm or fuctuant; they often ulcerate and discharge a brownish red exudate, and
they are associated with regional lymphadenopathy. Affected dogs are usually otherwise
healthy. Uicers and nodules affecting the nares, mucocutaneous junctions, and scrotum
may be seen, as well as papulonodular otitis exterma.l3 Disseminated sporotrichosis is
extremely rare.195, 196
Cat
Sporotrichosis is uncoinmon. The disease is believed to be acquired by inoculation of the
organism by contaminated claws or teeth from another cat.65, 196 This may explain why
the disease is usually scen in intact male cats that roam outdoors.1o5, 1o Lesions are
common on the head (see Fig.538C), distal limbs, or tail basc rcgion,1, 196 The cats
may initialy present with fight wound abscesses, draining tracts, or cellulitis. Affected
areas ulcerate, drain a purulent exudate, and form crusted nodules. Large areas of necro-
sis may develop, with exposure of muscle and bone. The disease may be spread to other
areas of the body (other limbs, face, pinnae) via autoinoculation during normal grooming
behavior. Some cats may present with a history of lethargy, depression, anorexia, and
fever, which suggest the potential for disseminated disease.i9s, 196 Although affected cats
frequently appear clinicall to have only dermatologic disease,most have necropsy evi
dence of lymph node and lymphatic vessel involvement, and S. schenckii is commonly
isolatedincuturefromnumerousnnalorgansandce9596
Zoonotic Aspects
 The zoonotic potential of sporotrichosis, especialy in cats, must be seriously considered
to humans through contact with an ulcerated wound or the exudate from an infected
injury or penetrating wound prior to the onset of the disease.196 Transmission from
animals to humans has been limited to feline sporotrichosis, presumably because
H
FIGURE 5-38. Miscellaneous fungal infections. A, Sporotrichosis. Close-up of the top of the head of a dog.
of a colle. C, Sporotrichosis presenting as multiple ulcers on the face of a cat.D,Multiple erythematos
Chester.)
388 · Fungal Skin Diseases
large numbers of organisms arc found in contaminated feline tissues, exudates, and
feces.192, 195, 19 Veterinarians, veterinary technicians, veterinary students, and owners of 
infected cats have a higher risk of infection.85. 192. 194. 196
The most common form of sporotrichosis in humans is cutaneolymphatic.4. s5. 105 A
prinary lesion --which may be a papule, pustule, nodule, abscess, or verrucous growth-
develops at the site of injury. This lesion may be painful. Most lesions are on an extremity
(finger, hand, foot) (see Fig. 5-38D) or the face. Secondary lesions then ascend proxi-
imally via lymphatic vessels. The cutaneous (fixed) form is less common.
DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis includes other infectious granulomas, foreign-body granulomas,
and neoplasms. Sporotrichosis should always be suspected in cats with nonhcaling, fight-
wound abscesses. Because of the zoonotic potential of sporotrichosis, prccautions must be
taken. All people handling cats suspected of having sporotrichosis should wear gloves.
Gloves should also bc worn when samples are taken of exudates or tissues. The gloves
should then be carefully removed and disposed of. Forearms, wrists, and hands should be
washed in chlorhexidine or povidone-iodine.
Cytoiogic examination of aspirates or direct smears reveals suppurative to pyogranu-
lomatous to granulomatous inflammation. The organism is diffcult to find in the exudates
of dogs but is easily found in those of cats (Fig. 5-39). S. schenckii is a pleomorphic yeast
that is round, oval, or cigar-shaped, 2 to 10 μm in length. Biopsy findings include nodular
to diffuse, suppurative to granulormatous to granulomatous dermatitis (Fig. 5-40). Fungal
 (-g ) sp  i a  n p ai p su a s
fungi have a refractile cell wall from which the cytoplasm may shrink, giving the impres-
sion that the organisin has a capsule. When this occurs, the organisms may be confused
with Cryptococcus neoformans. S. schenckii grows on Sabouraud's dextrose agar at 30°C;
samples submitted for culture should include both a sample of the cxudatc (from dccp
within a draining tract) and a piece of tissue (removed surgically) for a macerated tissue
culture. A fuorescent antibody test is most uscful in dogs because it may be positive
when cultures are negative.13. 195
tesy J.M. MacDonald.
Fungal Skin Diseases · 389
FIGURE 5-40. Feline sporotrichosis. Pyogranulomatous dermatitis with intracelllar yeast and
cigarbodies(arrow)
FIGURE5-41.Canine sporotrichosis.Numerous
(ast and cigar bodies (GMS stain)
390 ·Fungal Skin Diseases
CLINICALMANAGEMENT
Dog
 The treatment of choice is oral administration of a supersaturated solution of potassium
days beyond clinical cure (4 to 8 weeks). Signs of toxicity (iodism) include ocular and
nasal discharge, a dry haircoat with excessively scaling skin, vomiting. depression, and
   ps  s  ss    s
may then be re-instituted at the same or a lower dosage. If iodism becomes a recurrent
problem or if side effects are severe, alternative treatment should be considered.
 The imidazole and triazole classes of drugs may be considered for dogs that do not
 30 days beyond clinical cure. Side effects are usually mild.
Cat
Increased sensitivity to the toxic side effects of iodides and ketoconazole in cats poses a
greater challenge for the treatment of sporotrichosis. A supersaturated solution of potas-
sium iodidemaybeadinistered rallyat 20mgkgq12htoq24hwithfood5.12.195.19for
30 days beyond clinical cure (4 to 8 weeks). Signs of iodism include vomiting, anorexia,
depression, twitching, hypothernia, and cardiovascular failure. In animals that cannot
tolerate or fail to respond to iodides, ketoconazole or itraconazole should be used.5, 195. 196
Rhinosporidiosis
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Rhuinosporidium seeberi is a fungal organism of uncertain classfication.1. 197 Attempts to
culture it using conventional fungal culture media were unsuccessful; however, the organ-
ism has been grown in tissue culture.197 The disease is endemic in India and Argentina,
but North Amcrican reports have come almost exclusively from the sonthern United
States. It is thought that infection is acquired by mucosal contact with stagnant watcr or
dust and that traima is a predisposing factor.
CLINICAL FINDINGS
sneezing, unilateral seropurulent nasal discharge, and epistaxis. Nasal polyps may be
visible in the nares or may be visualized by rhinoscopy. Single or multiple polyps varying
in size from a few millimeters up to 3 cm are pink, red, or grayish and are covered with
d a ss   se s )  a d s
and they may protrude out of, or involve, the mucocutaneous area of the nostril.
DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis includes numerous infectious granulormas and neoplasms. Cyto-
logic examination of nasal exudate or histologic examination of the polyp should be
diagnostic. Biopsy findings include a fibrovascular polyp containing numerous sporangia
(spherules) having a thick, double outer membrane. The sporangia vary fron 100 to 400
Hi  sss go   e    i 
variable number of lymphocytes, plasma cells, and neutrophils are often found where
sporangiospores (2 to 10 μm in 'diameter) have been released into the surrounding
connective tissue.
Fungal Skin Diseases · 391
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Surgical excision is the treatment of choice, although recurrence 6 to 12 months after
surgery has been reorted. Sucesses have been reported with dapsone or ketoconazole
administered orally; however, the utility of medical therapy in canine rhinosporidiosis
requires further evaluation.
Alternoria Dermatitis
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Alternaria spp. are ubiquitous saprophytic fungi in soil and organic debris and a common
component of the fora of the canine and feline integument,3 9, They cause opportunistic
wound infections.
CLINICAL FINDINGS
Alternaria spp. are rarely reported to cause skin disease in dogs and cats. In the dog.
dermatologic abnormalities attributed to Alternaria spp. infection include (1) poorly cir-
tized areas of skin,19, 230 and (2) nodular, ulcerated, depigmented inffammation of the
nose (Alternaria tenuissima).1s9 In the cat, Alternaria spp. have been associated with
  ad   su    ) siod
5-38E).
DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis for superficial inflammatory disease includes staphylococcal fol-
liculitis, demodicosis, dermatophytosis, and Malassezia dermatitis. The differential diagno-
 sis for nodules includes infectious and foreign-body granulomas and neoplasms. Cytologic
examination of aspirates or direct smears from nodular lesions reveals pyogranulomatous
inHammation and numerous fungal elements. Biopsy findings include nodular to diffuse
pyogranulomatous dermatitis and panniculitis with numerous broad (3 to 6 μm in diame-
ter), septate, branched or unbranched hyphae (Fig. 5-42). Alternaria spp. grow on
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Surgical excision of nodules may be curative. Antifungal chemotherapy should be based on
 in vitro susceptibility tests. One dog was cured after 8 weeks of oral ketoconazole.199
● sYSTeMIC MYcoSeS
 Deep mycoses are fungal infections of internal organs that may secondarily disseminate by
hematogenous spread to the skin. Fungi that cause deep mycoses exist as saprophytes in
 soil or vegetation. These infections are usually not contagious because the animal inhales
inoculation are very rare, and animals with skin lesions are assumed to have systemic
infection until proven otherwise. The deep mycoses are discussed only briefy here. The
reader is referred to texts on mycology and infectious diseases for additional information.
Blastomycosis
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Blastomyces dermatitidis is a dimorphic saprophytic fungus.1. 2 9. 10. 14 23 Four elements-
moisture, soil type (sandy, acid), presence of wildlife, and soil disruption—make up
392 · Fungal Skin Diseases
FIGURE 5-42.Allernaria derma-
titis in a cat. A, Pyogranulomatous
panniculitis
 containing numerous
fungal hyphae (arrow). B, Close-up
of A stained with GMs. Fungal hy-
phae arc more obvios.
the "microfocus model” that hclps cxplain where B. dermatitidis is most likely to be
found.219, 220 Even within endemic arcas, the fungus does not seem to be widely distrib-
uted. Rarely has the organism been successfully isolated from the environment. Most
people and dogs living in such areas show no serologic or skin test evidence of exposure.
A point source where thc cxposure occurs within an enzootic area is inore likely. Blasto-
mycosis (Gilchrist's discase, Chicago disease) is principally a disease of North America, but
it has been identified in Africa and Central America. In North America, the endemic
distribution of blastomycosis is well-defined and includes the Mississippi, Missouri, New
York, Ohio, and St. Lawrence River Valleys and the Mid-Atlantic states.
CLINICAL FINDINGS
Dog
 Blastomycosis is an uncommon disease in endernic areas. Young (2 to 4 years old) male
dogs of large breeds and sporting breeds (especially Doberman pinscher, Labrador re-
triever, Bluetick coonhound, Treeing Walker coonhound, pointers, Weimaraners) are pre-
    si e       s
anorexi,weihtloss,uhing,dea,ula ds,lanss,and sds
'sd uy apu i susan us ay sisosa  soop jo os on dn
Fungal Skin Diseases · 393
nodules, and plaques, ulcers, draining tracts, and subcutaneous abscesses.23 Lesions are
usually multiple and may be found anywhere; however, the nasal planurm (see Fig.
 5-38F), face, and clawbeds (see Fig. 5-38C) appear to be preferred sites. Calcinosis cutis
been instituted 22a
Cat
 Blastomycosis is very rare in cats. Dyspnea, draining skin lesions (especially the digits) (sec
 Fig. 5-51A), and weight loss are the most prominent clinical signs.8. 23 Siamese cats may
 be predisposed.
DIAGNOSIS
A history of travcl to an cndemic area should increase the clinician's index of suspicion.
 Cytologic exainination of aspirates or direct smears is often diagnostic, revealing suppura-
like fungi (5 to 20 μin in diameter) that show broad-based budding and have a thick,
refractile, double-contoured cell wall (Fig. 5-43). Biopsy fndings include nodular to
dliffuse, suppurative to pyogranulomatous to granulomatous dernatitis wherein the fungus
is usually found easily (Fig. 5-44). Culture of cytologic specimens is not recommended
for in-hospital laboratories because of the danger of infection from the mycelial form of
the organisms. Only after the organisms have been scarchcd for extcnsively should
 serologic testing (agar-gcl immunodiffusion, ELISA) be used to help establish a diag-
nosis.2i9.223
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
 All aninals with clinical blastomycosis should be treated because spontaneous remission is
rate) may be effective alone, the sequential administration of these two antifiungal agents
than ketoconazole, as effective as amphotericin B, is easily administered at home, has few
side effects, and is equal cost-wise to amphotericin B. A dosage of 5 mg/kg q24h has the
same success rate and fewer side effects than 10 mg/kg q24h.24 The administration of an
FIGURE 5-43. Direct simear
from a dog with blastomycosis. Oval
yeasts demonstrate broad-based bud-
ding (arrow). (Courtesy T. Freuch.)
394 · Fungal Skin Diseases
FIGURE 5-44. Canine blastoriycosis. Large, round, thick-walled yeast bodies (H & E stain)
PUBLIC HEALTH CONSIDERATIONS
 Dogs appear to have a tenfold increased risk for blastomycosis compared with hurnans
and can serve as sentinels for hlastomycosis in humans.21s Penetrating wounds contami-
nated by the organisms have produced infections in humans.221.223 Care should be taken
to avoid getting bitten when handling infected animals. Accidental inoculation of orga-
Disms by contaminated knives or needles should be avoided at necropsy or during fine-
needle aspiration. Culturing of the organism should be limited to laboratories with proper
facilities.221
Coccidioidomycosis
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Coccidioides immitis is a dimorphic saprophyic soil fungus.1. 2. 9. 10. 14. 226 The ecologic
niche of this fungus is characterized by sandy, alkaline soils, high environmental tempera-
ture, low rainfall, and low elevation. Geographicall, this area is called the Lower Sonoran
Life Zone and includes the southwesterm United 'States, Mexico, and Central and South
America. Serologic surveys indicate that most human and canine inhabitants of the en-
demic area become infected. Coccidioidomycosis has also been calied San Joaquin Valley
Fever.
CLINICAL FINDINGS
Dog
Coccidioidomycosis is an uncommon disease in endemic areas.14 226 Young (1 to 4 years
old) male dogs are predisposed, and the Boxer and Doberman pinscher are predisposed to
disseminated infections. Clinical signs usually include coughing, dyspnea, persistent or
fuctuating fever, anorexa, weight loss, lameness, skin disease, and ocular disease4, 26
Skin lesions are usually multiple and include papules, nodules, abscesses, draining tracts,
and ulcers. Skin lesions almost always occur over sites of infected bone (especially the
distal diaphyseal, metaplhyseal, and epiphyseal areas of long bones) (see Fig. 5-38H).
Fungal Skin Diseases * 395
Cat
Coccidioidomycosis is rare in cats,14 226, 227 Clinical signs includc anoroxia, weight loss,
cough, dyspnea, lameness, ocular disease, and skin lesions. In one study, over one half of
 affected cats had dermatologic signs, especially draining tracts, subcutaneous granulomas,
and abscesses.227
DIAGNOSIS
A history of travel to an endemic area should increase the clinician's index of suspicion.
 Cytologic examination of aspirates or direct smears reveals suppurative to pyogranuloma-
tous to granulomatous inflammation. Fungal elements are seldom found (Fig. 5-45B).226
Biopsy findings include nodular to diffuse, suppurative to pyogranulomatous to granuloma-
tous dermatitis and panniculitis. Fungal elements are usually present but may be sparsc.
The organisms are present in spherule (20 to 200 μin in diameter) and endospore (2 to 5
μm in diameter) forrms (see Fig. 5-45A).1. 2,9, 226
Attempts should not be made to culture C. immitis in veterinary practices because of
the risk of human infection.226 Culturing of the organisn should he limited to laboratories
 p re   d s s s e a
diagnosis.226
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
All animals with cliical coccidioidomycosis should be treated because spontaneous remis-
sion is unlikely.226 The current drug of choice is ketoconazole.14. 26. 227 Treatment of
animals with disseminated disease should continue for a minimum of l year. Amphotericin
 B is used to treat animals that cannot tolerate or do not respond to ketoconazole.14. 226
Cryptococcosis
CAUSEANDPATHOGENESIS
Cryptococcus neoformans is a ubiquitous, saprophytic, yeastlike fungus that is most
infection being undetermined .202 Males appear to be over-represented (roaming behav-
(A, B, C, D) and two varieties of C. neoformans: C. neoformans v. neoformans (serotype A
mans is most prevalent in the United States and Europe, whereas C. neoformans v. gatii
is prevalent in Australia, Southeast Asia, Africa, and South America. In humans,
C.
treat.214
The establishment and spread of infection are highly dependent on host immunity:
 however, underlying diseases are often not detected in dogs and cats with cryptococco-
called European blastomycosis and torulosis.
CLINICAL FINDINGS
Dog
predisposed. Clinical signs include various abnormalitics of the central nervous system and
eyes.14. 211 Skin lesions are found in about 20% of cases; these lesions are characterized hy
papules, nodules, ulcers (Fig. 5-46A), abscesses, and draining tracts. The nose, lips, and
clawbeds are often affected.li. 211
396 · Fungal Skin Diseases
FlGURE 5-45. A, Canine cocciclioidomycosis. Coccidioides immitis spherule in center of pyo-
granuloma (PAS stain). B, Direct smear from a dog with coccidioidouycosis. Ruptured spherule
Fungal SkinDiseases·397
FlGURE 5-46. Miscellaneous fungal infections. A, Necrosis and ulceration in a dog with cryptococcosis. B,
nasal asperilosis. E, Ulcers on the leg of a dog with aspergilosis. (Courtesy R. Halliwell) F, Chronic blepharitis with
with protothecosis. (Courtesy J. Perrier.) H, Swollen, ulcerated footpads of a dog with protothecosis. (Courtesy J
Permier.)
398 ·Fumgal Skin Diseases
Cat
Cryptococcosis is an uncommon disease, but it is the most common deep mycosis of the
cat.8, 14, 200, 202, 204, 211 Clinical signs occur from abnormalities of the upper respiratory,
cutaneous, central nervous, and ocular systems.8 14. 200,202, 211 In about 70% of cases with
to mushy subcutaneous swelling over the bridge of the nose is evident (see Fig. 5-46B).
The skin or subcutaneous tissucs are involved in about 40% of cases.8, 14, 200, 201, 21 Lesions
are usually multiple and includc papules, nodules (see Fig. 5-46C), abscesses, ulcers, and
draining racts9u2116,17Sknlesinscanoccur anywherebutmost commonlyinvol
the face, pinnae, and paws.
DIAGNOSIS
 Cytologic examination of aspirates or direct smears reveals pyogranulomatous to granulo-
matous infammation with numerous pleomorphic (round to elliptical, 2 to 20 μm in
diameter) yeastlike organisms. These show narrow-based budding and are surrounded by a
mucinous capsule of variable thickmess, which forms a clear or refractile halo (Fig.
5-47).1-3, 9. 10. 2l1 Biopsy findings include a cystic degeneration or vacuolation of the
dermis and subcutis that is surprisingly acelular (sometimes likened to an infusion of soap
bubbles)Figs548,549)or anoular to difuse,pyogranulomatous to granulomatous
dermatitis and panniculitis (Fig. 5-50) containing numerous organisms. Mayer's mucicar.
mine is a useful special stain because it stains the organism's capsule (carrminophilic)
red.3. 2il The only clinically usefal serologic test is a latex aglutination test that detects
can persist, with or without clinical signs, for months to years after initial diagnosis and
treatment.201,204
s a rus n u soq isa pnig ssoo ae s n
Fungal Skin Diseases · 399
FIGURE 5-48. Canine cryptoxoc-
cosis. Dermis and subcutis have a
ous fungal organisms and very few
inflamnatory   cells are
seen
0
higher power (see Fig. 5-49).
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The drugs of choice are ketoconazole, itraconazole, and Huconazole." Itraconazole was
outcome was not influenced by gender, location of infection, or magnitude of pretreat-
   e  a  s s    s 
*See references 201, 203, 205, 208, 210-212, 215, 216.
(mucicarmine stain).
 400 · Fungal Skin Diseases
FIGURE 5-50. Feline cryptococcosis. Numer-
ous encapsulated  yeast bodics in pyogranuloma
(H & E stain).
likelihood of treatment failure.204 The combination of ketoconazole and fucytosine, with
su  es   d   y ss 
Amphotericin B, fucytosine, and the combination of both drugs have also been success-
dsm
cutancous cryptococcosis can be surgically excised and the animals cured.2os 2i1 A prelimi-
nary report indicated that the subcutaneous administration of amphotericin B was effec-
tive and associated with less azotemia than traditional amphotericin B protocols.206
Histoplasmosis
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Histoplasma capsulatum is a dimorphic saprophytic soil fungus.1 2,9 10, 14,229 The organism
 prefers areas with moist, humid conditions and soil containing nitrogen-rich organic mat-
ter such as bird and bat excrement. Most cases of histoplasmosis occur in the central
United States in the Ohio, Missouri, and Mississippi River Valleys. Surveys indicate that
most human and canine inhabitants of endemic areas become infected.
CLINICAL FINDINGS
Dog
Histoplasmosis is an uncommon disease in endemic areas.14, 22s Young dogs (<4 years old)
are usually affected, and Pointers, Weimaraners, and Brittany spaniels may be predis-
Fungal Skin Diseases · 401
antibiotic therapy, coughing, dyspnea, gastrointestinal disease, ocular discase, and skin
characterized by papules, nodules, ulcers, and draining tracts.
Cat
Histoplasmosis is an uncommon disease in endemic areas.14. 22s. 29 Most affected cats are
 s        s   
depression, weight loss, fever, anorexia, dyspnea, ocular disease, and skin disease.14.228.229
Skin lesions are usually multiple, occur anywhere on the body (especially the face, nose,
and pinnae), and are characterized by papules, nodules, ulcers, and draining tracts (Fig.
5-5iB).
DIAGNOSIS
 A history of travel to an endemic area should increase the clinician's index of suspicion.
 Cytologic examination of aspirates or direct smcars reveals pyogranulomatous to granulo-
matous infammation containing numerous small (2 to 4 μm in diameter), round yeast
bodies with a basophilic center and lighter halo caused by shrinkage of the yeast during
FIGURE 5-5l.A, Feline blastomy-
cosis.Nonhealing ulcer over lateral
thorax. B, Feline histoplasmosis. Nod-
ule on lateral surface of pinnae. (Cour-
tesy J. MacDonald.)
402 · Fungal Skin Diseases
FIGURE
5-52. Dircct smear
from a dog with histoplasinosis. Mul-
tiple small, intracytoplasmic yeasts in
a macrophage. (Courtesy T. French.)
tous to granulomatous dermnatitis with numerous intracellular organisms (Fig. 5-53). At
routine practice setting are not recommended because of the pathogenic potential of this
organism.229
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
FIGURE 5.-53. Canine histoplasinosis. Numerous sinall, intracellular yeast bodies in a granuloma
{H & E stain).
Fungal Skin Diseases · 403
cases, the combination of ketoconazole and amphotericin B is recommended.14, 29 Itracon-
Gza wze sen Aia ui suord umous aen ajozeung pue aroze
● MISCElLaNEOUS MYCOSES
Aspergillus Dermatitis
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Aspergillus spp. are ubiquitous fungi that exist in nature as soil and vegetation saprophytes
and as a component of normal skin, haircoat, and mucosal Hora in humans and ani-
in dogs, however, prodisposing factors are not usually identified.231 The organism
is
fumigatus is the most common specics cncountered in nasal aspergillosis, with A. niger, A.
nidulans, and A. flavus being occasionally involved.231 In disseminated aspergillosis, infec-
tion has involved, in decreasing frequency, A. terreus, A. deffectus, A. flacipes, and A.
fumigatus.231
CLINICAL FINDINGS
To date, cutaneous and mucocutaneous Aspergillus infections has been reported only in
 d   o        s
visible secondary to nasal discharge (see Fig. 5-46D). Most cases of disseminated asper-
C    q   ss  i no  s
California.13. 31 These dogs may have cutaneous nodules, abscesses, and draining tracts as
well as oral ulcers. Aspergillus spp. have rarely been associated with cutaneous nodules
and ulcers (see Fig. 5-46E) or blepharitis (see Fig. 5-46F) in otherwise healthy dogs.3
DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis includes other infectious diseases, ncoplastic discases, and in the
case of nasal aspergillosis, various immune-mcdiated disorders such as discoid and sys-
temic lupus erythematosus, pemphigus foliaceus and erythematosus, and drug cruption.
Cytologic cxamination of aspirates or direct smcars reveals suppurative to pyogranuloma-
    no sa    s
nodular to diffuse suppurative or pyogranulomatous dermatitis or necrotizing dermatitis
with minimal inflammation. Organisins are usually plentiful and characterized by broad (3
grown on Sabouraud's dextrose agar at 25°C.
 In nasal aspergillosis, blind eulture or eytologic examination of discharge is often
unrewarding and can erroneously suggest that the dlisease is bacterial in origin.21 Heavy
growths of Pseudomonas spp. or other Enterobacteriaceae are common. In addition,
Aspergillus or Penicillum spp. can be cultured from nasal swabs in up to 40% of normal
light-green rmold) to be visualized and sampled directly for cytologic, histopathologic, and
cultural examinations. Serologic diagnosis is possible using agar-gel immunodiffusion,
counter immunoelectrophoresis, or ELISA techniques.231
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Thiabendazole (10 to 20 mg/kg q12h) or ketoconazole (5 to 10 mg/kg q12h) administered
orally eliminates the disease in about 50% of the cases.13.231 Fluconazole (2.5 to 5 mg/kg
q12h) is reported to be more cffcctivc than itraconazole (5 mg/kg q 12h), but few clinical
404· Fungal Skin Diseases
trials have heen conducted to date.231. 255. 259 These medications must be administered for
3 to 4 weeks beyond clinical cure, so a total of 6 to 8 weeks of treatment is required. For
nasal aspergllsis, the most successful therapeutie regimen is enilconazole administered
[        s  s o    n
losis.14
Paecilomycosis
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Paecilomyces spp. are ubiquitous saprophytic, opportunistic yeastlike fungi that exist in
 pressed persons. The organism is presumed to produce opportunistic infections by invad-
ing mucosal or cutaneous surfaces. Evidence for immunosuppression has not been present
CLINICAL FINDINGS
Dog
 The disease appcars to be extrermcly rare. Most dogs have had disscminated infections
 a so p  s py o ao c ei gss s u 
sp re qasq e pue d uonn rdy ais Aq p
Another dog had an ulcerated, crusted nodule in the region of the left caudal marmmary
 gland.234 Both dogs experienced disseminated disease.
Cat
The disease appears to be extremely rare.23 One cat experienced an ulcerated, nonhealing
asns i au son s iq sn sm p aed e uo ao
experienced other cutaneous, nasal., and disseminated lesions despite receiving ketocona-
zole orally at 10 to 40 mg/kg/day. Anothcr cat had soft tissue swellings of a digit and
contiguous metacarpus and an upper lip, from which P. lilacinus was consistently iso-
lated.237 Surgical excision and oral itraconazole was curative.
DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis includes numerous infectious granulomas and neoplasms. Cyto-
logic examination of aspirates or direct smears reveals pyogranlomatous inflammation and
numerous pleomorphic fungal elements, including thick, branched, septate pseudohyphae
and round to oval, often unipolar, broad-based budding, yeastlike structures (2 to 15 μm
ano nof eaeu paaaid a st Asdog yund pue ee ne rse asnap spne
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
 Puecilomyces spp. are usually resistant to amphotericin B but may be susceptible to azole
compounds suchaskctoconazoleoritraconazole233,23Ketoconazole was of nobeneft in
one dog24 and onc cat232 with paecilomycosis. Too few cases have been treated to allow
detailed therapeutic and prognostie recommendations.
Protothecosis
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Prototheca spp. are ubiquitous, saprophytic achlorophyllous algae that are found in soil,
raw and treated sewage, thc slime flux of trees, animal wastes, tap water, fresh water
Fungal Skin Diseases · 405
FIGURE 5-54, Paeciloinyxosis. Ycast-like stncture (black arrow) and psendohyphae (white
arrous). (From Elliott GS, whitney MS, Reed WM, Tuite JF: Anteimortem diagnosis of
paeciloimycosis in a cat. JAVMA 184:93, 1984.)
 streams, swimming pools, and contaminated and stagnant water.23s. 245 In North America,
 most cases are reported from the southern United States. The organism causes opportun-
istic infections, and disseminated disease is often associated with dysfunction of host
immunity. The portal of entry is believed to be the colon in disseminatcd infections and
wound contamination in cutaneous lesions. The virulence of the Prototheca organisms may
differ; only Prototheca uickerhamit is isolated from cutancous infections in dogs and cats,
 protothecosis, before and during treatment, revealed an inverse relation between the
number of protothecal organisms and the nurmber of infiltrating macrophages, neutrophils,
T lymphocytes, and B lymphocytes.243 These findings suggest either that protothecal
organisims inhibit the migration or proliferation of cellular inflammatory infiltrate or that
 only dead organisms induce an effective local immune response.
CLINICAL FINDINGS
Dog
Protothecosis is a rare disease. Collies appear to be predisposed, and the majority of
protothecosis frequently have colitis and ocular and central nervous system involvement,
but thcy rarely have skin lesions.245 Disseminated disease is almost always associated with
P. zopfi.
 Dogs with cutaneous or mucocutaneous protothecosis usually do not have clinical
signs of systemic involvement, and infection is invariably due to P. wickerharni.239.241. 246
Dermatologic lesions may include multiple papulcs and nodules, often over pressure
points, or nodules and ulcers involving mucocutaneous junctions (especially nostrils), scro-
tum, and footpads (see Fig. 5-46G and H). Depigmentation of the nasal planum may be
striking (see Fig. 5-46).239
406 · Fungal Skin Diseases
Cat
Protothecosis is a rare disease. Only cutaneous involvement has been reported, and all
cats were in good health otherwise. Skin lesions may be solitary to multiple; they occur as
most commonly been on the paws and legs, but they have also occurred on the nose,
head, and pinnae and on the base of the tail. Only P. wickerhamii has been isolated.
DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis includes infectious, foreign-body, and sterile gramulomas, ab-
scesses, and neoplasms. Cytologic examination of aspirates or direct smears reveals pyo-
granulomatous to granulornatous inflammation with numerous intracellular spherules that
are round, oval, or polyhedral; nonbudding: and 2 to 30 μm in diameter.1-3. 9. 10. 245 The
fungi reproduce by endosporulation, and internal cleavage planes are visible in larger
spherules, which may contain 2 to 20 endospores. The characteristic morphologic form of
endospores results in a "wheel-like” or “daisy-like” appearance.
Biopsy findings include nodular to diffuse, pyogranulomatous to granulomatous der-
matitis and panniculitis with numerous fungal elements (Figs. 5-55 and 5-56). Protothecd
agar at 37°C, and punch biopsies are the preferred material for culture. The API 20C
 system can be used on cultures for species identification, as can flnorescent antibody
techniques on formalin-fixed tissue.1, 3. 238. 245
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Solitary lesions in othervise healthy patients, especially cats, may he surgically excised and
the patient cured,240. 241l A variety of antinicrobials (ineluding aimphotericin B and sodium
F1GURE 5-55. Protothecosis in a dog. Diffuse granulomatous dermatitis with nuinerous multinucleated
histiocytic giant cells.
Fungal Skin Diseases · 407
FIGURE 5-56. Protothecosis in a dog. Numerous organisims demonstrate intemal cleavage planes
(arrow) (GMS stain).
iodide) have been tried therapeutically, but treatment has failed in most instances. Clinical
response to antirnicrobial agents frequently fails to correlate with in vitro susceptihility test
results.23s Amphotericin B and tetracycline act synergistically to inhibit the growth of P.
twickerhamii; this conbination has been suecessfully used to treat protothecosis in hu-
s us p  un a  p saam  on g rg pan q s
continued to recur each time ketoconazole administration was stopped, even after treat-
ment periods of 10 months.239
Trichosporon Dermatitis
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Trichosporon spp. are ubiquitous yeastlike fungi that exist in nature as soil saprophytes
and as a minor component of normal skin, haircoat, and mucosal fora in humans and
animals.10, 248 In hurmans, most cases of Trichosporon infection have been disseminated,
fatal, and reported in association with severe imimunosuppression. The organism is be-
 cats, evidence for immunosuppression has not been present in all affectcd animals, but
one had rmulticentric lymphoma.
CLINICAL FINDINGS
To date, Trichosporon dermatitis has becn rcportcd only in cats,247, 24s and thc disease
appears to be extremely rare. Affectcd cats have presented with solitary papular
or
 nodular lesions on the nostril or a solitary ulcerated nodule at the site of a bite wound on
a distal limb. Trichosporon beigelii (Trichosporon cutaneum) and T. pullulans have been
isolated in culture.
408 · Fungal Skin Diseases
DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis includes numerous infectious granulomas, foreign-body granulo-
mas, and neoplasms. Cytologic examination of aspirates or direct smears reveals pyogranu-
lomatous infammation and numerous pleormorphic fungal elements, including septate,
branching hyphae, arthroconidia (2.5 to 10.4 μm), and pleomorphic blastoconidia (2.5 to 8
matitis with numerous fungal elements. Mycotic invasion of blood vessels may be visiblc;
this often results in areas of necrosis. Trichosporon can be grown on Sabouraud's dextrosc
agar, and punch biopsies are the preferred material for culture.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Trichosporon spp. are generally more susceptible to azole compounds than to amphoteri-
cin B or fucytosine.24s Affected cats should be treated with oral ketoconazole or itracona-
zole. Not enough cases have been treated to allow detailed therapeutic and prognostic
recommendations.
Geotrichum Dermatitis
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Geotrichum candidum is a ubiquitous soil saprophyte and a minor component of the
normal fora of the oral cavity, gastrointestinal tract, and integument. 33 24sa The organ-
ism is believed to produce opportunistic infections by invading mucosal or cutaneous
surfaces.
CLINICAL FINDINGS
Geotrichum dermatitis appears to be extremely rare. Geotrichum was cultured from both
a cat with a nonhealing wound on its back and its owner, who had a granulomatous
infection of the skin and suhcutis.8 One dog had a pinnal and periocular derimatitis that
s r p    d pu sm   r s  s,
ric onychodystrophy frorm which Geotrichum was repeatedly isolated.1l A healthy 5-month-
old Rottweiler had’'2 nodules, one on the head and one on the rump.248a
DIAGNOSIS
Cytologic examination of aspirates or direct smears reveals suppurative to pyogranuloma-
tous infammation with broad (3 to 6 μm in diameter), septate, infrequently branched
hyphae, spherical yeastlike cells, and rectangular or cylindrical arthroconidia (4 to I0 μm
wide) with rounded or squared ends.1. 2. s-io Biopsy fndings include nodular to difuse,
biopsy specimens were characterized by suppurative epidermitis and folliculitis and by
pyogranulomatous furunculosis, in which only a few fungal hyphac were seen, mainly
adherent to follicular keratin and hair shafts,24a Geotrichum grows on Sabouraud's dex-
 trose agar at 25°C, and punch biopsies are the preferred material for culture.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Little information is available on the treatment of Geotrichum dermatitis. Onc cat and its
 owner were cured with aimphotericin B.8 One dog was cured with the topical application
of miconazole.249 The Rottweiler puppy described in Clinical Findings was cured after
surgical excision of the two nodules.248a
Fungal Skin Diseases · 409
● ANTIFuNGAL ThERAPY
Topical
Topical therapy (see Table 5-3) is often curative in superficial yeast infections (Malasse-
zia, Candida) and may be curative or adjunctive in dermatophytosis. Dermatophyte infec-
tions are diffcult because the fungi are relatively protectcd within hair shafts and lhair
follicles. Topical agents tend to be more effective in short-coated animals, for localized
 alopecic lesions, and in long-haired animals that have been clipped. Many topical antifun-
gal agents are of historical interest only and are not discussed in this text. Fxamples of
such products include povidone-iodine, sodium hypochlorite, tolnaftate, Whitficld's oint-
ment (benzoic and salicylic acids), Gentian violet, potassiurm permanganate, and so
forth.25s The intcrested reader is referred to previous editions of this book. Derrmatophy.
tosis is a difficult situation. Topical antifungal agents kil unprotected hyphae and spores
rapidly, but not hyphae and spores within hairs,38, 72
SPOT TREATMENTS
Focal applications of topical antifungal agents are usefiul for the treatment of candidiasis,
Malassezia dermatitis, and localized dermatophyte lesions in dogs and shorthaired cats.
Nystatin and amphotericin B 3% are polyene antibiotics that bind with ergosterol in
fungal cellmembranes, resulting in altered cell permeability and eventual cell death26
Either product may be applied every 12 hours to treat Candida or Malassezia infections,
but they are not effective against dermatophytes. Nystatin is also available in combination
with triaincinolone for highly inflammatory lesions.
Azoles inhibit the synthesis of ergosterol, triglyceride, phospholipid, chitin, and oxida-
tive and peroxidative enzymes.152, 256.257 The imidazolcs clotrimazole 1% and miconazole
 1% or 2% inay be applied every 12 hours for the treatment of dermatophytosis, candidia-
sis, and Malassezia dermatitis.256 Thiabendazole 4% with dexamethasone 0.1% may be
applied every 12 hours for the treatment of highly infammatory dermatophyte lesions
(kerions) or highly inflammatory Malassezia lesions (skin or ear).
Naftifine 1% (Naftin cream or gel) and terbinafine 1% (Lamisil cream) are allylamines
that bind to stratum cormeum and penetrate into hair follicles.25 They inhibit ergosterol
biosynthesis and squalene epoxidase and may be applied every 12 hours for the treatment
of dermatophytosis and candidiasis. Naftifine also has anti-infammatory activity and is
useful for highly infammatory dermatophyte lesions.
 Chlorhexuline 4% (ChlorhexiDerm Maximum spray) is a synthetic biguanide (see
Chap. 3 for details) that may be applied every 12 hours for the treatment of Malassezia
and Candida infections and dermatophytosis.
SHAMPOOS
Antifungal shampoos are useful for the treatment of Malassezia dermatitis. However,
because of their lack of demonstrated efficacy against dermatophytes and the danger of
dlispersing arthrospores into the haircoat and environment as a result of their application,
shampoos arc not recommended for the treatment of dermatophytosis. However, one
study sugested that sinultaneous treatment of dermatophytosis due to M. canis in
Persian cats with oral griseofulvin and a 2% chlorhexidine/2% miconazole shampoo re-
sulted in quicker resolution of clinical signs and less environmental contamination than
with oral griseofulvin alore.77
 Shampoos containing 2% to 4% chlorhexidine or 2% miconazole are effective for the
treatment of Malassezia derinatitis and are the least likely to be drying or irritating. Daily
application is most effective but more likely to be irritating, and it is inpractical for most
For aninals who are particularly greasy or waxy, selenium sulide 1% or sulfur 2%
4l0·Fungal Skin Diseases
with benzoyl peroxide 2.5% are effectivc. These two products can he too drying and are
more likely to be irritating than chlorhexidine or miconazole.
RINSES
Antifungal rinses are the most effective topical products for the treatment of widespread
superficial mycoses. They have more residual activity than shampoos. The preferred prod-
ucts are lime sulfur 2% (see Chap. 3 for details) or enilconazole 0.2% 30. 36.9 Enilconazole
  s p  u pe d nu si   e s
information had suggested that enilconazole was not well-tolerated in cats,7i a study in
Pcrsian cats indicated that no clinical, hematologic, or biochemical toxicities were ob-
served.9 Enilconazole is reported to be safe and effective for cats in France.2s. 255 Many
 people find the odor of thc product to be objectionable. Enilconazole infusions are also
One of the most effective mcthods for the treatment of nasal aspergillosis.9
e si a (p re e d ) sp ye s g on e 
twice weekly.
Another useful rinse for the treatment of Malassezia dermatitis is acetic acid 2.5%
(see Chap. 3 for details). The solution can be prepared by combining equal parts of
vinegar (5% acetic acid) and water. The solution is well tolerated on the skin (not in the
ears!) and is particularly uscful as a foot soak (5 to 10 minutes daily) for Malassezid
pododerrmatitis.
Systemic
The most common indication for systemic antifungal therapy (see Table 5-4) is dermato-
phytosis. Griseofulvin is still the systeric antifungal agent of choice in these cases.6. 69.
1.'73 However, if it is ineffective, has caused complications, or is otherwise contraindi-
cated, ketoconazole or itraconazole may be acceptable altermatives. For Malassezia infcc-
tions, griseofulvin is not effective and ketoconazole is the drug of choice. Other regimcns
or treatments may be necessary for the less commmonly encountered mycotic infections.
Newer antifungals, particularly the triazole compounds and the allylamines, are available,
but in general, they still have not becn shown to be preferred over griseofulvin for routine
use. In addition, they are not approved for use in the United States. Finaly, they are
expensive.
GRISEOFULVIN
Griseofulvin is a fungistatic antibiotic obtaincd by fcrncntation from several species of
 Penicillum. Its antifungal activity results from the inhibition of cell wall synthesis, nucleic
acid synthesis, and mitosis. This agent is primarily active against growing cells, although
dornant cells may be inhibited from reproducing.256. 261 The drug inhibits nucleic acid
synthesis and cell mitosis by arresting division at metaphase, interfering with the function
of spindle microtubules, morphogenetic changes in fungal cells, and possibly antagonizing
chitin synthesis in the fungal cell wall. After oral administration, the drug may be detected
in the stratun cormeuin within 8 hours to 3 days. The highest concentrations are attained
 in the stratum corneum and the lowest are in the basal layers. The drug is carried to the
stratum corneum by diffusion, sweating, and transepiderinal fuid loss and is deposited in
keratin precursor cells and remains bound during the differentiatiou process. Conse-
quently, new growth of hair or claws is the first to be free from disease. Because
griseofulvin is not tightly bound to keratin, tissue lcvcls drop rapidly when therapy is
stopped. Thus, it must be administered until an infected claw grows out, which takes
months.
Griseofulvin is in a state of flux in the skin; consequently, a dosage administered once
,stratum cormeum levels are gone in 2 to 3 days. This drug is indicated for only dermato-
Fungal Skin Diseases * 4II
dida and Malassezia).
Griscofulvin is variably and incompletely absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract.
Therefore, not all animals respond at the lower end of the dosage scale. If response is
poor, the dosage may have to be increased. It should be given with a fatty rmeal to
enhance absorption. Griseofulvin has a disagreeablc taste, and nausea may be seen.
Dividing daily doses increases absorption and reduces nausea. The particle size of the
drug also affects absorption, and this infuences the dosage. There are two common forms,
a microsize crystal Fulvicin-U/F (Schering) given in a dosage of 25 to 60 mg/kg q12h (the
 most common initial dose is 25 mg/kg ql2h), and ultrarmicrosize Gris-PEG in polyethylene
glycol (Herbert) given in a dosage of 2.5 to 15 mg/kg ql2h. This difference is important
to recognize or toxicities may result. Idiosyncratic toxic reactions, particularly bone marrow
suppression, have been reported.260
 In problem cases, the dosage of microsize griseofulvin can be increased to at least 120
mg/kg/day with reasonable safety. One author recominended that kittens younger than 12
weeks of age not receive griseofulvin, although some clinicians use it in kittens as young
without any signs of clinical, hematologie, or hepatic toxicity.262 They concluded that
abnormalities developing with the use of high-dose griseofulvin therapy may be an idio-
syncratic reaction found in only a few cats. Anecdotal reports suggest that adverse reac-
tions to griseofulvin may be more common and severe in Persians, Himalayans, Siamese,
and Abyssinians, but this has not been our experience.6
 Griseofulvin is a potent teratogen26, therefore, it is absolutely contraindicated in
pregnant animals. However, many clinicians have administered griseofulvin to cats during
the last week of pregnancy with no ill effects.13 26l Because griseofulvin can cause abnor-
malities in spermatozoa in rodents, it is advisable to avoid using recently treated male cats
for breeding.* The most common problem is gastrointestinal upsets that resolve when the
drug is discontinued. Anemia, leukopenia, depression, ataxia, and pruritus have also been
exfoliative eruptions as well as erythema multiforne or toxic epidermal necrolysis. They
usually regress when the drug is withdrawn, although fatal reactions may occur. Hemo-
grams every 2 weeks and careful observation are advisable during therapy to monitor
those blood variables and the early onset of toxicity. The bone marrow reactions occur
more commonly in cats with FIV infection, and screening before therapy is indicated.267
 Although produced by various species of Penicillium, griseofulvin, penicillins, and cephalo-
sporins rarely exhibit cross-reactive side effects.
Griseofulvin does have anti-infammatory and immunomodulatory properties and is
knowm to suppress delayed-type hypersensitivity reactions and irritant reactions in the
skin253,263.26 These properties can lead to important clinical misinterpretations. We have
seen dogs and cats whose infammatory skin diseases (e.g., bacterial pyoderma and pem-
phigus foliaceus) showed significant improvement while the animals were receiving large
doses of griseofulvin for presumed dermatophytosis.
AZOLES
The systemically administered azoles include the imidazole, ketoconazole, and the triazoles
itraconazole and fuconazole.256-259 They inhibit the cytochrome P-450 enzyme, lanosterol
14-demethylase, thereby inhibiting the conversion of lanosterol to ergosterol and causing
the accumulation of Ci4 methylated sterols. Other actions inelude an inhibition of intra-
cellular triglyceride and phospholipid biosynthesis, inhibition of cell wall chitin synthesis,
and inhibition of oxidative and peroxidative enzymes. The potency of each azole is related
to its affinity for binding the cytochrome P-450 moiety. The relative toxicity of cach azole
is associated with the selectivity of its action on fungal versus mammalian cnzymes. Side
effects 0ccur in about 10% of dogs and 25% of cats treated with kctoconazole. Side
effects are much less frequent and, in general, less scvere with itraconazole and fucona-
zole.
412 · Fungal Skin Diseases
Because the triazoles and allylamines are lipophilic and keratinophilic and because
therapeutic levels persist in the skin and nails of humans for several days to weeks after
treatment is stopped, shorter durations of treatment and pulse regimens (e.g., once-a-
wcck dosing or I week of treatment per month) are feasible 254, 256-258 265 This has not
been investigated in dogs and cats.
 Drug interactions with the azoles are well-recognized.257a Interactions with certain
antihistamines (terfenadine, astemizole), gastrointestinal motility agents (cisapride), benzo-
diazepines, calcium channel blockers, anticonvulsants, antimycobacterial agents, and cyclo-
 sporine are of particular concern.
Ketoconazole
Ketoconazole (Nizoral [Janssen]) is an imidazole that is active against many fungi and
yeasts, including dermatophytes, Candida, Malassezia, and numerous dimorphic fungi
amphotericin B, which acts rapidly, is often used in combination with ketoconazole to
compensate for this initial delay. Alternatively, one can use itraconazole or fuconazole.
Ketoconazole is insoluble in water but soluble in dilute acid solutions, and increased
 gastric acidity promotes absorption. When it is given with food, especially tomato juice,
absorption is enhanced. Still, ketoconazole is variably absorbed, which probably accounts
for the variation of doses needed in certain patients. It should not be given with gastric
antacids, H, blockers, or anticholinergics. The major routes of delivery of ketoconazole to
the stratum corneum are via sweat, sebum, and incorporation into basal keratinocytes.
Ketoconazole is not approved for use in dogs and cats in the United States. A dosage of
10 mg/kg every 24 hours is effective for dermatophytosis, Malassezia dermatitis, and
candidiasis. For systemic mycoses, higher dosages (30 'to 40 mg/kg/day) are more com-
monly needed. Because ketoconazole does not readily enter the central nervous system, a
nervous system and nasal mycoses.
About 10% of treated dogs experience side effects, including inappetencc, vomiting.
pruritus, alopecia, and a reversible lightening of the haircoat.13, 259, 261 Side effects are
rmore common with doses in excess of 10 mg/kg/day. It also enhances the effects of
anticoagulants and increases the blood levels of cyclosporine and antihistamines, and its
concentration may be decreased if it is given concurrently with rifarnpin. At dosages
higher than 40 mg/kg/day, there were anorexia, nausea, and increased liver enzyme levels.
Cats are more sensitive; about 25% experience side effects, including anorexia, fever,
depression, vomiting. diarrhea, elcvated liver cnzymes, rarely icterus or neurologic abnor-
Inalities, and even death; therefore, one rarely exceeds 10 mg/kg/24 hours or 20 mg/kg/48
hours in cats. Cholangiohepatitis has also occurred in cats treated with ketoconazole.13
Ketoconazole is embryotoxic and teratogenic in rodents, causes mummified fetuses and
stillbirths in bitches, and is not recormmended in pregnant animals. In dosages of 10 mg/
kg/day or greater, it suppressed hasal cortisol concentration and responsc to adrenocortico-
 gesterone concentrations in dogs.271
When administration of the drug is halted, a sharp rebound of testosterone levels
occurs. In therapeutic usc, one should be aware of the possible effect on libido and
breeding effectiveness in male animals, adrenal insufficiency, the possibility of inducing or
nomodulatory and anti-infammatory effects, including suppression of neutrophil chemo-
taxis and lymphocyte blastogenic responses, inhibition of 5-lipoxygenase activity, and inhi-
In veterinary medicine, ketoconazole is effective in the treatment of dermatophytosis,
candidiasis, Malassezia derrmatitis, blastomycosis, coccidioidomycosis, histoplasmosis, and
cryptococcosis. In addition, it may be effective in some cases of mycetoma, phaeohypho-
Fungal Skin Diseases * 413
conazole is often prescribed in combination with anphotericin B for systeinie infections
because the antifungal activity of both seems to be enhanced.
Itraconazole
Itraconazole (Sporanox [Janssen]) is a triazole, and, compared with ketoconazole, has
ble organisms include dermatophytes, Candida spp., Malassezia, those causing many inter-
mediate and deep mycoses, Aspergillus, Sporotrichum, and the protozoans Leishmania and
Trypanosoma. The drug is given orally, with food, and concurrent antacids, H blockers,
and anticholinergics are contraindicated. For cats and small dogs, the capsules may be
opened and the pellets mixed with food. A pediatric suspension is also available for oral
administration and, because its bioavailability is greater than that of the capsules, does not
need to be given with food. In cats, 10 mng/kg/day should be suficient in most cases.250
Some cats may require 10/mg/kg q12h. Occasional cats better tolerate 20 mg/kg q48h.
Anecdotal reports indicate that these doses of itraconazole often produce vomiting
and/or anorexia in cats.54 Lower doses of itraconazole (1.5 to 3.0 mg/kg/day) produced
complete recovery (clinical and cultural) in only 8 of 15 cats with M. canis infection.54 In
dogs, most authors recoinmend 10 mg/kg/day,13. 259 although a recent study indicated that
5 mg/kg/day was just as effective and caused less side effects.224 The major routes of
delivery to the stratum corneum are sweat, sebum, and incorporation into basal keratino-
cytes,
 Itraconazole is lipophilic and keratinophilic, and levels in skin and claws may he 3 to
10 times higher than those in plasma. In humans, skin and nail levels persist up to 4
esseges
reduced severity. Because itraconazole is more specific for fungal than mammalian cyto-
chrome P-450 enzynes, endocrinologic side effects are not produced.
Like ketoconazole, itraconazole also has various inrmunomodulatory and anti-infam-
matory properties26 270.27Toxicity studies ndogs showed that,even at a osage of40
mg/kg/day for 90 days, there were no reactions.25Although it is not recommended during
pregnancy owing to teratogenic effects at high dosages, there were no detectable terato-
genic effects at 10 mg/kg/day. In cats, 50 to 100 mg/kg/day produced some side cffects,
which appeared to be dose-dependent. Anorexia, nausea, and hepatotoxicity were the
prinary side effects and usually resolved after drug withdrawal, In dogs, doses of 10 mg/
kg/day produce vasculitis and necroulcerative skin lesions in 7.5% of dogs trcated.224 These
lesions did not ocur at doses of 5 mg/kg/day. In humans, intermittant (*pulse”) therapy
(e.g., standard doses for 1 week each month) is effeetive.265
Fluconazole
Fluconazole (Diflucan [Roerig]) is a triazole and, compared with ketoconazole, has in-
creased potency, decreased toxicity, and a wider spectrum of action: Susceptible organisms
include dermatophytes, Candida, Malassezia, and those causing deep and intermediate
mycoses. The drug can bc given with or without food. The major routes of delivery to the
stratum corneum are sweat, sebum, and incorporation into basal keratinocytes. High levels
are achieved in skin, claw, and even the cerebrospinal fuid. Therapeutic levels persist in
stratum corneum for 10 days after therapy is stopped. In humans, Huconazole persists in
nails for 3 to 6 months post treatment.25s. 26s Becausc fuconazole is the most fungal
enzyme-specific of thc three systemic azoles, side effects are rare.26s Only extremely high
doscs are embryotoxic and teratogenic, and endocrinologic side effects are not produced.
Recommended doses of fHuconazole in cats and dogs vary from 10 to 20 mg/kg q12h
to10 mg/kg q8h20. 252, 259 The results of tw0 pharmacokinetie studies indicate that
fuconazole can effectively be administered to cats at 50 mg/cat q24h.252. 269 In humans.
 intermittant therapy (c.g., cvery other day; once weekly) is effective.265
414 · Fungal Skin Diseases
IODIDES
Iodides are given orally in daily doses of saturated solutions,5. 13. 256, 2s1 They have a
disagreeable taste and 'may causc nausea and iodism, especially in cats. Iodism may
 manifest as vomiting, diarrhea, dcpression, and anorexia. In dogs, ocular and nasal dis-
charge, scaling, and a dryhaircoat maybe visible.Other signs that havebeen desribed in
cats include twitching, hypothermia, and cardiovascular failure. Athough iodides are
widely distributed in the body, their mechanisin of action is unknown becausc they have
no efficacy against fungal organisims in vitro. Iodides do cnhance the halide-peroxidase
killing systerm of phagocytic cells. Iodides are anti-infammatory agents by virtue of their
 ability to quench toxic oxygen metabolites and inhibit neutrophil chemotaxis.
fodides are highly effective in the treatment of cutaneous and cutaneolymphatic
sporotrichosis. A supersaturated solution of potassium iodide is used. Dogs are given 40
mg/kg orally ql2h with food, and iodides are best tolerated when given with a fatty liquid
such as cream or whole milk.5,261 Cats are given 10 to 20 mg/kg q12h to q24h with food.
Cats may better tolerate the taste of sodium iodide over that of potassiurn iodide.5. 261
AMPHOTERICIN B
  d   e i    
S      o    
terol.ia, 256,2s This results in altered cell permeability, leakage of intracellular constiuents,
and cell death. It also binds to a lesser extent to other sterols, such as cholesterol in
mammalian cell mermbranes, and therefore is relatively toxic. Other possible mechanisms
 of action include oxidative mernbrane damage and enhanced cell-mediated immunity.
incuces production of tumor necrosis factor.272 Amphotericin B is most effective for
blastomycosis, histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, cryptococcosis, and candidiasis: In the
first three diseases when combined with ketoconazole, and in the last two when combined
with fucytosine. These combination protocols are used to take advantagc of the prompt
action of amphotericin B and to reduce its toxicity.
 e pp  asa u a a o s
tremic animals), anermia, phlebitis, and hypokalemia.26l One shouid avoid concurent use
of nephrotoxic drugs (e.g., aminoglycosides) and potassium-depleting diuretics. Amphoteri
cin B may also be useful in the treatment of Aspergillus, Trichosporon, Zygomycetes, and
disserminated Sporotrichurn infections.
 Organisms tend to develop resistance to the drug. Amphotericin given systermically
is as follows: 0.5 mg/kg on altermate days for dogs and 0.15 mg/kg for cats, which are
more sensitive. Treatment with this drug is dangerous and complicated, and clinicians are
advised to consult other references for specific guidelines.6.14.261
 An amphotericin B lipid complcx (Abclcet [The Liposome Company]) is reported to
maintain therapeutic efficacy while being only one tenth as toxie as traditional amphoteri-
cin B solutions.22.263a Amphotericin B was also reported to be useful when administered
subcutaneously by gravity fow, but this study is difficult to interpret and needs further
evaluation.206
FLUCYTOSINE
Flucytosine (Ancobon [Roche]) is an orally administered fuorinated pyrimidine that has
been useful against Candida, Cryptococcus, Aspergillus, and some fungi associated with
it is deaminated by cytosine deaminase to 5-fuoro-21-deoxyuridylic acid. These sub-
stances inhibit thymidylate synthetase and subsequent DNA synthesis.
Fungal Skin Diseases · 415
Resistant, mutant organisms emerge regularly and rapidly in the presence of the drug.
which is why it is combined with amphotericin B. The oral dosage is 60 mg/kg qSh, but it
is used as a second-line treatment, when more effective drugs, such as the imidazole and
thiazole derivatives, are not available or are not well tolerated. As a single agent, fucyto-
reported.' Fixed drug eruptions on the scrotum of dogs and toxic epidermal necrolysis
have occurred.
TERBINAFINE
Terbinafine (Lamisil [Novartis]) is an allylamine that is well absorbed orally in the pres-
cnce or absence of food.257 It inhibits ergosterol biosynthesis and squalene epoxidase,
resulting in fungal cell wall ergosterol deficiency and the intracellular accumulation of
squalene. Terbinafine is fungistatic and fungicidal. Because it is generally not inhibitory to
cytochrome P-450 systems, it is more selective than the azoles.
Terbinafine is lipophilie and keratinophilic and achieves high concentrations in stra-
tum corneum, hair, sebum, and subcutaneous fat. The stratum corneum/plasma ratio
varies from 13:1 to 73:1. The drug is delivered to the stratum corneum primarily via the
sebum, then through the basal kcratinocytes and to a lesser extent by diffusion through
the dermis and epidermis. In humans, terbinafine persists in therapeutic levels in the skin
for 2 to 3 weeks and in the nails for 2 to 3 months.
Terbinafine is active against dermatophytes, Candida spp., Sporotrichum, and Asper-
teratogenicity has been demonstrated.
There have been anecdotal reports of the use of tcrbinafine for the treatment of dogs
    (o   ) g sip  s p
effective for dermatophytosis in cats, and no toxicities were noted.23 Terhinafine (20 to 30
mg/kg q24h PO) was also reported to bc cflective and safe for the treatment of dermato-
phytosis in dogs.251
● rEfErenceS
General Laboratory, Pathology, and Clinica!
Hasal bridge in various dog groups. Vet Rec 145:17l,
Bibliography
1999.
1. Carter CR, Cole JR Jr: Diagnostic Procedures in Vet-
 1l. Scott DW, Miller WH Jr: Disorders of the claws and
erinary Bacteriology and Mycology V. Acateinic
clawbed in dogs. Comp Cont Educ 14:1448, 1992.
Press, New York, 1990.
12. Scott DW, Miller WH Jr: Disorders of the claws and 
2. Carter CR, Chengappa MM: Esscntials of Veterinary
clawbed in cats. Comp Cont Edue 14:449, 1992.
Bacteriology and Mycology IV. Lea & Fcbiger, Phila-
13. Scott DW, et al: Muller and Kirk's Small Animal
delphia, 1991.
Dermatology V. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia,
3. Chandler FW, Watts JC: Pathologic Diagnosis of
1995.
Fungal Infections. ASCP Press, Chicago, 1987.
l3a. Sierra P, ct al: Fungal flora on cutaneous and muco-
4. Fitzpatrick TB, et al: Dermatology in General Medi-
sal surfaces of cats infected with feline immunodefi-
cine: IV. MeGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1993.
ciency virus or feline leukenia inmununodefciency vi-
5. Foil CS: Fungal diseases. Clin Dermatol 12:529,
rus or feline leukeimia virus. Am J Vet Rcs 6l:158,
'9661
2000.
6. Greene CE: Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat
14. Wolf AM, Troy GC: Deep mycotic diseases. In: Et-
I1. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1998.
tinger SJ.Feldman EC (eds): Textbook of Internal
7. Gross TL, et al: Veterinary Dermatopathology. Mosby
Medicine IV. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1995,
Ycar Book, St. Louis, 1992.
P 439.
8. llolzworth J: Mycotic diseases. In: Holzworth J (ed):
Diseases of the Cat. Medicine and Surgory,
Dermotophytosis
Vol 1.
W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1987, p 320.
15. Antos I, et al: Nachweis von Dermatophyten bei klin-
9. Kwon-Chung KJ, Bennett JE: Medical Myeology. Lea
isch gesunder Katzen und Hlunden in Wien. Wien
& Febiger, Philadelphia, 1992.
Tieraztl Mschr 83:199, 1996.
10. Rippon JW: Modical Mycology III. W.B. Saunders
16. Bibel DJ, Smiljanic RJ: Interactions of Trichophyton
Co., Philadelphia, 1988.
mentagrophytes and nierococci in skin culture. J In-
l0a. Saridomichelakis MN, et al: Recovery of Microspo-
vest Dermatol 72:133, 1979.
rum gypseum and Malasseti pachydernatis from the
17. Blakemorc JC: Dermatomyeosis. In: Kirk RW (ed):
416 · Fungal Skin Diseases
Current Veterinary Therapy V. W.B. Saunders Co.,
38. DeBocr DJ, et al: Clinical update ou feline dernato-
Philadelphia, 1974, p 422.
phytosis—part I1. Cormpend Contin Educ 17:1471,
18. Bond R,et al: Chronic dernatophytosis due to Mi-
1995.
crosporum peryicolor infection in threc dogs. J Small
39. De Jaham C, et al: Enilconazole emulsion in the
Anim Prart 33:571, 1992.
treatrment of dermatophytosis in Persian cats: Toler-
19. Borikar ST, Singh BA: A note on clinical ringwonn in
ance and suitability. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds):
domestic animals. Indian Vet J 71:98, 1994.
Ardvances in Veterinary Dernatology Ill. Butter-
 20. Bourdeau P, et al: Quelques formes rares de derma-
worth-Heinernann, Boston, 1998, p 299.
tomycoses des carnivores domestiques. 2e cas: Drr-
40. DeJaham C, Paradis M: La dermatophyte feline I:
matite generalisee du chien dne a une infection mixte
Etiopathogenie, aspects cliniques et principes diag-
nostiques. Med Vet Quebee 27:141, 1997.
seum. Point Vet 14:69, 1983.
41. Dejahan C, Pararlis M: La dermatophyte féline I:
21. Bourdeau P, Chermette R: Formes rares de dermato-
Modalités therapeutiques. Med Vet Quchxc 27:147,
mycoses des camivorrs. [lle cas: Dermatite localisee
1997.
 d  r a r   
42. Ferreiro L, et al: Relations between canine and felinc
mentagrophytes et Trichophyton erinacei. Point Vét
derunatophytosis and euzymatic activity of Microspo-
19:619, 1987.
rum canis strains. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Ad-
22. Boundeau P: Qucl est votre diagnostic? Point Vet 19:
vances in Veterinary Dermatology II1. Butterworth-
665, 1987.
Hcincmann, Boston, 1998, p 470.
23. Bourdeau P, et al: Trichophyton ajeli in a dog. Proc
42a. Flaig K, et al: Mierosporum canis als Ursache eines
Annu Cong Eur Soc Vet Dermatol Eur Coll Vet Der-
Dermatophyten— Pseudomyzetoms bci ciner Katze.
matol 14:188, 1997.
Prak Tierarztl 80:398, 1999.
24. Bourda HE: Study of carine ringworm epideniology
43. Foil CS: Dermatophytosis. In: Grifin CE, et al (eds):
in Thessaloniki area. Bull Hlellenic Vet Med Soc 48:
Current Veterinary Dermatology. Mosby-Ycar Book.
87. 1997.
St. Louis, 1993, p 22.
25. Bussieras J, ct al: Qucleques forines rares de dermato-
44. Cabal MA: Antifungal activity of ketoconazole with
mycoses des carmivores domesliques. ler cas: Derma-
emphasis on zoophilic fungal pathogens. Aim J Vet
tite generalisee du chien, due a unc infection mixte
Rcs 47:1229, 1986.
45. fones HE: Immune respouse and host resistance of
grophytes.Point Vet 13:43,1982.
humans to dermatophyte infection. J Am Acad Der-
26. Cabaies FJ, et al: Seasonal study of the fungal biota
matol 28:$12, 1993.
of the fur of dogs. Myeopathologia 133:1, 1996.
 46. Kaplan W, Iyons MS: Observations on seasonal varia-
 27. Cahanes Fj, et al: Dermatophytes isolated from do-
tions in incirdence of ringworm in dogs and cats in the
Inestic aninals in Barcclona, Spain. Mycopathologia
U.S.A. Salouraudia l:91, 196l.
137:107, 1997.
47. Knudsen EA: The areal extent of derinatophyte infec-
28. Carlotti DN: Traitement des teignes choz le chat.
tion. Br J Dermmatol 92:413, 1975.
Point Vet 29:681, 1998.
48. Larssou CE, et al: Ringworm in domestic cats in Sao
29. Carlotti DN, Bensigner F: Dermatophytosis due to
Paulo, Brazil, between 1981-1990. Felinc: Pract
Microsporum persicolor (13 cases) or Microsporum
22(3):11, 1994.
'2101 [oqeiuaa pA sop u (sose) og) unasdhs
49. Lewis DT, et al: Epideiniology and clinical features
1999.
of dermatophytosis in dogs and cats at Louisiana
30. Carmey HC, Moriello KA: Dermatophytosis: Cattery
State University: 1981-1990. Vet Dernatol 2:51,
Inanagement plan. In: Griffn CE, et al (eds): Current
1991.
Veterinary Dermatology. Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis,
50. Leyden JJ: Progression of interdigital infections fromn
1993, p 34.
sinplex to complex. J Am Acad Dcrmatol 28:S7.
1993.
by procucts produced by derimatophytes. J Am Acad
 51. Lueker DC, Kainer RA: Hyperthermia for the treat-
Dermatol 28:S19, 1993.
ment of dermatomycosis in dogs and cats. Vet Med
32. DeBoer DJ, ct al: Immunological reactivity to intra-
Small Anim Clin 76:658, 1981.
dermal dermatophyte antigens in cats with dermato-
 52. MacKay BM, ct al: Severe dermatophyte infections in
phytosis. Vet Dermatol 2:59, 1991.
a dog and cat. Aust Vet Practit 27:86, 1997.
33.1
DeBocr DJ, Moriello KA: Development of an experi.
 53. Mancianti F, Papini R: Isolation of keratinophilic
Imental model of Microsporum canis infection in cats.
fungi fron the foors of private veterinary clinies in
Vet Microbiol 42:289, 1994.
Italy. Vet Res Commun 20:161, 1996.
34. DeBoer DJ. Moriello KA: The immune response to
54. Mancianti F, et al: Effcacy of oral adninistration of
Microsporum canis induced by a fungal cell wall vac-
itraconazole to cats withi derinatophytosis caused by
cine. Vet Dermatol 5:47, 1994.
Microsporum canis. J Ain Vet Med Assoe 213:993.
35. DeBoer DJ、 Moriello KA: Investigations of a killed
1998.
dermatophyte cell-wall vaccine against infection with
55. Mancianti F, et al: Itraconazole susceptibility of felinc
Microsporum canis in cats. Res Vet Sci 59:1100,
isolates of Microsporun canis. Mycoses 40:313, 1997.
1995.
56. Medleau L, Ristie Z: Diagnosing derrnatophytosis in
36. DeBoer DJ, Moriello KA: Inability of two topical
dogs and cats. Vet Med 87:1086, 1992.
treatments to infuence the course of experimentally
57. Medleau L, Kuhl KA: Dealing wth chronic recuring
induced dermatopbylosis in cats. J Am Vet Med As-
dernatophytosis. Vet Med 87:1101, 1992.
soc 207:52,1995.
 58. Medleau L, Whitc-Weithers NE: Treating and pre-.
37. DeBocr DJ, Moriello KA: Clinical updatc on feline
venting the various forms nf dermatophytosis. Vet
derrmatophytosis —-pait I. Compend Contin Educ 17:
Med 87:1096, 1992.
1197. 1995.
 59. Medleau L, Chalmers SA: Ketocomazole for treatument
Fungal Skin Diseases · 417
of dermatophytosis in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 200:
dermatophytosis due to Microsponm canis. Vet Der-
77, 1992.
tatol 3:65, 1992.
 60. Medleau L, Chalmers SA: Resolution of generalized
80. Poisson L, et al: Subcorneal neutrophilic acantholytice:
dermatophytosis without treatment in dogs. I Am Vet
pustular dermatitis: An unusual manifestation of der-
Med Assoc 201:1891, 1992.
matophytosis resembling canine pemphigus foliaceus.
61. Medlean L, Rakich PM: Mierosporum canis pscudo-
In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary
mycetoimas in a cat. J Am Anirn Hosp Assoe 30:573,
Dermatology ll. Butterworth-Heincrmann, Boston,
1994.
1998, p 456.
62. Mereantini R, ct al: Fpidemiology of dermatophytoses
81. Puecini S, et al: In vitro susceptibility to antirmycotics
observed in Rome, Italy between 1985 and 1993. My-
of Microsporum canis isolates froni cats. J Aim Vet
coses 38:415, 1995.
Med Assoc 201:1375, 1992.
63. Mignon BR, Losson BJ: Prevalence and characteriza-
82. Reberg SR, et al: Dermatophytosis in shelter cats in
tion of Microsporum canis carriage in cats. J Med Vet
Mycol 35:249, 1997.
northcastcrn Indiana: A suvey of disease prevalence
and the infuence of shelter management practices.
64. Miller WH Jr, Goldschmidt MH: Myeetonna in a cat
caused by a dermatophyte: A case report. J Ain Anin
Proc Annu Meinh Meet An Acad Vet Dcrmatol Am
Coll Vet DerTnatol 15:39, 1999.
Hosp Assoc 22:255, 1986.
S3. Rely LM: An unusual prcsentation of foline derma-
65. Moriello KA, DeBoer DJ: Fungal flora of the coat of
pet cats. Am J Vet Res 52:602, 1991.
tophytosis. Feline Pract 23(6):25, 1995.
66. Moriello KA: Management of dermatopbyte infections
84. Rycroft AN, MeLay C: Disinfectants in the control of
in catteries and multiple-cat households. Vet Clin
sinall animal ringworm due to Microsporun canis.
North Am Small Anim Pract 20:1457, 1990.
Vet Rec 129:239, 1991.
67. Moriello KA, DeBoer DJ: Fungal Hora of the hair-
85. Scott DW, Hom RT Jr: Zoonotic dermatoses of dogs
coats of cats with and without dermatophytosis.
and cats. Vet Cin North Aim Simall Anin Pract 17:
J Med Vet Mycol 29:285, 1991.
117, 1987.
68. Moriello KA, et al: Isulation of dennatophytes from
 86. Scott DW, Paradis M: A survey of canine and feline
the haircoats of stray cats from selected animal shel-
skin disorders scen in a university practice: Small Ani-
ters in two different geographic regions in the United
Inal Cinie, University of Montreal, St. Hyacinthe,
States. Vet De1mnatol 5:52, 1994.
Quebec (1987- 1988). Can Vet J 31:830, 1990.
69. Moriello KA, DeBoer Dj: Effcacy of griseofulvin and
 87. Sidhu RK, et al: Incidence of mycotic dermatitis in
itraconazole in the treatment of experimentally in-
dogs. Indian Vet J 70:885, 1993.
duced dermatophytosis in cats. J AmVet Med Assoc
88. Simpanya MF, Baxter M: Isolation of fungi froin the
pelage of cats and dogs using the hairbrush tech-
207:439, 1995.
70. Moriello KA, et al: Tlhe prevalence of positive intra-
nique. Mycopathologia 134:129, 1996.
dermal skin test reactions to Microsporum canis anti-
89.8
Sparkes AH, et al: Epicdeiniological and diagnoste
gens in cats recovered from dermatophytosis. Proc
leatures of canine and feline dlermatophytosis in the
Annu Mernh Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll
United Kingdom. Vet Rec. 133:57, 1993.
90. Sparkes AH, et al: Microsporun canis: Inapparent
Vet Denmatol 13:14, 1997.
71. Moriello KA: Treatment of fcline dernatophytosis:
J Simall Anim Pract 35:397, 1994.
Revised
rccommendations. Feline Pract 24(3):32,
91. Sparkes AH, et al: Hlumoral inmune responses in
1996.
cats with dermatophytosis. Ain J Vet Res 54:1869,
72. Moriello KA, DeBoer D]: Environmental dccontami-
nation of Microsporum canis: In oitro studies using
1993.
92. Sparkes AH, et al: SDS-PAGE separation of denmato-
isolated infected cat hair. In: Kwochka KW,
ctal
(eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology II. But-
phyte antigens, aud Wester inmoblotting infeline
terworth-Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p 309.
dermatophiytosis. Mycopathologia 128:91, 1994.
93. Sparkes AH, et al: Aequired imumity in experimen-
73. Okamoto K, et al: Drug sensitivity of Microsporum
tal feline Microsporum canis infcction. Res Vet Sei
fecture. J Jpn Vet Med Assoc 47:118, 1994.
61:165, 1996.
94. Weitzman I, ct al: A survey of dernatophytes isolated
ui suo wnodso Aq pesne sieo eaun u
from human patients in the United States fron 1993
and electron microscopic sludy. Arch Derrmatol Res
to l995.I Am Acad De11natol 39:255, 1998.
281:238, 1989.
95. White-Weithers N, Medleau L: Evaluation of topical
73. Papini R, Mancianti F: Extracellular enzymatic activ-
therapies for the treatment of dermatophyte-infected
hairs from dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31:
ity of Microsporum canis isolates.Mycopathologia
132:129,1996.
250, 1995.
76. Parker WM. Yager JA: Trichophyton dermatophyto-
Candidiasis
sis—a discase casily confused with pemphigus erythe-
 96. Barmett JA, et al: Yeasts: Characteristics and Identif-
matosus. Can Vet J 38:502, 1997.
 cation. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1990.
77. Paterson S: Miconazole/chlorhexidine sharnpoo as an
97. Bourdeau P, et al: Ilyperkeratose et candidose cuta.
nee chez un chien. Etude d'un cas. Rec Med Vét
phytosis in cats. J Small Anim Pract 40:163, 1999.
160:803, 1984.
78. Philpot CM, et al: Preliminary report on the isolation
98. Carlotti DN. et al: Les mycoses superficielles chez lc.
of a dysgonic variety of Microsporum canis together
chat. Prat Med Chir Anini Comp 28:241, 1993.
with the normal variety from a cattery. Mycopatholo-
99. Carlotti DN, Pin D: Candida pododermatitis in the
gia 120:73, 1992.
dog: A report of 5 cases. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am
79. Pinter L, et al: The value of enzyme-linked immuno-
Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vct Dermatol 15:55,
 sorbent assay (FLISA) in the sero-diagnosis of canine
1999.
418 · Fungal Skin Diseases
100. Dale JE: Canine dermatosis caused by Candida par.
atedl alherence of Malassezia pachydermatis to ca-
apsilosis. Vet Med Small Anim Chin 67:548, 1972.
nine cormeocytes in vitro. In: Kwochka KW, et al
101. Greene CF, Chandler FW: Candidiasis. In: Greene
(eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III. But-
CE (ed): Infectious Diseases of Dogs and Cats. W.B.
terworth-Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p 530.
Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1990, p 723.
120. Bond R, Lloyd DH: The relationship between popu.
102. Guillot J, ct al: Les Candidoses des carnivores domes-
lation sizes of Malassezia pachydermatis in healthy
87 ea rurod seo ot ap sodoid e uogeseoy isanbn
dogs and in basset hounds with M. pachydermatis-
51, 1996.
associated seborrhoeic dermatitis and adherence to
103. Ichijo S, et al: A caninc case of cutaneous phyrna
canine comeocytes in vitro. In: Kwochka KW, et al
caused by Candida zeylanoides. Ipn J Vet Mecd Assoe
37:773, 1984.
terworth-Heinemann, Bostun, 1998, p 283.
104. Kral F, Uscavage JP: Cutaneous candidiasis in a dog.
121. Bond R, Lloyd DH: Skin and mucosal populations of
J Am Vet Med Assoc 136:612, 1960.
Malassezia pachydernatis in healthy and seborrhoeic
105.
Schwartzman RM, et al: Experimentaly induced cuta-
basset hounds. Vet Dermnatol 8:101, 1997.
neous moniliasis (Candida albicans) in the dog.
122. Bond R. et al ISolat of Maiaseia sympodilis and
J Small Anim Pract 6:327, 1965.
Malassezia globosa fron healthy pet cats. Vet Rec
Malassezia Dermatitis
141:200, 1997.
123. Bond R, et al: Humoral and cellmediatecd inrune
105a. Aizawa T, et al: Molocular heterogeneity in clinical
isolates of Malassezia pachydermatis from dogs. Vet
responses to Malassezia pachydernatis in healthy
Microbiol 70:67, 1999.
 ea sp ae  si e so
106.Anthony RM, et al: The application of DNA typing
143:381, 1998.
124. Bond R, Lloyd DH: Studies on the role of carbohy-
methods to the study of the epidemiology of Malasse-
      
drates in the adherence of Malassezia pachydermatis
1994.
to canine cormeocytes in vitro. Vet Dermatol 9:105,
107. Bensignor E, et al: Comparaison de quatre tech-
1998.
125. Bond R, Lloyd DHl: Effect of topical therapy of Ma-
niques cytologiques pour la misc en cvidence de Ma-
lassezia pachydernatis sur la peau du chicn. Prat
lasvezia pachydermatis-associated seborrheic dermati-
tis on oral carige of M. pachydermatis. Vet Rec
Med Chir Anin Comp 34:33, 1999.
108. Boekhout T, Bosboom RW: Karyotyping of Malasse-
142:725, 1998.
126. Carlotti DN, Laffort-Dassot C: Dermatite a Malasse-
zia yeasts: Taxonomic and epidemiological implica-
tions. System Appl Mierobiol 7:146, 1994.
zia chez le chien: Etude bibliographique et retrospec-
10Sa.Bond R:Hlowmight Maiassezia pachydermatis cause
tive de 12 cas generalises traites par des derives az0.
kes. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 3i:297, 1996.
canine skin diseases? Proc Br Vet Dermatol Study
d yzassw jo upida uy e a fH ueu 71
Group, Autumn 1999, p 41.
109. Bond R, Sant RE: The recovery of Malassezia pachy-
dermatis in an intcnsive care nursery associated with
  s d s a  o 
dermatis from canine skin. Vet Dermatol Newsl 15:
25, 1993.
J Mcd 338:706, 1998.
110. Bond R, et al: Use of contact plates for the quantita-
128. Coutinto SD, et al: Protein profilcs of Malassezia
tive culture of Malassezia pachydermatis from caninc
pachydermatis
sisolated from cdogs. Mycopathologia
skin. J Small Anin Pract 35:68, 1994.
139:129, 1997.
1ll. Bond R, et al: Evaluation of a detergent scrub tech-
128a. Crespo MJ, et al: Isolation of Malassezia furfur from
nique for the quantitative culture of Malassezia
a cat. J Clin Microbiol 37:1573, 1999.
129. Dufait R: Pityrosporum canis as thc cause of canine
1995.
chronic dermatitis. Vet Med Sumall Anin Clin 78:
112. Bond R, et al: Comparison of two shampoos for treat-
1055,1983.
ment of Malassezia pachydermatis-associated sehor-
130. Dworecka-Kaszak B, et al: Evaluation of selected
rhoeic dermatitis in basset hounds. J Small Anim
physiological and morphological characteristics of Pi
Pract 36:99, 1995.
113. Bond R, et al: Population sizes and frequency of Ma-
of otitis externa and dermatitis in dogs and cats. Arch
Vet Polon 34:3, 1994.
healthy dogs. J Small Anim Pract 36:147, 1995.
131. Forstervanhijfte MA, et al: Resolution of exfoliative
114. B
Bond R,Anthony RM: Characterization of markedly
dermatitis and Malassezia overgrowth in a cat after
lipid-dependent Malassezia pachyaiermatis isolates
surgical thymoma resection. J Small Anin Pract 38:
from healthy dogs. J Appl Bacteriol 78:537, 1995.
451, 1997.
115. Bond R, et al: Factors associated with elevated cuta-
132. Godfrey DR: A case of feline paraneoplastic alopecia
neous Malasseaia pachycdernatis populations in dogs
with sccondary Malassezia-associated dermatitis. J
with pruritic skin disease. J Small Anim Pract 37:103,
Small Anirm Pract 39:394, 1998.
1996.
133. Griffn CE: Malassezia paronychia in atopic dogs.
116. Bond R, Lloyd DH: Factors affecting the adherence
Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Derrnatol Am
of Malassezia pachydermatis to canine corneocytes in
Coll Vet Dermatol 12:51, 1996.
vitro. Ve:t Dermatol 7:49, 1996.
134. Guaguere E, Prelaud P: Etude retrospective de 54
117. Bond R, 1.loyd DH: Comparison of media and condi-
cas de dermite a Malassezia pachydermatis chez le
tions of ineubation for the quantitative culture of Ma.
chien: Resultats epidemiologiqucs, cliniques, cytolo-
lassezia pachydermatis from canine skin. Res Vet Sci
giques et histopathologiques. Prat Méd Chir Anim
61:273, 1996.
Comp 31:309, 1996.
118.
Bond R, et al: Isolation of Malassezia sympoxdialis
135. Guillt J, et al: Prevalence du genre Matassezta chez
frorm felinc skin. J Med Vet Myuxol 34:145, 1996.
les rmarmmiferes. J Mycol Med 4:72, 1994.
119. Bond R, Lloyd DH: Evidence for carbohydrate-1medi-
136. Guillot J,. Gueho′j: The diversity of Malassezia yeasts
Fungal Skin Diseases · 419
confirmedl by rRNA sequence and nuclear DNA com-
within noninffamed hair follicles of skin biopsies from
parisons. Antonie van Leeuwenhoek 67:297, 1995.
cats with nonneoplastic dermatoses. Clormell Vet S2:
137. Guillot I. et al: Epiderniological analysis of Malassezia
371, 1992.
pachydermatis isolates by partial sequencing of the
155. Vitale C, ct al: Quantification of Malassezia pachyder.
large subunit rihosomal ' RNA. Res Vet Soi 62:22,
uatis obtained from skin of normal and atopic dogs.
1997.
Proc Annu Memb Meet Ain Acad Vet Dermatol Am
138. Guillot J. et al: Importancc des levires du genre
Coll Vet Dermatol 11:14, 1995.
Malassezia.Point Vet 29:69l, 1998.
156.Wagner R, Schadle S: Malassezia in 3 days old pup-
138a. Guillot I, Bond R: Maiassezia pachydermatis: A Ie-
pies. Proc Annu Menmh Meet Am Aead Vet Derrmatol
view. Med Mycol 37:295, 1999.
Am Coll Vet Derinatol 15:45, 1999.
139. Kennis RA, et al: Quantity and dlistribution of Malas-
157. Whitc SD, et al: Comparison via cytology and culture
seaorganismsonthesnofclrieallynormal dogs.
of carriage of Malassezia pachydermatis in atopic and
J Am Vet Med Assoc 208:1048, 1996.
healthy dogs. In: Kwochika KW, et al (eds: Advances
140. Kieffer M, et al: Immunological reactions to Pityros-
in Veterinary Derinatology III. Buttervorth-Heine-
porum ouale in adult patients with atopic and sebor-
mann, Boston, 1998, p 291.
rheie dermatitis. J Am Acad Dermatel 22:739, 1990.
Rhodotorula Dermatitis
141. Lloyd DH, Lamport Al: Activity of chlorhexidine
158. Bourdeau P, et al: Suspicion dc dermnatomycxose a
shampoos in vitro against Staphylococcus intermedius,
Rhodotorula muciaginosa chez.un chat infecte par lc
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Malassezia pachyder-
FeLV et le FIV. Rec Med vet 168:91, 1992.
matis. Vet Rec 144:536, 1999.
142. Lorcnzini R, et al: In vitro sensitivity of Malassezia
Piedra
spp. to various antimycoties. Drugs Exp Clin Res 1l:
159. Miguens MP, Ferreiros MP: Un caso de piedra
393,1985.
blanca cn un perro. Rev Iber Micol 4:69, 1987.
143. Mason KV, Evans AG: Dermatitis associaled with
Eumycotic Mycetoma
Malassexia pachydermatis in 1l dogs. j Am Anim
160. Alison N, et al: Eumyeotic rnycetoma caused by
Hosp Assoc 27:13, 1991.
Pseudoallescheria boydi in a dog. J Am Vet Med
144. Mason KV, Stewart LJ: Malassezia and canine derima-
Assoe 194:797, 1989.
titis. In: Ihrke PJ, et al (eds). Advanccs in Veterinary
Dermnatology II. New York: Pergarnon Press, 1993,
161. Bcale KM, Pinson D: Phaeohyphomyeosis caused by
p 399.
from the same houschold. J Ain Anin losp Assoc
145. Mathieson I, ct al: Enzymatic activity of Malassezia
pachydermatis. ln: Kwochka KW, et al (cds): Ad-
26:67, 1990.
162. Bourdeau P, et al: Pyogranulomatous panniculitis due
vances in Veterinary Dermatology IIl. Butterworth-
Heinenmann, Boston, 1998, p 532.
KW. et al (eds): Adlvances in Veterinary Dermatology
146. Mauldin EA, et al: Malassezia dermatitis in the dog:
 A retrospective histopathological and inimunopathol-
I1l. Butterworth-Heinermann, Boston, 1998, p 447.
ogical study of 86 cases (1990-1995). Vet Dermatol
163. Coyle V, et al: Canine TnycetoHma: A case report and
review of the literature. j Small Anim Pract 25:261,
8:191, 1997.
146a. Midreuil F, et al: Genetic diversity in the yeast spc-
1984.
164. Foil (CS: Eumycotie inycetoma. ln: Greene CE (ed):
cies Malassezia pachydermatis analysed by inultilocus
enzyme electrophoresis. Int J Syst Bacteriol 49:1287,
Infectious Diseascs of Dogs andl Cats. W.B. Saunders
Co., Philadelphia, 1990, p 738.
1999.
165. Mezza LE, Harvey HJ: Osteoyelitis associated with
147. Morris DO, Rosser EJ: Immunologic aspects of Ma-
pooe a  sd u sp 
macnromycotie myectoma in the foot of a dog. J Am
matitis. Proc Annu Memb Mcet Ain Acacd Vet Dor-
Anin Hosp Assoc 2l:215, 1985.
matol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 1l:16, 1995.
166. van dcn Broek AHM, Thoday KL: Eurnycetoma in a
148. Morris DO, ct al: Type-1 hypersensitivity reactions to
British cat. J Sinall Anim Pract 28:827, 1987.
Malassezia pachylermatis extracts in atopic dogs.Am
Phaeohyphomycosis
r Vet Res 59:836, 1998.
167. Ajello L, et al: Phacohyphorycosis in a dog caused
149. Nagata M, Ishidu T: Cutaneous reactivity to Malasse-
by Pseudomicrodochium suttonti. Mycotaxon 12:131,
zia pachydermats in dogs with seborrheie dermatitis.
1980.
Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am
167a. Bond R: Phaeobyphomycosis in two cats, Proc Br
Coll Vet Dermatol 11:1l, 1995.
Vet Dermatol Study Group, Autumn 1999, p 47.
  ss 
168. Bostock DE, et al: Plhaeohyphornycosis caused by Ex-
Malassezia in normal and atopic: dogs. Proc Annu
ophiala jeanselmei in a domestic cat. J Comp Pathol
Cong Eur Soc Vet Dermatol Eur Colf Vet Dermatol
92:479, 1982.
14:166, 1997.
169. Dhein CR, el al: Phaeohyphomycosis caused by Alter-
151. Plant JD, et al: Factors associated with and preva-
lence of high Malassezia puchydermatis numhers ou
1101, 1988.
dog skin. J Ain Vet Med Assoc 201:879, 1992.
170. Foil CS: Phaeohyphomycosis. In: Greene CE (ed):
152. Schmidt A: In vitro ativity of clmbzole, clotrimazle.
Infectious Discases of Dogs and Cats. W.B. Saunders
and silver-sulfadiazine against isolates of Matassezid
Co., Philadclphia, 1990, p 737.
pachyderrnatis. J Vet Med B 44:193, 1997.
171. Jang SS, ct al: Feline abscesses duc to Cladosporiun
153. Scott Dw: Bacteria and yeast on the surface and
trichoides. Sahouraudia 15:115, 1977.
within noninflamed hair follicles of skin hiopsies from
172. Kettlcwell P, et al: Phaeohyphomycosis caused by Ex-
dogs with nonneoplastic dermatoses. Cornell Vel 82:
ophiala spinifera in two cats. J Med Vet Mycol 27:
379, 1992.
257, 1989.
154. Scott DW: Bacteria and ycast on the surfacc and
173. Kwochka KW, ct al: Caninc phaeohyphomycosis
420 · Fungal Skin Diseases
caused by Drechsleru spicifera: A case report and
horncm: Aspectos clinicos, mierohiologicos e anato-
literature review. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:625,
mopatologicos. Arq Bras Med Vet Zootec 47:43,
1984.
1995.
174. Lomax LG, et al; Osteolytic phaeohyphomycosis in a
195. Rosscr EJ Jr: Sporotrichosis. In: Gniffn CE, et al
German shepherd dog caused by Phialemonium obot-
(eds): Current Veterinary Dermatology. Mosby-Year
atum. J Clin Microbiol 23:987, 1986.
Book, St. Louis, 1993, p 49.
175. Malik R, et al: Phaechyphomycosis caused by Exophi-
196. Wcrner AH, Wemer BE: Sporotrichosis in man and
ala jeanselmei in a cat. Aust Vet Practit 24:27, 1994.
aninals. Int J Denmatol 33:692, 1994.
176. McKeever PJ, et al: Chromomycosis in a cat: Success-
Rhinosporidiosis
ful medical therapy. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 19:533,
197. Breitschwerdt E: Rlhinosporidiosis. In: Criffn CE, et
1983.
177. McKenzie RA, ct al: Subcutaneous phaeohyphomy-
al (eds): Current Veterinary Dermatology. Mosby-
cosis caused by Monilella suaceolens in two cats. Vet
Year Book, St. Louis, 1993, p 711.
Pathol 2l:582, 1984.
Alternaria Dermatitis
178. Outerbridge CA, et al: Phaeohyphonnycosis in a cat.
198. Baumgartner W, Posselt HJ: Kutane Alternariosc bci
Can Vect J 36:629, 1995.
Hunden mit unspczifischcn Dermatitiden. Kleinter-
179.Padhye AA,et al:Xylohypha emmonsi sp. mov, a
praxis 28:353, 1983.
newagent of phacohyphomycosis.J Clin Microbiol
199. Weiss R, et al: Schimmclpilzmykose beim Hund
26:702, 1988.
durch Alternaria tenuissinu. Kleintierpraxis 33:293,
1988.
Treatinent with ketoconazole and 5-FC. Can Vet J
Cryptococcosis
25:130, 1984.
181. Sousa CA, et al: Subcutaneous phacohyphomycosis
200. Davies C, Troy GC: Deep mycotic infections in cats.
(Stemphyllun sp. and Claulosporium sp. infections) in
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32:38, 1996.
a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 185:673, 1984.
201.
Flalland B, et al: Clinical and serologic evaluation of
182. Van Steenhouse JL, et al: Subcutaneous phaeohypho-
cats with cryptococcosis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 209:
mycosis caused by Scolecobasidium humicola in a cat.
1110, 1996.
Mycopathologia 102:123,1988.
 202. Gerdes-Grogan S, Dayrell-Ilurt B: Feline cryptococ-
183. Waurzyuiak Bj, et al: Dual systemic mycosis cansed
cosis: A retrospective evaluation. J Am Anim IHosp
by Bipolaris spicifera and Torulopsis glabrata in a
Assoc 33:118, 1997.
dog. Vet Pathol 29:566, 1992.
203. IIansen BL: Successful treatment of severe feline
cryptococcosis with long-term high doses of ketocona-
Pythiosis and Zygomycosis
184. Bauer RW, et al: Oral conidiobolomycosis in a dog.
zole. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 23:193, 1987.
Vet Dermatol 8:115, 1997.
tors inftiencing treatiment, outcone, and the results
185. Bentinck-Smith J, et al; Canine pythiosis--isolation
and identification of Pythium insidiosu. J Vet Diagn
of sequential serum antigen tilers in 35 cats. J Vet Int
Med 11:1, 1997.
Invest 1:295, 1989.
205. Malik R, et al: Cryptococcosis in cats: Clinical and
185a. Dykstra MJ, et al: A description of cutaneous-subcu-
nycological assessment of 29 cases and evaluation of
taneous pythiosis in fifteen dogs. Med Mycol 37:427,
treatment using orally administered Auconazole. J
1999.
186. English MP, Laucke VM: Phycomycosis in a dog
Med Vet Mycol 30:133, 1992
206. Malik R, et al: Combination chernotherapy of canine
caused by unusual strains of Absidia corymbifera. Sa-
and feline cryptococcosis using subcutaneously admin-
bouraudia 8:126, 1970.
187. Foil CSO, et al: A report of subcutaneous pythiosis in
istered amphotericin B. Aust Vet J 73:124, 1996.
207. Malik R, et al: Cryptococcosis in dogs: A retrospec-
five dogs and a review of the etiologic agent Pythium
tive stucy of 20 consecutive cases. J Med Vet Mycol
spp. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:959, 1984.
188.B
Foil CS: Oomycosis (pythiosis). In: Greene CF (ed):
33:291, 1995.
208. Medleau L, et al: Cutaneous cryptococcosis in threc
Infectious Diseases of Dogs and Cats. W.B. Saunders
Co., Philadclphia, 1990, p 731.
cats. J Ain Vet Med Assoc 187:169, 1985.
189. Foil CS: Zygomycosis. In: Greene CE (ed): Infectious
209. Medleau L, et al: Clinieal evaluation of a eryptococeal
Diseases of Dogs and Cats. W.B. Saunders Co., Phil-
antigen latex agglutination test for liagnosis of crypto-
adelphia, 1990, p 734.
coccosis in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 196:1470, i990.
190.Hillier A,et al: Canine subcutaneous zygomycosis
210. Medleau L, et al: Evaluation of ketoconazole and
n pue pod aso y ds soo Aq psne
itraconazole for treatiment of disseminated cryptococ-
of Conicdiobous infections in other species. Vet Der-
cosis in cats. Am J Vet Res 51:1454, 1990.
matol 5:205, 1994.
211. Melleau L, Barsanti JA: Cryptococcosis. In: Creene
191. Thomas RC, Lewis DT: Pythiosis in dogs and cats.
CE (ed): Infectious Diseases of Dogs and Cats. W.B.
Compend Cont Edue 20:63, 1998.
Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1990, p 687.
Sporotrichosis
212. Medleau L, et al: Itraconazole for the treatment of
cryptococcosis in cats. J Vet Int Med 9:39, 1995.
192. Dunstan RW, et al: Feline sporotrichosis: A report of
 213. Mikiciuk MC, et al: Successful treatment of feline
five cases with transmission to humans. J Am Acad
cryptococcosis with ketocomazole and fueytosine. J
Dermatol 15:37, 1986.
Anl Anirm Hosp Assoc 26:199, 1990.
193. Macdonald E, et al: Reappearance of Sporothrix
 214. Miltchell DH, et al: Cryptococcal disease of the CNS
schenckit lesions after administration of Solu-Medrol
to infectedl cats. Sabouraudia 18:295, 1980.
in immunocompetent hosts: Influence of cryptococcal
4. Nogueira RHC, et al: Relato de esporotricosc felina
variety on clinical manifestations and outcome. Clin
194.
Infect Dis 20:611, 1995.
(Sporothrix schencki) com transmissao para o
215. Noxon JO, et al: Ketocomazole therapy in canine and
Fungal Skin Diseases * 421
feline cryptococcosis. J Am Anim Hlosp Assoc 22:179,
Annu Memb Meet Ain Acad Vet Dermatol Ain Coll
1986.
Vet Dermatol 15:37. 1999.
 216. Pentlarge VW, Martin RA: Treatment of cryptococco-
Protothecosis
sis in three cats using ketoconazolc. J Arri Vet Med
238. Boyd AS, et al: Cutaneous manifestations of Proto.
Assoc 188:536, 1986.
 217. Shaw SE: Successfnl treatment of il cases of felinte
thecα infections. J Am Acad Dermatol 32:758, 1995.
239. Dechervois I, Plassiart G: Protothecose cutaneo-na-
cryptococcosis. Aust Vet Pract 18:135, 1988.
218. Wilkinson GT, et al: Successful treatment of four
sale chez un chien. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 33:
cases of feline cryptococcosis. J Small Anim Pract 24:
145, 1998.
507, 1983.
240. Dillberger JE, et al: Protothecosis in two cats. J Ain
Vet Med Assoc 192:1557. 1988.
Blastomycosis
241.
Cinel P, et al: Cutaneous protothecosis in a dog. Vct
219. Arceneaux KA, et al: Blastomycosis in dogs: 115 cases
Rec 140:651, 1997.
(1980-1995). J Am Vet Med Assoc 213:658, 1998.
242.
Macartney L, et al: Cutaneous protothecosis in the:
dog: First confirmed case in Britain. Vet Rec 123:494.
State. J Vet Med Assoe 210:502, 1997.
1988.
221.
.Cote E, et al: Possible transmission of Blastomyces
243. Perez J, et al: Canine cutancous protothecosis: An
dermatitdis via culture specimen. J Am Vet Med
innunohistochemical analysis of the infammatory
Assoc 210:479, 1997.
cellular infiltrate. J Comp Pathol 117:83, 1997.
22la. Gortel K, et al: Calcinosis cutis associated with sys-
 244. Sudman MS. et al: Primary mucocutaneous protothe-
temic blastomycosis in thrce dogs. J Am Anim Hosp
cosis in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 163:1372, 1973.
Assoc 35:368, 1999.
245. Tyler DE: Protothecosis. In: Greene CE (ed): Infec-
222. Krawiec DR, et al: Use of an amphotericin B lipid
tious Diseases of Dogs and Cats. W.B. Saunders Co.,
complex for ireatment of blastomyeosis in dogs. J Arn
Philadelphia, 1990, p 742.
Vet Med Assoc 209:2073, 1996.
246. wilkinson GT, Leong G: Protothecosis in a dog. Aust
223. Legendre AM: Blastomycosis. In: Creene CE (ed):
Vet Pract 18:147, 1988.
Infectious Diseases of Dogs and Cats. W.B. Saunders
Co., Philadelphia, 1990, p 669.
Trichosporon Dermatitis
224. Legendre AM,et al: Treatment of blastomycosis with
247. Doster AR, et al: Trichosporonosis in two cats. J Arn
itraconazole in 112 dogs. J Vet Int Med 10:365, 1996.
Vet Med Assoc 190:1184, 1987.
225. Rudmann DG, et al:Evalualion of risk factors for
248. Grcene CE, Chandler FW: Tichosporonosis. ln:
blastomycosis in dogs: 857 cascs (1980-1990). J Am
Creene CF (cdl): Infectious Diseases of Dogs and
Vet Med Assoc 201:i754, 1992.
Cats. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1990, p 728.
Coccidioidomycosis
Geotrichum Dermatitis
226. Barsanti JA, Jeffery KL: Coccidioidomycosis. In:
 248a. Reppas GP, Snoeck TD: Cutaneous geotrichosis in a
Creene CE (ed): Infectious Diseascs of Dogs and
dog. Aust Vet J 77:547. 1999.
Cats. W.B. Saunders Co., Philatelphia, 1990, p 696.
249. Sidihu RK, et al: Cutancous gcotrichosis in a dog and
227. Greene RT, Troy GC: Coecidioidomycosis in 48 cats:
its landler—a case report. Indian J Anin Hlth 32:1,
A retrospective study (1984-1993). J Vet Int Med 9:
1993.
86, 1995.
Antifungai Theropy
Histopiasmosis
250. Boothe DM, et al: Itraconazole disposition afer sin-
228. Hodges RD, et al: Itraconazole for the treatment of
gle oral and intravenous and multiple oral dosing in
histoplasmosis in cats. J Vet Int Med 8:409, 1994.
healthy cats. Arn J Vet Res 58:872, i997.
229. Wolf AM: Histoplasmosis. In: Greene CE (ed): Infec-
231. Chen C: Personal comurunication, 1997.
tious Diseases of Dogs and Cats. W.B. Saunders Co.
252. Craig AJ, et al: Pharmacokinetics of fuconazole in
Philadelphia, 1990, p 679.
cats after intravenous and oral adninistration. Res 
 Aspergillus Dermatitis
Vet Sei 57:372, 1994.
230. Nooruddin M, et al: Cutaneous altcrmariosvis and as-
253. DArcy P, et al: The anti-inflammatory action of
pergillosis in humans, dogs, and goats in Punjab. In-
griseofulvin in experinental animals. J Pharm Phar-
dian J Vet Med 6:65, 1986.
nacol 12:659, 1960.
231. Sharp, N. J. H., et al: Canine nasal aspcrgillosis and
254. deDoncker P, et al: Antifungal pulse therapy for ony-
 penicilosis. Comp Cont Educ 13:41, 1991.
chonycosis. Arch Derrmatol 132:34-41, 1996.
Paecilomycosis
255. Guillot J, Cherrmette R: Ie traitment des myeoses des
232.Elliott GS, et al: Antemortem diagmosis of paecilomy-
 carnivores domestiques. Point Vet 28:51, 1997.
cosis in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoe 184:93, 1984.
 256. Gupta AK, et al: Antifungal agents: An overview: Part
233. Foil CS: Hyalohyphomycosis. In: Greene CF (cd):
1. [ Am Acad Dermatol 30:677, 1994.
Infectious Diseases of Dogs and Cats. W.3. Saunders
257. Gupta AK,ct al: Antifungal agents: An overview: Part
Co., Philadelphia, 1990, p 735.
I1. J Am Acad Dermatol 30:911, 1994.
234. Littrnan MP, Goldschmidt MH: Systemic paccilony-
257a. Cupta AK, et al: Drug interactions with intracona-
cosis in a dog. J An Vet Med Assoe 191:445, 1987.
zole, fuconazole, and terbinafine and their managc-
235. Nakagawa Y, et al: A canine case of profound granm-
Iment. J Am Acad Dermatol 41:237, 1999.
lomatosis due to Poaecioryces fungus. J Vet Med Sci
258. Facrgeman J: Pharmacokineties of Hueonazole in
58:157, 1996.
skin and nails. J Am Acad Dermatol 40:S14, 1999.
236. Patterson JM, et al: A case of disseminated paecilo-
 259. lleit MC, Riviere JE: Antifungal therapy: Ketocona-
mycosis in' the dog. I Arn Anin Hosp Assoc 19:569.
zole and other azole derivatives. Comp Cont Edue
1983.
21, 1995.
237. Rosser Ej: Cutaneous paecilomycosis in a cal. Proc
260. Helton KA, ct al: Griseofulvin toxicity in cats: Litera-
422 · Fungal Skin Diseases
ture review and report of seven cases. J Am Anin
griseofulvin therapy in cats with feline immunodefi-
Hosp Assoc 22:453, 1986.
ciency virus infection. J Vet Int Med 4:317, 1990.
26]. Hill PB, et al: A review of systemic antifungal agents.
268. Tamaki K, et al: Differential effect of griseofulvin on
Vet Dermatol 6:59, 1995.
interferon-induced HLA-DR and intercellular adhe-
262. Kunkle GA, Meyer DJ: Toxicity of high doses of gris-
sion molecule-l expression of human keratinocytes.
eofulvin in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 191:322, 1987.
Br J Dermatol 127:258, 1992.
263. Mitchell F, et al: Griseofulvin: Immunosuppressive
269. Vadcn SL, et al: Fluconazole in cats: Pharnacoki-
action. Proc Soc Fxp Biol Med 143:165, 1973.
netics following intravenous and oral administration
263a. Plotnick AN: Lipid-based formulations of amphoteri-
and penetration into cerebrospinal fuid, aqueous lu-
cin B. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 216:838, 2000.
mour, and pulmonary epithelial lining Huid. J Vet
264. Rowan-Kelly B, et al: Modifcation of polymorphonu-
Pharmacol Therap 20:181, 1997.
270. Van Cutsem J, et al: The antiinflammatory effects of
col 6:389, 1984.
ketoconazole. J Am Acad Denuatol 25:257, 1991.
265. Scher RK: Onychomycosis: Therapeutic update. J Am
271.
Willard MD, et al: Ketoconazole-induced changes in
Acad Dermatol 40:S21, 1999.
selected canine hormone concentrations. Am J Vel
266. Stt FW, et al: Teratogenes in cats associated with
Res 47:2504,1986.
griseofulvin therapy. Teratology 1l:79, 1975.
272. Yamaguchi H, et al: Immunomoxdulatory activity of
 267. Shelton GHl, et al: Severe neutropenia associated with
antifungal drugs. Ann N Y Acad Sci 685:447, 1993.
Chante
Parasitic Skin Disease
ninal skin is exposed to attack by many kinds of animal parasites.1-o Each species
 has a particular effect on the skin; the effect can be mild, as in the case of an
isolated fy or nosquito bite, or severe, as in the case of generalized demodicosis or
canine scabies. Although the reaction of the skin to the infestation may be slight, the
common parasitisms must be considered here because the dermatologist is the logical
consultant in such cases.
When ectoparasites are vectors or intermediate hosts of bacterial, rickettsial, or para-
sitic dliseases, they become more important than when they produce only their own effect.
A severe local or' systemic reaction may result when toxins are injected into the skin (e.g.
tick paralysis). The larvae of some parasites live in wounds or on macerated skin and
produce a condition known as myiasis. The most serious derrmatologic concern occurs
when the dermatosis produced by parasites living in or on the skin produces irritation and
sensitization.
 Some parasites (Cheyletiella mitcs and biting lice) live on the skin, subsisting on the
debris and exudates that are produced on its surface. Other parasites (feas, sucking lice,
 and ticks) live on the skin but periodically penetrate its surface to draw nourishment from
blood and tissue Huids. Still other parasites (demodectic and sarcoptic mites) live within
the skin for at least part of their life cycle, producing more severe cutaneous effects. The
reaction of the skin to these insults varies from trivial to lethal but usually includes
infainmation, edema, and an attempt to localize the foreign body. toxin, or cxcrctory
products of the parasite. These secretions are often allcrgenic and cause itching and
burning sensations.
● ANTIPaRaSItIC AGeNTS
 Over the years, dlozens of pesticides have been brought to the narket to treat or prevent
of compounds (e.g., chlorinated hydrocarbons) were so deleterious to the environment
 and wilelife that they virtually have disappeared from use. Other insecticides disappear or
remain, depending on market pressures. In the mid-90s, two new insecticides, imidaclo-
 prid and fipronil, were introduced for fea control. These products are so effective that
other agents, such as malathion, have disappeared. Environmental awareness also impacts
 product availability. In the carly 1990s, microencapsulated chlorpyrifos (Duratrol) was
used widely, whereas pyrethrin- and pyrethroid-based products were few in nunber.
rethrin and pyrethroid products abound. In general, the products we use today are
far
safer for animals and the environment than those we used 5 years ago. Efficacy also has
s  eo p     r s n s
Antiparasitic agents are delivered by collar, shampoo, cream rinse, powder, spray, dip
 Or spot application vehicle. Some agents are delivered by mouth, injection, or transdermal
 a  oe p a p as   a e su aa u 
Many antiparasitic agents would be highly toxic if applied in a vehicle that promoted
absorption or in a form that cnabled the animal to ingest quantities by licking the
423
424 · Parasitic Skin Diseases
medication. Cats, because of their licking habits, are particularly susceptible to toxic
reactions with chlorinated hydrocarbons, organophosphate, and pyrethroid products.
within the bounds of label indications. Most insecticides are registered by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and extralabel use, either for the species
follow label indications is not condoned or allowed, and the practitioner is not protected
by the argument that it is a standard acceptable practice. Many of these products, if
improperly used, pose environmental dangers. The Food Quality Protection Act of 1996
dramatically altered pesticide regulation. Even the disposal of insecticidal products is
facing regulation, and it is possible that, as a profession, veterinarians will be severely
limited in their ability to use or prescribe, or may be required to be licensed to use, these
agents to ensure that safe practices are followed.
Amitraz, ivermectin, milbemycin, and selamectin are four drugs that are regulated by
 on psn  are pe (aa) n  e pong ss pn a
extermal parasitic disorders of companion animals. Amitraz. is licensed for generalized
demodicosis and tick control in dogs. Selamectin is licensed for prevention of heartworrns
and the treatment of certain intestinal parasites, feas, and nonfollicular mites. All other
uses are extralabel applications, which, by definition, are illegal. Hlowever, the FDA
 o e o u asnu si esn p a  s
guidelines for extralabel usage have been developed by the American Veterinary Medical
Association, First and foremost, a valid veterinarian, client, and patient relationship must
exist. This requirement has greatest impact on the treatment of other animals at home
who have been exposed to the patient being examined or treated for scabies, cheyleticl-
liosis, or otodectic mange. Ivermectin or milbemycin, commonly used agents in these
narian. Beyond the valid relationship, the guidelines indicate that if a veterinary drug
exists in the proper dosage form; is labeled for the indication; and is clinically effective,
that product should be used. If no licensed drug exists or one or more of the three
 prerequisites cannot be satisfied, extralabel drug usage is appropriate.
Topical Treatments
o  p  sra e p ad i a e ro
dogs and cats. When treating the dermatosis, it is critical that the parasite; its life cycle,
epidemiology, and natural behavior; and the pathogenesis of the disease that it is causing
be considered. Topical therapy may be just one aspect of an overall trcatment plan or the
CHLORINATED HYDROCARBONS
Chlorinated hydrocarbons, which are dangerous insecticides, have become outdated and
replaced by safer products. They persist in the environment and animal tissue for long
      e  s s    s
Happy Jack, Inc.) and several methoxychlor fea and tick powders are still marketed. The
authors suggest the use of safer alternatives.
CHOLINESTERASE INHIBITORS
Two kinds of cholinesterase inhibitors are available, carbamates and organophosphates.
They were once the mainstay of insect control. However, with the advent of safer
products and better altermative treatment regimens, their use on pets is decreasing. They
are still valuable for environmental treatment in cases of infestation by feas and other
insects or arachnids.
Parasitic Skin Diseases * 425
Carbamates
Carbamates are typified by carbaryl and are safe for dogs and cats in 3% to 5% concentra-
tions in powders and 0.5% to 2% concentrations in sprays and dips. Carharyl should be
  n    s   r   sd  p
Although lower concentrations may be used on kittens and puppies older than 6 weeks, it 
is probably safer to use only pyrethrin until these animals are several months old.
 A fea colony bred from a newly collected strain of Florida feas was cormpared with
 commcrcially available feas (which had been reared away from the natural environment
to bendiocarb, malathion, and carbaryl as compared with the strain raised commercially.13
This more susceptible commercial strain was most comrmonly used for Hca product cff-
cacy tests in the past. Bendiocarb is a carbamate used by exterminators for prcmiscs flea
control.
Organophosphates
The most toxic insecticides in use are organophosphates. They are potent cholinesterase
inhibitors, and a cumulative effect may be seen if animals are exposed to similar insecti-
cides in another preparation or in lawn and garden applications. None of this group
should be used on kittens, and most are also dangerous to adult cats. Malathion is
different in some respects from the rest of the group. It provides a quick insect knock-
down, and it could be used carefully on adult cats. The main use of this class is for feas
and ticks. Chlorpyrifos and phosinet are the most commonly used products.
D-LIMONENE
 D-Limonene is a volatile citrus oil extract used in some botanical fea control products. Its
 insecticidal properties appear to be desiccant in nature because epicuticular oils are
removed. Efficacy is poorly defined, and adverse reactions have been seen in dogs and
cats.38
FIPRONIL
 Fipronil is a new insecticide and acaricide in the phenylprazole class.ll It acts as an
antagonist at the insect y-aminobutyric acid (GABA)receptor. Fipronil is marketed in a
spray (Frontline, Merial) or spot application product (Frontline Top Spot, Merial) for fea
 control in dogs and cats. Its efficacy in nonfollicular mite and lice infestations also has
been demonstratcd.
FORMAMIDINES
are also prostaglandin synthesis inhibitors and α-adrenergic agonists. Amitraz (Mitaban,
Upjohn & Pharmacia), the veterinary form, is available as a rinse and a collar for tick
control. In the United States and Canada, the rinse is licensed for use only in the
treatment of generalized demodicosis in the dog at a concentration of 250 ppm with an
application rate of every 14 days. It is also effective in the treatment of feline demodi-
cosis, Cheyletiella, Otodectes, Sarcoptes, and Notoedres. The drug is unstable and rapidly
oxidizes on exposure to air and sunlight, so it is important not to use expired product or
parts of a botle exposed to the air for long periods. Oxidized product may have increased
toxicity. The collar formulation is of no use in treating demodicosis.162
Its other actions include α-adrenergic agonist and prostaglandin inhibition. Side ef
fects of trcatmcnt often include transient sedation and pruritus, hypothermia, bradycardia,
hypotension, and hyperglycemia (use with caution in animals with diabetes mellitus). The
vehicle, xylene, is thought to contribute to toxicity problems.27. 45 A1nitraz dips are used at
different strengths and frequencies in various parts of the world.
426 · Parasitic Skin Diseases
INSECT GROWTH REGULATORS
 Insect growth regulators (IGRs) can be divided into two types: (1) juvenile hormone
chernicals in insects that control early stages of their metabolism, morphogenesis, and
reproduction.?5 Final maturation and pupation of Hea larvae proceed only in the presence
of appropriate levels or absence of the juvenile hormone for that stage of larval growth.
biochemical activities that mimic those of the natural juvenile hormone. Application to the
premises by spray or fogger prevents maturation of pupal fleas if they are exposed to it.
-at o -g ig 'ouuo sh p pasn juan an uo sudp noe jo une
control can be expected.29 Methoprene is sensitive to ultraviolet light, so that it has little
valuc outdoors. A problem with these products is the difficulty in delivering the product
deep into rugs, cracks, and recessed places where the larvae are developing. Environmen-
tally applied juvenoids do not affect the adult fiea, so that complete results (fea-free
outcome) are delayed for several weeks. This is corrected by simultaneous spraying or
mixing with insecticides that kill adult Heas. Juvenoids can be applied directly to the
environment or indirectly by on-animal applications. In the on-animal application mode,
the juvenoid is incorporated into a collar, spray, or spot application product and covers the
 animal's body. During feeding, the fea is exposed to the agent and eggs layed are exposed
  s       o    s  i
after 5 to 10 days of exposure.33
IMIDACLOPRID
Imidacloprid is a new insecticide of the chloronicotinyl nitroguanidine class.264 It binds to
the fea's nicotinic receptor on the postsynaptic neuron and blocks impulse transmission. It
prid is also effective against lice.
PYRETHRINS
Pyrethrin is a volatile oil extract of the chrysanthemum fower. It contains six active
pyrethrins that arc contact poisons and have a fast knockdown action and fushing action
on insccts but no residual activity. It is rapidly inactivated by ultraviolet light. Pyrethrins,
because of their low toxicity, rapid inactivation, and lack of tissue residue and buildup, are
relatively environmentally safe, although they are stil toxic to fish and bees. For clients
concermed with chemicals, the use of pyrethrins may be more acceptable, because this is
 an organic natural insecticide.
There is no cholinesterase suppression. Pyrethrin demonstrates a rapid kil but low
toxicity, and the low concentration of 0.06% to 0.4% is effective if it is synergized with
0.1% to 2% piperonyl butoxide, which forms a stable complex with cytochrome P450, thus
limiting the metabolism of pyrethrins in insects. Cats may develop central nervous system
(CNS) signs in response to piperonyl butoxide, but otherwise toxicity is low. Pyrethrins arc
effective against feas, Otodectes, fies, lice, and mosquitos. Effective use for Heas usually
necessitates daily application as a spray or a rinse unless nicroencapsulators or ultraviolct
light stabilizers are added to the formulation.
PYRETHROIDS
These synthesized chemicals are modeled after pyrethrin and include D-trans-allethrin,
bioallethrin, resmethrin, tetramethrin, deltamethrin, fenvalerate, and permethrin. The
LDso varies with the agent selected.22 In action and toxicity, they are relatively compara-
blc, although not identical, to pyrethrin. They produce a quick kill that is improved by the
addition of a synergist and pyrethrin. Some of the early pyrethroids degrade on exposure
to ultraviolet ight, so there is little or no residual activity. The new pyrethroids are
relatively photostable compared with pyrethrin.
Parasitic Skin Diseases · 427
 One of the most popular pyrethroid agents is permethrin, which is found in numerous
products with a wide variety of delivery systems. Part of permethrin's desirability is its low
toxicity (except in cats, so only limited low-concentration formulas are approved in this
species), relative stability on exposure to uitraviolet light, and potential for use as a
repellent. As with pyrethrins, the synthetic pyrethroids are often combined with other
active agents, particularly repellents.
REPELLENTS
Although these chemicals are capable of keeping insects away, they need frequent applica-
tion —often, every few hours depending on temperature, humidity, the density of insects,
the movement of the animal, and the drying effect of the wind. For control of feas, some
products only need daily or alternate-day application. Spray repellents are the primary
form for flea control because large areas must be treated frequently. Compounds with
repellent action inelude pyrethrin, pernethrin, citronella, diethyltoluamide (DEET),
ethohexadiol, dimethyl phthalate, butoxypropylene glycol, MGK-264, and ingredients in
Skin-So-Soft (Avon) bath oil (some believe that the fragrance is the effective ingred-
ient).14. 17 Amitraz has been effective in repelling ticks and is available in a tick collar
formulation.
ROTENONE
Rotenone, which is a natural organic compound, is derived from the root of the Derris
plant. It is similar to pyrethrins in having low toxicity, rapid action, and quick degradation.
It is available mixed with pyrethrin for use as a rinse or a shampoo for dogs and cats
(Durakyl, DVM Pharmaceuticals) and is used in sone products that are safe for puppies
and kittens.
SULFUR
s   ss sn h s a  u  si  
and its derivatives are excellent and safe parasiticides. The commercial lime sulfur solution
(LynDyp, DVM Pharmaceuticals) is safe for dogs and cats; is an inexpensive effective
treatment of infestations of nonfollicular mites; and is fungicidal, bactericidal, keratolytic,
 pe r e ad    a t    pm
sulfur ointment USP are other forms of sulfur medications. These high concentration
 products can be irritating.
Sulfur is a natural parasiticide that is relatively nontoxic and environmentally safe. Its
major drawback is the foul odor. It also stains jewelry and temporarily discolors hair,
especially white hair. It is drying but omly rarely iritating when used at a 2% concentra-
tion. A 2% to 5% lime sulfur solution is effective against Sarcoptes, Notoedres, Cheyle-
tiella, chiggers, fur mites, and lice. Contrary to common belief, sulfur is not an effective
ffea repellent, either topically or systemically.
Systemic Antiparasitic Agents
A variety of oral, topical, or parenterally given products are available that produce either
blood levels or cutaneous levels of the active agents. The advantages of these products are
their relative ease of administration and the certainty of their reaching the whole body.
eliminating parasites in long-coated animals. The disadvantages are the relative risks and
the use of the parasitic poisons internally to kill ectoparasite infestations. There is also the
risk of additivc toxicity if the pet is exposed to other topical insecticides. Another potential
difficulty is the duration of the effective blood levels between treatments. Fortunately, the
newer generations of systemic parasiticidal agents are not similar to the poisons of the
past.
428· Parasitic Skin Diseases
The usc of systemice agents should be approached with knowiedge regarding the
parasite to be treated and, most importantly, the biology of the parasite. For example,
feeding habits of the parasite may influence efficacy. Female feas, becausc they ingest
large quantities of blood, are more effectively killed by cythioate than are male feas.
 Systemic agents are particularly valuable in treating obligate parasites such as Sarcoptes,
Notoedres, Cheyletiello, and Demodex mites. They are valuable as adjunctive therapy for
nonobligate parasites, such as feas, because they are generally not effective as a sole
therapeutice agent. The mechanism of action of the drug. the route of parasitice exposure,
the duration of effective tissue or exposure levels, and the biology of the parasite rnust all
be considered when using systemic antiparasitic agents.
SYSTEMIC ORGANOPHOSPHATES
Two organophosphates, cythioate and fenthion, received wide usage in fea control pro-
grams.7 Cythioate was given orally twice weekly to dogs at 3 mg/kg and cats at 1.5 mg/kg
(extralabel usage in the United States). Fenthion was marketed for dogs with a topical
application rate of 8 mg/kg every 14 days. Although it was applied topically, the fenthion
was absorbed transdermally and killed fleas when they fed on treated blood. Although
both products showcd some efficacy, both have been withdrawn from the market in the
Unitcd States and receive little use elsewhere.
SYSTEMIC ENDECTOCIDES
These parasiticides were developed fron macrocyclic lactones produced by the fermenta-
tion of various actinomycetes,5 7, 4 This class of drugs includes avernectins (ivermectin,
doramectin, abamectin, selamectin) and milbemycins (milbemycin, moxidectin). At
present, the two products used in veterinary dermatology are ivermectin and milbemycin
least parly act by potentiating the release and effects of GABA. GABA is a peripheral
neurotransmitter in susceptible nematodes, arachnids, and insects. Avermectins and milbe-
myeins are also agonists of glutamate-gated chloride channels. In manmals, GABA is
limited to the CNS. Because these drugs do not cross the blood-brain barrier in most
adult animals, they are relatively safe and have a wide margin between efficacy and
mamnalian toxicity. In general, these drugs are effective for nematodes, microflaria, lice.
fur mites, Otodectes, Sarcoptes, Notoedres, Cheyletiella, and Demodex.
Ivcrincctin, milbemycin, and moxidectin are licensed for use orally every 30 days at
0.625 μg/kg, 0.5 mg/kg, and 3 μg/kg, respectively, for the prevention of diroflariasis. At
this dosage, no adverse side cffects are seen in dogs of any breeding. In treating extermal
parasites, ivermectin is administered at 200 to 600 μg/kg daily, weckly, or binonthly and
toxic side effects can be seen. Milbeinycin is administered at I to 2 mg/kg daily or wcekly.
and toxic side effects, although rare, have been reported. Selamectin is a novel new
avermectin that has been shown to be effcacious for the treatiment of Heas,311 ear mites,
scabies, ticks, some intestinal nermatodes, and prevention of heartworms. It is applied
topically and absorbed systemically, with efficacy for feas and hcartworms shown with
once-monthly dosing for both dogs and cats.
 JHigh-dose ivermectin or milbemycin can be toxic to dogs younger than 3 months of
age and to adult dogs within certain breeds. Breeds widely reported to be sensitive to
high-dose ivermectin include the collie, Old English sheep dog, Australian shepherd,
Shetland sheepdog, and crosses thereof.246 Individual reports of an adverse reaction in a
border collie, West Highland White terrier, German shepherd dog, and Sarmoyed can be
found.s6 Toxic side effects are neurologic in origin and inelude mydriasis, hypersalivation,
lethargy, ataxia, tremors, coma, and death. Ivermectin-sensitive colies lack adequate quan-
tities of P-glycoprotein necessary to successfully cxclude ivermectin from the brain.fo* In
breeds very sensitive to high-dose ivermectin, for example, the colie, one dose of morc
than 125 μg/kg can produce coma. In less sensitive individuals, side effects may not be
seen for dlays to weeks. To try to identify individuals sensitive to high-dose ivermectin, an
Parasitic Skin Diseases * 429
increasing dosage schedule has been proposed.36 For the first 5 days of treatment, thc dog
is given 50, 100, 150, 200 and 300 μg/kg of ivermectin, respectively. If the dog is highly
sensitive to high-dose ivermectin, subtle neurologic signs, for exainple, lethargy, ataxia,
should develop within 24 hours of the administration of the sensitizing dosage. If the drug
is discontinued immediately, the dog should return to normal within 24 to 48 hours.
Because some dogs do not develop these signs for weeks, the owner should always
observe the dog carefully.
Collies sensitive to high-dose ivermectin also are sensitive to high-dose milbemycin
when the dosage exceeds 5 mg/kg.44 Cross sensitivity to doramectin and moxidectin
remains untested but should be expected. High-dose milbemycin has been used to treat
hundreds of dogs with demodicosis and scabies, and neurologic side effects have not been
reported, even in ivermectin-sensitive hreeds, with dosages below 3 mg/kg. In a recent
 study of 70 dogs with nasal mite infestation, milbemycin was given weekly for three
consecutive weeks at dosages of 0.5 to 1.0 mg/kg.16 Sixteen dogs had side effects. In 12,
one or more episodes of vomiting or diarrhea, or hoth, ocurred. Tvo dogs seemed
lethargic, one was uncoordinated, and the last dog's sneezing worsened with trcatmcnt.
The dosage used did not seem to infuence the frequency of side effects, and a breed
frequency was not reported. All dogs return to normal within 48 hours of drug with-
 drawal. When moxidectin was given to ivermectin-sensitive collies, no toxicity was seen
with 15 μg/kg monthly, 1oa However, when it was given at 90 μg/kg. mild signs of toxicity
were seen.
lvermectin
 Ivermectin (Ivomec, Merial) is a derivative of avermectin B from fermentation products of
Streptomyces avermitilis. This drug is noted for activity against ncmatodes, microflaria,
and Sarcoptes, Cheyletiella, Notoedres, and Otodectes mites. Although ivermectin was not
shown to be efficacious for Demodex with the treatiment protocols that had been effective
for other ectoparasites (e.g., 0.2 to 0.4 mg/kg. orally or subcutaneously, weekly for up to 8
weeks), it can be effective when it is administered orally daily. Ivermectin does not affect
trematodes and cestodes, because GABA is not involved in neurotransimission in those
species. Parasite paralysis is the main action of ivermectin, but it also suppresses repro-
duction. Ticks are not kiled, but their egg production and molting are suppressed.
Ivermectin can be given parenterally, orally, or topically with good absorption. Iver-
mectin is rapidly absorbed orally and persists in the tissues for prolonged periods. This is
important because it does not have a rapid killing effect on susccptiblc parasitcs. Dosages
used to treat all nonfollicular mites range from 0.2 to 0.5 mg/kg. If given by injection or
applied topically, two doses at 14-day intervals should be sufficient. Orally, the drug is
given three times at weekly intervals.6 In rare cases, additional doscs may be nceded.
 Ivermectin also has apparent anti-inflammatory properties. The authors have seen
many dogs, whose ultimate dermatologic dliagnosis was atopy, food hypersensitivity, or
bacterial pyoderma, that had marked reduetion in pruritus or decreased visible inflamina-
tion for 3 to 7 days after receiving ivermectin. Ivermectin has been shown to have
immunomodulatory effects, especially at the level of T cells, in mice but this does not
appear to be true in the dog.5. 23
Ivermectin toxicosis is rare in cats (usually seen in kittens), dcvclops within I to 12
hours after administration of the drug, and is characterized by abnormal hehavior, ataxia,
lethargy, weakmess, recumbency, apparent blindness, coma, and death.
Milbemycin
Milbemycin (Interceptor, Novartis) is derived from fermentation products of Streptomyces
efficacy in the control of various intestinal parasites. Milbemycin has been used only in
dogs to treat nasal mites, scabies, or generalized demodicosis. No adverse reactions have
M   y    o sp   s    
receives widest usage in these dogs. In demodicosis, it is given daily, whereas it is given
430 · Parasitic Slin Diseases
every seventh day for 3 to 5 treatments in the other disorders. In some dogs, live scahies
 mites can be found after three treatments, suggesting that more frequent adninistration
might be needed in some cases.
Moxidectin
Moxidectin (Proheart, Fort Dodge) is derived from ferrnentation products of Streptomyces
ment and control of various nematodes, Hypoderma spp, mites, lice, and horm fics.
Although it is not approved for this use, moxidectin has been given orally or subcutane-
 ously at 0.2 to 0.4 mg/kg for the successful treatment of Octodectes infestations and
 generalized canine dernodicosis.
Doramectin
Doramectin (Dectomax, Pfizer) is derived from fermentation of selected strains of Strepto-
myces avermitilis. In the United States it is marketed for the treatment and control of
various nematodes, mites, and lice in cattle and swine. Although not approved for this use,
doramectin has been given subcutaneously at 0.2 to 0.3 mg/kg for the successful treatinent
of feline and canine scabies.
Selamectin
 Selamectin (Revolution, Pfizer) is the first FDA-approved topically applied product that
 prevents heartworm disease, kills adult fHeas, and prevents their eggs from hatching and
o so p sn oe i ie ssso pe sh u su r so e snn
 scabies and Dermacentor cariabilis infestations in dogs.43e Selamectin is a novel semisyn-
application, selamectin is identified in sebaceous glands, hair follicles, and basal layers of
the epithelium. It is applied topically, at a dose of 6 to 12 mg/kg, at the base of the neck
in front of the shoulder blades, every 30 days. When used according to the manufacturer's
directions, selamectin is safe in ivermectin-sensitive dogs, in breeding animals, and in
puppies and kittens 6 weeks of age or older.3b Occasional local reactions (inflammation,
alopecia) are seen following topical application of selamectin.
INSECT DEVELOPMENT INHIBITORS
These products are basically IGRs given by mouth or injection. Fleas feeding on treated
blood lay eggs that do not hatch or develop beyond the larval stage. Larvae feeding on the
feces of treated feas also will not develop. The most widely marketed product, lufenuron
(Program, Novartis), is given by mouth once monthly to dogs or cats or by injection every
chitin synthesis. Chitin is a major component of the fea exoskeleton but is not found in
mammals. With altered chitin synthesis, embryogenesis and hatching does not occur.
Cyromazine is another oral fea development inhibitor. It belongs to the triazine
 group of compounds. It does not inhibit chitin synthesis but increases its stiffness so the
exoskeleton cannot expand. The internal pressure in the larvae increases and results in
lethal body wall defects.42 Because the drug must be given daily, it has not reccived wide
usage.
NEONICOTINOIdS
These agents act at the nicotinic acetyl-choline receptor. Nitenpyram is a novel, orally
 re sp  p ar si t r   p
administration, and is lethal to feas only for 24 to 48 hours.
Parasitic Skin Diseases · 43I
●HELMINTH PARASITES
Ancylostoma and Uncinaria (Hookworm) Dermatitis
The larvae of Ancylostoma braziliense, A. caninum, and Uncinaria stenocephala cause a
characteristic skin lesion in humans that is called creeping eruption. The skin lesions that
these larvae produce in dogs or cats are not as severe, because thesc animals are their
specific hosts.4 The skin lesions are often incidental to conpletion of the normal life cycle
of the parasite, with the larvae quickly abandoning the skin and proceeding to other parts
of the body. Although percutaneous entry can lead to completion of the life cycle, larvae
s a u pe ss a u jusd ae aa au a ari ai s aq ud
of runs and paddocks during the spring and summer in cool climates, and animals exposed
to them become infected. Thus, the disease is essentially one of kenneled dogs on grass or
earth runs that have poor sanitation.
Cutaneous lesions seem to be more prevalent in areas with predominant infection
with U. stenocephala (Ireland, parts of England, and the United States), although animals
  sd ns  s us  o  sie r
dermatitis on skin penetration but rarely completes its life cycle by this route. It is
insignificant as a blood sucker compared with A. braziliense or A. caninum.6 A. caninun
can complete its life cycle via skin penetration.
Hookworm dermatitis has becn produced by natural and experimental infestations
with U. stenocephala. With both types of infection, similar clinical and histologic lesions
were produced. The third-stage larvac enter the dog's skin on areas of the body that
skin, although a few larvae may use hair follicles. The larvae enter the horny layer parallel
to the skin surface, and there is little evidence of enzymatic activity. The larvae are
thought sinply to exert pressure by undulating activity, thc forward movement being
achicvcd by pushing back against rigid keratinized cels. This route follows the line of least
resistance through the outer layers. After they, penetrate the epidermis, the dermis
appears to cause little hindrance to the migrating larvae. After larvae pass through tissue,
the cells reunite and there is little lasting cvidencc of their passage.*7 Some other species
of hookworrm larvae cause loss of integrity of the epidermis as they penetrate it.
 Clinical signs of hookworm dermatitis are initially red papules on the parts of the
body in frequent contact with the ground. Later, these areas become uniformly erythema-
ever, the skin of the sternum, ventral abdomen, posteromedial thighs, and tail may also be
invoived. Skin over the bony prominences of the elbows, hocks, and ischial tuberosities
may have more obvious lesions owing to the thickened skin and hair loss. The interdigital
webs may be erythematous, and the feet may be swollen, painful, and hot. The footpads
become spongy and soft, especially at the pad margins, where the tissue can he readily
grooved and often stripped from the underlying dermis. Chronically infamed foot pads
become variably hyperkeratotic (Fig. 6-2). The chronic inflammation causes the claws to
grow rapidly and to appear deformed. The claws may be friable and may brcak off,
leaving thick, tapered stunps. Arthritis of the interphalangeal joints may be present, too.
 Pruritus is a constant finding but varies in its intensity.
Histopathologic exarmination reveals varying degrees of perivascular dermatitis (hyper-
plastic or spongiotic) with eosinophils and neutrophils. The epidermis may contain recent
Aq ps ae sad   p ai an oae sdso pe so
clusters of neutrophils, eosinophils, and mononuclear cells. Hypersensitivity has been
suggested as a cause of the lesions.
examination finding of hookworm cggs, and a history of poor housing and sanitation.
Differential diagnosis may be complicated by a coincidental infcction with hookworms.
Differential diagnostic possibilities include demodectic mange, contact dermatitis, Pelodera
 dermatitis, and intradermal penetration by parasites such as Strongyloides and schisto-
somal agents.
432 · Parasitic Skin Diseases
FIGURE 6-I, Hookwormn dermatitis. A Siberian busky confined to a dirt-based run and
affected with A. canimur shows lesions of chronic hookworm dermalitis on all four feet. There
is alopecia, erytherma, swelling, and crusting.
Treatment should enphasizc cleaning of the premises, frequent rcmoval of feces, and
 generally improvcd hygiene, combined with appropriate routine anthelmintic treatment
and prophylaxis of all dogs in the kennel. Routine use of heartworn preventatives helps
minimize the frequeney of this disorder. Dry, paved runs, or periodic treatment of dirt or
gravel runs with 4.5 kg (10 Ib) of borax per 30 m2 (100 f) of run may be helpful, but
borax or salt kills vegetation. Attention to measures designed to iinprove foot health are
      m     P s 
alleviate joint stress. The paws should be kept clean and dry. Exercising dogs on new
clean pasture is beneficial.
Pelodera Dermatitis
Pelodera dermatitis (rhabditic dermatitis) is a local erythematous, nonseasonal pruritic
dermatitis caused by a cutaneous infestation with the larvae of Pelodera strongyloides. 2. 1)
Under filthy conditions, the larvae of the free-living nematode P. strongyloides may
invade the skin of cdogs. The adult parasites have a direct life cycle and live in damp soil
or decaying organic material, such as rice hulls, straw, and marsh hay that has been stored
 in contact with the ground for many months. The larvae may invade the skin of animals
(Fig. 6-3) and may be found in skin scrapings from affccted skin or in thc associated
be found in the hair follicles where a typical folliculitis is present.
Pasykso described Pelodera dermatitis in an 1l-year-old girl who slept with a pet dog
with the condition. The larvae invaded the epidermis and hair follicles, and the infamma-
tory infiltrate of mononuclear and eosinophilic cells surrounded necrotic hair follicles and
extended to capillaries and venules of the upper dermis. It was noted that the child might
have contracted the infestation from the dog, but it seems more reasonable that both
individuals were infested from the same environmental source. Smith and colleagues51
reported that human skin infections with larval neinatodes can be contracted from dogs
with A. braziliense, A. cuninum, U. stenocephala, Gnathostoma spinigerum, and Strongylo-
itles stercoralis, as well as P. strongyloides.
Parasitic Skin Diseases · 435
H
FIGURE 6-4. A, Ventral chest and abdomen of a beagle with Pelodera dermatis. The involved areas are
alopecic and erythermatous. B, Close-up view of the skin of the patient in A, showing intense erythema, multiple
papules, and alopecia. C, Tick bite. Note the erythematous nodule with a tick attached. D, Tick infestation.
PododeatisadgwihrousintdgtlrausisNdlasiontaillayrn
Colinson.) H, Erythena and excoriation of pinna and temporal region in a cat with O. cynotis.
436 · Parasitic Skin Diseases
FIGURE 6-5. Pelodera dermatitis in a dog. Numerous nematoxdes within hair follicle.
Anatrichosomiasis
Anatrichosomiasis is a type of larval migrans caused by the nematode Anatrichosorna
cutaneum, which produces blisters on the hands and feet of monkeys and humans in
Africa. A case caused by an Anatrichosomu sp. worm was reported in a 13-year-old South
African cat.8 The cat was presented for lameness with necrosis, sloughing. and ulceration
of the footpads of all four feet. Treatrment was not attempted, and the cat was euthanized.
 Histopathologic findings included superficial perivascular dermatitis with numerous worms
Female worms averaging 42 mm in length were identified as Anatrichosoma sp.8
 A female, 5-month-old Boxer was found to be passing double-operculate eggs in its 
feces.Sinilar ggs were obtained from skin scrapings taken fro araised,fakngry
thematous nodule on the dorsal midline in the lumbar region. The nodule was removed
surgically, and the eggs from the scraping and the nematode segments found in histologic
sections were identified as an Anatrichosoma sp.34
Schistosomiasis
Schistosoma cercariae of ducks, shore birds, voles, mice, or muskrat (natural hosts) pene-
trate the skin of humans, or other warm-blooded animals that are abnormal hosts, and
produce a pruritic dermatitis (Schistosoma dermatitis).
20 minutes and must either find a mollusk (snail) host within l2 hours or die. They form
sporocysts in the mollusk and hatch in 4 weeks as cercaria. These are shed into water but
die in 24 hours unless they reach a warm-blooded natural host. In the natural host, they
parasites are trematodes: Trichobilharzia ocellata, T. stagnicolae, and T. physellae infest
waterfowl of the Grcat Lakes area, whereas Austrobilharzia variglandis affects ducks and
terms in Florida and Hawai.55 In humans, the condition has been called swiimmers? itch,
clam diggers' itch, and rice paddy itch. These conditions occur because the cercariae
penetrate the skin of the abnorinal host and produce clinical disease. Although skin
 exposed to infested bodies of water from spring to fall may become infected, animals are
Parasitic Skin Diseases · 433
FIGURE 6-2. Digital hyperkeratosis due to
bookwonn (Uncinaria stenocephala) pododermatitis.
(Courtesy K. Thoday.)
Clinical features of Pelodera dermatitis include a distribution of skin lesions that
typically involves arcas that contact the ground - feet, legs, perineum, lower abdomen and
chest, and tail (Fig. 6-4A)4s, 49 The affected skin is crythematous and partially to com-
pletely alopecic. Multiple papules later develop to crusts, scales, and secondary infection
from the constant scratching (see Fig. 6-4B). Pruritus varies from mild to intense.
 Diagnosis is by skin scrapings, which readily reveal small, motile nematode larvae (625
to 650 μm in length). Larvae and adults can also be idcntified in contaminated litter by
using the Baermann technique.4s The history of contaminated bedding and pruritus,
together with the skin scraping findings, should be diagnostic, but the differential diagnos-
tie possibilities include hookworm derrmatitis, dirofilariasis, and strongyloidiasis (all on the
basis of the larval findings). Grossly, skin lesions rmay suggest contact dermatitis, bacterial
folliculitis, demodicosis, or scabies.
Skin biopsy reveals varying degrees of perifolliculitis, follculitis, and furunculosis (Fig.
6-5). Nenatodc scgments are present within hair follicles and dermal pyogranulomas.
Eosinophils are numerous.
Treatment is simple and effective. Complete rermoval and destruction of bedding are
mandatory. Beds, kennels, or cages should he thoroughly washed and sprayed with an
insecticide. The bedding should be replaced with cedar or other wood shavings, cloth, or
shredded paper. The patient should be bathed with a warm water shainpoo to soften and
remove crusts and then with a parasiticidal dip. as for scabies. This procedure usually
results in prompt relief of itching and rapid healing. Although repeated parasiticidal dips
u  ar   a s  d   p  
 Prcdnisolone may be given for a few days to help to stop the pruritus; systemic antibiotics
434 · Parasitic Skin Discases
B
FIGURE 6-3. A, Lava of the free-living nematode Pelodera strongyloides. (Courtesy J.
Georgi) B, Larva of P, strongyloides: bc, buccal capsule; es, esophagus; nf, nerve ring; is,
isthmus; eb, esophageal bulb; in, intestine. (From Willers WB: Pelodera strongyloides in associ-
ation with canine dermatitis in Wisconsin. J Aim Vet Med Assoc 156:319, 1970.)
may be indicated for any secondary pyoderma. The infestation is seif-linited and resolves
 spontaneously after the animals are removed from the source of contamination.
Strongyloides stercoralis--like Infection
In a single report, an apparently rare cutaneous manifestation of S. stercoralis infction
was reported in 5 of 10 Boston terers in a kennel.52Three wecks after a new pup was
placed in the kennel, 6-month-old puppies developed mucoid, blood-flecked feces; ane-
mia; general lymphadenopathy; and focal dermatitis. The hair was rough, dull, and dry,
and crusted lesions of I cm in diameter were on the tail, distal hindlegs, the ventral trunk,
and other areas with ground contact. Some pups had a severe, hemorrhagic pododermati-
tis. The dogs were housed in outdoor pens with concrete and shaded grassy areas. Fecal
samples contained large embryonated and unembryonated ova (80 by 35 μm) and first-
       n  o   
μm), and this parasite usually sheds only first-stage larvae in the feces. When feces were
cultured for 18 hours, free-living adults and third-stage larvae were produced.
Treatment with thiabendazole,52 11.4 mg/kg once daily orally for 5 days, or ivermec-
ssau aq Au suau nq 'ana aq uo o syan og o m cg'
Parasitic Skin Diseases · 437
FIGURE 6-6. Anatrichosormiasis. Nematode segiments within the epiderrmis of a cat's
footpad.
more apt to be swimming and thie cercariae are much more numerous in the water on
bright warm days of midsurnmer; thus, infection is rnost common then.
 At the time of penetration, the cercariae produce macules and wheals that last 15 to
20 hours. These later develop into papules and, after 2 to 4 days, into vesicles. These
stages are intensely pruritic. They are often confused with mosquito, chigger, or flea bites.
Healing takes place in 5 to 7 days. because the cercariac are walled off by an acute
infammatory reaction, with infiltration of neutrophils, lymphocytes, and eosinophils. Some
humans with the condition have only one strong reaction and on subsequent exposures
       d    s
exposure.
 Local treatment of the skin is not effective, except with palliative antipruritic lotions.
Control measures should primarly emphasize staying out of the water. Actions such as
removing water vegetation that encourages snail populations or killing the mollusks by
a se au  p jo r spd s o uoos es don an 
not aware of documented cases of canine schistosomiasis in the literature but have seen
dogs that had signs and a history suggestive of the problem.
Dracunculiasis
 Dracunculus insignis is a parasite of dogs and wild carnivores of North Ainerica5s. 60 1).
medinensis (guinea worm) affects humans, cats, and other animals in Asia and Africa.5 D.
insignis has been reported to affect the dog, raccoon, mink, fox, otter, and skunk.5s The
intermediatc host is a Cyclops (a crustacean) that is ingested from contaminated water by
 u s i on 8 ro pd e p isy  u dop a s sy 
develop in the subcutaneous tissue of the abdomen and limbs. Usually, a nodule forms,
and eventually, a fistula develops (Fig. 6-7). Just before the fistula opens, the host may
 show urticaria, itching, and a slight fever. When the host enters cool water, the female
worm is stimulated to releasc larvae (Fig. 6-8), which escape through the cutaneous
fistula. Some larvae may enter the blood, but they can be distinguished from Diroflaria
and Dipetalonema larvae by their long tapered tails. One can also apply cold water to the
fistula to stinulate the female worn and then make a smear of the exudate to identify the
larvae.
438 ·Parasitic Skin Diseases
FIGURE 6-7. Dracunculiasis. Nematode segments in an absccss
Clinical features are chronic, single to muliple nodules on the limbs, the head, or the
abdomen that evcntually ulcerate and do not heal (see Fig. 6-4E). The lesions are often
21 a   oi Aq ap u 2T 'a) sd ie a d pue pd
mm by 22 cm) may occasionally be seen in fistulae. Exfoliative cytologic study may reveal
neutrophils, eosinophils, and macrophages as well as larvae (about 500 μm length). Histo-
logic examination of an excised lesion reveals a nodular-to-diffuse dermatitis containing
adiult and larval nematodes surrounded by fibrosis and eosinophilic pyogranulomatous
inflammation.57.60
FIGURE 6-8. Dracunculiasis. Multiple larvae collected from the nodule shown in Figure 6-4E.
Parasitie Skin Diseases · 439
Individual lesions may bc removed surgically, or the worm may be removed gently by
carefully winding it up on a stick during a period of several days. With multiple lesions,
treatment is more difhcult and may not be effective. Although there are reports on the
efficacy of diethylcarbamazine, thiabendazole, metronidazole, nitridazole, and ivermectin in
the treatnent of dracunculiasis, treatment is not uniformly successfuf .1.57. 0
Control measures depend on decontaminating water supplies. With time, the inci-
dence of disease decreases and the disease dies out. Dracunculiasis can be prevented also
 by drinking only water that is passed through a fine flter.
Dirofilariasis
Adults of Diroflaria immitis live in the heart, and larvae are found in the blood and
occasionally in the subcutaneous tissues. Adult worms can rarely be found in abscess-like
lesionsinskinciallynthlhemirflarrarelyase ka
Although pustular eruiptions, ulcerative dermatitis, and scabies-like dermatitis have been
in those cases. A pruritic papulonodular dermatitis has been proved to be associated with
Dogs with cutaneous diroflariasis (heartworm dermatitis) typically have a chronic,
pruritic dcrmatitis with ulcerated papules, nodules, and plaques. Lesions are most com-
monly found on the head or the linbs but can be seen anywhere. Response to antibiotics,
topical agents, sedatives, and glucocorticoids is poor.
 Peripheral eosinophilia and a positive Knott's test for microfilaria are common find-
ings, but lesions can occur in dogs with occult filariasis.6 Histopathologic cxamination
revealed varying degrees of angiocentric pyogranulomatous dermatitis.Microflarial seg
nodules. Eosinophils varied in number from few to numerous. Many of the blood vessels
in the central areas of the lesions containcd microfilariae, but none of the deep dermal or
subcutaneous vessels outside the lesions showed cellular infiltrates or microflariae. Immu-
nohistochemical staining shows positive immumoreaction of the microfilariae with anti-
immunoglobulin G (IgG) serim.64
With standard heartworm treatments, the lesions become nonpruritic within 2 wecks
 and heal completely within 8 weeks
Other Filarial Infections
 A large number of flarial nematodes are found worldwide. The adults reside in subcuta-
neous tissues, whereas microfilariae circulate in the blood. Typically, no disease is caused
by either life stage, but the mieroflariae can be confused with those of D. immitis. Oeular
 onchocerciasis has been reported in dogs from the westerm United States.?0 Adult worms
and larvae were found within the pyogranulomatous mass and were either causal or
d sd aa so  su s p ss  
crustous dermatitis, especiall over the caudal half of the body) have been associated with
parasites induced the dermatitis or were a coincidental finding in some pre-existing skin
diseasc. Because the clinical findings were similar to thosc scen in filarial dermatitis in
 other species (e.g., equine onchocerciasis), the ncmatode is probably causal. In addition,
adulticidal (arsenical) and nicrofilaricidal (ivermectin) therapy cures the dermatoses associ-
ated with D. repens. 724
 Ten dogs from the western United States were described with a novel flarial infec.
tion.71 All dogs had singular or multiple, typically pruritic, papules or plaques with alope-
cia, scarring, erythema, ulceration, and crusting. The head (see Fig. 6-4F), neck, shoulder
region, and back were most commonly affected. On biopsy, a perivascular-to-interstitial
derinatitis with plasima cells and cosinophils was seen. In most dogs, dermal microgranulo-
mas surrounding microfilariae (Fig. 6-9) are observed. In one dog, an Acanthocheilonema 
sp. adult was isolated and this nematode is suspected as the causal agent in all dogs.
440 · Parasitic Skin Diseases
FIGURE 6-9. Acanthocheilonema infection. Granulomatous reaction around microflaria in the
derunis. (Courtesy A. Ilargis.)
Ivermectin administration (0.2 to 0.3 mg/kg) every 14th day for 3 doses results in rapid
clinical improvement.
Miscellaneous Helminthic Infections
 Parasitology textbooks1, 10 list hundreds of trematodes, cestodes, and nematodes of domes-
tic and feral arimals. Because pets are frequently bitten by the insect vectors for the
various parasites or ingest the parasite by eating the natural host or some intermediate
stage (e.g., dracunculiasis), aberrant infection can occur and probably is more common
than reported. In the unnatural host, the parasite may complete its life cycle if the natural
and new hosts are similar (e.g., dog and fox) or may die or encyst in an abnormal site,
often the skin. Taenia crassiceps and other cystocercoids can be found coincidentailly in
s(li-g pue oig sai) shop un suos us u p sq ueo pue meo io soop ais
With multiple lesions, treatment with praziquantel at 100 mg/kg/day for 15 days has been
reported to be effective. Subcutaneous abscesses have been reported in dogs with Para-
major,78 and in cats with Lagochilascaris major (Fig. 6-12). 79 or Gordius robustus.2 If
there is systermie involvement, the parasite should be identified specifically so that an
appropriate parasiticide can be selected. When the parasite has encysted in the skin or the
subcutis, thie wound should heal with removal of the parasite and good wound care.
· Arthropod parasites
Arachnids
Arachnids differ from insects in the absence of wings, the presence of four pairs of legs in
adults, and fusion of the head and the thorax.1. 1 with ticks and mites, the head, the
thorax, and the abdomen are fused so that they have lost their external signs of segmenta-
tion. The mouthparts and their base together are called the gnathostoma, or capitulum.
Parasitic Skin Diseases · 44l
abscesses on the body wall of a dog. (Courtesy R. Cher-
Imrtte.)
containcd many ovoid, transparcnt vesieles 1 to 5 mum in dianeter. (Courtesy R. (Chenmette.)
442 · Parasitic Skin Diseases
FIGURE 6-I2. Lagochilascaris
mujor infection. Ruptured abscess
with_ draining tract. (CourtesyA.
DellPorto.)
The rest of the parasite consists of fused elements of the head along with the thorax and
 abdomen, together called the idiosoma. There are separate sexes.
PARASITIC TICKS
Ticks differ from mites in their larger size, the hairless or short-haired leathery body, the
exposed armed hypostoma, and the presence of a pair of spiracles near the coxae of the
fourth pair of legs. Most ticks are not host specific. Ticks are divided into argasid, or soft,
ticks and ixodid, or hard, ticks. The argasid ticks are more primitive and less often
parasitic, produce fewer progeny, and infest the premises occupied by their hosts. Ixodid
ticks are more specialized and highly parasitic, produce more progeny, and infest the open
country frequented by their hosts.4
Argasid (Soft) Ticks
Argasid ticks are morc commonly parasites of birds and are found frequently in warmer
climates. In regions where they are endemic, they may infest all types of wild and
domestic animals. They have no dorsal plate, the sexes are similar, the capitulum is not
visible dorsally, and the spiracles lie in front of the third pair of unspurred coxae. Ticks of
this class seldom travel far from their lairs and are often nocturnal feeders. Only one
species is discussed.
● Spinous Ear Tick. Otobius megnini is found in the extermal ear canal of dogs and
cats. Its range is linited to the southern and western United States. The larvae and
nymphs infest the ear canal of the host, producing acute otitis exterma, pain, and occa-
sional convulsions. Asymmptomatic infection also can be seen.89 Often, the ear canals
become packed with immature ticks, but in some cases, only a few are found. Adults are
fiddle shaped with a constriction in the middle, but they are not spiny and do not feed
bccause they are not parasitic. Adults can live 6 to 12 months in a protected environment
and lay 500 to 600 eggs. Eggs hatch in days, and larvae typically feed immediately but can
survive unfed for 2 to 4 months. The larvae, engorged on lymph from the ear canal, are
yellow or pink. They are ahout 0.3 cm and spherical, with three pairs of minute legs.
After 5 to 10 days of feeding, they develop into nymphs. The nynphs, which also inhahit
Parasitic Skin Diseases · 443
the ear canal, are bluishi gray with four pairs of yellow legs (Fig. 6-13). They are widest
in the middle, and the skin has numerous sharp spines. The nymphs feed for 1 to 7
months before molting to adults.
 r yui pe po jo sso a  snsau sn ra sos  s
   s r s o  as pe  s
ment involves mechanically removing ticks with forceps, spraying or dipping the coat with
insecticidal materials such as pyrethroids and malathion, and treating the otitis externa.
 Otie treatments with an oil base may smother and kill some ticks.39
Reinfestation is a problem, so destruction of the lairs or nests of the ticks is irnpor-
tant. Spraying the sheds, grounds, woodpiles, and other homesites with malathion or
chlorpyrifos may be effective. An ainitraz tick collar (Preventic, Virbac) may prcvent
reinfestation.
Ixodid (Hard) Ticks
Hard ticks possess a chitinous shield, the scutuun, which covers the dorsal surface of the
male and the anterior dorsal part of the female tick. The capitulum is visible dorsally at
the anterior end, and its hase is important taxonomically. The sexcs are dissimilar, al-
though both are bloodsuckers. It is beyond the scope of this text to identify ticks
specifically, but because Rhipicephalus sanguineus (in comparison with Dermacentor) can
reproduce easily in buildings and thus presents special control problems, a fcw key
features for identifying genera are deseribed (Fig. 6- 14).
spiracles, and by triangular adanal plates in the male tick. The fourth coxae are no larger
than the other three. Dermacentor ticks are characterized by the large fourth coxae, the
rectangular base of the capitulum, aind the ormate scutum.
The general life cycle of ixodid ticks is siinilar, although each species may vary slightly
p u pe sp i o e ro p a s  o z u  sg sp s 
from the host for 6 to 90 days before molting. Nymphs also feed for a short period (3 to
61 e o dn apiq are spy (sp or ot l) isn is-o papxa ue arq (sep o
month life span) and prolific, with egg lays of 2000 to 8000. Generally, completion of the
and adult, although some species pass through all stages on the same mammal. If the
complicated life cycle is interrupted, the tick can survive for long periods or hibernate
through the winter. Although the life cycle is usually completed in a single year, it may
extend for 2 or 3 years.
While off the host, these ticks infest ground that is covered with small bushes and
shrubs. They resist cold but are susceptible to strong sunlight, desiccation, and excessive
rainfall. They require a moist environment.
Common Species of Ixodid Ticks Affecting Dogs and Cats
· Rhipicephalus sanguineus. The brown dog tick is widely distributed in North Amer-
ica and causes the primary tick problem in many sections of the United States. 1t
FIGURE 6-I3. Nymph of Otobius mwgmint, the spinous ear tick. (From
Lapage G; Mounig's Veterinary Helrninthology and Entoinology, 5th ed. Williams
&Wilkins Co., Baltimore, 1962.)
444 - Parasitic Skin Diseases
Copitulum
Capitulur
Genitalpore
Pregenitol plate
Coxa1V
Genital plate
Genitai groove
CoxaIv
Spiracle
Aral plate
Analgroove
Ana! groove
Adonal plate
A
RHIPICEPHALUS SANGUINEUS
C
1XODES RICINUS
Capitulum
Genital pore
FIGURE 6-I4. Ventral view of various species of
male ixodid ticks, showing genital and anal grooves,
Cox△ IV
coxac, and plates. Differential characteristics are indi-
Spiracle
cated hy heavy lines and dotted areas. (From Belding
ma
Postanalgroove
DL: Textbook of Parasitology. Appleton.Century-Crofts,
New York, 1965; redrawn from Hegncr, Root, Augus-
tine, and Huff: Parasitology, Appleton-Century Com-
pany,1938.)
B
DERMACENTOR ANDERSONI
can survive indoors, owing to its low moisture requirements, and can comnplete its
life cycle with only one animal as host. Although its principal host is the dog, it is
found on other canine species, cats, rabbits, horses, and humans. It requires three
distinct hosts (but perhiaps the same aninal) in its life cycle. It can transmit
babesiosis and anaplasmosis, Ehrlichia canis and Francisella tularensis infection, and
call cause tick paralysis.
· Dermucentor cariahilis. The American dog tick is also widely distributed in North
Ainerica but is especially coimmon along the Atlantic coast in areas of shrub and
beach grass. The principal host of the adult tick is the dog, but humans, domestic
animals, and large fur-bearing mamnals may be attacked. The principal host of the
immature tick is thc ficld mousc, but other small rodents or larger inamnals may
be infested. It spreads Rocky Mountain spotted fever, St. Iouis encephalitis, tulare-
mia, and anaplasmosis, and causes tick paralysis.
Other Ticks Thot May Affect Dogs and Cats
These includc Dermacentor andersoni (Rocky Mountain wood tick), Dermacentor occiden-
talis (Pacific or West Coast tick), Ixodes scapularis (black-legged tick), Ixodes dammini
(deer tick), and Amblyonma maculatum (Lone Star tick).
Damage From Ticks
Ticks injure animals by causing irritation via their bites; by producing hypcrsensitivity
reactions (see Chap. 8); by serving as vectors for bacterial, rickettsial, viral, and protozoal
diseases; and by producing tick paralysis through their poisonous secretions (see Fig.
6-4C and D).
 Tick paralysis has been produced by 12 ixodid species, including D. variabilis, and is
 und e  psn si sid  sss  s  ss  u u
produced by the salivary glands of the tick. It may be elaborated by ovarian function,
capacity, although those attached near the spine and neck seen to produce a inore severe
intoxication. The toxin affects the lower motor neurons of the spinal cord and cranial
nerves, and produces a progressive ascending flaccid paralysis.
Parasitic Skin Diseases · 445
Treatment and Control of Ticks
In cases of tick paralysis, rapid recovery follows mechanical removal of the complete tick
or ticks. When animals are infested by sinall numbers of ticks, manual removal from the
host is simple and easy. An effective method is to soak the tick in alcohol, grasp the head
parts at the surface of the skin gently with a 5-inch curved Crile mosyuito hemostat, and
apply firm traction. Ticks are commonly found in the ears and betwecn the toes. The
collected ticks should be soaked in alcohol or an insecticide until dead.
for maximum effcacy. Cats can be treated with fipronil or ivermectin.s7. ss The amitraz.
tick collar for dogs is reported to be highly effective in detaching or preventing the
attachment of ticks.s6 Although an amitraz-impregnated collar and a spot-on fipronil both
killed ticks and inhibited attachment and feeding. the amitraz collar had a longer duration
of effect and reduced egg hatchability and pereentages of surviving and fceding larvae.8a
 Selamectin was effective in controlling D. variabilis when administered monthly.43a
Immunotherapy with a tick vaccine to overcome a tick-induced immunosuppression,
with its subsequent larger nuinber of ticks, has been proposed.84a
Infestations of R sanguineus in houses and kennels can often be controlled or
eliminated by repeated spraying of woodwork, crawl spaces, pipe clearances, and cracks
with chlorpyrifos. For severe infestations, professional exterminators should be employed.
 Outdoor control measures are usually impractical but can help limit the number of
ticks, Their habitat can be destroyed by cutting and burning brush and grass, by cultivat-
ing land, and by rotating pastures. In urban areas, grass and shrubbed areas can be
treated with appropriately registered pesticides. Application is done in the spring and
repeated once during midsummer.
PARASITIC MITES
 io op p sn  s a a i i rpr a jo s a s
a leathery covering; the hypostome may be unarmed, and some mites have spiracles on
the cephalothorax. Parasitic mites are chiefy ectoparasites of the skin, mucous mem-
branes, or feathers, but a few are endoparasites. They are distributed worldwide, are
found on plants and animals, cause direct injury to animals, and spread disease. Because
of their prevalence and clinical inportance, four parasitic mites --Cheyletiella spp., Demo-
dex spp., Sarcoptes scabiei (var. canis), and Notoedres cati—and the'diseases they cause
are discussed in depth.
Most disorders discussed subsequently can be effectively treated with topical pesti-
cides or oral or parenteral avermectins (ivermectin and milbemycin). At present, the
acaricidal dosages are much higher (ivermectin: 200 to 600 μg/kg; milbemycin: 1 to 2 mg/
kg). Use at these doses is an extralabel drug use and should not be considered unless no
licensed product exists, the licensed products cannot be used because of animal idiosyn-
 crasies, or the licensed product is not effective. Casual use could subject the vcterinarian
to legal action, especially if the animal had an adverse reaction.
Dermanyssus gallinae
This mite attacks poultry (poultry mite), wild and cage birds, dogs, and cats, as well as
humans. It is called the red mite, but it is red only when engorged with blood. At other
times, it is white, gray, or black. The engorged adult, which is the largest form, is only 1.1
mm jn size (Fig. 6-15). It lives in nests and cracks in cages or houses. After a meal of
blood, it lays up to seven eggs at a time. They hatch to six-legged nynphs that do not
feed. After 24 ± 12 hours, these molt to eight-legged protonynphs that feed and molt, 30
± 15 hours later, to deutonymphs. These also feed and rmolt 30 ± 15 hours later to
adults. The whole cycle takes only 8 days under ideal conditions, but without feeding
446 · Parasitic Skin Diseases
FIGURE 6-I5. Dernanyssus gallinae
(Degeer). Left, dorsal view of female;
right, ventral view of female. (From La-
page G; Monnig's Veterinary Helminthol-
ogy and Entomology, Sth ed. Willianis &
Wilkins Co.,Baltimore, 1962.)
opportunities, it may last 5 months,92 Mites survive for up to 9 months without food when
kcpt at 5° to 25°℃.90a
This mite affects dogs and cats only rarely and almost accidentally.s Wild birds
nesting in the eaves of houses have mites, which may enter open windows and affect
covering a dog's body that the small grayish white mites crawling on the hair resembled
the “walking” dandruff of cheyletiellosis. In that case, itching was not severe. Most cases
occur in pets that have access to chicken houses or live in recently converted poultry
quarters. Clinical signs include erythema and papulocrustous, intensely pruritic eruptions,
especially over the back and the extremities. Diagnosis is made by finding the mites in
skin scrapings. Almost any insecticidal bath, dip. or spray eliminates the mites. The
affected premises that initiated the infection should he treated to prevent reinfestation.
Because -20°C and temperatures >45*C were lethal for D. gallinae, freezing, heating. or
both could bc advocated as alternatives to chemical sanitation.°0a
Lynxacarus rodovsky
The small cat fur mites are common in Australia, Hawai, and Brazil93. 96 and havc bccn
reported in Florida,9 and Texas.94 They have elongated bodies, 430 to 520 μm in length,
and faplike sternal extensions. These contain the first two legs, which grasp the hair of
the host (Fig. 6-l6). All of the legs have terrmninal suckers. Because all fur mites are
generally alike, a competent parasitologist is needed for accurate species identification.
These mites are not highly contagious and infection typically occurs by direct contact, but
fomites may be important for transmission.94 Bowmans3 reported only 1 of 14 cats in a
group to be affected. Severity of clinical signs relates to the chronicity and cxtent of the
infestation. In mild cases, there is little itching and the mites attached to the hair give a
salt-and-pepper appearance to the dull and dirty coat. Because hairs epilate easily, some
patchy alopecia can be seen. In severe cases, there is a generalized maculopapular to
exfoliative dermatiis. Severely involved cats tend to be more pruritic. Mites usually
congregate along the topline attached to the terminal parts of the hair. However, they
Imay occasionally be found all over the body. Diagnosis is made by isolation of mites on
skin scrapings or acetate tape impression. Treatment with insecticidal sprays or dips, lime
sulfur dips weekly,or ivermectin is usually adequat95, 9
Trombiculosis
 Although 20 of about 700 species of chigger mites (harvest mites) can cause disease, only
two are reported here.
Parasitic Skin Diseases · 447
FIGURE 6-I6. A. Lynxacarus
radocsky, female in ventral view:
se, stermal extensions; g, genitalia.
Boxly length, 515 μm. B, I. radou-
length, 430 μm. (From Bowman
WT, Domrow R: The cat-fur mite
in Australia. Aust Vet J 54:403,
1978. Photographs by R. Wilson.)
Eutrombicula (Trombicuia) alfreddugesi (North American Chigger) and
Neotrombiculo (Trombicuia) outumnalis
The adult forim is a scavenger living on decaying vegetable material. It is orange red, is
about the size of the head of a pin, and lives about 10 months, producing probably one
a pai paxs on yey pe pnne isi u pei ane sa  en ad as
that are parasitic and feed on animals. They drop to the ground and become nymphs, and
finally adults (Figs. 6-17 and 6-18). The entire cycle is complete in 50 to 70 days, but
adult female mites may live longer than a year. They are usually found in arcas wherc the
skin is in contact with' the ground, such as the legs, thc fcct, the hcad, thc cars, and the
ventrum. Signs are variable. The bite usually produccs scvere irritation and an intensely
pruritic papulocrustous cruption (Fig. 6-19B), but it may also cause nonpnuritic papules,
FIGURE 6-I7. A, Trombiculu alfredklugesi
p 1'g ae (u uy o)
dugesi  larva,  dorsal view  (legs  omitted).
Appleton-Century-Crofts, New York, 1965.)
X20
X100
448 · Parasitic Skin Diseases
FIGURE 6-I8. Neotrombicuia -
tumnalis. (Courtesy J. Georgi.)
pustules, and crusts. Secondary scaling and alopecia may appear. Mites may be found in
and around the ears of cats but are easily distinguished from Otodectes (ear mites) by
They are about 500 μm in size. When removed from the host for microscopic cxamina-
tion, they should be placed in mineral oil immedliately or they will escape.
Chiggers are seasonal in late summer and fall. Affected patients have a history of
environrmental contact in woods and fields. Skin biopsy reveals varying degrees of superfi-
cial perivascular dermatitis (spongiotic or hyperplastic) in which eosinophils are numerous.
Treatrment is successful with one or two parasiticidal dips or topical otic preparations
containing a parasiticide (Tresaderm, Merck AgVet).9s Systemic corticosteroids adrninis-
tered for 2 to 3 days help relieve the itclhing, if present. Unless rural animals are
0.25% fipronil spray blocked reinfestation in 15 of the 18 treated dogs.1oo The three
treated cats were reinfested within 7 to 10 days. Others have also had success with the
topical application of fipronil.96a
Walchia americana
 This chigger mite (Fig. 6-20) has been reported to bc common in squirrels and small
rodents in the southwestern and easterm United States and has been reported in the cat.99
The larvae live on the surface of the skin. Their salivary secretions allow them to feed on
tissue liquids of the host. A walled-off channel is formed on the skin surface as a host
reaction that attempts to isolate the parasite. The larvae detach and enter decaying wood
for a quiet period. Active nymphs emerge and forage, become_quiet again as they pass
through the imagochrysalis stage, and then ermerge as adults. These feed principally
7on
the Collembolla insect (spring tail). The adults lay many eggs, which hatch to parasitic
larvae. Some chiggers have a special liking for certain body locations on the host. The
mite prefers the ventrum but is also found on the ears and the back.
 In the cat reported by Lowenstine and colleagues,9 the lesions were on the ventral
trunk, the medial surface of the legs, and the interdigital spaces. Lesions could be
palpated, but the hair needed to be parted carefully to see them easily. There was nodular
thickened skin, and the surface was cracked and scaly, with moist, serous yellow exudate.
 The paws were swollen, and the claws were cracked. The cat shook its feet as if it had
Co o lo snded ouu paan uonsun ss snu uos ou ps
Parasitic Skin Diseases·449
C
FIGURE 6-I9. A, Self-induced hypotrichosis in a cat with Otodectes cynotis. B, Papules on the: medial clbow
Manning.) D, Scaling over the dorsum of a cat with cheyletiellosis. (Cat is lying on its side on a green towel.) E,
Cheyletiella infestation in dog. The white specks are walking dandnff F, Papular urticaria of huinan skin due to
Cheyletiella blakei bites. G, Localized demodicosis. A single alopecic patch at the commissure of the lips. H,
Periocular alopecia and erythema in a dog with localized democdicosis.
450 · Parasitic Skin Diseases
FlGURE 6-20. Walchia ainericana. (Courtesy J.
(Georgi.)
cm) with a few wheals and Hares. Skin scrapes produced few mites, but a skin biopsy
specimen contained manymites.
Histopathologic cxamination reveals varying degrees of intraepidermal pustular to
epidermis (Fig. 6-21). Eosinophils and mast cells are numerous.
Treatment with insecticidal products for the mites and broad-spoctrum antibiotics for
the sccondary infection procduces a good response in 10 days.
Otodectes cynotis
O. cynotis (ear mite) is a psoroptid mite that does not burrow but lives on the surface of
the skin. Adult mites are large and white and move freely. The anus is terrminal, they have
four pairs of legs, and all except the rudimentary fourth pair of the female mite extend
hcyond the body margin. All legs of the male mite bear short, unjointed stalks (pedicles)
with suckcrs, which are also present on the first two pairs of legs of the fermales.
FIGURE 6-2l. Walchia ameri-
cana larva buried in the epidermis
of a cat.
Parasitic Skin Diseases · 45I
FIGURE 6-22. Larger male O.
cynotis mit: approaching a deuto-
nymph.
The life cycle lasts 3 weeks. Thc cgg is laid with a cement that sticks it to the
substrate. After a 4-day incubation, it hatches to produce the six-legged larva. At this
point, the larva feeds actively for 3 to 10 days, rests for 10 to 30 hours, aund hatches to the
protonymph, which has eight legs, although the last pair are simall. After a simple active
and resting stage, the protonymph molts into the deutonymph. The deutonymph is usually
approached by the male adult (Fig. 6-22), and the two become attached (end to end) by
the pair of dorsal posterior suckers on the body of the nymph and those on the rear legs
of the adult male mite. If a male adult is produced frorn the deutonymph, the attachment
has no physiologic significance; however, if a female mite emerges, copulation occurs at
that moment, and thc female mite bccomes egg bearing. Female mites that are not
attached, and thereby do not permit copulation at the moment of ecdysis, do not lay eggs.
Sexual dimorphism occurs only in the aduit form. The first four legs of all stages bear
unjointed, short stalks and suckers, hut only the adult male mites lhave suckers on the rear
legs. Adults have approximately a 2-month life span.
The mites feed on epiderrmal debris and tissue fuid from the superficial epiclermis. In
this way, the host is exposed to, and immunized against, mite antigen,lo7. l0 There is n)
delayed hypersensitivity, but a reaginic antibody devclops carly in the disease and precipi-
tating antibodies later in its course.
As the mites feed, the epithelium of the ear canal is irritated and the canal flls with
cerumen, blood, and mite debris. This discharge has the classic coffee grounds appearancc
(see Fig. 6-4G). Clinical symptorns are variable, especially in cats. Some cats wifh massive
amounts of discharge show no clinical signs, whereas other cats have intense otic pruritus
with minimal discharge (see Fig. 6-4H). Dogs tend to have otic pruritus with minimal
discharge. Lesions may be restricted to the extermal ear canal, but mites are cominonly
ectopic mites often cause no disease, but some animals have a pruritic dermatitis, which
can resemble fea bite hypersensitivity, atopy, or food hypersensitivity (see Figs.
6-23 and 6-19A). Dogs and cats that have O. cymotis infestations often have positive
intradermal skin test reactions to othcr mites: Dermatophagoides farinae, D. pteronyssi-
 so  an ae asu o suon u ot sii as s pe s
tion is eliminated. Other conditions to be ruled out inclide pediculosis, Pelodera dermati-
tis, scabies, and chigger bites. Ear mites are highly contagious and especially prevalent in
the young. The mites are not host specifie,? so all contact animals should be presumed to
a truc otic parasite.105
452 · Parasitie Skin Diseases
FIGURE 6-23. Otodectic mange.
Dog with scvere gcncralizexd dlisease.
Various treatment options exist, and selection depends on the number of animals
involved and the severity of the clinical signs. With only one or two animals involved, the
otic route of treatment is used. If the ear canals are filled with debris, they should be
cleaned with an appropriate ceruminolytic agent. The rnite infestation can be addressed
thasone oltinTresademrvariousteroid-antiboti-antifungalarroduct
The thiabendazole in Tresaderm is thought to have both ovicidal and adulticidal activity.
The products containing no parasiticide are thought to work by smothering the mite.10s
Animals with severc otic pruritus or sccondary bacterial or yeast infections usually are
treated with the polypharmaceutical agents. Specific instructions depend on the product
used. Because all stages beyond the egg should be susceptible to the agent, treatment
should only be needed for 7 to 10 days unless there is a secondary infection. With this
short course of treatrment, body treatment with an appropriate fea spray, foam, or dip is
necessary to prevent reinfestation of the ear canal by the ectopic mites.109
In multiple animal situations, cases with skin disease, or when otic products cannot or
will not be used, ivermectin can effectively eradicate the mites.6. ior Although aural
adrninistration is commonly used, relapses can be seen because of the irregularities in
drug absorption.10 Near 100% efficacy is seen with oral (weekly for three doses), subcuta-
intervals) administration. Although no data are available, high-dose milbemycin should be
effectivc in animals sensitive to high-dose ivermectin. Moxidectin (0.2 mg/kg) was given
orally or subcutaneously, twice at a 10-day interval, with excellent tolerance and eff-
cacy107he spot aplicationformofpronil alsoisffctiveOthersindicate that h
application of 2 to 4 drops of the fipronil spot-on product in both ears, repeated in 10 to
effective for the treatment of Otodectes infestations in cats and dogs.43a
Pneumonyssoides caninum
 P. caninum is a mite of unkmown incidence.17 In one study, the mite was found in 7% of
dogs undergoing necropsy for unrelated reasons.112 It inhabits the nasal passages and
sinuses of dogs, and most infested dogs are asymptomatic. When signs result, they include
associated with the respiratory signs predisposes the dog to gastric dilatation-volvulusi13
Parasitic Skin Diseases · 453
 sssr uepi au Aq si sisue s sr'sinid pey aq sap as
and response to acaricidal therapy allows a presumptive diagnosis to be madc. The only
effective treatments are ivermectin or milbemycin.l1. 116
Environmental Mites
Many species of free-living mites can be found in grains, in hay and straw, and in the
house. These mites can cause skin disease by accidental parasitism on mammalsui9 or by
the induction of allergic reactions when the exoskeletons, body parts, or excreta are
ingested, absorbed percutaneously, or inhaled.3, 120 The latter rmethods are most important,
especially with D. pteronyssinus and D. farinae, the two most common species of house
dust mites. Dogs with an atopy-like condition (see Chap. 8) often show positive reactions
to these mites, but the absolute significance of those reactions is umcertain.
Environmental mites may be susceptible to parasiticides used in fea control pro-
straw mite problems can be resolved by removing the hay and straw or by using fresh
straw, which should contain the natural foodstuffs of these mites.17 Food storage mites
can be eliminated only by destroying the food. House dust mite populations can be
decreased by removal of carpets and frequent and thorough vacuuming of foors, furmi-
ture, and bedding. These cleaning procedures may help but do not completely resolve the
 pet's problem because the basis for the dermatitis is allergy and not direct parasitism.
Cheyletiellosis
Cheyletiell dernatitis (walking dandruff) is usually a mild, nonsuppurative mite-induced
 dermatitis produced by Cheyletiella spp. living on the surface of the skin.
Cause and Pathogenesis
Cheyletiella mites are large mites that affect cats, dogs, rabbits, and humans.3l The
incidence of the disease is unknown bccause signs arc so variable, but it is probably less
prevalent now because of the widespread use of Hea control products, which also kill this
general, Cheyletiella yasguri is considered the species found in dogsl23, C. blakei, the
yasguri between dogs and rabhits suggests that the various species do not have extreme
host specificity.123 All species can transiently affect contact humans.124
The large mites (385 μin) have four pairs of legs bearing combs instead of claws (Fig.
6-24). The most diagnostic feature of Cheyletiella spp. is the accessory mouthparts or
  s u a (   d  n  
genu I is diagnostic of C. yasguri, the cone-shaped sensory organ is diagnostic of C.
blakei, and the global sensory organ is dliagnostic of C. parasitiporax.
Free-living cheyletids (e.g., Cheyletus eruditis) can also infest cats and dogs.2s These
mites are not reported to produce clinical signs. The free-living cheyletids must be
differentiated from Cheyletiella mites, which they closely resemble. In the free-living
cheyletids, the palptarus bears one or two combs.125
The nites do not usually burrow but live in the keratin layer of the epidermis and are
not associated with hair follicles. They move about rapidly in pseudotunnels in epicdermal
debris but periodically attach thermselvcs firmly to the epidermis, pierce the skin with
smaller than louse nits and are attached to hairs by fine fbrillar strands. In contrast, louse
eggs are cemented firnly to the host's hairs (see Fig, 2-28Z).
Cheyletiella mites are not predacious on other mites. The entire life cycle is com-
pleted on one host and goes through the typical egg, larval, nymphal, and adult stages.
The life cycle is approximately 21 days.The mite isanobligate parasite,hecause larae,
n     r s  n rr a s    s
mites are more hardy and may live free of their host for up to 10 days or more.6. 22. 127
454·Parasitic Skin Diseases
口
FIGURE 6-24. Artist's sketch of adult female Cheyletiela yasguri mite,showing characteristic saddle-
typifies Cheyletella blaket. Insert C shows the global sense organ on genu I that typifies Cheyletiella
parasititorax.
 nostrils of cats and thus added a new twist to the epidemiology and therapy of the
disease.
may be affected, too. Both dogs and cats may be a source of human infection.124 In one
survey, 27 of 4l catteries that had problems with a pruritic dermatitis had animals with
cheyletiellosis.128 In 20% of these situations, humans cases were also found. C. blakei was
isolated in all cases. There is no doubt that the public health aspects of this parasite are
iinportant, because frequent contact with infected animals may produce an uncomfortable
skin disease in humans. Human infestations vary in severity, but after direct contact with
infested animals has oecurred, grouped, erythematous macules form on the arms, the
trunk, and the buttocks (see Fig. 6-19F). These rapidly develop a central papule that
Parasitic Skin Diseases · 455
FIGURE 6-25. A, C. yasguri aclull. larva, and cggs from skin scraping (low power). B, C.
456 · Parasitie Skin Discases
becomes vesicular and then pustular, finally rupturing to produce a yellow crusted lesion
that is frequently excoriated because of the intense pruritus. Although the lesions are
severely inflamed, they are well demarcated from surrounding skin. Older lesions have an
area of central necrosis, which is highly diagnostic. Constant animal contact is usually
needed to maintain human infections. With no further infestation, lesions subside in 3
weeks.
asun ue on suu a  a e aa ae sio pe sop u suds
pruritic dermatitis. Any brecd of animal can be affected, but there may be an increased
frequeney in Cocker spaniels.27 Initially, most infested animals develop a dorsally oriented
dry scaling with minimal or no pruritus (see Fig. 6-19D). These initial signs are probably
due to infammation caused by the mites' feeding. Because a cat's natural groorming
removes both scale and mites and eggs (both can be found in feces), these initial signs
dog. With time, the scaling becomes more severe and widespread (see Fig. 6-20E), hair
loss can occur, and the level of prurituis tends to inerease. In some animals, the intensity
of the pruritus is well out of proportion to the number of mites present, suggcsting the
evelopment of a hypersensitivity to themite. Animals in this latter group can have an
exfoliative erythroderma or a scabies-like condition with the same distribution of lesions
and intensity of pruritus. Some cats have a widespread papulocrustous eruption (miliary
dermatitis).9, 127 Other cats have self-induced dorsal hypotrichosis (*fur-rnowing") with little
 or no skin lesions.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis is confirmed by identifying the mite or its eggs. This process can be
difficult, especially in cats. Techniques used to identify the mite include direct exanina-
tion of the animal with a powerful magnifying glass and examination of supcrficial skin
resemble hookworm eggs bnt they are three to four times larger (230 by 100 μin) and are
often embryonated. The success rate of each technique depends on the length of the
animal's coat, the size of the area sampled, and most important, the number of mites
present.
can be evaluated in two ways. The first involves transferring the material to a Petri dish,
covering it with mineral oil, and examining its contents with a dissecting microscope. In
the second method, the hair and debris are dissolved by treating the sample with 10%
treatment, fecal fotation solutions are added and the solution is centrifuged at 1500 rpm
for 10 minutes. The surface layer is examined microscopically at low power for mites or
eggs. Each method has advantages and disadvantages, and no studies have been done to
 e   od  e   so om  
trial may be necessary to confirmn or negate the diagnosis.
The differential diagnosis depends on the clinical presentation. If just scaling is
 present in dogs, the differential diagnosis includes primary seborrhea, intestinal parasitism,
poor nutrition, demodicosis, otodectic mange, pediculosis, and fea infestation. If intense
pruritus occurs, scabies, flea bite hypersensitivity, and food hypersensitivity must also be
considered. For cats, diabetes mellitus and liver disease must be included if seborrhea is
 present, whereas feline scabies and the other differential diagnostic possibilities for miliary
dermatitis must be considered with pruritus.
Histopathologic study reveals varying degrees of superfcial perivascular dermatitis
    s   s  )
dermatitis is seen. Mite segments are occasionally found within the hyperkeratotic stratum
 corneum (Fig. 6-26). Eosinophils vary in number, from few to many.
Treatment
In many instances, Cheyletiella infestation can be resolved by the weekly application of
various pesticides to all dogs and cats in contact with the mites. Product selection and its
Parasitic Skin Diseases * 457
FIGURE 6-26. (Cheyletiellosis in
a dog. Note sections of mites within
the stratum corneum.
route of administration depend on the species, the age of the animals, and the nature of
the animals' coat and dermatitis. Lime sulfur dips or the various fea products are usually
effective when applied weekly for 3 to 4 weeks. One treatment with fipronil spray or spot-
Many veterinarians have recognized cases in which these treatments did not work or
pesticide, nasal sequestration of mites, or reinfestation from the environment. One investi-
gator reported the failure of some routine Hea products, the need to treat some animals
for long periods, and the isolation of live mites from furmiture.s She recommended Hea-
type environmental treatments every second wcck and treatment of animals with lime
sulfur, pyrethrins, or amitraz (dogs only) for 6 to 8 weeks.
 If relapse occurs, nasal sequestration is known, the owners are physically disabled, or
kennels or catteries are infested, satisfactory control usually necessitates the use of iver-
 given weekly should be suffcient. Milbemycin remains unproven but should be effective.
Canine Demodicosis
 Demodicosis (demodectic mange, follicular mange, or red mange) is an infammatory.
 parasitic disease of dogs characterized by the presence of larger than normal numbers of
demodectic mites. The initial proliferation of mites may be due to a genetic or immuno-
logic disorder.
Couse and Pathogenesis
· Parasite. The mite Denodex canis is part of the normal fauna of canine skin and is
present in small numbers in most healthy dogs.187-1ss Two other nites with different
cosis.146,166, 174 These mites could be mutants of D. canis or additional species of mite that
 have gone unrecognized. The skin of dogs with dermodicosis is ecologically favorable to the
reproduction and growth of demodectic mites. They seize this opportunity to colonize the
hair folicles and to popuate the skin by the thousands. The resulting alopecia and
erythema are knowu as demodicosis. The entire life cycle of the mite is spent on the
skin.199 The parasite resides within the hair folicles and rarely in the sebaceous glands,
where it subsists by feeding on cells, scbum, and epidermal' debris. The variant mites
e (ag i) ss us u n q a so  go ss mog
eggs hatch into small, six-legged larvae, which inolt into eight-legged nymphs and then
458 · Parasitic Skin Diseases
FIGURE 6-27. Adult and immature forins of Demodex canis.
E99
Larva
Nymph
Adulit
into cight-legged adults (Fig. 6-28).189 The 1nale adult measures 40 by 250 μm and the
female adult is 40 by 300 μin. Mites (ali stages) may be found in the lymph nodes, the
intestinal wall, the spleen, the liver, the kidney, the urinary bladder, the lung, the thyroid
gland, blood, urine, and feces. However, mites found in these extracutaneous sites are
usualy dead and degenerate, and represent simple drainage to these areas by blood or
lymph.
In the late 1980s, a short-tailed demodicid mite was identified in the dog and is being
which is a third to one-half as long as the typical D. canis mite. Beyond its size, this rmite
as (auaisar re g e pabe a) so a jo s au ars on sos
dogs show both types of mite on skin scraping.
334 to 368 μm in length. Histologically, it is found in hair follicles.
● Transmission. D. canis is a nornal resident of a dog's skin and ear canal. Trans-
mission occurs from the bitch to nursing neonates by direct contact during the first 2 or 3
days of neonatal life.5 Mites may be demonstrated in the hair follicles of puppics by the
time they are 16 hours old. The imites are first observed on the muzzle of the puppies,
which emphasizes the inportance of direct contact and nursing, When puppies were
taken by cesarean section and raised away from the infccted bitch, they did not harbor
Imites, indicating that in utero transmission does not occur.187, 201 Similarly, mitcs cannot
be demonstrated in stillborn puppies.1ss Although mites can be transferred to normal
adults by the application of mite-laden solutions to their skin or by close confinement with
that occur resolve spontaneously.198.201
Sako's found the thermotactic zone of D. canis to be between 16° a1d 41°C (60° to
106*F). Movement of the mites ceased at environmental temperatures below 15℃ (59°F).
Under various laboratory and artificial conditions, mites could live away from dogs for as
long as 37 days.199 However, these mites Iost their ability to infcct (invade the hair follicles
of) dogs. On a more practical note, after they are on the surface of the skin, mites are
rapidly killed by desiccation in 45 to 60 minutes at 20°℃ (68°F) and a relative humidity of
40% 188
Efforts to study the mite have been hampered by the inability to keep it alivc in the
laboratory. Recently, dog skin grafted to nude mice supported the growth and develop-
ment of Dernodex canis, which should alow detailed studies on the pathology and immu-
nology of demodicosis.143
Parasitic Skin Diseases · 459
● Types of Demodicosis. Two types of demodicosis are generally recognized: localized
and generalized. The course and 'the prognosis of the two types are vastly different.
Localized demodicosis occurs as one to several small, circumscribed, erythematous, scaly
nonpruritic to pruritic areas of alopecia, most commonly on the face and the forelegs. The
FIGURE 6-28. Demodex canis (X 500). A, Two adults (fomur pairs of legs). B, Adult and
larva (three pairs of stuby legs).
llustrationcontinuedon followingpage
460 · Parasitic Skin Diseases
FIGURE 6-28. Continued. C, Nymph (four pairs of stubby legs). D, Egg (arrow).
course is benign and most cases resolve spontaneously. In a small number of cases, the
localized proliferation of mites occurs only in the ear canals.136 These dogs have a
ceruminous otitis extema, which may be pruritic. Treatment usually is needed. General.
ized demodicosis usually covers large areas of the body but can be more localized,
especially when the disease first starts. A dog who has many localized lesions has involve-
Parasitic Skin Diseases · 46I
ment of an entirc body region (e.g., facial area), or has complete involvement of two feet
many localized lesions are needed before generalized discase is diagnosed. Six or fewer
usually indicates localized disease, whereas 12 or more is indicative of generalized disease.
The intermediate group must bc cvaluated on an individualized basis. The disease may
stay restricted in its scope or may become more generalized. Even with this relative
localization of the lesions, the pathogenesis, prognosis, and treatment regimcns remain the
same as that for dogs with widesprcad denodicosis.
Generalized democdicosis usually starts during puppyhood (3 to 18 months). If the
lesions do not resolve spontaneously or receive adequate treatment, the patient caries the
cosis in dogs older than 2 years of age. The Inajority of these cases occur in dogs between
sp su  us  e p  sp as go s e ae jo s  e z
typically have had the demodicosis from puppyhood but went undiagnosed. Dogs who first
experience the disease at 4 years of age or older have true adult-onset dermodlicosis.
True adult-onset generalized demodicosis is rare, but when it occurs, it can be as
serious as the juvenile form. In these cases, the dog has tolerated and controlled the
demodectic rnites as part of its norinal cutaneous fauna for years. If the resistance of the
host decreases, thc mitcs suddenly multiply by thc thousands. Onc can speculate that
soine internal diseases may cause immunosuppression or otherwise lower the dog's capac-
ity to control the number of mites, and adult-onset denodicosis occurs. Each year the
 presentation, in which skin scrapings have not been performed. If one does not scrape the
old dog with pyoderma or other skin disease, the diagnosis will be missed.
 Disorders recognized in dogs with adult-onset demodicosis include hypothyroidism,
naturally occurring or iatrogenic hyperadreocorticism, leishmaniasis, and malignant neo-
plasia or treatment thereofi33 152. 171. 1s1a. 190 In more than 50% of cases, no underlying
disease can be documented at the time the demodicosis is diagnosed.172 In these cases,
the dog should be monitored carefully because thc malignancy or systemic illness may
becone obvious weeks to months into trcatment. Although the condition may resolve
spontaneously in some mildly affected dogs with the resolution of the underlying disease,
Inost will require treatment. If no cause for the demodicosis can be found, the odds of
successful treatment are reduced.152
In demodectic pododermatitis, the disease is confined to the paws, although some
dogs have a higher than normal population of mites in their clinically nornal skin.
Demodectic pododermatitis can occur as a result of generalized dernodicosis, in which the
Iesions heal everywhere except on the paws. The foot can be involved, especially in Old
English sheepdogs, without generalized lesions. The digital, interdigital, anci plantar in-
volvements are almost always complicated by secondary bacterial infections (sce Fig.
6-29G and H).
Demodicosis is morc common in purebred dogs, and certain breeds have far more
frequent disease than other breeds. In the Cornell population, the 10 breeds with the
highest statistical risk of generalized demodicosis are thc Shar pei, West Highland white
tcrrier, Scottish terrier, English bulldog, Boston terrier, Great Dane, Weimaraner, Aire-
in other breeds (e.g., Doberman pinscher), but the frequency in those breeds is not out of
proportion to the number of dogs within that breed. In other clinics, the Dobernan
 A hereditary predisposition has been observed regularly in breeding kennels. Certain
breeders cai predict which litters will have the disease. In an affected litter, all or some
of the siblings experience generalized demodicosis. Elimination of affected or carrier dogs
(both parents and siblings) from a breeding program greatly reduces or eliminates the
incidence of demodicosis in that population of dogs. By following this strict culling
program, some kennels have virtually eliminated the disease from their line. Analysis of
the incidence data from one collic kcnncl (WIIM) and one beagle kennel (Dws) con-
ducted by the authors suggcsted an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance.
FIGURE 6-29. A, Periocular alopecia and hyperpigmentation in a dog with localized demodicosis. B, Hound-
cross with chronic gencralized denodicosis. C, A'9-month-old Dobernan pinscher whose face is disligured by the
effects of the disease. The loose fold of skin at the throat containing numerous pustules is characteristic.D,
Follicular papules, crusts, and alopecia over the dorsal neck and top of the head of a dog with generalized
demarcated, alopecic, crusted patches of generalized demodicosis with
pyoderna on therunp of aWest
demodectic podoxdermatiis. Erythema, alopecia. hyperpigmentation of a paw. I, Chronic pododermatitis in a dog
with demodectic pododermatitis.
Parasitic Skin Diseases · 463
 Other predisposing factors suggested for demodicosis include age, short hair. poor
nutrition, estrus, parturition, stress, endoparasites, and debilitating diseases. In two studies,
dogs relapsing after or not responding to treatrment with iverrnectin or milbemycin were
intact females.183, 183h Most of these factors are dificult to evaluate and many are highly
unlikely to be predisposing factors. Length of hair coat, size and activity of sebaceous
glands, sex of the animal, and biotin deficiency have no effect on the development or
progression of demodicosis.21 In fact, the great majority of clinical cases are seen in
purebred dogs that are receiving excellent diets and are otherwisc in generally good
condition.
 If most dogs harbor the Demodex mite as part of their normal fauna, the question
a ru op s o pe ssp doaap sp sos am pnme aq is
ences in the virulence of some Demodex strains have been considered but seem unlikely.
In liters with demodicosis, some puppies have serious disease whereas others remain
norinal. Because these normal puppics have been exposed to the same mite population as
their affected littermates, demodicosis cannot be solely associated with the strain of mite.
The induction of demodicosis in dogs treated with antilymphocyte serunl4s demonstrated
the probable role of immunodeficiency in this disease. The development of demodicosis in
aduit dogs undergoing immunosuppressive treatmentsls90 or having cancer or serious meta-
compromised immunologically, they should develop viral disorders, pneumonias, or other
systemic infections and they do not.201. 202 Likewise, most adult dogs having cancer,
og un issdnsi n o ss rnor  jo a
autoimmune disorders or cancer should develop demodicosis and they do not. A mite-
specific imimunoincompetence of varying severity helps explain these disparities. Immuno-
logic studies that support this theory are described in' the following sections.
● Nonspecifie Immunity. Nonspecific immunity in canine demodicosis has been
studied in the neutrophil and complement systems. No absolute deficiencies of neutro-
phils or abnormalities in neutrophil morphologic features havebeen observed.20l. 202Addi-
tionally, dogs with proven neutrophil dyslunction do not develop demodicosis. Limited
complement studies have not shown any association of complement deficiency with dermo-
dicosis.205, 207
● Humoral Immunity. Dogs with generalized demodicosis typically have normal
to elevated nurmbers of plasma cells in their skin, bone marrow, lymph nodes, and
distemper-infectious canine hepatitis vaccine, they can mount a normal antibody re-
sponse.ls The number of IgE-bearing mast cels in the skin of dogs with demodicosis is
demodicosis have a hyperglobulinemia and show a reactive serum protein electrophoretic
-p ot pasodsad aq o reade nou op Aouap vai o ii m so roand
cosis.205 All of these studies demonstrate that humoral immunodeficiency is not the cause
 ssdsn o a ay a s ss ro e i pr siso jo
hyperreactivity may be the result of T cell hyporeactivity.
 pressed T cell function, as measured by the in vitro lymphocyte blastogenesis (IVLB)
test481496201.202orkntestingwithhythmaggltininncanavain,orini
 o se ap  s pe spu   ro se ho i a ro 
one of function rather than numbers.
o a e on alns si s sn A pd oq to isn aan 
technical problems, and does not give identical results in dogs of the same breed and
age.13Accordingly, stdies using thistest shouldbe peformed in a large number of dogs
the IVLB in dogs with demodicosis was not subject to such careful scrutiny, and the
conclusions drawn may not be valid.
464· Parasitic Skin Diseascs
The original work demonstrated that the IVLB suppression seen in demodicosis was
either an immunoglobulin or an immune complex,168 suppressed the blastogencsis of a
 Or other techniques, and disappeared when the number of mites was reduccd with
treatment.66、 202 These data, coupled with the normal IVLB results from dogs with
localizeddiosisraryeneralizeddiseasrsultdinthythsisha
the immunosuppression of denodicosis was parasite induced. As the mites startcd to
the immune rcsponse to the parasite and allowed the proliferation of the mites to
continue unchecked.
Work by Barta and colleaguesl34 seemed to refute that theory. In that study, dogs
with dermodicosis and no bacterial pyoderma had normal IVLB test results, whcrcas dogs
o p s ss t u ae od o d pe sisop 
common problem in demodicosis, and not the mites themselves.
Subsequent work showed that dogs with deinodicosis become increasingly 1nore in-
the immunologic abnormalities exist after the pyoderma and demodicosis are re-
solved17、173,  The most recent studies have focused on the identification of the
lymphocyte subsets involved in denodicosis.137, 14l, 150. 173 Although these studies are in
activated by an irregularity in T helper cell function.14l. 173 with decreased interleukin-2
(IL-2) production and IL-2 receptor expression documented, the suggcstion has been
made that dogs with demodicosis have a decreased Th, response.173 It is hoped that
further studies in the nude mouse model will completely characterize the defect.
If demodicosis is an immunodefciency disorder, why does the condition resolve
spontaneously in some dogs and why is there significant clinical variability armong litter
mates with the disease? A hereditary, D. canis -specifc T cell defect of varying severity
offers an appealing solution, which answers many questions. The hereditary component is
supported by the higher prevalence in certain breeds and the association of demodicosis
supported by studies done with Demodex antigen. Normal dogs and in dogs in which the
 deinodicosis resolves spontaneously show an adequate delayed-type hypcrsensitivity skin
test result, whereas dogs with chronic disease do not.14s.149
With a severe D. canis -specific defect, the dog has generalized demodicosis with its
secondary immunosuppressive component. These dogs require vigorous treatment. With a
other immunosuppressing condition occurred. If the secondary condition was resolved, the
 demodicosis could resolve spontaneously or respond rapidly and completely to fairly
simple treatments. In puppies, the immunosuppressive factor could he the stress of
puppyhood, whereas more serious immunosuppressive diseases would be necessary in
adultdogs.
ClinicalFeatures
· Localized Demodicosis. In this variation of demodicosis, a patch of skin develops
mild erythema and partial alopecia. Pruritus may be present, and the area may be covered
with fine silvery scales. One to several squamous patches can be present. The most
common site is the face, especially the periocular area and the commissures of the mouth
(see Figs. 6-20G and H and 6-29A). Next in order of occurrence are the forelegs. More
rarely, one or more patches are seen on the trunk or the rear legs or the dog presents for
a bilateral ceruminous otitis extema. Most cases occur at 3 to 6 months of age and heal
spontaneously without treatment. It is rare for true localized demoticosis in a dog to
 on suq u p st as ae a    ss
Parasitic Skin Diseases · 465
within 30 days. Lesions can come and go over a period of several months. Recurrences
  r  o s e  e s us  asq ar a
reproduction of mites or the immunocompetence of the host has returned to nornal.
Rarely, dogs have only demodectic otitis externa.t36
● Generalized Demodicosis. Although localized demodicosis is a mild clinical dis-
ease, generalized demodicosis is one of the most severe canine skin discases; it can
 a    a   q     
usually starts with nultiple poorly circumscribed areas of disease, which worsen rather
and the trunk. Ear canal involvement usually accompanies othcr facial lesions. Each lesion
 gets larger, and somc coalesce to form patches (see Fig. 6-29F). Follicular hyperkeratosis
is often marked, and close examination of lesions often reveals follicular openings accentu-
ated and plugged with conical hyperkeratoses, whereas folicular casts are prominent at
Peripheral lynphadenopathy is marked. When secondary pyoderma complicates these
lesions, edema and crusting elevate the patches into plaques. Deep follculitis develops,
and exudates are produced and form thick crusts (see Figs. 6-29D to F). Sornc dogs
Bacteria thrive under these crusts and in the follicles. Staphylococcus intermedius is
the most common bacterial organism to complicate generalized demodicosis. Pseudomonas
occurs with demodectic pododermatitis. Proteus mirabilis is another serious secondary
After several months, the chronically infected skin is covered with crusted, pyogenic,
hemorrhagic, and folicular-furuncular lesions. The abdomen is least affected, perhaps
because fewer hair follicles are in that area. Numerous lesions are concentrated on the
head and neck, and involveinent may be severe. Many owners elect euthanasia for their
pets at this stage.
● Demodectic Pododermatitis. Demodicosis can be present on thc fcct of dogs
without generalized lesions. The case history reveals whether the dog once had general-
ized demodicosis that healed, except for the foot lesions, or whether the paws were the
only part of the body over affected. The digital and interdigital lesions are especially
susceptible to secondary pyodermas (see Fig. 6-29G and H). In some aninals, demodec-
tic pododermatitis can be chronic and extremely resistant to therapy. The pain and edema
is especially distressing to large dogs such as Great Danes, Newfoundlands, St. Bernards.
and Old English sheepdogs.
In summary, disease in one dog can progress through the following stages: fairly
localized demodicosis, generalized demodicosis, generalized pyogenic dernodicosis, and
chronic pyogenic demodectic pododermatitis.
Diagnosis
 Skin scrapings that are properly made and interpreted can establish the diagnosis of
dernodicosis. The affected skin should be squeezed firmly to extrude the mites from the
hair follicles, and skin serapings should be deep and extensive. Extrernely fragile arcas
should be avoided because the resultant hemorrhage usually makes interpretation of the
results difficult. Diagnosis is made either by demonstrating large numbcrs of adult mites
 or by finding an increased ratio of immature forms (ova, larvae, and nymphs) to adults.
The demonstration of an occasional adult mite in skin scrapings is consistent with a
diagnosis of normal skin, not demodicosis. However, because ^it is uncommon to find a
Demodex mite in the scrapings from normal dogs, the finding of one mite should not be
ignored. The dog should be scraped at several additional sites before the diagnosis of
demodicosis is dismissed.
The diagnosis of demodicosis can be made in some dogs with a seborrheic presenta-
tion or pododermatitis by trichography. Haired skin with surface and follcular hyperkera-
466*Parasitic Skin Diseases
FIGURE 6-30. A, Diffuse scaling, follicular casts, and focal erythema and alopccia over the back of a dog
with generalized demoxdicosis.B,Feline demodicosis.Alopecia and scaling of forehead and ears.C,Feline
demodicosis. Alopecia and hyperpigmentalion of chin and lip. D, Bilaterally synmetric alopecia in a cat with
gcncralizcd temoxdlicosis. (Courtesy B. Stein.) E, Canine scabies 4 weeks after onset in a Japanese spaniel.
same patient as in E, showing area on elbow where diagnostic skin seraping was mada. The typical papular
"rash" is well illustrated in this view. G, Ear margin showing characteristic grayish yellow crusts on affected
skin. H, Crusted lesions on the elbow that are typical of a chronic case.
Parasitic Skin Diseases · 467
tosis (hair casts) is selected for sampling. In heavily infested dogs, a large number of mites
u u u    s     u pd q 
 diseased dogs and should never be used during therapeutic monitoring as a replacement
for the skin scraping.
Skin scraping appears to he a straightforward, easy laboratory procedure; however,
every year, the authors continue to receive cascs on referral that somehow had negative
findings on scraping and were misdiagnosed. Adequate skin scrapings are mandatory in all
are obtained from a Shar pei or from a dog with fibrotic lesions, especially in the
interdigital region, a skin biopsy specimen should be examined before demodicosis is
ruled out.
 ou ars  s  s   s  
abnormalities. Anemia of chronic disease, elevations in white hlood cel numbers, hyper-
globulinemia, and depressed baseline thyroid hornone levels are found in many dogs. The
depressed thyroid hormone values are usually the result of the demodicosis (euthyroid sick
syndrome; see Chap. I0) and not its cause. In cases of adult-onset demodicosis, these
routine tests become more significant in identifying the cause of the dermodicosis. If
baseline thyroid hormone levels are depressed, addifional thyroid testing should be per.
plained elevations in liver enzyme activity should lead to the consideration of adrenal
function tests (see Chap. 10) for hyperadrenocorticism, a common cause of adult-onset
demodicosis.152, 158
Histopathology
containing mites and keratinous debris (Figs. 6-31 and 6-32). Dogs with demodicosis
have an active local cutaneous response that increases with the severity of clinical dis-
ease.12. 150 Three commonly recognized patterns of inflammation are interface mural
mural folliculitis, in which plasma cells, lymphocytes, macrophages, mast cells, and eosino-
phils are found around the follicles and lymphocytes are found infiltrating the epithelium,
is a consistent finding and the infltrating lyrnphocytes are CD3+ and CDs- 141 Perifollicu-
lar granulomas surrounding mite fragments can be seen in approximately 25% of cases.
and 20% have a suppurative furunculosis as the 1nain pattern. Perifollicular melanosis is
FIGURE 6-31. Demodicosis irnl a
dog. Note hair follicles containing
numerous mite segments and a pyo.
granuloma due to follicular rupture
(upper right).
 468 · Parasitic Skin Diseases
FIGURE 6-32. Demodicosis in a
dog. Note numerous mile segments
within hair follicles.
also a coinmon fnding in skin biopsy specimens from dogs with generalized demodicosis
(Fig. 6-33). 142, 144
To date, skin biopsy is not reliablc in differentiating localized from gencral-
ized deinodicosis or in indicating whether spotaneous resolution is likely. However, if
mites are numerous and there is minimal to absent cellular response or eosinophils are
FlGURE 6-33. Demodicosis. Inlerface mural folliculitis and
perifollicular melanosis. Mite fraginents are visible in lumcn of the
follicle.
Parasitic Skin Diseases · 469
absent, especially when there is a furunculosis, the dog likely has severc inmunosup-
pression.
Differential Diognosis
Because skin scrapings easily reveal mites in the vast majority of cases of demodicosis, the
disease should not be confused with other disorders. Generalized pyoderina may resemble
demodicosis, and demodicosis should be suspected in every case of folliculitis. Dermato-
 phytosis resembles patches of localized demodicosis. Superficial abrasions in young dogs
sometimes resemble the erythematous patches of localized demodicosis. Conversely, de-
modicosis may be mistaken for abrasions. Muzzle folliculitis or furunculosis (acne) or early
lesions of juvenile celulitis on the face of young dogs sometimes resemble pustular
demodicosis, and certain demodectic pustules on the abdomen and inside surfacc of the
thighs resemble canine impetigo. Differentiation can be made by exainination of exudative
cytology and skin scrapings. Contact dermatitis exhibits erythematous papules that orca-
dermatomyositis facial lesions can also mimic demodicosis.
Clinical Management
● Localized Demodicosis. This is a mild disease that usually heals spontaneously in
 6 to 8 weeks but inay wax and wane in a localized area for months. There is no difference
in healing between treated and untreated cases. There is no evidence that treatment of
localized demodicosis prevents generalization in cases so destined. If the clinician believes
that some form of treatment is indicated, a mild topical parasitide used to treat ear mites
alopccic area once a day. The medication should he rubbed in the' direction of the hair
growth so that as few hairs as possible are pulled out. The owner should be informed that
the medications and the rubbing necessary to apply them worsen the lesions for 2 to 3
weeks. This does not affect the outcorme of the disease, because the lesions only appear to
be getting larger. It is important to check the general health status of the dog at this time,
paying special attention to diet, endoparasite problems, and vaccination needs. Amitraz is
not a rational nor approved treatment for localized demodicosis, and its use here may
allow the mites to develop resistauice to it.
At a return visit 4 weeks later, the veterinarian can determine whether there are any
 indications of generalized demodicosis. The skin scraping at the beginning of localized
demodicosis offen reveals numbers of live adult mites and immature forms. After 4 weeks
of treatment, skin scrapings fron healing cases should show fewer mites, fewer immature
forms, and sometimes no live mites. If the lesions are spreading and the mitc count
(including the ratio of immature to adult) is high, the condition may be progressing to
gencralized demodicosis.
● Generalized Demodicosis. This can be the most serious non-neoplastic skin dis-
ease a veterinarian will treat. Although the prognosis for generalized demodicosis has
inproved dramatically since the mid-90s, it sil is not an easily treated disease and the
owner should be made aware of this from the onset. With intense treatment, most cases,
probably near 90%, can be cured, but it may take nearly ? year. Depending on thc dog
and the drug used, treatment can cost many hundreds of dollars and involve many hours
 of work on the owner's part. A common problem in the treatment of generalized demodi-
cosis is premature cessation of therapy and, in many instances, occurs because the owner
did not understand the entire course of treatment. These frustrations can be minimized
by having an indepth discussion about the costs and requirements of treatment before any
is undertaken.
Not all dogs need miticidal treatments. More than 30% to 50% of dogs younger than
1 year of age with generalized demodicosis recover spontaneously. In dogs with a familial
history of demodicosis, the condition may resolve spontaneously, but the rate probably is
much' lower than that seen with no farmilial history. Intact females may experience exacer-
bation or relapse of disease when they come into estrus and may be more resistant to
treatment.13 is3b Ovariohysterectomy is strongly recornmended. 'No data are available
470 · Parasitic Skin Diseases
to indicate whether treatinent accelerates the dog's self-cure, and this significant rate of
self-cure can confound therapeutic studies. Studies that do not specify the age of the dogs
or the extent of disease cannot be evaluated critically. To euthanize 6- to 12-month-old
 dogs because they have severe generalized demodicosis is unwarranted, because some of
them recover spontaneously il' secondary pyodermas and seborrheas are controled and the
 general health status is good. Dogs older than 1l to 2 years of age or dogs with acult-onset
generalized demodicosis require treatment.
 Before the institution of any treatment for the demodicosis, the dog's general health
and management should be improved, if necessary. This is especially true for dogs with
adult-onset disease. Their disease was triggered by some systemic disorder, and resolution
of the underlying condition allows the demodicosis to resolve spontaneously or to respond
better to treatment.
 Dogs with demodicosis need to be examined and have skin scrapings performed at
regular intervals, typically every 2 to 4 weeks. To determine the efficacy of trcatment, the
skin scrapings should always be done at the same sites and the results should be recorded
in tabular fashion. A shcet of paper with the dog schematic for identification of the
 scraping sites and tabulation of results is most helpful.
The pyoderma and seborrhea seen in dogs with demodicosis is a result of the mite
infestation and cannot be cured until the mites are eradicated. However, these problems
should be addressed before topical acaricidal treatment to make the skin less irritable and
bactericidal agents should be selected because of the probable iromunosuppressed state of
the dog. Because of the high frequency of deep pyodermas in these dogs, courses of
treatment of 6 to 8 weeks are commonplace, Because of the expense of this long-tcrm
treatment, the temptation is to use suboptimal dosages or a shortened coursc of treat-
ment. Both measures can result in more serious infections and should be avoided.
How long does one wait for the condition to resolve spontaneously? If a dog still has
clinical disease by the time it is 12 months of age, the odds of spontaneous rcsolution are
remote. In most dogs, the need for treatment will be known much sooner. After the first
4 to 6 weeks of observation, when most dogs worsen hecause subclinical lesions become
clinical, the dog who is destined to self-cure will show continual clinical improvement and
reduction in its mite burden. If the mite count remains static or starts to increase,
spontaneous resolution is unlikely.
Over the years, dozens of treatments have been used in demodicosis. Many were of
no value, and some effective ones are no longcr available 2o1 New treatments arc always
failed to produce clinical improvement or decrease mite counts in dogs with generalized
demodicosis, even though skin levels of the compound were about 10 times those in
blood.201
Miticidal treatments can be given orally or applied topically. Treatments must con-
o r  sap o ppe ue n n e aau are sds us un ann
always achieve clinical cure weeks before parasitologic cure. Parasitologic cure means that
skin scrapings from the dog contain no live or dead mites at any stage of development.
Demodex skeletons are translucent and can be overlooked if full illumination is used. The
diaphragm on the condenser should be closed down to increase the contrast and visibility
of the skeletons. A minimnum of four to six sites should be negative at the same time to
declare parasitologic cure. Site selection varies from case to case but always should
include at least one from the face and front feet.
Amitraz is the only licensed product in the United States and Canada for the treat-
ment of generalized demodicosis. The drug is diarnide, N'-(2.4-dimethylphcnyl)-N-[[(2,4-
dimethylphenyl)iminolmethyl]-N-methyimethanidamide.19 It is marketed in the United
States and Canada as Mitaban. Slightly different formulations of amitraz are marked
worldwide as Ectodex Dog Wash or Taktic.139 Amitraz is also available in a 9% antitick
collar, and claims for its effcacy in the treatment of demodicosis have been made.153
Unfortunately, this simple method of treatrment is ineffective.162
In the United States and Canada, Mitaban is licensed for use at 250 ppm with an
Parasitic Skin Diseases · 471
application frequency of 14 days. To achieve maximal results, it is imperative to follow this
protocol:
1. Dogs with medium-length or long coats should be clipped closely to allow the
aqueous solution to contact the skin and penetrate the hair follicle better.
 2. All crusts are removed. In some cases, tranquilization or anesthesia is necessary,
because some crusts adhere tightly and removal without anesthesia is painful.
Remember to) avoid sedating agents that are α-adrenergic agonists (e.g, benzodiaz-
 3. The entire dog is washed with a medicated shampoo designed to kill bacteria and
remove scales and exudates. Soaking in a whirlpool bath or a gentle stream of
water is beneficial. Even though the skin may appear raw and irritated after the
above-mentioned procedures, the medication can have optinal contact with the
affected skin. The dog is gently dried with a towel. Alternatively, the cleaning
preparation can be done the day before treatment.
e q inu rs u s pe m aq pe s us zey 
to the entire body—to normal as well as to affected areas of skin. Although the
solution is not irritating, it is mandatory for persons applying amitraz to wear
protective gloves and to work in a well-ventlated area. Amitraz causes a transitory
sedative effect for 12 to 24 hours, especially after the first treatment, and some
and include allergic reactions (urticaria and edema), skin irritation, and a variety of
systemic signs. Severe reactions or intoxications can be treated with yohimbine,
atipamezoleandother appropriate supportivemeasures.sTheocurrencer
severity of the side effects usually diminishes with subsequent applications. Rarely,
dogs have increasingly severe reactions to amitraz dips: marked weakness, ataxia,
yohimbine, which can prevent or markedly reduce the severity of these adverse
effects. Exposure to amitraz can cause contact dermatitis, migraine-like headaches,
 or asthma-ike attacks in some people. If there is demodectic pododermatitis, the
paws can be immersed in a small pan containing amitraz solution and gently
massaged to facilitate penetration. One should not rinse the feet or the body. The
medication should remain on the skin for 2 weeks. Although about half the drug is
retained in the skin for 2 weeks, some may be lost if the dog gets wet or swims. In
this case, a new application may be given before the next treatment is due.
 5. Although it is not necessary to repcat clipping and shanpooing before each treat-
ment, it makes sense to remove any new crusts before each treatment.
With this protocol, reported clinical cure rates vary from zero to nearly
90% 153 1s2.20 More frequent applications at this or higher concentrations increases the re-
covery rate.160. 170 When used weekly at a concentration of 500 or 1000 ppm, cure rates
drug use, increase the labor intensity of treatment, and markedly incrcase the cost of
treatment. The aqueous solution may not be effective in the ears or on the feet. In these
cases, amitraz in mineral oil (l:9) can be effective.
 Some percentage of dogs are not cured of their generalized demodicosis with the
licensed arnitraz protocol. When cure is not attainable, four options are available: euthana-
sia, control with regularly scheduled dips every 2 to 4 weeks, extralabel use of Mitaban or
another EPA-registered parasiticide, or use of an avermectin or milbemycin. It is a
violation of United States federal law to use an EPA-registered pesticide in a manner
inconsistent with its labeling, even when treating generalized demodicosis. Accordingly.
the extralabel use of an EPA-registered pesticide should be the last resort.
 Some investigators retreat amitraz. trcatment failures with that chemical but at a
higher frequency (every seventh day), either at the licensed strength (250 ppm) or at
higher concentrations (500, 750, or 1000 ppm). As mentioned earlier, these therapeutic
 modifications can cure some initial treatment failures. The product information on Mita-
472 · Parasitic Skin Diseases
 ban shows an increasing frequency of side effects as the topical concentration increases.
Most side effects are transient and of low frequency at concentrations less than I250 ppm.
 It is rare for a dog who tolerated dipping at 250 ppm every 14th day to experience clinical
side effects when Mitaban is used at 500 ppm every seventh day. No published data are
available on higher concentrations of Mitaban, but it can probably be used safely at 750 or
use of amitraz, but some dogs, perhaps as many as 20%, do not attain negative scraping
In the early 90s, pilot studies on the efficacy of orally administered ivermectin or
milbemycin were conducted with the hope of finding a therapeutic alternative for dogs
who couid not tolerate amitraz or be cured by it.157,17s 191 The results of those studies
were so positivc that it is now comrmonplace to treat generalized demodicosis with either
should not be undertaken without satisfaction of the guidelines for extralahel usage.
Because these drugs are simple to use and return the dog to clinical normalcy very
quickly, it is imnperative that the owmer understand all aspects of the disease and its
treatment. Because treatment is sinple and straightforward, some owners do not under-
stand why they should not use the dog for breeding. The authors will not treat any dog
with any drug if it is to be used for breeding. An even more common problem is
premature cessation of treatment because the dog looked normal. All dogs look normal
well before skin scrapings are negative with parasitologic cure lagging behind clinical cure
by 0.5 to 6 months.iss. is4. 159, 16 If the owner stops treatment to0 soon, a relapse will
occur.
 Data on the response of approximately 350 dogs treated with milbemycin are available
for review.* Within the group, dogs of all breeds, including the breeds that are sensitive
to high-dose ivermectin; either sex; and various ages at onset of disease and onset of
treatment were treated with dosages varying from 0.5 to 2.0 mg/kg given daily. Treatment
courses ranged from 60 to 300 days. Clinical cure rates varied from 15% to 92%,
depending on the dosage used and the age at onset of disease. Dogs with adult-onset
rates were higher with the higher dosages. In all studies, a small percentage of dogs
showed no real response to trcatment. If a low dosage was being used, a dosage increase
often resulted in clinical cure, but some dogs never achieved cure at 2 mg/kg. It is
Published data on the efficacy of ivermectin are more limited, with approxirmately 100
day and treatment courses ranged from 35 to 210 days. The rate of clinical cure varicd
from 83% to 100%. Preliminary data on an alternate-day protocol, in which the dog
As new avermectins and milbemycins become available or different formulations of
the available ones are investigated, other potentially effective treatments will become
available. The pour-on formulation of ivermectin is very effective in the treatment of
 nonfollicular mites of the dog and cat but performed very poorly when it was applied
sp po  g oespeems
two of the I2 treated dogs achieved parasitologic cure. In other studies moxidectin,
 io p ao q s  s  o  s  
day,135, 135a All dogs were cured, but details on long-term follow-up were unavailable.
Transient side effects included lethargy, anorexia, ataxia, and stupor. ln another study.
nine dogs were given 0.3 mg/kg/day, with an 88% cure rate.13s
In all the studies published, the rate of clinical cure excccds the true cure rate, with
relapses occurring in 10% to 45% of the cases. Although a relapse can occur at any timc,
most seem to occur within the first 3 months of the discontinuation of treatment. These
relapses are probably due to insufficient treatment. The skin scraping, the only test
"See references 140, 157, 160, 167, 178, 179, 183.
Parasitic Skin Diseases · 473
available to determine parasitologic cure, is extremely crude and results can and will vary
from veterinarian to veterinarian, from site to site, and with an even so slight variation of
technique on the same dog. Even if the skin scrapings from a dog are without flaw, the
scraping represents the parasitoiogic status of only 4 to 6 small areas of its skin and mites
could be present a few inches away. In some cases, especially those with refractory pedal
discasc, skin biopsy is used to determine the end of treatment. Obviously, this type of
testing is impractical in most cases.
 For these and other reasons, treatment is not stopped whcn negative scrapings are
obtained but is continued for some adlitional period of time, usually' 2 to 4 weeks. The
duration of the treatment after negative scraping should probably be based on the length
of treatment, and the authors believe it always should be 4 or more weeks. Cure rates are
If a dog relapses within the first 3 months, more aggressive treatment with the same
drug may cure it. If the second treatment results in relapse or if the first relapse occurred
9 or more months after treatment was stopped, further treatment with the drug is not
likely to cure the dog. If the dog was initially treated with milbenycin, additional treat-
ments with ivermectin can cure the dog and vice versa.
If all of the above-mentioned methods fail and the owner still wants to try to cure the
dog, he has the option of using the farm animal formulation of amitraz (Taktic, Hoechst-
Roussel).1 A 1250-ppm aqueous solution of the amitraz is applied to one half of the
animal's body on a rotating basis. If the feet are involved, they are treated daily. When
this protocol was used on 71 dogs, 56 (79%) were cured, with a mean course of treatment
of 3.7 months. No serious side effects were noted.
 One of the authors (Dws) has consulted on cases of canine generalized demodicosis
wherein daily avermectin or milbemycin therapy had been combincd with weckly amitraz
dips. The dogs developed severe neurotoxicity. In other cases, especially when the iver-
mectin is given once or twice weekly, no toxicity was noted with concurrent amitraz
dips, '7o The use of concurrent intensive macrocyclic lactone and amitraz therapy should be
used cautiously or be avoided.
disease until at least I2 months after treatment is stopped. During this waiting period, any
skin lesions that develop should be scraped and the administration of inmunosuppressive
drugs should be avoided. Two dogs relapsed 13 and 18 months, respectively, following
successful treatment.18sh
With current treatments, not all dogs can be cured of their demodicosis. The addition
of immunostimulants like levamisole, thiabendazole, Propionibacterium acnes (Immuno-
regulin, ImmunoVet), vitamin E, and muramyldipeptide-parapoxvirus combinations does
u  a pn   a u  i  a  n u
and vigor of the treatment, but probably l0% of dogs are incurable with any protocol. For
these dogs, the owner must choose between euthanasia or chronic maintenance therapy.
No data are available on the success and safety of long-term maintenance protocols with
milbemycin or ivermectin, but the authors have had some patients under control for over
4 years with no adverse effects. In these cases, either the milbemycin or ivermectin is
given every second to third day.
The concurrence of demodicosis and allergic skin disease (e.g, atopy) is an occasional
therapeutic challenge for the clinician. Clearly, glucocorticoids need to he avoided, if at all
possible. Symptomatic control of allergic pruritus should be attempted with antihistamines
or omega-3/omega-6 fatty acids, or both. Remember, heterocyclic antideprcssants are also
monoamine oxidase inhibitors and may be contraindicated in conjunction with amitraz.
 Ceneralized demodicosis is hereditary in young dogs. Until the mode of inheritance is
established, preventive measures are impossible if affected dogs and thcir littcrmates are
used for breeding. If the disease has a rccessive mode of inheritance, some normal
pass on the trait. Because no test is available to separate normal aninals fron carriers, all
puppies from litters in which one or more pups is clinically affected should be culled from
breeding programs. Dermatologists do not treat dogs for generalizcd demodicosis if they
474 · Parasitic Skin Diseases
are to be used for breeding. General acceptance of this policy will eventually eradicate the
disease.
 Feline Demodicosis
Feline demodicosis is caused by (1) Demodex cati,214. 216 (2) Demodex gatoi,211. 215 and (3)
an undescribed Demoder sp, 20,215
D. cati is much like D. canis, with minor taxonomic differences (Fig. 6-34A). The
(wa are slim and oval (see Fig. 6-34B) rather than spindle shaped, and all immature life
stages are narrower in D. cati than in D. canis. It is a rare disease that usually affects the
eyelids, the periocular area, the head, and the neck (see Fig. 6-30B and C).2i7 Lesions
are variably pruritic and consist of patchy erythema, scaling, crusting, and alopecia. It is
the localized type of demodicosis and is usually self-limited. Feline demodicosis may also
occur as a ceruminous otitis externa.29 Lime sulfur solution or mild parasiticides used for
ear mites can be used to treat the lesions. Amitraz in mineral oil (l:9) is an effective otic
miticide; it has not, however, been approved for use in cats.
Generalized feline demodicosis is rare and not usually as severe as the caninc
Lesions are found primarily on the head but may be on the neck, the trunk, and the
limbs. The lesions consist of circumscribed macules and patches with alopecia, scaling.
tus is variable. In two cases, large numbers of mites were found in scrapings of the ear
canal of healthy cats.214 Generalized demodicosis due to D. cati is usually associated with
FIGURE 6-34. A, Adult Demordex chati
in skin scraping. It is similar to D. canis,
except for a somewhat slimmer abdomen.
(Courtesy J. Georgi.) B, D. cati covum in
skin scraping. It is slim and oval rather
than spindle: shaped. (Courtesy J. Georgi.)
C and D, Demodex gatoi in skin scraping
from a cat. This mite is rnorphologically
similar to Demodex crceti, which is found
on hamsters. Note blunt, rounded abdo-
men.
D
Parasitic Skin Diseases * 475
underlying disease: diabetes mellitus,213 feline lcukemia virus infection, systemic lupus
erythematosus, hyperadrenocorticism, feline immunodeficiency virus infection, or squa-
found. One case had raised exudative lesions on the lips and chin.2os Mites and a
Staphylococus organism were obtained, and thc cat had a marked lymphopenia associated
with long-term therapy for a respiratory tract infection. Clinicians should be aware of its
possible association with serious systemic disease. Histologic examination reveals varying
degrees of perifolliculitis and folliculitis, with mites in hair follicles (Fig. 6-35).
Some cats respond in a short time spontaneously with mild remedies such as topical
ease with which generalized demodicosis can be treated in some cats may be explained by
the often superficial location of mites in the skin of cats as compared with that in the skin
 of dogs. Treatment with amitraz dips at 125 ppm or 250 ppm on a weekly basis also can
be beneficial.96a, 212
The second species of mite causing feline demodicosis is Demodex gatoi, and it bears
 a close taxonomic resemblance to Demodex criceti, which is found in the epidermal pits in
the stratum comeum of hamsters215.20,224 The mites affecting cats are shorter and have
broad, blunted abdomens (see Fig. 6-34C and D). unlike the slim, elongated abdomens 
nonprruritic cats, skin scrapings reveal numerous mites and ova, the latter being indicative
of rapid reproduction.215 Because of their small size and translucency, the 1nite can be
 overlooked if the slide is scanned rapidly with the four-power objective at full hight
intensity. The 10-power objective should be used, and the iris diaphragm should be closed
down to increase the contrast. ln pruritic cats, especially those that lick their skin, no
mites may be seen.209 In these cases, a contact cat at home should be examined because
the mite is contagious21 22 or a therapeutic trial should be started.
The clinical signs of disease due to D. gatot may be suggestive of feline scabies or
allergie skin disease, with severe pruritus; alopecic, scaly, excoriated, and crusted lesions
are seen, often concentrated on the head, the neck, and the elbows. Other cases have
 multifocal erythema and hyperpigmentation, with broken, stubby hairs located on the
 proximal rear legs, the Hanks, and the ventral abdormen. Some are cases of symmetric
alopecia with or without scaling (see Fig. 6-30D), which mimics feline symmetric alope-
cia, psychogenic alopecia, or hypersensitivity reactions.
acanthotic and hyperkeratotic, with mites in the stratum cormeum (Fig. 6-36). No mites
are found in the hair follicles.
FIGURE 6-35. Feline deinodi-
cosis. Interface mural folliculitis
and Derodex cati inites in the hair
follicle.
476 · Parasitic Skin Diseases
FIGURE 6-36. Feline demodicosis. Demodex gatoi (arrouc) in
the surface keratin layer.
Differential diagnosis of the second type of feline demodicosis must include all feline
dermatoses that are associated with excessive grooming such as psychogenic alopecia,
atopy, fod hypersensitivity, feline scabies, contact dermatitis, fea bite hypersensitivity.
and the democdicosis caused by D. cati. Careful skin scrapings are paramount in the work-
up for cach of these conditions to make a proper diagnosis. Because the mite can be
difficult to find in cats that groom excessively, a short therapeutic trial with lime sulfur is
indicated before complicated testing like dietary restriction is undertaken. If the cat has
 demodicosis, a positive response should be seen after three treatments.
 Because D. gatoi is contagious, all cats in the household should be treated simulta-
neously. Although ivermectin has been suggested as an effective treatment,216 most investi-
ppm, are also effective.96a
The third, presently undescribed, Demodex mite from the cat superficially resembles
 D. gatot, but is larger and possesses other anatomical differences 210a. 215
Canine Scabies
Canine scabies (sarcoptic mange) is a nonseasonal, intensely pruritic, transmissible infesta-
au (2-a i) s ia aqs sadoos a a  pas sop jo us ayt jo uo
cifcity of Sarcoptes mites, and indicate that this genus consists of a single heterogeneous
species.250a
Couse and Pathogenesis
The causative mite belongs to the family Sarcoptidae, as does Notoedres cati, the cause of
feline scabies. Because these mites have much in common, their 17- to 2l-day life cycles
are presented together. Copulation of adults occurs in a molting pocket on the surface of
the skin. The fertilized female mite excavates a burrow through the horny layer of the
Parasitie Skin Diseases · 477
FIGURE 6-37. Adult Sarcoptes scabiei
var. canis. Note the long unjointed stalks and
slickers.
skin at a rate of 2 to 3 mm/d and lays eggs in the tunnel behind her. The eggs hatch as
larvae and burrow to the surface of the skin, where they travel about feeding and
eventually resting in a molting pocket. Nymphs also wander about thc skin, but they may
stay in the molting pocket until they are mature. Mites prefer skin with ltle hair, so they
are most common on the ears, the eibows, the abdomen, and the hocks. As the disease
spreads and hair is lost, they may eventuaily colonize large areas of the host's body. The
entire life cycle may be complete in only 3 weeks.
Adult rmites are small (200 to 400 μm), oval, and white with two pairs of short legs
 anteriorly that bear long unjoined stalks with suckers (sce Figs. 6-37). The stalks are of
medium length in N. cati (see Fig. 6-44). Two pairs of posterior legs are rudimentary
not suckers, although the fourth pair of legs of the male mite have suckers. The anus of
S. scabiei var. canis is terminal, whereas that of N. cati has a dorsal location—an
important point of differentiation.
 Scabies mites have hosts of preference but can cause disease in other species. S.
humans occur within 24 hours after brief direct exposure and are characterized by pruritic
papules on the trunk and arms (Fig. 6-38D). Pruritus is severe, especiall when the skin
is warm—-as it is in bed at night or after a warm shower. Mites burrow but usually
remain on the aberrant host for only a few days. The lesions regress spontaneously in 12
    o  p a  e e o  aep i o
terminated. However, with many mites and prolonged repeated contact, the human le-
sions persist for long periods. Canine Sarcoptes mites can live on human beings for at
478 · Parasitic Skin Diseases
FIGURE 6-38. A, Generalized erythema and alopecia of dog with extensive scabies. B, Margin of the ear (pinna)
is a characteristic site. C, Grayish crusts on the body mimic seborrheic dermatitis. Heimorrhagic area is from skin
Pinnal alopecia, scale,and crust in an early case of feline scabies.F,Chronic feline scabies.Note marked crusting
and excoriation on pinnae and head. G, Dry, crusted lesions on the edges of the ears and face are typical of feline
Parasitic Skin Diseases · 479
least 6 days and produce ova during that time.20 There is one report, however, of a child
with Norwegian scabies caused by S. scabiei var. canis.24s Similar mites were found on
three dogs in the household and on all other members of the family.
The off-host survival time of scabies mites depends on the relative huimidity and
temperature. Female mites and nymphs generally survive longer than do male nites or
larvae, and low temperature and high humidity prolong survival.27 At 10° to 15°℃ (50 to
59°F), female mites and nymphs could survive for 4 to 21 days, depending on the
7  9  ss  (21 0   0 0)    6
to 6 days. These mites can be point sources of infection for other animals.35, 127
ClinicalFeatures
The distribution pattern of canine scahies typically involves the ventral portions of the
abdomen, the chest, and the legs.236. 241 The ears and the elbows, favorite habitats of
mites, are almost always affected and are premiere places for obtaining diagnostic scrap-
ings (see Fig. 6-30E to H). However, some animals have no ear lesions, The disease
spreads rapidly and can involve the entire body (see Fig. 6-38A), but the dorsum is
pruritic, reddish papulocrustous eruptions (sec Fig. 6-30F). Typicall, they have thick
yellowish crusts, and the intense and constant itching soon produces extensive excoriation
(see Fig. 6-38B and C). These patients are miserable because they are constantly scratch-
ing themselves. Itching is thought to be more severe in warm environments (e.g., indoors
or by the stove). In long-term cases, hyperpigrnentation of the affected skin is cormmon.
Most patients also have a generalized lymphadenopathy.
The incubation period for scabies is unknown. When fox mites were transferred to
aam asoun pue 'padonaap susis anojoq sep II oh y jo pouad sel e sen aiaue ssop
mild3 In the natural situation, infested dogs should start to itch a few days after
infection. The pruritus is at a low level and is proportional to the number of mites. As the
number of mites increases, the pruritus becomes more severe, but there is some point at
days after exposure. In experimental studies, inifected dogs seroconverted 2 to 5 weeks
with the more rapid seroconversion and self-cure of dogs at reinfection, it is clear that the
 Some dogs never have the classic lesions of scabies. They scratch incessantly and have
few, if any, real lesions other than mild erytheina and occasional excoriations. They are
often treated for an allergy with systemic corticosteroids but without benefit. These dogs
have had scabies cver since they came in contact with an infected dog or environment,
but mites are not found in skin scrapings. Thorough grooming may have removcd superfi-
cial mites and crusts, so only a few mites remainenough to cause pruritus but too few
to find. These dogs respond rapidly and dramatically to proper antiscabies therapy.
In cats, S. scabiei infestation is rare and variable in clinical presentation (Fig.
 spd as sed  pe d d  u  sg
without claw abnormalities; generalized crusts, scale, and pruritus; and self-induced hair
loss with no skin lesions. Temporary transmission from cats to humans has been reported.
Affected cats are often immunosuppressed before infestation.
Diagnosis
Seabies mites can be difficult to demonstrate, especially when the patient is intensely
pruritic, has had the disease for a long time, or has received multiple haths or dips.
 Scabies should be considered in any dog with nonseasonal, intense pruritus, especially
when the pruritus does not stop with the administration of 1.l mg/kg of prednisone.
Howcver, nearly 30% of dogs may respond to steroid treatments.236 when scabies is a
differential diagnostic possibility, it can be excluded only by the aninal's failure to respond
to adequate treatment.
 A helpful, although nonspecific, test for scabies is the pinnal-pedal reffex. The edge of
the dog's pinna is rubbed or scratched and the test is positive if the dog's hindleg
attempts to scratch the ear region. Between 75% and 90% of dogs with scabies and ear
480 · Parasitic Skin Diseases
FIGURE 6-39. Scabies. Digital
crusting, onychogryphosis, and (ony-
chorrhexis ina catwith Sarcoptes
scabiei var. canis infection.(Cour-
tesy H. P. Huang.)
lesions have a positive pinnal-pedal reffex.243 The test may be negative if no ear lesions are
 sd a    o se a   a aa s
scabies and 1mites of various species may share some cuticular or fecal antigens, reports on
the diagnostic accuracy of skin testing with house dust mite antigen bave arisen. In one
study of 20 dogs with scabies, 15 showed positive intradermal and serologic reactivity to
house dust mites that was lost when the scabies was treated.25o The authors have only
been able to show dust mite reactivity in approximately 30% of their cases.243 Testing with
a Sarcoptes suis extract resulted in approximately 30% reactivity in infected dogs in one
study.23i The serodiagnostic rate in these dogs also was approximately 30%.
 The absolute confirrmation of the diagnosis necessitates that some stage of the mite or
its feces be seen via skin scrapings. Multiple scrapings are necessary. For scraping, one
should choose skin sites that have not been excoriated. In these areas, one should look for
    -a   dn     s  
elbows, or the hocks are primary scraping sites because the mites seem to prefer these
areas, Large amounts of material are collected and spread on slides with mineral oil, and
every field should he examined carefully. One mite, one egg (Fig. 6-40), or dark brown
oval fecal pellets (Fig. 6-4l) are diagnostic. Depending on the number of scrapings taken,
mites may be seen in only 20% of cases.243 A few patients have mites in the feces. An
reported to be 92% sensitive and 96% specife,25 although some studies report a much
lower rate.231 Seroconversion can take up to 5 weeks after inoculation, so testing should
not be performed too early.
Histologic examination may be useful but is rarely conclusive, unless actual mites are
seen in the biopsy specimen. One should always select an active papule, undisturbed by
excoriation, as the biopsy specimen. Mites may rarely be found in' the superficial epider-
mis and the stratum corneum (Fig. 6-42). Early on, histopathologic changes are minimal
In developed cases, approximately 50% of biopsies have marked spongiosis and a perivas-
cular-to-interstitial, heavily eosinophilic dermatitis.247 A very suggestive histopathologic clue
is the presence of focal areas of epidermal edema, exocytosis, degeneration, and necrosis
(epidermal "nibbles") (Fig. 6-43). Eosinophils vary in number, from few to many, proha-
bly relative to recent glucocorticoid therapy. Focal parakeratotic hyperkeratosis is often
pronounced.
 Differential diagnosis should include contact dermatitis, atopy, food hypersensitivity,
Malassezia derinatitis, Pelodera dermatitis, cheyletiellosis, otodectic dermatitis, and dirofi-
lariasis. Any one of these dermatoses at a particular stage might resemble scabies. Failure
Parasitic Skin Diseases · 48I
FIGURE 6-40. Multiple S. sca-
biei ova in skin scraping.
 to find mites should not eliminate the dliagnosis of scabies, and doing so is a common
 mistake. Many such cases are erroneously treated as an allergy. Careful history, physical
examination, or appropriate cultures, biopsy, and examination of scrapings, and especially
response to acaricidal imedicaments, usually satisfactorily resolve the diagnostic problem.
Treatment
resolution, the condition does not resolve spontaneously in all dogs, so eradication of the
 mites is indicated.229 Treatment should be started as soon as the diagnosis is made or
suspected. This disease is highly contagious in a kcnnel or a hospital. The only licensed
method of treatment for canine scabies is the repeated application of a topical parasiticide.
If the dog has a dense coat, the hair should be clipped. All patients should bc bathed with
an antiseborrheic shampoo to remove crusts and other debris, and then an acaricidal dip
should be applied thoroughly and allowed to soak every inch of the skin surface. Spot
treatment is ineffective. Particular care should be taken around the ears and the eyes; the
FIGURE 6-4l. S. scabiei fccal
pellets (scybala) in linear arrange-
ment in skin scraping.
482 · Parasitic Skin Diseases
FIGURE 6-42. Canine scabies.
Note 1nite scgiments within stratum
cormeum.
skin in those regions is often severely infected yet delicate and easily iritated by parasiti-
cidal dips. Administration of systemic corticosteroids in full antiallergic dosages (1.1 mg/kg
of prednisone or prednisolone daily) for 2 to 3 days is useful to provide relief from
scratching and to stop self-mutilation until the mites are eliminated.
Many of the proven scabicides are no longer available for veterinary use, and mite
resistance to some pesticides, especially the organophosphates, has been suggested. These
problems limit the number of dips available, and no topical treatment can be considered
100% effective. Weekly administration of lime sulfur, organophosphate, or perrnethrin
dips can be effective. Amitraz is reported to be an effective agent when used at 250 ppm
once to three times at 2-week intervals.242 Other reportedly cffective topicals include
should be used until the pruritus is vastly reduced or elininated. Typically a 4. to 6-week 
course of treatment is satisfactory.
Topical treatments are very labor intense, especially when the dog has a dense coat.
Thc owner's physical abilities or the dog's lifestyle, for example, swims daily, sometimes
FIGURE 6-43. Canine scabies.
withi focalcpiderinalncerosis andex-
ocytosis (*nibbles").
Parasitic Skin Diseases · 483
eliminates this route of treatment. High-dose ivermectin or milbemycin can be effective in
these cases.6. 3s Because of the expense of milbemycin, ivermectin receives widest use but
cannot be used in ivermectin-sensitive breeds. Ivermectin is given at dosages of 0.2 to 0.4
mg/kg subcutaneous twice at 14-day intervals or orally three times at 7-day intervals. The
pour-on formulation applied twice at 14-day intervals at a dosage of 0.5 mg/kg is aiso
reportedly is 100% effective.244a
 Milbemycin oxine has been used as an alternate oral treatment for dogs sensitivc to
high-dose ivermcctin, At dosages below 3 mg/kg, adverse reactions in any hreed of dog
are very rare.l16 In thc initial clinical study, dogs were given 2 1ng/kg either twice at 14
of 56 dogs were treated with the thrce-dose protocol, and a 29% failure rate was
reported.22 Additional treatments were needed to cure the failures. If milbemycin is used,
the owner should be asked to report after the third dosage. If the dog is still pruritic,
additional treatments should be dispensed and these will result in cure.263
Recent studies indicated that two applications of selamectin at a 30-day interval cured
 93% to 100% of the cases of canine scabies,43a and that fipronil spray was also curative,23s
Most cases of scabies in a single-pet household can be resolved by treatment of the
animal alone. In multiple-dog households, all contact dogs should be treated, even if they
exhibit no signs, because asymptomatic carriers have been identified. Because the parasite
can live in the environment for up to 2l days, cleaning and applying an environmental
scraping, especially when multiple dogs are involved.
Humans who do not have lesions at the onset of treatment of the dog should not
should not develop. Development of new lesions indicates inadequate treatment of the
 dogs, environmental infestation, or truc human scabies, which could have been transferred
 to the dogs. The owners should be refcrred to a human dermatologist.
Feline Scabies
 Feline scabies (notoedric mange) is a contagious parasitic disease of cats caused by N.
Cati.
Cause ond Pathogenesis
N. cati (Fig. 6-44) primarly atacks cats but may also infect foxes, dogs, and rabbits.2 252
It causes transient lesions in humans. The mites are obligate parasites that probably
survive off the host for only a few days. The disease is highly contagious by direct contact,
and characteristically affects whole litters and both sexes of adult cats. Affected animals
FlGURE 6-44. Adult Notoedres cati. Notc
thce mediun-length stalks, the striated integu-
ment, and the lack of a terminally located anus.
The mite is smaller than S. scahiei var. camis.
484 · Parasitic Skin Diseases
n ssss us uo png aa an m 's yo siqu ae s
 mange appears in epizootics; it is rarely diagnosed in some parts of the country but is
endemic and common in others.
 The mite belongs to the family Sarcoptidae, and because its basic life cycle and
structure are similar to those of canine scabies, the two are discussed together in the
section entitled Cause and Pathogenesis of Canine Scabies. The main features of taxo-
nomic differentiation for the clinician are that N. cati mites are smaller than Sarcoptes
canis and have medium-length unjointed sucker-bearing stalks on their legs. They also
have more body striations and, most important, have a dorsal anus as compared with the
terminal anus of Sarcoptes. The abundant mites are much easier to find on skin scrapings 
than they are in cases of S. canis.
Clinical Features
The distribution is typical. Lesions first appear at the medial proximal edge of the pinna
of the car (see Fig. 6-38E). They spread rapidly to the upper ear, the face, the eyelids,
d ae p  a  pxa o   pe -g  aas)  e p
This probably results from the cat's habits of washing and of sleeping in a curled position.
Femalc mites burrow into the hormy layer of the epidermis between hair follicles.
becomes thickened, wrinkled, and folded and later is covered with dense, tightly adhering.
yellow to gray crusts (see Fig. 6-38G). There is partial alopecia in affected areas. Intense
pruritus develops, and the excoriations produced by scratching may become secondarily
infected. As the disease progresses, the hair loss and skin lesions spread until large areas
 of the body are involved. Peripheral lymphadenopathy is usually present.
Diagnosis
The distribution of lesions and the intensity of the pruritus are highly suggestive. Identif-
cation of the mites is diagnostic. Serapings should be examined with the IO-power objec-
tive with reduced light because the mites are small and become less visible with intense
light. The differential diagnosis should rule out Otodectes infection, cheyletiellosis, atopy,
food hypersensitivity, permphigus foliaceus or erythematosus, and systemic lupus erythema-
tosus.
 Histopathologic study reveals varying degrees of superficial perivascular or superficial
refecting recent glucocorticoid administration. Focal parakeratotic hyperkeratosis is usually
pronounced.
Treatment
Many parasiticidal agents are contraindicated because of extreme toxic effects in cats.
Sulfur in various forins is usually safe. With the cat under sedation, the hair is clipped, if
necessary, and the cat is bathed in warm water and soap to loosen scales and debris. A
 2% to 3% warm water solution of lime sulfur should be applied and allowed to dry on the
 o x posn s uo r n  as ara pdn si d  u
treatments may be necessary. All cats on the premises must be treated, because cats in
rapid and complete if all cats are thoroughly treated and re-exposure is prevented.
Amitraz as used in demodicosis can be effective. Ivermectin given subcutaneously twice or
thrice, or one subcutaneous dose of doramectin at 0.2 to 0.3mg/kg is effctive. 250b. 251
SPIDERS
Spiders are arachnids that inhabit woodpiles, old buildings, and refuse areas. The four
species of spiders that are medically important in the United States are the black widow
(Latrodectus mactans), the red-legged widow (Latrodectus bishopi), the brown recluse
(Loxosceles reclusa), and the common brown spider (Loxosceles unicolor). 254. 258
Spider bites occur most commonly on the forelegs and the face. Bites of spiders of
Parasitic Skin Diseases · 485
FIGURE 6-45. Histopathologic section of cat skin with
three N. cati mites in the stratum cormeum. The arrow
points to the central mite. Note extensive acanthosis, hy-
perkeratosis, parakeratosis, prominent rete ridges, and in-
Hltration of infamunatory cells in the superficial dermis.
(Courtesy B. Bagnall.)
the genus Latrodectus (the widows) initially consist of two small puncture marks with local
erythema. The local reaction may develop into granulornatous nodules within a few days.
 Bites of spiders of the genus Loxosceles (the brown spiders) initially appear as puncture
marks surrounded by local erythema.253 Within a few hours, they become vesicular and
 painful. The next day, the lesions turn black and become necrotic, and a large indolent
ulcer develops (see Fig. 6-38H). Skin biopsy reveals a nodular to difuse necrotizing
dermatitis and panniculitis (Fig. 6-46).
 Systemic reactions to spider bites may be severe. They may be manifested by saliva-
tion, nausea and diarrhea, ataxia and convulsions, or paralysis, any of which occur within 6
to 48 hours. Generalized urticaria can result from the ingestion or bites of less venomous
spiders.
 Although spider bites are rarely recognized and reported, they are probably underdi-
agnosed in veterinary medlicine.25s Diagnosis should be based on history and the physical
examination findings. An extremely painful local swelling should increase the suspicion of
spider bite.25 Recommended early bite wound therapy includes local infusion with 2%
analgesics, calcium gluconate, and epinephrine and glucocorticosteroids may be needed. In
 mended.25 Chronic ulcers may take months to heal and may be best treated by surgical
excision.
The numbers of spiders can be controlled by cleauing up woodpiles and outdoor sites;
 by eliminating scattered debris; and by spraying insecticides under appliances, in cup-
boards, in cracks in basement and attic Hoors, and outdoors under eaves and in window
wells and woodpiles.
486 · Parasitic Skin Diseases
FIGURE 6-46. Spider bite, histologic view.
Nodular area of necrotizing dermatitis and pannicu-
litis.
Insects
The numerous species of insects play important roles in the health of animals as vectors
 organs, such as antennae and simple or compound eyes. The structure of the masticatory
of wings and three pairs of legs. The abdoinen is segmented and terminates in the male
d snou prn u pa  apq au rso u u no naoy
connected hy fexible membranes.
The life cycles of insects are of three types: direct development, incomplete metamor-
phosis, and complete metamorphosis. In the first type, the newly hatched insect is a small
rcplica of the adult. Incomplete metamorphosis occurs in primitive insects, and the larvae
differ from adults in size, proportion, and lack of wings. Complete metamorphosis is
found in more specialized species. The wormlike larva differ from the adult in regard to
feeding habits. After several molts, the larva pupates and emerges as an adult. The larva
and the pupa possess characteristic hairs, bristles, and appendages, which are of taxonomic
importance. The duration of adult pupal and larval stages varies with the species and the
environment.
 Insects have medical importance hecause of the damage they can do to the skin and
because their stings, bites, or body parts can be allergens. Insect hypersensitivity, aside
froin Hea bite hypersensitivity, has received much attention and helps explain the severe
skin reactions to seemingly trivial bites.? Equally as important, insects seem to be a source
Parasitic Skin Diseases · 487
 of inhaled allrgen for some dogs or cats with atopy-like conditions. These animals have
inhaled allergens or do not respond to immunotherapy. Ants, moths, houseflies, butter-
flies, and cockroaches are probably important as strictly inhaled allergens. Mosquitos,
biting fies, and honeybees can cause disease through both their bites and the inhalation
of their body parts. Hypersensitivity to these insects can be documented by intradermal
tests.3. 31s It remains to be seen how effective immunotherapy can be.
PEDICULOSIS
Pediculosis is infestation with lice (Fig. 6-47A).
Cause and Pathogenesis
Lice are small, degenerate, dorsoventrally fattened, wingless insects that do not undergo
true metamorphosis. The eyes are reduced or absent, and each leg bears one or two
claws. There is one pair of spiracles on the mesothorax and usually six pairs on the
abdomen. Lice are host specifie and spend their entire life on their host. They survive
only a few days if separated from the host. Lice are spread by direct contact or by
contaminated brushes, combs, and bedding. The operculated white eggs (nits) are ce-
mented frmly to the hairs of the host. In contrast, Cheyletiella ova are smaller and loosely
   s u       s   o 
undergoes three ecdyses (molting), and becomes the adult. The entire cycle lasts 14 to 21
days.
 Lice are divided into two suborders: Anoplura, or sucking lice, and Mallophaga, Or
biting lice.
Anopiura
These have mouthparts adapted for sucking the blood of the host. With heavy infestations,
they produce sufficient aneinia to cause weakness, and somc animals hecome distraught
and ill-tempered because of the chronic irritation. The only species found commonly on
dogs is Linognathus setosus (Figs. 6-48A and 6-49C).
Mallophaga
 These so-called biting lice feed on epithelial debris and hair, but some species also have
mouthparts adapted for drawing blood from their hosts. Because they are active, they may
cause more irritation than do sucking lice, and rubbing by their host may cause alopecia.
 se   nn sop go ai  o a s (-g  s s s
internediate host of the dog tapeworm, D. caninum. Felicola subrostratuas infests cats
(Fig. 6-50; also see Fig. 6-48B) and may either be asymptomatic or cause severe
 pubic louse) infesting a dog has been reported. The dog, which had no clinical signs, slept
in the bed of its owner, who was infested with the louse.260
Clinical Features
 Lice can be highly irritating to the host and can cause intense itching. They accumulate
under mats of hair and around the ears and body openings. Sucking lice produce anemia
and severe debilitation, especially in young aninals. Sucking lice do not move rapidly and
 e   u   (t     s a 
be difficult to find and capture.
Lice produce a few direct lesions, but excoriations and secondary dermatitis from
scratching may be severe. Pediculosis may look like miliary dermatitis in cats and like Hea
bite hypersensitivity in dogs. Papules and crusts may be found (see Fig. 6-47B). Debili
tated, anemic, and frustrated patients are often ill-tempered and difficult to handle. The
 patient's coat is often dirty, matted, and il-kept, as this is a disease of neglect often
associated with overcrowding and poor sanitation. The animal has a mousy odor, especially
whell wet.
488·Parasitic Skin Diseases
FIGURE 6-47. A, Muliple louse nits on the head of a dog. (Courtesy J. King.) B, Multiple erythematous,
crusted papules on the back of a dog with pediculosis. C, Stages of life cycle of the flea (from left to right): Adult
Legend contimuedonoppositepage
Parasitic Skin Diseases · 489
B
FIGURE 6-48. A, L. setosus, adult male. B. F. subrostrata, egg-bearing female.
 In some cases, animals are asymptomatic carriers or have only seborrhea sicca with
variable pruritus. Pediculosis is often more prevalent in the winter months, perhaps owing
to the growth of longer, heavier haircoats and closer contact among animals. In addition,
the high ambient and skin surface temperature during summer can be lethal to lice.
 Pediculosis is a rare diagnosis in most veterinary practices. Lice are easily killed by
common fea shampoos, sprays, or powders; consequently, owners usually eliminate these
parasites with routine grooming care. More insecticidal shampoos are used today than
 were used many years ago, and louse infestation has decreased proportionately.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is made by physical exarmination to find and identify the lice. The acetate tape
impression method of immobilizing lice for identification is described in Chapter 2.
Differential diagnosis of pediculosis should include seborrhea, scabies, Hea bite hyper-
sensitivity, cheyletiellosis, and Dermanyssus, Lynxacarus, or Trombicula infestations. Skin
scrapings and acetate tape examinations should resolve any diagnostic questions. Histo-
 perplastic or spongiotic). Eosinophils are usually prominent.
papulesonte abdmen of dog witheabitlersesitivityF,Stcktighteas Echidnphaga alincean
European rabbit fea infestation. (Courtesy R. Harvey.) H, Multiple ulcers due to Tunga penetrans on the
metacarpal pad of a dog. (Courtesy J. King.)
490 · Parasitic Skin Diseases
FIGURE 6-49. Dog lice. A, Tri-
chodectes canis. B,Heterodoxus
spiniger.C,Linognathus setosus.
(From Lapage G: Monnig's Veteri-
nary Helminthology andEntomol-
ogy. 5th ed. williams & Wilkins
Co., Baltimore, 1962.)
1'h,11
Treatment
All affected animals and other animals in close association with them should be treated.
 Thick mats and hair tags should be clipped away. After a regular soap and water shampoo,
the animal should be soaked or sprayed thoroughly with a good insecticide. Lice are
given at 0.2 mg/kg subcutaneously once.262
Cots
Cats can be treated with pyrethrin or carbamate shampoos. After being dried, cats can be
    s n d    ps
within 10 to 14 days, because not all the nits may be killed and any that rermain will have 
hatched by that time. Two percent lime sulfur dips are also effective. Fipronil spray
should be effective.96, 258a
Dogs
Stronger medications with residual action can be used on dogs, although lice are easily
synergized pyrethrin or a pyrethroid is effective.Dogs can then he dipped or sprayed with
any residual Hea dip or fipronil.ib 25. 261 Imidacloprid was reported to be effective against
T. canis (biting) and L. setosus (sucking) infestations on dogs.26ia
 It is advisable to clean bedding, the premises, and grooming implements thoroughly
at least once, even though lice do not live long when they are off the host.
FLEAS
Fleas are small, brown, wingless insects with laterally compressed bodies (Fig. 6-51).
 Male feas are smaller than female feas, and the chitinous head bears antennae, eyes,
FIGURE 6-50. Felicola subrostrata, egg-bearing fe-
male. On the left is an intact egg; on the right, an
empty case.
Parasitie Skin Diseases · 49I
FIGURE 6-51. Ctenocephalides
felts felis adult.
combs, and suctorial mouthparts. The prothoracic and genal combs are useful taxonomi-
cally. Each segrment of the three-sectioned thorax bears a pair of powerful legs terminat-
ing in two curved claws. The structure adapts feas for powerful jumping, which enables
them to transfer from host to host. Because of thieir dependence on the host for protec-
tion and food, feas spend their entire adult life on the host or other contact animals.275
There are more than 2000 species and subspecies of feas worldwide. Although dogs
and cats could be transient hosts for virtually any species of fea, only Ctenocephalides
felis, C. canis, Pulex spp, and Echidnophaga galinacea are of medical concerm in most
pets. The rabbit Hea, Spilopsyllus cuniculi, is problematic in some parts of Europe and
Australia.283,a13
Worldwide, Ctenocephaliles spp. are of greatest medical concern. Surveys on flea-
infested dogs and cats have shown that C. felis felis is the most common species, with
prevalence figures of greater than 92% in dogs and 97% in cats.30, 31. 273. 280. 292 C. canis is
poultry fea, can occasionally infest pets, especially in warm climates,296 For transfer to
occur, the pet's environment must be or have been occupied by birds. Pulex irritans, the
human fea, is an uncommon finding on most dogs. Given the choice between infesting
humans or dogs, P. irritans appears to prefer the dog but transfers from the dog to
contact humans. Because P. irritans may be important as a plague vector, the infestation 
of pets may have some public health significance.
g    e a   ro s eis nd s pe ss 
The biology of only C. felis felis has been well described, and developmental data may not
apply to other species. The female fea lays her eggs on the host and usually while the
a  ga si nq asad ssq a j upui si udoa d s
macroenvironmental and microenvironmental conditions. Ambient temperature and rela-
tive humidity are critical for the Hea's development and its timing. Because of their
 negative phototactisin and positive geotropism, fea larvae move deep into carpets, down
cracks in wood foors, and under the soil surface or organic debris outside.3os In these
protected environments, the local temperature and humidity can be different from
those of the gross environment and the life cycle can be completed more rapidly than
expected.
492 · Parasitic Skin Diseases
 All stages of the flea are sensitive to environmental conditions.310 In general, tempera-
 iaxg i ae  e ss ro  an e   pe  q s
very high (greater than 35°C) or very low (less than 8°C) temperatures, relative humidity
is more critical for survival. For example, 50% of fea eggs will hatch at 35°℃ with a
humidity of 75%, but none hatch if the humidity is reduced to 33% or 50%. Provided that
the temperature does not fall below or exceed the viable limits of the fea, variations of
   g   a rg    s 
larvae pupate within 34 days when the temperature is 13°℃, whereas 80% pupate within 8
 days at 32°C. In warm climates, such as north-central Florida, cat feas survive outdoors 
all year round, even surviving light frosts in protected microhabitats such as inside a
doghouse or under a mobile home.296a
24 to 36 hours are lethal to most eggs. Newly hatched larvae move to dark protected
areas, where they fed on organic debris, other larvae, and most important, adult fea
feces (see Fig. 6-47D). Larvae are capable of moving over 40 cm in carpet. Two molts
are completed before the third larval instar enters the pupal phase. The larval phase is
completed in 5 to 10 days if sufficient food is available and the climate is ideal. Larvae are
the Achilles heel of the fea, and outside of the laboratory, less than 25% usually sur-
   r) y  (y    s) s 
extreme cold (less than 8°C) are lethal to the larvae in a short period of time.
At the end of the larval phase, the third instar produces a silklike cocoon in which
pupation occurs. If the larva is disturbed, it can develop as a naked pupa which decreased
its chances of survival slightly. At 80% humidity and 27°C, adult cat fleas can start to
to desiccation than other stages but will die at the temperature extremes (3°C or less;
 35°C or higher). Emergence is not automatic but depends on the presence of appropriate
stimuli, especially temperature and physical pressure. Without the proper stimulus, the
 adult Hea can remain in the cocoon for as long as 140 days. These pre-emerged acdults can
crmerge rapidly when the proper stimulus occurs, leading to a massive explosion in the
number of feas.
 In most households, C. felis felis takes 3 to 4 weeks to complete its life cycle, with
extremes of 12 to 174 days recorded:30-32 The newly emerged adults require a host for
long-term survival. Under standard household conditions, most nonhosted, nonfed adult
Heas do not survive after 12 days. Elevations in temperature or reductions in humidity
hasten the unfed feas' death. If the feas have fed for a few days before separation frorn
the host, they die much more rapidly in the environment. If feas are not removed from 
the host, they can survive lor more than I00 days.
The female Hea starts egg production 24 to 36 hours after her first blod meal. As
long as the female is not removed from the host, reproduction will continue for over 100
days, although the fecundity decreases with increasing time. Production varies, with peaks
of 40 to 50 eggs per day recorded. Under environmental conditions that allow a 21-day
life cycle, one mating female fea who lays 20 eggs per day, 50% of which hatch to
females, can be responsible for an infestation of more than 20.000 adults and more than
160,000 preadult forims in 60 days.
The biology of E. gallinacea is slightly different. After copulation, the female fea
       sia    sia  a s   s
fall into the environment, where the remainder of the life cycle is completed.296
Ctenocephalides canis is the most common flea isolated from dogs in Ireland and
Greece,267. 297 The ideal temperature and relative humidity for the development of C.
canis are 25°C (77°F) and 75%, respectively. When reared on cats, C. canis did not
develop beyond the first larval stages.
 Most species of Heas move freely around their host's body and can be found virtually
anywhere. E. gallinacea has a preference for the facial region (see Fig. 6-47F). During
feeding, the fea releases material into the dermis to prevent blood clotting. S. cuniculi,
the rabbit Hea, has a preference for the pinna and periauricular areas (see Fig. 6-47G).
Tunga penetrans burrows into the skin and produces significant damage at the site of
attachment (see Fig. 6-47H),285. 305
Parasitic Skin Diseases · 493
FIGURE 6-52. Flca bites on the legs of a girl. The back is
another coinrmonly affected arca when the sofa is infested.
The flea's saliva contains a variety of substances that can be irritating or allergenic
(sce Fig. 6-47E). Signs associatcd with fea feeding are variable and depend on the
number of Heas present, the tolerancc of the host for skin irritation, and most important,
the presence or absence of hypersensitivity to the fea saliva (see Chap. 8). Nonallergic
individuals can harbor variable numbers of Heas with little or no clinical response to them.
These animals are at risk for a blood loss anemia. Seventy-two female Heas can consume a
total of l ml of blood per day. All animals, hut especially those of small size, can lose a
considerable amount of blood per day when they are heavily infested. However, the
inritant nature of the fea's bite is usually somewhat protective for the animal. As the fea
population increases, the animal's grooming behavior or scratching increases, which dis-
fodges the Hea and decreases the population feeding at any one time. Aside from the
blood loss and skin damage they cause, feas are intermediate hosts for the tapeworm
Dipylidlium caninum and can be vectors for Rickettsia typhi, R. felis, Bartonella hinselar,
6-52).
FLEA CONTROL
Fleas are ubiquitous and, depending on thc climate, can cause a seasonal or nonseasonal
 problem for pets and their owners. Any animal that contacts other dogs or cats, frequents
grooming parlors or kennels, or is exercised in areas open to other pets or wildlife should
be considered exposed. Preventive environmental and animal treatments can minimize or
abort more serious problems. Measures discussed later can be both prophylactic and
therapeutic, but need to be used much more vigorously when the pet and its local
environment are heavily infested. Prevention is the key to good fea control.
 Although feas have a finite life span; often are groomed off and swallowed, especially
by cats; and have a decreased reproductive effciency when feeding on an allergie ani-
mal 2s 3o they cannot be ignored and do not go away by themselves. Control necessitates
routine regular treatment of all pets in the house, the house, and the yard. Effective on-
494 · Parasitic Skin Diseases
animal treatments can eventually eliminate environmental feas provided that untreated
animals do not reinfest the area.27sd Poor treatment in any one area, especially the house,
can make the whole program unsatisfactory. Most programs employ the use of pesticides
on the animals and in their cnvironment.
 Most pesticides have some residual activity, and levels can build up in the animal and
 its environment with repeated use. It is paramount that the vcterinarian be aware of all
(e.g, organophosphate) is used on both the pet and the environment, intoxication can
result from absorption from both sites.
External Environment
Because Hea eggs fall to the ground, the infested pet's yard can be seeded with fHeas by
the pet itself or by stray dogs, cats, or feral animals.275, sio Feral animals, cspecially
opossums and raccoons, are a very comrmon point source of infestation for a yard. Fleas
a s  s a  gq se a u n  s 
rate of reproduction increases as the animal starts to roam through neighborhoods at
night. As the animal stops at a garbage can or under a deck, it drops fea eggs into the.
sg  o s m on s  s dn d   
  (  a sn  og a  er 
to fea larvae. Accordingly, adults should not develop on paved areas, on deck surfaces, or
in short-cut, sun-exposed lawn. Eggs that fall in protected areas (e.g., under decks, in
crawl spaces, and in tall vegetation) can develop. All woodlands and uncultivated fields
should be considered infested.
Obviously, the most effective outdoor treatment is prevention, but yards visited by
untreated pets or feral animals will need treatment. The frst and most environmentally
sound step in outdoor fea control involves restriction of the pet from the trouble spots.
Crawl spaces, areas under decks, and garden areas should be fenced off, and pets shomuld
not be allowed to roam in woods or fields. Exercise in short-cut, sun-exposed fields is
allowed. Areas that cannot be avoided by the pet should be cleaned of organic debris
frequently and treated with a pesticide registered for outside use. Powder, liquid, and
granular formulations of carbamates or organophosphates are available.30-32 Nonrmicroen-
capsulated liquids have a shorter residual action than do the powder or granular formula-
tions. Recently, a novel biopesticide system for outdoor fea control has been marketed
(Interrupt, Veterinary Product Laboratories). This product contains harmless nematodes
called Steinernema carpocapsae, which kill flea larvae and pupae in the grass and soil.311
The effcacy of this system is not known.2586
 A comrmonly overlooked outdoor point source of infestation is the family vehicle. If
the pet travels with the family, the vehicle can be seeded with eggs. It is ill-advised to
apply aresidual pesticide inside the vehicleFumes that could develop whenthe vehicle
sits in the sun with the windows closed could make the passengers ill. Thc vchiclc should
be vacuumed thoroughly and frequently. If a pesticide is necessary, only short-acting, low.
toxicity agents (e.g., Pyrethrin) should be applied. The vehicle should be well ventilated
before use.
Internal Environment 
The house is usually most diffcult in the fea control process, especially if the household
 n sd   s  r     sd  s
area that is traversed or casually visited imust also be treated. If cats are present, virtually
every square foot of the house can be infested.
 Thorough cleaning is mandatory. Vacuuming with a powerful machine equipped with
a beater bar can reduce the Hea burden significantly by removing some eggs, larvae, and
adults, and by stinulating pre-emerged adults to emerge. All areas should be vacuumed,
but special attention should be paid to the furniture, the foor beneath the furniture, the
baseboard areas, and all carpets, especially those with a long nap. The vacuum should be
emptied after the cleaning. Carpet cleaning can be beneficial. Steam kills larval stages, but
Parasitic Skin Diseases · 495
most nonprofessional stean cleaners do not produce true steam. Carpet temperatures
from these machines rnay be too low to kill larvae. Even if the cleaing is not larvicidal, it
cleaning is that the local huunidity in the carpet can be increased to the ideal Hea level for
days to weeks. Any newly deposited eggs or missed pre-emerged stages may accelerate
their development because of this environmental improvement. Accordingly, cleaned car-
pets should be treated with a pesticide. During the cleaning phase, the pet's bedding
Unless the household is devoid of carpets and upholstered furniture, pesticides are
necessary. Owners have the choice of applying thc agents themselves or hiring a profes-
sional. Professional services probably costs more but, when owners put a dollar value on
their time and realize that most professional services use products not available to the
general public and usually include retreatment visits in the initiai pricc quote, professional
treatment becomes cost competitive. An added advantage is that profcssional treatmcnt
can last longer269 If professional services are employed, the owner should provide the
clinician with the names of the products used to ensure that they arc compatible with the
animal products being administered.
Health and environinental concers have led to the use of various nontraditional
pesticides, especially sodium borate. The borate compounds have rapid ovicidal and larvi-
cidal activity, probably through a dehydrating mechanism. Ingested crystals also kill larvae.
Owner-applied and professionally applied products are available. The professionally ap-
plied product (Rx for Fleas, Inc.) is guaranteed for I year, provided that the carpets arc
not cleaned, and has a reported efficacy of grcater than 99% 30-32
Most honeowners want to attack the flca problem themselves, and a wide variety of
pesticides and methods of dclivery are available. Whatever plan is developed, it must
address thc displaced adult Hea, the pre-emerged adults, and all the immature forms.
control program as the sole agent, except for spot treatment of trouble areas such as the
pet's slceping area. Products selected shouldi be either residual insecticides or quick kill
products coupled with an insect growth regulator. Because of hcalth and environmental 
concerns and local variations in pesticide regulations from state to state and nation to
nation, the numbers and types of household pesticides change from year to year. Products
necessitate inclusion of a growth rcgulator.
Insect growth regulators prevent the pupation of fea larvae.24. 30 37. 41, 282 294, 309 If
aborted. Methoprene is degraded by sunlight and should be reapplied at least every 30
weeks. Fenoxycarb and pyriproxyfen are sunlight stable and last 6 to 12 months. When
the household is already infcsted, growth regulators alone are not suficient.
A wide variety of insecticide plus growth regulator products are available through
veterinarians, pet stores, and other outlets. The insecticide kills displaced adult feas and
some pre-emerged adults provided that the cocoon is saturated, whereas the growth
regulator prevents larval development. However, because neither conponent affects larvae
 pra pu p d se paad s e pd  a 
period of activity of the insecticide, feas may be seen in the house shortly after the
treatment. If the house was massively infested, feas can be expected in 5 to 14 days30. 32
and retreatment with a quick kill insecticide is neccssary. If the infestation was mild, this
retreatment may not be necessary.
d  n si a   s  p n o s an
did not work because they continue to see feas. Although this apparent failure may be a
result of insect resistance to the parasiticide,0 the continued infestation most likely results
from poor application and not an inferior product. Thorough treatment of a house takes a
great dcal of time and effort, and most uneducated owners apply the products incorrectly.
 Perhaps the biggest setback in good fea control was the development of the fogger.
496 · Parasitic Skin Diseases
The advertisements for these products have stressed their ease of use but not their
spots (e.g., under furniture, in room corners, and in closets). These problems arc magni-
fied when the owner uses only the number of foggers necessary to cover thc number of
square feet of the house with no regard to intervening walls and passageways, which
interrupt aerosol dispersion.
The most effective methods of indoor flea control involve hand-directed spraying of
the pesticide. Products are available in aerosol cans, hand-operated sprays, and concen-
trates for dilution and application via hand-pressurized spray tanks. If large areas arc to be
treated, hand-operated sprays are thc poorest method of delivery because hand fatigue
Occurs. The spraying should start in the center of the room and work toward the walls. All
decreasc the amount of spraying necessary in large rooms. After the corners of the rooms
and trouble spots are hand sprayed, a well-designed fogger can be discharged to cover
unobstructed arcas.
Owners should be instructed to follow the manufacturer's directions carefully. Specilic
schedules for retreatment should be developed and followed. This is often thc wcak link
in the program. Many clients postpone rctreatment until new feas are seen. At this point,
the feas are estahlished, and retreatment is much more labor intensive and cxpensive.
 Fleas orient and move toward a light source, even more so when the light source is
suddenly and temporarily interrupted (which mimics the shadow cast by a passing
host).275a Cat feas are most sensitive to light with a wavelength between 510 to 550 nm
(green light). Intermittent light traps collect over 86% of the feas released into a 3 × 3 m
carpeted room within 20 hours, whereas nonblinking commercial fea traps collect less
than 14% of released feas.275α
Animal
None of the available fea eradication products for animal use is 100% effective in killing
feas over the entire time till the next application. Hence, good environmnental control to
limit the number of Heas reaching the animal is nccded. Another problem with these
products is that their residual effcacy under field conditions can be far shorter than that
found in thc laboratory. In dogs who swim frequently, most topical products havc no
residual effect. Accordingly, the best pesticide to use in any particular sifuation is one that
satisfies safety concems and has limited restrictions on its iuse. Products that indicate some
frequency of application but allow use as necessary give the veterinarian maximal Hexibility.
 Ideally, all dogs and cats in, the household should be treated with thc same vigor,
even if only one animal has problems. Failure to treat the other animals, especially if they
are alowed to roam outside, is a point source of infestation for the troubled pet via
environmental seeding of eggs. In households with a large nurber of pets, most owners
ea paa se  s  m se pn ae ui  pou o
ones. The owners should be encouraged to use the most effective method of control on
the normal animals that their situation allows.
 All animal fea control programs should be designed to prevent all fea bites. The
number of feas in the environment plus the owner's willingness and ability to do the
treatments determine whether the goal is achievahle. The key is regular use of the
product. Haphazard use of an excellent product gives poor results. Before the spccifics of
a regular basis. Product selection is based on the owner's constraints. Despite thc utmost
care, some fca control programs do not perform as expected, especially in multiple animal
households. At the onset of any control program, therapeutie monitoring with a Hea comb
is indicated to determine if the agents selected are effective and, if so, what the optimum
frequency of application should be. The animal is combed once or twice weekly, and if
feas or fea dirt are seen before the next scheduled application of product, the timing of
application is changed. If feas are still found after the modification, there is some fatal
flaw in the program and it should be reevaluated in its entirety.Regular use of a fea
comb can decrease fea populations on shorthaired animals. A thorough, 10-minute comh-
ing can remove up to 81% of the Heas Irom shorthaired dogs.275b
Parasitic Skin IDiseases · 497
 Since the last edition of this text, Hea control has been revolutionized with thc
marketing of long-acting residual products. The safety, ease of usage, and effcacy of these
 products is so high the use of conventional products almost seems like malpractice. However,
in households with large numbers of dogs, cats, or both, the new products can be too
be designed. The discussion on conventional products follows that of the ncwer products.
Spot Application Products
applied to one or two spots over the aluimal's dorsum, and the vehicle with its admixed
 insecticide diffuses in a concentration-dependent manner over the animal's entire body.
The various products' technical information indicates the rate of coverage varies from 12
 to 72 hours. Available products include imidacloprid, fipronil, selamectin, or permethrin as 
theirinsecticide.
Imidaclopricd (Advantage, Bayer) is marketed in various size tubes containing different
volunes of a 9.1% w/w solution. It is licensed for both dogs and cats. The target dosage is
10 mg/kg, which is achieved by using a larger volume in animals with a greater body
weight. Imidacloprid is strictly an insecticide with no activity against ticks or other arach-
nids. Company data show that efficacy is achieved within 12 hours of application and
persists for 30 days. Eficacy figures vary fron 95% to 100% depending on the species
and week after application, The efficacy starts to decline as the time to reapplication
approaches. According to the manufacturer, weekly immersion in water or a cleansing
bath at day 4 after application has littlc effect on residual effectivity. Contact dermatitis
has occasionally been secn at the site of application in both cats and dogs. Squames
impregnated with imidacloprid drop off into the environment and are larvacidal.2ssa Be-
cause of this, cnvironmental control can, at times, be achieved with the topical application
 of imidacloprid to pets.275b. 2s1a
Various studies in dogs20 264. 259,290 299a and cats20.23. 295 corroborate the manufac-
turer's efficacy data. However, the authors and others have seen animals with a significant
flea burden within 14 days of application. These feas could have been destined to dic but
had not had sufficient time to do so or could indicate that the duration of action is
significantly Iess than 30 days in a subset of the population. Imidacloprid is at its highest
concentration directly after application and is bound to hairs and keratinocytes. If epider-
mal turnover is increased or hairs are lost, the surface concentration of imidacloprid will
 decrease. Likewise, daily swimming, excessive licking. or frequent bathing, especially with
medicated shampoos, would be expected to reduce the surface concentration. Because the
efficacy and duration of action are dose dependent,264 it should not be surprising that
 some animals will need more frequent application. The authors have heard some investi-
gators say that they tell all of their clients with pets with skin disease to apply inidaclo-
prid every 14 days. Because this approach increases the cost of treatment, the authors
suggest that the rate of application be deterrmined on an individual basis. Owners are
asked to fea comb their pets once to twice wcekly and reapply product when needed.
Recent studies indicate that (1) imidacloprid exhibits significantly and consistently greater
fea kill at 6, 12, and 24 hours than selamectin,275f and (2) feas stop feeding within 3 to 5
minutes on imidacloprid treated dogs, but continue to feed during the first hour on
fipronil or selamectin treated dogs.?ama
Fipronil (Frontline, Merial) is available in a 0.25% spray or a 10% spot application
sun ue yoq si rdi seo pe si oq rou pasu si a (os di) ronpod
and acaricide, and is effective against feas, ticks, and mites. Fipronil is stored in the
sebaceous glands, and sebaceous secretion can replenish the skin surface supply. Sug-
the animal to the bite of the fea, and the need to control ticks. Typically, fipronil is
appied monthly for maximum effcacy. Manufacturer's data indicate a 24-hour lag phase
to maximal efficacy with a 93% to 95% efficacy at the 30-day point. Because the seba-
ceous glands replenish the drug lost at the skin's surface, water immersion or bathing is.
reported to have minimal impact on efficacy for at Ieast 30 days. Toxicity may be seen if
s pg  pasr ae (s s sle sn s ss
498 · Parasitic Skin Diseases
Effcacy figures vary with the species examined, the formulation used, and whether
the home environment was natural or simulated. In the sinulated home environment,
monthly application of the spot application product kept treated cats completely free of
for 30 day trials.29, 307 If the evaluation point is extended to 60 days, the eficacy drops to
 p  josj-g  eds    g 
inidacloprid, the authors have examined animals with significant fea burdens despite the
 recent application of the fipronil spot application product.
It must be eimphasized that neither imidacloprid nor fipronil (a) kill the majority of
feas before they are able to consume some quantity of blood, or (b) provide a noticeable
repellent effect on fHeas,265a 275s, 301a Selamecctin (Revolution, Pfizer) was reported to be
highly effective in the control and prevention of fea infestations in dogs and cats.43a
Selanectin (Revolution, Pfizer) is a senisynthetic avermectin applied to the skin every
30 days for control of heartworms, Heas, ticks, select intestinal parasites, and some
nonfollicular parasitic mites. Transdermally absorbed product circulates in the blood and
concentrates in the sebaceous glands, where it is stored as a reservoir to replenish the
skin. In fea control, peak efficacy is not seen for 36 to 42 hours after application. The
product is reported tokilladult eas, reduce gg rodutionineasnot kiledandave
an environmental larvicidal activity. Manufacturer's data show high efficacy (>97%) for all
of these claims.
 Permethrin spot application products arc available in veterinary (Defend Exspot Insec-
ticide for Dogs, Schering-Plough) and over-the-counter formulations. The concentration of
the permethrin varies from 45% to 60% and some products also contain methoprine or
pyriproxyfen.294 These products are toxic to cats, and no dog and cat contact should be
product with figures ranging from 7 days to once monthly. Efficacy figures vary with
 product and range froin 81% to 90% with weekly application?34, 271
Flea Collars
Flea collars arc available to kil Heas (e.g., insecticidal collars), repel feas (e.g., ultrasonic
collars are ofnovalueUnder ideal situationsinsecticidal collars canreduce the a
burden by 50% to 90% but do not elminate it.27,2s For the pet that is allergic to feas,
reduction probably is not suffcient and the insectide in the colar can preclude the use
of other similar products. Insecticidal collars should be rescrved for contact animals,
 especially free-roaming cats, when the owner does not routinely use other methods of
control. Colars containing methoprene or pyriproxyfen with orwithout an insecticide are
available. These are environmental control agents applied to the animals' body. Pyriproxy.
fen can kil adult feas, but both agents are aimed at sterilizing the eggs that the Hea
lays.3 The methoprene collars inhibit 94% to 99.5% of egg development for over 130
year.34
A noninsecticidal device was released on the European market: the Catan Dog's tag.
It was marketed as a non-chemical and nontoxic Inethod to control flea infestations.
tag was worn. The tag was claimed to become activated and to produce some type of
square-wave field that repelled or eliminated feas and ticks. However, studies conducted
in the United States demonstrated that the tag had no effect on adult eas, egg produc.
tion, or egg viability.27e
Flea Shampoos or Cream Rinses
Insecticidal shampoos are excellent grooming products but have a limited place in a
serious fea control program. With correct use (e.g., 15-minute contact time), the sham-
 s  e s    se   s    so
100% and 95% of the feas and ticks, respectively, and provided more than 95% residual
activity for 2 to 3 weeks.2s1 It remains to be seen if the residual activity would be similar
Parasitic Skin Discases · 499
in thc clinical situation. Because the bathing must be followed by the application of sorne
 other insecticide, one must question the use of most fea shampoos. They oftcn cost more
than grooming products and have heen known to cause reactions, so they cannot be
 considered an innocuous part of the program.
 Insecticidal cream rinses are available and claim residual activity against feas for up to
7 days but their true efficacy is unknown.
Flea Powders
Flea powders contain talc and various insccticides and repellents. Effective application
puts the product on the skin, where it can have prolonged residual activity if it is not
removed. Powders have limited applicability in animals with densc undercoats, short coats,
 or significant areas of hair loss. Because the talc absorbs sebum, repeated application of
higher concentrations of active ingredients. Caution should be exercised when using these
stronger products, becausc too-frequent application can lead to a high residual concentra-
tion of insecticides, Very little powder is used today.
Systemic Flea Products
The only systemic fea control product available worldwide is lufenuron (Program, Novar-
tis). It is given by mouth to dogs and cats once monthly or by injection every 6 months to
cats. The product concentrates in the amimal's fat and is released from there so effective
blood levels are maintained for at least 30 days with the oral produet.15.26.43As the fea
cated feces will develop endocuticular defects and will die.1s The cytotoxicity of lufenuron
affects cuticle, epidermal cells, chorion, and vitelline membrane of unhatched larvae.30lb
Although lufenuron causes mortality in adult feas—weakened endocuticle, decreased
resiliency of cuticle to expansion during blood feeding and egg produetion-this is only
seen after 7 days of continuous blood feeding at blood concentrations of more than 2
ppm.27a These conditions are unlikely to occur in the clinical situation with recommended
use of lufenuron. Reported efficacy on lufenuron varies from study to study but exceeds
95%inal214,68767932
The primary placc of lufenuron in a flea control program is the prevention of an
indoor and outdoor environmental infestation. If the animal already has a few fleas and
somne eggs have been layed, the lufenuron alone may be suffcient to control the situation
after 30 or nore days, but most practitioners would add on adulticide to hasten the
response time.
Because the various adulticides described in this section usually are not l00% effec-
tive, the concurrent use of lufenuron or another highly effective growth regulator is
indicated to prevent the development of a strain of feas resistant to the insecticide.
Until imidacloprid and fpronil were available, two systemic organophosphates re-
 ceived fairly wide usage. One product contained cythioate and was given by mouth twice
weekly, whereas the other contained fenthion and was applied to the skin for transdermal
absorption every 14 days. Although these products had some effcacy in fea control
programs, they were nowhere near as effcctive as the newer products and were removed
froin the market in the United States.7
 Over the years, various lay products containing garlic, thiamine, brewers' yeast, sulfur,
and other natural ingredients have been touted as systemic flea repellents.30-32 There is no
clinical evidence that thcsc products are effective.
Liquid Products
Various proprietary, nonproprietary, and homemade liquid fea control products are used.
Although home remedies (e.g., Skin-So-Soft, Avon) can have some efficacy, data on other
commonly used products (e.g., pennyroyal oil) are not available and some, like tea tree oil,
usually are mixtures of insecticides, repellents, and potentiators. Each product is labeled
 r u uoun uodde sin g s pe asn si sie pe sas o
 500 · Parasitic Skin Discases
the animal is sensitive to one ingredient or if the labcl directions are not follwed.17. 30
These products come in aerosol sprays, hand-pumped sprays, foams, and dips. As with any
other product, its efficacy is infuenced by its formulation and how wellit is applied.
Aerosol sprays are of no real use; the other modes of application have use in different
situations. Dips, or more appropriately rinses, are the most effective, in that a uniform
concentration of the product can easily be applied to the skin, regardless of the nature of
the haircoat. Drawbacks includc the smell of the product, the tendency for dips to dry the
coat and the skin, the long drying time, and the limited number of products licensed for
cats. Because most cats hate repeated dippings, the limited number of products is of
minimal concern.
Hand-pumped sprays are basicall prediluted dips that are usually more cosmetically
pleasing and expensive.2 Most animals canbe dipped just as effctively with these sprays
as they can with traditional dips, but application time increases significantly. This method
is ineffective in animals with dense undercoats, and many cats resent the use of sprays. If
 o aaxa  sd pd a s q p as  s r 
regularly, the owner can be instructed to make his or her own spray from a dip concen-
trate, provided that the label instructions do not exclude this use. The owner purchases a
misting spray botle and marks it clearly with a permanent marker. The dip's dilution
instructions are followed, but only that amount necessary to treat the animal or fill the
reservoir bottle is made. Some dips allow reuse of diluted emulsions, whereas other dips
prohibited, only that volume necessary to treat the animals should be made. These
homemade sprays have the odor and coat-drying problems of the dip, but their relatively
low cost may offset the disadvantages.
As mentioned earlier, fipronil is in both a spot application and spray formulation. The
spray formulation is just as hard to apply as a conventional product but its long duration
of activity makes it very valuable.287
Flea foams (mousse) are special liquids that leave the can as a foam, which is applied
to the hair. As the foam is massaged into the coat, the bubbles burst and the liquid
 s p  s    e     s  s
liquids. When it is used twice weekly, successful control can be expected in over 80% of
Cats.272
● diptera (flies)
Medically, fies forn a most important order of arthropods hecause they transinit or are
intermediate hosts for many bacterial, viral, protozoal, and helminthic disease agents.
However, their effects on skin are minor and are limited to bites (mosquitoes, stablc Hies,
black fics, and deer flies) and myiasis.
The reaction to insect bites varies, because some animals are less attractive or less
 susceptible to certain fies. The local lesion is an irritant reaction that may become less
 severe with repeated exposures. The systemic reaction to injected antigen, however, often
increases with repeated exposures (e.g., to bee and mosquito antigens), and severe local
edema or anaphylaxis may develop.
The primary lesion is a wheal or papule around a bleeding point (Fig. 6-53D). The
              s
tous hyperplasia develops, with scaling and alopecia. A superficial and deep perivascular or
diffuse dermal infiltrate of eosinophils, plasma cells, and lymphocytes may be present.
Fly Dermatitis
Adult male and female stable fies (Stomoxys calcitrans) are peculiarly adapted for attack-
tear open the skin, and the labella and whole proboscis are plunged into the wound to
FIGURE 6-53. A, Fly dermatitis on a German shepherd's pinna. Iemorrhagic crusts form from the
oozing blod and serum that result from the rasping mouthparts of stable lies (Stornoxys calcdtrans). B, Collie
H, Cuterebra sp. larva protruding from a fistula in the ventral neck region of a cat (area has been clipped).
501
502 · Parasitic Skin Diseases
suck blood. The entire action is highly irritating to the host and conducive to spreading
disease.
The fies usually attack the facc or the ears of dogs. The multiple bites arc commonly
saop ui us au jo ope papy au 1e no (veg-g oiy aas) saea aun jo sdn a uo punog
whose ears are tipped over (such as Shetland sheepdogs and collies) (see Fig. 6-53B).
Erythema and hemorrhagic crusts, caused by oozing serum and blood, are typical lesions.
sensitization. Affected dogs are always housed outdoors and are often confined so that
they cannot escape the fy attacks.
Ordinary fy repellents, fea products containing permethrin, or citronella in Vaseline
housed indoors during the day, if possible, until the lesions heal. Topical medications such
as antibiotic-corticosteroid ointment (Panalog) may be beneficial. The affected skin should
be kept clean and dry. The source of the fies should be investigated, and straw piles,
manure pits, and other likely areas can be sprayed with an insecticide.
 se pps u adar  s q a ae (dds s s x
running water. They are seasonal in early spring and summer and, during that time, cause
severe reactions in people and animals. Their bites are concentrated on hairless areas such
as the abdomen (see Fig. 6-53C), the head, the ears, and the legs (see Fig. 6-53D). The
lesions are intensely pruritic papules, crusts, and ulcers, with hermorrhage and severe
excoriation that resulf in circumscribed areas of necrosis. Soine animals have highly
diagnostic annular, macular lesions characterized by a small, pinpoint puncture, sur-
rounded by a larger blanched zone of edema, with a highly erythematous rim. Pruritus is
variable. Black fies tend to swarm, and animals bitten by a swarm can die (Fig. 6-54).
Histologically, black fy bites are characterized by a perivascular, predominantly eosino.
philic, dermatitis with marked superficial dermal edema and purpura (Fig. 6-55). Horse-
Hy (Tabanus), deer fly (Chrysops), and mosquito bites tend to be less reactive than are
black fy bites, but they are ali diagnosed, managed, and prevented in the same way as
described for stable fies.
Mosquito Dermatitis
Most animals develop a pruritic papule only at the site of the mosquito's bite. Some cats
apparently are hypersensitive to some mosquito salivary antigen (see Chap. 8) and develop
a pruritic, erosive, crusting dermatitis of the bridge of the nose; papular to nodular lesions
on the pinnae; crusted papular pinnal lesions; or byperkeratosis and swelling of the
FIGURE 6-54. Black fy bites.
Multiple lesions in a dog who was
swarmed and died as a result of the
bites. (Courtesy E. Clark.)
Parasitic Skin Diseases · 503
FIGURE 6-55. Black fly bite.
Perivascular, predominantly eosino-
philic, dermatitis with marked su-
perficial dermal edema and purpura.
mosquitos and recur within 24 hours of new bites.
Histologically, the lesions are characterized by an eosinophilie interstitial to diffuse
dermatitis with or without intraepidermal eosinophilic microabscesses or nodular eosino-
philic granulomas with collagen fame figures. Infltrative and necrotizing eosinophilic
Inural folliculitis is a common finding. Affected cats show positive intradermal test reac-
tions to mosquito extracts.
Lesional resolution is hastened by the administration of glucocorticoids but may be
incomplete with continued mosquito feeding. Unless the cat tolerates repeated applica-
tions of insect repellents, management changes are necessary. Because mosquitos feed
 primarily from dusk to dawn, the cat should be kept in a screened cage or room during
those hours.
Myiasis
 Although maggots can have medical use,32s natural infection is detrmental to the patient's
health. The adult forms of many dipterous fies piace eggs on the wet, warm skin of
debilitated, weakened animals with draining wounds or urine-soaked coats (see Figs.
6-53E and F).325 Animals that are attractive are not equally so at all stages to all Hies. As
the skin breaks down and liquefies, it becomes a more ideal habitat to further attract a
second or third species of fy. Calliphorids (blowfies) feed on only dead tissue, whereas
sarcophagids (fesh fies) attack living tissue.325 True screwworms, Cochliornyia hominoto-
 rax, have been eliminated from large areas of North America but exist in other areas.
 They are obligate parasites of living tissue and are never common in dogs and cats.322
Habronema larvae can rarely cause disease in animals housed near horses.s3 Specific
identification is not important in the treatment of most myiasis cases. If necessary, larvae
can be kept until adult flies develop, or the posterior aspect of the larvae can be examined
for posterior spiracles and stigmal plates that are taxonomically significant.
The larvae found in cutaneous myiasis are highly destructive and produce lesions over
extensive areas with punched-out round holes (see Fig. 6-53G) in the skin.7, si7, 3z5 These
holes may coalesce to form broad defects with scalloped margins. The larvae may be
found under the skin and in the tissues (Figs. 6-56 and 6-57). Favorite locations are
around the nose, eyes, mouth, amus, and genitalia, or adjacent to neglected wounds (see
Figs. 6-53E and F). Severely infested animals may die of shock, intoxication, or infec-
tion.325 Myiasis is always a disease of neglect.
Treatment necessitates clipping hair away from the lesions and cleaning them with an
antibacterial shampoo or wound flush. If the patient is stable, the diseased tissue should
 504 · Parasitic Skin Diseases
FIGURE 6-56. Sarcophaga sp.
larva (arrou) surrounded by necrotiz-
ing dermatitis.
       s    
 sss   s ae   ss prd n d  zgm
routine wound care is necessary, and the patient should be housed in screened, fy-free
quarters. Usually, healing is rapid and cornplete, but one should also be concermed about
the original cause. Fecal or urinary incontinence, a continually wet coat, fold dermatoses,
 Or constant salivation or lacrimation, together with poor hygiene, can predispose the
animal to myiasis. These underlying factors must be corrected as a primary part of
therapy.
Some larvae, especially those of Cordylobia anthropophaga (see Fig. 6-53G), Derma-
tobia hominis, several species of Cuterebra (see later) and Wohtfahrtia, and possibly
encysted larvae aud introduce them to new countries. Treatment of individual lesions is
FIGURE 6-57. C. anthropophaga
larva surrounded by necrotizing der-
matitis and panniculitis. (Courtesy J.
Van Heerden.)
Parasitic Skin Diseases * 505
the same as that mentioned earlier. In situations in which repeated infection with Cordy.
lobia can be expected, administration of high-dose ivermectin (0.4 mg/kg) every third
week can prevent infection.329
Cuterebra Species Infestation
 Adult Cuterebra fies are large and beelike with vestigial mouthparts, but they neither bite
nor feed. They are not dlirectly attracted to a host species but deposit eggs on stones or
vegetation near the entrance to the burrows or nests of animals to which they are
 s  ss   s q s  e p 
by skin penetration, or by ingestion as the animal grooms contaminated fur.2, 10,3at The
natural hosts are usually rabbits and other rodents, and in these animals, the parasites
exhibit host and site specifcity.33 Rabbit Cuterebra are less host specific and usually
affect cats and dogs.
Because cats and dogs are abnormal hosts, the larvae undergo aberrant migrations
and have been reported in the brain, the pharynx, the nostrils, and the eyelids.332, 33
Typical cases involving the skin are usually localized to the regions of the head, the neck,
or the trunk, Cases usually occur in late summer or fall, when the larvae enlarge and
produce a swelling of 1 cm in diameter, which develops a fistula (see Fig. 6-53H).
Treatment involves incising or spreading the fistulous opening and extracting the grub
with a mosquito forceps. Care should be taken to avoid crushing the larva because
retained parts may produce allergic or irritant reactions. The infected wound should be
 treated, but healing is slow.
 Identification is usually possible because thc second instar larvae are 5 to 10 mm in
Jo i on g is au us apoq aqisa zl o oi  oo un  o w pe yi
which are encircled by 3 to 4 rows of scattered dark spines and spinules. They have well-
developed cranial mouth hooks but no head capsule or legs. Molting occurs, and the third
instar is the dark, thick, heavily spined larvae that the clinician sees in the subcutaneous 
or submucosal pocket.
HYMENOPTERA (BEES, WASPS, AND HORNETS)
These venomous insects are not parasitic. They possess membranous wings and mouth-
parts for chewing, sucking, and licking. The ovipositor of the female insect is adapted for
stinging. The female insect has paired venom glands that express a toxin during the sting.
When bees and certain wasps sting, the tip of the abdomcn and the whole poison
 apparatus break off and remain in the wound. The gland may continue to express poison,
so the stinger should be removed from the skin as soon as possible. Other wasps and
hornets may sting repeatedly because they remain intact. Local redness, edema, and
infammation soon develop, and in some animals, angioedema, anaphylaxis, or sccondary
immune-mediated hemolytic anemia can occur. Intoxication is possible with a large num-
Facial eosinophilic folliculitis and furunculosis has been described in dogs (see Chap.
 8) and is thought to be due to the sting or bite of venomous insects, including bees,
nodular facial dermatitis.36 Lesions may be single or multiple, are crusted, and may be
ulcerated if the patient traumatizes them. Grossly, the lesions cannot be differentiated
from those of other causes of folliculitis or furunculosis, but cytologic evaluation of the
exudate shows numerous eosinophils and no signs of infection. Histologically, an eosino-
philic foliculitis or furunculos is seen, often accompanied by areas of collagen fame
ritic, the administration of topical or oral corticosteroids hastens the resolution of the
lesions. The stinger should be removed, if it can be located. In severe cases with anaphy-
laxis, epinephrine should be given intramuscularly and glucocorticoids should be adminis-
tered intravenously. If urticaria is present, epinephrine or large doses of prednisolone
folowed by a rapid-acting antihistamine should be administered systemically. The applica-
506 · Parasitic Skin Diseases
FIGURE 6-58. Fire ant sting. Vertically oriented linear bands
of full-thickness dermal necrosis. (Courlesy P. Rakich.)
tion of cold compresses may relieve local pain. Subsequent bites or multiple bites make
the reaction more sevcrc.
ANTS
The fire ant (Solenopsis invicta) is found in South America and the southeastern United
States.337 These ants inhabit urban and rural settings. When their nest is disturbcd, they
 swarm out, cover nearby objects, and deliver numerous stings. Fire ants attach thermselves
by pinching skin with their mandibles; they then arch their bodies and inject venom
through an ahdominal stinger. The venom is primarily composed of a unique alkaloid
(solenopsin A) that is cytotoxic and hemolytic.
FIGURE 
6-59.
.Thaumetopoea
spp. caterpilar. (Courtesy J. P. Bou-
tet.}
Parasitic Skin Diseases · 507
FIGURE 6-60. Urticarial and an-
 gioedematous lesions on the face of
a dog with _caterpillar dermatitis.
(Courtesy L. Poisson.)
 In dogs, the initial fire ant sting is painless, but it is followed within 15 minutes by
erythematous, pruritic swellings less than 1 cm in diameter.37 These swellings enlarge to
be up to 2 cm in diameter in about 6 hours; they then regress and disappear within 48
hours.
Histopathologic findings include vertically oriented, linear bands of full-thickmess der-
mal necrosis with surrounding edema and nuinerous eosinophils (Fig. 6-58).337
CATERPILLARS
The caterpillar larvae of certain Lepidoptera (butterflies and moths) can cause skin reac-
(-g ) (ds o) so y p a g jo ia r
 are most frequently involved. Bristles from these caterpillars contain thaumatopine, which
 causes mast cell degranulation and histamine release.
Animals (and humans) nay be envenomated on direct contact with the caterpillars Or
their nests, or by contact with airborne bristles. Most cases of skin reactions are seen in
the spring in young. curious dogs. Clinical signs include the surdden onset of facial
pruritus, urticaria, or angioedema (Fig. 6-60). The lips and muzzle are most severely
affected. In addition, the tongue is swollen and ptyalism is pronounced. In severe cases,
necrotic areas may develop in the skin and on the lateral and distal portions of the
tongue.
'Therapy i
includes the use of glucocorticoids, antihistamines, and in severe cascs,
epinephrine.
● rEFERENCES
Genera!
4. Moriello KA: Cormumon ectoparasites of the dog. Part
1. Bowman DD: Georgis" Parasitology for Veterinarians
I, Fleas and ticks. Canine Pract 14:7, 1987.
7th ed. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1999.
5. Paradis M: lvernectin in small animal dermatology.
2. Folcy RH: Parasitic mites of dogs and cats. Conp
P o do Xoo pue Aoqo '1 ued
Cont Educ 13:783, 1991.
20:193, 1998.
3. Grifin CE: Inscct and arachnid hypersensitivity. In:
6. Paradis M: Ivernectin in small animal dermatology.
Kwochka KW, MacDonald JM (eds): Cwrrent Veteri-
Part Il. Extralabel applications. Cornp Cont Ed 20:
459, 1998.
1993, p J33.
7. Scott DW, Miller WII Jr, Crifin CE: Muller and
508 · Parasitic Skin Diseases
Kirk's Small Animal Dermatology, 5th ed. W. B.
28. Hlugnet C, et al; Toxaicity and kinetics of amitraz in
Saunders, Co., Philadelphia, 1995.
dogs. Am J Vet Res 57:1506, 1996.
8. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1972-1982: 1ntrospec
29. Kawardla H, Hirano M: Insecticidal effects of insect
tive retrospections. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:537,
gruwth regulators methoprene and pyriproxyfen on
1984,
the cat fea. J Med Entornol 33:819, 1996.
9. Sosna CB, Medleau L: Symposium on external para-
30. MacDonald JM, Miler TA: Parasiticide therapy in
sites. Vet Med 87:537, 1992.
small animal dermatology. In: Kirk RW (ed): Current
10. Soulsby E]L: Helminths, Arthropods, and Protozoa of
Veterinary Therapy 9. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadel-
Domesticated Animals, 7th ed. Lea & Febiger, Phila-
phia, 1986, p 571.
delphia, 1982.
31. MacDonald JM: Flea allergy dernatitis and Hea con-
Antiparasitic Treatments
trol. In: Griffn CE, et al (eds): Current Veterinary
10a. Beal MW, et al: Respiratory falure attributable to
Dermnatology. Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis, 1993,
moxidectin intoxication in a dog. J Am Vet Med As-
p 57.
 32. MacDonald JM: Flea control: An overview of treat-
soc 215:1813, 1999.
11. Birckel P, et al: Skin and hair distribution of 14c-
ment concepts for North America. Vet Dermatol 6:
fipronil by microautoradiograpby following topical adl-
121, 1995.
33. Meola R, et al: Toxcity and histopathology of the
growth regulator pyriproxyfen to adults and eggs of
20:155, 1997.
12. Bischoff K, Guale F: Australian tea tree (Melaleuca
the cat fea. J Med Entomol 33:670, 1996.
34. Miller TA, Blagburn Bl.: Ovisterilant efficacy of pyri-
altermifolia) oil pxoisoning in three purebred cats.
proxyfen collars on cogs and cats. Proxe Anu Meinb
J Vet Diagn Invest 10:208, 1998.
13. Bossard RL, et al: Review of insecticide resistance in
Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol
cat fHeas. J Med Entonol 35:415, 1998.
12:63, 1996.
35. Moriello KA: Treatment of Sarcoptes and Cheyletiella
14. Brown M, Hebert AA: Insect repellents: An overview.
infestations. In: Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (eds): Kirk's
 J Am Acad Dermatol 36:243, 1997.
14a. Cadiergues MC, et al: Efficacy of an adulticide used
Current Veterinary Therapy Xl: Small Aninal Prac-
tice. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1992, p 558.
alone or in conbination with an insect growth regula.
tor in simulated home environments. Am J Vet Res
 36. Mueller RS, Bettenay SV: A proposed new therapeu-
tic protocol for the treatment of canine mange with
60:1122, 1999.
15. Dean SR, et al; Mode of action of lufenuron on larval
ivermectin. J Am Anim Hosp Assoe 35:77, 1999.
cat Heas. J Med Entomol 35:720, 1998.
 37. Palna KG, et al: Mode of action of pyriproxyfen and
16.DonaheWA,Young R: Assessing the effcacy of (S)
methoprene on eggs of Ctenocephalides felis (Siphon-
aptera: Pulicidae). J Med Entomol 30:421, 1993.
methoprene collars against Hea egg hatch on pets. Vet
Med 91:1000, 1996.
38. Roscnbaum MR, Kerlin Rl. Erythcma nultiforme
17. Donnan DC, et al: Fenvalerate/N, N-diethyl-m-tolus-
major and disserninated intravascular coagulation in a
amide (Deet) toxicosis in two cats. J Am Vet Med
dog follwing application of a d-limonene-based in-
Assoc 196:100, 1990.
secticidal dip. J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:1315, 1995.
39. Ross DH, et al: Efficacy of a permethrin and pyripro-
18. Duncan KL: Treatment of amitraz toxicosis. J Am Vet 
Med Assoc 203:1115, 1993.
xyfen prodnet for control of feas, ticks, and mosqui-
19. Folz SD, et al: Evaluation of a new treatment for
tos on dogs. Canine Pract 22:53, 1997.
canine scahies and demodicosis. J Vet Pharmacol
40. Schwinghammer KA, et al: Comparative toxicity of
ten insecticides against the cat Hea, Ctenocephalides
Ther 1:199, 1978.
 20. Franc M, Cadiergues MC: Antifeeding effect of scv-
felis. J Med Entomol 22:512, 1985.
eral insecticidal formulations against Ctenocephalides
41. Shaaya E: Interference of the insect growth regulator
felis on cats. Parasite 5:83, 1998.
methoprene in the process of larval-pupal differentia-
21. Franc M, et al: Pharmacokinetics of a new long-act-
tion. Arch Insect Biochem Physiol 22:233, 1993.
ing fornulation of lufeuron and dose-activity rela-
42. Shipstone MA, Masson KV: The use of insect devel-
tionship using experimental infestation by Ctenoce-
opment inhibitors as an oral medication for control of
phalides felis. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 20:80, 1997.
the feas Ctenocephalides felis, Ct. canis in the dog
and cat. Vet Dermatol 6:131, 1995.
fea, Ctenocephalides felis, to four pyrethroids. Para-
 43. Stansfielf DG: A review of the safety and efficacy of
lufenuron in dogs and cats. Canine Pract 22:34, 1997.
site 4:91, 1997.
23. Frank LA, Kania SA: The effect of ivermectin on
43a. Thomas CA: Revolution: A unique endectocide pro-
lymphocyte blastogenesis and T-cell subset ratios in
viding_coinprehensive convenient protection. Com-
healthy dogs. Vet Aller Clin Immunol 5:27, 1997.
pend Cont Edu Pract Vet 21(Suppl): 2, 1999.
 24. Garg RC, et al: Pharmacologic profle of methoprene,
43b. Thomas CA: Revolution safcty proflc. Compend
an insect growth regulator, in cattle, dogs, and cats.
Cont Edu Pract Vet 21(Suppl): 26, 1999.
44. Tranquilli JW, et al: Assessment of toxicosis induced
J Am Vet Med Assoc 194:410, 1989.
25. Halliwell REW, Carlotti DN: Insect growth regula-
by high-dose administration of milbemycin oxime in
tors: New products and new approaches for Hea con-
collies. Am J Vet Res 52:1170, 1993.
 45. Turnbull Gj: Animal studies in the treatment of poi-
trol on dogs. Prat Med Chir Anin Comp 33:293,
soning by amitraz and xylene. Hum Toxicol 2:579.
9661
26. Hink WF, et al: Evaluation of a single oral dose of
1983.
lufenuron to control fca infestations in dogs. Am J
Hookworm Dermattis
Vet Res 55:822, 1994.
46. Bowinan DD: Hookworm parasites of dogs and cats.
27. Hsu WH, Schaffer DD: Effects of topical application
Comp Cont Educ 14:585, 1992.
of amitraz on plasma glucose and insulin concentra-
47. Matthews BE: Mechanics of skin penetration by
tions in dogs. Am J Vet Res 49:139, 1988.
hookworm larvae. Vet Dernatol Newsl 6:75, 1981.
Parasitic Slin Diseases · 509
Pelodera Dermatitis
lariae (Filioiclea) in l0 dogs. Vet Dermatol 10:95,
48. Bourdeau P: Cas de dermatite a thabitidcs (Pelodera
1999.
72. Kamalu BP: Canine filariasis caused by Diroflaria
strongyloides) chez un chien. Point Vet 16:5, 1984.
49. IHorton ML: Rhabxditic dermatitis in dogs. Mod Vet
repens in southeastern Nigeria. Vet Parasitol 40:335,
Pract 61:158, 1980.
1991.
 50. Pasyk K: Dermatitis rhabditidosa in an ll-year-old
72a. Tarello W: La diroflariosc sous-cutanee a Diroflania
girl. Br J Dermatol 98:107, 1978.
(Nochtiella) repens chez le chicen. Revue bibliograph-
51. Smith JD, ct al: Larva currens; cutaneous strongy-
ique et cas clinique. Rec Med Vet 150:691, 1999.
loides. Arch Dennatol 112:1161, 1976.
Miscellaneous Helminthic Infections
Strongyloides stercoralis-like Infection
73.Amato JF, et al: Two cases of fisthulated abscesses
 52. Malone JB, et al: Stromgyloides stercoralis--like infec-
caused by Lagochilascaris major in the dormestie cat.
tion in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 176:130, 1980.
Mem Inst Oswaldo Cnz 85:471, 1990.
53. Mansfield LS,et al: Ivermectin treatment of naturally
74. Bate M, et al: Gnathostomu spinigerum in a dog's leg.
acquired and experimentally induced Strongyloides
Aust Vet J 60:285, 1983.
stercoralis infections in dogs. J Am Vet Med. Assoc
75. Bauer C,et al: Taenia crassiceps metacestodes in the
20:726, 1992.
subcutis of a dog. Kleintierprax 43:37, 1998.
Anatrichosomiasis
76. Chermette R, et al: Subcutaneous Tuenia crassiceps
 54. Hendrix CM, et al: Anatrichosoma sp. infection in a
cysticercosis in a dog. J An Vet Med Assoc 203:263,
dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 191:984, 1987.
1993.
77. Chermette R, et al: Quelques parasitoses canines ex-
Schistosomiasis
ceptionnelles cn France: 1II—cysticercose prolifera-
 55. Harmon RRM: Parasites, worms, and protozoa. In:
tive du chien a Taenia crassiceps: A propo de trois
Rook A, et al (eds): Textbook of Dermatology. Black-
cas. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 31:125, 1996.
well Scientific Publications, Oxford, 1979.
78. Craig TM, et al: Parasitie nematode (Lagochilascaris
56. HoefHer DF: Swiminer's itch. Cutis 19:461, 1977.
major) associated with a purulent draining tract in a
dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 181:69, 1982.
Dracunculiasis
79. DellPorto A, et al: Ocorrencia de Lagochilascaris
 57. Beyer TA, et al: Massive Dracunculus insignis infec-
major Leiper, 1910 em Gato (Felis catus domesticus
tion in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:366, 1999.
L) no estado de Sao Paulo, Brasil. Rev Fac Med Vet
58. Giovengo SL: Canine dracunculiasis. Comp Cont
Zootec 25:173, 1988.
Educ 15:726, 1993.
80. Hovorka I, Dubinsky P: Hclminths of dommestic dogs
59. Muhammad G: Dracumculus metinensis in a bull ter-
and cats in the urban arca of Kosicxe and the National
nier (a case report). 1ndian Vet J 67:967, 1990.
Park in the year 1992. Folia Vena 25:195, 1995.
60. Panciera DL, Stockham SL: Dracunulus insignis in-
81. Mog S, et al: Subcutaneous migration of an adult
fection in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 192:78, 1988.
Paragonimus kellicoti in a dog from Wisconsin. Vet
Dirofiloriasis
Pathol 34:5, 1997.
61. Bredal WP, et al: Adult Diroflaria repens in a subcu-
82. Moisan PG, et al: Incidental subcutaneous gordid
taneous granuloma on the chest of'a dog. J Small
parasitism in a cat. J Vet Diagn Invest 8:270, 1996.
83.
Sanderson TP, et al: Cutaneous habronermiasis in a
Anim Pract 39:595, 1998.
62. Coles LD, et al: Adult Diroflaria immitis in hind leg
dog. Vet Pathol 27:208, 1991.
abscesses of a dog. J Am Anirm Ilosp Assoc 24:363,
1988.
Parasitic Ticks
63. Elkins AD, et al: Interdigital cyst in the dog caused
84. Atwell R, et al: The effect of fipronil on Ixodes holo-
by an acdult Diroflaria immitis.J Am Airn llosp
cyclus on dogs in Northern NSw. Aust Vet Practit
Assoc 26:71, 1990.
26:155, 1996.
64. Mozos E, ct al: Cutaneous lesions assoxiated with
 84a. Barriga OO: Evidence and mechanisms of immuno-
canine
:heartworm infection. Vet Dermatol 3:191,
suppression in tick infestation. Gen Anal Biomed Eng
1992.
14:139, 1999.
65. Seott DW: Nocdular skin disease associated with Diro-
85. Barsant JA: Botulism, tick paralysis and acute poly-
filarla immitis infection in the dog. Cornell Vet 59:
radiculoneuritis. In: Kirk RW (ed): Current Veteri-
233, 1979.
nary Therapy VI1. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia,
66. Scott DW, Vaughn TC: Papulonodular dermatitis in a
1980, p 773.
dog_ with occult flariasis. Comp Anim Pract 1:31,
86. Blagbum BL, et al: Effcacy of the preventic (9 per
1987.
cent amitraz) collar for control of Rhipicephatus san-
67. Seavers A: Cutancous syndrome possibly caused by
guineus and Dernocentor variablis infestations on
heartworu infestation in a dog. Aust Vet J 76:18,
dogs. In: Proceedings of the 1993 North American
1997.
Veterinary Conference, Vol. 7, 1993, p 387.
S6a. Estrada-Penia A, Ascher F: Conparision of amitraz-
 Other Filariol Infections
impregnated collar with topical administration of fi-
 68. Carmichael J, Bell FR: Filariasis in dogs in Uganda
pronil for prevention of experimental and natural in-
J S Afr Vet Assoc 14:12, 1943.
69.Cazelles C, Montagner C: Deux cas de flariose cnta-
sanguineus). J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:1799, 1999.
nee associee a une leishmaniose. Point Vet 27:343,
 87. Rodriguez JM, Perez M: Use of ivermectin against a
1995.
heavy Ixodes ricinus infestation in a cat. Vet Rec 135:
70. Gardiner CH, et al: Onchocerciasis in two dogs.
140, 1994.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 203:828, 1993.
88. Searle A, et al: Results of a trial of fipronil as an
71. Hargis AM, ct al: Dermatitis associated with mierofi-
adulticide on ticks (Ixodes holocyclus) naturally at-
5I0 · Parasitic Skin Diseases
tached to aninals in the Brisbane area. Aust Vet
tes cynotis infestation of cats and mode of nite feed.
Practit 25:157, 1995.
ing. Am J Vet Res 41:877, 1980.
89.White SD,et al: Otohius megnini infestation in three
107a. Saridomichelakis MN, ct al: Sensitization to dust
dogs. Vet Demmnatol 6:33, 1995.
mites in cats with Otordectes cymotis infestation. Vet
Dermanyssus gallinae
IDermatol 10:89. 1999.
 90. DeClerg J, Nachtegaele L: Dernanysms gallinae in-
108. Scherk-Nixon M,et al: Treatment of feline otoacar-
festation in a dog. Canine Pract 18:34, 1993.
y pie du jo saa  a H soupi o
active ingredients. Can Vet J 38:229, 1997.
- jo  p o  u 
109. Vincenti P, Genchi C: Efficacite du fpronil (Frontline
manyssus gallinae (Acari: Dermanyssidae). J Med En-
spot on) dans le traitement de la gale des oreiles
tomol 36:68,1999.
(Otodectes cynotis) chez le chien et le chat. Proc
91. Ramsay GW, Mason PC: Chicken mite (D gallinae)
GEDAC 13:5, 1998.
infesting a dog. N Z Vet J 23:155, 1975.
110. Weishroth SH, et al: Immunopathology of naturally-
92. Tucci Ec, Gauimaraes JH: Biology of Dermanyssus
occurring otodectic otoacariasis in the donestie cat.
gallnae (DeCeer, 1778). Rcv Brasil Parasitol Vet 7:
J Am Vet Med Assoc 165:1088, 1974.
27, 1998.
 Pneurmonyssoides caninum
Lynxacarus radovsky
11l. Bredal W, Vollset I: Use of milbemycin oxime in the
93. Bowman WL: The cat fur mite (Lynxacarus rhaclot-
treatment of dogs with nasal mites (Pneumonyssoides
sky) in Australia. Anst Vet J 54:403, 1978.
caninum) infeetion. J Small Anim Pract 39:126, 1998.
94.Craig TM,et al: Lyrxacarus rhadousy infestation in
112. Bredal WP: The prevalence of nasal mitc (Pneumon-
a cat. J A1n Vet Med Assoc 202:613, 1993.
yssoides caninumj infection in Norwegian dogs. Vet
95. Foley' RHl: An epizoote of a rare fur mite in an
Parasitol 76:233, 1998.
island's cat population. Feline Pract 19:17, 1991.
113. Bredal WP: Pneumonyssoicdes canimum infection: A
96. Pereira M: The cat fur mite (Lynxacarus radouskyi)
in Brazil. Feline Pract 24:24, 1996.
Res Commun 22:225, 1998.
114. Bussieras J, Chernette R: Quelques parasitoses ca-
Trombiculiosis
 96a. Beugnet F, Bourdeau P: Les ectoparasites dlu chat.
Pneumonyssoides caninum. Prat Med Chir Anin
Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 34:427, 1999.
Comp 30:427, 1995.
 97. Flerning EJ, et al: Miliary dermatitis associated with
115. Gunnarsson L, et al: Experimental jnfection of ctogs
Eutrombicala infestation in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp
with the nasal mite Pneunonyssoides caninun. Vet
Assoc 27:529, 1991.
98. Greene RT, ct al: Trormbiculiasis in a cat. J Am Vet
Parasitol 77:179, 1998.
116. Gunnarsson LK, et al: Clinical efficacy of milbeimycin
Med Assoc 188:1054, 1986.
99. Iowenstine LJ, el al Trombiculosis in a cat. J Ain
oxine in the treatment of nasal mite infection in
dogs. J An Anim Hosp Assoc 35;81, 1999.
Vet Med Assoc 175:289, 1979.
117. Marks SI, et al: Pneumwmyssoides caninum: The ca-
100. Nuttall TJ, ct al: Treatment of Trombicula autumnalis
nine nasal imite. Compend Cont Educ 16:577, 1994.
infestation in dogs and cats with a 0.25 per cent
118. Mundell AC, et al: Ivermectin in the treatment of
fpronil spray. J SnallAninPract 39:237, 1998.
Pneumonyssoides caninum. A case report. J Am Anin
Otodectes cynotis
Hosp Assoc 26:393, 1990.
101. Bensignor E: Dermatite feline a Otodectes cynotis.
Environmental Mites
Point Vet 28:85, 1996.
101a. Bourdeau P, ct al: The probable role of envronmen-
119. Kunkle CA, et al: Dermatitis in horses and man
caused by the straw itch mitc. J Am Vet Med Assoc
tal conditions in the efficacy of treatment of Otocdec-
tes cynotis infestation in dogs? An example with moxi-
181:467, 1982.
dectin (Cydectin) in 50 dogs.
. Proc Annu Cong Eur
duced by storage mites. Res Vet Sci 40:123, 1986.
Soc Vet Dermatol Eur Col Vet Dermatol 15:149,
1998.
Cheyletiellosis
101b. Bourdeau P, Lecanu JM: Treatiment of multiple in-
121. Chadwick A]: Usc of 0.25 per cnt fipronil pump
and Trichodectes canis with fipronil (Frontline Spot-
J Simall Anin Pract 38:26l, 1997.
On; Merial). Proc Br Vet Dermatol Study Group.
122.
Cohen SR: Cheyletiella dematitis (in rabbit,cat, og.
Autumn 1999, p 35.
man). Arch Dermatol 116:435, 1980.
10lc. Coleman GT, Atwell RB: Use of fpronil to treat car
123.Foxx TS,Ewing SA:Morphologic features,behavir,
mites in cats. Aust Vet Practit 29:166, 1999.
and life history of Cheyletiella yasguri. An J Vet Res
102. Faulk Rll, et al: Effect of Tresadern against otoacar-
30:269,1969.
iasis: A clinical trial. Vet Med (SAC) 73:307, 1978.
124. Lce BW: Cheyletiella dermatitis: A report of 14 cases.
103.(
Gram DB, ct al: Trcating ear mites in cats; A com-
Cntis 47:111, 1991.
parison of subcutaneous and topical ivermectin. Vet
125. MeGarry JW: Recurrent infestation of a cat by Chey.
Med 89:1122, 1994.
letus eruditus (Shrank 1781). Vet Rec 125: 18, 1989."
104.
Harwick RP: Lesions caused by canine ear mites.
 126. MeKeever P], Allen SK: Dermafis asscriated with
Arch Derimatol 114:130, 1978.
Cheyletiella infestation in cats.  Am Vet Med Assoc
105.
Lopez RA: Of mites and uan. J Am Vet Med Assoe
174:718, 1979.
203:606, 1993.
127. Moriello KA: Cheyletiellosis. ln: Griffn CE, et al
106.1
Pappas C Jr, Katz TI: Evaluation of a treatment for
(cxds): Current Veterinary Dermatology. Mosby- Year
the ear rnite, Otodeetes cynotis, in kittens. Feline
Book, St. Louis, 1993, p 90.
Pract 23:21, 1995.
128. Otenshot TRF, Cil D: Cheyletiellosis in long-haired
107. Powell MB, et al: Reaginic hypersensitivity in Otodec-
cats. Tijdsch Diergeneeskd 103: l104, 1978.
Parasitie Skin Diseases · 5II
129. Paradis M, Vileneuve A: Elicacy of ivermectin
150. Day Mj: Ar irnmmohistochemmical study of the le-
against Cheyletiella yasguri infestalion in dogs. Can
sions uf denodicosis in the log. J Comp Path 116:
Vet J 29:633, 1988.
203, 1997.
130. Paradis M, et al: Efficacy of iverinectin against Chey-
151. Doxdds J: Bleccding disorders: Their imporlance in ev-
letiela blakei infestation in cats. J Am Anim Hlosp
eryday practice. Proe Aum Anin Hosp Assoe 44:147,
Assoc 26:125, 1990.
1977.
131. Smiley RL: A rcview of the fanily Cheyletiellidac
-pe yo puaen roj sisouaod  a 'aa son 79
(Acarina). Ann Entomol Soc Ain 63:1056, 1970.
onset demordicosis in dogs: 34 cases (1979-1990).
I32. Stein B: Personal communication, 1982.
J Aur Vet Med Assoe 204:616, 1994.
Canine Demodicosis
153.
Folz SD: Demodicosis (Denoxler caris). Connp Cont
133. Barriga OO, el al: Evidence of immunosuppression
Educ 5:116, 1983.
by Demodex canis. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 32:
154. Fondati A: The cffcacy of daily oral ivermectin in the
treatment of 10 cases of geueralized denmodicosis in
37, 1992.
134. Barta O, et al: Lymuphoeyte transformation suppres-
adult dogs. Vet Dermatol 7:99, 1996.
sion caused by pyoderma— failure to demonstrate it
155. Frane M, Soubeyroux H: Lc traitement de la demo-
decie du chien par un coller a 9 ponreent amitraz.
jn uncomplicated demodectic mange. Comp Inmunol
 Mierobiol Infect Dis 6:9, 1983.
Rev Med Vet 137:583, 1986.
I35. Bensignur E, Carlotti DN: Moxidectine in the ireat-
156. Gaafer SM, Grecve J: Natural transmission of Demo-
dex canis in dogs. j A1n Vet Med Assoe 148:1043.
study: 8 cases. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Ad-
1966.
157. Garfield RA, Reedy LM; The use of oral nilbemyein
vances in Veterinary Dermatology II1. Butterworth
Heinemann, Oxford, 1998, p 554.
135a. Bensignor F, Carlotti DN: Conduite a tenir face a
eralized demodicosis. Vet Dermatol 3:231, 1992.
une demodexice chez le chien. Point Vet 30:667, 1999.
158. Guaguere E: La demodecic du chien adulte. A pro-
136. Brockis DC: Otitis extema due to Demodex canis. Vel
pos de 22 cas. Prat Med Chir Anin Conp 26:411,
1991.
Hev 135:464, 1994.
137. Burkett C, et al; Imunology of dogs with juvenile.
159. Guaguere E: Eficacy of daily oral ivermectin treat-
onset generalizecd demodicoxis us detenmined by lym-
ment in 38 dogs with generalized dernoxdicosis: A
phoblastogenesis and CD4:CD8 ratios. J Vet All Clin
study of relapse rates. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds):
Immmol 4:46, 1996.
Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth
138. Burrows M: Evaluation of the: clinical efficacy of mox-
Heinemann, Oxford, 1998, p 453.
160. Guaguere E: La denodecie canine: strategie thera-
idectin in the treatment of generalized demodicosis in
peutique. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 30:295,1995.
thc: dog. Proe Aust Coll Vet Sci, 1997.
161.
fHamann F, et al: Canine demodicosis. Kleintierpraxis
139. Bussieras J, Chermelte R: Amitraz and canine demo-
dicosis. J Ain Anim Hosp Assoc 22:779, 1986.
42:745, 1997.
162.
Havtileck B, et al: Suivi imumunitaire individuel de
cosis with variahle oral doses of milbemycine oxime
chiens denrodeciques par intradermoreactions a la
in S8 cdogs. In Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in
Veterinary Dermatology II. Butterworth Heineimam.
Med vet 140:599, 1989.
163. Healy MC, Gaafar SM: Demonstration of reaginic
Oxford, 1998, p 583.
141. Caswell JL, et al; A prospcctive stuly on the immu-
antibody (IgE) in canine demodectic mange: An im-
munofuorescent study. Vet Parasitol 3:107. 1977.
nophenotype anci teuporal changes in the histologic
lesions of canine dlemodicosis. Vot Pathol 34:279,
164. Hcaly MC, Gaafar SM: Immunodeficiency in canine
1997.
 dernodectic mange. Il. Skin reactions to phytoheag-
142. Caswcll ∫L, et al: Canine demodicosis: A reexamina-
glutinin and concanavalin A. Vet Parasitol 3:133,
tion of the histopathologic lesions and deseription of
1977.
the immunophenotype of infiltrating cells. Vet Dor-
165. Hiler A, Desch CE: A new species of Denmodex mite
natol 6:9, 1995.
in the dog: Casce report. Proc Anmu Memb Meet Am
143. Caswell JL, et al: Establishment of Deruodex canis on
Acad Vet Dertnatol Ain Coll Vet Dermatol I3:118,
canine skn engrafted onto scid-beige mice. Parasitol
1997.
82:911, 1996.
166. lirsch DC, et al: Supprcssion of in vitro lymphocyle
144. Cayatte SM, et al: Perifollicular melanosis in the dlog.
transfornation by serum frorn dogs with generalized
Vet Dermatol 3:163, 1992.
demodicosis. Am J Vet Rcs 36:195, 1975.
145. Chen C: A revicw of canine demodicosis. Proc Annu
167. Holm B: Clinical efficacy of milbeinycine oxime in
Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet
the treatncnt of generalized demodicosis in the dog:
Dermatol 14:13, 1998.
A retrospective study of 40 cases (1993-1995). In
146. Chen C: A short-tailed demodectic mite and Dem)-
Kwochka KW, el al (eds): Advancrs in Veterinary
dex canis infestation in a Chihmahua dog. Vet Derima-
Dermatology III. Butterworth Heinemann, Oxford,
tol 6:227, 1995.
1998. p 582.
147. Chesney CJ: Short form of Demodex specics imite in
168. Krawiec DR, Cafar SM: Studies on irnmunology of
the dog: Occurrence and measurernents. J Small
dlemodicosis. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:669, 1980.
Anim Pract 40:58, 1999.
169. Kwochka KW, et al: The efficacy of amitraz for gcn-
l48. Corbett R, et al: Cellular immune responsivenes in
eralized demodlicosis in dogs: A study of two concen-
dogs with deimodectic mange. Transplant Proc 7:557,
trations and frequencies of application. Cornp Cont
1975.
Educ 2:234,1980.
149. Corbett RB, et al: The cell-mediated immunc rc-
170. Kwochka KW: Demodicosis. In: Griffn CE, et al
sponse: Its inhibition and in oitro reversal in dogs
with dernodectic 1mange. Fed Proc 35:589, 1976.
Book, St. Louis, 1993. p 72.
512 · Parasitic Skin Diseases
171. Lemarie SL: Canine demodicosis. Comp Cont Ed 18:
medical and veterinary concern. Cornell Vet 66:214,
354, 1996.
1976.
172. Lemarie SL, et al: A retrospective shrly of jrvenile-
tion and reevaluation. Cornell Vet 68:139, 1978.
(1986:91). Vet Dernatol 7:3, 1996.
190. Owen LN: Transplantation of canine osteosarcorma.
173.LmanSLHorohovDW:Evaluation ofinterleukin-
Eur J Cancer 5:615, 1969.
2 production and interleukin-2 rcceptor expression in
191. Paradis M, et al: Efficacy of daily ivernectin treat-
dogs with generalized demodicosis. Vet Dermatol 7:
rment in a dog with amitraz-resistant, generalized de-
213, 1996.
modicosis. Vet Dermatol 3:85, 1992.
174. Mason KV: A new species of Demodex mite with D.
192. Paradis M, Page N: Topical (pour-on) ivermcctin in
canis causing canine demodicosis: A case report. Proc
the treatment of canine generalizcd demodicosis. Vet
Annu Memh Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatof Am Coll
Dermatol 9:55, 1998.
Vet Dermatol 9:92, 1993.
193. Paulik S, et al: Evaluation of canine lymphocyte blas-
175. Medleau LM, et al: Effcacy of daily amitraz therapy
Bop Aq uosurdus oya uy ye pue oud ssoo
for generalized dernodicosis in dogs: Two inde-
demodicosis senun using ethidium bronide fuores-
pendent studies. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31:246.
cence assay. Vet Med (Praha) 41:7, 1996.
1995.
194. Paulik S, et al: Lymphocyte blastogenesis to concana-
176. Medleau I, et al: Daily ivermectin for treatrment of
valin A in dogs with localized demodicosis according
gencralized dennodicusis in dogs. Vet Dermatol 7:209,
to duration of discasc. Vet Med (Praha) 41:245,
1996.
1996.
177. Miller WH, Jr, et al: Dermatologic disorders of the
195. Reedy NR, ct al: Serum thyroxinc levels in caninc
Chinese Shar Peis: 58 cases (1981-1989). J Am Vet
demodicosis. Indian J Anim Sei 6l;1300, 1991.
Med Assoc 200:986, 1992.
196. Ristie Z, et al: lvermectin for treatment of general-
178. Miller WH Jr, et al: Efficaey of milbemycin oxime in
ized demodicosis in dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 207:
the treatment of generalized dermodicosis in adult
1308, 1995.
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 203:1426, 1993.
197. Roy S, cet al: Therapcutic cvaluation of herbal ccto-
179. Miller WH J, et al: Clinical effcacy of increased
parasiticides against canine denodicosis. Indian Vet J
dosages of milbemycin oxime for treatment of gener-
73:871, 1996.
alized demodiosis in adult dog. J Am Vet Med As
198. Sako S, Yamane O: Studies on the canine demodi-
soc 207:1581,1995.
cosis. Il. Exarnination of the oral-intermal infection,
180. Mojzisova S, et al: Studies on the immunology of
intrauterine infection, and infection through respira-
canine demodicosis. In: Kwochka, KW, et al (eds):
tory tract. Jpn J Parasitol 11:499, 1962.
Advances in Veterinary Dermatology II. Butterworth
199. Sako S: Studies on the canine demodicosis. IV. Ex-
Heineinann, Oxford 1998, p 498.
perimental infection of Demodex folliculorum var.
181. Mojzisova J. et al: The inmunomodulatory effect of
canis to dogs. Trans Tottori Soc Agri Sci 17:45, 1964.
levamisole with the use of amitraz in dogs with un-
199a. Saridomichelakis M, et al: Acult-onset denodicosis
coinplicated  _generalized  demodicosis. Vet  Med
in two dogs due to Demodex canis and a short-boxdied
(Praha) 42:307, 1997.
demodrxctic mite. J Small Anim Pract 40:529, 1999.
I8la. Mozos E, et al: Leishmaniosis and generalized de-
200. Schwassmam M.et al: Use of lufenuron for treat-
Imodicosis in three dogs: A clinicopathological antl im-
ment of generalized demodicosis in dogs. Vet Derna-
munohistochemical study. J Comp Pathol 120:257,
tol 8:11, 1997.
1999.
201. Scott DW, et al: Studies on the therapentic and im-
182. Muller GH: Demodicosis trcatmcnt with Mitaban liq-
munologic aspects of generalized demodectic mange
uid concentrate (amitraz). J Am Anim Hosp Assoe 19:
in the dog, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 10:233, 1974.
435, 1983.
202. Scott DW, et al: Further studies on the therapeutic
183. Mueller RS, Bettenay SV: Milbemycin oxime in the
and inmunologic aspects of generalizcd demordcctic
treatment of canine demodicosis. Aust Vet Practit 25:
mange in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 12:203,
122,1995.
1976.
183a. Mucller RS, Bettenay SV: An unusual presentation
203. Scott DW, Walton DK: Lxperiences with the usc of
of canine demodicosis caused by a long-bodied De-
amitraz and ivermectin for the treatments of general-
modex mite in a Lakeland terrier. Aust Vet Practit 29:
 ossy dsog wy wy I saop ur ssoopoap pa
128, 1999.
535, 1985.
I83b. Mueller RS, et al: Daily oral ivermectin for treat-
203a. Scott DW: Treatiment of canine demodicosis: Then
ment of gencralised demodicosis in 23 dogs. Aust Vet 
and now. Proc Annu Memb Meet Ain Acad Vet Der-
Practit 29:132, 1999.
matol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 15:11l, 1999.
184. Muse R, Walder EJ: Nodular granulomatous dermati-
204. Tapp T, et al: Effcacy of altermate day oral iverincc-
tis and generalized demodicosis in a dog. Proc Aanu
tin in the treatment of generalized deinodicosis. Proc
Memb Mcct Am Aead Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vct
Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Anmi Coll
Dermatol 14:75, 1998.
Vet Dermatol 14:25, 1998.
185. Nayak DC, et al: Prevalence of canine demodicosis in
205. Totman M, et al: Secondary inmumodefieiency in
Orissa (India). Vet Parasitol 73:347, 1997.
dogs with enterie, dermatologic, infectious, or para-
186. Nayak DC, et al Therapeutc effcacy of some hone-
sitic diseases. J Vet Med B 45:321, 1998.
206.
Wilkie BN, et al: Deficient cutaneous responsc to
denodicxosis in canines. Indian Vet J 75:342, 1998.
PHA-P in healthy puppics from a kennel with a high
187. Nutting WB: Hair follicle miles (Acari: Demodicidae)
prevalence of demodicosis. Can J Conp Med 43:415,
of inan. Int J Derrmatoi 15:79, 1976.
1979.
188. Nutting WB: Hair follicle mites (Demodex spp.) of
207. Wolfe JH, Halliwell REW: Total hemolytic comple-
Parasitic Skin Diseases · 513
ment values in normal and diseased dog populations.
 230. Arlian LG, et al: Characterization of lymphocyte sub-
Vet Immunol Immunopathol 1:287, 1980.
types in scabietic skin lesions of naive and sensitized
Feline Demodicosis
dogs. Vet Parasitol 68:347, 1997.
208. Bailey RG, Thompson RC: Demodectie nange inl a
 231. Beck W, Hiepe THI: Untersuchungen zu einem in-
cat. Aust Vet J 57:49, 1981.
trakutantest mit einer Sarcoptes-milbenextrakt-losung
209. Beale KM: Contagion and occult demodicosis in a
(Acari: Sarcoptidae) als methode zum nachweis an
family of 2 cats. Proc Annu Mcmh Mect Am Acad
Sarcoptes--ratude erkrankter hunde. Tierarztl Wschr
Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 14:99, 1998.
111:174, 1998.
210. Chalmers S, et al: Demodicosis in two cats scroposi-
 232. Bergvall K: Clinical effcacy of milbemmycin oxime in
tive for feline irmunodeficieney virus. J Ain Vet Med
the treatment of canine scabies: A study of 56 cases.
Vet Dermatol 9:231, 1998.
Assoc 194:256, 1989.
210a. Chesney CJ: An umusual species of demodex mite in
233. Bornstein S: Experimental infection of dogs with Sar.
a cat. Vet Rec 123:671, 1988.
coptes scabici derived from naturally infected wild red
211. Couroy JD, et al: New Demodexr sp.infesting a cat: A
foxes (Vulpes oulpes): Clinical observations. Vet Der-
case report. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 18:405, 1982.
matol 2:151, 1991.
212. Cowman LA, et al: Generalized demodicosis in a cat
 234. Bornstein S, Zakrisson G: Humoral antibody response
responsive to amitraz. J Am Vet Med Assoc 192:1442,
to experimental Sarcoptes scabiei car. vulpes infection 
in the dog. Vet Dermatol 4:107, 1993.
1988.
235. Bornstein S, el al: Evaluation of an enzyme-linked
213. Chesney Cj: Demodicosis in the cat. J Small Anim
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for the serological di-
Pract 30:689, 1989.
agnosis of canine sarcoptic mange. Vet Dermatol 7:
 214. Desch C, Nutting WB: Demodex cati, Hirst, 1919: A
redescription. Cornell Vet 69:280, 1989.
21, 1996.
215. Desch CE Jr, Stewart TB: Demodex gatoi: niew spe-
236. Carloti DN, Bensignor E: La gale sarcoptique du
cies of hair follicle mitc (Acari: Dernodecidae)fron
chien: etude retrospective de 38 cas. Prat Med Chir
the domestic cat (Carnivora: Felidae). J Med Ento-
Anim Comp 32:117, 1997.
237. Charlesworth EN, Johnson JL: An epidemic of canine
mol 36:167, 1999.
 216. Foley RH: Feline demodicosis. Comp Cont Ed 17:
scabies in man. Arch Dermatol 110:574, 1974.
 238. Curtis CF: Use of 0.25 per cent fipronil spray to treat
481, 1995.
217. Gabbert N, Feldman BF: A case report—Feline De.
sarcoptic mange in a litter of five-week-old puppies.
moxdex. Feline Pract 6:32, 1976.
Vct Rec 139:43, 1996.
218. Guagucre E, et al: Demodex catt infestation in associ-
239. Das SS: Effect of a herbal compound for treatment
ation with feline cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma
 of sarcoptic mange infestations on dogs. Vet Parasitol
in situ: A report of five cases. Vet Dermatol 10:61,
63:303,1996.
1999.
 240. Estes SA, et al: Experimental canine scabies in hu-
219. Kontos V, et al: Two rare disorders in the cat: Demo-
mans. J Arn Acad Dermatol 9:397, 1983.
dectic otitis externa and Sarcoptic mange. Fclinc
 241. Folz. SD: Canine scabies (Sarcoptes scabiei infesta-
tion). Cornp Cont Edue 6:176, 1984.
Pract 26:18, 1998.
242. Folz. SD, et al: Evaluation of a sponge-on therapy for
220. MeDougal B], Novak CP: Feline denodicosis caused
canine scabies. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 7:29, 1984.
by an unnamed Dermodex mite. Comp Cont Edue.
243. Griffn CF: Scabies. In Griffin CE, et al (eds): Cur-
(SAC) 8:820, 1986.
Medleau L, et al: Dermodicosis in cats. J An Anim
rent Vetcrinary Dernatology. Mosby-Year Book, St.
221.
Hosp Assoc 24:85, 1988.
I ouis, 1993, p 85.
244. Huang HP, et al: Sarcoptes scabiet infestation in a
222. Morris DO: Contagious demodicosis in three cats re-
cat. Feline Pract 26:10, 1998.
siding in the same household. J Am Anim HHosp Assoc
244a. Jagannath MS, Yathiraj S: Clinical evaluation of dor-
32:350, 1996.
anectin in the treatment of ectoparasites of canines.
223. Morris DO, Beale KM: Feline demodicosis—a retro-
Indian Vet J 76:333, 1999.
spective of 15 cases. Proc Annu Mernb Meet Am
245. Maldonado'RR, et al: Norwegian scabies dne to Sar-
Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 13:127,
coptes scabiei var. canis. Arch Dermatol 113:1733,
1997.
224. Nutting WB: Demodex crecti, motes on its biology.
1977.
 246. Miller WH Jr, et al: Treatment of canine scabies with
J Parasitol 44:328, 1958.
225. Stogdale L, Moore DJ: Feline demoxdicosis. J Ain
milbemycin oxime. Can Vet J 37:219, 1996.
247. Morris DO, Dunstan RW: A histomorphological study
Anim Hlosp Assoc 18:427, 1982.
226. White SD, et al: Generalized demoxlicosis associated
of sarcoptic acariasis in the dog: 19 cascs. J Am Anim
with diabetes mellitus in two cats. J An Vet Med
Hosp Assoc 32:119, 1996.
248. Paradis M, et al: Topical (pour-on) ivermectin in the
Assoc 191:448, 1987.
treatment of canine scabies. Can Vet J 38:379, 1997.
Canine Scabies
249. Paradis M: Scabices and Cheyletiella. Proc Annu
227.Arlian LG,et al: Survival of adults and developmental
Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Arm Coll Vet 
stages of Sarcoptes scabiei var. canis when off the
Dermatol 13:48, 1997.
host. Exp Appl Acarol 6:181, 1989.
 250. Prelaud P, Guaguere E: Sensitization to the house
228. Arlian LG, et al: Cross infestivity of Sarcoptes scabiei.
dust mite, Dermatophagoides farnae, in dogs with
J Am Acad Dermatol 10:979, 1984.
sarcoptic mange. Vet Dernatol 6:205, 1995.
229. Arlian LG, et al: The developnent of protective
250a. Zahler M, et al: Molecular analyses suggest mono-
inmunity in caninc scabies. Vet Parasitol 62:133,
specificity of the genus Sarcoptes (Acari: Sarcopht-
1996.
dae). Int J Parasitol 29:759, 1999.
5|4 · Parasitic Skin Diseases
Feline Scabies
269. Bourdeau P: Indoor control of Ctenocephalirles felis:
250b. Delucchi L, Castro E: Use of doramectin for treat-
Comparison of three products (foggers, funigation) in
ment of notocdric mange in five cats. J Arn Vet Med
a replicated rom. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Ad-
vances in Veterinary Dermatology II. Butterworth
Assoc 216:215, 2000.
251. Ferrero O, et al: Dorainectina en el trataniento de la
Heinemann, Oxford, 1998, p 575.
saa notoednica del gato. Rev Med Vet (Argent) 77:
270. Brown CB, ct al: The eficacy of ultrasonic pest con-
106, 1996.
trollers for Heas and ticks. J S Afr Vet Assoc 62:l10,
252. Foley Rl: A notoednic manage epizoolic in an is-
1991.
271. Carlotti DN, et al: Interet d’une fonmulation de per-
land's cat population. Feline Pract 19:8, 1991.
methrine en spot-on dans le traitcmcnt tie la derma-
Spiders
tite par allergie aux piqures de puce chez le chien:
 253. Berger RS: The: unrermarkable brown recluse spider
Une cturdc prospcctive de 24 cas. Prat Med Chir
bite. J Am1 Med Assoc 225:1109, 1973.
Anim Comp 32:83, 1997.
254. King KE: Spider bites. Arch Derinatol 123:41, 1987.
272.
Carloti DN, et al: Therapy and prevention of fea
255. Meerdink GL: Bites and stings of vcnonmous animals.
allergy dermatitis with a new permethrin forinulation
       
(foam) in 12 cats. In Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Ad-
W.B. Saunders Co.. Philadelphia, 1983.
vances in Veterinary Deimatology Ill. Butterworth
256. Muir G: Red back spiler hite in a cat. Cont Ther Ser
Heinemann, Oxford, 1998, p 574.
191:56, 1996
273. Chesney CJ: Species of Hea found om cats and dogs in
257. Northway RB: A therapeutic approacht to venomous
south west England: Further evidence of their poly-
spider bites. Vet Med (SAC) 80:38, 1985.
xenous state andl implications for Hca control. Vet Rec
258. Wong RC, et al: Spider bites (in depth review). Arch
136:356, 1995.
Derimatol 123:98, 1987.
273a. Dean SR, et al: Mode of action of lufenuron in adult
Pediculosis
Ctenocephalides felis (Stphonaptera: Pulicidae). J Med
258a. Bordeau W: Traitement d'un cas de phtiriose a Tri-
Entomol 36:486, 1999.
chodoctes canis par le fipronyl chez. un chat. Point
274. Dryden MW, et al: Effects of ultrasomie flea collars
on Ctenocephalides felis on cats. J An Vet Med Assoc
Vet 30:655, 1999.
259. Cooper PR, Penaliggon J: Use af Gpronil to eliminatc
195:1717, 1989.
275. Dryden MW: Hust association, on-host longevity and
recurrent infestation by Tricodectes canis in a pack of
blocxhounds. Vet Rec 139:95, 1996.
egg production of Ctenocephalides felis flis. Vet Par.
260. Frye FL, Furnan DP: Phthiriasis in a dog. J Am Vet
asitol 34:117, 1989.
275a. Dryden MW, Broce AB: Development of a flea trap
Med Assoc 152:l113, 1968.
261. Majunder P, et al: Control of lice infestation in dog
for callecting uewly emerged Ctenocephalides felis
with Butox (Deltamethrin) in South Tripura. Indian J
(Siphonaptera: Pulicidae) in homcs. J Med Entornol
Anin Ilealth 33:65, 1994.
30:901, 1993.
26la. Mencke N: Efcacy of Advantage against natural in-
275h. Dryden MW, et al: Techniques for estimating on-
festations of dogs with lice: a field study fron Norway.
aninal populations of Ctenocephalides felis (Siphon-
aptera: Pulicidae). J Med Entomol 3l:631, 1994.
Compend Cont Edu Pract Vet 22(Suppl): 18, 2000.
262.Shasti UVFffcacyof iveectn against lice infesta-
275c. Dryden MW: Laboratory evaluatious of topical Hea
control products. Proc Br Vet Dcrrnatol Sturdy Group,
tion in cattle, buffalocs, goats, and dogs. Indian Vet J
68:191, 1991.
Spring 1998, p 14.
275d. Dryden MW, ct al: Control of feas on pets and
263.
 Shipstone M, et al.: Milhcmycin oxine as a treatment
 in homes by usc of imidaclopnid 'or lufenmuron and
for canine scahies. Aust Vet Practit 27:170, 1997.
a.pyrethrin spray. J Am Vet Med Assoc 215:36.
Fleas
1999.
264. Arther RG, et al: Efhicacy of imidacloprid for removal
 275e. Dryden M: Investigations of alternative flea control
and control of Aeas (Ctenuxephalides felis) on dogs.
methodologies. Prc Annu Kansas St Univ Conf Vet
A1m J Vet Res 58:848, 1997.
61:37, 1999.
265. Ascher F, et al: Knock-down cffect of a 2 per cent
 275f. Everett R, et al: Comparative evaluation of the speed
permethrin spray used for fea allergy clermalitis ther-
of Hea kill of Acdvantage (inidaclopnid) and Hevolu-
apy. In Kwochka KW, ct al (eds): Advances in Veteri-
tion (selamectin) on dogs. Compend Cont Edu Pract
nary Dermatology I1. Butterworth Hleinemann, Ox-
Vet 22(Suppl): 9, 2000.
ford, 1998, p 566.
276. Fisher MA, et al: Evaluation of flea control pro-
265a. Ascher F, et al: Antifeeding effect of modern insecti-
grammes for cats using fenthion and lufenuron. Vet
cides. Proc Br Vet Dermatol Study Group, Spring
Rcc 138:79. 1996.
1998, p 20.
277. Foley JE, et al: Seroprevalence of Bartonella henselae
266. Arwel R, et al: The use of topical fipronil in field
in cattery cats: Association with cattery hygiene and
sludies for fea control in domeshic dogs. Aust Vet
Hlea infestation. Vet Quart 20:1, 1998.
Practit 27:175, 1997.
267. Baker KP, Elharam S: The biology of Ctenocephalides
tdogs of deltamethrin- andi diazinon-inmpregnated col-
canis in1 Ireland. Vet Parasitol 45:14l, 1992.
lars against Ctenocephulides fetis. Am ] Vet Res 59:
268.Blaghurn BL,et al:Effcacy of lufenuron against de
59, 1998.
velopmental stages of Heas (Ctenocephalides felis felis)
 279. Franc M, Cadiergues M: U'se of injectable lufenurou
in dogs houscd in simulated home environments. An
for treatment of infestations of Ctenocephalides felis
] Vet Res 56:464, 1995.
in cats. Am J Vet Res 58:140, 1997.
268a. Blagburm BL, et al: Dose titration of an injectable
280. Franc M, et al: Repartition des cspeces dc puccs
rencontrees chez le chien en Francc. Rev Med Vet
fested with fleas. Am J Vet Res 60: 1513, 1999.
149:135, 1998.
Parasitic Skin Diseases · 515
281. Franc M. Cadiergues MC: Activity of deltamethrin
the dog. [n Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in
Veterinary Dermatology II. Butterworth Heinemann,
alus sanguinenus in dogs. Vet Parasitol 81:341, 1999.
Oxford, 1998, p 570.
28la. Guagucre E, et al: Effcacite de linidaclopride dans
299a. Liebiseh A, Rciman U: The efficacy of imidacloprid
le traitement de la dermatite par allergie aux piqores
against fea infestation on dogs compared with thiree
de puces chez. lc chien. Prat Med Chir Anim Cornp
other topical preparations. Canine Pract 25:8, 2000.
34:231, 1999.
300.MeDonald Bj, et al: An investigation on the infuence
282. Guerrini VII, Kriticos CM: Efects of azadlirachtin on
of feline flea allergy on the fecundity of thc cat foa.
Ctenocephalides felis in the dog and cat. Vet Parasitol
Vet Derumatol 9:75, 1998.
74:289, 1998.
 301. Maskiell C: Clinical impressions of s-methoprene-in-
283. Harvey RG: Dermnatitis in a cat associated with Spi-
pregnated collars and lufenuron for Hea control in
lopsyllus cuniculi,Vet Rec 126:89,1990.
dogs and cats. Aust Vet Practit 25:142, 1995.
284. Harvey RC, et al: Prospective study coinparing Ii.
30la. Mehihom H: Mode of action of imidacloprid and
pronil' with dichlorvos/fenitrothin andmethoprenc/py-
comparison with other inscctieides (i.e., fpronil and
selainectin) during in vivo and in vitro experiments.
Vet Rec 141:628, 1997.
Compend Cont Edu Pract Vet 22(Suppl): 4, 2000.
285. Hastriter MW: Establishment of the tungid Hca,
301b. Meola RW, et al: Effeet of lnfenuron on chorionic
Tunga monositus. in the United States. Creat Basin
and cuticular structure of unhatched larval Ctenoce-
Naturalist 57:281, 1997.
phatlides felis (Siphonaptera: Pulicidae). J Med Ento-
286. Henderson G, et al: The effects of Steinermena car.
nol 36:92,1999.
pocapsea (Weiscr) application to different life stages
 302. Metzger ME, Rust MK: Effect of temperature on cat
on adult einergence of the cat fea Ctenocephalides
Aea development and overwintering. J Med Entomol
felis (Bouche). Vet Dennatol 6:159, 1995.
34:173, 1997.
287. Herrimann R, et al: Efficacy of a 0.25 per cent f-
303. Nishida Y ot al: Disinfestation of experinentally in-
pronil spray in the controlof Heaallergy dermatitis in
fested cat Heas, Ctenocephalides felis, on cats and
the dog. Kleintierpraxis 43:199, 1998.
dogs by oral lufenuron. J Vet Med Sci 57:655, 1995.
288. Hinkie NC, et al: Host grooming effieacy for regula-
tion of cat Hea populations. J Med Entomol 35:266,
resulting in secondary
 immune-mediated hemolytic
1998.
anemia in tvo dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:1026.
288a. Hopkins T: Imidacloprid topical formulation: larvi-
1999.
cidal effects against Ctenocephalides felis in the sur-
 304. Noden BH, ct al: Molecular identifieation of Rickett-
roundings of treated dogs. Compend Cont Edn Pract
sia tuplti and R. felis in co-infected Ctenocephalides
Vet 19:410, 1997.
felis. j Med Entomol 35:410, 1998.
289. Hopkins T: Imiclacloprid and resolution of signs of
305. Pampiglione S, et al: Tunga penetrars (Inseta: Si-
fea allergy derinatitis in dogs. Canine Pract 23:18,
phonaptera) in pigs in Sao Toine (Equatorial Africa):
1998.
290. Hopkins TJ, et al: Efficary of inidacloprid to remove
pathologieal aspects. Rev Elev Med Vet Pays Trop
51:201, 1998.
and cats. Aust Vet Practit 26:150, 1996.
 306. Postal JM, et al: Field efficacy of a mechanical pump
291.Hutchinson MJ, et al: Evaluation of flea control strat-
spray forulatincontaining0.25per centfprniin
ps paoo  seudy usn sa
the treatment and control of fea infestation and asso-
home environment. Vet Rec 142:356, 1998.
ciated dermatologic signs in dogs and cats. Vet Der-
292.Inai S,et al: Species distribution of fea infested t
matol 6:153, 1995.
dogs and cats in Japan. J Jpn Vot Med Assoc 48:775,
307. Postal jM, et al: Field cfcacy of a 10 per cent
1995.
fipronil spot-on formulation in tlie treatment and con
293. Jacobs DE, ct al: Comparison of fea control strale-
trol of fea infestation. In Kwochka KW, et al (eds):
Adlvancxes in Veterinary Dermatology II. Butterworth
trolled simulated home environment. Am J Vet Res
Heinemann, Oxford, 1998, p 568.
58:1260, 1997.
308. Robinson WH: Distribution of cat flea larvae in the
294. Jacobs DE, et al: A novel approach to flea control on
cats, using pyriproyfen. Vet Ree 139:559, 1996.
calpctod houschold environment. Vet Dermatol 6:
295. Jacobs DE, et al: Duration of activity of imidacloprid.
145, 1995.
a novel adlticide for fea comtrol, against Ctenoce-
309. Ross DH, et al: Topical pyriproxyfen for control of
phalides felis on cats. Vet Rec 140:259, 1997.
the cat fea and management of insecticidle resistance.
296. Kalkofen UP, Greenberg J: Echidnophaga gallinacea
Feline Pract 26:18, 1998.
310. Rust MK, Dryden MW: The biology, ecoogy, and
infestations in dogs. I Ain Vet Med Assoe 165:447,
management of the cat flea. Ann Rev Entomol 42:
1974.
296a. Kern WH, et al: Outdoor survival and developrment
451, 1997.
of inmature cat feas (Siphonaptera: Pulicidue) in
311. Silverman J, et al: Infection of cat Hea, Ctenocephali-
Florida.J Med Entoinol 36:207,1999.
des felis (Bouche)by Neoaplectana carpocapnai
297.Koutinas A, ct al: Flea spccices from cdogs and cats in
Weiser. J Nermatol 14:394, 1982.
northem Creece: Environmental and clinical inplica-
312. Simith RD, et al: Impact of an orally administered
tions. Vet Parasitol 58:109, 1995.
insect growth regulator (lufenuron) on fea infesta-
298. Iebreux B, et al: Evaluation of the efficacy of a diazi-
tions of dogs in a controlled simulated home environ-
non + pyriproxyfen collar in the treatment and con-
ment. Am ∫ Vet Res 57:502, 1996.
trol of fea infestation in cats. J Vet Pharm Therap 20:
313. Studdert VP, et al: Dermatitis of the pinae of cats in
157, 1997.
Australia associated with European rabbit Hea. Vet
299. Le Nain S, ct al: Efficacy of a 0.25 per cent fipronil
Rec 123:624, 1988.
formulation in the control of flea allrgy dermatitis in
314. Sture: GH, ct al: Dose selection of VK-124-l14, a
516 · Parasitie Skin Diseases
329. Nivoix R, Chermette R: Use of ivermectin for pre-
wv es i ooa_seo pue shop uo (saf spd
vention of cutaneous tumbu fy (Cordylobia anthropo-
Vet Assoc 42:316, 1999.
phaga) myiasis in dogs. In: Kwochka KW,et al (eds):
Mosquito Dermatitis
Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth
Heineinann, Oxford, 1998, p 471.
 315. Mason KV, et al: Mosquito bite-caused eosinophilic
330. Roosje PJ, et al: A case of Dermatobia hominis in a
dermatitis in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 198:2086,
dog in the Netherlands. Vet Dermatol 3:183, 1992.
1991.
 316. Nagata M, Ishida T: Cutaneous reactivity to mosquito
Cuterebra Species Infestation
bites and its antigens in cats. Vet Dermatol 8:19,
331. Baird CR: Development of Cuterebra ruficrus (Dip-
1997.
tera: Cuterebridae) in six species of rabbits and ro-
Fly Dermatitis
dents with a morphological comparison of C. ruficrus
and C. jellisoni third instars. J Med Entomol 9:81,
317. Penny DS: Fly strike in a dog. Vet Recc 125:79, 1989.
318. Pucheu-Haston CM, et al: Allergic cross-reactivities in
1972.
332.
. Fitzgerald SD, et al: A fatal case of intrathoracic
fea-reactive canine serum samples. Am J Vet Res 57:
cuterebriasis in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32:353,
1000,1996.
319.White SD,Boureau P: Hypersensibiltes aux piqres
1996.
333. Kazocos KR, et al: Cuterebra species as a cause of
de dipteres chez les carnivores. Point Vet 27:203,
pharyngeal myiasis in cats. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc
1995.
16:773, 1980.
Myiasis
Hymenoptera (Bees, Wasps, and Hornets)
320. Bourdeau, P, et al: Myiase a Dermatobia hominis.
334. Cowell AK, ct al: Scvere systemic reactions to Hyme.
Rec Med Vet 164:901, 1988.
noptera stings
s in three dogs.J Am Vet Med Assoc
321. Bragagna P, et al: Furuncular myiasis in a dog: Case
198:1014, 1991.
report. Praxis Vet 18:20, 1997.
Canine Facial Eosinophilic Foliculitis and Furunculosis
322. Chermette R: A case of canine otitis due to screw-
335. Gross TL: Canine eosinophilic furunculosis of the
worm, Cochliomyia hominivorax, in France. Vet Rec
124:641, 1989.
face. In lhrke PJ. Mason IS, White SD (eds): Ad-
vances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol 2. Pergamon
 323. Dongus H, et al: Cordylobia anthropophaga als erre-
Press, Oxford, 1993, p 211.
336.Holtz CS: Eosinophilic derrmatitis in a Siberian husky
land. Tierartztl Prax 24:493, 1996.
324.Fox MT, et al: Tumbu fy (Cordylobia anthropo-
cross. Calif Vet 44:11, 1990.
phaga) myiasis in a quarantined dog in England. Vet
Ants
Rec 130:100, 1992.
337. Rakich PM, et al: Clinical and histologic characteriza-
325. Hendhix CM: Facultative myiasis in dogs and cats.
lion of cutaneous reactions to stings of the imported
Comp Cont Educ 13:86, 199i.
fire ant (Solenopsis inticta) in dogs. Vet Pathol 30:
326. Hendrix CM, et al: Furuncuoid myiasis in a dog
555, 1993.
caused by Cordylobta anthropophaga. J Am Vet Med
Caterpillars
Assoc 207:1187, 1995.
338. Chermettc B, Chareyre C: A propos des chenilles
327. Jayagopala R, et al: Ivermectin in cutaneous myiasis
processionnaires. Point Vet 26:9:1993.
of dogs. Indian Vet J 70:557, 1993.
339.
Poisson L, et al: Quatre cas d'envenimation par les
328. Mulder JB: The medical marvels of maggots. J An
chenilles processionnaires du pin chez le chien. Point
Vet Med Assoc 195:1497, 1989.
Vet 25:992, 1994.
Chapte
Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal
Skin Diseases
 hese dermatoses are apparently rare in dogs and cats. Additionally, many of those
that have been reported are associative or circumstantial in nature. This chapter is a
bricf overview of proven and suspected skin dliseases of viral, rickettsial, and protozoal
origin in dogs and cats.
● viral diseases
Feline Leukemia Virus Infection
 The feline leukermia virus (FeLV) is an oncogenic immunosuppressive retrovirus.l 22 Al-
though it can induce skin tumors (lymphoma, fibrosarcoma), FeLV most commonly affects
the skin by its cytosuppressive actions. Clinical signs include chronic or recurrent gingivitis
dermatitis, generalized pruritus, and cutaneous horns.40 The viral origin of the cutaneous
s  ode sd aq pnd s s
A pruritic crusting dermatitis has been described in six FeLV-positive cats.19 The
lesions are scaly, erosive, and crusted, and vary in distribution. All cases have some
involvement of the face (Fig. 7-lA) or head, either around the lips or perioral skin,
pinnae, or preauricular skin. Other comrmonly involved sites include the feet or footpads,
 (ai-  aos) yunn no s andaid no sne an jo su snmm
 presentation, the cats usually are otherwise healthy.
The differential diagnosis depends on the distribution and the extent of the lesions
and the owner's ability to assess whether the skin lesions preceded the pruritus. If
pruritus is apparently primary, allergic disorders, feline scabies, Cheyletiella, and demodi-
systemic lupus erythematosus, and exfoliative dermatitis of thymoma must be considered.
 ad on esu e ss us pq  as uo d a ae s 
the skin lesions are viral in origin. Histologically, the epidennis is irregularly hyperplastic
and usually heavily crusted (Fig. 7-2). A characteristic feature is syncytial-type giant cell
formation in the epiderrmis and outer root sheath of the hair follicles to the level of the
isthmus (Fig. 7-3). Keratinocytes within and around the giant cells often are apoptotic.
Involved skin shows positive gp70 staining while nonlesional skin from these cats or other
FeLV-positive cats with no skin disease is negative.
 The skin lesions respond poorly to treatment with antibiotics, glucocorticoids, or other
agents. With time, the cats often show signs of intemal disease, e.g., anorexia, lethargy,
 but none is found at necropsy.
Feline Immunodeficiency Virus Infection
 Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIv) is another retrovirus that causes a variety of cytosup-
 pressive disorders in the cat.1. 48. 49 The most common clinical sign is chronic or recurrent
oral disease (gingivitis, periodontal disease, stomatitis).39. 42 Reported dermatologic signs
include chronic or recurrent abscesses, chronic bacterial infections of the skin and ears, an
517
518 · Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases
FIGURE 7-l. Legend continued on opposite page
Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases · 519
FIGURE 7-2. FeLV dernatitis. Markcd epider-
Imal hyperplasia with surfacc sceale/erust.
increased frcquency of infection with Cryptococcus neoformans, Candida albicans, or
Microsporum canis, and demodicosis.1l. 30. 48
 The authors have recognized a generalized skin disorder in three FIV-positive cats
which might have a direct association with the virus. All three cats had a gencralized
papulocrustous eraption with alopecia and scaling, which was most severe in the head and
limbs (Figs. 7-4 and 7-5). None of the cats was pruritic. On skin biopsy, a hydropic
 interface dermatitis was present. Occasional giant keratinocytes were seen. In addition, a
cance of this finding remains to be seen. No treatinents benefited the cats.
 The clinical signs of FIV and FeLV overlap; therefore, the two conditions cannot he
differentiated on the basis of signs alone. Co-infection with both viruses can occur, with
aq pons s u Ae jo sis e'uissndnso jo sos pa
serologic testing.
FIGURE 7- I, A, Facial exfoliation and nucocutaneous ulceration in a cat with FeLV dermatitis. B, Generalized alopecia
and cxfoliation in a cat with FeLV dermatitis. C, Footpad ulceration in feline poxvirus infection. (Courtesy R. Caskell.) D,
Focal oozing and crust in the temporal area of a cat with feline poxvirus infection. (Courtesy R, Gaskell) E, Balloming
distemper. Note the absence of inflammation around the pustules. G, Facial crusting, blepharitis, and corneal uleeration in
a cat with herpes dermatitis. Il, Cat from G with crusts removed to show severe ulcerative dermatitis.
 520 · Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases
FIGURE 7--3. FeLV dermatitis.
-d o u s pua a-s
dermis.
Feline Cowpox Virus Infection
Cowpox virus is a member of the Orthopoxvirus genus that has sporadically caused
infections of domestic and exotic cats in various European countries.” Cats with an
uncharacterized poxvirus infection have been rccognized in India and the United States,
 so the geographic arca of involvement may be increasing.1 In one study of 104 healthy
of disease than recognized.s The natural reservoir is small wild mammals. The
vinus circulates in different rodent species, especially voles and wood mice in western
Europe.4b. na Cats typically become infected through wounding while hunting these wild
manmals. Cat-to-cat, cat-to-human, or cat-to-dog transmission can also occur. 45
There appears to bc no agc, breed, or sex predisposition to infection, and many cases
are recognized in the fall of fhc year.s The primary lesion in the disease is an infected
*See references 1, 5, 8, 19a, 27, 34, 35, 43-45.
FIGURE 
7-4. FIV dermatitis.
Miliary dlermatitis-like lesions on the
hcad.
Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases · 52I
FIGURE 7-5. FIV dermatitis.
Partial alopecia with scaling. Papular-
to-plarquelike  lcsions  were also
present but are not visible.
bite wound, typically on the head, neck, or forelinb. Local viral roplication worsens the
primary lesions and is the point sourcc for the subsequent viremia. During the viremic
phase, some cats develop mild pyrexia, inappetence, and depression. Ten to 14 days after
the primary lesion, multiple secondary lesions develop over the body. The secondary or
 pox lesions are initially macular but progress to ulcerated, papular to nodular lesions that
crust rapidly (see Fig. 7-1C and D). Pruritus is variable, and approximately 20% of
infected cats develop oral vesiculation or ulceration.1 $ Lesions heal slowly over 3 to 4
weeks and may be permanently scarred. During the development and course of the
sccondary lesions, systemic signs of illness are uncommon unless the cat has some inter-
The differential diagnosis includes bacterial and fungal infections, eosinophilic granu-
loma, and neoplasia (especially mast cell tumor and lymphoma). Definitive diagnosis is
made by skin biopsy, serologic testing, and virus isolation.? Dermatohistopathologic find-
mation, and necrosis of the affected epidermis and the outer root sheath of the hair
follicle (see Fig. 7-1E). Eosinophilic intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies are found within
keratinocytes of the epidermis, hair follicles, and sebaceous glands.
FIGURE 7-6. Unusual pallor of
the basal cpidermal cells (arrus) in
a cat with FIv dermatitis.
522 · Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases
The diagnosis of cowpox is based on the results of diagnostic tests. Serum sanples
and fresh biopsy or scab material in viral transport medium are submitted to an appropri-
ate diagnostic laboratory for serologic examination and viral isolation, respectively. Sero-
logic tests cannot differentiate cowpox from other orthopox viruses. Histopathologic exami-
nation of secondary lesions usually supports the diagnosis, and orthopoxvirus involvement
can be demonstrated by inmunohistochemical techniques? or electron microscopy. Vinus
isolation is the only method of making a precisc diagnosis.
There is no specific therapy for cowpox infcction. If secondary bacterial infections of
the skin or other organs occur, appropriate antibacterial therapy should be instituted.
Severely ill animals, which typically have an underlying immunosuppressive disorder,
contraindicated.
 In humans, these contact infections are uncommon; they can be serious, however, espe-
occur most commonly on the hands and arms. A fatality in a human recciving corticostc-
roids has been documented.44 Accordingly, all infected cats should be isolated and han-
 s    a i  s x   p
several years, but it is susceptible to various disinfectants, especially to hypochlorite
solutions, Dogs develop solitary, asymptomatic, selfhealing ulcerated nodules.2 45
No data are available to indicate whether infection confers long-lasting immunity. To
 prevent posible reinfection, hunting should be prohibited.
Feline Infectious Peritonitis
 Feline infectious peritonitis is a systemic viral disease caused by strains of coronaviruses.
Effusive and noneffusive forms are most common.! Skin lesions other than those associ-
ated with debility have not been reported. Several cats thiat have been experimentally
infected have developed ulcerative lesions around the head and neck (Fig. 7-7).2 Histo-
pathologic tests showed changes typical of a superficial vasculitis, and viral antigen was
demonstrated in blood vessel walls by imrmunohistochemical techniques.
Canine Distemper
Canine distemper is caused by a parayxovirus.1 In addition to severe respiratory, gastro
intestinal, and neurologic disorders, the virus may produce skin lesions in soine animals.
FIGURE  7~-7. Well-dermarcated
necrosis and ulceration over the dor-
sal neck of a cat with feline infec-
tious peritonitis.
Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases * 523
FIGURE 7-8. Nasal hyperkerato-
sis in a dog with canine disteimper.
 Because of their general debility, some dogs, and especially very young, puppies, develop
widespread impetigo (see Fig. 7-1F). The classic skini manifestation of distermper is the
so-called hard pad disease, in which the dog develops nasal (Fig. 7-8) and footpad (Fig.
7-9) hyperkeratosis of varying severity. Although a variety of diseases (c.g., pemphigus
foliaceus, lupus erythematosus, drug eruption) induce nasodigital hyperkeratosis, animals
with those disorders are often not as systemically ill as dogs with distemper and have
more widespread skin lesions. Distemper, leishmaniasis, necrolytic migratory erythema
(see Chap. 10), and generic dog food skin disease (see Chap. 17) all can produce the
nasodigital lesions and similar systeimic signs of ilness. The index of suspicion for dis-
 temper should be high when the pads are much harder to the touch than the degree of
Histologically, the skin or pad surface is covered with marked orthokeratotic and
 parakeratotic hyperkeratosis, and acidlophilie cytoplasmic inclusion bodies are commonly
seen in keratinocytes.26 The inclusion bodies are variable in size and are round to irregular
 in outline. Nuclear inclusions are rare. Occasional multinucleated syncytial giant cells can 
FIGURE 7-9. Digital hyperkera-
tosis in a dog with canine dis-
ternper.
524 · Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases
be seen in the epidermis. Immunohistochemical detection of canine disteinper virus in
haired skin and footpad epithelium was reported to be very reliable for the antemortem
diagnosis of distemper.19h
Contagious Viral Pustular Dermatitis
 Contagious viral pustular dermatitis (orf, contagious ecthyma) is a disease that is found
 primarly in sheep and goats and is caused by a parapoxvirus.41 Contagious viral pustular
ss gyssdus uo p o pasie spn joyd e u pdi s s
consisted of circular areas of acute moist dermatitis, ulceration,and crusts, typically
acantholysis within the stratum spinosum, and marked infiltration of neutrophils. Saline
 ds ru e jous ps  o pe a so  go sns
removed from the inoculation sites were processed for electron microscopy, and parapox-
documented.2o The cat had multiple large crusted lesions over the face and back. Further
details were not provided.
 Therapy for contagious viral pustular dermatitis is topical and varies according to the
symptoms involved. The usual course of the disease in animals is 1 to 4 weeks. The
clisease may be transrmitted to humans if broken skin is exposed to lesion material or
contarminated objects. Generally, contagious viral pustular derrmatitis is a benign disease in
    s   e    ss  s
in humans are characterized by maculae that progress through a papular, nodular, and
/are
bullous. Complications of contagious viral pustular dermatitis in humans include regional
lynphadenopathy, lymphangitis, sccondary bacterial infection, and rarely, generalized or
systemic disease.
Pseudorabies
Pseudorabies is an acute, fatal viral disease caused by an α-herpesvirus.1 Pigs are the main
rcscrvoir of infection. Dogs and cats can be infected by contact with an infected animal
or, more typically, by eating raw pork products or offal. Incubation periods range from 2
 Early work suggested that intense, maniacal upper body pruritus was the cardinal
feature of the disease in dogs.23 More recent work, however, showed that this sign
0ccurred in only 52% of affected dogs,32 Ptyalism was a universal finding, followed by
restlessness, anorexia, ataxia, and a variety of other neurologic abnormalities. When
present, the pruritus is intense and leads to self-mutilation, typically of the head and ears.
In cats, the neurologic signs seem to predominate and pruritus is rare.1. 20a
 The diagnosis can be confirmed by virus isolation. Treatment is usually not attempted;
when it is, the result is unrewarding. Prevention by Ineans of strict hygienic procedures is
of paramount importance.
Mumps
Mumps is a human viral dlisease caused by a paramyxovirus, and there are reports of
clinical disease in dogs from households where humans had mumps.1 One author (WHM)
examined a dog with parotid salivary gland enlargement, a probably vesicular cheilitis, and
positive antibody titer to the mumps antigen. Only epidermal colarettes were present on
the lips, so biopsies were not performed. The skin lesions resolved spontaneously as the
salivary gland returned to norinal.
Feline Rhinotracheitis Infection
Feline rhinotracheitis is an infection with an α-herpesvirus resulting in upper respiratory
disease.29 Occasionally, a cat develops oral and cutaneous ulcers.f 16. 38 The cutaneous
Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases · 525
ulcers are usually superficial and multiple, and can occur anywhere on the body, including
the footpads. Stress or trauma to the skin might precipitate the developrnent of the ulcers.
Skin biopsies reveal epidermal ulceration with subjacent dermal necrosis and a mixcd
inHammatory infltrate. Basophilic intranuclear inclusion bodies may be visualized in the
keratinocytes or dermal histiocytes. Herpesvirus can be cultured from the skin; more
diagnostically, it can be seen in the keratinocytes via electron microscopy.12
 An ulcerative and necrotizing facial derimnatitis or stomatitis has been associated with
Ocular or respiratory signs. The disorder is recognized most often in adult cats but kittens
can be affected, Typically, crusted skin lesions involve the nasal planum, bridge of the
mose, and periocular skin (see Fig. 7-1G). When the crusts are removed, the exposed skin is
inflamed and ulcerated (see Fig. 7-1H). Similar lesions can be found elsewhere on the body.
Exfoliative erythema multiforme has occurred in cats following upper respiratory
infections. Generalized exfoliation and erosions occur that histologically showed individual
cell apoptosis and lymphocytic epitheliotropism. The lesions spontaneously resolve after
the infection is cleared.36
With intercurrent respiratory signs, the diagnosis is straightforward. In the absence of
  a    s r  ss 
reaction, erythema multiforme, pemphigus vulgaris, and systemic lupus erythematosus.
Diagnosis is via skin biopsy. Serologic test results do not confirm active infection nor that
the “skin disease is due to the virus. In skin biopsies, an ulcerative, often necrotic,
dermatitis and suppurative folliculitis and furunculosis is seen (Fig. 7-10). Demodex cati
mites may be visible within the follicular lumen.47 There is a perivascular-to-interstitial
mixed infammatory cell dermatitis with many eosinophils. In the surface and follicular
epithelium, multinucleated keratinocytic giant cells can he seen (Fig. 7-1l) and ampho-
philic intranuclear (Cowdry type A) inclusion bodies can be seen in the giant cells (Fig.
7-12) and other keratinocytes. A unique feature of this disease is necrosis of epitrichial
ent with herpesvirus. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing in affected cats was
healthy carriers.7 An immunohistochemical test was reported to be accurate.42c
In adult cats, the disorder can be triggered by stress or corticosteroid usage. Correc-
tion of these problems with the use of antibiotics and other symptomatic treatments may
 o oi pss e r  snods i mo
formulation without propylene glycol orally q24h), α-interferon, and acyclovir.s,47 These
Feline Calicivirus Infection
Oral ulceration is reported to be more common with calicivirus infection than with
neum.13 25 The tissues are swollen, tender, and ulcerated. Although calicivirus was isolated
from the skin in one case, no histopathologic tests were performed to demonstrate
whether the virus was causal or a contarninant. Because some infected cats can develop a
presumed immune-mediated arthropathy,2 it is reasonable to assume that the virus can
induce primary skin lesions.
Canine Papillomavirus Infection
Papillomaviruses belong to the papovavirus family and are either kmown to cause or
suspected to cause oral papillomatosis, cutaneous papilomas, and cutaneous inverted
papillormas in dogs (see Chap. 20）3h At least two strains ofvirus and probably nore exist
in the dog.24a In classic oral papillormavirus infection, self-cure is the rule, provided that
the host is iminunocompetent.34a Two addlitional syndromes have been recognized that are
 probably associated with papillomavirus infection in cdogs.
The first syndrome involves the development of multiple warts on the footpads of
526 · Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases
FIGURE 7-10. Suppurative, necrotizing folic-
ulitis and furunculosis in a cat with herpes der-
Imlatitis.
young dogs.? Affected dogs are 1 to 2 years of age at the onset of symptoms. They
lesions are large or involve the weight-bearing surface of the pad, lameness can occur.
The lesions wax and wane in severity, and individual lesions may spontaneously resolvc
but new ones develop. Histologically, the lesions have the characteristics of viral papillo-
mas; to date, however, efforts to demonstrate the virus have been unrewarding. Treatinent
with topical keratolytic or softening (c.g, water and petrolatum) agents removes the
hyperkeratotic debris, softens the lesions, and decreases the dog's discomfort, but it does
not appear to alter the course of infection. Topical dinethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and oral
etretinate have been of no benefit in the few dogs treated. Spontaneous resolution of all
lesions has not been recognized and it is unkmown whether immunotherapy would be of
benefit.3
The second syndrome invoives the development of multiple discrete and pigmentcd
papules,laques, ornodules (Fig.715)The cases recognized have ocurred n young
developed while the dog was receiving a corticosteroid and spontaneously regressed within
 3 weeks of drug withdrawal.?7 Lesions can be singular but typically are multiple from the
onsct, involved any skin surface, and became more numerous with time. Histologically
the lesions are sharply demarcated and characterized by surface and infundibular follieular
Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases · 527
FIGURE 7-Il. Epidernal giant cells in a cat
with herpes denmatitis.
epithelial pseudocarcinomatous hyperplasia and dysplasia. No koilocytosis or inclusion
bodies were seen. A novel papilomavirus was demonstrated in one dog7 and probably is
responsible for the lesions in the other dogs. The lesions can persist unchanged for over
 18 months, but transformation to intraepidermal carcinomas may occur.17. 33 No effective
treatment is reported.
Feline Papillomavirus Infection
Although papillomas are occasionally recogmized in cats, there was no evidence for their
hyperkeratotic plaques (see Fig. 7-14B).9 The lesions were of variable size, predominately
truncal in location, and hyperpigmented in one case. Histopathologic studies showed
s    r  r e  s
 Intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies were seen and papillomavirus-like particles were demon-
rus antigen that had characteristies of a novel feline papillomavirus. Other cases with
 similar features were subsequently reported.12. 15 The cats were assuned to be immuno-
compromised.
Many cases of multicentric squamous cell carcinoma in situ have been recognized in
the cat since 19904. 1s. 24. 31 (see Chap. 20). The lesions from these cats also showed
surface and follicular hyperplasia and dysplasia, but there was far more cellular atypia and
 528 + Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases
FIGURE 7-I2. Eosinophilic intranuclear inclu-
sion bodies (arrow) in herpes dermatitis.
koilocytosis was absent. Immunohistochemical staining of 63 cases with rabbit antibovine
papillomavirus antisera demonstrated positive nuclear staining of cells within the stratum
 granulosum in 30.24 Ultrastructural studies in six cats showed intranuclear particles that
virus induces long-lasting dysplastic lesions that eventually become neoplastic.
numbers of lesions, their location, or both, and because new lesions appear after surgery.
Topical treatment with 5-fuorouracil, which can be effective in humans and dogs,31 is
contraindicated in cats because of its neurotoxicity. Preliminary work suggests fhat B-
radiation therapy (strontium-90 plesiotherapy) is an effective treatment for early lesions1;:
as with surgery, however, it does not prevent new lesions. Anecdotal reports suggest that
  s)       
Neoplasia
 Papovaviruses cause cutaneous and mucosal papillomas (warts) in the dog (see Chap. 20)
Feline sarcoma virus produces cutaneous fibrosarcomas in young cats (sec Chap. 20).
FeLV and feline sarcoma virus have been associated with the development of lymphosar-
 coma. liposarcoma, melanorma, heimangioma, and multiple cutaneous horns in cats (see 
Chap. 20).
● rIcKETtSIal DISEaSeS
Canine Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever
Rocky Mountain spotted fever is caused by the rickettsial agent Rickettsia rickettsi and is
transmitted by ticks.1. 52 55. 56 It is a seasonal disease in the United States, with cases
Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases · 529
FIGURE 7-I3. Epitrichial sweat gland necrosis
in herpes dermatitis.
 occuring between April and September. Infected dogs develop fever, anorexia, lethargy.
peripheral lymphadenopathy, and signs of neurologic dysfunction. Approximately 20% of
cases will develop skin lesions of erythema, petechiation, edema, and occasionally, necrosis
and ulceration of the oral (see Fig. 7-14C), ocular, and genital mucous membranes and
the skin of the nose, pinnae, ventrum, scrotum (see Fig, 7-14D), and distal limbs and
s s sa a si e aas an si s a go epi ss ri
The epididynis of male dogs may be painful and swollen. Hematologic changes may
include anemia, leukopenia, or leukocytosis and thrombocytopenia. Skin biopsy reveals
necrotizing vasculitis (Fig. 7- 16).
 Dogs with Rocky Mountain spotted fever have a fourfold rise in serum antibody titer
to R. rickettsi. Direct immunofuorescence testing for R. rickettsii antigen in formalin
Therapy includes tetracycline (22 mg/kg q8h orally), doxycycline (10 to 20 mg/kg q12h
 Intereurrent use of high-dose corticosteroids to treat the skin lesions can prolong the
rickettsemia and course of treatment but otherwise has no detrimental effects.so Thc dog
presents a potential public health danger when infested with R. rickettsi-infected ticks;
there is also a danger when blood or tissues from rickettseinic dogs are handled without
suitable protection.
Canine Ehrlichiosis
Ehrlichiosis is caused by the tickborne rickettsial agent Ehrlichia canis.f Systemic signs of
illness predominate and include fever, weight loss, depression, lethargy, and anorexia.
Hematologic and clotting abnormalities, vasculitis, and monoarthropathy or polyarthropa-
thy also can be seen. Skin lesions are very rare and include a crusting facial derrmatitis
involving the bridge of the nose,4 pustular and purpuric lesions due to vasculitis, and an
530 · Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases
FIGURE 7-I4. Legend continued on opposite page
Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases · 53I
FIGURE 7-15. Multiple pig-
umented plaques due to papillormavi-
rus infection in a Shar pei.
s au snsn sn  is ssnd od asu
German shepherd dogs develop recurrent Gerinan shepherd pyoderma until the ehr-
lichiosis is resolved (see Chap. 4). The facial dermatitis had histologic features seen in
lupus erythematosus, but the dog was antinuclear antibody (ANA) negative and positive
for Ehrlichia canis. Doxycycline, an antibiotic with very little direct effect on thc skin,
resulted in resolution of the skin lesions This highlights the need to consider infectious
agents when the skin lesions clinically and histologically resemble those secn in lupus.
Feline Haemobartonellosis
Feline haemobartonellosis (feline infectious anemia) is an acute or chronic disease of
domestic cats characterized by fever, depression, anorexia, and inacrocytic hemolytic ane-
mia.1 It is caused by the rickettsial agent Haermobartonella felis. Cutaneous hyperesthesia
and alopecia arcata have been reported to occur in cats with acute and chronic haemobar-
tonellosis3, however, no pictures, photomicrographs, or details of any kind were provided
to substantiate these cutaneous diagnoses.
● protozoal dIseasEs
Feline Toxoplasmosis
Toxoplasmosis has been rarely reported to cause various cutaneous lesions in humanstl
and in cats,2, 78 Histopathologic findings in cats wcre reported to be necrotizing dermatitis
and yasculitis with Toxoplasma (Fig. 7-17). PCR-based techniques are available for the
rapid and accurate diagnosis of toxoplasmosis.90
FlGURE 7-14. A, Discrete wartlike lesion on the edge of the pad of a puppy. B, A focal hyperpigmented and crusted
lesion associated with papillomavirus infection in a cat. Note that the pigmentary change extends beyond the crusting. C,
Oral ulceration in a dog with Rocky Mountain spotted fever. (Courtesy C. Foil) D, Multifocal ulceration of the scrotuu in
a dog with Rocky Mountain spotted fever. E, Edema, purpura, and scaling on the scrotun of a dog with babesiosis.
(Courtesy D. Carloti.) F, Exfoliative dernatitis on the head and pinnae of a dog with leishmaniasis. (Courlesy Z. Alhaidari.)
G, Mucocutaneous ulceration in a dog with visceral leishumaniasis. (Courtesy A. Koutinas.) H, Purpura, ulceration, and
crusting on thc paw of a dog with leishumaniasis. (Courtesy Z. Alhaidari.)
532 · Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseascs
FIGURE 7-I6. Leukocytoclastic
vasculis in a dlog with Rocky Moun-
tain spotted fever.
Canine Caryosporosis
 Coccidia of the genus Caryospora have a complicated life cycle involving rodents, reptiles,
diarrhea. These organisms have been suspected121, 123 or identified?6 in puppies that
developed pustules, plaques, or nodules on the skin of the trunk. Thc tissue reaction was
 pyogranulomatous with eosinophils, and numerous organisms in various stages were identi-
fied in macrophages and connective tissue cells (Fig. 7- 18).
Canine Neosporosis
tissue cysts resemble those of Toxoplasma gondi, the organism has doubtless existed
unrecognized for years. Its complete life cycle is unknown. Infection occurs via vertical
cats may increase the risk of infection.l17 In one study, about i5% of normal dogs were
FIGURE 7-I7. Toxoplasma gon-
di tachyzoites (arrow) in endothelial
cells of a cat with cutaneous toxo-
plasmosis.
Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases · 533
FIGURE 7-I8. Tachyzoites {@r-
rouw) of Caryospora in pyogranuloin-
atousdermatitis ofa dog.(Courtesy
J. Dubey.)
 serologicall positive. Sporozoites penetrate cells and change into tachyzoites, which divide
rapidly and cause tissue damage. Tachyzoites then become bradyzoites within tissue cysts.
 Dogs of any age can be infected, but clinical signs are more severe in young dogs.
Neurologic and muscular signs predominatc, but pneumonia, hepatitis, myocarditis, or
dermatitis can also be seen,s9. 120 Skin discasc has been describcd in a small number of
dogs. Most had widespread draining nodules,79. 87. 99a 12. 11. 115 but one had a rapidly
spreading. ulcerative dermatitis of the eyelids, neck, thorax, and perineum.75 The lesions
may be pruritic.
 Histologically, nodular lesions are characterized by a pyogranulomatous dermatitis.
Tachyzoites can be seen within keratinocytes, macrophages, neutrophils, and rarely, in
endothelial cells. The dog with ulcerative lesions had an eosinophilic necrotizing dermatitis
with severe congestion, thrombosis, and infarction.7s To differentiate neosporosis from
toxoplasmosis, immunohistochemical or ultrastructural studics are needed. Scrologic tests
are available to determinc the rate of infection.119 A titer of ≥l:800 by indirect fuores-
 cent antibody testing is considered strongly suggestive of active infection.99a
Susceptibility testing of N. caninum to various antimicrobial agents has been per-
formed but detailed studies on the in citro versus in civo correlation of thesc data are not
available,. Susceptibility testing suggests that sulfamethoxazole, azithromycin, canthromy
cin, crythromycin, doxycycline, minocycline, and clindamycin hydrochloride can be of
benefit. Several cases were treated with a 2l-dayl15 or 45-day79 course of clindamycin
with pyrimethamine (0.25 to 0.5 mg/kg, orally, q12h) and sulfadiazine (30 mg/kg, orally.
ql2h) is also reported to be effective,oa when this combination is used, folinic acid (3
Canine Sarcocystosis
Sarcocystis organisms are widespread in nature, especially in cattle and sheep.' Dogs and
not pathogenic for dogs and cats, although there has been one report of a dog with
chronic diarrhea who developed multiple cutaneous abscesses over the whole body and
especially on the hind lirmbs.77 Biopsy showed severe necrotizing, fibrinosuppurative der-
 natitis with numerous neutrophils and fewer eosinophils andl macrophages. Vesscls were
534 · Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases
and, occasionally, in endothelial celis of vessels,
Canine Babesiosis
Canine babesiosis is a tickborne hematozoan disease caused by three species of Babe-
sial, 101: Babesia canis, which is worldwide in its distribution, and Babesia gibsoni and
Babesia vogeli, which are more restricted. Infection induces a parasitemia that results in
varying clinical signs. Asymptomatic carriers exist.
 Aside from the oral or cutaneous petechial and ecchymotic hemorrhages associated
with thrombocytopenia or disseminated intravascular coagulation, skin lesions are rare.
Skin lesions are due to subjacent leukocytoclastic vasculitis with or without vascular
necrosis.67 Clinical signs include edema, echymosis, ulceration, and necrosis (see Fig. 7--
14E), which can be seen on thc pinnae, axilae, groin, limbs, or scrotum.67. 69 As in
ehrlichiosis, dogs with babesiosis can have some of the clinical features of systemic lupus
erythematosus and may have a positive ANA titer. Accordingly, all dogs with suspect lupus
erythematosus should have serologic tests for appropriate rickettsial or protozoal diseases
before the diagnosis of systemic lupus is made.
Treatment with pentamidine isothionate resolved the skin lesions in the reported
case.67 Other babesiacides may also be effective.
Leishmaniasis
Leishrmaniasis is a serious protozoal infection caused by a variety of Leishmanid
other domestic animals. The disease is worldwide in distribution. In the Old World, most
cases in dogs occur in the Mediterranean basin and Portugal, but reports have originated
in France, Germany, Switzerland, the Netherlands, and other countries. In the New
World, the disease is endemic in South and Central America; endemic foci have been
reported in Texas, Oklahoma, Ohio, Michigan, and Alabama.65 Dogs imported from en-
demic areas may develop the disease months or years later, so cases could be recognized
anywhere. The disease is transmitted to humans and animals by bloodsucking sandfies of
the genus Lutzomyia in the New World and Phlebotomus in the Old World. The fre-
quency of infection increases during warm months when the vector load is high.57 Domes-
tic and wild dogs, rodents, and other wild mammals are the reservoir. Twenty percent of
Because of the occurrence of open lesions, some investigators have expressed concern
regarding the possibility of direct or mechanical transinission from dog to dog or from dog
to humans. Leishmaniasis in HIV-positive humans is an emerging discase.11i The possibil.
ity that humans act as a reservoir for other humans and animals has been put forth.74
 In general, tissue damage in leishmaniasis is due to granulomatous inflammation and
immune complex deposition. It has been hypothesized that dogs with subclinical or latent
leishmaniasis may develop cutaneous lesions at the sites of external trauma and resultant
inflammatory processes, because amastigotes in blood cells are transported to the infamed
areasl5a Thismechanism could partly explain the distribution of infamnatory and ulcera-
tive lesions at pressure points, which is common in canine leishmaniasis.
 The incubation period varies from weeks to several years with a gradual onset of signs
  s g  s s se ad a a d r 
animals, especially those who spend the night outdoors, are at an increased risk.s3 From
10 to more than 50% of seropositive dogs have no clinical signs of disease and may
remain healthy for prolonged periods of time,ifnot permanently &a 94a a Skinlesions
finding is an exfoliative dermatitis with silvery white, asbestos-like scaling. The exfoliation
(see Fig. 7--14F). Nasodigital hyperkeratosis may accompany the scaling, and the involved
skin can be hypotrichotic to alopecic. Periocular alopecia (lunettes) is common. The next
Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases · 535
most common presentation is an ulcerative derrnatitis (scc Fig. 7-14G and H). Other
findings include onychogryposis (Fig. 7- 19), paronychia, sterile pustular dermatitis, nasal
rial pyoderma occurs in about 25% of the dogs.94a
Systemic signs of illness are many and varied. Over 50% of involved dogs show
and the host's immunologic response to the organisin, physical ahnormalities are varied.
Generalized lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly are common findings. Other ah-
normalities include muscle wasting, cachexia, interrnittent fever, keratoconjunctivitis, and
lameness. Because of the Leishmania-induced cell-mediated immunodeficiency, these dogs
 can be predisposed to gcneralized demodicosis in all of its forms.106a
Cats are resistant to) experimental infcction, and reports of spontaneous cases are
eyelids, and pinnae. A generalized exfoliative dermatitis can also bc scen.
show an immunologic response to the organism. Resistancc or susceptibility to clinical
leishmaniasis appcars to be associated with the stimulation of a T helper-1 or T helpcr-2
cell response, respeetively.a4a IL-2 and TNF-α seem to play a protcctive role,94a With
infection, serum levels of anti-Leishmania IgG, IgM, IgA, and circulating immune com-
plexes inerease and, with high titer, predispose to renal diseasc.1o2. 103. lo5 With infection,
the number of CD21+, CD5+, CD4+, and CD8+ cells decreases and the degree of
mental infection, the dog develops a cell-mediated inmune response to the organism but
this can disappear with the onset of clinical signs, is With a persistent cell-mediated
response, the dog's clinical signs are absent or milder and the number of organisms found
in the tissues is fcwer.62, 66, 85
The differential diagnosis includes pcrnphigus foliaceus, systemic lupus erythematosus,
zinc-responsive dermatosis, necrolytic migratory erythema, sebaceous adenitis, and lym-
phoma. Laboratory findings usually include nonregenerative anemia, hyperglobulinemia,
hypoalbuminemia, and proteinuria.
Tests for immune-mediated diseases (Coomb's tests, ANA, lupus erythematosus prep-
of a clinically insignificant positive ANA titer varies from 16% to over 80% of dogs
tested.72, 94. 104 Because many of the clinical signs of leishmaniasis overlap with those of
systemic lupus erythermatosus, immunodiagnostic test results must he interpreted carefully
when a dog comes from an endemic arca.
FIGURE 7-19. Onychogryposis in
a dog with leishmaniasis. (Courtesy A.
Koutinas.)
536 · Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases
Demonstration of anti-Leishmania antibodies, positive skin test reaction,s or the
organism itself confrms the diagnosis. Although dogs can have positive serologic test
results in the absence of clinical disease, spontaneous elimination of the parasite is rare;
therefore, positive test results indicate infection.1 Various serologic tests are available
(IFA, ELISA, Dot-ELISA) and the published sensitivity and specificity vary with the test,
false-negative results reported in more than 10% of infected dogs tested. The test method
also dictates whether the test can be used to monitor response to treatment. For that
are most easily seen with Giemsa's stain and are found most often in smears from lymph
nodes or bone marrow (Fig. 7-20). Identilication in other tissues is more difficult and
often unrewarding. Lymph node cytology is positive in ahout 85% of the clinically ill dogs,
d a    r    e e  d  e 
serological titer,94a
Skin biopsy findings vary considerably. Orthokeratotic and parakeratotice hyperkeratosis
fewer numbers of lymphocytes and plasma cells. Granulormatous perifolliculitis (Fig. 7-
21), interstitial dernatitis, superficial and deep perivascular dermatitis, lichenoid interface
dermatitis, nodular dermatitis, lobular panniculitis, suppurative foliculitis, and intraepider-
mal pustular dermatitis (Fig. 7-22) are the nine inflanmatory pattens that have heen
recognized in leishmaniasis; this large number refects the clinical variability of the dis-
deep perivascular dermatitis, and interstitial dermatitis. It is common for a dog to have
 more than one pattern of inflammation present. In the perifollicular pattern, total oblitera-
tion of the sebaceous glands occurs in approximately 45% of the cases. This sebaceous
destruction no doubt contributes to the high frequency of clinical exfoliation. The Leish-
 Jo og redde u sena pie xu pun are suso o
snanu oqdoseq punon e uuoo pue ‘azis un wm  on z jeao on punon ae Aau 'soseo
and a sinall, rodlike kinetoplast. Although they are visible in routine stains, Leishmania
organisms are best seen when Giermsa stain is used. Immunohistochemical techniqucs
facilitate the identification of the organism.64 PCR is at least as sensitive as immunohisto-
chemical detection of Leishmania in biopsy specimens, and may be positive when the
latter is negative.119
FIGURE 7-20. Macrophage con-
taining_numerousLeishman-Dono-
van bodies. (Courtesy T. French.)
Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases * 537
FIGURE 7-21. Perifollicular
granulomatous dermatitis in a dog
with visceral leishinaniasis.
FIGURE 7-22. Intraepidermal pustular (er-
matitis in a dog with visceral leishmaniasis.
538 · Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases
 Dogs with visceral leishmaniasis show increased levels of IgG-2 specifically directed
against O-acetylated sialic acids during active disease, and these antibodies have 96.6%
sensitivity and 75% specificity.71
At present, canine leishmaniasis is considered an incurable disease in the vast majority
 Of cases. Treatments can bring about a clinical cure, but relapses months to years aftcr
of the parasite, but could also represent reinfetion. Accordingly, with the poor prognosis
for cure and the possible reservoir status of the dog for human infection, euthanasia may
be indicated. In endemic areas, insect control measures can be beneficial in reducing the
rate of insect feeding and, hopefully, infection.92
When treatment is indicated, the most widely used treatment is meglumine antimon-
ate.1, s2 Dosages vary with the study and range from 20 to 50 mg/kg given subcutaneously
parasitologic cure rates are much lower. Studies in humans and dogs have suggestcd that
the antilcishrmanial activity of liposome-encapsulated meglumine antimonatc is vastly supe-
leishmaniasis includc aminosicline,114, 132 amphotericin B,9 allopurinol,67a, 97, 129, t30 metroni-
dazole, and ketoconazole. Allopurinol has been rccciving widest attention because of its
 poe si ano [eu syu gh o I jo soesp aep pm oor aes pue isoo mo
 most cases, but parasitologic cure is rare. Various drig comibinations have been studied,
with megumine antimonate and allopurinol receiving widest usage.73, 7a, 8. 10 In one
study, the combination of meglumine and allopurinol was more cfcctivc than either
 product alone.73a The addition of allopurinol improves the clinical response rate, and its
use on a daily basis for 1 weck each month appears to prevent relapse. However, the rate.
of parasitologic cure is not impacted. The most helpful new treatment is an admixture of
chemotherapy and immunotherapy with LiF2 antigcn, an antigen derived from L. infan-
tum.io7 Simultaneous use of this antigen and meglumine resulted in parasitologic curc in
all cases tested.
There is no corelation between serologic titers and clinical signs in treated
or
can often be demonstrated cytologically, by culture, or by PCR in successfully treated
dogs, 67a. l1sl Thus, these dogs remain important carriers and reservoirs.
 Successful treatment of feline leishmaniasis has not heen reported.
+ REFERENCES
General Textbook Sources
5. Bennett M, et al: Feline cowpox virus infection.
1. Greene CE: Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat,
 J Small Anim Pract 31:167, 1990.
2nd ed. W. B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1998.
6. Bennett M, Baxby D: Feline and human cowpox. Vet
2.
Scott DW, et al: Muller and Kirk's Small Animal
Ann 35:229, 1995.
Dermatology, Sth ed. W. B. Saunders, Co, Phuiladel-
7. Bennctt, M, et al: The laboratory diagnosis of ortho-
phia, 1995.
pox vins infection in the domestic cat. J Small Anim
Virol Diseoses
Pract 26:653,1985.
 3. Agut M, et al: Autovaccination as a treatment in ca-
7a. Burgesser KM, et al: Comparison of PCR, virus iso-
nine papilomavirus dermatological disease: A study of
lation, and indirect fuorescent antibody staining in
nine cases. Biomed Letters 54(213):23, 1996.
the detection of naturally occurring feline herpesvirus
4. Baer KE, Helton K: Multicentric squamous cell carci-
infections. J Vet Diagn Invest 11:122, 1999.
noma in situ resembling Bowen's disease in cats. Vet
8. Canese MG, ct al: Feline poxvirus infection. A case
Pathol 30:535,1993.
report. Schweizer Archiv fur Tierheilkunde 139:434,
4a. Baxby D, Bennctt M: Cowpox: A re-evaluation of
1997.
the risks of human infection based on new epidemio-
9. Camey HC, et al: Papillomavirus infection of aged
logical information. Arch Virol 13:1, 1997.
Persian cats. J Vet Diagn Invest 2:294, 1990.
4b. Began M, ct al: The population dynamics of cowpox
10. Carpenter JL, et al: Cutaneous xanthogranuloma and
virus infection in bank voles: Testing fundamental as-
viral papilloma on an eyelid of a cat. Vet Dermatol 3:
sunptions. Fcology Letters l:82, 1998.
187, 1992.
Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases · 539
11. Chalners S, ct al: Demodicosis in two cats seroposi-
detection methods for diagnosing feline herpesvirus-1
tive for felinc immunode fciency virus. I An Vet Med
infection in cats with acute respiratory tract or
Assoc 194:256, 1989.
chronic ocular disease. J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:502,
lla. Chantrey J, et al: Cowpox-rcscrvoir hosts and
1999.
goographic distribution. Epidemiol Infect 122:453,
29. Maggs DJ: Update of feline herpesvirus (FHV-1).
'6661
Proc Am Coll Vet lnt Med 16:613, 1998.
12. Clark EG, et al;: Prinary viral skin disease in three
30.Mancianti F, et al: Mycological findings in feline im-
cats caused by three different vinuses and confirned
munodeficiency virus-infected cats. J Med Vet Myeol
by immunohistochemical and/or electronmieroscopic
30:257,1992.
techniques on formalin-fixed tissue. Proc Annu Memb
 31. Miller WH Jr, et al: Multicentrie squanous coll carci-
 Meet Am Acad Vet Dcrmatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol
nomas in situ resembling Bowen's dlisease in five cats.
9:56, 1993.
Vet Dermatol 3;177, 1992.
13. Cooper LM, Sabine M: Paw and mouth dlisrasc in a
32. Monroe WE: Clirnical signs associated with pseudora-
cat. Aust Vet J 48:644, 1972.
bies in dogs. J Ain Vet Medl Assoe 195:599, 1989.
14. Egberink HF, ct al: Isolation and identification of a
33.Nagata M, et al: Pigmented plaques associated with
 poxvirus frorm a dormestic cat and a human contact
papilmainus infctionsindogs is this epiderods
case. J Vet Med [Br] 33:237, 1986.
plasia verruciformis? Vet Dermatol 6:179, 1995.
15. Egberink HE, et al: Papillomavinus associated skin
34.1
Naidoo J, et al: Characterization of orthopoxviruses
lesions in a cat seropositive for feline immunodefi-
isolated from feline imfections in Britain. Arch Virol
ciency virus. Vet Microbiol 31:117, 1992.
125:261,1992.
16. Flecknell PA, et al: Skin ulceration associated with
34a. Nicholls PK, et al: Naturally occurring, monregress-
herpesvirus infection in cats. Vet Rec 104:313, 1979.
ing canine oral papillornavinis infection: Host immu-
17. Gross TL, et al: Multifocal intraepiclermal carcinoma
nity, virus characterization, and experimental infec-
in a dog histologically reseimbling Bowen's disease.
tion. Virol 265:365, 1999.
Am J Dermatopathol 8:509, 1986.
34b. Nicholls PK, Stanley MA: Canine papillomavirus--a
18. Gross, TL, ct al: Veterinary Dermatopathology.
 centenary review. J Comp Pathol 120:219, 1999.
Mosby-Year Book, Inc., St. Louis, 1992, p 340.
35. Nowotny N, et al: Poxvirus infection in the domestic
19. Gross TL, et al: Giant cell dennatosis in FeLV-posi-
cat: Clinical, histopathological, virological, and epi-
tive cats. Vet Dermatol 4:117, 1993.
demiological studies. Wien Ticrarztl Mschr Sl:362,
19a. Groux D, et al: La poxvirose feline: A propos de
1994.
deux cas. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 34:215, 1999.
36. Olivry T: Newly recognized feline dermatoses: se.
19b. Haines DM, et al: Immunohistochemical detection 
lectcd topics. Proc DVM Fall Scminar, Kcywcst,
of canine distemper virus in haired skin, nasal mu-
1997, p 29.
cosa, and footpad epithelium: A method for antemor-
37. Orth C, et al: Multiple pigmented cutaneous papules
1 s u  I  jo ss 
associated with a novcl caninc papillormavins in an
1999.
inumunosuppressed dog. Vet Pathol 34:8, 1997.
20. Hamblet CN: Parapoxvinus in a cat. Vet Rec 132:144.
38. Power HT: Newly recognized feline skin diseases.
1993.
Proe Anmu Memh Meet Ain Acad Vet. Dermatol Ain
20a. Hara M, et al: A natural case of Aujeszky's disease
Coll Vet Dernmatol 14:3l, 1998.
 in the cat in Japan. J Vet Med Sei 53:947, 1991.
39. Sato B, et al: Oral administration of bxvine lactoferin
21. Hargis AM, ct al: Ulccrative facial and masal dermnati-
for trcatment of intractable stormatitis in feline inmu-
tis and stomatitis in cats associated with feline herpes
nodeficieney virus (FIV)-pxositive and FIV-negative
1. Vet Dermatol 10:267, 1999.
cats. Am J Vet Res. 57(10):1443, 1996.
2la. Hinrichs U, et al: Neerotizing pneurmonia in a cat
40. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1900-1978: A 1non0o-
caused by an orthopox virus. J Comp Pathol 121:191.
graph. J Am Anin Hosp Assoe 6:331, 1980.
1999.
41. Scott DW: Large Animal Dermatology. W. B. Saum-
 22. Hoover EA, Mullins JI: Feline leukemia virus infec.
ders Co, Philadelphia. 1988.
tion and diseases. J Am Vct Med Assoc 199:1287,
42. Setsuko TOl, et al: Histopathological features of sto-
1991.
23. Howard DR: Pseudorabies in dogs and cats. In: Kirk
munodeficiency virus. J Jpn Vet Med Assoc 47:331,
RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy IX. W. B.
1994.
Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1986, p 1071.
42a. Smith KC, et al: Skin lesions caused by orthopoxvi-
24. LeClerc SM, et al: Papillomavirus infection in associ-
rus infection in a dog. J Simall Anim Pract 40:495,
ation with feline cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma
1999.
in situ. Proc Annu Memh Mect Am Acad Vet Der-
42b. Sundberg JP. et al: Feline papillomas and papill ya-
matol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 13:125, 1997.
viruses. Vet Pathol 37:1, 2000.
24a. LeNet JL, et al: Muliple pigmented cutaneous pap-
42e. Suchy A, et al.: Diagnosis of feline herpesvirus infec-
ules associated withi a novel canine papilloinavirus in
tion by immunohistochemistry. polymerase chain re-
an immunosuppressed dog. Vet Pathol 34:8, 1997.
action, and in situ hybridization. J Vet Diagn Invest
25. Love DN, et al: Feline calicivirus associated with py-
12:186,2000.
rexia, profound anorexia, and oral and perineal ulcer-
43. Thomsett LR: Feline poxvirus infection. In: Kirk RW
ation in a cat. Aust Vet Pract 17:136, 1987.
(ed): Current Veterinary Therapy IX. W. B. Saunders
26. Maeda, H, et al: Distermper skin lesions in a dog.
Co, Philadelphia, 1986, p. 605.
J Vet Med A 42:247, 1994.
44. Vestey JP, et al: What is human calpox/cowpox infcc-
 27. Maenhout T, et al: Drie Cevallen Van Koepokkenin-
tion? Int J Dermatol 30:696, 1991.
fektie bij de Kat in Belgie. Vlaams. Diergenerskd
45. von Bonhard D, et al: Zur Epidemiologie, Klink,
Tijdschr 60:66, 1991.
Pathologie und Virologic der Katzcn-Poucken-Infek-
28. Maggs DJ, et al: Evaluation of serologie and viral
tion. Klcintierpraxis 37:219, 1992.
540 · Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases
45a. Wienecke R, et al: Cowpow virus infection in an 11-
iasis: Strong evidence for a developing spectrum from
year-old girl. J Am Acad Dermatol 42:892, 2000.
asyimptomatic dogs. Vet Parasitol 76:173, 1998.
46. Willinson CT, et al: Posslble “orf" (contagious pustu-
67.
Capell, JL, et al: La babesiose canine, naladie a
lar dermatitis, contagious ecthyma of sheep) infection
complexes immuns: A propos dun cas de vascularite
in the dog. Vet Rec 87:766, 1.970.
a manifestations cutanees. Prat Med Chir Anin
47. Wojciechowski J, ot al: Ilerpesvirus dermatilis in a
Conp 31:231, 1996.
cat. Proc 14th Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet
67a. Cavaliero T, et al: Clinical, serologic, and parasito.
Dermatol, 1998, p 85.
logic follow-up after long-tern allopuriuol therapy of
48. Yamamoto JK, et al: Fpidemiologic and clinical as-
dogs naturaly infected with Leishmania infantum. J
pects of feline irnmumoueiciency virus infection in
Vet Intern Med 13:330, 1999.
cats from the continental United States and Canada
68. Cardoso L, et al: Use of a leishmanin skin test in the
and possible mode of transinission. J Am Vet Med
detection of canine Leishnania-spccific cellular im-
Assoe 194:213, 1989.
munity. Vet Parasitol 79:213, 1998.
49. Zenger E: FIP, FELV, FIV: Making a diagnosis. Proc
69. Carlotti DN, et al: Skin lesions in canine babesiosis.
Am Coll Vet Int Med 16:407, 1998.
In: Ihrke PJ, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Der-
Rickettsial Diseases
matology、 Vol 2. Pergamon Press, Oxford,′ 1993.
 50. Breitschwerdt EB, et al: Prednisolone at anti-infam-
p 229.
70. Chapman WL, et al: Antileishmanial activity of lipo-
matory or immunosuppressivc dosages in conjunction
sone-encapsulated meglumine antinonate in the dog.
with doxycycline does not putentiate the severiy of
Rirkettsia rickettsli infection in dogs. Antimicrob
Am J Vet Res 45:1028, 1984.
Agents Chemother 4l:141, 1997.
71.
Chatterjee M, et al: Diagnostie and prognostie poten-
51. Carlotti DN, Bensingnor, F: Manifestations dermato-
tial of antibodies against O-acetylated sialie acids in
logiqnes de Tehrlchiose canirne. Prat Med Chir Anim
canine yisceral leishimaniasis. Vet Immunol Immumo-
Cornp 31:325, 1996.
pathol 70:55, 1999.
 52. Creene CE, et al: Rocky Mountain spotted fever in
72.
Ciaramella P, et al: A retrospcctive clinical study of
dogs and its differentiation from carine ehrlichiosis.
J An Vet Med Assoc 186:465, 1985.
Leishmania infantum, Vet Rec 141:539, 1997.
73. Denerolle P: Leishraniose canine: diffcultes du diag-
 53. Cretillati S: Feline hacmobartonellosis. Fe:line Pract
14:22, 1984.
nostic et du traitement (125 cas). Prat Med Chir
 54. Frank IA: Cutaneous lesions associated with ehr-
Anim Comp 31:137, 1996.
73a.Denerolle P, Bourdoiseau G: Combination allopurl-
lichiosis in a dog. Vet Allergy Clin Immunol 4:90.
 nol and antimony treatment versus antimony alone
1997.
55. Ruitgers C, et al: Severe Rocky Mountain spotted fe-
and allopurinol alone in the treatiment of canine
 ss d y w I s y u 1
leishinaniasis (96 cases). J Vet Inten Med 13:413,
1985.
1999.
74. Dietze R, et al: Effect of eliminating seropositive ca-
56. Weiser ID, et al: Dernal necrosis associated with
Roxcky Mountain spotted fever in four dogs. J Am Vet
nincs on the transmission of visceral leishmaniasis in
 Brazil. Clin Infect Dis 25:1240, 1997.
Med Assoc 195:1756, 1989.
75. Dubey JP, et al: Newly recognized fatal protozoan
Protozoal Diseases
disease of dogs. J Am Vet Med Assox 192:1296, 1989.
57. Acedo-Sanchez C, et al: Changes in antibody titres
76. Dubey JP, et al: Caryospora-associated dermatitis in
against Leishmania infuntum in naturally infected
dogs. J Parasitol 76:552, 1990.
dogs in southern Spain. Vet Parasitol 75:1, 1998.
77. Dubey JP, et al: Fatal cutaneous and visceral infec-
58. Barber JS. Trees AJ: Naturally occurring vertical
tion in a rottweiler dog associated with a sarcocystis-
transimission of Neospora caninum in dogs. Intrmatl.
like protozoan. J Vet Diagn Invest 3:72, 1991.
J Parasitol 28:57, 1998.
78. Dubey JP, Carpenter JL: Histologicaly confirmed
 59. Bamnes JC, et al: Diffuse cutaneous leishmaniasis in a
clinical toxoplasmosis in cats: 100 cases (1952- 1990).
cat. J Ain Vet Med Assoc 202:416, 1993.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 203:1556, 1993.
60. Bernalina WE, et al: An immunodiffusiou assay for
79. Dubey JP, et al: Canine cutaneous ncosporosis: clinj-
the detection of canine leishmaniasis due to infcction
cal inprovement with clindamycin. Vet Dennatol 6:
with Leishmania infantum. Vet Parasitol 73:207,
37, 1995.
1997.
 80. Dubey JP, Lindsay DS: A review of Neospora can-
61. Binazzi M: Profle of cutaneous toxoplasmosis. Int J
Inum and neosporosis. Vet Parasitol 67:1, 1996.
Dermatol 25:357, 1986.
 81. Edelhofer VR, et al: Importierte Leishmaniose-falle
62. Bourdloiseau G, et al: Specific IgG1 and IgG2 anti-
bei Hunden in Osterreich—cine rerospektive studie
ss  
von 1985- 1994. Wien Tierairzl Mschr 82:90, 1995.
mania infantum-infected treated and untrcated dogs.
82. Ferrer L; Leishmaniasis. In; Kirk RW, Bonagura JD
Vet Immmol Immunopathol 59:21, 1997.
(eds): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy Xl. W. B.
63. Bourdoisea G, et al: Lymphocyte subset abnormalities
Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1992, p 266.
in canine leishmaniasis. Vet Immunel Immunopathol
83. Ferrer L, et al: Serological diagnosis and treatment of
56:345, 1997.
canine leishmaniasis. Vet Hec 136:514, 1995.
64. Bourdoiseau G, et al: Immunohistochemical detection
 84. Fisa R, et al: Serological diagnosis of canine leish-
of Leishmania infantu in formalin-fixed, paraffin-
maniasis by dot-ELISA. J Vet Diagn lnvest 9:50,
cmhedded sections of canine skin and lynph nodes.
1997.
I Vet Diagn Invest 9:439, 1997.
84a. Fisa R, et al: Epidemiology of canine leishrmaniasis
65.
Bravo L, et al: Canine lcishmaniasis in the United
in Catalonia (Spain). The example of the priorat fo-
 States. Cormp Cont Educ 15:699, 1993.
cus. Vet Parasitol 83:87, 1999.
66. Cabral M, et al: The immunology of canine leishman-
85. Fondevila D, et al: Epidermal irmmunocompetence in
Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases · 541
canine leishunaniasis. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 56:
106. Martinez-Moreno A, et al: Humoral and cell-incdi-
319, 1997.
ated immunity in natural and experimental canine
86.Font A, et al: Canine mucosal leishmaniasis. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 32:131, 1996.
87. Fritz D, et al: Neospora caninum: Associated nodular
1995.
106a. Mozos E, et al: Leishmaniasis and generalized dc-
dermatitis in a middle-aged dog. Can Pract 22:21,
 modicosis in three dogs: A clinicopathological and im-
1997.
munohistochemical study. J （omp Pathol 120:257,
88. Ginel PJ, et al: Use of allopurinol for maintenance of
1999.
remission in dogs with leishmaniasis. J Small Anim
107. Neogy AB, et al: Exploitation of parasite-derived anfi-
Pract 39:271, 1998
gen in therapeutie surcxess against canine visceral
89. Ginel PJ, et al: Use of allopurinel for maintenance of
leishmaniasis. Vet Parasitol 54:367, 1994.
remission in dogs with leishumaniasis. J Small Anin
108. Odin M, Dubxy JP: Sudden death associated with
Pract 39:271, 1998.
Neospora caninun myocarditis in a dog. J Am Vet
90. Greig B,et al: Neospora caninum pneumonia in an
Med Assoc 203:831,1993.
adult dog. J Am Vet Med Assoxc 206:1000, 1995.
109. Oliva G, et al: Comparative eficacy of meglumine
91. Hyman JA, et al: Specilicity of polymerase chain rcac-
anlimoniate and aminosidine sulphate, alone or in
tion identification of Toxoplasma gondi infection in
combination, in canine leishmamiasis. Ann Trop Med
paraffin-embedded animal tissues. J Vet Diagn Invest
Parasitol 92:165, 1998.
7-275, 1995.
110.Opitz. M: Hautmanifestationen bei der Leishimaniosc
92. Kilick KR, et al: Protection of dogs from bites of
des Hudes. Tierarztl Prax 24:284, 1996.
phlebotomine sandfies by deltamethrin colars for
111. Ozm C, et al.: Disseminated feline leishmaniasis due
control of canine leishmaniasis. Med Vet Entomol 22:
to Leishmania infantum in southem France. Vet Par-
105, 1997.
asitol 75:273, 1998.
93.Kirkpatrick CE, et al: Leishmunia chogast and L. dom-
112. Perl S, et al: Pyogranulomatous dernatis associated
ori: Experinental infections in domestic cats. Exp
with Neospora caninum in a dog. World Small Anim
Parasitol 58:125, 1984.
Vet Assoc 21:417, 1996.
94. Koutinas Al, et al: Skin lesions in canine Leishunania-
113. Perl S, ct al: Cutaneous neosporosis in a dog in Is-
sis (Kala-Azar): A clinical and histopathologic study
rael. Vet Parasitol 79:257, 1998.
0n 22 spontancous cascs in Greec.Vet Dermatol 3:
114. Poli A, et al: Comparison of arminosidine (paromoiny-
121, 1993.
cin) and sodium stibogluconate for treatment of ca-
94a. Koutinas AF, et al: Clinical comsiderations on canine
ninc lcishmaniasis. Vet Parasitol 71:263, 1997.
visceral leishimaniasis in Creece: A retrospective study
115. Poli A, et al: Neospora canimuin infection in a Ber-
of 158 cases (1989-1996). J Am Anim Hlosp Assoc
nese cattle dog from Italy. Vet Parasitol 79:79, 1998.
35:376, 1999.
115a. Prats N, Ferrer L: A possible mechanism in the
95. Larnothe J: Essai de traitermcnt de la leishmaniose
pathogenesis of cutaneous lesions in canine leishmani-
canine par ’amphotericine B (39 cas). Prat Med (Chir
asis. Vet Rec 137:103, 1995.
Anin Comp 32:133, 1997.
116. Pumarola M, et al: Canine leishmaniasis associated
96. Laruelle-Magalon C, Toga I: Un cas de leishmaniose
with systemic vasculitis in wo dogs. J Comp Pathol
feline. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 3l:255, 1996.
105:279, 1991.
97. Lester SJ, Kenyon JE: Use of allpurinol to treat
117. Rasmussen K, Jensen AI: Some cpidemiologic fca-
visceral leishmaniasis in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
tures of canine neosporosis in Denrmark. Vet Parasitol
209:615, 1996.
6:345, 1996.
98. Lindsay DS, et al: Examination of the activities of 43
118. Rhalem A, ct al: Immune rcsponsc against Leish-
chemotherapeutic agents against Neospora caninum
mania antigens in dogs naturally and experimentally
tachyzoites in cultures cells. An J Vet Res 55:976.
infection with Jeishmania infantun. Vet Parasitol 81:
1994.
173. 1999.
99. Lindsay DS, ct al: Felinc toxoplasimosis and the in-
118a. Rhalem A, et al: Analysis of immune responses in
portancc of the Toxoplasma gondi oocyst. Conp
dogs with canine visceral leishmaniasis before, and
Cont Fdue Praet Vet 19:488, 1997.
after, drug treatment. Vet Immunol Inmunopathol
99a. Lindsay DS, ct al: Neospora caninum and the poten-
71:69, 1999.
tial for parasite transmission. Conpend Contin Edue
118b. Riera C, ct al: Serological and parasitological follow-
Pract Vet 21:317, 1999.
up in dogs experimentally infected with Leishrnania
100.Liste F,Gascon M: Allopurinol in the treatment
infantum and treated with mcglumine antimoniate.
of canine visceral leishrmaniasis. Vet Rec 137-23,
Vet Parasitol 84:33, 1999.
1995.
119. Ronand S, et al: Direct aglutination test for sero-
101. Lobetti RG: Canine babesiosis. Comp Cont Educ
logie diagnosis of Neospora caninun infection. Parasi-
Pract Vet 20:418, 1998.
tof Res 84:50, 1998.
102. Lopez R, et al: Circulating immune complexes and
119a. Roura X, et al: Detection of Leishrmania infection in
renal function in canine leishmaniasis. J Vet Med B
paraffin-embedded skin biopsies of dogs using polym-
43:469, 1996.
erase chain reaction. J Vet Diagn Invest 11:385, 1999.
103. Lucena R, et al: Third component of complement
120. Ruehlnann D, et al: Canine neosporosis: a case re-
serum levels in dogs with leishmaniasis. J Vet Med
port and literature review. J An Anim Hosp Assoc
[Am] 41:48, 1994.
31:174, 1995.
104.
Lucena R, et al: Antinuclear antibodies in dogs with
121. Sangster LT, et al: Coccidia associated with cutaneous
leishmaniasis. J Vet Med A 43:255, 1996.
nodules in a clog. Vet Pathol 22:186, 1985.
105. Margarito JM, et al: Levels of IgM and IgA cireulat-
122.Sellon R: Ieishmaniasis in the United States. In: Kirk
sn  s    
GW, Bonagura JD (eds): Current Vcterinary Therapy
J Vet Med B 45:263, 1998.
XI. W. B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1992, p 271.
 542 · Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases
123.Shelton CC, et al: A coccidia-like organism associated
128. Vcrcammen F, et al: A scnsitive and specific 30-min
with subcutancous granulomata in a dog. J Amn Vet
Dot-ELISA for the detection of anti-Lcishmania anti-
Med Assoc 152:263, 1968.
budies in the dog. Vet Parasitol 79:221, 1998.
123a. Sideris V, et al: Asymptomatic canine leishmaniasis
129. Vercammen F, et al: First evaluation of the use of
in greater Athcns area, Greece. Eur J Epidemiol 15:
allopurinol as a single drug for the treatment of ca-
271, 1999.
nine leishmaniasis. Vlaams Diergeneeskd Tijdschr 64:
124. Slappendel RJ, Teske E: The effect of intravenous or
208, 1995.
subcutaneous administration of meglumine antimon-
130. Vercammen F, De Deken R: Treatment of caninc
ate (Glucantime) in dogs with leishmaniasis. A ral-
visccral leishinaniasis with allopurinol. Vet Rec 137:
domized clnical trial.Vet Quart 19:10,1997.
252, 1995.
125. Valladares JE, et al: Pharmacokinetics of liposome-
131.
Vercammen F, De Deken R: Antiboxly kinetics dur-
encapsulated meglurnine antimonate after intramuscu-
ing allopurinol treatment in canine leishmaniasis. Vet
lar and subeutaneous administration in dogs. Am J
Rcc 138:264, 1996.
Trop Med Hyg 57-403, 1997.
132. Vexenat JA, et al: Clinical recovery and lmitod cure
126. Valldares JE, et al: Pharmacokinetics of meglumine
in canine visceral leishmaniasis treated with aninosi-
antimoniate after ardrninistration of a multiple dose in
dine (paromomycin). Am J Trop Med Hyg 58:448,
dogs experirnentally infected with Leishmania infan-
1998.
tum. Vet Parasitol 75:33, 1998.
133.
Zaffaromi E, et al: Epidemiological patterms of canine
127. Vercammen F, et al: Dcvelopment of a slide ELISA
for canine leishmaniasis and comparison with four
81:11, 1999.
serological tests. Vet Rec 141:328, 1997.
Chuute
Skin Immune System and
Allergic Skin Diseases
 he subject of immunodcrmatology has seen a tremendous emergence of new discov-
 eries, findings, and laboratory techniques. An adequate review of this information is
decidedy beyond the scope of this chapter. For the practitioner, student, and academician
interested in details, numerous texts on inmunology and immunodermatology are avail-
able, and a number of review articles can be recommended." In this discusson, we
confine ourselves to a brief overview of the concepts regarding immunology of the skin.
To comprehend this discussion or to read the current scientific literature on many cutane-
 ous diseases, the reader has to understand some newer terminology about cefl surface
antigens, cytokines, and adhesion molecules, which are basic components of all immuno-
logic discussions.
● SurFaCe AnTiGeNS (dETerMInaNtS) Or rEcePtOr
TERMINOLOGY
The understanding of current literature involving immune responses requires an under-
standing of cell surface deterrminants, which are referred to by the cluster differentiation
(CD) nomenclature. This nomenclature is applied to antigens that have been detected on
the surface of cells with monoclonal antibodies, and these are usually assigned a number.
 Initially those antigens were studied and shown to be specific to or limited to a specific
group of cell types. This alowed us to identify what types of cells arc present in tissues or
exudates. Further studies have allowed us to recognize the function and, in many cases,
the structure of these antigens. It is now known that many of the surface molecules are
varicus immunoglobulins, carbohydrates, cnzymes, adhesion molecules to bind with other
cells, and receptors for the various immunoglobulins and cheinicals (cytokines) secreted by
cells to communicatc with surrountding cels. In humans, this list of cell surface determi-
nants has grown to well over 100 and appears to grow faster each year. Work in dogs and
 cats is allowing us to recognize some of these determinants in small animals as well (Table
8-1).10, 21, 52
Cytokines
Cytokines are secreted from cells and function in communicating with surrounding cells
(Table 8- 2). They are soluble proteins or glycoproteins that affect the growth, differentia-
tion, function, and activation fiunctions of other cells. These soluble hormone-likc mole-
cules were initially discovered in association with lymphocytes and callcd lymphokines or
with monocytes and called monokines. Bocause it was discovered that many other cells
produced the same substances, these terms, and others such as secretory regulins and
peptide regulatory factors, were no longer considered appropriate.
Cytokines are transiently produced and exert their hiological activities via specifc cell-
 surface receptors of target cells, which may be expressed only after activation of the
*See relerences 4, 5, 9, 14, 16, 20, 22, 23, 30, 36, 42, 49, 50, 54, 58, 60, 61, 69, 72, 75-77.
543
544 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
● Table 8- 1
Glossary of Leukocyte antigens'2
ANTIGEN
FAMILY
ANTIGEN
COMMENT
CD1
CD1a
 CD1 antigens are expressed in cortical thymoeytes but not ou mature
CD1b
T cells. CDl molecules are the best markers of dendritic/APC,
CDlc
although subpopulations of B cells and monocytes express CD1c.
TCR/CD3
TCRαβ
The: T-cell receptor/CD3 conplex is only expresscd on the surface of
TCRy8
mature T cels. There are two types of TCR: oβ and y8; cach is
CD3
associated with the CD3 complex, which is the signal transduction
 portion of both types of receptor.
CD4
CD4
Expressed byMHC classIrstricteThlercelMacrphags
and dendritic/APC can upregulate CD4 in some instances.
CD5
CD5
Fxpressed by almost all mature T cels; a minor subset of B cells can
 s   s     s
B cells.
CD8
CD8α
Expressed by MIIC class I-restricetel T eytotoxice xells. T cells usually
CD8β
 express CD8aβ heterodimers.
β, Integrins
CDlla
The β, integrins (CD1l/CDI8) are the major adhesion noleeule family
CD1lb
 of leukocytes. Most leukocytes express one or more members of this
CD1lc
family. CD18 is the β subunil that pairs with one: of four α-suhunits
CD18
to forin a heterodimer. The α-subunits are: CDlla (all leukocytes),
CD1lb(granuloytes,mnocytes,somemacrophagesCD1lcgran-
ulocytes, monocytes, dentdritie antigen-presenting cells). Macro-
phages and granuloeytes express 10-fold more CD18 than do lym-
phocytes.
CD14
CD14
Receptor for LPS (endotoxin) and IPS binding protein complexes.
spesdojo sos  px
sets of B cells.
CD21
CD21
CD21 is a C3dg receptor (CR2) that complexes with components of
the B-cell anfigen receptor complex (slg, CD79a, CD79b), CD19.
and CD35 (CR1). CD21 is expressed on mature B cells and follicu-
lar dendritic cells of the gerrminal center.
Link
CD44
types; involved in lyinphocyte trafficking and activation.
CD45
(D45
CD45RA
these isoforms. CD45RA is expresed by all B cel and by 100% of
CD45R
B-cell lynphomas involving lymph nodes. In skin discase, CD45RA
is expresdbymastllrasacmasandrlby
T-cell lymphomas.
β, Integrins
CD49d-like
VLA fanily (CD49a-f) members (a-subunits) occur as heterodimers
with the β-integrin subunit. VLA-4 (CD49dl) is broadly expresse?d
on leukocytes. VLA-4 is upregulated on memory T cells.
ICAM
CD50
CD54
menhers. ICAM-1 (CD54) is broadly expressed (leukocytes, cndo-
cndothclium, leukocytes, and even on epithelium in infammation
(by infammatory cytokines) and is important in leukocyte transini-
gration. Expression of CD54 on dendritic/APC enhances T-cell acti-
leukocytes but rarely occurs on endothelium.
NCAM
CD56
Neural cell adhesion molecule isoform; 1narker of NK cells in humans.
Thy-1
CD90
express Thy-1 on thynoeytes and T cells (similar to mice); expres-
s
cyte maturation; peripheral T cells lack Thy-1 expression. Thy-1 is
highly expressed by dermal dendritic/APC and fibroblasts. It is au
important marker in proliferative-diseases of dendritic/APC in dogs
(c.-g, cutaneous and systemic histioeytosis). Thy-1 is expressed also
by monocytes and eosinophils but not by neutrophils in the dog.
MHCII
Major histocompatibility conplex (MHC) class II molecules present
exogcnously derived antigen CD4- T cells.MHIC class I molccules
are highly expressed on dendritic/APC, B cells, resting (dog and cat!)
and activated T cells (dog, cat, and hunan), and monoeytes. Granu-
locytes do not express MHC class I. MHC class II can be upregu-
lated on epithelial cells (e.g., keratinocytes) and endothclial colls by
interferon-y.
Table continued on following page
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 545
● Tahle 8-1
GLOSSARY OF LEUKOCYTE ANTIGENS Continued
ANTIGEN
FAMILY
ANTIGEN
COMMENT
BCR/CD79
CD79a
The B-cell receptor complex (BCR) cxonsists of surfacx: Ig (slg) com-
plexed with two invariant molecules that function as signal transdue.
tion moleeules (CD79a, CB79b). CD79a (MB-1) is expressed
throughout all stages of B-cell development and persists into the
plasma cell stage (despite absent or diminished sig on plasma cells).
CID79a is a useful marker for establishing the dliagnosis of B-cell
Iymphoma because it is present in the BCR of all B cells regardless
of the isotype of the sIg receptor (background aswociated with Ig
sis of cutanncous plasnacytoma (about 80% have focal to diffuse
cxpression).
cell.7-9, 31. 50. 54 80. 85 Each mediator usually has multiple overlapping activities. Numerous
cytokines have been described, and typically they may perform several different functions,
depending on the tissue they interact with and the other cytokines that may be present.
Cytokines may affect the same cell in a permissive, inhibitor, additive, or suppressive
manner. Cytokines are involved in virtually every facet of immunity and infainmation,
 including antigen presentation, bone marrow differentiation, cellular recruitinent and acti-
vation, adhesion molecule expression, and acute-phase reactions (see Table 8-2).7 The
 particular cytokines produced in response to an inmunologic insult determine whether an
immune response develops and whether the response is humoral, cell-mediated, or aller-
cytokines, and this has been used to subclassify these cells and their associated different
fuinctions. A large group of cytokines have been identified that have as thcir sole or major
 purpose the direction of the movement of cells involved in inflammation and the immune
response. These have been called chemokines (Table 8-3).3. 50
Adhesion Molecules
Glycoproteins critical for cell-to-cell and cell-to-matrix adhesion, contact, and communica-
tion, adhesion molecules play an integral role in cutaneous infammation and iinmnunology
(see Chap.1)Table 84)1931,79s2Theintegrin family includesmembrane glycoprotins
with α and B subunits, such as vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1) on endothelial
cells, which binds T lymphocytes and monocytes via vascular leukocyte adherin-4 (VLA-4),
 and fibronectin and laminin, which bind keratinocytes and mast cells. The immunoglobulin
gene superfamily contains intercelular adhesion molccule-1 (ICAM-1) found on keratino-
cytes, Iangerhans' cells, and endothelial cells, which binds leukoeytes via leukocyte func-
tion-associated antigen-1 (LFA-1) or CDlla/CD18. The selectin family includes lectin
adhesion molecule-1 (LECAM-l or L-selcctin) on lymphocytes, which binds endothelial
leukocyte alhesion molecule-1 (ELAM-1 or E-selectin) and Gmp-140 (P-selectin) as a
"homing" mechanism. The cadherin family members are inportant in desmosome func-
tion (see Chap. 1).
Major Histocompatibility Complex
The major histocompatibility complex (MIIC) is a cluster of genes that encodes a range of
molecules of fundamental importance to the immune system.15 MHC class I loci encode
body and are target antigens in the rejection of incompatible tissue grafts. Products of the
MHC class I11 loci include a number of factors of the complement pathways, two
cytokines (TNF-α and TNF-β), and two heat-shock proteins. The MHC class II loci
546 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
● Table 8--2
 Immunologic properties of cytokines
CYTOKINE
PROPERTIES
interleukins
IL-1
Immunoaugmentation (promotes I-2, IFN-α, colony-stimulating factor (CSF)
production by T cells); promotes B-cell aclivation (promotes II-4, IL-5. IL-6,
IL-7 prxduetion and inmunoglobulin synthesis); stimulates macrophages and
fibroblasts; induces arachidonate metabolisn
IL-2
Activates T and natural killer (NK) cells; promotes cell growth and immunoglub-
ulin production; activates macrophages
IL-3
Promotesgrowthofearlymyeloprogeitor cellsinophilsmast cellad
basophils
IL-4
Promotes B-cell activation and IgE switch; promotes T-ccll growth; symergistic
with IL-3 for mast cell growth
IL-5
Eosinophilic growth; B-cell growth and chemotaxis; T-cell growth
IL-6
Terminal differentiation factor for cells and polyclonal immunoglobulin produc.
tion; enhances IL-4 induced IgE production: promotes T-cell proliferation and
cytotoxicity; promotes NK-cell activity, activates ncutrophils
IL-7
Lynphopoietin
IL-8
Chemoattractant for entrophils, T lynplocytes, basophils; increases histanine
release from basophils
IL-9
Maturation of erythroid progenitor cell tumor growth; synergistic with I-3 for
mast cell growth
IL-10
Dowmregulation (inhibits production of IL-1, IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-8. IL-12,
TNF-α, IFN-y, MI1C class II expression)
IL-11
Megakaryocyte, lymphocyte, and plasma cell growth
IL-12
Cytotoxic lyimphocyte maturation; NK-cell activation and proliferation
IL-13
Similar to IL-4; enhances production of MHC class II and integrins; reduced
_ production of IL-1 and TNF; activation of eosinophils
IL-14
Expands clones of B cells and suppresses immunoglobulin secretion
IL-15
Proliferation; inereased cytotoxcity of T cell, NK cells; expression of ICAM-3;
 B-cell growth and differentiation
IL-16
Chemoattractant, growth factor
IL-17
Autocrine proliferation and activation
IL-18
Similar to IL-12; inhibits IgE production by increasing IFN-
Colony-StiulatingFactors
Granulocyle CSF
Neutrophil growth
Monoeyte CSF
Monocyte growth
Granulocyte-nonocyte
Manornyeloeytic growth
CSF
 Basic fibroblast growth
 Fibroblast growth and matrix production
factor (bFGF)
Platelet-deriveci growth
Proliferation; chemoattractant for fibroblasts; active in wound healing
factor
Stem cell factor
Chemoattractant; with IL-3 stinulates growtlh; also has histarmine-releasing activ-
Inhibits IL-2-stimulated growth; switch factor for IgA but inhibits IgM and IgC
ity
 Transforming growth
factor
production; counteracts IL-4 stimulation of IgE: inhibits cytotoxicity
interferons
X-NI
Antviral; antprolferative imunomdulating (activation ofmacrophages prolf
(eration of B cells; stimulation of NK cells); inhibit fibroblasts
IFN-β
Antiviral; antiproliferative; immunornoculating (activation of macrophages, prolif-
eration of B cells, stimulation of NK cells); inhibit fibroblasts 
IFN-Y
Irinunomodulation (activation of macrophages; proliferation of B cell; stimula-
tion of NK cells); antiproliferative; antiviral; inhibit fibroblasts; iuhibits IL-4-
 mediated expression of IgE receptors and the IgE switch 
TNF-α
InAammatory, immunoenhancing, and tumoricidal
TNF-β
Infammatory, immumoenhancing, and tumoricidal
TNF-β123
Fibroplasia and immunosupprcssion
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 547
● Table S-3
 CHEMOKinES AND thEIR AcTIOnS
CHEMOKINE
TARGET CELLS
 BIOLOGICAL EFFECTS
CXC (a) Family
BCA-1 (B-cell-attracting
B lymphocytes
Chemotaxis
chemokinc-1)
β-TG(βthrovaboglobulin)
Nentrophils
Chemotaxis; activation
Fibroblasts
Chemotaxis; prolferation; activatiou
CTAP-III (connective tis-
Neutrophils
Chemotaxis; activation
sue-activating peptide
Fibroblasts
Chemotaxis; proliferation; activation
1I1)
ENA-78 (epithelial cell-
Neutrophils
Chemotaxis
derived neutrophil.
activating peptide 78)
GCP-2 (granulocyte chc-
 Neutrophils
Cheinotaxis; activation
Imotactie protein 2)
GRO-α,β,(growth reg-
Neutrophils
Chemotaxis; activation
ulated oncogene)
Basophils
Chemotaxis; activation
T lymphocytes
Chemotaxis
IL-8 (interleukin-8)
Neutrophils
Chemotaxis; activation
Basophils
Chemotaxis; inhibition of histamine release
T lyrnphocytes
Chemotaxis; inhibition of IL-4 synthesis
B lymphs/B-CELL
Chemotaxis; inhibition of growth and IgE production
Keratinocytes
Chemotaxis; expression of HLA-DR
 IP-10 (interferon-induci-
Activated’T lymphoxytes
Chemotaxis
ble protein 10)
Monocytes
Chemotaxis
NK cells
Chemotaxis; activation
MJG (monokine induced
Activated T lymphocytes
Chemotaxis
by y-interferon)
NK cells
Chemotaxis
NAP-2 (ncutrophil-activat-
Neutrophils
Cheinotaxis; activation
ing peptide 2)
PF-4 (platelet factor 4)
Neutrophils
Chemotaxis; activation
Monoeytes
Chemotaxis
Fibroblasts
Chemnotaxis
Basophils
Modulation of histamine release
SDF-1 (stromal cell-
T lymphocytes
Clemotaxis
derived factor 1)
Auy (8) 2-)
Ckβ8 (chemokine β8)
Monocytes
Chemotaxis
Resting T lymphocytes
Chemotaxis
Eotaxin
Eosinophils
Chemotaxis
Basophils
Chemotaxis; activation
Eotaxin-2
Eosinophils
Chennotaxis
Basophils
Chemotaxis; activation
Resting T lymphocytes
Chemotaxis
HCC-2
Monocytes
Chenotaxis
T lymphocytes
Chemotaxis
Eosinophils
Chemotaxis
Monocytes
Chcmotaxis
MCP-1 (1nonocyte che-
Monocytes
Chenmotaxis
Moatractant protein 1)
Basophils
Activation
T lynphocytes
Chemotaxis
NK cells
Chemotaxis; activation
Dendritie cells
Chemotaxis
MCP-2
Monocytes
Chcmotaxis
T lyrnphocytes
Chemotaxis
Eosinophils
Chemotaxis; activation
Basophils
Chemotaxis; activation
NK cells
Chemotaxis; activation
Dendritic cells
Chemotaxis
MCP-3
Monocytes
Chemotaxis
T lymphocytes
Chemotaxis
Eosinophils
Chemotaxis
Table continued on following page
548 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
● Table 8-3
 CHEMOKINES AND THEIR ACTIONS Continued
CHEMOKINE
TARGET CELLS
BIOLOGICAL EFFECTS
MCP-3 Continued
Basophils
Chemotaxis: activation
NK cells
Chemotaxis; activation
Dendritic cells
Chemotaxis
MCP-4
Fosinophils
Chernotaxis; activation
Monoxeytes
Chemotaxis
T lymphocytes
Chemotaxis
Basophils
Chemotaxis; activation
MIP-1α (macrophage in-
T lymphocytes
Chemotaxis
fammatory protein 1α
Monocytes/macrophages
Chemotaxis
or LD-78; also known
B lymphocytes
Increased IgE/IgG4 production
(uahoiid snouatopua se
NK cells
Chemotaxis; activation
Basophils
Activationl
Dendritie cells
Chemotaxis
MIP-1β
NK cells
Chemotaxis; activation
Dendritic cells
Chemotaxis
Blymphocytes
 Incrcased igE/IgG4 production
NIP-3a (also known as
T lymphocytes
Chemotaxis
Exodus of liver and ac-
Dendritic cells
Chemotaxis
tivation-regulated che-
mokne [LARC])
RANTEs (regulated upon
Eosinophils
Chemotaxis
T lymphoeytes
Chemotaxis
 T cells expressed and
Monocytes
Chemotaxis
presumably sccrcted)
Basophils
Chemotaxis
NK cells
Chemotaxis; activation
B lymphocytes
Increased IgE/IgG4 production
Dendritic cells
Chenotaxis
SLC (secomdary lynphoid
T lymphocytes
Chenotaxis
tissue chemokine)
STCP-1 (stimulated T-cell
Activated T lymphoxcytcs
Chemotaxis
chemotactic protein)
C (y) Family
Lymnphotactin
Lymphocytes
Chemotaxis
Activated NK cells
Chenotaxis; activation
CX3CFamily
Fractalkine
Monocytes
Chemotaxis
T lynphocytes
Chemotaxis
encode a series of transmembrane molecules with restricted expression by celils of the
immune systcm, particularly the antigen-presenting cells: Langerhans' cells, dendrocytes,
macrophages, and B lymphocytes.
In normal skin, low numbers (mean, 1.6 cells/HPF) of MHC class 1I and Langerlhans'
cells were demonstrated.1s Increased numbers of MHC class II and Langerhans' cells
were visible in the epidermis of dogs with discoid lupus erythematosus, allergic skin
disease, and deep bacterial pyoderma, but not in pemphigus foliaceus.t5
Skin-Associated Lymphoid Tissue
The irnmune system and its inflarmmatory component are complex models of biological
activity and interaction. There is a tendency to dissect the immune response into its
individual components and to discuss theim as autonomous functional units. Immune
responses are interwoven and interdependent, however, and manipulation of one compo-
nent influences others. Newer studies have shown that the skin itself is a very integral and
the skin, like the gastrointestinal tract, may be a functioning lynphoid organ; as such, it
has been called skin-associated lymphoid tissue (SALT). 53 Even prior to the devclopment
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases * 549
● Table 8-4
 Cell ADheSIoN Molecules
ADHESION
MOLECULES
CD
FAMILY
DISTRIBUTION
FUNCTION
VLA-1
CD49a
lntegrin
ECs, monocytes, macrophages,
Cell-matrix adhesion
activated T/B cells
VLA-2
CD49h
Integrin
ECs, EPs, activated T cells
Cell matrix adhesion
VLA-3
CD49c
Integrin
ECs, EPs
Cell-matrix adhesion
VLA-4
CD49d
 Integrin
Leukocytes
Cellcell and cell-matrix adhesion
VLA-5
Integrin
ECs, EPs, Iymphocyte, nono-
Cell-matrix aihesion
cytes, macrophages
VLA-6
CD49f
Integrin
ECs,EPs,T lymphocytes,
Cell-matrix adhesion
mast cells
LFA-1
CD1la/CD18
Integrin
Leukocytes
Adhesion of leukocytes of ECs
MAC-1
CD11b/CD18
Integrin
Monocytes, macrophages,
Adlhcsion of leukocytes to ECs
granulocytes, Langerhans
cells
gp150.95
CD11c/CD18
 Integrin
Monocytes, macrophages.
Adhesion of leukocytes to ECs
granulocytes, Langerhans'
cells
ICAM-1
CD54
lgG superfamily
Monocytes, EPs, fbroblasts
Cell-cell adhesion
JCAM-2
CD102
IgG superfanily
ECs,leukocytes
Acthesion of leukocytes to ECs
1CAM-3
CD50
IgG superfanily
EC, leukocytes, Langerhans'
Adhesion of lcukocytcs to ECs
cells
VCAM-1
CD-106
IgG superfamily
Activated ECs
Adhcsion of leukocytes to ECs
PECAM-1
CD31
IgG superfamily
ECs, leukocytes
Initiation of EC-EC adhesion,
platelet-monocyte/neutrophil-
EC adhesion
MAdCAM-1
IgG superfamily
ECs
Adhcsion of leukocytes to ECs
E-selectin
CD62E
Selectin
ECs
Adhesion of leukocytes to ECs;
rolling phenoinenon
P-selectin
CD62P
Selectin
Platelets, EC's
Adhesion of platelets to mono-
cytes and neutrophils; adhe-
sion of leukocytes to ECs;
rolling phenomenon
L-selectin
CD62L
Selectin
Leukocytes
Leukocyte-EC adhesion; lym-
phocyte homing
Cadherins
Cadlherin
EPs
EP-EP adlhesion
CD, cluster of dfferentiation: VLA, very latc activation; ICAM, intercelular adhesion molecule, VCAM-1, vascular cell adhesion molecule l:
PECAM-l, platelet-endothelial cell adhesion molecule 1: MAdCAM-l, mucosal aclress in cell adhesion molecule 1; PSCL, P-selectin
glycoproteinligand 1;EC,endohclal cellEP,epihclial cell.
of the SALT concept, it was suggested that the skin functions as a primary immunologic
organ. The term s
 components of the skin, excluding the regional lymph nodes, that constitute SALT.9 In the
following discussions, we attermpt to briefly review the specifics of the skin immune system
so that the reader is familiar with the tremendous gains in knowledge and future avenues
for work that will lead to further discoveries.
● SKiN IMMUNE SYSTEM
The SIS contains two major components, the cellular and the humoral. The celular
dendrocytes, lyrnphocytes, tissue macrophages, mast cells, endothelial cells, and granulo-
cytes (see Chap. 1). The humoral components include immunoglobulins, complement
components, fbrinolysins, cytokines, eicosanoids, neuropeptides, and antimicrobial pep-
tides. Virtually all infammatory and some noninfammatory skin diseases involve altera-
 tions of, or an interaction between, one or both parts of the SIs. As a result, it becomes
 inappropriate to consider immunologic disease as a category if onc is to include all skin
550 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
diseases that involve the immune system. Therefore, this chapter presents those diseases
classicall described as allergic (hypersensitive), and Chapter 9 deals with the immune-
mediated skin diseases,
The cpidermis is often considered the producer of the effective barier between the
outside world and the body's inside environment. In this role, the epidermis acts as a
rmechanical barier because it is often the first component of the body exposed to environ-
mental agents such as viruses, bacteria, toxins, insects, arachnids, and allergens. The
epidermnis also plays an active role in the body's immunoiogic response to these external
factors.
 Before the immune systerm can respond to these external factors, however, their
 presence has to be recognized. Recognition may occur at one of two levels: on the surface
of the epidermis or in the dermis. If an intact epidermis is present, it would seem most
likely that recognition of an environmental agent occurs in the epidermis. For many
immunologic responses, including helper T-cell induction, antigens must first be processed
for presentation to lymphocytes. Classically, this occurs by macrophages, which exprcss
Because macrophages are present in the dermis and do not normally reside in the
epidermis, this function is served by another cel, the Langerhans' cell. Even before
Langerhans" cells are reached, external stimuli will likely encounter keratinocytes, which
we now realize do more than act as a physical barrier.
Keratinocytes
Keratinocytes do much more than produce keratin, surface lipids, and intercellular sub-
stances (see Chap. 1). They are intimately associated with Langerhans’ cells and play a
 a  e  s    i i sis a u n 
cytokines that have important roles in mediating cutaneous immune responses, infamma-
tion, wound healing, and the growth and development of certain neoplasms.2. 6 Keratino-
cytes also produce eicosanoids, prostaglandin (PG) E2, and neuropeptides such as propi-
 prostaglandin Ez and the neuropeptides —also have anti-infaininatory effects.6s Keratino-
cytes, especially when perturbed by exposure to interferon-y (IFN-y), express MHC 1I
antigens.? This expression is required for cels to be antigen-presenting cells for T-cell
responses.
 Though keratinocytes are capable of phagocytosis, their role as antigen-processing
cells is unlikely because they do not efficiently process and present surface MHC II-
bound peptide antigens and have not been shown to be able to activate naive T cells.
However, they can induce proliferation of allogenic CD4+ T cells. There is evidence that
keratinocytes expressing MHC II surface molecules may induce tolerance. Keratinocytes
Imay also be stimulated to produce the leukocyte adhesion molecule, ICAM-1.
 Besides production of these immunologically important cell-surface markers, keratino-
cytes have been shown to be very capable producers of a variety of cytokines. They are
the primary epidermal source for cytokines.9 Probably the most inmunologically important
is interleukin-1 (IL-1). Keratinocytes store IL-1, which is readily released after damage
to the cells. In fact, release of IL-1 frorm keratinocytes is essentially a primary event in
skin disease.47 Other cytokines derived from keratinocytes include IL-3, IL-6, IL-7,
IL-8, IL-10, IL-12, IL-i5, IL-16, IL-18, tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α), and a variety
of growth factors and granulocyte-monocyte-macrophage stimulating and activating fac-
tors,9, 44, 47, 50, 65, 80
Depending on what cytokines are produced, keratinocytes may affect the type of
inmmune response. Keratinocytes produce both IL-12 and IL-10, which may skew which
type of T cells are activated or downregulate infanmmation, depending on what stagc
T
d aq rd ns u r e d ose a sy  o psda re so
important in stimulating and controlling inflammation and repair of tissue. Considering the
diverse functions, activities, and nediators produced by keratinocytes, it has hecome
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases * 55I
obvious that the cpidermis plays a major role in the imrmune response and that kcratino-
cytes do not finction only as a mechanical barrier to environmental substances.9, 6s, 85
Langerhans'Cells
Langerhans' cells are interdigitating dendritic ces, which appear as suprabasilar clear cells
 on skin sections stained routinely with hematoxylin and cosin (H&E) (see Chap. 1). They
are members of a faunily of highly specialized antigen-presenting cells called dendritic
 cells.37 They are localized at the interface between organism and environment, and they
are important sentinels of the immune system. Langerhans' cells are the major antigen-
cells. They are bone marrow -derived nonocyte/macrophage-type cells.
The Langerhans' cell is characteristically identified in the epidermis by the electron-
Chap. 1). In the dog, cutaneous dendritic antigen-presenting cels include both epidermal
and dermal Langerhans' cells that express abundant CDl molecules. Because CD1c may
also be expressed on canine monocytes, CDla is considered the best marker for canine
Langerhans* cells. The function of the CDl surface receptors has been elucidated.
CD1 receptors appear to be a third method of antigen presentation that is specialized
and may play a more important role in cutaneous disease. A unique feature of CDl
antigen presentation is the ability to present nonpeptide antigens to T cells,1 The epider-
do.52 Langerhans' cells express MHC class II antigens as well as receptors for C3b, Fc-
          eii  
tion. Antigenic peptides derived from endogenous protein synthesis (e.g., viral antigens,
transplantation antigenis, tuinor-associated antigens) are generally presented in the contcxt
of MHC class I molecules, which are expressed on the surface of essentially all nucleated
cells and recognized by CD8+ antigen-specific cytotoxic T cells. Fxogenous antigens (not
synthesized within antigen-presenting cells [e.g., extracellular bactcria, bacterial toxins,
dermatophytes, vaccines, pollens, dust mites]) are presented via CD4+ helper cells that
 a as e  s    sdd  
professiomal antigen-presenting cells (e.g., macrophages, dendritic cell, B cells).9 21. 37. 50 5. 6s
 e e  nsad  pe se   sn sn
co-stimulatory molecules, the so-called sccond signal to the lymphoid tissues (regional
lynph node), where helper T-cell lyrnphoeytes in particular are activated. MHC II mole-
cules are produced in the endoplasmic reticulum, where thcy then migrate to the Golgi
and endolysosomal compartments. The processed protein results in antigen peptides that
are incorporated into the MHC II inolecules at various points in this migration from
endoplasmic reticulum to the cell surface. At the surface, the antigenic peptide/MIIC II
complex is presented to the T-cell receptor om the surface of the T cell, resulting in
antigen-specific T-cell activation. Effective T-cell activation requires co-stimulators and
cytokines that promote clonal expansion of the antigen-specific T cell. The co-stimulator
or second signal is often supplied by the expression of the B7 family of cell surface
lipopolysaccharide, TNF-α, and iL-1B as well as other signals. Langerhans' cells produce
cytokines such as IL-1 and some lipid mediators that direct the T-cell response.
which is important in selective adhesion to keratinocytes.7 Epidermal Langerhans' cells
 s on  on  e  s  s s  s 
localize in the epidermis. Tissue injury, microbial infection, and other perturbations of
epidermal homeostasis provide a "danger” signal leading to local production of proinfarm-
matory cytokines, which in turn induce mobilization and migration of Langerhans' cells to
lymphoid tissue.
 In humans, quantitative immunohistochemical studies deinonstrated differences in
Langerhans' cells in dermatitis due to internal versus extermal antigcn sources.59 Evalua-
 tion of skin biopsy specimens revealed significantly more Langerhans' cells and spongiosis
552 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
in contact dermatitis (external antigen source)
 coinpared with drug reactions (internal
antigen source).
Lymphocytes
Lymphocytcs are all derived fron a common stem cell in the bone marrow and may be
divided into three main types: B (bursa- or bone marrow-derived) cells, T (thymus-
dependent) cels, and natural killer (NK) cells.
B cells are characterized by possessing umique surface immunoglobulins, Fc receptors,
CD79 or B-cell receptor compiex, and C3h receptors. B cells mature into plasma cells
after recognition of its specific antigen and activation, which produce the immunoglobulins
IgG, IgM, IgA, and IgE, and they are responsihle for antibody immunity.
The growth and development of B cells occurs in two phases. The first is antigen-
independent and yields B cells that express IgM and IgD. These initial antibodies consti-
tute the majority of the primary antibody response to antigens but are low affinity. The
second phase, or memory response, is a response to a specific antigen that, with T cells
second phase requires T-celf activation and is partly controlled by cytokines released by
T cells, with IL-1, IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, and IL-10 all playing roles in growth or differentia-
tion. IL-4 and IL-13 are particularly important for B cells to switch into IgE-producing
asmaellandistihadbynd
the switch to IgG4, and this precedes the switch to IgE.13 In human beings, B lympho-
cytes are rarely found in normal skin and, even in dermatologic disease, are muich less
common than T cels. Considering the relative increase in the frequency of plasma cells
in caninc compared with human cutaneous disease, however, the importance of B lym-
phocytes in the dog may be relatively greater. Humoral immunity is deseribed as provid-
ing primary defense against invading bacteria and neutralization activity against circulating
viruses.
NK cells are large granular lynphocytes that do not express antigen-specific receptors
but do have receptors that recognize the self MHC I molecule. When they encounter
nucleated cells with self MHC I molecules, these receptors inhibit killing (killer inhibitory
receptors). Many viral or tumor cells fail to express self MHC I and are killed. NK cells
T cells are formed in the thymus, express CD3 or T-cell receptor when mature, and
 sa  a o rossns e dy is o o o pp ae
two major types are differentiated by thcir activity and their T-cell receptors, which is the
part of the T cell that recognizes an antigen. Classically, T cells are considered responsible
for cell-mediated immunity, activation of memory B cells, and stimulation of NK cells.
 T cells play a central role in directing and modifying the inmune response. Functions
of T cells include (1) helping B cells make antibody and directing what type of antibody is
made (helper T ceils), (2) suppressing B-cell antibody production (supprcssor T cells),
r    ( o ,  a
(5) suppressing delayed hypersensitivity reactions mediated by other T cells, (6) regulating
macrophage function, (7) modulating the infammatory response with chermokines and
cytokines, (8) inducing graft rejection, and (9) producing graft-versus-host reactions. T-cell
lyinphokines may amplify or danpen phagocytic activity, collagen production, vascular
perineability, and coagulation phenomena. T cells can kill microorganisms and other cells,
or they can recruit effector cells to perform this function. T-cell function is known to he
canine distemper, feline leukemia virus infection, feline immunodeficiency virus infection),
cancers, and drugs.30. 51. 53 76
As T cells mature in the thymus, they develop surface receptor molecules. The
the cell., CD3 represents the T-cell receptor complex and marks all mature T cells. MHC
II-expressing T helper cells express CD4, and MHC I-restricted cytotoxic T cells ex-
 press CD8. CD28 is considered the major co-stimulator molecule required for the second
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 553
signal from the antigen-presenting cells. CD28 is thought to react with the B7 receptor on
the antigen-presenting cells. We also know that subpopulations of helper and cytotoxic
T cells exist. These subpopulations have different cytokine production profles. The initial
scparation and most studied are the Thl and Th2 subpopulations of CD4+ T cells; Th2
cells produce IL-4, IL-5, and IL-10, whereas Thl cells produce IL-2, IFN-y, and
TNF-α.9 50.54 However, we now recognize that CD8 and y-8 T cels also have type 1 and
type 2 profiles.80
 The type and diversity of T-cell receptors present on lyrmphocytes is an area of active
research and one of the most relevant markers of T-ccll populations. Terminology one
sees regarding T-cell receptors refers to the structure of the T-cell receptor, which is
usually a heterodimer consisting of two protein chains, most commonly in humans α and
β and, less commonly, y and 8. These protein chains are divided into variable, diversity,
joining, and constant regions. With polymerase chain reaction technology, T cclls in tissue
are now being studied by their variable region of the T-cell receptor complex, which
represents a small group of antigens. These antigens are most likely representing what is
initiating, or the target of, the inflammation.51
Tissue Macrophages
The cnd stage of the rnononuclear phagocyte system (MPS) is the tissue rnacrophage
which, in the derrmis, has also been considered the precursor cell to the dermal dendro-
cyte,9, 54 In blood, lymph nodes, and other tissues, there are dendritic macrophage type
     s  n po   n n o a  
derived and pass through thc blood circulation as monocytes which, in general, are
especially in inflammation. Tissue macrophages, epithelioid cells, and multinucleated histi-
ocytic giant cells are all MPs cells found in a variety of infammatory diseases. They serve
the critical function of the afferent arm of the inrnune system in processing and present-
ing antigens, especially for T-cell activation, yet are also important in the efferent arm of
the immune response.
Thc MPs also plays major roles in wound hcaling, granulopoiesis, crythropoiesis, and
antimicrobial defense (cspccially against intracellular pathogens). Monocytes and macro-
phages may secrete nurnerous enzymes, cytokines, inflammatory mediators, histamine-
releasing factors, and inhibitors when stimulated. Some mediators upgrade inflammation,
whereas others inhibit infammatory activity in order to prevent too much tissue destruc-
tion from inflammation.
Mast Cells
Mast cells are derived from hematopoietie stem cells in the bone marrow and migrate as
inmature unrecognizable celis in the blood and then localize in connective or mucosal
tissues (see Chap. 1). Once present in tissue, they proliferate and differentiate into mature
recognizable mast cells.3 The regulation of mast cell proliferation and differentiation is
the subject of much research. Cytokines from fibroblasts, stem cell growth factor, T cells,
and IL-3 are particularly inportant.
homeostasis was unknown. Mast cells combine characteristics of both innate and acquired
iminune responses: They can (l) bind certain bacteria and phagocytose/kill them,
(2) elaborate and secrete several biologically active products, and (3) serve as an antigen-
presenting cell and promote clonal expansion of CD4+ helper T cells,5, 4s,63 Their role in
disease has been recognized for many years, and the importance of mast cells in immedi-
ate hypersensitivity diseases is well docunented. Their role in other skin diseases, how-
s se r ssd   e d s  sp o s ns 
only recently been recognized.50 This relates to the diverse effects and interactions mast
cells have with other cells and structurcs of the skin (Fig. 8- 1).
 Mast cells serve as repositories for or symthcsizcrs of numcrous infammatory mediator
554 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic media.
Please refer to the printed publication.
FIGURE B-I. Schermatic representation of the documcnted interactions of hurman mast cells with other cells and
structures in skin. Factors identifed in rodent species only are not shown. (From Goldstein SM, Wintroub BV: The cellular
and molk:cular biology of the human mast ccll. In: Fitzpatrick, TB, et al, ed: Dermatology in General Medicine V. McGraw-
Hill, New York, 1993, p 365.)
substances. The mediators present vary by species studied and according to the type of
the mast cells (see later),sod Some mediators are universally present, such as histamine,
are two_main categories of mediators. Preformed mediators are produced and stored in
mast cell granules, which are modified lysosomes that develop from the Golgi apparatus
(Table 8-5).so Mast cells also produce mediators that are newly synthesized at the time of
cells have the potential to synthesize many cytokines-IL-1, IL-2, IL-3, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6,
IL-8, IL-10, IL-13, granuloeyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor, TNF-α, IFN--
and many chemokines (e.g., macrophage infammatory protein (MIP) 1-α).12, 4s Cytokine
 production may result in stored cytokines or secretion independent from mediators gener-
ated from degranulation.
There are differences in cytokine profles for the different types of mast cells, further
the mediation of immune and inflammatory responses. Classically, they are known for the
recruitment of eosinophils and neutrophils, immunoglobulins, and complement from the
circulation and the regulation of the immunologic response (see Tables 8-5 and 8-6). In
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 555
● Tahle 8-5
PREFORMED MEDIATORS OF HUMAN
MaSt CelLS
··....·..............
MEDIATOR
FUNCTION
Histamine
11, and H, receptor-mediated effects on smooth muscle, endothelial
 cells, and nerve endings
Tryptase
 Cleaves C3 and C3a; degrades VIP and CGRP kallikrein-like activity;
activates fibroblasts
Chyimases
Function unclear; cleave neuropeptides, including substance P
Aets in conccrt with other neutral proteases
Acidl hydrolases
Brcak down complex carbohycdrates
Arylsulfatase
Hlydrolyses aromatie sulfate esters
ECF-A
Eosinophil chemotaxis and "activation"
Neutrophil chernotactic factor
Neutrophil chemotaxis and "activation"
Heparin
Anticoagulant, anticomplementary; modifies activities of other preformed
ediators
Chondroitin sulfate
F'unction unknown
Cytokines (e.g., TNF-α, IL-4,
See Tahle 8-2
IL-3, IL-5, and IL-6)
addition, mast cells can (1) produce IL-12 to drive Th1 responses, (2) produce IL-4,
which is essential for the conversion of Th0 to Th2 cels, (2) produce IL-5 and IL-10 to
drive Th2 responses, and (4) activate B cells without surface contact.
 Mast cells may be divided in rodents morphologically and functionally into type I
tice tissue are misleading terms because both types of mast cells occur in mucosa and
connective tissue. A more precise differentiation of mast cells has been based on the
and are the predominant type found in the lung and smallintestinal mucosa. MCrc cells
 sss  s  u a d a are   p a s
gastrointestinal submucosa. However, because of differences in human and rodent mast
cell proteases, this classification has been largely limited to human mast cells, though dog
mast cells do have chymase and tryptase.35
Mast cell degranulation may be initiated by a variety of substances, including allergens
● Table 8-6
 PharmacologIc ActIvIties of nEwlY
Generated Mast cell MedIators
MEDIATOR
ABBREVIATION
PHARMACOLOGIC ACTIONS
 Prostaglandin D
PGD2
Bronehoconstriction; penipheral vasodilation; coronary
and pulmonary vasoconstriction; inhibition of plate-
mentation of basophil histamine release
 Prostaglandin F2
9-α, 11-β-PGFg
vasoconstriction; inhihition of platelet aggregation
Thromboxane A2
TXAg
striction
Leukotriene B4
LTB,
 Neutrophil chemotaxis, adherence and degranulation; 
angmentation of vascular permeahility
Leukotriene CA
LTC4
dr
 ity; arteriolar constriction
Leukotriene D4
LTDA
Bronchoconstriction; inerease in vascular permeability
Leukotriene E
LTE4
Weak bronchoconstriction; enhancement of bronchial
responsiveness; increase in vascular permeability
Platelet-activating factor
PAF
Platelet aggregation chemotaxis and degranulaon of
eosinophils and neutrophils; increase in vascular
permeability; bronchoconstriction; engenders hypo-
tension
 556 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
cross-linking two surface IgE (or lgGd) molecules, complement coimponents C3a and C5a,
eosinophil major basic protein, some hormones (estrogen, gastrin, somatostatin), substance
P, and a group of cytokines called histamine-releasing factors.30 50. 51 Other exogenous
compounds known to cause mast cell degranulation include anti-IgE, compound 48/80.
opiates, concanavalin A, and calcium ionophores. The different types of mast cells may be
affected differently, depending on the compound that causes degranulation. Variability in
degranulation, the mediators released, quantity, and tinc coursc may occur. Another
secretory mechanisn for histamine release has becn described.so It' has been called
picccmcal secretion and transfer to the cell surfacc by microvesicles. There is also varia-
bility in the response of different mast cells to inhibition of mast cell degranulation with
the drng crormolyn. Intestinal mast cells were most affected, whereas MC mast cells from
the lung were mildly affected, and skin MCre mast cells were not affected.63
The heterogeneity of mast cells has been demonstrated in dog skin, though it has not 
 si ym ag pu sho s jaoi o r jo sp a o ps 
The skin of atopic dogs contains at least two suhsets of mast cells that are distinguished in
the following ways: (1) histologically, by metachromatie staining properties in different
fixatives, and (2) functionally, by response to antigen in vivo (see discussion of carnine
atopy). Three mast cell subtypes are dlistinguished in normal canine skin based on their
content of the mast cell-specific proteases, chymase and tryptase: tryptase mast cells,
chymase mast cells, and tryptase/chymase mast cells.41
Intcrestingly, histamine has two types of effects on hyperseusitivity reactions, proin-
Hammatory and anti-inflammatory. The proinflamnatory effects of histainiue are Ieciated
through histamine l (H,) receptors and resultant decreases in intracellular cyclic adeno-
sine monophosphate (cAMP). Also, H, receptors mediate pruritus, and the trauma associ-
  p  p ss r o  a sd  p
tory effects of histamine (inhibition of the release of infammatory mediator substances
from mast clls, neutrophils, lymphocytes, and monocyte-macrophages) are mediated
through Hg receptors and resultant increases in cAMP. Canine and feline blood vessels
possess both H, and H, receptors.53
Endothelial Cells
The vascular endothelium is now kown to be a very active cell type that is irmportant in
various cytokines, endothelial cells express adhesion molecules (integrins, selectins, and
immunoglobulin supergene family [intercellular adhesion molecules]) on their surfaces.
Thc sclectins (E-selectin and P-selectin) are expressed on endothelial cells after certain
infammatory stimuli and act to slow down and cause rolling of leukocytes along the
vascular endothelium.
The leukocyte activation results in integrin cxpression and binding to immunoglobulin
supergene family molecules such as ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 on endothelial cells, resulting
in' adhesion. Transendothelial migration occurs after adhesion.6 Then, in response to
chemokines, the migrating lymphocytes, monocytes, and granulocytes inove toward the
site of inflammation. Without this ability to home, the circulating effector cells could not
respond to an immunologic or infammatory event. In addition, activated cndothelial cclls
can synthesize and secrete numerous substances such as cytokines (including IL-l, II-6,
and iL-8), fibronectin, collagen IV, protcoglycans, blood clotting factors, growth factors,
 and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor. Defects in endothelial cell adhesion
molecule expression 1may result in disorders that mimic immunodeficiencies owing to
defective migration of lymphocytes, monocytes, or granulocytes (sec Chap. 4).
Granulocytes
Neutrophils have, as their major roles, the function of phagocytosis and subsequent
destruction and elirmination of phagocytized material. In a sense, they are the scavengers
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 557
● Tahle 8-7
 Chemoattractants for Neutrophils
Bacterial products
Lipid chemotactic factors (e.g., IHETE) from mast cclls
C5a (derived from complement activation; tissue, vi-
Lysosomal protcases
nus, and hacterial cnzymcs clcave C5)
C3a
Collgen breakdown products
C567
Fibrin brcakdown products
Kallikrein
Plasininogen activator
Denatured protcin
Prostaglandins
Lymphokines
Leukotrienes (especially L'TB)
Monokines
Irmmune complexes
Neutrophil chemotactic factor (NCF) fron mast cells
FCF-A from mast cells
 of immunologically identified debris. They are considered most important in containing
infection. Owing, however, to their numerous chemoattractants (Table 8-7) and intracel-
lular products (Table 8-8) that may be released at sites of inflammation, neutrophils are
Neutrophil dysfunetions have been described in dogs with pyoderma and generalized
 demodicosis (see Chap. 4) but are likely secondary to thc skin disease. In addition,
primary (hereditary) neutrophil dysfunctions are described (see Chap. 4).
 Eosinophils, effector cells in hypersensitivity reactions, also participate in the down-
grading of infammation and defense of the host against extracelular parasites.9 50,5s4 They
are also phagocytic (immune complexes, mast cel granules, aggregated imrmunoglobulins,
and certain bacteria and fungi). Eosinophils have a tremendous ability to communicate
with surrounding cells by the expression of surface receptors and cytokine secretion. Over
 60 receptors for a variety of adhesion molecules, immunoglobulin Fc receptors, cytokines,
and lipid rnediators have been found on the eosinophil membrane.39 Eosinophil chemo-
taxis has been the subject of much research. Curently, a number of molecules are
considered good candidates for eosinophil chemotaxis in vivo. These include platelet-
(HETEs), and the C-C subfamily of chemokines.39 The C-C chemokines considered most
 potent and selective for eosinophil chemotaxis are eotaxin, regulated upon activation of
[u   jo a      
i     s s so   sa  d
colony-stinulating factor39 Eosinophils are noteworthy for their preformed mediators
stored within at least two types of cosinophilic granules but, like other inflammatory cells,.
they also newly synthesize leukotrienes and a variety of cytokines when activated (Table
● Table S-8  NEUTROPHIL PRODUCTS
Antimicrobial Enzymes
Hydrolases
Lysozymc:
Cathepsin B
Myeloperoxidase
Cathepsin D
Proteases
N-acetyl-B-glucosaminidase
β-glucuronidase
Collagenolytic proteinase
Collagenase
β-glycerophosphatase
Elastase
Others
Cathepsin G
Lactoferrin
Leukotrienes
Eosinophil chemotactic factor
Gelatinase:
Leukotrienes
Pyrogen
Prostaglandins
Throboxanes
Platelet-activating factor
558 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
cytotoxic degranulation occurs commonly in vivo.39
 Major basic protein (also found in basophils), eosinophil cationic protein, eosinophil.
 derived neurotoxin, and eosinophil peroxidase are potent toxic mediators and all have
been showm to he effective at killing a variety of parasites. Eosinophil proteases may
contribute to host tissue damage and wound healing because the collagenase degrades
type I and III collagen and gelatinase degrades type XVII collagen. Additionally, eosino-
phil dcgranulation results in the production of membrane-derived mediators such as
leukotrienes and PAF.
 Basophils, major effector cells in some hypersensitivity reactions, may also play a role
to mast cells in that they have high-affinity receptors for IgE and contain high levels of
histamine, but they also are the only leukocytes to share features oice thought specific for
eosinophils. Basophils contain major basic protein and the Charcot-Leyden crystals (lyso-
stored mediators and newly synthesized mediators after degramulation or activation. Baso-
phils degranulate in four distinct morphologic patterns, none of which is cytotoxic.2s
Basophils are important in host defense. This has been most conclusively shown in the
rejection of ticks. In skin diseases, basophils are particularly important in cutaneous
basophil hypersensitivity, a T cell-controlled reaction important in host responses to
  e ae sdos agass a ro us o o  ann ro
involved in late-phase reactions.1I
Humoral Components
The humoral components as described in the SIS include immunoglobulins (see Chap. 4),
complement components, fibrinolysins, cytokines, eicosanoids, neuropeptides, and antimi-
● Table S-9 SecRETorY PrOdUCTs Of EOSInOpHIlS
·.··.............
Granuie Proteins
Lipid Mediators
Major basic protein
Leukotriene B. (small amount)
Eosinophil peroxidase
Leukotriene C
Eosinophil cationic protein
Leukotriene Cs
Eosinophil-derived neurotoxic
5-HETE
β-glucwronicase
5,15- and 8,15--diHETE
Acid phosphatase
5-oxy- 15-hydroxy 6,8,11,13,-ETE
Arylsulfatase
Prostaglandins E, and E2
Cytokines"
6-Keto-prostaglandin F
IL-1
Thromboxane B,
PAF
IL-3
Enzymes
IL-4
Elastase (questionable)
IL-5
IL-6
Chareot-Leyden crystal protein
IL-8
Collagenase
92-kD Gelatinase
IL-10
IL-16
Reactive Oxygen intermediates
GM-CSF
Superoxide radical anion
RANTES
HOg
TNF-0
Hydroxy radicals
TGF-β
TGF-β1
MIP-1α
*Physiclogic significance of thesc cytokines needs to be confirmed.
HETE,hydrocyeicsatetraenoi ai;ETE,icosatetaenoic cid HETE,hydroxyeicoatetraeni acidTNF,mr ecrss
factor, TCF, transforming growth factor; MIP, macrophage inflammatory protein, PAF, platelet activating factor.
From Kita H, Gleich GJ: The eosinophil: Structure and funetion. In: Kaplan AP (ed):Allergy II.W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
1997, p. 153.
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 559
crobial peptides.9. 50 The changes observed in infammation, however, are mediated by
numerous substances derived from the plasma, from cells of the damaged tissue, and from
infltrating monocytes, macrophages, lymphocytes, and grannlocytes.
The interactions among cells, neurons, expression of cell receptors, cytokines, and
other soluble mediators determine the infarnmatory response. Some mediators augment
tors, and othcrs amplify or generate other mediators. All mediators and cells normally act
together harmoniously to maintain homeostasis and to protect the host against infectious
agents and other noxious substances. Many mediators may be preformed and stored with
the effector cels; other mediators are produced only in response to damage or appropri-
ate receptor activation. A complete summary of all infammatory mediator substances is
beyond the scope of this chapter; the interested reader is referred to the various refer-
ences.
influence immunologic and infammatory events 30 50. 54. 76 The critical step in the genera-
 tion of biological activities from the complement proteins is the cleavage of C3. There are
two pathways for the cleavage of C3. The classic pathway requires the presence of
require immunoglobulin and may be directly activated by bacteria, viruses, and some
abnormal cells. There is also a pathway to amplify C3 cleavagc, and an effector scqucnce.
The final effect of this sequence is the production of a membrane attack complex, which
causes cell lysis.
that have other effects. Thcse other components play a role in neutralization of viruses,
solubilization of immunc complexes, and interaction with receptors on other cells. Many
inffammatory cclls have receptors for degradation products of C3 and C5. These activated
receptors are important in phagocytosis, immune regulation, and mast cell and basophil
 asp  o pad a sro  sa o  
enteropathies, hepatopathies, systemic lupus erythematosus, and systemic glucocorticoid
reported in Brittany spaniels that expericnce recurrent bacterial skin and otic infections
and sepsis (see Chap. 4).
 Immune complexes are a hcterogeneous group of immunoreactants forined by the
formation, immunochcmistry, biology, and 'clearance of these reactants. Circulating im-
mune complexes influence both the afferent and efferent linbs of the inmune response
and can mediatc tissue damage in certain pathologic states. Circulating immune complexes
can be measured by a number of generally unavailable techniques, including Clq-binding,
been detected in nurmerous human dermatoses and probably play an important role in the
 pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus and vasculitis. Circulating immune com-
plexes have been demonstrated in 6% of a normal dog population, in contrast with 25% of
a population of sick dogs,53 as well as in numerous conditions such as diabetes melitus,
hypothyroidisn, arthropathies, nephropathies, neuropathies, mycotic and parasitic infec-
tions, systemic and discoid lupus erythematosus, cutancous vasculitis, generalized demodi-
cosis, and bacterial pyoderma.17, 53
  s  e     s
derived from cell membranes. Cell meinbranes contain phospholipids, one of which is
phosphatidylchroline, the parent molecule of PAF, Arachidonic acid is stored in cclls as an
ester in phospholipids and is the dominant fatty acid attached to the glycerol portion of
PAF. Though arachidonic acid is also present in other phospholipids, this is a major
source in infammatory cells. After specific receptor stimulation and after cellular injury.
phospholipases cause the degradation of phosphiolipids. Phospholipase A2 enzymes break
down phosphatidylcholine into a molecule of free arachidonic acid and one of PAF.
Phospholipase C activity also results in frec arachidonic acid, but it is the predominance
 of phospholipase A that contributes the most to the generation of infammatory mediators.
560 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
Glucocorticoids inhibit the action of phospholipases, possibly by the induction of lipocor-
tin, at pharnacologically achieved levels. This is thought to be a major anti-infammatory
mechanism of glucocorticoid therapy.1. 9, 23, 50, 54
PAF is not an eicosanoid but a phospholipid that also acts as an infamimatory
Inediator. It is produced from a variety of cells although, in humans, neutrophils and
responses to other stinuli and has its greatest effects oni eosinophils and monocytes. It is
an extremely potent eosinophil chemoattractant and stimulates their degranulation and
release of leukotrienes. A chemoattractant for mononuclear cells, PAF stimulates their
release of IL-l, IL-4, and TNF-α.
The metabolites of the oxidation of arachidonic acid are called eicosanoids and are
potent biological mediators of a variety of physiologic or pathologic responses. Though
only mast cells, leukocytcs, cndothelial cells, epithelial cells, and platelets have enough to
play amajr role in allrgic discasc.9,23 50,Free arachidonic acid is oxidized hyoe 
thrcc enzyme classes.The two most studied and important are cyclooxygenase and lipoxy
formation which, in the human epidermis, leads to thc formation of 12-HETE.55
The eicosanoids include two main typcs of molccules, the prostanoids and lcukotri-
enes, Prostanoids (prostaglandins and thrormboxanes) are derived by the metabolism of
arachidonic acid by cyclooxygenase. Two forms of cyclooxygenase are known, cyclooxygen-
ase-1 in the endoplasmic reticulum and cyclooxygenase-2 in the nuclear envelope, and
they serve different functions and are preferentially important in different tissues. Aspirin
and the nonsteroidal anti-infammatory drugs primarily funetion by blocking cyclooxygen-
olized by specific terminal enzymes that result in the formation of PGE, PGF?, PGDg,
PGl, or thromboxane A2. Different cell types have variations in which an enzyme system
is present and, therefore, which metabolites are produced. Each final metabolite has one
or more specific receptors, and new therapeutic agents such as misoprostol are being
developed as agonists or antagonists for these specific receptors.1. 5
Leukotrienes (LTA, LTB, LTC, LTD, and LTE) and their precursors -- hydroperoxy-
eicosatetraenoic acids (HPETEs) and HETEs—are derived by the metabolism of arachi-
donic acid by the three enzymes of lipoxygenation, 5-, 12-, and 15-lipoxygenase. Different
tissues express variable levels of the cytosolic lipoxygenases. The 5-lipoxygenase pathway
predominates in neutrophils, monocytes, macrophages, and mast cells, whereas the 15-
lipoxygenase pathway predominates in eosinophils and in endothelial and epithelial cells.
The 12-lipoxygenase patbway predominates in platelets. The 5-lipoxygenase pathway re-
sults in the production of LTA4 which, depending on the enzymes present in the cells, is
converted to LTB4 or LTC. LTD and LTE4 are produced from LTC4
Typically, eicosanoids have autocrine and paracrine functions that are important lo-
cally for host defense, and then they are inactivated or degraded. Abnormalities in produc-
tion or control mechanisms may occur, however, leading to local or systemic tissue
damage and disease. The actions of eicosanoids are diverse and variable according to the
species, tissue, cellular source, the presence of stereospecific receptors, and the generation
：is
further complicated by the complex interactions that occur but that are not included in
many laboratory studies, as well as by the fact that---because of their autocrine and
paracrine functions-they must be measured in the involved tissue. The effects of arachi-
donic acid formation and somc of the activities that cicosanoids may have in skin disease
are slummarized in Table 8- 10.9. 50. 54. 55
Aging and the Skin Immune System
With advancing age, the immune system of animals and humans undergoes characteristic
changes, usually resulting in decreased imrmunocornpetence, which is called immunose-
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 56|
● Table S-10 EFFECTS OF EICOSANOIDS IN SKIN DISEASE
EICOSANOID
EFFECT
LTC/D/E4
LT84
Leukocyte chemotaxis and activation; inercascd endothelial adherence of leukoeytes: stim-
12-1IETE
Stimulates smooth muscle contraction
15-HETE
Hyperalgesia; inhibits cyelooxygenasc; inhibits mixed lymphocyte reaction; stimulates sup-
pressor T cells; inhibits NK-cell activity
15-HPETE
Suppresses T-lymphocyte fiunction and Fc receptors
PGE2
Plasma exudation hyperalgesia stimulates cellprolferaion; suppresses lymphoyte and
neutrophil function
PGF,
Vasoconstriction, synergy with histamine and bradykinin on vascular permneability: stimu-
lates cell proliferation
PGD,
Smooth muscle relaxation
PCD,/PGL,
Suppression of leukocyte function; vasodilation andl increased permmeability
cepted for T lymphocytes but also claimed for B lymphoeytes, Langerhans’ cells, and
other components of the immune systcm. Some studies have shown that aging humans
and mice havc increased susceptibility to infections or malignancies as well as elevated
titers of autoantibodies, suggestive of higher susceptibility to autoimmune diseases,
· TYPES OF HYPERSENSITIVE REACTIONS
Clinical hypersensitivity disorders were divided on an imrmunopathologic basis, by Gell and
Coomhs, into four types9. 30. 2 76.
Type I: immediate (anaphylactic)
Type HI: cytotoxic
Type II1: immune complex
Type IV: cell-mediated (delayed)
Subsequently, two other types of hypersensitivity reactions have been described: late-
phase reactions and cutaneous basophil hypersensitivity. Clearly, these six reactions are
oversimplifed because of the complex interrelationships among the effector cells and the
numerous components of the infammatory response.
In most pathologic events, immunologically initiated responses almost certainly involve
multiple components of the infammatory process. In reality, many diseases may involve a
combination of reactions, and their separation into distinct pathologic mechanisms rarely
-p e  p  jo p a r  p and e
titis. Even the classic type IV reaction is not as straightforward as we uscd to think
because cvidence suggests that mast cells, eosinophils, and basophils may play a rolc.
 has provoked other investigators to modify the original scheme of Gell and Coormbs, often
to a seemingly hopeless degree of hairsplitting.s3 In this section, we briefly examine the
classic Gell and Coombs' classification of hypersensitivity disorders, because (1) it is still
somewhat applicable to discussions of cutaneous hypersensitivity diseases and (2) it is still
the i
immunopathologic scheme used by most authors and by major immunologic and
dermatologic texts.
Type I (anaphylactic, immediate) hypersensitivity reactions are classically described as
degranulation. A genetically programmed person absorbing a complete antigen (c.g., rag-
weed pollen) responds by producing a unique antibody (reagin, IgE). IgF is homocyto-
tropic and avidly binds membrane receptors on tissue mast cels and blcod basophils.
562 · Skin Immune System and Allergie Skin Diseases
When the eliciting antigen contacts the specific reaginic antibody, a number of infamma-
tory mediator substances are released and cause tissuc damage. This reaction occurs
terms such as reuginic antibody. homocytotropic antibody, or skin-sensitizing antibody are
I a  oe  ii o ss  ir  s s 
tivity reactions in dogs and cats are urticaria, angioedema, anaphylaxis, atopy, food hyper-
sensitivity, fea bitc hypersensitivity, and some drug eruptions.
Late-phase immediate hypersensitivity reactions have been recognized and stud-
ied.9. 30. 50. 54. 73 The onset of these mast cell-dependent reactions occurs 4 to 8 hours after
challenge (neutrophils, eosinophils, and basophils found histologically). They persist up to
initial reaction is histologically characterized by an infiltrate of neutrophils and eosinophils.
which changes to a predominance of mononuclear cells. These late-phase reactions can be
reproduced with intraderinal injections of leukotrienes, kallikrein, or PAF. Although late-
phase reactions to the intradermal injection of allergens have been recorded in dogs,7? the
clinical imaportance of such reactions remains to be defined in dogs and cats. These
reactions, however, are suspected to play a role in fea bite hypersensitivity and canine
atopy.
antibody (IgG or IgM), with or without cormplement, to complete antigens on body
tissues. This binding of antibody, with or without complement, results in cytotoxicity or
cytolysis. Examples of typc II hypcrsensitivity reactions in dogs and cats are pemphigus,
pemphigoid, cryoglobulinemia, and some drug eruptions.
Type IHl (irnmune complex) hypersensitioity reactions are characterized by the deposi-
tion of circulating antigen-antibody complexes (in slight antigen excess) in blood vessel
wals. These immune complexes (usually containing IgG or IgM) then fx complement,
which attracts neutrophils. Proteolytic and hydrolytic enzymes released from the infiltrat-
s e s a I a  ns d sdu 
release may be important in the initiation of immune complex deposition. Examples of
type IlI hypcrsensitivity reactions in dogs and cats are systemic lupus erythematosus,
leukocytoclastic vasculitis, some drug eruptions, and bacterial hypersensitivity.
Type IV (cell-mediated, delayed) hypersensitivity reactions classically do not involve
antibody-mediated injury. An antigen (classically, an incomplete antigen called a hapten)
Langerhans' cell. The antigen-presenting cell usually internalizes the antigen and digests
it, then presents a peptide fragment bound to MHC class II immune response autigens
on the cell surface. The processed antigen is then presented to T cells, leading to the
production of “"sensitized" T lymphocytes. These sensitized T lyrnphocytes respond to
further antigenic challenge by releasing lymphokines that produce tissue damage.
In
mouse models, there is evidence that the development of type IV hypersensitivity may
involve mast cells and in some situations, small amounts of gE50It has bcen suggestd
that the term cell-mediated is an unfortunate misnomer for this type of immunologic
reaction, which is no more or less cell mediated than antibody-dependent reactions, which
themselves are ultimately due to the participation of a lymphocyte or plasma cell.s3 Classic
 ro a s p sop i s sa a  po sa
Hea bite hypersensitivity, and some drug eruptions.
Cutaneous basophil hypersensitivity rmay be mediated by T cells or homocytotropic
antibody (IgE or IgG). It is characterized by a marked basophil infltratc and fibrin
deposition. These reactions occur about 12 hours after intradermal allergen injections and
may peak in intensity from 24 to 72 hours.9 50.54 Cutaneous basophil hypersensivity is
considered important in the development of immunity to ticks and in the pathogenesis of
flea bite hypersensitivity.30
Type I, type I1, and type Ill hypersensitivity reactions together form the “iininediate
hypersensitivity reactions. They are all antibody-mediated; thus, there is only a short delay
(from minutes to a few hours) before their tissue-damaging effects become apparcnt.
    s  ,     
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 563
mediated, and it classicaly requires 24 to 72 hours before becoming detectable. This
concept has also been further reevaluated so that type II, type IV, cutaneous basophil
hypersensitivity, and late-phase reactions are all regarded as having delayed-in-time mani-
festations varying from 4 to 48 hours.50
● theraPY For HYPerSenSITIVItY dISorDerS
Treatment Plans
combination of therapeutic agents for optimal control of symptoms. When possible, the
 optimal treatment of all allergies is avoidance of the offending allergen(s). If this is not
possible, most treatments are directed at blocking the effects of the allergic reaction.
and, possibly, with some immunomodulatory drugs. When avoidance or immunotherapy is
ineffective, partially cffcctive, or when clients decline it, other medical options are re-
quired. Often the optimal control requires different therapeutic protocols over the life of
the amimal. Therefore, a treatment plan is required that takes the different problems,
goals of the clients, and types of therapeutic agents into consideration. In general, these 
 are aimed at treating the byproducts of the allergic reaction that has already occurred.
The majority of therapeutic protocols are used to help alleviate pruritus, the major
symptom of most allergic diseases, to treat specific problems or secondary infections, to
avoid or decrease exposure to offending allergens, and to decrease infammation. These
therapeutic protocols may be specific for a problem or etiology or nonspecific. The most
commonly recommended therapeutic protocols are listed in Table 8- 1l. Thcse treatment.
options vary in their ease of administration, risks, effcacy, expense, and monitoring
required. In many cases, combinations of treatments may be used and an overall plan to
control those aspects of the problem considered most bothersome by the client is the
most effective way to manage these cases long term.
Avoidance
 Avoidance requires the identification of allergens contributing to the hypersensitivity. The
 offending allergens may be determined by historoclinical findings, provocation testing, and
allergy testing. Avoidance frequently is effective for hypersensitivities such as fea bite
hypersensitivity, ectoparasite hypersensitivity, and food hypersensitivity but is often inef-
fective in atopic discase. However, even if the offending allergens cannot be completely
avoided, it is helpful to eliminate exposure as much as possible. Some methods of
avoidance for atopic disease will be covered in that discussion.
Topical Therapy
Topical therapy is often incorporated into treatment plans and is discussed in more dctail
 in Chapter 3. The major disadvantages are the time and effort needed for administration.
● Table 8-- 11
 THERAPEU'TIC REGIMENS
NONSPECIFIC THERAPY
SPECIFIC THERAPY
Soothing topical baths, rinses
Antibiotics
Moisturizers
Ketoconazole
Topical glucocorticoids
Scabicide
Fatty acids
 Flea control
Nonsteroidal anti-infammatory agents
Hyposensitization
Antihistamincs
Hypoallergenic diet
Antidepressants
Immunosuppressive therapy
Systemic glucocorticoids
564 · Skin Inmune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
Expense may also be an important factor. Total body bathing and/or rinses are required
for regional or generalized pruritus and often reduce pruritus by removing surface dehris,
microbial byproducts, and allergens that may contribute to the pruritic load. Hydrocorti-
 sone (1%) shampoo is not significantly absorbed and may help treat allergic reactions.156
Topical glucocorticoids are most effective, but arc gcnerally limited to localized hypersen-
sitivity reactions. A 0.01% fuocinolone shampoo was applied to allergie dogstwice
weekly for 6 months - with no adverse effects.sa Topical therapy unfortunately is often
overlooked and not presented as an option to clients. Appropriately administered topical
therapy can greatly reduce the nced for systemic treatment in many patients.
Fatty Acids
A largc number of studies have shown that fatty acids are beneficial in the manageinent of
studies, the pruritus was due to hypersensitivity reactions, most commonly atopic disease.
Fatty acids and their role in normal skin and coat is diseussed in Chapter 3. Because
and ratios should be used in most allergic dogs and cats.
The proposed nechanisin, besides the inhibition of arachidonic acid metabolism,
relates to metabolic byproducts of fatty acid metabolism. Suppleinents used for pruritus
GLA is found in relatively high concentrations in evening primrose, borage, and black
currant oils. It is elongated to dihoimo(D)GLA, which directly competes with arachidonic
acid as a substrate for cyclooxygenase and 15-lipoxygenase. The result of DGLA metabo-
lism is the forrmation of prostaglandin E, and 15-hydroxy-8,11,13-eicosapentaenoic acid,
both of which are thought to have anti-infammatory effects.12 An increase in various
immune response parameters was reported in older dogs that were fed a diet rich in
Omega-6/omega-3 fatty acids at a ratio of 5 : 1.3s
EPA, which is usually supplied by using cold water marine fish oils, also competes as
a substrate for cyclooxygenase and 5- and 15-lipoxygenase. The metabolism of EPA by the
lipoxygenase enzymes results in the formation of LTBs and 15-hydroxyeicosapentaenoic
acid. These two products are thought to inhibit LTB4, which is a potent proinflammatory
mediator. This mechanism was reviewed by White,12 and Figure' 3-2 demonstrates the
interactions of GLA, EPA, and arachidonic acid.
 The usc of fatty acids for atopic disease and chronic pruritus has been extensively
studied. The beneficial effect has been documented in multiple double-blind or placebo-
have been published. In five separate clinical trials in North America, DVM Derm Caps
were effectivein11% to27%of thallegi ogs eted24 126136.414In catsmga
and omega-3 fatty acid-containing products have been effective in more than 50% of
(dose, omega-6:omega-3 ratio, animal's diet), with 10% to 80% of atopic animals realizing
varying degrees of clinical improvement. The henefit is maximized if other contributing
Malassezia dermatitis are controlled. Overall, it is probably safe to inforin clients that
about 20% of the dogs, and about 50% of the cats, with allergic pruritus experience
improvement. There is also evidence that higher doses of GLA and EPA enhance the
results.These doses maybe 4 to 10 times themanufacturer's recommendations-95.116.
137 140. 1l Another factor that is irnportant is the type of diet the animal is receiving. Dogs
receiving lower-fat diets may respond better to the supplements.137
Although the benefits of these products are clear, which fatty acid, which conbination
of fatty acids, what ratio of omega-6 to omega-3, and what dose of thesc agents are most
effective remain inconclusive. Several studies compared different types of supplements. In
onc study cvaluating four different supplements, no one product was effective in all cases,
and response could not be predicted.l46 Failure to respond to one product does not
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 565
preclude a favorable response to another product. This study suggested that a single dose
and type or blend of fatty acids that would be effective in all patients does not exist.
Therefore, multiple trials may be best. In the dog, various doses (up to three times the
manufacturer's recommendation) of only omega-6 fatty acids have not been effective in
Whereas twice the manufacturer's dose of an omega-6 and omega-3 fatty acid -containing
product was no more effective than the recommended dose,14 other studics rcported that
2 to 10 times the recommended dose may be necessary to control allergic pruritus in
dogs.83-95
 Another area that still needs investigation is the importance or effect of combining
the fatty acids with other elements, such as vitamins and minerals (so-called “cofactors").
Some manufacturers and authors!18 have claimed that the right combination of cofactors
maximizes the beneficial effects of the fatty acids. No controled studies to deterimine this,
fatty acid product containing cofactors was no more effective than products that did not
contain cofactors.146 Three different fatty acid products were coinpared in atopic dogs in
one study and no significant differences were noted, though the products differed some-
controlled studies are needed. How long one should try a produet has also not been
definitively determined. Although some dogs and cats show a favorable response within 1
to 2 weeks, an adequate therapeutic trial might necessitate 9 to 12 weeks.*
Aithough fatty acids may be solely effective for controlling pruritus and infammation
in some animals, their roles in synergistic therapy should be considered. Littc has been
be tried in combination with other antipruritic agents for managing allergic pruritus.27 A
synergistic effect with glucocorticoids was also described.96,122,147, 148
The risks and side effects of fatty acid supplementation are few. The most serious,
although rarely reported, side effect is pancreatitis,27 This has not been reported with the
diets that have incorporated omega-6 and omega-3 fatty acids to appropriate ratios. With
large doses, an increase in wcight or diarrhea may occur. With supplements containing
fish oil, some clients havc reported an unpleasant odor or increased eructation ("fish
breath").
 A beneficial role of fatty acids has been documented, and they play an important role
 in managing pruritic dogs and cats. Because of their low potential for risk and their good
warranted. Their exact rolc, indications, and optimal use still need to bc clucidated. In
addition, the practitioner is presented with numerous different formulations and products
from which to choose. Untif more studies are performed, it is best to use diets with the
about effectiveness and indications.
 In addition to fatty acid supplementation, controlling the fatty acids in the diet may
be beneficial. This has becn confirmed in a study that used evening primrosc oil at four
times the recommended dose (150 mg/kg/day).io7 Ten atopic dogs were stabilized on a
divided into two groups that had their diets switched to either Science Diet w/d (Hills) or
 a leading cornmercial dry dog food. The dogs consuming w/d continued to inprove while
the dogs consuming thie dry dog foods worsened. Altering the fatty acid ratios and
 e aa iu ar aq aeu sns hsn nou e si d u s
expensive method of assessing the efficacy of these agents. Studies showed that an omega-
"See refercnccs 94, 95, 108, 111, 122, 124, 128, 136, 140, 143, 146
566 · Skin Immunc System and Allergic Skin Diseases
6:omega-3 ratio of 5-10:1 was the optimum ratio to result in less proinfammatory
formulate a line of diets that have been evaluated and found to be beneficial in up to 44%
 of pruritic dogs.142. 151
 In one study,151 commercial dog foods were found to vary so greatly in both their
 rodod ay suoe e sioe eg g-euo pue g-eso jo onn pue Aub
infiamrmatory quantity and ratio of these fatty acids with commercial supplermcnts would
be impossible (specific details of quantities and ratios not listed for the majority of diets)
if onc rcally wants to know whether a dog will respond to omega-6/omega-3 fatty acids,
the only "sure” way is to feed a commercial diet that has known henefcial quantities and
R aan ae spne Aey asea (dy eqnuna aou pue quen eqnang ia) sone
synergistic or additive effect with other treatments, they are often recommended as part
of a treatment plan.
 Fatty acid supplements have also bcen reported to be effective in the management of
feline atopy. Although fewer studies have been reported in cats than in dogs, current
inforination would indicate that 50% to 75% of treated cats have a good responsc to
may be due to the omega-3 fatty acids because a double-blinded, placebo-controlled study
with evening primrose oil (omcga-6, GLA) showed no beneficial effect after 12 weeks of
therapy. In adition, it has ben reported that cats also heneft from the synergistic
effects of combining fatty acids (DVM Derm Caps Liruicd) with either chlorpheniramine
gistic effects achievable, and the safety of these products, any cat that will readily ingest a
liquid fatty acid supplement in its daily diet should initialy be treated with it. If the
supplcment alone fails to control the pruritus adequately, antihistamines or glucocorticoids 
can be added.
 Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents
 Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents arc classically used to decreasc pain and inflamma-
tion but have shown little bcnefit for pruritus or atopic diseasc. A nunber of nonsteroidal
drugs have been used to treat canine atopy. Little or no work has been done to document
the effect of some of these, including orgotein (metaloprotein, nonsteroidal anti-infam-
matory), phenothiazine tranquilizers, barbiturates, and levamisole.53. 58 Studies of nonste-
roidal antipruritic agents in dogs with hypersensitivity skin disease indicated that aspirin
(25 1ng/kg orally g8h), vitamin E (400 1U orally q12h), zinc methionine (Zinpro, I tablet/
9.1 kg orally q24h), vitamin C (25 mg/kg orall q12h), papaverine (150 to 300 mg/dog
q12h), doxycycline (3 mg/kg ql2h), and the combination of tetracycline and niacinamide
are rarely effective.53 s 1a, 14s So far, lipoxygenase inhibitors have not been shown
effcacious in canine atopy, though they are in human asthma.lo3 It was reported that
oxatomide—a mast cell stabilizer-- was effective at 15 to 30 mg every 12 hours for
controlling pruritus in allergic cats.s50. 153
 Some recently evaluated nonsteroidal agents include pentoxifylline and misoprostol.
 Pentoxifylline (Trental) has a variety of effects, and the benefits may result from different
mechanisms, depending on the disease being treated (see Chap. 3). It has been used for
S o n so         as
disease, the response to pentoxifylline is not dramatic, but the drug does appear to have
some benefit in a percentage of cases and may work best in combination with other
treatments and as a steroid-sparing drug. A double-blind, placebo-controlled study in
atopic dogs did show efficacy, though the condition of none of the dogs was completely
controlled239 It was effective in dogs with contact hypersensitivity at 10 mg/kg q12h, buit
dose after a favorable response were not made. Ten mg/kg q8h should be an effective
dose and may possibly be fowered to ql2h.97
Misoprostol acts as a PGE, analog. PGE inhibits production of IL-l and TNF-α in
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 567
some models of infammation and inhibits production of LTB, by activated neutrophils. Of
particular interest in allergic disease are its effects on decrcasing histamine release,
inhibiting eosinophil chemotaxis and survival, and inhibition of cutancous late-phase aller-
gic reactions.87, 134 Because late-phase allergic reactions may be involved in the pathogene-
available in 100-ug and 200-μg tablcts. It has been used primarily to treat gastrie ulcers
a rog pn uado ue ui pasn sem iI zg'suooqe oonpu on shoaid uogeuquoo ug pue
treatrment of canine atopic disease,2 In this study of 18 dogs treated with misoprostol at
6 μg/kg q8h, over 50% had grcater than 50% reduction of pretreatment pruritus and
  e  aq p s sn s u o u  r os 
in only one dog was the lesion scorc rcduccd by more than 75%. The drug is sensitive to
water and oxygen and should not be compounded with water or broken open in advance
of use. The greatest risks with misoprostol are for inducing abortions (it should not be
used in pregnant animals) and for causing diarrhea. In humans, life-threatening diarrhca
was caused in patients with inflammatory bowel disease treated with misoprostol. In dogs.
 33% experienced side effects, most commonly vomiting and diarrhea, but they were mild
enough that the drug was not discontinued.
Antihistamines
Histamine is a potent chemical rnediator that has yariable actions, depending on what
receptors and tissues are stinulated. The effects of histamine can be blocked in three
ways: by physiologic antagonists, such as epinephrine; by agents that reduce histamine
formation or release from mast cells and basophils; and by histamine receptor antagonists.
We used to think that most antihistamines worked by this latter effect. Now we have
learned that most of the older first-generation antihistamines also fuinction by preventing
mediator release from mast cells and basophils.104 In veterinary dermatology, the primary
indication for antihistarnine therapy is the treatment of pruritus mediated by stimulation
First-gencration (classic, or traditional) antihistamines are H, blockers. Ilowever, not
all the effects of histamine are antagonized by H, blockers. Because antihistamines are
metabolized by the liver, they should be used with caution in paticnts with hepatic
disease. In addition, their anticholinergic properties contraindicate their use in patients
with glaucoma, gastrointestinal atony, and urinary retentive states. Some antihistamines are
teratogenic in various laboratory animals. No information on teratogenicity is available for
dogs and cats; however, this issue should be considered before treating pregnant bitches
and queens. Finally, the eficacy of antihistamines is notoriously unpredictable and individ-
ualized in a given patient. Part of this variation may be dose-related because antiallcrgic
effects are concentration dependent and soime dose ranges are antiallergie whereas others
doses before finding the one that is beneficial for a given patient.
Antihistamines block the physiologic cffects of histamine. At least three dlifferent types
of histamine receptors have been recognized. The role of Hg receptors is just being
uncovered, and they are primarily located in the central nervous system, where they affect
a variety of nerve terminals and may affect neurotransmitter release,l04 Their role
ein
 dermatology has yet to be determined. The H-receptor antagonists are used in small
animal dermatology. This is because H receptors are primarily responsible for pruritus.
increased vascular permeability, rclease of inflammatory mediators, and recruitment of
inflarmmatory cells.1s
 In addition to their histainine-blocking action, somc of thcsc agents have sedative,
antinausea, anticholinergic, antiserotoninergic, and local ancsthetic effects. As mentioned
previously, most block mediator release if present prior to allergen challenge and if at the
appropriate concentration. Most of the second-generation, or nonsedating, antihistamines
block mediator release to some degrcc.15s However, the effects may differ with the
 mast cells, basophils, or eosinophils). Variable results may also depend on the method
568 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
used to induce cellular responses, such as immunoglobulin E (IgE)-induced release or
nonantibody inducers, though most also decrease the response to nonimmunologic stim-
uli.104, 15Cetrizine, a second-generation antihistamine, is particularly effective iblocking
the allergen-induced late-phase cutaneous reaction and in decreasing the influx of eosino-
phils in response to allergens.9)
A number of open uncontrolled or open controlled comparative studics have been
pheniramine (0.4 mg/kg q8h), diphenhydramine (2 mg/kg q8h), and hydroxyzine (2 mg/
kg q8h), may each be effective in up to 10% of the dogs with allergic pruritus. A doubie-
blind, placebo-controlled study in 30 dogs revealed that thc placebo was totally ineffective,
whereas clemastine fumarate (Tavist) at 0.05 mg/kg ql2h was effective in 30% of the
cases.13s Two other open clinical trials confirmed the effectiveness of clemastine in
dogs.129 136 Trimeprazine tartrate (Temaril) at 0.12 mg/kg ql2h was effective in only 3%
ql2h and terfenadine (Seldane) at'5 mg/kg ql2h were ineffective in double-blind, pla-
cebo-controlled studies.145. 149 Terfenadine overdose in the dog was associated with vomit-
 ing, agitation, weakness, ataxia, and premature ventricular contractions but did respond to
supportivecare.133
Antihistamines may also be used to act synergistically with, or reduce required doses
uf, glucocorticoids.135. 147 14s In one study, the addition of trimeprazine to ongoing, alter-
nate-day prednisone regimens in allergic dogs allowed an average 30% reduction in the
prednisone dosage in 75% of patients.13s Antihistamines can also be used synergisti-
cally with other nonsteroidal anti-infammatory agents that work by different mechan-
isms31314,4 15Iennica triaogs thatresnded tetherc
pheniramine nor a fatty acid -containing supplement (DvM Derm Caps) when these were
  s o as    s r se p
proximately 30% of the dogs responded well. This synergistic effect has also been docu-
 r n (sd  a) s pn n r  o sp od jo
tion of both.l36 Response to the combination was good in 10% of the dogs that did not
respond to the individual agents.
 Second-generation (nonsedating) antihistamines are also H, blockers but, because they
doses, they exert much less sedative action and anticholinergic effects than do first-
generation antihistamines. For some reason, second-generation antihistamines have not
been useful in dogs to date. Terfenadine (Seldane) at 5 mg/kg q12h,135 astemizole (His-
manal) at 0.25 mg/kg q24h,135s and loratadine (Claritin) at 10 mg/kg q24h153 were all
ineffective in placebo-controlled studies in dogs with allergic pruritus. Terfenadine and
astermizole have been pulled from the United States market because of severe interactions
with some other drugs. In addition to not having any greater eficacy in dogs and cats,
second-generation antihistamines are aiso more expensive, aud some authors do not think
these agents are worth using.113
Adverse effects vary in incidence and severity with individual patients and individual
mines. Trembling, increased pruritus, and panting have also been reported. Excitation may
occur in rare cases. Doxepin and chlorpheniramine appear to cause a higher incidence of
side effects. Drowsiness may lessen or resolve with continued therapy. For other side
effects, and when drowsiness persists, the drug should be discontinued. Once the side
effects have resolved, resuming therapy at a lower dose may still effectively control the
pruritus without causing the side effects. Overdosage of hydroxyzine has been reported to
cause ataxia, hyperesthesia, tremors, and hypersalivation.91 Cardiovascular adverse effects
(tachycardia, arrhythmias, hypertension) are very rare and usually seen only with overdos-
ing. Although the adverse effects of antihistamines in dogs and cats are varied and
numerous, they are rarely severe enough to necessitate stopping treatment.
H,-receptor blockers appear to have little use in allergic diseases. In a study of 15
dogs with allergic skin disease, cimetidine alone was helpful in only one dog. and no dog
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 569
responded better to the combination of H, (cimetidinc) and H, (diphenhydrarminc) block-
ers than to the H, blocker alone.123
cats are relatively sensitive to these drugs, and antihistamines other than those described n
this discussion should be used with caution. There seem to be more side effects in cats
than dogs, and care in their use has been recommended. However, two reports have
described using multipie types of antihistamines in cats. One author reported using
multiple antihistamines in cats and indicated that problems were encountered with only
cyproheptadine and hydroxyzine.s One study demonstrated an excellent response to chlor-
reported favorable, though not as good, results with chlorpheniramine; therefore, it is
 considered thc antihistamine of choice in the atopic cat. Cyproheptadine was evaluated in
as pd ang (y) e ur snd suu u aa sm pe seo oe o
effects in 8 cats.152
Side effects with cyproheptadine included polyphagia, sedation, vomiting, and yocali-
zation. Results of an open clinical trial indicated that clemastinc (0.1 mg/kg ql2h) was
effective in 50% of cats with allergie pruritus.29 Similar to dogs, synergistic effects may
            n
neither chlorpheniramine nor DVM Derm Caps liquid, when these were administered
individually, responded well when the two drugs were used in combination.1so Because of
the effects on eosinophils, cetirizine has been considered as a potential antihistamine to
try in cats, but no published reports are available as to efficacy.
There is rmarked individual variation in different antihistamines when used to treat
dogs or cats with chronic pruritus or allergic diseases. To maximize the percentage of dogs
and cats that will respond to antihistamines, multiple different drugs should be evaluated.
Antihistamine trials are often run consecutively, evaluating each drug for at least 2 weeks.
Which antihistamines are evaluated in any given pct is a factor of efficacy, cost, and
are those with relatively high (A) and moderate (B) eficacy as indicatcd in Table 8- 12.
Antidepressants
A variety of the psychotropic drugs have been used to treat some hypersensitivity disor-
ders, especiall if stress or a psychogenic component may be present. This category of
 drugs is discussed in detail in Chapter 15. The drugs that have been evaluated the most
are the heterocyclic (tricyclic) antidepressants (amitriptyline, doxepin) and fuoxetine, an-
other antidepressant that is structurally different from the heterocychic antidepressants but
that has a similar mechanism of action. Amitriptyline hydrochloride (generic or Elavil) at
1 mg/kg ql2h was effective in 16% of the allergic dogs treated.127 Another small pilot
study with the serotonin uptake inhibitor fuoxetine hydrochloride (Prozac) at l mg/kg
q24h showed it to be effective in 30% of dogs with allergic pruritus.154 Doxepin was
reported to be ineffective in one placebo-controlled study,135 though in anecdotal reports
it may be effective at 2 mg/kg qi2h. Amitriptyline has also been used in the cat with a
wide variation of success reported.s9. 121. 153 Some have indicated that amitriptyline is
associated with many side effects in cats, particularly when given twice daily. Amitripty-
● Table 8-12
 Antihistamines For DoGs anD Cats
ANTIHISTAMINE
DOG
CAT
Clermastine
A—0.05 to 0.1 mg/kg q12h
yz1b eur 190-
Chlorpheniramine
A—0.4 mg/kg q8h
A—2 mg/cal ql2h
Cyproheptadine
A—2 mg/cat q12h
Diphenhydramine
 B.-2.2 mng/kg q8h
Hydroxyzine
A—2.2 mg/kg q8h
B—10 mg/cat q12h
A, Generally effcctive: B, May be effective.
570 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
line was evaluated at 10 mg/cat q24h for recurrent idiopathic cystitis in 15 cats.1oi Two of
the 15 cats experienced sornnolence that resolved when the dose was decreased to 5 mg/
cat q24h. Nine cats stayed on the drug 12 months: 7 of these had increased body weight
and 8 had decreased coat quality due to decreased grooming. but serum biochemistry and
hematologic abnormalities were not observed.
 In general, the potentially more serious side effects of these drugs are induction of
and anticholinergic effects including dry mouth, urine retention, and reduced tear produc-
tion. They also lower the seizure threshold and enhance monainine oxidase inhibitor (e.g.
amitraz) toxicity. in addition to having the metabolic effects and side effects that are
inherent with frst-generation antihistamines. Up to 30% of animals treated with these
agents may show vomiting, darrhea, lthargy, hyperexcitability, polydipsia, aggresson,
side cffcts in dogs.12 Electrocardiographic abnormalties were not detected in dogs
treated with amitriptyline or clomipramine.139
Systemic Glucocorticoids
Hypersensitivity diseases typically respond well to systemic glucocorticoids, and this is the
treatment of choice for acute hypersensitivity diseases. It is also the treatment for many
recurrent but short-duration (under 4 months/year) disorders. It is only indicated in the
treatment of long-term, perennial hypersensitivity diseases when safer options arc not
effective or practical. If long-terrn therapy is required, short-acting oral glucocorticoids
human patients with atopic dermatitis cases are resistant to glucocorticoids because of
altered receptor binding.102
Glucocorticoids are the mainstay of therapy in cats with allergic discases when avoid-
ance is not possible.147 The most common reason they are not used is that owners are
concerned about the risks of glucocorticoids (inappropriately extrapolated from experi-
ences in humans or dogs) and the occasional objectionable side effects. Other contraindi-
cations to their use in thc cat are concurrent infections (viral, bacterial, fungal), diabetes
mellitus, pancreatitis, rcnal failure and, perhaps, pregnancy.147
Thc simplest glucocorticoid treatment is with repositol methylprednisolone acetate
(Depo-Medrol, Pharmacia & Upjohn) given subcutaneously or intramuscularly at 20 mg/
cat or 5mg/kg.53 121,147 Itmay be given as necded,but not more frequently than every $
weeks, and preferably every 12 wccks. Altemativcly, or if methylprednisolone acetate
is
ineffective, triamcinolone acetonide (Vetalog), 5 mg/cat q8- 12wk as needed, may be used.
In cases that do not respond adequately or in which injectable glucocorticoids produce
adverse side effects, or when clients prefer, oral glucocorticoids may be used (see Chap.
3). Most commonly, prednisone or prednisolone (2.2 mg/kg q24h) is given until the
se ous unan kp-ere ne a pamoy (sp or on ) ussi ui s sune
prefer oral prednisolone and use injectable glucocorticoids only as a last resort or in cats
that will not take oral medications.s9 These authors have seen diabetes mellitus occur
following one glucocorticoid injection. One of us (D.W.S.) uses injectable methylpredniso-
lone acctatc as his frst choice glucocorticoid for the cat and has never seen diabetes
mellitus after a single injection. Some cats will not take pills well, and liquid glucocorti-
coids such as dexamethasone, 0.25 mg/cat q12h then tapered to q72h, has been recom-
mended.121 We have used dexamethasone at 0.2 mg/kg q24h, then tapered, with good
effect even in cats that do not respond to prednisone or prednisolone. In cats that are
particularly difficult to pill, injectable dexamethasone or triamcinolone may be added to
buttcr, chcese, or chicken/fish broth and given orally.
Cyclosporine
Cyclosporine (Sandimmune or Neoral, Novartis) is used for a widc variety of dermatologic
diseases in humans, including atopic dermatitis.106, 14 There have also been anecdotal
reports of efficacy for atopic dermatitis in dogs. The drug is discussed in more detail in
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Discases · 571
 p an  oe jo  e e pisans q su h 'h p g sia
atopic dermatitis involves the inhibition of mast cell degranulation by affecting the interac-
tion between mast cells and nerves.105, 157
Cyclosporine given orally has bocn shown effective in a mumber of humans with
atopic dermatitis.s8. 16o It has been less effective when used topically, though a similar
acting topical drug, FK506 in ointment form (Tacrolimus), appears to have sone efficacy.
The oral dosage being tried for atopic dogs is 5 to 10 mg/kg daily. After a response is
seen, tapering to as low as 10 mg/kg, q48h may bc cffective. Because this is an expensive
 drug, the reduction to the lowest effective levels is usually important. Additionally, the
expense and marginal effcacy usually limit its use to cases of treatment failure with, 0r
adverse reaction to, standard treatment protocols. Though the usc of cyclosporine has not
been described for cats with allergic disease, it should be considered. Side offects in cats
occur at highcr doscs (10-20 mg/kg/day). Lower doses for atopy (5 mg/kg/day) may be
tolerated better and be Iess expensive.
 Required doses of cyclosporine are greatly reduced by the sitnultaneous administra-
tion of ketoconazole in dogs and cats (see Chap. 3).120a
Other Specific Therapies
Chronic allergic diseases, even in acute phases, predispose to sccondary infcctions with
Malassezia or bacteria, most often Staphylococcus internedius (see Chaps. 4 and 5).
When present, whether as infection or just overgrowth, they may contribute significantly
to the pruritus and infainmation. It is important to recognize and treat specifically for
these problerms; otherwise, therapies directed at the underlying hypersensitivity or pruritus
will be much less effective. Parasitic diseases, besides causing a hypersensitivity reaction
themselves, may aggravate other allergies by allergic or nonallergic mechanisms (see Chap.
6). These also must be identifed and controlled for optimal success with antiallergy
treatment protocols.
● HYPERSENSITIVITY DISORDERS
Urticaria and Angioedema
 Urticaria (hives) and angioedema are variably pruritic, edematous skin disorders that are
immunologic or nonimrmunologic. They are uncommon in the dog and extremely rarc in
the cat. In fact, we have seen only onc confirmed case of angioedema in the cat that was
not associated with snake bites or vasculitis.
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Urticaria and angioedema result from mast cell or basophil degranulation, though the mast
cell is considered the major effector cell. They may result froin many stimuli, both
sify urticaria and angioedema include physical forces (pressure, sunlight, heat, cold, exer-
cise), psychological stresses, genetic abnormalities, and various drugs and chemicals (aspi-
rin, narcotics, foods, food additives). A case of chronic urticaria and eosinophilic dermatitis
was reported in a dog and attributed to diethylcarbamazine drug reaction.1ss Chronic
idiopathice urticaria in humans may be associated with autoantibodies to the high-affinity
IgE receptor (Fc epsilon RI α).167 Humans with chronic urticaria were more likely to have
exposure to dogs and cats and have positive titers to Toxocara canis.169 The rclationship is
supported by a favorable response of many of these patients to parasiticidal therapy.
 pans are seo pue shop u rapaoie pue rn pasnno aary on panodai soioeg
Table 8- 13.53, 61. 163-166
572 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
● Table 8-13
 Factors reported to Have caused
URTICARIA AND ANGIOEDEMA IN
DOGS AND CATS
.·....·........................
Foods
Drugs (peniciln, ampicillin, tetracyeline, vitamin K, propylthiouracil, amitraz, ivermectin, moxidectin, radiocon-
trast agents, HyLyt*cfa shampoo)
Antisera,bacterins, and vaccines (panleukopenia, leptospirosis, distemper-hepatitis, rahies, feline leukenia)
Stinging aud biting insects (bee, homet, mosquito, hlack Hy, spider, ant)
Hairs from processionary caterpillar
Allergenic extracts
Blood transfusions
Plants (nettle, butlercup)
Infections (staphylkxrxcal pyoderma, canine distemper)
Sumlight*
Excessive heat or colda
Estrus°
Dermatographism
Atopy"
Psychogenic factors
Vasculitis, food allergy-induced
*Reported in dogs omuly.
CLiNICAL FEATURES
No age, breed, or sex predilections have been reported for urticaria and angioedema in
dogs and cats. Clinical signs may be acute (most common) or chronic. In humans, acute
urticaria and angioedema are empirically defined as episodes lasting less than 6 weeks,
whereas chronic episodes last longer. Urticarial reactions are characterized by localized or
generalized wheals, which may or may not be pruritic and usually do not exhibit serum
Jeakage or hemorhage (Figs. 8-2 and 8-3A). Characteristically, the wheals are evanes-
cent lesions, with each lesion persisting less than 24 hours. Urticarial lesions occasionally
are erythematous or assume bizare patterns (serpiginous, linear, arciform, annular, papu-
lar) and coalesce to cover large areas as plaques (see Fig. 8-3B). Hair may appear raised
a s na pe d aa ou a r a  'ss a 's
or hemorrhage (Fig. 8-4).
DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis for urticaria includes folliculitis, vasculitis, erythema multiforme,
lymphoreticular neoplasia, and mast cell tumor. Staphylococcal folliculitis often manifests
as slightly raised tufts of hair (tufted papules) and is the most common cause of rmisdiag-
FIGURE 8-2. Numerois wheals
in a dog with urticaria that oc-
curred following clipping, marking
with ink, and giving intradernal in-
 jections of allergens.
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 573
FIGURE 8-3. A, Lrticaria in
groin following ainitraz dip. B, Urti-
caria with coalescing lesions forming
poyg pue Adope pis Sop e ur sanhed
hypersensitivity, Urticaral "attacks"
were associated with ingesting aller-
genice fooxds.
FIGURE 8-4. Angioedema dur:
to phenamicdine administration. Note
swollen lips and eyelids. (Courtesy
of D. N. Carlotti.)
574 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
nosed “urticaria" jn dogs with short haircoats. Juvenile cellulitis, infectious cellulitis, mast
cell tumor, and lymphoreticular neoplasia are the most common considerations in the
differential diagnosis of angioedema. Definitive diagnosis is based on history, physical
examination, and pursuit of the etiologic factors listed in Table 8-13. A specifc
or
tentative etiologic diagnosis can usually be made in acute cases, but chronic urticaria and
angioedema are extremely frustrating diagnostic challenges, with 75% to 80% of such
diet trial should be performed.
Histopathology
 Skin biopsy shows a variable, nondiagnostic pattern, from simple vascular dilatatiou and
edema in the superficial and middle dermis to pure superficial perivascular to interstitial
dermatitis with varying numbers of mononuclear cells, neutrophils, mast cells, and eosino-
phils (uncommon)2s. k3. 84 Leukocytoclastic vasculitis is rare. Eosinophilic vasculitis has 
been observed in multiple cases that have involved food-induced urticaria.163 Direct im-
 munofluorescence testing of urticarial lesions in humans usually yields negative results but
Occasionally reveals inmunoglobulin, complement, or both in blood vessel walls (especially
when the histologic reaction is vasculitis).
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The prognosis for urticarial reactions is favorable because general health is not usually
affected. The prognosis for angioedema varies with severity and location. Angioedematous
reactions involving the nasal passages, pharynx, and larynx may be fatal.
 Therapy consists of (l) elimination and avoidance of known etiologic factors and
(2) treatment of symptoms with epinephrine (epinephrine 1 : 1000 at 0.1 to 0.5 ml subcu-
taneously or intramuscularly), glucocorticoids (prednisolone or prednisone at 2 mg/kg,
given orally, intramuscularly, or intravenously), or both. Antihistamines have not been
adequately evaluated for effcacy in treating chronic urticaria. Thcy are ineffective for the
treatment of acute reactions but may be useful for the prevention of future reactions or in
the management of chronie cases. Some cases of chronic urticaria in dogs respond well to
antihistamine therapy, altiough several agents may have to he tried to find thc one that
works best for a given patient. Pentoxifyline (10 mg/kg q8-12h) has been hclpful if
vasculitis is present.
Canine Atopic Disease
dogs in which the patient becomes sensitized to environmental antigens that in nonatopic
animals create no disease.5s. 61, 67. 27 Additionally, atopy_ has been defined as a reaginic
antibody-mediated disease.29 Though allergen-specific igE has been classically associated
with the disease, more components of the immune system appear to be important. Some
evidence supports the importance of allergen-specic IgG5 20s,264, 310-312 The role of
Langerhans' cells, T cells, and eosinophils, as well as changes in the inflammatory milieu
Cess.176 216, 234 256-259、 267
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Strong breed predilections, familial involvement, and limited breeding trials have dermon-
strated that canine atopy is genetically programmed.° A pilot study failed to demonstrate
any clear-cut relationship between any single dog leukocyte-antigen type and canine atopy.
*Sce references 30, 61, 67a, 201-203, 277, 281, 306, 314.
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 575
but the combination of haplotypes DL-A3 and Rl5 was found significantly more often in
atopic dogs.304a The heritability of the development of high-IgE response to antigen
induction is that immunization with the offending allergen had to occur shortly after birth
in human patients with atopic dermatis as compared with mast cells from patients with
allergic asthma or rhinitis.238
In adition to genetics, other factors are important in the development of clinical
atopy. One study has shown an association between the month of birth and the incidence
of canine atopy.so3 Dogs studied that were born during the onset of pollen seasons more
commonly experienced atopy than control dogs. This finding suggested that dogs may be
particularly susceptible to primary sensitization during the first 4 months of life, which was
supported by the work with the high-IgE beagle model.314 Birth during nonpollen seasons
would tend to disfavor the development of sensitization, whereas birth during pollen
seasons would tend to increase the incidence of sensitization. These two features also
 suggest that what a dog becomes sensitized to may relate to what allrgens are in high
levels at this time.
 Parasitic diseases may augment the production of IgE to other environmental aller-
gens.29 This observation has also been supported in studies in cats.430 Viral infections, or at
least vaccination with modified live viral vaccines, have been showm to augment produc-
dogs, most of these dogs do not experience clinical signs while housed in a laboratory
environment (O.L. Frick, personal communication, 1991). Thirty percent of the high-IgE
responder Beagles spontaneously develop IgE to house dust mites, whereas all the colony
dogs,bothhigh-andlow-IgEresponders,develop house dust mitespecificIgG314These
findings document that natural exposure to house dust mites was present in all animals
and, therefore, the development of house dust mite-speciic IgE is related to other
factors. Even when high-IgE responders with dermatitis were bred to each other, derma-
titis only developed in some of the offspring.314
When Beagles are fed the offending allergen, IgE is not induced, but IgG is.204 The
present at the microscopic level in asymptomatic rhinitis patients.s4 We have seen many
cases in which, when secondary infections are controlled, the owners considered their
dogs asymptomatic until educated about signs of pruritus and asked to observe more
closely. This may explain some of the dogs that have allergen-specific IgE but not
significant clinical disease. At least in humans, the armount of allergen exposure and size of
allergen may also contribute to the development of atopy as wllas the type of symptoms
manifested.291
 The increase in environmental pollutants and indoor allergens has been postulated as
another reason for the increase in incidence and development of atopic dermatitis in
humans.17, 212, 275 Considering all these studies, it is interesting to consider the potential
impact of the following situations. Migrating ascarid larvae and intestinal worm infestations
are more common in young dogs with developing immune systems, which is also when
most dogs go through the most rigorous vaccination time in their lifc. Both factors
Canine atopy has been classified as a type I hypersensitivity reaction. Genetically
predisposed dogs absorb percutaneously, inhale, and possibly ingest various allergens that
provoke allrgen-specific igE or IgG production. Canine IgE is (l) not precipitated in the
presence of antigen, (2) inactivated at 56°C, (3) not complement fixing, (4) antigenically
similar to human IgE, and (5) capable of passively transferring atopic sensitivities to
576 · Skin Immune System and Alergic Skin Diseases
espouse the primary importance of allergen-specific IgE, though total IgE level is not
elevated."
The lack of elevated serum total IgE levels in atopic dogs is because nornal dogs
and thc relatively minute levels of allergen-specific IgE—though enough to create
disease—are not enough to change total IgE levels. Serum IgE levels are lower in
laboratory dogs that live in confined environments with limited exposures and strict
t's oe  pa q ou  sl lo a ms  i
However, numerous studies show that allergen-specifie IgE is associated with atopic
disease,204. 216, 236, 314, 322 Canine IgE also binds to epidermal Langerhans' cells in lesional
atopic skin.256. 257
These findings are compeling evidennce for the pathogenic role played by allergen-
specilic IgE in canine atopic dlisease. However, the absolute requirement for IgE
is
questioned because of several observations in human or canine atopics: (I) atopy has been
    ( e    m
be detected in many atopic dogs and normal dogs experimentally sensitized to aller-
gcns1 60 l,and 3abnormallyincreased serumIglevelsenerallydonot ctat
consistently during exacerbations, remissions, or treatment.23. 50, 292 However, alergen-
specific IgE may decrease in response to hyposensitization.
 It has also been stated that allergen-specific IgG (IgGd subclass) is key.5s Willeimse
anaphylaxis (PCA) and P-K testing, in the IgGd subclass. Unfortunately, determining that 
the results becaime negative after IgG absorption, which would have proven that the
rcaginic antibody was an IgG, was not done. There also is controversy regarding the role
and specificity of IgGd.34, 268. 376 Another study showed that positive intradermal skin test
reactions and detectable IgE and IgGd to Dermatophagoides farinae, D. pteronyssinus.
and house dust antigen occurred with similar frequency in normal and atopic dogs236
However, allergen-specific IgGd was found in normal dogs in greater amounts than
allergen-specific IgE. In addition, a high percentage of atopic dogs had detectable IgGd to
various antigens despite negative intradermal skin test reactions. Allergen-specifie IgG also
increased in dogs undergoing byposensitization.2s Allergen-specific IgE had a higher
specificity and predictive value than allergen-specifie IgGd, and the authors concluded that
allergen-specific IgE was a more useful test in canine atopic disease.236
The subelass profle of allergen-specific IgG antibodies was studied in atopic dogs.99
The IgG response to house dust mites was dorninated by IgG4 antibodies, and the
of igG subclass restriction in the humoral response of atopic dogs, which may be depen-
dent on the nature of the allergen.
 The advent of in vitro tests that measure serum allergen-specific IgE levels has
offered another tool to assess IgE produetion. In a number of studies, these tests have
shown that normal dogs also produce allergen-specific IgE and that the titers do not
correlate with clinical disease.ai7 These observations in dogs, and other work in humans,
have shown that heterogeneity of IgE exists, and perhaps only one or some select types
IgE would exist: IgE- and IgE+. Individuals with serum and tissue-bound IgE- would
have minimal or no skin disease, whereas those with IgE+ would have atopic skin disease.
A number of studies in dogs and cats have supported this concept of IgE heterogeneity.
and this offers an explanation for the variation in serun IgE results in atopic and normal
dogs and the frequent lack of correlation between scrologic and skin test results.215. 216. 236.
2014Another possibilty is that the sensitivity toIgEand the ability of target cell to
degranulate may constitute the underlying abnormality in atopic disease.
Thc classic description of the pathogenesis of atopy is that IgE (or IgGd) ixes to
*See references 29, 30, 58, 61, 67a, 200, 222, 254, 376.
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 577
tissue mast cells, especially in the skin, the primary target organ of canine atopy. When
mast cell-fixed IgE reacts with its specifie allergen or allergens, inast cell degranulation
and release or production of 1nany pharmacologically active compounds ensues. This
occurs after intradermal injection of allergen and is the basis of positive reactions. The
mast cell dcnsity with the pattern of the typical clinical lesions. There are relatively more
mast cells on the pinnae and ventral interdigital skin of the paws than any other
(wheal) induced by intradermal allergen presentation does not mimic the clinical dis-
ease.67a In contrast, the recognition that late-phase reactions to intradernal injections or
patch test reactions produce lesions that clinically, histologically, and immmunophenotypi-
cally resemhle the spontaneous disease in humans and dogs has lcd to newcr theories
regarding the pathogenesis of atopic dermatitis (see later).
In humans and dogs, it has been shown that IgE fixes to epidermal Langerhans'
receptors on Langerhans' cells, and aeroallergen-specific IgE enhances the antigen-
and increased Langerhans’ cells have been found in lesional atopic skin. Even clinically
normal atopie skin has increased numbers of Langerhans' cells.15. 256. 257, 267 Dermal in-
    si d    ' ose s n s
Similar to what is found in atopic hurmans, there is also an increase in the endothelial
    sp     u iq  y sa 
of T cells in lesional skin of atopic dogs, with an increase in the CD4/CD8 T cells ratio,
   oe  s  a so  d o jo s  n
skin from atopic dogs has relatively more CD8+ cells and y, 8 T cells (type 1) than
 h sn pre siop o ui sisod ris e pue aas sidoe jo uo
likely that atopic dermatitis is caused by a combination of immediate and late-phase
contact rcactions to aeroallergens.236-259
 In humans, the genetic abnormality in atopic dermatitis appears to be an immunologic
skin dysfunction that has been induced by bone marrow transplantation.197 Abnormalities
molecules, (2) an inerease in T cells that are predominantly T helper cells, (3) hyperstimu-
latory epidermal Langerhans" _cells and increased dermal Langerhans' cells, (4) B-cell
overproduction of IgE, (5) IgE on Langerhans' cells, and (6) Langerhans' cells with IgE
that may be able to stimulate T cells locally.*
 In the atopic patient, this ability could lead to an exaggerated T-lymphocyte re-
sponse. Special stains of skin samples from humans with atopic dermatitis have revealed
that lesional skin contains increased numbers of activated helper T cells of the subclass
Th2245, 246 These helper T cells may preferentially induce IgE-producing B cels by
themselves, thus resulting in the production of IL-4, IL-5, and IL-10.9. 54. 245. 246 These
interleukins stinulate mast cell and eosinophil activation and proliferation. Though eosino-
phils are often not detected in routine lesional skin from human atopic dermatitis patients.
they do play a role in the infamrmation. This assessment is based on the presence of
cosinophils had been present) and the finding of eosinophils in early lesions at atopy patch
test sites.9.50.54. 229
The T-cell subclass is not a constant finding, and recent work has shown that, in
chronic lesions, there is more of a mixture. Thus, early lesions are doininated by Th2
cells, but a switch to both Thl and Th2 occurs in chronic skin lesions. This has also been
              
transcripts) are more prevalent in atopic dog skin, but a Thl cytokine profle (IFN-y) was
*See referenves 9, 50, 54, 178, 182, 197, 239, 245, 246.
578 * Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
found primarily in chronic skin lesions.259 It is obvious that the pathogenesis is rmuch more
complex than genetically prograrnmed alterations in IgE production.
Immediate intradermal test reactions do not mimic the clinical lesions in the atopic
 dog and, in many cases, they are not pruritic, suggesting that intradermally deposited
antigen does not reproduce the natural disease.67 In humans, similar changes to naturally
occurring lesions can be induced at allergen patch test (the so-called “atopy patch test")
sites in patients with atopic dermatitis, but not in norrmal patients or patients with rhinitis
resuts are positive, the changes induced by the patch tests mimic the clinical lesion, the
microscopic findings, and the cellular phenotype that occurs in the natural disease. In
addition, the time course of lesion development shows initial infltration with IL-4-
 containing T cell, eosinophils, and later IFN-y-containing T cells, similar to the natural
disease in human atopics.28, 23,297
These findings are in contrast with the late-phase reactions following intradermal
injection of allergen, with resultant mast cell degranulation and subsequent neutrophilic
infiltrates, These and other observations have led to the conclusion that the mast cell plays
Apis on po aq e si isn red adoe au ie pue s oidoe u or i e
atopic disease.245 Additionally, these observations strongly support the role of percutaneous
absorption and the pathogenesis after helper T-cell and eosinophil activation. Only one
patch test study has been published in dogs.29 Six of 10normal dogs experienced positive
intradermal skin test reactions to house dust mites, and 1 of 6 “positive" dogs experienced
reaction to antigens they were positive to with intradermal testing. These findings were
lesions in canine atopy occuring in contact areas would support the importance of
percutaneuspenetrationof aergen27.Therefore,the percutaneus absorptiof
antigen may better explain the clinical disease, and future studies in dogs may yield a new
understanding of the pathogenesis of canine atopy.
In atopic humans, the water-retaining capacity of even clinically normal skin is signif-
that the skin of atopic humans is inherently functionally abnormal.23 In dogs, preliminary
studies have indicated that the baseline hydration of nonlesional atopic skin is the same as
that in the skin of normal dogs.19a
might go as follows:
 Percutaneously absorbed allergens (allrgen penetration probably enhanced by inher-
ent defect of epidermal barrier function) encounter allergen-specific IgE on Langerhans?
cells, whereupon the allergens are trapped, processed, and presented to allergen-specific T
lymphocytes. There is a subsequent preferential expansion of allergen-specific Th2 cells,
which produce IL-3, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-10, and IL-13. The imbalance in allergen-
specific Th2 cells (with a resultant increase in IL-4-stinulated production of allergen-
specific IgE) and allergen-specific Thl cels (with a resultant decrease in INF- inhibition
of allergen-specific IgE production) culminates in enhanced production of allergen-specific
cxpression with lower levels of IL-13 and increased IFN-y.176. 259 297
Though percutaneous absorption of allergen is the most likely route of allergen
exposure, the ability of inhaled allergens to induce skin disease should not be overlooked.
In both dogs and humans, inhalation of allergen has been shown to cause exacerbation of
An older theory focused on β-adrenergic blockade as the underlying abnormality of
ddseusoe
role in the pathogenesis. Szentivanyi proposed the β-adrenergic theory of atopic disease in
 o  o g   o a  q s    
cyclic nucleotides.9, 50 54, 61, 67a In brief, the cyclic nucleotides cyclic adenosine monophos-
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases * 579
phate (cAMP) and cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) appear to serve as the
intracellular effectors of a variety of cellular events. They are viewed as exerting opposing
infuences in a number of systeins.
A number of pharmacologic agents are known to act via various cell receptors to
infuence intracelular levels of cAMP and cGMP. In general, substances that elevate
mine, and other mediator substances) or reduce intracellular cGMP levels (anticholinergic
drugs) tend to stabilize the cells (lynphocytes, monocyte-macrophages, neutrophils, mast
cells) and inhibit the release of various infammatory mediators. On the other hand,
suhstances that reduce cAMP levels (α-adrenergic drugs) or elevate cGMP levels (cholin-
release of inflammatory mediators. Further stucdies in the area of cyclic nucleotides and
biological regulation may produce sigmifcant advances in the areas of disease pathome-
chanism and control of immunologie infammation.
 Studies in a Basenji-Greyhound model of atopy have revealed the following findings:
(1) airway hypersensitivity to methacholine, citric acid, and leukotrienes, (2) elevated blood
histarmine and leukotriene levels after antigen challenge, (3) blunted cAMP response to
β-adrenergic agents, (4) adenyate cyclase activities and β-adrenergic rcceptor numbers
and affinities similar to those in normal dogs, and (5) elevated levcls of phosphodiester-
due to increased phosphodiestcrase activity rather than to defects in the β-adrenergic
receptor-adenylate cyclase system.
hecause of the existence of a normal suppressive or “damping” mechanism that exists
- eed Aue p pnn spoe gl jo Au a  on as
sponse. If any one of a number of possible perturbations (respiratory viral infections,
endoparasites, hormonal fuctuations) disturbs this damping mechanism so as to diminish
threshold is lowered, the individual becomes exposed to sufficient levels of allergen,
sensitization resulting in allergic breakthrough occurs. This may explain why some atopic
dogs experience a temporary worsening of their disease after their annual vaccinations.
It has been suggested that atopic dogs have a A-6 desaturase deficiency and metabo-
lize fats differently thannonatopic dogs9 16 In addition, atopic dogs have lower levels of
plasma triglycerides than normal dogs after being fed corn oil, suggesting impaired fat
has been proposed.151 Atopic dogs were fed an omega-3/omega-6 fatty acid-containing
diet to control their pruritus. Nonresponders had a smaller increase in plasma fatty acids,
suggesting an even more pronounced abnormality in fat absorption/metabolism/clearance.
Both responders and nonresponders appeared' to have a A-5 desaturase deficiency,
whereas nonresponders also appeared to have a A-6 desaturase deficiency. The proposed
A-5 desaturasc deficiency was also recognized by others.286 It was also reported that the
metabolism of omega-3 faty acids was differentially regulated among brecds of dogs.3s All
- oi sp oe jo ssusi a a uexa d po suio as j
 3/ormega-6 fatty acid supplementation.
Atopic dogs are known to be prone to secondary bacterial pyoderma and Malassezia
infections. A variety of abnormalities present in atopic dogs may explain these infections.
Atopic dog corneocytes have greater adherence for S. interrnedius ,242 and the numbers of 
S. intermedlius are increased on the skin of synptormatic atopic dogs.241 However, the
numbers of S. intermedius and cormeocyte adhesion appear to be normal in atopic dogs
whose condition is in remission with glucocorticoids.20 Intradermal injection of histamine
causes increased percutaneous penetration of staphylococcal antigens in normal dogs.
suggesting that the inflamed skin of atopic dogs would also be more accessible to staphy-
lococcal antigens and, perhaps, staphylococcal pyoderma.240 Cell-mediated immunity is
depressed.251
A similar situation occurs in human patients with atopic dermatitis. It has been shown
580 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
that, in dogs, many of these abnormalities are the result of the allergic reaction and not a
intradermal testing with Malassezia antigens, and fares of their dermatitis may respond to
antiyeast therapy.274 A similar phenomenon is likely to occur in atopic dogs and the
presence of an immunologic response has been demonstrated by intradermal testing and
serum levels of Malassezia-specific IgE than nonatopic dogs or dogs with Malassezia
dermatis without atopic disease, and the level was not related to numbers of organisms
to those in normal dogs (see Chap. 5).
Superantigens are a group of bacterial and viral proteins that are characterized by the
capaity to stimulate large nunbers of T cels2s7 They bind dlirectly to MHC class II
molecules on antigen-presenting cels and cross-link the antigen-presenting ceil with
T cells expressing certain receptors, leading to polyclonal T-cell activation. When staphylo-
coccal superantigens are applied to intact human skin, dermatitis is produced. Further-
more, in the presence of superantigens, keratinocytes potently activate T-cells. Thus,
superantigens play a role in the induction and exacerbation of infammatory skin disease.
to
allergens, IFN-y production is decreased, leading to a predominance of Th2-like
cytokines, Bactcrial toxins bridge Th2 cells and B cells, inducing B-cell activation. Bacte-
rial toxins also uprcgulate B7.2 expression on B cells and enhance IgE synthesis. IgE
binds to CD23, ailowing nonspecific B cells to becomc potent antigen-presenting cells via
the co-stimulatory moleculc, B7.2. As a result, Th2-like cells may expand and induce more
B cells to switch to IgE production, with subscqucnt ovcrproduction of IL-4 and allergenl-
specifie IgE. Staphylococcal superantigen-induced inflammation may explain the antibiotic-
is pe ou a  shon e u sd pe uu u r pa
of infection.
 The average serum histamine concentration in atopic dogs was reported to bc cqual
to that of normal dogs (15.3 ± 7.75 ng/ml)253 or lower (1.46 ng/ml) than that of norrmal
dogs to nasal aerosols of antigens that had given positive results on intraderrmal skin
testing was 0.98 ng/ml (before antigenic exposure) to 2.70 ng/ml (10 to 20 minutes after
exposure),273 Nasal exposure to antigens that did not give positive reactions on intradermal
skin testing resulted in average values of 0.76 ng/ml prior to exposure and 1.48 ng/ml post
in normal dogs but did not correlate with plasma histamine concentrations.253
Some studies showed inereased mast cell “releasibility” of histaminc in atopic
not release any more histamine after incubation with atopic serum and anti-lgE than
than in norrmal dogs.2ola Cutaneous mast cell density, as estimated by toluidine blue
staining, was identical in atopic and normal dogs.305 Cutaneous mast cel density, as
atopic than normal dogs.u5
Leukocyte (basophil) histamine release was found to be significantly greater in atopic
    s     s ae m
It was concluded that leukocyte releasibility is a disorder of imrunoregulation intrinsic to
the atopic state and unrelated to the concentration of serum or tissue IgE.
- si s jo as a z se'shop ido u mi aq  s vin 
known, though the lowering of local immune responses or an increase in antigen absorp-
tion and presentation could potentially result. In one study, serum IgA levels were the
 re uis m so yi us pe sp ru pe odoe u as
atopics.247a
 Canine atopy may be best described as a multifactorial disease in which genetically
 predisposed dogs exhibit a combination of cutaneous IgE-mediated immediate and late-
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 58I
phase reactions to environmental antigens. Inmunologic abnormalities, antigenic stimuli,
 altered physiologic and pharmacologic reactions, and genetic predisposition all play a role
in the pathogenesis.
CLINICAL FEATURES
Atopy is universally recognized and, in areas with feas, is the second most common
hypersensitivity skin disorder of dogs, probably affecting around 10% of the canine popu-
most estimates are likely low when one considers that many atopic dogs are never
presented to the veterinarian because they have mild symptoms or because they present
for only intermittent otitis externa, which is usually not attributed to atopic disease.194, 248
Certain breeds are known to have a predilection for canine atopy, including Boxers,
Chihuahuas, Gordon setters, Yorkshire terriers, Chinese Shar peis, Cairm terriers, West
dor retrievers, Cocker spaniels, Miniature schnauzers, Belgian Tervurens, Shiba inus, and
Beaucerons.* Canine atopy is reportedly more common in females than in males, though
some studies show no sex predilections.
 The age of onset of clinical signs in atopic dogs varies from 4 months to 7 years, with
about 70% of the dogs first rmanifesting clinical signs between 1 and 3 years of age. An
exception to this general rule would he the Akita, Chow Chow, Golden retriever, and
Shar Pei breed, wherein the signs of atopymay begin as early as 2months of age67a 3
This may partly reflect the environment (allergen load) that the puppies are raised in and
experience atopy, especially if they have changed environments.os Clinical signs may
initially be seasonal or nonseasonal, depending on the allergens involved. About 80% of all
atopic dogs eventually have nonseasonal clinical signs.27, 58, 6l, 67a, 282 About 80% of the
atopic dogs initially manifest clinical signs in the period from spring to fall, and about 20%
begin in winter.61 678,19, 232
The initial lesion is pruritus in areas with either no visible lesion, slightly erythema-
tous macules, or more diffuse erythema (Fig. 8-5A and B). An exception to the rule is
the atopic English bulldog, which often presents with erythema, edema, and other second-
ary skin lesions but little or no history of pruritus. Though somewhat controversial, the
presence of a primary papular rash should suggest another or coexistent disease. The
exception is very small papules, best observed with a magnifying lens that may be present
in areas of erythroderina or erythematous macules. The skin lesions in atopic dogs are
usually those associated with self-trauma, secondary bacterial pyoderma, secondary Malas-
sezia dermattis, and secondary seborrheic skin disease.27, 34, 61. 67a,282
 The self-trauma, chronic infammation, and secondary bacterial pyoderma or Malasse-
zia dermatitis may result in complete or partial alopecia, salivary staining, papules, pus-
D). In general, the presence of lichenified, crusty, or greasy plaques is associated with
secondary bacterial pyoderma or Malassezia dermatitis (see Fig. 8-5E). Pruritus usually
involves the face (see Fig. 8-5A and C), paws (see Fig. &-5B and D), distal extremities,
anterior elbows (see Fig. 8-5F), and ventrum, or some combination thereof (see Figure
8-5G).
r- i o u as ro d a  pss s as
dogs was more a ventral contact pattern and that the patterm of all skin disease overall
had no absolute association with the diagnosis of fea bite hypersensitivity or atopy from
pollens orhouse ustmites.10This study also reported dorsallumbar involvement in 39%
of the atopic dogs. Generalized cutaneous involvement may eventually be present in about
40% of these dogs.67a 277. 402 Atopic otitis exterma (see Fig. 8-5H) and conjunctivitis may
"See references 187, 192, 201, 255, 282, 283, 306, 359a.
FIGURE 8-5. See legend on opposte page
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Discases * 583
be present in about 40% to 80% of these dogs.* Secondary bacterial pyoderma (folliculitis,
furunculosis), pyotraumatic dermatitis, or acral lick dermatiis may be present in as many
a zx sz9 2z'sp ode Jo %71  soo 1s pa +'shop oide po %g se
inspection, however, reveals that most atopic dogs have mild scaling in most pruritic areas.
The haircoat is often dryer in these areas as well, though in some dog breeds (especially
German shepherd, Chinese Shar Pei, Lhasa apso, Shih tzu) it may be greasy.27 Hyperhi.
drosis may be present in 10% to 20% of atopic dogs.61,67a. 22
Seborrheic skin disease, hyperhidrosis, secondary bacterial infections, and secondary
Malassezia infections may complicate canine atopy, and there is a predisposition for atopic
dogs to have an increased number of Malassezia organisms on their skin.3o7 This is
utes to the objectionable odor of atopic dogs and more commonly involves the ears, paws,
claw folds, and ventral neck (Fig. 8-6). Brown staining of the claws at the claw fold is
exacerbating the atopic disease and pruritus directly, even without obvious yeast over-
furunculosis. Antibiofic therapy resolves the skin lesions and the pruritus. Whether these
atopic dogs are truly nonpruritic and asymptomatic without their infections, or whether
their owners tolerate or ignore low levels of licking, chewing. and scratching (perhaps
believing them to be normal for their dogs), is unclear. In any case, these dogs are skin
test-positive, and successful hyposensitization or anti-inflammatory drug therapy prevents
recurrence of the bacterial skin discasc.
Noncutaneous clinical signs rcported to occur occasionally in atopic dogs include
rhinitis, asthma, cataracts, urinary and gastrointestinal disorders, and hormonal hypersensi-
tivity.27, 58, 67a, 282 We have also secn cases with reverse sneezing that resolves with a
cycles, low conception rates, and high incidence of pseudopregnancy 61,67a It has not been
determined what proportion of the secondary infections, seborrhea, and noncutaneous
 signs are induced or infuenced by previous therapies used.
DIAGNOSIS
 The differential diagnosis is lengthy, considering the wide variation of presenting signs and
 pododermatitis, pruritic otitis externa, pruritic ventral dernatitis, pruritic generalized der-
matitis, seborrhea, recurrent superficial bacterial pyoderma, and Malassezia dermatitis.
The rore common considerations in the differential diagnosis, however, are (l) fea bite
 () s  () s ()   ( a
tact dermatitis (primary irritant or hypcrsensitivity), (6) intestinal parasite hypersensitivity,
(7) bacterial foliculitis, and (8) Malassezia dermatitis. In dogs under 12 months of age,
   s   a 
the major possibilities to pursue. In our experience, and that of most of the veterinary
literature, fea bite hypersensitivity only rarely causes facial dermatitis, conjunctivitis, or
"See references 7, 61, 67a, 192, 248, 277, 282, 402.
'Scc rcferences 27, 34, 61, 67a, 277, 282, 283.
FIGURE 8-5. Canine atopy. A, Mild erythroderma of the muzzle, an early lesion of atopic disease in a commonly
affected site. B, Erythematous macules, and mild digital alopecia interdigitally. C, Periocular alopecia and hyperpigmenta-
or Malassezia dermatitis is usually present in these ventral thoracic and abdominal lichenifed lesions. F, Licking of the
anterior elbows is a common site of pruritus in atopic dogs. G, Classic presentation of face, axillae, and paws. H, Pinnal
erythema with secondary accumulations of excessive cerumen.
584 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
FIGURE 8-6. Ventral neck lesions with Malassezia der-
matitis in an atopic dog.
 q    ( s a s s  a i t s
sitivity.0. 6i, 67, 186 Therefore, when these other cutaneous reaction patterms arc present in
a flea-hypersensitive dog, atopy may also be present and is most rapidly rulcd out by
intradcrmal skin testing. In addition, atopic dogs may have concurrent food hypersensitiv.
ity,61, 67a, 186, 517,518
The diagnosis is based on history, physical examination, ruling out other possible
tests are never a substitute for a meticulously gathered history, a thorough physical
examination, and a careful and complete elimination of other diagnoses and concurrent
problems. Owing to the generally low specificity of commercial in vitro tests, they should
rare in atopic dogs unless the dogs have concurrent ectoparasitisms, insect hypersensitivi-
ties, or endoparasitisms. 61. 67a
A tentative diagnosis of canine atopy can be based on history, clinical signs, and
laboratory tests to rule out other possibilities. A defnitive diagnosis of atopy and revela-
tion of the allergens involved rmay be made with intradermal (skin) testing and, to some
   o  s isn  a ss  s o  
the scratch, prick, and in vitro allergy tests.ss 61, 67a Because of the very common occur-
rence of “false-positive” (cliniecally insignificant) reactions obtained, in vitro allergy testing
should not be used alone to dliagnose atopy, but it may be helphil in determining which
alergens to include in a hyposensitization formula.
Intradermal Allergy Testing
A limited number of studies havc been conducted to document optimal intradermal
testing procedures. Unfortunately, different commercial allergen sources were sometimes
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Discases * 585
used, making comparisons impossible, and the studies have not directly compared differ
ent commercial sources of allergens. Whichever company is used should be consulted for
information regarding their testing concentrations. Multiple studies have been conducted
Evenwit th sameallrgen smrcesmeresultshavediffered3062602t islkely
sure to significant allergcn levels that may induce positive but clinically insignificant rc-
  sd jo sq uy uso u aq pns si su a s ia ese
t  jo aa   s  ss ou  
Preferably the allergen companies should have results of independent studies because
differences may occur. Studies with aqueous allergens made by Greer Laboratories havc
shown that, for rmost allergens, 0.05 ml of l000 protein nitrogen units (PNU) per ml is
not reactive in most normal dogs and cats. Exceptions are mold mix 2, which probably
should not be uscd, and housc dust. When house dust antigen was used at a strength of
greater than or equal to 250 PNU/ml, approximately 50% of atopic and normal dogs
at 125PNU/ml or less.House dust mite is currently prefered bymany authors4s61 6a
House dust is a heterogenous mixture of animal and human danders, molds, house dust
mites, insect debris, bacteria, food particles, breakdown produets of clothing, and inor-
ganic substances, and each lot can vary in its antigenicity and irritahility 390. 391
House dust mites arc thought to be the major allergenic component. House dust has
 paus pns u ess pue sp zsu pue s o srea o pasn u
the reactivities of house dust and house dust mite allergens in atopic dogs were very
 ad ns e sa    as os s rn
between reactions to house dust mite and Hea antigen but not bctwccn housc dust and
kapok or rmixed feathers. Other allergens that have given controversial results are cattle
hair, wool, feathers, tobacco, and cat dander as causes of false-positive (irritant) skin test
reactions.27. 58 61. 67* Catle hair, wool, feathers, and mold mixes should he used at 250
to 500 PNU/ml. In general, the recommended aqueous test allergen concentration is
1000 PNU/ml or 1 : 1000 weight/volume (w/v).
● Allergen Selection. Skin test allergen selection is an important subjcct, Consulta-
tions with allergen firns and national pollen charts reviewing prevalence of pollens in the
practice area help the clinician decide what to test for. A good veterinary reference is the
book by Reedy and colleagues, Allergic Skin Diseases of Dogs and Cats, 2nd edition. It is
switch because expericnce with one source becomes important. Tremendous unresolvcd
problerns surround the standardization of allergenic extracts, including standards for raw
material collection, methods of measuring the purity of raw materials, techniques for
identifying many substances, a variety of methods of manufacturing, and determination of
allergenstability andotency27300561.67a Bioactivity ofcommercial productsvaries
from 10-fold to 1000-fold, and no relationship was found between bioactivity and concen-
trations declared in PNU or w/v.58. 61. 67a
result in false-negative reactions bccause individual allergens within the mix may be in a
concentration too dilute for detection. More important, the patient may be allergic to only
one of the allergens within the mix, making hyposcnsitization based on the mix result less
specific. In fact, one inost likely ends up hyposensitizing with allergens that the pet is not
allergic to and, potentially, inducing new allergies. One report, however, has indicatcd that
treating normal dogs with irrclevant antigens administered according to a coinmon hypo-
sensitization protocol induced neither skin test positivity nor clinical signs of allrgy.329
Skin testing with commercial "regional" allergen kits that use mixes is unsatisfactory.
Instead, discussions with the supply housc regarding the most important allergens for the
 pe s  o aa ae   aq a  ad
tests for the client's budget.
 'su ip osnoy on shop ui puodui oq o podi ruo sura
586 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
dust, human dander, feathers, kapok, molds, weeds, grasses, and trees.* In the United
o aiam sop uadong reui pdan sm i y uI te sadog  ai aq 0
sensitive only to house dust mites and, even when other allergens had given positive
reactions, hyposensitization was frequently undertaken using only house dust mites and re-
evaluated in 1 year.5s, 374 Recent publications, however, indicate that multisensitivity is the
reported to be house dust, house dust mite, and human dander.f House dust mite is also
the most important allrgen in the United States and Japan.61, 67a, 359a
The two species of house dust mites commonly tested are D. farinae and D. pteronys-
sinus. Though both of these mites are members of the family Pyroglyphidae, they each
have inultiple allergenic epitopes for humans. In humans, there are two main groups of
allergens that may have_partial cross-reactivity between different species for allergens
within the same group. In dogs, it has also been shown that Derrnatophagoides mites
cros-react with the mite Blomia tropicalis3s Studies have shown that dogs and humans
recognize different major allergens from Dermatophagoides mites and that these antigens
are not cross-reactive,i36, s37 368, 369 However, the results of one in vitro study in atopic
7s.359h
In contrast, another study indicated that 69% of D. farinae -positive dogs had detecta-
ble serum IgE to a 30-kD protein thought to be Der F 1.361 This is an important
distinction because the trend in human medicine is to test for these specific allergenic
epitopes. It would not be appropriate to extrapolate and use these specific tests in dogs
unless the importance of that allergenic epitope is documented in the dog. Dogs react
much more commonly to D. farinae than to D. pteronyssinus but not to the major
allergens (Der F I and Der F I; Der P I andDer PI) recognized by humans.36. 3 Of
the house dust mite-hypersensitive dogs, 90% are found to react to a protein of 80 to
90 kD.336.337,368,369
Another house dust mite major allergen has been detected in the dog.$61 It is a
109-kD protein chitinase. Another potential complicating factor when comparing studies
on house dust mite studies is the variation in commercial extracts. This was shown in a
study in dogs based on antigen-specific IgG tests.385 Different commercial extracts varied
pm en sp prea krqe eu jo dnos e u snsar suar ns pmo
Other mites are also important contributors to the arachnid levels in house dust. The
mite Euroglyphus maynei has been found in numerous countries and, in England, has
heen reported to be the predominant species of mites in many homes. Though it is often
  s  j r e si h pe ds s  m  n
ported in the dog. The nite Blomia tropicalis is a glyciphagid house dust mite that is
found in tropical and suhtropical clirmates. It was found in 44% of examined houses in San
Diego and, in Brazil, was found as the dominant house dust mite species. Several studies
have shown some cross-reactivity with the Dermatophagoides spp. mites, but multiple
species-specific allergens are also found. It is possible that these other house dust mites,
which can be present in high numbers, may be important allergens in atopic dogs in
certain regions. One study showed that dogs reacted to B. tropicalis in a country where
this mite is not found and showed that at least some of this is due to cross-reactivity to
Dermatophagoides sp.325
Storage mites may also play a role in atopy or act as a separate disease (see Storage
Mite Dermatitis). In addition, other insect antigens (see Insect Hypersensitivity) have
been reported to cause positive reactions in many atopic dogs as well as in atopic suspects
that were skntestnegativetoall other ommonly tested allergens271923925359Cock
*Sec references 27, 34, 58, 61, 67a, 186, 192, 277, 279, 282, 337, 354, 370, 383.
+See references 58, 186, 192, 255, 277, 354, 386.
 Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 587
● Table 8-14
 ReasoNs For False-nEGatIve InTraDerMal
SKIN TeST reACTIONS
Subcutaneous injections
·····..···...·..
Too little allergen:
Testing with nixes
Outdated allergens
Allergens too dlute (100 PNU/ml recom mended)
Too small volume of allergen injected
Drug interference:
Glucocorticoids
Antihistamines
Tranquilizers
Progestational compounds
Any drugs that lower blood pressure significantly
Anergy (testing during peak of hyperscnsitivity reaction)
Inherent host factors
Estrus, pseudopregnancy
Severe stress (systemie diseuses, fright, struggling)
Offseason testing (testing more than I to 2months afer clinical signs have disappeared)
Histamine “hyporeactivity"
roaches (Blatella germanica, B. orientalis, Suppela suppellectillium, Periplaneta americana)
have been shown to be important allergens in humans and to cross-react with house dust,
possibly because of cockroach particles present in house dust.237 Twenty-five atopic dogs
were skin tested with cockroach antigen, and results were positive in four, though these
s0 as n o a a sp  seasda n o pi sm
 It is essential to remember that a positive skin test reaction means only that the
patient hassin-sniing atiodmastcel hat eraulatenantgenxpur
target tissue that responds to the released mediators. A positive reaction does not neces-
sarily mean that the patient has clinical allergy to the allergen(s) injected. Thus, it is
essential that positive skin test reactions be interpreted in light of the patient's history. By
the same token, a negative skin test reaction does not necessarily mean that the patient is
not atopic. Ten percent to 30% of the otherwise classically atopic dogs may have negative
number of test allergens used) to challenge dogs with the appropriate allergens or the
intervention of various factors known to produce false-negative reactions, as listed in Table
8-14.
Many factors may lead to false-positive or false-negative skin test reactions in dogs
(see Table 8-14; Table 8-15).34, 5s 6l1. 67a These factors must be carefully considered when
skin testing is performed. False-positive reactions to house dust mite have been reported
n us au jo asn uo is  s se sg'sqes qm sp j %og o dn u
●Table 8-15
 ReasonS For False.poSitive InTraDerMaL
Skin Test reacTIoNs
Irritant test allergens (especially those containing glyccrin; also some house dust, fcather, wool, mold, and all
food preparations)
Contaminated test allergens (bacteria, fungi)
Sin-sensitizing antibody only (prior clinical or present subclinical sensitivity)
Poor technique (traumatic placement of needle; dull or burred needl; too large a volume injected: air injected)
Substances that cause nonirmmunologic bistamine release (narcotics)
"Irrtable" skin (large reactions seen to all injected substances, including saline control)
Dermatographisn
 Mitogenic allergen
*These reactions would be more appropriately called “clinically insignificant."
 588 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseascs
reactions is the recent administration of certain drugs: glucocorticoids, antihistamines,
 no reliable withdrawal times for these drugs. Guidelines have been arbitrarily determined
by clinicians, with rare studies conducted to confrm them. One study that evaluated
hydroxyzine inhibition of intradermal test results for Hea allrgen demonstrated suppres-
sion up to 10 days.3zu Even this study has to be interpreted carefully because some
 e  s a a   e    
 antigen in particular is less inhibited by drugs 5s
General rules of thumh for drug withdrawal times prior to skin testing are: 3 weeks
for oral and topical glucocorticoids, 8 weeks for injectable glucocorticoids, 10 days for
antihistarmines, and 10 days for products and diets containing omega-3/omega-6 fatty acids.
treated topicall with a 1% hydrocortisone conditioner.156 If the dog has any cutaneous
signs of iatrogenic Cushing's syndrome, such as atrophy, striae, loss of elasticity, or peeling
and scaling, it is preferable to wait until these signs are improved prior to testing.
Although it has been reported that the biological activity of allergens stored in plastic
cnces occurred in skin test reactivity.379
Studies of intradermal test reactions in normal dogs have generally yielded the follow-
ing findings: (1) no breed differences, (2) either no age differences or decreased reactivity
C s o    s xs  r  s  
some allergens, (4) decreased reactivity to some allergens with increasing haircoat pigmen-
tation, (5) decreased reactivity to histamine in hospitalized dogs compared with normal
household dogs (stress related?), (6) weekly intradermal injections of allergens resulting in
multiple positive reactions to allergens that originally tested negative (usually after weekly
 injections for 8 weeks), and (7) previous treatment with allergens not inducing positive
able amounts of histamine, the quantity is not sufficient to cause false-positive skin test
reactions.372
Clearly. intradermal testing is not a procedure to be taken lightly. It requires keen
attention to details and possible pitfalls, together with experience and lots of practice.
Intradermal testing, however, is the preferred nethod of diagnosing canine atopy.
Whereas clinically insignificant positive reactions in normal dogs are very common with
serologic testing, they ocur in only 10% to 15% of normal dogs with intradermal test-
basis will probably be unhappy with the results. In experienced hands, however, the
intradermal test is a powerful tool in the diagnosis and manageinent of canine atopy.
When possible, cases should be referred to clinicians who specialize in this subject. When
this is not possible, the use of serun in vitro tests is appropriate as long as atopic disease
has been clinically diagnosed and the test results are carefully interpreted. These data are
then used to select allergens for hyposensitization, with suiccess rates being similar to
those achieved with intradermal testing (see later)
● Procedure for Intradermal Allergy Testing. A commonly used procedure for
intradermal testing is as follows:
1. Make sure the patient at least reacts to histanine. One-twentieth (0.05) ml of
1 : 100,000 histamine phosphate is injected intradermally. A wheal 10 to 20 mm in
diameter should be present at 15 to 30 minutes after injection. If the histamine
wheal is small (less than 10 mm) to absent, postpone intradermal skin testing and
test the animal with histamine weekly until the expected reaction is seen.
：A
positive reaction does not invariahly indicate that testing will be unaffected by
*Sec references 27, 61, 67a, 190, 195, 265, 331, 339, 363, 376.
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 589
 previous drugs. Rarely, cutanieous reactivity to histamine returns prior to cutaneous
reactivity to allergen,
 2. Chermical restraint is helpful and may decrease the endogenous release of gluco-
corticoids. One study has indicated 'that intradermal skin testing performed in
dermal skin test reactions, however. The combination of xylazine hydrochloride
(Rompun, 0.25 to 0.5 mg/kg IV) and atropine sulfate is usually satisfactory for
skin testing and is probably the most common form of chemical restraint em-
(17.5 mg/kg IV) with or without maintenancc with halothane, isofurane, or ime-
thoxyfurane; tiletamine-zolazepam (4 mg/kg IV); and medetomidine (Dormitor,
 3. The skin over the lateral thorax is the preferred test site. Because different areas
of skin vary in responsiveness, the site used should he consistent from patient to
patient. Gently clip the hair with a No. 40 bladie, using no chemical preparation to
clean the test site. Use a felt-tipped pen to mark cach injection site. Place injection
sites at least 2 cm apart, avoiding dermatitic areas.
4. Using a 26- to 27-gauge, 0.38-inch (0.9 crn) needle attached to a 1-ml disposable
syringe, carefully inject, intradermally, 0.05 ml of saline or diluent control negative
control) and 0.05 ml of 1: 100,000 histamine phosphate (positive control) and all
the appropriately mixed test allergens. Skin testing -strength antigens should have
been made fresh from concentrate within 12 weeks of use. Read the test sites at
15 and 30 minutes. Prevent the animal from traumatizing the test area.
significant and must be carefully correlated with the patient's history. With experi-
rccommended, however, that the novice measure the diameter of each wheal in
millimeters. A positive skin test reaction may then be objectively defined as a
wheal having a diameter that is equal to or larger than that halfway bctween the
diameters of the wheals produced by the saline and histaimine controls. In addition
to the objective assessment of size, a subjective assessmcnt of erythema and
turgidity of the wheals is also used in determining a positivc rcaction. The size of
tance. Late-phase immediate reactions (6 hours) and delayed skin test site reac-
tions (24 to 48 hours after injection) occasionally occur and are of unknown
significance. Pruritus at some positive reaction sites occasionally occurs and can be
managed with cold compresses or topical steroids. Systemic reactions (anaphylaxis)
to intradernal skin testing are extremely rare in dogs.
In Vitro Testing
● Serologic Allergy Tests. The radioallergosorbent test (RAST), enzyme-linked im-
munosorbent assay (ELIsA), and liquid-phase immunoenzymatic assay are three tests that
detect relative levcis of allergen-specic IgE in the serun. The RAST and ELISA attach
the allergens to be tested to a solid substrate such as a paper disk or polystyrene well
The liquid-phase irnmunoenzymnatic assay (VARL) does not use a solid phase initially but
mixes a labeled allergen with the patient's serum.3i1s The combined labeled allergen-
antibody complex is subsequently bound by the label to the plastic well. This method in
humans has bccn shown to decrease the incidence of false-positive results due to back-
tional distortions of antigens and resultant hiding of epitopes inherent to solid-phase
techniques.
A small number of studies conducted with thc carly assays have shown problems with
 companics have made changes, but newer independent studies that show that thcse
problems have been alleviated have not been presenited. Although these tests are pur-
590 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
ported to be species specifc, one study revealed that the canine RAST, but not the.
ELISA, indicated that all horses, goats, cats, and humans tested were also allergica16 With
all of the technologies involving the determination of allergen-specific IgE, virtually all
 s e y s doe e e a is o u aue  sp le s 
and sually multiple, positive reactions.216.323.331, 344,35:3,36,376
Z u ad m ssn sn v a  na s  
in dogs than in human beings, with the mean level in nornal dogs reported to be about
190μg/ml,which is sinilar to that found in atopic dogs.29 3, 61.a23The highest serum
IgE levels are found in dogs with endoparasitism, Serial deterninations of serurn IgE
u P ae jo sa g  s g u si  p s  s
predict the developnent of atopy.2o1 It has also been shown in the dog that the higher
fevels of total IgE contribute to an increased incidence of false-positive or irelevant
to 850 μg/ml).315
According to some researchers, false-positivc results are rarely obtained with the
        r  o  
allergen-specific IgGd.23 Investigators in the United States, however, reported that aller-
gen-specific IgG was detectable in the majority of nonatopic as well as al atopic dogs.2s
The results of serologic allergy testing correlate poorly or moderately with those
eof
antihodies, mixed monoclonal antibodies, and FceRlα-hased systems for detecting _the
canine IgE have reported improved overall correlation with intradermal testing, from 75%
to 90%, though there is still a variation depending on the allrgen being tested.o The
variation between individual allergens relates to their “stickiness" for background IgE.
 In part, the discrepancies between serologic and intradermal testing may be explained
by numerous difficulties in technique, sensitivity, and so forth. It is also important,
however, to realize that they test for two different things, so complete correlations are not
expected (Table 8- 16). IgG anti-IgE immune complexes are present in atopic dogs, which
with negative intradermal skin test results or poor results with hyposensitization based on
intradermal skin tests respond well to hyposensitization based on in vitro test results, it is
valuable to have this alternative test available.2 The differences may also indicate that two
types of IgE are present, that tissue-bound IgE does not corelate with circulating levels,
that tests have different sensitivities for different allergens, or that immediate skin test
reactivity and the presence of allergen-specific antibodies are no more than secondary
features (epiphenomena) of atopy.27. 29.30.61. 67a However, the results of brceding lines of
high-IgE responder dogs and their natural development of skin disease afler the develop-
atopic disease,394.395
 The point, here, is that false- or irrelevant positive reactions are to be expected with
serologic allergy testing. Hence, it is absolutely critical that (1) the candidates for testing
undergo meticulous work-up so that atopy is the only possible remaining diagnosis and
(2) the test results obtained be very carefully evaluated in light of the patient's dermato-
logic history. These tests are not used for the diagnosis of atopy but to detect what an
animal produces allergen-specific IgE to as a way to select allergens for hyposensitiza-
tion.27, 67a, 190, 195, 363
 Results with newer techniques have improved, the results with some allergens
variables being  evaluated  and
applied  to  commercial  tests include  such  things
as00,
*See references 322, 325a, 351, 367, 389, 394, 395.
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 59|
● Table 8-16
 COMPARISON OF INTRaDERMaL AND IN
vitro allergy tests in dogs
FEATURE
INTRADERMAL
IN VITRO
Detects reaginic antbody
Yes
Yes
Detects presence of reaginic antibody in serum
No
Yes
Detects presence of cutancous rast cells with
Yes
No
reaginic antibody present on them
Determines capability of indlucing a cutaneous
Yes
No
to antigen
Test results are inhibited by antilhistamines and
Yes
Nod
glucocorticoids
Sensitivity (per cent)
70-90
70-100
Specificity (per cent)
>90
0-90
Risk to patient
Rare but possible anaphylaxis
 Only serum sample required
Availability
Or sedative reaction
Limited to certain practices;
Excellent
 often rcquires referral
Cost per antigen tested
Inexpensive
Relatively expensive
Clinic overhead
Relatively high
Jittle to ne
1. Using monoclonal anticanine IgF antibodies instead of polyclonal antibodies
 2. Using mixtures of monoclonal antibodies to detect IgE
 3. Using the Fc receptor to detect IgE
 4. Proccssing the patient's serum through a column of ascarid antigen to removc
parasitic IgE
 5. Processing the patient's serum through a column with protein A to remove IgG
 respective companies and compared with intradermal test results. Limited studies have
compared two dlifferent commercial serologic tests and, in general, the comparisons were
made to intradermal test results. No studies have been conducted between commercial
companies with the different technologies based on the effectiveness of byposensitization.
However, multiple studies have shown that the results of hyposensitization based on
serologic test results in atopic dogs are similar to that with intradermal testing results,
including one double-blinded comparison.* These studies have used a wide variety of the
commercial tests available, and all appear to have similar results. Interestingly, even the
hyposensitization because all the reports using the different companies appear similar in
rosponse ratcs. Some cormpanies offer group testing, but there is no place for such testing
becanse it leads to inappropriate treatment recommendations.
Another issue has been the effects of antipruritic therapies on in vitro test results. In
general, antilhistamines, fatty acids, and other nonsteroidaf drugs nay be given without
affecting these tests. Short-terrm treatment with anti-infammatory doses of glucocorticoids
group of dogs that tested negative with an in vitro test experienced positive test results
when kept off of glucocorticoids for at least 1 month.360
 In suminary, serologic allergy tests have numerous advantages over intradermal test-
ing. including (1) no patient risk (no need to sedate; no risk of anaphylactic reactions),
(2) conveniencc (no need to clip patient's haircoat, chemically restrain patient, or keep
patient at clinic while preparing for, performing, and evaluating test), (3) lower likelihood
that results will be infuenced by prior or current drug therapy, (4) the ability to be used
*See referonccs 27, 265, 290, 317, 363, 378, 400, 408-410.
592 · Skin Iminune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
 in patients with widespread dermatitis or dermatographisn, and (5) similar results of
hyposensitization therapy in carefully clinically diagnosed atopic dogs. Canine IgE was
reported to be stable in serum samples subjected to 25 freeze/thaw cycles and when
incubated at 25°C for up to 10 days,23 The disadvantages of serologic tests are that they
are more expensive per item tested and that false-positive (clinically insignificant) results
are exceedingly common. Therefore, these tests are not appropriate to use for diagnosing
atopic disease but only for management.
 Attempts to create in-offce allergy screening tests have varied in their success at
 correlating with in vitro or intradermal test resuits, or in discriminating between atopic
and nonatopic dogs.° Even though these tests may have some value, they are limited
becausc hyposensitization still requires complete testing with individual alergens and the
diagnosis should not be made with tests but on clinical grounds.
Considering all the current available information, we and others suggest that intrader-
in an otherwise classically atopic dog. or when hyposensitization based on intradermal
testing is unsuccessful, serologic allergy testing may be useful. Because intradermal testing
is not readily available, the response rate to hyposensitization based on in vitro testing is
preferred over the option of lifelong therapy with glucocorticoids. When serologic testing
is used, it is for the selection of allergens in dogs in which the clinical diagnosis of atopic
disease is strong. If one is attempting to use a test to help confirn the diagnosis of atopic
disease, an intradermal test shoufd be performed.
● Basophil Degranulation Test. The in vitro basophil degranulation test has been
reported to show promise in the diagnosis of canine atopy.57,5s The original test requires
fresh blood, must be rin within 24 hours, is time consuming and labor intensive, and is
unlikely to become anything more than a research tool. The dermonstration that canine
sera also binds to hurman basophils has made the test potentially more practical because
only serum will be needed.377. 3s1 Preliminary results in dogs showed an 89% correlation
with intradermal test results.377 A technique utilizing flow cytometry for the detection of
 s s   s ssd  p so   
evaluated and may lead to this test being faster and less expensive and more readily
available.360 However, further work is needod to detcrminc whether it improves hyposen-
sitization or diagnostic efficacy compared with other tests.
Major and Minor Diagnostic Criteria
Because of the diffculties associated with the in vivo and in viro diagnosis of atopy, the
concept of major and minor diagnostic features has been introduced in an attempt to
provide consistency in the diagnosis of atopy in dogs and humans.312 For dogs, the
following criteria have been proposed:
 At least three of the following major features should he present:
·Pruritus
·Facial and/or digital involvement
· Lichenification of the flexor surface of the tarsus or the extensor surface of the
carpus
· Chronic or chronically relapsing dermatitis
· An individual or familial history of atopy
· A breed predilection
At least three of the following minor features should also be present:
· Onset of signs before 3 years of age
· Facial erythema and cheilitis
· Bacterial conjunctivitis
· A superficial staphylococcal pyoderma
*See refercnccs 341, 342, 351, 362, 367, 371, 394.
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 593
· Hyperhidrosis
·Immediate skin test reactivity to inhalant allergens
· Elevated allergen-specific IgGd
· Elevated allergen-specific IgE
To date, only one study has evaluated these criteria26, 2 Atopic dogs and nonatopic
dogs were evaluated, and the sensitivity and specifcity of each of the Willemse criteria
were statistically amalyzed. The authors concluded that pruritus, breed predilection, con-
junctivitis, pyoderma, and skin and serologic test results were not useful criteria. These
· Major Criteria
 Bilateral lesions of the plantar sinface of the interdigital spaces of the front
paws
 Onset of signs between 6 months and 3 years of age
Peribuccal erythema or erythema of the medial surface of the pinnae
Anitis
 Recurrent dermatitis for greater than 2 years
· Minor Criteria
Familial history
Exacerbation when the dog contacts vegetation (e.g., grass, weed).
Rhinitis
History of urticaria/angioedema
Acral lick dermatitis
Hyperhidrosis
Lichenification of the fold of the hock and/or the cranial surface of the carpus
In a study of 9l atopic dogs from Greece, lesions on the carpus and tarsus were
negatively associated with skin test positivity.277
The reliability of using the Willemse major and minor criteria to diagnose canine
atopy and not other diseases has stil ncvcr been proven. Additionally, it has been
suggested that a tentative diagnosis of atopic disease requires ruling out other major
possihilities bccause the criteria just listed determine what patients may have atopy,
but
they do not exclude the possibility of some other diagnoses.2767a We do not use these
criteria.
Histopathology
Skin biopsy of atopic dogs reveals variable degrees of superficial perivascular dermatitis
(pure, spongiotic, hyperplastic) with lymphocytes and histiocytes usually predominating
statistically there is a very mild tissue eosinophila23, 23it is not usually noted during
routine histopathologic examination. The presence of a significant tissue cosinophilia sug-
gests another or concurrent disease. Focal intraepidermal aggregates of cosinophils or
cells, or both indicates infection, usually secondary bacterial pyoderma, Therefore, histopa-
thology is more helpful in suggesting that further diagnostics are indicated and does not
confirm a diagnosis of atopy. Similar dernal changes of a milder degree may occur in
clinically nornal skin fron atopic dogs. Histopathologic findings consistent with secondary
bacterial pyoderma (suppurative folliculitis, perifollculitis, intraepidermal pustular dermati-
tis) or Malassezia dermatitis are common in specimens of skin from atopic dogs.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Prognostically, atopic dogs have about an 80% chance of experiencing nonseasonal disease.
Natural desensitization is rare. One placebo-controlled study, however, revealed that about
 20% of atopic dogs experience an improvement of greater than 50% after receiving an
satisfactorily controlled. The client, however, must be made aware that trcatment is
594 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
FIGURE B-7. A, Canine atopy. Hyperplastic perivas.
cular dermatitis. (From Scott DW: Observations on ca-
nine atopy. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 17.91, 1981.) B,
Canine_ atopy. Perivascular accumulation (of monomuclear
cells. (From Scott Dw: Observations on canine atopy. ]
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 17:91, 1981.)
usually required for life and that therapeutie modifications over the life of the dog are to
be expected.
Before the clinician discnsses the details of therapy with the client, it is imperative to
mention that some allergens may be tolerated by an individual without any disease
manifestations, but a small increase in that load (one or more allergens) may push the
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 595
 individual over the pruritic threshoid and initiate clinical signs 61, 67a Equally important
when considering the cause of dermatologic disorders is the conccpt of summation of
 effect— for example, a subclinical hypersensitivity in combination with a Hea infestation, a
mild bacterial pyoderma, or a dry environment may, produce marked discomfort that
would be absent if any one of the disorders existed alone.61. 6aThus, it is important to
Education of the client is of koy inportance to the successful long-term control of the
atopic dog. The following arc the key points that should be discussed with clients that
own atopic dogs.
Education Points to Consider
1. Atopic disease is a life-long problem.
2. It is controlled, not cured.
sdn-arg asen Au sr uee Aun 
a. Allergen load/exposure
b. Strcss
c. Borcdom
d. Changes in heat, humidity
e. Skin trauma
 4. Concurrent diseases complicate the control and require different therapies.
a. Fleas
b. Food hypersensitivity
c. Bacterial pyoderma
d1. Malassezia
1. Dermatitis
2. Otitis
3. Paronychia
e. Secondary bacterial otitis externa
f. Fold dermatitis
g. Pododermatitis
h. Urine retention and skin irritation
i. Anal sac disease
  so  a sr o  a  g se r s
owner dissatisfaction.
a. This may have profound effects on how the case is handled.
b. These need to be identified.
6. Clients must be agreeable and able to give or complete the treatment.
 si  a ay o sa pd a a s r
Chap. 3), hyposensitization, fatty acids and antihistainines (see Therapy for Hypersensitiv-
ity Diseases), systemic glucocorticoids (see Chap. 3), and occasionally immunosuppressive
most eficacious results, and the clinician should approach the rmanagement of the atopic
dog with a complete treatmcnt plan.27. 213 Developmcnt of a treatment plan needs to
consider multiple variables, including seasonality, distribution and amount of involved skin,
cost, willingness and ability of the client to administer the treatment, acceptability to the
patient, and risk to the patient. Optimally, the clinician incorporates avoidance, topical
therapy (especially shampooing), and fatty acids into the treatment plan.
Avoidance
Avoidance of allergens is not always possible or practical. Such manipulations and their
benefits are not generally possible' without acurate identification of the offending aller-
gen(s) by allcrgy testing. Because many patients have multiple reactivities and most
allergens cannot be avoided, the effective use of this approach is rarely possible as a sole
decreases the allergen load. Additionally, some patients may greatly benefit from avoid-
596 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
ance of confirmed allergens such as feathers (pilows, birds), cats (dander), newsprint
may be impossible, but a decrease in exposure may be achievabie (Table 8- 17).175
Cat allergen can be common and persistent even in environments where cats no
longer live.177 Cat allergen is very stable and ubiquitous, and is found in dust samples and
more than is often considered. However, attempts at controlling sources may be helpful.
oo ad  ua aq pasap q e soda u s an a ao
more or at least out of bedrooms and off fabric furniture; mold exposure can be de-
creased by removing or cleaning mildewed items, houseplants, and carpeting in bathrooms
and by keeping bread refrigerated; cotton cxposure can be decreased by avoiding laundry
rooms and'closets and by making sure thaf the dog's bedding is made fror synthetic
 material. In atopic humans involved in a controlled trial wherein vacuuming and miticide
were used in an attempt to eradicate house dust mites, the number of mites decreased
but the patients derived no clinical benefit.196
 Other studies, including a double-blinded, placebo-controlled study, have shown that
if mites can be reduced by greater than 90%, henefit occurs, but the control measures
require more than vacuuming, and just limiting mite nunbers in one area of the house is
not likely to be bcneficial.2ss 294 If the same is true in dogs, the complete home environ-
ment must changc, not just areas where the dog sleeps or stays within the house. For
house dust mites, this is best accomplished by (1) minimizing carpets throughout the
d se y sn  se  ( pd  e 
ble withwoodiny,or leather fuiture prd,pecially sfas,(3）reing i
below 45%, and (4) covering pillow cases and 1nattresses with impermeable covers. This is
often not possible or practical, and other techniques of treating carpets with a variety of
acaricides, including benzyl benzoate and pirimiphos, have been described. Treating car-
 pets and fabric furniture with acaricides may reduce mite levels by 70% to 90% for a
● Table 8-17
 PRACTICAL ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT
For the atopic canine 
·........·..
.·..·...·.·....··...·...
ALLERGEN
AVOIDANCE SUGGESTIONS
House dust
Keep dog out of room when cleaning/vacuurming for several hours
House dust mite
Use plastic zippered cover over dog bed
(<)  
Avoid letting dog sleep ou overstuffed furniture (if dog sleeps on human's bed, use
plastic mattress/pillow covers)
Avoid stuffed toys
Keep dlog overnight or during working hours in uncarpeted rooms
u uou, s sop y dou-duep aunan
Molds
Keep dog out of damp basements
Keep dog away from bams
Keep dog away while lawn is mowed
Avoid dusty dog foods
Clean and disinfect hurnidificrs
Avoid having large numbers of house plants
Avoid using as the dog's “holding' room any room with a high moisture level (bath-
room, laundry room)
Keep dog out of crawl spaces under house
Use dehumidifiers
Clean with chlorine bleach solutions
 Polleus
Keep dog out of felds
Keep grass cut short
Rinse dog off after periods in high grasses/weeds
Keep dog indoors at dusk and earlymoming during heavy pollen season
Use air conditioners
Keep dog away while mowing lawn
Modifed from Bevier DE: Long-term management of atopic disease in the dog. Vet Clin North An Small Anim Pract 20:1491,
1990.
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Discases · 597
 month but do not eliminate house dust mite allergen.2ss Tannic acid in carpets has been
 used to denature house dust mite proteins.313
Topical Therapy
 s e srs  si   m   i  si  
remove allergens frorn the skin and help to eliminate dry skin.27. 67a The second is through
topical antipruritic agents, which are usually most effective for treating localized areas of
be bathed at least every I or 2 weeks. It should be remembered that atopic dogs often
have sensitive, easily irritated skin. Hypoallergenic and colloidal oatmeal-containing sham-
poos are preferred. Shampoos and rinses containing the local anesthetic, pramoxine, are
useful.284
● Hyposensitization. Hyposensitization (inmunotherapy), which has been described
as the mainstay of therapy in canine atopy, is indicated in anirmals in which avoidance of
antigens is impossible, signs are present for more than 4 to 6 months of the year, and
other antipruritic drugs are unsatisfactory. This and avoidance are the only forms of
therapy that stop the allergic reaction, 'in contrast with most medical therapies that
counteract the effects of the allergic reaction. In humans, hyposensitization may even
prevent the development of new allrgies, though this has not been shown in the dog.397
In fact, some dogs that respond well to hyposensitization stop responding because of new
hypersensitivities that, in turn, do respond to a new immunotherapy formulation based on
repeat allergy testing.
Virtually no attempts have been made to standardize hyposensitization regimens in
the dog or to scientifically compare their merits. Thus, published regimens vary in the
form of allergen used (aqueous, alum precipitated, propylene glycol suspended, glyceri-
nated), the number and frequency of injections given in the induction phase, the dose of
allergen administered, the potency of allergenic extract, and the route of administration
(subcutancous, intramuscular, intradermal)." The vast majority of clinicians use only the
subcutaneous route when hyposensitizing for atopy. Numerous authors have written about
the benefits of hyposensitization, with inost reporting a 50% to 80% rate of good to
excellent responses, whether based on intradermal or serologic testing.f A double-blind
study of hyposensitization in atopic dogs (alum-precipitated allergens vs. an alum-based
placebo) reported that 59% of the dogs experienced a good response with the vaccine and
 21% of the dogs experienced a good response with the placebo.412 It is well accepted that
hyposensitization is an effective, valuable, and relatively safe treatment for atopic dogs.
The mechanism of action of hyposensitization is complex, with a variety of end-organ,
humoral, and cellular changes occurring in humans.40 Various hypotheses were proposed
in the past, such as (l) humoral desensitization (reduced levels of IgE), (2) cellular
desensitization (reduced reactivity of mast cells and basophils), (3) immunization (induc-
cells), and (5) some combination thereof 5o, 61, 67 In humans hyposensitized for atopy. the
 Organ changes that correlate best with the clinical response are skin, nasal, and conjuncti-
val sensitivity to titrated doses of allergen. At the cellular level, an increase in allergen-
induced CD25+CD8+ T lymphocytes correlates with a favorable response.403 Atopic
humans successfully treated with IFN-y or cyclosporine usually have no decrease and,
often, an increase in IgE levels,292 This suggests the beneficial effect is not humoral but
cellular (switch from Th2 to Thl cytokine profle).
Aqueous allergens, which are rapidly absorbed, necessitate smaller doses, and require
multiple, frequent injections, constitute by far the most commonly used type today. A
variety of hyposensitization dose protocols are used, but most of the aqueous reginens are
 modifications of the schedule shown in Table 8-18. Some specialists, includling ourselves,
 use just the two more potent concentrations and keep the intervals at no more than 14
*See references 27, 34, 61, 67a, 175, 188, 396, 398.
See referenccs 27, 34, 61, 67a, 188, 290, 306, 363, 370, 398, 399, 402, 404, 405, 407, 408, 409, 413.
598 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
● Table 8-18
 HYpoSEnSITiZatIon SChedUle fOr
AQUEOUS ALLERGENS'
.·............
INJECTION
VIAL1
VIAL 2
VIAL 3
NO.
DAY NO.
(100 to 200 PNU/ml)f
(1000 to 2000 PNU/ml)
(1w/0Nd 000'07 04 000'01)
1
0.1 ml
2
2
0.4 ml
3
4
0.4 ml
4
6
0.8 ml
5
8
1.0 inl
6
10
0.1 ml
12
0.2 ml
8
14
0.4 ml
9
16
0.8 1ml
10
18
1.0 ml
1. 1.
20
0.1 ml
12
22
0.2 ml
13
24
0.4 ml
14
26
0.8 rml
15
28
1.0 ml
16
38
1.0 in!
48
1.0 iml
"Injections are given sabheutanecusly.
Thereafer, repeat infections (1.0 ul) every 20 to 40 days, as needed.
days for the frst 4 months of therapy. In addition, we use different schedules depending
 on the size of the dog: Table 8-19 is one example of a small dog schedule. A preliminary
study used a rush protocol that takes only 6 hours to reach the maximurn concentration of
20,000 PNU/ml. This was reportedly done in 6 research and 14 clinical cases with no
● Table 8-19
 HYPOSENSItIZATION SCHEDULE FOR DOGS
UNDER 20 POUNdS
DAY
DATE
H>1I
VOLUME
DAY
DATE
ITCH
VOLUME
Viai !
Five-Day Intervai
1
0.1
30
0.5
3
0.2
35
0.5
5
0.3
40
0.7
7
0.4
0.6
Ten-Doy Intervai
9
11
0.8
50
0.7
13
1.0
0.7
70
0.7
Vidl 2
80
0.7
15
0.1
Fourteen-Day Intervai
17
0.2
94
0.7
19
0.3
108
0.7
21
0.4
122
0.7
23
0.5
136
0.7
25
0.5
150
0.7
* Grade itch on scale of 0 (none) to 10 (most severe this pet has had in the past).
· Note: it is possilble to go higher than 10 if the itching is geting worse than ever before.
· Call at 4 weeks and report grade of itching.
 z u a q d sao   e
· Call prior to giving any more shots if there are adverse reactions.
+ Vomiting, diarrhea, anxiousncss, wcakness are possible reactions.
· Reactions will usually occur within I to 2 hours after shot is given.
+ Recheck appointments should be made around day 60 and day 120.
 ae ss t o r  n ja d   
• Itch inereases before shot is duc, or after shot is given.
* Itch decreases after shot is given.
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 599
increase in adverse reactions nor loss of efficacy noted.4ol This type of protocol may be
indicated for cases requiring rapid hyposensitization because of particularly severe or life-
threatening allergic reactions such as venomous insect bhites.
Alum-precipitated allergens are intermediate in action between the aqucous allergens
and cmulsion allergens. They are more slowly absorbed than the aqueous allergens; as a
sd pii ao  'so nr ssal p rm ss re s
are possible. Concern has been exprcssed about the possible carcinogenicity of alum
 precipitates, which are increasingly less availablc today. In the United States, alum-
precipitated formulations for imrmunotherapy are available for only a simall number of
gens was improved with a low-dose protocol.411
the most slowly absorbed, allowing the largest doses, the least number of injections, and
the Inost rapid hyposensitization.
 By convention, in the past no more than 10 allergens were used at once for hyposen-
sitization.6l. 67a This has changed over the years as more investigators have used more
allergens, even up to 30.* Success has safely been achieved with the inclusion of up to 30
or more allergens in aqueous vaccines for atopic dogs In fact,larger numbersmay
increase the success rate. In one report,3s dogs were treated with up to 40 allergens, and
the response rate was 72% in dogs treated with 1 to 10 allrgens, 86% in dogs treated
with 11 to 20 allrgens, and 78% in dogs treated with 21 or morc allergens. Howcver, two
other studies did not find any difference in success based on number of allergens in the
vaccine.404. 410 It has also been reported that, in animals with greater than 12 positive
results, treatment failures to the first set of antigens may respond when a second set
containing more allergens than the animal is allergic to are added as a new treatment
be selected on the basis of history, the probable presence of that allergen in the environ-
ment, the frequency at which the allergen is known to rcact in that region, and the
duration of the allergen's presence.
Cross-reactivity may also be used in the decision. In general, cross-reactivity tends to
stay within families or closer relationships so that genera of the same fainily have some
cross-allergenicity, and species of the same genus have even greater cross-reactivity. Bc-
cause grasses have fewer families, they tend to be the most cross-reactive, but the thrce
main grass families tend to be different,3 Bermuda grass is in the family Eragrostoideae
and does not cross with the Festucoideae, the more common northerm pasture grasses.
 Pancoideae, which includes Johnson and Bahia grass, cross-reacts somewhat with the other
two families. Weeds arc lcss cross-reactive than grasses, and trees are the least cross-
reactive. All this information is based on allergens that commonly are found in humans,
and this may not be the same in the dog. as has been discussed for housc dust mites
allergens.
Besides cross-reactivity, another issue is the effects allergens may have when com-
bined. Studies have shown that molds, and to some degree insect allergens, contain
veterinary study, though protease degradation was documented, the author stated that
success with hyposensitization had apparently not been affected, as compared with other
published studies by the mixing of the mold allergens with other allergens (M. R.
Rosenbaum, personal communication, 1996).
Depending on cach indlividual dog's response, and which form of the allergen is being
used, a beneficial response inay occur as early as 2 wecks or as late as 18 months after
(when clinical signs first begin to reappear) and, depending on the forn of allergens
"See references 61, 67a, 396, 400, 405, 407, 409.
See references 27, 34, 61, 67a, 188, 306, 370, 398, 400, 402, 405, 407-409, 412.
600 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
involved and the vaccine protocol being used, boosters may be needed every week to
frequently than every 10 days are usually, given smaller volumes of allergen.27 In general,
we use 0.1 ml/day for these short intervals. Experience with the patient allows the owmer
 and the veterinarian to predict how long the patient will be asymptomatic after booster
injections. Boosters are then administered shortly before clinical signs would be expected
tofareup.
 Intervals between boosters may vary at different times of the year. It is also important
to not overtreat and cause adverse reactions. In one study, decreasing the dose, with or
without decreasing the frequency, was done in all dogs that experienced any adverse
reactions, and the response rate increased significantly in that group of dogs.407 Adjusting
the hyposensitization treatment for each individual case is the most appropriate way to
maxirnize the response and, even when adverse reactions are absent and no exacerbations
 prior to injections are observed, trying different protocols may increase efficacy.400
indication that sex, age, or duration of signs affects the success of hyposensitization,
though evidence is growing that age or duration may be important. This is true for human
patients with asthma and rhinitis who are hyposensitized.4 There is some evidence that
long-term disease (clinical signs for 5 years or more) and older age at the onset of clinical
signs (over 5 years old) indicate a poorer response to hyposensitization.306. 402. 404, 409 One
of us (C.E.G.) thinks that severity is more important, also somewhat related to chronicity,
and that dogs with excessive scarring do poorly.
Much of the inability to identify important variables may refect the lack of studies
with large-enough numbers to see differences in these groups. Boxers and West Highland
study evaluated 144 dogs on hyposensitization for over l year and divided the dogs by
breed into four groups: retrievers, spaniels, terriers, or other.410 The retrievers experi-
enced significantly less response to hyposensitization (46% moderate or marked improve-
ment) than did spariels (69%), terriers (76%) and other (70%) groups.
Some authors report that the likelihood of successful hyposensitization is greater in
aninals with few positive reactions; others disagree.96, 3ss, 404,49, 413 One study indicated
that low reactors (less than eight weak to moderate positives) responded better overall
than high reactors (more than eight strong reactions) but had a lower percentage of dogs
with an excellent response.4os Howcver, one of us (C.E.G.) thinks that animals with
numerous reactions, but reactions primarily lirmited to pollens, do better. Regional varia-
tions may also occur. One of us (C.E.G.) with practices in Las Vegas and southern
California has observed a better success rate in Las Vegas (80%) than in southern
California (60%) with the same protocols.
tization was much better in atopic dogs when it was based on allergy testing (70% good to
excllent responses) than when it was adninistered with standard regional allergens with
 no regard to allergy testing (18%, identical to placebo response),ai7 The response to
specific types of allergens has not been well studied. Though controversial, it has been
reported that pollen-hypersensitive dogs do better than dogs with other types of hypersen-
sitivity.61, 402One study reported that mold-hypersensitive dogs didvery poorly.402How-
ever, another study reported similar success rates with hyposensitization in dogs that were
only mold-hypersensitive and those that were hypersensitive to various other allergens.408
 Follow-up and compliance is critical to achieve the maximum success rate. One report
compliance and follow-up, it is important that they are educated about what to watch for.
Patterns of pruritus or signs related to when shots are given, overall level of pruritus,
changes in pattern of pruritus, and adverse reactions must be watched for.400
Adverse reactions to hyposensitization are uncommon but may oceur in up to 5% of
 patients.61. s8, 334, 396 Minor reactions may 0ccur in 25% of these dogs.407 Adverse reactions
includc (1) intensification of clinical signs for a few hours to a few days, (2) local reactions
(edema with or without pain or pruritus) at injection sites, and (3) anaphylaxis, Serious 
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 60I
Adverse reactions are treated according to symptom. Intensification of clinical signs is the
most conmon side effect. It may indicate that the animal's maximum tolerance dose of
allergens has been exceeded and that the final hyposensitizing dose achieved needs to be
 Iowered. In humans, most studies on the possible long-term adverse effects of hyposensiti-
zation have failed to demonstrate any clinical or immunologic abnorrmalities. One study of
 20 consecutive human patients with polyarteritis nodosa, however, revealed that, in six
patients, the onset of vasculitis synptoms coincided with hyposensitization for atopy.67a
Multiple other studies have failed to demonstrate any immunologic abnormalities.403
In the severely affected, nonseasonally atopic dog, it may be necessary to control the
symptoms with systemic glucocorticoids during hyposensitization. As long as oral predniso-
lone, prednisone, or methylprednisolone doses are kept as low as possible and adminis-
tered on an altermate-day basis (see Chap. 3), hyposensitization can still be successful61.6a
Avoiding glucocorticoids during at least the first few weeks of therapy allows one to
identify mild reactions and make adjustments, which is a good reason to try and avoid
those drugs early on.
Systemic Antipruritic Agents
Many atopic dogs require a systemic antipruritic agent, either as a sole agent or used in
 discussed earlier in this chapter, but some points are irnportant to consider when treating
atopic disease.
Systemic glucocorticoids are usually very effective for the management of atopy. They
however, the most dangerous of the treatments commonly used to treat atopy. As
 y  si  ss   ss o l  s s  s
months or for which safer options are not effective. Prednisolone or prednisone is admin-
istered orally (l mg/kg q24h) in the morning until pruritus is controled (3 to 10 days)
and then on an alternate-day (morning) regimen as needed (see Chap. 3). This schedule is
relatively safe compared with long-acting corticosteroids. Many atopic dogs have more
o d r a s a  a ss re s asr   a 
Malassezia dermatitis present. Any animal not responding to rational treatments should be
 re-examined to determine whether secondary infections or other complicating factors are.
present. Efficacy of treatment may change as seasons and allergen loads change or as
other complicating factors occur. Clients need to be aware of this, and encouraged to
treat minor fare-ups early. Combinations with topical therapy, fatty acids, and antihista-
mines are often more effective than single therapies.
Other Experimental and Therapeutic Agents
 In humans with atopic dermatiis, studies have demonstrated therapeutic benefits of
complexes,233 thymopentin,212. 293 extracorporeal photochemotherapy,269 and Chinese herbal
therapy.212. 29 A double-blind trial in atopic dogs showed no benefit with homeopathic
a s   d e  s
tally include peptide immunotherapy. anticytokine and cytokine receptor therapies, phos-
 In dogs, misoprostol (6 μg/kg q8h) produced at least 50% reduction in pruritus in
over 50% of patients;132 arofylline (phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitor, 1 mg/kg q12h) was as
effective as prednisone but produced frequent gastrointestinal side efects07
；pentoxifylline
and niacinamide (250 to 500 mg of each q8h) was ineffective*"; cyclosporine (5 to 10 mg/
kg/day) may be useful in severe, medically refractory cases (see Chap. 3).
FelineAtopy
Feline atopy (feline atopic disease) was first described in 1982, and in recent years it has
is heterogeneous, which helps to explain some of the differences found when testing for
602 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
feline atopy.216,433 Feline atopy is a pruritic skin and/or respiratory diseasc in cats that, in
intradcrmal test reactions to environmental allergens.
 The incidence of this disease is controversial, with some investigators stating it to be
the most common cause of allergy in the cat (73% of all allergic cats) or second in
incidence to fea bite hypersensitivity 439 44An inherited predisposition has not been
nent.453 This lack of well-documented genetic component is a major difference from other
species with atopic disease.
CAUSEANDPATHOGENESIS
Feline atopy is causcd by an exaggerated or inappropriate response of the affected cat to
environmental alergenspresmably involving skn-sensizing IgE3343Themost com
 mon cnvironmental allergens are nonseasonal (positive reactions in over 90% of cats
tcstcd),419. 4, 453 In a study of 28 atopic cats, 50% were mainly positive to nonseasonal
allergens and 48% were reactive to both nonscasonal and seasonal allergens.42 This study
also reported immediate rcactivity to flea allergen in 40% of the cats. In a study of 66
atopic cats, 50% wcre hypcrscnsitive to fleas, 58% to oniy nonseasonal allergens, 39% to
nonseasonal and scasonal allergens, and 5% to only pollens.4 HHouse dust mite reactions
(predominantly Dermatophagoides farinae) are the most prevalent of the nonseasonal
reactions, and generally 80% or greater of the atopic cats test positive419.433.44
Other environmental allergens, even tobacco, Inay also cause reactions in some
cats.43 443 44 Normal cats rarely experience positive reactions to Greer Laboratories house
dust mite antigens at l000 PNU/mI and, in eight normal cats, the VARL result was totaily
positivc reactions to house dust mites and 33% of the cats with eosinophilic granuloma
experienced positive results, but this was not statistically significant.44o It has also been
shown that cats with Otodectes infestation produce hypersensitivity reactions that may
cross-react with house dust mites. This could possibly explain some positivc reactions to
house dust mites in normal cats.278
Initially, the results of intradermal testing led to the hypothesis that this disease was
disease had been shown by a number of studies using P-K testing. PCA testing, and
ultrastructural studies demonstrating cutaneous mast cell degranulation only at sites of
antibody against a putative feline IgE showed reactivity against feline IgA and IgM as
well.42 More recent studlies have documented a specific polyclonal antifeline IgE as well
as the ability of the Fce RI-α assay to detect feline IgE.216, 39. 428. 431
 e          n 
number of Langerhans' cells, MHC class II dermal dendritic cells, and a predominance of
CD4+ T cell.446. 448-450. 452 Th2 cells and IL-4 expression may also play a role in feline
prelininary results of patch testing with aeroallergens in cats suggest that the pathogenesis
is similar to that in humans and dogs.446, 448-450 Studies in cats have shown thiat the highest
number of dermal mast cells is found in skin from caudal pinnac, which may explain some
of the head and neck lesions that may be visible when cats scratch at the pinnae.427, 435
CLINICAL FEATURES
No breed or sex predilections have bccn demonstrated. Young cats appear to be predis-
posed; 75% of the atopic cats with miliary dermatitis in one study experienced clinical
which 100% of the cats with skin disease demonstrate 61, 67, 414, 419. 438s The pruritus.
*Stxc rceferences 61, 67a, 416, 423, 424, 445, 453.
Skin Immunc System and Allergie Skin Diseases · 603
however, tnay not be obvious to the owier, particularly in cats presenting with noninHam-
matory alopecia, and some cats are presented for respiratory disease alone. In these cases,
othcr indircct cvidence of pruritus may be found, suchi as voiniting from hair balls, hair in
revealing broken and chopped-off distal ends of hairs, suggesting licking and chewing as
the cause of thc hair loss.
The clinical lesions of feline atopy are quite variable. The four most cormmonly
reported cutaneous reaction patterms are self-induced alopecia (fur mowing) (Fig. 8-8B).
eosinophilic granuloma complex lesions (Fig. 8-8C), miliary dermatitis, and initially nonle-
sional pruritus of the face, neck, and pinnae (Fig. 8-8A).* Some cats manifest various
may also be visible, usually in association with one or more of the rnore common lesions.
Recurrent swelling of the chin or lower lip (eosinophilic granuloma) may occur. The
pruritus and lesions may be localized or generalized.
Localized involvement often includes the abdomen, groin, lateral thorax, and caudal
thighs. The head, neck, and forelegs are also commonly involved. Although the pinnae are
commonly affected, the ear canals are usually spared. Some cats manifest a recurrent,
pruritic, ceruminous otitis externa that is typically misdiagnosed as ear mite infestation.
Rarely, cats manifest an erythematous papulopustular eruption characterized clinicopathol-
ogically as a sterile eosinophilic folliculitis and furunculosis.454 Noncutaneous signs may
aiso be observed. Sneezing was reported in 50% of the cases in one study, and conjuncti-
vitis may also be present.4i9 Chronic coughing and feline asthma may occur in as many as
7.4% of the atopic cats, with or without concurrent skin disease.30. 433. 434, 444 As more
asthmatic cats are carefully tested for atopy, this percentage will likely increase. Lymphad-
enopathy is common in chronic cases that have miliary dermatitis, excoriations, or eosino-
philic plaques. 33. 453 Though secondary bacterial pyoderma is rarely reported as a compli-
cation of feline atopy, one of us (C.E.G.) frequently encounters it in chronic cases with
lymphadenopathy.
incidence of concurrent food hypersensitivity has been reportcd. One study showed that
25% of atopic cats may have concurrent food hypersensitivity, fea bite hypersensitivity, or
both.419 Another retrospective survey of muitiple practitioners indlicated that 48% of atopic
cats had a cormponent of food hypersensitivity.434 In a prospective study of 66 atopic cats,
 8% had concurrent fod hypersensitivity and 50% had concurrent fea bite hypersensitiv-
ity.44 Only one cat in this study had all three diseases. In another prospective study,
100% of the atopic cats had concurrent fea bite hypersensitivity and none was food
hypersensitive.439 A study of 29 allergic cats reported that only one (3%) had concurrent
food hypersensitivity,415 The concurrent presence of Hea bite hypersensitivity and/or food
hypersensitivity can greatly complicate thc diagnostic work-up as well as the therapeutic
regimen.
DIAGNOSIS
The wide variation of clinical lesions reported in atopic cats requires the consideration of
a lengthy differential diagnosis for feline atopy. It is more practical to consider the
  ss  e dp on  p r pe  d
complex lesions (see Chap. 18), miliary dermatitis, and pruritus of the face or pinnae. The
food hypersensitivity, cheyletiellosis, otodectic mange, dermatophytosis, and psychogenic
alopecia,
The diagnosis of feline atopy is based on a compatible history and physical findings
*See refere1rces 61, 67a, 414, 419, 420, 433, 434, 438, 441, 453.
H
FIGURE 8-8. A, Feline atopy. Facial excoriations. B, Feline atopy. Selfinduced symmetric alopecia. Note
correpondtknfodsthat tngudoesnoteachwhilc thecatisculed toiitdoen,Contat
atous patch on the lip and alopecia are
caused by contact with a plastic dish during eating. Note partial
thighsfogwiodrsensivityHveredaryaandalciaafdhersiv
induced eosinophilic vasculitis.
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 605
FIGURE 8-9. Feline atopy. Cy-
tologic exarmination reveals numer-
ous cosinophils and lesser numbers
of nondegenerate neutrophils.
allergy test reaction, though it is ikely that this requirement is not met in some atopic
cats because the test is difficult to interpret in many cats.61 67a. 456 Good fea control and a
 poor response to a 9- to 13-week hypoallergenic diet, respectively, are required to rule out
keeping the cat indoors. In vitro tests are not used to diagnose atopy but only to help
select allergens when hyposensitization is being considered, Cytologic examination of skin
lesions usually reveals eosinophils and occasionally basophils, though this picture is not
( ) asay a en pue pog rn  ose a q adoe g os
The presence of degenerate neutrophils with intracellular bacteria indicates secondary
bacterial pyoderma. Peripheral eosinophilia is often present, unless the patient has re-
cently received glucocorticoids.67a
Allergy Testing
 Intradermal skin testing has been considered the optimal method for diagnosing atopic
conditions in cats.* Experience with intradermal skin testing is limited in the cat com-
pared with the dog. One study evaluated testing solutions in normal cats and, overall, the
same protocol for aqueous allergens as that used in the dog was considered effective for
the cat.f Age, allergen, coat color, and sex have a minor effect on skin test reactivity.416
  d  o so   p s  
firebush, and fea. However, it was shown that at least some of the reactions in normal
cats are not irritant but most likely are mediated by reaginic antibodies, because they
could be passively transferred.416. 430
● Procedure. The technique for feline intradermal allergy testing is similar to that
described in the dog, with the following exceptions:
1. Sedation with ketamine, ketamine and diazepam, tiletamine-zolazepam, or a gen.
eral gas anesthetic is usually used for restraint.61, 67a, 415, 437. 453
2.1
 Extra care should be taken to make sure that all the injections are intraderrmal.
3.
 The test site should be examined at 5 and 20 minutes post injection because feline
reactions sometimes occur and fade rapidlly, within 10 minutes.
 4. Reactions, including those to histamine, are often much subtler (less erythema and
turgidity) than those in dogs.
*See referenwes 6l, 67a, 414, 415, 425, 438, 442.
+See references 61, 67a, 416, 419, 436, 445, 453.
606 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
A study has shown that intradermal skin testing in cats, with and without prior
 sedation, produced marked increases in the concentrations of plasma cortisol, corticotro.
 pin, and a-melanocyte-stimulating hormone.45s This may explain the typically weak re-
o s  n e si n si  p si u sn us on ssds
cats are as reactive as any dog. Whether this refiects a different group of atopic cats or
has any prognostie significance has yet to be determined. Immediate skin test reactivity in
cats was reported to return 2 weeks after stopping oral prednisone administration and 4
wecks after the injection of methylprednisolone acetate.417
Serum In Vitro Testing
Commercially available serologic allergy tests (RAST, ELISA) that claim to diagnose feline
atopy by detecting allergen-specific IgE are available. Only recently has it heen shown that
 s     sn  e e u e 
neity of IgE antibodies in cats.430 The presence of D. farinae -specific IgE does rnot
distinguish among healthy, atopic, and D. farinae-immunized cats and does not correlate
increased by Toxocara cati infestations and by modified live virus vaccines.433. 41 In vitro
tests have been compared with skin tests with variable results, gcnerally poorer than those
obtained with intradermal skin testing.
A study compared the results of intradermal skin tests and a commercially available
 p  vr    p so oo  (rra) sn ae 
useful diagnostic test.42 In another report evaluating the VARL, only 1 of 8 normal cats
reacted, whereas 6 of 12 suspected atopic cats rcacted.343 However, in experimentally
similar to or more accurate than those obtained with intradermal testing.360. 430 Overall.
these commercial tests have not been evaluated in cats to the degree that they have in the
dog and, at this time, should probably not be used to diagnose atopy but only for the
selection of allergens for hyposensitization. Cats with confirmed allergic skin disease have
significantly more IgGd directed against house dust, fea, and pollens than normal cats and
cats with nondermatologic illnesses.429
 Only one study has rcported results of hyposensitization based on in vitro testing,
whercin success rates were similar to those based on intraderrnal testing.s34 Though we
havc not reviewed the percentages, wc have also seen cats respond well to hyposensitiza-
tion based on in vitro tests. In cats, results of intradermal testing are often diffcult to
interpret, which appears to be a disadvantage compared with in vitro testing. This also
makes the determination of in vitro sensitivity and specificity suspect if one uses the often
difficult-to-analyze results of intradermal skin testing as the standard. In addition, a
blinded study on the reproducibility of intraderrmal skin testing in cats has not been
reported, We have seen cats with poor intradermal test results but positive in vitro VARL
tests and good responses to hyposensitization. If only intradermal testing had been done,
place in the approach to suspected atopic cats.
Basophil Degranulation Test
The in vitro basophil degranulation test has been reported to show promise in the
 diagnosis of feline atopy.57. 5s The original test requires fresh blood, must be run within 24
hours, is very tine consuming and labor intensive, and is unlikely to become anything
more than a research tool. The demonstration that feline sera also binds to human
basophils makes the test potentially more practical because only serum is needed37. 38
 Preliminary results in cats showed a 76.5% correlation with intradermal skin test results.377
Histopathology
Skin biopsies of atopic cats are not diagnostic but are valuahle for looking for evidence of
vary according to the clinical lcsion sampled. Biopsy specimens from clinically noninfar-
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 607
matory alopccic areas typically have a normal to slightly hyperplastic epidermis with a mild
supericial perivascular dermatitis wherein lymphocytes or mast cells are predominant
(Fig. 8-I0B). InHammatory lesions (facial and pinnal pruritus, miliary dermatitis) reveal
ulcerations, and variable degrees of superficial or deep perivascular dermatitis, wherein
eosinophils are usually the dominant inflammatory cell (Fig. 8-10A).455
 Intraepidermal mast cells have also been seen in skin specimens from atopic cats,
Specimens from atopic cats with eosinophilic granuloma complex lesions reveal changes
typical of those lesions (see Chap. 18). In some cats, eosinophilic folliculitis and furunculo--
sis are prominent.5s To date, atopy, food hypersensitivity, and Hca bite hypersensitivity
cannot be differentiated histologically.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The prognosis for feline atopy is good, although soine cases are extremely cifficult to
d  pe u po asad  e  
derma greatly interfere with achieving a favorable therapeutic response, and care should
be taken to alleviate these complications. Treatment is usually required for life, during
which muliple different therapies may be used. The treatment plan may involve the use
of avoidance (see Canine Atopic Disease), glucocorticoids, antihistarmines, fatty acids (scc
The treatment selected varies according to many client and patient factors. Generally,
 the differences in risks of therapy among the different trcatments is not gravely important
because cats appear relatively resistant to the acute and chronic side effects of glucocorti-
convenient than the alternative forms of therapy. As a result, many atopic cats are
FIGURE 8-I0. Feline atopy. 4, Miliary dernatitis re-
action pattern. Perivascular and interstitial infiltrations of
predominantly cosinophils. B, Fur-mowing reaction pat-
lynphocytes. Note the epidermis is normal.
608 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
used in the cat owing to the actual or perceived diffculty in bathing cats. In cats that
tolerate bathing, however, and whose owners are willing, this practice can have a very
benefcial effect. Cats may also present the problem of not tolerating long-term pilling or
 oral therapy. This is one indication for hyposensitization bccause we have seen numerous
cats that tolerate injections q7-30d much better than oral medications. If glucocorticoids
need to be avoided, antihistamines alone or in combination with fatty acids should be
tried.
Hyposensitization is an option available in cases for which intradermal skin testing has
determined what the cats are specifically allergic to. Hyposensitization utilizing_cither
aqueous or alum-precipitated allcrgens is reported to give favorable responses in 70% of
cases, though most studies concerm small numbers of cats and do not involve long-term
follow-up.* In one study of 29 cats with follow-up periods of greater than 1 year, 50% did
not respond or were lost to follow-up prior to assessing response. Of those that stayed
with hyposensitization, 47% responded with a moderate or better response.415 It was also
reported that the response at 12 months was similar to that in the literature but decreased
with the longer follow-up periods.415
 Hyposensitization based on serum in vitro testing has also been reported effective,
with 75% of the cases improving over 50%.434 This study also indicated that different
 response rates may occur, depending on the type of lesions present. In this report, though
the numbers were small, 100% of linear eosinophilic granulomas and 95% of the indolent
ulcers responded well; the poorest response was in cats with self-induced alopecia, with
 53% responding. Most interesting was the 90% responsc in cats with asthma. Further
work looking at the different presentations of atopy is needed to confirm these observa-
tions.
 In some cats, hyposensitization is the best option other than repositol glucocorticoidls
because it is given by injection and rclativcly infrequently (once the maintenance dose is
reached). Many cats tolerate the injcctions bcttcr than long-term oral medications. Some
dermatologists use the samc immunotherapy protocol that they use for the dog; others use
a schedule similar to the one they use for small dogs (see Canine Atopy). One of us
(C.E.G.) has found that many of the cases that respond to hyposensitization stay im-
 provcd, even with a lower volume (0.5 ml) of maintenance injections, and uses a different
 protocol in cats from even the small dog protocol (Table 8-20).
Anecdotal reports indicate that chlorambucil or cyclosporine may be useful in severely
atopic cats that do not respond to conventional therapies (see Chaps. 3 and 9).433. 41
Contact Hypersensitivity
pular or lichenified dermatitis usually affecting sparsely haired skin in contact areas.
CAUSEANDPATHOGENESIS
Only a few reports of naturally occurring contact hypersensitivity in dogs and cats have
been documented by patch testing, yet this is a common and well-studied problem in
human dermatology.67a, 45s Much of the veterinary literature and data on naturally occur-
.In
reality, there is often a huge overlap between what has been called contact hypersensitiv-
experimentally induced irritant and allergic contact dermatitis can look histologically very
different in dogs and humans at 24 hours, the chronic lesions in natural cases may be
impossible to dlifferentiate.472. 483
Classically, contact hypersensitivity represents a type IV hypersensitivity reaction
whereinhistologicalylymhcyts arethdoinant cellt923 30493561 a6. 5 4
See references 414, 419, 433, 434, 436, 438, 442, 445, 453.
Skin Immunc System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 609
● Table 8-20
 HYPOSENSITIZATION SCHEDULE FOR CATS
DAY
DATE
ITCH
VOLUME
DAY
DATE
ITCH
VOLUME
Vial i
Five-Doy Intervai
1
0.1
30
0.5
3
0.2
35
0.5
5
0.3
40
0.5
7
0.4
9
0.6
Seven-Doy Intervai
11
0.8
47
20
13
1.0
54
0.5
61
0.5
Vial 2
68
0.5
1.5
0.1
Ter-Day Interva!
17
0.2
78
0.5
19
0.3
88
0.5
21
0.4
98
0.5
23
0.5
108
0.5
25
0.5
118
0.5
· Grade itch on scale of O (none) to 10 (most severe this pet has had in thc: past).
● Note: it is possible to go higher than 10 if the itching is geting worse than ever before.
· Call at 4 weeks and report grade of itching.
·Callif itch goes up by more than 2 levels.
sr ase an au ji sous anou e ia on noud  -
·Vomiting, diarrhea, anxiousness, weakness are possible reactions.
·Reactions will usually occur within 1I to 2 hours after shot is given.
· Recheck appointments should be made around day 60 and day 120.
· Itch increases beforc shot is due, or after shot is given.
* Itch decreascs after shot is given.
Most of the work on the pathogenesis of contact hypersensitivity has been performed in
laboratory animals. In contrast with irritant reactions, allergic contact reactions are charac-
terized by a immunologic reaction to a hapten, usually a small, chemically reactive, lipid-
soluble molecule that binds to a protein to become a complete antigen.472 The hapten
hn e ss   s o g    s s
synthesis.
The initial presentation and processing of the hapten is called the afferent phase of 
 allergic contact reactions. This phase is thought to require transfer of stimulated hapten-
containing Langerhans' cells from the skin to regional lymph nodes. This emigration from
skin to lynph nodes may be initiated by TNF-α.5s These T cells are stimulatet to express
skin-homing ligands that direct their movement to the skin. Langerhans' cell mumhers are
not in primary irritant contact dermatitis.455
The efferent phase or elicitation phase occurs in response to exposure to hapten in an
this reaction may occur locally. The activated memory T cells arc recruited to the site of
hapten exposure by expression of adhesion molecules, such as VCAM-l, E-selectin, and
ICAM-1 on the vascular endothelium. ICAM-1 is also expressed on keratinocytes and may
and keratinocytes after hapten exposure and stimulates the expression of E-selectin and
to substance P, a neuropeptide that may be released as a result of the interaction between
Langerhans' cells and nerve fibers.458 Other epidermal cytokines involved include IL-6 and
MIP. Which cytokines are associated with allergic contact and not irritant contact dermati-
tis is an area receiving extensive study. It appears that the differences in IL-1β, IL-6, IL-
12, and IFN-y may be key factors.iz The production of IL-12 may be central to the
 development of a Thl cell response.458
610 * Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
Newer information blurs the distinction between immunologic and nonimmunologic
events and makes differentiation problematic.477 The clinical and histopathologic features
Overiap, greatly. Langerhans' cells are just as actively involved in irritant as allergic reac-
tions (decreased numbers, apposition of lymphocytes). Virtually all cytokines identified in
allergic reactions are also present in irritant reactions (ICAM-1, IL-2, TNF-α, LFA-1).
The percentage of T-cell subtypes, Langerhans' cells, macrophages, and activated antigens
are not significantly dlifferent. Even patch testing produces the same cytokine profile and
so forth. Some authors conclude that the difference between irritant and allergic reactions
is more conceptual than demonstrable.477
The last phase of naturally occurring contact hypersensitivity is the resolution phase.
Less is kuown about this phase, though IL-10 may play an important role as it interferes
with Th2 cell cytokine production. IL-10 is upreguiated in keratinocytes in the late phase
of allergic contact reactions. Basophils, which begin to migrate into late lesions, may also
be involved in stimulating resohution,.472
In dogs, histopathologic cxamination has given conficting and confiusing results.6a
 In a Danish study wherein positivc patch test reactions underwent biopsy and histopatho-
logic examination, the neutrophil was the dominant infammatory cell.42 In another his-
topathologic study of experimentally induced contact hypersensitivity to DNCB in
dogs, the histopathology was similar to that seen in humans and laboratory animals, with
ar p oe ur ss aso prl e sud sr pe saa
also implicated eosinophils as a cellular component of contact hyperscnsitivity in the
tiating cases of contaet-induced atopic disease and irritant dermatitis from truc type IV
It has been noted that atopy is present in about 20% of the dogs with contact
hypersensitivity.474 This is in contrast with humans, wherein atopic dermatitis is associated
with a lower incidence of contact hypersensitivity.45s Whether this reflects similar breed
 predispositions, similarities in basic immunologic pathogenesis between contact hypersensi-
 d  d  so  po a    se 
itself may be a type of contact hypersensitivity, a type I (immediate) contact hypersensitiy-
confuse the diagnosis.
Experimental attempts to induce contact hypersensitivity in dogs and cats have given
inconsistent results. Nobreus and collagues,73 using a modifed “maximization technique”
of intradermal and topical sensitization, successfully sensitized dogs to dinitrochloroben-
zene. They showed that the sensitization could be transferred to normal dogs with
thoracic duct lymphocytes and that sensitization could be suppressed with antilymphocyte
serum. Krawiec and Gaafar466 as well as Conroy483 successfully sensitized dogs to dini-
trochlorobenzene with either intradermal and topical or topical challenge. Schultz and
Adams479 reported that helminth antigens, tissue antigens, viral antigens, bacterial anti-
gens, fungal antigens, protein antigens, dinitrochlorobenzenc, and mitogens had been used
sponses in the skin, with lirmited reproducibility or irreproducible results. Schultz and
Maguirec47 induced delayed-type hypersensitivity in normal cats with dinitrochlorobenzene.
Spontaneous, well-documented cases of contact hypersensitivity are rare in the vctcri-
o suunq on paajsun aq Au yeo uosiod p Aai uosod ynoui arnan Au
dogs carrying the oleoresins in their haircoats, only rare cases occur in the dog, and
 documentation of these by patch testing has not been published. Other plants, however,
have rarely been documented as a cause of contact hypersensitivity.Kunkle and Gross5t
reported a beautifully documented case of naturally occurring contact hypersensitivity to
Tradescantia fluminensis (wandering Jew plant) in a dog. Sensitivity to Hippeastrum
(Amarylidaceae) leaves and bulbs was documented in a dog in the Netherlands.4s6 Three
cases were described with positive patch to plants belonging to the Commelinceae farmily
(Commelina diffusa [spreading dayflower], Murdannia nudiffora [doveweed], and Trades-
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 6II
cantia fluminensis [wandering Jew]).46s One dog was also atopic, all three dogs tested had
d d  yo a e  a  d o ai a e
test site that was characterized by an eosinophilic infltrate. Asian jasmine was also shown
to be a cause in a case documented with patch testing and rcsolution upon avoidance.470
revealed on histopathologic examination of the patch test site.
 Dandelion lcaves were well documented as a cause in one dog.46s Cedar wood was
also reported as a cause of contact hypersensitivity, although patch testing was not per-
formed to docunent the case.463 Indoor or synthetic products that contain allergens are a
major cause of disease in humans but, again, are rarely documented to cause disease in
dogs. In a Danish study, confirmed contact hypersensitivity to the following substances
was docurmented: thiuram mix, cobalt chloride, nickel sulfate, quinoline mix, colophony,
black rubber mix, wood alcohols, epoxy resin, balsam of Peru, carba mix, formaldehyde,
fragrance mix, etlylenediamine, prinin, wood tar, and naphthyl mix.4s1, 4szTwo other dogs
were patch test positive to colophony, a pine oil resin, and this correlated with reaction to
cleaning products.462 Two different reports described reactions caused by cxposure to
cement.462.475
Well-documented cases were also reported in three dogs that were allergic to syn-
thetie textiles, though the allergenic component was not identifed.46s Carpet deodorizer
and a plastic shopping bag were suspected, but not proven, to be contact allrgens in a
dog16 and cat,471 respectively. Bleach has also been reported to cause reactions in two
dogs.62 Neomycin is a commonly mentioned but rarely documcntcd contact allergen in
dogs and cats.476. 45 Because it is often present in otic preparations, neonycin is most
frequently incriminated as a cause of “allergic contact otitis exterma." Contact dermatitis
accounted for about 43% and 27%, respectively, of the idiosyncratic cutaneous adverse
 drug reactions recognized in dogs166 and cats.165
  s jo as nd a  po aq  
hypersensitivity can be induced in dogs and cats, but only with dificulty and with
inconsistent results compared with tests on humans and guinea pigs. The incidence of
naturally oceurring disease is much lower than in humans and rarely as well documented
as in humans. Additionally, the pathogenesis of the lesions needs to be studicd because
there may be species differences or even multiple pathogenic mechanisms in the dog, as
evidenced by the strikingly different histopathologic findings reported from clinical lesions
d d  r   o      s    
tivity.483
CLINICAL FEATURES
 Naturally occurring contact hypcrsensitivity is reported to account for about 1% to 10% of
a Aa e hl npsu a siea u ae y on pe cr vis s n vg rs auu 
disease. A 1993 symposium on contact hypersensitivity in the dog presented very small
that over 20% of his cases of canine contact hypersensitivity occurred in yellow Labrador
sitivity in dogs in Denmark,4s1 50% of the dogs were Gernan shepherds, whereas this
breed accounted for only 16% of the purehred registered dogs. Other breedis described
but not documented to be at increased risk are Wirehaired fox terriers, Scottish terriers,
West Highland white terriers, and Golden retrievers.474 These are breeds also at risk for
s ood xs io oe o zt 'tsi p aq  podr ose are sood yung do
been documented.
 u       s  d s
naturally occurring "allergic contact dermatitis" in dogs and cats are listed in Table 8-21.
Again, virtually none of thesc substances, other than those previously listed, has been well-
612 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
● Table 8-21
SUBSTaNCES rEPoRTED tO CAUSE
NaTurally Occurring "allerGiC
ContaCt derMatitiS" In doGs
AND CATS
SUBSTANCE CATE-
EXAMPLES
GORY
Plants
Pollens and resins (grasses, trees, weeds), jasmine blooms, poison ivy, poison
oak, wandering Jew, dandelion leaves, Asian jasmine, cedar wood, Hippeas
Medications
Numerous topicals (especially neomycin, bacitracin, thiabendazole, tretinoin,
miconazole, polyhydroxidine, tetracaine and other “caines"); numerous otic
preparations, soaps, shampoos (especially those containing tars, creosols, and
benzoyanattd
dipsspaysaand ck collars andmedallons; especially dmonc
rotenone)
Highly chlorinated water
Home furnishings
Fibers (wocl, nylon, synthetics), dyes, nordants, fnishes, polishes, cleansers,
rubber and plastic products, detergents, cat litter, collars (leather, metal),
deodorants, cement, nickel, dichromate
documented with patch testing, and even less with typical histopathology of the positive
 patch test sites. None reported on results of intradermal testing with similar extracts or of
testing with protein-free extracts. Such studies may help to determine whether thesc
 animals have type IV hypersensitivity or IgE-mediated diseases.
 Clinical signs of contact hypersensitivity include varying degrees of dermatitis, which
tend to be confined to hairless or sparsely haired areas of skin in contact regions: ventral
aspect of paws (not pads) (Fig. 8-1lB); ventral abdomen (see Fig. 8-8D), thorax (see
Fig. 8-8E), tail, and neck; scrotum (see Fig. 8-11C and D); point of chin; perineum; and
 p  s  d  e p r s    s
Importantly, these cases have a history of slowly spreading into these adjacent areas as
hair loss progresses at the margins of erythematous pruritic lesions. If the allergen is in a
topical medicament in liquid, aerosol, or powder form, cutaneous reactions may also be
visible in haired areas as well (see Fig. 8-llA). Reactions to rubber or plastic dishes and
rawhide chew toys are usually confined to the lips and nose (see Fig. 8-8F). Lesions in
ring patterns around the neck, though now less conmon with the newer collars, used to
be a problem with Hea collars, particularly in cats (see Fig. 8- 11E).
Acute skin lesions consist of various combinations of erythema, macules, papules, and.
rarely, vesicles. Although vesicles are the classic lesions in most species, they are rarc in
dogs and cats and often manifest themselves only at the microscopic level in acute lesions.
Chronic lesions are often alopecic plaques that may be hyperpigmented or hypopig-
mented, excoriated, and lichenifed. Secondary bacterial pyoderma, Malassezia dermatitis,
seborrheic skin disease,or combinatonsof thesemaybepresent4,41, 484,sPruritus
varies from mild to intense. Contact hypersensitivities may be seasonal or nonseasonal,
depending on the allergens involved. In households with several dogs or cats, involvement
of a single animal would suggest hypersensitivity, whereas clinical signs in several animals
would point to irritant reactions or contagious disease.
DIAGNOSIS
sensitivity, canine scabies, insect hypersensitivity, Pelodera dermatitis, hookworm dermati-
tis, staphylococcal folliculitis, and Malassezia dermiatitis. Definitive diagnosis is based on
history, physical findings, and results of provocative exposure and patch testing with
appropriate histopathology. Provocative exposure involves avoiding contact with suspected
allergenic substances for up to 14 days.61, 67a. 468. 474.45
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 613
FIGURE 8-Il. Contact dermatitis. A, Contact dermatitis due to neomycin (Panolog) on the bridge of the nosc of a dog.
B, Alopecia, erytheina, and lichenification of the ventral paws, one of the common patterns of disease in contact dennatitis.
C, Crusting, erytherma, erosions of the scrotum forn contact dermatitis, a cominonly affected site in male dogs and it may
be the only area of involvement. D, Canine brucellosis. Scrotal ulceration due to licking. E, Alopecia, erythema, erosions,
and crusting in a cat with a flea collar reaction demonstrating thc classic ring of lesions around the neck.
614 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
The animal is first bathed with a nonirritating. hypoallergenic shampoo to remove all
r, e pd   p s a r ss oe a
environment for up to 14 days. The animal is then re-exposed to its normal environment
or to suspect substances, one at a time, and is observed for an exacerbation of the
dermatosis over 7 to 10 days. Provocative exposure is timc consuming, requires a patient
and dedicated owner, aud is frequently impossible to undertake. Additionally, without
biopsy or patch testing, provocative exposure does not reliably distinguish among contact
allergy, atopic disease, and iritant skin reactions. To better define the reactions,
，skin
biopsy specimens taken from acute lesions induced by the exposure should be studied.
The patch test is the method for documenting contact hypersensitivity.9 50. 61. 67a.47. 81
4s2 484.s5 In the classic closed patch test, the tesf substance is applied to a piece of cloth
or soft paper that is then placed dircctly on intact skin, covered with an impermeable
substance, and affxed to the skin with tape. After 48 hours, the patch is removed and the
condition of the underlying skin examined. Owing to the logistical problems of applying
and securing patch test substances to dogs and cats, patch testing is rarely done. The
sliding of the material and irritation from tape leads to much misinterpretation of results.
The use of ether to remove the tape and the adhesive (Scanpar) tends to minimize biut
not eliminate thesc problems.474
Walton4$84 rccommended open patch testing in the dog and listed suggested allergen
merely rubbed into a suitable marked test site of norrnal skin and the test site is then
exarmined daily over 5 days. Walton84 reported that positive patch test reactions in dogs
are much less infarmmatory than those in human beings and guinea pigs, usually consist-
ing of mild erythema and edema and variable degrees of pruritus. In a Danish study, 63%
of the affected dogs were monosensitive and 23% were sensitive to two allergens.82
and suspected allergens are applied to the skin (preferably with Scanpar), taped in place,
and secured under a body bandage. The test inaterials are removed in 48 hours, and the
test sites are observed for the following 3 to 5 days. Optimally, test sites should undergo
biopsy, but more fulminant reactions can be considered positive. The nature of the
reaction is not determined without biopsy of these acute lesions. Additionally, substances
eliciting positive reactions should be tested on normal animals to make sure that they are
not irritants.
A standardized patch test kit has been recommended for dogs.474 s2 Limited testing
with this kit in control dogs had been undertaken until a study indicated that 83.3% of
normal dogs responded to one or more allergens, suggesting that this human kit is not
appropriate for testing in dogs at the recormmended strengths.459 Further work at diffcrcnt
strengths is warranted before this test can be used in the dog, and it has not been
evaluated in cats. Additionally, many of the documented causes of contact hypersensitivity
ro sued leg ara suarane aui ssaq isan ain Aq pasu uaoq say pm saop 
materials not included in this standard battery. Therefore, a complete work-up still re-
quires that materials from the dog's local environment be tested in addition to the
and applied with the Finn Chambers or placed in the center of a 2-inch gauze pad.
Histopathology
In experimentally induced contact hypersensitivity in dogs and cats, skin biopsy revealed
varying degrees of superficial perivascular dermatitis, with mononuclear cells predorminat-
skin, however, biopsies revealed varying degrees of superfcial perivascular dermatitis in
which neutrophils prevailed.479 Reports of natural cases also have revealed significant
numbers of eosinophils.46, 469, 470. 483
 In naturally occurring contact bypersensitivity of dogs, cats, and human beings, skin
biopsy is nondiagnostic, showing varying degrees of superficial perivascular dermatitis
(spongiotic, hyperplastic) wherein neutrophils, mononuclear cells, or eosinophils may pre-
 Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseascs · 615
with spontaneous contact hypersensitivity revealed that neutrophils were thc doininant
dermaf infammatory cell and were commonly associated with neutrophilic cxocytosis and
even focal epidermal necrosis 482 These changes are unexpected and suggestive of irritant
contact dermatitis. No significant differences are found in the number of mononuclear
infammatory cells or in their subclasses in skin from humans with allergic or primary
irritant contact dermatitis.9 50 Histopathologic findings consistent with secondary bacterial
 pyoderma, Malassezia dermatitis, seborrheic skin disease, or combinations of these may be
present.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The prognosis for contact hypcrscnsitivity depends on the offending allergen. Therapy of
  r s          
glucocorticoids. Avoidance of allergens is preferable but may be impossible, either because
of the nature of the substanccs or because they cannot be identified. In such instances,
 pentoxifylline or glucocorticoids are usually effective but are often needed for life.
.In
some animals, management may consist of topical glucocorticoids alone (see Chap. 3).
Other animals require systemic glucocorticoids. Prednisolone or prednisone may be ad-
ministered orally at 1 mg/kg (dog) or 2 mg/kg (cat) daily for 5 to 7 days and then on an
alternate-day regimcn as nceded (see Chap. 3). Pentoxifylline (a methylxanthine deriva-
tive) suppresses thc production of TNF-α by leukocytes and keratinocytes. It also downre-
gulates adhesion molecule expression, and the oral administration of the drug in humans
with contact hypersensitivity gives variable results.460. 4s0 Pentoxifylline (10 mg/kg qSh) was
shown effectivc in preventing the development of contact hypersensitivity in the canine.469
Topical application of pentoxifylline was ineffective in treating humans with contact hyper-
sensitivity.460
D s u issd q o us q sy s ua  s
 Such hyposensitization, however, is usually limited and temporary. In gcneral, attempts 
to hyposensitize human beings, dogs, and cats to contactants havc bccn totaly unsuc-
cessful.*
Canine Food Hypersensitivity
 Food hypersensitivity (adverse food reaction, food allergy, food intolerance) is a nonsea-
sonal, pruritic skin disorder of dogs that is associated with the ingestion of a substance
found in the dog's diet496, 301. 529 Presumably it is a hypersensitivity reaction to an anti-
 s o on p  o ai  se po  s  
nontoxic, noninmunologic reactions (intolerances) may also be occurring and be incor-
rectly called food hypersensitivity. Toxic reactions are usually dose related, occur in any
individual, and are often associated with histarnine or bacterial toxins in the food.
 In one study of North American commercial pet fods, the histamine contact varied
s  o oi  qd si  s  g  g 
but might be enough to enhance existing pruritus in some animals. Food intoleranccs are
an individual sensitivity to a food that may occur by a variety of nonimmunologic mecha-
nisms, including metabolic, pharmacologic, and idiosyneratic. Their clinical differentiation
fomalrisralyaccmshdrcsaryhmd
tioity is still accepted, howcver, becanse of its common usage and because of the diffculty
differentiating betwccn hypersensitivity and intolerance in practice.67a.505
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Diet has long bcen recognized as a cause of hypersensitivity-like skin reactions in dogs.
cats, and human heings. Although the pathomechanism of food hypersensitivity is unclear,
*See references 22, 50, 61, 67a, 481, 482, 484.
616 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
type I hypersensitivity reactions are well documented and the most common type of
hypersensitivity reactions in humans, although type II and IV reactions have been sus-
 pected. Cutaneous type I reactions are associated with both immediate and late-phase
reactions.61 67a. 50s. 523 Immediated (within minutes to hours) and delayed (within several
hours to days) reactions to f0ods have also ocurred in the dog and cat.61. 67a 491. 517. 535
Why the skin is a frequent target of food-induced hypersensitivity is not well known,
though it has been recognized in humans that cutaneous lymphocyte antigen is induced
on T cells when cutaneous disease is present but not on T cells in food-related respiratory
disease.523 whether sensitization occurs in the intestinal mucosa or to absorbed allergen is
unkaown. Normally the gut possesses several mechanisms that make up the intestinal
rmucosal barrier, which blocks the absorption or the entering of foreign antigens into the
atic and intestinal enzymes in the gut luinen, and intestinal cell lysosomal activity. Intesti-
nal peristalsis also acts to decrease absorption of potential antigens by rermoving antigens
trapped in the intestinal mucous.
The intestinal mucosal barrier is composed of a protective mucous coating overlying
the epithelial cells, which are sealed together by tight junctions. Together the mucous and
epithelial cells block the passage of most macromolecules. This is supported by an immu-
nologic response of secretory IgA from the plasma cells in the lamina propria. Secretory
 IgA binds antigens and removes thcm in the intestinal mucus or, for those antigens that
pass through the intestinal barrier, secretory IgA binds antigen and is removed from the
mechanisms stimulate an immune response which, for many molecules, results in toler-
ance or anergy by activation of suppressor (CD8) T cells or suppressor cytokine profiles
(such as IL-4, IL-I0, and TGF-β) from Th2 and Th3 cells.4s9 Abnormalities in the barrier
or itnmune response may result in sensitization. Therefore, damage to the normal defense
barricrs along with ingestion of food molecules at the same time most likely contributes to
which molecules become antigenic.
The type of molecule also plays a role because most food hypersensitivity reactions
are directed against complex glycoproteins. The protection is delayed in human infants
because, in the first month of life, there is predominantly an IgM response, which is not
as effective as secretory IgA in trapping and removing antigens,523 Children have imma-
ture intestinal mucosal barriers that are less efficient in handling and processing food
proteins.,523
 Despite these defenses, an immunologic response to a variety of food antigens often
Occurs both innormal individuals and those with proven food hyersensiivity0,,523 In
rodents, it has been shown that antigen-presenting cells in the mononuclear phagocytic
system stimulate gut CD8+ T cells that play a role in the development of immune
tolerance; if overloaded with multiple antigens, this may prevent the induction of toler-
ance to subsequent exposed antigens. This observation has led to the suggestion that, if a
similar mechanism occurred in human infants, the observation of increased incidence of
food hypersensitivity in 4-month-old human infants fed a variety of solids foods could be
explained.523
Another consideration in animals, in which gastrointestinal parasitism and viral enteri-
tis are relatively common, is that a damaged intestinal tract allows the bypassing of the
normal defense mechanisms and antigens would overioad the gut mononuclear phagocytic
parasitic infection.29 This has been shown experinentally wherein endoparasites favor the
development of IgE to orally administered allergens in atopy-prone dogs495 and in cats.53
Poor digestion results in larger protein molecules and, because food hypersensitivity to
 Small proteins and amino acids is rare, these rmay be more capable of inducing a hyper-
sensitivity reaction.521
Additionally, because endoparasitism and viral enteritis occur in young dogs and food
hypersensitivity often develops in young dogs. it becomes a tempting hypothesis that
needs to be studied. Attention has also been focused on a heterogeneous group of
cytokines called histamine-releasing factors.61. 50. 505 After being initially generated by
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 617
chronic antigenic exposures, these cytokines can cause histamine release in the absence of
the provoking antigen, and this release can continue for some time after the antigen is
removed. Such a mechanism could explain the long delay (10 to 13 weeks) reported
between the initiation of a hypoallergenic diet and Clinical irnprovement in some food-
hypersensitive dogs. This mechanism is also thought to play a role in cutaneous hyperiri-
tability with chronic ingestion of the offending food allergens.523
Highly inbred, high IgE-producing atopic Spaniel-Basenji colony dogs were immu-
nized subcutaneously with food antigen extracts in alum.4s The dogs then experienced
clinical manifestations of food hypersensitivity after oral challenge with the foods. How--
ever, these dogs experienced only gastrointestinal signs.
Compared with what is known in humans, litle is known about the food allergens
that are important in small animals. Most commonly, the allergen is a water-soluble
glycoprotein present in the food, and this glycoprotein may become recognizable only
after digestion or heating and preparation of the food. The size of the allergenic glycopro-
teins in humans is generally large, with a molecular weight greater than 12,000 daltons.
This has not been confirmed in the dog. A company report of nine food-hypersensitive
dogs described reactions to allergens most likely with molecular weights greater than 1400
daltons in casein, fish, and egg.87 In the three casein-hypersensitive dogs, the offending
allergen was determined to have a molecular weight hetween 1100 and 4500 daltons. This
determination was based on patients reacting to a diet containing a hydrolysate with 98%
   a  e o no q s   s q sd  jo
the proteins being less than 1l00 daltons.
In another study, a low-molecular-weight hydrolyzed diet was used to diagnosc food
hypersensitivity in 69% of 29 suspected food-hypersensitive dogs.50o Rosser challenged 7
food-hypersensitive dogs with a hydrolyzed dict in which 98.8% of the proteins were
smaller than 1400 daltons— with no exacerbations.4$7
The documentation of a hypersensitive mechanism is rarely confirmed in the dog.
Food intolerance is also likely in the dog and may mimie food hypersensitivity reactions.
In humans, food intolerance is thought to account for the najority of adverse fod
p  ps a ou s sss so i sd  r s
We are beginning to acquire information on the dietary iteins responsible for food
  j os     s  ss    
lenged. Good studies are difficult because few owners are willing to scparatc a diet into
its components and to feed each item individually to identify the responsible allergen. In
addition, challenges are open and, in humans, the placebo effect has been shown to be
very high when attempting to determine dietary allergens. Therefore, documentation is
based on three positive double-blinded, placebo-controlled food challenges.523 In vitro
(serologic) test results cannot be relied on to detect allergens that cause hypersensitivity
because they are positive in most normal dogs and in most dogs with other skin dis-
eases.527 These test results are also positive in most dogs with proven hypersensitivity to
food, but not to the important allergens as determined by test meal investigations.527
The largest prospective study to date evaluated 25 food-hypersensitive dogs with
ingredients (beef, chicken, chicken eggs, cow milk, wheat, soy, corn) and not necessarily
to all the ingredients the dog had been eating prior to the diagnosis. Eighty percent of the
dogs reacted to one or two, and 64% of the dogs reacted to two or more, of these seven
foods, and the mean number of reactions in all dogs was 2.4. No dogs reacted to more
than five proteins, but we have seen a few cases that reacted to numerous proteins, and
one of us (C.E.G.) had a patient that, over a 2-year period, experienced hypersensitivity
pn  pau dn papua pue pap sem ii rd Aaa A on sunan
with corticosteriods and fed the foods it was hypersensitive to.
 In another study, one dog was hypersensitive to rine food items.516 Beef was the most
common reactant (60% of the dogs), but reactions were also detected with soy (32%),
chicken (28%), milk (28%), corn (25%), wheat (24%), and eggs (20%),500 This is similar to
other reports that show that, in general, the most common offending foods are those most
commonly found in the diets being fed: beef, dairy products, chickcn, milk, wheat,
6I8 · Skin Iinmune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
study reacted to a rice product.49
Another study also found that 50% of eight food-allergic dogs reacted to fish (herring
and catfish).524 We have also secn a few cases with well-documented reactions to potato, a
 concern with the move toward potato-based hypoallergenic diets. It should also be real-
ized that most cases do not get challenged with more than a few ingredients, and many
foods are not routinely tested in provocative challnge. Table 8-22 lists dietary items
reported to have caused food hypersensitivity in dogs. Though food additives (including
 prcscrvatives) are often blamed by the public (particularly by naturalists), these substances
are rarely documented to cause food hyperscnsitivity in dogs. One dog was documented to
react to the additive gum carrageenan.329
CLINICAL FEATURES
 It has been estimated that food hypersensitivity accounts for (l) as many as 1% of all
hypersensitivity in dogs and cats accounted for ahout 5% of all skin cdiseases and 15% of
 e  a t  so i sas  
The actual incidence is difficult to deternine because food hypersensitivity often
occurs concurrently with other ailergic diseases and symptoms may ameliorate or become
clinically acceptable when the concurrent allergy is controlled. In contrast, the other
allergy may be clinicall irrelevant when the food hypersensitivity is controlled—-thus, the
o  a ps  s   p  p 
investigator. Concurrent flea bite hypersensitivity or atopic disease occurs in up to 75% of
cases.491. 516. 517. 520. 529 Because many clients do not complete an adequate elimination diet,
 some cases go unrecognized.
 No age or sex predilections have been documented for caninc food hyperscnsitivity.
Though there is no age predilection, it is important to note that many cases occur in
young dogs. In four studies, between 33% and 52%, respectively, of the food hypersensi-
tive dogs experienced clinical signs at 1 year of age or less43.506.517. 529 The index 0f
suspicion for food hypersensitivity is above that of atopic disease when pruritus occurs in
dogs under 6months of age.67a. 506517Most investigators have not found a breed predi-
lection.69 491. 52s Other investigators, however, found that American Cocker spaniels, En-
glish Springer spaniels, Labrador retrievers, Collies, Miniature schnauzers, Chinese Shar
Peis, Poodles, West Highland white terriers, Wheaten terriers, Boxers, Dachshunds,
Dalmatians, Lhasa apsos, German shepherds, and Golden retrievers were at increased
risk.493, 506,517, 529
 Food hypersensitivity can cause a wide variety of lesions and can be cousidered in auny
●Table 8-22
DIeTary ItemS That Have CaUsed FooD
Hypersensitivity In the doG 
Artificial food additives (gum carragcenan)
Horse meat
Becf
Kidney beans
Canned fooxls
Lamb and mutton
Chicken
Oatmeal
Corn
Pasta
Cow's milk
Pork
Dairy products (whey)
Potatoxes
Dog biseuits
Rabbit
Dog foods (including prescription cauned anl dry d/l)
Rice Hour and rice
Eggs
Soy
Fish (variety)
Turkey
Food preservatives
Wheat
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Discases * 6I9
food hypersensitivity may be episodic or seasonal, such as when offending food itens are
Pruritus, with or without a primary eruption, is the only consistent finding. There is no
classic set of cutaneous signs pathognomonic for food hypersensitivity in the dog. A varicty
of primary and secondary skin lesions are noted. These include papules, plaques, pustules,
cia, scales, crusts, and moist erosions that appear as areas of pyotraumatic dermatitis (Fig.
8-- 12A; see Fig. 8--8G). Eosinophilic vasculitis presenting as urticaria, or any lesions of
Fig.8-8H).163
 In general, the major complaint is pruritus, and the pruritus is nonseasonal and may
be poorly responsive to glucocorticoids, though a favorable response should not decrease
one's index of suspicion, If the offending food is a snack or table food, thc signs can be
 episodic, depending on how often the dog eats it. Any distribution of skin involvement
may occur, but the ears, rump, distal limbs, axillae, and groin appear commonly affect-
Pruritic, hilateral otitis exterma (frequently with secondary bacterial or Malassezid
infections), along with secondary seborrheic skin disease, bacterial pyoderma, or both are
 pyodermas most commonly present as superfcial folliculitis, though folliculitis and furun-
culosis as well as bacterial pododermatitis or acral lick dermatitis may occur. Some dogs
present with only a recurrent bacterial pyoderma, withi or without pruritus, wherein all
(vomiting, diarrhea, colc)have been reported in 10% to 15% of these dogs.61.67%,46, 5s
 In experimentally induced food hypersensitivity, the inost common abnormality was an
increase in the number of bowel movcments. When food-hypersensitive dogs were fed
diets containing the offending allergen, they averaged about three bowel movements per
   r   p   d s  g s 
(C.E.G.) has observed that pruritic dogs with more than three bowel movements per day
are more likely to have food hypersensitivities as part of the reason for their pruritus. In
defecated greater than or equal to six times a day516 In humans, the noncutaneous
symptoms associated with food hypersensitivity are numerous ("tension-fatigue syn-
drome"), and malaise and dullness have been observed in dogs,67a. 529
Seizures have ben rarely described as being responsive to hypoallergenic diets.67. 59
o p 'sp a-poon Ig s u as anzis e m sop on pq rass
  on r s      s s 
texts,61512.523 This lack of recognition may reect that the presence of respiratory
symptoms has been a feature that strongly sugested atopic disease, and may have tlus
decreased an appropriate pursuit of food hypersensitivity in thosc dogs.
DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis of canine food hypersensitivity consists of atopy, drug reaction,
fea bite hypersensiivity, pediculosis, intestinal parasite hypersensitivity, scahies, Malasse-
ziα dermatifis, seborrheic skin disease, and bacterial folliculitis.
 At present, the definitive diagnosis of food hypersensitivity in dogs is reliable only on
the basis of elimination diets and provocative exposure testing. The necessary duration of
a hypoallergenic diet is controversial.496, 529 A 21-day protocol would have diagnosed only
26% of the food-hypersensitive dogs in Rosser's prospective study.517 Studies have indi-
cated that complete resolution or maximal improvement of clinical signs may require use
of a hypoallergenic diet for 10 to 13 weeks.493, 517 However, two of us D.W.S. and
W.H.M.) and others496 believe that a significant degree of improvement should occur
620 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
C
FlGURE 8-I2. A, Erythema and alopecia over the lateral thighs of a dog with food hypersensitivity. B.
Hypotrichosis of trunk and rump due to hair pulling in a cat with fod hypersensitivity. C, Feline food hypersensi-
tivity due tomilkSevereexcoriatonof the preauricular areaD,Felne foodhypersensitivty due tofish.ever
excoriation of the neck. E, Chronic fea bite hyperseusitivity in a Pekingese, showing alopecia, hyperpigmentation,
and licherification on the lower back and tail base. F, Canine flea bite hypersensitivity. After many seasons of
affiction, areas of the lower back and tail become hairless, thickened, gray, and folded. G, Feline fea bite
hypersensitivity. The individual aniliary lesions are shallow excoriations covcred with a sinall hrown crust. Some
clustered on the back of a cat. Area has bcen clippedi to exposc lesions.
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 62]
within 4 to 6 weeks, though maximum improvement may take 10 to 13 weeks. In another
study of 20 dogs, 95% of dogs improved within 3 weeks or less.500
Hypoallergenie diets must be individualized for each patient on the hasis of careful
dietary history. However, hidden antigens must also be considered because sorme canned
fish in water contain other proteins, such as vegetable and whey proteins present in
canned tuna and hot dogs.6l The objectives of the diet are (1) to feed the anirmals dietary
substances that they are not commonly exposed to and (2) to feed the animals a diet that
is free of additives (colorings, favorings, preservatives). Switching from one commercial
diet to another, or using commercially prepared "hypoallergenic" diets, is often not satis-
fish, canned tuna fish in water, rabbit, venison, turkey, rice, potatoes, ostrich, yams, and
ments.22 Because the calcium content of such diets is particularly low, a nondairy calcium
source as well as vitamins and essential fatty acids, at the minimum, should be added to
the diet.
 An alternative protocol, though not as accurate as feeding a carefully selected home-
prepared diet, is to feed a commercially prepared, limited, and novel protein source diet.
It has been suggested that one reason these cormmercial diets may not be as effective as
o r on pasn mda u ussd g uo si s pda-a
foods.9o Another concerm is that the source of animal fats added to many of these diets
could be contarninated with animal proteins other than those in the limited protein
source. In young dogs, this may be preferred until they are older than 10 to 12 months,
when the risks of a nonbalanced diet would be less.
A variety of limited and novel protein diets are now being manufactured by several
cormpanies, and they are very attractive because they are convenient and nutritionally
oats diet (Response k/o). Innovative Veterinary Diets (IVD) offers a potato-based food
with several novel proteins available, such as duck, lamb, venison, or rabbit; Waltham
offers chicken and rice limited protein diets, and Master Foods offers a capelin (a type of
fish in the salmon family) and tapioca dog food. Hills Pet Products Science Diets offer
rice with egg, lamb, salmon, or duck dry dog foods.
New foods are constantly being produced, and the practitioner should intermittently
check dog food companies at meetings, by teleplone, or via their websites. It is critical,
however, to understand that the reliability of these commercially prepared diets has either
not been confirmed (the usual situation) or confrmed in limited trials in kmown food-
hypersensitive dogs. Only a few studies have looked at the effcacy of some of these
limited protein dog foods and, to date, none of the diets is 100% effective.
When known food-hypersensitive dogs were fed canned d/d (lamb and rice) or dry
d   n  n d s  p (u  ) 
50% of the previously confirmed food-hypersensitive dogs were more pruritic on this diet,
and in 25% of the dogs the worsening of the clinical signs was confirmed to be due to the
fish.524 Capelin and tapioca (Pedigree canine selected protein 3, Master Food, Austria) was
effective in 93.7% of food-hypersensitive dogs.525 The differences in lish-based diets may
refect that, in humans, fish hypersensitivity may be limited to certain families or even 
species of fish.523
The commercial diets vary in the number of proteins as well as in their digestibility,
and it has been recommended that diets with high digestibility be used.5zi Complete
digestion results in the production of free amino acids and small peptides, which are
a u   s d   as on    snd 
capable of stimulating a food hypersensitivity. Exclude Veterinary Exclusion Diet (DVM
Pharmaceuticals) utilizes hydrolyzed liver and casein and novel carbohydrate sources of
pinto beans and oat groats; and CNM-HA (Purina) utilizes hydrolyzed soybean protein
and corn starch so that the carbohydrate source will also have limited antigenicity. Though
622 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseascs
linited studies by the companies that have developed these diets suggest they may be
beneficial, further independent work is needed. It has been suggested that the size of
 allergenic proteins in dogs may be smaller than it is in humans.
Feeding a strict diet is critical, and the dog's owner must be counseled to allow
nothing but water and the limited diet to enter the dog's mouth. We see many referred
 dogs whose owners have become frustrated because they think that food hypersensitivity
has been ruled out. Hlowever, on closer questioning, it is often determined that the dog is
still eating the offending foods. The dogs may stil be receiving treats such as rawhide
chewies, favorcd dietary suppleinents or medicines, or medication in food, such as cheesc
or a piece of hot dog. It must be remembered that medicines and supplements in gelatin
(parts and pieces of cattle, swine, or horses) capsules must be withheld during the dietary
trial. It is also important that the possibility of eating items while outside is eliminated and
that all family members follow the diet guidelines.
Following a strict diet may be very dificult or impossible for sorme owmcrs. In one
study, 37% of owners that had been thoroughly counseled and thought thcy could provide
major clinical sign being evaluated during the elimination diet is the pruritus. The level of
prurinus should markedly decrease, but this may be gradual and may take 4 to 8 weeks to
become evident. Because up to 75% of food-hypersensitive dogs havc othcr concurrent
hypersensitivities (especially atopy or flea bite hypersensitivity), the response to a hypoal-
lergenic diet may be partial (for instance, 50%reduction in pruritus.9,43, s6, 13.20 In
other dogs, the pruritus may only decreased 25% to 50%, but the pattern of the pruritus
may change.49 The diagnosis is then highly suspected by feeding thc animal its normal
diet and sceing the dermatosis exacerbate in 10 to 14 days.497. 506.si
In our experience, most welldocumented cases of canine food hypersensitivity with.
multiple positive challenges have a recurrence of pruritus within 3 to 7 days. Rapid
Tecurences, though not given in days, were typical in another study.su9 Posibly, the cases
requiring longer challenges represent food intolerance, which may be more dose related.
As soon as an exacerbation is noted, the offending diet is discontinued. It is also important
  's o ro   'ue p  a p  
see the lesions again resolve, confirning the diagnosis of food hypersensitivity. In general,
dogs that experienced exacerbation within 2 days will only have to be back on the
hypoallergenic diet a few days to again see the lesions or pruritus resolve, In humans,
three positive challenges that are double-blinded and placebo-controlled arc rcquired to
definitively document a food reaction because there is a significant placcbo effect.523
When home-cooked diets are uscd, dogs may lose weight, be hungry, and experience
diet cainot be evaluated. Some dogs may experience new dietary sensitivities within l to
3years.496, 529
Blood eosinophilia israre in the dog.61. 67a4s Prick, scratch,intradermal, and serologic
(RAST, ELISA, VARL) tests with food allergens in dogs with food hypersensitivity are
various dermatoses, and dogs with food hypcrsensitivity experienced positivc serologic
(RAST, ELISA) test results for one or more foods.527 Hence, serologic tests have a high
sensitivity but a very low specificity. A monocfonal IgE ELISA (CMG Immunodot) was
evaluated in proven food-hypersensitive dogs and yielded negative results in all instances,
yielcing a sensitivity of 0% and a positive predictive value of 0% 514
The lack of utility of these tests may refect (1) different immunologic mechanisms at
play (serologic tests only evaluate type I hypersensitivity) or (2) testing with inappropriate
antigens (processing and digestion). One group of investigators was unable to demonstrate
antigen-specifie IgE antibodies in the serum of proven food-hypersensitive dogs using the
P-K and oral P-K tests.507 Numerous factors may infuence the applicability of whole food
extracts for skin testing and serologic testing, including the effects of cooking, processing.
digestion, metabolism, additives, and contaminants on the original whole food substance.
Gastroscopic food sensitivity testing has been described.494, 503.515 This modality would be
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 623
inconvenient for routine clinical use, and further studies need to be conductcd to deter-
mine its usefulncss. Thc basophil degranulation test has also shown some promise for the
diagnosis of food hypersensitivity, but larger, controlled studies are needed.57. 58 This test
is not currently available in thc United States, requires rapid and special handing of
blood, is very labor intensive, and is unlikely ever to be more than a research tool. New
techniques may makc this type of testing more available in the future.
Histopathology
 Skin biopsy refects the variability of the gross morphology of skin lesions. It is usually
characterized by varying degrees of superficial perivascular dermatitis (pure, spongi-
otic, hyperplastic), with mononuelear cells or neutrophils usually predominating (Fig.
Malassezia dermatitis, or both of these are common. Occasionally, eosinophils are present,
and an cosinophilic vasculitis may also occur in rare cases.163 One dog with food hypersen-
sitivity denonstratcd an cpitheliotropic lymphocytic infiltrate that mimicked epitheliotropic
lynphoma (rnycosis fungoides) immunophenotypically.ss This confirms the variability that
 may occur histologically as well as clinically and emphasizes the need for a hypoallergenic
trial prior to making a diagnosis of epitheliotropic lymphoma.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
 The prognosis for food hypersensitivity is usually good. Therapy consists of avoiding
effective and challenge has confirmed the diagnosis, most clients will want to switch to a
to determine which ingredients are responsible. This allows the pet to eat a more varied
diet in the future.
Hypoallergenic diets are fornulated by adding single foodstuffs to the diet, one at a
time, and evaluating each item for 10 to 14 days. In this way, a tolerable, varied diet can
FIGURE 8-I3. A、 Canine fod bypersensitivty (beef).
B, Canine Hea bite hypersensitivity. Epidermal eosinophilic
microabscess.
624 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
usually be achieved over the course of 4 to 6 months. Such diets need to be balanced
with vitamin, mineral, and fatty acid supplements prior to this prolonged challenge.
Nonfavored, animal and vegetable protein-free vitamin supplements should be added, as
well as calcium.521 If the protein fraction is equal in quantity to the carbohydrate fraction,
then calcium carbonate (2 g for 15 kg/day) may be used. As a compromise, animals can be
"provoked" daily, for 10 to 14 days at a time, by being fed each of the major food items
reported to cause food hypersensitivity in dogs (beef, dairy products, wheat, soy, corn,
chicken, egg) to determine whether one or more of these items exacerbates the condi-
tion.4ss. 5o6 S50o On the basis of information obtained from this provocation, a commercial
food that does not contain the offending substance(s) can usually be selected. About 20%
 of food-hypersensitive dogs, however, cannot consume any commercial diet and must be.
investigations.
When hypoallergenic diets are not feasible, systemic glucocorticoids and/or antihista-
mines may be used to suppress clinical signs. Food hypersensitivity, however, may be
difficult to control with these drugs. A complete response to systemic glucocorticoids
g s so ssd-o o ogu sn
Feline Food Hypersensitivity
Feline food hypersensitivity (food allergy, food intolerance) is a nonseasonal pruritie skin
disorder of cats that has been described for many years,61. 67a, 501 This condition is de-
scribed as hoth uncommon and the third most common hypersensitivity in the cat. The
reported incidence ranges from 1% to 6% of all feline dermatoses.67a 491. 493 It has also
cats with the cutaneous reaction patterns of miliary dermatitis, eosinophilic granuloma
complex, and self-induced alopecia indicated that food hypersensitivity was the second
nosed in 70% and atopy in 13% of the cats, respectively. In a prospective study of 25 cats
recruited from referring veterinarians for suspicion of food hypersensitivity, 20 completed
a diet trial and provocation and none was found to respond to a restricted protein
(chicken and rice) cornmercial diet trial.439 Additionally, 14 of these cats underwent
intestinal permeability measurement and 13 were normal. Thirty five percent had fea bite
hypersensitivity alone, and 35% had concurrent fea bite hypersensitivity and atopy. In
another prospective evaluation of 6l pruritic cats and 12 cats with pruritus and vomiting
or diarrhea, food hypersensitivity was pursued using diet trials with rice and chicken 01
venison and rice, as well as provocative exposure,533 Food hypersensitivity was confirmed
in 16% of the pruritic cats and in 42% of the pruritic cats with concurrent gastrointestinal
signs. Such conficting results suggest that further studies are warranted to determine the
prevalence of these diseases.
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
  a  ai      s  I a 
however, also showed that IgG may also have been involved in the pathogenesis. It has
also been shown that endoparasitism in cats with Toxocara cati at the time of oral antigen
challenge increases the production of allergen-specific IgE.531 There also is the induction
hypersensitivity, or a combination of them suggests that a predisposition to allergies of any
more than a type I hypersensitivity because the associated diseases vary in their allergic
mechanism.
 In most clinical cases, the pathomechanism is not determined and, in fact, only the
association between diet and pruritus or dermatitis is established. Food intolerance, as
m   a sid   n e d oe     
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 625
● Table 8-23
 SUBSTANCES REPoRTeD tO HAVE CAUSEd
FOOD HYPerSENSITIVItY In The CAT
Dairy products (nilk, cheese)
Lamb and mutton
Fish
Eggs
Beef
All conmercial foods (various proteins, as well as preservatives and dyes)
Pork
Clarn juice
Chicken
Cod liver oil
Rabbit
Benzoic acid
Horse meat
has been done regarding the offending allergens or materials in the diets that result in the
 dermnatitis. In two studies, provocative exposure testing showed fish, beef, and dairy
products to be the most common allergens3253s In two studies, about 30% of the ood
hypersensitive cats were unable to eat any commercially prepared diet without experienc-
as clam juice and lamb baby food.491, 526. 534. 535 The frequent use and ready availability of
commercial diets that contain lamb or other unusual protein sources is likely to induce
some allergic reactions and make selecting a test diet more diffcult. We and others34
cooked and that found in commercial products. Table 8-23 lists all the foods currently
reported to have caused food hypersensitivity in the cat.
CLINICAL FEATURES
 predilection documented. In one study, however, 46% of the cats experienced the disease
by 2 years of age.535 Siamese or Siamese cross cats may be at risk because they accounted
for 30% of the cases in two studies,491, 535 and in one study such cats had a relative risk
The rmost consistent clinical finding is pruritus, which is present in 100% of such
cases. The pruritus is typically nonseasonal. Sorme cat owners like to rotate the commercial
diets fed to their cats so as to provide variety, however. This practice can result in an
irregularly recurrent pruritic dermatosis. Pruritus most commonly involves the face (see
Fig. 8-12C), head, pinnae, and neck (see Fig. 8-12D), or combinations of these.*
Generalized pruritus may also occur.30, 61], 67a, 512 The other common cutaneous reaction
patterns are self-induced alopecia (see Fig. 8-12B), miliary dermatitis, and eosinophilic
granuloma complex lesions. Some cats develop an exfoliative dermatitis characterized
histologically by a lynphocytie mural folliculitis (see Chap. 11). Rarely, cats manifest an
philic foliculitis and furunculosis.454, 45s Other reported nonpruritic signs are angioedema,
rticaria, and conjunetivitis.30. 535 Gastrointestinal (usuall diarrhea but also vomiting) dis-
33% of the food hypersensitive cats had concurrent gastrointestinal signs.533
Lymphocytic-plasmacytic colitis may be a manifestation of food hypersensitivity in
oscopy, but the cat responded to an elimination diet537 Sneezing, malaise, and dullness
have been reported 61, 67a, 491 Peripheral lymphadenopathy, which can be quite marked,
may be present.453 Up to 25% of food-hypersensitive cats have other concurent hypersen-
do not completely respond to systemic glucocorticoids.401, 493,535
*See references 492, 493, 513, 532, 535, 538, 539.
626 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis varies according to the clinical presentation. The inost common
alternatives are atopy, Hea bite hypersensitivity, psychogenic alopecia and dermatitis, der-
matophytosis, otodectic mange, cheyletiellosis, and notoedric mange. The ciagnosis is
suggested by using an elimination diet trial that results in a significant reduction in the
clinical signs. The diagnosis is confirimed if clinical signs recur when the cat is fed its
previous diet.
Hypoallergenic diets must he individualized for each cat according to previous dietary
history. Somc common favoritcs are lamb or ham baby food, ham, ostrich, ground rabbit,
lobster, and venison. One of these may be fed alone or mixed jn a blender with potato or
rice. Studies have shown that these diets are not nutritionally balanced, and feeding then
to yonng growing animals could lead to a deficiency disease.z2 Therefore, it may be
prudent to recommend that the diet be at least supplemented with taurine tablets,
calciuin tablets (dicalciun phosphate), saffower oil, and a multiple vitarmin that does not
contain additives.
 Commercially prepared "hypoallergenic" diets are not reliable. In some cases, how-
ever, such a diet is alf the client wil agree to try. In these cases, a canned diet may be
more preferable to dry diets because there are less preservatives.4o These diets also
q as sp jo sg s o ad a aq o ree
response forimula I/b, barley; Wysong, rice and quinoa). Innovative Veterinary Dicts also
make potato with venison or rabbit. Dry cat foods similar to most of the canned diets may
be found. In these iustances, the client should be told that negativc rcsults do not rule
out the possibility of food hypersensitivity and that a diet with totally different ingredients
from the cat's previous diet should be used.
 The number of commercially prepared “hypoallergenic" diets is inereasing daily, or so
it seems.492 It is essential to remember that, with very few exceptions, these diets have not
boen scientifically evaluated in confirmed food-hypersensitive cats. To our knowledge, only
two commercial diets have been evaluated in cats -canned d/d for dogs and feline d/d,
 od au se ui jo og e p snrd iod s q p
was also cvaluated and was effective in three of three cats.525 However, this dliet is not
very palatable to cats. A chicken and rice diet failed to docuument food hypersensitivity in
any of 20 cats with compatiblc clinical signs439 Baby foods have often been used as
because they can induce Heinz body anemia in cats.5u In many cases, to adequately
perform the dietary trial, the cat may have to remain completely indoors,51z Studies have
showm that the previously recommended 3-week dietary trial is ot adequate.91. 493 533
Improvement may occur rapidly. gradually, or late, but the diet should be continued for 9
to 13 weeks so that maximum response is achievcd. Cats that have concurrent atopy or
fed its forimer diet for l0 to 14 days to see whether the pruritus or dermatitis is
reproduced.493,535
 Intradermal allergy testing and serologic tests are thought to suffer from the same
 prohlems as discussed for canine food hypcrsensitivity—that is to say, they are tcorthless!
Histopathology
Skin biopsy is not diagnosic but is especially useful for ruling out other diagnostic
possibilities.28. 67a, 83, 45s The histopathologic findings are quite variable, as are the clinical
fesions (see Feline Atopy). The most common reaction patterm is a superficial or deep
perivascular derimatitis wherein eosinophils are the dominant infainmatory cell.45s Some
cases lack eosinophils, whereas others are prinarily composed of a dense infltrate of mast
cells that may be misinterpreted as mast cell neoplasia.28 Eosinophilic folliculitis and
furunculos ocasionally is a feature f fline food hypersensitivity2545Biopsy specmens
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 627
from eosinophilic granulona coinplex lesions show the typical histopathologic findings for
those lesions (see Chap. 18). Some cats have a lymphocytic mural foliculitis (see Chap.
11).
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
allergen(s). This is hest accomplished by feeding a linited protein source commercial diet,
alleviating the problem of having to balance a home-prepared diet. Examples of limited.
protein diets are Feline d/d (Hill's Pet Products); the Innovativc potato-based diets with
rabbit, lamb, duck, and venison; Waltham's limited protein diets with capclin and tapioca,
or chicken anti rice; chicken formula cat food (Iams). Fortunately, the pet food industry
has been responding to this problem by developing new diets with atypical protcin sources
in them. About 30% of food-hypersensitive cats, however, cannot be successfully managed
with any commercially prepared cliet.S35 It is especially important that a home-prepared
diet to be fed in the long terrm be balanced and, at the mininum, supplemented with
calcium, taurine, csscntial fatty acids, vitamins, and minerals. The supplements required
depend on the diet, and consultation with a nutrition text or nutritionist may be ncccssary.
 A hypersensitivity to a component of the new diet may develop,534 and it has heen
suggested that this development is more common in cats than dogs 512 One of us (C.E.G.)
has seen a cat that experienced new allergies to three consecutive diets over 2 years, at
which point the client elected to treat with glucocorticoids for the long term. in other
situations, avoidance is inpossible because the cat is outdoors and finds other sources of
allergenic substances to eat. In these cases, systemic glucocorticoids, antihistamines,
，Or
fatty acids may be used (see Chap. 3). The efficacy of antihistanines and fatty acids for
the management of food-hypersensitive cats has not been reported. In cases that require
high levels of systemic glucocorticoids or that do not respond to them, however, antihista-
mines and fatty acids may havc a bencficial effect.
Parasitic Hypersensitivity
 Parasites are known to be potent inducers of IgE and often elicit an eosinophilic re-
 s     e s      sns
hypersensitivity as very important and integral parts of their pathogenesis. Most are
covered in this chapter, but one classic example of a parasite that creates most of its
disease as a result of hypersensitivity is scabies, covered in Chapter 6.
CANINE FLEA BITE HYPERSENSiTIVITY
Flea bite hypersensitivity (Hea allergy dermatitis) is a pruritic, papular dermatitis in dogs
that becomes sensitized to allergens produced by Heas. It is the most comrmon hyperscnsi-
tivity skin disorder of dogs in parts of the world where feas are common. In one report
looking at thc prevalence of Heas and Hea hypersensitivity in the United Kingdom in
winter, feas were found in 4.7% to 19.3% of the dogs, and the prevalence of fea bite
hypersensitivity ranged from 1.8% to 11.4%.570 This suggests that approximately half of
dogs with feas experience feabite hypersensitivity.
Cause and Pathogenesis
 Flea saliva and whole fea extracts contain several potentially antigenic substances, includ-
ing polypeptides, anino acids, aromatic compounds, and fuorescent materials. However,
very little fea salivary antigcn is present in whole fea extract (<0.5%),542 547 These
  s d s se s u  s  e ss
guinea pig. Multiple sthudies have shown that at least 15 different antigens are 
628 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
present." Gel filtration of fea saliva revealed that allergens were present in a high-
molecular-weight fraction (about 4000 to 1,500,000 daltons) and in a highly fuorescent
aromatic fraction (< 1000 daltons). Individual dogs may react to completely different
 groups of allergens, though the most consistently reacting allergens appear in the range of
8 to 90 kD.t Only one salivary antigen—at 40 kDwas worthy of "major allergen"
designation, binding IgE from about 60% of the dogs.549 It was also demonstrated that
Ctenocephalides felis felis, Pulex irritans, and Pulex simulans shared one or more antigens,
and that guinea pigs and human heings sensitized to one type of fea reacted to all
species.87a
The newest breakthrough has been the development of a new techmique for collecting
characterization, and cloning of a major fea salivary antigen as well as the use of this
What still needs to be evaluated is whether any nonsalivary antigens are also important. If
they are and they do not cross-react, they would be missed.
Most dogs that are hypersensitive to flea saliva have immediate skin test reactions to
the intradermal injection of fea antigen, and these reactions correlate with clinical disease.
In one study, allergen-specific IgE to fea saliva correlated with clinical cisease, but
allergen-specific IgG to fea saliva was very common in dogs and did not correlate with
clinical disease.5ss However, another study indicated that antifea IgE and IgG levels were
similar in normal and Hea-hypersensitive dogs,s6s One of the cat Hea salivary antigens has
 been cloned and has been designated Ctefi.s7 The genes have been cloned into Esche-
ration). This allergen has been showm to be a major allergen in both experimentally
induced and naturally occurring Hea bite hypersensitivity, with greater than 90% of such
dogs reacting. In addition, ELISA inhibition with the rCtefl allergen removes 90% of the
antifea saliva IgE.
 The orderly sequence of fea bite hypersensitivity that develops in guinea pigs does
desensitization.61 67 Many fea-hypersensitive dogs also experience delayed skin test reac-
tions to fea antigen, and up to 30% experience only a delayed reaction.30, 67, 541 Whether
or not this is to the same salivary allergen that produces immediate reactions has not been
described. Biopsy specimens taken from skin lesions that are 4 to 18 hours old show
changes compatible with cutaneous basophil hypersensitivity, and specirmens from lesions
that are 24 to 48 hours old show changes compatible with a delayed-type hypersensitivity
skin lesions as a result of fea infestation unless they are Hea-hypersensitive. Skin samples
from fea-hypersensitive dogs and normal dogs were tested for leukotriene C4 levels.s59
Sites tested were from normal-appearing skin that was a control site or injected with fea
antigen or bacterial lipopolysaccharide. Surprisingly, all three sites had significantly less
leukotriene C4 in the Hea-hypersensitive dogs.
Studies of intradermal skin test reactions to fea antigen and of the serum levels of
antiflea IgF and IgG in Hea-naive dogs, cxperimentally maintained dogs, as well as dogs
kcpt as pets or in animal shelters, with and without fea bite hypersensitivity, have
indicated that dogs continually exposed to feas and fea-naive dogs have low antibody
These observations suggest that continually exposed dogs may become partially or com-
pletely iminunologically tolerant. Experimentally, intermittent fea exposure was shown to
induce both irmimediate and delayed intradermal reactions, and converting from intermit-
*See references 29, 30, 67a, 517, 549, 550, 556, 563, 564, 568.
'See references 29, 547, 549, 550, 563, 564, 568.
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 629
gested that, if a dog has an abundance of feas and no evidence of a hypersensitivity re-
Whereas up to 40% of the normal dog population in Hea-endemic areas may have
positive intradermal skin test reactions to fea antigen, up to 80% of the atopic dogs in the
dogs to fea bite hypersensitivity. In other studies, however, only 14% to 36% of atopic
one of us (C.E.G.) has looked at flea-positive incidence in atopic dogs in southern
California versus Las Vegas, a Hea-free environment. Less than l0% of positive fea
reactions were found in the Nevada dogs, with most having history of traveling to Hea
cnvironments. In contrast, multiple surveys over years in the southern Califormia dogs
have shown that more than 50% react positively to feas, though not all of these dogs
 prompted a clinical diagnosis of fea hypersensitivity.
Clinical Features
Most authors indicate that no breed or sex predilections are apparent.61, 67a In a French
study, however, Setters, Fox terriers, Pekingese, spaniels, and Chow Chows were predis-
posed.s71 Although dogs may experience fea bite hypersensitivity at any age, it is rare for
clinical signs to develop in animais less than 6 months of age. The most comrnon age of
onset is 3 to 5 years.
Canine fea bite hypersensitivity is characterized by a pruritic, papular dernati-
tis.61. 67a. 541. 565 The fea bite induces a wheal or papule that persists for up to 72 hours.
d  ia a sd o sd  o as a  dap  s
lichenification, crusting, and hyperpigmentation. Lesions are typically confined to the
dorsal lumbosacral area, caudomedial thighs, ventral abdomen, and fanks (see Fig. 8- 12E
and F). One study showed dorsal lumbar involvement in only 76% of fea-hypersensitive
dogs, but this was not a distinguishing feature because 39% of atopic dogs also had dorsal
lumbar involvement.1so This study showed that facial involveinent also occurred in 34% of
the dogs with fea-bite hypersensitivity, but that paw disease was present in only 1.2% of
the dogs. Crusted papules in the umbilical area may be particularly suggestive of fea bite
hypersensitivity.
Generalized cutaneous signs inay be present in severely hypersensitive animals. Py
otraurmatic dermatitis (*hot spots"), secondary bacterial pyoderma, and secondary sebor-
rhea are common in chronic cases. Owing to the constant, excessive chewing, some dogs
wear down their incisors. Fibropruritic nodules occasionally occur in chronic cases and are
ss
(summer and fall) in areas of the world with cold winters, though one study showed that
disease may be present year round, even in thesc climates.570 In warm climates, or where
household infestation persists, fea bite hypersensitivity may be nonseasonal, although
clinical signs are still usually more severe in summer and fall.
Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis includes food hypersensitivity, atopy, drug reaction, pediculosis,
cheyletiellosis, intestinal parasite hypersensitivity, Malassezia dermatitis, and bacterial fol-
lienlitis.
 Definitive diagnosis is based on history, physical examination, intradermal skin testing
lesions are very suggestive. The presence of feas or fea dirt is also a helpful, optimal
finding. It has also been suggested that a diagnosis requires evidence of feas.20 A recent
bath or dip or vigorous grooming, however, may eliminate the Heas and fea dirt. In fact,
15% of dogs with fea bite bypersensitivity do not have evidence of fea infestation (feas,
Hea excrement) at the time of examination.541 In our opinion, not finding evidence of fcas
630 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
does not rule out the diagnosis, but it does cause one to question the diagnosis. More
importantly, the mere presence of feas on a pruritic dog does not mean the animal has
Hea bite hypersensitivity. In fact, the diagnosis of fea hypersensitivity does not preclude
the presence of another disease. When feas consistently are not seen on fea-hypersensi-
tive dogs and the client has performed adequate Hea control, the persistence of pruritus
should prompt the clinician to look for a concurrent hypersensitivity such as atopy or food
hypersensitivity. Eosinophilia is often present.7a
· Allergy Testing. Intradermal testing is an excellent method to help confrm thc
 diagnosis of fea bite hypersensitivity. In the United States, onc commercial aqueous fea
antigenFleAtigen,reerLaboratorieshasmergdasaveryrcliable produta
This product is injected intradermally (0.05 ml of 1: 1000 w/v aqueous solution), along
with positive (histamine) and negative (saline) controls, and skin reactions are read at 15
and 30 ininutes and at 12, 24, and 48 hours. The majority of fea-hypersensitive dogs have
both immediate and delayed reactions. About 30% have only delayed reactions. The
delayed reactions are often very mild compared with the typical immediate reaction. The
only change may be mild erythema or increased dermal thickness.
Other investigators have evaluated the Greer fea antigen in normal and fea-hyper-
 e () doo au an  n  e is e  p me ()
mal reaction at least 5 mm larger than the negative control, and (3) an intradernal
rcaction at least equal to the half-way point between size of the positive and negative
control reactions. The grading system wherein a positive reaction was defined as being at
least 5 mm larger than the negative control was the most accurate, being positive in 94%
of the Hea-hypersensitive dogs and none of the normal dogs. When the *half-way point"
 grading system was used, 100% of the hypcrsensitive and 67% of the normal dogs showed
positiveresults.
Recently. another whole body fea antigen was tested and the skin threshold concen-
tration was found to be 1000 NU (Noon units)/ml.574 This antigen was then tested in 21
dogs with skin disease other than fea bite hypersensitivity and 24 fea-hypersensitive dogs
with the diagnmosis based on clinical findings. Intradermal testing had an sensitivity of 88%,
a specificity of 90%, and an overall accuracy of 89% in diagnosing Hea hypersensitivity.
has skin-sensitizing antibody or a cellular response to fea antigen. It does not necesarily
mean that the patient has clinical hypersensitivity. Thus, although virtually all fca-hyper-
sensitive dogs and cats have positive skin test reactions to fea antigen, so does a portion
of the normal dog population, and so do some dogs with other dermatoses. In one study,
 24% of normal dogs had positive intradermal reactions to flea antigen,376a Tvo years latcr.
most of these dogs were still normal, suggesting that positive intradermal reactions were
not predictive of future fea bite hypersensitivity. Current or recent administration of
drugs, especially glucocorticoids and progestogens, can cause false-negative intradermal
test reactions. In some cases, a positive reaction in a dog on glucocorticoid therapy is still
house dust mites at the same time,43 67 This limited intradermal test with saline, hista-
mine, fea, and house dust mite antigens allows for the recognition of many dogs that have
concurrent atopy. A positive house dust mite reaction occurs in about 50% of atopic dogs.
allergen utilized. Most normal and fea-hypersensitive dogs have high levels of IgG reac-
tive with fea salivary proteins, which presents huge technical problems in assays that
attempt to mcasure antifHea IgE .3ss In an experimental laboratory evaluation, the in vitro
tests were valuable if the flea antigen was optimized by partial purification.29 First, they
detect only IgE-mediated disease, and up to 30% of Hea-hypersensitive dogs primarily
have delayed intradermal reactions. Second, in contrast with results with other allergen
tests, one of us (C.E.G.) has seen many negative results in Hea-hypersensitive dogs that
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 631
had positive immediate intradermal skin test reactions. Lastly, some normal dogs had
positive serologic test results, suggesting that both sensitivity and specificity need to be
further evaluated. A recently developed assay utilizes two proprietary technologic break-
throughs in the development of an in vitro Hea allergy test for IgE-mediated disease.566
This study compared 18 fea-hypersensitive dogs with positivc intradermal skin test reac-
tions to 49 experimental dogs with no history of Hea exposure. The serologic tests had a
sensitivity of 78%, specificity of 91%, and overall accuracy of 88% when compared with
intradermal skin test results with the same fea salivary antigen.
It appears that a good intradermal test will give better sensitivity with similar accuracy
  as     a  aa s    
that intradermal testing detects more than IgE-nediated disease, or the obvious differ-
ences in whole body fea extract versus fea salivary extracts, remains to be determined
● Histopathology. Skin biopsy is nondiagnostic, revealing varying degrees of superf-
cial perivascular (pure, spongiotic, hyperplastic) to interstitial dermatitis, with eosinophils
microabscesses in association with epidermal edema and necrosis (epidermal nibbles) may
be visible (see Fig. 8-13B). Histopathologic findings consistent with secondary bacterial
pyoderna (supurative follculitis,intraepidermal pustular dermatitis) are common.
Clinical Management
 In general, it has been classically thought that fea bite hypersensitivity in dogs tends to
worsen as the animals age. Clinical signs begin a little earlier in the season, persist a little
is apparently rare. This concept has come into question, however, with some evidence that
 atopic discase, or food hypersensitivity may tolerate fea exposure much better if those
diseases are adequately controlled.
Therapy of fea bite hypersensitivity may include fea control (see Chap. 6), systemic
glucocorticoids, and hyposensitization.56 Of course, the single most effective therapy
would he separating the feas from the pet or eliminating the feas. This involves concen-
trating extermination efforts on the indoor and outdoor premises. Aggressive fea control
programs are necessary, and newer therapies have made the treatment of fHea bite hyper-
sensitivity without glucocorticoids a reality (see Chap. 6),s52, 561 Ultrasonic collars and a
recent noninsecticidal metal tag (Catan Dog's tag) on the European market are of no
use of a fea comb can dramatically reduce fea populations, especially in shorthaired
dogs.545s A thorough 10-minute combing can remove 81.5% of feas.
methrin spot applications or spray, fpronil (Frontline, Merial), and imidacloprid (Advan-
tage, Baycr) have all been shown effective for fea bite hypersensitivity. However, some
outdoor dogs require very aggressive use of these produets, and only those that are
legally in some of these cases. Repelents need to be applied frequently to dogs that visit
outdoor areas that cannot be adequately treated for Heas. In one study, neither inidaclo-
 prid, fipronil spray, nor fipronil spot-on provided noticeable repellent effect on feas.40
Signs of developing insccticide resistance include (1) clients presenting pruritic fea-
            
insecticides, and (2) clinicians noticing that products that used to control feas and fea
bite hypersensitivity for 1 month now only work for 2 weeks.s6a As resistance develops, it
takes longer for fleas to die and they are able to fed and inject antigen, Anccdotal
reports from the southern United States indicatc that this is occurring, with clinicians
indicating that imidacloprid or fipronil now must be applied every 1 to 2 weeks to be
totally cffective.
 Prerinisolone or prednisone is given orally at 1 mg/kg daily for 5 to 7 days and then
a an e aras  si pu se e de as n a-aie e u
632 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
sensitivity and heavy fea exposure may require 2.2 mg/kg daily to achieve remission and
then need much higher alternate-day dosages. If glucocorticoids are undesirable or unsat-
isfactory, some fea-hypersensitive dogs may respond to antihistamines (chlorpheniramine,
0.4 mg/kg q8h orally; diphenhydramine, 2.2 mg/kg q8h orally; or hydroxyzine, 2.2 mg/kg
q8h orally) or omega-3/omega-6 faty acid-containing products (see Chap. 3).
The efficacy of hyposensitization in canine fea bite hypersensitivity is stil contro-
versial. Enthusiastic proponents and outspoken critics abound.61, 67 Initial double-blind
controlled studies in dogs showed that hyposensitization with aqueous4 and alum-
precipitated557, 572 whole fea antigens is rarely efective as well as being cxpensive and
tine-consuming. Hyposensitization was used for only 3 to 4 months in these studics,
however, a much shorter time than that used for atopy (see Canine Atopy). A double-
protocol did show effcacy compared with a placebo-treated group,.562 This study certainly
indicated the potential for fea hyposensitization. On the basis of current information,
treatment of canine fea hite hypersensitivity with commercially available whole fea ex-
tracts should be viewed as a last-dlitch therapeutic effort. It would seem most appropriate
that, if hyposensitization were to be tried, the Hea salivary antigens (Heska Corp.) should
be used.
FELINE FLEA BITE HYPERSENSITIVITY
It has long been thought that feline fea bite hypersensitivity (fea allergy dermatitis) is the
most common feline hypersensitivity disease in areas where feas are present, causing a
variety of clinical syndromes, all characterized by pruritus.67a In one study, 70% of cats
referred for suspicion of food hypersensitivity actually had flea bite hypersensitivity alone
 or with other diseases based on response to fea control.439 However, in a study of 88 cats
 e p  q sy  aa a pu  a us e 
hypersensitivity as one cornponent of their skin dlisease, and atopic disease was the most
 prevalent problem.44 In the United Kingdom, feas were found on 18% to 26% of the
cats, cven' in winter.570 The prevalence of fea bite hypersensitivity in the same study
varied from 6% to 14%.
Cause and Pathogenesis
Though inuch research has been conducted on fea bite hypersensitivity in the dog and
because cats are used to maintain both research and commercial populations of the cat
Hea, Ctenocephalides felis felis The guinea pig and dog have very different immunopatho-
genic responses to fea antigen; therefore, it may be inappropriate to assume that cats will
intradermal test reactions to flea antigen. Experimental sensitization of cats to fea bites
resulted in lesions in all the continuously exposed cats and no lesions in the intermittently
exposed cats, which is in contrast with what has been described in dogs.578 Interestingly.
all the intermittently exposed cats experienced positive intradermal skin test reactions, but
only 60% had positive in vitro test results with the samc Hea salivary allergen. Overall,
when tested with Hea salivary allergen, 88% were positive on intradermal skin testing. and
88% were positive on the serum in vitro assay. Based on intradermal skin test results, the
serum test had an overall accuracy of 82%. This study also evaluated one flea-hypersensi-
tive cat serum for heat lahility of the positive serum. Heat inactivation at 56°C greatly
diminished and heat inactivation at 57°C abolished the reaction, indicating this was a IgE-
mediated reaction. In one study, delayed skin test reactions were reported in three of
seven fea-hypersensitive cats at both 24 and 48 hours,.577 Even some normal cats with
 negative intradermal test results have mild histopathologic changes at the site of intrader-
mal flea extract injections or fea bites, suggesting that subclinical reactions occur.37
ClinicalFeatures
usually considered the most typical lesions of fea bite hypersensitivity in the cat (see Fig.
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 633
 mon in cats and may be caused by a number of specific diseases (Table 8-24). However,
in one prospective study of perennially pruritic cats, the most prevalent reaction patterm
cally more prevalent in the cats with fea bite hypersensitivity and atopic disease.439
 Alopecia, excoriations, crusts, and scales may also be found. Alopecia may also occur as a
result of cats excessively grooming to remove feas. It has been shown that fea-hypersensi-
tive cats are more effective at removing feas than flea-naive cats. Additionally.
the
hypersensitive cats produce an unknown factor that results in the production of fewer fea
eggs.579 Pigment changes may occur, and multifocal small melanotic macules are evidence
of previous inflammatory sites. Lesions are typically confined to the dorsal lumbosacral
area (see Fig. 8-- 12H), caudoinedial thighs, ventral abdomen, fHanks, and neck. General-
ized cutaneous signs may be present in severely hypersensitive animals.
  s (  s oe   r
(litle or no dermatitis) or (2) eosinophilic granuloma compiex lesions (indolent ulcer,
eosinophilic plaque, eosinophilic granuloma, or some combination of these three lesions)
(see Chap. 18)61.67a, 5s1 In addition, any given cat may manifest various combinations of
these reaction patterns. Secondary hacterial pyoderma occurs occasionally. Cats with fea
bite hypersensitivity may experience moderate to marked periphcral lymphadenopathy.43
ogically as a sterile eosinophilic folliculitis and furunculosis.454 Because infiltrative eosino-
philic mural folliculitis occurs at the site of fea bite sites and intraderimal injections of fea
 antigen within 24 hours, this appears to be a reaction to fea antigen.577 Disease often
becomes morc severe as the cats age. Cats with fea bite hypersensitivity may have
concurrent atopy and/or food hypersensitivity, which can greatly complicate the diagnostic
work-up as wel as the therapeutic regimen.
Diagnosis
 The differential diagnosis depends on which clinical syndrome is being examined. Most
commonly, the differential diagnosis for miliary dermatitis (see Table 8-24) inust be
considered, with atopy, food hypersensitivity, cheyletielosis, and dermatophytosis being
the primary alternatives in most cases. The diagnosis is based on the history and physical
findings. The presence of feas, fea dirt, fea eggs, or infestation with the tapeworm
Dipylidium caninum all provide circumstantial evidence. Recent bathing or grooming.
however, may remove all evidence of feas. Neither does the mere presence of Heas on a
cat with one of the typical cutaneous reaction patterns confrm that the feas are causing
● Table 8-24
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF WIDESPREAD
PAPULOCRUSTOUS DERMATITIS ("MILIARY
DerMaTItIS") In The Cat
nsitivity reactions
Flea bite hypersensitivity
Atopy
Food hypersensitivity
Drug reaction
Intestinal parasite hyperscnsitivity
Penphigus foliaceus
Feline hypereosinophilic syndrome
Ectoparasitisms
Cheyletiellosis
Otodcctic mange
Tronbiculosis
Cat fur mite
Pediculosis
lnfections
Dermatophytosis
Staphylococcal folliculitis
Dietary imbalances
Biotin teficiency
Fatty acid deficiency
634 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
the dernatosis. Cytologic examination of papulocrustous lesions and eosinophilic granu-
loma complex lesions usually demonstrates nuinerous eosinophils and occasional basophils
(Fig. 8- 14). Eosinophilia, occasionally with basophilia, is often present.
Intradermal allergy testing with fea antigen, as described for the dog, produces a
d
mal rcaction to fea antigen only means that the cat is sensitized to the antigens; it does
not prove that the cat has clinical Hea bite hypersensitivity. In one study, 36% of the
   ad r p s s  p  s u a
reaction to fea antigen.5su In another study, 17% of specific pathogen-free cats also had
positive intradermal skin test reactions and serologic test results for fea salivary antigen.573
It is also useful to test at the same time with house dust mite to investigate the possibility
of concurrent atopy.43, 67a Limited evaluation of serum in vitro testing for feline fiea bite
hypersensitivity has shown poor predictive value. However, preliminary studies with the
canine Fce RI-α receptor-based serologic tests have shown an overall predictive yalue of
 82% and a better correlation with the clinical presentation than did intradermal testing
with thc same antigen.578
● Histopathology. Skin biopsy is not diagnostic but typically shows varying degrees
 of superficial or deep perivascular to interstitial dermatitis with numerous eosinophils and
mastelIaverlsinophilfliultisayvisblathsi
of fea bites and delayed skin test reactions.577 Cats presenting with clinical lesions of
 indolent ulcer, eosinophilic plaque, and eosinophilic granuloma have dermatohistopathol-
ogic findings consistent with these entities (see Chap. 18).
Clinical Management
Therapy of fea bite hypersensitivity includes vigorous fHea control and is most successful
Flea control has been revolutionized with the advent of more effective topical and
systemic formulations for killing feas, cggs, and larvae, but still more aggrcssive therapy
may bc required for the fea-hypersensitive outdoor cat.$7s For roaming outdoor cats,
imidacloprid (Advantage, Bayer) applied every 1 to 2 weeks has been effective for many
cases in our experience. Anecdotally, fipronil (Frontline, Merial) is also vcry effective at
more frequent intervals, but this goes against EPA-labeled use and is illegal. Fipronil
o a t ou p in se axa ae uds p pn ar
feas before they were able to consume at least some quantity of blood.543 Flea repeilents
are helpful, but they must be applied daily and are not tolerated by many cats. Regular
use of a fea comb can dramaticaly reduce fea populations, especially in shorthaired
cats.45a A thorough 10-minute combing can remove up to 81.5% of the feas.
FIGURE 8-I4. Feline flea bitc
hypersensitivity. Cytologic exarnina-
tionrevealsnumerous eosinophils
and  smaller  numbers of basophils
(arrow).
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 635
Repositol 1nethylprednisolone acetate (5 mg/kg or 20 mg/cat subcutaneously every 12
  sp  on g n o b y 7) od o asd o  (sa
an altermate-day basis) is most commonly uscd for short-term relief of the hypersensitivity
 or when fea control is ineffective (see Chap. 3). With severe fca infestations, the dosages
of these glucocorticoids may have to be doubled or a different glucocorticoid may
be
needed (see Chap. 3) to achieve an adequate response. Chlorpheniramine (2 to 4 mg/cat
q12h orally), cleinastine (0.68 mg/cat q12h orally), or hydroxyzine (2 mg/kg q12h orally)
 most cases, though an occasional cat may havc a dramatic response.76
TICK BITE HYPERSENSITIVITY
Cutaneous hypersensitivity reactions to tick bites have becn recognized in dogs and
ous basophil hypersensitivity and type II and type IV hypersensitivity responses. No agc,
breed, or sex predilections have bccn rcportcd.
Cutancous hypersensitivity reactions to tick bites in dogs and cats may be character-
ized hy (1) focal areas of necrosis and ulceration, (2) nodules that may or 1nay not be
 erytheinatous, pruritie, and ulcerated, and (3) pruritic pododernatitis. Diagnosis is based
 on history and physical exarmination.
 Skin biopsy may reveal leukocytoclastic vasculitis with hemorrhage, necrosis, and
ulceration (type IIl reaction) or nodular to diffuse dermatitis due to granulomatous or
 pyogranulonatous infammation (type IV reaction), often with numerous eosinophils and
lymphoid hyperplasia. Tick mouth parts are seldorn found in biopsy specimens.
Therapy includes tick removal and control. Surgical excision or glhucocorticoids are
effectivc for severe or persistent reactions.
FELINE MOSQUITO BITE HYPERSENSITIVITY
 Feline mosquito bite hypersensitivity has been described as a clinical entity in cats,5s2-55
The originaf descriptions of this syndrome came froin Australia,5s6 but not until 1988 was
the etiology confirmed 5x3 This is an uncommon, seasonal, predominantly pinnal and facial
dermatitis of cats.
Cause and Pathogenesis
Two excellent studies have documented the mosquito as the cause of this syndrome.581. 585
Lesions were shown to resolve without treatment when affected cats were confined to a
Imosquito-free environment. After challenge with mosquito bites, lesions developed at the
sites of the bites. In addition, previously normal haired skin was shaved and challenged
with mosquito hites. Again, these sites developed the typical lesions. Wheals werc scen
within 20 minutes, papules occurred at 12, 24, and 48 hours, and papulocrustous lesions
one component of the pathogenesis may involve a type I hypersensitivity5s3 5ss In one
study, P-K testing results were positive in three of three cats tested and negative with
then diffuse to nodular derimatitis with an intense eosinophilic infiltrate and foci of
collagcn fame figures. These latter findings do not occur in typical type I reactions,
 suggesting that more is involved in the pathogenesis of this disorder.
Clinical Features
 To date, no age, breed, or sex predilections have bcen recognized. The largest reported
serics of 26 cases had a median age of 3.3 years with a range of 9 months to 8 years.s It
is interesting to note that all 26 cats in this study had dark hair on their pinnae. Thc
disease is seasonal, coinciding with the mosquito season. Affected cats usually are kept
outdoors or allowed access to the outdoors, though the disease has been reported in an
636 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
indoor cat.5ss Pruritus is usually present, but the severity is variable. The earlier lesions
consist of erythematous papules to plaques that often have an erosive or ulcerated,
necrotic, or crusted appearance (Fig. 8-i5E). Chronic lesions include nodules, pigment
changes (melanoderma or, most commonly, leukoderma), alopecia, and scaling (Fig.
8- 15F). The development of multiple lesions often results in a polycyclic plaque or patch
 of alopecia interspersed with areas of acute lesions, scales, or crust. These lesions are
usually found on the pinnae (primarily the convex surface, but the concave surface may be
affected), bridge of the nose and, rarely, the eyelids and footpads,58-5ss The nasal planum
 ssp p d s a p  q  d pu pn
pads may also be affectcd with swelling, hyperkeratosis, fissures, and pigment changes.
Less cormmonly, the chin and lips may be affected.582 Lymphadenopathy and, in acute
cases, pyrexia may occur.
Diagnosis
 The major components of the differential diagnosis are permphigus foliaceus or erythema-
tosus, atopy, food hypersensitivity, and dermatophytosis. In endemic areas, feline poxvirus
infection is also an alternative. The clinical presentation is fairly distinctive, and the
tentative diagnosis is relatively well confirmed by keeping the cat indoors or hospitalized
for 5 days, at which point the lesions are much improved. If confinement is not possible,
  s  se  a  e a  s   
cases, this may he impossible or ineffective, and ruling out other possible diagnoses by
biopsy and other laboratory tests helps establish a diagnosis. Peripheral eosinophilia oc-
● Histopathology. Skin biopsy reveals severe superficial and deep eosinophilic in-
fammation that is initially perivascular, then intcrstitial,and finally diffuse28,6758-555
Infltrative eosinophilic mural folliculitis and firunculosis, dermal inucinosis, and fame
figures are often present (Fig. 8- 16). The finding of eosinophilic folliculitis and furunculo-
sis is uncommon in eosinophilc granulomas of other causes and, when found in cats and
dogs, is nore often associated with arthropods bites or inseet stings.58 Similar histopatho-
hypersensitivity.454.45
Clinical Management
Confinemcnt indoors during the mosquito season, or at least during the peak mosquito
feeding time, is beneficial. if this is not possible, repositol methylprednisolone acetate (20
mg/cat or 5 mg/kg subcutaneously) is usually effective and relatively safe because this
entity is a seasonal problem. Alternatively, oral glucocorticoids may be used (see Chap. 3).
In all cases, but especially those in which glucocorticoids cannot be used, mosquito
repellents in the form of pyrethrins with MGK 264, dimethyl metatolulimide (DEET), or
 butoxypolypropylene are helpful. Repellents do not need to be applied to the whole body,
only to the shorthaired and sparsely haired areas.
INSECT AND ARACHNID HYPERSENSITIVITY
Numerous insects and arachnids that may stimulate an immune response exist in the
normal dog and cat environment.592 594 59s These hypersensitivity reactions induce a pru-
 ritic discase that involves short or sparsely haired areas.
Cause and Pathogenesis
Insects andi arachnids are known to produce a number of potentially allergenic suh-
stances that may be present in their saliva, feces, or exoskeletons (body/wing parts,
hairs)559Dogshavebeen showtodevelopIgEantibodiestoavarietyof thee
or absorbed percutaneously and induce the allergic reaction.50 How allergen access occurs
in dogs and cats has not been documented but is thought to be siinilar to what occurs in
FIGURE 8-I5. A, Canine eosinophilic furuneulosis of the face. Multiple papules and ulcers on the bridge of
the nose and upper eyelid associated with exposure to wasps. B, Canine eosinophilic furunculosis of the face.
Erythernatous papules and ulcerated, oozing nasal plaque. (Courtesy of K. V. Mason.) C, Erythematous papules
centaneous diroflarais. E, Feline mosqguito lite hypersensitity Plaquelke swelling, ulration, and depigenta
tion of bridge of nose and nasal planum. F, Feline mosquito bite hypersensitivity. Note presence of mosquito on
depigmented, alopecic bridge of nose and nasal planurn. (Courtesy of K. V. Mason.) Ci, Multiple erythematous
pustules on the abdomen of a dog with bacterial hypersensitivity. (From Scott Dw, et al: Staphylococcal
hypersensitivity in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 14:766, 1978.) H, Hemorrhagic bulla skin test reaction 48
hours after the intradermal injection of Staphylococcus aureus bacterin-toxoid (Staphoid A-B) in a dlog with
Assoc 14:766, 1978.)
637
638 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Discases
FIGURE 8-I6. Feline mosquito
bite hypersensitivity, Infltrative, nec-
rotizing cosinophilicmural folliculitis
and furunculosis.
humans. Thesc hypersensitivities are common in atopic animals and may even be consid-
ered a subeategory of atopy.
 e ss p ss a u sp o psns yo g oe 
negative intradermal test reactions to routine allergens (pollens, molds, epithelia, fea, and
house dust mites), positive intradermal rcactions to onc or more insects or arachnids are
present.,s4 Another report from the eastern United States indicatcd that results in 15.6%
including Hea and house dust mite.sFourteen percent of these dogs with negative or
weakly positive results had positive reactions to at lcast onc of the insects tested. In
contrast, a study conducted in the northeastern United States dctcrmined that results in
  d m s e se i  psn siop oe a ro 
Or more insects, but none of the dogs had a positive reaction for insects alone.602
Another study evaluated intradermal injections of insect allergens to flea, fire ant,
cockroach, housefy, and moth.392 It showed that normal pet dogs had the saine incidence
of reactions as atopic dogs, except to Heas., This study also tested with a Dermataphago-
ides farinae antigen at 1:50,000 w/v/ml and found no difference in incidence of positive
reactions between normal and atopic dogs. This is in contrast with one other study that
showed significantly more reactions to D. farinae antigen in atopic dogs.30 In experimen-
tal studies on house dust mite reactions in laboratory and normal pet dogs, normal
laboratory Beagles were negative to house dust mite antigen, whereas normal house pets
were more likely to be positive.216 This may refect real IgE reactions that arc due to
either a clinically insignificant type of IgE or a sensitivity not associated with clinical
 no positive reactions to insects with the same allergens that caused' numerous positive
reactions in 10 atopic dogs.345. 593
Cross-reactivity among a variety of insects (house fy, horsefly, deerfly, caddis fy.
black fy, black ant, fire ant, moth, mosquito, cockroach, and fea) was evaluated.6ol Blaek
fy, black ant, cockroach, and fea were found to have significant cross-reactivity. Mites
such as Otodectes and Sarcoptes are known to produce hypersensitivity reactions that may
cross-react with house dust mites.276. 375. 595 Though cross-rcactivity could explain some
house dust mite, those intraderimal test results would be positive as well. More studies are
awaited to further evaluate cross-rcactivity. Allergens for cockroach are being identified
in humans and hopefully will be evaluated in dogs to determine whether they are
dlifferent.591
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Discases · 639
Further evidence tbat insect/arachnid hypersensitivity is a real clinical cntity would be
the response to therapy. One of us (C.E.G.) and others have seen cases with positive
 r o p i s ao  p si s e a s
immunotherapy success rates in two groups of insect-positive dogs when insects were left
out or included in the hyposensitization formula.so2 One of us (C.E.G.) has several cases
that were only or mainly insect-hypersensitive that have responded to hyposensitization,
 but further studies are needed to adequately answer this question.
Clinical Features
 No age, breed, or sex predilections have been described. The onset may be sudden and
occasionally is historically correlated with an increase in insect or arachnid numbers in the
animal's environment. The primary symptom is pruritus, though erythematous maculopa-
 pular dermatitis may be present. Depending on the offending allergen, these cases may be
secondary alopecia, crusting, lichenification, and secondary bacterial pyoderma. Occasion-
ally in chronic cases, nodules or frm plaques are present. Glabrous skin or short-haired
areas are more commonly affected. As a result, the abdomen, groin, axillae, face, distal
extremities, and pinnae are most commonly affected.
Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis consists of atopy, scabies, food hypersensitivity, hacterial follicu-
litis and furunculosis, and contact hypersensitivity. A helpful feature differentiating this
type of hypersensitivity from atopy that may occur in sorme cases is the presence of a
 papular dermatitis not associated with bacterial folliculitis.
 The diagnosis is suggested by a compatible history and physical findings and is
confirmed by positive intradermal test rcactions to insect or arachnid antigens. Intrader-
mal allrgy testing, as described for atopy, is performed with the antigens listed in Table
8-25. Cytologic examination of a specimen taken from a papule may reveal a mixturc of
 neutrophils and eosinophils.
· Histopathology. Histopathology has not been reported for a large group of cases
 s rd s a e s ro s p n n
mononuciear cells, mast cells, and soine eosinophils was found. Nodular and plaque-like
lesions show a muitinodular lymphocytic to granuloinatous dcrmatitis with numerous
eosinophils.
 Clinical Management
●Table 8-25
 RESULTS OF INTRADERMAL teSTS tO INSECtS
AND ARAChNIDS In I93 SUSPECT
ATOPIC DOGS*
NO. Of DOGS WIth 3 OR 4+
ANTIGEN
REACTIONS
PNU
Black fy
11.4
1000
Mosquito
7.8
1000
Deer fly
9.3
1000
Horsefly
17.1
1000
Red ant
5.7
1000
Black ant
4.2
1000
Housefly
auop xoN
1000
Cockroach
Not done
1000
*Southern Califormia.
640 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
Avoidance is best accomplished by keeping the animals indoors as much as possible and
utilizing an aggressive insect control regimen such as described for fea control (see Chap.
6). Medical management with glucocorticoids is usually effective. Prednisone, 1 mg/kg
q24h until the condition is controlled (3 to 7 days), then on an alternate-day regimcn, is
 most commonly used. Antihistarmines and fatty acids (see Chap. 3) may also be tried,
though their efficacy is not as good.
Storage Mite-Related Hypersensitivity
Storage mites are mites known to infest foodstufs. Classically, the storage mites belong to
foodstuffs. Multiple genera and species exist. These mites infest our, grains, cereal foods,
cheese, dried fruits, dried meats, jams, and jellies. Several of these mites occur in large
enough numbers and frequency to be inportant sources of environmental allergens. The
species studied the most in dogs are Acarus siro, Glycyphagus domesticus, and Tyropha-
 most frequently encountered and feeds on many foodstuffs as well as fungi and Inolds.
food-infesting mite found worldwide that likes foods with high fat or protein content. This
mite has been found in most foodstuffs that the other mites are reported to infest, as well
as well as brewer's yeast and herring meal, which are frequently added ta dog foods.
Glycyphagus donesticus is also called the grocer's itch mite and furuiture mite. It has a
food preference for rolled oats, brewer's yeast, and vegetable fibers, including some
commonly used as furniture stuffing. It establishes larger infestations with higher moisture
levels and is found in association with damp structures and mildew.
With the advent of dog foods containing newer ingredients such as rice, other mites
  p si    a s u o   q a
 p d  s  s s s   u  
food-infesting mites. This mite may become more prevalent than the grain or mold mite,
especially as food is stored at lower moisture contents. In certain situations, there are
many other mites that may be more numerous than these common ones. Similar to the
situation with house dust mites, regional dlifferences are likely to exist and, if cross-
i  n  a  se y o d s 
The source of allergen for testing may be as important as which mites one is testing
for. One of us (C.E.G.) tested 20 atopic dogs with Tyrophagus putrescentiae from HAL in
June-July 1995, with only 2 (10%) having a 3+ reaction and no dogs having 2+ or 4+
reactions. During the same two months in 1996, 25 atopic dogs were tested with ALK
n on pi sp ioe jo tg pue %6'ge s ao ua suai +7 pu sop
mal injections of A. siro and T. putrescentiae, respectively 192 In Greece, 48.4% of atopic
dogs reacted to A. siro but, because the prevalence of this mite is very low in Greek
homes, it was suggested that this may represent cross-reactivity with D. farinde or other
mites.277
● Clinical Features, Clinical presentation appears similar to atopic dermatitis. One
report included several dogs presenting primarily for diarrhea.304 This report also sug-
gested that ip and muzzle pyoderma may be a manifestation of storage mite derimatitis.
● Diagnosis, Appropriate clinical signs and intradermal testing are currently the
prefcrrcd method of making a tentative diagnosis. However, because one major source for
these mites is dry dog food, a dliet trial to home-prepared or canned dog food may also be
conducted.
● Therapy. Therapy includes avoidance as well as the routine drugs used for the
management of the atopic dog. Specific studies on hyposensitization have not been re-
ported. One pruritie dog with a positive intraderinal test reaction to storage mites re.
sponded to changing the diet from dry food to canned food only.ss This dog experienced
q  p q o so op ap r  p  asd
 improvcd when fed home-cooked lamb and rice or canned lamb and rice.
     p   s
Otodectic Acariasis
Hypersensitivity appears to play a role in some cases of otodectic acariasis (otodectic
ence a widespread, pruritic, papulocrustous dermatitis associated with Otodectes cynotis
infestation.67s Immunologically, passive cutaneous anaphylaxis reactions to O. cynotis anti-
gen were reported in cats with experimentally induced ear mite infestations, demonstrat-
ing the existence of reaginic antibody.soo In addition, cats may have facial or generalized
pruritic dermatitis that responds to iverimectin. Otodectes mites may be difficulf to find in
some cases.
Canine Eosinophilic Furunculosis of the Face
 Canine eosinophilic furunculosis of the face is an acute, predominantly nasal and muzzle
glucocorticoids.
● Cause and Pathogenesis. This syndrome was initially described in nine dogs in
which the common potential inciting feature was exposure to bees or wasps.5o07 Since then,
(no fying insects present), wherein the dogs had been seen playing with or following
reactions to blackfly and horsefy were positive.67a Eosinophils were numerous on cytologic
evaluation of this' dog. Because of the chronic history of the case and the lack of
histopathologic evaluation, however, it may represent a different syndrome. However,
another report did include a dog with a 3-month duration of nodules.606 Eosinophilic
furunculosis of the face has been proposed to be some type of hypersensitivity reaction to
known or possible exposure to insects and arthropods 05. 60 The condition is generaly of
short duration and not recurrent. Hence, if it is a hypersensitivity reaction, these cases
either resolve with no persistent sensitivity or the animals learm to avoid the offencding
arthropod/insect. The exact pathomechanism is unknown, and further studies are needed
regarding both pathomechanisn and etiology.
● Clinical Features. Age of onset was under 2 years in about 50% of the affected
dogs. Specific breed predilections arc not yet determined but, typically, large or midsize
breeds are affected. Toy and ininiatre breeds have not been described with this syn-
drone.No sex predilection has been deternined. Onset is very acute; often the dog is
normal when it goes outside but returns home within hours with fully developed lesions.
The severity of the reaction often peaks within 24 hours, and the course with just
antibiotics or without treatment is 14 to 2l days. The dogs present with papules, nodules,
plaques, and varying degrees of ulceration, serum exudation, hemorrhage, and crusts (see
Fig. 8-l5A and B). Pruritus may be absent or intense, and the lesions may be pain-
fulso5-sos Early lesions were described as erythematous or hemorrhagic blisters or papules.
Lesions are present on the bridge of the nose, on the muzzle, and often periocularly (see
Fig. 8-16A and B). Occasionally, lesions may be on the trunk (especially the relatively
glabrous ventral abdomen and thorax [Fig. 8-17B]), extremities (Fig. 8-17A and C),
generalized lesions and compatible histopathology seen by one of us (C.E.C.) did have 
two episodes.
● Diagnosis. The differential diagnosis is staphylococcal nasal folliculitis and furun-
culosis. If lesions persist, dermatophytosis may also be considered. Eosinophilic furun-
culosis of the face has a striking history and appearance, however, making a clinical
diagnosis . 1
rather simple. Cytologic  examination   reveals numerous 
eosinophils.
ably refect a secondary bacterial pyoderma. Blood eosinophilia was present in seven of
nine dogs examined.605 6os
 Histopathology. Skin biopsy and examination reveals infitrative eosinophilic mural
642 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
FIGURE 8-I7. Case of eosinophilie furun-
culosis and eosinophilie vasculitis. Lesions de-
vcloped acutely while dog was boarded in a
kennel. Suspected spider or insect bite on the
rear leg, where lesions were initially most se-
  s  oe q (y) m
pinnae, abdomen (B), face and shoulder (C).
follieulitis, luminal eosinophilie follculitis, and eosinophilic furunculosis (Fig. 8-18)2s, 07
Neutrophils, lymphocytes, and rmacrophages are also present in smaller nurmbers. Marked
dermal and subcutaneous mucinosis and ulceration are common. Focal or multifocal areas
of dermal hemorrhage and fame figures are also often found.
is very effective, with the najority of dogs responding rapidly within 24 to 48 hours, and
lesions heing completely resolved with 10 to 14 days. Oral prednisone, 1 to 2 mg/kg q24h
 s  i n s a-e    r a  ss 
usually effective, although repositol glucocorticoids could potentially be used because long-
term therapy is not required.
INTESTINAL PARASITE HYPERSENSITIVITY
Various intestinal parasites (ascarids, Coccidia, hookworms, tapeworms, whipworms) of
dogs, cats, and humans may rarely be associated with pruritic dermatoses.2.61. 67a 5s The
 pathomechanism of these dermatoses is unkmown, but a type I hypersensitivity reaction is
likely. Although the pathomechanism is unknown, a clear relationship between the parasite
and the derrmatosis is established, because (l) eliminating the parasites cures the derrmato-
sis and (2) re-infestation with the parasite reproduces it.
Clinical signs may consist of (1) generalized or multifocal pruritic, papulocrustous
dermatitis, (2) pruritic seborrheic skin disease, (3) pruritic urticaria, or (4) pruritus without
skin lesions. Othcr signs referable to intestinal parasitism may or may not be present. No
age, breed, or sex predilections have been reported.
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 643
A
FIGURE 8- 18. Canine eosinophilic furunculosis of the face. A, Note marked accumulation of eosinophils in follicles
(upper thinarr)numrous colagen amefgures(nothed arro)andpromientmcinosisof themidl and dep
denmis (curved arrouc). B, Canine eosinophilic furunculosis of the face. Hair follicle has been literally replaced by
eosinophils.
 Diagnosis is based on history, physical cxamination, fecal examinations, and response 
to therapy. Skin biopsy is nondiagnostic, revealing varying degrees of superficial perivascu-
lar dermatitis (pure, spongiotic, hyperplastic), often with small to large numbers of eosino-
phils.
 Therapy includes elirmination of the parasites and treatment of symptoms with topical
(sharnpoos, soaks) and systemic medicaments (glucocorticoids), as indicated.
FILARIASIS
Dirofilariasis
Numerous rare skin disorders associated with Diroflaria immitis infection (heartworm
these skin disorders is unknown, although a hypersensitivity to D. immitis microfilaria has
been suggested. No age, breed, or sex predilections have been reported.
 Cutaneous syndromes reported in association with dirofilariasis in dogs include (l) a
pruritic, ulcerative, nodular dermatitis of the head, trunk, and limbs (see Fig. 8-15C and
D), (2) a pruritic papulocrustous dermatitis resembling canine scabies, (3) a pruritie
ulcerativc dermatitis of the head and limbs, (4) an erythematous, alopecic dermatitis of
the chest and limbs, (5) interdigital cyst, aiid (6) seborrheic skin disease.
Diagnosis is based on history, physical examination, demonstration of D. immitis
microflaria in peripheral blood and in skin specimens, ruling out of other possible causes
of the dermatosis, and response to therapy for dirofilariasis. Most dogs with dirofilariasis
644 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
FIGURE 8- I9. Canine cutaneous diroflariasis. Perivascular pyogranuloma with microfilarial
segment within blood vessel.
have peripheral eosinophilia and serum hypergammaglobulinemia.20 About 50% of affected
laria cannot be dernonstrated in peripheral blood (occult diroflariasis) owing to an im-
mune-mediated reaction against microflarial antigen. Various ELISA methods for the
detection of adult D. immitis -associated antigens (Filarochek, Mallinckrodt; Dirochek,
Synbiotics; ClinEase-CH, Norden; CITE, Agri Tech Systeins) are very useful for the
detection of occult dirofilariasis.20
Histologic examination of the nodular form of cutaneous diroflariasis reveals superfi-
granulomas may be situated perivascularly, with microflaria present intravascularly (Fig.
8-- 19) or interstitially surrounding extravascular microfilaria (Fig. 8-20).
 neous lesions heal within 5 to 8 weeks after the completion of microfilaricidal therapy.
Filarioidea Dermatitis
A report in 10 dogs with a flarial nematode in the skin other than Diroflaria or
Dipetalonema was published (see Chap. 6),5s6 All the dogs came from the southwesterm
 United States. The dogs presented with single or multiple, alopecic_ papules or plaques 
and varying degrees of erythema, crusts, scarring. and ulceration. Eighty percent were
pruritic. Ali dogs had dorsal lesions. These dogs werc hcartworm antigen-negative and
yielded positive histopathologic results, with filarial segrments in microgranulomas or free
in the dermis or subcutaneous tissue. In one case, an adult nematode was found in the
tissue that was identifed as an Acanthocheilonema spp. Of the dogs treated and followed,
 all responded to ivermectin therapy or surgical excision with steroids and antibiotics.
Hormonal Hypersensitivity
 Hormonal hypersensitivity is a very rare, pruritic, papulocrustous dermatitis of dogs and
humans associated with hypersensiivity reactions to sex hormones.22 61, 67a, 610
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Discases · 645
FIGURE 8-20. Canine cutaneous diroflariasis. Extravascular microflaria
within a granuloma.
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Although the pathomechanism of the dermatitis in dogs is unknown, resuits of intradermal
p I a ie isns ausaaod on usan uoip doseq pue san a
type IV hypersensitivity reactions to endogenous progesterone, estrogen, or testosterone
are involved.67a, 610, 615, 616 In humans, a variety of skin disorders have been described,
 including urticaria, erythema multiforme, stomatitis, pruritic erythematous dermatitis, and
sive cutaneous transfer of skin test reactivity (positive P-K test result) to normal hu-
mans.57,58.,67a, 616
CLINICAL FEATURES
No age or brced predilections have been reported, but over 90% of the reported cases
have occurred in intact females. Affected females often have a history of repeated pseudo-
pregnancy, irregular estral cycles, or both. Dermatologic signs include a pruritic, erythem-
atous, often papulocrustous eruption that usually begins in the dorsal rump, perineal,
(Figs. 8-21 and 8-22). The feet, face, and ears are commonly affected in chronic cases.
Enlargerment of the vulva and nipples is common (Fig. 8-23). In female dogs, the
 dermatologic signs usually coincide initially with estrus, pseudopregnancy, or both but
tend to become more severe and protracted with each episode until the dog may have
646 · Skin lmmunc System and Allergic Skin Diseases
FIGURE 8-21. Canine hornonal
hypersensitivity. Traumaticandin-
farmmatory alopecia, hyperpigmenta-
tion, and lichenification of ventral
neck and chest, axillac, and medial
forclinbs,
some degree of pruritic derinatitis at all tines. In male dogs, dermatologic signs are
nonseasonal.616
DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis includes fea bite hypersensitivity, food hypersensitivity, atopy,
allergy testing has been performed with aqueous progesterone (0.025 ing), estrogen
FlGURE 8-22. Canine hormonal hyperscensitivity. Traur-
matic and inflammatory alopecia with enlarged nipples.
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases * 647
FIGURE 8-23. Canine hormmonal hypersensitivity.
Inflammatory and traumatic alopecia with lichenifca-
tion and vulvar enlargement.
(0.0125 mg), and testosterone (0.05 mg), and the skin is observed for immediate and
able in aqueous forn. The basophil degranulation test was useful in establishing the
diagnosis in five bitches67a. 615, however, this test is currently only a research toof (see
discussion of canine atopy).
Histopathology
Histopathology is mondiagnostic, revealing yarying degrees of superficial perivascular
nating.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The prognosis of hormonal hypersensitivity is favorable if neutering can be per-
symptoms with topical and systemic medicaments, as indicated. Response to neutering is
- s  is s      d  
corticoids is ofterl unsatisfactory. In females, response to repositol testosterone (1.0 mg/kg
intramuscularly) is a useful presurgical diagnostic aid, with dramatic relief of pruritis
occurring within 7 days. A similar response can be produced in males with the oral
administration of estrogen.616
Bacterial Hypersensitivity
lar dermatitis in dogs associated with a presumed hypersensitivity rcaction to staphylococ-
cal antigen.
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
In humans, bacterial antigens are thought to elicit type I, II, II1, and IV hypersensitivity
648 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
unclear, although evidence supporting the existence of a type III, and perhaps a type I,
may have elevated levels of circulating immune cormplexes,7 and these immune complexes
may contain staphylococcal (S. intermedus) antigens that stimulate canine neutrophils.6173
Such staphylococcal immune complexes could precipitate vasculitis. Two studies of normal
 ity, and dogs with recurrent staphylococcal pyoderma associated with atopy measured the
levcls of circulating antistaphylococcal IgE and IgG617b, 618a The levels of IgG were
elevated in all dogs that had experienced a staphylococcal infection, but IgE levels were
only elevated in dogs with bacterial hypersensitivity or recurrent pyoderma associated with
atopy.
 Staphylococci are one group of bacteria known to produce a number of toxins that
function as superantigens. The role of bacterial superantigens needs to be investigated
because they can induce T-cell activation in an antigen-nonspecific way. Superantigens
applied to human skin, either normal or atopic, induce dermatitis but, in atopic patients.
Exotoxins A, C, and toxic shock syndrome toxin-1 have been detected in some canine
S. intermedius isolates from normal dogs or dogs with atopy or bacterial pyoderma.617
There was no relationship with pruritus or type of lesion. Mason and Lloyd demonstrated
a p  as        
 permeability to staphylococcal antigens.241
Obviously, S. intermedius behaves as an antigen for some dogs, Theoretically, anti-
staphylococcal IgE, fixed to the surfaces of cutaneous mast celis and in the presence of
staphylococcal antigens, could cause the degranulation of mast cells, the liberation of
infammatory mediators, the depression of local bacteriocidal mechanisms, and the aug-
mentation of the absorption of staphylococcal antigens. These circumstances could encour-
 age the persistence of infection and a vicious cycle of infammation and pruritus.
CLINICAL FEATURES
Clinical signs associated with canine bacterial hypersensitivity are intense pruritus in
tous pusules and hemorrhagic hullae are present with bacterial hypersensitivity (see Fig.
8-15G and H). Anmular or arciform areas of central erythema or hyperpigmentation,
alopecia, and scaling that spread peripherally and often coalesce are very common but
nondiagnostic. Some lesions may exhibit associated palpable purpura. Rarely, a dog mani-
clues are prior pyogenic infection, poor or incomplete response to systemic glucocorti-
coids, and rapid response to appropriate systemic antibiotics. Relapse after cessation of
short-term antibiotic therapy is common.
Approximately 50% to 80% of these dogs have concurrent diseases that appear to
predisposc them to, or to intensify, the bacterial hypersensitivity.Gi. 620 Examples of such
diseases include seborrheic skin disease, hypothyroidism, other hypersensitivities (atopy,
tis, gingivitis, tonsillitis, lip folds, otitis externa).
DIAGNOSIS
 The differential diagnosis consists of bacterial folliculitis, demodicosis, dermatophytosis,
seborrheic skin disease, subcorneal pustular dermatosis, sterile eosinophilic pustulosis,
Definitive diagnosis is based on history, physical examination, and results of bacterial
culture, skin biopsy, and intradernal allergy testing. All reported cases of canine bacterial
hypersensitivity have grown pure cultures of either coagulase-positive Staphylococcus spp.
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 649
FIGURE 824.Bacterial hypersensitivity in a dog A, Suppurative uminal follculitis with neutrophilic vasculitis and
purpura. B, Subepidermal hemorrhagic bulla. (B, from Scott DW, et al: Staphylococcal hypersensitivity in the dog. J Am 
Anim Hosp Assoc 14:766, 1978.)
Histopathology
Skin biopsy reveals varying degrees of vasculitis and intraepicdermal pustular dermatitis or
folliculitis and furunculosis (Fig. 8-24).620 The vasculitis is usuaily mixed (neutrophils and
mononuclear cells), significant leukocytoclasis is common, and fbrinoid degeneration is
rare (Fig. 8-25).
Intradermal Allergy Testing
Intradermal allergy testing with a staphylococcal cell wall toxoid product (Staphoid A- B)
FIGURE 8-25. Canine bacterial hyperseusitivity. Mixed-cell (neutrophils, mononuclcar
cells) vasculitis with endiothelial swelling and degeneration and vacuolization of vessel wall.
14:766, 1978.)
650 · Slin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
uct is no longer available. The product was diluted with an equal volume of sterile saline,
and 0.1 ml of the mixture was injected intradermally. In virtually all dogs, normal or
dermatitic from any cause, an immediate wheal and fare reaction developed that per-
e sinou 7 on vz iv 'ainu u yr ue aq on paeadde pe siny gt on zi ioy pis
injection, however, dogs with bacterial hypersensitivity experienced erythematous, indu-
rated, oozing, pruritic reactions that often turned red-purple, became necrotic, and ulcer-
ated (Arthus reaction) (see Fig. 8-15H). Diagnostic skin testing with bacterial antigens
 presents problerns resuiting from a lack of uniformity of staphylococcal antigens, the
complex antigenic structure of staphylococci and their metabolites, and various nonimmu-
nologic cutaneous reactions.30, 67a
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Treatment of canine bacterial hypersensitivity may vary, depending on the existence of
concurrent diseases and the age of the dog. In those cases in which an underlying disease
 antibiotics is often curative. In cases in which no underlying dlisease can be detected but
the dog is less than I year of age, such a course of antibiotic therapy may still be curative.
When no underlying disease can be detected, however, and the dog is over I year of
repeated antibiotic or biological therapy. Biological therapy is preferred, because repeated
antibiotie therapy can lead to increasing bacterial drug resistance, rising drug expense,
to be successful in 67% to 88% of mature dogs with idiopathic bacterial hypcrsensitiv-
ity.67a. 619-60 This product is no longer available. An alternative treatment approved for the
dog is Staphage Lysate (Delmont Lahs) (see Chap. 4). When biological therapy is unsuc-
cessful, the therapy of choice for recurrent bacterial hypersensitivity is chronic antibiotic
ariministration (see Chap. 4).
Fungal Hypersensitivity
 Cutaneous hypersensitivity reactions to fungi are thought to be important in humans, but
the importance of such reactions in dogs and cats is unknown.23. 67a Hypersensitivity to
 Candida alhicans infections has been suspected in some cases of paronychia and gingivitis
in dogs and cats,inwhich the tissue response was out of proportion tothe degree of
infection found.s7a Fungal kerions are thought to represent hypersensitivity rcactions to
dermatophytes. Hypersensitivity reactions have been suspected in the pruritic widespread
papulocrustous eruptions (miliary dermatitis) in cats associated with Microsporum canis
infections.67a Malassezia dermatitis may also be, in part, a hypersensitivity reaction (see
Atopic Disease and Chap. 5).
● REFERENCES
General
6. Bochner BS: Celular adhesiou in infammation in al-
1. An S, Goetzl EJ: Lipid mediators of hypersensitivity
lergic infammation. In: Middleton E, et al (eds): Al-
and infammation. In: Middleton E, et al (eds): Al-
lergy Principles and Practice V. C. V. Mosby. St
Iergy Principles and Practice V. C.V. Mosby, St.
Louis, 1998, p. 94.
Lomis, 1998, p. 168.
7. Borish L, Rosenwasser LJ: Update on cytokines. J
2. Ansel J, et al: Cytokine modulation of keratinecyte
Allergy Clin Immunol 97:7i9, 1996.
cytokines. J Invest Dernatol 94:101s, 1990.
8. Borish L, Rosenwasser LJ: Cytokines in allergic in-
3. Bacon KB, Schall TJ: Chemokines as mediators of
alleryic infammation. Int Arch Allergy Immunol 109:
fammation. In: Middlton E,et al (eds): Allergy
97, 1996.
Principles and Practice V. C.V. Mosby, St. Louis,
4. Benjamin E, et al: Immumology、A Short Course II1.
1998, p. 108.
Wiley-Liss, New York, 1996.
9. Bos JD: Skin Immune System. CRC Press, Boca Ra-
5. Beutner EH, et al: Immunopathology of the Skin III.
ton, 1989.
Churchill I ivingstone, New York, 1987.
10. Cannon AG,Affolter VK: What does “CD" mean?
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 65I
Proc Annu Mcnb Meet Am Acad Vet Derimatol Am
in Veterinary Denmatology I1. Pergarnon Press, New
Coll Vet Dermatol 14:133, 1998.
York, 1993, p. 325.
11. Charlesworth EN, el al: Culaneous late-phase re-
sponseoallergenMelatorreleaseandinllammatory
Inodified cnltured Langerhans' cefls produce interleu-
cell infilration. J Clin Invest 83:1519, 1989.
kin 4 anc stimuate IgE proxdhetion by B cells. Eur J
12. Church MK, et al: Mast cell-derived mediators in
Immunol 19:245, 1989.
allergic infamnation. In: Midleton E. et al (eds):
 33. Hauser C, Orbea HA: Superantigens and their role it
Allergy Principles and Practice V. C.V. Mosby. St.
inmune-inediated chscases. J Invest Dermatol 10l:
Louis, 1998. p. 146.
503, 1993.
13. Corrigan CJ: Biology of lymuphocytes. In: Midlleton
Prelaud P: Allergologie Camine. Masson, Paris, 1999.
E, et al (eds): Allergy Principles andl Practice V. C.V.
35. Hill PB, Martin RJ: A review of mast cell biology. Vet
Mosby, St. Lonuis, 1998, p. 228.
Dematol 9: 145, 1998.
14. Dahl MV: Imrmunoderrmatology ll1. Year Book Mcdi-
36. Ihrke P], et al: Advances in Veterinary Dermatology
cal Publishers. Chicago, 1988.
I. Pergamon Press, New York, 1993.
- Anqneduns rofi jo uossdxg f e s1
 s a    2
plex class II noleeules by dermal infamumatory cells,
From neurons to nature's adjuvants. Adv Dermatol
cpidermal Langerhans'cells and keratinocytes in a-
14:209,1999.
ninc dermatological disease. J Conp Pathol 115:317.
38. Kearns RJ、 et al: Efet of age. hreed, and dhictary
1996.
(nega-6 (n-6): Omega-3 (n-3) fatty acid ratio on itn-
16. Day MJ: A Color Atlas of Clinieal humunology of the
une function, cicosanoid production and lipid per-
Dog and Cat. lowa State Uuiversity Press. Ames.
oxidatiot in yong and aged dogs. Vt lnmnopathol
1999.
69:165. 1999.
17. DeBoer DJ, et al: Cireulating imnune coraplex con-
39. Kita Il, et al: Biology of eosinophils. In: Middleton E.
centrations in sclccted cases of skin disease in dogs.
et al (edsj: Allergy Principles and Practice V. C.V.
Am J Vet Res 49:143, 1988.
Mosby, St. Louis, 1998, p. 242.
I8. Dore M, et al: Production of a nonoclonal antilbotly
40. Kondo S, Sauder DH: Epidermal cytokincs in allergice
against canine GMP-140 (P-selectin) and stuclies of its
contact dermatifis. J Ain Acad Denmatol 33:786,
vascular distribution in canine tissues. Vet Pathol 30:
1995.
41. Kube P, et al: Distribution, density, and hcterogereity
213, 1993.
19. Elangbam CS, et al: Cel adhesion moleculesup-
of canine mast cell depenling on fixation techniques.
Histochem Cell Biol 110:129, 1998.
date. Vet Pathol 34:61, 1997.
 20. Etinger SJ, Felllnan EC: Textbook of Veterinary
42. Lcwis RM, Pieut (A: Veterinary Clinical Immunol-
ogy. Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia, 1989.
[ntemal Medicine IV. W.B. Saunders. Philadelplhia,
43. Locke Pll, et al: Manual of Small Animal Demmatol-
1995.
 21. Fadok VA: Immunology can be fun! The star wars
ogy. British Sunall Aninal Veterinary Association,
Shurdington, 1993.
approach to immune function. Proc Aonu Menb
44. Luger TA. Schwartz T: Eviclence for an cpiderinal
Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Ain Coll Vet Derumatol
cytokine network. J Invest Dernatol 95:100s, 1990.
15:81, 1999.
45. Marin LB, et al: Eosiuophils in allergy: Role in dlis-
22. Fitzpatrick TB, ct al: Dermatology in General Medi-
ease, degranulatiomn, and cytokines. Int Arch Allergy
cine II. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1993.
Immunol 109:207, 1996.
23. Freedberg IM. et al: Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in
46. McEwan BJ, ct al: Tlhe: response of the eosinophil in
Ceneral Medicinc V. MeGraw-lill, New York. 1999.
acute infammation iu the hrorse. In: von Tscharner C,
24. Gant VA, et al: Biology of monoeytes and maeru-
Halliwell REW (erds): Advances in Veterinary Derina-
phagos. In: Midlleton E, et al (eds): Allergy Princi-
tology I. Bailliere-Tidall, Plhiladelphia, 1990, p. 176.
ples and Practice V. C.V. Mosby, St. Louis, 1998, p.
47. McKenzie RC. Saurder DN: The role of keratinocyte
295.
25. Grant JA, Huanin L: Biology of basophils. In: Midl-
Dermatol 95:105s, 1990.
dlleton E、 et al (eds): Allergy Principles and Practice
48. Mecheris DB: Unravelling tlhe mast cell dlilemrnat
V. C.V. Mosby. St. Louis, 1998, p. 277.
Culprit or victim of its generosity? Imnunol Today
26. Greeley EH. et al: The infuence of age on thr ca-
18:212. 1997.
nine immune system. Vet Iumunol linanunopathol
49. Middleton E, et al: Allergy Principles and Practice
55:1, 1996.
IV. Mosby Year Book, Inc., St. Iouis, I1993.
27. Gniffin CE, et al: Current Veterinary Dermatology.
 50. Middlleton E, et al: Allergy Principles and Practice V.
Mosby Year Book, Inc., St. Iouis, 1993.
C.V. Mosby, St Iouis, 1998.
28. Gross TL, ct al: Veterinary Dermatopathology: A
51. Modlin RL: Lymphocytcs. In: Freedlerg IM, et al
Macroscopic and Microscopic Evaluation of Canine
(eds): Fitzpatrick's Dernatology in General Medicine
and Feline Skin Discasc. Mosby Year Book, Inc., St.
V. MeGraw-Hill, New York, 1999, p. 400.
Louis,1992.
52. Moore PF, et al: The usc of imrmumological reagents
29. Halliwell REW: Clinical and immunological aspeccts of
in defining the patlhogenesis of canine skin diseases
allergic skin diseases in domestic animals: In: von
involving proliferation of leukocytes. In: Kwochka
Tscharner C, Halliwell REW (rds): Advances in Vet-
 s
erinary Dermatology I. Ballierc-Tindall, Philadelphia,
I11.Butterworth Heinemann. Boston, 1998、 p. 77.
1990, p. 91.
53. Muller Gll, et al; Small Animal Dermatology IV.
30. Halliwell REW, Gorman NT: Veterinary Clinical Im-
W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, 1989.
 munology. W.B. Sauders, Pliladelphia, 1989.
54. Nickoloff BJ: Dermal Inunune System. CRC Press,
31. Hargis AM, Liggit HD: Cytolines and their role in
Boca Raton, 1993.
cutaneous injury. In: Ihrke P], et al (eds): Advanecs 
55. Pentlared AP: Arachidonic acid mectabolism. In:
652 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
Freedberg IM, et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's Dermatology
nary Dermatology I. Balliere-Tindall, Philadelphia,
in General Medicine V. McCraw-Hill, Now York,
1990.
1999, p. 432.
78. Walsh LJ, Murphy GF: Iole of adhesion molecules in
56. Peters SP, et al: Late-phase allrgic reactions. In:
cutaneous inflammation and neoplasia. J Cutan Pathol
Middleton E, ct al (eds): Allergy Principles and Prac-
19:161, 1992.
tice V. C.V. Mosby, St. Louis, 1998, p. 342.
79. Wassom DL, Grieve RB: In vitro measurement of
57. Prelaud P: The basophil degranulation test in the di-
canine and feline IgE: Review of Fce RIo-based as-
agnosisofcanealrgikdiasInvonTa
says for detection of allergen-reactive IgE. Vet Der-
ner C, Halliwell REW (eds): Advances in Vetcrinary
matol 9:173, 1998.
Dennatology I. Bailliere-Tindall, Philadelphia, 1990,
 80. Wiliams IR, et al: Oytokines and chemokines. In:
p. 117.
Freedberg IM, et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's Dermatology
 58. Prelaud P: Les Dermites Allergiques du Chien et dn
in General Medicine V. McCraw-Hill, New York,
Chat. Masson, Paris, 1991.
1999, p. 384.
 59. Prieto VG, et al: Quantitative immunohistochemica!
81. Wolfe JH, Hallwell REW: Total hemolytic conple-
ment values in normal ard diseased dog populations.
differences in Langerhans' cels in dermatitis due to
intemal versus extermal antigen sources. J Cutan
Vet Immunol Immuopathol 1:287, 1980.
Pathol 25:301, 1998.
82. Yager JA: The skin as an inmune organ. In: Ihrke PJ.
60. Reedy LM, Miller WII Jr: Allergic Skin Diseases of
et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology I1.
Dogs aud Cats. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, 1989.
Pergamon Press, New York, 1993, p. 3.
 61. Reedy LM, et al: Allergic Skin Diseases of Dogs and
83. Yager JA, Scott DW: The skin and appendages. In:
Cats, 2nd cd. W.B. Saunlers, Philadelphia, 1997.
Jubb KVF, et al (eds): Pathology of Donestic Ani-
62. Saint-Andre Marchal I, et al: Feline Langerhans' cells
mals IV, Academic Press, New York, 1993, p. 531.
migrate from skin anrd vaginal nucosa to regional
84. Yager JA, Wilcock BP: Color Atlas and Text of Surgi-
calPathology of the Dog and Cal. Wolf, Spain,
lyuph nodes during experimental contact sensitization
with Huorescein isothiocyanate. Vet Dermatol 9:9,
1994.
1998.
85. Yager JA: The skin as an irninune organ. In: Kwochka
KW, et al (eds): Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1996.p. 3.
63. Schwartz LB. et al: Biology of mast cells in allergic
86.Zunic M, et al: Immune responses in the lymphoid
infammation. In: Middleton E, et al (eds): Allergy
Principles and Practice V. C.V. Mosby, St. Louis,
organs of dogs with experimentally induced IgE-me-
1998, p. 261.
diated allergy. Proc Annu Mcmh Meet Am Acad Vet
Dermatol Am Coll Vet Denrmatol 13:78, 1997.
64. Scott DW: Epidermal imast cells in the cat. Vet Der-
matol 1:65, 1990.
AllergicTherapy
65. Scott Dw: Felinc: dernatology 1979-1982: Introspcc-
 87. Alam R, et al: Selective inhibition of the cutancous
tive retrospections. J Am Anin Hosp Assc 20:537.
 late but not immediate allergic response to antigens
1984.
by misoprostol, a PGE analog-results of a double-
66. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1983-1985: "The se-
blind placebo-controlled stuiy. Am Rov Respir Dis
cret sits" J Asn Amin Hosp Assoc 23:255, 1987.
148:1066-1070, 1993.
67. Scott DW, el al: La dermatite miliaire feline: Une
87a. Beale KM, et al: Safety of long-term administration
modalite de reaction cutanee. Point Vet 19:284, 1987.
of a 0.01% fuocinolone shampoo in allergic dogs.Vet
67a. Scott DW, et al: Muller and Kirk's Sumall Animal
Dermatol 11:3, 2000.
Dennatology V. W,B. Saunders, Philadelphia, 1995.
 88. Beningo KE, et al: Observations on the use of tetra-
68. Stingl C, et al: The epidermis: An immunologic mi-
cycline and niacinamide as antipruritic agents in
croenvironment. In: Freedberg IM, et al (edsy: Fitz-
atopic dogs. Can Vet J 40:268, 1999.
patnick's Derrnatology in General Medicine V. Mc-
89. Bettenay SV: Feline atopy. In: Bonagura JD (ed):
Graw-Hill, New York, 1999, p. 343.
Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy Xllf. W.B. Saun-
69. Stone J: Dermatology, Immunology and Alergy.
ders, Philadelphia, 2000, p. 564.
Mosby Year Book, Inc., St. Louis, 1985.
90. Bierman CW, et al: Effect of Hl, receptor blockade
70. Sunderkotter C, et al: Aging and the skin inmune
 on late cutaneous reactions to antigen: A double-blind
    f s o
system. Arch Dermatol 133:1256, 1997.
71.
Swerlick RA, Lawley TJ: Role of microvascular endo-
1991.
thelial cells in inHainmation. J Invest Dermatol 100:
91. Bloom PB: Hydroxyzinc poisoning in 3 dogs. Proc
Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll
111s, 1993.
72. Thiers Bll, Dobson HL: Pathogenesis of Skin Dis-
Vet Dermatol 15:29, 1999.
92. Boeckh A: Misoprostol.
Comp Cont Educ Small
ease. Churchill Livingstone, New York, 1986.
Anim Pract 21:66, 1999.
73. Thomsen MK: Species specificity in the generation of
93. Bond R, Lloyd DH: Double-blind comparison of
eicosanoids: Emphasis on leukocyte-activating factors
three concentrated essential fatty acid supplements in
in the skin of allergie dogs and humans. In: Thrke PJ.
the management of canine atopy. Vet Dcrmatol 4:
et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology If.
185, 1994.
Pergamon Press, New York, 1993, p. 63.
94. Bond R, Lloyd DH: A double-blind cormparison of
74. Thomsen MK: The Role of Neutrophil-Activating
olive oil anda cmbination of evening primrose ol
and 6sh oil in the nanagement of chronc atopy.Vet
Copenhagen, 1991.
Rec 131:558, 1992.
95. Bond R, Lloyd DH: Randomized single-blind com-
gic disease. Semin Vet Med Surg 6:247, 1991.
parison of an evening primrose: oil and fish oil cornbi
76. Tizard JR: Veterinary Immunology: An Introduction
V. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia. 1997.
ment of canine atopy. Vet Dermatol 3:215, 1992.
77. von Tscharmer C, IIalliwell REW: Advances in Veteri-
96. Bond R, Lloyd DH: Cormbined treatrment with con-
Ski Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases * 653
centratcd essential fatty acids and prednisone in the
119. Marsella R, et al: Use of pentoxifylline in the treat-
management of canine atopy. Vet Rec 134:30, 1994.
ment of allergic contact rcactions to plants of the
97. Rees CA, ct al: Disposition and hrmatologic effects of
Conmelinceae family in dogs. Vet Dennatol S:121,
a single intravenous or oral doe pentoxifline admin
1997.
istratfion in normal dogs. Proc Annu Mernb Meet Am
120. Marsella R: Efects of kctoconazole on intradermal
Acad Vet Dermatol Am' Coll Vet Dermatol 15:89,
skin test and leukotriene C4 concentration in the skin
6661
of atopic dogs. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Ad-
98. Boguniewicz M, Leung DYM: Atopic dermatitis. In:
vances in Veterinary Dermatology II. Butterworth
Midleton E, et al (eds): Allergy Principles and Prac-
Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p. 549.
tice V. C.V. Mosby, St. Louis, I998, p. 123.
120a. McAnulty JF, Lensimeyer GL: The effects of keto-
 99. Campbell KI, ct al: Effects of oral sunflower oil on
comazole on the pharmacokinetics of cyclosporine A
serum and qutaneous fatty acid concentration profles
in cats. Vet Surg 28:448, 1999.
in scborrheic dogs. Vet Denmatol 3:29, 1992.
121.
Messinger LM: Therapy for feline derumatoses. Vet
100. Chalmers SA, Medleau L: Feline atopic dermatitis:
Clin North Am Small Arinm Pract 25:981, 1995.
Its diagnosis and treatment. Vet Med 89:342, 1994.
122. Miller WH Jr: Fatty acid supplements as anti-inflam-
101. Chew DJ, ct al: Amitriptylinc trcatment for severe
matory agents. In: Kirk Rw (ed): Current Veterinary
recurrent iliopathic cystitis in cats. J Am Vet Med
Therapy X. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, 1989,
Assoe 213:1282, 1998.
p. 563.
102. Clayton MH, et al: Altered glucocorticoid receptor
123. Miller WH Jr: Nonstcroidal anti-infammatory agcnts
binding in atopic dermatis. J Alergy Clin Immunol
 in the management of canine and feline pruritus. In:
96:421, 1995.
103. DeBoer DJ, ct al: Inability of short-duration treat-
Saunders, Philadelphia, 1989, p. 566.
ment with a 5-lipoxygenase inhibitor to reduce clinical
124. Miller WH Jr, et al: Clinical trial of DVM Derm
signs of canine atopy. Vet Dermatol 5:13, 1994.
Caps in the treatment of allergic disease in dogs: A
104. Estellc F, Simons R: Anithistamines. In: Middleton
nonblinded study. J Am Anim Hosp Asso: 25:163,
E, et al (eds): Allergy Principles and Practice V. C.V.
1989.
Mosby, St. Louis, 1998, p. 612.
125. Miller WH Jr, Scott DW: Eficacy of chlorphenira-
105. Garcia G, et al: Inhibitiou of histanine release from
mine maleate for the management of pruritus in cats.
dispersed canine skin mast cels by cyclosporine A,
J Am Vet Med Assoc 197:67, 1990.
rolipran and salbutamol, but not by dexamethasone or
126.
Miller WH Jr, et al: Investigation on the antipruritie
sodium cromoglycate. Vet Dematol 9:81, 1998.
effects of ascorbic acid given alone and in coinbina-
106. Granlund H, et al: Long-terim follow-up of eczema
 patients treated with cyclosporine. Acta Dermatol Ve-
skin disease. Canine Pract 17:1l, 1992.
nerol 78:40-43, 1998.
127. Miller WH Jr, et al: Nonsteroidal management of
107. Harvey RG: personal communication, 1990.
canine pruritus with amitriptyline. Comell Vet 82:53,
108. Harvey RG: Management of feline miliary dermatitis
1992.
by supplementing the diet with essential fatty acids.
128. Miler WH Jr. et al: Efficacy of DVM Derm Caps
Vet Rec 128:326, 1991.
Liquid in the management of allergic and infamma-
tory dermatoses of he cat. J Arm Anim Hosp Assoc
prinrose oil and fish oil on cats with crusting derrma-
29:37, 1993.
tosis ("miliary dermatitis"). Vet Rec 133:208, 1993.
129. Miller WH Jr, et al: A clinical trial on the efficacy of
110. Harvey RG: A comparison of evening primrose oil
clermastine in the rnanagement of allergic pruritus in
and sunfower oil for the management of papulocrus-
dogs. Can Vet J 34:25, 1993.
tous dermatitis in cats. Vet Rec 133:57l, 1993.
I30. Miler WH Jr, Scott DW: Medical management of
111. Harvey RG: A blinded, placebo-controlled study of
chronic pruritus. Comp Cont Educ 16:449, 1994.
the effcacy of borage seed oil and fish oil in the
131. Miller WH Jr, Scott DW: Clemastine fumaratc as an
antipruritic agent in pnuritie cats: Results of an open
112. Heripret D: Les antiprurigineux non steroidiens. Prat
clinical trial. Can Vet J 35:502, 1994.
Med Chir Anin Comp 28:73, 1993.
132. Olivry T, ct al: Treatment of canine atopie dermatitis
113. IIeripret D, Vroom M: Antipruritic therapy. In:
with misoprostol, a prostaglandin E analogue: An
Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary
open study. J Dernatol Trcat 8:243-247, 1997.
Dermatology Il. Butterworth Heinemann, Boston,
133. Otto CM, Greentree WF: Terfenardine toxicosis in
1998, p. 417.
dogs. J Ar Vet Med Assoc 205:1004, 1994.
ll4. Lim KK, et al: Cyclosporine in the treatment of der-
134. Pan PY, et al: The effects of short tern treatment
matologic disease: An updatc. Mayo Clin Proc 7l:
with the prostaglandin El (PGEI) analog inisoprostol
1183-1191. 1996.
115. Logas DB, Kunkle GA: Double-blinded study examin-
nephritis. Clin Immunol fmmunopathol 75:125- 130.
ing the effects of evening primrose oil on feline pnu-
1995.
ritic dermatitis. Vet Dermatol 4:181, 1993.
135. Paradis M, et al: Further investigations on the use of
116. Logas DB, Kumnkle GA: Double-blinded crossover
nonsteroidal and steroidal anti-infammatory agents in
- uo pns  s y as
the management of canine pruritus. J Am Anim Hosp
dose eicosapentaenoic acid for the treatment of ca-
Assoc 27:44, 1991.
nine pruritie skin disease. Vet Dermatol 5:99, 1994.
136. Paratlis M, et al: The effcacy of clemastine (Tavist), a
117. Lloyd DH, Thomsett LR: Essential fatty acid supple-
fatty acid-containing product (DVM Derm Caps), and
mentation in the treatment of canine atopy: A prelim-
the combination of both products in the managemcnt
inary study. Vet Dermatol 1:41. 1989.
of caninc pruritus. Vet Dermatol 2:17, 1991.
118. Lloyd DHl: Essential fatty acids and skin disease. J
137.
.Paradis M, Bettenay
 S: Nonsteroidal antiprunitic
Small Anim Pract 30:207, 1989.
dngs in sinall animals. In: Ihrke PJ, et al (eds): Ad-
654 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
vanccs in Vetcrinary Dcrmatology II. Pergamon
agement of allergic pruritus in dogs and cats. J Small
Press, New York, 1993, p. 429.
Anim Pract 40:359, 1999.
138. Paterson S: Use of antihistamines to control pruritus
154. Shonlberg N: Thc cfficacy of fuoxctine: (Prozae) in
in atopic dogs. J Small Anim Pract 35:415, 1994.
the treatment of acral lick and allergic inhalant der-
139.Pattorson S: Additive benefits of EFAs in dogs with
matitis in canines. Proc Annu Mcmb Meet Am Aead
atopic dermatitis after partial response to antihista-
Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 6:31, 1990.
nine therapy. J Small Anim Praet 36:389, 1993.
155. Simon FE, Simon KJ: Antihistamines. In: Midlleton
139a. Reich MR, et al: Electrocardiographic assessment of
E, et al (eds): Allergy Principles and Practice IV.
antiarxiety merlication in dogs and correlation with
Mosby Year Book, St. Louis, 1993.
senuu dnig concentration. J Am Vet Med Assoc 216:
156. Thomas RC, Logas D: Effects of a 1% hydrocortisone
1571, 2000.
conditioner in lhematological and biochemical paramc-
140. Scarff DH, Lloyd DH: Double blindl. placebo con1-
ters,adrenil funetion testing. and cutaneous reaction
trolled, rrossover study of evening primrose oil in the
to histamine in normal and pruritie dogs. Vet Derma-
treatment of canine atopy. Vet Ree: 131:97, 1992.
tol 10:109, 1999.
141. Scarff DH. et al: A inulticenter placebo-controlled
157. Toyoda M, Morohashi M: Morphological assessment
practitioner study to investigate the effect of evening
of the effects of cyclosporine A on rmast cell-nerve
primrose oil in canine atopic dermatosis. In: Von
relationship in atopic dermatitis. Acta Dermatol Ve-
Tscharmer C, Halliwell REW (eds): Advances in Vet-
nerol 78:321-325, 1998.
erinary Dermatology I, Bailliere-Tindal, Philadelphia,
158. Turek JJ, Hayck MC: Effect of omega-6:omega 3
1990, p. 481.
fatty acid ratios on cytokine produetion in adult and
142. Schick RO, et al: Efficacy of an omega-3 fatty acid
geriatric dogs. In: Reinhart GA, Carey DP (eds): Re-
adjusted dliet in pruritie dogs. Proe Annu Memh Meet
cent Advances in Canine and Feline Nutrition Il.
Eur Soc Vet Dennatol Eur Coll Vet Dermatol 12:
Orange Frazer Press, Wilmington, O1l1, 1998, p. 305.
245, 1995.
139. Umesh KG, et al: Evaluation of terfendaine and hy-
143. Scott Dw, Buerger RC: Nonsteroidal anti-inflainua-
droxyzine as antpruritie agents in dogs. Indian Vet ]
tory agents in the management of canine pruritus. ]
75:345, 1998.
Am Anin 1hosp Assoc 24:425, 1988.
160. van Joost T, et al: Cyclosporine in atopie dermatitis. J
144. Scott DW, Miler WH Jr: Nonsteroidal managenent
An Acad Derniatol 27:922, 1992.
of canine pruritus: Chlorpheniramine and a fatty acid
161. Vaughn DM, et al; Evaluation of effects of dietary
supplement (DVM Derm Caps) in combination, and
n-6 to n-3 fatty acids ratios on leukotriene B synthesis
the fatty acid supplement at twice the manufacturer's
in dog skin and neutrophils. Vet Derinatof 5:163,
recominended dosage. Comell Vet 80:381. 1990.
1994.
145. Scott DW, et al: Failure of cyproheptadine hydro-
162. White P: Essential fatty acids: Lse in management of
chloride as an antipruritie agent in allergic dog: Re-
canine atopy. Comp Cont Edue 15:45l, 1993.
salts of a double-blinded, placcbo-controlled study.
Urticaria and Angioedema
Cornell Vet 82:247, 1992.
163. Nichols PR, et al: A relrospective study of canine and
146. Scott DW, et al: Comparison of the clinical effcacy
feline cutaneus vasculitis. Proc Annu Mennb Meet
of two comurnercial fatty acid supplements (Efa Vet
Am Acad Vet Dcrmatol Amn Coll Vet Dennatol 14:27,
and DVM Derm Caps), evering primrose oil. and
cold watermarine ishlinthe management ofaller
1998.
164. Noxon JO): Auaphylaxis, wrticaria, and angioedema.
gic pnuritus in dogs: A double-blinded study. Cornell
Sermin Vet Med Surg 6:265, 1991.
Vet 82:319. 1992.
165. Scott DW, Miller WH Jr: iliosyneratic cutaneous adl.
146a. Seott DW, Cayatte SM: Failure of papaverine hydr-
verse drug rouctions in the cat: Literature: revicw and
chloride and doxyeyclinehyclate as anlipruritie agents
report of 14 cases {1990-1996). Feline: Pract 26:10,
in pnuritic dogs: Results of an open clisical trial. Can
1998.
Vet J 34:164, 1993.
166. Scott DW, Miller WH Jr: Idiosyncratic cutaneous ad-
147. Scott Dw, Miller WH Jr: Meliead management of
verse drug rcac:tions in the dog: Literature: review and
allergie pruritus in the cat, with emphasis on feline?
report of 10l cases (1990- 1996). Canine Praet 24:16,
atopy. J S Afr Vet Assoe 64:103, 1993.
148. Scott DW, Miller WH Jr: Nonsteroidal anti-inflamma-
6667
167.
Soter NA: Urticaria and angioedema. In: Frcexdherg
tory agents in thc management of canine allergic pr-
IM, et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in Ceneral
ritus. J S Afr Vet Assoe 64:52, 1993.
Medicine V. McGraw-Hil, New York, 1.999, p. 1409.
149. Scott Dw, et al: Failure of terfenadine as antipruritic
168.Vitale CB, ct al: Patative diethylcarhanazine-induced
agent in atopic dogs: Results of a double-blinded.
urticaria with eosinophilic dermatitis in a dog. Vet
placcbo-controlled study. Can Vet J 35:286, 1994.
Dermatol 5:197, 1994.
150.Scott Dw, Miller WfI Jr: The corubination of an
169.Wolrom E, et al: Chronic urticaria and foxocara
antilhistamine (chlorpheniramine)and an omega-
caris infection: A casc-study. Ann Dermalol Venereol
 3/omega-6 fatty acid-containing prodnct (DVM Derm
123:240, 1996.
Caps Liquid) for the managerment of pruritic cats.
 I A z N   udo  jo sas
Canine Atopy
1995.
General
151. Scott Dw, el al: Effect of an ouega-3/omega-6 fatty
170. Auxilia ST, Hill PB: Mast cell distribution in normal
acidi-containing commcrcial lanb andricediet on
 dog skin: A possible explanation for the predilection
pruritus in atopie tlogs: Results of a single-blinled
sites of atopic dermatitis. Proceedings of the British
studly. Can J Vet Res 61:145, 1997.
Sinall Aninal Veterinary Association, Birmingham,
152. Scoft DW, et al: Observations on the nsc of cypro-
1999, p. 236.
heptadine hydrochloride as an antpruric agent in
171.
 Ballauf B: Vergleich von Intrakutan—und Pricktest in
allergie cats. Can Vet J 39:634, 1998.
der Allergiediagnostik bcim Ilund Ticrarztl Prax 19:
153. Scotf DW, Miller WH Jr: Antihistaunines in the man-
428, 1991.
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 655
172. Becker AB, et al: Cutaneous mast cell heterogeneity:
prescnt at 1nncosal level in patients with asympto-
Response to antigen in atopic dogs. J Allergy Clin
atie rhinitis and mite allergy. J Allergy Clin Immu-
linmunol 78:937, 1986.
nol 96:6, 1995.
173. Berardesca E, Borroni G: Instrumental evaluation of
195. Codner EC, Iessard P: Comparison of intradermal
cutaneous hydration. Clin Dennatol 13:323, 1995.
allergy test and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
174. Bettenay S: A double-blinded trial evaluating homeo-
in dogs with allergic skin disease. J Am Vet Med
pathie trops in the treatment of atopy in 20 dogs. In:
Assoc 202:739, 1993.
Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary
196. Collo MJ, et al: A controlled trial of house dust mite.
Dermatology Ill. Butterworth Ileinemann, Boston,
eradication using natamycin in homes of patients with
1998, p. 508.
atopic dermatitis: Fffect on clinical status and mite
175. Bevier DE: Long-term management of atopic dlisease
populations. Br J Denmatol 121:199, 1989.
in the dog. Vet Clin North Ain Small Anin Pract 20:
197. Cooper KD: Atopic derrmatitis: Recent trends in
1487, 1990.
pathogencsis and therapy. Derimatol Foundation 102:
176. Bogunicwicz, M., Leung DYM: Atopic dermatitis: A
128, 1994.
question of balanec. Arch Derinatol 134:870, 1998.
197a. D'Amato G, et al: Clothing is a carrier of cat aller-
gens. J Allergy Clin Imununol 98:577, 1997.
198.
Davis FM: Anti-IgE treatment for allergic diseascs.
Clin Immunol 97:907, 1996.
Proc Anmu Memb Mext Am Aead Vet Dermatol Am
178. Bos JD, et al: Immune dysregulation in atopic ec-
Coll Vet Dermatol 14:57, 1998.
xema. Arch Derinatol 128:1509, 1992.
199. Day MJ, et al: Snbclass profile of allergen-specifie
179. Bourdeau P, Paragon BM: Altermatives aux corticoi-
IgG antibodies in atopic dogs. Res Vet Sci 6l:146,
des en dermatologie des carnivores. Rev Med Vet
1996.
168:645, 1992.
200. DeBoer Dj: Advances in allergic skin disease. In:
180. Bourdeau P, et al: Relationslips between the distribu-
Kwochka KW, et al (edis): Advances in Veterinary
tion of lesions and positive intradermal reactious in
Dermatology III. Butterworth Heinermann, Boston.
307 dogs suspected of atopy and/or fea bite hyper-
1998, p. 147.
sensitivity. Proc Annu Memb Meet Eur Soc Vet Der-
matol Fur Coll Vet Dermatol 15:157, 1998.
181. Brazis P, et al: Comparative study of histanine re-
not predict developuent of atopic dermatitis. Vet
lease from skin mast cells clispersed from atopic, as-
Dermatol 10:275, 1999.
caris-sensitive, and healthy dogs. Vet Immmunol Im-
20la. DeMora F, ct al: Skin mast cell releasibility in dogs
munopathol 66:43, 1998.
with atopic cderrnalitis. Inflam Res 45:424, 1996.
182. Bruijnzeel-Kourmen CAFM, et al: New aspects in the
202. De Weck AI., et al: Geneties and regulation of the
pathogenesis of atopic dermatis. Acta Derrmatol Ve-
IgE responsc leading to experimentally induced
nereol (Stockh) Suppl 144:58, 1989.
atopic-like dermatitis in beagle dogs. Proc Annu
183. Bruijnzecl PLB, et al: The involvement of eosinophils
Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vct
e ui se  or pso yd a 
Dermatol 13:76, 1997.
denmatitis: Its rclevance
for the pathogencsis of
203. De Weck AL, et al Dog allergy, a model for allergy
atopic dermatitis. Clin Exp Allergy 23:97, 1993.
genetics. Int Arch Allergy Immunol 113:55, 1997.
184. Butler JM, et al: Pruritic dennatitis in asthmatic ba-
204.
De Weck AL, et al: Genetic and environmental as-
senji-greyhound dogs: A rnodel for human atopie der-
pecls of IgE regulation in dogs. Proc Annu Mernb
matitis. [ Am Acad Dermatol 8:33, 1983.
Meet Eur Soc Vet Dermatol Eur Coll Vet Dermatol
185. Campbell KL, et al: Imrunoglobulin A deficieney in
15:111, 1998.
the dog. Canine Pract 16:7, 1991.
 205. Elsner P, et al: Bioengineering of the Skin: Water
186. Carloti DN, Castargent F: Analyse statistiquc de
and the Stratum Corneum. CRC Press, Boca Raton,
tests cutanes positifs chez 449 chiens atteints de der-
1994.
matite allergique. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 27:53,
 206. Esch RE: Camine allrgy to house dust mites. Vet
1992.
Allergy Clin Immunol 5; 110, 1997.
187. Carlotui D: La dermatite atopique du clhien.Point Vet
207. Ferrer I, ct al: Clinical anti-inflammatory efficacy of
17:5, 1985.
arofyline, a new selective phosphodicsterase-4 inhibi.
188. Carloti DN: Traiteiment et suivi au long cours du
tor, in dogs with atopic dermabtis. Vet Rcc 145:191,
chien a dermatite atopique. Prat Med Chir Anim
1999.
Comp 33(Suppl):359, 1998.
  x  
189. Carucci JA, et al: The leukotriene antagonist zafirlu-
anticorps anaphylactiques (lgG) pour le diagnostic
kast as a therapeutic agent for atopie derrmatitis. Arch
d’atopie chez le clhien. Ann Med Vet 135:57, 1991.
Dermatol 134:785, 1998.
209. Frank LA, McEntee MF: Demonstration of aeroaller-
190. Chalmers SA, Medlcau L: An update on atopic der-
gen contact sensitivity in dogs. Vet Allergy Clin In-
matitis in dogs. Vet Med 89:326, 1994.
munol 3:75-80, 1995.
191. Chan SCl, et al: Elevated leukoeyte phosphodiesterase
 210. Frick OL, et al: Imrnunoglobulin E antibodies to pol-
as a basis for deprcsscd cyelie adienosine monophos-
lens angmented in dogs by virus vaccines. Am J Vet
phate responses in the basenji-greyhound dog model
Res 44:440, 1983.
of asthma. J Allergy Clin Hmmmnol 76:148, 1985.
 211. Frick OL: Pathogenesis of chronic allergic reactions
192. Chaurloga P, et al: The incidencc of atopic diseases in
using the atopic dog as a model. Proc Am Acad Vct
dogs in the Kosice region (Slovakia): Anannestic and
Allergy, 1991.
clinical aspects. Folia Vet 42:159, 1998.
212. Graham-Brown RAC: Therapeutics in atopic dermati-
tis. Adv Dermatol 13:3, 1998.
mal dogs and in dogs with atopy or a scaling derma.
 213. Griffn CE: Atopic disease. Semin Vet Med Surg 6:
tosis. ] Small Anim Pract 36:305, 1995.
290, 1991.
194. Ciprandi G, et al: Mininal persistent infammation is
214. Griffn CE: Malassesia paronychia in atopic dogs.
656 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
 Proc Annu Mcmb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am
placebo-controlled study. J Am Acad Dermatol 28:
Coll Vet Dermatol 12:51, 1996.
232, 1993.
214a. Griot-Wenk ME, et al: Total serum IgE and IgA
 234. Ieung DYM: Atopic dermatitis: The skin as a window
s  p s au u sa a
into the pathogenesis of chronic allergic diseases. J
and exposed to different environments. Res Vet Sci
Allergy Clin Immunol 96:302, 1995.
67:239, 1999.
235. Leung DYM, et al: Atopie dermatitis (atopic eczema).
215. Groeben lI, et al: Dermal and airway responses to
In: Freedberg IM, et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's Dermatol.
  o   s m
ogy in General Medicine V. MeCraw-Hill, New York,
Immunol Immunopathol 58:209, 1997.
1999, p. 1464.
2]6. Halliwell REw, et al: Induced and spontaneous IgE
236. Lyon TM, Halliwell REW: Allergen-specific IgE and
antibodies to Dermutophugoides farinae in dogs
and
IgGd antibodies in atopic and normal dogs. Vet Im-
cats: Evidence of fuuctional heterogeneity of IgE. Vet
miunol Immunopathol 66:203, 1998.
Dcrmatol 9:179, 1998.
237. Magalono-Laruelle C: Seusibilisation a la blatte chez
217. Hanifn JM, et al: Recombinant interferon therapy for
le chien atopique. Prat Med Chir Anim Cornp 30:
atopic dermatitis. J Am Acad Derrnatol 28:189, 1993.
331, 1996.
 218. Hanifu JM: Biochemical and immunologic mecha-
238. Mao XQ, et al: Association between genetic variants
nisns in atopic dermatitis: New targets for cmcrging
of mast cll chymase and eczerma. Lancet 348:581.
therapies. J Am Acad Dermatol 41:72, 1999.
1996.
219. Ilarper, J:' Traditional Chincse medlicine for eczema.
239. Marsella R, et al: Doublc-blindcd placebo-controlled
Br Med j 308:489, 1994.
220. Iarvey RC, Noble WC: A temporal study comparing
cross-over study on the effects of pentoxifylline in
canine atopy. Proc Annu Mermb Meet Am Acad Vet
the carriage of Staphylococcus interrnedius on normal
 Dernatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 15:91, 1999.
dlogs with atopice dogs in clinical remission. Vet Der-
 240. Mason IS, Lloyd DH: Factors influencing the pene-
matol 5:21, 1994.
tration of bacterial antigens through canine skin. In:
221.1
Heripret D: Les antiprurigineux non steroidiens. Pral
von Tscharner C, Halliwell REW (eds): Advances in
Med Chir Anim Comp 28:73, 1993.
Veterinary Dermatology I. Bailliere-Tindall, Philadel-
222.
Hlill PB, el al: Concentrations of total senu lgE,
phia, 1990, p. 370.
IgA, and IgG in atopie and parasitized dogs. Vet lm-
241.
Mason IS, Lloyd DIl: The role of allergy in the
munol Imnunopathol 44:105, 1995.
development of canine pyoderma. J Small Anim Pract
223.
Hill PB, DeBoer Dj; Quantification of serum total
lgL concentration in dogs by use of an enzyme-linked
30:216,1992.
242. McEwan NA: Bacterial adherence to canine comeo-
immunsorbent assay containing onoclonal murine-
anticaninc IgE. Ain J Vet Res 55:944, 1994.
cytes. In: von Tschamcr C, Halliwell REw (eds):
224.Hirshman CA,et al:Enhanced bronchoalveolar lavage
Advances in Veterinary Dermatology I. Bailliere-Tin-
dall, Philadelphia, 1990, p. 454.
mast cells histamine releasibility in allergic dogs with
243. Morris DO, et al: Type-1 hypersensitivity responses to
Clin Imumol 81:829, 1988.
Malassezia pachydermatis extracts in atopic dogs.
225. Hites MJ, et al: Effect of immunotherapy on the
Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Derimatol Am
serum concentralions of allergen-specifc IgG antibod
Coll Vet Dermatol 13:74, 1997.
ies in dog sera. Vet Immunol Irnmunopathol 22.39,
244. Mudde GC, et al: IgE positive Langerhans' cels and
Th2 allergen spccife T cclls in atopic: dernatitis. J
1989.
226. Hofer MF, et al: Staphylococcal toxins augment spe-
Invest Dermatol 99:103, 1992.
cific IgE responses by atopic patients exposed to al-
 245. Mudde GC, et al: Advances in the pathogenesis and
lergen. J Invest Dermatol 112:171,1999.
Jackson HA, et al: Canine leukocyte histamine re-
Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am
227.
lease: Response to antigen and to anti-lgE. Vet Im-
Coll Vet Dermatol 14:41, 1998.
246. Mudde CC, et al: Allergen presentalion by epidermal
nunol Immunopathol 53:195, 1996.
228. Junghans V, et al: Epidermal cytokines Il-1β, TNF-α,
Langerhans' cells frun patients with atopic dermatitis
is nediated by IgE. Imumunology 69:335, 1990.
sponse to application of house dust inite antigens. J
247. Mueller RS: Diaghosis and management of canine
Invcst Dermmatol 11l:1184, 1998.
atopic disease. Aust Vet Practit 23:20, 1993.
229. Kapp A, et al: Eosinophil cationic protein in sera of
247a. Mueller RS, et al: Scrum and skin IgA concentra-
patients with atopic dermatitis. J Am Acad Dermatol
tions in normal and atopic: dogs. Aust Vet J 75:906.
24:555, 1991.
1997.
230. Kapp A, et a: Altered production of immunomodulat.
248. Muse R, et al: The prevalence of otic manifestations
ing cytokines in patients with atopic dermatitis. Acta
and otitis exterma in allergic dogs. Proc Annu Menb
Dermatol Venereol (Stockh) 144:97, 1989.
Meet Am Acad Vet Denmatol Ain Coll Vet Dermatol
231. Klubal, R, et al: The high-affnity receptor for IgE is
12:33, 1996.
the preclominant IgE-binding structure in lesional
249. Nimmo-Wilkie JS, et al: In vitro lymphocyte stimula-
skin of atopic dermatitis patients. J Invest Dermatol
tion by concanavalin A andl with histanine as a co-
108:3, 1997.
mitogen in dogs with atopic dermatitis. Vet Immuncl
232. Langeveld-wildschut EC, et al: Evaluation of the
Immunopathol 28:67, 1991.
alopy patch test and the cntaneous late-phase reaction
250. Nimmo-Wilkie JS, et al: Abnormal cntaneous re-
as rclcvant rnocdels for the study of allergic inflamma-
sponse to mitogens and a contact allergen in dogs
tiom in patients with atopic eczema. J Allergy Clin
with atopic dermatis. Vet Immunol Irmunopatho!
lumunol 98:1019, 1996.
28:97, 1991.
233. Leroy BP, et al: A novel therapy for atopic dermatitis
251. Nimmo-Wilkie JS, et al: Altered spontameous and his-
tamine-induced in vitro suppressor-cell function in
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 657
dlogs with atopie dermatitis. Vet Inmunol Immunopa-
272. Rhodes KH, et al: Comparativc aspccts of canine and
thol 30:129, 1992.
hurnan atopie dermatitis. Semin Vet Mcd Surg 2: 166,
 232. Nimmo-Wikie JS, et al: Changes in cell-mediated im-
1987.
mune responses after experimentally-induced anaphy-
273. Rhodes KH, ct al: Invcstigation into the immunopath-
laxis in dogs. Vet Immunol Immunopatheol 32:325,
ogencsis of caninc atopy. Semin Vet Med Surg 2:199,
1992.
1987.
274. Rokugo M, et al: Contact sensitivity to Pityrosporum
the skin of dogs with atopic dermatitis and correla-
ovale in patients with atopic dermatitis. Arch Derma-
tions with cutaneous and plasma histamine and total
tol 126:627, 1990.
serum IgE. Vet Pathol 27:179, 1990.
 275. Ruzicka T: Atopic eczema between rationality and
254. Nuttal TJ: Malassezia specifc IgE levcls in normal
irrationality. Arch Dermnatol 134:1462, 1998.
and atopic dogs. Proc Annu Menib Meet Eur Soc Vet
276.SagerN,t al:Hous dusmite specife reativity in
Dermatol Eur Coll Vet Dermatol 15:155, 1998.
the skin of subjects with atopie derrmatitis: Frequcncy
255. Ohlen BM: Diagnostiering och behanding vid atopi
and lyuphokine profile in the alergen patch test. ]
hos hund i Sverigc. Svensk Veterinar 44:299, 1992.
Allergy Clin Im1nunol 89:801, 1992.
256. Olivry T, et al: Langerhans' cell hyperplasia and IgF
277. Saridomichelakis MN, et al: Canine atopie dermatitis
cxprcssion in canine atopic deunatitis. Arch Derma-
in Grecce: Clinical observations and the prevalence of
tof. Res. 288:579-585, 1996.
positive intradernal test reactions in 9l spontaneous
 257. Olivry T, et al: Characterization of the cutaneous in-
cases. Vet Immunol Irmmunopathol 69:6l, 1999.
fammatory infltrate in caninc atopic denmatitis. Am J
278. Saridomichelakis MN, et al: Sensitization to dust
Dermatopathol 19:477-486, 1997.
Inites in cats with Otodectes cynotis infestation. Vet
 258. Olivry T, ct al: Characterization of the cutaneous in-
Dernatol 10:89, 1999.
famnatory infiltrate during IgE-mediated late-phase
279. Schick RO, Fadok VA: Responses of atopie dogs to
reactions in dogs with atopic dermatitis. Proc Annu
regional allergens: 268 cases (1981-1984). J Am Vet
Memb Mcct Am Acad Vet Deatol Au Coll Vet
Med Assoc 189:1493, 1986.
Demmatol 14:71, 1998.
280. Schwartzman RM: mmunologic studlies of progeny of
259. Olivry T. et al: Toward a canine imoclel of atopic
atopic dogs. Am J Vet Res 45:375. 1984.
dermatitis: amplification of cytokine-genc transcripts
281. Schwartzman RM, et al: The atopic dog model: Re-
in the skin of atopic dogs. Exper Denmatol 8:204,
port ol an attempt to establish a colony.Int Arch
1999.
Allergy Appl Immunol 72:97, 1983.
260. Peng Z, et al: Measurement of ragweed-sprecifie IgE
282. Seott DW: Observations on canine atopy. J Am Anim
 in canine serum by use of enzyme-linked irmmunosor-
Hosp Assoe 17:91, 1981.
bent assays containing polyclonal and monoclonal an-
 283. Scott Dw, Paradis M: A survey of canine and feline
tibodies. Am J Vet Res 54:239. 1993.
skin disorders stxen in a university practice: Small Ani-
261. Peug Z, et al: Hleterogeneity of polyclonal IgE char-
mal Clinic, University of Montreal, Saint-Ilyacinthe,
acterized by differential charge, affinity to protein A.
Quebec. (1987-1988). Can Vet J 31:830, 1990.
284. Scott DW, et al: A clinical study of the efficacy of
1997.
 s  d n  o
262. Refercncc deletecd.
the inanagement of pruritus in atopic dogs. Canine
263. Prelaud P, Sainte-Laudy J: Dermatite atopique du
Pract 25:15, 2000.
chien: Methodes de diagnostic in citro. Prat Med
285. Shaw SC: The role of house dust mite allergens in
Chir Anim Comp 23:441, 1988.
canine allrgic disease. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds):
264. Preclaud P. Sainte-Laudy J IgG specifiques de
Advances inVetcrinary Dermatology lll. Butterworth
Tacarien de la poussiere de maison, Dermatophago-
IIeinemann, Boston, 1998, p. 505.
ides farinae, chez les chiens atopiques et nonato-
286. Sinke JD, et al: Immunophenotyping of skin-infltrat-
piques. Rev Med Vet 140:1117, 1989.
ing T-cell subsets in dogs with atopic dermatitis. Vet
265. Prelaud P: Traitement de latopie canine. Prat Med
Immunol Immunopathol 57:13, 1997.
Chir Anim Comp 28:461, 1993.
287. Skov L, Baadsgaard O: Superantigens: Do they have
 266. Prelaud P, et al: Reevaluation of dliagnostic criteria of
a role in skin diseases? Arch Dermatol 13l:829.
canine atopic dernatitis. Proc Annu Memh Meet Eur
1995.
Soc Vet Dcrmatol Eur Coll Vet Dermatol 14:169,
288. Solomon, W. R, Platts-Mills TAE: Aerobiology and
1997.
inhalant allergens. In: Freedberg IM, et al (eds): Fitz-
267. Prelaud P, Olivry T: Etiopathogenie de la dermatite
patrick's Dernatology in General Medicine V. Mc-
Prat
MedChir Anin Conp
atopique canine.
Graw-Hill, New York, 1999, p. 367.
33(Suppl):315, 1998.
289. Sousa CA: Atopic dennatitis. Vet Clin North Am
268. Prelaud P: Diagnostic de la dermuatite atopique ca-
Sinall Anmi Pract 18:1049, 1988.
nine: Un diagnostic clinique. Prat Med Chir Anim
290. Sousa CA, Norton AL: Advanccs in rnethodology for
Comp 33(Suppl):331, 1998.
diagnosis of allergic skin clisease. Vet Clin North Am
269. Priuz B. et al: Long-term application of extracorpo-
Sinall Anirn Praet 20:1419, 1990.
real photochemotherapy in severe atopic denmatitis. J
291. Sporik R, et al: Exposurc to housc-rust smite allrgen
Am Acad Denmatol 40:577, 1999.
(der p l) and the development of asthma in child-
270. Racine BP, et al: Influence of sex aud age on scnum
hood: A prospective study. N Engl J Med 323:502,
total immunoglobulin E concentration in beagles. Am
1990.
J Vet Res 60:93, 1999.
292. Stevens SR, et al: Iong-terrn effectiveness and safety
271. Reinhold U, et al: Systemic interferon treatment in
of recombinant human interferon garnma therapy for
scvcrc atopic dermatitis. J Am Acad Dermatol 29:58,
atopie dermatitis despite unchanged serun IgE levels.
1993.
Arch Dermatol 134:799. 1998.
658 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
293. Stiller MJ, et al: A cdouble-blind, placebo-controled
Tecuce allergen: Comparison of the effects of tannic
clinical trial to evaluate the safety and efficacy of
acid and other treatments on proteins derived fron
thymopentin as an adjunctive treatment in atopie der-
dust mites and cats. J Allergy Clin lmmmunol 96:3,
matitis. J Am Acad Dermatol 30:597, 1994.
1995.
 294. Tan BB, et al: Double-blincd contolled trial of effect
   aoe jo ss e a '  
of house dust-mite: allergen avoidance on atopic der-
matitis. Lancet 347:15, 1996.
Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 14:53,
 295. Tanaka Y, et al: Immunohistochcmical studies on dust
1998.
mite antigen in positive reaction site of patch test.
Testing
Acta Dermatol Venereol (Stockh) Suppl 144:93, 1989.
296. Tangbal O, et al: The fatty acid profle of subcutane-
 315. Alaba O: Allergies in dogs and cats: Allergen-specife
ous fat and blood plasma in pruritic dogs and dogs
lgE determination by VARL Iiquid Gold compared
without skin problems. Can J Vet Res 62:275, 1998.
with ELISA/RAST. Vet Allergy Clin Immunol 5:93.
297. Thepen T, et al: Biphasic response against acroaller
1997.
geinatopie dermatitisshowingaswitchfromnitil
 316. Ackeman L: Diagnosing imhalant allergies: Intrader-
mal or in vitro testing. Vet Med 83:779, 1988.
cytochemical study. J Allergy Clin Inununol 97:828,
 317. Anderson RK, Sousa CA: In citro versus in tivo test-
e  e   
1996.
298. Tupker RA, et al: Lnduction of atopic dermatitis by
vances in Veterinary Dermatology II. Pergamon
iubalation ofhouse dust mite. JAllergy Clin Immunol
Press, Ncw York. 1993, p. 425.
97:1064, 1996.
318. August JR: Tlhe intradermal test as a diagnostic aid
299. Turncr CR, et al: Dermal mast cell releasibility and
for canine atopic disease. J Am Anim Hosp Assox: 18:
cnd organ responsiveness in atopic and nonatopic
164, 1982.
dogs. J Allergy Clin Immunol 83;643, 1989.
319. August JR: The reaction of canine skin to the intra-
300. Umesh KG, et al: Epideiniological and therapeutic
dermal injection of allergenic extracts. J Am Anin
aspects of canine atopy. Indian Vet J 72:56, 1995.
Hosp Assoc 18:157, 1982.
301. van der Heijden FL, et al: High frequency of I-4
 320. Barbet Jl., Hlalliwell REW: Duration of inhibition of
producing CD4+ allergen-specific T lymphocytes in
the immediate skin test reactivity by hydroxyzine hy-
atopic dermatitis losional skin. J lnvest Dernatol 97:
drchloride in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 194:1565,
389, 1991.
1989.
 302. va den Broek AllM, Simpson JW: Fat absorption in
321. Beale KM, et al: Effects of sedation on intradermal
dogs with atopic dermatitis. In: von Tscharner (,
skin testing in fea-allergic dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
HLalliwell REW (eds): Advanccs in Veterinary Derma-
197:861, 1990.
tology I. Balliere-Tindall, Philadelphia, 1990, p. 155.
322.Bevier DE, et al: Fee RIa-based ELISA techology
303.
Van Stee EW: Risk factors in canine atopy. Calif Vet
for in vitro determination of allergen-specific IgE in a
37:8, 1983.
population of intradernal skin-tested normal and
304. Vollset [, ct al: Immediate type bypersensitivily in
atopic dogs. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 19(Suppl):
 is A s snu ss Xq pn sp
10, 1997.
1986.
 323. Bond R, et al: Evaluation of two enzyme-linked im-
304a. Vriesendorp IIM, et al: Serological DLA typing of
Inunosorbent assays for the diagnosis of canine atopy.
normal and atopic dogs. Tramsplant Proc 7:375, 1975.
Vet Rec 135:130, 1994.
305. Welle MM, et al: Mast cel density and subtypes in
 324. Bourdeau P, et al: Positive skin reactions to allergenic
the skin of dogs with atopic dermatitis. J' Comp
challenge in healthy dogs: Part I—-Intradermal skin
Pathol 120:187, 1999.
testing. In: Kwochka KW,
et al (eds): Advances in
 306. White SD, Bourdeau P: L'atopic chez le chien: Don-
Veterinary Denmatology Ill. IB3utterworth Heinemann,
nccs actualisees. Point Vet 27:191, 1995.
Boston, 1998. p. 444.
 307. White SD, et al: Comparison via cytology and culhure.
 325. Bourdeau P, Blumstein P: Nonspocific scnsitization to
ofcarringe ofMalassezia pachylermatis in atopic and
housc dust mites in dogs: A study of 170 intradermal
healthy dog. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances
skin testing to Blomin tropicalis in France.Proe Anu
in Veterinary Dennatology I1. Butterworth Ieine-
Memb Meet Ain Acad Vet Dennatol Ain Coll Vet
man, 1998, p. 291.
Derrmatol 15:19, 1999.
 308. Willernse A: Canine atopic disease: Investigations of
325a. Bunde CJW, et al: Comparison of intradermal skin 
cosinophils and the nasal mucosa. Am J Vet Res 45:
testing and a new ELISA for specific IgE. Vet Allergy
1867, 1984.
Clin Immunol 5:1, 1997.
309. Willemse A, van den Brom WE: Investigations of the
 326. Campbell KL, Hall IA: Effecl of storage of allergens
syunptoinatology and the signifcance of immediate
in plastic and glass syringes on the results of intrader-
skin test reactivity in canine atopic dermatitis. Res
Vet Sci 34:261, 1983.
Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 9:48.
 310. Willemse A, et al: Alergen specife IgGd antibodies
1993.
in dogs with atopic dermatis as determined by the
327. Codner EC, et al: Effect of tiletamine-zolazcparn sc-
enzyme linked inmmunosorbent assay (ELISA).' Clin
dation on intradermal allergy testing in atopie dogs. J
Exp lmmunol 59:359, 1985.
Am Vet Med Assoe 20l:1857, 1992.
311. Willemse A. et al: Induction of non-IgE anaphylactic
328. Codner EC, McGrath CJ: The effect of tiletamine-
antibodies in dogs. Clin Exp Immunol 59:351, 1985.
zolazepam anesthesia on the response to intradier-
 312. Willemse A: Atopic skin disease: A review and a re-
  y y  
consideration of diagnostie critenia. J Srmall Anim
189, 1991.
Pract 27:771, 1986.
329. Codner EC, Lessard P: Effect of hyposensitization
313. Woodfolk JA, et al: Chemical treatment of carpets to
with irrelevant antigens on subscquent allergy skin
Skin lmmune System and Allergic Skin Diseases * 659
test results in normal dogs. Vet Dermatol 3:209,
349. Halliwell REW: Canine allergic skin diseases. Proc
1992.
Kal Kan Symp Trcat Small Anim Dis 1l:33, 1987.
330. Codner FC, Tinker MK: Reactivity to intradermal
350. Hlammerberg B, et al: Auto-IgG anti-IgE and Ig X
injectiomns of extraets of house dust and house dust
IgE immune complex presence and effects on
opsopprsp
ELISA-based quantitation of IgE in canine atopic
atopic. J Am Vet Med Assoc 206:812, 1995.
dernatitis,denoxlectic acariasis and helminthiasis.
331.
Codner EC, Griffn CE: Serologic allergy testing for
Vet Immunol Immunopathol 60:33, 1997.
dogs. Comp Cont Edue Pract Vet 18:237, 1996.
351. Hammerling, R., de Weck AL: Comparison of tvo
332. Curtis Cl, et al: Evaluation of the response to intra-
diagnostic tests for canine atopy using monoclonal
dermally injccted environmental miteallergen solu-
anti-igE antibodies. Vet Denmatol 9:191, 1998.
tions in healthy kenneled dogs. In: Kwochka KW, et
352. Johnson CA: The elfects of constant and variable
al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Derinatology
/II!.
temperaturc on the biological activity of allergens
Butterworth Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p. 510.
stored in plastie and glass syringes. Proe Annu Mernb
333. Darsow U, et al: Evaluating the relevance of aeroal-
Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet Denmatol
lergen sensitization in atopic cezema with the atopy
11:18, 1995.
patch test: A randomized, double-blind rrulticenter
353. Kleinbeck Ml., ct al: Enzyme-linked immunosorbent
study. J Am Acad Dermatol 40:187, 1999.
assay for measurenent of allergen-spccifc IgE anti-
334. DeBoer DJ: Survey of intradernal skin testing prac-
bodies in canine serum. Am J Vet Res 50:183i, 1989.
tices in North America. J Am Vet Med Assoe 195:
354. Koch HJ, Peters S: 207 Intrakutnatests bei Hundenl
1357, 1989.
mit Verdacht auf atopische dermatitis. Kleinterpraxis
335.Derer M, ct al: Monoclonal anti-IgE antibodies in the
39:25, 1994.
diagnosis of dog allergy. Vet Dermtatol 9:185, 1998.
355. Kunkle G, et al: Steroid effcts on intraderimal skin
336. Esch RE, et al: Isolation and characterizalion of a
testing in sensitized dogs. Proe Anmu Mernh Mcct
major dust mite (Dermatophagoides farinae) aller-
Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet Denmatol 10:41,
genic fraction in dogsProc Annn Memh Meet An
1994.
Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 13:87,
356. Lyon TM, Halliwell REW: Allergen-specife IgE and
1997.
IgCd antibodies in atopic and normal dogs. Vet In-
337. Esch RE, Gnier TJ: Clinical utility of in vitro canine
munol Immunopathol 66:203, 1998.
IgE assays. Vet Allergy Clin Inmunol 5:3l, 1997.
357. MacDonald JM, Angarano DW: Comparison of intra-
 338. Evans AC: Allergic inhalant dermatitis attributable to
dermal testing with conmercial in vitro allergy testing
marijuana exposure in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
(ELISA) in parasitized nonallergic beagle dogs. Proc
195:1588, 1989.
Annu Memb Meet An Acad Vet Dermatol Ain Coll
339. Ferguson EA: A review of intradermal skin testing inl
Vet Dermatol 6:46, 1990.
the UK. Vet Dermatol Newsl 14:13, 1992.
358. Marsella R, et al: Iouhle-hlinded pilot study on the
340.Frank LA, et al: Comparison of serum cortisol con-
effects of ketoconazole on intradermal skin test and
centration before and after intradermal testing in se-
dated and nonsedated dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoe
dogs. Vet Dermatol 8:3, 1997.
200:507,1992.
 359. Mason IS, Lloyd DIl: Evaluation of compound 48/80
 341. Ginel PJ, et al: Correlation between intradermal and
as a model of immediate hypersensitivity in the skin
in-hospital serological testing in atopie togs.
ln:
of dogs. Vet Dermatol 7:81, 1996.
Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary
 359a. Masuda K, et al: Positive reactions to common aller-
Dermatology
y 111. Butterworth Heinemanu, Boston,
gens in 42 atopic dogs in Japan. Vet Immunol Immu-
1998, p. 441.
nopathol 73:193. 2000.
342. Ginel PJ, et al: Evaluation of a commercial EL.ISA
359b. Masuda K, et al: IgE sensitivity and cross-reactivity
test for the detection of allergen-specifie IgE antilbod-
to crade and purified mite allergens (Derfl, Derfl2,
ies in atopic dogs. J Vet Med B 45:421, 1998.
Derpl, Derp2) in atopie dogs sensitive to Dermato.
phagoides mite allergens. Vet Immunol Immunopa-
Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Aim
thol 72:303,2000.
Coll Vet Dermatol 12:50, 1996.
360. McCall C: One years experience with IgE Fc Rl
344. Grifin CE: RAST and ELISA testing in canine atopy.
testing. Proc Annu Memb Meet Aim Acad Vet Der-
matol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 14:51, 1998.
W.B.Saundcrs,Philadelphia1989, p.592.
 361. McCall C, et al: Characterization and cloning of the
345. Griffin CE, et al: The effect of serum IgE on an in
major house dust mile (Dermatophagoides farinae)
vitro ELISA test in the normal canine. In: von
allergen for dogs. Proc Annu Meinb Meet Am Acad
Tscharmer (, Hallivell REw (cds): Advanccs in Vot-
Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 15:111, 1999.
erinary Dermatology I. Bailliere-Tindall, Philadclphia,
362. Miller WH Jr, et al: Evaluation of an allergy screen-
1990, p. 137.
ing test forusein atopic dog.J AnVet Med Assc
346. Griot-Wenk ME, et al: (Characterization of tw dog
200:931, 1992,
IgE-specific antibodies elicited by different recrnbi-
 363. Miller WH Jr, et al: Evaluation of the performance of
nant fragments of the epsilon chain in hens. Vet Im-
a serologic allergy system in atopic dogs. J Am Anim
munol Immunopathol 64:15, 1998.
Hosp Assoc 29:545, 1993.
347. Guaguere E, et al: Canine atopy: In titro testing
364. Miller WH Jr, et al: The influence of oral corticoste-
using a monoclonal anti-IgE. In: Kwochka KW, et al
roids or declining allergcn exposure on serologic al
(cds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology Il. But-
lergy test results. Vet Dermatol 3:327, 1992.
terworth Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p. 454.
365.
Mills AC, McKeever PJ: Comparison of intradermal
348. Halliwell REW, Kunklc GA: The radioallergosorbent
skin testing in non-sedated and sedated dogs. Proc
test in the diagnosis of canine atopie discase. J Al-
Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dernatol Am Coll
lergy Clin Immunol 62:236, 1978.
Vet Dermatol 10:46, 1994.
660 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
366. Moniello KA, Eicker SW: Influence of sedative and
tomidine) sedation for facilitating intradermal skin
anesthetic agents on intradermal skin test reactions in
testing in dogs. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet
dogs. Am J Vet Res 52:1484, 1991.
Dermatol Am Call Vet Dermatol 14:37, 1998.
367. Mueller RS, et al: Comparison of intradermal testing
388.
Wassom DL: Principles and history of the Fc epsilon
and serum
n testing for allergen-specifc IgE using
monoclonal IgE antibodies in 84 atopic dogs. Aust
Educ Pract Vet 19(Suppl):6, 1997.
Vet J 77:90, 1999.
389. Wassom DL, Gricve^RB: In vitro 1neasureinent of
 368. Noli, C. et al.: The significance of reactions to puri-
canine and feline IgE: Review of Fce Rlα-based as-
fied fractions of Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus and
says for detection of allergen-reactive IgE. Vet Der-
Dernatophagoides farinae in caninc atopic rdermatitis.
matol 9:173,1998.
Vet Immunol Immunopathol 52:147, 1996.
 390. Wellington J, et al: Deterinination of skin threshold
 369. Noli C: Specifcite de Pallergie aux acariens de la
concentration of an aqueous house dust nite allrgen
poussiere de maison chez le chien. Prat Med Chir
in normal dogs. Cormell Vet 81:37, 1991.
Anim Comp 33(Suppl):305, 1998.
391.Wellington jR, et al: Dermatophagoides mites in
 370. Ohlen BM: Projekt allergitester i Sverige. Svensk Ve-
house dust as an allergen souree in atopic dogs. Cor.
terinar 44:365, 1992.
nell Vet 81:429, 1991.
 371. Paradis M, Lecuyer M: Evaluation of an in-office al-
392. Willis EL, Kunkle GA: Intradermal reactivity to vari-
lergy screening test in nonatopic dogs having various
 ous insect and arachnid allergens in dogs from the
intestinal parasites. Can Vet J 34:293, 1993.
southeastern United States. J Am Vet Med Assoc 209:
372. Phillips MK, et al: Cutaneous histamine reactivity.
1431, 1996.
histarmine content of comumercial allergens, and po-
393. Willemse A, yan den Brom WE: Evaluation of the
tential for false-positive skin test reactions in dogs. J
 intadermal allergy test in normal dogs. Res Vet Sci
Am Vet Med Assoc 203:1288, 1993.
32;57, 1982.
 373. Plant JD: The reproducibility of three in vitro caninc
394. Zunic M: Comparison between IMMUNODOT tests
   o s d   
and the intradermal skin test in atopic dogs. Vet Der-
Acad’ Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 10:16,
matol 9:201, 1998.
1994.
395.Zunic M, Honel A: Diagnosis of canine atopy: In
374. Prelaud P: Tests cutanes dallergie imumediate chez le
vitro testing using CMG IMMUNODOT. Proc Anmu
chien: Minimiser erreurs et deceptions. Prat Med
Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet
Chir Anim Comp 27:529, 1992.
Dermatol 13:39, 1997.
375. Prelaud P, Guaguere E: Sensitization to the house
Hyposensitization
dust 1nite Dermatophagoides farinae in dogs with sar-
396. Angarano DW, MacDonald JM: Imnmunothcrapy in
coptic mange. Vet Dermatol 6:205, 1995.
canine atopy. In: Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (eds): Cur.
 376. Prelaud P: Methodes de diagnostic biologique en al-
rent Vetennary TherayXI.W.B.Sauders, Phiadel.
33(Suppl):281, 1998.
phia, 1991, p. 505.
397. DesRoches A: Specifc imnunotherapy prevents the
onset of new sensitization in monosensitized children.
Clinical experience with the basophil activation
model. Vet Dermatol 9:213, 1998.
 J Allergy Clin Immunol 95(1):309, 1995.
378.Rachofsky MA: Cormments on in vitro allergy testing.
398.
Ferguson EA: A retrospective comparison of the suc-
cess of two different hyposensitization protocols in
Dermatol Dialogue, Winter 1993/1994, p. 4.
379.Rees CA, et al: The effects of temperature and type
matol Study Grp 16:26, 1994.
399. Garfield RA: Injection immunotherapy in the treat-
Vet Allergy Clin Immunol 5:12, i997.
ment of canine atopic dermatitis: Comparison of 3
byposensitization protocols. Proc Annu Memb Meet
leukocytes Aplication to small animal allergy dian
Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol S:7,
sis by Bow cytometry. Vet Derimatol 9:213, 1998.
1992.
 ao yo a  s  s 1
400. Griffn CE: Hyposensization. Calif Vet 52:1, 1998.
tic antibodies on hunan basoplils: Application to ca-
401. McDonald JM: Rush hyposensifization in the treat-
nine allergy diagnosis, Vet Dermatol 7:i85, 1996.
ment of canine atopy. Proc Anu Memb Meet Am
382.8
Schmeitzel LP: The effects of multiple intraderrnal
Acad Vct Dermatol'Am Coll Vet Dermatol 15:95,
skin tests on skin teactivity. Vet Allergy, Summer
1986, p. 1.
402. Mueller RS, Bettenay SV: Longterm mmunotherapy
1999.
383. Schwartzman RM, Lillard S: Polyclonal anti-IgE anti-
in 146 dogs with atopic dermatiis—a retrospcctive
study. Aust Vet Practit 26:128, 1996.
Pract 20:17, 1995.
 403. Nelson HS: Immunotherapy for inhalant allergens. In:
384. Schwartzman RM: The ELiSA as an aid to the diag-
Middleton E, et al (eds): Allergy Principles and Prac-
nosis of canine atopic disease. Vet Allergy Clin Im-
ticc V. C.V. Mosby, St. Louis, 1998, p. 1050.
munol 3:81-90, 1995.
404. Nuttal T]: A retrospective survey of byposensitization
385. Shaw SC: The role of house dust mite allrgens in
therapy. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in
canine allergic disease. In: Kwochka KW, ct al (eds):
Veterinary Dermatology IIl. Butterworth Heinemann,
Advances in Veterinary Dermatology II. Butterworth
Boston, 1998, p. 507.
Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p. 505.
405. Reedy LM: Personal experiences with injcction im-
386. Sture GH, et al: Canine atopic disease: the preva-
munotherapy. Proc Anu Memh Meet Am Acad Vet
lence of positive intradermal skin tests at two sites in
Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 15:99, 1999.
the north and south of Great Britain. Vet Immunol
406.
 Rosenbauun MR, et al: Effects of mold proteases on
Inmnunopathol 44:293, 1995.
the biological activity of allergenic pollen extracts. Am
387. Vogelnest LJ, et al; The suitability of Domitor (mede-
J Vet Res 57:1447, 1996.
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases * 66I
424. DeBoer DJ, et al: Monoclonal antibodics against fe-
ment of canine atopic dermatitis: A retrospective and
line imumunoglobulin E. Proc Annu Menmb Mcet Am
prospective sturdy of 100 cases. In: Kwochka KW, et
Acad Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 10:1l, 1994.
al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology
III.
425.Foster AP, O'Dair H: Allergy testing for skin disease
Butterworth Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p. 169.
in the cat: In vivo versus in vitro tcsts. Vet Dermatol
408. Schwartzman RM,Mathis L: Inmunotherapy for ca-
4:111, 1993.
mine atopie dernatis: Eficacy in 125atopie dogs
withvacne formulations based onELISAallergy
426. Fostor AP, et al: Studies on the isolation and charac-
terization of a reaginice antibody in a cat. Res Vet Sci
testing. Vet Allergy Clin Immunol 5:123, 1997.
58:70, 1995.
409. Scott KV, et al: A retrospective shudy of hyposensiti-
427. Foster AP: A study of the number and distribution of
zation in atopic dogs in a Hea-scarce environment. 1n:
cutanecus mast cells in cats with discasc not affecting
Ihrke PJ, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Derma-
the skin. Vet Dermatol 5:17, 1994.
tology 11. Pergamon Press, New York, 1993, p. 79.
428. Bevier D, et al: Fce RIv-based ELISA technology for
410. Scoft KA, Rosychuk RAW, et al: Hyposensitization:
The Colorado State University experience with e-
mal cats and corrclation to intradermal skin test re-
phasis on efficacy by breed. Proc Annu Memb Meet
sults: Preliminary findings. Cornp Cont Educ Pract
Am Acad Vet Dermatol Aim Coll Vet Dermatol 15:
Vet 19(Suppl):17, 1997.
107, 1999.
429. Foster AF, et al: Allergen-specific IgC antibodies in
411. Wagner R: A retrospective survey of hyposensitization
cats with allergic skin disease. Res Vet Sci 63:239,
thcrapy using low concentrations of alum-prccipitatcerl
1997.
allergens. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Der-
430. Gilbert S, Hallwell REW: Assessrment of an ELISA
matol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 15:89, 1998.
for the detection of allergen-specific IgE in cats ex-
412.Willemse A, ct al: Effect of hyposensitization on
perimentally sensitized against house dust mites. In:
atopic dermatitis in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 184:
Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advanccs in Veterinary
277, 1984.
Dermatology Ill. Butterworth Heineimaun, Boston,
413. Willemse T: Hyposensitization of dogs with atopic
1998. p. 520.
 dermatitis based on the results of in vico and in citro
431. Gilbert S, Halliwell REW: Production and character-
(IgGd ELISA) diagnostic tests. Proc Annu Memb
izafion of polyclonal antisera against felinc IgE. Vet
Meet Ain Acad Vet Dermatol Arn Coll Vet Dermatol
Imnunol 1mmunopathol 63:223, 1998.
10:61, 1994.
432.
 Cilbert S, Halliwell REW: Feline immunoglobulin E:
Feline Atopy/Allergic Diseases
Induction of antigen-specific antibody in normal cats
414. Bettenay S: Diagnosing and treatment feline atopic
and levels in spontaneously allergie cats. Vet Immunol
 dermatitis. Vet Med 86:488, 1991.
Immunopathof 63:235, 1998.
415. Bettenay S: Responsc to hyposensitization in 29
433. Cilbert S, et al: L'atopie feline. Prat Med Chir Anim
atopic cats. In: Kwochka Kw, et al (eds): Advances in
Comp 34:15, 1999.
Veterinary Dermatology I1. Butterworth Heine mann,
434.
Halliwell REW: Efficacy of hyposensitization in feline
Boston, 1998, p. 517.
allergic diseases based upon results of in vitro testing
416. Bevier DE: The reaction of feline: skin to the intra-
for allergen-specific immunoglobulin F. J Am Anim
dermal injection of allergenic extracts and passive cul-
Hosp Assoc 33:3, 1997.
tancous anaphylaxis using the serum from skin test
435. Koeman JP, et al: Quantity and distribution of mast
positive cats. In: von Tscharmer C, Halliwell
cells and eosinophils in fclinc allergic miliary dernati-
REW (eds): Advances in Veterinary Denmatology 1.
tis. In: Kwochka KW, ct al (eds): Advanees in Veteri-
Balliere-Tindall, Philadelphia, 1990, p. 126.
nary Dermatology II1. Butterworth Heineinann, Bos-
417. Bovier DE: Effect of methylprednisolone acetate and
ton, 1998, p.480.
 Oral prednisone on immediate skin test reactivity in
436. McDougal BJ: Allergy testing and hyposcnsitization
cats. Proc Annu Memb Mcet Aun Acad Vet Dermatol
for three com mon felinc dermatoses. Mod Vet Pract
Am Coll Vet Dermatol 10:43, 1994.
67:629, 1986.
418. Bevier DE, Dunstan S: Ultrastructural changes in fe-
437. Mueller RS, et al: Effect of tiletamine-zolazepam an-
linc: dernal mast cels during antigen-induced degran-
esthesia on the response to intradermally injected his-
nlation in viuo. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Ad-
tamine in cats. Vet Dermatol 2:1l9, 1991.
438. Mueller RS: Diagoosis and management of felinc
vances in Veterinary Dermatology IIl. Butterworth
Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p. 213.
atopy. Aust Vet Practit 27:138, 1997.
419. Carlotti D, Prost C: Latopie feline. Point Vet 20:777,
439. O'Dar H, et al: An open prospective investigation
1988.
into aetiology in a group of cats with suspected aller-
420. Chalmcrs S. Medlleau L: Recognizing the signs of
gic skin disease. Vet Dermatol 7:193, 1996.
feline allergic dermatoses. Vet Med 84:388, 1989.
440. Prelaud P: In viro allergy testing to Dermatophago-
421. Cocner EC: Reactivity to intradernal injectioms of
ides farinae and flea in 99 cases of feline eosinophilic
cxtracts of house dust mite and fea antigen in normal
granulorma complex.Proc Annu Memb Mcct Eur Soc
cats and cats suspected of being allergic. Proc Annu
Vet Dermatol Eur Coll Vet Dermatol 14:170, 1997.
Meimb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vct
441. Prelaud P, et al: Le chat allergique. Prat Med Chir
Dermatol 12:26, 1996.
Anim Comp 34:437, 1999.
422. Corcoran BM, et al: Feline asthma syndrome: A ret-
442. Prost C: Les dermatoses allergiques du chat. Prat
rospective study of the clinical prcscntation in 19
Med Chir Anim Comp 28:15l, 1993.
cats. J Small Anim Pract 36:48l, 1995.
443. Prost C: Hypersensitivily to tobacco in six dogs and
423. DeBoer DJ, et al: Feline IgE: Preliminary evidence
two cats: A social disease. Proc Anmu Memb Meet
of its existence and cross-reactivity with canine IgE.
Eur Soc Vet Dermatol Eur Coll Vet Denmatol 10:70,
In: Ihrke PJ, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Der-
1993.
matology I1. Pergamon Press, New York, 1993, p. 51.
444. Prost C: Diagnosis of feline allergic dliseases: A study
662 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
of 90 cats. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in
Acad Vet IDermatol A1n Coll Vet Dermatol 15:51.
Veterinary Dermatology II1. Butterworth Ileinermann,
1999.
Boston, 1998, p. 516.
463. Clark EC, et al: Cedar wood-induced allergic contact
445. Reedy LM: Results of allergy testing and byposensiti-
dermatitis in a dlog. Proc Annu Menh Meet Am Acad
zation in selected felinc 
cskin diseases. ] Am Anim
Vet Dennatol Ain Coll Vet Dermatol 9:68, 1993.
Hosp Assoc 18:618, 1982.
464. Couer KM: Carpet deocdorizer as a contact allergen
446. Roxosje Pj, et al: Feline atopic dermatitis: A model for
in a dog. JA1n Vet Med Assoc 193:1553, 1988.
Langerhans' cell participation in diseasc pathogenesis.
465. Dunstan RW, et al. Histologie features of allergic
Am J Pathol 151:927, 1997.
contact tlenmatitis in four dogs. Proc Annu Memb
447. Roosje PJ, wilemse T: Cytophilic antibodies in cats
Meet An Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol
9:69, 1993.
sive transfer of immediate-type hypersensitivity. Vet
466.Krawiec DR, Gaafar SM: A comparative study of al-
Q 17:66, 1995.
448. Roosje PJ, et al: A role of Th2 cells in the pathogenc-
nitrochlorobenzene (DNCB) in dlogs. J Invest Derma-
sis of allergie dernatitis in cats? Cong Br Netherlands
tol 65:248, 1975.
Soc Inunol s6(1):98, 1995.
467. Kunkle GA, Gross TL: Allergic contact dlermatitis to
449. Roosje PJ, et al: MHC Class II+ and CDlA+ cells
Tradescantia fuminensis (wandering Jew) in a clog.
in lesioral skin of cats with allergic dermatitis. World
Conp Cont Edue 5:925, 1983.
Cong Vet Dermatol 3:59, 1996.
468. Kunkle GA: Contact allergie dermnatitis. Vet Clin
450. Roosje PJ, et al: Iumnunopathogenesis of feline atopic
North A Sumall Anin Pract 18: 106l, 1988.
dermatitis current concepts. Proe Annu Memb Meet
469. Marsella R, et al: Use of pentoxifylline in thc treat-
Eur Soc Vet Dennatol Eur Coll Vet Dermatol 15.
ment of allergie contaet reactions to plants of the
Speaker's Notcs, 1998.
Commetincene family in dogs. Vet Dermatol 8:121,
451. Roosje PJ、 et al: Increased mumbers of CD4+ and
1997.
CD8+ T cells in lesional skin of cats with allergic
470. Merchant SR, et al: Eosinophilic pustules and cosine-
dermnatitis. Vet Pathol 35:268, 1998.
 philie derrmatitis secondary to patelt testing a dlog with
452. Saint-Andre I, ct al: Quantitative assessment of CD18
Asian jasinine. Proc Annu Menb Meet An Acad Vet
Dermatol Ain Coll Vet Dermatol 9:64, 1993.
itive and CDla positive epidermal dendritic cells in
471. Michaud AJ: Plastic shopping bag as a possible con-
thc cat. In: Kwochka Kw, et al (eds): Advances in
tact allergen in a cat. Feline Pract 19:6, 1991.
Veterinary Dermatology IIl. Butterworth Heinemann,
472. Mydlarski PR, et al: Contact dernatitis. In: Mirldlc
Boston, 1998, p. 524.
ton E, et al (eds): Allergy Principles and Practice V.
453. Scott DW, et al: Milary dermalitis: A feline cutane-
C.V. Mosby, St Louis, 1998, p. I 135.
ous reactiou patterm. Proc Annu Kal Kan Semin 2:11,
473. Nobreus N, ct al: Induction of dinitrochlorobenzene
1986.
contact sensitivity in dogs. Monogr Allergy 8:100.
454. Scott DW, et al: Sterile eosinophilic folliculitis in the
1974.
cat: An unusual manifestation of feline allergic skin
474. Olivry T, el al: Allergic contact dermatitis in the dog.
dlisease? Comp Anim Pract 19:6, 1989.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 20:1443, 1990.
455. Scott DW: Aualyse du type de reaction histopatholo-
475. Olivy T: Allergic contact dermatilis fo cement: A
gique dans le diagoostic des dermatoses inanmato-
delayed hypersensitivity to dliclhromates and nickel.
Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am
ires chez le chat: Etude sur 394 cas. Point Vet 26:57.
Coll Vet Dermatol 9:63, 1993.
1994.
456. Willemse T, et al: Changes in plasma cortisol, cortico-
 476. Prelaud P: Dermatite de contact a la neoimycine chez.
tropin, and α-melanocyte-stimulating hormnone con-
un chat. Action Vet 2l:1169, 1991.
477. Rietschel RI: Iritant contact dermatitis. Mechanisms
centrations in cats before and after physical restraint
and intradermal testing. Am J Vet Rcs 54:69, 1993.
in irritant contact dermatitis. Clin Dennatol 15:557,
1997.
Contact Hypersensitivity
 478. Schultz KT, Maguire HIC: Chemically-incnced de-
457. Baadsgard O, Wang T: Immunc regulation in aller
layed hypersensitivity in the cat. Vet Irnmunol Ininu-
gic and irritant skin reactions. Int J Dermatol 30:161,
nopathol 3:585, 1982.
1991.
479. Schultz RD, Adams LS: lmuounologic methords for
458. Belisto DV: Allergie contact derinatitis In: Freedberg
the detection of humoral and cellular immunity. Vet
IM, et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in Ceneral
Clin North Am Small Anim Clin 8:721, 1978.
Medicine V. MeGraw-Hill, New York, 1999, p. 1447.
480. Schwartz A, el al: Pentoxifylline suppresses irriltant
459. Bourdeau P, et al: Positive reactions to allergenic
and contact hypersensitivity reactions. J Invest Der-
challenge in healthy dogs. Part 2Patch test. In:
matol 10l:549, 1993.
Kwochka KW, et al, (eds): Advances in Veterinary
481. Thomsen MK, Kristensen F: Contact dermatiis in
Derimatology 1l1. Butterworth Heinemann, Boston,
the dog: A review and clinical study. Nord Vet Med
1998, p. 445.
38:129,1986.
460. Brehler R, et al: Topically applied pentoxifyllinc has
482.Thomscn MK. Thomsen HK: Histopathological
no effecl on allergic patch responses. J Am Acad
ed sp p e a  s
Dermatol 39:1017, 1998.
 s  s  r n
46l. Calderwood-Mays MB, et al: Carpet deodorant con-
tive dogs. Acta Vet Scand 30:379, 1989.
tact dermatitis in a cat. Proe Aunu Meinb Meet Am
483. Walder E], Conroy JD: Contact dermatitis in dogs
Acad Vet Dermatol Ain Coll Vet Dermatol 9:67,
and cats: Pathogenesis, histopathology, experimental
1993.
induction and case reports. Vet Dermatol 5:149,
462. Carlotti DN, et al: Serotal contact dermatitis in the
1994.
dog: A report of 6 cases. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am
484. Walton GS: Allergic contact dermatitis. In: Kirk RW
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases · 663
(cd): Current Veterinary Therapy VI. W.B. Saunders,
Annu Memb Meet Aim Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll
Philadelphia, 1977, p. 571.
Vet DcHnatol 10:28, 1994.
485. White PD: Contact dermatitis in the dog and cat.
508. Jeffers JG, et al: Diagnostie testing of dogs for
Semin Vet Med Surg 6:303, 1991.
486. willemse T, Vroom MA: Allergic derinatitis in a
199].
CGreat Dane due to contact with hippeastrurn. Vet
509.
Jeffers JG, et al: Responses of dogs with food aller-
Rec 122:490, 1988.
gies to single-ingredient lietary provocation. J An
Conine Food Hypersensitivity
Vet Med Assoc 209:608, 1996.
  poyqq ipd   uey o
diagnose and prevent fod allergy. Monograph, Al-
ancmia in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:1405, 1995.
lergy Concepts, Inc., 1999.
511. Kunkle G, et al: Validity of skin testing for diagnosis
of fod allergy in dogs. Am Vet Med Asoe 200:677,
 an ssop u aasuasdy Aeaa f snsny g
ous manifestations, diagnosis, and troatment. Comp
1992.
Cont Edue 7:469, 1985.
 512. MacDonald JM: Food allrgy. In: Griffin CE, et al
489. Batt R, et al: Food allergy and intolerance--the gut
(eds): Current Veterinary Derimatology. Mosby Year
perspective. Waltham Focus, Focus on Skin and
Book, St. Louis, 1993, p. 121.
Coat, April, 1999, p. 31.
513. Merchant SR, Taboada J: Food allergy and immuno-
490. Brown CM, et al: Nutritional managerment of food
logic diseases of the gastrointestinal tract. Senin Vet
allrgy in dogs and cats. Coinp Cont Educ 17:637.
Med Surg 6:316, 1991.
1995.
 514. Mueller R, Tsohalis J: Evaluation of serum allergen-
specific IgE for the diagnosis of food adverse reac-
491. Carloti DN, et al: Food allergy in dogs and cats: A
revicw and rcport of 43 cascs. Vet Dermatol 1:55,
tions in the dog. Vet Dermatol 9:167, 1998.
1990.
492. Denis S, Paradis M: Lallergie alimentaire chez le
testing in the dog. Proe A1n Acad Vet Allergy. 1991.
chien et le chat. I: Revue de la literature. Med Vet
 516. Paterson S: Food hypersensitivity in 20 dogs with skin
Quebec 24:11, 1994.
and gastrointestinal signs. J Small Anim Pract 36:529,
493. Denis S, Paradis M: L'allergie alimentaire chez. le
1995.
chien et le chat. Il Etude retrospective. Med Vet
 517. Rosser FJ Jr: Diagnosis of food allergy in dogs. J Ain
Quehec 24:15, 1994.
Vet Medi Assoe 203:259, 1993.
518. Rosser F: Food allergy in dogs and cats: A review.
494. Elmwood CM, et al: Gastroscopic food sensitivity
testing in 17 dogs. J Small Anim Pract 35:199, 1994.
Vet Allergy Clin Immunol 6:21, 1998.
495. Errnel RW, et al: The atopic dog: A model for food
519. Rosser EJ Jr: Foreword in Allergy Concepts, Inc.:
allergy. Lab Anim Sei 47:40, 1997.
Protein hydrolysates in canine diets to diagnose and
496. Fadok VA: Diagnosing and managing the food-allergie
prevent food allergy. Monograph, Allergy Concepts,
dog. Comp Cont Edue Pract Vet 16:1541, 1994.
Ine., 1999.
497. Ferguson E, Scheidt VJ: llypoallergenic diets and
520, Roudcbush P, Schick R: Evaluation of a comercial
skin disease. In: Ihrke PJ, et al (eds): Advances in
jo suu a rg i aoy e qi po
Veterinary Dermatology I1. Pergamon Pross, New
adverse reactions to food in dogs. Vet Dermatol 5:63,
York, 1993, p. 459.
1994.
498. Ghermati I, et al: A casc of food allergy immunohisto-
521. Roudebush P, et al: Protein characteristics of con-
pathologically
minicking 、 rnycosis fungoides.
In:
mercial canine and fclinc hypoallergenic diets. Vet
Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary
Dermatol 5:69, 1994.
Dermatology Il1. Butterworth Heinemann, Bostou,
522. Roudebush P, et al: Results of a hypoallergenic diet
1998, p. 432.
499. Grifhn CE: Diagnosis and management of food al-
tional evaluation of homemade diet prescriptions. Vet
lergy. Proceedings of the European School of Ad-
Dermatol 3:23, 1992.
vanced Veterinary Studies. 1999.
523. Samnpson HA: Adverse reactions to foods. In: Midilc-
500. Groh M, Moser E: Diagnosis of food allergy in the
ton E, et al (eds): Allergy Principlcs and Practice V.
nonseasonally syinptomatic dog using a novel antigen,
C.V. Mosby, St Louis, 1998. p. 1162.
low molecular weight diet: A prospective study of 29
524. Tapp T. et al: Comparsons of a cymmerial limited
cases. Vet Allergy Clin Imnunol 6:5, 1998.
antigen dict versus a home prepared diet in the diag.
501. Guaguere E, Prelaud P: I es intolerances alirmentaires.
nosis of canine fod hypersensitivity. Vet Allergy Clin
"(66 pdae) pon
502. Guilford WG, et al: The histamine content of com-
525. Wagner R, Horvath C: Capelin and tapioca 1 dry
Imercial pet foods. N Z Vet J 42:201, 1994.
food in dogs and cats with food allergy. Proe Annu
503. Guilford WB, et al: Development of gastroscopic food
Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dernmatol Am Coll Vet
sensitivity testing in dogs. J Vet Intem Med 8:414,
Dermatol 15:32, 1999.
66
526. Walton GS: Skin responses in the dog and cat to
504. llalliwell REW: Comparative aspects of food intoler-
ingested allergens: Observations of 100 confirmed
ance. Vet Med 87:893, 1992.
cases. Vet Rec 81:709, 1967.
505. Halliwell REW: Management of dietary hypersensitiv-
527. White SD, Mason IS: Dietary allergy: In: von Tschar-
ity in the dog. J Simall Anin Pract 33:156. 1993.
ner C, Haliwell REw (eds): Advances in Veterinary
 506. Harvey RG: Food allergy and dietary intolerance in
Dermatology I. Ballere-Tiall, Philadelphia 1990,
dogs: A report of 25 cascs. J Small Anim Pract 33:22,
P. 404.
1993.
         
507. Hillier A, Kunkle CA: Inability to demonstrate food
Vet Med Assoc 188:695, 1986.
antigen-specific IgE antihodies in the serum of food
529. white SD: Food allergy in dogs. Coinp Cont Edne
allergic dogs using the PK and oral PK tests. Proc
Pract Vet 20:261, 1998.
664 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
Feline Food Hypersensitivity
548. Frank GR, et al: Salivary allergens of Ctenocephalides
530. Dennis JS, et al: Lymphocytie/plasmacytic colitis in
felis: Collection, purification, and evaluation by intra-
cats: 14 cases (1985-i990). J Am Vet Med Assoc
dermal skin testing in dogs. In: Kwochka KW, et al
202:313,1993.
(eds): Advanccs in Veterinary Dermatology II. But-
 531. Gillert, S., Halliwell REW: Tle effects of endopara-
terworth Heinemann, Bosten, 1998, p. 201,
sitisn andi of the administration of viral vaccines on
549. Greene WK, et al: Characterization of allergens of
the immune response to orally administered antigen
the cat fea, Ctenocephalides fels: Detection and fre-
in cats: Possible implications for the pathogenesis of
queney of IgE antibodies in canine sera. Parasite lm-
     
munol 15:69, 1993.
Acad Vet Demuatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 14:29.
 550. Greenc WK, et al: Isolation and in vitro translation of
1998.
mcssenger RNA encoding allergens of the cat fea,
532. Cuaguere E: Intolerance alimentaire a nanifestations
Ctencephalides felis. Vet lmmunol lmmunopathol
cutanees: A propos de 17 cas chez le chat. Prat Med
37:15, 1993.
Chir Anim Comp 28:451, 1993.
551. Gross TL, IIalliwell REW: Lesions of experinental
533. Markwell Pj, et al: Prevalence of food sensitivity in
fea bite hypersensitivity in the dog. Vet Pathol 22:78.
  r  sd   
1985.
Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary
552. Guaguere E, et al: Effcacite de linidaclopride dans
Dermatology IIl. Butterworth Heinemann, Boston,
le traitcement de la dermatite par allrgie aux piqures
1998, P. 493.
dc puces chez lc chien. Prat Med Chir Anin Comp
34:231,1999.
Am Vet Med Assoc 204:1039, 1994.
553. Carlotti DN, et al: Interet d’une formulation de per-
535. Rosser Ej: Food allrgy in the cat: A prospective
methrine en spot-on dans le traitement de la derma-
study of 13 cats. In: Ihrke PJ, ct al (eds): Advances in
tite par allergie aux piqures de puce chez le chien:
Veterinary Dermatology I1. Pergamon Press, New
 p d so  p sd  
York, 1993, p. 33.
Anim Comp 32:83, 1997.
 536. Roudebush P, McKeever PJ: Evaluation of a com-
554. Halliwell REW: Hyposensitization in the treatment of
ercial canned lanb and rice dliet for the manage-
fea bite hypersensitivity: Results of a double-blinded
ment of cutaneous adverse reactions to foods in cats.
study. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 17:249, 1981.
Vet Dcrmatol 4:1, 1993.
 555. Halliwell REW, Longino SJ: IgE and IgG anibodies
 537. Wasmer MI., cet al: Food intolerance mimicking ali-
to fea antigen in differing dog populations. Vet Im-
mentary lynphosarcoma. J Am Anim Ilosp Assoc 31:
numol Immunopathk,l 8:215, 1985.
463-466, 1995.
556. Halliwell REW, Schemmer KR: The role of basophils
538. White SD: Food hypersensitivity in cats: 14 cascs
in the inmunopathogenesis of hypersensitivity to Hcas
(1982- 1987). J Am Vet Med Assoc 194:692, 1989.
(Ctenocephalides felis) in dogs. Vet Inmmunol Immu-
539.Wills JM: Diagnosing and managing food sensitivity
nopathol 15:203,1987.
in cats. Vet Med 87:884, 1992,
557. Hlalliwell REW: Clinical and immunological response
Canine Flea Bite Hypersensitivity
to alum-precipitated Hea antigen in immunotherapy of
540. Ascher F, et al: Antifeeding effect of modern insecti-
fea-allery dogs n:hrkePJ, et al (eds): Advances in
Veterinary Dermatology I1. Pergamon Press, New
York, 1993, p. 41.
p.20.
 541. Carlotti D: Diagnostic de la dermatite par allergie aux
558. Hickey GJ. et al: Effects of prednisone on dermal
piqures de puce (DAPP) chez le chien. Linteret des
responses in Hea-allergen bypersensitizod dogs. Vet
intradermoreactions. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 20:
Dermatol 4:71, 1993.
559. Hnilica KA, et al: Induccd lcukotriene C4 synthesis in
41, 1985.
542. Cook CA, et al: The in vitro diagnosis of fea bite
dogs with naturally occurring fea allergy. Proc Amu
hypersensitivity: Flea saliva versus whole-fea extracts.
Memb Meet An Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet
In: Kwochka KW, et al (cds): Advances in Veterinary
Dermatol 13:24, 1997.
Dernatology Ill. Butterworth Hcincmann, Boston,
 560. Hinkle: N: Biological functions and larval management 
1998, p. 494.
strategies affecting cat fea (Ctenorephalides felis
 543. Dryden MW: Laboratory evaluations of topical lea
Buche) population. PhD Thesis, University of Florida.
control products. Proc Br Vet Dermatol Studly Gp.
Gainesville, 1992.
Spring 1998, p. 14.
 561. Hopkins T: Imidacloprid and resolution of signs of
544. Dryden MW: Host-association, host longevity, and
flea allergy dermatitis in dogs. Canine Pract 23:18.
egg production of Ctenocephalides felis felis.Vet Par-
1998.
asitol 34:117, 1989.
562. Kwochka KW, et al: Flea salivary antigen rush irnmu-
545.
Dryden MW, Broce AB: Development of a Hea trap
notherapy for flea allergy dermatitis in dogs: A dou-
for collecting newly emerged Ctenocephalides felis
ble-blinded, placebo-controlled clinical study. Proc
(Siphonaptera:Pulicirdine) in homes. J Med Entomol
Annu Meinb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll
30:901, 1993.
Vet Dermatol 14:107, 1998.
545a. Dryden MW, et al: Techniques for estimating on-
563. Lee SE, et al: Salivary antigens of the cat lea,
aninal populations of Ctenocephalides felis (Siphon-
Ctenocephalicdes felis felis. Parasite Immunol 19:13,
aptera:Pulictcdae). J Med Entornol 31:631, 1994.
1997.
546. Drydeu M: Investigations of alternative fea control
564. Ice SE, et al: Putativc salivary allergens of the cat
methodologies. Proc Anmu Conf Vet Kansas State
Hea, Ctenocephatides felts felis.Vet Irnmunol Immu-
Univ 6l:37, 1999.
nopathol 69:229, 1999.
 547. Frank GR, et al: Salivary allergens of Ctenocephalides
565. MacDonald JM: Flea allergy dernatitis and Hea con-
felis: Collection, purification, and evaluation by intra-
trol. In: Griffn CE, et al (eds): Current Veterinary
dermal skin testing in dogs. Conp Cont Edue Pract
Dermatology. Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis, 1993,
Vet 19(Suppl):20, 1997.
p.57.
Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Discases · 665
566. MeCall CA, et al: Fce Rla-based neasuremcnt of
2. Mosquito bite hypersensitivity in a cat. Vet Derma-
anti-Hea saliva IgF in dogs. Comp Cont Educ Pract
tol 5:33, 1994.
Vet 19(Suppl):24, 1997.
 585. Nagata M, Ishida T: Cutaneous reactivity to mosquito
567. McCall C, et al: Cloming, expression, and characte-
bites and its antigen in cats. Vet Dermatol 8:19-26,
1997.
hypersensitivity in the dog. Proc Annu Memb Mect
586. Willinson GT, Bates MJ: A possible further clinical
Eur Soc Vet Derrnatol Eur Coll Vet Dcrmatol 15:
manifestation of the eosinophilic granuloma complex.
156, 1998.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:325, 1982.
568. MeKeon SE, Opdebeeck JP: IgG and IgE antibodics
Insect, Arachnid, ond Heiminth Hypersensitivity
against antigens of thu: cat fHea, Ctenocephalides felis
587. Baldo BA, Panzani RC: Detection of IgE antibodies
felis, in sera of allergic and nonallergic dogs. Int J
Parasitol 24:259, 1994.
to a wide range of insect species in subjects with
569. Payne P: Resistant Hea strains: Fact or fiction. Proc
suspccted inhalant allergies to insects. Int Arch Al.
lergy Appl Immunol 85:278, 1988.
Annu Conf Vet Kansas State Univ 6l:125, 1999.
588. Boord MJ: Personal communication, 1995.
570. Penaliggon J, et al: Winter prevalence of fea infesta-
589. Bornstein S, Zakrisoon C: Serodiagnosis of sarcoptie
tion and Hea allergy dermatitis in cats and dogs in
mange in dogs. Proc Annu Meinb Meet Eur Soc Vet
(Great Britain and lreland. Proc Annu Memb Eur Soc
Vet Dermatol Eur Coll Vet Denmatol 14:167, 1997.
Dermatol Eur Coll Vet Dermatol 7:160, 1990.
571. Prelaud P, Cuaguere E: Diagnostic de la dermatite
590. Buerger RG: Insect and arachnid hypersensitivity dis-
orders of dogs and cats. In: Kirk Rw, Bonagura JD
par allergie aux piqures de puces. Prat Med Chir
(eds): Kirk's Curent Veterinary Therapy XIl. W.B.
Anim Comp 33(Suppl):373, 1998.
Saunders, Philadelphia, 1995, p. 631.
572. Schemmer KR, Hallivcll REW: Effcacy of alum-
591. Chi-Huei W, et al: lsolation and prcliminary charac-
terization of cDNA eneoding Anmerican cockroach al-
allergic dogs. Semin Vet Med Surg 2:195, 1987.
lergens. J Allergy Clin Immunol 96:3, 1995.
573. Stolper R, Opdiebecck JP: Flea allergy dermatitis in
592. Friberg ‘CA, Lewis DT: Insect hyperscnsitivity in
 dogs diagnosed by intradermal skin tests. Res Vet Sci
siall aninals. Counp Cont Edue Pract Vet 20:1121.
57:21, 1994.
1998.
574. Wllemse T: The diagnostie valuc of a whole-Hca cx-
593. Griffn CE, et al: Detection of insect/arachnid specifc
tract in dogs with clinical Hea bite hypersensitivity. In:
lgE in dogs: Comparison of two techniques utliing
Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary
Westen biots as the standard. In: Ihrke PJ, et al
Dermatology IIl. Butterworth Heinemann. Boston,
1998, p. 491.
mon Press, New York, 1993, p. 263.
Feline Flea Bite Hypersensitivity
   e p   
575. larvey RG, et al: Prospective study comparing fi-
Criffn CE, et al (eds): Current Veterinary Dermatol-
pronilwith dichlorvos/fenitrothion and methoprene/
ogy. Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis, 1993, p. 133.
595. Giffn CE: Scabies. In: Griffn CE, et al (eds): Cur-
pyrethrins in control of fea bite hypersensitivity in
rent Veterinary Dermatology. Mosby-Year Book, St.
cats, Vet Rec 141:628, 1997.
Louis, 1993, p. 85
 576. Kunkle GA, Milcarsky J: Double-blind fea hyposensi-
596. Ilargis AM, et al: Dermatitis associated with microfi-
tization in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc: 186:677, 1985.
lariae (Filarioidea) in 10 dogs. Vet Dermatol 10:95,
576a. Kunkle GA, et al: lmmediate intradermal flea anti-
1999.
597. Lierl MB, ct al: Concentrations of airborne insect-
Florida, USA. Vet Dermatol 1l:9, 2000.
derived particles in outdoor air [Abstract 412]. J Al-
577. Lewis DT, et al: Clinical and histological evaluation
lergy Clin Immunol 85:246, 1990.
of immediate and delayed fea antigen intradermal
 598. Moniello KA: Parasitic hypersensitivity. Semin Vet
skin test and fea sites in normal and fca-allergic cats.
Med Surg 6:286, 1991.
Vet Dermatol 10:29, 1999.
599. Mozos E, et al: Cutaneous lesioms associated with
578. McCall CA, et al: Correlation of feline IgE, deter-
canine heartworm infection. Vet Dermatol 3:191,
mined by Fce RIα-based ELISA technology, and
1992.
IDST to Ctenocephalides felis salivary antigens in a
 600. Powell MA, ct al: Reaginic bypersensitivity in Otodec-
feline model of fea bite allergic dermatitis. Comp
Cont Educ Pract Vet 19(Suppl):29, 1997.
ing. Ain J Vet Res 41:877, 1980.
579. McDonald BJ, et al: An investigation on the infuence
 601. Puchcu-Haston CM, et al: Allergenic cross reactivities
of feline flea allergy on the fecundity of the cat fca.
in fea-reactive: canine serum samples. Ain J Vet Res
Vet Dermatol 9:73, 1998.
57:1000, 1996.
580.Moriello KA, McMurdly MA: The prevalence of posi-
602. Rothstein E, et al: Investigation of inscct hypersensi-
tive intradermal skin test reactions to flea extract in
tivity and response to immunotherapy in allergic dogs.
clinically nornal cats. Cormp Anim Pract 19:28, 1989.
Submitted (1999).
 581. Plant JD: Recognizing the manifestations of fea al-
603. Thoday KL: Serum immunoglobulin concentrations in
lergy in cats. Vet Med 86:482, 1991.
canine scabies. In: Ihrke PJ. et al (eds): Advances in
Feline Mosquito Bite Hypersensitivity
Veterinary Derrnatology l1. Pergainon Press, New
582. Johnstome AC, et al: A seasonal eosinophilic dermati-
York, 1993, p. 211.
604. Wagner R: Beitrag zur Pravalenz, Klinik und Diag-
tis in cats. N Z Vet J 40:168, 1992.
583. Mason KV, Evans AG: Mosquito bite caused eosino-
nostik der Kaninen Atopie. Thesis Veterinarrmedizin-
ischen Universitat Wien, 1995, p. 99.
philic dermatitis in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 198:
2086, 1991.
Canine Eosinophilic Furunculosis of the Face
584. Ihrke PJ, Gross TI.: Conference in dermatology—No.
605. Curtis CF, et al: Canine eosinophilic foliculitis and
666 · Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
fununculosis in three cases. J Small Anim Pract 36:
616. Scoll DW, Miller W11 Jr: Probable hormonal hyper-
119, 1995.
sensitivity in two male dogs. Canine Pract 17:14.
606, Fondati A, Mechelli L: Cutaneous arthropod reac.
1992.
tions in the dog: 6 cases. In: Kwoehka KW, et al
Bacterial Hypersensitivity
(eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology II1. But-
terworth 1leinemann, Boston, 1998, p. 576.
617. Burkctt G, Frank LA: Comparison for production of
607.
Gross Tl; Canine eosinophilic furunculosis of the
Staphylococcus internedius exotoxin among clinically
face. In: Ihrke PJ, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary
normal dogs. atopic dogs with recurrent pyoderrna,
Dermatology I1. Pergamon Press, New York, 1993,
and dogs with a single episodc of pyoderma. J AIn
p. 239.
Vet Med Assoe 213:232, 1998.
608.
Guaguere E, et al: Furonculose eosinophilique chez
617a. DeBoer DJ. et al: Immunomodulatory cffects of
le chicn: Etude retrospective de 12 cas. Prat Med
staphylcxcocal antigens and antigen-antibody comn-
Chir Anim Comp 31:413,1996.
 609. Hotz CS: Fosinophilic dermatitis in a Siberian busky.
clear leuk0cytes. Ain J Vet Res 55:1690, 1994.
Calif Vet 44:11, 1990.
617b. Ialliwell REW: Levels of IgE and IgG antibodies to
Hormonal Hypersensitivity
staphylococcal antigens in normal dogs and dogs with
610. Chamberlain KW: Hormonal hypersensitivity in ca-
recurrent pyoderma. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am
nines. Canine Pract l:18, 1974.
Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 3:5, 1987.
s causcd by estrogens.
618. Miller WH Jr: Antibiotic-responsive generalized non-
61l. Coustou D, et al: Dermatitis
Ann IDermatol Venerol 125:505, 1998.
lesional pruritus in a dog. Comell Vet $1:389, 1991.
 612. Lee CW, et al: Autoimmune progesterone dermatitis.
618a. Morales CA, et al: Antistaphylococcal antibodics in
J Dermatol 19:629, 1992.
dogs with recurrent staphylococcal pyoderma. Vet In-
613. Miura MT, et al: Two cases of autoimmune proges-
munol Immunopathol 41:137, 1994.
terone dermatitis: Immuohistochemical and serologi-
cal studies. Acta Dermatol Venerol 69:308, 1989.
byposensitization with Staphylococcus aureus bac-
614. Moghadam BK, et al: Autoimmune progesterone der-
terin-toxoid. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 21:479, 1985.
matitis and stomatitis. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral
620.
Scott DW, ct al: Staphylococcal hypersensitivity in thr?
Pathol Oral Radiol Endocrinol 85:537, 1998.
dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 14:666, 1978.
615. Prost C, ct al: Hypersensibite hormonale et allergic
 621. Strange P, et al: Staphylococal enterotoxin B applied
alimcntaire chez une chienne Labrador. Prat Med
on intact normal and intact atopic skin induces der.
Chir Anin Comp 30:41l, 1995.
matitis. Arch Dermatol 132:27, 1996.
Cfu
Immune-Mediated Disorders
mmune-mediated dermatoses are well recognized but uncommon skin diseases in
 dogs and cats. These dermatoses have been reported to account for 1.4% and 1.3%,
respectively, of all canine and feline dermatoses cxamined by the dermatology service at a
university small animal practice.56 They have been subdivided into primary or autoin-
mune, and secondary or immune-mediated, the latter believed to bc primarily diseases
wherein tissue destruction results from an immunologic event that is not directed against
 normal self-antigens.2s, 65
In autoimmune disease, antibodies or activated lymphocytes develop against norimal
result from failure to elininate high-afinity self-reactive lyinphocytes in primary lymphoid
organs or failure to regulate the activity of low-affnity self-reactive lymphocytes. A major
 rssans q usss si sri jo s oon  ro po jo 
cells that are spccific for those clones.25. 65
The development of autoimmune diseases is a reflection of a lack of control or a
bypass of the normal control mechanisms. Over the years, a variety of posible defects
have been deseribed, but the exact abnormal mechanism and what induccs thcse diseases
still remain umknown. Some of the possibilities include (1) suppressor T cell bypass, (2)
expression or interaction, (4) cytokine and receptor ligand abnormalities, (5) autoantigen
modification, (6) cross-reacting antigens, (7) inappropriate interleukin (IL)-2 production,
(8) idiotype/anti-idiotype imbalance, (9) mutations in receptor affnity, and (10) failure of
clonal defetion of low-afinity autoreactive thymocytes.t In addition, there is sexual dinor-
 phism in the inimune response, with female sex hormones tending to accelerate immune
osds ssns   s xs ar p sss
    ug s   ss p- as u
commonly, the inciting antigens are drugs, bacteria, and viruses that stimulate an immuno-
that are recognized by a large fraction of T cells and have the potential to interfere with
the recognition and elimination of conventional antigens.28 These genc products may play
a role in the genesis of immune-mediated diseases. So-called “epitopc spreading” may also
make additional antibodies against molecules that arc similar in structure or even unlike in
structure but physically closely associated within the tissue.
● DIAGNOSIS OF IMMUNE-MEDIATED SKIN DISEASE
 pathologic changes and, optimally, the autoantibodies, immune complexes, or mediators 
*See referenocs 21, 22, 24, 25, 29, 30, 32, 34, 38, 47, 55-57, 59, 66, 67.
fSee references 1, 4, 6, 8, 9, 12, 15, 17, 25, 26.27, 35, 37, 39,41-43, 48, 58, 59,61, 65, 68, 70
667
668 · Immune-Mediated Disorders
(e.g, cytotoxic T cells) of the immunologic injury. Establishing the presence of character.
istic dermatopathology requires cutaneous biopsy (see Chap. 2). In general, the following
 guidelines should be ohservedz0.
1. Multiple biopsies should always be taken.
 2. Samples should be selected from the most representative lesions of the suspected
immune-mediated diseases.
3. Punch biopsy samples should be taken as gently as possible; wedge biopsy by
scalpel excision may be necessary.
 4. Whenever possible, biopsy specimens should be taken when the animal is not
 5. Dermatopathologic examination should be performed by a veterinary pathologist
who has a special interest in dermatopathology or by a veterinary dermatologist
trained in dermatopathology.
Establishing the mecdiator of the irnmunologic damage may require biopsy and/or
analysis of the patient's serum for auto or abnormal antibodies. The biopsies for immuno-
    s s  pssd a is  a 
tissuc, frozen tissue, or specially fxed samples, depending on the test to be performed.
The veterinary immunopathology laboratory will be able to tell you what is required. Tests
used to detect the presence of autoantibodies or various immunoreactants (e.g., immuno-
globulins, complement components, microbial antigens) in skin lesions include immunofu-
 general, the following guidelines are used for collecting these biopsy specimens:
pou sre  ps aq pnus s an   sds asd 1
   na a a d a pr  as
may be preferred. Vasculitis lesions less than 24 hours old are best. For bullous
diseases, the blister itself is not sampled; instead, the adjacent normal skin or
erythematous skin is used.
 2. Sites wherein imrmunoglobulins are often present in normal tissue (e.g., nasal
oq pinoys 10 pardues aq sou pmous (ssop jo spedooy 'seo pue soop jo wnued
3. Samples for dircct immunofuorescence testing need to be fixed and mailed in
Michel's fixative. Samples for direct immunoperoxidase testing may be formalin-
fixed. The results of studies of tissues processed by quick-freezing and of those
kept in Michel's fxative for up to 2 weeks are cormparable 1. 47 Studies in dogs and
cats suggest that specimens may reliably be preserved in Michel's fixative for at
for 4 to 8 years.31.47 The pH of Michel's fixative must be carefully maintained at
7.0 to 7.2 to ensure accurate results.55, 56
4. Samples for direct antibody detection should be sent to a veterinary immunopath-
ology laboratory.
Testing for abnormal antibody or immune complex deposition is considered highly
valuable in human medicine for many of the imrmune-mediated dermatoses. For the
 similar canine and feline diseases, however, their value has been considerably less. Reports
dural and interpretational pitfalls, including method of specimen handling, choice of
substrates used, method of substrate handing, specificity of conjugates, fuorescein-pro-
tein-antibody concentrations, and unitage of conjugates. An in-depth discussion of these
colleagues for details.5
The incidence of positive results in the canine disorders typically varies from about
Immune-Mediated Disorders · 669
FIGURE 9-I. A, Carinc pcmphigus vulgaris. Direct
immunofuorescence testing reveals host IgG within the
 intercelular spaccs of epidennis. B, Canine permphigus
erytlhematosus. Direct inmunofluorescence testing re-
veals host IgG within the intercellular spaces of epider-
mis and along the basement membrane zone. (A and B,
from Scott Dw, Lewis RM: Pheinphigus and permphi-
goid in a dog and man: Comparative aspects. J Am Acad
Dermatol 5:148, 1981.) Figure continues on follouing page
670 · Immune-Mediated Disorders
FIGURE 9-l. Continued. C, Canine bullous pemphigoid. Direct immunofuorescence testing reveals host IgG depos
ited at the basement membrane zone. (Fron Scott Dw, et al: Observations on the end therapy of canine pemphigus and
reveals host IgG within blood vessel walls.
much more commonly achieved with the imnunoperoxidase technique. With this
technique, however, the incidence of falsc-positive results is also much higher.2a 1 In fact,
the intercellular and basement membrane zone deposition of immunoglobulins or com-
 plement can be detected from time to time in a wide variety of infammatory derinato-
Ses.44. 47,55,56, 73
 s   e s a ssai s  e n r 
logic exarmiration, further testing and expense is usually not necessary. Thus, we, as well
as others,46 do not think that these tests need to be routinely done in the work-up of a
suspected case of immune-mediated skin disease in a dog or cat.
 Autoimmune dermatoses are classified on the basis of the specific autoallergens being
cence or immunohistochemical testing. Specife identifcation requires techniques such as
immunoprecipitation and immunoblofting. This is rarely done in routine veterinary diag-
nostic laboratories and is limited to certain veterinary immunologic research laboratories.
As a result, we may still be lumping together different diseases or variants that share
clinical, histopathologic, and routine immunopathologic features.
 Indirect immunofuorescence testing (testing serum for the
epresence of circulating
autoantibody) in the past rarely yielded positive resuits in dogs and cats, and results were
conficting. Therefore, it was not recommended as a cost-effective test.19, 47, 55. 56 More
Immune-Mediated Disorders · 671
 recently, results have been positive in a variety of discases, including pemphigus foli-
which more than a few cases have been studied is canine pemphigus foliaceus, wherein
the most recent study reported 63% of the cases to yield positive results.138. 140
Now that the technology is available, we should consider obtaining tissue and serum
samples for researchers who are performing these tests correctly and frequently. Only
then will we be able to determine whether the variants described in humans also exist in
dogs and cats and whether their differentiation leads to prognostic or therapeutic value.
    e    s  po g
suffciently characteristic to be diagnostic in the majority of cases,22.47 71
and procuring of representative skin specimens and their forwarding to a knowiedgeable
dermatopathologist. As techniques that are more sensitive become readily available, this
type of testing will undoubtedly become more common. For now, we recommend collect-
 ing serum from dogs and cats with active suspected autoimmune disease and saving it in
the freezer. After other test results are reviewed, and with the recommendation of the
pathologist, the indirect immunofluorescence test may still be performed by an appropri-
ate laboratory or the serum may be submitted to appropriate research centers to support
future progress. This sample may also be used at a later date as a pretreatment sample for
some serum biochemical parameters.
● THERAPY Of IMmUNE-MEDIATED SKIn DISEASES
As a group, all of these immune-mediated dermatoses are characterized by an inappropri-
ate immune response that, to be adequately controlled, may require the use of potent
 aemd s "sd an u s sr'shnp epunu pue aassdnsoun
high levels of glucocorticoids and, occasionally, cyclophosphamide or azathioprine. These
initial attempts at treatment, although often successful, led to many side effects (see
Chap. 3), In recent years, however, a variety of different treatment approaches have been
evaluated, and now more therapeutic options are available to the clinician for the manage-
ment of some of these diseases. The diseases are not all optimally treated in the same
way, however, nor do they carry the same prognosis. Therefore, it is important that the
clinician make as specific a diagnosis as possible. Although much work on new approaches
 to the management of these diseases is underway in human medicine, very little of this
 The drugs used to treat immune-mediated skin diseases are generally called immuno-
suppressive agents. However, the exact mechanism of some of these drugs is unknown.
They may act in methods different from those of the more classic immunosuppressive
agents. They are considered together because, whatever their mechanism of action, they
share the feature of being beneficial in managing the immune-mediated skin diseases.
Glucocorticoids are the most common class of drugs used as immunosuppressive
and some are effective only in specific diseases (Table 9-1). A special use of glucocorti-
coids for the initial treatment of some severe immune-mediated dermatoses is pulse
therapy. Glucocorticoid pulse therapy (1l ung/kg methylprednisolone sodium succinate
given intravenously over 1 hour for 3 consecutive days) was used to induce remissions in
cases of canine pemphigus that had not responded to oral glucocorticoids.79 This therapy
is expensive and not without complications (see Chap. 3).
Cyclophosphamide
Cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan, Bristol-Meyers Squibb) is metabolized to alkylating agents
672 · Immune-Mediated Disorders
● Table 9- 1
IMMUNOSUPPRESSIVE DRUGS AND
INDICATIONS
DRUG
INDUCTION DOSE
INDICATIONS
Glucocorticoids
 Short-term use in severe cases of auto-
immue disease
Prednisone
2.2-6.6 mg/kg q24h
Prednisolone
2.2-6.6 mg/kg q24h
Triamcinolone
0.2-0.6 mg/kg q24h
IDexamethasone
0.2-0.6 mg/kg q24h
Cyelophosphamide
1.5-2.5 mg/kg q48h
Undesirable for long-term use, short-
term usce only in severe cases
Azathioprine
1.5-2.5 mg/kg q24h (low dose in
All immune-mediated disorders; not for
use in cats
<i5 kg)
Chlorambucil
0.1-0.2 mg/kg q24-48h (in cats
All, but especially feline diseases
usually 0.2 mg/kg q48h)
Cyclosponne
5-10 mg/kg q24h
All
Chrysotherapy
Aurothioglucose
1 mg/kg IM
Feline pemphigus foliaceus and erythe-
plasma cell podoclermatitis; canine
pernphigus complex (second choice)
Auranofin
3-6 img q24h
Dapsone
1 ing/kg qsh (in dogs); 1 mg/kg
 Suhcorneal pustular dermatosis; leuko-
q24h (with caution, in cats)
cytoclastic vasculits pemphigus
complex
Sulfasalazine
22-44 mg/kg q8h (in dogs)
 Subcormeal pustular dermatosis; vascu-
litis
Vitamin E
100--400 mg q12h
 Discoid lupus erythematosus: pemphi-
gus erythematosus; epidermolysis
bullosa
Tetracycline and niacinarmide
qpea ugh Bu 0og Y 01 < saop u1 
In dogs <10 kg; 250 mg q8h each
gus erythematosus;, sterile pyogranu-
loma syndrome: sterile panniculitis;
tiveodermatologic syndrome; lupoid
onychodystrophy; German shepherd
metatarsal fistulae; vasculitis
Sun avoidance
Discoid lupus erythematosus; pemphi-
gus erythematosus; systemic lupus
erythematosus
transcription and replication.74-7G It is used alone or in combination with other chemo-
therapeutic agents for the treatment of various neoplasms, as well as for its immunosup-
in all phases of the cell cycle, this type of cytotoxic drug is more effective in slow-growing
tumors than phase-specific drugs that act during only a specifc time of the cell cycle. It is
most effective against rapidly dividing cells. Lymphocytes are especially sensitive to cyclo-
phosphamide. The drug is irmrmunosuppressive to both the humoral and cell-mediated
immune systems, but it is more cffective against B cells than against T cells. Cyclophos-
phamide suppresses antibody production. Maximal effect occurs if the drug is given
shortly after the antigenic stimulus, when it suppresses primary and secondary humoral
responses.
 Major toxic sequelae include sterile hemorrhagic cystitis, bladder fibrosis, teratogene-
sis, infertility, alopecia and poor hair growth, nausea, inflamrmation of the gastrointestinal
tract, increased susceptibility to infections, and depression of the bonc marrow and
hematopoietic systems. Cats may lose their whiskers. Hemorrhagic cystitis occurs in up to
30% of dogs on chronic therapy of more than 2 months' duration.75 Its effects should be
monitored with periodic hemograms and urinalyses.
Clinical indications include lymphoreticular neoplasms, for which the drug is best
cornbined with glucocorticoids or vincristine. It can be given with high doses of glucocor-
Immune-Mediated Disorders ·673
ticoids to achieve reinission of severe cases of immune-mediated discases such as systemic
lupus erythematosus, vasculitis, pemphigus complex, bullous pcmphigoid, idiopathic
thromboeytopenia, hemolytic anemia, gammopathies, and rhcumatoid arthritis.77. s2 Thc
potential for hemorrhagic cystitis and bladder fibrosis makes this drug less desirable for
m ssop asn gtonqo no oudoeze ue asn (syu  oi t) ura-su
immune-mediated skin disease will be on lifelong or months of therapy, we rarely use this
drug. The protocol for neoplasms is 50 mg/m2 of body surface area given orally q24h for 4
days. then no treatment for 3 days; this sequence is repeated weekly. For iminunosup-
pression, the oral dosage is 1.5 to 2.5 mg/kg. Dosage frequency varies from every other
dlay to 4 days on and 3 days off.47 75, 76
Chlorambucil
Chlorambucil (Leukeran, Glaxo Wellcome) is an orally administered alkylating agent.7 Its
cytotoxic effect is due to cross-linking of DNA.a-76 Compared with other alkylating
agents, it is slow acting and less toxic. Although serious toxicity is rare at usual doses,
myelosuppression is possible. Consequently, patients should initially be monitored with
 pdr q a  p  rir sm  on a  sr
daily dosing but often resolve with alternate-day dosing.80 Alopecia and delayed hair
growth after clipping have been reported, and Poodles and Kerry blue terriers are re-
 ported to be at greater risk.75 Chlorambucil is available only in a 2-mg tablet, making it
most useful in small dogs and cats.
 Chlorambucil may be useful in the pemphigus complex, bullous pemphigoid, discoid
and systemic lupus erythematosus, immune-mediated vasculitis, and cold agglutinin dis-
 an asa s t 'sa ro d  ari u se m se 'a
cats because they do not tolerate azathioprine as well as dogs. The size of the tablet is
very good for use in most cats. It is most cornmonly combined with a glucocorticoid and,
 occasionally, with azathioprine (dogs only!). Chlorambucil may be used to replace cyclo-
phospharide if hemorrhagic cystitis develops during the use of that drug. The oral dosagc
 in dogs and cats is 0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg q24h to q48h.7f-78. 81
Azathioprine
Azathioprine (linuran, Glaxo Wellcome) is a synthetic modification of 6-mercaptopurine
that canbegiven oralorbyinjtion76Howeveror skindiseasestheoralrout is
usually used. It is metabolized in the liver to 6-mercaptopurine and other active metabo-
lites. 6-Mercaptopurine is then metabolized by three enzyme systems. Xanthine oxidase
and thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) produce inactive metabolites. Humans and pos-
 e   (s) m o (a s   si 
likely to experience myelosuppression.87 Ten percent of the norrmal dogs sampled in one
study had low (heterozygous) TPMT activity (9 to 1.3 U/ml RBC; normal, 15.1 to 26.6).87
The drug antagonizes purine metabolism, thereby interfering with DNA and RNA synthe-
sis.7
Azathioprine primarily affects rapidly proliferating cells, with its greatest effects on
cell-mediated immunity and T lymphocyte -dependent antibody synthesis. Primary anti-
body synthesis is affected more than secondary antibody synthesis, Azathioprine is pre-
ferred over 6-mercaptopurine because it has a more favorable therapeutic index, and 6-
 mcrcaptopurine is less effective when given orally in humans.
Even so, azathioprine is a potent drug with potential toxicitics, which includc anemia,
leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, vomiting, hypersensitivity reactions (especially of the liver),
pancreatitis, elevated serum alkaline phosphatase concentrations, skin rashes, and alopecia.
The most common significant side effect is diarrhea, which may be hemorrhagic. This
often responds to dose reductions or temporary discontinuation of the drug.s More than
 90% of patients experience anemia and lymphopenia, but usually not to the degree that
 ar  sd ie aiss  ose s i pnos aq on sau 
responding to therapy, that are not lymphopenic, and that are otherwise tolerating the
674 · Immune-Mediated Disorders
drug very well should have their dose of azathioprine increased.s Long-term therapy is
associated with the development of demodicosis, recurrent bacterial pyoderma, or derma-
tophytosis in at lcast 10% of cases. Pancreatitis may occur, though this has been
reported in dogs that were also receiving glucocorticoids,?6 We have also noted pancreati-
tis in a few dogs and, in some cases, azathioprine could he continued when the glucocorti-
coid was discontinued without further episodes of pancreatitis,
 Patients should be monitored initially every 2 weeks with complete blood counts and
platelet counts.77. 85s After the patient's condition is stable, monitoring can be tapered to
once every 4 months. If other symptoms occur, or at least yearly, a chermistry panel
should also be run. Hepatitis and pancreatitis are the major conditions to monitor with
chemistry panels.
 In small animals, azathioprine may be beneficial for pemphigus complex, bullous
pemphigoid, and both types of lupus erythematosus, as weil as other autoimmune and
immune-mediated disorders.7 It is most commonly used in cases of canine pemphigus
foliaceus that do not respond to glucocorticoids. Azathioprine is usually not used alone but
is combined with systemic glucocorticoids. There is often a lag phase, with clinical im-
 provement occurring in 3 to 6 weeks.
After remission is achieved, the dosages of both drugs are tapered, but initially, unless
1 re sia  ra i ap   d e ae  s
mg/kg q48h. The oral dosage of azathioprine for dogs is 2.5 mg/kg q24h until clinical
response is achieved, and then it is continued every other day for a month or longer. Slow
tapering down to as little as 1 mg/kg q72h may be achieved. Slow tapering to the lowest
dose possible decreases side effects and the expense of therapy. Glucocorticoids can be
been recommended if high-dose prednisone in combination with azathioprine at l mg/kg
q24h for 3 months, then at 2 mg/kg q24h for 3 months, is ineffective.36 Another option is
to continue to increase the azathioprine dose if the complete blood counts are relatively
 oadoyd u s sd a fn asa r
Cats are susceptible to azathioprine toxicity (including fatal leukopenia and thrombo-
cytopenia), and this drug should be uscd very cautiously, if at all, in this species.83, 84
Cyclosporine
Cyclosporine (Sandinmune, Novartis) is effective in preventing human organ transplanta-
s   n s i si   re      
excellent results.90 It has also been evaluated for the treatment of immune-mediated skin
diseases, and its systemic use is discussed in Chapter 3. Initial studies in dogs and cats
with immunologie dernatoses such as pemphigus foliaceus, pemphigus erythematosus, and
discoid lupus erytheimatosus have shown cyclosporine by itself to be rarely effective.77, 90 It
is usually used concurrently with glucocorticoids.
 Topical cyclosporine, available as a veterinary product in a 0.2% ointment (Optim-
mune, Schering-Plough), has been used to treat keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Some of the
benefit may refect the vehicle used.2 A study treating canine nictitans plasmacytic con-
post-treatment plasma cell infltrates No controlled studies with topical cyclosporine for
immune-mediated skin diseases have been published. However, we and others have seen
cases of localized diseasc in lupus erythematosus and pemphigus erythematosus that
improved when topical cyclosporine was added to the treatinent regimen.
Leflunomide
Leflunomide is active in a wide range of immune disorders in murine and human
models.76 It has antiproliferative effects on T cell-dependent and T cell-independent
antibody synthesis, inhibits pyrimidine synthesis, and antagonizes the action of IL-3, IL-4,
and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α. When used with prednisone and cyclosporine, lefu-
Immune-Mediated Disorders * 675
nomide virtualy climinates allograft rejection responses. One of the metabolites of lefu-
nomide is highly gastroenterotoxic for dogs; thus the dose and dosage regimen must be
closely followed. The dosage for dogs is about 2 to 6 mg/kg/day orally until a serum
trough level of 30 μg/ml is achieved.
Chrysotherapy
Chrysotherapy is the use of gold as a therapeutic agent. Gold compounds are capable of
modulating many phases of immune and infammatory responses, but the exact mecha-
nisms of this effect are unknown.76. 96,97 Gold is available in two dosage forms, which have
dissimilar pharmacokinetics: The oral compound auranofin (Ridaura, SmithKline Bcecham)
contains 29% gold, and the parenteral compound aurothioglucose (Solganal, Schering)
contains 50% gold. Neither form is approved for use in dogs and cats, but thcir distribu-
tion, metabolism, and actions have been established in humans and laboratory animals.
Studies in humans show that the oral forms arc 25% absorbed and attain blood levels with
a 2l-day half-life, but only small amounts can be detected in tissues and skin.100 In a few
clinical trials in dogs with immune-mediated dermatoses, the results with oral gold were
equivocal, but no adverse side effcts were observed.io The parenteral form is 100%
absorbed but has only a 6-day half-life in blood. It is 95% protein-bound and is well
distributed to cells of the mononuclear phagocytic system, liver, spleen, bone marrow,
kidneys, and adrenal glands. Much lower levels are detected in skin.
In humans, gold may act at several levels of the inflammatory and immune response.
Auranofin appears to have an additional inmunomodulating action, whereas gold sodium
thiomalate inhibits IL-5 -mediated eosinophil survival, but both oral and parenteral golds
inhibit bacteria, the first componcnt of complement, and the epidermal enzymes that may
be responsible for blister formation in pemphigus.o6, s9 Gold inhibits phagocytosis by
Imacrophages.75 Gold also reduces the release of infamrnatory mediators, such as lysoso.
mal enzymes, histamine, and prostaglandin; inactivates complement components; interferes
with immunoglobulin-synthesizing cells; inhibits antigen- and mitogen-induced T-cell pro-
Toxic effects are worTisome in humans, because 33% of patients have some adverse
reaction, although 80% of these reactions are minor. Most common are skin eruptions,
oral reactions, proteinuria, and bone marrow depression. During the induction_ phase, a
hemogram and urinalysis should be checked weekly and monthly thereafter.93. 97 In over
100 dogs treated with injectable gold salts, the most common side effect was pain at the
injection site.36 In addition, two dogs experienced reversible thrombocytopenia, and four
thioprine to aurothioglucose therapy for pemphigus foliaceus36. 9 This may be enbanced
by previous or concurrent administration of azathioprine.77, 96 We have seen aurothioglu-
cose-related erythema multiforme in both dogs and cats and, in one dog and one cat, it
manifested primarily as oral ulceration and erythema.
 Parenteral gold (aurothioglucose) has been reported to be effective for the treatrment 
of cases of canine and feline pemphigus that were unresponsive to glucocorticoids or
treatment of canine bullous pemphigoid and feline plasma cell pododermatitis.7. s. 96
Although most adverse reactions develop late in therapy, it is suggested that a small test
dose of 1 mg be given intramuscularly to patients with less than 10 kg of body weight and
that 5 mg be given to larger patients in thc first week. Dosage is increased to 1 mg/kg
intramuscularly weekly until remission occurs. If no response occurs after 12 weeks of
therapy, the dosage can be increased to 1.5 to 2 mg/kg.77 After remission, one dose is 
given every 2 weeks and then once monthly for several months.
It is advisable to halt medication administration eventually for observation because
some patients go into complete remission, whereas other animals can be maintained on a
reduced dosage. Two points of caution: (1) The treatment takes 6 to 12 wccks for full
effect to occur, so that other medication—typically glucocorticoids —should be main-
tained, if needed, at full dosage until this lag period is passed; and (2) gold compounds
676 + Immune-Mediated Disorders
should not be administered simultaneously with other cytotoxic drugs (such as azathio-
 prine and cyclophosphamide) because toxicity is thereby enhanced.
d  shop m e uo un psn uoq su (uo) pi jo wg o 
(at 3 to 6 ing/day) with litte success. It has been recommended at 0.12 to 0.2 mg/kg qi2h
but is only available as a nonbreakable 3-mg capsule.1ol In addition, this oral form is
expensive.
Gold is seldom the first-choice drug for pemphigus. Patients are usually started on a
glucocorticoid regimen, with azathioprine added to reduce the steroid dosage. In cases
with excessive side effects, or when azathioprine and prednisone are ineffective, gold is a
for 4 weeks after the discontinuation of azathioprine.?6
Sulfones and Sulfonamides
DAPSONE
Dapsone (Dapsonc tablets, Jacobus) is an anti-infammatory, antibacterial chemical (4,4'-
diaminodiphenyl sulfone). It inhibits the action of lysosomal enzymes; neutrophil chemo-
taxis; degranulation of mast cells; synthesis of IgG, IgA, and prostaglandin; activation of
the alternative complement pathway; and T celresponses.1o9 It is an antioxidant scavenger
andi also inhibits proteases. It inhibits the incorporation of choline into cell membranes,
feres with myeloperoxidase-halide-mediated toxicity, inhibits neutrophil chemotaxis, inhib-
 its IL-1-stimulated adhesion of neutrophils to endothelial cells, inhibits adherence of
neutrophils to antibodies deposited in the skin, and inhibits integrin-mediated neutrophil
adherence.47, 107
 Dapsone is useful in various diseases characterizcd by accumulations of neutrophils
and, in some cascs, eosinophils.96 10s In humans, it is most effcacious for dermatitis 
hcrpetiformis and erythema elevatum diutinum. It is eratically effective for a wide variety
of other human skin diseases, including leukocytoclastic vasculitis, bullous lupus erytherna-
tosus, bullous pemphigoid, discoid lupus erythematosus, subcorneal pustular derimatosis,
linear IgA bullus dermatosis, and relapsing polychondritis.o In these cases, the human
[un piay si ssesp s Aepu oi oi spnq Apider pre mo spres uuau aheso
response occurs and then is gradually decreased and stopped after 4 to 10 months. In
Iany cases, there is no relapse. Treatment with dapsone is also cffective in human leprosy
and some cases of rheumatoid arthritis.
 In dogs, dapsone has bccn used with beneft in cases of subcorneal pustular dermato-
sis, leukocytoclastic vasculitis, linear IgA pustular dermatosis, and pemphigus foliaceus and
 cases were controlled. In the last three diseases, only about half the cases showed benefit.
pressive combinations (such as azathioprine with corticosteroids), the addition of dapsone
permitted lowering the dose of the corticosteroid.
Dapsone is not approved for use in dogs and cats in the United States, but reports
suggest a dosage of 1 mg/kg q8h (dogs onlyl) orally for 2 to 4 weeks until lesions clear,
and then a reduction of the frequency of administration to ql2h or q24h. Others have
used the drug once daily or every 48 hours in combination with prednisone. The less
frequent administration may be warranted because a study in normal dogs showed a half-
life of 13 hours after intravenous administration.104 In one dog given approximately 5 mg/
kg, bioavailability was 99.5% and half-life was 11.5 hours.104 The maintenance dosage
toxicity is somewhat dose-related.
 Potential toxicity can be serious. During induction, mild anemia, leukopenia, and
moderate elevations of serum alanine arninotransferase levels may he expected, but this
does not necessitate stopping treatment if the animal rcmains clinically normal. Blood
dyscrasias, thrombocytopenias, skin reactions, and hepatic toxicity can be serious but
Immune-Mediated Disorders * 677
therapy with hemograms and platelet counts, blood urea nitrogen determination, urinaly-
sis, and serum alanine aminotransferase determination. Cats are especially susceptible to
dapsone toxicity, with hemolytice anemia and various neurotoxicities reported. A dosage of
1 ing/kg q24h orally is recommended.
SULFASALAZINE
Sulfasalazine (Azulfidine, Pharmacia) is converted in the colon to sulfapyridine 5-amino-
salicylate, which has anti-inflaminatory action.os The dosage is 10 to 20 mg/kg q8h
orally.47. 1os The dosage may be reduced or even changed to every other day while
maintaining clinical remission. A scrious side effect with long-term administration is the
 production of keratitis sicca. Thus, tear production should be checked regularly. In one
report, two cases with subcorneal pustular dermatosis were managed satisfactorily with
sulfasalazinc after becoming refractory to dapsone.los Sulfasalazine has also been used
successfully in the management of neutrophilic vasculitis 102.108
TETRACYCLINE AND NIACINAMIDE
The combination of tetracycline and niacinamide has been recommended for the treat.
rment of discoid lupus erythematosus and peinphigus erythernatosus in dogs. Reported
results are variable, but 25% to 65% of cases have an excellent response.l10-iiz It has also
been effective in some cases of pemphigus foliaceus when added to azathioprine and
ulcerative dermatosis") in collies and Shetland sheepdogs respond well to tetracycline and
niacinamide.
This combination has also been used with success in some dogs with lupoid onycho-
dystrophy, Cerman shepherd dog metatarsal fistulae, sterile panniculitis, sterile granuloma-
tous/pyogranulomatous dermatitis, vasculitis, and cutaneous histiocytosis (see^ Chap. 3).
The precise mechanism of action is unknown. However, tetracyclines possess various anti-
infammatory and immunomodulatory propcrties, including suppression of in vitro lymph
chemotactic rcsponses, inhibition of the activation of complement componcnt 3, inhibition
of lipases and collagenases, and inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis.fio Niacinamide has
been shown to block antigen-IgE -inducerl histamine release in vivo and in vitro, prevent
degranulation of mast cell, inhibit phosphodiesterases, and decrease protease releases
The initial dosage for dogs weighing more than 10 kg is 500 mg of tetracycline and
500 mg of niacinamide given q8h. If response is favorable, the dosage may be decreased
to ql2h and then to q24h. Although no studies have been reported, one of us (C.E.G.)
noted that this combination may have shown benefit when used concurrently with vitamin
E or glucocorticoids. It was also reported that tctracycline alonc may be beneficial in
treating discoid lupus erythematosus.l1 Side effects are uncommon, although vomiting.
anorexia, lethargy, and diarrhea have been reported and are primarily due to the nia-
cinamide.so, lt. lie Onc of us (C.E.G.) also saw two cases of anorexia with increased liver
enzyme activity that resolved with discontinuation of therapy. In one case, tetracycline
adrministration was continued, suggesting that the niacinamide was responsible for the
adverse reactions.
Antimalarials
 Several antimalarials have been useful for the treatment of humans with discoid lupus
erythematosus, dermatomyositis, polymorphous light eruption, solar urticaria, and sclero-
derma.ll3 There are also anecdotal reports of response with cutaneous leishmaniasis,
cutaneous cryptococcosis, epidermolysis bullosa, and lymphocytic skin infltrations.114 Anti-
malarials may have future use in problem cases involving animals with such diseases.
Their specific mode of action is unknown, but the drugs stabilize lysosomal mem-
branes and thus are anti-inflammatory. They inhibit protein synthesis, viral replication, and
cell-mediated inmmunity. They do not affect the development of primary or secondary
678 · Immme-Mediated Disorders
antibody response but do inhibit complement. Consequently, they may inhibit the forma-
tion of immune complexes, which explains their effectiveness in systemic lupus erythema-
tosus and related autoimmune disorders. The drugs are seldom used alone for first-line
therapy and, in humans, are usually given with salicylates or small doses of corticosteroids.
Side effects are numerous, the most serious affecting the eyes.
          s
hydrochloride, Winthrop), chloroquine (Aralen, Winthrop), and hydroxychloroquine sulfate
(Plaquenil sulfate, Winthrop). Their place in veterinary dermatology has yet to be deter-
 q aq a s r  sns sdan re rne p
canine lupus erythematosus.* No case reports or studies supporting their efficacy have
 been reported.
Colchicine
Colchicine has been useful for the treatment of humans with leukocytoclastic vasculitis,
epidermolysis bullosa acquisita, linear IgA bullous dermatosis, dermatitis herpetiformis,
and relapsing polychondritis.16 It may have future use in problem cases involving animals
with such diseases.
Colchicine is an alkaloid that suppresses neutrophil chemotactic and phagocytic func-
tions via disruption of microtubule assembly and elongation, increasing cellular cyclic AMP
levels and inhibiting lysosomal degranulation. It also inhibits immunoglobulin secretion,
 IL-l production, histamine release, and human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DR expresson.
The main side effects are gastrointestinal.
Early clinical reports in dogs involved the use of a colchicine analog in cases of
rt u  sor as s,
● AUTOIMMUNE DISEASES
Pemphigus Complex
 The pemphigus complex is a group of uncommon autoimmume diseases described in dogs
and cats that is comparable to the human disease. Although there are similarities, many
significant differences exist. These disorders are vesiculobullous to pustular disorders of
the skin or mucous membranes characterized by acantholysis (loss of cohesion between
 keratinocytes). In humans, there are at least eight varieties of pemphigus, whereas dogs
 and cats have at least five varieties.59. 155 169
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
tholysis leading to vesicle formation and immunologically by the presence of autoanti-
bodies to components of the keratinocyte desmosome, both bound in the skin and
location, appear to relate to which components of the desmosone the autoantibodies are
targeting.'
7.146, 155. 165 For instance, humans with mucosal dominant pemphigus vulgaris
have antibodies against desmoglein III, those with pemphigus foliaceus produce antibodies
hoth.117 Using a neonatal mouse model, the injection of antidesmoglein If IgG alone is
and antidesmoglein I does produce lesions.l17 As pemphigus vulgaris progresses to cutane-
 ous involvement, antidesmoglein I antibodies are produced, possibly because of epitopc
spreading.
 In dogs and cats, only pemphigus vulgaris causes an intraepidermal vesicle or bulla.
The other forms of pemphigus are typically associated with intraepidermal pustules, a
major distinction between the human and the canine and feline diseases.22 127, 130 In the
Immune-Mediated Disorders · 679
sp Au jo nias o us  u pnsuuap a pou sm apoque snyduad ied
diagnosis for some variants of pemphigus. However, as the techniques to find serum
ences raise questions about the pathologic similarities and the accuracy of the diagnosis
based on just clinical and histopathologic fndings between the human and animal dis-
eases. Part of the discrepancy also relates to sensitivity and technique hecause we appear
to be finding more cases with detectable serum autoantibodies, and these autoantibodies
do target similar or identical structures as in thehuman diseases5125,1316716Furthr
studies comparing cases with and without appropriate immunologic findings are needed to
determine whether we have multiple similar diseases or the identification primarily relates
to the sensitivity of the techniques being used.
 Pemphigus antigens are heterogeneous (85 to 260 kd) and present in all mammalian
and avian skin, and those identifed specifically are associated with desmosomal compo-
foliaceus and pemphigus vulgaris antigens, which also differ from each other.136 This
regional difference and the specific profile of the patient's autoantibodies correlate with,
and help to explain, the distribution of lesions in clinical disease.117, 146 Canine skin has
d  s sd  r t gs rs   us 
logic, and inmunopathologic syndromes when injected into neonatal mice. Antibodies to
 some of these antigens are not associated with pathology, however.
 The pathomechanism of blister formation in pemphigus is unkrown, though it has
() e  u ae sd jo q  () a se aq o psd 
internalization of the pemphigus antibody and fusion of the antibody with intracellular
lysosomes, and (3) resultant activation and release of a keratinocyte proteolytic enzyme
(plasminogen activator or another factor), which diffuses into the extracellular space and
converts plasminogen into plasmin, which hydrolyzes the adhesion molecules.18. 124. 167. 168
The resultant loss of intercellular cohesion leads to acantholysis and blister forimation
within the epidermis. The pemphigus antibody-induced acantholysis is not dependent on
sd pe sna sd  s jo s s   ss s
foliaceus.174 Other studies have shown that plasminogen activator activity does not corre-
late with lesion development, and studies conducted in genetically engineered mouse
models also have suggested that direct interference with the antibody targets creates
similar lesions.18
 In desmoglein IIull mice, treatment with human pemphigus vulgaris serum induces
extensive acantholysis and blistering, suggesting that autoantibodies against cellsurface
Patients with pemphigus vulgaris and pemphigus foliaceus have IgG antibodies that pre-
cipitate cholinergic receptors.1ss Because cholinergic receptors control keratinocyte adhe-
sion and motility, their inactivation by autoantibodies may elicit cell signals that cause
desmosomal disassembly. Although keratinocyte desmosomal cadherins (desmoglein I and
III) hold the cells together, desmoglein Im mice do not experience spontaneous acan-
tholysis and blisters. In addition, activation of cholinergic receptors can prevent, stop, and
     o      s
in pemphigus may be mediated by at least two complementary pathogenic pathways: (1)
anticholinergic receptor autoantibodies that weaken intercellular adhesion between kerati-
nocytes via inactivation of the cholinergic receptor-mediated physiologic control of cad-
herin (desmoglein) expression and/or function, which causes dyshesion, cell detachment,
and rounding up (acantholysis), and (2) autoantibodies to other adherence molecules (e.g.
desmoglein) that prevent the formation of new desmosomes.
 UItraviolet light irradiation exacerbatcs the acantholysis induced by anti-desmoglein I
 phigus foliaceus, and pemphigus vulgaris.139. 153a
680 · Immune-Mediated Disorders
What initiates the autoantibody formation is still unknown, though a virus spread by
an insect vector is suspected in an endemic form of pemphigus foliaceus (fogo selvagem)
in South America.1s. 15s It has been suggested that the black fly may play the role of
 to black fies as a risk factor for endemic pemphigus foliaceus.145
Genetic factors in humans and dogs also appear to be important, In humans, both
may he susceptible to pemphigus vulgaris due to differences in their immune response
genes.1* Although this has not been dermonstrated in dogs, breed predispositions and
familial cases have been shown.47. 15o Other factors thought to be involved in the'patho-
genesis of some cases of pemphigus are drug provocation (especially penicillamine and
chronic skin disease both seem to be important in the pathogenesis of some cases of
canine and feline pemphigus30.131 Interestingly,drug-induced disease inhumans is less
cormmonly assciated with classic immunopathologic findings.72 Possibly, the human drug-
 oo s  d r n rs  si  p
drugs are those with highly reactive sulfhydryl moieties (e.g, penicillamine) and those 
with an amide component (e.g., captopril, penicillins, cephalosporins).
Diet has been implicated as a cause of pemphigus in humans.5s.17o The molecular
structurec of many food ingredients is similar to that of known pemphigus-inducing drugs.
For instance: thiols contained in garlic, onion, leek, and chive; isothiocyanates in mustard,
horseradish, turnip, radish, cabbage, caulifower, and Brussels sprouts; phenols in mango,
cashews, and many food aditives; and tannins in tea, coffee, ginseng, certain berries,
 s   s so n o p ae d 
close to rivers, many of which contain high levels of tannins because of decomposing
leaves and other vegetable matter.17o Heat and humidity cause tannin decomposition.
Perhaps consumption of such substances is more important than black fies!
 Owing to the thinness, or other characteristics, of canine and feline epidermis, intra-
epidermal vesicles, bullae, and pustules are fragile and transient. Thus, clinical lesions
usually include erosions and ulcers hordered by epidermal collarettes.
DIAGNOSIS
of all canine and feline skin disorders seen at university small animal clinics.56. 59 ln
general, the various forms of pemphigus have relatively distinct clinical differences. Cer-
tain diagnostic features, however, can be applied to the whole group. The most important
diagnostic aspects are the history, physical examination, and histopathologic findings. De-
tection of pemphigus antibody by direct immunofluorescence or immunohistochemical
testing may also be helpful but, owing to costs, technical problems, and relatively poor
diagnostic sensitivity and specificity at routine laboratories, these tests are not routinely
recommended. If they are performed, however, all the pemphigus variants should show an
intercellular deposition of IgG or complement components (see Fig. 9-LA）47,163.16 In
three of seven dogs with pemphigus foliaceus, the IgG was of the IgG2 or IgG4 sub-
types.13
Occasionally, immunoglobulins of other classes are found. Indirect immunofluores-
cence testing infrequently yields positive results unless a research laboratory is used; even
tion of immunoreactants along the basement membrane zone in addition to the intercellu-
lar findings (see Fig. 9--IB). Microscopic examination of direct smears from intact vesicles
or pustuies or from recent erosions often reveals numerous nondegenerate neutrophils,
occasiomally numerous eosinophils, and numerous acantholytic keratinocytes.5, 164 One or
two acantholytic keratinocytes may he visible in an occasional high-power microscopic field
during mieroscopic examination in any suppurative condition, but when these cells are
 present in clusters or large numbers in several microscopic fields, they are strongly
suggestive of pemphigus.
Immune-Mediated Disorders * 68I
 Skin biopsy may be diagnostic or strongly supportivc in pemphigus.2 47, 5. 164 Intact
vesicles, bullae, or pustules are essential. Because those lesions are so fragile and tran-
sicnt, it may be necessary to hospitalize the animal so that it can he carefully scrutinized
for 2 to 4 hours for the presence of primary lesions. When a bullous lesion is observed,
biopsy must be performed immediately. Multiple biopsies and serial sections greatly
increase the chances of demonstrating diagnostic histologic changes.
Electron-microscopic examination of pemphigus lesions has suggested that dissolution
of the intercellular cement substance is the initial pathologic change, followed by the
retraction of tonofilaments, disappearance of desmosomes, and acantholysis.163. 164
 Results of routine laboratory determinations (hemogram, serum chermistries, urinalysis,
serum protein electrophoresis) are nondiagnostic, often revealing mild to moderate leuko-
cytosis and neutrophilia, mild nonregenerative anemia, rnild hypoalbuninemia, and mild to
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT OF PEMPHIGUS: GENERAL COMMENTS
The prognosis for canine pemphigus appears to vary with the form and severity of the
disease5. 163. 164 The natural course of untreated cases is unclear. Veterinarians have long
recognized refractory imucocutaneous erosive or ulcerative disorders and severe exfoliative
dermatoses that have resulted in the death or euthanasia of affected dogs and cats.
da s s p   s  s  o  
phigus foliaceus. On the basis of the small numbers of cases documented in the veterinary
literature, (l) pemphigus vulgaris appears to be a severe disease that is often fatal and,
snhyduad (a) pazuqina are pun puodsan m y seue Aueu quauenn m uoao
foliaceus is less severe but, without therapy, may be fatal, and (3) permphigus crythemato-
 sar  nn are sa sd r rnd ed pe s
rarely produce systemic signs and readily respond to trcatment.36, 47. 59
 Becausc the prognosis and treatment for the different forms varies, it is important to
prolonged therapy and seem more likely to allow treatment to be pcrmanently discontin-
ued affter remission has been maintained for 6 months. Too few cases of parancoplastic
 permphigus have been deseribed to allow comment, though this condition carries a very
poor prognosis in humans.
Therapy of canine and feline pemphigus is often dlificult, requiring large doses of
Side effects of these drugs are common, varying from mild to severe, and close physical
and hematologic monitoring of the patient is critical. Additionally, therapy must usually be
maintained for prolonged periods, if not for life. Thus, the therapeutic regimen must be
 individualized for each patient, and owner education is essential.
Large doses of glucocorticoids (2 to 6 mg/kg prednisone orally q24h in dogs: 4 to 8
mg/kg prednisone q24h in cats) induce remission in most patients. However, severe
glucocorticoid side effects and the inability to achieve safe altermate-day maintenance
n   s  o     s s n a
dermatology practices, only 30% to 40% of cases are adequately controlled with glucocor-
ticoids alone.
When glucocorticoids are ineffective or undesirable, other imrnunomodulating drugs
can be used in an attempt to reduce the dosage or eliminate the need for glucocorticoids.
Azathioprine is often the drug of choice in this situation in dogs. Azathioprinc should be
used either not at all or very cautiously in cats, because even small doses (1 mg/kg orally
q48h) may produce fatal leukopenia or thrombocytopenia.121 Chlorambucil is effective in
dogs and cats and is the preferred treatment in the cat.1s4 Chrysotherapy (use of gold
salts) is also useful, especially in cats and cases that cannot be controlled with azathioprine
and prednisone.34, 36. 47. 132. 156
In animals in which significant nasal depigmentation has occurred and photoderma-
682 · Immune-Mediated Disorders
of sunscreens containing para-aminobenzoic acid with high sun-protective factor values
(SPF 15 or greater) is mandatory. Sunscreens should be applied I to 2 hours before sun
exposure is anticipated and reapplied every 3 to 4 hours.
   so      s 
           n 
taining omega-3/omega-6 fatty acids (see Chap. 3). The use of pentoxifylline for inhibiting
autoimmune diabetes mellitus in mice suggests its concurrent use may be warranted in
unresponsive cases of pernphigus.144
Given the recent interest in diet-induced pemphigus in humans,170 perhaps veterinari-
 ans should consider a restricted diet trial (paying particular attention to thiois, isothiocya-
 nates, phenols, and tannins) in dogs and cats with refractory cases of pemphigus. One of
us (D.W.S.) has received anecdotal reports of success with diet modification in dogs.
PEMPHIGUS VULGARIS
Pemphigus vulgaris has been reported in dogs and cats and appears to be the second
accounted for less than 0.1% of cases.122 In humans and dogs, the major pemphigus
vulgaris antigen is desmoglein Il, a 130-kd glycoprotein from the cadherin group of
adhesion molecules.18. 11s, i26, 141, 142, 168 In more severe cases that also have cutaneous
involvement, antibodies to desmogiein I are also present in humans and are pathogenic.17, 1%a
sex predilections have been reported. Pemphigus vulgaris is a vesiculobullous, erosive to
ulcerative disorder that may affect the oral cavity, mucocutaneous junctions (lips, nostrils,
eyelids, prepuce, vulva, anus), skin, or any cormbination thereof (Fig. 9-2A to D). About
75% to 90% of affected animals have oral cavity lesions at the time of diagnosis, and oral
 ud uo se ns t og ne u uis rer an s su a
halitosis or excessive salivation. Cutaneous lesions occur most commonly in the axillae and
groin. The Nikolsky sign may be present. The clawbed may be involved, resulting in
secondary bacterial pyoderma and lymphadenopathy may be present. Severely affected
animals may be anorectic, depressed, or febrile.
Diagnosis
 The differential diagnosis of pemphigus vilgaris includes hullous pemphigoid, epidermo-
lysis bullosa acquisita, linear IgA bullous dermatosis, systemic lupus erythematosus, ery-
thema multiforme, toxic epidermal necrolysis, drug reaction, candidiasis, idiopathic ulcera-
tive dermatitis (vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus) of collies and Shetland
sheepdogs, epitheliotropic lyrnphoma, and the numerous causes of canine and feline
ulcerative stomatitis.
The definitive diagnosis of pemphigus vulgaris is based on history, physical examina-
tion, direct smears, biopsy, immunofuorescence or immunohistochemical testing, and
demonstration of the antigen being targeted (desmoglein IIl). Pemphigus vulgaris is
characterized histologically by suprabasilar acantholysis with resultant cleft and vesicle
formation (Fig. 9-3)22 71. 163 Basal epidermal cells remain attached to the basement
membrane zone like a row of tombstones (Fig. 9-4). The dermal infammatory reaction
 may be scant and perivascular (cell-poor) or prominent and interstitial to lichenoid (cell-
rich).
Management
Jo oan e un 'dno s po sisud jsod a aieo o sedde suena sny
eight canine cases, only two patients were kept in remission over 1.5 years; three died or
were euthanized, and three were lost to follow-up.122 It has been suggested, and we agree,
that these cases should initially be treated aggressively with high-dose prednisone and
a aq on su i p n ' q  o s an a gn
Immune-Mediated Disorders * 683
B
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic meclia.
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic medlia.
 Ploase refer to the printed publication.
 Please refer to the printed publication.
G
FIGURE 9-2. A, Canine pemphigus vulgaris. Anmular erosions and ulcers bordered by epidermal collarettes in.
the inguinal region. B, Canine pemphigus vulgaris. Annular ulcers with collarettes ncar the anus. C, Ulceration of
the lips, chin, and nasal philtrum of a cat with pemphigus vulgaris. D, Ulceration of the hard and soft palate of a
cat with pemphigus vulgaris. (C and D, from Manning TO, et al: Pemphigus diseases in thc feline: Seven case
reports and discussion. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 18:432, 1982.) E, Multiple crusted erythermatous plaques over the
dorsum of a dog with pemphigus vegetans. F, Mutiple crusted, erythematous plaques over the dorsum and side of
a dog with pemphigus vegetans. (E and F, from Scott Dw: Pemphigus vegetans in a dog. Cormell Vet 67:374,
1977.) G, Pemphigus foliaceus. Numerous pustules over the thorax. H, Lateral surface of pinna of a dog with
pemphigus foliaceus.Note pustules (ealy lesions）and yeow cnusts (olderlesions)
684 · Immune-Medliated Disorders
FIGURE 9-3. Canine pemphigus vulgaris. Suprabasi-
al: Pemphiygus vulgaris without mucosal or mnucocutane-
ous involvement in two dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
18:401, 1982.)
FIGURE 9-4. Canine pemphigus vulgaris. Suprabasilar cleft with basilar epidlermal cells
remaining attached to the dermis like a row of “tombstones." (From Scott Dw, et al:
Pernphigus vulgaris without mucosal or mucocutaneous involvement in two dogs. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 18:401, 1982.)
Immune-Mediated Disorders · 685
combination with azathioprine are the initial treatments of choice in dogs, whereas sys-
temic glucocorticoids alone or in combination with chloranbucil are preferred in cats.
Combination therapy is usually required. Heparin (100 IU/kg ql2h subcutaneously) was
shown to have at least a temporary beneficial effect in one medically resistant case of
pemphigus vulgaris.151
PEMPHIGUS VEGETANS
Pemphigus vegetans has been reported in the dog but is considered to be extremely
variant, panepidermal pustular pemphigus, though some clinical features were different.59
disorder that evolves into verrucous vegetations and papillomatous proliferations, which
00ze and are studded with pustules (see Fig. 9-2E and F). The Nikolsky sign may be
present. Pruritus and pain are variable, and the dogs are usually otherwise healthy.
vulgaris in an animal that has more resistance to the disease.
Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis of pemphigus vegetans includes bacterial and fungal granulomas,
benign familial chronic pemphigus, and cutaneous neoplasia (especially lyuphoreticular
neoplasia and mast cell tumor).
The definitive diagnosis of pemphigus vegetans is based on history, physical examina-
tion, direct smears, biopsy, and immunofuorescence or inmunohistochemical testing.
Pemphigus vegetans is characterizcd histopathologically by papillated epidermal hyper-
plasia, papillomatosis, and intraepidermal microabscesses that predominantly contain eosin-
ophils and acantholytic keratinocytes (Figs. 9-5 and 9-6).71, 160, 163
Management
Too few cases of pernphigus vegetans have been described for specifc recommendations
to be made, but initially, systemic glucocorticoids would be indicated. In one report, three
FIGURE 9-5. Canine pemphigus vegetans. Seven intraepidcrmal cosinophilic microab-
scesses. (Fron Scott DW, Lewis RM: Pemphigus and pemphigoid in dog and imar: Compara-
tive aspects. J Am Acad Dermatol 5:148, 1981.)
686·Immune-Mediated Disorders
nantly cosinophils and a few acantholytic keralinocyles. (From Scott DW: Pemphigus vegetans
in a dlog. Comell Vet 67:374, 1977.)
cases were mentioned and all responded readily to tapering dosages of glucocorticoids.36 If
glucocorticoids are not cffective, azathioprine would be added.
PANEPIDERMAL PUSTULAR PEMPHIGUS
 In a 1991 report, 16 cases of putative pemphigus vegetans were described.14a To us,
however, many of the dogs in these cases appeared to have “deep” pemphigus erythema-
tosus or pemphigus foliaceus. The diagnosis of pemphigus vegetans was based on histopa-
thology because of the presence of pustules in the epidermis and follicular infundibula.
Dunstan7 has roferred to this group as having pemphigus vegetans/erythematosus and
considers this entity more sinilar to human pemphigus vegetans, Hallopeau type. Ie and
others73 have proposed the name panepidermal pustular pemphigus. One case evaluated
inmunopathologically had autoantibodies against desnoglein I, similar to pemphigus foli-
aceus.1os Based on the clinical fndings and limited immunopathologic studies, this entity
cannot be distinctly characterized. We still believe that these dogs sinply have pemphigus
foliaceus or pemphigus erythematosus,
PEMPHIGUS FOLIACEUS
Pemphigus foliaceus is the most common form of pemphigus and is perhaps the most
been reported to account for as high as 1% to 1.5% of all cases at a dermatology referral
 practice or as low as 0.04% of the hospital canine population." The major pemphigus
adhesion molecules.5a, 141 The same antigen is the target of the autoantibodies in the
 Dachshunds, Bearded collies, Newfoundlands, Doberman pinschers, the Finnish spitz, and
*Sce references 55, 120, 121, 129, 133, 135, 147, 156.
Immune-Mediated Disorders · 687
  'se  e s s jo a u  spsosd oq a sids
 an important differentiation frorn human permphigus foliaceus, which starts with erythema
and vesicles and may progress to pustules. Canine and feline pemphigus foliaceus does
not have a vesicular phase -it is a pustular, crusting disease.
Three forms of pemphigus foliaceus appear to exist in the canine,131 The first is
spontaneous canine pemphigus foliaceus. Akitas and Chow Chows may be prone to this
form. The disease develops in dogs with no previous history of skin disease or drug
exposure. The second form, drug-induccd pcmphigus foliaceus, may be more comimon in
Labrador retrievers and Doberman pinschers. Drug-induccd pemphigus is becoming more
frequently recognized, with several cases associated with thc administration of trimetho-
These dogs often have had one or more years of usually pruritie or allergic skin disease.
They suddenly experience “rmore severe disease with new features" that ends up being
diagnosed as pemphigus foliaceus. These dogs with chronic, disease-associated pemphigus
drug-induced, though a cause-and-effect relationship is not obvious, nor does the eruption
go away when the drugs are stopped. Vo scasonality or environmental risk factors were
found in a study of pemphigus foliaceus in dogs and cats.52
Pemphigus foliaceus usually begins on the face and ears (Fig. 9-7B); it cormmonly
involves the feet, clawbeds, footpads (villous hyperkeratosis or "hard pad") (scc Fig. 9-7C
to E), and groin and becomes multifocal or generalized (see Fig. 9-7A) within 6 inonths
in many aninals. Very early lesions consist of erythematous macules that rapidly progress
through a pustular phase (see Fig. 9-2G) and end up as dry, yellow or honey-colored to
brown crusts (see Fig. 9-2H). There are usually scales, alopecia, and erosions bordered
by epidermal collarettes. The Nikolsky sign Inay be present. Mucocutaneous orientation is
uncommon, and oral cavity involvermeint is very rare. Some dogs and cats with pemphigus
foliaceus present with only footpad lesions and may be lame.115. 13 Paronychia and involve-
ment ofthenipples are commonin catsVarious claw abnoralitiesonychodystrophy,
onychorrhexis, onychogryposis) occasionally occur in dogs. Nasal depignentation is com-
matosus). Pruritus and pain are variable, and secondary bacterial pyoderma and peripheral
lymphadenopathy may be present. Severely affected animals may be anorectic, depressed,
or febrile. The disease commonly has a waxing/waning course. There may be hours to
days when nurmcrous new pustules form, followed by days to weeks of crusting during
which few new lesions are found.
Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis of pemphigus foliaceus includes bacterial foliculitis, dermato-
phytosis, demodicosis, dermatophilosis, seborrheic skin disease, benign familial chronic
pemphigus, pemphigus erythematosus, discoid and systemic lupus erythematosus, derma-
thoiogy as well as the clinical findings (see Chap. 5),1s3 In addition, permphigus foliaceus
could be confused with subcorneal pustular dernatosis, sterile eosinoplilic pustulosis,
linear IgA pustular dermatosis, necrolytic migratory erythema, leishmaniasis, and zinc-
responsive dermatitis.
 The definitive diagnosis of pemphigus foliaceus is based on history, physical examina-
acterized histologically by intragranular or subcormeal acantholysis with resultant cleft and
vesicle or pustule formation (Figs. 9-8 and 9-9)22. 71. 16 Within the vesicle or pustule,
cells from the stratum granulosum may be attached to the overlying stratuin corneum
*See references 11, 49, 52, 252, 269, 286, 287.
688 · Immune-Mediated Disorders
FIGURE 9-7. Legendl on opposite page
Immune-Mediated Disorders · 689
FlGURE 9-8. Canine pemphigus foliaceus. Numerous neutrophils and acantholytic kerati
nocytes within a subcomeal pustule. (Fron Scott Dw, Lewis RM: Pemphigus and penphi-
goid in dog and man: Comparative aspects. J Am Acad Dermatol 5:148, 1981.)
(granular cell “cling-ons") (Fig. 9-10A and B). Either neutrophils or eosinophils may
predominate within the vesicle or pustule. Other helpful histopathologic fndings in canine
and feline pemphigus foliaceus are (1) eosinophilic exocytosis and mieroabscess formation
the follicular outer root sheath in the acantholytic and pustular process, and (3) acantholy.
tic, dyskeratotic granular epidermal cells ("grains") at the surface of erosions (Fig. 9- 11).
Management
The initial trcatmcnt of choice for pemphigus foliaceus depends on the clinical presenta-
tion. Milder localized cases may be treated with topical steroids, whereas more extensive
disease is usually treated with oral prednisone.156, 164 The induction dose should be main.
tained until the disease is inactive, though alopecia and residual crusts may be present.
After induction, the dosage is tapcred to an altermate-day reginen. In cats, patients failing
to respond to prednisone may respond to dexamethasone (0.2 to 0.4 mg/kg q24h) or
triamcinolone (0.4 to 0.8 mg/kg q24h) and can be safely maintained by administration of
either product cvery second or third day. It has been suggested that oral triamcinolone
may be superior to prednisone and prednisolone; however, this needs to he evaluated.131
Oral glucocorticoids are ineffective or unsatisfactory in at least 50% of cases. In the dog,
the next most common treatment is the addition of azathioprine for combination immuno-
suppressive therapy. In the cat, chlorambucil or chrysotherapy is used. If dogs do not
FIGURE 9-7. A, Pemphigus foliacens. Generalized papules, pustules, erosions, and erusts. B, Pemphigus foliaceus. Note
with pemphigus foliaccus. F, Erythema, alopecia, erosion, and crusting of the face and ear of a cat with pemphigus
erythaematosus. (From Seott DW, et al: Pemphigus erythematosus in the dog and cat. J Am Anim HIosp Assoc 16:815,
1980.) G, Nasal erythema, ulceration, crusting, and depigmentation in a dog with pemphigus erythematosus. H, Pemphigus
erythematosus denonstrating nasal depiginentation without crusting
'sg snyduad po asasns-rud pue uend pessn uo seaes
690 · Immune-Mediated Disorders
FIGURE 9-9. Canine pemphigus foliaccus. Nu-
merous acantholytic keratinocytes within subcormeal
pusttle.
 respond to azathioprinc and glucocorticoids, gold salt injections may be warranted, but
only after waiting for 4 weeks after discontinuing the azathioprine.36 It has been stated
that about 10% of patients with canine and feline pemphigus foliaceus fail to respond to
any treatment and are euthanized.120
PEMPHIGUS ERYTHEMATOSUS
sad p  u  e si  r si sa sr
drome between penphigus and lupus erythematosus because of histopathologic and im-
munopathologic fndings. It has also been suggested to be a mild form of pemphigus
in humans, it is believed to be similar to pemphigus foliaceus Is.59 Pemphigus erythemato-
dogs, collies and Gerrman shepherds may be predisposed.ss This disease has becn consid-
ered to be photoaggravated in some cases, similar to canine discoid lupus erythematosus.
This was confirrmed in a study demonstrating in vivo and in vitro sensitivity to UVB 139
 Pemphigus erythematosus is characterized by erythematous, pustular dermatitis of the
face and ears (see Fig. 9-7F). Because the primary lesions are transient, dogs and cats
typically present with oozing crusts, scales, alopecia, and erosions bordered by epidermal
collarettes. The Nikolsky sign is infrequently present. Pruritus and pain are variable. The
disease involves, and is oftcn limited to, the facial/nasal region. The nose frequently
becomes depigrnented, whereupon photodermatitis becomes an aggravating factor (see
Immunc-Mediated Disorders · 69 I
FIGURE 9-10. Canine pemphigus foliaceus. A, Early pallor and intragranular cleft fornation (arrow). B. Intragranular
acantholysis produces a "subcorneal" pustule with numerous kcratiroeytes fron the stratuin granulosurn still adherent
(granular "cling-ons") to the overlying stratum cornenm (arrou).
FIGURE 9-II. Caninc pcmphigus erythematosns. Aeantholytic keratinocytes ("grains")
within stratum granulosurm at the surface of an erosion. (From Scott I>W, Lewis RM:
Peinphigus and peinphigoid in dog and rman: Comparative aspects. J Ar Acad IDermatol 5:
148,1981.)
692 · Immune-Mediated Disorders
 Fig. 9-7G and H). If the nasal region is primarily involved, the condition is often worsc
in sunny weather and the dog may be inisdiagnosed as having nasal solar dermatitis
("collie nose"). Often the depigmentation is an early sign in pernphigus erythematosus.
This is in contrast with pemphigus foliaceus, wherein the depigmentation comes later. In
 addition, the crusting is often milder than what cccurs in penphigus foliaceus. Oral cavity
involvement has not been reported, and affected animals are usually otherwise healthy.
Occasional aninals have isolated skin lesions distant from the face and ears, such as on
 the paws or genitalia.
Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis of pemphigus erythermatosus includes bacterial folliculitis, der-
matophytosis, demodicosis, benign familial chronic pemphigus, facial pemphigus foliaceus,
discoid and systemic lupus erythenmatosus, dermatomyosiis, drug reaction, leishmaniasis,
and zinc-responsive dermatitis.
Thc definitive diagnosis of pemphigus erythematosus is based on history, physical
examination, direct smears, skin biopsy, and immunofuorescence or immunohistochemical
testing. Pemphigus erythematosus is histologically identical to pemphigus foliaceus, except
that it often has a lichenoid cellular infiltrate of mononuclear cells, piasma cells, and
neutrophils or eosinophils or both (Fig. 9-12). Immunopathologically these cases may
have a low positive antinuclear antibody titer and basement membrane immunoglobulin
deposition."5*
FIGURE 9-I2. Canine peinphigus erythemato-
sus. Note the combination of histopathologic pat-
terns: intracpidermal pustular dermatitis with nu-
mcrous acantholytic keratinocytes (upper arrow),
and interface dermatitis (lower arroc).
Immune-Mediated Disorders · 693
Management
 The initial therapeutic options for pemphigus erythematosus are different than for most
immune-mecliated diseascs. This is an important reason to try to establish a definitive
 diagnosis rather than just a diagnosis of “pemphigus."
Pemphigus erythematosus may initially be treated with sun avoidance and topical
glucocorticoids. In dogs, the combination of tetracycline and niacinamidc is effective in up.
to 25% of cases. If this combination is not effective, vitamin E, then a short course of
systemic glucocorticoids, may be added to the regimen. Once in remission, the initial 
therapeutic protocols may be effective in keeping the dlisease in remission. Topical cyclo-
 sporine has also been helpful in some cases.
PARANEOPLASTIC PEMPHIGUS
This form of pemphigus was first characterized in humans in l990 and recently described
ulceration with polymorphous skin eruptions; histology that includes intraepithelial acan-
tholysis, keratinocyte apoptosis, and vacuolar interface changes; direct imnunoffuorescence
testing findings that include the intercellular deposition of IgG within the epithelium and
C3 in a granular pattern along the basement membrane zone; and indirect immunofuo-
rescence findings that include IgG deposition in the intercellular spaces on monkey
urinary bladder have a specificity of 83% and a sensitivity of 75%; thus, false-positive and
false-negative results occur,15s Irnmunoprecipitation studies are needed to confirm the
diagnosis by identifying the characteristic antigen complex: desmoplakins I (250 kd) and 1I
(210 kd), bullous permphigoid antigen I (230 kd), envoplakin (210 kd), periplakin (190 kd),
desmoglein I1 ( 130 kd), and an umidentifed (170 kd) transmembrane antigen.15 Antibod-
ies from human patients reproduce the cutaneous lesions when injected into newborn
mice.159
 The pathogenesis of paraneoplastic pemphigus is unkrrown. It has bcen hypothesized
associated with anomalous expression of desmosomes and/or desmoplakins by the neo-
plasms and/or dysregulated cytokine production (e.g., IL-6) by neoplastic cell.5s Autoanti-
bodies against desmoglein 1i1 and the 170-kd protein probably initiate acantholysis and
 ceil membrane damage, resulting in autoantibody formation against desmoplakins. The
 antidesmoplakin antibodies then enter keratinocytes and bind target autoantigens by an
epitope-spreading phenomenon.
 A canine case was shown to have three serum autoantibodies important in human
teins.125 The best documented canine case had a concurrent lymphoma.143 Two cases of
with'a Sertoli ccll tumor,171 the other was associated with a mainmary carcinoma.123 In
humans, paraneoplastie pemphigus is usually associated with malignancies, especially lym-
phomas (Table 9-2) 1ss Unless the associated neoplasm can be cured, irmnunosuppressive
therapy is not very effective.15, 159
● Table 9-2
 NeOPLaSIa ASSOCIateD WIth HUMaN
PaRaNeOPLAStic peMPhIGUS
LYMPHOCYTIC NEOPLASIA
 NONLYmPhOCYTIc NeOPLASIA
Non-Hodgkin's lynphoma
Poorly diffcrentiated sarcoma
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia
Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia
Castleman's tumor
Inflanumatory fbrosarcoma
Thymoma
Bronchogenie squamous cell carcinoma
Hodgkin's disease
Roundl cell liposarcoma
T cell lymphoma
694 · Inmune-Mediated Disorders
Autoimmune Subepidermal Bullous Dermatoses
The ciassification of autoimmune blistering diseases is based on the antigen(s) targeted by
pathogenic autoantibodies. The autoimmune subepidermal bullous diseases represent dif-
demonstrated that canine subepidermal bullous discases include bullous pemphigoid (au-
toantibodies against bullous pemphigoid antigen 2 [Type XVII collagenf), epidermolysis
matosus (IgG autoantibodies against the noncollagenous aminoterminus of Type VlI colla-
gen), linear IgA bullous dermatosis (IgA and IgG autoantibodies against the extracellular
portion of bullous pemphigoid antigen 2, frorm which the intracellular, transmembrane,
and NC16A domains have been rermoved by proteolysis), and mucous membrane pemphi-
goid (autoantibodies against a 97-kd antigen  possibly the C-terminus of bullous pemphi-
goid antigen 2in the lower lamina lucida),51, 183, 191 These entities are similar clinically,
 However, they are different diseases, and studies of larger numbers of cases may reveal
important prognostic and therapeutic differences.
The use of salt-split skin as a substrate for indirect immunofuorescence testing is a
 practical contribution to the study of autoimmune subepidermal bullous diseases.17s, 191 A
1-molar solution of NaCl splits skin through the lamina lucida, allowing the recognition of 
autoantibodies that bind to the roof (epidermal), foor (dermal), or combined both sides of
the split.
BULLOUS PEMPHIGOID
Bullous pemphigoid is a very rare autoimmune, vesiculobullous, ulcerative dlisorder of skin
or oral mucosa or both that has been reported in dogs, cats, and lumans.18. 47. 180, 184, 185 It
However, it should be noted that the majority of reported cases were diagnosed on the
basis of clinical, histopathologic, and immunopathologic findings, not on the basis of the
specific antigen being targeted. It is likely that some of these cases were not true bullous
pemphigoid as determined by the presence of autoantibodies to specific bullous pemphi-
goid antigens. Olivry has studied the immunopathology and antigen targeting of 20 dogs
Cause and Pathogenesis
Bullous pemphigoid is characterized histologically by subepidermal vesicle formation and
immunologically by the presence of one or two autoantibodies against antigens at the basal
present in all mammalian and avian skin and are associated with hemidesmosomes and the
lamina lucida of the basement membrane.5.179
The frst antigen is bullous pemphigoid antigen 1 (BPAg 1. BP230), which is a 230-kd
intracelular antigen that is a homolog to desmoplakin I.l8, 1ss Serum antibodies to this
antigen have not yet bcen described in animals. The second bullous pemphigoid antigen
(BPAg 2, BP180), also called collagen XVII, is a 180-kd hermidesmosomal transmembran-
ous molecule.1ss In humans, circulating IgE and IgG4 autoantibodies are the major
immunoglobulins preferentially targeting two distinct epitopes on BP180, and the levels of
these autoantibodies parallel disease activity.178a Canine and feline cases of bullous pem-
phigoid exhibit antibodies to this latter molecule.169. 177. 184, 185 The cause of antibody
production is still unknown, but genetic factors have been determined in humans and
dogs.
The proposed pathomechanisrm of blister formation in bullous pemphigoid is as fol-
hemidesmosomes, (2) complement fixation and activation, (3) activation of mast cells and
release of chemotactic cytokines, (4) chemoattraction of neutrophils and eosinophils, and
Immune-Mediated Disorders · 695
(5) release of proteolytic enzymes from the infiltrating leukocytes, which disrupt
dermo-epidermnal cohesion, resulting in dermo-epiderrmal separation and vesicle forma-
basic protein, and neutrophil-derived myeloperoxidase and elastase were detected in blis-
ter fuid and serum of patients with bullous pemphigoid, suggesting that the release of
these substances from activated granulocytes may be important in the pathogenesis of
cornea or guinea pig skin, locally produce the clinical, histologic, and immunopathologic
 Other factors thought to be involved in the pathogenesis of some cases of bullous
pemphigoid are drug provocation (especially sulfonamides, penicillins, and furosemide)
ported in dogs, though the exact antigenic target was not determined and these cases may
 Clinical variants occur in humans, and their differentiation is proceding based on the
more advanced methods of detecting target antigens. The past confusion and overlap
between some of these “variants"—sich as cicatricial pemphigoid and herpes gestationis,
which do share, at least partially, the target antigens noted in bullous pemphigoid- are
beginning to be worked out.181, i8s.1s0 This also is the case in the canine, wherein Olivry's
group has recognized mucous membrane pemphigoid. This disease has been known as
 Mucous membrane pemphigoid is one of the most common forms of autoimrnune base-
ment membrane zone disease in dogs, 183 It is phenotypically distinct, yet immunologically
heterogeneous, as in humans. Six cases of mucous rmermbrane pemphigoid have been
recognized in dogs: four of them exhibited antibodies against the NCl6A domain of
BPl80 and one of them had antibodies against the C-terininus of BPi80.1s3
Clinical Features
Bullous pemphigoid is very rare in the dog, accounting for about 0.1% of all canine skin
disorders at one university small animal clinic and 0.01% of all canine dermatology cases
The disease in collies and shelties must be separated from so-called ulcerative dermatosis
 of collies and Shetland sheepdogs (prohably vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus).203
 Bullous pemphigoid is a vesiculobullous, ulcerative disorder that may affect the oral
cavity, mucocutaneous junctions, skin, or any combination thereof (Fig. 9-13A and B).
About 80% of affected dogs have oral cavity lesions at the time of diagnosis. In Olivry's
confirmed cases of canine bullous pemphigoid, only one third cxhibited oral involvement,
which is in contrast with cases of canine mucous meinbrane pemphigoid that cxhibit
consistent mucosal involvement with no or rminimal skin lesions. 1s3 Oral cavity involvement 
has been recognized either after or at the same time as the cutancous signs and rarely as
the initial event. Cutaneous lesions occur most commonly in the axilae and groin, also the
coininon sites for vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus of collies and Shetland sheep-
dogs. Ulcerative paronychia, onychomadesis, or footpad ulceration rmay occur.
been recognized in dogs, with lesions confined to the axillae, groin, or isolated mucocuta-
neous areas such as the anus and prepuce.47. 186 Cases of bullous pemphigoid may be
severe and clnically indistinguishable from peinphigus vulgaris and other subepidermal
blistering diseases. In true bullous pemphigoid, the vesicles and hullae are les fragile and
transient than those occurring in vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus of collies and
shecpdogs 1s3 In contrast with the faccid blisters of pemphigus vulgaris, the blisters of
tive of subepidermal bullous diseases and, with further study, we will hopefully be able to
better clinically differentiate these diseases. When vesicles and bullae have ruptured, the
696 · Immune-Mediated Disorders
FIGURE 9-I3. Legendl om opposite page
Immune-Mediated Disorders * 697
clinician sees ulcers bordered by epithelial collarettes. The pseudo-Nikolsky sign may be
present.
Pruritus and pain are variable, and secondary bacterial pyoderina is cormmon. Severely
affected dogs may be anorectic, depressed, or febrile and may die because of fuid,
 clcctrolyte, and protein inmbalances and septicemia.
Results of routine laboratory determinations (hemogram, serum chemistries, urinalysis,
tosis and neutrophilia, mild nonregenerative anemia, mild hypoalbuminermia, and mild to
moderate elevations of α2, β, and  globulins.5 Iss Peripheral eosinophilia is rare.35, 186
Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis includes pemphigus vulgaris, systemic lupus erythematosus,
epidermolysis bullosa acquisita, linear IgA bullous dermatosis, erythema multiforme, toxic
epidermal necrolysis, idiopathie ulcerative dermatosis (vesicular cutaneous lupus erythema-
tosus) of colies and Shetland sheepdogs, drug reaction, epitheliotropic lymphoma, candi-
diasis, and the numerous causes of canine ulcerative stomatitis. Definitive diagnosis of
bullous pemphigoid is based on history, physical examination, skin (or mucosal) biopsy,
demonstration of basernent mernbrane fixed autoantibodies, and circulating antibodies that
target the bullous pemphigoid antigens. Microscopic examination of direct smears fron
intact vesicles, bullae, or recent ulcers does not reveal acantholytic keratinocytes.
 Bulous pemphigoid is characterized histologically by subepidermal cleft and vesicle
infiltrates vary from mild and perivascular to marked and lichenoid (Fig. 9-16). Tissue
s jo ss sn  d sn  u o si eo
phils,184 Subepidermal vacuolar alteration (subepidermal “bubblies") has been suggested as
the earliest prevesicle histopathologic finding.47 Olivry thinks that the first lesion of canine
bullous pemphigoid might be eosinophil degranulation at the basement mernbrane zone
(Fig. 9-17).183
Electron-microscopic examination of pemphigoid lesions has revealed the following
features: srmudging, thickening, and interruption of the basement membrane zone; frag-
mentation and disappearance of anchoring fibrils, anchoring filaments, and hemidesmo-
somes; basal cell degeneration, and separation occurring within the lamina lucida.47, 16
tion of immunoglobulin, and usually complement, at the basement membrane zone of skin
specifie for bullous pemphigoid. Complement component C3 is the most cornmonly
demonstrated immunoreactant. The presence of IgG is expected.180. 184. 155 It would
appear to be important to test with all classes of immunoglobulins, because in some dogs,
results are positive for only IgM or IgA (though in light of the more recent studies,
these cases rnay not have truly been bullous pemphigoid). It is also important to sample
intact vesicles and bullae as well as perilesional tissue, Indirect immunofluorescence
testing frequently yielded negative results in the past, though a definitive diagnosis should
include the dermonstration of circulating IgG autoantibodies to the bullous pemphigoid
antigen(s).1so, iss In one study, the IgG subtypes were predominantly IgG2 or IgG4.i3
FIGURE 9-13. A, Bullae on thc labial rucosa of a dog with bullous pemphigoid. (From Scott DW, Lewis RM:
pemphigoid.Severe ulcerativc stomatitis and cheilitis. C, Systemic lupus erythematosus in a dog with arthrtis and
generalized erythematous, alopecic, and focally ulcerative skin lesions. D, Alopecia, erythema, crusting, and depigmentation
    t  e   sa s s  pio e jo o pe o o g
erythematosus. (D and E, from Scott DW, et al: A glucocoricoidresponsive dermatits in cats, resembling systemic lpus
eryttuematosus in mau. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 15:157, 1979.) F, Erythema, alopeica, and ulceration of the hind leg of a
the margin of the pinna in a dog with systermic lupus erythematosus.
698 · Immune-Mediated Disorders
FIGURE 9-I4. Carine bullous pemphigoid. Subepidermal vesicle and lichenoid band of
infammatory cells. (Froin Scott DW, Lewis RM: Pemphigus and pemphigoid in dog and
man: Comparativc aspects. J Am Acad Dermatol 5:148, 1981.)
Clinical Management
 The natural course of untrcated cases is unclear. Veterinarians have long recognized
refractory mucocutaneous ulcerative disorders that resulted in the death or euthanasia of
affected dogs. Retrospectively, sone of these dogs may have had bullous pemphigoid. On
the basis of the small number of cases documented in the veterinary literature, canine
bullous pemphigoid is usually a severe disease. The prognosis for true bullous pemphigoid
is not yet established, but it appears to be a more localized and more benign disease than
epidermolysis bullosa acquisita.is3 Extensive cases may be fatal unless treated. Therapy of
canine bullous pemphigoid may be difficult, requiring large doses of systermic glucocorti-
coids with or without other potent immunomodulating drugs. In one study of nine dogs
FIGURE 9-I5. Feline bullous
pemnphigoid. Subepidermal  vesicle,
cell-poor. (Courtesy Dr. T. Olivry.)
Immune-Mediated Disorders · 699
FIGURE 9- I6. Canine bullous pemphigoid. Subcpidermal vacuolar alteration (subepider-
mal "bubblies") and lichenoid band of inifammatory cells.
with subepidermal blistering disease believed to be bullous pemphigoid,1s6 the following
observations were made: I mg/kg prednisolone, given orally qi2h, was ineffective for
controlling the disease, and 3 mg/kg prednisolone, given orally ql2h, was effective for
controlling the disease. Two of the nine dogs requiring the larger dose were euthanized,
however, because of unacceptable side effects, and another two died after 7 to 10 days of
therapy (from acute pancreatitis). Thus, systemic glucocorticoids were unsatisfactory for
treatment in four of nine dogs (44%).
FIGURE 9- I7. Canine bullous pemphigoid. Subepidermal vacuolar alteratiou.
700 · Immune-Mediated Disorders
Suspected bullous pemphigoid cases have, in our experience, usually required combi-
maintained for prolonged periods if not for life. Thus, the therapeutic regimen must be
individualized for each patient, and owner education is essential. Mild cases of canine
bullous pemphigoid may he successfully managed with topical glucocorticoids or relatively
low doses of systemic glucocorticoids (2.2 mg/kg/day of prednisolone or prednisone orally
Tetracycline and erythromycin have been reported to be beneficial in the treatment of
drugs is related to their ability to inhibit neutrophil chemotaxis and random migration and
to increase dermo-epidermal cohesion and inhibit proteases that might be involved in
blister formation.
 Because (l) cutaneous lesions of bullous pemphigoid in humans can be induced by
 exposure to ultraviolet light and (2) canine bullous pemphigoid may worsen with exposure
and 5 PM.18, 47, iss The limited number of identified cases of true canine bullous pemphi-
goid have not been photosensitive.83 Until a defnitive diagnosis is made, sun avoidance
still should be recommended.
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA ACQUISITA
Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita is a subepidermal blistering disease. It is thought to be
one of the most common causes of autoiminune subepidermal blistering in dogs (25% of
the cases).1s3 In humans, it is an acquired autoimmune disease that was clinically similar
to the childhood form of epiderrnolysis bullosa—-hence the name —even though it is not
hereditary or a disease typically found in children.92 It is characterized by the chronic
development of subepidermal blisters that imay he induced by trauma and by fragile skin.
In humans, the epidcrmal separation was similar to that of bullous pemphigoid, and even
vcaled the antibody deposits to be located at the anchoring fibrils, separating this disease
from bullous pemphigoid, Subsequent studies have shown that the autoantibodies target
type VII collagen within the anchoring fibrils of the basement membrane zone.192
 A casc of epiderinolysis bullosa acquisita was described in a l-year-old, intact male
There was generalized urticaria, vesiculation, and cutaneous sloughing, resulting in ulcers.
Ulcerations were Imost pronounced in the oral cavity (Fig. 9-i8) and on the footpads.
FIGURE 9-I8. Canine cpidermo
lysis bullosa acquisita. Severe ulcer-
ation of oral cavity. (Courtesy Dr. T.
Olivry.)
Immune-Mediated Disorders · 701
The dog was also febrile and lethargic. Treatment with prednisone (5 mg/kg/day), antibiot-
ics, and dapsone was not satisfactory, so euthanasia was performed at the owmer's request.
 s     s    
occurring in the sublamina densa (Fig. 9-19). A mild, bandike infitrate of neutrophils
and lymphocytes was visible at the base of subepidermal vesicles. In more severe lesions,
 neutrophil microabscesses were visible in the superficial dermis. Direct immunofuores-
cence testing revealed IgG, IgM, IgA, and C3 at the basement memhrane zone. Indirect
immunofuorescence testing (IgG and IgA at the basement membrane zone of dog lip and
tongue, but not with monkey esophagus), indirect protein A immunogold electron micros-
copy, Westem immunoblotting, and recombinant collagen VII-NCI enzyme-linked immu-
nosorbent assay (ELISA) were all used to confirm that the autoantibodies targeted colla-
gen VII in the anchoring fibrils.ia1, 192a Olivry has recognized four more cases, and four of
the five dogs exhibited a generalized phenotype that did not respond to treatment 1s3 One
dog had a localized variant (predominantly head region) that responded completely to
 prednisone (2 mg/kg/day), thus resembling the Brunsting-Perry epidermolysis bullosa ac-
quisita in humans.183ae
LINEAR IgA BULLOUS DERMATOSIS
 A 3-year-old, spayed female mongrel dog was presented for vesicles, erosions, ulcers, and
crusts on the lips, pinnae, axille, stemum,groin, extremities, footpads, and tongu
Histologic examination revealed mixed inflammatory, hemorrhagic, subepidermal vesicles.
Circulating IgA and IgG autoantibodies targeted the 120-kd linear IgA bullous dermatosis 
antigen (LAD-1) in the upper lamina lucida.
MUCOUS MEMBRANE PEMPHIGOID
 A l-year-old, intact male Australian shepherd was presented for vesicles, erosions, and
crusts on the periorbital, perinasal, and pinnal skin as well as the oral mucosa.1 Histologic
 microabscesses, Circulating IgG autoantibodies targeted a 97-kd antigen in the lower
lamina lucida.
Lupus Erythematosus
 a  sas po d e ss   e s sa s
terminology and classification of the syndromes and cases with these disorders have led to,
FIGURE 9-I9. Canine epidermo-
lysis bullosa acquisita. Subepidermal
clefting  and  neutrophil  iniltrate.
(Courtesy Dr. T. Olivry.)
704 · Immune-Mediated Disorders
regulate cell proliferation and downregulate bcl-2) and a marked decrcase in bcl-2 (a
protein that promotes cell survival and inhibits apoptosis). It was hypothesized that basal
ative (thus expressing Ki-67), which induces the expression of p53 which, in turn, down-
regulates bcl-2 and activates an apoptotic pathway in the epidermis.
SYSTEMIC LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS
 Systemic lupus erythematosus is the most severe form of the lupus dliseases because it
involves more than cutaneous lesions and may present with a wide array of clinical
symptoms that reflect multiple organ or tissue damage.
Cause and Pathogenesis
The etiology of systemic lupus erythematosus appears to be multifactorial, with genetic
predilection, immunologic disorder (T cell deficiency, B cell hyperactivity, defciencies of
complement components), viral infection, and hormonal and ultraviolet light modulation
autoantibodies formed against numerous body constituents. The most well-studied are the
ANA, which are found in up to 100% of the cases reported. The study of these antibodies
utilizing newer techniques, such as immunoblotting and immunoprecipitation, has revealed
that a number of nuclear components are targeted, including double-stranded DNA,
histones, and extractable nuclear antigens, 15, 20, 20, 26 These latter may be rmore inpor-
tant in the dog and inelude a group of ribonuclear proteins (RNPs), the small nuclear
Studies in dogs with systemic lupus have showed that, in the active phase of disease,
there is a marked lymphopenia that, though it affects both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells,
   sp     j    9 eo  o
lymphocytes is direcly related to disease severity, and an increase in these cells is
associated with a good response to therapy. Additionally, the percentage of active phase T
spontaneous inactivity or treated dogs that responded poorly but normalized in dogs that
responded well to treatment,.194
 In humans, a number of drugs (especially procainamide, hydralazine, isoniazid, peni
bate systemic lupus erythematosus.5, 1s Vaccination with a modified live virus product
containing distemper, hepatitis, parainfluenza, and parvovirus antigens was suspected to
have precipitated systemic lupus erythematosus in a dog.47 Tissue damage in systemic
Zealand black mouse, the Fl hybrid of the New Zealand black mouse, and the New
. Zealand white mouse experience a lupus-like disease that has many similarities to systemic
 lupus erythematosus in humans.5, 16, 47 216
 In thc dog, the serologic abnormalities associated with spontaneous canine systenic
lupus erythematosus can be transmitted both to normal dogs and to mice by means of
cell-free extracts, thus suggesting an infctive agents yet,however, none of thse
dogs has developed overt systemic lupus erythematosus, indicating that other factors are
involved in the pathogenesis of the clinical entity. It has been reported that dogs with
systemic lupus erythematosus have lower levels of circulating thymic factors than do
normal dogs, analogous to the situation in humans.18. 47, 195
 In a colony of dogs obtained by the mating of a male and female, each having
systemic lupus erythematosus, the Fi generation had no clinical signs; with subsequent
breeding, a few dogs in the F2 generation were affected; and clinical signs were common
and marked in the F3 generation.202 Affected dogs had depressed suppressor T cell
cells.202
Immune-Mediated Disorders · 705
In the colony of dogs at Lyon, France, greater than 50% of the dogs are ANA
carriers, and 25% to 30% of the dogs experience disease.19 In the same colony, there is a
strong association betwcen dog leukocyte antigen (DLA) phenotypes and the occurrence
of systemic lupus erythematosus (DLA-A7 positively associated, DLA-Al and DLA-B5
negatively associated),1s6, 22 A high incidence (47.6%) of ANA positivity was also found in
 an English Cocker spaniel breeding colony.19
Clinical Features
The clinical signs associated with systemic lupus erythematosus are varied and changeable.
 Because of this phenomenal clinical variability and ability to mimic numerous diseases,
 systemic lupus erythematosus has been called the “great imitator."
● Dog. Systermic lupus erythematosus is an uncommon disease in dogs,25 47, 56.217 The
manifestatons are fever (constant or irregularly cyclic), polyarthritis (nonerosive, nonde-
forming), proteinuria (>0.5 g/L), and skin disease, being present in greater than 50% of
cases.47.195. 217 Consequent muscle wasting can make the dogs look much older than they
are. Other relatively common manifestations include anemia, leukopenia, peripheral lym-
phadenopathy, splenomegaly, and oral ulcers.47 195, 217 Other syndromes reported in associ
ation with canine systemic lupus erythematosus are pericarditis, thrombocytopenia, poly-
myositis, myocarditis, pneumonitis, pleuritis, neurologic disorders (seizures, meningitis,
 myelitis, psychoses, polyneuropathy), and lymphedema.
The cutaneous inanifestations of canine systemic lupus erythematosus are extremely
diverse. They include seborrheic skin disease, alopecia, diffuse or regional erythema,
cutaneous or mucocutaneous vesiculobullous or ulcerative disorders, footpad ulcers and
hyperkeratosis, discoid lupus erythematosus, refractory_ secondary bacterial pyodermas,
panniculitis (lupus profundus), and nasal dermatitis (see Fig. 9-13C, F to H).47.i95 217 Skin
lesions may be multifocal or generalized and commonly involve areas of skin poorly
protected by hair: face (especially nose, lips, pinnae if erect), limbs (especially cranial
aspect of thoracic limbs), axillae, groin, and ventral abdormen. They may be exacerbated or
induced by exposure to sunlght. Pruritus is variable, and scarring is common. Occasion-
ally, dogs experience acute facial or hermifacial edema.
 A 4-year-old, castrated male Bichon Frise with systemic lupus erythematosus had
erosions and ulcers of lips, external auditory meati, lateral thorax, axillae, prepuce, meta-
 mal blisters and late subepidermal vesicles with subjacent neutrophils. IgG autoantibodies
against the noncollagenous aminoterminus of type VII collagen (bullous systemic lupus
erythermatosus antigen) were detected. It was suggested that this was analogous to so-
sueunq u snsopmuyhua sndm ouashs snonnqI dh paeo
 Cat. Systemic lupus erythematosus is rarely reported in cats56,214,25 The incidence
predilection, and affected cats range from l to 12 years old. Siamese, Persian, and
Himalayan cats 1may be predisposed. Syndromes reported include hematologic abnormali-
thy, oral ulceration, conjunctivitis, renal failure, and subclinical pulmonary disease.
ties include seborrheic skin disease, exfoliative erythroderma, and erythematous, scaling.
crusting, alopecic, scarring dermatitis most commonly involving the face (see Fig. 9-13D),
pinnae, and paws (see Fig. 9-13E).
Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis of cutaneous systemic lupus erythematosus is lengthy, owing to
the varied and changeable cutaneous manifestations of the disorder. Typical alternative
706 * Immune-Mediated Disorders
diagnoses are seborrheic skin disease, dermatophytosis, bacterial foliculitis, demodicosis.
food hypersensitivity, scabies, pemphigus vulgaris, bullous pemphigoid, epidermolysis bul-
erythema, leishmaniasis, toxic epidermal necrolysis, candidiasis, and epitheliotropic lym-
phoma.
 The definitive diagnosis of systemic: lupus erythematosus is often one of the inost
challenging tasks in medicine. The disease is so variable in its clinicopathologic presenta-
normalities that are demonstrated depend on the organ systems involved and may include
result, thrombocytopenia with or without a positive platelet factor-3 test result or anti-
platelet antibody, leukopenia or leukocytosis, proteinuria, hypergammaglobulinemia (poly-
anticoagulant test result was reported in a dog with hemolysis, pulmonary thromboembo-
lism, nephrotic syndrome, polyarthropathy, and thrombocytopenia.221 The lupus erythema-
tosus (LE) cell test may yield a positive result in up to 60% of patients, but it is variablc
from day to day, is steroid-labile, and lacks sensitivity and specificity. The assay has becn
discontinued in many of the leading laboratories in human medicine.47
The ANA test is currently considered the most sensitive serologic test for systernic
lupus crythematosus25 47.195,20 It yields a positive result in up to 100% of cases of active
results in up to 20% of dogs with infectious diseases (particularly leishmaniasis) and up to
16% of control dogs.1s In general, results from different laboratories cannot be compared.
It is important to record the titer (and compare it with normals for the same laboratory;
some normal dogs may have high titers) and the pattern of nuclear fuorescence. The
homogeneous, then reticulonoduiar patterms are the most common in canine systernic
lupus erythematosus, but titers and patterms appear to have little or no specificity in dogs
and cats.47 19s Other authors indicate that the speckled and homogeneous ANA patterns
are the most common in dogs with autoimmune connective tissue diseases.207
There is lo clear, constant correlation between clinical disease activity and positive
ANA titer, though there is usually a progressive decrease in titer with successful ther-
must be remembered that ANA can be detected from time to time with probably any
interpreted in light of other critical historical, physical, and laboratory data.
Preparations of the protozoan Crithidia luciliae have hecome commerciall available
for assaying patient sera for antibodies against native DNA. Large surveys employing this
substrate in dogs and cats have not been reported, although preliminary reports indicate
that the assay is rarely positive in dogs with systemic lupus erythematosus and in those
with positive ANA titers,47 suggesting that dogs rarely forrm antibodies against native DNA.
Positive results with this test occurred in a 6-year-old female Beauceron with systeinic
lupus erythematosus as well as in two of her female puppies.19s The standard Farr test
(radioimmunoassay) for the measurement of antinative DNA antibodies in humans is
unsatisfactory in dogs, resulting in numerous false-positive results.47 Newer techniques
cmploying specific reagents in an ELISA format did not reveal anti-double-stranded
DNA antibodies but did detect IgG antibodies to the individual histones H, HeA, Ha, and
H4.20g
About 10% of human patients with systemic lupus erythematosus are ANA-neg-
ative.18. 47 These patients have unique anticytoplasmic antibodies (anti-Ro), which are not
detected when traditional ANA test substrates (mouse or rat liver) are employed; as al
result, special substrates (calf thymus, normal human lymphocytes, human epithelial tissue
culture line) are needed for such patients. The importance of this autoantibody systcm in
dogs and cats is unknown. It could, however, cxplain the negative ANA resuits occasion-
ally obtaincd in dogs with systemie lupus erythematosus.56. 217
In one study, sera from 131 dogs were evaluated for ANA and extractable nuclear
antigens (ENAs), including the Ro ribonuclear protein antigen.227 The ENA was only
Immune-Mcdiated Disorders · 707
positive in 46% of the dogs with systcmic lupus erythematosus, and none were Ro-
positive. EXAs were not specific for systemic lupus erythematosus, however, because
results were positive in 5% of healthy dogs and 1i% of dogs with other diseases. How-
ever, the newer techniques have shown that, in the dog, antihistone antibodies are positive
in 65% and anti-ENA antbodies are detected in greater than 40% of cases.195,209.227
 In humans, antihistone autoantibodies have an association with drug-induced systemic
lupus erythematosus.21s Two anti-ENA antibodies are highly specifie for canine systcmic
lupus erythematosus: The anti-Sm antibodies are found in i6% of cases and anti-hnRNP
G is found in 20% of cases (this autoantibody is not usually tested for in coinmercially
anti-hnRNP I, was found in a Schnauzer with polyarthritis.220 These studies demonstrate
that dogs Inay marifest different autoantibodies than humans and that testing techniques
may have to be adapted for the canine (and, presumably, the cat).
 Investigators have attempted to hetter understand lupus erythiematosus in bumans by
studying subsets of patients on the basis of one clinical characteristic (or set of them),
histopathologic or immunopathologic findings, or serologic studies.5. 18 The use of this
  sd  i     e  es
or presumed pathogenesis. Currently, three subsets of cutaneous lupus erythematosus are
recognized in humans: chronic cutaneous (discoid) lupus erythematosus, subacute cutane-
ous lupus erythematosus, and acute cutaneous lupus erythematosus. Their recognition is
inportant because the different probability of systemic disease does correlate with which
autoantibodies are detected.219
The suggestion that the disease previously described as idiopathic ulcerative dermato-
erythematosus, and that it may be similar to subacute lupus erythematosus in humans, was
based on clinical and histopathologic findings (sec Chap. 12).203 Serologic studies were not
 performed in the canine study but, in humans, this type of cutaneous lupus erythermatosus
is highly associated with anti-Ra antibodies (70% to 90% of cases), and approximately 50%
of the patients wil ecxpericnce systemic lupus erythematosus, though usually not severe
and lacking renal discase.219 A study reviewing the histopathology of dogs with so-called
hereditary lupoid dermatosis of German shorthaired pointers suggested that this disease
 of such subsets to the canine and feline diseases awaits further study.
The dermatohistopathologic changes in systenic lupus erythematosus vary with the
type of gross morphologic lesions and may be nondiagnostic.18. 22 72, 217 The most charac-
teristic finding is interface dermatitis (bydropic, lichenoid, or both), which may involve
hair follicle outer root sheaths (Figs. 9-20 to 9-22). Apoptosis of hasal and suprabasal
satellitosis.so Other common findings arce subepidermal vacuolar alteration (subepidermal
bubhlies), focal thickening of the baseincnt membrane zone (Fig. 9-23), and dermal
mucinosis. Uncommon findings are intrabasal to subepidermal vesicles, leukocytoclastic
vasculitis, and lupus erythematosus panniculitis (see Chap. 18). In humans, these changes
 are often not present until the skin fesions are at least 6 wccks old.
 Direct immunofluorescence or immunohistochemical testing reveals the deposition of
immunoglobulin, complement, or both at the basement membrane zone, often known as a
lesion), previous or current glucocorticoid therapy, and possibly other factors. In addition,
immunoreactants may bc found at the basement membrane zone of skin in many other
conditions, including sun-damaged skin.
We saw a casc of canine solar dermatitis that was positive for basement membrane
fuoresccncc. Though there is some controversy, positive lupus band tests from lesional
skin are not considlered very diagnostic. However, in humans, positive results from nonle-
sional sun-protected sites correlate well with the diagnosis of systemic lupus erythemato-
being the most commonly detected immunogiobulins.56. 217
708 · Immune-Mediated Disorders
FIGURE 
dermatitis
FIGURE 9-2l. Feline systemic lupus crythematosus.
Hydropice interface derrmatitis. (From Scotf DW, et al:
A glucocorticoid-repsonsive dermatitis in cats, resem-
bling systemic lupus erythematosus in man. J Arn Anim
Hosp Assoc 15:157,1979.)
Immune-Mediated Disorders · 709
FIGURE 9-22. Feline systemic lupus erythematosus. Hydropic degeneration of epidermal
basal cell. (From Scott DW, et al: A gluoocorticoid-responsive dermatitis in cats, resembling
systemic lupus erythematosus in man. J Am Anim Hosp Asscc 15:157, 1979.)
 In humans, it is often possible to distinguish between systemic lupus erythematosus
and discoid lupus erythematosus on the basis of direct immunofuorescence testing of
sus, sun-exposed normal skin may have positive lupus bands in up to 60% of cases,
FIGURE 9-23. Canine systemic lupus erythematosus. Two large, apoptotic keratinocytes in
stratum basale of epidermis can bc seen in the center of the photograph. In addition, the
basement membrane zone is thickened.
710·Immune-Mediated Disorders
whereas this rarely occurs in discoid lupus erythematosus.5, is This criterion is of no value
in the hairy dog and cat, wherein normal skin is usually negative.56, 217
 In humans, it is rccommended that (1) biopsies not be taken from edematous lesions
(only about 47% of such lesions are positive), (2) biopsies be taken frorn lesions over 1
month old (only about 30% are positive if less than I month old), (3) skin with telangiec-
tases not be sarmpled (17% of such lesions are positive, regardless of their etiology), and
(4) al glucocorticoid and immunomodulating therapy be tcrminated, if possible, 3 weeks
prior to biopsy.5, 18. 47
 Because no single laboratory test is diagnostic for systemic lupus crythematosus, a
number of groups have producedi sets of clasification criteria for making the diagno-
sis.25. 47 Although such criteria have ackmowledged validity in humans, there is no such
validation of criteria for dogs and cats. The veterinarian rmust rely on the recognition of
multisystenic disease (especially joint, skin, kidney, oral mucosa, and heinatopoietic sys-
tem), positive ANA results, and confirmatory histopathologic and immunopathologic find-
negative in lupus erythematosus.
The American Rheumatism Association developed criteria for the diagnosis of sys-
temic lupus erythcmatosus in humans, and these were modifed in 1982. These have also
been applied to dogs with minor modifications, primarily those reflecting the humoral
immunologic responses of the canine (Table 9-4) Dogs that experience four or more
matosus. It has also been suggested that a probable diagnosis of systemic lupus erythema-
d s   sd  d e r    i s
Though these critcria arc hclpful guidelines, they must be used cautiously. In humans,
numerous situations that may lead to a false diagnosis based on the American Rheumatism
● Tahle 9-4
CRITERIa FOR ThE DIaGNOSIS OF CaNINE
SYSTEMIC LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS*
 Rights were not granted to include this table in electronic media.
Please refer to the printed publication.
From Chabame L, el al: Canine systemic lpus erythematosus. Part II: Diagnosis and trealmemt. Compenrl Cont Educ Pract Vet
21:402. 1999.
Immune-Mediated Disorders + 71I
Association criteria have becn -described. The presence of skin disease and subsequent
 diagnosis of systemic lupus erythematosus is particularly problematic, and other multipart
classification schemes have becn proposed.218
Clinical Management
The prognosis in systemic lupus erythematosus is generally unprcdietable and depends on
respond more reliably to medication and are maintained in relatively long periods of
clinical remission. On the other hand, dogs with severe hemolytic anemia, thrormbocytope-
nia, or both often do not respond satisfactorily to systemic glucocorticoids and require
other irnrmunomodulating drugs. splenectomy, or both. Anirnals with glomerulonephritis
regularly experience progressive renal failure in spite of therapy, and this finding indicates
a poor prognosis.
 Therapy of systemie lupus erythematosus must he individualized. The initial agent of
choice is probably large doses of systemic glucocorticoids (e.g., 2 to 6 mg/kg prednisone
q24h).475196.217When systmic gcocorticoids are nsatisfactoryother munomodult
ing drugs may be useful: azathioprine (Imuran) given orally at 2.2 mg/kg, q24h, then q48h
(dog only), or chlorambucil (Leukeran) given orally at 0.2 mg/kg q24h, then q48h.47. 5, 217
nia, or both. Cyclophosphamide, 2 mg/kg q24h orally, 4 days a week, may be given for
weekly, may be useful when thrombocytopenia is severe.196
Levamisole (Levasole), given orally at 2.5 mg/kg q48h, has occasionally been beneficial
in dogs and humans with systeimic lupus erythernatosus.47 The combination of levamisole,
2 to 5 mg/kg (maximurm dose, 150 mg) q48h, with prednisone, has been reported to give
good results in 75% of canine cases, with rennissions lasting for months to years,196. 2o The
prednisone is initially dosed at 0.5 to l.0 mg/kg twice daily, then tapered off over 1 to 2
rnonths with long-term therapy consisting of just levamisole. Only 2 of 33 dogs treated
experienced unacceptable side effects (neutropenia, excited behavior, and aggressiveness)
frorm levamisole,196, 200
 Chrysotherapy (injectable aurothioglucose, oral auranofin) has occasionally been used
to reduce glucocorticoid requirernents in dogs but would be contraindicated in patients
with renal disease.is, 34, 47 Aspirin has occasionally been effective in the management of
-oeue uosdep-suned unq u pasn snp uo sr'sunq pue sop u sos
gens, antimalarials, colchicine, and omega-3/omega-6 fatty acids— are of undetermined
benefit in dogs and cats.15, 47 Plasmapheresis has been used to enhance initial response to
technique, currently used as a research tool, is hazardous and expensive.
 In murine lupus erythematosus, functional elinination of the helper T cell subset
(CD4+) suppresses autoantibody formation and prevents or retards disease.25 In humans,
treatment with an anti-CD4 antibody induced a long-lasting decrease in disease activity in
 Patients with systemic lupus erythematosus are prone to infections. i9s, 17 Thus, infec-
tions must be identified quickly and trcatcd aggressively.
The following staterments can be made about prognosis. Over 40% of the dogs with
systemic lupus erythematosus are dead within I year after the diaginosis is rnade, either as
a result of natural (renal disease, septicemia) or drug-induced causes or owing to euthana-
 sia.17 217 Dogs that respond well to therapy often do so with glucocorticoids alone and
often experience long-term remission on alternate-day therapy.47,217 Some dogs, in whorn
disease was controlled well with therapy for several months, remain in prolonged drug-
free romission,47, 196, 217
Several reports have indicated that people in close contact with dogs having systemic
of systemic lupus erythematosus conparcd with nonexposed human beings.2,17
712 · Immune-Mediated Disorders
DISCOID LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS
 Discoid lupus erythematosus (cutaneous lupus erythematosus) is the second most common
immune-mediated dermatitis of the dog, although it remains uncommon. It has been
described in the cat but appears to be very rare.
Cause and Pathogenesis
Canine discoid lupus erythernatosus is a rclatively benign cutaneous disease with no
crythematosus has not been reported, nor has the disease been shown to be a good model
rsn jo og poqe ui assp n sein ansodx us rprosp  n ro
suggesting that photosensitivity plays a role in the pathogenesis. In humans, it has been
demonstrated that the lymphocytes infiltrating skin lesions of discoid and systemic lupus
erytlhermatosus are predominantly T cells and that helper T cells predominate in discoid
plasma cells are prominent, a feature not shared with hunans, suggesting that B lympho-
cytes may be important and that a different pathogenesis may be occurring.
A 9-year-old Shetland sheepdog with discoid lupus erythematosus had, on indirect
inmunoffuorescence testing, antibody deposition at the basement membrane zone. West-
 a  q    s u p 
nents.2o A current hypothesis concerning the pathogenesis of lesion formation is pre-
scnted in the discussion of systemie lupus erythematosus.
Clinical Features
● Dog. There is probably no strong sex predilection, because both females234 and
Collies, German shepherds, Shetland sheepdogs, Siberian huskies, Brittany spaniels, and
stis has heen reported to account for 0.3% of the canine dermatoses examined at one
university small animal practice.56
Clinical signs of canine dliscoid lupus erythematosus initially include depigmentation,
erythema, and scaling of the nose (Fig. 9-24A). Early depigmentation manifests as a slate
the normally rough, cobblestone-like architecture of the nasal planum into a smooth
surface (see Fig. 9-24C and D). Later lesions commonly include erosion, ulceration, and
crusting. Initially, lesions tend to occur dorsally at the junction between the nasal planum
and haired skin or along the ventral or medial aspects of the alar folds. Typically, with
time, nasal involvement becomes more cxtensive and the lesions may spread up the bridge
of the nose. Less commonly, lesions may be visible periocularly, on the pinnae (see Fig.
9-24F), on the distal limbs, and on the genitals. The lips may also be involved (see Fig.
9-24E), and small punctate ulcers may be detected in the oral cavity (see Fig. 9-24G),
most commonly involving the tongue or palate (see Fig. 9-24E). Occasional dogs present
pain are variable. Scarring and variable degrees of permanent leukoderma are common.
Rarely, deeply ulcerated nasal lesions damage arterioles, resulting in episodic, pulsatile
hemorrhage. Affected dogs are otherwise healthy.
cxposure to ultraviolet light. Thus, the disease often is more severe in the summer and in
parts of the world with sunny climates. It is very likely that many dogs previously referred
to as having nasal solar dermatitis, or "collie nose,” actually had discoid lupus erythemato-
reported to rarely develop in chronic discoid lupus erythematosus skin lesions (see Fig.
20-19B)236 The cause of the _rare development of squamous cell carcinoma is likely
 multifactorial.232 In the reported cases, the discoid lupus had heen active for years and no
 photoprotection had been used on the chronically infamed, depigmented skin.23e We have
B
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic media
 Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic media
Please refer to the printed publicatlon.
Please refer to the printed publication.
H
erythematosus. (From Griffin CE, et al: Canine discoid lupus erythermatosus. Vet Iuuunol Iminunopathol 1:79,
1979.) B, Discoid lupus erythematosus. Note gray-blue discoloration of skin around nostrls. C, Nasal erythema,
ulceration, and depigmentation in a dog with discoid lupus erythematosus. D, Frontal view of nose of dog in C'. E,
Depigmentation of the lip in a dog with discoid lupus erythematosus. (C and D, From Walton DK, et al: Canine
 s s   (it  os     s s 
alopecia, erytherma, scale,
and crust of pinma. C, Palatine uleers in a dog with: discoid lupus erythermatosus. H,
Cryoglobulinemia in a cat. Necrosis of pinnal margin.
7 14 · Immune-Medliatcd Disorders
also seen squamous cell carcinoma occur in the nasal lesions of chronic dermatomyositis.
Thus, the depigmentation, ultraviolet light exposure, and chronic irritation may be more
 important than the disease affecting the nasal region.
breed, or sex predilections are reported. Lesions are most common on the pinnae and
face. They are erythema, scaling, crusting, and alopecia. Pruritus is variable. Nasal derma-
titis and depigmentation are less common (Fig. 9-25). Iesions 1may be rmore severe when
 exposure to sunlight is increased. Affected cats are otherwise healthy.
Diagnosis
 The most common differential diagnosis includes nasal solar dermatitis, nasal depigmenta-
tion, vitiligo-like disease, pemphigus erythematosus or pemphigus foliaceus, trauma, der-
matomyositis, epitheliotropic lymphoma, drug reaction, uveodermatologic syndrome, con-
tact dermatitis, and systemic lupus erythematosus.
Definitive diagnosis of discoid lupus erythematosus is based on history, physical exan-
ination, and skin biopsy. Immunopathology may be an aid to diagnosis but, in the dog, it
is not thought to be required for a definitive diagnosis because both false-positive and
false-negative results occur.20 233 Results of routine laboratory determinations (hemogram,
serum chemistries, urinalysis, serum protein electrophoresis) are usually unremarkable.
Thc ANA and LE ccll tests almost always yield negative results; if positive, the ANA titer
is low. One report indicated that 9% and 4% of the dogs with discoid lupus erythermatosus
were positive for anti-ENA and anti-Ro, respectively.27
Histopathology
Skin biopsy reveals interface dermatitis (hydropic, lichenoid, or both) (Figs. 9-26 and 9-
focal thickcning of the basement mermbrane zone, apoptotie keratinocytes, and marked
nosis of variable degrees is also a common feature of discoid lupus erythematosus.
 Immunopathologic testing reveals deposition of immunoglobulin, complement, or both
at the basement membrane zone.50. 231. 234 It would appear to be important to test for
individual immunoglobulin classes because IgG, IgM, or IgA may be the only demonstra-
ble immunoglobulin. In humans, it is recommended that (l) edematous lesions not be
biopsicd (only about 47% of such lesions are positive), (2) telangiectatic areas not be
biopsicd (about 17% of the telangiectatic skin lesions of any dermatosis are positive), and
FIGURE 9-25. Feline discoid lu-
pus erythematosus. Depigmentation,
erythema, and mild erosion of nasal
planum.
Immune-Mediated Disorders · 715
FIGURE 9-26. Canine discoid lupus erythematosus. Lichenoid interface dermatitis. (From
Scott DW, et al: Linear IgA dermatoses in the dog. Comell Vet 72:394, 19S2.)
Rights we
hot granted to include thls figure in electronic medla
Please refer to the printed publication.
FIGURE 9-27. Canine discoid lupus erythematosus.
Lichenoid interface dermatitis with thickening of the
basornent membrane zone. (From Walton DK, et al:
Canine discoid lupus crythematosus. J Arn Anim Ilosp
Ass0c 17:851, 1981.)
716 · Immune-Mediated Disorders
(3) lesions less than l month old not be biopsied (only about 30% of such lesions are
 positive). In addition, topical or systemic glucocorticoid therapy may lead to false-negative
immunopathologic findings.20, 47, 56
We do not think that immunopathologic testing is required for the diagnosis of
discoid lupus erythematosus in most instances. Immunopathologic tests are also consid-
ered to be inferior to, and only supportive of, a diagnosis based on histopathologic
lupus erythematosus, though one dog having autoantibodies to the basement membrane
zone has been reported 230
 Clinical Management
The prognosis for discoid lupus erythematosus is usually good.56. 231. 234 Therapy will
probably need to be continued for life, and marked depigmentation predisposes to sun-
hurn.
 Therapy of discoid lupus erythematosus must be appropriate to the individual.47,56, 31.
to intense sunlight (from S AM to 5 PM), the use of topical sunscreens, and the use of
topical glucocorticoids (see Chap. 3). Initially, topical glucocorticoid therapy is most suc-
cessful when potent agents, such as betamethasone or fuocinolone in DMsO (Synotic).
are applied every 12 hours.
 After the dermatosis is in remission, topical glucocorticoids are applied as needed
(once daily, q48h, and so forth), and less potent agents (e.g, 1% to 2% hydrocortisone)
may be sufficient for maintenance. Anecdotal reports indicate that the topical application
of 1% cyclosporine is effective.232a In some cases, a l-month course of systemic predni-
sone (2.2 mg/kg orally q24h until remission is achieved, then q48h) is helpful. The topical
agents may then be sufficient to maintain the remission. Though not frequently effective
d     e  o s  r  e 
before its benefit is recognized clinically, and systemic glucocorticoids may be used
concurrently during this period. Vitamin E should be administered 2 hours before or after
feeding. Two of us (D.W.s., W.H.M.) have had good success in some cases with the oral
administration of products containing omega-3/ormega-6 fatty acids (DVM Derm Caps)
and now use these products instead of yitamin E. Various combinations of fatty
acids, vitamin E, and other treatments have been used successfully. In some cases, more
- pue s ey am p ussn u  u aq a snp nod
min E.
 If these benign treatments are not effective in dogs, tetracycline and niacinamide in
10 kg, the dosage is 250 mg of each drug q8h, and in dogs over 10 kg. the dosage is 500
mg of each q8h. The tetracycline-niacinamide combination produces its effects within 8
weeks.
absolutely required, systemic glucocorticoids (2.2 to 4.4 mg/kg prednisolone or prednisone,
given orally q24h) are often effective, For more severe or refractory cases, other systemic
drugs may be added to the treatment regimen: azathioprine (2.2 mg/kg orally q24h, then
q48h in dogs only) or chlorambucil (0.2 mg/kg orally q24h, then q48h). Owners should
understand that discoid lupus erythematosus is rarely a life-threatening disease but that
some of the potent immunomodulating drugs could cause severe side effects.
 In humans, discoid lupus erythematosus is often responsive to antimalarial drugs-
chloroquine (Aralen), hydroxychloroquine (Plaquenil), and quinacrine (Atabrine).1s These
drugs may be useful in the dog as well, but dosage, efficacy, and toxicity need to be
carefully evaluated. Other drugs occasionally found to be beneficial in humans are reti-
spodno ranel asan jo ssunyasn au et'(aqenon io jeno) pio pue auosdep spiu
in dogs is currently unknown.
Immune-Mediated Disorders · 717
Bilateral rotation flaps have been succcssfully used for the treatment of chronic,
medically refractory cascs of canine nasal derinatitis.237
VESICULAR CUTANEOUS LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS
Results of a clinicopathologic study of five Shetland sheepdogs and two collies with so-
called “idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis" led the investigators to conclude that the syn-
drome should be renamed vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus (see Chap. 12).203
EXFOLIATIVE CUTANEOUS LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS
Results of recent pathologic and immunopathologie studies of German shorthaired point-
ers with so-called "hereditary lupoid derinatosis" led the investigators to conclude that the
syndrome should be renamed exfoliative cutaneus lupus erythematosus (see Chap. 12).212
Cryoglobulinemia and Cryofibrinogenemia
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Cryoglobulins and cryofibrinogens are proteins that precipitate from serum and plasma,
respectively,bycooling andredissolve nrewarming.18.47224Cryoglobulins havebeen
teins) and are most commonly associated with lymphoproliferative disorders. Type II
cryoglobulins are composed of monoclonal and polycional immunoglobulins and are most
commonly associated with autoimmune and connective tissue disease. Type Il cryoglobu-
lins arc composed of polyclonal immunoglobulins and occur with infections, autoimmune
disorders, and connective tissue diseases. Fssential forms also may occur where no under-
lying cause is identifiable. Cutaneous signs associated with cryoglobulins and cryofibrino-
gens are due to vascular insuffciency (obstruction, stasis, spasm, thrombosis) that occur
from microthrombi and vasculitis.
CLINICAL FEATURES
Cryoglobulinemia and cryofibrinogenemia havc been rarely reported to cause skin disease
cytes (cold agglutinin disease, cold hemagglutinin disease, cryopathic hemolytic anemia), it
is an autoimmunc disorder associated with cold-reacting (usually IgM) erythrocyte autoan-
tibodies. The cryopathic autoantibody is most active at colder temperatures (0° to 4°C) but
has a wide range of thermal activity (0° to 37°C). Two forms are recognized in dogs.25 The
first is associated with cold agglutinins that are IgM antibodies. The second forrn is a
nonagglutinating type, usually associated with IgG. The latter form is rarer and is not
kmown to cause skin disease. A dog with coinbined cryoglobulinemia (IgG, IgM) and
cryofibrinogenemia has been reported.245 Cold agglutinin disease reprcscnts a Typc I1
hypersensitivity reaction and has been associated with idiopathy and lead poisoning in
dogs and with upper respiratory infection, lead poisoning, and idiopathy in cats.
Clinical signs of cryoglobulinemia and cryofbrinogenemia are variable and rclate to
anemia, intracapillary cold hemagglutination, or both. Skin lesicns include pain, erythema,
purpura, acrocyanosis, necrosis, and ulceration. Skin lesions generally involve the extremi-
ties (paws, pinnae, nose, tip of tail) (see Figs. 9-24H and 9-28A) and are precipitated or
exacerbated by exposure to cold. Hemoglobinemia may also be present.
Tail-tip necrosis was reported in two litters of Birman kittens from the same qucen.241
Based on blood group testing of the quccn and one of the toms, a prcsumptivc diagnosis
of nconatal isocrythrolysis involving cold agglutinins was made. The tip of thc tail bccame
the neonates were protected from cold by close contact with the queen. The kittens
survived pending the severity of any intravascular hemolysis
718 * Immune-Mediated Disorders
FIGURE 9-28. Cryoglobulinemia
in a dog. A, Marked sloughing of skin
A
and claws, with exposure of pha-
langes on front paws. B. Biopsy of
pinna. Diffuse edema, extravasationl
of erythrocytes, thrombosed vesscls,
and homogenization of dermal colla-
gen.
DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis includes vasculitis, systermic lupus erythematosus, dermatomyosi-
tis, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and frostbite.
Definitive diagnosis of cold agglutinin disease is made by history, physical examina-
tion, and demonstration of significant titers of cold agglutinins. In vitro autohemagglutina-
tion of blood at room temperature can be diagnostic for cold-reacting autoantibodies.
thus permitting the autoagglutination to be readily visible macroscopically. The reaction
can be accentuated by cooling the blood to 0°C or reversed by warming the blood to
37°C. Doubtful cases can be confirmed via Coombs' test if the compiete test is performed
at 4°C and the Coombs reagent has activity against IgM. Caution in interpretation of the
cold Coombs' test is warranted, because normal dogs and cats may have titers up to l:
100.47, 247
 Cryoprecipitate levels may be crudely determined by allowing venous blood collcted
 in a warm syringe to clot at 37*℃ for 30 minutes, then the serum and citrated plasma are
cooled to 4°℃ and a gel-like precipitate is formed that will redissolve upon rewarming to
37C.24s The precipitate is removed, and the serum and plasma globulin and fibrinogen
levels with and without the precipitate may be compared to give a level of cryoglobulin
 Immune-Mediated Disorders * 719
and 0.16 gL-1 for cryofbrinogen, whereas an affected dog had levels of 0.669 gL 1 and
 0.3 gL-1, respectively,245
HISTOPATHOLOGY
Skin biopsy usually reveals necrosis, ulceration, and often secondary suppurative changes.
Fortuitously sampled sections may show vasculitis, thrombotic to neerotic blood vessels, or
 blood vessels containing an amorphous eosinophilic substance consisting largely of precipi-
tated ecryoglobulin.1, 22, 4s Diffuse edema, extravasation of erythrocytes, and homogeniza-
tion of dermal collagen also occur (see Fig. 9-28B).
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
 The prognosis for cryoglobulinemia and cryofbrinogenevia varies with the underlying
cause. Therapy includes (l) correction of the underlying cause, if possible, (2) avoidance
of cold, and (3) immunosuppressive drug regimens (e.g., glucocorticoids, azathioprine)
(see Chap. 3).
Graft-Yersus-Host Disease
Graft-vcrsus-host disease is a well-recognized result of bone marrow transplantation in
dogs and humans.2 18, 47, 249, z51 The disease occurs whenever lymphoid cells from an
inrmunocormpetent donor are introduced into a histoinconpatible recipient that is incapa-
ble of rejecting thern. The disease results from donor T cell responses to recipient
transplantation antigens.
 In dogs and humans, a bone marrow graft from a donor genetically identical for
 major histocompatibility (MIIC) antigens is followed by significant graft-versus-host dis-
minor histocompatibility antigens are important in the development of disease. The princi-
pal target organs are the skin, liver, and intestinal tract. In dogs, aeute graft-versus-host
disease develops about 2 weeks after grafting and is characterized by erythroderma,
jaundice, diarrhea, and gram-negative infections. Chronic graft-versus-host diseasc dcvcl-
ops ahout 3 to 4 months after grafting and is characterized by exfoliative erythroderma,
ulcerative dermatitis, ascites, and gram-positivc infcctions.
Diagnosis is based on history, physical cxamination, and skin biopsy. Hlistopathologic
findings in acute graft-versus-host disease include varying degrees of dermal lymphoid
infiltrates, interface dermatitis (hydropic or lichenoid) with apoptosis and satellitosis. The
 changes have been compared to and are similar to those occurring in erythema multi-
forme.? In chronic graft-versus-host disease, one finds variable sclerodermoid or poikilo-
dermatous changes.
The immunohistochermistry of acute canine graft-versus-host disease has been studied
in six dogs and is sinilar to that described in hurnans.2, 249 Epidermal and follicular
keratinocytes of affected skin upregulate ICAM-1, CD44, and MHC II, similar to what is
found in crythema multiforme.? Howevcr, the ovcrall lymphocytic infltratc in these two
discases is different. Although both discases have CD3+, CD8aβ+ and TCR-αβ+ T
cells, graft-versus-host disease had fewer dermal CD4+ T cells, CDl+ and CD11+
dendritic cells, and no CD21+ B cells (which occurred in erythema multiforme). These
findings suggested that the mechanism of disease is similar in the two diseases, though
erythema multiforme has additional pathologic pathways.2 Whether this relates to the
stage of disease is unknown because the dogs with erythema multiforine may have had
morc chronic disease than the dogs with experimentally induced graft-versus-host disease.
  u r  e d u a Ir  pe i
T cells, enabling subsequent interactions between T cells and keratinocytes.2. 249 Activated
T cells produce a storm of cytokines, including IL-2, IL-3, IL-4, interferon (IFN)-α, and
TNF-a. These mediators recruit and activate effector cells, including additional lympho-
720 · Immune-Mediated Disorders
cytes, macrophages, and natural killer cells that attack both host and donor tissue through
contact-dependent mechanisms (such as perforin) or soluble mediators (such as
TNF-α).
 Therapy of graft-versus-host disease with various combinations of systemic glucocorti-
coids, azathioprine, cyclosporine, methotrexate, and antithynocyte seruun have been only
partially and unpredictably effective.249 251 A combination of mycophenolate mofetil and
cyclosporine demonstrated synergism, but beneficial effects were still limited.25l Lefluno-
mide, when combined with prednisone and cyclosporine, has been reported to virtually
 elininate allograft rejection responses.76
Cutaneous Adverse Drug Reaction
Cutaneous adverse drug reactions (drug eruption, drug allergy, dermatitis medicamentosa)
in dogs and cats are uncommon, variably pruritic, and pleomorphic cutaneous or mucocu-
taneous reactions to a drug,253 23. 26. 276 2s6h.287
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Adverse reactions to drugs are common and, in humans, cutaneous reactions are onc of
topically, or by injection or inhalation. The incidence of cutaneous adverse drug reactions
in dogs and cats was reported to be 2% and 1.6%, respectively, of all the canine and
feline dermatology cases examined at one university practice.2s6. 287 In humans, the inci-
dence is reported to be 2.2% of all hospitalized patients and 3 per 1000 courses of drug
the incidence of drug reactions.290
Adverse drug reactions may be divided into two major groups: (1) predictable, which
pe sp  o se d   pi  pu sp ann r
(2) unpredictable or idiosyncratic, which are often dose-independent and are related to
the individual's immunologic response or to genetic differences in the susceptibility of
patients (idiosyncracy or intolerancc), which are often related to metabolic or cnzymatic
deficiencies. Drug metabolites are generated by cytochroine P-450-mixed function oxi-
dases (phase I enzymes) but also by other oxidative metabolizing enzymes, somc of which
are present in skin.295 Reactive drug metabolites then need to be detoxied by phase II
enzymes, such as epoxide hydrolase or glutathione-S-transferase, to prevent toxicity.
Thus, two places allow for inappropriate generation and/or accumulation' of toxic
reactants more toxic than the parent compounds. In humans, slow acetylation contributes
to sulfonamide drug reactions and familial anticonvulsant drug reactions are linked to
inherited detoxification defects.28s A hypothesis for the drug reactions associated with
sulfonamides and anticonvulsants includes (l) oxidation by cytochrome P-450 into chemi-
cally reactive metabolites (either in liver by hepatic cytochrome P-450 with secondary
transfer to skin or in keratinocytes by epidermal cytochrome P-450), and (2) decreased
 detoxification of these reactive metabolites, which bind to proteins and induce an immu-
nologic response.
Many cutaneous effects of certain drugs are predictable. For instance, many of the
and increased susceptibility to infecton through their ects on cellularbiology.18. 47. 254.
256,277Doxorubicin typically causes alopecia that begins on the head and extends to the
ventral neck, thorax, and abdomen.263, 274, 276 Hypcipigrncntation and pruritus may also
Il, and IV hypersensitivity reactions. Newer techniques may help to determine the
underlying immune response in some types of drug reactions.25s Additionally, other immu-
nologic reactions may occur as evidenced by the drug-induced development of erythema
miniature Schnauzers. Though the mechanism for these reactions is unkmown, it is
Immunc-Mediated Disorders · 721
 lupus erythcmatosus and atopy are thought to be predisposed to cutaneous drug rcac.
tions,1s but no such observations have been made for the dog and cat.
Any drug may cause an eruption (Tables 9-5 and 9-6), though certain drugs are
more frequently associated with cutaneous adverse drug reactions. The most common
drugs recognized to produce idiosyneratic cutaneous adverse drug reactions in dogs are
topical agents, sulfonamides (especialy those that are trimethoprim-potentiated, such as
Tribrissen), penicillins, cephalosporins, levamisole, and diethylearbarnazine.287 In cats, the
 most common causes are topical agents, penicillins, cephalosporins, and sulfonamides,26
CLINICAL FEATURES
Cutaneous adverse drug reactions can mimic virtually any dermatosis (see Tables 9-5 and
9-6; Fig. 9-29A to H).* In humans, the most common morphologic patterns are exan-
thematous, urticaria or angioedema, and fixed drug eruption.20 In dogs, the most common
reactions were contact dermatitis, exfoliative dermatitis, pruritus with self-induced lesions,
maculopapular eruptions, and erythema multiforne.2s7 In cats, the most common reactions
no breed predilections are evident, though Poodles, Bichon Frises, Yorkshire terricrs, silky
terriers, F
Pekingese, and Maltese terriers ("fuzzy" hair coats) are predisposed to local
injection reactions (especially with rabies vaccine) 270. 287 Doberman pinschers to sulfona-
ficial suppurative necrolytic dermatitis) reactions 287. 294
In one study of cutaneous adverse drug reactions in dogs,287 the following breeds
were found to be at increased risk: Shetland sheepdog. Dalmatian, Yorkshire terrier,
miniature Poodle, miniature Schnauzer, Australian shepherd, Old English sheepdog, Scot-
tish terrier, wirehaired Fox terrier, and Greyhound. Although humans with HIV infections
are at increased risk for drug reactions, cats with cutaneous adverse drug reactions were
 Although no specific type of reaction is related to only one drug, certain reactions are
more common with certain drugs. The syndrome of superficial suppurative necrolytic
dermatitis of miniuture Schnauzers has been associated only with shampoos (see Fig. 9-
29H).287, 284 Adult miniature Schnauzers of either sex show cutaneous and systemic signs
within 48 to 72 hours after shampooing (usually insecticidal). Lesions, which may be
  sd  sd s  a ad  r
pustulosis, becoming painful, necrotic, and ulcerative. Lesions regress spontaneously
and neutrophilia.
 Drug eruptions associated with systemic signs and a fatal outcome were reported in
 ssnd us p ss  a (  e s om
thematous macules, crusts, and erosions that histologically had dermal neutrophilic infil-
trates. Both dogs died in spite of inmunosuppressive therapy. Both had neutrophilic
infltrates of the respiratory tract. It was proposed that these two cases had a carprofen-
induced condition similar to Sweet's syndrome in humans.
 Erythema multiforme and toxic epidermal necrolysis have boen most common with
administration of sulfonamides, cephalosporins, and levamisole (see Fig. 9-29E to G).
Three dogs, two treated with trimethoprim/sulfonamide, experienced superficial peinphi-
gus that had features of erythema rmultiforme, ineluding keratinocyte apoptosis and neu-
trophilic satellitosis.l A drug eruption in a dog with coccidioidomycosis treated with
itraconazole had clinical and histologic changes compatible with erythema multiforne.279
Diethylcarbamazine and 5-fluorocytosine have been associated with fixed drug crup-
*See references 47, 52, 265, 269, 273, 279, 282, 284-287.
+See references 49, 52, 56, 253, 269, 273, 287, 291, 323
722 · Immune-Mediated Disorders
● Table 9-5
CutanEoUs aDverSe dRUG ReactIoNS IN
DOGS40, 271, 307
REACTION PATTERN
FREQUENCY*
DRUGS
Urticaria-angiocdema
R
 Penicillin, ampicillin, cephalosporins, sulfona
Imides, tetracycline, iverinectin, noxidectin, lev-
armisole, barbiturates, etoposide, neostigmine,
xylazine, phenamidine, cyclosporine, anitraz,
polyhydroxidine, vaccines, baterins, antisera,
blood transfusions, radiographic contrast media,
allergen extracts, vitamin K, hypoallergenic
shampoo
 Maculopapular (morbilliforin)
LI
Penicillins, sulfonamides, anoxicilln clavulanate,
griseofulvin, 5-uoroeytosine, ditylearba
zine, hydroxyzine, procainamide, cimetidine.
various sharupoos, amitraz
Erythroderma/exfoliative dermatitis
C
Various topical agents, sulfonamides, quinidine,
levamisole, lincomycin, itraconazole, hydroxy-
zine, chlorpheniramine, acepromazine
Autoimmune-like
R
Pemphigus foliaceus
Sulfonamides, ampicillin, penicillin, cephalospo-
rins, diethylcarbamazine
Pemphigus vulgaris
 Procainamide, thiabendazole, phenytoin 
Bullous pemphigoid
Triamcinolone
Systemic lupus erythcmatosus
Sulfonamides, hydralazine, primidone, vaccine
Erythcma multiforme
U
Sulfonamides, amoxicillin, amoxicillin clavulanate,
cephalexin, chloramphenicol, enrofoxacinl,
erythromycin,gentamicin,lncomycin, tetracy
cline,arotigucose,dtylarbamazine,ivr
mectin, levamisole, L-thyroxine, phenobarbital,
chlopyifos, D-limonene,otic drops,itracona-
zole
Toxic epidermal necrolysis
Sulfonamides, ampicillin, penicillin, cephalexn,
griseofulvin, levamisole, 5-fuorocytosine, D-lim-
onene, aurothioglucose
Pruritus and self-induced lesions
U
Sulfonamides, chloramphenicol, griseofulvin, ace-
(allergy-like)
promazineprimidone,levamisole,dethcarba
mazine, gentamicin, thyroid extracts, lincomy-
cin, astemizole, phenoharbital, cephalcxin,
various topicals
Injection site reactions
U
Panniculitis
Rabies vaccine, others 
Vasculitis
Rabies vaccine, others
Atrophy
Glucocorticoids
Contact dermatitis/otitis extema
Numerous topicals (dermatologic and otic)
Vasculilis
Local
Injectables (especially rabies varcine)
Multifocal
Sulfonamides, ampicilli,erytromycin,penicl
chloramphenicol, amoxcilin,enrofloxcin、gen
tamicin, ivernectin, metronidazole, phenobarbi-
tal, furosemide, itraconazole, loperamide (Imo-
dium)、 metoclopramide, vaccines, enalapril,
phenylbutazone
 Fixed eruption
R
Diethylcarbamazine, ampicillin, amoxicillin clavu-
lanate, cephalexin, 5-fuorocylosine, aurothio-
glucose, thiacetarsamide, L-thyroxine
Granulomatous mural folliculitis
R
Cefadroxyl, amitraz, shampoos, Lthyroxine
Lichenoid
VR
 Drug combination
Miscellaneous
Mucocutaneous dermatitis
 Retinoids
 Pressure point ulceration and
onychomadesis
Alopecia and inereased suscepti-
Glucocorticoids, numerous immunosuppressive
bility to infection
agents
 Flushing and pruritus
Doxorubicin
Table continued on opposite page
Immune-Mediated Disorders · 723
● Table 9-5
CUtANEOUS aDvErSe DrUG REaCtIOnS IN
DOGS40, 271. 307 Continued
REACTION PATTERN
FREQUENCY*
DRUGS
Hirsutism, papilomatosis, lym-
Cyclosporine
phoplasnacytoid dermatitis
Supericial suppurative necroly-
Shanpoos
tic dermatitis
Epitheliotropic lymphoma-like
 Ketoconazole, drug coinbination
Eosinophilic pustulosis
Ampicillin
Subcorneal to follicular neutro-
 Sulfonamides, carprofen
philic pustulosis
Urticarial eosinophilic dermatitis
Diethylcarbamazine
Sterile abscess
Sulfonamides
Scahies-like
Amoxicillin-clavulanate
Folicular necrosis and atrophy
Sulfonanides, levamisole
C=
commion; R = rare; U = uncommon; VR = very rare.
reaction (probably Type IIl) associated with trimethoprim-sulfadiazine (Tribrissen) admin-
 istration (probably sulfadiazine-related) has been recognized in Doberman pinschers (ge-
netically programmed?).2o Though idiosyncratic reactions to sulfonamides are considered
relatively common, cutaneous nanifestations occurred in only 9% of affected dogs in one
 study. 25s Interestingly, neither of these two dogs was a Doberman pinscher.
Cyclosporine has been reported to cause lymphoplasmacytoid dermatitis with malig-
nant features (usually a solitary plaque or nodule) in dogs and humans,22. 2s3 Methima-
zole may produce severe pruritus and excoriations of the face and neck of cats that are
● Table 9-6
CutaneouS AdverSe dRuG REactIonS In
CATS40, 270
REACTION PATTERN
FREQUENCY*
DRUGS
Urticaria-angioedema
VR
Tetracycline, penicilin, ampicillin, vaccines
Maculopapular (morblliforn)
R
Cephalexin, sulfonamides, penicilin, ampicillin,
griseofulvin
Erythroderma/exfoliative derrmatitis
U
Various topicals, penicillin
Autoimmune-like
R
Armpicilln, cimetidine, doxycycline, cephalexin,
Pemphigus foliaceus
sulfonamides
Erythema multiforme
R
Cephalexin, penicillin, aurothioglucose, amoxicil
lin, sulfonamides, griseofulvin, propylthiouracil
Toxic epidermal necrolysis
R
Cephaloridine, hetacillin, ampicillin, griseofulvin,
penicillin, aurothioglucose, cphaleon, Fe
antiserum
 Pruritus and self-induced lesions
U
Methinazole, amoxicillin clavulanate, propylthio-
(allergy-likc)
uracil, ampicilin, hetacillin, gentamicin
 Injection site reactionns
Panniculitis
Vaccines, glucxcorticoids
Vasculitis
Vaccines, ivermectin, antibiotics
Atrophy
Clucocorticoids, progestationals
 Contact derrmatitis/otitis extema
Numerous topicals (dermatologic and otic)
Vasculitis
R
Local
Injectables
Multifocal
 Penicillin, fenbendazole
Fixed enuption
VR
Clemastine, enrofoxacin
Lichenoid
VR
Drug combination
Miscellancous
 Pinnal erythema
Ciprofloxacin, enrofloxacin
Generalized atrophy and fragil-
Glucocorticoidls, progestationals, phenytoin
ity
*C = common: R = rare; L = uncommon; VR = very rare.
724 · Immune-Mediated Disorders
FIGURE 9-29. Legend on opposite page
Immune-Mediated Disorders · 725
only partially responsive to glucocorticoid treatment and mimic food hypersensitivity.266
Drugs have also been reported to produce reactions that clinically, pathologically,
and immunologically resemble pemphigus (see Figs. 9-29C and 9-30B) and pemphi-
goid 252 26s, 272, 27, 275 Drug reactions (associated with ketoconazole in one case, multiple
drugs in others) have occurred in dogs that were clinically and histologically indistinguish-
   s  p aq s     m
mans.26l, 2so, 287 Lesions resolved spontaneously when the drugs were stopped. Chronic
eosinophilic urticaria was associated with diethylcarbamazine.292
 Unusual reactions to local injections are also well recognized (Fig. 9-31). One such
reaction is the focal vasculitis and alopecia that follows the subcutaneous administration of
rabies vaccine, especially in Poodles and Yorkshire and silky terriers (sec discussion of
vasculitis).27o Another local reaction is the panniculitis associated with the subcutaneous
administration of rabies vaccine in cats and dogs,264 combined rhinotracheitis-calicivirus
vaccine in cats,2s and other products (see discussion of panniculitis in Chap. 18)2s6.27
 Plaquelike lesions with a distinctive interstitial granulomatous dermatitis histopatho-
logic appearance have been associated with drug therapy in humans.267 One of us
(Dw.s.) has seen one such reaction in a dog being treated with amoxicillin clavulanate
(Fig. 9-32).
Granulomatous mural follieulitis is a rare cutaneous reaction pattern apparently associ-
ated with drug administration (amitraz, cefadroxyl, topicals, L-thyroxine).28 Lesions consist
 Of large areas of well-circumscribed, coalescent alopecia; scaling; and hyperkeratosis (Fig.
 9-33A and B). Foci of papuies, plaques, erosions, and crusts may occur. Chronic lesions
often have a smooth, shiny, cicatricial appearance.
 Because drug reaction can mimic so many different dermatoses, an accurate knowl-
edge of the medications given to any patient with an obscure fomm of dermatosis is
imperative. Drug eruption may occur after a drug has been given for days or years or a
few days after drug therapy is stopped. Eruptions most commonly occur within l to 3
ules, rabies vaccine rcactions) may occur weeks to months after the drug is adrminis-
tered269. 270 At prescnt, thc only reliable test for the diagnosis of drug eruption is to
withdraw the drug and watch for disappearance of the cruption (usually in I to 2 weeks).
Occasionally, however, drug cruptions persist for weeks to months after the offending
drug is stopped (e.g., reactions to vaccines and othcr injcctables; lichenoid reactions),269.
270. 36. 2si Purposeful readministration of the offending drug to determine whether the
 eruption will be reproduced is undesirable and may be dangerous.
DIAGNOSIS
 The differential diagnosis is complex because cutaneous adverse drug reaction may mimic
virtually any dermatosis. In general, no specific or characteristic laboratory findings indi-
cate drug eruption. Results of in vivo and in vitro immunologic tests have usually been
disappointing. The basophil degranulation test has been rcported to be a valuable test for
detecting some hypersensitivity-induced cutaneous adverse: drug reactions"7 but is techni-
cally demanding and generally unavailable.
 Helpful criteria for determining whether a drug cruption is likely are as follows86, 287.
 1. Hypersensitivity or reactions occur in a minority of patients receiving the drug.
crusting, and alopecia due to Tresaderm. C, Exfoliative erythroderma due to Tribrissen. D, Vasculitic purpura duc to
chloramphenicol. E, Ulcerative stomatitis aind cheilitis associated with erythcma multiforme major in a dlog with Klebsiella
otitis extema who had received numerous topical and systermie medlicaments. F, Same dog as in E. Note ulccrs on footpads.
G, Multifocal ulcers on the ventral thorax and abdormen of a cat witi erytherna nultiforme major due to cephalexin.
(Courtesy E. Guaguere.) H, Superficial suppurative necrolytic dermalitis in a miniature Schnauzer following administration
of an antiseborrheic sharmpoo.
726 * Immune-Mediated Disorders
FIGURE 9-30. Cutaneous adverse
drug reactions. A, Fixed drug erup-
tion on scrotum of a dog associated
with  diethylcarbarmazine.
Well-cir-
tation. B, Pemphigus foliaceus on the
footpads of a cat in associantion with
trimethoprim-sulfadiazine.
B
F1GURE 9-31,local arca of ne-
crosis in the ftank of a dog follawing
administralion of leptospirosis bac-
terin.
Immune-Mediated Disorders · 727
FIGURE 9-32. Granulornatous
interstitial dermatitis in a dog associ-
ated with amoxicilin-clavulanate. In-
iltrate of' macrophages and lympho-
cytes around degenerate collagen
fibers.
FIGURE 9-33. Gramulomatous
mural folliculitis in a dog associated
with I-thyroxinc. A、 Well-cireum-
scribed alopecia. scaling, and mild hy.
perpigmentation over the dorsolateral
thorax. B、 Sinilar lesious, including
hyperkeratotic plaques, over the dor-
sal lumbosacral area.
728 · Immune-Mediated Disorders
 2. Ohserved manifestations do not resemble known pharimacologic actions for the
drugs.
3. Previous experience that the suspected drug is known for causing this type of
cutaneous reaction.
4. Lack of alternative causes that could explain the cutaneous reaction that occurred
with the suspect drug.
5. Appropriate timing -
generally, cutaneous adverse drug reactions occur within the
first 1 to 3 weeks of the initiation of therapy with the offending drug and while the
drug is still being taken or is still present in the body. Prior cxposure to the drug
may have been tolerated without advcrse cffects and, if the reaction is a hypersen-
sitivity reaction, prior exposure should have occurred so that sensitization could
 occur. If an animal has been previously sensitizcd, cutaneous reactions may be
seen within hours to days of drug readministration.
6. Dechallenge. Resolution begins to occur within 1 to 2 wecks aftcr the drug is
discontinued. For some reactions— such as fixed drug, lichenoid, and local injcc-
tion reaction—-resolution may require several weeks.
or of cross-reacting drugs. Though this is the most definitive way to document the
drug reaction, it is generally not recormmended because more serious reactions my
occur. In one study, 29% of cases of cutaneous adverse drug reaction in dogs were
confirmed, often accidentally, by rechallenge,287
Idlentifying the specific cause of a cutaneous drug cruption can be difficult because
reactions only occur with drug combinations and one drug will be tolerated.
Rccently, possible causal drng exposure has been assessed by adaptation of drug
implication criteria adopted by the French committee for pharmacologic surveillance in
humans (Table 9-7).278. 308
 Just as tlie clinical morphology of drug reactions varies greatly, so do the histologic
findings. Histologic patterns recognized with cutaneous adverse drug reactions include
 Fabl 9--7
Proposed criteria For the implication Of
DRUGS AS CAUSES OF CUTANEOUS
ERUPTIONS263. 22
Delay in Appearance of Lesions as Related to Dnug Administration
Drug attrilbuted a score of:
a.l suggestivc) if lesions began over 7 days after the first administratio of the drug or less than I day after
b. 0 (inconclusive) if a specifie assessinent could not be made.
C.
-1 (not suggestive) where criteria for “suggestive" (+ I) not met.
Effect of Drug Interruption on Cutoneous Lesions
IDrug attrihnted a score of:
a. 1 (suggestive) if lesions resolve solely with removal of suspect drug.
b. 0 (inconclusive).
C.  I (incompatible) if patient does not inprove npon drug elimination or if inprovement occurs without
removal of suspeet drug.
Drug Rechallenge
Drug attributed a score of:
. 1l (suggestive) if lesions reeur with readinistration of the suspect dug.
b. 0 (inconclusive) if no rechallenge perlormed.
C. - 1 (incompatible) if rechallenge does not reproduce the lesions.
A positive total cdrug seore (e.g.. + 1, + 2, + 3) is considered suggestive of drug causation.
A zero score is consiclered inconclusive.
A negalive score (e.g, -1, -2, -3) is considered doubtful.
Drugs are given a mumerical score of -3 to +3 hased on the addedl values obtained fron the three eriteria.
Immune-Mediated Disorders · 729
 perivascular dermatitis (pure, spongiotic, hyperplastic), interface dcrrmatitis (hydropic, lich-
enoid), vasculitis/vasculopathy (Fig. 9-34), intraepiderinal vesiculopustular dermatitis (Fig.
9-35), subepidermal vesicular dermatitis, interstitial dermatitis, and panniculitis. Eosino-
phils may be absent or numerous.269.270 In humans, eosinophils may be more prominent
dromes -such as crytherna rmultiforme, toxic epidermal necrolysis, and superficial suppu-
rative necrolytic derrmatitis --have their own characteristic histopathology. Superficial sup-
purative necrolytic derinatitis of miniature Schnauzers is characterized by parakeratosis,
superficial cpiderrmal suppuration and necrosis, epidermal edema, and suppurative perivas-
licular epithelium.  Granulomatous mural folliculitis is characterized by infiltration and
eventual replaccment of follicular epithelium, and occasionally sebaceous glands, by granu-
lomatous inffammation (Fig. 9-37),2ss
 Direct immunofluorescence and inmunohistochemical testing in drug reactions imay
walls of blood vessels and at the basement membrane zone.269.270. 2s6. 287
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The prognosis for drug reaction is usually good unless other organ systerns are involved or
there is extensive epidermal necrosis. Therapy of drug reaction consists of (l) discontinu-
ing the offending drug, (2) trcating symptoms with topical and systemic medications as
indicated, and (3) avoiding chemically related drugs.26, 2s Drug reactions may be poorly
responsive to glucocorticoids, though some immunologically mediated reactions respond to
Erythema Multiforme
Erythema multiforme is an uncommon, acute, usually self-limited eruption of the skin,
mucous membranes, or both characterized by distinctive gross lesions and a diagnostic
sequence of pathologic changes.
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
 Despite recognition of multiple etiologic and triggering causcs, thc pathogenesis of ery-
thema multiforrme is not fully understood. It is currently thought to represent a host-
specific cell-mecdiated hyperscnsitivity reaction directed toward various antigens, including
FIGURE 9-34. Vasculitis associ-
atcd  witlh  trimethoprim-sulfamcthox-
azole in a dog. Note necrosis of
vesscl walls, thromhosis, and karyor-
rhectic neutrophils.
730 · Immune-Mediated Disorders
FIGURE 9-35. Stcrile neutro-
philic/cosinophilic pustulosis in a clog
associated with trinethoprim-sulfa-
diazine. A, Intraepidenmal pustulcs 
and dense interstitial dermatitis. B.
Close-up of A. Pustules contain neu-
trophils and eosinophils.
FIGURE 9-36. Superficial sup-
purativc nccrolytie dermatitis of
Iminiature Schriauzers.  Superfieial
suppuration and neccrosis affecing
the epideruis and hair follcle in-
fundibulum.
Immune-Mediated Disorders · 73 I
FIGURE 9-37. Granulomatous mural
folliculitis in a dog associated with L-
thyroxine, A, Hair follicles have been rc-
placed by granulomatous infiltrate (ar-
row). B, Macrophages, often containing
melanin, within follicular epithelium.
Folicular keratin is excessive and orthio-
to-parakeratotic (left). C, Hair follicle
replaced hy granulomatous infiltrate, int-
clucting rnultinucleated histiocytic giant
cells (arrow).
studies indicated that the inmunohistochemical findings in skin lesions from dogs with
erythema multiforme and axutc graft-versus-host disease were similar.2 Epidermal and
follicular keratinocytes markedly expressed ICAM-1, MHC II and, to a lesser extent,
CDla. The expresson of these molecules is likely to tether leukocytes and keep them in
the epithelium. The sinultaneous expression of MHC II and CDla provides altered
keratinocytes with the capability of antigcn prcscntation. Keratinocytes in adjacent, nonin-
famed epidermis also expresscd ICAM-1 and MHIC II, suggesting that the upregulation
of both adhesion molecules may represent an early phase in the development of erythema
multiforme. CD44 was markerdly upregulated in keratinocytes and infltrating cells, and it
is involved in T lymphocyte activation and site-specific extravasation of lymphocytes into
tissues. Intraepithelial infiltrating cells were mainly CD3+, CD8-αβ+, TCR-aβ+ T lyn-
phocytes, with smaller numbers of CD4+ T lymphocytes. CD1+, CDllc+ Langerhans*
cells were increased in number. The majority of derinal infiltrating cells were also CD3+,
CD8-αβ+, TCR-aβ+ T lynphocytes. CD1+, CDllc+ dermal dendrocytes were in-
creased in number.
The phenotypic changes in keratinocytes in canine erythema multiforme indicate that
alteration of the keratinocyte (e.g., by drugs, inufectious agents) might be a primary factor
in discase pathogenesis.2 The upregulation of ICAM-1 and MHC II, perhaps through the
-d 1 (ou) +a pe (o) +a q d-N pe -NI go ud
732 · Immune-Mediatcd Disorders
cytes, allows the tethering and keeping of lymphocytes in epithelium. Keratinocyte apopto-
sis is probably produced by signals from intracpithelial CD8+ T lymphocytes.
 Studies in humans with erythema multiforme have shown that various baseinent
membrane zone molecules-—integrins o6 and β4, laminins I and 5, collagens IV and
VII—-are disrupted and fragmented.312 A subset of humans with erythema multiforne
have autoantibodies against desmoplakin I and II as well as suprahasilar acantholysis in
skin biopsy specimens.304
The confusion with the pathogenesis and classification of erythema multiforme has
been frustrating for human and veterinary medicine for years.29s, 36-38 In humans, ery-
humans, is that the more common, mild, relapsing cutaneous disease of erythema multi-
forme (erythema multiforme “minor) is most often associated with viral infections,
whereas the more scvcre forms involving mucosa and having more widespread cutaneous
disease (erythema inultiforme “major") are most often associated with drug eruptions.306
In addition, much confusion has existed over the relationship of erythema multiforme
to the Stevens-Johnson syndrome (also called erythema multiforme rmujor by some au-
thors), toxic cpidermal necrolysis (Lyells syndrome), and "overlaps" of the latter two
entities. Relying on some etiologic, clinical, and histopathologic sirmilarities, it had been
histologic grounds 297 a06 35 319 320 Using standard histopathologic and immunohistochemi-
cal techniques, it was shown that the infammatory infiltrates in the skin of humans with
erythema multiforme and toxic epidermal necrolysis differed both in density and na-
ture.i5, 321 In erythema multiforme, the cellular infltrate was of high density (cell-rich)
and rich in T lymphocytes, whereas in toxic epidermal necrolysis, the infltrate was of low
 density (cell-poor) and dominated by macrophages and dermal dendrocytes.315
study of apoptosis in canine skin disease, investigators found that keratinocyte apoptosis
was a feature of erythema multiforme but not of toxic epidermal necrolysis.50 This at least
suggests that these two diseases are not the same. However, before conclusions can be
reached, more cases and some that share the histopathology of both disorders need to be
studied.
 Much of the confusion in classification has stemmed from the terminology that is
applied to the various syndromes in humans and the lack of agrectnent on a clinical
definition.47. 306. 30s Hence, various authors consider the Stevens-Johnson syndrome and
erythema multiforme major to be different or the same, and they divide erythema multi-
ay sione suos 'uostat syi od ssz 'res'lou no suea ofeu, pue ouu, ou aoy
proposed that the term erythema multiforme be used to describe all forms of the entity
 q su a on p s s   p
Stevens-Johnson syndrome-toxic epidermal necrolysis, elirminating the terms major and
minor.3o, s1s In veterinary medicine, this confusion has been compounded by the common
Thc clinical separation of these different diseases is becoming more realistic in human
 medicine. The first point of separation is on presentation because most cases of erythena
multiforne are relatively mild; have an acute onset of lesions, including classic target
lesions; have no fevcr or prodromal symptoms; and, if there is mucosal involvement, it is
usually mild and limited to the oral cavity.so6 These cases are self-limited, and lesions clear
within 1 to 3 weeks.
The confusion has occurred in cases that are more widespread and may involve fever
or prodromal symptoms. Recently, after the publication of a study in human paticnts
forme or Stevens-Johnson syndrome -toxic epidermal necrolysis, a clinical classification
was proposed and rcviewed and a consensus on a clinical' separation was reached.298
However, these authors wrote of their classification that its “validity is unproven." Four
types of Iesions were found in these cases: typical target lesions, raised atypical target
lesions, fat atypical target lesions, and macules with or without blisters. Two main features
were used to separate these cases: the presence of typical target Iesions and extent or
Immune-Mediated Disorders · 733
body surface area of epidermal detachment.29s Cases were classified into one of five
categories, and the salient differentiating feature between what is erythcma multiforme
and the rest of Stevens-Johnson syndrome-toxic epidermal necrolysis cascs was the pres-
cnce of the typical target lesion in all cases of erythema multiforme. Additionally, ail
erythema muliforme cases involved less than l0% body surface area epidermal detach-
ment.
When this classification scheme was used, a significant correlation between clinical
Johnson symdrome - toxic epidermal necrolysis. Erythema multiforme was primarily associ-
 ated with infections, particularly herpesvirus, and Stevens- Johnson syndrome -toxic epider-
Mal necrolysis was primarily associated with drug administration.297. 29s Erythema
multiforme lesions 1may also occur with lupus erythematosus in Rowell's syndrome.300
Histopathologic findings in the erythema multiforme cases revealed a predominantly in-
flaminatory imononuclear lichenoid infiltrate, and Stevens-Johnson syndrome-toxic epi-
dermal necrolysis  revealed predominantly  epidermal  necrosis  with  minimal  infamma-
tion.297, 301, 321
The human international consensus clinical classification has been adapted for use in
causal drug exposure was addressed by atlopting the drug irmplication criteria used in
humans (see Table 9-7).27s In this scheime, erythema multiforme cases have fat or raised
target or polycyclic lesions, less than 50% of the body surface affected with an erythema-
tous or purpuric macular or patchy eruption, and less than l0% of the body surface
showing epidermal detachment. The erythema multiforme cases were subclassified into
"minor" if one or no mucosal surface was involved and “major" if more than one mucosal
 surface was affected. All three forms of Stevens-Johnson syndrome -toxic epidermal ne-
crolysis had greater than 50% of the body surface affected with macular or purpuric
eruption, greater than one mucosal surface involved, and no target or polycyclic lesions.
With this classification schcrme, it was shown that only 19% of erythema multiforme
was associated with drug exposure, whereas 92% of Stevens-Johnson syndrome -toxic
showed an overlap between the groups, suggesting that, at least in this canine classification
system, biopsy and histopathologic examination was not able to separate the two entities,
though the erythema multiforme cases did have less epidermal necrosis and greater
 dermal inflammation than the Stevens- Johnson syndrome -toxic epidermal necrolysis cases.
Further studies are indicated to document the validity and usefulness of this classification
system in dogs. We and others273 think that the histopathologic findings of erythema
multiforme and toxic epidermal necrolysis in dogs, as in humans, are quite different.
major feature for the diagnosis of erythema multiforme in humans but has not been
addressed in the dog. The typical target lesion is defined as a highly regular, well-defined,
round, wheal-like erythematous papule or plaque of less than 3 cm in diameter that has at
● Table 9-8
proposed criteria for the clinical
CLASSIfICATION OF ERYThEMA MULTIFORME
And stevens-JohnSon Syndrome-toxic 
Epidermal necrolysis"?
EM min
........... ..
CLINICAL LESIONS
EM maj
SJS
OVERLAP
TEN
Flat or raised, focal or multifoxeal, target of
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
polyeyclic lesions
Number of mucosal surfaces involved
None or I
>1
>1
>1
>1
Erythematous or purpuric, macular or patchy
<50
<50
>50
>50
>50
(aruns apog jo yuaniad) tondnra
Epidermal detaclhment (percent of body sur-
10
<10
<10
10-30
>30
face)
EM min = erytherma rmmltiforme minor; EM rmaj = erythemu multiforme major; SJS = Stevens-Johnson syndrome; OVERLAP
ssiou pa o = N s de N-s =
734 ·Immune-Mediated Disorders
 least three different zones, which are composed of two concentric rings around a central
disk (Fig. 9-38A). The central disk varies from erythematous to violaceous, dusky, purpu-
("halo") is erythematous,29s, 307 This "typical target lesion" has been detected in 15.9% of
veterinary medicine.
Erythema multiforme is uncommon in dogs and cats, accounting for only 0.4% and
0.11%, respectively, of all the canine and feline dermatology cases examined at a univer-
sity practice.323 Erythema multiforme has been recognized in dogs in association with
 infections, drug therapy (especially trimethoprim-potentiated sulfonamides, penicillins, and
cephalosporins), and idiopathy (Table 99)47 56, 263 291. 302. 3s. 31. 32.323 Two cases of drug-
 induced erytherma multiforme have been associated with disseminated intravascular coagu-
lation.311. 3is Erythema multiforme has also been reported to be a manifestation of adverse
reactions to dietary substances.323 In one study, 22.8% of the cases of canine erythema
multiforme were idiopathic.323 A subgroup of idiopathic erythema multiforme has been
 described in old dogs. occasionally associated with an underlying disease, suggesting im-
mune dysfunction.2 In cats, erythema multiforme has been reported in association with
drug therapy (cephalexin, penicilin, aurothioglucose, trimethoprim-sulfonamide, amoxicil-
lin, griseofulvin, propylthiouracil) and herpesvirus infection wherein lesions may accom-
pany upper respiratory signs and resolve when the respiratory disease resolves.47.323 385
CLINICAL SIGNS
 Prodromal or concurrent clinical signs may reflect the underlying cause. As the term
multiforme implies, the skin lesions are variable, but they are usually characterized by an
 acute, rather symmetric onset of (1) erythematous macules (see Fig. 9-38B) or slightly
● Table 9-9
reported etioloGic Factors for canine
EryThema Multiforme40, 30?
Antibiotics
Amoxicillin
Amoxicillin clavulanate
Cephalexin
Chloramphenicol
Enrofloxacin
Erythroinycin
Centamicin
Lincomycin
Ormetoprim-sulfacdimethoxine
Tetracycline
Trimethoprim-sulfadiazine
Trimethoprin-sulfarnethoxazole
infections
 Pseudomonal otitis externa
 Staphylococcal dermatitis
Anal sacculitis
 Misceifaneous
Aurothioglucose
Chlorpyrifos
Beef and/or soy (in diel and chewable heartworm preventive)
Diethylcarbamazine
D-limonene
Idiopathic
Jvermectin
Levamisole
L-Thyroxine
Otic drops
Phenobarbital
Immune-Mediated Disorders · 735
FIGURE 9-38. A, Erythema muliforme minor in a dog caused by Tribrissen, Annular, erythematous, target
lesions in flank. B, Canine erythema multiforme due to cephalexin. Serpiginous erythema. C, Toxic epidermal
necrolysis in a cat. (From Rosenkrantz WS: Cutaneous drug reactions. In: Griffin CE, et al [eds]: *Current
Veterinary Dermatology.Mosby-Year Book,St.Louis,1993.）D,Severe ulceration of theventrum,medial thighs,
and scrotum of a dog with toxic epidermal necrolysis due to levamisole. (Courtesy G. T. Wilkinson.) E, Ulcerated
footpads in a dog with idiopathic leukocytoclastic vasculitis. F, Cutancous idiopathic vasculitis in a dog. Necrosis and
ulceration tracing pinnal vasculature. G, Punctate ulcers on the tongue of a dog with idliopathic lcukocytoclastic
vasculis. H, Pilting ede ma of the hock in a dog with vasculitis.
736 · Immune-Mediated Disorders
FIGURE 9-39. Idiopathic ery-
thema mmltiforme major in a dog.
More-or-less symmetric necrosis and
ulceration in the groin.
elevated papules that spread peripheral and clear centrally, producing annular (target) or
arciform patterns (see Fig. 9-38A), (2) urticarial plaques, (3) vesicles and bullae, or (4)
 red e si usn (p, s,) arn oss a j n as
plaque-like lesion wherein the periphery remains indurated while the center clears and/or
becornes cyanotic to purpuric (see Fig. 9-38A),323 These lesions may then become cen-
 rns sr m sin ria u s sq ro ri a
 oozing erosions and ulcers. Mucosal lesions are similar in onset and symmetry but are
usually vesicular, bullous, and ulcerative. The oral ulcers are often hemorrhagic and
 coated by grayish-white pseudomembranes of necrotic epithelium and fibrin. The maculo-
papular form of erythema multiforme initially is characterized by lack of suface pathology
(lack of scale, crust, oozing, hair loss). The urticarial form of erythema multiforme is
characterized by a normal overlying skin and haircoat and the persistence of urticarial
lesions, as opposed to the evanescent nature of the wheals in true urticaria.
come systemically ill (fever, depression, anorexia) and have rather extensive vesiculobul-
lous and ulcerative lesions. The most commonly affected body sites in dogs include the
FIGURE 9-40. Idiopathic ery.
thema multiforme major. Marked
vesiculobullous and ulcerative cheili-
tis, stomatitis, and glossitis.
Immune-Mediated Disorders· 737
FIGURE 9-41l. Idiopathic _ery-
eated ulccration and necrosis of lat-
eral surface of pinma.
ventrum (Fig. 9-39) (especially axillae and groin; 65.9% of cases), mucocutancous junc-
tions (47.7%), and oral cavity (Fig. 9--40) (31.8%), pinnae (Fig. 9-41) (25%), and foot-
pads (20.5%).323 Skin lesions are occasionaily painful (22.7%) but rarely pruritic (4.5%).
Target lesions (15.9%), Nikolsky's sign (11.4%), and pitting edema of the distal linbs
(11.4%) occur occasionally.323 In dogs, 86.4% of cases are predominantly vesiculobullous
and/or ulcerative, whereas only 13.6% are predorninantly maculopapular.323
 -    s d  ss s 
the trunk and mucocutaneous junctions are most commonly affected.323
DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis includes bacterial folliculitis, dermatophytosis, demodicosis, urti-
caria, and other vesicular and pustular disorders. Definitive diagnosis is based on history,
physical examination, ruling out of alternatives with laboratory testing, and skin biopsy.
Skin biopsy findings vary with the gross morphology of the lesions and do not reliably
distinguish between clinically mild and severe forms of the disorder.15s, 47, 71, 30s. 323 Neither
 are there any apparent histopathologic differences between cases with suspected triggers
FIGURE 9-42. Erythema multi-
forme in a cat associated with multi-
ple drugs. Marked  vesiculobullous
and ulcerative disease of pinnac.
(Courtesy C. Tieghi.)
738 · Immune-Mediated Disorders
FIGURE 9-43. Erythema multi-
forme in a dog due to trimethoprim.
slfamethoxazole. Note hydropic de-
generation, marked apoptosis (arrow)
at all levels of epidermis, and lym-
phocytic exocytosis. Also note mild
epidermal hyperplasia and normal
stratum comeum.
and those without (i.e., idiopathic).32s Maculopapular lesions are characterized histologi-
and 9-44). The infundibular region of hair follicle outer root sheath epithelium is often
similarly affected. In the absence of necrosis, ulceration, and bacterial infection, the
stratum corneum is orthokeratotic and normal, and the epidermis shows mild to moder-
 ate, regular hyperplasia. A superficial interstitial or, rarely, a dense lichenoid inflammatory
infiltrate is visible.
Urticarial lesions are characterized by hydropic interface dermatitis and striking der-
mal edema (Fig. 9-45). Dermal collagen fibers become vertically oriented and attenuated,
presenting a weblike appearance ("gossamer” collagen). Vesiculobullous lesions are charac-
terized by segmental full-thickness coagulation necrosis of epithelium (Fig. 9-46). A
superficial perivascular to interstitial accumulation of predominantly lymphohistiocytic cells
 is typical, and subepidermal cleft and vesicle formation may occur owing to separation of
the necrotic epithelium from the underlying connective tissue at the basement membrane
zone. Pigmentary incontinence is common.
FIGURE 9-44. Erythema muli-
forine in adog due to trimetho-
prim-sulfamethoxazole, Note apop-
totic keratinocytes and one adherent
Iymphocyte ("satelltosis") (arrmc).
Immune-MediatedDisorders·739
FIGURE 9-45. Canine erythema multiforme. Marked dermal edema with vertical stretching of
collagen fibers ( "gossamer collagen").
  q sis au s nsn sn nsa 
strate IgG, IgM, or C3 between epidermal keratinocytes, around globoid bodies in the
superficial dermis, or in association with dermal blood vessel wall.47. 273. 323
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Erythema multiforme may run a mild course, spontaneously regressing within a few
weeks. An underlying cause should be sought and corrected, whenever possible, a proce-
FIGURE 9--46. Canine crythema
the epidermis has undergone coagu-
lation necrosis and has separated
from the viable epidermis below.
740 · Immune-Mediated Disorders
Severe vesiculobullous cases of erythema multiforme require supportive care and an
exhaustive search for underlying causes. When trigger factors can be identified and elimi-
nated, the erythema multiforme usually resolves within 3 wecks.323
 In human medicine, the use of iromunosuppressive drugs, especially glucocorticoids,
 in the treatment of erythema multiforme continues to be controversial.307. 323 Given the
 presumed immune-mediated pathogenesis of erythema multiforme, treatment with immu-
nomodulating drugs would seem to make sense in cases in which elimination of potential
trigger factors has been achieved yet the disease persists.323 In fact, dogs with severe
idiopathic erythema multiformc have been successfully treated with large doses of gluco-
corticoids and/or azathioprine.323
Anecdotal reports suggest that cyclosporine253 or etretinate316 may be useful in idio-
pathic erythema imultiforme in dogs. We have used pentoxifylline successfully in a few
cases should receive a novel antigen ("hypoallergenic") diet to rule out diet-related dis-
ease.323 Even “idiopathic" cases have been known to spontaneously resolve after 4 to 12
 months, suggesting that undocumented antigenic triggers had been eliminated.323
Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis
Toxic epidermal necrolysis is a rare, variably painful, extensive vesiculobullous and ulcera-
s sri sn  r s 'siop u e po p s jo rr s
cutaneous with mucosal involvement is often called Stevens-Johnson syndrome, though
confusion in the veterinary and human literature has equated this with more severe
erythema multiforme.319
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
 In humans, toxic epidermal necrolysis has been temporaly associated with drugs in 80%
related.307 A variety of drugs and causes have been associated with toxic epidermal
necrolysis in dogs (see Table 9-9).56 2s2, 291, 317 324 Flea dips were implicated in both a dog
and cat that experienced toxie epidermal necrolysis 305 Some cases are idiopathic.
Although the pathomechanism of toxic epidermal necrolysis is unknown, immuno-
pathologic mechanisms have been suggested i8 It has also been suggested that drug-
induced erythema multiforme major and toxic epidermal necrolysis may relate to defective
epidermal detoxification of drug byproducts.307 Fadok proposed that apoptosis may be
induced and that it is massive and sudden in toxic epidermal necrolysis, but localized and
more gradual in erythema multiforme.253 In humans, apoptosis seerms to be the key
mechanism leading to keratinocyte death, and TNF-α is a major cytokine involved in
apoptosis. 309, 313, 314,325
 Perforin (a cytoplasmic peptide contained in cytotoxic T lymphocytes and natural
killer cells) has been suggested to play a role in keratinocyte apoptosis3 In addition, the
role of calcium in the regulation of apoptosis is crucial, and the expression of calprotectin
(a calcium-binding protein) is increased in the epidermis of patients with toxic epidermal
late keratinocytes to produce TNF-α and perturb calcium homeostasis, which leads to
keratinoyte apoptosis in the absence of infammatory cells. Other stuclies have suggested
that the upregulation of keratinocyte Fas ("cell-surface death receptor," CD95) is the
critical trigger of keratinocyte destruction.325
In dogs, one study could not demonstrate apoptosis in any of seven cases of toxie
epidermal necrolysis, and it was thought that the epidermis in these cases was undergoing
CLINICAL FEATURES
There are no apparent age, breed, or sex predilections. Clinicaly, toxic epidermal necroly.
sis is usually characterized by an acute onset of constitutional signs (pyrexia, anorexia.
Immune-Mediated Disorders · 741
lethargy, depression) and a multifocal or generalized vesiculobullous disease (see Fig. 9-
38C and D). This may be a major differentiating feature from erythema multiforme
Vesicles and bullae, necrosis, and resultant ulcers with epidermal collarettes may be found
anywhere in the skin and often involve the oral mucosa, mucocutaneous junctions, and
footpads. Nikolsky's sigm is usually present. Cutaneous pain is usually moderate to marked.
DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis is relatively limited in severe cases with constitutional signs and
 acute history, and ift includes burms, systemic lupus erythenatosus, severe erythema multi-
forme, superficial suppurative necrolytic dermatitis, and epitheliotropic lymphoma.
Definitive diagnosis is based on history, physical examination, and skin biopsy. A
hemogram usually reveals neutropenia or neutrophilia.56 In humans, persistent neutro-
 penia portends a fatal outcome.18
HISTOPATHOLOGY
Histopathologic findings in toxic epidermal necrolysis are identical, regardless of underly-
ing cause. They consist of hydropic degeneration of basal epidermal cells, full-thickness
coagulation necrosis of the epidermis, and minimal dermal infammation (silent dermis or
cell-poor inflammation) (Fig. 9-47)2.47 71 Dermo-epidermal separation results in subepi-
dernal vesicles (Fig. 9--48). This is in contrast with the cell-rich inflammation that occurs
in erythema multiforme,315, a23 The periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)-positive basement mem-
brane zone, when present, is usually located at the foor of the vesicles. The infundibular
region of hair folicle outer root sheath cpithelium may be similarly affected. In humans,
the atrichous sweat gland duct is often affected, but this has not been studied in ani-
mals.296 It must be emphasized that toxic epidermal necrolysis is not usually the definitive
diagnosis. It is imperative to rcmembcr that toxic epidermal necrolysis is only a cutaneous
reaction pattem, and every attempt must be made to find the underlying cause.
FIGURE 9-47. Canine toxic epidermal necrolysis (associated with staphylococcal endocar-
ditis). Fullthickness epidermal coagulation necrosis with minimal inflarmmation. (From Scott
DW, et al: Toxic epidermal nccrolysis in two dogs and a cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 15:271,
1979.)
742 · Immune-Mediated Disorders
FIGURE 9-48. Canine toxic epidermal necrolysis (staphylococcal endocarditis). Fullthick-
al: Toxic epidermal necrolysis in tvo dogs and a cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 15:271, 1979.)
 Results of direct and indirect immunofuorescence testing are usually negative.i8, 56, 269
 In hurnans, immunohistochemical studies have shown that the cell-poor infiltrate in toxic
epidermnal necrolysis contains predominantly macrophages and dermal dendrocytes, unlike
the cel-rich infiltratc rich in T lymphocytes found in erythema multiforme.315
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The prognosis for toxic epidermal necrolysis is guarded to poor, pending identification of
the underlying cause, with a mortality rate as high as 50% in humans.307 The mortality is
 greatest in idiopathic cases, wherein a precipitating factor cannot be recognized and
u  ro     sd p s   
second-degree burn, owing to fuid, electrolyte, and colloid losses and to secondary infec-
 tions and sepsis that compound the loss of epidermal barrier function. Mortality rates are
lower when therapy in humans is conducted in specialty treatment centers for burn
patients.301,303
Treatment consists of (1) correction of the underlying cause and (2) symptomatic and
supportive measures (e.g., fuids, antibiotics, topicals). The use of systemic glucocorticoids
is controversial, some investigators thinking that these drugs are at best not helpful and, at
worst, detrimental.is The incidence of sepsis resulting in a higher fatality rate is the
greatest concern, so the severity and extent of involvement may relate to the decision as
to whether to use glucocorticoids. The administration of systemic glucocorticoids may be
indicated, however, in drug-induced cases.18 Plasmapheresis has been beneficial in hu-
mans.30? Intravenous immunoglobulin therapy has been reported to be effective in hu-
mans, presumably via Fas (CD95) blockade.325 Recovery (depending on the identification
and correction of the underlying cause) usually occurs in 2 to 3 weeks.
Yasculitis
 Cutaneous vasculitis is an uncommon disorder in dogs that is characterized by purpura
(often palpable), wheals, edema, papules, plaques, nodules, alopecia, scarring, necrosis,
and ulceration, often involving the extremities. In some cases, the lesions are slightly
Immune-Mediated Disorders · 743
 purpuric, appearing erythematous but not blanching with diascopy. Cutaneous vasculitis is
rare in cats.
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Vasculitides are classified histologically into neutrophilic, eosinophilice, Iymphocytic, granu-
lomatous, mixed forrns, and cell-poor forms.47, 72 The neutrophilic forms may be leukocy-
toclastice (neutrophil nuclei ndergo karyorrhexis, resulting in “nuclear dust") or nonleuko-
forms of neutrophilic vasculitis occur.72 In one there are associated skin lesions such as
intraepidermal pustules, folliculitis, or neutrophilic spongiosis, and this pattern may be
associated with bacterial skin infections or drug reactions. In the third neutrophilic form,
the major lesion is thrombosis and resultant tissue ischemia. This pattern is more often
Eosinophilic vasculitis is associated with arthropod reactions, food hypersensitivity,
eosinophilic granuloma, and mast celtumors.22 72 32 However, the “vasculic nature of
matitis with vasculitis associated with cyclosporine administration was ohserved in a dog
with periocular edema and alopecia and a swelling at the base of one ear.34o In humans,
vasculitis is also categorized by the size of the affected vessel (large or small), though this
has been considered of litte value in the dog and cat.72. 39 In most cases, cutaneous
vasculitis involves simall dermal blood vessels (postcapillary venules). Vasculitis can occur
via immune and nonimmune mechanisms.25, 330. 341 As a cause of cutaneous disease,
vasculitis most commonly is thought to he immunologically mediated and the result of a
drug reaction or infection.25. 347
The pathomechanism of most cutaneous vasculitides is assumed to involve Type III
the initiation of immune complex deposition in blood vessel wals. However, it appears to
be more complex, and multiple mechanisms likely play a role. It has been postulated that
differences in membrane receptors (probably adhesion molecules and cytokines) for im-
munoglobulin and complement on leukocytes may account for the different histologic
appearances of neutrophilic and lymphocytic vasculitides.5 Additionally, initial neutrophil-
induced damage to endothelial cells could result in the expression of “not self" antigens,
whereupon dendritic cells and T cells could initiate a secondary cell-mediated immune
response, thus perpetuating the vascular disease and producing a lymphocyte-dominated
infltrateIcutaneous ecrotizing vasculitsendothelial cell showincreased expression
 of ICAM-1 and E-selectin.34T E-selectin is an adhesion molecule for neutrophils. In some
cases and forms of vasculitis there has been an association with the presence of autoanti-
bodies that react with neutrophil cytoplasmic structures (e.g, proteinase-3, myeloperoxi-
dase) or endothelial cells.337, 347
sensitivity, insect bites, malignancies, connective tissue disorders [such as lupus erythema-
tosus]), precipitating factors (infections, drugs, vaccines), or it may be idiopathic (about
50% of all cases)* Infections may induce immune complex or septic vasculitis.22. 72. 282
About 7.5% of the dogs treated with itraconazole at 10 mg/kg/day experience cutaneous
vasculitis (lymphedema and/or necrotizing lesions on one or more limbs), whereas dogs
treated with 5 mg/kg/day do not experience this reaction.3 Focal cutaneous vasculitis
reactions at the site of rabies vaccination have been described in dogs, and rabies viral
antigen was detected in blood vessel walls.351 In a retrospective study of cutaneous
vasculitis in 18 dogs and 1 cat, food hypersensitivity was diagnosed in 2 dogs, adverse drug
reaction in 2 dogs, rabies vaccine reaction in 4 dogs, and the condition was idiopathic in
10 dogs. The 1 cat had vaccine-related vasculitis.342*
"See referen1ces 12, 18, 56, 72, 282, 330, 337, 340-342.
744 · Immune-Mediated Disorders
Certain breeds may be predisposed, such as Jack Russell terriers, Scottish terriers,
German shepherd dogs, Greyhounds, Dachshunds, and Rottweilers.56.328 343, 344. 350 Vaccine
reactions are more commonly recognized in Poodles, silky terriers, Yorkshire terriers,
 Pekingese, and Maltese, which may refect breed predilection, small body size, or the long
 period of anagen hair growth and “fuzzy" haircoat phenotype in these breeds.2s7 In one
survey, two of four cases were the Bichon breed, one Maltese and one Poodle.342 The
breed associations may suggest some genetic component to the etiology of some forms of
vasculitis, as has been suggested in humans because of HLA associations.347
CLINICAL FEATURES
 Skin is often the only organ system involved. However, other organ systems may be
affected, wherein the skin lesions may represent the initial sign of a systemic disease, Skin
lesions typically occur in dependent areas of the body, in skin over areas of pressure and
normal “wear and tear," and in skin covering extremities (pinnae, tip of tail, and so forth)
that are more susceptible to cold environmental influences. Cutaneous signs of vasculitis
usually include palpable purpura, plaques, hemorrhagic bullae, papules or pustules, necro-
sis, punched-out (crateriform) ulcers, and occasionally acrocyanosis, especially involving
the extrenities (paws, pinnae, lips, tail, scrotum, and oral mucosa), and they may clearly
he associated with vascular pathways (see Fig. 9-38E to G; Figs. 9-49 to 9-54).
FIGURE 9-49. Ulcerated nodule on the leg of a
dog with eosinophilic vasculitis.
Immune-Mediated Disorders ·745
FIGURE 9-50. Purpurie hives in a
dog with food hypersensitivity vascul-
tis.
FtGURE 9--51. Pinmal lesions in a
dog with vasculitis. The pinnal apex
shows acrocyanosis and an infarct.
FIGURE 9-52. Subungual hemor-
rhage in a claw of a dog with sym-
metric lupoid onychodystrophy. This
es ssns dde r
damage.
746 ·Immune-Mediated Disorders
FIGURE 9-53. Footpads of a dog
with vasculitis.Note multiple crusted
depressions (pits) representing healed
and hcaling infarcts.
FIGURE 9-54. Lymphedema of the rear limb in
a dog with vasculitis.
Immune-Mediated Disorders · 747
 Pinnal lesions are often more prevalent on the apex and concave surface (see Fig. 9-
51). Hemorrhages may occur within the claw (see Fig. 9-52). Pads may develop central
punched-out ulcers (see Fig. 9-38E) or depressed scarred or crusted plaques (see Fig. 9-
53). Generalized urticaria may occur and, in our experience as well as in the results of
one study, this is more common with food hypersensitivity as the underlying etiology (see
 Fig. 9-50),342 Edematous plaques and lymphedema may be present on the extremities or
in the groin (see Figs. 9-38H and 9-54). The lesions may or may not be painful. In
some animals, widespread erythema that may be purplish or cyanotic occurs. The ery-
thematous skin does not blanch with diascopy, confirming its purpuric nature (Fig. 9-
55)330 Rarely, subcutaneous nodules arc noted, which represent panniculitis caused by
septal vasculitis,30, 345 Constitutional signs may be present, including anorexia, depression,
and pyrexia. Although extracutaneous signs are uncommon, polyarthropathy, myopathy,
neuropathy, hepatopathy, thrombocytopenia, and anemia have been reported in some dogs
and cats.330 338 341 Any age, breed, or sex rmay be affected.
A proliferative thrombovascular necrosis of the pinnae has been recognized  in
 predilections. Lesions begin on the apical margins of the pinnae and spread along the
concave surface. An elongated necrotic ulcer is at the center of the lesions. There is often
a thickened, scaly, hyperpigmented zone surrounding the ulcers (Fig. 9-56A and B). The
FIGURE 9-55. A, Abdomen of
dog with drug-induced vasculitis ad
purpura. B, Erythema fails to blanch
withdiacopy.  confrming   dermal
hemorrhage.
748·Immune-Mediated Disorders
FIGURE 9-56. A, Pinnal thrombovascular necrosis with erythema of pinnal apex and linear crust on lateral
areas of alopecia, scaling, crusting, and hyperpigrmentation.
Legenad continued onoppositepage
Immune-Mediated Disorders ·749
FIGURE 9-57. Alopecic, hyper-
pigmented plaque on caudomedial
thigh of a Poodle due to postvac-
cinal vasculitis.
lesions are wedge-shaped, with the wide base at the pinnal apex. As the ulcer enlarges,
thc older areas undergo complete necrosis, resulting in a deformed pinnal margin.
A focal cutaneous vasculitis and alopecia at the sites of rabies caccination has been
aq o pdde sia As pue a pue sod se ze oz e z sap u pq
predisposed. Reactions were characterized by roughly annular areas of variable alopecia,
hyperpigmentation, and, less commonly, scaling or erythema overlying a variably indurated
dermis and subcutis. The caudal or lateral thigh, or the withers, arc typically affccted (Fig.
 9-57). The lesions generally appcar 3 to 6 months after the subcutaneous administration
 of vaccine and persist for months to years.
A cutaneous and renal glomerular vasculopathy ("Alabama rot,""Greenetrack dis-
ease") has been describeci in kenneled and racing, related and unrelated, Greyhounds (see
Chap. 12) 328, 329 No age (6 months to 6 years) or sex predilections exist. Palpable purpura,
with lesions pinpoint to 10 cm in diameter, is characterized by reddened areas that rapidly
 become dark red to purple to black and then slough. Lesions are multiple and most
commonly occur on thc limbs and, less commonly, the groin and trunk (Figs. 9-58 and
9-59). Within 1 to 2 days, the lesions ulcerate and discharge a serosanguineous fuid. The
ulcers are well-demarcated and usually extend into the subcutis. Healing is slow, resulting
in scar formation within 1 to 2 monthis. Many dogs experience pitting edema, especially
distal to the stife or elbow, on limhs that have ulcers. In most dogs, new lesions do not
develop after the initial lesions resolve. Some dogs cxperiencc pyrexia, lethargy, polydipsia,
polyuria, vomiting, dark or tarry stools, and acute renal failure. This syndrome is thonght
to be produced by verotoxin (shiga-like toxin) elaborated by E. coli in contaminated raw
beef produets (sirmilar to the hemolytic-uremic syndrome in people) 329 A genetie predispo-
sition may help explain the susceptibility of Greyhounds.329
Familial(autosomal recessive trait) cutaneous vasculopathy of German shepherd dogs
E, Canine uveodermatologie syndrome. Depiganentation of lips. F, Uveodermatologic syncrome in an Akita. (Fron Mac-
Donald JM: Uveodernatologic syndrome in the dog. In: Crffn CE, et al Iedsl: Current Veterinary Dernatology. Mosby-
Year Book, St. Louis, 1993.) G, Feline auricular chondritis, Swollen, curled, 1nisshapen pinnae. (Courtesy E. Guaguere.) 11,
Feline auricular chondritis. Swollen, violaceous pinna. (Courtesy E. Cuaguere.)
750 · Immune-Mediated Disorders
FIGURE 9-58. Cutaneous vasculo-
pathy in a Greyhound. large area of
B. Fenwick.)
FIGURE 9-59. Cutaneous vasculopatly ju a
Creyhound. Marked lymphedema of left hind leg.
 josu  p
leg. (Courtesy B. Fenwick.)
Immune-Mediated Disorders · 75I
has been reported in young puppies.350 These dogs experience pyrexia and lethargy, most
commonly associated with swollen, depigmented foot pads. Alopecia, crusts, and ulceration
may also occur, involving the pinnae, tail, and nasal planum. Footpad biopsies demon-
strate varying degrees and combinations of nodular dermatitis, collagenolysis, vascular
degeneration, vasculitis, and cell-poor interface dermatitis with basal cell apoptosis. The
changes may parly refect the stage of disease at the time of biopsy. The cause is not
deterimined, though a variety of immunologic test results have been normal.
Ischemic derrnatopathy is a syndrome that results from loss of blood supply from
either vasculitis or vasculopathy. In sore cases, a relationship between vasculitis and
vasculopathy is present because both histopathologic lesions may occur in the same case
and may refect stage of lesion development at time of sampling.72 This syndrome is
exemplified by what has been called the prototypical form of ischemic dermatopathy, post-
rabies vaccination alopecia.34s In addition, lesions of canine dermatomyositis are thought to
diseases that are considered cell-poor, such as familial Gerinan shepherd vasculopathy.
sone “lupoid” dermatoses, and the disease in Greyhounds.72 To date, the reports primarily
have beenn associated with vaccine reactions, with lesions occurring in a wider distribution
than just at the site of vaccination32.348A typical postvaccinal lesion is visible at the site
of injection about 2 to 8 months after vaccination, and multiple multifocal lesions develop
within 1 to 5 months after the appearance of the injection site lesion. The lesions are
various combinations of plaques, nodules, alopecia, scale, erosions, ulcers, crusts, hyperpig-
mentation, and scarring (see Fig. 9-57). Lesions may occur at the site of vaccination,
pinnae (usually the apex and often the concave surface, especially at the pinnal margins),
face, paw pads, tip of the tail, periocular region, and ovcr bony prominences. Erosions
and ulcers may be seen on the tongue. An associated ischemic, atrophic myopathy may be
present.
DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis includes coagulopathy, systemic lupus erythematosus, cold agglu-
tinin discase, frostbite, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and lymphoreticular neopla
sia. When urticarial lesions predominate, hypersensitivity disorders not associated with
vasculitis are also differential diagnoses. Definitive diagnosis is based on history, physical
examination, and skin biopsy. Histopathology reveals varying degrees of neutrophilic,
eosinophilic, or lymphocytic vasculitis (Fig. 9-60), possibly reflecting the age of the
lesions and the types of immunoreactants.22, 71 Fibrinoid necrosis is not usually pres-
ent.7.348 Involvement of deep dermal vessels may suggest systemic disease.
When the deep vasculature is affected, necrosis of appendages and subcutaneous fat
may occur. The lesions most likely to show diagnostic changes are those from 8 to 24
hours old. In some biopsies, the diagnosis of vasculitis or vasculopathy is suspected on the
basis of a cell-poor hydropic interface dernatitis, mural folliculitis, and the loss of defini-
tion and staining intensity and ultimate atrophy or necrosis of hair folicles ("fading
follicles") (Fig. 9-61). Sebaceous and sweat giands may be similarly, but less frequently,
affected. Hyalinization of dermal collagen and hypovascularity as demonstrated by de-
cutaneous vasculitis has been established, it is imperative that underlying etiologic factors
be sought and eliminated (Table 9- 10).
 Cutaneous vasculitis has been reported in dogs with bacteremia, systemic lupus ery.
thematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, polyarteritis nodosa, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, ehr-
lichiosis, babesiosis, leishmaniasis, sarcocystosis, parvovirus and coronavirus infections, drug
reactions, vaccine reactions, staphylococcal hypersensitivity, and as an idiopathic occur-
rence.17. 56.333 341 In addition,lymphoeytic 0r e0sinophilic vasculits has been recognized
in dogs with drug reaction, severe scabies and flea bite hypersensitivity, food hypersensi-
with drug administration, vaccination (rabies, herpes virus-calicivirus-panleukopenia), infec-
tions (FeLV, FIV, FIP), and idiopathy.35. 38 341
752 · Immune-Mediated Disorders
FIGURE 9-60. Canine cutaneous idiopathic leukocytoclastic vasculitis. Degeneration of
blood vessel wall with leukocytoclasis and “nuclear dust" forrnation. (Fron Manning TO.
Scott DW: Cutaneous vasculitis inu a dog. J Ain Anim llosp Assoc 16:61, 1980.)
Pruliferatice thrombonascular necrosis of the pinnae is characterized by artcriolar
 proliferation, selerosis, hyaline degeneration, and eventually thrombosis, 33 No infanra-
tory vasculitis is present. Focal vasculitis and alopecia subsequent to rabies vacination is
characterized by vasculitis affecting the arterioles of the deep dermis and subcutis, septal
 panniculitis, fat necrosis, focal lymphoid nodules, and marked atrophy or necrosis of the
overlying adnexa (see Fig. 9-61; Figs. 9-62 and 9-63).341
Cutaneous and renal glomerular casculopathy is characterized by mild to severe
changes in the arterioles and arteries of the deep dermis and subcutis.i2s Thcse changes
range from incrcased eosinophilia of the tunica imedia to pyknosis and karyorrhexis and,
occasionally, fibrinoid necrosis. Vascular thrormbosis and ischemia result in purpura and
cutaneous infarcts. Many affected Greyhounds, especially those with azotermia, have
thrombocytopenia, normocytic normochromic anemia, hypoalbumineimia, and increased
serum creatine kinase activity.329
Direct immunofuoresccnce or irmmunohistochemical testing nay demonstrate immu-
noglobulin, complemcnt, or both in vessel wall and occasionally at thc bascmcnt mem-
hrane zone in both the neutrophilic and lymphocytic forms of cutancous vasculitis (scc
Fig. 9-1D)5 15. 56 In humans, the most common immunoreactants are C3, IgM, and fibrin
in a granular pattern within the vessel wall.341 These tests are usually not meeded, how-
ever, and are not particularly useful for diagnosis. If they are performed, they are best
done within the first 4 hours after lesion formation and no later than 24 hours.47. 341
Studies in humans have shown that the intradermal injection of 0.o2 ml of a histamine
phosphate solution into the skin of patients with active cutaneous vasculitis was a reliable
method for dcmonstrating thc deposition of immunoreactants, with dircct immunofuores-
cence testing of the injection site performed 4 hours after injection.5
plexes, decreased levels of serum complemment, and hypergainmaglobulinemia.17
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
It is diffcult to predict the course of the disease in any individual case. A single episode
lasting a few weeks nay occur, or the disorder may be chronic or recurrent. The outcome
Immune-Mediated Disorders · 753
FIGURE 9-61, Rahics vaccine-induced vasculifis
in a dog. Ischermic neerosis of hair follicles (*faling
follicles") (arrou) with subjacent panniculitis.
depends on the extent of intermal organ involvement (especially renal and neurologic) and
the underlying or precipitating factor(s).
Treatinent of vasculitis consists of correction of the underling cause and immunomo-
indicated because of its relative lack of side effects and some reports of success (see
associated vasculitides (which required 2 to 5 months of therapy) but was of no benefit in
leukocytoclastic vasculitides,123nmore severe cases of vasculitis, esecially neutropilc
types, systemic prednisone 0r prednisolone (2 to 4 mg/kg orally q24h) is initially used,
with or without pentoxifylline.47.33. 33s For cases that are rclractory to glucocorticoids,
 sulfones such as dapsone (1 mg/kg orally q8h in dogs: 1 mg/kg orally q24h with caution in
cats) or sulfasalazine (20 to 40 mg/kg orally q8h in dogs) may be effective.47.30. 3ll 343 The
combination of glucocorticoid and dapsone may be synergistic 343 Large doses of vitamin E
may bc a usefiul adjunctive therapy.341. 343 Cyclophosphamide has been useful in some
therapy can be stopped after 4 to 6 months of treatiment. Other patients require long-
term maintenance therapy with lower drug doses and reduced frequency of administration
(see Chap. 3). The vasculitis occurring with itraconazole therapy can often be eliminated
by reducing the dose from 10 mg/kg/day to 5 mg/kg/day (see Chap. 5).
754 · Immune-Mediated Disorders
● Table 9-10
ETIOLOGIC faCTORS FOR CuTaNEOUS
VASCULITIS
Infections
Bacterial
Mycobacterial
Fungal
Viral
Protozoal
Rickettsial
Injections of Foreign Proteins
Sera
Vaccines
Hyposensitization
Drugs
Antibiotics
Ivermeclin
Vaccines
Metronidazole
Phenobarbital
Furosemide
Itraconazole
Phenylbutazone
Enalapril
Imodium
Metoclopranite
Fenbendazole
Allergy
Food
Insect/arthropod
Genetic
Hereditary pyogranuloma and vasculitis of Scotish terriers
Cutaneous and renal vasculopathy of Greyhounds
Familial vasculopathy of German shepherd dogs and Jack
 Russell terriers
Dermatomyositis
Immune-Mediated Diseases
Systemie lupus erythematosus
Discoid lupus erytheumatosus
 Rheurmatoid arthritis
Other Diseases
 Plasma cell pordodermatitis 
Malignancies
Ulcerative colitis
Juvenile polyarteritis in beagle dogs
Proliferative thrombovascular necrosis of the pinnae is slowly progressive and usually
that pentoxifylline or the combination of tetracyclinc and niacinanide are occasionally
effective31 In our experience, pentoxifyline has been helpful to totally succesful in
thrombotic pinnal diseases, possibly through its effect of increasing peripheral perfusion
and/or its anti-inflammatory effccts.
 If pentoxifylline is ineffective, the treatment of choice is partial surgical removal of
the pinna. Relapses have occurred only when attempts were made to save as much tissue
as possible. Focal_cutaneous vasculitis and alopecia subsequent to injections may also
 respond (up to 75% reduction in lesion size) 'to pentoxifylline or may be treated by
complete surgical excision, or it occasionally spontaneously resolves.327, 34s It would be
logical to not repeat the incriminated vaccine, unless required by law.327 341 One could
Immune-Mediated Disorders · 755
FIGURE 9-62. Rabies vaccie-induced vasculi.
tis in a dog. Panniculitis with atrophied hair folli-
cles and hydropie interface derumatitis.
FIGURE 9-63. Rahies vaccine-in-
duced vasculitis in a dog. Note kar-
yorzhectic leukoeytes  within  vessel
wall (arrou).
756 · Immune-Mediated Disorders
avoid the local vaccine reaction by giving the product intramuscularly, but generalizcd
reactions would still be possible.327
Canine Linear lgA Pustular Dermatosis
Linear IgA pustular dermatosis is a very rare idiopathic, sterile superficial pustular derma-
tosis of Dachshunds, characterized histologically by subcorneal pustules and immunologi-
cally by the deposition of IgA at the basement membrane zonc of affected skin.56, 32 It is
not analogous to a similarly named dermatosis of humans.5. 18
Clinically, linear IgA pustular derinatosis is characterized by nultifocal to generalized
pustular dermatitis. The trunk is typically involved. Secondary skin lesions include annular
areas of alopecia, erosion, cpidermal collarettes, hyperpigmentation, scaling, and crusting
(see Fig. 9-56C). Pruritus is minimal to absent, and the dogs are otherwise healthy. All
cases to date have been recognized in adult Dachshunds of cither sex.
The differential diagnosis includes bacterial folliculitis, dermatophytosis, demodicosis,
pemphigus foliaceus, and subcormeal pustular dermatosis. Cytologic examination of pus
reveals nondegenerate neutrophils, no microorganisms, and an occasional or no acantho-
ia ao us p (aa oo ro ps si sia  o
mal pustular dermatitis, with numerous nondegenerate neutrophils and rminimal acantholy.
sis) (Fig. 9-64), and direct immunofuorescence or immunohistochemical testing (IgA
deposited at the basement membrane zonc).
Therapy consists of large doses of prednisolone or prednisone (2.2 to 4.4 mg/kg orally
q24h, then an alternate-day regimen) or dapsone (l mg/kg orally qSh, then as needed)
(see Chap. 3). Interestingly, glucocorticoids may work in one case and not another. The
same is true of dapsone.
Canine Uveodermatologic Syndrome
The uveodermatologic syndrome (Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada- like syndrome) is a rare, idio-
pathic syndrome of concurrent granulomatous uveitis and depigmenting dermatitis in
clogs.361. 364
FIGURE 9-64. Canine linear IgA pustular dermatosis. Subcorneal pustular dcnnatilis.
Immune-Mcdiated Disorders * 757
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
The cause of this syndrome is unknown. The syndrome has similarities to the Vogt-
Koyanagi-Harada syndrome in humans, which is currently thought to represent an autoim-
mune disorder18.35335635859364 Inhumans, cell-mediated hyersensitivity tomelanin and
melanocytes has been demonstrated, as have antibodies against melanin, gangliosides, and
photoreceptors.34 Antiretinal antibodies were demonstrated in a dog.360
CLINICAL FEATURES
 In humans, the Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome has three phases: (1) a meningoencepha-
litic phase with prodromata of fever, malaise, headache, tinnitus, nausea, and vomiting. (2)
an ophthatmic phase with photophobia, uveitis, decreased visual acuity, and potential
blindness, and (3) a dermatologic phase with poliosis (90% of cases), alopecia (73%), and
vitiligo (63%).1 36 The dermatologic signs are usually symmetric, especially involving the
head, neck, and eyelids, and they usually mark thc convalescent stage when the uveitis
begins to abate. The pigmentary changes tend to be permanent.
 In dogs, there are no apparent age (6 months to 13 years) or sex predilections,
but Akitas, Chows, Samoyeds, and Siberian huskies appcar to be predisposed.352, 356, 35s. a59.
361. 64 The syndrome is usually characterized by the acute onset of uveitis and concurrent
or subsequent depigmentation of the nose, lips, eyelids, and occasionally the footpads,
usually appear within 10 days of the recognition of the ocular lesions, but they occasion-
ally occur several months later.364
 In one dog, a concurrent onychomadesis was present.362 Oral ulcerations rarely OC-
cur.5 63 In most cases, skin lesions are mild, consisting of welldemarcated depigmenta-
tion with or without mild erythema and scale. Some cases, however, progress or even
rapidly develop more marked dermatitis, with depigmented areas developing varying de-
grees of erosion, ulceration, and crusting. Perhaps some of the dermatitis may be associ-
ated with exposure to sunlight (photodermatitis).7 Patchy leukotrichia may be present in
the areas surrounding the cutaneous depigmentation, Rarely, leukoderma and lcukotrichia
are widespread.354, 35, 361 Clinicopathologic evidence of a meningoencephalitic phase is rare
signs referable to the uveitis (anterior and posterior) may include photophobia, blepharo-
spasm, lacrimation, conjunctival congestion, cormeal edema, retinal detachinent, glaucoma,
cataract, and blindness.364
DIAGNOSIS
The definitive diagnosis is based on history, physical examination, and skin biopsy. Histo-
pathologic findings in specimens taken from early skin lesions are characterized by lichen-
oid interface dermatitis, wherein large histiocytes are a major cellular component (Figs.
ation of epidermal basal cells is rare. Cytology of aqueous humor in one case revealed an
infltrate of predominantly macrophages,*s7 Histopathologic findings in the eye include
 granulomatous panuveitis and retinitis, and degenerative changes of the optic nerve and
tract may occur.364 Results of direct and indirect immunofluorescence testing are usually
negative.56
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
 Patients with poorly controlled uveitis often experience posterior synechiae with secondary
patients with anterior uveitis. Systemic glucocorticoids and azathioprine are needed to
758 · Immune-Mcdiated Disorders
FIGURE 9-65. Canine uveodermatologic syndrome. Lichenoid interface dernatitis.
one dog.361 If the disease is treated early, variable degrees of cutaneous repigmentation
therapy and because more aggressive therapy is often required, we recommend combina-
FIGURE 9~66. Close-up of Figure 9-65. Nuimerous Hhistiocytes in lichenoid band
Immune-Mediated Disorders · 759
 Dogs usually require long-term altemate-morning oral glucocorticoid therapy (c.g.
some very_good responses with the combination of tetracycline and niacinamide (see
Chap. 3). This drug combination has allowed marked reduction in or discontinuation of
systemic glucocorticoid therapy. The response of the skin lesions should not be used to
assess response to therapy because uveitis may be active while the skin is improving.356
changes are in remission.
Auricular Chondritis
Auricular chondritis (*relapsing polychonditis") is a rare disease of cats and dogs charac
terized by inflammation and destruction of auricular cartiage.18. 53.368. 369 In humans, a
 somewhat similar condition is called relapsing polychondritis.is However, in cats, only the
 auricular cartilage is affected, and the condition has not been reported to have a relapsing
de sd si sd dn   s  
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Relapsing polychondritis is often classified among the immune-mediated diseases because
of similarities to rheumatoid arthritis and lupus erythematosus as well as its favorable
 response to immunomodulatory therapy. In humans, antibodies against Type 1I collagen
may be demonstrated in some cases.18 In one dog, a definitive cause was not determined,
though chronic otitis preceded the development of the auricular chondritis.366
CLINICAL FEATURES
Affected cats and the one dog presented with a history of swollen, erythematous, painful
ceous, and curled and deformed (see Fig. 9-56G and H; Fig. 9-67). Typically, both
pinnae are affected, although one may be more severely affected than the other, or the
 condition may be initially unilateral, then bilateral.365 Cats may be otherwise healthy or
 xas (s i on I) ae ou so u eie p i ed jo suis mous A
breed predilections are evident.3 The dog had a history of nonerosive polyarthritis and
 no doap a o rod s s m e s p pe r ro a
chondritis.
FIGURE 9-67. Auricular chondritis
in a dog with suspect polychondritis.
760 · Immune-Mediated Disorders
DIAGNOSIS
 Biopsies reveal lymphoplasmacytic infammation, loss of cartilage basophilia, and cartilage
neutrophilia, lymphocytosis, and hyperglobulinemia3es One cat was positive for ANA but
also had concurrent FIv infection.36s Direct immunofuorescence testing was negative in
twG cats.371
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Xan in ay o A suis s ou aus pu ud ou u ane yn s
induced a remission in four cats, and no relapse occurred when therapy was
stopped.365. 36 Permanent deformity of the pinnae is to be expected, whether or not the
cat is treated. Surgical excision was effective in climinating the discomfort and gross 
lesions in the one dog,.365
Immunoproliferative Enteropathy of Basenji Dogs
 Immunoproliferative enteropathy of Basenjis is characterized by chronic intractable diar-
the condition has been hypothesized. A similar disease exists in humans.
 Basenjis of either sex and a wide age range are affectcd. Skin lesions are variable and
 may consist of alopecia, hyperpigmentation, hyperkeratosis, and marginal necrosis and
ulceration of the pinnae or a symmetric alopecia of the ventrum. The haircoat is often dry
and dull.
Diagnosis is based on history, physical exarnination, and laboratory testing. Most
affected dogs have hypergammaglobulinemia. Some dogs are hypothyroid. Intestinal bi-
 opsy reveals lymphoplasmacytic enteritis.
 Dermatohistopathologic findings are nondiagnostic. Alopecic skin is characterized by
cndocrinopathic changes, probably refecting hypothyroidism. Dermatitic pinnae are char-
acterized by ulcerative perivascular dermatiis, necrosis, and changes consistent with sec-
 ondary bacterial infection. Although the clinical appearance of the pinnae is suggestive of
a vasculopathy, histologic evidence of vessel disease has not been reported.
FIGURE 9-68. Feline auricular chondritis. Infammation and necrosis of ear cartilage.
Immune-Mediated Disorders * 76|
 Therapy is provided according to syuptoms and is often disappointing. Genetic coun-
seling, avoidance of stress, and high-quality commercial diets are indicated. Systemic
glucocorticoids may be beneficial.
Alopecia Areata
Alopecia areata is an uncommon disorder of dogs and cats characterized by patches of
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Alopecia areata is of complex pathogenesis with immunologic targeting of anagen hair
follicles and the relatively consistent finding of antifollicular autoantibodies (IgG class) as
well as CD4+ and CD8+ cells in the affected follicles in humans.373 T lymphocytes and
antifolicular antibodies have also been documented in the dog.374 In dogs, autoantibodies
is different from the findings in humans and mice, wherein the outer root sheath and hair
matrix are most often targeted.373 CD4+ and CD8+ perifollicular lymphocytes and αβ,
dendritic antigen-presenting cells are present in the perifollicular dermis.373
 Other observations in humans supporting the immunologic basis are (1) accumulations
s a  d a r  sq r e (a  rdr s prr ro
increased incidence of various autoantibodies in alopecia areata, (4) decreased numbers of
) a n   o  go sd  ( so  
increased expression of class I and II MHC antigens (7) the deposition of C3 or IgG and
IgM or both at the basement membrane zone of the hair follicles in lesional and normal
scalp as revealed by direct immunofluorescence testing. and (8) the therapeutic benefit of
inducing delayed-type hypersensitivity and immunosuppressive therapies. In addition, ge-
netic, endocrine, and psychological factors have been thought to play a role in humans
with alopecia areata.18, 373 Morphologic abnormalities of melanocytes in follicular bulbs
have been described in humans with alopecia areata. Cytokines IL-Iα, IL-lβ, and TNF-α
are potent inhibitors of hair folicle growth and in viro produce changes in hair follicle
morphology similar to those in alopecia areata.372a
CLINICAL FEATURES
 In dogs and cats, alopecia areata is characterized by focal or multifocal patches of
lections. Though few cases have been reported, the Dachshund may be over-repre-
sented.373 The alopecic areas are well circumscribed, and the exposed skin appears normal
(Fig. 9-69). Chronically alopecic areas may become variably hyperpigmented.
Lesions may occur anywhere, especially the head, neck, and trunk. Lesions may be
involve the majority of the body (Fig. 9-70). Hair growth may occur spontaneously, with
the initially regrown hair being white, only to later be replaced by pigrmented hair (Fig.
9-71),.37a Microscopic examination of hairs plucked frorm the margin of enlarging lesions
reveals a mixture of normal telogen, dysplastic, and “exclamation point" hairsshort,
stubby hairs with frayed, fractured, pigmented distal ends whose shafts undulate or taper
toward the proximal end (Fig. 9-72). Occasionally, alopecia areata may be confined to the
dark-haired areas of multicolored haircoats (Fig. 9-73). Claw changes compatible with
trachyonychia (roughening, ridging, vertical striations) were seen in one dog and were 
compared to those occasionally occurring in humans with alopecia areata.371
DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis includes traction alopecia, injection reactions, acquired pattern
alopecia, topical steroid reaction, folicular dysplasia, dermatophytosis, demodicosis, staphy-
762 · Immune-Mediated Disorders
FIGURE 9-69. Canine alopecia
areata. Wellcircumscribed annular
alopecia over hip region.
lococcal folliculitis, pseudopelade, psychogenic alopecia, and endocrinopathies. Definitive
 diagnosis is based on the insidious onset of asymptomatic, well-circurnscribed areas of
 noninflammatory alopecia and on skin biopsy.
HISTOPATHOLOGY
The characteristic early histopathologic findings include a peribulbar accumulation of
"swarm of bees" (Fig. 9-74). This early change may be diffcult to demonstrate, and
specimens may only show a few inffarmmatory cells with apoptosis of bulbar keratinocytes.
Finding helpful diagnostic lesions is aided by performing multiple biopsies from the
advancing edges of early lesions. Later, the histopathologic findings consist of a predomi-
nance of catagen and telogen hair follicles as well as folicular atrophy. Hair foliles may
be distorted in contour, with folicular and hair shaft dysplasia and peribulbar pigmentary
S            s
tract associated with orphaned epitrichial sweat and sebaceous glands and arrector pili
FIGURE_ 9-70. Dachshund withl
generalized alopecia areata.
Immune-Mediated Disorders· 763
FIGURE 9-71. leukotrichia of
the hair regrowth with spontaneous
resohution of alopecia areata in a
Rottweiler.
 muscles. As in humans,372 eosinophils may be found in the peribulbar infiltrate and within
the fibrous tracts of dogs with alopecia areata.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The prognosis for alopecia areata in hurnans is usually good; most patients recover
completely within 3 to 5 years with or without therapy. Although topical, intralesional, or
 The biological behavior of alopecia areata in dogs and cats is unclear. Most dogs and cats
with one or a few lesions spontaneously rccover after a course of 6 months to 2 years.47
 Initial hair regrowth is often a color lighter than nornal (leukotrichia).
A variety of inmmunomodulatory therapies have been used in humans and mice,
including corticosteroids, contact sensitizers, cyclosporine, minoxidil, and UV exposure
FIGURE 9-72. Canine  alopecia
-xa,) spua paiade auappis um syes
clamation points").
764 · Immune-Mediated Disordecrs
FIGURE 9-73. Alopecia areata in a
Dachshund. Alopecia of pinnae and around
hairs on the muzzle and eyebrows were rc-
tained.
FIGURE 9-74. Canine alopecia areata. Peribul-
bar accumulalions of lymphocytes ("swarm of bees")
(arrous).
Immume-Mediated Disorders · 765
Pseudopelade
 Pseudopelade is a rare disorder of dogs and cats characterized by alopecia that grossly is
noninflammatory.
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
conducted on skin biopsies from two dogs377 and one cat37s have shown a predominance
 of αβ, CD8 + lymphocytes within the epithelium of the hair follicle isthmus. The perifol-
licular dermis was rich in CD4+ and CD8+ lymphocytes as well as CDl+ dendritic
antigen-presenting cells. Circulating autoantibodies (IgG class) against multiple lower hair
follicle proteins (including hair keratins) and trichobyalin were demonstrated in four dogs.
but not in the cat.
CLINICAL FEATURES
 Pseudopelade has been descrihed in 1- to 1l-year-old dogs with no apparent breed or sex
 predilections.33 Lesions have been characterized by well-circumscrihed, noninfammatory
areas of alopecia, which varied from 2 to 8 cm in diameter in one or more body areas to a
 diffuse alopecia sparing only the head and neck. Some lesions were scaly and/or hyperpig-
mented. Pruritus and constitutional signs were absent.
Cats present with more-or-less symmetric, noninfarmmatory alopecia that may begin
Onychomadesis has heen a constant finding (see Fig. 9-76).
DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis is as described for alopecia areata. Definitive diagnosis is based
on skin biopsy. Histopathologically, the differential diagnosis includes those entities char-
acterized by lymphocytic mural foliculitis (see Chap. 11).
FIGURE 9-75. Pseudopelade inl a cat. More-
or-less symmetrice hair loss on the face.
766 · Jmmune-Mediated Disorders
FIGURE 9-76. Sa1e cat as in Figure 9-75.
Alopecia of front  legs.  Note  all claws  have
sloughed.
HISTOPATHOLOGY
The characteristic early histopathologic findings include a variably severe accumulation of
lynphocytes, histiocytes, and fewer plasma cells that is inost intense at the follicular
isthinus (Fig. 9-77)377 37s In cats, small mumbers of neutrophils and eosinophils may also
be present. In early lesions, inflammation is marked, atrophic changes are mild to absent,
 and sebaceous glands are present. In late lesions, atrophic changcs arc severe, infamma-
tion is mild, and sebaceous glands are often absent.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
This condition has failed to respond to topical and systemic glucocorticoids as well as
chlorambucil.377. 379 In cats, anecdotal reports indicate that cyclosporine may be effec-
tive.379 Spontaneous remission has not been reported.
Amyloidosis
Amyloidosis is a generic term that signifies the abnormal extracellular deposition of one of
a family of unrelated proteins that share certain characteristic staining properties and
and cat, most cases of amyloidosis are related to deposition of immunoglobulin light
chains.22.25.386
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
 Different amino acid compositions of amyloid may occur.35. 39 Amyloid deposits contain a
nonfibrillar protein called amyloid-P, which is identical to a normal circulating plasma
 globulin knowm as serum amyloid-P (an elastase inhibitor that may help protect amyloid
deposits from degradation and phagocytosis). Primary and myeloma-associated systemic
 d e (    s    sm
the amyloid fibril protein, which is called amyloid-L. In secondary systemic amyloidosis
Immune-Mediated Disorders · 767
FIGURE 9-77. Same cat as in Figures 9-75
and 9- 76. Note mural lymphocytie folliculitis.
(associated with chronic infammation), a serum precursor protein, serim amyloid-A (a
its. Serum amyloid-A is thought to he cleaved proteolytically by macrophages to amyloid-A
and excreted extracellularly.
Although the pathogenesis of amyloidosis is unclear, it is morphologically related to
cells of the mononuclear phagocytic system, plasma cells, and keratinocytes. Functional
 Ultimately, amyloid deposits lead to changes in tissue architecture and function. In dogs
and cats, amyloidosis is usually associated with chronic inflammatory disease, neoplasia,
and accumulations of plasma cells.22, 25, 381, 386 It has also heen associated with a vasculitic
syndrome.37 It has also been suggested that vaccination reactions caused polyarthritis in
12 Akitas, 33% of which progressed to renal anyloidosis.389 A familial tendency has
been detected in Chinese Shar pei and beagle dogs and in Abyssinian and Siarnese
Cats.381,382,365.387
CLINICAL FEATURES
 Most commonly, amyloidosis is an internal disease, usually affecting the kidneys, spleen,
and liver, with death often resulting from the renal involvement.25. 381 Cutaneous lesions
 are described in dogs with systemic amyloidosis and primary cutaneous disease.22 Cutane-
768 · Immune-Mediated Disorders
FIGURE 9-78. Canine cutaneous
amyloidosis.  Ecchymoses produced
d d us  n q
pura) (arrows). (Courtesy R.M.
Schwartzman.)
ous lesions with _systemic amyloidosis associated with a monoclonal gammopathy was
by flicking the abdominal skin briskly with a finger or by removing hair (Fig. 9-78). If the
skin was traumatized severely, blood cozed through the skin within seconds and clotted
 immediately. Skin biopsy revealed an amorphous, homogeneous, eosinophilic superficial
dermis. The walls of the blood vessels in the involved area were thickened by deposition
of the homogeneous eosinophilic material (Fig. 9-79). The material was Congo red-
positive (congophilia), and a green birefringence of the material was visible in Congo red -
 stained sections examined with polarized light (dichroism). A monoclonal serum IgG
paraprotein was found. No treatment was given, and the dog remained unchanged for 14
months.
Mucocutaneous amyloidosis unassociated with monoclonal gammopathy was reported
 in a 3-year-old Brittany spaniel.3so The dog had multiple, whitish to ulcerated papular and
plaquelike lesions on the tongue and gingiva as well as oozing ulcers on the footpads,
ventral surface of the interdigital spaces, and multiple pressure points (elbows, stifles).
FIGURE 9-79. Canine cutaneous
amyloidosis. Dermal blood vessel
wall is markedlly thickened by amy.
loid deposition (arrow). (Courtesy
R. M. Schwartzman.)
Inmune-Mediated Disorders · 769
A casc of generalized amyloidosis was described in a I0-weck-old German shepherd
amyloidosis was found at necropsy, the pads only showed chronic exudative inflammation.
 Primary nodular cutaneous amyloidosis has been described as the most common type
of cutaneous amyloidosis in dogs and cats.22 Solitary or grouped dermal or subcutaneous
nodules may occur anywhere but more commonly involve the ear. Soine nodules may
ulcerate secondary to necrosis. In humans, nodular amyloidosis is considered to be a
plasmacytoma that locally produces immunoglobulin light chains as precursors to amyloid
lesions would be neoplasia, cysts, and infectious or sterile nodular granulomas. Diagnosis
is made by histopathologic examination, which shows inultiple dernal accumulations of
amorphous eosinophilic material. Simall numbers of plasma cells are found, as well as
 macrophages and small numbers of lymphocytes.
DIAGNOSIS
The diagnosis of amyloidosis is confirmed by biopsy.22 Light-microscopic examination
reveals the deposition of an eosinophilic amorphous substance that is congophilic and
birefringent when polarized (Fig. 9-80) s Secondary--hut not primary and myeloma-
nate, Electron-microscopic examination reveals the characteristic presence of 7.5- to 10-
nm-wide linear, nonbranching tubular fbrils, each fibril being composed of several
filaments arranged in a β-pleated sheet configuration.39
CLNICAL MANAGEMENT
Solitary nodules unassociated with systeimic disease can be successfully excised. Successful
treatment of multiple lesions is not reported. In hurmans, skin lesions of both primary and
myeloma-associated amyloidosis have responded to DMSO, which 1may inhibit amyloid
synthesis or act to promote amyloid degradation.39
FIGURE 9-80. Canine cutaneous amyloidosis. Multiple “lakes" of homogencous, fractured
almyloid.
770 · Immune-Mediated Disorders
●REFERENCES
General
Macroscopic and Microscopic Evaluation of Canine
1. Abdou NI: The idiotype-anti-idiotype network in hu-
and Feline Skin Disease. Mosby-Year Book, St.
 man autoimmunity. J Cln Immunol 5:365, 1985.
Louis, 1992.
 2. Affolter VK, et al: Immunohistochemical characteriza-
23. Haines DM, et al: Avidin-biotin peroxidase complex
tion of canine acute graft-versus-host disease and
erythema  multiforme.
.In: Kwochka KW, et al
formalin fixed skin biopsics in canine autoimmune
(eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology IIl. But-
skin disease. Can J Vet Res 5l:104, 1987.
terworth-Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p 103.
24. Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary
3. Ahmed SA, et al: Sex hormones, immune responses,
Dermatology Il1. Butterworth-Hleinemann, Boston,
and autoiminune diseases. Am J Pathol 121:531,
1998.
1985.
 25. Halliwell REW, Gorman NT: Veterinary Clinical Im-
4. Ansel J, et al: Cytokine modulation of keratinocyte
munology. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1989.
cytokines. J Invest Dermatol 94:101S, 1990.
 26. Hargis AM, Liggit HD: Cytokines and their role in
5. Beutner EH, et al: Immunopathology of the Skin II1.
      e  s
Churchill Livingstone, New York, 1987.
 in Veterinary Derrmatology Il. Pergamon Press, New
6. Bos JD: Skin Immune Systein. CRC Press, Boca Ra-
York, 1993, p 325.
ton, FL, 1989.
27. Hauser C, et al: T helper cells grown with hapten-
7. Bradley GA, Calderwood Mays MB: Immunoperoxi-
 modifed cultured Langerhans' cells produce interleu.
dase staining for the detection of autoantibodlies in
kin 4 and stimulatc lgE produetion by B cells. Fur J
caninc autoimmune skin disease: Comparison to im-
Imnmunol 19:245, 1989.
munofuorescence results. Vet Immunol Immunopa-
 28. Hauser C, Orbea HA: Superantigens and their role in
thol 26:105, 1990.
immunc-mediated diseases. J Invest Dermatol 10l:
8. Braquct P, et al: Perspectives in platclet-activating
503, 1993.
factor research. Pharmacol Rev 39:97, 1987.
29. Henfry J: Autoimmune skin disease in dogs. In Pract
9. Brunner CJ: Autoimmunity. In: Bonagura JD (edl):
13:131, 1991.
Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy Xll. W.B. Saun-
 30. Hewicker-Trautwein M, et al: Zur diagnostic bulloser
ders Co., Philadelphia, 1995, p 554.
und nicht-bulloser autoimmuner Hautkrankheiten bei
10. Caciolo PL, et al: Michel's medium as a preservalive
Hund und Katzc. Kleintierpraxis 37:135, 1992.
for immunofuorescent staining of cutaneous biopsy
specimens in dogs and cats. Am J Vet Res 45:128.
preservation in canine skin utilizing Michel's fxative.
1984.
Vet Immumol Immunopathol 9:161, 1985.
1l. Carlothi DN, et al: Drug-related superficial pemphi-
32. Ihrke PJ, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Derma-
gis in the dog: A report of 3 cases. Proc Annu Memb
tology I1. Pergamon Press, New York, 1993.
Mcet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol
 33. Kalaher KM: The value of immunofuorescence test-
15:23, 1999.
12. Dahl MV: Immunodermatology II. Year Book Medi-
XI. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1992, p 503.
cal Publishers, Chicago, 1988.
34. Kristensen F, Mehl NB: Autoimmune lidelser hos
13. Day MJ, Mazza G: Tissue immunoglobulin G suh-
hund og kat: Behandling med guldsalte. Dansk Vet
classes observed in immune-imediated dermatopathy.
Tidsskr 72:883, 1989.
deep Pyoderma, and hypersensitivity dermatis in
35, Kromer G, et al: Is autoimnunity a side effct of
dogs. Res Vet Sci 58:82, 1995.
14. DeBoer DJ, et al: Cireulating immune complex con-
1986.
centrations in selected cases of skin disease in dogs.
 36. Kummel BA: Medical treatment of canine pemphi-
Aim J Vet Res 49:143, 1988.
gus-pemphigoid. In: Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's Current
15. Dore M, et al: Production of a monoclonal antibody
Veterinary Therapy XI1. W.B. Saunters Co., Philadel-
against canine CMP-140 (P-selectin) and studies of its
phia, 1995, p 636.
vascular distribution in canine tissues. Vet Pathol 30:
37. Lewis RM, Picut CA: Veterinary Clinical Immunol.
213, 1993.
ogy.Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia, 1989.
16. Ettinger SJ. Feldman EC: Textbook of Veterinary In-
 38. Locke PH, et al: Manual of Small Animal Derrmatol-
ternal Medicine IV. W.B. Saunders Co., Phiadelplhia,
oy. British Small Animal Veterinary Association,
1995.
Shurdington, 1993.
17. Fadok VA: TGFβ: The janus of cytokines. J Vet Al-
39. Luger TA, Schwartz T: Evidence for an epidermal
lergy Clin Immunol 5:129, 1997.
cytokine network. J Invest Dernatol 95:100s, 1990.
18. Freedberg IM: Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in Ceneral
40. Matus RW, et al: Plasimapheresis in 5 dogs with sys-
Medicine V. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1999.
temic immune-mediated disease. J Am Vet Med As-
19. Griffin CE, Rosenkrantz Ws: Direct immunofluorcs-
soc 187:595, 1985.
cence testing: A comparison of two laboratories in the
41. McEwan BJ. et al: The response of the eosinophil int
diagnosis of canine immune-mediated skin disease.
acute infammation in the horse. In: von Tscharner C,
Semin Vet Med Surg 2:202, 1987.
Halliwcll REW (eds): Advances in Veterinary Derma-
20. Grifin CE: Diagnosis and managcment of primary
tology I. Bailliere-Tindall, London, 1990, p 176.
antoimrnune skin disease; A review. Semin Vet Med
42. McKenzie RC, Saunder DN; Thc role of keratinocyte
Surg 2:173, 1987.
cytokines in inflammation and immunity. J Invest
21. Griffn CE, et al: Current Veterinary Dermatology.
Denatol 95:105s, 1990.
Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis, 1993.
43.
 Middleton E, et al: Allergy Principles and Practice
22. Gross TL, et al: Veterinary Dermatopathology: A
IV. Mosby-Ycar Book, St. Lomuis, 1993.
Immune-Mediated Disorders · 771
44. Moore FM, et al: Loealization of immunoglobulins
67. Day MJ: A Color Atlas of Clinical Immunology of tht:
and complement by the peroxidasc antiperoxidase
Dog and Cat. Iowa State University Press, Aines, IA.
mcthod in autoimmune and monautoimmune canine
1999.
dermatopathics. Vet Immunol Immumopathol 14:1.
 68. Walsh LJ, Murphy GF: Role of adhesion inolecules in
1987.
cutaneous infammation and neoplasia. J Cutan Pathol
45. Morrison LH: When to request immunofluorescence:
19:161, 1992.
Practical hints. Semin Cutan Med Surg 18:36, 1999.
 69. Wolfe Jfl, Halliwell REW: Total hemolytic cormple-
46. Motier S, von Tscharner C: Immunohistochemistry
 ment values in normal and diseased dog populations.
in skin disease: diagnostie value? In: von Tscharmer C,
Vet Immunol Inmunopathol 1:287, 1980.
Halliwell REw (eds): Advances in Veterinary Derma-
fa oi un tio su ue s us oui ivf a 02
tology I. Bailliere-Tindall, London, 1990, p 479.
ct al (cds); Advances in Veterinary Dermatology I1.
47. Scoft DW, et al: Muller and Kirk's Small Animal
Pergamon Press, New York, 1993, p 3.
Dernatology V. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia.
71. Yager JA, Scott Dw: The skin and appendages. In:
1995.
 Jubb KVF, et al (eds): Pathology of Domestic Ani-
48. Nickoloff BJ: Dermal Immunc Systcm. CRC Press,
nals IV. Academic Press, New York, 1993, p 531.
Boca Raton, FL, 1993.
72.YagerJA,Wilcock BP: Color Atlas and Text of Surgi-
49. Noli C, et al: A retraspective evaluation of adverse
cal Pathology of the Dog and Cat: Dermatopathology
reaction of trimethoprim-sulfonamide cormbinations in
and Skin Tumors. Wolfe Publishirng, London, 1994.
dogs and cats. Vet Q 17:123, 1995.
73. Zipfel W, et al: Demonstration of innunoglobulins 
 50. Nolhi C, et al: Apoptosis in sclected skin diseases. Vet
and complement in canine and feline autoimmune
Dermatol 9:221, 1998.
and nonautoiminone skin diseases with the direct in-
 51. Olivry T, et al: Heterogeneity of canine autoimmune
munoHuorescence _ and   indirect  immunoperoxidase
subepidermal bullous diseases: Identification of tar-
method. J Vet Med A 32:494, 1992.
geted antigens defines novel clinicopathologic cntities.
Therapy
Proc Anmu Meinb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am
74. Miller E: The use of cytotoxic agcnts in the treatment
Coll Vet Dermatol 13:80, 1997.
of immunc-mediated diseases of dogs and cats. Senin
 52. Medleau L, et al: Trimethoprim-sulfonamide-associ-
Vet Med Surg 12:157, 1997.
ated drug eruptions in dogs. J Am Anirn Hosp Assoc
75. Plumb DC: Veterinary Drug Handbook II1. lowa
26:305,1990.
State University Press, Aincs, 1999.
 53. Scott Dw: Feline dermatology 1979-1982: Introspec-
76. Pedersen NC: A review of immunologic diseases of
tive retrospections. J Arm Anim Hosp Assoc 20:537,
661 19  mo   
1984.
77. Rosenkrantz W: Immunomodulating drugs in derma-
 54. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1983-1985: *The se-
tology. In: Current Veteriuary Therapy X. W.B. Saun-
cret sits." J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 23:255, 1987.
ders Co., Philadelphia, 1989, p 570.
 55. Scott Dw, et al: Iminune-mediated dermatoses in
78. Rosenkrantz WS: Penphigus foliaceus. In: Grifn
dornestic animals: Ten years after. Part 1. Compend
CE, ot al (cds): Current Veterinary Derrnatology.
Cont Edue Small Anim Pract 9:423, 1987.
Moshy-Year Book, St. I.ouis, 1993, p 141.
 56. Scott DW, et al: Iminune-metiated dermatoses in
79. White SD. ct al: Corticosteroid (methylprednisolone
dormestic animals: Ten years after. Part I1. Compcnd
 sodium snccinate) pulse therapy in 5 dogs with auto-
Cont Educ Small Anim Pract 9:539, 1987.
 57. von Tscharner C, Halliwell REW (eds): Advances in
immune skin disease. J Am Vet Med Assoc 19l:1121,
Veterinary Dermatology I. Bailliere-Tindall, Philadel.
1987.
80. White SD: Nonsteroidlal imrmunosuppressive therapy.
phia, 1990.
58. Stone J Dermatology. Irmmunology, and Allergy.
In: Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's Current Veterinary
Therapy XIV. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1999,
Moshy- Year Book, St. Iouis, 1985.
59. Suter MM, et al: Autoimmune diseases of domestie
P 536.
Alkylating Agents (Cyclaphosphamide, Chlorambucil)
animals: An update. In: Kwochka KK, et al (eds):
Advances in Veterinary Derinatology Il. Butter-
81. Rhodes KH, Shoulberg N: Chlorambucil: Effective:
worth-1Ieinemann, Boston, 1998, p 321.
therapeutic option for the trcatrment of feline in-
60. Swerlick HA, Lawley T]: Role of rnicrovascular endo-
mune-mediated dermatoses. Feline Pract 20:5, 1992.
thelial cells in infammation. J Invest Derimatol 100:
82. Stanton ME, Legendre AM: Effccts of eyclophospha
1l1$, 1993.
mide in dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 188:
61. Thiers BH, Dobson RL: Pathogenesis of Skin Dis-
1319, 1986.
ease, Churchill Livingstone, New York, 1986.
Azathioprine
 62. Thomsen MK: Species specifeity in the generation of
83. Beale KM: Azathioprine toxicity in the domestic cat.
cicosanoids: Emphasis on leukocytc-activating factors
In: von Tschamer C, Halliwell REW (cds): Advances
in the skin of allergic dogs and humans. In: Ihrke PJ,
 in Vetcrinary Dermatology I. Bailliere, London, 1990,
et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology I1.
p 457.
Pergamon Press, New York, 1993, p 63.
63. Thomsen MK: The Role of Ncntrophil-Activating
 84. Beale KM: Azathioprinc for treatment of iminune-
mediated diseases of dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med
Mediators in Canine Health and Disease. Ballerup.
Assoc 53:1236, 1992.
Copenhagen, 1991.
 S5. Griffn CE: Pemphigus foliaceus; Recent findings on
64. Thormpson JP: Basic inmunologic principles of aller-
the pathophysiology and results of treatment." Pro-
gic disease. Scmin Vet Med Surg 6:247, 1991,
ceedings of the University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh.
65. Tizard IR: Veterinary Immunology: An Introduction
1993, p 85.
V. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1996.
86. Moriello KA, et al: Acutc pancrealitis in two dogs
66. van den Broek, A: Autoimmune skin diseases in cats.
given azathioprine and prednisone. J An Vet Med
In Pract 13:175, 1991.
Assoc 191:695, 1987.
772 · Immune-Mediated Disorders
87. White SD, et al: Investigation into the role of thiopu-
Therapy IX. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1986. p
rine 1methyltransferase in the use of azathioprine in
6始
dogs: Phase one. Proc Annu Meimb Meet Ain Acad
109. Wozel G, Barth J: Curent aspects of modes of action
Vet Dermatol Anm Coll Vet Dermatol 14:1ll, 1998.
of dapsone, Int J Dematol 27:547, 1988.
Cyclosporine
Tetracycline/Niocinamide
 88. Page EH, et al: Cyclosporine A. J Am Acad Dermatol
110. Humbert P, et al: The tetracyclines in dermatology. J
14:785, 1986.
Am Acad Dermatol 25:691, 1991.
 89. Read RA: Treatment of canine nictitans plasmacytic
111. Rosenkrantz WS: Discoid lupus erythematosus. In:
conjunctivitis with 0.2% cyclosporine ointmcnt. J
Griffin CE, et al (eds): Current Veterinary Dermatol-
Sinall Anim Pract 36:50, 1995.
ogy. Moshy-Year Book, St. Louis, 1993, p 149.
90. Rosenkrantz WS, ct al: Clinical evaluation of cyclo-
112. White SD, et al: Use of tetracycline and niacinamide
for treatment of autoimmune skin disease in 31 dogs.
Inediated disease and epitheliotropic lymphoma. J Am
J Am Vet Med Assoc 200:1497, 1992.
Anim Hosp Assoc 25:377, 1989.
91. White JV: Cyclosporine: Prototypc of a T-cell selec-
Antimaloriais
tive immunosuppressant. J Am Vet Med Assoc 189:
113. Isaacson D, et al: Antimalarials in dermatoloyy. Int J
566, 1986.
Deninatol 21:379, 1982.
92. Williams DL: A comparative approach to topical cy-
1l4. Tamnenbaum L, Tuffanell DL: Antimalarial agents.
closporine therapy. Eye 11:453, 1997.
Arch Dermatol 116:587, 1980.
Gold Therapy
Cokchicine
115. Guilhan J, Orr J: Essais de traitement de leczema
d s  dees pam pe
des carnivores domestiques par le colchicoside. Bull
a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 181:26l, 1982.
Acad Vet Francc 30:29, 1957.
94. Kummel B: Treatment of autoinmune disease.
116. Sullivan TP, et al: Colchicine in dermatology. J Am
Derm Dialogue 4:2, 1985.
Acad Dermatol 39:993, 1998.
 95. Medleau L, et al: Ulcerative pododermatitis in a cat:
Pemphigus Complex
Immunofuorescent findings and response to chryso-
 117. Amagai M, et al: The clinical phenotype of pemphi
therapy. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 18:449, 1982.
96. Muler GH, et al (eds): Small Animal Dermatology
gus is defined by the antidesnoglein autoantibody
profle. J Am Acad Dermatol 40:167, 1999.
IV. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1989.
118. Anhalt CJ: Makng sense of antigens and antilolies
RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy Vll1. W.B.
in pemphigus. J Am Acad Dermatol 40:763, 1999.
119.August
Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1983, p 448
 JR, Chickering WR: Pemphigus foliaceus
causing lameness in 4 dogs. Compend Cont Educ
98. Sfikakis PP, et al: Suppression of IL-2 and IL-2 re-
ceptor biosynthesis by gold compounds in in vitro
Small Anim Pract 7:894, 1985.
120. Bensignor E, ct al: Le pemphigus foliace des carmi-
activated human peripheral blood mouonuclear cells.
vores domestiques. Ann Med vet 142:5, 1998.
Arth Rheumatol 35:208, 1993.
121. Caciolo PL, et al: Pemphigus foliaceus in 8 cats and
99. Suzuki S, et al: Gold sodium thiomalate selectively
results of induction therapy using azathioprine. J Am
inhibits IL-5 mectiated eosinophil survival. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 96:251, 1995.
Anim Hosp Assoc 20:571, 1984.
122. Carlotti DN, et al: Pemphigus vulgaris in the dog: A
100. "Thomas I: Gold therapy and its inclications in derrma-
report of 8 cascs. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad
tology. J Am Acad Dermatol 16:845, 1987.
101. White 'S: Oral gold therapy. Derm Dialogue 5:2.
Vet Dermmatol Am Coll Vet Dcrmatol 15:2l, 1999.
123. Carlotti DN, et al: Concurrent superficial pemphigus
1986.
and multifocal cutaneous mctastatic marmmary carci-
Sulfones/Sulfonamides 
noma in a dog: A paraneoplastic disease? Proc Annu
102. Fadok VA, Barrie J: Sulfasalazine-responsive vasculitis
Meinb Meet Am Acad Vet Dcrmatol Ain Coll Vet
in the dog: A case report. J Aim Anim Hosp Assoc 20:
Dermatol 15:75, 1999.
161, 1984.
124. Crameri FM, Suter MM: Induction of acantholysis in
103. IIalliwell REW, et al: Dapsone for the treatinent of
a serum-free culture system. Proe Annu Memb Meet
pruritic dermatitis (dermatitis herpetiformis and sul-
Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 10:63,
cormeal pustular dermatosis) in dogs. J Ain Vet Med
1994.
Assoc 170:698, 1977.
125. deBruin A, et al: Periplakin and envoplakin are target
104. Hekman P, et al: Pharmacokinetics and bioavailability
of dapsone in the beagle dog. J Small Anim Pract 30:
gus. J Am Acad Dermatol 40:682, 1999.
92,1989.
125a. Ding X, et al: The anti-desmoglein 1 autoantibodies
105. Katz SI: Sulfones. In: Freedberg iM, et al (eds): Fitz-
in pemphigus vulgaris sera are pathogenic. J Invest
patrick's Derrnatology in General Medicine V. Me-
Demmatol 112:739, 1999.
Graw-Hill,New York, 1999, p 2790.
126. Dmochowsla M, et al: Desmnocolins I and ll are
106. Ices GE, et al: Fatal thromboeytopenie hemorrhagic
recognized by certain sera frou patients with various
diathesis associated with dapsone adninistration to a
types of pemphigus, particularly Brazilian penphigus
dog. J Am Vet Med Assoe 174:49, 1979.
foliaceus. J Invest Dermatol 100:380, 1993.
107. Thuong-Nguyen V, et al: Inhibition of neutrophil ad-
127. Dunstan RW: Controversies in im munologic diseases
herence to antibody by dapsone: A possible therapeu-
from a pathologist's perspective. Controversics in Vet-
tic mcchanism of dapsone in the treatment of IgA
 erinary Dermatology. Bad Kreuznach, 1992.
dermatoses. J Invest Dermatol 100:349, 1993.
128.
.Fukuda E, et al: Pemphigus erythematosus in a Shet-
108. Scott Dw: Sulfones and sulfonamides in canine der-
land sheepdog. I Vet Med (Tokyo) 51:24, 1998.
Inatulogy. In: Kirk Rw (ed): Current Veterinary
129. Greek JS: Feline pemphigus foliacens: A retrospective
Immune-Mediated Disorders · 773
of 23 cases. Proc Annu Memb Mret Ain Acad Vet
involvement in a Cerman shepherd dog: Possible re-
Deruatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 9:27, 1993.
sponse to heparin. Vet Dcrmatol 3:79, 1992.
130. Criflin CE: Controversies in inmumologic diseases
152. Pascal A, et al: Seasonality and cnvronrncntal risk
fron a clinician's standpoint. Controversies in Veteri-
fuctors for pemphigus foliaccus in animals: A retro-
nary Dermatology. Bad Kreuziach, 1992.
spective study ofS3 cases presented to theveterinary
131.
 Griffn CF: Pemphigus foliaceus: Recent findings on
    n 
the pathophysiology and results of treatinent. Presen-
Davis from 1976 to i994. Proc Annu Meimb Meet
tation, William Dick Bicentenary, Edinburgh, 1993.
Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 11:24,
132. Grifin CE: Recognizing and treating pemiphigus foli-
1995.
aceus in cats. Vet Med 86:513, 1991.
153. Poisson L, et al: Subcormeal neutrophilic acantholytic
133. Halliwell REW, Goldschmidt M: Pemphigus foliaceus
pushlar derimatitis: An unusual manifestation of der-
in the canine: A casc report and ciseussion. J Am
malophytosis resembling canine pemphigus foliaceous.
Anim Hosp Assoc 13:431, 1977.
In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in Vetcrinary
134. Ihrke PJ. et al: Pemphigus foliaceus of the footpads
Dermatology Il. Butcrworth-Hcinemann, Boston.
in 3 dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 186:67, 1985.
1998,p 456.
135. Ihrke Pj, et al: Pemphigus foliaccus in dogs: A review
153a. Reis VMS, et al: UVB-inducedt acantholysis in en-
of 37 cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 186:59, 1985.
demic penuphigus foliaceus (fogo selvagem) and pem-
136. Ioannides D, et al: Regional variation in the expres-
phigus vulgaris. J A1m Acad Dermatol 42:571, 2000.
sion of pemphigus foliaceus, pemphigus erythemato-
154.
Rhodes KH, Shoulherg N: Chlorambucil: Effective
sus, and pemphigus vugaris antigens in human skin. J
therapeutic options for the treatment of feline im-
 Invest Dermatol 96:15, 1991.
mune-mediated dermatoses. Feline Pract 20:5, 1992.
137. Ischi K, et al: Characterization of autoantibodies in
I55. Robinson ND, et al: The new pemphigus variants. J
pemphigus using antigen-specific enzyme-linked in-
Am Acad Derinatol 40:649, 1999.
munosorhent assays
s with baculovirus-cxpressed re-
156. Rosenkrantz. WS: Pemphigus foliaccus. In: Griffn
combinant desmogleins. J Ininunol 159:2010, 1997
CE, et al (eds): Current Veterinary Dermatology.
138. Iwasaki T, et al: The detection of the autoantigen
Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis, 1993, p 141.
snudued rm shop u rias suged Aq pi
157. Ruocco V, Sacerdoti G: Pemphigus and bullous pern-
foliaceus. Proe Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Der-
phigoid cluc to drugs. Int J Dermatol 30:307, 1991.
 Inatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 12:44, 1996.
158.
Ruoco V, ct al: A case of dlict-relatexd penphigus.
139. Iwasaki T, Maeda Y: The effect of ultraviolet (UV) on
Dermatology 192:373, 1996.
the severity of canine pemphigus erythematosus. Proc
159. Schoen II, et al: Immunophoresis in paraneoplastic 
Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Derrratol Ain Coll
pemphigus. Arch Dermatol 134:706, 1998.
Vet Dcrmatol 13:86, 1997.
140. Iwasaki T, et al: Effect of substrate on indircct immu-
160.
Scott Dw: Pemphigus vegetans in a dog. Comell Vet
67:374, 1977.
nofuoresccnce test for canine permphigus foliaceus.
 16l. Scott DW, et al: Pemphigus erythematosus in the dog
Vet Pathol 33:332, 1996.
141. Iwatsuki K, ct al;: Ultrastructural binding site of pein-
and cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:815, 1980.
162. Scot IW, et al: Pemphigus vulgaris without mucosal
phigns foliaceus antibodies: Comparison with pemphi-
gus vulgaris. J Cutan Pathol 18:160, 1991.
or Inucocutaneous involvement in two dogs. J Am
142. Koch Pj, et al: Targeted disruption of the pemphigus
Anim Hosp Assoc 18:401, 1982.
vulgaris antigen (desnoglein 3) gene in mice causes
163. Scott DW, Lewis RM: Pemphigus and pemphigoid in
loss of keratinocyte cell adhesion with a phenotype
dog and man: Comparativc aspccts. J Am Acad Der-
similar to pemphigus vulgaris. J Cell Biol 137:1091,
matol 5:148, 1981.
1997.
164. Scott DW: Pemphigus in donestic animals. Clin Der-
143. Iemmens P, ct al: Paraneoplastic pernphigus in a
matol 1:141, 1983.
dog. Vet Dermatol 9:127, 1998.
165. Shirakata Y, et al: Lack of mucosal involvement in
144. Liang L, et al: The phosphodiesterase inhibitors pen-
pemphigus foliaceus may be due to low expression of
toxphyline and roliprani prevent dliabetes in NOD
desmoglein 1. J Invest Dermatol 110:76, 1998.
micc. Diabctes 47:570, 1998.
166. Stannard AA, et al: A mucocutaneous dliscasc in the
145. Lombardi C, et al: Environmental risk factors in en-
dog, resembling pemphigus vulgaris in man. ] Am Vet
demic pernphigus foliaceus (fogo selvagern). J nvest
Med Assoc 166:575, 1975.
Dernatol 18:847, 1992.
167. Suter MM, et al: Ultrastructural localization of pein-
146. Mahoney MG, et al: Explanation for the clinical and
 phigus antigens on keratinocytes in oivo and in vitro.
Am J Vet Res 41:507, 1990.
aceus and vulgaris. J Clin Invest 103:461, 1999.
168. Suter MM, et al: Identification of canine penphigus
147. Manning TO, et al: Pemphigus discascs in the fcline:
antigens. In: Ihrke PJ, et al (eds): Advances in Veteri-
Seven case reports and discussion. J Am Anin Hosp
nary Dermatology Il. Pergamon Press, New York,
Assoc I8:433, 1982.
1993, p 367.
169. Suter MM, et al: Bullous autoimmune skin diseases in
of nondesmoglein targets of pemphigus autoimmun-
animals. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Der-
ity. Arch Dermatol 134:971, 1998.
matol Am Coll Vet De1matol 13:100, 1997.
149. Matise AW: Canine penphigus vegetans: A report of
170. Tur E, Brenner S: Diet and pemphigus. Arch Derma-
I6 cases. Proc Annu Mermh Meet Am Acad Vet Der-
tol 134: 1406, 1998.
matol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 7:28, 1991.
171. Walder Ef, Wermer A: A possible case of paraneo-
150. Noxon JO, Myers RK: Pemphigus foliaceus in two
plastie: skin disease with features of erythema rmulti-
Shetland sheepdog littermates. J Ain Vet Merl Assoc
Forme and pemphigus folicaceus in a dog. Proc Annu
194:545, 1989.
Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet
151. Olivry T, et al: Pemphigus vulgaris lacking mucosal
Dertmatol 12:70, 1996.
774 · Immune-Mediated Disorders
172. Wolf R, et al: Drug-induced versus drug-triggered
 pemphigus. Dermatologica 182:207, 1991.
autoantigen. J Clin Invest 93:2022, 1994.
173. Wurm S, et al: Comparative pathology of pemphigus
188. Stanely JR: Bullous pemphigoid. In: Frcedberg IM, et
in dogs and humans. Clin Dermatol 12:515, 1994.
al (eds): Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General Medi-
174. Xue W, et al: Functional involvement of urokinase-
cine V. MeGraw-Hill, New York, i999, p 666.
type plasminogen activator receptor in pemphigus
189. Thomas I, et al: Treatment of generalized bullous
acantholysis. J Cutan Pathol 25:469, 1998.
peinphiguid with oral tetracycline. J Am Acad Derma-
tol 28:74, 1993.
Autoimmune Subepidermal Bullous Dermatoses
190. Yancy KB: Cicatricial pemphigoid. In: Freedberg IM,
175. Ghohestani RF, et al: Diagnostic value of indirect
     
immunofuorescence on sodium chloride-split skin in
Medicine V. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1999, p 674.
dlifferential diagnosis of subepidermal autoimmune
bullous dcrrmatoses. Arch Dermatol 133:1102, 1997.
Epidermolysis Bullosa Acquisita
191. Olivry T, et al: Canine epidermolysis bullosa acquis-
Bullous Pemphigoid
ita: Cireulating autoantbodies target the aminoter-
176. Boreyo L, ct al: Deposition of eosinophil granule
minal noncollagenous (NCl) domain of collagen VIl
in anchoring fibrils. Vet Dermatol 9:19, 1998.
phigoid: Comparison with neutrophil and mast ccll
192.Wooxlley DT, et al: Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita.
granule proteins. Am J Pathol 148:897, 1996.
In: Freedberg IM, et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's Derrmatol.
177. Chan LS, et al: Cloning of the cDNA encoding ca-
ogy in General Medicine V. McGraw-Hill, New York,
nine skin basement membrane bullous pemphigoid
1999, p 702.
antigen 2 reveals molecular and immunologic identity
192a. Xu LT, et al: Molecular cloning and characterization
of a cDNA encoding canine typeVI colagen noncol.
in the human and canine NCl6A domain. J Invest
Dermatol 110:509A, 1998.
lagenous (NC1) domain, the target antigen of autoin-
178. Czech W, et al: Granulocyte activation in bullous dis-
mune disease epidermolysis bullosa acquisita (EBA).
-uad srq u sd e o s s
Biochim Biophys Acta 1408:25, 1998.
goid and pemphigus vulgaris. J Am Acad Dermatol
29:210, 1993.
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus
178a. Dopp R, et al: IgG4 and IgE are the major immu-
193. Cohen PL: T- and B-cel abnormalities in systemic
 noglobulins targeting the NC16A domain of BP180 in
lupus. J Invest Dermatol 100:69s, 1993.
bullous pemphigoid: serum levels of these inmuno-
 globulins reffect disease activity. J Am Acad Dermatol
sets in canine systemic lupus erythematosus. Autoinm-
42:577, 2000.
Inunity 22:1, 1995.
179. Hashimoto T, et al: Comparative study of bullous
195. Chabanne L, et al: Canine systermic lupus erythema-
pemphigoid antigens anong Japanese, British, and
tosus. Part I: Clnical and biologic aspects. Compend
Cont Educ Pract Vet 2l:135, 1999.
the 170-kd antigen present both in the baseinent
196. Chabaune L, et al: Caine systemic lupus erythema-
membrane and on the keratinocyte cell membrane. J
tosus. Part II: Diagnosis and treatment. Compend
Invest Dermatol 100:38s, 1993.
Cont Educ Pract Vet 21:402, 1999.
I80. Iwasaki T, et al: Canine bullous pemphigoid (BP)-
197. Chung JH, et al: Apoptosis in the pathogenesis of
identification of the 180 kd canine BP antigen by
cutanecus lupus erythematosus.Am J Dermatopathol
circulating autoantibodies. Vet Pathol 32:387, 1995.
20:233,1998.
181. Katz Si: Herpes gestationis (peinphigoid gestationis).
198. Clercx C, et al: Nonresponsive generalized bacterial
In: Freedberg IM, et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's Dermatol-
  s  se 
ogy in General Medicine V. McGraw-Hill, New York,
sus in a Beauceron. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 35:220,
1999, p 686.
1999.
182. Kunke G, et al: Bullous pemphigoid in a dog: A casc
199. Day MJ: Inheritance of serum autoantibody, reduced
report with immunofuorescent findings. J Am Anin
serum IyA and autoimmune dlisease in a canine
Hosp Assoc 14:52, 1978.
breeding colony. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 53:207.
183. Olivry T: personal communication 1999.
1996.
183a Olivry T. et al: Novel localized variant of canine
200. Fourmel C, et al: Canine systemic lupus erythemato-
cpidermolysis bullosa acquisita. Vet Rec 146:193.
sus. Part I: A study of 75 cases. Lupus 1:133, 1992.
2000.
201. Hansson II: Antinuclear antibodies: Presence and
184. Olivry T, et al: Novel feline autoimmune blistering
specificity in autoimmune connective tissue disease in
skin disease resembling bullous penphigoid in hu-
the dog. Vet Inmunol Immnunopathol 69:225, 1999.
 mans: IgG autoantibodies target the NCi6A cctodo-
202. Iubert B, et al: Spontaneous familial systemic lupus
main of type XVII collagen (BP180/BPAG2). Vet
erythematosus in a canine breeding colony. J Cormp
Pathol 36:328, 1999.
Pathol 98:85, 1988.
185. Olivry T, et al: Canine bulous pemphigoid IgG auto-
203. Jackson HA, Olivry T: Cutaneous lupus erythemato-
bodies target antigenic epitopes in the NC16A ccto-
sus (ulcerative dermatitis) in the Shetland 'sheepdog
(domain of type XVII collagen (BP180/BPAg2). Proc
and collie: A review and re-evaluation of the clinical
Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll
and histological features. Proc Annu Memb Meet Ain
Vet Der1matol 14:115, 1998.
Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 15:3],
186. Scott DW: Pemphigoid in domestic animals. Clin
'6661
Dermatol 5:155, 1987.
204. Jones DRE: Canine systemic lupus erythematosus:
187. Stahle-Backdahl M, et al: 92-kd gelatinase is pro-
New insights and their inplications. J Comp Pathol
duced by eosinophils at the site of blister formation
108:215, 1993.
in bullous penphigoid and cleaves the extracellular
205. Kristensen AT, et al: Detection of antiplatelet anti-
Immune-Mediated Disorders · 775
body with a platelet irnmunofuorescence assay. J Vet
227. White SD, et al: Investigation of antibodics to cxtract-
Intern Med 8:36, 1994.
able nuclcar antigens ini dogs. Am J Vet Res 53:1019,
206. Lehman P, et al: Experimental reproduction of skin
1992.
-  p v q sna s u s
diation. J Am Acad Dennatol 22:181, 1990.
MeVey Ds, Shuman W: Use of multiple antigen sub-
Discoid Lupus Erythemotosus
207.
 strates to detect antinuclear antibody in canine sera.
228. Guaguere E, Magnol JlP: Lupus érythemateux dis-
Vet Immumol Immunopathol 28:37,1991.
coide a localisation auriculaire chez le chien. Prat
208. Monier JC, et al: Systermic lupus crythematosus in a
Med Chir Anim Comp 24:101, 1989.
colony of dogs. Am J Vet Res 49:46, 1988.
229. Kalaher KM, Scott DW: Diseoid lupus erythematosus
209. Monestier M, et al: Autoantibodies to histone, DNA
 in a cat. Feline Pract 19:7, 1991.
and nucleosome antigens in caninc systenic
lupus
230. Iwasaki T, ct al: A canine case of discoid lupus ery.
erythematosus. Clin Exp Iummol 99:37, 1995.
thematosus with circulating autoantibody. J Vet Med
210. Mooney E, et al: Characterization of the chaunges in
Sei 57:1097, 1995.
matrix molecules at the dernoepidernal junction in
231. Olivry T. et al: Le lupus érythémateux discoide du
lupus erythematosus. J Cutan Pathol 18:417, 1991.
chien: A propos de 22 observations. Prat Med Chir
211. Xorris DA: Pathomechanisms of photosensitive lupus
Anin Comp 22:205, 1987.
erytheinatosus. J Invest Dermatol 100:58s, 1993.
232. Rogers KS, et al: Squarous cell carcinona of the
212. Ofivry T, et al: Interfacc deninatitis and sehaceous
canine nasal planum: Eight cases (1988-1994). J Am
adenitis in exfoliative cutaneous lupus erythematosus
Anim Hosp Assoe 3l:373, 1995.
(lupoid dermatosis) of German shorthaired pointers.
232a. Rosenbauin M: (lyclospurine. Derm Dialogue, Sum-
Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am
mer 1999, p 5.
Coll Vet De1matol 15:4l, 1999.
233. Rosenkranfz Ws: Discoidl lupus erytheimatosus. In:
213. Olivry T, ct al: Bullous systemic lupus erythematosus
(Griffn CE, et al (eds): Current Veterinary IDermatol-
(type-1) in a dog. Vet Rec 145:165, 1999.
ogy. Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis, 1993, p 149.
214. Pedersen NC, Barlough JE: Systemic lupus erythema-
234. Scott DW, et al: Canine lupus erythcmatosus. II: Dis-
tosus in the cat. Feline Pract 19:5, 1991.
coid lupus erytheimatosus, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 19:
215. Prinz JC, et al: Trcatment of severe cutaneous lupus
481, 1983.
erythematosus with a chimeric CD4 monoclonal anti-
235. Scott Dw, ct al: Cmusual fntlings in canine peinphi-
body, cM-T412. J Am Acad Dermatol 34:244, 1996.
mus erythematosus and discoid lupus crythcimatosus. ]
216. Sauder DN, ct al: Epidermal cytokines in murine 
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:579, 1984.
lupus. J Invest Dermatol 100:42S, 1993.
 236. Scott IW, Miller WH Jr: Squamous cell careinorma
217. Scott DW, et al: Canine lupus erythematosus. I: Sys-
arising in chronic discoid lupus erytheumatosus nasal
termic lupus erythcmatosus. J Ain Anim Hosp Assoc
lesions in two German shepherd dogs. Vet Dermatol
19:461, 1983.
6:99, 1995.
237. Stanley BJ, et al: Bilateral rotation llaps for the treat-
thematosus: A review and personal perspective on
ment of chronic nasal derrnatitis in four dogs. J Am
the nomenclature and classification of the cutaneous
Anin Hosp Assoc 27:295, 1991.
manifestations of lupus crythernatosus. Iupus 6:84,
238. Sugai SA, et al: Cutaneous lapus crythematosus: Di-
1997.
rect iumunofuorescence and epidermal bascment
219. Sontheimer RD: Iupus erythemalosus. In: Freedberg
membrane study. Int J Icrmatol 31:260, 1992.
IM, et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General
239. Willemse ‘T, et al: Discoid lupus erythematosus inl
Medicine V. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1999, p 1993.
cats. Vet Dermatol 1:19, 1989.
 240. williarns IREA, ct al: The contribution of direct im-
220. Soulard M, et al: The I protcin of the heterogeneous
nuclear ribonucleoprotein cornplex is a rovel dlog nu-
munofluorescence to the diagnosis of lupus erythema-
clear autoantigen. J Autoimmun 9:599, 1996.
tosus. J Cutan Pathol 16:122.1989.
221. Stone MS, et al: Lupus-type anticoagulant in a dog
with hemolysis and thrombosis. J Vet Intern Med 8:
 Cryoglobulinemia and Cryofibrinogenemia
57,1994.
241. Bridle KH, Littlewood JD: Tail tip necrosis in1 two
222. Teichner M, el al: Systemic lupus erythermnatosus in
litters of Birman kittens. J Small Anin Pract 39:88.
dogs: Assoxiation to the major histocompatibility com-
1995.
plex class I antigen DLA-A7. Clin Immunol Immuno-
242. Cohen SJ, et al: Cutaneous manifestations of cry-
pathol 55:255, 1990.
oglobulineania: Clinical and histopathologic study of
223. Thoren-Tolling K, Ryden L: Serum auto-antibodies
seventy-two patients. J Aim Acad Dermatol 25:2l.
and clinical/pathologic features in Cerman shepherd
1991.
dogs with a lupus-like syndroume. Acta Vet Scand 32:
243. IDickson Nj: Cold agglutinin disease in a puppy asso-
15. 1991.
ciated with lead intoxication. J Srmall Anin Pract 31:
224. Velthuis PJ, ct al: Immunohistopathology of light-in-
105, 1990.
dluced skin lesions in lupus erythematosus. Acta Der-
 244. Godfrey DR, Anderson RM: Cold agglutinin disease
matol Venereol (Stockh) 70:93, 1990.
in a cat. J Ssmall Anim Pract 35:267, 1994.
225. Vitale CB, et al: Systermic lupus erythermatosus in a
245. Nagata M, et al: Cryoglobulinaemia and cryofibrino-
cat: Fulfillmcnt of the American Rheumatisin Associa-
genacmia: A comparison of canine and hunan cases.
tion criteria with supportive skin histopathology. Vet
Vet Dermatol 9:277, 1998.
Dcrmatol 8:133, 1997.
246.
Niemand S, et al: Kalteagglntinin-Krankheit bei eincr
226. Welin Henricksson E, et al: Autoantilbxody profles in
Katz. Kleintierpraxis 30:259, 1985.
canine ANA-positive sera investigated by immunoblot
 so u sn o  y f  
and ELISA. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 61:157.
haernobartonellosis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 196:907,
1998.
1990.
776 · Immune-Mediated Disorders
Graft-Versus-Host Disease
269. Mason KV: Cutaneous drug eruptions. Vet Clin North
248. Hom TD, et al: Hcappraisal of histologic features of
Am Small Anim Pract 20:1633, 1990.
the acute cutaneous graft-versus-host reaction based
270. Mason KV, Rosser EJ: Cutaneous drug eruptions. In:
on an allogenic rodent model. J Invest Dermatol 103:
von Tscharner C, Halliwell REW (eds): Advances int
206, 1994.
Vcterinary Dermatology I. Balliere-Tindall, Philadel-
249. Johnson ML, Fariner ER: Graft-versus-host reactions
phia, 1990, p 426.
in dermatology. J An Acad Dermatol 38:369, 1998.
271.
Mason KV: Fixed drug eruption in two dogs caused
250. Langley RGB, et al: Apoptosis is the mode of kerat-
by diethylcarbamazine. J Am Anim Hlosp Assoc 24:
inocyte death in cutaneous graft-versus-host disease. J
301, 1988.
Am Acad Dennatol 35:187, 1996.
272. Mason KV, Day MJ: A pemphigus foliaceus-like
251. Yu C, et al: Synergism between mycophenolate nofe-
cruption associated with the use of ampieillin in a cat.
til and cyclosporine in preventing graft-versus-host
Aust Vet J 64:223, 1987.
disease among lethally irradiated dogs given DLA-
273. Mason KV: Blstering dnug eruptions in animals. Cln
nonidentical unrelated marrow grafts. Bloxl 9l:2581,
Dermatol 1l:567, 1993.
1998.
 274. Mauldin GN, et al: Efficacy and toxicity of doxornbi-
cin and cyclophosphamide used in the ireatrment of
selected malignant tumors in 23 cats. J Vet Interml
Cutoneous Adverse Drug Reaction
Med 2:60, 1988.
252. Affolter VK, von Tscharmcr C: Cutaneous drug reac-
275. McEwan NA, et al; Dmig cruption in a cat reserm-
tions: A retrospective study of histopathologic changes
bling pemphigus foliaceus. J Small Anim Pract 28:
and their correlation with the clinical disease. Vet
713,1987.
Dermatol 4:79, 1993.
276. Ogilvie GK, el al: Aeute and short-tern toxicoses as-
253. Affolter VK, Shaw SE: Cutaneous drug eruptions. In:
sociated with the administration of doxorubicin to
Ihrke PJ. et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Derma-
dogs with malignant tumors. J Am Vet Med Assoc
tology If. Pergamon Press, New York, 1993, p 447.
195:1584, 1989.
254. Baker JR, et al: Pathologic effects of bleomycin on
277. Ogilvie GK, ct al: Hypotension and cutaneous rcac-
the skin of dogs and rmonkeys. Toxicol Appl Pharrmt-
tions associated withi intravenous administration of
col 25:190, 1973.
etoposide in the dog. Aiu J Vet Res 49:1367, 1988.
255. Barbaud AM, et al: Role of delayed ccllular hypersen-
278. Perez T. et al: Hypersensivity reactions to drugs:
sitivity and adhesion molecules in amoxcillin-induced
Corrclation between clinical probahility score and lab-
morbillform rashes. Arch Dermatol 133:48 l, 1997.
oratory dliagnostic procedure. J Invest Clin Inmunol
256. Barthold SW, et al: Revcrsible dermal atrophy in a
5:276. 1995.
cat with phenytoin. Vet Pathol 17:469, 1980.
 279. Plotnick AN, et al: Prizmary cutaneous coccidioidomy-
257.Bureau of Veterinary Drugs: Suspected drug adverse
cosis and subsequent drug eruption to itraconazole in
reactions reported to the Bureau of Veterinary Drugs.
a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 33:139, 1997.
Can Vet J 33:237, 1992.
280. Rijlaarsdam U, et al: Mycosis fungoides-like lesions
258. Carlotti DN, Bensignor E: La gale sarcoptique du
associated with phenytoin and carbamazepine therapy.
chien: Etude retrospective de 38 cas. Prat Med Chir
J Am Acad Dermatol 24:216, 1991.
Anim Comp 32:117, 1997.
 281. Roche E, Mason KV: Periocular alopecia caused by a
259. Cribb AE: Idiosyneratic reactions to sulfonauides inl
fxed dnug eruption. Aust Vet Pract 21:80, 1991.
dogs. J An Vet Med Assoc 195:1612, 1989.
282. Rosenkrantz WS: Cutaneous dng reactions. In: Gnf-
260. Giger U, et al: Sulfadiazine-induced allergy in six
in CE, et al (eds): Current Veterinary Dermatology.
Mosby-Yea1 Bouk, St. Louis, 1993, p 154.
1985.
.Cordon KG, et al: Pseudomycosis fungoides in a pa-
283. Hosenkrantz WS, et al: Cyclosporine and cutaneous
261.
immune-mediated discasc. J Am Acad Dermatol 14:
tient taking clonazepan and fuoxctine. J Am Acad
1088,1986.
Vet Derrmatol 34:304, 1996.
262. Gupta AK, et al: Lynphocytie infltrates of the skin in
284. Seott DW, et al: Drug cnuptiou associated with sul-
fonamide treatment of vcrtebral osteomyelitis in a
dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 168:111i, 1976.
Dermatol 23:1137,1990.
 285. Scott Dw: Drug cruption in a cat due to a miticide.
263. Hammer AS, Cuoto CG: Diagnosing and treating ca-
Feline Pract 7:47, 1977.
nine hemangiosarcoma. Vet Med 87:188, 1992.
264. Hendrick MJ. Dunagan CA: Focal nccrotizing granu-
 286. Scott DW, Miller WH Jr: Idiosyiicratic cutaneous ad-
lomatous panniculitis associated with subcutaneous in-
verse drug reactions in the cat: Literature review and
soseo ot shop pun speo ui auona sqen jo uonoae
report of 14 cases (1990-1996). Feline Pract 26:10,
(1988- 1989). J Am Vet Med Assoc 198:304, 1991.
1998.
265. Henricks PM: Derrnatitis associated with the use of
287. Scott DW, Miller WH Jr: Idiosyncratic cutaneous ad-
primidone in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoe 191:237,
verse drug reactions in the dog:Literature review and
1987.
report of 101 cases (1990-1996). Canine Pract 24:16,
266. Kunkle G: Adverse cutaneous reactions in cats given
6661
Inethimazolc. Dern Dialogue Spring/Summer, 1993,
288. Scott DW: Follculite murale gramulomateuse chez lc
P 4.
chien: Manifestation dun accident medicamenteux
267. Magro CM, ct al: The interstitial granulomatous drug
cutane? Med Vet Quehec 29:154, 1999.
rcaction: A distinctive clinical and pathologic entity. j
289. Stanley RG, Jabara AG: Chronic skin reaction to a
Cutan Pathol 25:72, 1998.
combined feline rhinotracheitis virus (herpesvirus)
268. Mason KV: Subepidermal bullus drug eruption re-
 and calicivirus vaccine. Aust Vet J 65:128, 1988.
sembling bullous pemphigoid in a dog. J Am Vet
290. Stem RS, Wintroub BU: Cutaneous rcactions to
Med Assoc 190:881, 1987.
drugs. In: Freedberg IM, et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's
Immune-Mediated Disorders · 777
Dermatology in General Medicine V. MeGraw-Hill,
formc major (Stevens-Johnson syndrome) in a dog. I
New York, 1999, p 1633.
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26:297, 1990.
291. Van Hees J, et al: Levamnisole-induced drug eruptions
311. Melleau L, et al: Erythema muliforme and dissemi-
in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 21:255, 1985.
nated intravascular coagulation in a dog. J Ain Anim
292. Vitale CB, et al: Putative diethylcarbamazinc-induced
Hosp Assoe 26:643, 1990.
urticaria with cosinophilic dermatitis in a dog. Vet
312. Mirowsk GW, et al: Altered expression of epithelial
Dermatol 5:197, 1994.
integrins and extracellular Inatrix receptors in oral er-
293.Vitale CB, ct al: Putative Rinadyl-induced neutro-
ythema inultifonne. J Cutan Pathol 23:473, 1996.
philic dermatosis resembling Sweet's syndromc in 2
313.
Paquct P, Pieraud GE: Soluble fractions of turmor
dogs. Proc Annu Memh Meet Anm Acad Vet Derma-
tol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 15:69, 1999.
toxic epidermal necrolysis: A comparison with second-
degree bums. Int J Mol Med 1:459, 1998.
tis in rminiature schnauzers. In: Ihrke PJ, et al (eds):
314. Paquet P, Pieraud GE: Epidermal calprotectin in
drug-induced toxic epidernal necrolysis. J Cutan
Press, New York, 1993, p 419.
Pathol 26:301, 1999.
295. Wolkenstien P, et al: Metabolie predisposition to cu-
315. Paquet P, Pieraud GE: Erythema multiforine and
taneous adverse drug reactions. Arch Dermnatol 131:
toxie epidcrmal neerolysis: A cornparative study. Am J
544, 1995.
Dermatopathol 19: 127, 1997.
316. Power H: Practicc tip. Derm Dialoguc Winter 1993/
Erythema Multiforme and Toxic Epidermal
1994, p 7.
Necrolysis
317. Rachofsky
yMA, ct al: Toxic cpidermal necrolysis.
296. Akosa AB, Elhag AM: Toxic epidermal necrolysis: A
Compend Cont Edue 11:840, 1989.
study of the sweat glands. J Cutan Pathol 22:359.
318. Rosenbaum MR, Kerlin RL: Erythena multiforrne
1995.
major and disseminated intravascular coagulation in a
297. Assier H, ct al: Erythema rmuliforme with mucous
tlog following application of a d-limonene-based in-
membrane involvement and Stevens-Johnson
SyT-
secticidal dip. J Aun Vet Med Assoc 207: 1315, 1995.
drome are clinically differcnt dlisorders with distinct
319. Roujeau J: The spectrum of Stevens-johnson syn-
causcs. Arch Denmatol 131:539, 1995.
drone and toxic epidermal necrolysis: A clinical clas-
298. Bastuji-Garin S, et al: Clinical classification of cases of
silication. J Invest Dermatol 102:28s, 1994.
toxic cpidlermal necrolysis. Stevens-Johnson's syIl-
320.
drome and erythema muliforme. Arch' Dermatol 129:
dermal necrolysis are severity variants of the sane
92, 1993.
299. Becker DS: Toxic epidermal necrolysis. L.ancet 351:
IDcrmatol 24:726, 1997.
1417, 1998.
321. Rzony B, et al: Histopathologic and epidemiological
300. Child FJ, et al: Howell's syndrome. Clin Exp Derma-
characteristics of patients with erythema exudativuin
tol 24:74, 1999.
multiforne inajor, Stevens-Johnson syndrome and
301. Cote B, et al: Clinicopathologic correlation in ery-
thema multiforme and Stevens-Johnson syndrome.
1996.
Arch Dermatol 13l:1268, 1995.
322. Scott DW, et al: Erythema multiforme in the dog. J
   d i  
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 19:453, 1983.
forne in a Doherman on trimethoprim-sulpharmcthox-
323. Scott IDW, Miller WH Jr: Erythema multforme in
azole therapy. J Small Anim Pract 32:635, 1991.
dogs and cats: Literature review and case material
303. Egan CA, et al: Plasrmapheresis as an adljunct trcal-
from the Comell University College of Veterinary
ment in toxic cpidenmal necrolysis. J Am Acad Der-
Medicine (1988-96). Vet Dormatol 10.297, 1999.
matol 40:458, 1999.
324.
Scott DW, et al: Toxic epidermal necrolysis in two
304. Foedinger D, et al: Autoantibodies against desrno-
dogs and a cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 15:271, 1979.
plakin I and II define a subset of paticnts with ery-
325. Viard I, et al: Inhibition of toxic epidermal necrolysis
thema muliforne major. J Invest Dermatol 106:1012,
i s r   o o 
1996.
noglobulin. Science 282:490, 1998.
 305. Frank AA, ct al: Troxic epidennal necrolysis associated
Vasculitis
with Hea dips. Vet Hum Toxicol 34:57, 1992.
326. Beale KM: Vasculopathy in two dogs associated with
306.Fritsch PO, Ruiz-Maldonado R: Erythema multi-
ivernectin administration. Proc Annu Memh Meet
forne. In: Freedberg IM, et al (eds): Fitzpatrck's
Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 15:39,
Denmatology in General Medicine V. McGraw-Hill.
1999.
New York, 1999, p 636.
 327. Bensignor E: What is your diagnosis? J Small Anim
307. Fritsch PO, Ruiz-Maldonado R: Stevens-Johnson syn-
Pract 40:151, 1999.
drome and toxic epidermal necrolysis. In: Freedberg
 328. Carpcnter JL, ct al: Idiopathic cutaneous and renal
IM, et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in Gencral
glonierular vasculopathy of greyhounds. Vet Pathol
Medicine V. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1999, p 644.
25:401, 1988.
308.Hinn AC, ct al: Erythema ultiforne, Stevens-Foh-
 329. Cowan LA, et al: Clinical and clinicopathologic ab-
son syndrome, and toxic epidermal necrolysis in the
HoTmalities in greyhourds with cutaneous and renal
dog: Clinical classifcation, drug cxposure, and histo-
glomerular vasculopathy: 18 cases (1992-1994). J Am
pathologie correlations. J Vet Allergy Clin Immunol 6:
Vel Med Assoc 210:789, 1997.
13, 1998.
330. Crawford MA, Foil CS: Vasculitis: Clinical syndromes
309. Inachi S, et al: Epidermal apoptotic cell death in
in small aniroals. Compend Cont Educ 1l:400, 1989.
erythenma multiforme and Stevens-Johnson syndrome.
331. Fondati A, et al: Familial cutaneous vasculopathy and
Arch Dermatol 133:845, 1997.
demodlicosis in a Cerman shepherd dog. ] Small
310. McMurdy MA: A case resembling erythcma multi-
Anim Pract 39:137, 1998.
778 · Immume-Mediated Disorders
332. Frank LA: Rabies vaccine-induced ischemic dermati-
dog: Clinical characteristics and treatment of a disor-
tis in a dog. Vet Allergy Clin Immunol 6:9, 1998.
der sinilar tu human Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syn-
333. Griffn CE: Pinnal Diseases: The Complete Manual
drome. Vet Focus l:112, 1989.
of Ear Care. Solvay Veterinary, Inc., Princeton, 1985,
 354. Campbell KL, et al: Generalized leukoderma and po-
p 21.
liosis following uveitis in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp
334.
Griffn CE: Pinnal diseases. Vet Cin North Am Simall
Assoc 22:121, 1986.
Anim Pract 24:897, 1994.
355. Herrera DH, Duchene AG: Uveodermatological syn-
335. Guaguere E, et al: Lesions cutanees associées a des
dromc (Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syudrome) with
 maladies internes chez le chien. Prat Med Chir Anim
  e  p p
Comp 32:275, 1997.
Ophthalmol 1:47, 1998.
336. Legendre AM, et al: Treatment of blastomycosis with
356. Kem TJ, et al: Uveitis associated with poliosis and
intraconazole in 112 dogs. J Vet Intern Med 10:365,
      s s  
1996.
1985.
 337. Lotti T, et al: Cutaneous small-vessel vasculitis. J Am
357. Lindley DM, et al: Oeular histology of Vogt-Koyan-
Acad Dermatol 39:667, 1998.
agi-Harada-like syndrome in an akita dog. Vet Pathol
338. Mathet JL, et al: Vascularite leucocytoclasique pri-
27:294, 1990.
maire a localisation cutaneo-muqueusc chez. le chat: A
 358. MacDonald [M: Uveodcrmatologic syndrome in the
propos de deux cas. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 32:
dog. In: Griffin CE, et al (eds): Current Veterinary
293, 1997.
Derimatology. Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis, 1993,
 339. Mandell BF, Hoffrnan GS: Systernic necrotizing arte-
p 217,
ritis. In: Freedberg IM, et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's DeI-
matology in General Medicine V. McGraw-IIill, New
mans and dogs. Compend Cont Edue 11:1211, 1989.
York, 1999, p 2034.
360. Murphy CJ.et al: Antiretinal antibodies associated
340. Marning TO, Scott DW: Cutaneous vasculitis in a
withVogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrorme in a dog.]
dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:61, 1980.
Am Anim Ilosp Assoc 27:399, 1991,
 341. Morris DO: Cutaneous vasculitides. Proc Am Coll Vet
 361. Slinckx J, Fontaine J: Un cas de syndroine uveoxder-
 Intem Med Forum 16:452, 1998.
.Nichols PR,et al: Arerspective study of canine and
 matologique ressemhlant all syndrome Vogt-Koyanagi-
342.
Harada chez un fox terrier. Point Vét 30:243, 1999.
feline cutaneous vasculitis. Proc Annu Memb Meet
362. Tachikawa S, et al: Uveoderrmatologic (Vogt-Koyanagi-
An Acad Vet Dermatol An Coll Vet Dermatol 14:27,
Harada-like) syndrorme with sloughing of the nails in
1998.
a Siberian husky. J Vet Med (Tokyo) 48:559, 1995.
 343. Parker WM, Foster RA: Cutancous vasculitis in fivc
 363. Vercelli A, et al: Canine Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada- likc.
 Jack Russell terriers. Vet Dermatol 7:109, 1996.
syndrome in two Siberian husky dogs. Vet Dermatol
344. Pedersen K, Scott DW: Idiopathic pyogranulomatous
1:151, 1990.
infammation and leukocytoclastic vasculitis of the na-
 364. Warmoes T: Modele canine d'un syndrorne de Vogt-
sal planum, nostrils and nasal mucosa in Scottish ter-
Koyanagi-Ilarada. Point Vet 30:249, 1999.
ricrs in Denmark, Vet Derrmatol 2:85, 1991.
345. Rachofsky MA, et al: Probahle hypersensitivity vascu-
Auriculor Chondritis
litis in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 194:1592, 1989.
365. Badoil F: Etude comparative chez Thomme et le chat
 346. Scott DW: Eosinophils in the walls of large dermal
de la polychondrite atrophiante chronique. These,
and subcutaneous blood vesscls in biopsy specimens
Ecole Nationale Veterinaire de Lyon, 1996.
from cats with cosinophilie granulouna or eosinophilie
366. Boord MJ, Griffin CE: Aural chondritis or polychon-
plaque. Vet Dermatol 10:77, 1999.
dritis dessicans in a dog. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am
347. Soter NA: Cutaneous necrotizing venulitis. In: Freed-
Acad Vet Dernatol Am Coll Vet IDermatol 14:65,
berg IM, et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in
1998.
General Mcdicine V. McGraw-Hil, New York, 1999,
 367. Bunge MM, et al: Relapsing polychondritis in a cat. J
P2044.
Anm Anim Hosp Assoe 28:203, 1992.
348. Vitale CB. ct al: Vaccine-induced ischemic derma-
368.
Cuaguere E, et al: Polychondrite anriculaire atro-
topathy in the dog. Vet Dermatol 10:131, 1999.
phiante: A propos dun cas chez un chat. Prat Mod
349. von Tschanner C, Ilaemmerling R: Granulomatous
Chir Anim Conp 27:557, 1992.
vasculitis inl a West 1lighland white terrier. Proc
 369. Lemmens P, Schrauwen E: Feline relapsing poly.
Annu Meinb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll
chondritis: A case
report. Vlaams Diergenecskd
Vet Derrnatol 14:85, 1998.
'Tijdschr 62: 183, 1993.
350. Weir JA, ct al: Familial cutaneous vasculopathy of
Immunoproliferative Enteropathy of Basenji Dogs
German shepherds: Clinical, genetic and preliminary
pathologic and immunological studics. Can Vet J 35:
 370. Breitschwerdt EB, et al: Clinical and laboratory char-
acterization of basenjis with immumoproliferative
763, 1994.
sinall intestinal disease. Am J Vet Res 45:267, 1984.
351. Wilcock BP, Yager JA: Focal cutaneous vasculitis and
alopecia at sites of rabies vaccination in dogs. J Am
Alopecia Areota
Vet Med Assoc 188:1174, 1986.
371. DeJonghe SR, et al: Trachyonychia associated with
Linear IgA Pustular Dermatosis
alopecia areata in a Rhrxdesian ridgeback. Vet Derima-
tol 10:123, 1999.
352. Scott DW, et al: Lincar IgA dermatoses in the dog:
372. Elston DM, et al: Eosinophils in fibrous tracts and
Bullous pemphigoid, discoid lupus erythematosus and
near hair bulbs: A helpful diagnostic feature of alope.
a subcoreal pustular dermatitis. Cormell Vet 72:394,
cia areata. J Am Acad Dermatol 37:101, 1997.
1982
372a. Madani S, Shapiro J: Alopecia arcata update. J Am
Uveodermatologic Syndrome
Acad Dermatol 42:549, 2000.
353. Boldy KL, et al: Uvcodermatologic syndrorne in the
 373. McElwee KJ, et al: Comparison of alopecia areata in
Immune-Mediated Disorders · 779
human and nonhuman mammalian species. Pathobiol-
381. DiBartola SP, Benson MD: The pathogenesis of reac.
ogy 66:90, 1998.
tive systermic anyloidosis. J Vet Interm Med 3:31,
374. Olivry T, et al: Antifollicular cell-mediated and hu-
1989.
moral immunity in canine alopecia areata. Vet Der-
 382. DiBartola SP, ct al: Farmilial renal amyloidosis in Chi-
matol 7:67,1996.
nesc Shar Pei dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 197:483,
 375. Tobin DJ. et al: Hair folicle-specific antibodies in
1990.
mamrnalian species with alopecia areata. J Invest
383.
Dodds JW: Amyloidosis. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 3l:
Dermatol 108:654, 1997.
100,1995.
376. Tobin DJ, et al: Anti-trichohyalin antibodies in canine
384. Gelens HC, et al: Reactive amyloidosis in a puppy.
alopecia areata. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Ad-
associated with a chronic inflanumatory syndrome. J
vainces in Veterinary IDermatology II. Butterworth-
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 30:529, 1994.
Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p 353.
385.
Van der Linde-Sipman JS, ct al: Generalized AA-
Pseudopelade
arnyloidosis in Sianese and Oriental cats. Vet Immu-
377. Gross TL, et al: Morphologic and imrmunologic char-
nol Immunopathol 56:1, 1997.
acterization of a canine isthmus mural foliculitis re-
 386. Platz SJ, et al: Identification of lambda light chain
II p a surq po opdopnsd uqus
amyloid in eight canine and two feline extramedullary
plasmacytomas. J Comp Pathol 116:45, 1997.
17, 2000.
378. Power HT, et al: Novel feline alopecia areata-like
387. Snyder PW, et al: Pathologic features of naturally
dernatosis: Cytotoxic T lymphocytes target the follic-
occurring juvenile_polyarteritis in heagle dogs. Vet
ular isthmus. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances
Pathol 32:337, 1995.
in Veterinary Dernatology III, Butterworth-Heine-
388.
 Schwartzman RM: Cutaneous amyloidosis associated
mann, Boston, 1998, p 538.
with a monoclonal gammopathy in a dog. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 185:102, 1984.
379. Power HT: Newly recognized feline skin diseases.
Proc Antu Meinb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am
389.
Touart DM, Sau P: Cutaneous deposition discases:
Coll Vet Dermatol 14:27, 1998.
Part 1. J Am Acad Dermatol 39:149, 1998.
Amyioidosis
 380. Alhaidari Z, et al: Amylose cutaneomuqueuse chez un
chien. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 26:34l, 1991.
Chapter
Endocrine and Metabolic
Diseases
any hormones affect thc skin and adnexa.? Although this chapter is limited to a
 discussion of endocrine influences on the skin, hormones also affect the rest of the
body. The specifc actions of many proven and alleged hormonal imbalances on the skin
are often poorly understood. Additionally, confusion is intensified by (1) species differ-
ences, (2) lack of adequate, standardized, or readily available diagnostic tests, (3) conflict-
ing data in the literature, and (4) the complex physiologic and pathophysiologic intcr-
relationships between the endocrine glands and their horinonal products. The skin must
also be regarded as having endocrine functions because it is a major site for the metabo-
lism and interconversion of many of the steroids.
With the exception of some of the sex horinone dermatoses, animals with an endo-
crine or metabolic disorder have both dermatologic and constitutional signs of illness.
Depending on the disease under consideration and the astuteness of the owmer, the skin
changes may be noticed months before the constitutional signs. Classically, endocrine
disorders are associated with a symmetric, nonpruritic hair loss. Early on, however, the
animal may have no hair loss but be presented for a localized (e.g., ceruminous otitis
cutaneous abnormality (e.g., cutaneous mucinosis). If there is an endocrine basis for the
disorder under consideration, hair loss eventually accompanies the abnormality. Because
most dogs and cats go through two hair cycles per year, hair loss should appear within 6
months of the presenting complaint. If the chronically affected animal has a perfectly
normal coat, an endocrine causality is very unlikely and any abnormal laboratory data
should be interpreted cautiously.
With a coat change, the hair in the involved areas is dull and dry and usually epilates
) mos Aa mor Aeu (usoody a moan you eu seq pedg sa
hyperadrenocorticism), or may regrow very abnormally (e.g., the woolly coat of adrenal
hyperplasia-like syndrone). In hypothyroidism or hyperadrenocorticism, all hair follicles on
the trunk are affected and advanced cases have a bilaterally symmetric truncal alopecia.
Early in the course of the disease, the hair loss may be localized to regions of the body
(e.g., ank and saddle areas) and necessitate the consideration of nonendocrine causes of
 e      s s    s 
graphic variation in the number and/or affinity of sex hormone receptors in dog skin, the
sex hormone dermatoses have a more regionalized pattern of alopecia that persists in
those areas for extended periods of time.
● FUNCTIONAl ANATOMY OF THE ENDOCRINE
HYPOTHALAMUS AND HYPOPHYSIS
Anatomically and functionally, the hypothalamus and the hypophysis (pituitary gland) are
important portion of the hypophysis as it relates to dermatology is the adenohypophysis
(ses sred an d )
 The hypothalamus contains a number of specialized cells that combine neural and
secretory activity: the endocrine neurons. The endocrine hypothalamus produces hor
780
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases * 78I
 mones (adenohypophysiotropic releasing and inhibiting factors) that are transported as
unstainable neurosecretions to the pituitary portal system and then to the adenohypophy-
sis. Important hypothalamic releasing and inhibiting factors that control the adenohypoph-
· Corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) (or adrenocorticotropic hormone-releasing fac-
tor [ACTH-RF], corticotropin-releasing hormone [CRH])
· Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH)_ (or thyroid-stimulating hormone-releasing
factor [TSH-RF], thyrotropin-releasing factor [TRF])
· Growth hormone-inhibiting factor (GHIF) (or somatotropin-inhibiting factor [SIF],
somatostatin)
· Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) (or follicle-stimulating hormone -releasing
 hormone [FSH-RH], luteinizing hormone -releasing hormone [LH-RH])
· Prolactin-releasing factor (PRF)
• Prolactin-inhibiting factor (PIF)
 These hypophysiotropic factors are presently thought to be regulated by higher brain
centers, adenohypophyseal hormones (*"short-loop" feedback system), and target endocrine
gland hormones ("long-loop" system).
 By means of light nicroscopy and acidic or basic dye-staining characteristics, the
adenohypophysis is seen to consist of three cell types: acidophils (producing growth
hormone [GH] and prolactin), basophils (producing follicle-stimulating hormone [FSH],
luteinizing hormone [LH], thyrotropin [TSH], B-lipotropin, and corticotropin [ACTH]].
 aos  a g    s m
immunohistochemicaf examination are used, the adenohypophysis is observed to consist of
five cell types: thyrotrophs (producing TSH), corticotrophs (producing ACTH and
B-lipotropin), gonadotrophs (producing FSH and LH), somatotrophs (producing GH), and
mammotrophs (producing prolactin).l. & The release of adenohypophyseal hormones is
thought to be regulated by hypophysiotropic factors from the hypothalamus and negative
feedback by target endocrine gland hormones.
 In general, three factors determine the secretory rates of the endocrine glands:
influence. The effects of hormones depend on many factors, including the chemical
structure, the concentration in the blood, the method of transport in the blood, the
quantity of unbound target cell receptors, the integrity of target cell postreceptor mecha-
nism, and thc rate of hormonal degradation and elimination.
 Most peptide hormones (e.g., ACTH, TSH, FSH, LH, and TRH) initiate their actions
by activating the cell membrane enzyme adenyl cyclase and the cyclic adenosine mono-
phosphate system. Steroid hormones (e.g, glucocorticoids and sex hormones) pass through
  sd s pi e a on uo r on s xrm
cell cytoplasin to the nucleus, where they bind chromatin receptors and initiate activity.
The basic causes of endocrine disease include the following: (l) primary hyperfunc-
tion (e.g., hyperadrenocorticism due to functional pituitary and adrenal neoplasms and
hyperestrogenism due to functional ovarian or testicular neoplasms), (2) secondary hyper-
function (e.g., hyperadrenocorticism due to bilateral adrenocortical hyperplasia), (3) pri-
mary hypofunction (e.g., congenital or acquired hypothyroidism and hypopituitarism due
to cystie Rathke's cleft), (4) secondary hypofunction (e.g., secondary hypothyroidism due
to hypopituitarism), (5) ectopic hypersecretion (e.g., ectopic ACTH syndrome), (6) failure
 anp ue a) a o mp re () s  re jo
chronic liver disease), (8) hormone interactions (e.g., antiandrogenic actions of progesto-
gens), and (9) iatrogenic hormone excess (excessive giucocorticoids, progestogens, or estro.
gens),1. 2
782 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
· DIAGNOSIS OF ENDOCRINOPATHIES
The diagnosis of clinical endocrinopathies is usually based on finding an abnormal concen-
tration of a hormone in the blood. The ideal endocrine assay does not exist. Although
radioimmunoassay (RIA) and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) are the most
sensitive, specific, accurate, and precise available methods of measuring hormones, these
techniques are usually species specific and must be specially validated for dogs and cats.
 Any laboratory not willing to provide validation information on request is best avoided.
normal individuals from those with an endocrinopathy. At any one moment in time, a dog
with an endocrine disorder can have hormone levels within the normal range. Conversely,
a norrnal dog may have a subnormal level. Basal blood hormone levels Huctuate in
response to environmental, psychic, circadian, and drug-induced influenccs, and they vary
with age, breed, sex, and so forth. Thus, various stimulation and suppresson tests are
routinely employed to overcome this unreliability of basal blood hormone levels.
The endocrine system is very dynamic, and hormonal interactions are complex. It is
not at all uncommon for one hormone, in deficiency or excess, to affect the levels of
another hormone. Common examples include pseudohypothyroidism in the dog with
hyperadrenocorticisma or decreased growth hormone levels in dogs with hypothyroid.
ism,87 sex hormone imbalances,l or adrenal disease,383 The laboratory abnormalities usu-
ally disappear once the primary endocrine disorder is resolved. If the abnormalities persist
have a polyglandular syndrome,3. 7 In these syndromes, multiple glands become dysfunc.
tional simultaneously and require individual treatment. When widespread clinicopathologic
and endocrine abnormalities exist in the same patient, muliple laboratory evaluations are
 needed for the patient's complete evaluation.
· ThyroId Hormones
A deficiency of thyroid hormone action is the most common endocrine derinatosis of
dogs, but it is rare as a naturaly occuring disorder in cats..2. 16 The etiology of canine
hypothyroidism is complex, with the most important cause being lymphocytic (autoim-
mune) thyroiditis.
Thyroid Physiology
Canine thyroid physiology is a complex subject aud has been exhaustivcly reviewed.1ol It
has been shown that dogs_ produce 3,5,3'5'-tetraiodothyronine (thyroxine [T.]), 3,5,3'-
triodothyronine (T). 3,3',5'-triodothyronine ("reverse” T, [rT]), 3,3'-dliodothyronine
(3,3'-T), and 3',5′-diodothyronine (3',5'-T).1, 79, 8a3, 96
The thyroid gland secretes all the T4, but up to 60% of the daily T, requirement is
formed via monodeiodination (thyroxine 5'-deiodinase) from T, in peripheral tissues. The
preference of canine thyroid to secrcte T rather than T4 is enhanced by TSH. T, is more
potent and penetrates much faster into interstitial and intracellular spaces than does T4
Iodine-deficient dogs show an 80% reduction in their serum T. levels, but their serum T3
levels remain nornal and the dogs remain eumetabolic. In addition, hypothyroid dogs
being adequately maintained on only oral liothyronine (T) have no detectable serum T4
whereas those _maintained on only oral levothyroxine (T) show normal levels of both
 s u  pr e an r a si ii 's a pe d s
T, serving mainly as a prohormone.
 In dogs, rT, which is metabolically inactive, is formed via monodeiodination (thyrox-
*See references 1, 2, 12, 14, 68, 91, 131, 133, 137, 183, 212.
Endoerine and Metabolic Diseases · 783
 ine 5-deiodinase) from T4. In human beings and rodents, a number of conditions (chronic
and acute illnesses, surgical trauma, fasting, starvation, fever, and glucocorticoid therapy)
produce moderate to marked reduction of serum T, levels, 1mild to marked reduction of
serum T, levels, and marked elevation of serum rTa levels.28. 47. 48, 101. 162 In thcse circum-
stances, the patients are euthyroid and in no need of thyroid medication. This situation is
 called the euthyroid sick syndrome and is a cominon source of misdiagnosis when basal T:
and T4 serum levels are used to diagnose hypothyroidism. The euthyroid sick syndrome
also occurs in dogs and cats.α It is thought that this metabolic switch in the sick patient is
protective by counteracting the excessive calorigenic effects of T, in catabolic states and is
caused by an imhibition of one or more iodothyronine B-ring deiodinases, leading to both
decreased production of T, from T4 and decreased rT, degradation.
Studies in dogs have shown that T, is the major product of peripheral tissue deiodina
tion of T, and rT. T, is metabolically inactive.
Information on thyroid physiology in cats is minimal, and naturally occurring feline
hypothyroidisn has been documented rarely. It is known that cats produce both T, and
T411. 13.17
Thyroid Hormones and the Skin
Thyroid hormone plays a dominant role in controlling metabolism and is essential for
-o pn jo uon jo susou rd u z quuop p yo rerou
n yo   siuss d  yo s  n
consumption. These effects are thiought to be initiated by the binding of thyroid hormone
to nuclear chromatin and by auginentation of the transcription of genetic information.
pe   u a  e sd au p  ns p a
maturation of mammalian skin, as well as in the maintenance of normal cutaneous func-
tion.
Hypothyroidism results in epidermal atrophy and abnormal keratinization because of
decreased protein synthesis, mitotic activity, and oxygen consumption in dogs and hu-
mans.1. 2 The thyroid hormone-deficient epidermis is characterized by both abnormal
lipogenesis and decreased sterol synthesis by keratinocytes.136 Epidermal melanosis may
occur in hypothyroid dogs and humans, but the pathogenic mechanism is unclear.1i1
 Sebaceous gland atrophy occurs in hypothyroid dogs and humans, and sebum excretion
triglyceride levels because of impaired plasma clearance.145 Alterations in plasma fatty acid
fatty acid concentrations. Thyroid horrmones may regulate A-6-desaturase activity.
Thyroid hormone is necessary for the initiation of the anagen phase of the hair follicle
cycle.1f Anagen is not initiated in hypothyroid dogs, resulting in retention of the hair
follicles in telogen and leading to failure of hair growth and alopecia. The oral or topical
administration of T4 to normal dogs increases both the growth rate of hair and the
numbers of anagen hair follicles, especially in the Hanks.61
 In hypothyroid dogs, humans, and rats, glycosaninoglycans accumulate in the dermis,
leading to an increase in the interstitial ground substance and a thick, myxedematous
dermis.1. 2 The exact cause of this tissue mucinosis is unknown, but because thyroid
hormones are thought to restrain the synthesis and to increase the catabolism of glycos-
aminoglycans, decreased thyroid function should cause an accumulation in the dermis.
Thyroid hormone has been reported to heal the ulcers and to reduce the scarring
associated with chronic radiodermatitis in humans and to improve the healing of deep
derimal burns in rats.il These effects were thought to be due to actions of thyroid
hormone on the proliferation and metabolism of fibroblasts and collagen synthesis. In
*See references 1, 2, 48, 65, 95, 101, 103, 132, 158.
784 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
huinans, hypothyroidism is associated with a 50% reduction in plasma fibronectin levels.11
Not surprisingly, the skin of hypothyroid dogs and hunan beings exhibits poor wound
healing and easy bruising.
Bacterial pyoderma is a common complication of canine hypothyroidism.1. 20 1or. 137 In
various animal models, it has been reported that (1) the developiment of lymphoid tissue
lynphoid organs and thymus, and (3) depletion of thyroid hormones results in impaired
neutrophil functions and B- and T-lymphocyte functions.
 Uncomplicated canine hypothyroidism is characterized by the absence of pruritus.
( e  r (      
dull, dry, easily epilated haircoat that fails to grow after clipping, (3) variable hyperpig.
mentation, (4) skin that is often dry, cool to the touch, thick, and puffy, (5) poor wound
healing, (6) easy bruising, (7) frequent seborrheic skin disease, bacterial pyoderma, or
both, and (8) variable changcs of coat color. Histologically, the condition is characterized
by various combinations of orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, folicular keratosis, follicular
dilatation, follicular atrophy, telogenization of hair follicles, excessive trichilemmal keratini-
zation (fame follicles), epidermal melanosis, sebaceous gland atrophy, thick dermis, and
increased dermal mucin (myxederma).4, 16
Thyroid Function Tests
Despite the routine and regular use of thyroid function tests in veterinary nmedicine since
the early 1970s, the practitioner is still plagued with the problem of making an accurate
but inexpensive diagnosis of hypothyroidism. After years of discussion on the inaccuracy of
single sample measurements of any of the various thyroid horrones, the use of stimula-
s       s    
 s  s  e    u   s 
thyroid disease. In most parts of the world today, TSH is not available at any price and
TRH, when available, is very expensive. Some preliminary work has been done with the
new recombinant human TSH (rhTSH), and this hormone probably will be useful in
tested. As one might imagine, these new hormones are very expensive and will not find
their way into veterinary medicine until their costs decrease significantly.
Until a new function test becomes available, the practitioner has returned to the dark 
ages of thyroid testing where only single sample measurerments are available for interpre-
tation. However, great strides have been made since the l970s. If samples are sent to
 qualified laboratories and seriously ill animals or those under the influence of drugs known
to infuence thyroid hormones are not tested, hypothyroidism or euthyroidisui can be
accurately diagnosed in over 95% of animals tested.
SERUM THYROID HORMONE DETERMINATIONS
RIA or ELISA methods are used to deterrnine serum levels of total T4 (TT), free T4
(fT4), total T, (TTs), free T, (fT), and reverse T (rT). Serum samples may he held at
r0om temperature for at least I week with no significant deterioration.25 Reported basal
serum levels of thyroid hormones in dogs are as follows: TT4, 1.5 to 4 μg/dl; fT4, 0.3 to
1.7 ng/dl; TT3, 75 to 160 ng/dl: and fT,: 0.3 to 0.6 ng/dl. However, because not all
laboratories may use the sane assay kit or technique to determine their results, normal
ranges can vary from lahoratory to laboratory. Because normal levels of TTa and fT, are
common in hypothyroid dogs,23. 78. loz these hormones appear to have little diagnostic
specificity for hypothyroidism and will not be discussed further.
The sensitivity and the specificity of TT4 measurements in the diagnosis of hypothy-
roidisrn have been studied extensively. These measurements can lead to erroneous diagno-
 ses, especially if the paticnt's state of health and drug history are ignored. Low levels can
occur with a variety of acute and chronic illnesses (euthyroid sick syndrome), including
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases · 785
hyperadrenocorticism, diabetes mellitus, hypoadrenocorticism, liver disease, renal failure,
various cutancous and noncutaneous infectious diseases, and a variety of other conditions.
 Drugs can decrease or falsely increase TT, levels by changing its production, binding.
 or 1metabolism. Anticonvulsants (phenobarbital, phenytoin, and diazepam) and glucocorti-
coids are the most common offenders, but salicylates, phenylbutazone, sulfonamide anti-
microbials, radiocontrast agents, mitotane (o,p'-DDD), furosemide, various cardiac drugs.
androgens, and estrogens, to name a few, have also been implicated.48, 54, 75. 1ot. 102. 137 Of
special concern in dogs with dermatologic disease are corticosteroidss5. 15 and the poten-
tiated sulfonamides470.3. 15ecauscdogsreceive these orothermedicationsbecause
of illness thyroid levels could be suppressed by both the disease and the drug.
Variations in TT, levels can occur with season,1 2. 11 time of day,91, 99 breed, 2, 12, 48, tm, 140
body size,1 133 age,12. 133 and the reproductive status of bitches.13t, 10 With all these
variables, it is not surprising that TT4 measurements can be unreliable. Compounding the
problems in measurement are those of interpreting test resuits, Most laboratories report.
their normal values in a range; some report the mean value and its standard deviation. If
one interprets a test result that is just below the lower limit of the normal or below the
mean as abnormal, the margin of error in that interpretation is high.
 To reduce the frequency of the misdiagnosis of hypothyroidism, many laboratories 
suggest a gray zone of interpretation wherein the test results may not be accurate in the
diagnosis of hypothyroidism. Typically used zones are 1.0 to 1.5 μg/dl when the normal
range is greater than 1.5 or values that fall between 1 and 2 standard deviations of the
mcan. By making the definition of hypothyroidism more stringent (e.g., a value below
1.0 μg/dl or less than 2 standard deviations from the mean), the specificity of TT4
increases. However, some normal dogs have TT4 values within these stricter guidelines
  r  o  a   a s p  
guidelines, basal TT4 measurements can be low in approximately 20% of euthyroid dogs11
and be normal in 30% to 50% of hypothyroid dogs.is with stricter criteria, TT4 is in the
normal range in only approximately 10% of hypothyroid dogs.43, 124 Unfortunately, the
misdiagnosis rate of approximately 20% in the euthyroid dogs can still be expected.
In humans, serum thyroid horinone-binding protein levels are known to markedly
  sd - r n s   s an
dog have been identified by electrophoresis as thyroxine-binding globulin, thyroxine-bind-
in thyroid hormone-binding protein levels or the availability of binding sites on those
proteins infuences TT measurements. If there is an insuffcient amount of protcin or the
receptors are occupied by other hormones or drugs, the T will not bind and will be
rapidly metabolized by the liver. Because fT4 is not immediately infuenced by most of
the disorders that alter protein levels or receptor availability, its levels should be normal in
the euthyroid dog. It has bcen suggested that the fT. may be the hetter test to document
reported that glucocorticoids, phenylbutazone, salicylates, diazepam, primidone, phenytoin,
androgcns, and phenobarbital may decrease basal serum TT. levels by interfering with
pregnancy, in male dogs with functional Sertoli's cell testicular tumors, and in response to
In summary, basal serum levels of TTa are significantly influenced by numerous
conditions that have nothing to do with thyroid disease and hypothyroidism. In the
absence of classic historical, clinical, and clinicopathologic evidence of thyroid hormone
deficiency, low basal serum TT. levels must be interpreted cautiously because approxi-
mately 20% of euthyroid dogs have low levels at any one measurement. To support the
larly poor mcasure of thyroid dysfunction.2. lis Because TTs is predominantly an intracel
lular hormone and is preferentially produced in states of thyroid deficiency, TT, levels
drop before TT, levels. In addition, TT; levels are more severely affected by nonthyroid
illnesses and drugs and are inconsistently responsive to TSH and TRH stirmulation.
 Because the concentration of fT, appears to determine hormone availability to cells,
786 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
and because total hormone concentrations may change with drugs, illness, and so forth
without a change in fT4, a direct or an indirect measurement of fT4 provides a more
consistent laboratory assessment of thyroid status than does the measurement of TT.. The
standard techniques for measurement of fT4 are RIA, chemiluminescence, and equilib-
rium dialysis. Equilibrium dialysis is superior to RIA methods, but onc report indicates
that the chemiluminescence test is equivalent in accuracy to equilibrium dialysis.117 In the
carly evaluations of fT, measured by RIA, betwcen 11% and 20% of hypothyroid dogs
with no confounding illnesses had normal fT4 levels, whereas 0% to 8% of euthyroid dogs
had low levels.23, 43 100. 118 Free-T4 measurements by dialysis or chemiluminescence are
more accurate.
 In two independent studies using large numbers of dogs, the sensitivity of fT4 in the
diagnosis of hypothyroidism was 98% whereas the specificity was either 92% or 93% 89,124
most accurate test of thyroid function in the dog. Because some normal dogs and dogs
with other endocrine diseases or nonthyroidal illnessio7 have low fT4 levels, low levels are
not absolutely diagnostic for hypothyroidisnm.
 In normal cats, basal serum TT, and TT levels by RIA are reported to range from 15
to 60 ng/dl and 1.5 to 5 μg/dl, respectively.1. 2. 11 T4-binding serurm globulins could not be
found in the cat.1. 2.1
 In dogs, basal serurn rT, levels by RIA are reported to be approximately 100 ng/dl.1. 2
Serum rT, levels are expected to be elevated in the euthyroid sick syndrome.
SERUM THYROTROPIN DETERMINATION
In humans, the determination of serum TSH levels by RIA is the most sensitive and
reliable indicator of hypothyroidism, often being abnormal for months before basal serurm
TT levels and TSH stimulation test results are abnormal.1,2 11 Serum TSH levels should
human reagents in dogs are inaccurate, 2 and tests designed for the dog (cTSH) can vary
depending on the specificity of the antibody used. Normal levels vary with the laboratory.
jo aun Aq paounn jou are siaaal Hsi reid are plu go uen ss jo snea png
day, but random fuctuations do occur, so a single measurement may not be indicative of
the thyroid status of the dog.29 In one study, it was estimated that a dog would have to be
 po s  essr   n s  e 
cTSH assay were disappointing and were no more predictive of hypothyroidism than
measurement of TT4 126. 134 Although some studies showed 100% correlation of cTSH
results with the final diagnosis,72. 73 most showed inconsistent elevation in hypothyroid
 dogs and elevations in 10% to 30% of normal dogs.127
 In prinary hypothyroidisrn, TSH levels should increase to stimulate the glands to
produce more hormone.4 In secondary or tertiary disease, levels are low. Because the
majority of hypothyroid dogs have primary disease, elevated cTSH levels are to be
expected in most dogs. In a number of recent studies evaluating cTSH, fT4, and/or
TT4, the sensitivity of cTSH in the diagnosis of hypothyroidisrn varied from 63% to
 87%42. 43. s9, 124, 144 whereas the specificity varied from 75% to 93%. In most instances, the
TT, or fT; performed better, indicating that single measurements of cTSH are of ques-
tionable value.
To increase the discriminating value of c'TSH, it has been suggested that the assay be
 q 0 y      6s  s 1o 4 e   1 
whereas the cTSH level would have to be elevated before the diagnosis of hypothyroidism
would be acceptable. Because it would be harder for hypothyroid dogs to satisfy these
ity would increase. Similar increases in specifcity have been reported when TT4 and fT4
are evaluated together.23
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases · 787
PROVOCATIVE THYROID FUNCTION TESTS
To overcome the unreliability of basal hormone measurement levels, various provocative
tests of thyroid function have been developed.16s There is controversy about the relative
efficiency and accuracy of the various tests. Results are often diffcult to compare because
of variation in nethods (different products used at different doses, different time intervals
of sampling, and different laboratories performing and interpreting the tests). As men-
tioned earlier, the availability and/or expense of the hormones used in these tests has
severely curtailed their use.
Thyrotropin Stimulation Test
TSH is a species-specific glycoprotein with a molecular weight of about 28,000 that is
produced by the adenohypophysis.isThe secretion ofTSHis stimulated by hypothalamic
TRH and is inhibited by hypothalamic somatostatin, thyroid hormones, glucocorticoids,
dopainine, and stress. Bovine TSH is biologically active in dogs and cats.
The TSH stimulation test has been widely evaluated in dogs and is vastly superior to
the determination of basal blood TT4 and fT, levels in the diagnosis of hypothyroidism.* A
commonly used procedure for conducting the TSH stimulation test in dogs is as follows:
Serum samples for TT4 determination are collected iminediately before and 6 hours after
the intravenous (IV) injection of 0.1 IU/kg or 1 to 2 units/dogli6 of bovine TSH. Because
TSH can be frozen in conventional freezers for over 200 days without loss of biological
 sn e ssp m as um  ao  psn a u s a d
or repeated IV injections can rarely produce anaphylaxis,67 so some investigators use the
subcutaneous route.
 Euthyroid dogs usually have pre-TSH serum TT. levcls within or below the normal
pre-TSH range for the laboratory performing the assay, and post-TSH serum TT levels
within the normal post-TSH range. Some investigators categorize the response to TSH as
normal when the post-TSH TT level increases by some specific amount, even if the post-
TSH TT4 value does not enter the normal post-TSH TT4 range. The specific increase
expected varies from laboratory to laboratory and cannot be used reliably elsewhere.118
The commonly espoused criterion—that euthyroid dogs double their basal serum TT4
levels after TSH stimulation—is unreliable. In general, measuring serum TT, levels
before and after TSH administration is unreliable and not recommended. Little work has
been done with fTq.117
The TSH stimulation test usually achieves normal poststimulation serum TT. levels in
dogs with the euthyroid sick syndrome and drug-related low basal serum TT4 level.1. 2 11.
with glucocorticoids, both the pre-TSH and post-TSH serum TT4 levels are below the
expected normal ranges95 120. s8. 207 However, the slope of the response paralls that of
normal dogs. Glucocorticoids have been reported to suppress TRH secretion, suppress
pituitary responsiveness to TRH, suppress TSH secretion, depress serum thyroid hor-
mone-binding protein levels, suppress basal serum TT and TT, levels, inhibit the conver-
sion of TT, to TT,, and increase serum rT, levels.
 If a clinician wishes to perform a TSH stimulation test on dogs receiving thyroid
least 30 days. Cessation for 60 days may give more reliable results.1. 2.10f The TSH
stimulation test can be conducted simultaneously with an ACTH stimulation test or a
dexamethasone suppresson test with no compromise in the accuracy of either proce-
dure.10, 13
 In cats, the following two protocols have been reported to be accurate measurements
of thyroid function: (1l) serum TT4 determinations before and 6 hours after IV injection of
either 1 IU or 1 IU/kg of bovine TSH70. 146 and (2) serum TT determinations before and
10 hours after intramuscular (IM) injection of 2.5 IU of bovine TSH.6
*See references 1, 2, 23, 24, 78, 102, 118.
788 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
 Thyrotropin-Releasing Hormone Stimulation Test
TRH is a tripeptide produced by the hypothalamus.l. 2 TRH stimulates the release of TSH
 and prolactin.76 TRH secretion is enhanced by norepinephrine, histamine, serotonin, and
dopamine, and it is probably inhibited by thyroid hormones.
In humans, serum TT4 and TSH responses to exogenous TRH have been used to
differentiate among primary, secondary, and tertiary hypothyroidism.1.,2 Patients with pri-
mary hypothyroidisn have low basal serum TT levels and high basal serum TSH levels,
neither of which responds to TRH stimulation. Patients with secondary hypothyroidism
have low basal serum TT4 and TSH levels, neither of which responds to TRif stimulation.
 oq n H pe di s resq a  i n  
which respond to TRH stimulation,
A variety of different studies on the accuracy of the TRH stirmulation test in separat-
 ing euthyroid and hypothyroid dogs have been published.* This testing can be done in
conjunction with other stimulation tests (e.g., ACTH stimulation test for hyperadrenocorti-
 ss pe as  si H u isn ae o p  (
collected before and 4 or 6 hours after injection. Most authors suggest doses of 0.2 or
0.25 mg. but a dose of 0.05 mg/kg has also been suggested 31, 16 Doses greater than
 0.9 mg or greater than 0.1 mg/kg often cause various cholinergic side effects, including
hypersalivation, coughing, miosis, vomiting, diarrhea, urination, tachycardia, and tachypnea.
 In the early evaluations of this test, TT, levels only were deternined. Basal TT4 levels
are expected to at least double in normal dogs, whereas this should not occur in hypothy-
roid dogs. When results of the TRH stimulation test were compared with thc results of
TSH stimulation tests performed in the same dogs, the TRH results were less predictable
of hypothyroidism; the current sentiment is that the standard TRH stimulation test is not
reliable for the diagnosis of hypothyroidism.51. 147 Recent studies have focused on measure-
increase over 150% after TRH administration, whereas very little change should occur in
hypothyroid dogs.69 143 This small rate of change indicates that pituitary output of TSH is
measurement of cTSH is probably just as accurate.l43 Unless further modifications im-
 prove the accuracy of the TRH stimulation test, it has little or no use.
hours after the IV injection of 0.1 mg/kg of TRH.122 146 TRH doses of 0.1 mg/kg or
 greater often produced the cholinergic ide effects mentioned earlier for dogs.
THYROID BIOPSY
Primary and secondary canine hypothyroidism can be easily distinguished by histologic
examination of a biopsy specimen of the thyroid.1 2 1 In primary hypothyroidism, there is
massive loss of follicular epithelium, usually associated with lymphocytic thyroiditis.s6 In
secondary hypothyroidism, the follicies are distended with colloid, the follicular epithelium
is fattened, and there is no vacuolation of the colloid. Normal dogs treated with systemic
glucocorticoid have increased numbers of colloid droplets per thyroid follicular cell, sug-
gesting inhibition of thyroid lysosomal hydrolysis of collid.1l In these dogs, basal serum
TTs and TT. levels were decreased, but TSH and TRH stinulation test results were
normal.
TESTS USED IN LYMPHOCYTIC THYROIDITIS
o jo qnu e s o m sand m pe sop u
evaluations have been conducted, including determination of serum levels of antithyro-
 globulin antibodies, serum levels of antimicrosomal and anticolloidal antibodies, in vitro 
*See references 51, 69, 76, 78, 84, 102, 143, 147, 149.
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases * 789
lymphocyte blastogenesis to thyroid extract, delayed-type hypersensitivity skin test reac-
antithyroglobulin antibodies are demonstrable in more than 50% of cases of naturally
occurring hypothyroidism by means of ELISA, hemagglutination, and indirect immunofu-
 Orescence techniques.22 36, 62-64
Antibodies to T4 or T, also may be detected.34, 52. 79. 130 When present, these autoanti-
bodies cause spurious elevations of the TT4 or TTs values as measured by RIA.s0, s6 The
patient looks either normal or hypothyroid but has TTa or TTs levels consistent with
hyperthyroidism. Great Danes, Irish setters, Borzois, Doberman pinschers, and Old En-
glish sheepdogs may be predisposed. Interestingly, antithyroglobulin antibodies are also
demonstrable in 1more than 40% of dogs with nonthyroidal endocrine disorders and
healthy relatives of antibody-positive patients, as well as in 13% of hospitalized patients
family memhers that might experience hypothyroidism and helping to differentiate pri-
mary immune-mediated hypothyroidism (antibody-positive) from secondary and tertiary
hypothyroidisin (antibody-negative).
· GlucoCOrtIcOIdS
Glucocorticoids are produced by the zona fasciculata of the adrenal cortex and are
probably the most commonly used therapeutic agents in veterinary medicine,.1. 2, 306 Gluco-
corticoids are bound primarily to a high-affinity corticosteroid-binding globulin (80%) and
serum albumin (10%).213 The remaining 10% is free and metabolically active. Because
most of the receptor sites on the corticosteroid-binding protein are open, cortisol produc-
tion can increase fivefold before the free fraction increases. Hyperglucocorticoidism may
be produced by hypersecretion of ACTH or ACTH-like substances (ectopic, idiopathic,
functional pituitary neoplasm), hypersecretion of endogenous glucocorticoids (funetional
adrenocortical neoplasm), and cxogenous glucocorticoid administration (iatrogenic).
Glucocorticoids and the Skin
 The skin is a sensitive and specifc indicator of hyperglucocorticoidism, refecting both
internal disease and inappropriate therapy.1. . 1l The protein catabolic, antienzymatic, and
antimitotic effects of glucocorticoids are manifested in numerous ways in dog and cat skin:
(1) the epidermis becomes thinned and hyperkeratotic (because of suppressed deoxyribo-
nucleic acid [DNA] synthesis, decreased mitoses, and keratinization abnormalities), (2) the
basement meinbrane zone becomes thinned and disrupted, (3) pilosebaceous atrophy
becomes pronounced, (4) the dermis becomes thinned and dermal vasculature becomes
production), and (5) wound healing is delayed. Unique to the dog, presumably through
changes in protein structure, collagen and elastin fibers become attractive sites for miner-
alization, resulting in dystrophic calcinosis cutis.71 In chronic cases, cutaneous ossification
can occur.2ll Additionally, owing to the broad-spectrum anti-infammatory and immuno-
bacterial and fungal cutaneous infections.1 2 11
 Clinically, hyperglucocorticoidism in dogs and cats is characterized by (1) thin, hypo-
tonic skin, (2) easy bruising (petechiae and ecchymoses), (3) poor wound healing,
(4) seborrhea sicca, (5) phlebectasias, and (6) increased susceptibility to bacterial infection,
deinodicosis, and perhaps dermatophytosis and Malassezia infection. In dogs, calcinosis
tation are features of hyperglucocorticoidism. In human patients, but not in dogs and cats,
hypertrichosis and cutaneous striae are cormmon features of hyperglucocorticoidism.
Ilistologically, hyperglucocorticoidism in dogs and cats is characterized by variable
combinations of orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, follicular keratosis, telogenization of hair
790 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
follicles, excessive trichilemmal keratinization (faine follicles), thin dermis, and telangiecta-
sia.4. 16 The follicular dilatation, follicular atrophy, epidermal atrophy, epidermal melanosis,
sebaceous gland atrophy, and dystrophic mineralization that occur in dogs are rare in cats.
Adrenal Function Tests
Adrenal function tests are basically of two types: those that are single measurements of
        o  s  a
response tests. Single measurements of basal glucocorticoid levels, although cheaper and
elevated basal glucocorticoid levels, but some dogs have normal levels,243 and dogs with
nonadrenal disorders can have elevated levels. 1s6
URINARY GLUCOCORTICOID DETERMINATION
In dogs, the major cortisol metabolites found in urine are cortol, 3-epiallocortol, cortolone.
3-cepiallotetrahydrocortisol, and tetrahydrocortisol.1 2 1l These metabolites are excreted
mainly as glucuronides, and a major portion of this fraction is represented by steroids
reduced at C-20. Thus, the usc of steroid assay procedures that measure only those
steroids having a dihydroxyketotic side chain, such as the Porter-Silber reaction, do not
measure these cortisol metabolites in dogs. In cats, virtually all glucocorticoid metabolites
are cxcreted in bile (99%), with only a small amount of Porter-Silber chromogens present
as the free compounds in urine (1%).1. 2, t5
Assays of urinary steroids (17-ketosteroids and 17-hydroxycorticosteroids) ncccssitatc
24-hour urine samples, metabolic cagcs, and collecting equipment; are easily contami-
nated; and must be performed before and after the administration of a provocative test
agcnt. Thcy arc rarcly used today.
Thc urinary cortisol to creatinine ratio was developed to avoid the need for 24-hour
have low values (5.7 ± 0.9), whiereas dogs with hyperadrenocorticism have high values
(337.6 ± 72). However, values in dogs under stress,320 with renal cisease, or with other
disorders can overlap those in dogs with Cushing's disease, so the test is not specific
(positive predictive value, 87%)236 Because values are not normal in dogs with hyperad-
renocorticism, this ratio can be a useful screening test to exclude that diagnosis (negative
predictive value, 100%).
BLOOD CORTISOL DETERMINATION
Blood cortisol levels in dogs and cats have been measured by three methods: fluorometry.
competitive protein binding, and RIA.1. 2 RIA is the method of choice and the one in
general use. Basal blood cortisol levels by RIA in normal dogs and cats are approximately
0 to 8 μg/dl,l. 2 but the normal values established for the laboratory performing the
testing should always be used. Serum or plasma can be used in the testing, and freezing is
 iy ae p shep a u   i sds pd sn
(<20°C)ll.25 Most investigators separate thc scrum or plasna as quickly as possible and
freeze it until the assay is performed.
Important considerations when interpreting blood cortisol levels include the following:
(1) different laboratories may vary in their normal and abnormal values, (2) stress and
 nonadrenal illness can markedly elevate blood cortisol levels, (3) cortisol levels can vary
with the patient's age, (4) episodic cortisol secretion ocurs in normal dogs and dogs with
hyperadrenocorticism, and (5) single measurements of blood cortisol are of limited value
in the diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism.* Although early data suggested rhythmic varia-
tion in cortisol secretion in dogs and cats,1. 2. 11 it is now generally thought that these
*See references 1, 2, 11, 12, 183, 186, 212, 298
Endoerine and Metabolic Diseascs · 791
specics show little or no circadian variation in plasma concentrations of ACTH or corti-
per day.
CORTISOL RESPONSE TESTS
To overcome the unreliability of basal blood cortisol levels, various provocative tests have
been developed.1. 2.20 33b Because some dogs with hyperadrenocorticism have an altered
clcarance of ACTH and dexarnethasone219 or may have low circulating cortisol levels 25 no
 one test is absolutely diagnostic and all results must be evaluated in light of the patient's
signs. Cortisol response tests are traditionally begun at 8 to 10 AM.
Corticotropin (ACTH) Stimulation Test
ACTH is a polypeptide with a molecular weight of about 4500 secreted by the adenohy-
pophysis as part of a large prohormone, pro-opiomelanocortin, which also contains in its
sequence B-lipotropin, f-endorphin, enkephalins, and α-MSH.1, 2, 246
 si e sp r (sn as ) n s H 
hypoadrenocorticism or iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism in dogs and cats. Basal blood
cortisol levels are normal or low and show little or no response to ACTH. In addition, the
ACTH stimulation test is useful for monitoring therapeutic response to adrenosuppressive
treatments.249, 273 Two commonly used protocols for ACTH stimulation are as follows:
(1) plasma or serum cortisol samples collected before and 2 hours after the IM injection
of 2.2 IU/kg of ACTH gel or (2) plasma or serum cortisol samples collected before and 1
 p h a se(s) H s jo       
currently difficult to obtain. The synthetic product is packaged in single-dose vials of
 0.25 rng. Conventionally, the whole vial was administered. In many animals, this 0.25-mg
dose was well above the 5 ug/kg necded to maximally stimulate the dog's adrenal
glands.24s, s3o Because the product's bioavailability is maintained for 4 months in the
refrigerator or for 6 1nonths in the conventional freezer (-20°C), many investigators
subdivide the vial and give only what is needed.171, 248 The ACTH stimulation test can be
performed concurrently with the TSH stimulation test while maintaining the accuracy of
both tests.10. 13
 In many of the older texts and papers, the ACTH stimulation test was considered
inferior to the low-dose dexamethasonc suppression test for the diagnosis of spontaneous
hyperadrenocorticism in the dog.* This assessment was based on the fact that about 15%
of cases with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism do not have an exaggerated re-
sponse to ACTH administration; about 50% of cases with an adrenocortical tumor hyper.
responded; and chronically ill or stressed animals can have elevated basal cortisol levels
and may hyperrespond to ACTH. As was discussed in the thyroid testing section, more
current methods of evaluation give the raw data and the sensitivity, specificity, and
probability that the positive test result was correct.
 In one study comparing the accuracy of the ACTH stimulation test versus the low.
dose dexamethasonc suppression test in 40 dogs with hyperadrenocorticism (30 with
pituitary-depcndent dlisease, 10 with adrenal tumor) and 41 normal dogs, the sensitivities
of both tests were nearly identical, 95% and 96%, respectively, but the specificity of the
low-dose dexamethasone test was 76%, resulting in a positive predictive value of 76%. The
ACTH stimulation test was more specife (91%), with a positive predictive value of 91% 31s
 In another study on 20 dogs with pituitary-dependent disease, 59 dogs with nonadrenal
disease, and 21 normal dogs, the positive predictive values for the ACTH stimulation test
and low-dose dexamcthasone suppression test were lower, 67% and 38%, respectively, but
The poorer performance of both of these tests was due to the inclusion of the 59 dogs
"See referencos 183, 212, 235, 256,272, 273, 280, 333, 343b.
792 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
with nonadrenal disease. About 35% had significantly elevated baselinc cortisol levcls, and
 g o  e uosp o sns n ous o y  p %
respectively. Eight dogs (14%) had abnorinal ACTH response test results. Both of these
and other studies validate the use of the ACTH stimulation test hut highlight the need for
careful evaluation of the results.
 The ACTHI stimulation test has becn studied in normal cats and in a small number of
cats with spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism." Two protocols recommended for cats are as
follows: (1) plasma or serum cortisol determinations before and 90 minutes aftcr thc IM
injection of 2.2 IU/kg of ACTH gel and (2) plasma or serum cortisol determinations
before and 90 minutes after the IV injection of 0.125 mg of synthetic ACTH. Other
investigators reported no diffcrence in the response of the healthy cats to 0.i25 mg or
 0.250 ng of synthetic ACTH IM (peak cortisol responses at 30 minutes after injection).310
It was reported that cats with diabetes mellitus rmay hyperrespond to ACTH,2s1 but
another study failed to document this fnding in diabetic and nondiabetic sick cats.343
Low-Dose Dexarmethasone Suppression Test
The low-dose dexamethasone suppression test is used to confirm the diagnosis of sponta-
dexamethasone consistently suppresses blood cortisol levels to less than I μg/dl for the 8-
hour test period. The definition of suppression varies, but most investigators think that a
reduction in the blood cortisol level to below 1.5 μg/dl or to less than 50% of the resting
level indicates suppression. A commonly used protocol for the low-dose dexamethasonc
suppression test is to take plasma or serum cortisol sarnples before and 4 and 8 hours
 sion test has been performed concurrently with the TSHI stimulation test while preserving
the accuracy of both tests.10. 13
As mentioned in the discussion of the ACTH stimulation test, the low-dose dexameth-
asone suppression test can be equally or more specific than the ACTII stimulation test
but has a much lower specificity and positive predictive value in both normal dogs and
dogs with nonadrenal disease because (l) they have an accelerated clearance of dexancth-
asone, (2) they have a receptor insensitivity, or (3) their chronic illness has resulted in
significant adrenocortical hyperplasia. As with all other tests, the results of the low-dose
and not just accepted at face value.1.2
The dexamethasone suppresson test has been studied in a few normal cats and cats
ported that plasma cortisol responses of healthy cats to IV injections of dcxamethasonc at
doses of 0.01 mg/kg. 0.1 mg/kg, and 1 mg/kg were similar (with peak suppresion at 6 to
10 hours after injection).310 It was reported that the results of dexamethasone suppression
testing were not different in normal, diabetic, and nondiabetic sick cats.343
High-Dose Dexamethasone Suppression Test
dependent hyperadrenocorticism and  that caused by the adrenocortical neoplasia in
used to confirm the diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism. The definition of suppression
varies, but imost investigators think that a reduction in the blood cortisol level to below 1.5
ug/dl or to less than 50% of the resting level indicates suppression. A couninonly used
protocol for the high-dose dexamethasone suppression test is to take plasma or serum
cortisol samples before and 4 and 8 hours after the IV injection of 0.1 mg/kg of dcxa-
methasone. Sone investigators recomimended a much higher dose, 1 mg/kg.2so Although
Sce references 1, 2, 11, 279, 281, 283, 284, 310, 342, 343b.
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases · 793
this larger dose increases the expense of the test, it does not clcarly enhance the diagnos-
reliable than the 0.1 mg/kg dose.11. 240
fashion240, 280.325 In a large study of 181 dogs with pituitary-dependent disease and 35
dogs with an adrenal tumor, suppression did not occur in 46 (25%) of the dogs with
pituitary-dependent disease. Suppression did occur in 2 (6%) of the dogs with adrenal
might have had a tumor in the intermediate lobe, an area typically tinresponsive to blood.
borne ACTH and dexamethasone.340
PLASMA CORTICOTROPIN (ACTH) DETERMINATION
Plasma ACTH levels have been measured by RlA in normal dogs and in dogs with
ACTH levels are extremely useful in determining the cause of spontaneous canine hyper-
adrenocorticism, especially when interpreted together with the results of dexamethasone
undetectable (less than 20 pg/ml) in dogs with functional adrenocortical neoplasms. As is
the case with plasma cortisol levels, plasma ACTH levels fuctuatc cpisodically throughout
the day, which results in some overlap of values between normal dogs and dogs with
spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism. Plasma ACTI1 levels have been measured by RIA in
ACTH levcls wcre markedly elevated in one cat with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocor-
ticism,
Accurate dctermination of plasma ACTH necessitates proper collection and handling
of the specien and a carefully performed, difficult RIA technique. Conventionally, blood
for ACTH assay was collected in heparin-containing or cthylenediaminetetra-acetic-
containing plastic tubes and spun within 90 minutes at 4°C (39.2°F). The plasma must be
promptly separated into plastic or polypropylene tubes and kept frozen until assayed. If
aprotinin, a proteinase inhibitor, is added to the collection tubes, the separated and
refrigerated (but. unfrozen) plasma will not undergo any decrease in ACTH concentration
provided that it reaches the laboratory within 4 days,247 At -- 20°C (4°F), the ACTH
concentration of samples is maintained for only 30 days, so the assay must be performed
quickly.225
CORTICOTROPIN-RELEASING FACTOR STIMULATION TEST
CRF is a peptide secreted in pulsatile fashion by the bypothalamus.1. 2 1ss CRF secretion
is stimulated by epinephrine and serotonin, and it is inhibited by glucocorticoids and
serotonin antagonists (e.g, cyproheptadine).
 The isolation and synthesis of CRF makes possible an additional diagnostic test to
thetic ovine CRF was injected intravenously (0.1, 1. or 10 ug/kg) into normal dogs and
produccd peak plasma ACTH and cortisol levels within 30 to 60 rminutes.241 Preliminary
canine pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism (increased levels of ACTH and cortisol)
and adrenocortical ncoplasia (no response),28o However, until a relatively inexpensive,
single-dose, stcrilizcd CRF preparation becomes available, the CRF stimulation test is of
limited usefulness to most veterinarians.
OTHER ADRENAL FUNCTION TESTS
Attempts havc been 1natde to devise more foolproof, inexpensive, and time-efficient adre-
nal function tests for the dog and the cat. Tests evaluated include (1) the metyrapone
794 · Endoerine and Metabolic Diseases
response test, (2) the lysine-vasopressin test, (3) the insulin response test, (4) the glucagon
sion tests.1 211 197. 20, 201owever, these tests are inferior to the standardCT stmua
 tion and dexamethasone suppression tests and cannot be recommended.
· Growth hormone
GH (somatotropin) is a polypeptide (molecular weight about 22,000) produced by the
adenohypophysis. 2 It has diametrically opposed intrinsic anabolic and catabolie activities.
Its catabolic activity (enhanced lipolysis and restricted glucose transport caused by insulin
resistance) is caused directly by the GH polypeptide, whereas its anabolic activity is
mediated by somatomedins (insulin-like growth factors), which are primarily generated by
the liver and controlled by CH346, 34.3s The major function of GIH is hormonal control of
 growth (in concert with thyroid hormones, insulin, cortisol, and sex steroids). GH is also
important for the development of the thymus and T-cell function.370. 371
The secretion of CH is episodic and labile; it is affected by the sleep-wake cycle,
physical activity, the animal's nutritional state, physical and emotional stress, and preg-
nancy.l 2 In a study of 500 normal dogs, pulsatile' GH secretion was found during a 24-
hour period.347 About 30% of the dogs did not respond to clonidine and xylazinc provoca-
tion, probably because the agents were administered in the postsecretory refractory period
norepinephrine, dopamine, and serotonin —as well as hypoglycemia, various amino acids,
and progestogens stimulate GH secretion.
No significant changes occurred in the concentrations of GH in whole blood held at
room temperature (20° to 22°C) or in refrigeration (4°C) for 24 hours; in plasma held at
room temperaturc or in rcfrigcration for 8 days; or in plasma that went through four
frceze/thaw cycles.381
Excessive GH secretion produces acromegaly.354, 365, 375, 377 The skin becomes thick
ened, is myxedematous, and is thrown into exaggcrated folds. These changes are most
obvious on the face and the extremities. Hypertrichosis is common. Hyperpigmentation
Occurs in about 40% of human patients with acromegaly but has not becn reported in
dogs.1l Histologically, acromegalic skin is characterized by increased dermal collagen and
mucinandbyhyperplasiaof theepidermis and the appendages416.75
Hyposomatotropism in the mature dog yields similar cutaneous findings, but the dog has a
normaladultcoatforcthairlossstat59Hstlogicallbothnits 
characterized by variable combinations of orthokeratotie byperkeratosis, follicular keratosis.
follicular dilatation, follicular atrophy, telogenization of hair follicles, excessive trichilemmal
and decreased to absent elastin fibers in chronically affected dogs.4. 16
 Specific RIA techniques for measuring canine GH have been developed.1. 3s.376 Basal
Neither breed nor sex causcs variation in norrnal levcis, but age has a profound effect.
Dogs younger than 1 year have approximately double the levels in dogs older than 1
levels as compared with mature dogs. Basal GH levels in pituitary dwarfs and hypophysec-
tomized dogs may approximate these values as well. Thus, basal GH levels are inadequate
for the documentation of GH deficiency.
To document GH deficiency, stimulation tests must be performed.1. 2 1. 36l, 372 Cloni-
dine hydrochloride (Catapres), an α-adrenergic and antihypertensive drug, has been used
to stimulate GH release in dogs. Normal dogs showed a marked increase in plasma GH
 and insulin-like growth factor (IGF-1) levels within 15 to 30 minutes after IV injection of
20 to 30 μg/kg of clonidine, whereas no response occurred in pituitary dwarfs and
hypophysectomized dogs. Bccause some normal dogs show no response to clonidine or
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases · 795
 xylazine provoeation,347 this test cannot be considered diagnostic for GH deficiency. Cloni-
dine may cause severe hypotension and shock.ll Xylazine (Rompun), a sedative hypnotic
drug, gives similar results when injected intravenously at 100 to 300 μg/kg. The 300 μg/
 sq  pe n u s pe u s  a asp x 
dogs.1l More recently, testing with synthetic human or bovine GH-RF has been sug-
and 30 minutes. Side effects have not been reported. Proper interpretation of GH levels
also necessitates the assessment of thyroid and adrenal gland function.1. 2. 355. 376 Both
hyperglucocorticoidism and bypothyroidism impair GH secretion. In addition, pseudopreg.
 ro   n s sr xs p  sd 
plasma GH levels and poor response to xylazine.
     r s  d   
plasrma GH levels during the administration of an IV glucose load. In canine acromegaly,
plasma GH levels were not suppressed by the IV administration of 1 g of glucose per
kilogram.1. 2. 354
(IGF-1) is most commonly assayed. IGF-1 plasina levels parallel body size in dogs; normal
[ou 1oy lu/su 0gg 0n 07 0 pasoddo se puu 06 on g ae sueds 1aoo 1oy sanpa
German shepherds. IGF-l production is impaired by glucocorticoids and estrogens, and
levels are expected to be low or undetectable in GH-deficient states and elevated in
acromegaly. Values have been normal in some dogs with presumed adult-onset hyposoma-
totropisrn.359, 368
● seX Hormones
Estrogens
  a d ae e s n p  q  d e s
follicles, thc zona reticularis of the adrenal cortex, and Sertoli's and interstitial cells of the
testicles.1. 2 41s They may also be made by peripheral aromatization of androgens, Pituitary
as pre se u nd unsa pe on re uao ss Hn
matogenesis in males.1.2 Hypothalarmic GnRH stinulates the pituitary to release FSH. In
turn, estrogcn inhibits GnRH release, and inhihin (produced by ovarian follicles and
testicular Sertoli's cells) inhibits FSH release.
Estrogens are reported to stimulate epidermal mitosis, to increase epidermal thickness
in rmice and humans, and to reduce epidermal thickness in rats and humans.l1, 41s Epider-
mal atrophy was produced in dogs by daily IM injections of 1 mg of diethylstilbestrol for
400 days.
Estrogens increase skin pigrnentation in the guinea pig by increasing both free mela-
nin and 1nelanin within melanocytes, whereas nvariectomy has the opposite effect.1l Cuta-
neous hyperpigmentation is a feature of clinical derrnatoses associated with hyperestrogen-
ism in dogs.
Estrogens reduce both sebaceous gland size and sebum production in rats and hu-
mans. These effects appear to resut fron a local action on sehaceous glands rather than
from a feedback suppression of endogenous androgens. The daily IM injection of 1 mg of
diethylstibestrol into dogs for 400 days produced markcd sebaceous gland atrophy.
   s    jo   ss s
than in intact normal female rats, and estradiol implanted into spayed female or castrated
male rats reduces the growth rate. In dogs. estrogens administered orally, subcutaneously,
epilated hair are striking features of clinical dermatoses associated with hyperestrogenism
in dogs. There appears to be regional sensitivity of hair folicles to estrogenic abnormali-
796 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
tics because these dermatoses follow a predictable pattern (see later). Evidence also
suggests that these estrogen-sensitive areas of skin may have increased numbers of estro-
genreceptors.390
Estrogens are reported to increase the amount of dermal ground substance in mice
and hurans.11 The daily IM injection of 1 mg of diethylstilbestrol in dogs for 400 days
reduced the thickmess of the subcutis3s, Estrogens are also known to affect thymic
function, to enhance antibody production, and to inhibit suppressor T-cellfunction.9
Hyperestrogenism is thought to be the cause of two distinctive dermatoses in dogs:
ferinization of the male dog with a functional tumor of the testicle and hyperestrogenism
 of the intact female dog. Cutaneous changes in these syndromes include (l) bilaterally
symmetric alopecia that begins in the perineal, genital, and ventral abdominal regions and
spreads cranially and ventrally, (2) variable hyperpigmentation, (3) a dull, easily epilated
cnd sd () r u ()  re an n se  
(6) vulvar enlargement, and (7) variable scborrheic skin disease. In male dogs, linear
testicular neoplasia. Histologically, both syndromes are characterized by variable combina-
tions of orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, follicular keratosis, follicular dilatation, follicular
atrophy, telogenization of hair follicles, excessive trichileminal keratinization (fame folli-
cles), epidermal melanosis, and sebaceous gland atrophy.4. 16
The vast majority of adrenalectomized and ovariectomized dogs maintained on only
sex steroids are not necessary for normal skin and haircoats in dogs. However, hypoestro-
 genism has been hypothesized as an etiologic consideration in the estrogen-responsive
dermatosis of spayed female dogs. Clinically, the dermatosis is characterized by (I) bilater-
ally symmetric alopecia that begins in the perineal, genital, and ventral abdominal areas
and spreads cranially and ventrally, and (2) an easily epilated haircoat that fails to regrow
after clipping. Histologically, the dermatosis is characterized by follicular keratosis and
follicular dilatation with telogenization of hair folicles.4. 16 In addition, spayed female cats
with feline acquired symmetric alopecia may respond to estrogen replacement therapy.
 sre o re ss s no sd  () s
available assays measure only one type of estrogen (e.g., estradiol or estrone). Because
numerous estrogenic substances are produced in the body, such assays may be unsatisfac-
 anp u ym shop  o oo o Am prn ku u ao snu n
functional Sertoli's cell ncoplasm of the testiclc could be shown to have hyperestrogenisim
(only estradiol was measured). Additionally, blood estrogen levels, along with the blood
levels of the other sex steroids, fuctuate markedly during the day, necessitating multiple
sanples and unrealistic financial considerations.400 Evidence has been presented that sug-
gests that dogs can have so-called cutaneous hyperestrogenism (increased cutaneous estro-
gen receptors) in the absence of hyperestrogenism.3s Reported values for blood estradiol
in the dog and cat vary with the sex of the animal, whether it is neutered or intact, the
stage of the estrous cycle, and the laboratory used.418
Androgens
Androgcns arc present in both male and female animals and they are produced by the
interstitial cells of the testicle, by the zona reticularis of the adrenal cortex, and through
tion by testicular interstitial cels and ovulation and corpus luteum formation and mainte-
nance.1. 2 Hypothalamic GnRH stimulates the pituitary release of LH. In turn, androgens
and progesterone inhibit LH release, and estrogens and androgens (via hypothalamic
aromatization to estrogens) inhibit GnRH release.
Androgens are reported to stimulate epidermal mitosis in mice and rats.1, 418 In
humans, androgens are reported to increase epidernal mitotic activity and cell turnover
time and thickness.
D pdai are nq sid a an  ud uo pa ou a sao
stimulate pigmentation in specialized areas of the skin, such as the subcostal region of the
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases · 797
male golden hamster and the scrotum of the ground squirrelll In humans, androgens
increase cutaneous pigmentation, especially in sexual skin, apparently owing to increased
melanin synthesis and alteration of the packaging of melanosomes. Men with an androgen
deficiency experience hypopigmentation.
Androgens enlarge the sebaceous glands in rats, rabbits, harmsters, mice, and humans
and increase sebum production in humans and rats.!l In humans, excessive androgens
produce excessively oily skin, whereas androgen deficiency produces dry skin and hair.
Trhe action of androgens involves both an increase in the rate of formation of new
 sebaceous cells and an increase in the size of mature cells.
In rats, androgen administration retards the initiation of anagen, whereas gonadec-
effect on the rate of hair growth in rats. In humans, an excess of androgens results in
accelerated hair growth, whereas androgen deficiency in men causes the hair to become
sparse.395
Androgens are reported to increase the relative and total amounts of hyaluronic acid
and dermal ground substance in mice.!! In humans, androgens cause thickening of the
dermis with demonstrable increase in skin collagen content. Androgens also inhibit various
T-cell functions.399
logic hypothesis. The dermatosis is characterized by (l) bilaterally symrmetric alopecia that
begins in the perineal, genital, and ventral abdominal areas and spreads cranially and
ventrally, (2) a dull, dry, easily epilated haircoat that fails to grow after clipping, (3) thin
 s n so     s s ()   
Histologically, the dermatosis is characterized by orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, epidermal
atrophy, folicular atrophy, telogenization of hair follicles, sebaceous gland atrophy, and
thin dermis.4, 16 In addition, castrated male cats with feline acquired symmetric alopecia
sumed to be the cause of seborrhea oleosa in oversexed intact male dogs, and the
condition resolves with castration.11 Hyperandrogenism has also been demonstrated in
intact male animals with hyperplasia of the circumanal glands and the tail gland.49
 Normal cats treated with mibolerone became virilized, showing thickening of the skin of
the neck and elitoral hypertrophy.1. 2
Assays (RIA) for plasma or serum androgens are commercially available and are
d s spi d pe  da s a aq p
p   i s   sa s a r p 
and cats are approximately 0.5 to 6 ng/ml, whereas those in normal female dogs and cats 
are usually less than 0.5 ng/ml,1 2, i1, 17. 409. 418
Progesterone
 Progesterone is present in both male and female animals, and it is produced by the
corpus luteum of the ovary and by the zona reticularis of the adrenal cortex.1,2,4v9, 418 The
effects of progestational compounds on the skin have not been well studied. However,
tate) for the management of feline and canine skin disorders, the clinician must be alerted
to some possible cutaneous side effects.
 Progesterone is kmown to have immunosuppressive action, and various progesterone
 have also been shown to bind to the intracellular cytosol receptor for dihydrotestosterone
and to inhibit the enzyme 5-α-reductase, which converts testosterone to dihydrotestoster-
 one. By binding androgen receptors in multiple tissues, progestational compounds may be
androgenic, synandrogenic, or antiandrogenic, depending on the compound and the dose.
in rabbits. In the cat, subcutaneous injections of medroxyprogesterone acetate may pro-
duce local alopecia, atrophy, and pigmentary disturbances, and oral megestrol acetate
798 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
administration can produce generalized cutaneous atrophy, alopecia, xanthomas, and poor
wound healing. Bilateral fank alopecia was reported in a dog with hyperprogesteronemia
and a testicular Sertoli's cell neoplasm.2393
Assays (RIA) for plasma or serum progesterone are commercially available and are
burdened by the same interpretational, financial, and practical considerations as previously
 mentioned for estrogen assays. Values for blood progesterone in female dogs and cats are
approximately less than 5 ng/ml (in anestrus, estrus, and proestrus) and 10 to 50 ng/ml (in
pe shop ae un juu I uen ss aiexdde are aan pue (aunaid pue snsa
cats., 2, 41s
Sex Hormone Function Tests
As is the case with other endocrine tests, basal measurements of serum sex hormone
levels can give misleading results, especially in intact dogs. Although stimulation tests with
hCGw1 or GnRH400 to evaluate reproductive performance are available, their value in dogs
with gonadal or adrenal sex hormone dermatoses is largely unknown. To date, the testing
that has received widest attention in these conditions is the sex hormone ACTH response
as offered by the Endocrinology Laboratory at the University of Tennessee, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Knoxville, TN 37901-1071.374 Dogs are given either synthetie ACTH
(0.5 IU/kg IV) or repository ACTH (2.2 mg/kg IM), and serum samples are collected
before injection and again at 1 hour (synthetic ACTH) or 2 hours (gel ACTH) after
injection. Samples are separated immediately, frozen, and mailed frozen to the laboratory
by overnight mail. In addition to cortisol determinations, the laboratory measures prestim-
drosterone sulfate, androstenedione, testosterone, and estradiol-17B. Normal values are
 available for all hormones for intact or neutered male or female animals. The laboratory
 should be contacted hefore testing to make sure the protocol has not changed.
Gonadotropins and Prolactin
The gonadotropins, FSH (follitropin, molecular weight about 32,000) and LH (lutropin,
secretion is stimulated by hypothalamic GnRH and inhibited by estrogens, glucocorticoids,
inhibited by inhibin from the ovarian follicle and testicular Sertoli's cells. LH secretion is
 inhibited by progestogens and androgens. In normal dogs and cats, serum FSH levels by
RIA are reported to be approximately 40 to 70 ng/ml (higher in females in proestrus).
Serum LH levels by RIA in normal dogs and cats are reported as follows: 0 to 3 ng/ml in
intact male animals, 6 to 10 ng/ml in female animals in estrus, and less than 2 ng/ml in
female animals in metestrus or anestrus.1. 2 Gonadotropin deficiencies were detected with
hypothalamic or pituitary disorders.
 Prolactin is a polypeptide (molecular weight, ~ 22,500) produced by the adenohy-
pophysis. Prolactin secretion is episodic and labile; it is stimulated by one or more
hypothalamic releasing factors (including TRH) and inhibited by hypothalamic dopamine.
e qo a r   s ds   s 
1 to 10 ng/ml.1. 2 Hyperprolactinemia was found with hypothyroidism, pituitary neoplasms,
and certain drug administrations (phenothiazines, cimetidine), resulting in galactorrhea,
 gynecomastia, and inhibition of FSH or LH secretion.
● clinIcal ASPects of EndoCrIne Skin dIseaSes
Canine Hyperadrenocorticism
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's disease, Cushing's syndrome) is a common disorder of
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases · 799
cally characterized by polyuria and polydipsia, bilaterally symmetric alopecia, thin hypo-
tonic skin, and skeletal muscle wasting. More than 50% of cases have nontraditional
clinical findings.3 14. 33. 34
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
 ere os s s rouoei aq Aeui io Aeeu moso  usnouiperdq su
Ared pe reupe qoq o anp si usonupeady an s jo rqunu neus t
 neoplasia.220 Iatrogenic canine hyperadrenocorticism results from the misuse of exogenous
glucocorticoids.232
 In about 80% to 85% of dogs with spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism, the dis-
 order results from excessive pituitary ACTH secretion, which produces bilaterai adreno.
cortical hyperplasia (pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism). This excessive ACTH se-
cretion arises from either microadenomas or macroadenomas of the anterior pituitary
pituitary tumors appear to arise spontaneously with no genetically coded predisposition.321
Approximately 90% of the pituitary tumors are functional, and large tumors cause neuro.
logic signs in over 50% of patients.314 The tumor can be found in either the pars distalis
or the pars intermedia.172. 150, 181, 246 ACTH secretion from the pars distalis is regulated by
CRH and cortisol, whereas intermediate lobe secretion is regulated by tonic inhibition by
prinarily dopamine. It is estimated that upward of 30% of the pituitary tumors are
ACTH than smaller ones, and the large ones, especially those of the intermediate lobe,
anong the size of the pituitary neoplasm, the degree of bilateral adrenocortical hyperpla-
sia, and the severity of the clinical signs. The hypersecretion of ACTH results in bilateral
adrenocortical hyperplasia that may be diffuse, nodular, or both. The zona glomerulosa is
usually normal in width and histologic appearance, and enlargement is due to hyperplasia
of the zona fasciculata and zona reticularis. In some cases, gross enlargement of the
adrenals is absent. The adrenal cortex may be grossly and histologically normal but
functionally abnormal.
Functional (cortisol-producing) adrenocortical neoplasns account for ahout 15% to
20% of the cases of naturally occurring canine hyperadrenocorticism. A threefold higher
 i ns a r pp q s sn u eu r jo a
may be adenocarcinomas or adenomas and can occur in either gland. Older data sug-
gested a higher frequency of occurrence in the right adrenal, but newer studies show no
clear-cut predilection for 0ne gland over the other27, 288,291, 326 These neoplasms are
thought to function autonomously, producing excessive amounts of cortisol, which results
in negative feedback suppression of CRF (hypothalamus) and ACTH (pituitary) and in
atrophy of the contralateral adrenal gland. Adrenocortical adenocarcinomas tend to be
large, often extending into the adrenal vein and caudal vena cava, and they usually
metastasize to the liver, lung, kidney, and lymph nodes. Dogs with bilateral adrenocortical
adenomas or carcinomas have been reported rarely.20 Intercurrent pheochromocytomas
 By far, the most alarming cause of canine hyperadrenocorticism is the injudicious use
 of glucocorticoids for therapeutic purposes.232, 306 Although iatrogenic hyperadrenocorti-
cism appears to be less common than the 50% incidence rate cited in the past, it still is a
 problem for clinicians and pet owners. Long-term steroid use, whether by mouth,266. 306 
adrenocortical suppression, elevated levels of hepatic enzymes, and iatrogenic hyperadren-
ocorticism in dogs.
 800 * Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
CLINICAL FEATURES
 Naturally occurring canine hyperadrenocorticism is a disease of middle-aged and older
 dogs, but cases occur in young dogs. No definitive sex predilection has been documented,
dogs of mixed breeding, can be affected. The occurrence of spontaneous hyperadrenocor-
ticism in related Dachshunds,333 Dandie Dinmont terriers,303 and Yorkshire terriers304
reinforces the concept of breed predisposition. Iatrogenic canine hyperadrenocorticism
 pruritus because they are more likely to receive long-term systemic corticosteroids.
 The clinical signs of hyperadrenocoricism are many and varied. Although some find-
ings may be caused by the compressive or inyasive effects of a pituitary or adrenal tumor,
most signs are a direct result of excessive levels of cortisol and possibly other adrenal
so  azis ao   sp a ro pdap sd ne ss a sr
power of observation, and the cause of the hyperadrenocorticism. Smaller breeds tend to
more sensitive to the catabolic effects of glucocorticoids and tend to experience signs
 e  si p s siop roa  po a pe ai ar
interest in their dog's skin may detect subtle changes in the coat and present the dog for
dog owner who pays little attention to the animal and presents the animal only when the
disease, and therefore the signs, are well advanced. In dogs with pituitary-dependent
ss  a o s  se d  n a
tend to develop gradually, whereas the rate of occurrence can be more rapid and unpre-
dictable with pituitary adenocarcinomas or adrenal tumors.
Polyuria and polydipsia (> 100 ml/kg/day of water intake) are commonly the initial
signs of hyperadrenocorticism and can precede easily recognized cutaneous changes by 6
t0 12 months. Incidence figures vary from 32% to 82% 241, 280 Concomitant with the
polyuria and polydipsia, varying degrees of polyphagia develop in approximately 50% of
affected dogs. In some chronic cases we have seen, the earliest sign of hyperadrenocorti-
cism is apparently spontaneous improvement in the dog's allergies.
Cutaneous changes occur in most cases of hyperadrenocorticism, but not all are
recognized by casual inspection of the skin. The most cormmon change occurs in the coat,
Early on, the coat loses its luster and healthy appearance and is more difficult to groom
(Fig. 10-LA). Some Poodle owners comrnent that grooming appointments could be
skipped because the hair was not growing as fast as normally. with time, hairs are lost,
resulting in hypotrichosis to alopecia (see Fig. 10-1B and C). In most cases, the hair loss
is symmetric and involves the trunk, sparing the head and distal extremities, but patchy
hair loss or involvement of only the fank region14 (see Fig. 10-30) or the face32 can also
occur. In one study of 60 dogs, 8 (13.3%) had nontruncal alopecia of the legs (see Fig.
10- 1D) or face,33 Short-coated dogs, in particular, tend to have a thinned or moth-eaten
coat (see Fig. 10-1E).
Coat color change can occur as the initial cutaneous sign in some dogs. Black hairs
turm auburm or rust colored and brown hairs lighten to tan or blonde (see Fig. 10-1F).
This change in pigmentation can involve the entire length of the hair shaft or only the
distal portions. In the latter case, the color change appears to be due to solar bleaching
  see si ooo  eu se ae se prs pou e su  s
mediated by sex hormones. In our experience, coat color change with few other signs of
hyperadrenocorticism is indicative of a gonadal sex horrmone imbalance or adrenal neopla-
sia, especially adenocarcinomas. Clitoral hypertrophy (see Fig. 10-1G) is another strong
indicator of an adrenal tumor.
Other cutaneous signs include thin, hypotonic skin (nimics dehydration, tends to
wrinkle) (see Fig. 10-1E), hyperpigmentation, easy bruising (petechiae and ecchymoses),
phlebectasias (see Fig. 10-1H), seborrhea (dry or greasy), comedones (Fig. 10-2A), poor
wound healing. bacterial pyoderma (see Fig. 10-2B), calcinosis cutis (see Fig. 10-2C and
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases · 80I
FIGURE 10-I. Hyperadrenocorticism. A, Soft-coated Wheaten terrer with an unmanageable coat. B, Marked
  s      o    e n    
G, Clitoral hypertrophy associated with an adrenal tumor. H, Phlebectasia.
802·Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
H
FIGURE I0-2. Hyperadrenocorticism. A, Comedones, alopecia, and pothelly. B, Severe facial furuncnlasis in a
dog with Cushing's disease. C, Calcinosis cutis on the ventral abdomen. D, Calcinosis cutis along the caurdal dorsum.
E, Stria with focal ulceration. F, Thin, hypotonic skin with a central wriukle, prominent vasculature, and a few
wound in a cat with hyperadrenocorticism. (Courtesy of R. Rosychuk.)
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases· 803
FIGURE I0-3. Cutaneous ossi-
fication over the dorsum of a dog
with chronic iatrogenic hyperad
renocorticism. A bone saw was
needed to take the biopsy samples.
D), and striae (see Fig. 10-2E). The striae may occur spontaneously or be the result of
remodeling of a previous scar. In chronic cases, the calcinosis cutis persists and cutaneous
ossification (Fig. 10-3) can occur.211 Demodicosis (Fig. 10-4) may be a secondary con-
incidence figures for most of these conditions, figures that can be different from those
generated today. For example, a study done in the 1980s on 300 dogs280 reported come-
dones in 34% of the dogs, whereas a more recent study on 60 dogs showed a 5%
incidence rate.33 These disparate results do not mean that the signs of hyperadrenocorti-
cisin are changing but rather that most cases are diagnosed and treated earlier before the
 The skin infections in hyperadrenocorticism typically occur in the hypotrichotic to
FIGURE I0-4. Adult-onset pedal
demodicosis in a cushingoid dog.
804 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
alopecic areas, but some dogs do not have other skin lesions. Typically, the infection is
follicular, but large, nonfollicular superficial pustules (bullous impetigo) with minimal
o   d n    s    
recur shortly after treatment is discontinued. In cases in which the response to antibiotics
is poor, multiple deep skin scrapings should be performed to check for demodicosis.
Calcinosis cutis occurs in up to 40% of cases, but the incidence in cases presented early is
'du au uo you lesp  1ao Auou iso snoo 1 sgs(8 0n %'1) 1mo yonm
and in the axillary and inguinal regions (see Fig. 10-2C and D). Early lesions are firm,
whitish dermal papules to plaques. With time, the overlying skin reddens, ulcerates, and
crusts. Old lesions can resemble pyoderrna or pyotraumatic dermatitis and are often
pruritic. Other causes of pruritus in hyperadrenocorticism are bacterial pyoderma, Malas-
sezia dermatitis, seborrhea, and demodicosis.
 Cutaneous phlebectasias occur in up to 40% of the dogs with hyperadrenocorticism,
especially over the ventrum and medial thighs.30s These vascular lesions are macular to
 papular, are erythematous, range up to 6 mm in diameter, are asymptomatic, and gener-
ally do not blanch with diascopy (see Fig. 10-1H). These lesions do not regress after
effective treatment. Pressure sores (decubital ulcers) are comimon in large dogs with
hyperadrenocorticism.2
Musculoskeletal abnormalities are common in canine hyperadrenocorticism.1 2 272. 273
Lethargy and decreased exercise tolerance are common. Skeletal muscle atrophy and
weakness occur, with atrophy being nost pronounced over the head, shoulders, thighs.
and pelvis. Abdominal enlargeinent (potbelly) is frequent (see Fig. 10-2A), with the
abdonen being faccid and the dog not being able to tense the abdormen normally. In
additiou, a cushingoid myotonia or pseudomyotonia may occur, which is characterized by
muscle stiffness and proximal appendicular muscle enlargement. Lameness associated with
osteoporosis and osteomalacia, with or without pathologic fractures, is rare. Chronic hy-
rupture and patella luxation.?
Persistent anestrus is frequent in intact bitches with hyeradrenocorticism.2 235 280, 409
In addition, clitoral enlargement is not uncommon and presumably results frorm hyper-
secretion of adrenal androgens.18s Clitoral enlargement does not occur with iatrogenic
hyperadrenocorticism. Testicular atrophy is common in intact males.
 Respiratory complications reported to occur with canine hyperadrenocorticism include
excessive panting, bronchopneumonia, dystrophic mineralization and fibrosis, and pulino-
nary thrombosis.3,254, 274
 Behavioral changes may also occur (aggressiveness, depression, psychoses, and self-
mutilation). Neurologic signs, including ataxia, blindness, head pressing, somnolence, Hor-
ner's syndrome, anisocoria, circling. hyperesthesias, and seizures, occasionally are apparent
in naturally occurring canine hyperadrenocorticism and are caused by pituitary neoplasia
may have abnormal adrenal function tests2Exophthalos,indolent comeal ulcers,and
g   e      
hyperglycemia occurs in 40% to 60% of cases, with overt diabetes mellitus being noted in
ticism include hypertension,276 recurent urinary tract infections, urolithiasis, and acte
pancreatiis.2. 3 Acute abdomen with or without hemoperitoneum is a rare manifestation of
hemorrhage from an adrenocortical neoplasm.316
DIAGNOSIS
is basically that of polyuria and polydipsia: chronic renal disease, chronic liver disease,
diabetes mellitus, diabetes insipidus (pituitary or renal), psychogenic polydipsia, hyperthy.
roidism, hypercalcemia, hypernatremia, bypokalemia, hypoadrenocorticism, polycythemia
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases · 805
vera, and pyrexia.1. 2, 1 With truncal alopecia and no polyuria and polydipsia, the differen-
hormone imbalance. Definitive diagnosis is based on history, physical examination findings,
hemogram, urinalysis, serum chemistry studies, radiography, skin biopsy, and adrenal
should be controlled before adrenal function tests are performed.2s Many chronic dis-
eases make it dificult to interpret test results.
Hemograms classically reveal leukocytosis (17,000 to 68,000/μl), neutrophilia (1l,500
to 65,000/μl), lymphopenia (0 to 1000/μl), and eosinopenia (0 to 1000/μl).1. 2, 1i, 235 272, 250. 33
Erythrocytosis (polycythemia), nucleated red blood cells, thrombocytosis, and hyperseg-
gravity (typically, 1.012). In addition, 50% of these dogs have urinary tract infection,
nine ratio is increased in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism, but the elevation is not specific
for that disorder.233 Calcium crystals may be observed because these dogs are 10 times
more likely to have uroliths.29 About 15% of these dogs have glucosuria in association
with concurrent diabetes mellitus. The urinary cortisol/creatinine ratio is typically ele-
vated in hyperadrenocorticism. However, elevations are not specific for hyperadrenocorti-
cism.203. 237 Because the seemingly trivial stress of an office visit can falsely elevate the
cortisol/creatinine ratio, owners should collect screening urine samples at home.320
 Serurm chemistry panel abnormalities may include mild to marked elevations in levels
of cholesterol and triglycerides,2os serum alanine transaminase, serum aspartate transami-
nase, and glucose, and a decreased blood urea nitrogen (BUN) level. Hypophosphatemia
occurs in about 33% of dogs with spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism. Abnormal glucose
tolerance test results and elevated serum insulin levels are common.
The serum alkaline phosphatase level is usually elevated in canine hyperadrenocorti-
 ete zsi pn-s e o np Ar si pe (%  o 
serum alkaline phosphatases can be increased by anticonvulsants or in diabetes mellitus,
hepatic disease, and other nonadrenal illnesses, results of this testing cannot be considered
has elevations in both the liver and cortisol fractions, it has severe liver disease and may
be more at risk for adverse reactions with o,p'-DDD treatment.313
-ady suu un ml asn ae (i e i d) sal au p lesg
renocorticism.l. 2, 207 These spuriously low thyroid hormone levels are caused by glucocorti-
coids and do not usually indicate concurrent hypothyroidism. The results of TsH stinula-
tion tests are usually normal, but pre-TSH and post-TSH levels may be below the normal
ranges. When the hyperadrenocorticism is corrected, thyroid hormone levels return to
normal. Occasionally, a dog truly has concurrent hypothyroidism and requires thyroid
hormone maintenance therapy.
normal, 170 or less) and diastolic (110 to 180 mm Hg: normal, 100 or less) blood
pressures, which may predispose to thromboembolism, glomerulosclerosis, left ventricular
may or may not normalize with treatment.276 In dogs with cushingoid myopathies, electro-
myographic studies have revealed bizarre high-frequency discharges in association with
histopathologic findings in skeletal muscle (atrophy, degeneration, and necrosis) and pe-
ripheral nerves (segmental demyelination).
 Dogs with hyperglucocorticoidism have decreased blood GH levels, which respond
poorly or not at all to xylazine or clonidine.l 2. 11. 260. 290 36s The pituitary dysfunction in
these dogs extends to other hormones and can influence serum gonadotropin (LH and
 Serum testosterone responses to exogenous LH or human chorionic gonadotropin injec-
tions are normal in this situation.
 Radiography may reveal (1) hepatomegaly; (2) osteoporosis and osteomalacia (espe-
cially of vertebrae, ribs, and fat bones), with o1 without pathologic fractures; (3) dys-
trophic mineralization of soft tissues (especially of the lung, the kidney, and the skin); and
806 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
(4) adrenocortical neoplasms. The success rate of demonstrating_ adrenal tumors with
area of an adrenal gland indicates tumor, but does not differentiate adenomas from
adenocarcinomas, because the incidence of mineralization is similar for both. Special
radiographic techniques (nephrotomography and x-ray computed tomography) are re-
not differentiate adenomas from adenocarcinomas and is impractical for routine use.
Easy access to sensitive imaging techniques (ultrasonography, x-ray computed tomog-
raphy, nuclear magnetic resonance) has greatly increased the clinician's ability to demon-
 brain imaging could be a routine part of the initial diagnostic work-up of an animal with
hyperadrenocorticism, risk and cost effcacy must be evaluated carefully in the patients
with no neurologic signs.314 In two studies on 34 dogs with pituitary-dependent disease
and no neurologic signs, pituitary masses were detected in 19 (56%) dogs.174. 175 This
compared with the 100% rate when central neurologic signs are present.193 Thirteen dogs.
 detected in 2 of the 5 dogs initially considered negative, and the previously documented
mass had enlarged in only 4 of the 8 dogs. These data suggest that initial pituitary imaging
is of litle prognostic yalue in dogs not undergoing hypophysectomy. The primary place of
pituitary imaging studies is in patients with neurologic signs, especially when those signs
 a sis on   t  aeq s n  e no a
 Routine use of an abdominal ultrasonogram can also be questioned in dogs with
classic clinical and laboratory signs of pituitary-dependent disease. It is of great diagnostic
significance in patients when adrenocortical neoplasia, pituitary-dependent disease with an
intercurrent pheochrormocytoma, or nonadrenal illness with overlapping symptoms (e.g.
conditions, both glands should be evaluated and compared with each other and the
normal values established for dogs.169,22, 231 Because bilateral adrenal neoplasia20 and
intercurrent adrenal neoplasia and pituitary-dependent disease173 220. 324 has been docu-
mented, the evaluation should not stop when a mass is detected in one gland.
 Dogs with hyperadrenocorticism may have significant elevations of coagulation factors
I (fbrinogen), V, VII, IX, and X, as well as elevated levels of antithrombin II and
plasminogen. These abnormalities may predispose the patient to hypercoagulability and
thromboembolism.
Histopathology
Skin biopsy in canine hyperadrenocorticism may reveal many nondiagnostic changes con-
sistent with endocrinopathy (orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, epidermal atrophy, epidermal
melanosis, follicular keratosis, follicular dilatation, follicular atrophy, telogenization of hair
follicles, excessive trichilemmal keratinization, and sebaceous gland atrophy) 4, 16 Histopath-
ologic findings highly suggestive of hyperadrenocorticism include dystrophic mineralization
(of collagen fibers, basement membrane zone of epidermis and hair follicles), thin dermis,
and absence of arrector pili muscles (Figs. 10-5 to 10-7). Histopathologic findings
trophic mineralization) may be detected. Histopathologic characteristics of cutaneous phle-
 po rp rens jo u pe u r   s
se-uyo d  eo) (s r s
dermal blood vessels, which may be encased by an epidermal collarette (papular stage)3s
In many cases, especially with chronic disease, the tentative diagnosis of hyperadreno-
corticism is straightforward and easily supported by the results of routine laboratory tests.
At the other end of the spectrum is the dog with truncal alopecia, recurrent pyoderma, or
seborrhea with no nondermatologic signs. Results of routine tests in these dogs often
suggest a diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism, but more than 30% of these dogs have no
convincing hematologic or biochemical evidence of that disease.333 In these dogs, the
diagnosis must be confrmed or refuted by adrenal function tests.
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases · 807
sence of hair shafts, sehaceous gland atrophy. thin dermis, and dystrophic mineralization of
dermis (right) and surface (left).
Adrenal FunctionTests
 Once spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism is suspected, the diagnosis is substantiated and
 confirm or rule out the diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism.43b After the diagnosis is
confirmed, the purpose of the second stage is to differentiate pituitary-dependent hyper-
adrenocorticism from that caused by adrenal neoplasia.43:
FIGURE I0-6. Camine hyperadrenocorticism. Dystrophic mineralization of the glassy me mbrane of 
a hhair follicle.
808 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
FIGURE IO-7. Dystrophic mineralization of dermal collagen.
n as a  s s o jo  a sisn  s
of basal glucocorticoid levcls in urine or blood and those that are provocative, dynamic-
response tests of the_ glucocorticoid levels in blood. Aside from the urinary cortiscl/
creatinine ratio test, all cortisol evaluations are currently conducted on serum or plasma.
Single measurements of plasma cortisol are completely unreliable. Normal dogs, dogs with
nonadrenal disease, dogs recently hospitalized, and stressed dogs can have cortisol levels
above normal levels, whereas up to 50% of dogs with hyperadrenocorticism can have
that can be of diagnostic significance is the urinary cortisol to creatinine ratio. Normal
dogs have low values (5.7 ± 0.9), whereas dogs with hyperadrenocorticism have high
values (337.6 ± 72).203. 237 However, because dogs under the stress of an exarnination,
FIGURE I0-8. Cutaneous phleb-
ectasia. Marked dilatation and con-
gestion of superficial vessels.
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases · 809
with renal disease, and with other disorders can have values that overlap those found in
hyperadrenocorticism, the test is not specific for hyperadrenocorticism and performs best
in excluding that diagnosis. 320
 Single measurements of endogenous plasma ACTH levels can aid in the diagnosis of
hyperadrenocorticism and the definition of its cause.343c Plasma concentrations deteriorate
when the sample is unfrozen. The addition of aprotinin, a proteinase inhibitor, to the
cold and arives at the laboratory within 4 days.247 Plasma ACTH levels should be normal
 pe a ad  sip  (d n ) p o
with hyperadrenocorticism have abnormal levels, and one study of 4l dogs with adrenal
tumors showed that 30% of dogs had levels within the normal range.3 Repetition
sampling probably would increase the sensitivity of this testing but is cost prohibitive.
Plasma ACTH leveis should only be evaluated in conjunction with other tests.
documents a diagnosis of iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism or hypoadrenocorticism in dogs.
Basal blood cortisol levels are low or normal and show little or no response to ACTH.
Two commonly used ACTH stimulation test protocols for dogs are as follows: (1) plasina
or serum cortisol determinations are collected before and 2 hours after the IM injection
of 2.2 IU/kg of ACTH gel and (2) plasma or serum cortisol determninations are collected
before and 1 hour after the IV injection of either 0.25 mg/dog or 5 μg/kg of synthetic
ACTH.
 In hyperadrenocorticism, dogs with pituitary-dependent bilateral adrenal hyperplasia
should show an exaggerated response to the administration of ACTH.280. 3435 Because
adrenal tumors should secrete independently of ACTH, poststimulation values should
show little change from the initial sample, Unfortunately, these theories do not absolutely
hold in the clinical situation.
The low-dose dexamethasone suppression test is used to diagnose spontaneous hyper-
adrenocorticism in dogs.* Plasma or serum cortisol levels are determined before and 8
hours after an IV injection of 0.01 mg/kg of dexamethasonc. Most investigators also draw
a sample at 4 hours. In normal dogs, the low dose of dexamethasone consistently sup-
presses cortisol levels to less than 50% of baseline or less than l μg/dl for the test period.
Because of differences in dexamethasone metabolism in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism
and possibly other nonadrenal illnesses, the low-dose dexarmethasone suppression test does
results in uncontrolled diabetics and other chronically stressed dogs and is uninterpretable
in the dog with iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism.
 One study on 2i6 dogs with hyperadrenocorticism used the low-dose dexamethasone
suppression test to document hyperadrenocorticism and to discriminate between pituitary-
dependent disease and adrenocortical neoplasia.206 Thirty-five dogs had adrenal tumors,
and 18l had pituitary-dependent disease. By definition, hyperadrenocorticism was docu-
mented if the cortisol level at 8 hours was greater than 1.4 μg/dl. Under these criteria,
diagnosis was correct in 213 of the 216 (99%). To discriminate between pituitary-depen-
8-hour sample was less than 50% of baseline or less than 1.4 μg/dl at 4 hours. None of
 many dogs with pituitary-dependent cisease, adrenal tumor could havc erroneously been
diagnosed depending on which definition was being followed. This and many other studies
ticism, especially when dogs with chronic nonadrenal disorders are in the study popula
tion.206, 239, 318
In most cases, the low-dose test does not reliably discriminate between pituitary-
dependent disease and adrenal neoplasia. One pattern, complete suppression at 4 hours
"See references 1, 2, 235, 255, 256, 280, 333, 343b.
810 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
dp-d r aa aad iry e s 'so g e uissans jn ss 
measurement of plasma ACTH levels, or some other testing must be performed to
 separate pituitary-dependent disease from adrenal neoplasia.
● Tests to Differentiate the Cause of Hyperadrenocorticism. Because the treat-
ment of choice is different for pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism and adrenal
neoplasia, every effort should be made to dehine the cause of the hyperadrenocorticism.
Unless the low-dose dexamethasone suppression test shows the diagnostic pituitary-depen-
dent pattern or the imaging techniques (radiographs, ultrasonography, and so on) clearly
demonstrate adrenal neoplasia or bilateral hyperplasia, further suppression testing is nec-
essary.
sion test3e High-dose dexamethasone suppression testing is performed with the IV in-
jection of 0.1 mg/kg of dexamethasone with sampling points at 0, 4, and 8 hours.235 272.333
Some investigators recommend a dose of 1 mg/kg 2s but there is no clear and convincing
evidence that this dose increases the accuracy of the test in most dogs. Some investigators
define suppression as a decrease in cortisol to less than 50% of the level at time zero,
whereas other rescarchers use levels of less than 1.5 μg/dl. In theory, dogs with pituitary-
 dependent disease should demonstrate suppression cormpletely at 4 hours and maintain or
should occur. However, suppression is inadequate in 15% to 30% of dogs with pituitary-
ACTH levels can be helpful. However, one study showed that ACTH levels and high-dose
dexamethasone testing gave contradictory results in 15% of dogs tested, so some dogs
cannot be categorized by this testing.3a3
CRF stimulation testing can be useful in differentiating naturally occurring hypoad-
renocorticism_ from the iatrogenic form185 241. 285 and pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorti-
causes rapid elevations in both plasma ACTH and cortisol levels. Dogs with pituitary-
dependent disease show prompt elevation in both ACTH and cortisol leveis, whereas dogs
   s n a  n  s e 
when CRF becomes available for routine diagnostic use.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The prognosis for untreated naturally occurring canine hyperadrenocorticism is poor, with
death often occurring within 2 years (from such conditions as septicemia, diabetes melli-
tus, heart failure, pancreatitis, pyelonephritis, and thromboembolism)249 273 There is o
clear and convincing evidence that treatment of the uncomplicated case prolongs suryival
time. However, successful treatment improves the quality of life for the dog and its
owner. Death may be associated with adrenalectomy, hypophysectomy, o,p'-DDD admin-
therapy related to growth of a pituitary neoplasm or metastasis of an adrenocortical
e  jo ae jo si e se sis jo s g m pz ae 
conditions. Several independent studies on large numbers of dogs gave mean survival
times of approximately 2 years, with ranges from 10 days to 8.2 years.240, 20
The cause of hyperadrenocorticism determines the treatment. Adrenocortical tumors
should be surgically removed.291. 301 When the tumor is undiagnosed, has metastasized, or
cannot be removed because of the patient's health, medical treatment can be instituted,
but the vigor of therapy and results are different from those obtained in treating pituitary-
disorders (e.g,1
 urinary tract infection and diabetes mellitus) should be identified and
 treatment of these conditions should be instituted.3 274 Although the problems identifed
Endocrine and Metabolie Diseases · 8II
may not respond completely to treatment until the hyperadrenocorticism is resolved, they
can become life threatening to the patient if their control is not attempted.
Pituitary-Dependent Hyperadrenocorticism
Surgical treatment can be accomplished with either bilateral adrenalectomy or hypophys-
ectomy.1. 2,1826126oth procedures necesstate a skilled surgeon,intensive intrapr
tive and postoperative monitoring and supportive care, lifelong hormone replacement
can persist or recur at a later date.
Radiation therapy offers a nonmedical alternative for dogs with pituitary-dependent
Bop ae u psn sq ue  yonoa 'sarsadxa Aaa si ssad ar pue p a
it finds greatest use in dogs with neurologic signs secondary to macroadenomas. Protocols
vary with the study, but doses between 44 and 48 Gy, fractionated in 1l or 12 doses, are
 srop as s s a s a    s is 
before the treatments can be completed. Small tumors appear to respond better than
may not be sufficient to returm the dog to a normal life, and relapses occur in up to 50%
of the cases.193
Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism has been treated with drugs that act on the
hydrochloride (Periactin) is an antiserotonin agent that blocks serotonin-mediated CRF
and ACTH release. The drug has been used to treat spontaneous canine hyperadrenocor-
ticism (0.3 to 3 mg/kg/day orally), but most dogs were not helped.312 Bromocriptine
mesylate (Parlodel) is a potent dopamine receptor agonist that inhibits ACTH secretion.
 This drug has also been used to treat dogs with spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism (up to
0.1 mg/kg/day) with rare benefit,1, 2. 11 Side efects with these drugs include vomiting.
s nb r fo an ade u s pe s n ss
effects and infrequent benefit, these drugs appear to have limited usefulness in the
management of hyperadrenocorticism.2
Trilostane, an inhibitor of 38-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, is used in Europe for the
treatment of hyperadrenocorticism in humans. In a preliminary study of five dogs with
hyperadrenocorticism, all responded, even the one dog with a nonresectable adrenal
tumor, to treatment with no side effects noted.234 The dosage used varied from 2.6 to
4.8 mg/kg. In three dogs, the dosage was given twice daily until a response occurred, then
the administration was reduced to once daily. The other two dogs received the drug once
 daily from the onset. With its apparent high degree of safety and eficacy, further studies 
are indicated.
The drug L-deprenyl (Anipryl, Pfzer Animal Health) is a selective irreversible mono-
amine oxidase-B (MAO-B) inhibitor. Because MAO-B is used in dopamine metabolism, its
 inhibition increases central dopamine concentration. L-deprenyl is used in the treatment
t-orusouandy  sa u pue sap o u uunsp uon gon
Most old dogs with cognitive dysfunction have an inter-related to intercurrent HPA
dysregulation.299 Its use is contraindicated in patients taking other MAO inhibitors, which
include amitraz and tricyclic antidepressants, These drugs should be withdrawn for at least
14 days before treatment is begun.is1
 As discussed previously, the release of ACTH from the pars intermedia is tonically
ACTH secretion. It is estimated that 30% of dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadreno-
corticism have pars intermedia involvement with prinary dopamine depletion, secondary
excessive ACTH secretion, and tertiary bilateral adrenal hyperplasia, L-deprenyl restores
the dopamine concentration, thus reducing ACTH secretion. If the hyperadrenocorticism
is secondary to CRH-mediated ACTH secretion, L-deprenyl will have little or no effect.
Because there is no readily available test to determine if the patient in question has
pars intermedia involvement, the only way to determine eficacy is by therapeutic trial.
8I2 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseascs
Because approximately 70% of dogs with pituitary-dependent disease do not respond to
this drug, and those that do do so slowly, it is suggested that L-deprenyl be used as 3
first-line agent in dogs with mild-to-moderate disease. With severe disease, other treat-
ments should be used to put the disease into remission with consideration of L-deprenyl
goe u   I e a  si p    r
days. If no response occurs, the dosage should be incrcased to 2 mg/kg for an additional
[ si ass e'ssp ra a ppau gg sop 0a o podai e  pouad 
and cumulative. Because the drug is very safe and not adrenolytic, response is deterrmined
by change in clinical signs and lahoratory monitoring is not needed. Adverse reactions
entation, decreased hearing, and restlessness.is1 In the 90 dog study, the owners and
veterinarians of about 80% of those dogs thought the dog was better with treatment. In a
Ketoconazole is an antifungal imidazole drug that also inhibits adrenocortical steroido
ketoconazole show significant decreases in basal cortisol levels and response to exogenous
ACTH.35 Similar response occurs when dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorti-
and 11 dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism_ were treated with 15 mg/kg
dogs with pituitary-dependent disease did not respond. In another study of 11 dogs, the 9
with pituitary-dependent disease all responded but experienced relapse within I year.287
recommends that the drug be given at 5 mg/kg every 12 hours for 7 days to determine
whether the dog shows any idiosyncratic reactions to its administration. If none occurs,
the dose is increased to 10 mg/kg every 12 hours for l4 days. Response is determined by
     s ao  n s 
poststirmulation cortisol levels above the reference range, the dosage should be increased
to 15 mg/kg every 12 hours for 14 days. If this dosage produees the desired suppresson,
it must be maintained on a daily basis. Although ketoconazole is safe and effective in the
treatment of hyperadrenocorticism, its expense precludes its long-term use in many dogs.
Its primary indications are cases of adrenal neoplasia in which surgery cannot be per-
formed or in which metastasis has occurred and dogs who cannot tolerate other medical
treatments.
The drug of choice for pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism in dogs is
0,p'-DDD (mitotane, Lysodren).14, 249. 275, 230 This drug is a chlorinated hydrocarbon
derivative that causes selective necrosis and atrophy of the zona fasciculata and zona
reticularis of the adrenal cortex, whereas the zona glomerulosa (mineralocorticoid-
producing zone) is relatively resistant. In a small number of dogs, this zone is destroyed
with treatment and the dog is a permanent Addisonian.174 The initial dosage of o,p'-DDD
is 25 to 50 mg/kg/day for 7 to 10 days. The daily dose should be divided in half and
administered every 12 hours with food.32a Small doses of glucocorticoid (oral prednisone
 or prednisolone at 0.2 mg/kg/day, or oral hydrocortisone at 1 mg/kg/day) are often given
during the initial 7 to 10 days of o,p'-DDD therapy to minimize the side effects associ-
of cases.? In dogs with concurrent diabetes mellitus, treatment with o,p'-DDD reduces
the daily insulin requirement and can predispose to insulin overdosage and hypoglyce-
mia.177 A low initial dosage of o,p'-DDD (25 mg/kg/day) and a higher daily maintenance
dose of prednisone or prednisolone (0.4 mg/kg) or hydrocortisone (2 mg/kg) prevent the
allow for easier regulation of the diabetes.
lethargy, vomiting, diarrhea, anorexia, and weakness.2a9 Less common side effects inchude
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases · 813
disorientation, ataxia, and head pressing. About 25% of dogs have one or morc side effects
during initial therapy, but the effects are relatively mild in most dogs. Side effects develop
when plasma cortisol levels either fall below normal basal range (less than l μg/dl) or
drop too rapidly into normal range (glucocorticoid withdrawal syndrome) and resolve
promptly with glucocorticoid supplementation. If adverse signs occur during initial
ap pron a e ps aq prs ue p a adr aa-do
doubled until the dog can be evaluated. If clinical signs persist longer than 3 days after
 increasing the glucocorticoid dose, other medical problems should be considered.
There are many ways to assess the effectiveness of initial o,p'-DDD therapy. Meas-
urement of daily water consuinption and eosinophil counts can be used but may be
misleading because they only indirectly refiect circulating cortisol levels and not all
cushingoid dogs manifest cosinopenia or polydipsia, especialy while hospitalized. Urinary
cortisol/creatinine ratios cannot bc used for 1monitoring.2s9 Most investigators perforn an
ACTH stimulation test to monitor the level of adrenal suppression. Because prednisone,
prednisolone, and hydrocortisone all cross-react in most cortisol assays, glucocorticoid
supplementation should not be given on the morning of ACTH stimulation testing. To
ensure adequate control of hyperadrenocorticism with o.p'-DDD, both basal and post-
ACTH cortisol levels should remain within the normal resting (basal) range.172 After
o,p'-DDD induction therapy and ACTH stinilation testing. O,P'-DDD administration
should be discontinued and glucocorticoid supplementation should be continued until
cortisol results are available.
About 15% of dogs still have exaggerated cortisol production after initial o,p'-DDD
therapy.249 In these dogs, daily o.p'-DDD therapy should be continued and ACTH stimu-
lation tests repeated at 5- to i0-day intervals until basal and post-ACTH cortisol levels are
in the normal range. This may necessitate as long as 30 to 50 days in some dogs 249 In
           
nornal range after initial o,p'-DDD therapy. In these dogs, o,p'-DDD administration
should be stopped and glucocorticoid supplementation continued as needed until basal
cortisol levels normalize. This usually takes about 2 to 6 weeks.
After normal cortisol levels are documented, o.p'-DDD is continued at a weekly
maintenance dosage. The weekly maintenance dosage is that used for loading and should
be divided in half and given twice weckiy. During rnaintenance therapy with o,p'-DDD,
d sis p  a  u a ae s ns pr
appetite, depression, weakness, and mild weight loss in spite of normal cortisol levels,
alternate-moming doses of prednisone or prednisolone (0.4 mg/kg) are beneficial.
Ahout 5% of the dogs treated with maintenance o,p'-DDD therapy experience iatro-
genic hypoadrenocorticism characterized by low basal and post-ACTH cortisol levels and
hyperkalemia or hyponatremia. These changes can occur after wecks or years of treatment
but typically occur at about 5 nonths.24s Adverse clinical signs resolve after stopping 0p'-
DDD therapy and supplementation with appropriate doses of glucocorticoids and mineral-
0,p'-DDD therapy is not indicated unless the hypoadrenocorticism resolves and basal and
post-ACTH cortisol levels inerease above normal range.
Taa-,do jo sasop aouaue pue supeon ehur ym pen siop jo %og yoqy
experience relapse within 12 months of treatment as evidenced by recurrence of clinical
treatment for 5 to I4 days, and then maintenance is reinstituted with larger dosages,
typically 25% to 50% higher than that used previously. Approximately 40% of the dogs
who expcricnce rclapse once do so one or more additional times.249 Dosage adjustiments
allow control to be regained. In a study on 200 dogs treated with o,p'-DDD, 184 were
 o n    s   po mn
ensure contiued control and prevent serious relapse during o.p'-DDD therapy, ACTH
stimulation testing should be repeated every 6 months during maintenance therapy. With
 An altermative protocol for the use of o.p'-DDD has been developed to minirmize the
occurrence of relapses and the unexpected development of hypoadrenocorticism. High
814 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
doses are given for extended periods to destroy the adrenal cortex intentionally, resolving
DDD is administercd at 50 to 75 mg/kg/day for medium-sized to large dogs for 25 days.
Dosages up to 100 mg/kg/day are recommended for toy breeds. The daily dosage is
divided into three or four equal parts and is given with food. Glucocorticoid and mineralo-
administered at 1 mg/kg every 12 hours until 1 week after the o,p'-DDD regimen is
completed, and the dosage is then reduced to 0.5 mg/kg every 12 hours. Fludrocortisone
(0.0125 mg/kg) and sodium chloride (0.1 mg/kg/day divided over two or three meals) is
suggested therapy for the hypoadrenocorticism. Adjustncnts in treatment are made ac-
cording to thc animal's needs. Although this protocol is designed to destroy the adrenal
cortex, the treatment is not uniformly successful because relapse rates near 30% within 1
once-weekly administration for 5 to 6 weeks should result in another remission, Because
Bupeol jo sep o Xpueou paau looood Cai-,do prepus an Aq pairan soop ouos
 n        u s  s a ro a
treatment. An ACTH stinulation test should be performed after the 25 days of treatment
to ensure that adrenal suppression has occurred. Additional loading time is indicated if the
adrenals hyperrespond to ACTH.
Aside from pituitary irradiation, none of the treatments described affects pituitary
tumors, and their continued growth can be expected. Growth is slow but progressive.
Large tumors can result in neurologic dysfunction with stupor, anorexia, and head press-
ing imost cornmonly observed.271 Other signs include pacing, circling, behavioral changes,
weakmess, seizures, ataxia, and adipsia. If these signs develop, pituitary irradiation is
 nccessary for continued mamagement.
Adrenocortical Neoplasia
 The therapy of choice for adrenocortical neoplasia is adrenalectomy.291. so1 The najority of
 dogs with clinical evidence of hyperadrenocorticism and nonsuppressible adrenal function
tests have a unilateral adrenocortical tumor. Because bilateral adrenocortical tumors have
been documented,230 both adrenal glands should be evaluated carefully by ultrasound or
other imaging stucdies beforc surgery is undertaken. During the evaluation, both adrenal
glands should be compared in size and consistency with each other and with norrmal
values for dogs. Despite the common conception that the gland contralateral to the tumor
will be atrophied, that gland often is normal in size .23o Dogs with symmetric and normal
sized glands should be evaluated for a steroid-producing tumor of another organ system
(c.g., luteoma, a serious hcpatic disorder with shunting, or an ectopic ACTH-producing
turnor). A more problematic situation is when there is an obvious mass in one gland while
thc contralateral gland is normal sized or somewhat enlarged. Is this a dog with pituitary.
anesthesia, the clinical and laboratory data should be reviewed carefully. If any inconsist-
encies are found, additional testing for pheochromocytoma should be conducted before
the dog is taken to surgery.
 In one report, tumor cells were found in blood vessels in 22 of 37 adrenal tumors and
Accordingly, all surgical candidates should bc evaluated thoroughly before and during
surgery for evidence of metastatic disease. During surgery, the visccra, especially the
pancreas, should be handled carefully because these dogs are pronc to potentially fatal
pancreatitis. If the contralateral adrenal gland is atrophied, the dog will have to be
supported as a glucocorticoid-deficient patient with maintenance and stress closes of
ghuicocorticoids for 2 or more months. ACTH stimulation testing can be performed every
2 to 4 weeks to determine when the remaining adrenal gland has returned to normal
funetion.
If the adrenal neoplasm is malignant, if the owner refuses surgery for the dog, or if
g aq u n r 'ro reins snn ue pio s p 
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases · 815
cial. Although published data are limited, ketoconazole appears to be effective for both
an adrenolytic agent, tumor growth continues and metastasis, with al its sequelae, may
 sp s u  y  e e e si ado a 
adrenal tumors. Reports of success with both the standard and new protocol have been
reported.202.293 With the standard protocol, loading often takes longer and can necessitate
 dosages as high as 150 mg/kg/day. Relapses are common and, in general, maintenance
o s e   rd  pu o e  r a s
 32 dogs, 66% were considered to have a good to excellent response to o,p'-DDD, with
a mean survival time of 16.4 months, and a final mean maintenance dosage of 35.3 to
1273 mg/kg/week.250
 of the lesions.17o A thin flm of the gel is applied to the lesions once or twice daily until
resolved.
latrogenic Hyperadrenocorticism
Therapy for canine iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism necessitates ceasing excessive exo-
genous glucocorticoid administration. When glucocorticoid therapy is withdrawn, patients
may be susccptible to hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal insufficiency for 3 to 12 1months and
the dog may show signs of glucocorticoid insufficiency under normal living conditions or
apy with hydrocortisone (0.2 to 0.5 mg/kg/day) or prednisolone (0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg/day).
The glucocorticoid administration is slowly withdrawn during 7 to 14 days. Other investi-
gators, including ourselves, do not routinely use the steroid supplemcnts unless surgery or
some other known stressful situation is to occur. The glucocorticoid is dispensed and the
u op sp i q  spu p   p  n on p a s
Recovery usually occurs within 3 to 4 months. Exogenous ACTH should not be used in
iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism. The block after prolonged glucocorticoid therapy is not
at the level of the adrenocortical response to ACTHI but at the level of the ability of the
hypothalamic-pituitary unit to resume release of CRF and ACTH. Therefore, ACTH
After the hyperadrenocorticism is controlled, the skin may initially show increasing
scaling and pigmentation and new hair regrowth may be different from the normal color
(for example, gray hair grows in black, black grows in red) and texture. With successful
therapy, the cutaneous signs of hyperadrenocorticism, including calcinosis cutis, usually
ss s  pssid s  as   u s  o g  s
tion, the skin lesions persist unless removed surgically. Some dogs with bacterial pyoderna
have recurring episodes of infection for up to 1 ycar after the hyperadrenocorticism has
  sis as q s os pnors sis s  
 owing to the physiologic alterations.176.273
Feline Hyperadrenocorticism
 Both naturally occurring and iatrogenie hyperadrenocorticism are rare in the cat.
CAUSES AND PATHOGENESIS
Naturally occurring hyperadrenocorticisrn is a rare disease in the cat, with fewer than 100
to make precise statermcnts on the value of the various diagnostie tests and the best
method of treatment. Approximatcly 80% of cats have pituitary-dependent hyperadreno-
corticism resulting from a pituitary adenoma or adenocarcinoma, whereas the reinainder
have functioning adrenocortical tumors.102. 343a Both adrenocortical adenomas and aden0-
carcinomas have been reported, and in one case, progesterone secretion appeared to be
its remaining adrenal gland approximately l year after the other gland was removed for a
816 · Endocrine and Metabolie Diseases
similar tumor. Iatrogenice hyperadrenocorticism can be produced with only great diffcuity
in the cat,221. 302, 307
 possibly because of the lower number of low-capacity, high-affnity
dexamethasone-binding receptors in this species.317
CLINICAL FEATURES
Naturally occurring hyperadrenocorticism typically occurs in middle-aged to old cats. 1s2a
clinical syndrome is not as predictable as it is in the dog. The most common owmer
complaint is marked polyuria and polydipsia. Weight loss, anorexia, polyphagia, and de-
 pression also may be reported. On physical examination, muscle wasting and a potbelly are
conmon findings. Skin changes occur in about half the cases and include alopecia (see
Fig. 10-2F and'G), thin skin (sce Fig. 10-2F), fragile skin (Fig. 10-9A; see Fig. 10-2H),
easy bruising (see Fig. 10-- 9B), recurrent abscessation, comedones, seborrhea, and hyper-
  s a go    a r   r a 
 over 50% of the cases and is manifested by tearing during grooming or routine handling.
Although data are limited, this extreine fragility may be more common in cats with
adrenal tumors than in those with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism.226
Rcports on cats with iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism are rare.221. s02. 307 These cases
can have all of the clinical signs of the naturally-occurring disease (e.g., muscle wasting,
polyuria and polydipsia, steroid-induced diabetes mellitus). Cutaneous signs seen include
hair loss, thin hypotonic skin. medial curling of the ear tips, easy bruising, mild seborrhea
sicca, and spontaneous tearing of the skin, Because medial curling of the pinna has not
 been reported in the naturally occurring cascs, this may bc of diagnostic significance.
DIAGNOSIS
In the absence of cutancous signs, the primary differential diagnostic consideration is
diabetes mellitus. Becausc approximately 90% of cats with naturaly ocurring hyperadre-
nocorticism are prediabetic or overtly diabetic because of the insulin antagonistic action of
corticosteroids, the responsiveness of the cat to insulin is of key importance.251 The
diabetes mellitus in cats with hyperadrenocorticism is difficult to impossible to regulate
renocorticism, the diabetes responds to insulin as expected or may spontaneously resolve.
With just hair loss, the differential diagnosis includes all causes of traumatic alopecia,
telogen defluxion, diabetes mellitus, and advanced hyperthyroidism. Cutaneous asthenia,
pancreatic neoplasia, hepatic lipidosis., progestogen administration,323 and acquired skin
fragility syndrome (see Chap. 18) must be considered when extreme fragility is noted.
In thc cat, hemograms, serum chemistry panels, and urinalysis are of little diagnostic
  o   q s  o   a  s
frequently encountered diabetes rnellitus,1s4. 239.302
Histopathology
 Skin biopsy results can vary. In some cases, the hair follicles are in anagen with no
atrophic changes of the epidermis or pilosebaceous units. Other cats show profound
atrophic changes. The most consistent abnormality is a decreased quantity of dermal
collagen, The bundles in the superficial and deep dermis are thiuner than normal, widely
diameters vary in size.
Adrenal Function Tests
All the various diagnostic tests used in the dog have all been used inl cats, but the limited
data available make determining the reliability of each test difficult.182,198, 343b, 343
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases · 8I7
B, Bruising and ulceration (torn skin) on the back of a cat with iatrogenie hyperglueocorticoidism. The arca has bcen
clipped. (From Scott, DW: Feline dermatology 1900-1978: A monograph. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:331, 1980.)
chosis. I, Same patient as in G with perineal hair loss and vulvar enlargernent.
8I8 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
Cats excrete small amounts of cortisol in their urine 217 With hyperadrenocorticism,
the urinary cortisol/creatinine ratio is elevated above normal. However, the cortisol/creati-
nine ratio can also be elevated in nonadrenal disease (e.g., renal failure227), so this testing
i s h e  e ra s   ad s  s 
the dog. 1lyperadrenocorticisn can be dismissed when the urinary cortisol/creatinine ratioy
is normal, but elevations do not confirn that diagnosis. In the ACTH stimulation test,
'pasn uaaq aaeq Hv jo soy (A1 8r 2zi) onus pue (1 nI z7) p8 an og
 Most protocols suggest that cortisol levels be determined before and 90 minutes after
ACTH administration.279. 253. 284. 310, 343h Most cats with hyperadrenocorticism show an
Cortisol samples are collected before, 3 to 6 hours, and 8 hours after IV administration.
Suggested dosages vary from 0.01 to 0.1 ing/kg. Because upward of 20% of normal cats
do not show adrenal suppression when 0.01 mg/kg of dexamethasone is given,178, 296 some
authors suggcst 0.l mg/kg for low-dose testing. Normal cats should have their cortisol
levels suppressed to less than 1 μg/dl during the test period. Where studied, all cats with
hypcradrenocorticism have failed to have their cortisol levels suppressed to normal levels.
High-dose testing is conducted with either 0.1 or 1 mg/kg. Suppression to 50% or less of
the baseline value suggests pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism, but failure to sup-
press is not absolutely indicative of adrenal neoplasia.2 Because so few cases have been
studied, the accuracy of this cut-off point is open to question. Endogenous plasma ACTH
lovels were elevated in the 23 cats tested with pituitary-dependent disease and low in 3
tumors.221
Ultrasonographic examination of the adrenal glands in the cat can be difficult.182a
 Unilateral or bilateral adrenal enlargement, the latter being indicative of pituitary-depen-
dent hyperadrenocorticism, may ocur. Special radiographic techniques may be of addj-
tional diagnostic value, but this is unproved in cats.258
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Cats with hyperadrenocorticism often are presented late in the coursc of discasc. At this
point, thc prognosis becomes much poorer because most cats have insulin-resistant diabe.
tes mellitus, hyperfragility of the skin, or other degenerative changes. No medical treat-
   ss op  e  s p s 
ment of cats with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. When o,p'-DDD 
was
administered orally (25 to 50 mg/kg/day) to four normal cats, two showed progressive
diarrhea, and anorexia. The response in diseased cats is generally poor,269 although anec-
ment are available only for one cat.305 After about 2 months of daily treatinent with 37.5
mg/kg/day, the cat was maintained on a weekly dose of 50 mg/kg/week. With this
trcatmcnt, all clinical signs resolved, but recurred when the drug was discontinued.
Ketoconazole is also of uncertain value.1sza Even though norimal cats show no cortisol
suppression with a month's worth of treatment,336 some diseased cats improve with
treatment. When seven cats were given 20 to 30 mg/kg/day, four cats responded, two
blocker of adrenal conversion of il-deoxycortisol to cortisol, has been uscd in five cats,
with clinical response in three.187. 25t, 270 At dosages of 65 mg/kg every 12 hours, adrenal
are available. Because intermediate lobe hormones in the cat are under dopaminergic
control,245, 337 L-deprenyl may be of some use.
 Because of the limited success of medical treatments, most investigators recommend
adrcnalcctomy as the treatment of choice. In cats with adrenal neoplasia, surgcry should
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases + 819
disease, bilateral adrenalectomy must be perforined and lifelong treatments for hypoad-
renocorticisn must be administered. Because the majority of cats with hyperadrenocorti-
cism present poorsurgical risksbecause of their diabetesmeitus and fragile skin,medica
trcatmont with either ketoconazole or metyrapone should be considered. If either agent is
effective, its administration should be continued until the skin is healed and the diabetes
mellitus is controlled. After the cat's health is better, surgery should be performed. In the
largest study reported, postoperative complications devcloped in all 10 cats.11 Electrolytic
irregularitics were most common, but skin lacerations, pancreatitis, hypoglycermia, pneu-
monia, and venous thrombosis were also rcported. If the cat survives the postoperative
period, all clinical signs resolve in 2 to 4 months. In inost cats, the diabetes mellitus
becomes subclinical and no longer requires insulin.
There are no reports of cats with iatrogenic hypcradrcnocorticism with signs of
glucocorticoid or Imineralocorticoid insufficiency on sudden cessation of treatment. Unless
the cat is to undergo surgery near the time of glucocorticoid withdrawal, replacement
therapy should not be needed.
Hypopituitarism
Hypopituitarism can be caused by failure or loss of one or more of the pituitary hor.
degrce of hormonal deficiency and the stage in life at which the deficiency occurs.
Hypopituitarism may be caused by pituitary or hypothalamic deficiencies. Pituitary
deficiencies may be caused by congenital hypoplasia, destructive lesions (infections, lym-
phocytic hypophysitis, infiltrative diseases, trauma, and neoplasms), vascular lesions, and
the inherited disorder of German shepherds and Carmelian bear dogs. Hypothalamic
deficiencies may be caused by trauma, encephalitis, aberrant parasite migration, harmar-
 toma, neoplasia, and neurosecretory dysfunction.
 Diagnosis of hypopituitarism is based on various clinical signs, responses of various
target organs and pituitary hormones to challenges with pituitary and hypothalamic hor
 mones and releasing factors, and various sophisticated radiographic techniques.1. 2
Pituitary Dwarfism
Canine pituitary dwarfism is a herecditary hypopituitarisrn associated with proportionate
dwarfism, bilaterally symmetric alopecia and hyperpigmentation, and variable thyroidal,
adrenocortical, and gonadal abnormalities.
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
 In the Gerinan shepherd and Camelian bear dog, pihuitary dwarfism is thought to be
degrees of anterior pituitary insufficiency. Because normal dogs can have Rathke's cysts
and some dwarfs have either a hypoplastic or normal pituitary gland, the defect in some
ss
deficicncy, with or without concurrent thyroidal, adrenocortical, and gonadal abnormalities.
Immunodeficient dwarfism has been reported in an inbred colony of Weimaraners
with GH deficiency and congenital absence of the thymic cortcx.370, 371
CLINICAL FEATURES
  da nq a    q  p ard 
 For the frst 2 to 3 months of life, the dog may appear normal and indistinguishable
frorn norrnal litter mates. After this time, the dog fails to grow, the haircoat is notably
820 · Endocrine and Metabolie Diseases
shorter, and no primary hairs develop (Fig. 10--10). The puppy coat of secondary hairs is
retained. This hair is soft, woolly, and easily epilated (see Fig. 10-9C). Primary hairs are
often present on only the face and the distal extremities. Bilaterally symmetric alopecia
then develops, cspccially in the wear areas of the neck and caudolateral aspects of the
thighs. The alopecic skin is at first norrmally pigmented, then progresses through increas-
ing degrees of hyperpigmentation (see Fig. 10-9D). The skin becomes thin, hypotonic.
and scaly. Comedones may bc numerous. These dogs may have behavioral abnormalities
such as fear biting and aggressiveness. Gonadal status may vary from atrophic testicles or
absence of cstrus to normal findings. If there are concurrent deficiencies of TSH
[ 0r
 ACTH, the dogs may manifest signs of hypothyroidism and adrenocortical insuffciency. As
dwarfs grow older, they often become progressively more listless, dull, and inactive, and
diseases, or neurologic dysfunction.2
Immunodeficient dwarfism in Weimaraners is characterized by puppies that appoar
normal at birth, exhibiting a wasting syndrome at a few weeks of age.370. 371 Clinical signs
include unthriftiness, emaciation, lethargy, and persistent infections, usually resulting in
death.
had histologic evidence of hypopituitarisim, and two dogs had normal serum concentrations
d  s pus    o     g
tary dwarfism, these dogs had no dermatologic abnormalities and eventually reached
normal staure.
DIAGNOSIS
Thc differcntial diagnosis includes congenital hypothyroidism with dwarfisin, juvenile dia-
betes melltus, gonadal dysgenesis, malnutrition, severe metabolic diseases (portacaval
shunts, congenital renal disease, and congenital heart defects), and skeletal dysplasias
(chondrodysplasia in Alaskan malamutes, pseudoachondroplastic dysplasia in Miniature
poodles, and mucopolysaccharidosis).1 2 Defnitive diagnosis is based on history, physical
examination findings, laboratory test results, skin biopsy, radiography, the presence of
insulin-induced hypoglycemia, and the results of GH stimulation tests. Depending on the
consistent with hypothyroicdism and secondary adrenocortical insufficiency. Iminunodefi-
FIGURE I0-I0. Pituitary dvarf
with a normal littermate.
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases · 821
Histopathologic examination of the skin reveals changes consistent with endocrinopa-
thy (orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, follicular keratosis, folicular dilatation, follicular atro-
phy, telogenization of hair follicles, excessive trichilemmal keratinization, sebaceous gland
atrophy, epidermal melanosis, and thin derrmis).16 A highly suggestive finding is the de-
creased amount and size of dermal elastin fibers (sce Figs. 10-12 and 10-13). In cases
with concurrent hypothyroidism, histopathologic findings may include vacuolated or hyper-
trophied arrector pili muscles.
 Radiography may reveal delayed closure of growth plates of long bones, delayed
eruption of perrnanent teeth, failure of the os penis to mineralize completely by 1 year of
age, open fontanelles of the skull, and smaller-than-normal heart, liver, and kidney.1, 2 l1, 349
A characteristic metabolic abnormality of GH-deficient dogs is hypersensitivity to the
units/kg into CH-defcient dogs produces severe. prolonged hypoglyccrmia.
 Basal plasma GH levels (by RIA) in normal dogs vary from 1 to 4.5 ng/ml in most
reports.1. 21 However, basal CH levels in pituitary dwarfs and hypophysectomized dogs
may come close to these values. Thus, basal GH levels are inadequate for the documenta-
tion of GH deficiency. Clonidine (an α-adrenergic antihypertensive drug) and xylazine
have been used to stimulate (GHI release in the dog and to document the existence of GH
 deficiency.1. 2. 1. 347. 355 Normal dogs show a marked increasc in plasma GH and insulin-like 
growth factor (IGF-1) levels within 15 to 30 minutcs after the IV injection of 10 to
30 μg/kg of clonidine or 100 to 300 μg/kg of xylazine, whereas pituitary dwarfs and
sex hormone abnormalities must always be ruled out because they can impair GH secre-
tion. These hormones can be evaluated singularly or by the rapid sequential injection of
the various stimulating or releasing hornones.s,9. 356
The measurement of plasma IGF-1 levels could also be diagnostic (<5 ng/ml) for
growth hormone deficiency, but test results must be evaluated in light of the size of the
dog.1 2.s Heterozygous carrers of the pituitary dwarfism trait have internediate levels of
plasma IGF-1 compared with dwarfs and normal dogs. In some instances, it may be of
value to assess both GH and IGF-1 levels.1, 2, 368
Human or bovine GHRF has been used to evaluate GH responses in the dog.1. 2 34 359
When administered to normal dogs at a dose of 1 μg/kg, GHRF produccd a twofold to
fourfold increase in GH levels, whereas there was no response in dogs with hyposomato-
tropism.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The owner should be made aware of the chronic nature of the disease, the general
unavailability of CH for treatment, and the animal's shortened life expectancy. If the
owner is willing to accept these possibilities, the dwarf dog_can be kept as a pet.
Concurrent hypothyroidism34s or secondary adrenocortical insufficiency necessitate addi-
tional specific therapy with levothyroxine or glucocorticoids, respectively. If scondary
adrenocortical insufficiency is present, this should always be treated first.
Bovine GH (10 IU subcutaneously, every other day for 30 days) and porcine
GH (2 IU subcutaneously, every other day, or 0.1 IU/kg subcutaneously, three times
weekly, for 4 to 6 weeks) have been used experimentally to treat canine pituitary dwarf-
ism1.2. 1.349 355 A beneficial response to GH in the skin and haircoat occurs within 6 to 8
weeks. Howcvcr, growth plates closc rapidly, and no appreciable increase in stature is
achieved. Aithough not reported during the treatment of canine pituitary dwarfism, re-
sa   s o  d pe  r s p
diabetes mellitus, or acromegalic-like bone changes.351 Antibody production to bovine GH
can occur and block its activity.366
Progestin administration to normal dogs increases growth hormone and IGF-l con-
centrations in the blood (see Acromegaly) 344. 37s, 379 These hormones arise from the
mammary ductile epithelium. When four intact dwarf German shepherds, two male and
two female, were given medroxyprogesterone acctate (5 or 10 mg/kg subcutaneously every
822 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
third week), all dogs grew a normal coat.3s, 401 As expected, the progestin administration
ble for the coat regrowth.362 Long-term follow-up data was reported for two dogs. In
these animals, a maintenance dosage of 5 ing/kg every sixth week was used. Both dogs
maintained thei1 haircoat and were healthy 3 to 4 years after the initiation of treatment.
They both had repeated episodes of pyoderma, the male had some acromegalic features,
and the bitch had to be neutered for a progestin-induced pyometra.35s Refnement of the
treatment protocol rmight eliminate some of the side effects.
Hyposomatotropism in the Mature Dog
Hyposomatotropism (pseudo-Cushing's syndrorme, or GH-responsive dermatosis) is a rare
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
The cause and the pathogenesis of this disorder are unkrown.* Clonidine or xylazine
stimulation tests have documented inadequate or absent GH secretion in some hut not all
dogs.36s When 95 dogs with clinical signs compatible with hyposomatotropism were stud.
ied, 32 (34%) had a normal GH response test result.359 In addition, serum IGF-1 levels
were normal in dogs with an abnormal GH response. IGF-l should be decreased with
true GH deficiency. when 12 normally coated Pomeranians and 7 with hyposomatotrop-
ism were studied, all dogs showed no significant increase in GH levels after xylazine or
 human GHIRF administration.372 All dogs also had abnornal adrenal sex horrmone synthe-
sis, sugestive of a partial deficiency of the 21-hydroxylase enzyme. These factors, coupled
with normal pituitary morphologic findings in one of two dogs at necropsy,ll shied doubts
on the primary role of GH in this condition. Thc GH deficiency could be induced by the
Inay or may not contribute to the hair loss in these dogs.11, 412
Huctuating but low GH levels that showed no response to clonidine or CHRH, but the
dogs had normal levels of IGF-1.a6s The authors suggested that both dogs had a mild and
fuctuating hyperadrenocorticism with resultant glucocorticoid-caused suppression of soma-
tostatin release.
CLINICAL FEATURES
Hyposomatotropism has been reported predorninantly in male dogs of many different
breeds, but especially in Chow Chow, Keeshond, Pomeranian, Miniature Poodlle, Samo-
yed, and American water spaniel breeds.45. 359 Because four of these brecds, namely the
Chow Chow, Keeshond, Pomeranian, anrd Sanoyed, are over-represented in adrenal hy-
Derplasia-like syndrome, it is very likely that any growth hormone irregularity in these
dogs is a coincidental or secondary problem. Age at onset is between 9 months and 11
 years, with about 50% of the affected dogs being younger than 2 years of age. The first
ss jo i  s ad po ssn  e si o ar u r a
hairs, giving the coat a puppy-like appearanc. With time, all hairs are lost around the
neck, pinnae, tail, and caudomedial thighs (scc Fig. 10-9E). As those areas hecome
alopecic, the truncal primary hairs are lost gradually and then the secondary hairs become
more sparse. Complete truncal alopecia is uncommon, even in chronic cases. In many
dogs, the exposed skin hyperpigments rapidly (see Fig. 10-9F). A small nurnber of these
dogs have hair loss, with or without hyperpigmentation, restricted symmetrically to the
fank region (Fig. 10-11).3s6 12 Hairs in affected areas are often easily epilated. In
chronic cases, the skin may be thin and hypotonic. In cases in which skin biopsies had
*See references 14, 345. 359, 368, 372, 373, 376.
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases · 823
FIGURE 
1o-Il. Hyposomato-
tropism. Symmetrie flank alopecia.
been performed, the hair grew back over the biopsy sites. The dogs are nornal except for
the dermatologic signs.
Airedales, Boxers, and Fnglish bulldogs experience a seasonal discase in which Hank
  sai  a r s  r  da  e 
dogs may be spurious because a seasonal folicular dysplasia is also deseribed in thesc
saine breeds (scc Chaps. ll and 12). Alternatively, the low GH levels may be caused by
the hormones responsible for thc hair loss or may be real.389 In the last case, the GH
deficiency would be a co-contributor to the hair loss. By itself, it causes no hair loss but
makes the hair follicles more sensitive to the cffects of other hormoncs.
DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis includes hypothyroidism, hypcradrenocorticism, and gonadal or
adrenal hyperplasia-like syndrome. Definitive diagnosis is based on history, physical exaimi-
nation findings, laboratory results that rule out other conditions, skin biopsy, and response
to therapy.S
Skin biopsy reveals changes consistent with enndocrinopathy (orthokeratotic
hyperkeratosis, follicular keratosis, follicular dilatation, telogenization of hair follicles, ex-
cessive trichilemmal keratinization, cpidermal melanosis, sebaceous gland atrophy, and
d a   s  e e ir   a p no 
only in dogs that have been clinically affected for 2 years or longer376 Measurements of
plasma GH and IGF-1 levels before and after the iV injection of clonidine or xylazine
documents GH deficiency, but this testing is not routinely available in most laboratories.
 In dogs with seasonal GH deficiency (Airedales, Boxers, and English bulldogs), xylazine
responses are suppressed during the period of hair loss but become normal with hair
regrowth. Hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism, and sex hormone abnormalities 1nust
always be rulcd out before GH test results are interpreted because these conditions
impair GH secretion.1. 2. 355. 376
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Until the pathogenic mechanism of this disorder is completely defined, treatment recoin-
H o pudsoi oyp H pauup tm shop os ao are supuu
supplementation, whereas others do not. Additionally, some dogs regrow the coat with
824 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
FIGURE IO-I2. Normal canine skin. Nuinerous
thick, long elastin bundles and fibers are present in tht
dermis (Verhoeff's stain). (From Parker WM, Scott
DW: Growth hormone-responsive alopecia in the na-
ture dog: A discussion of i3 cases. J Ain Anim Hosp
Asoc 16:824, 1980.)
  so  d     p  e  a  
   s s r   e  n  
these animals be treated initially as if they had a gonadal or adrenal sex hormone
 imbalance. If there is no response to those treatments, GH supplementation is indicated.
Response to bovine, porcine, and human GH has been reported 345, 355 372 although
  s  'g  s   'e a    e  s
0.1 IU/kg three times weekly for 6 weeks355 or 0.015 IU/kg twice weekly for the same
period.37 The recombinant bovine growth hormone available for dairy cattle cannot be
 diluted down to these doses. Because GH is a diabetogenic agent, a fasting blood sugar
level should be obtained before treatment and weekly thereafter. If hyperglycemia occurs,
the injections should be discontinued immediately; otherwise, an irreversible diabetic
condition may develop. Other side effects include acromegaly and hypersensitivity to the
and bovine growth hormone. Autoantibody production with loss of effcacy is another
problem recognized with those agents,.262 If response is to occur, it should be seen within
3 months. Most dogs start to lose hair again within 3 to 36 months. Retreatment should
produce another remission.
Although the pathogenic mechanism of this disorder is unknown, the high number of
be used for breeding.
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases · 825
FIGURE I0-I3. Hyposormatotropism (growth hor-
mone-responsive dermatosis) in a dog. Marked ab-
sence  of dermal elastin (Verhoeff's  stain). (From
Parker WM, Scott DW: Growth hormone-responsive
alopecia in the mature dog: A discussion of 13 cases.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:824, 1980.)
Acromegaly
Acromegaly is due to hypersecretion of GH in the mature animal. It is a rare disease in
 dogs and cats.
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Acromegaly is caused by hypersecretion of GH in the mature animal (after epiphyseal
closure). Hypersecretion of GH results in an overgrowth of connective tissue, bone, and
viscera. In the dog, acromegaly has been reported in association with injections of anterior
pituitary gland extracts, acidophilic hyperplasia or adenoma of the anterior pituitary gland,
dliestrus in the intact cycling bitch, and administration of progestational compounds.*
 Some acrormegalic changes were induced in two pituitary dwarfs treated with methylpro-
CLINICAL FEATURES
Canine Acromegaly
 No breed or age predilections are evident, but most cases occur in middle-aged to old
 dogs. Because progestational stimulation is the rmost common cause of acrornegaly in dogs,
*See references 1, 2, 351, 354, 357, 365, 375, 377, 378.
826 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
FIGURE I0-|4. Acromegaly. Acromegalic beagle (center) and two nornal litterrmates
FIGURE 10-I5. Acromegaly. Note large lhead and
paws.
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases · 827
most cases occur in intact females. Male or female dogs being trcated with progestational
compounds are at risk. The most common signs noted include inspiratory stridor (due to
 soft tissuc inereases in the orolingual-oropharyngeal regions), inereased body size (espe-
cially paws and skull) (Figs. 10- 14 and 10-15), abdominal enlargement, polyuria, polydip-
and galactorrhea.s5 Cutaneous changes include thickened, myxedematous skin thrown into
excessive folds, hypertrichosis, and thick hard claws.
Feline Acromegaly
No breed or age predilections are reported, but more than 90% of cases occur in male
cats. Clinical signs include inereased body size (especially paws and skull), prognathism,
widened interdental spaces, organomegaly, dyspnea due to cardiac failure, cardiomegaly,
neurologic signs with large tumors, and polyuria and polydipsia with or without renal
failure.366 skin changes are the same as those describcd for the dog but are usually not
marked.
 Both dogs and cats with acromegaly can have insulin-resistant diabetes melitus.424
 Although the diabetes occurs later than the other signs, it may be the only complaint at
o pa paurd ro agns aq a apaq rn us a  sau au 'nsi
unnoticed because they occur gradually.
DIAGNOSIS
The definitive diagnosis of acromegaly is based on history, physical examination indings,
serum chemistry studies, skin biopsy, persistent elevation of plasma GH levels, altered
response of GH levels to stinulation with clonidine, GHRH, or IV glucose adininistra-
 pe y  o pu  sp e  se se  s 
to severe elevations of serum alkaline phosphatase levels. Nonsuppressibility of plasma GH
levels after an IV glucose load is considered a hallmark of acromegaly. The levels of
plasma GH do not always correlate with the degrcc of aeromegaly. GH levels may also be
elevated in response to stress, acute illncss, chronic renal and liver disease, diabetes
mellitus, and starvation. 2 The measurement of plasma IGF-1 levels (mean, 679 ± 116
 (s  r  a   o  o  n 
also be diagnostic but must be evaluated in light of the size of the dog.1. 2. 334
 In dogs and human beings, histologic examination of acromegalic skin reveals collage-
nous hyperplasia, myxedema, and hyperplasia of the epidermis and appendages (Figs.
10- 16 and 10-17).35
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
 Dogs with acromegaly associated with diestrus or with progestational compound treatiment
have responded well to ovariohysterectomy and to cessation of progestogen therapy.
q sr n ro  ssn ou  d  a d
described for the cat.215
Sex Hormone Dermatoses
Dermatoses associated with sex hormones are uncommon and nay bc of gonadal or
adrenal origin.1. 2. 11 14 Clinical signs typically include the absence of systemic signs and the
presence of truncal alopecia, which may be generalized or regioralized. Regionalized, or
patterned, hair loss is more common. The ciscussion lends itself to categorization by sex
and gonadal status, but there is great overlap in each catcgory.
828 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
FIGURE I0-I6. Acromegaly. Papillated hy-
 perplasia and orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis.
FIGURE I0- I7. Acromegaly. Collagenous hyperplasia.
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases · 829
HYPERESTROGENISM IN FEMALE ANIMALS
Hyperestrogenism in the female dog is a rare disorder characterized by bilaterally
symmetric alopecia, enlargement of the vulva and nipplcs, and estrous cycle abnormali-
Cause and Pathogenesis
This disorder is usually associated with cystic ovaries and rarely with functional ovarian
urassond sonpond ose Xeu shoun ssu a gyueusjeu ane %os o %ot pue us
      ss r  s n
with normal adrenal function.373 The cause of the hyperestrogerism is unlmown, but it
may be due to abnormalities in peripheral conversion of sex hormones or an ectopic
source of production.
Estrogenic substances have been administered to dogs by a number of investigators,
resulting in cutaneous syndromes identical to the naturally occurring disease. An identical
syndrome may also occur with overdoses of estrogens used to treat misimating and urinary
incontinence after ovariohysterectomy.3s6, 421 Sone dogs have cutaneous hyperestrogenism
(normal blood estrogen levels) owing to increased numbers of cutaneous estrogen recep-
tors.390
Clinical Features
Hyperestrogenism associated with polycystic ovaries usually occurs in the middle-aged,
ism associated with functional ovarian neoplasia usually occurs in clder intact females, and
 no breed predilections are reported. The disorder is characterized by bilaterally symmetric
alopecia beginning in the perineal, inguinal, and flank regions (see Fig. 10-9G and H).
The hair loss remains confined to these areas for long periods but can progress to involve
the entire trunk in chronic cases. Hairs in affected areas are easily epilated. In some dogs,
the hair loss is confined to the fank area and the degree of hair foss can vary with the
estrous cycle.
The nipples and vulva are enlarged (Fig. 10- 18A), and comedones are usually numer-
mary glands enlarge. Secondary seborrheic changes can occur, but skin infections are
mania) often ocur, and endometritis or pyometra may be seen. In the cat, truncal
alopecia was associated with persistent estrus.403
Diagnosis
In the intact female, the diagnosis is straightforward if the dog has both estral and
cutaneous changes. With a history of poor estrus, tumor or inconpletely excised ovarian
tissue, or estrogen administration without the history of sane, the diagnosis is more
difficult and the primary differential diagnostic considerations include hypothyroidism,
hyperadrenocorticism, and follicular dysplasia. Definitive diagnosis is based on history.
physical examination findings, laboratory test results that rule out other conditions, and
response to therapy. Skin biopsy differentiates hyperestrogenism frorm folicular dysplasia
and other nonendocrine follicular disorders but docs not differentiate this condition from
other endocrine disorders. Changes include orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, follicular kerato-
sis, follicular dilatation, follicular atrophy, telogenization of hair follicles, excessive trichi-
Elevated blood estrogen levels may support the diagnosis. An hCG response test can be
useful in detecting hormonal changes in tumors that are not too large. Ultrasonography
 ge's t'suisedosu ueueao Sugeurap iog rnjasn are Adosoredei put
Clinical Management
Therapy for hypercstrogenism in the intact fcmalc dog consists of ovariohysterectomy. A
good response is usually evident within 3 months but occasionally docs not occur for 6
830 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
FIGURE I0- I8. A, Hypercstrogenism. Note the hypcrtrophied, hyperpiginented vulva. B, Estrogen-responsive
recessed vulva. D, Hypertrichosis in an e.strogen-responsive Irish setter. E, Flank alopecia in an inlact female with
dertnatosis. Dull dry coat with coat color change. H, Linear preputial dermatosis in a dog with a Sertoli's cell tumor.
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases · 83|
FIGURE I0- I9. Ilyperestrogenism in a dog. Note follicular keratosis and plugging, ab-
sence of hair shafts, and sebaceous gland atrophy.
months. Symptomatic therapy with topical antiseborrheic agents may be indicated. If an
ovarian neoplasrm is suspected, chest radiographs should be taken before surgcry, No
successful treatment of neutered females with nonovarian hyperestrogerism has been
described.373
ESTROGEN-RESPONSIVE DERMATOSIS OF FEMALE ANIMALS
 Estrogen-responsive dermatosis is a rare, bilaterally symmetric alopecia of unkmown etiol-
Cause and Pathogenesis
The cause and the pathogenesis of estrogen-responsive dermatosis in female dogs are
unknown.37s Hypoestrogenism has been suggested as the cause of this endocrinelike
dermatosis. In most cases, low estrogen levels cannot be documented. Investigators have
experience dermatoses before their first estrus, during pseudopregnancy, or in association
with an abnormal estrous cycle. The role of estrogens in the response of those dogs is
uncertain, and it is best to reserve the term estrogen-responsive dermatosis for neutered
females.
Clinical Features
Estrogen-responsive dermatosis is usually first noticed when the dog is a young adult (2 to
4 years). No age or breed predilections are documented, but most reported cases involve
 Dachshunds and Boxers. In shorthaired dogs, the dermatosis is characterized by hypotri-
chosis that begins in the perineal and genital regions. Diffuse alopecia results and can
affect the caudomedial thighs, the ventral abdomen, the thorax, the neck, and the postau-
ricular region of the head (see Fig. 10-18B and C). Hairs in affected areas are easily
alopecia. In longhaired dogs, the first noticeable change is loss of primary hairs, giving the
coat a puppy-like quality. Hair loss starts in the fank region and progresses slowly (Fig.
10-20). Some Irish setters with this condition present for hypertrichosis with blending of
the retained hairs (see Fig. 10-18D). Any dog with this condition can have secondary
832 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
FIGURE 
10-20.
. Estrogen-
responsive deruatosis. Loss of pri-
mary hairs and flank alopecia.
 seborrheic skin disease, but this is uncornmon. Dogs with estrogen-responsive dermatosis
 are usually normal otherwise, but concurrent cstrogen-responsive urinary incontinence
 occurs occasionally. In cats, symmetric truncal alopecia, especially of the ventrurn, may
occur.
Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis varies with the presentation. With persistent ventral hair loss,
the primary differential diagnostic possibility is patterned haldness. Careful review of the
history can help differentiate the conditions. In both cases, the dogs have normal puppy
coats and shed them at the appropriate time. With patterned baldness, the coat that
sa ym s u   s p pu n   rs si s
responsive dermatosis, a normal adult coat develops that is maintained for variable periods
of time before the hair loss begins. With other presentations, hypothyroidism, hyperadren-
Ocorticism, hyposomatotropism, adrenal sex hormone imbalance, and follicular dysplasia
must be considered. Definitive diagnosis is based on history, physical examination findings,
eliminates nonendocrine causes of the hair loss but otherwise is nondiagnostic, revealing
orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, follicular keratosis, folicular atrophy, follicular dilatation.
and telogenization of hair follicles (Fig. 10-21).4. 16
Clinical Management
Traditionally, this condition has been treated with diethylstilbestrol, given orally at doses
of 0.1 to I img. Some investigators give the drug every other day, whereas other clinicians
give it daily for 3 weeks, stop treatment for I week, and then repeat the cycle.!1 The
latter scheme was developed to spare the bone narrow13 because dogs are susceptible to
sometimes irreversible bone marrow depression (thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, and ane-
is safer or more effective. The drug is given as described until hair regrows, and then the
frequency of administration is slowly reduced to a maintenance dose of once to twice
weekly.
 Diethylstilbestrol tablets are difficult if not impossible to obtain, and the small tablct
size makes division into simaller doses difficult, often thus precluding the treatment of
small dogs. Estradiol and various conjugated or esterified estrogens are available through
pharmaceutical houses and may be beneficial in dogs. We have used estradiol in a few
Endocrine and Metabolic Discases * 833
FIGURE I0-21. Estrogen-respornsive dermatosis. Note follcular keratosis and plugging and
absence of hair shafts.
dogs and noted a positive response with no apparent side effects. Before a substitute for
diethylstilbestrol is dispensed, its potency relative to diethylstilbestrol should be deter-
mined. When estrogens cannot be used, response may occur with the daily administration
of methyltestosterone or mibolerone (Cheque Drops, Upjohn). Methyltestosterone is given
at 1 mg/kg with a maximal dose of 30 mg. whercas the mibolerone is given at 30 μg for
dogs weighing less than 11 kg and at 50 μg for dogs weighing between 11 ard 23 kg. Thc
drug is given until hair regrows and then tapered to a maintenance level. These agents are
controlled substances because of their anabolic nature and should be dispensed carefully.
HYPOGONADISM IN INTACT FEMALE ANIMALS
The term hypogonadism indicates a decrease or abnormality in the functional activity of
the gonads. The condition can rcsult from primary gonadal abnormalities or irregularities
in the hormonal control mechanisms. Bitches witti hypogonadism can present for infertil-
ity, coat changes, or both.
Cause and Pathogenesis
A variety of disorders of sexual development (primary hypogonadisim) have been de.
scribed.1 2 Many conditions have been discovered at neutering or when the bitch's cycle
failed to occur. Becausc the gonadal problem is identified early, coat changes are uncom-
 Mon in these dogs. If the reproductive irregularity is ovcrlooked, hair loss can occur.
miniature Poodles, Terriers, and Dachshunds may be predisposed.403
 Secondary hypogonadism is much more comrmon. The dog's history includes an irreg-
ular estrous pattern, an increasing interestrous interval, or complete anestrus. If these
estral irregularities develop after the dog has had a normal cycle for years, the hypogonad.
ism is due to some systemic illness, typically of the endocrine system. Hypothyroidism and
hyperadrenocorticism are the most common causes.l. 2
 All nonpregnant bitches go through a phase of pseudopregmancy in diestrus. In some
dogs, the pseudoprcgnancy becomes clinical, with the development of preparturient be-
haviors and mammary activity. Dogs with clinical pseudopregnancy appear to have normal
diestrus hormonal changes but, for some unknown reason, are sensitive to them.1. 2
834 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseascs
Clinical Features
The nature of the hair loss that can occur in these dogs varies with the cause of the cyclic
abnormality. With primary hypogonadism, there are no clinical or cytologic signs of estrus.
 p au a ui is (sa g  a  m a ss ss 
increasing interestrous intervals, the hair loss starts around the heat period, gradually
worsens through the cycle, and then spontaneously resolves months after the cycle is
d s r  r     s a  
 In dogs with short to medium-length coats, the hair loss associated with cyclic
 a d a  a p r  a u soo s
10-18E). In some dogs, the hair loss remains restricted to these areas, even with the
development of complete anestrus, whereas it progresses to truncal alopecia in other dogs.
The truncal alopecia is a late event and follows multiple cycles of hair loss and regrowth.
loss is seen. The dog gradually loses its primary hairs on the trunk and has a puppy-like
coat. When hair loss starts, it is usually first noted in the collar area, the lanks, and the
 posterior thighs. Progression to generalized truncal alopecia is slow.
In dogs with clinical pseudopregnancy, the hair loss usually is first noticed 4 to 6
weeks after estrus and involves the collar area,therump, and the mammary region (see
Fig. 10-18F).412 An occasional dog has Hank alopecia. The hair loss can become more
widespread at subsequent estrous cycles. Behavioral and physical signs (marmmary devel-
opment and lactation) of clinical pseudopregnancy are present.
Diagnosis
When the hair loss is cyclic and has a teinporal relationship to an estrous cycle or occurs
in an intact but anestrous bitch, the diagnosis of an ovarian-induced hair loss is straightfor-
ward. Other differential diagnostic possibilities include excessive shedding and seasonal
fank alopecia. When the hair loss is noncyclic, hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism,
hyposoinatotropism, adrenal sex hormone imbalance, and follicular dysplasia must be
indicate an ovarian cause.
Because hypogonadism in the adult dog is typically secondary to an underlying endo-
crine disorder, all dogs with an increasing interestrous interval should be tested for
hypothyroidism and hyperadrenocorticism. If results of these tests are normal, an ovarian
  s  a  s n   si 
of sex horrnone levels; with abnormalities in estrogen, progesterone, or testosterone
levels402. 403; or by response to neutering.
Clinical Management
 s     u    a   s
cyclic, do not lose their coat again. If the owner does not wish to neuter the dog and
there is no other intercurrent endocrine disorder, the case should be referred to a
theriogenologist for evaluation and treatment. Although there are reports of hair regrowth
and return to estrous function with administration of GnRH (2 μg/kg IM twice at 10-day
intervals), FSH (0.75 to 2 IU/kg IM daily until signs of proestrus occur), FSH (20 IU/kg
hyperadrenocorticism is documented, correction of that condition can return the dog to
normal reproductive function with subsequent hair regrowth. In some dogs, the ovarian
 dysfunction persists and the animal must be neutered.
HYPERANDROGENISM IN MALE DOGS
 Documented hyperandrogenism in the male dog is rare and has not been reported in the
cat. It can cause circumanal gland and tail gland hyperplasia, with or without seborrhea
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases · 835
oleosa, in dogs with testicular neoplasia.412. 41s Hyperandrogenism is a suspected cause of
seborrhea oleosa or truncal endocrine alopecia in oversexed intact male dogs.11
Cause and Pathogenesis
The circumanal glands and the tail gland of the dog are composed of the same glandular
("hepatoid") tissue. This tissue as well as the sebaceous glands is androgen responsive.
 Hypertestosteronemia, usually in association with testicular neoplasia (especially interstitial
cell tumors),41s results in glandular hyper-reactivity with hyperplasia and increased secre-
tion.
Clinical Features
Dogs with idiopathic hyperandrogenism have severe seborrheic disease or, rarely, symmet-
ric truncal hair loss. The seborrhea is greasy and is most pronounced on the face, on
the ears, and in the intertriginous areas (feet, axillae, and groin). Infection and pruritus
are common, which worsens the condition. The hair loss in some dogs mimics that of
other endocrine conditions. All dogs with idiopathic byperandrogenisin show hypersexual
behavior, aggression to other dogs or humans, or both.
Hyperandrogenism due to testicular neoplasia causes circurmanal gland hyperplasia.
The glands around the anus enlarge uniformly, resulting in a donut-like appearance (Fig.
10-22). Tail gland hyperplasia appears as an oval enlargement of the dorsal surface of the
 proximal tail (Fig. 10-23). In advanced cases, the area becomes alopecic and greasy, and
FIGURE 10-22. Dog with interstitial cell tumor
of testicle and hypertestosteronemia. Circumanal
gland hyperplasia and macular melanosis.
836· Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
FIGURE 10-23. Saine dog as in Figure 10-22.
Alopecia, macular melanosis, and hypertrophy of tail
gland.
the glandular hyperplasia can become so severe that muliple nodules or cysts or both
inguinal area, nodular lesions can be present elsewhere. Some dogs have macular melano-
sis of the tail gland, the perianal area, thc scrotum, the ventral tail, and the ventral
abdomen (Fig. 10-24) before, simultaneously with, or after the glandular hyperplasia
 occurs. A testicular mass can usually be palpated in these dogs but may not be apprecia-
ble when the skin lesions are first noted.
Diagnosis
 Diagnosis is based on history, physical examnination findings. determination of blood testos-
terone levels, and response to castration. Testicular ultrasonography may be helpful in
usually reveals an interstitial cell neoplasm. No cause of idiopathic hyperandrogenism has
been found.
Clinical Management
Castration is indicated for these dogs. In idiopathic hyperandrogenism, the skin gradually
returns to normal condition in 2 to 4 months, but the behavioral changes can last longer
and may necessitate behavior modifcation. In seborrheic dogs, frequent bathing with an
appropriate antiseborrheic shampoo hastens the dog's response. Castration of the dog with
 a   A q  n p m  sd is 
to normal status. Some of the glandular hyperplasia is irreversible, as is the overlying hair
loss. The macular melanosis fades slowly during 6 months.
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases · 837
FIGURE 10-24. Same dog as in Figures 10-22 and 10-23. Note enlarged scrotum and rnacular
mclanosis of scrotum and perianal area.
TESTOSTERONE-RESPONSIVE DERMATOSIS OF MALE ANIMALS
Testosterone-responsive derrmatosis (hypoandlrogenism) is a rare, bilaterally symmetric alo-
 pecia of unknown cause in castrated male dogs.4oz. 412 The condition is even rarer in the
cat.
Cause and Pathogenesis
 s   sp sn-ssn o sd    
unknown. Hypoandrogenism has been suggested but not documented as the cause of this
endocrine-like dermatosis.
Clinical Findings
This condition is rare and occurs in old castrated males. Afghan hounds may be predis
posed.ao3 Some authors inelude intact dogs with testicular abnormalities or tumors in this
category because some affected animals show transient response to testosterone, but we
think that those cases should be described elsewhere (hypogonadism, testicular tumor)
because they are not idiopathic. Castrated males with this condition first have a dull, dry
coat with or without other scborrheic changes (Fig. 10-25). Dogs with dark brown or
before hair loss is noted (see Fig. 10-18G). The hair loss in these dogs is truncal, is
slowly progressive, and mimics that of other endocrine disorders. The skin may be thin
arnd hypotonic. Rarely, the dog has hypertrichosis.
Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis includes hypothyroidisn, hyperadrenocorticism, hyposomatotrop-
ism, and adrenal sex hormone imbalance, Definitive diagnosis is made by history, physical
examination findings, lahoratory test results that rule out other conditions, and response to
therapy. Skin biopsy is nondiagnostic, revealing orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, cpidermal
atrophy, follicular keratosis, follicular atrophy, follicular dilatation, telogenization of hair
follicles, thin dermis, and sebaceous gland atrophy.16
838 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
FIGURE I0-25. Testosterone-responsive dermatosis. Note thinning, hypotonicity, and scaling.
Clinicai Management
Therapy consists of methyltestosterone given orally at l mg/kg, up to a maximal total dose
of 30 mg, every other day.11 Mibolerone (Cheque Drops, Upjohn) per the manufacturer's
recommendations also is effective. A good response should be evident within 3 1nonths. At
this point, a maintenance dose may be established (once or twice weekly). Large doses of
anabolic steroids may result in seborrhea oleosa, cholestatic liver disease, and behavioral
changes (aggression). Because anabolic steroids are abused substances in humans, drug
use should be monitored carefully.
TESTICULAR NEOPLASIA AND THE SKIN
Of occurrence of interstitial cell tumors, seminomas, and Sertol's cell tumors.1. 4s A 10-
year survey of all canine testicular tumors examined at the College of Veterinary Medicine
at Cornell identified 1971 tumors with the following breakdown: interstitial cell tumor,
750 (38.1%); seminoma, 690 (35%); and Sertoli's cel turmor, 531 (26.9%).11 Combinations
of tumor types in the same or contralateral testicle occur in approximately 25% of cases.405
Cryptorchid testes are more than 10 times more likely to develop tumor, especially
tumors, occur more frequently in the right testis in either thc normal or cryptorchid
location,1. 2.405
Testicular tumors can reduce ferility392 by direct destruction of the testis or by the
abnormal secretion of horrmones, can be malignant with metastatic potential, and can
and seminomas are more likely to cause hair loss than are interstitial cell tumors. When
the clinician examines an old male dog with a palpable scrotal testicular tumor or a
s an os a r pn e ssns as rn p
whether the tumor 'is the cause of the hair loss or a coincidental finding with no
 dermatologic significance. When the dog has one or more of the following abnormalities,
the tumor is likely to be functionally signifcant and the dog should be castrated:
(1) puppy-like coat, (2) patterned alopecia, (3) coat color change, (4) linear preputial
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases · 839
pe pn (2) eisediady pus eun uoun (9) sisua ien () siso
hyperplasia, and (8) nurmerous comedones.
Sex steroids appear to have preferential afinity for primary hair follicles, Disorders
caused by sex steroids tend to cause the dog to lose its primary hairs first while retaining
the secondary hairs, giving the puppy-like coat.
Because of the presumed sex and site variation in the numbers or afinity of sex
hormone receptors in the skin of dogs, sex steroid imbalances induce hair loss in certain
regions of the body and the alopecia tends to be confined to these areas for long
periods.1. 41s Coat color change can be explained by environmental bleaching or a direct
effect of the sex hormones on pigment production and transfer. The latter is probably
most important.
 Linear preputiadl dermatosis is a tenm used to describe a linear narrow pigmentary
changc running from the preputial orifice along the ventral aspect of the prepuce to the
scrotum (see Fig. 10-18H).3s The cxact mechanism of the development of the lesion is
unknown (Fig. 10-26), but it is not associated with trauma and appcars to be a specife
dog has linear preputial derrmatosis but its testes palpate normally or are intra-abdominal,
a complete ultrasonographic cvaluation of the patient is indicated to locate the neo-
plasm.392
 Dogs with macular melanosis have multiple black macules around the anus, perineum,
ventral proximal tail, inguinal area, and serotum (see Fig. 10-24). Typically, these are
sudden in onset and numerous. These lesions must be tlifferentiated from lentigines. The
latter have an identical clinical appearance but are distributed rmore widely and can occur
in females. In addition, lentigines tend to have a gradual onset. The causc of macular
FIGURE 10-26. Linear prepucial erythema.
Beyond some rnildl vascular dilatation and conges-
tion, no histologie abnormalities are presenl.
840 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
melanosis is unknown. Circumanal and tail gland hyperplasia results from androgenic
stimulation of the circumanal giands (see Figs. 10-22 and 10-23). This is most common
with interstitial cell tumors.4is Comedones are not specifc for a sex hormone imbalance
but are common in these disorders.
The change in coat quality and color, the patterned alopecia, and comedones are not
speific to testicular tumor but also can occur in hypogonadism and adrenal sex hormone
imbalance.59. 374, 412 Testicular tumors can be functional but not yet palpable; thus, most
investigators suggest castration of the intact male dog with sex hormone signs because it is
 diagnostic for neoplasia and therapeutic for both neoplasia and hypogonadism. If the
 patient is a poor surgical candidate or the owmer refuses to neuter thc dog, the condition
may not be resolvable.
Sertoli's Cell Tumor
no hair loss.392
● Cause and Pathogenesis. A syndrome of endocrine alopecia and feminization
occurs in about one third of dogs with a testicular Sertoli's cell tuimor.!., 2. 11 An identical.
clinical syndrome has been reported rarely in association with testicular interstitial cell
tumors and seminomas. However, more than one type of tumor may he present in the
hererditary syndrome of male pseudohermaphroditism, cryptorchidisin, Sertoli's cell 1neo-
plasia, and feminization has been reported in Miniature schnauzers.1. 2. 387
 Many investigators demonstrated increased levels of estrogens in the peripheral blood
and the neoplastic tissue of dogs with Sertoli's cell testicular neoplasia and feminization
Hyperestrogenism results in the cutaneous, prostatic, behavioral, and hematologic abnor-
malities. Bilateral Hank alopccia has bccn reported in a male dog with hyperprogesterone-
suppresson have been reported with hyperestrogenemia and a testicular interstitial cell
tumor.420
● Clinical Features. Functional Sertoli's cell tumors are most common in cryptor-
chid testicles. The incidence of feminization increases from about 15% with scrotally
located tumors to 50% in cases of inguinal and 70% in cases of abdominal location.
Feminization is more likely with larger tumors and tends to he increasingly severe as
tumor size increases. Although any breed of dog may be affected, Boxers, Shetland
sheepdogs,Weimaraners, Cair terriers, Pekingese, and Collies are predisposed.1.2 ll 40. 42
The disease usually affects middle-aged to older dogs.
About 10% of dogs with Sertoli's cell tumors have one in both testicles, and about
 20% have another tumor type. In the Cornell review,1' approximately 20% of tumors had
histologic features of malignancy, but metastasis occurred in only 8% of those cases. Blood
estrogen leveis are not always elevated. In addition, the hyperestrogenism could be a local
(tissue level) effect with the peripheral aromatization of androgens to estrogens.
The functional Sertoli's cell tumor feminization syndrome is characterized by varying
combinations of bilaterally symmetric alopecia, nipple enlargement, pendulous prepuce,
and attraction of other male dogs (Fig. 10-27). It is important to emphasize that affected
dogs may have alopecia, feminization, or both. The alopecia begins on the collar region,
the rump, the perineum, and the genital area and progresses slowly (Fig. 10-28A). In
some dogs, the hair loss is restricted to the fanks (see Fig. 10-28B). Generalized truncal
hair loss is rare. Hairs in affected areas are easily epilated. The skin may be thin or of
normal thickness. Pruritus, dermatitis, and hyperpigmentation are uncommon. Linear
preputial dermatosis (see Fig. 10- 18H) is a common but not consistent finding.
 In addition to nipple enlargement and attraction of other male dogs, signs of femini-
zation may include decreased libido and spermatogenesis. The tumor may be palpated in
a retained or scrotal testicle. The non-neoplastic testicle is usually atrophied. Caution is
warranted here because functional Sertoli's cell tumors may occur in palpably normal
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases · 84I
FIGURE 10-27. lntrascrotal testis with Sertoli's cell tumor constituting most of the serotal
mass. The small nodule at the posterior edge of the scrotum is the uninvolved but atrophied
testis. Note the cnlarged nipples.
scrotal testicles. The prostate is often enlarged (estrogen-induced squamous metaplasia)
and infected, and there may be clinical signs referablc to prostatomegaly, prostatitis, or
both. Rarely, spermatic cord torsion with an intra-ahdominal testicular Sertoli's cell tuinor
occurs, resulting in an acute abdomen.40G Estrogen-induced bone marrow depression
(thrombocytopenia, neutropenia, and anemia) is uncommon to rare, but is a life-threaten-
ing complication.413 Pseudohermaphroditism in Miniature schnauzers consists of unilateral
or bilateral cryptorchidism, small penis and prepuce, feminization, and endocrine alope-
cia.1. 2. 3s7 These dogs may also have anorexia, depression, and pyrexia with concurrent
pyometra.
● Diagnosis. A dog with a palpable testicular mass and one or more of the skin
changes associated with a functional testicular tumor (e.g., patterned alopecia, linear
preputial erythema) is no diagnostic challenge. When no tumor can be palpated, the
diagnosis is more problematic and the differential diagnosis includes hypogonadisin and
adrenal sex horrmone imbalance. Advanced cases can mimic cascs of hypothyroidism or
hyperadrenocorticism, but these are rare, Definitive diagnosis is based on history, physical
examination findings, laboratory tests to rule out other disorders, and response to therapy.
Skin biopsy is nondiagnostic, revealing orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, follicular keratosis,
follicular dilatation, follicular atrophy, telogenization of hair follicles, excessive trichilemmal
keratinization, and sebaceous gland atrophy (Fig. 10-29),16 Elevated blood estrogen levels
may support the diagnosis. Diagnosis is confirmed by histopathologic exainination of the
neoplastictesticles,
● Clinical Management. Therapy consists of bilateral castration. Although the meta-
static rate of these tumors is low, all dogs should be examined carefully before surgery. If
the spermatic cord is thickened or the sublumbar lynph nodes are enlarged, spread may
have already occurred. A good clinical response usually occurs within 3 months. Remission
  o   o      
hyperestrogenism warrants a guarded prognosis because these often persist after sur-
gery.367
FIGURE I0-28. A, Sertoli's cell tumor. Hair loss in the collr area and along the ventrum. Pendulous
prepuce.B,Flank alopecia in an Airedale terrier with a Sertoli's cell tumor. C, Male hiypogonadism in a wooly
horrmone imbalance. Loss of primary hairs and mild hypotrichosis.
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases · 843
FIGURE 10-29. Skin fron dog with fuctional Sertoli's celltesticular neoplasm syndrome.
Note follicular keratosis and dilatation, absence of hair shafts, and sebaceous gland atrophy.
 Therapy of pseudohermaphroditism in Miniature schnauzers may entail simultaneous
castration and hysterectomy.
Seminomas
Seminomas are as common as interstitial cel tumors in dogs. They are more common in
cryptorchid testes.405 Boxers and German shepherds are predisposed. Reports indicate a
low rate of malignancy but a tendency to be locally invasive.4o5 In the Cornell study,
12.2% of the seminomas had histologic features of malignancy, and evidence of metastasis
was recognized in 11% of those cases.11
 Secretory activity in seminomas is rare. Most cases have no dermatologic signs. If
there is secretion of estrogens, the clinical signs mimic those of Sertoli's cell tumors.
Interstitial Cell Tumors
Interstitial cell tumors are common.405 Boxers are predisposed. Interstitial cell tumors
have no tendency to develop in cryptorchid testes, and these tumors occur with equal
frequency in the right or the left testicle. They are often multiple in the same testicle or
can be found in both testes. Texts report rare evidence of malignaney, but 12.9% of the
 tumors in the Cornell study had histologic features of malignancy.1l No metastatic lesions
were reported.
 In most cases, interstitial cell tumors cause no dermatologic abnormalities. When
 dn  i a    ss  
melanosis, or combinations of these (see Fig. 10-24). Additional findings can include
prostate disease, circumanal adenoma, and perineal hermia. The association of perineal
HYPOGONADISM IN INTACT MALE ANIMALS
Of all the sex hormone -related dermatoses, hypogonadism (castration-responsive der-
matosis, “woolly" syndrome, alopecia X) in the male dog is the most poorly under-
844 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
stood.373. 41 412 Dogs with this condition can either have symmetrically small and atrophic
testes or palpably normal testes.
Cause and Pathogenesis
 Primary, noninflammatory testicular degeneration is rare in the adult dog.1. 2 Dogs with
corticism, or nonpalpable bilateral secretory testicular tumors.
 A syndrome of delayed gonadal maturation has bcen described, especially in Afghan
(younger than 3 years). The external genitalia are hypoplastic.
Most dogs with hypogonadal hair loss have palpahly normal testes and can be sucuess-
o  re ar  so d s sa s 
serum estradiol, progesterone, and testosterone levels may show abnormalitics in the
levels of oneormore hormones034l42butnormal values are possible373400Thehair
loss in the dogs with normal lovels may be due to abnormalities in the levels of some
unmeasured sex steroid, abnorinalities in peripheral conversion of the sex steroids, or
hormones. In the breeds predisposed to this condition, the follicular sensitivity no doubt
has some genetic influence. Because some of these dogs respond to melatonin supplemen-
tation, their pineal axis may also be at fault.
Clinical Features
There is no apparent breed predilection in dogs with atrophic hypogonadism. These dogs
hypothyroidism, or hyperadrenocorticism.
   ss r  a     sn
perineal and inguinal regions.4 The hair loss spreads slowly to involve the ventrum and
then thc trunk.
HIypogonadism with normal testes can occur in any breed, but Malamutes, Siberian
huskies, Chow Chows, Samoyeds, Pomeranians, and Keeshonds appear to be over-repre-
sented. The age of onset is a very inportant piece of infornation, but many owners piace
 it many months later then it actually was. Dogs seem to fall into two categories. In the
first and possibly most common, onset of coat change is between 2 and 4 years of age.
The coat changes in the second group start in late middle age or early old age. The initial
  o  st d u o pe  po u  a si uis 
lost slowly while the secondary hairs are retained, giving the dog an overall puppy-likc
appearance (see Fig. 10-28C). The retained secondary hairs lose their luster, become
crimped and Auffy, and take on a woolly appearance. Dark hairs lighten down to their
roots, indicating a change in pigment deposition rather than environmental bleaching (see
Fig. 10-28D).
 Because these coat changes occur slowly over many months, some owners do not
when the problem began, base their answcr on hair loss only. Inspection of pictures taken
of thc dog months earlier might give a more accuratc age at onset. Hair loss is noted on
Progression of hair loss in these areas and elsewhere is slow. Rarely, dogs that have this
hair loss is restricted to the fank region (see_ Fig. 10-28G). Hyperpigmcntation of the
skin is variable and, when prescnt, is diffuse. The testes are normal on palpation, and no
 other physical abnormalities are found.
Diagnosis
With atrophic hypogonadism, hypothyroidisin and hyperadrenocorticism must be consid-
ered and ruled out by appropriate testing. If the dog has palpably normal testes, testicular
 neoplasia, adult-onset hyposomatotropism, adrenal sex hormone irmbalances, and folicular
Endocrinc and Metabolic Discases · 845
 dysplasia are the primary diffcrential diagnostic possibilities. Skin biopsy is diagnostic for
follicular dysplasia but of no help in the differential diagnosis of other conditions. Castra-
tion with histopathologic evaluation of the testes is both diagnostic and therapeutic for
hypogonadism and testicular neoplasia. If no response occurs within 4 months of castra-
tion, the other differential diagnostic conditions should be investigated.
If the owner is unwilling to use castration as a diagnostic test, thyroid testing and
 nsan yy ao m ay sp s q a a are sap su n
Ievels. Sex hormones, especially androgens, can interfere with the true measurement of
TT levels by changing the amount or affinity of binding proteins. With hyperandrogene-
mia or hypocstrogenemia, the baseline TT4 level can be at or above normal limits. These
changes do not occur in all dogs with hypogonadism and can be caused by other nongona-
dal disorders that alter thyroid hormone binding.
Although the hair loss in these dogs is due to a sex hormone abnormality, baseline
s os ur rr aq  ousd o surss urs jo sa s
hyperestrogenemia, or hyperprogesteronemia can be documented 373,411 In our experience,
the likelihood of detecting a bascline sex hormone abnormality is influcnced by the dog's
horinones levels vary during the day and the range of norral values is wide, it is difficult
to document a baseline abnormality when the dog has only been affected for a short
cially when the dog is a Chow Chow, Samoyed, Pomeranian, or Keeshond and its coat
change started within the first 4 years of life. These dogs are likely to have an intercurrent
adrenal sex hornone abnormality (see Adrenal Hyperplasia-Like Syndrome). Too few
cases have been recognizcd in the Malamute and Siberian husky to know whether to
include them with the other breeds. Dogs of other breeds, especially when their coat
change started in later life, are likely to have only a gonadal problem that can be
documented by baseline sex hormone measurements. If baseline sex hormone levels are
normal, rcsults of GnRH stimulation tests40o or ACTH stimulation testing can be useful.
Clinical Management
Correction of the underlying cause of the atrophic hypogonardisim usually resolves the hair
loss. If response is incomplete, testosterone supplementation may be necessary. Castration
is curative for most dogs with normal testes, with hair regrowth in 2 to 4 ronths. If
castration is not allowed, supplementation with testosterone59 or treatment with human
chorionic gonadotropin (50 IU/kg IM twice weckly for 6 wecks)403 may be of some
benefit. No reports are available on the long-term successful medical management of 
these cases.
As mentioncd carlier, castration is curative for most dogs with palpably normal testes.
      o   o  si 
years.373 Again, the four breeds mentioned seem to be over-represented. All dogs who do
adrenaf hyperplasia -like syndrome. There are anecdotal reports that dogs with this condi-
tion respond to melatonin supplementation.16 Because hair follicles have no melatonin
is cdhue to local or serum changes of the sex hormones. The latter has been demonstrated
(see Chap. 3),38s Because dogs with scasonal fank alopccia412 (sec Chap. 11) have normal
hair follicle level is probable. Oral treatment with 3 to 6 mg q8-12h should initiate hair
growth within 6 weeks. If no response occurs, testosterone supplementation might be
beneficial.
ADRENAL SEX HORMONE DISORDERS
 These dogs have symnetric truncal alopecia, which mimics that seen in hyposomatotrop-
ism or the gonadal sex horrnone dermatoses, but these patients do not respond to GH
supplementation or neutering.359, 373, 374
846 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
 Dogs with the bilateral adrenal hyperplasia of pituitary-dependent bypcradrenocorti-
cism offen have abnormal sex hormone levels. Beyond the clitoral hypertrophy that occurs
in some bitches, the sex hormone irregularities do not seem to contribute to the clinical
symptoms of these dogs. Cutaneous changes typical of those occurring with a gonadal sex
hormone imbalance can take place in animals with adrenal neoplasia or adlrenal hyperpla-
 sia- like syndrome.
ADRENAL NEOPLASIA
The vast majority of dogs with a functioning adrenocortical tumor experience the classic
signs of byperadrenocorticism discussed earlier in this chapter. Although sex hormone
 ar aq on se i i a  p  sq iedou e nd
the clinical signs are not different from those of the glucocorticoid predominating cases.17s
With rare exception, dogs with sex hormone-producing adrenal tunmors also have
elevated cortisol levels, so they experience the classic polyuria and polydipsia of hyperad-
renocorticism. However, instead of the gradually progressive truncal hypotrichosis that
(see Fig. 10-1F) are the most common abnormalities that we have recognized. Circum-
anal gland hypertrophy or circumanal gland adenoma in a neutered male or female can
also occur. Clitoral hypertrophy can occur in intact or neutered females (see Fig. 10- 1G).
Although abnormalities in sex hormone levels can be detected in these dogs, thc
diagnosis of adrenal neoplasia is based on the routine cortisol stimulation or suppression
tests and ultrasonographic evaluation of the adrenal glands. Surgical removal of the in-
volved gland results in resolution of the clinical signs, provided the dog does not have a
metastatic adenocarcinoma.
ADRENAL HYPERPLASIA-LIKE SYNDROME
Cause and Pathogenesis
 A study of Pomeranians who were normal or had presumed adult-onset hyposomatotrop-
ism noted that an abnormal sex hormone response to ACTH stimulation occurred.372 Both
those in normal control animals. Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate and androstenedione
an enzyme involved in adrenal steroidogenesis, was responsible for the abnormal adrenal
FIGURE 10-30. Hyperadrencxcor-
ticism secondary to an adrenal tumor.
Symnctric fank alopecia in a dog
-ladi jo susis peonuoo aq ia
adrenocorticism,
Endocrinc and Metabolic Diseases · 847
sex hormone production. The investigators who made this discovery in Pomeranians called
the condition congenital adrenal hyperplasia-like syndrome because of its similarity to a
condition in humans.374
Other investigators, including ourselves, tested neutered dogs from other breeds and
 of the progesterone cornpounds,26a,373 Iusuffcient data are available to determine whether
all dogs with adrenal sex hormone imbalance have enzymatic defects or whether some
dogs produce higher levels of adrenocortical sex steroids than do normal dogs.
The causc of the hair loss in these dogs probably relates to altered sex hormone
binding at the hair follicles. Because elevations in progesterone are common in these dogs
 and progesterone can have antiandrogenic activity,1t, 4is the hair loss may be atributable
- an  o s     s  e 
tation supports this theory.sa Howevcr, becausc the hair loss in these dogs does not
mimic that of tcstosterone-responsive dermatoses and not all dogs respontd to androgen
suppleinentation, other mechanisms may be imiportant.
The role of GH in this disorder also is unknown. The GH deficiency may bc an
intercurrent endocrinopathy, which contributes to the hair loss via changing the sensitivity
of the hair follicles to sex hormones,41? or the deficiency could be induced by these
horinone imbalances.l. 2 In a Chow Chow examincd by one of us (W.H.M.), the GH
response to xylazine stimulation was abnormal. Castration resulted in regrowth of hair, and
the growth hormone response returncd to normal.
Clinical Features
Thc disorder has been recognized in many breeds, but especially in Pomeranian, Chow
Chow, Keeshond, anid Sainoyed. Coat changes typically start between 1 and 2 ycars of
age, but hair loss inay not occur until later. Dogs of both sexcs can be affected, but male
dogs are over-represented. The hair loss can start before or after neutering. If the hair
loss occurs in an intact dog, rogrowth may occur with neutering, but a relapse within 1 to
2 years can be cxpected.
The dcrmatologic changes in these dogs mimic those of hyposomatotropism and
gradual development of a dull, dry coat with loss of rmany primary hairs (Fig. 10-31). The
caurdomedial thighs are more severely involved and are first to become alopecic. Because
the initial coat changes are often subtle, it is diffcult to define the tine frame to hair loss.
 In some dogs, hair loss lags behind the initial coat changes by at least 1 year. As the hair
FIGURE I0-3l. Adrenal hypcr-
plasia-like syndrome.Truncal hair
loss and retention of guard hairs in a
3.year-old dog.
848·Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
FIGURE 10-32. Adrenal hyper-
plasia-like syndrome.A puppy-like
dog. The hairless areas hyperpig.
Imented very quickly.
loss in the frictional areas progresses, more primary hairs are lost on the trunk, giving the
reimaining coat a puppy-like appearance (Fig. 10-32). Thc retained secondary hairs are
moiai on pu sop asa asasp jo sreas rae auo sioo pue ar si ooe peun
tufts of hair at sitcs damaged by skin biopsy or cutting trauma.
At the onset of the coat changes, these dogs are otherwise healthy. With long-
standing disease, most dogs experience noticeable polyuria and polydipsia, but it is no-
where near as marked as that occurring in hyperadrenocorticism or diabetes melltus.
 Some dogs, espccially the Samoyeds (a breed with a tendancy toward hyperprogesterone-
nia) in our case material, experience profound polyuria and polydipsia associated with
imsulin-resistant diabetes mellitus.
Diagnosis
The primary differential diagnostic possibilities if there is a persistent pattemed alopccia
with retention of the secondary hairs on the trunk include hyposoinatotropism, gonadal
sex hormone imbalance, adrenal sex hormone imbalance, and follicuiar dysplasia. The last 
disorder is excluded by skin biopsy.4. 16
totic surface and follicular hyperkeratosis, follcular dilatation, excessive trichilemmal kera-
tinization, epidermal melanosis, and telogenization of hair follicles) and can also show
some features of follicular dysplasia (dysplastic follicles with a tentacular or octopus-like
appearance and abnormalities in melanization of the hairs, follicular epithelium, and
sebaceous glands) (Fig. 10-33). The dysplastic-type changes can occur in any endocrine
skin disease but tend to be more forid in adrenal hyperplasia-like syndrome.
Results of routine laboratory tests are typically normal, as are those of thyroid tests
and the results of low-dose dexamethasone suppression testing. Dogs with diabetes melli-
tus undergo the biochemical changes of that disorder, and dogs in which estrogen levels
these dogs expcrience and can result in small elevations in serum alkaline phosphatase.
The diagnosis is confimed by the detection of abnormal concentrations of sex hormones,
 especially progesterone and estradiol, as determined by baseline testing373 or in response
to ACTH administration.374 Baseline testing is least desirable because abnormalities do not
show in all dogs and the testing cannot differentiate the gonadal or adrenal origin if the
dog is intact.
Currently, the only laboratory with well-established normal values for sex steroids
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases · 849
FIGURE I0-33. Adrenal hyperplasialike syn-
drome. An admixture of cndocrine (surface and
follicular hyperkeratosis, follicular dilatation,
anrd
telogenization of hair folliclcs) and dysplastic (dys-
plastic follicles) changes. Abnormalities in jmelaniza-
tion are also prescnt.
before and after·ACTH administration (Table 10-1) is the Endocrinology Laboratory at
the University of Tennessee, College of Veterinary Medicine, Knoxville, TN 37901-1071.
We have submitted pre- and post-ACTH samples to our regular endocrinology laborato-
ries for sex hormone evaluation. Because these laboratories do mot use the same assay
values that are as well established, the results developed therein are not directly compara-
(e.g., elevated progesterone baseline value that more than triples after ACTH administra-
tion) can be duplicated.
Clinical Management
 In intact dogs, especially male dogs, neutering is the initial treatment of choice because
initially occurred after neutering, recurred after regrowth following surgery, or did not
improve after surgery, treatment options include methyltestosterone, GH, mclatonin, o,p'-
DDD, or observation, Bilateral adrenalectomy should be effective, but is unproven. Be-
cause GH is not readily available, the options are reduced. Treatments with melatonin or
 mal adrenal steroid production. These animals, like those who remain untreated, should
mendations for o.p'-DDD use indicate that the drug be given at daily doses of 15 to
25 mg/kg.34 Rcsponse is determined by ACTH response testing for plasma cortisol at
weekly intervals.
850 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
● Tahle 10- 1
Mean (±sd) SEX HoRMone levEls* In
Normal Dogs before and After
ACTH STIMULATION
INTACT (n = 10)
NEUTERED (n = 9)
MALES
Baseline
Post-ACTH
Baseline
Post-ACTH
Progestcrone
0.4 (±0.5)
1.1 (± 1.2)
0.1 (±0.0)
0.4 (±0.4)
17-hydroxyprogesterone
0.3 (±0.4)
1.4 (±0.9)
0.1 (±0.0)
0.6 (±0.3)
DHEAS
18.5 (±11.5)
20.8 (± 11.0)
2.1 (±3.3)
2.9 (±4.3)
Audrustenedione
13.3 (± 10.1)
12.2 (±6.7)
4.8 (±1.5)
5.4 (±2.0)
Testosteroune
3.1 (±4.2)
2.6 (±4.1)
0.0 (±0.0)
0.0 (±0.0)
Estradiol 17 β
18.7 (±14.6)
15.6 (±8.6)
43.1 (± 10.0)
41.3 (± 13.5)
INTACT (n
= 5)
NEUTERED (n = 8)
FEMALES
Baseline
Post-ACTH
Baseline
Post-ACTH
Progesterone
0.3 (±0.1)
0.8 (±0.3)
0.1 (±0.1)
0.7 (±0.7)
17-hydroxyprogesteronc
0.2 (±0.1)
1.5 (±0.4)
0.1 (±0.1)
0.9 (±0.3)
DHEAS
5.7 (± 1.7)
7.8 (±1.68)
3.8 (±4.5)
5.0 (±4.7)
Andrusteuedione
6.5 (±8.0)
2.0 (±0.9)
6.5 (±3.7)
4.9 (±0.4)
Testosterone
0.1 (±0.0)
0.1 (±0.0)
0.0 (±0.0)
(00+)00
Estradiol 17 β
24.8 (±9.4)
22.0 (±8.1)
40.3 (±8.2)
40.6 (±8.1)
"All levcls are in ng/nl exvept estradiol 17 β levels, which are in pg/iml.
Modied with permission from Sclmcitzcl LP, et al: Congenital adrenal hyperplasia-like syndrome. Ie: Bomaura J (ed):
Kirk's Curent VetenitaryTherapy Xi.W.B. Saumders,Philadeipha,I995, p 600.
The goal of therapy is to reduce the baseline cortisol concentration to a low-normal
 3 to 5 μg/dl,374 whereas another investigator recoimmended 5 to 7 μg/dl.368. 373 After the
desired adrenal suppression has been achieved, drug adninistration is changed to weekly
and then adjusted as needed to maintain the suppression. This treatment resulted in
complete hair regrowth in 10 of 12 cases.369
Because thesc dogs are healthy and the o,p'-DDD treatment is cxpensive and not
without risk, somc owners elect not to treat their dog. If the dog's progesterone or
estrogen metabolism is iregular, periodic laboratory evaluations for progesterone-induced
diabetes mellitus or estrogen-induced bone marrow suppression is indicated. At the first
 sign of an abnorinality, trcatinent must be instituted to prevent serious metabolic conse-
quences. The untreated dog's hair loss progresses very slowly and eventually involves the
majority of the trunk (Fig. i0-34). These dogs are at increased risk for frostbite, sunburn,
FIGURE 10-34. Adrenal hypcr-
plasia-like syndrome. A 13-year-old
Bouvier de Flanders with untreated
disease for over 7 ycars. Xote the
islands of hair onl the almost hairless 
tnunk.
 Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases ● 85I
 or other environmental insults, and thcir management must be adjusted accordingly. As
mentioned carlier, they will experience polyuria and polydipsia that worsens slowly. At
 some point, the polyuria and polydipsia can become so severe that the dog loses its house
training. Because the hair follicles in these dogs are still viable despite years of inactivity,
late treatment results in coat regrowth and the elimination of the cortisol-induced polyuria
 and polydipsia.
RARE SEX HORMONE DERMATOSES
Early editions of this and other dermatology texts associated feline endocrine alopecia and
cussed in Chapter 11 because it has no endocrine basis in the vast majority of cases.
 Occasionally, cats respond to estrogen or testosterone supplenentation, but because of the
hepatic sensitivity of cats to sex hormones and the rarity of the condition, all other causcs
of hair loss should be investigated first.
 d a ro ss rq aa as  u   s
perineurn, and the ventral abdomen, which can progress to involve the entire ventrun,
the neck, and the face.ll The exposed skin is hyperpigmented and seborrheic. Moderate
 e s re    s so sd aas o
testes and sex hormone levels in thesc dogs are nornal. Skin biopsy reveais no evidence
pruritus precedes the skin lesions. In early cases, only the inguinal nipples are involved,
which refutes an endocrine cause. Trauma during itching is the likely cause of the nipple
hypertrophy. Most dogs with idiopathic male feminizing syndrome have hypersensitivity,
with food hypersensitivity and hormonal hypersensitivity most likely. Resolution of signs
with castration supports the latter diagnosis.
 If the hair loss, hyperpigmentation, and seborrhea precede any pruritus and the
nipple enlargement is uniform throughout all glands, endocrine disease must be consid-
ential diagnostic considerations.
Canine Hypothyroidism
Hypothyroidism is the most common cndocrine disorder of the dog and is characterized
by a plethora of cutaneous and noncutaneous clinical sigus associated with a deficiency
of thyroid hormone activity.* It is also the Inost commonly overdiagnosed endocrine
disease.
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
acquired primary hypothyroidism accounts for more than 90% of all cases of canine
hypothyroidism. The two main causes of acquired primary hypothyroidism are lymphocytic
thyroiditis and idiopathic thyroid necrosis and atrophy.
Lymphocytic (Ilashimoto's) thyroiditis is a comrmon cause of hypothyroidism in dogs.f
Lymphocytic thyroiditis has long been recognized as a familial disorder of colony-raiscd
Beagles with polygenic inheritance.ss In one closed colony, approximately 10% of dogs
were affected.is9 Dogs with thyroiditis arc at increased risk for thyroid tumors, but it is
unclear whether the neoplasia is triggered by the thyroidiis or some other genetic
infuence.26 Lymphocytic thyroiditis is thought to he an atoimmune disorder in which
humoral and cell-mediated autoimmunity are involved in the pathogenesis.
 Antibodies to thyroglobulin, T3, T4, or combinations thereof can be detected.l30 Anti-
"Scc referenccs I, 2, 14, 20, 48, 68, 101, 111, 137.
'See references 22. 34, 52, 55, 62-64, 79.
852 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
thyroglobulin antibodies are demonstrable in the sera of more than 50% of dogs with
naturally occurring hypothyroidism, and Great Danes, Irish setters, Borzois, Old English
roglobulin antibodies can be found in normal dogs or those with nonthyroidal endocrine
diseases.40. 71. 98 Antibodies have been detected in approximately 50% of clinically normal
dogs related to dogs with hypothyroidism and in approximately 15% of randomly studied
with various dermatoses.2 Anti-Ts antibodies and, rarely, anti-T4 antibodies can also be
detected in the serum of dogs with thyroiditis34. 52 70. 130 Invariably, dogs with anti-T3
 antibodies have antithyroglobulin antibodies, but the reverse is not true.52 These autoanti-
bodies interfere with thyroid assays and lead to spurious results that suggest hyperthyroid-
ism6l Twenty percent of the dogs with naturally occuring hypothyroidism also have
circulating immune complexes.
 Lymphocytic thyroiditis has been produced in normal dogs by injections of thyroglob-
ulin or thyroid antigens with adjuvants, intrathyroid injections of antithyroglobulin antibod-
ies, and intrathyroid injections of allogenic lymphocytes.5. 6 Thyroid lesions in dogs with
naturally occurring lymphocytic thyroiditis are characterized by imultifocal to diffuse inter-
stitial infiltration of lymphocytes, plasma cells, and macrophages associated with destruc-
tion of thyroid follicles, as well as by the presence of electron-dense deposits in the
and severity of laboratory abnormalities vary with the extent of involvement. Dogs with
mild pathologic changes in the thyroid glands often have normal thyroid profiles. Be-
cause lymphoeytic thyroiditis is a focal disease and because infammation is minimal in the
late stages, it has been suggested that so-called idiopathic thyroid necrosis and atrophy
may be an end stage of lymphocytie thyroiditis.
 Naturally occuring secondary hypothyroidism accounts for less than 10% of all canine
neoplasia 1. 2 ll Other causes of canine hypothyroidism are rare,
CLINICAL FEATURES
Goitrous and nongoitrous congenital hypothyroidism has been reported in the Boxer, Bull
mastiff, German shepherd, Scotish deerhound, and Giant schnauzer breeds,33, 35, 60. 87. 92. 135
Mongrels can also be affected.35
Acquired hypothyroidism may affect any breed of dog. At Cornell University, breeds
at risk for hypothyroidism, in decreasing order of relative risk, are the Chinese Shar pei,
Chow Chow, Great Dane, Irish wolfhound, Boxer, English bulldog, Dachshund, Afghan
hound, Newfoundland, Malamute, Doberman pinscher, Brittany spaniel, Poodle, Golden
retriever, and Miniature schnauzer.ll Other studies include the Airedale terrier, Cocker
Antithyroglobulin antibodies are found more often in Great Danes, Borzois, Irish setters,
Oid English sheepdogs, and Doberman pinschers.2 48 German shepherd dogs and mon-
grels are thought to be at lower risk.l Familial hypothyroidism has been suspcctcd in
Great Danes, Doberman pinschers, and German shorthaired pointers.
There is no sex predilection for canine hypothyroidism, but neutered male and female
affected, thc risk is greater for dogs betwcen the ages of 6 and 10 years. The onset of
hypothyroidisim tends to be earlier (2 to 3 ycars old) in laurge and giant breeds and those
breeds predisposed to the disorder.
The clinical signs associated with hypothyroidism are many and varied and involve
multiple organ systems.? At presentation, the dog can have systemic ilness with normal
skin, dermatologic disease plus systemic signs of illness, or dermatologic disease only. In
sop an on pne aq  pz aq  sis sas a aa he a
*See references 14, 20, 48, 68, 99, 101, 111, 113, 137.
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases · 853
aging, or may not exist. If there are no systemic signs, the cutancous lesions may be due
hypothyroidism has rightfully been labeled *the great impersonator."
Although lethargy, mental depression, obesity, hypothermia, and thcrmophilia are
classic manifestations of hypothyroidismmanyhypothyroid dogs appear active and alet,
are well feshed or thin, and do not exhibit heat-seeking behavior.1o6 In general, if a dog is
obviously obese, it is probably not hypothyroid. The rectal teuperature of most hypothy-
roid dogs is in the normal range.
The classic cutaneous signs of canine hypothyroidism include (1) bilaterally symmetric
truncal alopecia, which tends to spare the extremities (Fig. 10-35B); (2) a dull, dry.
r   o re  o se   a  
(3) thick, puffy, nonpitting skin (myxedema) that is cool to the touch (see Figs. 10-35D
and 10-36); (4) variable hyperpigmentation (see Fig. 10-35B); (5) seborrhea (see Fig.
10-35C); (6) susceptibility to skin infections (Fig. 10-37); and (7) lack of pruritus.
However, the clinical variations from this classic picture are enormous and frequent.
 Because receptors for thyroid hormones are found on sebocytes and cells of the outer.
root sheath and dermal papilla,l8 coat abnormalities can be expeeted in most, if not all,
hypothyroid dogs. Growing hairs are decreased in diaimeter, and telogen hairs are main-
tained because initiation of anagen is prevented.3s Although soine laboratory dogs don't
lose hair, hair loss is common in household dogs. Initially, the coat loses its normal sheen
and luster and becomes duil, dry, and brittle. Shedding becomes more pronounced during
nonshed periods, and the lost hairs either regrow more slowly than normally or are not
replaced.
 Noticeable hypotrichosis or alopecia occurs first in frictional- areas, especially over
pressure points, the ventrum, the perineum, and the tail (see Fig. 10-35E). Large and
giant breeds often lose hair first on the lateral surface of the extremities (see Fig.
10-35F). With time, the hair loss becomes more widespread (see Fig. 10-35G) and
involves the entire trunk in a symimetric distribution (see Fig. 10-35B). In advanced
cases, all hairs except those on the head and distal extremities are lost. Most cases are
presented earlier in the course of the disease and may have hypotrichosis or alopecia,
which may be focal, multifocal, synmetric, or asymmetric (Figs. 10-38 to 10-40; see Fig.
10-35H). In some dogs, hair loss is restricted to the fank region (Fig. 10-41). An
unusual finding is hypertrichosis in which, because of the retarded turnover of the hairs,
the coat becomes thick and resembles a carpet (Fig. 10-42). Hypertrichosis occurs most
 asa       au ss a  s  an
the tips of the hairs, because the retained hairs are more susceptible to environmental
bleaching This coat color change can occur in nonhypertrichotic hypothyroid dogs but is
more common in dogs with sex hormone imbalances.
Because thyroid hormones influence serum and cutaneous fatty acid concentra-
hypothyroid dogs. The altered lipid profle can result in dryness, greasiness, or seborrheic
thc body (see Fig. 10-35C), or in both locations. On the body, the seborrheic changes
can be focal, multifocal, or generalized. The seborrheic changes predispose the animal to
secondary staphylococcal or Malassezia infections, which intensify the seborrheic signs.
and may be superficial (folliculitis) (see Fig. l0-37) or deep (furunculosis) (see Fig.
I0-43B and C). The pathogenic mechanism of this increased susceptibility to bacterial
a combination of both. In various laboratory animals, it has been reported that depletion
 of thyroid hormone results in impaired B-lymphocyte and T-lymphocyte functions.l1 Be-
cause hypothyroid dogs do not appear to be at risk for noncutaneous infections, the skin
infections in most dogs are probably due to a skin defect or alteration in local cutancous
 a  o sse  a sss s  rd ro o
H
FIGURE I0-35. A, Adrenal sex hormone imbalance, Note similarities to Figures 10-9E and 10-28F.
B, Hypothyroidism. Note symmetric truncal alopecia and hyperpigmentation. C, Hypothyroidism. Dull, dry.
tail. F, Hypothyroidism. Frictional hair loss of the distal limbs of a St, Bemard. C, Hypothyroidism, Truncal
hypotrichosis and alopecia with secondary superficial folicultis. H, Hypothyroidism. Nasal alopecia and hyperpig-
mentation, The area is cool to the touch
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases · 855
FIGURE 10-36. Ilypothyroidl.
ism.  Generalized myxedema in a
mongrel dog.
cyte blastogenesis to phytomitogens, respectively.11 The irmmunologic abnormalities return
to normal with T therapy. However, antibiotics are necessary to resolve the current
infection, whereas Ta therapy prevents further relapses. Some hypothyroid dogs experi-
ence a secondary Molassezia dermatitis in intertriginous areas or, less commonly, in a
generalized distribution, or they have Malassezia otiis externa.20 Some cases of adult-onset
When seborrhea, bacterial pyoderma, or Malassezia dermatitis are attributable to
canine hypothyroidism, pruritus may be considerable. Poor wound healing is probably
referable to defects in fbroblast function and collagen metabolism. Altered healing can be
 manifested by delayed healing of traumatic or surgical wounds or by the development of
excessive fbrous tissuc at points of minimal trauma. In the latter case, excessive scarring
can occur in areas of deep follicular infection, or the dog can have excessive calluses at
common pressure points and other less commonly affected areas such as the tuber
ischium.1, in Easy bruising may be associated with the collagen metabolism defects
 mentioned previously or with thrombasthenia and clotting factor defects that respond to
thyroid hormone therapy.35 48,101
FIGURE 10-37. Hypothyroidism.
Truncal alopecia with a secondary
superficial folliculitis.
856·Endocrine and Metabolie Diseases
FIGURE I0-38. Hypothyroidistm.
Facial hair loss and scaling.
 Other cutaneous signs commonly associated with hypothyroidism include hyperpig-
tation and lichenification are not specific for hypothyroidism, but reflect its chronicity.
Although comedones can be numerous on the ventral ahdomen of hypothyroid dogs, they
usually accompany sehorrheic changes on the trunk. In the absence of other seborrheic
changes, numerous comedones are more frequently associated with hyperadrenocorticisin
or sex hormone dermatoses. Because thyroid hormones help to regulate the production of
dernal glycosarminoglycans, hypothyroid dogs can accumulate hyaluronic acid in the der-
mis.41, 46 This accumulation of mucin can lead to myxedema, in which the skin is thick.
puffy (Fig. 10-36), and cool to the touch, or rarely mucinous vesiculation (see Fig. 10-
43D).20 The myxedematous changes are usually most pronounced on the face, where the
skin of the forehead, eyelids, and lips droops, producing a tragic facial expression (see Fig.
10-35D).
The veterinary literature includes large lists of noncutaneous abnormalities associated
with hypothyroidism. Aside from mental 'dullness, central nervous systein signs are rare
Figure 10-39.
.Hypothyroid-
isn. Hair loss on the head and ears.
Endocrinc and Metabolic Diseases · 857
FIGURE I0-40. Hypothyroidis.
Hair loss over the caudal dorsum.
in primary hypothyroidism and can be caused by atherosclerotic or myxedematous
can also affect the vessels in the heart,kidney, and gastrointestinal tract.i, 16 Signs can
include seizures, disorientation, circling, and coma. Myxedematous coma is of most con-
 pinschers, and precoma signs include severe mental depression, hypoventilation, bradycar-
various drugs, disease, or anesthesia.
Neuromuscular disorders can occur with or without cutaneous signs. Cranial nerve
abnormalities (head tilt, ataxia, facial palsy, and laryngeal paralysis), megaesophagus, unilat-
eral lameness, paraparesis, tetraparesis, and myopathy with weakness and atrophy have all
the problem, these changes may or may not be reversible with treatment.
FIGURE I0-41. 1lypothyroid
ism. Symmetric fank alopecia and
hyperpigmentation.
858 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
FIGURE I0-42. Hypertrichosis
in an Irish setter with hypothyroid-
ism,
 The most common gastrointestinal sign of hypothyroidism in humans, but not in dogs,
is constipation. In dogs, the most common gastrointestinal signs of hypothyroidlism are
hypothyroidism in dogs include bradycardia, weak apex beat, atherosclerosis, thronbosis,
and cardiac arrhythmias associated with cardiomyopathy.1, 2. 9, 101
Ocular abnormalitics that may be associated with canine hypothyroidism include cor-
neal lipidosis, cormeal ulceration, lipid aqueous fair, keratoconjunctivitis sicca, uveitis, and
retinopathy.1. 2, 48, 101, 113
Hypothyroid dogs can have mild nonregenerative anemia or an increased bleeding
tendency due to platelet dysfunctionl50 or clotting factor defects (see Fig. 10-43E).
Because Ta arnplifies production of factor VI1I and factor VII-related antigen, hypothy-
l01 ' g'aseas spueqm uoa im sop e u agod uoenso a usiom pnoa sin
The theory that hypothyroidism induces acquired von Willebrand's syndrome has largely
been discounted.108. 109
 Classic reproductive changes associated with hypothyroidism include infertility, altered
or absent estrous cycles, abortion, high puppy mortality, decreased spermatogenesis, and
testicular atrophy.2. 21 Gynecomastia and inappropriate galactorrhea can occur in up to
25% of intact, anestrous bitches and rarely in neutered fermale and male animals (Fig.
10-44).1 2 11.7 In these cases, the mammary changes are thought to be due to hyperpro-
lactinemia induced by elevated levels of TRH.37
 Renal lesions have been recognized in humans and laboratory animals with hypothy-
Hypothyroidism can exist singularly, occur intercurrently with another endocrine dis-
ease (eg, diahetes melitus),o be secondary to another endocrine disease (e.g, hyperad-
renocorticism)150 or be part of a polyglandular problems 13 In the latter case, diabetes
mellitus, hypoadrenocorticism, and thyroiditis occur simultaneously and are thought to
dominate. Because hypoadrenocorticism and diabetes melitus are causes of thyroid profle
irregularities in euthyroid dogs, thyroid testing should be postponed in these dogs until
the other conditions are rogulated. Satisfactory control of one problem (e.g., diabetes
 melitus) often neccssitates correction of the other intercurrent conditions.50
Congenital hypothyroidism has been reported in both purebred and mongrel
dogs.330.67.92Itmaybegoitousorngoitous.During thefstmnth f lif,th
 puppies are fairly normal, but abnormalities are recognized quickly thereafter. The dogs
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases · 859
FIGURE 10-43. A, Sevcrely hypothyroid black cocker spaniel, showing severe chronice otitis. B, Hypothyroidism.
Interdigital furunculosis is the only sign of disease. C, Hypothyroidism. Symmetric areas of furunculosis mimicking
F, Hypothyroidism.Photomicrograph showing vacuolated arreclor pili muscle.G, Hypothyroidism.Photomicrograph
showing myxedema. H, Traumatic dorsal hair loss and scaling in a hyperthyroid cat.
860 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
FIGURE I0-44. Hypothyroid-
isrn. Gymecormastia in a neutered fe-
male.
are sonnolent, mentally retarded, disproportionately dwarfed, and lame. Other signs aisc
are possible. Hair loss is not evident, but the coat is often different from that of the
 normal littermates. Early treatment is needed to prevent irreversible changes.
DIAGNOSIS
sis is exhaustive, as would be expected from a disease with such variable signs.14 Defini-
tive diagnosis necessitates thyroid biopsy but, because such testing is impractical, most
determinations, urinalysis, skin biopsy, and thyroid function tests. None of these tests is 
test is diagnostic, it is important to evaluate all test results in light of the patient's history
and physical examination results.
The hemogran classically reveals a normocytic, normochromic, nonregenerative ane-
 30% of cases.lo6 In addition, macrocytic and microcytic-hypochrormic anemias may occur in
canine hypothyroidism, possibly refecting defects in vitamin Bi and folic acid metabolism
 or iron metabolism, respectively. Leptocytosis may be prominent in the anemic hypothy-
roid dog.
Another classic laboratory finding in hypothyroidism is hypercholesterolemia (260 to
1000 mg/dl). 2, 45 101 However, serum cholesterol levels are greatly infuenced by diet,
can be elevated in other nonthyroid disorders, and are significantly elevated after a 24-
hour fast in only about 50% to 75% of cases. Serum cholesterol levels tend to be elevated
with severe degrees of thyroid failure. Analysis of serum lipids in lipemic hypothyroid dogs
at the origin, B,-lipoprotein, and α2-lipoprotein positions 32,136,145
Serum creatine kinase activity is mildly to markedly elevated in less than 50% of dogs
with hypothyroidism with or without concurent clinical myopathy,.101. 106 Other serum
enzyme leveis that may be mildly to markedlly elevated in hypothyroidism include lactate
dehydrogenase, aspartate transaminase, alanine transaminase, and alkaline phosphatasc
 levels. These elevations presumably result from the aforementioned hypothyroid myopathy
and from the degenerative hepatopathies (fatty infltration and cirrhosis) that may accom-
 pany canine hypothyroidism.
lymphocytie thyroiditis have had proteinuria and iminune complex glomerulonephritis.
    s r ro oa 
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases · 861
Skin biopsy in canine hypothyroidism may reveal many nondiagnostic changes consist-
ent with endocrinopathy (orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, epidermal atrophy, epidermal mel-
anosis, follicular keratosis, follicular dilatation, folicular atrophy, telogenization of hair
pathologic findings highly suggestive of hypothyroidism include vacuolated, hypertrophied
(  si  p    s s ed 
(see Fig. 10-43G), and a thick dermis. About 50% of the biopsy specimens from hypothy-
roid dog skin reveal variable degrees of infammation, refecting the common occurrence
of secondary seborrhea, bacterial pyoderma, or both.
Thyroid Testing
Except for thyroid biopsy, no one thyroid test is diagnostic for primary hypothyroidism.11 s
rate of metabolism, basal measureinents can be subject to a wide margin of error.
Function studies (TSH or TRH stimulation tests) test the thyroid's secretory capacity and
are most diagnostic but are not commonly used because of the expense and difficulty in
obtaining TSH or TRH. All test rcsults, including stimulation tests, must be evaluated
critically, and if the results do not correlate well with the history and physical examination
findings, the test should be repeated.78
Because stimulation tests are not available, basal measurerments of TT4, fT4, TT3,
fT3, and cTSH are the mainstay of testing. Because measurement of TTs and fT, has
limited value in the diagnosis of hypothyroidism, these hormones will be elininated from
the discussion.23.7,12 In the iterature prior to 1995,most studies defined a normal range
of values for TT4 or fT4 and evaluated their results based on this range.23. 7s. 100. 102. iis
 Dogs with values in or above the normal range were considered euthyroid, whereas those
with values below the lower limit of normal were not. These studies also reported their
data as raw numbers of dogs that were or were not considered euthyroid or hypothyroid
under the conditions of study. Both of these shortcoinings caused some inaccuracy in the
data.
Thyroid testing started to become popular in the late 1970s. In that era, statistical
methods rarely were used in clinical sturdies, so the range of normal presented for the
various thyroid tests was exactly that. The lower limit of normal was the lowest value
recorded in the population of normal dogs tested. In most cases, the number of dogs used
to develop the normal range was not available or was smail. Today, we know that large
numbers of observations are needed to statistically discriminate between two very similar
conditions and that means values ± l or 2 standard deviations are a more accurate way of
presenting the normal range of the data. Additionally, we know that raw data presentation
does not account for random Auctuations in the population and that calculation of the
test's sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, and negative predictive value is more
informative and accurate.
If one accepts the range of normal values for TT, fT4, or cTSH at their face value
and defines a hypothyroid dog as one with a TT4 or fT4 helow normal or a cTSH above
normal, significant error is introduced. For example, when 51 euthyroid dogs were evalu-
ated and the diagnosis of hypothyroidism was based on a subnormal TT4 or fT4 level, 20%
of the dogs would have been called hypothyroid.18 In that same study, 8% of the 24
hypothyroid dogs were called normal. In another study of 49 euthyroid dogs with skin
disease and 9 hypothyroid dogs, low TTx or fT, levels were defined as a value less than
the mean minus 2 standard deviations.2?3 With these stricter criteria, none of the euthyroid
dogs was considered hypothyroid. Three of the 9 hypothyroid dogs had a low Tf4 and 9
had a low fT4 level.'In all 9 of the hypothyroid dogs, diagnosis was correct if the
definition of hypothyroidism was based on a low TT4 or fT, level.
These and other studies indicate that we should request two or more thyroid tests for
each patient and that we must be critical in our evaluation of these tests. Values just
below normal are of unknown significance, and the accuracy of diagnosis increases as the
value minus 1 standard deviation) are not interpretable by themselves, and tests must be
862 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseascs
performed again at a later date or be evaluated with another thyroid hormone. If stimula-
tion tests become available again, data in the gray zone should be evaluated by that
testing.
To overcome shortcomings in sample size and account for random fuctuations in the
population, most current papers present the sensitivity and specificity data of the test in
    s    (       
questionable value in discriminating between normal and disease states because abnormal
values can be found in a significant percentage, in this case 25%, of normal individuals.
 Published sensitivity figures for TT levels vary from 89% to 100%; the specificity varies
from 75% to 82%.43 124 Figures for the sensitivity and specifcity of fT range from 80% to
98% and 92% to 94%, respectively.43. s9, 124 Lastly, the sensitivity and specificity data for
cTSH range from 63% to 87% and 75% to 93%, respectively.42,43 59,124 144 Obviously, no
One test is perfect, but a fT level by dialysis has the highest degree of accuracy for any
epileptic dogs or those taking other medications that can infuence hormone levels$953
Because immune-mediated thyroiditis is a common cause of hypothyroidism, measure-
ment of serum antithyroglobulin, anti-T3, or anti-T antibodies can be useful in document-
ing thyroiditis. In an evaluation of over 100,000 serum samples submitted for thyroid
profles, approximately 6% had autoantibodies.30 Approximately 5% had antibodies to T3,
0.3% had antibodies to T4, and 0.9% had both T and T4 autoantibodies. Approximately
y jo og de pr s pa  spa jo e ot 
roid dogs have normal levels; thus, this testing cannot be used to document hypothyroid.
ism.45 Additionally. these autoantibodies can interfere with the accurate measurement of
TTa or TT..8o Although the dog has the clinical signs of hypothyroidism, its TT; or TT4 is
a aq a shop as u a rii a r proy aun on po kisnds 
FunctionStudies
The TSH stimulation test is vastly superior to the determination of basal serum TT, fT4,
or cTSH levels for the diagnosis of hypothyroidism. Unfortunately, the TSH of bovine
origin that was used in this testing is not available in many parts of the world. Recombi-
nant human TsH stimulates the dog's thyroid gland when given intravenously at doses of
50 μg or greater.l41 However, this product is extremely expensive, which precludes
its regular use. If bovine TSH is available, samples are collected hefore and 4 or
6 hours after the subcutaneous or intravenous administration of 0.1 IU/kg or l IU/
dog.27,78,102,1618Because reconstituted TSHmaintains its potency when frozen in th
divided and frozen so the largest nurmber of animals can be tested.
Traditionally, euthyroidism was diagnosed when the post-TSH TT4 value was at least
double the basal level. With this system, approximately 30% of euthyroid dogs can be
called hypothyroid and approximately 50% of hypothyrcid dogs are called normal.1s It is
more appropriate to base normalcy on either a rise in the post-TSH TT. to some
 predetermined value or an increase of at least some predetermined amount. Specific
values for the end point of normalcy or the rise expected in norinal dogs vary with the
laboratory and the amount of TSH used. When one investigator used the 1.4 μg/dl rise
suggested in another studys2 rather than the 1.9 μg/dl figure suggested by the testing
laboratory, diagnosis was incorrect in 4 of 75 dogs.lis Accordingly, test results must always
be interpreted in light of the norinal values developed by the testing laboratory.
A TSH (or TRH) stimulation test performed on a dog that is receiving thyroid
functionlo5 thedrug must ewithdrawn for accurate testing.Most dogs can be accurately
tested after a 30-day withdrawal period, but approximately 20% of dogs are still under the
infuence of the drug 0 An 8-week withdrawal is satisfactory in all dogs.
 The TRH stimulation test was developed as a less expensive and consistently available
altermative to the TSH stimulation test.sf Unfortunately, the test has not lved up to its
expectation and is of little diagnostic value.1 Serum TT4 levels are determined before and
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases · 863
6 hours after the IV injection of 0.2 or 0.05 1ng/kg (maximum, 1 mg)s1. 165 of TRH. The
post-TRH TT4 level in normal dogs should increase by 0.4 μg/dl or more or be at least
112 times greater than the basal value.1. 2. s 102 Although TRH testing in normal dogs
gives good results, its accuracy in hypothyroid dogs often is not satisfactory.51
The diagnosis of hypothyroidism, as well as the distinction between primary and
secondary hypothyroidism, can be based on thyroid biopsy.6 Radioiodine uptake studies
of hypothyroidism, it can be unreliable. The metabolie effects of thyroid hormones may
produce varying degrees of improvement in symptoms such as lethargy, depression, and
obesity, regardiess of their cause. In addition, thyroid hormone administration may pro-
duce varying degrees of hair growth in normal dogs and hair regrowth in dogs with
numerous dermatoses that are unrelated to hypothyroidism.61 However, thc instituition of
n  e s o eq pe s got  u yd ps  jo u
therapeutic dose of levothyroxine for a 1month will be significantly abovc normal. This
Imarkedly elevated post-pill TTa level does not guarantcc the cuthyroid state but should
 prompt the clinician to carefully cvaluate the case before continuing the treatment.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
After treatment of primary hypothyroidism has been started, it is continued for the
remainder of the patient's life.
In most cases, oral levothyroxine (T) is the drug of choice for hypothyroidism.
Various treatment regimens can be found in the veterinary literature, but most suggest
either once- or twice-daily administration of 0.02 mg/kg to a maximum daily dosage of
decreases when multiple treatments are needed each day, it is ideal to administer the T4
once daily. When 12 thyroidectonized dogs were treated with 0.04, 0.02, or 0.01 mg/kg
of levothyroxine either once or divided twice daily, variability in drug absorption and
elimination was noted among the dogs.97 Twice-daily administration resulted in drug
daily show signs of toxicity. Because of the rapid metabolic tumover rate of T4 (10 to 16
a pareu pue na an uro undose duou rsury u sep  sap ui snu
excretion, signs of overdosing are very uncommon at the typical therapeutic dosages and
include anxiety, panting, polydipsia, polyuria, polyphagia, diarrhea, tachycardia, heat intol.
Ultimately, the accuracy of any clinical diagnosis is proven by a positive response to a
specific treatment. Although some euthyroid dogs experience temporary improvement in
dermatologic signs of hypothyroidism confirms the accuracy of the diagnosis. If the diag-
nosis of hypothyroidism is based on an cvaluation with ncar 100% sensitivity and specific-
ity, treatment can bc startcd on a oncc-daily basis and clinical response can be expected.
The question remains as to the best treatment protocol for the cases where thyroid testing
cannot be performed, is inconclusive, or may be confounded by intercurrent disease or
tration, response to treatment will be incomplete and the accuracy of the diagnosis comes
under question. To avoid this problem, it is best to start treatinent on a twice-daily basis.
If the diagnosis was correct, the dog will return to normal with the Ta suppleinentation.
Once the expected response occurs, the frequency or administration can be rcduced to
  o s sis  ae  s   osn e  s o  g
this modification, twice-daily treatments are nceded.
864 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
Although no studies have used levothyroxine from different manufacturers in the
same dogs, data suggest that bioavailability does vary with the product used. Accordingly.
the veterinary clinician should select an effective product and use it to the exclusion of all
 others. Because the clinician has little control over what product a pharmacy catering to
humans dispenses, prescriptions for levothyroxine should not be written.
  s p  s o p  a j 
rectable with treatnent. Some lesions (e.g., scars over pressure points) do not disappear
entirely, but new ones should not develop. Dogs with atitudinal abnormalities (e.g.
lethargy, depression) respond rapidly (within 2 to 4 weeks) to levothyroxine therapy.
Hesponse in the skin is slower, and the owner must be told to administer the drug for at
least 3 months. Initial skin changes usually do not become apparent for approximately 4
weeks. Unless warned of this slow response time, many owners stop treatment after a
Jo squou  on g Aq os Apeu no reuou ane saop ison 'poad s um papuodsan
treatment, but it can take longer to regrow the long-flowing coat of some breeds such as
the Afghan hound.
Dogs with cardiac disease experience a change in cardiac function with treatment and
should be started on lower doses of levothyroxine; otherwise, heart failure may be precipi-
tated.10 The following protocol for levothyroxine is recommended: 0.005 mg/kg every 12
hours for 2 weeks, then 0.01 mg/kg every 12 hours for 2 weeks, then 0.015 mg/kg every
12 hours for 2 weeks, then up to routine maintenance dosage. In addition, patients with
concurrent hypoadrenocorticism should not be treated for hypothyroidism until their
adrenal insuffciency is corrected and stabilized with medication.Thyroid hormone therapy
can also necessitate altered doses of insulinll2 and certain anticonvulsants (phenytoin and
phenobarbital) in cases being managed with those agents.48
Liothyronine (T) may also be used to treat canine hypothyroidism but is rarely
indicated.1. 2 102 It should be given orally at 4 to 6 μg/kg every 8 hours, thus necesstating
more frequent administration and greater expense.
of IV administration of levothyroxine or oral liothyronine by gastric tube, mechanical
and passive rewarming.87a
The reasons for therapeutic failure with thyroid hormones are multiple. The most
common reasons are incorrect diagnosis, failure to recognize other intercurrent endocri-
nopathies (e.g., hypothyroidism in a dog with a sex hormone imbalance), and insuffcient
therapy (e.g., insufficient course of treatment, wrong dosage, wrong frequency of adminis-
clinician has determined that the corect dosage of an appropriate medication was dis-
pensed and that the clients are administering the medication appropriately, post-pill
testing is the next step in determining why the dog's response was poor.
In dogs, TT. levels peak 4 to 6 hours after oral administration of levothyroxine and
decline thereafter.96 With thie adininistration of a satisfactory dose of an absorbable prod-
uct, the TT4 level should be within the normal range at 4 to 6 hours. Values at or slightly
above the upper limit of normal are expected.5s Dogs given the medication once daily
If the peak TT4 valuc is too high or low, dosage adjustments are necessary. The adequacy
of a new dosage must be determined by additional post-pill testing in 2 to 4 weeks.
 Because the half-life of T4 can vary from dog to dog, an adequate peak value in a dog
receiving once-daily treatment does not necessarily guarantee that normal levels are main-
tained during the entire 24-hour period. If this dog's response is poor or incomplete, a
24-hour post-pill TT4 value should be evaluated. If that TT4 is well below normal, the
 single dose must be increased or the dog should be treated twice daily.
 Dogs with autoantibodies to T4 cannot be monitored by conventional post-pill testing
because the autoantibodies interfere with the TT4 assay. In these cases, free T4 can be
 s e h n  q ose  s H su g on  iu pu po 
within the norimal range with appropriate T4 replacement therapy. Because some hypothy-
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases · 865
roid dogs do not have elevated TSH levels and TT4 levels may be too high despite normal
TSH levels, monitoring via TSH levels is least desirable.
 Post-pill testing is unnecessary in dogs that show a satisfactory response to treatment
that point is indicated. Hypothyroid dogs rarely show clinical signs of overdosage when
they are given 0.02 mg/kg of levothyroxine twice daily. If signs occur, post-pill testing
should be performed immediately. ff the TT value is greaty eievated above normal
levels, the diagnosis of hypothyroidism must be questioned. Moderate elevations above
normal levels indlicate overdosage and suggest that the half-life of levothyroxine may be
longer in this dog. Some investigators decrease the dosage but maintain the twice-daily
administration, whereas other researchers reduce treatment to once daily. Too few dogs
are recognized with this problem to allow for specific recommendations.
When normal dogs are given levothyroxine, their responsiveness to TSH decreases
after 4 weeks of treatment and continued treatment results in increased unresponsiveness
and histologic evidence of thyroid inactivity 104. 105 Although unproved, clinical evidence
suggests that unnecessary administration of levothyroxine for long periods eventually in-
duces a secondary hypothyroidism, necessitating lifelong replacement therapy.
primary hypothyroidism. Dietary iodine deficiency is corrected by supplementing dogs
with dietary iodine at 34 μg/kg/day and cats with 100 μg/day.11
Feline Hypothyroidism
 Other than congenital hypothyroidism, naturally occurring spontaneous hypothyroidism has
been documented in only one cat.12s
CLINICAL FEATURES
Signs of congenital hypothyroidism in cats are similar to signs in the dog.19, 74, 122, 142, 148
The kittens are born normal, but are obviously different from their littermates by 4 to 6
weeks of age. Affected cats have a decreased rate of growth, with stunting. and become
 Although they have full haircoats, the coat is dull and dry and has fewer primary hairs
than norrmal. Unless treatment is instituted soon after signs begin, death can ocur within
2 weeks. In one cat colony, autoimmune thyroiditis with an autosomal recessive mode of
inheritance was documented.142
When experimental adult cats underwent thyroidectomy by radiation and were fol.
lowed for 96 weeks, the systemic and cutaneous signs were far different from those in
hypothyroid dogs.153 Clinically, the cats were initialy lethargic but returned to normal
 a e s   r e   on s s
groomed less than normal, which resulted in dorsal matting and seborrhea, and experi-
enced alopecia of the pinnae, pressure points, and dorsal and lateral tail base region. With
the sensitivity of the cat's thyroid axis to iodine levels,1l iodine depletion can cause
clinical signs. Experimentally deprived cats exhibited cutaneous changes more typical of
the dog.'5 The coats became dry with easily epilated hairs, and symmetric alopecia
developed on the lateral neck, the thorax, and the abdomen. The skin was dry, scaly, and
thickened.
 The cat with spontaneous adult-onset hypothyroidism resembled dogs with that dis-
ease,12s The cat was lethargic, thermophilic, inappetent, and obese. The cat's face was
puffy and the coat was dull, dry, seborrheic, and lighter in color than normal (Fig.
10-45). Hair regrowth at clipped sites was poor. The diagnosis was confirmed by TSH
response test and thyroid biopsy.
DIAGNOSIS
 Because naturally occurring acquired hypothyroidism is so rare in cats, no data exist on
the diagnostic value of hemograms, chemistry profles, and other tests uscd in the dog.
866· Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
FIGURE I0-45. Hair loss andl sealing in a cat with
spontaneous hypothyroidism. (From Rand JS. et al:
Spontaneous adult-onset hypothyroidism in a cat. J Vet
Interm Med 7:272, 1993.)
S e e s   e e s ro sa  e  s sd s
are low until 5 weeks of age,167 As in the dog, isolated measurement of TT4 has very poor
discriminating value in the diagnosis of feline hypothyroidism. Cats with common nonthy-
roidal illnesses such as diabetes mellitus, livcr disease, or renal disease have TT4 values
detection of hypothyroidism, In one study, fT4 valucs were not decreased in cats with
nonthyroidal illness.3
When either 1 IU/cat or 1 IU/kg of TSH is given intravenously, TT4 levels peak at 6
hours. TTs and fT4 levels peak at 7 hours. Total T4 levels should 'double and fT4 values
should triple in euthyroid cats.70. 146 When 0.1 mg/cat of TRH is given intravenously, TT4
 and fT, levels peak at 4 hours and increase onefold and twofold, respectively. Vorniting at
the injection of TRH occurred in 4 of 13 cats.146
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Appropriate doses of thyroid hormones for cats have not been studied in detail. Cats
bilateral thyroidectomized for hyperthyroidism typicaly receive between 0.05 to 0.2 mg
of levothyroxine every 24hours or 30 μg of liothyronine every 8hours.148 1sThese doses
should be adequate for cats with congenital or acquired bypothyroidism. The cat with
 spontaneous adult-onset disease was given 0.1 mg every 24 hours and returned to normal
status after 3months of treatment.Typical of dogs, constitutional changes were noted
 after 1 week of treatment, whereas skin changes started about week 6 of treatment.
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases · 867
FIGURE 10-46. Overgrown claws
in a hyperthyroid cat.
Feline Hyperthyroidism
Hyperthyroidism and diabetes mellitus are the most common endocrine disorders of the
cat.1. 2. 15a The cause of feline hyperthyroidism is usually a solitary thyroid adenoma or
cal signs are due to an accelerated basal metabolic rate and increased sensitivity to
catecholamines.
 Feline hyperthyroidism occurs in older cats, 6 to 20 years of age, with no apparent
breed or sex predilections. Common clinical signs include polyphagia, polydipsia, polyuria,
weight loss, hyperactivity, tachycardia, vomiting, and diarrhea.i54 Cutaneous abnormalities
occur in approximately 30% of cases and include excessive shedding and matting of the
haircoat,
focal or symmetric alopecia associated with excessive grooming (see Fig.
10-43H), increased rate of claw growth (Fig. 10-46), dry or greasy seborrhea, thin skin,
and peripheral arteriovenous fistula.1. 2 i54 In chronic cases, there is complete truncal
alopecia with thin, hypotonic skin, mimicking hyperadrenocorticism (Fig. 10-47).11
 Diagnosis is based on history, physical exarnination findings, and elevated basal TT ,
fT4, or TT, levels. Common biochemical abnormalities in hyperthyroid cats include ele-
FIGURE I0-47. Tnucal hair
loss with thin hypotonic skin in a
chronically hyperthyroid cat.
868 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseascs
aspartate transaminase. More than 50% of hyperthyroid cats have TT4 levels that overlap
those of normal cats.57 In these cases, hyperthyroidism can be diagnosed by fT4 measure-
increased in nonthyroidal disease, fT4 should always be evaluated with the TT4.115. 123 The
T3 suppression test involves the oral administration of 15 to 25 μg of liothyronine every 8
hours for seven doses.57. 129 A sample for TT4 and fT4 determinations is taken before the.
medication administration is started and then 2 to 4 hours after the seventh dose.
Hyperthyroid cats show little or no change in their TT4 or fT4 levels, whereas euthyroid
cats show a 50% reduction in TT and fT4 values. Hyperthyroid cats show no change in
TT4 levels after TRH administration.57
Therapy includes surgical excision, radioactive iodine treatment,po and the adminis-
tration of antithyroid drugs (methimazole, carbimazole, stable iodine, and calcium ipo-
date).94,155
Diabetes Mellitus
 In human beings, diabctes mellitus is associated with a number of dermatologic disorders,
including yascular complications (microangiopathy and atherosclerosis), necrobiosis lipoid-
ica, granuloma annulare, scleredema, fbrovascular papillomas, yellw nails, rubeosis, bac-
terial and fungal infections, diabetic neuropathy, pruritus, idiopathic bullac, alopccia,
xanthomatosis, and poor wound healing.46 Up to 30% of humans with diabetes mellitus
experience a skin disorder that is either an early indicator of undiagnosed diabetes or a
complication of known diabetes. In dogs and cats, skin lesions have been reported to
The most common dermatologic manifestations of diabetes mellitus in dogs and cats
appcar to be bacterial pyoderma (Fig. 10-48A), seborrheic skin discase (sec Fig. 10-
48B), thin and hypotonic skin, and varying degrees of alopecia (Fig. 10-49). The thin,
hypotonic skin, with or without alopecia, probably results from protein catabolisrm. The
d   d si s rs p  a s s
catabolism and abnormal lipid metabolism.
 Diabetics are predisposed to infections, particularly those caused by coagulase-positive
staphylococci and Candida spp.11 436, 41 This susceptibility appears to be due to abnormal
ities in neutrophil chemotaxis, phagocytosis, intracellular killing, and cell-mediated (T-cell)
Rarely, pruritus vulvae, xanthomatosis, and necrobiosis lipoidica have been reported in
cats with naturally occurring and megestrol acetate -induced diabetes mellitus.
Necrolytic Migratory Erythema
Necrolytic migratory erythema is a term coined to describe the skin rash in humans with
a glucagon-secreting pancreatic tumor (glucagonoma) or, rarely, hepatic cirrhosis and
 other miscellaneous gastrointestinal disorders. The rash has been recognized in dogs and
-r s  o a o s u s    
neous syndrome,11 430, 42, 43 superficial necrolytic dermatitis,4 433 and metabolic epidernal
necrosis44.47 are commonly used to describe the same condition. However, epidermal
necrosis and necrolysis are not features of this disorder.
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
The skin lesions in necrolytic migratory erythema are due to degeneration of the keratino-
cytes, which results in laminar high-level epidermal edema and degeneration. The specifc
*See references 1, 2, 11, 17, 424, 446, 455.
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases·869
G
H
FIGURE I0-48. A, Diabetes mellitus. Severe facial bacterial pyoderma B, Diabetcs nelitus. Hypotrichosis with
tic migratory erythema. Serotal ulccration and crusting. F, Necrolytic migratory crythema. Intact and crusted vesicu-
lar lesions. G, Xanthomas of the hock region in a cat. (Courtesy of K, Helton.) H, Xanthomas uf the pads of a cat.
(Courtesy of D. Chester.)
870 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
FIGURE I0-49. Diabctcs mellitus
in a cat. Abdominal hair loss.
cause of the degeneration is unknown but probably results from cellular starvation or
some other nutritional imbalance. Cutaneous hypoaminoacidemia or deficiencies in biotin,
essential fatty acids, or zinc have been proposed.433.442.43 These nutritional deficiencies
result from metabolic abnormalities caused by hyperglucagonemia, liver dysfunction, or
combinations of these.
n    n e si a    
producing islet cell tumor of the pancreas. Successful resection of the tumor corrects the
metabolic irregularities associated with the hyperglucagonemia, and the eruption heals
association with hepatic cirrhosis and its associated hyperglucagonemia, pancreatitis, celiac
Approximately 75 cases of necrolytic migratory erythema in dogs are reported in the
veterinary literature, and only five (6.7%) have had a documented pancreatic tumor. The
remainder of patients have hepatic disease that is well characterized ultrasonographically
and histologically. Although the hepatopathy occasionally has been associated with the in-
gestion of mycotoxins or anticonvulsant medications, its cause in most dogs is unknown.50
Dogs with glucagonomas typically have elevated plasa glucagon levels23 44, 451. 42 whereas
those with hepatic disease most often do not. The inability to. consistently document
hyperglucagonemia in the liver group probably relates to the highly efficient extraction of
glucagon from the plasma by the liver.450 The one case reported in the cat was associatcd
with a pancreatic tumor.47
CLINICAL FEATURES
Necrolytic migratory erythema is typically seen in old dogs.433 442, 43, 454 No consistent
breed predisposition has been identified. Skin disease is the presenting complaint in most
dogs, although the eruption occasionally develops after the recognition of systemic illness,
especially the polyuria and polydipsia associated with diabetes mellitus.43 Skin lesions
occur in areas of trauma, especially the muzzle, mucocutaneous areas of the face (see Fig
10-48C), distal limbs, and footpads (see Fig. 10-48D). Lesions can also be in the mouth,
on the pinnae, on the external genitalia (see Fig. 10-48E), on the elbows and hocks, and
along the ventrum. Most lesions are crusted with subjacent erosion or ulceration, but
intact vesicular lesions (see Fig. 10-48F) occur occasionally.
Routine laboratory evaluation of most dogs usually shows normocytic, normochromic,
   s      
 enzymes, especially serum alkaline phosphatase and alanine aminotransferase; and hypoal-
Endocrine and Mctabolic Diseases · 871
huminemia.44 Dogs with liver disease have increased sulfobronophthalein retention or
gnomonic *honeycomb” patterm on ultrasound evaluation of the liver 45o Antinuclear anti-
body titers can be postive3.4 In contrast, dogs with pancrcatic tumors typically show no
biochemical abnormalities other than hypoalbuminemia. The liver is normal by palpation
and ultrasonography. Utrasonographic identification of the pancreatic mass is extremcly
 na rd a  s ssn  r 
trations, and elevated insulin concentrations.4a3
 The one case reported in the cat occurred in an ll-year-old with a short history of
allorexia,
depression, and skin disease.447 The initial skin lesions involved the axillae,
proximal front limbs, and dorsurn. With time, the ventrum, lateral thorax, and groin
became involved. The dorsal skin was thickened and covered with adherent white scales,
whereas the lesions elsewhere were exudative, alopecic, and reddened. Clinical biochemi-
cal abnormalities were nonspecific, and none of the alterations typical in the dog was
 present. At necropsy, the liver was enlarged and a large pancreatic carcinoma was present
 at the junction of the left and right lobes.
DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnostic considerations in the dog include pemphigus foliaceus, systemic
lupus erytheinatosus, zine deficiency, and generic dog food dermatosis. If the laboratory
evaluation is perforined before skin biopsy, all differential diagnostic considerations except
systemie lupus erythernatosus can be excluded because dogs with pemphigus foliaceus,
zinc deficiency, and generic dog food dermatosis rarely have the abnormalities described.
 If all cases in the cat resemble the one reported, the differential diagrosis should include
the exfoliative dermatitis associated with thymoma, FeLV- or FIV-associated dermatitis,
pemphigus foliaceus, or acquired skin fragility syndrome with secondary bacterial follicu-
litis.
Cytologic examination of the vesicular fluid reveals complete acellularity in this disor
der, whereas inflammatory cells occur in the other differential diagnostic conditions. Skin
biopsy of early lesions shows diffuse parakeratotic hyperkeratosis, with high-level confuent
vacuolation of keratinocytes resulting in a band of upper-level epidermal edema (Figs.
10-50 and 10-51)4, 433 Dermal changes are usually mininal and include superficial
edema and a perivascular accumulation of lynphocytes and plasma cells. Chronic lesions
rarely show the epidermal edema and havc inarked parakeratotic hypcrkeratosis, epider-
Imal byperplasia, and surface crusting. Chronic lesions may have a superficial interstitial to
lichenoid infammatory infiltrate. Bacteria, derrmatophytes, or yeast may be visible in the
superficial keratin layer.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Necrolytic migratory erythema is a cutancous marker for a serious internal disease with a
short survival time. One study showed that most dogs died or were euthanized within 5
months of the development of skin lesions.443 Cases due to an identifiable glucagonoma
should be treated surgicaily. Because dogs with necrolytic migratory erythema oftcn have
subclinical pancreatis, surgery can be dificult with a signifcant risk of postoperative
complications.432 Although too few cases have been reported, glucagonomas in dogs ap-
return the dog to normal for an extended but not indefinite period of tine. One of us
(W.H.M.) administered sornatostatin (6 μg/kg subcutaneously q8h) to a dog with a meta-
static tumor, and the skin lesions vastly improved within l4 days. Because of real
dysfunction and the high cost of the somatostatin ($100 per day), the treatments were not
continued and thc dog was euthanized.
Dogs with liver disease are more problematic. Treatment with corticosteroids usually
inproves the skin lesions but eventually precipitates a diabetic crisis54 Unless thehepato-
pathy is associated with mycotoxin ingestion, anticonvulsant medications, or some other
872 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
FIGURE I0-50. Canine necrolytie migratory erythema. Marked edema of thc upper one half of
cpidernis with diffuse parakeratotic hyperkeratosis.
FIGURE 10-5 1. Close-up of Figure 10-50. Marked interecllular and intracllular edlema with 
parakeratotic hyperkeratosis.
Endocrine and Metabolie Diseases · 873
FIGURE I0-52. Feline xanthoma. Typical xanthoma cells
resolvable condition, the animal cannot be cured. Because the skin lesions have a nutri
tional basis, supplementation can be of some henefit. The forimula used most widely was
developed at the University of Californias and consists of high-quality protein (1 egg
yolk/4.5 kg), a zinc supplement (eg., zinc sulfate: 10 mg/kg/day), and a fatty acid supple-
ment. If there is any clinical or biochemical evidence of pancreatitis, pancreatic enzymes
can be added. Although amino acid hypcralimentation should be beneficial, it is very
  si d e o e f oq s  qu   
commercially available large animal product (Aminosyn, Abbott) and administer 500 ml/
dog over 6 to 8 hours.449 Because the supplementation does not address the underlying
hepatopathy, the disease progresses and eventuaily results in the animal's death.
Xanthomas
 Xanthornas are benign granulomatous lesions associated with an abnormality in lipid
metabolisrn. Xanthomatosis has been reported in cats with presumed hereditary hyperlipo-
proteinemia.429. 431 43s No reports of xanthomatosis in Miniature schnauzers with hyperlip-
idemia have been presented. Cases of apparently idiopathic xanthomas have been reported
in the cat.427 429Most cases of xanthomatosis in dogs42 and cats17. 437. 40 have been
associated with the feeding of high-fat foods or treatss or with naturally occurring or
drug-induced (megestrol acetate) diabetes mellitus.145
Lesions consist of multiple whitish or yellow papules, nodules, or plaques, which may
be ulcerated (see Fig. I0-48G and H). The surrounding skin is erythematous, and the
 lesions can be painful or pruritic. The head, distal extremities, feet, and bony prominences 
are typically involved.
Histopathologically, there is a nodular to diffuse infltration of foamy macrophages and
   r  s a   o  
often prorminent throughout the affected dermis. Granulomatous infammation and fbro-
plasia may also occur.
Lesions associated with diabetes mellitus or hyperlipoproteinemia resolve spontane-
ously with resolution of the underlying problem. Surgical removal without correction of
dy odoi  sm u as'ssde un snsar nn ono  
874 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
demia and xanthomatosis,431 feeding a low-fat cominercial diet (Prcscription Diet canine
r/d [Hill's]) resulted in complete clinical remission within 30 days. New lesions developed
 each time a regular commercial cat food was given for even a short period of tine.
Minoxidil in Canine Alopecia
Minoxidil is a vasodilator that has been used topically or orally to treat pcople with
How, have direct effects on keratinocytes (prolong life in culture, stimulate differentiation,
and increase mitotic activity of matrix cells), and suppress lymphocyte-mediated immuno-
logic phenomena.
When neonatal descendants of Mexican hairless dogs were treated topically with 3%
minoxidil daily for l month, all dogs grew hair.43a Application to adult dogs of this
breeding resulted in no hair growth. Other dogs with alopecia of undetermined cause
have been treated with minoxidil.425, 435 In the most detailed study,135 all dogs had bilater-
 ally symmetric alopecia isolated to the fank or dorsal lurmbar regions, and all dogs were
breeds (Boxer, Doberman pinscher, Staffordshire bull terrier, and Airedale terTier) prone
to folicular dysplasia, some cases of which are seasoually recurrent (see Chaps. 10 and
11). Dogs were treated with 0.1 to 0.5 mg/kg of minoxidil given orally every 24 hours. Of
12 dogs studied, 4 had a good response, 2 had a partial response, 4 had no response, and
2 dogs spontaneously regrew their hair before treatment could be given. These data are
diffcult to interpret and could all be explained by a spontaneously waxing and waning
follicular dysplasia. In addition, 50% of the treated dogs experienced moderate to severe
 side effects, including weakness, lethargy, and collapse. We do not recommend the use of
oral minoxidil in dogs at this tine.
● References
General References
adrenal and thyroid function tests in healthy dogs.
1. Chastain CB, Canjam VK: Clinical Endocrinology of
Am J Vet Res 48:458, 1987.
Companion Animals. Lea & Febiger, Philadcliphia.
l1. Muller and Kirk's Small Animal Dermatology, 5th cd.
1986.
W.B. Saumders Co., Philadelplia, 1995.
 2. Feldman EC, Nclson RW: Canine and Feline Endo-
12. Quadri SK, Palazzolo DL: flow aging affects the ca-
crinology and Reproduetion, 2nd ed. W.B. Saunders
nine endocrine system. Vet Med 86:692, 1991.
Co., Philadelphia, 1996.
13.Reimers TJ, et al: Changes in serum thyroxine and
3. Greco DS: Endocrine emergencies. Part I: Arenal,
cortisol in dogs after sinultaneous injection of "TSII
thyroid, and parathyroid lisorders. Conp Cont Educ
and ACTH. I Am Anim IIosp Assoe 18:923, 1982.
19:27, 1997.
14. Rosycluk RAw: Cutaneous manifestations of endo-
4. Gross TL, et al: Veterinary Dermatopathology. Moshy
crine dlisease in dogs. Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet
Year Book, St. Louis, 1992.
20:287,1998.
 5. Hess RS, Ward CR: Dialhetes mellitus, byperadreno-
15. Scott 1Dw: Feline dermatology 1900-1978: A mono-
corticisn, and hypothyroidism in a dog. J Am Anim 
graph. J An Anim Hosp Assoc 16:331, 1980.
IHosp Assoc 34:204, 1998.
16. Scott Dw: Histopathologie fndings in the endocrine
6. Kemppainen Rj, et al: Endocrine responses of normal
skin disorders of the dog J A Aniru Hosp Assoc 18:
cats to TSH and symtheic ACTH administration.
73,1982.
J Am Anirn Hosp Assoc 20:737, 1984.
17. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1979-1982: Introspec-
7.Kooistra HS, et al: Polyglandular deficiency syndrome
tive retrospections. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:537,
in a boxer dog: Thyroid hormone and glucocorticoid
1984.
deficiency. Vei Q 17:59, 1995.
8. Meij BP, et al: Assessrment of a combined anterior
Thyroid Physiology and Disease
pituitary function test in beagle dogs: Rapid sequen-
18. Ahsan MK, et al: Irnmunohistochemical localization of
tial intravenous administratiomn of four hypothalamic
thyroid hormone nuclcar receptors in human hair fol.
rclcasing hormones. Dom Anim Endocrinol 13:161.
licles and in citro effecl of l-iriodothyroninc on cul-
1996.
tured cell of hair follicles and skin. j Med lnvcst 44:
9. Meij BP, et al: Thyroid-stimulating hormone re-
179, 1998.
sponses after single administration of thyrotropin-
19. Armold U, ct al: Goitrous hypothyroidism and dwarf.
releasing hormone and combined administration of
 ism in a kitten. J Am Anim ffosp Assoc 20:735, 1984.
20. Beale KM: Iermatologic maunifestations of hypothy.
Dam Anim Endocrinol 13:465, 1996.
roidisn. In: Hypothyroidism: Diagnosis and Clinical
10. Moriello KA, et al: Determination of thyroxine, trio-
Manifestations. Daniels Pharmaceuticals, St. Peters-
 dothyronine, and cortisol changes during simultaeous
burg, 1993, p 16.
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases · 875
 21. Beale KM, et al: Correlation of racing and reproduc-
Autoantikorpem gegen Thycoglobulin. Tierarztl Prax
tive performance in Greyhouncls with response to thy
25:170, 1997.
roid function testing. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 28:263,
41. Delverdier M, et al: Les mucinoses cutanees du chien
1992,
et du chat: Etude histologique et histochimique 
22. Beale KM, et al: Prevalence of antithyroglobulin anti-
partir de 106 cas. Rev Med Vet 146:33, 1995.
 bodies detected by enzyme-linked immunosorbcnt as-
42.
say of canine scrum. J An Vet Med Assoc 196:745,
thyrotropin (cTSH) concentrations with bovine TSH
0661
response test results in euthyroid and hypothyroid
23. Beale KM, et al: Serum thyroid hormone concentra-
dogs. Proc Annu Meet Am Coll Vet Intem Med 15:
tions and thyrotropin responsiveness in dogs with
668, 1997.
generalized dermatologic disease. J Am Vet Med As-
43. Dixon RM, Mooney CT: Fvaluation of seruin free
soc 201:1715, 1992.
thyroxinc and thyrotropin concentrations in the diag-
 24. Beale KM, et al: Comparison of two doses of aqueous
nosis of canine hypothyroidism. J Smal Anim Pract
bovine thyrotropin for thyroid function testing in
40:72, 1999.
dogs. J An Vet Med Assoc 197:865, 1990.
44. Dixon RM, et al: Serum thyrotropin concentrations: A
25. Behrend EN, et al: Effect of storage conditions on
new diagnostic test for canine hypothyroidism. Vet
cortisol, total thyroxine, and frcc thyroxine concentra-
Ree 138:594, 1996.
tioms in serum and plasma of dogs. J Am Vet Med
45. Dixon RM, Mooney CT: Canine serurm thyroglohulin
Assoc 212:1564, 1998.
autoantibxdies in health, hypothyroidism, and nonthy-
26. Benjamin SA, et al: Association between lymphocytic
roidal illness. Res Vet Sci 66:243, 1999.
thyroiditis, hypothyroidism, and thyroid neoplasia in
45a. Dixon RM, et al: Epidermiological, clinical, haeinato-
beagles. Vet Pathol 33:486, 1996.
logical and biochemical characteristics of canine hypo-
 27. Bichsel P, et al: Neurologic manifestations associated
thyroidism. Vet Rec 145:48l, 1999.
with hypothyroidism in four dogs. J Am Vet Med
46. Doliger S, et al: Histochemical study of cutaneous
Assoc 192:1745, 1989.
1       s
28. Brent BA, Hershman IM: Thyroxine therapy in pa-
47. Engler D, Burger AG: The deiodination of the io-
tients with severe nonthyroidal illnesses and low thy-
 dothyronines and of their derivatives in inan. Endo-
roxine concentration. J Clin Endocrinol Metah 63:1,
crinol Rev 5:151, 1984.
48. Ferguson DC: An intermal medical perspcctivc of hy-
1986.
 29. Bruner JM, et al: Effect of bme of sample collection
pothyroidism.  In: Hypothyroidism: Diagnosis and
in serum thyroid-stimulating hormone concentrations
Clinical Manifestabions. Danicls Pharmaccuticals, St.
p  u I shop pooy pe pia u
Petershurg, 1993, p 2.
49. Ferguson DC, Hoenig M: Reexamination of dosage
Assoc 212:1572, 1998.
 30. Bruyette DS, et al; Effect of thyrotropin storage on
reginens for l-thyroxine (T4) in the dog: Bioavailabil-
ity and persistence of TSH suppression. Proc Annu
thyroid-stimulating hormone response testing in nor-
Meet Am Coll Vet Intern Med 13:668, 1997.
mal dogs. J Vet Interm Med 1:91, 1987.
 50. Ford SL, et al: Insulin resistance in threc dogs with
31. Budsberg SC. et al: Thyroxin-responsive umilateral
 hypothyroidism and diabetes unellitus. J Am Vet Med
forelimb lameness and generalizcd neuromuscular dis-
Assoc 202:1478, 1993.
ease in four hypothyroid dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
51.1
 Frank LA: Comparison of thyrotropin-releasing hor-
202:1859, 1993.
mone (TRH) to thyrotropin (TSH) simulation for
32. Campbell KL, Davis CA: Effects of thyroid hormones
evaluating thyroid function in dogs. J Am Anin Hosp
on serum and cutaneous fatty acid concentrations in
Assoc 32:481, 1996.
dogs. Am J Vet Res 51:752, 1990.
52. Gaschen F, ct al: Recogmition of triodothyronine-
 q   s
dog due to an iodide organification defect. Am J Vet
lating thyroglobulin autoantibodies. Am J Vet Res 54:
Res 44:1257, 1983.
244, 1993.
34. Chastain CB, et al: Anti-triodothyronine antibodies
 53. Gaskill CL, et al: Effects of phenobarbital treatment
on serum thyroxine and thyroid-stimulating hormone
roiditis in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 194:531, 1989.
concentrations in epileptic dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 
35. Chastain CB: Unusual manifestations of hypothyroid.
215:489, 1999.
ism in dogs. In: Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (eds): Kirk's
 34. Gookin JL, et al: Clinical hypothyroidism associated
 Current Veterinary Therapy XI. W.B. Saunders C..
with trimethoprim-sulfadiazine  administration  in  a
Philadelphia. 1992, p 327.
dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:1028, 1999.
 36. Conaway DH, et al: Clinical and histological features
55.
Gosselin SJ, et al: Autoimmune lymphocytic thyroid-
of primary proressive, familial thyroiditis in a colony
itis in dogs. Vet Imraunol Immunopathol 3:185, 1982.
of borzoi dogs. Vet Pathol 22:439, 1985.
 56. Graham PA, et al: Heterogencity of thyroid function
37. Cortese L, et al: Hyperprolactinemia and galactorrhea
in beagles with lymphocytic thyroiditis. Proe Annu
associated with primary hypothyroidism in a bitch.
Meet Am Coll Vet Intern Med 15:667, 1997.
J Simall Anim Pract 38:572, 1997.
57.
 38. Credille KM, et al: Clinical, morphologic, morpho-
cats. In: Kirk RW, Bonagura JI) (eds): Kirk's Current
metric, and cell proliferation assessiment of hair folli-
Veterinary Therapy XI. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadel.
cles in canine hypothyroidism. J Invest Dermatol 110:
phia, 1992, p 334.
581, 1998.
58. Greco DS, et al: The effect of levothyroxinc treat-
39. Daminet 5, et al: Short-term infuence of prednisoue
ment on resting energy expenditure of hypothyroid
and phenobarbital on thyroid function in euthyroid
dogs. J Vet Intent Med'12:7, 1998.
dogs. Can Vet J 40:411, 1999.
59.
Greco D: Use of endogenous thyrotropin and free
40. Deeg C, et al: Canine Hypothyreose: Nachweis von
thyroxine determinations for monitoring thyroid re-
876 · Fndocrine and Metabolic Diseases
placement treaument in dogs with hypothyroidisn. 1n:
77. Kelly MJ, Hill JR: Canine myxedema stupor and
Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy
comia. Comp Cont Educ 6:1049, 1984.
XII1. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1999, p 330.
78. Kemppainen RJ: Laboratory diagnosis of hypothyroil.
60. Creco DS, et al: Congenital hypothyroid dwarfism in
ism. In: IHypothyroiclism: Diagnosis and Clinical Man-
a family of Giant Schnauzers. J Vet Inten Med 5:57,
ifestations. Daniels Pharmaceuticals, St. Petersburg.
1991.
1993, p 10.
61. Gunaratnam P: The effct of thyroxine on hair
79. Kemppainen RJ, Young DW: Canine triodothyronine
growth on the dog, J Small Anim Pract 27:17, 1986.
autoantibodics. In: Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (eds):
62.
Haines DM, et al: Survey of thyroglohulin autoanti-
Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XI. W.B. Saunders
bodies in lngs. Am J Vet Res 45:1493, 1984.
Co., Philadclphia, 1992, p 327.
63. IIaines DM. et al: Thc detection of camine autoanti-
bodies to thyroid antigens by enzyme-linked immuno-
nine and thyroxine in a golden retriever. J An Anim
sorbent assay, hemagglutination, and indirect immu-
Hosp Assoc 32:195, 1996.
nofluorescence. Can J Comp Med 48:262, 1984.
81. Kobayashi Dl, et al: Serum thyroid hormone concen-
64. Haines DM, Penhale WJ: Experimental thyroid auto-
 trations in clinically normal dogs after administration
inmumity in the dog. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 9:
of freshly reconstiluled versus prcviously frozen and
221, 1985.
stored thyrotropin. J Arn Vet Med Assoc 197:597,
65. Hall IA, et al: Effect of triethoprim/sulfarmethox-
1990.
azole on thyroid function in dogs with pyoderma.
82. Larson MG: Determination of free thyroxine and
J Ain Vet Med Assoc 202:1159, 1993.
cholestcrol as a new screcning test for canine hypo-
66. Hansen SR, et al: Acute overdose of levothyroxine in
thyreoilisu. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 24:209, 1988.
a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 200:1512, 1992.
83. Laurberg P: Iodothyronine dciotlination in the canine
67. Hasler A. Rohner K: Schiwerwiegende Reaktionen
thyroid. Domest Anim Endocrinol 1:1, 1984.
nach TSH-Stimulationstest beim Huud. Schweiz Arch
84. Li WI, et al: Effects of thyrotropin-releasing horrmone
Tierheilkd 134:423, 1992.
onscriun concentrations of thyroxine and triiodothy-
67a. Ilenik RA, 1Dixon RM: Intravenous administration of
ronine in healthy, thyroidectomized, thyroxine-treated,
and propylthiouracil-treated dogs. Am J Vet Res 47:
levothyroxine for treatment of suspected myxedema
coma complicated by severe bypothermia in a dog.
163, 1986.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 216:713, 2000.
 85. [iu SK, et al: Clinical and pathologic findings in dogs
68. Ileripret D: Diagnostic biologique de Thypothyroidie
with atherosclerosis: 21 cases (1970-1983). J An Vet
canine. Prat Med Chir Anin Comp 32:3l, 1997.
Med Assoc 189:227, 1986.
86.
   d p e   g
69. HIoenig M, Ferguson DC: Counparison of TRH-stinu-
thyroidism. J Coinp Pathol 93:415, 1983.
latcd thyrotropin (eTSII) to TRH- and TSH-stimu-
lated T in euthyroid, hypothyroid, and sick dogs.
87. Medeau IL, et al: Congenital hypothyroidism in a
dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2l:341, 1985.
Proc Annu Meet Am Coll Vet Intern Med 15:668.
88. Meij BP, et al: Thyruid-stimulating hormone re-
1997.
sonses after single administrationof hyroid-releasing
70. Jioenig M, Ferguson DC: Assessment of thyroid
hormone and combined adrministration of four hypo-
functional reserve in the cat by the thyrotropin-stimu-
thalamie releasing hornones in beagle dogs. Domest 
lation test. Am J Vet Res 44:1229, 1983.
Anin Endoerinol 13:465, 1996.
71. Iversen L, et al: Development and validation of an
89. Melian C, ct al: Evaluation of free T4 and endoge-
improved enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for the
nous TSH as rliagnostic tests for hypothyroidism in
detection of thyroglobulin autoantibodies in canine
dogs. Proc Annu Meet Ain Coll Vct Intcrn Med 15:
scrum samples. Domest Anim Endocrinol 15:325,
667, 1997.
1998.
90. Meric SM, Rubin SI: Serum thyroxine concentrations
72. Iversen L, et al: Evaluation of the analytical perform-
following fixed-dose ratlioactive iodine treatment in
ance of an enzyme inmunometrie assay (EIA) de-
hyperthyroid cats: 62 cases (1986-1989). J Aun Vet
signed to measurc cndogenous thyroid-stimulating
Med Assoc 197:621, 1990.
hornone (TSH) in canine serum sanples. J Vet Med
91. Miller AB, et al: Serial ihyroid hornone concentra-
Assoe 45:93, 1998.
 s   r s
72a. [versen L, et al: Biological variation of canine serum
roidism, and euthyroid dogs with atopie dermatitis. Br
thyrotropin (TSII) concentration. Vet Clin Pathol 28:
Vet J 148:451, 1992.
16, 1999.
92. Mooney CT. Anderson TJ: Congenital hypothyroidisrn
73. Jensen AL, et al: Evaluation of an inrnunoradiormet-
in a boxer dog. J Small Anim Pract 34:3i, 1993.
ric assay for thyrotropin in serum and plasma samples
93. Mooney CT,et al: Effect of illness mot associated
uf dogs with prinary hypothyroidisin. J Comp Pathol
with the thyroid gland on serum total and free thy-
114:339, 1996.
roxine concentrations in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
74. Jones BR, et al: Prelininary stucties on congenital
208:2004,1996.
hypothyroidisrn in a family of Abyssinian cats. Vet
94. Mooney CT, Thoday Kl.: CVT update: Medical treat-
Rec 131:145, 1992
ment of hyperthyroicdism in cats. In: Bonagura JD
75. Kantrowitz LB, et al: Serum total thyroxine, total tri-
(ed): Kirk's Curent Veterinary Therapy XI. W.B.
iodothyronine. free thyroxine, and thyrotropin conecn-
Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1999. p 333.
trations in epileptie dogs treated withi anticonvulsants.
95. Moore GE, et al: Fffects of oral administration of
J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:1804, 1999.
anti-infammatory doses of prednisolone v thyroid
76. Kaufinan J, et al: Senun concentratious of thyroxine,
hormone response to thyrotropin-releasing hormone
3,3,3'-triodothyronine, thyrotropin, and prolactin in
and thyrotropin in clinically normal dogs. Am J Vet 
Res 54:1993.
atdininistration. Am J Vet Rcs 46:486, 1985.
96. Nachreiner RF, Refsal KR: Radioimmunoassay rnoni-
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases · 877
toring with thyroid hormonc concentrations in dogs
118. Paradis M, et al: Studies of various diagnostic meth-
on thyroid replacement therapy: 2674 cases (1985-
uds for caninc hypothyroidism. Vet Derinatol 2:125.
1987). J Am Vet Med Assoc 201:623, 1992.
1991.
97. Nachreiner RF, et al: Pharmacokinetics of L-thyrox-
119. Patterson JS, et al: Neurologic manifestations of cere-
ine after its oral administration in dogs. Am J Vet Res
brovascular atherosclcrosis associated with primary
54:2091. 1993.
bypothyroidism in a dog. J Arn Vet Med Assoc 186:
98. Nachreiner RF, et al: Prevalence of autoantibodies to
499, 1985.
thyroglobulin in dogs
s with nonthyroidal illness. Am J
120. Peterson ME, et al: Effects of spontaneous hyperad-
Vet Res 59:951, 1998.
renocorticism on serum thyroid hormone conccntra-
99. Nelson RW, Ihle Sl.: Hypothyroidism in dogs and
tions in the dog. Am J Vet Res 45:2034, 1984.
cats: A difficult deficiency to diagnose. Vet Med 82:
121. Peterson ME," Camble DA: Fffect of nonthyroidal
60, 1987.
ilncss on serum thyroxine concentrations ju cats: 494
100. Nelson RW, et al: Serum free thyroxine concentratjiun
cases (1988). J Am Vet Med Assoc 197:1203, 1990.
 in healthy dogs, dogs with hypothyroidism, and euthy.
122. Pcterson ME: Feline bypothyroidism. In: Kirk RW
roid dogs with concurrent illness. J Am Vet Med
(ed): Current Veterinary Therapy X. W.B. Saunders
Assoc 198:1401, 1991.
Co., Philadelphia, 1989, p 1000.
101. Panciera DL: Canine hypothyroidism. Part I. Clinical
123. Peterson ME, et al: Measurement of serum concen-
findings and control of thyroid hormone secretion and
trations of total and free T4 in hyperthyroid cats and
metabolism. Conp Cont Educ 12:689, 1990.
cats with nonthyroidal disease. Proc Am Coll Vet In-
102. Paneiera DL: Caninc: hypothyroidisn. Part ll: Thy-
ten Med 16:701, 1998.
roid function tests and treatment. Comp Cont Educ
124. Peterson ME, et al: Measurcement of serum total thy.
12:943, 1990.
roxine, triodothyronine, free thyroxinc, and thyrotro-
103. Panciera DL, Post K: Effect of oral administration of
sulfadiazine and trimethoprim in comhination on thy-
pin concentrations for diagnosis of hypothyroidism in
roid funchion in dogs. Can J Vet Res 56:349, 1992.
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 21l:1396, 1997.
125. Quinlan Wj, Michaeison S: Honologous ractioinmu-
104. Panciera DL, et al: Thyroid function tests in euthy-
noassay for canine thyrotropin: Response of norinal
roid dogs treated with L-thyroxine. Am J Vet Res 51:
and x-irradiated dogs to propylthiouracil. Endocrinol-
22, 1989.
ogy 108:937, 1981.
105. Panciera DL, ct al; Quantitative norphologic stucly
126. Rachofsky MA: Clinical rclovancc of results from thc
 on the pituitary and thyroid glands of dogs adminis-
new canine specific endogenous TSHI assay: A review
tered L-thyroxine. A1n J Vet Res 51:27, 1990.
of 79 cases. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet
106. Panciera DL: Hypothyroidisin in dogs: 66 cases
 Dernatol A1n Coll Vet Derinatof 4:1988.
(1987-1992). J Am Vet Med Assoc 204:761, 1994.
127. Ramsey IK, et al: Thyroid-stimulating hormone and
107. Panciera DL: Thyroid-fumction testing: Is the future
total thyroxine concentrations in cuthyroird, sick cu-
here? Vet Med 92:50, 1997.
108. Panciera DL. Johnson GS: Plasma von Willebrand
thyroid and hypothyroid dogs. J Suall Anin Pract 38:
540,1997.
128. Rand JS, et al: Spontaneous adult-onset hypothyroid-
roidism. J Am Vet Med Assoc 205:1550, 1994.
109.Panciera DL, Johnson GS: Plasma von Willebrand
ism in a cat. J Vet Intern Med 7:272, 1993.
129. Refsal KR, et al: L'se of triodothyronine suppression
factor antigen concentration and buccal mucosal
bleeding tine in dogs with experimental hypothyroid-
isrn. J Vet Intern Med 10:60, 1996.
have serum concentrations of iodothyronincs within
110. Panciera DL.: An cchocardiographic and electrocar-
norrnal range. J Am Vet Med Assoc 199:1594, 1991.
diographic study ol cardiovascular function in hypo-
130. Refsad KR, et al: Thyroid hormone autoantibodies in
thyroid dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 205:996, 1994.
thc dog: Distribution with serum concentrations of
111. Panciera DL: Clinical mamifestations of canine hypo-
thyroxne and thyrotropin inalabratory survey.Proc
thyroidism. Vet Med 92:44, 1997.
Annu Meet Am Coll Vet Intern Med 16:700, 1998.
112. Panciera DL: Treating hypothyroidism. Vet Med 92:
131. Reimers TJ, et al: Effects of reproductivc state on
58, 1997.
concentrations of thyroxine, 3,5,3-triodothyronine
113. Panciera DL: Conplications and concurrent condi-
and corisol in serun of dogs. Biol Reprod 3l:148,
 tions associated with hypothyroidlisin in dogs. In: Bon-
1984.
agura ID (ed): Kirk's Curent Veterinary Therapy
132. Rcirmers TJ. et al: Effect of fasting on thyroxine,
XiI11. W.B. Sannders Co., Phiadelphia, 1999, p 327.
3,5,3'-triodothyronine, and cortisol conccntrations in
114. Panciera DL: Is it posible to diagnose canine hypo-
serum of dogs. Am J Vet Hes 47:2485, 1986.
thyroidism? J Small Anim Pract 40:152, 1999.
133. Reimers TJ, et al: Effects of age, scx, and body size
115. Paradis M, Page N: Seruun free thyroxine concentra-
on serun concentrations of thyroid and adrenocortical
tions measured by cheiniluminescence in hyperthy-
hormones in dogs. A1n J Vet Res 5l:454, 1990.
roid and euthyroid cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32:
134. Richardson IIW: Evaluation of endogenous cTSH as-
489, 1996.
say RIA test kit in clinically normal and suspect hypo-
116. Paradis M, et al: Effeets of adrninistration of low dose
thyroid dogs. Proc Annu Memb Meet Ain Acad Vet
of frozen thyrotropin on serum total thyroxine con-
Derinatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 4:1988.
centrations in clinically normal dogs. Can Vet J 35:
135. Robinson WF, et al: Congcnital hypothyroidism in
367, 1994.
Scotish deerhound puppies. Aust Vet J 65:386, 1988.
117. Paradis M, et al: Serun-free thyroxine concentrations,
 136. Rosenberg RM, et al: Abnormal lipogenesis in thyroid
measured by chemiluininescence assay before and af-
hormone-deficient epidermis. J Invest Dermatol 86:
ter thyrotropin administration in healthy dogs, hypo-
244, 1986.
137. Rosychuk RAW: Dermatologic manifestations of ca-
thies. Can Vet J 37:289, 1996.
ninc hypothyroidism and the usefilness of dermato-
878 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
pathology in establishing a diagnosis. Canine Pract 22:
et euthyroidiens soufrant de maladies systemiques.
25, 1997.
Med Vet Quebec 27:119, 1997.
138. Rudas P, et al: Inpaired local deiodination of thyrox-
157. Torres SMF, et al: Hypothyroidism in a dog associ-
ine to trliodothyronine in dogs with symmetrical tnun-
ated with trimethoprim-sulfadiazine therapy. Vet Der-
cal alopecia. Vet Res Commun 18:175, 1994.
matol 7:105, 1996.
 a       
I58. Torres SMF, et al: Effect of oral administration of
pea f wy 'shop un uogouny pron uo aucrosupand
serum des Hundes und seine Rcaktion in TRH-
Res 52:416, 1991.
Stimulatonstest. Tierarztl Prax 24:479, 1996.
159.
Vajner L: Lymphocytic thyroidlitis in beagle dogs in a
140. Sauve F, et al: Evaluation de la function thyroidienne
breeding colony: Findings of serum autoantibodies.
chez les chiens de race Terre-Neuve. Med Vet Qué-
Vet Med Czech 11:333, 1997.
bec 27:77, 1997.
160. Van Der Walt JA, et al: Functional endocrine modif-
141. Sauve F, Paradis M: Use of recornbinant human thy-
cation of the thyroid folowing ovariectoiny in the
roid-stimulating hormone for thyrotropin stmulation
canine. J S Afr Vet Assoc 54:225, 1983.
test in euthyroid dogs. Can Vet J 41:215, 2000.
161.
Wall JR, Kurok T: Immunologic factors in thyroid
142. Schurmm-Draeger PM, Fortmeyer HP: Autoimmune
disease. Med Clin North Am 69:913, 1985.
162. Wartofsky L, Burman KD: Alterations in thyroid
Clin Endoerinol Diabetes 104:12, 1996.
funetion in patients with systemie ilness: The “enthy-
143. Scott-Moncrieff JCR, Nelson RW: Change in scrun
1oid sick syndrome." Endocrinol Rev 3:164, 1982.
thyroid-stimulating hormone concentration in  re-
sponse to administration of thyrotropin-releasing hor-
cedema: Evidence for increased capillary permeability
mone to healthy dogs, hypothyroid dogs, and euthy-
to protein. Clin Endocrinol 18:627, 1983.
roid dogs with concurrent diseases. J Am Vet Med
164. Wiliams DA, et al: Validation of an inrmunoassay for
Assoc 213:1435, 1998.
 canine thyroid stimulating hormone and changes in
144. Scott-Moncrieff JCR, et al: Cormparison of serum
serum concentration following induction of hypothy-
concentrations of  thyroid-stimulating  hormone
in
healthy dogs, hypothyroid dogs, and euthyroid dogs
1996.
with concurrent disease. J Am Vet Med Assoc 212:
165. Yu AA, et al: Effect of endotoxin on hormonal re-
387,1998.
sponses to thyrotropin and thyrotropin-releasing hor-
145. Simpson JW, van den Broek AHM: Fat absorption in
mone in dogs. Am J Vet Res 59:186, 1998.
dogs with diabetes mellitus or hypothyroidism. Res
166. Zeiss CJ, Wacidle G: Hypothyroidism and atheroscle-
Vet Sci 50:346, 1991.
rosis in dogs. Comp Cont Educ 17:1l17, 1995.
146. Sparks AHl, et al: Thyroid function in the cat: Assess-
167. Zerbe CA, et al: Thyroid profiles in healthy kittens
ment by the TRH response test and thyrotropin stim-
frorm birth to 12 weeks of age. Proc Annu Meet Am
mlation test. I Small Anim Pract 32:59, 1991.
Coll Vet Intern Med 16:702, 1998.
147. Sparkes AH, et al: Assessment of dose and time re-
Adrenat Physiotogy and Disease
sponses to TRH and thyrotropin in healthy dogs.
168. Angles JM, et al: Use of urine cortisol:ereatinine ratio
J Small Anim Pract 36:245, 1995.
versus adrenocorticotropic hormone stimulation test-
148.
 Stephan I, Schutt-Mast 1: Kongenitale Hypothyreose
ing for monitoring mitotane treatment of pituitary-
mit disproportioniertem Zwergwuchs bei einer Katze.
dependent hyperadrenocorticism in dogs. J Am Vet
Kleintierpraxis 40:701, 1995.
Med Assoc 21l:1002, 1997.
149. Stolp R, et al: Plasma cortisol response to thyrotropin
169. Barthcz PY, et al: Ultrasonographic evaluation of the
releasing hormone and luteinizing hormone releasing
adrenal glands in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:
hornone in healthy kennel dogs and in dogs with
1180, 1995.
170. Beale KM, Morris DO: Treatment of canine calcino-
nol 93:365, 1982.
150. Sullivan P, et al: Altered platelet indices in dogs with
sis cutis with dimethylsulfoxide gel. Proc Annu Memb
 Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol
hypothyroidism and cats with hyperthyroidlism. Ain J
14:97, 1998.
Vet Hes 54:2004, 1993.
17l. Behrend EN, et al: Efct of storage conditions on
151. Tarttelin MF, et al: Serum free thyroxine levels re-
corisol, total thyroxine, and free thyroxine concentra-
spond inversely to changes in levels of dietary iordline
tions in serum and plasma of dogs. J Am Vet Med
in the cdomestic cat. N Z Vet J 40:66, 1992.
Assoc 212:1564, 1998.
152.
Thoday KL, et al: Radioinmunoassay of serum total
172. Behrend EN, Kemppainen RJ: Medlical therapy of
thyroxine and triodothyronine in cats: Assay rmethor-
canine Cushing's syndrome. Comp Cont Educ 20:679,
ology and effects of age, sex, breed, heredity, and
1998.
environment. J Small Anim Pract 25:457, 1984.
173. Bennett PF, Norman EJ: Mitotane (o.p'DDD) resis-
153. Thoday KL.: Feline hypothyroidism: An experimental
tance in a dog with pituitary-dependent hyperadreno.
study. Vet Dermatol Newsl 12(1), 1989.
corticism and pheochromocytoma. Aust Vet J 76:101,
154. Thoday KL, Mooney CT: Historical, clinical and labo-
1998.
ratory features of 126 hyperthyroid cats. Vet Rec 131:
174. Bertoy EH, et al: Magnetic resonance imaging of the
257, 1992.
brain in dogs with recently diagnosed but untreated
155. Thoday KL, Mooney CT: Medical management of
pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Vet
feline hyperthyroidism. In: Kirk RW, Bonagura JD
Med Assoc 206:651, 1995.
(eds): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XI. W.B.
175. Bertoy EH, et al: One-year follow-up evaluation of
Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1992, p 338.
magnctic resonance imaging of the brain in dogs with
156. Thomeloe C, et al: Evaluation de la thyroxine totale
pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Vet
 par ELISA chez des chats nonnanx, hyperthyroidiens
Med Assoc 208:1268, 1996.
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases · 879
176. Biewenga WJ, et al: Persistent polyuria in two dogs
dexamethasone suppresson/ACTH stimulation test.
following adrenocorticolysis for pituitary-dependent
J Am Vet Med Assoc 185:289, 1984.
hyperadrenocorticism. Vet Q 1l:193, 1989.
198. Emms SG, et al: Adrenalectony in the management
177. Blaxter AC, Gruffydd-Jones TJ: Concurrent diabetes
of canine hyperadrenocortcism. J Am Vet Med Assor
melltus and hyperadrenocorticism in the dog: Diag-
23:557, 1987.
nosis and management of eight cases. J Small Anim
199. Etreby MFE, et al: Functional norphology of sponta-
Pract 31:117, 1990.
neous hyperplastic and neoplastic lesions in the ca-
178. Boord M, Griffin C: Progesterone secreting adrenal
nine pituitary gland. Vet Pathol 17:109, 1980.
mass in a cat with clinical signs of hyperadrenocorti-
200. Feldman EC: Evaluation of a coinbined dexametha-
cism. J A1n Vet Med Assoc 214:666, 1999.
179. Bruyette DS, et al: L-deprenyl therapy of canine pit1-
hyperadrcnocorticism. J Am Vet Med Assoe 187:49,
itary depcndent hypcradrenocorticism. Poster, Am
1985.
Coll Vet Intem Med’ Forum, Washington DC, 1993.
 201, Fcldman EC: Evaluation of a six-hour combined dex-
180. Bruyette DS, et al: Management of canine pituitary-
amethasone soppression/ACTH stimulation test in
ependent hyperadrenocorticisu withl-deprenyl Ai-
dogs with hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Vet Med Assoc
pryl). Vet Clin North Am 27:273, 1997.
189:1562, 1986.
181.
Bruyette DS, et al: Treating canine pituitary-depen-
 202. Feldinan EC, et al: Coinparison of mitotane treat-
dent hyperadrenocorticism with I-deprenyl. Vet Med
ment for adrenal tumor versus pituitary-dependent
92:711, 1997.
hyperadrenocorticism in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
182. Bruyette DS: Anipryl versus lysodren. Proc Am Coll
200:1642, 1992.
Vet Intern Med 16:525, 1998.
 203. Feldman EC, Mack RE: Urine cortisol:creatinine ra-
182a. Bruyette DS: An approach to diagnosing and treat-
tio as a screening test for hyperadrenocorticism in
ing feline hyperadrenocorticism. Vet Med 95:142,
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 200:1637, 1992.
2000.
204. Feldman EC, Nelson RW: Use of ketoconazole for
183. Chastain CB, et al: Evaluation of the hypothalamic-
control of canine hyperadrenocorticism. In: Kirk RW,
Bonagura JD (eds): Kirk's Current Veterinary Ther-
Anim Hosp Assoc 22:435, 1986.
apy XI. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1992,
184. Chauvet AE, et al: Effects of phenobarbital adminis-
p 349.
tration on results of serum biochemical analyses and
205. Feldman EC, et al: Plasma cortisol response to keto-
adrenocortical function tests in epileptic dogs. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 207:1305, 1995.
ticism. J Am Vet Med Assoc 197:71, 1990.
I85. Chrousos GP, et al: Cinical applications of corticoto-
206. Feldman EC, et al: Use of low- and high-dose dexa-
pin-releasing factor. Aun Interm Med 102:344, 1985.
methasone tests for distinguishing pituitary-dependent
186. Church DB, et al: Effect of nonadrenal illness, anaes-
from adrenal tumor hyperadrenocorticism in dogs.
thesia and surgery on plasma cortisol conccntrations
J Am Vet Med Assoc 209:772, 1996.
in dogs. Res Vet Sci 56:129, 1994.
207. Ferguson DC, Peterson ME: Serum frec and total
187. Daley CA, et al: Use of metyrapone to treat pituitary-
iodothyronine concentrations in dogs with hyperad-
   e  ay 
renocorticism. Aim J Vet Res 53:1636, 1992.
cutaneous wounds. J Am Vet Med Assoc 202:956,
208. Ford SL, et al: Hyperadrenocorticism caused bybilat
1993.
eral adrenocortical neoplasia in dogs. Four cases
188. den Hertog E, et al: Results of monselective adreno-
(1983-1988). J Am Vet Med Assoc 202:789, 1993.
corticolysis by o,p'-DDD in 129 dogs with pituitary-
209. Frank LA, et al: Comparison of cortisol concentra-
dependent hyperadrenoxorticism, Vet Rec 144:12, 1999.
tions after administration of cosyntropin at low and
189, Dow SW, et al: Perianal adenornas and hypertestos-
high doses. Proc Annu Mermb Meet Am Acad Vet
teronemia in a spayed bitch with pituitary-dependent
Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermmatol 15:99, 1999.
hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Vet Med Assoc 192:1439,
210. Frank LA, Oliver JW: Comparison of serum cortisol
1988.
concentrations in clinically normal dogs after adminis-
190. Dow SW, et al: Response of dogs with functional
tration of freshly reconstituted versus reconstituted
pituitary macroadenormas and macrocarcinomas to ir-
and stored frozen cosyntropin. J Am Vet Mcd Assoc
radliation. J Small Anim Pract 31:287, 1990.
191. Duesberg CA,et al: Adrenalectony for treatment of
212:1569, 1998.
211.
 Frazier KS, et al: Multiple cutancous rmetaplastic ossi-
byperadrenooorticism in cats: 10 cases (1900-1992).
fication associated with iatrogenie hyperglucocorti-
J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:1066, 1995.
192. Duesberg C, Peterson ME: Adrenal disorders of the
coidism. J Vet Diagn Invest 10:303, 1998.
212. Garnier F, ct al: Adrenal cortical response in clini-
cat. Vet Clin North Ain 27:32l, 1997.
193. Duesberg CA, et al: Magnetic resonance imaging for
cally nornal dogs before and after adaptation to a
dliagnosis of pituitary macrotumors in dogs. J Am Vet
housing environment. Lab Anim 24:40, 1990.
Med Assoc 206:657, 1995.
213. Gayrard V, ct al: Interspecies variations of corticoste-
194. Dunn KJ, et al: Use of ACTH stimulation tests to
roid-binding globulin parameters. Domest Anin En-
Imonitor the treatment of canine hyperadrenocorti-
docrinol 13:35, 1996.
cism. Vet Rec 137:161, 1995.
 214. Glaze MR, et al: Ophthalmic corticosteroid therapy:
195. Dunn KJ: Complications associated with the liagnosis
Systemic effects in the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
and management of canine hypcradrenocorticism. In
192:73, 1988.
Practice 24:246, 1997.
 215. Goossens MMC, et al: Cobalt 60 irradiation of pitui-
'96T
Eichenbauun JD, et al: Efect in large dogs of oph-
tary gland tumors in three cats with acromegaly.
thalmic prednisolone acetate on adrenal gland and he-
J Am Vet Med Assoc 231:374, 1998.
patic function. J Am Anin Hosp Assoc 24:705, 1988.
216. Goossens MMC, et al: Efficacy of cobalt 60 radio-
197.
Eiler H, et al: Stages of hyperadrenocorticism: re-
sponse of hyperadrenocorticoid dogs to thc combined
ocorticism. J Aun Vet Med Assoc 212:374, 1998.
880 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
217. Goossens MMC, et al: Urinary excretion of glucocor-
as refected in the urinary cortisol/creatinine ratio in
ticoids in the dliagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism in
dogs. Dom Anim Endocrinol 7:559, 1990.
cats. Domest Anin Endocrinol 12:355, 1995.
238. Jonies CA, et al: Adrenocortical adenocarcinoma in a
218. Greco DS, et al: Dexamethasone pharmacokinetics in
cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 28:59, 1992.
clinically normal dogs during low- and high-dosc dex-
239. Kaplan AJ, et al: Effects of disease on the results of
anethasouie suppression testing. Am J Vet Res 54:
diagnostic tests for usc in detecting hyperadrenocorti-
580, 1992.
cisin in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:445, 1995.
 219. Greco DS, et al: Pharmacokinetics of exogenous corti-
240. Kemppainen RJ. Zenoble RD: Nondexamethasone-
suppressible, pituitary-dependent hyperaclrenocorti-
 adrenal illness and adrenopathic dogs. J Vet Pharma-
cism in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 187:276, 1985.
col Ther 21:369, 1998.
241. Kemppainen RJ, ct al: Ovine corticotrophin-releasing
220. Greco DS, et al: Concurrent pituitary and adrenal
factor in dogs: Dose-response relationships and ef
tumors in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism:17 cases
fects of dexamethasone. Acta Endocrinol ll2:12,
(1978- 1995). J Arn Vet Med Assoc 214:1349, 1999.
1986.
221. Greene CE, et al: Iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism in
242. Keinppainen RJ, Peterson ME: Circulating concentra-
a cat. Feline Pract 23:7, 1995.
tion of dexamethasone in healthy dogs, dogs with hy-
222. Grooters AM, et al: Ultrasonographic characteristics
of the adrenal glands in dogs with pituitary-dependent
  w s ns e 
hyperadrenocorticism: Comparison with normal dogs.
Res 54:1765, 1993.
J Vet lntern Med 10:110, 1996.
223. Guptill L, et al: Use of urinc cortisol:creatinine ratio
tions in dogs with byperadrenocorticisn. Am J Vet
to monitor treatment response in dogs with pituitary.
Res 52:682, 1991.
dependent hyperadrenocorticisrn. J Ain Vet Med
244. Kemppainen RJ, et al: Effects of single intravenously
Assoc 210:1158, 1997.
administered doses of dexainethasone on response to
224. Hansen BL、 et al: Synthetic ACTH (cosyntropin)
the adrenocorticotropic hornone stimulation test in
stirmulation tests in normal dogs: Comparison of inlra-
dogs. Am J Vet Res 50:1914, 1989.
venous and intramuscular administration. J Am Anin
245. Kemppainen RJ, Peterson ME: Regulation of α-mela-
Hosp Assoc 30:38, 1994.
nocyte-stimulating hormone secretion froin the pars
225. Hegstad RL, et al: Effect of sample handlng on ad
intermedia of domestic cats. An J Vet Res 60:245,
renocorticotropin concentration measured in canine
1999.
plasma, using a commercially available radioimmuno-
246. Kemppainen RJ, Boehrend E: Adrenal physiology.
assay kit. Am J Vet Res 51:194l, 1990.
Vet Clin North Am 27:173, 1997.
247. Kemppainen RJ, et al: Preservative effect of aprotinin
feline hyperadrenocorticissn. In: Ihrke PJ, et al (eds):
on canine plasma immunoreactive adrenocorticotropin
Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol 2. Perga-
concentrations. Domest Anin Endocrinol ll:355,
mon Press, New York, 1993, p 391.
1994.
227. Henry CJ, et al: Urine cortisol:ereatinine ratio in
248. Kerl ME, et al: Evaluation of a kow-tlose syrithetie
healthy and sick cats. I Vet Intern Med 10:123, 1996.
arlrenocorticotropic hornone stimulation test in clini-
228. Hess RS, Ward CR: Concurrent canine hyperadreno-
corticism and diabetes melitus: Diagnosis and treat-
hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:1497,
ment, Comp Cont Educ 20:701, 1998.
1999.
229. Hess RS, et al: Association between hyperadrenocorti-
249. Kintzer PP, Peterson ME: Mitotane (o.p'-DDD)
cism and development of calcium-containing uroliths
in dogs with urolithiasis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 212:
pcradrenocorticism. J Vet Intem Med 5:102, 1991.
1889, 1998.
250.
Kintzer PP, Peterson ME: Mitotane treatiment of 32
230. Hoeranf A, Reusch C: Ultrasonographic characteris-
 dogs with cortisol-secreting adrenocortical neoplasms.
tics of both adrenal glands in 15 dogs with functional
J Am Vet Med Assoc 205:54, 1994.
adrenocortical tumors. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 35:
 251. Kipperman BS. et al: Diabetes melitus and exocrine
193, 1999.
pancreatic neoplasia in two cats with hyperadrenocor-
231. Horauf A, Reusch C: Darstellumg der nehennieren
ticism. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 28:415, 1992.
mittels Ultraschall Untersuchungen bei gesundcn
252. Kippernan BS, et al: Pituitary tumor sive, neurologic
Hunden, Hunden mit nicht-endokrinen Erkrankungen
signs, and relation lo endocrine test results in dogs
 sowie mit Cushing-syndrom. Kleintier Praxis 40:351,
withpituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism: 43
1995.
cases (1980-1990). 1 Am Vet Med Assoc 201:762,
232.Huang H,et al: Iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism in
1992.
28 dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 35:200, 1999.
253. Kooistra HS, et al: Corelation between inopairment
233. Hurley KJ. Vaden SL: Evaluation of urine protein
of glucocorticoid feedback and the size of the pitui-
-ay uapudap-ared ym sp u puu
ocorticism. J Am Vet Med Assoc 212:369, 1998.
renccorticism. J Endocrinol 152:387, 1997.
234. Hurley K, et al: The use of Trilostane for the treat-
ment of hyperadrenocorticism in dogs. Proc: Annu
lism in dogs: 47 cases (1986-1987). J Aim Vet Med
Meet Ain Coll Vet Intern Med 16:700, 1998.
Assoc 197:1368, 1990.
235. Jensen RB, DuFort RM: Hyperadrenocorticism in1 
254a. Lusson D, Billeimaz B: Un cas d'hypercorticisme
dogs. Comp Cont Educ 13:615, 1991.
spontane chez un chat. Point Vet 31:57, 2000.
236. Jensen Al, et al: Evaluation of the urinary cortisol:
255.
 Mack RE, Feldman EC: Comparison of two low-dose
creatinine ratio in the diagnosis of hyperadrenocorti-
dlexamethasone suppression protocols as screening
cism in dogs. J Small Anim Pract 38:99, 1997.
and dliscriminating tests in dogs with hyperadrenocor-
237. Jones CA, et al: Changes in adrenal cortisol secretion
ticisn. J Am Vet Med Assoc 197:1603, 1990.
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases · 881
256. Mack RE, et al: Diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism in
adrenocorticism. J Aim Vet Med Assoc 209:1724,
dogs. Comp Cont Educ 16:311, 1994.
1996.
277. Penninek DG, et al: Radiographic features of canine
Fall von Hypercortisolismus bei einer Katze.Kleintier
hyperadrenocorticism caused by autonomously func-
Praxis 37:843, 1992.
tioning adrenocortical tumors: 23 cascs (1978-1986).
258.Mauldin CN, Burk RL: The use of diagnostic com-
J Ain Vet Med Assoc 192:1604, 1988.
puterized tonography and radiation therapy in canine
278. Peterson ME, et al: Immunocytochcmical study of
and feline hyperadrenocorticism. Probl Vet Med 2:
the hypophysis in 25 dogs with pituitary-dependent
557,1990.
hyperadrenocorticism. Acta Endoerinol 101:15, 1982.
259. Mlugua SW, et al: Adrenocortical suppression by a
 279. Peterson ME, et al: Adrenal function in the cat: com-
glucocorticoid: Effect of a single 1. M. injection of
parison  of  thc  effects 
of cosyntropin (synthetic
betamethasone depot versus placebo given prior to
ACTH) and corticotropin gel stimulation. Res Vet Sci
orthopaedic surgery in dogs. Acta Vet Scand 29:415.
37:331, 1984.
1988.
280. Peterson ME: Canine hyperadrenocorticism. In: Kirk
260. Meij BP, et al: Alterations in anterior pituitary fune-
RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy IX. W.B. Saun-
tion of dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocor-
ders Co., Philadelphia, 1986, p 963.
ticism. J Endocrinol 154:505, 1997.
 281. Peterson ME, Steele P: Pituitary-dependent hyperad-
261. Meij BP, et al: Assessment of pituitary function after
renocorticism in a cat. J Ain Vet Med Assoc 189:680,
1986.
mest Anim Endocninol 14:81, 1997.
282. Peterson ME, et al: Plasima iruunoreactive ACTH
262. Meij BP, et al: Residual pituitary function after
peptides and corisol in norrnal dogs and dogs with
transsphenoidal hypophysectomy in dogs with pitui-
Addison's dlisease and Cushing's syndrorne: Basal con-
tary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism.jEndocrinol
centrations. Endocrinology 119:720, 1986.
155:531, 1997.
283. Peterson ME, Kemppainen RJ: Dose-response rela
263.Meij BP, et al: lesults of transsphenoidal hypoply-
tionship between plasma concentrations of corticotro-
pin and cortisol after adininistration of ineremental
renocorticism. Vet Surg 27:246, 1998.
doses of cosyntropin for corticotropin stinrulation test.
264. Meyer DJ, et al: Effect of otic medications containing
ing in cats. Am J Vet Res 54:300, 1983.
glucocorticoids in liver fuuction tests in healthy dogs.
284. Peterson ME,
, Kenppainen RS: Comparison of im-
J Am Vet Med Assoe 196:743, 1990.
munoreactive plasina corticotropin auid cortisol re-
265. Moore GE, Hoenig M: Effect of orally administered
sponse to tvo synthetic corticotropin preparations (te-
prednisone on glucose tolerance and insulin seeretion
tracosactrin and cosyntropin) in healthy cats. Am J
in clinically normal dogs. Am J Vet Res 54:126, 1993.
Vet Res 53:1752, 1992.
266. Moore CE, Hoenig M: Duration of pituitary and ad-
 285. Peterson ME, et al: Effects of synthetic ovine cortico-
renocortical suppression after long-term administra-
tropin-releasing hormone on plasrna concentrations of
tion of anti-inffammatory doses of prednisone in dogs.
immunoreactive adrenocorticotropic, α-melanocyte-
Arn J Vet Res 53:716, 1992.
267. Muller PB, et al: Effccts of phenobarbital trcatnennt
rally acquired adrenocortical insufficiency. Am J Vet
on adrenal function tests in dogs. Proc Aunu Meet
Res 53:1636, 1992.
Am Coll Vet Intern Med 16:700, 1998.
286. Peterson ME, et al: Effect of spontanrcous hyperad
268. Murphy CJ, et al: latrogenic Cushing's syndrome in a
renocorticism in endogenous production and utiliza-
dog caused by topical ophthalmic rnedication. J Am
tion of glucose in the dog. Dom Anim Endocrinol 3:
Anim Hosp Assoc 26:640, 1990.
117, 1986.
269. Nelson RW, et al: Hyperadrenocorticism in cats.
287. Pinard SA, et al: Traitement de hypercorticisine spon-
Scven cases (1978-1987). J An1 Vet Med Assoc 193:
tane du chien par le ketoconazole: A propos de treize
245, 1988.
cas. Prat Med Chirurg Anim Cie 30:3f9, 1995.
270. Nelson RW, Feldinan EC: Hyperadrenocorticism. In:
288. Poffenbarger EM, et al: Gray-scale ultrasonography in
August JR (ed): Consultations in Feline Internal
the diagnosis of adrenal neoplasia in dogs: Six cases
Medicine. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1991,
(1981-i986). J Ain Vet Med Assoc 192:228, 1988.
p267.
289. Randolph JF, et al: Use of urine cortisol-to-creatinine
271. Nelson RW, et al: Pituitary macroadenomas and ma-
croadenocarcinomas in dogs treated with mitotane for
peradrenocorticism during induction treatment with
pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism: 13 cases
milotane (o.p'-DDD). Am J Vet Res 59:258, 1998.
(1981-1986). J Am Vet Med Assoc 194:1612, 1989.
290. Regnier A, Garmier F: Growth hormone responses to
272. Velson RW. ct al: Topics in the diagnosis and treat-
growth hormone-releusing hormone and clonidine in
ment of canine hyperadrenocorticism. Conp Cont
dogs with Cushing's syndrome. Res Vet Sci 58:169,
Educ 13:1797, 1991.
1995.
273. Nichols R: Probles associated with medical therapy
291. Reusch CE, Feldman EC: Canine hyperadrenocorti-
of canine hyperadrenocorticism. Probl Vet Med 2:
cism due to adrenocortical neoplasia. J Vet Intern
551, 1990.
Med 5:3, 1991.
274.
 Nichols R: Concurrent illness and complications asso-
292. Reusch CE, el al: The effcacy of l-deprenyl in dogs
ciated with hyperadrenocorticism. Probl Vet Med 2:
565,1990.
Intem Med 13:291, 1999.
275. Norman EJ, et al: Dynamic adrcnal fumction testing
293. Rijnberk A, Belshaw BE: An altermative protocol for
in eight dogs witht hyperadrenocorticisim associated
the medical management of canine pituitary-depen-
with adrenocortical neoplasia. Vet Rec 144:551, 1999.
dent hyperadrenocorticism. Vet Rec 122:406, 1988.
276. Ortcga TM, et al: Systemic arterial blood pressure
294. Rijnberk AD, Belshaw BE: o.p'-DDD trcatment of
ad urine protein/creatinine ratio in dogs with hyper-
canine hyperadrcnocorlicism. An altermative protocol.
882 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
In: Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (eds): Kirk's Current Vet-
nine adrenocortical tumour: A clinical emergency. Vet
erinary Therapy XI. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia,
Rec 131:539, 1992.
1992, p 345.
317.
van tlen Broek AHM, Stafford WL: Epidermal and
295. Roberts SM, et al: Effect of ophthalmic prednisolone
 hepatic glucocorticoid receptors in cats and dogs. Res
acetate on the canine adrenal gland and hepatic func-
Vet Sei 52:312, 1992.
tion. Am J Vet Res 45:1711, 1984.
318. van Liew CH, et al: Comparison of results of adreno-
296. Bohson M, et al:_ Adrenal gland function in the cat.
corticotropic hormone stimulation and low-dose dexa-
Cornp Cont Ed 17:1205, 1995.
methasone suppression tests with necropsy findings in
 297. Rothuizen J, et al: GABAergic inhibition of the pitui-
dogs: 8l cases (1985-1995). J Am Vet Med Assoc
tary release of adrenocorticotropin and the α-melano-
211:322, 1997.
  ae jo s e no  ss a 
thy. Domest Anim Endocrinol 13:59, 1996.
dogs with hyperadrenocorticism causedl by adrenocor-
298.Rothuizen J, et al: Aging and the hypothalamus-
tical tunour. Vet Q 17:113, 1995.
pituitary-adrenocortical axis,with specialreference t0
320. van Vonderen IK, et al: Influence of veterinary care
the dog. Acta Endocrinol (Copenh)125:73, 1991.
on the urinary corticoid:creatinine ratio in dogs. J Vet
299. Ruehl WW, et al: Adrenal axis dysfunetion in geriatric
 Intern Med 12:431, 1998.
clogs with cognitive dysfunction. Proc Annu Meet Am
321. van Wijk PA, et al: Molecular screening for somatic
Coll Vet Intern Med 15:119, 1997
pathologie findings associated with large pituitary tl-
Invest 20:1, 1997.
inors in dogs: Eight cases (1976-1984). J Am Vet
 322. van Wijk PA, et al; Effects of corticotropin-relcasing
Med Assoc 193:854, 1988.
hormone, vasopressin and insulin-like growth factor-I
301. Scavelli TD, et al: Results of surgical treatment for
On proliferation of and adrenocorticotropic hormone
hyperadrenocorticism caused by adrenocortical eo-
secretion by canine corticotropic adcnoma. Eur J En-
plasia in the dog: 25 cases (1980-1984). J Am Vet
doerinol 138:309, 1998.
Med Assoc 189:1360, 1986.
323. Vollset I, Jakobsen G: Feline endocrine alopecia-like
302. Schaer M, Ginn PE: Iatrogenic Cushing's syndrome
disease probably induced by medroxyprogesterone ac-
and steroid hepatopathy in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp
etate. Feline Pract 16:16, 1986.
Assoc 35:48,1999.
 324. von Dehn BJ, et al: Pheochromocytoma and hypcrad-
 303. Scholten-Sloof BE, et al: Pituitary-dependent hyper-
renocorticisim in dogs: Six cases (1982- 1992). J Am
adrenocorticism in a family of Dandie-Dinmont terri-
Vet Med Assoc 207:322, 1995.
ers. J Endocrinol L35:535, 1992.
 u op
304. Schulman J, Johnston SD: Hyperadrenocorticism in
s   ao  s
two related Yorkshire terriers. J Am Vet Med Assoc
by dexamethasone. J Am Vet Merd Assoc 192:641,
182:524,1983.
1988.
305. Schwedes CS: Mitotane (o,p'-DDD) treatment in a
326. Voorhout G, et al: Nephratomography and ultraso-
cat with byperadrenocorticism. J Smal Anim Pract
nography for the localization of hyperfunctioning ad-
38:520, 1997.
 s   s   
306. Scott Dw: Dermatologic usc of glucocorticoids:; Sys-
1990.
tenic and topical. Vet Clin North Am 12:19, 1982.
327. Voorhout G, et al: Assessment of survey radiography
307. Scot Dw, et al: Iatrogenic Cushing's syndrorne in1
and comparison with x-ray conputed tonography for
the cat. Feline Pract 12:30, 1982.
detection of hyperfunctioning adrenocortical tumors
308. Scott DW: Cutaneous phlebectasias in_ cushingoid
in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 196:1799, 1990.
dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 21:351, 1985.
328. Ward DA, et al: Band keratopathy associated with
309. Simpson JW, van den Brock AHM: Assessiment of fat
hyperadrenocorticism in the dog. J An Anim Hosp
-aaq yn saop pre saop jeou un uondiose
Assoc 25:583, 1989.
ocorticalism. Res Vet Sci 48:38, 1990.
 329. Watson ADJ, et al: Systemic availability of o,p'-DDD
 310. Smith MC, Feldman EC: Plasma endogenous ACTI
in normal dogs, fasted and fed, and in dogs
with
concentrations and plasma cortisol responses to syn-
hyperadrenocorticism. Res Vet Sci 43:160, 1987.
thetic ACTH and dexamethasone sodium phosphate
 330. Watson ADJ. et al: Plasma cortisol responses to three
in healthy cats. A1n J Vet Res 48:1719, 1987.
311. Solter PF, et al: Assessment of corticosteroid-induced
76:235, 1998.
 alkaline phosphatase isoenzyme as a screening test for
 331. Watson PJ, Hertage ME: Hyperadrenocorticism in
hyperadrenocorticism in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
six cats. J Small Anim Pract 39:175, 1998.
203:534,1993.
 332. White SD: Facial dermatosis in four dogs with hyper-
312. Stolp R, et al: Results of cyproheptadine treatment in
adrenocorticism. J Am Vet Med Assoc 188:144l,
dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism.
1986.
J Endocrinol 101:311, 1984.
 333. White SD, et al: Cutaneous markers of canine hyper-
313. Syakalima M, et al: The age dependent levels of se.
adrenocorticism. Comp Cont Educ 1l:446, 1989.
rum ALP isoenzymes and the dliagnostic significancc
334. Widner WR, Gupill, L: Ienaging techniques for facil.
of corticosteroid-induced ALP during long-term_glu-
pue shop u usonooaptredu jo sisousep su!
cocorticoid treatment. J Vet Med Sci 59:905, 1997.
cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 206:1857, 1995.
 314. Theon AP, Feldinan EC: Megavolt irradiation of pitu-
335. Willard MD, et al: Ketoconazole-induced changes in
itary macrotumors in dogs with neurologic signs.
selected canine hormone concentrations. Am J Vet
I Am Vet Med Assoc 213:225, 1998.
Res 47:2504, 1986.
 315. Valentine RW, Silber A: Feline hyperadrcnocorticism:
336. Willard MD, et al: Effects of long-term administra-
A rare case. Feline Pract 24:6, 1996.
tion of ketoconazole in cats. Am JVet Res 47:2510,
 316. Vandenbergh AGGD, et al: Haemorrhage from a ca-
1986.
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases · 883
337. Willemse T, Mol JA: Coruparison of in vivo and i
355. Eigenmann JE: Growth hormone-delicient disorders
titm corticotropin releasing hormone-stimulaled re-
associated with alopecia in the dog. In: Kirk RW (cd):
Current Veterinary Therapy IX. W.B. Saunders Co.,
Am J Vet Res 55:1677, 1994.
Philadelphia, 1986, p 1015.
338. Wilson SM, Feldman EC: Diagnostic value of the
356. Hamann F, et al: Pituitary function and morphology
steroid-induced isoenzyine of alkaline phosphatase in
in two Cerman shepherd dogs with congenital dwarf.
the dog. J Am Anim Ilosp Assoc 28:245, 1992.
339. Yamini B, et al: Ovarian steroid tumor resernbling
ism. Vet Rec 144:644, 1999.
357. Klesty C, et al: Ein ungewohnlicher Fall von extre-
luteoma associated with hyperadrenocorticism (Gush-
ing's disease) in a dog. Vet Pathol 34:57, 1997.
dackel-hundin wahrend des Diostrus ein Fall von Ak-
340. Young Dw, Keinppainen RJ: Molecular forms of
romegalie? Kleintier Praxis 40:527, 1995.
B-endorphin in the canine pituitary gland. Am J Vet
358. Kooistra HS, et al: Progestin-induced growth hor-
Res 55:567. 1994.
mone (GH) production in the treatrment of dogs with
341. Zenoble RD, Kernppainen RJ: Adrenocortical sup-
congenital GH defciency. Domcst Anim Endocrinol
pression by topically applied corticosteroids in healthy
15:93, 1998.
dogs. J Ain Vet Med Assoc 19l:685, 1987.
359. Lothrop CD, Schmeitzel LP: Crowth hormone-
342. Zerbe CA, et al: Hyperadrenocorticisin in a cat. J Arn
responsive alopecia in dogs. Vet Med Rep 2:82, 1990.
Vet Med Assoc 190:559, 1987.
360. Lund-Larscn TR, Grondalen J: Ateliotic dwarism in
343. Zerbe CA, et al: Effect of nonadrenal illness on acdre-
the German shepherd dog: Low somatomedin activity
nal function in the cat. Am J Vet Res 48:451, 1987.
associated with apparently normal pituitary function
 343a. Zerbe CA: The hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis
(two cases) and with panadenopituitary dysfunction
and pathophysiology of hyperadrenocorticism. Com-
(one case). Acta Vet Scand 17:298, 1976.
pend Cont Educ Pract Vet 21:1134, 1999.
 361. Morison WB, et al: Orally administercd clonidinc as
a secretagogue of growth hormone and as a thymo-
corticism in cats and dogs. Compend Cont Edur
tropie agent in dogs of various ages. Ain ] Vet Res
Pract Vet 22:17, 2000.
51:65, 1990.
343c. Zerbe CA: Differentiating tests to cvaluate hyperad-
362, Nixon AJ, et al: Localization of insulin-like growth
renocorticism in dogs and cats. Compend Cont Educ
factor receptors in the skin folieles of sheep (Ouis
Pract Vet 22:149, 2000.
urles) and changes during an induced growth cycle.
Growth Hormone Physiology and Disease
Comp Biochem Physiol A Physiol 118:1247, 1997.
344. Aribat T, et al: Growth hormone response induced by
 363. Ramsey IK, et al: Concurrent central diabetes insip-
synthetic human growth hormone-releasing factor (1l--
idus and panhypopituitarism in a Gerrman shepherd
dog. J Small Anim Pract 40:271, 1999.
44) in healthy dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 36:367,
364. Randolph JF, et al: Delayed growth in tvo German
1989.
shepherd dog litermates with normal senim concen-
345. Bell AG, et al: Growth hormone responsive dermato-
sis in three dogs. N Z Vet J 41:195, 1993.
trations of growth hormone, thyroxinc, and cortisol.
346. Bercu BB, Diamond FB: Growth hormone neurose-
J Am Vet Med Assoc 196:77, 1990.
cretory dysfunction. Clin Endocrinol Metab 15:537,
 365. Randolph JF, Peterson ME: Acromegaly (growth hor-
mone cxcess) syndromes in dogs and cats. In: Kirk
1986.
347. Bourdin M, et al: Exploration fumctionnelle biochi-
HW, Bonagura JD (eds): Kirk's Current Veterinary
Imique des troubles de la secretion de GH. Proc Gr
Therapy Xf. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1992,
Etud Dermatol Anim Comp 7:20, 1991.
p 322.
348. Cornegliani I, Fabbrini F: Use of 1-thyroxine and
366. Randolph JF, Peterson ME: Growth hormone therapy
medicated shanpoo in three cases of canine pituitary
in the dog, In: Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's Current
Voterinary Therapy Xlil. W.B. Saunders Co., Phila-
dwarfism. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in
Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth-Heinemann,
delphia, 1999, p 376.
Oxford, 1998, p 483.
367. Randolph JF: Personal communicatiou, 1999.
368. Rijnberk A, et al: Disturbed release of growth hor-
herd puppy. Comp Cont Edue 9:931, 1987.
rmone in mature dogs: A comparison with congenital
 350. Dicks P, et al: The localization and characterization of
growth hormone deficiency. Vet Rec 133:542, 1993.
insulin-like rowth factor-l receptors and theinvesti-
369. Rosenkrantz W, Griffin CE: Lysodren therapy in sus-
gation of melatonin receptors on the hair follicles of
pect ardrenal sex hormone dermatosis. Proc Ann
seasonal and nonseasonal fibre-producing goats. J En-
Meet Wld Cong Vet Der1natol 2:121, 1992.
docrinol 151:55, 1996.
370. Roth JA, et al: Thymic abnormalities and growth hor-
351. Dubreuil P, et al: long-term growth horrmonc-releas-
mone deficiency in dogs. Ain J Vet Res 4l:1256,
1980.
like growth factor-l concentations, and bone healing
371. Roth JA, et al: Improvement in clinical condition and
in the beagle, Can J Vet Res 60:7, 1996.
thyinus morphologic features associated with growth
352. Eigenmann JE, et al: Panhypopituitarism caused by a
hormone treatment of irnmunodeficient dwarf dogs.
suprasellar tumor in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
Am J Vet Res 45:1151, 1984.
19:377, 1983.
 372. Schmeitzel LP, Lothrop CD: Hormonal abnormalities 
353. Eigenmann JE, et al: Elevated growth hormone levels
 in Pomeranians with nornal coat and in Pomeranians
and diabetes mellitus in a cat with acromegalic fea-
with growth hormone-responsive dermatosis. J Am
tures. J A1n Anim Hosp Assoc 20:747, 1984.
Vet Med Assoc 197:1333, 1990.
373. Schmeitzel LP, Parker W: Growth hormore and sex
mone oversecrction: Diabetes melitus and acromeg-
hormone alopecia. In: [hrke PJ, et al (eds): Advances
aly. In: Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy
in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol 2. Pergarnon Press,
IX. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1986, p 1006.
New York, 1993, p 451.
884 · Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
374. Schmeitzel LP, et al: Congenital adrenal hypcrplasia-
cystic endometrial hyperplasia in a bitch. J Am Vet
like symdrome. In: Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's Current
Med Assoc 201:107, 1992.
Veterinary Therapy XII. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadel-
395. Feldman SR: Androgen insensitivity syudrome (testic-
phia, 1995.
ular feminization): A model for understanding steroid
375. Scott DW, Concannon PW: Gross and microscopic
     si 
changes in the skin of dogs with progestogen-induced
1992.
acromegaly and elevated growth hornone levels.
 396. Fiorito DA: Hyperestrogcnism in bitches. Comp Cont
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 19:523, 1983.
Edue 14:727, 1992.
376. Scot Dw, Walton DK: Hyposomatotropism in the
397. Fourrier P, Lepesant V: Dysendocrinic sexuelle chez
mature dog: A discussion of 22 cases. J Am Anim
 un caniche male age de 5 ans. Prat Med Chir Anim
Hosp Assoc 22:467, 1986.
Comp 22:395, 1987.
377. Selman PJ. et al: Progestins and growth hormone
398. Griffn C: Linear prepucial erythema. Proc Annu
excess in the dog. Acta Endocrinol 125:42, 1991.
Menb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol An Coll Vet
378. Selman PJ, et al: Progestin treatment in the dog 1.
IDermatol 2:35, 1986.
Effects ngrowthhormne,insuiik rowthfatr
399. Grossman CJ: Regulation of the immune system by
1 and glucose homeostasis. Eur J Endocrinol 131:413,
sex steroids. Endocrinol Rev 5:435, 1984.
1994.
400. Hlammerling R, et al: Is therc a role for estradiol in
379. Selman PJ: Progestins and manmary growth hormone
the etiology of dermatoses in the male dog? Proc
production in the dog. Vet Q 19:s39, 1997.
Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll
380. Shanley KJ, Miller WH: Adult-onset growth hormone
Vet Dermatol 10:82, 1994.
deficiency in sibling Airedale terriers. Comp Cont
401. Herttage ME, Evans, 1I: The effect of progestogen
Educ 9:1076, 1987.
administration on insulin-like growth factor concentra-
381. Trotot V, et al: Effets des conditious le conservation
-u a o  oid sp ad o  sn
du sang total et du plasma de chien sur la concentra-
tern Med 16:702, 1998.
tion plasmatique en hormone de croissance. Rev Med
402. Hubert B, Olivry T: Dermatologie et hormones sex-
Vet 144:909, 1993.
uelles chez. les carnivores domestiques Ire partie:
382. van Garderen E, et al: Expression of growth hormone 
physiopathologie. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 25:477,
in canine mammary tissue and mammary tumors: Ev-
1990.
idence for a potential autocrine/paracrine stmulatory
403. Hubert B, Olivry T: Dermatologie el horrmones sex-
loop. Aim J Pathol 150:1037, 1997.
uelles chez les carmivores dornestiques 2e partie:
Etude clinique. Prat Med Chir Anim Conp 25:483,
383. Yokoyana S, et al: Case of growth hormone respon-
sive dermatosis in a Pomeranian caused by o,p'-DDD
1990.
inhibition of adrenal cortical honnones. J Vet Med
404. Johnson GR, et al: Ultrasouographic features of tes-
51;27, 1998.
ticular neoplasia in dogs: 16 cases (1980- 1988). J Am
Vet Med Assoe 198:1779, 1991.
Sex Hormone Physiology and Disease
405. Ladds PW: The male genital systerm. In: Jubb KV, ct
384. Allan FJ, et al: Endocrine alopecia in a miniature
al (eds): Pathology of Domestie Animals, 4th ed, Vol
poodle. N Z Vet J 43:110, 1995.
3. Academic Press, New York, 1993, p 471.
 385. Ashley PF, et al: Effect of oral melatonin administra-
406. Laing EJ, et al. Spermatie corrl torsion and Scrtoli
tion on sex hormone, prolactin, and thyroid hormone
cell fumor in a dog. J Am Vet Mad Assoc 183:879,
concentration in adult dogs. J Arn Vot Med Assoc
1983.
215:1111, 1999.
407. Lanore D, et al: Metastase secretante d'un sertoli-
386. Barsanti JA, et al: Diethylstilbestrol-induced alopecia
nome. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 27:727, 1992.
in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoe 182:63, 1983.
408. Lecomte R: Hyperoestrogenisme spontane ou iatro-
387. Bruinsma DL, Ackerman LA: Malc pscudoherma-
gene et ses repercussions cliniques et hematologiques.
phroditism in a Miniature Schnauzer. Vet Med Small
Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 24:73, 1989.
Anim Clin 78:1568, 1983.
 409. Leyva-Ocariz H: Effct of hyperadrenocorticism and
388. Carlson RA: Endoerine alopecia in a dog showing
diahetes melitus on serum progesteronc conccntra-
response to FSH adininistration. I Am Anim Hosp
tions during early metoestrus of pregnant and non-
Assoc 21:735, 1985.
pregnant cycles induced by pregnant mares' serum
389. Curtis CF, et al: Investigation of the reproductive and
gonadotrophin in domestic dogs. J Reprod Fert Suppl
growth hormone status of dogs affected by idiopathic
47:371, 1993.
recurrent fank alopecia. J Small Anim Pract 6:162,
410. Mann FA, et al: Serum testosterone and estradiol
1996.
17-B concentrations in 15 dogs with perineal hernia.
390. Eigenmann JE: Estrogen-induced Bank alopecia in
I Arm Vet Med Assoc 194:1578, 1989.
the femmale dog: Evidence for local rather than sys-
411. Medleau L: Sex hormone-associated cndocrine alope-
temic hyperestrogenisn. J An Aim Hosp Asso: 20:
cias in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 25:689, 1989.
621, 1984.
412. Miller WH jr: Sex hormore-related dermatoses in
391. England GCW, et al: Evaluation of the testosterone
dogs. In: Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy
response to hCC and the identifcation of a presumed
X. W.B. Saunders Co., 1989, p 595.
anorchid dog. J Small Anin Pract 30:44l, 1989.
413. Morris Bf: Fatal bone marrow suppression as a rcsult
392. England GCW: Ultasonographie diagnosis of nonpalp-
of Sertoli cell tumor. Vet Med Sinall Anim Clin 78:
able Sertoli cell tumors in inferule dogs. J Small
1070, 1983.
Anim Pract 36:476, 1995.
414. Nemzek JA, et al: Cystic ovaries and hypcrestrogen-
ism in a canine fernale pseudohermuaplirodite. J An
with Sertoli cell tumor and alopccia in a dog. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 28:402. 1992.
Vet Med Assoc 188:1058, 1986.
415. Nuttall T: What is your diaguosis? J Small Anim Pract
394. Fayrer-Hosken RA, et al: Follicular cystic ovaries and
39:509, 1998.
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases · 885
416. Paradis M: Melatonin therapy for caninc alopecia. In:
436. Huntley AC: The cutaneous manifestations of diahe-
Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy
tes inelitus. J An Acad Dermatol 7:427, 1982.
XIII. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1999. p 546.
437. Jones BR, et al: Cutaneous xanthomnata associated
417. Pluhar GF, et al: Cranulosa cell tumor in an ovario-
with diabetes mellitus in a cat. J Small Anim Pract
hysterectornized dog. J Ain Vet Med Assoc 207:1063,
26:33, 1985.
1995.
438. Jones BR, ot al: Inherited hyperchylomieronermia in
418. Schmeitzel LP, Lothrop CD: Sex hormones and skin
the cat. Felinc Pract 16:7, 1986.
disease. Vet Med Rep 2:28, 1990.
439. Kinura T, Doi K: The effect of topical minoxidil
419. Scott IDW, Reiners TJ: Tail gland and perianal gland
hyperplasia associated with tcsticular neoplasia and
less descendants of Mcxican hairless dogs. Vet Der-
hypertestosteronemia in a dog. Canine Pract 13:15,
matol 8:107, 1997.
1986.
440. Kwoxchka KW, Short BC: Cutaneous xanthomatosis
420. Suess RP, et al: Bone marrow hypoplasia in a femi-
aud diabetes mellitus following long-termn therapy
nized dog with an interstitial cell tumor. J Am Vct
with megestrol acetate in a cat. Comp Cont Educ 6:
Med Assoe 200:1346, 1992.
185, 1984.
Watson ADj: Oestrogen-induced alopecia in a bitch.
441. Latiner KS, Mahaffey EA: Neutrophil adherence and
421.
J Small Anin Pract 26:17, 1985.
Weaver AD: Survcy with follow-up of 67 dogs with
dogs. Am J Vet Res 45:1498, 1984.
422.
442. MeNeil PE: The underlying pathology of the hepato-
testicular Sertoli cell tumours. Vet Rec 113:105, 1983.
cutaneous syudromc: A report of 18 cases. In: Ihrke
Miscellaneous
PJ, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Derrmatology.
423. Bond R, et al: Metabolic epidermal necrosis in two
Vol 2. Pergamon Press, Now York, 1993, p 113.
dogs with different underlying diseases. Vet Ree 136:
443. Miller WHi Jr, et al: Necrolytic inigratory crythcma in
466, 1995.
dogs: A hepatocutaneous syndrome. J An Anirn Hosp
424. Bruskiewicz KA, ct al: Diabetic ketosis and ketoacido-
Assoec 26:573, 1990.
sis in cats: 42 cases (1980-1995). J Am Vet Med
444. Miller WH Jr, et al: Necrolytic migratory erythema in
Assoc 211:188, 1997.
a dog with a glucagon-secreting endocrine turnor. Vet
425. Bussieras J, et al: Interet possible du minoxidil dans
Dermatol 2:179, 1991.
le traitement de certaines alopecies canines. Prat Med
445. Nara T, et al: Necrolytic migratory erytheina in a
Chir Anim Comp 22:25, 1987.
dog. J Vet Med Tokyo 49:464, 1996.
426. Camy G: Alopecie endocrinienne associee a un dia-
 446. Niemand HG: Bilabericht. Kleintierpraxis 16:193.
bete chez un chien. Point Vet 20:501, 1988.
1971.
427. Carpenter JL, et al: Cutaneous xanthogranuloma and
447. Patcl A, et al: A case of mctabolie cpidermal nccrosis
in a cat. Vet Denmatol 7:221, 1996.
viral papilloma on an cyelid of a cat. Vet Dermatol 3:
448. Price VH (ed): Rogaine (topical minoxidil, 2%) in the
1987, 1992.
428. Chastain CB, Graham CL: Xanthomatosis secondary
 management of male pattern baldness and alopecia
areata. J Am Acad Dermatol 16(3 Part 2), 1987.
to diabetes nellitus in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
449. Power HT: What's up about the hepatocutaneous
172:1209, 1978.
syndrome? Dermatology Dialogue, Winter 1999, p 13.
429. Denerolle Pj: Three cases of feline cntaneous xantho-
450. Tahoada J, Merchant SR: Superficial necrolytic dcr-
mas. Proc Wld Cong Vet Dernatol 2:84, 1992.
matitis and the liver. Proc Am Coll Vet Intern Med
430. Foster AP, et al: Recognizing canine hepatocutaneous
15:534, 1997.
syndrome. Vet Medl 92:1050, 1997.
451.
 Torres SMF, et al: Resolution of superficial necrolytic
431, Grieshaber TI, ct al: Spontaneous cutaneous {erup-
dormatitis following excision of a glucagon-secreting
tive} xanthomatosis in two cats. J Am Anim Hosp
panereatic neoplasm in a dog. I Am Anim Hosp As-
Assoc 27:509, 1991.
soc 33:313, 1997.
432. Gros TE, et al: Glucagon-producing pancrcatic cndo-
452. Torres S, et al; Superficial necrolytic dermatitis and a
r   s o  sr a
panereatic endlocrine tumor in a dog. J Small Anim
dermatitis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 197:1619, 1990.
Pract 38:246, 1997.
453. Vitale CB, et al: IDiet induced alterations in lipid
433. Gross TL, et al: Superficial necrolytic derrmatitis (nec-
metabolism and associated cutaneous xanthoma
rolytic migratory erythema) in dogs. Vet Pathol 30:75,
for-
mation in 5 cats. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Ad-
1993.
vances in Veterinary
/ Dermatology III. Butterworth-
434. Haitjema H: Metabolic epidermal necrosis associated
Heinemann, Oxford, 1998, p 243.
with hepatopathy in a dog. Aust Vet Practit 25:20,
454. Walton DK, et al: Ulcerative derinatosis associatcd
1995.
with diabetes mellitus in the dog: A report of four
435. Harvey RG: The use of minoxidil (Loniten, Lpjohn),
cases. J An Aniun Hosp Assoc 22:79, 1986.
in selected cases of canine alopecia: A report of an
455.
Willinson JS: Spontaneous diabetes melltus. Vet Rec
open trial. Vet Derinatol Newsl 12:36, 1990.
72:548, 1960.
Chapter
Acguired
Alopecias
 n acquired alopecia is a hair loss that develops sometime during the life of an
 animal. The hereditary alopecias (see Chap. 12) and hair losses that develop as a
result of specific disease processes, such as dernatophytosis, endocrine abnormalities,
immunologic diseases, or self-inficted hair loss from hypersensitivity or parasitism are
discussed elsewhere in this book. The conditions presented here include a potpourri of
 acquired disorders characterized predominantly by noninfanmatory alopecia. In most
instances, the etiopathogenesis of these disorders is poorly understood.
· CaNINE ACQUIRED ALOPECIAS
Canine Pinnal Alopecia
Pinnal alopecia is most common in dachshunds but has also been observed in other
breeds, such as Chihuahuas, Boston terriers, Whippets, and Italian greyhounds.4 The
pinnal alopecia is seldom noticed in animals less than l year of age. If it is, a genetic
alopecia is likely. At frst, the haircoat is thinner and the hairs become smallr than
normal on the pinnae. Progressive diminution of the hairs makes the alopecia more
prevalent as the dog ages. With close observation, however, the clinician notes that very
small vellus hairs are stil present (Fig. ll-LA). Uncommonly, the condition may progress
to total pinnal alopecia when the dog reaches 8 to 9 years of age. The remainder of the
dog's coat is normal. Diagnosis is facilitated by dermatopathologic examination, which
heips rule out other diseases. Changes similar to those of pattern baldness may be seen;
these changes include hair follicles that are often in anagen but are reduced in length and
 diameter (miniaturized) (Fig. 1l-2). No treatment is required, because this is a benign
number of alopecia syndromes (see Chap. 3) and anecdotal reports suggest that it may be
I (e  as s s an  
 It is important to differentiate such spontaneous alopecias from dermatoses that cause
hair loss on the pinnae. Hair follicle dysplasias, estrogen-responsive dermatosis, rare cases
of hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism, dermatophytosis, and alopecia areata may also
of the pinnae, even though the otic glucocoricoid-containing preparation may only be
applied to the concave surface of the pinnae or to the ear canal (Fig. 11-3). This has
been seen by the authors in dachshunds wherein it also aggravated the pinnal alopecia
present previously. However, these other differentials do not feature miniaturization of
hairs and hair follicles. Vasculitis or ischemic dermatitis can occur on the pinnae and
cause alopecia with severe erythema, scaling, crusting, and eventually, ulceration and
tissue loss at the pinnal margin. Other inflammatory diseases may cause alopecia and are
 differentiated by the history of inflammation or previous pruritus.
88
888·Acquired Alopecias
G
FIGURE II-I. A, Pinnal alopecia in a Dachslhund. Note that the small vellus hairs are still present on folded
skin margins. B, Telogen defuxion. Postpartum shedding resulting from the physiologic stress of gestation and
lactation. C, Traction alopecia in a Maltese. Note the oval crythematous alopecic patch caused by a barrette used
to pull the hair snugly forward. D, Yorkshire terrier with short hair syndrome. This dog previously had long, silky
hair that reached the floor. E, Area of alopecia that persisted for 3/a months in a Siberian husky hefore hair
unknowm. G, Preauricular feline alopecia. Note normal sparseness of hair between the eye and the ear. H, Felinc 
symmetrie alopecia. Ventral view showing characteristic bilateral alopecia without slin reaction or lesions.
Acquired Alopecias · 889
FIGURE II-2. Pinnal alopccia. Note marked
attenuation and miniaturization of hair follicle in
this biopsy specinen.
FIGURE II-3. Pinnal alopecia in
a Dachshund that was aggravated by
the use of the topical glucocorticoid
 containing the product clobetasol.
890 · Acquired Alopecias
Pattern Baldness
 Pattem baldness is most commonly secn in Dachshunds but may be seen in breeds such
 as the Manchester terrier, miniature Doberman pinscher, and Chihuahua.26, 43 The cause
is unknown, but the alopecia is probably genetically determined (see Chap. 12).
Canine Follicular Dysplasia
There is a group of diseases characterized by coat changes, including alopecia, that arc
referred to as follicular dysplasia.43 Color dilution alopecia is a well-documented hereditary
follicular dysplasia (see Chap.12). Among certain breeds, including Siberian huskies, Irish
water spaniels, Portuguese water dogs, curly coated retriever, Boxer, Airedale terrier,
English and French bulldogs, and miniature Schnauzers, there is a marked predilection,
suggesting a genetic basis (see Chap. 12).14. 43 In addition, there are several endocrine
 syndromes (adrenal sex hormone imbalances) that may also have abnormalities in follicular
receptors, indlicating a component of the disease that may be considered a dysplasia.
These syndromes also have predisposed breeds, the Pomeranian, the Samoyed, and the
Chow Chow (see Chap. 10). Occasionally, nonpredisposed breeds also develop similar
 s s a  d  s   s   s
coat color, loss of primary hairs and retention of secondary hairs; development of curly or
twisted hairshafts; and varying degrees of alopecia. Some cases have presented for failure
to regrow their coat following clipping. These dogs were usually clipped because of a poor
or dull coat that the owner believed would improve with new growth after clipping. In
 general, changes are most pronounced on the truncal part of the body; however, the neck
and proximal extremities are often involved as well.
 Diagnosis is based on histopathologic examination. Different features may be seen in
the various breeds, suggesting that multiple abnormalities may be occurring and vary from
breed to breed or syndrome to syndrome. Histologic changes can include macromelano-
 somes, distortion of hairshafts or follicle shape, follicular hyperkeratosis, distorted anagen
hair bulbs, abnormal tricholemmal keratinization, and a predominance of catagen or
telogen follicles.14, 5s Treatment of these disorders has not been very successful, and most
reports are anecdotal. Synthetic retinoids, particularly etretinate, may be helpful in some
cases.12. 13 32 Melatonin, testosterone, and mitotane have been used in some cases. Testos-
terone and mitotane should be considered only when the clients insist, because the
disease is more benign than the therapy. Additionally, the adrenal or sex hormone abnor-
Iality should be documented, as described in Chapter 10.
Cyclic Follicular Dysplasia
Dogs occasionally develop a temporary pattern alopecia.43 Typicaly, truncal alopecia or
marked thinning of the haircoat is present, but associated scaling and inflammation are
absent. Most commonly, lesions involve the trunk, especially the fank region. In some
cases, the problem is a seasonal one, with hair loss occuring primarily in the winter or
spring months. This kind of alopecia appears to be more of a problem in Alaska, where it
has been seen in Labrador retrievers, mixed breeds, Yorkshire terriers, and an Airedale
terrier36, therefore, duration of light exposure may be important. Some dogs may experi-
ence only one or two episodes, whereas others develop some degree of alopecia every
 year. In a sense, this condition may be considered an abnormal shedding patterm.
SEASONAL FLANK ALOPECIA
Seasonal fank alopecia is a more loealized cyelic folicular dysplasia that also tends to
occur in the fall or spring.4, 14, 25. 42 Some dogs lose hair in the late fall and regrow it
spontaneously in the spring: others do the reverse and lose hair in the spring. Airedale
terriers, English bulldogs and Boxers are at higher risk, but the condition has been
Acquired Alopecias · 891
FIGURE II-4. English bulldog
with recurrent seasonal flank alope-
Cia (folieular dlysplasia). Note alope-
cia and hyperpigmentation.
 described in miniature Schnauzers, miniature Poodles, Doberman pinschers, Bouvier des
Flandres, Scottish terriers, Staffordshire terriers, French bulldogs, and Affenpinschers (see
Chap. 12).25, 42, 5, 5s These dogs devclop a nonscarring alopecia that is most often confined
to the thoracolumbar region (Fig. 1l-4). The lesions are bilaterally symmetric, annular to
 polycyclic in shape, and have well-demarcated borders; in addition, the alopecic skin is
usually markedly hyperpigmented (Fig. 11-5). Scaling and bacterial foliculitis may occur
in the alopecic areas. In some dogs, only onc sidc of the body is affccted, or one side is
more severely affected than the other.2s An occasional dog will also develop alopecia and
 occurs in 3 to 4 months may consist of completely normal hair, or hair that is a different
color, texture, or both. In over half the cases, the hair loss occurs at least twice in
successive years.25 In the Affenpinschers reported with this condition, the hair loss only
occurred in the winter, when the dogs were kept in a conservatory without artificial light
or heat.5s To date, underlying causes, such as common endocrinopathies, have not been
identifed. A study evalnating reproductive hormones and growth hormone response to
xylazine was normal except for an elevated post-adrenocorticotropic hornone (ACTH)-
FIGURE II-5. Close-up of thte
dog in Figure 1l-4. Note the gener-
ally well-circumscribed  scalloped
Imargins of alopecia.
892·Acquired Alopecias
stimulated progesterone, which was greater in the affected group during the minimum
hormonal imbalance, possibly related to melatonin or prolactin, because these two hor-
mones interact in an inverse relationship. Elevated prolactin stimulates shedding in
horses.53 Possibly, melatonin therapy inhibits prolactin release, which decreases the exces.
sive shedding in these dogs.
Histologically, the fully devcloped lesions reveal follicular atrophy and infundibular
hyperkeratosis, which extends into the opening of secondary follicles and sebaceous ducts,
giving the appearance of a malformed foot.2s Dysplastic follcles usually have an octopus-
or jelly fish- ike appearance (Fig. 11 -6A); the hyperkeratotic, distended infundibulum is
the body and the subjacent secondary follicles are the tentacles.*7 Sebaceous glands are
melanized (see Fig. li -6B). Because melanin-containing sebocytes undergo their normal
degenerative process, plugs of melanin are formed in sebaceous ducts and extruded as
casts into the distended hair follicle infundibulum.42
dorap on ano shop aos sop u Xue u aqnpaidun si ssouond su
alopecia does not recur; still other dogs eventually develop permanent alopecia.25, 42 About
20% of the dogs have only one episode of alopecia. The degree of alopecia is also
variable, with some dogs developing a virtually identical hair loss year after year and other
dogs deveioping larger areas of hair loss as years go by.25s 29 Treatment with subcutaneous
mclatonin implants or injections was reported successful in 9 of 9 dogs with recurrent
fiank alopecia.28.29
FIGURE II-6. A. Seasonal flank alopecia. Note the dysplastic, keratin-filled hair follicles with tentacular projections
B, Close-up of A. Note the fne stippling of the sebaceous gland with melanin and themelanin cast within the associated
sebaceous duict.
Acquired Alopecias · 893
 There were four Airedalcs, four Boxers, and one giant Schnauzer that had had
multiple recurences of alopecia. Six of these dogs were treated with three 12-mg subcuta-
neous implants (total dose of 36 mg) of melatonin. Three were treated twice with 12.5-mg
 subcutaneous injections of melatonin at 2-week intervals. At present, there are anecdotal
reports that oral melatonin is also efficacious, with a varicty of doses being recommended.
The current recommendations are 3 to 6 mg PO q8 to 12h.20
Anagen and Telogen Defluxion
 ln anagen defuxion, a special circumstancc (e.g., antimitotic drugs, infectious diseases,
 endocrine disorders, or metabolic diseases) interferes with anagcn, rcsulting in abnormali-
ties of the hair follicle and hair shaft. Hair loss occurs suddenly, within days of thc insult,
as the growth phase continues (Fig. 11-7A and B)10 24 43 In telogen defuxion, a stressful
circumstance (e.g, high fever, pregnancy, shock, severe ilness, surgery, or anesthesia)
causes the abrupt, premature cessation of growth of many anagen hair folicles and the
synchronization of these hair follicles in catagen, then in telogen.l0. 24 43 Within 1 to 3
months of the initial insult, a large number of telogen hairs are shed as a new wave of
hair folicle cyclic activity begins (see Fig. 1l - 1B).
(1) eisd jeony aay aay on pasodnd uaaq sq uap uaan 'sueq u
immediate anagen release, the most common type, wherein anagen hair follicles prema-
FIGURE II-7. A, Anagen deflux-
iou jn a kitten dinring the course of an
 pa sm  
fractured appearance of the haircoat.
B, Hairs from a dog with anagen te-
luxion. Note the focal area of tran-
sient mctalolic arrest and the struc-
tural defect that is susceptible to
fracture: (arrow).
B
894 · Acquired Alopecias
turely enter telogen and hair loss begins within 3 to 5 weeks (e.g., drug effects; periods of
physiologic stress); (2) delayed anagen release, a common form, wherein follicles remain in
 prolonged anagen and their "release" results in increased shedding in 2 to 3 months (e.g.
postpartum hair loss;: (3) short anagen, a very speculative form, wherein an idiopathic
shortening of anagen results in increased shedding and decreased hair length: (4) immedi-
ute telogen release, wherein normal telogen is shortened and hair loss begins in a few days
Or weeks (e.g., drug effects, such as minoxidil); and (5) delayed telogen release, wherein
telogen is prolonged (e.g., irregularities in photoperiod).
Diagnosis is based on history, physical examination, and direct hair examination.
  e   rs   a n   
nonpigrmented root end that lacks root sheaths (see Fig. 2-28B). Anagen defuxion hairs
are characterized by irregularities and dysplastic changes. The diameter of the shaft may
be irregularly narrowed and deformed, and breaking often occurs at such structurally
weakened sites, resulting in ragged points (see Fig. 2-28F). Skin biopsy is only rarcly
helpful. When the alopecia due to telogen defluxion begins, histopathologic examination
shows only normal skin. In anagen defuxion, the characteristic changes are usually most
evident in the affected hairs, and these are usuall lost when the skin is clipped for
mented cell nuclei in the keratinocytes of the hair matrix of anagen hair follicles, and
eosinophilic dysplastic hair shafts within the pilar canal 58
 Both anagen and telogen defluxion spontaneously resolve when the inciting factor is
relieved.
Excessive Shedding
Owners often ask “Why does my dog (or cat) shed so much? They are naturally con-
ccrncd about large amounts of hair getting on their rugs, furniture, and clothing. The
shedding of hair is reported as the biggest disadvantage of pet ownership.9 When owners
perceive shedding hair as excessive, it compounds this feeling. If excessively shed hairs are
not associated with gross alopecia, the condition may cause inconvenience to the owner,
but it is probably normal or at least causes no problem for the animal. The hair growth
cycle is controlled by a number of factors (see Chap. l), and the questions about shedding
are often difficult to answer. Very little information about it is available in the literature.
 In the northern hermisphere, many outdoor dogs and cats shed to varying degrees in
spring and fall, indoor pets may shed all year long. When animals are shedding exces-
sively, many hairs can be easily epilated, but areas of actual alopecia cannot be created. In
contrast, the clinician can usually create alopecia by gentle manual epilation in animals
with hair loss due to endocrine disorders and follicular dysplasias. When there is no
obvious clinical disease, modification of behavior, diet, or adjustment of light and tempera-
ture can be considered treatment. Hyperexcitable or nervous animals seem to shed rnore
treatments may be beneficial. If no abnornal conditions can be discovered, the only
treatment is to remove the dead telogen hairs from the animal by combing. brushing, or
in some cases, vacuuming. Loshed (A.B.S.) is marketed in a spray, wipe-on sheet, and
shampoo formulation for dogs and cats. The spray and wipe-on formulations contain
keratin, ainino acids, vitamins, essential unsaturated fatty acids, and herbal extracts, and
the manufacturer claims that regular use will reduce excessive shedding. Detailed studies
on its effcacy or mode of action are unavailable.
Traction Alopecia
Traction alopecia has been described in dogs that have had barrettes, rubber bands, or
other methods used to tie up their hair.35. 58 when these devices have been applied toc
tightly or for too much time, alopecia may result. Initially, an infammatory plaque may
 Occur, but it progresses to an atrophic scarred patch. Invariably, lesions are present on the
top or lateral aspects of the cranium. If the disease is allowed to progress too long, the
alopecia becomes permanent (see Fig. 1l-lC).
Acquired Alopecias · 895
 Diagnosis is based on the characteristic history and physical exaimination findings. In
the alopecia. Early lesions should be differentiated fromn alopecia areata, pseudopelade,
s si  s  r s   pp s a p 
latation. Hydropic degeneration of epidermal basal cells and apoptosis of keratinocytes
may be seen. Chronic cases may be characterized by fibrosing dermatitis and scarring
alopecia or a "cell-poor" hydropic interface dermatosis with marked pilosebaceous atrophy
("faded" follicles).
 Treatment consists of instructing the owner regarding proper placement of hair-
holding devices. Atrophic scars do not respond to medical thcrapy; if treatment is desired
for cosmetic purposes, surgical excision is required.
Trichorrhexis Nodosa
Trichorhexis nodosa appears along the hair shaft as small, beaded swellings associated
with a loss of cuticle.22 56 The expanded areas are composed of frayed cortical fibers
through which the hair readily fractures, The basic cause is trauma, and a contributing
factor is inherent weakness of the hair shaft. Examples of physical trauma include exces-
sive brushing, back combing, application of heat, and prolonged μltraviolet light exposure.
Sources of chemical trauma include bathing in excessively salty water or chlorinated
 swimming pools, shampooing, and insecticidal or acaricidal dips.47 Trichorrhexis nodosa
has also been reported in association with amitriptyline thcrapy.47
 Clinical signs include nultifocal or generalized hypotrichosis, wherein affected areas
show broken, stubby hairs (Fig. 1l-8). A trichograrm reveals hairs with nodular areas of
cortical splitting that resemble two brooms pushed together (see Fig. 11- 19).
Treatment requires eliminating the source of physical or chemical trauma.
Medullary Trichomalacia
 Medullary trichomalacia results in patchy alopecia, especially in Gennan shepherd dogs
(see Chap. 12).54
Trichoptilosis
Trichoptilosis ("split ends") is a common hair shaft abnormality associated with the cumu-
lative effects of chemical and physical trauma. A severe form, resulting in patchy alopecia,
has been described in Golden retrievers (see Chap. 12).46
FIGURE II-8. Trichorrhexis no-
dosa in a Greyhound associatcd with
amibriptyline therapy. Note broken
hairs and patchy alopccia. (Courtesy
C. Tieghi.)
896 · Acquired Alopecias
FIGURE II-9. Topical steroid-
induced erythema,  hyperpigmenta-
tion, and Haccid bullae in groin of a
sop
Injection Reactions
Injection reactions may induce focal areas of alopecia.47 Two types may be sccn. In the
first, there is an inflaininatory rcaction that is usually either a panniculitis or a vasculitis.
Rabies vaccines (particularly those licensed for subcutaneous use) are most commonly
p s d psse a  ar o  is   pe 
dermal and epidermal atrophy. This form of reaction most commonly occurs with subcuta-
neous injections of glucocortieoid or progestational compounds.
 Lesions are most commonly seen over the shoulders, back, and posterolateral thighs,
which are sites where injections are given. The inflammatory reactions initialy present as
a circular to oval crythcmatous plaque. It is firrm when palpated and may extend into the
 deeper tissues. In some cases, the skin is not crythematous but just thickened and firm. In
 other cases, there is an initial subcutaneous swelling (panniculitis). Chronically, the alope-
cic area becomes hyperpigmented and shiny, with or without mild scaling. The noninflam-
matory form presents as an atrophic, hypopigmented, oval-to-circular patch. With both
forms, the first signs of the lesions usually occur 2 to 4 months after an injection.
Diagnosis is based on the presence of typical lesions with a corpatible history.
Differential diagnoses are dermatophytosis, foliculitis, cellulitis, demodicosis, alopecia
areata, pseudopelade, and localized scleroderma. Dermatopathologic examination is useful
for establishing the diagunosis and ruling out the other differentials. In the inflammatory
d o a su i e sd e sd jo saa a 
ized, atrophic, and occasionally, miniaturized. In the noninfammatory form, varying de-
 grees of dermal and pilosebaceous atrophy are present.
Treatment is not usually required, although it may take months to over a ycar before 
occur, the new hairs are often a different color. When hair growth does not recur, surgical.
excision is effective. For the infammatory form, intralesional or systemic glucocorticoids
may be beneficial. Pentoxifylline and dapsone have been used in the vasculitic form (see 
Chap. 9).
Topical Glucocorticoid Reactions
Topical products containing potent glucocorticoids may cause focal alopecia. Concurrent
dermal atrophy,pyoderma,accid subepidermal bullae,comedones,ormilia-ike lesions
 may also be present in some cases (Fig. 1ll -9).1s The most common history is the initial
Acquired Alopecias · 897
effective use of a topical glucocorticoid-containing procduct for thc treatrnent of localized
pruritus or papular dermatitis. With time, the reaction to the topical starts to induce
lesions seen by the client, which are not attributed to the topical product. The topical
 product is then used more frequently, for a prolonged period of time, and sometimes on
 an increasingly larger area of skin. Lesions are most often seen on the groin or convex
base of the pinnae (see Fig. 11-3).
Short Hair Syndrome of Silky Breeds
 Yorkshire terriers and silky terriers normally have long, silky hair coats. Thc luxurious coat
was achieved by many generations of selective breeding, and it is a source of great pride
and the coat is replaced with hairs that never grow to their former full fength (see Fig.
trying vitamin and mineral supplements or coat conditioners containing fatty acids. The
affected dogs have no itching, erythema, or scaling of the skin. Onset occurs when the
dog is l to 5 years of age. There are no broken or bitten hairs. Because the long silky
hairs are gone, the remaining haircoat would be adequate for a mixed-brced dog or a
purebred dog with shorter hair. The condition also occurs in youngcr dogs. In such cases,
the puppy coat is normal, but it is replaced with a permanent shorter coat. The abnormal
Dew coat is apparent when the dog is 5 months of age. The hair on the head is of normal
length; however, the posterior abdominal area, hind legs, and chest have hairs that are
shorter than normal. There is no scaliness or inflammation of the skin.
It can only be theorized that the hair cycle has been shortened by some umknown!
factor, such that the hairs are shed before they reach their normal full length. The most
important differential diagnoses are hair follicle dysplasias, endocrine (especially hypothy-
roidism) and genetic disorders, and psychogenic alopecia. There is no known treatment.
Postclipping Alopecia
Failure to regrow hair following clipping has been termed post-clipping alopecia or
folicular arrest.14.43 The hairs may not regrow for up to 24 nonths, but they usually
regrow within l year. Although this condition has been described as relatively common,
the authors consider it uncommon in their clinical experiences and discussion with groom-
ers and surgeons. It is seen more often in breeds with long, thick coats, such as Sibcrian
huskies and Chow Chows, but it may occur in any dog (see Figs. 11- 1E, 11-10, and 11-
11). The condition is most commonly seen following clipping for surgical procedures or
for the removal of mats. The clnical appearance is typical; in thc affcted areas, the coat
looks exactly as it did after it was clipped several months previously. The rest of the coat
is usually normal. It has been proposed that this syndrome may occur as the result of
 possibility, however, is that these dogs are in their normal catagen stage of hair growth,
between losing and growing a new haircoat. This theory is supported by thc discovery of
similar histologic changes in biopsies from normal-haired and affected areasi2; both can
show catagen arrest. Most of these dogs regrow hair in the clipped area after they go
through a heavy shedding or so-called blowing of their coat.12
Cicatricial Alopecia
 A variety of diseases may result in a scarring alopecia. Once adnexal units are replaced by
scar tissue, hair loss becomes permanent.io In addition to the scarring diseases, deep
 physical, thermal, and chemical injury may result in scarring alopecia.
Chronic Radiant Heat Dermatitis
This symdrome, also referred to as erythema ab igne, was recently described in two dogs.7
Erythema ab igme occurs in humans from prolonged and repetitive exposure to moderate
898 · Acquired Alopecias
FIGURE II-I0. Postclipping alopecia in an
Akita. Absence of hair regrowth at site of fraclure
ns e suu gt reda
FIGURE 1I-Il. Postclipping alo-
pecia in an English bulldog. Absence
of hair regrowth al site of intradler-
mal skin testing I year later.
Acquired Alopecias · 899
heat and results in erytherna and hyperpigmentation. In the two dogs reported, the major
findings were sharply narginated, irregular, asymmetric, alopecic patches. Variable degrees
 Of crytherma, central hypopigmentation, peripheral hyperpigmentation, crusts, and ulcer-
ation were seen. The dorsolateral thorax was most affected. Both dogs would lay by
heating sources (infrared lamp, burning stove). Histopathology differs depending on the
stage biopsied. Acute lesions were characterized by epidermal atrophy, focal basal cell
vacuolation, and epithelial apoptosis, which may involve the adnexal epithelium. These
 apoptotic cells had enlarged, irregular, hyperchromatice nuclei. Scarring alopecia remained
following removal of the source of the heat (see Chap. 16).
Follicular Lipidosis of Rottweilers
This recently recognized syndrome occurs in young Rottweilers of either sex. Although the
ctiology is unknown, thc exclusive occurrence in Rottweilers suggests genetic predisposi-
tion (see Chap. 12).17 All reported dogs and most seen by the authors were younger than
1 year of age. Hypotrichosis of the red-colored points is seen. The degree of alopecia may
r o (  s a a se    sy  p 
case had concurrent thyroid atrophy and chronic renal disease. One author (CEG) has
hormone (TsH) response tests were not done. In all dogs followed, the disease improves
 or completely resolves clinically. Histopathology of affected skin shows hair matrix cells to
 be swollen and vacuolated (Fig. 11-13). Special stains and electron microscopy revealed
lipid within the vacuoles (sec Chap. 12).17
Alopecia Mucinosa
 A 10-year-old Labrador retriever was reported with an ll-month history of progressive
alopecia that startcd on the head and progressed to involve the limbs and patches on the
trunk.? Periodic patchy hair growth would occur intermittently. Generalized scaling was
also noted. A nornocytic norinochromic anemia, hyperglobulinemia and positive antinu-
clear antibody tcst (ANA > 1:32) were present. A total serum thyroxine was normal.
Histopathology rcvcaled orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, acanthosis, hydropic degeneration
of basal cells, sparse apoptosis of keratinocytes, pigmentary incontinence, and mononu-
 infammation with infltration of lymphocytes into the folicular and sebaceous epithelium,
epithelial degeneration, and cystic spaces within the folicular epithelium. These spaces
stained positivc for mucin.
FIGURE I1-I2. Rottwcilcr with
follicular lipidosis: note the thinning
 alopecia of the red-haired areas and
the unaffected  black  lhair  on  the
face.
900 · Acquired Alopccias
FIGURE II-I3. Follicular lipi-
dosis. Note the vacuolar changes of
the hair bulbs.
● FELINE ACQUIRED ALOPECIAS
Feline Pinnal Alopecia
  s   eo  d ss e d s s 
1F).40 Lesions are typically present on both pinnae. The alopecia may be patchy or involve
most of the pinnal surface, and the affected'skin is clinically normal. After several months,
the hair regrows without treatment. The cause is unknown.4 Histopathologic findings have
not been reported.
Feline Preauricular Alopecia
The temporal region between the ear and eye of cats is more sparsely haired than are
other parts of the head (see Fig. 1ll-1G).ao This is a physiologic, not a pathologic,
condition.40 In long-haired or densely coated cats, this area is not noticeable; however, in
cats with short or less dense haircoats, it can look like alopecia. When cat owners ask their
veterinarians about the condition, they can be told that the condition is normal and
 neither requires nor would respond to treatment. In typical cases, skin scrapings, fungal
cultures, and biopsies are totally urnecessary. If inflammation, excessive scale, or follicular
casts are present, diagnostic tests for other diseases should be considered.
Feline Acquired Symmetric Alopecia
Feline acquired symmetric alopecia (formerly feline endocrine alopecia) is a rare acquired
CAUSEANDPATHOGENESIS
The exact cause and pathogenesis of feline acquired symmetric alopecia are unknown. The
original name of feline endocrine alopecia was changed because no true endocrine cause
had been proved 26 However, there has been a study that suggests there 1may be ahnorrnal
tlyroid function, and 73% of affected cats responded to liothyronine (T) therapy.51. 52
One theory suggested that these cats may have had a decreased thyroid reserve. The
results were based on basal changes in group averages. Individual cases can have normal
total thyroxine (TT4) or TT, levels or a normal response to TSH. However, as groups,
these cats had a deprcssed response to TS1152 It has also been observed that an identical
Acquired Alopecias · 901
patterm of alopecia can be self-inflicted. Because cats are sometimes secret groomers, the
owmers may not be awarc that they are licking or pulling exccssively at the hairs. Hair
regrowth that occurs with gonardal or thyroid horrmones in these cats may be due to
psychologic or other changes not related to treatment of a true defciency. In this syn-
drome, placerment of an Elizahethan collar or bucket on the cat's head for several weeks
will demonstrate whether the alopecia was self-infficted. If hair regrowth docs not oecur,
traumatic causes can be excluded and this syndrome should then be considered. When
 hair does not regrow, demodicosis, hyperglucocorticoidism, hyperprogesteronism, and
paraneoplastic alopecia should be considcred.
CLINICAL FEATURES
Feline acquired symmetric alopecia is a rare disease sccn mostly in neutered rmale and
female cats. No breed predilection has been reported, but purebred cats are rarely
 affected. The age of affected cats ranges from 2 to 12 years, with an average of 6 years.
 Feline acquired symmetric alopecia is characterized by bilaterally symmetric hypotri-
chosis, which begins in the genitaf and perineal regions (see Fig. li-iH). Diffuse thin-
ning of the hair, rather than complete baldness, affects the anogenital region, proximal
tail, caudomedial thighs, and ventral abdomen. Long-standing cases may have hypotri-
chosis of the lateral thorax and fanks, but the dorsum is spared. Hairs in the affected
 areas are easily epilated. Pruritus and skin lesions are usually abscnt.
DIAGNOSIS
The first diagnostic question is whether the cat has bitten or licked the lhairs, and thereby
caused the alopecia, or the hairs have fallen out by thcrmsclves. Close examination by
 y      s  s jo s u si s a 
helps because the distal hair tips are intact and pointed, and the proxinal (bulbar) ends
are telogenized in this syndromc. If the distal end of the hair shows a broken or chewed
off cdgc, the cat is creating the hair loss. It must be emphasized here that imost cats with
a symmctric alopecia that appears noninflammatory are causing it by licking and chewing
and do not have acquired synmetric alopecia.24
The differential diagnosis includes the pruritic causes of alopccia such as fea bite
hypersensitivity, atopy, food hypersensitivity, dermatopbytosis, feline demodicosis (rare).
and ectoparasites such as Otodectes cynotis and Cheyletiella blakei. Nonpruritic causes of
alopecia include hypothyroidism (extremely rare), hyperglucocorticoidism (rare), hyperpro-
rhexis nodosa, telogen and anagen defuxion (rare), and psychogenic alopecia (rare). Lym-
of the cervical or inguinal region in 28.6% of the cases. It was suggested that this
condition could have been a type of food hypcrsensitivity. but no pruritus or description
of short stubby hairs was rcported. Two of four affected cats resolved their alopecia as the
 gastrocnteritis improved with prednisone and liet change. Definitive diagnosis is based
on history, physical examination, results of laboratory studies, and responsc to therapy.
Hemograin, serum chemistries, urinalysis, and tests of thyroid and adrenal function are
normal. Skin biopsy reveals telogenization of hair folicles.43. 5s
CLNICAL MANAGEMENT
The client should he counseled about the benign nature of this condition and informed
that treatment inay not be necessary. If treatment is elected, T, should be tried initially.
Ts —-initially given orally at 20 μg/cat ql2h, then slowly increased to 50 μg/cat-should
be administered for 12 weeks.51 The most significant side effects to consider are cardiac
arrhythimias, including premature ventricular beats.
either sex horimone alone.*o Excellent results have been obtained with intramuscular
902 · Acquired Alopecias
injections of repositol testosterone (12.5 mg/cat) and repositol diethylstilbestrol (0.625 mg/
cat). If diethylstilbestrol is unavailable, one can use estradiol (0.5 mg/cat). The cats are re-
examined in'6 weeks, and if new hair growth is not evident, a second injection is given.
 Relapse occurs after a variable period of time (6 months to 2 years) in about 50% of the
 cats, and retreatment is usually effective. The occasional transient side effects that are
seen with androgen-estrogen therapy are signs of estrus in females and aggressiveness,
Overdose of either testosterone or estrogen can result in severe hepatobiliary disease and
licensed for use in cats in the United States.
Progestational compounds are also effective for the treatment of feline acquired
symmetric alopecia.40 Repositol progesterone (2.2 to 22 mg/kg) or medroxyprogesterone
acetate (50 to 175 mg/cat) may be administered intramuscularly or subcutaneously. The
cats are re-examined in 6 weeks, and a sccond injection is given if lair regrowth is not
evident. Megestrol acetate may be given orally (25 to 5 rng/cat), once every other day,
until hair growth is evident, A maintenance dose of 2.5 to 5 mg/cat, once every 1 to 2
weeks, is usually required. Because potential side effects of progestational compounds in
the cat are numerous and occasionally severe, the previously mentioned trcatments or 10
treatments are recommended (see Chap. 3). Progestational conpounds are not licensed
for use in cats in the United States. Interestingly, they can produce feline symmetric
alopecia - like hair loss.
Injection Reactions
Cats may also react to various subcutaneous injections, although less frequently.43 Rabies
reactions similar to those in dogs have been described.38 Praziquantel (Droncit) has been
incrininated in multiple cases. Besides the infammatory alopecic form, a pruritic ulcera-
    n      o o oe a g 
often develop secondary infections. Because most of these lesions occur in the dorsocervi-
cal or shoulder region, the major differential diagnoses are feline ulcerative linear fibros-
 ing dermatitis (see Chap. 18) and food hypersensitivity. Chronic vaccine reactions have
been ineriminated as a cause of neoplasia, especialy fibrosarcomas, in the cat (see Chap.
20).
Topical Glucocorticoid Reactions
Focal alopecia has been seen in cats as a local reaction to topical glucocorticoid-containing
products. The pinnae or base of the pinnae has most commonly been affected from the
use of otic products (Fig. 11- 14).
Paraneoplastic Alopecia
This syndrome has been seen in old cats that present with a 2-week to 5-month history of
acutcly and involves the ventrum and the legs. Less frequently, alopecia may be seen on
the pinnal and periocular areas. Focal areas of erythema and scaling may be present. Hair
may be easily epilated from all over the body. Some cats appear to groom excessively,
which, in cormbination with the hypokeratosis seen histologically, may account for the
smooth, glistening appearance of the alopecic skin (Fig. 1l-15). The footpads may be
affected, becoming shiny, smooth, soft, and occasionally, crusted and fissured (Fig. 11-
16). In some cats, the pads are painful and the cats are reluctant to walk. A black, waxy
material may accumulate in the clawbeds. In one cat, there was an associated Malassezia
dermatitis.1l
Hematologic and biochemical results are not indicative of underlying neoplasia. Skin
biopsy reveais telogenization, marked atrophy, and miniaturization of hair follicles (Fig.
11 - 17). Focal areas of epiderrmal hyperplasia and alternating orthokeratotic and parakera-
Acquired Alopecias · 903
FIGURE II-I4. Pinnal alopecia
in a cat from topical glucocorticoid
application.
totic hyperkeratosis are present. Areas of hypokeratosis are prominent. A mild superfcial
lymphocytic perivascular infiltrate is present in the dermis. Adnexal atrophy may be
severe. Radiographic and ultrasonographic studies usually fail to reveal an abdominal mass.
The diagnosis is usually made during exploratory laparotomy. Most cats have had a
duct adenocarcinoma.1a, 31
  s rn   n si aq  i sid  as
occurred by the time a diagnosis is made, although early surgical intervention may be
curative. One case was reported that was treated with surgical excision of a pancreatic
 carcinoma that was confined to the left limb of the pancreas. This cat recovered and, 10
 pancreatectomy resulted in complete hair regrowth within 10 weeks. However, although
no evidence of metastasis was seen at the time of surgery (including biopsies of liver and
 o         e  
 necropsy. These cases substantiate the relationship between the neoplasia and dermatolog-
ical disease.
FIGUREII-I5.Paraneoplastic
alopecia in a cat. Note the glistening
appearanceof  theskin.(Courtesy
Dr. B. Atlee.)
904 · Acquired Alopecias
FIGURE HI-I6. Paraneoplastic
alopecia in a cat. Footpad is thin,
shiny, and focally crusted.
FIGURE II-I7. Paraneoplastic alopecia in a
cat. Note marked attenuation and miniaturization
of hair follicles. (Courtesy R. Dunstan.)
Acquired Alopecias * 905
Exfoliative Dermatitis and Thymoma
Exfoliative dermatitis is another example of a dermatosis being a marker for intermal
head and pinnae. The early scaling tends to be fine, whitc, and nonadherent. In more
chronic cases, the scalcs become larger and present on the skin as well as trapped within
the hair coat. This condition progresses to involve most of the body, and alopecia devel-
ops. Initially, erythcma is mild, but may become more pronounced in chronic cases.
 Brownish, waxy deposits accumulate around the lips, eyes, and in the ear canals and
clawbeds. The cats develop the skin disease as the initial sign without cvidence of the
underlying neoplasia, which has usually been found at post mortem. Histopathology shows
a cell-poor hydropic interface dermatitis. Radiology reveals a mediastinal mass that histo-
the symptoms (see Chap. 14).
Follicular Dysplasia
A form of follicular dysplasia was reported in a Cormish rex cat (see Chap. 12).45s Sorme
alopecia of the tail and dorsal lumbar area had been present at birth, but at 10 nonths of
age, the condition progressed to synmetric truncal alopecia. lIair examination revealed
melanin clumping that distorted hair shaft anatomy. Hair examination of a variety of other
normal cats revealed that blue and cream-colored normal cats had smaller melanin
 (  as  ps  s a rs nu p  s
Chap. 12).
Trichorrhexis Nodosa
-1I sstd iieq o jo rn oaissooxa oi anp seo ie pzasooan uooq seq uonpuoo s
18 and 11-19A and B). Acquired trichorrhexis nodosa was reported in a cat in association
with chronic use of a Hea shampoo.3 Another acquired form of trichorrhexis nodosa was
 reported in a 2-year-old cat.1 Syminetric diffuse alopecia that spared only the head and
extremities was seen in a cat with fea allergy that also had whitish nodes on some hair
o  ss  i    su a  a a  sr
light microscopic trichogram and scanning electron microscopy, were associated with
cuticular damage and splaying of cortical cells. The pathologic findings of the nodes were
consistent with trichorrhexis nodosa. It was postulated that this case represented an
FIGURE II-18. Tnichorrhexis
nodosa associated with chronice use
of fea shampoo on a cat. Note the
generalized hypotrichosis and hroken
hairs of varying lengths.
906 · Acquired Alopecias
FIGURE II-I9. A, Trichorrhexis
nodosa. Hair from the cat in Figure
l1-18. Note the nodular area in the
center of the lair slhaft, where break-
age will occur. B, Trichorrhexis no-
dosa. Hair from the cat in Figure
11-18. This bair has fractured at a
nodule, giving the appearance of two
brooms end to end.
B
Acquired Alopecias·907
acquired form of the disease secondary to excessive trauma associated with excessive
groorming from feas and possibly a hair keratin defect to explain the uncormmon fragility
 Of the hairs in this cat. Discontinuation of the fea shampoo or treatment of the fea bite
hypersensitivity cured these two cats.
Idiopathic Lymphocytic Mural Folliculitis
 Mural folliculitis is a reaction pattern that is characterized by inflammation that targets the
a variety of diseases, including dermatophytosis, demodicosis, carly prodromal epitheli-
otropic T-cell lymphoma (see Fig. 11-24A), pseudopelade, sebaceous adenitis, food hy-
tive mural foliculitis there may be an association with feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV)
infection, high-dose glucocorticoid therapy, epitheliotropic lymphoma, severe illness, and
debilitation (Fig. 11 -20). Pseudopelade is believed to have an immune-mediated etiology
and is discussed in Chapter 9. Mural folliculitis as a manifestation of cutaneous adversc
drug reaction (see Chap. 9) and sebaceous adenitis (see Chap. 18) are discussed clse-
where.
FIGURE I1-20. A, Facial alope-
cia in a cat with mucinous degenera-
tive mural folliculitis. B, Close-up
and scaling. (Courtesy Dr. I. Olivry.)
908 · Acquired Alopecias
FIGURE II-21. Idiopathic feline
lymphocytic mural follculitis. Annu-
Bupos oug pue tioadop jo are iel
over shoulder.
Idiopathic forms of lynphocytic_ mural folliculitis have been deseribed.6. 14-16. 27. 34
 Idliopathic cases have been described in middle-aged to old cats, and may have one or
more well-circumscribed, annular areas of alopecia (Fig. 1l-21) or a diffuse partial
alopecia (Fig. 1l-22). Scaling is variable. The head, limbs, and trunk are most commonly
involved. Pruritus is variable.
Although lymphoeytic mural foliculitis is a reaction pattern seen in a number of
feline dermatoses, careful histologic studies may allow separation of specific syndromes in
 diagnoses. Fungal elements nay be quite sparse in cats with dermatophytosis and this
reaction pattern. Fungal culture by a brush technique may be required. In cats with
pseudopelade, the lymphocytic infiltrate targets the isthmus of the hair follicle, with
sebaceous glands being spared early but often infiltrated or obliterated late in the disease.
 In sebaceous adenitis, the sebaceous glands are targeted, but the hair follicle isthmus and
infundibulum may be less intensely infiltrated. Early or prodromal epitheliotropic lym-
phoma may require sequential biopsies over many months before it can be reliably
differentiated from a non-neoplastic lymphocytic mural folliculitis.6 Severely inflammatory
FIGURE II-22. Idiopathic felinc
lymphocytic .
mural
folliculitis.
Markcdexfoliation
overtrunk.
(Courtesy J. Guillot.)
Acquired Alopecias · 909
lymphocytic mural folliculitides —associated with histiocytes, fower eosinophils and neu-
trophils, follicular mucinosis, and follicular destruction—may bc associated with FIV
tis and those with drug-induced or food-induced forms have the hair follicle infundibulum
targeted (Fig. 11-23). Cats with drug- or food-induced reaction also seem to have a
 concurrent hydropic interface dermatitis and foliculitis (Fig. 1l -24B).
Reports of therapeutic responses are anecdotal and confusing. Part of the confusion
undoubtedly is generated by the failure to recognize that this follicular reaction pattern
has numerous etiologies. Idiopathic cases have responded, and failed to respond, to
resolve on a novel protein diet and relapse with dietary challenge. Other cases have
resolved when concurrent drug therapy was discontinued. Still other cases have been 
reported to spontaneously resolve.34
Alopecia Mucinosa
 In humans, alopecia mucinosa (follicular mucinosis) is characterized by well-demarcated
areas of alopecia, fine scaling, and prominent hair follicle orifices, with or without slightly
raised and mildly erythematous papules or plaques.3 There are three clinical patterns.
The first and most common is seen in young adults; it is restricted to the head and neck,
FIGURE II-23. Idiopathic lymphocytic mural
folliculitis in a cat. Entire infundibulum of hair
follicle is infiltrated by lymphocytes.
910·Acquired Alopecias
FIGURE II-24. A, Early epithe-
liotropic lymphoma in a cat. Note
nural and perifollicular infiltration of
neoplastic lymphocytes. B. Adverse
cutaneous reaction to food. In adi-
tion to interface follieulitis, the epi.
as si (f do ai re
involved
FIGURE II-25. Feline alopecia
mucinosa. Alopecia and scaling of head,
neck, and front legs. (Courtesy V. Stud-
dert.)
Acquired Alopecias · 9l1
FIGURE II-26. Feline alopcia mucinosa. A, Epidermal mucin appears as clear vacuolar areas and
esdse snsp sds
filled with mucin and alcian blue-stained sechion.
and it resolves in about 2 years. The second form is seen in a slightly older age group,
and lesions are more generalized and resolution takes longer. The third form is seen in
aged people, and plaques of mycosis fungoides eventually develop within the areas of
Alopecia mucinosa was recognized in two adult cats with asymptomatic, well-demar-
specimens initially revealed mucinosis of the epidermis and the hair follicle's outer root
sheath (Fig. 11-26). Several months later, both cats had plaques in the areas of alopecia.
(e s i a p r   s e sr so
Both cats were lost to follow-up.
● rEFErENcEs
1. Alhaidari Z, et al: Acquired feline hair shaft abnormal-
recurrent flank alopecia. J Sinall Anim Pract 37:417,
 s   s sn 
1996.
Dermatol 7:235, 1996.
6. Declercq J: Lymphocytic mural follculitis in two cats.
la. Barrs VR, et al: What is your diagnosis? J Sinall Anim
Vlaams Diergeneeskd Tijdschr 64:177, 1995.
Pract 40:559, 1999.
6a. Declercq J: A case of diet-related lymphocytic mural
2. Bell A, Oliver F: Alopecia mucinosa (follicular muci-
folliculitis in a cat. Vet Dermatol 11:75, 2000.
nosis) in a dog. Vet Dermatol 6:221, 1995.
7. Declercq J, Vanstapel Mj: Chronic radiant heat derma-
 3. Brooks DG, et al: Pancreatic paraneoplastic alopecia in
:6 oa  sop om u (oua q tra) sn
3 cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 30:557, 1994.
269, 1998.
4. Cieslowski D, Paradis M: Alopecie saisonniere canine.
 8. Dennis JS, et al: Lymphoeytie/plasmaeytic gastroenteri-
Med Vet Quebec 24:98, 1993.
tis in cats: 14 cases (1985-1990). J Am Vet Med Assoc
 5. Curtis CF, et al;: Investigation of the reproductive and
200:1712,1992.
9. Endenburg N, Knol BW: Behavioural, household, and
912 · Acquired Alopecias
social problems associated with companion animals:
 35. Rosenkrantz WS, et al; Traction alopecia in the canine;
opinions of owners and nonowners. Vet Quart 16:130,
four case reports. Calif Vet 43:7, 1989.
1994.
36. Rosenkrantz WS, Griffin CE: Unpublished observa-
10. Fadok VA: The dynamics of hair growth and develop-
tions, 1999.
nent. Dermatol Rep 4:1, 1985.
37. Rothstein E, et al: A retrospeetive sturdy of dysplastic
11. Godfrey DR: A case of feline paraneoplastic alopecia
with  secondary  Malassezia-assciated dermatitis.
follicular dysplasia syndroines or endocrine skin dis-
Small Anim Pract 39:394, 1998.
ease. Vet Dermatol 9:235, 1998.
12. Criffin CE: Personal observation, 1993.
38. Schmeitzel LP, et al: Focal cutaneous reactions at vac-
13. Grifin CE: Open forum. Etretinate, how is it being
cination sites in a cat and four dogs. Proc Annu Memb
used in veterinary dermatology? Derm Dialogue,
Meet An Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet IDerimalol
Spring/Sumumer 1993, p 4.
2:39,1986.
14. Gross 'TI., et al: Veterinary Dermatopathology. Mosby--
39. Scott DW: Thyroid function in feline endocrine alope-
Year Book, St. Louis, 1992.
cia. J Am Anin Hosp Assoc 1l:98, 1975.
15. Gross TL, et al: Infltrative mwral folliculitis. Dermato.
40. Scott DW: Feline dermatology, 1900-1978: A mono-
pathology Session, Am Coll Vet Pathol, Albuquerque,
graph. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:331, 1980.
1997.
41. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1983- 1985: *Thc sccrct
16. Gross Tl, et al: An anatomical classification of follcu-
sits." J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 23:255, 1987.
litis. Vet Dermnatol 8:147, 1997.
 42. Scott'DW: Seasonal Hank alopecia in ovariohysterec-
17. Gross TI., et al: Folicular lipidosis in threc rottweilers.
tomized dogs. Cornell Vet 80:187, 1990.
Vet Dermatol 8:33, 1997.
43. Scott DW, et al: Muller and Kirk's Small Animal Der-
18. Gross, T. L., et al.: Subepidermal bullous dermalosis
matology, 5th ed. W. B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia,
due to topical corticosteroid therapy in dogs. Vet. Der-
1995.
matol. 8:127, 1997.
44. Scott DW, et al: Exfoliative dermatitis in association
19. Headington JT: Telogen efHuviur. New concepts and
with thyimoma in 3 cats, Feline Pract 23:8, 1995.
review. Arch'Dermatol 129:356, 1993.
45. Scott Dw: Les agregats de melanine dans lappareil
 20. Hadson S, et al: Hesolution of parancoplastic alopecia
pilo-scbace: signification en dermatohistopathologic du
following surgical removal of a panereatic carcinoma in
chat. Med Vet Qucbec 28:38, 1998.
    n   1g   8
46. Scott DW, Rothstein E: Trichoptilosis in threc goldcn
matol 14:107, 1997.
retrievers. Canine Pract 23:14, 1998.
21. Kimura T, Kunio D: The effect of topical minoxidil
47. Scott DW, Miller WH Jr: Idiosyncratic cutancous ad-
treatment on hair folleular growth of neouatal de-
verse drug reactions in the dog: Literature review and
scendants of Mexican hairless dogs. Vet Dermatol S:
report of 101 cases (1990-1996). Canine Pract 24:16,
107, 1997.
1999.
22. Kral F, Schwartzman RM: Veterinary and Comparative
 48. Scott Dw, Miller WH Jr: Idiosyncratic cutaneous ad.
Denatology. J. B. Lippincott Co, Philadelphia, 1964.
verse drug reactions in the cat: literature review and
23. Kwochka KK, et al: Advances in Veterinary Dernatology,
report of 14 cases (1990-1996). Feline Pract 26:10,
Vol 3. Butterworth Heinernann, Boston, 1998, p 511
1998.
24. Miller WH, Jr: Symmetrical truncal hair loss in cats.
49. Scott DW: What's new in feline dermatology. Proc Br
Comp Cont Educ 12:46l, 1990.
Small Anim Vet Assoc, 1999, p 128.
25. Miller MA, Dunstun RW: Seasonal fank alopecia in
 50. Tasker S, et al: Resolution of parancoplastic alopecia
boxers and airedale terriers: 24 cases (1985-i992). J
following surgical removal of a pancreatic carcinoina in
Am Vet Med Assoc 203:1567, 1993.
a cat. J Small Anim Pract 40:16, 1999.
26. Muler GH, et al (eds): Small Animal Dermalology.
 51. Thoday KL: Differential diagnosis of syinmetrical alo-
3rd ed. W. B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1983.
pecia in the cat. In Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary
27. Olivry T: Newly recognized feline syndromes: Selected
Therapy IX. W. B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1986,
topics. Proc. DVM Spring Seminar, Key West, 1998, p.
p 545.
29.
 52. Thoday KL: Aspects of feline symmetric alopecia. In:
28. Paratlis M: Canine recurent fank alopecia: Treatment
von Tscharner C, Halliwell REW (eds): Advances in
with melatonin. Proc Annu Mcrmh Mcet Am Acad Vet
Veterinary IDerrmatology I. Bailliere-Tindal, Philadel-
 Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 1l:49, 1995.
phia, 1990, p 47.
29. Paradis M: Melatonin therapy in canine alopecia. In:
53. Thompson DL, et al: Prolactin administration to
Bonagura J (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy XIII.
seasonally auestrous mares: Reproductive, metabolic,
W. B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 2000, p 546.
and hair-shedding responses. J Anim Sc. 75:1092,
30. Paradis M: Melatonin in the treatment of canine pat-
1997.
tern baldness. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Veterinary
54. Tieghi C, et al: Medullary trichomalacia: A retrospec-
Dermatology
 IIl. Butterworth-Heincmann, Boston,
tive study of 6 cases in German shepherd dogs. (Sub-
1998, p 511.
mitted for publication 1999).
 31. Pascal-Tenorio A, et al: Paraneoplastic alopecia associ-
 55. Waldman L: Seasonal fank alopecia in affenpinschers.
ated with intermal malignancies in the cat. Vet Derma-
J Small Anim Pract 36:271, 1995.
tol 8:47, 1997.
 56. Whiting DA: Structural abnormalities of the hair shaft.
32. Power H: Personal couninunication, 1993.
J Am Acad Dermatol 16:I, 1987.
33. Power HT, ct al: Novel feline alopecia areata-like der-
matosis: cytotoxic T-lymphocytes target the follicular
alopecia at sites of rabies vaccination in dogs. J Ain
isthrus. Proc. World Cong Vet Dennatol 3:74, 1996.
Vet Med Assoc 188:1174, 1986.
34. Power, H. T: Newly recognized feline skin diseases.
 58. Yager JA, Wilcock BP: Color Atlas and Text of Surgical
Proc. Annu. Memb. Meet. Am. Acard, Vet. Dermatol.
Pathology of the Dog and Cat. Dermatopathology and
Am. Coll. Vet. Dermatol. 14:27, 1998.
Skin Tumors. Wolfe Publishuing, London, 1994.
Chapte
Congenital and Hereditary
Defects
 ongenital and hereditary defects appear to be becoming more common. Some of
 this apparent increase in frequency no doubt refects an enhanced ability to diag-
nose these conditions. However, this does not cxplain all cases. Many of the' disorders
 gene more widely, with the eventual production of new cases. Breeders of animals with
suspected or proven genodermatoses should be instructed to avoid breeding of all close
relatives of the affected animal.
● DISORDERS OF ThE SURFACE AND FOLLICULAR
EPITHELIUM
A variety of disorders of keratinization or cornification are recognized in dogs and cats.
Those with a kmown or suspected inherited basis are discussed in this chapter, and the
remainder are covered in Chapter 14. Also included here are developmental defects and
inflammatory disorders with a hereditary basis.
Primary Seborrhea in Dogs
Primary seborrhea is used to describe animals with an inherited disorder of keratinization
or cornification. The epidermis, the follicular epithelium, the hair cuticle, and the claw
can all be involved.
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
 Primary seborrhea is most commonly recognized in the American Cocker spaniel, English
springer spaniel, West Highland white terrer, andBasset hound.5 ,71 73 s0 Other reds
affected include the Irish setter, German shepherd dog, Dachshund, Doberman pinscher,
bulldogs) are seen in certain hospital populations because of breeding practices in the
surrounding area. This disorder has been studied most extensively in the American Cocker
 may not apply to other breeds.
 A variety of cellular kinetic studies have been performed in normal beagles, normal
Cocker spaniels, and Cocker spaniels with primary seborrhea.44--9 When the seborheic
Cocker spaniels were cornpared with normal dogs, their basal cell labeling indices were
three to four times greater than normal values. The epidermis, the hair follicle infundibu-
lum, and the sebaceous glands were all hyperproliferative, but the hair root matrix was
normal.4, 45 The calculated epidermal cell renewal time for these dogs was approximately
8 days5 as compared with 21 days for normal Cocker spaniels.46 Simifar kinetic abnorrmali-
ties have been demonstrated in seborrheic Irish setters.? The hyperproliferative nature of
Sd    s         
16
914 · Congenital and Hereditary Defects
FIGURE I2-I. A, Primary seborrhea in a Cocker spaniel. Hyperplastic ceruminous otitis externa. B, Primary
seborrhea in a Cocker spaniel. Seborrheic plaques in the intertriginous arca of thc ventral neck. C, Primary
seborrhea in aCocker
spaniel. Erythema, 
apolecia,and seborrheic plaques on the abdomen.D,Prinary seborrhea
Legend contirues on oppositepage
 Congenital and Hereditary Defects · 915
celular defect because the hyperproliferation remains in cell culture and persists whcn
sehorrheic skin is grafted onto normal dogs.45 4s. 49
 In an extensive study of 100 West Highland white terriers over 12 gerierations, the
 inheritance of primary seborrhea was proved and it was probably transmitted as an
autosomal recessve trait7s This mode of inheritance probably applies to other breeds
Although labeled index stuidies were not performed in the seborrheic West Highland
white terriers, histologic and ultrastructural studies indicated epidernal hyperproliferation.
CLINICAL FEATURES
 Because of the inherited basis of the disease, signs occur early in life and become more
 severe with advancing age. Affected West Highland white terriers demonstratc clinical
changes at 10 weeks of age.7 In most dogs, early changes such as mild Hlaking or dullness
 of thc coat are overlooked or attributed to intestinal parasites, inadequate nutrition, or
other puppyhood problems. Usually by 12 to 18 months of age, the dog is presented for
itsseborrhea.
 The presenting complaint varies from dog to dog. Common seborrheic findings in-
clude ceruminous, hyperplastic otitis exterma (Fig. 12-1A); a dull coat with excessive
faking of the skin; greasy malodorous skn, which ismarked inbody folds orintertriginous
areas; follicular casts; multiple discrete to coalescent, scaly or crusty pruritic patches
(seborrheic dermatitis) (sec Fig. 12-1B and C); digital hyperkeratosis (see Fig. 12-1D):
and dry, brittle claws. Lesions of seborrheic dermatitis tend to be most severe around the
eyes and mouth, on the pinna, or in the intertriginous areas of the feet, axillae, or groin.
'Most seborrheic dogs have all of the seborrheic abnormalities described previously,
tend to have dry faky skin, whereas Cocker spaniels, Springer spaniels, West Highland
white terriers, Basset hounds, Chinese Shar peis, and Labrador retrievers usually exhibit
otitis, greasy seborrhea, seborrheic dermatitis, or typically some combination of these. The
greasiness and seborrheic dermatitis involve most or all of the body, but arc most pro-
nounced on the face, the ventral neck, the feet (especially interdigitally), the perineum,
and the ventral body. Basset hounds and Chinese Shar peis also have signs of the disorder
 pepuosi sps s jo nu s pq su
Aside from the visual and olfactory findings, pruritus occurs in many of these dogs.
This is especially true when the dog is greasy or has seborrheic dermatitis. The pruritus
tions and Malassezia dermatitis (see Chap. 14). When dogs with primary seborrhea have
either condition, their skin lesions worsen rapidly and their pruritus increases dranatically.
especially when Malassezia dermatitis is present. In some cases, the lesions of the second.
 ary infections are so severe and widespread that the seborrheic lesions cannot be appreci-
ated until the staphylococcal or Malassezia component is resolved.
DIAGNOSIS
The clinical lesions in prinary or secondary seborrhea (see Chap. 14) are identical; thus,
the diagnosis of primary seborrhea is made by exclusion. In dogs younger than I year, the
list of differential diagnostic possibilities is short and includes demodicosis, cheyleticllosis,
FIGURE I2-1, Continued seborzhea in a Persian cat. Kitten with a greasy, matted haircoat and patchy alopecia. F.
birth. G, Congenital ichthyosis in a dog. Marked hyperkeratosis and mild erythema in a pinna. H, Pinna and periocular
region of a dog with epidermal splasia. Chronic alopecia hyperpigentation, and lchenifcatin.
916 · Congenital and Hereditary Defects
nutritional deficiency, ichithyosis, epidermal dysplasia, and food hypersensitivity. In adult
dogs, the list is much longer.
The diagnosis of primary seborrhea is supported by biopsy. In noninfected faky or
greasy areas, hyperplastic superficial perivascular dermatitis is visible. There is usually a
marked kcratinization defect, characterized by orthokeratotic or parakeratotic hyperkerato-
sis, follicular keratosis, and variable apoptosis of keratinocytes (Fig, 12-2). In imany cases,
the epidermis is normal to slightly increased in thickness. In mildly infamed lesions, the
perivascular cellular infiltrate is mild and consists of lymphocytes and plasma cells. In
infamed lesions, the perivascular infammation becomes more intense, and papillomatosis
dermal papilae (papillary "squirting") (Fig. 12-3) This capping is common at the follicu-
lar ostia.? The follicular hyperkeratosis is typically orthokeratotic unless secondary infec.
tions are present. Bacteria are numerous in the surface, and follicular debris and yeast
may also be present. Evidence of secondary bacterial infcction (e.g., intraepidermal pustu-
lar dermatitis or folliculitis) is common.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Primary seborrhea cannot be cured, and the ease of control varies from dog to dog. The
sehorrheic changes in these dogs worsen signifcantly with dietary inadequacies, external
parasites, or endocrine or metabolic diseases, so these dogs should be monitored carefully
for the development of any intercurrent discase. Seborrheic dogs are prone to secondary
staphylococcal infections or Malassezia dermatitis. Administration of an appropriate antibi-
otic or ketoconazole is often necessary at the onset of antiseborrheic therapy to resolve
seborrhea may indicate that the infection has returmed and the dog should be examined.
The mainstay of treatment involves the use of antiseborrheic shampoos and moisturiz-
ers. The shampoo selection and the vigor of treatment depend on the nature of the
 seborrhea.42 Dry, uninfamed skin is easier to manage than greasy skin. Many dogs are
FIGURE 12-2. Canine seborrheic dermatitis. Hyperplastic superfiecial perivascular dermatitis with
a marked keratinization defect and parakcratotie capping.
Congenital and Hereditary Defccts · 917
FIGURE 12-3. Close-up of Figure 12-2. Pap-
illary squirting.
both dry and greasy, and greasiness is especially prominent in the intertriginous regions 
and between the toes and the pads. Long hair impedes the thorough cleaning of the skin,
especially when the area is greasy, so owners should be encouraged to keep the coat cut
short.
 Dogs with dry skin with mild to moderate scaling usually require a bath once or twice
weekly to returm the skin to near-normal condition. Dogs with heavy scaling need to be
bathed two or three times a week. This intense bathing is done for 2 to 3 weeks to
reduce the corneocyte count to near normal,2 and then the frequency of bathing is
 once weekly), whereas other clinicians allow the client to decide on the basis of the
individual dog's needs. As long as the dog is not prone to secondary bacterial infcctions,
the latter method is most appropriate. Overbathing any dog, but especially one with dry
seborrhea, can result in increased scaling.
 A large nunber of grooming or antiseborrheic shampoos are appropriate for the
bathing of dry skin. Product selection depends on client and veterinarian preference. It is
advisable to start with the mildest product and change to a stronger one only if the initial
product is unsatisfactory. For mildly faky skin, moisturizing hypoallergenic shanpoos
shampoo, Virbac; MicroPearls Advantage Hydra-Pearls shampoo, EVSCO; DermaPet All
Natural Conditioning Shampoo, DermaPet), colloidal oatmeal shampoos (Epi-Soothe, Vir-
bac), or emollient-based chlorhexidine products (ChlorhexiDerm shampoo, DVM Pharma-
ceuticals; Nolvasan shanpoo, Fort Dodge Animal Health; Hexadene shampoo, Virbac) are
918 · Congenital and Hereditary Defects
commonly used. For rmore severe Haking, sulfur and salicylic acid products (MicroPearls 
Advantage Seba-Moist Moisturizing Shampoo, EVSCO; DermaPet Seborrheic Shampoo,
 DermaPet; Sebolux shampoo, Virbac; SebaLyt sharnpoo, DVM Pharmaceuticals) are ap-
propriate. For recalcitrant cases, mild tar products (MicroPearls Advantage Tar Moisturiz-
ing Shampoo, EVSCO; Nusal-T shampoo, DVM Pharmaceuticals; T-Lux shampoo, Virbac)
 might be appropriate but, because all tar products are degreasing agents, they should be
used cautiously.
When there is secondary Malassezia dermatitis, products with both an antiseborrheic
and antinycotic activity (Dermazole, Virbac; DermaPet Malacetic shampoc, DermPet;
MicroPearls Advantage Miconazole or Seba-Hex shampoos, EVSCO) are useful. Even
though the skin of seborrheic dogs is greasy, it is easy to irritate it, so caution should be
used when strong shampoos (e.g., benzoyl peroxides, sclenium sulfides) are to be used.
If the dog's coat is dirty, a rapid shampooing with a nonmedicated grooming product
is indicated before the antiseborrheic bath. After the dog is lathered with the antisebor-
rheic product, the shampoo inust remain in contact with the skin for 10 to 15 minutes for
maximal effect. Gentle manipulation of the dog's skin during this waiting period tends to
keep the dog happy and increases the cleaning action of the shampoo. After 10 to 15
minutes, the dog is rinsed thoroughly. Rinsing should take two to three times longer than
lathering. Prolonged rinsing not only removes the dehris and shampoo but aids in hydra-
tion of the skin. The dry skin of many of these dogs becomes flaky again soon after the
bath, especially when the humidity is low. The application of an afterbath rinse or
conditioner helps to provide a barrier to transepidermal water loss and its associated
drying. Most manufacturers offer cream rinses for each shampoo they market, and one
typically uses the rinse that matches the shampoo. Although any afterbath rinse can be
effective, studies have shown that those containing oils, especially linoleic acid, are most
effective in decreasing transepidermal water loss.15 If the client keeps some diluted
product in a misting bottle and sprays it on the dog as needed, the frequency of bathing
can often be reduced.
 For dogs with greasy skin, the shampoos must be stronger and need to be used more
n a m a u p s i ro p oi ad a si s 
with antibiotics or antifungal agents to control these secondary problerns, Dogs with
mildly to noderately greasy skin can be treated with sulfur and salicylic acid or mild tar
products. Dogs with very greasy skin are often bathed with stronger tars (LyTar shampoo.
DVM Pharmaceuticals; Allerseb-T, Virbac), selenium sulfides (Selsun Blue dandruff sham-
poo, Abbott), or benzoyl peroxides (OxyDex shampoo, DVM Pharrmaceuticals; Pyoben
shampoo, Virbac; MicroPearls Advantage Benzoyl-Plus, EVSCO). All these products are
excellent degreasers and create a dry seborrhea if used excessively. After the presenting
greasiness is resolved, many investigators switch to a less potent product or alternate
between a strong and a mild product. Greasy dogs often need an afterbath rinse, espe-
cially if the dog's environment has low humidity. Most strong shampoos can disrupt the
epidermal barrier and increase transepidermal water loss, with resultant worsening of the
seborrhea. An afterbath rinse can prevent this, but it may make the dog too greasy, so
cach casc must be approached on its own merits.
Seborheic dogs usually have ceruminous otitis externa, which must bc treated rou-
tinely and regularly. Instead of antiseborrheic shampoos, ceruninolytic ear flushes arc
employed (see Chap. 19). The frequency of maintenance use is best determined by having
the client smell the ears. When thc waxy odor is first noticed, the ears should be cleaned.
Despite vigorous cleaning, many of thcsc dogs expcricnce recurrent secondary bacterial or
yeast infections. These infections are heralded by the sudden need to clean the ears
frequently, otic pruritus, otic malodor, or combinations of these. Appropriate medications
should he dispensed promptly and used for 2 to 3 weeks. Ear surgery should be consid.
ered for dogs that have frequent infections.
 If the client is unable or unwilling to bathe the seborrheic dog. it becomes an
n a  ae  as aa p as ad s 
Congcnital and Hereditary Defects · 919
ments can be beneficial in these dogs, they rarely provide coirnplete control and should
be used as an adjunct to other treatments. Because primary seborrhea is a hyperprolifera-
tive disorder, drugs that inhibit cell replication may be bencficial. Corticosteroids and
cytotoxic drugs are applicable in such circumstances. Because these drugs have severe side
effects and are needed for life, they should be reserved for cases in which all other
measures have failed.
 Retinoic acids have been used extensively in seborrheic dogs, with varying results
from dog to dog and investigator to investigator. Although isotretinoin works in some
s a s ou nn are sri o b y g o  sss
have been obtained with etretinate. When 16 Cocker spaniels with severe seborrhea were
B peq sop t 'sep ozI roy Aro snou v Aaaa byar I jo sesop e ie ouaa uaie
moderate to cxcellent response.73 In moderately affected dogs, improvement was marked
maximal responses. This treatment has no efect on the hyperplastic otitis of these dogs,
and this must be managed by other means.4 Five West Highland white terriers and four
pen sp c  fo u sn o sosr ou ps pns se s sg
experienced side effects, including increased pruritus, reluctance to eat hard food, vomit-
ing, stiff gait, conjunctivitis, and exfoliative dermatitis. The side effeets disappeared with
withdrawal of drug administration and did not recur with alternate-day drug adlninistra-
tion.
 Etretinate has been removed from thc markct and was replaced by acitretin. Anec-
dotal information suggests equal effcacy in the treatmcnt of scborrheic dogs when admin-
istered at 1 mg/kg q24h. Data on treatment with lowcr doses are not available. The high
cost of this agent will preclude its use in many dogs. Somc invcstigators have returned to
the use of retinol (see Chap. 17). Because retinol is much more toxic than the retinoic
acids, the daily dosage should not exceed 400 IU/kg/day and the animal should be
monitored carefully for signs of toxicity.
 If there is a response to retinol
.O1 a retinoic acid, trcatrnent should be for life.
Altermate-day treatment is usually not satisfactory, and suggested reginens include adrnin-
istration for' 5 of 7 days: 1 week on, I week off; or daily use during alternate months.4
should be monitored for this condition. If it occurs, drug withdrawal may result in the
regaining of tear function. Topical cyclosporine is usually effective if the etretinate admin-
istration cannot be stopped.+ Both isotretinoin and etretinate can alter fat metabolism and
livcr function. Alterations usually occur early in treatment and are mild and transitory.*
Long-terin administration of etretinate has not rcsulted in severe metabolic changes in
normal dogs, hut cases should be monitored periodically.
Vitamin D analogs are receiving much attention in the treatment of psoriasis (see
Chap. 15). These agents alter epidermal proliferation and terminal differentiation and
significantly improvc the skin lesions in psoriatic patients. When calcitriol (1,25-dihydroxy-
vitamin D*) was given at 10 ng/kg q24h to Cocker spaniels with primary seborrhea, over
60% experienced significant improveiment50 and all dogs showed decreased cell prolifera-
tion in labeling studies. Because calcitriol can decrease PTH, electrolyte levels shouid be
checked.
stroyed by their owners. Most of those dogs have grcasy seborrhea, which predisposes
them to near-constant bacterial or yeast infections. Maintenance treatment with antibiotics
or ketoconazole often makes these dogs more acceptable to their owmers and less malo-
dorous. The expense of these drugs often precludes their use in all but small dogs. As a
 sa a   re  r r s ar  rg  
sebaceous glands. Prednisolone is administered daily at 1 to 2 mg/kg until the greasiness is
controlled and then adjusted slowly to the lowest alternate-day dosage that is effective.
Some dogs require daily treatment.
 Because these dogs are already prone to secondary infections and corticosteroids
aggravate that predisposition, these patients must be cxainined frequently. Most of these
920 · Congenital and Hereditary Defects
dogs have signs of iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism at some point in treatment. If the
corticosteroids administration is stopped, a severe rebound in the seborrhea can be
expected. Although we are aware of cases apparently well controlled with methotrexate,$
specific details on protocols, efficacy, and side effects are not available. Because this drug
is used in hyperproliferative disorders of humans, it should be of some benefit in dogs.
One of us (WHM) used azathioprine for pemphigus foliaceus in a seborrheic Cocker
spaniel. While the dog was receiving maintenance treatment (2.2 mg/kg q48h), its sebor-
rhea improved markedly. This suggests that drugs other than methotrexate may be benef-
cial. No details are available to support or refute that supposition.
Primary Seborrhea in Cats
Seborrhea is rare in cats, and primary seborrhea has been recognized in Persian, Himala-
dermonstrated in Persian cats. Cats of either sex or any coat color can be affected. Among
affected cats, the severity of the seborrheic signs varies. Severe seborrhea is obvious in
affected kittens by 2 to 3 days of age because their hairs paste together and they look
dirty (see Fig. 12-1E). Breeders usually euthanize these animals. With time, the whole
body becomcs scaly and greasy and hair is lost (Fig. 12-4). Waxy debris accumulates in
the face folds and ears (Fig. 12-5), and the cats have a rancid waxy odor. Mildly affected
 cats have similar signs, which are much milder and do not appear until about 6 weeks of
age.
 Biopsy of noninfected skin shows a marked keratinization dcfct, characterized by
orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis and papillomatosis (Fig. 12-6). The perivascular cellular
infiltrate is mild and consists predominantly of lymphocytes.
No effective treatment has been reported for severely affected cats. Retinoic acids
have been used safely in cats but are untried in primary seborrhea. A commercial
product containing omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids (DVM Derm Caps) was used unsuc-
cessfully in two cats.s Mildly affected cats can be kept fairly normal by good grooming.
should not be used on cats.
Idiopathic Facial Dermatitis of Persian and Himalayan Cats
An idiopathic and presumably hereditary facial dermatosis of young Persian and Himala-
FIGURE I2-4. Primary sebor-
rhea in a Persian kitten. Alopecia
and rmarked comedone formationon
the ventral thorax and abdomen.
Congenital and Hereditary Defects · 92I
FIGURE I2-5. Prinary sebor-
rhea in a Persian kitten. Marked ac-
cumulation ofcenumenon apinna.
onset is 12 months. Skin lesions are confined to the head, especially the periocular,
 perioral, and chin regions (Figs. 12-7 and 12-8) and the neck, and are not caused by the
cat. With time, the lesions often become pruritic, which increases their severity and
distribution. Secondary bacterial or Malassezia infection also increases the symptoms and
severity of the lesions.
Affected cats have a dirty face with an adherent black exudate on skin and distal
portions of the hair shafts. The subjacent skin is inflamed, and the severity of the
infammation increases with time, pruritus, or secondary infection. Most cats also have
accumulations of black, waxy materials in the ears. Histopathologic findings are nondi-
agnostic and include orthokeratotie hyperkeratosis, crusting, and hyperplasia of the epider-
mis and mixed-cell superficial perivascular to interface dermatitis. Eosinophils, neutrophils.
and mast cells may be prominent, and pignentary incontinence is usually present. Epider-
 mal microabscesses containing eosinophils and neutrophils are occasionally seen.
No effective treatment has been identified. Topical and/or systemic treatments re-
 move the exudate, but it reforms quickly after treatment is discontinued.
FIGURE I2-6. Primary sebor-
rhea in a Persian kitten. Marked or.
thokeratotic hyperkeratosis, papilo-
matosis, and  mild lymphocytic
 perivascular dermatitis.
922 Congenital and Hereditary Defects
FIGURE I2-7. Idliopathic facial
dermatitis of Persian and Himalayan
cats. Accurmulation of keratoseha-
ceous debris around the eyes of a
Himalayan cat.
Ichthyosis
Ichthyosis (fish scale disease) is a rare congenital skin disease and has been reported in
the digital, carpal, and tarsal pads.
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Ichthyosis in animals1. 8. 34 51. 57. 78 resembles but is not identical to ichthyosis in humans.
Humans are affected by over a dozen ichthyosiform dermatoses. Most are inherited
   ree s na  u   ss r  a  s
 adulthood. The skin disease can be accompanied by other developmental defects such as
mental retardation and short stature. Various classification schemes have been used to
describe the various ichthyosiform dermatoses, but none is ideal. Classifications focusing
on the clinical, genetic, and biochemical data overlook the histopathologic abnormalities.
whereas those revolving around ultrastructural alterations (e.g., epidermolytic and nonepi-
dernolytic) probably are too narrowly focused. No classification system has been adopted
FIGURE 12-8. Idiopathic facial
dermatitis of Persian and Hlimalayari
cats. Exudation and crusting on the
chin of the cat in Fig. 12-7.
Congcnital and Hereditary Defects · 923
for animals, but pathologists who have studied the disorder most intensively use the
epidermolytic/nonepidermolytic scheme.6s
  a  ar q  si    s ae on
characterize the disorder. Because the parents of affected dogs have been normal, cases
have been recognized in both sexes, and single cases have occurred in litters of five
puppies or more, an autosomal recessive rnode of inheritance is most likely.5. 6 Beyond
histopathology, labeled index and ultrastructural studies have bcen performed in a small
Russell terrierl and three West Highland white terrier puppies.s In these dogs, the
epidermal cell renewal time was approximatcly 3.6 days, which is 6 and 2 times faster
than normal dogs (23.4 days) or dogs with primary scborrhea (7.9 days), respectively.
Ultrastructural  studies in two Cavalier King Charles spaniels and one soft-coated
Wheaten terier showed changes (e.g, increased DNA and RNA synthesis) that are also
indicative of epidermal hyperproliferation in these, and probably most, dogs with ichthyo-
logic atypia of keratohyalin granules, curvilinear structures in the stratum corneum, and
sparsc keratohyalin granules and abnornal tonofilament morphology in the stratum cor-
decreased free fatty acids and acylceramide levels and increased ceramide If1 fcvels.51
CLINICAL FEATURES
Ichthyosis appears to be most common in West Highland white terriers but has also heen
at birth. Affected West Highland white terriers or Yorkshirc tcrricrs tcnd to bc born with
black skinwhichcracks andpeelsoffat about 2wecksof a
Much of the body of these dogs is covered with tightly adhering, verrucous, tannish
gray scales (see Fig. 12-1F) and feathered keratinous projections, which give a rough
texture to the skin (Fig. 12-9). Although some of these projections adhere to the skin,
i  aa ss e i ss  dn  o    so
Large quantities of scaly, seborrheic-smelling debris accumulatc on the skin surface. Sealy,
erythematous dry patches are particularly prominent in thc flcxural creases and intertrigi-
nous areas. The horny layer of the nasal planum and digital pads thickens (Fig. 12-10).
Masses of hard keratin acumulate at the margins of the pads and often extend upward
enlarged, and the whole foot can seem heavier than nornal. Hyperkeratosis may surround
the mucocutancous junctions of the face. Some dogs have severe erythroderima or hair
loss,7s Insuffcient details have been given about affected cats, but a striking cornification
defect is present from birth.5, 1s One kitten also had pronounced ectropion and eclabium.
DIAGNOSIS
If the dog is presented in early puppyhood, no other diagnoses are appropriate. If the dog
is presented as an adult with no prior history, all causes of seborrhea or exfoliative
dernatitis must bc considered (see Chap. 14). The diagnosis is confirmed by biopsy,
which usually revcals characteristic histopathologic changes, especially the prominent gran-
ular layer and the presence of many mitotic figures in keratinocytes. Marked orthokera-
may not be hyperplastic. One of the most characteristic histopathologic changes is marked
hypergranulosis, but this layer may be normal, thin,78 or iregular. Mitotic figures may be
numerous. The superficial epidermis may contain numerous vacuolated keratinocytes,
*See references 1, 3, 5, 18, 34, 51, 65.
924 · Congenital and Hereditary Defects
FIGURE I2-9. Close-up of skin from the chest of a 5-month-old Doberman pinscher with
canine ichthyosis, showing the laiminated, tightly-adhering scales.
which may rupture and result in reticular degeneration. Severe reticular degeneration may
lead to rmicrovesicle formation.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The owner should understand the chronic nature, incurability, and difficult treatment of
ichthyosis. Although the affected dog's general health seems to be good, the skin changes
FIGURE I2-I0. Carpal pad of the dog in Figure 12-7. Note the feather-like hyperkerato-
sis of the carpal pad.
Congenital and Hcreditary Defects · 925
FIGURE I2-II. Congenital canine lamellar ichthyosis. Marked laminated orthokeratotic hyperkel
atosis.
 s are sd ss   os   p as  a
 pets. Still, a devoted owmer may be capable of tolerating the burden of caring for these
dogs.
 Frequent bathing and the use of emollient rinses helps these dogs. To facilitate the
cleaning and moisturization of the skin, the coat should be kept short. Harsh shampoos
(seleniurn sulfides, strong tar products, and benzoyl peroxides) should be used cautiously
because they can worsen the condition. In humans, ointments or solutions of 3% to 12%
before the agent is applied? Commercial moisturizers (Hurmilac, Virbac; Hylyt*efa, DVM
Pharmaceuticals; HydraPearls Moisturizing Creme Rinse, EVSCO), a 5% lactic acid
spray,2 or a 50% propylene glycol solution7s can be useful in dogs.
Because of the intensity of topical treatment, most affected dogs are euthanized.
 Retinoic acids can be very beneficial in the treatment of ichthyosis, but a response may
take up to 6 rnonths of treatment51 and some cdogs do not tolerate the drug. Both
isotretinoin. (1 to 2 mg/kg q12h) and etretinate (2.5 mg/kg q24h) are reported to be
effective, and daily treatment must be continued to maintain effcacy. Acitretin, the
replacement for etretinate, may be effective at a dose of 0.5 to I mg/kg q24h,
Sebaceous Adenitis
In Standard poodles, sebaceous adenitis is believed to be inherited in an autosomal
recessive fashion (see Chap. 18).
Follicular Parakeratosis
 A congenital, hereditary dlisorder of cornification has been described in multiple Rottwei-
suggesting an X-linked mode of inheritance. In addition to their skin lesions, affected dogs
and their littermates are likely to be stunted and have other noncutaneous congenital
defects.
 926 · Congenital and Hereditary Defects
CLINICAL FEATURES
Like dogs with ichthyosis, these dogs experience a generalized seborrheic condition at or
near birth that worsens with advancing age. Unlike the case with ichthyosis, the skin of
the nasal planurm and footpads of these dogs remains normal (Fig. 12-12) and there is
minimal involvement of the glabrous skin of the abdomen, groin, and medial thighs.
Pruritus is unconmon unless there is a secondary bacterial or Malassezia infection. Early
 On, the involved skin is scaly, but becomes thickened and crusted with time with numer-
ous comedones. Hairs are often clumped together in a brownish-to-yellowish-to-blackish
waxy material (Fig. 12- 13). In two Rottweilers, bands of hyperkeratotic, hyperpigmented,
often verrucous papules and plaques followed the lines of Blashko (Fig. 12-14). Advanced
cases have a marked body odor.
DIAGNOSIS
With the widespread seborrheic lesions present near birth, the diagnosis of a congenital
disorder of cormifcation is straightforward. With normal skin on the planum nasale and
footpads, other seborrheic disorders can be discounted, but skin biopsy is needed for
absolute confirrmation of the diagnosis. Skin biopsies reveal a prominent surface and
follicular keratinization disorder with a mild-to-moderate superficial perivascular dermati-
FIGURE 12--|2. Follicular comification disor
der. Accumlation of keratosebaceous debris on the
mnzzle and bridge of the _nose of a Rottweiler
puppy. Note the sparing of the nasal planum.
Congenital and Hereditary Defects · 927
FIGURE 12-13. Folicular comi-
fication disorder. Hairs on the muz-
sae oun renaaon pased are a
clumps.
tis. The surface epithelium is mildly affected and is hyperplastic and covered with a
basket-weave orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis. The infundibular epithelium is hyperplastic,
and the pilar canal is flled with a densely packed parakeratotic hyperkeratosis that
projects above the skin surface in a conical fashion (Fig. 12-15A). Numerous lipid
bacterial folliculitis or Malassezia dermatitis rmay be visible. Ultrastructural studies per-
formed in one dog detected abnormalities in keratinization only of the follicular epider-
mis. The cells in involved follicles had fattened nuclei, a less hoinogeneous interior, and
course bundles of tonofilaments. Numerous lipid vacuoles are present within involved
keratinocytes.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
 No effective treatment for these dogs has been described. Bathing with strong antisebor-
 retinoic acids, or calcitriol has been unrewarding.
FIGURE I2-I4. Follicular cormi
fication  disorder.  Abdominal  skin
showing bandlike hiyperkeratosis and
follicular casting along the lines of
Blachko.
928· Congenital and Hereditary Defects
FIGURE I2-I5. Follicular para-
keratosis. A, Note remarkable follic
lar parakeratosis. B, Numerous lipid
droplets in the parakeratotie debris.
Epidermal Dysplasia in West Highland White Terriers
Epidernal dysplasia in West Highland white terriers (Armadillo Westie syndrome) is an
uncommon condition that tends to occur in families in this hreed.79 The mode of inheri-
tance is unknown, but it is probably transmitted as an autosomal recessive trait.
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Dogs with this condition have a dysplastic epidernis and an infammatory perivascular
dermatitis associated with Malassezia infection. Resolution of the Malassezia infection
results in the elimination of the infammation but not the dysplasia. These findings.
coupled with an carly agc at onset, suggest that the dysplasia is an inherited disorder of
keratinization that predisposes the dog to Malassezia dermatitis and probably hypersensi-
tivity to the organism.
CLINICAL FEATURES
Dogs of either sex can be affected, and signs usually begin between 6 and 12 months of
age, although some adult-onset cases have been recognized.79 Typically, affected dogs have
a somewhat greasy coat before pruritus, the primary sigu of this disorder, is recognized.
Congenital and Hereditary Defects · 929
The pruritus is initially focused at the face, the cars (see Fig. 12-1H), the legs (Fig. 12-
     si  (l -l    a 1   
skin is infamed, is greasy, and has large amounts of keratosebaceous debris on the
   e   s d    s
Animals with advanced cases are greasy, nearly bald, lichenifed, and often hyperpig-
corticosteroids, but response to these drugs is soon lost. There is no response to antihista-
mines, antibiotics, and antiseborrheic shampoos.
DIAGNOSIS
 In the absence of cytologic cvidence of a secondary Malassezia dermatitis, the primary
differential diagnostic considerations are food hypersensitivity, scabies, and cheyletiellosis.
considered. The demonstration of Malassezia yeast via cytologic examination of the kerato-
sebaceous debris does not confrm the diagnosis of epidermal dysplasia because yeasts are
common in some West Highland whitc tcrricrs.68 Biopsy is necessary to confim the
diagnosis. Areas sampled should not have the surface debris removed by close clipping or
presurgical cleaning.
Histopathologic findings include variable degrees of hyperplastic perivascular dermati
tis with epidermal dysplasia (Fig. 12-17)3 79 The epidermis shows varying degrees of
hyperchromasia, cxcessive keratinocyte mitoses, crowding of basilar keratinocytes, epider-
mal "buds,” subepiderinal linear alignment of mast cells, and loss of polarity (Fig. 12- 18).
taken sampies, marked parakeratotic surface and follicular hyperkeratosis is visible. In
most cases, numerous spherical to oval single budding yeasts (Fig. 12-20) can be seen in
the surface and superficial follicular keratin, Yeasts are absent in some cases.3
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
This condition is frustrating to manage. Rcsolution of the Malassezia dernatitis eliminates
the pruritus and returns the dog to near-nornal status. A mild keratinization defect
(scaling, minor crusting) persists. However, because the treatments of yeast infection do
not completely eliminate the organism, the Malassexia dermatitis recurs after treatment is
discontinued.
(sec Chap. 5), these dogs respond poorly to those treatments. Kctoconazole (10 mg/kg
q12h-q24h for 30 to 45 days) is necessary to induce remisson. Enilconazole (Imaverol,
 Jannsen) rinses are also effective in countries where the product is available. Because the
epidermal dysplasia persists, the Malassezia dermatitis and its associated signs recurs.
Attempts to prevent reinfection by the frequent use of antiseborrheic or antifungal sham-
 p  aa og e  so a p a a   s soo
rinse once or twice weekly can decrease the frequency of severe infections, but episodic
or constant use of ketoconazole or enilconazole is necessary.
 Treating the epidermal dysplasia with fatty acid supplements (Derm Caps, DVM) or
retinoic acids (isotretinoin or etretinate) have been unrewarding in the fow cascs in which
it was attempted.5 79 The only method of control that we have found to be effective is the
daily or alternate-day administration of ketoconazole. This has been successful in two dogs
for longer than 3 years. Because of the cxpcnsc of this treatment and poor prognosis for
cure, most affected dogs are euthanized.
Psoriasiform-Lichenoid Dermatosis in English Springer Spaniels
Psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatosis is rare and is recognized in only English springer span-
iels.25. 5 The dermatosis begins in young dogs (4 to 18 months of age) of both sexes.
Asymptomatic, generally symmctric, erythematous, lichenoid papules and plaques are ini-
930 · Congenital and Hereditary Defects
人
F1GURE I2-I6. A, Epidermal dysplasia, Markexl thickening and folding of erythematous, alopecic skin on a
limb. B, Epidermal dysplasia. Chronic alopccia, hyperpigmentation, and lichenification. C, Epidermal dysplasia in
Legendcontinuedonoppositepage
Congenital and Hereditary Delects · 93I
FIGURE I2-17. Epidernal dys-
plasia and Malassezia pachydermuatis
infection in a West Highland White
terrier. Note marked epithelial bud-
ding of the epidermis and the hair
follicle's outer root sheath (arrous).
tially visible on the pinnae (see Fig. 12-16D), in the extermal ear canal, and in the
(some almost papillomatous) and spread to involve the face, the ventral trunk, and the
perineal area. Chronic cases resemble severe seborrhea. The exclusive ocurrence of this
dermatosis in English springer spaniels suggests a genetic predilection. It has been pro-
posed that affected dogs have a distinct and exaggerated reaction to a superficial staphylo.
coccal infection.14
 Skin biopsy reveals superficial perivascular to intcrstitial dermatitis with psoriasiform
epidermal hyperplasia and areas of lichenoid interface dernatitis, intraepidermal microah-
scesses (containing cosinophils and neutrophils), and Munro's microabscesses (Figs. 12- 21
and 12-22).3 Chronic hyperkeratotic lesions frequently show papilated cpidermal hyper-
plasia and papillomatosis.
This dermatosis is characterized by a waxing and waning course for 1 to 3 years.
 Spontaneous remissions are not reported. Various medicaments, including anti-inflamma
tory doses of glucocorticoids, oral vitammin A, levamisolc, dlapsone, autogenous vaccine, and
antiseborrheic shampoos, are of little or no help. In four cases treated with cephalexin (20
 mg/kg ql2h), response was excellent with complete resolution of lesions. 14
Schnauzer Comedo Syndrome
The Schnauzer comedo syndrome affects the backs of some Miniature Schnauzer dogs
'saded nduu psn aneq  pru suo adn aq pgi si pues
CAUSEANDPATHOGENESIS
This condition has been observed exclusively in Miniature Schnauzers. It seems to be a
seborrheic or acneiform disorder and occurs in only certain predisposed individuals. The
txclusive occurrencc in Schnauzers and the clinicopathologic similarity to nevus comedoni-
 cus in humans? suggest that this syndrome may be a developmental dysplasia of hair
FIGURE I2-I6. Continued spaniel, Erythematous lichenoid plaques on a pinna. (Courtesy of K. Mason.) E, Sanc
dog as in D. Erythematous lichenoid papules and plaques on prepuce. (Courtesy of K. Mason.) F, Miniature Schnauzer
Schnauzer. If, Marked hyperkeratosis of the footpads in a Dogue dc Bordearx. (Courtesy of M. Paradis.)
932 · Congenital and Hereditary Defects
FIGURE 12-I8. Close-up of
Figure 12-17. Epidermal dysplasia.
Inercascd mitosis, crowding, and
loss of polarity of basilar keratino-
cytrs,
follicles with an inherited basis. After it is recognized, Schnauzer comedo syndrome can
usually be treated and easily controllcd, but recurrences are common. However, there is
much variability, with some cases rcsponding more favorably to therapy than others.
CLINICAL FEATURES
 In the predisposed individual, comedones (blackheads) tend to form over the back. These
can be felt as sharp, crusted, papular projections above thc surface of thc skin. Some
 comedones are soft and waxy.
The lesions are most numerous at the midspinal area of the back, fanning out laterally
and cxtcnding from the ncck to the sacrum (see Fig. 12-l6F). Schnauzer comedo
syndrome is seldom noted in the early stage before the comedo extrudes from thc
follicular orifice. At that stage, there is no pain or discomfort. In some individuals, the
comedo changes into a soft, small, aene-like pustule and causes slight irritation (see Fig.
12- 16G). Dogs do not usually display visible pain or itching. In some dogs, the plugged
follicles becorne infected. In these cases, the number of papular lesions increases rapidly;
FIGUrE 
12-19. Close-p of
Figure 12-17. Note diffuse spon-
giosis,lymphocytic exocylosis,and
focal parakeratotic hyperkcratosis.
Congenital and Hereditary Defects · 933
FIGURE I2-20. Close-up of Fig-
ure 12-17. Numerous yeasts
parakeratotic follicular keratin.
they become much more widespread and can involve the entire trunk. If sccondary
staphylococcal infection occurs, especially when it is widespread, the lesions tend to be
 pruritic or painful.
DIAGNOSIS
Clipping a small spot on the back exposes the skin so the individual comedones and
papules can be seen. The restriction of these lesions to the caudal dorsum of a Schmauzer
with no other signs of disease is virtually pathognomonic of the condition. The diagnosis
can be confirined by biopsy in which a section through one of the noninfected comedones
reveals a keratinous plug blocking the hair follicle and sebaceous gland. A small cystic
cavity is formed, lined by thin, stretched follicular epithelium and filled with keratin and
sebum (Fig. 12-23). Sebum secretion accumulates bchind thc plug, which further dilates
the cyst. If the follicle ruptures, a perifollicular infammatory iniltrate appears. If a
secondary bacterial infection is present, perifolliculitis, folliculitis, or furumculosis may be
visible.
FIGURE I2-21. Psoriasiform-
lichenoid derinatosis in an English
dernal  hyperplasia and lichenoid
cellular initrate. (Courtesy of K.
Mason.)
934 · Comigenital and Hereditary Defccts
FIGURE I2-22.Psoriasiform-
lichenoid dermatosis in  an  English
and eosinophils. (Courtesy of K.
Masonl.)
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The owner should be informed that, because of its genetic basis, the condition can be
controlled but not cured. Mild cases require no treatment and become apparent only
   s a s r   pd o pa si  ae 
bother the dog or become infected repeatedly, topical antiseborrheice therapy should be
instituted. If a secondary infection is present, systemic antibiotics should be administered
for 3 to 4 weeks.
In mild cases, (
daily or alternate-day wiping of the area with various human acne
cleaning pads, alcohol, or Listerine antiseptic (contains 0.06% thymol, 0.09% eucalyptol,
0.06% methyl salicylate, and 0.04% menthol) loosens or dissolves the comedones. Benzoyl
FIGURE 12-23. Schnauzer comedo syndrome. Dilation and plugging of hair follicles with
compact keratin (comedones).
Congenital and Hereditary Defects · 935
peroxide gel also can be used but may be irritating with repeated application. In more
sevcre cases, antiseborrheic shampoos are indicated. Because these plugged follicles are
casily infamed by harsh agents, the miidest shampoo should be used first and only
replaced by a stronger one if the first product is ineffective. Sulfur, tar and sulfur, benzoyl
Sg psn auo so ae soodus s sd prad pozua pue apiad
the dorsum twice weekly for 1 to 3 weeks removes the comedones, and then the
frequency is adjusted to the patient's needs. The rare case that is refractory to topical
12 hours.4'One case was treated every-other day for 4 months after remission was
achieved, and then therapy was discontinued.28 No relapse was noted within a l-year
follow-up period.
Footpad Hyperkeratosis
Familial footpad hyperkeratosis has been reported in Irish terrierslou 41 and the Dogue de
 Labrador retriever, the Golden retriever, and mongrels. Studies in Irish terriers suggested
an autosomal recessive inheritance.10a
All cases experience severe hyperkeratosis by 6 months of age. All pads of all feet are 
involved. The entire surface of the pad is involved, but the keratin is more cormpacted in
 s as  o s(eae  s) s s pe sn 
faster and their transverse profle is round rather than U-shaped.1oa No other skin lesions
are present.
Histopathologic findings include moderate to severe epidermal hyperplasia with
marked papillated and diffuse orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis (Fig. 12--24).70 Some fusion of
the conical papillae by keratin can occur. Electron microscopic studies in Irish terriers
were normal.ua
Treatment is synptomatic. Daily soaks in 50% propylene glycol cause signif-
cant improvement within 5 days, but treatment must be continued to maintain the re-
FIGURE I2-24. Digital hyperkeratosis in an Irish terrier. Marked papilated hyperplasia and
orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis.
936 · Congenital and Hereditary Defects
sponse,.0, 70 Treatment with retinoic acids has been proposed but not tested. The mode of
inheritance has not been established,
Nasal Hyperkeratosis
 An apparently hereditary nasal hyperkeratosis has been described in Labrador retrievers.67
 Because the sires and dams of affected dogs were clinically normal, the condition was
hypothesizcd to be autosomal recessive. The condition was recognized in malcs and
females between 6 and 12 months of age. It mostly affected the dorsal nasal planum and
was characterized by dry, rough, grayish, or brownish keratinous accumulations. Fissures
developed occasionally. The lesions were stahle over time, and the dogs were otherwise
healthy. Histopathologic findings included mild to marked parakeratotic hyperkeratosis,
moderate lymphocytic and neutrophilic exocytosis, and multifocal serous lakes within the
upper epidermis. A superfcial interstitial-to-interface dermatitis is present. No response
S    s       
a sy  aq sp s e o z o id og o oe
reappcared when treatment was stopped.
Aplasia Cutis
Aplasia cutis (epitheliogenesis imperfecta) is a congenital inherited discontinuity of squa-
mous epithelium2s35sIt is considered an autosonal recessive trait in cattle,horses
sheep, and pigs, but litle is known of its inheritance in dogs and cats. The condition is
characterized by areas of abrupt absence of epithelium, with resultant ulcers. Histologi-
cally, the ulcerated areas are distinguished by the complete absence of epiderrmis, hair
follicles, and glands. The lesions of aplasia cutis in the newborn rapidly become infected,
and septicemia soon results in death. With supportive therapy, small lesions may heal by
scar formation. Skin grafing may be beneficial.
Dermal Dysplasia
A case of generalized dermal dysplasia was reported in a young mongrel dog.6l The dog
had multiple papules to nodules that had both epidermal and folicular abnormalities. The
some regions. Clusters of immature epithelial cells were present along thc basement
 membrane zone of the epidermis or hair follicles. The hair follicles were deformed and
surrounded by mucin.
Dermoid Sinus
A dermoid sinus is a neural tube defect resulting from incomplete separation of the skin
and neural tube during embryonic development. The sinus is a tubular indentation of skin
extending from the dorsal midline as a blind sac ending in the subcutaneous tissue or
cxtending through the spinal canal to the dura mater. The lumen becomes filled with
sebum, keratin debris, and hair. It may become cystic and is often infamed. If infected, it
 may produce meningomyelitis and neurologic clinical abnormalities. Rarely, derruoid si-
nuses may be associated with spina bifida-type lesions, hemivertebrae, and vertebral
fusions.21
  so r o a   q  ss p
crosses.1. 7. 23, 50a, 53. 54. 82 Individual cases in a Boxer, English bulldog, Shih Tzu, Chow
Chow, Boerboel, Yorkshire terrier, Great Pyrenees, English springer spaniel, and Siberian
husky have alsobeen reported..1214a17,21.72,74a sThe dermoid sinusof Rhodesian
inheritance of the dermoid sinus suggest that the factor may be inherited as a simple
recessive gene.54 If so, complete eradication of the problem can be achieved by only a
Congcnital and Hereditary Defects * 937
program of progeny testing. However, by not breeding from affected anirnals, the inci.
dence can be rapidly reduced. When additional cases occur, breeders should extend that
 policy by not using either parent or any sibling of an affected pup for breeding. The
 problem is complicated further because dermoid sinus is not always easy to detect in a
young pup.
CLINICAL FEATURES
Lesions are often noted in young dogs. Whorled hair may be seen along the topline
(norrmal in the Rhodesian ridgeback), or isolated whorls may appear at the dorsal inidline
at the cervicothoracic or lumhothoracic junction. A tuft of hair may protrude fron single
or multiple sinall openings in the skin and a cord of tissue may be palpated, descending
from the skin toward the spine (Fig. 12-25). In densely coated dogs, the lesions are not
visible and go unnoticed until the sinus becomes infected or ruptures and induces a
draining pyogranulomatous dermatitis.12. 17 In one dog, neurologic disease was precipitated
when the owner attempted to squccze material out of the sinus.74
Diagnosis can be suspected on the basis of the anarnnesis and the clinical appearance,
but it is confirmed by a fistulogram. A tract may be delincated from the skin to the dorsal
 processes of the thoracie vertebrae. Laumbar myelograms imay dlemonstrate atteruation of
the subarachnoid space near the termination of the fistula.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Sinuses that are quiescent need no treatment other than observation. If drainagc or
the deep attachments of the dermoid sinus, complete removal is not always possible. The
tissue af the base is often fibrous, and careful blunt dissection is needed. Meningitis rmay
comnplicate these cases; therefore, extreme care should be taken to ensure an aseptic
technique during surgery. Successful surgery often results in complete recovery. Affected
patients should not be bred.
FIGURE 12-25. Dual fistulac opcning on either side of the midline in the cervical region of
the Rhodesian Ridgeback dog are typical lesions of a dermoid sinus. (Neck has been clipped.)
Notice the whorled ridge of hair on the lower back from which the brecd derived its name.
938 · Congenital and Hereditary Defects
● Table 12- 1
Types of epidermolysis bullosa (eb)
TYPE OF EB
STRUCTURE AFFECTED
DEFICIENT PROTEIN 
EB simplex
Dowling-Meara, Weher-Cockayne,
Intermediate flaments
Keratin 5 or 14
Koebner
Aqdonsp reinosnu ym
Hemidesmosones
 Plectin
Junctional EB
With pyloric atresia
Hemidesmosomes
Integrins αg or βa
Nonlethal
Anchoring filaments/lamina densa
Type XVII collagen or laminin 5
Lcethal
Anchoring filaments/lamina densa
Laminin 5
 Dystrophy EB
Dominant
Anchoring fbrils
Type VIIcollagen
Recessive
Anchoring fibrils
Type VII colagen
Epidermolysis Bullosa
 In humans, the term epidermolysis bullosa refers to a group of mechanobullous diseases.?
Most have a hereditary basis and are a result of a structural irregularity of the anchoring
 complexes of the epidermis (Table 12-1). One disorder, epidermolysis bullosa acquisita, is
a nonfamilial autoimmune disorder targeting collagen type Vll of the anchoring fibrils (sce
Chap. 9). The hereditary forms are divided into three major categories, namely epidermo-
lysis bullosa sinplex, junctional epidermolysis bullosa, and dystrophic epidermolysis bul-
losa. All forms have been reported in animals.
Epidermolysis bullosa simplex is the most superfcial disorder, with clefting occurring
in the basal layer of the epidermis. The first reports of epidermolysis bullosa simplex in
dogs were in Colies7 and Shetland sheepdogs.$6 Those dogs may have had dermatomyosi-
tis because the skin lesions mimicked those of dermatomyositis. We and othersis have
tomyositis but have been unable to demonstrate muscle disease by electromyography
   s   s  s   ()
volvement31, 4 or epidermolysis bullosa simplex.
In junctional epidermolysis bullosa, blisters form within the lamina lucida (Fig. 12-
 26) of the dermoepidermal basement membrane. Multiple clinical subtypes are recognized
 in humans, and lethal and nonlethal variants are described in the dog, Junctional epider-
molysis bulosa occurs in very young animals (e.g., at birth to 6 weeks of age) and has
FIGURE 12-26. Junctional _epi-
dermolysis bullosa in a puppy. Elec-
thannormal hemidesmosomes and
decreased electron density in the
underlying lamina lucida (arrows).
(Courtesy of R. Dunstan.)
Congenital and Hereditary Defects · 939
been reported in a mongrel, Toy_ poodle, multiplc Beauccrons, two German shorthaired
ulcerative lesions arc most marked over bony prominences of the face, on the pinna,
  q ose to s (i ) spdo  e s  o sd nsd
oral cavity, and the claws may be dystrophic. In the Beaucerons and German shorthaired
pointers, an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance was suspected.
inheritance was suggested.
Histologically, animals with junctional epidernolysis bullosa show a subepidermal
separation with little or no subjacent dermal infammation (Fig. 12-28). There was no
expression of type XVII collagen in the German shorthaired pointers, and there was no
abnormal expression of laminin 5, BPAG2 (type XVII collagen), integrin-αs, and type VII
collagen in the mongrel.
Dystrophic (derinatolytic) epidermolysis builosa has been described in a domestic
shorthaired cat,93 a Persian cat,66a an Akita,59 and multiple Beaucerons.40 The domestic
shorthaired cat had disease from 3 months of age, which included paronychia and claw
loss on all feet; ulceration of the gums, tonguc, palate, and oropharynx (Fig. 12-29A); and
ulceration with crusting of the metacarpus, metatarsus, and digital pads (see Fig. 12-
 29B). The Persian cat had juvenile-onset ulceration of oral rmucosa and footpads, onycho-
madesis, and fragile skin at sites of mechanical trauma. The Akita experienced its first skin
lesions around 1l year of age. Footpad fissures and ulcers were the first lesions recognized,
followed by claw dystrophy and alopecia and scarring of the ear margins, tail tip, and
were examined for the early development of erosive crusty lesions around rucocutaneous
junctions and over pressure points and sloughing of claws. The dogs also had defects in
tooth enamel, retarded growth, and an abnormal stance. In all animals, skin biopsy
showed a sub-basilar dermoepidermal separation. Ultrastructurally, the separation occurs
FIGURE I2-27. Junctinal epidermolysis bullosa.
Fullthickness ulceration of the digitaf and umain
carpal pads. (Courtesy of T. Olivry.)
940 · Congenital and Hereditary Defects
FIGURE 12-28. Junctional epi-
dlermolysis
bullosa." Subepidermal
separation with minimal dermal in-
flanmation. (Courtesy of T. Olivry.)
beneath the lamina densa, with a reduction in the nuunber of anchoring fibrils. There is
decreased to absent expression of type VII collagcn.66a
To date, only one case of epidermolysis bullosa acquisita has been described in
animals (see Chap. 9).64 With the clinical, histologic, and irmmunofluorescence similarities 
between this disease and bullous pemphigoid, it is possible that more cases exist hut have
 gone unrecognized. The one case reported involved a l-year-old Great Dane with acute-
onset vesiculohullous disease involving the oral cavity, footpads, and truncal skin. Treat-
ment with high levels of prednisone did little for the dog. On skin biopsy, the superfcial
dermis had a bandlike, neutrophilic, lymphocytic, and histiocytic infiltrate with an overly-
ing dermoepidermal separation. Immunologic studies denonstrated circulating autoanti-
bodies to the NCl domain of type Vll collagen.
Aside from topical and/or systemic antibioties or antifungals, no treatmcnts help thesc
animals. Manageinent changes to ninimize trauma may allow mildly affected dogs to lcad
a reasonably confortable life.
Familial Canine Dermatomyositis
Familial canine dermatomyositis is a hereditary, idiopathic inflammatory condition of the
skin and muscles of young Collies, Shetland sheepdogs, and Beauceron shepherds.0,2la 27,
shepherd dog, and Kuvasz3. 62. 02 and has been recognized in other purebred dogs. The
fanilial basis in these other breeds is unproven.
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
abnormalities,2 but it is unclear whether this immunologic reaction causes all of the
changes or is in response to some pre-existing muscle or skin damage. Although dermato-
myositis could be induced by drugs, vaccines, infections (especially viral ones), toxins, or
intermal malignancies, their causal relationship inl de rinatomyositis remains unproven.2
A familial history is rare in hurnans but common in Collics and Shetland sheepdogs.
variable expressivity.31 Studies in the Shetland sheepdog conducted by one of us (WHM)
 and others?7 suggest a similar mode of inheritance in this breed.
FIGURE I2-29. A, Dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa in a kitten. Oral ulceration. (Courtesy of S. White.) B,
sheepdog with dermatomyositis. Severe facial scarring and drop jaw. D, Dermatoinyositis in a collie, Chronic case
eyelids. F, Dermatomyositis in a collie. Patchy alopecia and erythena over the cranial aspect of the carpi. G, Collie
 pointer. Marked scaling and hyperkeratosis of the face and pinna. (Courtesy of M. Song.)
941
942 · Congenital and Hereditary Defects
CLINICAL FEaTURES
 In Collies and Shetland sheepdogs, no coat color or coat length is associated with derma-
tomyositis. Either sex can be affected. Because of the familial predisposition, lesions occur
early in life, typically before 6 months of age. Signs in some dogs appear as early as 7 to
11 weeks of age. The progression of lesions varies. Some mildly affected dogs have few
lesions, which heal rapidly without scarring. Most dogs have new lesions after the first
ones are recognized, but the rate of progression is variable. The extent of the skin lesions
is known by I year of age. Unless management changes occur, lesions usually decrease in
number and severity from that point on.
Skin lesions occur in areas of mechanical trauma and are common on the face (see
Fig. 12-29C and D), especially around the eyes (see Fig. 12-29E) and muzzle (Fig. 12-
30); on the tips of the ears; on carpal and tarsal regions (see Fig. 12-29F); on the digits;
q uo ae susal peog pe po (-  aas) n a jo dg n uo pue
primary lesions arc usually absent. Typical skin lesions are characterized by alopecia,
erythema, scaling, and mild crusting. Ulceration can occur in severely affected dogs. Skin
lesions are usually not pruritic unless a secondary staphylococcal infection has occurred,
dogs, large areas of normal skin remain, whereas in severely affected dogs, the entire face,
distal limbs, and tail can be involved. Some dogs have onychorhexis (Fig. 12-31),
onychoschizia, or onychomadesis.
The myositis typically occurs months after the skin lesions are recognized and corre-
lates with the severity of the skin lesions. Mildlly affected dogs have no clinical muscle
Asdq u no usat  uo pn qnou i s jo s s ss
These patients may have epiderinolysis bullosa simplex, dermatomyositis with focal but
undetected myositis, or dermatornyositis without the myositis.84 ln humans, the diagnosis
of amyopathic dermatomyositis can be confrmed only when no muscle changes are
 detected for 4 years or longer after the skin lesions have occurred. To our knowledge, this
type of follow-up testing has not been perforined in dogs. The rare dog related to dogs
with classic derinatomyositis has EMG changes of myositis with no skin lesions. The
significance of these findings is unknown.
Clinical signs of myositis vary. A comrnon finding is a dirty water bowl that contains 
food particles. These dogs do not have trouble chewing their food, but do not swallow it
 completely, so residual pieces are washed from the mouth during drinking. Some dogs
FIGURE I2-30. Dermatomyosi-
tis. Patchy depigmentation and scar.
ring of the nasal planum. The lips
are also scarred.
Congenital and Hereditary Defects · 943
FIGURE I2-3l. Dermatomyositis. Onychor-
rhexis of all claws on all four feet.
have a peculiar high-stepping, gait. Severely affected dogs drink, chew, and swallow with
difficulty; have a stiff gait; have megaesophagus; and often havc sccondary aspiration
the muscles of mastication and distal limbs. Thc rarc dog has skin lesions only in
adlulthood.2la 31. 92
DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnostic considerations should include demodicosis, staphylococcal follic-
ulitis, dermatophytosis, discoid lupus erythematosus, and epiderinolysis bullosa simplex.
The latter might be considered if there are no muscle signs or lesions and if vesicles are
present.
 Diagnosis is confirmed by history, physical examination findings, biopsy of aflected
skin and muscle, EMG, and laboratory tests to rule out other conditions. Biopsy of
affected skin shows scattered hydropic degeneration of the surfacc and follicular basal
cells (Fig. 12-32)3 Apoptotic basal cells (Civatte's bodies) occasionally are visible. With
confuent hydropic change, intrabasal or subepidermal clefting may be apparent (Fig. 12-
33). Dermal infammation can be absent. Most cases show a mild perivascular to intersti-
tial dermatitis in which lymphocytes, plasma cells, and listiocytes predominate. Mild
pigmentary incontinence may be present in the superficial dermis. Folicular atrophy and
perifolicular fibrosis are cormmon findings (Figs. 12-34 and 12-35) and may be the only
findings in chronic lesions. Vasculitis occasionally is present in the skin. Muscle biopsy
 may show mixed infammatory exudates accompanied by muscle fiber necrosis and atro-
 phya1 Needle EMG abnormalities include positive sharp waves and fibrillation potentials
in muscles of the head and of distal extremities
Hemograms and serum chemistry profiles are usually unremarkable, but creatine
944 · Congenital and Hereditary Defects
FIGURE I2-32. Dermatomyositis (epidermolysis bulosa simplex) in a collie. Marked
 a   o   s  s  
kinase levels can be increased. Neurologic examination and nerve conduction studies are
usually normal. Elevated concentrations of immunoglobulin G and circulating immune
globulin G and circulating immune complex levels correlates with the severity of the skin
disease.31
FIGURE 12-33. Dermatomyositis (epidermolysis bullosa simplex) in a collie. Subepidermal
 z    s  a o     
Epiderinolysis bullosa simplex in the collie dog. JAVMA 17l:172, 1977.)
Congenital and Hereditary Defects · 945
FIGURE I2-34. Canine dennatomyositis. Fi-
brosing dermatitis, with orphaned apocrine glands
and pigmentary incontinence.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The skin lesions of dermatomyosiis are worsened by trauma and prolonged solar expo-
sure. Management changes to avoid these secondary insults should be instituted. Mildly
affected dogs usually require no additional treatment because their skin lesions heal
spontaneously. Some of these dogs have perrnanently alopecic, hyperpigmented, and
scarred areas where the most severe active lesions were. Severely affected dogs are
 o  s  p a sh as r a o 
which results in lameness and difficulty in drinking and eating. These dogs often have
aspiration pneumonia. Although large doses of prednisolone (1 to 2 mg/kg q24h) improve
the skin lesions, it is difficult to maintain the animal on safe levels of the drug and the
steroid-associated muscle changes compound the pre-existing changes. Humane euthanasia
should be encouraged.
Mildly to moderately affected dogs can usually be maintained as acceptable pets for
extended periods. Some skin lesions remain and muscle atrophy, especially of the rmuscles
of mastication, is apparent. Oral doses of vitamin E (200 to 800 1U/day) or marine lipid
supplements (e.g., DVM Derm Caps) appear to be beneficial for the skin but not for the
muscle lesions. Some dogs require cpisodic courses of treatment with prednisolone (l mg/
kg q24h) to control traumatic or solar fares. Other dogs, especially those with moderately
severe disease, need near-constant corticosteroid treatments. In these animals, pentoxifyl.
line (Trental, Hoechst-Roussel) should be adlded to the corticosteroid regimen in the hope
946 · Congenital and Heredlitary Defects
FIGURE 12-35, Canine dermatomyositis. Peri-
follicular fibrosis.
of significantly reducing or eliminating the corticosteroid. The drug is given with food at
months of treatment needed before effcacy can be determined.
These treatments usually minirmize the development of new skin lesions, and those
that do occur tend to be milder. Muscle disease progresses, and old dogs have profound
atrophy of the muscles of the head, the distal limbs, and sometimes the body. With severc
atrophy, the animal's ability to cat and drink can be compromised and dietary manipula-
tions becomc neccssary. The limb and body atrophy can cause an abnormal gait, but
locomotion is still possible. Amyloidosis occurs in some chronically affected dogs.3
Idiopathic Ulcerative Dermatosis in Shetland Sheepdogs and Collies
The ulcerative dermatosis described in Shetland sheepdogs and Collies is of unkmown
etiology. It was originally hypothesized to be a variant of dermatomyositis.36 Results of a
clinicopathologic study of five Shetland shecpdogs and two Collies with this syndrome led
the authors to conclude that it is distinct from dermatomyositis and should be renamed
vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus (see Chap. 9).3
CLINICAL FEATURES
Lesions occur in middle-aged to older dogs with no antecedent history of skin disease.
 The disease appears to be more prevalent in Shetland sheepdogs. No sex predilection is
Congenital and Hereditary Defects · 947
noted, but relapses or exacerbations can occur with estrus. Ini all dogs, there can be cyclic
recrudescence, which often occurs in summer.
The initial lesions are vesiculobullous and are visible in the groin and then the axilary
regions. The bullae tend to be faccid and centcrcd in areas of figurate erythema. Lesions
normal and abnormal skin. In some cases, lesions can be found on the eyelids, the pinnae,
the oral mucosa, the external genitalia, the anus, and the footpads.The lesions are painful
 espccially if secondarily infected.
DIAGNOSIS
 degeneration of basal cells and extensive individual keratinocyte apoptosis, which can
extend into the stratum spinosum.3. 3s In sevcrc cases there may be extensive blister
formation at the derrmoepidermal junction. In thc dermis, there is a superficial perivascu-
lar to partially lichenoid dermatitis. Interfacc folliculitis is often present. There is no
follicular atrophy. Direct irmmunofuorescence and antinuclear antibody test results are
negative. Some dogs have EMG abnormalities typical of dermatomyositis. Hemograrns,
 serum chemistry profles, and ANA test results are usually unremarkable or negative.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
 Because lesions may bc triggered or worsened by trauma, managerment changes to mini-
mize trauma are appropriate. The photosensitive nature of the lesions makes photoprotec-
tion an important management consideration. Antibiotic therapy is indicated in cases with
secondary infections. Glucocorticoids, with or without azathioprine, the combination of
tive. The cyclic nature of the disease can make maintenancc management more diffecult.
Canine Benign Familial Chronic Pemphigus
In humans, benign familial pemphigus (Hailey-Hailey disease) is an autosomal dominant
unknown but probably lies hetween desmosomal protein 3 and desmosomal glycoproteins.
 In the early stages of lesion formation, the intracellular components of desmosomes are
primarily disrupted.& There are reduced quantities of desimoglein and plakoglobin in
     osn u dap ss  p 
disease is a genetic weakness in desimosomes. A similar disorder has been reported in
English setters and their crosses,83, s4a The disorder has also been recognized in a Dober-
man pinscher. The disorder in English setters and their crosses was inherited in an
autosomal dominant fashion.s4a
CLINICAL FEATURES
Lesions occur in dogs at about 6 months of age and occur over pressure points on the
limbs,$3 on the ventral chest,4a or on the pinnae (Fig. 12-36).5 Lesions are first character-
ized by alopecia, erythema, and slight sealing. Increased scaling and crusting occur later as
the lesions become plaquelike. Vesicopustules are rare. Lesions remain localized and
cannot be easily induced.
DIAGNOSES
The differential diagnosis is limited and includes pressure point irritation and superficial
bacterial folliculitis. Skin biopsy shows acanthosis with orthokeratotic and parakeratotic
hyperkeratosis and marked, diffuse, multifocal areas of acantholysis of the lower and
middle portions of the epidermis and follicular outer root sheath.83 The acantholysis is
948 · Congenital and Hereditary Defects
FIGURE I2-36. Benign familial
chronic pemphigus, Multiple vesicu-
lar lesions on the inner pinnal sur-
face of a Doberman pinscher.
 often so marked that the appearance of the affected epidermis is likened to that of a
dilapidated brick wall. Acantholytic dyskeratotic keratinocytes (corps ronds) may be visible
(Fig. 12-37). Immunofuorescence testing yields negative results.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
In humans, treatment of infections withi or without the use of topical corticosteroids and
avoidance of trauma usually provide good results.2 Severe patients can be helped by the
administration of systemic glucocorticoids, methotrexate, dapsone, cyclosporine, and reti-
 noids. Because the lesions in dogs are asynptomatic and localized, no treatment has been
attempted.
Hereditary Lupoid Dermatosis of German Shorthaired Pointers
The lupoid dermatosis of German shorthaired pointers is an uncommon disorder. Cases
have been recognized worldwide.76. s6. 87. 89-91 Aside from a familial predisposition, no
cause of the dermatosis has been determined. Results of immunopathologic studies led
FIGURE 12-37. Benign familial
chronic  pemphigus. Suprabasalar
acantholysiswithnumerousdys-
keratotic cells (corp ronds).
Congenital and Hereditary Defccts *949
thc authors to conclude that this syndrome should be renamed exfoliatice cutaneous lupus
erythematosus.6
CLINICAL FEATURES
Typically, exfoliative skin lesions are first noted at about 6 months (3 to 36 months) of
age. Scaling and crusting appear first on the face, the ears, and the back and then in a
more generalized distribution (see Fig. 12-29H). The hocks and the scrotum may be
severely involved. The lesions are variably painful or pruritic. Pyrexia and lymphadenopa-
thy may accompany the skin lesions. Lesions may have a waxing and waning course or be
persistent.
DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnostic possibilities includc nutritional disorders, a primary keratiniza-
tion disorder, drug eruption, sebaceous adenitis, and systemic lupus erythematosus. The
rare dog has laboratory evidence (proteinuria and positive antinuclear antibody titer) of
systemic lupus erythematosus.9i Skin biopsy shows mild to moderate acanthosis, orthokera-
keratinocyte apoptosis is found throughout the stratum spinosum and may be confuent.
Basilar clefting may be present. Interface foliculitis accompanies the interface derrmatitis.
The dermis shows a mixed cellular mild to moderatc intcrface dermatitis, and sebaccous
glands may be normal, small, or absent (in about half the cases). Ultrastructural studies in
one dog showed decreased numbers of hemidesmosomes along the basal layer."7 Imnmuro-
pathologic studies have revealed the following: epitheliotropic/folliculotropic/sebotropic
lymphocytes exhibited a unique CD3', CD8α , y8TCR1+ phenotype: IgG, IgA, IgM, and
C3 were detected at the epidermal and infundibular basement membrane zone in 97%,
3%, 18%, and 13% of the sections, respectively; and circulating antinuclear antibodies
were not detcctcd.66
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
 To date, no uniformly successful treatment has been reported. Antiseborrheic baths and
immunosuppressive doses of corticosteroids have given poor results. Fatty acid supple-
 number of dogs have been treated with retinol or retinoic acids with no benefit.87, 90
FIGURE I2-38. Hereditary lu-
poid dermatosisof  German short-
haired pointer. Hydropic  interface
dermatitis. (Courtesy of T. Gross.)
950 · Congenital and Hereditary Defects
· dIsorderS of HaIrS And HaIr GroWTh
A variety of inherited disorders of the hair shaft or hair growth are reported in dogs and
cats.1. i17 Congenital conditions are easily recognized because they occur near birth, when
they are easy to differentiate from endocrine and other acquired alopecias. Inherited
disorders with tardive onset are more difficult and can mimic a variety of other disorders.
Careful inspection of hairs via a trichogram or a skin biopsy differentiates inherited
disorders from other acquired alopecias. These tests should be performed routinely in
animals with abnormal hairs, for hair loss early in life, or for hair loss with an unusnal
distribution.
 Inherited hair disorders have no specific treatment. Nutritional supplements, special
diets, and so forth, as espoused by some breeders, are of minimal benefit. Good gentle
grooming is imperative to minimize secondary infections and seborrhea. Without the
normal protection of their coat, affected animals are susceptible to frostbite, sunburn, the
effects of low environmental humidity, and other environmental insults. With appropriate
 management changes, these animals can lead nearly normal lives.
Structural Defects of the Hair Shaft
 In humans, a variety of inherited or acquired conditions affect the shape, composition,
and strength of the hair shafts.2 Depending on the condition, the defect can be recog-
nized because the scalp hairs are unmanageable or unusual in appearance or because the
hairs break easily with routine brushing or combing. Diagnosis is confirmed by light and
scanning electron microscopic examination of affected hairs.
Coat abnormalities are common in veterinary medicine, but only six hair shaft defects
  a  q ao u n  eq 
 microscopic examination of hair shafts was not a routine part of the clinical evaluation of
 patients with abnormal coats.
TRICHORRHEXIS NODOSA
In humans and animais, trichorrhexis nodosa is most often an acquired defect in which
  'i d as rs r  n pe a n s ss a
some cases have an inherited basis.? Two of us (WHM and DwsS) have examined two
unrelated young Golden retrievers for a poor coat. At examination, there was no hair loss.
but the hairs were uneven in length, Trichograms showed nodular hair fracture typical of
trichorrhexis nodosa (Fig. 12-39). No systemic or topical cause of the problem could be
identified, and the condition persisted. These cases suggest that inherited trichorrhexis
nodosa may occur in animals.
TRICHOPTILOSIS
Trichoptilosis, the longitudinal splitting of the distal end of a hair ("split ends,” “frizzies")
is probably a very common condition in dogs and cats who are repeatedly bathed, sprayed.
or otherwise treated topically with “mild" products or who have received one or more
harsh treatments. If the animal's hairs are weaker than normal because of some congenital
or acquired structural defect, the fracture will occur with minimal to no insult. Because
the shaft fracture occurs at the tip of the hair, the area involved is not hairless, but is
covered by hairs of unequal length. No other abnormalities should be detected.
 Trichoptilosis was reported in three male Golden retrievers. 14s Two of the dogs were
siblings. One dog had no history of topical treatments; the other two were treated with
flea sprays. All dogs had widespread disease with poor feathering on the limbs (Fig. 12-
40) and patchy hypotrichosis on the trunk (Fig. 12-4l). Because one dog had disease that
arose spontaneously and the extent of the disease in the other two seemed to be dispro-
          s 
The hair shaft distal to the fracture should be examined carefully for additional abnormali
Congenital and Hereditary Defects · 95I
FIGURE I2-39. Trichorrhexis no-
dosa. Discrete splintering of hair.
ties that might explain the shaft fracture. If the shafts above and below the fracture point
 are normal, a detailed history of topical treatments should be taken and suspected treat-
ments should be stopped. Once the trauma is discontinued, the coat should return to
 normal. If no insult can be found, it is unlikely that the coat will improve.
MEDULLARY TRICHOMALACIA
Medullary trichomalacia is an unusual hair shaft disorder wherein the medulla vacuolates
spontaneously. The disorder has been studied in detail in six German shepherd dogs,155
 and a familial hyperfragility of hairs secondary to a disorder of keratinization is suspected
 in this breed. Because this disorder has also been recognized in several other breeds, an
acquired, rather than congenital, etiology is also likely, but no cause was detennined in
those dogs.
 The German shepherds had multiple patches of involvement over the dorsun. Prior
 to hair loss, the patches could be identified because the hairs lost their fexibility and
 stood away from the rest of the coat. On close inspection, the hairs appeared thicker than
FIGURE I2-40. Trichoptilosis.
Shaft fracture at different points
along thehairsgivesa disheveled
 and uneven look to the coat.
952 · Congenital and Hereditary Defects
FIGURE I2-41. Trichoptilosis.
Same dog as in 12-40 with involve-
ment of the hairs over the chest
wall.
FIGURE I2-42. Trichoptilosis ("split
op e uy (spua
FIGURE I2-43. Medullary tricho-
malacia. Patch of hair fracturc over
shepherd dog.
Congenital and Hereditary Defects * 953
FIGURE
12-44.
Medullary
trichomalacia in a dog.
normal, were stiff to the touch, and broke with minimal trauma (Fig. 12-43). The hair
 loss in the other breeds was also patchy but not confined to the dorsum.
 On trichography, the involved hairs have longitudinally split in the middle of the hair
shaft and the medula is depigmented and vacuolated (Fig. 12-44). Skin biopsies from
affected areas show catagenization of most hair follicles, some of which contained in-
creased numbers of apoptotic outer root sheath keratinocytes. Biopsies from normal areas
or involved areas that had returmed to norrnal showed no abnormalities.
 In all cases, normal hairs regrow spontaneously at the next shed cycle. Relapses are
uncomrmon. If a relapse occurs, the new patches can be more or less numerous and will
be in the same region but not necessarily in the same location.
PILI TORTI
 Pili torti is a condition in which curvature of the hair folicle leads to fattening and
rotation of the hair shaft (Fig. 12-45). In humans, most cases have a hereditary basis and
the patients often experience other cutaneous and systemic abnormalities.? Localized
 acquired pili torti can result from follicular inflammation.
FIGURE I2-45. Pili torti. Note 360-
degree twist of hair shaft on its long axis
(arrow).
FIGURE I2-46. A, Pili tori in a cat. (Courtesy of C. Foil.) B, Spiculosis in a Kerry blue tcrrier. (Courtesy of
follicular dysplasia. Note the marked hypotrichosis over the dorsum that spares white-coated areas. (Courtesy of C.
Foil.) F, Pattern baldness on the pinna of a 7-year-old dachshund. G, Patterm baldness on the ventral neck of an
Irish water spariel. H, Pattem baldness on the tail and thighs of an Irish water spaniel.
954
Congenital and Hereditary Defects · 955
FIGURE I2-47. Pili torti in a
cat. Note hypotrichosis and twisted
hairs. (Courtesy of C. Foil.)
Pili torti has been reported in a litter of kittensll2 and in soine Bull terriers with
acrodermatitis.215 In the dogs, most hairs were normal, suggesting that the affected hairs
resulted from follicular inflammation. In the cats, all hairs were affected by 10 days of age
(Fig. 12-46A). In addition to the generalized hair loss, the kittens had periocular and
    prs s s a d  s 
typical of pili torti (Fig. 12-47), but primary hairs were not involved. On biopsy, follicular
hyperkeratosis with occasional cystic dilatation was the only notable fnding.
SHAFT DISORDER OF ABYSSINIAN CATS
Shaft disorder is an uncommon to rare condition of Abyssinian cats.157 Only whiskers and
primary hairs are affected. These hairs are rough and lusterless and have an onion-shaped
swelling visible with the naked eye, usually at the tip of the hair (Fig. 12-48). Hair
fracture can occur at the swelling. Skin biopsy shows no follicular abnormalities. The
cause of the condition is unknown, but because of its restriction to Abyssinian cats, it
must be considered an inherited disorder. No details on treatment are available.
FIGURE I2-48. Shaft disorder of
Abyssinian cats. Note  the omion-
shaped swelling at the tip of the
hair.
956 · Congenital and Hereditary Defects
SPICULOSIS
Spiculosis is a rare disorder of young intact male Kerry blue terriers.13o Affected dogs have
multiple, hard, britle follicular spicules (see Fig. 12-46B), which are 1 to 2.5 mm in
diameter and 0.5 to 3 cm in length. The spicules can be found on any haired surface but
are most common over the lateral hock region. Although the spicules can be asynpto-
matic, most dogs lick or chew at them.
in an amorphous mass of keratin, which is shaped into the spicule by the outer root
sheath and the follicular wall (Fig. 12-49).
 In asymptomatic dogs, no treatment is indicated and the spicules persist. In pruritic
animals, the only effective treatment has been with isotretinoin (1 mg/kg orally q24h).
After 3 to 4 months of treatment, the spicules disappear. With discontinuation of the drug
regimen, the dog may remain normal or the spicules may redevelop. In the latter case,
 maintenance therapy with isotretinoin is indicated.
Congenital Hypotrichosis or Alopecia
With congenital hair loss, hypotrichosis or alopecia is obvious at birth or develops during
the frst 2 to 4 weeks of life. Some animals have only hair follicle disease, whereas other
 animals also have involvement of other skin appendages. Additional ectodermal defects
such as abnormal dentition or tear production may also be noted. To categorize these
FIGURE I2-49. Spiculosis in a Kerry blue ter-
rier.
Congenital and Hereditary Defects · 957
FIGURE I2-50. Chinese crested dog, a recognized breed.
 animals accurately, Foil proposed a numeric classification scheme, noting changes in hair,
teeth, claws, adncxal glands, or other ectodermal structures. Classification of newly recog-
 nized cases accordling to this scheme should help to categorize these disorders and remove
some of the confusion or misclassification in the veterinary literature.
ALOPECIC BREEDS
The best known examples of hairless dog breeds are the Mexican hairless dog and the
Chinese crcsted dog (Fig, 12-50). Other hairless breeds include the Inca hairless dog.
dian hairless) is bred for its hairlessness (Fig. 12-51) 14
FlGURE I2-51. Feline alopocia universalis. (From Scott
DW: feline dermatology I900- 1978: A monograph, JAAHA
16:331,1980.)
958 * Congenital and Hereditary Defects
FlGURE I2-52. American hairless terrier and its normally lhaired littermate, an
American rat terTier. (Courtesy of C. Foil.)
 These hairless breeds resulted frorm the intentional breeding of animals with a sponta-
neous mutation. Aside from pets, these animals are useful in the study of sunscrecns (sec
Chap. 16), topical glucocorticoids,39 and topical hair growth stimulators such as minoxi-
dil. 123 Interestingly, minoxidil only stimulates hair growth in neonatal dogs. In the Mexican
hairless, an autosomal dorminant mode of inheritance has been demonstrated.122 The
American hairless terrier (Fig. 12-52) was developed from American rat terriers with an
          
survival time than their haired relatives,l1o. 124 This decreased survival may be due to a
familial immunoincompetence linked to the hairlessness. lh, 9
CONGENITAL HYPOTRICHOSIS
Congenital hypotrichosis is the term used to dcscribe animals born without their normal
pelage or who experience non-color-linked hair loss within the first rmonth of life. Some
anirmals have only hair folicle involvement, whereas other animals have additional ccto-
dermal defects. Many cases are not well charactcrized.
Dogs
 Congenital hypotrichosis has been deseribed in the American Cocker spaniel, Belgian
shepherd, German shepherd, Toy and Miniature poodes, Whippet, Beagle, French bull.
dog, Rottweiler, Yorkshire terrier, Labrador retriever, Bichon Frise, Lhasa apso, and
Basset hound.* We have recognized it in Cocker spaniel- Miniature poodle crossbreeds.5
Most cases have been recognized in male animals, suggesting soine sex linkage. The X-
linkage was proven in the Geriman shepherd.iot Most affected aninals are born with
noticeable hair loss, which progresses over the next month or so. Some dogs are born
*See references 1, 3, 5, 101, 104, 105, 110, 113, 120, 126, 128, 133, 151, 154.
Congenital and Hereditary Defects * 959
 normally haired but lose it shortly thereafter.1. lio The hair loss is symmetric in distribution
and typically involves the tenporal regions, the ear pinnae, the caudal dorsum, and the
entire ventrum (Figs. 12-53 and 12-54; also see Fig. 12-46C). Some patients are born
hair loss is regionalized, it is well delineated from the adjacent norrmal skin. Early on, the
hairless skin is clinically normal, but it can become hyperpigrnented and seborrheic with
time. If the dog is examined after its puppy teeth have been replaced by adult teeth,
 abnormalities in dentition may be recognizcd.
Cats
Congenital hypotrichosis has been reported in Birman,102 Burmese,97 Devon Rex,l53 and
Siamesel4s cats. Multiple kittens in the liter are involved, and no sex linkage has been
described. In Birman and Siainese cats, the condition is an autosomal recessive trait.
Affected cats either are born hairless (Fig. 12-55) or have a thin downy coat that is
 Iost in the first weeks of life (see Fig. 12-46D). Affected Burmese cats have no whiskers,
claws, or papillac on the tongue.97 At neceropsy of affected Birman kittens, no thymus was
found.102
The tentative diagnosis of congenital hypotrichosis in dogs or cats is straightforward
  s  i -i o ii s  us  p si 
involvement is marked. In some cascs, there is complete absence of follicles,zor. 102
whereas hair follicles are hypoplastic and decreascd in number in other cases.9, i48 Ad-
 nexae (sebaceous glands, sweat glands, and arrector pili muscles) are recuced in number,
hypoplastic, or ahsent.
BLACK HAIR FOLLICULAR DYSPLASIA
Black hair follicular dysplasia is an uncommon disorder in which dogs with bicolor or
tricolor coats lose hairs in the black areas only at an early age.
FIGURE 12-53. The partially alopecic males compared with a full-coated sister. The patteri of
alopeciawhichisbilaterally smetric nd includes about two thirdsof thebody surface,is the same
in both males. (From Selimanowit. V], et al; Congenital ectodernal defect in miniatare poodles. J
Hered 61:196, 1970.)
960· Congenital and Hereditary Defects
FIGURE I 2-54. A, Diamond-shapcd alopecic rcgion over the: dorsal pelvis and alopecia of the head and limbs.
B, Ventral vicw of affected male, showing the pattem of alopecia on the trunk and legs. (From Selmanowitz V]. et
al: Congenital ectodermal defcct in miniature poodles. J Hered 61:196, 1970.)
FIGURE I2-55.A Birman cat
with her hypotrichotie kittens. (Cour-
tesyofJ.King.)
Congenital and Hereditary Defects · 96 1
absent. (Acid orcein elastica stain x 70.) B, Transition zone Of appendage-frec and appendage-containing skin.
Hair folicles, sweat glands, and sebaceous gland cells (near the upper portion of the section of the follicle in the
large area of alopecia. There is no overt difference in the appearance of the epidermis and connective tissuc on
either side of the transition. (From Selmanowitz VJ, et al: Congcnital cctodermmal defeet in miniature poodlles. J
Hered 61:196, 1970.)
FIGURE I 2-57. Canine hypotrichosis. Dystrophic hair follicles and abortive hair shafts.
962 · Congenital and Hereditary Defects
FIGURE I2-58. Hercditary hypotrichosis in a Siarmese cat. The poorly developed hair
follicles are devoid of hair shafts. (From Scott Dw: Feline dermatology 1900-1978; A
monograph. JAAHA 16:331, 1980.)
Cause and Pathogenesis
 Black hair follicular dysplasia is a familial disorder with ncar-uniform involvemcnt of the
puppies with black coats. In one study, the condition was thought to be autosomal
recessve.147 Ilistologic and ultrastructural studies show disorders of pigment transfer and
suggests that the defect in hair formation plays a significant role in the hair loss, With
color genetic influence or possibly a deficiency in 1nelanocyte-stimulating horrmone could
 contribute to the pigmentary changes.100
Clinical Features
Black hair follicular dysplasia has been recognized in mongrels and purebred dogs of
many breeds, including the Bearded colie, Border collie, Basset hound, Papillon, Saluki,
Beagle, Jack Russell terrier, American Cocker spaniel, Schipperke, Cavalier King Charles
normal but show coat changes by 4 wccks of age. Only the black hairs are affected (see
Fig. 12-46E). The first noticeable change in most dogs is loss of luster of the black hairs,
followed by progressive hair loss until all black hairs are lost. In large Munsterlanders,
C e  n jo psu um pe Ane e m uq e rq as on up sam
ately he called color dilution alopecia. Because the hair loss is due to shaft fracture,
stubble can remain. Excessive scaliness occurs in the involved areas. The rate of hair loss
 is variable, but near-total alopecia occurs by 6 to 9 months of age.
Diagnosis
The color-linked nature and early age at onset of the hair loss make the diagnosis
 straightforward. Biopsy specimens from nonblack areas are normal, whereas black areas
*See references 1, 3, 5, 100, 108, 109, 118, 125, 129, 143, 147, 152.
Congenital and Hereditary Defects * 963
FIGURE 12-59. Black hair follicular dysplasia
Follicular dilatation with the accumulation of kera-
tin and large clumps of free melanin.
FIGURE I2-60. Patterned pin-
nal baldness. A 12-year-old ^cat
with hair loss restricted to the pin-
lae. The hair loss began early in
adulthood.
964 · Congenital and Hereditary Defects
FIGURE I2-61. Legend on opposite page
Congenital and Hereditary Defects · 965
it x i  s lq e pe a  u  as
Large melanin granules (rnacromclanosomes) are visible within hair shafts, and thc folli-
cles are irregular, are dilated, and are filled with keratin, fragments of hair shafts, and
large clumps of free melanin (Fig. 12-59). The normal architecture of hair shafts is often
obscured, with unclear definition between cuticle, cortex, and tnedulla. Hlair shaft outline
is irregular and focally bulging, and severely affected shafts may be rather amorphous
eosinophilic structures containing irregular clumps of melanin. Nurmcrous pcribulhar
melanophages occur in the dermis. The pigmentary changes are less pronounced than
they are in color dilution alopecia.
Tardive Hypotrichosis or Alopecia
Animals with tardive hypotrichosis or alopecia are born with normal coats. Focal, regional-
ized, or generalized hair loss occurs either about the time when thc puppy coat is
replaced by the adult coat or when the animal is a young adult.
PATTERN BALDNESS
Pattern baldness has been reported in only dogs, and four syndrormes are rccognized. The
first is pinnal alopccia of male and, rarely, female Dachshunds. We have also recognized
this disordcr in dogs of othier breeding and in the cat (Fig. 12-60). Affected dogs slowly
progresses slowly to complete pinnal alopecia (see Fig. 12-46F). Complete baldness
usually occurs by 8 or 9 years of age. As the hair loss progresses, the exposed skin
ss u r s  s  d    sa
The second syndrome occurs in American water spaniels and Portuguese water dogs.
Hair loss in these dogs typically is noted at about 6 months of age and is restricted to the
ventral neck, the caudomedial thighs, and the tail (see Fig. 12-46G and H). Recognition
of this problem by the respectivc brccd clubs has sharply reduced the frequency of
occurrence.
 The third syndrome occurs in Greyhounds, and affected dogs cxperience hair loss on
the caudal thighs as might occur in early endocrine alopecia. Thyroid and sex hormone
  p ss s arn  'ss  a  iq  o sr sn
caudal thighs.lo6 This condition must be differentiated from the bald thigh syndrome of
Greyhounds 147a In the bald thigh syndrome, the hair loss is on the lateral thighs and
probably has an endocrine basis.
The last and most common syndirome is seen primarily in Dachishunds but also is
recognized in Boston terriers, Chihuahuas, Whippets, Manchester terriers, Greyhounds,
and Italian greyhounds.  The condition is recognized almost exclusively in female ani-
mals. At approxinately 6 months of age, affected dogs gradually begin to lose hair in the
postauricuiar regions and along the ventral neck, on the entire ventrun (Fig. 12-6lA),
and on the caudomedial thighs. Hair loss is gradual over the next 12 months but remains
restricted to the described areas. Close inspection of the hairless skin reveals multiple
 small fine hairs. The primary differential diagnosis for this syndrome is estrogen-respon-
later in life anrd leaves no residual hairs.
Histologically, pattern baldness is characterized by a decrease in size (miniaturization)
FIGURE 12-61. A, Pattern baldness on the ventrum of a 2-year-old dachshund. B, Color dilutiou alopccia in a blue
Doberman pinscher. C, Color dilution alopecia in a faw Doberman pinscher. D. Follieular dlysplasia in an adult red
Doberman pinscher. E, Folieular dysplasia in an adult black Doberman pinscher. F, Facial and pinnal byprpigentation
axillae of this 6-month-old dachshund. H, Acanthosis nigricans, severe hyperpiginentation, and licheniication in a 5-ycar-old
dachshund.
966 · Congenital and Hereditary Defects
FIGURE I2-62. Patterned baldness. Involulion
and miniatnization of the hair follicles.
of the hair follicles and hair shafts with normal adnexal structures (Fig. 12-62).3 The
follicles are shorter and thinner, have smaller hair bulbs, and produce fine hair shafts.
When several dogs with recurrent Hank alopecia and intercurrent pattern baldness
received melatonin, hair regrew in all locations. These surprising results led to larger
studies in which 11 dogs were either given oral melatonin (5 mg q24h) or 1 to 3 constant-
release 12-mg implants. All dogs experience significant hair growth within 45 days.13 Peak
response occurred after 3 to 4 months of treatment. Melatonin has a short halflife in
 dogs when given by mouth or injection, and its bioavailability is dose dependent.121、 t27, 139
the United States are nonpreseription, potency and bioavailability may vary considerably
from product to product. if no change occurs within 30 days, a dosage increase may be
indicated,
COLOR DILUTION ALOPECIA
Color dilution alopecia (color mutant alopecia) occurs in some dogs with bhue or fawn
coat colors. These colors are dilutions of black or brown, respectively, and result from the
infuence of coat color genes at the D locus and possibly others.i36. 137 Color dilution
alopecia does not occur in all dogs with blue or fawn coats, and the frequency within
alfected breeds varies.
Congenital and Hereditary Defects · 967
FIGURE 12-63. Folicular dyspla-
sia.A synrmetrie, monpruritie alopecia
in a tricolored Cormish Rex.
Cause and Pathogenesis
The causc of color dilution alopecia is unknown, but coat color genes play a significant
rolc in the condition. Under the influence of genes at the D locus and possibly others,
dilute hairs have larger pigment granules (1macromelanosornes) than their nondilute coun-
tcrparts. Although the hairs are lighter in color, they contain as much or more melanin
than nondilute black or brown hairs. Only one allele, d, is recognized at the D locus in
dilute coat colors would lose hair, but they do not. Unrecognized, deleterious allcles may
be present within certain breeds and cause lethal pigmentary changes, which rcsult in the
hair loss.
All affected dogs have irregularities in melanin transfer and storage. Mature or stage
IV melanosomes are stored irregularly in hairs, and epidermal keratinocytes and vacuoliza-
ultrastructural studies have been undertaken to determine whether concurrent struetural
defects exist, and some conficting results have been published. In the Doberman pin-
scher, the cuticle of affected hairs is normal except at the point of pigrmentary clunping.
whercas cuticular defects were detected in affected and normal hairs from Yorkshire
terricers and Dachshunds s6 . 14s All of these data suggest that the dilution genes may
express themselves differently in differcnt breeds and that a coincidental structural defect
may exist in certain breeds.
Clinical Features
 Color dilution alopccia is most widely recognized and reported in blue or fawn Doberman
pinschers. 16, 136 If also has been reported in Dachshunds, Great Danes, Whippets, Italian
greyhounds, Chow Chows, Standard poodles, miniature Dobernan pinschers, Yorkshire
tcrricrs, Silky terriers, Chihuahuas,
, Boston. terriers, Salukis, Newfoundlands, German
dilute coat colors.* It has also been reported in crean Chow Chow and blond Irish
setters, but these cases may represent some other condlition.5 The frequency of the
disease in blue or fawn Doberman pinschers can be as high as 93% in blues and 75% in
  qd n q   sq r  sg  g s
*Scc refcrenccs 1,3, 5. 96. 98, 100, 102a. 132, 137
968 · Congenital and Hereditary Defects
than they are in Doberman pinschers. Some breeds with a dlilute coat color (e.g., Weimar-
aners) do not lose hair.
 Color dilution alopecia can be first manifested by dorsaly oriented, recurrent bacterial
foliculitis or hypotrichosis. Only hairs or hair follcles in the dilute areas are involved.The
onsct of signs is tardive, and the starting point depends on maragenent factors and the
depth of the coat color. Dogs with light-blue (e.g. gray) coats are usually affected at
approximately 6 months of age, whereas dogs with less dilution (e.g., steel blue) may not
the process.
In the recurrent folliculitis form, papules and pustules occur and disappear with
appropriate antibiotic treatment. The involved folicles tend to remain hairless or regrow
hair slowly. With repeated bouts of infection, the hypotrichosis becomes more widespread
and persistent. In the hair loss form, secondary pyodermas can also occur but the history
  a pnd s   ms  s a pd p
with the hair loss forrm typically lose hairs first over the dorsum and then from the rest of
the body (see Fig. 12-6iB and C). The rate of hair loss is variable, but most light-colored
dogs are almost completely alopecic by 2 to 3 years of age.
The initial hair loss in these dogs is due to shaft fracture, and some broken hairs
regrow. With time, the tendency to regrow decreases. Exposed skin is subject to environ-
mental insults, and scaliness is common. One report suggests that these dogs may be
mutagenic cffects of the sun, they should be photoprotected.
Cats with a blue or cream-colored coat carry the Maltese dilution gene. As in the dog.
this gene is expressed by clumping of melanin in the follicular epithelium and hair shafts
s s a  e  r go  od  p  a
 of several other cats. The involved cats spontaneously experience symmetric truncal hypo-
trichosis to alopecia without a history or trichographic evidence of excessive grooming or
harsh topical treatments.
Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis varies with the age at onset. In the young animal, only other
inherited hair defects or demodicosis should be investigated. with onset at 2 to 3 years or
later, endocrine disorders, especially hypothyroidism, are considered for dogs with just
hair loss. All causes of superficial folliculitis shouid be considered in that presentation. In
the cat, all causes of excessive groorning need to be considered (Fig. 12-63).
Microscopic examination of plucked hairs shows numerous macromelanosomes, of
irregular shapes and sizes, unevenly distributed along_the shaft. In some cases, the
macromelanosomes are huge and distort the hair shaft (Fig. 12-64). The cuticle may be
absent or fractured over the bulging pigment clurnps (Fig. 12-65). Histopathologic study
initially shows sebaceous melanosis; melanin clumping in epidermal and folicular basal
cells (Fig. 12-66) and hair matrix cells; numerous macromelanosomes in hair shafts; hair
follicles in various stages of growth with follicular hyperkeratosis, fractured hair shafts, and
frce ctumps of melanin (Fig. 12-67); and numerous peribulbar melanophages.3 95. 136, 146
As mentioned before, the presence of melanin clumping indicates the action of dilution
genes and does not necessarily mean the animal has color dilution alopecia. Microscopic
examination of hairs from normal-coated color diluted dogs and cats reveals melanin
clumping, but the normal architecture of the hair shaft is preserved. Other changes of
follicular dysplasia, especially the presence of dysplastic hair shafts, must be present to
confirm the diagnosis. 146 With time, all follicular activity ceases and the follicles become
dilatcd and cystic.
 Clinical Management
Early on, hair loss is due to shaft fracture, so every effort should be made to avoid the
use of harsh shampoos and topical agents and vigorous grooming techniques. These
 Congenital and Hereditary Defccts ·● 969
FIGURE I2-64. Color dilution
alopecia. Marked melanin cluaping
and  distortion of  cuticular-cortical
anatomy.
FIGURE 12-65. Color dilution alope-
cia. Scanning electron microscopic views
(SEMs) of hairs from a normal black (A)
and affected blue (B) Doberman_pin-
scher. The cortical irregularities in B are
due to macromelanosoines. (Courtesy of
D. Pricur.}
FIGURE 12-66. Color dilution
alopecia. Melanin clumping in sur-
face epidcrmis.
970 · Congenital and Hereditary Defects
FIGURE I2-67. Color dilution alopecia.
Marked clumping of melanin ("melanotic mush")
 in the pilar canal of a hair folicle.
measures should slow but not prevent hair loss. Anccdotal reports suggest that treatment
with oral retinoic acids can be of benefit, but specific details are unavailable.4 Etretinate
was reported to occasionally help dogs with color dilution alopecia, resulting in decreased
scaling and decreased frequency and severity of bacterial pyoderma.l14 However, any hair
regrowth was partial and characterized by fne hairs.
FOLLICULAR DYSPLASIA
Non-color-linked follicular dysplasia has probably existed in vctcrinary dermatology for
decades but went unrccognized. The diagnosis in affected dogs typically was idiopathie or
nonresponsive endocrine skin disease because they had a spontaneous, symmetric, asymp-
1988142 and has been recognized in many different breeds since then. With the high
frequency of disease within certain breeds, genetic predisposition is most likely. Fcaturcs
 Of the disorder vary somewhat with the breed involved.
 Both cyclic and structural follicular dysplasia arc recognized. As the name suggests,
cyclic follicular dysplasia is an interruption of the normal hair cycle, and affected animals
experience hair loss that spontaneously disappears in the next one to four shed periods.
The most cormmon cyclic dysplasia is scasonal fank alopecia wherein affected dogs experi-
ence geographic fank and/or saddle area alopecia and hyperpigmentation. The hair loss
Congenital and Hereditary Defects · 97t
early fall, respectively.107 i, 140. 156 Other less common cyclic dysplasias are postclipping
alopecia and catagen arrest whcrein spontancous regrowth occurs, but in a much less
predictable fashion. In all of these disorders, skin biopsies show alteration in the hair
cycle, sebaceous melanosis, and the presence of dysplastic hair follicles.% All of these
disorders are described in detail elsewhere (see Chap. 11).
In the structural dysplasias, the clinical picture (e.g., age at onset, distribution of hair
loss) varies with the breed. In addition to the presence of sebaceous melanosis and
dysplastic hair follicles, these dogs have other structural changes that weaken the hairs.
Fracture of these weakened hairs is the initial cause of the hair loss, and it occurs in areas
that have been too vigorously groomed or subjected to trauma (e.g., collar region).
Because the structural changes are mild initially, the hairs continue to grow and the hair
loss disappears spontaneously. However, the hair that regrows often is weaker than the
hair that was lost and the hair loss will recur because trauma is unavoidable. With each
and every episode, the structural changes become more pronounced, and eventually the
Siberian Husky and Malamute
Multiple dogs in a littcr can be affected.4, 142 At 3 to 4 months of age, the guard hairs on
the trunk are lost in a slowly progressive fashion and the coat turns a reddish color. In
Malamutes, the onset of signs may not be seen until 3 to 4 years of age. The head and
the distal limbs are spared., Areas clipped for biopsy do not regrow hair. Secondary hairs
 are less frequently involved.
Doberman Pinschers, Miniature Pinschers, and Manchester Terriers
Black or red dogs can be affected, and the hair loss is noted between l and 4 years of
age.13 Hair loss begins in the fank region and progresses slowly to involve the caudal
dorsum and entire fank region (see Fig. 12-61D and E). Complete truncal hair loss has
 not been recognized.
Griffons, and Affen Pinschers
Hair loss begins between 2 and 4 years of age and is restricted to the fank and/or saddle
regions.134 In some dlogs, the hair loss persists, whereas cyclic loss and regrowth occurs in
other dogs (see Chap. 11).
ou ann si e st coi s'a a on 3mp st siop os u sso r a
from an early age. IIair loss occurs first over the caudal dorsum and spreads slowly to
involve most of the trunk. Early on, spontaneous hair regrowth can occur, but the new
hairs are not of normal quality and texture, These and other hairs, are lost eventually, and
the hair loss persists (Fig. 12-68). A dominant 1mode of inheritance has been suggested in
the Irish water spaniel. 0
Other Dogs
In recent years, we and other investigators have recognized one to several cases of
follicular dysplasia in thc Shetland sheepdog. Labrador retriever, Chihuahua, German
shepherd dog, Bull mastiff, Pekingese, Australian shepherd, Rhodesian ridgeback, English
springer spaniel, German shorthaired and wirehaired pointer, Rottweiler, Chesapeake Bay
retriever, Miniature schnauzer, Bouvier de Flanders, and French bulldog. Undoubtedly.
many other breeds could he added to the list if pathology records were carefully reviewed.
 Because too few cases within a specific breed have been published, details of the clinical
patterns are not available.
 i          s
synmetric hair loss affected the blue, beige, and cream-colored hairs (see Fig. 12.-63).
972 · Congenital and Hereditary Defects
FIGURE 12-68. Follicuar dysplasia in a Portu-
guese Water dog. The dog has not been clipped
for several years.
Diagnosis
 The primary differential diagnostic consideration in these dogs is endocrine hair loss,
cspecially thiat associated with the sex hormones. Histopathologic examination shows vary.
ing degrees of surface and follicular orthokeratotic: hyperkeratosis, variation in follicular
activity with a high frequency of catagen arrest, melanin clumping within hairs and hair
bulbs, fractured hair shafts with clumps of free melanin in hair folicle lumina, peribulbar
any one case, and those present can vary in severity. All these changes, with the exception
of a large numher of dysplastic hairs, can occur in endocrine skin disease as well. Huskies
have tortuous glassy membranes and follicular epithelial cell disarray.142 Portuguese water
dogs also show vacuolar alteration of the hair follicle inncr root sheath (Fig. 12-69) and
hair matrix with ultimate dissolution of the hair matrix (Fig. 12-70).138
Treatment
Because the dysplasia in these dogs has a genetic basis, no treatment prevents the hair
loss. Superimposed nutritional deficiencics or cndoerine discascs furthcr weaken the al-
ready weakened hairs, so every effort should be made to maintain the animal's good
health. Harsh grooming techniques (e.g., stripping the coat) or products (e.g., benzoyl
Invariably, owners hear of a nutritional supplement, dietary change, or other treatment
Congenital and Hereditary Defects · 973
FIGURE I2-69. Follicular dysplasia of the Po1-
tuguese Water dog, Marked vacuolar alteration of
the inner root sheath of the hair follicle.
that has helped other dogs with the same problem and want to try it on their pet.
 Because spontaneous hair regrowth occurs in these dogs, regrowth cannot necessarily be
attributed to the change made. Only treatments that prevent new episodes of hair loss for
 at least I year should be considered successful; we are unaware of any.
FOLLICULAR LIPIDOSIS
Follicular lipidosis is a variant of follicular dysplasia that is recognized worldwide in the
Rottweiler.ila l1s Because of its recent recognition, clinical data are limited to four dogs.
Clinical Features
Both males and females can be affected, and clinical signs occur within the first 9 months
 of life. The presenting complaint is hair loss in the mahogany points of the face and feet
 (see Chap. 1l). All black hairs and the mahogany hairs from other points are normal.
Diagnosis
The restriction of the hair loss to the mahogany points of the face and feet is pathogno-
monic for the condition. The diagnosis can be confirmed by skin biopsy, which shows 
severe swelling of the matrix cells of anagen hair follicles. The swelling is due to accumu-
mahogany points show scattered and mild swelling of anagen bulbs.
974 * Congenital and Hereditary Defects
FIGURE 12-70. Follicular dysplasia of the Por-
tuguese Water dog. Vacuolar alteration and dissolu-
tion of the hair matrix.
Treatment
aosi u ss    sre n nq n pu si dn-m n pa
 or persist, but remains confined to the mahogany points of the face and feet.
Melanoderma and Alopecia in Yorkshire Terriers
Melanoderma and alopecia in Yorkshire terriers is a well-recognized but poorly studied
dermatosis, but the mode of inheritance is unknown. The cause is unknown, but one
investigator demonstrated decreased dermal elastin_and abnormal growth hormone re-
sponse to clonidine administration in eight dogs.° Typically, the syndrome affects York-
shire terriers of either sex, beginning at 6 months to 3 years of age.
The dogs have symmetric alopecia and marked hyperpigmentation over the bridge of
the nose (see Fig. 12-61F), on the pinnae (Fig. 12-71), and occasionally on the tail and
feet. Affected skin is sinooth and shiny. There is no pruritus or pain, and affected dogs
are otherwise healthy.
 epidermal surface and of the hair folicles and epidermal melanosis.
i sp so risnouds iaon on readde suisan Pu m siop o
Congenital and Hereditary Defects · 975
FlGURE I2-71. Melanoderma
and alopecia in Yorkshire terriers.
mentation of the pinna.
affected throughout their lifetime. Three dogs treated with growth hormnone regrew hair
but lost it again.99
· dIsorderS Of PIGMENtatION
Hypopigmentary Disorders
  a e  ( d r o ( d s no s
matory or metabolic causes. Idiopathic cases occur with some regularity and have been
 reported in dogs of various breeds.? The high frequency of these changes in the Belgian
Tervurens, German shepherd dog, Rottweiler, and Doberman pinscher suggests a heredi-
tary infuence in these breeds (see Chap. 13).
Hyperpigmentary Disorders
Aside from lentigines (see Chap. 13) or macular melanosis associated with testicular
 neoplasia (see Chap. 10), hyperpigmentation in dogs and rarely in cats is poorly demar-
 cated, involves large areas, and has a variety of inffammatory or endocrine causes. Acan-
 thosis nigricans in some Dachshunds probably has a hereditary basis.
ACANTHOSIS NIGRICANS
Canine acanthosis nigricans is an uncommon cutaneous reaction pattern characterized by
axillary hyperpigrnentation, lichenification, and alopecia in association with various known 
and unknown causes.
Cause and Pathogenesis
Canine acanthosis nigricans is best thought of as a cutaneous reaction pattern with
 Canine acanthosis nigricans may be divided into primary (idiopathic) and secondary types.
 Primary (idiopathic) canine acanthosis nigricans is almost exclusively a disease of
thosis nigricans in humans is known to be inherited.2
 976 · Congenital and Hereditary Defects
Secondary canine acanthosis nigricans is associated with underlying disorders, includ-
ing (1) friction or intertrigo. (conformational abnormalities, obesity, or both resulting in
excessive axillary friction and dermatitis) with a secondary bacterial or Malassezia infec-
tion, (2) endocrinopathy (e.g., underlying hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism, sex hor-
e sp e sd r  ad   s m
ated with atopy. food hypersensitivity, or contact dermatitis), In humans, acanthosis
diethylstilbestrol, and glucocorticoids), and internal malignancy (especially of the gastroin-
testinal or female reproductive tract),2 162 Drug-induced acanthosis nigricans has not been
reported in animals, and the cases in dogs associated with malignancy may have had other
causes.164
Clinical Features
Although primary canine acanthosis nigricans has been reported in several breeds, Dachs-
hunds are overwhelmingly the breed at risk. Primary canine acanthosis nigricans occurs in
may occur in any breed and is more commonly recognized in those predisposed to the
various underlying diseases described previously. Secondary canine acanthosis nigricans
 generally mimics any sex or age predilection inherent in the underlying diseases.
The earliest sign of primary canine acanthosis nigricans is usually bilateral axillary
hyperpigmentation (see Fig. 12-61G). With time, lichenification, alopecia, and seborrheic
changes develop (see Fig. 12-61H). In severe cases, the dermatosis may spread to involve
the forelimbs, the ventral neck, the chest, the abdomen, the groin, the perineum, the
hocks, the periocular area, and the pinnae. Seborrheic skin disease (greasy with rancid
odor) and secondary bacterial pyoderma or Malassezia dermatitis are common complicat-
ing factors. Pruritus is variable and is usually most severe when seborrheic changes,
bacterial pyoderma, or Malassezia dermatitis is present.
Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis of canine acanthosis nigricans includes the previously mentioned
causes of primary and secondary disease, Definitive diagnosis is based on history, physical
examination fndings, laboratory tests that rule out other conditions, skin biopsy, and
rcsponse to therapy. Juvenile-onset acanthosis nigricans in a Dachshund is most likely to
be primary and genetic. Thyroid function is usually normal in Dachshunds with acanthosis
nigricans. Histopathologic examination is nondiagnostic, revealing hyperplastic superficial
inentary incontinence, and follicular keratosis. The perivascular infamnatory infltrate is
usually mixed mononuclear cells and neutrophils. A similar histopathologic patterm may
occur with many chronie inflammatory dermatoses.3
Clinical Management
The prognosis for cure in canine acanthosis nigricans varies with the underlying cause.
When the acanthosis nigricans is due to some definable and correctable disorder, the
lesions need no specific treatment and resolve spontaneously as the primary disease is
treated. Responsc may be slow. Primary canine acanthosis nigricans in the Dachshund is a
controllable, but not a curable, disease.
Early cases of acanthosis nigricans need no treatment. As the lesions become more
widespread and hyperplastic, the resultant seborrheic changes necessitate treatment. Anti-
seborrheic bathing and the frequent application of talc to the intertriginous areas is
         d  
sinall areas, the application of a potent topical glucocorticoid (e.g., betamethasone valerate
ointment) can be beneficial for some time. Eventually, the lesions become too widespread
for the safe use of these topical products. Advanced cases can be treated with melato-
nin,163 systemic glucocorticoids, or vitamin E.
Congenital and Hereditary Defects * 977
Systemic glucocorticoids are effective in the treatment of canine acanthosis nigri-
cans,1 presumably via their anti-inffammatory, antiseborrheic, and anti-MSH effects.
pe saep 01 on 2 iog sinou 1z Aiaaa syb I ie Areno uai si auosuid 1o auosupd
then on an alternate-morning regimen. Vitamin E acetate (dl-tocopherol acetate), 200
 IU given orally every 12 hours as the only treatment, produced improverment within 30 to
 s  's sie d po s   s om
reduced, but infammation, fichenification, pruritus, greasiness, and objectionable odor all
subsided. There were no side effects, and improvement was maintained while treatment
continued.
Disorders of Atypical Coloration
Coat color is controlled by multiple genes with various kmown or presumed alleles at each
locus. In mice, in which coat color genetics is best knowm, certain coat colors are external
markers for serious internal disease. The importance of coat color in certain dermatologic
or systemic illnesses in pets is of increasing interest.
CONGENITAL DISORDERS
Animals born with a dilute coat color (e.g., blue or beige) are at risk for color dilution
alopecia. The best known examples of linkage of coat color with intcrnal discasc are cyclic
hematopoiesis and the Chediak-Higashi syndrome.
Chediak-Higashi Syndrome
The Chediak-Higashi syndrome is an inherited disorder of Persian cats, white tigers,
Hereford cattle, Aleutian minks, and humans.65. 10 In cats, it is an autosomal recessive
S   o         r
clumps of melanin (macromelanosomes).16l Affected cats have giant lysosomes in the
cytoplasm of various cells, including neutrophils and macrophages.159 On blood smears,
these lysosomes appear as large eosinophilic granules.
 Chediak-Higashi syndrome is characterized by increased susceptibility to infection,
partial oculocutaneous albinism, photophobia, and bleeding disorders. Thc cats have red
fundic light reflection instead of yellow-green. Because of thc immunologic deficiency,
 affected cats are at increased risk for infection. Most cases of dermatophytic pseurdlomyce-
toma have occurred in smoke-colored Persian cats.
 There is no specific treatment. Affected anirmals should not be used for breeding.
Canine Cyclic Hematopoiesis
autosomal recessive syndrome in which Collie puppies are borm with a silver-gray haircoat
that differs from the normal sable or tricolor coat.60,167 In sone of these puppies, a slight
yellow pigmentation may be present, which produces a mixture of light-beige and light-
 gray bair. The light-colored nose is a characteristic and diagnostic feature.
 In addition to the hair color change, gray Collie puppies are usually smaller and
weaker than their littermates, a difference observable by 1 week of age. By 8 to 12 weeks
of age, signs of clinical illness appear, including fever, diarrhea, lymphadenopathy, infec-
tions, conjunctivitis, and arthralgia. The term cyclic neutropeniu reflects the appearance of
 neutropenia altermating with rebounding neutrophilia. This cycle continues at 10- to 12-
 as well as cyclic reticulocytosis, monocytosis, and thrombocytosis.5, i167 Other clinicopathol-
ogic abnorrmalities include hyperglobulinemia, depressed mitogenic responses of lympho-
cytes, and cyclic hormonogenesis.
978 · Congenital and Hereditary Defects
There is no effective treatment, and parents and littermates should not be used for
breeding. Affected animals usually die before 6 months of age without supportive care.
 Even with optimal care, most die before 2 years of age because of hepatic or renal failure
associated with amyloidosis. Bone marrow transplantation is effective but impractical.67 In
differential diagnosis, this syndrome must not be mistaken for the dominant or Maltese
 gray collie and a transient dilution called powder puff.
Coat Color Dilution and Cerebellar Degeneration in
Rhodesian Ridgeback Dogs
An autosomal recessive trait in a family of Rhodesian ridgeback dogs has been de-
were ataxic, had dificulty in crawling and nursing, opened their eyes later than their
normal littermates, and did not grow norrmally. Most were euthanized at 4 to 6 weeks of
 age. At nccropsy, the dogs had Purkinje's cell degeneration and cutaneous abnorrmalities
typical of color dilution alopecia.
ACQUIRED DISORDERS
and endocrine diseases (especially hyperadrenocorticism and sex hormone imbalances).
 Most of these conditions can occur in any breed. A peculiar gilding syndrome has been
described in Miniature schnauzers.
Acquired Aurotrichia in Miniature Schnauzers
This syndrome was first reported in 1991 and appears to be uncommon.166 Dogs of either
sex can be affcted, and the disorder is recognized in young adult dogs, typically between
2 and 3 years of age. More than half of the reported cases started in warm weather, but
the condition can start in periods with minimal solar exposure. The cause of the alteration
in hair color is unknown, but because of the restriction to the Miniature schnauzer breed,
there must be some genetic infuence.
Affected dogs typicall have patchy color change of the hairs over the dorsal thorax
and along the abdomen (see Chap. 13):is The affected hairs are golden in color. In a few
dogs, the color change is diffuse in those areas and may involve the periocular region or
ears. Concomitant with the gilding, the number of secondary hairs in the area is de-
creased. The dogs are otherwise healthy. Aside from some pigmentary changes in the
 guard hairs, there is no histologic explanation for the gilding.
No treatment is indicated or should be effective, The condition resolves spontaneously
i1n 6 to 24 months, Both the coloration and the density of the undercoat return to normal
Relapses are uncommon.
● dISorDErS Of ColLAGEN
The best known exarnple of a congenital disorder of collagen is Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
in which abnormal production or degradation results in abnormally fragile skin. The other
conditions discussed are less clear cut. They have a high incidence in certain breeds,
which suggests an inherited predisposition, and abnormalities in dermal collagen are
visible in biopsy specimens. However, it is not clear whether the collagen changes are
primary or secondary to some as yet described condition. Because of the striking breed
predisposition, the conditions are considered here.
Congenital and Hereditary Defects · 979
Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, cutaneous asthenia, and dermatosparaxis are all terms used to
describe group of inherited connective tissues diseases characterized by excessive fragility
reserved for cases wherein abnormalities in both collagen and elastin (cutis laxa) exist. The
cutis laxa syndromes are no longer included with the Ehlers-Danlos syndromes and have
not been definitively documented in animals. The term dermatosparaxis literally means
"torm skin" and is used to describe patients with one specific subtype, type VIIC, of
 Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in which the skin is extraordinarily fragile.
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
 The Ehlers-Danlos syndromes in humans continue to undergo reclassification as the
 molecular basis for the various clinical entities is identified. Currently, 10 subtypes, based
 on the clinical features, mode of inheritance, and nature of the biochemical defect, are
defined; however, not all patients can be categorized in this scheme (Table 12-2)2 173
The molecular basis for all subtypes is not known.Where known, mutations in the genes
coding fibrllar collagen or the enzymes that catalyze their post-translational rmodifications
 have been identified.?2 Al forms have a genetic basis, and six are inherited as an autosomal
dominant trait, three as an autosomal recessive trait, and one as an X-linked recessive
trait.
Because of the collagen defects, the skin of affected animals often tears easily,
resuling in large, gaping "fsh mouth" wounds (Fig. 12-72A). These lacerations heal
strength of the skin of affected dogs is reduced 40-fold, whereas that of affected cats is
mongrel dogs and cats with varying modes of inheritance.180
Recessive cutaneous asthenia has been absolutely confirmed in only cats,17o-172, 175. 157,
193. 195 but the occurrence of the disease in a mongrel dog with apparently normal parents
suggests a recessive form in dogs.169 Affected collagen forms twisted ribbons rather than
cylindric fibrils and fibers (Figs. 12-73 and 12-74). These structural changes are due to
abnormalities in formation or maintenance of collagen fibrils and fibers. 172, 182, 1s7 Biochem-
ical studies have demonstrated a procollagen processing defect in which there is decreased
activity of procollagen peptidase and an accumulation of partially processed type I procol.
lagen containing N-terminal propeptides.187 Collagenase activity typically is increased 2/
times above normal levels.187
 Dominant cutaneous asthenia is a simple autosomal trait in dogs and cats. Changes
● Table 12-2
TYpES oF EHLeRS-DANLOS SYNDROMe
TYPE
TISSUES AFFECTED
ABNORMALITY
I
Skin, joints 
？
II
Skin, joints
Collagen V
I11
Skin,
foints
IV
 Skin, blood vessels, intestine
Collagen III
V
Skin, joints, heart
Procollagen (lysyl oxidase: deficieney)
VI
Skin, joints, bone, eyes
Procollagen (lysyl hydroxylase deficiency)
VIla,b
Skin, joints
Procollagen
vIIc
Skin, joints
Procollagen (procollagen peptidase deficiency)
VII
Skin, joints, teeth
Skin, bones
IX
Copper defciency (lysyl oxidase deficiency)
X
 Skin, joints, platelets
Fibronectin
XI
Joints
H
FIGURE I2-72. A, Cutaneous asthenia in a cat. Hyperfragility of the skin. B, Typical appearance of a
C.Cutaneous asthenia in a dog.Hyperextensibility ofthe skin.(Courtesy of G.Ackland)D,Cutaneous
asthenia in a dog,Same dog as in C.Courtesy of G.Ackand.） E,Cutaneous asthenia in a cat.Hyperextens
bility of the skin. (Courtesy of P. McKeever.) F, Collagen disorder of the footpads of a German shepherd. G.
Solitary fistula on the caudal metatarsal area of a Gernan shepherd. H,Fluctuant sweling on the caudal
Imetatarsal area of a German shepherd.
086
Congenital andHereditaryDefects·981
FIGURE I2-73. SEMs of colla-
  a e r s s
the derinis of a dermatosparactic cat
(00×()  ()
(From Holbrook KA, et al: Demma-
cosparaxis in a Himalayan cat: II.
Ultrastructural studies‘of dernal
collagen. J Invest Denmatol 74:100.
1980.)
FIGURE 12-74. A, Transmission electron microscopic view (TEM) of a collagen fiber bundle from the dermis of
the dermatosparactie cat showing fibers and fbrils in various planes of a section within the bundle (× 10,000). B.
TEM of a dermal collagen fiber bundle from the moriul control cat. All fibrils within a fber are organized in the
same plane (X6200). (From Halbrook KA, et al: Dermatosparaxis in a Himalayan cat: I1. Ultrastnuctural studies of
dermal collagen. J Invest IDormatol 74:100, 1980.)
 982 · Congenital and Hereditary Defects
    d        n 
state.186, i96 The defect can cause focal or diffuse changes in the dermal collagen and
results from abnormalities in the packing of collagen into fbrils and fibers owing to
mutations of structural proteins. Unlike normal fibers in which the fibrils are uniform in
diameter, cylindric, and packed in uniform parallel arrays, the fibers here are severely
disorganized with many larger-than-normal fibrils.1s7 A mixture of abnormal and normal
fibers occurs in heterozygous animals. Biochemical sturdies show a decrease in proteoder-
matan sulfate levels, an increase in hyaluronic acid levels, and an altered iduronic acid/
glucuronic acid ratio.187
Dermal thickness in dogs can be thinner than normal (1.2l mm versus 1.7l mm)177 or
normal.7a The dernis in cats can also be thinned (0.25 mm versus 1.71 mm)173 or
normal. Normal dermal thickmess is usually a result of an increased thickness of individ-
ual collagen bundles.
Ehlcrs-Danlos syndrome has been reported in the Beagle, Dachshund, Boxer, St.
Welsh corgi, Red kelpi, soft-coated Wheaten terrier, Garafiano shepherd, Fila brasiliero,
and mongrels.1, 16e 182a 194. 197 We have recognized it in the Irish setter, Keeshond, Toy
poodle, and English setter. Most cases in the cat occur in doinestic shorthaired or
longhaired breeds or Hlimalayan cats.
CLINICAL FEATURES
The skin is soft, pliable, and thin. It may or may not be loosely attached to underlying
tissues or be hyperextensible. It has decreased elasticity and a moist, blanched appearance.
The skin usually can be stretched to extreme lengths (see Fig. 12-72C to E) and may
hang loosely in folds, especially on the legs and the throat. In long-coated dogs, the
excessive folding may be noticed on only the face and may result in the need for repeated
eyelid surgerics. Minimal trauma from traction or scratching may produce skin tears, with
little or no bleeding. Healing is rapid, but irregular thin white scars are prominent
disfiguring features (see Fig. 12-72B). Widening of the bridge of the nose, subcutaneous
hematomas, elbow hygromas, coincidental umbilical and inguinal hernias in a puppy. and
epicanthal folds are additional signs in some affected animals. Some animals manifest only
  s r       s 
cornea, lens luxation, and cataracts)169,185
DIAGNOSIS
The clinical syndromes of excessively folded skin, hyperextensible skin, easily torn skin, or
excessively scarred skin in a young animal with no history of severe trauma are highly
suggestive of cutaneous asthenia. Complete documentation may necessitate biopsies for
ultrastructural and biochemical study. The skin extensibility index devised by Patterson
lumbar skin to the maximal distance above the spine that can be attained without pain.
This distance is measured, as is the body length from the base of the tail to the occipital
crest. Extensibility is calculated as follows:
Vertical height of skin fold
Extensibility index =
Body length
× 100
 In affected dogs, the skin extensibility index is greater than 14.5%; in affected cats, it
is greater than 19%.i77
 Skin biopsy may reveal striking dermal abnormalities or normal skin. The inability to
shortencd, and disoriented (Fig. 12-75). Additionally, collagen fibers may form irregularly
Congenital and Hereditary Defects · 983
FIGURE I2-75. Cutancous asthenia. Histopathologic view showing fragmcnted collagen
fbrils that are shortened and disoriented.
 sized bundles, may demonstrate inproper interweaving, and may be surrounded by muci-
trichrome stain is useful in the light-microscopic evaluation of animals with collagen
disorders. In a study of norrmal cats and diseased cats with either Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
or the acquired fragility syndrome, the normal cats showed no staining abnorimalities
whereas lf of the 12 diseased cats showed trichrome abnormalities of varying severity.174
All 8 cats with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome showed staining abnormalities, even though light-
microscopic abnormalities were absent in 6 cats evaluated with hematoxylin-and-eosin
ss  e  u s  u  i  s
However, this tochnique is not foolproof because one cat with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
had no trichromc abnormalities.17l
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The clinician should inform the owner of the nature, heritability, and chronic incurable
course of the disease. The animal should not be used for breeding. Most affected animals
are cuthanized.
With appropriate lifestyle and housing modifications and prompt veterinary attention
to wounds and intercurrent skin diseases, pets without joint laxity can lead long lives. Cats
should be declawcd to prevent wounding during grooming or scratching. The afected
animal cannot play with other animals and must be leash-walked away from woody trees
and shrubs. Alf visitors to the pet's household must be aware of the defect lest a sudden
grab for restraint results in a large skin wound. Households contain numerous items with
sharp corners or rough surfaces, which can rip the affected pet's skin. These inust be
removed or padded. Because these animals are prone to hygromas, foors and all resting
places should he well padded. Any skin disease, especially conditions that result in pruri-
tus, must be addressed and resolved quickly. Wounds should be sutured promptly.
 Because vitanin C is necessary in collagen synthesis, two of us (WHM and DWS)
  oe a m s  '  po  s o  s on p
daily, whereas 500 mg twice daily was used in dogs. No change occurred in the cats,
whereas two of the three dog owners were convinced that their dog's skin was less
984 · Congenital and Hereditary Defects
stretchy and less fragile with the vitamin supplementation. Further investigations with
vitamin C are indicated to support or refute these findings.
Disorder of the Footpads in German Shepherd Dogs
 po s sd e  u a ro ss n si  s jo  u
litter are typically affected. The condition shows some clinical and histologic features of
the familial vasculopathy of German shepherd dogs, sugesting some common etiopatho-
genesis.
CLINICAL FEATURES
German shepherd dogs of either sex are affected at a few weeks to a few months of
in the litter are involved. The pads of all feet are softer than normal. Swelling, depigmen-
tation, ulceration, and crusting can develop on one or more pads (see Fig. 12-72F),
especially the metacarpal and metatarsal pads. When ulcerated, the pads are tender and
can cause lameness. The dogs are otherwise healthy.
DIAGNOSIS
In the absence of a drug history to induce a drug eruption or skin lesions clscwhcrc, the
clinical signs are typical of this disorder. Diagnosis is confirmed by biopsy, which revcals
deep diffuse dermatitis focused around multifocal areas of collagenolysis (Fig. 12-76).
The infammation can be neutrophilic (Fig. 12-77) or lymphoplasmacytic.168
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Treatment with antibiotics, glucocorticoids, and topical agents has been unrewarding. With
foot protection and good wound care, the ulcers heal spontaneously by l year of age. The
pad softness remains. Long-term follow-up of most dogs has not been reported, but some
i g ae jo s g on z kq pp pue sopiue reuu padoap au s
FIGURE I2-76. Collagen disorder of the footpads of German shepherds. Diffusc to nocdular
dlermatitis.
Congenital and Hereditary Defects · 985
FIGURE 12-77. Close-up of Figure 12-76. Focal accurulations of neutrophils and mononuclear
cells around degenerate collagen.
Focal Metatarsal Fistulation of German Shepherd Dogs
Metatarsal fistulation (deep metatarsal/metacarpal tortis, sterile pedal panniculitis) is an
condition appears to be most common in dogs of direct German ancestry.5 All affected
I a e s a  i r  s  ar  si
CLINICAL FEATURES
With the exception of one German shepherd dog crossbred, all cases have occurred in
o sai o  ys eet sse g e z jo se  q s prs 
dogs, 45 were males.i83 10 The dogs that we have examined have all been of direct
German ancestry and are low at the carpi and tarsi (fat-footed). Lesions are initially
asyrmptomatic, and the owners become aware of them only becausc the dog licks the area
or because bloody spots are seen on the foor.
Lesions occur on the central plantar surface of the metatarsus just proximal to the
metatarsal pad (see Fig. 12-72G). Both hind legs are involved in most dogs, and the
tion, a well-demarcated fistula with serosanguineous discharge is visible. Palpation identi-
fies a fibrous tract to deeper tissues. Early lesions have an intact epithelium, with fuid
accumulating beneath the surface, yielding a smooth, rounded, fuctuant cystic structure
(see Fig. 12-72H). No other skin lesions may be identified, or those lesions may coexist
in dogs with German shepherd pyoderma (see Chap. 4) or other infections.183
DIAGNOSIS
With a single lesion, the differential diagnostic considerations include a foreign body or
focal bacterial or fungal infection. Bilaterally symmetric lesions in a German shepherd dog
are pathognomonic.
Cytologic evaluation of the draining Huid shows pyogranulomatous inflammation with
986 · Congenital and Hereditary Defects
or without intracelular bacteria. Closed lesions are sterile, whereas open lesions may be
secondarily infected by staphylococci. Biopsy shows deep nodular to diffuse dermatitis
 si  n    s   siu 
pyogranulomatous, llair folicle rupture with endogenous foreign body reaction to follicu-
lar keratin and hair shafts is common.
 Routine laboratory evaluations are noncontributory, and antinuclear antibody titers are
negative. Titers of circulating antibodies to type I and II collagen were signifcantly
elevated in 1l dogs.iss Because nonaffected German shepherd dogs were not tested, the
significance of these anticollagen antibodies is unknown.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
If the dog has other skin lesions, all must be treated simultaneously for good results.
lesions re-forrn weeks to months later. Systemic antibiotic treatment improves secondarily
infected lesions, but has no effect on early lesions. Prednisolone administration at 1.1 to
2.2 mg/kg every 24 hours results in resolution of the lesions in most dogs in 14 to 28
days. Vitamin E given at 200 to 300 1U q12h has resolved the lesion in one dog and
reduced the maintenance of glucocorticoid dosage in two others.191 Spontaneous resolution
in one dog has been reported184 After resolution, the lesions may never recur184 or
relapses may be episodic. In these cases, repeated treatments with prednisolonc are
effective, but can induce signs of iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism. Treatrnent with vitamin
E or a topical corticosteroid may be beneficial. The twice-daily application of a 0.01%
fluocinolone acetonide in dimethyl sulfoxide solution (Synotic, Syntex) to early lesions has
prevented fistulation and has been satisfactory for long-term control in many dogs.5 The
combination of tetracycline and niacinamide is also effective (see Chap. 3).
Multiple Collagenous Nevi
 Solitary collagenous nevi (see Chap. 20) can occur in any breed of dog. In some German
Icsions are a cutaneous marker for renal cystadenocarcinomas or iterine leiomyomas. This
 trait appears to have an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance.
FIGURE I2-78. Metatarsal fistula
in a German shepherd. Decp dermal
pyogranulomatous inflarnmation with
fisulation.
Congenital and Hereditary Defects · 987
+ DISOrDERS OF ELASTIN
Cutis Laxa
Cutis laxa (dermatochalasis, elastolysis) is a hereditary disorder of clastic fibers in humans
characterized clinically by skin that is pendulous, faccid, hanging in folds, and seerningly
excessive compared with the individual's body size. Cutaneous fragility is not present. The
disorder is characterized histologically by a progressive loss of elastic fibers.
Cutis laxa has been anecdotally described in a Matin de Naples in France.176 No
· DISORDERS OF VESSELS
Aside from the rare case of congenital hemangioma or arteriovenous fistula, inherited
disorders of blood vessels are rare. Most cases of vascular disease are due to an acquired
vasculitis (see Chap. 9), but an idiopathic and apparently faimilial vasculopathy has been
described in five breeds of dogs.
Familial Vasculopathy
BEAGLES
A systemic necrotizing vasculitis of small to medium-sized arteries is well described in
colony-bred Beagles.2i2 No sex predilection is noted, and signs occur early in life (4 to 10
hunched stance. No skin lesions have been described.
GERMAN SHEPHERDS
Affected dogs have signs at 4 to 10 weeks of age, and the signs often occur 7 to 10 days
after the first immunization.200, 210, 214 No sex prcdilection is noted. The dogs are lethargic
nose is swollen and crusted, ulcerated lesions occur on the ear margins, the nasal planum,
cases, the central portion of the pads can ulcerate. One dog experienced generalized
demodicosis.200
 Skin biopsy shows nodular to diffuse lymphohistioplasmacytic derrmatitis around de-
generated collagen bundles and subtle vascular alteration, especially of postcapillary ven-
nence. Necropsy reveals collagenolysis of footpads, peritendinous sheaths and deep fascia
of the distal limbs, and ventrurm.
Treatment with antibiotics or glucocorticoids causes minirnal to no improvement.
Dogs recover spontaneously by 5 to 6 months of age, with residual scarring at points of
ulceration. The pads remain' soft. Pyrexia, lethargy, or panosteitis can occur at each
subsequent immunization.
To date, no cause of the condition has been defined. It is unclear whether there is
some systemic immunologic abnormality that results in the vasculitis or whcther the
vessels are abnormal. The condition appears to have an autosomal recessive mode of
inheritance.
GREYHOUNDS
Large numhers of racing Greyhounds have manifested this condition (see Chap. 9).19s No
sex predilection is noted, and signs can occur in dogs 6 to 72 months of age. Approxi-
988 · Congenital and Hereditary Defects
FIGURE 12-79. Legend on opposite page
Congenital and Hereditary Defects · 989
mately 75% of cases have only skin lesions, whercas the remainder have renal plus
   a   i n sis   s e ss 
skin lesions are found, but they can precede or follow the skin lesions.
Skin lesions occur primarily over the tarsus, the stife, or the inner thigh. Occasionally.
the forelimh is involved. The first sign noted is swelling and tendermness, followed by
s u o ol in u   a ssa su dp p kidrs
Lesions heal slowly but spontaneously with routine wound care.
 Skin biopsy shows thrombosis of arterioles, venules, and capillaries in the superficial
uremicsyndromenhumans9a9That syndromeismost typicallycausedbyaverotoxin
(shiga-likc toxin) that damages the vascular endothelium. Most racing Greyhounds eat raw
Imeats, which likely contain the toxin producing Escherichia coli. It remains to be seen
whether a familial vascular predisposition also exists.
SCOTTISH TERRIERS
This condition has been reported in five Scotish terrier puppies, and no additional cases 
Affected dogs first experienced a bilateral nasal discharge at 3 to 4 weeks of age, followed
by progrcssive ulceration and destruction of the nasal planum, the nostrils, and the nasal
mucosa by 5 to 6 months of age (Fig. 12-79A and B). No treatments were effective. Skin
biopsy showed nodular to difuse pyogranulomatous dermatitis with leukocytoclastic vascu-
litis (Fig. 12-80). The condition probably had an autosomal dorminant mode of inheri-
tance.
JACK RUSSELL TERRIERS
Five cases of cutaneous vasculitis have bccn rcported in the Jack Russcll terrier, and we
and others have examined additional cases in this breed.207 Although thc cases recognized
s sp u por ropros ar 'sisq ry e ay a so ap au  u
than l year of age is more convincingly a genetically infuenced condition.
and discretely ulcerated and crusted skin lesions of the bony prominences of the head and
the footpads. The lesions in three of the five reported cases arosc 2 to 3 weeks after
routine vaccination. Treatment with dapsone (I mg/kg q8h), prednisolone (1 mg/kg q24h),
vitamin E (200 to 400 IU q24h), or combinations thereof resolved the lesions in the dogs,
but relapses typically followed drug withdrawal.
 Skin biopsy findings vary frorn case to case but typically show apoptosis of the basal
layer of the epidermis, pigmentary incontinence, leukocytoclastic vasculitis, and ischemic
degeneration of the hair follicles. These changes are more typical of canine systemic lupus
with the postvaccinal onset of lesions in three of the five dogs, other causes of vasculitis
should be considered before attributing the disorder to a genetic abnormality (see
Chap. 9).
FIGURE I2-79. Continved A, Hereditary pyogranulomatous disease with vasculitis in Scotish teriers. Bilateral ulcer-
depigmentation, and loss of the surface architecture of the nasal planum. C, Congenital lymphedema in a dog. The hindleg
is swollen and cdematous, and pits easily. D, Lethal acrodermatitis in a bull terrier. Erythema, alopecia, and peeling skin on
the face. E, Lethal acrodermatitis in a bull terrier. Hyperkeratotic footpads and pedal erythema. F, Canine tyrosinemia.
Depigmentation and ulceration of the nosc. (Courtesy G.A. Kunkle.) G, Canine tyrosinemia. Ulceration of footpads.
(Courtesy of G. A. Kunkle.) H, Acral nutilation in an English pointer.
990 · Congenital and Hereditary Defects
FIGURE 12-80. Hereditary pyo-
granulomatous disease with vasculi-
tis in Scottish terriers. Leukocyto-
clastic vasculitis  surrounded  by
pyogranulomatous dermatitis.
Lymphedema
 Lymphedema is swelling of sorne part of the body due to abnormal lymph fow.
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Lymphederma can be primary or secondary,20,203. 26 Primary lymphedema is caused by
developmental defects in lymphatics and lymph nodes. Secondary lymphedema results
from the obstruction of lymphatics or lyinphatic fow by infiammatory or neoplastic
disease, surgery, or trauma. In sone dogs, primary lymphedema has been shown to be
primary  lymphedema  has  been  classified  by  lymphangiography  and  histopathologic
study into two basic structural defects: (1) lymphatic hypoplasia, with or without hypopla-
 sia or absence of the regional lymph nodes, and (2) lymphatic hyperplasia and dilata-
tion.201, 202, 205
 Decreased transport capacity of the lyruphatic systen leads to an increase in protein-
rich interstitial fuid211 Such lymphostasis affects the other two members of the dermal
 p a ssa po s p e e os m se 
static hemangiopathy). The tissues become infiltrated by infammatory ceils; the activated
vascular endothelial cells and the dermal inflammatory cells release mediators acting on
epidermal and dermal structures; the dcrmal connective tissue elements, ground sub-
stance, microflaments, collagen, and clastic fibers are damaged; and angiogenic factors
from vascular endothelial cells and infammatory cells contribute to vascular proliferation.
CLINICAL FEATURES
including the English bulldog (Fig. 12-81), German shepherd, Borzoi, Belgian Tervuren,
Old English sheepdog, Labrador retriever, Great Dane, Poodle, and Old English sheep-
of disease is usually within the first 12 wceks of life.
The hind limbs are the most commonly affected, although the front limbs, the
ventrum, the tail, and the pinnae may be involved.2o2 Affected skin is usually normal in
surface appearance but is thickened and spongy and pits with digital pressure (see Fig.
12-79C). The swollen skin is not warm, tender, or infamed. Regional lynph nodes may
not be palpable, and the animals are usually healthy otherwise. Disturbed antigen recogni-
tion and pathways into lymphatics results in altered immunosurveillance, thus predisposing
Congenital and Hereditary Defects · 99I
FIGURE I2-81. Congenital ly-
phedemain an Englishbullog.
(Courtesy of J. King.)
to infections and 1malignancy.21l Because lymphedema predisposes affected tissues to
secondary bacterial infection and delayed healing, these complications may be clinically
apparent.
DIAGNOSIS
Differential diagnosis includes other causes of obstructive, inflammatory, and hypopro-
teinemic edema. Definitive diagnosis is based on history, physical examination findings,
laboratory tests to rule out other conditions, skin biopsy, patent blue violet dye test, and
of the affected limb. In animals with primary lymphedema, the purplish discoloration
 ous and dernal edema.213 Lymphatics may be dilated (Fig. 12-82) and hyperplastic, or
they may be hypoplastic.Perilymphatic broblasts are increased, extravasated erythrocytes
and their remnants are visible, and fragmentation and degeneration of collagen and elastic
fibers ensues with chronic lymphedema. Chronic cases may involve variable degrees of
fibrosis and epidermal hyperplasia. Infammatory cells are usually few and include lympho-
FIGURE I2-82.  Lymphedema.
Note the  marked  dilatation of the
superficial-, mid-, and deep-dermal
lymphatics.
992 · Congenital and Hereditary Defects
cytes, macrophages (often containing lipid droplets), plasma cells, and mast cells. Changes
of secondary infection may be present (Fig. 12-83).
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The prognosis and the indicated therapy vary with the severity of the lymphedema.202
Mild cases may wax and wane, spontaneously regress, or persist indefinitcly with no
adverse consequences to the patient. More severe cases may requirc (l) frequent bandag-
ing (e.g, modifed Rohert Jones splint) to reduce the lymphedema,213 (2) surgical extirpa-
tion of the edematous tissues, (3) reconstructive surgery, or (4) amputation of the affected
 part. No successful form of medical management has been reported for dogs. The benz0-
pyrene group of drugs has proven benefit in humans.202 Good attention to skin care and
hygiene and control of infections is essential. Dogs with severe primary lymphedema often
die shortly after birth because of pleural and abdominal effusions.204
● Endocrine, metabolic, And Immunologic disorders
Endocrine, metabolic, or immunologic diseases can occur in any animal. Certain breeds or
specific families within a breed are at greater risk for a particular disease, suggesting a
heritable infuence. The reader is referred to Chapters 8, 9, and 10 for a complete
discussion of thcsc disorders. The disorders discussed subsequently havc cach bcen recog-
nizcd in only one breed of dog and therefore are included in this chapter.
Acrodermatitis
Acrodermatitis has been reported as an inherited, autosomal recessive trait that produces
a lethal syndrome in Bull terriers,216. 21s, 221 The clinical, pathologic, and genetic features of
the syndrome resemble acrodernatitis enteropathica in humans, lethal trait A46 in Black
   s  a  s   a 
did not respond to high-dose zine replaceent therapy216,21,222 The specific cause of the
metabolism.220, 221 It is unknown whether both trace mineral deficiencies exist independent
of each other or whether one causcs thc othcr.22
FIGURE12-83.Lyuphederma
with a secondary lymnphangitis.
Congcnital and Hereditary Defects · 993
CLINICAL FEATURES
 At birth, affectcd pups have skin pigmentation that is lighter than normal, and the coat in
some dogs is dull,brittle, and fuffy2s The pups are weaker than their normal littermates,
and they cannot chew or swallow well because of their high-arched hard palate. Their
 growth is retarded.206 By 6 weeks of age, their feet are splayed, the footpads are cracked,
and crusted skin lesions appear between the toes. Ulcerated, exudative crusted lesions are
also found on the ears and the muzle (see Fig. 12-79D). Papular or pustular dermatitis
may be found around all body orifices but most notably around those of the head. The
foot lesions (see Fig. 12-79E) progress rapidly to severe interdigital pyoderma and
paronychia. Later, there is onychodystrophy21sa and frondike keratinization of the noncon-
tact areas of the footpads. Generalized bacterial folliculitis may develop, being most severe
in areas prone to frictional trauma, such as the elbows and 'the hocks. Affected animals
may have diarrhea and respiratory infections with chronic nasal dlischarges. At weaning
time, they appear especialy aggressive, but by 14 to 16 weeks, they become less active,
less responsive to external stimuli, and sleep a great deal. Many have ocular abnormalities.
 The average survival time is 7 months, but conventional treatments may prolong this time.
DIAGNOSIS
priate. In individual cases, drug eruption, pemphigus foliaceus, and staphylococcal
or
Malassezia infection secondary to some congenital irnmunodeficiency may be considered.
There is a high incidence (75% to l00%) of secondary yeast infection in Bull terriers with
 acrodermatitis.215. 219 Skin biopsies should be performed in all cases.
Histopathology shows diffuse parakeratotic hyperkeratosis with focal crusting and in-
necrolytic migratory erythema (see Chap. 10), but the keratinocytes are viable and not
 degenerating. Lymphocytes are scverely reduced in T-cell areas of lymphoid tissues.
 Routine laboratory tests show no consistent abnormalities specific for this disor-
Malassezia yeasts can be isolated in most cases by scraping, on acetate tape preparations,
 Or by biopsy.215, 219
CLNICAL MANAGEMENT
 Efforts to return these dogs to normal status with oral or parenteral zine supplementation
have been unrewarding.216. 221 Treatment with systenic antibiotics resolves cutaneous and
systemic infections, but provides no long-term solution because infections return. If Ma-
lassezia infection is present, the administration of ketoconazole (10 mg/kg ql2h) results in
marked irnprovement.138 One animal has been maintained well for nearly 2 years with
ketoconazole.
 Parents of affected dogs are carriers for the disorder, as are more than half of the
clinically normal siblings of affected dogs. No relatives of the affected dogs should be
used for breeding, Some of the apparently normal littermates may experience zinc-
responsive dermatitis (see Chap. 17).
Tyrosinemia
 A single casc of congenital tyrosinemia in a young dog has been reported.217 It appeared
   d  s  r   n   
inherited as an autosomal recessive trait, is a group of distinct metabolie diseases with five
phenotypes in humans.2 The case reported in the dog was characterized by early-onset
characteristic eye anrd skin lesions with varying degrees of mental retardation.
994 · Congenital and Hereditary Defects
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
The tyrosinemia in the dog was apparcntly hereditary because both parents had elevated
serum tyrosine levels. The serum tyrosine levels were elevated bccausc of the deficiency
 of cytosolic hepatic tyrosine aminotransferase. The pathophysiologic change is considered
case with the cormeal lesions, but many skin lesions have no crystals. Instead, there may
be increased numbers of highly condensed tonofibrils and increased numbers of kerato-
hyaline granules in the yranular layer. Tyrosine is known to influence the murnber of
microtubules in the tonofibrils.
CLINICAL FEATURES
vitis and cloudy corneas. The globes were small, and cataracts and corneal granulation
were present, but there was no ulceration. There was ulceration of the mose, tongue, and
central portions of the footpads (see Fig. 12-79F and G). As the disease progressed,
ulcers involved the metatarsal pads and the claw folds, and claws were broken. Erythema-
tous bullae were found on the abdomen. The nasal planum was affected by erythema,
 focal ulceration with marginal crusting, and hypopigmentation.
DIAGNOSIS
Diagnosis of a metabolic defect was suspected because of the historical and physical
examination findings and confirmed by metabolic screening tests. High levels of tyrosine
 inn the serurn and urine were identifed.
Histopathologic examination of ulcerated skin lesions revealed pyogranulomatous in-
Hammation associated with large, dark-brown granules (110 to 170 mm in diameter) of
tyrosine (Fig. 12-84) surrounded by an eosinophilic, amorphous material, which resem-
bled the Splendore-Hoeppli reaction. The granules gave a positive orange reaction when
stained with Millon's reaction for tyrosine.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The prognosis for a cure is not good. In humans, dramatic reduction of plasna tyrosine
levels with subsequent clearing of skin and eye lesions occurs in patients receiving diets 
FIGURE I2-84. Tyrosinemia. Ty-
 granulomatous inflammation.
Congenital and Hereditary Defects · 995
Dietary manipulation also resulted in clearing of the dog's skin lesions,
· MISCElLANEOUS DISORDErS
Acral Mutilation Syndrome
Acral mutilation and analgesia is an unusual hereditary sensory neuropathy of dogs that
results in progressive mutilation of the distal extremities.
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
The disorder has been reported in German shorthaired pointers,24 English springer
spaniel227 and English pointer dogs. It is probably inherited in an autosomal recessive
  s  eo   ap  e assn  ss adn
dorsal roots. The nerve cell bodies of the subcapsular mantle zone are decreased in
number (by 22% to 50%), and the neuron mantle is decreased in thickness. The number
of small neurons (20 um or less) in the affected ganglia is disproportionately increased in
affected dogs. The spinal cord changes occur in the dorsolateral fasciculus, where reduced
fiber density correlates well with the loss of pain perception that is clinically apparent.
Light- and electron-microscopic exaininations of spinal roots, ganglia, and peripheral
nerves show myelinated and unnyelinated fiber degeneration. Neuronal degeneration does
not account for the deficiency of sensory cell bodies. This mutilation acropathy is a
manifestation of a sensory neuropathy in which the neuronal deficiency results froin
CLINICAL FEATURES
The syndrome appears first in affected pups at 3 to 5 months of age. Both sexes and more
 s d p dn jo sso  si a d   p a o 
the toes and sometimes in the proximal legs and trunk. Usuall, the hind legs are most
The toes and feet become swollen, and the skin of the footpads, the plantar surface,
and the area over the tuber calcis may be ulcerated. Paronychia is present, and autoampu-
tation of the toes may be noted. Thc puppies walk unfinchingly on the mutilated feet (see
Fig. 12-79H). Proprioception is normal, tendon refexes are intact, and no motor or
 autonomic impairment is present. EMG studies reveal no denervation potentials.
DIAGNOSIS
 History and a thorough clinical examination of puppies of predisposed breeds provides a
presumptive diagnosis. Histopathologic examination of nerve tissues at necropsy establishes
a definitive diagnosis.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
 Attcmpts to prevent further Imutilation by means of bandages, restraint collars, or sedation 
are of little benefit, and euthanasia is usually requested by the owners.
The hereditary aspects of this syndrome are important because it has been seen in
several strains of English pointers. Parents of affected pups should not be used as
breeders. Siblings should not be used either until the mode of inheritance is firmly
established. Even then, the breeding of siblings should probably be discouraged unless
some test is developed to identify carriers of the disorder.
996 · Congcnital and Hereditary Defects
Persistent Scratching in Cavalier King Charles Spaniels
A neurogenic pruritus has been described in young adult Cavalier King Charles spaniels.
Magnetic resonance imaging studies showed cerebellar tonsil herniation with syringohy-
humans. With the young age at onset and apparent uniqueness of this condition to this
breed, a familial basis is probable.
CLINICAL FEATURES
Affected dogs are presented for pruritus of the shoulder or neck region starting between
 6 and 24 months of age. One or both sides may be involved. The pruritus interferes with
 normal activity and can be triggered or exacerbated by excitement, wearing of a collar, or
 manipulation of the area. On physical examination, no primary skin lesions are visible and
the dog has lower motor neuron deficits of the ipsilateral thoracic limb.
TREATMENT
 Surgical procedures to alleviate the herniation should be beneficial. Medications to reduce
cerebrospinal fuid production can be useful; response has occurred in some dogs treated
with dexamethasone (0.25 ing/dog q24h) and acetazolamide (3 mg/kg q8h). Clinical signs
improve but do not disappear. Some dogs are stable over long periods of time with no
treatment.22a
Cutaneous Mucinosis
mucinosa, dermatomyositis, or discoid lupus erythematosus,228 ar it can be idiopathic.223
The Chinese Shar pei is prone to the latter (see Chap. 18).225. 229
Shar peis have rmore dermal rnucin than do other breeds.l10.22s Some dogs have
cxaggerated amounts and cxhibit pronounced folding (see Fig. 18-58A), mucinous vesicu-
lation (see Fig. 18-58B), or both. The exaggerated folding, is most pronounced on the
head, the ventrum, and the dlistal extremities, and some of these dogs snore and snort
owing to involvement of tissues in the oropharynx. The vesicles vary in size and can occur
in normal-appearing or edematous skin.
Recent studies in Shar peis with idiopathic mucinosis show that distorted lymphatics,
assive accumulations of hyaluronic acid, and mast cells of the chymase carboxypeptidase
subtype are features of this disorder (see Chap. 18).
DIAGNOSIS
folds and is confirmed by skin biopsy, in which the dermis contains excessive mucin with
 Io other abnormalities. 10. 23.22s Visuall, the vesicles mimic those of the various autoim-
mune and immune-rmediated disorders, but clinical evaluation of the vesicles' contents
quickly identifies the mucinous nature of the fuid. Mucinous vesicles do not discharge
fluid with puncture by a small-gauge needle. The fuid must be expressed by digital
tion of mucin in the superficial dermis. To date, the mucinosis in Shar peis has occurred
in euthyroid dogs. Because this breed is prone to hypothyroidism,229 an intercurrent
thryroid abnormality could lead to severe mucinosis.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
 In most cases, the excessive rucinosis in Shar peis is a cosmetic problem only. Most
animals seem to outgrow it by 2 to 5 years of age.225 Dogs with oropharyngeal involve-
Congenital and Hereditary Defects · 997
 ment may warrant treatment because they can experience respiratory arrest with anesthe-
sia.229 High levels of prednisolone (2.2 mg/kg) for 6 days, followed by a slow reduction to
BO medication in 30 days, should reduce the amount of mucin.225 Most animals remain
normal after only one course of treatment. A few dogs require repeated or continuous
treatment. These dogs should be evaluated for hypothyroidism.
Urticaria Pigmentosa
 In humans, a mastocytosis syndrome is recognized wherein mast ceil hyperplasia occurs in
the skin and virtually all other organ systems.2 Urticaria pigmentosa is the most common
cutaneous manifestation of mastocytosis and is characterized by variably symptomatic,
 small, yellow-tan to reddish-brown macues or papules. Urticaria pigmentosa has been
recognized in the dog, described in detail in three related Sphinx cats,2s briefy described
 in young (youngcr than 1 year old) Himalayan cats,β reported in two unrelated Devon Rex
cats,230 and seen in a young Siamese cat by one of the authors (DWS).
CLINICAL FEATURES
All three Sphinx cats had the same grandsire and started their disease early in life (see
Chap. 13). The cats had a multifocal, partially coalescing macular and crusted papular rash
on the head and neck, ventrum (Fig. 12-86), and extremities. Some of the lesions were
 dark brown. Dermatographism could not be elicited in any cat.
around the mouth, chin, neck, and eyes. The condition resolved spontaneously after
several months.
 The Siamese cat had erythema, hyperpigmentation, scaling, crusting, and pruritus
 involving the face and pinnae (Fig. 12-85).
DIAGNOSIS
In the absence of a familial history, all causes of crusted papular lesions in cats (miliary
dermatitis—see Chap. 8) must be considered. Skin biopsies show moderate-to-severe,
 perivascular-to-diffuse dermal and subcutaneous infiltrate of well-differentiated mast cells
with small numbers of eosinophils and neutrophils. Epidermal melanosis may be promi-
nent. All three Sphinx cats had peripheral eosinophilia and basophilia, but no internal
Organ involvement could be identified.
FIGURE I2-85. Urticaria pig
mentosa.Siamese cat withfacial
crusted papular rash.
 998 · Congenital and Hereditary Defects
FIGURE 12-86. Urticaria pigmen-
tosa. Ventral papular rash on a Sphinx
cat. (Courtesy of C. Vitale.)
TREATMENT
 Because the mast cel hyperplasia in urticaria pigmentosa has either a familial or an
idiopathic basis, cure cannot always he expected. Trcatment with corticosteroids with or
withiout antihistamines controls the lesions in Sphinx and Siamese cats while the drugs are
being administered.
+ rEFerences
General References
10a. Binder H, et al: Palmoplantar hyperkeratosis in lnish
1. Foil CS: The skin. In Hoskins JD (ed): Veterinary
terriers: Evidence of autosomal recessive inheritancc.
Pediatries, 2nd ed. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia,
J Small Anim Pract 4l:52, 2000.
1995.
11. Bond R, ct al: An idiopathic facial dernatitis of Per-
2. Freedberg IM, et al: Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in
sian cats. Vet Dermatol 11:35, 2000.
Ceneral Medicine, 5th ed. MeGraw Hill Book Co,
12. Booth MJ: Atypical dermoid sinus in a chow show
New York, 1999.
dog. Tydskr S Afr Vet Ver 69:102, 1998.
Gross TL, et al: Veterinary Dermatopathology. Moshy
13. Bourdeau P: La dermataomyosite familiale canine.
3.
Year Book, St, Louis, 1992.
Point Vet 28:553, 1996.
14. Burrows A, Mason KV: Ohservations of the pathogen-
4. Power HT, Ihrke Pj: Tle use of synthetic retinoids in
veterinary medicine. In Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's
esis and treatment of lichenoid-psoriasiform dermati-
Current Veterinary Therapy Xll. W.B. Saunders Co,
tis of springer spaniels. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am
 Philadelphia, 1995, p. 585.
Acad Vet Dermatol Ain Coll Vet Dernatol 10:81,
5.
Scott DW, et al: Muller and Kirk's Srmall Animal
1994.
Dermatology, 5th ed. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadel-
14a. Cainacho AA, ct al: Dermoid sinus in a Great Pyre-
phia, 1995.
necs dog, Braz J Vet Res Anim Sei 32:170, 1995.
15. Canpbell KL, Kirkwood AR: Effect of topical cils on
Disorders of the Surface and Folicvlar Epitheliurm
transepiderual water loss with seborrhea sicca.In
6. Alhaidari Z, et al: Congenital ichthyosis in two Cava.
lurke P], et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Derma-
lier King Charlcs spaniel littermates. Vet Dermatol 5:
tology. Vol 2. Pergamon Press, New York, 1993.
117, 1994.
p 157.
7. Antin IP: Dermoid sinus in a Rhodesian Ridge-back
16. Campbell Kl., ct al: Effects of four anti-seborrheic
dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 157:961, 1970.
shampoos on transepiderual water losses, hydration
8. August JR, ct al: Congenital ichthyosis in a dog:
of the stratum cormeuin, skin surface lipid concentra-
Cormparison with the hurnan ichthyosiforn rlermatn-
tion, skin surrace pH, and corneocyte counts in dogs.
ses. Comp Cont Educ 10:40, 1988.
Proc Annu Memh Meet Am Acad Vet Derinatol Am
9. Baker BB, Maibach Ill: Fpidermal cell renewal in
Coll Vet Dennatol 10:85, 1994.
seborrheic skin of dogs. Aim J Vet Res 48:726, 1987.
17. Cornegliani L, Chibaudo G: A dermoid sinus in a
10. Bensignor E: A propos d'une observation de dernato-
 Siberian husky. Vet Dermatol 10:47, 1999.
mlyosite chez un beauceron. Rec Med Vet 173:125.
18. Credille KM, et al: Ileterogeneity in nonepidermoly-
1997.
lic ichthyosis in a cat and two dogs. In Kwochka KW,
Congenital and Hereditary Defects · 999
et al (eds): Advances in Vcterinary Dermatology IIL.
dogs to topical trcatment with corticosteroids. Toxicol
Butterworth-1leinemann, Boston, 1998, p 529.
Pathol 27:528, 1999.
19. Dunstan RW, et al: A disease resembling junctional
40. Kocl H, Walder E: Epidernolysis bullosa dystrophia
epidermolysis bullosa in a toy poodlc. Am J Derrmato-
in Beaucerons. In von Tschamer C, Halliwell REW
pathol 10:442, 1988.
(eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol I.
 20. Fadok VA: Treatmncnt of canine idiopathic scborrhca
Bailliere Tindall, Philadelphia, 1990, p 41.
with isotretinoin. Am J Vet Res 47:1730, 1986.
41. Kral F, Schwartzinan RM: Veterinary and Cormpara-
21. Fatone G, et al: Dermoid sinus and spinal malforina-
tive Dennatology. JB. Lippincott Co, Philadelphia,
tions in a Yorkshire terrier: Diagnosis and folow-up.
1964.
J Small Anim Pract 36:178, 1995.
42. Kwochka KW: Shampoos and moisturizing rinses in
2la. Ferguson EA, et al: Derrmatomyosiis in five Shet-
veterinary dermatolory. In Bonagura JID (ed): Kirk's
land sheepdogs in the United Kingdom. Vct Rcc 146:
Current Veterinary Therapy XIl. W.B. Saunders Co,
214,2000.
Philadelphia, 1995, p 590.
22. Fontaine J, et al: Familial junctional cpidermolysis
43. Kwochka KW; Keratinization abnormalitics: Under-
bullosa in Beauceron dogs. Vet Dermatol (In press).
standing the mechanism of scale formation. In Ihrke
23. Garmmie JS: Dermoid sinus removal in a Rhodesian
PJ, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology,
nidgcback dog. Can Vet J 27:250, 1986.
Vol 2. Pergamon Press, New York, 1993, p 91.
44. Kwochka KW: Ccll proliferation kinctics in thc hair
cvaluation of antiseborrhcic sharnpoos in dogs. Vet
root matrix of dogs with healthy skin and dogs with
Derinatol 4:57, 1993.
idiopathic seborrhea. Ain J Vet Res 51: 1570, 1990.
25. Gross TL, et al: Psoriasiform lichenoid dennatitis in
45. Kwochka KW: In vivo and in vitro exanination of cell
the springer spaniel, Vet Pathol 23:76, 1986.
proliferation kineties in the norinal and seborrheic
26. Guaguere E, et al: Epidermolyse bulleuse jonctionelle
caine epidermis. Proc Anu Memb Meet Am Acad
familale associee a une absence d'expression de colla-
Vet Derrmatol A1n Coll Vet Denimatol 7:46, 1991.
gene XVIl (BPAG2, BP180) chez le Brague Ale-
46. Kwochka KW, Rademakers AM: Cell proliferalion of
mandl: A propos de deux case. Pral Med Chir Anim
epidermis, hair follicles, and sebaceous glands of bea-
Comp 32:471, 1997.
gles and Cocker spaniels with healthy skin. Ain J Vet
27. Guaguere E, et al: Familial canine dermatonyositis in
Rcs 50:587, 1989.
8 Beanceron shepherds. In Kwochka KW, et al (eds):
47. Kwochka KW, Rademakers AM: Cell proliferation ki-
Advances in Veterinary Dermatology
III. Butter-
netics of epidermis, hair follicles, and sebaceous
worth-1Ieinemann, Boston, 1998, p 527.
 p e i ro sg n n 
glands of Cocker spaniels wih idiopathic seborrhea.
Am J Vet Res 50:1918, 1989.
J Rcs 34:443, 1973.
48. Kwochka KW, Smeak DD: The cellular defect in idl-
29. Hannigan MM: A refractory case of Schnauzer com-
opathic seborrhea of Cocker spaniels. In von Tschar-
edo syndromc. Can Vet J 38.238, 1997.
30.Hargis AM,et al: A skn disorder in threc Shetand
sheeplogs: Comparison with familial canine dernato-
Dermatology, Vol l. Balliere Tindall, Philadelphia,
myositis of Collies. Conp Cont Edue 7:306, 1985.
1990, p 265.
31. Hargis AM, Mundcll AC: Familial canine dennato-
49. Kwochika KW, ct al: Devclopment and characteriza-
Imyosiis. Comp Cont Edue 14:855, 1992.
tion of an in vitro cell cnlture systein for the carine
32. Hargis AM, et al: Conplenent levels in dogs with
epidermis. Proc Annu Menb Meet Ain Acad Vet
familial canine dermatomyositis. Vet Imnunol Immu-
Dcrmatol Am Coll Vet Dennatol 3:9, 1987.
nopathol 20:95, 1985.
50. Kwochka KW: Advances in the management of ca-
33. Hargis AM, el al: Severe secondary amyloidosis in a
nine scaling. Proceedings of the Third World Con-
dog with dermatomyosilis. J Comp Pathol 100:427,
gress of Veterinary Dermatology, 1996, p 69.
50a.Lanore D, et al: Sinus dermoide chez une chienne
1989.
34. Helnan RG, ct al: Iehthyosiforn dermatosis in a soft-
rhodesian ridgeback. Point Vet 30:575, 1999.
coated wheaten terrier. Vet Dermatol 8:53, 1997.
51. Lewis DT, et al: Charaeterization and management of
 35. Hewitt MP, et al: Epiheliogenesis imperfecta in a
a Jack Russell tenier with congenital ichthyosis. Vet
black Labrador puppy. Can Vet J 16:371, 1975.
Dermatol 9:111, 1998.
36. Ihrke PJ, Gross TL: Ulcerative derrmatosis of Shetland
52. Lcwis 1DT, et al: A heredlitary disorder of comification
sheepdogs and Collies. In Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's
and inultiple congenital defects in 5 Rothweiler dogs.
Current Veterinary Therapy XII. W.B. Saunders Co,
Vet Dermatol 9:61, 1998.
Philadelphia, 1995, p 639.
 53. Lumbrechts N: Dermoid sinus in a crossbred Rhode-
 37. Iwasaki T, ct al: Caninc familial dermatomyositis in a
sian ridgeback dog involving the second cervical ver-
family of Shetland sheepdogs. Proc Annu Memh
tebra. J S Afr Vet Assoc 67:155, 1996.
Meet Ani Acad Vet Deramtol Am Col Vet Dermatol
 54. Mann CE, Stratton J: Dermoid sinus in the Rhodc.
15:15, 1999.
sian ridgcback. J Small Anin Praet 7:631, 1966.
 38. Jackson HA, Olivry T: Cutaneous lupus erytheinato-
55. Mason KV, et 'al: Characterization ol lichenoid-pso-
sus (alcerative dermatitis) in the Shetland sheepdog
riasiform dermatosis of springer spaniels. J Aim Vet
and colle: A review and revelation of the clinical and
Med Assoc 189:897, 1986.
listological feamures. Proc Annu Meimh Mcet Ain
 56. Miller WII Jr: Canine facial dermatoses. Comp Cont
Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 15:31,
Educ 1:640, 1979.
1999.
57.
Muller GH: Ichthyosis in two dlogs. J Arn Vet Med
39. Johnstonc I, et al: A hereditary junctional mechano-
Assoe 169:1313, 1976.
bullous disease in the cat. Proc Wd Cong Vet Der-
58. Munday BL: Epitheliogenesis inperfecta in lanbs
matol 2:111, 1992.
and kttens. Br Vet J 126:47, 1970.
39a. Kirmura T, Doi K: Dorsal skin rcactions of hairless
59. Nagata M, et al: Dystrophic form of inherited epider.
I000 · Congenital and Hereditary Defects
molysis bullosa in a dog (Akita Inu). Br J Dermatol
79. Scott DW, Miller WH Jr: Epidermal dysplasia and
133:1000, 1995.
Malasszia pachydernatis infection in West Highland
60. Nagata M, el al: Mitis junctional epidermolysis bul-
white terriers. Vet Dermatol 1:25, 1989.
losa in a rlog. In Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances
80. Scott IW, Miller WH: Primary seborhoea in English
in Veterinary
y Dermatology lll. Butterworth-Heine-
springer spaniels: A retrospective studly of 14 cases.
mann, Boston, 1998, p 528.
J Small Anim Pract 37:173, 1996.
61. Nakayama H, ct al: Systcmic dermal dysplasia with
81. Scott DW, Miller WH Jr: Congenital folcular para-
perifollicular mucinosis in a dog. Vet Pathol 34:5,
keratosis in a Rottweiler and Siberian husky. Canine
1997.
Pract (in press, 1999).
62. Nuttall TJ: What is your diagnosis? J Small Anin
82. Selcer EA, et al: Dermoid sinus in a Shih tzu and a
Pract 39:317, 1998.
boxer. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:634, 1984.
63. Olivry T, ct al: Absent cxpression of collagen XVII
83. Shanley KJ, et al: Canine benign familial chronic
(BPAG2, BP180) in canine familial localized junc-
pemphigus. In Ihrke PJ, et al (eds): Advances in Vet-
tional cpidermolysis bullosa. Vet Dcrmatol S:203,
erinary Dermatology, Vol 2. Pergamon Press, New
1997.
York, 1993, p 353.
 84. Stonccipher MH, et al: Cutaneous changes of denna-
ita: Circulating autoantilbodies target the aminoter-
tomnyositis in patients with normal muscle enzymes.
Ininal moncollagenous (NCl) domain of collagen VII
Dermatomyositis sine inyositis? J Ain Acad Iermatol
in anchoring fibrils. Vet Dermatol 9:19, 1998.
28:951, 1993.
65. Olivry T, Mason IS: Cenodermatoses: inheritance and
84a. Sueki H, et al: Doninantly inherited epidermal
management. In Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances
acantholysis in dogs, simulating human benign familial
in Veterinary Dermatology Ill. Butterworth-Heine-
mann, Boston, 1998, p 365.
S5. Tada J, Hashimoto K:Ultrastructhural localization of
66. Olivry T, et al: Interface dermatitis and sebaceous
cell junctional cornponents (desmoglein, phakoglobin,
E-cadherin, and B-catcnin) in Hailey-Hailey disease,
("lupoid dermatosis") of German shorthaired pointers.
Darier's disease, and pemphigus vulgaris. J Cutan
Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am
Pathol 25:106, 1998.
Coll Vet Dermatol 15:4l, 1999.
S6. Theaker AJ: A case of lupoid dernatosis in a German
66a. Olivry T, et al: Reduced anchoring fibril formation
short-haired pointer. Proc Br Vet Dermatol Study
and collagen VII imrmunoreactivity in feline dys-
Grp 16:5, 1994.
trophic epidermolysis bullosa. Vet Pathol 36:616,
 87. Vercelli A, Schiavi S: A case report of lupoid derma-
1999.
tosis in a German short-haired pointer. In Kwochka
67. Page N, et al: Hereditary nasal hyperkeratosis in Lab-
KW, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology
rador retrievers. Proc Anmu Memb Meet Am Acad
Il1. Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p 466.
Vet Dcrmatol Am Coll Vet IDermatol 15:4l, 1999.
88. Vroorn Mw: A retrospective study of 43 West
68.Palshof P, Christoffersen E: Malassezia pachydermatis
Higlhland white terriers. Proc Wld Cong Vet Derma-
on the skin of normal and seborrheic West Highland
white terriers. Proc Eur Soc Vet Derrmatol 10:269,
tol 2:70, 1992.
 89. Vroom MW: Three cases with hereditary lupoid der-
1993.
matosis of the Cerman shorthaired pointer. Proe Eur
69. Paradis M, Scott DW: Hereditary primary seborrhea
Soc Vet Dermatol 10:67, 1993.
oleosa in Persian cats. Fcline Pract 19:17, 1990.
90. Vroom MW, ct al: Lupoid dermatosis in 5 German
70. Paradis M: Footpad hyperkeratosis in a fanily of Do-
short-haired pointers. Vet Dermatol 6:93, 1995.
gues de Bordeaux. Vet Dermatol 3:75, 1992.
91. White SD, Gross TL: Hereditary lupoid dermatosis of
Point Vet 28:559, 1996.
the Gerinan shcrthaired pointer. In Bouagura JD
  a a  s )
72. Pcnrith ML: Dermoid sinus in a Boerboel bitch. J S
Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1995.
Afr Vet Assue 65:38, 1998.
92. White SD, et al: Dermatomyositis in an adult Pem-
73. Power IHT, et al: Use of etretinate for treatment of
broke Welsh corgi. J Am Anim HIosp Assoc 28:398,
primary keratinization disorders (idiopathic seborrhea)
1992.
in Coxker spaniels, West Ilighland white terriers, and
 93. White SD, et al: Dystrophic (dennolytic) epidermo-
Basset hounds. J Am Vet Med Assoc 20l:419, 1992.
lysis bullosa in a cat. Vet Dermatol 4:91, 1993.
74. Power HT: Newly recognized feline skin diseases.
Proc Annu Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll
Disorders of Hairs and Hair Growth
Vet Dermatol 14:27, 1998.
94. Allen LSS: Skin condition in Yorkshire terriers. Ca-
74a. Pratt JN, ct al: Dermoid sinus at the lumbosacral
nine Pract 12:29, 1985.
junction in an English springer spaniel. J Small Anin
95. Bagladi MS, et al: Sebaceous gland melanosis in dogs
Pract 41:24, 2000.
with endocrine skin disease or follcular dysplasia: A
75. Raczkowski JJ: Pathogenetic Stucties of Canine Sehor-
retrospective study. Vet Dermatol 7:85, 1996.
rheie Skin Disease in the West Highland White Ter-
rier Breed. Masters thesis, Kansas State University.
hunds: A clinical study and the hereditary, iniceroscop-
1984.
ical、 and ultrastructural aspect of the‘dlisease. Vct
76. Rest JR, Theaker A]: Lupoid derrmatosis in a German
Dermatol 7:91, 1996.
shorthaired pointer. Proc Eur Soc Vet Dermatol 10:
 97. Bourdeau P, et al: Alopecie hereditaire generalisee
271, 1993.
feline. Rec Med Vet 164:17, 1988.
77. Scott DW, Schultz RD: Epidermolysis bullosa simplex
98. Brignac M, et al: Microscopy of color mutant alope-
in a collie dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc 17l:72l, 1977.
cia. In von Tscharner C, Halliwell REW (eds): Ad-
78. Scott DW: Congenital ichthyosis in a dog. Compan
vances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol 1. Bailliere
Anim Pract 19:7, 1987.
Tindall, Philadelphia, 1990, p 448.
Congenital and Hlereditary Defects · I001
99. Carlotti D: A propos des alopecies auriculaires. Point
120. ihrkc PJ, ct al: Generalized congenital hypotrichosis
Vet 25:8, 1993.
in a female Rottweiler. Vet Dermatol 4:65, 1993.
100. Carlotti DK: Canine hereditary black hair follieular
121. Johnson PD,et al: Coat color darkening in a dog in
dysplasia and color mutant alopecia: Clinical and his-
response to a potent melanotropic peptide. Smail
topathological aspects. In von Tscharner C, IHalliwell
Anim Clin Endocrinol 5:1, 1995.
REW (eds): Advauces in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol
122. Kimura T, et al: Thc inheritance and breeding results 
1. Bailliere Tindall, Philadelphia, 1990, p 43.
of hairless descendants of Mexican hairless dogs. Lah
101. Casal ML, et al: X-linked ectodermal dysplasia in the
Anim 27:55, 1993.
dog. J Heredity 88:51.3, 1997.
123. Kimura T, Doi K: The effect of topical minoxidil
102. Casal ML, et al: Congenital hypotrichosis with thyinic
  jo r r r o 
aplasia in nine Birman kittens. J Am Anin Hosp As-
less descendants of Mexican hairless dogs. Vet Der-
soc 30:600, 1994.
matol 8:107, 1997.
J02a. Castellano MC: Colour dilution alopecia in a
124. Kimura T, Doi K: Age-related changes in skin color
Gerrman shepherd dog. Canine Pract 24:6, 1999.
and histologic features of hairless descendants of
103. Cerundolo R, et al: Studics on the inheritance of hair
Mexican hairless dogs. Am J Vet Res 55:480, 1994.
loss in the Irish water spaniel. Proc Am Acad Vet
125.K
Knottcnbelt CM, Knottenbelt MK: Black hair follien-
Dermatol A1m Coll Vet Dermatol 14:95, 1998.
lar dysplasia in a tricolour Jack Russell terrier. Vet
104. Chastain CB, Sawyer DE: Congenital hypotrichosis in
Rec 138:475, 1996.
Inale Basset hound littelmates. J Am Vet Med Assoc
126. Kral F, Schwartzman RM: Veterinary and Coinpara-
187:845, 1985.
tivc Dermatology. J.B. Lippincott Co, Philadelphia,
105. Conroy JD: Hypotrichosis in miniature poodle sib.
1964.
lings. J Am Vet Med Assoc 166:697, 1975.
127. Krishnaswamy Y, et al: Pharmacokinetics and oral
106. Cowan LA, et al: Thyroid hormone and testosterone
concentrations in racing greyhounds with and without
anirnal models and clinical implications. J Pineal Res
bald thigh syndromc. J Vet int Med 1I1:142, 1997.
22:45, 1997.
107. Curtis CF, et al: Investigation of the reproductive and
128. Kunkle GA: Congenital hypotrichosis in two dogs.
growth hornone: status of dogs affected by idiopathie
J Am Vet Med Assox: 185:84. 1984.
recurrent flank alopecia. J Small Anin Pract 37:417.
      a  sa 
1966.
salukis. Vet Rec 137:294, 1995.
108. Delmage D: Black hair folicular dysplasia. Vet Rec
130. McKeever PJ, et al: Spiculosis. J An Anirm Hosp
137:79, 1995.
Assoc 28:257, 1992.
109. Dunn KA, et al: Black hair follicular dysplasia in
131. Madewell BR, et al: Multiple skin tunours in a Dob-
dogs. Vet Rec 137:412, 1995.
ermnan pinscher with
colour dilution alopecia. Vel
 p   s  s 
Dermatol 8:59, 1997.
emerging genodermatoses in domestic anirnals. Curr
132. Malik R, France MP: Hyperpigmentation and sym-
Probl Dermatol 17:216, 1987.
Wetrical alopecia in thrce Silky terniers. Aust Vet
11l. Fontaine J, ot al: Alopecie recidivante des fances:
Pract 21:135, 1991.
133. Marks A, et al: Congeuital hypotrichosis in a French
Vet 29:445, 1998.
blldiog. J Small Anim Pract 33:450, 1992.
11 l1a. Fontaine J, Olivry T: Alopecie evoquant une lipidose 
134. Miller MA, Dunstan RW: Scasonal Hank alopecia in
folliculaire chez un Rottweiler. Prat Med Chir Anim
boxers and Airedale terriers: 24 cases (1985-1992).
Comp 34:681, 1999.
J A1n Vet Med Assoc 203:1567, 1993.
111b. Fukata K, et al: Microscopic observation of skin and
135. Miller WH Jr: Follicular dysplasia in adult black and
lynphoid organs in the hairless dog derived from the
Ted Doberman pinschers. Vet Dermatol 1:181, 1990.
Mcxican hairless. Exper Anim 40:69, 1991.
       
112. Geary MR, Baker KP: The occurrence of pili torti in
pinschers with blue or fawn coat colors: A sturdy on
a litter of kittens in England. J Sinall Anin Pract 27:
the incidence and histopathology of this dlisorder. Vet
85, 1986.
JDermatol 1:113, 1990.
113. Grieshaber TL, cl al: Congenital alopecia in a Bichon
137. Miller WH Jr: Alopecia associated with coat color
frise. J Am Vet Med Assoc 188:1053, 1986.
dilution in two Yorkshire terriers, one Saluki, and one
114. Griffin CE: Etretinate—- how is it bcing used in veter-
mix-breed dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27:39, 1991.
inary dermatology? Denn Dialogue, Spring/Summer
138.
Miller WH Jr, Scott Dw: Follicular dysplasia of the
1993, p 4.
Portuguese water dog. Vet Dennatol 6:67, 1995.
115. Gross TL, et al: Follicular lipidosis in three Rottwei-
139. Paradis M: Melatonin in veterinary derinatology. Proc
lers. Vet Dermatol 8:33, 1997.
Annu Meet Can Vet Med Assoc Acad Can Med Vet
116. Guaguere E: Aspects histopathologiques ot ultrastrue-
50:46, 1998.
turaux de lalopecie des robes diluees: A propos d'un
140. Paradis M: Quel est votre diagnostic? Med Vet Que-
cos chez un Dobernan pinscher bleu. Prat Med Chi-
bec 26:103, 1996.
rurg Anim Cie 26:537, 1991.
141. Post K, et al: Clinical and histopathologic changes as
117. Guaguere E: Les alopecies dorigine genetique chez
seen in Siberian husky follieular dysplasia. In von
le chien. Point Vet 28:543, 1996.
Tschamer C, Halliwell REW (eds): Advances in Vel-
118. Hargis AM, et al: Black hair follenlar dysplasia in
erinary Dermatology, Vol 1. Bailiere-Tindall, Phila-
black and white Saluki dogs. Vet IDermatol 2:69,
delphia, 1990, p 446.
1991.
142.
. Post K, et al; Hair follicle dysplasia in a Siberian
119. Hirota Y, et al: Inmunologic features in hairless de-
husky. J Ain Anim Hosp Assoc 24:659, 1988.
scendants derived from Mexican hairless dogs. Jpn J
143. Hest JR, et al: Dark hair follicle dystrophy in a border
Vet Sci 52:1217, 1990.
coillie. Vet Rec 136:607, 1994.
1002 + Congenital and Hereditary Defects
144. Robinson R: The Canacdian hairless or sphinx cat.
Disorders of Collagen
I Hered 64:47, 1973.
168. Affolter V: Collagen disordcr of the footpads of three
145. Roperto F, ct al: Colour dilution alopecia (CDA) in
Gcrman shepherd dogs. In Ihrke P], el al (eds): Ad-
ten Yorkshire terriers. Vet Dermatol 6:171, 1995.
vantes in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol 2. Pergamon
146. Rothstein E, ct al: A retrospective study of dysplastie
Press, New York, 1993, p 418.
hair folicles and abnormal melanization in dogs with
169. Barmiett KC, Cottrell BD: Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in
follicular dysplasia syndromes or endocrine skin dis-
a dog: Ocular, cutaneous and articnlar abnormalities.
case. Vet Dermatol 9:235, 1998.
J Small Anim Pract 28:94l, 1987.
147. Schmutz SM, et al: Black hair folleuar dysplasia, an
170. Collier LA, et al: A clinical description of dermato-
autasoinal rccessive condition in dogs. Can Vet J 39:
sparaxis in a Himnalayan cat. Feline Pract 10:25, 1980.
644,1998.
147a. Schoning PR, Cowan LA: Bald thigh syndrome of
ten. Proc Annu Meet Eur Soc Vet Dermatoi Eur Coll
Greyhound dogs: gross and microseopic findings. Vet
Vet De1matol 14:190, 1997.
1Dermatol 11:49,2000.
172. Counts DF, et al: Derumatosparaxis in a Hirnalayan
148. Scot DW: Feline dermatology 1900-1978: A mono-
cat. I. Biochemical studies of derinal collagen. J In-
graph. J An Anin Hosp Assoc 16:313, 1980.
vest Dermatol 74:96, 1980.
149. Scott Dw, Rothstein E: Trichoptilosis in three golden
173. Dueatelle R, ot al: A morphometric classifcation of
retrievers. Canine Pract 23:14, 1998.
dermatosparaxis in Lhe dog and cat. Vlaams Dierge-
150. Scott Dw: Les agregats de melanine dans Iappareil
ncesk Tudschr 56:107, 1987.
pilo-sebace: Signification en dermatohistopathologie
174. Fernandez CJ. et al: Staining abnormalities of dermal
du chat. Med Vet Quebec 28:38, 1998.
collagen in cats with cutaneous asthenia or acquired
151. Selmanowitz VJ. ct al: Congcnital ectodermal defect
skin fragility as demonstrated with Masson's tri-
in poodles. J Hered 61:196, 1970.
chrome stain. Vet Dermatol 9:49, 1998.
152. Selmanowifz VJ, et al: Black hair follicular dysplasia
175. Fontaine J, ct al: Anomalie du collagene dermique:
in dogs. J Ain Vet Med Assoe 17l:1079, 1977.
Dermatosparaxie chez un chat europeen. Point Vet
I53. Thoday K: Skin diseascs of the cat. In Pract 3:21,
24:255, 1992.
1981.
154. Thomsett LR: Congenital hypot richia in the dog. Vet
taires. Point Vet 28:549, 1996.
Bec 73:915, 1961.
177. Freeiman LJ. et al: Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in dogs
155. Tieghi C, et al: Medullary trichomalacia; a retrspec-
 and cats. Semin Vet Med Surg 2:221, 1987.
tive study of 6 cases in the Geriman shepherd. (In
preparation, 1999).
pies and AA-amyloidosis. Vet Rec 138:264, 1996.
156. Waldnan L: Seasonal Hank alopecia in affenpinschers.
179. Hegreberg GA, Padgett GA: Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
J Small Anim Pract 36:272, 1995.
in animals. Bull Pathol 8:247, 1967.
157. Wilkinson GT, Kristensen TS: A hair abnormality in
180. Hegreberg CA, et al: A heritable counective tissue
Abyssinian cats. J Small Anim Pract 30:27, 1989.
disease of dogs and mink resembling the Ehlers-
Danlos syndrome of man. li: Mode of inheritaice.
Disorders of Pigmentation
J Hered 60:249, 1969.
158. Anderson RK: Canine
acanthosis migricans. Comp
181. HIegrcbcrg GA, ct al: A heritable connective tissue
Cont Edue 1:466, 1979.
disease of dogs and mink resembling the Ehlers-Dan-
158a. Chieffo C, et al: Cerebellar Purkinje's cell degenera-
los syndrome of man. IIl: Histopathologic changes of
tion and coat color dilution in a family of Rhodesian
the skin. Arch Pathol 90:159, 1970.
Ridgeback dogs. J Vet Intern Med 8:112, 1994.
182. Hlolbrook KA, et al: Dermatosparaxis in the Himala-
159. Colgan SP, et al: Defective in vitro motility of poly-
yan cat. Il: Ultrastructural studics of dermal collagen.
morphonuclcar lcukocytes of homozygote and hetero-
J Invest Dermatol 74:100, 1980.
zygote Cheliak-Iigashi cats. Vet Immunol Immuno-
182a. Jelinek F, Karban J: Cutaneous asthenia in one dog.
pathol 31:205, 1992.
Acta Vet Bmo 67:109, 1998.
160. Hallivell REW, Gorman NT: Vctcrinary Clinical Iim-
183. Kristensen F: Deep metatarsal/metacarpal toritis in
munology. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1989.
s
German shepherds. Proc Annu Meet Eur Soc Vet
IDermatol Eur Coll Vet Dermatol 14:194, 1997.
herited coat-color dilutions of cats. J Hered 72:178,
184.
Kunkle GA, et al: Focal metatarsal fistulas in five
1981.
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 202:756, 1993.
162. Rendon MI, et al: Acanthosis nigricans: A cutaneous
185. Matthews BR, Lewis CT: Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in
inarker for tissue resistance to insulin. J An Acad
a dog. Can Vet J 31:389, 1990.
Dermatol 2l:461, 1989.
186. Minor RR: Animal models of heritable diseases of the
s  g     s e
skin. In Golcdsmith EL (edl): Biochemistry and Physiol-
Mod Vet Pract 47:38, 1966.
ogy of Skin. Oxford University Press, New York, 1982.
164. Schwartzman RM, Orkin M: A Conparative Study of
187. Minor RR, et al: Genctic discases of connective tis-
Skin Diseases of Dog and Man. Charles C Thormas,
sues in animals. Curr Probl Dermatol 17:199, 1987.
Springfeld, IL, 1962, pp 313-318.
188. Neibauerer CW, et al: Antibodies to canine collagen
165. Scott DW, Walton Dk: Clinical evaluation of oral
types I and II with spontaneous cruciate liganicnt
vitamin F for the treatunent of prirmary acanthosis
rupture and osteoarthritis. Arthritis Rheun 30:319,
tnigricans. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 21:345,1985.
1987.
166.
White SD, et al: Acquired aurotrichia ("gilding syn-
189. Olivry T; Congenital and acquired collagen degenera-
drome") of miniature schnauzers. Vet Dermatol 3:37,
tion in dogs and cats. Proc Annn Mcct Eur Soe Vet
1991.
Dermatol Eur Coll Vet Dermatol 14:139, 1997.
167. Yang T: Gray collie syndrome. J Ain Vet Med Assoc
190.
 Page N, Paradis M: Quel est votre diagnostic? Med
191:390, 1987.
Vet Quebec 26:147, 1996.
Congenital and Hereditary Defects · 1003
191. Paterson S: Sterile idiopathic pedal panniculilis in the
CGerman shepherd dogs: Clinical, genctic, and prclini-
Geruan shepherd dogclinical presentation and re-
nay pathological and irmnunologic studies. Can Vet J
sponse to treatment of four cases. J Simall Anim Pract
35:763, 1994.
36:498, 1995.
Endocrine, Metabolic, and Immunologic Disorders
192. Patterson DF, Minor RR: Hereditay fragility and hy-
215. Bettenay SV: Acrodermatitis of bull terriers—long
per-extensibility of thc skin of cats. Lab Invcst 37:
lerm management. Proc Wld Cong Vet Dermatol 2:
170, 1977.
193. Rest [R: Pathology of pwo possble genodermatoses.
69, 1992.
216. Jezyk PF, ct al: Lethal acrodermatitis in bull terriers.
J Small Anim Pract 30:230, 1989.
194. Rodriguez F, et al: Collagen dysplasia in a litter of
J Am Vet Med Assoc 188:833, 1986.
217.Kunkle GA, ct al: Tyrosinemia in a dog. J Arm Anim
Garafiano shepherd dogs. [ Vet Med A 43:509, 1996.
Hosp Assoc 20:615, 1984.
195. Scott Dw: Cutaneous asthenia in a cat. Vet Med
218. MeEwan NA: Confrnation and investigation of lethal
(SAC) 69:1256, 1974.
196. Scott DW: Feline dermatology: Introspective retro-
acrodermatiis of bull terriers in Britain. In Ihrke PJ.
ot al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology. Vol
spechions. J Am Anim Hosp Assoe: 20:537, 1984.
2. Pergamon Press, New York, 1993, p 151.
196a. Sequeira JL, et al: Collagen dysplasia (cutaneous as-
219. MeEwan NA: Isolation of ycasts from bull terriers
thenia) in a cat. Vet Pathol 36:603, 1999.
197. Sousa C: Soft-coated Wheaten terriers and E.D.S.
suffering from lethal acrodermatitis. Proc Eur Soc
Vet Dermatol 10:277, 1993.
Derm Dialogue 1:3, 1982.
219a. McEwan NA: Nail disease, zinc deficiency and lethal
Disorders of Vessels
acrodermatitis. Proc Br Vet Dermatol Study Grp,
197a. Burkett G: Skin disease i greyhounds. Vet Med 95:
Spring: 29, 1999.
115, 2000.
220. Mundell AC: Mineral analysis in bull terriers with
198. Carpenter JL, et al: Idiopathic cutaneous and renal
lethal acrodermatitis. ProcAnnu Memb Meet Am
glomerular vasculopathy of greyhounds. Vet Pathol
Acad Vet Dermatol Aim Coll Vet Dermatol 4:22,
35:401, 1988.
1988.
199. Cowan LA, et al: Clinical and clinicopathologic ab-
221. Smits B, el al: Lethal acrodermatitis in bull terriers:
normalities in greyhounds with cutaneous and renal
 A problem of defective zinc metabolism. Vet IDerma-
glomerular vasculopathy: 18 cases (1992- 1994). J Am
tol 2:91, 1991.
Vet Med Assoc 210:789, 1997.
Miscellaneous Disorders
200. Fondati A, ct al: Familial cntaneous vaseulopathy and
222. Uchida Y, ct al: Scrum concentrations of zinc and
denmodicosis in a Gernan shepherd dog. J Sinall
copper in bull terriers with lethal acrodermatitis and
Anim Pract 39:137, 1998.
201. Fossum TW, Miller MW: Lymphedema—ctiopatho-
tail-chasing bchavior. Am J Vet Res 58:s08, 1997.
223. Beale KM, et al: Papular anel plaque-like rmucinosis in
gencsis. J Vet Interm Med 6:238, 1992.
202. Fossum TW, et al: Lyrmphedema—clinical signs, di-
224. Cumrmings JF, et al: Acral nutilation and nociceptive
agnosis and trcatment. J Vet Intern Med 6:312, 1992.
loss in English Pointer dogs. Acta Neuropathol 53:
203.
 Jacobsen JOG, Egges C: Primary lymphoedeima in a
kitten. J Small Anin Pract 38:18, 1997.
119, 1981.
225. Griffin CE, Rosenkrantz WS: Skin disorders of the
Shar pei. In Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (eds): Kirk's
pups. J An Vet Med Assoc 155:81, 1971.
Current Veterinary Therapy Xi. w.B. Saunders Co.
      
Philadelphia, 1991. p 519.
edema in the dog. part II: Pathological studies. J Med
226. Hutt FB: Necrosis of the toes. In Genetics for Dog
Genet 4:153, 1967.
Brceders. W.H. Freeiman, San F'rancisco, 1979.
 206. Neu H, et al: Primarc kongenitale lymphedemc bci
227. Mason LT: The oecurrence and pedigrcc analysis of a
sieben Labarador-, cincm Deutschen Sehaferlund-
und einem Kanadischen Wolfswelpen. Kleintierpraxis
spaniel. Proc Annn Mermh Meet Am Coll Vet Derima-
39:5383, 1994.
tol Am Coll Vet Denmatol 15:23, 1999.
207. Parker WM, Foster RA: Cutaneous vasculitis in fivc
Jack Russell terriers. Vet IDermatol 7:109, 1996.
siculation in a dog with hypothyroidism. J Am Vet
208. Patterson DF, et al: Congenital hereditary lyuph-
Med Assoe 196:757, 1990.
edema in the dog, part l: Clinical and genetie studies.
 229. Miller WH Jr, et al: Dermatologic disorders of Chi-
J Med Genet 4:145, 1967.
nese Shar-Peis: 58 cases (1981-1989). J Arm Vet Med
209. Pedersen K, Scott DW: Idiopathic pyogranulomatous
Assoc 200:986, 1992.
infanmation and lcukocytoelastie vasculitis of thc na-
sal planum, nostrils, and nasal mueosa in Scottish
like diseasc in fwo unrelated Devon Rex cats. Proe
terrTicrs in Denmark. Vet Dermatol 2:85, 1991.
Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll
210. Rest JR. ct al: Failial vasculopathy of German shep-
Vet Denmatol 15:65, 1999.
herd dogs. Vet Rec 138:144, 1996.
231.
Rusbridge C: Persistent seratehing in Cavalier King
211. Ryan T, Mortimer PS: Cutaneous lymphatic systern.
Charles spaniels. Vet Rec 140:239, 1997.
Clin Dermatol 13:417, 1995.
232. Rusbridge C: Persistent scratching in Cavalier King
212. Scott-Monerieff JCR, et al: Systemic necrotizing vas-
Charles spaniels. Vet Rec 141:179, 1997.
culitis in nine young bcagles. J Am Vet Med Assoc
232a. Rusbridge C, et al: Syringohydromyelia in Cavalier
201:1553, 1992.
King Charles spaniels. [ Ain Anirm Hosp Assoc 36:34,
213. Takahashi JL, et al: Prinary lymphedema in a dog: A
2000.
case report. J Am Anin 11osp Assoe 20:849, 1984.
 233. Vitale CB, et al: Feline urticaria pigmentosa in three
214. Weir JAM, et al; Farmilial cutaneous vasculopathy of
rclated Sphinx cats. Vet Dcrmatol 7:227, 1996.
Chaptel
Pigmentary Abnormalities
+ TerminolOGY And InTroDuCTioN
 The color of normal skin depends primarily on the amount of melanin, carotene, and
oxyhemoglobin or reduced hermoglobin that it contains and the location of the pigments 
within the subcutis, vessels, dermis, epidermis, and hair. Epidermal and hair pigmenta-
tion results primarily from melanin, which has two forms and imparts four basic colors.
 yellow and red pigments and contain cysteine thiol groups that react to form 5-S-cysteinyl
dopa. Intermediate melanins arc a blend of eumelanin and phaeomelanin. A lack of
melanin results in white hair or skin. Table 13-1 contains terminology used in describing
pigment changes. See Chapter l for a complete discussion of the process of melanization
and its control. Some aspects of the local regulation of melanization are mentioned
below.
In lowcr animals, melatonin is believed to play a major regulatory role in cutaneous
pigmentation. In humans, cats, and dogs, adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and pitui-
     s n  r o 
cytes and melanocytes is also important. In humans, keratinocytes are knowm to produce
multiple factors that infuence the growth, differentiation,_tyrosinase activity, dendritic
growth, pigmentation, and morphology of melanocytes.6. 3s Basic fibroblast growth factor
 and endothelin-1 are produced by cuitured human keratinocytes.?7 Both of these factors
are melanocyte mitogens, and endothelin-l also increases tyrosinase activity in vitro.
molecule 1 (ICAM-1) expression on human melanocytes. A variety of cytokines and
leukotrienes infuence melanocyte function, with leukotriene B4 (LTB4) locally stimu-
lating and IL-1, IL-6, and IL-7 inhibiting melanogenesis in humans. These local factors
would better explain the patterns and localized control of the pigrment changes seen in 
animals.
 Hair pigmentation is separate from that of the skin, and a follicular melanin unit has
also been described. In the hair, melanocytes are found in the hair bulb. In contrast to
epidermal melanocytes, which are always active, hair melanocytes are active only during
anagen. The controlling mechanism for hair pigmentation is still unknown.23 Follicular
melanocytes produce larger melanin granules. Variations in hair coloration refect the
 s  se o ro a s p rs s s 
be modulated in vivo by hydrogen peroxide.
Visible pigmentation depends on which stage of melanosomes is transferred, the size
Melanosomes larger than 0.5 to 0.7 μm are dispersed individually within keratinocytes,
and smaller melanosones are grouped into melanosome complexes, As keratinocytes mi-
grate to the surface of the skin, melanosomes may be degraded at different rates. Lighter
skin has higher levels of melanosome degradation than darker skin, If one considers all of
the factors involved in normal pigmentation, it becormes apparent that defects may occur
at many different levels of this complex process.
1005
1006 · Pigmentary Abnormalities
● Table 13-1
TerMinoLoGY uSED to DEscRibe PIGmenT
CHANGES
TERM
DEFINITION
Hypopigmcntation
General tern mcaning lcss pigment
Leukoderna
Lack of pigmeut in the skin
Leukotrichia
Lack of pigment in the hair
Graying.
Decreased pigment of the hair
Hyperpigmentation
Goneral term meaning increase in pigment
Melanoderma
Melanotrichia
Poliosis
Premature grayness of hair
· HYPERPIGMENTATION
Hyperpigmentation or melanoderina is associated primarily with increased melanin in the
epidermis and corneocytes. Histologically, there may also be dermal pigiment, but when
the majority of the pigment is in the dermis, a slate or steel blue coloration is present.
Hyperpigmentation in animals may be genetic, acquired, or associated with pigmented
tumors.
Genetic
LENTIGO
Lentigo is a macular melanosis that is intensely black and usually occurs as multiple
 s a  e sg     o ae  s
often increase in number and size over a period of several months; subsequently, they
become static and remain unchanged for the life of the dog. The lesions are sometimes
grouped in clusters or nay spread rather diffusely over the ventral surface of the body.
These sharply circumscribed macules do not itch and are of no consequence to the
patient. They should not have a rough surface nor be palpably thickened. When a
hyperkeratotic surface or thickening is present, other diseases such as epidermal nevi or
papillomavirus-induced lesions must be considered. Lentigines have been referred to as
"tar spots" (Fig. 13- 1).
A hereditary form of lentigo called lentiginosis profusa has been reported in Pugs and
was thought to have an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance.4 Many of the lesions
described in these dogs were clinically and histologically hyperplastic,31 however, so it is
induced lesions.2 Similarly, generalized lentigines—-probably epidermal nevi were re-
 ported in a cat.21
Histologically, early lentigines are characterized by a sharply localized increase in the
 s ud    gss pe s jorq
increased, because almost every keratinocyte contains melanosomes. Usually, no structural
changes or only mild structural changes occur in the epidermis. As the lesion develops,
the epiderrmis may thicken slightly, mild orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis may occur, and
slight rete ridge formation may be present.
 s so pn s  as  ou  an  u si s
have been reported to become malignant. The only significance is that this lesion may
 need to be differentiated from pigmented tumors, especially melanomas, papillomavirus-
LENTIGO SIMPLEXIN ORANGE CATS
 Lentigo simplex has been described in orange cats.26. 28 The condition is characterized by
asymptomatic macular melanosis, usually beginning in cats younger than 1 year of age.
Pigmentary Abnormalities ·I007
FIGURE 13- 1. Closc-up view of a 7-year-old French bulldog with multiple lentigines. Note.
the intensity of the pignentation and the sharply dermarcated borders.
 The lesions start on the lips and begin as tiny, black, asymptomatic spots that
gradually enlarge and become more numerous with time. There can be lesions on the
nose, gingiva, and eyelids in addition to the lip. Well-circumscribed, generally circular
areas of intense, uniform macular melanosis, ranging from 1 to 9 mm in diameter and
occasionally coalescent, are present in variable numbers (Fig. 13-2 A). The surrounding
tissue is normal. The lesions do not vary in the intensity of hyperpigmentation with the
time of year. They are asymptomatic, do not develop into melanoma, and have no
identified cause.
Histopathologic findings include marked hypcrmelanosis, predominantly of the basal
cell layer of the epithelium, that is caused by the increased numbers of melanocytes and
by hypermelanosis of the neighboring basal keratinocytes (Fig. 13-3). Occasionally, me-
lanophages are seen in the superficial dermis.
is desired, surgical excision is the only way to eliminate them.
EPIDERMAL NEVUS
Nevi are developmental defects in the skin and, in some cases, have been hereditary in
 ad ro s   t q  a o d  
and can appear in a linear fashion,34 Most cpidermal and all melanocytic ncvi are associ-
ated with increased pigmentation, but with epidermal nevi, the degree of pigmentation is
These lesions are often cosmetic, although secondary infections may occur and some
may be pruritic or inflammatory. Surgical excision or laser surgery ablation is curative.
Etretinate has been helpful in some nonsurgical lesions of epidermal or comedo nevi.
CANINE ACANTHOSIS NIGRICANS
This disease is seen most comrmonly in Dachshunds, and this has led to the belief that the
prirnary (idiopathic) form is genetic in origin (see Chap. 12). Sinilar lesions may be
acquired and occur secondary to a variety of chronic inflammatory diseases. Thus, the
FIGURE 13-2. Legend on opposite page
Pigmentary Abnormalities + I009
FIGURE I3-3. Feline lentigo simplex. Note the abnupt transition betwcen the melanotic area
(left) and normal epithelium (right).
term has also been described as a reaction pattern associated with things such as friction
(Fig. 13-4), hypersensitivity diseases, and seborrhea with Malassezia.
URTICARIA PIGMENTOSA
This disease has been reported in Sphinx cats and may havc a genetic basis, as some cats
were related.32 Multifocal to generalized fat-topped papules and plaqucs can bc secn (Fig.
13-5). These may have a dark brown color. The lesions arc usually pruritie and may
exhibit a dlistribution associated with previous traurna. Diagnosis is confirmed by histopa-
thology revealing mast cell infltration with no malignant features. Treatment with antihis-
  a  aa n  eq  sn s  ss
and 20).
Acquired
 POSTINFLAMMATORY
s p s  d si r jon  o i a
 cats produce more piginent in or around areas of inflammation. Many diseases character-
ized by chronic erythematous papular lesions may undergo hyperpigmentation. Often, this
commonly seen with superficial bacterial pyoderinas.17 Many other chronic inHammatory
FIGURE I3-2. Pigment abnormalities. A, Lentigo simplex in an orange cat with marked macular mclanosis of the: lips.
hypopigmentation present from birth on the lips of a mature Doberman pinscher. F, A 2-year-old Newfoundland that had a
normal black color at birth but gradually developed patehy bypopiguentation evident in skin and hairs. G, Epitheliotropic
lymphoma affecting the nasal plaum. If, Acquired aurotrichia in a miniature schnauzer. (Courtesy S. White.)
I0I0 · Pigmentary Abnormalities
FIGURE 13-4. Hyperpigmented
lichenified plaque in the axilla of a
dachshund that developed after the
dog gained several pounds.
dliseases also result in hyperpigmentation; exanples include the chronic or healing lesions
of canine demodicosis, caninc scabies, and the center of healing annular dermatophytosis.
Occasionally, a patch of pigmented comedones appears as a hyperpigmented patch or
plaque. These patchcs or plaqucs Inay be from slate blue to gray in color and should raise
the suspicion of dermodicosis, hyperadrenocorticisn, or comedo nevus (Fig. 13-6).
More diffuse hyperpigmentation may result from the chronic difuse infammation
that may be associated with such things as exposure to ultraviolet light of skin that has lost
hair or from chronic irritation due to cutaneous friction. Most pruritic diseases may be
incriminated because both friction and inflammation may lead to hypepigmentation.It is
Mclanotrichia may also occur in aninals after the healing of areas of deep inflamma-
tion (e.g, panniculitis, vaccine reaction). This is seen rnore commonly in certain breeds
such as the Yorkshire terrier, Silky terrier, Bedlington terrier, Old English sheepdog, and
Poodie. In some dogs, especially Poodles with sebaceous adenitis, inultifoeal areas of
melanotrichia may be seen (see Fig. 13-2B). Because the inflammatory lesions of seba-
ceous adenitis occur even in areas without melanotrichia, it is possible that this alteration
FIGURE I3-5. Uricaria pigmen-
tosa in a Sphinx cat. (Courtesy C.
Vitali). Several papules, many of
which are coalesced to form a linear
plaque on the lateral thoracoabdomi-
nal area.
Pigmentary Abnormalities * IolI
FIGURE 13-6. Hyperpigmenta-
o np ae endad ou un u
comedones in a case of demodi-
cosis.
is not due to infammation but occurs as a result of some other pathomechanism. Multifo-
cal areas of melanotrichia have been seen in Poodles following bouts of intervertebral disk
disease.
 The exact mechanism of hyperpigmentation in these inflammatory diseases is un-
known. Studies suggest that keratinocytes may be able to locally stirmulate melanogenesis
by releasing melanocyte stimulating factors. It is possible that these factors are present at
low levels in the normal epidermis, but their levels and activity are increased in response
adult dogs with silver or gray haircoats may be the result of reversion to a puppy coat
under the influence of genes at the graying (G) locus. Silver dogs are usually born with
dark coats that lighten when the adult hairs develop. If the melanotrichia is due to G
locus infuences, the hairs revert to their normal adult color at the next shedding. In other
dogs, the melanotrichia may be due to the infuence of melanocyte-stimulating factors
such as LTB4.
HORMONE-ASSOCIATED
 Diffuse hyperpignentation may also result from some metabolic or hormonal disorders
such as hyperadrenocorticisim, hypothyroicdism, and the sex hormonc dermatoses (see
Chap. 10). The mechanism is unknown, although it has been suggested that the hyperpig-
mentation may result from direct effects of the hormonal changes on the melanocytes.
ACTH and other pituitary lipotrophic hormones stimulate melanogenesis, and this factor
may be why some hyperadrenocorticism and adrenal sex hormone cases become hyperpig-
mented. However, the direct actions of other hormones on the melanocytes have not been
well defined. In some cases, it also appears that ultraviolet exposure may play a role.
When alopecia precedes the hyperpigmentation, skin is cxposed to light, which can
contribute to the pigment changes that occur. Protection of the skin decreases the
hyperpigmentation in some animals.
Melanotrichia may also occur following the resolution of metabolic or hormonal
disorders; it is commonly noted in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism that are treated with
mitotane (o.p'-DDD) (Fig. 13-7). The mechanism is unknown, but G locus infuences are
DRUG-INDUCED
 Because this change is usuaily teniporary, even when o,p'-DDD therapy is continued, it is 
1012 · Pigmentary Abnormalities
FIGURE I3-7. Apricot Poodle that developed
melanotrichia following treatment of its Cushing's
disease with mitotane (o,p'-DDD.) A, Before treat-
ment. B, After treatment. Usually the normal coat
maintenancc therapy.
ap a xg np a aq nou p sas y aq pas arsd
minocycline has been shown to cause hyperpigmentation in dogs,'s and the effect was
believed to be atributable to iron deposition. In humans, a variety of other metallic
by parenteral or topical absorption of metals such as silver, gold, and mercury.2
PAPILLOMAVIRUS-ASSOCIATED
Canine papillomaviruses induce at least two syndromes that may have pigmented lesions.
Cutaneous exophytic papillomas usually occur in older dogs and more commonly in male
dogs.28 They appear as caulifower-like nodules or keratinous plaques, mainly on the head.
eyelids, and paws. The lesions may appear fesh tone, pink, brown, or black in color.
These lesions may regress on their own. Papillomavirus-associated canine pigmented
plaques have been compared with epidermodysplasia verruciformis.20 This disease is seen
mainly in young Pugs, miniature Schnauzers, and Shar peis and may have a genetic basis.
The lesions are often slightly rough black pigmented macules to plaques. They occur
mostly on thc groin, abdomen, ventral thorax, and neck. They do not spontaneously
squamous cell carcinoma (see Chap. 20) (Fig. 13-8).
FELINE ACROMELANISM
Siamese, Himalayan, Balinese, and Burmese kittens are born white and develop points as
 adults owing to the infuence of external temperature28, high environmental temperatures
Pigmentary Abnormalities · I013
FIGURE 13-8. Pigmentee viral
papillomas that developed into a
squamous cell carcinoma in the axil.
lary arca of a dog.
produce light hairs, and low temperatures produce dark hairs. Coat color also appears to
be affected by physiologic factors that determine heat production and loss (e.g., infamma-
are “usually teinporary, and the normal color returns with the next hair cycle, if the
temperature influences are remedied.
PIGMENTED TUMORS
Many tumors have pigmentation different from the surrounding skin. This color diference
 may refect the type of tissue and its associated color or other pigments. Vascular tumors
 may appear red, port wine, or red-blue. Histiocytic, lymphocytic, and plasmacytic tumors
often appear pink, red, or purple. The common hyperpigmented (black) tumors are the
melanocytoma and melanoma; however, a variety of tuunors 1may occur with hyperpigmen-
tation, Basal cell tumors, trichoblastomas, fibromas, epidermal nevi, and epithelial nevi
may also commonly occur as hyperpigmented lesions. The lesions of squamous cell carci-
noma in situ (Bowen's disease) in the cat may also be dark brown to black (Fig. 13-9).
FIGURE I3-9. Pigmented plaque
in a cat from Bowen's disease.
I014 * Pigmentary Abnormalities
· HYPOPIGMENTATION
Hypopigmentation (hypomelanosis) refers to a lack or decrease of pigment in the skin or
haircoat in areas that should normally be pigmented. Hercditary hypomelanoses have been
divided into melanocytopenic (absence of melanocytes) and mclanopcnic (decreased mela-
nin) forms. Piginent loss may occur from melanocyte destruction, dysfunction, or abnor-
mal dispersion of melanosomes as a result of abnormal melanosome transfer or from
infammation. Lack of or decrease in melanosome production may also be a cause. The
disorder may be congenital or acquired.
Genetic
CHEDIAK-HIGASHI SYNDROME
Chediak-Higashi syndrore is an autosomal recessive disordcr reported in Persian cats
with yellow eyes and a blue smoke haircoat color.! It is characterized by partial oculocuta-
neous albinism and is discussed in Chapter 12.
ALBINISM
Albinism is a hereditary lack of pigmentation that is transimitted as an autosomal recessive
trait.1, 7. 1l Albino individuals have a norrmal complement of melanocytes, but they lack
tyrosinase for melanin synthesis and, therefore, have a biochemical inability to produce
 nelanin. Therefore, histopathologic studies reveal a normal epidermis with no pigment,
but clear basal cells representing melanocytes are still seen.Skin,hair, andmucous
membranes are amelanotic. Although humans have unpigmented (pink) irides, dogs typi-
cally have milder ocular changes, with blue eyes.12 These dogs should not be used as
breeders.
PIEBALDISM
Genetically determined white spotting is referred to as piebaldism.' It is comrnon in dogs
and is transmitted as a completely dominant trait. Melanocytes are absent or incompletely
differentiated in affected sitcs.
WAARDENBURG-KLEIN SYNDROME
Waardenburg-Klein syndrome has been described in cats, Bull terriers, Sealyham terriers,
Collies, and Dalmatians. In addition to blue eyes and amelanotic skin and hair, the
affected animals are deaf and have blue or heterochromic irides. 12 The defeet is in the
migration and differentiation of melanoblasts. Therefore, the affected skin has no melano-
cytes present. The syndrome is transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait with incom-
 plete penetrance, so these anirmals should not be used for breeding.
CANINE CYCLIC HEMATOPOIESIS
penia) is a lethal autosomal recessive syndrome wherein collie puppies are born with a
silver-gray haircoat that differs from the normal sable or tricolor coat (see Chap. 12). In
 some of these puppies, a slight yellow pigmentation may be present, which produces a
  e si su p u   pe q  o a
diagnostic lesion.
Breed-Associated, Suspect Genetic
GRAYING
 Graying results froin a reduction in melanocyte replication through senescence. It appears
to be age and genetically related as certain breeds are more prone. German shepherd
Pigmentary Abnormalities · I015
dogs, Irish setters, Labrador retrievers and golden retrievers appear to be more likely to
develop gray muzzles and chin at a relatively younger age (Fig. 13- 10).
VITILIGO
A presumptive hereditary vitiligo has been described in Belgian Tervuren dogs, German
shepherds, collies, Siamese cats, Rottweilers, Doberman pinschers, and giant Schnauzers.
It has also been described in a Bull mastiff, Newfoundlands, Old English sheepdogs, and
a Dachshundwith juvenile-nset diahetes mellitus. 11 18, 24a, 27, 28, 30 Intrestingly it has
been reported in nly fmale Samese cats. It apears that, as inhumans, vitiliongs
and cats is inherited in a multifactorial genetie pattern.15
Although the exact cause of vitiligo is unkcnown, several theories have been pro-
posed.15 The autoimmune theory is a favored one, and antimelanocyte antibodies have
been demonstrated in the serum of humans, dogs, and cats with active vitiligo.22 Antime-
lanocyte antibodies were demonstrated in the serum of all 17 Belgian Tervuren dogs with
vitiligo and in none of 1l normal Belgian Tervuren dogs tested.22 Also, three affected
Siainese cats had autoantibodies, but four normal Siamese cats did not. One Siamese cat
had negative immunostaining for vimentin suggesting a destruction of dendritic cells.16
The autotoxicity theory proposes an increasedmelanocyte susceptibility to melanin pre-
cursor molecules (such as dopachrome) or an inhibition of thioredoxin reductase, a free-
radical scavenger located on the melanocyte membrane. The neural theory proposes nerve
It is important to consider that multiple mechanisms could be responsible for the same
phenotype.
The animals develop somewhat symmetric macular leukoderma and leukotrichia, espe-
cially of the nose, lips, buccal mucosa, and facial skin (see Fig. 13-2C and D). The
footpads (Fig. 13-11) and claws, as well as the haircoat, may be affected. The authors
(Fig. 13-12). The onset of the condition is usually in young adulthood. In some cases,
pigment returns to affected areas; in others, however, the depigmentation is permanent.
Diagnosis is based on history, physical examination, and histopathologic evaluation.
Late lesions of vitiligo are characterized by a relatively normal epidermis and dermis.
except that no melanocytes are seen (Fig. 13-13). In some cases (possibly early lesions), a
mild lymphocytie interface dermatitis and occasional lymphocyte exocytosis may be seen.10
Electron microscopy studies of melanocytes at the periphery of lesions demonstrate de-
vacuoles, fatty degeneration, and pyknosis).15
FIGURE 13-I0. Gray muzzle in
a German Shepherd dog.
I0l6 · Pigmentary Abnormalities
FIGURE I3-I1, Vitiligo in a Sia-
mesc   cat.  Depigmented
footpads.
(Courtesy E. Guaguere.)
 Successfil treatinent has not been reported, although a small mumber of cases may
 spontaneously improve. Spontaneous improvernent over 3 years was reported in a Siamese
cat.16
NASAL HYPOPIGMENTATION
 Nasal depigmentation is a term for a syndrome more appropriately called nasal hypopig-
 mentation. When pigment loss is complete, then it is appropriately called nasal depigmen-
FIGURE I3-I2. Onychomadesis and leuko-
nychia in a Rottweiler with vitiligo.
Pigmentary Abnormalities · 1017
FIGURE 13--I3. Canine vitiligo. A. Nornal skin adjacent to a vitiliginous
s macule. B, Complete absence of melanin in
a vitiliginous area
tation, which also is called Dudley nose. This syndrome is of unknown origin and may be
a forn of vitiligo.10 It has been reported in Afghan hounds, Samoyeds, Siherian huskies,
yellow Labrador retricvcrs, white German shepherds, Golden retrievers, Poodles, Dober-
man pinschers, Irish seters, and Pointers.10.1,2sThe dogs are normal at birth.but the
black of thc nasal planum gradually fades to a chocolate brown or whitish color. No
trcatmcnt has yet worked effectively. A few patients recover spontaneously; in others, the 
degrcc of pigmentation waxes and wanes, sometimes seasonally, Because this discoloration
is a show ring fault, breeders of show animals are understandahly concerned.
A distinction betwcen noses that depigment almost entirely and those that only
lighten shonld be made. A common syndrome of seasonal nasal hypopigmcntation
is
seen in Siberian huskies, Golden retrievers, Labrador retrievcrs, and Bermese Mountain
dogs.1s. 28 It has been referred to as snou nose and is characterized by a dlecrease in the
nasal pigment, typically during the winter months (Fig. 13-14). The pigment gets darker
again in the spring or summer. Complete depigmentation is not noted. The lips, pads,
eyelids, claws, and haircoat are not usually affected.
MUCOCUTANEOUS HYPOPIGMENTATION
and oral cavity is considered a fault in most breeds of dogs. The nasal form is a
particularly comrmon problcm in Australian shepherds, Sibcrian huskics, and Golden and
I018· Pigmentary Abnormalities
FIGURE I3-I4, Canine snow nose.
Labrador retrievers. Some of these dogs also have seasonal nasal hypopigmentation. Al-
though they have lightly pigmented noses, there is still enough pigimnent to prevent
sunburn. Dogs with complete leukoderma of the nasal planum are prone to sunburn,
which may develop into nasal solar dermatitis.
 Hypopigmentation of the lips and nose occurs as a congenital condition in Doberman
pinschers, Rottweilers, and occasionally, other breeds? (see Fig. 13-2E). It is present from
birth and is static in contrast to yitiligo, which is acquired in mature dogs and often
progresses or changes over time. The cause of congenital hypopigmentation is unkmown.
 Many owners object to the cosmetic appearance, but no treatment is effective.
TYROSINASE DEFICIENCY
Tyrosinase deficiency has heen reported in Chow Chows, but the condition is extremely
black tongue turns pink, and portions of the hair shafts turn white. The buccal mucosa
may also rapidly depigment.
The change in color is the result of a deficiency of tyrosinase, the enzyme necessary
Pigmentary Abnormalities · I019
 to produce melanin. Tyrosinase deficiency can be confirmed by skin biopsy. After tyrosine
is added to histologic preparations, the specimen is incubated, and the melanin is meas-
ured after tissue staining. There is no effective treatment; however, melanin rcappears
 spontaneously in 2 to 4 months. Chow Chow breeders have claimed success with the use
 of vitamins, unsaturated oils, and dietary changes, but thie inprovement was probably
spontaneous.
Acquired
Acquired hypopigmentation of previously normal skin and hair can result from many
factors that destroy melanocytes or inhibit melanoeyte function.3. 24 Trauma, burns, infec-
tions, and ionizing irradiation may have potent local effects. It may also be idiopathic.
Dogs that sunbathe frequently or swim in chlorine pools and dry themselves in the sun
may develop lighter and coarser haircoats.
 POSTINFLAMMATORY
less common than hyperpigmentation. Postinflammatory hypopigmentation is most evident
 in the groin and inguinal region following foliculitis. Multiple circular hypopigmented
macules may be seen, or they can coalesce into variably shaped macules. Other infections,
such as blastomycosis,sporotrichosis, and leishmaniasis,may causc hypopigmentation, 1s
One infectious disease in particular to consider with leukoderma without obvious swelling
or infectious lesions is leishmaniasis (Fig. 13- 15). Acquired hypopigmentation of the nose
and lips can result from contact dermatitis frorm plastic or rubber food dishes. A red Irish
 setter puppy that had severe pustular dermatitis developed white bands around the hair
the infection.28
A number of inflammatory diseases may begin with nasal hypopigmentation or depig-
mentation of the nose and occasionally lips. Discoid lupus erythematosus most commonly
starts on the nasal planum, but occasionally, systemic lupus crythematosus, pemphigus
FIGURE 13-15. Nasal depig-
mentation associated with leishman-
iasis (Courtesy A. Koutinas).
1020 · Pigmentary Abnormalities
erythematosus and foliaceus, uveodermatologic syndrome, drug eruption, and bullous
 pemphigoid 1nay also start on the nose.
DRUG-RELATED
Hypomelanosis due to drugs has been seen with subcutaneous injections of glucocorticoids
and progestational drugs aud with topical glucocorticoids. Some dogs that receive ketocon-
of their coats (Fig. 13-16). Chemical hypomelanosis may occur following the adninistra-
tion of potent antioxidants such as dihydroquinone and monobenzyl ether.l1. 1s One tri-
 color collie with lupus erythematosus developed leukotrichia following vitamin E therapy.
A cause for the leukotrichia was not determined, although it was speculated that there
was an association with vitamin E because the mucocutaneous depigmentation attributed
to lupus was reversed with thcrapy before the leukotrichia developed.
METABOLIC
Some chronic metabolic diseases may affect haircoat color. This cause appears to be
partieularly prominent in the sex hormone dermatoses of male dogs. Deficiencies of
nutrients such as zinc, pyridoxine, pantothenic acid, and lysine have produced graying of
the hair. Copper deficiency is said to cause black hair to develop a reddish hrown hue.
C
FIGURE 13-16. A, Doberman pinscher before therapy. B, Same dog during procainanide therapy. C, Abrupt
Pigmentary Abnormalities · I021
NEOPLASIA
Hypomelanosis associated with neoplastic conditions has been seen in dogs. Leukoderma
or leukotrichia, especially of the nasal planum, lips, and face, may ocenr as an early sign of
Nasal depigmentation has also been seen with squamous cell carcinoma. A peritumoral
amelanotie balo has been seen around basal cell tumors.ll Leukoderna or leukotrichia
 may be seen with mammary adenocarcinomna or gastric carcinoma.11
IDIOPATHIC
Normal biack Newfoundlands, at about 18 months of age, may develop patches of depig-
mentation on the nose, lips, and eyelids (see Fig. 13-2F). The lesions steadily progress,
mentation with trace 1minerals, vitainins, and zinc produces no improvement.
A litter of chocolate Labrador retriever puppies developed idiopathic leukotrichia that
leukotrichia, which was initially noted at 8 wecks of age on the face but then spread. By
the time thc puppies were 14 weeks of age, one owner reported that pigmentation was
returning. Eventually, all of the affected puppies developed nornal coat colors, and no
recurrences were noted over the following 18 months.
 Idiopathic, widespread but patchy leukotrichia is occasionally seen in adult black or
chocolate Labrador retrievers (Fig. 13-17). The condition appears to be permanent.
PERIOCULAR LEUKOTRICHIA
Bilateral periocular leukotrichia (goggles) occurs in Siamese cats.2s There is no apparent
age predilection, but the condition is seen more commonly in fenales. Commonly recog-
nized precipitating factors include pregnancy, dietary deficiency, and systemic illnesses.
The condition is characterized by patchy or complete lightening of the hairs of the mask
e  si os a (hir ) saa n pe ae a e 
usually resolves within the succeeding two hiair cycles.
 A syndrome of unilateral periocular depigrmentation, called Aguirre's syndrome, has
been deseribed in Siamese cats. This condition is associated with Hormer's syndrome, or
 cormeal necrosis with uveitis, and upper respiratory tract infections.13
FIGURE I3-I7. Idiopathic lcu-
kotrichia in an adult black Labrador
retriever.
|022 · Pigmentary Abnormalities
FIGURE 13- I8. Periocular leukotrichia (goggles) in a Siamese cat after estrus.
· MISCELLANEOUS PIGMENT CHANGeS
Acquired Aurotrichia
This syndrome occurs in rniniature Schnauzers of either sex.35 The primary guard hairs
turn from silver or black to gold (see Fig. 13--2H). These gold hairs occur primarily in
patches on the dorsal thorax and abdomen, although periocular and pinnal involvement
occurs in some cases. An associated thinning of the secondary hair in the affected areas
may be noted (see Chap. 12).
Red Hair
A variety of conditions can cause hair to become reddish in color. Lightly colored hair
exposed to saliva or tears becomes stained by porphyrins. When seen in areas other than
A variety of endocrinopathies may cause lightening of the haircoat or result in dark
hair turning red. Although it is reported with hypothyroidism and hyperadrenocorticism,
genism or hyperprogesteronism. Some dogs with Sertoli cell tumors fail to shed their coat
normally, and hairs are actually retained in catagen or telogen. The hairs remain for years;
the lightened, red, dry, frizzy coat may be parly caused by chronic ultraviolet and
environmental exposure. The potential effects of sun, chlorine, detergents, and environ-
mental factors should be considered any time the coat color has changed.
Red/Brown Claws
Claws rmay tum a brown or red color, This problem can result from licking and salivary
staining. Malassezia dermatitis has also been associated with this change, and less fre-
quently, bacterial paronychia may also cause this discoloration (see Chap. 19)
Flushing
Cutaneous fushing, in which the skin turns varying shades of red, is due to vasodilatation
of cutaneous blood vessels. Flushing can be persistent or paroxysmal; it is caused by
emotional, autonormic, or endocrine infuences, or by the direct action of vasoactive
variety of physiologic and pathologic conditions, especially the carcinoid syndrome, sys-
Pigmentary Abnormalities · I023
temic mastocytosis, Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, or pheochromocytoma. In dogs, persistont
fHlushing has been attributed to drug reactions and mast cell tumors. Paroxysmal fushing
has been associated with pheochromocytoma and mast cell tumors. 19
Drug-lnduced Color Changes
Some drugs may induce color changes in the skin. Rifampin, β carotene, and clofazamine
are known in people to cause reddish orange discoloration of the skin. A cat treated with
clofazamine developed reddish orange skin and mucus membranes, which resolved folow-
ing discontinuation of therapy.14 Pinnal erythema has been reported in cats in association 
with enrofloxacin or ciprofoxacin administration.29
● rEfereNCES
1. Alhaidari Z, et al: Melanocytogenesis and melanogene-
17. MacDonald JM: Hypcrpigmentation. In: Griffin CE, et
sis: Gcnctic regulation and comparative clinical dis-
al (eds): Cuurent Veterinary Dermatology. Mosby- Year
cases. Vet Dermatol 10:3, 1999.
Book, St. Louis, 1993, p 234.
la. Benitz KF, et al: Morphologic effects of minoeycline in
18. MacDonald JM: Nasal depigmentation. In: Grifin CE,
et al (eds): Current Veterinary Dermatology. Mosby-
1967.
Year Book, St. Louis, 1993, p 223.
2. Bergfeld WF, MeMahon JT: Identification of foreign
19. Miller WH Jr: Cutancous fushing associated with in-
trathoracic neoplasia in a dog. J Ain Anim Hosp Assoc
Light microscopy, electron microscopy, and x-ray en-
28:217,1992
ergy spectroscopice exanination. In:Callen JP, et al
20. Nagata M, et al: Piginented plaques associated with
(eds): Advances in Dermatology-—Vol 2. Year Book
Medical Publishers, Chicago, 1987, p 171.
papillomavirus infection in dogs: Is this epidermodys-
3. Bologuia JL, Pawelek JM: Biology of hypopigmenta-
plasia verruciformis? Vet Dermalol 6:179, 1995.
21. Nash S, Paulsen D: Generalized lentigines in a silver
tion. J Am Acad Derimatol 19:217, 1988.
4. Briggs OM: Lentiginosis profusa in the pug: Threc
cat. J Ain Vet Med Assoe 196:1500, 1990.
case reports. J Small Anim Pract 26-675, 1985.
22. Naughton CK, et al: Antibodies to surface antigens of
5. Engstrom D:Tyrosinase deficiency in the Chow Chow.
pigmented cells in animals with vitiligo. Proc Soc Exp
     (   
Biol Med 18l:423, 1986.
Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1966, p 352.
23. Ortonne JP, Prota G: Hair rnelanins and hair color:
6.Fitzpatrick TB, et al: Derrnatology in General Medli-
 Ultrastructural and biochemical aspects. J Invest Der-
cine, 4th ed. McGraw-Hill Book Co, New York, 1993.
matol 101:82s, 1993.
24.Pawelck J, et al: New regulators of melanin biosyuthe-
3:175, 1985.
sis and the autodestruction of nelanin cells. Nature
 8. Griess D. Guaguere E: Variations de Pindicanemie cet
286:617, 1980.
de lindicanurie dans le syndrorme rubra-pilaire du
24a. Peterson A, ct al: Progrcssivc leukotrichia and leuko-
chien. Rev Med Ve. 132:12, 1981.
derina in a Newfoundland dog. In: Kwochka KW, et al
9. Grines PF, et al: Cytomegalovirus DNA idcntified in
(eds): Atlvances in Veterinary Denmatology IHI. Butter-
skin biopsy spccimens of patients with vitligo. J Am
worth-Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p. 443.
Acadl Dermatol 35:21-26, 1996.
25. Scott Dw: Feline dernatology 1983-1985: The secret
10. Gross TI., et al: Veterinary Dernatopathology: Gross
sits. J A1n Anim IHosp Assoc 23:255, 1987.
and Mieroscopic Pathology of Skin Diseases. Mosby-
26. Scott DW: Lentigo sinplex in orange cats. (Comp
Year Book St. Louis, 1992.
Anim Pract l:23, 1987.
11. Guaguere E, Alhaidari Z: Disorders of melanin pig-
 27. Scott DW: Vitiligo in the Rottweiler. Canine Pract 15:
mentation in the skin of dogs and cats. Proc Wld simall
22,1990.
Anin Vet Assoc 8:47, 1991.
28. Scott DW, et al: Muller and Kirk's Small Aniumal Der-
12. Guaguere E, Alhaidari Z: Pigmentary disturbanccs.
matology,5th ed.W..Saunders Co, Philadelphia,
Adv Vet Dermatol 1:395, 1990.
13. Holzvorth J: Diseases of the Cat: Medicine and Sur-
1995.
29. Scott DW, Miller WH Jr: Iliosyieratic cutaneous ad-
gery, Vol 1. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1987.
14. Kaufman AC, et al: Trcatinent of localized Mycobacte-
verse drug reactions in the cat: Literature review and
rium aviurn complex infection with clofazamine and
report of 14 cases (1990-1996). Feline Pract 26(4):10,
doxycycline in a cat. J Am Vet Mexd Assoc 207:457,
1998.
1995.
 30. Scott Dw, Randolph JF: Vitiligo in two old English
15. Kovacs SO: Vitiligo. J Am Acad Dcrmatol 38:647,
sheepdog littermatcs
s and a dachshund with juve-
1998.
nile onset diabetes mellitus. Comp Anin Pract 19:18,
16. Lopez R, et al: A clinical, pathological and irmmuno-
1989.
 31. Vanlensburg IBJ, Briggs OM: Pathology of canine lel-
matol 5:27, 1994.
tiginosis profusa. J S Afr Vet Assoc 57:159, 1986.
1024 · Pigmentary Abnormalities
32. Vitale CB, et al: Feline urticania pigmentosa in
drome") of miriature schnauzcrs. Vet Dermatol 3:37,
three related Sphinx cats. Vet Dcrmatol 7:227-233,
36. Yaar M, Cilchrest BA: IIuman melanocyte growth and
1992.
1996.
33.
White SD, Butch S: Leukotrichia in a litter of Labra-
differentiation: A decade of ncw data. J Invest Dcrma-
dor rctrievers. J Am Anin Hosp Assoc 26:319, 1990.
tol 97:611, 1991.
34. White SD, ct al: lnfammatory linear verrucous epider-
37. Yohn J, et al: Cultured human keratinocytes synthe-
mal nevus in four dogs. Vet Dermato! 3:107, 1993.
size and secrete endothelin-1. J Invest Dermatol 100:
35. White SD, et al: Acquired aurotrichia ("Gilding syn-
23, 1993.
Chamte.
Keratinization Defects
eratinization defects are those that alter the surface appearance of the skin. The
epidermis of animals is being replaced constantly by new cells. The epidermal cell
renewal time in normal dogs is approximately 22 days.32 Despite this high turnover rate,
the epidermis maintains its normal thickness, has a barely perceptible surface keratin
layer, and loses its dead cells invisibly into the environment. If the delicate balance
between cell death and renewal is altered, the epidermal thickness changes, the stratum
corneum becomes noticeable, and the normally invisible sloughed cells of the stratum
corneum become obvious. The causes of keratinization defects are numerous; they pro-
duce clinical signs by altering proliferation, differentiation, desquamation, or some combi
nation of these33 62 Alterations in epidermal lipid formation and deposition can accom-
pany these other changes.*
The keratinization defects include hyperkeratosis, hypokeratosis, and dyskeratosis. Hy-
perkeratosis is cornmon in chronic dermatoses. It is further distinguished histopathologi-
is not as common, but it is seen histologically in some cases, presumably as a resnlt of
 very rapid exfoliation. Another fault in epidermopoiesis is dyskeratosis, which is seen in
neoplastic skin diseases (such as squainous cell carcinoma).
Keratinization defects can be congenital or acquired. The congenital defects (e.g,
primary seborrhea, ichthyosis, epidermal dysplasia of West Highland White terriers, pso-
riasiform-lichenoid dermatosis of English Springer spaniels, and Schnauzer comedo syn-
drome) are discussed in Chapter I2. The most common acquired keratinization defect is
the callus, which is discussed in Chapter 16. The remainder are considered here.
A characteristic of healthy skin is that the relationship between transepidernal water
 loss and hydration remains directly proportional. 4 Follwing skin damage or a decrcase in
efficiency of the water barrier, a dissociation between hydration (water-holding capacity)
and transepidermal water loss occurs. In pathologic skin, the correlation between transepi-
to a damaged skin barrier or alterations in keratinization, or both. Hence, there is
increased transepidermal water loss and decreased hydration.
Dryness (xerosis) of the skin is caused by decreased water content, which must be
more than 10% for skin to appear and fee normal.18 Moisture loss occurs through
evaporation to the environment under low humidity conditions and must be replenished
by water from lower epidermal and dermal layers. In xerotic skin, the stratum corneum is
thickened, disorganized, and fissured. An important part of the stratum corneum barrier is
the presence of three intercllular lpids: sphingolipids, free sterols, and free fatty acids.
Larmellar bodies are an essential part of this barrier to both trap and prevent excess water
loss. The optimal stratum cormeun water concentration to promote softness and pliability
is 20% to 35%.
+ ANTISEborRHEIC TrEaTMENtS
veterinary medicinc, seborrheic lesions are usually widespread in nature and occur in
1025
1026 · Keratinization Defects
haired skin, thus making the shampoo vehicle the most appropriate.'6 For the most part,
- aq u snpd aeni, pe pud ou ae soo oodas Aa
products carefully. Although the active ingredients may be identical in name and concen-
tration, the purity, stability, and irritability of the active and inert ingredients may be very
different and the shampoo may perform poorly.5s If a change from one brand of the
"same" shampoo to another is contemplated, it is best to give the new product to the
clients who have been using the shampoo to be replaced. if they believe that the new
 product is equally as good or better than the old one, the change can be made.
Antiseborrheics are commercially available in various combinations.16, 35 The clinician
must decide which combination of drugs to use and needs to know each drug's actions
and concentrations. Ideal therapeutic response depends on the correct choice, but varia-
dlifferent preparation is needed than for oily and greasy seborrhea (seborrhea oleosa).
Sulfur, for instancc, is useful in dry seborrhea, but is not a good degreaser. Benzoyl
peroxide, on the other hand, degreases well, but can be too keratolytic and drying for dry,
brittle skin. The following discussion may help the clinician understand the differences
and uses, and help distinguish the correct mcdication from among the myriad of commer-
cially available pharmaceuticals.
agents facilitate decreased cohesion among cormeocytes, desquamation, and shedding.
resulting in a softening of the stratum cormeum with easy removal of scale. They do not
dlissolve keratin. Keratoplastic agents attempt to renormalize the keratinization and abnor-
mal epithelialization that is present in keratinization disorders. The complete mechanism
of these effects is not known, although some keratoplastic agents (paticularly tar) are
believed to normalize epidermal proliferation by decreasing deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
production with a resuftant decrease in the mitotic index of thc cpidermal basal cells.
Follicular fushing is a term used to describe agents that help remove folicular secretions,
remove bacteria, and decrease follicular hyperkeratosis. The most common major ingredi-
ents in antiseborrheic shampoos include tars, sulfur, salicylic acid, benzoyl peroxide, and
selenium sulide. Other commonly included active agents are urea, glycerine, and lactic
acid. In an ultrasonographic biomicroscopic study of the ability of shampoos to remove
scale from the skin of dogs,44 selenium sulfide and colloidal oatmeal were the most
effective, tar and sulfur-salicylic acid were moderately effective, and benzoyl peroxide,
cthyl lactate, and chlorhexidine were ineffective.
 Sulfur is both keratoplastic and keratolytic, probably through the interaction of sulfur
with cysteine in keratinocytes. It is a mild follicular fushing agent, but not a good
degreaser. Sulfur is also antibacterial, antifungal, and antiparasitic, and these actions are
attributed to the forrnation of pentathionic acid and hydrogen sulfide. The smaller the
sulfur particles are (collidal are smaller than precipitated), the greater the effcacy. The
best keratolytic action occurs when sulfur is incorporated in petrolatum. This is in sharp
contrast to the findings with salicylic acid, which produces its effect faster when employed
in an emulsion base. The keratolytic effect of sulfur results from its superficial effect on
the horny layer and the formation of hydrogen sulide. The keratoplastic effect is caused
by the deeper action of the sulfur on the basal layer of the epidermis and by the
formation of cystine.
In the shampoos marketed in North America by the well-recognized manufacturers of
dermatologicals, a pure sulfur product cannot be purchased, Because of the synergistic
activity between sulfur and salicylic acid, all "sulfur" shampoos contain both ingredients.
(DVM Pharmaceuticals), SeboRx (DVM Pharmaceutucals), Micro Pearls Advantage
Sebolux (Virbac).
Salicylic acid (0.1% to 2%) is keratoplastic and exerts a favorable influence on the new
formation of the keratinous layer. It is also mildly antipruritic and bacteriostatic. In
stronger concentrations (3% to 6%), it solubilizes the intercellular “cement," thus acting as
Keratinization Defects · I027
a keratolytic agent, causing shedding and softening of the stratum corneum. When salicylic
acid is combined with sulfur, it is believed that a synergistic effect occurs. A common
combination is a 2% to 6% concentration of each drug. In human dermatologic practice, a
 40% salicylic acid plaster is used to treat calluses and warts.
 Tar preparations are derived from destructive distillation of bituminous coal or wood.
Birch tar, juniper tar, and coal tar are crude products listed in order of inereasing capacity
to inritate. Coal tar solution (5%, 10%, or 20%) produces a milder, more readily managed
effect. Coal tar solution contains only 20% of the coal tar present in coal tar extract or
 a    r sud rd s n pn
refined to decrease the staining effect and the strong odor. In this refining process, some
of the beneficial effects of tar are lost, and its potential carcinogenic danger is also
 decreased. Unadulterated tar products have no place in small animai practice because of
their toxicity and tendency to cause local irritation. Cats are especially sensitive to coal tar.
All tars are odiferous, potentially irritating and photosensitizing. and carcinogenic. Some
tars may stain light-colored coats. In one of the author's (DwS) experience, tars are the
most irritating topical antiseborrheic medications in veterinary dermatology, and he does
not use tar-containing topical preparations.
 Tar shampoos are widely used, however, and seem to be helpful in managing sebor-
rhea. They are keratolytic, keratoplastic, and mildly degreasing. As with sulfur shampoos,
tar products usually contain other ingredients, usually sulfur and salicylic acid. Two pure
tar products are marketed: Clear Tar shampoo (VRx) and Micro Pearls Advantage Tar
Moisturizing shampoo (EVsCO). Popular combination products include LyTar (DVM
Pharmaceuticals), NuSal T (DVM Pharmaceuticals), Mycodex High Potency Tar and Sul-
fur shampoo (Pfizer), Mycodex Tar and Sulfur Pet shaimnpoo (Pfizer), Allerseb-T (Virbac),
and T-Lux (Virbac).
 Benzoyl peroxide (2.5% to 5%) is keratolytic, antibacterial, degreasing, antipruritic,
lar substance in the horny layer to account for its keratolytic effect. It is not a stable
ingredient and should not be repackaged, diluted, or mixed with other products. Benzoyl
peroxide is drying, can induce a contact dermatitis (in less than 10% of patients), and
bleaches hair, clothing, and furniture. Skin tumor-promoting activity has been docu-
mented in laboratory rodents, but no such activity has been documented in any other
species.55
Benzoyl peroxide is available as a 5% gel (OxyDex, DVM Pharmaccuticals) and
(Pyoben, Virbac) and as a 2.5% to 3% shampoo (DermaPet Benzoyl Peroxide shampoo,
DermaPet; OxyDex, DVM Pharmaceuticals; Micro Pearls Advantage Benzoyl-plus sham-
products are available that also contain sulfur (DermaPct Benzoyl Peroxide Plus shampoo,
DermaPet; SulfOxyDex, DVM Pharmaceuticals). Only reputable benzoyl peroxide prod-
ucts should be used, because poor products have short shelf lives, little activity, or
excessively dries out normal skin with prolonged use, and it is generally contraindicated in
the presence of dry skin or significant iritation, or both.se A study showed that benzoyl
peroxde combined with a liposome-based (Novasome microvesicles) humectant (Micro
Pearls Advantage Benzoyl Peroxide shampoo) eliminates or rminimizes this drying effect.5
Pyoben, because of its spherulite formulation, should also be minimally drying.
Selenium sulide alters the epidermal turnover rate and interferes with the hydrogen
bond formation in keratin. It is keratolytic, keratoplastic, and very degreasing. At this
writing, there are no selenium sulfide shampoos marketed specifically for veterinary use in
North America. The human product that contains 1% selenium sulide (Selsun Blue,
Abbot Laboratories) is effective in dogs and usually is not too iritating.
 In human medicine, there are dozens of keratolytic and keratoplastic agents marketed
and most are generic products, e.g. 10% sulfur ointment, ichthammol ointment, zinc
oxide, and thuja or those marketed for other purposes, for cxample, petroleum jelly, udder
balm. KeraSolv Gel (DVM Pharmaceuticals) contains 6.6% salicylic acid, 5% sodium
I028 · Keratinization Defects
lactate, and 5% urea in a propylene glycol gel and is an effective local treatment for
hyperkeratotic lesions, for example, nasal hyperkeratosis.
 In the process of removing the excessive scale or grease, antisehorrheic products can
damage the stratum comeum and alter the hydration of the epidermis.10-13 Excessively
low humidity can cause similar alterations. Emollients and moisturizers are used to coun-
teract these effects.
 Emollients are agents that soften or soothe the skin, whereas moisturizers increase
the water content of the stratum corneurn. Both types of drugs arc useful in hydrating
and softening the skin. Many of the occlusive emollicnts are actually oils (saffower,
sesame, and mineral oil) or contain lanolin. These emollients decrease transepidermal
 water loss and cause moisturization. These agents work best if they are applied immedi-
ately after saturation of the stratum cormeum with water. For maximal softening, the skin
should be hydrated in wet dressings, dried, and covered with an occlusive hydrophobic oil.
The barrier to water loss can be further strengthened by covering the local lesion with
plastic wrap under a bandage. Nonocclusive emollients are relatively ineffective in retain-
ing moisture, Examples of emollients include vegetable oils (olive, cottonseed, corn, and
peanut oil), animal oils (lard, whale oil, anhydrous lanolin, and lanolin with 25% to 30%
water), silicones, hydrocarbons (paraffin and petrolatum [mineral oill), and waxcs (white
wax [bleached beeswax], yellow wax [beeswax]. and spermaceti). Hygroscopic (humectant)
  s e sa d   n a se as  
the environment if the relativc humidity is greater than 70%.18 These agents, such as
propylene glycol, glyccrin, collidal oatmeal, urea, sodium lactate, and lactic acid, may also
be applied between baths. Both occlusive and hygroscopic agents are found in a variety of
veterinary spray and cream rinse formulations, which are matched to a coresponding
shampoo, for exarmpie, HyLyt*efa cream rinsc and shampoo (DVM Pharrmaceuticais),10-13
The addition of novasomes or spherulites to veterinary antiseborrheics has increased
the efficacy of the products while decreasing the labor intensity of the treatments. As
discussed in Chapter 3, these are tiny capsules incorporated into shampoos that adhere to
the skin and hair and remain there after rinsing. In a time-dependent fashion, some of the
capsules disintegrate and release either water and lipids (novasomes) or active ingredients
with or without moisturizers (spherulites). Because of the newness of these products, the
number of studies documenting their efficacy is linited. In one study, Micro Pearls
Advantage Hydra-Pearls Cream Rinse (EVSCO) was shown to be superior to a traditional
humectant emollient (Humilac, Virbac) for the treatment of dry skin in dogs.54 In a study
on epidermal hydration, nine dogs had areas of their skin treated with water or Sebolux
(Virbac), a sulfur/salicylic acid shampoo with spherulites, The shainpoo-treated area had
greater hydration than either the control or water-treated areas.2 These preliminary data
rinses nay be an unnecessary step in many treatment protocols.
Systermic antiseborrheic agents are used prirnarily in the treatment of the congenito-
hereditary seborrheic disorders (see Chapter 12). Because most of the generalized second-
ary seborrheas are due to altered environmental conditions, dietary deficiency, inetabolic
abnormalities, or other correctable disorders, systemic treatments are rarely considered
and probably would be of litle value. These agents might be of some value in those
idiopathic conditions in which the defect appears to be due to altered keratinization, for
example, feline acne,
Retinoids are the most commonly used systeinic autiseborrheic agents in veterinary
medicine. Retinoids refer to all the chemicals, natural or synthetic, that have vitamin A
activity. Synthetic retinoids are primarily retinol, retinoic acid, or retinal derivativcs or
 analogs. They have been developed with the intent of anplifying certain biologic cffects
while being less toxic than their natural precursors. More than 1500 synthetic retinoids
have been developed and evaluated 37, 46 Different synthotie drugs, all classed as synthetic
retinoids, may have profoundly dlifferent pharmacologic effects, side effects, and disease
indications.
 Naturally occurring vitamin A is an alcohol, all-trans retinol. It is oxidized in the body
Keratinization Defects · I029
to retinal and rctinoic acid. Each of thesc conpounds has variable metabolic and biologi-
cal activities, although both are important in thc induction and maintenance of normal
growth and differentiation of keratinocytes. Only retinol has all of the known functions of
vitamin A. The two most widely used retinoids in veterinary dermatology were isotretinoin
(13-cis-retinoic acid; Accvitane, Roche), synthesized as a natural metabolite of retinol, and
etretinate (Tegison, Roche), a synthetic retinoid. Etretinate is no longer available because
tissue residues in humans can persist for years after drug withdrawal and might result in
fetal cdefects.$ It was replaced with acitretin (Soriatane, Roche), a free-acid metabolite of
but because it has a much shorted terminal elimination half-life (2 days versus etretinate's
100 days), its long-term safety should be better. It is available in 10- and 25-mg liquid-
flled capsules, which come in prescription packs of 30 capsules. At this writing, each
capsule costs between $8.00 and $10.00. To date, the only information available on its
effcacy in dogs comes from anecdotal reports on the Internet. It appears to be as safe
and effective as etretinate when givcn at 1 mg/kg q24h. Unless it is shown that lower
dosages are equally as effective, the expensc of acitretin will prcclude its use.
The biological effects of retinoids arc numerous and' diverse, but their ability to
regulate proliferation, growth, and differentiation of epithelial tissues is their major benefit
in dermatology. They also affect proteases, prostaglandins, humoral and cellular immunity,
and cellular adhesion and communication.1 Isotretinoin is usually given in a dose of 1 to
3 mg/kg ql2 to 24h hours and appears to be indicated in diseases that require alteration
or normalization of adnexal structures, although some epidermal diseases may respond.37
Diseases in which isotretinoin has been reported to be effective in veterinary derrmatology
include Schnauzer comedo syndrome,*7 sebaceous adenitis (partieularly carly in the disease
in Poodles and Vizslas or shorthaired brecds),37, 46. 61 ichthyosis,37 feline acne,7 epithel-
otropic lymphoma3, 4. 65 keratoacanthoma26. 37, 46. 1 and sebaceous gland hyperplasias
and adenomas.16 Isotretinoin has been ineffective for primary idiopathic seborrhea of
Cocker spaniels and Basset hounds, and epidermal dysplasia of West Ilighland White
terriers.2i. 37. 46 It was also ineffective in the treatment of preneoplastic and squamous cell
carcinoma lesions in cats.20
Toxicity of isotretinoin in the dog and cat appears to be less of a problem than in
junction crythema, stiffness, vomiting, diarrhea, and keratoconjunctivitis may be noted.
 ss   e po a a  se 
rhea, anorexia, and vomiting have been the major side effects noted.37. 46. 50 These side
effects may be transient or self-limited with discontinuationl or decrease in dose of the
drug. With long-term use, skeletal abnormalities, including cortical hyperostosis, periosteal
potent teratogens.
 Etretinate or acitretin are indicated in disorders of epithelial or follicular development
or keratinization.25 Most commonly, etretinate is given at I mg/kg every 24 hours. Etreti-
effective in most West Highland White terriers,Basset hounds, or colics,37. # but excep
tions have been noted.5o Etretinate can also be effective in the treatment of ichthyosis,
solar dermatitis, squamous cell carcinoma,keratoacanthomas and sebaceous adenit 0
46. 59 Dogs with folicular dysplasias such as color dilution alopecia may also respond with
Toxicity with etretinate is similar to that seen with isotretinoin. In humans, etretinate
is considered safer for long-term use because of a lower propensity for producing skeletal
abnormalities. However, it is considered rnore of a teratogen and should be used only in
spayed females, nonbreeding rales, or female dogs that will not be used for breeding.
Teratogenicitymay persist even 2years after cessation of therapy45.46Monitoring forboth
synthetic retinoids includes pretreatment measurement of tear production, hemogram,
1030 · Keratinization Defects
chemistry profile, and urinalysis. This is repeated in 1 to 2 months and, if no problems are
detected, then repeated only as deemed necessary.46 Because experience with increased
triglyceride levels shows that they normalize when animals are receiving low-fat diets, it is
recommended that dogs being given etretinate may benefit frorm changing to such a diet.46
A topical (calcipotriene or calcipotriol) or systemic vitamin D analog, especially I,25-
and a preliminary clinical trial was conducted in a small number of Cocker spaniels with
o  sd a  n pdp m se asau sess 
vitamin D on keratinization but minimize the hormonal infuence on calcium and phos-
phorus metabolism. Vitamin D analogs inhibit keratinocyte proliferation, induce terminal
differentiation of keratinocytes, and decrease immunologic reactivity by reduced produc-
tion or transcription of various cytokines and reduced antigen-presenting function of
Langerhans cell 13 25, 39 When calcitrol was given at 10 ng/kg q24h to seborrheic Cocker
spaniels, significant improvement was noted in approximately two thirds of the dogs.38 No
adverse reactions were noted, but because these compounds infuence calcium metabolism
and accidental overdosing can be fatal,7 the patient should have its PTH, calcium, and
phosphorus levels monitored at least weekly.
most recent addition to the armamentarium is oral cyclosporine, which improves the
clinical lesions by downregulating the proinflammatory epidermal cytokines.97 Because
cytotoxic treatments have anecdotal efficacy in the treatment of primary seborrhea in
dogs59 and cyclosporine is receiving wider usage in this species, cyclosporine might have
 some place in the treatment of serious disorders of keratinization,
● CANINE SEBORRHEA
Seborrhea is a chronic skin disease of dogs that is characterized by a defect in keratiniza-
tion with increased scale formation, excessive greasiness of the skin and haircoat, and
 sometimes by secondary inflammation. Some patients are both Haky and greasy, depending
  e a a a  p  g  jo   
seborrhea sicca, seborrhea oleosa, and seborrheic dermatitis. Seborrhea sicca denotes
dryness of the skin and coat. There is focal or diffuse scaling of the skin with the
accumulation of white to gray nonadherent scales, and the coat is dull and dry (Fig. 14--
1A). Seborrhea oleosa is the opposite; the skin and hairs are greasy (see Fig. 14-1B). The
o u s p n aq pe  s s ssr a
dogs with severe seborrhea cleosa is tremendous. Seborrheic dermatitis is characterized by
scaling and greasiness, with gross evidence of local or diffuse inflammation (see Fig. 14-
1C). It is often associated with folliculitis. Animals with seborrhea oleosa or seborrheic
dermatitis should be examined carefully for Malassezia yeast. The lipolytic nature of this
organism worsens an already greasy skin condition. In addition, Malassezia yeast increase
condition encouraged yeast overgrowth, and then the yeast continue to stimulate sebor-
rheic change. In advanced cases, the initial seborrheic condition could have been resolved,
but the patient's clinical condition will remain the same until the yeast are eliminated.
Classic localized seborrheic dermatitis has circular lesions with alopecia, erythema, mar-
 ginal epidermal scaling, and later hyperpigmentation (see Fig. 14-1D). This condition
must be differentiated from other disorders that cause similar lesions.
 These three terms appropriately describe the dog's clinical appearance and aid in
initial shampoo selection, but they cannot be used to direct the diagnostic effort to find
the cause of the seborrhea. Individuals respond to the same seborrheic insult in different
manners. Although most fatty acid-deficient dogs have dull, dry, and faky coats, some are
greasy, and a dog with early generalized demodicosis may be either faky or greasy.
Regardless of the nature of the seborrhea, all causcs of seborrhea should be considered
and excluded only by the appropriate testing.
Etiologicaly, seborrhea is classified into primary and secondary types. Primary sebor-
Keratinization Defects · Io31
G
FIGURE 14-1. A, Severe faking in a dog with a fatty acid defcieucy. B, Greasy seborrhea in a dog with
chronic liver disease. Note that the greasy inaterial adheres to the hairs uind stains them. C, Diffuse seborheic
F, Vitamin A-responsive derinatosis in a Cocker spaniel. Marked comedo formation on thc abdomcn. F,
Vitamin A-responsive dermatosis. Same dog as in E. Close-up of follicular plugging. G, Vitamin A-responsive
dermatosis. Same dog as in E and F. Severe ceruminous otitis exterma, if, Flaking in a cat caused by too low
an environmental humidity level.
1032 · Keratinization Defects
rhea is an inherited disorder of epidermal hyperproliferation and is discussed in Chapter
12. It is rmost commonly seen in American Cocker spaniels, English Springer spaniels,
West Highland white terriers, and Basset hounds, but Irish setters, Doberman pinschers,
Chinse Shar peis, dachshundis, Labrador retrievers, and German shepherds are at in-
creased risk.34, 59 However, not all individuals within those breeds are affected. A veteri-
narian does the owner and animal a great injusticc if seborrheic signs in a dog of thosc
breeds are immediately classified as primary scborrhea. The diagnosis of primary scbor-
 rhea is tenable only if the signs started early in life and appropriate diagnostic tests have
failed to reveal a cause for the keratinization defect.
 Secondary seborrheas are those caused by some external or internal insult that alters
the proliferation, differentiation, or desquamation of the surface and follicular epithe-
lium.33 Virtually any disorder discussed in this texthook can result in seborrheic signs
during the acute or healing phase of the disease.
Cause and Pathogenesis
Any disorder that alters cellular proliferation, differentiation, or desquamation prodlices
seborrheic signs. In most instances, the mechanisms by which the following seborrhea-
 inducing factors cause their changes are incompletely understood.
● Infammation. Inllammatory skin diseases are typically characterized by epidermal
hyperplasia,2 which probably results from the release or production of dermal eicosanoids,
histamine, and cytokines. Leukotriene B4 (LTBa) concentrations have been reported to be
increased in the skin lesions of dogs with seborrhea.1 Both LTB4 and prostaglandin E,
increase DNA synthesis in the basal layer and stinulate epidermal proliferation.36.62 If the
inflammation is mild, seborrheic signs can develop in the absence of pruritus. Examples
low-grade contact dermatitis, and carly cpitheliotropic lymphoma.
● Endocrine Factors. Hormoncs infuence cellular proliferation59 and serum and
cutaneous lipid profles,a o Although all hormonal imbalanccs can cause seborrhea, spon-
taneous or iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism and hypothyroidism are the most common
causes (see Chap. 10). In hyperadrenocorticism, othcr signs of the disease are usually
 present; in contrast, some hypothyroid dogs arc perfectly normal aside from the sebor-
rhea.
● Nutritional Factors. Glucose, protein, essential fatty acids, 14 and various vitamins
and trace minerals are necessary for normal cellular proliferation and differentiation.
 Deficiency, excess, or inbalance in one or more of these nutrients can produce seborrhea
(see Chap. 17). Because the vast majority of pets in developed countrics eat high-quality,
balanced diets, nutritional seborrheas are very uncommon.s When they do occur, they
usually are secondary to malabsorption or maldigestion?9 or metabolic disease, espccially
hypothyroidisn.8
● Environmental Factors. The water and lipid content of the skin is important to
desquaimation changes and the squames (packets of dead cells) becorme visible. Low
environmental humidity, cxcessive bathing (especially with harsh products), and fatty acid
 deficiency can produce this change.
As can be seen from the above-mentioned factors, virtually any disease can cause
seborrhca and can do so by many different mechanisms.
Clinical Features
 The clinical signs of sccondary seborrhea include fakiness, greasiness, seborrheic dermati-
tis, ceruminous otitis externa, or some combination of these. The nature, distribution, and
severity of the signs depend on the cause of the seborrhea and the individual patient. In
general, systemic causes (e.g. endocrine disease, dietary deficiency, hepatic or gastrointes-
tinal disease, and prirmary or secondary lipid abnorimalities) result in generalized signs that
Keratinization Defects ·I033
FIGURE I4-2.Secondary sebor-
rhea. Dishevelment of the coat with
scborrheic change in the saddle and
flank region of a puppy.
are not pruritic at their onset. These animals can become pruritic, however, as the
They often have more pronounced seborrheic changes around the face, feet (especially
interdigitally), intertriginous areas, and perineum. Allcrgic disordcrs, although systcinic
diseases, tend to cause regionalized seborrheic changcs, and pruritus preccdes the sebor-
rheic changes.
 Except for low environmental humidity and ovcrzealous or inappropriate topical treat-
ments (e.g., excessive bathing, dipping, or powdering, contact dermatitis to a sharnpoo),
external causes (e.g, cheyletiellosis, demodicosis, dermatophytosis) result in focal, rmultifo-
cal, or regionalized signs of secondary seborrhea (Figs. 14-2 and 14-3). At examination,
these dogs have areas of normal skin. Sebaceous adenitis, a disorder that results in the
 destruction of most, if not all, scbaceous glands often is initially regionalized to the face.
and dorsum of the trunk.
FIGURE I4-3. Close-up of the
puppy in Figure 14-2. Note the
large fakes of scale riding up the
hair shafts. This schorrheie change is
fairly common in puppies and usu-
AqAisnoauods saiossiATe
montlas of age.
1034 · Keratinization Defects
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of seborrhea is straightforward and is based on the characteristic lesions.
Determining the cause of the seborrhea is far more difficult. Beyond the mandatory
 parasites and evidence of malabsorption or maldigestion, the specific diagnostic approach
varies from case to case.
 Some investigators perform skin biopsies early in the diagnostic effort; others perform
routine laboratory and endocrine testing first. ff the scborrhea is focal, multifocal, or
regionalized, and trichography shows numerous hair casts (Fig. 14-4), an indication of
abnormal folicular keratinization, an early biopsy is indicated to characterize the extermal
insult. When the seborrhea is generalized and probably attributable to some systemic
disease, an early biopsy is not necessary. In this case, the tissues would show the charac.
teristic changes of a keratinization defect; for example, a variably hyperplastic superficial
perivascular dermatitis with orthokeratotic or parakeratotic hyperkeratosis may be found,
but biopsy would be unlikely to reveal the cause of such changes.
  ss  s o asa s  t  o
recent onset, should have hemography, a chemistry profilc, and urinalysis performed to
aid in the initial characterization of any systemic disease. Any abnormality detected should
noncontributory, a thyroid or adrenal evaluation, or both, should be performed.
If the seborrheic lesions are focal, multifocal, or regionalized, an external cause is
likely. If the history and physical examination do not result in a short list of differential
diagnoses, a skin biopsy is useful in categorizing the dlisorder.
As mentioned before, seborrheic dogs are prone to secondary staphylococcal infec-
tions and Malassezia dermatitis. If either of these conditions is identified by physical
examination and exudative cytologic examination, they should be resolved before skin
FIGURE 14-4. Follicular cast,
which is an accumulation of keratin
and follicular uaterial that adhercs
to the hair shaft extending above the
surface of the follicular ostia. It is a
primary lesion in vitain A-respon-
sive dermatoses, primary idiopathic
sehorrhea, and sebaceous adenitis.
(Photograph ilustrates hair epilated
from a dog with sebaceous adenitis;
the clumps of material at the base of
multiple hairs are the casts.) Follicu-
lar casts may be secondary lesions in
dermodectic mange and dermatophy.
Keratinization Defects · Io35
biopsies are taken because the inflammation caused by these infections can mask some of
the subtle histologic features of the underlying disease.
Clinical Management
The primary aim of treatment in secondary seborrhea is the correction of its cause. With
treatment, the sehorrheic signs should resolve spontaneously in 30 to 60 days; in chronic
cases, however, a complete response may not occur for 3 to 4 months. Because scborrheic
 dogs are prone to secondary staphylococcal infections or Malassezia dermatitis, appropriate
treatment may be necessary if the dog is infected. Resolution of these secondary infcc-
 tions and the underlying cause of the scborrhea can result in very rapid improvement.
The topical agents used in primary seborrhea are also used here, but treatment
haired dogs and cats is dramatically improved if the coat is clipped. Typical, the dog is
bathed, with or without moisturization, twice weekly for 1 to 2 weeks. Very greasy dogs
may require altermate-day bathing for 2 to 3 weeks. No specifie protocol should be
bathing a dog with secondary seborrhea exacerbates the seborrhea. The client is in the
best position to determine when the dog needs a treatment. If the dog is not too faky or
greasy on its scheduled bath day, the treatnent should be postponed until the surface
progresses, the bathing interval increases. The baths can often be stopped after 30 days.
disease acceptable, especially if bathing the dog has been very diffcult.
 In most cases, the thorough bathing and drying of a seborrheic animal is a labor
intense process that takes 30 minutes or more. Although some owners will follow any
bathing protocol, most want to bathe their pet as infrequently as possible. In this scenario.
shampoo selection is very important and an inappropriate choice can barm the patient.
For example, most benzoyl peroxide products are contraindicated in patients with dry skin
specific indications for the use of the benzoyl peroxide product in the patient, the
frequency of use must be monitored carefully because dryness and irritation will occur if
the product is used more often than the patient's skin will tolerate. In general, the milder
the sharmpoo, the slower the patient's response time, but the greater the margin of safety.
 Dogs or cats with dry skin and coat can be bathed with a variety of different
products, and product selection depends on client and veterinarian preference.3s Com-
monly used types of product include hypoallrgenic grooming products (DermaPet All
Natural Condition Shampoo [DermaPet], D-Basic shampoo [DVM Pharmaceuticals],
HyLyt*efa Hypoallergenic Moisturizing shampoo [DVM Pharmaceuticals], Micro Pearls
oatmeal products (DermaPet Oatmeal shampoo [DermaPet], Epi-Soothe [Virbac])、 or
maceuticals], Nolvasan shampoo [Fort Dodge], and Hexidine [Virbac]]. With the high
frequency of secondary bacterial or Malassezia infections in seborrheic dogs, the latter
shampoos receive frequent use in dry dogs. In many cases, a bath once or twice a week is
sufficient to keep the visible scales to a minimum. Unless the shampoo being used
contains novasomes or spherulites, a cream rinse should be applied to the skin to inerease
its hydration. In most instances, the grooming shampoos have their own matching crearm
rinse.
greasiness of varying severity), alternative shampoos must be selected and seiection is
based on the severity of the seborrheic signs. Greasy dogs are most problematic and
usually require strong shampoos. To save money and increase the effcacy of the antiseb-
 u e q  e   s d  d r
shampoo. This bath removes the dirt and surface material frorm the coat and skin, and
1036*Keratinization Defccts
thus allows better contact of the antiseborheic product with the skin. In general, the
sulfur and salicylic acid products are less potent than the pure tar products, and those are
less potent than the tar combination products. Benzoyl peroxide, with or without sulfur,
and the selenium sulfide shampoos are the most potent and can remove a tremendous
amount of scale and grease with just one bath. In addition to decreasing the surface lipids,
strong tars, selenium sulfide, and benzoyl peroxide shampoos increase trausepidermal
water loss and must be used cautiously.to, 12, 5
 After the quick cleansing bath, the antiseborrheic product should be applied. Owners
 eq see a up oos jo duns  e adde o you p q pus
all too common technique wastes shampoo and can irritate the skin on the dorsum
because it is diffieult to rinse all of the product from thc skin. With concentrated
shampcos, the client should be instructed to put an ounce or so of the shampoo into a
 asads kuaa arou o pausisp ose an soq rends u p sodus
shampoo.
After the dog has been lathered with the antiseborheie product, the shampoo rmust
rcrmain in contact with the skin for 10 to 15 minutes for maximum effect. Gentle
manipulation of the dog's skin during this waiting period tends to keep the dog content
and increases the cleansing action of thc shampoo. After 10 to 13 minutes, the dog should
be rinsed thoroughly. It should take two to three times longer for the rinsing than it did
for the lathering. Prolonged rinsing not only removes the debris and shampoo but also
 a ae s u a  s ap a us  jo o m s
especially when the environmental humidity is low. The application of an after-bath cream
rinse or emollient spray helps provide a barrier to transepidermal water loss and its
associated drying.54 Although any after-bath rinse can be effective, studies have shown that
thosc containing oils, and especially linoleic acid, are most effective in decreasing transcpi-
dermal water loss.11 If the client keeps some diluted product in a misting bottle and
sprays it on the dog as needed, the frequency of bathing can often be reduced.
after-bath rinse, especially if the humidity level is low. All strong shampoos can disrupt
the epidermal barrier and increase transepidermal water loss, with resultant worsening of
the seborrhea.ll An afterbath rinse can prevent this, but it may make the dog too greasy.
Each case must be approached on its own merits.
In occasional cases, the cause of the secondary seborrhea can be idcntified but not
corrected; common cxamplcs include low winter humidity and intentional fatty acid defi-
ciency for weight loss or control of pancreatitis or abnormalities in lipid metabolism. ln
these cases, bathing and moisturizing must be continucd at some maintenance level. The
 application of moisturizers containing fat can be beneficial in thesc animals.10
·VITAMIN A-RESPONSIVE DERMATOSIS
A vitamin A-responsive dernatosis has been described primarily in Cocker spaniels, but it
has also heen recognized in a Labrador retriever and a miniature Schnauzer.2s. 30, 43 s1. 32
In these dogs, the condition is characterized by an adult-onset, medically refractory
seborrheic skin disease, wherein marked folicular plugging and hyperkeratotic plaques
hyperkeratotic plaques are especially prorminent on the ventral and lateral chest and
abdomen. Other lesions include varying degrees of focal crusting, scaling, alopecia, and
follicular papules. A ceruminous otitis externa is usually present (see Fig. 14-IG). A
 generally dry, dull, dishevcled, casily cpilatcd haircoat is present, along with a rancid skin
odor and mild to moderate pruritus. Except for the skin disease, the dogs are gencrally
healthy.
 K. W. Kwochka (personal cominunications) and the authors have recognized a group
of Gordon setters with a vitamin A--responsive condition that differs in its clinical presen-
tation. Instead of a seborrheic presentation, these dogs have a pruritic disorder, especially
Keratinization Defects · I037
over their dorsums, with a papular dermatitis in the pruritic regions. Treatment with
antibiotics resolves the papular dermatitis and lessens the pruritus but a relapse can be
expected when the antibiotic is withdrawn. Allergy testing is inconclusive, and skin biop-
sis. Treatment with vitamin A alcohol results in resolution of the rash and pruritus, and
the dog remains normal with continued trcatment.
The marked folieular plugging that oceurs in these dogs is highly suggestive of this
disease. In the absence of systemic signs of hyperadrenocorticism, only sebaceous adenitis
e (ie  ) a siy r  y   (r d )
generalized demodicosis (see Chap. 6), and folicular dysplasia (see Chaps. ll and 12)
produce such profound follicular changes. The clinical lesions are characterized histologi-
cally by profound, disproportionately marked follicular orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis (Fig.
14-5). At present, the final dliagnosis of vitaimin A-responsive dermatosis can be con-
firmed only by response to treatment.
Treatment consists of 10,000 U vitamin A (retinol) given orally, once daily with a fatty
 meal. Improvement can be expected in 3 weeks, with complete clinical remission in 8 to
10 weeks. Treatinent should be continued for life because the lesions and symptoms
reappear when treatment is discontintued.
FIGURE 
|4-5. Vitamin A-responsive
dermatosis. Disproportionate orthokeratotic
hyperkeratosis of multiple hair follicles.
1038 · Keratinization Defects
● feliNe Seborrhea
Primary seborrhea is very rare in cats (see Chap. 12). Although cats suffer from many of
the disorders that cause secondary seborrhea in dogs,51 seborrheic signs are uncommon in
this species. Cats fastidious grooming habits, which remove scales quickly, may be par-
tially responsible for this lower incidencc.
When cats do become seborrheic, they usually have seborrhea sicca, with fine white
 or gray fakes and scales in the coat (see Fig. 14-1H). When the signs are fairly general.
ized and the cat is not pruritic, dietary deficiency, intestinal parasitism, low environmental
humidity, diabetes melitus, hyperthyroidism, cheyletiellosis, and pediculosis are the pri-
mary differentials. 51, 59 Contact dermatitis and overzealous shampooing or powdering could
be added to the list, but these causes are easily excluded through the history. With
pruritus or rmore localized lesions, demodicosis, dermatophytosis, lymphocytic mural
folliculitis (see Chap. 1l), and allergy must be considered. Greasy seborrheie signs (sebor-
s     a    e   o 
chronie hepatic, pancreatic, or intestinal disease, drug eruption, or systemic lupus erythe-
 skin (Fig. 14-7), so any one disease cannot be included or excluded just on the nature of
the seborrheic change.
of the signs. Bathing can help hastcn the cat's response but is not widcly done because
most cats are intolerant of repeated bathing. With the exception of products that contain
tar, selenium, quaternary ammonium compounds, or phenol, shampoos used on dogs can
also he used on cats. Caution is warranted with benzoyl peroxide, because it can cause
variable degrees of irritation in about 25% of the cats treated.
● NaSoDIGItAl HYPerKeratoSIS
Nasodigital hyperkeratosis is characterized by increased amounts of horny tissue originat-
ing from and tightly adherent to the epidermis of the footpads or nasal planum.
Cause and Pathogenesis
Hyperkeratosis of the nose, footpads, or both can occur as a congenitohereditary disorder,
an idiopathic entity, or as a coexistent featurc of a variety of disorders. The idiopathic
form occurs most commonly in old dogs. It shows no breed or sex predilection and is
probably a senile change.27. 34. 59
 Nasodigital hyperkeratosis can be seen in a varicty of disorders but especially in the
congenitohereditary disorders of keratinization (see Chap. 12), distempcr or leishmaniasis
(sce Chap. 7), pemphigus foliaceus, drug reaction, or systemic lupus erythematosus (see
Chap. 9), zinc-responsive and generic dog food derrnatosis (see Chap. 17), necrolytic
migratory erythema (see Chap. 10) and cutancous lynphoma (see Chap. 20). With nasal
hyperkeratosis only, discoid lupus erythematosus and pemphigus erythermatosus (see Chap.
 9) must be considered. If lesions are restricted to the pads, familial pad hyperkeratosis42
  i  r (  as  sd  (e d a)
diagnoses. Except for familial pad hyperkeratosis and papilomavirus, all of the aforemen-
tioned disorders usually have lesions in the haired skin and often produce systemic signs
 of illness. However, some cases have lesions restricted to the nose, footpads, or both,
cither at their onset or during their entire course.
Clinical Features
variety of shapes, depending on its location, its stage of development, and the variation
 among individual animals. At times, sinall verrucous keratin growths appear in a regular
Keratinization Defects ·I039
FIGURE I4-6. A, Greasy seborrhea in a cat with pancreatic insufficiency. B, Nasodigital hyperkeratosis. Note.
B. Keratin accumulation is most marked at the edges of the pads. D, Feline acne, Multiple comedones on the
chin. F, Ear margin dermatosis with marginal hypotrichosis and scaling. F, Canine tail galnd hyperplasia. G,
A small island of normal skin is visible.
I040·Keratinization Defects
FIGURE I4-7. Dishevelment of
the coat with seborrhea sicca in a
cat with hepatitis.
 pattern. At other times, the keratin is ridged, grooved, or feathered. Dryness is the
characteristic common to all lesions. The nasal planum, which is moist, black, soft, and
shiny in normal dogs, becomes hard, dry, rough, and hyperkeratotic, cspccially on the
dorsum of the nose (see Fig. 14-6B). Fissures, erosions, and ulcers develop in the dry
epidermal tissue.
The digital hyperkeratosis involves thc entire surface of all pads but is most pro-
nounced at the edges of weightbearing pads (see Fig. 14-6C) and on the accessory carpal
and tarsal pads. The contact surfaces of weightbearing pads are less involved because
friction during walking wears down the keratin. The hard, cracked pads contain excess
keratin tissue, which makes walking painful, especially for heavy dogs. Fissures and ero-
sions add significantly to the discomfort. Corms form in the feet of some individuals
because excess keratin develops into deep, circular plaques.5s These plaques press into the
surrounding footpad and cause pain when pressure is created as the animal walks.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of simple nasodigital hyperkeratosis can be straightforward or very conpli-
cated. If the typical fesions occur in an old dog with no other skin or systemic problems,
the diagnosis can be made on the basis of the clinical findings. If the nasodigital hyperker-
atosis is present along with other skin lesions in a young to rmiddle-aged dog, or if it
occurs with nasal or pedal depigmentation, erythema, erosion, and crusting, all of the
 disorders mentioned previously must be considered and excluded by means of thc appro-
 priate testing.
 The diagnosis is confirmed by a biopsy that reveals the characteristic features of
idiopathic nasodigital hyperkeratosis and none of the features for the other differential
diagnoses. Histopathologic findings in idiopathic nasodigital hyperkeratosis include irregu-
lar to papillated epidermal hyperplasia and marked orthokeratotic to parakeratotic hyper-
keratosis.
Clinical Management
Because the formation of excess keratin cannot be stopped, treatment must be lifelong
and directed toward the softening and removal of the excessive keratin. Because these
 measures are time consuming and somewhat messy, they are usually reserved for patients
 in which the hyperkeratosis causes discomfort or fissuring.
Keratinization Defects · 104|
Dogs with profound hyperkeratosis should have the excess keratin removed with
scissors or a razor bladc. After appropriate instruction, many clients can perform the
trimming at home and may choosc to use it as the sole inethod of treatment for
asymptomatic dogs. In most cases, the trirming is necessary only at the onset of treat-
ment because further keratin buildup is minimized by the application of hydrating and
softening agents.
Topical treatment must include hydration and the application of a keratolytic agent.
Hydration of the pads is easily accomplished by soaking the fet in water and applying
wet compresses to the nose. After 5 to l0 minutes of hydration, the areas are covered
with keratolytic agent. Petroleum jelly, ichthamnol ointinent, various human dry skin
lotions, 50% propylene glycol, 6.6% salicylic acid, 5% sodiun lactate, and 5% urca in
animal must be confined to a crate or the feet must be bandaged so that foors, carpets,
and furmiture are not stained. When the nose or pads are fissured, cintments containing
antibiotics and corticosteroids are indicated.
Typically, daily hydration and softening must be performed for 7 to 10 days to return
the nose and pads to near norinal. The owners should be warned not to try to removc all
of the keratin, because overzealous treatiment can remove the normal protective keratin
layer and predispose the nose and pads to lacerations and frictional ulcers. When the nose
and pads are near normal, some clients prefer to stop all treatments until significant
n       p   so  
impossible, isotretinoin or etretinate therapy may be of some benefit, but their efficacy
remains unproven.46
· ACNE
In humans, acne is a multifactorial disease of the pilosebaceous unit.22 Acne-prone individ-
s ao srd p   jo d r  e   sn
than do their normal counterparts. The levels of linoleic acid in scbum from an acne
patient are low. Bacteria (Propionibacterium acnes, Propionibacterium granulosun, and
micrococci) and yeast (Pityrosporum ovale) play an important contributory role through
their lipolytic action on sebum to produce free fatty acids, the production of inflammatory
enzymes (e.g, proteases), and the induction of folicular inflammation. Because androgens
stimulate sebum production, patients with systemic hormonal imbalanccs can have severe
acne, Acne patients have incrcased 5a-reductase activity in their skin. Bccause this en-
zyme system converts testosterone to dihydrotestosterone, local hormone infuences are
 probably very important.
Acne in' dogs and cats is uncommon and has not been thoroughly studied.s. 50 Pets
with acne have abnormal folicular keratinization; beyond that, however, there probably is
little pathomechanistie similarity to human acne. For example, the comedonal lipid pro-
files from hairless dogs showed a predominance of free sterols, ceramides, and free fatty
acids.3 These lipids are of epidermal rather than sebaceous origin and suggest that the
sebaceous glands are minimally important in acne in dogs.
Canine Acne
 Although skin lesions are fairly common in the skin of the chin and lips of young dogs, it
is doubtful that this is a true acne in which the defect in follicular keratinization arises de
novo. Careful inspection of the involved skin rarely reveals comedones; instead, sterile or
 s  s    e     i  
discussed in detail under muzzle folliculitis and furunculosis in Chapter 4.
I042 · Keratinization Defects
Feline Acne
Feline acne is an uncommon condition that affects cats of any breed or gender and is not
confined to adolescence.
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
 Feline acne is an idiopathic dlisorder of follicular keratinization.5. 50, 51 Although some cats
experience only one episode during their lives, many affected cats have cyclie or near-
constant disease. Poor grooming habits, an underlying seborrheic predisposition, the pro-
duction of abnormal sebum, hair cycle influences, stress, direct viral infuences, and
these wouid be an aggravating factor, none has been proven causal. Hormonal infuences
frequency in males and females.59
CLINICAL FEATURES
The earliest lesions are crusts and comedones on the chin, the lower lip, and occasionally.
the upper lip (see Fig. 14-6D).6 At this stage, there are no symptoms associated with the
lesions, so they are often overlooked or ignored by the client. Some cases remain in the
suppurative foliculitis furunculosis, or cellulitis may develop (see Fig. 410A) (Pasteurella
multocida, B-hemolytic streptococci, staphylococci, Malassezia, dermatophytes).66 In severe
cases, the chin and lips can become edematous and thickened, and the cat often scratches
or rubs the chin on furniture or other rough surfaces. Regional lymphadenopathy may be
prominent. Follicular cysts of variable sizes and scarring are commonplace in chronic
cases.
DIAGNOSIS
 In most cases, the diagnosis of feline acne is straightforward and is based on the presence
 of classic Iesions on the chin and lips. In the comedonal stage, deimodicosis, dermatophy-
tosis, and Malassezia infection should be excluded by the appropriate tests. With furuncu-
lar lesions, primary or secondary bacterial or fungal infections should be considered and
documented by appropriate cytologic and cultural techniques. With pronounced chin
edema (the so-called fat chin), an eosinophilic granuloma with collagen ffame figures must
be considered (see Chap. 18).
Histopathologic fndings in feline acne include follieular keratosis, plugging, and dila-
tation (comedo).? In advanced cases, perifolliculitis, folliculitis, and furunculosis with an
associated pyogranulomatous dermatitis may be seen (Fig. 14-8).
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The need for treatinent and intensity of treatment vary from case to case. If the owner
does not object to the presence of asymptomatic comedones, no treatment is required. If
the lesions are visually objectionable or if they progress to sterile or secondarily infected
papules or furuncles or induce pruritus, treatment is required.
Topical therapy is benefcial in all cases and is directed toward the dislodgement and
dissolution of the comedone. In many cascs, the casc and effcacy of treatment can be
increased by clipping the area before treating it. If draining papules and furuncles are
adnixed with the comedones, the area should be hot packed in a magnesium sulfate
(Epsom salt) solution (2 tbsp/quart or 30 ml/L warm water) for 5 to 10 minutes. Soaking
promotes drainage and softens the surrounding comedones. Because drainage typically
orally for 14 to 21 days. Antibiotic selection depends on the invading organism, but
clavilanated amoxicillin, a fuoroquinolone, or a cephalosporin are good empiric choices.
Keratinization Defects · I043
FIGURE 14-8. Feline acne. ruptured comedo (folicular plug) with surrounding pyogranu-
lomatous dermatitis.
 Topical treatment with mupirocin (see later) may alleviate the need for systeimic antibiot-
ics.
Although alcohol, various human acne cleaning pads, or Listerine antiseptic can be
effective comedolytic agents in cats, most investigators dispense antiseborrheic shampoos
for daily to twice-weekly use. Sulfur-salicylic acid, ethyf lactate, or benzoyl peroxide
may be too irritating for some cats. Other topical products used in cats include vitamin A
acid (Retin-A 0.05% cream) and topical clindamycin, tetracycline, or erythromycin solu-
tions or ointments.5o Topical metronidazole 0.75% gel has been reported to be useful,
perhaps through its combined antibactcrial and anti-infiainmatory properties. Mupirocin
ointment applied twice daily can be very effective.66 When 25 cats were treated, 24 had a
good to excellent response.
 After all the papules and comedones have been eliminated, treatment should be
discontinued gradually over several weeks. Some cats remain free of lesions for extended
 periods and others relapse. Once the amount of time that passes before relapse is kmown,
a maintenance cleaning program can be instituted. Those cats with recurrent acne may
benefit from fatty acid suppiementation.5o
Aside from antibiotics and fat supplements, systemic therapy is rarely indicated. In
cats with severe inflammation, a 10- to 14-day course of oral prednisolone (1 to 2 mg/kg
q24h) can be beneficial and may reduce scar tissue formation. Any bacterial infection
should be resolved before the corticosteroid is administered. Cats that do not allow topical
treatment or are refractory to it may benefit from the oral administration of isotretinoin (2
third of treated cats respond.so Responders require long-term treatment, but the fre.
quency of administration can often be reduced to every 2 or 3 days.
· Canine ear MarGIn dermatoSIs
Marginal seborrhea affecting the pinna of the ear is characterized by numerous small,
greasy plugs (follicular casts) adhering to the skin and hairs of the medial and lateral
I044 · Keratinization Defects
margins. It is most common in Dachshunds but also occurs in other breeds with pendu-
lous ears (see Fig. 14-6E). Sleeping next to a forced air duct or wood stove seems to
increase the frequency or severity of disease. The small particles can easily be removed
for diagnosis with the thumb nail or a Hat instrument. These particles are soft, irregular,
and greasy. With tine, the scaling becomes more confuent and can involve the entire ear
margin, and the condition can be acormpanicd by partial alopecia of the pinna. In chronic
cases, the seborrheic debris on the ear margins, especially at the tips, can become very
thick and hard. With head shaking, seratching, or blunt trauma, the hard crust and its
subjacent viable tissues can crack and result in an ear fissure (see Chap. 19). The fissure is
painful and causes the dog to shake its head, which accelerates the fissuring.
 In early cases, the diagnosis of ear margin dermatosis is straightforward. Seborrheic
changes are restricted to the ear margin of a dog with pendulous ears. Pruritus and pain
are absent, With heavy crusting and fissures, all the causes of vasculitis (Fig. 14-9) rmust
be considered (see Chap. 9). Histopathologie examination shows marked surface and
follicular orthokeratotic or parakeratotic hyperkeratosis (Fig. 14- 10).
Ear margin dermatosis is an incurable condition that can be controlled with antisebor.
rheic treatments. Coupled with these treatments, management changes should be consid
ered. Affected dogs should not be allowed to sleep near forced air heating ducts, wood
stoves, or other dry heat sources.59 In addition, the dog's diet should be reviewed and
improved if necessary.
Because of the follicular nature of the seborrhea, sulfur-salicylic acid, benzoyl perox-
ide, or benzoyl peroxide-sulfur shampoos are most commonly used to remove the accumu-
lated debris. In chronic cases in which the debris is hard, the areas should be soaked in
warm water for 5 to 10 minutes before the shampoo is applied. The areas are sharmpooed
every 24 to 48 hours until the debris is completely removed. Severc cascs can take 10 to
14 days for this to occur. After the cleaning, a moisturizer should be applied to 1minimize
transepidermal water loss. When the ears are near normal, the frequency of sharmpooing
is reducedl to an as-needed basis.
In some cases, removal of thc dcbris results in pinnal inflammation. In most in-
stances, however, this infammation is mild and requires no treatment. Moderately in1-
famed lesions benefit from the application of a 1% hydrocortisone cream or ointment. 9
FIGURE I4-9. Ear imargin scaling and crusting in a Dachshund. Lesions away from
the ear margins suggest au underlying vasculopathly.
Keratinization Defects · I045
FIGURE 14-I0. Histopathologic section of ear imnargin deruatosis. Tangential section shows
a papillated epidermis with orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis.
With severe infammation or early fssures, prednisolone (1 mg/kg q24h orally) or a potent
steroid-antibiotic topical product is needed for 7 to 10 days. With extensive fissuring,
pinnal surgery is required. With multiple fissures, a cosmetic ear crop should be per-
formed. Appropriate diagnostic tests should bc performed before surgery to ensure that
the fissure was not caused by somc underlying vasculitic process.
● canine taIl Gland HyperplasIa
All dogs have an oval spot on the dorsal surface of the tail, about 2.5 to 5 crn distal to the
anus, that is different from other skin. The area has simple instead of compound hair
folicles and numerous largc sebaceous and circumanal (perianal or hepatoid) glands (Figs.
14-1l and 14-12).
Some dogs with primary or sccondary seborrhea, or with relative or absolute elevated
blood androgen levels develop hypcrplasia of the sebaceous glands, circumanal glands in
the tail gland, or both. When thc androgen levels are elevated, the circumanal glands
around the anus and elsewhere are also typically hyperplastic. Early tail gland hyperplasia
usually goes unnoticed because the overlying hairs hide the defect. with tine, however,
the area becomcs hairless because of friction and compression of the hair follicles by the
hyperplastic glands. At this stagc, the owner notices an oval, bulging. hairless area on the
tail (see Fig. 14-6F). The overlying skin may be scaly, greasy, hyperpigrnented, or some
combination thereof. In advanced cases, the area can havc a nodular appearancc hecause
of nonuniforrm glandular hypertrophy and cystic dilatation or secondary infection.
 si s re  an  i p n  jo ee 
mon. Grouped or single pustules may develop, with each pustule representing an acne-
like sebaccous or circumanal gland infection. Puncturing the pustules, expressing the
contents, and administering systemic antibiotics usually provide relief. In some cases, the
infection may recur.
 Tail gland hyperplasia is usually a strictly cosmetic defect rcquiring no treatment.
Because many cases arc causcd by hyperantdrogenisin, castration should be offered to
 prevent furthcr enlargement. When castration is performed, a beneficial response usually
1046 · Keratinization Defects
FIGURE I4-II. Canine tail gland hyperplasia. Markcd
the hair follcles disrupts the hair cycle and results in
alopecia.
occurs within 2 months. The owncr should be warmed that castration rmay not lead to
complete resolution of the existing lesion. Although the glands should hecoine less hyper-
plastic, the alopecia may be permancnt as a result of prolonged glandular pressurc on the
hair follicles. In the past, medical treatment with estrogens or progestational compounds
has been recominended because of their antiandrogenic effects. As a result of their
 potential serious side effects, however (e.g., bone marrow supprcssion, diabetes mellitus),
these agents are no longer suggested.
Animals that do not respond sufficiently to castration or are not neutered may benefit
from surgery. An elliptic piece of skin is removed from the dorsal area of the tail over the
enlargement. Blunt dissection and curettage are then performed to remove the excess
glandular material under and lateral to the incision. Before the wound is sutured, addi-
tional loose skin can usually be removed to provide a normal conformation of skin around
the tail. The area should be bandaged to prevent self-damage or suture removal by the
dog. Excellent cosmetic correction usually results, with only a small scar remaining visible,
Without castration, recurrence can be expected in I to 3 years.
· feline taIl Gland HYperPlaSia
Cats have the same tail gland area as dogs, but it is located in a linc along the dorsal
aspect of the tail and is commonly called the supracaudal organ. As in dogs, this area is
rich in sebaceous and epitrichial sweat glands (Fig. 14- 13), and a waxy secretion accumu-
lates on the surface.
In sorme cats, especially those kept in catteries or small enclosures, unusually large
Keratinization Defects·I047
FIGURE ↑4-I2. Close-up of the circumanal (perianal
 or hepatoid) glancls in the tail gland.
FIGURE 14-13. Feline stud tail. Marked sebacous gland hypcrplasia
I048 · Keratinization Defects
amounts of exccss secretions accumulate and cause 1mating of the hair and the formation
of scales and crusts (Fig. 14-14). In some cases, the overlying haircoat is thinned, and the
skin may become hyperpigmented (see Fig. 14-6G). Rarely, sccondary bacterial folliculitis
and furunculosis conplicate the condition. This condition is of great concern to owners of
uncastrated male show cats, which accounts for the popular name stud tail51; however, it
has also been observed in females and altered males. Castration does not resolve the
gtoisrnd shi dois dy a inq u
Treatment consists of clipping the affected area and washing it with antiseborrheic
shainpoos. Benzoyl peroxide shampoo can be very useful. This treatment can be followed
by daily cleaning with alcohol or a milder antisehorrheic shampoo (e.g., sulfur-salicylic
acid). It is advisable to provide affected cats with as little confinement as possible, because
fresh air and sunshine may help prevent recurrencc. The unconfined cat usually resumes
cleaning itself and the tail gland area with the customary fastidiousness characteristic of
cormmon side effects, however, their advisability as therapy for a benign, asynptomatic
disease is qucstionable. Retinoids have not been used in this condition, but they may be
of some valuc in recalcitrant cases.
If the cat fails to care for the problem, the owner must carefully and frequently cornb
and groom the area to prevent recurrence.
FIGURE 14-14. Feline tail gland hyperpla-
sia with accunulation of greasy material in the
hairs.
Keratinization Defects · I049
· EXFolIatIve DErMaToSES
Virtually every surface or superficial follicular skin lesion in dogs and cats cxfoliates (falls
off in scales and layers) during its development, maturation, or involution. With the
coalescence of adjacent lesions, large areas of exfoliation can occur, making the list of
possible exfoliative dermatoses large indeed. True exfoliative dermatoses, however, are
characterized by generalized severe dcsquamation with or without generalized erythema
(erythroderma). Although affected animals may have some unaffected areas on the body,
those that are involved are uriformly affected, with no visible normal skin.
 In animals receiving no medications for a systemic or skin disease, the following must
bc considered as causes of the exfoliative dermatitis: ichthyosis, contact dermatitis to a
topical agent (shampoo, dip, and so forth), pemphigus foliaceus, feline leukemia virus
(FeLV) or fcline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) dermatitis, systemic lupus erythematosus,
erytherma multiformne or toxic epidermal necrolysis, epitheliotropic lymphoma, the disor-
medications, drug eruption and unexpected physiologic response to the drng must be
sources increase the number of possibilities. In these animals, widespread supericial
bacterial folliculitis, dermatophytosis, Malassezia dermatitis, demodicosis, chcyletiellosis,
and occasionally scabies must be considered, Idiopathic cases are reported.
With careful consideration of the history, physical findings, and routine in-offce
diagnostic tests (e.g., skin scrapings, trichography, cytologic tests), the list of differential
diagnoses for an exfoliative dermatosis becomes considerably shorter. Definitive diagnosis
is oftcn inade by skin biopsy. Most causcs of cxfoliative derinatosis arc covcred clsewhcrc
 in this textbook. Parapsoriasis, cutancous flushing, thymoma, and physiologic response to a
drug are considered here.
● THYMOMA
A generalized exfoliative derrmatitis has been described in a small number of cats with
thymoma.17. 49 5s Affected cats were middle-age to old, with an exfoliative dernatitis frst
noted on the head and pinna. Pruritus usually is minimal or absent, but may be intense.
 Despite treatinent with steroids, antibiotics, or other agents, lesions sprcad anid involve the
 n  s     sm jn  e   
exfoliation (Fig. 14-15), and scborrheic debris accumulates in the intcrdigital spaces and
FIGURE I4-I5. Hair loss and
seborrheic change in a cat with a thy-
moma. Notc how the epithelium ex-
foliatcs in large shecls.
1050 · Keratinization Defects
FIGURE I4-I6. Hair loss and
seborrheic paronychia in a cat witi
a thymoma.
around the clawbeds (Fig. 14-16). Some affected cats lose hair pigment and turn whitc.
Beyond the skin lesions, the cats appear otherwise healthy.
The differential diagnosis includes systemic lupus erythematosus, FeLV or FIV der-
 Inatitis, drug reaction, demodicosis, or hyperadrenocorticisin with secondary bacterial,
 dermatophyte, or Malassezia involvenent. On skin biopsy, a cell-poor hydropic interface
derimatitis of the surface and follicular epithelium is seen (Fig. 14--17) Apoptotic kera-
tinocytes are seen in the basal layer and, to a lesser extent, in the stratum spinosum. In
one casc, the infiltrating lymphocytes were CD8+, and sebaceous glands were also infil-
trated.49u
 Most thymomas are benign, and surgical removal will result in permanent resolution 
 of the skin lesions.
· ParaPSorIASIS
FIGURE
14-I7. Thymoma.A
cell-poor hydropic interface dermati-
tis.
Keratinization Defects * 105|
FIGURE I4-I8. Parapsoriasis.
Superfcial perivascular to lichenoid
dermatitis with parakeratotic hyper-
keratosis and diffuse exocytosis of
lymphocytes.
been reported in animals and only in one dog and onc cat53 The dermatoses were
 characterized by widespreadl erythernatous, scaly plaques that spared the head, pinnae,
and distal limbs (see Fig. 14--6H). Irregular hair loss occurrcd in thc involved areas. In
the dog, many of the plaques were studded with large, superfcial, faccid, yellow pustules,
 annular erosions, and epidermal collarettes that werc a result of a secondary staphylococ-
cal infection.
 Biopsy of affected skin showed a focally parakeratotic, regularly hyperplastic, superf-
cial perivascular to lichenoid interface dermatitis with diffuse exocytosis of normal lympho-
cytes (Fig. 14-18). A striking finding was a (liffuse accumulation of lymphocytes arranged
in a line within the basal cell layer of the epidermis and hair follicle outcr root sheaths
(Fig. 14-19).
'Both animals were treated with high levels of corticosteroids, the cdog with oral
 prednisolone (2.2 mg/kg q24h) and the cat with methylprcdnisolone acetate injections (5
mg/kg q2wk). Marked healing ocurred in 8 to 10 days, with complete resolution of all
 lesions in 6 to 10 weeks. Both cases required maintenancc therapy to prevent relapse.
FIGURE I4-I9. Parapsoriasis.
Jo sisooxa pue ssorsuods osni
lymphocytes. Note thc row of lyin-
 phocytes within the basal layer.
1052 · Keratinization Defects
· CUTANEOUS FLUSHING
Cutaneous fushing is duc to vasodilation of the cutaneous blood vessels and is manifested
by the skin turning various shades of red.2 Thc flushing can be regionalized or general-
ized and paroxysmal or persistent. Pathologic fushing is due to the direct action of
vasoactive compounds on' the blood vesscls. Because some vasoactive compounds (e.g.,
histamine) are pruritogenic, some Hushing disorders can be pruritic, but the Hushing
 precedes the pruritus.
 In dogs, persistcnt, widespread erythema (erythroderma) can be a feature of systemic
lupus erythematosus, demodicosis, drug reaction, thallium toxicosis, mast cell tumor, cuta
necus lyinphoma, or systemic rmastocytosis.41. 64 Paroxysmal fHushing has been associated
with pheochromocytoma, drug reaction, mast cell tumor, and the carcinoid syndrome.41
 In humans, the carcinoid syndrome refers to an uncoinmon condition associated with
slow-growing nalignant carcinoid tumors derived frorm enterochromaffin cels, which pro-
duce a variety of vasoactive compounds.2 In most instances, the tumor is located in the.
gastrointestinal tract, but it can also bc found in the ovary, testis, skin, or bronchus. In
 dogs, the carcinoid syndrome has been reported in association with pulmonary adenocarci-
noimatl and has been recognized in several dogs with intestinal lesions.59
At their onset, flushing disorders in dogs have no associated exfoliation. In chronic
cases, especially whcn the Hushing is persistent, desquamation occurs but remains ovcr-
shadowed by the crythroderma. Al anirmals with such a presentation should havc a
● PhYSIOLOGIC reSPOnSe tO DrUGS
As mentioned earlier, virtually all surface or superficial follicular skin lesions exfoliate at
some point, especially during their involution. Accordingly, the drugs used to treat the
lesions cause exfoliation in effect. If the skin lesions are widespread and numerous, an
exfoliative dermatosis will result. Because clients are aware of the initial lesions, mnost
recognize that the exfoliation is a sign of healing and are not concerned by it.
acids) can cause an exfoliative dermatitis near the onset of treatiment or after discontinua-
tion of the drug. Exfoliation at the termination of treatment with a cytostatic agent should
be expected, and the client should be made aware of this expectation. The most common
exaimple is the profound scaling that occurs when an anirmal is withdrawn from a chronic
FtGURE I4-20. Exfoliative der-
matosis  in  a  hypothyroid  Do
berman pinscher resulting from the
institution of thyroid hormone Te-
placement therapy.
Keratinization Defects · 1053
course of treatment with moderate to high doses of a corticosteroid. Similar changes can
occur in dogs with spontaneous hyperadrenocorticisin that are being treated with mitotane
p m  jo sa m isg   sp py u pe (aado
hormone. Much more problematic is the exfoliation that occurs 1 to 2 weeks after
            
whether the exfoliation represents a drug eruption or clinical evidence of increased
epidermal turnover. If the pharmacology of the drug allows this change and the animal is
 showing no clinical or laboratory evidence of systeinic illness, the question can be an-
swered by observing the animal carefully for 7 to 10 days. Pharmacologic exfoliation will
m io sisied m ua p e nq 'an s um ds no nssal
● rEFerencEs
1. Anderson RK: Exfoliative dermatitis in the dog. Comp
therapy in dogs and cats. Part I. Sharnpoo therapy. In
Cont Edue 3:885, 1981.
Pract 20:244, 1996.
2. Baker BB, et al: Epiderual cel renewal in dogs after
17. Day MJ: Review of thynic pathology in 30 cats and 36
clipping the hair. Ain J Vet. Res 35:445, 1974.
dogs.JSmallAnim Pract 38:393,1997.
3. Bedford CJ Young JM: A comparison of comedonal
18. Draelos ZD: New developrments in cosmetics and skin
and skin surface lipids frou hairless dogs showing clin-
care produets. Ady Denmatol 12:3, 1997.
ical signs of acnc. J Invest Dermatol 77:341, 1981.
19. Fllis CN, Voorhees J: Etretinate therapy. J An Acad
4. Berardesca E, Borroni G: Instruinental evaluation of
Dermatol 16:267, 1987.
cutaneous hyrlration. Clin Dermatol 13:323, 1995.
20.Evans AC、et al: A trial of 13-cis-retinoic acid for
5. Bond R: Caninc and feline acne. Vet Ann 33:230,
treatinent of squarnous cell carcinoma and preneoplas-
1993.
tic: lesions of the head in cats. Am J Vet Res 46:2553,
6. Breen P, Jeromin A: Practice tips. Dcrim Dialoguc,
1985.
Winter 93/94, p 7.
21. Falok VA: ‘Treatment of canine idiopathie scborrhea
7. Campbell A: Calcipotriol poisoning in dogs. Vet Rec
with isotretinoin. Ain J Vet Rcs 47:1730, 1986.
141:27, 1997.
22. Frcedberg IM. et al: Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in
8. Campbell KL, Davis CA: Effects of thyroid hormones 
General Medicine, 5th ed. McGraw-Hill Book Co.,
on seruin and cutancous fatty acid concentrations in
New York, 1999.
dogs. Ain J Vet Res 51:752, 1990.
23. Gardcy L, et al: Hydrating etfect of a shampoo on the 
9. Canpbell 'KL, et al: Effects of oral sunferwer oil on
skin of healthy dogs. Proc Aln Acad Vet Dermatol Am
serum and cutaneous fatty acid concentration proflcs
Coll Vet Dermatof 15:27, 1999.
in seborrheic dogs. Vet Dermatol 3:29, 1992.
24. Gordon JG, Kwochka KW: Conneocyte counts for cval-
10. Campbell KL. Schaeffer DJ: Efects of four veterinary
tatiou of antiseborrheie shampoos in dogs. Vet Derma-
shampoos on transcpidernal water losscs, hydration of
tol 4:57. 1993.
the stratum comeun, skin surface lipid cocentrations.
25. Gottlicb Sl, et al: Cellular actions of etrelinate in
and corneocyte couuts in dogs.
.Proc Annu Meinb
psoriasis: Enhanced epiclermal differentiation and re-
Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vct Dcrmatol
duced cel-mediatcd inflammation are unexpecled out-
9:96, 1993.
11. Campbell KL, Kirkwood AR: Efect of topical oils on
comes. J Cutan Pathol 23:404, 1996.
26. Ghriffiu CE: Open forum-Etretinate-
How is it being
trausepidermal water loss in dogs with seborrhca sicca.
used in veterimary tlermatology? Derm Dialogue,
In: lhrke PJ, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Der-
Spring/Summer 1993, p 4.
27. Gross TL, et al: Veterinary Dermatopathology. Mosby-
p 157.
12. Campbell Ki. et al: Effects of four anti-seborrheic
Year Book, St. Louis, 1992.
28. Guaguere I: Cas clinique: Seborhee primaire repom-
shanpoos on transcpiderrmal water losses, hydration of
the stratun corneum, skin surface lipid concentration,
dant a ladninistration dc vitamine A. Point Vet 16:
skin surface pH,and cormeocyte counts in dlogs. Proc
689, 1984.
29. Guaguere E: Quel cst votre diagnostie? Point Vet I8:
Vet Derinalol 10:85, 1994.
245, 1986.
13. Campbell KL, et al: Fffects of four topical hunectant/
30. Ihrke PJ. Goldschmidt MIl: Vitamin A-responsive
erollicnt solutions on the skin of dogs. Proc Anm
dermatosis in the dog. J Ain Vet Med Assoc 182:682.
Mcet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Arm Coll' Vet Dermatol
1983.
12:49, 1996.
31. Kietzmann M: Eicosanoid levels in canine imflamma-
14. Campbell KL., Bibus D: Effect of α-linolenic acid on
tory skin diseases. In: von Tscharner C, Halliwell REW
the skin and plasma phospholipids of beugle puppies.
(eds): Advances in Vetcrinary Dermatology I. Baillerc-
Proc Am Acad Vet IDerimatol Am Coll Vet Dermuatol
Tindall, London, 1990, p 211.
15:105, 1999.
32.Kwochka KW, Rademakers AM: Cell proliferation of
15. Christophers E, Mrowietz U: Psoriasis. In: Frcedberg
cpidernis hair folicles, and sbaccous glands of a
IM, et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General
gles and Cocker spaniels with healthy skin. Am J Vet
Medicine, 5th ed. MeGraw-Hill Book Co., San Fran-
Rcs 50:587, 1989.
cisco. 1999, p 495.
33. Kwochka KW: Keratinization abnorimalities: Under.
16. Curtis C: Use and abuse of topical dermatological
standing the mechanism of scale formation. in: lhrkc
1054 · Keratinization Defects
P]. et al (eds). Advances in Veterinary Dennatology,
49a. Rivierre C, Olivry T: Dermatite exfoliative paraneo-
Vol. 2. Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1993. p 91.
plasique associee a un thyrnoine chez un chat: Resolu-
34. Kwochka Kw: Keratinization disorders. Current Vcter-
tion des syinptoines apres thymectormie. Prat Med Chir
Anin Comp 34:531, 1999.
1993, p 167.
50. Rosenkranlz Ws: The pathaogenesis, diagnosis, and
35. Kwochka KW: Shampoos and moisturizing finscs in
management of feline acne. Vet Mcd S6:504, 1991.
velerinary denmatology.
.In: Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's
5l. Scott Dw: Feline dermatology 1900-1978: A mono-
Current Veterinary Therapy XI1. W. B. Saunders Co,
graph. J Aun Anim Hosp Assoc 16:331. 1980.
Philadelphia, 1995, p 590.
52. Scott Dw: Vitamin A-respousive dermatosis in thc
36. Kwochka KW: The structure and function of epidermal
Cocker spanicl. J An Anim Hosp Assoc 22:125, 1986.
lipids. Vet IDcrmatol 4:151, 1993.
 53. Scott DW: Exfoliativc dermatoses in a dog and a cat
37. Kwochka KW: Retinoids and vitamin A therapy. ln:
resembling large plaque parapsoriasis in humans.
Grifin CE, et al (eds): Current Veterinary Dermatol-
Comp Anim Pract 2:22, 1986.
ogy. Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis, 1993, p 203.
 54. Scotf DW, et al: A clinieal study on the efficacy olf two
38. Kwochka KW: Advanees in tlhe managernent of canirne
commercial vcterinary enolients (Micropearls and
scaling. Proe 3rd World Cong Vet 1Derrmatol 1996, p.
Humilac) in the management of wintertine dry skin in 
99.
dogs. Cornell Vet 8l:4i9, 1991.
39. Lu 1, et al: Modulation of epidernal differentiation,
55. Scott Dw, et al: A clinical study on the effect of two
tissue inflammation, and T-lymphocyte infltration in
coumnercial veterinary benzoyl peroxide shampoos in
psoriatic plaques by topical calcitriol. J Cuan Pathol
dogs. Canine Pract 19:7, 1994.
23:419. 1996.
 56. Scott DW: Clinical assessment of topical benzoyl pcr-
40. Marks SL., et al: Clinical evaluation of ctretinate for
oxide in treatment of canine skin diseases. Vet Med
the treatment of cauine solar indnced squamous cell
74:808, 1979.
carcinoma and preneoplastic lesions. J An Acad Der-
57. Scott DW: Topical cntancous medieine, or "Now wlhat
natol 27:11, 1992.
should 1 try?* Proc Am Anim Ilosp Assoe 46:89. 1979.
41. Miller WH Jr: Cutaneous fushing associated with in-
58. Scott DW, et al: Exfoliative dermmatitis in association
trathoracic neoplasia in a dog. J Ain Aniun Hosp Assoc
with thymoma in three cats. Feline Pract 23:8, 1995.
28:217,1992.
59. Scott IDW. et al: Muller and Kirk's Small Aninal Der-
42. Paradis M: Footpad hyperkeratosis iu a fanily of
matology、 Sith edl. W. B. Saunders, Co., Philadcelphit,
Dogues de Bordeaux. Vet Dermatol 3:75, 1992.
1995.
43. Parker W, et al: Vitamin A-responsivc scbonrheic der-
 60. Sirpson JW, van den Brock AUM: I'at absorption in
matitis in the dog: A case report. J Am Anin Hosp
dlogs with diabetes melltus or hypothyroidism. Res Vet
Assoc 19:546. 1983.
Sci 50:346, 1991.
61. Stewart LJ. et al: Isotretinoin in the treatment of sehxa-
assess changes in the skin after shampoo therapy. In:
ceous adenitis in tvo vizslas. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Der-
27:65, 1991.
natology, Vol 3. Butterworth-Heimemann, Buston,
62. Suter MM, et al: Keratinocyte biology and pathology.
1999, p 523.
Vet Dermatol 8:67, 1997.
45. Peck GL, Di Giovanna J: Retinoids. In: Freelherg
63. von Tscharmer C, ct al: Proliferation characteristies of
 IM, et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General
canine keratinocyte cullures infected with Malassezid
Medicine, 5th ed. MeGraw-Hill Book Co., San Fran-
pachydermatis. Proc Ain Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll
ciscoo, 1999.
Vet Derinatol 15:107, 1999.
46. Power HT, Ilrke PJ: The use of synthetic rctinoids in
64. White SD: The skin as a sensor of internal medical
veterinary rmedicine. In: Bonagura JD (edl): Kirk's Chur-
disorders. In; Ettinger SJ (ed): Textbook of Veterinary
rent Velerinary Therapy XI1. W. B. Saunders Co, Phil-
Intemal Medieine, 3rd ed. W. B. Sarnders Co, Phila-
adelphia, 1995, p 585.
delphia, 1989, p 5.
47. Prens EP, ct al: Effccts of cyclosporine on cytokincs
65. White SD, ct al. Isotretinoin and etretinate in the
and cytokine receptors in psoriasis. J Am Acad' Derma-
 treatment of henign and malignant cutaneous neoplasia
tol 33:947, 1995.
and in sebaceons adenitis of longhaircd dlogs. Proc
48. Reichrath J, et al: Biologic effects of topical calcipotriol
Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll
(MC 903) treatment in psoriatic skin. J Am Acad Der-
Vet Dermatol 7;101, 1991.
matol 36:19, 1997.
66. White SD, et al: Feline acne and resulls of Ireatinenl
49. Rcistcr M: Ask the vet: Feline aene problein. Cat
with nupirocin in an opcu clinical trial: 25 cases
Fancy 39:16, 1996.
(1994-1996). Vet Dermatol 8:157, 1997.
Chanter
Psychogenic Skin Diseases
D sychodermatology, also known as psychocutancous medicine and dermatopsychoso-
 matics, is a growing field of interest in human medicine.7. 24 Workers in this field
believe that the body (soma) and mirnd (psyche) have been treated separately for too long
and that they constitute a single unit. It is believed that the rolce of enotional factors in
diseases of the skin is of suchi significance that if emotional factors are ignored, effective
impossible. One exploratory mmodel for these mind-body relationships is the neuro-im-
muno-cutaneous-endocrine (NICE) network, in which thcsc four organ systems are inti-
mately linkcd and share a language of neuropeptides, cytokines, glucocorticoids, and other
effector molccules.1s Research in laboratory anirmals and humans indicates that the central
nervous system (CNS), through the effects of neurohorinones, can significantly modulate
immune responses and pruritus. The relationship between the hypothalamus and the
imimune systein seems to involve neurohormones secreted by the hypothalamus (thyrotro-
pin releasing factor, prolactin releasing factor, gonadotropi releasing hormone); the neu-
rotransmitters norepinephrine, serotonin, dopamine, acetylcholine, y-aninobutyric acid;
and the polypeptide neuroregulators somatostatin, vasoactive intestinal peptide, substance
cyte-stimulating hormone, neurotensin, ncurokinin A, neuropeptide Y, enkephalins, and
endorphins.14, 24 These factors are known to have vasornotor, inmunomodulatory, chemo.
tactic, and cellular growth effects.1s
The role of neurotransmitters and neuroregulators in veterinary dermatology is un-
known. The ield of bohavior is rapidly expanding in veterinary medicine, and the use of
 bchavioral pharmacothcrapy is rapilly growing 22 41. 42 Many of the drugs in use act on the
monoamine neurotransmitters, which include dopamine, serotonin, and norepinephrine.
Hecent studies with drugs that block serotonin reuptake, norepinephrine reuptake, or
cndorphin actions suggest that they play some role. Part of the effcct may be related to
the decrease in the effects of endorphin-induced histamine release.
Studies in laboratory animals have shown that the CNS can interact with the immune
system. Guinea pigs sensitized to bovine serum albumin were conditioned by repeatedly
being exposed to the allorgen and an odor simultaneously.4 They eventually expericnced
the allergic rcaction when exposed to the odor alone, without the allergcn.
 In  humans, psychodermatologic  conditions  are  divided  into  psychophysiologic
disorders in which there is a bona fide skin disorder (allergy, urticaria) that can be
exacerbated by ermotional stress; primary psychiatrie disorders in which there is anxiety,
depression, delusion, and obsessive-compulsive behavior; and secondary psychiatric disor-
ders.7,14
Most lesions of psychogcnic dermatoses in anirmals are the rcsult of self-induced damage.
There is good clinical evidence that psychological disturbances are the cause.3 8. 22 31. 47
 Obsessive-compulsive disorders are characterized by repetitive, stereotypic, ritualistic be-
haviors in excess of what is required for nornal function; the execution of these behaviors
interferes with normal daily activities and functioning.3. 8, 22. 31 Behavioral conditions that
can be present in obsesive-compulsive anials include boredom, attention-seeking, hyper-
activity, and anxiety. Three general factors are involved in the etiopathogcnesis:
1055
1056 · Psychogenic Skin Diseases
1. Breed predisposition. Breeds that are emotional and nervous develop more psycho-
genic dermatoses. Oriental breeds of cats (Abyssinian, Siamese, Burmese, and
 Doberman pinschers, Great Danes, Irish setters, Labrador retrievers, and Gcrman
shepherdls.21.38.48
 2. The lifestyle of the aninal can be causative or contributory. When individuals not
 of predisposed brceds are forced into stressful, isolated, or boring situations and
are without human or canine companionship, they may develop psychogenic der-
matoses. Long confinement in crates, continual chain restraint, simall-pen housing.
or domination by a forceful or inconsiderate owner may precipitate problems. A
rival animal in the same house or an aggressivc neighborhood animal can trigger a
psychogenic disturbance.
3.
 The individual animal, regardless of breed or lifestyle, can be particularly nervous,
hyperesthetie, fearful, or shy.
The diagnosis of a psychogenic dermatosis is by exclusion and generally cannot be
well docunented. The diagnosis is also occasionally used for those frustrating cases that
 do not respond to treatment, cven when a thorough work-up has not been perforned.
Physical causes must always he eliminated before a diagnosis of psychogenic dermatosis is
made. This includes ruling out such causative factors as trauma, neuropathy, local pain,
parasites, allergy, bacterial or fungal infections, and internal diseases. The problem of
accurate diagnosis can be coinpounded by the fact that psychogenic factors may play a
partial role in a diseasc; a work-up may reveal an organic disease, but the psychological
component may be significant enough 'that such treatinent becomes necessary for ade-
quate control of the whole condition.
Dermatoses thought to be psychogenic in origin or to have a significant psychogenic
component include acral lick dermatitis (lick granuloma), tail dock neuroma, feline psycho-
 genic alopecia and dermatitis, and miscellaneous psychogenic manifestations such as tail
sucking (feline), tail biting (canine), fank sucking, foot licking, self-nursing, and anal licking.
O PSYChOLOGICAL DRUG ThERAPY
A variety of drugs that affect CNS neurotransmitters or endorphins or that have other
sedative, antidepressant, or antianxiety effects may be beneficial in diseases characterized
 by self-destructive behavior, abnormai licking or chewing, and pruritus.* In general, these
drugs are tried when the disease is believed to have a significant psychological component
in its cause. These drugs, which work by a variety of mechanisms, include antidepressants,
antipsychotics, opiate antagonists, anxiolytics, and mood stabilizers.
The drugs that have been evaluated the most are the heterocyclic (tricyclic) antide-
pressants (amitriptyline, clomipramine, doxepin) and fuoxetine, another antidepressant
that is structurally different from the heterocyclic antidepressants but that has a sinilar
 mechanism of action.t These drugs act primarily by increasing neurotransmitter levels of
serotonin. They work prinarily by blocking the reuptake of serotonin by the presynaptic
neuronal membrane, which effectively increases the activity of serotonin. Doxcpin, clomip-
ramine, and amitriptyline also increase the effect of norepinephrine, which is responsible
for arousal and stimulating the behavioral focus,30 Clomipramine and fuoxetine are more
H, blockers, and this may be helpful in some cases as well. These other effects may help
to make these drugs useful in allergic diseases as well, especialy when a psychogenic
hours was effective in 16% of the allergic dogs treated,17 whereas doxepin hydrochloride
*7, 10, 13, 22, 3l, 41,42: see Relerences.
110, 11, 17, 20, 22, 31, 33, 35, 40, 41: see References.
Psychogcnic Skin Discascs · I057
at I mg/kg every 8 hours was ineffective.26 However, one author (CEG) has seen excellent
responses to doxepin in some animals. Anecdotal reports indicate that the serotonin
reuptake inhibitor Hluoxetine hydrochloride at 1 mg/kg q24h is effective in 30% of dogs
with allergic prurtus. Althese drngs at the folowing dosageshave beenreportd
effective for a variety of psychogenic dermatoses in dogs and cats to be described.22
· Fluoxetine (Prozac), 1 mg/kg q24h, can be uscd,2. 31, 3 40 The problem is that it is 
very expensive.
· Clomipramine (Clomicalm, Anafranil), 2 to 4 mg/kg daily given q24h or dividcd
q12h for dogs, and 0.5 to 1.5 mg/kg daily given q24h for cats.5. 10, 11, 27, 29. 31, 35
Clomiprarine is available as a veterinary drug (Clomicalm), now licensed for use in
 dogs with separation anxiety. In dogs, clomipramine has a short elimination half-life
and inarked interdog variability.ll It should be given with food to minimizc vomit-
ing.l0 Absorption following oral administration is similar when clomipramine is givcn
with or without ineals. 12a
· Amitriptyline (Elavil), 1 to 3 mg/kg q12h,13 17.22 although lcss cxponsive, nay not be
as effective as clormipramine or Huoxetine.
· Doxepin (Sinoquan, Adapin), 0.5 to 2 mg/kg q12h with higher doses used more in
psychogenic dermatoses, also has the advantage of being less expensive.
· Imipramine (Tofranil), 2 to 4 mg/kg q24h.
 In general, the potentially more serious side effects of these drugs are induction of
cardiac arrhythmias, such as promotion of heart block by slowing of cardiac conduction,
and anticholinergic effects including dry mouth, urine retention, and reduced tear produc-
tion.7, 17, 41 They also lower the scizure threshold, and they enhance ronarnine oxidase
inhibitor toxicity in addition to having the metabolic results and side effects that are
inherent to first-generation antihistamines. Up to 30% of animals treated 1may show
varying combinations and variably severe degrees of voniting, diarrhea, lethargy, hyperex-
citability, polydipsia, increased frequency of urination and/or defecation, urinary retention,
aggrcssion, personality changcs, and anorexia.10.29, 30, 31. 40
Endorphins may also play a role in perpetuating or inducing pruritic behavior such as
excessive groorming. The opiate antagonists bind competitively to opiate receptors in the
CNS and block thc binding of endogenous cndorphins that may be produced or released
from self-destructive behavior.22 3o This prevents or inhibits the euphoric state that the
endorphins would induce, helping to alleviate the desire to be self-destructive. Feline
psychogenic alopecia and canine acral lick dermatitis arc two syndromes characterized by
excessive self-licking. Studies using endorphin blockers demonstrated some efficacy. In
cats with feline psychogenic alopecia, naloxone (Narcan) injected subcutaneously (1 mg/kg)
rosulted in improvemcnt in four of five treated cats.so Another study in dogs with acral
lick dermatitis showed that the endorphin blocker naltrexone (Trexan) (2.2 mg/kg q24h)
   a s aa  n ss ae p o e pia 
mon, although there is a report of a dog with naltrexone-induced pruritus.36 Naltrexone
(Nemexin) administered orally successfully suppressed pruritus in various intermal and
dermatologic diseases in humans, wherein traditional therapeutic modalities had failed.16a
Anxiolytic oral drugs (especially benzodiazepines and antihistamines) that may be
helpful are phenobarbital, 2.2 to 6.6 mg/kg.q12h; diazepam (Valiu1n), 0.2 mg/kg q12h in
cats; 0.25 to 1.1 mg/kg q12h in dogs: hydroxyzinc (Atarax), 2.2 mg/kg q8h; buspirone
 ayihgo g  o  0 g (dsng)
mechanism of action of this class of drugs is not well know. Possible mechanisms include
increased y-amincbutyric acid activity and antagonism of serotonin activity. Buspirone
ity.7. 42 Adverse effects include mild sedation, appetite stinulation, personality changes,
and paradoxical excitation. In cats, diazepam causes an idliosymceratic hepatotoxicosis that is
often fatal.? This drug must be discontinued if cats become unduly sedated, lethargic, 0r
anorectic or begin vomiting. Bascline screening serum biochemistry is recoinmended prior
s ot ped s ue eds pun jo sp g o g ie pue ade sun om
alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AsT).
I058·Psychogenic Skin Discascs
● CanIne PSYCHOGENIC DERmATOSES
Acral Lick Dermatitis
Acral lick dermatitis, also krown as lick granulona, results from an urge to lick the lower
cranial portion of a leg, producing a thickencd, irm, oval plaque. The condition may be
that presented with lesions and a history compatible with acral lick dermatitis were of
 psychogenic origin; today, however, it is believed that organic disease is commonly present
(see Chap. 4, Acral Lick Furunculosis). Potential organic causes should always be ex-
cluded. At the very minirnum, bactcrial or fungal disease, demodicosis, previous trauma,
allergy (inhalant, food, fea), and underlying joint disease should be ruled out before
diagnosing a case as purcly psychogenic in origin. If readily available, electromyography
(EMC) may bc a yaluable tool to identify cases with abnormal paraspinal muscle activity
suggesting a neurological origin.13
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
 Boredom or separation anxiety may causc a dog to develop the habit of licking its leg. A
    u   go   s  an     s
large, active dog wlhose owners work and have no children at home. Either there is no
companion dog or another dog in the household provides no play activity. Unusual
  s   so   e  o  s a  s
periods or dogs that are chained can becoine bored and relievc thcir frustrations by
constantly licking a leg. In other dogs, a preexisting focal dermatosis (e.g., an infection,
neoplasm, or wound) precipitates a vicious circle. The constant licking produces an eroded
arca on the skin that itches exquisitely. An itchi-lick cycle is established until a firn,
ulcerated lesion results. Possibly, a wound may initiate the licking, or the licking may
occur in response to stress or boredom. The licking of the erosion or wound leads to
ulceration and to the exposure of deeper skin layers. The licking prevents the ulcer from
healing and predisposes the animal to secondary infection. Epidermal hyperplasia and
dermal fbrosis account for the nodular plaque that is characteristic of the disease. The
lesion at this stage used to be called a granuloma or turmor, but it is neither meoplastic nor
granulomatous.
Excessive licking mnay cause the production and release of cndorphins, making the.
animal feel better (euphoric) and at the same time producing an analgesic effect that
decreases the animal's pain perception. This process essentialy addicts the dog to the
compulsive licking.
Electrophysiologic studies have suggested that a mild distal sensory axonal polyneu-
ropathy may bc present in some cases of acral lick dermatitis,46 although these abnormali-
ties may be a result and not the cause of the disease. EMG studies of paraspinal muscles
demonstrated abnormal spontaneous activity in 56% of the cases, suggesting a possible
lesion in ventral motor nerve roots, which is not likely to be a result of the licking in a
peripheral area.43 No cases of primary sensory neuropathy were demonstrated in this
study.
On the basis of the phenomenology of the condition and the pharmacologic rosponse,
it has been proposed that canine acral lick dermatitis is an animal model of obsessive-
compulsive disorder.19.22. 3
CLINICAL FEATURES
Predisposed breeds include the Doberman pinscher, Great Dane, Labrador retriever, Irish
are older than 5 years of agc whcn presented for treatment. Males with the disorder
outnumbcr females two to one.
Psychogenie Skin Diseases · 1059
In almost all cases, the lesion is singlc and unilateral (Fig. 15-lA). In somc cases,
multiple legs may be affected, and these cases may respond poorly to treatrment bccausc
there is offen an organic disease, such as staphylococcal furunculosis, or ar allergy that
must be addressed. One cluc that there may he a psychogenic component to the condi-
tion is the development of a newly licked area when the original lesion hias been covered
by a bandage or wrap. The most common site for a lesion is the cranial carpal or
radial, metatarsal, and tibial regions. Chronic lesions become hard, thickened plarques or
nodules that have an ulcerated surface and a hyperpigmented halo (see Fig. 15-1D).
Extremely large lesions on the joints that have been present for years may be associated
with arthritis or ankylosis of the underlying joint.
DIAGNOSIS
A tentative diagnosis can usually be made from the clinical exaimination and history. A
definitive diagnosis requires ruling out the other differential diagnoses, which include
neoplasia, pressure point granuloras, calcinosis circumscripta, bacterial furunculosis, de-
modicosis, dermatophytosis, mycotic or mycobacterial grarulomas, and underlying hyper-
dermatitis if they occur on the cranial surface of the leg. Fungal cultures confirm the
diagnosis of lesions induced by nycoses; exfoliative cytological findings and biopsy samples
 provide the basis for diagnosis. Hlowever, hypoallergenic diets and intradermal tests are
often indicated to detect a causative or concurrent allergic disease.
Histopathologically, the lcsions usually show features that are characteristic of the
disorder but are not diagnostic by themselves.*s An ulcerated surface is hordered by
irregular epidermal hyperplasia, which may be papillated and is usually marked (Fig. 15-
 2). A mild perivascular accumulation of neutrophils and mononuclear cells is usually
present. The dermis shows varying degrees of fibroplasia, and dermal papile often show
vertical streaking of fibroblasts and collagen fibrils (Fig. 15-3). Common findings include
moderate-to-marked numbcrs of plasma cells around the epitrichial sweat glands (Fig. 15-
4) and inferior segments of hair folicles and sebaceous gland hyperplasia. Foliculitis or
furuneulosis rmay cocxist.
Radiographs usually
y reveal a secondary periosteal reaction of bones that underlic
large, chronic, acral lick dermatitis lesions.* Joint disease is not induced by the licking; if
present, joint discasc may be the causc of the excessive licking.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Psychological counseling with the client should be the first step in the managercnt of
problem is in its head antd not just on the leg. Together, the clinician and client must
become psychological detectives to find what caused the dog to lick its leg. Examplcs of
causes include the following:
1. The dog is left alonc all day.
2. The dog is confined for long periods to a crate, kennel, cage, or run.
3. There is a new pet in the home.
4. There is a new baby in the home.
 5. A female dog is in heat nearby bul not accessible to the male dog.
 6. A new dog has come to the neighborhood.
7. A death has occurred in the family.
 8. A long-time companion of the dog has died.
 9. Children or other family 1nembcrs have moved away.
The first step in treatment is to recognize the cause and eliminate it, if possible.
Sometimes a change in the dog's lifestyle is the answer. Each situation differs, but the
following are examples of succcssful corrective measures:
I060 ·Psychogenic Skin Diseases
G
FIGURE I5-I, A, Aeral lick derrmatitis. The carpal area is commonly affected, B, Bilateral acral liek dermatitis
Psychogenic Skin Diseases ·I06I
FIGURE I5-2. Canine acral lick
cermatitis. Fibrosing dermatitis with
marked epidermal and  sebaceous
ation.
1. More walks and human cornpanionship are very helpful. Some owncrs can take
their dog to work if they own a small shop or business.
 2. For a kennel dog, avoidance of confinement to cages, kennels, or runs can bc
beneficial. The owner can make a house pet of the afficted dog. Even nightly
confinement to a cage may cause enough frustration to trigger acral lick dermatitis.
3. A new puppy as a companion can act as a diversion that may discourage further
licking. The success of this method depends on the extent to which a friendship
develops between the two dogs. For a male dog, a spayed feinale is very suitable.
The owner should be aware, however, that obtaining a companion dog is not a
guaranteed cure.
4. Freedom to leave the house and premises can enable the dog to develop a life of
its own in the neighborhood. This suggestion is suitable for some rural areas but is
usually impossible in suburban or urban areas where leash laws are in effect.
Once the lesion is present, therapy for the psychological component alone may not be
effective. Systemic, topical, and surgical treatmcnt may be required along with psychother-
● Psychological Drug Therapy. The psychological drugs may be needed for only a
short while, until the habit is broken by behavior modification or the underlying boredom
Or stress is eliminated. In other cases, long-term treatment may be required. Antidepres-
sants are the most effective. Doxepin and amitriptyline are less expensive and can be used
when long-term treatment is required. In some cases, a more expensive drug such as
Auoxetine or clomipramine may be needed initially, but maintenance with a less cxpensive
drug may be possible. For difficult cases, fuoxctine and clomipramine have been the most
effcctive treatments. In a double-blind, placcbo-controlled study, clomipramine was effec-
tive for the treatment of canine acral lhick dermatitis.lo However, stressors were not
removed, and all dogs relapsed when clomipramine therapy was stopped. Others have also
had success with clomipramine.27
Anxiotytic oral drugs (especially benzodiazepines and antihistamines) that may be
helpful but less effective than the antidepressants are phenobarbital and diazcpam. Hy-
FlGURE 15-1. Continued Doberman pinscher. F, Salivary staining of the paws assxiated with Malassezia pododermali
tis in an atpi dog. G Typieal pattern in eline psychogenie alopecia witl selinficte alopecia of the ahdomen, groin, and
inguinal regions. Note he alopecia on the medial forelegs and the inammary enlargement in this cat that were causcd by
megestrol acetate. H, Erosive plaque of dermatitis in a cat from selflicking. Alopecia is also present.
I062·Psychogenic Skin Diseases
FIGURE I5-3. Caninc acral lick dlermatitis. Vertical
streaking of cullagen fibrils between rete. ridges.
FlGURE I5-4. Canine aeral lick dermatitis. Periepitrichial sweat gland accummlation of
plastnla cells.
Psychogenic Skin Diseases · I063
droxyzine (Atarax), 2.2 mg/kg q8h, is a piperazine-derivative antihistamine with other
effects that has been helpfuil in some cases, especially those associated with allergy.
Endorphin blockers may also be effective. Naltrexone (Trexan) has been used in dogs
with severe chronic acral lick dermatitis.3 49 Dogs were treated with 2.2 mg/kg orally every
24 hours. Of 10 dogs, 7 responded well, but 4 dogs relapsed when the drug was
discontinued. Long-term control may be accomplished with reduced doses or longer
expensive.
 Endorphin substitution by the administration of an exogenous source of opiate may
decrease dogs? desire to stirnulate the release of endorphins. Hydrocodone (HIycodan) at
0.25 mg/kg q8h inmproved 3 dogs within 3 weeks.1 Two were 100% better after 16 weeks 
of treatment.
 Progestagens have a calming effect, especially on male dogs. An injection of repositol
progesterone (Depo-Provera, 20 mg/kg every 3 wecks) has bcen successful in selected
cases.2s Megestrol acetate (Megace, Ovaban) has been used orally at 1 mg/kg q24h, then
tapered to minimal maintenance doses and frequencies. These agents have to be contin-
ued for several months and should not be used in intact female dogs.
● Trcating the Lesion. At the same time as thc psychological treatment, the skin
lesion should be treated until it is healed; treatment of the lesion alone yields disappoint-
ing results. Attempts at preventing licking mechanically by the use of Elizabethan collars,
buckets, muzzles, bandages, casts, and wire-cloth devices may be helpful in allowing initial
healing but are usually unsuccessful alone. Repellent liquids and creains have shown only
limited success and usually only with early and mild lesions.
· Topical Applications. Topical corticosteroids may be helpful, but their use is limited
to the mild early lesion. One commercially available product, Synotic, contains
Auocinolone acetonide 0.01% in 60% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). This product is
One homemade formula uses equal parts of 90% DMSO solution and a solution of
1% hydrocortisone acetate and 2% Burrow's solution in propylene glycol (Hydro B-
1020, Hydro-Plus). This solution is applied to the lesion twice a day for several
wecks. Rubbcr gloves should be worn by the dog's owner when handling this and
all other products containing DMSO. A combination of fuocinolone in DMSO
 aa  n n q s (r a   
Iany cases,*s Three nilliters of funixine meglunine are added to an 8-ml vial of
Synotic. This solution is applied twice a day until the lesion has healed. The
treatment time varies from 3 to 8 weeks. The anaigesic capsaicin (HEET) mixed
with bitter apple (isopropyl alcohol, water, bitter cxtract)-one part HEET (capsai-
cin 0.25%, imethyl salicylate 15%, carmphor 3.6%, acetone, alcohol) to two parts
bitter apple—-has also been reported to be effective in carly lesions." This solution
is applied initially two to three times per day, then tapered as needed.
• Intralesional Injections. Triamcinolone acetonide (Vetalog) or methylprednisolone
acetate (Depo-Medrol) injections havc also bccn recommended. These agents are
helpful in lesions smallcr than 3 cm in diameter. They are useless in large chronic
lesionis,
· Surgical Remoual. In some cases, surgical excision of the entire lesion is the treat-
 ment of choice. This is casily and quickly accomplished if the lesion is small enough
to allow surgical repair without undue skin tension. The clinician should always
close the incision with mattress sutures and use bandages or protective devices to
 prevent removal of the sutures or self-inflicted trauma by the dog before healing is
complete, which requires at least 2 to 3 weeks. If the animal traumatizes the
surgical sitc before complete healing has occurred, the resulting wound will be very
difficult to 1nanage. Systemice antibiotics should always be prescribed postoperatively.
In extreme cases, excision of the lesion and replacement with a full-thickness skin
graft can be performed.
1064 · Psychogenic Skin Diseases
· Laser Therapy. Some cascs may respond to laser therapy, which has the advantages
 of sterilizing the lesion as the tissue is vaporized and less postoperative pain.
 Radiation Therapy. The occasional effectiveness of radiation therapy has, in general,
s a to  o y osn o i ss n ae sa oo
have sustained excllcnt responses to radiation therapy.32
· Cryosurgery. Cryosurgery may be used as a last resort for lesions that are so large
they cannot be removed surgieally, cannot be grafted with a full-thickness skin fap,
and have not responded to other treatment. When properly performed, the hard.
ened mass of tissuc is frozenl and sloughs over several weeks. New healthy skin
begins to grow from the wound margins. Freezing destroys nerve endings, thereby
blocking the itch-lick eycle. The procedure must usually be repeated two or three
times, It should be attempted only by those familiar with cryosurgical techniques.
* Acupuncture. Acupuncture has been reported to be effective, but its usefulness
must be documented further.15
* Electroshock. Good responses were reported in a few dogs with the lse of remotc
punishment, using precisely controlled momentary shock from an electronic training
collar.4
 In summary, a guarded prognosis should be given to the client before beginning any
treatment. Acral lick dermatitis is one of the most obstinate skin disorders, but at least it
is not life-thrcatening.
 Miscellaneous Psychogenic Manifestations
There is a group of six psychogenic manifestations (obsessive-cormpulsive disorders) that
involves sucking or licking a specifically selected anatomic area.2, 47 The animal concen-
trates on one area to which it habitually returns. The treatment regimens that can be tried
derinatitis.
TAIL BITING
Tail biting is seen mnostly in young. long-tailed, long-haired dogs. These dogs chase their
tail arnd then hite the tip (Fig. 15-5). Many of the afficted dogs stop this habit when they
FIGURE 15-5. Tail biting in a
dog. Notice the alopccia and excori-
ation on the tip of the tail.
Psychogenic Skin Diseases · I065
FIGURE I5-6. Excessive tail
grooming in a cat with a sacral ver-
tebral anomaly.
get older. These tail-chasers must be differentiated from the dog and occasional cat (Fig-
15-6) that traumatizes the tail tip when it becomes infccted and pruritic or when the
tail's normal sensations are altered by lumbosacral stenosis, cauda equina syndrome, or tail
dock neuroma.
TAIL DOCK NEUROMA
This is a rare disorder that follows some tail dockings.6 Cocker spaniels may be predis
s u n p  pr e u n o ne s  od
This is palpable as a frm, deep nodule that usually adheres to the skin in the scarred tail
tip. Histologically, the nodule is characterized by fibrous tissue with thick collagen bundles
and multiplc small nerve bundles randomly located throughout the nodule (see Chap. 20).
This ncuroma appears to stimulatc pain or some sensation that causes the dog to lick or
FLANK SUCKING
Flank sucking in dogs is similar, in most respects, to tail sucking in cats, but it is more
common and is especial prevalent in Doberman pinschers (sec Fig, 15-1E). At onc
time, trichuriasis was thought to be a cause of the disorder, but this has not been
documented. In fact, treatmert for whipworms or surgical removal of the cecum (typhlec-
have a form of psychomotor epilepsy. This condition should be differentiated from local-
ized folliculitis, which is pruritic. Folliculitis is usually associated with inflammation and
alopecia, and it may demonstrate hyperpigmentation and lichenification. These conditions
 respond to antibiotics. Atopy and food hypersensitivity should also be ruled out. Biopsies
should be performed before a diagmosis of psychogenic Hank sucking is made hecause the
presence of dermatopathological ahnormalities suggcsts that an underlying organic disease
   r q  d o   au s s
 suggested a single intramuscular injection of medroxyprogesterone acetate (20 mg/kg) as
 possible therapy.28
SELF-NURSING
This is largely restricted to female dogs and cats but can occasionally be seen in males.
Usually the self-nursing is confined to one nipple, and the animal repeatcdly suckles that
nipplc. The nipple may bccome enlarged through infammation and lichenification. Spay.
1066 · Psychogenic Skin Diseases
ing the animal seems to be helpful in correcting this annoying habit. Sedation and
 psychological training to break the habit may also he useful.
ANAL LICKING
 This habit, which is almost impossible to break, occurs only in dlogs, and a breed predilec-
tion exists for Poodles. Many dogs, and particularly Poodles, lick the anal area because of
anal sac disease, Malassezia anal sacculitis, and cven perianal Malassezia dermatitis. Ilow-
ever, if these causes, atopy, and food hypersensitivity are ruled out, thc possibility of
psychogenic anal licking becomes much more likely. Removal of the anal sacs is not
curative in this syndrome. Anorectal disease, particularly inflammation of the lower colon
and rectal mucosa, should also be ruled ouf. Neurotie Poodles that lick the anal area
cause their owners much anguish. When this condition is chronic, the perianal skin
becomes thickened, hyperpigmented, verrucous, and lichenified (Fig. 15-7). Secondary
bacterial pyoderma or Malassezia dermatitis is likely, and some response to antibiotics or
 antiyeast medication occurs. The specifc therapy is to try to identify and remove the
 cause or to administer antianxiety or antidepressant drugs as for acral lick derrmatitis.
FOOT LICKING
'This condition is usually associated with atopy, other hypersensitivities, or Malassezia
dermatitis (see Fig. 15--1F); foot licking is rarely seen alone. It is a difficult habit to
break, but therapy with heterocyelie antidepressants may be helpful.
· felne PSYchoGenIc DermatoSes
Psychogenic Alopecia and Dermatitis
Psychogenic alopecia or dermatitis (neurodermatitis) is an alopecia or a chronic skin
 inflammation produced by constant licking. When dermatitis is not present, the complaint
may be of excessive groorming. 12. 37 The dermatic form results fron more severe grooming.
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
The primary abnormality is thought to be excessive grooming that may result from an
anxiety neurosis. The anxiety may be caused by psychological factors such as displacement
phenomena (e.g, a new pet or baby in the houschold, a move to new surroundings.
boarding, hospitalization, loss of a favorite bed or companion, or competition for a social
hierarchy position with other pets in the household or in response to other cats entering
such as Siamese and Abysinian, although all the Oriental breeds may be prediposed.35.37
 Feline psychogenic alopecia has been proposed as an animal model of obsessive-compul-
sive disorder.8. 22.3%
Felinc psychogenic alopecia and dermatitis may be expressed in many ways. Some
ad an a uo sqeq dreus an un rae renned e e kisnoii yn s
alopecia, abrasion, ulceration, and secondary infection. Other cats lick and chew more
 gently or over a more widespread area so that alopecia is the predominant lesion. Some
cats actually chew at their hair or skin, whereas others chcw and pull their hair out.
It has been proposed that the stress may induce an elevation in the levels of adreno-
 corticotropic horrnone and melanocyte-stimulating hormone, which then causes increased
endorphin production.5o The endorphins protect the animal from abnorinalities associated
with chronie stress. However, their narcotic, addictive-like effect may act to reinforce the
abnormal grooming behavior. Agents with dopaminergic or opioid effects may decrease
excessive grooming.
Psychogenic Skin Diseases·I067
FIGURE I5-7. Anal licking in a dog. The perianal aurca is
erythemalous, lichenified, and hiyperpigmerrted.
CLINICAL FEATURES
common sites: inedial forelegs, the inside of the thigh, the caudal abdoinen, and the
inguinal region (Fig. 15-8; sce also Fig. I5-1G). Less cominonly, the dorsal lumbar,
sacral, or tail regions may bc involved. This pattern should raise one's index of suspicion
thighs and ventrum. The characteristie lesion of the derrmatitic form is a bright red,
elongated, oval plaque or red streak (see Fig. 15-1 H). Eosinophilic plaques may resuli.
Animals with chronic cases develop lichenification and hyperpigmentation. The course is
long and progresscs slowly, sonetimes remaining static for rnonths. Siamcsc or Siamese-
cross cats often lick out the hair in a localized area of the back, the ventral abdomen, or a
leg without causing a skin reaction. Because the temperaturc-labile enzymes that convert
melanin precursors into melanin are active (high temperatures produce white hair, low
  se oo si r sa  e r d d sn
dark (Fig. 15-9). After the next shedding, the hair is usually replaced by normal-colored
hair.
DIAGNOSIS
Lesions of the dermatitic forin may be confused with or possibly develop into eosinophilic
plaques. The alopecic formns may be confused with derrmatophytosis, demodicosis, atopy.
food or Hea bite hypersensitivity, and felinc acquired symmetric alopecia. Because cats arc
often reclusive grooners, owners may not know that the cat is licking or chewing cxces-
sively. Several helpful techniques are available to answer thc question, “Does the cat
groom excessively? Tufts of hair may have been found in thc cat's favorite hiding places.
Altermatively, the cat may be vomiting hairballs, or hair may be visible in the feces. With.
cats that use litter boxes, the client can inspect the feces over the next scveral days and
I068 - Psychogenic Skin Diseases
FIGURE 15-8. Feline psychogenic alopecia. Hlair has
and biting.
FIGURE 15-9. Constant licking
removed hair from the back, re-
ducing the skin temperahure and
causing the hair to grow in dark in
color.
Psychogenic Skin Diseases · 1069
find that they contain hair. Physical exanination reveals short stubby hairs that are readily
palpated by rubbing the fingertips against the normal angle of hair growth. Another
method is to roll the skin and view the folded skin perpendicularly to reveal numerous
shorn-off hairs (Fig. 15- 10). Placing an Elizabethan collar on the cat will result in hair
growth in areas that cannot be groomed. This time-consuming procedure is rarely nceded
to establish excessive grooming us a cause of the hair loss. A' sinple laboratory test for
differentiating betwcen self-induced hair loss and spontaneous alopecia is the epilation
and 1nicroscopic cxainination of hairs from the affected areas. In psychogenic alopecia,
hairs do not epilate easily, they appear to be broken off when examined microscopically
(see Fig. 2-28G), and the hairs regrow while the cat is wearing an Elizabethan collar. In
addlition, cats that are fur-mowing as a rcsull of a hypersensitivity often respond to an
injection of methylprednisolone acctatc, whercas cats with psychogenic disease do not.
Bccause felinc psychogenic alopecia is diagnosed primarily by ruling out other differ-
cultures, hiopsies (which should show normal skin in nondermatitie areas), and a complete
blood cell count constitutc the minimal database that should be ohtained. If ann eosino-
philia is present or the biopsy reveals an inflaininatory or endocrine appcarancc, thc
genic diet trials; trial ectoparasite therapy for Cheyletiella, Otodectes, and the supericial
Dermodex gatoi imite (see Chap. 6); intradcrmal allergen testing; and endocrine function
testing. An initial alternative to the cndocrine function test may be a 30-day trial with an
hair when grooming is prevented. '5
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Many of the treatinents for psychogcnic dermatoses have potential side effects, require
frequent administration, and arc expensive, Therefore, cats with thc alopccic form of the
disease may best be served by no treatment other than attermpts at relieving the stressful
situation.
 Cats are such territorial creatures that a changc in the pecking order of animals in the
territory has treimendous anxiety potential. One nccds to look for a new cat that entered
the household or that invaded the cat's territory. Other factors are barking dogs, a new
baby, moving to a new home, or rmajor changes in the present home. If these problems
 can be modified or removed, the cat rmay improve without any therapy or with just a 30-
  s rd     o s a  o 
 eliminated, the cat may have to be 1naintained on medication continuously.35
FIGURE 15-I0.“Fur-mowing" in
a cat. By rolling the skin oue can see
the short broken hairs still present.
I070 + Psychogenic Skin Diseases
Topical rmedications are of little value because the cat immediately licks them off. The
alopecic form 1may be successfully managed with phenobarbital (2.2 to 6.6 mg/kg q12h
orally) or diazepam (total dose of 1 to 2 ng orally ql2h to q24h). Some authors havc
reported occasional success with 12.5 to 25 mg of primidone administered orally q8h to
q24h.12. Treatiment with the endorphin blocker naloxone 1 mg/kg subcutaneously has been
shown to have some effcacy, with one injection lasting up to several weeks 50.51 Fluoxe-
 a  so o   n  s   i e 
symmetrical alopecia.8 33 In a study of 11 cats with psychogenic alopecia, 5 of 5 responded
to clomipraminc at 1.25 to 2.5 mg PO q24h; 2 of 3 responded to amitriptyline at 5 mg
 PO ql2h, and 1 of 4 responded to buspirone at 5 mg PO q12h.35 Others have also had
success with clomipramine.3, 4 If a thorough diagnostic work-up was not performed or if
previous trcatments provcd ineffective, trial therapy with chlorpheniramine 2 mg/cat q12h
or systemic glucocorticoids is warranted. A response may be seen in some cases of
psychogenic alopecia; however, allergic dermatitis may also respond. Aggressive fea con-
trol may help in cats that are not intradermall test-positive to feas. Whether this
response to fea control refects an undetected fea allergy or that the presence of feas
stresses the cat is unknown. In cases of dermatitis, if cytologic tcsts reveal intracellular
of 2.5 to 5.0 mg megestrol acetate [Ovaban] administered orally every other day, then
weekly, or 100 mg medroxyprogesterone acetate [Depo-Provera] administered subcutane-
ously as needed) have also been recommended. Again, the side effects of these drugs can
be striking, so one must weigh the gravity of the disease against the possible drug
toxicities.
Tail Sucking
by a wetness of the distal 2 to 3 cm of the tail (Fig. 15-ll). Close examination of thc
FIGURE I5-II, Tail sucking in a cat. The tip of the tail is wet and matted
Psychogenic Skin Discases · I07t
skin reveals normal skin without infammation or scaling. Whenever the cat ceases to lick
the tail and the hair dries, the condition can no longer be detected. Drying occurs when
its tail. Treatment is not successful until the cat's boredoin is relieved, possibly by changes
in its lifestyle.
● rEFERENCES
1. Brignac: M M: Hydrocodone treatment of acral lick der-
endocrine letwork: Relationship of mind and skirt.
matitis. Proc World Congress Vet Dermatol 2:50,
Arch Dennatol 134:1431, 1998.
1992.
19. Ovcrall KL: Recognition, diagnosis, and management
2. Center SA, et al. Fulminant hcpatic: failure associated
of ohsessive-compulsive disorders: Part 1. Canine Pract
with oral administration of diazepam in 1l cats. J Am
17:40, 1992.
Vet Med Assoc 209:618, 1996.
 20. Overall KL: Recogition, cdiagnosis, and management 
3. Dodman NH, et al: Usc of narcotic antagonists to
of obsessive-compulsive disorders: Parl 2.-a rational
modify  stereotypic self-licking.
self-chewing,
and
approach.Canine Pract 17:25, 1992.
scratching behavior in dogs. J Am Vet Med Asoe 193:
 21. Overall KL: Recognition, diagnosis, and management
815, 1988.
of obsessive-coinpulsive disorders: Part 3—a rational
4. Eekstein RA, Hart BL: Treatment of canine aeral lick
approach. Canine Pract 17:39, 1992.
dermatitis by behavior modificatiou using electronic
 22. Overall KI: Clinical Behavioral Medicinc for Sinall
stimulatiou. J A1n Anim IHosp Assoe 32:225, 1996.
Anirmals. Mosby, St. Louis, 1997.
 5. Goldbergcr E, Rapoport JL: Canine acral lick dermati-
23. Owen LN: Canine lick granuloma treated with radio-
tis: Response lo the antiobsessional drug clomipranine.
therapy. J Small Anin Pract 30:454, 1989.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27:179, 1991.
24. Panconesi E: Strcss and skin diseases: Psychosomatic
6. Gross TL, Carr SH; Amputation neuroma of docked
derrmatology. Clin Dermatol 2:4, 1984.
tails in dogs. Vet Pathol 27:61, 1990.
23. Paradis M, Bettenay S: Nonsteroidal antipruritic dngs
7. Gupta MA, Gupta AK: Psychodermatology: An update.
in small animals. In: lhrke PJ, et al (eds): Advances in
 J Am Acad Dermatol 34:1030, 1996.
Veterinary Dermatology I1. Pergarmon Press, New
York, 1993, p 429.
disorder and mcdication inodels. Am J Psychiatry 152:
26. Paradis M, ot al: Further investigations on the use of
1236, 1995.
nonsteroidal anti-infammatory agents in the manage
9. Heltom-Rhodes K: Bitter apple: HEFT cornbination
ment of canine pruritus. J Am Anirn Hosp Assoc 27:
topical therapy in the dog, Dernatol Spring/Summer 
44, 1991.
1993, p 5.
 27. Paterson S; A placebo-controlled study to investigate
10. Hewson CJ, et al: Effcacy of clomipramine in the
cloinipramine in the treatment of canine acral lick der-
treatment of canine compulsive disorder. J Am Vet
matitis. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in
Med Assoc 213:1760, 1998.
Veterinary Dermatology Ill. Butterworth-Heinemann,
11. Hewson CJ, et al: The pharmacokineties of clomipra-
Oxford, 1998, p 436.
mine in dogs: Parameter estimates following a single
28.Pemberton PL: Canine
 and feline bchavior control:
Progestin therapy. In: Kirk RW (ed): Current Veteri-
mipramine. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 21:214, 1998.
nary Therapy VIl1. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia,
12. Holzworth J: Diseases of the Cat: Medicinc and Sor-
1983, p 62.
gery, vol. 1. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1987.
29. Pfeiffer E, et al: Clomipranine-induced urinary rete.
12a. King IN, et al: Pharinacokinetics of clomipramine in
tion in a cat. Can Vet J 40:265, 1999.
dogs following single-dosc intravenous and oral admin-
 30. Plumb DC: Veterinary Drug Handbook, 3rd ed. lowa
istration, Am J Vet Res 6l:74, 2000.
State University Press, Ames, 1999.
13. Koblenzer CS: Pharmacology of psychotropic drugs
3l. Rapoport JL, et al: Drug treatment of canine acral
useful in dermatologic practice, Int J Dermatol 32:162,
lick: An animal model of obsessive-conpulsive disor-
1993.
der. Arch Gen Psychiatr 49:517, 1992.
14. Koo JYM, Pham CT: Psychodermatology: Practical
 32. Rivers B, et al: Treatnent of canine acral lick dermati-
tis with radiation therapy: 17 cases (1979- 1991). J A1n
381, 1992.
Anirn HIosp Assoc 29:541, 1993.
15. Looney Al., Rothstein E: Use of acupuncture to treat
33. Romatowski J: Two cases of fuoxetine-responsive be-
psychodermatosis in the dog. Canine Pract 23:18,
havior disorders in cats. Feline Pract 26:14, 1998.
1998.
 34. Russell M, et al: Lcamcd histauine relcasc. Science
16. MacDonald JM: Personal commuication, 1991.
225:733, 1984.
16a. Metze D, et al: Efficacy and safety of naltrexone, an
 35. Sawyer LS, et al: Psychogcnic alopecia in cats: 1l cascs
oral opiate receptor antagonist, in the treatiment of
(1993- 1996). J Ain Vet Med Assoc 214:71, 1999.
pruritus in internal and dermalological diseases. J Aim
36. Schwartz S: Naltrexone-induced pruritus in a dog with
Acad Dermatol 41:533, 1999.
tail-chasing behavor. J Am Vet Med Assoc 202:278,
17. Miller WH Jr, et al: Nonstcroidal management of ca-
1993.
nine pruritus with armitriptyline. Cornell Vet 82:53,
37. Scott Dw: Feline dermatology 1900-1978: A mono-
1992.
graph. J Am Anim Hosp Assox 16:331, 1980.
18. O'Sullivan RL, et al: The neuro-inununo-cutaneous-
38. Scott Dw, Walton DK: Clinical evaluation of a topical
1072 · Psychogenic Skin Diseases
treatment for canine acral lick dermatitis. J Am Auin
45. Thoday Kl: Aspects of feline symmctric alopecia. ln:
Hosp Assoc 20:562, 1984.
von Tscharmer C, Halliwell REw (eds): Advances in
39.
Seksel K, Linderman MJ: Use of clomiprarmine in the
Veterinary Dennatology I. Bailliere Tindall, London.
treatment of anxiety-related and obsessive-compulsive
1990, p 47.
disorders in cats. Aust Vet J 76:317, 1998.
46. van Nes JJ: Electrophysiological cvidence of sensory
40.8
Shoulberg N: The efficaey of fHuoxetine (Prozac) in the
nerve dysfiunction in 10 dogs with acral lick dermatilis.
treatment of acral lick and allergic-inhalant dermatitis
J Am Anin Hosp Assoc 22:157, 1986.
in canines. Proc Annu Member Meeting Am Acad Vet
47. Voith VL: Behavioral disorders. ln: Davis LE (cd):
Dermatol An Coll Vet Dermatol 6:31, 1990.
Ilandbook of Small Animal Therapeutics. Churchill
41. Simpson BS, Simpson DM: Behavioral pharmacother-
Livingstone, New York, 1985, p 519.
apy: Part I-- antipsvehoties and antidepressants. Comp
48. Walton DK: Psychodlcrmatoses. In: Kirk RW (ed):
Current Veterinary Therapy IX. W.B. Saunders Co,
Continuing Education Pract Vet 18:1067, 1996.
42. Simpson BS, Simpson DM: Behavioral pharniacother-
Philadelphia, 1986, p 557.
49. White SD: Xaltrexone for treatinent of acral lick deT-
apy: Part I- anxiolytices and mood stabilizers. Comp
matitis in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 196:1075, 1990.
Continuing Educalion Pract Vet 18:1203, 1996.
50. Willemse T, ct al: Felinc psychogenic alopecia and the
43.
Steiss JE, et al: Letters to the editor——High incidence
role of the opicid system. In: von Tschamer C, Ilalli-
of EMG abnorimealities in caune acral lick dermatitis.
well REW (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology
Vot Dcrnatol 6:115,1995.
I. Bailhere Tindall, London, 1990, p 195.
44. Swanepoel N, et al: Psychogenic alopecia in a cat:
51. Willemse T, ct al: The eflect of haloperidol and nalox-
Hesponse to clomipramine. J'S Afr Vet Assoc 69:22,
ome on cxccssive grooming bchavior of cats. Eur Ncu-
1998.
ropsychopharmaco1 39:45, 1994.
Environmental Skin Diseases
● PHOTODeRMATITIS
 a s n ds so e sso r 
fractions of angstroms to thousands of meters. The ultraviolet (UV) spectrum is of particu-
s q so o  si (u 0  ss) n 2e p   1
 not typically reach the carth's surface because of the ozone layer.27 UVB (290 to 320 nm)
 is often referred to as the sunburn, or erythema, spectrum and is ahout 1000 times more
UVB and is the spectrum associated with photosensitivity reactions.27
Incident ultraviolet light (UVL) is partially reflected, absorbed, and transmitted in-
ward. Absorbed light raises the energy level of light-absorbing nolecules (chromophores).
resulting in various biochemical processes that can damage virtually any component of a
cell. This damage can result in ccllular hyperproliferation, mutagcnesis, alteration of cell
surface markers, and toxicity. Chromophores in the skin includc kcratin proteins, blood,
hemoglobin, porphyrin, caotenc, nucleic acids, melanin,lipoprotcins, peptide bonds, and
aromatic amino acids, such as tyrosine, tryptophan, and histidine.s6 Natural barriers to
UVI. damage include the stratum comeum, melanin, blood, and carotenes. Melanins
absorb UVL and scavenge free radicals produced during the burming but release other
free radicals that can be equally or more damaging. These barriers can easily be
 Photoderinatology is an ever-expanding field in human mcdicine and includes photo-
 dynamic mechanisms and various specifie diseases not recognized in veterinary medi
cine.37. 67 Phototoxicity and photosensitivity are of primary concerm to veterinary clini-
cians.96 Phototoxicity is the classic sunburm reaction and is a dose-related response to light
ing effects of UVL because of the production, ingestion, and injection of or contact with a
photodynamic agent. Photosensitivity is most prevalent in farm animals, but cases are
recognized in dogs.30, 51
· SOLAR DERMATItIS
Solar derinatitis occurs from an actinic reaction on white skin, light skin, or damagcd skin
(e.g, depigmented or scarred areas) that is not sufficiently covered by hair.7. 35 96 The
 condition develops when such skin is exposed to direct or refected sunshine. The rapidity
of onsct and the severity of the reaction depend on various factors related to the animal,
the duration of sun exposure, and the intensity of the sunlight. The sun's rays are most
intense during the sumrmer months from 9 AM to 3 PM but cspecially from 1l AM to
2 PM. Altitude influences solar intensity. For every 300-m (l000-ft) increase in elevation,
the sun's intensity increases by 4%.3 The dermatitis is purely a phototoxic reaction
phototoxicity is incompletely understood, but it involves the epidermis and blood vessels
of the superficial and deeper vascular plexus. Exposure to UVB and UVC results in the
formation of clusters of vacuolated keratinocytes in the superficial epidermis (so-called
1073
I074·Environmental Skin Diseases
sunburn cels), as well as apoptotic keratinocytes, vascular dilatation and leakage, and
depletion of Langerhans' and mast cells, with an increase in tissue levels of histamine,
 prostaglandins, leukotrienes, other vasoactive compounds, infamrmatory cytokines, adhe-
direct result of the UVB or could be mediated by cytokines released by the epidermal
cells.
p ros jo sisd an u u Ad aq a -(o) n H
degrade all components of connective tissue. Natural defenses (antioxidants) include su-
peroxide dismutase, catalase, glutathione peroxidase, vitamin E, vitamin C, and ubiqui-
nones. A biphasic apoptosis can occur. Some apoptotic keratinocytes are seen within 4
hours of exposure due to UVA's direct damaging effect on the cell membrane. Other
apoptotic cells appear about 24 hours after exposure. This delayed damage is a result of
DNA alteration.7 Solar dermatitis in companion animals is divided into canine nasal solar
dermatitis, feline solar dermatitis, and canine solar dermatitis of the trunk and extremities.
The nasal and feline forms are the most common entities and therefore are discussed in
the greatest detail.
Canine Nasal Solar Dermatitis
Canine nasal solar dermatitis is an actinic reaction in poorly pigmented nasal skin of
dogs.8. 35, 53. 83.96
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
This is a phototoxic reaction occurring in poorly pigmented skin. Affected dogs may be
born without pigment, or the nose may have undergone spontaneous noninfarnmatory
Any dog with an active or resolved traumatic or infammatory condition that causes hair
loss, depigmentation, or scarring of the nasal area is also susceptible to this photodermati-
tis. The condition is more frequently seen in sunny climates.
CLINICAL FEATURES
The lesions are found principally at the junction of the haired and hairless skin of the
s h  e aq u aoy an io d pesu a uo eane ae paq (i-ii i) as
sparsely haired and lightly pigmented. Initialy, the area that was devoid of pigment
becomes erythematous and scaly. If sun exposure continues, perilesional hair loss occurs,
with resultant involvement of the newly exposed skin. Exudation and crusting follow, and
ulceration may he seen, especially if the dog rubs the area. If intense photoprotection is
started early, the area can heal completely. In most cases, these measures are adopted to0
late, and the lesion heals by scarring, The healed area is larger than the original lesion,
and the scarred skin is more susceptible to solar and traumatic damage. Progression and
enlargement of the lesions are evident with the passage of each year, but are especially
rapid during periods of prolonged exposure to intense sunlight. This usually occurs during
the surnmer months, but may be seen during the winter as a result of reflection frorn
snow, In chronic cases, deep ulcers form and tissues of the nares and nasal tip disappear,
exposing unsightly nasal tissues that bleed easily. Sometimes, vertical fissures occur at the
nasal tip, dorsal to and involving the nares. After they are established, these fissures are
often permanent. Although rare, squamous cell carcinomas can occur.
DIAGNOSIS
 The diagnosis of nasal solar dermatitis can be straightforward or complicated, depending
on the chronicity of the condition. The key features of the diagnosis are the restriction of
FIGURE I6-I. A, Nasal solar dermatis. Note sharp margin of erythematous, sunburned depignented area.
Negative cirect immunofourescent test. B, Feline solar clermatitis. Subured, erythematous imargins of the pinnue
the pinnal margin. D, Actinic keratoses on thc nasal area. E, This 14-year-old cat had the disease for several years
developed on the posterior abdomen of sun-loving brown and white Stafordshire terier. G, Close-up of the samc:
dog as in F. H, Contact dermatitis chue to a carpet deodorizer.
I076 · Environmental Skin Diseases
lesions to sun-exposed, nonpigmented, sparsely haired skin; the onset of signs after solar
exposure; the absencc of skin lesions in the affected arca before the currcnt condition
began; and the complete or ncar-complete resolution of the lesions with removal from
sunlight. In early cascs, the affected area is red and scaly, but the architecture should be
nornal and adjacent areas of black skin should be perfectly nornal. If all of the above-
 mentioned factors are true, the diagnosis of solar dermatitis is warranted.
Bccause of the scarring nature of solar dermatitis, the diagnosis of chronic cascs is
Imorce problematic. These cases start with abnormal skin from previously unrecognized or
unreported episodes and do not heal completely with strict photoisolation. The basic
quandary here is whcthcr the dog has chronic solar dermatitis or some other nasal skin
e sn  sn r s e  e sd s e  s
IIowever, many dogs with underlying disease lhave lesions restricted to the face.
The list of facial dermatoses (those that start on, reinain confined to, or have their
most pronounced lesions on the face) is extensive. The ones germane to this discussion
arc discoid lupus erythematosus, systemic lupus erythematosus, dermatomyositis and epi-
infectious folliculitis and furunculosis due to bacterial, dermatophyte, Demodex, yeast, or
leishmanial infection. Except for discoid lupus erythematosus (see Chap. 9), which tends
to start on and remain restricted to the perinasal area, these diseases tend to start in the
haired skin on the bridge of the nose and work toward the nasal plarum. They also tend
to involve the pinnae and the mucocutaneous junctions and have no prcdilection for
 nonpigmented skin. When the nasal planum is extensively ulcerated, fissured, and friable,
vasculitis, neoplasia (especially basal cell tumors, squamous cell carcinomas, fibrosarcomas,
and lymphomas), and granulornatous diseases (especially sterile pyogranuloma syndrome)
must be considered.
The diagnosis of solar derrmatitis is confirmed by biopsy. The early depigmcnted arcas
of the nose show fewer melanocytes and less mclanin pigment than are seen in normal
skin. After exposure to solar radiation, cpidermal hyperplasia with intraepidermal edeima is
observed. Vacuolated (sunburn cells) and apoptotic keratinocytes may be seen.? Perivascu-
lar accumulations of inflammatory cells are seen in the upper dernis, and vascular
usually is not seen (Fig. 16-2)35. 36 and requires special stains (e.g, periodic acid-Schiff
[PAS] stain) for best visualization. A more common change is bandlike supcrficial dermal
fbrosis. Ulceration can cause disappearance of the epidermis and even of the dermis and
underlying cartilages. In rare advanced cases, activity in the cells of the basal laycr is
increased, and large. polyhedral tumor cells that invade the dermis and subcutancous 
FIGURE I6-2. Feline solar der-
matitis. Chronic cxposure has re-
sulted in dysplastie changes charac-
terized by alopecia, scaling, thick-
ening, and curling of the pinnae.
Environmental Skin Diseases · I077
tissue are formed. A squamous cell carcinoma forms, and cords of neoplastic cells invade
the tissue to the level of the nasal cartilage.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
After the diagnosis is confirmed, the pre-existing lesions must be treated, and, most
important, new lesions must be prevented. In early cases, photoprotection allows the
lesions to heal spontaneously. In more advanced cases, corticosteroids are necessary to
decrease the infammation. Although topical products are most beneficial, many dogs
resent their thorough application, and thus the oral route is commonly used. Prednisolone
ss sus  J ans aq pis sp or on L i pise (h x I)
cytologic evidence of bacterial infection, antibiotics should be administered.
Avoidance of direct or reflected sunlight is paramount, especially in chronic cases in
which solar sensitivity is extreme.*6 During the summer, the most dangerous photoperiod
is from 9 AM to 3 PM, with the peak from 11 AM to 2 PM. Affected dogs should be kept
indoors or in the shade during these times. When indoors, the dog can sunbathe beneath
a closed window because glass cffectively filters UvB, but open windows or doors defeat
walks or run fooring must also be avoided.
 Striet photoisolation is usually impossible, and sunblocks or sunscreens can allow some
or colored zine oxide preparations are most comrmonly used in humans and may be of
benefit in dogs that do not lick the area. Most clients prefer sunscreens that are clear and
absorb incident light. Most products absorb only UVB, but some agents contain ingredi-
ents to screen UVA as well. Waterproof products with a sun protective factor (SPF) of 15
Han uapioun a jo %ge u aio qiosqe sonpod gi dds s pasn an pnous 1ayoy 1o
and are sufficient to protect most animals. For maximal efficacy, the product should be
applied and gently rubbed into the area 15 to 30 minutes before sun exposure. When
basis.96
negate the need for other measures, because black skin can still absorh some sunlight and
be burned.44 Black ink can be applied to the skin's surface with felt-tipped markers or by
a cotton-tipped applicator (Q-tip) with permanent laundry or stamp pad ink. Markers are
easiest to use, but the solvents can be irritating. Permanent coloring can be achieved by
tattooing. Tattooing was popular in the past, but poor early results, the expense of the
equipment, the need for multiple treatments under general anesthesia and rare adverse
reactions to the tattoo ink?9 have limited its use. Most of the early treatment failures were
because skin with an active immune-mediated disorder (e.g., discoid lupus erythematosus)
but not true solar dermatitis was tattooed. Tattooing should be considered when other
photoprotection measures are ineffective.
 Although some benefit may be seen with the administration of B-carotene,7 treatment 
with systemic agents usually is unrewarding. Preliminary work has shown that topically
applied vitamin C can help protect pig skin against UVL damage when the vitamin C is
applied after irradiation.s This treatment or the oral administration of vitamin C may or
 may not be beneficial in dogs.
When the solar dermatitis progresses to an actinic keratosis or squamous cell carci-
noma or results in massive tissue destruction, treatments with retinoic acid, hyperthermia,
cryosurgery, surgical excision, photochemotherapy, or radiotherapy may be of some bene-
fit, but effcacy data are limited.96 Patients requiring these treatments have a poor prog-
niosis.
Feline Solar Dermatitis
Feline solar dermatitis is a chronic actinic dermatitis of the white ears and, occasionally,
the eyelids, the nose, and the lips of cats, which is caused by repeated sun exposure.. 83.96. 102
It can deveiop into an actinic keratosis or true squamous cell carcinoma.77
1078· Environmental Skin Diseases
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
The disease occurs in white cats or in colored cats with white-haired areas on the face or
ears. Blue-eyed, white cats are most susceptible. Actinic damage to the ear tip occurs
but the damage makes the area more susceptible to further actinic insults. The disease
Occurs mostly in warm, sunny climates such as those of California, Florida, Hawaii,
Australia, and South Africa. Sixteen cats with solar dermatitis were examined for heme
biosynthesis abnormalities, but none were demonstrated.4
CLINICAL FEATURES
The earliest sign is erythema and fine scaling of the margin of the pinna. The hair is lost
in this area, making it even more accessible to solar radiation. There is almost no
as 3 months of age. Lesions become progressively more severe each summer. The advanc-
ing lesions consist of severe erythema of the pinna, peeling of the skin, and formation of
marginal crusts (see Fig. 16-i1B and 16-2). At this stage, many cats demonstrate that
they are inn pain and further damage their ears by scratching. The margins of the pinnae
may be curled. The margins of the lower eyelids, nose, and lips may be affected,
especially in white, blue-eyed cats. An actinic keratosis or invasive squamous cell carci-
noma can develop in some cases on the ears, the nose, or other areas (see Fig. 16-1C
and D). Carcinomatous change may occur, usually after 6 years of age, but sometimes as
early as 3 years. The squamous cell carcinoma appears as an ulcerating, hemorrhagic, and
locally invasive lesion. It is partially crusted and, in advanced cases, destroys the pinna
(see Fig. 16-1E).
DIAGNOSIS
A tentative diagnosis of feline solar dermatitis can be made from the clinical appcarancc,
the color of the cat, and the history. As in the dog, the question remains as to whether
the cat has a primary or secondary solar dermatitis. For pinnal lesions, the primary
differential diagnostic considerations include dermatophytosis, early notoedric mange, fight
wounds, vasculitis, and possibly frostbite or cryoglobulinemia. Discoid or systemic lupus
erythematosus and pemphigus erythematosus or foliaceus may have to be considered. The
differential diagnostic possibilitics arc cxcluded by sknbiopsy, which also detects dysplas-
tic or neoplastic changes.
Histopathologic study shows that, in the early stages, superficial perivascular dermati-
tis (spongiotic, hyperplastic changes) is present. Vacuolated (sunburn cells) or apoptotic
tive tissue. With the formation of squainous cell carcinoina, the epidermal surface is
ulcerated and the dermis is invaded by nests of polyhedral epithelial tumor cells. In a
disorganized manner, these cells resemble the stratum spinosum. Their nuclei vary moder-
ately in size, and mitotic figures are frequent. In advanced cases, the masses of tumor
tissue extend to the level of the cartilage.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Affected cats should be kept indoors from 9 AM to 3 PM and should not be allowed to
sunbathe by open doors or windows. During the summer, the ears should be protected
with a waterproof sunscreen. B-Carotene and canthaxanthin (25-mg doses of active carote-
noids) are administered orally to treat feline solar dermatitis.54 Only the most severely
oxygen and free radicais and possibly to forn a lipid-carotene complex in skin that absorbs
the damaging solar rardiation.
After early irreversible lesions develop, serious consideration should be given to a
Environmental Skin Diseases · I079
cosmetic amputation of the ear tips. This merely rounds off the ears, reinoves the thinly
haired tips, and allows hair to cover and protect the pinna. Results are usually excellent,
 cosmetically and prophylactically. Photoprotection is necessary to prevent new lesions.
Cats with actinie keratoses who are not candidates for surgery may beneft from
treatment with retinoic acids. Although isotretinoin at 3 mg/kg was ineffective,28 more
recent studies with etretinate (10 mg per cat q24h) have shown some promise.92 Etreti-
nate is no longer available in the United States, but acetretin could be used at 5 to 10 mg
 per cat q24h. If retinoid treatment is ineffective, superficial irradiation (picsiotherapy) with
a hand-held strontium probe can be beneficial. If all of the above-mentioned therapies fail
or the cat has advanced disease at presentation, radical amputationl of the pinna (pinnec-
tomy) is necessary.
Canine Solar Dermatitis of the Trunk and Extremities
Although the nose and the ears are the areas most exposed and, therefore, are most
susceptible to actinic damage, other regions of the body can also be affected. A solar
glossitis is recognized in sled dogs.2 A comhination of factors is necessary for sun damage
to occur. First, the skin must be unpigmented or poorly pigmented. Second, only a sparse
haircoat covers the skin, allowing the ultraviolet rays of the sun to reach the epidermis.
Third, the areas so predisposed must be exposed to the sun, This occurs in dogs that like
to sunbathe or that are confined to areas where no sun shelter is available during the
middle of the day, especially if the ground cover is highly reflective. As is true of the
other types of solar dermatitis, the chance of actinic disease is increased in sunny climates.
Breeds predisposed to truncal solar dermatitis include the Dalmatian, American Staf-
fordshire terrier, German shorthaired pointers, white Boxers, Whippets, Beagles, and
white Bull teriers.8. 74, 75 83, 86, 96 The fank and the abdomen are the areas most severely
affected (see Fig. 16-IF and G). In dogs who sunbathe in right or left lateral recum-
bency, the fanks and the ventrolateral abdomen are most commonly affected, but lesions
can be seen on the nose, the ears, the tail tip, or the distal limbs. Dogs that sunbathe on
their back or that are caged on wire above white concrete can have the entire ventrum
involved. The duration of exposure infuences the damage done. A single prolonged
exposure as might occur in cool weather or with a strong breeze results in full-thickness
necrosis.74 At first, regular sunburning occurs and the affected areas are erythematous and
scaly. One to thrcc days later, the site becomes extremely tender and will become
necrotic. With repeated but episodic exposure, the initial sun burning is followed by an
actinic folliculitis, actinic folicular cyst formation, or dernal fbrosis74 Running a hand
over affected areas of skin may produce a bumpy feeling, because the wlhite areas of skin
are thickened, whereas the black areas are normal. At this stage, biopsy reveals variable
 degrees of superfcial perivascular dermatitis and folliculitis. Superficial derrmal fibrosis
may be prominent. Solar elastosis may be seen (Fig. 16-3).
 dp   aq se ps a   
ulceration, crusting, and comedones, and they occasionally develop necrosis, fistulae, and
 sid s  an a a rs e s s n s
 mation, and premalignant actinic keratosis. Finally, a squamous cell carcinoma can de-
velop, especially if the dog continues to be exposed to direct sunlight. Such squamous cell
 a     s    
 p su  i a on s jo t e sne i a s
          s   es
hemangiosarcoma.s
Therapy involves photoprotection by keeping the animal out of the sun and by using
     aq s i d  sr  ss n
orally ql2h for 30 days, then q24h for life), in combination with anti-infarmmatory doses
hours or divided every 12 hours is effective when dysplastic change has occurred.92
Etretinate is no longer available in the United States, but acetretin could be used at 0.5 to
1 mg/kg q24h.
I080·Environmental Skin Diseases
FIGURE I6-3. Solar clastosis. De-
generation of elastin fbers. (Courtesy
A. Hargis.)
Photosensitivity
 Photosensitivity occurs when the skin has an increased susceptibility to nonburning doses
of UVL. The increased susceptibility is due to the production of (e.g., congenital or
agent.26 Photosensitization is uncommon in dogs and cats.
 Unlike solar derinatitis, lesions of photosensitivity occur in well-haired regions of the
body. The hairs must be light in color. Most cases are recognized in the white rcgions of
Siamese cat and yellw Labrador retriever with acquired porphyria.47
In black-and-white animals, the tentative diagnosis of photosensitization is straightfor-
ward. The white-haired areas are involved, whereas the immediately adjacent black-haired
skin is normal. Early on, the affected skin is red and can return to normal once the
animal is removed from the sun. In more sensitive animals, the skin ulcerates and
 becomes necrotic. In porphyric animals, systemic signs (e.g., hyperthermia) can accompany
the skin lesions.
As in all solar diseases, the animal should be removed from sunlight immediately and
should be bathed if a contactant is likely. Every effort should be made to identify the
 sensitizing agent, but most cases defy diagnosis.
Actinic Keratosis
 Actinic keratoses may be seen in dogs and cats and are premalignant epithelial dysplasias 
(see Chap. 20).
Miscellaneous Effects of Solar Exposure
Exposure to UVL is an important factor in precipitating or potentiating a number of skin
role of UVL is clearly defned in some conditions, its pathogenic role in other disorders is
less well understood. For example, UVL exposure may induce or exacerhate the lesions of
gus erythematosus),6 and pemphigoid (see Chap. 9).
In addition, UVL exposure of skin has important local and systemic immunologic
consequences (photoimmunologic changes).6 For example, exposure to UVB or UVA
Environmental Skin Diseases * |o8I
changes Langerhans' cell morphologic features and function, and infuences cutaneous
cytokine production. Impaired antigen recognition and processing and impaired immune
responses may influence susceptibility to cutaneous neoplasms and infections. The damag-
ing effects on cutaneous immunity of low-dose UVB are genetically determined in mice.105
This UVB susceptibility is mediated almost exclusively by tumor necrosis factor-a
(TNF-α), and the trait appears to be a risk factor for the development of squamous cell
carcinoma and basal cell carcinoma.
· IRRITANT CONTACT DERMATITIS
Contact dermatitis is an inflammatory skin reaction caused by direct contact with an
 offending substance.37. s2. 83
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
The disease is divided into two types: primary iritant contact dermatitis and contact
hypersensitivity21 (see Chap. 8). Newer information blurs the distinction between immuno-
logic and nonimmunologic events, and makes the distinction between these two entities
problematic.95a
dogs and cats without any antecedent period of sensitization. The rapidity of onset and
the intensity of the reaction depend on the nature of the contactant, its concentration, and
the duration of the contact. Corrosive substances such as strong acids and alkalies injure
the skin immediately and produce lesions of varying severity. Severe reactions should be
classified as chemical burns. Less potent contactants need prolonged or repeated contact
to produce irritation. A number of primary irritants such as soaps, detergents, disinfec-
tants, hair-coloring agents, weed and insecticidal sprays, fertilizers, strong acids and alka-
lies, and Hea colars are potential causative agents.1 o, 1-s Although most primary iritants
 rs s rn a p q  s s rs s 
sure, and contact with living organisms and plants.
 In humans, irritant contact dermatitis is more common in the young and in atopic
 individuals,75t The authors believe this to also be true in dogs and cats.
CLINICAL FEATURES
Irritant contact dermatitis can affect any aninal of any age. Whereas atopic dogs, German
shepherd dogs, Poodles, and several other breeds appear to be at an increased risk for
 contact hypersensitivity, no breed predisposition is recognized in irritant contact dermati-
 hair) of their defense system and probably are at increased risk as a secondary phenorme-
non.
 ad a s o p se e ns s 
matitis in areas where the haircoat is thin or missing. The abdomen, the chest, the axillae,
the fanks, the interdigital spaces, the legs, the perianal area, and the ventral surface of
the tail are the most susceptible areas (Fig. 16-4A and B; also see Fig. 16-lH). When
the offending agent is a liquid (e.g., shampoo and fea dip solution) or a topical medica-
tion (see Fig. 16-4C) or is bound to a collar (see Fig. 16-4D and E), the reaction occurs
where the substance touches the skin. Licking of the contactant can cause oral lesions
(Fig. 16-4F) and spread the agent to other areas of the body.
Patches of erythema and papules represent primary lesions (see Fig. 16-4A). Vesicles
 ssiod as a s (oie ii os) so pe sop un ssd sa a
severe scratching and biting. Pyotraumatic dermatitis and eventual ulceration may obliter
 ate prinary lesions.
Io82·Environmental Skin Diseases
FIGURE 16-4. A, Contact derumatitis due to a floor cleaner. B, Contact derrnatitis caused by a caustic cage
cleaner. C, Acute vesicular eruption due to an ear medication. D, Contact dermatitis caused by a leather collar.
fertilizer. G, Irritant contact dermatitis affecting the delicate scrotal skin. H, Full-thickmess thermal bum in a Silky
terricr, with sloughing and infection.
Environmental Skin Diseases · I083
Single episodes are common in primary irritant contact dermatitis, as in scrotal
involvement from soap that is not rinsed off (see Fig. 16-4G). Seasonal recurrence results
from exposure to plants, lawn fertilizer, herbicides, and ice-melting substances.
DIAGNOSIS
The tentative diagnosis of contact dermatitis is based on historical and physical findings. If
multiple animals in a household are affected, primary irritant contact dermatitis is much
more likely than contact hypersensitivity. When the contactant is harsh and produces
immediate reactions or is applied intentionally (e.g., medication), the diagnosis is straight-
atopy, food hypersensitivity, drug reaction, Malassezia dermatitis, and early scabies must
be considered.
In most clinical cases, the histopathologic changes of primary irritant contact dermati-
changes).li3 The exact appearance depends on the stage of contact dermatitis and the
effects of secondary infection and excoriation. Nentrophils or mononuclear cells may
 predominate in a given case.
The confirmation of irritant contact dermatitis can be made by provocative exposure
testing, in which the agent is applied to normal and diseased' skin. With low-grade
irritants, one application to normal skin may not be sufficient to cause irritation, so
diseased skin should also be challenged. With harsh irritants, which cause ulceration and
Hecrosis, provocative exposure testing should be avoided. Patch testing is of unproven
value in the diagnosis of irritant contact dermatitis.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
 The dificult task of discovering and eliminating offending substances depends on the
correlation of a detailed history and a careful exarmination of the environment of the dog.
Soap, fea collars, grasses, pollens, insecticides, petrolatum, paint, wool, carpets, rubber,
and wood preservatives are examples of contact irritants. If the location of the initial
infammation can be correlated with an agent that came in contact with that area, the
cause can sometimes be found. With removal of the irritant, the lesions should heal
spontaneously. For pruritic patients, a 5- to 7-day course of prednisone or prednisolone
(1.1 mg/kg q24h) can be beneficial.
When the contactant cannot he found, relief depends on systemic and topical therapy.
The involved areas should be bathed frequently with plain water or a mild, nonirritating
shampoo. Drying must be complete, because macerated tissue is more susceptible to the
irritant. For localized lesions, topical corticosteroids may be beneficial in controlling the
inflammation. For animals with widespread lesions, repeated 7- to 10-day courses or
alternate-day administration of oral steroids is necessary. Pentoxifylline (10 mg/kg q12h) is
beneficial in the treatment of contact hypersensitivity.72 It may be of benefit in irritant
dermmatitis as well.
● bUrnS
 Superficial and deep burms are painful, often produce scarring, and are an important causc
of sepsis. Burn management is long and arduous.
CAUSEANDPATHOGENESIS
Burms can be caused by strong chemicals, electric currents, solar and microwave radiation,
andheat.10, 1 83 94, 97.15Most cases in small animals arecausedbyheat from resboiling
liquids, electric heating pads, animal driers, and hot metals (e.g. mufHers and wood
     e         
|084 · Environmental Skin Diseases
 determining the extent of the burn. In pigs, water at 44C (111.2°F) needed 6 hours of
contact to cause a burn, whereas temperatures of 70°C (158°F) or greater caused transepi-
dermal necrosis in less than 1 second.16 The temperature of fHames, boiling liquids, and
with exposure.
Electric heating pads are a cominon unexpected cause of burns in small animals. Heat
 output can vary from pad to pad and can Huctuate during use. At the lowest seting.
temperatures as high as 44°C (1ll.2°F) can be achieved, whereas temperatures of 56°℃
(132.8°F) can be obtained at the medium setting.lo6 The burm potential of these pads is
 modifed by the padding surrounding the unit, the nature of the animal's coat, and several
 e a d nd g d s   se    r
risk. Large volumes of subcutaneous fuids may increase the animal's sensitivity and allow
burning at very low settings.
As discussed in the section on solar dermatitis, sunlight does most of its damage in
nonpigimented or lightly pigmented skin. However, black skin absorbs nearly 50% more
solar radiation than does white skin and intense solar exposure can cause thermal burms in
darkly pigmented dogs. This is demonstrated in the report of two Dalmatians who devel-
 oped ulcerative, necrotic, crusted, plaquelike lesions in their black spots.44 Lesions devel-
oped 7 days after exposure of 4 hours or more to intense sunlight. Because solar bums
are rare in darkly pigmented skin, the animal should be evaluated for an underlying
irregularity in thermoregulation.
Burns of dogs and cats have been categorized into two types: partial-thickness bums
and full-thickness burns.s Partial-thickness burns involve the epidermis and the superficial
dermis. Healing of the burned area can be complete with little or no scarring because of
re-cpithelialization frorm the hair follicles and sebaceous glands.34 In full-thickness burns,
there is complete destruction of al cutaneous structures. Without surgical intervention,
healing occurs via second intention with extensive scarring.
The cause of the burn and the percentage of body involvement have great impact on
the patient's survival. Patients burmed by fire are at great risk for damage to the respira-
tory tract, and chemicals can burn the mouth or other tissues if they are spread by licking
or careless handling by the owner.97 Heat causes capillary leakage at and distant to the
burn site. Patients with large burns experience fluid and electrolyte imbalances, and can
Loss of the skin as a protective barrier opens the underlying tissue to invasive
infection. Although microcirculation is restored within 48 hours to areas of partial-thick-
 n r no      s   s
delivcry of hurmoral and cellular defense mechanisms, provides an excellent medium for
bacterial proliferation, with the cver-present potential for life-threatening sepsis. Initial
 colonization of the burn wound surface by gram-positive organisms shifts by the third to
fifth day after the burn to an invasive gram-negative Hora (especially Pseudomonas aerugi-
nosa).
CLINICAL FEATURES
 Burns caused by fre or contact with hot metal are obvious from the outset but may not
reach their full extent for 24 to 48 hours. Burns from microwave radiation, electric
currents, chemicals, and electric heating pads or cage driers can be more insidious,
because the haircoat may hide the trauma and the owner may be aware of only the
aninal's apparent pain and its accompanying behavioral changes.13 94, 106 When the animal
is presented for treatment of skin burmed by heating pads or cage driers, the affected skin
is usually hard and dry. Chemical, electric, solar, or microwave burns are erosive to
additional 24 to 48 hours. Infection causes a purulent discharge and’ sometimes an
unpleasant odor. Large areas of necrotic skin may slough and reveal a deep, suppurating
Environmental Skin Diseases · I085
wound (see Fig. 16-4H). If the skin is debrided and sutured, temporary closure may be
 achieved. However, the sutured area almost always sloughs, leaving a large, raw surface.
If 25% of the body is involved in the burn, there are usually systemic manifestations,
including septicemia, shock, renal failure, and anemia.34. 97
DIAGNOSIS
The diagnosis is straightforward if the client has observed the accidental burning. If the
burn was not observed or was malicious, the diagnosis can be more diffcult, especially if
the burn is superficial. The histologic findings of a gradually tapering coagulation necrosis
 of the epidermis and deeper tissues confirm a thermal or chemical burn. Superficial burns
(Fig. 16-5). With microwave burns, there is full-thickness coagulation necrosis.94 Electric
burns may show a diagnostic histologic feature of a fringe of elongated, degenerated
cytoplasmic processes that protrudes from the lower end of the detached basal cells into
the space separating the epidermis and the dermis. The nuclei of the basal cells and often
of the higher-lying epidermal cells appear stretched in the same direction as the fringe of
cytoplasmic processes. This gives the image of keratinocytes that are “standing at atten-
tion" (see Fig. 2-32).
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
For minor and major burns, the initial wound management, after evaluation and stabiliza-
fuid and electrolyte balance is crucial for survival. Patients with chemical burns should be
bathed when possible to remove any residual agent. After the patient is stabilized, wound
management can begin. The best treatment of burns is the prompt surgical excision of the
diseased tissue with sutured wound closure. Except for small burms, this is impractical in
pets. Regardless of the location or the depth of the wound, removal of al debris, loose
skin, and necrotic tissue is imperative. The wound is thoroughly cleaned with povidone-
iodine or some other suitable antiseptic cleaner and is debrided as needed. Daily hydro-
therapy is used for complete cleaning of all burn wounds. Suturing is seldom necessary,
because the sutured area almost always sloughs. After all burn wounds have been ade-
quately cleaned and debrided, local care consists of the application of topical antimicrobial
agents. Occlusive burn wound dressings are avoided because of their tendency to produce
a closed wound with bacterial proliferation and to delay healing. Nonocclusive dressings,
FIGURE 16-5. Thermal burm.
Superficial denmal edema and epi-
dermal necrosis resulting in epicer-
mal separation, Follicular necrosis is
also visible.
086 · Environmental Skin Diseases
FIGURE I6-6. legend on opposite page
Environmental Skin Diseases · I087
changed frequently, can be useful in certain cases. The wound should be cleaned two or
three times daily and the topical product should be reapplied.
 In human patients with burns, a 0.5% silver nitrate solution, silver sulfadiazine,
mafenide acetate (Sulfamylon) cream, and iodophors receive wide use.37 The silver nitrate
solution is used as a wet dressing and is considered effective, Because most veterinary
patients do not tolerate wet dressings, silver sulfadiazine is probably the most commonly
used burn cream.78. s3 It is nonstaining, painless, and has fair penetration of an eschar.
Practitioners report excellent results with mupirocin ointment (Bactoderm, Pfizer Animal
Health).7s The technical information on this product warns of nephrotoxicity due to
absorption of the polyethylene glycol in the base. Treatment of large deep burns could
result in renal failure. Systemic antibiotics are not effective in preventing burn wound
infection and may allow invasion by resistant organisms.
Burn healing is slow, with weeks to months of treatment. Most burns that receive
veterinary attention are full thickness and heal as hairless areas with scarring (Fig.
16-6A). In some cases, the scarring impedes function and various plastic surgical proce-
dures must be performed. After all of these obstacles are overcome, most patients lead a
normal life. Because the scarred skin is hairless and often nonpigmented, solar exposure
Pous sae u os saop y po aq aa su rs ng  a por
be examined periodically. 40
● raDIaNT HeaT bUrns
 ss  ae sis u r r n axa ar 
lamps) can result in thermal burns,19, 22 Considering the frequent use of wood stoves in
the colder climates and the tendency for dogs and cats to lie extremely close to them,
radiant bums should be considered rare.
Unlike a conduction burn, which occurs in areas of contact with a known high
temperature heat source, radiant burns occur over the dorsum and lateral chest walls
without a history of exposure. Because the owner never sees the dog touch the stove, they
do not associate the skin disease with heat source and will not volunteer that history.
Radiant bums occur in a driplike configuration with hair loss, erytherma, and ulcer-
ation (see Fig. 16-6B). Adjacent haired skin can be hyperpigmented. With dorsally
 oriented, well-established lesions, as shown in the figure, the differential diagnosis is
limited to a caustic or malicious thermal burn. The diagnosis can be confirmed by skin
Occasional apoptotic cell can be seen scattered in the suprabasilar layers. Superficial
dermal mucinosis is a consistent finding.
 Once the anirmal is removed from exposure, the lesions heal spontaneously and
+ raDIATION INJUrY
Skin changes are an expected consequence of radiation therapy and are somewhat dose
 dependent. With treatment, the mitotic activity of the epidermis, melanocytes, hair folli
cles, and sebaceous gland stops. After a 2- to 3-week lag period, the treated area becomes 
FIGURE I6-6. A, Permanent scaring and depigmentation from a healed burm. The dog is now susceptible to solar
derrnatitis. B, Radiant heat burn. Erythema, erosion and ulceration, and crusting in a driplike fashion on the chest wall.
Area was clippetd. C, Frostbite, Pinnal necrosis and ulceration. D, Frostbite. The tip of the pinna has sloughed. E, Frostbite.
nated intravascular coagulation. H, Pedal necrosis in a kitten fed an inappropriate milk replacement.
I088 · Environmental Skin Diseases
hairless, depigmented, and scaly,24 23 Depending on the dosage administered and the
sensitivity of the patient, no further damage will occur and the area will heal in 2 to 3
months. The leukotrichia (Fig. 16-7) may or may not be permanent. In some animals,
the blood vessels are damaged enough to resulf in clinical signs ranging from a red,
edematous swelling to full-thickness necrosis.
In most instances, the skin changes are minor and need no treatment. With tissue
necrosis, the devitalized skin should be removed, but efforts to close the defect should be
 postponed until the extent of the vascular damage is kmown.
● FrostbIte
Cause and Pathogenesis
Frostbite is an uncominon condition in healthy animals who have been acelimatized to the
cold. Ill animals or those that have recently moved from a warm climate to a cold one are
more susceptible. Frostbite is due to prolonged exposure to freezing temperatures or
 contact with frozen metal objects. If the animal has a pre-existing vasculopathy or cryo-
globulinemia, external temperatures do not have to be very low to cause necrosis.84 The
lower the temperature, the greater the risk. Lack of shelter, blowing wind, and wetting
 decrease the amount of exposure time necessary for frostbite to develop.
Clinical Features
Frostbite typically affects the tips of the ears, the digits, the scrotum, and the tail tip
because these areas are not well insulated by hair and the blood vessels are not well
touch. After thawing, there may be mild erythema, edema, pain, and eventual scaliness of
the skin. In mild cases, the hair of affected areas may turn white. Later, the tips and
margins of the pinnae may curl. In severe cases, the skin becomes lecrotic and sloughs
(see Fig. 16-6C to E). Healing proceeds slowly; but if the tips of the ears are lost, the
remaining pinna of the ear has a rounded contour that is usually so cosmetically accept-
able as to be unnoticed. Often, the lesions look similar to hurns.
Clinical Management
must be handled gently. In rats, administration of aspirin and pentoxifylline for 5 days
FIGURE 16-7. Pemmunent leuko-
trichia and hypotrichosis following pi-
tuitary irradiation
Environmental Skin Diseases · I089
after the freezing significantly improved tissue viability.93 In mild cases, the thawed skin is
led and scaly with little or no necrosis. Healing occurs spontaneously. In severe cases,
necrosis occurs and the affected tissue should be amputated, but not too early, because
more tissue may actually be viable than is initially suspected. Once frozen, tissues may be
and alopecic could be treated beneficially by plastic surgery. This should remove the
hairless portion and leave the remaining pinna well covered with hair for protection from
the cold. Every effort should be made to keep these patients in protected quarters during
cold weather.
● mISCElLANEOUS CaUSES Of NECrOSIS AND SLOUGhInG
Tissue necrosis and sloughing typically are a result of a severe injury to the vasculature
supplying the area. Most lesions occur on nose, tips of the pinnae and tail, and extrcmities
because the vessels in those locations are most susceptible to environmental insult. When
 a a sn  ae   p  s 
by the accumulation of gas, chyle, or fuids, the overlying tissues can become anoxic and
slough. 15, 33 There are many well-documented causes of peripheral cutaneous necrosis in
 small animals, including solar dermatitis, frostbite, severe burms, exposure to caustic con-
tactants, cold agglutinin disease, cryoglobulinemia, drug reaction, systemic lupus erythema-
 pressure (pressure sore), traps, and elastic bands.30
There are also some rare, often poorly documented or poorly understood associations.
Dogs may rarely have peripheral necrosis with ergotism and leptospirosis.65 Dry gangrene
sloughing have been reported in dogs and cats with disseminated intravascular coagulation
FIGURE I6-8. Early perivascular necrosis on the forelimb
following extravascular leakage of a barbilurate.
I090·Environmental Skin Diseases
chogenic carcinoma or follicular lymphoma, respectively.5 Necrosis and sloughing of the
digits have been reported as sequelae of hepatitis in dogs.73 Necrosis and sloughing of the
digits have also been seen in puppies and kittens (see Fig. 16-6H) fed highly concen-
a cause of tail tip necrosis in kittens (see Chap. 9). Necrosis has been associated with
sensory nerve damage either because it induces self-trauma (e.g., cauda equina syndrome
and so-called chilblains)57. 62 or because it interferes with proprioception (e.g., trophic
ulcer of the footpad).32
● SUBCUTANEOUS EMPHYSEMA
Subcutaneous emphysema is characterized by free gas in the subcutis. Possible causes
include air entering through a cutaneous wound, a lung punctured by a fractured rib,
 internal penetrating wounds, extension from pulmonary emphysema, extension from tra-
"pumped" into the subcutis. It can also occur secondary to alveolar rupture associated
with positive-pressure ventilationl5 and following gastrostomy tube placement.75a
Subcutaneous emphysema is characterized by soft, fuctuant, crepitant, subcutaneous
swellings. The lesions are usually not painful, and the animals are not acutely ill, except in
the case of gas gangrene.
Diagnosis is based on history and physical examination. Treatment is directed at the
underlying cause. Sterile subcutaneous emphysema requires no treatment, unless it is
extensive and incapacitating, wherein multiple skin incisions may be necessary.
● SUbcuTaneouS chYle
The subcutaneous accumulation of chyle has been reported subsequent to thoracic duct
swellings are fuctuant, nonpainful, and often occur in the groin and/or pelvic limb.
 is directed at the underlying cause.
· snake bite
 Two subfamilies of venomous snakes are indigenous to the United States: Crotalidae and
 Elapidae. Crotalidae, commonly called pit vipers, include the copperhead, the cotton-
mouth moccasin, and the rattlesnake. One or more species of this subfamily are found in
om aq unoo s u pasidai ae apidea 'sas snonsoo gt a jo re A
genera of coral snakes, which are found in only the southeastern and southwestern United
States. In Germany, common vipers (Vipera berus) are most problematic.64 In Australia,
 si ad  i ss  r nr s    
major culprit in the Middle East.3
 Snake venoms contain over 25 toxic polypeptides, low-molecular-weight proteins, and
a species depending on the habitat of the snake and season of the year.48. 49 In general,
venoms produce alterations in the resistance and integrity of blood vessels, changes in
dynamics, alterations of nervous system function, depression of respiration, and necrosis at
coral snake bites637Theseverityof a poisonous snake bite depends onthe tpe and size
of the snake, the amount of venom injected in relation to the victim's weight, the site of
venom injection, and the time interval between the venom injection and the onset of
 medical therapy.91
Environmental Skin Diseases * I091
Most snake bites occur during spring and summer, and animals in rural areas (espe-
cially near rodent burrows) are most at risk. In one study, young medium-to-large breed
dogs were at increased risk, especially German shepherds and Rottweilers (guard dogs,
trained to attack). The face and legs are most cormmonly involved. If there is no pain or
 swelling at the bite site within Iy2 hours of the bite, no venom was injected. Bites around
the face are potentially serious because of rapid swelling and respiratory embarrassment
(Fig. 16-9A). Cutaneous manifestations of snake bites with venom injection include rapid,
progressive edema, which usually obliterates the fang marks (see Fig. 16-9B); pain; and,
hours later, and this area often becomes necrotic and sloughs.
 All snake bites are potentially lethal, especially in small dogs or cats, and specific
wound treatments should be postponed until the patient is stable. Although there can be
some benefit to removal of local venom by suction, the stress to the dog or cat can
outweigh any potential benefits. Antivenin should be administered when available.s3, 71. 91
 pe  sm e m p s  s no n s  s o u
respectively.so The survival rate of those not treated was approximately 30% lower. For
maximum effcacy, the antivenom should be administered within 2 hours of the bite.
When administration is delayed for 8 hours or more, the antivenom is of little use
Because these antisera contain horse serum, the patient should undergo skin testing with
the product before administration. Even with a negative test, reactions can occur, so the
patient should be monitored carefully for signs of anaphylaxis. Because snake bites are
contarninated by the oral fora, which often includes Pseudomonas sp. and Clostridiurn
tetani,91 broad-spectrum antibiotics and tetanus toxoids should be administered.
 Beyond the above-mentioned measures, treatment recommendations vary. Some in-
vestigators administer antihistamines or corticosteroids, whereas other researchers do
should be managed similarly to a bum.63
● foreIGn bODIes
 Foreign bodies occasionally cause skin lesions in dogs and cats. Although porcupine quills
(Fig. 16-10; also see Fig. 16-9C), suture materials (Figs. 16-11 and 16-12),23 air rife
 pellets, and road gravel are conmon foreign bodies, most are of plant origin (seeds and
 awns, wood slivers). One of the most notorious plants in the United States in this regard
is the foxtail (Hordeum jubatum). A related piant (Hordeum murinum) causes problems in
France.9
 In a retrospective study of 182 cases of grass awn migration in dogs and cats in
California, younger dogs (with inereased activity) and hunting and working breeds (with
increased exposure) were at greater risk.1 The most common site of grass awn localization
was the external ear canal (5l% of cases), with the other common cutaneous sites being
the interdigital webs (see Fig. 16--9D). Lesions consist of nodules, abscesses, and draining
tracts. Secondary bacterial infection is exceedingly common.
 Another common plant foreign body in the United States is the burdock (Arctium
sp.).3e The burs of these common weeds become trapped in the haircoat, where they
often cause local irritation and mat formation. Dogs generally do not tolerate the burs
well,and chew and lik them from their fur. In doing so, the dogs may produce focal skin
lesions (see Fig. 16-9E) or, more commonly, oral lesions. The lesions of typical burdock
stomatitis are seen as (1) multiple 2- to 3-mm, whitish, shiny papules along the junction of
the upper buecal and gingival mucosa or (2) multiple, erythematous, granular papules and
plaques on the dorsal surface of the tongue (see Fig. 16-9F). Some dogs with burdock
stomatitis are remarkably asymptomatic, whereas other anirmals show typical signs of
stomatitis. Biopsies reveal the burdock (Fig. 16-13) and a nodular to diffuse pyogranu-
lomatous inflammation containing numerous eosinophils and centered on plant material
(Fig. 16-14).
Free hair shafts are a common endogenous foreign body in the dog. The hair can
I092· Environmental Skin Diseases
F1GURE I6-9. A, Profound facial edema secondary to a puff adder bite. (Courtesy P. Bland.) B, Snake fang
marks. (Courtesy D. Carlotti.) C, Porcupine quills. D, Digital draining tract sccondary to foxtail penetration.
Severe ilceration and crusting of the skin of the nasal region. A purulent
 exudate is present. H, Thalliun
intoxication. Erythema, alopecia, and erosion of the digits and interdigital spaces.
Environmental Skin Diseases·Io93
FIGURE I6-10. Porcupine quill
lodged in a necrotic dermatitis.
reach the dermis either by being pushed through a normal hair follicle wall by constant
licking or when the inflamed folicle ruptures (Fig. 16-15). The rupture of the inflamed
follicle is most common and is a frequent sequela to bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis.
 The foreign body reaction around the hair shaft (Fig. 16- 16) cormplicates the treatment of
the primary follicular disease because it is diffcult to determine what part of the patient's
symptoms and tissue inflammation is due to infection or the sterile reaction to the hair
 shaft. Although exceptions can be found, it is best to assune that infection is still present
FIGURE I6-Il. Iarge, tender granulomatous mass sur-
rounding huried sutures at the site of a laceration repair.
1094 · Environmental Skin Diseases
FIGURE 16-12. Fragments of
pyogranulomatous infamnation.
when the lesion is tender to palpation. Clinically, significant foreign body disease is
concurrent infection has been adequately treated, and (2) the recurrence of infection at
frequent intervals in these sites. Predilected areas of skin include the chin, interdigital
mas or other foreign body reactions is surgical removal. When surgery is impossible,
topical glucocorticoid therapy is often useful.
FIGURE I6-I3. Burdock fragment buried in the skin. Note
the visible barbing on the sides which prevents easy removal and
encourages inward imigration.
Environmental Skin Diseases · Io95
FIGURE I6-I4. Burdock sur-
 rounded by mixed inflaunmatory infl.
trate.
● ARTERIOVENOUS FISTULA
An arteriovenous fistula is a vascular abnormality, defined as a direct communication
  a i sss e  e     
riovenous fistulae may be congenital or acquired and are rarely reported in dogs and
cats.12, 17, 42, 45. 83, 110 Most clinically relevant cutaneous arteriovenous fstulae are acquired,
and most of these result from penetrating wounds or blunt trauma, although they may
-od mpp peans) sog ounoni pre eisedou uooun on aeuoas aq oe
dures and extravascular injections of iritating substances). Recurrent peripheral arteriove.
Acquired arteriovenous fistulae most commonly involvc the paws (after declaw proce-
dures or injury) and the neck (secondary to neoplasms), but they havc involved the
temporal region, the pinnae, the legs, the fank, the prepuce, and the tongue. Affected
areas show persistent or recurrent edema, pain, and occasionally, secondary infection and
hemorrhage. Superficial blood vesscls proximal to the fistula may be distinct and tortuous.
Arteriovenous fistulae are generally characterized by pulsating vessels, palpable thrills, and
FIGURE I6-I5. Multiple resid-
ual  papules and  a  nodule  on the
back of a dog successfully treated
for bacterial furunculosis. The lesions
rounding free hair shafts.
|096 · Environmental Skin Diseases
FIGURE l6-I6. Granulomatous reaction around a fragiment
of hair shaft.
 continuous machinery murmurs. Occlusion of the artery proximal to the fistula results in a
sudden decrease in heart rate and disappearance of the murmur and thrill.45
Diagnosis is based on the history, physical examination findings, and demonstration of
the arteriovenous fistula by contrast radiography. Therapy includes surgical extirpation of
the fistula or, in some instances, amputation of the affected part.
· MYOSPHERULOSIS
 Myospherulosis is a rare granulomatous reaction thought to be due to the interaction of
ointments, antibiotics, endogenous fat, or oily contents of cysts with erythrocytes.43 90, 14 It
is associated with small saclike structures (parent bodies) filed with' endobodies (spher-
 n seu  a sop  sn  pn  su p (s
    i si es  i 
injections of oil medicaments or after the topical application of oily products to open
wounds. Because muscle is not always involved, it has been suggested that spherulocytosis
or spherulocytic disease might be a better designation for this entity.8
Patients are usually presented for solitary subcutaneous or dermal nodules, which may
 p ae se ps io   o  jo s  ss  
histiocytes with abundant vacuolated cytoplasm. Histiocytes surround parent bodies (30 to
350 m) composed of thin eosinophilic wals and flled with homogeneous eosinophilic, 3-
to 7-m spherules (Fig. 16-17). Parent bodies and spherules do not stain with periodic
acid-Schiff, Grocott-Gomori methenamine-silver, or Ziehl-Neelsen stains but are positive
 for endogenous peroxidase (diaminobenzidine reaction) and hemoglobin, indicating that
the spherules are erythrocytes.114
The only effective treatment is surgical excision.
Environmental Skin Diseases · I097
FIGURE I6-I7. Myospherulosis. Macrophages containing many intracytoplasmic inclusions
(fragments of erythrocytes).
· thallium toXIcoSIS
Thallium is a cumulative, general cell poison that may produce skin lesions or systemic
toxicity.87, 109,115
Cause and Pathogenesis
The use of thallium as a rodenticide and roach poison in the United States was banned
more than 25 years ago because of its toxicity. Despite the unavailability of thallium for all
these years, cases of thallium toxicosis are still occasionally recognized in the United States
from baits found in house walls, garages, and barns.19 15 with doses of more than 20
to the central nervous system and circulatory system.87 Nervousness, convulsions, tremors,
salivation, weakmess, and paralysis, together with a rapid, weak pulse, are seen. Reliable
early signs of less acute toxicity include vomiting, hemorrhagic gastroenteritis, polydipsia,
pyrexia, and brick red mucous membranes. Colic and dyspnea are often apparent. Smaller
doses of thallium may be cumulative and may produce the subacute or a chronic syn-
drome. Even with the best of care, the mortality rate can be extreriely high (70%);
therefore, the prognosis is poor. Thallum is rapidly absorbed through the oral and
intestinal mucosa and through the skin. It is mainly excreted in the urine, but it may
persist in various tissues for up to 3 months. Thallium_and potassium move together
through cell walls and are excreted together in the urine. Therefore, increased turnover of
one substance increases the secretion of the other. In rats, cystine and methionine seem
to protect against the alopecic and toxic effects of thallium.
Researchers ermphasize that thallium poisoning may be commonly unrecognized in
cats that do not show cutaneous involvement.s3 Although the syndrome with skin lesions is
classic and highly suggestive, cases of poisoning without skin lesions exhihit multisystemic
problems that necessitate a detailed case work-up and laboratory support for accurate
diagnosis. Even with intensive supportive care, only 19% of the' feline patients in one
study recovered; thus, a poor prognosis must be given.s3 Many of the antidotal drugs
1098 · Environmental Skin Diseases
Clinical Features
 delayed by 12 to 96 hours after ingestion, but the length of the course until death is only
s sisa e s j u ane  uas nou ae sos us sp g on 1
 amounts or survives the peracute signs, severe gastrointestinal signs occur, which necessi-
tate intensive supportive care. With ingestion of small amounts over some time, chronic
intoxication occurs. Signs may not develop for 7 to 21 days after ingestion and may not
reach their peak for an additional 21 days. Chronically intoxicated animals have hyperemic
 mucous membranes, mild to moderate gastrointestinal signs, and skin lesions characterized
by erythema and hair loss. The hair loss is first noted in frictional areas, and ulceration
may follow the hair loss. Advanced cases have involvement of the face (see Fig. 16-9G),
the ears, the ventrum, the perineum, the feet (see Fig. 16-8H), and the mucocutaneous
other organ involvement are common.
Diagnosis
Because thallium intoxication is rare, it often is not suspected. The primary differential
diagnostic possibilities to explain the systemic and cutaneous signs include drug eruption,
 systemic lupus erythematosus, necrolytic migratory erythema, toxic epidermal necrolysis.
erythema multiforme major, lymphoreticular neoplasia, and the various rickettsial and
 protozoal diseases. The diagnosis is confirimed by the detection of thallium in the urine by
 a rapid colorimetric spot test (Gabriel-Dubin test) or absorption spectrophotometry."7 The
spot test is inexpensive and more readily available than absorption spectrophotometry, but
is less sensitive, with both false-positive and false-negative reactions reported. In most
cases, these urine tests are performed after skin biopsy results suggest thallotoxicosis.
 Thallium exerts a local toxic effect on epidermal cells in the process of differentiation
leading to keratin formation. Degenerative changes are evident in the hair follicle and in
the surface epidermis.101 The direct insult to the hair follicle is especially noteworthy in
anagen hairs; the hair shaft is converted to an amorphous mass, the bulb degenerates, and
the hair is lost (Fig. 16- 19). Follicular pluging and parakeratosis are prominent. The
surface epidermis shows massive parakeratotic hyperkeratosis and apoptosis with vacuolar
degeneration of keratinocytes (Fig. 16-20). Multiple spongiform microabscesses are
 present in the superfcial epidermis and the hair follicle's outer root sheath. The superfi-
 cial dermis shows edema, vascular dilatation, and extravasation of erythrocytes.
Clinical Management
The prognosis in all cascs of thallitoxicosis is grave, and most animals die. In mildly
intoxicated cases, supportive care with the administration of appropriate fuids, electro-
lytes, antibiotics, and so forth is paramount and may be the only treatment needed,
because the thallium is slowly eliminated from the body via the bile and urine. Various
adverse reactions for each agent, all can precipitate a thallium crises by drawing thallium
from tissues into the blood. Because of this rebound, chelators such as dithizone (diphen-
ylthiocarbazonc) (70 mg/kg q8h) or dithiocarb sodiurm (diethyldithiocarbamate sodium)
lium with Prussian blue or activated charcoal may be of some benefit. The charcoal
appears to be more effective. Potassium chloride supplementation (1 to 2 g q8 to 12h)
promotes renal elimination by competing with thalliurn for distal tubular reabsorption.
Patients should be monitored for signs of cardiac and renal toxicity. Combination treat-
Environmental Skin Diseases ·I099
FIGURE I6- I8. A, Early infammation and crusting of the eyelids and lips of a cat with thallium poisoning.
(From Zook BD, et al: Thallium poisoning in cats. JAVMA 153:285, 1968.) B, Callus dermatitis. Note intertrigi
nous folds in the thick, rugose callus. C, Stermal callus in a dachshund. D, Pressure sore in the hock region. E,
band of erythematous skin. H, Facial fold intertrigo. The thumb is pulling the lip forward to expose the
erythernatous, infected crevice hidden in the fold.
IIoo + Environmental Skin Diseases
F1GURE I6-I9. Thallium toxicosis. Follicular necrosis and
degeneration of hair shafts.
FIGURE 16-20. Thallium toxicosis. Marked parakeratotic hy-
perkeratosis overlying epidennal hyperplasia and vacuolar degen-
eration of keratinocytes.
Environmental Skin Diseases · |l0|
 If the animal survives the intoxication, the skin lesions heal spontaneously with com-
plete hair regrowth. Bathing with mild shampoos or hydrotherapy can accelerate the skin's
healing but may unduly stress the animal.
● MISCELLANEOUS TOXICOSES
 ss  r s s    ooxn 
cases involve farin animals, but pets can be equally as susceptible. The agents can cause
skin lesions by direct action on the skin, by altering levels of vital nutrients, or by altering
the function of other organs. The number of cases of reported cutaneous toxicoses in
small animals is small, but these cases are probably underreported.
 Arsenic is a general tissue poison that combines with and inactivates sulfhydryl groups
 in tissue enzymes.20, ss Sources of arsenic include herbicides, rodenticides, pesticides, and
arsenical medicaments. Signs of arsenic toxicosis vary according to the dose, the physical
form, the route of administration, and the composition (organic or inorganic).
Arsenic toxicosis was reportcd in a mature dog presented for listlessness, anorexia,
weight loss, rough coat, swollen muzzle, and necrosis and ulceration of the pinnae, feet,
lips, and prepuce.29 A container of liquid insecticide (44% sodium arsenite) was found to
be leaking into the dog's house. Arsenic concentrations were found at toxic levels in urine,
blood, feces, and hair. Bathing the dog and cleaning up its environment resulted in
complete remission within 1 month, Chronic arsenic toxicosis is a know cause of Bowen's
 on dde pou op (o d ss) s u s na es u a
associated with arsenic poisoning, it should be considered, especially when the animal has
 intercurrent gastrointestinal signs.
Mycotoxins are toxic metabolites produced by molds. Intoxication occurs by ingestion
of spoiled grain or grain products. Ergotism was the first recognized mycotoxicosis and has
been reported to cause necrotizing skin lesions in dogs.?o A case of necrolytic migratory
erythema (see Chap. 10) was reported in a dog that ate moldy biscuit meal containing
ochratoxin A, citrinin, and sterigmatocystin.6 Because most owners do not feed obviously
spoiled foods, this may be an isolated case. However, it coes demonstrate that agents that
produce no direct skin signs can do so by altering the function of other organs.
● CallUS ANd HYGRoMA
A callus is a round or oval hyperkeratotic plaque that develops on the skin, typically over
bony pressure points. The elbow and the hock are the most common sites. Dogs with
 Dogs that sleep in unusual positions because of orthopedic disease or that are hypothyroid
can have calluses in unusual locations. Callosities are a normal, protective response to
 pressure-induced ischemia and infammation.ss The calus is hairless and gray, and has a
wrinkled surface (see Fig. 16-9B). Histologically, there is irregular to papillated epidermal
seen in the dermis.
Although calluses, especially those in unusual locations, can be mistaken for lesions of
ringworm, demodicosis, or other inflammatory disorders, diagnosis in most cases is
straightforward. Most callosities need no treatment, but some calluses necessitate treat-
 Iment because the owner finds them objectionable or because they are extremely hyper-
plastie and become ulcerated or easily infected. Environmental modification is mandatory.
Padding (e.g, foam rubber pads, air mattresses, and straw bedding) rmust be provided,
and the dog must use it consistently. Padding efforts often frustrate the client because the
dog avoids the padding or destroys it. If the environment cannot be padded, the individ-
ual lesions can be protected by making pads for affected areas (e.g., elbow pads). With
some ingenuity, virfually any callus can be padded. Again, the dog can frustrate the effort
[|02 · Environmental Skin Diseases
 by removing the pad. After padding is provided, the callus can be softened with any good
hand cream. In extreme cases, the callus can be removed surgically. This has to be
performed carefully because there can be excessive hemorhage and suitures often do not
hold. Wound dehiscence is a possible complication of surgery.
Hygroma is a false or acquired bursa that develops subcutaneously over bony promi-
nences.3 Hygromas develop after repeated trauma-induced necrosis and infamination
over pressure points. They are initially soft to fuctuant (fuid filled) but may become
abscesses or granulomas with or without fistulous tracts, especially if they are secondarily
infected.
 Histologically, hygromas are characterized by cystic spaces surrounded by dense walls
of granulation tissue, the inner layer of which is a fattened layer of fbroblasts. Early
lesions usually respond well to loose, padded bandages applied for 2 to 3 weeks and
corrective housing. More severe lesions may necessitate extensive drainage, extirpation, or
skin grafting procedures.
● callus derMatitis And pyodermA
Callus derrmatitis is a secondary infection of a callus subjected to repeated trauma or
softened without the obligatory environmental modifications.
Cause and Clinical Features
 The callus is the initial response to trauma. Continued trauma and the proliferative skin
reaction that follows producc crevices in the callus and intertriginous areas, which results
 in a fold dermatitis. Additional trauma causes epidermal breakdown, ulceration of pressure
points, and istulae. The lesions are most common over the hock and elbow joints of giant
breeds such as Great Danes, St. Bermards, Newfoundlands, and Irish wolfhounds (see Fig.
16-17B). Sternal calluses on the chest of Dachshunds, setters, Pointers, Boxers, and
Doberman pinschers may also become secondarily ulcerated and infected (see Fig.
16-17C). Often, there are no specific bacterial fora involved in this infection, although
staphylococci are commonly isolated. Pressure point granulomas, which contain free hair
shafts, may develop.
Ulcerated or fistulated lesions may be deeply infected, and exudative cytologic exami-
nation should be performed in all cases. The surface should be scrubbed, and the lesion
should be squeezed firmly before samples are collected. In many cases, pieces of hair
shafts pop to the surface. Infection usually results in a pyogranulomatous infammation.
Clinical Management
 Primary attention must be given to relieving the trauma so the tissue can heal. This can
be accomplished through the use of waterbeds, special bedding, pads for various body
parts, or a combination of these measures. In severe cases, surgical excision of the callus
may be indicated. This is major surgery with a diffcult postoperative course, and the
reader is referred to texts on soft tissue surgery for details of treatment.
Mild surface infammation and fold dermatitis can be relieved by daily whirlpool baths
in warm water. Distal lesions may be amenable to soaking in a bucket. With imbedded
hair shafts, a mildly hypertonic drawing solution of magnesium sulfate (Epsom salts)
(30 ml/L or 2 tbsp/qt of warm water) can be beneficial. In noninfected lesions, hydrother--
apy is typically suficient to cause healing. When this is not possible, the topical applica-
tion of an antibiotic cream or Preparation H, a human hemorrhoid preparation containing
livc yeast extract and shark liver oil, can be beneficial.
Infected lesions necessitate a prolonged course with antibiotics. Six weeks or longer of
treatment is usually necessary. Because the infected tissue cannot return to normal condi-
tion with antibiotic treatment, the client is not able to determine when the infection is
resolved. Cytologic examinations should be performed every second week. When no sign
of infection is present, treatment should be continued for an additional 7 to 14 days.
 Relapses are prevented by management changes.
Environmental Skin Discases · Il03
· YENTRAL COMEDONE SYNDROME
This is common in Greyhounds.16a Friction and pressure-point contact with the ground
result in comedone formation on thc stermum. Secondary bacterial infection produces
papules and pustules. Treatmcnt includes comedolytie and antibacterial topical applica-
tions, and management changes.
● PresSUre sores
 Pressure sores (decubital ulcers) result from prolonged application of pressurc concen-
trated over a bony prominence in a relatively small area of the body. The pressure is
sufficient to compress the capillary circulation, causing tissue damage or frank necro-
sis30, 373h severity of ressure ores is vaiable, andas excted,more severe leons
are diffcult to trcat. Grade I lesions affect the epidermis and superficial dermis, whereas
  e s      sn re  
 infected with a variety of pathogenic bacteria. Within 24 to 48 hours, the edges of the
ulcerated area are undermined. Because of the area of capillary and vcnous congestion at
the base of the ulcer and tissue margins, systemic antibiotics do not pcnetrate well.
Animals that are recumhent for prolonged periods on hard surfaces are at increased
risk for pressure sores. Emaciation increases the susceptibility. Lesions are initially charac-
terized by an erythematous to reddish purple discoloration. This progresscs to oozing.
necrosis, and ulceration. The resultant ulcers tend to be dcep, to be undermincd at the
edges, to bc sccondarily infected, and to heal slowly (see Fig. I6-17D).
 Prevention is paramount. All recumbent animals shouid be kept on a waterbed or
eggcrate foarm rubber pad, be turmed frequently, and receive a daily whirlpool bath. If a
pressure sore develops, additional padding should be supplied in that area. The wound
ers from its disease fairly quickly, the pressure sore should heal spontaneously but slowly.
erate healing. Although hydrogen peroxide at high concentrations is cytotoxic, low concen-
trations (1.5% to 3%) stimulate fbroblasts and angiogenesis, and can increase wound
cence can be expected. Presurgical application of agents that encourage a hcalthy bed of
granulation tissue (e.g, Granulex, Pfizer Animal Health) can be beneficial.
+ tuG-of.war blisters
 Dogs who play tug-of-war vigorously, cspeciall with another dog, can develop blisters on
the digital and main pads of the front feet. Dogs who are tug-of-war fanatics and have a
high tolerance for pain are most at risk. Dr. Eve Brown, a practitioner in thc Cormell
area, sees the condition often enough that she encourages her clients not to let their dogs
play tug-of-war.
The onset of signs is acute and is characterized by lameness. At examination, classic
frictional blisters are seen on one or more pads. Most of the blisters are ruptured, and
examination of the foor of the blister shows normal pad epithelium. This is in contrast to
more typical pad ulcers seen in dogs with mechanobullous diseases (see Chap. 12),
drag injuries). In the case of dogs with mechanobullous diseases or acute trauma, the
ulcers are sharply inarginated and the dermis is visible.
With the appropriate history, the diagnosis is straightforward. In a puppy, in which
there can be concerm for an underlying hyperfragility of the pads, biopsies may be needed
-as r h s p ad as s  s ro p a o
rated pad away and protectivc bandaging. Becausc an intact epithelium exists at the
bottom of the blister, the dog should returm to normal function quickly.
Il04 · Environmental Skin Diseases
· PYOTrAUMATIC DERMatITIS
Pyotraumatic dermatitis (acute moist derrmatitis, or “hot spots") is produced by self-
induced trauma as the patient bites or scratches at a part of its body in an attempt to
alleviate some pain or itch.s The majority of cases are complications of fea bite hypersen-
sitivity, but allrgic skin diseases, other ectoparasites, anal sac problems, infammations
such as otitis externa, foreign bodies in the coat, irritant substances, dirty unkempt coats
(scc Fig. 16-17E), psychoses, and painful musculoskeletal disorders may be underlying
causes, These factors initiate the itch-scratch cycle, which varies in intensity with individu-
disposed to this problem are those with a heavy pelage that has a dense undercoat, such
as Golden and Labrador retrievers, Collies, German shepherds, and St. Bernards. The
problem is much more common in hot, hurmid weather and may be related to lack of
ventilation in the coat.
 A typical lesion is red, moist, and exudative. There is a coagulum of proteinaceous
exudate in the center of the area surrounded by a red halo of erythematous skin. The hair
is lost from the area, but the margins are sharply defined from the surrounding normal
skin and hair (see Fig. 16-17F). The lesion progresses rapidly if appropriate therapy is
not started at once (see Fig. 16-17G). Much pain is associated with the local area, and
this may eventually deter the animal from further self-tralima. Lesions are often located in
close proximity to'the prinary painful process (e.g, near infected ears, anal sacs, and fea
hites on the rump).
 True hot spots havc bacteria colonizing thc surfacc of the lesion but are not skin
infections. This is in contrast to pyotraumatie folliculitis (see Chap. 4) in which the dog
traumatizes the skin over a staphylococcal follculitis or furunculosis.s5 Without clipping
and palpating the lesion, it can be difficult (if not impossible) to differentiate pyotraumatic
dermatitis from pyotraumatic folliculitis.
Diagnosis is made by the history of acute onset, the physical appearance, and some
association with a prinary cause. True pyotraumatic derrmatitis is a relatively fiat, eroded
to ulcerated lesion. Histologically (Fig. 16-2l), the tissue reaction is acute, exudative, and
involves the surface epithelium only. Lesions that are thickened, are plaquelike, and are
bordered by papules or pustules (satellte lesions) should always suggest a primary erup-
tive process, especially a staphylococcal infection, which the dog has traumatized.s5
Therapy is effective if applied promptly and vigorously. Application of pramoxine
the area. Cleaning with povidone-iodine or chlorhexidine is the first and most important
FIGURE I6-21. Pyotrauinatic
dermatitis. Traumatic erosion of the
epidermis with marked serum exu-
dation. The hair follicles and mid-
to-deep dermal tissues are normal.
Environmental Skin Diseases · Il05
step in local therapy. Cleaning is more rapid and effective when the hair is clipped, but
clipping is not always possible in show dogs. In unclipped areas, the shampoo formulation
of the antiseptic should be used, whereas solutions are applied on clipped lesions.
After the wound is cleaned, the nature of additional treatments depends on the dog
and the investigator. A few dogs lose all interest in the lesion after they create it and only
require the application of a drying agent. A 2% aluminum acetate solution (Domeboro
solution), an aluminum acetate and 1% hydrocortisone solution, or a menthol and Hama-
melis solution (Dermacool, Virbac) are commonly used products and can be effective.4
The solution is applied two to three times daily until a healthy scab develops. Herbal
extracts are also reported to be effective, but detailed studies are lacking.112
 e    s iso rn  p s s a 
costeroid. If oral corticosteroids are not contraindicated, prednisolonc or prednisone
(1.1 mg/kg q24h) is most uscful becausc thc owner does not have to manipulate a tender
lesion. If oral drugs are contraindicated or the lesion is not severe enough to warrant
fully treated with a topical steroid (e.g, betamethasone valerate cream) alone, a recent
study showed that a neomycin-prednisolone combination was more effective than either
individual ingredient.oo The prednisolone alone gave the poorest results. The duration of
treatment depends on the severity of the lesion and the agent used, but 7- to l4-day
courses are typical.
At the time of the initial treatment, it is most important to find the predisposing
factor and to eliminate or modify it to stop the patient's refex self-trauma. The treatment
have repeated problems. There is no simple prophylaxis. Constant attention to grooming.
hygiene, baths, and parasite control and periodic cleaning of the ears and anal sacs helps.
Owners should be particularly vigilant during periods of hot, humid weather. Although
diet (e.g., high protein content) is often suggested as a cause, except for severe faty acid
deficiency or food hypersensitivity, this has never been proved.
+ INTERTRIGO
Intertrigo (skin fold dermatitis) is a frictional dermatitis that occurs in areas where two
skin surfaces are intimately apposed. The apposition results from the intentional breeding
of certain dogs (e.g., English bulldog and Chinese Shar pei) or cats (e.g., Persians) for
pronounced folding. congenital, or acquired anatomic defects; it may also result from
thickening of the dermis or suhcutis caused by obesity, hormonal influences, or infainima-
tory skin disease. Skin rubbing against skin is irritating, and the areas where this occurs
have poor air circulation. If moisture, sehum, glandular secretions, and excretions such as
tears, saliva, and urine are present, these areas provide an environment that favors skin
maceration and bacterial or Malassezia yeast overgrowth. Although bacteria or yeast play a
central role in the pathogenesis of fold'dermatitis, they rarely invade viable tissues, so the
old designation of fold pyoderrna is inaccurate.*8 The surface organisms act on the trapped
secretions and sebum, and produce breakdown products, which are irritating and odorifer-
ous. As the iritants are ruibbed on the apposed surface, infammation results and pro-
duces the clinical signs of the disease and causes the increased production of more
irritants. A vicious cycle is created.
 Satisfactory treatment of an intertrigo necessitates resolution of the infammation and
a  oan s p e s ans a jo  p na
folding cannot be elirminated because the anatomic defect is uncorrectable or would
 destroy the desired appearance of the animal, cure cannot be achievcd and a long-term
control regimen should be instituted. In some animals, control measures do not work and
surgery is needed.76 When the folding can be eliminated, only a short course of treatment
is necessary to resolve the derrmatitis.
-isseu pue peusso s suqp poddeua on pue susue aoins o jo paouy
tates the use of antiseborrheic products. Benzoyl peroxide-based or sulfur-based prod-
FIGURE 16-22. A, Lip fold intertrigo characterized by erythema, exudation, and fetid odor. B, Profound
E, Vulvar fold intertrigo. Severe dermatitis due to constant licking. F, Tail fold intertrigo in a dog with screw tail
conformation. (Courtesy P. Ihrke.) G, Close-up of thc dog in F. (Courtesy P. Ihrke.) H, Calcinesis eutis secondary
to percuitaneous penetration of calcium carbonate.
Environmental Skin Diseases · Il07
ucts, in gel. ointment, or shampoo formulations, are most cominonly used. Although the
 gels and ointments have better residual activity, they can be iritating and worsen the
inflammation if used at the onset of treatment. Most investigators use shampoos to gain
control and reserve the other formulations for maintenance treatments.
After the surface debris is removed, tissue inflammation can be eliminated by the
topical application of a corticosteroid cream or the oral administration of prednisolone
(1.1 mg/kg q24h). A 5- to 7-day course of treatment should be suffcient. In mild cases,
an aluminum acetate and hydrocortisone solution is very effective.
If the skin apposition cannot be eliminated (e.g, by surgery or weight loss), the
 dermatitis recurs unless maintenance cleaning with an antiseborrheic product is instituted.
For folds of the face, the body, or the vulva, the daily application of a plain or medicated
talc can he beneficial and reduce the amount of bathing required. Lip, vilvar, and tail
folds are usually not amenable to talcing. The talc is applied carefully to the crevice of
each fold. Before the next application, the previous day's dose must be removed by
brushing with a dry cloth or by washing. If the area is washed, it should be dried
completely before the talc is reapplied. In many cases, the talcing can reduce the fre.
quency of washing from once daily to once or twice weekly. When talcing is inefective,
Malassezia yeast predominate, commercial or homemade acetic acid products are benefi-
cial.GI
bulldogs, and Pugs (see Fig. 16-17H)83 It is also occasionally seen in Persian and
Himalayan cats. The fold may rub on the cornea and cause severe keratitis and ulceration.
The breed standards in some cases require a facial fold, so even though its presence may
 damage the eye, one should be careful to explain the ramifications of surgical correction
to owners and should obtain their approval before ablating the folds.
 Lip fold intertrigo is primarily an aesthetic problem to owners, because it produces
severe halitosis.s3 Owners may need to be convinced that the small lip fold can produce
all that odor. This problem is prevalent in dogs with a large lip fap, such as spanicls and
St. Bernards (Fig. 16-22A). Malassezia overgrowth is cxtremely common in this area and
acetic acid treatments once to twice daily can be beneficial. Cheiloplasty is curative.
Body fold intertrigo occurs primarily in obese individuals, and in certain Basset
hounds and Chinese Shar pei dogs (see Fig. 16-22B and C). It is most common in Shar
 pei puppies that have an increased number of folds and in those with a tendency to
seborrhea. As the puppies mature, they do grow out of their folds on parts of the body,
face, where the folds persist. It may also be seen on the ventral midline of female dogs
and cats with intertrigo between pendulous mammary glands or with rolls of body fat.
Vulvar fold intertrigo is common in obese older female animals that have infantile
vulvae as a result of spaying at a young age (see Fig. I6-22D).s3 The vulva is recessed,
produced are cspecially unpleasant. Licking is a near-constant feature and worsens the
dermatitis (see Fig. 16-22E). Ascending hacterial urinary tract infections are a common
obesity is usually present, weight reduction is indicated. Estrogenic treatments can cause
vulvar enlargement with reduction of the folds, but the potential danger of such endocrine
therapy must be considered. Surgical vulvopasty (episioplasty), with fixation of the dorsal
vulvar commissure to elevate the vulva out of the crevice, is curative. Squamous cell
carcinoma has been reported to arise from chronic vulvar fold dermatitis.83
Tail fold intertrigo results from pressure of corkscrew tails on the skin of the peri
s  os sne a o ad  t  s as r s x 
anal sac secretions, and other skin gland products enhance the skin maceration from the
Il08 · Environmental Skin Diseases
FIGURE 16-23. Calcinosis cutis.
Coalescing papular
 lesions  on 
thle
edge of the main carpal pad of dog
that walked over a calcium-containing
ice melter.
● calcinosis cutis
Calcinosis cutis involves the deposition of calcium salts in dermal tissues. Lesions can be
 localized and secondary to trauma in normal or metabolically abnormal dogs (see Chap.
 20) or widespread.20, 41 In dogs, widespread calcinosis cutis typically occurs in spontaneous
 or iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism (see Chap. 10), but several reports describe ventral
calcinosis caused by percutaneous penetration of calcium carbonate or calcium chlo-
ride.8s, 9 Lesions consisted of multiple erythematous, crusted, ulcerated papules and
plaques on the glabrous skin of the ventral abdomen, the inguinal region, and the medial
thighs (see Fig. 16- 11H). The authors have also seen pedal lesions (Fig. 16--23) associ-
ated with calcium-containing ice melters.
When calcinosis cutis is recognized in glabrous areas or other areas of contact, the
 owner should be questioned carefully about possible exposure to bone meal, landscaping
products, or barn dusts before adrenal function tests are performed. Once exposure to the
calciurn is stopped, the lesions should resolve spontaneously. Treatment with DMSO gel
may hasten resolution of the lesions.6 A thin film should be applied once to twice daily.
● REfeReNCES
1. Al-Bagdadi FK, et al: Hair dye effects on the hair
Meet Am Acad Vet Denmatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 
coat and skin of the dog: A scanning electron micro-
14:97, 1998.
scopic study. Anat Histol Embryol 17:349, 1988.
7. Bensignor E: Soleil et peau chez les carnivores
2. Arnold P, et al: Solare glossitis bei Schlittenhundcn.
dornestiques l—effets des rayonnements solaires sur
Schweiz Arch Tierhcilk 140:328, 1998.
les structures cutanees. Point Vet 30:225, 1999.
3. Aroch 1, Harrus S: Retrospective study of the epi-
 8. Bensignor E: Soleil et peau chez les carnivores
demiological, clinical, haematological, and biochemical
domestiques 2—-affections photoinduites et photoag-
gravees. Point Vet 30:229, 1999.
palestinae. Vet Rec 144:532, 1999.
 9. Bergeaud P: Pathologies liees aux epillets. Point Vet
4. Ascher F, et al: Interet d'une solution topique non
26:105, 1994.
antibiocorticoide dans le traitement de la dermatite
10. Bilbrey SA, et al: Chemical burn caused by benzalko.
nium chloride in eight surgical cases. J' Am Anim
30:345, 1995.
Hosp Assoc 25:31, 1989.
5.Ashley PF, Bowman LA: Symmetnic cutaneous ne
11. Borurn T: Management of decubital ulcers with the
crosis of the hind feet and multicentric follicular lym-
phoma in a cat. J Arn Vet Med Assoc 2l4:21l,
Summer:16, 1986.
1999.
 12. Bouayad H, ct al: Peripheral acquired arteriovenous
6. Beale KM, Morris DO; Treatment of canine calcino-
fstula: A report of four cases and literature review.
 sis cutis with dimethylsulfoxide gel. Proc Annu Memb
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 23:205, 1987.
Environnental Skin Diseases * II09
[3. Bradley DM, ct al: Biochemical and histopathological
33. Famsworth IR, Birchard S: Subcutaneous accumula-
cvaluation of changes in sled dog paw skin associated
tion of chyle after thoracic duct ligation in a dog.
with physical stress and cold temperatures. Vet Der-
J Arm Vet Med Assoc 208:2016, 1996.
matol 7:203, 1996.
 33a. Fosum TW, et al: Generalized lymphangiectasis in a
14. Brennan KF, thrke PJ: Grass awn migration in dogs
dog with subeutaneous chyle and lyrnphangioma. J
and cats: A retrospective study of 182 cases. J Ain
Ain Vet Med Assoc 197:23l, 1991.
Vet Med Assoc 182:1201, 1983.
34. Fox SM: Management of therinal bums— Part I.
15. Brow DC, Holt D: Subcutaneous emphysema, pncu-
Conp Cont Edue 7:631, 1985.
mothorax, pneumumediastinum, and pneumopericar-
35. Frank IA, Calderwood-Mays MB: Solar dermatitis in
dliun associated with positive-pressure ventilation in a
dogs. Compendi Cont Educ: 16:465, 1994.
cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 206:997, 1995.
16. Brow 1>E, ct al: Eclinocytosis associated with rattle-
tic fibers in the dennis of clinically normal dogs and
snake envenomation in dlogs. Vet Pathol 31:654, 1994.
dogs with solar dermatitis and other dermatoses. Arml
16a. Burkell G: Skin diseases in greyhounds. Vet Med 95:
I Vet Res 57:178,1996.
115,2000.
37. Freidberg IM, et al: Fitzpatrick's Dernatology in
17. Butterfeld A13, et al: Acquired peripheral arteriovenous 
General Medicine 5th ed." McGraw-Hill Book Co,
fstula in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 176:445, 1980.
New York, 1999.
18. Coyne BE, et al: Thermoelectric burms frorm im-
38.
Gamy C: Cas clinique: Pyodermite des plis. Point Vet
proper grounding of electrocantery units: Two casc
18:411, 1986.
reports. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 29:7, 1993.
39. Georgi ME, et al: Pappus bristles: The cause of bur-
19. Darr D, et al: Protection against UVB damage to
dock stomatitis in dogs. Comell Vet 72:43, 1982.
porcine skin with topical application of vitamin C. In:
von Tscharner C, Halliwcll REW (eds): Advances in
J A1n Amim llosp Assoc 180:109, 1982.
Veterinary Dcrmatology, Vol l. Bailliere Tindall, Lon-
41.
Gross TL: Calcinosis circumscripta and renal dyspla-
don, 1990, p 463.
sia in a dog. Vet Derrnatol 8:27, 1997.
19a. Darr D, Fridovich I: Free radieals in cutaneous biol-
42. Harari J, et al: Recurrent peripheral arteriovenous
ogy. J Invest Dermatol 102:671, 1994.
fistala and hyperthyroidism in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp
20. Davidson EB, et al: Calcinosis circumscripta of ahe
Assoc 20:759, 1984.
thoracic wall in a German shepherd dog. I Am Anim
43. Ilargis AM, et al: Myospherulosis in the subcutis of a
Hosp Assoc 34:153, 1998.
dog. Vet Pathol 21:248, 1984.
44. Hlargis MM, Lewis TP HI: Fullthickness cutaneous
plex class II molecules by dermal infainmatory cells,
burn in black-haired skin on the dorsum of the boly
epidermal Langerhans' cclls and keratinocytes in ca-
of a Dalmatian puppy. Vet Pathol 10:39, 1999.
nine dermatological disease. J Comp Pathol 115:
45. Hosgoord G: Arteriovenous fistulas: Pathophysiology, dli-
317,1996.
agnosis and treatment. Comp Cont Educ 11:625, 1989.
 22. DeClercg J, Vanstapel M-J: Chronic radiant heat der-
46. Hruza LL, Pentland AP: Mechanisms of UV-induced 
matitis (Erythema ah igne) in two dogs. Vet Dermatol
infammation. J Invcst Dermatol I00:35s, 1993.
9:269, 1998.
47. Hubcrt BM: Porphyries: Cutaneous manifcstations in
 23. DeNardo CA, et al; Comparison of seven different
a cat and a dog. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Ad-
suture materials in the feline oral cavity. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoe 32:164, 1996.
Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p 461.
24. Dermell Ws, Whcaton LG: Surgical management of
48. Hudelson S, Hludelson P: * Pathophysiology of snake
envenomization and evaluation of treatments- Part I.
1995.
Comp Cont Ed 17:889, 1995.
 25. Dernell Ws, Wheaton LC: Surgical management of
49. Hudelson S, Hudelson P: Pathophysiology of snake:
radiation injuryPart II. Comp Cont Ed 17:499.
envennornization and evaluation of treattments- Part
1995.
11. Comp Cont Ed 17:1035, 1995.
26. Dolowy WC: Giant hogwoed photodernatitis in two
50. Hudelson S, Hudclson P: Pathophysiology of snake
dogs in Bellevue, Washington. J Am Vet Med Assoc
envenomization and evaluation of treatments—Part
209:722, 1996.
III. Comp Cont Ed 17:1385, 1995.
27. Dunstan RW, et al: The light and the skin. In:
51. Hudson WE, Florax MJH: Photosensitization in fox-
Kwochka KW, et al (eds):
：Advances in Veterinary
hounds. Vet Rec 128:618, 1991.
Dermatology I1. Buttcrworth-Heinermann, Boston,
52. FHunt GB, Chapman BI. "Trophic ulceration of rwo
1998, p 3.
digital pads. Aust Vet Pract 21:196, 1991.
28.Evans AC, et al: A trial of 13-cis-rctinoic acid for
53. lhrke P: Nasal solar dernatitis. In: Kirk RW (ed):
treatment of squamous cell carcinoma and preneo-
Current Veterinary Therapy VIl. W.B. Saunders Co,
plastic lesions of the head in cats. Am J Vet Res 46:
Philadelphia、 1981, p 440.
2553,1985.
 54. Irving RA. et al: Porphyrin values and treatiment of
 29. Evinger Jy, Blakemore JC: Dermatitis in a dog asso-
feline solar derinatitis. Aim J Vet Res 43:2067, 1982.
ciatcd with exposure to an arsenic conpound. J Am
55. Israel E, et al: Microangiopathic hemoltic anemia in
Vet Med Assoc 184:1281, 1984.
a puppy: Crand Rounds Conference. J Am Anin
30. Fadok VW: Necrotizing skin diseases. In: Kirk RW
Hosp Assoc 14:521, 1978.
   
y VII1. W.B. Saun-
 56. Iwasalki T, Maeda Y: The effect of ultraviolet (UV) on
ders Co, Philadelphia, 1983, p 473.
the scvcrity of canine peinphigus erythematosus. Proc
31. Fairley RA: Photosensitivity dermatitis in two collie
Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll
working dogs. N Z Vet J 30:61, 1982.
Vet Dermatol 13:86, 1997.
32. Fairley RA, MacKenzie IS: Photosensitivity in a ken-
57. Jepson PGH.: Chilblain syndroine in dogs. Vet Rec
nel of HHarrier hounds. Vet Dermatol 5:1, 1994.
108:392, 1981.
IIl0 · Environmental Skin Diseases
 58. Kanj LF, et al: Pressure ulcers. ∫ Am Acad Dermatol 
38:517, 1998.
trol Therapy 134:2355, 1987.
59. Kimura T, Doi K: Responses of the skin over the
80. Mirtschin PJ, et al: Snake bites recorded by veteri-
dorsum to sunlight in hairless descendants of Mexican
nary practices in Australia, Aust Vet J 76:195, 1998.
hairless dogs. Am J Vet Res 55:199, 1994.
81.
 Mulcahy J, Rand J: Oral and dermal ulceration in a
60. Kimura T, Doi K: Protective effects of sunscreens on
cat exposed to a quatermary ammonium compound.
sunburm and suntan reactions in cross-bred Mexican
Aust Vet Pract 26:194, 1996.
hairless dogs. Vet Dermatol 5:175, 1994.
 S2. Muller GH: Contact dermatitis in animals. Arch Der-
61. Knevitt R: Lip fold pyoderma. Cont Therap Series
matol 96:423, 1967.
187:829, 1995.
83. Muller GH, et al: Small Animal Dermatology IV.
62. Komarek JV: Fallbericht: Verfolgung der Rute beim
W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1989.
Hund-Cauda-equina-syndrome. Kleintier-Prax 33:25,
 84. Nagata M, et al: Cryoglobulinaemia and cryofibrino-
1988.
 genaenia: A comparison of canine and human cases.
63. Kostolich M: Reconstructive surgery of a snakebite
Vet Dermatol 9:277, 1998.
wound. Canine Pract 16:15, 1990.
S5. Neiger RD: Arsenic poisoning. In: Kirk RW (ed):
64. Kraft W, et al: Schlangenbisse bei Hunden. Tierarztl
Current Veterinary Therapy X. W.B. Saunders Co,
Prax 26:104, 1998.
Philadelphia, 1989, p 159.
65. Kral, F., Schwartzinan, R. M.: Veterinary and Com-
86. Nikula KJ, et al: Ultraviolet radiation, solar dermato-
parative Dernatology. J.B. Lippincott Co, Philadel
ses, and cutaneous neoplasia in beagle dogs. Radiat
phia, 1964.
Res 129:11, 1992.
 87. Osweiler GD, et al: Clinical and Diagnostic Veteri.
toimmunology, and idiopathic photodermatoses. Int J
nary Toxicology, 3rd ed. Kendal/Hunt Pnblishing Co,
Dermatol 32:387, 1993.
Dubuque, IA, 1985.
67. Ledo E: Photodermatoses. Part Il: Chemical photo-
88. Paradis M, Scott DW: Calcinosis cutis sccondary to
dermatoses and dermatoses that can be cxacerbated,
percutaneous pcnetration of calclurm carbonate in a
precipitated, or provoked by light. Int J Dermatol 32:
Dalmatian. Can Vet J 30:57, 1989.
480, 1993.
89. Patterson JM: Nasal solar dernatis in the dog-a
68. Lazarov A, et al: Dermal spherulosis (myospherulosis)
method of tattooing. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 14:370,
after topical treatment for psoriasis. I Arm Acad Der-
1978.
Inatol 30(Part 1):265, 1994.
90. Patterson JW, Kannon GA: Spherulocystic disease
69. Little CJL, et al: Hepatopathy and dermatitisin a dog
("myospherulosis") arising in a lesion of stcatocystona
associated with the ingestion of nycotoxins. J Simall
multiplex. J Am Acad Dermatol 38:274, 1998.
Anim Pract 32:23, 1991.
91. Peterson ME, Meerdink GL: Bites and stings of ven-
70. Mansfield PD: The managcnent of snake venorn poi-
omous animals. In: Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary
861 869 0pg  d sop 0 uuos
Therapy X. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1989,
71. Marks SL, et al: Coral snake envenomation in the
p 177.
dog: Report of four cases and review of the literature.
 92. Power HT, Ihrke PJ: The use of synthetic retinoids in
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26:629, 1990.
veterinary inedicine. In: Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's
72. Marsella R, et al. Use of pentoxifylline in the treat-
Current Veterinary Therapy XI. W.B. Saunders Co,
ment of allergic contact reaction to plants of the
Philadelphia, 1995.
Commelinceae family in dogs. Vet Dermatol 8:121,
 93. Purkayastha SS, et al: Efficacy of pentoxifylline with
1997.
aspirin in the treatment of frosthite. Indian J Med
73. Mason BjE: Necrosis of a dog's toes following hepati-
Res 107:239, 1998.
tis. Vet Rec 10l:286, 1977.
 94. Reedy LM, Clubh FJ: Microwave burm in a Toy Poo-
74. Mason K: Actinic dermatosis in dogs and cats. Proc
dle: A case report. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27:497,
Anmu Meet Eur Soc Vet Dermatol Eur Coll Vet Der-
1991.
matol 12:67, 1997.
95. Reinke SI, et al: Histopathologic features of pyo-
75. Mason KV: The pathogenesis of solar induced skin
traumatic dermatitis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 190:57.
lesions in bull terriers. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am
1987.
Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 4:12,
95a. Rietschel RL: Irritant contact dermatitis. Mecha-
1987.
 nisms in irritant contact dermatitis. Clin Derrmatol 15:
75a. Mason Nj, Michel KE: Subcutaneous emphysema,
557, 1997.
pneumoperitoneun, and pneumoretroperitoneum af-
 96. Rosenkrantz Ws: Solar dermatitis. In: Griffn CE, et
ter gastrostorny tube placement in a cat. J Am Vet
al: Current Veterinary Derrmatology. Mosby-Year
Med Assoc 216:1096, 2000.
Book, St. Louis, 1993, p 309.
75b. McAlvany JP, Sherertz EF: Contact dermatitis in
97. Saxon WD, Kirby R: Treatment of acute burn injury
infants, children, and adolescents. Ady Derrmatol 9:
and smoke inhalation. In: Kirk RW, Bonagura JD
205,1994.
(eds): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XI. W.B.
76. Messinger LM: Treatment of skin fold deninatitis af-
Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1992, p 146.
fccting a cat's perineal urethrostomy site. J Am Anir
98. Schaer M: Eastern diamondback ratlesnake enven-
Hosp Assoc 30:341, 1994.
omation of 20 dogs. Comp Cont Edue 6:997, 1984.
77. Miller WH Jr: Epidermal dysplastic disorders of dogs
99. Schick MP, et al: Calcinosis cutis secondary to percu-
and cats. In: Bonagura JD (ed: Kirk's Current Veteri-
u od sn
iary Therapy XIl. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia.
Vet Med Assoc 190:207, 1987.
1995.
100. Schroeder H, et al: Efficacy of a topical antinicro.
78. Miller WJ Jr, Scott DW: Unpublished observations,
bial—anti-infammatory combination in the treatment
1999.
of pyotraumatic dermatitis in dogs. Vet Dermatol 7:
79. Mills BC: Feline deaths following tattooing with In-
163, 1996.
Environmental Skin Diseases · III!
101. Schwartzman RM, Kirschbaum JO: The cutaneous
109. Thomas ML, et al: Chronic thallium toxicosis in a
histopathology of thallum poisoning. J Invest Derna-
dog. I Am Anim Hosp Assoe 29:21l, 1993.
tol 39:169, 1962.
110. Trower ND, et al: Arteriovenous fstula involving the
102. Scott DW: Feline dernatology, 1900--1978: A mono-
prepuce of a dog. J Small Anim Pract 38:455, 1997.
graph. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:331, 1980.
111.
Tur E, et al: Topical hydrogen peroxide treatment of
103.
 Shakespeare AC, et al: Infarction of the digits and tail
ischemie ulcers in the guinea pig: Blood recruitment
secondary to disseminated intravascular coagulation
in multiple skin sites. J Am Acad Dermatol 33:217,
and metastic hemangiosarcoma in a dog. J Arn Anim
1995.
JHosp Assoc 24:517, 1988,
112. Vedros NA, Steinberg K: In pitro and in vico activity
104. Springer TR, Bailey WJ: Snake bite treatment in the
United States. Int J Dermatol 25:479, 1986.
matitis. Canine Pract 19:8, 1994.
105. Streilein [W: Sunlight and skin-associated lymphoid
113. Walder EJ, Conroy JD: Contact dermatitis in dogs
tissues (SALT). J Invest Derrnatol 100:47S, 1993.
and cats: Pathogenesis, histopathology, experimental
106. Swaim SF, et al: Heating pad and thermal burns in
induction, and casc reports. Vet Dermatel 5:149,
small animals, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 25:156, 1989.
1994.
107. Swain SF, et al: Pressure wounds in animals. Comp
114. Waldrman JS, et al: Subcutaneous myospherulosis.
Cont Ed 18:203, 1996.
J Am Acad Dermatol 2l:400, 1989.
 108. Tennant BC: Lessons from the porphyrias of animals.
115. Water CB, et al: Acute thallum toxicosis in a dog.
Clin Dermatol 16:307, 1998.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 201:883, 1992.
Chapter
Nutritional Skin Diseases
ermatoses may result from numerous nutritional deficiencies, excesses, or imbal-
ances, but the skin responds with only a few types of clinical reactions and lesions.
These include scaling, crusting, alopecia, comedones, erythema, and a dry, dull or greasy
 ds r  s    rd  
tional cause.
 It is useful to know the nutritional requirements of dogs and catsl. 26 but it is diffcult 
it became fashionable to name thern in terms of their responsc to a nutrient rather than
 in terms of a deficiency. Notablc examples of these are the zinc-responsivc dermatoscs
and the vitamin A-responsive dermatoses (rather than zine deficiency and vitainin A
deficiency). In many instances, these entities may represent genetically related inabilities
to absorb or metabolize the nutrients rather than true nutritional deficiencies; in others,
the response obtained may be the result of presently unknown effects of supraphysiologic
doses of the nutrients.
Major nutritional problerns of concern are deficiencies of essential fatty acids, protein,
the minerals zine and copper, and vitamins A, B, and E, as well as excessive levels of
vitainin A.25 Food hypersensitivity 1may also produce dermatoses (see Chap. 8).
· FATTY ACID DEFICIENCY
Fatty acid deficiency is uncommon to rare and is seen only in animals that are fed dry
rations, commercial food that has been poorly preserved (storage, temperature, preserva-
out of the food to save costs, because it leaked from the bag during storage, or because it
became rancid. Fatty acid deficiency also may occur from diets that contain fat but have
inadequate antioxidants, such as vitamin E. Signs of fatty acid deficicncy can be seen in
dogs that are fed high-quality reducing dog foods in which the fat content has been
lowered.
 Dog food should have a minimum of 3% fat in canned food and 7% to 8% fat in dry
food. Cats usually have 35% to 40% of their calories provided by fat—a much higher
amount--because they need a dense caloric formula. The oxidation of fat during storage
is a great concern hecause when fat becomes rancid, the essential fatty acids as well as
vitarnins D, E, and biotin are destroyed. Oxidation imay occur in canned food after 1 year
and in dry food after 6 months, cspecially if the food is stored at high temperatures.
Animals may also develop fatty acid deficiency in association with intestinal malabsorption.
pancreatic disease, and chronic hepatic disease.
Animals must be on a diet deficient in essential fatty acids for several months before
skin problems become evident.* There is an early decrease in lipid production with
resultant fine scaling of the skin and loss of the luster and sheen of the hair (Fig. 17-lA).
*See references 6, 13, 14, 16, 26, 38, 39.
1112
Nutritional Skin Diseases · II13
This dry phase can last for months and can have associated hair loss and secondary
bacterial infections. Eventually, the skin thickens and becones greasy, especially in the
ears, in the intertriginous areas, and betwecn the toes. The dryness of the coat is replaced
by. greasiness, and many animals bccome, pruritic. Secondary bacterial or Malassezia
infections can occur, with intensification of the seborrheic changes and pruritus.
Fatty acid defciency in a number of species produces abnormal keratinization, result-
ing in epidermal hyperplasia, hypergranulosis, and orthokeratotic or parakeratotic hyper-
keratosis (Fig. 17-2). This abnormal keratinization is thought to result from arachidonic
acid deficiency with resultant prostaglandin E deficiency, which causes aberrations in the
ratios of epidermal cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cyclic AMP) to cyclic guanosine
 monophosphate (cyclic GMP) and in DNA synthesis.
The polyunsaturated fatty acid linoleic acid is esscntial in the diet of all animals,
Arachidonic and linolenic acids are also required; however, with the exception of arachi-
donic acid in the cat, these acids can bc synthesized from linoleic acid. Cats seems to lack
an active A-6-desaturasc to initiate the conversion of linoleic acid to arachidonic acid and
thus are obligate carmivores.1, 16, 27
the dermatosis is indeed an essential fatty acid defciency. In such cases, the coats may
develop more luster. Fatty acid deficiency can be corrected by changing the dog's ration
to one of higher quality and fat content, through the administration of various veterinary
fatty acid supplements, or by the adlhition of household fats to the diet. Because fat
supplements have a high caloric density, might trigger an episode of pancreatitis in a
predisposed dog, and need to be supplemented with at least vitamin E, this old route of
treatment is no longer used routinely.
 It is more beneficial to upgrade the basic diet or to use balanced nutritional supple-
ments. If the fatty acid deficiency is compounded by intercurent vitamin or mineral
imbalances, household supplements will not correct them and may aggravate a vitamin E
deficicncy. Most prescription supplements contain all the necessary vitamins and minerals
for the skin in addition to the essential fatty acids. Although most supplements are
reasonably priced, the cost of using them continually in a normal dog or cat usually
exceeds the cost of a better quality pet food.
 Excessive fat supplcmentation is contraindicated in cases in which the fatty acid
hyperlipidlemia disorders. In these cases, treatment with balanced omega-6 and omega-3
fatty acid supplements (Derm Caps, DVM Pharmaceuticals; EFA Caps, Virbac; Efa Vet,
Efamol Vet) may be of some beneft29 These supplements contain linoleic acid plus the
marine lipids, eicosapentaenoic and docosahexaencic acid. They are thought to modulate
arachidonic acid metabolism with the production of various leukotrienes and prostaglan-
dins, which can alter the infammatory cascade and epidermal proliferation. These prod-
ucts have received the most attention in the treatment of allergic disorders (see Chaps. 3
and 8), but those reports indicate that improvement in coat quality also occurs with their
use. It is unknown whether the improvement is due to the modulation of epidermal
proliferation or to some other mechanism. The products supply high-quality fats in small
volumcs with low caloric density (fewer than 5 calories for every 9.1 kg of body weight);:
therefore, their use in obese animals should not significantly slow the weight loss. No data
are available on the safety and effcacy of these supplements in dogs with pancreatitis or
other disorders of lipid metabolism. The authors are aware of cases of fare-ups in
pancreatitis when the full recommended dosage was initiated suddenly; with gradual
introduction over 2 weeks, however, some dogs with pancreatitis have been able to
tolerate the supplement.
When dietary fat supplementation is impossible, topical application of essential fatty
acids may be of some benefit. Studies in mice have shown that topically applied fats can
correct the cutaneous changes of fatty acid deficiency.29 No data are available to support
or refute this mechanisin in dogs. Some of these dogs do very well when bathed with
shampoos containing fatty acids (e.g., HlyLyt*efa, DVM Pharmaceuticals) or rinsed with
after-bath products containing fatty acids (e.g., Alpha-Sesame Oil-V Rx). The response
||14 · Nutitional Skin Diseases
FIGURE I7-I, Legend on opposite page
Nutritional Skin Diseases · IIl5
FIGURE 17-2. Essential fatty
acid defciency in a dog. Epidermal
and  follieular hyperplasia  with a
mild, mononuclear perivascular der-
matitis.
seen in these animals may be due to mechanisrns other than transepidermal fat absorp-
tione.
to normal in 4 to 8 weeks, but severe cases can take up to 6 months. Shampooing with
antiseborrheic products hastens the clinical improvement, but these products should be
used only when absolutely necessary. There is no specific laboratory test for fatty acid
deficiency; the diagnosis is confirmed by response to treatment. If seborrheic changes are
controlled by bathing, it may be impossible to determine whether the supplementation is
of any benefit.
· PrOTein DefICIeNCY
Protein deficiency may be produced by inanition, starvation, feeding kittens commercial
dog food, or feeding dogs special or very low-protein diets. Many commercial pet foods
are actually extremely high in protein; as a result, protein deficiency is rare.
             i 
day) and the keratinization of skin require 25% to 30% of the animal's daily protein
 pigmentation, and loss of hair pigment. There is patchy alopecia in which hairs become
 s ms a p  s a  a p '   
prolonged. These lesions, together with scales and crusts, may appear symmetrically on
the head, back, thorax, and abdomen, and on the feet and legs. Lesions are more
prominent in young, growing dogs whose protein requirements are higher. Because ade-
quate protein is needed for wound healing, there is a high rate of wound dehiscence in
protein-depleted dogs.3. 4 In humans, a mean hair root diameter of less than 0.06 mm
suggests protein deficiency, but no similar specifications are available for animals. An
FIGURE I7-I. A, Fatty acid defciency in a dog. Dull, dry, brittle haircoat and diffuse scaling. B, Vitamin A defcieney
in a dog, Marked follicular hyperkeratosis aind follcular casts. C, Vitamin E deficiency in a dog. Marked cxfoliative
erythroderma on the pinna. D, Zinc-responsive dermatosis. Facial crusting. E, Same dog as in D, Severe erytheina
ad  pe a au se op us  end ps sag 7 pue a u se op   ssus upn
sis of fcotpards, H, Gceneric dog food dermatosis. Hyperkeratotic, crusted plaques with peripheral erythemas in a mucocuta-
neous distribution. (Courtesy of P. Ihrke.)
Il16 · Nutritional Skin Diseases
analysis of the diet and the provision of protein on a dry matter basis (25% for dogs and
important in supplementation.
● VItamin defICIenCIeS
Vitamin A
This vitamin functions to maintain healthy skin and epithelial cells; therefore, deficiency
a rid  pa r po s  e sp r s
tions with a firm center are formed. A poor coat, alopecia, scaling of the skin, and an
 paired.19 A single injection of 6000 IU aqueous vitamin A solutior per kg of body weight
True vitamin A deficiency has been recognized in a mongrel dog4l The dog had
severe seborrhcic skin lesions, nyctalopia, and diarrhea since puppyhood. The skin was
thickened, hyperpigmented, and alopecic, with marked follicular hyperkeratosis (see Fig.
17-1B). Antiseborrheic shampoos wcre of no benefit, and the dog responded only par-
tially to low-dose supplementation of vitamin A.
Because vitamin A is stored so well, toxicity may be of greater concern than defi-
   sr       r i  
diet. A level 30 times the requirement for 2 to 3 months can produce toxicity. The dosage
of retinol for dogs and cats should not exceed 400 IU/kg/day orally. Retinoids are deriva-
tives of retinol with an increased therapeutic index but decreased toxicity.!9 In human
medicine, they are used in skin cancer, photoaging, acne, lichen planus, discoid lupus
etretinate havc reccived widest use in disorders of keratinization. Both of these agents are
safe in dogs and cats, but their expense precluded prolonged use in most cases. Etretinate
is no longer marketed and has been replaced by one of its major metabolites, acitretin.
The new product is of unproven efficacy in anirals but is so expensive that it will
probably receive little use. The high cost of thc retinoids has prompted some to return to
treatment with retinol. These anirmals should be monitored carefully for signs of intoxica-
tion.
 Hypervitaminosis A is best descrihed in cats fed large amounts of liver.22 Among their
other signs, these cats have disheveled, seborrheic coats probably as a result of their
inability to groom themselves properly. Reports of this condition in dogs are rare.22, 41
Affected dogs show pain when manipulated owing to vertebral changes, and they have
seborrheic skin lesions identical to thosc seen in animals with hypovitaminosis A or
vitamin A-responsive dermatosis.
Yitamin A-Responsive Dermatosis
Some cases of severe seborrhea in Cocker spaniels and several other hreeds have re-
sponded to vitamin A supplementationl7 and are discussed in detail in Chapter 14.
Yitamin D
Vitamin D is produced in the skin and has its major impact in calcium homeostasis.
Naturally occurring excess or deficiency has not been reported in animals. In addition to
its role in calcium homeostasis, I,25-dibydroxy vitamin D, impacts keratinocyte prolifera-
tion and differentiation.3, 15, 21 with this activity, various topical or systemic analogs are
being investigated in the treatment of psoriasis. Because primary seborrhea (see Chap. 12)
is a hyperproliferative disorder, vitamin D analogs are being studied in dogs.
Nutritional Skin Diseases · IlI7
Yitamin E
Vitamin E, selenium, and fatty acids have a balanced relationship. Experimental vitamin E
deficiency in dogs also results in severe suppression of in vitro lymphocyte blastogenesis.24
fat foods, such as canned red tuna, are fed almost exclusively. If food processing or fat
oxidation has inactivated the vitamin E, the imbalance resuls. Cats show pain on gentle
are large, firm lumps in the subcutaneous tissues and abdominal cavity. Diagnosis can be
 is a pink to yellow homogenous material on H & E stain and is deep crimson on acid-fast
stain,
 Naturally occurring vitamin E deficiency has not been reported in dogs, but experi-
mentally induced vitamin E defciency has been studied.o Researchers showed that skin
s    a r r o  d a  s
and a later greasy and infammatory stage (erythroderma and seborrhea oleosa) (see Fig.
17-1C); in addition, the dogs tended to develop secondary bacterial pyoderma. The
dermatohistopathologic findings in dogs with experimentally, produced vitamin E defi-
ciency are nondiagnostic. Morphologically, the findings are characterized by hyperplastic
superficial perivascular dermatitis (Fig. 17--4). This is a common reaction pattern in
caninc skin, one most commonly seen in hypersensitivity reactions, ectoparasitisms, and
seborrheic disorders. When the experimental dogs that had been fed a vitamin E-
 Research Council recommendations, the dermafosis responded dramatically. The erythema
and greasiness subsided within 3 to 6 weeks, and the scaling resolved within 8 to 10
weeks.
Vitamin E deficiency induces T cell dysfunction in dogs and has been associated as a
substantiate this claim. Megadose vitamin supplementation, although of some probable
beneft, has not been curative.12
Vitamin E is an antioxidant, stabilizes lysosomes, reduces prostaglandin E, (PCE2
synthesis, and increases interleukin 2 (IL-2) production with resultant anti-inflammatory
 and immunostimulatory effects.1s Alone or in combination with vitamin A where it has
synergistic effects, it has been used to treat dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa, discoid lupus
erythematosus, granuloma annulare, or benign familial pemphigus in humans. In dogs,
 some cases of discoid lupus erythematosus, dermatornyositis, or acanthosis nigricans re-
FIGURE I7-3. Steatitis in a cat.
Pyogranulomatous, lobular panniculi-
tis. Amorphous matcrial (arrows) is
ceroid.
IlI8 · Nutitional Skin Diseases
FIGURE 17-4. Experimental vi-
tamin E deficiency in a dog. Epider-
 s eeay  re 
most marked feature and mirnics
that seen in essential fatty acid def-
ciency (see Fig. 17-2).
spond to treatrment with vitamin E.41 It is unlikely that vitamin E deficiency would occur
 in dogs on commercial diets. It would enter into the differential diagnosis of a dog with
 seborrhea or erythroderma. Diagnosis would be based on dietary history, physical exami
nation, the ruling out of more common canine dermatoses, compatible skin biopsy results.
and response to vitamin E therapy.
Vitamin E, d- and α-tocopherol being the most biologically active form, is used in
doses of 10 mg (13.5 IU)/kg/day as an antioxidant and for the therapy of pansteatitis in
cats (resulting from excess tuna or fat in the diet). In severe cases, it is mandatory to use
 systermic corticosteroids during the painful period of treatment (2 to 3 weeks).20 Vitamin E
 in doses of 400 to 800 IU q12h has been used successfully in discoid lupus erythematosus
and systemic lupus erythematosus, and in disorders involving the basement membrane
zone.
Vitamin B
 B-complex vitamins are considered as a group because defciencies of single B vitamins
by intestinal bacteria; because they are water soluble and not stored, a constant supply is
needed, and toxicities do not occur. It is possible for biotin, ribofavin, niacin, and
 pyridoxine deficiencies to have clinical ramifications.
 Biotin can be inactivated by feeding the animal a diet high in uncooked eggs.16. 26. 27
The whites contain avidin, which binds biotin so that it cannot be absorbed. Biotin
deficiency can also result from prolonged oral antibiotic therapy. The most striking sign is
a "spectacle eye” of alopecia around the face and eyes. Biotin deficiency should be
differentiated from demodicosis, dermatophytosis, and other facial dermatoses (discoid
lupus erythematosus, pemphigus, dermatomyositis, epidermolysis bullosa). In severe cases,
crusted lesions of the face, neck, body, and legs are present. There may also be lethargy,
emaciation, and diarrhea. Biotin deficiency has been shown to cause a widespread papulo-
crustous dermatitis in cats.16
Riboflavin deficiency may produce a dry, faky dermatitis (seborrhea), especially
around the eyes and ventrum; the outstanding sign, however, is cheilosis.26, 27 The def-
ciency also produces alopecia on the head of cats.lf Ribofavin deficiency is all but
impossible if any meat or dairy products are present in the diet.
Niacin deficiency is manifested as pellagra and is characterized by ulcerated mucous
and abdomen.26, 27 For a deficiency to be produced, the diet nust be low in animal
Nutritional Skin Diseases · Il19
 protein and high in corn. Corn and all cereals are low in tryptophan, which is converted
to niacin by all animals except cats. Commercial pet foods contain more than enough
niacin; therefore, supplementation is not needed.
Pyridoxine deficiency, produced experimentally in cats, causes a dull, waxy, unkempt
 multiple areas of alopecia in the temporal and periauricular area, on the dorsum of the
muzzle, periorally, and on the extremities. When these experimental pyridoxine-deficient
cats were fed a balanced diet, all of the skin lesions resolved. This condition has not been
 observed clinically and remains a laboratory phenomenon.
The most common signs of B-compiex deficiencies are a dry, faky seborrhea with
alopecia, anorexia, and weight loss. Effective treatment consists of brewer's yeast, B-
complex injections, or both. Supplementation may be needed only if the animals are 
anorectic or have problems that cause excess water turnover.
When 119 dogs with dull coat, brittle hair, loss of hair, scaly skin, pruritus, or
dermatitis were given biotin (0.5 mg/10 kg body weight/day) for 3 to 5 weeks, 108 (91%)
were cured or improved significantly.1l Insufficient data were supplied to determine
whether these dogs were truly deficient in biotin or responded by some other therapeutic
effect. This report highlights the need for broad-based vitamin supplementation when a
nutritional deficiency is suspected or when fatty acids are added to a seborrheic dog's diet.
● MINErAl IMbALaNCES
other; abnormal levels of any one of them may be refected in the skin. Because of the
great variation among individuals, only one or several of a group of animals may develop
lesions, even though all have been fed and managed alike.
 Copper deficiency should appear as a balance problem only if excess zinc is added to
the diet.26. 27 Copper isneeded by enzynes that convert L-tyrosine tomelanin and by the
follicular celis in the conversion of prekeratin to keratin. A deficiency is manifested by
hypopigmentation and faulty keratinization of the skin and hair follcles, with the hair
supplements are not needed. Bull terriers with lethal acrodermatitis, a zinc deficiency
disorder, are also copper deficient.4s Dogs with zinc-responsive disorders may also have
irregularities in their copper balance.
● ZInC-reSPONSIve DermaTOSIS
 Zinc is an important cofactor and modulator of many critical biological functions.30, 34
Although zinc deficiency was thought to play a role in many dermatoses of the dog. recent
work2s indicates that zinc deficiency is rare in the dog. Zinc deficiency has been docu-
mented in Bull terriers with acrodermatitis (see Chap. 12), and relative or absolute
deficiency is suspected in two other dernatologic syndromes.8.23. 32
 Syndrome I occurs in Siberian huskies and Alaskan malamutes primarily, but Bull
terriers may also be affected.23, 2 Although a familial history is lacking in many cases, the
striking breed predilection strongly supports a genetic linkage and affected dogs should
not be used for breeding.7 Skin lesions in these breeds develop despite well-balanced dliets
with sufficient zinc. Lesions develop early in adulthood (at 1 to 3 years of age) and
progress at a variable rate. Most dogs develop their lesions in September through Janu-
ary.7 Over one-half of the dogs have lesional pruritus, and pruritus in “normal" skin can be
the hallmark of a pending relapse during maintenance, There is early erythema followed
by alopecia, crusting, scaling, and underlying suppuration around the mouth, chin, eyes,
and ears (see Fig. 17-1D to F). Other body openings and the scrotum, prepuce, and
vulva may be affected. Although the coat is dull, there is excess sebum production. Thick
pue onseu aq Au us au suod anard rao pur soqa an uo eadde Au si
1l20 · Nutritional Skin Diseases
the legs stiff, as a result of hardened crusts. Secondary bacterial or Malassezia infections
(see Fig. 17-1G), and claw disease, especially onychomalacia, may be observed.2sa In
chronic cases, hyperpigmentation occurs in the area of the lesions. There may be a
d aq Ae ss pe (end) s pe (d) us jo ss ps
tated or intensified by stress and estrus.
It has been shown that malamutes have a genetic defect of decreased capability for
zinc absorption from the intestines.23, 27 In some Siberian huskics, hypothyroidisrn and a
 decreased serum zinc level have been reported, but the significance of these conditions is
unknown.23 Dogs on high-calciur or high-cereal diets, which have high levels of phytate,
found in well water or the water in houses with old plumbing—-may interfere with zinc
absorption. Prolonged enteritis and diarrhea also prevent normal absorption. A severe
deficiency may cause poor growth and weight loss in young puppies and poor wound
healing in any animal.3, 36
ouz paj an ye sp anpe unon o saddnd suore Aide ui suooo I suoupus
 a  o se rs s  sd   s s 
zinc absorption), or diets that are oversupplemented with minerals and vitamins. Many
breeds may be abnormal, but Great Danes, Doberman pinschers, Beagles, German shep-
a litter. Some animals may he normal, whereas others are stunted, depressed, and anorec-
tic. The skin lesions are hyperkeratotic plaques over areas of repeated trauma or where
calluses might normally occur. The footpads and nasal planum may be affected, and any
and an associated lymphadenopathy. Severely affected dogs can look as though they have
canine distemper.
 se r e q  s u  n s s  
zinc is difficult and can be unreliable, however, because samples may be contaminated by
zinc in glasswarc or rubber stoppers, and by the influences of various environmental,
 physiologic, and disease-related factors.28, 46, 49
Diagnosis may be made by history taking, physical examination, and skin biopsy.
Hyperplastic superficial perivascular dermatitis, with marked diffuse and folicular paraker-
atotic hyperkeratosis, is suggestive of zinc deficiency (Figs. 17-5 and 17-6). Papillomato-
sis and mild diffusc spongiosis are also common findings. Eosinophils and lymphocytes are
often prominent in the perivascular celular infltrate. Intraepidermal pustular dermatitis
secondary Malassezia infection may be present (see Chap. 5).
Treatment involves the inspection and correction of any inadequacy in thc diet,
including the base diet, water, and any treats or supplements given to the animal.
 Secondary bacterial or Malassezia infections must be appropriately treated. In Syndrome
 II, dietary adjustments alone can resolve the skin lesions in 2 to 6 weeks. Zinc supplemen-
tation is necessary in Syndrome I and can hasten the animal's response in Syndrome II. In
the latter case, the supplement need be given for only a few weeks to restore the zine 
suppiementation stopped without an immediate relapse in the condition. For the remain-
der, supplementation rmust be lifelong but the dosage may have to be adjusted.
Oral zinc supplementation at a dose of 1 mg of elemental zinc/kg/day should be
sufficient for most dogs.7 Zinc sulfate (10 mg/kg/day), zinc gluconate (5 mg/kg/day), or
zine methionine (1.7 mg/kgday) are commonly used preparations. If zine sufate is used,
the tablets should be crushed and mixed with food to enhance absorption and decrease
gastric irritation. In Syndrome II, the supplement can be withdrawn when the skin has
returned to normal, if the nutritional problem has been corrected. In Syndrome I, zinc
    s   o      a 
initiating treatment, the dosage should be increased by 50%. In both syndromes, existing
skin lesions can be improved by hydrating the crusts with wet dressings or whole-body
Nutritional Skin Diseases · Il21
FIGURE 17-5. Zinc-responsive derinatosis in a Sibenian husky. Hyperplastic perivascular
dermatitis with marked diffuse parakcratotic hypcrkcratosis.
warm water soakings for 5 to I0 minutes and then bathing the animal with an anfisebor-
rheic shampoo. Lesions on the face and elsewhere improve with the application of
  ss s  s do   psa  r 
active ingredient—an antibiotic or keratolytie agent—provides additional benefits. Once
the dog returns to normal, it is not unusual to be able to decrease the dosage of zinc,
especially in the warm months. Relapses during the cool months or later in life may occur
but should respond to dosage increase.
Intravenous injection with sterile zinc sulfate solutions at dosages of 10 to 15 mg/kg has
 lesions, and maintenance injections every I to 6 months are necessary to prevent relapses.
FIGURE t7-6. Close-up of Fig-
fuse  parakcratotic  bypcrkeratosis that
also involves hair follicles.
I122 · Nutritional Skin Diseases
Intravenous treatment is expensive and cardiac arrhythmias can occur if the drug is
administered too fast. A recent study documents the place of low-dose corticosteroids in
the treatment of dogs who do not respond to zinc alone.4 Corticosteroids are known to
increase zinc absorbtion from the gastrointestinal tract by induction of metallothionein,
but they may also have some direct effect on the skin in these dogs. In these dogs,
discontinuation of the corticosteroid lowers the serum zinc levels and results in a clinical
relapse. Some dogs seem to respond better to zinc when they are also treated with
omega-6/omega-3 fatty acids.
In kittens, dietary zinc deficiency was reported to cause thinning of the haircoat, slow
hair growth, scaly skin, and ulceration of the buccal margins.1s The cat's requirement for
dietary zinc was estimated at between 15 and 50 ppm.
· Generic doG food skin dIsease
Dogs fed only generic dog foods marketed in the late 1980s developed bilateral symmetric
food and involved the bridge of the nose, mucocutaneous junctions, pressure points, and
distal extremities (see Fig. 17-lH). Well-dernarcated, older lesions had erythematous
borders with scales, crusts, and variable hyperpigmentation and lichenification. A few dogs
nopathy, and pitting edema of dependent areas.
 Skin biopsies showed hyperplastic superficial perivascular dermatitis with diffuse par-
akeratotic hyperkeratosis, prominent focal keratinocyte apoptosis, and a mixed dermal
cellular infiltrate (Fig. 17--7). Although the clinical and histopathologic findings are similar
to those seen in the zinc-responsive dermatoses, the acuteness of onset and the frequent
Occurrence of systemic illness suggest that other nutritional imbalances may play a role.
The differential diagnosis should include relative or absolute zinc deficiency, immune-
mediated skin diseases (especially pemphigus foliaceus and systemic lupus erythematosus),
staphylococcal folliculitis, and necrolytic migratory erythema. Treatment with antibiotics or
corticosteroids was unsuccessful, but rapid response occurred 1 week after simply chang.
FIGURE I7-7. Generic dog food dermatosis. Multiple apoptotic keratinocytes
Nutritional Skin Diseases · II23
 ing the dogs' diet to a national brand of dog food that met National Research Council
requirements.
 a ar ss e o os s o so o a 
 Improvements in the formulation of generic pet foods must have becn made, because
they are still marketed.
· NUTRItIONAl SUPPLeMENts
Pets that are fed high-quality commercial foods typically receive no benefits from addi-
tional supplements. Whcn disease results from the animal eating low-quality food or from
inherent metabolic defects that alter the digestion or absorption of one or more nutrients,
 e   a a a r     i   
nutrients should be in the correct proportion. If the owners are reluctant to change foods
without absolute proof of the benefit of doing so, or if the animal refuses to cat anything
different, a supplement proposed by Lewis can be beneficial.26, 27 For every 9 to 14 kg of
ounces (56 g) of cooked liver, 100 mg of zinc sulfate, and 1 drop of tincture of iodine.
Most owners find it convenient to make large batches of the supplement. Problems with
thorough mixing of the ingredients and giving the dog the correct amount can be over-
come by making a puree of the mixture in a blender and freezing the supplement in icc
cube trays. At each meal, the owner can thaw the appropriate number of cubes and add
ribofiavin, niacin, iodine, and zinc, it should resolve all nutritional dermatoses unless they
 s   (s s I  i q   
 nutritional causes can be discounted; if a good response is seen, the supplement can be
continued or a new base diet can be selected.
● REFERENCES
1. Anderson RW (ed): Nutrition of the Dog and Cat:
10. Figueiredo C, et al: Clinical evaluation of the effect of
Proceedings of an International Symposium. Elmsford,
vitamin E in the treatment of generalized canine de-
New York, Pergamon Press, 1980, p 67.
modicosis. Ady Vet Dermatol 2:247, 1993.
2. Bensignor E: Dermatose amelioree par le zine chez un
11. Frigg M, et al: Clnical study on the effect of biotin on
caniche. Point Vét 28:741, 1996.
skin conditions in dogs. Schweiz Arch Tierheilk 131:
 3. Bikle DD; Vitamin D: A calciotropic hornone regulat-
621, 1989.
ing calcium-incuced keratinocyte differentiation,J Am
12. Gilbert PA, et al: Serum vitamin E levels in dogs with
Acad Dermatol 37:S42, 1997.
pyoderma and generalized demodicosis. J Am Anin
4. Burton G, Mason KV: The possible role of predniso-
flosp Assoc 28:407, 1992.
    as,  n
13. Hansen AE, Weise HF: Fat in the diet in relation to
husky. Aust Vet Pract 28:20, 1998.
nutrtion of the dog.1. Characteristic appearance and
 5. Carnphell KL: Fatty acid supplcmentation and skin
gross changes of animals fed diets with and without
(lisease. Vet Clin North Ain (Small Anim Pract) 20:
fat. Tex Rep Biol Med 52:205, 1951.
1475, 1990.
14. Hansen AE, Weise HF: Studies with dogs maintained
 6. Campbell KL, et al: Effects of animal and soy fats and
on diets low in fat. Proc Soc Fxp Biol Med 52:205,
proteins in the diet on fatty acid concentrations in the
1943.
serum and skin of dogs. Am J Vet Res 56:1465, 1995.
15. Holick MF, et al: Clinical uses for calciotropic hor-
7. Colombini S, Dunstan RW: Zine-responsive dermatosis
mones 1,25-dihyclroxyvitamin D, and parathyroid hor.
in northern-breed dogs: 17 cases (1990-1996). J Am
dd
Vet Med Assoc 21l:451, 1997.
tive. J Invest Dermatol Symp Proc l:1, 1996.
8. Fadok VA: Nutritional therapy in veterinary dernatol-
16. lolzworth I: Diseases of the Cat: Medicine and Sur.
ogy. In: Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy IX.
gery. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1987.
W.B, Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1986, p 591.
17. ihrke PJ, Goldschmidt MH: Vitanin A-responsive
9. Figueiredo C: Vitamin E serum contents, erythrocyte
dermatosis in the dog. j Am Vet Med Assoc 182:687,
and lymphocyte counts, PCV and Hg determination in
1983.
normal dogs, dogs with scabies, and dogs with demodi
18. Kane E, et al: Zinc deficieney in the cat. J Nutr 1ll:
cosis. Proc Annu Memh Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol
488, 1981.
1:1, 1985.
19. Keller KL, Fenske NA: Use of vitamins A, C, and E
I124 · Nutritional Skin Diseases
and related compounds in dermatology: A review. J
healing in the presence of hypoproteinemia. J Arn Med
Am Acad Dermatol 39:61l, 1998.
Assoe 118:21, 1942.
34. Russell RM, et al: Zinc and the special senses. Ann
disease") in the cat: A review article and report of 4
Intern Med 99:227, 1983.
spontancous cases. Vet Dermatol 3:101, 1993.
35. Sanecki RK, et al: Tissue changes in dogs fed a zinc-
21. Kragballe K: The future of vitamin D in dermatology.
deficient ration. Am J Vet Res 43:1642, 1982.
36. Sanecki RK, et al: Extracutaneous histologic changes
J Am Acad Dermatol 37:S72, 1997.
 22. Kronfeld Ds: Vitamin and Mineral Supplementation
acompanying zinc deficiency in pups. Am J Vet Res
for Dogs and Cats. Veterinary Practice Publishing Co.
46:2119, 1985.
Santa Barbara, CA, 1989.
 37. Scott Dw: Feline derrmatology 1900--1978: A mono-
23. Kunkle GA: Zinc-responsive dermatoses in dogs. In:
graph. J An Anim Hosp Assoc 17:331, 1980.
38. Scott DW: Feline derrmatology 1979-1982: Introspec-
Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1980, p 472.
tive retrospections. J Arn Anim. Hosp Assoc 20:537,
24. Langweiler M, et al: Effect of vitamin E defciency on
1984.
39. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1983-1985: *The secret
the proliferative response of canine lymphocytcs. Am J
sits." J Am Anim Hlosp Assoc. 23:255, 1987.
Vet Res 42:1681, 1981.
40. Scott'Dw, Sheffy BE: Dermatosis in dogs caused by
 25. Leibetseder J: Emahrungsbedingte Erkrankungen der
vitamin E deficiency. Comp Anim Pract 41:42, 1987.
 Haut bei Hund und Katze. Wien Tierarztl. Mschr 83:
41. Scott DW, et al: Muller & Kirk's Small Animal Der-
19, 1998.
matology V. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, 1995, p 891.
 26. Lewis LD: Cutaneous manifestations of nutritional im-
42. Sousa CA, ct al: Dermatosis associated with feeding
balances. Proc Am Anim Hosp Assoc 48:263, 1981.
goncric dog food: 13 cases (1981-1982). J Am Vet
27. Lewis LD, Moris ML Jr: Small Animal Clinical Nutri-
Med Assoc 192:676, 1988.
tion, 2nd ed. Mark Moris Associates, Topeka, KS,
43. Sousa CA: Nutritional dermatoses. In: Neshit GH (ed):
1984.
Dermatology: Contermporary Issues in Smal Animal
28. Logas Dl., ct al: Comparison of serum zine levels in
Practice. Churchill Livingstone, Inc., New York, 1987.
healthy, systemically ill, and dermatologically diseased
44. Thompsun W, et al: The effect of hypoproteinenia on
dogs. Vet Dermatol 4:61, 1993.
wound disruption. Arch Surg 26:500, 1938.
28a. McEwan NA: Nail disease, zinc defciency and lethal
45. Uchida Y, et al: Serum concentrations of zinc and
acrodermatitis. Proc Brit Vet Dermatol Study Grp,
ss  
Spring 1999, p. 29.
tail-chasing behavior. Am J Vet Res 8:808, 1997.
29. Miller WH Jr: Nutritional considerations in small ari-
 46. van den Broek AHM, Thoday KL: Skin disease in dogs
mal dermatology. Vet Clin North Am 19:497, 1989.
associated with zine deficieney: A report of 5 cases. J
 30. Norris D: Zine and cutaneous inflammation. Arch Der-
Small Anim Pract 27:313, 1986.
47. Willense, T.: Zinc-responsive disorders of the dog. In:
matol 121:985, 1985.
Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (eds): Kirk's Current Veteri-
 31. Norton A: Skin lesions seen in cats with vitamin B
nary Therapy XI. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia,
(pyroxidine) deficiency. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am
1992, p 532.
Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 3:24, 1987.
 48. Wolf AM: Zinc-responsive dermatosis in a Rhodesian
32. Ohlen B, Scott DW: Zinc responsive dermatitis in pup-
ridgeback. Vet Med 80:37, 1985.
pies. Canine Pract 13:2, 1986.
49. Wright RP: Identification of zinc-responsive dermato-
33. Rhoads JE, et al: The mechanisin of delayed wound
ses. Vet Med 80:37, 1985.
Miscellaneous Skin Diseases
● canIne Subcorneal PuStular dermatoSis
Subcorneal pustular dermatosis is a very rare, idiopathic, sterile, superficial pustular der-
matosis of dogs.3. 8. 9
Cause and Pathogenesis
 The cause of subcorneal pustular dermatosis is unkmown. In humans, it has been postu-
globulin (Ig)A that could be chemoattractant to neutrophils have been demonstrated in
vivo in the stratum corneum. Elevated levels of tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) have
been demonstrated in the serum and pustules of a human with subcorneal pustular
dermatosis.7 Some cases of human subcorneal pustular dermatosis are associated with the
presence or development of paraproteinemia (usually the IgA type), with or without
myeloma, but this condition has not been reported in dogs.8
 IgA myelomas and intraepidermal IgA deposits have been described in humans.10
Clinical Features
No apparent age (6 months to 14 years old) or sex predilection exists. Although many
breeds^ have been affected, Miniature schnauzers have accounted for about 40% of the
cases.
Affected dogs usually have a multifocal to generalized, pustular to seborrhea-like
dermatitis. The head and trunk, particularly, are affected in a symmetric fashion. Intact
pustules are usualnnfolicular,grenishyelw,and transient,esisting foronly 
hours at a time (Fig. 18- LA and B). Thus, the affected dogs often have only circular areas
of alopecia, erosion, scaling, crusting, and epidermal collaretes. Lesions tend to heal
centrally, often with hyperpigmentation, and to spread peripherally, producing annular and
serpiginous configurations. Rarely, the footpads are affected and peel superficially. Pruritus
varies from nonexistent to extreme. The course of the dermatosis is often to erupt and
regress. Usually, the dogs are otherwise healthy. Occasional dogs have peripheral lym-
 phadenopathy; rarely, they have pyrexia, anorexia, and depression.
Diagnosis
Because this dermatosis is diagnosed by the exclusion of other conditions, improved
diagnostic techniques should make it rare.
The differential diagnosis includes bacterial foliculitis, pemphigus foliaceus, linear IgA
pustular dermatosis, systemic lupus erythematosus, sterile eosinophilic pustulosis, sebor-
rheic skin disease, scabies, atopy, and food hypersensitivity. Definitive diagnosis is based
on history, physical examination, exclusion through laboratory testing, and response to
glucocorticoids, and topical agents. Direct smears from intact pustules usually reveal
numerous nondegenerate neutrophils, occasional acantholytic keratinocytes, and no micro-
1125
I126 · Miscellaneous Skin Diseases
FIGURE I8-I. See legend on opposite page
Miscellaneous Skin Discascs · II27
FIGURE 18-2. Canine subcor-
neal pustula1  dermatosis.  Cytologic
examination reveals nondegenerate
neutrophils and no microorganisms.
organisms (Fig. 18-2). Carefully performed cultures from intact pustules are usually
negative, but a few colonies of coagulase-negative or coagulase-positive staphylococci are
occasionaily isolated. Immunofuorescence testing results are negative. Skin biopsy reveals
 intraepidermal (subcorneal) pustular dermatitis.3 8 Acantholysis is usually minimal, but it is
occasionally marked. Neutrophils do not show degenerative changes. Hair follicles are
rarely involved (Figs. 18-3 and 18-4).
o edon a ar on pu a a sp pe yo g ao o dn
to 21.1 X 102/iml).8 Serum protein electrophoresis occasionally reveals increased amounts
of α1, α, and β globulins.&
Clinical Management
The drug of choice in subcorneal pustular dermatosis is dapsone (see Chap. 9), which is
given orally at 1 mg/kg q8h. A beneficial rcsponse usually occurs in 1 to 4 weeks. In a
minority of cases, the therapy can be stopped and long-term remission may result; more
often, however, the drug is tapered to maintenance levels, with the dosage varying from
dog to dog (1 mg/kg, q24h to twice a week).
 In dogs, the major side effects of dapsone have been hematologic and hepatic. Many
dogs experience mild nonregenerative anemia and leukopenia as well as mild to moderate
elevations of serum alanine aminotransferase during induction therapy. If these laboratory
 abnormalities are not associated with clinical signs, it is not necessary to stop therapy; the
levels will return to normal when maintenance doses are achieved. Dapsone has also
 caused fatal thrombocytopenia in one dog, profound leukopenia in one dog, occasional
vomiting and diarrhea, and generalized, pruritic crythematous maculopapular skin erup-
 tions.s Dapsone is not licensed for use in dogs.
FIGURE I8-l. A, Muliple nonfollcular pustules on the abdomen of a dog with subcorneal pustular dermatosis. B.
Close-up view of A.C,Feline plasmacell pododermatitis.
:Swollen footpad with cross-hatched white striae.
D, Feline plasma cell pododermatitis, Ulcerated nodule projecting from a footpad. E, Lichenoid dernatitis on the chest and
cat. Cluster of lichencid papulcs in the preauricular area. H, Sanc cat as in G. Clustcr of lichenoid papules and plaques in
the axillary area.
II28 · Miscellaneous Skin Diseases
FIGURE I8-3. Canine subcormeal pustular dermatosis. A large subcorieal pustule.
Very rarely, dogs have apparently hecome resistant to dapsone. These dogs may or
may not benefit from the oral administration of sulfasalazine (Azulidine, Pharmacia &
Upjohn), 10 to 20 mg/kg q8h, until the dermatosis is controlled, and then as needed.
Chronic administration of suifasalazine may be associated with keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
 One dog that did not respond to dapsone was successfully treated with injectable gold
salts.6
FIGURE I8-4. Canine subcorneal pustular dermatosis. Subcorneal pustules that do not
involvehair follicles.
Miscellaneous Skin Diseases · I129
● FELINE PLASMA CELL PODODERMATITIS
Plasma cell pododermatitis is a rare cutaneous disorder of cats.3 16, 17
Cause and Pathogenesis
The cause and pathogenesis of this disorder arc unknown. The tissue plasimaceytosis, the
consistent hypergammaglobulinemia, and the beneficial response to immunomodulating
some cases have recurred seasonally, suggesting that the condition is an allergic response.
In one study, 50% of the cats with plasma cell podorlermatitis had concurrent feline
immunodeficiency virus (FIV) infection.i4 In the latter study, four of six cats with FIV
infection had plasma cell pododermatitis.1s In this study, immunohistochemical examina-
tion of an affected footpad from one cat demonstrated FIV-immunoreactive cells within
the infammatory infiltrate.
Clinical Features
No age, breed, or sex predilections are apparent. Clinically, plasma ceil pododerinatitis
begins as a soft, painless swelling of multiple footpads on multiple paws (see Fig. 18- 1C).
 ar sd p r  pn a  si   e 
affected. Lightly pigmented pads may take on a violaceous hue. The surface of affected
pads is cross-hatched with white scaly striae. Affected pads are swollen and feel rmushy or
Haccid. Initially, the cat is usually asymptomatic.12 The cats are usually otherwise healthy.
 In some cases, one or more pads may become ulcerated and secondarily infected, which
occasionally results in pain, lameness, and regional lymphadenopathy. Cats occasionally
experience recurring hemorrhage from ulcerated or nodular areas of 'a footpad (see Fig.
18- 1D).19
A minority of cats with plasma cell pododermatitis also have plasma cell stomatitis,
the palatine arches.16 In addition, a cat occasionally has immune-mediated glomerulone-
phritis or renal amyloidosis.17
Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis includes infectious or stcrile granulomas and pyogranulomas,
eosinophilic granuloma, mosquito or insect bite reaction, or neoplasia, all of which typi-
cally affect only one footpad. A tcntative diagnosis may be based on history, physical
examination, and aspiration cytologic study wherein plasma cells are numerous. Definitive
 diagnosis is based on culture and biopsy. Neutrophilia and lymphocytosis may be visible,
and hypergammaglobulinemia is typical.
 Serum protein electrophoresis reveals polyclonal gammopathy. Carefully performed
cultures are negative. Aspiration cytologic study rcveals numerous plasma cells with
smaller numbers of lymphocytes and neutrophils. Antinuclear antibody test results are
 Occasionally positive, and direct iminunofluorescence testing rarely reveals Ig at thc base-
 ment membrane zone. However, these latter two immunologic indings are nondiagnostic.
 Most cats in the original reports were feline leukemia virus (FeLV)-negative and FIV-
ncgative.16, 7, 19 In another study, 50% of cats were FIV-positive.4
 Skin biopsy of early lesions is characterized by superficial and deep perivascular
dermatitis, with plasma cells predominating. Later lesions are characterized by diffusc
plasmacytic dermatitis (Figs. 18-5 and 18-6).3. 4 Many plasma cells contain Russel's
bodies (Motts cells). Numbers of neutrophils are variable, reflecting the absence or
 presence of ulceration and secondary infection. Rarely, leukocytoclastic vasculitis is also
present.
II30 · Miscellaneous Skin Diseases
FIGURE 18-5. Feline plasma cell pododer-
matitis. Diffuse plasmacytic dermatitis.
Clinical Management
The therapy of choice is not clear. Because plasma cell pododermatitis is usually asympto-
matic and may spontaneously regress, treatment may not be indicated in most cases.
When treatment is necessary, both large doses of systemic glucocorticoid (prednisone or
prednisolone administered orally at 4.4 mg/kg q24h) or chrysotherapy (see Chap. 9) may
be effective.13, 15-17, 19 Triamcinolone acetonide, 0.4 to 0.6 mg/kg q24h, or dexamethasone,
0.5 mg q24h, as initial treatments may be effective in cases refractory to prednisone. Once
effective, the dose of glucocorticoids is reduced. A clear response to therapy is evident in
2 to 3 weeks, and maximum improvement occurs in 10 to 14 weeks. Footpads may re-
correction.i. 1s Surgical excision of the fatty footpad has also been described as beneficial.
with no recurrence of disease in the surgically treated pads with follow-up periods of 2
years.11, 14. 19a
● LIchenoid derMatoses
Lichenoid dermatoses are rare, usually idiopathic skin disorders of dogs and cats.21-26 
Miscellaneous Skin Diseases · I I3|
FIGURE I8-6. Feline plasma cell pododermatitis. Numerous plasma cells.
Cause and Pathogenesis
 The cause and pathogenesis of most of these dermatoses are unclear; their clinical and
histopathologic features sugest an immune-mediated pathomechanism.1
Clinical Features
 There are no confirmed age, breed, or sex predilections. However, Doberman pinschers 
have accounted for several of the published cases.2 23 26 Lichenoid dermatoses are char-
acterized by the usually asymptomatic, symmetric onset of grouped, angular, fat-topped
papules that develop a scaly to markedly hyperkeratotic surface (see Fig. 18-1E to H).
Lesions may coalesce to form hyperkeratotic, alopecic plaques, and they Imay occur
anywhere on the body. Lesions may appear anywhere, though we find that the concave
surface of the pinnae and ventral thorax and abdomen are commonly affected. Lesions
 may be limited to the pinnae.?o Affected anirmals are usually otherwise healthy.
Diagnosis
These lesions are usually visually diagnostic. The differential diagnosis includes psoriasi-
forrm lichenoid dermatosis of English Springer spaniels, staphylococcal folliculitis, and
like forms of viral papillomas) rarely enter into the differential diagnosis. Definitive
diagnosis is based on history, physical examination, cxclusion through laboratory testing.
and skin biopsy. Carefuly performed cultures are negative. Skin biopsy reveals hyperkera-
totic and byperplastic lichenoid and hydropic interface dermatitis (Fig. 18-7). The infam-
titis, suppurative folliculitis, or both are present, one should suspect a lichenoid tissue
II32 · Miscellaneous Skin Diseases
FlGURE I8-7. Caninc idiopathic lchcnoid dermatitis. Lichenoid interface dermatitis.
lichenoid tissue reaction in response to an ectoparasite (especially scabies or cheyletiel
losis) or Malassezia.
Clinical Management
The prognosis for canine and feline idiopathic lichenoid dermatoses appears to be good.
All cases have undergone spontaneous remission after a course of 6 months to 2 years. No
form of therapy has been shown to be beneficial. In humans, oral retinoids have been
useful in many cases.1 Focal lesions have responded to surgical excision, and laser therapy
 may be beneficial. Antibiotic therapy has inproved some lesions, though recurrences are
possible.
● canine sterile eosinophilic pustulosis
 Sterile eosinophilic pustulosis is a rare idiopathic dermatosis of dogs.28. 29, 32 33, 35
Cause and Pathogenesis
The cause and pathogenesis are unknown. The peripheral eosinophilia, sterile tissue
eosinophilia, and responsiveness to systemic glucocorticoids that characterize this syll-
drome suggest that it may be immune mediated. However, intradermal skin testing.
hypoallergenic diets, and immunopathologic studies have not been helpful in elucidating
the etiopathogenesis. The cause in humans is unknown, though an association with human
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome has been reported. The condition in one human
was thought to represent an adverse cutaneous reaction to indeloxazine.3o Cats also rarely
experience a clinical and pathologic sterile eosinophilic folliculitis; the clinical presentation
is different, however, and the lesions are associated with an underlying hypersensitivity
  o       e e 
sitivity (see Chap. 8).34
Miscellancous Skin Diseases * II33
Clinical Features
No apparent agc, breed, or sex predilections cxist. The onset of clinical signs is often
acute, and the distribution of lesions is multifocal (especially involving the trunk) or
into annular erosions with epidermal collarettes (Fig. 18-8A and B). Peripheral spread.
central healing, and hyperpigmentation of lesions result in numcrous target lesions. Al-
though most dogs are otherwise healthy, fever, anorexia, depression, and peripheral lym-
phadenopathy may be present.
Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis includes staphylococcal folliculitis, pemphigus foliaceus, drug
 reaction, and subcorneal pustular dermatosis. Definitive diagnosis is based on history.
physical examination, hemograrm, direct smears, cultures, and skin biopsy. Most dogs have.
peripheral eosinophilia (up to 5.6 X 103/ml). Direct smears reveal numcrous eosinophils,
nondegenerative neutrophils, occasional acantholytic keratinocytes, and no microorganisms
(Fig. 18-9)33 Carefully performed cultures are negative. Biopsy reveals intraepidermal
eosinophilic pustular dermatitis and eosinophilic folliculitis and furuneulosis (Fig. 18--
10).33 Flame fgurcs are occasionally visible in the surrounding dermis. Direct and indirect
immunofuorescence results are negativc.33 Scrum α, β, and y globulins may be ele-
vated.33
Clinical Management
Most dogs respond well to systemic glucocorticoids (oral prednisone or prednisolone, 2.2
to 4.4 mg/kg q24h) in 5 to 10 days; however, stopping treatiment consistently results in
 relapses. Thus, long-term, alternate-morning therapy is indicated, and cure is unlikely. In
two dogs that could not be treated with glucocorticoids, we had good success with
dapsone or the combination of an antihistamine (diphenhydramine) and an omega-6 and
 omega-3 fatty acid supplement (Derin Caps, DVM Pharmaceuticals). Isotretinoin and
interferon-αzs were successful in treating two humans with eosinophilic pustular follicu-
Litis.27, 31
● felIne HYPerEoSInoPhiLIc SYndrome
The hypereosinophilic syndrome is a rarc disorder of cats37, 39 It is characterized by
 persistent idiopathic eosinophilia associated with a diffuse infltration of various organs by
mature eosinophils.
Cause and Pathogenesis
 The cause and pathogenesis of this syndrome are unknown. It represents a leukoprolifera-
tive process likely caused by a number of disorders, all of which are marked by sustained
overproduction of eosinophils.42
Clinical Features
The disease is more common in middle-aged female.cats.37. 39 Tissue infiltration with
mature eosinophils results in multisystermic organ dysfunction. The bone marrow, lymph
 nodes, liver, spleen, and gastrointestinal tract are typically involved. Rarely, cardiac abnor-
malities are found; in one cat, restrictive cardiomyopathy was a clinical feature.40 The most
aly. Rarely, affected cats have dermatosis characterized by generalized maculopapular
1134 · Miscellaneous Skin Diseases
FIGURE I8-8. See legend on opposite page
Miscellaneous Skin Diseases · II35
FIGURE I8-9. Canine sterile eo-
sinophilic pustulosis. Cytologic exam.
iiation reveals rumerous eosinophils.
erythema, severe pruritus, marked excoriation, and possibly wheals and soft tissue swell-
ings of the limbs (see Fig. 18-8C and D).36, 38, 41
Diagnosis
 Diagnosis is based on history, physical examination, exclusion through laboratory testing.
and skin biopsy. There are no specific tests for this syndrome: Rather, the syndrome is
defined by a combination of unexplained prolonged eosinophilia and evidence of multior-
gan involvement.1. 5 42 Flea bite hypersensitivity, eosinophilic granuloma complex, food
hypersensitivity, asthma, eosinophilic gastroenteritis, endoparasitic infections, and mast cell
tumor should be ruled out. The other consideration is eosinophilic leukermia, which is very
similar but may show abnormal cells and an increased M/E ratio greater than I0:I on
103/ml) is characteristic in cats. Direct smcars of skin lesions reveal a predominance of
eosinophils and basophils. Skin biopsy reveals variable degrees of superfcial and deep
 perivascular-to-interstitial dermatitis, with eosinophils predominating.
 Clinical Management
The prognosis is poor; in most cases, survival times are short and patients do not respond
to any treatment. Cats with cutaneous lesions may have slowly progressive disease and
longer survival times (2 to 4 years）.36, 41 These cats may have a favorable, but transient,
response to high doses of glucocorticoids. Interferon-α has been beneficial in treating
some humans.1.42
FIGURE I8-8. A, Canine sterile eosinophilic pustulosis. Pustules and annular erosions on the abdomen. B, Close-up of
the dog in A. Annular erosion with epilermal colarettes. C, Feline lhypereosinophilic syndrome. Erythema and excoriation
of the face and pina.D,Same cat as in C.Erythema,alopecia,and excoriation over the back.F,Canine sterile
pyogranuloma. Erythematous nedules bordering footpads. F, Cauine sterile pyogranuloma. Erythematous nodules bordering
nostrils. G, Canine sterile pyogranuloma. Multiple erythematosus, ulcerated, crusted papules around the eye. H, Idiopathic
sterile pyogranulomas in a cat. Violaceous papules and nodules on the top of the head (the area has been clipped).
II36 · Miscellaneous Skin Diseases
FIGURE I8-I0. Caninc sterile eosinophilic pustulosis. Subcorneal eosinophilic pustular dermalitis
and eosinophilic luminal folliculitis.
● IdIOpaThIC STerile GranulOma ANd PYoGraNULOMa
Idiopathic, sterile, granuloinatous to pyogranulomatous skin disease is uncommon in dogs
and very rare in cats. 4, 46, 49
Cause and Pathogenesis
The cause and pathogenesis of these conditions are unknown. The characteristic granulo-
matous histopathologic appearance, absence of microhial agents and foreign material, and
also supports an immune dysfunction, It has been proposed that this syndrome is due to
immune dysfunction in response to a chronic antigenie stimulus and is related to cutane-
Ous histiocytosis.45
In human sarcoidosis, a classic “sterile" granulomatous disease, polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) technology has shown that mycobacterial (multiple species) DNA is
present in most lesions.ba Similar studies in canine and feline sterile granulomatous
dermatoses are awaited.
Clinical Features
DOG
The disorder may occur in dogs of all ages, breeds, and sexes, but collies, Weimaraners,
Great Danes, Boxers, and Golden retrievers may be predisposed.46 Lesions are usually
multiple and typically affect the bead (especially the bridge of the nose, the muzzle, and
the periocular region), the pinnae, and the paws. Firm, painiess, nonpruritic, dermal
papules, plarques, and nodules are present (see Fig. I8-8E to G). The lesions may
become alopecic, ulcerated, and secondarily infected, especially on the paws. Animals are
Miscellaneous Skin Diseases · II37
usualy otherwise healthy. One dog with sterile pyogranuloma syndrone had associated
hypercalcemia.43
CAT
 In cats, two clinical syndromes have been described.3、 48 Some animals have pruritic
papules and nodules on the head and pinnae (see Fig. 18-8H). Lesions are usually
crythematous to violaceous in color. Other cats present with pruritic, symmetric, preauri-
cular plaques (preauricular xanthogranulomas) (Fig. 18- 11).&, 4s Papules and wheal-like
lesions coalesce to form orange-yellow, friable, well-circumscribed plaques. These plaques
 become reddish purple on palpation.
Diagnosis
 The differential diagnosis includes other granulomatous and pyogranulomatous (bacterial,
mycotic, foreign body) and neoplastic disorders. Deinitive diagnosis is based on history,
physical examination, cultures, and biopsy. The major differential diagnoses are the infec-
tious diseascs. Cytologic examination reveals pyogranulomatous or granulomatous inflam-
mation with no microorganisms (Fig. 18-12). In rare cases of mycobacterial diseases,
direct smears from lesions reveal mycobacteria; formalin-fixed tissue samples are negative.
Direct smears stained with acid-fast stains for mycobacteria should be examined cytologi-
cally. Culthures (aerobic, anaerobic, mycobacterial, and fungal) are best grown from tissue
taken by aseptic surgical biopsy techniques, and they are negativc. In dogs, biopsy usually
reveals nodular to diffuse, granulomatous to pyogranulomatous dermatitis.
Early lesions show a characteristic vertical orientation of oblong (sausage-shaped)
perifollicular granulomas or pyogranulomas that track, but do not initially involve, the hair
lomatous process becomes diffuse, often severely attenuating or obliterating adnexae and
cvcn extending into the subcutis. Special stains and polarization reveal no microorganisms
or foreign material. Rarely, dogs have diffuse sarcoidal granulomatous dermatitis (Fig.
18-- 16).+ PCR testing for infectious agents may also be considered.
 In cats, biopsy of the papulonodular Icsions on the head and pinnae reveals perifollic-
FIGURE I8-I1. ldiopathic ster-
ile granulomas in a cat. Preauricular
plaque.
1I38 · Miscellaneous Skin Diseases
FIGURE I8-I2. Canine sterile
pyogranuloma.Cytologicexamina-
tion reveals macrophages, nonde-
generate neutrophils, and no micro-
organisms.
ular pyogranulomatous dlermatitis.s Biopsy of the preauricular plaques reveals diffuse
zone, contains numerous multinucleated histiocytic giant cells, and exhibits unexplained
purpura (Figs. 18-17 and 18-18).3. 48
Clinical Management
Therapy may consist of surgical excision of solitary lesions, if feasible, or of systemic
 glucocorticoids if multiple lesions are present or surgery is impractical.46 Some cases may
FIGURE 18-I3. Canine idiopathic sterile granuloma. Granulomatous dermatitis that tends
to track appeudages (AOG stain).
Miscellaneous Skin Diseases·II39
FIGURE
I8-|4. Canine sterile
granuloma.
Granulomatous
derma-
titis.
 respond to tetracycline/niacinamide, even when glucocorticoids are ineffective (see Chap.
3).f7 Doxycycline and niacinamide may also be effective. Tetracycline and niacinamide are
 dosed at 250 mg q8h in dogs under 10 kg and 500 mg q8h in dogs over 10 kg. In dogs,
prednisone or prednisolone is administered orally at 2.2 to 4.4 mg/kg q24h until the
lesions have regressed in 7 to 14 days. About 60% of dogs then require prolonged
altermate-morming glucocorticoid therapy.46
Occasionally, cases in dogs are unresponsive to glucocorticoids or become refractory
 after variable periods of remission. Azathioprine (Imuran, Glaxo Wellcome) is useful in
such cases and is adininistered orally at 2.2 img/kg q24h until remission, then on alternate
days. Once remission has been maintained for several months, therapy may be successfully
FIGURE 18--15. Canine sterile
pyogranuloma.
Pyogranulomatous
dermatitis.
II40· Miscellaneous Skin Diseases
FlGURE I8-I6. Canine sterile
sarcoidal granuloma. Confuent sar-
lomas.
discontinued in some cases. Others may require long-terrm low-dose therapy. We have
 Occasionally been able to reduce the dosage and frequency of administration of azathio-
prine to 0.25 mg/kg once weekly. The oral administration of sodium iodide has been
resolve after about 9 months.4s
● GraNULoMAToUS SEbACEoUS ADENItIS
Granulomatous sebaceous adenitis is an uncommon idiopathic dermatosis of dogs and is
rare in cats.2. 53, 60. 62-66 Since the description of this condition in the dog, a histopathologi-
FIGURE 18-17. Feline preauric-
ular granuloma. Diffuse granuloma-
tous dermatitis with narrow Grenz
zone (arrous).
Miscellaneous Skin Diseases * lt4I
FIGURE 18-I8. Feline preau-
ricular granuloma. Numerous histio-
cytes and multinuclcated histioeytic
giant cells.
Cause and Pathogenesis
The cause and pathogenesis of the disorder are unknown, but speculations include
the following: (1) sebaceous gland destruction is a developmental and inherited defect;
(2) sehaceous gland destruction is due to a cell-mediated immunologic rcaction directed
against a component of thc gland; (3) the initial defect is a keratinization abnorimality with
subsequent obstruction of the sebaceous ducts, resulting in infammation of the glands;
and (4) the sebaceous adenitis and keratinization defccts are the result of an abnormality
in lipid metabolism.2 51, 61, 64 Studies in rodents suggest that primary sebaccous gland
disease and destruction can result in follicular plugging and inadequate dissociation of the
internal root sheath from the hair shaft, which results in hair shafts perforating the bulbar
area of the hair follicle and causing inflammation.64a
 Preliminary pedigree analysis of affected and related Standard Poodles suggests an
may have subclinical disease, breeding studies are being undertaken to confirm the mode
 of inheritance.
Clinical Features
DOG
There is no apparent sex predilection, and the disorder tends to appear in young adult
 to middle-aged dogs. Although many breeds and mongrels may be affected, there are
 breed predilections for Standard Poodles, Akitas, Vizslas, Samoyeds, and Belgian sheep-
nent on the face, head, pinmae, and trunk; and dominated by abnormal keratinization (see
 Fig. 18-20B). Initial lesions usually occur on the dorsal surfaces of the body, particularly
the head and cervical region. Some dogs have severe involvement of the tail (*rat-tail").66
 Secondary pyoderma may be present and can be superficial folliculitis or deep folliculitis
and furunculosis. In one study, 43% of patients had concurrent pyoderma.6 Ceruminous
otitis externa is comnon.5 In Belgian sheepdogs, bilateral suppurative otitis extema was a
 constant finding.54 In addition, the disease in Belgian sheepdogs seemed to be photoaggra-
 p a  o a s  s so   
In short-coated dogs, such as Vizslas and Dachshunds, lesions begin as generally
arrular areas of scaling and alopecia that tend to enlarge peripherally, to become polyey.
clic, and occasionally to coalesce (Fig. 18- 19A). The surface scales are usually fine, white,
1I42 · Miscellaneous Skin Diseases
G
FIGURE I8- I9. A, canine gramulomatous sebaceous adenitis. Annular and arciform areas of alopecia and scaling
in a Vizsla. B, Canine sebaceous adenitis. Early disease in an Akita with a thin, broken, dishevelled haircoat. C,
Canine sebaceous adenfis. Advanced disease in an Akita, with pronounced hair loss, hyperkeratosis, and dermatitic
areas. D, Canine sebaceous adenitis. Marked hyperkeratosis, folicular casting, and broken hairs. E, Feline sebaceous
  e    s          d 
Eosinophilic plaque in scattered patches on the cat's abdomen and chest. Hair has been clipped away. Lesions are
well demarcated, red, moist, and raised and have been licked incessantly.
Miscellaneous Skin Diseases · II43
 and nonadherent. Hair casts are prominent. Lesions are usually asymptomatic, unless
secondary staphylococcal infection occurs. Intermittent edematous swelling of the muzzle,
lips, and eyelids occurs occasionally,56.65. 66
The Standard Poodle manifests marked hyperkeratosis followed by alopecia. The hairs
are dull and brittle, with tightly adherent, silver-white scales that incorporate small tufts of
matted hairs. Hair casts are prominent. In some cases, the initial changes may be a loss of
the tight curls as the hair straightens and coat color changes (Fig. 18-20A). Lesions often
begin on the face and pinnae but progressively involve the neck and dorsal trunk.
Akitas tend to have fairly generalized, erythematous and greasy skin changes (see Fig.
18-19B to D). Papules, pustules, scales, matting of the hair, and yellow-brown greasy
keratosebaceous debris are usually prominent. Hair casts are often prominent (Fig. 18-
 20C). Severe hair loss, especially of the undercoat, is often present. Secondary pyoderma
is common and often more severe in this breed when sebaceous adenitis is present. Some
animals may show signs of systemic illness, such as fever, malaise, and weight loss.
 Samoyeds experience moderate to severe, predominantly truncal alopecia and scaling.
Hairs are duli, brittle, and broken. Hair casts are prominent.
In German shepherds, lesions may begin on the tail and progress cranially on the
body.
Dogs with granulormatous sebaceous adenitis are generally nonpruritie. However, sec-
ondary staphylococcal infection is a frequent complication, and affected animais may then
become pruritic. In the breeds that are not predisposed, sebaceous adenitis may occur as
acute-onset generalized exfoliative erythroderma that may be intensely pruritic. As these
cases progress, the erythroderma and pruritus ceases and alopecia results. At this point.
these cases are easily confused with endocrinopathies.
FIGURE I8-20. A, Sebaceous adenitis in a Poodle
showing hair with loss of tight curls. B, Sebaceous adenitis
in a Miniature Schnauzer. Note the numerous hair casts.
C, Canine sebaceous adenitis. Trichogram reveals promi-
nent casts of keratosebaccous debris surrounding numerous
hair shafts.
I|44 · Miscellaneous Skin Diseases
CAT
Lesions consist of multifocal anmular areas of scales, crust, broken hairs, hair casts, and
alopecia (sec Fig. 18-19E).57, 63 64 Lesions begin on the head, pinnae, and neck, then
spread caudally on the body.
Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis includes staphylococcal foliculitis, demodicosis, dermatophytosis,
keratinization defects (especially seborrhea and ichthyosis), follicular dysplasia, and cndo-
crinopathies. Skin scrapings and carefully performed cultures are negative. Prominent hair
casts are most likely associated with granulormatous sebaceous adenitis, seborrhea, vitamin
A- responsive dermatosis, demodicosis, and folicular dysplasia. Microscopic examination of
affected hairs reveals casts or collars of yellow-brown keratosebaceous material surround-
ing hair shafts at varying intervals (see Fig. 18-20C).
Dermatohistopathologic findings are variable in intensity. They vary with the chronic-
ity of the lesion and, to Some extent, with the haircoat type and breed of animal.2 3. 52, 64
In general, early lesions are characterized by variable degrees of sebaceous adenitis
(granulomatous to pyogranulomatous). In most cases, sebocytes are no longer visible
d  n     s s   se  
granulomas in areas in which sebaceous glands are normally found (Figs. 18-21 and
18-22). The other adnexae are spared. Short-coated dogs (e.g, Vizslas) often have large
granulomatous lesions, some of which extend into the subcutis.
Chronic lesions are characterized by hyperplastic superficial perivascular dermatitis
cles and variable dcgrces of perifolicular fibrosis and follicular atrophy. Sebaceous glands
are absent. Standard Poodles may have only a scanty lymphocytic infammation at the
level of the sebaceous duct, but no sebaceous glands are present. Nonpredisposed breeds
glands. Complete absence of sebaceous glands is not a feature of endocrine disorders.
FIGURE I 8-2l. Sebaceous adenitis. Perifollicular granulomas where sebaceous glands should be.
Miscellaneous Skin Diseases + I|45
FIGURE 18-22. Caninc granulomatous seba-
ceous adenitis. Scbaceous duct exiling a granu-
lorna.
It has been reported that biopsies from clinically normal standard Poodles that were
still normal 2 years later may contain focal areas of mild granulomatous sebaceous adeni-
tis,51. 64 Animals with secondary staphylococcal infections may have areas of neutrophilic
intraepidermal pustular dermatitis, suppurative foliculitis and furunculosis, and nodular to
An immunohistologic study revealed that CD1c*, CDlle+ dendritic cells, neutrophils,
cytes were TCR-aβ+, CD8+, and CD4+. CD2l+ B lymphocytes and plasma cells were
uncommon. Indirect immunofluorescence results for circulating autoantibodies were nega-
tive.
Clinical Management
Many authors have found that response to therapy varies somewhat, depending on the
severity or chronicity of the disease and on the hreed of animal.2. 53. 54, 58. 64 Further
confusion is created by the fact that some dogs have cyclic patterms of spontaneous
improvement and worsening that are independent of any therapy.2 However, White and
colleagues reported that response to therapy could not be predlicted on the basis of breed,
clinical signs, histopathologic findings, or prcsence or absenee of sebaccous glands in skin
 biopsy specimens.66 Mild cases may be satisfactorily controlled with keratolytic shampoos
 and emollient rinses.5s More stubborn cases may benefit from the topical application of
50% to 75% propylene glycol in water as a spray or rinse once daily, then two to three
1146 + Miscellaneous Skin Diseases
times weekly as needed.& 64 Some dogs respond to oral adninistration of products contain-
reports of beneficial effects from baby oil soaks (undluted or diluted 1:1 with water; let
stand I to 6 hours) followed by shampooing out the excess oil as a treatment for Poodles.
These applications are repeated weekly until maximum improvement is achieved, then
 every 3 to 4 weeks as needed.
Systemic glucocorticoids are not effcacious, though they may help to decrease the
pruritus that may occur in generalized exfoliative cases.54 They do not alter the course of
the disease because sebaceous gland destruction and alopecia still occur.
 In severe or refractory cases, synthetic retinoids (see Chap. 3) may be useful, though
their expense has severely linited their use. Synthetic retinoids were reported to be
effective in 60% of the dogs treated.6s “Effective” was defined as greater than 50%
reduction in scaling and alopecia. It was interesting to note that somc dogs in which the
initial choice of retinoid (either isotretinoin or etretinate) failed did respond to the second
retinoid.
 In the past, it was suggested that certain breeds respond more favorably to a particu-
lar type of retinoid (e.g,Vizslas and Poodles to isotretinoin; Alitas to etretinate）56,64. 65
However, this was not detected in the study by White and associates.66 In Belgian
 (no y 7 o 1)  pe ( y 7 o 1) u
been evaluated the most. Acitretin has replaced etretinate and is dosed at 0.5 to 2 mg/kg
q24h.4a Responses to synthetic retinoids generally require 4 to 8 weeks of therapy, and
therapy must usually be continued forlifeThe potential side effects of sythetic retinoids
are legion (see Chap. 3), but they are uncommon and are usually mild when they do
occur.56
Cyclosporine (Sandimmune, Novartis, 5 mg/kg ql2h orally) has been reported to be
effective in dogs in which synthetic retinoids failed.2 so Cyclosporine commonly produced
lymphoplasmacytic dermatitis, when dosed at 20 to 30 mg/kg/day (see Chap. 3). These
side effects appear to be uncommon at the lower doses.
spond to none of the currently recommended treatments.5s One of the authors (DwS) has
vitamin A, isotretinoin, etretinate, omega-6/omega-3 fatty acids) with tetracycline and
discourage the use of affected animals for breeding, purposes. No information on the
treatment of granulonatous sebaceous adenitis in cats has been published.
· LOCALIZED SCLERODERMA
 Localized scleroderma (morphea) is a rare disease of dogs and cats.67 68. 70
Cause and Pathogenesis
 In humans, the cause and pathogenesis of localized scleroderna are unknown.l Three
predominant theories on pathogenesis have emerged: (l) the vascular theory (early endo-
thelial injury, perivascular fbrosis, hypoxia, and abnormal vascular reactivity); (2) the
abnormal collagen metabolism theory (increased production of collagen and reduced col-
lagenase activity); and (3) the immunologic theory (humoral and cell-mediated autoim-
 munity). There are reports of Borrelia burgdorferi playing a role in the development of
 morphea lesions in humans.
Miscellaneous Skin Diseases · II47
Clinical Features
 In dogs and cats, no age, breed, or sex predilections are apparent. Localized scleroderma
is characterized by asymptomatic, well-demarcated, sclerotic plaques that are alopecic,
smooth, and shiny (see Fig. 18-19F). Hypopigmentation may cccur. Lesions tend to be
linear and to occur on the trunk and limbs. Affected animals are otherwise healthy.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis is based on history, physical examination, and skin biopsy. Histopathologic
examination reveals fibrosing dermatitis. The overlying epidermis is unremarkable (Fig.
18-23A and B). The entire dermis and subcutis are replaced by collagenous tissue. The
FIGURE I8-23. A, Canine morphea. Normal skin peripheral to a lesion. B, Canine morphea.
Lesional skin.Fibrosing dermatitis.
1l48 · Miscellaneous Skin Discases
nornal loosely woven, fine-fibered appearance of the superficial dermis is replaced by
dense collagen bundles. Pilosebaceous units are essentially absent. Mild superficial and
 deep perivascular accumulation of lymphohistiocytic cells is present.
Clinical Management
Jo asinoi n iaa inono A ussi snoauds poo aq o sreade sisousod au
several weeks,67. 6 or permanent scarring may result.70 When regrowth occurs, the hair is
usually thinner and finer than normal, and it may be a slightly different color.7o In
humans, no forms of topical or systemic therapy are known to be of regular benefit to
 patients with localized scleroderma. In humans, pentoxifylline has been recommcnded for 
morphea.69
● feline eosInoPhilIc GranuLomA compLeX
The eosinophilic granuloma complex includes a group of lesions that affect the skin,
mucocutaneous junctions, and oral cavity of cats. The term itself is often used as a final
diagnosis; in fact, there is another primary cause. It is essential to realize that the
eosinophilic granuloma complex is nothing more than a mucocutaneous reaction pattem in
cats —not a specific disease.
Three lesions have traditionally been recognized: (1) the indolent ulcer, (2) the
eosinophilic plaque, and (3) the eosinophilic granuloma. These lesions are common and
insects, especially to Heas and mosquitoes (see Chap. 8) 2. 4.5. 7i. 72.78. 79. 81 In a group of 88
cats with pruritus due to allergic skin diseases, 3l% had one or more lesions of the
eosinophilic granuloma complex.7s In another study of 25 cats with suspected allergic skin
disease, only 12% had lesions compatible with eosinophilic granuloma complex: Intrader-
mal testing results were positive for housedust mite in all three cats, for pollen in two
cats, and for fea antigen in one cat.71 The latter cat was still tentatively considered atopic.
Bacterial involvement occasionall is a factor because antibiotic therapy resolves or mark-
cdly improves soine lesions.2, 80
 In somc instances, thesc lcsions may be heritable.2 77 Eosinophilic granulomas and
indolent ulcers occurred in a colony of specific pathogen-free cats and other cats with
limited genetic diversity.57 A genetic dysregulation of cosinophil signaling and/or regulation
s  sa g  a    ,     s
Therefore, when no hypersensitivity can be documented, a heritable form of the disorder
should be considered. In contrast with what had been reported in carlier veterinary
literature, more recent attempts to transmit eosinophilic plaques by autologous tissue
techniques have been unsuccessful.73
 It has been postulated that some oral eosinophilic granulomas result from imbedded,
swallowed insect parts.74
Feline Indolent Ulcer
Indolent ulcer (eosinophilic ulcer, rodent ulcer) is a common cutaneous, mucocutaneous,
and oral mucosal lesion of cats. Clinically, most indolent ulcers occur unilaterally on thte
upper lip (see Fig. 18-19G). However, lesions also occur in the oral cavity, in other areas 
of the skin, and bilaterally. The lesions are usually well circumscribed, red-brown, alope-
cic, and glistcning; they have a raised bordcr. Pruritus and pain are rare, and peripheral
may be predisposed. Lip ulcers appear to be precancerous and rarely undergo malignant
transformation into squarnous cell carcinoma (see Chap. 20). Cats with indolent ulcers
may also have eosinophilic plaques, eosinophilic granulomas, or both.
The differential diagnosis includes infectious ulcers (bacterial, fungal, FeLV-assocj-
ated), trauma, and neoplasia (squamous cell carcinoma, mast cell tumor, lymphoma)
Miscellaueous Skin Diseases · II49
Carefully performed cultures are negative. Biopsy is nondiagnostic, revealing hyperplastic,
clear cells usually predominating) and fibrosing dermatitis (Fig. 18-24). Blood eosinophilia
and tissue eosinophilia are rare. Chronic, recurrent, medically refractory cases should be
 evaluated for underlying fea bite hypersensitivity, atopy, and food hypersensitivity.
Therapy with systemic glucocorticoids is often effective. Prednisone or prednisolone is
administered orally (4.4 mg/kg q24h) until the lesions are healed. Alternatively, methyl-
prednisolone acetate (Depo-Medrol, Pharmacia & Upjohn) may be administered subcuta-
neously at 20 mg/cat every 2 weeks until the lesions are healed, or cither dexamethasone
(0.4 mg/kg q24h) or triamcinolone (0.8 mg/kg q24h) may be adininistered orally. Recur-
rent lesions may be managed with alternate-evening oral glucocorticoids or repeated
subcutaneous injections of methylprednisolone (never more frequently than every 2
months).
Medically refractory lesions should be evaluated for underlying hypersensitivity disor-
s s o pdsi ss r os e   si
(e.g, amoxicillin clavulanate, cefadroxil, enroHoxacin) or topical mupirocin2. 74. 0 Antibi-
otic-responsive lesions contain numerous neutrophils on cytologic and histopathologic ex-
amination. Other methods of treatment reported to be occasionally succcssful in feline
indolent ulcer include radiotherapy, cryosurgery, laser therapy, surgical excision, mixed
bacterial vaccines, and immunomodulating drugs such as levamisole, thiabendazole, inter-
feron-α (60 to 300 units/day, orally or suhcutaneously, for 30 days [see Chap. 3]), and
aurothioglucose (Solganal, Schering-Plough)2 4. 5. 74 Progestational compounds, such as
feline indolent ulcer. However, these drugs are not recommended because of their side
effects.
Feline Eosinophilic Plaque
Eosinophilie plaque is a common cutaneous lesion of cats, Clinically, most eosinophilic
plaques 0ccur on the abdomen and medial thighs (Fig. 18-25A; see Fig. 18-i9H).
FIGURE I8-24. Histologic section of indolent ulcer. There is surface ulceration with fibrin
covering the necrotic surface and a dense monornuclear cellular infiltrate in the dermis. Note
the ulcerative perivascular dermatitis. (From Scot, DW: Feline dermatology I900-1978: A
monograph. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:331, 1980.)
II5o·Miscellaneous SkinDiseases
FIGURE I8-25. A, Feline eosinophilic plaque. Raised, erythematous abdominal plaque. B, Typical eosino-
philic granuloma on a white cat's rear leg with hair clipped away. The firm cordlike masses are slightly pink and
not ulcerated, painful, or pruritic. C, Eosinophilic granuloma bilaterally located at the angles of the jaw behind
oopd ansodde uo paruuoo puaba
Miscellaneous Skin Diseases · II51
FIGURE 18-26. A, Feline eosin-
ophilic plaque. Diffuse spongiosis of
sheaths. B,Feline eosinophilic
plaque. Diffuse spongiosis and mi-
crovesicle or microvesicopustule for-
mation in the epidermis.
Lesions may be single or multiple, and they may also occur on mucocutaneous junctions
or in other areas of the skin. Eosinophilic plaques are well circumscribed, raised, round to
 oval, red, oozing, often ulcerated, and 0.5 to 7 cm in diameter, Pruritus is usually severe,
 Peripheral lymphadenopathy may he present. Cats with eosinophilic plaque may also have
indolent ulcers, eosinophilic granulomas, or both. Lesions that are histologically similar to
eosinophilic plaques occasionally occur in the conjunctiva76 and cornea.7s There are no age
 or breed predilections, but females may be predisposed.
FIGURE 18-25 Continued. the last molars. A netal mouth gag and plastic endotracheal tubc can be seen. The ulcerated
nodule on the lower lip. E, Canine eosinophilic granuloma. Greenish brown mass on the ventrolateral aspect of the tonguc
 granuloma. Ukerated nodule on a foot.
1152 · Miscellaneous Skin Diseases
The differential diagnosis includes infectious granulomas (bacterial, fungal) and neo-
plasia (mast cell tumor, lymphoma). Carefully performed cultures are negative. Biopsy
reveals hyperplastic superficial and deep perivascular dermatitis with eosinophilia, to inter-
stitial or diffuse eosinophilic dermatitis (Fig. 18-27). Flame figures are possible. Diffuse
spongiosis, which involves the outer root sheaths of hair follicles (Fig. 18-26A), and
cosinophilic microvesicles and microabscesses may be visible (Fig. 18-26B). Some lesions
have remarkable mucinosis of the epidermis and hair follicle outer root sheath,. $ and
some involve the subcutaneous fat. Direct immunofluorescence testing frequently reveals
the intercellular deposition of Ig within the epidermis (a pemphigus-like pattern)., Blood
and tissue eosinophilia are constant.
Methods of treatment are as described for feline indolent ulcer. Anecdotal reports 
indicate that interferon-α is not effective for eosinophilic plaques (see Chap. 3). In
addition, anecdotal reports indicate that occlusive biosynthetic absorbent wound dressings
(e.g., Biodres Wound Dressing, DVM) applied to Iesions for 48 hours may be effective.
Feline Eosinophilic Granuloma
Eosinophilic granuloma (linear granuloma) is a common cutaneous, mucocutaneous, and
oral mucosal lesion of cats. Clinically, most eosinophilic granulomas occur on the caudal
thighs, on the face, and in the oral cavity (especially the tongue and palate). On the
caudal thigh, the lesions are usually well circumscribed, raised, firm, yellowish to pink
plaques with a distinctive linear configuration (sec Fig. 18-25B). They are often discov-
ered accidentally because they are usually nonpruritic. Lesions on the face and in the oral
is thc most conmon cause of lower lip swellings and nodules (pouting cats) and asympto-
matic swollen chins (fat-chinned cats, feline chin edema) in the cat (see Fig. 18-25D).
When the surface of eosinophilic granulomas is eroded or ulcerated, a characteristic
speckling with pinpoint white foci (corresponding to foci of collagen fame figures) may be
visible. Peripheral lymphadenopathy may be present. Cats with eosinophilic granuloma
may also have indolent ulcers, eosinophilic plaques, or both. Lesions that are histologically
similar to eosinophilic granulomas occasionally occur in the conjunctiva.76 There are no
age or breed predilections, but females may be predisposed.
The differential diagnosis includes infectious bacterial or fungal granulomas, insect
FIGURE 18-27. Felinc cosino-
philic plaque. Diffuse dernal infl-
tration of predominantly eosino-
phils.
Miscellaneous Skin Diseases · II53
FiGURE 18-28. A, Felinc eosinophilic granuloma on chin.
Early granuloma formation centered on Hame figures (arrwus).
B, Feline eosinophilic granuloma. Granulomatous dermatitis as-
sociated with fame figures. (B from Scot DW: Feline derma-
tology 1900-1978: A monograph. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:
331,1980.)
bite reactions, and neoplasia. Biopsy reveals nodular to diffuse granulomatous dermatitis
with multifocal areas of fame figure formation (Fig. 18-28). Eosinophils and multinucle-
ated histiocytic giant cells are coinmon (Fig. 18-29). Mucinosis of the epidermis and hair
folicle outer root sheath, focal infltrative to necrotizing mural cosinophilic folliculitis or
terized by palisading granuloma formation around the fame figures. Eosinophils are less
eosinophilia Inay occur, especially with oral lesions. Carefull performed cultures are
negative,
 Methods of treatment are as described for feline indolent ulcer. Anecdotal reports
indicate that interferon-α is not effective for eosinophilic granulomas (see Chap. 3).
Interestingly, many eosinophilic granulomas occurring in cats youngcr than I year sponta-
neously regress over a period of 3 to 5 months. Omega-3/omega-6 fatty acid-containing
products (Derm Caps Liquid, DVM Pharmaceuticals) are effective in some cases and
reduce glucocorticoid requirements in others (see Chap. 3).
· CanIne eoSInoPhilic GranuLomA
flame figure formation in the oral cavity and skin of dogs.2, s 82, 4-86 8s s9
Cause and Pathogenesis
The cause of cutaneous granulomas associated with Hame figures is poorly understood. In
humans, occasional cases have been reported after insect bites, tuberculin tests, and other
forms of trauma. Proposed pathomechanisms include vasculitis, microangiopathy, disorder
II54·Miscellaneous Skin Diseases
FlGURE I8-29. Feline eosinophilic granuloma. Granulomatous dermatitis associated with
fame figures and forcign-body giant cells. (High-power view of Fig. 18-28B.)
of fibrinolysis, disorder of phagocytic function, disorder of catabolic enzyme release, and
cell-mediated immune response. In dogs, no antecedent trauma or disease has been
recognized, and cultures for bacteria, fungi, and viruses are negative. Macerated tissue
from lesions produces no lesions in dogs that have been injected. The tissue eosinophilia,
occasional blood eosinophilia, and glucocorticoid responsiveness of lesions have prompted
speculation regarding a hypersensitivity state. In addition, the tendency of the oral form of
the disease to occur in Siberian huskies and Cavalier King Charles spaniels has suggested
a genetic basis for the disease. Some authors have reported the seasonal recurrence of
cutaneous eosinophilic granulomas in dogs, suggesting that the condition may be a hyper-
 sensitivity reaction to pollens, molds, and insects.
Clinical Features
Although any age, breed, or sex of dog may be affected, eosinophilic granulomas are most
commou in'dogs less than 3 years of age (80% of cases), Siberian huskies (76%), and
 males (72%). Eosinophilic granulomas occur most commonly in the oral cavity as ulcer-
ated palatine plaques and vegetative lingual masses. The lingual masses often have a
 greenish brown hue (see Fig. 18-25E). In Cavalier King Charles spaniels, lesions may be
solitary on the soft palate or bilateral near the tonsils. Less commonly, they occur as
multiple cutaneous papules, nodules, and plaques over the ventral abdormen, prepuce,
digits, fanks, and cheek (see Figs. 18-25F to H and 18-30A). The cutaneous lesions are
usually nonpruritic and painless, and the dogs are otherwise healthy. Rarely, solitary
lesions occur in the external ear canal.8 There has been one report of a tracheal lesion.83?
Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis includes granulomatous and ncoplastic disorders, Diagnosis is
based on biopsy. Characteristic histopathologic findings include variably sized foci of fame
(Figs. 18-30B and 18-31). Properly performed cultures are negative, and blood eosino-
philia occurs occasionally.
Miscellaneous Skin Diseases + II55
FlGURE I8-30. A, Nodulc of eosinoplilic gramuloma on the digit of a Siberian husky.
B, Canine eosinophilie granuloma. Granulomatous dermatitis associated with fiame figures.
Clinical Management
Canine eosinophilic granulomas are usually very glucocorticoid responsive. Seventy-eight
percent of cases were treated with prednisolone or prednisone orally (0.5 to 2.2 mg/kg/
undergo spontaneous remission, and some lesions are seasonally or chronically recurrent.
● EOSINOPHILIC DERMATITIS AND EDEMA IN DOGS
A syndrome of eosinophilic dermatitis and edema has been described in dogs and com-
 pared with eosinophilic cellulitis (Wells' syndrome) in humans.$a Four of the 9 dogs were
1l56 · Miscellaneous Skin Diseases
FIGURE I8-3l. Canine eosinophilie granuloma. Focal Hame figures and accumulation of
eosinophils.
Labrador retrievers. All dogs had an acute onset of erythematous macules that progressed
abdomen and thorax. Edema varied from facial to generalized and pitting. Nunerous
possible triggering events were identifed: drugs, new diets, arthropods, and concurrent
allergic or immune-mediated diseases.
Histopathologic findings included superficial and deep perivascular to interstitial der-
matitis with marked dermal edema and vascular dilatation. Eosinophils were numerous,
 and Hame figures were seen in about half the specimens.
Seven of the 9 dogs were treated with glucocorticoids or hydroxyzine and recovered
in 1 to 3 weeks. Two dogs received no treatment: one recovered in I week, the other
continued to wax and wane.
● PANNICULITIS
Panniculitis is a multifactorial inflammatory condition of the subcutaneous fat, character-
ized by deep-seated cutaneous nodules that often become cystic and ulcerated and de-
velop draining tracts. The disorder is uncommon in dogs and cats.101
Cause and Pathogenesis
The lipocyte (fat cell, adlipocyte) is particularly vulnerable to trauma, ischemia, and neigh-
boring inflammatory diseasc. In addition, damage to lipocytes results in the liberation of
infammatory agents, and they incite further infammatory and granulomatous tissue reac-
tions.
(Table 18-1). Many of these factors have yet to be recognized in dogs and cats, but this
fact may only reflect lack of awareness. Hereditary deficiency of α-antitrypsin predisposes
humans to panniculitis in response to various stimuli.97 α-Antitrypsin protects the body
Miscellaneous Skin Diseases · Il57
● Table 18-1
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF HUMAN
PANNICULITIS
INFECTIOUS
Bacterial,* rnyobacterial, actinoimycetic," fungal, chlamydial, viral
IMMUNOLOGIC
Lupus erythennatosus,* rheumatoid arthritis, drug eruption,° erythema nodosum,° arthropod bite*
PHYSICOCHEMICAL (FACTITIAL)
Trauma," pressure, cold, foreign body* (e.g., postsubcutaneous injection of vaccines or bulky, oily, or insoluble
liquids)
PANCREATIC DISEASE
Inlammation,” neoplasia*
POSTGLUCOCORTICOID THERAPY
VASCULITIS*
I cukocytoclastic, periarteritis nodosa, thrombophlebitis, embolism *
NUTRITIONAL
Vitamin E dcficicncy*
ENTEROPATHIES
HEREDITARY
α-Antitrypsin defhciency
IDIOPATHIC*
*Recognized in dogs and cats.
against connective tissue degradation by the neutrophil proteases, elastase and cathepsin
G. Serum concentrations of α-antitrypsin were found to be normal (1.62 to 2.43 mg/dl)
in nine dogs with sterile panniculitis.97 Infectious and nutritional causes of canine and
feline panniculitis are discussed elsewhere (see Chaps. 4, 5, and 17) and are therefore not 
addressed here. This discussion concentrates on sterile forms of panniculitis.
Nodular panniculitis refers to sterile subcutaneous infiammatory nodules and is not a
specific disease. It is a purely descriptive term, clinically representing the end resut of
frequently misused term and does not exist as a specifc disease. In dogs and cats, the
majority of cases of sterile nodular panniculitis are solitary lesions of idiopathic origin. A
nized in dogs (see Chap. 9)4, 101 Panniculitis has also been described in dogs and cats in
association with pancreatic disease (carcinoma, necrosis).92. 97. 9.10 Eosinophilic panniculi-
tis in humans has been associated with arthropods, injection reactions, and lymphoma.90
Eosinophilic panniculitis is rarely described in ogs and cats 1ol and could be associated
with arthropods and injections.
Clinical Features
Panniculitis is manifested clinically as deep-seated cutaneous nodules. The lesions may
 occur singly or in crops; they are either localized to specific areas or generalized, and they
vary from a few millimeters to several centimeters in diameter, Nodules may be firm and
    r i    os   a
(see Fig. 18-32B and C). The lesions may or may not be painful and often heal with
depressed scars. Hyperpigmentation may also occur around the lesions or at the site of
ized panniculitis proximal to the tarsal and carpal pads.ss We believe that these cases are
identical to metatarsal fistulation (see Chap. 12).
1l58 · Miscellaneous Skin Discases
FIGURE I8-32. A, Idiopathic sterle panniculitis in a Dachshund. Tvo subcutaneous nodules on the trunk
B, Canine idiopathic sterile panniculitis. Subcutaneous nodule with multiple draining tracts. C, Feline panniculitis.
Multiple fistulae on the ventral abdomen. D, Idiopathic sterile panniculitis in a cat. Ulcerated nodule in the groin.
E. Juvenile celluis in a Golden retriever. Erythema, edema, exudation, crusting, and alopecia on the face and
up of amucinousvesicle.
Miscellaneous Skin Diseases · II59
DOG
The majority (s0%) of dogs have a solitary lesion, most commonly over the ventrolateral
chest, neck, and abdomen.1o1 No age, breed, or sex predilections are apparent in dogs
with solitary lesions.
se       s   ss
heralding a new crop of skin lesions. A rare dog has arthralgias, abdominal pain, vomiting.
or hepatosplenomegaly91,95,97 In dogs with multiple skin lesions, the trunk is most
commonly involved. There is no age predilection, but female dogs may be over-repre-
sented. Although all breeds and mongrels may be affected, Dachshunds and Poodes
appear to be predisposed.2. 5. 97
  ss u o  (d   
teric, pleural).92, 92a, 99
CAT
The majority (95%) of cats have a solitary lesion, most commonly over the ventral
abdomen and ventrolateral thorax (see Figs. 18-32D and 18-33A).1o1 Cats with multiple
lesions often have constitutional signs as described for dogs.96, i0, 1o1 No age, breed, or sex
predilections are evident.
Diagnosis
 Sterile nodular panniculitis is most commonly misdiagnosed as deep pyoderma, cutaneous
ence of numerous eosinophils suggests arthropod- or injection-induced lesions. Sudan
stains may reveal extracelular and intracellular lipid droplets. Animals with multiple
 lesions and systemic illness often have mild to moderate feukocytosis and neutrophilia,
 mild nonregenerative anemia, and elevated ag, β, and β globulin fractions on serum
Ig and complement at the basement membrane zone.* Animals with pancreatic panniculi-
tis may have increased serum concentrations of amylase and lipase.
Asoq  n s asoq uxa pe oq q a ps q u s
technique that is satisfactory for subcutaneous nodules.3 5 Punch biopsies fail to deliver
tissue sufficient to be of diagnostic vahue in about 75% of cases. Panniculitis may
be
lobular, septal, or diffuse, or it may have a combination of these characteristics.101
11n
addition, panniculitis may be granulomatous, pyogranulomatous, suppurative, eosinophilic,
 and radial fat crystals may occur.11 The histopathologic pattern and cytomorphologic
picture of the reactions have little diagnostic, therapeutic, or prognostic significance (Figs.
18-34 to 18-37). Lipid-laden macrophages (lipophages) are often prominent (see Fig.
18-37B). It is imperative to realize that most panniculitides, regardless of cause, look
histologically identical. Thus, one cannot diagnose sterile nodular panniculitis from a
agents, and polarized light examination is indicated to rule out foreign bodies. Tissue
cultures for aerobic, anaerobic, and mycobacterial cultures are negative prior to a diagno-
sis of sterile nodular panniculitis,.
 If the panniculitis is predominantly lymphohistioplasmacytic, with or without concur-
rent neutrophilic vasculitis or interface dermatitis, or if other clinical signs suggest lupus
erythematosus, other diagnostic tests may include antinuclear antibody and direct immu-
nofuorescence testing of lcsional skin (see Chap. 9). If vasculitis is present, the diagnostic
tests indicated may reflect the differential diagnosis of vasculitis (see Chap. 9). If pannicu-
litis is persistent and refractory or if the patient shows concurrent signs of gastrointestinal
disease, pancreatic disease should be ruled out.
II60·Miscellaneous Skin Diseases
FIGURE 18-33. A, A cat with
lateral thorax. Note the variation
in erythema, and one lesion has iul-
cerated. B, Canine idiopathic sterile
panniculitis. Gytologie exam-
ination reveals pyogranulomatous in-
farmnation wherein nentrophils are
nondegenerate, no microorganisms
are seen, and inacrophages contain
mumerous cytoplasmic vacuoles (li-
pophages!
Erythema nodosum is characterized histologically by a septal panniculitis and is
include concurrcnt infections (e.g-:
, bacterial endocarditis, coccidioidomycosis), neoplasia,
 and drug reactions. One of the authors (Dws) saw a dog with recurring sterile panniculi-
tis associated with the administration of an ivermectin-containing heartworm preventive.
 Postinjection panniculitis is characterized by a discrete nodule that oftcn has a nc-
crotic center (Fig.18-38A）.3. 96. 103 Surrounding the necrotic core is a layer of macro-
phages and often multinucleated histiocytic giant cells; therc is an outer layer of intense
lymphocytic and eosinophilic inflammation. In some cases, the presence of focculent
foreign debris or shiny, amorphous-to-globular, bluish-gray-to-brownish material is virtually
diagnostic (see Fig. 18-38B).
Traumatic panniculitis is characterized by a large central focus of lobular fat necrosis.?
Lipocytes lack nuclei but retain their shape, creating ghosts or shells of fat cells. Ruptured
lipocytes form large, cystic spaces. Interspersed and surrounding the devitalized lipocytes
suggests arthropod- or injection-induced lesions.m.96
 In humans, pancreatic panniculitis is characterized by virtually pathognomonic histo-
Miscellaneous Skin Diseases · Il61
FIGURE I8-34. Caninc idiopathic stcrile panniculitis. Pyogranulornatous panniculitis.
pathologic changes: lobular and septal panniculitis with focal necrosis; anuclear, necrotic
lipocytes surrounded by a thickened, shadowy, acidophilic cell membrane ("ghostlike"
 rd e  s  o s   p   i
necrotie foci (saponified calcium).9 These findings have not been reported in dogs and
cats with pancreatic panniculitis.92, 9, 100
Clinical Management
Careful surgical excision of solitary lesions is usually curative.1o1 Dogs and cats with
multiple sterile panniculitis lesions usually respond well to systemic glucocorticoids. 91. 95. 101
FIGURE 18-35. Canine idiopathic sterile pannienlitis. Pyogranulomatous pamiculitis with
mumcrous foarmy macrophages (lipophages).
Il62 · Miscellanecus Skin Discases
FIGURE 18-36. Feline idiopathic sterile panriculitis.
Marked lobular pannicultis and fat necrosis. (From
Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1900-1978: A mono-
graph. J Ain Anim Hosp Assoe 16:331, 1980.)
Prednisolone or prednisone may be administered orally (2 mg/kg, q24h in dogs, 4 mg/kg
q24h in cats) until the lesions have regressed (in 3 to 8 weeks). Therapy should be
permanent remission. In recurrent cases, altermate-day steroid therapy may be required
for prolonged periods.
In a few canine and feline cases, good results have been obtained with oral vitarmin E
(dll-α-tocopherol acetate), 400 IU ql2f.4. io1 The vitamin E must be given at least 2 hours
before or after a meal for maximum effectiveness. In humans, oral potassium iodide has
been used successfully in cases of sterile nodular panniculitis; one of us (D.W.S.) has used
this agent successfully in two dogs. One case of pedal panniculitis responded to only
vitamin E therapy; vitamin E therapy had a steroid-sparing effect in two others.9 We have
had success with tetracycline and niacinamide in a few dogs (see Chap. 3).
O subcutaneouS fat scleroSIs
Subcutaneous fat sclerosis has been described in a l-year-old male domestic shorthaired
cat.10 An inguinal abscess had been treated by surgical drainage and antibiotics 5 weeks
 prior to the appearance of a rapidly growing abdominal subcutaneous mass. The mass was
 pe s pe pasi aram saq aui 'sassaid rq a on raiet pe na
normal overlying skin was cool, indurated, and adherent. The mass was large enough to
 restrict movement of the legs. Differential diagnosis included neoplasia, panniculitis, and
nutritional steatitis. Results of a hemogram and serum chemistry profile were normal.
Bacterial and fungal cultures were negative. Oral treatment with prednisolone was not
Miscellaneous Skin Diseases * Il63
FIGURE 18-37. A, Septal pan-
niculitis in a cat. B, Numerous lipu-
phages in a postinjection panniculitis
in a cat.
effective. Later, small subcutaneous satellite nodules could be palpated on the chest wall
cranial to the mass.
On necropsy, the abdominal subcutaneous tissues were thickened, fbrous, and adher-
ent to the dermis. Histopathologic findings revealed extensive subcutaneous fbrosis with
minimal fat necrosis and infammation. Within the subcutaneous fat, or within the fat-rich
interstitial tissues of abdominal muscles, were bands of septal fibrosis, fat cells of in-
creased size (fat micropseudocyst formation), and lipocytes containing needle-shaped fat
clefts (fat crystals) (Fig. 18-39). Although a few scattered lymphocytes, histiocytes, and
multinucleated histiocytic giant cells were found, and although there were isolated foci of
neutrophils, the process was largely noninflammatory.
These findings are simiar to two rare human disorders: sclerema neonatorum and
subcutaneous fat necrosis of the newborn.1 The latter is indistinguishable from poststeroid
 panniculitis, but this cat had no history of corticosteroid administration.
● Canine Juvenile CellulitIS
matitis and lymphadenitis) is an uncommon granulomatous and pustular cdisorder of the
face, pinnae, and submandibular lymph nodes, usually of puppies.3 17-109
HI64 · Miscellaneous Skin Diseases
FIGURE I8-38. Postinjection pannicultis (rabies vaccine) in a cat. A,
Cranulomatous nodule surrouding central area of necrosis and locculent
of vaccine-related material (arrmus).
Cause and Pathogenesis
The cause and pathogenesis are unknown. Heritability is supported by an increased
sterile granulomas and pustules that respond dramatically to glucocorticoids suggests an
 underlying immune dysfunction. Special stains and electron inicroscopic examination of
tissues do not reveal microorganisms, and cultures are negative.1os Atternpts to transmit
the discasc with lesional tissues have been unsuccessful.1o8
FIGURE 18-39. Sclerosing panl-
niculitis in a cat. Fat crystal with ra-
dial configuration.
Miscellaneous Skin Diseases * II65
Clinical Features
Puppies are affected between the ages of 3 weeks and 4 months, and one or several
puppies in a litter may have the condition. A 2-year-old Lhasa apso experienced adult-
breeds have experienced the disorder, Golden retrievers, Dachshunds, and Gordon setters
acutely swollen face, especially the eyelids, lips, and muzzle. Physical examination at this
time reveals striking submandibular lymphadenopathy. Within 24 to 48 hours, papules and
pustules develop rapidly, especially on the lips, muzzle, chin, bridge of the nose, and
periocular area. Lesions typically fistulate, drain, and crust (see Fig. 18-32E). A marked
pustular otitis exterma is conmon (Fig. 18-32F), and the pinnae frequently are thickened
and edematous. Affected skin is usually painful but not pruritic. About 50% of affected
 puppies are lethargic. Anorexia, pyrexia, and joint pain (sterile suppurative arthritis) are
 present in up to 25% of cases.
to fuctuant subcutaneous nodules that may be painful or fistulate. These nodules espe-
lesions.
Diagnosis
 In very early cases, the differcntial diagnosis is angiocdema (see Chap. 8). However,
angioedema is not accompanied by marked regional lymphadenopathy or systemic illness.
After the dramatic infamimatory lesions have appeared, the differential diagnosis includes
staphylococcal dermatitis, demodicosis, and adverse cutaneous drug reaction.
Cytologic examination of papulopustular lesions reveals pyogranulomatous inflamma-
tion with no microorganisms (Fig. 18-40). Carefully performed cultures are negative.
Biopsies of early lesions reveal multiple discrete or confuent granulomas and pyogranulo-
mas consisting of clusters of large epithelioid macrophages with variably sized cores of
obliterated. In later severe lesions, suppurative changes in the superficial dermis, in and
FIGURE I8-40. Juvenile cellu-
litis. Cytologic examination reveals
Pyogranulornatous infammation
wherein neutrophils appear nonde-
generate and no microorganisms
are seen. Notc nctrophagocytosis
by two nacrophages (arrouws).
II66 · Miscellaneous Skin Diseases
FIGURE I8-4l. Juvenile celluli-
tis. Well-demarcated dermal granu-
loma from an early case.
around ruptured hair follicles, and in the subjacent panniculus are predominant (Fig.
18-42).
Total globulin levcls and results of serum electrophoresis, immunoelectrophoresis, and
Clinical Management
Early and aggressive therapy is indicated because scarring can be severe. Large doses of
FlGURE I8-42. Juvenile cellulitis in a dog. Note diffuse cellulitis
Miscellaneous Skin Diseases · II67
orally) is administered daily until the disease is inactive (usually in 10 to 14 days). Dogs
with intercurrent truncal panniculitis may require a longer course of treatment to resolve
all lesions. Some dogs respond much better to dexamethasone (0.2 mg/kg q24h orally). 1f
there is cytologic or clinical evidence of secondary bacterial infection, bactericidal antibiot-
ics (cephalexin, cefadroxil, amoxicillin clavulanate) should be given simultaneously. Topical
therapy, especially wet soaks with aluminum acetate or magnesium sulfate (see Chap. 3)
are useful, but puppies often find the restraint and pain undesirable, and the struggling
and stress associated with the topical therapy become counterproductive. Relapses are
virtually unheard of.
● feline ULCeraTIve DeRmatItIS WItH LINeaR
SUBEPIDERMAL FIBROSIS
 This is an uncommon feline dermatosis.3. 110
Cause and Pathogenesis
The cause and pathogenesis of this disorder are unknown. Trauma, injections, foreign
 bodies, and infectious agents do not appear to play a role.
Clinical Features
 Any age, breed, or sex of cat may be affected. Typically, lesions are solitary and occur
over the dorsal neck and shoulder area (Fig. 18-43). Crusted ulcers, 0.2 cm to 1 cm in
diameter, enlarge slowly over a period of weeks to months. No pruritus and pain are
FIGURE I8-43. Feline ulcerative dermatitis
with linear subepiderrnal fbrosis. Chronic nonheal-
ing ulcer over the dorsal neck. Note the rim of
thickened skin that surrounds the ulcer (arrow; area
has been clippcd).
[I68 · Miscellaneous Skin Diseases
FIGURE I8-44. Feline ulcera-
tive dermatitis with linear subepi-
dermal fibrosis. Note the bandlikc
arca of subepidermal fibrosis of the
superficial dermis (arrow).
present, and affcted cats are otherwise healthy. Thesc nonhcaling ulcers typically have a
thick, adherent, brown crust, and a rim of firm, thickened skin surrounds the ulcer.
Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis includes trauma, injection reactions, burms, infections, panniculi-
tis, and neoplasia (especially squamous cell carcinoma). Biopsy reveals ulcerative dermatitis
are not a prominent infammatory cell type. The characteristic finding is a linear subepi-
 dermal band of superficial dermal fbrosis (Fig. 18-44) that extends peripherally frorn the
ulcer to a distance of several pilosebaceous units.
Clinical Management
 Either surgical excision or aggresive glucocorticoid therapy is usually curative. The rec-
ommended glucocorticoid protocol is 20 mg of methylprednisolone acetate/cat subcutane-
ously, every 2 weeks, ntil the cat is cured.
● PerforatinG derMatitis
An unusual perforating dermatitis has been described in cats,11. 112 Multiple firm, conical,
areas of the body (Fig. 18-45). The lesions tend to cluster and form linear configurations.
m d e sd  s  o pd o ps oq aa o s 
not features. In another cat,1ll lesions occurred whcrever the animal excoriated itself and
n    as  so e eo  si s  
superficial interstitial dermatitis, rich in eosinophils and mast cells, underlying a conical.
exophytic projection from the skin surface (Fig. 18-46). The exophytic mass consists of
necrotic cellular debris, strands of keratin, and numerous collagen fibers in varying de-
 grees of degeneration. There is transepidermal elimination of collagen fibers, often verti-
cally oriented, into the base of the surface mass (Fig. 18-47). Superficial and middle
Miscellaneous Skin Diseases * I169
FIGURE I8-45. Pcrforating der-
matitis over the hip of a cat. Note
the linear arrangement of hypcrkera-
totie papules.
FIGURE 18-46. Perforating dermatitis in a cat.
Exophytic conical mass containing degenerate col-
lagen, inllammatory cells, and keratin.
I170 · Miscellaneous Skin Diseases
FlGURE 18-47. Perforating dermatitis in a cat.
Vertical orientation  of degenerate  collagen  fibers
projecting into the exophytic surface mass.
dermal collagen fbers show a segmental staining abnormality in sections stained with
Masson's trichrome. With this stain, collagen fibers stain homogeneously blue. In perforat-
ing dermatitis, the collagen fibers show segmental red bands. This staining abnormality
 has been described in animals with cutaneous asthenia and acquired skin fragility; it
 presumably indicates some kind of abnormality in collagen metabolism (synthesis, packing.
degradation).
Clinical Management
 In one cat,12 treatment with ascorbic acid (vitamin C), 100 mg ql2h orally, resulted in
resolution of the lesions within 30 days. However, when therapy was stopped, the lesions
recurred within 8 months. In another cat, successful treatment also necessitated control-
ling the concurrent allergic skin disease.!!1
● FELiNe ACQUIrEd SKIN FrAGILITY
This is a rare disorder with multiple etiologic factors. It is characterized by markedly thin
 and fragile skin in the absence of hyperextensibility 3 13-116
Cause and Pathogenesis
The pathogenesis of the cutaneous changes is unknown, and the cause appears to be
  s     s   s
d o a ss ar  s s e d s) s s
liver disease (lipidosis, cholangiohepatitis, or cholangiocarcinoma), phenytoin administra-
 d  s  s  su    
Miscellaneous Skin Diseases · I171
FIGURE 18-48. Feline acquired
skin fragility. Extensive area of full-
thickness skin loss over the trunk of
a cushingoid cat. (Courtesy of R.
Rosychuk.)
adrenal function test results have been normal, and no associated discases were found at
necropsy.3 114
Clinical Features
Most affected cats are middle-aged or older. The skin becomes markedly thin and is
damaged readily by minor trauma. Extreme cutaneous friability leads to irregular tears and
the shedding of large sheets of skin (Figs. 18-48 to 18-50). The skin may become so
thin that it takes on a translucent quality. Partial alopecia may occur. The skin is not
hyperextensible.
Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis includes spontaneous and iatrogenic Cushing's syndrome and
FIGURE 18-49. Feline acquired
tear over the thorax of a cat with
cholangiohepatitis.
↓I72 · Miscellaneous Slin Diseases
FIGURE 18-50. Feline acquired
skin fragility. Remarkcable thinning of
truncal skin with resultant easy visual-
ization of the underlying blood vessels
in a cat with megestrol acetate-in-
duced dliabetes mellitus.
 some cats with cutaneous asthenia; in these cases, however, the abnormalities are present
from birth. Whereas the skin extensibility index is a useful clinical tool for the documenta-
tion of cutaneous asthenia (see Chap. 12), its use is contraindicated in acquired skin
fragility.
 Because of the extreme attenuation of the skin, biopsy is difficult. The tissue often
folds and twists as wet tissuc papcr does, and the dermis is severely atrophic. Dermal
collagen fbers are very thin and disorganized (Fig. 18-51).3, 114 Panniculus is usually not
 prescnt in biopsy specimens. The epidermis and hair follicles may be atrophied. Masson's
trichrome -stained sections may show the segmental staining abnormality of collagen seen
in cutaneous asthenia (see Chap. I2), but to a much milder degree.!n4 Electron micro-
s  ss s ro ao  r oi isi q  s oo
asthenia (see Chap. 12),114
FIGURE I8-51. Feline acquired
skin fragility. Note attenuated, disor-
ganized, and wispy collagen fbers.
Miscellaneous Skin Diseases · II73
Clinical Management
Regardless of the underlying cause demonstrated, the prognosis is grave. Affected cats are
very difficult to handle without skinning them. Surgical repair is usually unsuccessful and
leads to more extensive clamage. Early cases in association with spontaneous or iatrogenic
Cushing's syndrome have resolved when the inciting cause was eliminated.
● IDIOPATHIC DIFFUSE LIPOMATOSIS
This condition is extrermely rare in dogs and cats.3. 5. li7 Adult animals are presented for
progressively enlarging skin folds, especially over the neck and trunk. The cutaneous
abnormalities are symmetric, but may be 1more severe on one side of the body than on
the other (Fig. 18-52). The skin folds are pendulous, thick, heavy, and blubbery. Skin
overlying larger folds may be thin, hypotrichotic, and traumatized from contact with the
environment.
Biopsy reveals a remarkable diffuse thickening of the panniculus (Fig. 18-53). Prolif-
erating fat may resemble mature adipose tissue, with mucinosis only of interlobular septae
and with sinail numbers of primitive mesenchymal cells and lipoblasts around blood
vessels. In other cases, the normal anatomy of thc panniculus is lost in a proliferative
mixture of normal-appearing and dysplastic lipocytes (Fig. 18-54).
There is no effective therapy.
· IdIoPathIc ACQUired CUtaNeoUS LAXItY
An unusual dermal collagen disorder was reported in a 9-year-old male English setterl18 in
under the neck, The folds were composed of thin skin with a jclly-like subcutis, whereas
other arcas of the dog's body were covered with normal skin. On necropsy, the dermis in
the affected areas was found to be only two thirds of the normal thickness, and the
 dermal collagen bundles were smaller than normal in diameter, fragmented, and widely
separated by ground substance. The elastin was normal. The affected tissues contained
areas of necrotic subcutaneous fat and vessels with endothelial swelling and a decreased
 lumen. No inflammation was observed. Vascular insufficiency was proposed as the cause.
FlGURE I8-52. Idliopathic dif-
fuse lipomatosis. Remarkable irregu-
lar proliferation of subcutaneous fat
with resultant distortion of the body.
(Courtesy of L. A. Lima.)
1I74 · Miscellaneous Skin Diseases
FIGURE I8-53. Idiopathie diffuse lipomatosis.
Thc: skin is markedlly thickened because of the ab-
normal proliferation of lipocytes. Note the complete
loss of the normal lobular-septal anatomy of the
panniculus.
● IdIoPathIc MUcInOSIS
 Idiopathic mucinosis is rare in dogs and occurs alinost exclusively in the Chinese Shar pei
presenting to a veterinary teaching hospital) to 12.6% (in Shar peis presenting to a
diffuse and may vary from mild to severe. Gross deformity of a leg occurred in one
case.123
Clinically, mucinosis may be manifested as generalized, thickened, puffy, nonpitting
skin. Thickened folds are often most prominent over the face, neck, and limbs (Figs.
18-55A and see 18-32G). Severe focal mucinosis is usually associated with some degree
skin or as the only lesions (see Figs. 18-32H and 18-55B). When ruptured, these lesions
yield an acellular, clear, viscid, sticky, and stringy Huid (Fig. 18-55C). Affected dogs are
not pruritic, do not have clinically inffamed skin, and are otherwise healthy.
puppy.l19 The puppy had pruritic, crusted, papular, and plaquelike lesions on the head
and pinnae.
Idiopathic mucinosis occurs in young Chinese Shar peis that do not have pruritus or
clinically evident inflarnmation, Diagnosis is straightforward in such cases. A diagnosis may
 be supported by pricking or puncturing the skin with a hypodermic needle. Stringy, sticky,
which reveals marked diffuse dermal mucinosis and mild perivascular accumulations of
mast cells and eosinophils (Figs. 18-56 and 18-57). One study of Shar peis with idio-
Miscellaneous Skin Diseases · II75
FIGURE 18-54. Idiopathic diffuse lipomatosis.
Proliferation of often misshapen lipocytes.
pathic mucinosis and mucinous vesicles indicated that dilated, distorted lymphatics (factor
lymphatic changes are the cause or an effect of the condition is unknown. The mucinosis 
 of Shar peis results from the massive accumulation of hyaluronic acid and, to a lesser
extent, of chondroitins 4 and 6 sulfate and dermatan sulfate.121
Thirteen Shar peis with mucinosis and 13 normal dogs underwent cutaneous mast cell
density and mast cell subtype studies based on protease content127a In sections stained
with toluidine blue, normal dogs had a median mast cell density of 31.2/mm2, compared
with 9.1 mm? in Shar peis with mucinosis. The predominant mast cell subtype in normal
dogs was the tryptase-chymase-carboxypeptidase-cathepsin G subtype, whereas in Shar
 peis with mucinosis it was the chymase-carboxypeptidase subtype.
Chinese Shar peis also experience localized and generalized mucinosis in conjunction
 Some cases of idiopathic mucinosis in Chinese Shar peis spontaneously resolve, 01
defate, as the dogs age. Remarkable defation also follows the administration of glucocor-
 prednisone. Pentoxifylline, 10 mg/kq qSh, was effective in a case that had been glucocorti-
coid-responsive but required chronic therapy.
● Waterline disease of blacK labrador retrIevers
Waterline disease is a poorly understood condition of black Labrador retrievers of either
sex.4 5 Affected dogs present with severe pruritus, secondary seborrhea, and alopecia of
II76·Miscellaneous Skin Diseases
FIGURE I8-55. A, Idiopathic mucinosis of thc Chincsc Shar pei. Notc the remarkable thickening and folcding of the
skin. (Courtesy M. Paradis) B, Multiple mucin containing vesicles on a Chinese Shar pci. C, Note string of raucin
bctwcen the: fingcrtips that was expressed from a simall hypodcrmie ncedle puncturc.
    sn s   s    
disorder is poorly responsive to systemic glucocorticosteroids. Our recent cases of this
"syndrome,” whether in Labrador retrievers or other brecds, have involved Malasseziu
dermatitis and responded to ketoconazole administration (see Chap. 5). We seriously
doubt the existence of “waterline discasc.
Miscellaneous Skin Diseases · II77
FIGURE 18-56. Idiopathic muci-
nosis of the Chinese Shar pei. Dif-
fuse dermal mucinosis with' minimal
infammation.
● IdIoPaThIc PreaUrIcUlar ULceraTIve DErmaTItiS
OF CATS
A pruritic, unilatcral to bilateral, prcauricular ulcerative dermatitis was reported in a 3-
month-old kitten and two of its littermatcs. 128 The condition was unresponsive to glucocor-
ticoids, antihistamines, fatty acids, antibiotics, and hypoallergenic diets. Isotretinoin (10 mg
q24h orally) resulted in healing after 3 weeks. Further details were not given.
FIGURE 18-57. Idliopathic muci-
up of mucinosis and perivascular
mast cells.
II78 · Miscellaneous Skin Diseases
FIGURE 18-58. Waterline disease
in a black Labrador retriever. Note
rernarkably well demarcated alopecia
and deriatitis of the ventral aspect
of the body.
● IdIopathic ulcerative dermatitis of the upper lip
IN DOGS
A unique ulcerative dermatitis has bcen anecdotally reported in dogs. Well-demarcated
ulcers occur in the skin of the upper lip, below the nasal planum, and on the nasal
 philtrum of St. Bernards and Newfoundlands.12sa Topical application of 1% cyclosporine
was an effective treatment. Further details were not given.
● colloid milium
Colloid milium is a dermatosis in humans characterized by deposition of amorphous
material in the dermis.1, 129 It is classified into_adult colloid miliurm, juvenile colloid
milium, nodular colloid degeneration, and drug-induced colloid milium. The adult form is 
the most common and, although the pathogenesis is unclear, current opinion favors elastic
microfbrils as being the origin of the colloid. In humans, the lesions are discrete, translu-
cent papules to nodules with an irregular “lumpy" surface.129 Lesions are typically multiple
and occur on the face, neck, ears, and dorsal hands. A gelatinous material can often be
expressed after puncture of the lesions.
 Beagles. The dogs belonged to a group of Beagles, owned by a pharmaceutical company,
that were receiving an investigational drug. No details or clinical photographs were sup-
 plied. The lesions were described as multiple, asynptormatic nodules that oozed a gelati-
nous material when biopsied. The dogs were reported to be otherwise hcalthy, and
necropsy failed to reveal other abnormalities.
Histologically, colloid milium in humans and dogs is characterized by the deposition
of a homogeneous, pale-pink fissured substance within the derrnis (Fig. 18-59).129 Fibro-
blasts are present within the colloid, but no infammation is visible. The colloid stains 
 positive with periodic acid- Schiff before and after diastase digestion.
 In humans, dermabrasion and surgical excision are the only effective treatiments.1. 129
Miscellaneous Skin Diseases · II79
FIGURE I8-59. Collid milum in a dog. A, The denmis is flled with a hormogencous, pale depost (collid). B, Closc
up of A. The colloid is fssured in many arcas (arrow).
● IdIopathIc GreaSy Skin And haIrcoat WIth
SeBaCEoUS GLAND HYPErPLASIA
We have seen a small nrumber of dogs that have been presented for very greasy/oily skin
and haircoat. The anirmals were otherwise healthy, and the skin and haircoat were other-
wise unremarkable. The dogs represented several breeds and both sexes; their “greasy
 problem" was noted within the first year of life. Some of the dogs had an objectionable
odor as well.
 Physical examination revealed a very greasy skin and haircoat. In longer-coated dogs,
the haircoat was clurmped and matted with the excess grease (Fig. 18-60A). Skin scrap-
ings and direct smears of the greasy material were negative. Histologic examination
revealed remarkablc sebaceous gland hyperplasia (see Fig. 18 -60B). Otherwise, the skin
appeared histologically normal.
Various topical therapies -degreasing shampoos (benzoyl peroxide, selenium sulfide)
and rinses (vinegar and water) —were of transient (48 to 72 hours) benefit. Castration was
 of no benefit in two male dogs. It would have been interesting to try oral isotretinoin in
these cases, but the owners were dissuaded by the expense and possible side effects.
O SYSTEMIC PLASMACYTOSIS
Systemic plasmacytosis is rare in humans and is characterized by cutancous infltration of
 mature plasma cells, polyclonal hyperglobulinemia, superficial plasmacytic lymphadenopa-
1l80 · Miscellaneous Skin Diseases
FIGURE I8-60. ldiopathic greasy skin and hair coat with seba-
cecus gland hyperplasia in a dog. A, The hair coat is clumped and
matted with grease. B, Biopsy revcals hyperplastic sebaceus glans
in otherwise normal skin.
B
thy, and bone marrow plasmacytosis.130 The condition is unresponsive to therapy, and the
course is invariably chronic, but asymptomatic for years.
Systemic plasmacytosis was diagnosed in a 9-year-old Keeshond with waxing and
waning, ventral pitting edema and variable erythema 3o The dog also had abnormal claw
perivascular and periadnexal accumulation of mature plasma cells and a superficial leuko-
and
 melphalan was of no benefit. The condition remained unchanged over a 3-yoar period.
● REFERENCES
General References
-e aaneedu saaq unq tr pue ssop u sison
1. Freedberg IM, et al: Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in
pects. J Am Acad Dermatol 22:1023、 1990.
9. McKeever PJ, Dahl MV: A disease in dogs resem-
General Medicine, 5th ed. McGraw-Hill, Inc., New
bling human subcomeal pustular dermatosis. J Am
York, 1999.
2. Grifin CE, ct al: Currcnt Veterinary Dermatology.
Vet Med Assoc 170:704, 1977.
Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis, 1993.
10. Takata M, et al: Subcorneal pustular derimatosis asso-
3. Gross TL, et al: Vcterinary.
Dermatopathology.
ciated with IgA rnyeloma and intraepidermal IgA de-
Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis, 1992.
posits. Dermatology 189:111, 1994.
4. Muller GH, et al: Small Aninmal Dermatology, 4th ed.
Feline Plasma Cell Pododermatitis
W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1989.
 11. Canonge F, et al: Pododermatite lymphocytaire quad-
5. Scott Dw, et al: Muller and Kirk's Simall Aninal
ripodale chez un chat. Point Vet 29:753, 1998.
Dermatology, 5th ed. W.B. Sauntders Co.. Philadel-
12. Foil CS: Facial, pelal and other regional dermatoses.
phia, 1995.
Vet Clin North Am Simall Anin Pract 25:923, 1995.
Canine Subcorneal Pustular Dermatosis
13. Gisseleire Y: Preliminary results of a study of the
6. Clasper M: Successful use of gold in the treatment of
comparative effcacy of coricosteroids and chryso-
a case of camine sub-cormeal pustular dernatosis. N Z
therapy in the management of feline plasma cell po
Vet J 39:65, 1991.
dodermatitis. Proc Br Small Anim Vet Assoc 1994.
7. Groh Jl, et al: Role of tumor necrosis factor-α in
14. Guaguere E, et al: Feline pododermatitis. Vet Der-
 Sneddon-Wilkinson subcomeal pustular dermatosis.
matol 3:1, 1992.
J Am Acad Dermatol 25:944, 1991.
15. Nuttall T: What is your diagmosis? J Small Anim Pract
 8. Kalaher KM, Scott DW: Subcorneal pustular derma-
39:459, 1998.
Miscellaneous Skin Diseases * I18|
16. Scott Dw: Feline dermatology 1979-1982: lntrospec-
drome and eosinophilic leukemia: A comparison of 22
tive retrospections. J Ain Anim Hosp Assoc 20:537,
hypereosinophilic ^cats. J Am Anim Hlosp Assoc 30:
1984.
591,1996.
17. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1983-1985: "he se-
 38. Muir P, et al: llypereosinophilic syndrome in a cat.
cret sits." J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 23:255, 1987.
Vet Rec 132:358. 1993.
18. Simon M, ct al: Plasma cell pododcrmatitis in immu-
39. Neer TM: Hypereosinophilic syndrome in cats. Corp
nodeficiency virus-infected cats. Vet Pathol 30:477,
Cont Educ 13:549, 199i.
1993.
40. Saxon B, et al: Restrictive cardiomyopathy in a cat
19. Taylor JE, Schmeitzel LP: Plasma cell pododermatitis
with hypereosinophilic syndrome. Can Vet J 32:367,
with chronic footpad hemorrhage in two cats. J Am
1991.
Vet Med Assoc 197:375, 1990.
41. Scott DW, et al: Hypereosinophilic syndrome in a
19a. Yamamura Y, et al: A surgically treated case of feline
cat. Feline Pract 15:22, 1985.
:s oossy pn oa udf I sod s vusd
42.Weller PF: The idiopathic hypereosinophilic sym-
669, 1998.
drome. Arch Dermatol 132:583, 1996.
Lichenoid Dermatoses
Idiopathic Sterile Granuloma and Pyogranuloma
 20. Anderson Wl, et al: ldiopathic benign lichenoid kera-
43. Barnett SJ, et al: Challenging cases in intemal medi-
tosis on the pinna of the ear in four dogs. Cormell Vet.
cine: Wtat's your diagmosis? Vet Med 93:35, 1998.
79:179,89.
44. Houston DM, ct al: A case of cutaneous sterile pyo-
21. Bucrger RM, Scott DW: Lichenoid dermatiftis in a
granuloma/granuloma syndrome in a golden retriever.
cat: A case report. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 24:53,
Can Vet J 34:121, 1993.
1988.
-s ruead as e a 7 r 
22. Cill PA, Purvis-Simith G: Idiopathic lichenoid derma-
drome and cutancous histiocytosis in a dog: An inm-
tosis in a Doberman bitch. Aust Vet Practit 25:144,
munohistochemical report. Proc Annu Congr Eur Soc 
1995.
Vet Dermatol/Eur Coll Vct Dermatol 14:193, 1997.
23. Guaguere E, Mialot M: Dermatite lichenoide idio-
45a. Li N, et al: Identifcation of mycobacterial DNA in
pathigue chcz un Doberman. Prat Med Chir Anim
cutaneous lesions of sarcoidosis. J Cutan Pathol 26:
Comp 26:355, 1991.
271, 1999.
24, Scott DW: Lichenoid reactions in the skin of dogs:
46. Panich R, et al: Canine cutaneous sterile pyograrru-
Clinicopathologic correlations. J Am Anin Hosp As-
loma/granuloma syndrome: A retrospective analysis of
soc: 20:305, 1984.
29 cases (1976 to 1988). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27:
25. Scott DW: Lichenoid dermatoses in dogs and cats.
519, 1991.
In: Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy X.
47. Rothstein E, et al: Tetracycline and niacinamide for
W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1989, p 614.
the treatment of sterile pyograruloina/granuloma syn-
26. Scott DW: Idiopathic lichenoid dermatitis in a dog.
drome in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 33:540,
Canine Pract 11:22, 1984.
1997.
Canine Sterile Eosinophilic Pustulosis
48. Scott DW, et al: Idiopathic sterile granulomatous and
27. Berhis P, et al: Eosinophilic pustular folliculitis
pyogranulomatous dermatitis in cats. Vet Dermatol
(Ofuj's discasc): Effcacy of isotretinoin. Derimatolo-
1:129, 1990.
49. Scott DW, Noxon JO: Sterile sarcoidal granulomatous
gica 179:214, 1989.
28. Carlotti D, et al: La maladie d'Ofugi (pustulose 长osi-
slin disease in threc dogs. Canine Pract 15(3):1l,
nophilique sterile). Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 24:
1990.
131, 1989.
Granulormatous Sebaceous Adenitis
29. Craig JM: A case of sterile eosinophilic pustulosis ia
50. Carothers MA, et al.: Cyclosporine-responsive granulo-
dog. Vet Dermatol Newsl 15:11, 1993.
matous sebaceous adenitis in a dog. J Am Vet Med
30.Kimura K,et al: A case of eosinophilic pustular folic-
Assoc 198:1645. 1991.
ulitis (Ofuji's disease) induced by patch and challenge
 51. Dunstan RW, Hargis AM: The diagnosis of sebaceous
tests with indeloxazine hydrochloride. J Dermatol 23:
adenitis in standard poodle dogs. In: Bonagura JU
479, 1996.
(ed): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XII. W.B.
 31. Mohr C, et al: Eosinophilic pustular follieulitis: Sue-
Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1995.
  mn 
 52. Gross TL, et al: An anatomical classifcation of follc-
257, 1995.
uliis. Vet Dermatol 8:147, 1997.
32. Scott IDW: Sterile eosinophilic pustulosis in the dog.
53. Guaguere E, et al: Adenite sebacec granulornateuse:
J Am Anim Hosp Assoe 20:585, 1984.
A propos de trois cas. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 25:
 33. Scott DW: Sterile eosinophilic pustulosis in dog and
man: Comparative aspects. J Am Acad Dermatol 16:
169, 1990.
54. Guaguere E, et al: Granulomatous sehaceous adenitis
1022, 1987.
34, Scott DW, et al: Sterile cosinophile follculitis in the
in 7 Belgian sheepdogs. Proc Annu Congr Eur Soc
Vet Dermuatol Eur Coll Vet Dermatol 14:191, 1997.
cat: An unusual rnanifestation of feline allergic skin
54a. Guaguere E: Adenite sebacee granulomateuse chez
disease? Comp Anim Pract 19:6, 1989.
35. Thomsen MK, et al Impairment of neutrophil fune-
un Akita Inu. Prat Med Chir Anim Cornp 35:47,
tions in a dog with an eosinophilic dermatosis. Acta
2000.
Vet Scand 32:519, 1991.
 55. Martins C, et al: Sebaceous adenitis. J Am Acad Der-
matol 36:845, 1997.
Feline Hypereosinophilic Syndrome
 56. Power HT, Ihrke PJ: Synthetic retinoids in veterinary
 36. Harvey RG: Feline hypereosinophilia with .cutaneous
 derimatology. Vet Clin North Am Small Anirn Pract
lesions. J Small Anim Pract 31:453, 1990.
20:1525,1990.
37. Huibregtse BA, Turuer Jl.: Hypereosinophlic syn-
57. Power HT: Newly Tecognized feline skin diseases.
Il82 * Miscellaneous Skin Diseases
Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Ain
ous reaction pattern. Proc Ann Kal Kan Semin 2:11,
Coll Vet Dermatol 14:27, 1998.
1986.
58. Prost C: Adenite sebacee granulomateuse: Etude ret-
 S0. Song MD: Diagnosing and treating feline eosinophilic
rospective de 13 cas. Proc GEDAC 12:255, 1997.
granulomna complex. Vet Med 89:1141, 1994.
59. Renfro L, et al: Neutrophilic sebaceous adenitis. Arch
81. von Tscharner C, Bigler B: The eosinophilic granu-
Dermatol 129:910, 1993.
loma complex. J S1mall Anim Pract 30:228, 1989.
60. Rosser EJ Jr, et al: Sebaceous adenitis with hyperker-
Canine Eosinophilic Granuloma
atosis in' the standard poodle: A discussion of 10
82. Bredal WP, et al: Oral eosinophilic granuloma in
cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 23:341, 1987.
three Cavalier King Charles spaniels. J Small Anim
6l. Rybnicek J, et al: Sebaceous adenitis: An inmumohis-
Pract 37:499, 1996.
tocheimical examination. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds):
83. Brovida D, Castagnaro M: Tracheal obstruction due
Advances in Veterinary Dermatology Il. Butter-
-jenn jeoing op r u euonis oudouisos ue o
worth-Heinemann, Boston, 1998. p 539.
62. Scott DW: Granulomatous sebaceous adenitis in dogs.
ment and clinicopathological observations. J Am Anim
HHosp Assoc 28:8, 1992.
J Am Aninn Hosp Assoc 22:631, 1986.
84. da Silva Curiel JM, et al: Eosinophilic gramuloma of
63. Scott 1W: Adenite sebacee pyogranulomateuse steile
the nasal skin in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 193:566,
chez un chat. Point Vet 21:107, 1989.
1988.
64. Scott DW: Sterile granulomatous sebaceous adenitis
85. Fontaine J, et al: Deux cas de granulomes eosinophi-
in dogs and cats. Vet Ann 33:236, 1993.
64a. Stenn KS, Sundberg JP: Hair folicle biology, the
liques oraux chez un Husky Siberien et un Malamute.
Ann Med Vet 134:223, 1990.
sebaceous gland, and scarring alopccia. Arch Derima-
 86. Norris JM: Cutaneous eosinophilic granuloma in a
tol 135:973, 1999.
65. Stewart LJ, et al: Isotretinoin in the treatment of
crossbred dog: A case report and literature review.
Aust Vet Practit 24:74, 1995.
sebaccous adenitis in two Vizslas. J Am Anim Hosp
87. Poulet FM, et al: Focal proliferativc cosinophilic der-
Assoc 27:65, 1991.
 sho    r r o yo s
66. White SD, et al: Sebaceous adenitis in dogs and re-
Pathol 28:171, 1991.
sults of treatment with isotretinoin and etretinate: 30
 88. Scott DW: Cutancous eosinophilic granulomas with
cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:197, 1995.
collagen degeneration in the dog. J Am Anin Hosp
Localized Scleroderma
Assoc 19:529, 1983.
67. Bensignior E, et al: Morphea-like lesion in a cat.
 89. van Duijn HE: Dric gevallen van een oraal eosinofiel
J Small Anim Hosp 39:538, 1998.
 granuloom bij Siberische huskies. Tijdschr Dierge-
68. Bourdeau P, et al: Observation d'un cas de scleroder-
neesk 120:712, 1995.
mie localisée (morphée) chez un chien. Rev Med Vét
Eosinophilic Dermatitis and Edema in Dogs
167:1121, 1990.
 89a. Holm KS, et al: Eosinophilie cermatitis with edema
69. Samlaska CP, Winfield EA: Pentoxifylline. J Am Acad
in nine dogs, compared with eosinophilic cellulitis in
Dermatol 30:603, 1994.
humans. J Ain Vet Med Assoc 215:649, 1999.
70. Scott Dw: Localized scleroderma (morphea) in tvo
dogs. J Am Anim Ilosp Assoc 22:207, 1986.
Panniculitis
 90. Adame J, Cohen PR: Eosinophilic panniculitis: IDiag-
Feline Eosinophilic Granuloma Complex
71. ODair H, et al: An open prospcctive investigation
nostic considerations and evaluation. J Am Acad Der-
Imatol 34:229,1996.
into aetiology in a group of cats with suspected aller-
91. Aoki S, et al: Nodular nonsuppurative panniculiis in
gic skin disease. Vet Dermatol 7:193, 1996.
72. Mason KV, Evans AG: Mosquito bite-caused eosino-
a dog. J Jpn Vet Med Assoc 41:659, 1988.
 92. Brown PJ, et al: Multifocal necrotizing steatitis assuci-
philic dermatitis in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 198:
ated with pancreatic carcinoma in three dogs. J Small
2086, 1991.
Anim Pract 35:129, 1994.
73. Moriello KA, et al: Iack of autologous tissue trans-
92a. Campbell KL, et al: Cutaneous markers of hepatic
mission of eosinophilic plaques in cats. Am J Vet Res
and pancreatic diseases in dogs and cats. Vet Med 95:
51:995, 1990.
306,2000.
74. Moriello KA: Diseases of the skin. In: Sherding RG
93. Dalhl PR, et al: Pancreatic pannicultis. J Am Acad
(ed): The Cat: Diseases and Clinical Managenent II,
Dermatol 33:413, 1995.
Vol 11.
ChurchllLivingstone, New York, 1994,
94. DeManuelle TC, Stannard AA: Difficult dermiatologic
p 1907.
diagnosis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 213:356, 1998.
75. Paulsen ME, et al: Feline eosinophilie keratitis: A
95. Guaguere E, et al: Panniculite nodulaire stenile chez
review of 15 clinical cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
le chien: A propos de trois cas. Rev Med Vet 164:
23:63, 1987.
195, 1988.
76. Pentlarge VW: Eosinophilic conjunctivitis in five cats.
96. Hendrick MJ, Dunagan CA: Focal necrotizing granu-
J Am Anim Hosp Assoe 27:21, 1991.
77. Power HT: Eosinophilic granuloma in a family of
jcction of rabies vaccine in cats and dogs: 10 cases
specifc pathogen-free cats. Proc Annu Memb Meet
(1988- 1989). J Am Vet Med Assoc 198:304, 1991.
Am Acad Vet Derrmatol/Am Coll Vet Dermatol 6:45.
97. Hughes D, et al: Serum α-antitrypsin concentration
1990.
in dogs with panniculitis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 209:
78. Prost C: Diagnosis of feline allergic liseases: A study
1582, 1996.
of 90 cats. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in
 98. Patterson S: Sterile idiopathic pedal panmiculitis in
Veterinary Dermatology Ill. Butterworth-Heinemann, 
the Gerrman shepherd dog-clinical presentation and
Boston, 1998, p 516.
responsc to treatment of four cases. J Small Anim
79. Scott DW, et al: Miliary dermatitis: A feline cutane-
Pract 36:498, 1995.
Miscellaneous Skin Diseases * Il83
99. Patterson S: Panniculitis associated with pancreatie
Idiopathic Diffuse Lipomatosis
necrosis in a dog. J Small Anim Pract 35:116, 1994.
117. Gilbert PA, et al: Diffuse truncal lipomatosis in a dog.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26:586, 1990
ated with pancreatitis in a cat. Feline Pract 11:31,
1981.
Idiopathic Acquired Cutaneous Laxity
101. Scott DW, Anderson WI: Panniculitis in dogs and
118. Pieraggi MT, et al: An unusual dermal collagen disor-
cats: A retrospective analysis of 78 cases. J Am Anin
der ina dog. J Comp Pathol 96:289, 1986.
Hosp Assoc 24:55l, 1988.
Idiopathic Mucinosis
102. Shihayta K, et al: Idiopathic nodular pannicuitis with
119. Beale KM, et al: Papular and plaque-lke mucinosis in
systemic signs in a dog. Jpn J Vet Dermatol 5:10,
a puppy. Vet Dermatol 2:29, 1991.
1999.
103. Stanley RC, Jabara AG: Chronic skin reaction to a
120. Bomhard DV, Kraft W: Idiopathische Mucinosis Cu-
tis bein Chinesichen Shar Pei: Epidemiologie, klin-
combined feline rhinotracheitis virus (herpesvirus)
isches Bild, histopathologische Befunde und Behan-
and calicivirus vaccine. Aust Vet J 65:128, 1988.
dlung. Tierarztl Praxis 26:189, 1998.
Subcutaneous Fat Sclerosis
121. Delverdier M, et al: Les mucinoses cutanees du chicn 
104. Buerger RG, et al: Subcutaneous fat sclerosis in a cat.
et du chat: Etude histologique et histochimique a
Comp Cont Edue 9:1198, 1987.
partir de 106 cas. Rev Med Vet 146:333, 1995.
Canine Juvenile Celulitis
122.
Griffin CF, Rosenkrantz WS: Skin disorders of the
105. Barta O, Oyekan PP: Lymphocyte transformation test
Shar Pei. In: Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (eds): Kirks
in veterinary clinical immunology. Comp Immunol
Microbiol Infect Dis 4:209, 1981.
adelphia, 1992, p 519.
106. Jeffers JG, et al: A dermatosis resembling juvenile
122a. Lopez A, et al: Cutaneous mucinosis and mastocyto-
cellulitis in an adult dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31:
sis in a shar-pei. Can Vet J 40:881, 1999.
123. Madewell BR, et al: Cutaneous mastocytosis and mu-
204, 1995.
107. Mason IS, Jones J: Juvenile cellulitis in Gordon set-
cinosis with gross deformity in a shar pei dog. Vet
ters. Vet Rec 124:642, 1989.
Dermatol 3:171, 1992.
108. Reimann KA, et al: Clinicopathologic characteristics
124. Mauidin EA, et al: More than mucin? Proc Annu
of canine juvenile cellulitis. Vet Pathol 26:499, 1989.
Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet
109. White SD, et al: Juvenile cellulitis in dogs: 15 cases
Dermatol 14:67, 1998.
(1979-1988). J Am Vet Med Assoc 195:1609, 1989.
 125. Miller WH, et al: Dermatologic disorders of Chinese
Feline Uicerative Dermatitis With Linear
Shar Peis: 58 cases (1981-i989). J Am Vet Med
Assoc 200:986, 1992.
Subepidermal Fibrosis
126. Rosenkrantz WS, et al: Idiopathic mucinosis in a dog.
110. Scott DW: An unusual ulcerative derrnatitis associated
Comp Anim Pract 1:39, 1987.
with linear subepidermal fibrosis in cight cats. Feline
127. Schafer H, Spieth K: Fallbericht: Idiopathische Muzi-
Pract 18(3):8, 1990.
       
 Perforating Dermatitis
127a. Welle M, et al: Mast cell numbers and subtypes in
111. Haugh PG, Swendrowski MA: Perforating dermatitis
the skin of Shar Peis with cutaneous mucinosis. Proc
exacerbated by pruritus. Feline Pract 23(6):8, 1995.
Annu Congr Eur Soc Vet Dermatol Eur Coll Vet
112. Scott Dw, Miller WH Jr: An unusual perforating
Dermatol 14:179, 1997.
dermatitis in a Siamese cat. Vet Dermatol 2:173,
Idiopathic Preauricular Ulcerative Dermatitis of Cats
1991.
128. Breen PT, Jeromin AM: A case of feline idiopathic
Feline Acquired Skin Fragility
ulcerative dermatosis responding to isotretinoin. Der-
113. Diquelou A, et al: Lipoidose hepatique et syndrome
matol Dialogne, Spring/Summer, 1993, p 6.
        
Idiopathic Ulcerative Dermatitis of the Upper Lip in
Anin Comp 26:151, 1991.
Dogs
114. Femandez CJ, et al: Staining abnormalities of dermal
collagen in cats with cutaneous asthenia or acquired
128a. Hosenbaum M: Cyclosporine. Derm Dialogue, Sum-
skin fragility as demonstrated with Masson's tri-
mer: 1999.
chrome stain. Vet Dermatol 9:49, 1998.
Colloid Milium
115. Regnier A, Pieraggi MT: Abnormal skin fragility in a
129. Touart DM, Sau P: Cutaneous deposition discases:
cat with a cholangiocarcinoma. J Samall Anim Pract
Part I. J Am Acad Dermatol 39:149, 1998.
30:419, 1989.
116. Zur G: Feline skin fragility syndrome in a cat with
 Systemic Plasmacytosis
hepatic lipidosis. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Ad-
vances in Veterinary Derrmatology II1. Butterworth-
clonal ganmmopathy in a dog. J Vet Interm Med 12:
Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p 495.
471, 1998.
Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal
Sacs, and Ears
· EYELId DISEASES
The eyelids are complex folds of skin that are susceptible to many structural and func-
tional'disorders. This discussion is limited to diseases that affect eyelids and not thc
eyeball, the conjunctiva, and the third eyelid, which are purely in the realm of the
ophthalmologist.
Anatomy
Canine and feline eyelids consist of an upper eyelid, a lower eyelid, a row of cilia in the
upper lid only, and a number of glands. Meibomian glands (tarsal glands) are modified,
large sebaceous gland units that produce a viscous, oily secretion. Zeis' glands are seba-
ceous glands associated with cilia. Mol's glands are modified epitrichial sweat glands
associated with cilia. In addition, accessory lacrimal glands in the eyelids discharge tears
into the conjunctival sac and contribute to the precorneal film. The largest of these in the
dog is the superficial gland of the membrana nictitans, also known (erroneously) as the
Harder gland (or harderian gland).
The bacterial and fungal fora of the eyelids of normal dogs has been studied.1l 14 The
bacteria most commonly isolated include Staphylococcus intermedius, coagulase-negative
staphylococi, and Corynebacterium spp. These are sinilar to the bacteria found on
normal canine skin in many other locations (see Chap. l). However, fungi were rarely
isolated from eyelids, whereas they are commonly isolated fron other areas of the skin.
Diseases
Because of the thin and delicate nature of the skin on the eyelid, its loosely attached
subcutis, and the presence of a mucocutaneous junction at the eyelid margin, the eyelid
and periocular area demonstrate exaggerated responses to numerous dermatologic condi.
tions.13 Because a normal eyelid margin is necessary for maintenance of tear film and
discomfort and discharge. In addition, eyelid disease may result in abnormal tear composi-
tion, which may result in qualitative tear flm disease.18 This inay lead to keratoconjuncti-
vitis and corneal ulccrs. These signs can be the primary reason that the owner seeks
veterinary care.
BLEPHARITIS
 Inflammation of the eyelid is termed blepharitis.6 7 Often, a mucous discharge is apparent.
Many dermatoses may cause blepharitis or may be limited to the lids (Table 19-1)2. 5
 Some of these diseases are more likely to present with blepharitis only. In young dogs,
localized Demodex infestation may appear on the lids (Fig. 19- 1A). Usually, only one eye
and only part of the eyelid are involved. Alopecia with mininal inflammation may be seen.
but is usually diffuse. Every year, the authors see a nunber of cases referred from
1185
II86 * Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears
● Table 19-1
DISEASE LIMITED TO OR THAT MAY FIRST
PRESENT AS EYELID OR PERIOCULAR
DERMATOSES
.......
Demodicosis
Self-trauma resulting from ocular disease
Dermatophytosis
Lupus erythematosus
Malassezia dermatitis
Vitiligo
Bacterial folliculitis
Periocular leukotrichia (especially in Siarmese cats)
Atupy
Solar derrmatitis
Food hypersensitivity
Distemper
Zinc-responsive dermatosis
 Topical steroid alopecia
Juvenile cellulitis
Drug eruption
Idiopathic periocular alopecia
ophthalmnologists because of chronic conjunctivitis and blepharitis due to atopy and, less
commonly, food hypersensitivity. Varying combinations of blepharitis with periocular alo-
pecia, hyperpigmentation, and lichenification may result from chronic pruritus. Although
other symptoms may be found on close examination, they often go unrecognized by the
owmler.
 An idiopathic periocular crusting, occasionally associated with Malassezia or feline
acne, may be seen in cats, particularly Persians.21 Idiopathic facial dermatitis has been
described in primarily Persian cats and is characterized by scale and crust, and is often
periocular (see Chap. 12).4 Idiopathic seborrhea and bacterial folliculitis in dogs, and
dermatophytosis in dogs and cats (see Fig. 19-1B to D) may also cause scaling and
and often involve the eyelids (see Fig. 19- 1E to G). Other diseases are known for their
 periocular distribution, although they are not limited to that area (see Fig. 19-1H) (Table
19-2).2
An idiopathic chronic ulcerative blepharitis, localized to the medial canthal region, has
been described in Dachshunds, German shepherds, and Poudles.1 Biopsy reveals a diffuse
lymphoplasmacytic dermatitis. Response to topical or systemic glucocorticoids is excellent,
but therapy must often be maintained for life.
Ulcers and nodules were seen on the eyelids of a dog with neosporosis.7 A prolifera-
tive mass at the lateral canthus was described in a malamute that was histologically a
pyogranuloma associated with Onchocerca sp."
ENTROPION AND ECTROPION
 Entropion (inversion, or turning in) and ectropion (eversion, or turning out) of the lid
margins are best corrected by surgery. Chronic conjunctivitis or other diseases of the eye
that may result in distortion of the lids should also receive attention.
HORDEOLUM (STYE)
This is an acute, painful pyogenic infection of a sebaceous gland of the eyelid. Two types
are recognized. The external hordeolum (zeisian stye) involves the glands of Zeis and the
cilia on the outer eyelid. The internal hordeolum (meibomian stye) involves the meibom-
ian gland in the inner surface of the eyelid. The internal type is the most common
hordeolum in dogs. Treatment consists of incising the abscess and applying an antibiotic
 ointment. Appropriate systemic antibiotics are useful when the hordeolum is caused by
staphylococci.
CHALAZION
A chronic infammation of a meibomian gland, a chalazion appears externally on the skin
surface of the lid as a painless nodule and internally on the palpebral conjunetiva as a
yellow, smaller nodule. The irritation from the inner swelling causes conjunctivitis. Treat-
Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears · II87
dog with uveodermatologic syndrome. H, Severe blepharitis in a cat with hypereosinophilic syndrome.
I188 · Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears
●Table 19-2
DIseases that affect the eyelid Or
PerIocular Area In AddItIOn to other
SITES
Pemphigus foliaceus
Solar dermatitis
Pemphigus erythematosus
Vitiligo
Systermic lupus erythematosus
1Hypereosinophilic syndrome
Discoid lupus erytheimatosus
Drug eruption
Uveodermatologic syucdrome
Ieishmaniasis
Canine familial dermatomyositis
Vascuilitis
Canine necrolytie migratory erythema
Pemphigus vulgaris
Erythema multiforme
Bullous pemphigoid
 ment consists of incision and curettage of accumulated sebaceous material. Large chalazia
may be excised completely to prevent recurrence.
TRICHIASIS
This disorder is an abnormal position or direction of the cilia, resulting in epiphora,
 mucous ocular discharge, and sometimes corneal vascularization and even corneal ulcer-
 ation. Treatment consists of meticulous electroepilation of the involved cilia.
DISTICHIASIS
Animals with distichiasis display aberrant cilia on the lid. They may emerge from the
 openings of the meibomian glands or the inner lid margin. Electroepilation is the treat-
ment of choice. Distichiasis has heen reported in Poodles, Boxers, Pekingese, German
 shepherds, Cocker spaniels, Shetland sheepdogs, and Bedlington and Yorkshire terriers, as
well as in the Shih tzu, Pug, and St. Bernard.-17
EPIPHORA
Epiphora is common in Poodles (Fig. 19-2A). The cause may be atresia, blockage of the
 nasal lacrimal system, or lid or membrana nictitans deformities.? Surgical correction of the
lid problem or deepening of the lacrimal lake frequently permits improved function of the
should also be implemented. In some cases of white dogs, the chief complaint is the
 brown staining that may represent oxidized tears on the hair. Besides white Poodles, this
is a problem in Maltese and Bichon frise. Bacteria may play a role because the adminis-
tration of tetracycline or other antibiotics deerease the brown staining in some cases. In
others, treatment with topical ointment blocks the chronic wetting or reaction of the tears
staining of hairs.
TUMORS OF THE EYELIDS
These tunors are difficult to manage because of the problems with plastic repair after
surgery, or with protection of the globe if radiation therapy is contemplated. In dogs,
papillomas, sebaceous gland tumors, and melanocytic neoplasms are the most common
(see Fig, 19-2B) (see Chap. 20). Basal cell tumors, mast cell tumors (see Fig. 19-2C),
 and epitheliotropic lymphoma (see Fig. 19-2D) are also found. A metastatic ocular tunnor
that was believed to arise from a primary eyelid epitrichial sweat gland tumor has been
reported 12 In cats, squamous cel carcinoma is, by far, the most common.18 A histiocy-
toma of the eyelid of a l0-month-old Afghan that regressed spontaneously has been
reported in the eyelid.s. 20 In one case, the sterile pyogranuloma or granuloma was
 responsive to tetracycline and niacinamide therapy.20
Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears * I I89
  s  sd  o si  r      sii 
staining of the wct hair. (This phenomenon is seen anywhere that white hair is constantly wet.) B, Verrucous
the upper eyelid of a cat. (Courtesy M. Paradis) D, Epitheliotropic lymphoma. Depigmentation and erytherma-
Onychornycosis in a dog caused by Trichophyton mentagrophytes. Claws are grossly deformcd, and there is
claws in a dog with Malassezia paronychia.
II90 · Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears
● Table 19--3
 NEOPLaStIC CONDItIOnS ThAT MAY AFfECT
The eyelid or perlocular area
Squamous cell carcinoma
Lymphoma
Actinic keratosis
Epitheliotropic lymphoma
Melanocytoma and melanoma
Papilloma
Sebaceous gland tumors
Mastocytoma
Fibrous histiocytoma
Histiocytoma
Dermoid
 In older dogs, eyelid tumors are common (Table 19-3).2 These can be adenomas and
adenocarcinomas of Zeis’ and Moll's glands, as well as meibomian gland tumors. For
treatment, surgical removal is indicated when the tumor is on the palpebral junction and
touches the cornea. This can be accomplished by surgical excision, electrosurgery, or
ation) must be removed. It is important to remove the entire tumor; otherwise, it regrows.
V-shaped incision exposes the entire tumor for removal and can be closed with one or
two sutures. Animals with massive eyelid tumors that require removal of a large section of
lid should be referred to an ophthalmologist, because correct plastic repair is necessary for
 proper lid function.
● Claw diseaSEs
 Claws mnay be affected by many of the diseases described in this text. However, dogs and
cats presenting with claw disorders as the only dermatologic manifestation of disease are
rarely encountered. Such dogs and cats accounted for approximately 1.3% and 2.2%,
 respectively, of all dogs and cats examined for dermatologic disease at one university
teaching hospital.35. 36
 Claws and their disorders have received litle attention in yeterinary medicine.34-36
Reviews on canine and feline claw diseases have been published.35, 36 The most commonly
reported types of claw diseases are asymmetric and result from known or presumed
trauma with or without secondary bacterial infection and onychodystrophy. The normal
microanatomy of the canine claw has been studied,31 but no in-depth microanatomic shudy
 of claw disorders has been published. Further work is warranted, because chronic claw
diseases are debilitating for affected animals and frustrating for both veterinarians and
OWners.
Anatomy
The claw is a specialized structure that is a direct continuation of the dermis and
epidermis (Fig. 19-3A).31, 36 The distal phalanx of each toe has a crescent-shaped dorsal
extends distally from, this bony process as the periosteum of the phalanx. It has a rich
blood supply, which is the source of the profuse hemorrhage if the claw is trimmed too
short. The structures constituting the claw are compressed laterally and may be divided
into the coronary band, the ventral sole, and the lateral and medial walls. Most of the
claw is formed from the coronary band and the dorsal ridge. In many areas, the dermis
has fine papillae that project distally and interdigitate with soft epidermal lamellae.
The epidermis of adjacent skin is also continuous with that of the claw. The basal
layer of the epidermis, supported by the dermis, is most active in the coronary band and
dorsal ridge areas and causes growth in a circular fashion, prodncing a curved claw. This
is why the claw may grow around into the volar surface of the footpad. The horny walls
 grow over the sole of the claw for the same reason. During the first 2 years of life, the
FIGURE I9=3. A, Midsagital section through the claw of the dog: a, straturm corneum of the epidernis of the claw,
a', straturm cormeum of the epidennis of the sole; b,b', deep, noncormifed epidermal layers of the dorsum and sole of
  aos a sdas mon u p pn mo p s  po tae au u pd mo  tm 
digital pad; e, skin with hair and glands; f, epidermis of the digital pad with stratum granulosum and lucidum; g, tubular
Fundamentals of the Histology of IDomestic Animals. Copyright I952 by Cornell University. Heprinted by permission of
Cornell University Press.) B, Onychocryptosis with the claw growing back into the pad. C, Onychomalacia with the claws
soft and growing in the wrong direction. D, Onychorrhexis with longitudinal striations that have split the claw open, and
another digit with onychornadesis, the slonghing of a claw. E Onychogryphosis in a cat with hyperthyroidism.
Figurecontinuedonfollowingpage
1192 · Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears
FIGURE I9-3 Continued. F, Onychoschizia with splitting and lamination, longitudinal striations, and
breaking of the claw. G, Onychodystrophy, abnormal claw formation, may be seen following trauma,
snch as in dlogs that regrow dystrophic claws follwing onychomadesis, or in dogs with no known
claws of beagles grow an average of 1.9 mm per week, but this rate declines with age.
Rates of growth as slow as 0.8 mm per week have been reported.21. 36
The epidermis of the claw sole has distinct granular and clear layers, as well as the
usual structures. However, the epidermis of the rest of the claw is largely composed of a
thick horny layer that consists of fat cornified epidermal cells fused into a horny plate,
with an absent stratum granulosum. On the ventral surface, the claw is separated from the
footpad by a distinct furrow. The sole is relatively soft and is compressible. A fold of
 modified skin hides the dorsal junction of hairy skin and claw. This claw fold is free from
hair on its inner surface and produces the thin stratum tectorium that is the outer layer of
the proximal claw.
The claws of animals have important functions as prehensile, locomotor, and offensive
and normal locomotion. Abnormal claws predispose the feet to trauma, strains, and
pododermatitis. Because of the long growth cycle, the correction of abnormalities may
necessitate 6 to 8 months of treatment.
A study on the microanatomy of the normal canine claw revealed that numerous
 intranuclear vacuoles are present in the keratinocytes of the stratun basale and stratum
spinosum.3l Additionally, focal areas of subepidermal clefting were frequently seen. An
evaluation of normal cat claws has shown a variety of artifacts.37 Clefts were seen at
  sna os  ro se r se  ia
and apoptotic keratinocytes (2 to 3 per high-power field [HPF] in dorsal and ventral
matrices) were seen. It was suggested that the intracytoplasmic vacuoles may be an
artifact of occlusion, as had been previously suggested in the human literature. These
findings must be kept in mind when considering the diagnosis of inflammatory and
interface dermatoses, and dystrophies of the claw.
Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears · II93
Certain terms are used specifically when describing claw abnormalities (Table 19-4;
see Figs. 19-3B to G),36 Many of these abnorrmalities may be seen together in the same
claw or in different claws of the same animal. Some conditions have litle diagnostic
specificity, although others may. For example, leukonychia with no other abnormalities is
suggestive of vitigo. Other changes that may affct claws include crusting or excessive
keratinous, waxy deposits on the claws, staining of the claws (often to a brown or red
color), and an abnormally rapid growth rate. Infammation of the claw fold and distal digit
(paronychia) often leads to an abnormally rapid growth rate, which, in some cases, is
associated with onychogryphosis. Extension of all the claws and difficulty jumping to
elevated surfaces was reported in a cat with polycythemia vera.26 Varying degrees of
lameness, pain on touch or palpation, pruritus, and regional lymphadenopathy may be
present.
Because nomenclature has not been rigorously followed when various claw disorders
 have been reported, there is much confusing and relatively unuseful information in the
literature. For instance, onychodystrophy is a common sequelue of many claw disorders
(e.g, bacterial and fungal infections, autoimmune diseases, vasculitides, and "idiopathic"
onychomadesis). It may be more useful to focus on the earliest signs of disease. For
instance, dogs with symmetric lupoid onychodystrophy begin with onychomadesis, and
usually respond to omega-6 or omega-3 fatty acids or tetracycline and niacinamide. How-
 ever, dogs that develop onychodystrophy as a result of initial onycholysis do not respond
to these medications.
Diseases
A wide variety of diseases were shown to be associated with claw diseases in dogs (Table
19-5) and cats (Table 19-6). In addition, icdiopathic onychomadesis, food hypersensitivity,
 drug eruption, vaccination reaction, zinc-responsive dermatosis, and linear epidermal ne.
vus have been described as causes of claw disease.24, 28, 37
TRAUMA
Trauma is the most common cause of claw disease seen in dogs and the second most
common in cats.35, 3 Usually, the trauma is physical, although chemical trauma due to
● Table 19-4  TERMINOLOGY FOr CLAW DiSOrDERs
··.....·.........
Anonychia
Absence of claws (usually congenital)
Brachyonychia
Short claws
Leukonychta
Whitening of claws
Macronychia
Unusually large claws
Micronychia
Unusually small claws, Often shorter or narrower than normal
Onychalgia
Claw pain
Onyehauxis (hyperonychia)
Simple hypertrophy of claws
Onychia (onychitis)
Inflammation somewhere in the claw unil
Onychoeryptosis (onyxis)
Ingrowm claw
Onychodystrophy
Abnormal claw formation
Onychogryphosis (onychogryposis)
Hypertrophy and abnormal curvatre of claws
Onycholysis
Separation of claw structure at distal attachment and progressing
proximally
Onychormadesis (onychoptosis)
Sloughing of claws
Onychomalacia (hapalonychia)
Softening of claws
Onychomyeosis
Fungal infection of claws
Onychopathy (onychiosis)
Disease or abnormality of claws
Onychorrhexis
Onychoschizia (onychoschisis)
 Splitting or lamination of claws, usually beginning distally
Pachyonychia
Thickening of claws
Paronychia (perionychia)
Infammation or infection of claw folds
Platonychia
Increased curvaturc of claws in long axis
Modified from Leider M, Rosenhlum M: A Dictionary of Dermatologic Words, Termns, and Phrases. MeGraw-Hil Book Co, New
York, 1968.
1I94 · Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears
● Table 19-5
CAUSES OF CLAW DISORDERS IN I96 DOGS
DIAGNOSIS
NUMBER OF CASES
Bacterial paronychia scecondary to broken or tor claw
49
Bacterial paronychia,one paw, idiopathie
13
Bacterprychiaouawsnlaryththd
2
Bacterial paronychia, front paws, secondary to atopy
1
Bacterial paronychia, four paws, recurrent, idiopathic
4
Broken or tom claw
44
Neoplasia
24
Demodicosis
3
Derimatophytosis (Trichophyton mentagrophytes)
3
Candidliasis secondary to diabetes mellitus
1
Blastomycosis
1
Geotrichosis
1
Cryptococcosis
1
Symmetric lupoid onychodystrophy
7
Pemphigus foliacens
2
Pemphigus vulgaris
2
Bullous pemphigoid
Epidermolysis bullosa
1
Onychodystroply, idiopathic
18
Onychodystrophy or onychoschizia secondary to seborrhea
4
Onychodystrophy or onychorrhexis, idiopathic
6
Onychomadesis, four paws, with atrial fibrillation
From Scott Dw, Miller Wll Jr: Disorders of the claw and clawbed in dogs. Comp Cont Educ 14:1448, 1992.
substances such as fertilizers may occur. Trauma most commonly affects one or just a few
claws (asymmetric claw disease). Occasionally, all four paws have multiple claws affected
(symmetric claw disease), owing to trauma such as that induced by excessive running on
hard (asphalt, concrete) surfaces and gravel. The resulting embedment of debris in the
distal ends of the claws may cause secondary bacterial infections. Clipping too closely can
 also lead to injury from embedded debris or predispose the claws to secondary infections.
  q s     os e  o  s ps
quick and inay affect multiple claws in cases in which many are intentionally cut back.
● Tahle 19-6
CaUSEs oF Claw disorDErs in 65 cats
DIAGNOSIS
NUMBER OF CASES
Onychodystrophy (idiopathie)
87
Bacterial paronychia secondary to broken or torn claws
9
Broken or torn claws
8
Bacterial paronychia secondary to feline leukemia virus infection
Pemphigus foliaceus
Bacterial paronychia (recurrent, idiopathic)
2
Squamous cell carcinoma
2
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Bacterial paronychia secondary to acquired arteriovenous fstula
√
Bacterial paronychia secondary to diabetes mellitus
Bacterial paronychia secondary to iatrogenic Cushing's syndrome
Dermatophytosis from Micrasporurn canis
Cryptococcosis
Sporotrichosis
Eosinophilic plaque (atopy, presumptive)
[lemangiosarcoma
Metastatic bronchogenie carcinoina
From Seott DW, Millr WH Jr: Disorders of the claw and elawbed in cats. Comp Cont Edue 14:449, 1992.
 Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears ● I195
INFECTIONS
 Infectious causes of claw diseases are also coinmon. Bacteria are most often incriminated,
 and bacterial infections should always be considered secondary (see Fig. 19-2E). A search
four paws are involved, are likely and a guarded prognosis should be given. Trauma is the
most common underlying cause. However, hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism, diabetes
melltus atpy, muemdiated iseases, arerivenous slae, thr infetious agent,
and dystrophy may be responsible (see Fig. 19-2F). Onychodystrophy and other diseases
that scar and permanently damage the coronary band may result in defective claw growth
that predisposes the animal to onychorrhexis and onychoschizia. These sites may break
 preferred source of specimens for cytologic examination or culture and susceptibility
testing.
 Fungal infections, which are referred to as onychomycosis, may also occur (see Fig.
19-2G). Dermatophytosis, particularly Trichophyton infection in the dog. blastormycosis,
cryptococcosis, geotrichosis, and sporotrichosis have all been reported, although rarely.
Lesions are not usually confined to the claws. Dermatophytes invade the claw keratin and,
therefore, are usually associated with onychomalacia. Claws may be brittle and easily
broken or powdered. Malassezia infection may affect only the claws.29 Generally, these
cases have mild paronychia with a brown, dry to slightly moist claw fold exudate that
 e    r s     n se
these are atopic dogs, and the paw pruritus, due to Malassezia infection, may be the only
symptom after successful control of the atopic disease.30
Parasites may also result in claw diseases. Demodicosis may be accompanied by a
paronychia that stimulates abnormal claw growth. Ascaris infection, hookworm dermatitis,
 and leishmaniasis have been reported causes of claw disease. Leishmaniasis is most com-
 growth, onychogryphosis, and onychodystrophy.
IMMUNE-MEDIATED DISEASES
 Immune-mediated diseases often involve the claw fold, resulting in paronychia. In some
cases, other claw changes, especially onychomadesis, may occur, and less commonly, only
claw disease is seen. Symmetric lupoid onychodystrophy appears to be the most common
immune-mediated disease to cause abnornal claws (Fig. 19-4A),34-36 When claw disease
alone is seen, symmetric lupoid onychodystrophy, lupus erythematosus, bullous pemphi-
goid, and pemphigus vulgaris are the most likely immune-mediated causes. With paro-
nychia or footpad involvement, pemphigus foliaceus is most likely the underlying condition
in both the dog and the cat (see Fig. 19-4B). Cryoglobulinemia, drug reaction, and
tions may induce sudden onset of onycholysis or onychomadesis, possibly due to vasculi-
occlusion or ischemia may also result in claw abnormalities.
A form of vascular disease similar to Raynaud's disease in humans was recently
described (see Fig. 19-4C).2 Carloti reported three middle-aged female dogs with this
condition. The dogs developed onychalgia, onychogryphosis, and intermittent acrocyanosis
of multiple digits and paws. Long-terrn therapy with the yasodilator, isoxsuprine, at a dose
of 1 mg/kg/q24h PO, was very helpful in controlling the disease.37
SYMMETRIC LUPOID ONYCHODYSTROPHY
The dogs' ages ranged from 3 to 8 years. Two other reports describe eight dogs with
I196 · Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears
G
FIGURE I9-4. A, Onychogryphosis in a dog with discoid lupus erythematosus. (Courtesy D. Carloti.) B,
Onychogryphosis and onychomadesis in a dog with pemphigus foliaceus. C. A case of Raynaudl-like disease in a dog.
claw dystrophy and viligo. Notice the depigmentation of the onycholytic claw. F, Idiopathic ceruminous otitis
exterma in a dog. G, Nasopharyngeal polyp. Blue polyp protruding from the ear of a cat with chronic otitis cxtcrna.
H. Ceruninal gland carcinoma. Severe deformation and ulceration of the pinna of an aged cat.
Figure continued on opposite page
Discases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears · Il97
FIGURE I9-4 Continued. I, Subungual hemorrliage in a claw of a clog with symmetric lupoid onychodystrophy. This
suggests vascular damage. J, Claw biopsy from a dog with symmetric lupoid onychodystrophy. Active lesions show
lynphoplasmacytic bydropie and liehenoid dermatitis. K, Same dog as in J. Chronic lesions show pigmentary inconti-
nence. L, Congenital supranumery claws on the hind paw of a yellw Labraclor retriever. M, Horizontal band defects on
the claws of a dog, coinciding with thc prior prcsencc of a portosystemic shunt. N, Anal sac absocss in a dog.
lupoid onychodystrophy, of which three were Rottweilers and three were giant or standard
Schnauzers.23 24 All dogs were presented for claw disease and were otherwise healthy.
Typically, owners first noticed a single abnormal claw on two_paws or more. Howevcr,
within 2 to 9 weeks, every claw on all four paws was affected. The initial clinical sign was
Il98 · Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears
usually a separation at the claw bed and sloughing of one or more claws. Subungual
hemorrhage was seen in some dogs (see Fig. 19-41). After the claws had been sloughed,
regrowth was characterized by short, misshapen, dry, soft, brittle, often crumbling and
discolored claws. About half of the dogs exhibit lamcness or pain, or both, on palpation.
Secondary bacterial infection may be seen. Histopathologically, the disorder is characterized
by hydropic and lichenoid interface dernatitis (see Fig. 19-4j and K). Direct immunoffuo-
rescence testing did not reveal a lupus band. Although most cases have been idiopathic,2. 33
Mueller reported cases that responded to antibiotic therapy and that resolved with an
elimination diet:3, 37 Lupoid onychodystrophy may be a reaction pattern of the claw, with
 several potential causes (e.g., food hypersensitivity, drug reaction, idiopathy).
 Response to omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids (Derrn Caps, DVM Pharmaceuticals) or
tered orally (see Chap. 3) is often effective, and has beern used successfully when fatty
acid therapy has failed.3, 37 With successful therapy, clinical improvement is usually
obvious within 3 to 4 months and maximal in 1 year. When treatment is stopped, the
condition often relapses.2.38
NEOPLASIA
Neoplasia may also involve the claw or the distal digit (see Chap. 20).21 Usually, one claw
is affected, although rarely multiple claws Inay be involved. Epithelial neoplasms are most
common and include squarmous cell carcinoma, subungual keratoacanthoma, inverted
squamous papillomas, and atrichial sweat gland carcinoimas (see Fig. 19-4D). Atrichial
sweat gland carcinomas and squamous cell carcinomas in the claws of cats tend to be
aggressive. Melanoma, mast cell tumors, fibrosarcoma, osteosarcoma, lymphosarcoma, he-
mangiosarcoma, metastatic carcinomas (especially from the lung), myxosarcoma, and neu-
IDIOPATHIC ONYCHODYSTROPHY
 Onychodystrophy is often diagnosed when multiple paws and claws are affected and other
causes cannot be determined. Again, it is important to include in this category only those
dogs that developed onychodystrophy as the initial clinical manifestation of their disease,
not as a result of onychomadesis, onycholysis, and so forth. These animals often have
secondary bacterial infections, so that inmprovement may be seen with aggressive antimi-
crobial therapy. However, recurrence after discontinuation of appropriate therapy is rou-
tine. Certain breeds appear predisposed and include Siberian huskies, Dachshunds, Rho-
dogs with claw disease, the three Rottweilers had symmetric lupoid onychodystrophy.24
of the authors (CEG) has also seen two cases in Welsh terriers (see Fig. 19-3G). One
owner, a breeder, reported that a littermate had a similar problem, and other breeders.
 anecdotally, reported the same. Old dogs are prone to idiopathic onychodystrophy. Dogs
  s  no  m ps  aa  
useful here, but the authors are unaware of any attempts to use these agents.
IDIOPATHIC ONYCHOMADESIS
Idiopathic onychomadesis is also described as a problem, particularly in the German
the Rottweiler? Most of these dogs have not had claw biopsies performed and, thus.
could actually represent a number of different disorders. In one case, a Rottweiler had
vitiligo and, concurrently, onycholysis (see Fig. 19-4E). These cases, besides having
onychomadesis, are characterized by frequent secondary bacterial infections under the
claw plate, onychoschizias, and onychorrhexis. The mineral composition of claws from 21
 dogs with idiopathic onychormadesis (including 8 Gernan shepherds) showed a significant
Diseases of Eyclids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears · 1I99
increase in the concentrations of calcium, potassium, sodium, and phosphorus, and de-
creased concentrations of iron, manganese, and mnagnesium, as compared with 32 normal
dogs (which also included 8 German shepherds).2s The Gernan shepherds with idiopathic
 onychomadesis had signifcantly decreased concentrations of iron, manganese, and magne-
sium. German shepherd dogs with idiopathic onychomadesis were significantly overrepre-
sented compared with the reference hospital population. Anecdotal information indicates
that German shepherd dogs with idiopathic onychomadesis may benefit frorn treatment
with pentoxifylline (see Chap. 3).
Miscellaneous Claw Disorders
ysis bullosa, dermatomyositis, drug eruption, ergotism, thalotoxicosis, linear epidermal
nevi, nutritional deficiencies, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and necrolytic migra-
tory erythema. Carloti reported two young malamutcs with paronychia and onychorrhexis
 of all digits that had histopathologic indings suggestive of zinc-responsivc dermatosis and
a dramatic response to zinc sulfate therapy.37 Carloti also reported a linear cpidermal
nevus in a dog, which was present since birth, which extended from the groin to two
digits of the paw.*7 The lesion responded to the oral administration of etretinate. Another
situation that 1may occur is the development of permanent onychodystrophy after destruc-
tion of the basal cells of the germinative layers. Even though the infectious agent may be
elirminated and the underlying or primary disease is cured or controlled, the claw contin-
  o ad si  sn  p d e  m o sn
infections may ensue.
Trachyonychia (lusterless, longitudinally ridged, and rough-surfaced claws) was diag-
nosed in an 8-year-old Rhodesian Ridgeback2uThe claw abnormality had hegun at 1 year
of age and affected all 20 claws. Pieces occasionally broke off thc claws, rcsulting in
bleeding. Over the years, the dog had lost many claws, but they always grew back. Claw
biopsy revealed lymphocytic infiltration of the claw matrix.
retriever (see Fig. 19-4L). Horizontal bands were seen on all claws of a dog (see Fig.
suggesting a disturbance in claw growth coincidental with the systemic disease.
Diagnosis
Because of the nurnerous causes of claw disease, it is obvious that a wide variety of
diagnostic tests, or procedures, may be needed. These are often determined on the basis 
of history and physical examination findings. The history should inelude a thorough drug
history including vaccinations. Claw disease may develop 2 to 8 weeks following a vaccina-
tion.24 In these cases or those suspected of a vascular etiology, the biopsy and work-up
should not be put off, because the diagnostic lesions may only be present early in the
course of the disease. When only claw disease is present, a simpler approach rmay be
warranted. In general, when only one or a few asymmetric claws are affected, the initial
work-up may be limited to a complete history, physical examination, and cytologic evalua-
tion of collected exudate or debris. Material from within the claw fold or under the claw
should be obtained for evaluation. Cytologic cxanination is helpful in establishing the
 presence of bacterial or fungal infection (suppurative to pyogranulomatous to granuloma-
tous inflainmation, degenerate neutrophils, and phagocytosed microorganisms), pemphigus
diseases (nondegenerate neutrophils or eosinophils and numerous acantholytic keratino-
cytes), and neoplasia.
 If bacteria, yeast, or another cause is not identified, fungal cultures and skin scrapes
disease, and trauma is the most likely inciting factor. If there is no evidence of neoplasia
 initial trial antibiotic therapy is indicated. When multiple paws and claws arc symmetri-
cally affected, or when antibiotic therapy is ineffective, a work-up for underlying diseases
should be begun. At this point, biopsy is often warranted.
I200 · Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears
Biopsy may be the only way of confirming a diagnosis of certain claw diseases, such as
plasia. Onychodystrophy, or idiopathic onychomadesis, should not be diagnosed without
biopsy. In many instances, punch biopsy specimens and those taken eliptically with a
scalpel fail to deliver the claw bed and, hence, the diagnosis. The claw bed is best
visualized when the third phalanx is removed with the intact claw and the entire structurc
  s pseejos s  er s s
histopathologic examination is rarely of benefit. When affected, the dewclaw is often the
 preferred claw to remove. A technique of biopsying the claw has been described wherein
a biopsy is taken by rotating a punch in one direction, cutting horizontally and medially
  xd p  j aq  r   a a po  r 
through normal skin on the lateral aspect of the claw fold.32 Lameness was transient and
 sm no sd an  n ps  d   ra s 
 biopsied),. The authors still prefer the amputation of P3.
Treatment
 Prognosis is most accurately established and therapy is most accurately instigated when a
specific diagnosis is determined. Bacterial infection, usually due to coagulase-positive
staphylococci, is treated with the adininistration of systemic antibiotics (which may need to
be continued for 4 to 6 months) and antibacterial agents and drawing soaks. In severe or
refractory cases, it may be necessary to avulse the affected claws under general anesthesia.
When avulsing claws, it is very important to try to preserve the underlying dermis (the
"quick"). If the quick is stripped away, claw regrowth may be abnorrnal or absent, and
concerns exist for osteomyelitis or avascular necrosis of P3. Onychomycosis, due to derma-
tophytosis, may be treated with long-term high-dose griseofulvin (50 to 75 mg/kg q12h) or
ketoconazole (10-20 mg/kg q24h). Treatnent should continue until all damaged claw has
grown out and becen tririmed off This may take as long as 6 months, an expensive
proposition in large dogs. Antifungal soaks may make the patient feel better and decrease
contagion but are not effective therapy. Avulsing the claws may slightly speed resolution.
therapy is incffective or too costly. Onychectomy has good results if the cxtcnsor and
fexor tendons are apposod over the distal end of the second phalanx, as has been
described.24 This is also used as primary treatment in some cases, because of the cost of
medical therapy and the likelihood of recurrences. Cases with permanent deformitics may
o d on pa aq  so  oe r pe r o d a
damaged area. The alternative is surgical declawing.
Perhaps the most frustrating cases are those with symmetric onychodystrophy with
onychorrhexis, onychoschizia, and brittle claws in which the cause cannot be determined.
In such cases, prophylactic trimming and fling of the claws and frequent application of
acrylic nail cement can be helpful in preventing onychaschizia, onychalgia, and secondary
 bacterial infection. Trial therapy with ormega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids or tetracycline and
niacinamide is indicated. Some cases may respond to long-term, repeated administration
Of gelatin: however, dystrophic changes recur when therapy is stopped. Gelatin is dosed
empirically at 10 grains (oue capsule) every 12 hours in Dachshunds.3s Altermatively, one
packet of Knox gelatin per 7 kg every 24 hours may be administered orall.34 These dogs
 should receive good-quality, high-protein diets. Biotin has been reported to be deficient,
 at least in some dogs, and, therefore, may be a useful treatment (5 mg/kg/day orally).27
● ANAL SAC DISEASES
Anatomy
 Anal sacs are paired invaginations of the skin located between the internal and external
sphincters of the anus,40, i1, 45, 49 Each sac is connected to the surface by a single duct
Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears · I20I
(about 3 to 10 mm long) that opens at the mucocutancous junction of the arus of the
dog, but. that opens on a pyrarnidal prominence 0.25 cim latcral to the anus of the cat.
The walls of the sacs contain fibrous connective tissue and abundant large sebaceous
glands, but the fundic portion of the canine sac has numerous epitrichial swcat glands.
tion of these glands is a mixture of fatty and serous materials and cellular debris. The
color and consistency of the secretion of these glands in normal dogs is variable, although
 often it is a brownish, oily Huid. The anal sac secretion has a characteristic disagreeable
odor when cxpressed or when infection or inpaction occurs (Table 19-7). The odor or
the fuid may have a function in social recognition among dogs. Anal sacs are probably
vestigial structures that the ancestors of dogs and cats used as a spraying defensc mecha-
nisimn similar to that used by the skunk. Normally, defecation causes compression of the
sacs annd expression of some of their contents. The anal sac is sometimes called the anal
gland, which is an erroneous term that should not be used. There are, however, multiple
circumanal (perianal) glands in the cutaneous border of the anus, and modified sebaceous
 and apocrine cells in the lining and ducts of the anal sacs. The cxact function of the anal
sacs is unknown, and they are unnecessary for good health.
Diseases
Anal sac problems occur more frequently in sinaller breeds (weighing less than 15 kg)
especially Poodles (miniature and toy), Chihuahuas, and seborrheic Cocker and English
Springer spaniels. They are less common in German shepherds and giant breeds. There is
 in a nonrefcrral hospital.43 An incidence as high as 12% has been described.40
Anal sac impaction is the most corurnon problem, The distended sacs can often be
palpated just lateral to and bclow the midpoint of the anus (at 4 o'clock and 8 o'clock 
positions). The exact etiology is unknown, However, change in character of the se-
cretion, oversccretion, or change in the muscle tone or fecal form may cause overfilling
of the sacs, plugging of the duets with resulting fermentation, infammation, and infec.
tion. Retention may be secondary to obesity or intestinal disorders, infammatory bowel
disease, or diarrhea.50 Impaction and chronic infections may have a prolonged course
(months) with many periods of quiescence and exacerbation. Following cxpression of the
o  sd p on isn i osr an i ie pns is a s
causes.
Anal sac infections may occur as a result of chronic or recurent impactions. It
- aa s es   ro a   sns  oe s
tamination, low tail attachment, and chronie bowel disease may lead to secondary infec.
tion.s0 Thc most common bacteria isolated are Escherichia coli, Streptococcus faecalis,
Clostridium welchi, and Proteus.39 Staphylococcus may also be associated with infected
anal sacs.46 Malassezia pachydermatis is frequently isolated from normal and abnormal
anal saes.42. 4 Adequate studies to define what criteria should be met to determine a
 diagnosis of infection are not readily available. Cytology of anal sac contents with the
presence of inflammatory cells with intracellular bacteria would be a minimum require-
ment.
● Table 19-7 ANAL SAC SECRETIONS
COLOR
CONSISTENCY
ODOR
DISEASE PROCESS
Straw
Thin liquid with sinall brownish flecks, or thick
Pungent
None
liquid pus
Greenish yellow
Medium-thick liquid
Fetid
Infectiom
Rerdl
Oily thick paste
Fetid
Infection
Dry paste
Mild
Impaction
Black
Dry or thick liquid
Mill
Chronic inpaction
I202 · Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears
Anal sac abscess occurs as the result of an infection, which is often associated with
some degree of impaction. The ruptured sac releases the infection, and secretion into the
surrounding tissue results in cellulitis and possible fistula formation (see Fig. I9-4N).
Anal sac neoplasia may also occur and most commonly is an adenocarcinoma (see
Chap. 20). Older females are overrepresented. Clinical signs may be (ninimal or unappar-
ent except for a mass or swelling in the perianal area.47 Tenesmus, constipation, and
i os e jo sis n  us auo ar ae isod pe eo
or infection.47
Clinical Features
Abnormalities of the anal sacs cause scooting, licking, biting. or rubbing the anus, and
          s
signs are not specific for anal sac disease and may be seen with any anal pruritic disease
such as atopy, food hypersensitivity, psychogenic anal licking, vulvar fold dermatitis, tail
fold dermatiisvaginitis, proctitis and perianal fistulac.40 46Cats rarely seoot but tpically
 cause traumatic alopecia of the tailhead and/or caudal abdominal areas. Infected anal sacs
may rupture, resulting in cellulitis with localized erythema, swelling, and pain, and a
usually unilateral, and the course is short (7 to l0 days). A foul-smelling odor may be
 noted by the owners or on cxamination without expressing the sacs. Infected anal sacs are
a focus of infection that has the potential for several untoward results. Some veterinarians
are convinced that dogs licking the anal region in such cases transfer infection to the
mouth with resultant tonsillitis, pharyngitis, and gagging, and only treatment of both areas
(anal sacs and pharynx) has produced good results. In other cases, anal sac infection may
be the source of antigen in dogs with widesprcad bacterial hypcrscnsitivity.39
Clinical Management
IMPACTIONS
Feline impactions usually occur without infection, and manual expression (by lateral
external compression)usuallyrelieves clinical signs for a relatively long time.43. 4$
Canine impactions tend to recur. They should be gently but thoroughly expressed.
This may have to be repeated several times at weekly intervais by gently placing a gloved
finger in the posterior rectum and compressing the sac between the finger and the thumb
expressed. If recurrence is frequent, irrigation should be performed as for chronically
infected anal sacs.
INFECTED ANAL SACS
 Chronically infected anal sacs should be treated as any infection— by drainage. This need
not be surgical. Frequent expression of the purulent or bloody exudate followed by
instiliation of an antibiotic solution may be curative. Inferior results are often obtained
with this method because the tendermess of the region precludes thorough treatment. It is
preferable to anesthetize the patient lightly and to lavage both sacs thoroughly with
lactated Ringer's solution, using a blunt needle or cannula attached to a syringe. Cerumi-
nolytic agents such as hexamethyltetracosane (Cerumene, EVsCO) may also be useful as
lavage fuids. Ater the sac is thoroughly fushed, it is important to instil an antibiotic
crean, nitrofurazone solution, or a lotion containing antibiotic and corticosteroid in a
ceruminolytic base (e.g., Liquichlor, EVsCO). This may be repeated in 5 to 7 days. If
yeasts are involved, a solution containing nystatin (Panolog. Fort Dodge) or clotrimazole
(Otomax, Schering-Plough) may be used. If recurrence develops after the initial response,
surgical removal of the sacs is indicated.
Discases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears * I203
 An acutely infected anal sac (abscess) rnust be treated by liberal incision at the point
 of localization and by curettage and application of 5% to'7% iodine solution (Lugol's
solution, Butler). Healing occurs by granulation. If the anal sac abscess does not heal with
the above-mentioned treatments or if it recurs repeatedly, surgical excision of thc anal
sacs is indicated.
● EXTerNaL EaR DISEaSES
Anatomy and Physiology
 The primary purpose of the external ear canal and pinnae is to collct sound waves and
transmit them to the tympanic membrane. In normal young dogs, air-conducted stinuli
are detected at 0 to 10'decibels (dB) and hone-conducted stimuli are detected at 50 to 60
 dB.152 The pinnae and vertical canal is the part formed with the auricular cartilage. At the
extermal orifice of the ear, the auricular cartilage begins to roll into a funnel shape, which
becomes tube shaped as it reaches down into the lowcr portions of the ear canal. The
external ear canal is variable in length (5 to 10 cm) and classically divided into the vertical
and horizontal portions.21 The vertical portion originates from the pinnae and extends in a
rostral ventral direction before bending medially (horizontal canal) and continuing until it
reaches the tympanic membrane, The lumen is 0.5 to 1 cm in diameter.21 Shar peis have
an ear canal of small diameter compared with other dog breeds.147 This is especially true
of the vertical ear canal. The cartilage structures and the bony external acoustic process
are lined by skin (Fig. 19-5).
The skin lining the ear canal normally is a relatively smooth surface and, similar to
Pinna
Bone
Cartilage
Muscke
Ear Canal
Cavity
Vertical Part
VestibulocochlearNerve
Skin Lining
(Cranial NerveVIll)
Far Canal
Inner Ear
Ear Canal
Horizoatal Part
MiddleEar
Parotid Gland
Tympank
Membrane
FIGURE I9-5. Scheimatic diagram of the anatomy of the ear. (Courtesy of CLIVE, Univ. of Edin-
burgh).
I204 · Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears
most body regions, has a thin epiderrmis and dermis that contains adnexa (hair follicles,
and sebaceous and ceruminal glanis). The vertical canal has relatively more adncxa than
the horizontal canal. To date, breed differences in the amount of sebaceous glands have
 not been showm, although ceruminal (apocrine) gland and hair follicle density does (lif-
fer.144 An association between the development of otitis exterma and ccrurminal gland
density has also been shown.14
tions. This material forms the carwax and cerumen that is believed to play some protcc-
tive role. Canine immunoglobulins A, G, and M have been identifed in canine cerumcn.86
 IgG is the predominant immunoglobulin found in both normal and inflamed ears with its
relative concentration significantly increasing in diseased ears. The ear canal has a clearing
mechanism. The moveiment of the epidermis, epithelial cell migration, clears out the
The tympanic membrane is an cpithelial structure that separates the external car
laterally from the middle ear cavity located medially. The normal tympanic membrane
when viewed from the external ear canal during an otoscopic examination is a concave.
translucent meinbrane, although there is a white C-shaped area in the dorsal part (Fig.
19-6). This corresponds to the attachiment of the manubrium of the malleus bone. For
 descriptive purposcs, the tympanic membrane is divided into two parts: the pars faccida
 and pars tensa. The pars faccida is the smaller part that lies next to the manubrium. The
  jo rd pe sou a e spu y ud ra  si esut srd
The middle ear consists of the tympanic cavity and walls, medial wall of the tympanic
membrane, the auditory ossicles and associated ligaments, muscles and nerves (chorda
tympani and other smaller nerves), and the auditory tube. In the norrnal ear, the only
communication from the middle ear to the outside environment is through the auditory
tube, which opens into the nasal pharynx, The tympanic cavity is divided into three parts:
dorsal, middle, and ventral. The dorsal is the smallest and contains the head of the
malleus and the incus. The middle part, also called tympanic cavity proper, is adjacent to
the tympanic rmembrane. The auditory tube opens in the middle portion of the tympanic
cavity. The ventral portion is the tympanic bulla and is the largest portion. The tynpanic
bulla is somewhat egg shaped, with' the dorsal aspect open to communicate with the
middle part. When otitis media is present, this part acts as a reservoir to trap the debris
and toxins. This portion also has the poorest access and, even with a ruptured tympanum,
cannot be adequately examined by otoscopy. Structures running close to or in channels
along the middle car include the facial nerve, vagus nerve, and carotid and lingual
arteries.
Otitis Externa
Otitis externa is inflaimmation of the ear canal, which may result from numerous causes.
The most relevant classification scheme divides the causes of otitis externa into predispos-
a o a a  ssd se s  sso a se p is 
otitis. Most chronic cases have at least one prirmary and several other causes or factors
treatment failures.
PREDISPOSING FACTORS
Predisposing factors inerease the risk of developing otitis exterma.21, 52. 151a They work in
conjunction with primary causes, secondary causes, or perpetuating factors to cause clini-
cal disease. The most successful management of otitis externa necessitates that they be
recognized and controlled whenever possible.
Ear type has been reported to predispose the animal to otitis exterma by altering the
FIGURE 19-6. Fiberoptic videoscope views of ears. A, Normal tympanic membrane, some hairs, and cerurmen. B,
Ear rnites and excessive cerumen. (Courtesy L. Gotthelf). C, Horizontal ear canal with proliferative changes seen as
papules and folds in contrast to a normal smooth lining. D, Deep horizontal ear canal with proliferative changes,
highest level at which a myringotomy should be performed. F, Feeding tube down an exudative ear canal showing an
accumulation of pus and debris and an air bubble being cleaned out of the canal.
1206 · Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears
● Table 19-8
 FACTORS AND CAUSES OF OTITIS EXTERNA
PREDISPOSING FACTORS
Conformation
Stenotic canals
Hair in canals
Pendulous pinnae
Hairy concave pinnae
Excessive moisture
Swimmer's ear
High-humidity climate
Excessive cerumen production
Overactive glands
Treatment effects
Trauma from cotton applicators 
Irritant topicals
Superinfections by altering normal microfora
 Obstructive ear disease
Neoplasms
Polyps,
Granulomas (infections, foreign body, sterile)
Systemic disease
Immune suppression or viral disease
Debilitation
Catabolic states
PRIMARY CAUSES
Parasites
Otodectes cynotis
Demodex conis, D. cati, Sarcoptes scabiei, Notoedres cati
Flies (especially Stomoxys calcitrans)
Ticks (especially Otobius megnint)
(uno sdods ueu you ads se
Microorganisms
Dermatophytes
Sporothrix schenckii
 Hypersensitivity diseases
Atopy
Food hypersensitivity
Contact hypersensitivity
Drug reactions
Keratinization disorders
Primary idiopathic seborrhea
Hypothyroidism
Sex hormone imbalances
Lipid-related conditions
 Foreign bodies
Plants (especially foxtails)
Hair
Sand, dirt
Hardened medications and secretions
Glandular disorders
Ceruminal gland hyperplasia
tisedoq no eisedadku puel snos
Altered secretion rate
Altered type of secretions
Autoimmune diseases
Lupus erythematosus
Pemphigus foliaceus
Pemphigus erythematosus
Cold aglutinin disease
Viral diseases
Canine distemper
 Miscellaneous conditions
Solar dermatitis
Frostbite
Vasculitis, vasculopathy
Juvenile cellulitis
Eosinophilic dermatitis or granuloma
Sterile eosinophilic folliculitis
Aural chondritis
SECONDARY CAUSES
Bacteria
Staphylococcus intermedius
Protetus sp.
Pseudomonas sp
Escherichia sp.
Klebsiella sp.
Table continued on opposite page
Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears · I207
● Table 19-8
FACTORS AND CAUSES OF OtItIS EXTERnA
(Continued)
Yeast
Malassezia pachydermatis
Candiudu albicans
 Topical reactions
Abnorrnal skin required
Foreign bodies
Small or microscopic
PERPETUATING FACTORS
Pathologic responses
Epidermal
Alterced cpithelial cell migration
Hyperkeratosis
Hyperplasia
Epithclial folds
Derinal
Ederna
Fibrosis
Adnexal
Ceruminal gland—- hypertrophy or hyperplasia
Hidradenitis
Lumen
Stenosis
Cartilage
 Mineralization
Tympanic mcmbrane changes
Opacity
Dilation
Diverticulum
Middle car cavity
Epithelial changes
Sinple purulent
Caseated or kcratinous
Cholesteatoma
Proliferative
Destructive osteomyelitis
Modified frum Griffn CE et al: Otis externa and media. Current Veterinary Dermatology: The Art and Science of Therapy.
Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis. 1993. p 245.
externa is greater in the months with greater relative humidity and temperature.%4 Al-
though increased temperature and relative humidity have been suggested, only one of
these explanations stilf seems plausible. The temperature of the external car canal is not
different in erect versus pendulous eared dogs.ss However, the pinnae have higher relative
humidity at the skin surface than other body regions.6 Therefore, increased relative
humidity may be an important factor. Occasionally, dogs and cats present for chronic
recurrent otitis that appears to have only excessive cerumen production as the underlying
cause (see Fig. 19-4F). A variety of secondary bacterial or yeast infections occur. Work-
ups reveal no underlying cause of these cases of idiopathic excessive cerumen production.
In dogs with hairy ear canals prone to otitis exterma, hair removal should be part of the
not recommended by the authors. In fact, hair removal can precipitate or exacerbate otitis
externa. Obstructive ear diseases often lead to otitis externa. Feline nasopharyngeal polyps
and neoplasia in dogs are most often likely to cause this problem. Shar peis have ear
canals of smaller diameter than those of other dog breeds and some individuals, especially
those with mucinosis, have stenotic vertical ear canals and external orifices.
 Feline Nasopharyngeal Polyps 
Feline nasopharyngeal polyps is a relatively uncommon infammatory disease in cats.93. 126
They may originate from the pharyngeal mucosa, the auditory (eustachian) tube, or the
middle ear (see Fig. 19-4G). Although their etiology is unknown, inflammatory polyps
may be congenital or secondary to viral or bacterial infections. A congenital cause has
been proposed because polyps occur primarily in young cats and because they have been
I208 · Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears
seen in sibling kittens. Feline calicivirus has been recovered from the tissues of several
cats.
 Nasopharyngeal polyps should be considered in the differential diagnosis of unilateral,
medically resistant otitis externa or otitis media with or without respiratory signs. Otorrhea
(dark brown ceruminous or purulent exudate) without signs of infammation of the ear
 canal lining, head-shaking behavior, and a mass in the horizontal ear canal are the most
common signs of external ear involvement. Middle ear involvement may cause head tilt,
 nystagmus, and disequilibriun.
 Diagnosis is confirmed by examuination of the ear and upper airway under anesthesia.
 Histopathologically, the lesion is a loose mass of connective tissue containing numerous
blood vessels and mononuclear leukocytes, covered by an epithelium that may be strati-
fed, nonkeratinized squamous, or simple to bilayered ciliated columnar. Treatment in-
cludes surgical removal of the polyp and, often, bulla osteotomy. Postsurgical complica-
tions include regrowth, persistent discharge, and transient Horner's syndrome.
Ceruminal Gland Neoplasms
Neoplasms of the ear include those capable of affecting the skin elsewhere, as well as
common pinnal neoplasms are sebaceous gland tumors, histiocytomas, and mast cell
tumors. In the cat, the most common pinnal neoplasms are squamous cell carcinoma,
basal cell tumor, hemangiosarcoma, and melanocytic neoplasms.
The most common neoplasmn of the ear canal is ceruminal gland in origin (see Fig.
19-4H).1oo, 1o7. ios. 120 These neoplasms are more common in cats than in dogs. In the dog.
the neoplasms are typically benign, whereas in the cat, they are malignant in about 50%
of cases. Ceruminal gland neoplasms typically occur in older animals and in one ear.
Clinical signs include variable degrees of head-shaking and ear-scratching behavior, otor-
rhea, an offensive necrotic odor, frequent secondary bacterial otitis exteima, and even
intermittent hemorrhage fron the affected ear. Occasionally, ceruminal gland neoplasms
present as bulging, ulcerative, draining masses below the ear in the parotid region (Fig.
19-7). Otoscopic examination usually reveals a small (less than I cm' in diameter), well-
circumscribed, pinkish white, dome-shaped mass, with frequent ulceration, hemorrhage,
and secondary infection (Fig. 19-8). Ceruminal gland tumors are positive for cytokera-
tin.10 The only effective therapy is surgical excision, usually by lateral ear resection or
total ablation of the ear canal. The best results are achieved with ear canal ablation and
FIGURE I9-7. Ceruminal gland
carcinoma in a cat presenting as a
mass in the parotid area.
Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears · I209
FIGURE I9-8. Nodular ceru-
minal gland carcinoma.
lateral bulla osteotomy.107. 1os The recurrence rate is around 70% with lateral ear resec-
tion.107,10s
PRIMARY CAUSES
Primary causes directly induce otitis externa. The most common causes seen by the
critical to successful long-term management that a primary cause be found and controlled.
Parasites
A number of parasites have been associated with otitis externa (see Table I9-8).21
for up to 50% of the otitis exterma cases diagnosed in cats and 5% to 10% of the cases in
dogs (see Fig. 19-6B). Ear mites may initiate otitis exterma but remain undetected. One
reason is the diffculty that may occur in demonstrating the mites. As few as two or three
mites can cause clinical otitis externa.74 This may be explained by studies showing that ear
explanation is that the mites initiate the otitis externa and then leave the canal or are
destroyed by the infammation or the secondary infection. In recurrent cases of parasitic
should be considered. Owing to variations in the time necessary for transmission from
carTier to affected patient, the time of onset of hypersensitivity reactions, and the develop-
I210 · Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears
FIGURE I9-9. Legend on opposite page
Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears · I2l1
FIGURE I9-9 Continued. I, Idio-
pathic inflammatory and hyper-
plastic otitis externa in a Cocker
ized, causing the pinna to extend out
laterally.
o in se psd a ssp as rao  q eou suis  jo 
intermittently recurrent cases.77
 Fly bites are a common cause of pinnal dermatitis during fy season (see Chap. 6).
 Pinpoint ulcers that are rapidly covered by a black-red crust are typical (see Fig. 19-6H).
Hypersensitivities
 Atopy, food hypersensitivity, and contact hypersensitivity can cause otitis extema (see
Chap. 8)21. 61 The otitis externa may be secondary to self-trauma, or the hypersensitivity
reaction may involve the external ear canal. Atopic dogs have otitis signs in 83% of the
        e s o    
the incidence of otitis in atopics, is more frequently associated with otitis externa than is
food hypersensitivity. Erytherma of the pinna and vertical canal is a common feature of
allergic otitis exterma (see Fig. 19-9A and B).77 Chronic inflammation may eventually lead
to secondary bacterial or yeast infections.
pe sssiadu pooy m seo pire shop jo os o dn u ssid si sss ra
ear. Cocker spaniels and Labrador retrievers have been suggested as breeds more likely to
 present with otitis externa as the only symptom of food hypersensitivity.81 Dogs younger
than 6 months of age with acute bilateral otitis and no evidence of ear mites or foreign
 bodies should also be considered as more likely to have food hypersensitivity.
Contact hypersensitivity may result from medications (e.g., neomycin) used to treat
otitis externa. In addition, vehicles such as propylene glycol can also be responsible for
hypersensitive or irritant reactions in the ear.77 Therefore, changing medications on the
basis of major active ingredients may not alleviate a treatment reaction. Typically, these
FIGURE I9-9. A, Allergic ottis extema in a dog with atopy. B, Gontact hypersensivity in a cat due to a topical product
that contained neomycin. C, Erythema multiforme in a dog with severe ulceration of the ear canal. Candida albicans was
found in cytologic studies and in otic cultures. D, Seborrheic otitis exterma in a hypothyroid dog. E, Sterile eosinophilic
pinnal follieulitis in a dog. F, Pseudomonas otitis externa in a Cocker spaniel with atopy and primary seborrhea. G.
Proliferative otitis cxterna with numerous folds resulting, Similar changes are present in the vertical and horizontal canal. H,
Classc fly bites Stomoxys calcitrans) on the pinna of a dog.
1212 · Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears
cases have a history of either (1) short-term response to therapy, and then as medication
administration is continued, symptoms worsen; or (2) previous good responses to a prod-
uct, but a worsening with the most recent course of treatment.140, 141 Another clinical clue
is the development of erythema dorsally and ventrally to the extemal orifice, because the
medications usually contact these areas as well. Drug reactions may also involve the ear
canal and the pinnae. This may be due to contact allergic or irritant effects. In other
 cases, systemic drug reactions, such as erythema multiforme, may affect the ear canal (see 
Fig. 19-9C).
Keratinization Disorders
The keratinization disorders generally present as chronic ceruminous otitis externa.21
Breeds prone to primary idiopathic seborrhea tend to have ceruminous otitis externa (see
Chap. 14). Endocrinopathies, such as hypothyroidism and sex hormone imbalances (see
Chap. 10) may result in chronic ceruminous otitis externa, most likely by altering keratini-
zation and, possibly, glandular function (see Fig. 19-6D). Hypothyroidism is the most
commonly encountered endocrinopathy involving the ear. Many times, the primary cause
of the otitis externa is a disease that has some other historical or physical examination
findings as a clue.
Foreign Bodies
Foreign bodies that enter the ear canal and become lodged usually result in otitis
exterma.21 Typically, it occurs unilaterally, although bilateral disease may occur. Most
comimonly, the dogs and cats have acute onset of head shaking and scratching at the ear
or ears. There is no initial discharge; however, if immediate veterinary care is not sought,
Examples of otic foreign bodies include plant awns, sand, and dried out medicaments.
Glandular Disorders
Glandular disorders are not well documented in the dog and cat. One study did show that
Cocker spaniels with otitis had a greater surface area of glands in their ears than did
 Cocker spaniels without ear disease.144 Cocker spaniels, English Springer spaniels, and
 Labrador retrievers have more ceruminal glands and hair follicles in their ear canals than
do Greyhounds and mongrels.144 In addition, one of the authors (CEG) has seen cases in
dogs and cats that had chronic ceruminous otitis and also demonstrated histologic seba-
ceous gland hyperplasia. They had no other evidence of keratinization disorder or skin
disease. Management necessitated that clients learn how to clean the ears on a routine 
basis.
Autoimmune Diseases
Autoimmune diseases may affect the ear canal, but most commonly cause pinnal disease.21
 Of the diseases listed in' Table 19-8, the one most commonly seen is pemphigus foli-
aceus.
Viral Diseases
Viral diseases are known to cause otitis extema in humans but have rarely been incrimi-
nated in the dog. Canine distemper virus has been associated with otitis externa, but
whether this is actually directly due to viral invasion of the ear or is secondary to
Miscellaneous Conditions
Idiopathic infammatory or hyperplastic otitis exterma is seen primarily in Cocker spaniels,
initially at a relatively young age.133 Over one to several years, these dogs develop marked
proliferative otitis exterma if they are not aggressively managed. Without treatment, they
often progress to calcified ear canals. These cases usually do not have other skin disease,
Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears * I213
although it is imperative to rule out atopy, primary idiopathic seborrhea of Cocker
spaniels, and food hypersensitivity. In the authors' expericnce, food hypersensitivity is the
disease most oftcn overlooked, because a diet trial alone will not rcverse the perpetuating
factors. Food hypersensitivity can only be ruled out with a diet trial and provocative
exposure testing once the ears have been improved with therapy. The etiology of this
disease is unknown but, considering the histopathologic glandular changes, it is attractive
t0 consider that this may represent a primary glandular disorder.144
Jucenile cellulitis often involves the ear canal and occasionally initially starts with otitis
exterma and pinnal disease (see Chap. 18). These puppies have marked lymphadenopathy
 Canine sterile eosinophilic pinnal folliculitis is an uncommon idiopathic, nonseasonal,
and crusts are present on the concave surface of the pinnae. Pruritus is variable. The ear
canal is not involved. Cytologic examination of papules reveals nurnerous eosinophils and
 no microorganisms. Biopsy reveals eosinophilic foliculitis and furunculosis. Cultures are
 negative. The condition is responsive to topical or oral glucocorticoids but usually recurs.
Canine proliferative eosinophilic otitis externa is an uncommon idiopathic inflamma-
tory disorder of the ear canal of dogs.127 Affected dogs have a history of chronic unilateral
otitis externa. Otoscopic examination reveais solitary or multiple polypoid masses attached
to the ear canal lining by a slender stalk. The masses obstruct the canal. Biopsy reveals a
papillomatous, proliferative eosinophilic dermatitis or eosinophilic granuloma. Intraepider-
mal eosinophilic microabscesses are found. Some lesions contain multifocal areas of de-
generate collagen and fame figures, with or without an accompanying palisading granu-
loma. Surgical excision may be curative or be followed by recurrence.
SECONDARY CAUSES
 Secondary causes contribute to or cause pathology only in the abnormal ear or in combi-
nation with predisposing factors. These same organisrms or agents may be found in norrnal
ears without disease. They are generally easy to manage with a speific drug once the
diagnosis is made. In some cases, eliminating the concurrent predisposing factor or
primary disease may result in the resolution of the secondary cause.
Bacteria
Bacteria are rarely primary causes; therefore, a diagnosis of bacterial otitis exterma is
usually not a completc diagnosis. S. intermedius and the gram-negative organisms Pseudo-
in chronic otitis. This may refect that this organisrn is well adapted for the warm moist
environment of ears occluded by hyperplasia of skin and ceruminal glands.7l Scarification,
moisture, and alkalinization were used to create Pseudomonas aeruginosa ear infections in
normal dogs.1o9 After these organisms establish infection, they significantly contribute to
the inflammation, damage, and clinical signs.
Yeast
M. pachydermatis is the most common yeast that contributes to otitis exterma as a
pue adeys aoq io ynud e sey e isea upnq e si h si i slo auendid
may be found in as many as 36% of normal canine ears.56 In otitis, it is found in up to
proposed that S. intermedius produces a factor that stimulates the growth of M. pachyder-
matis.56 It has also been shown that M. pachydermatis is a heterogeneous species, with at
least two groups identified by a variety of biochemical characteristics.94 Two strains were
different in that one could not grow in the absence of nicotinic acid but grew well in the
presence of staphylococci. Possibly, this is the factor that staphylococci supply. M. pachy-
dermatis is a common complication with hypersensitivity disorders and may result in a
ME%
—————「—————
 OTITIS MEDIA
%3H
-888一—
8
—---!
205050
OTITIS EXTERNA
Ear Canals
二—-——————-—
一凹6弹饼
23388
Middle Ear
020２——0———
1———
CLINICALLY NORMAL
————-———-——
——00浓
Ear Canals
———
5———————
—————-—————
_—
2
rogenes
● Table 19-9
Culture negative ears
pou 1
a
ORGANISMS
Ids
Gram-Positit
ponda
1214
Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears · I2I5
colony types) of M. pachydermatis have been described, but the significance of these is
unknown.86, 94 Oleic and linoleic acids were shown to be mycostatic, and the common fatty
acids found in canine cerumen are margaric, stearic, oleic, and linoleic.86 The possibility of
  du sm  sn q  sn  n ais  o e
intensive care nursery where 15 infants were culture positive over a period of approxi-
 mately 15 months.62 The culture-positive babies were at greater risk for lower weight and
had greater severity of concomitant illness. It was specuiated that the M. pachydermatis
was introduced into the intensive care nursery from a health-care worker's hands after
being colonized from pet dogs at home. Further studies to support or explain this
association are anxiously awaited.
Topical Acquired Irritant Reactions
Various therapeutic ingredients may induce infammation in the already damaged aural
epidermis and dermis but have no effect on normal skin.sl As a result, they are not typical
     i    s  r  
irritant or allergic reactions, but often they wil cause the ear canal to become ulcerated.
Sorme of these ingredients, such as propylene glycol, are present in numerous topical
produets, even though active ingredients may be totally different. The continued use of
those ingredients hinders the healing and beneficial effects that are expected.
PERPETUATING FACTORS
Perpetuating factors prevent the resolution of otitis externa or otitis media. They result
from infammation and the pathologic responses of the skin and otic structures. These
changes occur from the effect of the predisposing factors, and primary and secondary
causes. In chronic cases, one or more of these factors are present. In acute cases of otitis
externa, treating the primary cause may be sufficient in controlling a case, but after the
establishment of some perpetuating factors, treatment must be directed at them. Perpetu-
ajo ssprei d o asuosr iod o uosan oeu aq eu sie ue
predisposing factors and primary causes present.
Progressive Pathologic Changes
The microanatomy of the canine and feline ear canal have been studied.6s, 70. 144, 146
Chronic infammation stimulates the skin lining the ear canal to undergo numerous
changes, including epidermal hyperkeratosis and hyperplasia, dermal edema and fbrosis,
ceruminal gland hyperplasia, and dilatation. Hidradenitis or infammation of the ceruminal
glands 1nay also occur. A study found that sebaceous glands do not atrophy, as had been
previously reported.144 Morphometric analysis showed that breeds predisposed to otitis
externa had an increased quantity of ceruminal glands compared with the number of
sebaceous glands, and that dogs with otitis externa had an even greater area of ceruminal
glands. An occasional animal may have sebaceous gland hyperplasia. Chronic inflammation
ajod pe   u s d o p 
Abnormal epithelial cell migration may occur in response to inflammation.15 This
rnechanism, which is normally responsible for the removal of the waxes, lipids, exfoliating
corneocytcs, and associated commensal bacteria, is affected. Inflammation and stenosis
s nd  sn n  p s os i  q 
evidence to support this in the dog is the finding that dogs with otitis media may have
adnexa and stratified epidermis growing in the middle ear that is believed to have
migrated in from the extermal ear canal.102
These progressive changes cause a thickening of the skin, which eventually extends to
both sides of the auricular cartilage. The sweling leads to stenosis of the canal lumen.
More important, the skin is thrown into numerous folds, which inhibit effective cleaning
and application of topical medications (see Fig. 19-9G). These folds act as sites for the
accumulation of secretions and exudates, and the perpetuation and protection of second-
12l6 · Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears
ary microorganisms (see Fig. 19-6C). The epidermis becomes thickened, and the hyper-
keratotic stratum corneum increases the keratin debris that is exfoliated into the canal
lumen. The increased secretions and cpithelial dehris favor the proliferation of bacteria
and yeast.
The combination of microbial metabolic byproducts, secretions, and debris trapped
within the folds and ear canal fron the stenosis further contribute to the pathologic
 changes. In a sense, regardless of the initial disease process, the clinician is now faced
 by contributing to stenosis of the car canal and by inhibiting the effective treatment of
deep infections. It is interesting to note that the calcification occurs in the connective
tissue outside of the auricular or annular cartilage. These changes have a major impact on
 therapeutic regimens and must be considered in the managerment of chronic cases.
Tympanic Membrane Alteratioris
The abnormal tympanic membrane thickens, becomes opaque or slightly colored, and
loses its transparency. Additionally, the attachment to the manubrium cannot be seen. It
may appear white, off-white, yllw, brown, or gray. Therefore, it can appear the same as
referred to specialists and the referring veterinarian believes the tympanic membrane is
intact, but it is not.
It has been theorized that the tympanic membrane may dilate and extend into the
tympanic cavity. Because the tympanic membrane is capable of reepithelializing after
rupture, it is comnon to have otitis media with an intact tympanic membrane15la in one
study in which 8 dogs were necropsied, ruptured tympanic membranes were identified in
only 2 of 14 ears with otitis exterma and media.102 However, out of the 62 middle ear
specimens examined, histologically definitive tympanic membrane could only be recog-
nized in 26%. Tissue, including adnexal structures that originate from the external ear
canal, may be found in the middle ear cavity, even when the tympanic membrane appears
intact. The auditory tube was patent in all cases in which it was examined at necropsy.
Commonly, the tympanic membrane thickens in response to infammation and may de-
velop polyploid extensions of granulation tissue into the middle ear cavity, which, in some
cases, form adhesions with middle ear mucosa.
 Aural cholesteatoma is a keratin-filed epidermoid cyst, located within the middle car
cavity. Aural cholesteatoma may occur in ll% of the animals with chronic otitis media.102
It has been postulated that cholesteatomas result when a pocket of tympanic merbrane
for1ms within the iddle ear cavity. One predisposing factor 1may be spontaneous occlusion
of the external ear canal from chronic proliferative changes, leading to external car canal
stenosis.
Another response of the tympanic membrane is the development of a pocket (false
 middle ear) that allows the impaction and sequestration of material from topical therapy.
This may explain why some dogs appear to regrow their tympanic inembrane rapidly after
these animals cannot have their middle ear fushed through the eustachian tube and are
 less susccptiblc to ototoxicity.
Otitis Media
 Otitis media is infammation of the middle ear.l1s The normal middle ear cavity may
contain some bacteria (staphylococci, streptococci) and occasional yeast,11o but there is no
exudate or inflammatory cells. The presence of exudate within the tympanic cavity is
diffieult to treat with topical therapy and often remains as a source for infections and
proinfammatory toxins and debris to reach the external car canal. In more advanced
cases, the authors have found keratin plugs developing within the tynpanic cavity (Fig.
19-10). The keratin may serve as a reservoir for bacteria and a source for infammation.
Eventually, calcification may occur, which may be observed radiographically. In some
cases, osteomyelitis of the bony wall or within the newly proliferated bone occurs. Osteo-
myelitis is difficult to treat medically and often requires surgery to alleviate. Otitis media
Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears · 1217
FIGURE 19-I0. Keratinous
plugs removed by fushing from a
midile car cavity (a dine is in the
upper right corner).
occurs commonly with chronic otitis exterma. Histologic changes in the middle car may be.
 present, even with an intact tympanic membrane.1o2 The presence of adnexa in some of
but the tympanic membranes have since healed—possibly even while otitis externa or
media is present. In one study, otitis media was diagnosed in 38 dog ears, and an intact
tympanic inembrane was present in 71% of the ears.64
Otitis media may occur from extension of otitis externa through the tympanic mem-
brane, from ascending nasal or respiratory infections through the auditory tube, and frorn 
hematogenous spread. In dogs, only extension from otitis externa is considered a common
cause of otitis media, but in cats, upper respiratory infections are known causes of otitis
media. Otitis media has becn reported to be present in l6% of dogs with acute otitis
 n s i i    sap jo  pe 
media in 82.6% of chronic otitis externa cars and that the tympanic membranes were
intact in 71% of the dogs with otitis media.64 A difference in total microbial isolates or
their susceptibility patterms between horizontal canal and middle car samples were found
in 89.5% of the ears.04 Bilateral otitis media was present in 72.7% of the dogs.
An extremely rare complication of bacterial otitis media is meningoencephalitis 141a
One author (WHM) has examined two allergic dogs who presented for head shaking.
head tilt, and Horner's syndrome. Both dogs had extermally bulging, normal-appearing
tympanic membranes, as is seen in serous otitis media in children, and both dogs re-
 sponded completely to treatment with amitriptyline.
CLINICAL FEATURES
 Otitis exterma is a common condition in dogs, perhaps accounting for 15% of all the dogs
presented for veterinary care.51,6l,5  The true incidence of otts exta is not know,
-duss ono jo Xioisy e peu sop leou Apasoddns jo %s's ieu paiou Apms auo pun
toms.122 In cats, the incidence is much lower, perhaps 4% ol. 15-117 137 The lower inci-
1218 · Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears
dence in cats may be partially attributable to the upright position of the pinna and the
relatively hairless ear canal.
The most common indication of otitis externa is aural pruritus or head shaking. As
otitis externa progresses, a mild to marked exudate or malodor may develop. This is
usually when the client presents the pet to the veterinarian. It is imperative that a
thorough history, both general and dermatologic, be taken. If that is not done, many
patients are unnecessarily misdiagnosed. History taking should include questions regarding
predisposing factors. Additionally, the majority of cases of chronic ear disease have histori.
cal or physical evidence of the primary disease. The common indications that the underly-
 rn un sd  aos a rps arau e si d 
locations. Keratinization disorders may have changes in coat quality, color, and density or
questions about the dogs hearing as well as observing responses to sounds made during
the examination. One study using brainstem auditory evoked response showed that hear-
ing loss in otitis cases most commonly was a result of conductive hearing loss due to
Clinical signs of otitis media are quite variable and not specifie. Most commonly the
symptoms mimic or occur because of concurrent otitis externa and include head shaking.
aural discharge, or odor. Deafness with extension to inner ear disease may also occur.
Pain when eating may be noticed in dogs with severe disease or in animals with otitis
PHYSICAL FINDINGS
Physical findings indicative of otitis externa include erythema, swelling, scaling, crusting.
alopecia, broken hairs, head shyness, otic discharge (otorrhea), malodor, and pain on
palpation of the auricular cartilage. Some animals attempt to scratch the ear with the
ipsilateral hind paw or shake the head during or after palpation of the ear canal. Lesions
 may involve the pinna and the skin caudal to the pinna on the head, on the lateral face,
and around the vertical canal. Pyotraumatic dermatitis of the lateral face and aural
hematomas are the lesions most commonly associated with aural pruritus, although clinical
otitis externa may not be noticeable. Head tilt may be seen with either otitis externa or
otitis media. However, concurrent facial nerve abnormalities (e.g., facial palsy and hemifa-
cial spasm) or Horner's syndrome indicates otitis media, although facial palsy may also be
seen with hypothyroidism and concurrent ceruminous otitis.
 Palpation of the external ear canal and tympanic bulla may provide additional infor-
mation. The thickness, firmness, and pliability of the vertical and horizontal canal should
be deterimined. Thicker, firmer, and less pliahle canals are associated with proliferativc
changes and support a more guarded prognosis. Mineralized canals are rock hard and can
rarcly be returmed to normal or successfully managed with medical therapy (see Fig. 19-
 91).7 Pain and palpable abnormalities of the tympanic bulla imply the presence of otitis
media.
 Erythema of the concave surface of the pinna with a normal convex surface is strongly
erythema of the vertical canal with a norrmal horizontal canal. Cases that started with only
ear canal disease and, after treatment, spread peripherally in rostral and ventral directions
910
ear canal should make one consider the secondary causes Pseudommonas infection,
Candida infection, and topical reactions.
Otoscopic Examination
The otoscopic examination is used to detect foreign bodies, to determine whether otitis
media is present, and to assess what type of lesions, exudate, and progressive pathologic
examination of the second ear. Exaimining the unaffected ear frst decreases the risk of
Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears · I219
spreading an infectious agent from the diseased ear to the unaffected ear. Having multiple
otoscopic cones of varying sizcs placed in cold sterilization containers allows one to usc
aseptic cones. One problem often encountered in practice is the extrermely painful, ulcer-
 ated, swollen ear that one cannot adequately examine. Even with anesthesia, these cases
may not be adequately examined, and it may be necessary to treat the animal and to
reduce the sweling and inflammation, then have the patient returmn in 4 to 7 days so that
an otoscopic examination can be properly performed.77
A record of lesions should be kept. Proliferative changes, the amount and type of
discharge, and the presence of erythema or ulcers should be noted (see Fig. 19-6D).
Assessment of the tympanic membrane should be made and recorded.
 The degree of canal stenosis should be determined, because changes in lumen size
can be used to help monitor treatment. Is proliferation the result of diffuse thickening, or
should also be noted. Does it involve the horizontal canal, the vertical canal, or both?
d ro d  p d  pn q  a go  
factors may be involved. Dry coffee ground-like debris is typical of ear mites. Moist
brown discharge tends to be associated with staphylococcal and yeast infections. Purulent
creamy to yellow exudates are often seen with gram-negative infections. Waxy, greasy,
yelow to tan debris is typical of ceruminous otitis, sometimes with concurrent Malassezia
infection. Ceruminous discharge is most often seen with keratinization, glandular condi-
tions, and chronic hypersensitivity disorders.
 Fiberoptic video-enhanced otoscopes are now available. These machines improve the
visualization of the ear canal and tympanic mermbrane (see Figs. 19-6A to F). They allow
photographic records to be taken, which are valuable for patient records as well as to
show clients what is occurring in their pets' ear canals.
DIAGNOSIS
A diagnosis of otitis exterma is easily made from the history and the physical examination.
Otitis media is much more difficult to diagnose, because many patients present with
symptoms of only otitis externa. Evidence of inflammation of the tissue surrounding the
middle ear or the inner ear usually indicates that otitis media has occurred. Even with
otoscopic examination, many cases of otitis media may not be detected, and in cases with
apparently intact diseased tympanic membranes, otitis media may be present. The tym-
panic membrane becomes opaque and white, gray, pinkish, or brown owing to disease and
thickening. When this occurs and it loses its characteristic opalescent, fish scale appear-
ance, it may resemble a keratinous plug.77 In addition, middle ear changes or the medial
wall of the tympanic bulla may be interpreted as a diseased but intact tympanic mem-
brane. The tympanum is rarely seen to bulge in canine otitis media, and when it does, it
is usually associated with inspissated middle ear debris rather than fuid.so An evaluation of
- Xuo 'sa pnu u i pn shuug uoded pue doso nud
panometry was accurate in deterrmining the integrity of the tympanic membrane.ioi This
study revealed that even after lavagc of the ear canal, a satisfactory view of the tympanic
membrane could be obtained in only 28% of cases otoscopically examined while under
anesthesia.
 Radiography is indicated in suspected cases of otitis media and especially before
surgical procedures involving the middle ear. However, radiography is helpful only when it
demonstrates middle ear pathologic changes (e.g., fuid lines or changes in the osseous
nometry appears valuable in the diagnosis of a ruptured tympanic membrane. Its value in
clinically infamed ears and ears with otitis media needs to be determined, although it
appears preferable to previously described techniques.101, 18
 on   su   e  a  a jo m
inaccurate and causes a statistically significant incidence of damage to the tympanic
membrane.loi, us Hlowever, palpation and positioning of a soft feeding tube 'to help
deterimine the presence or the location of the tympanic membrane is a valuable technique
1220 · Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears
that may reveal false middle ear cavities.77 The feeding tube is passed under visualization
through a surgical otoscope head within the ear canal to the level where the tympanic
memhrane is expected to be located. In a normal ear, the tip of the tube remains
visualized. In ears with false middle ear or ruptured tympanic membranes, the tube is
passed beyond view and in a ventral direction below the normal plane of the horizontal
canal.
Myringotomy has been promoted in the past as a technique to gain access to the
middle ear for draining fuid, relieving pressure and instilling medication. Though it is a
useful technique for those indications, it is also considered thc best way to detect otitis
media when combined with cytology and culture.64 The important aspect is that the
tympanic membrane is incised or punctured in the ventral half, preferably the posterio-
ventral quadrant, which is below the attachment to the manubrium.
but it is valuable in determining_ what infectious agents, if any, are present. Cytologic
study reveals any cocci (especially Staphylococcus and Streptococcus), rods (especially
yeasts (Malassezia and Candida), and mixed infections. The presence of white blood cells,
as well as phagocytosis of bacteria, incdicates that the body is responding to the infection
and that treatment of the infection is warranted. The mere visualization of numerous
bacteria in the absence of an inflammatory response and phagocytosis usually indicates
are toxic neutrophils, the ear canal must be fushed to rcmove the toxins.
Cytology is the most appropriate method to determine the importance of bacteria. In
one study, 31.6% of ears were culture positive for Staphylococcus or Streptococcus but
were cytologically negative for cocci.6 when grarm-negative organisms were cultured, only
was four or more organisms per oil immersion field (OlF). Unfortunately, the significance
of these findings is unclear, because the presence of infammatory cells, phagocytosis, and
response to antibiotic therapy dirccted against the cultured organisms were not recorded.
One of the authors (C.E.G.) uses one bacterium/OIF as significant, especially if infamma-
tory cells are present.
 Cytologic evaluation is the preferred method to ascertain the role of Malassezia in a
particular case for two reasons. In one study, I8% of the cases that had Malassezia
detected by cytologic examination were sterile on culture by a commercial laboratory
culturing specifcally for Malassezia at 37°C (98.6°F).7 Another blinded study compared
the sensitivity of cytologic study versus culture for detecting bacteria or yeast in normal
and otitic canine ears.*7 The sensitivity of cytologic examination of cerumen for detection
of gram-positive cocci, gram-negative rods, and yeasts was 84%, 100%, and 100%, respec-
      r    a   
69%, and 50%, respectively. It has been suggested that if Malassezia organisms are found
in ear swab cytologic examination in numbers averaging 10 or more per HPF or 4 or
Cytology should be done from the deep ear canai and, when appropriate, the midle
ear cavity. The incidence of otitis media with an intact tympanic membrane is as high as
59% in dogs with chronic otitis.f4 Studies by Cole and colleagues have demonstrated that
the findings from the external ear canal cytology and middle car cytology may also vary
greatly. Yeast were considered signifcant in 65.8% of ear canals and 34.2% of middle ears
q a  p  o  gsa p  s  s  
  s s  s so  no   
  si  n u i e a  ogs  o 
a chronic recurrent case of otitis externa, the middle ear should be sampled.
Histopathologic studies have been conducted on many dogs and cats with otitis
 externa.69, 73, 14s Unfortunately, these have usually been animals with chronic disease in
which the cause of the otitis externa was not specified. In general, there are variable
degrees of epidermal, sebaceous gland, and ceruminal gland hyperplasia. The inflamma-
tion is usually interstitial, diffuse, or nodular in pattern, with lymphocytes, plasma cells,
Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears · I22I
and mast cells usually predominating. Many cases show some degree of fibrosis and cystic
s aq e spe pur sda ndns sp eru jo ue
CULTURE AND SUSCEPTIBILITY TESTING
The primary indication for culture and susceptibility testing is the presence of otitis media
   a   e   e a s s n
be prescribed. Culture and susceptibility testing should not be done without cytologic
evaluation, which demonstrates that bacteria and white blood cells (that are exhibiting
degenerative changes and are phagocytosing the bacteria) are present in the discharge.
However, the conclusion of one study, demonstrating the relatively inaccurate results for
detecting bacteria with cytology versus culture of the middle ear, is that otitis media
should be cultured.6 They also found that bacteria isolated by culture fron the external
and middle ear of the same ear were usually not identical either in type or antibiotic
susceptibility. Therefore, all cases of otitis media to be cultured should have both the ear
horizontal canal and middle ear sampled.64 It is common for otitis patients to have
multiple types of bacteria isolated from an inflamed ear canal. In one study of 176 otitis
cultures, 49.4% had two or more types of bacteria and 27.3% had three or greater
different isolates per specimen.96 Because numerous bacterial species may be cultured
from tissues of the osseous bulla, a single antimicrobial agent to which all bacterial isolates
obtained from both osseous bullae during bilateral total ear canal ablations, because
an si pe e ca   pi aa a sads pn 
multiply to large mumbers in abnorimal ear canals, and the mere ability to culture large
numbers of one or more microorganisms does not demonstrate that these organisms are
involved in the disease process. It is important to remember that resistance to a particular
antibiotic in vitro may not correlate with clinical response, because direct application of
medication to the car canal results in a higher antibiotic concentration than with systemic
cocci, and enterococci--disk diffusion techniques (Kirby-Bauer) indicate in vitro suscepti-
When therapy will be limited to topical treatment, culture and susceptibility testing are
rarely cost effective.
 Depending on the primary diagnosis, many other tests may be needed to make a
definitive diagnosis. Which tests are most cost effective and indicated depends on thc
 history and complete physical examination findings.
TREATMENT
Therapy of otitis externa depends on identifying and controlling the predlisposing factors
 and primary causes whenever possible. In addition, cleaning the ear canals and the middle
ear, applying topical therapies, and administering systemic medications may be necessary
for the effectivc climination or control of primary and secondary causes as well as
perpetuating factors. 61, 118, 151a
The administration of sedatives such as xylazine or ketamine and diazepam may be
needed to allow adequate examination or treatment in some cases. Other animals require
a general anesthetic. Many clients are reluctant to have their dogs anesthetized but are
often more understanding if the need for getting the ears cleaned and completely exam-
ined is explained in detail.
Cleaning
Thorough cleaning of the ear canals is extremely important for the effective management.
of otitis externa.2l, 77. 16 18, 151a In chronic cases of otitis media, or in animals with a false
rmiddle ear, management includes cleaning that area. Cleaning is valuable for several
reasons. Besides preventing effective therapy, the exudate may interfere with adequate
exainination until it is cleaned out. Foreign bodies, especially small cnes, are eliminated
1222 · Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears
● Table 19-10
 Otic cleansers, ceruminolytics, and
DRYING AGENTS
CERUMINOL.YTIC
MILD
DRYING
CLEANSERS
CLEANSERS
DRYING AGENTS
CLEANSERS
Docusate Solution (Life Science)
X
Clearx Ear Cleansing Solution
X
(DVM)
Panotic (Pfizer)
X
Clearx Cleanser (DVM)
X
Certumenex (Purdue-Fredericks)
X
Cenimene (EVSCO)
X
Oticalm (DVM)
Cerulytic (Virbac)
X
Corium-20 (VRx)
X
Nolva-Cleanse (Fort Dodge)
X
Oti-Clens (Pfzer)
X
Otipan (Harliman)
Clearx Drying Solution (DVM)
X
Bur-Otic Astringent Ear Drops
X
(Virbac)
Dermal Dry (Butler)
X
Domeboro Otic (Dome)
X
Otic-Care B Drying Cream
X
(ARC Labs)
Alocetic Ear Rinse (DVM)
X
Epi-Otic (Virbac)
X
Oticlean A Ear Cleansing Lotion
X
(ARC Labs)
Otic-Fresh (Pan American)
Nolvasan Otic (Fort Dodge)
X
Otocetic Solution (Vedco)
X
 Chlorhexiderm Flush (DVM)
when ears are adequately cleaned. Pus and inflammatory debris can inactivate some
cellular debris, and free fatty acids, thus decreasing the stisnulation for further infamma-
tion. In proliferative conditions of the ear canals, thorough cleaning is one of the most 
valuable steps in management, just as it is in treating intertrigo (fold dermatitis).77
 Ceruminolytic agents grealy facilitate and expedite the cleaning procedure (Tables
19-10 and 19-1l). They include various typcs of surfactants, such as dioctyl sodium 
● Table 19- 11
 Otic ClEanSInG PREPaRTIONS
PRODUCT (COMPANY)
INGREDIENTS
Adams Pan-Otic (Pfizer)
 Isopropyl alcohol, aloe vera, urea, propylene glycol, dioctyl
sodium sulfosuccinate
Alocetic Ear Rinse (DVM)
Acetic acid, aloe vera
Bur-Otic Astringent Ear Drops (Virbac)
Acetic acid, Burow's solrtion, propylene glycol
Cerulytic Ear Ceruminolytic (Virbac)
Benzoyl alceohol, propylene glycol
Cerumene (EVSCO)
Squalene
Chlorhexiderm Flush (DVM)
Chlorhexidine
Clearx Ear Cleansing Solution (DVM)
Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate, urea peroxide
DcrmaPet Ear/Skin Cleanser (DermaPet)
Acetie acid, boric acid
Epi-Otic Ear Cleanser (Virbac)
Lactic acid, salicylic acid, chitosanide, propylene glycol
Gent-L-Clens (Schering-Plough)
Lacticacidsaliylcidlnl
Nolva-Cleanse (Fort Dodge)
Propylene glycol, surfactants
OtiCalm Cleansing Solution (DVM)
Benzoic acid, malie acid, salicylic acid, encalyptus
Oti-Clens (Pfzer)
Malic acid, benzoie acid, salicylic acid, propylene glyeol
Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears · I223
sulfosuccinate (docusate, DsS) (Docusate solution, Life Science) or calcium sulfosuccinate,
and detergents that act by ermulsifying the waxes and lipids. Carbamide peroxide (Earoxide
ear cleanser, Tomlyn) is a slightly less potent cerurminolytic agent that acts as a humectant
by releasing urea when activated. It releases oxygen, creating a foaming action that helps
d si d  pro s    p 
helpful with more purulent exudates. The ceruminolytic Clearx ear cleansing solution
(DVM Pharmaceuticals) combines DsS and carbamide peroxide, thus possessing the sur-
factant, humectant, and oxygen-producing effects of both ingredients.
Some ear cleansers also have antinicrobial propertiesioea 1o2s Epi-Otic (Virbac) was
reported to eliminate S. intermedius, P. ueruginosa, and M. pachydermatis. 102s
 Three ceruminolytic ear cleansers (Panotic, Pfizer; Clearx Cleanser, DVM Pharmaccu-
ticals; Cerumenex, Purdue-Fredericks) with a variety of ingredients including propylene
glycol, Dss, carbamide peroxide, or triethanolanine caused middle ear damage when
administered directly into the middle ear of normal dogs and guinea pigs.los Squalene
(Cerumene, EVscO), a mider surfactant cleanser, caused no significant middle ear pa-
thology when administered in the same way to normal dogs or guinea pigs.1o The clinical
significance of these findings is unknown, bccause labeled manufacturer's guidelines for
the products were not used, and the products were not used as they would be in clinical
 practice (e.g., the products were injected into the middle ear and left there —-no fushing
wasperformed).s
Propylene glycol, glycerin, and mineral oil have mild ceruminolytic effects and are
can be sent home are listed in Table 19-10. Although these products are mild wax
removers, they still have ingredients, such as propylene glycol, which may be ototoxic if
they allowed to remain in the middle ear. For chronic control of excess cerumen, cerumi-
nolytic agents administered two or three times weekly are usually effective.
 Most ceruminolytics and detergents are contraindicated with a ruptured tympanum.
Some disinfectant cleaners, such as chlorhexidine and iodophors, are also contraindicated
with a ruptured tympanurn.75. s9 Frequently, the condition of the tympanic membrane
cannot be determined until the ear canal has heen cleaned. When a rupture is suspected,
these agents should not be used. In some cases, a ruptured tympanic membrane is not
may be decreased by thorough fushing with water or sterile physiologic saline. Additional
detergents or disinfectants are not used in the fushing water or saline unless an intact
tympanuin is noted. The use of ear loops, fushing the ear with water or saline, or the use
sh unuedu paindnu e jn buruep jo poau oxjojo isa ay s! sneredde uoons e jo
suspected.
 Several methods for removing the pus, debris, and emulsified waxes and lipids have
been described. One of the easiest to set up, implement, and clean up is the use of a
rubber ear bulb syringe. After the use of a ceruminolytic agent, repeated fushing with
lukewarm water or saline removes most of the exudate. when the tynpanic membrane is
known to be intact, the use of a detergent or disinfectant solution inay improve the
results. A space should always be left between the rubber nipple and the canal orifice.
This allows back fow and helps prevent excessive pressure on the tympanic membrane.
This procedure is not effective for cleaning false middl ears or the tympanic bulla. Ear
curets or loops are helpful in removing debris lodged deep near the tympanum in cases of
milder, waxy, crusty accumulation with small foreign bodies or leftover waxy debris. For
larger forcign bodies or keratin plugs in the middle ear, an alligator forceps may be used.
However, in most situations, an ear curet is preferred. If the tympanum is ruptured, the
a jo no uni eu png o puad s suqsng um moems o pnou aq Aeu ue
nose. Thus, if the animal is anesthetized, it is important to have a tracheal tube in place
to prevent possible aspiration pneumonia.
The ear curet is gently pulled along the epidermis to break loose any debris. This is
less traumatic than using cotton swabs. Ear curets are placed down the ear canal through
a surgical otoscope head. Under visualization, the loop is passed along the epithelium of
I224 · Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears
the canal until the wax to be removed is reached. The loop is then rolled over the debris
and gently pulled out of the canal. This method minimizes the risk of damaging an intact
tympanum.
A feeding tube and a 12-ml syringe are effective for fushing the ear canal. Feeding
tube, attached to a syringe filled with water or saline, is passed through a surgical
otoscope head and cone and passed down the ear canal under visualization. After the tip
 pue pasnun ag teo ronnos au 'ieun ra au jo juo pasap an pe pan s!
aspirated back out, along with the debris that was broken up. In severe cases, and
whenever the tympanum is ruptured, fushing with a syringe and feeding tube is the most
effective and safe fushing technique and is usually the method of choice (see Fig. 19--
6F).77 This will allow retrograde fushing and, if the tube is placed into the middle ear
cavity, allows fushing of the middle ear cavity. The tip of the tube should be directed
toward the ventral aspect of the tympanic bullae as the more delicate structures are
located in the middle and dorsal compartments of the middle ear cavity (see Fig. 19-6E).
This is a preferred method for drying the ear out, as well, especially when there is no
tympanum present.
Vestibular syndrome or deafness may occur after ear fushing, even when no ototoxic
nno o    a e p  e s is ssu s  si
 In 105 otitic dog ears cleaned and examined, none had detectable damagc to hcaring as
assessed by brainstem auditory evoked response testing. and cleaning actually produced
ject13 104, 1 However, the prevalence of ototoxicity secondary to the use of fushing
solutions, cleaning. and medications when a ruptured tympanic membrane exists is un-
known. Two separate studies have evaluated the effects of chlorhexidinel19 and gentami-
cinl45 in normal dogs with ruptured tympanic membranes. No cochlear or vestibular
dysfunction was measurable after 3 weeks of otic application of these two agents. In
clinical practice, ototoxicity following cleaning or treatment appears to be rare.80
suction. Suction may also he combined with tube fushing, and this is a very effective
cleaning method and the treatment of choice when ceruminolytics must be avoided. The
ear cavity. The disadvantages are the limited access to the middle ear, the time needed to
clean the equiprent, and when used alone, the lack of infusion of liquid.
Some clinicians use a dental water propulsion device (Water Pik). These devices
rapidly clean the ear with multiple rapid pulses of water. There is no suction, and the
time needed to set up and clean the equipment eliminates sorme of the advantages they
seem to offer. It is not as effective in cleaning the middle ear as are the syringe and
feeding tube. Care must be taken to avoid directing the pulsating stream directly onto a
damaged tympanic membrane. The use of a curved water current defuser (Anthony
Products) helps avoid tympanic membrane damage.
After the fushing has been completed, the ear canal is dried, or in cases complicated
by infection, a disinfectant may be applied to the canal. lf the tympanum is ruptured,
e asneo X pie snooe jo uonuo %g v panajaid si %g on og te pn oae
burning sensation when it is applied to infamed, eroded, or ulcerated epithelium and is
best applied while the patient is still sedated.
After the ear is cleaned and relatively dry, topical medications or drying agents can be
used. Most drying agents contain isopropyl alcohol and one or more of the following:
boric acid, benzoic acid, salicylic acid, acetic acid, aluminum acetate, sulfur, and silicone
dioxide. By reading the labels, the major ingredients and, therefore, activity of the prod
ucts can be determined. Veterinary products of the drying or drying cleanser type include
Clearx ear drying solution (DVM Pharmaceuticals), Bur-Otic Astringent ear drops (Vir-
bac), Derral Dry (Butler), Domcboro Otic (Dome), and Otic-Care B drying cream (ARC
Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears · I225
Labs). These products can be used at home for prophylactic treatment of swimmer's ear
and idiopathic excessive cerumen production and as a deodorizer. Alcohol and higher
concentrations of the acids may be irritating or cause a burning sensation in ulcerated
ears. For chronie control of moist ears, drying agents applied twice weekly are usually
effective.
 Modifed drying products with less drying ingredients and more antimicrobial proper-
ties and mild ceruminolytic agents are available. Ingredients often combined with the
drying agents achieve these elfects and include propylene glyeol, lanolin, glycerin, para-
chlorometaxylenol, and chlorhexidine. Some of the veterinary products in this group_are
listed in Table 19-10. Thesc products are used imost effectively in mildly dirty ears. Ears
that have a mild objectionable odor to the client are helped by these products. They are
 not as helpful for clinical otitis externa, although they may be used for long-term manage-
ment of milder cases of recurrent waxy otitis externa, after the inflammation is controlled.
An advantage of these products is their lack of antibiotics or glucocorticoids, which may
induce bacterial resistance or adrenal suppression, respectively.
 In especially waxy or exudative ears, the client may need to clean the ears intermit-
tently so that topical medications can be properly applied. In rmost chronic cases, the
combination cleanser-dryers are not sufficient. In these cases, the client should be in-
structed in the use of the ear buib syringe for home fushing and possibly the use of
ceruminolytics.7 These cases must be carefully selected. In general, the tympanum should
be intact if ceruminolytics are going to be used. This is because the client may not be
able to rinse adequately all residual drug, and repetitive application could be dangerous,
especially if the agent is not being rinsed out. The client must be willing and able to try
fushing, and the animal must be tolerant of the procedure. Many animals tolerate home
fushing after the initial infammation and pain are resolved. This procedure is rarely
home Hushing and necessitate thorough rinsing. The clients use cotton balls or swabs only
in areas that they can visualize, not down thc ear canal.
Owners should rarely clean the ears more than once every 48 hours. With more
frequent applications, the ears often do not have an opportunity to dry out, and the
resultant increased humidity, epithelial maceration, and facilitation of microbial growth
 promote delayed healing, irritation, and secondary infection.
Topical Therapy
Numerous topical preparations for the extermal ear canal are available.151a Most of the ear
products contain various combinations of glucocorticoids, antibiotics, antifungals, and para-
the effects needed. As the case progresses, the patient should be monitored and products
changed accordingly. Each of these types of ingredients is discussed, but the clinician
should be aware of the vehicle.
o po  e s  p aq  a po a   
exterma. In general, dry, scaly, crusty lesions are benefited by oil or ointment bases, which
help moisturize the skin. Moist, exudativc conditions should be treated with solutions or
lotions and not occlusive ointments or oils. Creams are frequently poor choices because
 the client may have diffculty in getting the medication to the horizontal canal. In addi-
● Table 19- 12 
OtIc GlucoCORTIcOId PreParatIOnS
DRUG (COMPANY)
INGREDIENTS
Bur-Otic HC Ear Treatment (Virbac)
Hydrocortisone, acetic acid, Burow's solution, propylene
glycol
Epi-Otie HC (Virbae)
Hydrocortisone, lactie acid
Hydro-10 Mist (Butler)
Hydrocortisone
Synotic Otic Solution (Fort Dodge)
Fluocinolone, dinethyl sulfoxide
I226 · Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears
● Table 19-13
 OTIC ANTImICROBIaL-
-GlucocortIcOId
PrePaRaTIONs
DRUG (COMPANY)
INGREDIENTS
Clearx Ear IDrying Solution (DVM)
Acetic acid, colloidal sulfur, hydrocortisone
Forte-Topical (Pharnacia & Upjohn)
Penicillin, neomycin, polymyxin B, hydrocortisone
Gentocin Otie Solution (Schering-Plough)
Gentamicin, betamethasone
*Neo-Precdef (Pharmacia & Upjohn)
Neomycin, isofupredone
Otomax (Schering-Plough)
Gentamicin, betamethasone, clotrimazole
Paalog Ointment (Fort Dodge)
Nystatin, neomycin, thiostrepton, triamcinolone
Topagen Ointment (Schering-Plough)
Gentamicin, betamethasone
Tresaderm (Merial)
Thiabendazole, neomycin, dexamethasone
Tritop (Pharmacia & Upjohn)
Neomycin, isoflupredone, tetracaine
"Ophthalnic proluct, excellent for cars.
tion, many clients find the application of fuid drops aesthetically more pleasing compared
with the application of viscous materials or the need to insert an applicator down the ear
canal.
Topical glucocorticoids are beneficial in most cases of otitis exterma (see Tables 19-12
and 19-I3). Glucocorticoids have antipruritic and anti-inffammatory effects, decrease
exudation and swelling, cause sebaceous gland atrophy, decrease glandular secretions,
 and ventilation. Because pain and pruritus are alleviated, the animal becomes easier to
medicate. There are different types and potencies of topical glucocorticoids available,
which the clinician should become familiar with. The more potent topical glucocorticoids
 Plough), and fuocinolone acetonide (Synotic, Fort Dodge). Studies have shown that even
the moderately potent glucocorticoids triarncinolone acetonide (Panolog, Fort Dodge) and
dexamethasone (Tresaderm, Merial) are absorbed systemically (see Chap. 3).1z1 Treated
dogs have elevated levels of liver enzymes and suppressed adrenal response to corticotro-
pin (adrenocorticotropic hormone [ACTH]) stimulation. The systemic absorption of more
potent topical glucocorticoids should make the clinician cautious of long-term treatment.
The initial therapy or acute exacerbations may necessitate a potent topical glucocorticoid
(fuocinolone, betamethasone, dexamethasone, or triamcinolone) but, after the inflamma-
tion or allergic reaction is controlled, prophylactic or long-term therapy should use the
least potent topical glucocorticoid possible, such as 0.5% or 1% hydrocortisone, contained
in Hydro B-1020 (Butler), Bur-Otic HC and Epi-Otic HC (Virbac), Clearx ear drying
solution (DVM Pharmaceuticals), and Cort/Astrin solution (Vedco). Stronger than these
hydrocortisone products, but still milder than the potent glucocorticoids, are combination
 a       o s s 
of otitis externa due to atopy or food hypersensitivity, the pinna is frequently affected and
● Table 19-14
 Otic AnTImIcroBIal preParatIoNs
DRUG (COMPANY)
INGREDIENTS
Betadine Solution (Purdue-Fredericks)
Povidone-iodine
Chloromycetin Otic (Parke-Davis)
Chloramphenicol
Ciloxan Ophthalnic (Alcon)*
Ciprofioxacin
Conofite Lotion (Schering-Plough)
Miconazole
Gentocin Ophthalmic (Schering-Plough)t
Gentamicin
Nolvasan Solution (Fort Dodge)
Chlorhexidine
Tobrex Ophthalmic (Alcon)*
Tobramycin
Xenodine (VPL)
Iodine
*Not a veterinary product, but useful.
IOphthalmie produet, but good in ears.
Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears · I227
● Table 19-I5 OTIC ANTIPARASITIC PREPARATIONS
PRODUCT (COMPANY)
INGREDIENTS
Aurimite (Schering-Plough)
Pyrethrins, benzocaine, dioctyl soxlium sulfosuccinate
Cerumite (EVsCO)
Pyrethrins, squalcne
Ear Mitecide (Vedco)
Rotenone
Ear Mite Lotion (Durvet)
Rotenone
Eradimite (Fort Dodge)
Pyrethrins
Mita-Clear (Pfizer)
Pyrethrins
Nolvamite (Fort Dodge)
Pyrethrins
Otornite (Virbac)
Pyrethrins
 should be treated. Antibiotic agents are present in many topical ear products. Uncompli-
cated cases of allergic or ceruminous otitis externa may be managed by topical glucocorti-
coid application alone, and inappropriate use of topical antibiotics may cause a secondary
superinfection or sensitization. All other concerns about the use of topical glucocorticoids
should be considered (see Chap. 3).
Topical antibacterial agents are indicated when infection is present (see Tables 19- 13
 ial), neomycin-polymyxin (Forte-Topical, Pharmacia & Upjohn), and gentamicin (Gentocin
 Otic Solution and Otomax, Schering-Plough)—and chloramphenicol (Liquichlor, EVSCO)
are potent topical antibiotics with good activity against pathogens usually found in otitis
stimulate excessive granulation tissue in the middle ear.77 Clients should also be careful
not to come in contact with chloramphenicol owing to the possibility of idiosyncratic bone
marrow suppression. Using topical antibiotics that are not likely to be needed as systemic
drugs may decrease the occurrence of resistant cases of otitis externa and otitis media.
The more potent broad-spectrum antibiotics (gentamicin and chloramphenicol) should not
be used as first-choice treatments so that resistant strains of bacteria are not created.
 Therefore, neomycin-polymyxin is preferred by the authors as a first-line topical antibiotic.
Most topical antibiotics contain a glucocorticoid, and its potency may not always be
desirable.
 Gram-negative, gentamicin-resistant infections are the bane of many practitioners. In
Scotland, 8l% of the Pseudomonas isolates from canine otitis exterma are resistant to
organism is susceptibie to. Multiple studies have shown that Pseudomonas is usually
susceptible to polymyxin B, and this antibiotic is often overlooked in the treatment of
diffcultPseudomonascases.71 5Onepossiblereason is that polmyxinBis inactivated
a aa  o  s  s  a   a s  d a
topically or topically and systemically in l1 of 12 dogs with Pseudomonas infections
resistant to fuoroquinolones and gentamicin.124 An injectable form or the equine uterine
infusion (Ticillin,Pfzer Animal Health） may be used as ear drops82. 124 The Ticilin is
reconstituted to 100 mg/ml and this is stable for one month if frozen. It may be divided
into 10 to 15 ml vials, which are stable in the refrigerator for 3 days, so clients must
freeze the vials and hring a new one out every 3 days for treatment. Other antibiotic
regimens that are useful include injectable amikacin (50 mg/ml) applied at 3 to 5 drops in
each ear every 12 hours, Tobramycin ophthalmic drops, and in-office formulated enrofox-
ble enrofoxacin (20 mg/ml) (Baytril, Bayer) to 12 ml of a liquid base (such as propylene
glycol and water; Epiotic, Virbac; or Clearx ear drying solution, DVM Pharmaceuticals; or
 o po y  r         a  
not been evaluated, but none is reported.
Treatment options are available that do not depend on altermative antibiotics, but
frequent cleaning should not be forgotten. Presoaking the ear with tromethamine-ethyl-
enediaminetetraacetic acid (Tris EDTA, Derma Pet) for 5 to I0 minutes or mixing
1228 · Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears
gentamicin at 3 mg/ml with Tris EDTA increases the efficacy against gram-negative
chemicals by mixing 4.8 g of EDTA (disodium salt), 24.2 g of Tris (Trizma) base, 3900 ml
distilled water, and 100 ml white vinegar.71 The pH of this mixture is then adjusted to 8.0
sterilization is achieved. Tris EDTA has also been shown to be synergistic with amikacin,
neomycin, cephaloridine, kanendomycin, and enrofloxacin.67, 142 Tris EDTA can be valu-
regimen or as a presoak before instilation of antibiotic (usually two to three times a
week).
Topical antiseptics such as povidone-iodine, chlorhexidine, aluminum acetate, and
acetic acid are helpful in the treatment of bacterial otitis externa (see Tablc 19--14).151a
Acetic acid has been effective in the treatment of otitis externa in humans. It is believed
that its activity is not completely due to the pH because other acidic products are not as
effective in killing Pseudomonas and Staphylococcus. Acetic acid is most effective against
Pseudomonas, with a 2% solution being lethal within 1 minute of contact.71. 7 Staphylo-
coccus and Streptococcus can be killed within 5 minutes of contact with 5% acetic acid
solution. However, this concentration is occasionally irritating. In vitro studies indicated
that mixtures of boric acid and acetic acid were effective antibacterial agents: 0.5% boric
acid with 0.5% acetic acid was lethal for P. aeruginosa; 5% boric acid with 0.5% acetic
effective as polymyxin and hydrocortisone ear drops in a group of acute otitis externa
  o   s      s  s
monas pyocyanea infections.9s Stinging from the aluminum acetate drops resulted in their
being discontinued in 5% of the cases treated. Silver sulfadiazine at 1% has been reported
to be an effective antimicrobial in cases of otitis externa.6l. 14s It is active against P.
aeruginosa, Proteus spp., enterococci, and S. intermedius. It is made by mixing 0.1 g of
silver sulfadiazine powder with 100 ml of distilled water or 1.5 ml ( 1/3 teaspoon) of silver
sulfadiazine cream with 13.5 ml distilled water, and applying the solution at a dose of 0.5
Iml per ear twice daily.71 Another study showed that a 0.1% solution is also effective and is
more liquid, allowing easier application and better dispersal in the car canal.123 Occasional
erosive, severe infammatory reactions can be seen in ears treated with silver sulfacdiazine,
but ototoxicity has not heen reported.
Antifungal agents are required in any case complicated or caused by the yeasts
Malassezia and Candida or by dermatophytes (see Tables 19- 13 and 19- 14);151a Malasse-
zid and dermatophytes usually respond well to topical l% miconazole (Conofite lotion,
 Schering-Plough) or clotrimazole (Otomax, Schering-Plough). In vitro testing has shown
nystatin (Panolog, Fort Dodge) to be effective against Malassezia. Thiabendazole (Tresa-
derm, Merial), although not effective in vitro, may work in some cases. Again, povidone-
iodine or chlorhexidine is also effective. When bacteria and Malassezia are present to-
gethcr, the combination of gentocin, clotrimazole, and betamethasone (Otomax,
Schering-Plough) or neomycin, thiostrepton, nystatin. and tramcinolone (Panalog, Fort
 Dodge) is effective, as is povidone-iodine, chlorhexidine, or 5% acetic acid. For chronic,
 recurrent bacterial or yeast infections, antimicrobial agents used two or three times weekly
may be effective.
 Parasiticidal agents are indicated in ear products for Otodectes and, less commonly.
Dernodex, Otobius, and trombiculid infestations (see Table 19--15). Most cases respond to
products containing, Pyrethrins (Otomite Plus, Virbac; Cerumite, EVSCO; Mita-Clear,
Pfizer Animal Health; Otic-Care M, ARC Labs), rotenone (Ear Mitecide, Phoenix; Ear
Mitecide, Vedco; Ear Mite Lotion, Durvet), and thiabendazole (Tresaderm, Merial). In
 prs sod p o e d aa u jo n  o 
this, all in-contact animais, both dogs and cats, must be treated. Second, Otodectes can be
found on other botly areas. Therefore, whole-body treatments with effective parasiticidals
must be done. The life cycle of Otodectes necessitates that otic and body treatment be
continued for at least 3'weeks, with a month being necessary in some cases. Some
Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears · I229
veterinarians recommend topical application of ivermectin (drops in the ears), especially in
cats. Although this may be effective, one study showed that the recurrence rate was
higher and the time to remission slower than with systemic ivermectin therapy.76 Amitraz
(1 ml of amitraz in 9 to 29 ml of mineral oil) is also effective when applied as otic
drops.21 Fipronil spray may eliminate ear mites both from the ear and the body with one
SystemicTherapy
 Systemic therapy is indicated if otitis externa is severe, marked proliferative changes are
present, otitis media is present, when owners cannot administer topical treatments, and in
cases in which topical adverse reactions are suspected. Appropriate antibiotics or antifun-
gals should be used until at least l week after cure. Antibiotics that are known to
selected and given at doses that are at the high end of the recommended doses. Examples
of antibiotics that are useful for otitis media and proliferative otitis include trimethoprim-
sulfadiazine, 25 mg/kg every 12 hours; ormetoprim-sulfadimethoxine (Primor, Pfzer Ani-
mal Health), 55 mg/kg day 1 and 25 mg/kg every 24 hours subsequent days; clindanycin
every 12 hours; enrofoxacin (Baytril, Bayer Corporation), 5 to 20 mg/kg every 24 hours;
and orbifoxacin (Orbax, Schering-Plough) 2.5 to 12.5 mg/kg q24h, In general, Huoroquin-
olones are needed at higher doses for Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections, such as 20 mg/
kg enrofoxacin, 12.5 mg/kg orbioxacin, or 20 mg/kg ciprofoxacin q24h.71, 150 Marbofoxa
cin at 5 mg/kg every 24 hours has shown encouraging results for treating Pseudomonas
otitis.60 The use of acupuncture with conventional otitis therapy was shown in a blinded
study to decrease the signs and symptoms of otitis more rapidly than conventional therapy
 alone.134 However, the overall success and cure rate at 3 months was no different between
 groups. Ketoconazole (Nizoral, Janssen) at 10 mg/kg every 12 to 24 hours is given when
otitis media is associated with Malassezia. In unresponsive cases, itraconazole (Sporanox,
Janssen) may be effective. Otoscopic and cytologic examination is required before a
patient can be considered cured.
a  si s p   n s r pe u re n
ously at 0.3 mg/kg and repeated three times at 10-day intervals, it eradicates the ear
mites. This form of therapy treats the whole pet and eliminates a carrier state; therefore,
   s     s o    q  
mites the use of ivermectin in all the household pets was rewarding. Collies, Shetland
sheepdogs, Old English sheepdogs, other herding breeds, and crosses of these breeds
should not be treated with high-dose ivermectin. Systemic therapy with moxidectin at 0.2
to 0.4 mg/kg SQ or PO at 10 day intervals or every 72 hours for 7 treatments is also
effective.57
Systemic glucocorticoid therapy is indicated when there is markedly inflamed edema-
tous otitis and when chronic pathologic changes cause marked stenosis of the canal
lumen5a Oral prednisone or prednisolone,1 to2mg/kgPO,ortriamcinolone acetonide
0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg PO, may be given daily fo1 4 to 7 days, then tapered to alternate-day
regimens. This treatment is continued until the proliferative tissue has resolved or has
stopped improving.S
 Some cases of allergic otitis externa may be treated with systeimic
glucocorticoids, allowing the initial topical therapy to be a low-potency glucocorticoid
uncommon case of stenosis, primarily of the vertical canal, or when systemic glucocorti-
coids are ineffective in reducing the proliferative tissue, intralesional triamcinolone aceto-
nide may be helpful.7 Triamcinolone acetonide is particularly effective for inhibiting
fibroblasts and reducing collagen production.
 Isotretinoin (Accutane, Roche) and etretinate (Tegison, Roche) have been helpful in a
limited number of cases of otitis externa. Isotretinoin was used in a few dogs and cats that
had histologic evidence of sebaceous gland hyperplasia. Although it appeared to be help-
ful, its administration was stopped owing to side effects or expense. One study of etretin-
1230 · Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears
ate in Cocker spaniels with primary keratinization disorders indicated that the ceruminous
otitis externa in these dogs did not improve.129 However, in these cases, other perpetuat-
 ing factors were not adequately treated. Etretinate is no longer available in the United
States. When the ears are repetitively cleaned and concurrent infections are treated,
retinoids may be more beneficial. Further work and studies with synthetic retinoids are
indicated (see Chap. 3).
Surgery
 Surgical procedures that may promote drainage or ventilation are described in most
surgical textbooks. It should be emphasized that surgical procedures do not replace a
thorough diagnostic work-up and that case selection should be done carefully. In cases
with marked proliferative changes of the medial wall, surgical debridement is indicated.
isd o s     jo ss  op e s s
to improve ventilation and response to medical therapy, and to manage medically resistant
otitis media. It is imperative for the best results that the primary diagnosis is determined
before surgery. Many animals have undergone surgical procedures only to continue to
 procedure, clients not properly educated about expectations may be unsatisfied with the
results. Even cases that have been successfully ablated may have persistent pruritus and
 inflammation of the pinna.77.97
Lateral ear canal resection eliminates the lateral wall of the vertical canal. It is
successful in approximately 50% of cases, and clients should be warmed of the relatively
high failure rate When the procedure is performed early in disease before the develop-
ment of otitis media or other perpetuating factors, it is much more successful.92 In one
study, lateral resection failed in 86.5% of the Cocker spaniels, but Shar peis tended to
s e  r     e's o  s n r s
vertical ear canal or when medical management is not effective and improvement of
 i  r a dn a e  ro a  a
decrease the humidity of the ear canal by up to 10%. Contraindications are stenotic
 horizontal ear canals, otitis media, and severe proliferative disease or mineralization of the
auricular cartilage. The most important step is to make certain that the opening to the
canal is as wide as possible and that there is skin-to-skin apposition to decrease scar tissue
formation. The cartilage fap must be pulled ventrally, and skin-to-skin apposition should
beobtained.
Vertical canal ablation may be indicated if the primary disease is limited to the
that was associated with the medial wall of the vertical canal. A study reported inprove-
d go  o u pno ss jo u s os s o  ui s
with the other patients requiring continued medical therapy. However, medical therapy
by the authors. When horizontal canal stenosis or otitis media is present, other procedures
are indicated, One should not amputate at the horizontal canal but at the last centimeter
of the vertical canal. It is better to leave two drain boards, both dorsal and ventral.
 Total ear canal ablation is often recommended in dogs with end-stage ear disease that
is poorly or completely unresponsive to aggressive cleaning and medical therapy. In some
is less expensive and often preferable as a long-term solution. It is often combined with a
bulla osteotomy and curettage of the tympanic bulla, which decreases the incidence of
mending total ablations has been the concern with hearing loss. Hearing loss is significant
but not usually complete.97 12, 13 Although this may be a problem in normal dogs, this is
a minor concern in dogs with chronic diseases.111
Dehiscence of the surgical wound after total ear canal ahlation and lateral bulla
 Osteotomy is common.149n Wound contamination may be an important contributing factor 
 in postoperative dehiscence. One study demonstrated that during surgery, there is sub-
 stantial contamination of subcutaneous tissue with bacteria (E. coli or Streptococcus canis
Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears · I23I
FIGURE I9-Il. Acquired fold-
ing of the pinna in a cat with iatro-
genic hyperglucocorticoidism.
contamination in 94% of the surgical procedures) from excised tissues of the osseous
bulla.149a
Acquired Folding of the Pinna
Acquired folding of the pinnae ("fop-eared" cats) occurs in adult cats.125, 138 A sudden,
bilateral, lateral folding over of the distal one third of the pinnae is seen (Fig. 19-1l).
The folded portion of the pinna is cool, thin, and palpably devoid of cartilage. All cats
have received long-term (8 months to 2 years) daily applications of glucocorticoid-contain-
ing otic preparations. Serum cortisol responses to ACTH are depressed, suggesting the
presence of iatrogenic secondary adrenocortical insufficiency and iatrogenic Cushing's.
syndrome. Stopping the glucocorticoid therapy may or may not result in any improvement
 of the pinnal folding.
FIGURE 19-I2. Congenital mi-
crotia in a Dachshund. Left pinna is
smaller than the right pinna.
1232 · Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears
Miscellaneous
 Congenital microtia was seen in a Dachshund (Fig. 19- 12).
● references
Eyelids
Dermatology V. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia,
1. Abegneli PL: Pathologie des paupieres chez les cami-
1995.
vores domestiques. Rev Med Vet 165:217, 1989.
Claws
2. Angarano DW: Dermatologic disorders of the eyelid
 22. Bergvall K: Treatment of symmetrical onychomadesis
and periocular region. In: Kirk RW (ed): Current
and onychodystrophy in five dogs with omega-3 and
Veterinary Therapy X. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadel-
omega-6 fatty acids. Vet Dermatol 9:263, 1998.
phia, 1986, p 678.
23. Boord M: Personal communication, 1993.
3. Bistner SI: Diseases of the nasolacrimal system. In:
 24. Boord MJ, et al: Onychectomy as a therapy for sym-
    )  
metric claw and claw fold disease in the dog. J Am
Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1974, p 488.
Anim Hosp Assoc 33:131, 1997.
4. Bond R, et al: An idioipathic facial dermatitis of 13
25. Carlotti D: Nail dliseases in the dog and cat: Differen-
persian cats. Proc Eur Soc Vet Dermatol Eur Coll
tial diagnosis and_ treatmcnt. Proceedings, William
Vet Dermatol 14:155, 1997.
Dick Bicentenary,Edinburgh, July, 1993.
5. Charbonne L, Clerc B: Les blepharites des carmivores
25a.De Jonghe SR, et al: Trachyonychia associated with
domestiques. Point Vet 20:33, 1988.
alopecia areata in a Rhodesian Ridgeback. Vet Der-
6. de Ceyer C: Dermatologie des paupieres du chien et
matol 10:123, 1999.
du chat. Premiere parie: Etade generale. Prat Med
26. Evans LM, Caylor KB: Polycythemia vera in a cat
Chir Anim Comp 28:605, 1993.
and management with hydroxyurea. J Am Anim Hosp
7. de Geyer G: Dermatologie des paupieres du chien et
Assoc 31:434, 1995.
du chat. Deuxieme partie: Etude speciale, Prat Med
27. Foil CS, Conroy J: Dermatoses of claws, nails, and
Chir Anim Comp 28:613, 1993.
hoof. In: Von Tscharmer C, Halliwell REW(eds): Ad-
 8. Dugan SJ, et al: Variant nodular granulomatous epi-
vances in Veterinary Dermatology I. Bailliere Tindall,
sclerokeratitis in four dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
Philadelphia, 1990, p 420.
29:403, 1993.
28. Harvey RC, Markwell PJ: The mineral comnposition of
9. Gardiner CH, et al: Onchocerciasis in two dogs. J Am
nails in nornal dogs and comparisou with shed nails
Vet Med Assoc 203:828, 1993.
in canine idiopathic onychornadesis. Vet Dernatol 7:
10. Gelatt KN: Histiocytoma of the eyelid of a dog. Vet
29,1996.
Med (Small Anim Clin) 70:305, 1975.
29. Griffn CE: Claw diseases. Presentation, European
11. Gerdin PA, et al: Survey and topographic distributon
 School of Advanced Veterinary Studies, Luxembourg.
of bacterial and fungal microorganisms in eyes of
1994.
clinically normal dogs. Canine Pract 18:34, 1993.
30. Griffn CE: Malassezia paronychia in atopic dogs. J
Vet Allergy Clin Immunol 5:78, 1997.
12. Hirai T, et al: Apocrine gland tumor of the eyelid in
a dog.Vet Pathoi 34:232,1997.
31.
Mueller RS, et al: Microanatomy of the canine claw.
13. Johnson BW, Canipbell KL: Dermatoses of thc ca-
Vet Dermatol 4:5, 1993.
nine eyelid. Comp Cont Educ 11:385, 1989.
tomy: Description of a new biopsy technique for ca-
14. Kakoma I, et al: Identification of staphylococci and
nine claws. Vet Dermatol 10:55, 1999.
33. Mueller RS, et al: Evaluation of the pathogenesis of
tive frequency of isolation, β-lactarmase production,
and selected antimicrobial sensitivity profles. Carine
Proc Ann Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Derinatol Ain
Pract 18:11, 1993.
Coll Vet Dermatol 14:83, 1998.
15. Ketring KL: Diseases of the eyelids. In: Kirk RW
(ed): Current Veterinary Therapy VII. W.B. Saunders
 34. Rosychuk RAW: Diseases of the claw and claw fold.
In: Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's Current Veterinary
Co, Philadelphia, 1980, p 546.
Therapy XII. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1995,
16. Lawson DD: Canine distichiasis. J Small Anim Pract
p 641.
14:469, 1973.
 35. Scott Dw, Miller WH: Disorders of the claw and
17. Lenehan TA, Tarvin G: Personal communication,
clawhed in cats. Comp Cont Edne 14:449, 1992.
1993.
36. Scott DW, Miller WH: Disorders of the claw and
18. McLaughlin, SA, et al: Eyelid neoplasms in cats: A
clawhed in dogs. Comp Cont Educ 14:1448, 1992.
review of demographic data (1979 to 1989). J Am
37. Scott Dw, Foil Cs: Claw diseases in dogs and cats.
Anirn Hosp Assoc 29:63, 1993.
In: Kwochka KK, et al (ecis): Advances in Veterinary
19. Moore CP: Qualitative tear film disease. Vet Clin
Dermatology, Vol 3. Butterworth Heinemann, Boston,
North Am Small Anim Pract 20:565, 1990.
1998, p 406.
20. Rothstein E, et al: Tetracycline and miacinamide for
38. Scot DW, et al: Symmetrical lupoid onychodystrophy
the treatment of sterile pyogranuloma/granuloma syn-
in dogs: A retrospective analysis of 18 cases (1989-
drome in a dog. J Ain Anim Hosp Assoc 33:540,
1993). JI Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31:194, 1995a.
1997.
 38a. Vicek T, et al: Symmetrical lupoid onychodystrophy
21. Scott DW, et al: Muller and Kirk's Small Animal
in two sibling Rottweilers. Vet Pathol 34:5, 1997.
Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears · I233
Anal Sacs
vances in Veterinary Dermatology Ill. Butterworth
39. Anderson RK: Anal sac discase and its related derma-
Heinemann, Boston, 1998. p 463.
toses, Comp Cont Educ 6:829, 1984.
61. Carlotti DN, Tailleu-LeRoy S: L'otite externe chez le
40, Duijkeren E: Disease condlitions of canine anal sacs. J
chien: Etiologie et clinique, revue biblographique et
Small Anim Pract 36:12, 1995.
ctude retrospective portant sur 752 cas. Prat Med
41. Greer WB, Calhoun ML: Anal sacs of the cat (Felis
Chir Anim Comp 32:243, 1997.
domesticus). Am J Vet Res 27:773, 1966.
62. Chang HJ, et al: An epidemic of Malassezia pachy-
42.Hajsig M,Luknan P: Pityrosporum pachydermatis
dermatis in an intensive care nursery associated with
(P. canis) in the infamed canine anal sacs. Vet Arch
colonization of health care workers' pet dogs. N Engl
50:43, 1980.
J Med 338:757, 1998.
: Incidence and distribution of anal sac
63.Chesney CJ: The intimate envelope: Water and skin.
43. Harvey CE:
disease in the dog. J Am Anim Hlosp Assoc 10:573,
In: Kwochka KK, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary
1974.
Dermatology IIl. Butterworth Heinermann, Boston,
44. Lukman P: Nalazista glijvice Pityrosporum canis u
1998, p 47.
organizuma zdravih i bolenith pasa. Vet Arch 52:37,
64. Cole LK, et al: Microbial fora and antimicrobial sus-
1982.
ceptibity pattems of isolated pathogens from the hori-
45. Morntagna W, Parks H: A histochemical study of the
zontal ear canal and middle ear in dogs with otitis
glands of the anal sac of the dog. Anat Rec 100:297,
media. J Am Vet Med Assoc 212:5348, 1998.
1948.
46. Muse R; Anal gland disease and anal pruritus. In:
 concentration susceptibility testing of enrofloxacin on
Griffin CE, et al (eds): Dermatology. Western Veteri-
isolated bacterial pathogens from dogs with chronic
nary Conference, Las Vegas, 1998, p 186.
otitis extena and otitis media. Proc Annu Memb
47. Ross JT, et al;: Adenocarcinoma of the apocrine
Mcet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol
glands of the anal sac in dogs: A review of 32 cases. J
14:123, 1998.
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27:349, 1991.
66. Eger CE, Lindsay P: Effects of otitis on hearing in
48. Seim HB: Diseases of the anus and rectum. In: Kirk
dogs characterized by brainstem auditory evoked re-
RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy IX. W. B.
sponse testing. J Small Anim Pract 38:380, 1997.
Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1986, p 916.
 67. Farca AM, et al: Potentiating effect of EDTA-Tris on
49. Titkemeyer C: Applied anatomy of the perianal region
the activity of antibioties against resistant bacteria as-
of the dog. Mich St Univ Vet 18:162, 1958.
sociated with otiis, dematitis and cyshiis. J Small
50. Vercell A: Perianal diseases in dogs. Proc Eur Soc
Anim Pract 38:243, 1997.
Vet Dermatol Eur Coll Vet Dermatol 14:5l, 1997.
68. Fermando SDA: A histological and histochemical
Ear Conals
study of the glands of the external auditory canal in
the dog. Res Vet Sci 7:116, 1966.
 51. Ascher F, et al: Mise au point et étude experimentale
 69. Fermando SDA: Certain histopathologic features of
 d'une formulation destinee au traitement des otites
externes du chien et du chat. Partie l. Epidemiologie
the external auditory meatus of the cat and dog with
et microbiologie. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 23:267,
otitis extema. Am J Vet Res 28:278, 1967.
70. Fernando SDA: Microscopic anatoiny and histochem-
1988.
52. August JR: Diseases of the ear canal. In: Complete
istry of glands in the external auclitory neatus of the
Manual 'of Ear Care. Veterinary Learming Systems,
cat (Felis dornesticus). Am J Vet Res 26:1157, 1965.
Princeton Junction, NJ, 1986, p 37.
71. Foster AP, DeBoer DJ: The role of Pseudomonas in
 53. Benson CE: Susceptibility of selected otitis exterma
canine ear disease. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vot 20:
pathogens to individual and inixtures of acetic and
909, 1998.
72. Franc M, et al: Tumeurs du conduit audif exterme
boric acids. Proc Anu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet
Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 14:121, 1998.
des camivores. Rev Med Vet 132:733, 1981.
54. Blanco JL, et al: Microbiological diagnosis of chronic
73. Fraser G: The histopathology of the external auditory
otitis extema in the dog. Zentralbl Veterinarmed 43:
meatus of the dog. J Comp Pathol 71:253, 1961.
475, 1996.
74. Frost RC: Canine otoacariasis. J Small Anim Pract 2:
 55. Blue JL, Wooley RE: Antibacterial sensitivity patterns
253, 1961.
of bacteria isolated from dogs with otitis externa. J
75. Galle HG, Venker-van Haagen Al: Ototoxicity of the
Am Vet Med Assoc 177:362, 1977.
antiseptic combination chlorhexidine/cetrimide (Say-
56. Bormand V: Bacteriologie et mycologie de lotite ex-
lon): Effects on equilibrium and hearing. Vet Q 8:56,
terne du chien. Schweiz Arch Tierheilkd 134:341,
1986.
1992.
76. Crain D, et al: Treatment of ear mites in cats: A
 57. Bourdeau P, et al: The probable role of environmen-
coinparison of subcutaneous and topical ivermectin.
tal conditions in the efficacy of treatment of Otodec-
Vet Med 89:1122, 1994.
tes cynotis infestation in dogs: An example with moxi-
77. Griffn CE: Otitis extema and media: In: Griffin CE,
  
et al (eds): Current Veterinary Dermatology. Mosby--
Dermatol Eur Coll Vet Dermatol 15:149, 1998.
Year Book, St. Louis, 1993, p 245.
58. Boyanowski KJ. et al: Ceruminolytic agents. J Am
78. Griffn CE: Principiles for treatment of the diseased
Anim Hosp Assoe 34:281, 1998.
ear canal. In: Complete Manual of Ear Care. Veteri-
59. Breitwieser F: Ergebnisse bakteriologischer und my-
nary Learming Systems, Princeton Junchion, NJ, 1986,
kologischer Untersuchungen bei der Oitis externa
p 61.
des Hundes. Tierarztl Prax 25:257, 1997.
79.
Griffn CE, et al: Otitis in dogs and cats. CD ROM,
60. Carlotti DN, et al: Marbofoxacin for the systemic
CLIVE, University of Edinburgh, 1998.
 80. Griffn CE, Song MD; Management of otitis externa.
terna in the dog. In: Kwochka KK, et al (eds): Ad-
In: Kwochka KK, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary
I234 · Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears
Dermatology Ill. Butterworth Heinemann, Boston,
aging chronic otitis exterma. Semin Vet Med Surg
1998, p 369.
Small Anim 8:24, 1993.
81. Griffin CE: Etiology and pathogenesis of ottis. In:
Griffin CE, et al (eds): Otology Medicine and Sur-
 dogs and cats: Histological and imumunohistochemical
gery. Westen Veterinary Conference, Las Vegas,
rvaluation of 23 cases. Proc Eur Soc Vet Dermatol
1998, p 3."
Eur Coll Vet Dermmatol 14:195, 1997.
82. Griffin CE: Pseudomonas otitis therapy. In: Bonagura
101. Little CJL, Laue JG: An evaluation of tympanornetry,
JD (ed): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy
XIII.
(stoscopy. and palpation for assessment of the canine
W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 2000, p 586.
tympanic 1meinbrane. Vet Rec 124:5, 1989.
83. Grono LR: Otitis externa. In: Kirk RW (ed): Current
102. Litte CJL, et al: Infammatory middle ear disease of
Veterinary Therapy VII. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadel-
the dog: The clinical and pathological features of cho-
phia, 1980, p 461.
lesteatoua, a complication of otitis media. Vet Rec
84.
Hayes HM Jr, Pickle WJ: Effects of ear type and
128:319, 1991.
weather on the hospital prevalence of canine otitis
102a. Lloyd DH, Lamport Al: Evaluation in vitro de
exterma. Res Vet Sci 42:294, 1987.
 Iactivite antimicrobienne de topiques cutanes et auri-
85. Holt D, et al: Lateral exploration of fistulas develop-
   p    z s
ing after total ear canal ablations: 10 cases. J Am
34:259, 1999
Anin Hosp Assoc 32:527, 1996.
102b. Lloyd DH, et al: Antimicrobial activity in vitro and
 86. Huang HP, Little CJL: Effects of fatty acids on the
in vivo of a canine ear cleanser, Vet Rec l43:11l,
growth and composition of Malassezia pachydermatis
1998.
and their relevance to canine otitis exterma. Res Vet
103. Logas DB: Diseases of the ear canal. Vet Clin N Am
Sci 55:119, 1993.
Small Anim Pract 24:905, 1994.
87. Huang HP, et al: The rclationship between microbial
104. Mansfield PD: Ototoxicity in dogs and cats. Comp
numbers found on cytological exarnination and micro-
Cont Educ 12:331, 1990.
bial growth density on culture of swabs from the
105. Mansfeld PD, et al: Infectivity of Malassezia pachy-
external ear canal in dogs. Proc Fur Soc Vet Derma-
dernatis in the exlermal ear canal of dogs. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 26:97, 1990.
tol 10:81, 1993.
106. Mansfield PD, et al: The effects of four commercial
88. Huang HP, et al: The application of an infrared tym-
panic membrane thermometer in comparing the ex-
ceruminolytic agents on the middle car. J Am Anim
ternal ear canal temperature betwccn crect and pen-
Hosp Assoc 33:479, 1997.
dulous ears in dogs. In: Kwochka KK, et al (eds):
107.
 Marino DJ. et al: Results of surgery and long-term
 Advances in Veterinary Dermatology I1. Butterworth
follow-up in logs with ceruminous gland adenocarci-
noma. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 29:560, 1993.
Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p 57.
89. lgarashi Y, Oka Y: Vestibular ototoxicity following in-
tratympanic applications of chlorhexidine gluconate in
ccruminous gland adenocarcinoma.J Am Anim Hosp
the cat. Arch Otorhinolaryngol 242:167, 1985.
Assoc 30:54, 1994.
109. Mathison PT, ct al: Development of a canine model
90. Jeffers JG, et al: A dermatosis resembling juvenile
ccllulitis in an adult dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31:
for Pseudomomas otitis extena. Proc Aunu Memb
Meeting Am Acad Vet Dermatol Ain Coll Vet Der-
204, 1995.
91. Jolhnson A, Hawke M: An Ink inpregnation study of
matol 11:21, 1995.
110. Matsuda H, et al: The aerobic bactcrial fora of the
the migratory skin of the external auditory canal of
  ) p y d  
Anim Pract 25:269, 1984.
1986.
111. Matthiesen DT, Scavelli T: Total ear canal ablation
92. Johnston DE: Early lateral drainage prodecure for
chronic otis extena in dogs.Proc Enr Coll Vet Surg
amd lateral bulla osteotomy in 38 dogs. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 26:257, 1990.
4:38, 1995.
112. McAnulty JF, ct al; Wound healing and brainstem
93. Kapatkin AS, et al: Results of surgery and long-term
follow-up in 3l cats with nasopharyngeal polyps. J
nal ablation with lateral tympanic bulla osteotomy in
Ain Anim Hosp Assoc 26:387, 1990.
dogs. Vet Surg 24:1, 1995.
94. Kiss G, et al: Characteristics of Malassezia pachyder-
113. McAnulty JF, et al: Wound healing and brainsten
ratitis strains isolated from canine otitis extenma. My-
and evoked potentials after experimental ventral tym-
coses 39:313, 1996.
panic bulla osteotomy in dogs. Vet Surg 24:9, 1995.
95. Kiss G, et al: New combination for the therapy of
114. MeCarthy RJ, Caywood DD: Vertical car canal resec-
canine otitis externa. I. Microbiology of otitis externa.
tion for end-stage otitis externa in dogs. J Am Anim
J Small Anim Pract 38:51, 1997.
Hosp Assoc 28:545, 1992.
96. Kowalsli J: The microbial environment of the ear
115. MeKeever PJ. Richardson HW: Otitis externa, part 2:
canal in health and disease. Vet Clin N Am Small
Clinical appearance and diagnostic methods. Compan-
Anim Pract 18:743, 1988.
1on Aniin Pract 2:25, 1988.
97. Krahwinkel DJ, et al: Effect of total ablation of the
116. MeKeever PJ, Richardson HW: Oiis exterma, part 3:
extermal acoustic meatus and bulla osteotony on audi-
Ear cleaning and medical treatment. Companion
tory fumctiou in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 202:949,
Anim Pract 2:24, 1988.
1993.
117. McKeevcr PJ. Torres S: Otitis exterma, part 1: The
98. Lambert iJ: A comparison of the treatment of otitis
ear and predisposing
g factors to otitis extema. Comp
externa with 'otosporin' and alurminium acetate: A Re-
Anim Pract 2.7, 1988.
  y  sd u ad sas e g uod
118. Merchant SR: Medically managing chronic otitis ex-
Pract 31:291, 1981.
terna and media. Vet Med 92:5i8, 1997.
99. Iayton CE: The role of lateral ear rcsection in man-
119. Merchant SR, et al: Ototoxicity assessument of a chlor-
Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears · I235
hexidine otic preparation in dogs. Prog Vet Neurol 4:
140. Scott DW. Miller WH Jr: Idiopathic cutaneous ad-
72, 1993.
verse drug reactions in the cat: Literature review and
120. Moisan PG, Watson GL: Ceruminous gland tumors in
report of 14 cases (1990-1996). Feline Pract 26:10,
dogs and cats: A review of 124 cases. J Am Anim
1998.
Hosp Assoc 32:448, 1996.
141. Scott DW, Miller WH Jr: Idiosyncratic cutaneous ad-
121.
Moriello KA, et al: Adrenocortical suppression associ-
verse drug reactions in the dog: Literature review and
ated with topical otic administration of glucocorticoids
report of 101 cases (1990-1996). Canine Pract 24:16,
in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 193:329, 1988.
1999.
122. Muse H, et al: The prevalence of otic manifestations
 14la. Spangler EA, Dewey CW: Meningoencephalitis sec-
and otitis exterma in allergic dogs. Proc Am Acad Vet
ondary to bacterial otitis media/interna in a dog. J Am
Derrmatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 12:33, 1996.
Anim Hosp Assoc 36:239, 2000.
123. Noxon JO, et al: Minimal inhibitory concentration of
142. Sparks TA, et al: Antimicrobial effect of combinations
silver sulfadiazene on Pseudomonas aeruginosa and
of ELTA-Tris and amikacin or neormycin on the mi-
Staphyloccus intermedius isolates from the ears of
croorganisms associated with otitis exterma in dogs.
dogs with otitis externa. Proc Am Acad Vet Dermatol
Vet Res Comm 18:241, 1994.
Am Coll Vet Dermatol 13:72, 1997.
143. Spruell JSA: Treatment of otitis media in the dog. J
124. Nuttal TJ: Use of ticarcillin in the management of
Small Anim Pract 5:107, 1964.
canine otitis externa complicated by Pseudomonas ae-
144.
 Stout-Graham M, et al: Morphologic measurements
ruginosa. J Small Anin Pract 39:165, 1998.
of the extemal horizontal ear canal of dogs. Am J Vet
Res 51:990, 1990.
143:456, 1998.
145. Strain GM, et al: Ototoxicity assessment of a gentami-
126. Pope ER: Feline infamrmnatory polyps. Companion
cin sulfate otic prcparation in dogs. Am J Vct Res 56:
Anirn Pract 19:33, 1989.
532, 1995.
127. Poulet FM, et al: Focal proliferative eosinophilic der-
146. Strickland JH, Calhoun ML: The microscopic anat-
omy of the extemal ear of Felis domesticus. Am J Vet
Pathol 28:171, 1991.
Res 21:845, 1960.
128. Powell MB, et al: Reaginic hypersensitivity in Otodec-
 147. Sylvestre AM: Potential factors affecting the outcome
tes cymotis infestation of cats and mode of feeding.
of dogs with a resection of the lateral wall of the
Am J Vet Res 41:877, 1980.
vertical ear canal. Can Vet J 39:157, 1998.
129. Power HT, Ihrke PJ: Synthetic retinoids in veterinary
148. Thomas ML: Development of a bacterial model for
dermatology. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Clin 20:
canine otitis externa. Proc Annu Mermb Meet Am
1525, 1990.
Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 6:28,
130. Rausch FD, Skinner CW: Incidence and treatment of
1990.
budding yeast in canine otitis externa. Mod Vet Pract
149, van der Gaag I: The pathology of the external ear
59:914, 1978.
canal in dogs and cats, Vet Q 8:307, 1986.
131. Remedios AM, et al: A comparison of radiographic
149a. Vogel PL, et al: Wound contamination and antimi-
versus surgical diagnosis of otitis media.J Am Anim
crobial susceptibility of bacteria cultured during total
Hosp Assoe 27:183, 1991.
ear canal ablation and lateral bulla osteotomy in dog.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:1641, 1999.
Anim Clin 72:1646, 1977.
150. Walker RD, et al: Pharmacokineic evaluation of en-
133. Rosychuck RAW: Managerment of otitis extera. Vet
rofoxacin administered orally to healthy dogs. Am J
Clin North Am 24:921, 1994.
Vet Res 53:2315, 1992.
134. Sanchez-Araujo M, Puchi A: Acupuncture enhances
151. Weisbroth SH, et al: Immunopathology of naturally
the efficacy of antibioties treatiment for canine otitis
occurring otodectic otoacariasis in the domestic cat. J
crises. Acupunct Electrother Res 22:191, 1997.
Am Vet Med Assoc 165:1088, 1974.
135.
 Schulte A: Neoplasien in Ohr der Katze. Kleintier-
15la. White PD: Medical management of chronic otitis in
Praxis 33:407, 1988.
dlogs. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 21:716, 1999.
136. Scott DW: Canine sterile eosinophilic pinnal folliculi-
152. Wolschrijn' CF, et al: Comparison of air and bone
tis. Comp Anim Pract 2:19, 1988.
137. Scott DW: Feline derinatology 1900-1978: A mono-
young dogs and cdogs with bilateral ear canal obstruc-
graph. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:331, 1980.
tion, Vet Q 19:158, 1997.
138.
Scott Dw: Feline dermatology 1986 to 1988: Looking
153. Swaim SF, Bradley DM: Evaluation of a closed-suc-
to the 1990s through the eyes of many counsellors. j
tion drainage for treating auricular hematomas, J Am
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26:515, 1990.
Anim Hosp Assoc 32:36, 1996.
139. Scott Dw: Observations on canine atopy. J Ain Anim
Hosp Assoc 17:9l, 1981.
Chapte!
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic
Tumors
· cutaneouS OncoLoGY
Veterinary oncology has come into its own as a specialty. Detailed information on the
tionsl-4, 6.7 and therefore is not presented here. This chapter is an overview of canine and
feline cutaneous neoplasia as well as non-neoplastic tumors.
 The combined incidence rates (the number of new cases of a disease diagnosed in 1
-tjndod au jo ooo'oot ied seso se passaidxa pue ysu ne uonendod au Aq papp seak
tion at risk) for benign and malignant neoplasms in dogs and cats were reported to be
about 1077 and 188, respectively.3. 6. 7. 32 Thus, dogs have about six times as many
neoplasms as do cats. The incidence rates for canine and feline skin neoplasms are about
728 and 84, respectively.
The peak age period for neoplasm occurence in dogs and cats is 6 to 14 years. The
 pe sot e se pespu  sedou sno  seun
years, respectively. The frequency of various skin neoplasms differs in dog and cat breeds
(Table 20-l). Canine breeds that have the highest ncoplasm incidence are the Boxer,
Scottish terrier, Bull mastiff, Basset hound, Weimaraner, Kerry blue terier, and Norwe-
plasms in cats.1 The overall incidence of neoplasia is greater in female dogs than in male
 ( 1 9) d s  y 's  (1 sa %9) s
most surveys.3,5, 6, 35
- n an su  n a   ssu   
terized by sudden onset, rapid growth, infltration, recurrence, and metastasis. The most
important criterion of malignancy is metastasis. In dogs, the number of malignant neo-
plasms is only about half the number of benign neoplasms.3, 6, 7, 32 However, in cats, there
 are about three times as many malignant neoplasms as benign neoplasms.3 6. 7 52. 35
The skin is the most common site of occurrence of neoplasms in the dog (about 30%
of the total) and the second most common site in the cat (about 20% of the total).3. 6-9. 12.
 29, 32, 35-38, 41 The most common skin neoplasm in dogs and cats varies somewhat from one
report to another. In general, canine skin neoplasms may be broadly categorized as about
55% mesenchymal, 40% epithelial, and 5% melanocytic in origin, and feline skin ne0-
plasmns as 50% epithelial, 48% mesenchymal, and 2% melanocytic. In the dog, the most
common skin neoplasms, in approximate descending order, are lipoma, sebaceous gland
hyperplasia, mast cell tumor, histiocytorma, and papiloma (squamous papilloma and fibro.
papilloma). In the cat, the approximate order is basal cell tumor, squamous cell carci-
noma, mast cell tumor, and fibrosarcoma.
specifc diagnosis. This can be achieved only by biopsy and histologic evaluation. Exfolia-
tive cytologic techniques (aspiration and impression smear) are easy and rapid, and often
*Sce references 1, 3, 5-7, 11, 21, 32, 34.
1236
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I237
● Table 20-1
BREED PREDILEcTIONS FOr CUTANEOUS
Neoplasms and non-neoplastic lumps In
THE DOG AND CAT
Papilloma
Cocker spaniel, Kerry blue terrier
Keratoacanthoma
Collie,German hepherd dog,Keeshnd, Lhasa apso,orweian
elkhound, Old Fnglish sheepdog, Yorkshire terrier
Squuarous cell carcinoma
Scotish temerPeingeseboxer,Poodle,orwegian elkud
Squamous cell carcinoma, gla-
Dalmatian, bull terrier, Ainenican Staffordshire terTier, beagle
brons, nonpigmented skn of
trunk (actinic)
Squarnous cell carcinoma, clawbed
Black Labrador retriever, Black Standard Poodle, Giant Schnauzer,
dachshund, Bouvier de Flandres
 Feline benign basal cell tumor
Persian, Himalayan
Basal cell carcinoma
Cocker spaniel, English Springer spaniel, Kerry blue terrier, Poo-
dle, Shetland sheepdog, Siberian husky, Siamese cat
Trichoepithelioma
shepherd dog, Golden retriever, Irish setter, Miniature Schnau-
zer, Standard Poodle, Persian cat
Tricholemmoma
Afghan hound
Pilomatrixoma
Kerry blue terrier, Old English sheepdog, Poodle
Trichoblastoma
Cocker spaniel, Poodle
Sebaceous gland tumors
Beagle, Cocker spaniel, dachshund, Irish setter, Lhasa apso, Mala-
mute, Miniature Schnauzer, Poodle, Shih tzu, Siberian husky,
Pcrsian cat
Sweat gland tumors
Cocker spaniel, German shepherd dog. Golden reriever
Cireumanal gland tumors
Beagle, Cocker spaniel, English bulldog, German shepherd clog,
 Lhasa apso, Samoyed, Shih tzu, Siberian husky, Afghan hound,
dachshund
Fibroma
Boston terrier, boxer, Doberman pinscher, fox terrier, Golden re-
triever
 Fibropruritic nodule
Gerrnan shepherd dog
Fibrosarcoma
Cocker spaniel, Doberman pinscher, Golden retriever
Myxoma or rnyxosarcoma
Doberiman pinsche1, German shepherd
Schwannoma
Fox terrier
Hemangioma
Airedale terrier, boxer, English Springer spaniel, German shepherd
dog. Golden retriever
Hemangioma, glabrous, nonpig-
Anerican Staffordshire terrier, Basset hound, beagle, Dalmatian,
mented skin (actinic)
English Springer spaniel, Greyhound, Saluki, Whipet
Hemangiosarcoma
 Bernese Mountain dog, boxer, Gerrman shepherd dog, Golden re-
triever
Hemangiosarcoma, glabrous, non-
See actinic hemangioma
 pigmented skin (actinic)
Hemangiopericytoma
Beagle, Boxer, Cocker spaniel, Collie, Fox terrier, English Springer
spaniel, Gernan shepherd dog, Irish setter, Siberian husky
Lipoma
Cocker spaniel, Dachshund, Doberman pinscher, Labrador re-
triever, Miniature Schnauzer, Weimaraner, Siamese cat
Liposarcoma
Mast cell tumor
American Staffordshire terrier, Beagle, Boston terrier, Boxer, Bull
terrier, Dachshund, English bulldog, Fox temrier, Golden re-
triever, Labrador retriever, Pug, Shar pei, Weimaraner, Siamese
Lynphoma
Basset hound, boxcr, Cocker spaniel, German shepherd dog,
 Golden retriever, Irish setter, Scottish terrier, St. Bermard
Plasmacytoma
Cocker spaniel
Histiocytoma
Arnerican Staffordshire terrier, Boston terrier, boxer, Cocker span-
iel, Daclhshund, Doberman pinscher, English Springer spaniel.
Great Dane, Labrador retriever, Miniature Schnauzer, Rottwei
ler, Scottish terrier, Shar pei. Shetland sheepdog, West Highland
white terrier
Malignant histiocytosis
Bermese Mountain dog
Systemic histiocytosis
Bermese Mountain dog
Cutaneous histiocytosis
ColleShand sh
Benign fibrous histiocytoma
Collie, Golden retriever
Table continued on following page
I238 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
● Table 20-1
BrEed PReDIlecTiONS For cUTaNEoUS
Neoplasms And Non-neoplastic Lumps In
THE DOG AND CAT Continued
Melanocytic tumors
Airedale terricr, Boston terricr, boxer, Chihuahua, Chow Chow,
Cocker spaniel, Doberman pinscher, English Spriniger spaniel.
Golden retriever, Irish scter, Irish terrier, Miriature Schnauzer,
Scottish terrier
Fllicular cyst
Boxer, Dobcrman pinschcr, Miniature Schnauzer, Shih tzu
Dermoid cyst
Boxer, Kerry blue termie1, Rhodesian Ridgeback
Collagenous nevus
German shephcrd dog
Vascular nevus, serotal
Airedale terrier, Kerry blue terrier, Labrador retriever, Scottish
terrier
Epidermal nevus
Miniature Schnauzer, Pug
Actinic keratosis
American Staffordshird terrier, Basset hound, Beagle, Bull terrier,
Dalmatian
Calcinosis cireunseripta
Boston terrier, Boxer, Genuan shepherd dog
Focal rnucinosis
Dobenman pinscher, Shar pei
 provide valuable information about neoplastic cell type and differentiation. The tech-
niques, methods, and interpretation used in cytologic studies have been beautifully de-
inferior to and is no substitute for biopsy and histopathologic exarmination. Historical and
clinical considerations often allow the experienced clinician to formulate an inclusive
 differential diagnosis on a cutaneous neoplasm but variability renders such “odds playing"
unreliable. In short, "a lurnp is a lump" until it is evaluated histologically.
The detailed histopathologic description of canine and feline cutaneous neoplasms is
ou  ro asa   a  s go ass  
is presented hcrc. For in-depth information and
1 photomicrographic illustrations, the
reader is rcferred to other texts on cutaneous neoplasial-3. 42 and the individual references
cited for each neoplasm.
The use of markers-
-enzyme histochemical and immunohistochermical methods for
identifying specifc cell types—has increased and has facilitated the diagmosis of many
neoplastic conditions in dogs and cats.47-64 Examples of these markers are presented in
Chapter 2.
Clinical manageinent of cutaneous neoplasms may include surgery, cryosurgery, elec-
perthermia, phototherapy, and combinations of these. Detailed information on the various
treatiment moxdalities is available in a number of excellent references.4. 6. 7, 25, 4]a Brief
comments on treatment are included under clinicul management for each tumor.
 The crucial difference between normal and neoplastic cells stems from discrete
changes in specific genes controlling proliferation and tissue homeostasis.l14 More than
●Table 20-2
ImMUnoTheraPY AGents uSed in CaNIne
AnD Feline NEOplaSIa
PRODUCT NAME
 ACTIVE INGREDIENT
INDICATIONS
TOXICITY
Acemannan Immunostimulant
Polymannose
Fibrosarcoma
Discornfort, decreased activity,
(Carrington Laboratonies,
vomiting, loose stools
Dallas, Texas)
hmmunoRegulin (Vetoquino]-
Propionibacteriun acnes
Neoplasia*
Fever, chills, anorexia, leth-
Imnunovet, Tampa, Flor-
argy
irla)
Regressin-V (Vetrepharm Re-
Nonpathogenic Myco-
Neoplasia*
search, Athens, Georgia)
beicteria spp.
*Off-label.
Molified fron VanKampen KR: Iununotlerapy and cytokines. Sem Vet Medl Surg 12:186, 1997.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I239
regulating genes have been associated with the pathogenesis of neoplasia: oncogenes
an osdns-rn am 'soe r snoa   sud apoa
 encode proteins that restrict cell proliferation and differentiation.107
  's u s oo ie jo  o un o a s  
suppressor genes are vulnerable sites for critical DNA damage because they normally
    o   pe sq d s 
are able to hinder growth and metastasis of cells cdriven to uncontrolled proliferation by
oncogenes. p53 participates in many cellular functions: cell cycle control, DNA repair,
differentiation, genomic plasticity, and programmed cell death. p53 is an important com-
 ponent in a biochemical pathway or pathways central to carcinogenesis, and p53 mutations
provide a selective advantage for clonal expansion of preneoplastic and neoplastic cells.
 Overexpression of p53 is positively associated with gene mutation. Overexpression of
p53 was detected in most canine squamous cell carcinomas and circumanal gland adeno-
carcinoinas.1o7 Mutations in p53 were found in 1nost feline and canine squamous cell
 o r e ao  py m s d s n e  st's
neoplasms.1sl
Cyclins are associated with and activate various cyclin-dependent kinases at various
phases of thc cll cycle.o In humans, overexpression of cyclin D and downregulation of
 The apoptotic index and mitotic index of various benign and malignant canine skin
 neoplasms were compared.1a In general, there was an inverse relationship bctwecn apo-
ptohic index and mitotice index in benign neoplasms, and no correlation in malignant
neoplasms. Thus, classification of canine skin ncoplasms according to their apoptotic and
● EPITHELIAL NEOPLASMS
Papilloma
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
 Since the mid-1980s, great advances have been made conceming the understanding and
classification of papilomaviruses in animals and humans. 73. 7. s Differentiation of papllo-
 mavirus types by cleavage patterms produced by treating viral DNA with restriction endo-
nuclcases and the in vitro hybridization of viral DNA havc emphasized the heterogeneity
of papilomaviruses within animal genera. In dogs, at lcast five types of papillomaviruses
tend to have site specificity on the aninal as well as histologic specificity.  It would
appear that multiple feline papilmaviruses exists, a The papillomaviruses are transnit-
ted by direct and indirect (via fonites) contact. In general, infection occurs in damaged
skin. The incubation period varies from I to 2 rmonths.77
differ dramatically in their sensitivity.3 Southern blot hybridization is highly specific and
sensitive, but it is time-consuming and does not allow detection of DNA segments of
unknown types. Dot blot and reverse blot hybriclization have good sensitivity and reason-
able accuracy, hnt are also laborious. In situ hybridization is less sensitive than Southern
blot, but does allow identification of cells harboring viral DNA. Polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) is the most widely used technique, but it is rot as sensitive as the others.
Papillomavirus is fairly stable in the environment and can survive for 63 days at 4 t0
 8°C or for 6 hours at 377℃.77 Humoral immunity (neutralizing antibodies) protects against
viral challenge but does not play a role in clearance of established lesions.7 Ceilular
formalin-inactivated) are effective preventives, but are of no known therapeutic benefit.77
 There is great interest and much research in the role of papillomaviruscs and onco-
1240 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
 a (a   se p sd u p aq u s   ces
region), and LCR (long control region). The Ll and L2 genes encode for viral capsid
 proteins, and E region consists of genes involved in regulation of viral DNA replication
(El and E2) or cell proliferation and immortalization (E6 and E7). In addition, E2
protein is an important viral transcription factor regulating expression of E6 and E7
normal cell differentiation. E6 and E7 proteins have oncogene potential and can interfere
with cellular factors involved in the control of cell proliferation and the prevention of cell
immortalization. E6 and E7 oncogenes are capable of immortalizing cells, inducing cell
growth, and promoting chromosomal instability in the host cell. E6 oncoprotein causes
degradation of p53 protein by the cellular ubiquitin proteolysis system, leading to unblock-
 ing of cell division and host DNA synthesis, which results in chromosomal instability and
accumulation of various mutations in affected cells.
Papillomaviruses appear to be involved in the etiology of certain forms of squamous
 cell carcinoma in dogs and cats (see Squamous Cell Carcinoma).77
Severe or unusual forms of papillomatosis have been seen in dogs with IgA deficiency
or receiving glucocorticoids or cancer chemotherapy.70. 72, 74 82,84,85It would apear that
glucocorticoids and immunosuppression can exacerbate latent infections and cause expan-
sion of the tissue tropism of the virus.
CLINICAL FINDINGS
Dog
Cutaneous papillomas (warts and verrucae) are common in the dog, and at least five
syndromes are recognized clinically. Canine oral papillomatosis is common and affects
 young dogs with no apparent breed or sex predilection. Lesions are almost always multiple
 and affect the buccal mucosa, the tongue, the palate, the pharynx, the epiglottis, the lip,
the nasal planum, the skin, the eyelids, the conjunctiva, and the cornea (Fig. 20-lA and
C)1 5-sThe lesions bein as white,fat,smooth,shiny papules and plaques of aw
millineters in diameter and progress to whitish gray, pedunculated or caulifower-like
hyperkeratotic masses up to 3 cm in diameter. The surface of well-developed lesions is
covered by fronds of hyperkeratosis. Florid oral papillomatosis has been seen in Beagles in
association with IgA deficiency.$2. 8s4 Severe oral papillomatosis with generalized cutaneous
papillomas (same virus) was seen in a young Shar pei in association with glucocorticoid
a dog receiving cancer chemotherapy.72
Cutaneous papillomas occur uncommonly in older dogs and are more common in
may be single or multiple, ocurring mainly on the head, the eyelids, and the feet (Fig.
 20- 1B). They are usually pedunculated or cauliflower like, firm to soft, well circum-
scribed, alopecic, and smooth to keratinous; they are usually smaller than 0.5 cm in
diameter. Papillomavirus has been identified in the lesions.76,77, $4, 36
'a8r jo sieak e oi spuou g sop u uaas Arensn are smodnd patioaui snoaunno
abdomen and the groin; are small (1 to 2 cm in diameter), raised, and firm; and contain a
central pore opening to the surface of the skin (Fig. 20-2). DNA hybridization studies
with a canine oral papillomatosis virus probe revealed that cutaneous inverted papillomas
are due to a different papillomavirus from that causing canine oral papillomas.
Multiple pigmented, papular, cutaneous papillomas associated with a novel papillma-
virus were seen in a 6-year-old boxer receiving long-term systemic glucocorticoids.70 The
lesions werc black, rounded, had a waxy surface, and occurred on the ventrum. The
papillomas spontaneously regressed 3 weeks after glucocorticoid administration was
stopped.
Multiple pigmented plaques associated with papilomavirus infection has been reported
 in miniature Schnauzers and Pugs (Fig. 20-3).7s The condition has been reported in an
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I241
FIGURE 20-I. A, Severe cral viral papillomatosis in a young dog. B, Squamous papilloma on the hock of
of a young dog. E, Two keratoacanthomas on the dorsal neck of an Old English sheepdog. The lesion at the
left has an overlying cutaneous horn, F, Squamous cell carcinoma on the nose of a collie. G, Squamous cell
I242 · Neoplastic and Non-Ncoplastic Tunors
FlGURE 20-2. Iaverted papillomas near the prcpuce of a young dog.
English settcr,$7 and the authors have seen cases in the Shar pei (Fig. 20-4). Lesions
often begin at 2 to 4 years of age, and are must common on the ventrum and medial
thighs. Melanotic macules and plaques become progressively more scaly and hyperkera-
totic. This condition appcars to be identical to that previously referred to as “pigmented
cpidermal nevi” and “lentigines."2, 5 In miniature Schnauzers and Pugs, the condition 
appears to be inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion.7 Sorme lesions may undergo
malignant transformation into squamous cell carcinomas.75, &7 This syndrome appears to be
very similar to epidermodysplasia verruciformis in humans.75
were firm, hyperkeratotic, and often hornlike in appearance, They occurred on multiple
footpads of two paws or more (see Fig. 20-1D). Larger lesionis were associated with
Occasionally, cutaneous horns may overlie papillomas.
FIGURE 20-3. Pigmented viral
papilloimas on the leg of a Pug.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors * I243
FIGURE 20-4. Multiple
Pg
Inented viral papilormas on the thigh
and abdomen of a Shar pei.
Although cutaneous viral papillomas are usually benign, apparent transformation into
treated with a live virus vaccine that was made from papillomavirus isolated from naturally
occurring oral papillomas experienced squamous cell carcinomas at the sites of vaccinc
inoculation.65. 77. 84 This did not occur when formalin-inactivated vaccines were used.77
Rare cases of viral papillomatosis have heen completely unresponsive to treatment, per-
haps owing to immunologic defects (Fig. 20-5).74. f
Cat
There are at least two types of papillomaviruses in domestic cats: oral (FdPv-2) and skin
(FdPV-1).s3a Tongue lesions occur in 6-month to 9-year-old cats, and are multifocal, small
(4 to 8 mm), soft, light pink, oval, slightly raised, and fat-topped. The ventral tongue is
usually affected. Solitary cutaneous papillomas are rare in cats, and rmost are not kmown to
ed pe  u pup sem sded es za sssded q ps aq
loma of a cat. Lesions are seen in adult cats with no apparent breed, sex, or site
predilection. The papillomas are solitary, pedunculated to cauliflower like, well circum-
scribed, and hyperkeratotic; they are smaller than 0.5 cm in diameter.
FIGURE 20-5.Multipleviral
papillomas in an immunosuppressed,
aged Shar pci.
1244·Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
Multiple viral papillomas were first reported in cats in 1990.67 Affected cats are
can occur anywhere on the body, especiall the head, neck, dorsal thorax, ventral abdo-
 q i un  g o  g  a sa u  d pe 
melanotic macules, and evolve into plaques, which become progressively more scaly.
hyperkeratotic, and occasionally, greasy. Recent information indicates that these viral
papilomas are the precursors to feline multicentric squamous cell carcinoma (Bowen's 
disease) (see Squamous Cell Carcinoma).20
Occasionall, cutaneous homs overlie papilmas.35
DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnostic considerations in dogs include keratoacanthoma, trichofollicu-
           s
mast cell tumor, cutaneous horn, dilated pore of Winer, and melanocytic neoplasm.
-nbs -s s t'sd snqg pe snuns ou pp aq Au smded aeo
odoxa) paeed Aq pazuao are (ada uouo isou an) seuonded sno
papilloma) or plaquelike (verruca plana, or flat wart) epidermal hyperplasia and papilloma-
tosis, with variable degrees of balloning degeneration (koilocytosis) and giant, clumped,
pleomorphic keratohyaline granules (Figs. 20-6 and 20-7).1. 2. 5 Basophilic intranuclear
inclusion bodies are variable findings. Inverted papillomas (endophytic papilloma) are cup-
shaped lesions with a central core of keratin.1. 66 The cup is lined by mature squamous
epithelium with centripetal papillary projections, ballooning degeneration, abnormal kera-
tohyaline granules, and variable intranuclear inclusion bodies. Keratoacanthomas are histo-
cytes.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastie Tumors · I245
FIGURE 20--7. Canine viral squarmous papilloma. Note balooning degeneration and clump-
ing of keratohyalinc granules.
logically similar but lack cvidence of viral infection. Idiopathic squamous papillomas are
histologically identical to viral squamous papillomas, except that they lack evidence of
virus infection (ballooning degeneration, abnormal keratohyaline granulcs, and intranuclear
inclusion bodies).2 Routine use of immunohistochemical or PCR techniques would greatly
reduce the number of "idiopathic" cases. Fibropapilloma (fbrous polyp) is characterized
hyperplasia (Fig. 20-8). The recently reported pigmented papular papillomas have a
unique, cup-shaped appearance with marked parakeratotic hyperkeratosis, angular baso-
FIGURE 20-8. Canine fibropapilloma. Papillomatous proliferation of epidermis and fibro-
blasts.
I246·Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
philic intranuclear inclusion bodies, eosinophilic fibrillar cytoplasmic inclusions (modified
keratin protein), and scarce keratohyalin granules (Figs. 20-9A and B).7o The multiple
macular and plaquelike papillomas show a typical squamous papilloma configuration with
The feline multiple viral papillomas are characterized early by focal, abrupt, plaquelike
 sr   rr r  a
osis, balloning degeneration, and abnormal keratohyaline granules (Fig. 20-11).67, 9,71, 83a
Basophilic intranuclear inclusions and gray intracytoplasmic inclusions (proliferating cyto-
keratin flaments) are variably present. Fine, coalescent, pink, fibrillar, intracytoplasmic
masses first appear in the keratinocytes of the stratum spinosum and become irregular,
solitary, large, and amphophilic in the stratum granulosum.
 Papillormavirus  antigen  can  be  detected by irmmunohistochemical techniques in
viral papillomas.* However, other techniqucs, such as PCR, are much more sensitive.73
 Papillomavirus has also been detected in some canine and feline squamous cell carci-
tumors, or sweat gland neoplasms.78 Papillomas are positive for cytokeratin.50. 61
'See references 66, 67, 69-71, 75-82, 84, 86.
FIGURE 20-9. A, Pigmcnted
papular viral papiloma from an im-
munosuppressed dog. B, Close-up of
A. Koilocytosis, intranuclear, and in-
tracytoplasmic inclusien bodies.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I247
FIGURE 20- 10. A, Pigmented viral
papilloma from a Shar pei. Note sud.
den transition from normal skin (right)
to papilloma (left). B, Close-up of A.
FIGURE 20-Il. Feline viral
papiloma. Note the “fat wart" ap-
pearance  with  hyperkeratosis  and
koilocytosis within the stratum gran-
ulosun.
1248·Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Clinical management of papillomas may include surgical excision, cryosurgery, electrosur-
spontaneous regression within about 3 months, and solid immunity follws experimental
or natural infection.7, ss Autogenous or commercially produced wart vaccines and immu-
nomodulating drugs (e.g, levamisole and thiabendazole) are without documented thera-
peutic value. Live virus vaccines produced from canine oral papillomas are protective but
have been associated with injection site squamous cell carcinomas,65 84, 85 Formalin-inacti-
against natural and experimental infection and produced no injection site squamous cell
carcinomas.. 85 In certain cases with large masses of proliferating tissue, eating and
 a jo   ns a p q  a p 
papillomas, which is usually performed by cryosurgery or electrosurgery. There is abso-
lutely no evidence to suggest that the removal or crushing of some papillomas causes early
regression of the others. Reports have indicated that intralesional injections of bleomycin,
5-fuorouracil, or interferon, as well as the oral administration of levamisole or retinoids,
be effective in the treatment of canine inverted papillomas 33 Canine inverted papillomas
have also bcen reported to regress spontaneously.79 Anecdotal reports indicate that inter-
feron (Roferon-A, Hoffman-LaRoche), 1.5 to 2 million units/m2 BSA given subcutaneously
 3 times a week, is effective for the treatment of severe cases of oral or cutaneous viral
papillomatosis, or both (see Chap. 3).88
Keratoacanthoma
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Keratoacanthomas (intracutaneous cornifying epitheliomas, or infundibular keratinizing
that these neoplasms are of hair follicle origin.? There are unsubstantiated references to
the occurrence of keratoacanthomas in the cat. The cause of keratoacanthomas is un-
known, although the generalized forms may have a hereditary basis in dogs and humans.
 Immunohistochemical studies failed to identify papillomavirus antigen.6, 78.80
CLINICAL FINDINGS
 Usually, these neoplasins occur in dogs 5 years of age or younger. Male dogs are more
commonly affected than female dogs. The incidence is higher in purebred dogs and
 o pd  r a e p    
shire terriers are also reported to be at risk for the solitary form.t. 5
Although keratoacanthomas are usually solitary, they may be multiple in the Norwe-
gian Elkhound, Keeshond, German shepherd dog. and Old English sheepdog (see Fig.
20- 1E). Most tumors occur on the back, the neck, the thorax, and the limbs. There is
considerable variation in the gross appearance of keratoacanthomas. Most of the tumors
 s s   pm    se e
from 0.5 to 4 crn in diameter, with a pore opening onto the skin surface that ranges from
less than 1 irin to several millimeters in diameter. The opening usually contains a hard
keratinized plug, varying from small and inconspicuous to large and hornlike. Superficial
lesions with large keratinous plugs are easily mistaken for cutaneous horns. Some of the
tumors are entirely dermal or subcutaneous, do not communicate with the surface of the
skin, and are easily confused with cysts. Keratoacanthomas are not invasive or metastatic.
 us d an e (s og on d   o  
anticipated, because affected dogs tend to have new tumors at other sites throughout their
lives.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I249
DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnostic considerations include papillomas, trichofolliculomas, cutaneous
filled crypt in the dermis that opens to the skin surface (Fig.20-12）.1.2.33 92The wall of
the crypt is cormposed of a thick, complex, folded layer of welldlifferentiated stratified
squamous epithelium, with columns of squanoid cells projecting peripherally from the
    su a s      s 
histopathologic differential is the inverted papiloma.3. 6 However, the keratoacanthoma
does not have ballooning degeneration, abnormal keratohyaline granules, or intranuclear
inclusion bodies. Keratoacanthomas are positive for cytokeratin.47
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Clinical management of keratoacanthomas may include surgical excision, cryotherapy, clce.
and prednisonc and immunotherapy with aiitogenous vaccine or levaimisole have been
ineffective in dogs.5 The oral administration of retinoids or intralesional injections of 5-
fuorouracil or methotrexate have provided good rcsults in thc treatment of keratoacantho-
mas in humans.? The oral administration of retinoids (isotretinoin or etretinate) has been
aq isnus suurn pue Aden yo suu  o e le uaas si ssuodsor po V ses o
continued intermittently for life in most cases. Keratoacanthomas are also known to
resolve spontaneously.3, 91
Squamous Cell Carcinoma
Squamous cell carcinomas (epidermoid carcinomas) are common maligmant neoplasms of
the dog and cat, arising from keratinoeytes,1. 2, 3-9 12, 18 24, 32, 35 The etiology of squamous
cell carcinoma is not clear in all cases (Table 20-3). Squamous cell carcinoma occurs
FIGURE 20-I2. Canine keratoacanthoma. A central keratin-flled crypt opens to the skin.
surface.
I250·Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-I3. Canine keratoacanthoma. Note mul-
tiple hom cysts and projections of squamoid cells.
(From Weiss E, Frese K: VIl. Tumors of the skin. Bull
World Health Organ 50:79, 1974.)
 most frequently in sun-damaged skin and is usually preceded by actinic (solar) keratosis."
Thus, squamous cell carcinoma is seen more frequently in geographic areas characterized
by long, periods of intense sun exposure. Rarely, squamous cell carcinoma has been
reported to arise from burn scars or chronic infectious processes,5. 6. 109, 122 Squamous cell
 carcinoma was reported to arise in chronic discoid lupus erythematosus lesions134 and in
*See references 1-9, 12, 18, 24, 32, 35.
● Table 20-3
Factors contributing to the
DevElopMent of SQuaMous cell
CARCINOMA
 Ultraviolet radiation
lonizing radiation
Arsenic
Polyecyclic aromalic hydrocarbons
Papillomavinuses
Tobacco (from second-hand smoke)
Lack/oss of pigment
Lack/oss of hair
Gcnodermatoses (albinisin, picbaldism, epidermodysplasia verruciformis)
Chronic ulcer/sinus tract
Scar
Pre-existing chronic dermatitis
Irmmunosuppression
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I25I
arise from burn and frostbite scars, radiation burns, and stasis dermatitis. Papillomavirus
structural antigens were demonstrated in up to 50% of the canine squamous cell carcino-
mas tested, suggesting an etiologic role for these viruses.78 51. s6 The results of similar
studies were negative in the cat.90, 81 However, a recent report indicated that 45% of the
cats with multicentric squamous cell carcinoma in situ (Bowen's disease) had papillomavi-
rus antigen in their lesions.20 Squamous cell carcinomas occurred at the site of injection of
a live canine oral papillomavirus vaccine in some dogs.65. 84 Squamous cell carcinomas
 occured in 24% of the felinc immunodeficiency virus (FIV)-infected cats in one study.116
 Naturally occurring oral and conjunctival papillomas in dogs may rarely progress to squa-
mous cel carcinoma."5 A 1bp deletion was detected in codon 89 in exon 4 of tumor-
suppressor gene p53 in a canine squamous cell carcinoma.121a
CLINICAL FINDINGS
800
Squamous cell carcinoma occurs at an average age of 9 years, with no sex predilection,
although puppies are rarely affected u15 In gencral, Scottish terriers, Pekingese, Boxers,
claw bed origin are seen most commonly in black-coated dogs of large breeds, especially
Labrador retrievers, standard poodles, giant Schnauzers, Dachshunds, and Bouvier de
Flandres.1. 4-7. 124 125 132 Short-coated breeds with white or piebald ventral coat and skin
color (Dalmatian, American Staffordshire terrier, Bull terrier, and Beagle) have the high.
est incidence of solar-induced squamous cell carcinoma.23 5. 7 120. 121 These dogs usually
spend many hours a day lying in the sun. Nasal squamous cell carcinomas may rarely
occur as a sequela to depigmentation associated with conditions such as discoid luipus
erythematosus (Fig. 20- 14), pemphigus erythematosus, and vitiligo that result in increased
Lesions occur most commonly on the trunk, the limbs, the digits, the scrotum, the
FIGURE 20-|4. Squanous cell
carcinoma arising from chronic, un-
controlled discoid lupus erythemato-
sus.
I252· Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
lips, the anus, and the nose (see Fig. 20-1F) and may be proliferative or ulcerative. The
proliferative types are papillary masses of varying size, many of which have a caulifower.
like appearancc. The surface tends to be ulcerated and bleeds easily. Cutaneous horns
may dcvclop on the surface of such lesions. The ulcerative types initially appear as
shallow, crusted ulcers that become deep and crateriform. Squamous cell carcinomas are
usually solitary, but they may be multiple on the trunk of sunbathing dogs or in the claw
nomas usually have a single affected digit (Fig. 20- 15), which is swollen and painful with
a misshapen or absent claw and paronychial discharge, and they may experience multiple
neoplasms in other digits over a period of years (Fig. 20-16). Squamous cell carcinoma is
the most common neoplasim of the digit of the dog.2s
Cat
prcdilection. White cats (short-haired or long-haired cats) have squamous cell carcinoma
about 13 times as frequently as do other cats, owing to increased susceptibility to aetinic
damage.* The most common sites are the extermal nares (see Fig. 20-1 G) (about 80% to
90% of allected cats), the pinnae (Fig. 20-1H) (about 50%), the eyelids (Fig. 20-17)
planum is rare (Fig. 20-19)119, 129 Lesions may be proliferative or ulcerative and may
*Se references 4-7, 30, 35, 103, 104, 108a, 128, 130.
FIGURE 20-I5. Subungual squamous cell
carcinoma in a dog. Digit is enlarged, and claw
has sloughed. (Courtesy C. Foil.)
Neoplastie and Non-Neoplastic Tumors * I253
FIGURE 20-I6. Multiple subungual squa-
rmous cell carcinomas in a dog.
FIGURE 20-I7. Squamous cell
carcioma on lower eyelid of a cat.
FIGURE 20-I8. A, Squamous cell carcinoma on the upper lip of a cat. The carcinoma arose frorm a long-
shoulder (the area has been clipped). C, Basal cell tumor on the neck of a cat. D, Melanotic basal cell tumor on
projecting from a surface pore.
ofadog
1254
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I255
FIGURE 20-I9. Squarnous cell
carcinoma of the nasal planum in a
cat.
occasionally have overlying cutaneous horns. Lesions are multiple in about 45% of affected
cats.7.103
 Generally, squamous cell carcinomas are locally invasive and slow to metastasize. In
 dogs and cats, squamous cell carcinomas arising from the digits appear to he more
 aggressive and may be misdiagnosed as paronychia or some form of pyoderma.
DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagznosis of solitary cutaneous squamous cell carcinomas includes numer-
cus neoplastic and granulomatous disorders. Claw bed lesions are frequently misdiagnosed
as infectious paronychia. Cytologic examination is useful for establishing a presumptive
FIGURE 20-20. Canine squamous cell carcinoma. Cytologic cxamination of aspiratc shows
a cluster of atypical keratinocytes. (Courtesy T. French.)
I2S6 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
masses or cords of keratinocytes that proliferate downward and invade the derinis (Fig.
bridges, mitoses, and atypia (Fig. 20-22A). Solar elastosis may occasionally be seen.2. 14. l1s
The majority of squamous cell carcinomas in dogs and cats are of the well-differentiated,
histopathologic subtype, but poorly differentiated, acantholytie (pseudoglandular), spindle
cell, and clear cell varieties do occur.2 5 Rarely, squarmous cell carcinomas arise from
chronic discoid lupus erythematosus lesions (Fig. 20-22B) or follicular cysts (Fig. 20-22C).
Squaimous cell carcinomas are positive for cytokeratin, and such cxaminations may be
critical in establishing the true identity of spindle cell and clear cell varieties.27, 47, 40, 50.5s.60
An abundant local inflammatory reaction, consisting mainly of CD3+ T lymphocytes,
mous cell carcinoma.126a Well-differentiated and mildly invasive ncoplasms exhibited signif-
icantly greater numbers of these cells and expressed MHC II in higher proportion than
moderately differentiated and invasive_ neoplasms. This cellular and huinoral response
 In one study,28 80% of the canine digital squamous cell carcinomas had radiographic
evidence of bone lysis, and 13% had already metastasized.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Squamous cell carcinomas are generally locally invasive but are slow to netastasize.
 d s s s     s
 n ss  a on e q o  ro s g ssu e
invade bony tissue of the third phalanx) and metastasize 1nore frequently (up to 22% to
regional lymph node).4. 7,124 In one study,28 95% of the dogs with subungual squamous cell
carcinoma survived at lcast l ycar, whereas only 60% of the dogs with lesions elsewherc
    s s      re    
histopathologic differentiation but not with the anatomic site.lo2 Fifty percent of cats with
poorly differentiated neoplasms were destroyed within 12 weeks, and the longest survival
tirne was 20 weeks.
Clinical management of squanous cell carcinomas may include surgical excision,
(pinnectomy) or nasal planurm (rosectomy) is effective and affordable, and most owmers
FIGURE 20-21. Caninc squamous cll carcinoma. Inegular proliferation of keralinoeytes
withdermalinvasion.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I257
FIGURE 20-22. A, Canine squamous cel carcinoma. Note hon pearls, keratinocyte atypia, and desmoplasia. B,
Squamous cell carcinomaleft）arising from chronic discoid lupus crythcmatosus (rght).CSquamous cllcarcinoma arising
from the base of a follicular cyst.
year cure rate of 60% in nasal planum squamous cell carcinoma in cats.7. 104. 119. 139
Noninpasive brachytherapy (plesiotherapy) with Strontium 90 provided a l-year disease-
free interval for S9% of the cats treated for squamous cell carcinoma of the nasal
planum.? 141 Hyperthermia is often effective for the treatment of superficial cutaneous
squamous cell carcinomas in cats and dogs.4 7 19. 128-130 Photodynamic therapy is success-
ful in 63% of feline nasal and aural squamous cell carcinomas.7, 126, 129 It is best used for
lesions smaller than 2 to 5 cin diameter or with minirmal invasion. The response of
advanced stage squamous cell carcinoma in cats to photodynamic therapy is poor hut may
 s          
100 Joules/cm2 was 69 days, but with 200 Joules/cm2, it was 522 days. It is only applicable
to lesions smaller than 3 mim deep. Laser therapy may be useful, but too few reports are
available.L35
 In general, chemotherapy with various agents- bleomycin, vincristine, hydroxyurea,
cisplatin (fatal pulinonary edema in the cat), 5-fuorouracil (neurotoxicity in the cat),
benzaldehyde, thioproline, oral retinoids lhas been ineffective.* Intralesional sustained-
 release chemotherapy with cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil combined with bovine collagen and
*See references 4, 7, 106, 120, 121, 128, 130.
I258 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastie Tumors
epinephrine produced a complete response in 64% of cats with nasal planum lesions, and
the nasal planum, intratumoral administration of carboplatin in purified sesame oil pro-
duced cormplete remission in 67% of the cases with no systemic toxicity.140 Recomhinant
feline interferon showed dranatic in vitro antitumor effect against squamous cell carci-
noma.l3a7
 In all cases, avoidance of sunlight is an important part of prevention.5. 128. 130 The
development of new squamous cell carcinomas is common when ultraviolet light is not
 avoided.1o3 It is important to remember that normal window glass does not totally block
Factor 40 fabric) has been modifed for, well tolerated by, and effective for preventing
 truncal actinic dermatitis and squarmous cell carcinomas in many Bull terriers.105^
Multicentric Squamous Cell Carcinoma In Situ
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
 Multicentric squamous cell carcinoma in situ (Bowen's disease) is uncommon (in cats) to
factors.123 Papillomavirus antigen has been demonstrated in 45% of the feline skin lesions
 by immunohistochemical methods.20 Thus, these carcinoma in situ lesions probably repre-
sent a malignant transformation of the viral papillomas (see Papilloma). In one report, five
old cats had Demodex cati infestation only in the squamous cell carcinonas.1l All of the
cats were feline leukemia virus (FeLV) negative, but three were FIV positive. The authors
hypothesized that (1) the papillomavirus infection and squamous cell carcinomas created a
local immunodeficiency state, allowing the demodicids to multiply excessively, or (2) the
FIV infection and its associated immunodeficiency state predisposed the cats to both the
 papillomavirus infections and the D. cati proliferations.
CLINICAL FINDINGS
  so  (     o) s no  s si  
multifocal, and in cats, they occur most commonly over the head, neck, dorsal thorax,
abdomen, and proximal limbs.100. 123 Most lesions have occurred in thickly haired and
darkly pigmented skin. They are initially characterized by well-circumscribed, melanotic,
hyperkeratotic macules and plaques, 0.5 to 3 cm in diameter (see Fig. 20-18B). Some
lesions become almost verrucous. Cutaneous horms may develop on thie surface of some
lesions.127 Later, the lesions become thick, crusted, ulcerated plaques that tend to bleed
easily. In dogs, the oral mucosa and the genitalia imay be involved, and nodules may be
seen in addition to the lesions described earlier for cats.2. 110
DIAGNOSIS
Histopathologically, well-circumscribed areas of irregular epidermal and superficial follicu-
e ais a  n s(a  yo ) s are ep pe e re
appearance are highly variable, and mitotic figures are common in all cell layers. Ortho-
keratotic to parakeratotic hyperkeratosis and hypermelanosis are common, and a lichenoid
infammatory infltrate may be seen. In one study,"0 27% of the cats had focal areas of
margins of the squamous cell carcinoma, and papilomavirus antigen is most commonly
deteeted in these inargins.20
 In five cats, Demodex cati infestation was detected only in the squamous cell carcino-
mas (Fig. 20-24).:11
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors - I259
FIGURE 20-23. Squamous cell
carcinoma in situ in a cat.
A,
Inarked irregular hyperplasia, hyper-
-da jo esedssp pue uouuid
dermis and hair follicle infuudibula.
B, Close-up of A. Marked epidermal
dysplasia and several mitoses.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The mean course of disease, before animals are euthanized because of cosmetic concerns
and owner frustration, is more than 2 years. No metastases have been recorded, although
a footpad lesion invaded contiguous bone in one dog.l1o Lesions may wax and wane in size
 or, in some instances, individual lesions may disappear. However, muliple lesions are 
always present.
 In dogs, the topical application of 5-fluorouracil caused regression of some lesions.l10
In cats, 9oSr plesiotherapy (β-irradiation) is effective in healing thin lesions (less than 2 to
 4 mm in thickmess).20. 123 However, new lesions continue to develop, and thicker plaques 
do not respond. The oral administration of isotretinoin was ineffective in one cat,i2a but
other reports indicate that etretinate (2 mg/kg/day; no longer available) or acitretin (3 mg/
 animals, observation without therapy may be the most practical approach,
Basal Cell Tumors
The term basal cell tumor has been used in the veterinary literature to classify a large
group of common neoplasms of dogs and cats presumed to be derived from basal
I260 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tunors
FlGURE 20-24. Numerous Demodex cati (arrow) inl
a squamous cell carcinoma in situ.
epithelial cells of both epidermal and adnexal origin. Numerous histopathologic subclassifi-
cations have been applied to these neoplasms: medusa head, garland or ribbon, trabecular,
solid, cystic, adenoid, basosquainous, and granular cell. In general, these various histopath-
ologic types are often found within the same neoplasm and offer no useful clinical,
 prognostic, or therapeutic information,27 Most veterinary basal cell tumors are benign and
are not contiguous with the basal cell layer of the epidermis (medusa head, garland or
ribbon, trabecular, adenoid, and granular cell types); these lesions generally, show differ-
entiation toward follicular structures and have been reclassified (see later).2. 5. 142a The
 subclassifications solid basal cell tumor and basosquamous basal cell tumor are reported to
be biologically aggressive in some instances; most of these lesious are probably true basal
 cell carcinomas.2 The term basal ccll tumor, borrowcd from human dermatopathology, is
now considered synonymous with basal cell carcinoma of low-grade malignancy. Some
authors prefer the terms basal cell epithelioma and basaloma, both of which indicate the
relatively good prognosis of the neoplasm.2. 5
 In conclusion, the term basal cell tumor appears to have limited usage in veterinary
 medicine and is retained for an uncommon, true basal cell neoplasn of cats that has no
obvious adnexal features.2.5
BENIGN FELINE BASAL CELL TUMOR
● Cause and Pathogenesis. These tumors are uncommon benign neoplasms of the
cat that are thought to arise from the basal cells of the epidermis. The entire basal cell
1I s'sas a u si us  n jo %og on %i rg p oo no
*See references 8, 12-15, 26, 30, 35, 39. 95.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors * I26I
cell tumor.2.5 The cause of basal cell tumors in cats is unknown. In humans, there is a
strong correlation between exposure to ultraviolet light and the development of basal cell
tumors.
● Clinical Findings. Basal cell tumors occur in adult cats with no sex predilection.
are solitary, but they may occasionally be muliple.96 The most comimon sites of occur-
rence are the head, the neck (see Fig. 20-18C), the limbs, and the dorsal trunk.1. 2. 5
Basal cell tumors are usually frm, rounded, elevated, and well circumscribed; they are
often melanotic (see Fig. 20-i8D), may be cystic, and are frequently ulcerated and
alopecic.
● Diagnosis. Histopathologically, basal cell tumors are characterized by a well-cir-
cumscribed, symmetric proliferation of basaloid cells that has a fairly broad zone of
connection to'the overlying epidermis (Fig. 20-25A and B).1. 2 The tumor often has a
basaloid cells are arranged in tightly packed lobules and trabeculae. Basal cell tumors are
 positive for cytokeratin.49
● Clinical Management. Clinical management of basal cell tumors may include
surgical excision, cryotherapy, electrosurgery, and observation without treatment.f-7
BASAL CELL CARCINOMA
● Cause and Pathogenesis. Basal cell carcinomas are common (in cats) to uncom-
mon (in dogs) low-grade maligmancies arising from small, pluripotential epithelial cells
within the basal cell layers of the epidermis and adnexa.2 s Numerical incidence data are
difficult to provide, because these neoplasms have been traditionally included in the broad
category of basal cell tumor (see earlier). The cause of basal cell carcinormas in dogs and
cats is unknown. In humans, there is a strong corelation between ultraviolet light expo-
sure and the development of basal cell carcinomas, Despite high mitotic activity, basal cell
tumors have a slow growth. A recent study suggested that this may be due to an increased
duration of the entire cell cycle and increased apoptosis.97
B
FIGURE 20-25. A, Feline basal cell tumor. Proliferation of
basaloid cells and melanocytes. B, Feline basal cell tumor. Cy-
tologic examination of aspirate shows typical clusters of mono-
morphic basaloid cells.
1262 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
· Clinical Findings. Basal cell carcinomas occur in dogs and cats at an averagc agc
of 7 to 10 years and with no sex predilection.? Siamese cats, Cocker spaniels, Kerry blue
terriers, Shetland sheepdogs, Siberian huskies, English Springer spaniels, and Poodles
appear to be predisposed.f The tumors occur most commonly on the head, the neck, and
the thorax. In cats, lesions occasionally occur on the nasal planum or the eyelids. Basal
cell carcinomas are usually solitary, well circumscribed, frm to cystic, rounded, 0.5 to 10
cm in diameter, and commonly'alopecic and ulcerated. Basal cell carcinomas are fre-
quently melanotic (Fig. 20-26).
● Diagnosis. Three major histopathologic variants of basal cell carcinoma occur in
dogs and cats: solid, keratinizing (basosquamous), and clear cell. Solid basal cel carci-
noma is the most common subtype in cats and is characterized by circumscribed, irregular
 dermal masses comprising multiple basaloid cell aggregates embedded in a moderate
stroma (desmoplasia). Mitotic activity is low to high, and atypical mitotic figures are
common. Variable secondary features include cyst forrmation (necrosis), melanization, adl-
nexal differentiation, mucinosis, artifactual cleft formation between stroma and neoplastic
cells, and cartilaginous metaplasia.2.03
p y s pie jo s pp isa ue Aq paz si pe ssp u
plaquelike configuration, multifocal epiderrmal contiguity, and multiple areas of abrupt
squamous differentiation and keratinization.2
Clear cell basal cell carcinoma is rare and is more commonly encountered in cats.2
The overall architecture is identical to that of solid basal cell carcinoma, but the epithelial
cells are large and polygonal and have water-clear or finely granular cytoplasm. Basal cell
carcinomas are positive for cytokeratin.47, 49. 50. 60 61 Papillmavirus antigen was not de-
tected in feline basal cell carcinomas.80
· Clinical Management. Clinical management of basal cell carcinomas may include
surgical excision, electrosurgery, cryosurgery, and observation without thcrapy.47 The
*See references 1, 2, 5-7, 12, 30, 35, 95.
↑Sec rcfercnecs 1, 5-7, 12, 14, 95, 99.
FIGURE
20-26.
 Melanotic
basal cell tumor on muzzle of a
Bop
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · 1263
FIGURE 20-27. Triclhoepithelioma on thc
paw of a cat.
incidence of recurrence and metastasis is very low.94 In humans, intralesional injections of
interferon have been used to treat basal cell carcinoma.
Hair Follicle Tumors
Previous surveys of hair follicle neoplasins in dogs and cats indicated that these neoplasms
account for about 5% and 1%, respectively, of all skin neoplasms seen in these specics. 9
The most common subtypes were trichoepitheliorma and pilomatrixoma.l49 With the reclas-
sifcation of so-called basal cell tumors (see earlier), it appcars that the majority of
previous reports of these neoplasrns were examples of trichoblastoma.2. 5, 14za Thus, neo-
plasms of hair follicle origin are much more common than previous vcterinary literature
suggested. Hair follicle tumors are positive for cytokcratin.47.54.61
TRICHOEPITHELIOMA
● Cause and Pathogenesis. Trichoepitheliomas are uncommon benign neoplasms of
dogs and cats that are thought to arisc from keratinocytes that differentiate toward all
three segments of the hair folicle.1 2. 5.33 140 The cause of trichoepitheliomas in dogs and
cats is unknown. In humans, a syndrorne of multiple trichoepitheliomas is hercditary.
Usually, trichoepitheliomas occur in dogs and cats older than 5 years of age. No sex
predilection appears to exist in either species, In cats, there is a predilection for Persians,
and the neoplasms occur most commonly on the head, the limbs (Fig. 20-27), and the
tail.1. 12a 150 In dogs, there may be a predilection for the dorsal lumbar (see Fig. 20-18F)
and Iateral thoracic and limb areas, and Golden retrievers, Basset houmds, German shep-
herd dogs, Cocker spaniels, Irish setters, English Springer spaniels, miniature Schnauzers,
and Standard Poodles may be predisposed. t 4za, 149
Although these neoplasms are usually solitary, they may occasionally be rmultiple. They
are solid or cystic, rounded, elevated, well circumscribed, and dermoepidermal in position,
"See references 12, 14, 26, 27, 33, 149, 150.
1264 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-28. Canine trichcepithelioma. Disorganized proliferation of hair follicle-like
structures and hairs.
 ranging from 0.5 to 15 cm in diamcter. Frequently, they become ulcerated and alopecic.
Trichoepitheliomas are rarely invasive or metastatic.5
● Diagnosis. Histopathologicaly, trichoepitheliomas vary considerably, depending on
the degree of differentiation and whether the tumor is primarily related to the follicular
lack of intercellular bridges (desmosomes), differentiation toward hair follicle-like struc-
tures, formation of abortive or rudimentary hairs, desmoplasia, infammation, melanization,
and shadow (ghost) cells. 149 Dystrophic mineralization or malignant transformation may be
seen in up to 18% of the cases.149 A variant showing marked mucinosis is most common
in Golden retrievers.149
● Clinical Management. Clinical management of trichoepitheliomas may include
 rence and metastasis are rare, in spite of histopathologic evidence of malignancy.1. 7. 149
TRICHOLEMMOMA
● Cause and Pathogenesis. Tricholemmomas are rare benign neoplasms of dogs
and cats that arise from keratinocytes of the outer root sheath of hair folicles.1. 2, 142s,133
149, 150o The cause of tricholemmomas is unknown. In humans, a syndrome of multiple
tricholemmomas is hereditary.
· Clinical Findings. In dogs, tricholemmomas occur at 5 to 13 years of age. There
appears to be no sex predilection, but Afghan hounds may be predisposed. These neo-
plasms occur most commonly on the head and neck and are usually firm, ovoid, and 1 to
7 cm in diameter.
● Diagnosis. Histopathologically, tricholemmomas are characterized by a nodular
proliferation of keratinocytes, many of which are clear and have a positive reaction with
periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) stain owing to their glycogen content (Fig. 20-29).1, 2. 149 The
tumor lobules are surrounded by a distinct, often thickened basement membrane zone.
· Clinical Management. Clinical management of tricholemmomas may include sur-
gical excision, cryotherapy, electrosurgery, and observation without treatment.4-7
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I265
FlGURE 20-29. Canine tricholemmoma. Proliferation of predouminantly clear, outer root
shcath-like keratinocytes. Individual nodules are often surrounded by a distinct, thick base-
ment membrane zone
TRICHOFOLLICULOMA
● Cause and Pathogenesis. Trichofoliculormas are rare benign neoplasms of dogs
that are highly structured hamartomas of the pilosebaceous unit.2. 5. 149 The cause of
trichofolliculomas is unknown.
● Clinieal Findings. Trichofoliculomas occur in adult dogs, with no apparent age,
nodules, often containing a central depression or pore that may exude keratosebaceous
material or contain a tuft of hairs.
● Diagnosis. Histopathologically, trichofolliculomas are characterized by a central
large dilated or cystic follicle with smaller follicles or follicle-like structures that radiate
 outward from the central follicle into the surrounding connective tissue in an arborizing
pattern (Fig. 20-30).5.149
● Clinical Management. Clinical management may inclnde surgical excision and
observation without treatment.5. 149
DILATED PORE OF WInEr
● Cause and Pathogenesis. Dilated pore of Winer is an uncommon benign follicu-
lar tumor of cats.2 142a 146,14s The cause of this Iesion is unknown, although most evidence
favors a developmental origin arising from the combined forces of obstruction and intra-
follicular pressure leading to hair follicle hyperplasia.
● Clinical Findings. Dilated pore is seen in older cats, with no apparent breed or
sex predilection, The lesions are solitary and occur most frequently on the neck, head, and
trunk (see Fig. 20-18F) 142a, 146, 148 They are characterized by a well-demarcated, smooth,
dermoepidermal cyst-like structure with a central, keratin-filed wide-mouthed pore.
● Diagnosis. Histopathologically, this disorder is characterized by a markedly dilated,
keratinized, pilar infundibulum lined by an epithelium that is atrophic near the ostium but
I266 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE  20-30.  Canine  trichololliculoma.
Central large hair follicle with numerous smaller
abortive hair follicles radiating into the surround-
ingdermis.
FIGURE 20-3l. Fcline dilated pore of Winer. Widely dilated, keralin-filed hair follicle.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · 1 267
 at the base shows psoriasiform hyperplasia with rete ridges and irregular, thin projections
into the surrounding dermis (Fig. 20-32).
● Clinical Management. Clinical management includes surgical excision and obser-
vation without treatment.5. 148
WARTY DYSKERATOMA
ation of dogs. 145 Although warty dyskeratoma is believed by many investigators to arise
from pilosebaceous structures, its occurrence in the oral cavity of hurmans has challenged
traditional interpretations.5
recognized to infer age, breed, sex, or site predilections. The lesions are solitary, wartlike
 papules or nodules with a hyperkeratotic umbilicatcd ccnter.
● Diagnosis. Histopathologically, warty dyskeratoma is characterized by a cup-shaped
invagination connected with the surface by a keratin-filled channel (Fig. 20-33).5. 14s The
large invagination contains numerous acantholytic, dyskeratotic cells (Fig. 20-34). The
lower portion of the invagination is occupied by nurmerous villi (elongated dermal papillae
acanthocytes with a pyknotic nucleus surrouinded by a clear halo) can usually be found
● Clinical Management. Clinical management of warty dyskeratoma inay include
surgical excision and observation without treatment.5
PILOMATRIXOMA
· Cause and Pathogenesis. Pilomatrixomas (pilomatricomas, or calcifying epithelio-
mas [of Malherbe]) are uncommon (in dogs) to rare (in cats) neoplasms and are thought
to arise from the hair matrix.1,2,142a,149, 150 The cause of pilomatrixomas is unknown.
● Clinical Findings. Pilomatrixomas usually occur in dogs and cats oldcr than 5
and Old English sheepdogs appear to be predisposed. Usually, pilomatrixomas are solitary.
FIGURE 20-32. Close-up of Figure 20-31. The base of the lesion shows characteristic
psuriasiform cpithelial hyperplasia.
I268 + Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-33. Canine warty dyskeratoma. The base of a kcratin-filled 
ple villi
There may be site predilection to neck, shoulders, lateral thorax, and back. Pilomatrixomas
are solid to cystic, rounded, elevated, well circumscribed, and dermal to subcutaneous in
 position, and they range from 1 to 10 cm in diameter. They frequently becore ulcerated
and alopecic. Pilomatrixomas are rarely invasive_ or metastatic* (matrical carcinoma) to
lymph nodes, lungs, nervous system, and bone.1. 2. 5. 147. 149
● Diagnosis. Histopathologically, pilomatrixomas are characterized by a well-circum-
scribed, cystic, multilobulated, deep dermal to subcutaneous proliferation of basophilic
FlGURE 20-34. Close-up of Figure 20-33. Basal villi with a single layer of attached
keratinocytes.
Neoplastie and Non-Neoplastic Tumors * I269
FIGURE 20-35. Close-up of F'igure 20-33. Acantholytie cells anrd typical corps roumds
(arrow).
cells (which resemble hair matrix cells) and shadow, or ghost, cells (fully keratinized,
faintly eosinophilic cells with a central, unstained nucleus) (Fig. 20-36).33. 149 Shadow cells
 are 1ot pathognomonic, having been found in other hair follicle neoplasrns, various kera-
tinizing cysts, inffamed hair folicles, and chronic hyperkeratotic dernatoses.5, 14a There is
abrupt keratinization (no straturn granulosum), aned the keratin is homogeneous, rclatively
amorphous, and nonfibrillar (tricholeminal keratin). A constant feature of pilormatrixormas 
is the occurrence of multiple dermal papilla-like strurcturcs within the basaloid cellular
 are calcification within the areas of shadow cells, desmoplasia, and infammation.149
● Clinical Management. Clinical management of pilomatrixomas may inclurde surgi-
cal excision, cryotherapy, and observation without treatment.47 149,150
FIGURE 20-36. Canmine pilo-
matrixoma. Multilocular mass con-
sisting of deeply basophilic epithe-
lial wall and  brightly eosinophilic
homogeneous central keratin.
I270 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-37. Close-up of
Figure 20-36. Multiple dermal pa-
pilla-like structures within the basa-
foid wall of a neoplasin.
TRICHOBLASTOMA
● Cause and Pathogenesis. Trichoblastomas are cormmon, usually benign neoplasms
in dogs and cats, which are presumably derived from trichoblastic (primitive hair gern)
epithelium.2. 5, 142a The incidence of these tumors in dogs is probably close to that
cats is more difficult to estimate because cats have several types of neoplasms that are
composed of small basaloid epithelial cells (to include benign feline basal cell tumor,
ductular epitrichial sweat gland neoplasms, and primitive hair follicle neoplasms).2, 5 The
cause of trichoblastomas is unknown.
● Clinical Findings. Trichoblastomas occur in dogs and cats older than 5 years of
overrepresented. Lesions are usually solitary, dome shaped, firm, 1 to 2 cin in diameter,
and often alopecic, ulcerated, and melanotic. In dogs, lesions occur most commonly on
the head and the neck, especially the base of the ear. In cats, lesions occur most
commonly on the cranial half of the trunk. Metastasis is extremely rarc.144
 si ag n u g lin eis pe ren pey  o pu)
cominon in dogs and is characterized by basaloid cells arranged in branching, winding.
and radiating columns with no epidermal contiguity (Fig. 20-38).2. 5 The trabecular type is
most common in cats and is characterized by lobules and broad trabeculae of basaloid
cells with prominent peripheral palisading and no epiderrmal contiguity,2 s The granular
cell type is rare and is architecturally identical to the ribbon type of trichoblastoma, but
many of the epithelial agregates are composed entirely of larger cells with granular or
vacuolated cytoplasm.2. 5, B
● Clinical Management. Clinical management of trichoblastomas Inay include surgi
 cal excision, cryotherapy, and observation without treatment.4-7
Sebaceous Gland Tumors
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
 Sebaceous gland tumors are common (in dogs) to uncormmon (in cats) epithelial growths
Ncoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors ·I27
FIGURE 20-38. Canine trichoblastoma. Ribbon or medusoid type
CLINICAL FINDINGS
Dog
Sebaccous gland tumors arc common in dogs, accounting for 6% to 21% of all canine skin
tumors in multiple surveys.151. 152 Affected dogs avcrage 9 to 10 ycars of age, and therc is
no sex predilection. Nodular scbaceous hypcrplasias account for about 53% of thc lesions
and occur most commonly in Beagles, Cocker spaniels, Poodles, Dachshunds, and minia-
ture Schnauzers.1, 152 The lesions are usually solitary (about 70% of cases), well circum-
scribed, raised, smooth and greasy to hyperkeratotic, wartlike or cauliflower-like in appear-
ance, pinkish to orangish, 3 mm to 7 cm in diameter, and frequently melanotic or
  e      o     
the eyelids.
 Sebaceous epitheliomas (basal cell carcinoma with sebaceous differentiation) account
for about 37% of sebaceous gland tumors and occur most commonly in Shih tzus, Lhasa
apsos,Malamutes,iberianhuskies,and Irish seers.52Thelesions areusually solitary
(about 67% of cases), well circumscribed, raised, smooth, and greasy to hyperkeratotic,
and frequently ulcerated or melanotie.152 They occur most cominonly on the cyelids and
the head (scc Fig. 20-18H).
Sebaceous adenomas account for about 8% of sebaceous gland tumors and occur most
as described for sebaceous hyperplasia and sebaceous epithelioma (see earlier).
Sebaceous carcinoma accounts for only about 2% of the tumors.152 Lesions arc soli-
tary, nodular, 2.5 to 7.5 cm in diameter, and frequently ulcerated (Fig. 20-39B). The
head and the limbs are most commonly affected.1 Cocker spaniels may be predisposed.1
Cat
Sebaceous gland tumors are uncommon in cats, accounting for about 3% of all feline skin
tumors.1. 14, i53 Affected cats are usually 10 ycars of age or older; there is no apparent sex
predilection, Persians may be predisposed.? Lesions are usually solitary and occur most
commonly on the head, the neck, and the trunk. They are well circumscribed, raised,
I272 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-39. A, Sebaceous adenoma on the medial limh of a dog. B, Sebaceous carcinoma on the limh
of a dog. C, Sebaccous gland hyperplasia on the thorax of a cat. Note striking reseinblance to feline mast cell
glaud carcinoma over thie lateral neck and shoulder of a dog. F, Atrichial sweat gland adenoma on the footpad
of a dlog. G, Circumanal gland adenoma in the perianal region of a dog. H, Cireumanal gland carcinoma in a
dog.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I273
smooth and greasy to hyperkeratotic, wartlike to caulifower-like in appearance, pinkish to
orangish, and 0.5 to 1 cm in diameter. Nodular sebaceous hyperplasia accounts for about
67% of allfeline sebaceous gland tumors (Fig. 20-39C) 14, 153
DIAGNOSIS
Cytologic examination reveals clustering of lipidized sebocytes (Fig. 20-40B). Histopatho-
enlarged sebaceous glands composed of numerous lobules grouped symmetrically around
centrally located sebaceous ducts) (Fig. 20-40A); sebaceous adenoma (lobules of seba-
ceous cells of irregular shape and size, which are asymmetrically arranged and well
B
FIGURE 20-40. A, Nodular sebaceous lyperplasta inu a dog. B, Nodular sebaceous hyper
plasia in a dog. Cytologic cxamination of aspirate shows the typical clustering of highly
lipidized sebocytes.
I274·Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-4l. Canine sebaceous epithelioma. Proliferation of basaloid cells with fre
quent sebaceous differentiation.
dcmarcated fron the surrounding tissue and contain mostly mature sebocytes and fewer
undiffercntiated germinative cells); sebaccous epithelioina (tumor similar to basal cell
tumor but containing mostly undifferentiated germinative cells and fewer mature sebo-
cytes) (Fig. 20-41); and sebaceous carcinoma (tunor with pleomorphism and atypia) (Fig.
20-42).2.sa, 152, 153 In one study, about 81% of sebaccous cpitheliomas and 54% of
o pue o renuad eiseady snaas jo sear peq saop u sepe snas
phasing into epitheliormatous or adenomatous areas, suggesting that sebaceous hyperplasia
FIGURE 20-42. Cauine sebaceous carcinoma. Proliferation of pleomorphic, atlypical sebo-
Cytes.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · 1275
may be a precursor to the other lesions.l52 Sebaceous gland tumors are positive for
cytokeratin.47,49
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Clinical management of sebaceous gland tunors may include saurgical excision, cryother.
apy, electrosurgery, and observation without treatiment.4-7 Sebaceous gland neoplasms
rarely recur aftcr surgery, and sebaceous carcinomas rarely metastasize.i52. i5: Oral reti-
noids have been an effective treatment of sebaceous hyperplasia in humans and a small
number of dogs (see Chap. 3) 8s. s9 Neither in dogs nor in cats were any clinical variables
ity.152, 153
Sweat Gland Tumors
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Epitrichial (apocrine) sweat gland tumors are uncommon growths in the dog and cat
arising from the glanduar or ductular components of epitrichial sweat glands.2.14. 27.3.158
Atrichial (eccrine) sweat gland tumors are rare in dogs and cats.2. 14.27. 33 The cause of
sweat gland tumors is unknown, Cytogenetic analysis of two feline epitrichial sweat gland
neoplasms revealed a loss of chromosome E3 or B2 and E3 in both.i60
CLINICAL FINDINGS
Dog
Epitrichial suweat gland tumors may be benigir or malignant in the dog.'. iss However, no
clinical features are consistently helpful in distinguishing histologicaily benign from histo-
logically malignant tumors.15s These neoplasms generally occur in dogs that are 10 years of
age or oler, with no apparent sex predilection. Golden retrievers, Cocker spaniels, and
usually solitary (about 93% of cases), well circumscribed, firm, raised, 0.5 to 10 cm in
diameter, and frequently ulcerated. Some tumors may be cystic and have a bluish or
purplish tint when viewed through the overlying skin (see Fig. 20-39D). Lesions occur
epitrichial sweat gland carcinomas are poorly circumscribed, infiltrative, plaquelike, or
ulcerativc growths (see Fig. 20 -39E), especially in the ventral abdomen, proximal limb, or
neck area, which may be misdiagnosed as pyotraumatic dermatitis or staphylococcal der-
matitis.
Atrichial sueat gland tumors may be benign or malignant and are extremely rare.2. 5.
27, 15 The lsions are solitary m,well to poorly circumscribed, frequently ulcerated, and
1 to 3 cm in diameter; they 0ccur on the footpads (see Fig. 20-39F). Atrichial sweat
 gland carcinomas may present as a poorly defined swelling of the footpad and the digit.
Cat
 r e isen u  ro uq q a s p s p
of age or ofder, with no apparent breed or sex predlilection. Epitrichial sweat gland
 s p ns p ias     a  s
usually solitary (about l00% of cases), well circumscribed, firm, raised, 0.3 to 3 cm in
diameter, and frequently ulcerated. Some lesions inay be cystic and have a bluish or
purplish tint when viewed through the overlying skin. Lesions occur most commonly on
the head (especially the cheek), the pinna, the neck, the axilla, the limh (Fig. 20-43), and
paws was reported in a cat with metastatic epitrichial sweat gland carcinoma.161
I276· Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FlGURE 20-43. Epitrichial sweat gland
carcinoma on the digit of a cat.
Atrichial stceat gland tumors are alnost always malignant in cats and are extremely
rare.2. 14 Atrichial sweat gland carcinomas usually present as poorly defined swellings of the
footpadl and the digit and may affect multiple digits in cats. Ulceration is common.
DIAGNOSIS
Cytologic examination reveals clusters of epithelial cells containing secretory droplets (Fig.
 20-44). The literature on histopathologic classification of sweat gland neoplasms is confus-
ing and includes nunerous subtypes: cystadenoma, glandular adenoma, ductular adenoma,
syringoadenoma, spiradenoma, cylindroma, hidradenoma papilliferum, and carcinoma (soli-
tary, papillary, tubular, glandular, ductular, mixed, clear cell, signet ring) (Figs. 20-45 to
 20-48)? The clinical signifcance of these various histologic types is unknown. In one
*See references 1. 3, 5, 6, 156- 158.
FIGURE 20-44.Epitrichial sweal
gland adenoma in a dog. Cytologic
examination of aspiratc revcals clus-
tered epitrichial sweal gland cells
)  us 
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I277
FIGURE 20-45. Feline papillary cystademouna. Papillary processes, lincd with a single row
of cuboidal to epitrichial sweat gland celsprojectingintoayst cavity containing amophous
secretorymaterial.
retrospective study, most epitrichial sweat gland neoplasms in dogs (9l per cent) and cats
(80 per cent) were histologically malignant.l5s Most carcinomas were the solid type, and
there was no apparent relatiouship between thehistopathologic subtype and clinical varia-
bles. In dogs, about 22 per cent of carcinomas showed lymphatic invasion (see Fig. 20-
48), and cartilaginous or osseous metaplasia was rarely seen. Epitrichial sweat gland
neoplasms (Fig. 20-49) are positive for cytokeratin.7,40 52 Carcinomas, but not adenomas,
were positive for carcinoembryonic antigen (in secretory cells) and vimentin (in myoepi-
thelial cells).52
FIGURE 20-46. Canine papillary syringadenorma
1278 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-47. Close-up of Figure 20-46.
FIGURE 20-48. Canine epitrichial sweat gland carci-
noma. Proliferation of atypical epitrichial sweat gland
cells in cords and glandular structures, with lymphatic
invasion (right).
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I279
FIGURE 20-49. Canine atri-
chial sweat gland adenoma.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Clinical management of sweat gland tumors may include surgical excision, cryosurgery.
nodes, lungs, and bones,6. 27 3. 35. 15s 162 no instances of metastasis were documented in
 ares p ss jo  ge q uaa raps aadsni a
lymphatic invasion.  Atrichial sweat gland carcinomas are aggressive and exhibit rapid
metastasis to regional lymph nodes and subcutaneous tissues of the affected limb.2. 5
Perianal Gland Tumors
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Perianal gland tumors, which are common in the dog, arise most frequently from cir-
cumanal glands (perianal or hepatoid glands and modified sebaceous glands) and less
gland tumors is unknown. However, the circumanal glands and their tumors are known to
be modulated by sex hormones and contain both androgen and estrogen receptors.65s
CLINICAL FINDINGS
Circumanal gland tumors occur in dogs at an average age of ll years, Adenomas are
about nine times more frequent in male than in female dogs. Carcinomas occur with
equal frequency in male and female dogs. Cocker spaniels, English bulldogs, Samoyeds
Afghans, Dachshunds, German shepherd dogs, Beagies, Siberian huskies, Shih tzus, and
Lhasa apsos are predisposed to the development of circumanal gland turnors. Apocrine
neoplasms of anal sac origin are most common in old female dogs and are often associ-
ated with pseudohyperparathyroidism1. 47 163 Circumanal gland neoplasms may be solitary
or rmultiple. Most occur adjacent to the anus, but they may occur on the tail, perineum,
prepuce, thigh, and dorsal lumbosacral area. The snaller (less than I cm in diameter)
neoplasms are spberical or ovoid and tend to become multinodular and ulcerated as they
*See references 1, 2, 4, 6, 7, 10, 27, 33. 163, 164.
I280· Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-50. Diffuse circumanal
gland hyperplasia around the anus of a
dog.
 dermal in location, and well eireurmscribed to poorly circurmscribed.
Nodular circumanal gland hyperplasia may occur as multiple discrete nodules of
varying size that are impossible to distinguish from circumanal gland adenomas (see Fig.
 20-39G) or as a diffuse bulging ring around the anus (Fig. 20-50). Most circumanal
gland tumors are benign.
Circumanal gland carcinomas (see Fig. 20-39H) tend to_grow more rapidly, attain a
larger size, and ulcerate more extensively than do adenomas. Dogs with lesions larger than
 5 cm in diameter have an II-fold higher risk of dying of tumor-related causes.l64 Metasta-
1 sso jo %og on dn u soo 'spou yal requnns pue [eies a o aeadsa sis
Apocrine tumors of anal sac origin are usually adenocarcinomas, present as a perineal
tumors usually metastasize, especially to the sacral and sublumbar lymph nodes.1. 163
DIAGNOSIS
Histologically, perianal gland tumors are classified into two basic types: (1l) circumanal
gland tumors (hyperplasia [Fig. 20-51], adenoma, and carcinoma) and (2) apocrine tu-
mors of anal sac origin. Perianal gland neoplasms are positive for cytokeratin.47. 16
Myoepithelial cell stained for neuron-specific enolase and synaptophysin.6
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
 Clinical management of circumanal gland tumors may include surgical excision, cryosur-
*See references 1, 2, 5, 7, 33, 163, 164.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I28I
FIGURE 20-51. Canine cir-
cumanal gland hyperplasia.
tration is usually the treatment of choice for circumanal gland hyperplasias and adenomas,
with 95% of dogs responding well. Concurrent surgical excision is usually needed only
with ulcerated or recurrent neoplasms in male dogs but is usuaily mandatory for circuin-
anal giand neoplasms in female dogs. Castration is not effective for carcinomas. Estrogen
therapy is not usually recommended, because any tumor regressions induced are transient.
Recurrence of circumanal hyperplasia or adenoma after surgical resection and castration,
evaluated for hyperadrenocorticism (elevated androgen levels, see Chap. 10).5. 7 Apocrine
sis are conmmon.163
Salivary Gland Tumors
xas ao poaiq quaiedde ou arn aioqi zsr'seo pue ssop u aunu arr susedou puela Areaes
 predilections, and neoplasms generally occur in animals 10 years of age or older. Typical
presentations include an ulcerated mass near the lateral commissure of the nouth and a
subcutaneous mass caudoventral to the angle of the mandible or below the ear. The
majority (S5%) of the neoplasms are malignant. Recurrence after surgery and metastasis
are common.
· MeSENChYMaL NeOPLaSmS
The classification of some mesenchymal neoplasms, especially the sarcomas, is controver-
sial. Many authors lump fbrosarcomas, hemangiopericytormas, myxosarcomas, rhabdo-
myosarcomas, liposarcomas, malignant fibrous histiocytomas, undifferentiated sarcomas,
and schwannomas into a “grab-bag" category called soft tissue sarcoma.7, 23, 40, 182 183 The
histologic distinction between some of these neoplasms is often subtle, and there is
 r a ssdo ssu   u jo    si
presentations and biological behaviors. A recent immunocytochemical study on canine
cutaneous fibrosarcomas, hemangiopericytomas, and schwannomas suggested that these
terms carry litle precision in respect to tumor cell differentiation.4 The authors of this
study suggested that these three “tumors" merely refect varieties of proliferative patterns
that may be manifested by cells of varying lineage, and that they would support the use of
the term spindle cell tumor of canine soft tissue to encompass this group of lesions.
1282 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
 Sarcomas are frequently characterized by a pseudocapsule of compressed neoplastic
always be followed with radliotherapy with or without hyperthermia. If surgery is to be
succesful, it must be aggressive (e.g., compartmental resection or amputation).d
Reports of the use of radiotherapy on animal sarcomas before the routine use of
pom ss p- asse   e e  
voltage radiation resulted in l-year local cure rates of only 17%13). With the use of
megavoltage radiation (doses of 45 to 50 Gy), 1-year control rates of 48% to 67% have
been achieved.182, 183 However, the probability of long-term control of many soft-tissue
 sarcomas with radiation therapy remains low.7. 40
Tumors of Fibroblast Origin
FIBRQMA
● Cause and Pathogenesis. Fibromas are uncommon benign neoplasms of the dog
and cat arising from dermal or subcutaneous fbroblasts.2, 4-7. 33 The cause of fibromas is
unkown. In one canine fibroma, cytogenetic evaluation demonstrated trisomy 1.210
● Clinical Findings. These neoplasms usually occur in older dogs and cats. There is
no breed or sex predilection in cats. In dogs, however, fibromas are reported to occur
most commonly in Boxers, Boston terriers, Doberman pinschers, Golden retrievers, and
Fox terriers. 7 12,1Female anials are predsposedUsually, these lesions are solitry
(Fig. 20-52A) and may be more common on the limhs, fanks, and groin. They are
usually well circumscribed, firm (fbroma durum) to soft (fbroma molle), dome shaped to
 pedunculated, dermcepidermal to subcutaneous in location, and 1 to 5 cm in diameter. In
dogs, fbrormas may be melanotic (see Fig. 20-52B), have a pin-feathered appearance, or
 asu a a a   n  sy e  e n u 
large size, and may invade the orbital cavity. Fibromas are usually noninvasive and are
nonmetastatic
● Diagnosis. Cytologic examination reveals small numbers of spindle-shaped fibro-
 blasts (Fig. 20-53B). Histologically, fibromas are characterized by whorls and interlacing
bundles of fibroblasts and collagen fibers (Fig. 20-53A).2 33 fhe neoplastic cells are
usually fusiform, and mitoses are rare. Fibromas containing focal areas of mucinous or
B
FtGURE 20-52. A, Fibroma, cat. B, Melanotic dligital 6broma in a dog. Note resemblance
to digital melanorna in Figure 20- 147.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors * I283
B
FIGURE 20-53. A, Canine fibroma. Interlacing proliferation of well-differentiated fbroblasts and collagen fbers. B,
Canine fibroma. Cytologic examination of aspirate reveals small numbers of monomorphic fibroblasts. C, Perifollicular
fibroma from a dog.
myxomatous degeneration are often called fibromyxomas. Some fibromas are distinctly
● Clinical Management. Clinical management of fbromas may include surgical exci-
 sion, cryosurgery, electrosurgery, and observation without treatment.4-7
DERMATOFIBROMA
· Cause and Pathogenesis. Dermatofbromas are rare fbrocytic tumors in dogs and
cats.2 The cause is unknown, and there is controversy about whether the lesion is neoplas-
tic or reactive.
● Clinical Findings. Dermatofibromas appear as solitary, well-circumscribed, firm
nodules that are usually less than 2 cm in diameter. The overlying epidermis is alopecic
and thickened. Lesions occur most often on the head, and affected animals are usually
younger than 5 years old.
stellate fibrocytic cells arranged in haphazard bundles and small whorls, interspersed with
a moderate stroma composed of collagen fbers and bundles of varying thickness.2
● Clinical Management. Clinical management of dermatofibrormas may include sur.
gical excision, cryosurgery, and observation without treatment.
I284· Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIBROVASCULAR PAPILLOMA
 A fibrovascular papilloma (skin tag, keratin tag, skin polyp, acrochordon, fbroepithelial
polyp, or soft fibroma) is an uncomnon benign tumor of fbrovascular origin in dogs.1. 2 5
The cause of these growths is unknown, but they may be a proliferative response to
trauma or focal furunculosis.
● Clinical Findings. No sex predilection is established, but large and giant breeds
appear to be predisposed, especially the Doberman pinscher and Labrador retriever. The
lesions may be solitary or multiple, filiform to pedunculated, smooth or hyperkeratotic,
 (-o )    7  1 q a   g o   os
papillomas occur most commonly on bony prominences, the trunk, and the sternum.
· Diagnosis. Histopathologically, fibrovascular papillomas are characterized by a fi-
brovascular core exhibiting papillomatosis and irregular hyperplasia of the overlying epi-
dermis (Fig. 20-55).2. 5
● Clinical Management. Clinical management of fbrovascular papillomas may in-
clude surgical excision, cryosurgery, electrosurgery, and observation without treatment.5
FIBROPRURITIC NODULE
● Cause and Pathogenesis. The etiopathogenesis of fibropruritic nodules is un-
kmown. However, they have been described only in conjunction with the chronic self-
● Clinical Findings. Fibropruritic nodules are most commonly seen in dogs older
than 8 years of age and may be more common in German shepherd dogs and their
crosses.2 5 Solitary to multiple firm, sessile or pedunculated, alopecic nodules develop,
which vary in size from 1 to 2 cm in diameter (Fig. 20-56A). Lesions may be erythema-
tous or hyperpigmented, or smooth or hyperkeratotic, and are occasionally ulcerated.
Fibropruritic nodules are located predorminantly over the dorsal lumbosacral area of dogs
with chronic Hea bite hypersensitivity.
● Diagnosis. The clinical presentation is characteristic. Histopathologically, fibropru-
ritic nodulcs are characterized by nodular dermal fibrosis, infammation, and often,
marked papillated epidermal hyperplasia (Fig. 20-57)2 $ Eosinophils are usually a promi-
nent inflammatory cell.
FIGURE 20-54, Multiple fibrovascular papillomas on the sternun of a dog.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I285
FlGURE 20--55. Canine fbrovascular papilloma. Papillomatous proliferation of epidermis
and fbrovascular core.
· Clinical Management. The treatment of choice is surgical excision and controlling
the associated Hea bite hypersensitivity.
FELINE "SARCOID"
● Cause and Pathogenesis. The cause of this rare neoplasm is unknown. Because
of its histologic resemblance to the equine sarcoid, immunohistochemical tests for bovine
papillomavirus were performed but were negative.20 In addition, immunohistochemical
tests for FeLV and felime sarcoma virus (FeSV) were also negative.20
● Clinical Findings. Affected cats are often young (l to 2 years of age) and spend
time outdoors in rural areas. Single or multiple nodules, up to 2 cm in diameter, which
are often ulcerated, ocur most commonly on the nasal philtrum (Fig. 20-58)20, 16s
Lesions also occur on the external nares, upper lip, digits, pinnae, and tip of tail. The
lesions are usually slow growing but often recur with markedly increased growth rate after
surgical excision.
● Diagnosis. Histologically, nonencapsulated, poorly demarcated dermal nodules are
characterized by a dense proliferation of fibroblastic cels with prominent swirling. The
overlying epidermis forms long, pointed rete ridges (Fig. 20-59), and spindle cells may
abut the epidermis in a picket fencelike configuration.
· Clinical Management. Good responses have been gained with cryosurgery, radio-
ox"(en "uud) uonpndue ro Aderan
FIBROSARCOMA
● Cause and Pathogenesis. Fibrosarcomas (fbroblastie spindle cell sarcomas) are
coinmon (in cats) to uncommon (in dogs) neoplasms arising from dermal or subcutaneous
fibroblasts. The cause of fbrosarcomas in older animals is unkmown. Some feline fibrosar-
comas are virus induced.4-7, 172 Such fibrosarcomas, and cell-free extracts derived from
them, contain C-type virus particles. Cell-free extracts produce multicentric fbrosarcomas
when they are injected into kittens and puppies. Cats older than 5 years appear to be
more rcsistant to the oncogenic effects of FesV and usually have no neoplasms or benign
I286· Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
H
FIGURE 20-56. A, Multiple fibropruritic nodules over the runp of a dog with fea bite hypersensitivity. B,
the
trunk of a young, feline leukermia virus (FeLV)-positive cat. D, Schwannoma on the hock of a dog. E, Multiple
solar-induced hemangiomas in a Saluki. (Courtesy A. Hargis.) F, Bluish hemangioma on the left pinna of a cat. G,
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I287
FIGURE 20-57. Canine fhropnuritic nodule,
Deoplasms that spontaneously regress. The FeSV is a mutant of FeLV, and cats with
FeSV-induced fbrosarcomas are FeLV positive. FeSV is not associated with the solitary
and rahies vaccines) may eventuate in fibrosarcomas in some cats, especially if vaccines 
arc repeatedly given at the same site (cervical, interscapular) (see Postvaccinal Sarco-
mas)25-57 Cytogenetic analysis of nine feline fbrosarcomas revealed heterogeneous kar-
yotypic changes, including trisomy D1, marker Fl, and nonrandom involvement of chro-
· Clinical Findings
Dog. Fibrosarcomas are uncommon in the dog.1 2 4-7 They occur in older and female
dogs, and Cocker spaniels, Doberman pinschers, and Golden retrievers Inay be predis-
posed.1 47, 12, 16 Fibrosarcomas are usually solitary, irregular and nodular in shape, rm t
Heshy (see Figs. 20-56B and 20-60), poorly circunscribed, variably sized (1 to 15 cm in 
diameter), and subcutaneous in location. They are often ulcerated and alopecic. Lesions
occur most commonly on the limbs and the trunk. Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia
has been reported in association with canine fibrosarcoma.
Cat. Fibrosarcomas are common in the cat.° FeSV-associated fibrosarcomas are
seen in cats younger than 5 years of age and are usually multicentric (see Fig. 20-
56C).1, 2, 4-7, 172 Fibrosarcomas that are not associated with' FeSV are seen in older cats
*See references 1, 2, 4-7, 16, 26, 33, 35, 171.
I288 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-58. Feline sarcoid.
Well-circumscribed, ulcerated nod-
ule on muzzle.
(average age 12 years) and are typically _solitary. Lesions occur most commonly on the
shape, firm to feshy, poorly circumscribed, variably sized (1 to 15 cm in diameter), and
subcutaneous (trunk and distal limbs) or dermal (pinnae and digits) in location. They are
a pn o  s  h ( s i a) s m 
cases.1. 4-7,16.23.171
● Diagnosis. Cytologic examination reveals pleomorphic, atypical fibioblasts (Fig.
20-6lA). Histopathologically, fbrosarcomas are characterized by interwoven bundles of
immature fibroblasts and moderate numbers of collagen fibers.i. 2. 3 171 The neoplastic
cells are usually fusiform, mitotic figures are common, and cellular atypia is pronounced
(Fig. 20--6lB). Areas of necrosis or hemorrhage are not uncommon. Fibrosarcomas with
focal areas of mucinous or myxomatous degeneration are often called fibromyxosarcomas.
significantly correlated with the proliferative activity of fibrosarcomas but not with the
mitotic indices.174
 Fibrosarcomas arising in subcutaneous vaccination sites are accompanied by a lym-
phoid and granulomatous inflammatory response at the periphery, with epithelioid macro-
phages and multinucleate histiocytic giant cells, which have an amorphous gray-brown to
was demonstrated in feline multicentric fbrosarcomas but not in feline postvaccinal fbro-
sarcomas.249
● Clinical Management. The clinical management of choice for fibrosarcomas is
 cin, cyclophosphamide, inethotrexate, and vincristine), immunotherapy (with mixed bacte-
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I289
FIGURE 20-59. Feline sarcoid. Dense, swirling pro-
liferation of fibroblasts underlying a papilated epidermis
with long, pointed rete ridges.
rial vaccine and levamisole), and cryosurgery have been of limited benelit." Acemannan
(Acemannan Immunostimulant) is a carbohydrate moiety that enhances macrophage re
 (-t   1 () r    
interferon-y (IFN-y), increases natural killer cell activity, enhances T cell function, and
enhances macrophage phagocytosis.25. 17. 176 The product has been advocated (repeated
intraperitoneal and intratumoral injections) for the treatment of fbrosarcoma in cats and
 dogs.17 However, controlled studies are completely lacking, and the product is controver-
sial.7, 171
 In a study of 44 cats with fibrosarcomas, it was found that the mitotic indcx and
tumor site correlated with prognosis, whereas histologic appearance, tumor size, and
duration of tumor growth did not.169 Cats with fibrosarcomas of the head, the back, or the
limbs and with a mitotic index of 6 or greater had the poorest prognosis. In a study of 84
dogs with fbrosarcomas, the site of tumor occurrence, tumor size, and delay hetween
detection of the tumor and surgical excision had little infuence on the prognosis for
recurrence or metastasis.170 Mitotic index of the neoplasms has a significant predictive
value for recurrence, postsurgical survival time, and metastasis.23. 170
MYXOMA AND MYXOSARCOMA
● Cause and Pathogenesis. Myxomas and myxosarcomas are rare neoplasms of the
dog and cat arising from dermal or subcutaneous fibroblasts, the cause of which is
*See references 4-7, 23, 40, 171, 182, 183.
1290 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-60. Fibrosarcoma,
dog. (Courtesy H. Harvey.)
unknown.1 2 4-7, 16,3 Myxoma has been reported to develop at the site of a subcutaneous
 pacemaker in a dog.184
● Clinical Findings. These neoplasins usually occur in older dogs and cats, with no
sex predilections. Doberman pinschers and Gerrnan shepherd dogs may be predisposed.1
are usually solitary infiltrative growths that are soft, slimy, and poorly circumscribed and
e n  ae sox uq ae s drs ap ou a
their infiltrative growth patterns.
· Diagnosis. Histopathologically, myxomas and myxosarcomas are characterized by
stellate to fusiform cells distributed in a vacuolated, basophilic, mucinous stroma that may
be partitioned by collagenous connective tissue septae (Fig. 20-62).2. 33 Myxomas and
 myxosarcomas are positive for vimentin.56
● Clinical Management. In clinical management, the therapy of choice for myxomas
 and myxosarcomas is radical surgical excision,.1-7, 19
NODULAR FASCIITIS
● Cause and Pathogenesis. Nodular fascitis (pseudosarcomatous fascitis) is a rare,
represent a proliferative inflammatory process arising from the subcutaneous fascia and
· Clinical Findings. There are no age, breed, or sex predilections for dogs and cats.
Nodular fascitis can occur anywhere on the body but may favor the head, the face, and
the eyelids. The masses are usually solitary, firm, poorly circumscribed, 0.2 to 5 cm in
diameter, and subcutaneous in location. In humans, nodular fasciitis is self-limited, and
and cats is also henign, but spontaneous regression has not been reported.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors * I291
FIGURE 20-61. Canine fbrosar-
coma. A, Cytologic cxamination of
aspirate reveals pleomorphic, atyp-
ical fibroblasts. (Courtesy J. Blue.) B,
Proliferation of pleomorphic, atypical
fibroblasts.
● Diagnosis. Histopathologically, nodular fascitis is characterized by a poorly circum-
 scribed, infiltrative proliferation of pleomorphic fibroblasts growing haphazardly in a highly
pe sso eauesns punois pron jo yoe sure e ym euons pazuenosa
giant cells are common, and a chronic inflarm matory infiltrate is often present.
● Clinical Management. The clinical managernent of nodular fascitis in dogs and
cats has consisted of surgical excision,
Tumors of Neural Origin
SCHWANNOMA
● Cause and Pathogenesis. Schwannomas (neurofbroma, neurilemoma, neurinoma,
 Or perineural fbroblastoma) are rare neoplasms of the dog and cat arising from dermal or
subcutaneous Schwann cells (nerve sheath)* The cause of schwannomas is unknown.
 There is much confusion about terminology concerning these neoplasms in the veteri-
nary literature. The lesions have been classified as neurinomas, neurilemormas, schwanno-
*See references 1. 2, 5-7, 16, 185. 189.
I292· Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-62. Feline myxo
sarcoma. Atypical fibroblasts (fusi-
form-to-stellate)with  abundant
ground substance (mucin).
 mas, malignant schwannomas, neurofibromas, and neurofbrosarcomas.173 Some authors 
have proposed the term peripheral nerve sheath tumor to include those neoplasms involv-
● Clinical Findings. Schwannomas usually occur in older dogs (average 9 years) and
cats (average 12 years), with no sex predilection. In cats, no breed predilection exists, but
in dogs, the Fox terrier may be predisposed5 Schwannomas are usually solitary. They
occur most commonly on the limbs, the head, and the neck in cats, but they occur more
commonly on the limbs, the head, and the tail in dogs (see Fig. 20-56D).1 2 5-7.15. 189
often lobulated, variable in size, and dermal (especially in cats) to subcutaneous (especially
in dogs) in location. They are often alopecic. Rarely, schwannomas may be plexiform
(multinodular) (Fig. 20-63).is9 There may be obvious nerve involvement with or without
FIGURE 
20-63.
Multinodular
schwannoma, dog.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I293
FIGURE 20-64. Canine schwan-
noma.
a. Palisading  spindle-shaped
cells with fine, wavy fibers.
neurologic deficit. Soine lesions arc painful or pruritic (owing to paresthesias?) and may
● Diagnosis. Histopathologically, schwannomas are characterized by two patterns: (1)
extend in various directions, with spindle-shaped cells that may exhibit nuclear palisading
(Fig. 20-64); and (2) neurilemoma—areas of spindle-shaped cells exhibiting nuclear
 palisading and twisting bands or rows (Antoni type A tissue), alternating with an edema-
(  a ) s p  a  o ns s
neoplasms can be extremely pleororphic, with ceils being arranged in fascicles, shects,
and whorls, and individual neoplastic cells being fusiforrm, ovoid to round, or multinu-
FIGURE 20-65. Canine schwan-
noma. Antoni A and B type tissue.
I294 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastie Tumors
cleated all in the same neoplasm.1ss Schwannomas are positive for vimentin and S-100
protein.16, 49.58
● Clinical Management. The therapy of choice is surgical excision.4-7. 19, 185. 189
and cryosurgery appear to be of minimal beneft. Schwannomas recur frequently after
NEUROTHEKEOMA
● Cause and Pathogenesis. Neurothekeomas are rare benign cutaneous neoplasms
of Schwann cell origin.2. 5 The cause of these neoplasims is unknown.
been seen to generate age, breed, or sex data. The lesions are solitary, firm, nodular, and
subcutaneous to dermal in location. They occur on the legs and digits.
● Diagnosis. Histopathologically, neurothekeomas are characterized by nests and
cords of cells in a variably mucinous matrix (Fig. 20-66). A close rclationship to small
 nerves may be seen.2 5
● Clinical Management. Clinical management includes surgical excision.
GRANULAR CELL TUMOR
· Cause and Pathogenesis. Granular cell tumors (granular cell myoblastoma, or
granular cellschwannoma) are rare neoplasms of the dog and cat.1,5. 186, 19 Although the
cell of origin is not established with certainty, current evidence suggests a neural sourcc.
In humans, granular cell tumors contain neuron-specific enolase and myelin basic pro-
tein.,.51 The cause of granular cell tumors is unknown.
· Clinical Findings. Granular cell turnors have been reported in dogs from 2 to 13
years old, with no breed or sex predilection. Most of the neoplasms occurred as solitary.
firrm, round, well-circumscribed masses within the tongue. Other dogs had a solitary
subcutaneous neoplasm near the shoulder or on the lip or ear, and one dog had multiple
dermoepidermal and subcutaneous malignant neoplasms with visceral metastasis (Fig. 20--
FIGURE 20-66. Canine neurothckeoma, Nests of neuroid tissue.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I295
FIGURE 20-67. Malignant granular cell turnors on the thorax of a dog.
tumors have been seen on the tongue, vulva, and digits.190
● Diagnosis. Histopathologically, granular cell tumors are charactcrized by a circum-
scribed mass of ovoid to polyhedral cells with central or ccccntric nuclei and pale
cells may be arranged diffusely or in ncsts and rows (Fig. 20-68). The cytoplasimic
granules are PAS positive. The pseudocarcinomatous hyperplasia that so frequently over-
o  s so p s  ss a si s  s  r s
tumors are  positive
: for neuron-specific enolase and variably positivc for vimentin and
S-100 protein.156. 190
FIGURE 20-68. Canine malignant granular cell tumor. Cords and clusters of anaplastic
cells with fine, cosinophilic cytoplasmic granules.
I296 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
● Clinical Management. The thcrapy of choice for granular cell tumors is surgical
excision.5-7
MENINGIOMA
● Cause and Pathogenesis. Primary cutaneous (extraneuraxial) meningioma is ex-
ceedingly rare in the dog 1ss Although the cause of these lesions is unknown, it is
 hypothesized that they originate from arachnoid cap cell rests displaced during ermbryo-
genesis into the skin.
● Clinical Findings. An ll-ycar-old Poodle had a firm, well-circumseribed, 3-cm-
 diameter, subcutaneous mass in the right hind leg that had been enlarging for several
months.188
● Diagnosis. Histopathologically, meningiomas show a uniform and lobulated ar-
rangement of solid masses of ovoid to clongated cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm.1ss Most
cells form concentric whorls around central small capillary spaces that are often obliter-
 ated. Electron microscopy reveals characteristic delicate intracytoplasmic filaments.
● Clinical Management. Surgical excision is curative.
TAIL DOCK NEUROMA
● Cause and Pathogenesis. Tail dock neuroma occurs rarely in dogs as a sequela to
 n jo uosr e ae sn st  upapnes ndei o ss
surgical nerve transection, followed by disorganized proliferation of the proximal nerve
stump because of poor apposition or the absence of the distal nerve segment.
● Clinical Findings. Historically, affected dogs have inflicted self-trauma to the tail
since puppyhood, beginning soon after tail dlocking. Physical examination reveals a painful,
alopecic, hyperpigmented, lichenified, excoriated dermatosis at the tip of the tail. The
underlying connective tissue is thickened and firm. Cocker spaniels may be predisposed.
Dogs with a neuroma following surgical amputation for a variety of disorders (trauma,
neoplasia, or tail biting) have the onset of symptoms following surgery (Fig. 20-69).
FIGURE 20-69. Tail dock neuroma in a dog following amputation of
tail tip.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors * I297
FIGURE 20-70. Canine tail
dock neuroma. Axonal sprouting in
a bed of ibrous connective tissue.
(Courtesy T. Gross.)
● Diagnosis. Histopathologic exainination reveals axonal sprouting with secondary
remyclination in a bed of fibrous connective tissue (Fig. 20-70).2.187
● Clinical Management. Surgical excision is curative.
Tumors of Vascular Origin
HEMANGIOMA
· Cause and Pathogenesis. Hemangiomas (angiomas) are uncommon (in dogs) to
rare (in cats) benign neoplasins arising from the endothelial cells of blood vessels.* The
 cause of most hemangiomas is unknown. C-type virus particles have been found in cells
 an fo s sa a a  s go a a q  s
mented, sparsely haired dogs.2. 204. 205
· Clinical Findings
Dog. Hemangiomas are more comimon than hemangiosarcomas and occur in dogs at
 and sparsely haired ventral ahdomen and thorax have an increased incidence of heman-
giomas (see Fig. 20-56E). Breeds at risk include Boxer, Golden retriever, German shep-
herd dog, English Springer spaniel, Airedale terrier, Whippet, Dalmatian, Beagle, Ameri-
can Staffordshire (pit bull) terrier, Basset hound, Saluki, and English pointer,2, 12, 205
Multiple, presumably solar-induced hemangiomas have been reported in related whip-
reddish black, 0.5 to 4 cm in diameter, and dermal to subcutaneous in location.
Cat. Heinangiomas are less common than hemangiosarcomas, usually occur in ani-
usually solitary and occur most commonly on the ears (see Fig. 20-56F), the face, the
neck, and the limbs. Hernangiomas are slow growing, usually well circurmscribed, firm to
fuctuant, rounded, bluish to reddish black, 0.5 to 4 cm in diameter, and dermal to
*See references 1, 2, 4-7, 14, 16, 33.
I298 + Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-7l. Canine capillary hemangioma. Superficial dermal proliferation of normal-
appearing erudothelial cells and blood vesscls.
subcutaneous in location. Spontancous or trau ma-induced blceding from these neoplasms
may occur.
● Diagnosis. Histologically, hemangiomas are characterized by the proliferation
cels.1.2. 33 Hemangiomas are often subclassfied as cavernous or capillary, depending on
the size of the vascular spaces and the amount of intervening fbrous tissues (Figs. 20-71
and 20-72).1. 2. 3, 33 Solar-induced lesions are often less well circumscribed, and solar
FIGURE 20-72. Canine cavermous henmangioma. Deep dermal proliferation of widely di-
lated, bloodl-filled vessels.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors * I299
dermatitis and elastosis may be present.2 5.205 21l Electron microscopy may be benefcial in
determining the vascular origin of a neoplasm, because Weibel-Palade bodies are a spe-
cifc cytoplasmie marker for endothelial cels.5 In addition, immunolistochemistry may be
type IV collagen and laminin are found in vascular proliferations.47, s0. 53. 62, 212 In a recent
study,198 vWf and CD31 (platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule [PECAM]) both
 consistently marked normal vascular endothelium and all hemangiomas from dogs. Lectins
t ie'susdou esa au ny si poo pou are (vanl snd x a)
disseminated intravascular coagulation have been reported in conjunction with heman-
giomas.204
● Clinical Management. Clinical management of hemangiomas may include surgical
 excision, cryosurgery, electrosurgery, and observation without treatment.4-7
HEMANGIOSARCOMA
● Cause and Pathogenesis. Hemangiosarcomas (angiosarcomas, or malignant hem-
angioendotheliomas) are uncommon malignant neoplasms of dogs and cats arising from
theendothelial celsofbloodvessels149a2Thcausefmosthmangiosarco-
mas is unkrown. In humans, they have been associated with exposure to thorium dioxide,
a a ap eos o e isns ns ss go pu pn s
the cause of hemangiosarcomas in the ventral glabrous skin of lightly pigmented, sparsely
coated dogs2, 205 and on the pinnae of white-eared cats.212
· Clinical Findings
Dog. Hemangiosarcomas occur in dogs at an average of 10 years of age, with no
apparent scx predilection. Typical hemangiosarcomas occur most commonly in Gerrman
shepherd dogs, Golden retrievers, Bermese Mountain dogs, and Boxers.* Lesions are
often rapidly-growing and are most commonly found on the trunk and the extremities.
Whippets, Dalmatians, beagles, greyhounds, American Staffordshire terriers, Basset
hounds, Salukis, English pointers, and other short-haired and light-skinned breeds are at
increased risk for solar-induced hemangiosarcomas.2. 204. 205
Solar-induced herangiosarconas are often rmultiple and most common on the ventral
thorax and the abdomen. Typical hemangiosarcomas are usually solitary, whereas solar-
induced lesions may be multiple. Dermal hemangiosarcomas (usually solar induced) are
wellto-poorly circumscribed, red to dark blue plaques or nodules that are usually less
than 2 cm in diameter. Subcutancous hemangiosarcomas (usually not solar-induccd) are
poorly circumseribed, dark red or blue-black, bruiselike, spongy masses that can measure
up to10 cm in diameter.205. 23 Alopecia, thickened skin,hemorrhage, and ulcration are
common features of dermal or subcutaneous hemangiosarcomas.
ta j s ot  o s   no  ss 
There is no breed predilection. White cats may be prone to cutaneous hemangiosarcoma
are usually solitary, rapidly growing, and occur most commonly on the head (see Fig. 20-
56G) and the pinna (especially in white-haired cats), on the limbs, and in the inguinal and
axillary regions. Dermal hemangiosarcomas are poorly circumscribed, red to dark blue
plaques or nodules that are usually less than 2 cim in diameter. Subcutaneous hemangio-
sarcomas are pooriy circumscribed, dark red or blue-black, spongy masses that can mea-
sure up to 10 cm in diameter. Alopecia, thickened skin, hemorrhage, and ulceration are
common features of dermal or subcutaneous hemangiosarcomas. In one study,2ll tvo
thirds of the cats with cutaneous hemangiosarcoma eventually developed multicentric
lesions. Proliferative vascular lesions of varying morphologic appearance are occasionally
seen on the digits and distal limhs of older cats (Fig. 20-73)2o1 These often have an
"See references 1, 4-7, 12, 16, 194a, 196, 219, 223.
1See referenuces 1, 2, 4-7, 16, 30, 207, 211, 212.
I300 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-73. Feline heman-
giosarcoma. Paw is swollen and
studdedwithmultifocalblack
crusts.
rss assd, s  r q aa p a p asse
"hemangiomatosis," "infiltrative hemangioma,”" or “low-grade hemangiosarcoma." We con-
cur with others2oi and would prefer to call thesc lesions simply “hernangiosareoma.”" A
● Diagnosis. Histopathologically, hemangiosarconas are characterized by an invasive
proliferation of atypical endothelial cells with areas of vascular space formation (Figs. 20--
74A and B)." Solar-induced lesions may have associated solar dermatitis and solar elasto-
antigen (vWf), type IV collagen, and laminin.1 In a recent study,i9s vWf marked
73% and CD31 (PECAM) marked 100% of the canine hemangiosarcoimas investigated.
vWf can be aberrantly expressed in some carcinomas and in rmacrophages.19s CD31 also
reacts with norimal canine lymphatic vessel endothelium and is probably of little or no
yalue in distinguishing between hemangiosarcomas and lymphangiosarcomas,I9s Lectins
(e.g, Ulex europaeus, UEA-1) are not good markers for canine vascular ncoplasms.191. 1ss
Anemia, purpura, thrombocytopenia.
. hypofibrinogenemia, and findings associated with
sarcomas.5. 204
that these skin tumors should be staged via henogram, serum biochemistry, urinalysis,
thoracic radiographs, echocardiography, and abdominal ultrasonography 19a
· Clinical Management. The therapy of choice for hemangiosarcomas is radical
animals with hemangiosarcoma is poor, with local recurrence and metastasis being com-
 mon. They are highly invasive and inalignant in dogs, with an average survival time of 4
*See references 1,2,33, 205, 211, 212,223.
tSee references 47, 49-51, 55, 56, 62, 212.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I301
FIGURE 20-74. Canine he-
mangiosarcoma. A, Proliferation of
atypical vascular structures associ-
atcd with necrosis and henorrhage.
B, Close-up, of A. Proliferation of
a p so pea re
normal vascular structures.
months after diagnosis 1s2 In cats, hemangiosarconas are reported to frequently recur after
cats with cutaneous hemangiosarcoma developed metastatic lesions. Early amputation is
usually curative for feline hemangiosarcomas of the distal limbs and digits. Palliative
responses have been obtained in dogs with the concomitant administration of doxorubicin
and vincristine.4. 5, 7
Canine cutancous hemangiosarcomas were staged based on the depth of histologic
1 as ca (aos oi op) 1 ss p (snns) 1 ss (ep)  ais ue
lesions were small, raised, red-purple nodules: were coinmonly found on the ventral
abdomen, prepuce, and pelvie limb; and had a median postsurgical survival of 780 days.
Stage II and II lesions were larger, poorly circumscribed, soft to fuctuant, often bruise-
like; had no anatomic site predilection, and had shorter postsurgical survival times (median
(stage I1) hemangiosarcomas achieved a median postsurgical survival of 425 days with
I302 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-75, Multiple heman-
giopericytomas on the front leg of a
dop
Ideally, the effcacy of single-agcnt chemotherapy should be determined before com-
bination therapy is attemptcdis Some authors believe that combination chemotherapy
has no strong survival advantage compared with single-agent chemotherapy and recom-
mend a doxorubicin-based protocol adjuvant to surgery.194a Mixed bacterial vaccines are of
tripeptide phosphatidylethanolamine had significantly longer survival times (median, 277
days) than did dogs treated with surgery and chemotherapy alone (median, 143 days) 221a
HEMANGIOPERICYTOMA
· Cause and Pathogenesis. Hemangiopenicytomas (peritheliomas) are common ne-
oplasms of the dog arising from vascular pericytes.* Rare cases of hemangiopericytoma
in cats have been reported·5s. 13, 14 The cause of hemangiopericytomas is unknown. Trisomy
 2 (three copies of chromosome 2) has been reported in threc cases of canine hemangio-
ties in all three: trisomy 9; trisomy 2 and 29; trisomy 2 and deleted chromosomes.210
● Clinical Findings. Hemangiopericytomas occur in dogs at a mean age of 7 to 10
apparent sex predilection. Hemangiopericytomas are usually solitary and occur most com-
rmonly on the limbs (especially the stife and elbow). They are usually firm, multinodular,
well circumscribed, 2 to 25 cm in diameter, and dermal to subcutaneous in location (Fig.
20-75; see Fig. 20-56H). Alopecia, hyperpigmentation, and ulceration are common.
● Diagnosis. Several patterns are associated with the hemangiopericytoma, and one
 s   a p q  sd rs  d  
variable histopathologic appearance is considered unique to the hemangiopericytoma. The
classic pattern is the perivascular whorls (fingerprint pattern) of spindle-shaped to ovoid
cells (Fig. 20-76A and B).1 Other patterns include storiform, myxoid, and epithelioid.
p oi-so au nq ci  eu i asd ae sdo
· Clinical Management. The therapy of choice for hemangiopericytomas is surgical
*See references 1, 2, 4-7, 16, 202, 215, 226.
fSee references 1, 2, 4-7, 16, 33, 226.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I303
FIGURE 20-76.
A，Canine
hemangiopericytoma.Perivascular
whorls of cells create a fingerprint-
like appearance. B, Canine heman-
giopcricytoma.Perivascular prolif-
eration of plump pericytes.
like fibrosarcomas.2 202, 215 About 30% or more of these neoplasms recur 4 months to 4
years after surgical excision, and about 60% were reported to recur after surgery and
months before surgery and tumors with increasing degrees of necrosis histologically had
higher rates of recurrence.215 Metastasis is rare.16.202. 215
ANGIOKERATOMA
● Cause and Pathogenesis Angiokeratomas are rare, benign, superficial, cutaneous
toma is unknown.
● Clinical Findings. Angiokeratomas occur on the conjunctiva and skin of dogs (Fig.
 20-77). The lesions are usually discrete, soft papules, 2 to 4 mrn in diameter, that may be
I304 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-77. Angiokeratoma
on the thorax of a dog.
heavily melanized. Their color varies from red to black. Angiokeratoma occurred in the
interdigital space of a cat.211
● Diagnosis. Histopathologically, angiokeratomas are characterized by dilated and
 sa o d e  s po p  s
20- 78).2, 15, 200, 211
excision and observation without treatment.
● IdIOPaThIC TelaNgIeCtaSIA
Idiopathic telangiectasia resembling essential telangiectasia of humans was diagnosed in a
12-year-old dog.is6a The condition had been present for 3 years and was characterized by
FIGURE 20-78. Canine angiokeratoma. Dilated, blood-illed superficial dermal vessels
surrounded by hyperplastic epidermal collarettes.
Ncoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors * I305
erythema of the antebrachial region of both front linbs. The dermatosis was asympto.
matic. Histopathologie findings included dilatation and proliferation of superficial derrmal
blood vessels. Alkaline phosphatase activity was absent in the abnormal vesscls, suggesting
that they were venules.
LYMPHANGIOMA
● Cause and Pathogenesis. Lymphangiomas (angiomas) are rare benign neoplasms
of the dog and cat. They arise frorm the endothelial cells of lymphatic vessels. 2 4-7. 16
Their cause is unknown, and some authors consider them hamarfomas. Surgical trauma
sn ssn       o    
is confusing, with congenital lesions being referred to as congenital lymphangioma, con-
genital lymphangiectasis, and lymphatic hamartoma. Acquired lesions are called acquired
lymphangioma, lymphangiectasis, or lymphangiomatosis.
● Clinical Findings. Lymphangiomas have been reported in dogs and cats from
sst suoad xas no paq de ou pm a jo saa g o I ui so
scribed (Fig. 20-79A). Lymphangiomas may be accompanied by pitting ederna and turgid
    ss e po  o p (o  s
 Axillary and inguinal areas and limbs are most commonly affected.
● Diagnosis. Histologically, lymphangiomas are characterized by a proliferation of
variably sized, cavernous, angular vascular spaces. They are lined by a single layer of
fattened endothelial cells and occur within the dermis, the subcutis, or both (Fig. 20-
80)1. 2 5 Lymphangiomas are imentin, Wf, and CD31 positive.192a 95. 98
● Clinical Management. The therapy of choice for lymphangiomas is surgical exci-
sion, but recurrence is common.2 195 Amputation may be necessary. Radiation therapy was
successful in a dog with recurring lymphangioma.221 In another dog with an unresectable
lymphangioma, the condition was controlled with: intermittent administration of furosem-
ide.24
LYMPHANGIOSARCOMA
● Cause and Pathogenesis. Lynphangiosarcoma (angiosarcoma) is a rare malignant
lymphangiosarcoma is unknown, although in humans, the neoplasm often arises in areas of
chronic lymphedema.5
● Clinical Findings
Dog. Lymphangiosarcoma has occurred in dogs from younger than 1 to 1l years of
age, with no apparent breed or sex predilection.2. 5 192 216, 218 Lesions are usually solitary,
poorly circumscribed, Huctuant swellings up to 20 cm in diameter. Pitting edema, serous
 drainage (lymphorrhea), purpura, and ulceration may be present. The limbs and the
ventral abdomen are most often affected.
Cat. Lymphangiosarcoma has occurred in adult and aged cats, with no apparent
thickening or poorly circumscribed edematous inass of the ventral abdomncn (see Fig. 20-
79C) or draining tract to cystlike areas on a limb. Lesions are usually rapidly growing.
Affected skin may be erythematous to purplish, is soft and spongy, and oozes a serosan-
 guineous fuid (lyinphorrhea) (see Fig. 20-79D). Regional lyinph nodes are often in-
volved.
● Diagnosis. Histologically, lymphangiosarcoma is characterized by the proliferation
 ss a pai   n r sn   a r
"See references 2, 4-7, 193, 195, 199, 214, 224, 225.
I306 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastie Tumors
G
FIGURE 20-79. A, Canine lymphangioma. Purpuric mass in the groin. B, Canine lymphangioma. Multiple
vesicles and bullae filled with clear-to-nilky fuid on the medial thigh. C, Feline lymphangiosarcoma. Multiple
Canine mast cell tumor. Multiple suhcutaneous nodules ovcr the withers. H, Canine mast cell tumor. Erythema-
tous, edematous, and nodular lesions in the groin.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I307
FIGURE 20-80. Canine lyinphangioma. Proliferati
Ivrnphaticvessels
surround collagen fbrils (Figs. 20-81 and 20-82).1. 2. 5. 206 The neoplastic vessels are
characterized by tortuous shapes, a lack of pericytes, and little or no blood. A pleomorphic
infammatory infltrate is usually present. Lymphangiosarcomas are vimentin positive, and
membrane in lymphatics) and irnmunohistochemical identification of collagen type IV (not
present in lymphatics) may be the only definitive way of distinguishing lyrnphangiosarcoma
from hemangiosarcoma.21 Weibel-Palade bodies have been found in lynphatic endothelial
cells.218
FIGURE 20-8l. Feline lymphangiosarcoma. Atypical endothelial cells forming vessls and
infiltrating between collagen bundles.
I308 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-82. Close-up of Figure 20-8l. Pleounorphic and alypical cndothelial cells
lining vessels and budding off into the vascular lurmen.
· Clinical Management. The treatment of choice is radical surgical excision or
three of nine cats in one study 26
Tumors of Adipose Origin
LIPOMA
· Cause and Pathogenesis. Lipoimas are common (in dogs) to uncommon (in cats)
lipomas is unknown. Cytogenetic analysis of two feline lipomas was reported.232 One
neoplasm had a reciprocal translocation of chromosomes B4 and Cl, and in the other, an
F1-marker chromosome was detected. Similar studies were conductel in dogs.234a
Weimaraners, Doberman pinschers, miniature Schnauzers, Labrardor retrievers, and small
often over the thorax (Fig. 20-83), the brisket, the abdomen, and the proximal limbs (sec
Fig. 20-79E). They are usually dome shaped or pedunculated, well circumscribed, soft to
Habby, variable in size (1 to 30 cm in diameter), often multilobulated, and subcutaneous
in location. Some lipomas are firm, owing to the presence of fbrous tissue, and are found
to be fibrolipomas histologically.2. 5. 16 Some lipomas are painful and are found to be
Infiltratie lpomas areuncommon indogs and cats.2 5,2222aThese neolasms
 r rd e aa  ( g  s   o srn
animals (4 : 1). Doberman pinschers and Labrador retrievers 1nay be predisposed. Obesity
does not appear to be a prerequisite. These tumors occur imost frequently on the extremi-
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I309
FIGURE 20-83. Huge lipoma 0n
the ventral thorax of a dog.
ties, the thorax, and the neck. The neoplasms are large, poorly circumscribed, soft, deep
subcutaneous masses that infltrate adjacent muscle, fascia, tendon, joint capsule, and
bone; they may cause dysfunction because of mechanical interference or pressure pain.31
● Diagnosis. Cytologic examination reveals an often acellular preparation containing
numerous lipid droplets (Fig. 20-85). Histologically, lipomas are characterized by a well-
Some neoplasms have a marked fibrous tissue component and are called fibrolipomas.
appearing lipocytes that infltrates surrounding tissues, especially muscle and collagen.2, 22s
Angiolipoinas are characterized by mature adipose tissue with a complex, branching blood
vascular component (Fig. 2088) Lipomas are positive for vimentin.47,50. 5
● Clinical Management. The treatment of choice for all types of lipomas is surgical
reduces the size of the neoplasms and improves the definition from surrounding tissues.
Small, asymptomatic lipomas are often merely observed, unless they grow large. Lipomas
that are large can usually be easily peeled out, because they are well circumscribed and
FIGURE 20-84. Pigmentcd li-
poma in the fank of a dog.
I310 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-85. Canine lipoma.
Cytologic exanination of aspirate re-
veals fat droplets (arrows).
FIGURE 20-86. Feline lipoma. Proliferation of nor-
Iral-appearing fat.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I3II
FIGURE 20-87. Close-up of Figure 20-86. Normal-appcaring lipocytes.
have a poor blood supply. The intratumoral injection of 10% calcium chloride solution
caused complete remission in 4 of 18 canine lipomas treated, with a 50% rcduction in size
of the other 14 treated tumors.22 Although infltrativc lipomas are not malignant, they
necessitate radical surgical excision to prevent local recurrence, which still may occur in
36% of the cases.22s It is diffeult to distinguish infiltrative lipoma from normal fat, thus
surgical margins are hard to define.
LIPOSARCOMA
· Cause and Pathogenesis. Liposarcomas are rare malignant ncoplasms of the dog
FIGURE 20-88. Canine angiolipoma. Proliferation of lipoxytes with a central branching
vascular component.
|312 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-89. Feline liposarcoma. Proliferation
n of pleomorphic, atypical lipocytes
unknown, although they can be induced in cats by injection of FeLV,5. 6, 233 One cat
developed a metastatic postvaccinal liposarcoma.230 A glass fragment was found within a
liposarcoma in a dog.233
O inoqe jo saeiaae ue ie seo pue saop u insso seoresodr sauue e o
s srenn are sd    y c s rs
they occur most frequently on the ventral abdomen, the thorax, and the proximal limbs.
Liposarcomas are usually poorly circumscribed, firm to feshy, variable in size (1 to I0 cm
in diameter), and subcutaneous in location. Liposarcomas are malignant and infiltrative
but rarely metastasize (lymph nodes, lungs, liver).
● Diagnosis. Histologically, liposarcomas are characterized by a cellular, infltrative
proliferation of atypical lipocytes with abundant, eosinophilic, finely vacuolated cytoplasm
(Fig. 2089)1 2, 3 Liposarcomas may be histologically welldifferentiated, pleomorphic, or
· Clinical Management. The therapy of choice for liposarcomas is wide surgical
excision.5.19
Miscellaneous Mesenchymal Tumors
LEIOMYOMA AND LEIOMYOSARCOMA
● Cause and Pathogenesis. Leiomyomas and leiomyosarcomas are extremely rare
skin neoplasms of dogs and cats; they arise from smooth muscle cels of arrector pili
muscles (piloleiomyomas) or cutaneous blood vessels (angioleiomyomas).* The cause of
these neoplasms is unknow.
● Clinical Findings. These neoplasms are usually solitary, firm, well circumscribed
 dermoepidermal in location, and less than 2 cm in diameter. There are no reported age,
*Sec references 1, 2, 5-7, 14, 16, 33, 236.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors * I313
breed, or sex predilections. They may occur more frequently on the groin, the vulva, the
head, and the back (Fig. 20-90) Dermal intravascular leiomyosarcoma was diagnosed on
the digit of a cat.236a
● Diagnosis. Histopathologically, leionyomas and leiomyosarcomas are characterized
by interlacing bundles of smooth muscle fibers that tend to intersect at right angles (Figs.
 n ur m s  nn ae ru   s ta pe -og
 s jo s n  un ri uo s us a s
gen, and neural origin, Smooth muscle tumors are positive for vimentin, desmin, and S-
100 protein.49. 50. 56, 5s Intravascular leiomyosarcoma was positive for vimentin and smooth
muscle actin.236a
· Clinical Management. The therapy of choice is surgical excision.4-7 Dermal intra-
vascular leiomyosarcoma is not metastatic.236a
RHABDOMYOMA AND RHABDOMYOSARCOMA
· Cause and Pathogenesis. Rhabdomyomas and rhabdomyosarcomas are extremely
rare neoplasms of dogs and cats that arise from skeletal muscle.6. 13. 237, 23s The cause of
these neoplasms is unknown.
● Clinical Findings. Rhabdomyomas are reported most commonly on the pinna in
adult white-eared cats.23s The lesions were raised, firm, wellcircumscribed, red-purple
nodules, 1 to 2 cm in diameter, on the convex surface of the pinna. Rhabdomyosarcomas
were described on the pinna and in the inguinal region of adult cats.237
● Diagnosis. Histopathologically, these neoplasms consist of whorls and bundles of
FIGURE 20-90. Canine leiomyoma. Pigmented nod-
ule (arrow) lateral to the vulva.
I3I4 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-91. Canine leiomy-
oma. A, Piloleiomyoma. B, Closcup
of A demonstrating the "right angle"
orientation of muscle libers.
 pearance of cross-striations in tumor cells and bundles. Skeletal muscle tumors are posi-
tive for desmin and vimentin.49.237
· Clinical Management. The therapy of choice is surgical excision.
OSTEOMA AND OSTEOSARCOMA
● Cause and Pathogenesis. Extraskeletal osteomas and ostcosarcomas arc rarc in
● Clinical Findings. Osteoma cutis is reported in adult dogs and cats.1. 5. 240 The
lesions are solitary, discrete, firm nodules primarily involving proximal extrermities (Fig.
20-92). Histopathologically, numerous trabeculae consisting of both woven and lamellar
bone, normal osteocytes within lacunae, and multinucleate osteoclasts are seen (Fig. 20-
 93). Because osteoma-like changes may be seen in certain nevi and neoplasms or as
heterotypic ossification in response to repeated tissue injury (chronic inflammation and
calcinosis cutis), true osteomas must satisfy the following criteria: (l) growth unattached to
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastie Tumors * I315
FIGURE 20-92. Caninc ostcoma. Solitary
nodulc on thc ventral thorax (the area has hccn
clipped).
 trauma or inflammation), and (3) origin that is not developmental.
Extraskeletal osteosarcomas have been reported in the skin and subcutaneous tissues
(espccially trunk and proximal limb) of aged dogs and cats.1. 3. 239. 241 242 Beagles and
Rottweilers may be at increased risk.242 Lesions are firm and 2.5 to 30 cim in diameter.
 Diagnostic criteria include: (1) uniform morphologic pattern of sarcomatous tissue that
excludes the possibility of mixed mcsenchymal tissue, (2) production of maligmant osteoid
or bone, (3) high mitotic index, and (4) cxclusion of osseous origin. Metastatic lesions are
present in ovcr 60% of the animals. Histopathologically, a proliferation of malignant
 osteoblasts and variable amounts of osteoid are seen (Fig. 20-94). Neoplasms may or Imay
 not have suffcient mineralization to be radiographically evident. Osteosarcomas are posi.
tiveforvimentin.749Median survivalafterdiagnosisis about 2months4Median survival
after surgery was 33 days, whereas median survival follwing surgery and chernotherapy
(doxorubicin or cisplatin) was 146 days.241
● Clinical Management. The treatment of choice is surgical excision.5. 241. 242
CHONDROMA AND CHONDROSARCOMA
· Cause and Pathogenesis. Chondroinas and chondrosarcomas are extremely rare
skin neoplasms of the dog.1, 243. 244 The cause of these neoplasms is unknown.
● Clinical Findings. Primary cutaneous chondroma was diagnosed in a l0-ycar-old
Labrador retriever.' The lesion was solitary, frm, 1 cm in diameter, and located on the
head. Histologically, mature chondrocytes formed a nodule within the dcrmis and subcu-
tis.
 Prirnary cutaneous chondrosarcomas were diagnosed in a few dogs.1 243. 244 Most were
adult to aged animals, and mostly mediurn to large breed dogs (cspecially German
 shepherd, Golden retriever, Boxer). Lesions were solitary, firm, and multilobulated, and
1316 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-93. Feline osteoma. Bone formation in
the suhcutis.
occurred in the subcutaneous tissue of the neck, fank, groin, limb, and thorax. Histologi-
cally, malignant cells with chondroid differentiation (Fig. 20-95) formed nodules within
the dermis and subcutis.
· Clinical Management. The treatment of choice is surgical excision.
FIGURE 20-94. Canine osteosar-
coma. Invasive proliferation of atypi-
cal osteoblasts and osteoidl formation.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I3I7
FIGURE 20-95. Canine chon-
drosarcoma. Proliferation of sarcoma
cells with chondroid differentiation.
POSTVACCINAL SARCOMA
● Cause and Pathogenesis. The incidence of postvaccinal sarcomas in cats has
Occur most frequently: (l) if vaccines are repeatedly given at the same site, (2) follwing
rabies or FeLV vaccines, and (3) when adjuvated vaccines are used.247. 252, 253 255, 26i
However, cases have been reported in association with other killed, adjuvated vaccines
(e.g.. panleukopenia), with modified live vaccines (e.g., herpes-calici-parvo), and with the
injection of three drugs (penicillin, metoclopramide, dexamethasone) in the same sy-
brands of rabies and FeLV vaccines.247, 253 In one study,254 the number of postvaccinal
sarcomas declined abruptly when a switch was made to modified live virus vaccines.
The macrophages and multinucleated histiocytic giant cells associated with postvac-
cinal sarcomas contain granular to crystalline, gray-brown to bluish material within their
cytoplasm. Electron probe x-ray microanalysis revealed that the material was composed of
aluminum and oxygen, and aluminum hydroxide and aluminum phosphate are used as
adjuvants in some feline vaccines.253. 255, 257. 261 It has been hypothesized that the chronic
infammation that follows vaccine reactions, with resultant proliferation of resident fbro-
A short-termn (4 weeks) study was conducted on the local effects of various vaccines in
cats.26o Specific pathogen-free (SPF) cats were injected with FeLV, rabies, and rhino-
tracheitis-calicivirus-panleukopenia vaccines, and saline. Repeated physical and cytologic
examinations were perforrmed. Only rabies vaccine caused palpable lesions in all cats, and
cytologic examination revealed increasing numbers of lymphocytes and macrophages with
fewer eosinophils and neutrophils. The macrophages often contain granular to crystalline
bluish material in their cytoplasm.
Immunohistochemical and PCR techniques detected FeLV antigen in multicentric
feline fbrosarcomas but not in feline postvaccinal sarcomas249
u  (    ) r   (a  
sarcomas.48,252, 26 Nobreed or sex predilections are kown.Postvaccinal sarcomas neces-
sarily occur at sites of vaccination: interscapular area, dorsal neck, shoulder, fank, and
femoral area. Nonvaccine-associated sarcomas occur on the head, pinnae, and distal limbs.
Postvaccinal sarcomas are usually preceded by postvaccinal panniculitis. The lesions are
I318 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-96. Feline postvac-
cinal sarcoma. A, Fluge tumor over
withers and left shoulder. B, Granu-
 lomatous reaction peripheral to sar-
coma contains macrophages and
multinucleated histiocytie giant cells
(arrow) that have phagocytosed an
amorphous substance.
irregular in shape, firm, multilobular, and large (larger than 4 cm diameter in over 50% of 
the underlying musculature; occasionally the dorsal spinous processes of the underlying
vertebrae), and exhibit rapid growth (Fig. 20-96A).
● Diagnosis. The sudden occurrence of a tumor at an injection site, often preceded
by postvaccinal panniculitis, is highly suggestive. Most masses' that occur within' 3 weeks
following vaccination are granulormatous panniculitides, and these typically resolve within I
t0 3 months. Lesions that persist beyond this time, or show progressive enlargement after
 4 weeks, should be aspirated for cytologic examination or biopsied.
Histopathologically, most postvaccinal sarcomas are fibrosarcomas.* Less common
 neoplastic types include malignant fibrous histiocytoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, osteosarcoma,
chondrosarcoma, liposarcoma, myxosarcoma, and myofibroblastic sarcoma. A characteristic
*See referenves 171, 246, 248, 251, 252, 255, 257, 261.
Ncoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors * 1319
-e ru o s dd e s ses esd m 
matory response wherein macrophages and multinucleated histioeytie giant cells contain
96B),246, 248, 251, 252. 257, 26 Lymphoid nodules or eosinophils, or both, may be prominent.
 Clinical Management. Postvaccinal sarcomas are locally invasive, poorly demar-
other than amputation where possible, is seldom curative. Recurrent sarcomas tend to be
more difficult to excise. In one study,22 postvaccinal sarcomas recurred in 86% of the cats
within 6 months after cxcision. Twenty-two percent of the cats had two to four recur-
rences. In contrast, only 14% of nonvaccinal sarcomas recurred after surgical excision.252
Radical first excision provides a significantly longer interval to first recurrenc (325 days)
than marginal first excision (79 days) 252a Fxcision at a referral institution resulted in a
significantly longer interval to first recurrence (274 days) than excision at a referring
veterinary clinic (66 days).252a
 Postvaccinal sarcomas wcrc initially said to metastasize rarely.252 However, several
been from an interscapular sarcoma and have been of the fibrosarcoina histopathologic
type. Metastases have involved lung, liver, mediastinum, and pericardium, More recent
studies indicate metastatic rates of 22%252a to 24%,247x mostly to the lungs, which develop
concurently with or after recurrence of the primary tumor.
 It appears that postvaccinal sarcomas arc more radiosensitive than nonvaccinal sarco-
mas, and that radiotherapy may be a useful postsurgical adjunctive therapy.171. 247a, 25s As a
 r   o s  e  a ao d n m
 every 3 weeks for five or six treatments).171.25
The following measures have been recommended to reduce the frequency of postvac-
cinal sarcomas in cats and to 1nake epidemiologic studies more useful252a,254, 255. 261,
1. Avoid unnecessary vaccines.
2. Use as litte killed vaccines as possible.
 3. Do not administer killed vaccines in the interscapular space (harder to excise,
higher recurrence rates, decreased survival).
4. Standardize vaccination sites (caudal half of left side of body for FeLV, caudal half
of right side of body for rabies).
 5. Avoid previous vaccine sites.
6. Maintain detaied records ahout vaccinations (site, route, vaccine manufacturer,
vaccine type, vaccine serial number).
 7. Instruct owners to watch for postvaccinal reactions and document their occurrence.
a ae (q) 'squ g rn arou noy siiad (e) suonr us peusod j g
than 2 cim in diameter, or (c) are increasing in size 1 month post-vaccination,
recommend biopsy or excision and biopsy. Fine-needle aspirates are not reliable.
UNDIFFERENTIATED SARCOMA
● Cause and Pathogenesis. Classification of some mesenchymal neoplasms rmay be
ally called undifferentiated, or spindle cell, sarcoimas. Employing electron microscopy or
immunohistochemical (marker) techniques greatly reduces the incidencc of such diagno-
ses, but these are not always available to practitioners, nor are thcy always economically
feasible,
● Clinical Findings. Undifferentiated sarcomas usually occur in older dogs and cats
and have the clinical features of fibrosarcomas, neurofbrosarcomas, and hemangiopericyto-
mas. An aggressivc undifferentiated sarcoma with widespread metastasis was reported in a
6-month-old Neapolitan Mastiff.264 In cats, 1undifferentiated sarcoma has been reported to
involve the footpads of one or more feet.?5 Affected cats are usually lame, and affected
pads are soft, mushy, and painful, and may be ulcerated.
 In dogs, an undifferentiatcd sarcoma has been reported to affect the digit.262 Affected
dogs were 11 to 15 years old and had solitary, soft to firm, variably ulcerated masses
1320 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
 involving a digit. Iesions were described as growing out of an ulcerated digital pad or
appeared to arise in the area of dense collagenous trabeculae located proximal to the fat
pad and atrichial sweat glands. The tumor cells had some features of histiocytes: nuclear
Although most of these tumors had neoplastic cells in vessels, no recurrences or metasta-
scs were recorded. Tumor cells were positive for vimentin, but negative for desmin, S-100
400-nm intracytoplasmic secretory granules.
Undifferentiated sarcomas were reported in old dogs on the lower lip at the mucocu-
taneous junction.26s The tumors were about 2 to 3 cm in diameter, frequently ulcerated,
and 1netastases (regional lymph node, lung) were recorded in 75% of the cases. Histologi-
cally, the tumors were similar to the digit tumors described earlier.262 Exteusive electron
microscopic and immunohistochemical studies failed to identify the neoplastic cells. The
authors suspected a myelomonocytic origin.
 Clinical Management. Radical surgical excision is the treatment of choice for
undifferentiated sarcomas.5. 19 Radiotherapy or chemotherapy alone does not provide ade-
quate control.23 Radiotherapy plus hyperthermia may be more effective.183
Mast Cell Tumor
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Mast cell tumors (mastocytomas, mast cell sarcomas, or mastocytoses) are common ne0-
plasms of the dog and cat that arise from mast cells.* The cause of mast cell tumors is
unknown. In dogs (especially puppies), mast cell tumors have been experimentally trans-
mitted using tissues and cel-free extracts, which suggests a viral cause. However, ultra-
structural examination of mast cell tumors has only occasionally revealed viral particles. It
has been theorized that Boxers and Boston terriers possess oncogenes that are transmitted
to offspring and comhine with a genetically deterrmined deficiency of immune surveillance
to result in an increased incidence of mast cell tumors in these breeds. Rarely, canine
mast coll tumor has been thought to arise within scars and chronic dermatoses5. 292
Chromosomal fragile site expression, a phenomenon thought to predispose humans geneti-
tumors.7 In the dog, it has been suggested that abnormalities in the c-kit/c-kit ligand
gene may lead to an activation of its product, the kit receptor, which leads to uncontrolled
with various mast cell tumor extracts failed to produce neoplasms in normal individuals.
Multiple histiocytic mast cell tumors have been described in 6- to 8-week-old Siarnese
kittens in which multiple kittens of two litters (sired by the same torm) were affected,
suggesting a genetic infuence.274
CLINICAL FINDINGS
Dog
Mast cell tumors occur in dogs at an average age of 8 years but are rarely reported in
puppies.f There is no apparent sex predilection, but Boxers, Boston teriers, English
bulldogs, Bull terriers, Fox terriers, Staffordshire terriers, Labrador retrievers, Dachs-
hunds, Beagles, Pugs, Golden retrievers, Weimaraners, and Shar peis are at increased risk.
Shar peis are often younger than other breeds when they develop mast cell tumors
(average age, 4 years; 28% are younger than 2 years old).2s They may also be more likely
*See references 1, 2, 4-7, 27, 30, 272, 282, 300.
+See 1eferences 1, 2, 4-7, 22, 28, 269, 275, 282, 289, 295.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors .* I321
FIGURE 20-97. Canine mast ccll tumor. Mela-
notic interdigital nodule.
to develop multiple lesions. T
The clinical appearance of mast cell tumors is variable.
Lesions may be frm to soft (see Fig. 20-79F), papular to nodular to pedunculated,
dermal to subcutaneous in location (see Fig, 20-79G), well to poorly circumscribed, and
skin colored to erythematous (see Fig. 20-79H) to hyperpigimented (Fig. 20 -97). They
vary from a few millimeters to several centimeters in diameter. Some lesions may appear
as urticarial swellings or diffuse areas of edema and inflammation resembling cellulitis
(Fig. 20-98). Some neoplasms have a pin-feathered appearance (Fig. 20-99) or are
FIGURE 20-98. Canine mast
cell tumor. Swollen, cellulitic-ap-
pearing forelimb. (Courtesy D. An-
garano.)
1322 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-99. Canine mast cell tumor.
Pin-feathercd nodule over stife region.
ulcerated. Palpation of some lesions 1nay result in release of vasoactive substances and
resultant local edema and inflammation (Darier's sign). Flushing (sudden, symmetric,
diffuse reddening of large areas of skin) has been rarely reported in dogs with mast cell
tumors, Mast cell tumors are usually solitary but may be multicentric either synchronously
or sequentially. The neoplasms are distributed as follows: 50% on the trunk, 40% on the
extremities, and 10% on the head, Some interesting breed-site predilections have been
reportcd': Boxer (hind limbs, multiple lesions), Boston terrier (hind limb), Rhodesian
ridgeback (tail), American Staffordshire terrier (hind limb), Pug (hind limbs, multiple
lesions), Weimaraner (multiple lesions), and English setter (head, hind limb). Diffuse mast
cell tumor produced gross distention and deformity of the hind limbs in Shar peis.2s48. 285
 Noncutaneous symptoms that can be associated with mast cell tumors include gastric
 and duodenal ulcers, defective blood coagulation, and immune-medliated thrombocytope-
nia.4-7.269.282
A case of cutaneous mastocytosis resembling urticaria pigmentosa was reported in a
puppy.276 At 3 weeks of age, the dog had multiple cutaneous papules and nodules,
prunitus, and lethargy. The lesions were generally alopecic, raised, pink to red, slightly
firmn, 1 to 5 cm in' diameter, and especially numerous on the head, neck, legs, and
 perineum. By the time the dog was 27 weeks old, the condition resolved spontaneously.
 Urticaria pigmentosa-like disease was also reported in two adult dogs.279 Both had
been affected since 6months to 1 year of age.Papules and nodules would come and go
 over many areas of the body. Biopsies revealed the accurmulation of well-differentiated
 mast cells in the superficial dermis and very few eosinophils. Occasionally, erythematous
rashes that would progress to wheals or bullae would appear and disappear within hours.
Traumatizing the lesions could produce sudden increase in size (edema), and stroking
normal skin could result in a wheal-and-fare response (Darier's sign). Both dogs were
otherwise healthy and were followed for several years. The lesions were responsive to
glucocorticoids, and to a combination of H,- and Hg-blocking antihistamines.
Cat
Mast cell tumors occur in cats at an average age of 10 years, although kittens can be
occur most commonly on the head and the neck. The clinical appearance of mast cell
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I323
tumors is variable: (1) multiple raised, soft, round, poorly demarcated, eclematous, pinkish,
variable-sized (0.5 to 5 cm in diameter) masses that are fixed to the overlying skin; (2)
multiple raised, firm, round, well-circumscribed, white to yellow, smal (2 to i0 mm in
diameter) papules and nodules that are fxed to the overlying skin (Fig. 20-100A); (3)
single or muftiple raised, frm, erythematous, well-circumscribed, variable-sized (1 to 7 cm
in diameter) plaques (Fig. 20-l00B) that are frequently ulcerated and pruritic; and (4)
solitary, firm to soff, well-circumscribed, variable-sized (0.3 to 3 cm in diameter), often
alopecic dermal masses, some of which grossly mimic sebaceous gland tumors. Occasion-
ally, solitary mast cell tumors may spontaneously resolve, only to be followed by a new
tumor at a different location (Fig. 20-100C)3s, 272. 290,300 A case of diffuse cutaneous
mastocytosis in a l-year-old cat was reported.271 Generalizcd pruritus, papules, and ero-
 sions were present.
Urticaria pigmentosa is a proliferative mast cell disorder of humans.5, 299 A syndrome
with some clinicopathologic similarities to the human disorder has bcen scen in cats (see
Chap. 12).
A histiocytic subtype of mast cell tumor occurs primarily in Siamese cats from 6
 primarily on the head and pinnae (Fig. 20- 101) and eventually spontaneously regress.
gastric and duodenal ulcers (thought to be histamine induced) and defective blood coagu-
lation (thought to be heparin induced).
DIAGNOSIS
 This is one tumor in which stained impression smears or aspirates are useful in establish-
ing a tentative immediate diagnosis (Fig. 20-102).7, 43. 45 However, anaplastic and histio-
cytic mast cells may not contain the distinctive cytoplasmic granules. Hence, cytologic
examination should not replace a complete histologic examination. Smcars of cutaneous
mast cell tumors in cats may reveal endocytosis of erythrocytes by the neoplastic mast
cells.
Histologically, mast cell tumors are characterized by a diffuse to multinodular prolifer-
ation of mast cells (Figs. 20-103 and 20-104).1.2 23 Frequent findings in canine mast cell
tumors include tissue eosinophilia, focal areas of collagen degeneration, and a wide variety
 of vascular lesions (hyalinization, fibrinoid degeneration, and eosinophilic vasculitis) (Fig.
 20-105). Even highly malignant tumors usually have a low mitotic index, making this an
insensitive measure of tumor behavior,295 In cats, special caution is warranted to avoid
confusing mast ceil tumors with other round cell tumors and cosinophilic plaques. How.
ever, the striking tissue eosinophilia and collagen degeneration seen commonly in canine
  g pe vn-o si) de   sq o (ss 
diagnosis can be confirmed only by electron microscopic demonstration of mast cell
stains.294 No stain was ideal, and all stains became less effective as tumor cells become
less differentiated. Feline mast cell tumors were negative for tryptase and erratically
trypsin-like protease, and dipeptidyl peptidase I1.49 54, 56 59 Recent investigations suggest
that c-kit can be used as a reliable immunohistochemical markcr for caninc mast cells and
mast cell tumors.293
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Clinical management of mast cell tumors may include surgical excision, cryosurgery.
d sqsss s  
malignant neoplasms, because metastasis occurs in about 30% of cases (especially regional
lymph nodes, spleen, liver, and bone marrow). Tumors arising from the perineum, the
1324 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20- I00. A, Feline mast cell tumor. Multiple papular-to-nodular lesions over the thorax (the area
has been clipped). B, Feline mast cell tumor. Large, uilcerated nodule between the eyes. C, Feline mast cell
tumor. Small, yellowish papule resembling a sebaceous gland tumor. D, Canine nonepitheliotropie lymphoma.
Raised, erythermatous lesion in the shape of an arc or C over the withers (the area has been shaved). G, Canine
epitheliotropic lymphoma (mycosis fungoides) Erythroderma, alopecia, and scales. H, Canine epitheliotropic
lymphoma (pagetoid reticulosis). Erythema, infiltration, and ulceration of the lips.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I325
FIGURE 20-I0l. Feline histiocytic mast cell
turmor. A, Siamese kitten with inultiple papules
and nodules on pinnae and forehead. B, Domestic
shorthair kitten with multiple, coalescent lesions
that have caused both pinnae to droop. (Courtesy
B.Kiegcr.
 prepuce, the scrotum, mucocutaneous sites, and the digits are more commonly aggressive
and malignant. Prognosis is based on tumor growth rate, tumor site, local tumor recur-
rence, systermic signs, tumor staging, previous chemotherapy, histologic grading, AgNOR
not always predictable. In general, Boxers have a better prognosis, mainly because they
havc a worsc prognosis, because they havc more poorly differentiated mast cel tumors.289
 (   s  e  (1o a)  a  
each canine mast cell tumor case is based on an amalgamation of these systems (Table
 20-6). The clinical staging system is predicated on the results of studies of lymph node
and bone marrow aspirates, as well as buffy coat examinations. However, mast cells may
aq se h s sip peu m sde mo aq pe aou qdu un p a
 sq   as s  p   s  s 
results of quantitative buffy coat evaluations, the severity of mastocyternia in dogs without
mast cell tumors often exceeds that during tumor slaging in dogs with mast cell tumors,
I326 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-I02. Canine mast
cell tumor. Aspiration of a skin nod-
ule rcveals a clump of mast cells.
and random detection of mast cells in blood simears during hemogram determination in
dogs is usually not secondary to mast cell tumor.288a
Early surgical excision is indicated in animals with a solitary neoplasm. Wide surgical
 margins, at least 3 cm between the palpable tumor and the incision, are recommended
when possible. Approximately 50% of canine mast cell tumors recur, even after a wide
FIGURE 20-I03. Feline mast cell tumor. Well-circumscribed, dome-shaped proliferation
of mast cells.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I327
FIGURE 20-I04. Close-up of Figure 20-103. Proliferation of monomorphous mast cells.
surgical excision, usually within 4 months.47, 269 270, 282, 295 Presurgical treatment with
intralesional or systemic glucocorticoids, or both, may dccrcase tumor volume and local
swelling and inflammation, thus helping to achieve adequate excision.2sz Presurgical radio-
therapy or intralesional deionized water might accoinplish this, as well.282 In dogs with
mast cell tumors, the survival time is related to the degree of histologic differentiation.270.
282,26,291.26 For animals with high-grade mast celtumors, the mean survival time is 18
weeks after diagnosis; with intermediate-grade tuinors, 28 weeks; and with low-grade
tumors, 5l weeks. However, some veterinary pathologists believe that tumor grade is
FIGURE 20-I05, Canine mast cell tumor. Diffuse proliferation of mast cells, marked
cdema, and multifocal areas of collagenolysis.
I328 · Neoplastic and Non-Ncoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-l06. Feline histio-
cytic mast cell tumor. A, Mast cell
cytoplasmic granules do not stain
with' H & E. B, Mast cell cytoplas-
mic granules stain with AOC.
● Table 20-4
HistoloGIC ClassIfIcatIOn of MaSt Cell
TUMORS
GRADE
MICROSCOPIC DESCRIPTION
High (anaplastic, Grade I.27u Grade II1291)
Highly cellular, indistinet cytoplasmic bounclaries: irreg
lar size and shape of nuclei, often frequent mitotic
figures; low number of cytoplasmic grannules
Intermediate (intermediate differentiation,
Closely packed cells with indistinct cytoplasnic bounda-
Grude 1I1,270 Grade I1201)
Ties; mucleus to cytoplasm ratio lower than that of high
grade; mitotic figures infrequent; more granules than
in high-grade tumors
Low (well differentiated, Grade I11,70
Clearly defined cytoplasmic boundary with regular,
Grade [291)
spherical, or ovoid nucleus; mitotie figures rare; cyto-
plasmic granules large, deep staining, and plentifl
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors * I329
●Table 20-5
ClinicaL staginG sYstem For Mast cell
TUMORS
Stage I
One tumor confned to the dermis without regional lynph node involvenment
a. Withonn syslemie signs
b. With systemic sigms
Stage II
One tumor confined to dermis with regional lynph node involvement
a. Without systemic signs
b.With systeinie signs
Stage II
involvenent
a. Without systeinic signs
b.With systenie sigrs
Stage IV
From Tarns TR, Macy DW: Camine mnast zell tumors. Comp Cont Educ 3:873, 1981.
often an unreliable prognostic indicator and are reluctant to grade these neoplasms., 295
Histologic grade does not always corectly predict biological behavior (benign versus
DNA ploidy status of canine mast cells tumors was not found to be of prognostic
significance.266 in one study,295 three methods were simultaneously evaluated for their
prognostic significance in dogs: histologic grading, argyrophilic nucleolar organizer regions
(AgNOR), and antiproliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA). A combination of the three
methods was superior to any method alone, and these methods accurately prcdicted
outcome in about 80% of the cases. PCNA was best at distinguishing between recurrent,
Jonrecurent, and metastatic tumors. In another study,264 the number of Ki-67 positive
 Iuclei was significantly and inversely associated with patient survival, whereas PCNA was
less accurate. Immunohistochemical detection of p53 tumor-suppressor protein was not
associated with histologic grade, tumor location, breed, tumor recurrence, or survival
specimens, and results correlated well.280
voltage radiotherapy is given postsurgically for intermediate grade (grade Il) mast cell
tumors in dogs, 94% to 97% of the animals were disease free for 1 year, 93% for 3 years,
H i pnaay iog asom ais an sns z sasr g i s p
tumors.277.298
In cats, the vast majority of cutaneous mast celltumors are benign.2 30 272, 2s2. 290. 300 A
histologic grading systcin similar to that used in dogs was evaluated in feline mast cell
tumors and found not to correlate with biological behavior.27, 29o The authors have
followed some cats with cutaneous mast cell tumors and positive buffy coats for years with
no signs of systemic disease. In one study,2ao there was no significant difference between
● Tablc 20-6 
 SUGGESTED TReaTMENT Of MAST CELL
TuMoRS baSED ON ClInICal STaGeS
STAGE
TREATMENT
 Surgical excision only. (Surgery is defined as the excision of the tumor with a minirnum 
margin of3 cm between papable tumor and the incisionine; such excision should include
regional lymph node when possible.)
1I
Surgical excision plus raciation.
III
Intralesional steroids plus cimetidine. (Intralesional steroid is defined as the intralesional
injection of l mg of triamcinolone for every centimeter diameter of tumor. This dose is to
be administered every 2 weeks.)
IV
Systemic steroids* plus cimetidine.
*A dose of 0.5 mg/kg of body weiglht of prednisoloue to be alministered every 24 to 48 hours.
Cinetidine should be given daily at a dose of 4 mg/kg q6h.
From Tams TR.Macy Dw: Canine mast cellimnors.Comp Cont Ecue 3:876,1981.
1330 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
 complete or incomplete surgical excision and recurrence! The histiocytic mast cell tumor
of cats, which is often characterized clinically by multiple cutaneous nodules in Siamese
cats younger than 4 years, undergoes spontaneous remission frequently,2 30,274 30 Adult,
non-Siamese cats with widespread lesions are more likely to have visceral involvement.26s
tion of oral prednisolone or prednisone (0.5 mg/kg q24h) or intralesional trancinolone (1
mg for every I cm of dliameter of tumor) has been recommended (see Table 20-4). This
treatment may cause temporary regression of the tumors that may last a few to several
months. Only 20% of the dogs with mast cell tumors responded to 1 mg/kg/day predni-
sone administered for 28 days, and responses were transient.237 Combination cheinother-
apy (glucocorticoids plus cyclophosphamide, vincristine, or vinblastine, for example) has
been  recommended by  some investigators.  A cyclophosphamide-vinblastine-prednisone
combination produced a 78% response rate (all partial responses) with a median survival
time of 150'days in dogs with metastatic mast cell tumors.276a A cyclophosphamide-
vincristine-prednisone-hydroxyurea comhination produced a 60% response rate (mostly
partial responses) with a median response duration of only 53 days in dogs with measur-
able mast cell tumors.277a A vinblastine-prednisone combination produced a 47% response
rate with a median responsc duration of 153 days.295a Lomustine produced predorminantly
Jo %L uo rgs sp paean jo %zv ui (shep 601 ueu) ssuodsai Areodu pue reed
the dogs with mast cell tumors responded to vincristine, and all responses were only
partial.288
 Cimetidine (4 mg/kg orally q6h) has been recommended in dogs with evidence of
Cimetidine acts by competitively inhibiting the action of histamine on the H, receptors of
gastrice parietal cels, thus reducing gastric acid output and concentration.
Deionized (distilled) water is hypo-osmotic and oncolytic. It has been injected into the
surgical margins following removal of canine mast cell tumors.269 27s The recurrence rate
with surgery alone was 52.6%, whereas that with surgery plus deionized water was
26.2%.278 In addition, small (smaller than 0.25 cm*) mast cell tumors were injected
intralesionaly, and all regressed278 Injoctions are usually administered every 1 to 3weeks
for four treatments. In another study, deionized water was of no benefit, although none of
and usually require heavy sedation, local anesthesia, or general anesthesia.
 In dogs, there is a frequent tendency for local hemorrhage during surgery and
delayed wound healing at the site of tumor removal.l. 4-7 269 35 Cryosurgery, hyperther-
Inia, or manipulation may rarely precipitate a shocklike reaction in dogs that have not
been pretreated with antihistamines.1. 4-7, 69. 282
·LYMPHOHISTIOCYTIC NEOPLASMS
Tumors of Lymphocytic Origin
LYMPHOMA
 Cutaneous lymphoma (malignant Iymphoma, lymphosarcoma, lymphoreticular neoplasm,
lymphomatosis, or reticulum cell sarcoma) is an uncommon malignant cutaneous neoplasm
of the dog and cat." In cats, the cause of most types of lymphoma is FeLV, although
cats with cutaneous lymphoma are usually FeLVnegative.Recently, it was reported that
40% of the feline cutaneous lymphomas tested were positive for FeLV antigen hy immu-
nohistochemica! or PCR techniques.31s In dogs, the cause of lymphoma is unknown.
although (l) lymphoma can be transmitted to puppies by the injection of whole-cell
 preparations of malignant lymphocytes, (2) C-type viruses were found in neoplastic cells
*See references 1, 2, 4-7, 14, 35. 317.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I331
FIGURE 20-I07. Canine epi-
theliotropic lymphoma.Aspirate
from a skin nodule reveals pleo-
morphic, atypical lymphocytes.
from dogs with lymphoma, and (3) lymphoma has been induced in neonatal puppies by
injections of FeLV.4-7, 312. 312a
Histologically. lynphoma can be divided into nonepitheliotropic and epitheliotropic
forms.57 The epitheliotropic lymphomas are a subset of cutaneous T cell lymphomas.
Mycosis fungoides and its associated leukemia, the Sezary syndrome, account for the
majority of cases of epidermotropic cutaneous T cell lymphoma. pagetoid reticulosis
phoid infltrate is alrmost entirely confined to the epidermis in the early stages of the
disease. Nonepitheliotropic cutaneous lynphomas are large-coll lymphomas of the dermis
and subcutis, and are a heterogeneous group with respect to immunophenotype. In
humans, B cell lymphomas may rarely be epitheliotropic, thus mimicking clinically and
histopathologically the T cell lymphomas so7a In addition, nonepitheliotropic cutaneous
lymphomas 1may be of T cell origin.3o4a One study suggested that immumocytochemical
studies of cytospin preparations of fine-needle aspirates provided a practical, economical,
 and accurate rmethod for the diagnosis and phenotyping of canine lymphorma.307
107).
Nonepitheliotropic Cutaneous Lymphoma
 Nonepitheliotropic cutaneous lymphoma occurs in older dogs and cats with no sex predi-
lection.* In dogs, Boxers, St. Bemards, Basset hounds, Irish setters, Cocker spaniels,
Nonepitheliotropic cutaneous lymphoma is the most common form of cutaneous lym-
phorna in the cat but is the least common form in the dog.37
 Nonepitheliotropic cutaneous lymphoma is usually generalized or multifocal and has a
variety of cutaneous manifestations. Nodules are present in virtually all cases; they are
firm, dermal or subcutaneous, often alopecic and red to purple (see Fig. 20- 100D and
mucosal involvement are rare.s04 Occasionally, lesions are present in bizarre, arciform, or
 s   s e sr r ce soio   ss ss
lesions. Affected animals usually have signs of systemic involvement. Rarely, nonepitheli-
otropic cutaneous lymphoma is associated with monoclonal or biclonal gammopathies,
*See references 1, 2, 4--7, 14, 35, 306, 317.
I332· Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-I08. Feline nonepitheliotropic lynphouma. Diffuse dennal and subcutaneous
infiltration of ncoplastic lynphocytes,
serum hyperviscosity, or hypercalcemia.1-7 Syinmetric cutaneous necrosis and sloughing of
the hind paws was seen in association with multicentric lymphoma in a cat 30l Progression
of the lesions is rapid, with lymph node and systemic metastasis.
Histologically, nonepitheliotropic cutaneous lymphomas are characterized by diffuse
dcrmal and subcutaneous infiltration by malignant lymphocytes (Fig. 20-108). These
malignant lymphocytes are lymphocytic (well differentiated or poorly differentiated), lym-
phoblastic, histiocytic (most common), or *clear cell" in cytologic form (Figs. 20-107 to
FIGURE 20- I 09. Close-up of Figure 20- 108. Neoplasuc lymphocytes.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors * I333
lymphomas, often of a CD4 to CD8 phenotype.57. os Some are claified as non-T, non-B
cell eutaneous lymphomas (null cell lymphomas?).57 Rarely, these lymphomas may be B
cell lymphomas.sos In cats, most nonepitheliotropic cutaneous lymphomas are T cell lym-
 phomas,30s 315 and 40% of those tested have been positive for FeLV antigen by immuno-
histochemical or PCR methodology.315
Clinical management of nonepitheliotropic cutaneous lymphoma is usually unsuccess-
ful.4-7, 57 304 Traditional regimens of combined chermotherapy or chemoimmunotherapy
 of a solitary cutaneous lymphoma lesion results in long-term remission or, perhaps, cure.
The average survival from the onset of skin lesions to death (usually due to enthanasia) is
about 4 months.304
Epitheliotropic Cutaneous Lymphoma
Epitheliotropic cutaneous lymphoma is an uncommon cutaneous malignancy of dogs and
instances, the cause of epitheliotropic lymphomas is unknown. There is controversy about
whether human mycosis fungoides, the prototypic epitheliotropic (T cell) lyinphoma.
   se gsd du s sd ai  s s
leukemia-lymphoma, the causative factor is believed to be the human T cell lyinpho-
trophic virus type I.5 Epitheliotropic lymphoma of dogs and cats is of unknown etiology.
 o  rn   s   so pe e p
was extracted from a cat with epitheliotropic cutaneous T cell lymphoma, amplified for
FeLV provirus by PCR, and shown to be positive.30 This sugests that FeLV may be
involved in the etiology of epitheliotropic cutaneous T cell lymphoma in cats, even when
cats test negative with commonly used methods of detecting FeLV antigen in blood.
Epitheliotropic cutaneous lynphoma encompasses a spectrum of disease, inclucing
mycosis fungoides, Sezary syndrome, and pagetoid reticulosis.57
Mycosis Fungoides
In dogs and cats, mycosis fungoides usually affects older aninals (average of 9 to 1l
years), with no apparent breed or sex predilections. Four clinical presentations are de-
scribed: (1) generalized pruritic erythema and scaling (exfoliative erythroderma) (see Fig.
20-100G), which is usuall misdiagnosed as allergy, scabies, or seborrhea; (2) mucocuta-
neous erythema, infiltration, depigmentation, and ulceration (see Fig. 20-100H, Fig. 20-
110A and B, and Fig. 20-111), which is usually misdiagnosed as immune-mediated
disease (pemphigus vulgaris, builous pemphigoid, or lupus erythematosus); (3) solitary or
multiple cutaneous plaques or nodules (Fig. 20-110C and D); and (4) infiltrative and
ulcerative oral nucosal disease, which is usually misdiagnosed as a non-neoplastic, chronic
stomatitis (Fig
of systemic illness. In cats, lesions may be initially well-circumscribed, annular areas of
alopecia, erythema, and scaling (usually misdiagnosed as dermatophytosis or demodicosis)
(Fig.20110F）02Rarel,dogs havelsions isolated tthe lips,nasal lanum,nasl
 o os  pp s s se sse o d
nosa in cats (see Chap. 11)
microabscesses (focal accurnulations of pleomorphic, atypical lymphocytes within the epi-
thelium) (Figs. 20-113 and 20-114), and the presence of mycosis cells (large, 20p to 30μ
lymphocytes with hyperchromatic, indented or folded nuclei) and Sezary, or Lutzner, cells
 (smaller, 8u to 20p lymphocytes that have markedly hyperconvoluted nuclei with numer-
*See references 1, 2, 5, 302, 317, 332, 334.
↑Sec references 57, 302, 308, 309, 312, 313, 318, 319, 330.
$See references 5, 57, 302, 304, 308, 319, 332, 334.
I334 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-II0. A, Canine epitheliotropic lyrnphoma. Depigmentation, infltration, and mild erythema of
otropic lymphoma. Numerous nodules, some of which are ulcerated and crusted, on a background of exfolia
oral mucosa. F, Feline epitheliotropic lymphoma. Anmular area of alopecia, scaling, and mild erythema on the
teristic lbutton tumor on the hock.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I335
FIGURE 20-Ill. Feline epi-
theliotropic lymphoma. Alopecia
and infltration of muzzle and chin.
 In dogs, the neoplastic lymphocytes are often more *histiocytic" in appearance than in
humans.318, 319 Often, a lichenoid band of pleomorphic lymphoid cells, with or without
plasma cells, neutrophils, and eosinophils, is present in the superficial dermis and sur-
rounding appendages. Epidermal mucinosis (acid mucopolysaccharides) and mild fibrosis
tropism for hair follicles and epitrichial sweat glands, unlike what is seen in humans.s, 319
 In addition, epidermotropism is still prominent in the tumor stage, unlike what is seen in
humans.318, 319
FIGURE 20-I12. Canine epitheliotropic lym-
phoma,Hyperkeratotic,depigmented, infltrated
footpads.
I336 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-113. Canine epitheliotropic lympho
the epiderm is with neoplastic lymphocytos.
The histopathologic distinction between mycosis fungoides and benign lymphocytic
dermatoses can be difficult to inpossible. Large studies in humans have shown that
dermotropism, hyperconvoluted epidermal lymphocytes, haloed lynphocytes, epidermal
lymphocytes larger than dermal lynphocytes -are significantly more common in mycosis
serve as independent absolute diagnostic tools for mycosis fungoides. Unfortunately, even 
FIGURE 20-114. Close-up of Figure 20-113. Pautrier microabsces containing pleomor.
phic antd atypical lymphocytes.
Neoplastie and Non-Neoplastic Tumors * I337
FIGURE 20- I15. Fclinc epithcliotropic lymphoma. Typical Sezary cell.
lymphocyte immunophenotyping and genotyping (clonal T cell receptor chain gene rear-
rangerments) are of poor sensitivity and specificity 30s.331
Electron microscopy reveals many tumor cells characterized by a high ratio of nucleus
to cytoplasm, deep invaginations of the nuclear membrane (convoluted or cerebriform
nucleus), a relatively wide rim of peripheral chromatin, a paucity of organelles, and
peripheral cytoplasmic vlli or projections (Fig. 20-115)2. 5, 302. 32s Direet immunofuores-
cence testing may show the intercellular deposition of immunoglobulin in the epithelium,
falsely suggesting a cliagnosis of pemphigus.5 328
            s
of canine cases, the T cells are CD4 and CD8 negative.57, 318 The majority of cases of
 Discordant pan T cell antigen expression is frequently observed in canine mycosis fun-
XIIa-, MHCII-, CD4-, and CD18-positive dermal dendrocytes were seen in all cases of
canine mycosis fungoides, especially in the supericial dermis 310 Clonal TCR rearange-
dedifferentiate or lose expression of various surface molecules.308
due toeuthanasiais5to10month5304,332,3Occasionally,dogs andcatswithmyosis
 no   si s e re sn a   r  a s
u ro o jo uaaq nn sy sie pun soop u srog siso non adr
bencfit.* Chermotherapy with various combinations of prednisolone, chlorambucil, vincris-
tine, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and methotrexate have occasionally produced some
degree of clinical improvement for 1 to 5 months. Rarely. solitary nodules can be surgi-
"See references 5, 7, 302, 304, 317, 332-334.
I338 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
The most commonly effective treatment of canine mycosis fungoides is the topical
 10 mg, is dissolved in 50 ml of water or propylene glycol and applied to the clipped
surface (total body) two or three times weekly until lesions have regressed. The solution is
then applied as needed for maintenance (every 2 to 4 weeks). No signs of toxicity or drug
hypersensitivity have been reported in dogs. Occasionally, dogs have experienced demodi-
cosis. Because mechlorethamine is a potent sensitizing agent in humans, gloves should be
worn when applying the drug, and the dog should not be handled for the fist few hours
 produce buming of the eyes and throat. Although topical mechlorethamine appears to be
apa ou 'sprouny sisoa jo sns anbed pue onap, n smu non rasn
suggests that it alters in any way the ultimately fatal course of eventual systemic involve-
ment. In addition, mechlorethamine is a topical carcinogen and cocarcinogen, and may be
mous cell carcinoma and basal cell carcinoma), colon cancer, and Hodgkin's disease in
humans.5
In humans, topical carmustine (BCNU) has been reported to be effective in mycosis
 fungoides, with fewer toxicities and hypersensitivity reactions than seen with topical mech-
 lorethamine and no development of secondary skin neoplasms. Other therapies reported
to be of benefit in humans with mycosis fungoides include the administration of oral
retinoids or interferon, oral methoxsalen (8-methoxypsoralen) and subsequent exposure to
ultraviolet A light (PUVA), cyclosporine, photophoresis, and electron beam therapy.$
Retinoids (isotretinoin at 1 to 8 mg/kg/day; etretinate at 1 to 8 mg/kg/day) have
only about 50% of the dogs with epitheliotropic and nonepitheliotropic cutaneous lym-
phoma that were treated with oral retinoids had a clinical improvement of more than
50% 3 Survival time in these dogs varied from 5 to 17 months (mean, 11 months).
Acitretin (l mg/kg ql2h) was ineffective in a dog with nonepitheliotropic T cell lym-
phoma.304a Cyclosporine and omega-3 and omega-6 faty acid-containing products have
not been effective. However, large doses of linoleic acid (3 ml/kg of saffower oil [76%
linoleic acid] administered orally rwice weekly) was reported to induce remissions in 7 of
10 dogs treated.314, 322 About 50% of the dogs with mycosis fungoides treated with peg L-
asparaginase (weekly or biweekly injections of 30 U/kg intramuscularly or intraperitoneally)
experienced a reduction in erytherma and scaling.32 However, there was no effect on
 plaques and tumors, and no indication that the treatment prolonged survival time.
Anecdotal reports indicate that interferon (Roferon-A, Hoffman-LaRoche), 1 to 1.5
million units/m2 BSA given subcutaneously three times/week, may be effective in dogs
with epitheliotropic lymphoma (see Chap. 3),ss
 One dog with mycosis fungoides (plaque on chin, submandibular lymph nodes) was
three treatments at 3-week intervals).316 The disease was still in remission I year later.
Sezary'sSyndrome
 Sezary's syndrome is an epitheliotropic T cell lymphoma characterized by erythroderma
(generalized erythema), pruritus, peripheral lymphadenopathy, and the presence of Sezary,
or Lutzner, cells (see Mycosis Fungoides in this chapter) in the cutaneous infiltrate and in
indistinguishable from those in mycosis fungoides. Most authors believe that Sezary's
syndrome and mycosis fungoides are variants of the same T cell lymphoma.
generalized pruritus, exfoliative erythroderma, multiple skin plaques and nodules, and
lymphocytic leukemia (Fig. 20-116). Skin biopsies reveal epitheliotropic lymphoma. Sé-
zary-like cells are found in the peripheral blood and the skin. As in mycosis fungoides, the
neoplastic lymphocytes in canine Sezary syndrome are CD3 and CD8 positive.37, 312 Dogs
and cats usually do not respond to chemotherapy.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors * 1339
FIGURE 20-Il6. Sézary syndrome
in a dog. Depigmentation, erythema, in-
filtration, and alopecia of nose, muzzle,
chin, and periocular area.
Pagetoid Reticulosis
 Pagetoid reticulosis occurs in two clinical forms: localized lesions (Woringer-Kolopp form)
with a benign clinical course, and generalized lesions (Ketron-Goodman form) with a
u a  u a se  sa r i 
lymphocytes are CD3 and CD8 positive and exclusively y/△ T cels.57. 323
In the dog, most cases of pagetoid reticulosis are the Ketron-Goodman form.57, 319, 2.32
Erythematous papules, plaques (Fig. 20-117), erosions, and ulcers are seen on the
 mucocutaneous junctions, oral cavity, paws, and abdomen. Affected dogs become ill and
 reported in dogs, but no details were given.2
FIGURE 20-I17. Pagetoid retic-
ulosis in a dog. Alopecia, scaling.
crusting.and several erythematous
plaques and nodules on lateral tho-
rax.
1340 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
Early histopathologic findings included extreme epitheliotropism (epidermis and ad-
nexae) and monomorphous, haloed neoplastic lymphocytes (Figs. 20- 118 and 20-- 119).
LYMPHOMATOID GRANULOMATOSIS
Lymphomatoid  granulomatosis is  a  rare lymphohistiocytic  proliferative disorder  in
dogs.2. 326 The atypical lymphohistiocytic cells that characterize this disease are variably
Most dogs have only visceral lesions (especially cardiopulmonary and skeletal muscle).
Occasional cutaneous involvement has been characterized by multiple chronic, recurrent,
punctate to crateriform ulcers that heal with scarring (Fig. 20-120). Subcutaneous
plaques may be present. Lesions involve the face, the eyelids, the mucocutaneous junc-
tions, the elbows, and the trunk.
Biopsy reveals abrupt foci of full-thickness epidermal necrosis and ulceration overlying
wedge-shaped zones of dermal necrosis.2, 326 There is a multicentric, angiodestructive,
lynphohistiocytic proliferation. A polymorphous lymphohistiocytic infiltrate invades blood
vessel walls in the deep dermis and panniculus (Fig. 20-12l), resulting in ischemic
necrosis. Atypical large lymphocytes with pale cytoplasm and mitotic figures increase in
number during the course of the disease. Successful therapy has not been reported.
PSEUDOLYMPHOMA
 Pseudolymphomas are a heterogeneous group of henign reactive T or B cell lymphoprolif-
erative processes of diverse causes that simulate cutaneous lymphomas clinically or histo-
FIGURE 20-I18. Pagetoid reticulosis in a dog. Ne0-
plastic lymphocytes exhibit extrerme follienlotropism.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors + I341
FIGURE 20-119. Pagetoid re-
ticulosis in a dog. Close-up of Fig-
ure 20-118.
logically, or both.35 ss In humans, pseudolymphomas have been associated with reactions
to sunlight, drugs (especially anticonvulsants), arthropods, viruses, foreign material (espe-
cially tattoo ink), and contactants, as well as with idiopathy.
Pseudolymphomas usualy present as plaques or nodules, usually solitary, often ery-
thematous, and occasionally ulcerated. Age, breed, sex, and site predilections are not clear
in small animals. Animals with pseudolymphoma, regardless of the number of skin lesions
have been recogmized in dogs and cats in association with arthropod (especially tick) hites,
vaccinations, and drugs.5 A case of pseudolymphoma resembling pseudo-IHodgkin's disease
was reported in a dog.3s The dog had multiple, widespread, discrete, hrin nodules and
plaques that were alopecic and red-purple (Fig. 20-122). Biopsy revealed a nodular to
diffuse dermal and subcutaneous proliferation of pleomorphic and atypical lymphohistio-
cytic cells with numerous Reed-Stermberg celis (large cells with a multilobulated nucleus
whose morphology is such that nuclear lobes appear to be “kissing," or “mirror images")
(Fig. 20- 123A and B). The disorder spontaneously resolved.
Histopathologicall, the distinction between malignant lymphoma and pseudolym
phoma of the skin is one of the most dificult problems in dermatopathology.33 The
FIGURE 20-I20. Lymphomatoid
granulomatosis. Crateriform ulcers
on ventral abdomen and medial
thigh. (Courtesy W. Rosenkrantz.)
I342 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-I21. Canine lym-
phomatoid granulomatosis. Pleo-
morphie lymphohistiocytie cells in-
(Courtesy E. Walder.)
cellular infiltrate is usually bandlike, nodular, or diffuse, and is composed predominantly
However, some lesions may show marked cellular atypia.35.36 Major points of differentia-
tion between lymphoma and pseudolymphoma are presented in Table 20 -7.
excision of solitary lesions is usually curative.
CUTANEOUS PLASMACYTOMA
● Cause and Pathogenesis. Cutaneous plasmacytomas (cutaneous extramedullary
plasmacytomas) are common in the dog and extremely rare in the cat.* These neo-
*See references 1, 2, 5, 367, 368. 371-374.
FIGURE 
20-122. Pseudolym-
 phoma in a dog. Multiplc nodules
on pinna.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastie Tumors · I343
FIGURE 20-I23. Pseudolym-
phoina in a dog. A, Pleomorphic,
muncrous mitoses. B, Close-up of A.
Reed-Stemberg-lke cell with "kiss-
ing" nuclei (arrow).
● Table 20-7
HistoLoGIc criteria for The
DIfferEnTIatION Of MaLIGnaNt LyMPhOMA
from pseudolymphoma
 MALIGNANT LYMPHOMA
PSEUDOLYMPHOMA
 Cellular infltrate greater in cleep dermis (*bottom
Cellular infiltrate greatcr in superfcial dermis (*top
heavy")
heavy"),
Monomorphous cellular infiltrate
Polymorphous (rmixed cell) infltrate
-d aensn sdu oe no pasu 
 Small lymphocytes usually predominate
nate
Germninal centers rare
Germinal centers coininon
Polychroine (tingible body) macrophagcs rare
Polychrome (tingible body) macrophagcs common
No necrosis en masse
Epithelial and vascular structures often involvel
Epithelial and vascular structures spared
Cytologic atypia common
Cytologic atypia rarc
 Monoclomal immunocytologic pattern
Polyclonal immunocytologic pattern
I344 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-I24. Canine plas-
Imacytoma. Ulcerated nodule on dligi-
tal pad. (Courtesy C. Foil.)
plasms are of plasma cell origin and are rarely associated with multiple myeloma. The
cause of cutaneous plasmacytomas is unknown. Because canine plasmacytomas oecur
frequently in areas associated with chronic immune cell stimulation (e.g, gingiva in
association with periodontal disease, pinna in association with otitis externa, chin and paws 
in association with chronic allergic dermatitis), it has been hypothesized that these ne0-
plasms may arise due to chronic, prolonged B cell recruitment and cytokine stimulation.37
It is likely that these neoplasms were previously reported as reticulum cell sarcoma,
atypieal histiocytoma, lymphoma, or neuroendocrine tumor.
10 years, there is no sex predilection, and Cocker spaniels may be predisposed.* They
are usually solitary and occur most cormmonly on the digits (Fig. 20-124), the lips, the
chin, and the ears (especially in the external ear canal) (see Figs. 20-110G and 20-125).
Most plasmacytomas are well circumscribed, raised, smooth, firm to soft, pink to red,
dermal in location, and 1 to 2 cm in diameter (range, 0.2 to 10 cm). Tumors in the ear
canal are often polypoid, and those on digits are often ulcerated and hemorrhagic. Dogs
with multiple cutaneous lesions are rarely seen.5. 367
 Plasmacytomas are extrernely rare in cats, being reported on the leg. lip, and gingiva
 Of aged animals.369. 372
"See references 1, 2, 5, 367, 368, 371, 374.
FlGURE 20-I25. Canine plasmacytoma. Purplish nod-
ule on muzzle.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I345
FIGURE 20-126. Canine plas-
macytoma. Cytologic examination
of  aspirate showspleomorphic
plasma cells. (Courtesy T. French.)
● Diagnosis. Cytologic examination reveals sheets of variably differentiated plasma
cells (Fig. 20- 126). Histologically, plasmacytomas are characterized by sheets, packets,
and cords of cells iniltrating the dermis and subcutis (Figs. 20-127 and 20- 128)2. 367, 369.
371-374 The neoplastic cells may be well differentiated or extremely pleomorphic and
atypical. Amyloid is present in about 10% of lesions.1. 2 375 Electron microscopy or immu-
nohistochemical techniques may be required to confirm the plasma cell origin of the
FIGURE 20-I27. Camine plasmacytoma. Diffuse imfl-
tration of dermnis.
I346 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-128. Close-up of Figure 20-127. Cordlikc proliferation of pleomorphic, atypi-
cal plasma cclls.
neoplastic cells. Immunohistocheinical sturlies have shown that most plasmacytomas are
 80% of the canine plasmacytomas were positive for CD79a.377 In addition, CD3-positive T
cells and CD18-positive dendritic cells were scattcred throughout the neoplasms.377 At-
tempts to correlate DNA aneuploidy and oncoprotein content with histopathologic appear-
ance and biological behavior of canine plasmaeytomas was fraught with false-positive and
false-negative results.37o A histologic grading systerm and determination of proliferation rate
(immuuohistochexnical detection of Ki-67 antigen) were also found to be of minimal
prognostic value.373
· Clinical Management. The treatment of choice is surgical excision. Local recur-
of no benefit, because neoplasms exhibited benign biological behavior in spite of malig-
or precede (by weeks to months), the developiment of multiple myeloma.2, 5, 374
Tumors of Histiocytic Origin
There are at least five defined histiocytic prolifcrativc disorders that may involve the skin
disorders or fron lymphoproliferative diseases in regular paraffin sections. The clinical
syndromes. Histiocytomas usually occur as solitary lesions in younger dogs, and they
spontaneously regress. Cutaneous histiocytosis presents with solitary or muitiple lesions,
which tend to wax and wane. Most cases respond to immunomodulatory therapy, and
some may eventually spontaneously regress. Systemic histiocytosis is especially common in
 Bermese Mountain dogs, and it is a slowly progressive disease that requires continuous
immunomodulatory therapy. Malignant histiocytosis, especially com mon in Bermese Moun-
tain dogs, Rottweilers, and Golden retrievers, is a multicentric, rapidly progressive disease
that rcsponds poorly to treatment. Histiocytic sarconua is a recently reported disorder-
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors * I347
especially common in Bernese Mountain dogs, Rottweilers, Golden retrievers, and Flat-
coated retrievers- which requires early radical excision or anputation.
Extensive immunophenotyping has shown that these disorders are all proliferations of
dendritic antigen-presenting cells,3 In all of these disorders, the prolferating cell is
CDIa, b, c; CD1lc; CD18; CD45; and MHC 1I positive.20 However, histioeytomas lack
expression of CD4 and CD90 (Thy-l), which distinguishes them from cutaneous histiocy-
tosis and systemic histiocytosis.57, 37 Similarly, malignant histiocytosis and histiocytic sar-
coma arc CD4 and Thy-1 negative.
It has been suggested that cutaneous histiocytosis and systemic histiocytosis not be
reactive Langerhans’ cell histiocytosis.57 However, breed predilections for the two syn-
dromes are different, and immunophenotypically these disorders appear to represent a
proliferation of the perivascular dermal dendritic antigen-presenting cell.7 In the same
way, it has been suggested that malignant histiocytosis and histiocytic sarcoma are within a
referred to as “disseminated and localized malignant histiocytosis." More recently, it has
been suggested that these two disorders be referred to as “localized histiocytic sarcoma"
and “disseminated histiocytic sarcoma."337 Because the breeds at risk for the two syn-
dromes are identical, this seems reasonable.
Histiocytoma
· Cause and Pathogenesis. Histiocytomas are common benign neoplasms of the
dog.2.5-7. 27 There are rare anecdotal reports of histiocytomas in the cat.13.14.26Their
 cause is unknown, although they are more likely a uniquc proliferation or reactive hyper-
plasia rather than a true ncoplasm. Immunohistochermical and electron inicroscopic studies
have shown that the proliferating cel is the Langerhans cell337, 340. 342 It has been
Langerhans' cell histiocytosis, 57. 342
· Clinical Findings. Characteristically, histiocytomas affect young dogs, with about
be affected. Boxers, Dachshunds, Cocker spaniels, Grcat Dancs, Scottish terriers, Boston
terriers, Doberman pinschers, Labrador retrievers, miniature Schnauzers, English Springer
spaniels, and Shetland sheepdogs are predisposed. There is no sex predilection. Histiocy-
tomas are usually solitary and occur most commonly on the head, the pinnae, and the
lirmbs (Fig. 20-i29A; also see Fig. 20-110H and 20- I130). They are usually small (less
than 3 cin in diameter), firm, dome or button shaped, well circumscribed, dermal in
location, and frequently ulcerated. Histiocytomas are fast growing but benign. Most of the
rare reports of alleged generalized histioeytomas in older dogs were not confirned ultras-
tructurally or immunohistochemically and probably represented histiocytic lyinphosarcorma,
even with regional lymph node involvement, have been documented.33, 342 This may bc
● Diagnosis. Cytologic examination reveals sheets of pleomorphic “histiocytes" (Lall-
gerhans' cells) with variable nuinbers of lymphocytes and neutrophils, depending on the
stage of growth or involution (Fig. 20- 13i). Histopathologically, histiocytomas are charac-
terized by uniform sheets and cords of pleomorphic histiocytic cells infiltrating thc
dermis and subcutis, and displacing the collagen fibers and adnexae (Figs. 20-132 and
20-133).1. 2. 33 A characteristic feature of this neoplasm is a high mitotic index. Thc
overlying epidermis is typically hyperplastic, with prominent rete ridgcs and subjacent
dernal edema. Epithelial invasion is frequent, and intraepithelial nests of Langerhans'
cells resemble the Pautrier's microabsccsscs of epitheliotropic lymphoma.57, 342 in fact,
solitary or multiple histiocytomas in an older dog are a diagnostic dilemma, hecause the
distinction from epitheliotropic lymphoma is often impossible histologicaly., 337, 32 In
FIGURE 20-129. A, Canine histiocytoima. Ulcerated nodule on a pinma. B, Malignant histiocytosis. Multiple
red-purple macules, papules, and nodules over shoulder and neck (arca has bccn clipod). C, Canine systemic
on the bridge of the nose. H, Canine melanocytoma. Melanotic nodule on the lower eyelid.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I349
FIGURE 20-I30. Ulcerated caninc cutaneous histio-
cytoina on toe.
 such cases, immunophenotyping is indispensable. Lymphocytic infiltration (CD8-positive
cytotoxic T cells) and areas of necrosis develop in regressing neoplasms. Histiocytomas are
CD1a, b, c; CD1la, c; CD18; CD45; ICAM-1; and MHC 11 positive.37-34z Histiocytomas
lack expression of CD4 and CD90 (Thy-1), which are consistently expressed in cutancous
and systemic histiocytosis.57 Upregulation of expression of VLA-4, CD11b, CD44, and
CD54 (ICAM-1) is observed in most histiocytomas.57 In addition, they are often vimentin
 positive, occasionally lysozyme positive, and usually S-100 negative.340
· Clinical Management. Clinical management of histiocytomas may include surgical
excision, cryosurgery, electrosurgery, and observation without treatment.4-7 The majority
of these neoplasms undergo spontaneous regression within 3 months. Even cases with
 multiple skin lesions and regional lymph node involvement undergo spontaneous resolu-
tion, although some lesions regress as new ones appear over a course of, perhaps, several
 months.37, 32 Lesions that are causing problems (pruritus, ulceration, and secondary infcc-
FIGURE 20-131. Canine histio-
cytoma. Aspirate of skin nodules
shows nunerous pleomorphic Lan-
gerhans' cells ("histiocytes"). (Cour-
tesy J. Blue.)
1350 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastie Tumors
FIGURE 20-I32. Canine histiocytoma. Diffuse infiltration of Langerhans’ cells (histico-
cytes") with edema of superficial dermis and hyperplasia of overlying epidermis.
tion), but are in areas where surgical excision is diffcult, respond dramatically to the
 topical administration of a glucocorticoid in dimethyl sulfoxide.
MalignantHistiocytosis
· Cause and Pathogenesis. Malignant histiocytosis (disseminated histiocytic sar-
coma) is a rare, malignant neoplasm of Langerhans' ceil origin in dogs.* The cause of the
neoplasm is unknown.
● Clinical Findings. Malignant histiocytosis has been recognized in several breeds of
dogs with no sex predilection; typically, older animals are affected. This neoplasm has also
been reported in closely related Bermese Mountain dogs, predominantly male dogs.353
Other breeds that appear to he predisposed include the Rottweiler, Golden retriever,
Labrador retriever, and Flat-coated retriever.57, 337 Spleen, liver, lymph nodes, and lungs
are most cormmonly involved. Cutaneous lesions are uncommon and are characterized by
multiple, firm, dermal to subcutaneous nodules (Fig. 20-129B) or plaques anywhere on
the body. Lesions may or may not be alopecic, erythematous, or ulcerated. Typical clinical
signs of malignant histiocytosis includc lethargy, weight loss, lymphadenopathy, hepato-
● Diagnosis. Histopathologically, malignant histiocytosis is characterized by nodular
to diffuse, deep dermal and subcutaneous infltration, with cytologically atypical histiocytic
plastic cells may be in dense proliferations of pleomorphic, individualized round cells,
more densely packed bundles of plump spindle cells, or both.337 Large round or stellate
multinucleated giant cells are common. Neoplastic cells are positive for CDl, CDllc,
ICAM-1, and MHC I1.57 Unlike the cells, cutaneous and systemic histiocytosis, the cells of
malignant histiocytosis are not CD4 and CD90 (Thy-1) positive.37. 37 The neoplastic
cells of malignant histiocytosis are also positive for lysozyme, α-antitrypsin, and cathepsin
B.5,351,353
*See referenecs 1, 5, 20, 57, 337, 351-356.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I351
FIGURE 20- 133. Close-up of Figure 20)-132. Proliferation of pleomorplic, hyperchro-
matie I angerhans' cells ("histiocytes").
● Clinical Management. At present, there is no effective treatment. The disease
usually progresses rapidly to death or euthanasia.
Histiocytic Sarcoma
● Cause and Pathogenesis. Histiocytic sarcoma (localized histiocytic sarcoma") is a
rare, malignant neoplasm of Langerhans' cell origin in dogs.20. 57 The cause of the neo-
plasm is inknown.
FIGURE 20- 134. Canine maligmant histiocytosis. Atypical "histiocytes" exhibiting crythr0-
phagocytosis.
1352 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
● Clinical Findings. Histiocytic sarcoma has been recognized in several breeds, and
Bermese Mountain dogs, Rottweilers, Golden retrievers, Labrador retrievers, and Flat-
no sex predilection. Lesions are solitary or multiple, rapidly growing, dermal to subcutane-
 ous nodules, and most occur around joints (especially elbow and stifle). Lesions may
extend circumferentially around a joint, or actually infiltrate the joint, and involve tendons
and muscles. Metastasis to regional lymph nodes has been documented in a few cases late
in the course of the disease.
● Diagnosis. Histopathologically, histiocytic sarcoina is characterized by a dermal and
subcutaneous proliferation of spindle cells forming bundles and whorls, large round cells
arranged in sheets and arrows, individual pleomorphic round cells, or mixtures of these
types.20 Mitotic index ranges from 1 to 5/HPF. Multinucleated neoplastic giant ceils are
frequent. The neoplastic cells are CDla, b, c; CD1lc; CD18; ICAM-1; and MHC II
positive.20, 57, 337 Unlike the clls of cutaneous and systemic histiocytosis, the cel of
histiocytic sarcoma are not CD4 and CD90 (Thy-1) positive.57, 337
· Clinical Management. Histiocytic sarcomas have been cured by early surgical
excision,20 often requiring amputation of the entire extremity.337 Advanced cases have a
Systemic Histiocytosis
● Cause and Pathogenesis. Systemic histiocytosis is a proliferative disorder of peri-
● Clinical Findings. Systemic histiocytosis occurs most commonly in closely related
Although an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance had been proposed,346 an analysis of
127 cases ruled out autosomal recessive, autosomal dominant, and sex-linked modes of
inheritance, and implicated a polygenic mode of inheritance.348 In the Bermese Mountain
the same dams or sires, and there is a higher frequency in the offspring of affected
parents compared with the offspring of normal parents that have produced the disease.345
Clinical signs vary with the severity of the disease and include anorexia; weight loss;
respiratory stertor; marked conjunctivitis, episcleritis, and chemosis; peripheral lymphade-
nopathy; and multiple cutaneous or subcutaneous papules, plaques, and nodules over the
entire body, especially the muzzle, the nasal planum, the eyelids, the dorsum, the fanks,
may appear normal to erythematous to ulcerated, and the lesions may be asymptomatic or
painful. The course is often prolonged and fuctuating, with alternating episodes of exacer-
bation and remission, or rapidly progressive and fatal. Ultimately, most dogs die or are
liver, spleen, bone marrow, and lymph nodes.
● Diagnosis. Histopathologically, systemic histiocytosis is characterized by predomi-
nantly deep perivascular, nodular, or diffuse dermal and subcutaneous infiltrations
of cytologically normal histiocytic cells (Fig. 20-135).* Variable populations of lympho-
cytes, neutrophils, and eosinophils are present. Histiocytic cells frequently invade vascular
walls, which may produce thrombosis and ischemic necrosis. The tumor cells express
0 pue a ssdxa ose u 2e 2x zsII H pue I- TI  q 
(Thy-I), which differentiates them from the cells in malignant histiocytosis, histiocytic
also positive for acid phosphatase, nonspecific esterase, and lysozyme.5. 346
*See referenices 1, 2, 337, 345, 346, 349, 350.
Neoplastic and Non-Ncoplastic Tumors · I353
FIGURE 20--I35. Canine systemic histiocytosis. Proliferation of normal-appearing "histio-
cytes"” and occasional lymphocytes.
and cytotoxic drugs has been generally ineffective.57 Early cases with less severe disease
thymosin fraction 5 maybe beneficial346 but a subsequent report indicated that responses
effective.37. 337 Ocular lesions tend to be more difficult to treat and often require the
application of cyclosporine-containing ophthalmic drops.337
Cutaneous Histiocytosis
● Cause and Pathogenesis. Cutaneous histiocytosis is a benign proliferation of peri-
vascular dermal dendritic antigen-presenting cells of dogs. The cause of the disorder
as multiple, erythematous, derrmal or subcutaneous plaques or nodules, 1 to 5 cm in
diameter, anywhere on the body (see Figs. 20- 129E and F). The lesions may occur in
localized clusters or in a more generalized distribution. Some dogs have lesions limited to
the nasal planum and nasal mucosa, producing a “clown nose" appearance.2 Lesions often
wax and wane and appear in new sites.38a Systemic involvement and lymphadenopathy are
not reported.
● Diagnosis. Histopathologically, cutaneous histiocytosis is characterized by nodular
to diffuse, predominantly deep dermal or subcutaneous infiltrations of cytologically normal
histiocytes, lymphocytes, and neutrophils (Fig. 20- 136A).1. 2, 5. 337 Involvement of the
superficial dermis is inconsistent, epidermotropism is not usually seen, but folliculotropism
 d       (  ) d  
overlying epidermis usually lacks the prominent hyperpiasia and rete ridge formation seen
with histiocytoma. The histiocytic cells express CDla, h, c; CD1lc; ICAM-l; and MHC
cells in malignant histiocytosis, histioeytic sarcoma, and histiocytoma.57, 337 Enzyme histo-
 chemical studies showed that the cells were positive for nonspecific esterase.341
*See references 1, 2, 57, 338, 341, 343, 344.
I354 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastie Tumors
FIGURE 20- I36. Cutaneous histiocytosis. A, Histiocytie cells have virtually replaced the demmis ancd subeutis,
but the overlying epidermis is unreactive. B, Close-up of A. Follicular epithelium is invaded hy huistioeytie
(arrote) and lymphorcytie cells.
· Clinical Management. Treatment with large doses of glucocorticoids and with or
without cytotoxic drugs usually produces remission. However, recurrences are common.2 3
 treated one dog with tetracycline and niacinamide. Spontaneous regression may occur.37
Benign Fibrous Histiocytoma
· Cause and Pathogenesis, Benign fibrous histiocytomas are rare tumors of dogs
and cats.2. 5. 16. 357. 35s The cause of benign fbrous histiocytomas is unknown. These tumors
may be rcactive proliferations rather than true neoplasns.2. 357
● Clinical Findings. Fibrous histiocytomas occur most commonly in dogs 2 to 4
years of age, with no sex predilection. Collies and Golden retrievers appear to be predis.
posed2 s Cutaneous benign fbrous histiocytomas occur as solitary or multiple nodules and
occur most commonly on the face, the legs, and the scrotum (Fig. 20-137). They are
usually firm, well circumscribed, 0.5 to 7 cm in diameter, and derrnal in location (Fig. 20-
138). The overlying skin may be norrmal or alopecic. Histologically identical lesions occur
 in the cornea, with or without concurrent skin lesions (Fig. 20-139),ss These neoplasins
are benign.
● Diagnosis. Histologically, fibrous histiocytomas are characterized by poorly circum-
scribed celular infltrate permeated by a swirling stroma. The majority of cells are histio.
and plasma cells are comimonly present, especially at the periphery of the rmasses.
· Clinical Management. Clinical management of fbrous histiocytomas may include
surgical excision and the administration of glucocorticoids.2. 5, 35s Sublesional injections of
Neoplastie and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I355
FIGURE 20- I37. Canine benign fibrous histiocytoma. Multiple papulcs and nodules on
thie lower lip of a collie.
 10 to 40 mg of methylprednisolone may be effective for single lesions. Multiple lesions
are best treated with prednisolone or prednisone, 2 to 4 mg/kg orally once daily until they
have completely regressed (1 to 2 weeks). Recurrent lesions may necessitate long-term
alternate-day steroid therapy. Some cascs are initially unresponsive to, or become refrac-
tory to, systemic glucocorticoids. Azathioprine, 2 mg/kg orally every 48 hours, is usually
effective in these cases.3. 357
Malignant Fibrous Histiocytoma
· Cause and Pathogenesis. Malignant fibrous histiocytomas (extraskeletal giant cell
tumors, giant cell tumors of soft parts, or dermatofibrosarcomas) are uncornmon (in cats)
FIGURE 20-138. Canine hcnign fibrous
histiocytoma. Nodule on the paw of a
collic.
I356 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20- I39. Canine benign f-
brousluistiocytoma.
Nodule on the
sclera of a collie.
to rare (in dogs) malignant neoplasms.* These neoplasms are believed to arise from
undifferentiated mesenchymal cells. The cause of rmalignant fibrous histiocytomas is un-
Cytogenic analysis of four feline malignant fibrous histiocytomas revealed variable karyo-
typic changes and frequent nonrandom involvement of chromosome E1.180, 362
Some consider malignant fbrous histiocytoma not to be a single entity but rather a
"grab-bag” diagnosis that includes pleomorphie forms of several soff tissue sarcomas.360 In
*See references 1, 2, 5, 7, 16, 27, 30, 361-366.
FIGURE 20-I40. Canine benign fibrous histiocytoma. Proliferation of histiocytic and
fibroblastie cells with intermingling lymphocytes.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I357
FIGURE 20-141. Feline malig-
nant fibrous histiocytoma.
Large,
ulcerated mass originating in the
 periorbital region.
 one study, histologically purc malignant fibrous histiocytoma, malignant histiocytosis, and
hybrid lesions (diagnostic criteria for both present in same mass) were studied.36o Age,
breed, and lesion distribution data were remarkably similar. The authors offered two
hypotheses: (1) these tumors are derived frorn the same undifferentiated precurscr cel
that differentiates toward one tumor type or the other with overlapping phenotypes; or (2)
these tumors are derived from different cell types, at least one of which can differentiate
toward the phenotype of the other.
● Clinical Findings. Malignant fbrous histiocytomas occur in older cats and dogs,
 adnd p  yedai o u d xas ro paq e u 
affected. They are usually solitary, frm, poorly circumscribed, variable in size and shape,
and dermal and subcutaneous in location (Fig. 20-141; also see Fig. 20- 129F). There is a
predilection for the leg (especially the paw) and the shoulder. These neoplasms are
locally invasive (to muscle and bone). Early reports indicated that these tumors were slow
to metastasize, but 9 of 10 dogs in a recent report deveioped metastasis, usually wide-
spread a The rmean survival after diagnosis in these 10 dogs was 6l days.
● Diagnosis. Histologically, malignant fibrous histiocytormas are characterized by an
infiltrative mass composed of varying mixtures of pleomorphic histiocytes, fibroblasts, and
multinucleate tumor giant cells (Figs. 20-142A and B).1,2.361. 363 38s.a36 Mitotic figures and
a storiform ("cartwheel") arrangement of fbroblasts and histiocytes are common features.
Recognized histologic subtypes include giant cell type, storiform-pleomorphic type, and
 dermatofibrosarcoma type.2 366 Malignanf fbrous histiocytomas are positive for vimentin,
stained variably with cytokeratin, vimentin, desmin, and S-100.363
● Clinical Management. The therapy of choice for 1nalignant fibrous histiocytomas
is radical surgical excision or amputation. Recurrence after surgical excision is common.
· meLanoCYtIc NeOPLaSmS
The nomenclature for melanocytic tumors is complex and confusing, with terms such as
melanoma, malignant melanoma, melanosarcoma, melanocytoma, benign melanoma, mel-
*See references 1, 2, 27, 30, 361, 363, 365, 366.
I358 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-|42. Feline malig-
nant fibrous histiocytoma. A, Cyto-
logic examination of aspirate reveals
multinucleated neoplastic giant cell.
B, Proliferation of atypical fibrohis-
tocytic cells and numercus atypical
rmultinucleated histiocytic giant cells
(arrouw).
anocytic nevus, acquired nevus, and congenital nevus having uncertain meaning in certain
contexts. The so-called nevus cell, which makes up the pigmented nevi of humans, is now
known to be a melanocyte with slight histopathologic and biochermical alterations. On this
designated melanocytoma.2. s The term melanoma is used in this text as synonymous with
a malignant proliferation of melanocytes. In dogs, most cutaneous melanocytic neoplasms
(about 70%) are benign, whereas benigm and malignant neoplasms occur with about equal
frequency in cats.* Melanocytic neoplasms are the second most common tumor of the
canine digit.28
Melanocytic neoplasms are relatively common (in dogs) to uncommon (in cats) benign
 or malignant neoplasms arising frorm melanocytes and melanoblasts.1. 2, 4-7 The cause of
"See references 11, 14, 26, 35, 381, 384, 385, 388.
Neoplastie and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I359
these neoplasms usually is unknown. In cats, melanomas have been produced with injec-
tions of FeSV5. 6 In humans, there is a correlation between exposure to ultraviolet light
and the development of melanoma. Chronic exposure to insecticides may also be a risk
e siop  on ps q  s  is  r
treatment with antilymphocyte serum) and to nude mice.5 The tumor-suppressor sub-
stances p2l/Waf-1 and p-53 were undetectable in the tumor cells from a canine multicen-
tric melanoma.39 Melanoma developed within a congenital giant melanocytic nevus in a
dog.390h In a study of melanomas from two cats, monosomy D4 was found in both, along
with a variable complex profle of further alterations: monosomy E3, elongated chromo-
some F2, deleted chromosome Bl, and chromosome Al fusions.387b
Breed predilections in dogs suggest that melanocytic neoplasms could have a genetic
basis 3sa Alterations in expression or function of genes and proteins involved in cell cycle
control and apoptosis may be of paramount importance in the development of mela-
noma.388A
 In general, over 85% of melanocytic neoplasms in dogs arising from haired skin are
benign, whereas about 33% of those arising from the claw bed are malignant.7 In addition,
 Over 75% of the melanocytic neoplasms in Doberman pinschers and miniature Schnauzers
 are benign, whereas 85% of those in miniature Poodlles are malignant.7
Melanocytoma
CLINICAL FINDINGS
Dog
Breeds reported to be at risk include Scottish terriers, Airedales, Boston terriers, Cocker
spaniels, Springer spaniels, Boxers, Goldcn retrievers, Irish setters, Irish terriers, miniature
Schnauzers, Doberman pinschers, Chihuahuas, and Chow Chows.1 2 5-7, 381, 434 Doberman
pinschers and Irish setters develop multiple melanocytomas.1. ss6 Lesions are usually soli-
tary and cccur most frequently on the head (especially the eyelid and the muzzle) (see
Fig. 20-129H), the trunk, and the paws (especially interdigitally)1 2 331. 434 They are
usually well circumscribed, firm to feshy, brown to black, 0.5 to 5 cm in diameter, and
Cat
 Melanocytomas occur in cats at an average age of 10 years, with no sex or breed
circumscribed, firm to feshy, brown to black, 0.5 to 4 cm in diameter, and alopecic, and
vary from dome shaped to pedunculated to papillomatous in appearance.
DIAGNOSIS
Histopathologically, melanocytomas are characterized by melanocytes in sheets, packets
(nests and theques), and cords (Figs. 20-143 and 20-144).1, 2. 33 3ss. 434 The melanocytes
may be predominantly epithelioid, spindle cell, or a combination of these two forms.
proliferation is distinctly perifollicular (pilar neurocristic melanocytoma)(Fig. 20-145)378
Melanocytomas are positive for vimentin.2. 16. 47. 49. 59
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The therapy of choice is radical surgical excision.4-7 Up to 10% of the dogs with histologi-
cally benign melanocytomas die of their disease (usually euthanasia performed for recur-
rence,tastasisrth0,grettably,liical eatresreablydisnguh
benign from malignant melanocytic proliferations. 3ss 434
I360 + Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastie Tumors
FIGURE 20-I43. Feline mel-
anocytoma. Proliferation of spindle-
shaped rmelanocytes.
FIGURE 20-|44. Feline melanocytoma. Multi-
ple theques of cpithelioid melanncyteos.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors * I36I
FlGURE 20-I45. Pilar neurocristic melanocytoma.
Neoplastic melanocytes surround and involve hair folli-
cle.
Melanoma
CLINICAL FINDINGS
Dog
 Melanomas occur in dogs at an average age of 9 years, with no sex predilection. Breeds
subungual melanomas.386 Lesions are usually solitary and occur most commonly on the
head (Fig. 20-146), the limbs, the digits (including the claw bed) (Fig. 20-147), the
FIGURE 20-I46. Melanoma on the lip of a dog.
I362 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-I47. Digital mela-
noma. Note resemblarice to mela-
notic fbroma in Figure 20-52B.
pcor), shaped (dome, plaque, and polypoid), and colored (gray, brown, and black) and
range from 0.5 to 10 cm in diameter. Ulceration is common.
Cat
 Melanomas occur in cats at an average age of 10 to ll years, with no sex or breed
head (especially the pinna, the eyelid, and the lip) and the neck (Fig. 20-148),1 2 4-7, 38
They are variably circumscribed and shaped (dome, plaque, and polypoid), and most are
brown to black (Fig. 20-149) and vary from 0.5 to 5 cm in diameter. Ulceration is
frequent.
DIAGNOSIS
Histopathologically, melanomas are characterized by atypical melanocytes in sheets, pack-
cytes may be predominantly epithelioid, spindle cell, or a combination of these two forms.
Rarcly, thc melanocytic proliferation may be distinctly perifollicular (pilar neurocristic
FIGURE 20-I48. Melanoma on the ventral neck of a cat.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I363
FIGURE 20-I49. Multiple mela-
normas on the thorax of a cat.
melanoma).37 Clear cell (balloon cell) melanomas have been described.2. 3s3 391 A recent 
report recognized five histologic types of feline melanoma, which were, in decreasing
frequency: signet-ring. epithelioid, balloon-cell, mixed epithelioid or spindle, and spin-
dl391 The signet-ring and balloon-cell types were often amelanotic, and were confirmed
were previously diagnosed as undifferentiated carcinomas, undifferentiated sarcomas, and
lymphomas. Melanomas are positive for vimentin and variably positive for S-100 protein
and neuron-specific enolase.2 47,49 53,59, 391 The murine monoclonal antibody IBF9 reacts
with a high percentage of canine melanomas in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tis-
 sues,38 Seven monoclonal antibodies recognizing melanoma-associated antigens in human
FIGURE 20-I50. Canine mela-
noma. Cytologic examination of as-
pirate reveals several melanocytes.
I364 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-I5l. Felinc mela-
noma. Proliferation of atypical epi-
thelioid melanocytes.
tissmes were tested in canine melanomas, but only two (HMSA-1, HMSA-2) worked.379
Although the two antibodies recognized about 83% of the canine melanomas, they also
stained about 29% of canine neoplasms of nonmelanocytic origin.
Malignancy of canine and feline melanocytic neoplasms was not related to the pre-
dominant cel type or tumor size, nor the intensity of PCNA expression.390a However,
 Ki67 expression significantly correlated with histologic prognostic factors (malignancy.
 invasive growth) and patient survival.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
 in dogs, animals had a median survival time of 12 1nonths and a dcath rate of 54% within
 2 years if their neoplasm was small, and a median survival time of 4 months and a death
 o  s    sm du n  s 7  t jo 
dogs with digital melanomas already had metastases at the time of diagnosis. The mean
survival time of dogs with surgically treated oral melanomas was 3 months.3s7 The average
survival time following surgical excision of feline cutaneous inelanomas was 4.5 months.91
tide phosphatidylethanolamine, IL-2 and TNF-α, intralesional granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor, and various autologous tumor vaccines have given disappointing
may correlate with more aggressive biological behavior in canine melanomas2 390 3s1 and
feline melanomas.1 3ss One study in cats indicated that epithelioid cell-type neoplasms
were more likely to be malignant, whereas a second study failed to confirm this linding
indicated that there was no correlation between the degree of cellular pleomorphism,
 mitotic index, and extent of local infiltration in feline melanomas.382
 Large tumor size (> 2 cm?), high mitotic index, aneuploidy, and distant metastasis are
usefiul prognostice indicators for canine melanoma.s0.3s7, s8sa
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I365
● mISCEllaneoUS cUTaNeoUS NeoPlaSmS
Transmissible Yenereal Tumor
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
The transmissible venereal tumor (infectious sarcoma, contagious venereal tumor, venereal
granuloma, canine condyloma, transmissible lymphosarcoma, transmissible reticulum cell
tumor, histiocytoma, or sticker tumor) is an uncommon benign to malignant neoplasm of
sible venereal tumor is considered a naturally occurring allograft, with transmission occur-
cells contain 59 chromosomes, and only 42 or 43/59 are acrocentric (normally 76/78).
whereas 16 or 17 are metacentric (2/78 normally)405 as compared with the normal canine
complement of 78. A viral origin has been investigated but not verified. The neoplasm is
usually transmitted by coitus, but may be inoculated into multiple sites by licking, biting.
and scratching. Transmission may be accomplished by subcutaneous, intravenous, and
 intraperitoneal injections and by skin or mucosal scarification (incubation period, about 3
weeks). Transmissible venereal tumor has a worldwide distribution, but is more prevalent
in tropical and subtropical urban areas. It is enzootic in the southeast United States,
southeastern Europe, Central and South America, Japan, the Far East, the Middle East,
and parts of Africa.396s, 405
allogeneic host.5. 405 During progressive growth of the tumor, cell-mediated immune re-
sponses to tumor cells are impaired, and serum antibodies are present that, when incu-
antibodies from dogs with regressing transmissible venereal tumors. Circulating immune
complexes have been detected in dogs with transmissible venereal tumor, but the patho-
genetic significance of this finding is unknown. Anti-tumor IgG antibodies have been
Dogs experimentally rechallenged with transmissible venereal fumor cels mount a rapid T
lymphocyte response, resulting in rapid tumor regression.5. 405 T cels, B cells, and plasma
 cells participate in an effective immune response against transmissible venereal tumor and
also associated with an effective immune response and tumor regression.404 Immunosup-
pression results in increased tumor growth rate and malignancy 3963
 Some investigators report that transmissible venereal tumors are usually benign in
male dogs but that metastasis to regional lymph nodes is common in intact female dogs,
suggesting that these tumors may be hormone dependent.402 Ovariectomy was reported to
 produce a rapid reduction in size of transmissble venereal tumors in bitches.402 Other
authors indicate that males are more susceptible to metastatic disease.396a
CLINICAL FINDINGS
 Transimissible venereal tumor occurs in sexually active dogs (average 4 to 5 years old) and
in areas with high concentrations of free-roaming dogs, inadequatcly enforced leash laws,
and poorly controlled breeding. Neonatal animals and those with poor health or immuno-
supression for various reasons may be more likely to have rapid tumor growth and
metastatic lesions.5, 405 Neoplasms occur cormmonly on the external genitalia (penis and
vagina) (Figs. 20-152A and 20-153) and the skin (especially the face and the limbs) (Fig.
   d    s q    -
fower-like, firm or friable, 1 to 20 cm in diameter, and dermoepidermal to subcutaneous
 in location, and they may frequently be ulcerated. Early signs of genital lesions include
discharge, often hemorrhagic, with excessive licking of the area. Genital lesions are often
pale to bright red, fragile, and commonly hemorhagic, and with time necrotic, ulcerative,
I366 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-I52. A, Transmissible venereal tumor in a dog. Friable, hemorrhagie nodule on the penis. B,
Multiple folicular cysts (milia) in the groin of a dog. H, Epitrichial sweat gland cyst on the neck of a cat.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I367
FIGURE 20-I53. Transmissible
venereal tumor of the vagina and
vulva.
and secondarily infected. Some dogs have concurrent thrombocytopenia and prolonged
clotting and bleeding times.407a
 In experimental or laboratory dogs, these tumors frequently regress spontaneously. In
one experimental dog colony, the neoplasm was transmitted through 40 generations,
consisting of 564 dogs.5. 405 Neoplasms developed in 68% of the dogs and spontaneously
regressed permanently in 87% of these dogs within 180 days. However, there is no such
 ssai ss s  aru   q i g a
FIGURE 20-- I54. Transmissible venereal tumor in a dog. Subcu-
taneous nodule near the elbow.
1368 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
naturally occuring cases of transmissible venereal tumor is rare, and many instances of
DIAGNOSIS
blue cytoplasm, and multiple small, distinct, clear intracytoplasmic vacuoles (Fig. 20-
155)405 Histopathologicall, transmissible venereal tumor is characterized by compact
masses or sheets of uniform round to polyhedral neoplastic cels, often growing in rows in
pecially lymphocytes), and increasing numbers of collagen bundles. Transmissible venereal
tumors are positive for vimentin and negative for cytokeratin.59, 400 4o1 Tumor cell are also
 positive for lysozyme, neuronal-specific enolase, and ACMI (mononuclear phagocytic sys-
tem)400,401
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Transmissible venereal tumor rarely regresses spontaneously, and metastasis (regional
lyrnph nodes, skin, central nervous systein, and anywhere) occurs in up to 17% of the
cases. oth radiotherapy and surgical excision have been successful although recurrence
surgical margins, and tumor transplantation into the surgical wound by instruments and
 gloves may be important in postsurgical tumor recurrence. Chemotherapy is very effec-
tive.5. 405. 406 More than 90% of the dogs treated with vincristine (0.025 mg/kg intra-
venously, once weekly for an average of 4 to 6 weeks) were cured, including those with
tine3o as well as with malignancy and prognosis 406a Vincristine-resistant transmissible
mg/m? of body surface area (BSA) intravenously once weekly for an average of 6 weeks is
 also effective.407 Single-drug chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide or methotrexate was
vaccine, levamisole, and intralesional bacille Calmette-Guerin vaccine are all of unproven
FIGURE 20-I55. Trausimissible
venereal tumor. Aspirate of skin
nodule shows monoimorphous pop-
nlation of large round cells with
vacuolated cytoplasm. (Courtesy T.
Frenchi.)
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors * I369
FIGURE 20-I56. Transmisible venereal tumor. Sheets of neoplastic rnononuclear cels 
with vesicular uuclei.
venereal tumor is bighly antigenic, and tumor regression is followed by transplantation
 Occur 2 or more years later.36a
Primary Cutaneous Neuroendocrine Tumor
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
 Primary cutaneous neuroendocrine tumors are rare neoplasins of dogs,5, 392-395 The cause
of these tumors is unknown. The cell of origin may be the Merkel cell, which, like this
 neoplasm, shows dual epithelial and neural differentiation.5. 51, 393 These neoplasms have
 p pos, su, sn ree, peo aisd uq od
tumors,” and “undifferentiated sarcomas."
CLINICAL FINDINGS
 In dogs, the vast majority of primary cutaneous neuroendocrine tumors have been
reported to be malignant and metastatic,392 or benign with rare recurrence after sur-
gery.383.95 Most dogs are older than 8 years of age, and most have solitary lesions (Fig.
20-157), especiall on the lips, the ears, or the digits. The tumors are usually rapid
 growing, are 0.5 to 2.5 cm in diameter, and may be ulcerated. Neuroendocrine tumors
may also occur in the oral cavity of dogs.395
DIAGNOSIS
Histopathologically, primary cutaneous neuroendocrine tumors are characterized by sheets,
amphophilic cytoplasm, hyperchromatic and vesicular nuclei, and frequent mitoses (Fig.
20-158).2 392-395 Giant and multinucleate tumor cells may be seen. Electron microscopic
examination reveals characteristic cytoplasmic dense-core membrane-bound granules and a
 perinuclear whorl of intermediate filaments (Fig. 20-159). The characteristic cytoplasmic
I370 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FlGURE 20-I57. Merkel cell tu-
mor in a dog. Alopecie, ulceratect
nodule between eyes. (Courtesy M.
Nagata.)
 neurosecretory granules are often lost in forrmalin-fixed tissues. Immunohistochermical
 studies have shown that the primary cutaneous neuroendocrine tumors contain cytokeratin
and chromogranin A.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Clinical management of these tumors is best accomplished with early rardical surgical
cxcision. The vast majority of dogs appear to be cured after surgery.
FIGURE 20-I58. Canine neu-
roendocrine tumor. lnfiltrate con-
sisting of round tumor cells and
frequent mitoses.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors·I371
FIGURE 20- I59. Merkel's cell. N, nucleus of a Merkel's cel; astcrisk indicates basal lamina; M.
mitochondria; arrows indicate specific granules of the Merkel's cell; D with pointer, desmosome
between the Merkel cell and a keratinocyte (K); C, collagen with cross-striation (×20,000). lnset:
burg-Lever G: Histopathology of the Skin, 7th ed. J.B. Lippincott Co, Philadelphia, 1990, p 863.)
Epithelioid Sarcoma
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Epithelioid sarcoma is an extremely rare malignant neoplasm of dogs and cats that is
I372 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-I60. Feline cpi-
thelioid sarcoma. Two nodules in
the axillary region.
CLINICAL FINDINGS
Epithelioid sarcoma has been recognized in adult cats and dogs.16. 36. 40s Lesions_ are
solitary and occur on the lirmbs (Fig. 20-160). They begin as firm, poorly circumscribed,
dermal or subcutaneous nodules that may ulcerate as they enlarge. Metastasis may occur.
DIAGNOSIS
Histopathologically, epithelioid sarcomas are characterized by a nodular arrangement of
FIGURE 20-I6l. Feline epithelioid sarcoma. Mulifocal area of necrosis within a neo-
plasun.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I373
FIGURE 20- I62. Close-up of Figure 20-161. Proliferation of pleomorphic, atypical epi
thelioid cells.
 Mitoses are frequent, and necrosis is characteristically present, cspecially in the center of
large nodules (Fig. 20-162). In one dog. tumor cells were positive for vimentin and,
focally, for desmin.40s
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
 The therapy of choice is early radical surgical excision.
· SecoNdarY Skin NEOPLASms
Secondary skin neoplasms result from the metastasis of prirmary neoplasms in other organs
d  u s o susn s o p q  s o si us a o
neoplasm, as well as hemodynamic, immunologic, biochemical, or microenvironmental
factors. Theoretical mechanisms for preferential metastasis include site-specific production
of local growth factors, microvascular endothelial cellular adhesion molecules, and soluble
chemotactic agents that facilitate migration, adherence, and invasion of neoplastic cells
- seo pe siop un ai are ssedou us aeps 'so en rd 
scribed, solid, subcutaneous nodules were recognized on the heads of cats with metastatic
mammary adenocarcinoma and gastric carcinoma., 417 Multiple purpuric papules, plaques,
and nodules of the neck have been seen in dogs with metastatic pharyngeal carcinomas
(see Fig. 20- 152B).5 Visceral hemangiosarcomas may metastasize to the skin as dermal or
subcutaneous papules and nodules, which nay be bluish to reddish to blackish in color.417
A stermal liposarcoma metastasized to the skin of the front limb as papules.417 Oral
 melanomas may metastasize to the skin of the muzzle and lips.417 Nodular to ulcerative to
edematous (pseudocellulitis, inflammatory carcinoma) lesions have been recognized in the
ventral abdominal, inguinal, and medial thigh skin of dogs and cats with metastatic
mammary adenocarcinoma (see Fig. 20-152C)5. 417, 419. 420 and colonic adenocarcinoma
(Fig. 20-163; also see Fig. 20-152D).5 414, 417 Nodules in the umbilical skin have been
recognized in dogs and cats with metastatic pancreatic ductal acdenocarcinoma, jejunal
I374 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-I63. Metastatic colonic adenocarcinoma in a dog. Lymphatic metastasis in
skin.
adenocarcinoma, and teratoma.ll A seminoma metastasized to the skin of the jaw and
trunk in a dog.fi8a The authors have seen solitary or multiple metastatic cutaneous nodules
 d  sp  (a1 -0 )
Ulcerative, destructive lesions on the digits have becn seen in aged cats with asympto-
matic bronchiogenic or squamous cell carcinomas of the lung (Fig. 20- 165; also see Fig.
20-152E).131, 4i2, 415 417, 418 Usually, multiple digits of multiple paws are involved, but
Occasionally multiple digits on one paw or one digit only are affected. Occasionally, lesions
may also be present at other cutaneous sites: head, abdomen, lip, thigh, lumbar area.
Leukemia cutis is a dissemination of aggressive systemic leukemia to the skin. Cutane-
ous lesions seen with leukemia may be specific (leukemic infltrates presenting as macules,
papules, plaques, nodules, purpura, and ulcers) or nonspecific (infectious dermatoses,
urticaria, erythema multiforme, exfoliative dermatitis, and pruritus). In dogs, leukemia
cutis (patchy alopecia, erythema, and papules of the trunk) was reported with chironic
FIGURE 20-l64. Cutaneous me-
tastases from  prostatic  carcinoma.
Multiple ulcerated nodules over with-
ers.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I375
FIGURE 20-I65. Metastatic bronchiogenic carcinorna in a cat. Metastatic lesions in der-
mis.
    si ro ss r r     
Histopathologically, leukemia cutis is characterized by a perivascular, interstitial, lichenoid,
or diffuse monomorphous infiltration of leukemia cells.* The leukemia cells often infiltrate
between collagen bundles.
Surgical transplantation of a neoplasm (tumor seeding) is rarely reported ini dogs or
neoplasm was removed. Most cases involved urinary tract carcinomas.
· PaRANeOPLASTIC SYNDROMeS
 Certain dermatoses may 0ccasionally be associated with concurrent neoplasims.2a, 420a. 420b
 Such dermatologic conditions include amyloidosis, pruritus, necrolytic migratory erythema.
exfoliative dermatitis, peinphigus, vasculitis, dernatomyositis, and collagenous nevi. Pruri-
tus of the distal limbs was seen in a cat with oral squamous cell carcinoma.? Pruritus
disappeared when the neoplasin was excised, and it returned when the ncoplasm re-
clirrei.
· NON-NEOPLASTIC TUMORS
Cutaneous Cysts
A cyst is a non-neoplastic, simple saclike structure with an epithelial lining. Classification
of cysts depends on identification of the lining epithelium or the pre-cxisting structure
from which'the cyst arose.
FOLLICULAR CYSTS
The majority of cutaneous cysts in the dog and cat are folicular in origin and can be
and isthmus-catagen (tricholemmal) cysts are common in dogs and uncommon in cats.
Matrical cysts are uncommon in dogs and rare in cats. Hybrid cysts, which cornbine two
or three types of follicular epithelium, are uncommon in dogs and cats.
 Follicular cysts usually appear as solitary, well-circumscribed, round, smooth, firm to
1376·Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastie Tumors
Huctuant lesions that are dermal to subcutaneous in location and 0.5 to 5 cin in diarne-
ter.1 2 5 142a Occasional lesions may have a bluish hue. Lesions may open and discharge a
yellowish, brownish, or grayish material that is caseous or doughy in consistency. There
are no apparent age or sex predilections for solitary follicular cysts, and they occur most
commonly on the head, the neck, the trunk (sec Fig. 20-152F), and the proximal limbs.
and miniature Schnauzers may be predisposed.1 Rarely, follicular cysts appear as recurrent
soft tissue swellings in the medial canthus of the eye.422
Multiple follicular cysts of presumed congenital origin occur on the dorsal midline of
the head in young dogs and on pressure points (espccialy the elbow) of dogs, presumably
resulting from chronic trauma, dermal fibrosis, and obstruction of follicular ostia.? Small (2
to 5 mm in diameter) follicular cysts (milia) may be seen as postinfammatory changes,
especially in dogs.5 They are usually white and grossly resenble pustules or calcinosis cutis
  s u  aq o   a (-o  s oe ie - )
received therapeutic levels of glucocorticoids for long periods.
All types of cysts may be complicated by rupture and resultant foreign body granu-
loma reaction and secondary bacterial infection. Such cysts ofen appear inflamed and
infected grossly, and may be painful, pruritic, or both.
The therapy of choice for most cutaneous cysts is surgical excision or observation
without treatnent. Cysts should never be squeezed bard or manually evacuated, because
such procedures greatly increase the chance of expressing cyst contents into the dermis or
subcutis and inciting foreign body reaction and infection.
Infundibular Cyst.
by pathologists and *sebaceous cysts" or *wens" by clinicians.2, 5. 424 They are characterized
FIGURE 20-166. Multiple follicular cysts over back
 of dog (area has been clipped). (Courtesy E. Teixeira.)
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I377
FIGURE 20-I67. Canine follicular cyst (milium).
by a cyst wall that undergoes cpidermal differentiation; a cyst cavity containing lamellar,
often concentrically arranged keratin (Fig. 20-168); and often a conncction to a rucimen-
tary hair follicle if serial sections are employed.2, 5 Cytologic cxamination of any keratin-
flled cyst reveals squames (Fig. 20- 169A) and cholesterol crystals (Fig. 20-169B).
Isthmus-CatagenCyst
Isthmus-catagen_ (tricholemmal) cysts are characterized by a cyst wall that undergoes
geneous, amorphous keratin (Fig. 20-170),2. 430
FlGURE 20-I68. Canine infundibular cyst.
I378·Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-I69. Canine follicu
A
lar cyst. A, Aspirate contains nuner-
ous squames.“ S, Aspirale contains
cholesterol crystals.
B
Matrical Cyst
Matrical cysts arc characterizcd by a cyst wall of deeply basophilic, basaloid cells, which
 abruptly keratinize to form eosinophilic, amorphous keratin replete with ghost, or shadow,
cells.2
Hybrid Cyst
Hybrid (mixed, or panfollicular) cysts are characterized by two or three types of folicular
DERMOID CYST
Dermoid cysts are rarely observed in dogs and cats.* They are developrmental anom-
alies and are often congenital and hereditary. Dermoid cysts are most commonly reported
in Boxers, Kerry blue terriers, and Rhodesian ridgebacks. In Rhodesian ridgebacks and
their crosses, the condition (dermoid sinus, or pilonidal sinus) is thought to be inherited
as a simple recessive trait (see Chap. 12) 2 §, 423. 426. 428
"See references 1, 2,5, 423,426,428, 429,432.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastie Tumors · 1379
FIGURE 20-I70. Canine isth-
mus-catagen (trichilemmal)  cyst.
Note  trichilemmal   differentiation
of the cyst wall.
Iesions may be solitary or rmultiple and often occur along the dorsal midline. Der-
Inoid cysts occurred in the fank region of two cats.t29 Histopathologically, the lesions are
characterized by a cyst wall that undergoes epidermal differentiation and contains well-
developed small hair follicles, sebaceous glands, and occasionally epitrichial sweat
glands.2.5
EPITRICHIAL (APOCRINE) SWEAT GLAND CYST
Epitrichial cysts are common in dogs and rare in cats.1 2.  There arc no apparent breed or
scx predilections, and affected animals are usually 6 years of age or older. They may be
the result of sweat gland duct obstruction. Lesions are usually solitary, well-circuinscribed,
smooth, tense to fuctuant swellings, which are 0.5 to 3 cin in diaineter. The overlying
FIGURE 20-171. Canine hy-
brid cyst. Note combined epider-
mal (left) and trichilemmal (right)
differentiation of the cyst wall.
I380 + Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-I72. Legend on opposite page
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I381
FIGURE 20- I73. Canine epitrichial sweal gland cyst.
skin may be atrophic and alopecic, and the lesions often appear bluish (see Fig. 20-
152H). Cyst contents are usually clear, watery, and acellular. Lesions occur most com-
monly on the head, the neck, and the limbs.1. 5'
ranged from 2 to 10 mm in size and were soft, smooth, round, and fuid flled. They were
 located in the skin around the medial canthus and in the upper and lower eyelids. The
 cysts involved both eyelids in most cats.
Epitrichial sueat gland cystomatosis is a term used to describc a rare condition in
giands produce grouped vesicles and builae,0.5 to 5 cm in diameter, especially on the
head and the neck (Fig. 20-172A). The overlying skin is usually atrophic and alopecic,
and the cysts may have a bluish to purplish tint.
pathologically, epitrichial sweat gland cysts are made up of variable-sized dilated epitrichial
sweat glands (Figs. 20- 173 and 20-174), which may 0ccur as large solitary cysts, clusters
of smaller cysts, or large cysts surrounded by smaller satelite cysts (Fig. 20175).1 2 5,433
The treatment of choice for epitrichial cysts is surgical excision or observation without
treatment. Solitary lesions may be aspirated, but oftcn recur within several weeks. There
 is at present no practical approach to the dog with epitrichial sweat gland cystomatosis.
SEBACEOUS GLAND CYST
Cysts that involve sebaceous structures are extremely rare in dogs and cats.? Sebaceous
dict cysts appear as solitary, firm, dermal nodules that are smaller than I cm in diameter.
 There are no kmown age, breed, sex, or site predilections.
FIGURE 20-I72. A, Multiple epitrichial sweatl gland cysts in a dog. B, Solitary collagenous nevus in a Brittany spaniel.
Firm, well-circumscribed, partially pin-feathered nodule over the thorax. C, Multiple collagenoms nevi in a German
shepherd dog. D, Multiple collagenous nevi on the paw of a German shepherd dog. E, Two small, mclanotic organoid nevi
in the perauricular area of a young cat. F, Congcnital vascular ncvus in thc groin of a young dog. G, Congenital scbacous
ncvus in the fank of a dog (the area has bheenu clipped). H, Multiple hyperkeratotir, nelanotie epidermal nevi in the Hank of
a young dog.
I382 · Neoplastic and Non-Ncoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20- I74. Close-up tof Figure 20- 173. Columnar glandular epithelium with apical
budding,
BRANCHIAL CYST
 Branchial cysts are developmental defects arising from the second branchial cleft. They
predilections. Affected animals have a poorly circumscribed, firm to fuctuant swelling in
the ventral cervical region. Histopathologically, branchial cysts are characterized by a thin-
walled cyst lined by pseudostratified, nonciliated, columnar epithelial cells.! The treatment
 of choice is surgical excision or observation without therapy.
Nevi
A nevis (hainartoma) is a circumscribed developmental defect of the skin, characterized
congenital and are uncommonly reported "in dogs and cats. The mechanism of nevus
formation is not understood. A failure in the normal orderly embryonic inductive process
has been theorized. In addition, the distribution of certain epidermal and vascular nevi has
 prompted speculation that a relationship to dermatomes or peripheral nerves exists. Fi-
nally, some nevi have a hereditary occurrence.
COLLAGENOUS NEVI
u an Aos se s jo spaiq auu ui pzn ue  u s
cutaneous lesions, especially on the head, neck, and proximal extremities (see Fig. 20--
172B).2 5, 439 447 Most collagenous nevi are frm, well circumscribed, and 0.5 to 5 cm in
diameter. Some lesions are alopecic, are hyperpigmented, and have pitted surfaccs ("cob-
and lameness.
 In German shepherd dogs, a syndrome of multiple, approximately symmetrically
distributed collagenous nevi (so-called nodular dermatofibrosis) on the limbs (see Fig.
20-172C and D), head, neck, and ventral trunk has been described.* In these German
"See references 2, 5, 435, 437, 438, 443, 445, 449.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I383
FIGURE 20-175. Epitrichial sweat gland cystomato-
sis in a dog. Multiple, large, dilated epitrichial sweat
glands.
the sudden onset of skin lesions at 3 to 7 years of age. There is no sex predilection. The
lesions are distribated inore or less symmetrically on thc limbs and head, and range from
0.5 to 5 cm in diameter. They are usually firm, asymptomatic, and covered by normal skin
and hair. These Gerrman shepherds virtually always develop bilateral renal disease, varying
from polycystic kidneys to renal cystadenomas to renal cystadenocarcinomas. Enlarged and
abnormally shaped kidneys may eventually be palpable in about 60% of the dogs and may
be detected radiographicaly or ultrasonographically in about 86% 43 The dogs usualy
develop clinical signs of renal dysfunction within 3 to 3 years after the initial recognition
of the skin lesions Intaet females almost always develop multiple uterine leionyomas.443
Many of the dogs have multiple small intestinal polyps, which are asymptomatic.4s Death
is due to renal failure, metastasis (sternal and abdominal lymph nodes, liver, lungs), and
euthanasia.443
Multiple collagenous nevi in association with bilateral renal cysts, cystadenomas, and
cystadenocarcinomas have occasionally been recognized in other dog breeds: Golden re-
trievers, Boxers, German shepherd crosses, and mongrels41. 43a 45 Periodic abdominal
radiographs or ultrasound examinations, or both, have been recommended for all dogs
with multiple collagenous nevi.451
The renal pathology associated with multiple collagenous nevi has been described as
non-neoplastie cysts, hyperplastic and dysplastie nodules, adenomas, adenocarcinomas, and
different stages of the same process.
 The pathogenesis of the multiple collagenous nevi and bilateral renal disease syn-
 drome is not known. One hypothesis is that the skin lesions may represent a paraneoplas-
 d (o  ) s   es  o  ssd 
the renal tumors14341 Another hypothesis is that the skin,renal, and uterine lesions
develop independently through a common genetie abnormality. 41. 43 451
1384· Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
 A syndrome of regional collagenous nevi has been reported.442 Adult dogs develop
nodular lesions on a limb or the face that increase in number and spread to involve a
large area of the limb, neck, and sternum.
hyperplasia, which often displace adnexae and subcutaneous fat (Figs. 20-176 and 20-
177). In clinical management, surgical excision or obscrvation without therapy is usually
employed. Chemotherapy (prednisone, azathioprine) has not been effective.
ORGANOID NEVI
Organoid nevi are uncommonly reported in dogs and cats.35. 4 Lesions arc solitary,
occasionally multiple, firm to mushy, 0.3 to 3 cm in diameter, and dome shaped to
pedunculated. They occur primarily on the face, the head (see Fig, 20-172E), and the
 proxinal extremities. Linear organoid nevus occurred in a I-week-old Old English sheep
dog as linear, yellowish, crusty lesions on the head, neck, shoulders, and dorsolateral
thorax,44 and in a 3-month-old Standard Schnauzer as linear, hyperkeratotic, hyperpig-
mented lesions on the head, neck, trunk, cars, and lirmbs. 46
 Focal adnexal dysplasia and adnexal nevi have been described in dogs.1. 2. 45o These
two conditions may or may not be identical. Adnexal nevi are usually not inflaned, and
the hyperplastic adnexae maintain a more-or-less normal anatomic orientation (Fig. 20-
178A). Focal adnexal dysplasias are usually infamed, fibrosed, and the hyperplastic ad-
nexae are arranged in bizarre configurations (Fig. 20-178B). Lesions are solitary, firm,
well circumseribed, and dome shaped to polypoid, and range from 1 to more than 4 cm in
prcssure points and interdigital areas) are most commonly involved. Affected dogs are
generally middle aged or older, there is no sex predilection, and Doberman pinschers and
Labrador retrievers Imay be predisposed.! The histopathologic findings of so-called focal
adnexal dysplasia are similar to so-called folliculosebaceous hamartoma in humans, and the
lesion is perhaps best classified as a nevus at present. Similarly, adnexal nevi consist of
hyperplastic adnexae and fall under the category of organoid nevi
FIGURE 20- I76. Collagenous nevus. Exophytic, nodnlar hyperplasia of collagen
Ncoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors·I385
FIGURE 20-I77. Close-up of Figure 20-176. Collagenous hyperplasia surrounding a hair
follicle.
FIGURE 20-I78. A, Adnexal (pilosebaceous) nevus. Note the 1ore-or-less norinal anatoinical configura
tion of the hyperplastic hair folicles and sebaceous glands. B, Focal adlnexal dysplasia. The bizarrely arranged
central adnexae are surrounded by fibrosis and chronie infarmumation.
1386· Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
Histopathologically, organoid nevi are characterized by hyperplasia of two or more
skin components (Fig. 20-179). Focal adnexal dysplasia is characterized by circumscribed,
dermal to subcutaneous nodules composed of loosely distributed, haphazardly arranged
folliculosebaceous units and abundant collagen.2 450 Concurrent suppurative or pyogranu-
lomatous infammation is common. Adnexal nevi are composed of hyperplastic adnexae
observation without treatment. Isotretinoin and etretinate were ineffective for the treat-
 rment of linear organoid nevus in one dog.146a
VASCULAR NEVI
Vascular nevi occur on the serotun (varicose tumors of the scrotun, or scrotal vascular
hamartona) and occasionally elsewhere in dogs (see Fig. 20-172F).1, 2, 33, 452 They are
 s  d  s  p e    s  n 
Scottish terriers, Airedales, Kerry blue terriers, and Labrador retrievers. The lesions are
characterized by single or multiple, slowly enlarging and hyperpigmenting plaques on the
ally seen at other cutaneous sites, 1s, 46 Histopathologically, the scrotal lesions are charac-
terized by cavernous dilatation (telangiectasia) of blood vessels and epidermal melanosis.
Therapeutic options include surgical excision and observation without treatment. A 2-year-
ass yoau sh punoe (ueis sm-iod,) ed pan yrp e ym iar roraei Po
 birth was cured with surgical excision and an axial rotation ffap.448
SEBACEOUS GLAND NEVI
 Sebaceous gland nevi are rarely diagnosed in dogs.1. 2, 47 They are usually solitary, alope-
cic, scaly plaques, smaller than 2 cm in diameter, with an irregular or papilated surface. A
 sebaceous gland nevus was recognized in a 1-year-old male Poodle.47 The lesion had been
 present on the lateral right thigh since birth and had been slowly enlarging. It was linear,
multinodular, alopecic, smooth, shiny, greasy, and orange-yellow (see Fig. 20-172G)
FlGURE 20-I79. Organoid nevus. Dome-shaped mass consisting of an excess of hair
follicles and sebaceous glands. (From Seott DW; Felince dermatology 1900- 1978: A mono-
graph. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:331, 1980.)
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I387
Histopathologically, sebaceous gland nevi are characterized by sebaceous gland hyperplasia
and overlying papillated epidermal hyperplasia (Fig. 20-180). Therapeutic options include
 surgical excision and observation without treatment.
EPITRICHIAL (APOCRINE) SWEAT GLAND NEVI
Epitrichial sweat gland nevi are rarely diagnosed in young dogs and cats.1 436 Lesions have
been solitary and located on the head and neck (Fig. 20- 18i). Lesions may be bluish in
color and Huctuant. Histologically, a linear to nodular proliferation of hyperplastic, dilated
epitrichial sweat glands is present in the deep dermis and subcutis (Fig. 20- 182). Thera-
 peutic options include surgical excision and observation without treatinent.
FIGURE 20- 181. Epitrichial sweat gland nevus in a
cat. Multilobulatedl, alopecic, furctuant masses on leff
side of face. (Courlesy M. Paradis.)
I388· Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-I82. Kpitrichial
sweat gland nevus in a cat. Hyper-
plastic, secretion-filled epitrichial
sweat glands.
EPIDERMAL NEVI
 Epidermal nevi are uncommonly diagnosed in dogs.1. 2 5. 47 These Iesions usually occur in
young adults. Lesions previously reported as lentigines or pigmented epidermal nevi in
Pugs and miniature Schnauzers were probably papillomas (see Papilloma). Lesions are
usually multiple, occasionally solitary, ovoid to circular to linear plaques, hyperpigmented,
scaly to papillomatous, and smaller than 2 cm in diamcter (Fig. 20-183). They occur most
commonly on the ventral abdomen (see Fig. 20- 172H), the ventral thorax, and the medial
limbs. Epidermal nevi tend to follow Blashko's lines, possibly resulting from genetic
mosaicism in which two or more geneticaly different cell lines are present within the
same individual.448a
FIGURE 20-I83. Iinear cpidormal ncvus in a dog. Hyperpigmented, infamcd, lincar
lesion runs from stermum to medial elbow.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I389
Epidermal nevi occurred in a 2-month-old male miniature Schnauzcr; the lesions
developed as wavy, linear bands of closely set, hyperpigrmented, hyperkeratotic papules
and plaques over the trunk.447 Infammatory linear verrucous epidermal nevi were re-
 ported in three related Cocker spaniels.453 All dogs were female and had lesions before 6
months of age. Linear, pigmented verrucous lesions were noted most commonly on the
Iateral trunk, the footpads, and the ears. All lesions were moderately pruritic.
 Histologic examination of epidermal nevi shows orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, papil-
lated epidermal hyperplasia, epidermal melanosis, and papillomatosis (Fig. 20- 184). In
some instances, granular degeneration of the epidermis is present.
Therapeutic options include surgical excision and observation without treatment. In
achieved with the oral administration of isotretinoin or etretinate,453
HAIR FOLLICLE NEVI
Hair follicle nevi are uncommonly diagnosed in dogs.1. 2. 44 Lesions are solitary or multi-
ple, hyperkeratotic, ovoid or linear plaques, especially on proximal cxtremities. Hairs
arising from the lesions may be thick and brushlike. Histologically, hair folicles and hair
shafts that are larger than normal are present in clusters (Fig. 20-185). Therapeutic
 options include surgical excision and observation without treatment.
COMEDO NEVI
Comedo nevi are rarely diagnoscd in dogs.44 ILesions are solitary, wellcircumscribed,
syndrome is probably a rmore widespread form of comedo nevus (see Chap. 12). Histologi-
cally, there are clusters of dilated, hyperkeratotic hair follicles (Fig. 20-186).
Therapeutic options include surgical excision and observation without treatment. The
cral administration of isotretinoin is effective treatment for the Schnauzer comedo syn-
drome (see Chap. 12).
FIGURE 20- I84. Epidermal nevus. Orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, papilted epidermal
hyperplasia, and papillomatosis.
1390 * Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20- I85. Hair follicle nevus from a dog.
PACINIAN CORPUSCLE NEVI
 Pacinian corpuscle nevi are rarely reported in dogs and cats.1 Numerous pacinian corpus-
cles are seen in the dermis and subcutis.
MELANOCYTIC NEVI
Although the term “melanocytic nevus" has been frequently employed in veterinary medi-
cytomas (see Melanocytic Neoplasins). Congenital melanocytic nevi are occasionally seen
(Figs. 20-187 and 20-188A and B).
A Golden retriever was born with a strip of abnorrnal skin on the right pelvic imb.306
When examined at 5 years of age, the dog had a 5-cm-wide strip of abnormal skin that
extended from the medial stifle to the metatarsus. The hair in the lesion was a darker
color, and the skin was thickened with multiple dark papules and one 3.5 X 7 cm nodule
that had recently arisen. Histopathologic findings included a melanocytic nevus with a
focal melanoma, which metastasized. This case was likened to congenital giant melanocytic
nevus in humans, wherein 12% of the lesions develop melanoma. Early surgical excision is
recommended
Keratoses
Keratoses are firm, elevated, circumscribed areas of reactive keratinocyte proliferation and
 excessive keratin production.2. $ Keratoses are uncommonly reported in dogs and cats.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · J391
FIGURE 20- I86. Comedo nevus in a dog
ACTINIC KERATOSIS
exposure to ultraviolet light and occur more commonly in sunny areas of the world.
FIGURE 20-I87. Melanocytic
nevus, present since birth, on the
rump of a hypothyroid dog.
I392 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-I88. Melanocytic
nevus in a dog. A, Focal junctional
and dermal proliferation of melano-
cytes (compound melanocytic ne-
vus). B, Close-up of A.
skin, and vary in appearance from ill-defined areas of erythema, hyperkeratosis, and
crusting to indurated, crusted, hyperkeratotic plaques varying from 0.3 to 5 cm in diame.
ter (Fig. 20-189A). Dalmatians, American Staffordshire terriers, beagles, Basset hounds,
and bull terriers have an increased incidence of actinic keratoses. Histopathologically, they
are characterized by atypia and dysplasia of the epidermis and superficial hair follicle
epithelium, hyperkeratosis (especially parakeratotic), and occasionally solar elastosis of the
underlying dermis (Fig. 20-190). Actinic keratoses are_ premalignant lesions that are
capable of becoming invasive squamous cell carcinomas. Early lesions regress with avoid-
ance of sunlight and photoprotection. If pruritus or pain is prominent, topical or oral
noin, etretinate, acitretin), cryosurgery, or surgical excision (see Solar Dermatitis, Squa-
mous Cell Careinoma),85 89. 4553
LICHENOID KERATOSIS
 rn s siop  po   d   ao  s a s
circumscribed, erythematous, and scaly to markedly hyperkeratotic plaques or papillomas
Neoplastic and Non-Ncoplastic Tumors · I393
FIGURE 20-I89. A, Felinc actinic keratosis. Two crusted plaques on a background of solar dermatitis. B,
Multiple melanotic lichenoid keratoses on the pinna of a miniature Schnauzer. C, Multiple brownish, greasy
seborrheic keratoses over the back of a dog. D, Cutaneous hom cranial to the vulvt. E, Two cutaneous hornis
on the pinna of a cat. F, Multiplc cutancous horns on the footpads of an FeLV-infected cat. G, Calcinosis
circumscripta on the elbow of a dog. Il, Calcinosis circumseripta on the tongue of a dog.
1 394 * Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-I90. Feline actinic keratosis. Epidermal dysplasia (carcinoma in situ) and
parakeratotic hyperkeratosis.
varying from 0.5 to 2 cm in diameter. Occasionally, multiple lesions are present on the
epidermal hyperplasia with overlying hyperkeratosis and an underlying subepidermal lich-
enoid band of infammation are seen (Fig. 20-19lA and B). Therapeutic options include
 surgical excision or observation without treatment.
SEBORRHEIC KERATOSIS
Seborrheic keratoses are rarely recognized in dogs.3, 4s37 The cause of seborrheic keratoses
u  a q   s  p  u   p  s
and have no apparent age, breed, sex, or site predilections. The lesions are elevated
hyperkeratosis, hyperplasia (basaloid and squamoid), and papillomatosis (Fig. 20-192).
Therapeutic options include surgical excision and observation without treatment.
PERIOCULAR KERATOSIS
The authors have occasionally consulted on older dogs with distinctly periocular keratoses.
The dogs were not disturbing the lesions, and usually had no other dermatologic disease.
The lesions were described as having developed gradually, more or less symmetrically.
Whitish to grayish, dry, keratinous fronds were presented on the periocular skin (Fig. 20--
193). No biopsies were permitted. No therapy was attempted.
CUTANEOUS HORN
 Cutaneous horns are uncommon in dogs and cats. The cause of cutaneous horns may be
unknown, or they may originate from papillomas, basal cell tumors, squamous cell carcino-
mas, keratinous cysts, keratoacanthomas, or actinic keratoses. Cutaneous horns may be
single or multiple and have no apparent age, sex, or site predilections. They are firm,
a a pe   as)     on d jo sd 
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors·I395
FIGURE 20-I9l. Canine idiopathic lichenoid keratosis. A, Papilated epidermal hyperplasia, hyperkeratosis, and a
lichenoid cellular infiltrate.B, Closc-up of A.
 cutaneous horms have been seen on the footpads of cats with FeLV infection.21. 38. 456
Generally, multiple horns are seen on multiple footpads, and the homs may arise from
anywhere on the pad (see Fig. 20-l89F). Occasionally, lesions are seen on the face.
Multiple cutaneous horns have also been described on the footpads of FeLV-negative
the claws (Fig. 20-194).
FIGURE 20- I92. Canine sebor-
rheic keratosis, Papillated epidermal
hyperplasia and orthokeratotic hy-
perkeratosis.
I396 * Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-I93. Perioculur ker-
atosis in a dog.
Histopathologically, cutaneous horns are characterized by extensive, compact, lami-
nated hyperkeratosis (Figs. 20-195 and 20-196). The base of a cutaneous horm must
 always be inspected for the possible underlying cause. FeLV-associated cutaneous horms in
cats are characterized by parakeratotic hyperkeratosis, apoptosis, and multinucleate kera-
tinocytic giant cells (Fig. 20-197),456 Multiple subungual cutaneous horns from FeLV-
negative cats did not have these histopathologic findings.s Therapeutic options includc
surgical excision and observation without treatiment.
FIGURE
20-194.
.Subungual
horns. Hormlike structures (arrow)
were present below numerous claws.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I397
FIGURE 20-I95. Felinc cutaneous horm. Hornlike projection of dense keratin arising
from hyperplastie. hypergranular, hyperkeratotie footpari epithelium.
FIGURE 20-I96. Feline cutaneous horn. Hornlike
projection from the footpad of an FeLV-infected cat.
I398 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-197. Close-up of
Figure 20-196. Mulimucleated
(syncytial) keratinoeytes (arrow).
Calcinosis Cutis
Calcinosis cutis is an uncommon disorder of the dog.2. 5 Calcification of the skin may
 occur in a wide variety of unrelated disorders (Table 20-8). The complex biological
process whereby inorganic ions are deposited as a solid phase in soft tissues is not
calcium phosphate nidus and progresses to hydroxyapatite crystal forrmation within a
collagen matrix.
Metastatic calcinosis cutis is rarely seen in dogs and cats, and all cases have occurred
in association with chronic renal disease.2. 5. 463. 469 474 Cutaneous lesions have been local-
 n 'd para ae spd pa us p e spon s on p
they are often ulcerated and discharge a chalky white, pasty to gritty material. Although
●Table 20-8
CaUSEs of CalcinoSIs CUtIs In DoGS
·................
Localizcd areas (calcinosis circumscripta)
Inflamrmatory lesions (tuberculosis, foreign body granuloma, demodicosis, staphylococcal pododermatitis)
Degenerative lesions (folicular cysts)
Neoplastie lesions (pilomatrixoma, others)
Widespread areas (calcinosis universalis)
Hyperglucocorticoidism (naturally occurring or iatrogenic)
Diabetes mellitus
Percutaneous penetration of calcium
Idiopathic calcification(deposition of catcium salts with ro appreciable tissue lamage or demonstrable metabolic
defect)
Localized areas (Idiopathic calcinosis circumscripta of large breed dogs)
Widespread areas (idiopathic calcinosis nniversalis of young dogs)
Metastatic calcification (deposition of calcium salts associated with abnormal metabolism of calcium and phospho
Tis with dernonstrabhle serum level changes)
 Chronic renal disease
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors * I399
most animals with renal failure are older, metastatic calcinosis of the footpads has been
reported in younger dogs with renal dysplasia.46s One should consider chronic renal failure
in a dog of any age with calcinosis in multiple footpads. Skin biopsy findings are identical
to those reported for calcinosis circumscripta (see later). Although therapy has usually
been unsuccessful, the lesions in one cat completely resolved after 3 months of dictary
 management (restricted protein and phosphorus).4s Although footpad lesions usually indi-
cate metastatic calcinosis and renal disease, calcinosis circumscripta has been reported to
affect one footpad of an otherwise healthy young Gerrman shepherd dog475 and a young
y jo spedo an pu eys uai u  jo sed de g oxra im
hind feet of a Dachshund.r6o Surgical excision was curative in all cases.
Widespread calcinosis cutis has frequently been reported in dogs in association with
naturally occurring or iatrogenic hyperglucocorticoidism (see Chap. 10). Cutaneous lesions
consist of papules., plaques, and nodules that are frm, often gritty, frequently ulcerated
and secondarily infected, and yellowish white to pinkish yellow. These lesions may occur
anywhere hut are especially common along the dorsum and in the axillae and groin.
Histologically, calcium salts are deposited along collagen and elastin fibers in the dermis
- aoq ug e aq prs anba ae pe saz au jsq pu
loma reaction. This form of caicinosis cutis in dogs is thought to be dystrophic in nature,
because blood calcium and phosphorus leveis are invariably nornal. Correcfing the hyper.
glucocorticoidism causes this type of calcinosis cutis to regress within 2 to 12 months. A
syndrome of idiopathic calcinosis cutis that is grossly and histologically identical to gluco-
corticoid-associated calcinosis cutis has rarely been seen in healthy dogs younger than 1
year old23 s The authors have recognized this syndrome in English buldogs, Doberman
pinschers, Dachshunds, Labrador retrievers, and Rottweilers (Fig. 20-198A and B). Le-
from percutaneous penetration of caicium (contact with commercial hygroscopic landscap-
 ing, products [see Chap. 16]). Spontaneous recovery followed avoidance of further contact
with' the suhstances.
FIGURE 20-I98. Idiopathic calcinosis cutis in a black Labrador retriever puppy. A, Multiple hard, white papules
with surrounding erythema in groin and medial thighs. Lesions spontaneously resolved. B, Massive dystrophic
mineralization of derrmal collagen.
I400 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
CALCINOSIS CIRCUMSCRIPTA
● Cause and Pathogenesis. Calcinosis circumscripta (kalkgicht, calcium gout, apo-
crine cystic calcinosis, or multiloculated subcutaneous granuloma) is uncommon in dogs
and rare in cats.2. 5. 461. 474 In most cases, the cause is unknown. Because lesions most
frequcntly occur over pressure points or sites of previous trauma, such as that incurred
during ear cropping, the calcium deposition may be dystrophic.2 The tendency for dys-
trophic mineralization may be enhanced by the active calciurn metabolism of large, rapidly
growing dogs.2 Rarely, calcinosis circunscripta is reported to occur at the site of previous
subcutaneous injections,462. 46. 467 from degeneration of pre-existing epitrichial sweat gland
cysts, at the sites of previous bite wounds,2 on the neck in association with choke
seussdjoseogs
otherwise healthy, symmetric calcinosis circumscripta has been reported in dogs in associ-
ation with hypertrophic osteodlystrophy and idiopathic polyarthritis.474
dogs (younger than 2 years of age) of either sex.474 About 90% of all reported cases have
been in large breeds of dogs, and more than 50% of cases have been in German shepherd
dogs. Lesions are usually dome shaped, fuctuant or firm, and 0.5 to 7 cm in diameter.
Initially, the overlying skin may be freely inovable and covered with hair. As the lesions
progress, however, ulceration frequently occurs, as does the discharge of a chalky white,
pasty to gritty material. Lesions are usually single but occasionally multiple or bilaterally
nences, especially the lateral metatarsal and phalangeal areas of the pelvic limb and the
elbow (see Fig. 20-189G）47They may also occur over the dorsal aspects of the fourth to
sixth cervical vertebrae472 or in the tongue (see Fig. 20-189H).474 Boxers and Boston
terricrs appcar to be predisposed to lesions at the basc of the pinna and on the cheek,
respectively461, 462, 474 Postinjectional (especially medroxyprogesterone acetate) calcinosis
circumscripta is seen at injection sites, usually within 5 months of injection, and most
commonly in Poodles.466. 467 Choke chain-associated lesions occur on the neck.465 Poly-
dioxanone suture-associated lesions occur at surgical incision sites, and all reported cases
have occurred in German shepherds.464. 471 Calcinosis circumscripta is cxtremely rare in
cats.429,430
FIGURE 20-I99. Canine calci-
nosis circumseripta. Nodular accu-
mulations of  mineral below  the
level of epitrichial sweat glands.
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · |401
FIGURE 20-200. Canine calci-
nosis _  circumscripta.
Palisading
granuloma surrounding a mineral
leposit.
● Diagnosis. Histologically, caleinosis circumscripta is characterized by multifocal ar-
eas of granular amorphous material in the deep dermis and subcutis surrounded by a zone
of granulomatous infammation and separated by fbrous trabeculae (Figs. 20-199 and
 20-200)2, 474 Cartilaginous and osseous metaplasia, as well as transepidermal elimination
of minerals, may be seen in some lesions. The amorphous masses are usuaily strongly
 periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) positive and Alcian blue positive. Radiographic examination
reveals mineralized soft tissues.
● Clinical Management. The treatment of choice is surgical excision. Recurrences
 pathic polyarthritis had spontaneous
Sremission of their calcinosis circumscripta as the
associated disease became inactive.474
FIGURE 20-201. Focal cutane-
ous mucinosis in a Shar pei. Alope-
cic, pin-feathered nodule near vulva.
I402 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
FIGURE 20-202. Canine focal cutaneous mucinosis. Diffuse dernal mucinosis
Cutaneous Mucinosis
Cutaneous mucinoses are a heterogeneous group of skin disorders characterized by the
excessive accumulation or deposition of mucin (acid mucopolysaccharide) in the dermis or
epithelial structures,2 4 450 The mucinosis may be primary or secondary, or focal to diffuse.
 In dogs, cutaneous mucinosis may be seen with hypothyroidism, acromegaly, lupus erythe-
matosus, dermatomyositis, alopecia mucinosa, and mycosis fungoides and as a normal
finding in the Shar pei. In cats, cutaneous mucinosis may be seen with alopecia mucinosa 
 and mycosis fungoides.
Focal cutaneous mucinosis has rarely been reported in dogs.439 Three dogs (two
g ns eos pu ( s g o g s aarn te ssd uoa
and rubbery to soft nodules (1 to 3 cm in diameter) on the head or the leg (Fig. 20-201).
The primary histopathologic finding was an accumulation of excessive mucin (Alcian blue
positive or colloidal iron positive) within the dermis or subcutis, which disrupted and
o d    n   - ) s  s
● References
General Textbook Sources
Dermatology, 5th ed. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadel-
1. Goldschmidt MI, Shofer F: Skin Tumors of the Dog
phia, 1995.
and Cat. Pergamon Press, New York, 1992.
6. Theilen CH, Madewell, BR: Veterinary Cancer Medi.
2. Gross TL, et al: Veterinary Dermatopathology. A
cine I1. Lea & Fehiger, Philadelphia, 1987.
Macroscopic and Microscopic Evaluation of Canine
7. Withrow SJ, MacEwen EG: Clinical Veterinary On-
and Feline Ski Disease. Mosby-Year Book.
St.
cology, 2nd ed. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia,
Louis, 1992.
1996.
 2a. Guaguere E, Prelaud P: A Practical Guide to Feline
Survey Articles and Chapters
 Dermatology. Merial, Paris, 2000.
 3. Moulton JE: Tumors in Domestic Animals II. Uni-
 8. Bastianello SS: A survey of neoplasia in dlomestic spe-
versity of California Press, Berkeley, 1990.
cics over a 40-year period from 1935 to 1974 in the
4. Ogilvie GK, Moorc AS: Managing the Veterinary
Republic of South Africa. V. Tumours occurring in
Cancer Patient: A Practice Manual. Veterinary Learn-
the cat. Onderstepoort J Vet Res 50:105, 1983.
ing Systems, Trenton, New Jersey, 1995.
9. Bastianello SS: A survey of neoplasia in domcstie: spe-
5. Scott' DW, et al: Muller and ‘Kirk's Small Animal
cies over a 40-year period from 1935-1974 in the
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I403
Republic of South Africa. VI. Tumours occurring in
 33. Pulley LT, Staimard, AA: Tumors of the skin and soft
dogs. Onderstepoort J Vet Res 50:199, 1983.
tissues. In: Moulton JE (cd): Tumors in Domestie
10. Berrocal A,et al: Canine perneal humours. J Vet
Anirmals IHl. University of California Press, Berkeley.
Med A 36:739, 1989.
1990, p 23.
11.Bostock DE: Ncoplasms of the skin and subcutancous
 34. Hothwell TLW, et al: Skin neoplasms of dogs in Syd-
tissues in dogs and cats. Br Vet J 142:1, 1986.
ney. Aust Vet J 64:161, 1987.
12. Brodey Rs; Caninc and felinc ncoplasia. Adv Vct Sci
35. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1900-1978: A mono-
14:309, 1970.
graph. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:331, 1980.
13. Burrows AK, et al: Skin ncoplasms of cats in Perth.
36. Scott Dw: Feline dermatology 1979- 1982: Introspec-
Aust Vet Pract 24:11, 1994.
tive rctrospcctions. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:537,
14. Carpenter JL, et al: Tumors and tumor-like lesions.
1984.
In: llolzworth J (ed): Diseases of the Cat: Medicine
 37. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1983-1985: “The se-
and Surgery, Vol. 1. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia,
cret sits." J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 23:255, 1987.
1987, p 413.
38. Scott DW: Fcline dermatology 1986-1988: Looking
15. Cotchin E: Skin tumours of cats. Res Vet Sci 2:353,
to the 1990s through the eyes of many counsellors. J
1961.
Am Anin Hosp Assoc 26:517, 1990.
16. Degorce F, Parodi AL:
: Tumeurs conjunctives des
39.Susaneck Sj: Feline skin tumors. Comp Cont Edue 5:
carnivores dornestiques. Rcc Med Vet 166:1043.
251,1983.
1990.
40. Thrall DE, Cillette EL: Soft tissue sarcomas. Semin
l6a. De Las Mulas JM, et al Apoptosis and imitosis in
Vet Med Surg. 10:173, 1995.
tumours of the skin and subcutancous tissues of the
41. Van Den Ingh TSGAM: Huidtumoren bij de IIond.
dog. Res Vet Sci 66:139, 1999.
Tijschr Diergeneeskd 98:538, 1973.
17. Er JC, Sutton RH: A survey of skin neoplasms in
41a.VanKarnpen KR:Immunotherapy
and cytokines.
dogs from the Brisbane region. Aust Vet J 66:225.
Semin Vet Med Surg 12:186, 1997.
1989.
42. Yager JA. Sott DW: The skin and appendages. In:
18. Finmie JW, Bostock DE: Skin neoplasia in dlogs. Aust
Jubb KvF, ct al (eds): Pathology of Domestic Ani-
Vet J 55:602, 1979.
mals IV, Vol. 1. Academie Press, New York, 1993, P
19. Craham JC, O'Keefe DA: Diagnosis and treatment
531.
of soft tissue sarcomas. Comp Cont Educe 15:1627,
Cytology
1993.
20. Gross TL, Affolter VK: Advances in skin oncology. In:
42a. Alleman AR, Bain PJ: Diagnosing neoplasia: The cy-
Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary
tologic criteria for malignancy. Vet Med 95:204, 2000.
Dermatology
 I1l. Bntterworth-Heinemann, Boston,
43. Barton CL: Cytologic analysis of cutaneous neoplasia:
An algorithmic approach. Comp Cont Educ 9:20,
1998, p 382.
 21. Head KW: Somc data concerning the distribution of
1987.
skin tumors in domestic animals. In: Rook A, Walton
44. Carter RF, Valli VEO: Advanccs in the cytologic diag-
GS (eds): Comparative Physiology and Pathology of
nosis of canine lymphorma. Semin Vet Med Surg
the Skn. F.A. Davis Co, Philadelphia, 1965, p 613.
(Small Anim) 3:167, 1988.
22. Keller ET, Madewell BR: Locations and types of neo-
45. Hall RL, MacWilliams PS: The cytologic examination
plasms in immature dogs: 69 cases (1964-1989). J
of cutaneous and subcutancous masses. Semin Vet
Am Vet Med Assxe 200:1530, 1992.
Med Surg (Small Anim) 3:94, 1988.
23. Kuntz CA, et al: Prognostic factors for surgical treat-
46. Stirtzinger T: The cytologic diagnosis of mcscnchymal
ment of soft tissue sarcomas in dogs: 75 cases (1986-
tuors. Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 3:157,
1996). J Am Vet Med Assoc 21l:1147, 1997.
1988.
24.Ladds P, et al: Nooplasrms of the skin of dogs in
46a. Thrall MA: Cytologic examination of cutaneous and
tropical Queensland. Aust Vet J 60:87, 1983.
subcutaneous lumps and lesious. Vet Med 95:224.
25. MacEwen EC, Ielfand SC: Recent advances in the
2000.
biologic therapy of cancer. Comp Cont Educ 15:909,
Immunohistochemistry
1993.
47, Andreasen CB, et al: Internediate flamcnt staining in
26. Macy DW, Reyoolds HA: The incidence, characteris-
the cytologic and histologic diagnosis of canine skin
tics, and clinical management of skin tumors of cats. J
and soft tissue tumors. Vet Pathol 25:343, 1988.
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 17:1026, 1981.
  n  n  
27. Magnol JP: Tumeurs cutanees dhi chien et du chat.
globin in couneetive tissue: in tumors in dogs. Vet
Rec Méd Vet 166:106l, 1990.
Pathol 24:573, 1987.
28. Marino DJ, et al: Evaluation of dogs with digit
49. de las Mulas JM, et al: Immunohistochemical distri-
masses: 117 cases (1981-1991). J Am Vet Med Assoc
 og ur suaoid yuaey arpaau jo waned cogng
207:726,1995.
feline neoplasms. Vet Pathol 32:692, 1993.
 29. Mialot M, Lagadic M; Epidemiologie descriptive des
50. Desnoyers MM, et al: Inrnunohistochemical detec-
tumeurs du chien et du chat. Rec Med Vet 166;937,
tion of intermediate flamcnt proteins in formalin
1990.
fixed norrmal and neoplastie tissues. Can J Vet Res 54:
30. Miller MA, et al: Cutaneous neoplasia in 340 cats.
360, 1990.
Vet Pathol 28:389, 1991.
51. Elas JW: Irumunohistopatlhology: A Practical Ap-
31. Nielsen SW. Colc CR: Cutaneous epithelial neo-
proach to Diagnosis. American Society of Clinical
plasms of the dog-a report of 153 cases. Am J Vet
Pathologists, Chicago, 1990.
Res 21:931, 1960.
52. Ferrer L, et al: Iminunocytochemical denonstration
32. Priester WA: Skin tumors in doumestie animals. Data
of intermedliate flarment proteins, S-100 protein and
from twelve United States and Canadlian colleges of
CFA in apocrine sweat glands and apocrine gland-
veterinary medicine. J Natl Caucer Inst 50:457, 1973.
derived lesions of the dog. J Vet Med A 37:569, 1990.
1404 · Neoplastic and Non-Ncoplastic Tumors
 53. Fondevila D, ct al: Immunohistochemical localization
75. Nagata M, et al: Pigrnented plaques associated with
papillomavirus infection in dogs: Is this epiderinodys-
and lymphomas. J Vet Med A 36:71, 1989.
plasia verruciformis? Vet Dermatol 6:179, 1995.
 54. Fondevila D, et al: Immunoreactivity of canine and
76. Narama I, et al: Cutaneous papilloma with viral repli-
feline mast cell tumours. Schweiz. Arch Tierheilkd
cation in an old dog. J Vet Med Sci 54:387, 1992.
132:426, 1990.
77. Nicholls PK, Stanley MA: Canine papillomatosis-
—α
55. Magnol JP, et al: Une nouvelle approche, diagnos-
centenary review. J Comp Pathol 120:219, 1999.
np snou snssn sap sinaun sap anbpsouud ia aubn
78. Schwcgler K, ct al: Epithelial ncoplasms of the skin,
chien et du chat. Point Vet 22:831, 1991.
the cutaneous mucosa and the transitional epithelium
 56. Mwore AS, et al: Inmunohistochemical evaluation of
in dogs: An immunolocalization stuly for papllormavi-
 intermediate filainent expression in canine and feline
rus antigen. J Vet Med A 44:115, 1997.
ncoplasus. Aim J Vet Res 50:88, 1989.
79. Shimada A, et al: Cutaneous papillomatosis associated
57. Moore PF, et al: The use of inmmunological reagents
with papillomavirus infection in a dog. J Comp Pathol
in deining the pathogenesis of canine skin diseases
108:103, 1993.
involving proliferation of leukocytes. In: Kwoclka
80. Sironi G, et al: Immunohistochemical detection of
 s
papillomavirus structural antigens in animal hyper-
III., Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p 77.
plastic and neoplastic epitheliad lesions. J Vet Med A
 58. Rabanal RH, et al: Immunocytochemical diagnosis of
37:760, 1990.
skin tumours of the dog with special reference to
81. Sundberg JP, et al: Immunoperoxidase localization of
undifferentiated types. Res Vet Sc 47:129, 1989.
papillomaviruses in hyperplastic and neoplastic epi-
59. Sandusky GE, et al: Diagnostic immunohistochernistry
thelial lesions of animals. Am J Vet Res 45:1441.
 of canine round cell tumors. Vet Pathol 24:495, 1987.
1984.
60. Sandusky CE, et al: Irnmunocytochermical study of
 82. Sundberg JP, et al: Involvement of canine oral papil-
tissues fron clinically normal dogs and of neoplasms
lonavirus in generalized oral and cutaneous verru-
using keratin monoclonal antibodies. Am J Vet Res
cosis in a Chinesc Shar Pei dog. Vet Pathol 31:183,
52:613, 1991.
1994.
61. Thoonen H, et al: Expression of cytokeratins in cpi-
83. Sundberg JP, et al Feline papilormaviruses: host
thelial tumours of the dog investigated with monoclo-
range, molecular diversity and epitope conservation.
nal antibodies. SchweizArch Tierheilkd 132:409,
Vet Pathol 31:616, 1994.
1990.
 83a. Sundberg JP, et al: Feline papillomas and papilloma-
62. Von Bcust BR, ct al: Factor VIll-related antigen in
viruses, Vet Pathol 37:1, 2000.
canine endothelial neoplasms: An immunohistochemi-
84. Sundberg JP: Canine papillomaviruses. In: Castro AE.
cal study. Vet Pathol 25:251, 1988.
Heuschele WP (eds): Veteriary Diagnostic Virology:
63. Wallace: ML, Suoller BR: Immunohistochemistry in
A Practitioner's Cuide. Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis,
diagnostic dermmatopathology. J Am Acad Dermatol
1992, p 148.
34:163, 1996.
85. Sundberg JP, et al: Mucosotropic papillomavirus in-
64. Williamson MM, Middleton DJ: Cutaneous soft tissue
fections. Lab Anim Sci 48:240, I998.
tumours in dogs: classifieation, clifferentiation, and
 86. Teifke JP, et al: Detection of canine oral papillormavi
histogenesis. Vet Dermatol 9:43, 1998.
rus-DNA in canine oral squamous cell carcinomas
Papilloma
and p53 overexpressing skn papillomas of the dog
65. Bregman CL, et al; Cutaneous neoplasms in dogs
using the polymerase chain reaction and nonradioac-
associated with canine oral papilomavirus vaccinc.
tive in situ hybridization. Vet Microbiol 60:119, 1998.
87. Walder EJ: Malignant transformation of a pigmented
Vet Pathol 24:477, 1987.
66. Campbell KL, et al: Cutaneous inverted papillomas in
epidermal nevus in a dog. Vet Pathol 34:505, 1997.
88. White SD: Newly introduced drugs in veterinary der-
dogs. Vet Pathol 25:67, 1988.
67. Camey HC, et al: Papillomavirus infection of aged
matology. Proc World Cong Vet Dermatol 3:84, 1996.
Persian cuts. J Vet Diagn Invest 2:294, 1990.
68. Carpenter JL, et al: Cutaneous xanthogranuloma and
Keratoacanthoma
viral papilma on the eyelid of a cat. Vet Dermatol
89. Kwochka KW: Retinoids in dermatology. In: Kirk RW
3:187, 1992.
(ed): Current Veterinary Therapy X. W.B. Saunders
69.Egberink HF, et al: Papillormavirus associated skin
Co, Philadelphia, 1989, p 553.
lesions in a cat seropositivc for felinc immunodefi-
90. Power HT, Iurke PJ: Synthetic retinoids in veterinary
ciency vinus. Vet Microbiol 31:117, 1992.
dermatology. Vet Clin'North Am Small Anim Pract
70. Le Nct JL, ct al: Multiple pigmented cutaneous pap-
20:1525, 1990.
ules associated with a novel canine papillomavirus in
 91, Smith DA, Knottenhett MK: Spontaneous regression
an immunosuppressed dog. Vet Pathol 34:8, 1997.
of intracutaneous cornifying epitheliomata in a dog. J
71. Lozano-Alarcon F, et al: Persistent papillomavirus in-
Small Anim Pract 29:20i, 1988.
fection in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32:392. 1996.
92. Stannard AA, Pulley LT: Intracutancous cornifying
72. Lucroy MD, et al: Cutaneous papillomatosis in a dog
epithelioma (keratoacanthoua) in the dog: A retro-
with malignant lynphoma following long-term chemo-
spective study of 25 cases. J Am Vct Med Assoc 167:
therapy. J Vet Diagn Invest 10:369, 1998.
385, 1975.
73. Majewski S, Jablonska S: Hunan papillmavirus-as-
sociated tumors of the skin and mucosa. J Arn Acad
Basal Cell Tumor
Dermatol 36:659, 1997.
93. Anderson WI, Scott DW; Cartilaginous mctaplasia as-
 74. Mill AB, et al: Concurrent hypothyroidism, IgM defi-
sociated with a basal cell tumor in a dog. J Comp
ciency, impaired T-cell mitogen response, and multi-
Pathol 100:107, 1989.
94. Day DG, ct al; Basal ccll carcinoima in two cats. j
nine Pract 17:15, 1992.
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 30:265, 1994.
Neoplastic and Yon-Neoplastic Tumors · I405
95. Diters RW. Walsh KM: Feline basal cell tunors: A
immunodeficieney virus infeclion in cats in Southerm
review of 124 cascs. Vet Pathol 21:51, 1984.
California. J Am Vet Med Assoc 199:1357, 1991.
96. Fehrer SL, Lin SH: Multicentric basal cell tumors in
117. Kitchell Bic. et al: Intralesional sustained release
a cat. J A11 Vet Med Assoc 189:1469, 1986.
chemotherapy with cisplatin and 5-luorouracil thera-
97. Maiolino P, et al: Mitotic phasc distribution, mitotic
oss  o sdg
activity, and apoptosis in basal cell tumours of canine
carcinoma. Proc Annu Mcet Vet Cancer Soc 12:55,
skin. J Vet Med A 43:619, 1996.
1992.
98. Seiler RJ: Grannlar basal cell tumors in the skin of
118. Knowles DP, Ilargis AM: Solar elastosis associated
three dogs: A distinct histopathologie entity. Vet
with ncoplasia in two Dalmatians. Vet Pathol 23:512,
Pathol 18:23, 1981.
1986.
99. Strafuss AC: Basal cell turmors in dogs. J Am Vet
119. Lana SE. ct al: Feline cutaneous squamous cll carei-
Med Assoc 169:322, 1976.
noma of the nasal plaum and the pinnae: 6l cases. ]
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 33:329, 1997.
Squamous Ceif Carcinoma
120. Levine N, et al: Controlled localized heating and iso-
100. Baer KE, Helton K: Multiccntric squamous cell carci-
tretinoin effects in canine squamous cell carcinoma. J
norna in siltu resemhling Bowen's dlisease in cats. Vet
Am Acad Derrmatol 23:68, 1990.
121. Marks SL, et al: Clinical cvaluation of etretinate for
Pathol 30:535. 1993.
thc: treatment of canine solar-incdnced squamous cell
101. Bito T, ct al: Iess expression of cyclin E in cutaneous
carcinoma and prencoplastie lesions. J Arn Acad Der-
lignant keratinocyte lesions J Cutan Pathiol 24:305,
matol 27:11, 1992.
|2la. Mayr B, el al: Novcl caninc tumor suppressor gene
1997.
102. Bostock DE: Prognosis in cats bearing squamous cell
p53, mutations in cases of skin and mammary neo-
plasms. Vet Res Comin 23:285, 1999.
carcinoma. J Smafl Anim Pract 13:119, 1972.
122.
snbs pd pai y rs sf M 
J03. Clarke RE: Cryosurgical treatnent of feline cutane-
cell carcinoma in a dog with chronic otitis externa.
ous squamous cell carcinoma. Aust Vet Pract 2l:148,
Vet Dermatol 237, 1991.
1991.
104. Cox NR, et al: Tumors of the nose and paranasal
123. Miller WH Jr, et al: Multicentric squarmous cell carci-
noma in situ resembling Bowen's disease in five cats.
sinuses in cats: 32 cases with comparison to a national
Vet Derrmatol 3:177, 1992.
database (1977 through 1987). J Ain Ainn Hosp As-
124. O'Bnicr MG, ct al: Treatmeat by digital amputation
soc 27:339, 1991
of snhungual squainous cell carcinoma in clogs: 21
105. Dipold TF, Roberts L: Squamous ccll carcinoma in a
white bull tericr.Lniversity of Sydney Postgraduate
cases (1987-1988). J Ann Vet Med Assoc 201:759,
Committee in Veterinary Science Control and Ther-
1992.
125. Paradis M, cot al: Squamous cell carcinoma of the nail
apy Series #3837, 1997, p 909.
bed in three related giant schnauzers. Vet Ree 125:
106. Evans AG, et al: A trial of 13-cis-retinoic acid far
trcatment of squamous cell carcinoina and preneo-
322.1989.
126. Peaston AE, et al: Photodynamic therapy for nasal
plastic lesions of the head in cats. Am J Vet Res 46:
and aural squanous cell carcinoma in cats. J Am Vet
2553, 1983.
107. Garblin RM, ct al: Overexpression of p53 tumor
Med Assoc 202: 1261, 1993.
126a. Perez J、 et al: Imrnunohistochemical study of the
Spressor protein in spontaneously arising neoplasms
infanmatory infiltrate associated with feline cutane-
of dogs. An J Vet Res 58:85, 1997.
108.Garma-Avina A: The cytology of smamous cell carci
ols squamous cell carcinoma and precancerous le-
nomas in domestic anirnals. J Vet Diagn Invest 6:238,
sions (actinic keratosis). Vet Immunol lnmunopathol
69:33, 1999.
1994.
108a. Gomes LAM, et al: Squamous cell carcinoma associ-
127. Rccs CA, Goldschmidt MH: Chutaneous horn and
ated with actinic derunatitis in seven white cats. Fe-
squarrous cell carcinoma in situ (Bowen's disease) in
line Pract 28:14, 2000.
a cat. J Am Anim Ifosp Assoc 34:485, 1998.
128. Rogers KW: Feline cutaneous squamous cell carti-
109. Gourlcy IM, et al: Bum scar malignancy in a dog. J
Am Vet Med Assoc 180:1095, 1982.
noa. Feline Pract 22:7, 1994.
129. Rogers KS, et al: Squarnous cell carcinoma of the
J10. Gross TL, Brimacomb Bl: Multifocal intraepiderimal
carcinoma in a dog histologically resenbling Bowen's
canine nasal planum: eight cases (1988-1994). J Am
dliscasc. An J Dermatopathol 8:509, 1986.
Anim Hosp Assoc 31:373, 1995.
I11. Guaguere E, et al: Democlex cati infestation in associ-
130. Ruslander D, et al: Cutaneous squanous cell carci-
ation with feline sqtamous cell carcinoma in situ: a
nonra in cats. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 19:1119,
report of five cases. Vet Dermatol 10:61, 1999.
1997.
112. Hahm KA, ct al: Photodyuamic therapy response inl
131. Scott DW, Miller WII Jr: Disorders of thc claw and
cats with cutancous squainous cell carcinoina as a
clawbed in cats. Comp Cont Educ 14:449, 1992.
function of Huence. Vet Dermatol 9:3, 1998.
132. Scott Dw, Miller WH Jr: Iisorders of the claw and
clawhed in dogs. Comp Cont Educ 14:1448, 1992.
dcrmatosis, senile koratosis)
and solar
keratosis
133. Scott DW, Teixeira EAC: Multiple squainous cell car-
with squamous cell carcinoma. Am J Pathol 94:193.
cinomas arising from multiple cutaneous follicular
1979.
cysts in a dog. Vet 1Dermatol 6:27, 1995.
114. Harmis CC: p53: at the crossroads of inolecular carci-
134. Scott DW, Miller WII Jr: Squanous cell carcinona
nogenesis and 1molecular epidemiology. J Invest Der-
arising in chronic discoid lupus crythematosus nasal
matol Symp Proc 1:115. 1996.
lesions in two Germnan shepherd dogs. Vet Dermatol
115.HazirogluM,SaylamM:Squamous cellcarrinoma in
6:99, 1995.
a puppy. J Comp Pathol 101:221. 1989.
135. Shelley BA, et al: Usc of the neodyunium:yttirium-
116. Hntsom CA, et al: Ncoplasia associated with feline
aluminun-gamet laser for treatment of squamous cell
|406 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
carcinoma of the nasal planum in a cat. J Am Vet
denocarcinomas in the dog. J Coinp Pathol 88:525,
Med Assoc 201:756, 1992.
1978.
136. Strafuss AC, ct al: Squamous cell carcinouna in dogs.
158. Kalahcr KM, et al: Ncoplasmns of the apoerine swcat
J Am Vet Med Assoc 168:425, 1976.
glands in 44 dogs and 10 cats. Vet Ree 127:400, 1990.
I37. Tateyama S, et al: In vitro growth inhibition activities
159. Kusters AHl, et al: Atrichial sweat gland adeuocarci-
of recombinant feline interferon om cell lines derived
noma in the dog. Vet Dermatol 10:si, 1999.
from caniuc tumors. Res Vet Sei 59:275, 1995.
160. Mayr B, et al: Autosomale Monosomie (B2/E3) und
138. Teifke JP, Kohr CV: Imrmuncshistochenical detrction
Deletion (B2/E3) in Schweissdrisentuinorgewebe bei
-enbs pappaqu-xmm ered un uossaudxaraao ggd jo
Katzen (2 Fallberichte). Wien Tierirztl Mschr 83:141,
Inous cell carcinomas of cattle, horscs, cats, and dogs.
1996.
JComp Pathol 114:205, 1996.
16l. Meschter CL: Disscminated sweat gland adenocarci.
139. Theon AP, et al: Prognostic factors associated with
noma with aeronecrosis in a cat. Cormell Vet 8l:195,
radiotherapy of squamous cell carcinona of the nasal
1991.
plane in cats. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 206:991, 1995.
162. Soga R, ct al: A case of canine apocrine gland carci-
140.
Theon AP, et al: Intraturmoral administration of car-
noma inetastasized to bones. J JIpn Vet Med Assoc 49:
boplatin for treatment of squamous cell carcinomas of
110, 1996.
the nasal plane in cats. Am J Vet Res 57:205, 1996.
 Perional Gland Tumors
14l. van Vechtem MK, Theon AP: Strontium-90 plesio-
therapy for trcatment of carly squamous cell carci-
163. Ross JT, ct al: Adenoearcinoma of the apoerinc 
noa of the nasal planum in 30 cats. Proc Annn
glands' of the anal sac in dogs: A review of 32 cases. J
Meet Vet Cancer Sox 13:107, 1993.
Am Anin Hosp Assoc 27:349, 1991.
164. Vail DM, ct. al: Perianal adenocarcinoina in the ca-
142. Withrow SJ. Straw RC: Resection of the nasal planum
in nine cats and five dogs. J Ain Anin llosp Assoc
nine male: A retrospective study of 4l cases. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 26:329, 1990.
26:219, 1990.
165. Vercelli A: Immunehistochemical identification of es-
Hair Folide Tumors
trogen and androgen receptors in canine perianal adl
|42a. Abraino F, et al: Survey of canine and feline follicn-
cnoma. Proc Annu Cong Eur Soc Vet Derinatol Fur
lar tumours and tumour-like lesions in central Italy. J
Coll Vet Dermatol 14:204, 1997.
 Small Anim Pract 40:479, 1999.
166. Vos JH. ct al: The expression of keratirus, virmcntin,
143. Diters RW, Goldschinidt MIl: Hair follicle tumors
neurofilament protcins. smooth mnscle actin, neuron-
resembling ticholemmomas in six dogs. Vet Pathl
 specific enolase, and synaptophysin in tumors ol the
20:123,1983.
specific glands in the canine anal region. Vet Pathol
144. Fukui K, et al: [Two cases of canine malignant basal
30:352,1993.
lumor]. J Jpn Vet Med Assoc 45:856, 1992.
Salivary Gland Tumors
145. Hill JR: Warty dyskeratoma in tvo dogs. Proc Annu
167. Carberry CA, et al: Salivary glarnd tumors in dogs and
cats: A literature and case rcvicw. J Am Anim Hosp
Dermatol 3:40, 1987.
146.Lather PB,et al: The dlated pore of Winer——An
Assoc 24:561, 1988.
overlooked cutancous lesion of cats. J Comp Pathol
Feline Sorcoid
101:375, 1989.
168. Cumbrell RC, et al: Dermal Gibropapilloimas in cats.
147. Rodriguez F, et al: Metastatic pilomatrixoma associ-
Vet Rec 142:370, 1998.
ated with neurological signs in a dog. Vet Rec 137:
Fibrosarcoma
247, 1995.
148. Seott Dw, rlanders JF: Dilated por: of Winer in a
169. Bostock I)E, Dye MT: Prognosis after surgical exci-
cat. Feline Pract 14:33, 1984.
sion of fibrosarcomas in cals. J Am Vet Med Assoc
149. Sott DW, Anderson Wl: Canine hair follicle neo-
175:727, 1979.
170. Bostock DE, Dye MT: Prognosis after surgical exci-
plasms: A retrospective amalysis of 80 cases (1986-
1987). Vet Dermatol 2; 143, 1991.
sion of canine fibrous connective tissuc sarcomas. Vet
150. Scott DW, Anderson WI: Hair follicle neoplasms in
Pathol 17:581, 1980.
three cats. Feline Pract 19:14, 1991.
171. Doliger S, Dcvauchelle P: Donnees actuelles sur les
tumeurs du “complcxe fibrosarcome felin." Point Vet
Sebaceous Gland Tumors
29:405、 1998.
151. Finazzi M, et al: Reperti istologici su tumori delle
172. Harasen GLG: Multicentric ibrosarcoma in a cat and
ghiandole sebacee del cane. Clin Vet 110:123, 1987.
a review of the literature.Can Vet J24207,1984.
l52. Scott DW, Andcrson Wl: Canine sebaceous gland tu-
173. Hilmas D, Gillete E: Radiotherapy of spontaneous
mors: A retrospective analysis of 172 cases. Canine
connective tissue sarcoinas in animals. Cancer les 56:
Pract 15:19, 1990.
365, 1976.
153. Scott DW, Anderson WI: Fcline sebaceous gland tu-
174. Karadlemir N, et al: Comparison of argyrophil nucleo-
mors: A retrospective analysis of nine cascs. Feline
lur organizer region counts, proliferating cell nuclcar
Pract 19:16, 1991.
antigen (PCNA) indices and uitotie indices in fibro-
154. Strafiuss AC: Sebaceous carcinoma in dogs. J Am Vet
mas and fibrosarcomas. Folia Vet 42:67, 1998.
Med Assoc 169:325, 1976.
175. Kent EM: Use of an immunostimulant as an ait in
155. Strafuss AC: Sebaceous gland adenormas in dogs. J
trcatment antl managemcnt of fibrosarcoma in three:
Amt Vet Med Assoc 169:640, 1976.
cats. Feline Pract 2l:13. 1993.
176. King GK, et al: The effet of accmamman immuno-
Sweat Gland Tumors
stimulaut in combination with surgory and radiation
156. Christie GS, Jabara AC: Canine sweat gland growths.
therapy on spentaneous canine and feline fibrosareo-
Res Vet Sci 5:237, 1964.
mas. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31:439, 1995.
157. Jabara AG, Finnie [W: Four cascs of clear-cell hidra-
177. Mayr B. et al: Trisormy D1, marker Fl: new cytoge-
Ncoplastic and Non-Neoplastie Tumors · I407
netic findings in two cases of feline fibrosarcoma. ]
Vet Med A 4]:197, 1994.
tion. Vet Radiol 28:13. 1987.
178. Mayr B, el al: Mutations in tumour suppressor gene
198.Ferer L, ct al: lmrmunohistochemical detection of
p53 in two feline fibrosarcomas. Br Vet J 15l:707,
CD31 antigen in normal and mweoplastic endothelial
1995.
cells. J Comp Pathol 112:319. 1995.
179. Mayr B, el al: Cytogenetic variation between four
199. Fossuin TW, ct al: Generalized lynphangiectasis in a
cases of feline fibrosarcorna. Res Vet Sci 6l:268,
dlog with subcutaneous chyle and lymphangioma. J
1996.
An Vet Med Assoc 197:231, 1990.
180. Mayr B, et al: Cytogenetic alterations in four fe-
200.
George C, Sumrners BA: Angiokeratoma: A benign
linc soft tissue tuimours. Vet Res Cominun 22:21,
vascular tumor of the dog. J Srmall Anim Pract 31:
1998.
390, 1990.
 rossns 1 cd paao e na   
201. Ginn PE, Kunkle GA: Hermangiosarcoma of multiple
tionis in cases of spindle cell sarcoma. pleomorphic
digits in a cat. Proc Annu Memb Meet Aim Acad Vet
sarcoma and fibrosarcoma in cats. Vet Res Comm 22:
Dermatol Arm Coll Vet Dermatol 13:110, 1997.
249. 1998.
202. Craves CM, et al: Canine hemangiopericytoma: 23
182. McChesney Sl., et al: Radiotherapy of soft tissue sar-
comas in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 194:60, 1989.
1988.
183. MeChesney-Cilltte S, et al: Response of canine soft
203. Hammer AS, et al: Efficacy and toxicity of VAC
tissue sarcouas to radiation or radliation plus hyper-
chemotherapy (vineristine, doxorubicin, cyclophospha-
thermia: a randomized phase I study. Int J Hyper-
rnide) in dogs with hcmangiosarcona. J Vet Int Med
thermia 8:309, 1992.
5:160, 1991.
203a. Handhiaryani E, et al: Canine hemangiopericytoma:
Myxoma
an evaluation of mctastatic potential.J Vet Diagn
184. Rowland PH, et al: Myxoma at the site of a subcuta-
Invest 1l:474, 1999.
neous pacemaker in a dog. J Am Anim Ilosp Assoc
204. llargis AM, Feldman BF: Evaluation of hemo-
27:649, 1991.
11l cases (1983- 1988). J A1mn Vet Mcd Assoc 198:891.
Neural Tumors
1991.
183. Brehm DM, et al: A retrospective evaluation of 51
203. Hargis AM, et al: A retrospective clinicopathologic
cascs of peripheral nerve sheath mmors in the dog. J
study of 212 dogs with cutaneous hemangionas and
Arm Anin Hosp Assoc 31:349, 1995.
hemangiosarcomas. Vet Pathol 29:316, 1992.
I86. Geyer C, et al: Iminunohistochermical and mltrastruc-
206. Hinrichs U, et al: Lymphoangiosarcomas in cats: u
tural investigation of granular cell tumours in dog.
retrospective study of 12 cases. Vet Pathol 36:164,
cat, and horse. J Vet Med B 39:485, 1992.
187.Gross TL,Carr SH: Amputation neuroma of docked
1999.
207. Krajo AC, et al: Unusual metastatic hehavior and clin-
tails in dogs. Vet Pathol 27:6l, 1990.
icopathologic findings in eight cats with cutaneous or
188. Hlerrera GA. Mendoza A: Primary canine cutaneous
visceral hcmangiosarcoma. J Arn Vct Med Assoc 214:
meningiorma. Vet Pathol 18:127, 1981.
670, 1999.
189. Jones BR, et al Nerve sheath tumours in the dog and
208. lewis DL, Harari J: Peripheral arteriovenous fistula
cats. N Z Vet J 43:190, 1995.
associated with a subcutaneous hemangiosarcomna/he-
190. Patniak AK:‘Histologic and
 immunohistochemical
mangioma in a cat. Feline Pract 20:27, i992.
studies of gramular cell tunors in seven dogs, three
209. Mayr B, et al: Trisomy 2 in three cases of canine
cats, one horse, and onc bird. Vet Pathol' 30:176,
hacrnangiopericytoma. Br Vet J 148:113, 1992.
1993.
 210. Mayr B, ct al:' Cytogenetice characterization of a fi-
Vascular Tumors
broma and three haemangiopericytomas in domestic
dogs. Br Vet J 151:433, 1995.
191. Augustin-Voss HG, et al: Phenotypic characterivzation
of normal and neoplastic canine endothelial cells by
211. Mialot M: Tumeurs vasculaires de: localisation cutanee
lectin histochemistry. Vet Pathol 27:103, 1990.
chez le chat: étude d’unc seric de 40 cas. Prat Méd
192.Barnes JC, et al Disseminated lymphangiosarcoma n
Chir Anim Comp 30:571, 1995.
a dog. Can Vet J 38:42, 1997.
212. Miller MA, et al: Cutaneous vascular neoplasia in 15
192a. Belanger MC, et al: Invasive multiple: lymphan-
cats: Clinical, morphologic, and immunohistochemical
giornas in a young dog. J An Anin Hosp Assoc 35:
studies. Vet Pathol 29:329, 1992.
507, 1999.
213. Perez J, et al: Irmmunohistochemical characterization
193.Berry WL., ct al: Lymphangiomatosis of the_pelvic
of hemangiopericytomas and other spindle cell turnors
limb' in a Maltesc dog. J Small Anin Pract 37:340,
in the dog. Vet Pathol 33:391. 1996.
1996.
 214. Post K, et al: Cutaneous lynphangioma in a young
194. Brown NO, ct al: Canine hemangiosarcoma: Retro-
dog. Can Vet J 32:747, 1991.
spective analysis of 104 cuses. J Am Vet Med Assoc
215. Postorino NC, ct al: Prognostic variables for caninc
186:56, 1985.
hemangiopericytoma: 50 cascs (1979-1984). J Am
194a. Chun R: Feline and canine hemangiosarcoma. Comp
Anim flosp Assoc 24:501, 1988.
Cont Educ Pract Vet 21:622, 1999.
 216. Sagartz JE, et al: Lyrnphangiosarcoma in a young dog.
195. Danielson F: Lymphangioma in the 1metacarpal pad
Vet Pathol 33:353, 1996.
of a dog. J Simall Anim Pract 39:295, 1998.
217. Scavelli TD, et al: IIeimangiosarcoma in the cat: Ret-
196. Delisle F,et al: Jhemangiosarcome chez le chien.
rospective evaluation of 31 surgical cases. J Am Vet
Point Vet 28:73, 1996.
Med Assoc 187:817, 1987.
196a. Demanuclle TC, et al: Idiopathic telangiectasia i a
218. Shiga A, et al: Lymphangiosarcoma in a dog. J Vet
Golden Retriever. Vet Dermatol 10:311, 1999.
Med Sci 56:1199, 1994.
197. Evans SM: Caninc hemangiosarcoma: A retrospective
219. Srebermik N, Appleby EC: Breed prevalence and sites
1408 - Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
of haemangioma and haemangiosarenma in dogs. Vet
240. Jabara AG, Paton JS: Extraskeletal osteoma in a cat.
Rec 129:408, 1991.
Aust Vet J 6l:405, 1984.
220. Swayne DE, et al: Lymphangiosarcoma and haeman.
241. Kuntz CA, et al: Extraskeletal osteosarcomas in dlogs:
giosarcoma in a cat. J Comp Pathol 100:91, 1989.
14 cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 34:26, 1998.
221. Turrel JM, et al: Response to radiation therapy of
242. Langenbach A, et al: Extraskeletal osteosarcomas in
recurring lymphangioma in a dog. J Am Vet Mod
dogs: a retrospective study of 169 cases (1986- 1986).
Assoc 193:1432, 1988.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 34:113, 1998.
22la. Vail DM, ct al: Liposome-encapsulated imuramyl tri-
Chondroma and Chondrosarcoma
vant immunotherapy for splenie hemangiosarcoma in
243. Davidson JR: Caninc and feline chondrosarcoma.
the dog: a randomized mati-institutional clinical trial.
Comp Cont Edue: Pract Vet 17:1109. 1995.
Clin Cancer Res l:1165. 1995.
244. Fopovitch CA, et al: Chondrosarcoma: A retrospectivc
222. Walsh KM, Abbot DP: Lymphangiosarcoma in two
study of 97 cdogs (1987-1990). J An: Anin Hosp
cats. J Comp Pathol 94:611, 1984.
Assoc 30:81, 1994.
223.Ward Hl, et al: Cutaneous hemangiosarcoma in 25
 Postvaccinal Sarcomas
dogs: a retrospeclive study. J Vet Int Med 8:345,
245. Briscoe CM, et al: Pulmonary metastasis of a feline
1994.
0    I  
224.White SD, ct al: Acquired cutaneous lymphangiectasis
1998.
in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 193:1093. 1988.
246. Burton G, Mason KV: Do postvaccinal sarcomas OC-
225. Woods ]P, ct al: Coucurrent lymphangioma, inmmune-
cur in Australian cats? Aust Vet J 75:102, 1997.
247. Coyne MJ, et al: Estimated prevalence of injection-
casc in a dog. J An Anim Hosp Asov: 31:70, 1995.
site sarcomas in cats during^1992.」 Am Vet Med
226. Xu FN: Ultrastructure of canine hemangiopericytoma.
Assoc 210:249, 1997.
Vet Pathol 23:643, 1986.
247a. Cronin K, et al: Radiation therapy and surgery for
Adipose Tissue Tumors
fibrosarcoma in 33 cats. Vet Radiol'Ultrasound 39:51,
227. Albers GW, Theilcn GH: Calkiwn chloride for treat-
1998.
ment of subeutaneous lipoamas in dlogs. ↓ Am Vet
248. Doddy FD、 et al: Feline fbrosarcoinas at vaccine
Mcd Assoc 186:492, 1985.
sites and nonvaccine sites. J Comp Pathol 114:165,
228. Bergman PJ. et al: Infitrative lipoma in dogs: 16
1996.
cascs (1981-1992). J Am Vet Med Assoc 205:322,
249. Ellis JA, et al: Use of immunohistocheimistry and
1994.
polymcrase chain reaction for detection of oncoma-
229. Esplin DG: Infltrating lipoma in a cat. Feline Pract
viris in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded fibrosar-
14:24, 1984.
comas from cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 209:767,
1996.
ated with a vaccine site in a cat. Fclinc Pract 24:20,
250. Esplin DG. Campbell R: Widesprcad mctastasis of
1.996.
fbrosarcorma associated witlh a vaceine site iu a cat.
231. Frazier KS, et al: Infiltrative lipoma in a canine stife
Feline Pract 23:13, 1995.
joint. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 29:81, 1993.
250a. Gagnon AC: Dng injeetion-assoxiated fibrosareoma
232. Mayr B, et al: Zytogenetische Verinderungen in Li-
in a cat. Feline Pract 28:18, 2000.
pomen bei Katzen (2 Fallberichte). Wien Tierirztl
Mschr 83:230, 1996.
cat: Histology and imnunohistoxchemistry. Vet Pathol
233. MeCarthy PE, et al: Liposarcoma associated with a
31:126, 1994.
ss    I  e  A  
252. Hendrick MJ, et al: Comparison of fbrosarcoimas that
209:612,1996.
 developed at vaccine sites and at nonvaccine sites in
234. Messick JB, Radin MJ: Cytologic, histologic and ultra-
cats: 239 cases (1991-1992). J Ain Vet Med Assoc
stnctural characteristies of a canine myxoid liposar-
205:1425, 1994.
coma. Vet Pathol 25:520, 1988.
252a. Hershey AE, et al: Prognosis for presumed feline
234a. Reimann N, et al: Cytogenetic investigations of ca-
vaccine-associated sarcoma afer excision: 6l cases
nine lipomas. Cancer Genetics lll:172, 1999.
(1986-1996). J Am Vet Med Assoc 216:58, 2000.
235. Stephens LC, et al: Virus-associated liposarcoma and
253. Kass PH, et al: Epidemiologic cvidencc for a causal
malignant lymphorna in a kitten. J Am Vet Med As-
relation between vaccination and fibrosarcoma tumor-
soc 183:123,1983.
igenesis in cats. J An Vet Merd Assoc 203:396, 1993.
254. Lester S, et al: Vaccine site-associated sarcomas in
Leiomyomd and Leiomyosarcoma
cats: clinical experience and a laboratory review
236. Finnie JW, et al: Multiple piloleiomyomas in a cat. J
(1982-1993). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32:91, 1996.
Comp Pathol 113:201, 1995.
255, Macy DW, et al: Vaccine-associated sareomas in cats.
 236a. Jacobsen MC, Valentine BA: IDermal intravascular
Feline Pract 23:24, 1995.
leiomyosarcoma in a cat. Vet Pathol 37:100, 2000.
256. Macy DW, Hendrick MJ: The potential role of in-
Rhabdomyoma and Rhabdomyosorcoma
fammation in thc devclopment of post vaccinal sarco-
237. Martin de las Mulas, J, et al: Desmin and vimentin
mas in cats. J Small Anim Pract 36:103, 1996.
immtnocharacterization of felinc muscle tumors. Vet
Pathol 29:260, 1992.
Med Vet Quebec 27:133, 1997.
238. Roth I.: Rhabdomyoma of the ear pinna in four cats.
258. Rudmann DG, et al: Pulmonary and mediastinal me-
J Comp Pathal 103:237, 1990.
tastases of a vaccine-site sarcornu in a cat. Vet Pathol
33:466, 1996.
Osteoma and Osteosdrcoma
259. Sandler I, et al: Metastatic vaccine-associated filbrosar-
239. Easton CB: Extraskeletal osteosarcoma in a cat. J Am
coma in a 10-ycar-old cat. Can Vet J 38:374, 1997.
Anim Hosp Assoc 30:59, 1994.
 260. Schultze AE, et al: Repeated physical and cytologic
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I409
characterizations of subcutancous postvaccinal reac-
278. Grier Rl, ct al: Mast cell tumour destruction in dogs
tions in cats. Am J Vet Res 58:719, i997.
by hypotonic solution. J Stuall Anin Hosp Assoc 36:
261. Weigand CM, Brewer WG Jr: Vacciue-site sarcormas
385,1995.
in cats. Comp Cont Ednc Pract Vet 18:869, 1996.
278a. Jaffe MH, el al: Immunohistocheinical and clinical
Undifferentiated Sorcomas
evaluation of p53 in canine cutaneous mast cell tu-
262. Carpenter JL、et al: Distinctive unclassifed mesen-
mors. Vet Pathol 37:40, 2000.
278b. Faffe Mll, et al: Deionised water as an adjunct to
chyual tumor of the digit of dogs. Vet Pathol 28:396,
surgery for the treatment of canine cntancous mast
1991.
cell turmours. J Smal Anin Pract 4l:7, 2000.
263. Kipar A. et al: Round cell sarcomas of possible my-
elomonoeytic origin localized at the lip of aged dogs.
279. Jeromin AM, et al: Urticaria piginentosa-like discase
in the dog. J Ain Auim Hosp Assoe 29:508, 1993.
J Vet Med A 42:185, 1995.
280.Kravis LD, et al: Frequency of argyrophilie nuclcolar
264. Sanders NA, et al: Aggressive, unrdifferentiated sar-
organizer regions in fne-neede aspirates and biopsy
 coma with widespread metastasis in a six-imonth-old
specimens from mnast cell tumors in dogs. J Ain Vet
Neopolitan mastiff. J Ain Anin Hosp Assoc 32:97.
Med Assoc 209:1418, 1996.
1996.
 281. Legoretta RA, cl al: Use of hyperthermia and radio-
Mast Cell Tumor
therapy in treatment of a large mast cell sarcoma in a
264a. Abadie J, et al: lamnunohistochenical detcction of
dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 193:1545, 1988.
282. Lemarie RJ, ct al: Mast cell tutnons: clinical manage-
proliferating cell nuclear antigen and Ki-67 in mast
cell turnors frou dogs. J An Vet Med Assoc 215:
ment. Comnp Cont Educ Pract Vet 17:1085, 1995.
1629, 1999.
tor (c-kit) by the rmalignant mast cells from spontane-
265. Al-Sarraf R, et al: A prospective study of radiation
therapy for the treatment of grade 2 mast cell tunors
ous canine mast cell tumours. J Comp Pathol l15:
in 32 dogs. Vet Int Med 10:376, 1996.
399, 1996.
283a. London CA, et al: Spontaneous canine mast cell tu-
266. Ayl RD, et al: Correlation of DNA ploidy to tunor
lnistologic grade, clinical variables, and survival in
gene c-kit. Exper IIermatol 27:689, 1999.
dogs withi 1nast cell tumors. Vet Pathol 29:386, 1992.
284. Long RD: Cutaneous mast cell tumor in a Siamese
267. Beadleston DL, et al: Chymase and tryptase staining
 of nonnal feline skin and of feline cutaneous mast
kitten, Can Vet J 37:167, 1996.
cell tumors. Vet Allergy Clin I1muno! 5:54, 1997.
284a. Lopez A, et al: Cutaneous mucinosis and mastocyto-
 268. Bell A, et al: Visceral and cutaneous mast cell neopla-
sis in a Shar-Pei, Can Vet J 40:881, 1999.
sia in a cat. Aust Vet Pract 24:86, 1994.
284b. Ma Y, et al: Clustering of activating mutations in c-
kits juxtamembrane coding region in canine mast cell
269. Bensignor E, et al: Ie mastocytome cutane canin:
Resultats dune Etude analomoclinique et therapeu-
neoplasms. J Invost Dcrmatol 112:165, 1999.
285. Madewell BR, et al: Cutaneous mastocytosis and m-
tique de 85 cas. Rec Med Vet 173:351, 1996.
270. Bostock DE: The prognosis following surgical removal
  id  e   s  s
of mastoeytomas in dogs. J Snall Aninma Praet 14:27,
Dermatol 3:171, 1992.
 286. Magnol JP, Toulemonde N: Histopronostic du masto-
1973.
271. Brown CA, Chalrmers SA: Difuse cutaneous mastocy-
cytoue canin, Validite du grarding de Patnaik. Rev
Med Vet 138:125, 1987.
tosis in a cat. Vet Pathol 27:366, 1990.
287. McCaw DL. et al: Response of canine rmast cell tu-
sia in the cat: 14 cases (1975-1985). J Aim Vet Med
rnors to treatiment with oral prednisonc. J Vet Int
Assoe 190:1440, 1987.
Med 8:406, 1994.
273. Cayatte SM, et al: Identification of mast cells in buffy
288. McCaw DL, ct al: Vincristine therapy for mast cell
tumors in dogs. J Vet Int Med 1l:375, 1997.
diseases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 206:325, 1995.
288a. McManus PM: Frequency and severity of mastocy-
274. Chastain ‘CB, et al: Benign cutaneous mastocytomas
temia in dogs with and without mast cell tumors: 120
in two litters of Siamesc: kittens. J Am Vet Med Assoc 
cascs (1995-1997). J Am Vet Med Assoc 215:355,
193:959, 1988.
1999.
275. Cole W: Mast cell tunor in a puppy. Can Vet J 31:
289. Miller DM: The occurrence of mast coll tumors in
457, 1990.
young Shar Peis. J Vet Diagn Invest 7:360, 1995.
276. Davis BJ, et al: Cutancous Imastocytosis in a dog. Vet
290. Molander-McCrary H, et al: Cutancxous rnast cell tu-
mors in cats: 32 cascs (1991-1994). J Am Anim Hosp
Pathol 29:363, 1992.
 276a. Elnshie R: Combination chemotherapy with and
Assoc 34:281, 1998.
 r   m s r s 
290a. Parodi A: Le mastocytome du chicn cst-il une tu-
   s u   
meur genetique? Point Vet 31:67, 2000.
Newsletter 20:6, 1997.
291. Pataik AK, et al: Canine cutaneous mast cell tumor:
277. Frimberger AE, et al: Radiotherapy of inconpletely
 Morphologic grading and survival tiune in S3 dogs.
resected, moderately differeutiated mast cell tumors
Vet Pathol 21:469, 1984.
in the dog: 37 cases (1989-1993). J Am Anim Hosp
292. Peterson SL: Scar-associated canine mast cell tumor.
Assoc 33:320, 1997.
Canine Pract 12:23, 1985.
277a. Gerritsen RJ, et al: Multi-agent chemotherapy for
293. Reguera MJ, et al: Canine mast cell tumors exprcss
mast cell tumours in the: dog.
Vet Quart 20:28,
stem cell factor receptor (c-kit). Proxe Amnn Memh
1998.
Mect Ain Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol
277b. Ginn PF, ct al: Immmohistochernical detection of
15:77, 1999.
jo lopopur iod r st uaqord 1ossaddns-loum 2gd
293a. Russnick KM, ct al: Trcatment of caine mast cell
proguosis for caniue cutaneous mast cell tumors. Vet
tumors with CCNU (Lounustine). J Vet Intern Med
Pathol 37:33, 2000.
13:601, 1999.
1410 * Ncoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
294. Simoes JPC, Schoning P: Canine mast cell tumors: d
with neoplastic CD8+ T lymphocytes in a case of
comparison of staining techniques. J Vet IDiagn Invest
canine cutaneous lymphoma: establishment and char-
6:458, 1994.
acterization of a longtern T-celline. In: Kwochka
295. Simors JPC, et al: Prognosis of canine mast cell tu-
KW, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Derimatology
mors: A comparison of three methods. Vet Pathol 31:
Ill. Butterworth, Heineinann, Bostlon, i998, p 433.
637,1994.
295a. Tharmm
1 DH, et al: Predisone and vinblastine
tern T cell line (DLC 01) established from a dog
chenotherapy for canine mast cell tumor-4l cases
with Sezary syndrome and producing rotroviral parti
(1992-1997): J Vet Intermn Mexd 13:491, 1999.
cles. Leukemia 13:128l, 1999.
296. Thiel W: Mastzellntumoren bei Hunden-Auswertung
313. Gnuber A, et al: Mycosis fungoides bei drei Hunden:
pathologisch-histologischer Untersuchungshefunde der
Differentialdiagoostiche Abgrenzung lurch immunhis-
Jahre 1980 bis 1986 mit 1linweis auf dic TNM-Klassi-
tochemischen  Nachweis der  T-Zell-Spezifitat des
Bzierung vomu Tumoren bei Haustieren. Kleintier-Prax
IHautinfiltrates. Kleinterpraxis 40:569. 1995.
35:401, 1990.
314. Iwamoto KS, et al: Liuoleate prodluces remission
297. Tinsley PE, Taylor DO: Immunotherapy for mnlticxer-
in canine mycosis fungoides. Cancer Icter 64:17,
tric malignant mastocytoma in a dog. Mod Vet Pract
1992.
68:225, 1987.
315. Jackson MI, et al: Immunohistochemical identifica-
298. Turrel JM, et al: Prognostic factors for radiation treat-
tion of B and T lynphocytes in formalin-fixed, paraf-
ment of mast cell tumors in SS dogs. J Am Vet Med
fin-embedded feline lymphosarcomas: Relation to fc-
Assoc 193:936, 1988.
line leukemia vinus status, tumor site, and patient age.
299. Vitale CB, et al: Feline urticaria pigmentosa in three
Can J Vet Res 60:199, 1996.
related Sphinx cats. Vet Dermatol 7:227, 1996.
 316. Lemanie Sl., Eddlestone SM: Treatuent of cutaneous
300.Wilcock BP, et al: The morphology and behavior of
T-cell lymphoma with dacarbazine in a dog. Vet Der-
feline cutaneous mastocytomas. Vet Patlaol 23:320,
matol 8:41, 1997.
1986.
 317. Miller W11 Jr: Canine cutancous lymphomas. In: Kirk
Lymphoma
RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy VI1. W.B.
301. Ashley PF, Bowman LA: Syminetric cutaneous neero
Saunders Co, Phuiladelphia, 1980, p 493.
318.Moore PF,et al: Canine cutareous epitheliotropic
sis of the hind feet and imulticentric follicular lym-
phoma in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:21l, 1999.
lynphoma (mycosis fungoides) is a proliferative disor-
302. Baker Jl., Scott DW: Myxsis fungoides in two cats. J
der of CD8+ T cells. Am J Pathol 144:42l, 1994.
319. Moore PF, Qlivry T: Cutancous lymphomas in com-
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 25:97, 1989.
303. Beale KM, et al: An unusual presentation of cutane-
 panion animals. Clin Derimatol 12:499, 1994.
oossy dsoh uy uy I ssop om u euouduq sno
320.
Moriello KA, et al: Peg L-asparaginase in the treat-
ment of canine cpitheliotropie lynphoina and histio-
26:429, 1990.
304. Bealc KM, Bolon B: Canine cutaneous lymphosar-
cytic proliferative dermatitis. In: Ihrke PJ, et al (eds):
coma: Epitheliotropic and nonepitheliotropie, a retro.
d   a  s
spective study. In: Ihrke PJ, et al (eds): Advances in
Press, New York, 1993, p 293.
Veterinary Dermatology Il. Pergamon Press, New
321. Olivry T, et al: Investigation of epidermotropism in
York, 1993, p 273.
304a. Bensignor E, Carloti DN: Un cas de lymphome
adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) and B, integrins. Arch
cutane T non-epitheliotrope chez un chicn leishma.
Dermatol Res 287:186, 1995.
nien. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 34:551, 1999.
 322. Petersen A, et al: The use of saflower oil for the
303. Bergman R, et al: Inrmunophenotyping and T-cell
treatment of rnycosis fungoides in tvo dogs. Proc
 e  e sse ai an rd
Annu Memb Mcet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll
the histopathologic diagnosis of rrycosis fungoides. J
Vet Dermaatol 15:49, 1999.
Am Acad Dermatol 39:554, 1998.
323.Poisson I、ct al: Reticulose 
 pagetoide generalisée
306. Caciolo PL. et al: Cutaneous lynphosarcoma in the
(forme de Ketron-Goordman) chez, un chien. Prat
cat: A report of nine cases. J Am Anim Ilosp Assoc
Med Chir Anim Comp 31:219,1996.
20:505,1984.
324. Schick RO, et al: Cutaneous lynphosarcoma and leu-
307. Caniati M, et al: Camine
lymphoma: immunocyto-
kemia in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoe 203:1155, 1993.
chemical analysis of fne-needle aspiration ancd biopsy.
325. Shapiro PE, Pinto FJ: The histologic specrum of
Vet Pathol 33:204, 1996.
mycosis fungoides/Sezary syndrome (entancous T-cell
307a. Chui CT, ct al: Epidermotropic cutaneous B-cell
lyinphoma): A review of 222 biopsies, including newly
lymphoma mimicking mycosis fungoides. J Am Acad
dlescribed patterms
and  the carlicst  pathologic
Dermatol 41:271, 1999.
changes. Ain J Surg Pathol 18:645, 1994.
308. Day MJ: Imnunophenotypic characterization of cuta-
 326. Smithi KC, et al: Canine lymphomatoid granulomato-
ncous lymplaoid neoplasia in the dog and cat. J Comp
sis: An immunophenotypic analysis of threc cases. J
Pathol 112:79, 1995.
Comp Pathol 113:129, 1996.
309. DeBocr DJ, et al: Mycosis fungoides in a dog: Dern-
327. Smofler BR, et al: Reassessiment of histologic parame-
onstration of T-cell specificity and response to raclio-
ters in the diagnosis of mycosis fungoides. Am J Surg
Pathol 19:1423, 1995.
 310. Fivenson DP, et al: Dermal dendrocytes and T-cells 
 328. Sloeckli R, et al: Canine epidemmotropir: lyimphoma
in canine mycosis fungoides, Cancer 70;209 I, 1992.
associaterl with the intercellular deposition of immu-
311. Fivenson DP, et al: T-cell receptor gene Icarrange-
noglobulin on direct iromunofluorescence testing.
Comp Anim Pract 1:36, 1988.
a canine model of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. J In-
329.
Thrall MA, et al: Cutaneous lymphosarcorma and leu-
vest Dcrmatol 102:227, 1994.
kernia in a dog, resembling Sezary syndrome in man.
312. Ghernati I, et al: Retrovirus-like particles associatcd
Vet Pathol 21:182, 1984.
Ncoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors · I4lI
330. Tobey JC, et al: Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma in a cat.
Malignant Histiocytosis
J Am' Vet Med Assoc 204:606, 1994.
351. Ilayden DW, et al: Disseminated nalignant histiocy-
gene rearrangements by polymerase chain reaction
tosis in a golden retriever: Clinicopathologic, ultra-
structural, and immunohistochemical findings. Vet
and denahring gradient gel electrophoresis (PCH,
DCGE) in arechival specimens from paticnts with
Pathol 30:256, 1993.
352.
Marholdt F, Besch A: Maligne Histiozytose bei einem
early cutaneous T-cell lymphoma: Correlation of his-
Berner sennehund. Pract Tierarzl. 75:690, 1994.
tologic findings with PCR/DCCE. J Am Acad Derma-
353. Moore PF,Rosin A: Malignant histiocytosis of Ber-
tol 38:453. 1998.
332. Walton DK: Canine epidermotropic lymphoma (my-
nese Mountain dogs. Vet Pathol 23:1, 1986.
354. Scott Dw, et al: Lyinphoreticular neoplasia in a dog
cosis fungoides and pagetoid retieulosis). In: Kirk RW
(ed): Curent Vetrinary Therapy IX. W.B. Saunders
resembling malignant histiocytosis (histiocytic medul-
lary reticulosis) in man. Comell Vet 69: 176, 1979.
Co, Philadclphia, 1986, p 609.
355. Tsuda T, et al: A case of canine maliguant histiocyto-
333.white SD, et al: Use of isotrelinoin and etretinate for
sis. I Jpn Vet Med Assoc 51:259, 1998.
the treatrment of benign cutaneous neoplasia and cu-
356. Uno Y, et al: Malignant histiocytosis with multiple
taneous lymphoma in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 202:
skin lesions in a dog. J Vet Mod Sci55:1059, 1993.
387, 1993.
334. Wilcock BP, Yager JA: The behavior of epidermo-
Benign Fibrous Histiocytoma
tropie lymphoma in 25 dogs. Can Vet J 30:754, 1989.
357. Paulscn ME, ct al: Nodular gramulomatous episclero-
Pseudolymphoma
kerahilis in dogs: 19 cases (1973-1985). J Am Vet
Med Assoc 190:1581, 1987.
356. Smith JS, et al: Infitrative comeal lesions resembling
dolynphoma in a dog resembling pseudo-Hodgkin's
fbrous histioeytoma: Clinical and pathologie findings
discasc. Vet Dermatol 1:171, 1990.
 336. Ploysangam T, et al: Cutaneous pseudolymphonas. J
in six dogs and one cat. J Arn Vet Med Assoe 169:
Am Acad Dermatol 38:877, 1998.
722, 1976.
Histiocytoma
Malignant Fibrous Histiocytoma
359. Bames M, et al: Tumor induction following intraoper-
337. Afolter VK, Moore PF: Canine histiocytic prolifera-
tive discase. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet
alive radiotherapy: late results of the National Cancer
Dcrmatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 15:79, 1999.
Institute canine trials. Int J Radiat Oueol Biol Phys
338. Collns BK, et al: Idiopathic gramulcmatous discase
19:651, 1990.
with ocular adnexal and cutaneous involvement in a
360.Kerlin RL, Hendrick MJ: Malignant fbrous histiocy-
toma and malignant histiocytosis in the dog-conver-
dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 201:313, 1992.
 338a. Florek C, Willins BE: A Basset hound witli swollen
third eyelids and skin masscs. Vet Med 95:99, 2000.
Pathol 33:713, 1996.
361. Legrand JI. ct al: Histiocytome fihreux malin chcz un
339. Kipar A, ct al: Expression of major histocompatibility
chat. Ftude d’un cas clinique et comparaison avee les
coinplex class II antigen in neoplastie cells of canine
donnees de la literature. Pral Med Chir Anim Comp
cutaneous histioeytoma. Vet Immunol Immunopathol
62:1, 1998.
22:401, 1987.
340. Marchal T, et al: lmmunophenotypic and ultrastruc-
362. Mayr B、 et al: Cytogenetie findings iu two cases of
tural evidence of the Langerhans ccll origin of the
feline malignant fibrous histioeytorma. J Small Anim
canine cutaneous histiocytoma. Acta Anat 153:189,
Pract 37:239, 1996.
1995.
 363. Pace LW, et al: Immunohistochemical staining of fe-
 341. Mays MBC, Bergeron JA: Cutaneous histiocytosis in
line malignant fibrous histiocytomas. Vet Pathol 3l:
dogs. J Arn Vet Med Assoc 188:377, 1986.
168. 1994.
342. Moore F, et al: Canine cutaneous histiocytoma is an
364. Pires MA: Malignant fibrous histioeytoma in a puppy.
Vet Rec 140:234, 1997.
presses CDI and specifie B-integrin molecnles. Am J
365. Tloolen RJMM、 et al: Malignant ibrous histiocyto-
Pathol 148:1699, 1996.
mas in dogs and cats: An immunohistochemical stidy.
Scott IDW: Canine cutaneous histiocytoses. In: Kirk
Res Vet Sei 53:198, 1992.
343.
RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy X. W.B. Saun-
366. Waters CB, et al: Giant cell variety of malignant fi-
ders Co, Philadelphia, 1989. p 625.
brous histiocytoma in dogs: 10 cases (1986-1993). J
 344. Thormton RN, Tisdall CJ: Multiple cutaneous histio-
Am Vet Med Assoc 205:1420, 1994.
cytosis in two dogs. N Z Vet J 36:192, 1988.
Plasmacytoma
Systemic Histiocytosis
367. Bacr KE, et al.: Cutancous plasmacytomas in dogs: A
345. Brearley MJ, ct al.: Systemic histiocytosis in a Ber-
nese Mountain dog. J Simall Anim Pract 35:271,1994.
Pathol 26:216, 1989.
346. Moore PF: Systenie histiocytosis of Bernese Moun-
368. Clark GN, et al: Extraunedullary plasmacytomas in
tain dogs. Vet Pathol 2l:554, 1984.
tlogs: Results of surgical excision in 13l cases. J Am
347. Nagata M, et al: Progressive Langerhans cell histiocy-
Anim Hosp Assoc 28:105, 1992.
tosis in a young dog. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am
369. Eastman CA: Plasma cell tumors in a cat. Feline
Acad Vet Dermatol A1n Coll Vet Dermatol 14:7,1998.
Pract 24:26, 1996.
348. Padgett GA, et al: Inheritance of histiocytosis in Bcr-
 370. Frazier KS: Analysis of DNA aneuploidy and C-myc
nese Mountain dogs. J Small Anim Pract 36:93, 1995.
oncoprotein content of canine plasma cell tumors us-
349. Paterson S, et al: Systemic histixytosis in the Ber-
ing fow eytoinetry. Vet Pathol 30:505, 1993.
nese Mountain dog. J Small Anim Pract 36:233, 1995.
371. Kyriazidou A, et al: An im mnnohistochemical study of
350. Scott DW, et al: Systemic histiocytosis in two dogs.
canine cxtranedullary plasma cell tumours. J Comp
Canine Pract 14:7, 1987.
Pathol 100:259, 1989.
I412 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
372. Kyriazidou A, et al: Imrnunohistocheimical staining
of benign canine multiccntrice inclanoma. Vet Pathol
with ncoplastic and inflamnatory plasina cell lesions
35:94, 1998.
in feline tissues. J Comp Pathol 100:337, 1989.
390a. Roels S, ct al: PCNA and Ki67 proliferation markers
373.Platz. SJ, et al: Prognostic value of histopathological
as criteria for prediction of clinical behaviour of ne-
lanocytic tumours in cats and dogs. J Comp Pathol
Pathol 36:23, 1999.
121:13, 1999.
374. Rakich PM, et al: Mucocutaneous plasmracytomas in
 390b. Valentine BA, el al: Malignant transformation of a
dogs: 75 cuses (1980-1987). J Am Vet Med Assoc
giant congenital pigmcnted nevus (hamartoma) in a
194:803, 1989.
dog. Vet Dermatol 10:127, 1999.
375. Howland PH, et al: Cutaneous plasmacytomas with
 391. van der Linde-Sipman JS, ct al: Cutaneous inalignant
amyloid in six dogs. Vet Pathol 28:125, 1991.
melanonas in 57 cats: Identification of (amelanotic)
376. Rowland PH, Linke RD: Immunohistochemical char-
signet-ring and balloon cell types and verification of
acterization of light-chain-dlerived amyloid in one fe-
line and five canine plasma cell tumors. Vet Pathol
croscopy, and in situ hybridization. Vet Pathol 34:31,
31:390, 1994.
1997.
 377. Schrenzel MD, et al: leukocyte differentiation anti-
Neuroendocrine Tumor
gens in canine cutaneous and oral plasmacytomas. Vet
392. Glick AD, et al: Neuroendoerine carcinoma of the
Dermatol 9:33, 1998.
skin in a dog. Vet Pathol 20:76l, 1983.
Melanocytic Tumors
393. Konno A, et al: Immunohistochemical diagnosis of a
378. Anderson Wl, et al: Pilar neurocristic melanoma in
394. Nickoloff BJ, et al: Canine neuroendocrine carci-
four dogs. Vet Rec 123:517, 1988.
379.Berrington AJ. et al: Innunchistochernieal detection
noma. A tunor resembling histiocytoma. Am J Der-
of melanoma-associated antigens on formalin-fixed,
matopathol 7:579, 1985.
paraffin-embexdded canine tumors. Vet Pathol 31:455,
395. Whiteley IO, Ieiningen JR: Neuroendoerine (Mer-
kel) cell tumors of the canine oral cavity. Vet Pathol
1904.
380. Bolon B, et al: Characteristics of canine melanomas
24:570, 1987.
and conparison of lhistology and DNA ploidy to their
Transmissible Venereal Tumor
biologic behavior. Vet Pathol 27:96, 1990.
396. Auber EI, et al: Single-drug chemotherapy of canine
381. Bostock DE: Prognosis after surgical excision of ca-
transmissible venereal tumor with cyclophosphamide,
ninc mclanomas. Vet Pathol 16:32, 1979.
methotrexate, or vincristine. J Vet Intern Med 4:144,
38la. Burkhart CC, Burkhart CN: Melanoma and insecti-
1990.
cides: Is there a connection? J Am Acad Dermatol
396a. Boscos CM, ct al Cutaneous involvement of TVT
42:302,2000.
 382. Day Mj, Lucke VM: Melanoeytie ncoplasia in the cat.
1999.
J Small Anim Pract 36:207, 1995.
397. Das AK, et al: A clinical report on the effcacy of
383. Diters RW, Walsh KM: Cutaneous clear cell melano-
vincristine onl canine transmissible venereal sarcoma.
mas: A report of three cases, Vet Pathol 21:355, 1983.
Indian Vet J 68:575, 1991.
384. Fresc K: Verlanfsuntersnchungen beim Melanomen
 398. Goswami TK. et al: Lymphokinc activated killer cell
der IJaut und der Mumdschleimhaut des Hlundes. Vet
activity in transmissible venereal tumour of a cas-
Pathol 15:461, 1978.
trated dog. Inclian Vet J 74:895, 1997.
385. Goldschmidt MH, ct al: Feline dermal melanoma: A
399. Harnelin A, et al: Corrclation of Ag-NOR protein
retrospective stdyIn: IhrkePJ,et al (eds):Advancs
mcasurcments with prognosis in canine transmissible
venercal tumour. J Cormp Pathol 112:429, 1995.
York, 1993, p 285.
400. Marchal T, et al: Immunophenotype of the canine
386. Goldschumidt MIl: Pigmented lesions of the skin. Chin
transmissible venereal tumour. Vet Immunol Immu-
Dermatol 12:507, 1994.
nopathol 57:1, 1997.
387. Harvey IJ. et al: Prognostic criteria for dogs with
401. Mozos F, ct al: Immumohistochemical characteriza-
oral melanoma. J Aim Vet Med Assoc 178:580,
ton of canine transmissible venereal tumor. Vet
1981.
Pathol 33:257, 1996.
387a. Mac Ewen EG, et al: Adjuvant therapy for melanoma
402. Nandi SN, et al: Effect of ovariectomy ou regression
 in dogs: results of randomized clinical trials using
of transmissible venereal tumour in bitches. Indian J
Vet Pathol 12:97, 1988.
and granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating fac-
403.Panchbhai VS, et al: Use of autogenous vaccine in
tor. Clin Cancer Res 5:4249, 1999.
transmissible canine venereal tumour. Indian Vet J
387h. Mayr B, et al: Cytogtenetic alterations in feline mela-
67:983, 1990.
noma. Vet J 159:97, 2000.
404. Pérez J, et al: Immunohistochemical study of the lo-
388. Miller WH Jr, et al: Feline cutaneous melanocytic
cal  inflammatory
infiltrate in spontaneous canine
neuplasimns: A retrospective analysis of 43 cases
trausimissible venereal tumour at diferent stages of
(1979--1991). Vet 1Deninatol 4:19, 1993.
growth. Vet Inmunol Immunopathol 64:133, 1998.
388a. Mcdiano JF, et al: The rmolecular basis of canine
405.
Rogers KS; Transmissible venereal tumor. Comp
melanoma. J Vet Intern Med 13:163, 1999.
Cont Edue Pract Vet 19:1036, 1997.
389.Oltver JL,et al: Isolation and characterization of the
406. Rogers KA, et al: Transmissible venereal tumor: a
canine melanoma antigen recognized by the murine
retrospcctive study of 29 cascs. ] Am Anin Hosp
monoclonal antihodly IBF9 and its distribution in cul-
Assoc 34:463, 1998.
tured canine melanoma cell lines. Am J Vet Res 58:
406a. Santos FCA, et al: Caracterizagao e quantificacao de
46, 1997.
regives organizadoras de nucleolos coradas pela prata
390. Ritt MG, et al: Functional loss of p2l/Waf-1 in a case
(AgNORs) em tumor venereo transmissivel canino,
Neoplastie and Non-eoplastic Tumors · I413
genital e extragenital. Arq Bras Med Vet Zootec 50:
423. Fatone C, et al: Dermoid sinus and spinal malforma-
665, 1998.
tions in a Yorkshire tericr: diagnosis and follow-up. J
407. Singh J, et al: Cliuicopathological studies on the ef-
Small Anim Pract 36:178, 1995.
424. Fezer C, Weiss E: Die zystischen Bildungen in der
mens on transmissible venereal tumours in dogs. Vet
Haut der Haustiere. Arch Exp Veterinarmed 23:60,
Res Comun 20:71, 1996.
1969.
407a. Singh TP, Pangawkar CR: Hemostatic disorders in
425. Joffe DJ: Branchial cyst in a cat. Can Vet J 31:325,
 dogs infected with transmissible venercal turnour. In-
1990.
dian Vet J 75:879, 1998.
426. Lambrechis N: Dermoid sinus in a crosshred Rhode-
Epithelioid Sarcoma
sian ridgcback dog involving the second corvical vor-
tehra. J S Afr Vet Assoc 67: I53, 1996.
408. Fstrada MM, ct al: Epithclioid sarcoma in a dog. J
427. Parker WM: Muliple (more than two thousand) cpi-
Comp Pathol 107:107, 1992.
dermal inclusion cysts in a dog. Can Vet J 36:386,
Secondary Skin Neoplasms
1995.
409. Anderson Wl, et al: Presumptive subcntaneous surgi-
428.Penith ML.: Dermoid sins in a Boerboel bitch. J S
cal transplantation of a urinary bladder transitional
Afr Vet Assoc 65:38, 1994.
cell carcinoma in a dog. Comcll Vet 79:263, 1989.
429. Rochat MC, et al: Dermoid cysts in cats: two cases
410. Couto CG, Somusa C: Chronie lyuphocytie leukenia
and a review of the literature. J Vet Diagu lnvest 8:
with cutaneous involvement in a dog. J Au Vet Med
505, 1996.
Assoc 22:374, 1986.
430. Scott DW, Anderson Wl: Cutancous trichilemmal
41l. Crowe DT, Todoroff RJ: Umbilical masses and discol.-
cysts in thre dogs. Cornell Vet 81:245, 1991.
orations as signs of intraabdoninal disease. J Am
431. Scott DW, Anderson Wl: Cutaneous hybrid cyst in
Anim Hosp Assoe 18:295, 1982.
four dogs. Corarll Vet 81:19, 1991.
412. Estrada M, Lagadic M: Metastases digitales d'uu car-
432. Selcer EA, et al: Dermoid sinus in a Shih tzu and a
cinome pulmonairc asyinptormatique chez le chat.
boxer. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:634, 1984.
Etude d’une serie de 1l cas. Prat Med Chir Anim
433. Vilafranca M, et al: Generalized apocrinc cystomatosis
Comp 27:791, 1992.
in an Old English shcepdog. Vet Derinatol 5:83,
413. Gilson SID, Stone EA: Surgically induced tumor seed-
1994.
ing in cight dogs and two cats. J An Vet Med Assoc.
Nevi
196:1811, 1990.
434. Aronsohn MG, Carpenter JI.: IDistal exlremily melan-
414. Harapson ECGM, et al: Cutaneous mctastasis of a
oeytie nevi and malignant melanomas in dogs. J Ain
colonic careinouma in a dog J Smal Anim Pract 3l:
Ainn Hosp Assoc 26:605, 1990.
155, 1990.
435. Atlee BA, et al: Nodular dermatofibrosis in Geruan
415. Jacohs TM, Tonlinson M]: The lung-digit syndroinc
shepherd dogs as a markcr for renal cystadenocarci
in a car. Feline Praet 25:3i, 1997.
morna. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27:481, 1991.
416. Lcifer CE, Matus RE: Chronie lymphocytic leukemia
436. de Ceyer C: Dermatologic des panpieres du chien et
in the dog: 22 cascs (1974-1984). J Am Vet Med
du chat. Premicrc partie: etnde generale. Prat Med
Assoc 189:214, 1986.
Chir Anim Comp 28:605, 1993.
417. Mnller A, et al: Metastases cutanees chez les cami-
437. Cilbert PA, ct al: Nodular dermatofibrosis and renal
vores doinestiques. Prat Med Chir Anim Conp 33:
cystadenoma in a German shepherd dog. J Am Anim
267, 1998.
Ilosp Assoc 26:253, 1990.
418. Scot-Moncrief JE, et al: Pulmonary squamous cell
438. Guaguere E, ct al; Dcrmatofibrose nodulaire chez lc
carcinoma with multiple digital metastases in a cat. J
Bergcr allemand: Etude retrospective de 10 cas. Prat
Small Anim Pract 30:696, 1989.
Med Chir Anin Comp 31:21l, 1996.
418a. Spugnini EP、et al: Seminoma with cutaneous metas-
439.
 Joncs BR, et al: Cataneous collagcn nodules in a dog.
tasis in a dog. J Am Anirn Hosp Assoc 36:253, 2000.
J Srmall Amim Pract 26:445, 1983.
419. Susaneck SJ, et al: Infarnmatory mammary carcinoma
440. Kraft 1, Frese K: Histological stuctics on canine pig-
in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoe 19:971, 1983.
Inented moles. J Comp Pathol 86:143, 1976.
420. white S1), et al: Cutaneous Imetastases of a manmary
441. Marks SL, et al: Nodular dermatofibrosis and renal
adenocarcinoma rcsernbling eosinophilic plaques in a
cystadenomas in a goldcn retriever. Vet Dermatol 4:
cat. Felinc Pract 15:27, 1985.
133,1993.
Paraneopiastic Syndromes
442. Mays MBG, et al: Regional collagenous nevi in three
 420a. Cohen PR: Paraneoplastic dermatopathology. Cuta-
dogs: Nevus, nxdular dermatobrosis. or sormething
new? In: Ihrke PJ, ct al (eds.). Advances in Veteri-
neous paraneoplastic: syndromes. Ady Dermatol 11:
nary Denmatology II. Pergamon Press, New York,
215, 1996.
420b. Guaguere E, et al: Lesions cutanees assciees a des
1993, p. 315.
443. Moe i., 1iurn B: Hereditary multifocal renal cyst-
maladies intermes chez le chien. Prat Med Chir Anin
adenocarcinomas and nodular dermatofibrosis in'31
Comp 32:275, 1997.
German shepherd dogs. J Simall Anim Pract 38:498.
Cysts
1997.
420c. Chaitman J, et al: Msltiple cyelid cysts resembling
443a. Nell B, et al: Nodulire Derinatofbrose und renales
apocrine hidrocystomas in three Persian cats and oue
 Zystadlenokarzinom bci einein Schafer hundmischling.
Ifimalayan cat. Vet Patho! 36:474, 1999.
Wien Tierarztl Mschr 85:123. 1998.
421.
444. Paradis M, Scott Dw: Naevi recemmcnt rcconnus
Med Assoc 194:67, 1989.
chez le chien: Naevus comedonien, nacvus organoide
422. Davidson HJ. Blanchard Gl.: Periorhital epidermal
lineaire et naevus du follculc pilcux. Point Vet 21:
cyst in the nedial canthus of threc cdogs. J Am Vet
489, 1989.
Med Assoe 198:271, 1991.
 445. Perry W: Generalized nodular derinatofibrosis anrd re-
|414 · Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
nal cystadenoina in u scries of 10 closely related
Caicinosis Circumscripta
German shepherd dogs. Aust Vet Pract 25:90. 1995.
460. Alhaidari Z: La calcinose circonserite du chien: a pro-
446. Rourlebush P, MacDonald JM: Mucocutaneous an-
pos de deux cas. Prat Med Chir Anin Coup 30:339.
 giomatous hamartoma in a dog. I Am Anim Hosp
1995.
Assoc 20:168,1984.
461. Andlerson WI, Scott DW: Calcinosis circumseripta in
446a. Scararnpella F, cl al: Linear organoid nevus in a
a domestic short-haired cat. Cornell Vet 77:348, 1987.
dog. Vet Dermatol 11:69, 2000.
462. Berrocal A, et al: Calcinosis circumseripta in two cats.
447. Scott DW, et al: Ncvi in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp
Feline Pract 20(3):0, 1992.
Assoc 20:505, 1984.
463. Bohmer E, et al: Caleinosis cutis der Ballen bei einer
448. Sugai Y, et al: Portwine
stain nevus in a dog. Jpn J
Katze. Tierarztl Prax 19:88, 1991.
Vet IDerimatol 4:29, 1998.
464. Davidson EB, et al: Calcinosis circumseripta of the
448a. Tonssaint S, ct al: Benign epidermal proliferations.
thoracic wall in a German shepherd dog. J Ain Anin
Adv Dermatol 14:307, 1999.
Hosp Assoc 34:153, 1998.
449. Vilafranca M, et al: Chromophilic-cosinophilic (orco-
465. Gardner DE, et al: Calcinosis cireumseripta-like le-
cyte-like)renal cell carcinoma in a dog with nodular
sions in dogs associated with use of choke chains. N
denmatofbrosis. Vet Pathol 31:713, 1994.
Z Vet J 23:95, 1975.
450.Walder EJ, Gross T1.: Focal adnexal dysplasia (folli-
466. Ginel 'P, et al: Calcinosis cireurnscripta associated
culosebaceous hamartoma). In: Ihrke Pj, et al (eds.).
with mecdroxprogesterone in two poodle bitches. J
Advances in Veterinary Dernatology 11. Pergamon
Am Anim Hosp Assoe 28:391, 1992.
Press, New York, 1993, p. 311.
467. Ginel PJ, et al: A further case of medroxyprogester-
451. white SD, et al: Nodular dermatofibrosis and cystic
one aeetate associated with calcinosis circumscripta in
renal disease in threc mixed-breed dogs and a boxer
the dog. Vet Rec 136:44, 1995.
dog. Vet Dermatol 9:119, 1998.
468. Gross TL: Calcinosis circumscripta and renal dyspla-
452. Wcipers WL. Jarrett WFlI: Haemangioma of the
sia in a dog. Vet De1matol 8:27, 1997.
scroturm of dogs. Vet Rec 66:106, 1954.
469. Jackson HA, Barber PJ: Resolution of metastatic cal-
453. White. SD, et al: Inflammatory linear verrucous epi-
ciheation in the paws of a cat with succcssful dietary
dermal nevus in four dogs. Vet Dermatol 3:107, 1993.
Inanagement of renal hyperparathyroidism. J Small
Keratoses
Anim Pract 39:495, 1998.
454. Anderson WI, et al: Idiopathic benign lichenoid kera-
 470. Joffe Dj: Calcinosis circumseripta in the footpad of a
tosis in the pinna of the ear in four dogs. Corell Vet
dog. Can Vet J 37:161, 1996.
471. Kirby BM, et al: Calcinosis circumscripta associated
79:179, 1989.
455. Bensingnor E, Carlotti DN: Keratose solairc chez
with polydioxanone sutures in two young dogs. Vet
deux chiens nus. Point Vet 27:263, 1995.
Surg 18:216, 1989.
456. Center SA, et al: Multiple cutaneous horns on the
472. Lewis DG, Kelly.
DF: Calcinosis circumscripta in
footpads of a cat. Feline Pract 12:26, 1982.
dogs as a cause of spinal ataxia. J Small Anim Pract
457. Goldschrmidt MH, Kunkle G: Inverted follicular kera-
31:36, 1990.
473. Rewerts JM, et al: Idiopathic caleinosis circumscripta
tosis im a dog. Vet Pathol 16:374, 1979.
458. Koinani S, et al: Four cuses of cutaneous hons in the
causing lameness in a husky. Iowa St Univ Vet 56(1):
footpads of feline leukemia virus-negative cats. J Jpn
23, 1994.
474. Seott DW, Bucergcr RG: Idiopathic calcinosis cireum-
Vet Med Assoc 51:27, 1998.
scripta in the dog: A retrospective analysis of 130
Mucinosis
cases, J Au: Anin Hosp Assoc 24:651, 1988.
459. Dillberger JE, Altman NH: Focal mucinosis in dogs:
475.
Slanpley A, Bellah JR: Calcinosis circuinscripta of
Seven cases antl a review of cutaneous mucinoses of
the metacarpal pad in a young dog. J Am Vet Med
nan and aninals. Vet Pathol 23:132, 1986.
Assoc 196:113, 1990.
Chapte!
Dermatoses of Pet Rodents,
Rabbits, and Ferrets
wmer complaints relative to skin problerms in pet rodents, rabbits, and ferrets are
commonly encountered in small aninal practice.,3-6, 10-12, 16-20 Although much has 
been written about the dermatoses of the comnonly kept exotic marnmals, the material is
 often anecdotal or difficult to interpret. In particular, therapeutics in cxotic animals is
controversial because few of the drugs commonly used are approvedl for use in these
spccics. In addition, becausc most treatmcnts have cvolved through a hit-and-miss ap-
proach, there are great discrepancies in the literature concerning what drugs to usc and at
what dose to administer them. Over 300 references on these small “exotie" mammals were
listed in the fifth edition of this text. '7
 Special caution is indicated with the use of antibiotics, because death due to direct
the guinea pig and rabbit, antibiotics that specifcally affect gram-positive organisms are
 contraindicated, and broad-spectrurn antibioties should be used. In rabbits and rodents, it
aerobic, anaerobic, gram-positive, and gram-negative bacteria.0 15 The safest drugs are the
fuoroquinolones, trimethoprim-sulfonamides, chloramphenicol, aminoglycosides, and met-
ronidazole.7a, 10. 15
 One drug that is commonly used in these species and that appears to be safe and
subcutaneously and repeated every 2 weeks until the disorder being treated is curcd. It
has also been reported that ivermectin is effective topically (one or two drops applied
between the scapulae).47, 7t
Special prccautions must also be observed when using topical medications. First,
these animals routinely remove topical agents through their grooming behaviors. Second,
thesc small creatures are prone to hypothermia after shampooing and dipping. Thus,
 q snu see ap pue amndua apoq ie ada q pnous suonnos snonbe
warm and dry and away frorn drafts after treatment. Avoid alcohol-based sprays. In
addition, inhalation/aspiration pneumonia is a potential problem. Thus, the face is best
avoided when dips are administered.
The structure and function of small exotic mammal skin are similar to those described
d u sno sqen pe (sard eaua sou) suu u yoe eh at'l nae 
orderly waves originating on the ventrum between the front legs and spreading dorsaly
and caudally. In some rabbits, thickened patches of skin can be associated with the
variation in hair growth cycles. This is more common in young rabbits and becomes less
obvious with increasing age. The mean thickness in these patches is 2 mm as compared
with l mim in norrnal skin. Histologic examination of the patches reveals increased size of
hair follicles and increased vascularity. Notable histologic differences include (l) the
absence of epitrichial sweat glands in rodcnts and (2) thc structure of the tail epithelium 
of the mouse and rat, which features orthokeratosis with a stratum granulosum at the
follicular osia and parakeratosis without a stratum granulosum in the interfollicular areas.
Hamsters have large glands on either Hank, which are visible as dark brown patchcs
 p s a  d n  ss 'se a u d a are s
used for marking territory. In sexually arouscd males, the haircoat over the glands be-
comes matted from secretions and readily visible, and the animals scratch the areas as if
1415
|4l6 * Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets
they are pruritic. These findings may be interpreted as signs of skin discasc by some
owners. Gerhils have a yellowish tan, midventral scent gland, which is also scbaceous,
more prominent in male animals, and occasionally mistaken as a cutaneous abnormality.
Rabbits have a rnental or chin gland (which is sebaceous in nature) with which they mark
around the cxtermal auditory meatus. In addition, nornal ferrets can have several come-
dones on the tail.
 Most rodents are burrowing animals that spend most of their time in the wild seeking
food and escaping predators. When they are placed in sterile environments with ad
libitum feeding and no dangcr of predators, they are left with little to do except to chew
on themselves or on others. In addition, male rodents tend to be territorial and aggressive.
 Self-inficted trauma or that inficted on cagemates can be triggered or amplified by
crowding.
Some other normal behaviors may be rmisinterpreted as pruritus. A rabbit ribbing its
mental, or chin, gland on a cage or furniture is only marking its territory. Likewise, a
guinea pig scooting or dragging its perineal area on the ground is usually scent-marking.
although in some male animals, the glandular secretions can become impacted and causc
irritation. Male hamsters may clean and fuss with their fank glands.
the ears, the nostrils, and the haireoat of rodents and rabbits.s 11 17 Not surprisingly, S.
qureus is a cominon opportunist and cause of skin infections in these species.
Finally, these small creatures, especially mice, rats, guinea pigs, and rabbits, are
frequently used for studying models of hunan diseases (e.g., hereditary hypotrichoses and
ichthyoses in mice and rats), for exanining the pathogenesis of various dermatoses also
a r sd a  s e   a s  s
ing therapeutic agents used in various human dermatoses (e.g, treatiment of Malassezia
dermatitis in guinea pigs and the use of retinoids in rhino mice), for studying percutane-
ous absorption and various aspects of dermatopharmacology (e.g., the mouse tail assay for
studying epidermal drug effects), and for screening the potential irritancy or sensitization
of topical agents (e.g, the guinea pig Draize test for contact allergens and the rabbit skin
test for topical irritants).16
· CHINCHILLA
In the wild, chinchillas keep their haircoats clean and healthy by bathing in fine volcanic
dust.17 A similar dust is coinmercially available (chinchilla dust, or Fuller's earth) and
should be provided daily.3. 10. 17,21 The dust is poured 5 to 10 cm deep in a metal pan and
left in the animal's cage for about 30 minutes. Chinchillas deprived of their dust baths are
prone to abnornalities of the haircoat and skin. Chinchillas kept in a warm: (warmer than
 80°F) humid environment develop matted fur.
Fungal Infections
Dermatophytosis is uncommon in chinchillas.3 4 17. 2 Trichophyton mentagrophytes is the
most frequent cause, but Microsporum gypseum and M. canis are occasionally isolated.
Lesions arc most common around the eyes, the nares, and the mnouth, but may occur
anywhere, Circumscribed areas of alopecia, broken hairs, and variable degrees of scaling.
erythema, and crusting are seen. Secondary staphylococcal infection can occur and usually
 presents as cellulitis or abscess.22
Recommended therapy includes griscofulvin by mouth (50 mg/kg g24h) for 30
g isnp ueapo e o rpmod ude ppe o ppoi uq Asnod pr i z ar sa
(see Chap. 5), the authors cannot recommend it.
Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabhits, and Ferrets · I417
Fur Chewing
Chinchillas may chew, pull out, and eat their fur during times of stress (gestation, travel,
and shows), in the absence of dust baths, and for unknown reasons.3. 10, 17, 21, 22 when the
heritable trait, that no therapy is effective, and that the condition is best controlled by
 pellets, and reducing stress may help.
Fur-Slip
 o ao si drsg sdesa hi se r jo p e m ed e aa oi so
when chinchillas are frightened or handled roughly. Chinchilla fur grows in tufts with up
to 90 fbers per follicle and up to 1000 follicles/cm.2 22 Fur-slip affects spots 2 to 5 cm in
diameter. Fur regrowth oceurs within 3 months for some folicles and usually takes 5
 months for an cntire spot. Howevcr, regrowth is rarely a perfect fit and always looks
patched.
Nutritional Disorders
Fatty acid defciency results in generalized scaling, poor haircoat, reduced hair growth,
and perhaps cutaneous ulcers in the chinchilla.2. 21
Zinc deficiency may produce alopecia.21
● FERRET
Ferrets have activc sebaceous glands that contribute to their distinctive odor and some-
what greasy feeling coat. Occasional small, red-brown waxy deposits can be found on
normal skin. During breeding season, intact males have increased sebaceous secretions, to
the point of having a yellowish discoloration of the undercoat, a very oily fur, and quite a
musky odor. Frequent bathing may strip essential oils from the skin, resulting in keratini-
zation disorders and pruritus.lo Owners should be encouraged to use mild shampoo no
more frequently than once monthly, if possible.
Bacterial tnfections
 Bacterial skin infections are uncominont in the ferret and are usually caused by S. aureus
 or Streptococcus spp.* Infections are usually secondary to bite wounds (cspccially on the
neck of female ferrets during breeding season, perpetratcd by aggressive male animals as
and follicular (Fig. 21-1) lesions or dccp abscesses and fistulae. Staphylococcal or strepto-
coccal cellulitis of the neck may be associated with dental disease and imandibular osteo-
myelitis.2s Diagnosis is based on cytologic examination, Trcatment consists of a reginen of
% o %go 1o poad uopy %e) sqooupue erdo jo suogeuqoo snouen
chlorhexidine), surgical drainage, and the administrafion of systemic antibioties (Table
21-1).
 Actinomycosis (*lumpy jaw) is rarely reported in ferrets.17 2s Affected animals have
 nodules or abscesses in the neck, and fistulae and discharge of thick green-yellow pus may
be seen.
*See references 4, 6, 15, 17, 24, 25, 30.
|418 · Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Fcrrcts
FIGURE 21-I. Superfcial bacte-
rial folliculitis in a ferret. Multiple
crusted papules and patchy hair loss
over dorsaf midline.
Fungal Infections
Dermatophytosis appears to be rare in ferrets.* M. canis und T. mentagrophytes are the
 most common causes, and young aninals are most frequently affected. Lesions consist of
annular areas of alopecia, broken hairs, scale, and varying degrees of erythema and
crusting. Pruritus is usually absent. Diagnosis is confirmed by microscopic examination of
affected hairs and fungal culture. Therapy consists of topical application of antifungal
agents and environmental clean-up as described for cats. Griseofulvin is usually not
needed. Dermatophytosis in ferrets is a potcntial zoonosis. Blastomycosis was diagnosed in
*Sec rcferenccs 3, 6, 10, 17, 24, 25, 28, 35.
● Table 21-1
CoMMon TherapeutIc AGenrS In SMall
MAMMALS
AGENT
PROTOCOL
Antibiotics
Amoxicillin
10-20 mg/kg SC or PO q12h (ferret, nouse, rat)
Ampicillin
5- 10 mg/kg SC or PO q12h (ferret, mouse, rat)
Ccphalexin
15-25 mg/kg P0 q12h
Chloramphenicol succinate
50 mg/kg IM or SC q12h
Chloramphenicol palmitate
50 ng/kg PO q12h
Ciprofoxacin
5- 15 mg/kg PO cq12h
Doxycycline
 5-10 mg/kg PO or SC q24h
Enrofloxacin
5-20 mg/kg PO or SC q12h
Gentamicin
5 mg/kg IM or SC q24h
Metronidazole
20 mg/kg PO q12-24h
Sulfadiazine-trincthoprin
15-30 mg/kg SC q24h
Sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim
15--30 mg/kg PO q12h
Tetracycline hydrochloride
20 mg/kg SC or PO q12h
Antifungals
Griseofulvin
25-50 mg/kg PO q24h
Antiparasitics
Anitraz 250 ppm
Total body dip q2wk
Ivermectin
0.3-0.4 mg/kg SC q2wk
Lime sulfur 2%
Total body dip q7d
IM, intramuscularly, PO, orally; SC, subcutaneously.
Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets · I419
ferret with multiple subcutaneous nodules.24 Coccidioidonycosis was diagnosed in a ferret
with a persistent draining tract of the stife.27
An outbreak of otitis exterma and pinnal necrosis in association with mites (Otodectes?)
and yeast (Malassezia?) infection was reported.26 A painful, rapicdly progressing crusting and
necrosis of the pinnae spread, if untreated, onto the face. Mites and yeast were found in
smcars. Histopathologic findings included suppurative epidermitis, numerous surface yeast,
q24h, per os) and a polypharmaceutical otic preparation was rapidly effective.
Ectoparasites
Otodectic mange (ear mites) is common in ferrets. 10. 17. 38 Affected ferrets may manifest no
clinical signs or variable degrees of excessive cerumen production. Pruritus, infammation.
and secondary bacterial infection are uncommon. Diaginsis is confirrned by finding Oto-
ivermectin (500 μg/kg divided bctwecn the two ears).10 Injectable iverinectin is the
(Ivomec diluted 1:10 in propylene glycol; 400 μg/kg divided equally in both ears, re-
peated in 2 weeks) was more effective than the subcutaneous administration of ivermectin
(400 μg/kg, repeated in 2 weeks). Ivermectin should be used with caution in pregnant
jills,17 25, 28 when ivermectin was administered at 2 to 4 weeks of gestation, an increased
incidence of congenital defects, such as cleft palates, was seen. However, when ivermectin
was administered after 4 weeks of gestation, no problems were noted.
may be asyrnptomatic or have cutaneous reaction patterns similar to fea bite hypersensi-
tivity in cats. Ferrets manifesting presumed Hea bite hypersensitivity have a pruritic
papulocrustous dermatitis ovcr the rump, ventral abdomen, and caudomedial thighs, or a
sef-induced, symmetric alopccia ovcr the rump, flanks, ventral abdomen, or medial thighs
(fur-mowing) in which the skin appears normal. Treatment strategies must include thc
ferret; in-contact ferrets, cats, and dogs; and the environment, as described or cats.
Fipronil spray has been found to be safe and effective for ferrets.31
Sarcoptic mange is uncommon in ferrets and has two clinical presentations: (1)
intense pruritus and dermatitis over the face, the pinnae (Fig. 21-2A), and the ventrum
and (2) pruritic pododermatitis.10. 17 In the pododerimatitis form, tlie feet are swollen,
erythematous, and crusted, and the claws may be dystrophic. Affected ferrets may actually
slough claws or digits. Diagnosis is confirined by finding Sarcoptes scabiei mites in skin
sp s a  sn  ad o e se psn uo st ade
(weekly until 2 weeks after clinical cure) or ivermectin injections.
Demodicosis was reported in two unrelated fcrrcts that were living in thc same
household and receiving long-term treatmcnt with a glucocorticoid-containing otic oint-
ment.34 The ferrets exhibited excessive cerumen in the ears and pruritus, alopecia, come-
dones and orange discoloration of the skin behind the ears and on the ventrum. Skin
scrapings and ear srmears revealed numerous short mites that resembled Dernodex gatoi.
Amitraz dips were curative, and no side effects were reported.
Ferrets housed outdoors may occasionally have cysts, abscesses, or fistulae in the neck
includes careful surgical removal of the larva and routine wound care.
Flystrike (especially Wohlfahrtia vigil) can be a problem for coimrnercial ferret ranch-
crs and outdoor ferrets.lo Eggs are commonly laid on the face, neck, and fanks of young
ferrets, causing irritation and subcutaneous abscesses.
2i'sea a pue peq  pmoe Aadsa say uo puny  aiisu u sy
Treatment is as described for cats.
as an animal model for studlying dracunculiasis.17 Lesions consist of tendcr swcllings,
which abscess and develop fistulae. Iesions occur most commoniy on the legs.
FIGURE 2l-2. A, Alopecia, crusts, and excoriations on the pinnae of a ferret with sarcoptic
ange. B, Mast cell tumor on the lower jaw of a ferret. C, Sebaceous cpithelioma on the shouldler
of u ferret. D, Squamous cell carcinoma on the lip of a ferret. (Courtesy of W. Gould.）E,Alopecia,
crusting, and ulceration of the nosc of a gerbil with "sore mose." F, Squanous cell carcinoma of the
ventral scent gland in a gerbil. (Courtesy of W. Gould.) G, Staphylococcal pododerinatitis in a
guinca pig, (Courtesy of J. King.) H, Alopecia and thick crusts over the dorsum in a guinea pig wih
trixacariasis. (Courtesy of E. Guaguere.)
1420
Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets · I42I
Viral Infections
S so    g ss     si a s
include an erytheimatous rash under the chin and in the inguinal region; swelling and
 brownish crusts on the chin, lips, nose, and the periocular area; and swollen, hyperkera-
the anus and inguinal region.
Endocrine Disorders
HYPERADRENOCORTICISM
Adrenocortical neoplasia and hyperplasia are the most common causes of progressive
bilateraly symmetric alopecia in the ferret.10.37.39a 41. 43Two authors indicated that this
disorder accounted for about 25% of all the ferrets examined in their practice.3 The
condition was initially diagnosed as Cushing's syndrome. However, other classic clinical
signs (polyuria, polydipsia, and polyphagia) and hematologic, biochemical, or urologic
abnormalities associated with Cushing's syndrome are rarely present. In addition, basal
plasma cortisol levels are usually within the normal range and adrenal function tests
(adrenocorticotropic hormone [ACTH] stimulation, dexamethasone suppression) have not
FIGURE 21-3. Young ferret with canine dis-
temper virus infection. A. The eyes are encrusted
shut with mucopurulent exudate. B, Dermatitis,
excoriations, and crusting around the lips and
chin; hyperkeratosis of the footpads. C,Dermati-
tis in the inguinal area. (From Hillyer EV, Que-
senberry KE: Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents:
Clinical Medicine and Surgery. W.B. Saunders,
Philadelphia, 1997.)
I422 · Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets
adlrenal gland is not atrophied. These considerations in conccrt with the common occur-
rence of vulvar enlargement in affcted female ferrets and returm to male sexual behavior
 in castrated male ferrets suggested that the endocrine abnormality was in the adrenocorti-
cal production of sex hormones.41 Median plasma concentrations of 17-hydroxyprogester-
      d  e    
concentration of at least one of these three hormones, but only 22% had high concentra-
tions of all three hormones. These concentrations decreased after adrenalectomy.
 The etiology of hyperadrenocorticism in ferrets is uuknowm, but several hypotheses
havc been put forth.10. 43 Early neutering may lead to metaplasia of undiferentiated
gonadal cells in the adrenal capsule. In a Dutch study, a significant linear correlation was
found between the age at neutering and the age at the time of diagnosis,12a Hyperadreno-
corticism in ferrets is common in the United States, but apparently rare in the United
Kingdom, suggesting that diet (prepared foods in the United States, whole prey in the
United Kingdom), photoperiod (housed indoors in the United States, outdoors in the
United Kingdom), and genetics (U.S. population more inbrcd) may also play a role.
a m e e go ( r sa a pe z aq as ae sis ae
frequency in females and males. In rmost cases, clinical signs are frst noted in the spring.
usualy begins on the tail and tail base (Fig. 21-4) and progresses to the ventral abdomen,
caudomedial thighs, dorsal surface of hind paws, lumbosacral region, and shoulder blades.
spring and spontaneously regress in the autumn. However, clinical signs recur with in-
creasing severity each spring and eventually persist.1. 17, 43 Most affected males and
 se a u un s pa a  s ns e au sn
21 -5), as is return to male sexual behavior in castrated males. In more chronic cases, the
 back of the neck, top of the head, and trunk become alopecic, and the body skin becomes
thin and hypotonic (Fig. 21-6). About 9% to 30% of affected ferrets are reported to have
varying degrees of pruritus, mostly over the dorsum between the shoulder blades.10, 43, 43
mines. Numerous comedones are occasionally found on the tail, and phlebectasias may be
u    m a  s   e s
males) occur in about 63%, 56%, 87%, and 15%, respectively, of the cases.13 Mammary
gland hyperplasia has been reported, and stump pyometras arc not ncommon. Stranguria
may be present in up to 19% of affected males.4au The enlarged adrenal gland can be
palpated in about 30% of cases.
FIGURE 2I-4. Alopecia of thc
tail in a ferret with an adrenal adle-
noma
Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets · I423
FIGURE 21-5. Symmetric alopecia and! vulvar
enlargement associated with an adrenal adenoma
in a feret. (Courtesy of W. Gould.)
FIGURE 21-6. Truucal alopecia
and hypotonic skin (note exaggerated
wrinkling) in a ferret with an adrenal
adenoma.
I424 · Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Fcrrets
Diagnosis is usually confirmed by ultrasonographic exanination or exploratory laparot-
oo rn s gy sude rdxa pue rona oqdeouosnqq uo
creatinine ratios were significantly higher in ferrets with hyperadrenocorticism than in
normal ferrets.29 However, this is not specific for hyperadrenocorticism, and affected
ferrets can have normal ratios.42
 Eighty-four percent of affected ferrets have unilateral adrenal tumors, whereas 16%
have bilateral adrenal tumors.43 Of the unilateral tumors, over 80% are in the left adrenal
gland.17, 43, 43a Histologically, 56% of the tumors are nodular hyperplasia, 27% are adeno-
 I u iasie sioung v g. lu, an %1 pue suouape ane %i1 ‘suou
diameter were adenocarcinomas.43 In 47% of the patients with bilateral tumors, each
gland had a diferent histologic type of tumor.43 43# All male ferrets with a returm of male
sexual behavior had adenocarcinomas.43
 In one study,4 27% of the ferrets with hyperadrenocorticism had concurrent insulino-
mas. This emphasizes the importance of performing a complete exploratory.
 The “adrenal panel" (Clinical Endocrinology Laboratory, Department of Comparative
Medicine, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, 615-974-5638) may give diagnostic
results in 96% of the cases.?9 However, results are not always diagnostic, and the test may
 not be cost-effective in a practice situation.43, 43
 In most animals, the treatment of choice is unilateral adrenalectomy.10. 17 43 Clinical
improvement is evident within 2 to 8 weeks, and complete recovery is usually seen within
5 months. Hair regrowth usually occurs in the opposite direction to which it was lost. In
two cases in which a unilateral adrenalectomy was performed and no hair growth had
occurred for 6 to 8 months, a secondary exploratory revealed tumors on the rcmaining
adrenal.43 Seventeen percent of the animals with unilateral tumors develop tumors on the
remaining adrenal, resulting in a recurrence of clinical signs within 14 months.1 Ferrets
with bilateral adrenal tumors should have the largest adrenal gland completely removed,
g  '( [ ) o  9 j og 0 o q 
following subtotal bilateral adrenalectomy, 15% of the ferrets had recurrence of clinical
signs within 7 to 22 months.43a
Medical treatment has been used, usually unsuccesfully, when surgery could not be
performed, or when, after surgical removal of a neoplastic adrenal, the remaining adrenal
used at 50 mg orally, once daily for 7 days, then every 3 days until clinical cure.
weekly maintenance dose of 50 mg. To facilitate administration, the 0.p'-DDD is mixed
with corm starch and 50-mg doses are put in gelatin capsuies. However, mitotane is rarely
effective.10. 43a Ketoconazole has been ineffective wheni given orally at 15 mg/kg every 12
hours.10. 43a
 Anecdotal reports indicate that leuprolide (Lupron, TAP Pharmaceuticals), when given
at 100 μug/kg subcutaneously, every 21 days, is very effective for the treatment of hyperad.
renocorticism in ferrets. Response is usually seen by the third injection and is complete by
6 months. Once maximum response is achieved, the interval between injections is ex-
tended. Ferrets with aggressive adrenal carcinomas may not respond.
HYPERESTROGENISM
 Hyperestrogenism is well recognized in the female ferret.10. 17. 24 28 However, this disorder
is rare because large-volume ferret breeders are neutering and descenting the animals at 6
 ss    e  p      a p s
estrus. Jills allowed to remain in estrus during the breeding season are susceptible to the
toxic effects of estrogen on bone marrow. Affected jills develop pancytopenia and varying
 degrees of alopecia. Clinical signs accompanying the pancytopenia inelude pale mucous
membranes, petechial or ecchymotie hemorrhages, anorexia, depression, and weight loss.
Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabhits, and Ferrets · I425
FIGURE 2I-7. Alopecia of the
tnank and tail in a jill with hyperestro-
genism.
 The alopecia is bilaterally symmetric, beginning on the tail, the perineum, the abdomen,
the medial thighs, and the rump and progressing cranially (Fig. 21-7). Vulvar enlarge-
ment is a constant finding. Untreated animals die of infectious or hemorhagic complica-
tions. Treatment is often unrewarding. Ovariohysterectomy; intravenous blood transfu-
sions; administration of dexamethasone, anabolic steroids, and systemic antibiotics; and
to be repeated several times for 3 to 5 months.10. 17. 24, 28
ALOPECIA ASSOCIATED WITH TESTICULAR NEOPLASIA
Testicular neoplasia is rare, because most large-volume breeders neuter male ferrets at 6
weeks of age. A sparse haircoat and a bald tail were reported in association with an
 interstitial cell carcinoma of the testicle in one ferret.17 Total body alopecia and pruritus
wcre reported in association with a testicular Sertoli's cell neoplasm in another ferret.17
BREEDING SEASON ALOPECIA
Breeding season alopecia is commonly seen, especially in the female and less fre-
quently in the male ferret, during the period of sexual activity frorm March through
neutered ferrets are affected. Bilaterally symrmetric alopecia affects the tail, the perineum,
the ventral abdomen, the rump. and occasionally, the periocular region and the paws.
 Affected ferrets are otherwise healthy, and spontaneous hair regrowth occurs in the fall.
SHEDDING
Seasonal shedding is seen in spring and early summer.6, 17. 28s, 41 Variable degrees of
hypotrichosis or alopecia may be seen over the trunk and resolve spontaneously within a
month or two.
TELOGEN DEFLUXION
fever, severe illness, surgery, andi anesthesia).17, 41 Bilaterally symmetrie hypotrichosis or
alopecia is most proiminent on the trunk (Fig. 21-8).
I426 · Derrmatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Fcrrets
FIGURE 21-8. Telogen defluxion.
Patchy alopecia of the dorsal trunk.
(Courtesy of M. Paradis.)
HYPOTHYROIDISM
Although anecdotal reports suggest that hypothyroidism is a common cause of endocrine-
e sp e ns pau a to u sne a aa u doe 
know of no documented cases. Some data have been published on basal serun thyroxine
 and triodothyronine levels and thyroid function tests in normal ferrets.17. 28
Miscellaneous Conditions
Some authors believe that the most common cause of alopecia and dull, dry haircoat in
ferrets is poor dietary practices.3 Food passage averages 3 to 4 hours in ferrets; thus, diets
high in protein and fat but low in fiber are important. A low-fat diet may result in a dry.
dull haircoat.l0
 Biotin deficiency (from excessive feeding of raw eggs) can result in bilaterally symmet-
ric alopecia in ferrets.6. 24. 25. 28
Severe intestinal parasitism (especially Toxascaris leonina) can produce variable de-
 grees of hair loss and scaling in ferrets.25
Contact dermatitis can occur with frequent use of shampoos or insecticide sprays.25
 Focal areas of alopecia have been seen at the site of previous injections.23
The authors have seen an occasional ferret with prosumptive atopy. Affected animals
manifested synmetric, noniesional pruritus over the trunk, the rump (Fig. 21-9), and the
 paws. Fleas were not present, hypoallergenic diets were ineffective, and response to
glucocorticoids or chlorpheniramine was good. One of the authors (WHM) has seen one
food-hypersensitive ferret with the same clinical signs. The feret was normal whcn fed a
commercial hypoallergenic diet for cats (Innovative Veterinary Diets [IVD] venison).
Erythema annulare centrifugum was reported in a ferret with hyperadrenocorticisin.42
Parallel linear bands of erythema were prcsent over the dorsolateral lumbosacral area and
encircling the tail (Fig. 21-10). The dermatitis disappeared after 20 days of treatment
with a commercial omega 3/omega 6 fatty acid-containing product (Derm Caps).
The blue ferret syndrome is an unusual idiopathic condition affecting ferrets of either
sex, neutered or intact.? The abdominal skin shows bilaterally symmetrie bluish discolor-
ation. Affected ferrets are asynptomatic. The condition regresses spontaneously during a
few weeks. In the authors' experience, this condition is mnost commonly seen in ferrets
that have been clipped for surgery or to provide access to veins during the resting phasc
 of the hair cycle. The clipped area remains hairless for a long time, then suddenly begins
to turm blue. It appears that hair follicles are making melanin, which will be incorporated
Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets · I427
B
FIGURE 2I-9. A, Selfinduced alopecia ovcr the rump of a ferrct
with a prwritic dermatosis resembling atopy. B, Same ferret. Selfin-
duced hypotrichosis of hind paw.
I i sn   ' s s sae n e os sr n o
to 2 weeks).
 Self-inflicted facial excoriations (burrowing) rmay be seen in ferrets that have inade-
quate bedding, nesting 1naterial, or hiding spots." Intact females may pull out hair to use
as bedding. 10
Neoplasia
a n a o a are o a pe a s u  ag ae ssou us
  s   s  s  i s e    s
(about l3% of all neoplasms). One of the most frequent of these is the mast cell tu-
mor.10. 17 33 Lesions may be solitary or multiple and 1may come and go over time. Mast cell
FIGURE 2I-I0. Erythema an-
nulare centrifugum in a ferret with
par
encircle the  tail andinvolvc  the
dorsal lumbosacral area.
I428 · Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrcts
tumors present as papules or nodules (see Fig. 21-2B), which vary from skin colored to
yellow, brown, or red. They may be firm, soft, or cystic. Some lesions are pruritic. Lesions
 may occur anywhere, but are most commonly reported on the ncck and dorsal trunk.
Similar to the situation in cats, most cutanieous mast cell tumors in the ferret are
benign.10. 17
 Basal cell tumors and sebaceous gland neoplasms (especially on the head, neck, limbs,
d  ce ai r's  o ose e (t- r h as s  e g
gland carcinomas (especially on the tail and the groin), chondromas (especially on the tail),
chondrosarcomas (especially on the tail), and squamous cell carcinomas (especially on the
digit and the lip [see Fig. 21-2D]) have also been reported on rumerous occasions.17. 33
 Cutancous epitheliotropic lymphoma was reported in an 8-year-old ferret with a 4-
month history of progressve alopecia and pruritic dernatitis.3 The ferret had generalized
alopecia and erythema, excoriations, erosions, crusts, and ulcerated plaques on the head,
trunk, limbs, paws, footpads, and tail The nasal planum and footpads were depigmented,
and the claws were onychogryphotic. Isotretinoin (2 mg/kg/q 24h, per os) produced a
marked improvement after 60 days, but the ferret was euthanized due to renal failure
associated with pyelonephritis.
Other cutaneous neoplasms reported in ferrets include papilloma, fibroma, fbrosar-
 coma, malignant fbrous histiocytoma, histiocytoma, hemangioma, hemangiosarcoma, neu-
rofibroma, neurofbrosarcoma, myxoma, myxosarcoma, ceruminous gland adenocarcinoma,
lymphoma, and rhabdomyosarcoma.*
The treatment of choice for cutaneous neoplasms is surgical excision.
● GErBIL
Bacterial Infections
Bacterial skin infections, usually associated with S. aureus, are common in gerbils.7 8. 17
These infections are virtually always secondary to other perhaps less obvious conditions.
accumulated harderian gland secretions.. 8 Infections resulting from cage-related injury
are typically seen on the nose and the muzzle (from rubbing on the cage and equipment
 or burrowing in abrasive liter), whereas those caused by bite wounds typically occur
around the head, the tail, the rump, and the perineal area. Those secondary to accumu-
lated harderian gland secretion typically begin on the nose and the periocular area. $
Staphylococcal infections may be superficial (alopecia, erythema, oozing, crust, and scale)
or deep (abscess, fistula, and ulcer), and are usually nonpruritic.
Treatment of bacterial derrmatitis includes sone combination of eliminating predispos-
ing causes, daily topical cleaning with a 3% hydrogen peroxide or 0.5% to 1% chlorhexi-
dine, and administration of systemic antibioties (see Table 21- 1).
Ectoparasites
 Demodicosis has rarely been reported in gerbils.6, 17 Lesions occurred on the face, thc
thorax, the abdomen, and the lirmbs and were characterized by alopecia, oozing, crusts,
 scales, and secondary bacterial infection. Demodex merioni was isolated in skin scrapings.
A dermatosis associated with Acarus farris was reported.44 Alopecia, scaling, and
thickening of the skin began on the tail, spread to the hind paws, then to the head.
but environmental changes (decreased humidity, new litter, new food) and a single appli-
cation of fipronil spray were curative.
*See references 6, 10, 17, 28, 32, 33, 40.
Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets * I429
Barbering
Although gerbils tolerate crowding better than do most rodents, they chew or "barber" the
hair of cagermates.6. 8 The affected areas appear clipped or shaved, and rarely arc any
actual skin lesions present. The dorsum of the tail and the top of the head are most
frequently involved.
Bald Nose and Sore Nose
Bald nose describes a clinical condition common to the gerbil, which is characterized by
alopecia on the muzzle and the dorsum of the nose.3.6.5, 15. 17 There are usuall no skin
lesions. The alopecia has been attributed to mechanical trauma associated with rubbing
against cages and cage equipment, and burowing in abrasive bedding. Placing animals in
a sinooth-sided enclosure or aquarium with soft bedding such as shredded paper may be
curative.
 Bald nose may also be an early stage of the nasal dermatitis (sore nose [see Fig. 21-
rich in porphyrins and accumulate about the nasal and facial areas, and apparently lead to
the development of an irritant contact dermatitis and secondary staphylococcal infectiou.
p   r  o sp e se a a m a s 
to self-inficted trauma and secondary infection. The stress of overcrowding and high
humidity may contribute to the development or the severity of the condition. This condi-
tion is common in research colonies and commercial breeding colonies.
The earliest clinical sign is the accumulation of a reddish brown discharge and crust
around the nose, the lips, and less frequently, the eyes. This porphyrin-rich secretion
exhibits an orange fuorescence when viewed under ultraviolet light (Wood's light). There
is frequently protrusion of the nictitans. This is followed by alopecia and, if not treated,
 dermatitis, pruritus, and secondary staphylococcal infections. Lesions can then spread to
the paws, the legs, and the ventrum.
Therapy consists of topical or systermic antibiotic therapy for secondary staphylococcal
infection, if present, and housing with access to sand. Surgical removal of the harderian 
 gland is effective but less practical.6. 17
Miscellaneous Conditions
d p a  ro s   si ss go r l 
tion.6 17 Typically, the back is completely bald, the surrounding haircoat is thinned or
patchily alopecic, and the haircoat shows profound leukotrichia. The majority of affected
animals fail to thrive and die at the timc of weaning. Surviving gerbils develop a normal
haircoat as they mature. The etiopathogenesis of this condition is unknown.
 The ventral scent gland in gerbils can become inflamed from being rubbed against
self-mutilation.4
When relative humidity is greater than 50%, the normally sleek and smooth gerbil
haircoat often appears greasy and stands out.? Pine shavings can also cause this appear-
ance.3
A gerbil's tail skin is very thin, and easily peels off.15 If the tail skin is lost, the
exposed tail becomes necrotic and sloughs off.i6. 16 Alternatively, the bare tail can be
surgically removed where the skin stops.
Neoplasia
The skin is the second most common site of neoplasms in gerbils.6, 17 Skin neoplasms are
s i ao po u (e  sr  on ) s p u s 
ncoplasms in the gerbil are melanocytormas and melanomas (especially of the paw and the
pinna),5, 16 sebaceous gland adenomas (especially of the ventral scent gland),6, 17 and
430 ·Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rahbits, and Ferrets
squamous cell carcinoma (especially of the ventral scent gland [see Fig. 21-2F] and the
and neurofibroma.6, 17
Diagnosis of skin neoplasns is based on exfoliative cytologic study or biopsy, and the
treatment of choice is surgical excision.
● GUInEa PIG
Bacterial Infections
 Bacterial skin infections are common in guinea pigs.2-11, 17 These infections are virtually
always secondary to other _ factors, especially
/ trauma  (cage-related  injuries and bite
wounds) and cctoparasites. Those secondary to bite wounds are typically found around the
head, the tail, thc rump, and the genital area and are associated with S. aureus. Abscesses
(especially abscesses on thc ncck), Streptobacillus moniliformis, or Yersinia pseudotubercu-
the lips was associated with feeding of tough, fibrous hay.17 Treatment of thesc infections
Table 21-1).
An exfoliative dermatitis resembling staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome was re-
 ported in a guinea pig colony, chiefly among female animals in the late stages of gesta-
as initiating factors. Alopecia was first noted on the ventral abdomcn. After a few days, the
skin became acutely erythematous and painful. Affected skin subsequently fissured and
large thick fakes were desquamated. The condition spontaneously resolved after a course
of 10 to 14 days. S. aureus was isolated from the skin, the pharynx, the trachea, and nasal
washings of affected animals. Skin biopsies revealed intragranular acantholysis and cleav-
age within the epidermis with minimal infammation. An exfoliative toxin produced by the
staphylococci was reported to cause the skin lesions.
The most common skin disease associated with S. aureus infection (occasionally
Corynebacterium pyogenes) in the guinea pig is pododermatitis (bumble foot)2-1. 17
Predisposing factors includc trauma to the footpad, poor sanitation, obesity, aging, and
vitanin C deficicncy. Affected animals react vigorously when the feet are palpated. The
the disease process extends to pbalangeal and metatarsal or metacarpal bones and joints.
Most guinca pigs with pododermatitis have a poor prognosis, because treatment is dlifficult
and systemic amyloidosis is a frequent consequence of chronie infection. Pododerimatitis
m s n haq b pn se  aanar q pad aq r
smooth surfaccs, instituting individual weight control, and providing routine foot care.
d     s     s 
iodine or chlorhexidine scrubs, soaks, and ointments under a bandage). Extensive infec
tions also necessitate systeimnic antibiotics (see Table 21 -1).
Fungal Infections
Dermatophytosis is common in guinca pigs and is almost always caused by T. mentagro-
phytes. 1o. 17This dermatophyte can be isolated from the skin and haircoat in approximately
canis, M. gypseum, M. audouini, and T. verrucosum can cause disease in guinea pigs.16
Lesions typically begin as scaling, broken hairs, and alopecia on the nose, which spread to
the periocular, forehead, and pinnal areas. In severe cases, the dorsal lumbosacral area is
also affected (Fig. 2l-1l), but the limbs and the ventrum are usually spared. Pruritus is
Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets · I43I
FIGURE 2I-Il. M. caris infec-
tion in a guinea pig. Alopecia and
erythena oflateral abdouminaland
shoulder regions. (Courlesy of E.
Guaguere.)
usualy minimal or absent. Some animals have more inflammatory lesions characterized by
erythema, follicular papules, pustules, crusts, and pruritus. Diagnosis is confrmed by
microscopic examination of affected hairs and fungal culture. Treatment is usually accom-
plished with the topical application of antifungal agents (2% lime sulfur, 1% chlorhexidine.
or 0.2% enilconazole dips weekly until thc animal is cured).2-1. 17 Griseofulvin is not
usually needed, but can be given at 25 mg/kg every 24 hours orally until the animal is
g sse uad u paoe aq pus uosa jouuue  sr o
 Dermatophytosis in guinea pigs is an important zoonosis.17
 Cryptococcosis was reported in a single guinea pig.'7 The aninal had a plaque on the
dorsum of the nose, which became crusted and ulcerated, and spread into the nostrils.
Skin biopsy was diagnostic, and the aninal waus euthanized.
Guinea pigs have been used as an experimental rmodel for studying the pathogenesis
 of cutaneous candidiasis.$2 Skin lesions are readily produced by the application of Candida
albicans under occlusion and consist of erythema, pustules, oozing, and erusts.
Guinea pigs have also been used as an experimental model for studying the pathogen-
esis and treatment of Malassezia dermatitis.s3 Skin lesions are readily produced by the
 application of inocula of Malassezia (Pityrosporum) ouale and consist of erythema, edema,
crtists, and scales.
Viral Infections
 Hairless guinea pigs have been used as an experimental model for studying the pathogen-
esis of recurrent herpes simplex infcction.46 Intracutaneous inoculation of herpes simplex
yirus produces pustules and crusts, which spontaneously resolve and can be reactivated by
local trauma.
Poxvirus-like virions were demonstrated during the electron microscopic examination
 of specimens from two guinea pigs with a chronic, crusting cheilitis.17
Ectoparasites
Trixacarus (Caviacoptes) caviae is a burrowing sarcoptiforn mite and, arguably, the most
the frst differential diagnostic suspect in intense pruritus in guinea pigs. The mite is
similar to S. scabiei in appearance but is smaller in size (average, 175 μm in length), and
the female mite has a dorsal rather than terminal anus. T. caciae is sinilar in size and
appearance to Notoedres spp. but differs by lacking prominent, sharp, dorsal cuticular
|432 · Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets
H
FIGURE 2I-12. Legend on opposite page
Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets · I433
spines. The areas most commonly affected include the dorsal neck and the thorax (see
Fig. 21-2H), but in severe cases, the entire body may be involved (Fig. 21- 12A).
include lichenifcation, hyperpigmentation, crusts, thick, whitish to ycllowish scales (see
Fig. 2l-12B), and brittle, easily epilated hair. The extreme irritation and self-mutilation
cause lethargy, anorexia, progressive emaciation, and death associated with bacterial infec-
tion or immune-mediated renal disease. Hyperesthesia, behavior such as furiously runring
in circles and blindly walking into objects, and seizures can be seen and may be triggered
by examining the affected animal. Resorption of fetuses and abortion may be scen in
breeding animals. Diagnosis may be confirmed by skin scrapings (Fig. 21-13A), but it is
not unusual for these to be negative. Treatment consists of 2% lime sulfur dips (once
weekly until cure is achieved) or ivermectin injcctions. Orally administered ivermectin is
pruritic papular dermatitis in areas contacted by the guinea pig (arms, thighs, and abdo-
men).
Chirodiscoides cavice is the guinea pig fur mite.10. 17. 4s Infestation is uncommon, and
 clinical discasc is probably rare. Heavy infestations can cause pruritus, alopecia, erythema,
and thc perineum. Diagnosis is confirmed by the microscopic identification of the mites
(see Fig. 21-13B), which are often found attached to hair shafts. Treatment is as de-
scribed for lice. Although injections of ivermectin have been reported to eliminate C.
caviae,. 10. 17 others found this form of therapy to be ineffective.18
 Other mites rarely reported to affect guinea pigs and produce clinical syndromes
characterized by pruritus and dermatitis, which is most prorminent on the face, the pinnae,
and the dorsum, include S. scabiei, Notoedres muris, and Myocoptes musculinus. !7 Diag-
nosis and treatment are as described for T. caviae infestation.
-ied aq Ae d ra au i o ssid ea u pa auo ae ar
ized by two different biting lice, with Gliricola porcelli (the slender guinea pig louse) (see
Fig. 21-13C) being much more frequently encountered than Gyropus otalis (the oval
 guinea pig louse). Trimenopon hispidum is a biting louse rarely isolated from guinea
pigs.a9 Most infestations occur without clinical signs, but heavy infestations may produce a
roughened, disheveled haircoat, scaling, crusting, alopecia, and pruritus, especialy around
the ears and over the dorsum (see Fig. 21-12D). Heavy infestations are more commonly
encountered in young animals and those with decrcased resistancc and under poor man-
agement. Diagnosis is confirmed by gross or microscopic visualization of lice or nits.
Treatment can be accomplished with pyrethrin- or pyrethroid-containing fea powders or
sanitation is important.
a au s  rd r    si sp 
dermatitis consisting of erythema, papules, oozing, crusts, and alopecia. Skin scrapings and
skin biopsy reveal the presence of the nematode Pelodera strongyloides. Removing con-
taminated bedding and maintaining a clean, dry cage environment are curative.
Cheyletiellosis is rarely reported in guinea pigs.7 Affected animals have scaling and
variable degrees of hypotrichosis and pruritus on the dorsum. Skin scrapings reveal the
mite Cheyletiella parasitivorax. Treatment is as described for rabbits.
Demodicosis is rare in guinea pigs.'f Lesions occur most commonly on the trunk (Fig.
FIGURE 2I-I2. A, Alopecia, erythema, and thick, yellwish crusts on the ventrum of a guinea pig with trixacariasis.
(Cotrtesy of E. Guaguere.) B, Close-up of the thick, yellowish crusts on the skin of a guinea pig with trixacariasis. C.
Chirodiscoides caiae infestation in a guinea pig Note the uneven, clipped appearance of the haircoat over the caudal half
of the lody. D, Pediculosis in a guinea pig. Numerous nits can be seen over the face and neck. (Courtesy of J. King. ) E,
F, Epitheltropiclhmaia hamst. Gnralized alpeciahema scaing, an xaggeratd fls of sknG,Sr
self-inficted alopecia and ulceration over the ear, neck, and shoulder in a mouse with M. musouli infestation. (Courtesy of
on su  n e jo yon p  o s pue sso nre o H (m M
infection.
I434 · Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets
21- 14) and consist of alopecia, erythema, papules, and crusts. Pruritus is variable. Diag-
nosis is confirmed by finding numerous Demodex caviae mites in skin scrapings (see Fig.
21-13D). Amitraz dips (250 ppm, every week until 4 weeks afer skin serapings are
negative) are reported to be an effective treatment.
Fleas (C. felis) and ticks may be rarely encountered on guinea pigs.6. 17 Treatment is
the same as thiat described for cats.
Nutritional Disorders
Nutritional deficiencies, other than vitamin C deficiency, are unlikely to be encountered in
pet guinea pigs. Experimental production of nutritional deficiencies with resultant cutane*
ous abnormalities have been reported and are briefy mentioned here. Protein deficiency
 produces generalized alopecia.2. 17 Fatty acid deficiency results in generalized alopecia,
scaling, and dermatitis. 1Pyridoxine ciency produces alopecia, caling, and dermatit,
which is most promincnt on the limbs, the face, and the pinnae.2 17 Vitamin C deficiency
is associated with cutaneous petechiae, ecchymoses, hematomas, generalized scaling, and a
rough, unkempt haircoat.2. 3. 8. 17 Vitamin C deficiency is common and is most commonly
seen in animals being fed a commercial rabbit chow or an outdated commercial guinea
pig chow as the sole diet or in anorectic animals.
B
FIGURE 2I-I3. Ectoparasites. A, Trixacurus cauide (Courtesy of K. Thoday.) B, Chirodiscoides caviae. C, Gliricola
porcelli. (Courtesy of G. Kollias.) D, Demodex caviae (Courtesy of D. Carlotti.) E, Myobia musculli. F, Myocoptes
musculimus. G, Psoroptes. H, Listrophorus gibbus. (B, E to G from Bowman DD: GeorgisParasitology for Veterinarians,
7th ed. W.B. Saunders Co., Philacdelphia, 1999.)
Figure contimued on opposite page
Dernatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets · I435
FIGURE2I-I3.Continued
I436 * Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets
FIGURE 2I-I3. Continued
FIGURE 2I-I4. Alopecia and erythema over
the back of a guinea pig with demodicosis.
(Courtesy of D. Carlotti.)
Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets · I437
Miscellaneous Conditions
tion.&, s, 17 The alopecia is most prominent on the lumbosacral area and the fanks.
Marked sheding during stress is common in guinea pigs.3 When guinea pigs are sick,
 it is often easy to epilate an entire area of haircoat when tenting the skin.
 Guinea pigs establish male-dominated social hierarchies, and animals of low social
ranking or young animals may lose considerable amounts of hair, especialy on the head,
the rump, the perineum, and the prepuce owing to barbering or receiving bite wounds.6.8.
17. 19 Ear chewing can be a problem, resuling in ear margin notches or actual cropping
close to the head. Guinea pigs may also selfbarber, producing hair loss in only those
areas that they can reach with their mouth (the fur on the head, the neck, and the
clipped. The underlying skin is usually normal in appearance. In some cases, the addition
of long-stemmed hay resolves the barbering. suggesting that the cause was boredom or a
need for fiber.5. 8, 17, 19
 s s d s  s  si s p s r si
 cloths and socks in cages with guinea pigs.17 Segments of these materials become wrapped
 around distal extremities and serve as constricting bands or tourniquets. Tissues distal to
the constriction become swollen and painful, then necrotic, and then they slough (Fig.
21-15).
Apparent ergot poisoning was characterized by the sudden onset of anorexia, lethargy.
and lameness.47 The feet became discolored, desiccated, insensitive to touch, and wood-
like.
Thinning of the haircoat is common near the time of weaning in neonates and
spontaneouslyresolves.6,17
Hereditary hairlessness has been reported in guinea pigs (Fig. 21-16)."7 Bilaterally
symmetric alopecia over the fanks and trunk has been seen in guinea pigs with cystic
 of the abdomen, and ovarian cysts may be palpable as discrete, large, rounded masses in
the dorsal middle abdomen. Ultrasonographic examination may be diagnostic.10 Ovariohys-
terectomy is curative.
Sebaceous glands are especially abundant around the anus, in the folds of the perianal
and genital regions, and in the dorsal sacral skin, especially in sexually mature male
animals.6, 10, 17 Excessive accurmulations of sebaceous debris, and occasionally bedding
material and feces, may become entrapped in these folds or mat down the dorsal sacral
FIGURE 2I-I5. Necrosis and
slough of the hindfoot of a guinea pig
caused by a constricting band. (Cour-
tesy of G, Kollias.)
I438 · Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets
FIGURE 2I-I6. Congenital alope-
f jo isaumo) sid eaus e us ro
Gourreau.)
FIGURE 2[-17. Truncal alopecia in a guinea
pig associated with bilateral cystic ovaries. The
cystic ovaries and uterus are on the right.
Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets · I439
laircoat. Intertrigo, secondary bacterial infections, and unpleasant odors may intervene in
this situation. These areas should he cleaned as needed with 3% hydrogen peroxide, 0.5%
chlorhexidine, or a mild astringent (aluminum subacetate) to prevent the aforcimentioned
sequelae.
e sm  u t gspo o jo sur snono pue sisdy doa
most commonly observed on the ventral aspect of the front paws. They can be removed
with scissors and an emery file. Replacement of cage surfaces with smoother materials
Overgrowm claws are a frequent problcm in pet guinea pigs.3. 17 Frequent cxamination
 and trimming prevents traumatic and infectious complications.
Neoplasia
The skin is the second most common site of neoplasia in the guinea pig.2 3. 6. 8, 17 The 
most coinmon cutaneous neoplasm is the trichofolliculoma.'7 This tumor is most com-
monly encountered as a benign, solitary lesion over the dorsal lumbar area (see Fig. 21 --
12E). The overlying skin is usually alopecic and crusted. Frequcntly, a central pore is
seen, through which keratinous imaterial or dark, hemorrhagic exudate is discharged.
 Other cutaneous neoplasms reported in gunea pigs include sebaccous adenoma, fbroma,
fibrosarcoma, lipoma, liposarcoma, schwarmoina, and lymphoma.2, 17
● HAMSTeR
Bacterial Infections
Bacterial skin infections are uncommonly reported in hamsters. S. aureus and Pasteurella
pneumotropica have been recovcred from isolated cases of skin abscesses and bite
[y aue pn sauo pup pur ases peod on ad ae siansh s g'spom
abscess located ventral or cranial to the eye may be a tooth root abscess.'0 Treatment of
bacterial dermatitis includes elimination of predisposing causes, surgical drainage, daily
topical cleaning with 3% hydrogen peroxide or 0.5% chlorhexidine, and occasionally sys-
temic antibiotic administration (see Table 2l - 1).
Experimentally, the hamster is susceptible to infection with Treponerna pallidum
subsp. endericurn, the agent of endenice syphilis of humans.56 Intradermal injection of the
spirochete results in erythematous papules and ulcers, which eventually heal but are
followed by perioral ulcers and an erythematous maculopapular rash on the paws and the
trunk and death. This form of hamster syphilis has been proposed as a useful model for 
the study of the immune response, antibiotic therapy, and vaccination techniques in
human venereal and congenital syphilis.
Fungal Infections
 Dermatophytosis is rare in hamsters and is caused by T. mentagrophytes.2 3. 6. 8. 16-19
Diagnosis is confirmed by microscopic examination of affected hairs and fungal culture.
Treatment is as described for the other rodents
Ectoparasites
 Demodicosis is the most common ectoparasitism of the hamster.in. 17 Demodex criceti and
D. aurati are both normal residents of hamster skin.'7 D. aurati is long and tapered
(averagc, l80 μm long) and inhabits hair follicles, whereas D. criceti is short and stubby
(average, 90 μm long) and inhabits thc keratin and pits of the epidermal surface. Clinical
deimodicosis is seen in aged hamsters, is usually associated with D. aurati, and is usually
associated with conditions that suppress immune responses (e.g., malnutrition, concurrent
I440 · Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets
disease, cancer, and exposure to carcinogens),6, 8. 17. 19 Lesions are most commonly seen 
over the dorsal lumbosacral area but may be generalized (Fig. 21-18). Moderate to
severe alopecia is accompanied by variable degrees of scaling, crythema, and smal hemor-
rhagic crusts. Pruritus is usually absent. Diagnosis is confirmed by skin scrapings. Treat-
 ment of demodicosis in hamsters has not been extensively evaluated or reported. The
authors and others 4. 19 were succeful with 250 ppm of amitraz applied as a whole-body
dip once weekly until 4 weeks after skin scrapings are negative.
 Notoedric mange is rarely reported in hamsters.8. 17, 19 Lesions are characterized by
thick yellowish crusts, erythema, and alopecia on the pinnae, the muzzle, the tail, the
 genitalia, and the paws. Pruritus is severe, and self-mutilation can be extreme. Diagnosis is
confirmed by finding Notoedres sp. mites in skin scrapings. Treatment with 2% lime sulfur
dips (whole-body application weekly until two treatments after clinical cure) or ivermectin
injections is effective.
S. scabiei, T. caviae, and Ornithonyssus bacoti are reported to be rare causes of
pruritus and dermatitis in hamsters.17 Clinical signs, diagnosis, and treatment are the same
 as that described for notoedric mange.
Fleas (C. felis felis) are rarely encountered on hamsters.6 Treatment is the same as
that described for cats.
Traumatic Alopecia and Dermatitis
 Female hamsters are generally more aggressive than are males.6 17 Aggressive hehavior in
establishment of social dominance among Inale hamsters is positively correlated with the
weight, size, and degree of pigmentation of the fank glands.17 Aggression-related bite
wounds are most commonly seen around the head, the tail, and the perineal area.
Aggression can produce severe wounding, such as the complete removal of the fank
glands of the victim.17
FIGURE 2l-I8. Denodicosis in a hamster. A, Alopecia, scaling,
erythema, and lichenilication on the head and neck. (Courtesy of C.
Kollias.) B, Demodex aurati in skin scraping.
Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets · |441
Nutritional Disorders
Nutritional deficiencies are unlikely to be seen in pet hamsters. However, one author9
indicates that hair loss in hamsters is associated most often with continuous feeding of low
protein (less than 16%) feed, such as is commonly found in pet stores. Experimental
production of nutritional deficiencies with resultant cutaneous abnorimalities have been
reported and are briefy mentioned here. Pantothenic acid deficiency produces exfoliative
dermatitis,depigmentation of thehaircoat,and theaccumulationof porphyrin-rich ecr
tions around the nose, the mouth, and the eyes.2 17 Ribofavin deficiency produces alope-
cia, scaling, and dermatitis, which are most evident on the extremities.2, 17 Pyridoxine
deficiency produces a generalized alopecia2 17 Faty acid deficiency results in generalized
-p d rr suo jo se nod o ud n pe s o
ciency results in alopecia and depigrmentation.2
Miscellaneous Conditions
Foreign body granulomas associated with bedding consisting of wood shavings and saw-
dust were reported on the paws and the shoulders of hamsters.7 The problem was
eliminated by using shredded paper as bedding.
Swelling and pruritus of the face and the paws has been reported in several ham-
sters.? In all instances, owners had recently purchased a fresh bag of cedar or pine
shavings produced by a leading pet company or bulk shavings from landscaping or nursery
regressed. Presumably, the shavings had been treated with some chemical that produced a
contact dermatitis.
 Hereditary hairlessness has been reported in hamsters.17
 Hyperadrenocorticism is rarely reported in hamsters.8 54 Clinical signs include bilater-
ally symmetric alopecia, hyperpigmentation, and thinning of the skin. The baseline plasma
cortisol value in one affected hamster was elevated (approxinately twofold increase)
compared with that in one normal hamster. One hamster was treated with metyrapone (8
mg orally q24h for 1 month), and hair regrowth was complete after 12 weeks. A second
hamster was treated with o,p'-DDD (5 mg orally q24h for 1 month), then metyrapone as
described previously, and responded to neither drug. This hamster was euthanized, and a
chromophobe adenoma of the hypophysis and bilateral adrenocortical hyperplasia were
found at necropsy.
The fank scent glands of the hamster can become infamed from being rubbed
 jo u e u a a ae  io s p p
glands can lead to self-mutilation.4
Ringtail is occasionally seen in the hamster (see Rat in this chapter).2. 17
Neoplasia
Skin neoplasms are rare in hamsters.2 6, 8, 17 The most frequently reported cutaneous
frequently in male hamsters and most commonly on the back, the head, the neck, and the
flank gland.
 Epitheliotropic lynphoma (mycosis fungoides) is the second most common cutaneous
ncoplasm of the hamster.17. 5 Affected animals have an exfoliative erythroderma (see
Fig. 21 -12F), which is generally pruritic, and go on to manifest peripheral lymphadenopa-
microscopic examinations demonstrated an epitheliotropic lymphoma jn which many cells
show the typical features of Sezary cells.5s Immunohistochemical studies showed that the
[442 · Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets
FIGURE 21-I9. Epitheliotropic
lympboma in a lhamster. Gencralizcd
alopecia and nultiple crusted nodules
and plaques.
Other cutaneous neoplasms reported in hamsters include basal cell carcinoma, squa-
mous cell carcinoma, keratoacanthoma, papilloma, epitrichial sweat gland adenoma, fibro-
● MOUSE
Bacterial Infections
 Bacterial skin infections are uncommon in pet mice, are usually caused by S. aureus, and
are secondary to trauma (cage-related injuries and bite wounds) or self-inflicted (the
injury are typically seen on the nose and the muzzle, whereas those associated with: bite
wounds typically occur around the head, the tail, the rump, and the perincal arca.
Staphylococcal infections may be superficial (alopecia, erytheima, oozing. and crust) or
deep (abscess, fistula, necrosis, and ulcer) and are usually nonpruritic. Submandibular and
 periorbital granulomas were associated with bacterial psendomycetuna (hotryomycosis) due
to S. aureus.72 Other bacteria occasionally isolated from cutaneous abscesses and pyogran-
ulomas in mice include Streptococcus sp., P. pneumotropica, Actinobacillus sp., Actinomy-
of elimination of predisposing causes, surgical drainage, daily topical cleaning with 3%
hydrogen peroxide or 0.5% to 1% chlorhexidine, and systeinic antibiotic administration
S. moniliformis is a rare cause of epizootics of edema and cyanosis of the extremi-
ties.2. 8, 17
C. kutscheri (murium) is a rarc cause of epizootics of furuneulosis and cutaneous
pyogranulomas, which may progress to necrosis and slonghing of extremities.2. 8.17
The mouse has been used as an experimental model for staphylococcal scalded skin
symdrome,17,62
 Mycobacterium chelonae infection caused nodular, granulomatous lesions on the tails
of immunocompromised mice.84a
Fungal Infections
Dermatophytosis is uncommon in mice and is usually caused by T. mentagrophytes.1-6, 13.
  n s   n s  o d   p
monly seen on the face, the head, the tail, and the trunk and consist of annular areas of
Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets · I443
alopecia, broken hairs, scales, and variable degrees of crythema and crusting. Pruritus is
usually minimal to absent. Diagnosis and treatment are the same as that described for
 guinea pigs.
Viral Infections
 Mouse pox (infectious ectromelia) causes epizootics in research colonies but is rarcly, if
with eventual swelling, necrosis, ulceration, and even sloughing of digits, pinnae, and tail.
Diagnosis is confinned by skin biopsy, electron microscopic examination of crusts, vira!
isolation of the orthopoxvirus, and polymerase chain reaction.17, 63
Reovirus Type 3 infection of suckling mice causes severe illness and an oily hair-
coat.2 s 17 Animals that survive past weaning experience alopecia.
 Sialodacryoadenitis virus infection causcs eye rubbing and scratching, periorbital swell-
 ing, and red tears (chromodacryorrhea).2 9. 17
Ectoparasites
matic carriers, whereas other animals show varying degrees of skin disease and pruritus.
Severely infammatory and pruritic forms of the infestation are associated with genetic
susceptibility and mite-related hypersensitivity reactions.'7 Inmature mice or those that
are immunocompromised may be more susceptible to severe forms of the disease, Clinical
signs may be mild and include patchy alopccia, slight erythema, and minor scaling on the
head and the muzzle. Other mice may show intense pruritus and self-mutilation of the
face, the head, thc pinnae, the neck, and the shoulders (see Fig. 21-12G). Severely
affected animals can become debilitated and die. Diagnosis is confirmed by skin scrap-
ings (see Fig. 2l-l3E). The trcatincnt of choice is subcutaneous injections of iver-
mectin.3 4. 17 1s. 71 Ivermectin adninistered topically or in drinking water is less effec-
tive.59, 60, 67, 69
Myocoptes musculinus is a mite commonly found on mice.2-6 8 16-9 Some aninals are
asymptomatic carriers, whereas others manifest varying degrees of skin disease and pruri-
tus. Lesions are most severe on the back and the ventrum. Unlike the case with M.
musculi infestations, severe ulceration is not seen with M. musculinus infestations. Diagno-
sis is confirmed by skin scrapings (see Fig. 21 -13F); however, the mites are often difficult
to find. The treatment of choice is subcutaneous injections of ivermectin every 2 wceks
until the animal is cured.3.417, 1971 Ivermectin administered topically or in drinking water
   uo e r ae e s o y   sn si
fordia affinis, Psorergates simplex, O. hacoti, S. scabiei, N. muris, and Trichoecius rom-
boutsi.2-6. 8. 9., 17. 19
Fleas (especially C. felis felis) may be recovered from pet mice maintained in house-
 The sucking lousc Polyplax serrata is occasionally found on pet mice.2-6. 8. 9. 17. 19 Some
animals may bo asynptomatic carriers, but others manifest varying degrees of dermatitis
and pruritus. Young animals, debilitated anirmals, and animals in poor managerment situa-
tions are more likely to be affected. Lice and related dermatoses are most cornmonly
found on the neck and back. Treatmcnt can be accormplished with topical insecticidcs or
ivermectin injections.
Nutritional Disorders
Nutritional deficiencies are unlikely to be encountered in pet mice. Experimental produc-
tion of nutritional deficiencies with rcsultant cutaneous abnormalities have been reported
and are briefy mentioned here. Zinc deficiency produces exfoliative dermatitis, alopecia,
and depigmentation of the haireoat2. 17 Pantothenic acid deficiency results in exfoliative
dermatitis and depigmentation of the haircoat.2 17 Ribofavin deficiency produces alopecia.
scaling, and dermatitis, especialy on the extremities.2 17 Pyridoxine deficiency results in
I444 · Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets
exfoliative dermatitis, especially on the face, the ears, the limbs, and the tail.2. 17 Biotin
deficiency causes exfoliative dermatitis.2 Fatty acid deficiency produces an exfoliative der-
matitis.2. 17
Miscellaneous Conditions
especiall on the muzzle, the whiskers, the face, the head, the rump, the tail, and the
perineum. These behaviors can be exacerbated by crowding, stress, and boredom. Mice
frequently rub the hair off the muzzle as they stick their face through slotted feeders or
wire bars.
 Mice develop numerous types of hereditary hairlessness and keratinization defccts,
which are probably never seen by the practitioner.2, 8. 17. 68, 69 Some of these conditions
have been used as laboratory models for the study of various aspects of cutaneous
pathophysiology and pharmacology,such as ichthyosisasebia, rhino,and blotchy (similar
to the Menkes kinky hair syndrome in humans) and flaky skin (similar to psoriasis in
humans).17. 62. 63, 68, 73
Ringtail is rarely reported in mice (see Rat in this chapter).8. 17 Idiopathic dry gan-
increase when the mice are exposed to cold temperatures and when the ears are trauma-
tized by excessive grooming in attempts to remove lice. The condition progresses rapidly
from initial erythema of the distal one third of the pinna to necrosis and slough. Rarely,
the distal one third of the tail is also involved.
 2i 's v s(o s) sd m sse ui s si snd ad
 Infected mice often mutilate the base of the tail. Diagnosis is confirmed by microscopic
examination of strips of cellophane (Scotch) tape that have been applied to the perineum.
The eggs of S. obvelata are banana shaped and about 30 μm by 150 μm. Treatiment with
ivermectin injections is curative.
A spontaneous immune complex vasculitis was reported to affect up to 21% of certain
strains of aged mice.$8 Mice developed multiple crusts between the scapulae or on the
 dorsal neck. These lesions rapidly evolved into irregular ulcers and spread laterally and
caudally on the body. Pruritus was intense. Histologic examination revealed leukocytoclas-
tic vasculitis and IgG, IgM, and fibrinogen were demonstrated in dermal blood vessel
walls.
Alopecia areata was reported in the C3H/Hej mouse and proposed as a model of the
human disease.70
Neoplasia
Although mice are sensitive to the induction of various skin neoplasms by the topical or
skin neoplasms are rare.2. 3 6. 8. 17 The most commonly reported cutaneous neoplasins are
 papilloma, squainous cell carcinoma, and fibrosarcoma. 17. 64 Other reported cutaneous
neoplasms include hair follicle tumors, sebaceous gland tumors, mast cell tumors, heman-
 giomas, hemangiosarcomas, melanomas, lymphomas, and a solitary epitheliotropic lym-
 phoma resembling pagetoid reticulosis in humans.17,57. 61
+ RabBIT
Bacterial Infections
Pasteurellosis (snuffes) is the most common bacterial disease of the rabbit." Most rabbits
carry Pasteurella multocida asymptomatically in the nasal cavity, and under conditions of
*See references 2-5, 8, 10, 11, 17, 77, 80, 81, 86, 92, 96.
Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets · I445
stress, the bacteria multiply and cause disease. Subcutancous abscesses develop as a result
 of septicemia, external wound contarmination, or direct extension from deeper stics. The
absccsses are variable in sizc, are usually firm on palpation, and are filled with a thick,
white to tan exudate. Diagnosis is confrmed by microscopic examination of direct smears
 of exudate and culture. In the rabbit, subcutanecus absccses are due to pasteurellosis
until proven otherwise. Other causes of abscesses include S. aureus, Fusobacterium,
be secondary to dental disease, a tooth root abscess, or an oral foreign body.l0
 Absccsses in rabbits are typically filled with thick, caseated pus and are surrounded by
a thick capsule. These two attributes make the use of drainage, drains, and topical and
cxcision and at least 2 weeks of antibiotic treatment (see Table 21- 1).10. 15. s1 Jf this is
impossible, radical debridement, fushing, and antibiotics for several weeks may be effec-
tive.7a In soine rabbits, ahscesses continue to recur in the same spot or at some other sites
in an apparently healthy individual.1 Some of these rabbits may require lifetime antibiotic
therapy to prevent recurrences.10
Necrobacilosis (Schmorl's disease) is a sporadic bacterial infection of rabbits caused
by Fusobacterium necrophorum.t It is characterized by infarnmation, necrosis, ulceration,
and abscessation, especially on the face, the head, and the neck. Diagnosis is confirmed by
culture. Treatment is acconplished with surgical debridement, topical antimicrobial appli-
cations, and systemic penicilin or tetracycline administration.
P. aeruginosa causes a localized moist dermatitis (sore deulap) and, ocasionally,
subcutaneous abscess in areas of skin that are continuously wet. The muzzle, the dewlap
(see Fig. 2l-l2H), the Hank, and the haunches are most commonly involved. The af-
fected skin is moist, erythematous, edematous, alopccic, and often ulcerated. The fur is
often clumped, creating a spiked appearance. The most striking clinical feature is the
blue-green color of the fur in animals with white fur, which is caused by a water-soluble
pigment (pyocyanin) produced by the bacteria. Diagnosis is confirmed by rnicroscopic
examination of direct sinears froin oozing areas and culture. Treatment includes clipping.
 gentle cleaning. and application of astringents (aluminum acetate) and topical gentamicin
sulfate ointment. Prevention is directed at rcmoving the cause of continued wetness of the
fur. The most common cause is the constant drooling ("slobbers") associated with dental
disease.10 Leaking water valves or water bottles should be replaced. Water bowis or pans
should be replaced by water botles with sipper tubes. Malocclusion of the teeth should
Ulceratice pododermatitis (sore hocks) is a common disorder in rabbits.§ Genetic
predilection is important, as large body size and thinner plantar fur pads are irmportant
predisposing factors. Unsanitary cage conditions, rough cage surfaces, and obesity also
contribute to pressure necrosis and secondary bacterial infection with S. aureus. Lesions
commonly occur unilaterally or bilaterally oni the plantar aspect of the metatarsal rcgion
or, less commonly, the volar surface of the metacarpal area. Focal infammation, oozing.
crusts, and alopecia progress to ulcers, hemorrhage, and abscesses. In severe infections,
the disease may extend to the bony structures of the foot and result in septicemia.
Treatment includes correction of predisposing conditions, surgical drainage, topical antini-
crobial applications, and systemic antibiotic administration (sce Table 21-1). Scvere cases
'puodsai jou op Xensn
Venereal spirochetosis (treponematosis, rabhit syphilis, or vent disease) is uncom-
by direct contact, especially mating. Cold environments appear to predispose to the
disease. Because of the grooming, social, and sleeping habits of rabbits., lesions are
"Sec referenves 2, 6, 8, 11, 17, 82, 92, 96.
tSee references 2, 3, 7, 8, 17, 92, 96.
tSee references 2-f, 8, 10, 17. 92. 96.
Sce references 2-6, 8, 10, 11, 17, 92, 96.
|446 · Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets
frequently seen on the nose (Fig. 2l-20A), the lips, the chin, the face, the eyelids, the
edema, oozing, erosions, and brownish crusts.Focal leers and hemorrhage maybe seen.
 Diagnosis is confirmed by skin biopsies, the Venereal Disease Research Laboratory
(VDRL) slide test, and the rapid plasina reagin (RPR) card test. Treatment with penicillin
G benzathine or penicillin G procaine is curative (42,000 IU/kg, subcutaneously, once a
An outbreak of S. qureus infection in a rabbitry was associated with a pustular,
 cxudative dermatitis in the young and mastitis in lactating does.93 A cellulitis due to S.
 aureus infection is occasionally seen and is characterized by the acute onset of fever, and
 painful edematous swelling, espccially over the head, neck, and thorax."6 Necrosis and
slough may occur.
Fungal Infections
 Dernatophytosis is common in rabbits. T. mentagrophytes is the most common dermato-
phyte isolated, but M. canis, M. gypseum, M. audouini, T. verrucosum, and T. schoen-
leini have been reported.* T. mentagrophytes can be isolated from the haircoat and skin
 of approximately 36% of clinically norrmal rabbits, representing an important potential
 zoonosis. The disease is most common in young aninals and where husbandry and
management are suboptimal. Lesions are characterized by patchy alopecia, broken hairs,
crythema, and yellowish crusting, and typically first appear on the bridge of the nose (see
Fig. 21-20B), the eyelids, the pinnae, and the paws, and occasionally, on many body sites.
The condition is usually pruritic. Diagnosis and treatment are the same as that described
for the guinea pig. Griseofulvin is teratogenic, and should not be used in breeding does. A
modified live T. mentagrophytes vaccine may prove useful in prophylaxis.17
Aspergillosis of the lungs and skin was reported in a whole litter of 4-week-old
rabbits.17 Multiple 1- to 2-mm papules were present all over the body. Histologically, the
papules were cystic folicles distended with necrotic debris and dichotomously branching
hyphae, Aspergillus sp. was isolated in culture. The animals were raised on moldy grass
 hay bedding material. A change in nesting materials prevented further occurrences.
Viral Infections
Myxomatosis is occasionally observed in domestic rabbits.f The myxoma virus (a poxvirus)
is transmitted from reservoir wild rabbit hosts by mosquitoes. There are several strains of
virus with variable virulence. In domestic rabbits, severe disease and high mortality are
frequently produced. Affected rabbits are febrile, lethargic, and depressed. In the acute
form of the disease, there is edema and erytherma of the anus, the genitalia, the lips, the
nares, and the eyelids. Less virulent strains of the virus produce numerous skin tumors
Lesions were a few millmeters to 3 cm in diameter, erythematous, and plaquelike, and
became hemorrhagic and necrotic. Morbidity was low and mortality infrequent. Diagnosis
is based on distinctive clinical signs, biopsy, and virus isolation. There is no effective
treatment, and control of insect vectors and screening of enclosures are paramount in
endemic areas. Heterologous vaccine may be useful.
Rabbit pox is infrequently reported in domestic rabbits. The causative poxvirus is
d on re saa e e aq sp g o  u po ae  p
to nodular eruption. The rabbits have extensive edema of the face and perineum. Diagno-
sosi sa pe asdoq aq pnuo s sis
Shope fibroma virus and Shope papilloma virus are oncogenic (see Neoplasia).
"See references 2, 3, 6, 8, 10, 17, 92, 96.
'See references 2, 7, 8, 10, 11, 17, 92, 96.
'See references 2, 7, 8, 10, 11, 17, 92, 96.
FIGURE 21-20. A, Crusts on the nose of a rabbit with spirochetosis. (Courtesy of G. Kollias.) B. Focal area of
alopecia and crusting over the nose of a rabbit due to T. nertagrophytes iufection. (Courtesy of G. Kollas.) C,
Multiple erythematous nodules and plaques around the eye, on the pinna, and on the muzzle of a rabbit with
myxomatosis. (Courtesy of G. Kollias.) D, Crusting and erythema of the lateral surface of the pinna of a rabbit with
psoroptic mangc. E, Crusts, scalc, and focal ulccrs over fhe dorsum of a rabbit with cheyletielosis (area has been
clipped). F, Frostbite in a rabbit. Notc acrocyanosis and nccrosis of the pinna. G, Orange-colored crust and discolor-
ation of the hair around the eye of a rat with sialodacryoadenitis virus infection. (Courtesy of J. King.) H, Trixacarus
dipersus in a rat. Marked crusting and alopecia on the fac and pinnae. (Courtesy of P. Bourdeau.)
1447
1448 · Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets
Ectoparasites
 Psoroptes cuniculi, a nonburrowing mite, is the most common cctoparasite of the rabbit,
and all rabbits should be considered infected until proven otherwise.* Rabbits are also
susceptible to P. ouis (cattle and sheep).17 P. cuniculi is transmitted by direct contact with
infected rabbits, fomites, and contaminated environmcnt. Starving mites survive for ap-
proximately 21 days off the host over the usual range of temperatures (5 to 30°℃ [41 to
86°F]) and relative humidities (20% to 75%).17 Crusts dislodged into the environment
contain many mites. The mites pierce skin to feed, and hypersensitivity to mite-related
 antigens rmay be important in the pathogenesis of the dermatitis and pruritus.17
P. cuniculi typically produces otitis exterma (otoacariasis, ear canker, and ear mites)
(see Fig. 21l-20D). Affected rahbits shake their heads and scratch at the head and ears.
Alopecia, excoriations, and secondary bacterial infection may be present around the head,
neck, and ventrum.17, 70 In early stages, a dry, whitish gray to tan crusty exudate forms 
inside the vertical car canal. Later, a dry, crusty material with a layered appearance
accumulates in the ear and the lateral surface of the pinnae. A secondary bacterial
infection may complicate the parasitic otitis externa, contributing to the foul odor and
pain. Occasionally, mites may produce lesions on the face, the head, the neck, the limbs,
the abdomcn, and the back.17. 83. 97
Diagnosis is confirned by finding the mites in ear swabs or skin scrapings (see Fig.
 21- 13G). In one report in which natural infections were studied and rmite numbers were
quantitated, affected animals harbored 40 to 100,000 mites per rabbit. The treatment of
choice is the subcutaneous injection of ivermectin.10 17 81. ss Do not attempt to clean out
the crusts and debris, because this causes pain and bleeding. The cage and environment
should be sanitized, and reducing the relative humidity to less than 20% while increasing
the temperature to 40°C (104°F) is of benefit in this regard.17, 18 In one report,97 an in-
contact guinea pig also developed psoroptic mange.
S. scabiei var. cuniculi, a burrowing mite, is a rare cctoparasite on rabbits in North
America but is commonly found in some other parts of the world, such as Africa and
and excoriation on the muzzle, the lips, the bridge of the nose, the eyelids, the head, the
 margins of the pinna, the paws, and the extermal genitalia. Pruritus is intense. Severe
infestations can lead to anorexia, lethargy, emaciation, and death. These mites can tran-
siently produce lesions in humans. Diagnosis is confirmed by finding S. scabiei mites in
skin scrapings. However, mites are often diffcult to demonstrate, and response to therapy
 is a frequently used diagnostic test. The treatment of choice is ivcrmcctin.6, i7, 19.90
Cheyletiella parasitovorax, a nonburrowing mite, is a common ectoparasite on rab-
bits.2-6. 8 1o0. 16-19 Most rabbits harbor the mites without overt signs of skin disease. With
heavy infestations or in hypersensitive hosts, a variably pruritic dermatosis is seen. Lesions
consist of scaling, crusting, and variable degrees of erythema, alopecia, and greasiness over
the withers, the back (see Fig. 2l -20E), and the ventral abdomen. Occasionally, lesions
are limited to the face. These mites can produce skin lesions in humans. Diagnosis is
confirrned by finding C. parasitovorax in skin scrapings or acetate tape preparations. The
treatment of choice is ivermectin.
Listrophorus (Leporacarus) gibbus is a common fur mite of rabbits, which is rarely
matic, The mite is usually found attached to hair shafts, especially on the back, the groin.
and the ventral abdomen. Occasional rabbits may manifest a variably pruritic, scaly,
erythematous, alopecic dermatitis in the aforementioned sites. Some animals only manifest
pruritus and traumatic alopccia with no skin lesions. Diagnosis is confirmed by finding L.
gibbus in skin scrapings and acetate tape preparations (see Fig. 21.-13H). Treatment with
 pyrethrin- or pyrethroid-containing Hea powders, 1% selenium sulfide baths, or 2% lime
*See references 2-6, 8, 10, 11, 16-19, 77, 81, 86, 92, 96.
'See references 2-6, 8, 10, 11, 16-19. 74, 75, 90, 92, 96.
Derrnatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets * I449
sulfur dips is curative.17 s6a 9a Ivermectin may also be effctive.0 Fipronil spray was
reported to be effective.91 One author reported treating over 50 rabbits with fipronil spray
(3 ml/kg) with no adverse effects.79 However, the therapeutic index for this product is
fairly narrow in rabbits, possibly due to the isopropyl alcohol content.9l Company repre-
sentatives received a number of roports of suspected adverse reactions to fipronil spray in
rabbits, and recommended that the product not be used in this species.78
Notoedres cati, a burrowing mite, is a rare ectoparasite on rabbits in North America,
but is commonly found in other parts of the world, such as India. Clinical signs,
diagnosis, and trcatment are identical to those described for S. scabiei.
infested with Cediopsylla simplex (comrnon Eastern rabbit fea), especially around the
head and the neck, and Odontopsyllus multispinosis (giant Eastern rabbit fea), especially
 sp r s s  e  pe 'siso sis  ed a 
cats.
The rabbit sucking louse Haemodipsus ventricosus is uncommon in the United
 States.2-s, 7. 9, 1s-19 Pediculosis is usually associated with poor management. Lice are most
commonly found on the dorsum and may produce intense pruritus. Severe infestations in
debilitated animals may produce anemia, weakess, emaciation, and death. H. centricosus
 n ps n se s ae st   ro ra t s
 Demodex cuniculi mites have been isolated from rabbits with generalized pruritus and
scaling, but their pathogenic significance is in doubt.17
Members of the fy genus Cuterebra occasionally produce myiasis in domestic rabbits
reared outdoors or in nonscreened cnclosures.t Aimong those fy species reported in the
United States are Cuterebra cuniculi, C. buccata, and C. horripilum. Larvae and, there-
fore, lesions appear in the summer and early fall. The incidence of infestation decreases
with age, which correlates with the development of immediate and dclayed-type hypersen-
sitivity reactions to larval antigens. C. horripilum prefers thc ventral ccrvical rcgion,
whereas C. buccata larvae localizc in the interscapular, axillary, inguinal, or rump area.
Initial lesions include subcutaneous cystlike structures. As the larvae (warbles) enlarge, a
"breathing hole,” or fstula, is produced. The surrounding haircoat is moist and matted,
secondary bacterial infection is common, and the lesions are often painful. Treatment 
consists of surgical removal of thc larvae (one should not crush or otherwise daimage the
larvae), routine wound care, and oecasionally, administration of systemic antibiotics. Pre-
vention and control are aimed at eliminating contact with the warble fly.
 Flystrike (maggots) is most commonly seen in the perineal region, and may spread
dorsally onto the rump.' Moist dermatitis and fur matting arc prescnt. Rabbits that are
sedentary, overweight, or that have perineal derrmatis (urine scald) may be predisposed.
Treatment includes cleansing and one injection of ivermectin.10
Nutritional Disorders
Nutritional deficiencies are unlikely to be encountered in pet rabbits. Experimental pro-
duction of nutritional deficiencics with resultant cutaneous abnormalities have been re-
ported and are bricfly presented here. Copper deficiency results in alopecia and a depig-
haircoat.2. 17
Miscellaneous Conditions
Several days before parturition, the female rabbit undergoes a generalized loosening of
the fur.2 3.6. 8. 10. 17 The female rabbit pulls out mouthfuls of hair to line the nest. Hair loss 
*Sex referenccs 2-6, 8, 10, 16-19, $7, 88.
+See references 2-6, 8, 10, 16-19, 92, 96.
I450 · Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets
FIGURE 21-21. Congcnital alo-
pecia in a rabbit. (Courtesy of J.
Gourreau.)
is especially prominent on the abdomen, chest, forelegs, and hips. Some rabbits pull out
fur as a behavioral vice.2. 8 Other rabbits rub fur off against the cage surface or feeders.$
Does in heat and rabbits on low-fiber diets may barber their own hair.1o The barbered
rabbit typically has patches of broken-off hairs over the head and back."o Seasonal molts
can result in haircoat irregularities and thinning.$
Compulsive self-mutilating behavior was encountered in 5% to 10% of the rabbits in a
colony of Checkered crosses.85 Extensive automutilation of digits and pads of the front
feet was observed. The behavior could be interrupted by giving the rabbits haloperidol
(0.2 mg/kg IM q12h), a dopamine antagonist. Because the condition was never seen in
animals of other breeding lines kept in the same building under identical conditions, and
the affected animals came from highly inbred stock, it was hypothesized that the disorder
was genetically determined.
Hereditary alopecias (Fig. 21 -21) are rarely described in rabbitsl7 but are unlikely to
 be seen by practitioners.
 Cutaneous asthenia has been reported in rabbits (Fig. 21-22).17, 76, 94 The animals had
a history of skin fragility and repeated spontaneous skin tears, and were covered with
 scars. The skin extensibility index (see Chap. 12) in two rabbits was 21% to 32% in the
 r sn pu u  jo u e y po se sn p
examination was unremarkable, but electron microscopic exarmination revealed distorted
 and tangled collagen bundles with collagen fibrils being of different diameters and having
 a loose, frayed appearance.
Hutch burn is a contact dermatitis caused by urine scalding of the perineal region
because of an unclean environment or an inability of the rabbit to void urine without
soiling itself, such as after an orthopedic o1 neurologic injury, or with obesity.3, 1o Washing
 the area frequently with antimicrobial agents and applying a protectant cream, such as
zinc oxide, are helpful.
Frostbite may be seen in rabbits that are suddenly exposed to cold climates without a
period of acclimatization.'7 Erythema, acrocyanosis, necrosis, and sloughing are typically
seen on the pinna (see Fig. 21 -20F).
Both male and female rabbits possess two sebaceous scent glands on either side of
the vulvar or testicular area that secrete a brown waxy debris.3 This secretion can build up
and can be easily removed by gentle traction or soap and water.
The authors have seen a condition resembling alopecia areata in rabbits. Affected
animals presented with one or more areas of noninfammatory annular alopecia, especially
Derrnatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets * I45I
FIGURE 2I-22. Hyperextensibil-
ity of the skin in a rabbit with cuta-
neous asthenia. (Courtesy of R. Har-
vey.)
on the black-furred areas of the pinnae. Spontaneous recovery was accompanied by the
regrowth of white fur (Fig. 21-23).
 Sebaceous adenitis was reported in domestic rabbits 80. 6a The animals varied from 2%
to 6 years of age. Lesions began around the neck or face, remained localized for several
months, then became generalized. All rabbits eventually had a generalized, nonpruritic
exfoliative dermatosis with patchy to coalescing areas of alopecia. Skin biopsies were
diagnostic. No response was secn to antibiotics, glucocorticoids, ivermectin, griseofulvin,
fatty acids, azathioprine, or oral retinoids.
 Facial eczema has been reported in young suckling rabbits,ll The condition is spo-
radic and of unknown etiology. Areas of alopecia and slight erythema occur on the bridge
of the nose and the periocular region. Affected animals are otherwise healthy. The
 condition responds rapidly to topical glucocorticoid therapy.
Neoplasia
o  d sn    ssu so  s
carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, sebaceous carcinoma, melanoma, osteosarcoma, and
lymphoma have been reported.
Shope papillomas are uncommon in domestic rabbits.t In the United States, the
 disease occurs in the Southwest and along the Mississippi River. Shope papilloma virus (a
papovavirus) commonly infects wild rabbits, with insects serving as vectors. Lesions are
and thc pinnae. Removal of the papillomas usually results in healing, and recovered
rabbits are resistant to reinfection. Spontaneous regression of lesions occurs within 12
months. Experimental infection of domestic rabbits resulted in malignant transformation
to squamous cell carcinoma within 8 to 9 months in a high percentage of the inoculation
sites. A program of screening animal enclosures and vector control should be instituted in
endemic areas.
 Shope fibromas are uncommon in domestic rabbits.1 Shope fibroma virus (a poxvirus)
commonly infects wild rabbits in North and South America and is transmitted via insect
vectors. Lesions consist of single or multiple flat, firm, subcutaneous nodules, especially on 
°See references 2-6, 8, 10, 16-19, 84, 92, 96.
tSec referenecs 2, 3, 6, 8, 10, 17, 92, 96.
tSee references 2, 3, 6, 8, 17, 92, 96.
I452 · Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabhits, and Ferrets
FIGURE 21-23. Alopecia areata-
like condition in a rabbit, Well-cir-
cunscribed areas of noninflamumatory
alopccia on the pinna are regrowing
white hair.
the genitals, the perineum, the ventral abdomen, the paw, the nose, the pinna, and the
eyelid. Newborn rabbits are more susceptible than are older animals and havc more
extensive lesions. Experimentally infected adult rabbits often show spontaneous involution
of their fbromas within 5 months through necrosis and sloughing. Mosquito cradication
and enclosure screening is indicated to prevcnt infcction in endemic areas.
Cutaneous lymphoma was reported in doinestic rabhits from 7 wecks to 9 1/2 years
 old.96h Most had early internal organ involvement and systemic disease. Lesions consisted
of multifocal areas of alopecia, scale, erytheina, and plaques. Histologically, the lympho-
 mas were epitheliotropic and CD3+. One rabbit was unsuccessfully treated with oral
isotretinoin and interferon-α.
· RAT
Bacterial Infections
Bacterial skin infcetions arc uncommon in pct rats, are usually caused by S. aureus, and
are secondary to trauma (cage-related injuries and bite wounds) or self-inficted (the
pruritus associated with ectoparasites).2-s i0, 16-19 Rats are more resistant to experimental
wound infcction with S. aureus than arc micc or hamsters.17 Infections resulting from
cage-related injury are typically seen on the nose and the muzzle, whereas those associ-
ated with bite wounds typically occur around the head, the tail, the rump, and the
perineal area. Staphylococcal dermatitis may be superficial (alopecia, erythema, oozing.
and crust) or deep (ahscess, fistula, necrosis, and ulcer) and is usually nonpruritic. Granu-
lomas occurred on the trunk and mammary gland in asscciation with infection by an
atypical slow-growing S. aureus.1oo Other bacteria occasionally isolated from cutaneous
abscesses and pyogranulomas in rats include Streptococcus sp., P. pneumotropica, Kleh
siella pneumoniae, P. aeruginosa, and Mycobacterium lepraermurum (rat leprosy)2 s 1619
Treatment of bacterial dermatitis includes soine combination of elimination of predis-
posing causes, surgical drainage, daily topical cleaning with 3% hydrogen pcroxide or 0.5%
 to 1 % chlorhexidine, and systemic antibiotic administration (see Table 21 - 1).
S. moniliformis is a rare cause of epizootics of edema and cyanosis of the extremi-
ties.2, 8, 17
C. kutscheri (murium) is a rare cause of epizootics of furuncuiosis and cutaneous
 pyogranulomas, which may progress to necrosis and sloughing of extremities.2. 8
Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets · I453
Fungal Infections
Dermatophytosis is rare in rats and is usualy associated with T. mentagrophytes.16, o, 16-9
This dermatophyte can be isolated from the haircoat of clinically nornal rats and is a
potential zoonotic agent. Lesions are most commonly seen on the neck, the back, and the
base of the tail and consist of annular areas of alopecia, broken hairs, scales, and variable
degrees of crythcma and crusting. Pruritus is usually minimal to absent. Diagnosis and
 treatment are as described for guinea pigs.
Viral Infections
Sialodacryoadcnitis virus (a coronavirus) infection causes eye rubbing and _scratching,
periorbital swelling, and red tears (chromodacryorrhea) (see Fig. 21-20G) 2. 4. 17
 Poxvirus infection has heen described in laboratory white rats.'7 Skin lesions consisted
of erythematous papules, which becaine crusted and occured mainly on the glabrous
 areas of the hody (tail, paws, and muzzle). Sometimes, the affected portions of paws and
tail underwent necrosis and sloughing. Diagnosis was confirmed by biopsy, electron mi-
 croscopy, and viral isolation.
Ectoparasites
N. muris occasionally causes a severely pruritic dermatitis in rats.2-6, 8, 10. 16-19 Lesions are
most commonly present on the pinnae, the nose, the paws, and the ventrum and consist
 of erythema, papules, yellowish hyperkeratotic crusts, and cxcoriations. Diagnosis is con-
 s   re  pe   s s a 
(once weekly until 2 weeks after cure) or subcutaneous injections of ivermectin.
Other mites that are rarely found on rats include Radfordia ensifera, O. bacoti
(tropical rat mite), S. scabiei, Trixacarus diversus (Fig. 21-20H), T. caviae, M. musculi,
and Demodex sp.*
Fleas (especially C. felis felis) may be recovered from pet rats maintained in house-
holds frequented by cats and dogs.2-6.&. 17
The sucking louse Polyplax spinulosa is oecasionall found on pet rats.t Some animals
may be asymptomatie carriers, and other animals manifest varying degrees of dermatitis
and pruritus. Young animals, debilitated animals, and animals in poor management situa-
tions are more likely to be affected. Lice and related dermatoses are most commonly
 s   o   a  p  e  
ivermectin injections.
Nutritional Disorders
Nutritional deficiencies are unlikely to be encountered in pet rats. Experimental produc-
tion of nutritional defcicncies with resultant cutaneous abnorinalities has been reported,
and these are bricfy mentioned here. Zinc deficiency produces exfoliative dermatitis,
exfoliative derimatitis, depigmentation of the haircoat, and excessive harderian gland activ-
Ribofavin deficiency produces alopecia, scaling, and dermatitis, especially on the extremi-
ties.? Pyridoxine deficiency results in exfoliative dermatitis, especially on the face, the ears,
the limbs, and the tail.2 17 Biotin deficiency causes exfoliative dernatitis and periocular
 alopecia.2. 17 Niacin deficiency causes alopecia and excessive harderian gland activity.
 increased porphyrin secretion, and blood-caked whiskers.2. 17 Esscntial fatty acid deficiency
*See references 2, 3, 6, 8, 10, 16-19, 99, 101.
'See references 2. 3, 7, 8, 10, 16-19.
I454 · Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets
produces an exfoliative dermatitis and, occasionally, necrosis of the tail.2. 17 Protein def-
ciency causes alopecia, exfoliativc dermatitis, and depigmentation of the haircoat.2. 17
Miscellaneous Conditions
Barbering and bitc wounds are frequently seen when rats are housed together,2-6. 8. 17
These bchaviors can be exacerbated by crowding, stress, and boredoin. Areas most com-
monly affected includle thie muzzle, the whiskers, the face, the head, the rump, the tail,
and the perineuin. Rats rnay also rub the hair off the muzzle as they stick their face
through slotted feeders or wire bars.1'7
 Rats have numerous types of hcrcditary hairlcssness that are probably never sccn by
the practitioner (Fig. 21 -24).17
Ringtail is a poorly understord condition seen in rats.2-s. 17 The incidence of the
disorder increases as the rclativc humidity falls below 40% and is especially common in
young unweanecd animals housed in cages with wire mesh bottoms, on hygroscopic bed-
ding, and in rooms with excessive ventilation. In the northern hemisphere, imost cases are
seen froin Noveimber to May, when heating systems often cause inarked reductions in
relative humidity. Some strains of rats seein 1nore susceptible than others. The condition
usually occurs aftcr 2 months of rcduccd rclativc humidity. Onc or morc annular constric-
tions dcvelop in the tail, which becomes edematous, inflamed, and nccroscd distal to the
constrictions (Fig. 21 -25). Ringtail is prevented by maintaining a relative humidity of at
least 50%.
 Perianal pruritus is seen in association with pinworms (Syphacia muris).2. 4. 8. 17 In-
fected rats occasionally mutilate the base of the tail. Diagnosis is confirmed by micro-
scopic exarmination of strips of cellophane (Scotch) tape that have been applied to the
‘u oi Ay un o noqe pe pades euuq ae sumu s jo sa a unauad
Ivermectin is effective treatment.
Auricular chondritis has been described in rats.17 The condition has occurrcd sponta-
neously and in association with the placement of metal ear tags or immunization with type
II collagen. Typically, bxoth cars are affected, although one ear may be affected days to
weeks before the other. The pinnae are swollen, erythematous, and nodular, and' they
become thickened and deforimed. Pain and pruritus are rare. Histologically, there is a
multifocal granulomatous chondritis with progressive destruction of cartilage.
 Systemic hair embolism has becn reported subsequent to intravenous injections in
rats.17 Cutaneous lesions consist of focal areas of necrosis and ulceration on the ventral
FIGURE 21-24. Congenital alo-
pecia in a litter of rats. (Courtesy of
J. King.)
Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets · I455
F1GURE 21-25. Ringtail in a rat.
Necrosis of the distal portion of the
tail. (Courtesy of C. Kollias.)
tis and panniculitis, and intravascular hair shaft fragments.
The fur of the aged rat frequently turns yellow and beconcs morc coarsc. Thc cause
is unknown.
Alopecia areata was reported in DEBR rats and proposed as a useful model of the
hunan disease.70
Brownish scales were observed to occur on the skin of rats, mainly on the dorsum
and tail and were more numerous in males and with inereasing age.lo2 The scales also
 occurred in strain-dependent patterns. Gonadectomy produced a fading of the scales in
malcs, whereas the adiministration of androgen to gonadectomized malcs and to females
produced a darkening of the scales.
Neoplasia
 Spontaneous cutaneous neoplasms are uncommon in rats.2 6. s, 17, os Mesenchymal neo-
plasms are more common than are epithelial neoplasms. The most comrmon are fibromas.
fibrosarcomas, and lipomas. The face, the shoulder, the fank, the tail, and the paws are
typically affected. Other reported skin neoplasms in rats include papilloma, keratoacan-
thoma, sebaceous gland tumors, squamous cell carcinoma, basal cell carcinoina, hair
 follicle tumors, hemangiosarcoma, melanoma, and malignant fbrous histiocytoma.
● REFERENCES
1. Balsari A, et al: Dermatophyles in clinically healthy
6. Collins BR: Dermatologic disorders of common small
lahoratory aninmals. I ab Anim 15:75, 1981.
mondomestie animals. In: Nesbitt GIH (ed): Dermatol.
2. Benirschke K, et al: Pathology of Laboratory Anirnals.
ogy. Churchill Livingstone, New York, 1987. p. 235.
Springer Verlag, New York, 1978.
7. Cotchin E, Row FfC: Pathology of Laborutory Rats
3. Burguaun P: Dermatology of rabbits, rodents, and
and Mice. Blackwell Scientific Publications, Oxford,
ferrets. In: Neshitt GH, Ackerrman LJ (eds): Derma-
1967.
tology for the Small Animal Pracitioncr. Veterinary
7a. Gobel T: Bacterial diseases and antimicrobial ther-
Leaning Systems Co., Trenton. NJ, 1991, p 205.
apy in srnall nanmals. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet
4. Burke T]: Skin disorders of rodents, rabbits, and [er-
(Suppl)21:5, 1999.
rets. In: Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (eds): Current Veter-
8. Harkiess JE, Wagner JE: Thc Biology and Medieine
inary Thcrapy Xl. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia,
of Rabbits and Rodents I1. Lea & Febiger, Philadcl.
1992, p 1170.
phia, 1989.
5. Clyde VL: Practical treatment and control of common
9. Hlarkness JE: Small roients. Vet Clin North Am
ecioparasites in exotic pets. Vet Med 91:632, 1996.
(Small Anin Pract) 24:89, 1994.
I456 · Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets
10. Hillyer EV, Quesenberry KE: Ferrets, Rabbits, and
35. Paradis M: Guide dn furet domeslique. Med Vet
Rodents. Clinical Medicine and Surgery. W.B. Sau1-
Qnebec 17:63, 1987.
ders Co. Philadelphia, 1997.
 35a. Patterson MM, Kirchain SM: Comparison of threc
11. Hime JM, O'Donoghue PN: Handbook of 1iscascs of
treatments for control of ear miltes in ferrets. Lab
Laboratory Aninals. Heineinann Veterinary Books,
Anim Sci 49:655, 1999.
I ondon, 1979.
12. Jacobson ER, Kollias GV: Exotic Animals. Churchill
phoma in a fcrrct. J Am Vet Mcd Assoc 209:144l,
Livingstone, New York, 1988.
1996.
13. Lopez-Martinez R, et al: Dermatophytes isolated
 37. Rosenthal KL, et al: Hyperadrenocorticism associated
from laboratory aninals. Mycopathologia S8:111, 1984.
with adrenocortical tumor or nodular hyperplasia of
14, Morris TH: Antibiotie therapeutices in laboratory ani-
tlhe adrenal gland in ferrets: 50 cases (1987-1991). J
Imals. Lab Anim 9:16, 1995.
Am Vet Med Assoc 203:271, 1993.
15. Rosenthal KL: Bacterial infections and antibiotic ther-
38. Rosenthal KL: Ferrets. Vet Clin North Am (Small
apy in small mammals. Coinpend Contin Educ Pract
Anim Pract) 24:1, 1994.
Vet 20 (Suppl):13, 1998.
 39. Rosenthal JL, Peterson ME: Evaluation of plasma an-
16. Schuchinan SM: Individual care and treatment of
drogen and estrogen concentrations in ferrets with
rabbits, mice, rats, guinea piys, hamsters, and gerhils.
hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Vet Med Assoc 209:1097,
In: Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy X.
1996.
W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1989, p 738.
 39a. Rosenthal KL: Adrenal gland diseases in ferrets. Vet
17. Scott DW, et al: Muller & Kirk's Small Animal Der-
 Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 27:401, 1997.
matology V. W. B. Saunders Co, Philadclphia, 1995,
40. Rudmann DG, et al: Complex ceruminous gland ade-
nocarcinoma in a brown-footed ferrct (Mustela puto-
p 1127.
18. Stcin S. Walshaw S: Handbook of Rabbit and Rodent
rius furo). Lab Anim Sei 44:637, 1994.
 Medicine. Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1996.
 41. Scott DW, et al: Bilaterally symmetric alopecia associ-
ated with an adrenocortical adenoma in a pet ferrel.
19. Timm KI: Pruritus in rahbits, rodents, and ferrets.
Vet Clin North Am (Small Anirn Pract) 18:1077,
Vet De1matol 2:165, 1991.
42. Scott DW, et al: Figwrate erythema resembling ery-
1988.
20. Wagner JE, Farrar PL: Husbantry and inedicine of
thema annulare centrifugum in a ferret with adreno-
small rodents. Vet Clin Xorth Ain (Sinall Anim Pract)
cortical adenocarcinoma-assorciatedaloprxia.
Vrt
Dermatol 5:111, 1994.
17:1061, 1987.
42a. Shoemaker NJ, et al: Correlation between age at
Chinchilla
neutering and age at onset of hyperadrenocorticism in
 21. Hoefer HL: Chinchillas. Vet Clin North Ain (Snall
ferrets. J An Vet Med Assoc 216:195, 2000.
Anim Pract) 24:103, 1994.
43. Weiss CA, Scott MV: Clinical aspects and surgieal
22. Rees RC: Some conditions of the skin and fur of
treatment of hyperadrenocorticism in the domestic
Chinchila lanigera. J Small Anim Pract 4:213, 1963.
ferret: 94 cases (1994-1996). J Am Anim Hlosp Assoc
Ferret
33:487, 1997.
43a. Weiss CA, et al: Surgical treatment and long-tern
23. Ackerman J: Ultrasonographic detection of adrenal
gland tumors in two ferrets. J Am Vet Med Assoc
outcorne of ferrets with bilateral adrenal tumors or
adrenal hyperplasia: 56 cases (1994-1997). J Am Vet
205:1001, 1994.
24. Besch-Wiliford CL: Biology and medicine of the fer-
Med Assoc 215:820, 1999.
ret. Vet Clin North Amu (Small Anim Pract) 17:1155,
Gerbil
1987.
44. Jacklin MH: Dermatosis associated with Acarus farris
25. Cooper JE: Skin discascs of ferrets. Vet Ann 30:325,
in gerbils. J Small Aniu Pract 38:410,1997.
1990.
45. Jackson TA, et al: Squamous cell careinoma of the
 26. Dinsdale JR, Rest JR: Yeast infection in ferrets. Vet
midventral abdominal pad in three gerhils.J AmVet
Rec 137:647, 1995.
Med Assoc 209:789, 1996.
 27. IDuval-Hurlelson KA: Coccidioidomycosis in three Eu-
Guinea Pig
ropean ferrets. J Zoo Wildife Med 21:353, 1990.
n  xs s   na   
28. Fox JG: Biology and Diseases of the Ferret. Willians
tivation in the guinca pig. An animal modcl for rccur-
& Wilkins Co., Baltimore, 1998.
rent disease. Int J Dermatol 30:29, 1991.
29. Gould WJ, et al: Evaluation of urinary cortisol: Creat-
47. Fry FL: Apparent spontaneous ergot-induced necro-
inine ratios for the cliagnosis of hyperadremocorticism
titing dennatitis in a gunea pig. J Small Exotic Anim
associated with adrenal gland tumors in ferrets. J Am
Med 2:165, 1994.
Vet Med Assoe 206:42, 1995.
47a. Guaguere E: Acariose a Chirodiscoides cauiae et
 30. King WW, et al: Superficial spreading pyoderna and
dermalophytie a Microsporum canis chez un cobaye.
ulcerative dermatitis in a ferrct. Vet Dermatol 7:43,
Prat Med Chir Aninm Comp 34:65, 1999.
1996.
48. Hinsjarvi P, Phyala L: Ivermcctin trcatrncnt of a col-
 31. Lewington J: Frontline for ferret feas. University
ony of guinca pigs infested with fur rmite (Chirodis-
Sydney Postgraduate Foundation Vcterinary Scicnce
coides caviae). Lab Anim 29: 200, 1995.
Control Therapy Series 189:856, 1996.
49. Peguin J: Phthiriose a Trimenopon chez un cobaye.
32. 1.i X, et al: Cutaneous lymphoma in a ferrct (Mustela 
Point Vet 28:91, 1997.
putorius furo). Vet Pathol 32:55, 1995.
50.
Quesenberry KE: Guinea pigs. Vet Clin North Am
33. Li X. et al: Neoplastic dliseases in ferrets: 574 cases
(Small Anim Pract) 24:67, 1994.
1968-1997). J Am Vet Med Assoc 212:1402. 1998.
51. Rothwell TL, et al: Haematological and pathological
34. Noli C, et al: Dermulicosis in ferrets (Mustela puto-
responses to experimental Trixacarus caviae infection
rius fauro). Vet Qnart I8:28, 1996.
in guinea pigs. J Comp Pathol 104: 179, 1991.
 Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets · I457
5la. Shipstone M: Trixacarus caviae infestation in l
69. Sundberg JP, Schultz LD: Inherited mouse rmnta-
lions: Models for the study of alopccia. J Invest Der-
tration. Aust Vet Pract 27:143. 1997.
matol 96:95S, 1991.
52. Sohnle PD, et al: Mechanisms involved in elinination
70. Sundberg JP, et al: Alopecia areata in hurmans and
of organisms from experimental cutaneous Cancdlide
other mammalian species. J Invcst Dermatol 104:32s,
zibicans infections in guinca pigs. J Innuno 117:525,
1995.
1976.
71. Vachon P, Aubry L: I'utilisation d'ivernectin pour le 
53. Van Cutsem J, et al: The in vitro antifungal activity of
traitement des acariens, Myohia msculi et Myocopte
ketoconazole, zinc pyrithione、 and selenium sulfide
musculinus, dans une colonie de souris transgeniques.
against Pityrosporum and their eficacy as a shampoo
Can Vet J 37:231, 1996.
in the treatuent of experimental pityrosporosis in
72. Wardrip CL, et al: Diagnostic exercise: head and
guinea pigs. J Am Acad. 1Der1natol 22:993, 1990.
neck swelling in A/JCr inice. Lab Anin Sci 44:280.
53a. Vangeel 1, et al: Prevalence of dermatophytes in
1994.
asymptomatic guinea pigs and rabbits. Vet Rec 146:
73. Wrench R: Scale prophylaxis. A ncw antiparakeratotic
440, 2000.
assay. Arch Dermatol 1i7:213. 1981.
Hamster
Rabbit
 54. Bauck LB, et al: Hyperadrenocorticism in three teddy
74.Arlian LG,et al: Sarcoptes scabiei: Thc circulating
bear hamsters. Can Vet J 25:247, 1984.
antibody response and induced inmnity to seabies.
55. Harvey RG, et al: Epidermotropic cutaneous T-cell
Exp Parasitol 78:37. 1994.
   ( si m
75. Arlian LG, et al: Sarcoptes scabiei: Histopathological
(Mesocricetus auratus). A report of six cases and the
 changes associated with acquisition and expression of
demonstration of T-cell specificity. Vet IDermatol 3:
host immunity to scabies. Exp Parasitol 78:51, 1994.
13, 1992.
76. Brown PJ, et al: Abnornalities of collagen fibrils in a
 56. Kajdacsy-Balla A, et al: Syphilis in the Syrian hamster.
rabbit with conneetive tissuc defect similar to Ehlers-
A model of human venereal and congenital syphilis.
Danlos syndrome. Res Vet Sci 55:346, 1993.
A1n J Pathol 126:599, 1987.
77. Carpenter JW, et al: Caring for rabbits: An overview
Mouse
and formulary. Vet Med 90:340, 1995.
78. Cooper PE, Penaoliggon J: Use of Frontlinc spray on
57. Abbott DP, et al: A condition resembling pagetoid
rabbits. Vet Rec 140:535, 1997.
reticulosis in a laboratory mnouse. Lab Anin 25:153,
79. Cutler SL: Ectopic: Psoroptes cuniculi infestation in a
'1661
pet rabbit. J Srmall Anim Pract 39:86, 1998.
58. Andrews AG, et al: Immune complex vasculitis with
 80. Harkness JE: Rabbit husbandry and 1nedicine. Vet
secondary ulcerative dermatitis in aged C57BL/6NNla
Clin Northi Ain (Small Anim Pract) 17:1019, 1987.
mice. Vet Pathol 31:293, 1994.
81.
Harrenstien L, et al: How to handle rcspiratory, oph-
 59. Baumans V, et al: The effectiveness of Ivomec and
thalinic, neurological and dermatologic problems in
Neguvon in the control of murine mites. Lab Anin
rabhits. Vet Med 90:373, 1995.
22:243, 1988.
 60. Baumans V, et al: The use of repeated treatment with
82. Hazarika RA, et al: Experimental staphylococcal der-
inatitis in rabbits. Incian J Vet Pathol 15:39, 1991.
83. Hillyer EV: Pet rabbits. Vet Clin North Aim (Small
and oxurid wonns. Lab Anim 22: 246, 1988.
61. Booth CJ, Sundherg JP: Ilemangiomas and heman-
Anim Pract) 24:25, 1994.
giosareomas in inbred laboratory micc. Lab Anim Sci
84. Ilotchkiss CE, et al: Malignant mchanoma in two rab-
bits. Lab Anin Sci 44:377, 1994.
45:497, 1995.
62. Foster HL, et al: The Mouse in Biomedical Rescarch.
85. Iglauer F, et al: Hereditary coupulsive self-mutilating
Acadeinic Press, New York, 1982.
'96  qg    1
63.Kietzmann M,et al: The mousc cpieris as a model
1995.
in skin pharimacology: Infnence of age and sex on
86. Jenkins JR: Skin disorders of the: rabhit. J Small Ex-
Otic Anin Med 1:64, 1991.
epidermal metaholic reactions and thieir circadian
rhythms. Lab Anim 24:321, 1990.
86a. Kirwan AP, et al: Diagnosis and prevalence of Le-
     a   
poracarus gibbus in the fur of domestic rabbits in thc
129/ mice. 1ab Anim Sci 45:604, 1995.
UK. Vet Rec 142:20, 1998.
64a. Mahler M, Jelinek F: Granulomatous infainmation
87. Kumar SP, et al: Use of Jevamisole for thue treatiment
in the tails of mice associated with Mycobacterium
of mange due to Notoedres cati in rabbits. Indian Vet
chelonae infection.Lab Anim 34:212,2000.
J70:161, 1993,
65. Ycubauer H, et al: Specific detection of mousepox
88. Kamboj DS, et al: Clinicotherapeutic eficacy of ami-
virus by polymerase chain reaction. Iab Anirn 3l:201,
traz against Notoedres cati infestation in rabhis. In-
1997.
dian Vet J 70:751, 1993.
66. Niemaltowski MG, ct al: The infammatory and im-
89. Linder KE, et al: Gencralizcd cxfoliative dermatosis
mune response to mousepox (infectious ectoinclia) vi-
with sebaceous adlenitis in three domcstic rabbits.
rus. Acta Virol 38: 299, 1994.
Proc Annu Meet Am Acad Vet IDermatol Ain Coll
67. Papini R, Marcancini A: Treatment with ivcrmcctin in
Vet Dermatol 14:89, 1998.
-dosonw pue ynosu sqofiw sueae 1pes suyuup
90. Maiti SK, et al: An cvaluation of ivermectin oral
tes rmasculinis mange in naturally infected laboratory
preparation in the trcatment of sarcoptic mange in
mice. Agnew Parasitol 32:11, 1991.
rabbits. Indian Vet J 72:612, 1995.
68. Sundberg JP, el al: Inherited mousc mutations as
91. Malley D: Use of Frontline spray in rahhits. Vet Rec
models of human aclnexal, cornification, and papulo-
140:664, 1997.
squamous dermatoses. J Invest Dermatol 95:62S,
92.
Manning PJ, ct al: The Biology of the Laboratory
1990.
 Rabbit I1. Academie Press, San Diego. 1994.
I458 * Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets
93. Okerman L, et al: Cutaneous staphylococcosis in rab-
97. Yeatts JWG: Rabbit mite infestation. Vet Ree 134:
bits. Vet Rec 114:313, 1984.
359, 1994.
93a. Pinter L: Leporacarus gibhus and Spilopsyllus cuti-
Rot
cult infestation in a pet rabbit. J Small Anim Pract 40:
 98. Binhazim AA, et al: Spontaneous hermangiosarcoma in
220,1999.
94. Sinke JD, et al: A case of Ehlers-Damlos-like syn-
the tail of a Long-Evans rat carrying the Elcer muta-
drome in a rahbit with review of the discasc in other
tion. Lab Anim Sci 44:191, 1994.
species. Vet Quart 19:182, 1997.
99. Erdelyi LL ct al: Behandlung med ivermcctin mot
95. Tripathi SC, et al: Therapeutic effcacy of ivermcctin
springmask och palskvalster hos laboratorieratta: Stra-
in rabhits (Oryctolagus rumiculus) experimerntally iu-
tegisk progran i eu produktion-sauhet. Scand J Lab
fected with Psoroptes cuniculi. Indian J Anim Hlth
Anim Sei 15;184, 1988.
32:55,1993.
100. Kunstyr I, et al: Gramlonatous dermatitis and masti-
96. Weisbroth SHI, et al: The Biology of the Laboratory
Rabbit. Acadcmic Press, New York. 1974.
Staphylococcus aureus—a case report. Lah Anin 29:
96a. White SD, et al: Sebaceous adenitis in four domestic
177, 1995.
rabbits (Oryctalagus cumicubus). Vet 1Derumatol ll:53,
[01. MacHole EJA: Mange in domesticated rats. Vet Rcc
2000.
138:312, 1996.
96b. White SD, et al: Lyuphorma with cutaneous involve-
102. Tayama K, Shisa H: Developmenl of pigrncnited
ment in three domestic rabbits (Oryctolagus cunicu-
scales on rat skin: Relation to age, sex. strain、 and
tus). Vet Dermatol 1l:6l, 2000.
hormonal effect. Lab Anim Sci 44:240, 1994.
Chapte
Chronology of 
Veterinary
Dermatology (1900-2000)
1 overview of the history of veterinary dermatology, IHistorical Highlights—Ancient
e pas ai jo 'ge oi 1iz sosd oe rdu u pu aq un a pe 
of this book (1976). This naterial was updated for the third edition of this book (1983).
 Because the historical material is unchanged, it is not repeated in the sixth cdition.
 Instead, the chronology is given here and updated to 2000.
1900
 Joseph Bayer and Eugene Frohmer of Vienna, Austria, persuaded Hugo Schindelka
to write a book on skin diseases of domestic aninals.
1903
Publication of the first book on veterinary dermatology, Hautkrankheiten bei
Haustieren (Skin Diseases of Domestic Animals), by Hugo Schindelka at Vienna.
1908
Publication of the second and final edition of Schindclka's book, Hautkrankheiten
bei Haustieren.
1910
Publication of the first book on comparative dermadology, Die Vcrglcichende
Pathologie der Haut (The Comparative Pathology of the Skin), by Julius Heller at
Berlin, Germany.
1926
 Publication of Animal Dermatology by Leblois in F rancc.
1930
Publication of the book, Course in Skin Diseases of Domestic Animals, by N.N.
Bogdanov at Moscow.
1931
 Publication of Die Klinik dcr Wichtigsten Tierdermatosen (The Clinic of the Most
Important Animal Dermatoses) by Julius Heller at Berlin, Germany
1931
 Publication of Veterinari Dermatologie by Frantisek Kral (Frank Kral) at Brmo,
Czechoslovakia.
1948
 Frank Kral ermigrated to the United States and joined the faculty of thice School of
Veterinary Medicine, University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia. He fonned the
Veterinury Dermatology Clinie, which was the first teaching unit of aninal skin
diseases in the United States.
1953
 Publication of Veterinary Dermatology by Frank Kral and Benjainin J. Novak, first
veterinary dermatologic book in English: a complete revision, expansion, and trans-
lation of Kral's 1931 book (325 pages).
1958
 Formation of the Dermatology Subcormmittee of the Committee on General Medi-
cinc of the American Animal Hospital Association on April 23, 1958. R.W. Worley
and G.H, Muller, Cochairmen; first organization of veterinary dermatology.
1958
E.M. Farber appoints G.1. Muller to the clinical faculty of Stanford University's
 Dermatology Departrment and establishes the first center of comparativc dlcrmatol-
ogy in America.
1959
       n s  m
shortly thereafter joins F. Kral's veterinary derrmatology section at the University of
Pennsylvania.
1959
 Formation of the Dermatology Comrnittec of the American Animal Hospital Asso-
ciation on February 5, 1959. G.H. Muller, Chairman. Committee functioned for 7
years.
1959
 Publication of the Compendium of Veterinary Dermatology by Frank Kral. Hand-
out for Kral's cross-country symposia in 1959 (69 pages).
1962
2Publication of A Comparativc Study of Skin Discases of Dog and Man by Robert
1459
1460 · Chronology of Veterinary Dermatology (1900-2000)
M. Schwartzman and Milton Orkin: the first book in English on comparative
derimatology (365 pages).
1963
 Transatlantic Conference on Canine and Feline 1Dernatology at Chicago and Lon-
don on April 26, 1963. Knowles, Muller, and Schiwartzman for the United States;
Singleton, Joshua, and Wilkinson for England.
1964
 Publication of section on Dermatologic Diseases (edited by G.H. Muller) in R.W.
Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy. Revised and updated in all subsequent cdi-
tions.
1964
 Publication of chapter on “"Feline diseases of the skin" by J.D. Conroy in Feline
Medicine.
1964
The American Academy of Veterinary Dermatology was organized at Philadelphia
by Conroy, Kral (President), Muller, and Schwartzman.
1964
Synposium on Comparative Physiclogy and Pathology of the Skin at Iondon,
England, in April, 1964. A.J. Rook and G.S. Walton, Chairmen. Proceedings were
published in 1965.
1964
Schwartzman: a rcvision and expansion of Kral and Novak's Veterinary Dermatol-
ogy (444 pages).
1964.
 First Symposium on Comparative Dermatology sponsored by the American Acad.
emy of Dermatology at Chicago on December 8, 1964. Milton Orkin was chair-
man of this and the next three symposia.
1965
1965
 Publication of Comparative Physiology and Pathology of the Skin by A.J. Rook and
G.S. Walton.
1966
 Third Symposium on Comparative Dermatology, December 5, 1966, at Miaimi,
Florida.
1966
 Symposium on Skin Diseases Common to Man and Animals at Palm Springs,
California, on Novermber 2, 1966. Orkin and Muller, Cochairmen.
1967
Fourth Symposium on Comparative Dermatology, Deceinber 4, 1967, at Chicago.
1967
 Publication of Atlas of Canine and Feline Dermatoses by R.M. Schwartzman and
Frank Kral.
1968
 Publication of the atlas, Canine Skin Lesions, by G.H. Muller.
1968
 J.D. Conroy receives a Ph.D. degree and thereby launches the first career devotcd
 cxclusivcly to veterinary dermatohistopathology in America.
1969
 Publication of Small Animal Dermatology by G.H, Muller and R.W. Kirk (485
cats. Used as a textbook by many schools of veterinary medicine. Translated into
 Japanese and French and reprinted in Taiwan,
1970
Formation of an organizing committee of the American College of Vcterinary
Dermatologists consisting of Blakemore, Conroy, Muller (Chairman), Schwartz-
man, Kirk, and Kral.
1973
The formation of the Task Force on Comiparative Dermatology as part of the
 National Program for Dermatology of the American Academy of Dermatology.
1974
Publication of the atlas, Feline Skin Lesions, by G.H. Muller.
1974
 Publication of a stereoscopic atlas of Clinical Dermatology of Small Animals by
G.G. Doering and H.E. Jensen (21l pages).
1974
 Dermatology Specialty Group of the American College of Veterinary Intcrnal
Medicine (ACVIM) receives approval of the Advisory Board of Veterinary Special-
ties of the American Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA) on April 5, 1974.
1974
 The first meeting of the Dermatology Specialty Group of the ACVIM was held on
April 20, 1974, at San Francisco.
1974
The Dermatology Specialty Group was officially recognized by receiving prohation-
ary approval of the ACVIM and Council of Education of the AVMA on July 20,
1974, at Denver, Colorado.
1976
 Chronology of Veterinary Dermatology (1900-2000) · 1461
1976. Honorary Secretary Brian G. Bagnal; committee members Michael R.
Geary, Raymond Hopes, David HI. Lloyd, and Keith L. Thoday.
1976
Publication of the Veterinary Dermatology Newsletter (Vol. i, No. 1) in May 1976
by the British Veterinary Dermatology Study Group.
1976
Publication of the second edition of Small Animal Dermatology by G.H. Muller
and R.W. Kirk (809 pages). Translated into Italian.
1979
Publication of The Skin and Intermal Disease (edited by G.H. Muller), the Veteri-
nary Clinics of North America, 1979, W.B. Saunders Company (152 pages).
Publication of Feline Dermatology 1900-1978: A Monograph by D.W. Scott (128
1980
pages).
1980
Frank Kral deceased September 7, 1980.
1981.
Formation of a French veterinary dermatologic organization: Groupe D'Etude en
Dermatologie des Animaux de Compagnie (GEDAC). President Pierrc Fourrier,
Secretary Didier Carlotti.
1981
Publication of Canine Dermatoses by J.M. Keep (Australia).
1981
 Publication of Feline Dermatoses by J.M. Keep (Australia).
1981
Publication of Equine Dermatoses by R.R. Pascoe (Australia).
1982
On March 9, 1982, the American Board of Veterinary Specialties of the AVMA
as a certifying body in Veterinary Dermatology. This group replaces the Dermatol-
ogy Specialty Group of the ACVIM. The organizing committee of the American
College of Veterinary Dermatology consists of Doctors J.C. Blakermore, J.D. Con-
roy, R.E.W. Halliwell, G.H. Muller, and E. Small.
The American College of Veterinary Dermatology was approved by the Council of
7861
Delegates of the AVMA on July 20, 1982. The charter members of the group are
the diplomates of the ACVIM (Dermatology) listed under 198l. There were 24
diplomates at the end of 1982.
1982
 Formation of a German veterinary dermatology organization called the "Freundes-
kreis Hautkrankheiten Interessierter Tierartzte." The organizing members are H.
Koch (President), B. Beardi, G. Feslev, H. Gehrig, G. Kasa, F. Kasa, G.H. Muller,
and C. Terling. The first meeting was held on October 12, 1982, at Birkenfeld,
West Germany. The namc of this organization was later changed to Arbeitskreis
Veterinar Dermatologie.
1983
 Publication of the third edition of Small Animal Dermatology by G.H. Muller,
1983
Publication of Canine and Feline Dermatology: A Systematic Approach by G.H.
Nesbitt (244 pages).
1983
Publication of Atlas of Skin Diseases of the Horse by L.F. Montes and J.T.
Vaughan.
1984
 Formation of the European Society of Veterinary Dermatology (EsVD) on Sep-
tember 18, 1984. President Hans Koch (Germany), Vice President Ton Willemse
(Holland), Secretary David Lloyd (England), Treasurer Didier Carloti (France),
Membership Secretary Pierre Fourrier (France), Meeting Secretary Claudia Von
Tscharner (Switzerland). Honorary Mermbers Richard Halliwell, Peter Ihrke,
Robert Kirk, George Muller, and Danny Scott (USA).
1984
informally that year under the auspices of the Australian Coilege of Veterinary
 Scientists. It granted full fellowship by examination in veterinary dermatology to
Kenneth V. Mason on August 28, 1984.
1984
Publication of Equine Dermatoses by R.R. Pascoe (Australia).
1984
Publication of Skin Diseases of the Pig by R.D.A. Cameron (Australia).
1984
 Formation of Groupe de Travail en Dermatologie Veterinaire in Belgium.
1984
Formation of Swedish Veterinary Dermatology Study Group in Sweden.
1985
Formation of Dansk Selskah for Veterinaer Dermatologi in Denmark.
[462 · Chronology of Veterinary Dermatology (1900-2000)
1985
Publication of the Color Atlas of Small Animal Dermatology by G.T. Wilkinson
(272 pages), Australia.
1986
Publication of Skin Diseases in the Dog and Cat by D.1. Grant (187 pages),
England.
1986
Formation of the Canadlian Academy of Veterinary Dermatology. President Lowell
Ackerman, Secretary B.P. Pukay.
1987
 Publication of Contemporary Issues in Small Animal Practice: Derrmatology, Vol. 8,
Ncw York (332 pages) (edited by G.1I. Nesbitt).
1987
 Formation, on October 23, of the Italian Veterinary Dermatology Group as part of
the Italian Small Animal Veterinary Association (SCIVAC). President, Alessandra
Fondati.
1987
 Formation of the Grupo dc Dermatologia de Asosiacion de Veterinarios Especialis-
tas en Pequefios Animales in Spain.
1987
 Publication of Atlas of Skin Diseases in Dogs and Cats by F. Kristensen (Den-
Imark),
1988
 Publication of Large Animal Dermatology by D.W. Scott (487 pages).
1988
Publication of Vanliga Hudsjukdomar Hos Hund Och Katt by B. Ohlen (Sweden).
1988
Publication of Pruritus (edited by S.D. White), the Veterinary Clinics of North
America, 1988, W.B. Saunders Company (143 pages).
1989
Publication of the fourth edition of Small Animal Derrmatology by G.H. Muller,
R.W. Kirk, and D.W. Scott (1007 pages). Translated into German.
1989
 Publication of first issue of Veterinary Dermatology, an international joumal dc-
voted to dermatology.
1989
 Publication of Skin Infection in Domestie Animals by A. Chatterjee (India).
1989
I'M pe aaa r'T Aq se pe sho yo sasea us ot jo u
Miller, Jr.
1989
Publication of Skin Diseases of Cattle by D.1, Bryden (Australia).
1989
Publication of Practical Canine Dermatology by L.J. Ackerman.
1989
 Publication of Practical Feline Dermatology by L.J. Ackerman.
1989
Publication of Practical Equine Dernatology by L.j. Ackerrnan.
1989
The First World Congress in Veterinary Dermatology was held in September at
Dijon, France.
1990
Publication of Small Animal Allergy. A Practical Guide by E. Baker.
1990
 Publication of Color Atlas of Small Animal Dermatology by B.A. Kummel.
1990
 Publication of Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. I, by C. von Tscharncr
and R.E.W. Halliwell.
0661
 Publication of Common Skin Diseases in Dogs and Cats by B. Ohlen (Sweden).
0661
 Publication of A Colour Atlas of Equine Dermatology by R.R. Pascoe (Australia).
1990
 Publication of Canine and Feline iDcrmatology by K.P. Baker and L.R. Thomsett 
(United Kingdom).
1990
Publication of Advances in Clinical Dermatology (edited by D.J. DeBoer), the
Veterinary Clinics of North America, 1990, W.B. Saunders Company (310 pages).
1661
 Publication of Clinical Dermatology of Dogs and Cats by T. Willemse (Nether-
lands).
1991
Puhlication of Les Dermites Allergiques du Chien et du Chat by P. Prelaud
(France),
1991
 Publication of second edition of Skin Diseascs in the Dog and Cat by D.I. Grant
(United Kingdom).
1991
 Publication of Dermatology for the Small Animal Practitioner by G.H, Neshitt and
L.J. Ackerman.
1991
 Publication of Techniques Diagnostiques en Dermatologie des Carnivores by E.
Guaguere (France).
1992
Publication of Skin Tumors of the Dog and Cat by M.H. Goldschmidt and F.S.
 Shofer.
1992
 Publication of Veterinary Dermatopathology. A Macroscopic and Microscopic Eval-
Chronology of Veterinary Dermatology (1900-2000) - I463
uation of Canine and Feline Skin Diseases by T.L. Gros, P.J. Ihrke, and E.J.
Walder.
1992
The Second World Congress in Veterinary Dermatology was held in May at
Montrcal, Quebec.
1992
The European College of Veterinary Derimatology was granted approval as a
certifying body in veterinary dermatology, and thc following individuals were
D. Lloyd, K. Thoday, and T. Willemse.
Publication of Current Veterinary Dermatology. The Science and Art of Therapy
1993
by C.E. Griffn, K.W. Kwochka, and J.M. MacDonald.
Publication of Manual of Sinall Animal Dermatology by P.1I. Locke, R.G. Harvey,
1993
and I.S. Mason (United Kingdom).
1993
Publication of second edition of Color Atlas of Small Animal Dermatology: A
Guide to Diagnosis by G.T. Wilkinson and R. G. Harvey (United Kingdorn).
1993
 Publication of Advances in Veterinary Dermatology. Vol. I1, by P.J. Ihrke, I.S.
Mason, and S.D. White.
1994
 Publication of Color Atlas and Text of Surgical Pathology of the Dog and Cat:
Dermatopathology and Skin Turnors by JA. Yager and B.P. Wilcock.
1995
 Publication of the fifth edition of Muller and Kirk's Small Animal Derinatology
(1,213 pages) by D.W. Scott, W.H. Miller, and C.E. Griffin. Translated into
Portuguese and Spanish.
1995
Publication of Dermatology (edited by V. A. Fadok), the Veterinary Clinics of
North America Fquine Practice, 1995, W. B. Saunders Company (150 pages).
1995
 Publication of Feline Dermatology (edited by G. Kunkle), the Veterinary Clinics
of North America Small Animal Practice, 1995, W. B. Saunders Company
(246 pages).
1995
 Publication of Handbook of Small Animnal Dermatology by K. A. Moriello and
I. S. Mason.
1995
Formation of the study group, Omada Ktiniatrikis Dermatologias, in Grecce.
1995
Formation of the Italian Society of Veterinary Dernatology in Italy.
1995
Formation of the Association of Veterinary Dermatology  Taipei in Taiwan.
1995
Formation of the Arbeitskreis Veterinardermatologic in Austria.
1996
The Third World Congress in Veterinary Dernatology was held in Septcrmber at
Edinburgh, Scotland.
1997
Formation of Deutsche Gesellschaft fir Veterinardcrmatologie in Gernany.
1997
 Publication of second edition of Allergic Skin Diseases of Dogs and Cats by L. M.
Recdy, W. H. Miller, Jr., and T. Willeimse.
1997
 Publication of A Color Handbook of Skin Diseases in the Dog and Cat by P. J.
MeKeever and R. G. Harvey.
1997
Publication of Color Atlas of Small Animal Dermatoses for Small Anirnal Practi-
tioner by C. Chen (Taiwan).
1997
Tony Stannard deceased July 2, 1997.
1998
 Publication of Canine and Feline Dermatology. Diagnosis and Treatment by G. H.
Nesbitt and I. Ackerman.
1998
 Publication of Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. Ill, by K. W. Kwochka
T. Willemse, and C. von Tscharner.
1998
Formation of Nihon Juhi Hifuka Gakkai in Japan.
1998
 d Aq ne pue so  yo sasesa us jo xooh roo v jo uognd
McKeever and R. G. Harvey.
1998
Publication of Skin Diseases of the Dog by S. Patcrson (United Kingdom).
1998
Publication of Vade-Mecum de Dermatologie Veterinaire by" G. Marignac
(France).
1999
Publication of △EPMATO AIKA-EN△OKPINOAO IA KAI METABOAIKA
NOZHMATA by A. Koutinas (Greece).
1999
 Publication of Allergologie Canine by P. Prelaud (Francc).
| 464 · Chronology of Veterinary Dermatology (1900-2000)
1999
Publication of Manual of Equine Dermatology by R. R. R. Pascoe and D. C.
Knottenbelt.
1999
North Anerica Small Animal Practice, 1999, W. B. Saunders Company (215
pages).
2000
Publication of Skin Diseases of the Cat by S. Paterson (United Kingdom).
2000
 Formation of the Brazilian Society of Veterinary Dermatology in Brazil.
2000
 Lloyd Reedy deceased. April 21, 2000.
2000
The Fourth World Congress in Veterinary Dermatology was held in August/
September at San Francisco, Califormia.
2000
 Publication of A Practical Guide to Feline Dermatology by E. Guaguere and P.
Prelaud (France).
1ex
Page numbers in italics refer to ilustrations; page numbers fol-
lowed by t refer to tables.
Aaro-Perkins corpuscle, 44
Acarus farris, in gerbils, 1428
Abamectin, 428
Acarus qiro, 451
Ablomen, cominon and less common dermatoses of, 104t
Accutane. See Isotretirwin.
Abelcet. See Amphotericin B lipid complex.
Aceattr
Abrasion(s), cpidermal, management of, 266-267
107
Abscess(es). See also Microabscess{es).
for Malassezia spp., 368
anal sac, 1197, 1202, 1203
Acetic acid, 227
definition of, 89
otie therapy with, 1228
dermal. 187,187
topical, 236, 356t
in actinobacillosis, 321-323
antifungal therapy with, 410
in cats, 276, 310-311
Aclromotrichia, 96
 nonhealing or recurrent, 311
Acid mantle, of skin, 31-32
in dogs,302,310,311
Acid orcein-Cie1nsa (AOG) stain, 129, 130t
in hamsters, 1439
Acid phosphatase, in cell type identification, 204t
in rabbits, 1445
Acidophil(s), 781
in rats, 1452
Acinetobacter spp., as resident flora, in cats, 33, 275
plague-related, 325-326
in dogs, 33. 275
subeutaneous, hclninthie infections and, 440
Acitrctin, 241
in cats, 310-311
antiseborrheic therapy with, 919, 1029
jn togs,302,310,311
for actinic keratosis, 1079
Absidia corymnbifera, 384
for granulomatous scbaceous axdenitis, 1246
Abyssiian cat, amyloidosis in, 767
 indications for, 1029
cryptococcosis in,395
Acne, 1041-1043
griseofulvin side effects in, 357
canine, 303, 1041
grooming for,215
feline, 1029, 1039, 1042-1043, 1043
hair disorder of, 109
clinical managcment of, 242
hair shaft disorder of, 955, 955
Acral lick dermatis, 308, 1057, 1058-1064
psychogenie dermatoses ini, 1056, J066
acupuncture for, 1064
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 77t
cause and pathogenesis of,1058
Acanthocheiloruma infeetion, 435, 439-440, 440
clinical fcatures of, 1058-1059, 1060
Acanthocyte(s), 143
clinical management of, 1059- 1064
in cytologic diagnosis, 118t
cnyosurgery for,258,1064
Acantholysis. 143-147, 146, 147, 678
dliagnosis of, 1059, 1061, 1062
in penuplhigus, 678-679
clectroshocek for, 1064
Acanthoua(s), infundibular keratinizing. See Keratoacan-
lascr therapy for, 1064
thoma.
lesion in, treatment of, 1063-1064
Acanthosis, definition of, 134
 organic disease and, 1058
trc,134
psychological drug therapy for, 1061-1063
Acanthosis nigricans, 975-977
radiation therapy for, 1064
breecd(s) with predilection for, 75
Acral lick furuneulosis, 302, 308-309
canine, 1007-1009, 1010
Acral mutilation syndrome, 988-989, 995
causc and pathogenesis of, 975-976
Acremonium hyalinum, 377
clinical featurcs of, 964, 976
Acrodcrmatitis, 988-989, 992-993
clinical management of, 253, 976-977
Acromegaly, 794-795
diagnosis of, 976
canine, 825-827, 826. 828
in1 dogs, 153
fclinc, 825, 827, 828
primary (idiopathic), 975
Acromelaisn. 8
secondary, 975-976
feline, 1012-1013
1465
1466 · Index
ACTH, 17, 781
Adrenal hyperplasia-like syndrome (Continued)
plasma levels of. dctermination of, 793
clinical features of, 847, 847-848, 848
measurement of, 809
secretion of, excessivc, 799
diagnosis of, 848-849,849, 850t
sex hormon resmse totest for798
Acrenal sex hormome imhalance(s), 845-846. 854
ACTH stimulalion test, 791-792
 hreed(s) with predilcction for, 75
in hyperadrcnocorticisn, 809
in dogs. 842
x horuoe levels after in dogs, 848-849, 850t
Adrenalectomy, in cats, 818-819
Actin, 22t
 in dogs, 811
Actinic keratusis, 1080, 1391-1392, 1393, 1394
Adrenocortieotropie hormune (corticotropin). See ACTH.
breed(s) withi predlilection for, 1238t
Advantage. Sce Inicdacloprid.
in cats, 173
risk for, haircoat color and, 76
neous.
Actinin, 22t
Aclverse food reaction. See Food fuypersensitivity.
Actinobacillosis (Actinobacillus inlection）), 321-323
Affenpinscher, Iollicular dysplasia in, 971
diagnosis of, 125
 scasonal flank alopecia in, 891
pscudomycetona causel by, 312
Afghan hound. See Hloumd, Afghan.
Actinobaeilus spp, in mice, 1442
Age, and drug absorption, 220°
Actinobacillus lignieresi, 321
and graying, 1014
Actinomyces spp.,in abscesses in cats, 31l
and risk for non-n1eoplastie skin disorders, 75. 76t
in mice, 1442
 and skin inmune system, 360-561
in oral flora of cats, 276
skin changes with, 64-65, 65
infections causcd by, 276. See also Actinomycosis.
Agouti hair, 8
Aclinornyces hordeovutneris,321
Aguirre's syndrome, 1021
Actinomyces meyeri, 321
Airedale.See Terrier,Atredale
Actinomyces odontolyticus, 321
Akita, anyloidosis in, 767
Actinomyces tiscosus, 321
dystrophie cpiderrnolysis bullosa in, 939
Actinornycosis, 317, 321, 322
granulomatous sehaceous adenitis in, 1141, 1142, 1143,
diagnosis of, 117, 125, 321
1143
in ferrets, 1417
pemphigus foliaccus in, 686, 687
Acupuncture,263
postclipping alopecin in, 898
for acral lick dermatitis, 1064
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 771
Acyclovir,for feline rhinotracheitis,525
veodermatologic syndrome in,748-749. 757
Adapalene, 234. 241
Alabrama rot. SeeCireyhound.
Adapin. See Dotepin.
Alaskan malarmute. See Malamute.
Adenitis. See Sebaceous adenitis.
Albinism, 17, 1014 
Adenocareinoma, adrcnocortical, in cats, 815
Alcalignes spp., as transiont fora in cats, 275
in dogs, 799
Alcian bhue, staining characteristics of various substances
colomnic, cutancous 1metastases of, 1366, 1373, 1374
with, 130t
cyclid, 1190
Alcohol(s), antipruritic therapy with, 229-230
jejunal, cutaneous metastases of, 1373-1374
inn shanpoo, 223
mammary, 1021
in topical therapy, 230
cutaneous metastases of, 1366, 1373
Aleuroconidlia, 337
pituitary, in cats, 815
Alkaline phosphatase, in cell type identifcation, 204t
in dogs, 799
jn hyperadrcnocorticisrn, 805
Adenohypophysis, 780
Allergen(s), alum-precipitated, for hyposensitization of
Adenoma(s), adrenocortical, in cats, 815
clogs, 599
in dogs, 799
aqueous, for hyposensitization of dogs, 597-599,
eyclid, 1190
598t
pituitary, in cats, 815
emulsion, for hyposensitization of dogs, 599
in dogs, 799
Allergie brcakthrough, 579
sebaceous gland, 1029
Allergic contact derrnatitis. See Contact hypersensitirity
clinical management of、242
(allergic contact cermatitis)
in dogs, 1271, 1272
Allergie ialant ematitis ee Atopy.
 in gerbils, 1429- 1430
Allergroom, 229t, 235, 917, 1035
sweat gland, 1279
Allergy. Scc also Atopy.
in hamsters, 1442
and bacterial infection, 277
Adenosine triphosphatase.in cell type identifcation. 204t
breed(s) with predilection for, 73
Adherens junction(s), 19, 22t
cytologic diagnosis af, 117
Adlhcsion molccule(s), 545, 549t
drug. Sce Drug reaction, cutaneous.
Adipocyte(s). See Lipocyte(s).
food.See Food hypersensitievity.
Adipose tissuc, 63, 63
Adnexal (pilosebaceous) nevi, 1384- 1386, 1385
in vitro,589-592,591t
Adrenal function tesi(s), 790-794
 in feline atopy, 606
inl canine hyperadrenocorticisn,$07810
intradenmal, 584-589, 591t
in feline hyperadrenocorticism, 816-818
allergen selection for, 585-588
Adrenal hyperplasia-like syndrome, 846-851
lalse-negative, causes of, 587t, 587-588
causc and pathogencsis of, 846-847
falsc-positivc, causes of, 587t, 587588
Index·1467
Allergy test(s) (Continued)
Alopccia (Contirued)
in leline atopy. 605-606
perioaular, in leishmaniasis, 534
procedure for.588-589
pinnal, canine, 887,888, 889
serologic. 589-592, 591t
feline, 888, 900
 in leline atopy. 606
postelipping, 897, 898
D-trans-Allethriu, 426
preauricular, feline, 888, 900
Allopurinol, for leishmaniasis, 538
primary, 86
Aloe vera, topical thrapy with, 36
psyehogcnic,hair examination in, 109
Alopecia, 6,87, 92. See also Demodicosis, in dogs: Hair;
scasonal fank, 890-893, 891, 892
Melanoderna and alopeciu:Telogen defuxion.
secordary, 86
acquired, 887-911
short hair syndrome of silky breeds and, 888,897
anagen defuxion and. Sce Anagen deffuxion.
superficial bacterial folliculitis and. 293-294
canine, acquired, 887-899, 888, 589
tardive, 965-974
drug-indured. 722t
telogen defuxion and. See Telogen defuxion.
in follicular dysplasia, 890
topical steroid-induced, in cats, 902, 903
in injection rcaction, 896
in dogs, 889, 896, 896-897
in trichorrhexis nodosa, 895, 895, 006
traction, 888, 894-895
minoxidil in. 874
traumatic, in hamsters, 1440
pinmal, 887, 888, 889
trichoptilosis and, 893
topical steroid-indnced, 889,896, 896-897
trichorrhexis nodosa and, in cats, 905, 905-907, 906
chronic racdiant heat dermatis and, 897..899
inn dogs, 895, 895, 906
cicatricial, 897
Alopecia areata, 198-199, 201, 761-763
color dilution. See Color dilution alopecia.
cuuse and pathogenesis of, 761
color mtant.Sec Color clilution alopecia.
clinical features of, 761, 762-764
congenital, 956-965
clinical management of, 763
in hamsters, 1441
defnition of, 761
in rahbbits, 1450, 1450
diagnosis of, 671,761-762
in rats, 1454, 1454
hair examination in, 108, 111
ylfollaasiaand093
histopathology of, 762-763. 764
delinition of, 85
in mice, 1444
dermatophytosis and, 342-347, 344-345, 346
il rabbits, 1450- 1451, 1452
cxcessive shedding and, 894
in rats, 1455
exfoliative dermatitis and thymoma in cats and.
Alopecia mucinosa, in cats, 909-911, 910-911
905
in dogs, 899
feline, acquired, 900-911
Alopccia X,843-845
clndocrinc, 851
Altermaria spp., 387
in follicular dysplasia, 905
colonies of, morphology of, 123
 in injection reaclion, 902
dermatitis caused by, 387, 391, 392
in trichorrhcxis nedosa, 905, 905-907, 906
in normal fora, 338, 338t
pinnal, 888, 900
in dogs, 34
prcauricular, 888, 900
Alternaria alternata,379,391
psychogcnic,1060-1061,1066-1070
Alternaria tenuissima, 39[
cause and pathogenesis of, 1066
Alternative therapy(ies), 263
clinical fcaures of, 1060-1061, 1067, 1068
Aluminum acetate, otie therapy with, 1228
clinical management of, 1069-1070
Aluminum acetate solution (Burow's solution: Domeboro),
dliaguosis of, 1067-1069, 1069
227,229t, 230
symmetric,888, 900-902
Ambtyomna maculatun,444
topicad steroid-induced, 902,903
Anerican |lolisticVeterinary MedicalAssociation,263
focal. 86
Aminoglycoside(s), otie therapy wih, 1227
follicular dysplasia and, canine, 890
Auminosidin, for leishnaniasis, 538
feline, 905
Amitraz, 427
follicular lipidosis of Rottweilers and. 899, 899, 900
adverse effects and side effects of, 425, 471-472, 473,
hereditary. See Alopecia, congenital.
573,725
hyperadrenocorticism and, 780
therapy with, antiparasitic, 425
hypothyroidism and, 780,783-784
for canine demodicosis, 470-472, 473
idiopatlie lynphoeytie mural folleulitis in cats and, 907--
for canine scabies, 482
909, 907-910
for feline demodicosis. 474, 475, 476
in ferrets, breeding season and, 1425
for feline scabies, 484
hyperstrogenism and,1424-1425,1425
jn snall animals, dosage and adninistration of, 1418t
misccllaneou5 causes of, 1426- 1427
otic,1229
testicular neoplasia and, 1425
regulation of，424
in guinca pigs, 1437, 1438
Amitriptyline, 1036- 1057
in mice, 1444
for feline psychogenic alopccia, 1070
in rex mutant cats, 9
Amoxicillin, efieacy of, against Staphylococcus intermedis,
injectiou reaction and, 92. $96, 902
282
medullary trichomalacia and, 895
in small animals, dosage and adninistration of, 1418t
paraneoplastic, 902, 903, 904
Amoxicillin-clavulanate, adverse effects and side effects of,
patten haldncss and, 890
725,727
1468·Index
Amoxicillin-clavulanate (Continued)
Angicedema (Continued)
efficacy of, against coagulase-positive staphyloxcocci, 282
clinical management of, 574
against Staphylococus intermedius, 282
drug-indnced, in cals, 723t 
long-tern therapy wih,287
in dogs, 722t
systemic, dosage of, 284. 284t
Angiogenesis, regulation of, 56
Amphotericin B, adverse effects and side effects of, 414
Angiokerato1na,1303-1304,1304
antfungal therapy with,414
Angiolipoma, 1309, 1311
for leishmaniasis, 538
Angioma. See Lymphangioma.
resistance lo, 414
Angiosarcoma. See Hemangiosarcoma; Lymphanglosar
topical, 356t, 409
com.
Amphotericin B lipid complex, 414
Angora rabbit, myxomatosis in, 1446
Ampicillin, efficacy of, against Staphylococcus intermedius,
Anipryl. See L-Deprenyl.
282
Annelloconidia, 337
 in small animals, dosage and administration of, 1418t
Aonychia, definition of, 1193t
 systemic, for bacterial infections, 281
Aoplura, characteristies of, 487
Anyloid, denmal deposits of, 160
Ant(s), 506-507
Amyloid-A, 767
Antibiotic(s), and steroids, combination therapy with, 280,
Amyloid-L,766
284-285
Amyloidosis. 766-769, 768, 769
antinllammatory properties of, 285
defnition of, 766
concentration-dependent, 283
nodular, 769
costs of, 283
paraneoplastic, 1375
distribution of, in skin, 281
Amyloid-P, 766
efficacy of, factors affecting, 281
Anaerobic bacteria. See Bacteria, anaerobic.
for canine neosporosis, 533
Anaerobic cellulitis, 302, 310
for leishmaniasis, 538
Anafranil. See Clomipramine.
for malodorous dogs, 214
Anagen, 5, 5, 6, 46, 46, 48
for Rocky Mountain spotted fevcr, 529
hypothyroidism and, 783
for small animals, 1418t
stages of, 46
immunomodulatory properties of, 285
Anagen defluxiom, 893, 893-894
in shampoo, 223
hair examination in, 108, 109
long-term therapy with, 287-288
Anal area, cryosurgery in, 258
suboptimal protocols for, 287-288
Anal licking, 1066,1067
Anal sac(s), abscess of, 1127, 1202, 1203
otic therapy with 1227, 1229
anatomy of, 1200--1201
resistance to,282
diseases of, 1201-1202
selection of, factors affecting, 282-283
clinical fealures of, 1202
systemic, course of treatment with, 284
clinical management of, 1202- 1203
dosage of, 284, 284t
expression of, 211, 1202
duraion of therapy with,285
impaction of, 1201
for bacterial infections, 281-285
 clinical managerment of, 1202
time-dependent, 283
infections of, 1201
topical, for bacterial infection, 279, 280
clinical management of, 1202- 1203
for ear treatment, 1226t, 1226-1227
neoplasia of, 1202
potentiation of, with EDTA-Tris, 280
secretions of, 1201, 1201t
Antibody(ies), homocytotropic, 562
Anaplasia, definition of, 174
reaginic, 561-562
Anaplasmusis, 444
skin-sensitizing, 562
Anatrichosona cutaneum,436
Antidepressant(s), [056-1057
Anatrichosomiasis, 436, 437
for acral lick derrnatitis, 1061
Anchoring fbril(s), 35, 36t
for hypersensitivity disorders, 569-570
Ancobon.See Flucytosine.
Antifungal therapy, 409-415
cog q pasno suapopod "dds rosfiouy
 in small animals, 1418t
Ancylastona braziliense, 431
otic,1226t,1228
in humans, 432
rinses for,410
Ancylostoma canimurn, 431, 432
shampoos for, 409-410
in humans, 432
spot trcatments in, 409
Ancylostoma dermatitis, 431-432, 432
systemic, 356-358, 357t, 410-415
Androgen(s), 796-797
topical, 218t, 364-356, 356t, 409-410
and acnc, 1041
for ear treatment, 1226t, 1227
bloud levels of, assays for, 797
Antihistamine(s), 1057
Androgen-estrogen therapy, for feline acquired symmetric
for acral lick dermatitis, 1061
alopecia, 901-902
for bypersensitivity disorders, 567-569, 569t
Alemia, feline infectious, 531
Anti-infammatory agent(s), in topical therapy, 21St, 232.
 in hypothyroidism, 858, 860
233,233t,234t
Anesthesia, for biopsy, 128
nonstcroidal, for hypersensitivity disorders, 566-567
Angicederna, 91, 571-574
systemic,238-239
cause and pathogenesis of, 571, 572t
Antimalarial agent(s), for discoid lupus crythematosus, 716
clinical features of, 572, 573
inmunosuppressive therapy with, 677-678
Index · 1469
Antirmicrobial agent(s),otic preparations of, 1226t, 1227
Aspergillus faous, 403
topical, 218t,230-232
Aspergilus fumigatus, 403
for ear trcatment, 1226t, 1227
Aspergillus nidulans, 403
Antimicrobial-glucocorticoid agent(s), topical, for ear treat-
Aspergillus niger, 397, 403
ment, 1226t, 1226-1227
Aspergilus terreus. 403
Antinyootics).ScAntfungal therapy
Asthenia, cutancous (Ehlers-Danlos synclrome, dermato-
Antinuclear antibody (ANA) test, for systemuc lupus erythc-
spararis), 159, 978, 979-984,980
matosus,706
cause and pathogenesis of, 979-982, 980, 981
Antioxidant(s),209
clinical features of, 980, 982
Antiparasitic agcent(s), 423-430
clinical mamagcment of, 983-984
in small animals, l418t
dlefinition of, 979
otic therapy with, 1227t, 1228
diagnosis of, 982-983, 983
systemic,427-430
in dogs, 159
topical, 218t, 424-427
in rabbits, 1450, 1451
for ear treatment, 1226t, 1228-1229
bypes of, 979, 979t
Antipruritie agent(s), systemic, nonsteroidal, 238-239
Astringent(s), in topical therapy, 218t, 226-227
tupieal, 218t,228-230,229t
Atabrine hydrochloride. Sec Quinacrine hydrchloride.
Antiseborrhcic agent(s), 1025- 1030
Atarax. See Hydroxyzine.
systemic,1028
Atopy. See also Allergy.
topical, 218t, 227-228, 1025-1028
and canine demodicosis, co-occurrence of, 473
Anliseptie agent(s), 230
and contact hypersensitivity, 1081
otic therapy with, 1228
and Malassexia dermatitis, 365, 374
topical, for ear treatinent, 1227
canine,205,574-601
α-Antitrypsin, in cell type identification, 204t
avoidance as th1erapy for, 595-597
Amus, common and less common dermatoses of, 104t-
basophil degranulation test in, 592
105t, 105t
cause and pathogenesis of, 574-581
Anxiolytic agent(s), 1057
client education about. 595
for acral licek dermatitis, 1061
clinical features of, 581-583, 582, 584
Aplasia cutis, 936
clinical rmanagernent of, 244, 593-601
Apocrine sweat gland(s).See Sueat gland(s),epitrichial
diagnosis of, 152, 583-593
{apocrine)
diagnostic ecriteria for, 592-593
Apoptosis,138-140,142
environmental management for, 595-597, 596t
defnition of, 138
experimental therapies for, 601
in catageu, 48
histopathologyof9394
Apoptotic body(ies), 140
hyposensitization for, 397-601, 598t
Arachidonic acid, 30, 208, 239, 1113
intradermal allergy testing in, 584-589, 591t
Arachnid(s), 440-485
scnalogic allergy tests in, 589-592, 591t
hypersensitivity to, 636-642
systemic antipruritic agents for, 601
Aralen. Sec Chloroquine.
topical therapy for, 597-601
Arectium spp.. See Burdock.
clinical management of 239, 244, 593-601, 607-608,
Argentafin stain(s), 19
609t
Argyroplil stain(s), 19
cytologic diagnosis of, 114, 117
Armadillo Westie syndrome, 914, 928-929, 930, 932, 933
feline, 184, 601-608
Arofylline, for canine atopy, 601
allergy testing in, 605606
Arrector pili muscle,41,42, 43, 55,55
basophil degranulation test in, 606
age-related changes in,64,65
cause and pathogenesis of, 602
innervation of, 59
clinical features of, 602-603, 604
Arsenic toxicosis, 1101
clinical management of, 607-608, 609t 
Arteriole(s), cutane(us, 56
diagnosis of, 603-607, 605
 Arteriovenous anastomoses, 56-57
hislopathology of, 606-607,07
Arteriovenous fistula, 1095-1096
hyposensitization for, 608, 609t
Arthroconidia, 121, 337, 351
serum in vitro testing in, 606
Arthropod parasite(s), 440-500)
foot licking in, 1066
Ascaris infection, claw involvement in, 1195
in ferrets, 1426, 1427
Ascorbic acid. See Vitamin C.
insects and, 486-487
Aspergillosis, 403
Atrophy. epidermal, 135- 136, 140
in rabbits, 1446
epithelial, 197-199
nasal, 397, 403
follicular, 166, 167
Aspergilus sp.. 337
in injection site reaction, in cats, 723t
colonie of, mhologyof 3
in dogs, 722t
culture of, 121
of connective tissne, 197-199
cyeloheximide sensitivity of, 121
of dermal collagen, 159
cxamination fo, specimen coection for, 119
of dermal elastin, 159
in nomnal fora,34, 338.338t
Aural cholesteatoa, 1216
otitis cxtcrma caused by, 1214t
Auranofn, immunosuppressivc thcrapy with, 672t, 675
Aspergillus leflectus, 403
676
Aspergiflus dermatitis, 397, 403-404
Aureobasidium spp., in Donmal fora, of dogs, 338, 338t
Aspergillusflavipes,403
Auricular chondnitis, canine, 759, 759- 760
[470 · Index
Auricular chondnitis (Continued)
Bacteria (Contimued)
feline, 748-749, 759-760, 760
hypersensitivity to,637, 647-650,649
in rats, 1454
in normal fora, 274
Arothioglucose, mmunosuppressive therapy with, 672.
resident, 274-275
675-676
numbers of, 276-277
Aurotrichia, acquirerd, 1008, 1022
transient,274-277
in miniature Schnauzers, 978
in surlace debris, 155, 155
Australian shcpherd. See Shepherd, Australian.
intracelular, in cytologic diagnosis, 113, 117, 118t
Austrobtharzia tarigiandis,436
L-forns, infections caused by, 327
otitis externa caused by,1210,1213,1214t
Autoimmune dermatosis, 667, 678-769
otitis media caused by, 1214t
classifeation of, 670
phagocytosed,113
cytologic diaguosis of, 114,117,661
susceptibility testing of, indicalions for, 125
otitis externa caused by,1206t,1212
Bacterial colomization, and imection, comparison of, 277
Autoimmunc subepidermal bullous dermatosis, 694-701
cytologic identification of, 116, 118t
Aveeno, 229t, 230, 236
Bacterial infection(s), 277-278. Scc also Pyoderma.
Avernectin(s), 428, 445
and bacterial colonization, comparison of, 277
Avoidancc, of allergcns, as therapy for hypersensitivity,
causes of, 277
563, 595-597
deep, 298-324
of sun. See Sun dooidance.
cytologic findings in, 117
Axila, comnon and less common dennatoses of, 104t
treatment of, 285
Azathioprine, adverse effects and side cffccts of, 673-674
diagnosis of, 125
antiseborrheic effects of, 920
cytologie, 113, 116, 118t, 125
for discoirl lupus erythematosus, 716
in cats, systemic therapy for, 281, 282
for graft-versus-host disease, 720
in dogs, 188
for idiopathie sterile granuloma and pyograrmloma
systermic therapy for, 281
1139-1140
in ferrets, 1417, 1418
for pemphigus, 681
in gerbils, 1428
for pempligus foliaceus, 689-690
in guinea pigs, 1418, 1420, 1430
for systemic lupus erythcmatosus, 711
in hamsters, 1418, 1439
for vasculitis, 753
in micc, 1442
immunosuppressive therapy with, 672t, 673-674
in rahhits, 1444-1446
Azilhromycin, eficacy of, against Staphylococcus interme-
in rats, 1452-1453
dius,282
1etabolic causes of, 278
 systernic, dosage of, 284t
mixed, antibiotie therapy for, 283
Azium. See Dexamethasone.
prinary, 278
Azole(s), anlifungal therapy with, 411-413
recurrence of, 278
drug interactions with, 412
antibiotic therapy for, 283
mechanism of action of, 411
 chronic, management of, 286-288
topical, 409
relapse of, 285
Azulfidine. See Sulfasalazine.
secondary, 277
saperficial, 288-298
surface, 288
Babesia canis, 534
treatment of, 279-288
Babesia gibsoni, 534
rc-cxamination during, 285
Babesia pogeli, 534
systemic, 281, 282
Babesiosis, 444
topical, 279-281
canine, 530-531, 534
Bacterial overgrowth, 117
 Bacillus spp., as resident microflora, in dogs, 275
Bacterin(s), autogenous staplylococcal, 286
as transient fora, in cats, 275
Bacteroides spp., celulitis caused by, 310
in dogs. 275
in infections, 276
Bacitracin, topical, for bacterial infection, 279, 280
in oral fora of cats, 276
Back, counmon and less common dermatoscs of, 104t
in subcutaneous ahscesses in cats, 310
Bacquiloprim-sulfadimethoxine, systemic, dosage of, 284t
Baldness, patterm, 890, 954, 963-964, 965-966, 966
Bacteria, adhesion of, 276
 clinical management of, 253
aerohic, ccllulitis caused by, 309-310
Balinese cat, acromelanism in, 1012- 1013
gram-negative, as resident fora, in dogs, 34, 275
hair color of, 8
anaerobie, 276
Ballooning degeneration, epidernal, 142- 143, 145
cellulitis caused by, 302, 310
Banarmine. See Flunixin meglumine.
 in abscesses in cats, 311
Barhering, in gerbils, 1429
in subcutaneous abscesses in cats, 310
in guinea pigs, 1437
otitis media caused by, 1214t
in mice, 1444
and acne, 1041
in rabbits, 1450
antibactorial sensitivity of, 276
in rats, 1454
culture of, indications for, I25
Barrier function, of hair, 3l, 274
specimen collcction for, 125
of skin, 31
extracellular, in cytologic diagnosis, I15, 118t
Bartonella hinselar, 493
gram-ncgative, as resident Hora, in dogs, 34, 275
Basal cell carcinoma, 1261-1263, 1262
Index · 1471
Basal cell carcinoma (Continued)
Beauceron (Continued)
 breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t
 epiderinolysis bullosa in, dystrophic, 939
clear cell, 1262
junctional, 939
in hansters, 1442
 systemie lupus erythenatosus in, 706
in rabbits, 1451
Bedllington terrier. See Terrier, Bedlngton.
in rats, 1455
Bee(s),505-506
keratinizing, 1262
Behavioral change(s), in hyperadrenocorticism, 804
melanotic,1262,7262
Belgian sheepdog. See Sheepdog, Betgian (Belgian Ter-
solid, 1262
curen).
with sebaceous differeutiation, 1271
Bclgian Tervurcn. Scc Sheepdog, Belgian (Belgian Ter-
Basal cell plasma membrane, 34
turen).
Basal cell tumor(s), 1013, 1021, 1259-1263
Bendiocarb, 425
benign feline, 1254, 1260-1261, 1261
Benzalkoniun chloride, 232
breed(s) with prcdilection for, 1237t
in shampoo, 223
solid. See Neuroendocrine tumor(s), primary cutanearus.
Benzoxdiazepine(s), 1057
Basal lamina, of basement mernbrane zone. See Lamina
 for aeral lick dermatitis, 1061
densa (basal lamina).
Benzoyl peroxide, 228, 231
Basement membrane zone, epidermal, 11. 13
adverse effects and side effects of, 231
components uf, 34-35, 36t
antiscbohcic therapy with, 918, 1026-1027, 1036
funetions of, 34
in gels, 226
thickened, 172, 172
in shampoo, 223
ultrastructure of, 34-35, 35
topical, for bacterial infection, 279-280
folliceular (glassy membrane), 43, 47, 49
Benzoyl-Plus, 231
Berger de Beauce, risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in,
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 77t
77t
Basidiobolus spp., 384
 Bernese mountain dog, color dilution alopecia in, 967
Basophil(s), 781. See also Hypersensitivity, cutaneous baso-
hemangiosarcomas in, 1299
phil.
histiocytic sarcorma in, 1346-1347, 1352
functions of, 558
histiocytosis of, 189
in cytologic diaosis, 114,117,118
 malignant histiocytosis in, 1346
 Basophil degranulation test, 592
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
 in felinc atopy, 606
lumps in, 1237t
Basosquamous carcinoma. See Basal cell carcinoma, kerd-
snow nose in, 101.7
tinizing.
systemic histiocytosis in, 1346, 1352
Basset hound. See Hournd, Basset.
Betadinc. Scc Poridone-iodine.
Bathing, See also Grooming.
Betamethasone, adrenocortical suppression by, 232
of cats, 215, 1038
adversc effects and side: effeets of, 232
of dogs, 212-213
for discoid lupus erythematosus, 716
preparation for, 210-211
injectable, 247t
of seborrheic animal, 916-918, 1035-1036, 1038
 otic therapy with, 1226
Beagle, acromegaly in, 826
Betainethasone-17-valerate, adrcnocortical suppression by,
actinic keratoses in, 1391
232
amyloiclosis in, 767
Betasone. See Betamethasone.
atopy in,575
Bichon Frise, congenital hypotrichosis in, 958
black hair follicular dysplasia in, 962
drug reactions in, 721
cell proliferation kinetics in, 7
epiphora in, 1188
collcid milium in, 1178
systemic lupus erythenatosus in, 705
congenital hypotrichosis in, 958
vaccine reaction in, 744
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in, 982
Bioallethrin, 426
fainilial vasculopathy in, 987
Biopsy, 125-131
hair growth in, daily, 6
anesthesia for, 128
hemangiopericytoma in, 1302
artifacts in, 130-131, 131, 148, 149
complications of, 128- 129
lymphocytic (Hashimoto's) thyroiditis in, 851
excisional, 128
mast cell tumors in, 1320
in bacterial infection, 285
oral papillornatosis in, 1240
in claw disease, 1200
Pelodera dermatitis in, 435
in demodicosis, 467-469
pododematitis in, 344-345
in dermatophytosis, 349
risk for neoplastic skin disordlers and non-neoplastic
in hypothyroidism, $59, 861
lunps in, 1237t, 1238t
in immune-mediated skin disease,668
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 76, 77t
in leishmaniasis, 536, 536, 537
scbaceous giand hyperplasia in, 1271
in Malassezia dermalitis, 370, 370-372
solar dermatitis in, 1079
in pemphigus complex. 681
squarmous cell carcinoma in, 1251
indications for, 125-126, 278
trichoinycosis axillaris in, 327
instruments for, 127
zinc-responsive dermatosis in, 1120
“nonspecifefndings in, 201-202
Beauceron, atopy in, 581
pattern analysis in, 177-178
dermatornyositis in, 940
punch,127-128
1472·Index
Biopsy (Continued)
Borrelia burgdorferi, 326-327
site for, 126-127
and morphea, 1146
specinen in, collection of, 127
Borreliosis, 1yme, 326-327
fxation of, 129
Borzoi, antithyroglobulin antibody(ies) in, 852
handling of, 128, 129
antithyroid antihocly(ies) in, 789
special procedures for, 202.-.204
lymphedcma in, 990
staining of 129, 130t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorlers in, 77t
technique for, 127-128
Boston terricr. See Terrier, Boston.
thyroid, 788
Botryomycosis (cutaneous bactcrial granuloma, bacterial
timing of, 126
pseudomycetoma), 302, 311-312,313
Biotin, deficiency of, 1118
in mico, 1442
Bouvier de Flanders, adrenal hyperplasia-like sydrome
in ferrets, 1426
in mice, 1444
in, 850
in rats, l453
follicular dysplasia in, 971
supplementation of, in claw disease,1200
risk for ncoplastie skin disorders and non-ncoplastie
Bipolaris spiciferum, 379
lnmps in, 1237t
Birbeck's granule(s), 24
seasonal Hank alopecia in, 891
Birman cat, cold agglutinin disease in, 717
squanous cell careinoma in, 1251
congenital hypotrichosis in, 959, 960
Bowen's disease, 1244, 1254, 1258-1259, 1259, 1260
hair color of, 8
pigmented plaque in, 1013, 1013
Bite wound(s), abscesses caused by, in cats, 310-311
Boxer, alopecia in, minoxidil for, 874
in guinea pigs, 1437
anatrichosomiasis in, 436
in hamsters, 1439
atopy in, 581
in mice, 1444
calcinosis circumseripta in,1400
in rats, 1454
 callus derinatitis in, 1102
Bitter apple, for acral lick dermatitis, 1063
chondrosarcomas in, 1315
Black lies, 502
coccidioidomycosis in, 394
bites of, 501, 502, 502, 503
demoid eyst (sinus) in, 1378
Black hair follicular dysplasia, 959-965
distichiasis in, 1188
cause and pathogenesis of, 962
Ehlcrs-Danlos syndrome in, 982
clinical features of, 954, 962
estrogen-responsive dermatosis of, 829
definition of.959
fbromas in,1282
diagnosis of, 962-965, 963
follicular dysplasia in, 890, 971
Black widow spider, 484
food hypersensitivity in, 618
Black-legged tick(s), 444
haircoat of, 7
Blaschko's lines, 9
hemangiopericytoma in, 1302
Blastoconidia, 336-337
hemangiosarcomas in, 1299
Blastomyces dermatitidis, 337, 391-392
histiocytomas in, 1347
culture of, 121
hyperadrenocorticism in, 800
Blastomycosis, 387, 391-394
hypothyroidism in, $52, 853
calise of, 391-392
'l unuiaod pum uouens uas oredop
claw involvement in, 1195
1136
clinical fndings in, 87, 392-393, 393,401
interstitial cell tumors in, 843
clinical unanagement of, 393
lynphomas in, 1331
diagnosis of, 393, 393, 394
mast cell tumors in, 1320
European. See Cryptococcosis.
melanocytoma in, 1359
in cats, 393,401
multiple collagencus cysts in, and renal pathology, 1383
in togs, 387, 392-393
muzzle folliculitis and furunculosis in, 304
in ferrets, 1419
papillomas in, 1240
pathogenesis of, 391-392
pododermatitis in, 305
pododermatitis caused by, 305
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and nom-neoplastic
public health considerations with, 394
lumps in, 1237t
Blepharitis, 1185-1186, 1187
risk for mon-neoplastic skin disorders in, 76, 77t
definition of, 1185
seasonal Hank alopecia in, 823, 890, 893
in aspergillosis, 397, 403
seminoma in, 843
Blister(s). See also Bulla/hullae; Vesicle(s).
Sertoli's cell tumor in, 840
tug-of-war,1103
squamous cell carcinoma in, 1251
Bloxd pressure, in hyperadrenoeorticism, 805
sterile pyogranuloma on feet of, 305
Blood vcssel(s), cutaneous, 56, 56-58, 57. See also
white, truncal solar dermatilis in, 1079
Vasculitis.
Brnchycladium spiciferum. See Bipolaris spiciferum.
 histologic changes in, 171
Brachyonychia, definition of, 1193t
disorders of, 987-992
innervation of, 59, 60
1257
Blowflies, 503
Branchial cyst(s), 1382
Blue ferret syndrome, 1426-1427
Breediung season alopecia, in ferrets, 1425
Body fold intertrigo, 1106, 1107
Breweryeast,indicaions orn caninenoporosis
Body tenperature. See Heat, body; Temperature.
Brittany saiel ee Saniel rily.
Bocrhoel, dermoid cyst (sinus) in, 936
Bromocriptine rnesylate, 811
Index ·1473
Bronchogenic carcinoma, 1089-1090
Burn(s) (Continued)
cutaneous mctastases of, 1366, 1374, 1375
radiant heat, 1086-1087, 1087
 Brown recluse spider, 484
scar from, 97
 Brown-Brenn stain, staining characteristics of varicus sub-
Burow's solution (aluminum acetate solution; Domehoro),
stanices with, 130t
227, 229t, 230
Brucell canis, 325
Burrowing, in ferrets, 1427
Brucellosis, 325
Buspirone (BuSpar), 1057
canine, 613
 ro audordkxong
Brushing, 210
Bubblies, subepidermal. See Subepidermal wcuolar alter-
ation.
Cadherin(s), 22t, 545
Bulbitis, 195, 201
 in morphogenesis of skin appendages, 3
Bull mastil. See Mastiff, ball.
Caim terrier. See Terrier, Cairn.
Bull terrier. Sce Terrier, bull.
Caladryl, 229, 229t
Bulla/bullae, 87, 90, 148
Calcinosis cireumscripta, 1393, 1399, 1400-1401, 1401
Bulldog, English, calcinosis cutis in, 1399
breed(s) with predilection for, 1238t
demodicosis in, 461, 465
Calcinosis cutis, 1106, 1108, 1108, 1398t, 1398-1401
follicular dysplasia in, 890, 971
dlystrophic, 789
hyperestrogenism in, 829
idiopathic, 1398t, 1399, 1399
hypothyroidism in, 852
in hyperadrenocoaticism, 800, 802, 804, 815
intertrigo in, facial fold, 1107
metastatic, 1398t, 1398-1399
tail fold, 1107
widespread, 1399
lymphedema in, 990
Calcipotriene, antiseborrheice therapy with, 1030
Malassexia dermatitis in, 348-349
Calcipotriol, antiseborrheic therapy with, 1030
mast cell tunors in, 1320
Calcitriol, antiseborrhcic therapy wilh, 919, 1030
muzzle folliculitis and furunculosis in, 304
Calciun, percutaneous penetration of, 1399
pododermatitis in, 305
Calcium-calnodulin interactions, 20
postclipping alopecia in, 898
Caldesmon, 20
risk for neoplastic skin disorders ant non-eoplastic
Calendula, 263
lumps in, 1237t
Calicivirus infection, feline,525
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 78t
Calliphorids, 503
seasonal Hank alopecia in, 823, 890, 891
Callus, 87, 100, 1092, 1101-1102
seborrhea in, 913
Callus dermatitis and pyoderma, 1097, 1102-1103
sterile pyogranuloma on feet of, 305
Candida spp., eulture of, 362
superficial bacterial follculitis in, 294, 296
cycloheximide sensitivity of, 121
 French, congenital hypotrichosis in, 958
identifieation of, 362
follicular dysplasia in, 890, 971
in nommal fora, 361
lentigo in, 1007
superficial mycoses caused by, 338
scasonal fank alopecia in, 891
Candida albicans, 361
Bullous dermatosis, autoinmune subepidermal, 694-701
colonies of, uorphology of, 123
Bullous pemphigoid, 694-700
hypersensitivity to, 650
causes of, 13,694-695
in cytologic diagnosis, 115, 117
claw involvcment in, 1195 
Candida gulliermondi, 361
clinical features of, 695-697, 696-697
Candida krusei, 361
clinical management of, 698- 700
Candida parapsilosis, 361
diagnosis nf, 670, 671, 697. 698, 699
Candida pseutotropicalis, 361
drug-induced, in dogs, 722t
Candida stellatoidea, 361
in dogs. 194
Candida tropicalis, 361
pathogenesis of, 694-695
Candida xeylanoides, in dogs, 362
Bullous pemphigoid antigen(s), 36t, 694
Candidiasis, 361-363
I (BPAG I), 13, 22t, 694
cause of, 361
II (BPAG II). 13, 22t, 694
clinical finlings in1, 348, 348-349, 362
Burdock, glossitis caused by, 1091, 1092
clinical management of, 362-363
skin lesions caused by, 1091, 1092, 1094, 1095
diagnosis of, 362, 363
stomatitis causcd by, 1091, 1092
in cats, 362
Burkholderia pseudomallei, 328
in dogs, 348, 348-349, 362
Burmnese cat, acroumelanisin in, 1012- 1013
in guinea pigs, 1431
congenital hypotrichosis in, 959
pathogenesis of, 361
demodicosis in, 474
pododermatitis caused by, 305
grooming for, 215
topical therapy for, 409
psychogenic deruatoses in, 1056
Candidosis. See Cantidiasis.
Burn(s), 1082, 1083- 1087
Canine disorder(s). Sec specific disorder.
cause and pathogenesis of, 1083-1084
Canthaxanthin, 254
clinical features of, 1082, 1084-1085
Capillary(ies), cutaneous, 56
clinical management of, 1085-1087, 1086-1087
in fat, 63
diagnosis of, 1085, 1085
Capitulum, definition of, 440
full-thickness, 1084
Caprylie acid, 235
partial-thickness, 1084
Capsaicin (IIEET), for acral lick dermatitis, 1063
1474·Index
Carbamate(s), topical, antiparasitic therapy with, 425
Cat(s) (Continued)
Carbamide peroxide, 1223
squamous cell carcinoma in, 1241
Carbaryl,425
stratum corneum in, thickmess of, 28
Carbowax 1500, 226
sweating in, 53
Carcinuid syndrome, 1052
tabby,8
Carcinoma, basal cell. See Basal cell carcinoma.
Abyssinian pattorn of, 8
basosquamous. See Basal cell carcinoma, keratinzing
blotch pattern of, 8
bronchogenic, cutaneous metastases uf, 1366, 1374, 7375
mackerel patterm of, 8
ceruminal gland, 1196, 1208, 1208, 1209
tail gland of, 55
epiderinoid. See Spuamous cell carcitona.
thcrmoregulation in, respiratory rate and, 54
gastric, 1021
saliva and, 54
metastatic, claw involvement in, 1198
tortoiseshell, 8
pharyngeal, cutancous metastascs of, 1366, 1373
white, squamous cell carcinoma in, 1241
prostatic, cutaneous metastases of, 1374. 1374
with blue eyes,8
sebaceous, in rabbits, 1451
white-eared, pinna of, risk for skin dlisorders in, 76
sebaceous gland, in dogs, 1271
wire-hair mutation in, 9
squamous cell. See Squamous cell carcinoma.
zine deficiency in, 1122
sweat gland, 1198
Cat food, fat in, 1112
Carmelian bear dog, hypopituitarism in, 811
Cat fur mite(s), 446, 447
pituitary dwarfisrn in, 819
 skin scraping for, 10l, 107
β-Carotene, 209, 254
Catagen, 5, 5-6, 47, 48
skin color change caused by, 1023
Catan Dog's tag, 498
Carprofen, adverse reaction to, 721
Catapres. See Clonidine.
Caryosporosis, canine, 532, 533
Catenin(s), 20, 22t
Castration-responsive dermatosis, 843-845
Caterpillar(s), dermatitis caused by, 507, 507
Cat(s). Sce also Feline; individual species.
Cathclicidins, 33
abscesses in, 276
CD antigen(s), in cell type identifcation, 204t
acquired skn fraglty syndrome of, 199, 1170113,
Cediopsylla simplex, on rabbits, 1449
1171-1172
Cefadroxil, adverse effects and side effects of, 725
agouti, 8
systemic, dosage of, 284t
breeds of, alopecic, 957, 957-958
Cell dcath, 136-137
with predilection for skin disorders, 75, 77t-82t
prograrumed (spontaneous), 138-139
cutancous mast cells of, 39, 40
Cell envelope, of cormeocytes, 28, 29
deafness in, 8
Cell type(s), identification of, markers for, 204t
epidermis of, 10
Cellular infiltrate(s), dermal, 177
 immunoglobulins of, 31
Ccllulitis, 299-300
footpad of, 12
aerobic,309-310
furunculosis in, 300, 302
anaerobic, 302, 310
grooming for, haircoat type and, 215
canine juvenile (pyoderma, puppy strangles, sterile gran-
special problems in,215
ulomatous dermatitis and lymphedema), 328, 1163-
hair color of, 8-9
1167
and personality, 9
cause and pathogenesis of 1164
Maltese dilution and, 9
clinical feahures of, 1158, 1165 
hair follicles of, 10
 clinical management of, 1166-1167
hair growth in, annnal, 4
definition of, 1163
daily, 6
diagnosis of, 1165, 1165-1166, 1166
hair of, length of, 9
otitis cxterna caused by, 1213
types of,8-9
clostridial, 302
hairccat of, pointed, 8
staphylococcal, in dogs,324-325
tipped, 8
Cephalexin, adverse effects and side effects of, 197, 724-
types of, 215
725,735
household, resident fora of, 275
distribution of, in skin, 281
inmunomodulation in, 287
in small anirnals, dosage and adninistration of, 1418t
Langerhans' cells of, 24
otic therapy with, 1229
mechanoreceptors in, 61
systemic, dosage of, 284, 284t
normal mierofora of. See: Microflora.
Cephalosporin(s), adverse cffects and side effects of,
oral fora of, 276
721
orange,lentigo siuplex in, 1006-1007,1008,1009
effcacy of, against coagulase-positive staphylococci,
perforating dermatitis in, 1168-1170, 1169, 1170
282
piebald, 8
long-term therapy with, 287
 white spatting in, 8
systemic, for bacterial infections, 281
plague in, 325-326
Ceramide(s), 30--31
praricullrativeeatitisof,idpathic1177
Cerumen, imrunoglobulins in, 1204
rex mutant of, 9
Ceruminal gland(s), carcinoma of, 1196
sarcoid in, 1285, 1288, 1289
neoplasia of, 1196-1197, 1208, 1208-1209, 1209
secondary hairs of, 4
Cenuminolytie(s), 1222t, 1222-1223, 1223
skin of, normal pH of, 3
Chalazion,1186-1188
thickness of, 3
Chamamile, 263
Index + 1475
Chediak-1ligashi syndrome, 977, 1014
Chloramphenicol (Contimued)
diagnosis of, 76
s   
Chemoattractant(s), for neutrophils, 557, 557t
in small animals, dosage and administration of 1418t
Chemokine(s),545, 547t-548t
otic therapy with, 1227
Chenotherapy, for squamous cell carcinoma, 1257-1258
systermic, dosage of, 284t
Cheque Drops, 838
ChlorhexiDerm, 917, 1035. Scc also Chlorhexiline, sharn-
poo.
Chest, lower, common and less cornrnon dermatoses of,
ChlorhexiDerm Maxi. See Chlorhexidine, sharpoo.
104t
ChlorhexiDerm Maximum. See Chlorhexicdine, topical.
Cheyletiella blakei, 453, 454
Chlorhexidine, 1035
in humans, 449
for contamiuated wounds, 267
Cheyletiella dermatitis.See Cheyleticllosis.
in topical therapy, 230
Cheyletiella mite(s), acetate tape impression for, 107
shaipoo, 223, 356t
eggs of, 108, 112
topical, 356t, 409
cxamination for, 106, 107
for bacterial infcction, 279, 280
flea comb for, 107
Chlorhexdine diacetate, preoperative use of, 255
skin seraping for, 101, 106
Cheyletiella parusitivorax, 453, 454
with, 409
in rabbits, 1448
Chlorinated hydrocarbon(s), antiparasitie therapy with, 424
Cheyletiella yusguri, 453, 454, 455
Chloroacetate csterase, in cell type identification, 204t
Cheyletiellosis, 449, 453-457
Chloroaluminum sulfonated phthalocyanine, 237
case of, 453
Chloroquine, 254, 678
diagnosis of, 456, 457
for discoid lupus erythematosus, 716
in guinea pigs, 1433
in rabbits, 1447, 1448
Chlorphenolac, for keratin clearance, in fungal diagmosis,
pathogenesis of, 453-456
120-121
treatment of, 456-457
formula for, 120
Cheyletus eruditis，453
Chlorpyrifos, 423, 425
Cheylletiella mite infestation. See Cheyletiellosis.
Cholesteatoma, aural, 1216
Chicago disease. See Blastomycosis.
Cholcestcrol cleft(s), dermal, 160, 161
Chief complaint, in diagnosis, 75
Cholinesterase inhibitor(s), antiparasitic therapy with, 424-
Chigger mite(s). Sce Trombiculosis (chigger mites).
425
Chihuahua, anal sae disorders in, 1201
Chondritis. See Auricular chondritis.
atopy in, 581
Chondroitin-4-sulfate, 38
color dilution alopecia in, 967
Chondroitin-6-sulfate, 36t, 38
follicular dysplasia in, 971
Chondroina, 1315-1316
melanocytoma in, 1359
Chondrosarcoma, 1315-1316, 1317
pattern baldness in, 965
Chow Chow, adrenal hyperplasia-like syudrome in, 847
 pinnal alopecia in, 887
adult-onset hyposomatotropisin in, 822
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
aspergillosis in, 397
lumps in, 1238t
color dilution alopecia in, 967
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 77t
dermatomyositis in, 940
Chin, common and less common dermatoses of, 104t
dermoid cyst (sinus) in, 936
Chinchilla, dermatoses of, 1416-1417
follicular dysplasia in, 890
fatty acid deficiency in, 1417
haircoat of, 8
fungal infections of, 1416
hypogonadisn in, 844-845
fur chewing in, 1417
hypothyroidism in, 852
fur-slip in, 1417
melanocytona in, 1359
nutritional deficieney in, 1417
mucinosis in, 1174
zinc deficiency in, 1417
pemphigus foliaceus in, 686, 687
Chinese crested dog. 957, 957
postclipping alopecia in, 897
 Chinese Shar Pei. See Shar Pei.
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-ncoplastic
Chirodiscoides caviae, in guinea pigs. 1433, 1434
lumps in, 1238t
Chitin, 336
risk for non-ncoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 77t
synthesis of, inhibitors of, in insect control, 426
tyrosinasc defcicncy in, 1018-1019
Chitosan, 336
uveodermatologic syndrome in, 757
Chitosanide, 221
Chroinoblastormycosis, definition of, 376
Chloraimbucil, for discoid lupus erythematosus, 716
Chromomycosis, 379
for pemphigus, 681
definition of, 376
for pemphigus foliaccus, 689
Chromophobe(s), 781
immunosuppressive therapy with, 672t, 673
Chronic radiant heat dermatitis, 897-899
Chloramine(s), in topical therapy, 231
Chronology of veterinary derinalology, 1459- 1464
Chloramphenicol, adverse effects and side effects of, 724
Chrysops spp., 502
725
efficacy of, against coagulase-positive staphylococci,
Chrysotherapy, for penphigus, 681
282
for pemphigus foliaceus, 689-690
against staphylococcal infection, 283
for systemic lupus erytheinatosus, 711
against Staphylococcus intermedius, 282
irmmunosuppressive therapy with, 672t, 675-676
1476·Index
Chyle, subcutaneous, 1090
Clomicalm. See Clomipromine.
Chymase, 39
Clomipramine, 1056-1057
 in ccll type identification, 204t
for feline psychogenic alopecia100
Cicatricial alopccia, 897
Clonidine, in diagnosis of C1I dehciency, 794-795
Cicatricial pemphigoid. See Pemphigoid, mucous mem-
Clorox, 231
brure.
Clostrlclum spp, as resident fora, in dogs, 34, 275
Cicatricial pemphigoid antigen, 36t
cellulitis caused by, 310
Cinetidine, for recurrent bacterial infections, 286
in infeclions, 276
Ciprofoxacin, in small aninals, dosage and administration
in subcutancous abscesses in cats, 310
of, 1418t
Clostridium welchi, in anal sacs, 1201
otie therapy with, 1229
Clotrimazole, topical, 356t、409
pinnal erythema in cats caused by, 1023
Clotrinazole/betamcthasone, topical, 356t
Circumanal (perianal) glands, 54-55
Clotrimazole/betamethasone/gentamicin, topical, 356t
tumors of, 1272, 1279-1281, 1280, 1281
Cluh hair, 48, 49,50
 breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t
Cluster differentiation (CD), 543
Citrimin, 1101
Coagulation, electrosurgical, 262
Citrobacter spp., ctitis media caused by, 1214t
Coagulation necrosis, 136
Citronella, 427, 502
Coal tar solution, 1027
Citrulline, 43
Cocci, See also Staphylococci; Streptococci.
Civatte body(ies), 140
identifcation of, 116
Claophialiophoru spp.379
phagocytosed, 113
Cladosporum spp. in normal fora,338,338t
Coccidioides immitis,337,394,396
Claclosporun bantianurn. See Xylohypha bantiana.
culture of, 121
Cladosporurn trichoides. Sec Xylohypha bantiana.
Coccidioidomycosis, cause of, 394
Clam digger's itch, 436
clinical fndings in, 387
Clarithromycin, efficacy of, against Staphylococus interme-
clinical managemment of, 395
dius,282
diagnosis of, 395. 396
systemic, dosage of, 284t
in cats, clinical findings in, 395
Claw(s), anatomy of, 1190-1193, 1191-1192
in dogs, clinical findings in, 387, 394, 396
clipping of, 210-211
in ferrets, 1419
in cats, 215
pathogenesis of, 394
counmon and less common dermmatoses of, 105t
Cochliomyia hominovorax,503
dermatophyte collection from, 120
Cocker spanicl. Sec Spaniel, cocker.
iseases of, 1190, 1193-1200
Colchicine, for vasculitis, 753
 asymmetric versus symmetric, 1194
immunosuppressive therapy with, 678
diagnosis of, 1199-1200
Cold agglutinin discase, 717-719
in cats, 1193, 1194t
Cold cream, 225
in dogs, 1193, 1194t
Cold hemagglutinin disease, 717
miscellaneous causes of, 1199
Collagen, abnormalities of, 37
terminology for, 1193, 1193t
dermal, 36-38, 37
treatment of, 1200
atrophy of,159
infections of, 1189, 1195
degeneration of, 157
neoplasia of, 1196-1197, 1198
dysplasia of, 159, 159
of guinea pig, overgrowth of, 1439
dystrophie mineralization of, 157-158, 158
red/brown, 1022
fibrinoid degeneration of, 157
supranumerary, 1197, 1199
hyalinization of, 156- 157
trauna to, 1193-1194
lysis of, 157
Clear cel(s). See Melanocyte(s).
pathologic changes in, terminology for, 156--159
Cleft(s), artifactual, 148, 149
disorders of, 978-986
at dermoepidermal junction, 147-148
epidermal, 11
cholesterol, dermal, 160, 161
functions of, 36, 37
epidermal,147-148,148
in dermal edema, 163-164
Clicnt compliance, in skin treatnent, 215-217, 216t
syuthesis of, 37
Client-veterinarian relationship, 75, 93
inhibitors of, 37
Clindamycin, efficacy of, against Staphylococcus tnterme-
stimulators of, 37
dius,282
types of, 36t,37
for caninc neosporosis, 533
in cell typc identification, 204t
otic therapy with, 1229
Collagenase(s), 37
systemic, dosage of, 284t
Collagenous nevus/nevi, 1380-1381, 1382-1384, 1384,
Clipping, 214. See also Grooming.
1385
alopecia after, 897, 898
breed(s) with predilection for, 1238t
before bathing, 223
multiple, 986
of claws, 210-211
 renal pathology with, 1383
complications of, 1194
paraneoplastic,1375
in cats, 215
Collarette(s), epidermal, 86, 87, 97, 156
Clitoral hypertrophy, in hyperadrenocorticism, 800, 801,
Collie, Bearded, black hair follicular dysplasia in, 962
804,846
pemphigus foliaccus in, 686
Clofazamine, skin color change caused by, 1023
benign fibrous histiocytoma in, 1354
Index * I477
Colle (Continued)
Contact dermatitis, allrgic. See Contact hypersensitivity
Border, black hair folleular dysplasia in, 962
(allergie contact dernatitis).
bullous pemphigoid in, 695
diagnosis of, 143, 144, 145
cutaneous histiocytosis in, 1353
drug-indueed, in cats, 721, 723t
cyclic hematopoiesis in, 977-978, 1014
in dogs, 721, 722t
dermatornyositis in, 938, 940, 942, 944
o sis so 
dermatophytosis in, 344-345
in ferrets, 1426
epidermolysis bullosa sirnplex in, 938
in hamsters, 1441
fly bites on, 501, 502
in rabbits, 1450
food hypersensitivity in,618
initant, 1075, 1081-1083,1082
hemangiopericytomain,302
Contact hypcrsensitivity (allergic contact dermatitis), 88,
idliopathic sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma in, 1136
608-615
idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis of, 707, 717, 946-947
afferent phasc of, 609
immunodeficiency in, 279t
causc and pathogencsis of, 608-611, 612t
ivermectin contraindicated in, 1229
clinical features of, 604, 611-615, 612t, 613
ivermectin sensitivity in, 428-429
clinical management of, 615
keratoacanthoma in, 1248
diagnosis of, 612-615
nasal folliculitis and furunculosis in, 303
ear involvement in, 1210-1211, 1211-1212
pemphigus erythematosus in, 690, 692
efferent (clicitation) phase of, 609
protothecosis in. 405
histopathology of, 614-615
pyotraumatic dermatis in, 1104
Contagious ecthyma, 524
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
Corntagious viral pustular dermatitis, 524
lumps in, 1237t
Coonhicund, Bluctick, blastomycosis in, 392
nisk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 78t
dermlatophytosis in, 344-345
Sertoli's cell turmor in, 840
Treeing Walkcr, blastomyeosis in, 392
squamous cell carcinoma in, 1241
superficial bacterial foliculitis in, 294
jn rabbits, 1449
systemic lupus erythematosus in, 705
Coral snake(s), 1090
vitiligo in, 1015
Cordylohia spp., 505
Waardenburg-Klein syndrorme in, 1014
Cordylobia anthropophaga, 501, 504, 504
Colloid body(ies). See Apoptotic body(ies).
Corgi. See Welsh corgi
Colloid niliun, 1178, 1179
Corium. See Dernis.
Colonic adenocarcinoina, cutaneous metastases of, 1366,
Corneocyte(s), 27-28
1373, 1374
Corneometer, 32
Color dilution, normal, hair exarmination in, 108, 110
Cormification, 29
Color dilution alopecia, 965-970, 1029
defects of, 913-949
cause and pathogenesis of, 967
Cormifin, 28
clinical features of, 967-968
Corps r0uds, 138
clinical mauagement of, 968-970
Cortex, of hair shaff, 39, 41, 44, 108, 110
diagnosis of, 968, 969, 970
Corticosteroid(s), autiseborrheic therapy with, 919-920
differential diagnosis of, 968
for dermatomyositis, 945
hair exainination in, 108, 110
topical, for acral lick dermatitis, 1063
haircoat color and, 76
Corticotroph(s), 781
Combined immunodeficiency, 279t
Corticotropin. See ACTH.
Camedo,87,95
Corlicotropin-releasing factor (CRF), 781
Comedo nevi, 1389, 1391
Corticotropin-releasing factor stimulation test, 793
Comedo syndrome, in miniature Schnauzer. See Schnauzer
in hyperadrenocorticism, 810
comecdo syndrone.
Cortisof, blood levels of, dctermination of. 790-791
Comedone(s), in hyperadrenocorticism, 800, 802, 803
measurerment of, in dogs, 808
Comedone syndromc, ventral, 1103
Cortisol response test(s), 791-793
Common brown spider, 484
Cortisol/ereatinine ratio, urinary, in cats, 818
Complement, 559
in dogs, 808-809
deficiency of, 279t
Corynebacterum spp., as transient Hora, in dogs, 275
cpidermal,31
in oral fora of cats, 276
Compliance, client, in skin treatment, 215-217, 216t
tichomycosis axillaris caused by, 327
Conditioner(s), 211
Corynebacteriun miuutissimum, Huorescence of. 119
for hair, 212, 218t
Corynebacteriun pseudotuberculosis, in abscesses in cats.
Condyloma, caninc. See Transmissible venereal tumor.
311
Conidiobolus spp, 384
Cowpox virus infection. feline. See Feline poxuirus infec-
Conidiogenous cell, definition of, 336
tion.
Conidiophore, definition of, 336
Crean(s), formulations of, and effcacy of active ingredi-
Conidium/conidia, definition of, 336
ents, 218t, 224-225
types of, 336-337
Crean rinse,212, 918, 1035
Conjunetivitis, canine nietitans plasmaeytic, treatment of,
Cresol(s), contrainrdications to, in cats, 230
674
in topical therapy, 230
Conncctive tissue, atrophy of, 197-199
Critical temperature, definition of, 53
destruction of, 37
for dlogs. 53
Conofite. See Mirconazole.
Crotalidae, 1090
1478 · Index
Crust(s), 86, 87, 94, 154, 154-156, 155
Cutaneous vasculitis. See Vasculitis.
cellular, 155
Cuterebra spp., 501, 504
hemorrhagic, 154-155
in ferets, 1419
palisading, 155
infestation of, 505
serocellular (exudative), 154, 155
Cuterehra buccata, 1449
serous, 154
Cuterebra cuniculi, 1449
Cryofibrinogen(s), 717
Cuterebra horripilum, 1449
Cryofbrinogenemia, 717-719
Cuticle, of hair shaft, 39, 41, 108, 110
Cryoglobulin(s), 717
Cutis laxa, 987
Cryoglobulinemia, 713,717-719, 718
Cutting, electrosurgical method for, 261
Cryopathic hemolytic ancimia, 717
without coagulation, 26]
Cyclic hematopoiesis, 279t
advantages of, 256
canine, 977-978, 1014
disadvantages of, 257
Cyclic neutropenia, canine, 977-978, 1014
for acral lick derimatitis, 1064
Cyclin(s), 1239
for squamous cell carcinoma, 1257
Cycloheximide, fungal sensitivity to, 121
freezing agents for, 257
Cyclophosphamide, adverse elfects and side eflects of, 672,
indlications for, 258-259
673
principles of, 255-256
antineoplastic therapy wilh, 672, 673
nnits for, 257-258
for systemic lupus erythematosus, 711
Cryptococcosis, 395-400
for vasculitis, 733
cause of,395
immunosuppressive therapy with,671-673,672
claw involvement in, 1195
Cyclosporinc, adverse cffects and side effects of, 244, 723.
clinical rmanagement of, 399-400
1246
diagnosis of, 398, 398-400
antisehorrheie therapy with, 1030
in cals, clinical fndings in, 397, 398, 399, 400
dosage and administration of, 244
in dogs, clinical fndings in, 395, 397, 398, 399
drug interactions with, 244
in guinca pigs, 1431
for canine atopy, 244, 601
pathogenesis of, 395
for discoid lupus erythematosus, 716
pododcrrmatitis causcd by, 305
for graft-versus-host disease, 720
Cryplococrus neoformans, 337, 388, 395
for granulomatous sebaceous adenitis, 1146
cyeloheximide sensitivity of.121
for hypersensitivity disorders, 570-571
serotypes of, 395
for immune-mediated disorders, 244, 720
stain for, 119
varieties of, 395
indications for, 243-244
Cryptorchidism,838,843
pharimacology of, 243-244
Ctenocephalides canis, 491, 492. See also Flen(s).
topical, 674
Ctenocephalides felis felis, 491, 491, 492. Sec also Flea(s).
Cydectin. See Moxidertin.
on ferrets, 1419
Cyproheptaline hydrochloride,811
ou hamsters, 1440
Cyromazine, 430
on mice, 1443
Cyst(s), 87,92
on rabbits, 1449
branchial, 1382
om rats, 1453
cutaneous, 1375-1382
Curvularia geniculata, 377
dermoid, 1378-1379
Cushing's disease. See Hyperadrenocorticisin (Cushing's
breed(s) with predilection for, 12381
disease,Cushing's syndrome).
dermoid (dernoid sinus), 936-937
Cutaneous arteriovenous fistula. See Arteriovenous fistula.
epidermal inclusion. See Cyst(s), infundibular.
Cutaneous asthenia. See Asthenia, cutanemus (Ehlers-Dan-
epidenmoid. See Cyst(s), infundibular.
los syndrome, dermatosparaxis).
epitrichial (apocrine) sweat gland, 1366, 1379-1381,
Cutaneouis bacterial granuloma (botryomycosis, hacterial
1380-1382
pseudomyeetoma), 302, 311-312, 313
follicular, 1366, 1375-1378, 1376, 1377
i nice, 1442
breed(s) with predilection for, 1238t
Chulaneous cyst(s). See Cyst(s).
ho (keratin cysts), 156
Cutaneous drug reaction. See IDrug reaction, cutaneous.
hybrid, 1378, 1379
Cutaneous Hushing. 1022- 1023, 1052
infundibular, 1376-1378, 1377, 1378
Cutaneous histiocytosis. See Histiocytosis.
isthmus-catagen, 1377, 1379
Cutaneous hom(s), 1244, 1392, 1394-1396, 1396-/398
matrical, 1378
 feline leukemia virus and, 517
pseudohom, 156
in dogs, 1241, 1242
scbaceous. See Cyst(s), infundibular.
 multiple, in cats, 528
sebaceous gland, 1381
Cutaneous lxity, iopathic acquired, 1173
tricholernmal, 1377, 1379
Cutaneous mucinosis, 996-997, 1401, 1402, 1402
Cystadenoma, 1276
Cutaneous teuroencbocrine turmor(s), primary, I369-1370,
papillary, 1277
1370
Cystocercoid infection, 440
Cutancous oncology, 1236-1239
Cystomatosis, of cpitrichial (apocrine) sweat glands, 1380-
Cutaneous papilloma. See Papiloma(s), cutaneous.
1381. 1381
Cutaneous plasmacytoma. See Plasmuucytona.
Cytlhioate, 428, 499
Cutaneous tuberculosis. See Tuberculosis.
Cytocrinia, 19
Index · 1479
Cytokeratin, 20-22, 22t, 52
Dapsone (Continued)
 in cell type identification, 204t
for subcormcal pustular dermatosis, 1127-1128
Cytokine(s), 543-545, 546t
for vascnlitis, 753
Cytologic examination, 112- 117
immunosuppressive therapy with, 672t, 676-677
fndings in, 113-115, 116-117, 118t
toxicity of, 676-677
specinen collection for, 112-116
Darier's disease, 138
stains used in, 116 
Dawu dish soap, 213
Cytology, of normal skin, 115, 116
D-Basic shampoo, 1035
Cytostan A, 28
Deafness, after ear flushing, 1224
Cytoxan. See Cyclophosphamide.
in cats, 8
Decorin, 38
Dectomax. See Doramectin.
Dachshund, acanthosis nigricans in, 975, 976, 1007
Decubital ulcer(s),1097,1103
alopecia areata in, 761, 762, 764
management of, 267-268
black hair follicular dysplasia in, 962
Deep mietatarsa/metacapal tortis. See Focal metatarsal fis.
caleinosis cutis in, 1399
tulation.
calls dermatis in, 1102
Dcer Hy, 502
chronic ulcerative blepharitis in, 1186
Deer tick(s), 444
claw disease in, clinical managerncnt of, 1200
Deerhound, Scottish, congenital bypothyroidisin in, 852
color dilution alopecia in, 967
Defend Exspot Insechieide for Dogs, 498
congenital microtia in, 1231,1232
β-Defensin(s),33
ear nargin dermatosis in, 1044, 1044
Del(s), epidermal, 156
Ehlcrs-Danlos syncrome in, 982
Deltamethrin, 426, 498
estrogen-responsive dermatosis of, 829
Demodectic mite(s). See Demwodicosis.
food hypersensitivity in, 618
Dermodex aurati,1439,1440
granulomatous sebaccous alenitis in, 1141
Demwodex canis, 106, 457-458, 458-460, 474
haircoat of, 7
Dernodex cati, 106, 474, 474-476,475
histiccytonas in, 1347
in Bowen's disease, 1258, 1260
hyperadrenocorticism in. 800
Dernodex caviae, 1434, 1434
hyperpigmentation in, 1010
Demodex criceti, 474, 475, 1439
hypogonaclism in,833
Dernodex cuniculi.on rabbits,1449
hypothyroidism in,852
Dermodex gatoi106,474,474-476,476
idiopathic onychodystrophy in, 1198
Demodicosis, 277
juvenile cellultis in, 1165
atlall-onset, 278, 461, 467
lipomas in,1308
claw involvement in, 1195
Malassesia derumatitis in, 365
cliagnosis of. 185
 mast cell tumors in, 1320
in cats, 466, 474-475, 474-476
pannicmlitis in, 1158. 1159
generalized, 466
pattem baldness in, 963-964, 965
in dogs, 169, 196, 457-474
permphaigus foliaceus in, 686
adilt-onset, 278, 461, 467
pinnal alopecia in, 887, 888, 889
and atopy,-occurrence of 473
pododermatlitis in, 305
bacterial complications of, 465
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
causc of, 457-458,458-460
lumps in, 1237t
cellular immunity in, 463-464
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 78t 
clinical features of, 462, 464-465, 466
sehaceous gland hyperplasia in, 1271
clinical management of, 469-474
seborrhea in, 913, 1032
diagnosis of, 465-467
squamous cell carcinoma in, 1251
differential diagnosis of, 469
sterile pyogranuloma on feet of, 305
generalized, 459-463,462,465,466,469-474
vasculitis in, 744
fistopathology of, 467-469, 467-469
vitiligo in, 1015
hunoral immunity in, 463
Dalmatian, actinic keratoses in, 1391
localized, 449, 459-460, 462, 464-465. 469
atopy in, 581
1onspecifc immunity in, 463
drug reactions in, 721
transmission of, 458
food hypersensitivity in, 618
types of,459-463
hemangiosarcomas in, 1299
in ferrets, 1419
pododermatitis in, 305
in gerbils, 1428
postbathing follculitisin, 212
in guinea pigs, 14331434,1436
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
in hamsters, 1439-1440, 1440
luunps in, 1237t, 1238t
in hyperadrenocorticism, 803, 803
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 76, 78t
 in rabbits, 1449
solr dermatitis in, 1079
in rats, 1453
squarnous cell carcinoma in, 1251
pododermatitis cau sed by. 305
Waardenburg-Klein syndrome in, 1014
skin scraping for,101-106,467
Dandie Dinmont terer, hyperadrenocorticism in, 800
Dermulcent(s),227
Dandnaff, walking, See Cheyletiellosis.
Dendrocytes, dermal, 38, 39
Dapsonc, adverse effects and side cffxts of, 1127
Dopigmcntation, nasal (Dudley nose), 1016-1017
for pemphigus, 682
Depo-Medrol. Se Methylprednisolne acetate.
1480·Index
Depo-Provera See Medroxyprogesterone acetate: Proges-
Dermatitis (Continued)
terone,repositol.
noxdular, 184-189, 185
L-Depreny, for caninc hyperactrenocorticism, S11-812
cell types in, 184-187
for feline hyperadrenocorticism, 818
characterization of, 187-189
Ierm Caps, 239, 929, 945, 1113, 1198
nongranulomatous,189
 for felinc cosinophilic granuloma, 1133
Peloclera, 432-434, 434-436
Dermacentor spp., 443, 444
in guinea pigs, 1433
Dernacentor andersoni, 444, 444
in humans, 432
Dermacentor occidentalis, 444
perforating. 1168-1170, 1169. 1170
Dernacentor variabilis, 444, 445
perivascular. See Pericascular dermatitis.
Denmacol, 229, 229t
pinnal, 1211
Dermal collagen. See Collagen.
preauricular ulccrative, idiopathic, of cats, 1177
Dermal dysplasia, 936
Denmal hair papilla, 41, 44, 46, 46, 47, 48, 49
causc and pathogenesis of, 1066
 Dermal macrofibril bundle (DMB), 35
clinical features of, 1060-1061, 1067, 1068
Demal Soothe, 229
clinical rmanagement of, 1069- 1070
antipruritic therapy with, 229t
diagnosis of, 1067-1069, 1069
for pruritus, 228"
pododennatitis caused by, 305
Dernanyssus gallinae, 445-446, 446. See also Mite(s).
pusttlar, contagious viral, 524
poultry.
 intraepidermal, 189-190, 192, 193t
skin scraping for, 101
subepidermal, 190, 193t 
DermaPet shanpoo(s), 917, 918, 1026-1027, 1035
superficial, in kittens, 288
Dermatan sulfate, 38
Pyogranulomatous, 184,188, 313,317
Dernatitis, acral lick. See Acral lick dernutitts.
pyotraumatic, 288, 300, 1097, 1104, 1104-1105
acute moist, 288, 300. See also Pyotraumatic dermuatitis.
rhabditic.See Peloderu dernatitis.
allergic contact. See Contact hypersensttivity (allergic
Rhodotorula, 375, 376
contact dermatitis).
Schistosoma,436
allergic inhalant. See Atopy.
seborrheic, 1030
Alternaria, 387, 391, 392
localized, 1030
Ancyloxtoma, 431-432, 432
skin fold, 288. See also Intertrigo.
Aspergillus,397,403-404
solar. See Nasal solar dermatitis; Solar dermatitis.
callusane pyoderma,1097,11021103
staphylococcal, in dogs, 205
caterpillar, 507, 507
subepidermal vesicular, drug-induced, 729
Cheyletiella. See Cheyletiellosis.
traumatic, in hamsters, 1440
chronie atopic, 99
Trichosporon, 407-408
chronic: radiant heat,897-899
Uncinaria,431-432,433
contagious viral pustular, 524
vesicopustular, 190
diffuse,184-189,185
dlrug-induced, 729, 730
cell types in, 184-187
vesicular, intraepidermal, 189-190
characterization of, 187- 189
suhepidermal, 190
granulomatous,184,185
IDermatitis medicamenlosa. See Drug reaction, cutaneous.
nongranulomatous, 184, 189
Dernatobia hominis, 504
feline inmunodeficieney virus, 519, 520, 521
Dermatochalasis. See Cutis laxa.
fcline leukemia virus, 517, 518-519
Dermatofibroma, 1283
fibrowing, 196, 202
Dermatofhrosis, nodular, in German shepherd, 1380-
filanial, 644
1381, 1382-1383
fy, 500-502, 501
Derinatohistopathology, confusing terms uscxd in, 176- 177
Geotrichum, 408
pattem analysis in, 177-202
granulomatous, 184, 187
terminology for, 131
interstitial, drng-induced, 725, 727
Dermatology, veterinary, chronology of, 1459- 1464
heartwonn, 439
Denmatome(s), 59
herpes, feline. See Feline rhinotracheitis infection.
Dermatoycosis, definition of, 336
hookworm, 431-432, 432, 433
Dermatomyositis, breed(s) with predilection for, 75
claw involvement in, 1195
claw involvement in, 1199
in leishmaniasis, 530-531, 534-535, 535
diagnosis of, 146
inhalant allergic. See Atopy.
familtal canine, 940.-946
interfacc. See Interface dermatitis.
causc and pathogenesis of, 940
interstitial. See Interstitial dermutitis.
clinical features of, 941-943, 942-943
intraepidcrmal vesicopustular, drug-inducecl, 729, 730
clinical managcment of, 945-946
iritant cntact,075,10811083,1082
dliagnosis of, 943-944, 944-946
localized moist (sore dewlap), in rabbits, 1445
differential diagnosis of. 943
Malassezia.See Malassezia dernatitis.
in dogs, 169
miliary, 294, 343, 650
diagnosis of, 148
differentiul diagnosis of, 633, 633t
paraneoplastic, 1375
mosquito,502-503
Dermatophagoides farinae, 451, 453
mucocutaneou,drug-induced,in dogs,
Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus, 451, 453
nasal solar. See Nasal solar dermatitis.
Dermatophilosis, 296-298, 297
Index ·|481
Dermatophilus congolensis, dermatitis caused by. See Der-
Dermatosis/dermatoses (Continued)
matophilosis.
castration-Tesponsive, 843--845
Dernatophyte(s), 336
in male dog, 843
anthropophilic, 339-340, 340t
developmental, 197199
culture of, 337
endocrine, 197-199
exarnination for, 119-121
estrogen-responsive, 796
direct, 120-121
of female animals, 830, 831-833, 832, 833
specimen collection for, 119-120
exfoliative, 1049. See also Exfoliatice dermatitis.
geophilic, 339-340, 340t
eyelid, 1185-1190, 1186t
identification of, 122, 123
FeLV, 175,175
in norrnal fora, 338
generie dog food, 1114-1115, 1122,1122-1123
superficial mycoses caused by, 338-361
growth hormone-responsive.See Hyposomatotropism
zoophilic, 339, 340t
(pseudo-Cushing's syndrome, GH-responsice derm
Dermatophyte test medium (DTM), 121-122. 123, 349 
tosis).
Dermatophylic kerion, 343, 344-345, 351
invisible, 199-201
Derrmatophytosis, 277, 339-361
Jchenoid, 1126-1127, 1130-1132, 1132
cause of,339-342,340t
linear preputial, 830
chronic, 358
loss of heterozygosity in, 65
claw involvemnent in, 1195
mixed reaction pattems in, 199, 205
climate and, 339
nutritional,197-199
clinical fndings in, 342-347
periocular, 1186t
 clinical management of, 353-361
psychogenic, 1055-1071
in catteries, 359
carine,1058-1066
in kittens, 360-361
feline, 1066-1071
definition of 336
pustular,linear IgA, canine, 748, 756,756
dliagnosis of, 119-121, 347-353, 350-355
poderma-like, 328
environmental decontamination in, 359-360
sex hormone, 827-851
hair examination in, 108, 110
rare formns of, 851
histopathology of, 349, 350, 351
sterile pustular, cytologic diagnosis of, 117
hyperthermia for, 238
subcorneal pustular, 89, 1125-1128, 1126-1128
in cats, clinical findings in,343-347, 346,348
cytologic diagnosis of, 117
histopathology of, 350, 353
testosterone-responsive,797
incidence of, 339
of male anirnals, 830, 837-838,838
in cattery, environmental decontamination in, 359-360
transient acanthalytic, 138
management of, 358-36]
vitamin A-responsive, 1008, 1036-1037, 1037
monitoring response to therapy in, 361
dermatohistopathology of, 133, 136
prevention of, 361
zinc-responsive, breed(s) with predilection for, 75
treatment of cats in, 359
dermatohistopathology of, 133, 135
treatinent of kittens only in, 360-361
Dermatosparaxis. See Asthenia, cutaneous (Ehlers-Dunlos
in dogs. clinical findings in, 342-343, 344-346
syndrome, dermatosparaxis).
in Europe, 343
Dermazole. Sec Miconazole, shampoo.
incidence of, 339
Dermis, 34, 35, 35-39
sylvatic, 343
age-related changes in, 64-65
in ferrets, 1418-1419
ccllular clements of, 37, 39, 40
in guinea pigs, 1430-1431, 1431
cellular infltrates in, 177
in hamsters, 1439
duep, 36, 38
in humans, 347, 348
deposits in, 160, 161
animal-origin, 347, 348
 dermatohistopathology of, terninology for, 156-165
in mice, 1442-1443
development of, 2
in muliple-cat bouseholds, 1nanagement of, 358-361
fibers of, 36-38
in rabbits, 1446
collagenous, 36-38. 37. See alsa Collagen.
in rats, 1453
elastin, 36-38
infammatory response to, 341
reticnlar, 36
pathogencsis of, 339-342
functions of, 35-36
pododermatitis caused by, 305
ground (inlerstitial) substancc of, 38
recurrenrce of, 358
ripening of, 2
risk factors for, 342
scrotal, 36
seasonality of, 339
superficial, 36, 3738
sylvatic, treatment of. 354
Dermoid cyst(s). See Cyst(s), derwid.
systemic therapy lor, 356-358.357t
Dermolysis,epidenmal.See Acanthotysis.
topical therapy for, 354-356, 356t, 409
Desaturase, 208
transmission of, 339
Desiccation, electrosurgical, 261-262
vaccination against, 358
Desmin, in cell type identification, 204t
Dermatopsychosomatics, 1055
Desinocalmin, 20
Dermatosis/denatoses, atrophic, 197-199, 203
Desmocolln(s), 20
bullous, autoimmune subepidermal, 694-701
Desimoglea. 20
canine ear margin, 1039, 1043-- 1045, 1044, 1045
IDesmoglein(s), 20
1482 · Index
Desmoplakin(s), 20, 22t 
Dipeptidyl peptidase I1, in cell type identification, 204t
Desmoplasia, dermal, 161
Diphenhydramine, in shampoo, 223
Desmorrhexis, epidermnal. See Acantholysis.
Diptera, 300-507
Desmosine, 37
Dipylidiun caninum,493
Desmosome(s), 19-20, 22t, 23
Direct snear(s), for Malassezia spp. 368
core glycoproteins of, 20
techniquc for, 112, 113, 117
plaque proteins of, 20.22t
Diroflaria immitis.439
Detergent(s), 231-232
Diroflaria repens, 439
exposure to, 31
Dirofilariasis, 439, 643-644, 644. 645
Dexanethasone, for pemphigus foliaceus, 689
Disinfectant(s), 223、230
Disseminated intravascular coagulation, 1089
injectable,247t
claw involvement in. 1199
otice therapy with, 1226
Disitimurus exudrus. 379
Dexamethasone suppression test, high-dose, 792-793
Distemper, canine, 518, 522-524, 523
in hyperadrenocorticisn, 810
Distichiasis, 1188
in cats, 818
DMSO. See Dimethyl sulforirie (DMSO).
lw-dose, 792
Doberman1 pinscher, aeral lick dermatitis in, 1058
 in hyperadrenocorticism, 809-810
alopecia in, minoxidil for, 874
Diabetes rnellitus, 868, 870
antitlyroglobulin antibody(ies) in, 852
and hyperadrenocorticisn, in cats,816
antithyroid antibodly(ies) in, 789
IDiagiosis, histopathologic pattem in, 177-202
benign failial pemphigus in, 947, 948
history-taking in, 71,72-84、74
blastomycosis in, 392
medical history in, 82-84
bullous pemphigoid in, 695
methods used in, 71-205
calcinosis cutis in, 1399
physical examination in, 84-94
callus dermatitis in, 1102
record-keeping in, 71-72, 73, 71
coccidioidomycosis in, 394
systematic approach to, 71, 72t
color dlilntion alopecia in, 967-968
Diagnostic plan, dcvelopment ol, 93-94
demodicosis in, 461, 462
Diumams montanus. plague transnission by, 35
dernal melanocytes of, 39
Diapedesis, of erythrocytes, in epidermis, 147
dilution alopecia in, 76
Discopy, 88, 91, 100
drug reactions in, 721, 723
Diazepam, 1057
drug-induced dermatosis in, 1052
adverse effects and side effects of, in cats, 1057
drug-relatcdl hypopigmentalion in, 1020
for acral lick demmatitis, 1061- 1063
fbromas in,1282
for feline psychogenic alopccia, 1070
fibrosarcomas in, 1287
Diet, and pcmphigus, 680, 682
fibrovascular papillornas in, 1284
and skin, 207-210
flank sucking in, 1060-1061, 1065
assessment of, 84
follicular dysplasia in, 971
for ferrets, 1426
histiocytomas in, 1347
for xanthomatosis, 874
hypopigmentation in, 975, 1008-1009
hypoallergenice, for dogs, 623624
hypothyroidism in, 852
in fatty acid deficieney. 1113
ichthyosis in, 924
limited-protcin, for cats,627
jmmunodeficiency in, 279t
Diethiylearbamazine, adverse effects and side effects of.
lichenoid dermatosis in, 1131
721, 725, 726
lipomas in, 1308
Diethylstilbestrol, for feline acquired synmetrirc alopecia,
melanocylic neoplasns in, 1359
902
Tnelanxytoma in,1359
Dicthytoluamide {DEET), 427
miniature, color dilution alopecia in,967
Diff Quik.See Wright's stain,modified (DiffQuik).
follieular dysplasia in, 971
Differential diagnosis, 93
hairroat of, 7
Differin. See Ardapatene.
mucinosis in, 1402
Diffise dermatitis. See Dermatitis, diffuse.
mucocutaneous hypopigmentation in, 1018
Diffuse hpomatosis, idiopathic, 1173, 1173-1175
muzzle folliculitis and firuneulosis in, 304
Difloxacin, systemic, dosage of, 284t
myxomas and myxosarcomas in, 1290
Ditlucan. See Fhuconazole.
nasal depigmentation in, 1017
Dihomo y-linolenic acid (DGI .A), 208, 239
pemphigus foliaceus in, 686, 687
5,6-Dihydroxyindole (DHI), 17
postbathing folliculitis in, 212
5,6-Dihydroxyindole-2-carboxylic acidl (DHICA), 17
psychogenic dermatoses in, 1056
Diodothyronine, 782-783
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
Dilated porc of Winer, 1254, 1265-1267, 1266, 1267
lumps in, 1237t, 1238t
Jinethyl phthalate,427
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 78t
Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), 219
seasonal flank alopccia in, 891
for aeral lick der1natitis, 1063
seborrhea in, 227, 913, 915, 1032
topical therapy with,235-236
vitiligo in, 1015
Dip(s), antifungal, 356. 356t
zine-responsivc dermatosis in. 1120
for feline scahies, 484
Dog(s). See also individual species.
for scabies, 482
bacterial pyoderma in, 28
lindane, 424
bathing of, 212-213
Index ·I483
Dog(s) (Continued)
Drug reaction (Continued)
breeds of, alopecic, 957, 957-958, 958
liagnosis of, 725-729, 728t, 729-731
with prcdilection for skin disorders, 75, 77t-821
in cats, 721, 723t
critical temperature for, 53
in dogs, 197, 721, 722t-723t
cutaneous mast celis of, 39, 40
predictable versus unpredictable (idiosyncratic), 720
denmal dendrocytes in. 38
Drug-receptor interaction, 219
epidermis of, 10
Dry bath(s), 213, 215
jmmunoglobulins of, 31
Dry skin, 220
turmover time for, 31
Dulley nose, 1016-1017
fontpad of, 12
Dunstan's blue line, 175-176, 177
hair follicles of, 10
Durakyl, 427
hair growth in, amnual, 4
Duratrol, 423
daily, 6
Dwarism, pituitary, 817, 819-822, 820
hair types in, 7-8
Dyshesion, epidermal. See Acanthotysis.
haircoat of, 7-8
Dyskeratosis, 137- 138, 1025
hunting (dolichocephalie) hreeds of, nasal follieulitis and
Dysplasia, derual, 936
furuncaulosis in, 303
epiderimal, 173, 173
Langerhans' cells of, 24
canine,914-975
normal mierofora of. See Microfora.
in West Ilighland white terrier, 914, 928-929, 930-
resident umicrofora of, 33-34
933
respiratory rate of, in thermoregulation, 54
follicular, 6, 6, 152, 153, 166-168
skin of, hydration of, 32
of dermal collagen, 159, 159
normal pl of, 3
of sebaceous glands16170
thickness of, 3
 Dystrophic mineralization, of dermal coflagen, 157- 158,
stratum coneum in, thickness of, 28
158
swcating in, 53
tail gland of, 54-55
wild, haircoat of, 7.
Ear(s). See also Otitis extema.
Dog food, fat in, I112
amatomy of,1203,1203-1204,1205
generic, dermatosis caused by, 1114-1115, 1122, 1122-
cleaning of, 918,1205,1221-1225, 1222t
1123
in cats, 215
storage of, 209
common and less common dermatoscs of, 103t
Dogiel's end-bulb. See Meissner's corpuscle.
cxamination of, 211
Dogue de Bordcaux, footpad byperkeratosis in, 935
external, discascs of, 1203-1232
risk for non-neoplastic skin cisorders in, 78t
fold dermatitis of, 1216
Domeboro, 227, 229t, 230
glandular disorders of, 1212
Dopachrome, 17
bair rcmoval froun, 1207
Dopachrome tautorncrase, 17
microanatomy of, 1215
 Dopaquinone, 17
middle, 1204
Doramectin, 428,429
llueshing of, 1216, 1217
systemic, antiparasitic therapy with, 430
ncoplasia of, 1208
Dot blot hybridization. 1239
normal Hora of. 12141
Down hair(s), 4
parasites in, 1206t, 1209-1211
Doxepin, 1056-1057
physiology of, 1203- 1204
Doxycyclne, efficacy of, against staphylococal infection,
progresive pathologic changes in, 1205, 1210, 1215-
283
1216
against Staphylococcus intermedus,282
Ear canal(s), cleaning of, 1221-1225, 1222t
for Rocky Mountain spotted fevcr, 529
drying agents for, 1222t, 1224-125
 in small aninals, dosage and administration of, 1418t 
fushing of, 1224
systemic, dosage of, 284t
mineralized, 1211, 1218
Dracunculiasis, 435, 437-439, 438
Ear canker, in rabbits, 1448
in ferrets, 1419
Far clcarser(s), 1222t
Dracunculus insignis, 437
Ear margin dernatosis, canine, 1038, 1043-1045, 1044,
Dracumculus medinensis, 437
1045
Drechstera spiciferum. See Bipolaris spiciferum.
Ear mite(s) (Otodectes cynotis), 449, 450-452、451, 452,
Droncil. See Praziquuntel.
1205,1209
Drug(s), ahsorption of, 218-220
cxaminatlion for, 107
diffusion coefficient of, 219
in cats, 435
physiologic response to, 1052, 1052-1053
in dogs, 435
psychotropic, 1056- 1057
in ferrets, 1419
skin color changes causcd by, 1023
skin scraping for, 101
Drug allergy. See Drug reaction, cutaneous.
Ecchymos, 87, 88
Drug eruption. Sec Jxug reaction, cutancous.
Eccrine sweat gland(s). Scc Sweat gland(s), atrichial (ec-
Drug reactiou, cutaneous. 720-729
crine).
cause ane pathogenesis of 720-721,722t723t
Echiulnophuaga gallnacea, 488-489, 491, 492
claw involvement in, 1199
Ecthyma, contagious, 524
clinical features of, 721-725, 722t-723t, 724-725, 726
Ectodex Dog Wash, 470
clinical management of, 729
on ferrets, 1419, 1420
1484·Index
Ectoparasites (Continned)
Endothelium, vascular, 56
on gerbils, 1428
cutaneous nerves and, 59
on guinea pigs, 1420, 1431-1434,1432, 1434, 1436
Fndothrix infeclion, 341
on hamsters, 1439-1440, 1440
diagnosis of, 121
on mice, 1432, 1435, 1443
English hnlldog. See Bulidog, English.
on rabbits, 1434, 1447, 1448-1449
English pointer. See Pointer, English.
on rats, 1447, 1453
English setter. Sce Setter, English.
Ectothrix infcction, 341
English Springer spaniel. See Spaniel, Springer.
diagnosis of, 121
Enilconazolc powder, 224
Ectromelia, infectious, in mice, 1443
Fnilconazole rinse, 356, 356t
Ectropion, 1186
antifungal therapy with, 410
Edema. Sec also Fosimophilic dermatitis and edenu.
Enrofloxacin, efficacy of, against coagulase-positive staphy-
derrmal, 163-164, 164
locoi,282
intercelular, of epidermis, 140-142, 143
against Staphylococcus intermedius, 282
 intracellular, of epiderrnis, 142, 144
in small anirnals, dosage and administration of. 1418t
EDTA-Tris, potentiation of topical antibiotics with, 280
otic therapy with,1227,1229
FFA Caps, 1113
pinnal crythema in cats caused by, 1023
Efa Vet, 1113
systemic, dosage of, 284t
Ehlers-Danlos syadrome. See Asthenia, cutaneous (Ehters-
Entactin. See Nidogen.
Danlos symrone,dermatosparaxis.
Enterococcus spp., otitis media caused by, 1214t
Ehrlichicanis44452951
Enterotoxin(s), 275
Ehrlichiosis, canine,529-531
Entormophthorales, 384
Eicosanoid(s), 30, 559-560, 561t 
Entomophthoromycosis, 377, 384
Eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), 208, 239-240
Entropion, 1186
Eimer's organ. See Tylotrich pad.
Environmental skin disease,1073-1108
Elafin, 28
Enzyme(s), epidermal, hydrolytie, 34
Elapidae, 1090
uxidative, 34
Elastin, dermal, 36-38
Enzyme histocheimistry, 202, 204t
atrophy of, 159
Eosinophil(s), cutaneous, 39
disorders of, 987
functions of, 557-558
cpidernal, 11
in cytologic diagnosis, 114, 117, 118t
Elastolysis. Sec Chutis laxa.
in dermal blood vessels, of cats, 182, 183
Elaunin fber(s), 38
in dernmatitis, 188
Elavil. See Amitriptyline.
secretory products of 557-558, 558t
Electric fulguration,262
Eosinophilia, in cats, 178
Electrocoagulation, 262
with furunculosis, 299-300
Electrodesiccation, 261 -262
Eosinophilic dermatitis and edema, in dogs, 1155-1156
Electroincision, 261
Eosinophile furuneulosis, of face, canine, 505, 637, 638,
Electrolysis.262
641-642, 642. 643
Electron microscopy, 202
Eosinophilic granuloma, canine, 1150-1151, 1153-I155,
of pemphigus lesions, 681
1155-1156
Electroshock, for acral lick dernatitis, 1064
feline, 1150--1151, 1152-1153, 1153-1154
Electrosurgery, 259-262
Eosinophilic granuloma complex, feline, 1148-1153
instrumentation for, 261
Eosinophilic intracytoplasrmic inclusions,18s-189
 mechanisms of, 261
Eosinophilic otitis externa, proliferative, canine, 1213
technigues of, 261-262
Eosinophilic pinnal folliculitis, sterile, canine, 1210- 1211,
Eleidin, 27
1213
Elkhound, Norwegian, hair color of, 8
Eosinophilic plaque, feline, 1142, 1149- 1152, 1150-1152
keratoacanthoma in, 1248
Eosinophilic pustulosis, canine, sterile, 1132 - 1133, I134-
risk for meoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
1136
lumps in, 1237t
Eosinophilic ulcer. See Indolent ulcer, feline.
squamous cell carcinoma in, 1251
Eosinophilice vasculitis, 182
Elongase, 208
Epicuticle, of hair shaft, 41
Emolient(s), 223. 228, 1028
Epidermal collarette(s), 86, 87, 97, 156
 in topical therapy, 218t, 227
Epidermal dysplasia, caine, 914-915
Emphysema, subcutancous, 1090
in West Highland white terrier, 914, 928-929, 930-
Emulsion(s), therapeutic, 224-225
933
Endcctocide(s), systcmic, anliparasitic therapy with, 428
Epidermal melanin umit, 16
430
Epidermal necrolysis, toxic. See Toxic epidermal necrolysis.
Endoerine disease, 992-995
Epidermal ncvus/ncvi, 1007, 1013, 1380-1381, 1388- 1389,
causes of, 781
1388-1389
clinical aspects of, 798
breed(s) with predilection for, 1238t
diagnosis of, 198, 782
in dogs, 157
in ferrets, 1421-1426
Epidermal-dermal junction, 34, 35
Endorphin(s),endogenous, 1057
Epidermis, age-related changes in, 64-65
Endorphin blockers, for acral lick dermatitis, 1063
basal layer(straturn basale)of10,13,1314,15,20
Endorphin substitution, for acral lick dermatitis, 1063
basement membrane zone of, 11, 13
Endothelial ccll(s), innuuologic functions of, 556 
compoments of, 34-35, 36t
Index · I485
Epidermis (Continued)
Erythema multiforme (Continued)
funetions of, 34
drug-induced, in cats, 721, 723t, 724-725, 734, 737, 737
thickened, 172, 172
in dogs, 722t, 724-725, 734, 734t
ultrastnueture of, 34--35, 35
ear involvement in, 1210-1211, 1212
clear layer (stratum lucidum) of, 10, 27, 27
exfoliative, in cats, 525
dermiatohistopathology of, terminology for, 132-156
idiopathic, in dogs,734,736, 737,740
differentiation of, 29
in humans, 732-733
dysplasia of 173, 173
major, 88,732
enzymes of,34
minor,732,735
granular layer (stratum granulosurn) of, 10, 26, 26-27
target lesion in, 733-734, 735, 736
histochemistry of, 34
Erythrocyte(s), diapcdesis of, in epidernis, 147
hormy layer (stratum corncum) of, 10, 26, 27-29
Erythroderma, drug-induced, in cats, 723t
 barrner function of, 31
in dogs, 722t
hydration of, 32
Erythromycin, efficacy of, against coagulase-positive stapy-
thickness of, 28, 32
lococci, 282
keratinization of, 29
against Staphylococcus intermerdius, 282
microscopic anatomy and physiology of, 10-14, 10-35,
systemic, dosage of, 284t
26
Escherichia coli, as transient flora, in cats, 275
pricke cell layer of, 26
in dogs, 275
proliferation of, 29
in anad saes, 1201
spinous layer (stratur spinosum) of 10, 19-22,
 otitis media caused by. 1214t
22
Estradiol, for feline acquiredl symimetric alopecia, 902
stratum conjunctum of, 27
Estrogen(s), 795-796. See also Hyperestrogenism.
stratum dysjunctum of, 28
and hair growth, 6
thickness of, 10
blood levels of, assays for, 796
turnover time for, in dogs, 31
Ethohcxadiol, 427
Epidcrinodysplasia verrucifornis, 1012
Ethyl alcohol, 230
Epidermolysis bullosa, 938-940
Ethyl lactate, in shampoo, 223
causes of, 13
topical, for bacterial iufection, 279, 280
claw involvement in, 1199
Etretinate, 241-- 242, 1029
dystrophic (dermatolytic). 938, 938t, 939-940, 941
antiseborrheie therapy with, 919
junctional, 938t, 938-939, 939, 940
for epidermal dysplasia in West Highland white terries,
types of, 938, 938t
929
Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita, 694, 700, 700-701, 701,
for granulomatous sebaceous adenitis, 1146
938, 940
indications for, 243
diagnosis of, 671
otic therapy with,1229-1230
Epidermcolysis bullosa acquisita antigen, 36t
teratogenicity of. 243, 1029
Epidermolysis bulsa simplex, 938.938t
toxicity of, 243, 1029
Epiderolytic hyperkeratosis, 156, 157
Eumelanin(s), 8, 16, 17
Epidermophytes, 349
European blastomycosis. See Cryptococcosis.
Epidermphyonspp.36
Eautrombicaua alfreddugesi, 47, 447-448. See also Trom-
Epidernophyton foccosum, characteristies of, 349
biculosis (chigger mites).
Fpidermopoies, 29-31
Evaporimcter, 32
changes in, 132
Exeoriation(s), 87, 98
defects in, 1025
Exfoliative dcrnatitis, 1049
Epi-Otic, 1223
and thymoma, in cats, 905
Epiphora,1188,1189
drug-indneedi, 1052, 1052-1053
Epi-Soothe, 229t, 236, 917, 1035
in cats, 723t
Epithelial neoplasm(s), 1239-1281. See also specific ne0-
in dogs, 721, 722t
plasm.
paraneoplastic, 1375
Epitheliogenesis imperfecta. Sec Aplasia cutis
Exocytosis, in epidermis, 147,148
Epithelioma(s), intracutaneous cornifying. See Keratogcan-
Exophiala jeansetmet, 379
thoma.
Exophiala spinifera,379
sebaceous, in dogs, 1271
a s s  () e  
Fpitope spreading, 667
thematosus, 706-707
Ergotism, 1089, 1101
Eyelid(s), anatomy of, 1185
claw involvement in, 1199
common aned less common dermatoses of, 103t
in guinea pigs, 1437
diseases of, 1185-1190, 1186t
Erosion(s), 87, 98
diseases that affect other areas and, 1186, 1188t
Erytherma ab igne, 897899
normal Aora of, 1185
Erythema annularc centrifugum, in ferrets, 1426, 1427
tumors of, 1188-1190, 1189, 1190t
Erythema mnltiforme, 729-740
Ezrin,20
cause and pathogenesis of, 729-734, 734t
classification of, 732-733, 733t
clinical features of, 734-737, 735-737
Facial eczema, in rabbits, 1451
clinical management of, 739-740
Facial excoriations, self-infficted, in ferrets, 1427
definition of, 729
Facial fold intertrigo, 1097, 1107
diagnosis of, 141, 737-739, 738-739
I'actor VIl-related antigen, in cell type identification, 204t
1486·Index
Familial vascalopathy, 987-989
Ferrct (Continued)
Fat(s), dietary, 207-208, 1112
biotin deficiency in, 1426
supplementation of, 1113
blastouycosis in, 1419
subeutaneous, changes in, 171-172
blue ferret syndroume in, 1426-1427
necrosis of, 172, 172
burrowing in, 1427
Fat cell(s). Scc Lipocyte(s).
coccidioidomycosis in, 1419
Fatty acid(s), and haircoat quality, 209
contact dermatitis in, 1426
antibacterial properties of, 274
demodicosis in, 1419
anti-inflammatory properties of, 208
dermatoses of, 1417-1428
deficieney of, 1112-1i15, 1114-1115
diet for, 1426
in chinchilla, 1417
dracunculiasis in, 1419
in guinca pigs, 1434
ear mites in, 1419
in hamsters, 1441
ectoparasites on, 1419,1420
in mice,1444
enlocrine disorders in,1421-1426
in rats, 1453-1454
erythema annulare centrifugum in,1426,1427
dictary, 239.--240
feas in, 1419
essential, 208
fystrike in, 1419
deficiency of, 31
fungal infections in, 1418-1419 
histoplasmosis in, 1419
metabolism of, 208-209, 239-240,240
hyperadrenocorticism in,14211424,1422,1423
of sebum, 51
hyperestrogenism in, 1424- 1425, 1425
omega-3, 208
hyputlhyroidisn in, 1426
omega-6, 208
 injection reaction in, 1426 
omega-3/omega-6, 239, 1113, 1198
intestinal parasites in, 1426
antiseborheic therapy with,918919
neoplasia in, 1420, 1427-1428
dietary ratio of, 239*
otitis exterma in, 1419
for dermatomyositis, 945
otolectice mange in, 1419
for diseid lupus erythematosus, 716
pinmal necrosis in, 1419
for feline eosinophilic granuloma, 1133
sarcoptic 1nange in, 1419
polyunsaturated, 30, 208, 1113
shedding in, 1425
supplementation of, 208, 209, 239-241
telogen deluxion in, 1425, 1426
adversc effects and side effects of, 241
ticks in, 1419
for claw disease, 1200
viral infections in, 142l, 1421
systernie: therapy with, 239-241
Festoon(s), dermal. 162
therapy with, for cpidermal dysplasia in West Highland
Fibril-associatcd collagens with interrupted triple helices
white terriers, 929
(FACIT),37
topical therapy with, 235, 1113-1114
Fibrillin, 36t, 37
Felicola subrostrata, 487, 489, 490
Fibrinogen, in morphogenesis of skin appendaes, 3
Feline immunodeficiency vinus infection, 278, 517-519.
Fibroblast(s), collagenases synthesized by, 37
520,521
dermal, 37, 39
and abscesses, 311, 517
components synthesized by, 36
and fungal infections, 337, 338, 342
Fibroblastoma, perineural. See Schuarmom.
and griseofulvin side effects, 357
Fibroma(s), 1013, 1282, 1282-1283, 1283
and Malassezia infection, 363
breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t
and mural follculitis, 907
in rats, 1455
Feline infectious anemia, 531
Shopc. in rabbits, 1451-1452
Feline infectious peritonitis, 522, 522
Fibrona durun, 1282
Feline leprosy. See Leprosy,feline.
Fibroma 1nolle, 1282
Feline leukeinia vinus infection, 317, 518-520, 1285-1287
Fibronectin(s), 36t
and abscesses, 31l, 517
functions of, 38
and fungal infectious, 337, 338, 342, 519
in morphogenesis of skin appendages, 3
and Malassezia infection, 363
synthiesis of, 38
neoplasia related to,517,528
Fibropapilloma, diagnosis of, 1245, 1245
Feline poxvirus infection, 145, 518-519, 520-522
Fibroplasia, dermal, 161, 162
Fclinc rhinotracheitis infection, 518, 524-525, 526-529
Fibropruntic nodule, 1284-1285, 1286, 1287
Feline sarcoma virus, 528, 1285-1287
 breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t 
FeLV. See Feline leukemia virus infection.
Fibrosarcoma(s), 1281, 1285-1289
Feninization, of male dog, 796, 840-843
brecd(s) with predilection for, 1237t
idiopathic, 851
cause and pathogenesis of, 1285-1287
Fenoxycarb, 426, 495
claw involvement in, 1198
Fenthion, 428, 499
clinical findings in, 1287- 1288
Fenvalerale, 426
clinical management of, 1288- 1289
Ferret, actinomycosis in, 1417
cutalneous, in cats, 528
alopecia in, breeding season and, 1425
diagnosis of, 1288, 1291
byperestrogenism and, 1424-1425,1425
in cats, 1286, 1287-1288
testicular neoplasia and, 1425
in dogs, 1286, 1287, 1290
atopy in, 1426, 1427
in gerbils, 1430
bacterial infcctions in, 1417, 1418
in1 hasters, 1442
Index·1487
Fibrosarcoma(s) (Continued)
Flea hite hypersensitivity (Continued)
in mice,1444
cytologic diagnosis of, 114
in rats, 1455
felinc,632-635
Fibrosis, 196
cause and pathogenesis of, 632
dermal, 161
clinical features of, 620, 623t, 632-633
 clinical management of, 634-635
Fibrovascular papilloma(s), 1284, 1284, 1285
diaguosis of 633t,633-634,634
Fila brasiliero, Ehlers-Danlos syndrorne in, 982
histopathology of, 634
Filaggrin, 42
in cats, 157
functions of, 26
Flea collar(s), 498
synthesis of, 29
Flea comh, for ectoparasite diagmosis, 107
Filamentous body(ics). See Apoptotic body(ies).
 in flea control, 496-497
Filariasis, 643-644
Flea crcam rinses, 498-499
Filarioidea dermatitis, 644
Flea foam(s), 500
Fine-needle aspiration, for cytologic diagnosis, 115-116
Flea powder(s), 499
Finnish spitz, pemphigus foliaceus in, 686
Flea sharnpoo(s), 49s-499
Fipronil,423, 497-498,500
Flea spray(s), 499-500
antiparasitie therapy with, 425
Flea-bite hyperscnsitivity, 488-489
spray, otic therapy with, 1229
Flesh fies, 503
Fire ant(s), sting of, 506, 506-507
Flora. See Microfora.
Fish scale disease. See Ichthyosis.
Flotation, for ectoparasite diagnosis, 107
Fissurc(s), 87, 99
Fluconazole, adverse effects and side effects of, 411
Fistula/fistulae, arteriovenous, 1095- 1096
antifngal therapy with, 411, 413
multiple perianal, cryosurgery for, 258-259
 dosage and administration of, 357t
Fite's modified acid-fast stain, staining characteristies of
Flucort. See Flumethasone.
various substances with, 130t
Flucytosine, adlverse effects and side effects of, 415
FIV. See Feline immunodeficiency vimus infection.
antifungal therapy with, 414-415
Fixed drug eruption, causes of, 721, 722t
resistance to, 415
in cats. 723t
Flumethasone, injectable, 247t
in dogs, 725, 726
Flunixin meglumine, fo acral lick dermatitis, 1063
Flame figure(s), 159, 160
Fluocinolone, adverse cffects and side effects of, 232
Flane follicle(s). 166, 167, 784, 790
for aeral lick dermatitis, 1063
Flank sucking, 1060-1061, 1065
for discoid lupus erythematosus, 716
Flea(s), characteristics of, 490-491, 491
in shampoo,223
control of, 493-500
otic therapy with, 1226
in extcrnal enviroument, 494
Fluocinonidc, adrenocortical soppression by, 232
in intermal environment, 494-496
5-Fluorocytosine, acdverse effects and side effects of, 721
liquid products for, 499-500
 Fluoroquinolone(s), anti-infammatory and immunomodula-
on animal, 496-500
tory properties of, 285
spot application products for, 497-498
efficacy of, against staphylococcal infeclion, 283
systernic products for,499
against Staphylococus intermedius, 282
development of, inhilitors of, 430
long-term therapy with,287
European rabbit, on cats, 488-489
systemic, for bacterial infections, 281
growth of. regulators of, 495
Fluoxetine, 1056- 1057
life cycle of. 488-489, 491-492
for feline psychogenic alopecia 1070
(n animals, control of, 496-500
Flushing, cutaneous, 1022-1023, 1052
8ty sonpd ddr ods
Fly(ies), 500-507
on ferrels, 1419
stable, 500, 501
on hamsters, 1440
Fly bite(s), pinnal, 1210-1211, 1211
on humans, 493, 493
Fly dermatitis, 500--502, 501
on rabbits, 1449
Flystrike, in ferrets, 1419
0nl rats, 1453
inn rabbits, 1449
plague transmission hy, 325-326
Foam cel(s), 184-185
rabbit, 491, 492
epithelioid, 185
common Easterm, 1449
Focal acltiesion(s), 19. 22t
giant Eastemn, 1449
Focal adnexal dysplasia(s), 1384- 1386, 1385
repellents for, 499-500
Focal metatarsal fistulatkon, 980, 985-986, 986
sticktight, 488-489
Fogger(s), lor fca control, 495-496
 Flea bite hypcrscnsitivity, and fibropruritic nodule, 1284-
Fogo selvagem. See Pemphigus foliaceus.
1285
Fold dermatitis, 1216
canine, 627-632
Folinic acid, supplementation of. in canine neosporosis,
allergy testing in, 630-631
533
cause and pathogenesis of, 627-629
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), 781, 795, 798
clinical features of, 629
Follicular arrest, 7, 897, 898
clinical management of, 631-632
Follicular atrophy, 6
diagnosis of, 629-631
Follicular cast(s), 87, 95
histopathology of623,631
Follicular dysplasia, 6, 970-973, 1029
clintical ruanagement of, 239
black hair,954,959-965,963
[488 · Index
Follicular dysplasia (Continued)
Foot licking, 1060, 1066
canine,890
Footpad(s), anatomy of, 9
cyclic, 890-893
atrichial sweating from, 53
diagnosis of, 971, 973, 974
derimatophyte collection from. 120
feline, 905
fissures of, 99
treatment of, 971-972
histology of, 10, 12
Folieular fushing, 1026
hyperkeratosis of, 930, 935, 935-936, 1114-1115
Follicular lipidosis, 973-974
in canine distemper, 523, 523
of Rottweilers, 899, 899, 900
in vaseulitis, 746, 747
Follicular mucinosis. See Alopecia mucinosa.
swcat glands of, 52, 52-53
Follicular parakeratosis, 925-927, 926, 927, 928, 929
ulceration of, in dog with systemie lhupus erythematosus,
Follicular stile, 48
696-697
Folliculitis, bacterial, in cats, 300, 302
Foreign body(ies), in ear, 1212
in hypothyroidism, 853
skin lesions caused by, 1091-1094, 1093-1095
superficial, 289, 291-296, 294, 295, 296
Forcign body granuloma(s), in hamsters, 1441
in cats, 294
Foreign-body reaction(s), cytologic diagnosis of, 117
deep,299-300
Formalin, biopsy specimen fixation in, 129
eosinophilic, in cats, 194
Formamidine(s), topical, antiparasitic therapy with, 425
facial eosinophilic, in dogs, 505
Fox terrier. See Terrier, fox.
luminal, 166, 194, 200
Foxtail, skin lesions caused by, 1091
mural, 166, 192
Francisella tularensis, 444
gramulomatous, drug-induced,722t,725,727,729,
Freezing artifact, 142, 144
731
French bulldog. See Bulldog, French.
idiopathic lymphocytie, of cats, 907-909, 907-910
Frontline. See Fipronil.
infiltrative,194,197
Frostbite, 1086, 1088-1089
interface, 192-194, 196
 in rabbits, 1447, 1450
necrotizing. 194. 198
Fulguration, clectric, 262
pustular,194,199
Fulvicin U/F. See Griseofulvin, microsized.
muzzle,303-304
Fungal infection(s). See also Mycosis/mycoses.
nasal, 301, 303
diagnosis of, 118t, 118-125
necrotizing, 301, 303
in chinchilla, 1416 
in ferrets, 1418-1419
pedal. See Pododernatitis.
in guinca pigs, 1430-1431, 1431
penetrating. See Fununculosis.
in mice, 1442--1443
postbathing. 212
in rabbits, 1446, 1447
pruritic, 293
in rats, J453
pyotraumatic,288,300-303,301,303
otitis externa caused by, 1213-1215, 1214t
staphylococeal, 97
otitis media caused by, 121.4t
diagnosis of, 113, 150
pododermatitis caused by, 305
in cats, 289
thcrapy for, 409-415
in dogs, 170, 171, 347
Fungizone. See Amphotericin B.
dermal cdcma in, 164
Fungus/fungi. See also Mtcrofora; Mycosis/nycoses; spc-
superfcial, in dogs, 289
cific fungus.
superficial, in dogs, 289
characterishics of, 336-337
Follitropin. See Folicle-stimulating hormone (FSHH).
classification of, 336
Fontana’s ammoniacal silver nirate,staining characteristics
colonies of, morphology of, 123
of various substances with, 130t
conidia of. See Conidium/comidia.
Fuod allergy. See Food hypersensitity.
contaminant, and pathogenic, differentiation of, 337
Food hpersensivitycanine,61524
culture of,118,121-122,123,337,349
cause and pathogenesis of, 615-618, 618t
dimorphic, 337
clinical features of, 604, 618-619, 620
examination for, 118-125
clinical management of 623-624
growthi of,in tissue, 337
diagnosis of, 619-623
hypersensitivity to, 650
histopathology of623,23
hypha/hyphae of. See Hypha/hyphae.
clinical features of, 573
identification of, 122-125, 123-124, 336
diagnosis of, 117, 148
in normal fora,338,338t
tar involvement in, 1211
in cats, 338, 338t
feline, 183, 624-627
in dogs, 338, 338t
cause and pathogenesis of, 624-625, 625t
pathogenic, and contaminant, dlifferentiation of, 337
clinical features of, 620, 625
characterization of, 337-338
clinical managemcnt of, 627
propagale of, 336
diagnosis of, 626-627
saprophytic, as resident lora, in dogs, 34
histopathology of, 626-627
in normal Aora, 338, 338t
mural foliculitis caused by, 909, 910
taxonomy of, 337
otitis extema in, 1211, 1213
Fur chewing, in chinchilla, 1417
vasculitis caused by, 743, 745, 747
Fur-slip, in chinchilla, 1417
Focd intolerance. See Food hypersenstvity.
Furunculosis, 166, 195, 200
Index · |489
Fununculosis (Continued)
Glannd(s)(Continued)
acral lick, 302, 308-309
specialized, 34-55
bacterial, in hypothyroidism, 853
sweat. See Sweat gland(s).
cytologic diagnosis of, 117
deep folliculitis and, 299, 299-300, 301, 302
Clomus, 57, 58
eusinophilic, of face, canine, 505, 637, 638, 641-642,
Glossitis, burdock, 1091, 1092
642,643
Glucan, 336
in cats, 300, 302
Glucocorticoid(s), adverse effects and side effects of, 246
in dermatophytosis, in dogs, 343, 344
alternate-day therapy with, 250, 251
in hyperadrenccorticism, 800, 802
and adrenocortical fnnction in dogs, 232, 234t
in mice, 1442
and skin, 789-790
in rats, 1452
anti-infammatory properties of, 244-245, 245t
mnzzle, 302, 303-304
injectable, 246-247, 247t, 250
nasal, 301, 303
intravenous, 247
pedal. See Pododernatitis.
oral, 245, 250
pyogranulomatous, 351
otic preparations of, 1225t, 1226t
in dogs, 302
parenteral, 245-246
pyotraumatic foliculitis and, 300~303
proxduction of, 789
staphylococcal, 200, 202
selection of, 247-248
in dogs, 171, 299
urinary levels of, deterinination of, 790
Fusidic acid, topical, for bacterial infection, 279, 280
Clucocorticoid therapy. See also IHyperadrenocorticism
Fusobacteriun spp, celulits caused by, 310
(Cushing's disease, Cushing's syndrome).
in infeetions, 276
effects of, on biopsy, 128-129
in oral flora of cats, 276
for discoid lupus erythermatosus, 716
in subcutaneous abscesses in cats, 310
for graft-versus-host disease, 720
Fusobacterium necrophorum, in rabhits, 1445
for idiopathic sterile gramuloma and pyogranuloma,
1138-1139
for permphigus, 681
Gap junctions, 19
for pempligus erythematosus, 693
Gel(s), 218t, 226
for pemphigus foliaceus, 689-690
Gelatin,for claw disease, 1200
for systemic lupus erythematosus, 711
Gelatinase, 37
for vasculitis, 753
Gene(s), honeobox, 93
immunosuppressive, 671, 672t
Gene therapy, 264
intralesional, 247, 250, 252
Genenic dog food dermatosis, 11l41115, 1122, 1122-
pulse, 671
1123
systemic,238-239,244-252
Gentamicin, in small animals, dosage and administration of,
administration of, 246-247, 247t
1418t
adverse effects and side effects of, 250-252
otic therapy with, 1227
dosage of, 248-249, 249t
topical, for bacterial infection,280
evaluation of, 252
Geotrichium candidum, 408
for feline sychogenic alopecia,1070
Geotrichium dermatitis, 408
for hypersensitivity disorders, 570
Geotrichosis, claw involvenent in, 1195
indications for, 246
Gerbil, bacterial infections in, 1428 
otc therapy with, 1229
bald nose in, 1429
regimen for, 249-250
barbering in, 1429
topical, adversc cffects and side effects of, 232
congenital abnormalities of pigrnentation and haircoat in,
alopecia caused by, 889, 896-897
1429
anti-inflannatory effects of, 232
demodicosis in, 1428
anti-infammatory potencies of, 232,233,233t
dermatoses of, 1428-1430
for ear treatrment, 1225t, 1226t
ectoparasites on, 1428
reactions to, in cats, 902, 903
neoplasia ini, 1429-1430
in dogs, 896, 896
sore mose in, 1429, 7430
β-Glucuronidase, in cell type identification, 204t
tail disorder of, 1429
Glycerin, 1028
ventral scent gland disorder of, 1429
Glycosaminoglycan(s), 38
German shepherd. Scc Shepherd, Gernan.
Glypican, 38
German shorthaired pointer. See Porinter, German short-
Gnathostona, definition of, 440
haired.
Gnathostomu spinigerum,in dogs,40
Germicide(s), 230
in humans, 432
Giant cclls), in feline herpes dermatitis, 525, 527
Gold. See Chrysotherapy.
multinucleate epidermal, 174-175, 175
Golden retriever. See Retriever, golden.
multinucleate histioeytie, 147, 185-187, 186
Gomori's aldehyde fuchsin stain, staining characteristics of
multinucleate keratinocyte, 174- 175, 175
various substauces with, 130t
Gilchrist's dlisease. See Blastomycosis.
 Gomori's methenamine siver stain, staining characteristics
Gland(s), age-related changes in, 64-65
of various substances with, 130t
changes in, terminology for, 168-171
Gomon's reliculin stain, staining characteristies of various
sebaceous, See Sebaceous gland(s).
substances with, 130t
1490 · Index
Gumadotroph(s), 781
Greyhound (Continued)
Gonadotropin(s), 798
hermangiosarcomas in. 1299
Gonaclotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), 781, 795, 796
Italian, color dilution alopecia in, 967
Gordius robustus, in cats, 440
pattern baldness in, 965
Graft-versus-host disease, 719-720
pinnal alopecia in, 887
Gram's stain, 116
otitis extema in、1212
staining characteristics of various substances with, 10
patterm baldness in, 965
Granular celltumor, 1294-1296, 1295
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-ncoplastic
lumps in, 1237t
perkeratosis.
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 79t
Cranulocyte(s), functions of,556-558
trichorrhexis nodosa in, 895
Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor defciency of,278
vasculitis in, 744
Cranulocytopathy,279t
vasculopathy in, cutaneous and renal glomerular, 749,
Granuloma(s), bacterial, 302, 311-312, 313
750,752
dermal, felinc,186
familial, 987-989
eosinophilic, canine, 1150-1151, 1153-1155, 1155-1156
ventral comedone syndrome in, 1103
feline, 1150-1151, 1152-1153, 1153-1154
Griseofulvin, adverse effects and side effects of, 411
foreigm-body, 189, 191
in cats, 357
lincar. See Eosinophilic gransloma, feline.
antifungal therapy with, 357, 409, 410-411
nyeobacterial,312-321,317,318,320
anti-infammatory properties of, 411
ppportunistic (atypical),317, 319-321, 320
immunomodulatory properties of. 411
palisading, 189, 191
preauricula1, feline, 1241
microsized, 411
sarcoidal, 185, 189,190
closage and acdministration of, 357t
tuberculoid, 189, 189
teratogenicity of, 337, 411, 1446
venereal. See Transmissible cenereal tumor.
oltramicrosized, 411
Cranuloma and pyograuloma, sterle idiopathic,1136
dosage and administration of, 357t
114)
Gris-PEG. See Griseofuloin, ultramicrosized.
cause and pathogenesis of, 1136
Grooming, 207
clinical feahures of, 1 136- 1137
for cats, 214-215
clinical management of, 1138-1140
for dogs, routinc, 210
diagnosis of, 1137-1138, 1138-1141
frequeney of, 213
in cats, 1134-1135, 1137
special problcms in, for cats, 215
in dogs,1134-1135, 1136-1137
for dogs, 213-214
Granulematous dermatitis and lymphadenitis, juvenile ster-
Grover's disease, 138
ile. See Cellulitis, canine juvenile.
Growth factor(s), in hair cycle, 4-5
Gramlomatous inflamumation, 184
Growth hornone, 794-795
Grapc sced cxtract, 209
and hair growth, 6
Grass awi, 1091
deficicney of, 794
Gray collie syndrome, 977-978, 1014
excess of. See Acromegaly.
Graying, 1014-1015. 1015
in adrenal hyperplasia-like syndromc, 846-847
Greasy skin and hair coat with sebaceous gland hyperplat-
plasina levels, in pituitary dwarfsm, 821
sia, idiopathic,1179, 7180
therapy with, in pituitary cdwarisn,821
Great [Dane, acral lick dermatitis in, 1058, 1060
Growth hormone -inhibiting factor (GIHIF), 781
 antithyroglobulin antibody(ies) in, 852
Growth horinone - releasing factor (GHRF), 781
antithyroid antibody(ies) in, 789
Growth hormone -responsive derrmatosis. See Hlyposornato-
callus dermatitis in, 1102
tropism (pseudo-Cushing's syncrome, CH-responsive
color dilution alopecia in, 967
dermatosis).
dcmodicosis in, 461, 465
Guinea pig, alopecia in, congenital, 1437, 1438
epidermolysis bullosa acquisita in, 940
cystic ovaries and, 1437, 1438
histhoeytomas in, 1347
bacterial infections in, 1418, 1420, 1430
hypothyroidism in, 852
barbering in. 1437
idiopathie sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma in, 1136
bite wounds in, 1437
lymphedema in, 990
candidiasis in, 1431
 muzzle follieulitis and fiuruncnlosis in. 304
cheyletiellosis in, 1433
pododerrnatitis in, 305
Chirodiscoules cariue in,1433,1434
psychogenic dermatoses in, 1056
claws of, overgrowth of, 1439
risk for ncoplastic skin tisorders and non-neoplastic
cryptococcosis in, 1431
lumps in, 12371
demodicosis in, 1433-1434, 1436
risk for non-ncoplastic skin disorders in, 76, 79t
dermatophytosis in1, 1430- 1431, 1431
sterile pyogranulorma on feet of, 305
dermatoses of, 1430- 1439
zinc-responsive dermatosis in, 1120
digits and paws, neerosis and sloughing of, 1437, 1437
Great Pyrenees, dernoid cyst (sinus) in, 936
ear chewing in, 1437
risk for non-neoplastic skin dlisorders in, 79t
ectoparasites on, 1420, 1431-1434, 1432, 1434, 1436
Crenz zone, 164, 166
ergot poisoning in,1437
Grcyhound, drug reactions in, 721
footpads of, hyperkeratosis and cutaneous horns of, 1439
Ehlcrs-Danlos syndrone in, 982
fungal infections in, 1430- 1431, 1431
hair growth in, daily, 6
haircoat of, thinning af, at weaning, 1437
Index ·|49|
Guinca pig (Continued)
Ilair follicle(s) (Contimued)
lice ini, 1433, 1434
catagenization of, 166
Matassezia dennatitis in, 1431
changes in, terminology for, 165-168
mites in, 1431-1433, 1432-1434
components of, 41, 43
neoplasia in, 1432, 1439
degeneration of, 277-278
mtritional deficiency in, 1434
development of, 4-7
Pelodera den1atitis in, 1433
dysplasia of, 6, 152、 153, 166-168
sebaccous gland disorler in, 1437-1439
fibrous root sheath of, 43
shedding in, 1437
 in epidermal renewal, 48
telogen defluxion in,1437
indluction of, 4-7
trichofolieuloma in, 1432, 1439
inferior segiment of, 41. 43
trixacariasis in, 1420, 1431-1433, 1432-1434
inffammatiou of, See also Follicaulitis; Fururcutosis; Pert-
viral infections in, 1431
folliculitis.
Guinea worn, 437
assessment of, 195-196
Gum, in haircoat, 214
hydropic, 192
Gyropus opatis, in guinea pigs, 1433
lichenoid, 192
secondary, 195-196
infundibulun of, 28, 41, 43, 43
Haarscheiben. See Tylotrich pad.
inner root sheath of, 41-43, 44, 44, 48
Habronema spp., 503, 504
cuticle of, 42、44
in dogs, 440
llenle layer of, 42, 44
Haemohartonellfelis531
HHuxley layer of, 42, 44
Haemobartonellosis, feline, 531
innervation of, 59, 60, 62
Haemodipsus tentricosus, on rabbits. 1449
isthmus of, 41, 43, 43
Hair. See also Alopecia.
keratinization of, 11, 48
age-related changes in, 64
microscopic anatomy of、 10
altalysis of, as diagnostic tool, 7
miniaturized, 168, 198
awni, 4
morphogenesis of, 39
 barricr function of, 31
nevi of, 1389, 1390
cxlors of, 7-9, 108
obstruction of, 277
conditioners for, 212
of sinus hair, 44-45, 45
dernatophyte collection from, 120
outer root sheath of, 41, 43, 44, 48, 49, 50
dermatophyte-infected, abnormalities of, 121
reactivation of, 4-7
disorders of, 950-975
regression of, 4-7
down, 4
ruptured, dermatitis caused by. 189
cxanination of, 108, 109-112
telogen, 43, 48, 49, 50, 108, 109
functions of, 4
telogenization of, 166
in cndocrine disorders, 780
tnmors of, 1263-1270
 in immune defense, 274
in mice,1444
 jn nutritional deficiency, 108, 111
in rats, 1455
lanugo, 4
Hair gern(s), 2, 49
Iechanorcceptors and, 61
Hair growth. See also Hair cycie.
pignentation of. 108
androgens and, 797
abnormnalities of, 108, 110
disorders of, 950-975
primary (outercoat, guard), 4, 7, 41, 42
cstrogens and, 795
central, 41
 neural mechanisms of, 5
lateral, 41
rcgulation of, 5
red, acquirerl, 1022
Hair matrix, 41, 44
seconctary {undercoat), 4, 7, 39-41, 42
Hair pluck examination, for 1mites, 105- 106 
sinus, 6
technique for, 108
specinen of, collction of, in fungal infection,
Hair shaft, layers of, 39, 41, 44. 108, 110
120
morphology of, 108,109
tactile, 44-45
Iesident microfora of, 275
telogen, 341
structural defects of 950-956
types of, 7-9
Hair tract(s)、 4
Hlair care proxduct(s), 211-212. See also Shampoo(s)
Haircoat, color of, and risk for no-coplastie skin disor-
Hair cast(s), 108, 111
ders, 76
IIair cycle, 4-7, 5. See also Hair growth.
disorders of, 977-978
Ilair disk. See Tylotrich pad.
acquired, 978
Hair follicle(s), 2, 39-48. Sec also Follicular.
congenital,977-978
age-related changes in, 64-65
in hyperadrenocorticisn, 800, 801
anagen,41,44,46,46,108,109
greasy, with sebaceous glad hypcplasia, idiopathic.
arrangement of. 41, 42
1179, 1180
bacterial infection of,277-278
in hypothyroidism, 783-784
basement meinbrane zone (glassy membrane) of, 43, 47,
normal, care of, 207-215. See also Croomng.
49
thickness of, 3
bulb of, 43, 43, 46,46, 47, 48, 108, 109
Hale's colloidal ion stain, staining characteristies of various
catagen, 47, 48, 108, 109
substances with, 130t
1492· Index
Halogenated agent(s), topical, 230-231
Hermatoxylin and eosin stain (H & E), 129, 130t
Hamartoma. See also Nerms/nett.
1lemidesmosome(s), 13, 19, 20, 22t, 35
 defnition of, 177
Hemitrichosis. See Hypertrichosis,unilateral.
Hamster, bacterial infections in, 1418, 1439
Hemogram(s), in hyperadrenocorticism, 805
 contact dermalitis in, 1441
Heuolysin(s), 275
demodicosis in, 1439-1440, 1440
Hemorrhage, from muzzle, 304
derrnatophiytosis in, 1439
 subungual, 1197, 1198
ectoparasites on, 1439-1440, 1440
Heparin sulfate, 36t, 38
epitheliotropic lymphoma in, 1432, 1441, 1442
1lepatocutaneous syndrome, 868
fank scent glands of, 1441
Hepatoid coll(s), of canine tail gland, 54--55
feas on, 1440
Hepatoid gland(s), 1045, 1047
fungal infections in, 1439
Hlepatoid tissue, 835
hereditary airlessness in, 1441
Hepatormegaly, in hyperadrenocorticism, 804
hyperadrenocorticisin in, 1441
Ilerhal medicine, 263
neoplasia in, 1432, 1441-1442, 1442
Hereditary lupoid dernatosis, of German shorthaired
notoedric mange in, 1440
pointers, 941, 948-949, 949
nutritional disorlers in, 1441
Herpesvirus infection, in cats, 171
ringtail in, 1441
Q-Herpesvirus infection, feline rhinotracheitis caused by,
syphilis in, 1439
524-525
traumatic alopecia and dermatitis in. 1440
pseudorabies caused by, 524
Haplonychia, definition of, 1193t
Heterodoxus spiniger, 487, 490
Happy Jack Kennel Dip. 424
lleterozygosity, loss of, 
IIard pad disease, 523, 523
Hexachlorophene,230
Harder gland(s), 1185
Hexadene, 917. See also Chtorhexidine, shuarmpoo.
Ilavana brown cat, grooming for, 215
HIexidine, 1035
Head, common and less common dermatoses of, 103t
Hexylresorcinol, 230
JFeartworm disease, 439, 643-644, 644, 645
IHidradenitis, 170, 171
Heat, body, conservation of, mechanisms for, 53-54
Himalayan cat, acromelanism in, 1012-1013
dissipation of, mechanisms of, 54
basal cell tumors in, 1261
production of, mechanisms for, 53-54
dermatophytosis in, 347
Heat, radiant, bums raused by, 1086-1087, 1087
Ehlers-Danlos syndroue in, 982
dermatitis caused by, 897-899
epitrichial cysts in, 1381
Hederiforn ending, See Tylotrich pad.
facial fold intertrigo in, 1107
Helminth parasite(s), 43l-440
griscofalvin side effects in, 357
Hemangioenrlathelioma, malignant. See Hemangiosarcornal
grooming for, 215
Hemangioma, 1297-1299
hair color of, 8
breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t
idiopathic facial dermatitis of, 920-921, 922
cause and pathogenesis of, 1297
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
clinical fndings in, 1297-1298
lumps in, 1237t
diagnosis of, 1298, 1298-1299
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 79t
glabrous, nonpigmented skin (actinic), breed(s) with
seborrhea in, 920
 predilection for, 1237t
systcmic lupus erythematosus in, 705
in cats, 528, 1286, 1297-1298
urticaria pigmentosa in, 997-998
in dogs, 1286, 1297
Histacalm, 229, 229t
in mice, 1444
Histamine, in atopy. 580
laser surgery for, 259, 260
in pruritus, 62, 62t
solar-related, risk fer, haircoat color and, 76
Histamine-releasing factors, 556
IIemangiopericytoma, 1281, 1286, 1302, 1302-1303,
Histiocyte(s), cutalleous, 39
1303
in dermatitis, 187, 187-188
breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t
Histiocytic sarcoma. See Sarcoma(s), histiocytic.
Hcmangiosarcoma, 1299- 1302
Histiocytoma, 1334, 1346, 1347-1350, 1348-1351. See
breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t
also Transmissible tenereal tumor.
cause and pathogenesis of, 1299
atypical. Sce Neuroendocrine tumor(s), primary cutane-
claw involvement in, 1198
Dus.
clinical findings in, 1299-1300
benign fbrous, 1354-1355, 1355, 1356
clinical management of, 1300-1302
breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t
diagnosis of, 1300, 1301
breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t
glabrous, nonpigmented skan (actinic), breed(s) with
eyelid, 1288
predilection for, 1237t
malignant fbrous,1348,1355-1357,1357-1358
in cats, 1286, 1299, 1300
HHistiocytosis, cutaneous, 1346, 1348, 1353-1354,
in dogs, 1299
1354
in mice, 1444
breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t
in rats, 1455
Langerhans' coll malignant, 1347
laser surgery for, 259
reactive,1347
risk for, haircoat color and, 76
Inalignant, 1346, 1347, 1348, 1350-1351, 1351
solar-induccd, 1299
breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t
visceral, cutaneous 1netastases of, 1373
systemic, 1346, 1348,1352-1353,1353
Hematopoiesis, canine cyclic, 1014
breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t
Index ·|493
Histoplasma capsulatum,337,400
Hycodan. See Hydrocodone.
culture of, 121
Iydra-Pearls cream rinse, 229t
stain for, 119
Hydration, of skin, 1025
Histoplasmosis, cause of, 400
Iydro B-1020, for acral lick dermatitis, 1063
clinical managemcnt of, 402-403
Hydrocarbon(s), 1028
diagnosis of, 401-402. 402
 chlorinated. antiparasitic therapy with, 424
in cats, clinical findings in, 401, 401
Hydrocodone, for acral lick dermatitis, 1063
in dogs, elinical findings in, 400-401, 402
Hydrocortisone, 232
in ferrets, 1419
in shampoo, 223
pathogenesis of, 400
Hydrogen peroxide, 231
Hives. See Urticaria.
Hydropic degeneration, epidermal, 143, 146
Hoeppli-Splendore phenomenon, 317
Hydro-Plus, for acral lick dcrmatitis, 1063
Holistic medicine, 263
Hydrotherapy, 220-221
Holoerine gland(s). Sce Sebaceous gland(s).
for bacterial infection, 280-281
Homeobox gene(s), 93
αx-Hydroxyacid(s) (2% to 10%), topical, 235
Homeopathy, 263
Hydroxychloroquine sulfate, 678
Ilookworm dermatitis, 431-432, 432, 433
for discoid lupus erythcmatosus, 716
claw involvement in, 1195
Hlydroxylysine, 36
Hordeum jubatun, 1091
4-Ilydroxyproline, 36
Hordeum murinum,1091
Hydroxyzine, 1057
Hordoleum (stye), 1186
 for acral lick dermatitis, 1061-1063
Horinonal hypersensitivity, 644-647, 646, 647
Hygroma, 1102
Hormone(s), and hair growth, 6. Scc also specifie hornone.
Hy-Lyt^efa, 229t, 917, 1028, 1035. 1113
Horm(s), cutane0us, 1244, 1392, 1394- 1396, 1396-1398
IIymenoptera, 505-506
feline lenkemia vinus and, 517
Hyperadrenocorticism,infections in,80304
in dogs, 1241, 1242
I lyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's disease, Cushing’s syn-
multiple, in cats, 528
drome), 278, 781, 782, 790
Horn cysts (keratin cysts), 156
alopccia in, 780
Hor pearls (squamous pearls), 156
differential diagnosis of, 804-805
Hormet(s), 505-506
iatrogenie, 799, 800
Horsefy, 502
in cats, 815-819
Hot spot(s). See Pyotraumatic dermatitis; Pyotraumatic fol-
adrenal function tests in, 816-818
liculitis.
causes and pathogenesis of, 815-816
Hound, Afghan, delayed gonaclal maturation in, 844
clinical features of, 802, 816, 817
demodicosis in, 461
clinical management of, 818-819
eyelid tumor in, 1188
diagnosis of, 816-818
grooming of, 214
histopathology of, 816
hypoandrogenism in, 837
in dogs, 158, 176, 798-815
hypothyroidism in, 852
causes of, 799
nasal depigmentation in, 1017
dfferentiation of, tests for,810
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastirc
clinical features of, 800-804, 801-803, 840
lumps in, 1237t
clinical management ol, 810-815
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 77t
diagnosis of, 804-810, 807-808
tricholemmoma in, 1264
tests for. 809-810
Basset, actinic keratoses in, 1391
iatrogenic, management of. 815
black hair follicular dysplasia in, 962
pathogencsis of, 799
congenital hypotrichosis in, 958
pihuitary-dependent, 799
henangiosarcoimas in, 1299
 clinical manageincnt of, 811-814
immunodeficiency in, 279t
prognosis for, 810
lyuphonas in, 1331
in ferrets, 1421-1424, 1422-1423
Malassezia dermatitis in, 364, 365
in hamsters, 1441
Mycobacteriurn wvium infection in, 315
red hair in, 1022
pododerinatitis in, 305
Hyperandrogenism, in male dogs, 834-836, 835, 836,
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
837
lumps in, 1237t, 1238t
Hypereosinophilie syndrome, feline, 1133-1135, 1134-
nisk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 77t
1135, 1187
seborrhea in, 913, 915, 1032
Hyperestrogenism, 781, 795-796
trichoepithelioma in,1263
in female animals, 817, 829-831, 830, 831
Humectant(s), 227, 1028
in ferrets, 1424-1425, 1425
Humilac, 235
red hair jn, 1022
Humoral immumity, 558-560
Hyperglucocorticoidism, 252, 789-790, 1399
Husky, Siberian. See Siberian husky.
diagmosis of, 805
Hutch bum, 1450
Hypergranulosis, 134, 137
Hyaline body(ies). See Apoptotic body(ies).
Hyperkeratosis, 132-133, 133-136, 1025
Ilyalinizatiou, uf derrnal collagen, 156157
basketweave, 132, 134
Hyalohyphomycosis, definition of, 376-377
compact,132,134
Hyaluronate, 38
epidermal, 180
Hyaluronic acid、 38
fotpad, 930, 935, 935-936, 1114-1115
1494 · Index
Hyperkeratosis (Continued)
Hypersensitivity (Continued)
laminated, 132, 134
ype IV (cell-mediated, delayed), 561, 562-563
nasal, 936
Hyperthermia, for squanous cell carcinorna, 1257
orthokeratotie (anuclear), 132, 132, 1025
therapeutic use of, 237-238
diffuse, with perivascular dermatitis, 178-179
Hyperthyroidisun, feline, 859. 867, 867-868
disropronat fliuar,133136
Hypertrichosis, definition of, 85
with perivascular dermatitis, 179
unilateral, 5
parakeratotie (nucleated,132133,13,1025
Jlypervitaninosis A, 1116
diffuse, with perivascular dermalitis, 179
Hypha/hyphae, 336
focal, overlyiung epidermal papillae,133135
cenocytic,336
focal, with perivascular dermatitis, 179
examination for, 119, 121
Hypcrmclanosis. See fiyperpigmentation.
septate,336
Hyperonychiadelinition o,1193
sparsely septate,336
Hyperpigmentation, 86, 151-152, 153, 236, 1006-1013
spiral, 124, 124
acquired, 1009-1013
Hyphomyces destruens. See: Pythium insidiosum.
congenital and hereditary, 975-977
Hyphomycosis. See Pythiosis.
drug-induced, 1011-1012
Hypoandrogenism, 830, 837-838, 838
genetic,1006-1009
Hypoderma spp, in ferrets, 1419
honmone-associated, 1011
Hypodernis. See Subcutis.
in feline acromelanmism, 1012- 1013
Hypogonadism, breed(s) with predilection for, 75
in pigmented tumors, 1013, 1013
definition of, 833
papillomavirus-associated, 1012, 1013
in intact femalc animals, 830, 833-834
postinfammatory,96,151-152,1009-1011、1011
in intact male animals, 842, 843-845
Hlyperplasia, epidermal, 134-135, 138, 139, 180
Hypogranulosis, 134
irregular,134-135
Hypokeratosis, 13 134, 1025
papillated, 135, 139
Hypouelanosis. Sce Hypopigmentator.
pseuclocarcinomatous,135,139
Hypophysectomy, in dogs, 811
psoriasifonn, 135, 138
Hypoplysis funetional anatomy of, 780781
regular, 135, 138
Hyppigmentation,1014-1021
Hyperprolactinemia, 798
acquired,1019-1021
Hypersensitivity, and mucinosis, 1175
breed-associated, suspect genetic, 1014-1019
antidepressarnits for, 569-570
canine, 1008-1009
antihistamines fo1, 567-569, 569t
congenital and hereditary, 975
arachnid,636-642
drug-related, 1020, 1020
bactenial, 637, 647-650, 649
genetic,1014
contact. See Contuct hypersensitivity (allergic contact
idiopathic, 1008, 1021, 1021
(dermatitis).
in leishmaniasis, 1019, 1019-1020
cutaneous basophil, 562
in meoplasia, 1008, 1021
cyelosporine for, 570-571
metabolic, 1020
Hca bitc. See Flea btte hypersensitiuity.
mucocutaneous,1008-1009,1017-1018
food. See Food hypersensilicily.
nasal, 1016-1017
foot licking in, 1066
seasonal, 1017
fungal, 650
 postinflammalory, 1019, 1019-1020
hornonal, 644-647
Hypopigmentation (hypomelanosis), 96, 152-154, 154
in clermatophytosis, 341-342
Hypopituitarism, 781, 818
insect, 198, 486-487, 636-642. See also Flea bite hyper-
Iypoplasia,epiermal, 131
sensiticity; Mosquito bite hypersensitivity:Tick bite
Hyposensitization for canine atpy, 01, 
hypersersitioity.
for feline atopy, 608, 6091
intestinal parasite, 642-643
Hyposomatotrapism (psendo-Cushing's syndrome, GHI-e-
mosquito bite, feline, 635-636, 637, 638
sponsive deruatosis), 794-795
nonsteroidal anti-inffammatory agents for, 566-567
adult-onset, breeds) with predilection for 75
otitis extema caused by, 1210-1211, 1211-1212
in dogs, 203
parasitie, 627-644. Scc also specific parasite.
in mature dog, 817, 822-824, 823-825
skin disorders related to, 571-650. See also specinc dis-
Hypothalamus, functional anatomy of, 780-781
order.
Hypothyroidism, 278, 781, 782, 783
storage mite-related, 640
alopecia in, 780
systemic glhucocorticoids for, 570
canine, 167, 851-865
therapy for, 563-571
cause and pathogenesis of, 851-852
avoidance as, 563, 595-597
clinical features of,852-860,854-860
fatty acids in, 564-566
clinical management of, 863-865
regimens for,563.563t
congenital, 858-860
topical,563-564
diagnosis of, 859, 860-863
tick bite, 635
secondary, 852
to Malassexia antigens, 364, 650
treatiment of, 864
type I (anaphylactic, immediate), 561-562
feline, 865-866, 866
late-phase, 562
immune-mediated,789
type II (cytotoxie), 561, 562
in ferrets, 1426
type I1I (iumune complex),561, 562
otitis exterma in, 1210-1211
Index * 1495
Hypothyroidism (Continued)
 Immunoperoxidase testing, in immune-mediated skin dis-
 red hair in, 1022
easc,668
socondary,789
Immunoregulin,286-287
skin changes in, 783-784
Immunosuppressive agent(s), 671 -678, 672t
tertiary, 789
Inpetigo, 288-290, 289, 290
Hypotrichosis, congenital, definition of, 958
bullous, 289, 290
in cats, 959, 960-962
staphylococcal.288
in dogs, 954, 958-959, 959, 960
in dogs, 290
definition of, 85
Iupression smear(s), for Malassezir spp., 368
tardive,965-974
technique for, 112-115, 116-117
luran. See Azathioprine.
In situ hyhridization, 1239
In vitro lymphocyte blastogenesis (IVLB) test, 463-464
Ice, antipruritic therapy with, 229t
Inca hairless dog, 957
Ichthyosis, 1029
India ink, for fungal staining, 119
canine, 914-915
Indolent ulcer, feline, 1142, 1148-1149, 1149
causc and pathogenesis of, 922-923
Indole-5,6-quinone, 17
clinical fcatures of, 914, 923, 924
Infection(s), bacterial. See Bacterial infection(s).
clinical management of, 242, 243, 924-925
fungal. See Fungal infection(s).
dlefinitton of, 922
diagnosis of, 923-924, 925
Inhalant dermatitis, allergic. See Alopy.
Harlequin, 31
Tnhibin, 795
hypergranulosis in, 137
Injection site reaction(s), 725, 726
X-linked, 31
canninte, 896
Iggo dome. See Tylotrich pad.
drug-induced 72l. 722t
Iggu-Pinkus dome. See Tylotrich pad.
feline, 902
IGR(s) (insect growth regulators), 495
in ferrets, 1426
Inaverol. See Enilconazole rinse.
Insect(s), 486-500
Imidacloprid, 423, 497. 498
hyperscnsitivity to, 196, 486-487, 636-642. See also
antiparasitie therapy with, 426
Imidazole, antifungal therapy with, 411
titity; Tick bite hypersensitivity.
topical, 409
Inseet developuent inhibitor(s), systemie, antiparasitic
Jmipranine, 1057
therapy with, 430
Immune complex(es), 559
lusect growth regulators (1GRs), 495
deposition of, in cutaneous lupus erythenmatosus, 702
antiparasitic therapy with, 426
vasculitis caused by, in micc, 1444
Jnsecticide(s), regulation of, 424
Immune system, of skin. See Skin immune system.
Insulin hypersensitivity, in pituitary dwarfism, 821
Immune-mediated skin disease, 667--769. See also specific
Insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1), 795
disease.
in pituitary dwarfism, 821
claw involvement in, 1195, 1196-1197
Integrin(s), fonctions of, 13- 14
clinical managemicnt of, 244
in morphogenesis of skin appcndagcs, 3
diagnosis of, 667-671
in stratum basale, 13
primary (antoimmune),667
subunis of, 13
secondary, 667
Interceptor. Scc Milhemycin.
treatment of, 671-678
Intc rdigital pyoclermma (pododermatitis). See Pododermati.
Immunocytochemistry, 202-204, 204t
L&s.
Immunodeficiency, aequired, 278
Interface dlermatitis, drug-induced, 729
and canine demodicosis, 463-464
hydropic, 180. 181
and leishmaniasis, 535
lichenoid, 180, 181
in German shepherds, 307, 308
Interferon(s), therapy with, 252-253
management of, 286
α-lnterferon, for feline rhinotracheitis, 525
primary, 278, 279t
hurman recombinant, for recurrent bacterial infections.
Immunofluorescence testing. 202
286
in immune-mexliated skin dlisease, 668-671, 669-670
Intemational Veterinary Acupuncture Society, 263
 in systemic lupus erythematosus, 707, 709- 710
Interrupt, 494
salt-split skin for, 694
Interstitial ecell turmor(s), 837, 838, 843
Inmunoglobuln(9),epieral, 31,32
Interstitial dermatitis, 182-184, 183, 184
in cenamen, 1204
drug-induced, 729
in pemphigus complex, 680
Intertrigo,288, 1097, 11051108, 1106
in vascnlar endothelium, 56
body fold, 1106, 1107
lmmunoglobulin E, 561-562, 574-577
facial fold, 1097, 1107
Immunoglobulin gene superfamily, 545
lip fold, 1106, 1107
Innunohistochemistry, in immune-mediated skin disease.
tail fold, 1106, 1107
668
vulvar fold, 1106, 1107
lnmunologic disorder(s), 992-995
 Intestinal parasite hypcrscnsitivity, 642-643
Immunomodulation, for chronic recurrent baeterial infec-
Iutradermal allergy testing, See Allergy test(s), intraderal.
tions,286-287
Intrinsie factors, in hair cycle, 5-6
for dogs with immunodeficieney, 286
Intron-A, 233
1496·Index
Invisible dernatosis, 199-201
Keeshond (Continued)
Involucrin, 28
risk for neoplastic skin rlisorders and non-neoplastic
formation of, 29
lumps in, 1237t
lodide(s), antifungal therapy with, 414
nisk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 80t
lodine, in shampoo, 223
KeraSolv, 226, 1027-1028
in lopieal therapy, 230-231
Keratin, 20-22, 29, 48, 220
lodism, 414
hard, 29
lodophor(s), 231
in epidermal barrier function, 31
Irish sctter. Sec Setter, Irish.
soft, 29
Irish terier. See Terrier, Irish.
Keratinase, fromn Microsporun canis, 341
Irish water spaniel. See Spaniel, Irsh water.
Keratinization, defects of, 913-949, 1025-1053
Irish wolfhound. See Wolfhound, Irish.
drug-induced,1052,1052-1053
Isodesmosine, 37
ear involvemcnt in, 1205, 1212
Isothiocyanate(s), 680
in mice, 1444
Isotretinoin, 241-242
disorders of, 31
adverse effects and side effects of, 1029
epidermal, 29
antiseborrheic therapy with, 919, 1029
follicular, 48
dosage and administration of, 242-243
infundibular, 48
for epidermal dysplasia in West Highland white terriers,
inncr root sheath and hair shaft mcdullary, 48
929
trichilemmal, 11, 48
indications for, 242, 1029
excessive, 166, 167, 790
otic therapy with, 1229-1230
trichogenic, 48
Isoxsuprine, for Raynaud-like disease in dogs, 1195
Keratinocyte(s), acantholytic, 143, 155
Itching. See Pruritus.
adhesion of, 19, 22t
Itraconazole, adverse effects and side effects of, 4ll, 413,
antimierobial peptides synthesized by, 33
721,743, 753
apoptotic, 139-140, 740
antifungal therapy with, 357, 410, 411, 413
changes in,in cutaneous lupus erthenatosus,702
anti-inflammatory effects of, 413
in erythema muliforme, 731-732
dosage and adninistration of, 357t
culturcd, 31
imunornodulatory effects of,413
cutaneous nerves and, 59
otic therapy with, 1229
functions of, 26, 29
Ivermectin, 428, 445
immunohistochemistry of, 20-22
adverse effects and side effects of, 428-429
immunologie functions of, 550-551
anti-infammatory properties of, 429
in epidermal immunity, 26
for canine demodicosis, 472, 473
phagocytie functions of, 22
for feline demodicosis, 476
ultrastructure of, 20, 23
for scabies, 483, 484
Keratinosome(s), 22
inl sinall animals, dosagc and administration of, 1418t
Keratoacanthoma, 1029, 1241, 1248-1249, 1249-1250
otic therapy with, 1229
breed(s) with preclilection for, 1237t
regulation of, 424
clinical management of, 242
systemic, antiparasitic therapy with,429
in hamsters, 1442
toxicosis, in cats, 429
in rats,1455
in dogs, 428-429
subumgual, 1198
Ivomec. See Iternectin.
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca, 283, 919
Ixodes spp., Lyme horreliosis transinission by, 326
treatment of, 674
Ixodes darnmini, 444
Keratogenesis, 29-31
Ixodes ricinus, 444
Keratohyalin, synthesis of, 29
Ixodes scapularis, 444
Keratohyalin gramule(s), 48
epidermal, 11
from normal skin, 115, 116
Jack Russell terrier. See Terrier, Jock Russell.
functions of, 26
Jejunal adenocarcinoma, cutaneous metastases of, 1373-
morphology of, 26-27
1374
Keratolinin, 28
Juvenile cellulitis. See Cellulitis, canine jucenile.
Keratolytic agent(s), anfiseborrheie therapy with, 1026-
Juvenile hormone analog(s), in insect control, 426
1028
Juvenile pyoderma. See Cellulitis, canine juvenile.
Juvenile sterile granulomatous dermatitis and lymphadeni-
1028
tis.See Celulitis, canine juvenile.
Keratosis, 1390-1396
Juvenoid(s),426
actinic, 1391-1392, 1393, 1394
lichenoid, 1391-1394, 1392-1393, 1395
periocular, 1394, 1396
Karyolysis, definition of, 136
seborrheic, 1392, 1394, 1395
Karyorrhexs, definition ol, 136
Kenion, 650
Keeshond adrenal hypeplasialike syndrome in, 847
dermatophytic, 343, 344-345, 351
adult-onset hyposomatotropism in, 822
Kerry blue terrier. See Terrier, Kerry blue.
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in, 982
Ketoconazole, adverse effects and side effects ol, 4ll, 412
hypogoniadisn in, 844-845
antifungal therapy with, 357, 410, 411-413
keratoacanthoma in, 1248
dosage and adlministration of, 357t
Index · 1497
Ketoconazole: (Continued)
Leishmaniasis (Continued)
drug interactions with, 412
cytologic diagnosis of, 117
for adrenal neoplasia, 815
hypopigmentation in, 1019, 1019-1020
for canine hyperadrenocorticism, 812
in humans, 534
for epidermaf tysplasia in West Highland while terriers,
visceral, 195, 537, 538
929
Lentiginosis profusa, 1006
Lentigo, 87, 96, 1006, 1007
for leishmaniasis,538
Lentigo sinplex in orange cats, 1006- 1007, 1008, 1009
hypomelanosis caused by, 1020
Leprosy, canine, 316-319
in shampoo, 223
feline, 315-316, 317, 318
otic therapy with、 1229
in rats, 1452
Klebsiela spp., in mice, 1442
Leptospirosis, 1089
Kebsiella pneumoniae, infection by, in rats, 1452
Lesion(s). See Skin lesion(s).
KOH, for kerahin clearance, in fungal diagnosis, 120
I eukemia, skin lesions of, 1374-1375
Koilocytosis, 142-143, 145
Leukemia cutis, 1374
 Komondor, grooming of, 214
Leukeran. See Chlorambuci.
Korat cat, grooning for, 215
Leukocytoclastic vasculitis, 181- 182, 182
Kuvasz, dermatomyositis in, 940
Leukoderma, 96, 975, 1017-1018, 1021
I eukonychia, definition of, 1193t
Leukotnichia, 96, 975, 1021
Labiogram(s), 3
in radliation darmage, 1088, 1088
1aboratory test(s), 94-131
periocular, 1021, 1022
Labrador retricver. See Retrieter, Iabrador.
Leukotriene(s), 560
Lacrimal gland(s), 1185
effects of, con skin, 208
Lactic acid, 235, 1028
in pruritus, 62, 62t
Levamisole, adiverse effects and side effects of, 286, 721,
I acunae. See Cleft(s).
735
Lagochiascaris major, in cats and dogs, 440, 442
for recurrent bacterial infections, 286
Lamellar body(ics), 1025
for systemice lupus erythematosus, 711
Lamellar grannle(s), 29-30, 30
Levothyroxine, for hypothyroidism, in cats, 866
Lamina densa (basal lamina), of basement membrane zone,
in'dogs, 862-865
34, 35
Lhasa apso, atopy in, 581
Lanina fbrorcticularis, of basement membrane zone. See
congenital hypotrichosis in, 958
Subiamina densa area (lamina fibroreticularis).
food hypersesitvity in,618
Lamina lucida (lamina rara), of basement membrane zone,
glueocorticoid-induced reaction in, 246-247
34,35
juvenile cellulitis in, 1213
Lamina rara, of basement mernbrane zone. See Lamina
keratoacanthoma in, 1248
lucida (lamina rara).
Malassezia derinatitis in, 348-349
Laminin, 13, 36t
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
in cell type identification, 204t
lunps in, 1237t
Lamisil. See Terbinafine.
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 80t
[angerhans' cel(s), 10, 2-25, 24, 25
Lice. See Louse/lice.
age-related changes in,64
L ichenification, 87, 99
development of, 2
Lichenoid dermatosis, 1126-1127, 1130-1132, 1132
functions of, 24, 26
l ichcnoid lesion(s), drug-induced, in cats, 723t
histochemistry of, 24
in dogs, 722t
inmunologic functions of, 551-552
lidocaine, advcrsc cffects and side effects of, in kittens
immunophenotype of, 24
 and puppies, 129
in epidermal inmunity, 26
effects of, on microorganisns, 128
in hair follicle, 48
precautions with, 129
Langerhans' granule(s). See Birbeck's granule(s).
Light trap(s), for Hca control, 496
Langer's line(s), 9
Lime sulfur, 233-234
Lanolin, 1028
in small arinals, dosage and administration of, 1418t
Lamugo hair, 4, 41
Lime sulfur rinse, 234. 356, 356l, 427
Laser Doppler flowmety, 57-58
antifungal therapy with, 410
Iaser surgery, 259, 260
lor feline demodicosis, 475, 476
Laser therapy, for aeral lick dermatis, 1064
for scabies, 482
for squarnous cell carcinoma, 1357
I)-Limonene, antiparasitic therapy with, 425
Lathyrisn, 37
Lincomycin, efcacy of, against Staphylococcus interme-
Latrodectus spp,484485
dius,282
Latrodectus bishopi,484
resistance to, 282
Latrodectus rmactans,484
systemic, dosage of, 284t
LeHunomide, for graft-versus-host disease, 720
Lineosarnide(s), efficacy of, against staphylococcal infection,
immunosupprossive therapy with,674-675
283
Leg(s), common and less common dermatoses of, 105t
resistance to,282
Leiomyoma, 1312-1313, 1313, 1314t
systermic, for bacterial infections, 281.
I eiomyosarcona, 1312-1313
Lindane dip, 424
Leishmaniasis, 278, 530-531, 534-538, 535-537
Linear granuloma. See Eosinophilic granuloma, feline.
1498 · Indcx
Linear IgA bullous dlermatosis, 694, 701
Lupus erythematosus (Continued)
Linear IgA pustular derrmatosis, canine, 748, 756, 756
forms of, 702
Linear preputial derrnatosis, 830, 839, 839
histopathology of, 714-716, 715
Linkin, 36t
in cats, 714, 714
Linognathus setosus,487,489,490
in dogs,712-714,713,1187
Linoleire acidl, 208-209, 235, 1113
in humans, 707
topical therapy with,209
pathogenesis of, 702
Linolenic acid,208,239.1113
pigmentary ineontinence in,163
Liothyronine,for hypothyroidisn, in cats,866
vesicular, 98, 717, 946-947
in dogs,862-863
drug-induced, 704
Lip(s), common and less common dermatoses of, 103t
in dogs, 7224.
hypopigmentation of, congenital, 1018
in cats, 696-697, 707, 708-709
upper, iipat uativ t of, i dg,1
clinical fealures of, 696, 705
Lip fold intertrigo, 1106, 1107
in dogs, 172, 173, 696-697, 707, 708-709
Lipid(s), dermal deposits of, 160, 161
cause and pathogcncsis of, 704-705
epidermal.28-31.51
clinical features of, 696, 705
intercellular, 29-30
diagnostic eriteria for, 710t, 710-711
Lipocortin-1, 245
in humans,702-704
Lipocyte(s), 63, 1156
panniculitis of, 197
development of, 2
pigmentary incontinence in, 163
Lipoma(s), 1306, 1308-1311, 1309-1311
syste1mic, 702, 704-711
breed(s) with prcxlileetion for, 1237t
bullous. 694
in rats, 1455
causes of, 13
infltrative,1308-1309
cause and pathogenesis of, 704-705
Lipomatosis, difuse, idiopathic,1173,11731175
clinical features of, 696, 705
Liposarcoma, 1281, 1311-1312, 1312
clinical management of. 711
breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t
dermatohistopathology of,707,708709
in cats, 528
dliaguosis of, 142, 705-711
sternal,cutaneous metastases of, 1373
in cats, 696-697,707,708-709
β-Lipotropie hormone (β-lipotropin), 17
inn dogs, 172, 173, 696-697, 707, 708-709
Listeria momocytogenes,327
diagnostic criteria for, 710t, 710-711
Listeriosis, 327-328
in humans, 707, 709-710
Jistrophorus (Leporacarus) gibbus, 1434-1435
prognosis for, 711
in rabbits, 1448-1449
Iupus profundus, 197
Local anesthctic(s), antipruritie therapy with, 230
Luteinizing hormone (LH), 781, 796, 998
for pnuritus, 228
Lutropin. Sec Luteinizing hormwne (LH).
Lone Star tick(s), 444
Lutzomyia spp., 534
Longhaired cat(s), 215
Lyell's syndrome. See Toxic epidermual necrolysis.
Loricrin, 28
LymDyp. See Litme sulfur rinise.
functions of, 26-27
Lyine borreliosis, 326-327
Loshed, 894
Lymph vessel(s), cutaneous, 58, 59
Lotion(s), 218t,224-225
Lymphangioma, 1305,1306
Lotrinin. See Clotrimazole.
Lyinphangiosarcoma, 1305-1308, 1306-1308
Lotrisone. See Clotrimazole/betamethasone.
in cats, 1305, 1306
Louse/lice. See also Pediculosis.
in dogs, 1305
characteristics of, 487
Lymphede1ma, 990-992
hunan pubic, 487
cause aud pathogenesis of,990
nits, 108,112, 488
clinical features of, 988-989, 990-991, 991
on guinea pigs, 1433, 1434
clinical managemcnt of, 992
on mice,1443
delinition of, 990
on rabbits, 1449
dliagnosis of, 991, 991-992, 992
on rats, 1453
 in vasculitis, 746
Loxosceles spp, 484485
Lyinphocyte(s), cutaneous, 39
Loxosceles reclusa, 484
functions of, 552-553
Loxosceles unicolor, 484
in cytologic diagnosis, 114, 118t
Lufeneron, 430, 499
I ymphocytic mural folliculitis, idiopathic, of cats, 907-909,
Lumpy jaw, in ferrets, 1417
016-206
Lupoid onychodystrophy, 745
Lymphocytic (Hashimoto's) thyroiditis, 851-852
symmetric, 1195-1198, 1196-1197
tests for, 788-789
Lupus erythematosus, 701-717
Lymphohistiocytic infiltration, in cutancous lupus crythe-
classification of, 701-702, 703t
matosus, 702
cutaneous (discoid), 712-716
Lynphoid nodules, 174, 175
canine vesicular, 707
Lymphokine(s), 543
cause and pathogenesis of. 712
Lymphoma, I330- 1342. See also Neuroendocrine tumor(s).
characteristics of,702
primary cutaneous.
clinical features of, 712-714, 713, 714, 1187
and pseudolymphoma, differentiation of, histologic crite-
clinical management of, 716
ria for, 1341-1342, 1343t
exfoliative, 707, 717
B cell, 1331
Index · 1499
Lymphona (Continuerd)
Malassezia spp. (Conlinued)
breed(s) with prcdlction for 1237t
superficial inycoses caused by, 339. See also Malassezid
epitheliotropic1021,1029,1331,1331,1333130,
dermatitis.
1334-1339, 1347
Matassezid canis. See Malassezia puchylernatis.
clinical management of, 242, 244
Malassezia dermatitis, 363-374, 1060-1061
drug-induced, 725
acanthosis nigricans and, 976
in cats, 910
acrodermatitis and, 993
in hamsters, 1432, 1441, 1442
atopy and. See Atopy.
in mice, 1444
cause of, 363
of eyelid, 1188, 1189
claw involveucnt in, 1195
in mice, 1444
clinical management of, 371-374
in rabbits, 1451, 1452
diagnosis of, 119-121, 366-371, 369-373
largo-cell, 1331
epidermal dysplasia in West Highland white teriers and.
nonepitheliotropic, 1324, 1331-1333, 1332
928-929
T cell, 1331
follicular parakeratosis and, 926, 927
Lymnphomatoid granulomatosis, 1340, 1341, 1342
foot licking in, 1066
Lymphomatosis.Sce Lymphoma.
hypothyroidism and, 853-855
Lymphosarcoma. See also Lynphona.
in cats, lnical fndngs in, 366,368
claw involvement in, 1198
in dogs, 370-372
in cats, 528
clinical findings in, 348-349, 365-366, 367
in dogs, cytologic diaynosis of, 114
dermatohistopathology of, 158
transmissible, See Transmissible cenereal tumor.
 pigmentary incontinence in, 163
Lynxacarus radocsky, 446. 447. See also Cat fur mite(s).
in guinea pigs, 1431
1.ysine, deficiency of, 1020
pathogenesis of, 363-365
for feline rhinotracheitis, 525
pododermatitis caused by, 305
1.ysosomal hydrolase(s), 37
rerdl/hrown claws in, 1022
Lysozyme, in cell type identification, 204t
rinses for, 410
risk faclors for, 364-365
seborrhca and, 915-916, 918, 1030, 1034,
MacKenzie (toothbmsh) specimen colleetion inethod,
1035
120
601 'oy i erdo
Maeroconidia, collection of, 122
zine-responsive dermatosis and, 1120
 in fungal identifieation, 122
zoonotic aspects of 366
Macrolide antibiotic(s), anti-inflamrmatory and irnmuno-
Malussezia furfur, 363, 364
 modulatory properlies of, 285
Malasseria globosa, 363
resistance to, 282
Malassezia obtusa,363
systemic, for bacterial infections, 281
Malassexia otitis externa, 366
Macronychia, definition of, 1193t
 pathogenesis of, 364
Macrophage(s), in cytologic dliagnosis, 113, 118t
Malassezia pachydermatis, and Staphylococcus aureus, syn-
tissue, funetions of, 553
eryis1 of, 33
Macule(s), 86, 87
as resident fora, in dogs, 34
erythematous, 86
characteristics of, 363
Maculopapular (Imorbilliforrm) lesion(s), drug-induced, in
culture of, 371
cats, 723t
cytologic examination for, 369, 369
in dogs. 722t
diagnosis of, 114, 117, 119-121
Madurella grisea, 377
enzymatic properties of, 364
Maduromycosis, 377
in anal sacs, 1201
Maggot(s). See Myiasis.
in hurmans, 366
Magnesium ufte,forbactrl infecton,
in morumal Hora, of cats and clogs, 364
Major histocompatibility complex (MHC), 545-548
in surface debris, 155
Malamute, chondrodysplasia in, 820
otitis extema caused by, 1213-1215
demodicosis in, 461
populations of, variability in, 370
folicular dysplasia in, 971
public health considerations with, 1215
hypogonadism in, 844
strains (sequevars) of, 363-364
hypothyroidlism in, 852
Malassezia paronychia, 189
periocular dernatosis in, 1286
Malassexia restricta, 363
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
Malassezia slooffae,363
lumps in, 1237t
Malassezia sympodialis, 363, 366
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 80t 
cytologie exarnination for,369
wooly, male hypogonadism in, 842
Malattion,425
zine-responsive dennatosis in, 1119, 1199
for feline demodicosis, 475
Malassexia spp., cylologic cxamination for, 366-370
Male ferminizing syncrome, idiopathic, 851
in cats, 363
Malignant fibrous histiocytoma, 1281
lipid-dependent, 363, 371
in rats,1455
non- lipid-dependent, 363, 371
Mallophaga. characteristics of, 487,489, 490
otitis exterma caused by,1213-1215, 1214t
Maltesc dilution, 968
otitis media caused by, 1214t 
and feline hair color, 9
skin scrapings for, 366-368
hair in, 108, 110
1500 · Index
Mammary adenocarcinoma, 1021
Megestrol acetate (Continuedl)
cutaneous metastases of, 1366, 1373
for feline acquired synmetric alopecia, 902
Mammotroph(s), 781
for leline psychogenic dermatitis, 1070
Manchester terrier. See Terrier, Manchester.
Meghumine antimonate, therapy with, for leishinauiasis.
Mange, demodectic. See Demodicosis.
538
follicular. See Demodicosis.
Meibomian gland(s), 1185
notoedric. See also Scabies, feline.
Meissner's corpuscle, innervation of, 59, 61,62
in hamsters, 1440
otodectic. 451, 452
Melanin, 96, 1005
in ferrets, 1419
photoprotective effects of, 16
psoroptic, in rabbits, 1447, 1448
types of, 16-17
red, See Demodicosis.
Melanin granule(s), epidermal, 11, 16, 16
sarcoptic. See also Scabies, canine.
from normal skin, 115, 116
in ferrets, 1419, 1420
in sebaceous glands, 152, 153
Mannan, 336, 341
Melanization, regulation of, 1005
Manx cal, grooming for, 215
α-Melanocortin (α-MSH), actions of, 17
tail fold intertrigo in, 1107
Melanocyte(s), 10, 14-19
Marbofoxacin, otie therapy with, 1229
age-related changes in, 64
systemic, dlosage of, 284t
and keratinocytes, interaction of, 16, 17
Masson trichoue stain, staining characteristies of various
appearance of, 14, 15
substances with, 130t
cell surface receptors on, 17
Mast cell(s), cutaneous nerves and, 59
dendritic, 15
dermal, 39,40
dermal,39
epidennal,156,157,158
development of, 2
fixation of, 39
epidernal, 14,15
functious of, 553-556, 554
follicular, 14
in cytologic diagnosis, 114, 118t
functions of, 16
perivascular, 57
ultrastmcturc of, 16, 18
staining of, 39
Melanoeytoma, 1013, 1348, 1359, 1360, 1361
subtypcs of, in dogs, 39
dermmal, 96
Mast cell mediator(s). 553-556, 555t
in cats, 174
Mast cell tumor(s), 1320- 1330
in gerbils, 1429-1430
breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t
in hamsters, 1441
cause and pathogenesis of, 1320
pilar neurocristic, 1359, 1361
claw involvement in, 1198
Melanoderma.See Hyperpignentation.
clinical fndings in, 1320-1323
Melanodema and alopecia, in Yorkshire teriers. 964, 974
clinical management of 1323-1330, 1328, 1329
973,975
by stagc, 1325, 1329t
Melanogenesis, 17, 18
diagmosis of,1323,13261328,1328t,1329t
Melanoma, 1013, 1359, 1361-1364, 1363, 1364
histologic classifcation of, 1325, 1329t
claw involvement in, 1198
in cats, 1322-1323.1324,1325, 1326, 1328
clear cell(ballon cell), 1363
in dogs,1306, 1320-1322, 1321, 1322,1326-1327
in cats, 528, 1362, 1362, 1363, 1363, 1364
cytologic diagnosis of, 114
in dogs. 1361, 1361-1362, 1362, 1363
in mice, 1444
in gerbils, 1429-1430
of cyelid, 1188,1189
in hamsters, 1441
staging of, 1325, 1329t
in mice, 1444
Mastif,bull, congenita hypothyridism in, 852
in rabbits, 1451
follicular dysplasia in, 971
in rats, 1455
vitiligo in, 1015
oral, cntaneous metastases of, 1373
muzzle foliculitis and furunculosis in, 304
pilar neurocristie, 1362-1363
Ncapolitan, undifferentiated sarcoma in, 1319
signet-ring, 1363
pododermatitis in, 305
subungual, 1361
Mastitis, 302
Melanophage(s). 162- 163
Mat(s), in haircoat, 213
Melanosis, macular, in dogs, 837, 839-840
Matin de Naples, cutis laxa in, 987
perifollicular. 168, 169, 195
Max Joseph spaces, 147
sebaceous gland, 170
Mechanoreceptor(s), 61, 62
Melanosome(s), 17, 1005
 Medical history, in diagnosis, 82-84
stages of, 18-19
Medroxyprogesterone acetate, for feline acquired synmet-
Melanotrichia, 96
ric alopccia, 902
drug-induced, 1011-1012
therapy with, for feline psychogenic dermatitis, 1070
hormone-associated, 1011, 1012
in pituitary dwarfism, 821-822
postinfammatory, 1008-1009, 1010-1011
Medulla, of hair shaft, 39, 41, 44, 108, 110
Melatonin,1005
Medullary trichomalacia, 895, 951-953, 952, 953
formulations of, 254
Megace. See. Megestrol acetate.
therapy with, 253-254
Megestrol acctate, therapy with, for acral lick dematitis.
for seasonal fank alopecia, 893
1063
Melioidosis, 328
Index ·1501
Membrana nicttans, suprfcial glan f, 1185
Microsporum audouini (Continued)
Membrane-coating granules, 22
 in rahbits, 1446
Meningioma, 1296
Wood's lamp examination for, 119, 347-349
Menthol, antipruritic therapy with, 229-230
Microsporu canis, as resident fora, in cats, 33
Merial. See Fipronil.
 cattery and multiple-cat household dermatophytosis
Merkel cell tumor(s), 1369- 1370, 1370
caused by, 358
Merkel's cels), 10, 1369, 1371
prevention of, 361
functions rof, 19
response to treatiment in, monitoring of, 361
of tylotrich pad, 19, 20, 45, 46
characteristics of, 339
ultrastrueture of, 19, 21
clinical management of, 234
Mesaagen, 46
in kittens only, 360-361
Metabolie disease, 992-995. See also specific disorder.
colonies of, morphology of, 122, 123
Metabolic epiderimal necrosis, 868
culture of, 120, 349
Metanagen, 46
diagnostic criteria for, 122
Metaplasia, defnition of, 174
environnental decontamination for, 359-360
Metatarsal fistulation, 980, 985-986, 986, 1157
chzyinatic propertics of, 341
Methimazole, adverse effects and side effects of, 723-725
exaimination for, 119, 120, 121
Methoprene, 426, 495, 498
identifieation of 122
 Methotrexate, antiseborrheic effects of, 920
in cats, 338
for graft-versus-host dliscasc, 720
asyrnptomatic cariage of, 340-341
Methoxychlor llea and tick powders, 424
clinical findings in, 342, 343-347, 346
Methylene blue, 116
clinical manageinent of, 409
Methylprednisolone, injectable, 247t
experimental models of,341
Methylprcdnisolone acctate, 247, 250
histopathology of, 349,351, 352
for aeral lick derumatitis, 1063
hypersensitivity reaction to, 341-342
Methyltestosterone, for hypoancdrogenisin, 838
incidence of, 339
Meticorten. See Prednisone, injectable.
infanmatory response to, 341
Metronidazole, for leishmaniasis, 538
in dogs, clinical fndings in, 343, 344-345
in small aninmals, dosage and administration of, 1418t
histopathology of, 350
Metyrapone, for feline hyperacdrenocorticism, 818
incidence of, 339
Mexican hairless dlog, 957, 958
in guinea pigs. 1430-1431, 1431
MGK-264, 427
in humans, 347
Mibolerone, 838
in rabbits, 1446
Miconazole, for Malassevia dermatiis, 219
macroconidia of, 122. 124
shampo0,223, 356t
microscopic morphology of, 122, 124
topical, 356t, 409
transmission of, 339
Miconazole Spray. Sce Miconaole.
vaccinc against, 358
Microabscess(es), 149-151, 150, 151, I52
veterinary clinic as source of, 340
tosinophilic, 150, 151
Wood's lamp cxainination for, 119, 121, 347-349
papillary, 165
Microsporun distortum, characteristics of, 339
Microbial fora. Sec Microftoru.
Wood's lamp exainination for, 119, 347-349
Mierocirculation, cutaneous, measurenent of 57-58
Posy ead pu p mn rodson
Micrococcus spp., as resident Hora, in cats, 33, 275
dlermatophytosis caused by, 358
in dogs. 33-34, 275
characteristics of, 339
Mierofibril(s), dernal, 37-38 
colonies of, morphology of, 122, 123
Microfora, ctaneons, antagonism among, 33
conidia of, 121
interactions of, 33
diagnostic criteria for, 124
synergism among. 33
irlentification of, 122- 124
cpidermal hydration and,32
in cats, incidence of, 339
nomadic, 33
in dogs, clinical findings in, 343, 344-345
normal, 274
incidence of, 339
fungi in, 338, 338t
in guinea pigs, 1430
in immune defense,32-33
in normal Hora, 338
of ears, 1214t
in rabbits, 1446
of eyelids, 1185
in veterinary clinic, 340
resident, 33, 274-275
macroconidia of,122, 124
in cats, 33
microscopie rnorphology of, 122, 124
transicnt,33,274-277
transmission of, 340
Micronychia, definition of, 1193t
Microspomum persicolor, 340
MicroPearls sharnpo0(s), 917, 918, 1026-1027
characteristics of, 349
Microscopy, drect smears for, 112, 113, 117
culture of, 349
inprcssion smears for, 112-115, 116- 117
examination for, 120
swab smears for, 115. 116
in cats, histopathology of, 349, 352
Mirosporm spp. 336, 39
in dogs.clinical fndings in, 342-343, 344-345
superficial mycoses caused by, 338
histopathology of, 352
Microsporur audouinii, characteristics of, 339
 spontaneous remission of, 354
 in guinea pigs, 1430
Microsporum tanbrenseghemi, conidia of. 121.
1502·Index
Microtia, congenital, in Dachshund, 1231, 1232
Mouse (Continued)
Mierovasculature, cutaueous, 56, 56-58. 57
bacterial infecions in, 1442
deep plexus of, 56, 56
barbering in, 1444
middle plexus of, 56, 56
bite wounds in, 1444
superficial plexus of566
cage-related injury in, 1442
Microvesicle(s), epidermal, 148, 148
dermatophytosis in, 1442 - 1443
Milbeimycin, 428, 429, 445
dermatoses in, I442-1444
for canine demodicosis, 472
cctoparasites ou, 1432, 1435, 1443
for scabies, 483
fungal infections in, 1442-1443
regulation of, 424
hereditary hairlessness in, 1444
systemic, antiparasitic therapy with,429-430
immune complex vasculitis in, 1444
Mineral(s), supplementation of, 209
ncoplasia in, l444 
Mineral imbalance(s), 1119
nutritional disorders in, 1443-1444
Mineral oil, 227, 1028
ringtail in, 1444
Mineralization, dennal perifollcular, 168
viral infection in, 1443
dlystrophic, of dermal collagen, 157-158, 158
Mouse pox, 1443
perifollicular, 43-44
Moxidectin, 428,429
Minoxidil, in caine alopecia, 874
for canine dernodicosis, 472
Misoprostol, for canine atopy, 601
otie therapy with, 1229
Mitaban.See Amitraz.
systemic, antiparusitic therapy with, 430
Mite(s). See also Storage mite-related hypersensitivity.
Muein, epidermal, 11
cat fur, skin seraping for, 101
in dermis, 38
Cheyletielta. See Cheyletiellosis.
Mucinosis, cutaneous, 996-997, 1401, 1402, 1402
chigger. See Tromhiculosis (chigger mites).
dermal, 164, 165
deniodectic. Scc Dermodicosis.
dliffuse, 1402, 1402
car. Soc Ear mite(s) (Otodectes cynotis).
focal, 1401, 1402
environmental, 453
breed(s) with prcdilecbion for, 1238t
harvest. See Trombiculosis (chigger mites).
follicular. See Afopecia mecinosa.
house dust, 453
hypersensitivity and, 1175
on ferrets, 1419
idiopathic, 1158, 1174-1175, 1176-1177
on guinea pigs, 1431-1433, 1432-1434
in hypothyroidism, 783
o11 mice, 1443
Mucinous degeneration, lermal. See Mucinosis.
on rabbits, 1448-1449
Mucocntaneous junction(s), common and less common
on rats.1453
dermatoses of, 103t-104t
parasilic, 445-484
Mucoid degeneration, demal. See Mucirwosis.
poultry, 445-446, 446
Mucor spp., 384
skin seraping for, 107
in normal Mlora, 338, 338t
sarcoptic. See Scabies.
Mucorales, 384
structure of, 440, 445
Mucormycosis, 377, 384
treatincnt of, 445
Mucous membranc pemphigoid, 694, 695, 701
Mitotane (o,p'-D)D1)). advcrsc cffects and side effects of,
812-813
Multinucleate histiocytic giant cell(s), 147, 185-187, 186
liyperpigmentation caused by, 1011-1012
foreign body-type, 185, 186
mclanotrichia caused by, 101l, 1012
Langhans-type, 185, 186
Touton-type,185-187,186
849-850
Multinucleatc kcratinocyte giant cell(s), 174-175, 175
for adrenal neoplasia, 815
Mumps, 524
for caninehyperadrenocortiism,1214
Munro's microabscess, 150- 15l, 151
for feline hyperadrenocorticism, 818
Munsterlander, large, black hair folicnlar dysplasia in,
Mitotie figures, 134
962
Moisturizer(s),223,1028
Mupirocin, topical, for bacterial infection, 279, 280
 in topical therapy, 227
Mural follieulitis. Sec Fofliculitis, mural.
Mold(s), 336, 337. See also Fungus/fungi
Musculoskeletal systern, in hyperadrenocorlicism, 804
Molecular biology, 204
Muzzlc, bleeding froin, 304
Moll's gland(s), 1185
folliculitis of, 303-304
Monilia spp. See Candida spp..
furunculosis of, 302,303-304
Moniliasis. See Candidiasis.
surface markings of, 3
Moniliella suaveolens, 379
Myceliurn, defnition of, 336
Monoclonal gaminopathy, amyloidosis associated with, 768
Mycetoma, actinornycotic, definition of, 376
Monokine(s), 543
black (dark)-grained, 376, 377
Mononuclcar cells, in cytologic diagnosis, 117
definition of, 376
Mononuclear phagocyte systern (MPS), 53
eumycotic,377-379, 378
Morphca, 1142, 1146-1148, 1147
definition of, 376
Mortlerella spp., 384
granules in,337
Mosquito bite(s), 502
pododernatitis caused by, 305
Mosquito bite hypersensitivity, feline, 635-636, 637, 638
white-grained, 376, 377
Mosquito dermatitis, 502-503
Mycetoma foot,378
Mouse, alopccia areata in, 1444
Mycobacteria, classifcation of, 312-313
Index · 1503
Mycobacteria (Continued)
Myxoma(s), 1289-1299
granulomas caused by, 312-321, 317, 378, 320
breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t
leprosy, 312
Myxoruatosis, in rabbits, 1446, 1447
opportunisie, 312-313, 319-321
Myxosarcoma(s), 1281, 1289-1290, 1292
tuberculosis, 312
breed(s）with predilection for,1237t
Mycobacteriosis, and abscesses in cats, 311
claw involvement in, 1198
atypical, 317
diagnosis of, 117, 125
Mycobacterium avium,312,315
Naftifine, topical., 356t, 409
Mycobacteriurn bocis, 314
Naftin. See Naftifine.
Mycobacterium chelonei, 312, 317, 319
Naloxone, 1057
Mycobacteriumn chitae, 315
for feline psychogenic alopecia, 1070
Mycobacterium fortuitum, 312, 317, 319
Naltrexone, 1057
Mycobacterium kansasi, 312
for acral lick dermatitis, 1063
Mycobacterium leprue, 316
α-Naphthyl acetate csterase, in ccll type identifieation, 2041
Mycobacterium lepraemurium, 312, 315
Narcan. See Naloxone.
in rats, 1452
Nasal furuncalosis, 94
Mycobacterium malmwense, 315
Nasal hyperkeratosis, 936
Mycobacterium marimum, 312
 Nasal planun, conon and less common dermatoses of,
Mycobacterium phlei, 312, 319
103t
Mycobacterium snegmatis, 312, 319
cpidermis of, 26
Mycobacteriun therinoresistible,312,319
histology of, 12
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 312, 314
pigmented epitheliun of, 16
Mycobacteriun ulcerans, 312
Nasal solar dermatilis. See also Solar dermatitis.
Mycobacterium xenpi, 312, 319
caninc, 1074-1077, 1075
Mycophenolate mofctil, and cyclosporinc, combined, for
Nasodigital hyperkeratosis, 1038- 1041, 1f039
graft-versus-hst disease,720
Nasolabiogram(s), 3
Mycoplasma spp., in abscesses in cats, 311
Nasopharyngeal polyp(s), feline, 1207- 1208
infections caused by, 327
Neck, common and less common dermatoses of, 104t
Mycoplasma-like bacteria (L-forms), infeetions causcd by,
Kcerobacillosis, in rabbits, 1445 
327
Necrobiosis, definition of, 176
Mycoptes musculinus,1434-1435
Ncerobiosis lipoidica, in diabetic dogs, 868
in guinca pigs, 1433
Neerolysis, definition of, 136
 in mice, 1443
toxic epidermal. Sce Toxic epidermal mecrolysis.
Mycosis/mycoscs. Scc also Fungal infection(s): Fungus/
Necrolytic migratory erythema, 868-873
fiungi.
cause and pathogenesis of, 868-870
and abscesses in cats, 311
claw involvement in, 1199
cytologic diagnosis of, 117
clinical features of, 869, 870-871
decp,391-403
clinical management of, 871-873
definition of, 391
definition of,$68
diagnosis of, 118-119
diagnosis of, 871, 872
definition of, 336
mycotoxin-related,1101
intermediate. See Mycosis/mycoses, subcutaneous.
paraneoplastic, 1375
subcutaneous, 337, 375-391
Necrosis, and cell death, comparison of, 136-137
diagnosis of, 118-119
cuseation,136
superficial, 337, 338-375
coagulation, 136
systemie therapy for, 356-358, 357t
delinition of. 136
topical therapy for, 354-356, 356t
epidermal, 137--140, 141
systemic,337, 391-403
fat,172, 172
therapy for, 354-358, 356t, 357t, 409-415
hyalinizing, 172
Mycosis fungoides, 1021, 1324, 1331, 1333--1338, 1334-
nicrocystic, 172, 172
1337
 mineralizing. 172
in hamsters, 1441
miscellancous causcs of, 1086, 1089, 1089- 1090
Mycostatin. See Nystatin.
Necrotizing fascitis, staphylococcal, 324-325
Mycotoxin(s),1101
streptococcal.324
Myelin basie protein, in cell type identification, 204t
Nematode(s), flarial, 439
Myiasis, 501, 503-505, 504
Neoycin, otic therapy with, 1227
in rabbits,1449
topical, for bacterial infection,280
Myobia musculi, 1434-1435
Neomycin-polymyxin, otic therapy with,1227
on mice, 1443
Neonicotnoid(s), systemic antiparasitc therapy with,430
on rats, 1453
Neoplasm(s). Sce alsn Fumor(s).
Myoglobin, in cell type identifcation, 204t
adrenal, 801, 846, 846
Myospherulosis, 1096, 1097
clinical management of, 810, 814-815
Myringotomy. 1220
functional, 799
Myxedema, 783-784.853
anal sac, 1202
dermal. See Mucinosis.
ceruminal gland, 1196-1197,1208, 1208-1209, 1209
Myxedema coma, treatment of, 864
claw involvement in, 1196-1197, 1198
Myxoid degeneration, dermal. See Mucinosis.
cytologie diagrnowis of, 114, 117, 118t
I504 · Index
Neoplasmn(s) (Continued)
Nevus/nevi (Continued)
cytonorphologic findings in, 117, 118t
renal pathology with,1383
ear, 1208
paraneoplastic, 1375
cpithelial, 1239-1281
comedo,1007, 1389, 1391
cyelid involvement in, 1188-1190, 1189, 1190t 
definition of, 177
hypopigmentation caused by, 1008, 1021
epidermal, 1007, 1013, 1380-1381, 1388-1389,
in ferrets, 1420, 1427-1428
1389
in gerbils, 1429-1430
breed(s) with predilection for, 1238t
in guinea pigs, 1432, 1439
in dogs, 157
in hamsters, 1432, 1441-1442, 1442
epithelial,1013
in mice, 1444
epitrichial (apocrine) sweat gland, 1387, I387, 1388
in rabbits, 1451-1452
hair follicle, 1389, 1390
in rats, 1455
linear epitermal, claw involvement in, 1199
luss of heterozygosity in, 65
melanocytic, 1007, 1390, 1391, 1392
lyrnphohistiocytic,1330-1357
organoid, 1380-1381,1384-1386,1386
lymphoreticular. See Lymphoma.
pacinian corpuscle,1390
melanocytic, 1357-1364
sebace0us gland, 1380-1381, 1386-1387, 1387
1mesenchymal, 1281-1304
vascular, 1380--1381, 1386
pinnal, 1208
scrotal, 1386
secondary, of skin, 1373-1375
breed(s) with predilection for, 1238t
surgical transplantation of, 1375
Newfoundland, callus dermatitis in, 1102
testicular, and skin, 838-843
color dilution alopecia in, 967
hyperandrogenism caused by, 834-836, 835-837
demodicosis in, 465
in ferrets, 1425
hypopigmentation in, 1008-1009, 1021
vinus-related, 528
hypothyroidism in, 852
Neoral. See Cyclosporine.
idiopathic ulcerative dermatitis of upper lp in, 1178
Neospora caninum,532-533
pemphigus foliaceus in, 686
Neosporosis, camine,532533
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 80t
Neotrombicula autumnalis, 447-448
skin of, hydration of, 32
Nerve(s), cutaneous, 58-63, 60, 61
vitiligo in, 1015
Nest(s), of dermal or epiderinal cells, 174, 174
Niacin, defciency of, 11181119
Neural cell adhesion molecules (N-CAM), in morphogene-
in hamsters, 1441
sis of skin appendages, 3
in rats, 1453
Neurilermona. See Schwannoma.
Niacinamide. See Tetracycline ond niacinamide.
Neurinoma. See Schwannoma.
 Nictitans plasmacytic conjumctivitis, canine, treatment of,
Neurodermatitis, feline, 1066- 1070
674
 Neuroendocrine tumor(s), primary cutaneous, 1369- 1370,
Nidogen, 36t
1370
Nikolsky's sign, 88, 101
Neurofibroma. See alsu Schucannoma.
Nitenpyram, 430
 in gerbils, 1430
Nitrogen, iquid, in cryosurgery, 257
Neurofbrosarcoma, claw involvement in, 1198
Nitrous oxide, in cryosurgery, 257
Neuroflament, in cell type identifcation, 204t.
Nizoral. See Ketocurwzole.
Xeurohormone(s), 1055
Nocarda spp., in abscesses in cats,31l
Neuro-immuno-cutaneous-enclocrine (NICE) network,
Nocardia usterrides, 323
1055
Nocardia brasiliensis,323
 Neuron-specific enolase, in cell type identification, 204t 
Nocardia caviae,323
Neuropeptide(s), 59
Nocardia farcinica, 323
in pruritus, 62t, 62-63
Nocardia nova,323
Neuroregulator(s), 1055
Nocardiosis, 323, 323-324, 324
Ncurothekeoma, 1294, 1294
 and opportunistic (atypical) mycobacteriosis, co-infection
Neurotransmitter(s), 1055
with, in cats, 320
Neurotrophin(s), 59
diagnosis of, 125
Neutrophil(s), chemoattraetants for, 557, 557t
in cats, 317
cutaneous,39
Nociceptor(s), 61, 62
degenerate, and cytologic diagnosis, 113, 115, 118t
Nodular dermatitis. See Dermuatitis, nodular.
functions of, 556-557
Nodular dermatofibrosis, in German shepherd, 1380-1381.
in cyiologic diagnosis, 117
1382-1383
in derrnatitis, 187
Nodular fascitis, 1290- 1291
nondegenerate, and cytologic diagnosis, 113, 114,
Nodule(s), 87, 91
liSt
ynphoid, 174,175
 produets of, 557, 557t
Nolvasan. See also Chlorheridine diacetnte.
Neutrophilic vasculitis, 181
shampoo, 917,1035
Nevus/nevi, 1382-1390
Nonspecific cnolase, in cell type identification, 204t 
adnexal (pilosebaceous), 1384-1386, 1385
North American chiggcr. Sec Eutromhicula alfrerllugesi.
benign, loss of heterozygosity in, 65
Norwegian elkhound. See Elkhound, Norwegian.
collagenous, 1380-1381, 13821384,1384,1385
Nose, dermatoses of, in gerbils, 1429, 1430"
breed(s) with predilection for, 1238t
hyperkeratosis of, in canine distenper, 523, 523
multiple, 986
hypopigmentation (depigmentation) of, 1016-1017
Index*1505
Nose (Contimued)
Onychogryposis (onychogryphosis) (Comtinued)
congenital, 1018
in hookworm dermatitis, 1195
seasonal, 1017, 1018
in leishmariasis, 535, 535, 1195
surface markings of, 3
Onycholysis, definition of, 1193t
Notoedres cati, 476, 477, 483, 483-484. See also Scabies,
Onychomadesis, 1189, 1193, 1196
feline.
clinical management of, 1200
in rabbits, 1449
definition of, 1193t
Notoedres muris, in guinea pigs, 1433
drug-incuced, in dogs, 722t
in mice, 1443
idiopathic, 1196-1197, 1198-1199
Novasome(s), 221, 222, 1027, 1028, 1035
Onychomalacia, 1191
Nuclear streaming, and cytologic diagnosis, 113
definition of, 1193t
 5'-Nucleotidase, in cell type identificatiou, 204t
Onychomycosis, 1189, 1195
Nutrition, and canine seborrhea, 1032
clinical management of, 1200
 and hair growtlh, 6
definition of, 1193t
and skin, 207-210
in dermatophytosis, in cats, 343
 Nutritional disorder(s), claw involveinent in, 1199
in dogs, 343
diagnosis of, 198
Onyehpathy, definition of, 1193t
hair examination in, 108, 111
 Onychoptosis, definition of, 1193t
in chinchilla, 1417
Onychorrhexis, 1191, 1195
 in yuinea pigs, 1434
 clinical managcinent of, 1200
in ha1nsters, 1441
defnition of, 1193t
in1 mice, 1443- 1444
 Onychoschisis, definition of, 1193t
in rabbits,1449
Onychoschizia, 1192, 1195
in rats. 1453-1454
 clinical management of 1200
Nutritional skin disease, 1112- 1123
definition of 1193t
Nutritiomal supplement(s), 207, 1123
Onychosis, de:finition of, 1193t
Nutritiorad therapy, 207
Onyxis, defnition of, 1193t
Nystatin, topical, 356t, 409
Oomycosis. See Pythiosis.
Nystatin/triancinolome, topical, 356t
0,p'-DDD (mitotane). See Mitotame (o.p'-DDD).
Optimmune. See Cyclosporine.
 Oral cavity, coinmon and less common dermatoscs of, 103t
Oatmeal, colloidal, 230, 917, 1028
cryosurgery in, 258
for pruritus, 228
Orbifloxacin, otic therapy with, 1229
topical therapy with, 236
systenic, dosage of, 284t
Obsessive-cornpulsive disorder(s), 1064- 1066
Orf,524
Ochratoxin A, 1101
Organophosphatc(s),499
Odlund body(ics), 22
for scabies, 482
Odontopsylus multispinosus, on rabbits,1449
systemic, antiparasitic therapy with, 428
Odor(s), in haircoat, 214
topical, antiparasitic therapy with, 425
Oil(s), animal, 227, 1028
Oriental cat, psychogenic alopecia and dermatitis in, 1066
hydrophilic,226
psychogenic derrnatoses in, 1056
hydrophobic, 226
Ormetoprin-sulfadiazine, otic therapy with, 1229
vegetable,227,1028
Ormetoprim-sulfadimethoxine, systemic, dosage of, 284t
Oil red O stain, staining characteristics of various suh.
Ornithine decarboxylase, 29
stances with, 130t
Ornithonyssus bacoti, on hamsters, 1440
Oil rinse(s), 212
on mice, 1443
Ointment(s), 21St, 224-225
on rats, 1453
Old English sheepdog. See Shcepdog, Old Fnglish.
Orthckeratosis. See Hyperkeratosts, orthokeratotic (an-
Oleic acid, 208
clear).
Onchocerciasis, ocular, 439
Ossification, cutaneous, in hyperadrenocorticisn, 803, 803
Oncogene(s), 1239
Osteoma, 1314-1315, 1315-1316
Oncology, cutaneous, 1236- 1239
Osteosarcoina, 1314-1315, 1316
Oncosis, definition of, 140
claw involvement in, 1198 
 Onychalgia, definition of 1193t
in rabbits, 1451
Onychauxis, definition of, 1193t
Otitis cxtcrma, 1204- 1231. See also Ear(s).
Onychia, definition of 1193t 
allergic,1210-1211,1211
Onychitis. See Onychia.
bacterial, 1210, 1213, 12141
Onychocryptosis, 1191
causes of, primary, 1206t, 1209-1213
defnition of, 1193t
secondary, 1206t-1207t, 1213-1215
Onychodystrophy, 1192, 1193, 1195
coruminous, 918, 1036, 1196
definition of, 1193t 
classification of, 1204, 1206t- 1207t
idiopathic, 1191-1192,1198
clinical features of, 1217-1218
in hookvorm dermatitis, 1195
culture and stusceptibility testing in, 1221
lupoid, 745
cytologic examination in,1220
symmetrnic, 1195-1198, 1196-1197
definition of, 1204
post-infectious, 1199
diagnosis of, 1219-1221
Onychogryposis (onychogryphosis), 1191, 1196
drug-induced, in cats. 723t
definiion of, 1193t
in dogs, 722t
1506 · Index
Otitis extema (Continued)
Panniculitis (Continued)
car clcaning in,1221-1225,1222t,1224
diffuse, definition of, 197
histopathology of, 1220-1221
in dogs, 197
hyperplastic, 1212
drng-induced, 729
in dogs, cytologic diagnosis of, 115
in dogs, 725
in ferrets, 1419
in cats, 1158, 1159, 1160, 1162-1164
in food hypersensitivity, 1211, 1213
in dermatophytosis, 353
in hypothyroidism, 1210-1211
in dogs, 1157-1159, 1158, 1161
inl rabbits, 1448
in humans, differential diagnosis of, 1156, 1157t
inflammatory, idiopathic,1212
in injection site reaction, in cats, 723t
Malzssezia,366
in dogs, 722t
pathogenesis of, 364
in vasculitis, 747
otoscopic examination in、1205, 1218-1219
lobular, 196-197, 1162
parasitic, 1206t, 1209-1211
lupus erythematosus, 197
perpetuating fatrs in,1207t,12151217
nodular, 1157
physical findings in, 1211, 1218-1219
pancreatie, 1160-1161
predisposing factors in, 1204- 1209, 1206t
postinjection,1160,1163,1164
proliferativc. 1210-1211
pyogranulomatous,377,1161
proliferative eosinophilic, canine,1213
sclerosing, 1164
Pseudomenas, 1210-1211, 1213
septal, 197, 1160, 1163
surgery for, 1230-1231
in cats, 197
systemic therapy for,12291230
sterile,203
topical acquired irritant reactions causing, 1215
cytologic diagnosis of, 114
topical therapy for, 1225t-1227t, 1225-1229
in cats, 175, 311
treatment of, 1221-1231
sterile: pcdal. Scc Focal metatarsal fistulation.
yeast-related, 1213-1215
traumatic, 1160
Otitis media, 1216-1217, 1217
Weber-Christian, 1157
bactenial, 1214t
Pansteatitis, in cats, 1117, 1117-1118
culture and susceptibility testing in, 1221
Pantothenic acid, defciency of, 1020
Otoacariasis, in rabbits, 1448 
in hamsters, 1441
Otohius megnint, 442-443, 443
in micc, 1443
Otomax. See Clotrimazole/betamethasone/gentamicin.
in rats, 1453
Otoscopic cxamination, in otitis exterma, 1205, 1218-1219
 Papillae adiposae, 63, 64
Ovaban. See Megestrol acetate.
Papillary squirting, 135, 173
Ovoid bodylies). See Apoptotic body(ies).
Papilloma(s), 1239- 1248
Oxacilln, efficacy of, against coagulase-positive staphylo
breed(s) with prcdilection for, 1237t
cocci, 282
cause and pathogenesis of, 1239-1240
against Staphylococcus intermedius,282
clinmical findings in, 1240-1244
long-term therapy with, 287
clinical management of, 1248
systernic, dosage of, 284t
cutancous, in dogs, 1240,1241
Oxidizing agent(s), topical, 231
cutaneous exophytic, 1012
OxyDex,226,231,1027
cutaneous inverted, in dogs, 1240, 1242
Oxytalan fiber(s), 38
diagnosis of, 1244-1247, 1244-1247
differential diagnosis of, 1244--1246
fibrovascular, 1284, 1284, 1285
footpad, in dogs, 1241, 1242
Pachyonychia, definilion ol, 1193t
in cats, 527, 530-531, 1243-1244
Pacific (West Cuast) tick(s), 444
in dogs, 1240-1243, 1241-1243
Pacini's corpuscle, innervation of, 59, 61, 61, 62
in gerbils, 1430
Paecilormyces fumosoroseus, 404
in hamsters, 1442
Paecilomyces lilacimus, 404
in mice, 1444
Paecilomycosis, 404, 405
in rabhits, 1451
Pagetoid reticulosis, 1021, 1331, 1339-1340, 1339-1341
in rats, 1455
Pain, assessment of, 83
mliple, in dogs, 1241, 1243
Paint, in haircoat, 213
 pigented, papufar cutancous, in dogs, 1240
Panalog, 232, 502. See also Nystatin/triamcinolone.
of eyelid, 1188
Pancomulin, 28
 Shope, in rabbits, 1451 
Pancreas, cancer of, cutaneous metastases of. 1373
squamous, inverted, 1198
tumors of,870
Papillomatosis, dermal, 162
Pancreatitis, fatty acids and, 24!
oral, canine, 1240, 1241
Panhypopituitarism, 782
Papilomavirus antigen, in Bowen's disease, 1258
Pannieulitis, 91, 171-172, 196-197, 203, 1156- 1162
Papillomavirus infection, caninc, 525-527, 530-531
cause and pathogenesis of, 1156-1157
detection of, 1239
clinical features of, 1157.-1159
feline, 527-528, 530-531, 1243-1244
clinical management of, 1161 ~ 1162
pigmentary abnormalities with, 1012, 1013
cytologic diagmosis of, 117
 Papillon, black hair follicular dysplasia in, 962
definition of, 1156
Papovavirus(es), ncoplasia caused by, 528
diagnosis of, 1159-1161, 1160-1164
Papule(s),86,88
Index * 1507
Parabens, in shampoo, 223
Pelodera strongyloides,432, 434
Paragonimus kelicoi, in dogs, 440
in humans, 432
ParakeratosisSHperkeratossparakeratoti (ue
pododermatitis causod by, 305
tedl).
Pemphigoid, ballous. See Bullous pemphigoid.
Parakeratotc cap(s), 133, 135
cicatricial. See Pemphigoid, mucous membrane.
perivascular dermatitis with, 179
mucous membrane, 694, 695, 701
Paraneoplastic alopecia, 902. 903, 904
Pemphigus, benign farmilial, canine, 947-948, 948
Paraneoplastic syndrome(s), 1375
diet-induced, 680, 682
Parapoxvirus infection, in cats, 524
pauepidernal pustular, 685, 686
in dogs, 524
prognosis for, 681
Parapsoriasis, 1039, [050-1051, 1051
pauraneoplastic,693,693t, 1375
Parasitic dlisease. See also specific parasite.
diagnosis of, 671
car involvement in, 1206t, 1209-121.1
pathomechanism of. 19
intestinal, in ferrets, 1426
Pemphigus complex, 88, 678-693
of claws, 1195
cause of, 678-679
of skin, 423-507
characteristics of, 678
liagnosis of, 101-107
clinical management of, 681-682
pododermatitis caused by, 305
diagnosis of, 117, 669, 680-681
otitis cxtema in, 1206t, 1209-1211
in cats and dogs, cause and pathogenesis of, 679-680
Parasitic hypersensitivity, 627-644. See also Intestinal
diagnosis of669,680
parasite hypersensitiuity; spccific parasitc.
in humans, 678-680
Parlodel. See Bromocriptine mesylate.
pathogcnesis of, 678-680
Paronychia,1022, 1193
prognosis for, 681
bacterial, 1189
Penphigus erythenatosus, 688, 691, 691-693
 in cat with systemic lupus erytlheimatosus, 696-697
dliagnosis of, 669, 680, 691, 692, 692
demodectic, 1195
in cats and dogs, 669, 680-681, 688-689
Malassezia, 366, 1189
cytologic diagnosis of, 114
Paste(s), 225
management of, 693
Pasteurella multocida, in cats, in oral Hora, 276
prugnosis for, 681
in subcutancous abscesses, 3l0-311
Pemphigus Foliaceus, 686-690
Pasteurella pneumotropica, infection by, in hamsters,
cause of, 680
1439
claw involvement in, 1195, 1196
in mice, 1442
clinical fcaturcs of, 683, 687, 688-689
inl rats, 1452
diagnosis of, 671,687-689, 689, 690, 691
Pasteurellosis. in rabbits, 1444—1445
differcntial diagnosis of, 687, 688-689
Patch, 86, 87
drug-induced, 729
Pattern baldress, 890, 954, 963-964, 965-966, 966
ini cats, 723t,725,726
clinical nanagement of, 253
in dogs, 687, 722t
Pautrier microabscess, 151, 152, 1347
in cats, 687-690, 688-689
Paw(s), cominon and less comnon dernatoses of, 105t
in dogs, 199, 686-690, 688-689
Paxillin, 22t
chronic, disease-associated, 687
 Peanut agglutinin, in cell type identification, 204t
dhiagnosis of, 147, 155
 Pedal folliculitis and furunculosis. See Pododermatitis.
spontaneous, 687
Pediculosis, 487-490, 488
in humans, 678
cause of,487
incidence of, 686
clinical features of, 487-489, 488
management of, 689-690
definition of, 487
prognosis for, 681
diagnosis of, 489
Pemphigus vegetans, 685-686, 685-686
differential diagnosis of, 489
clinical fcatures of, 683
in cats, 490
prognosis for, 681
in dogs, 490
Peimphigus vulgaris, claw involvement in, 1195
pathogenesis of, 487
dliagnosis of, 671
treatiment of, 490
in cats, vill in, 163
 Pekingese, dermatophytosis in, 343
in cats and dogs, 669, 679
distichiasis in, 1188
clinical features of, 682, 683
drug rcactions in, 721
clinical mamagement of, 682-685
facial fold intertrigo in, 1107
diagnosis of, 682, 684
follielar tysplasia in,971
differential diagnosis of, 682
pododerrnatitis in, 305
in humans, 678-679
risk for meoplastic skin disorders and mon-ncoplastie
prognosis for, 681
lumps in, 1237t
Penicillate nerve cndings. 62
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 80t
 Penicillin(s), adverse effects and side effects of, 721
Sertoli's cell tumor in, 840
distribution of, in skin, 281
squamous cell carcinoma in, 1251
systemic, for bacterial infections, 281
vaccine rcaction in. 744
Pericillium spp, as resident fora, inu dogs, 34
Pelodera derimatitis, 432-434, 434-436
colonies of, norphology of, 123
 in guinea pigs, 1433
in normal flora, 338, 338f
in humas, 432
Pentoxifylline, 601
1508·Index
Pentoxifylline (Continued)
Pharyngcal carcinoina, cutancous metastases of, 1366, 1373
 adverse effects and side effects of, 241
Phcnamidinc, adverse effects and side effexts rf, 573
for dermatomyositis, 945. 946
Phewharbital, 1057
for pemphigus, 682
for aeral lick dermatitis, 1061- 1062
for vasculitis, 753-754
for feline psychogenic alopecia, 1070
formulations of, 241
Phenol(s), 680*
indications for, 241
contraindications to, in cats, 230
pharmacology of, 241
in sharmpox, 223
Peptile regulatory factor(s),543
in topical therapy, 230
Peptostreptococus spp, cellulitis caused by, 310
Pheomelanin, 8,16, 17
 in infections, 276
Phialemuonium curvatum,377
in subcutaneous abscesses in cats, 310
Phticlenonium obouatum,379
Perforating dermatitis, 1168-1170, 1169, 1170
Phialoconidia, 337
Perforin, 740
Phialophora gougeroti. See Fxopholiajeansemet.
Periactin.SeeCiproheptadine hydrochloride.
Phiatophora Eerrucosa,379
Perianal gland(s). Sec Circumanal (perianal) glands.
Phlebeclasia, in hyperadrenocorticisn, 800, 801, 804
Pericyle(s), 57
Phtehotomus spp., 534
Periderm, 2
Phosmet, 425“
Perifollicular filbrosis. 168, 169, 195
Photocarcinogenesis, 24
Perifollicular melanosis, 168, 169, 195
Photochenotherapy, 237
Perifolliculitis, 166, 192-196, 195
Photodermatitis, 1073
 Periodic acid-schiff stain, for fungi. 119
Photodynaic therapy, for sqaous cellcarcinoma, 1257
staining characteristies of various substances with, 130t
Photofrin-V, 237
Perionychia, definition of, 1193t 
Photoimmunology. 24
Peripheral nerve shcath tumor, 1292
Photoperiod, and cyclic follicular dysplasia, 890
Peritonitis, felinc infectious, 522, 522
and hairgrowth, 5-6
Perivascular dermatitis, deep, J78, 179
Photoprotectbion, 236-237
diffuse orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis with, 178- 179
for pemphigus erythematosus, 693
drug-indnced,729
in discoid lupus erythematosus, 716
cosinophilic, 178
in pemphigus, 681-682
hyperplastic, 178, 180
Photoscnsitivity, 1080
pure, 178, 179
 in cutaneous lupus erythematosus, 702
spongiotic, 178, 179-180
Phntothermolysis, 259
superficial, 178, 179
Phthirus pubis, 487
with parakeratotic caps, 179
Phycomycosis, 377. See also Pythiosis.
Permethrin, 426-427, 502
Physical examination, 84-94
for scahies, 482
 dermatologic cxarmination in, 85-86
spot application products, for flea control, 498
general observation in, 84-85, 85
Persian cat, basal cell tumors in, 1261
Physieal therapy, 237-238
dermatophyte pseudomycetoma in, 343-347
Phytogel,253"
dernatophytosis in, 346, 347, 409
Phytomutrient(s), 209
dystrophie epidermolysis bullosa in, 939
Picric acid, 230
enileonazole therapy for, 410
Picbaldism, 1014
epitrichial cysts in, 1381
Piedra. 374-375
facial fold intertrigo in, 1107
black, 374
griseofuolvin side effects in, 357
cause of, 374
grooming for, 215
clinical findings in, 374, 374
idiopathic facial dermatitis of, 920-921, 922
clinical managcment of, 375
papillomavirus infection in, 527, 530531
diagnosis of, 374, 375
periocular derimatosis in, 1186
pathogenesis of, 374
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
white,374,374
Jumps in, 1237t
Piedraia hortae, 374
risk for non-ncoplastic skin disordcrs in, 80t
Pigmentary incontinence, 162-163, 163
sebaceous gland tumors in, 1271
Pigmentation, abnormality(ies) of, 87, 91, 900-911, 1005-
seborrhea in, 914-915, 920, 920,921
1023. See also specific disorder.
systeuie lupus erythcmatosus in, 705
congenital and hereditary, 975-978
 yellow-eyed "smoky," Chediak-Higashi syndrome in, 76.
terminology for, 1005, 1006t
977. 1014
androgens and, 796-797
Peruvian Inca Orchil dog. 957
constitutive, 16
Pesticide(s), regulafion of, 424
estrogens and, 795
Petechiae, 87,88
facultative, 16
pH meter, 32
of hair, 1005
Phaeohyphomycosis, 367, 379-381, 380, 382
regulation of, 17
cyeloheximide sensitivity in, 121
Pili torti, 953-955, 953-955
definition of, 376
hair examination in, 112
 pododermatitis caused by, 305
Pilomatrixoma, 92, 1267-1269, 1269, 1270
 Phaeomelarin(s), 1005
breed(s) witlh predilection for, 1237t
Phagocytosis, in cytologic dliagnosis, 117
Pilunidal sinus. See Cyst(s), derrnoid (dermoid stnus).
Index·1509
Pilosebaceous follicle, 48
Pododermatitis (Continued)
Pinkus corpuscle. Sec Tylotrich pad.
plasma cell, feline, 1126-1127, 1129-1130, 1130-1137
Pinna, acquired folding of, in cats, 1231, 1231
tick-related, 435
alopecia of, caninc, 887, 888, 889
ulcerative, in rabbits, 1445
feline, 888, 900
Pointer, black hair follicnlar dysplasia in, 962
dernatitis of, 1211
blastomycosis in, 392
erythema of, drug-induced, in cats, 723t, 724-725, 1023
callus dermatitis in, 1102
fy bites of, 1210-1211, 1211
dermatophytosis in, 344-345
in feline auricular chondritis. 748-749
English, acral mutilation in, 988-989, 995
lesions of, in vasculitis, 745
hemangiosarcomas in, 1299
marginal neerosis in, in dog with systeimie lupus erythe-
German shorthaired, acral mutilation in, 995
matosus, 696-697
dermatophytosis in, 343
necrosis of, in ferrets, 1419
familial hypothyroidism in, 852
neoplasia of, 1208
follicular dysplasia in, 971
proliferative thrombovascular nccrosis ol, 747-749, 748,
hereditary lupoid dermatosis of 180, 707, 717, 941,
752.754
948-949, 949
squamous cell carcinona of, in white cats, 1241
hyperadrenxorticism in, 801
in white-carcd cats, 76
junetionl epidermolysis bullosa in, 939
Pinnal foliculiis, sterile cosinophilic, canine,1213
muzzle follieulitis and furunculosis in, 304
Pinnal-pedal reflcx, in scabies, 479-480
pododermatitis in, 305
Pinworm, in mice, 1444
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75
in rats, 1454
truncal solar dermatitis in, 1079
Pit bull. See T'errier, Stafforrshire.
zinc-responsive dermatosis in, 1120
Pit viper(s), 1090
histoplasosis in, 400
Pituitary dwarfism, canine, 817, 819-822, 820
nasal depigmentation in, 1017
Pituitary gland. See Hypophysis.
nasal folliculitis and furunculosis in, 301, 303
Pityrosporun spp.. Ssee: Malassezia sp.
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, S0t
Pityrosporum canis. See Malassezia pachydermatis.
wirchaired, follicular dysplasia in, 971
Pityrosporum ovate.Scc Malassezia furfur.
Polyethylene glyeol, 226
Pityrosporun pachydermatis.See Malassezia pachyderna
Polyglandular syndrome(s),782
tis.
Polyhydroxydine, 231
Plague, 325-326, 491
Polymerasc chain rcaction (PCR). 1239
Plakoglobin, 20, 22t
Polymyxin B, otic therapy with, 1227
Plakophilin, 20, 22t
topical, for bacterial inifeetion, 280
Plaque(s), 86, 88
Polyp(s), nasopharyngeal, 196, 1207
eosimophilic, feline, J142, 1149-1152, 1150-1152
Polyplax serrata, in mice, 1443
multiple, pigmented, in dogs, 1240-1242, 1242, 1243
Polyplax spinuzlosa, on rats, 1453
Plaquenil sulfatc. Sce Hydroxychloroquine sulfate.
Pomeranian, adrenal hyperplasia-like syndrore in, 846
Plasima cell(s). cutaneous, 39
847
in cytologic diagnosis, 118t
atlt-onset hyposormatotropism in, 822
in nodular and diffuse dermatitis, 188, 188
follicular dysplasia in, 890
Plasma cell pododerimatitis. feline, 1126-1127, 1129-1130,
haircoat of, 8
1130-1131
hypogonadlism in, 844-845
Plasmacytoma, 1334
hypothyroidisn in, 852
breed(s) with predileetion for, 1237t
immunodefcieney in, 279t
cutaneous, 1342-1346
risk for non-ncoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 80t
cause and pathogenesis of, 1342-1344
Poodll, adult-onset hyposomatotropism in, 822
clinical fndings in, 1334, 1344, 1344
anal licking in, 1066
clinical manageinent of, 1346
lbasal cell carcinoma in, 1262
diagnosis of 1345, 1345-1346, 1346
calcinosis cireumseripta in, 1400
in hamsters, 1442 
chlorambucil therapy in, side effects of, 673
Plasmacytosis, syste1nic, 1179- 1180
chronic ulcerative blepharitis in, 1186 
Plasmapheresis, for systemic lupus erythematosus, 711
contact hypersensitivity in, 1081
Platelet-activating factor, 559-560
dermal pcrifolicular mineralization in, 168
Platonychia, definition of, l193t
dermatophytosis in, 344-345
Plcctin, 13, 22t
distichiasis in, 1188
Plesiotherapy, for actinic keratosis, 1079
drug reactions in, 721, 725
for sqtamous cell carcinoma, 1257
epiphora in, 1188, 1789
Pneunonyssoiles canirun, 452-453
foodl hypersensitivity in, 618
Pododlenmatitis, 301, 304-306
glucocorticoid-induced reaction in, 246-247
autoinmune,305
granulomatous sebaceous adenitis in, 1146
demodectic, 461
hair growth in, 5
caine, 462, 465
haircoat of, 8
fungal, 305
hyperadrenocorticism in, 800
hookworm, 433
hypothyroidlism in, 852
in dogs, 301, 344-345
lymphedema in, 990
Malassezia, rinses for. 410
Malassezia dermatitis in, 348-349
parasitic, 305
melanotrichia in, 1010
1510 + Index
Poodle (Cortimued)
Prednisolone (Continued)
drug-induced, 1012
for vasculitis, 753
miniature, adult-onset hyposomatotropisin in, 822
jmmunosnppressive therapy with, 672t
anal sac disorders in, 1201
systemic, otic therapy with,1229
congenital hypotrichosis in, 958, 959, 960
Prednisone, for discoid lupus erythematosus, 716
delayed gonadal maturation in, 844
 rad pu n as oqeloi g
drug reactions in, 721
for penphigus, 681
hypogonadism in,833
for pemhigus foliaceus9
mclanocytie neoplasms in, 1359
for systemic lupus erythematosus, 711
pseudoachondroplastic dysplasia in. 820
for vasculitis, 753
seasonal fank alopecia in, 891
immnnosuppressive therapy with, 672t
nasal depigmentation in, 1017
injectable,247t
panniculitis in, 1159
systemic, otic therapy with, 1229
pilormatrixoma in, 1267
Preen gland. See Tail gland, of dog.
postvaccinal vascenlitis in, 749,749
Prclipoblast(s), 2
psychogeruc dermatitis in,305
Pressure sorc(s). See Ulcer(s), decubital.
risk for neuplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
Preotella spp, cellulitis caused by310
lumps in, 1237t
in infections, 276
risk for non-ncoplastic skin disorders in, 75, S0t
sebaceous adenitis in, 242, 1029
Proanagen, 46
sebaceous gland hyperplasia in,1271
Procainamide, hiypopigmentation caused by, 1020, 1020
squamous cell carcinoma in, 1251
Proflagrin, 26-27
standard, black, risk for neoplastie skin disorders and
Progestagen(s), for feline acquired symmetric alopecia, 902
non-neoplastie lumps in, 1237t
therapy with, for acral lick dermatitis, 1063
color ltn alopeciain,967
in pituitary dwarfism, 821-822
granulomatous sebaceous adenitis in, 1141, 1143, 1143
Progesterone, 797-798
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
blood levels of, assays for, 798
lumps in, 1237t
for feline acquired symmetric alopecia, 902
risk for lion-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75
repositol, for acral lick dermatitis, 1063
sebaceous adenitis in, 925
Program. See Lufeneron.
squamous cell carcinoma in, 1251
Proheart. See Moxidectin, systemic.
trichoepithelioma in, 1263
Prolactin, 798
zinc-responsive dermatosis in, 1120
levels of, melatonin and, 253
systemic lupns erythermatosus in, 705
Prolactin-inhibiting factor (PIF), 781
toy, anal sac disorders in, 1201
Prolactin-releasing factor (PRF), 781
congenital hypotrichosis in, 958
Proliferative eosinophilic titis extera, canine, 1213
Ehlers-Danlos syndrone in, 982
Propagule, fungal, 336
hyperadrenocorticism in, 801
Propioniacterum spp, in hair follcle, 1
junctional epidermolysis bullosa in, 939
Propionibacterium ocnes. See also Immunoregulin.
trichoblastoma in, 1270
as resident Hora, in tlogs, 34, 275
vaccine reaction in, 744
Propylene glycol, 1028
Pore of Winer, dilated, 1254, 1265-1267, 1266, 1267
topical,230,235
Poroconidia, 337
Prostaglandin(s), effects of, on skin, 208
Porphyroonas spp, clllitis caused by, 310
Prostatic carcinoma, cutaneous 1netastases of, 1374, 1374
in subcutaneous abscesses in cats, 310
Protein, deficiency of, 207, 1115-1116
Portuguese water dog, follicular dysplasia in, 890, 971, 972,
dietary, for cats, 1116
973,974
for dogs, 1116
patten baldness in. 965
Protein A. 275, 276
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 80t
Proteoglycan(s),fctions of, 38
Postclipping alopecia, 897, 898
rnajor, 38
Potassium iodde, atfngal therapy with, 414
Proteus spp. in anal sacs, 1201
Potassium permanganate, 227
otitis extema caused by, 1214t
Pothelly, in hyperadrenocorticism, 802, 804
 otitis media caused by, 1214t
Poultry mite(s), 445-446. 446
pseudomycetoma caused by, 312
skin scraping for, 107
Proteus mirabilis, as transient Hlora, in cats, 275
Povidone-iodine, 231
in dogs, 275
prcoperative use of, 255
in generalized demodectic mange, 465
soaks, for bacterial infection, 280-281
Prototheca spp., characteristics of, 404-405
topical, for bacterial infection, 279
Pratotheca wvickerhamii, 405, 406
Powder(s), 218t, 224
Prototheca zopfi, 405
Prairie dog(s), plague in, 325-326
Protothecosis, 404-407
Pranoxine, for pruritus, 228
cause of, 404-405
in shampoo, 223
clinical imanagement of, 406-407
Praziquantel, injection reaction with, 902
cliagnosis of, 406,406,407
Preauricular ulcerative dermatitis, idiopathic, of cats, 1177
in cats,406
Prednisolome, for dermatomyositis, 945
inn dogs, 397, 405, 406, 407
for discoid lupns erythematosus, 716
pathogenesis of, 405
for idiopathic stcrile gramulorna and pyogranuloma, 1139
Protozoal disease(s), 531-538
Index + 1511
Prozac. See Fluoxetine.
Public health considerations, with blastomycosis, 394
Pruritus, 61-63, 228. Sce also Scabies.
with canine Rocky Mountain spotted fever, 529
and bacterial infcction, 277, 286
with feline poxvirus, 522
assessment of, 83
with fca infestation, 491
clinical management of, in dogs, 239
with hookworm, 432
drug-indueed, in cats, 721, 723t
with Malassezia dermatitis, 366, 1215
in dogs, 721, 722t
with plague, 326
epicritic, 62
with sporotriclhosis, 386-388.387
in feline leukemia virus dermatitis, 517
Pug, atopy in, 581
in folliculitis, 293
distichiasis in1, 1188
 in byperadrcnocorticism, 804
 intertrigo in, facial fold, 1107
in Malassezia dermatitis, 366
tail fold, 1107
in pscudorabies, 524
lentiginosis profusa in, 106
mediators of,62,62t
mast cell tumors in, 1320
modulators of, 62t, 62--63
multiple pigrmented plaques in, 1240, 1242, 1242
neurogenic, in Cavalicr King Charles spaniels, 96
papillomavirus-associated pigmentary abnormality in,
paraneoplastic, 1375
1012
perianal, in mice, 1444
risk for reoplastie skin disordlers and non-neoplastic
protopathic, 62
lumps in, 1238t
Pruritus vulvae, in diabetic dogs, 868
Tisk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, S0t
Pseudoacarthosis, 134
Pulex irritans, 491*
Pseucoaltescheria boydi, 377
Puli, grooming of, 214
culture of, 121
Puppy strangles. See Cellulitis, cunine jucenile.
cyclohcximide sensitivity of, 121
Purpura. 87, 100
Pseudo-Cushing's syndrome, See Hyposomatotropism.
Pustular denmatosis, linear IgA, camine, 748, 756, 756
(pseurlo-Cushing's syndrome, GH-responsive dernato-
sterile, cytologic diagnosis of, 117
sis).
subcoreal, canine.See Subcorneal pustular derrutosis.
Pseudohorm cysts, 156
Pustular mural folliculitis, 194, 199
Pseudohypothyroidlisn, 782
Pust ular pemphigus, panepidermal, 685, 686
Pseudolymphoma, 184, 1340-1342, 1342, 1343
prognosis for, 681
and lymphoina, differentiation of, histologic criteria for,
Pustule(s), 86, 87, 89, 97
1341-1342,1343t
color of, 89
insect bilte,192
epidermal, 149-151,150, 151
Pseudomicrocdochium sutioni, 379
intraepidermal, 190, 193t
Pseudomonas spp., as transient fora, in cats, 275
location of, 89
in dogs, 275
nonfollicular, 89
otitis exterma caused by, 1210-1211, 1213, 1214t
size of 89
otitis media caused by, 1214t
spongiforn (of Kogoj), 150, 150
pseudlouycetoma caused by, 312
subepidenmal, 190, 193t
Pseudononus aeruginosa, luorescence of, 119
Pustulosis, sterile eosinophilic, 200
in generalized demodectic mange, 465
cytologic diagnosis of, 114
in rabbits, 1445
Pyknosis, definition of, 136
infection by, in rats, 1452
Pyoben, 231, 1027
Pseudomycetoma, bacteral, 302. 311-312, 313, 376
Pyocyanin, 1445
diagnosis of, 125
Pyoderma. See also Demodicosis, in tlogs.
in dogs, 302
bacterial, in dogs, 28, 277
dermatophytic, 343-347, 348, 349, 376
recumennt, 286
treatncnt of, 357-358
 in hypothyroidism, 853
in dogs, 302
callus,328
in micec, 1442
callus dermatitis and, 1097, 1102-1103
Pseudopelade, 765, 765-766, 766, 767, 907
deep, 298-324
Pseudopreynancy, 830, 833, 834
German shepherd, 531
Pseudopyodcrma(s), 328
in hypothyroidisn, 784
Pseudorabies, 524
interdigital (pododermatitis). See Pododermatitis.
Psorergates stmplex, in mice, 1443
juvenile. See Celulitis, canine jucenile.
Psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatosis, of Springer spaniel,
mucocutaneous, 180, 289, 290-291,291,292
929-931, 930-931, 933, 934
nasal, 301, 303
Psoroptes, 1434-1435
superfcial, 288-298
Psoroptes cuniculi, in rabbits, 1448
Pyogranuloma. See also Cranuloma and pyogranuloma.
Psoroptes ocis, in rabbits, 1448
in rats, 1452
Psychocntancous medicine, 1055
infectious, cytologic dliagnosis of, 113
Psychodermatology, 1055
perifollicular, 195
Psychogenic skin dlisease(s), 1055-1071
sterile, cytologic diagnosis of, 113
acral lick dennatitis as. Sce Acral lick cderrnatitis.
on feet, 305
canine,1058-1066
Pyogranulona-granuloma syndrome, sterile, [89
feline, 1066-1071
Pyotraumatic dermatitis, 1097,1104, 1104-1105
Psychological drug therapy, 1056- 1057
Pyotraumatic folliculitis, 288, 300-303,301, 303
PTD lotion, 229t
Pyrethrin(s), 423
1512 · Index
Pyrethrin(s) (Continued)
Rabies vaccine, adverse effects of, 725, 743
otie therapy with,1227t,128
focal cutancous vasculitis and alopecia causcd by, 749,
topical, anparasiti therapy with, 4
749, 752, 753, 754-756, 755
Pyrethroid(s), 423
Radfordia affnis, in mice, 1443
topical, antiparasitie therapy with, 426-427
Rudfordia ensifera, in rats, 1453
Pyridoxine, delicieney of, 1020, 1119
Radiation injury, 10871088, 1088
 in guinea pigs, 1434
Radiation therapy, 238
in hamsters, 1441
for acral lick dermatitis, 1064
in micc, 1443-1444
for canine hyperadrenocorlicism, 81 1, 814
in rats, 1453
for squamousll carcinoma,1257
Pyrinethamine/sulfadiazine, for canine neosporosis, 533
Radiosurgery, 262-263
Pyriproxyfen,426,495,498
Radixin, 20
Pythiosis, 377, 381-384
Rat(s), alopecia areata in, 1455
cause of, 38]
 aricular chondritis in, 1454
clinical management of, 384
bacterial infections in,1452
diagnosis of,382-384,383
cage-relatel injury in, 1452
in cats,nial nings in,828
dernatophytosis in, 1453
in dogs, clinical fndings in, 367, 381382, 383
dermatoses of, 1452-1455
pathogenesis of, 381
miscellaneous, 1454-1455
Pythiun gracile. Sce Pythium insidiosum.
ectoparasites on, 1447, 1453
Pythium insidiosum, 381
Heas on, 1453
fungal infections in, 1453
fur of, age-related chauges in. 1455
Quatermary aumonium compounds, 232
leprosy in, 1432
in shampoo, 223
lice on, 1453
Quinacrine hydrochloride, 678
mites on, 1453
for discoid lupus erythematosus, 716
neoplasia in, 1455
mutritional disorders in, 1453-1454
pinworm in, 1454
Rabbit, abscesses in, 1445
plague in, 325-326
alopecia areata in, 1450-1451, 1452
ringtail in, 1454, 1455
alopecia in, congenital, 1450, 1450
sialodacryoadenitis in, 1447, 1453
uspergillosis in, 1446
skin of, scales on, 1455
bacterial infeclions in, 1444- 1446
systemic hair embolism in, 1454-1455
barbering in, 1450
Trixacarus ditersus in, 1447
cutaneous asthenia in, 1450, 1451
viral infections in, 1447, 1453
tlernatophytosis in, 1446
Rathke's cleft cyst, $19
dermatoses in, 1444-1452
Hat-tail, canine, 1141
miscellaneous, 1449-1451
Raynaud-ike disease, in dogs,I195
lrooling (slobbers) in, 1445
Red hair, acquired, 1022
ectoparasites on, 1434, 1457, 1458-1459
Red kelpi, Ehlers-Danlos syndromc in, 982
facial evzema in, 1451
Red mange. See Demodicosis, in dog.
Heas on, 1449
Bed-legged widow spider, 484
fystrike in, 1449
Refsun disease, 31
frostbite in, 1447, 1450
Regulin(s), secretory, 543
fungal infections in, 1446, 1447
Relapsing polychondritis, 759
hair loss in, 1449-1450
Relief, antipruritie therapy with, 228, 229t
hutch burn in, 1450
Reovirus infection, in mice, 1443
lice on, 1449
Rcpellent(s), Hea, 499-500
localized moist (sore dewlap) dlermatitis in, 1445
fly, 502
lyuphorna in,1451,1452
topical, antiparasic therapy with, 427
mites in, 1448-1449
Heserve cells, 48
myiasis in, 1449
Resihist, 229
myxomatosis in, 1446, 1447
Resiprox, antipruritic therapy with, 229t
necrobacillosis (Schnorl's disease) in, 1445
Resmethrin, 426
neoplasia in, 1451-1452
Resocortol butyrate, adrenccortical suppression by, 232
nutritional disorders in, 1449
Rcsorcinol, 230
pasteurellosis (snuffes) in, 1444-1445
Respiratory ratc, in thermoregulation, 54
psoroptic mange in, 1447, 1448
Rete ridges, 10-13, 134-135, 138
scent glands of, 1450
Reticular degeneration, epidernal 142,145
scebarcous adenitis in, 1451
Reticulin, 36
self-mutilation in, 1450
Reticulum cell tumor, transimissible. See Trumsmissible ve-
Staphylococcus aureus in, 1445, 1446
ounmaiau
ulcerativc pododenmatitis (sorc hocks) in, 1445
Retin-A. See Vitamin A (retinol, retinoic acid, Retin-A).
venereal spirochetosis in, 1445- 1446, 1447
Retinal, 241-242, 1028-1029
viral infection in, 1446 
Retinoie acid, 234, 241-242, 1028-1029. See also Vitamin
Rabbit pox, 1446
A (retinol, retinotc acid, Hetin-A).
Index * 1513
Retinoic acid (Continued)
labrador (Continued)
 antiseborrheice therapy with, 919
cyelie follieular dysplasia in, 890
for actinic keratosis, 1079
dermal melanocytes of, 39
for epidermal dysplasia in West Highlard white terriers.
eosinophilic lermatitis and edema in, 1155-1156
929
fibrovascular papillommas in, 1284
 Retinoid(s), antiseborrheic therapy with, 1028
follieular dysplasia in, 971
inverse agonist, 242
food hypersensiivity in, 618, 1211
synthetic,234,1028
footpad hyperkeratosis in, 935
for granulomatous sebaceous adenitis,1146
graying in, 1015
in syste1mic therapy, 241-243
histiocytic sarcoima in, 1352
teratogenicity of, 1029
histiocytomas in, 1347
topical, 234
idiopathic leukotrichia in, 1021, 1021
Retinol, 1028-1029. See alsc Vitamin A (retinol. retirnic
lipomas in, 1308
acid,Retin-A).
lyrnphedema in, 990
antiseborheic therapy with, 919
mast cell tumors in, 1320
therapy with, 1036
mucocuaneous hypopigmentation in,1017-1018
Retriever, Chesapeake Bay, follicular dysplasia in, 971
masal hyperkeratosis in, 936
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 77t 
otitis exterma in, 1212
curly coated, follicular dysplasia in, 890, 971
pomphigus foliaceus in, 687
curly-coated, risk for non-neoplastie skin disordcrs in,
pododermatitis in, 305
78t
psychogenic dermatoses in, 1056
fatcoated, histiocytic sarcoma in, 1346-1347, 1352
pyotranmatic dcrimatitis in, 1104
Golden, acral lick dernatitis in, 1058
Tisk for neoplastie skin disorders and non-neoplastie
atopy in, 581
lumps in, 1237t, 1238t
benign fibrous histiocytoma in, 1354
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 80t
chondrosarcomas in, 1315
seborrhea in, 913, 915, 1032
fibro1nas in, 1282
skin pll in, 3
fibrosarcomas in, 1287
snow nose in, 1017
food hypcrsensitivity in, 618
squamous cell carcinoma in, 1251.
footpad hyperkeratosis in, 935
swealing in, 53
yraying in, 1015
vascular nevi in, 1386
heinangiosarcomas in, 1299
vitamin A-responsive dermatosis in, 1036
histiocytic sarcoma in, 1346-1347, 1352
 yellow, masal depigmentation in, 1017
hypothyroidism in, 852
photosensitivity in, 1080
idiopathic sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma in,
supranumery claws in, 1197, 1199
1136
zinc-responsive derrnatosis in, l120
juvenle cellulitis in, 1158, 1165
Reversc blot hybridization, 1239
lymphomas in, 1331
Rcverse T, 782-783
malignant histiocytosis in, 1346
measurement of, 784-786
mast cell tumors in, 1320
Rcvolution. Sec Selamectin.
melanocytic nevus in, 1390
Rex cat, 9
melanocytoma in, 1359
Cornish, follicular dysplasia in, 905, 971
mucocutaneous hypopigmentation in, 1017-1018
dermatophytosis in, 347
multiple collagenous cysts in, and renal pathology,
Devon, congenital hypotrichosis in, 959
1383
groorming for, 215
 nasal depigrnentation in, 1017
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 80t
pododermatitis in, 305
Rhabditie dermatitis. See Pelodera dermatitis.
pyotraumatic dermatitis in, 1104
Rhabdomyoma, 1313-1314
isk for neoplastie skin disorders and uo-neoplastic
Rhabdomyosareoma, 1281, 1313- 1314
lumps in, 1237t, 1238t
Rhinosporidiosis, 390-391
risk for nion-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 79t
Rhinosporidium seeberi,390
seborrhea in, 243, 1029
Rhinotracheitis infection, feline, 518, 524-525, 526-529
show nose in, 1017
Rhipicephalus sanguineus, 443-444,444,445
trichoepithelioma in, 1263
Rhizopus spp, 384
tnichoptilosis in, 895, 950
in normal Hora, of dogs, 338, 338t
trichorrhexis nodosa in, 950
Rhodesian Ridgcback, coat color dilution and cerebellar
yascular mevi in, 1386
degeneration in, 978
Labrador, aeral lick dermatitis in, 1058 
dermoid eyst (sinus) in, 936-937, 937, 1478
alopecia mucinosa in, 899
follicular dysplasia in, 971
atopy in, 581
idiopathic onychodystrophy in, 1198
 black, nisk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neo-
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-ncoplastic
plastic lumps in, 1237t
lumps in, 1238t
waterline disease of, 1175-1176, 1178
risk for nion-neoplastic skin disorders in, 80t
blastomycosis in, 392
trachyonychia in, 1199
calcinosis cutis in, 1399, 1399
zinc-responsive dermatosis in, 1120
chondroma in, 1315
Rhordococcus (Corynebuterium) equi, in abscesses in cats,
congenital hypotrichosis in, 958
311
15l4 · Index
Rhodotorula spp, dermatitis caused by, 375, 376
Ruffini's cnd-bulb. See Meissner's corpuscle.
in normal fora, of cats, 338, 338t
Russell body(ies), 188-189
Rhodotorula mucilaginosa, 375
Russian blne cat, grooming for, 215
Riboflavin, deficiency of, 1118
in hamsters, 144!
in mice, 1443
$100 protein, in celltype identification, 204t
in rats, 1453
Sahouraud's dextrose agar, 349
Rice paddy itch, 436
fungal culture in, 121-122, 123
Rickettsia felis, 493
Saffower oil, 209, 224, 227, 1028
Rickettsia rickettsit, 528-529
St. Benmard, callus dermatitis in. 1102
Ricketsin typhi.493
demodlicosis in, 465
Rickettsial disease(s), 528-531
distichiasis in, 1188
Ridaura. See Auranofin.
Ehlers-Danlos syndrornc: in, 982
 Rifampicin, systemic, dosage of, 284t
hypothyroidism in, 854
Rifampin, and β-lactamase-resistant antibiotic、 cy-adminis-
 d n p 
tration of, 283
lip fold intertrigo in, 1107
skin color change caused by, 1023
lymphormas in, 1331
Himadyl. See Carprofen.
pyotraumatic dermatitis in, 1104
Ringtail, in hamsters, 1441
Tisk for neoplastic skin dlisorders and non-neoplastic
in mice, 1444
lumps in, 1237t
in rats, 1454, 1455
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 81t
Ringworm. Sce Dermatophytosis.
St, Louis cncephalitts, 444
Rinsc(s), 214
Salicylic acid, antisebortheic therapy with, 918, 1026- 1027,
antifungal. 356, 356t,410
1036
conditioning, 211
 Saliva, in thermoregulation, in cats, 54
cream, fea. 498-499
Salivary gland tumor(s), 1281
formulations of, and efficaey of active ingredients, 218t,
SALT (skin-associated lymphoid tissue). See Ski-associ-
224
ated tymphotd tissue.
oil, 212
Salt-split skin, 694
 Rocky Mountain spotted feve1, 444
Saluki, black hair follicular dysplasia in, 962
canine, 528-529, 530-531
color dilution alopecia in, 967
Hocky Mountain wood tick(s), 444
hemangiosarcomas in, 1299
Rod(s), identification of, 116
risk for neoplastie skin disorders and non-neoplastic
Rodent(s), dermatophytes transmitted by, 339-340
lumps in, 1237t
plague in, 325-326
poxvirus carriage by, 520
adult-onset hyposomatotropisin in, 822
Rodent ulcer. Sec Indolent ulcer, feline.
follicular dysplasia in, 890
Roferan-A, 253
granlomatous sebaceous alenitis in, 1141, 1143
Rompun. See Xylasine.
hypogonadlism in, 844-845
Rotenone, antiparasitic therapy with, 427
ivermectin sensitivity in, 428
for feline demodicosis, 475
nasal depigmentation in, 1017
otic therapy with,1227t,1228
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
Rottweilet, alopecia areata in, 763
Jumps in, 1237t
calcinosis cutis in, 1399
risk for non-neoplastie skin disorders in, 8lt
congenital hypotrichosis in, 958
uveodennatologic syndrome in, 757
follieular dysplasia in, 971
San Joaquin Valley fever. See Coccidioidowycosis.
follieular lipidosis in, 899, 899, 900, 973-974
Sandflies,534
follicular parakeratosis in, 925, 926, 927
Sandimmne. See Cyclosporine.
haircoat of, 7
Sarcocystosis, canine, 533-534
histiocytic sarcoma in, 1346- 1347, 1352
Sarcoid, feline, 1285, 1288, 1289
listioeytomas in, 1347
Sarcoma(s), 1282
hypopigmentation in, 975
epithelioid, 1371-1373, 1372, 1373
idiopathic onychodlystrophy in198
fihroblastic spindle cel. See Fibrosurcona(s)
idiopathic onychomadesis in,1196,1198
histioeytic, 1346- 1347, 1351-1352
immunodefciency in, 278
disseminated, 1347
lcukoderma and leukotrichia in, 96
localized, 1347
lupoid onychodystrophy in, 1195
infectious. See Transmissible venereal tumor.
1naligant histiocytosis in, 1346
postvaccinal, 1317-1319,1318
rcticulum cell. See Lymphoma.
mvzie folliculitis and furuneulosis in, 304
soft tissue, 1281
risk for neoplastie skin disorders and non-ncoplastic
undifferentiated, 1281, 1319-1320. See also Neuroendo-
lumps in, 1237t
crine tumor(s), prinary cutaneous.
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 80t
Sarcophagu sPp., 501, 504
snake bites in, 1091
Sarcophagids, 503
vasculitis in, 744
Sarcoptes scabiei,481
vitligo in, 1008-1009, 1015
in guinea pigs, 1433
Round bodyies), 138
in hamsters, 1440
Ruffni corpuscle(s), innervation of, 61, 62
in mice,1443
Index · 1515
Sarcoptes scabiei (Continued)
Schnauzer (Continrued)
in rats, 1453
risk for neoplastic skin dlisorders and non-neoplastic
var.canis, 476,477
lutnps in, 1237t, 1238t
var. cunicul, in rabbits,1448
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 81t
Sarcoptic mange. See Scabies.
seasonal flank alopecia in, 891
Sarcoptic mite(s). See Scabies.
sebaceous gland hyperplasia in, 1271
Satellite ce(s), apoptosis of, 137, 141
Sertol's cell tumor in, 840, 843
necrosis of, 137
skin pII in, 3
Satellitosis, 137, 141
superficial suppurative neroltic deatitis of, 720,
Scabics, 98
721, 724-725, 729, 730
camine, 466, 476-483, 478
trichoepitheloma in, 1263
cause of, 476-477
viamin A-responsive dermatosis in,1036
clinical features of, 466, 478, 479, 480
standard, melanoma in, 1361
diagnosis of, 148, 479-481, 481-482
Schnauzer co1merlo syndroine, 227, 242, 930, 931--935,
pathogenesis of, 476-479
934,1029.1389
skin scraping for, 106
Schwannoma, 1281,1286, 1291-1294, 1292-1293
treatment of. 481-483
breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t 
feline, 477, 478, 480, 483-484
Seleroderma, localized, canine, 1142, 1146-1148, 1147
cause of, 476, 483
Selerosis, denmal, 161-162
clinical features of, 478, 484
Scolecobasidium humicola, 379
liagnosis of, 484,485
Scopulariopsis spp, in nornal Aora, of cats, 338, 338t
pathogenesis of, 483-484
Seottsh terrier. Sce Terrier, Scottish.
skin scraping for, 106
Seraping(s). See Skin scraping
treatment of, 484
Screwworm(s),503
in foxes, 477
Scrotun, skin of, histology of, 14, 36
in humans, 477, 478, 479, 483
varicose tumors of, 1386
skin scraping for, 101
vaseular hamartorua of. 1386
Scale, 87, 93
vascular nevi of, 1386
Scaling, 86
Sealyham terTier. Sec Terrier, Sealyham.
 in bacterial infection, 277
Seasonal Hank alopecia, 890-893, 891, 892
orthokeratotic, 86
Sebaceous adenitis, 95, 168, 925, 1029
Scar(s), 87, 97, 196
clinieal manageinent of, 242, 243
Scarlet red stain, staining characteristics of various sub-
gramulomatous, 199, 1140-1146
stances witl,130t
cause and pathogenesis of, 1141.
Schipperke, black hair follular dyslasia in 962
clinical features of, 1141-1144
color dilution alopecia in, 967
clinical managerment of, 1145-1146
pemphigus foliaceus in, 686-687
diagnosis of, 1143-1145, 1144-1145
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 81
in cats, 1142, 1]44
Schistosomuz dennatitis, 436
in dogs, 1141-1143, 1142, 1143
Schistosomiasis, 436-437
in rabbis, 1451
in hmans, 436-437
Sebaceous gland(s), 2, 41, 42, 43, 48-51, 50
Schmorl's disease, in rabbits, 1445
adenonas of, 1029
Schnauzer, giant, congenital hpothyroidism in, 852
clinical management of, 242
risk for neoplastic skin tlisorders and non-ncoplastic
in dogs, 1271, 1272
lumps in, 1237t
in gerbils, 1429-1430
seasonal fank alopecia in, 893
age-related changes in, 65
squamous cell carcinoma in, 1251
androgens and, 797
vitiligo in, 1015
atrophy of, 168, 170, 170
hair growth in, 5
carcinoina of diagnosis of, 1274, 1274
iniature, atopy in, 581
in dogs, 1271
aurotrichia in, 978, 1008-1009, 1022
cysts of, 1381
comedo syndrome in. See Schnauzer comecdo syn-
disorder of. in guinea pigs, 1437-1439
drome.
distribution of, 48
dnig reactions in, 721.
dysplasia of, 168-170
epidermal nevi in, 1389 
enzymes in,51
follicular dysplasia in, 890, 971
epithelioma of, diagnosis of, 1274, 1274
food hypersensitivity in,618
Finctions of, 48
gilding syndrome in, 978
hyperplasia of, 168-170, 1029
histiocytomas in, 1347
clinical manageinent of, 242
hypothyroidism in, 852
in dogs, 7254, 1271
lipomas in, 1308
in eyelid, 1188, 1189
 melanocytic neoplasms in, 1359
with greasy skin and haircoat, idliopathic, 1179, 1180
melanocytoma in, 1359
in dogs, atrophie, 168, 170
melanoma in, 1361
nornal,170
muliple pigmented plaques in, 1240, 1242
inncrvation1 of, 59
Mycobacterium aviu infection in, 315
melanosis of, 152, 153, 170
papillomavirus-associated pigmcntary abnormality in,
nevi of, 1380-1381, 1386-1387, 1387
1012
regulation of, 51
1516 · Index
Sebaceous gland(s) (Contimed)
Sesame oil, 227,1028
tumors of, 1270-1275
Setter, callus dermatitis in, 1102
breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t
English, atopy in, 581.
cause and pathogencsis of, 1270
benign familal pemphigus in, 947
clinieal fndings in, 1271-1273
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in, 982
clinical 1management of, 1275
idiopathie acquired cutaneous laxity in, 1173
diagnosis of, 1273, 1273-1275, 1274
Malassezia dermatitis in, 365
in cats, 1271-1273
multiple pigimented plaques in, 1240-1242
in dogs, 1254, 1271, 1272
Gordon, atopy in, 581*
in mice, 1444
black hair follieular dysplasia in, 962
in rats, 1455
juveuile cellultis in, 1165
Seba-Ilex. Sec Chlorhexidine, shanpoo.
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 79t
SebaLyt, 1026
vitamin A-responsive dermatosis in, 1036
Seboluix, 1026, 1028
Inish, acral lick dermatitis in, 1058
Seborhca.93
antithyroglobulin antibody(ies) in, 852
 and bacteriadl infection, 277
antithyroid antibody(ies) in、 789
canine, 208-209, 235, 1030-1036, 1031. See also Demo-
atopy in, 581
dicosis, tn dogs.
Ehlers-I Danlus symdrame in, 982
causc and pathogenesis of, 1032
epidermis of, turmover time for, 31
clinical features of, 1032
estrogen-responsive dermatosis in, 830
clinical 1management of, 1035-1036
graying in, 1015
diagnosis of, 1034, 1034-1035
hernangiopericytoma in, 1402
endocrine factors and, 1032
hypotlyroidisi in, 852, 853
environmental factors and, 1032
lynphomas in, 1331
in inflammation, 1032
melanocytoma in, 1359
nutritional factors and, 1032
melanorna in, 1361
primary, 227, 913-920, 1030-1032
Hasal depigmentation in,1017
breed(s) with preclilection for, 75, 227
pociodermatiis in, 305
cause and pathogenesis of, 913-915
psychogenie dermatoses in, 1056
clinical features of, 914, 915
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
clinical managemenl of, 916-920
lumps in, 1237t, 1238t
defnition of, 913
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 79t
diagnosis of 915-916,916-917
seborrhea in, 227, 243, 913, 915, 1029, 1032
secondary,227,1030-1032,1033
trichoepithelioma in, 1263
feline,1008,1038,1039,1040
Sex, and risk for non-ncoplastie skin disorders, 76
primary, 914, 920, 921
Sex hormone(s), 795-798. See also spectfic horrmwne.
Seborrhea oleosa, 228, 1026
Sex hormone ACTH response test, 798
in cats, 1038, 1039
Sex horinone dermatosis, 827-851, 1020
in dogs, 1030
 Sex hormone function test(s), 798
Seborrhea sicca, 208, 228, 1026
Sezary syndrome, 1331, 1338, 1339
in cats, 1038, 1040
Shampoo(s), 21l-212
in dogs, 1030
adverse reaction to, in miniature Schnauzers, 721
Seborrheic dermatitis, diagnosis of, 151
antibacterial, 223, 280
SeboRx, 1026
antifungal, 356, 356t, 409-410
Sebum, and acne, 1041
anti-inflamnatory agents in, 223-224
components of, 51
antimycotic, 223,918
functions of, 48, 51
antiparasite, 223
Secretory component, 31
antipruritie agents in, 223-224
Selamectin, 428, 498
antiselborlieic, 223, 916-918, 1026-1027, 1035- 1036
otie therapy with, 1229
carbaryl, for feline demodicosis, 475
regulation of, 424
contact tine for, 222, 223
systemic, antiparasitie therapy with, 430
deteryent, 211
Selectin(s), 545
fea, 498-499
in vascular endothelinm, 56
formulations of, and efficacy of active ingredients, 218t,
Selective IgA defciency, 278, 279t
221-224,222
Selective IyM deficiency, 2791
medicated, use of, 223
Seleniun sulide shampoo, 223
microvesiclc technology for, 221, 222
antifungal therapy with, 409-410
moisturizing hypoallergenie, 917
antiseborheic therapy withi, 918, 1026-1027, 1036
soap, 211
Self-destnietive behavior, 1055, 1057
Shar Pei, amyloidosis in, 767
Self-mutilation, in rabbits, 1550
atopy in, 581
Self-nursing, 1065-1066
body fold intertrigo in, 1106, 1107
Seminoma(s), 838, 843
demodicosis in, 461
Sensory perception, 59-61
dermal mucin of, 38
age-relatlcd changes in, 65
dermal mucinosis in, 164, 165
Serglycin,38
food hypersensitivity in,618
Sertoli's cell tumor, 830, 838, 840-843, 841, 842, 843
histiocytomas in, 1347
red hair with, 1022
hypothiyroidism in, 852
Index·1517
Shar Pet (Continued)
Shepherd (Contimued)
mast cell tumors in, 1320-1321
German, acral lick dermatitis in, 1058
mucinosis in, 996-997, 1158, 1174-1175, 1176-1177,
anyloidosis in, 769
1401,1402
anal sac disorders in. 1201
multiple pigmented plaques in, 1242. 1243
caleinosis circumscripta in, 1400
oral papillormalosis in, 1240
calcinosis cutis in, 1399
otitis externa in, 1207
chondrosarcomas in, 1315
papillomas in, 1243, 1247
chronic ulcerative blepharitis in, 1186
papillomavirus-associated pigmentary abmormality in,
collagen disorder of footpacds in. 980, 984, 984, 985
1012
color dilution alopecia in. 967
risk for neoplastic skin clisorders and nou-meoplastic
congcnital hypothyroidism in, 852
lunps in, 1237t, 1238t
congeuital hypotrichosis in, 938
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75,81t
contact hypersensitivity in, 108 1
seborrhea in, 913. 915, 1032
delayed growth in, 820
skin seraping from, 105
dermatomyositis in,940
superficial bacterial folliculitis in, 289, 293
dennatophiytosis in, 344--345
Shedding. 8, 210
distichiasis in, 1188
excessive, 894
Ehlers-Danlos syndrone in, 982
in ferrets, 1425
familial vasculopathy of, 189, 749-751, 987
in guinea pigs, 1437
libropruritic nodule in, 1284
seasonal,6
fy dermatitis in, 507
Sheepdog, Belgian (Belgian Tervuren), atopy in, 581
focal metatarsal fistulation of, 980, 985-986, 986
granulomatous sebaceous adenitis in, 1141, 1146
[ollicular dysplasia in, 971
hypopigmentation in, 975
follieulitis, furumculosis, and cellulitis in, 301, 306-308
lymphedema in, 990
food hypersensitivity in, 618
risk for non-neoplastie skin disorders in, 77t
furunculosis in, 301
vitiligo in, 1015
gramulomatous sebaceous adlenitis in, 1143
Old English, antithyroglobulin antibody(ies) in, 852
graying in,1014-1015,1015
demodicosis in, 465"
hair color of, 8
drug reaetions in, 721
haircoat of, 7
grooming of, 214
hemangiopericytona in, 1302
hair growth in, 5
hemangiosarcomas in, 1299
hypothyroidisnt in, S52
hypopigmentation in. 975
ivernectin contraindicated in,1229
hypopituitarisim in, 811
keratoacanthoma in, 1241、 1248
idiopathic onychomadesis in, 11981199
melanotrichia in, 1010
IC1-1 plasma levels in. See Xylasine.
pilomatrixoma in、1267
immunodefciency in, 307, 308
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
iverinectin sensitivity in, 428
lumps in, 1237t
keratoacanthona in, 1248
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 80t
lupoid onychodystrophy in, 1195
vitiligo in, 1015
Jyphederra in, 990
 Shetland (shelic), hasal cell carcinoma in, 1262
lymphomas in.1331
 bullous pemphigoid in, 695
mcdullary trichomalacia in. 895. 951
color dlnopin967
moeutaneous pyodemma in, 290291,291
cutaneous histiocytosis in, 1353
nultiple collagcnous nevi (nodular dernatofibrosis) in
dermatomyositis in, 938,940,942
986, 1380-1381, 1382-1383
distichiasis in, 1188 
myxomas and myxosarcomas in,1290
drug rcactions in, 721
Husal folliculitis and furunculosis in, 303
epidermolysisbullsa simplex in,938
pernphigus erythematosus in, 690
fly bitcs on. 502
pituitary dwarfism in, 819, 820
follicular dysplasia in. 971
pododermnatitis in, 305
histiocytomas in, 1347
psychogenic dermatoses in, 305, 1056
hypotlhyroidism in, 852
pyoderma of, 278,531
idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis of, 707, 717, 946-947
pyotraumatic dermatitis in, 1104
ivermectin contraindicated in, 1229
pythiosis in, 381
risk for neoplastie skin disorders and nou-neoplastic
risk for neoplastic skin disorders ancdl non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t 
lumps in, 1237t、1238t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 81t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 78t- 79t
Sertoli's cell tunor in, 840
seburrbeu in, 913, 1032
superfcial bacterial folliculitis in, 294
seninoma in, 843
systemic lupus crythematosus in, 703
snake hites in, 1091
Sheltie. See Sheepdog, Shetland (Sheltie)
sweating in. 53
systenic lupus erythematosus in. 705
follicular dysplasia in, 971
trichoepithelioma in, 1263
mucocutaneous bypopigmentation in, 1017-1018
tyrosinemia in, 994
risk for non-neoplastie skin disorders in, 75
vasculitis in, 744
Belgian. congenital hypotrichosis in, 958
vitiligo in, 1015
Garafino, Ehiers-Danlos syndrome in, 982
white, masal depiginentation in, 1017
1518 * Indcx
Shepherd (Continuedl)
Siberian husky (Continued)
zine-responsive dermatosis in,1120
bypothyroidism in, 1120
multiplecollgenus cysts inand renal pathy
idiopathic onychodystrophy in, 1198
1383
muocutaneous hyopigrnentation in, 1017-101$
Old English, lymphedema in, 990
nasal depigmentation in, 1017
Shetland sheepdog, See Sheepcdog, Shetland (Sheltie).
postlipping alopeciain97
Shiba inu, atopy in, 581
risk far neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
Shih tzu, atopy in, 581
lumps in, 1237t
distichiasis in, 1188
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in. 75. 8lt
glcocorticoid-induccd rcaction in, 246-247
snow nose in, 1017
Malassezia dermatitis in, 365
uveodermatologic syndrome in, 757
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
zinc-responsive derimatosis in, 1114-1115, 1119, 1121,
Jumps in, 1237t,1238t
1121
risk for non-neoplasti skin disorders in, t
Silicone(s), 1028
Shivering. in thermoregulation, 54
Silky terrier. See Terrier, Silky.
Shope fibroma(s), in rabbits, 1451- 1452
Silver nitrate, 227
Shope fbroma virus, 1446, 1451
Silver salt(s), 232
Shope papila(s),n rabbits, 1451
Silver sulfadliazine, 232
Shope pailma vius, 1446, 141
Sinulidae spp, 502
Short hair syndrome of silky breeds,888,897
Sinequan. See Doxepin.
Shorthaired cat(s), Ameriean, grooming for, 215
Sinus hairs (vibrissae, whiskers), 44-45, 45
domestic, grooming for, 215
 echanoreceptors and, 61.
double coat, 215
Sinus pad, 45, 45
dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa in, 939
Skin, aeidity of, antimicrobial effects of, 31-32
Ehlers-Danlos syndrounc in. 982
cleaning of, 210-213
cxotic, scborrhea in, 920
color of, drug-inrduced changes in, 1023
single coat, 215
dryncss of, 1025
Sialodaeryoadenitis, in mice, 1443
ecology of, 31-34. See also Microfora.
in rabbits,1447
cnbryonic, 2
in rats, 1447, 1453
cxamination of, 85-86
Siamese cat, acromelanisin in, 1012- 1013
gencral functions of, 1-2
Aguirre's syndrome in, 1021
reasy, with shaceous gland hperplsia iopath,
amyloidosis in, 767
1179, 1180
basal cell carcinoma in, 1262
gross anatomy of, 3-9
basal cell tunors in, 1261
byeration of in immune clfense, 32
congenital lypotrichosis in, 959, 962
measurement of, 32
cryptococcosis in,395
isnmunologic functions of, 25-26, 274. See also Skin
demodicosis in, 474
uasfisaumuru!
dermatophytosis in, 346
metabolisn of, 3
griseofulvin side cffcts in, 357
microscopic amatomy of, 9-65
grmoming for, 215
pH of, and anlimicrohial susceptibility, 282
hair color of, 8
in immue defense, 31-32
junctional epidermolysis bullosa in, 939
measurement of, 32
lipomas in, 1308
physiology of, 3-9
mast cell tumors in, 1322-1323
properties ol, 1-2
Mycobacterium auium infection in, 315
thickaess of, 3
periocular leukotnichia in, 1021,1022
Skin appentiage(s), fornation of, 2-3
plhotosensitivily in, 1080
Skin biopsy. See Biopsy.
pinnal alopccja in, 888, 900
Skin care, normal, 207-215. Sce also Grooming.
psychogenic dermatoses in, 1056, 1066-1067
 Skin extensibility index, 982
risk for neoplastic skin clisorders and non-neoplastic
Skin fold dermatitis. See Intertrigo.
Junps in, 1237t
Skin irmnune system, 549-561
risk for non-ncoplastic skin disorders in, 81t
 adhesion 1molecules in, 545, 549t
staphylococcal folliculitis in, 289
aging and, 560~561
systeinic lupus erythcmatosus in, 705
basophils in, 558
tail sucking in, 1070, 1070-1071
cell snrface antigens (determinants) in, nomenclature for.
urticaria pigmentosa in, 997-998
543-549,544t-545t
vitilhigo in, 1015, 1016
cell surface recxptors in, nonenclaturc for, 543-549
 Siberian husky, alopecia in, 888
complement in,559
 basal cell carcinoma in, 1262
cytokines and, 543-545, 546t
calcinosis cutis in, 1399
definition of, 549
dernoid cyst (sinus) in, 936
cicosanoids and, 559-560, 561t
eosinophilic granulorma in, 1154, 1155
endothelial cells in, 556
follicular dysplasia in, 890, 970, 97!
cosinophils in, 557-558
follicular parakeratosis in, 925
granulocytes in, 356
humoral componcnts of, 558-560
hookworm clermatitis in, 432
inune complexes in, 559
hypogonadism in, 844
keratinocytes in, 550-551
Index + 1519
Skin imnune system (Continued)
Spaniel (Comtinued)
Langerhans' cells in, 55I-552
cosinophilic granuloma in, 1154
Jipid mediators in, 559-560
ichithyosis in, 923
lymphocytes in, 552-553
persistent scratching in. 996
major histocompatibility cormplex (MHC) and, 343-548
risk for non-neoplastie skin disorders in, 77t
mast colls in, 553-556, 554
Cocker, amyloidosis in.、 768
neutrophils in, 356-357
anal sac clisoreders in, 1201
platelet-activating factor in, 559-560
atopy in, 581
tissue macrophages in, 553
basal cell carcinoma in, 1262
Skin lesion(s), anmular, 88-89, 102
black hair follicular dysplasia in, 962
arriform, 102
 cell proliferation kinetics in. 7
asymmetric. 84, 85
cheyletiellosis in, 456
bilaterally symmetric, 84, 85
congenital hypotrichosis in, 958
coalescing.89
distichiasis in. 1188
configuration of, 88-89. 102
cpidemmal mevi in, 1389
diffuse, 88
epidermis of, turmover time for, 31
distribution of, 90-93, 103t-105t
fibrosarcomas in, 1287
grouped, 102
food hypersensitivity in. 618, 1211, 1213
iris (central healing, target). 102
haircoat of, 8
linear, 88, 98, 102
hernangiopericytoa in, 1302
morplology of, 86-88, 87-101
histiocytormas in, 1347
polycyclic, 102
hypothyroicdism in, 852, 859
primary,86-87, 87-92
iliopathic ouychotystrophy in. 1198
primary and/or secondary, 86. 87, 92-96
ICF-I plasma levels in. See Xylasime.
scondary,86,87,97-100
immunodehiciency in, 279t
serpiginous, 102
lipomas in, 1308
single, 102
lynphomas in, 1331
stages of, 89-90,178
Malassezin dermattis in, 365
Skin seraping, 101-107, 115
melanocytoma in, 1359
Skin surgery. Sce Surgery.
mineralizcd car canals in, 1211
Skn-associated lymphoid tissuc, 26, 548-549
otitis cxterna in, 1212, 1213
Skin-So-Soft, 427, 499
papillomas in, 1240
Skunk odor, removal of, 214
plasmacyloma in, 1344
Sloughing, tissue, miscellancous causes of, 1086, 1089.
Pseudomuomas otitis extena in, 1210-1211
1.089-1090
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and mon-neoplastic
Snake bite, 1090-1091, 1092
lumps in, 1237t, 1238t
Snow nose, 1017, 1018
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 81t
Snuffes, in rabbits, 1444-1445
sehaceous gland hyperplasia in, 1271
Soak(s), for bacterial infection, 280--281
seborrhea in, 227, 243, 913-915, 914, 919-920, 1029,
Sodium borate, 495
1032
Sodiun hypochlorite, in Iopical therapy, 231
tail dock nenroma in, 1065, 1296
Sodium lactate, 235, 1028
trichoblastoma in, 1270
Solar dermatitis.1029, 1073-1081
trichoepithelioma in, 1263
canine, nasal, 1074-1077, 1075
vitamin A-respomsive clermatosis in, 1031,1036
of trunk and cxtremitics, 1075, 1079, 1080
white piedra in, 374, 374
feline, 1075, 1076, 1077-1079
Irish water, follicular dysplasia in, 890, 971
in white-cared cats, 76
 risk for non-neoplastic skin cisorders in, 79t
risk for, haircoat color and. 76
Japanese, seabies in, 466
Solar clastosis, 160, 160
lip fold intertrigo in, 1107
Sotenopsis inticta, 506
Springer, acral inutilation in, 995
Solganal. See Aurothioglucose.
anal sac disorders in, 1201
Solvent(s), exposure to, 31
basal eell carcinoma in, 1262
Somatonedin(s), 795
deep folliculitis and furunculosis in, 301
Somatotroph(s), 781
dermoid cyst (sinus) in, 936
Somalotropin. See Grouth hormone.
 Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in, 982
Soriatanc. See Acitretin.
follieular dysplasia in, 971
Southern blot hybridization, 1239
foodt hypersensitivity in, 618
Spariel, American water, adlt-onset hyposomatotropisn
liermangioperieytoma in, 1302
in, 822
histiocytomas in, 1347
pattem baldness in, 965
idiopathic onychomadesis in, I198
Brittany, amylidosis in78
melanocytoma in. 1359
(ollagenous mevus in, 1380- 1387
otitis extema in, 1212
histoplasmosis in, 400
hypothyroidism in, 852
930-931,933,934
imnunodefciency in, 279t
risk for ncoplastie skin disorders and non-eoplastic
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 77t
lumps in, 1237t, 1238t
 Cavalier King Charles, black hair follicular dysplasia in,
risk for non-neoplastie skin disorders in. 811
962
scborrhea in,227, 243, 913, 915, 1029, 1032
1520·Index
Spanicl (Continued)
 Squamous eddy(ies), 156
skin pH in, 3
Squamous pearl(s), See Horn pearis (squamous pearls).
trichocpithelioma in, 1263
Squirrel(s),ground,plague in,325-326
Spectrin, 20
rock,pla in,
Spherulite(s), 221, 222, 1028, 1035
 Staffordshire terricr. See Terrier, Staffordshire.
Spherulocytie disease, 1096, 1097
Stain(s), for fungi, 119
Sphernlocytosis, 1096, 1097
spccial, staining characteristics of various substances
Sphinx cat,957
urticaria piguentosa in, 997, 997-998, 998, 1009, 1010
with,130t
tissuc, 129, 130t
Spiculosis, 954, 956, 956
Spider hite(s), 478, 484-485, 486
Staphage Lysate. See Staphylococcus aureus, phage lysate
Staphylococcal foliculitis. See Folliculitis.
Spilopsylls cuniculi491,492
Spinous car tick(s), 442-443, 443
Staphylococcal hypersensitivity. See Bacteria, hypersensitic-
Spirochetosis, venereal, in rabbits, 1445-1446, 1447
ity to.
Staphyloxoccal pyoderma. See Pyoderma.
SPi. Sec: Stephylococcus aureus, phage lysate.
Staphylococcal scalded skin sydrome,inmice,1442
Spongiosis, 179- 180
Staphylococci, ardhesion molecules of, 276
diffuse, 179-180
as resident Hora, in dogs, 275
eosinophilic, 147
epidermal, 140-142, 143
autogenous vaccine against, 286
coagulase-negative, as resident flora, in cats, 33, 275
lymphoytic,147
in dogs, 33-34, 275
Sporanox. See Itraconazole.
as transient Aora, in cats, 275
Sporothrix schenckii, 337, 386, 388
Coagulase-positive, antibiotic susceptibility of, 282
culture ol, 121
as residennt fora, in cats, 33, 275
Sporotrichosis, 386-390
in dogs, 33-34
cause of, 386
as transient flora, in cats, 275
claw involvement in, 1195
identification of, 116
cutaneolymphatic, 386. 388
in anal sacs, 1201
cutaneous, 386
diagnosis of, 388, 388, 389
in hair follicle, 51
infectins causedby, dethof, an aniot tha
in cats,linical indings in,86,87,88,89
 clinical management of, 390
283
in dogs, elinical findings in, 367, 386, 387, 389
in dogs, 205
clinical management of, 390
primary,278
seborrhea and, 915-916, 918, 1030
pathogenesis of, 386
necrotizing fascitis caused by, 324-325
pododenmatitis caused by, 305
zoonotic aspccts of, 386-388, 387
otitis externa caused by, 1213- 1215, 1214t
resistance in, 276
Spray(s), 218t, 225
Springer spanicl Se Spael, Srnger.
toxc shock syndrome caused by. in dlogs, 324-325
Staphylococus qureus, and Malassezia pachydermatis, s-
Squamatization, definition of, 175
Squame(s), frorm mormal skin, 115, 116
ergism of, 33
as resident fora, in cats, 33, 275
Squanous cell, 23
infection by, in hamsters, 1439
Squamous cell carcinormna, 1021, 1029, 1249-1258
breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t
in mice, 1442
clawbed, brced(s) with predilection for, 1237t
in rabbits, 1445, 1446
phagc lysate (SPL), 286-287
clinical findings in, 125i- 1255
clinical management of 1256-1258
Staphylococcus capitis, as resident flora, in cats, 33, 275
dliagnosis of, 1255-1256, 1255-1257
Staphylococcus epidernidis, as resident fora, in cats, 275
glabrous, nonpigmented skin of trunk (actinic), breed(s)
in dogs, 33, 275
Staphylococcus felis, 276
with predilection for, 1237t
Staphylococcus haermolyticus, as resident fora, in cats, 33,
in cats, 1241, 1252- 1255, 1253- 1255
in dogs,1241,1241,12511252,12511253
275
Sfaphylococcus hominis, as resident Hora, in cats, 33, 275
in gerbils, 1429--1430
Staphylococcus hyicus, 275
in hamsters, 1442
Staphylococcus intermedius, 324-325
in mice, 1444
antibiotie susceptibility of, 282
in rabbits, 1451
antibiotie therapy for, 281-282
in rats, 1455
as resident fora, in cats, 33, 275
nasal, in dogs, 1251. 1251
of claw bed, 1196, 1198
in dogs, 33-34, 275
antogenous vaccine against, 286
of lnng, cutaneous netastases of, 1374
of pinna, in white-eared cats, 76
 in generalized dermodectie mange, 465
in surhcutaneous abscesses in cats, 310
papillomas and 1012,1013
risk factors for, 1249-1251, 1250t
 infections caused by, 275, 277
 otitis media caused by, 1214t
risk for, haircoat color and, 76
solar-induced, in dogs, 1251
strains of, 275
subungual, in dogs, 1252, 1252-1253
superficial folliculitis causcd by, 293
Staphylococcus scturt, as resident lora, in cats, 33, 275
Squamous cll carcinoma in situ, 1013
multicentric, 1254, 1258-1259, 1259-1260
Staphylococcus simulans, as resident flora, in cats, 33, 275
Staphylococcus warneri, as resideut Aora, in cats, 33, 275
inn cats, 527-528
Staphylococcus xylosus, as resident Hora, in dogs, 33, 275
Index * 152]
Steatitis,171-172
Suhcutis, 63, 63-64, 64
in cats, 1117, 1117-1118
age-related changes in. 65
Steinemema carpocapsae, 494
changes in, 171-172
Blg "dels umfiyduas
Subepidermal bubblies. See Subepidernal cacnolar alter-
Sterigmatocystin, 1101
ation.
Sterie eosinophilie pimal foliculitis, canine, 1213
Subepidermal vacuolar alteration, 172-173, 173. 697, 699
Sterile eosinophilie pustulosis, caninc, 1132-1133, 1134-
Sublamina densa area (lamina fibroreticularis), of basement
1136
membrane zone, 34
Sterle granuloma and pyogranuloma, idliopathic, 1136-
 Submental organ (chin gland), 48
1140)
Sucquet-Hoyer canal, 57
 Sterile granuloimatous dermatitis and lymphadenitis, juve.
Sudan black’ B stain, staining characteristics of various sub
nile. See Cellulitis, canine juvenile.
stancos with, 130t
Sterile panniculitis, 203
 Sulfa dnug(s), adverse effects and side effects of, 724-725
cytologic dliagnosis of, 114
resistance to, 282
in cats, 175, 311
Sulfasalazine, for subcorneal pustular dermatosis, 1128
Sterile pustular dermatosis, cytologic diagnosis of,
for vasculitis, 753
117
immunosuppressive therapy with, 672t, 677
Sterle pyogranuloma, cytologic diagnosis of, 13
Sulfonaumide(s), adverse effects and side effecls of, 283,
on feet, 305
721, 723
Sterile pyogranuloma-granulorma syndrome, 189
inmunosuppressive therapy with, 676-677
Steroid tachyphylaxis, 248
potentiated, efficacy of, against coagulase-positive staphy-
Stevens-Johnson syncrome, 740
lococci, 282
classification of, 732-733, 733t
systemic, for bacterial iufections, 281
Sticker tumor. See Transrnissible venereal tuor.
Sulfone(s), immunosuppressive therapy with, 676677
Stomatitis, burdock, 1091, 1092
SulfOxydex, 231, 1027
Stomoxys caleitrans, 500, 501
Sulfur, antiparasitie therapy with, 427
Storage mite- relaled hypersensitivity, 640
antiscborrheic therapy with, 918, 1026- 1027, 1036
Stratum corneum, emulsion in, in immune defense,
as flea repellent, 209'
274
for feline scabies, 484
in immune defense, 274
jnn powders, 224
Stratum geriminativim, 2
in shainpoo.223
Stratum intermcdium, 2
topical therapy with, 233-234
Streptococci, α-hemolylic, as resident flora, in cats,
Sulfur/benzoyl peroxide, shampoo, 356t
275
anifungal therapy with, 409-410
in dogs. 275
Sun avoidaunce, in discoid lupus erythematosus, 716
otitis media caused by, 1214t 
in pemphigus, 681-682
β-hemolytic, as resident Hora, in cats, 33
in pemphigus erythematosus, 693
in dlogs, 33
indications for, 672t. 1077, 1078
as transient fora, in cats, 275
Sunbum cells, 140
in oral Hora of cats, 276
Sunflower oil, 209, 235
in subcutaneous abscesses in cats, 310
Sunscreen(s), oral, 254
otitis media causcd by, 1214t
lopical, 236-237
in rabbits, 1445
Supcrantigen(s),667
infection by, in mice, 1442
Superficial necrolytic dermatitis, 868
in rats, 1452
Supracaudal gland. See Tait gland, of dog.
necrotizing fascitis caused by, 324
Supracaudal organ. See Tail gland, of cat.
nongroup-D, otitis media caused by, 1214t
Surface sampling, in diagnosis, 94- 107
 otitis exterma caused by, 1214t
Surface-acting agent(s), in topical therapy, 231-232
otitis media caused by, 1214t
pseudomycetoma caused by, 312
Luser surery; Hadiosurery.
toxic shock syndrome caused by, in dogs, 324
cold steel, 254-255
Streptococcus canis, 324
for acral lick dermatitis, 1063
Streptococusfaecalis,in anal sacs,1201
for otitis exiema, 1230- 1231
Streptomyces acermitilis, 429,430
for squamous cell carcinoma, 1256-1257
Streptomyces cyanogriseus,430
Swab sncar(s),for Malasseia spp.,368
Streptomyeshyroscopicus29
technique for, 115, 116
Streptotrichosis,cutaneous.See Jermatophilosis.
Sweat, epitrichial, properties of, 51
Striae, in hyperadrenocorticism, 802, 803
Sweat gland(s), 41, 42, 43, 51-54
Stromelysins, 37
adenomas of, 1279
Strongyloides stercoralis, in humans, 432
age-related changes in, 64-65
Strongyloides stercoralislike infection, 434
atrichial (eccrinc), 3, 51, 52, 52-53
Stud tail, 55, 215, 1047
carcinona of, 1198
Stye (hordolenm), 1186
tumors of, 1275
Subcomeal pustular dermatosis, canine, 1125-1128, 1126-
in cats, 1276
1128
in dogs, 1275
Subcutaneous chyle, 1090
epitrichial (apocrine), 2, 51, 51-52, 52
Subcutaneous emphysema, 1090
adenoma of, in hansters, 1442
Subcutaneous fat sclerosis. 1162-1163, 1164
careinoma of, 1276, 1278
1522 · Index
Sweat gland(s)(Contimued)
Telogen, 5, 5-6, 48, 49, 50, 341
changes in, 170-171, 171
Telogen defuxion, 6, 198, 888, 893-894
cystomatosis of, 1380-1381,1381
hair examination in, 108, 109
cysts of, 1366, 1379-1381, 1380-1382
in ferrcts, 1425, 1426
dilation of, 171, 171
in guinea pigs, 1437
necrosis of, 171, 171
in bumans, 893-894
in feline rhinotracheitis, 525
Temperature, and hair color, in cats, 8
nevi of, 1387, 1387, 1388
 and hair growth, 5-6
tunors of, 1275
Tenascin, 36t
in cats, 1275. 1276
functions of, 38
in logs, 1272, 1275
 in morphogenesis of skin appendages, 3
in epidernal renewal, 52
Tension line(s), 9
tumors of 1275-1281
Teratoma. cutaneous etastascs of, 1374
breed(s) with predileetion for, 1237t
Terbinafne, antifungal therapy with, 358, 413
cause and pathogenesis of, 1275
topical, 356t, 409
clinical findings in, 1275-1276
Terminal uridinyl transferase nick end labeling (TUNEL)
clnical management of 1279
method, for detcctiou of apoptosis, 140
diagnosis of, 1276-1277, 1276-1279
Terrier, Airedale, alopecia in, minoxidil for, 874
in cats, 1275-1276, 1276
cyclic follicular dysplasia in, 890
in dogs, 1272, 1275
demodicosis in, 461
Swcating, atrichial, 53
follcular dplasiin901
epitrichial, 53
hypothyroidism in, 852
Swimmer's iteh, 436
melanocytoma in,1359
Sylvatic ringworn. Sec Dermatophytosis.
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
Syntlecan, 38
lumps in, 1237t, 1238t
in morphogenesis of skin appendages, 3
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 77t
Syuwtic. for acral lick dermatitis, 1063
seasonal fank alopecia in, 823, 890, 893
Syphacia muris,1454
Sertoli's cell tumor in, 842
Syphacia obvelata, in mice, 1444
vascular nevi in, 1386
Syphilis, hamster, 1439
Amenican hairless, 957, 958, 958
rabbit,1445-1446
Bedlington, dermal perifollicular mineralization in, 168
Syringadenoma, 1276
distichiasis in, 1188
papillary,1277-1278
haircoat of, 8
 Systeimic hair embolisin, in rats, 1454-1455
melanotrichia in, 1010
Systeinie lupus erythematosus. See Lupus erythenatosus,
Boston, atopy in, 581
systemnic.
cadcinasis circumseripta in, 1400
Systenic therapy. See also specific therapy.
color dilution alopecia in, 967
broad-spectrum, 238-254
demodicosis in, 461
fbromas in, 1282
histiocylomas in, 1347
hyperadrenoxorticism in, 800
T eclls (T lymphocytes),in epidermal inmmunity, 25-26, 29
imast cell tumors in, 1320
Tabanus spp,
.502
mclanocytoma in, 1359
Tactile hair disk. See Tylotrich pad.
pattern baldness in. 965
Tactile pad. Scc Tylotrich pad.
pinnal alopecia in, 887
Taenia crassiceps infection, 440, 441
risk for ncoplastie skin disorders and non-neoplastie
Tail, common and less cownmon dermatoscs of, 104t-105t
lumps in, 1237t, 1238t
Tail biting, in dogs, 1064, 1064-1065, 1065
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 77t
Tail dock nellroma, 1065, 1296,
1296-1297, 1297
Strongylotdes stercoralis-like infection in, 434
Tail fold intertrigo, 1106, 1107
tail fold intertrigo in, 1107
Tail gland, of cat, 55
Bull, acrodermatitis in, 955, 988-989, 992-993, 1119
of dog, 54-55
actinic keratoses in, 1391
Tail gland hyperplasia, 227
immunodefcicney in, 279t
canine,1039, 1045-1046,1046, 1047
mast cell tumors in, 1320
feline,1039,1046-1048,1047,1048
nasal folliculitis and furnculosis in, 303
Tail sucking, in cats, 7070,1070-1071
pili torti in, 955
Taktic,470,473
pododermatitis in,305
Talin, 20
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastie
Tan Sal, 227
lumps in, 1237t, 1238t
Tannin(s), 680
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 77t
Tar, in haircoat, 213
squamous cell carcinoma in, 1251
Tar products, antiseborrheic thcrapy withi, 918, 1026- 1027,
Wardenburg-Klein syndrome in, 1014
1036
white, risk for skin disorders in, 76
Tazarotene (Tazorac), 234, 241
truncal solar dermatilis in, 1079
Tea tree oil, 236, 499
zinc deficiency in, 1119
Tegison. See Etretinate.
Cairn, atopy in, 581
Teichoic acid, 276
risk for ron-ncoplastie skin disorders in, 75, SIt
Telangiectasia, idiopathic, 1304-1305
Sertoli's ce:ll tumor in, 840
Index · 1523
Terrier (Continued)
Terrier (Continued)
Dandie Dinmont, hyperadrenocorticism in, 800
Staffordshire, aclinic keratoses in, 1391
fox, fbromas in, 1282
alopecia in, minoxidil for, 874
hemangiopericytonain. 1302
follicular dysplasia in, 971
mast cell tumors in, 1320
hemangiosarcomas in.1299
risk for neoplastie skin tlisorders and non-ncoplastie
histiocytomas in, 1347
lumps in. 1237t
mast cell tumors in, 1320
schwannoma in, 1292
risk for neoplastic skin clisorders anrdl non-neoplastic
wirchaired drug reactions in, 721
lumps in, 1237t, 1238t
haircoat of, 7
risk for skin disorders in. 76
hypogonadism in, 833
seasonal fank alopecia in, 891
Irish, footpad lyperkeratosis in, 935
squamous cell carcinoima in, 1251
melanocytoma in, 1359
truncal solar dermatitis in, 1079
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-ncoplastic
Welsh, jidliopathic onychodystrophy in, 1198
lps in, 1238t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in. 75
lisk for non-meoplastie skin disorders in, 75. 8[t
West Higlhland white, atopy in, 58 1
Jack Russell, black hair follieular dysplasia in, 962
demodicosis in, 46l, 462
dermatophytusis inl, 343
epidernal dysplasia in, 914, 928-929, 930-933
familial vasculopathy in, 989
food hypersensitivity in, 618
ichthyosis in1, 923
histiocytomas in, 1347
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 82t
ichtlhyosis in, 923
vaseulitis in, 744
ivennectin sensitivity in, 428
 Kciry blue, basal cell carcinoima in, 1262
Malassezia dernatitis in, 365
chlorambucil therapy in, side effects of 673
risk for meoplastie skin disorders aned non-reoplastic
deroid cyst (sinus) in, 1378
lumps in, 1237t
footpad hyperkeratosis in, 935
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75. 82t
haircoat of, 8
seborrhea in, 243, 913. 915, 1032
papillomas in, 1240
Wheaten, Ehlcrs-IDankos symtlrorne in, 982
pilomatrixoma in, 1267
food hypersensitivity in, 618
risk for ncoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
hypcradrenocorticisin in, 801
lumps in, 1237t, 12381
ichthyosis in, 923
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 82t
wire-coated, risk for non-neoplastie skin disorders in,
spiculosis in, 956, 956
75
vascular nevi in, 1386
wirchaired fox, atopy in, 581
Lakelaund, dernafomyositis in, 940
risk for non-ncoplastic skin disorders in, 82t 
Maltese, drug rcactions in, 721.
Yorkshire,atopy in, 581
epiphora in,1188
color dilution alopecia in, 967
traction alopccia in, 888
congenital hypotrichosis in, 958
vaccine rcaction in, 744
cyclie follcular dysplasia in,890
Manchester, Ehlers-Danlos syndromc in, 982
delayed gouadal imaturation in, 844
follicular dysplasia in, 971
dermatophytosis in, 343, 358
patterm balduess in、 965
dennoid cyst (sinus) in, 936
pododermatis in.305
distichiasis in, 1188
psychogenic dermatitis in, 305
dug reactions in, 721, 725
Seottish, atopy in, 581
glucocorlicoid-indueod rcaction in,246-247
demodicosis in, 461
grooming of, 214
dng rcactions in, 721
hyperadrenocorlicism in, 800
fanilial vasculopathy in. 988-989, 989, 990
ichthynsis in, 923
histioxytomas in, 1347
keratoacanthona in, 1348
lymphomas in, 1331
melamorierrna and alopecia in, 964, 974-975, 975
melanocytoma in.1359
melanotrichia in, 1010
melanoma in, 1361
postvaccinal vaseulitis in, 749
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastie.
risk for neoplastic skin disordlers andl mon-meoplastie
lumps in,1237t,1238t
lumps in. 1237t
risk for non-ncoplastie skin disorders in, 75, 82t
risk for non-ncoplastic skin disorders in. 82t
scasonal Hank alopecia in, 891
short hair syndrome in, 888, 897
 squamous cell carcinoma in, 1251
skin pH in. 3
vaseular nevi in, 1386
vaccine reaction in, 744
vasculitis in, 744
Testicular neoplasia, and skin,838-843
Sealyhan, risk for non-neoplaslic skin disorders in, 75
hyperandrogenism causedl by, 834-836, 835-837
Waardenburg-Klein syncdrome in, 1014
in ferrets. 1425
silky, burn injury in, 1082
Testosterone, for feline acquired synmetrie alopccia, 902
color dilutian alopecia in, 967
Tetracycline(s), anti-inflarmmalory and inmunomcdulatory
drug reactions in, 721, 725
properties of, 285
melanotrichia in, 1010
efficacy of, against coagulasc-positive staphylococci, 282
postvaccinal vascnlitis in, 749
against Staphylocoecusinternelius,282
short hair syndroine in, 897
for Rocky Mourntain spotted tever, 529
vaccine: reaction in. 744
in small aninals, dosagc and ad ministration of, 1418t 
1524·Index
 Tetracycline and niacinamide, 601
Tick(s) (Comtinued)
for claw discase, 1200
bites of, 435
for diseoid lupus erythematosus, 716
black-legged, 444
for idiopathic sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma, 1139
control of, 445
for peuphigus, 682
dlamage from. 435, 444
for vasculitis, 733, 754
dcer, 444
 immunosppressive therapy with, 672t, 677
in ferrets, 1519
Tetramethrin, 426
infestation of, 435
ixodid (hard), 442, 443-444, 444
cause and pathogenesis of, 1097-1098
Loe: Star, 444
claw involvement in, 1199
 Lyme borreliosis transmission by, 326
clinical fcatures of, 1089, 1092, 1098, 1099
Pacife (West Coast), 444
clinical managemcnt of, 1098- 1101
parasitic, 442-445
diagnosis of, 1098, 1100
Rocky Mountain wood, 444
Theumetopoea caterpillar, 506, 507
spinous ear, 442..443, 443
Theque(s). See Nest(s).
structure of, 440, 442
Therapentic plandevelopnt of, 9394
treatment ol, 445
Therapy. surgical. See Surgery.
Tiek bite hypersensitivity,. 635
systeniSSysteithrpy.
Tick paralysis, 444, 445
topical. See Topical therapy.
Tinea. See alsu Derrmatophytosis.
Therimoreceptor(s), 59-61, 62
in humans, 347
Theruoregulation, 53-54
Tissue sloughing, miscellaneous causes of, 1086, 1089,
 arteriovenous anastoimoses and, 57
1089-109)
Titanium dioxide, 237
topical, 356t, 409
Tofranil. See Imiprarnine.
Thiol(s), 680
Toluidine blue stain, staining charaeteristics of various sub.
Thiopurine methyltransferase, 673
stances with, 130t
Thiostrtn,tpical, fr bateril infti, 20
Tonofilament(s), 23
Thrush. See Candidiasis.
Toothrush (MacKenzie) specimen collection method, 120
Thymol(s), 230
Topical therapy. 217-237
antipruritie therapy with, 229-230
aclive ingredients in, 218t, 226-237
T'hymoma, 1049, 1049-1050, 1050
facetors affeeting, 217-220
 exfoliativc dermatitis and, 905
"Thyroid function test(s), 784-789
for hypersensitivity disorders, 563-564
in canine hypothyroidism, 862-863
for otifis extenua, 1225t-1227t, 1225-1229
in lymphocytic thyroiditis, 788-789
formulations for,217, 218t, 221-226
provocative, 787-788
Torula spp., 377, 378
Thyroid gland, biopsy of, 788
Torulosis. See Cryptocxccosis.
physiology of, 782783
Touch corpuscle. See Tylotrich pad.
Thyroid hormone(s), 782-789
Touch doune. See Tylotrich pad.
and hair growth, 6
Toxascaris leonina, in ferrets, 1526
and skin, 783-784
Toxic epidermal necrolysis, 88, 101, 740-742
in hyperadrenocorticism, 805
cause aund pathogenesis of, 734t, 740
serum levels of, determination of, 784-786
classifcation of, 732-733. 733t
in canine hypothyroidism, $61 -862
clinical feabures of, 735, 740-741
Lherapy with, dernatosis caused by, 1052
clinical management of, 742
Thyroiditis, immune-mediated, 862
definitian of, 740
Thyrotroph(s), 781
diaguosis of, 741
Thyrotropin (TSH).781
dng-indxxd,721
in hypothyroidism, S6 1
in cats, 723t, 735
recobinant, 784
in dogs,722t,735
serum levels of, dctcrmination of, 786
histopathology of. 741, 741-742. 742
Thyrotropin stimmlatiou test, 787, 862
Toxic shock protein, 275
Thyrotropin-releasing horinone (TRH),. 781
Toxic shock syndrome, staphylococcal, in dogs. 324-325
recombinant, 784
streptococcal, in dogs, 324
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone stimulation test, 788, 862-
Toxicosis, arsenic, 1101
863
miscellancous, 1101
Tliyroxine,782-783
thallium, 1089, 1092, 1098-1101, 1099, 1100
in hypothyroidism, 861
Toxoplasma gondi, 531, 532, 532
serum levels of, determinalion of, 784-786
Toxoplasmosis, feline, 531, 532
measurement of, 784-786
Trachyonychia, 1199
L-Thyroxine, adverse effects and side effects of, 725
Transepidermal elimination, 175, 176
Tiearilin, tic rapy with, 1227
Transepidermal water loss (TEWL), 32, 209, 220-221,
Tick(s), and canine babesiosis, 534
235,1025
aned canine chrlichiosis, 529-531
prevention of, 918, 1028
amd canine Rocky Mountain spotted fever, 528-529
Transglutainases, 28
argasid (soft), 442-443
Transient hypogammaglobulinemia. 279t
Index ·1525
Transmissible venereal tumor, 1365- 1369
Trichophyton mentagrophytes (Continued)
cause and pathogenesis of, 1365
 in cats, clinical findings in, 346
clinical fndings in, 1365-1368, 1366, 1367
incidence of, 339
clinical management of, 1368- 1369
spontaneous remission of, 354
diagnosis of, 1368, 1368, 1369
in dogs, clinical findings in, 343, 344-345, 346
Trauma, to claws, 1193-1194
histopathology of, 355
Trental. See Pentoxifyltine.
incidencc of, 339
Treponema pallidun subsp. endenicum, infcction by, in
in guinca pigs, 1530
hamstcrs, 1439
in hamsters, 1439
Treponema paralisuniculi, in rabits, 1445-1446
in mice. 1442
Trcsaderm, 232, 448, 452. See also Thiabendazole.
in normal Aora, 338
adverse effects and sidc cffects of, 724-725
in rahbis, 1446, 1447
Tretinin, 241
inl rats, 1453
topical, 234
inl vetcrinary clinie, 340
Trexan. See Nattrexone.
macroxeonidia of, 124, 124
Triamcinolone, adlrenocortical suppression by, 232
Inicroconidia of 124,124
adverse effccts and side effects of, 232
microscopic morplhology of, 124, 124
for aeral lick dermatitis, 1063
transnission of, 340
for pemphigus foliaceus, 689
Trichophyton rubrum, identilication ol, 124-125
inmunosuppressive therapy with, 672t
immunornodulatory properties of, 341
injectahle, 2474
in normal fora, 338
intralesional tlerapy with, 247
Trichophyton schoenteinit, in rabbits, 1446
otie therapy with, 1226, 1229
Wood's lamp exanination for, 119, 347-349
Triazole(s), antifungal therapy with, 411
Trichophyton terrestre, characteristies of. 339
Tribrissen. Sce Trimethoprin-sulfacdiazine.
in normal fora, 338
Trichiasis, 1188
in velerinary clinic, 340
Trichwbitharin ocellata, 436
Trichophyton tonsurans, 121
Trichobitharzia physellae，436
Trichophyton cerrucosum, conidia of, 121
Trichohilharzia stagnicolae, 436
in giinea pigs, 1430
Trichoblastoma, 1013, 1270, 1271
in1 rabbits, 1446
breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t
Trichoptilosis, 895, 950-951, 951. 952
Trichodectes canis, 487, 490
hair cexamination in, 108, 111
Trichoecius romboutsi, in mice, 1443
Trichorrhexis nodosa, 950, 951
Trichoepithelioma, 1254, 1263,1263-1264,1264
caninc, 895, 895
broed(s) with predilection for, 1237t
feline, 905, 905-907, 906
Trichofolliculoma, 1265, 1266
hair cxanination in, 108, 111
in guinea pig, 1432, 1439
Trichosporon spp., characteristies of. 407
Trichoglyphics, 4
derrmatitis caused by, 407-408
Trichography, 108
superficial mycoses caused by, 339
Trichohyalin, functions of, 42
Trichosporon beigeli, 374,407
Trichohyalin granule(s), I1, 42-43
Trichosporon cutaneum. See Trichosporon beigeli.
Tricholemmorna,1264.1265
Trtchusporor pullulans, 407
breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t
Triclosan, in shampoo, 223
Trichomalacia, hair examination in, 108, 111
Triadothyronine,782
edullary, 895
for feline acquired symmetric alopecia, 901
Trichomycosis axillaris, 327
in hypothyroidism, 861
hair exainination in, 108
serum levels of, determination of. 784-786
Trichophyton pp,336,339
measurement of, 784-786
enzynatie properties ol, 341
Trilostane, for canine hyperadrenocorticism, 811.
exainination for, 1201
Trinenopon hispidum, in guinea pigs, 1433
in cats, histopathology of、 353
Trimethoprim-sulfadiazine, adverse cffocts and side effects
in dogs. clnical findings in, 34-343, 344
of, 723, 724-725, 726, 730, 735
histopathology of, 349-353, 355
in small animals, dosage and administration of, 1418t
spontaneous remission of. 354
otic therapy with, 1229
treatment of. 358
superficial mycoses caused by, 338
Trimethoprin-sulfamethoxazole, alverse effects and side
transmission of, 339-340
effects of, 721
Trichophytort ajelloi, in dogs, clinical lindings in, 343
in small animals, dosagc and acdministration of、 1418t
Trchophytont equinum, characteristics nf, 339
systemic, dosage of, 284t
conidia of, 121
Tris EI>TA,tctherapy with, 1227128
Trichophyton mentagrophytes, cattery and multiple-cat
Triracamus (Caviacoptes) caviae, on guinea pigs, 1420,
household dermatophytosis caused by, 358
1431-1433, 1432-1434
characteristics of, 339
on rats, 1453
colonies of, morphology of, 123, 124
T'rixacarus dicersus, on rats, 1447, 1453
conidia of, 121
Trornbicula alfreddugesi. Scc Eutrormbicula alfreddugesi
identification of, 124-125
Tromhicula autunnalis. See Neotromhicule mtummalis.
immunomodulatory properties of, 341
Trombiculosis (chigger mites), 446-453. 447-449
1526·Index
Trombiculosis (chigger inites) (Contirued)
Ulcer(s) (Continued)
examination for, 106-107
management of, 267-268
Tropoelastin, 37
eosinophilic. See Indolent ulcer, feline.
Trmk, common and less comnon dermatoses of, 104t
pressure-point, drug-induced, in dogs, 722t
Tryptase, 39
rodent.See Incolent ulcer,fele.
 in cell type identifieation, 204t
Ulcerative dermatitis, feline, preauricular, idiopathic, 1177
Tuberculosis, Mycobacteriun outum, in cats and dogs, 315
with linear subepidermal fbrosis, 1167, 1i67-1168.
true, in cats and dogs, 314
1168
unnamed variant, in cats, 314
of upper lip, idiopathic, in dogs, 1178
Tug-of-war blister(s), 1103
Ulcerative pododermatitis, in rabbits, 1445
Tuiarcmia, 444
Ultraviolet hight. See also Photosensitivity.
Tumor(s), 87, 92
and cutaneous lupus erythematosus,702
contagious vencrcal. Sce Transmissible venereal tumor.
exposure to, miscellancous effects of, 1080- 1081
cryosurgery for, 258
pathogcnic rolc of, 1080--1081
electrosurgery for, 261
sereens for, in topical therapy, 218t
cyelid, 1188.- 1190, 1189, 1190t
Uncinaria dermatitis, 431-432, 433
granulare9425
Uncinaria stenwcephala,431,433
hypcrpigmented, 1013
in humans, 432
hyperthermia for, 237-238
porodenmatitis caused by, 305
melanocytic, breed(s) with predilection for, 1238t
Undecylenic acid, 235
inesenclymal, miscellaneous types of, 1312- 1320
Urea, 1028
neuroendocrine. See Neuroendocrine tumor(s), primary
in creams, 225
cutaneous.
topical therapy with, 235
non-neoplastie, 1375-1402
Urinalysis, in hyperadrenocorlicism, 805
of adipose origin, 1308-1312
Urticaria, 91, 571-574
of fibroblast origin, 1282-1291
cause and pathogcnesis of, 571, 572t
of histiocytic origin, 1013, 13461357
clinical features of, 572, 572, 573
of lymphocytic origin, 1013, 1330-1346
 clinical management of, 574
of neural origin, 1291-1297
diagnosis of, 572-574
ofvascularorigin101312978
drug-induced, in cats, 723t
pancreatic,870
in dogs, 722t
penipheral nerve sheath, 1492
histopathology of, 574
photochemotherapy for, 237
Urticaria pigimenlosa, 997, 997-998, 998, 1009, 1010, 1323
pigmented, 1013,1013
Uveodermatologic syndroine (Vogt-Koyanagi-HIarada-like
pituitary, 799
syndrome), 180, 748-749, 756-759, 758, 1187
plasrmacytic, 1013
primary cutaneous neuroendoerine. See Neuroendocrine
tumor(s), primary cutaneonus.
Vaccination, adversc cffects of, 725, 743-744, 749, 749,
radliation therapy for, 238
751, 752, 753, 755, 767
radiosurgery for, 263
against dermatophiytosis, 358
reticulum cell, transnissible. See Trensmissible venereal
Valium. See Diazepam.
tumor.
van Gieson's stain, staining characteristics of various snb-
sticker. Scc Transmissible venereal tumor.
stances with, 130t
surgical treatment of, 254 -255
Vanishing cream, 225
transmissible venereal. See Transmissible cenereul tumor.
Vasculitis, 180- 182, 182, 742-756. Scc also Blood ces-
Tumor seeding. 1475
sel(s), cutaneous.
Tumor suppressor gene(s), 1439
cause and pathogencsis of, 743-744, 751, 754t
Tunga penetruns, 488-489, 492
cell-poor, 743
Tylosin, cfcacy of. against Staphylococcus intermedius,
characteristics of, 742-743
282
classification of, 743
systemuic, dosage of, 284t
claw involvement in, 1195
Tylotrich hairs, 45
clinical features of, 744-750, 744-751
Tylotrich pad(s), 7, 10, 45, 45-46
clinical management of, 752-756
innervation of, 59
definition of. 742- 743
Merkel's cells of, 19, 20, 45, 46
diagnosis of, 751-752, 752-753
Tyrnpanic mernbrane, 1204, 1205
drug-induced, 100, 729, 729, 743, 747, 753
alterations in, 1216
in dogs, 725,729
in otitis mcdia, 1216-1217
eosinophilic, 182, 743, 744
palpation of, 1219-1220
food hypersensitivity, 743, 745, 747
ruptured, cleaners contraindicated with,1223
granulomatous, 743
Tyrosinase, catalytic activities of, 17
histopathologic indicators of, 181, 182t
6101 -8101 jo Ayp.
idiopathic, 743
in melanin pathway, 17
in dogs, 735
Tyrosinemia, 988-989, 993-995, 994
inmune complex, in rnice, 1444
inmune complex (septic), 743
in dogs, 670, 735
Llcer(s). 98, 196
 in injection site reaction, in cats, 723t
decubital, 1097, 1103
in dogs, 722t
Index · 1527
Vasculitis (Continued)
Vitiligo, 48, 1008-1009, 1015-1016, 1016, 1017
leukocytoclasie, 181-182, 182, 743
 in dogs, diagnosis of, 154
iliopathic, 735
Vizsla, granulonatous sebaceous adenitis in, 114l, 1142,
lymphocytie, 181-182, 743, 752
1146
mixed, 743
risk for non-neoplastie skin dlisorders in, 82t
neutrophilic, 181, 743, 752, 753
sebaceous adenitis in, 242, 1029
nonleukocyloclastic, 743
Vogt-Koyanagi-IHaracda-like syndrome. See Uueodermato-
paraneoplastic, 1375
logic syndrome Vogt-Koyanagi-Haradalikesy-
postvaccinal, 749,749,751, 752,753, 754-756, 755
drome).
vaccine-rolated, 743
Voight's linc(s), 9
Vasculopathy, cutaneous and renal glomerular, 749, 750, 752
von Willebrand’s disease, 858
familial, 987-989
Vulvar fold intertrigo, 1106, 1107
of German shepherds, 749-751
Vegetation(s), 94
Veil cells. 57
Waardenlurg-Klein syndrone, 1014
Venereal tumor(s), transmissible (contagious). See Trans-
Wagner-Meissner complex. See Meissner's corpuscie.
missible cenereal tumuor.
Walchin americam, 448-450, 450
Ventral comedone syndrome, 1103
Venule(s), cutancous, 56
Wart(s), in dogs, 525-526, 528, 530-531, 1340. See also
postcapillary, 56
Papillomais).
Verhoeff's stain, staining characteristics of various sub-
Warty dyskeratoma, 1267, 1268-1269
stances with, 130t
Wasp(s), 505-506
Verutoxin. 989
Water therapy. See Hydrotherapy.
Verrucae, See Papilloma(s);: Wart(s).
Waterline disease, of black Labrador rctricvers, 1175-
Versican, 38
1176, 1178
Vesicle(s), 86, 87. 90
Wax(es), 1028
epicderrmal, 148
Weber-Christian pannieulitis. 1157
intraepidermal, 190. 193t
Weibel-Palade body(ies), 56
subepidermal, 190, 1931
Weimerancr, blastomycosis in, 392
Vestibular syndrome, after ear fushing, 1224
 demodicosis in, 461
Vetalog. See Triamcinolone.
histoplasmosis in, 400
Veterinary dermatology, chronology of, 1459-1464
iliopathic sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma in,
Villi, dermal, 162, 163
1136
Vimentin, in cell type identfcation, 204t
iiunodeficiency in, 279
Vineristine, for systemic lupus erythematosus, 711
inmunodeficicnt dwarfisn in, 819, 820
Vinculin, 20, 22t
lipomas in, 1308
Viral disease(s), 517-528
mast cell turmors in, 1320
and immunodeficiency, 278
mnzzle folliculitis and furunculosis in, 304
in ferrets, 1421, 1421
pododermatitis in, 305
 in guinea pig, 1431
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
in mice, 1443
lumps in, 1237t
in rabbits, 1446
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 82t
otitis extena caused by, 1212
Sertoli's cell tumor in, 840
Vitanin(s), supplementation of, 209
Welsh corgi, dennatomyositis in, 940
Vitarnin A (retinol, retinoic acird, Retin-A), 234, 241-242
Ehlers-Danlos syndrorme in, 982
deficiency of, 1114-1115,1116
haircoat of, 7
therapy with, 1036
immunodeficiency in,279t
toxicity of, 1116
Wen(s). See Gyst(s), infundilnslar.
Vitamin A acid, topical therapy with, 234
West Highland white terrier. See Terrier, West Highland
Vitamin A-responsive dermatosis, 1008, 1036-1037, 1037,
tehite.
1116
Wet dressing(s), an tipruritie therapy with, 229-230
Vitamin B, deficieney of, 11l8- 1119
(Whcal(s), 87, 91
Vitamin B-coplex. deficiency of, 1118-1119
Whippet, color dilution alopccia in, 967
Vitamin C, dehciency of, in guinea pigs, 1434
congenital hypotrichosis in, 958
therapy with,for Ehers-Danlos syndrome,983-984
hemangiosarcomas in, 1299
for perforating dermatitis, 1170
idliopathie onychonadesis in, 1198
Vitamin D, analogs of, antischorrheie therapy with, 919, 1030
pattern baldness in, 965
deficiency of, 1116
pinnal alopecia in, 887
production of, in skin, 2
risk for neoplastic skin disorlcrs and non-neoplastic
Vitamin E, deficiency of, 11141115, 1117,1117-1118
bumps in, 1237t
1118
risk for non-neoplastie skin disorders in, 76, 82t
therapy with, 1118
truncal solar dernatitis in, 1079
for dermnatomyositis, 945
Whirlpool hath(s), 220
for discoid lupus erythematosus. 716
Wilder's retieulin stain, staining characteristics of various
for panniculitis, 1162
substances with, 130t
for pernplhigus, 682
Wirehaired griffon, follcular dysplasia in, 971
for pemphigus crythcmatosus, 693
Witel hazel, 227
for vasculitis, 753
Wohlfahrtia spp., 504
1528 · Index
Wohifahrtia vigit, in ferrets, 1419
Yeast(s) (Conlinued)
Wolfhound, Irish, callus dermatitis in, 1102
in cytologic diagnosis, 115, 117, 118t
hypothyroidisin in, 852
in surface debris, 155-156
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 79t
otitis exterma caused by, 1213-1215, 1214t
Wood's lamp exarmination, 119, 347349
otitis media caused by, 1214t
Woolly syncdrome, 843--845
stain for, 119
in male dog, 843
Yersinia pestis, 325
in abscesses in cats, 311
 healing of, age-related changes in, 63
Yorkshire terrier. See Terrier, Yorkshire.
components of, 264, 264t
factors affecting, 266
stages of, 264-266
Zeis' gland(s), 1185
management of, 266-268
Zinc,deficiency of,1020
Wright's stain, modified (Diff Quik), 116
and copper balance, 1119
for fungi, 119
in chinchilla, 1417
in micc, 1443
in rabbits, 1449
Xanthine oxidase, 673
in rats, 1453
Xathogranulorna(s),preauricular,1137,1137
supplementation of, 1120-1122
Xanthoma(s), 869, 873, 873-874
Zinc 0xide, 237
Xanthomatosis, in diabetic dogs, 868
Zinc-responsive dermatosis, 1114-1115, 1119-1122, 1121
Xenodine. See Polyhydroxydine.
claw involveinent in, 1199
Xerosis, 1025
Zoonoses. See also Public health comsiderations.
X-linked ichthyosis, 31
reverse, 340
Xylazine, in diagnosis of GHI deficiency, 795
Zygomycetes, 384
Xylohypha bantiana,379
examination for, specimen collectiou for, 119
Xylohypha emmonsi, 379
Zygomycosis, 377, 384-386, 385
Zygomycota, 377
cycloheximide sensitivity of, 121
Yeast(s),、336, 337, 370, 373. See also Fungus/fungi; Micro-
Zykin,22t
fora.
and acne, 1041