OPHTHALMIC
DISEASE
IN
ETERINARY
V
MEDICINE
CHARLES L.MARTIN
MANSON
PUBLISHING
OPHTHALMIC
DISEASEIN
ETERINARY
MEDICINE
Charles L. Martin DVM, MS, DAcVO
 Emeritus Professor
University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA
Visiting Professor
Auburn University, Alabama, USA
MANSON PUBLISHING/THE VETERINARY PRESS
Copyright ? 2005 Manson Publishing Ltd
ISBN: 1-84076-016-8
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
written permission of the copyright holder or in accordance with the
provisions of the Copyright Act 1956 (as amended), or under the terms of any
licence permitting limited copying issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency.
33-34 Alfred Place, London WC1E 7DP, UK.
Any person who does any unauthorized act in relation to this publication
may be liable to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages.
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
For full details of all Manson Publishing Ltd titles please write to:
Manson Publishing Ltd, 73 Corringham Road, London NW11 7DL, UK.
Tel: +44(0)20 8905 5150
Fax: +44(0)20 8201 9233
Website: ww w.manson-publishing.com
Commissioning editor: Jill Northcott
Project manager: Paul Bennett
Copy-editors: Ruth Maxwell and Peter Beynon
Cover and book design: Cathy Martin, Presspack Computing Ltd
Colour reproduction: Tenon &t Polert Colour Scanning Ltd, Hong Kong
Printed by: Grafos SA, Barcelona, Spain
Contents
Preface
4
 Problem-Based Management of Ocular
Emergencies
93
Contributors
6
Introduction
93
Blindness
94
Abbreviations
8
5
Principles of Ophthalmic Surgery
105
Anamnesis and the Ophthalmic Examination
11
Introduction
105
Anamnesis
11
Patient preparation for surgery
105
 Ophthalmic examination
12
Anesthesia/sedation
105
References
38
 Preparation of the surgical field
106
 Patient positioning and exposure of the globe
107
2
 Ophthalmic Pharmacology
41
Instrumentation
108
Routes of administration
41
 Postoperative care
112
Antimicrobial agents
45
References
112
 Topical antiviral agents
49
Miotics (cholinergic agonists)
49
 Orbit and Globe
113
Mydriatics
51
Anatomy
113
 Beta adrenergic blockers
53
Vision in domestic animals
115
Diuretics
54
Diseases of the orbit
116
 Artificial tears
55
Diseases of the globe
131
Dyes
55
References
141
Topical anesthetics
56
Matrix metalloproteinase inhibitors
56
Eyelids
145
Glucocorticoids
57
Introduction
145
Prostaglandin inhibitors (NSAIDs] and
Anatomy
145
prostaglandin analogs
59
Physiology
147
Antihistamines and decongestants
60
Diseases of the eyelids
148
Immunosuppressive drugs
61
References
179
Antifibrin agents
62
Viscoelastic agents
62
8
Conjunctiva and Third Eyelid
183
References
63
Anatomy and physiology
183
Examination of the conjunctiva
184
3 Basic Ocular Pathology
71
Diseases of the conjunctiva
185
Overview of inflammation
71
Trauma-associated conditions
200
Acute inflammation
71
Miscellaneous conjunctival conditions
203
Chronic inflammation
80
 Congenital diseases of the third eyelid
204
Immune-mediated inflammation
84
Acquired diseases of the third eyelid 
205
 Abnormal cell growth and neoplasia
86
Infectious causes of inflammation of the
References
91
third eyelid 
210
Lacerations of the third eyelid 
210
Foreign bodies of the third eyelid
211
References
214
9  Lacrimal System
219
13 Lens
369
 Anatomy and physiology
219
 Anatomy and physiology
369
Diseases of the lacrimal apparatus 
222
Diseases of the lens
373
References
237
References
395
10 Cornea and Sclera
241
14 Vitreous and Ocular Fundus
401
 Anatomy and physiology
241
Vitreous
401
Diseases of the cornea
245
Diseases of the vitreous
402
 Diseases of the sclera
286
Ocular fundus
405
References
288
Diseases of the retina and choroid
413
 Diseases of the optic nerve
449
11 Anterior Uvea and Anterior Chamber
298
References
460
 Anatomy and physiology
298
Diseases of the iris and ciliary body
303
15 Presumed Inherited Ocular Diseases
471
 Altered aqueous humor
325
Introd uction
471
Neoplasia of the iris and ciliary body
326
Acknowledgements
472
References
330
References
488
12 Glaucoma
337
Appendix 1 - Systemic Disease Rule Outs
Introduction
337
Based on Ocular Lesions
493
Anatomy and physiology
337
 Clinical signs of glaucoma
340
Appendix 2 - Glossary
495
 Diagnosis of glaucoma
344
Classification of glaucoma
345
Index
499
Therapy of primary glaucoma
356
 Therapy of secondary glaucoma
361
 Therapy of absolute glaucoma
362
Prophylaxis
364
References
364
Preface
This text is not meant as an encyclopedic answer to all
to point out deficiencies in our knowledge or point out
veterinary ophthalmology questions, but rather to cover
conflicting views of which the reader may not be aware.
the vast majority of questions which are likely to arise in
It is frightening to realize how little “hard data' are avail-
 veterinary practice. The intent is not to make specialists 
able in clinical veterinary medicine. We are reminded of
out of all who read this text, but to help the generalists
this by our clients who daily ask specific questions which
to make better informed decisions regarding their
we cannot answer. The latest journal article or the most
patients. That information may allow the practitioner to
recent continuing education program does  not
handle the problem with more confidence, refer the
automatically take precedence over previous data and
patient with a better workup in a more timely manner, or
clinical views.
may simply allow more accurate client education
In addition, I wish to salute those many individuals
regarding an ocular condition or treatment.
who over the years have dedicated their careers to basic
While a small number of ophthalmologists feel they
and clinical ophthalmic research and publication of
should see all patients with eye problems, the reality is
scholarly work upon whose shoulders this book rests. [
that the general practitioner can competently manage a
hope to have done justice to their endeavors and
variety of ocular conditions if well informed. The
apologize to any whose work of origination of data
difficult part for all of us is to realize when we need
and/or theories have inadvertently been omitted.
additional help. Having worked in a referral institution
 Lastly, I wish to thank Manson Publishing for having
my entire career, I have come to realize the best referrals
'uoadwoo oi 1 ansind on ioaloid au u yey qanoua
 come from the best informed general practitioners.
Jill Northcott for her encouragement to publish it, and
Dogma regarding clinical conditions becomes easily
Paul Bennett and Ruth Maxwell whose meticulous
esta blished, often without good scientific validation. At
attention to detail and patience with my response to
times the busy practitioner may find more information in
queries in the copy editing process made the manuscript
I 'alqns e snoge mouy oi paiuem aus/ay uei yooq s
infinitely better.
realize that we are all looking for one or two sentence
answers to all of our questions, but it is also important
Charles L. Martin
Contributors
K. PAIGE CARMICHAEL DVM, PHD, D1. ACVP, DACVP
Associate Professor
 Department of Veterinary Pathology
College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Georgia 
Athens, USA
KRISTINA R. VIGANTAS DVM, Dip. ACVO
Staff Ophthalmologist
Veterinary Eye Care
Bessemer, Alabama, USA
R. DAVID WHITLEY DVM, MS, Dip. ACVO
Professor and Head of Department of Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
Auburn University
Auburn, Alabama, USA
DEDICATION
I would like to dedicate this book to my wife, Marilyn, and to my family.
A special acknowledgment is due to my patients and their owners who have endured my life-long learning curve.
It is hoped that this text can shorten the learning curve for others.
8
Abbreviations
ACAID anterior chamber-associated immune
DNP disophenol
de viation
DSH domestic shorthaired (cat)
ACTH adrenocorticotropic hormone
ECM extracellular matrix
ACVO American College of Veterinary
ECVO European College of Veterinary
Ophthalmologists
Ophthalmologists
ADCC antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity
EDTA ethylenediamine tetra-acetic acid
AMS aquired immunodeficiency syndrome
ELISA enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
ANA antinuclear antibody
ERD early retinal degeneration
Ara-A adenine arabinoside
ERG electroretinogram
ASD anterior segment dysgenesis
ERU equine recurrent uveitis
BCG bacillus Calmette Guérin
ESE eye scheme examiners
BIO binocular indirect ophthalmoscope
FDA Food and Drugs Administration
BUT (tear) break-up time
FeLV feline leukemia virus
BVD bovine virus diarrhea
FeSV feline sarcoma virus
CA carbonic anhydrase
FHV feline herpesvirus
CAI carbonic anhydrase inhibitor
FIP feline infectious peritonitis
CAV-1,2 canine adenovirus-1,2
FIV feline immunodeficiency virus
CBC complete blood count
FNA fine needle aspiration
CCC continuous circular capsulorrhexis
5-FU 5-fluorouracil
CE corneal endothelium
GAG glycosaminoglycan
CEA Collie eye anomaly
GME granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis
CERF Canine Eye Registry Foundation
GMP guanosine monophosphate
CNS central nervous system
GM1, GM2 gangliosidosis
CPC cyclophotocoagulation
GSD German Shepherd Dog
CPK creatine phosphokinase
H&E hematoxylin and eosin
 CPRA central progressive retinal atrophy
HETE hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid
CSF cerebrospinal fluid
HMG-CoA hydroxymethyglutaryl-CoA
CT computed tomography
 IBK infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis
D diopter
IBR infectious bovine rhinotracheitis
DD disk diameter
ICH infectious canine hepatitis
DLH domestic longhaired (cat)
MU idoxuridine
DMSO dimethyl sulfoxide
IFA indirect fluorescent antibody
DNA deoxyribonucleic acid
IFN interferon
ABBREVIATIONS
IL- interleukin-
PHTVL persistent hyperplastic tunica
i.m. intramuscularly
vasculosa lentis
IOL intraocular lens
PFM preiridal fibroblastic membrane
IOP intraocular pressure
PLD pectinate ligament dysplasia
 IRBP interphotoreceptor retinoid-binding protein 
PLR pupillary light reflex
i.v. intravenously
PMMA polymethyl methacrylate
KCS keratoconjunctivitis sicca
PMN polymorphonuclear neutrophil
KP keratic precipitate
p.o. per os
LE lupus erythematosus
PPM persistent pupillary membrane
LIU lens-induced uveitis
PRA progressive retinal atrophy
MAC membrane attack complex
prcd progressive rod-cone degeneration
MCF malignant catarrhal fever
(photoreceptor degeneration)
MG Marcus Gunn (pupil)
PTVL persistent tunica vasculosa lentis
MLV modified live vaccine
PVP polyvinylpyrrolidone
MMP matrix metalloproteinase
RBC red blood cell
MOC multiple ocular coloboma
rcd rod-cone dysplasia
MRI magnetic resonance imaging
rd rod dysplasia
 MSH melanocyte-stimulating hormone
RMSF Rocky Mountain spotted fever
 NGESK nodular granulomatous episclerokeratitis
 RPE retinal pigmented epithelium
NMDA N-methyl D-aspartate
SARDS sudden acquired retinal degeneration
NSAM nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug
syndrome
OD oculus dexter; right eye
s.c. subcutaneously
OP oscillatory potential
SCC squamous cell carcinoma
OS oculus sinister; left eye
SEM scanning electron microscopy
OU oculus uterque; each eye
SLE systemic lupus erythematosus
PAF platelet activating factor
SPF specific pathogen-free
PAS peripheral anterior synechia
 SPL subpalpebral lavage
PCO posterior capsular opacification
STT Schirmer tear test
PCR polymerase chain reaction
TCTL cytotoxic T-cell
PCV packed cell volume
TFT trifluorothymidine
PD pupillary distance
TH tyrosine hyroxylase
PDE phosphodiesterase
TIMP tissue inhibitor of matrix
PDGF platelet-derived growth factor
metalloproteinases
PDT parotid duct transposition
TNF tumor necrosis factor
PE pigmented epithelium
tPA tissue plaminogen activator
PERG patterned electroretinogram
UV ultraviolet
PG prostaglandin
VEP visual evoked potential
PGAG polysulfonated glycosaminoglycan
VKH Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome
PHPV persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous
YAG neodymium:yttrium, aluminum, and garnet
laser
This page intentionally left blank
11
Anamnesis and the
Ophthalmic Examination
ANAMNESIS
While ocular discharge is typical of ocular surface and
adnexal disease, intraocular disease and the systemic
 In a busy general practice the gathering of historical data
history should not be overlooked.
pertaining to ocular complaints is often neglected or
limited to what the owner volunteers. Although many
Ocular color changes
 ophthalmic diagnoses are anatomic diagnoses, based on 
Color changes may be due to conjunctival and episcleral
direct visual inspection and augmented by known breed-,
hyperemia associated with conjunctivitis, scleritis,
age-, and species-related syndromes, the importance of
uveitis, or glaucoma. Bulbar conjunctival hyperemia may
the history should not be minimized. Not only should the
be diffuse, involving capillaries and large vessels as with
ocular history be scrutinized but the general medical
conjunctivitis, or selective, involving mainly the larger
history should be included, as many systemic states may
conjunctival vessels and deeper episcleral vessels with
be manifest in the eye and its adnexa.
uveitis, glaucoma, and scleritis. 
 Subconjunctival
With experience, the breed, age, and occasionally the
hemorrhage also produces a red bulbar conjunctiva,
sex are important data, as many ocular syndromes are
either in a sector or, occasionally, involving the entire
inherited or at least have a breed predisposition {see
circumference of the conjunctiva. The normal variation
Chapter 15: Presumed inherited ocular diseases),
of a unilateral or bilateral nonpigmented third eyelid
The owner's complaints are usually among
the
margin may make the eye look redder and, indeed, a
following: decreased yvision or blindness, (
ocular
non-pigmented third eyelid is probably more susceptible
discharge, ocular color changes, pain, an opacity or film,
 to irritation than the pigmented conjunctival surface.
pupillary changes, and exophthalmos/enlarged eye(s).
Corneal opacities may produce red (granulation,
These complaints form the basis for the problem-
intense neovascularization, hemorrhage), white (lipids,
oriented approach to ophthalmology, and are discussed
calcium, scar, edema, fungal plaques), or black (melanin
in more detail in subsequent chapters.
pigment, corneal sequestrum in cats, demetiaceous fungi)
color changes.
Problems
 Intraocular color changes may arise from the aqueous
Decreased vision or blindness
humor, iris, or lens. Aqueous humor color changes may
Depending on the function of the dog, the environment,
be red with hyphema, white to gray with hypopyon,
the amount of vision lost, unilateral versus bilateral loss,
fibrin, or lipids, and brown to black when filled with
and the rapidity of development, the historical data may
free-floating iris cysts. Iris color changes are usually most
be accurate or mislea ding. Insidious loss of vision such as
dramatic with unilateral involvement and with lightly
progressive retinal atrophy in the house dog
is
 pigmented irides. The brown iris becomes darker and the
notoriously late in its course when the animal
is
blue iris becomes brown with uveitis or when infiltrated
presented. Dogs that work by sight are more critically
with pigmented tumors. Iridal redness may be observed
(sioalqo Aueuoueis snsiaa Suaow) adki oi se paienieaa
with intense neovascularization and engorgement and
and degree of deficiency. Nonleading questions should be 
with petechial/ecchymotic hemorrhage in the blue irides.
asked regarding night vision, day vision, and ability to
The latter changes are not often obvious in the darker
see moving objects as opposed to stationary objects, and
compact irides. Occasionally, a blue iris may turn green
the circumstances under which the visual loss was noted.
in an icteric animal.
This information must then be interpreted in light of the
 Lens color changes are typically in shades of gray-
animal's function and environment and the owner's
white with aging and white with cataract formation.
ability to discriminate. Most animals are not presented
Rarely, hemorrhage may occur into the lens associated
with a complaint of decreased vision unless the condition
with congenital vascular anomalies such as persistent
is bilateral and relatively severe.
hyperplastic primary vitreous (PHPV).
Ocular discharge
Ocular pain
The type of discharge should be noted and historical data
Blepharospasm and rubbing the eye(s) are obvious signs
regarding chronicity, progression and modification by
of pain noted by owners but ocular pain often manifests
therapy, season, and environment should be obtained.
in a subtle manner with general malaise, depression,
12
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
 excessive sleeping, and a worsening of the temperament.
with instructions. Asking to see the remaining
These signs are often not noted by the owners until
medication may allow an assessment of whether the
improvement occurs and retrospective comparisons are
 medication has been given as frequently or for as long as
made. In humans, conjunctival pain is described as a
was claimed.
foreign body sensation, corneal pain as a sharp ocular
Many ocular problems are breed related and it is often
ued auoepeau e uano si uied iejnoonu pue "uied
desirable to establish possible inheritance, although the
radiating over the trigeminal nerve distribution. Para-
necessary information is often not available. In most
 doxically, superficial corneal ulceration is often more
instances, genetic syndromes are inferred by the
painful than deep ulceration due to the concentration of
occurrence of a known syndrome in a particular age and
nerve fibers under the corneal epithelium'. Species
breed of animal (see Chapter 15, p.471).
variations also exist, as cats and horses are typically
As the eye often manifests systemic illness, it is
more symptomatic with conjunctivitis and corneal
imperative that possible systemic ramifications be
disease than dogs.
considered. In addition, topical medications may have
systemic side-effects and, conversely, systemic drugs may
Opacities
have ocular side-effects. Candidates for ocular surgery
Opacities or films over or in the eye may result from
need to be evaluated preoperatively for systemic disease.
prolapse of the third eyelid; tenacious ocular discharges;
Historical data pertaining to environmental factors
corneal opacities; fibrin; blood; inflammatory cells, or
such as animal exposure, type of housing, bedding,
masses in the anterior chamber; and cataracts. Historical
fenced yard, dusts, irritants such as fumes and fiberglass,
data regarding chronicity, laterality, constant or inter-
and function of the animal may help to establish an
mittent occurrence, progression, and precipitating
etiologic diagnosis for a previously unresolved problem.
factors should be obtained. Protrusion of the third eyelid
is often described by owners as "the eye rolling up into
With experience, the clinician will note that many
the head'.
ocular syndromes ha ve predicta ble histories but
he/she should always be on the lookout for 'red
Pupillary changes
herrings', which are common with historical data.
Alterations in pupil size are usually noted when
unilateral or when accompanied by another ocular
complaint such as blindness, which draws the owner's
 attention to the eye. Alterations in pupil size are most
OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION
1o 'sapul pauid aall ym saaa ui paaiaso aisea
against the background of a white cataract. Ocular
RESTRAINT
disease should always be ruled out as the cause for
The best restraint for ophthalmic examination is
altered pupil size, shape, and mobility before proceeding
usually the least amount possible. The inexperienced
to neurologic ca uses.
examiner usually mistakenly assumes that chemical
sedation will facilitate the examination and make up for
Exophthalmos/buphthalmos
deficiencies in technique. While sedation is routine in
Enlarged or prominent eyes are most dramatic when
large animal ophthalmic examinations, it is rarely
unilateral. The condition may be acute or chronic in
 necessary in small animals.
nature, and is often accompanied by another complaint
One of the most formidable obstacles to a good
such as red eye, pain, ocular discharge, or a film over the
 ophthalmic examination is protrusion of the third eyelid.
eyes.I
Differentiation  between 
éxophthalmos and
Protruding third eyelids can usually be circumvented by
buphthalmos is usually not difficult but in brachy-
keeping the animal alert, off balance, or anxious.
cephalic breeds and animals with only one eye, mild
Movement of the head, positioning over the edge of the
degrees of the problem may be difficult to detect for even
table, or making noises to attract the patient's attention
the experienced examiner.
will change the mental status sufficiently so that the eye
will be exposed for short periods. These maneuvers,
General comments
combined with exposing the eye to short bursts of light
The initial clinical appearance of the problem and its
that is no brighter than necessary, will allow the
modification with time, therapy, and environmental
experienced clinician enough of a "window of oppor-
change should be documented. Measurement of corneal
tunity' to complete most examinations.
In the dog the muzzle is often held with one hand and
dimensions may be used to determine subtle differences
this serves to manipulate the head as well as afford
between eyes. Information on the administration of prior
protection to the examiner. Most dogs do not require
"home' or professional remedies should be obtained,
additional restraint for routine examination but if there
particularly for chronic cases. With new clients it is
is any doubt as to the examiner's safety, muzzling or, in
necessary to obtain historical data on previous ocular
extreme cases, chemical sedation, is indicated. The
 problems and their course and response to therapy.
. The
aq oi A1i saop Ajuanbajui moq 4q passaudwi si roung
disease process may have been modified and
the
during the course of an ophthalmic examination. The
interpretation of the ocular examination, such
as
authority with which the head is moved and the dazzle of
pupillary light reflexes and intraocular pressures, may be
the lights seem momentarily to take the aggressiveness
out those dogs so inclined. Students are frequently
of response to previously prescribed therapy should
pauadxa ue ylim si iued e iainb mou Aq palzznd
provoke questions to determine the owner's compliance
examiner when they had struggled with the patient only
ANAMNESIS AND THE OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION
13
minutes earlier. In the dog, most sedatives or general
easily performed, and facilitate examination even if
anesthesia only make the ophthalmic examination more
sedation is used. Blockage of the palpebral branch of the
difficult due to protrusion of the third eyelid and
auriculopalpebral nerve (branch of Vllth cranial nerve)
infra version (rolling down) of the eyes.
may be performed at several locations but the most
 In the cat, restraint in a *cat bag' may be necessary for
complete akinesis with the least amount of local anesthetic
an unruly patient. Ketamine sedation {10 mg/kg) will
can be produced by injection at the dorsal margin of the
provide ideal conditions for examination, producing a
highest point of the zygomatic arch (1.1)2. Firm palpation
dilated pupil, eyes straight ahead, and immobilization.
of the dorsal rim of the arch will usually cause the nerve to
snap under the examiner's finger. An alternative site is at
 In small animals, speed and utilization of short bursts
the base of the ear between the ear and the zygomatic
of light will enable an ophthalmic examination to be
process (1.2). A 25 gauge needle is placed at the site, a
performed without chemical sedation in the vast
syringe is then attached, and 1-3 ml of a local anesthetic is 
majority of uncooperative patients.
injected. The resultant block will give sufficient akinesis of
the orbicularis oculi muscle such that the lids can be
In the horse, whether presented with or without ocular
opened with minimal force but the animal will still be able
pain, sedation and palpebral nerve akinesia is routinely
to blink. The dorsal branches of the palpebral nerve can
performed for a thorough examination. Xylazine
also be blocked at the supraorbital foramen where it
(0.5-1.1 mg/kg) intravenously (i.v.) will quieten the animal
mingles with the supraorbital nerve (sensory, Vth cranial
and drop the head for examination. This not only
nerve). The supraorbital foramen can be identified by
facilitates the examination but is safer for the examiner. If
 grasping the margins of the dorsal orbital rim and moving
ocular pain is present, palpebral nerve blocks are routine,
medially until it widens {1.3). At this point the foramen
can be palpated in the middle of the rim?. Palpebral nerve
blocks do not affect the intraocular pressure {IOP) but
 attempting to measure the IOP in a blepharospastic horse
1.1
without a nerve block may result in an artificially elevated
IOP. Xylazine sedation may lower the intraocular pressure
{IOP) by up to 27%4.
DIFFUSE ILLUMINATION WITH
HEAD UNRESTRAINED
Examination with diffuse illumination without head
restraint is the initial step in ophthalmic examination and
'22 al ie yool asop p lag 01 ysnu aul ul pa1ouai uayo 51
This is the time to evaluate conformation and symmetry of
the eyes and adnexa. It is important to keep the head
Im peay aui jo apis aui suunoi Aidus se 'pauesaiun
modify lid conformation. In addition, manipulation of the
head will often precipitate blepharospa sms in a dog that is
"eye shy' by nature, in pain, or has received prior ocular
medication. If some restraint of the head is necessary, the 
head should be supported under the mandible.
1.1 A needle placed subcutaneously above the zygomatic arch for a
palpebral nerve block in a horse.
1.2
1.3
1.2 Injection at the base of the ear to block the palpebral branch of
1.3 A needle in the supraorbital foramen to block the palpebral
the facial nerve in a horse.
(motor] and supraorbital (sensory] nerves in a horse.
14
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
Comparison of ocular and adnexal symmetry is
 serious or resistant infectious agents are involved,
important and should be performed from various angles
cultures should be obtained early in the examination
of observation, i.e. frontal and dorsal. Palpebral fissures,
before the use of topical anesthetics. Topical anesthetics
third eyelid position, globe size and position, iris color,
may be bacteriocidal. Ideally, even if the problem is
 and pupil size should be evaluated for symmetry. This is
unilateral, cultures of both eyes are preferred for
the time when the orbit should be evaluated, retropulsion
comparative purposes but due to the additional expense
of the globes into the orbit compared (1.4), and the
this practice is usually not followed. Stap bylococcus spp.
patient examined for exophthalmos by comparing the
 and Streptococcus spp. are the most consistent flora of
corneal vertices from a dorsal vantage point. Ocular
discharges and lid dermatologic lesions such as swellings,
be moistened with sterile nutrient broth or saline before
alopecia, and erythema should be noted. The cornea
use to make the procedure more comfortable and
should be inspected for its luster, surface irregularities,
increase the growth ratell. Calcium alginate swabs have
and opacities. The specular light reflection off the cornea
been reported to yield a higher growth rate7. Swabs
superimposed on the pupils allows accurate assessment
 should be placed in a transport medium or immediately
of ocular alignment, and gross opacities in the anterior
plated to prevent drying of the small samples.
chamber and lens may be noted.
Commercial culturettes with transport media and fine
tipped swabs are convenient and easy to place on small
MICROBIOLOGIC CULTURES OF
lesions and avoid contamination  from  adjacent
CONJUNCTIVA/CORNEA
structures (1.5).
If the type of discharge, history of chronicity, lack of
response to therapy, or severity of the problem indicates
EVALUATION FOR ANISOCORIA
[UNEQUAL PUPILS] AND THE PUPILLARY
LIGHT REFLEX [PLR]
The presence of static anisocoria (consistently unequal
pupils under varying light conditions) is determined by
directing a light at the stop or base of the nose from a
distance of 60-90 cm (2-3 feet) in a darkened room. This
will outline both pupils simultaneously against the
retroillumination of the tapetal reflection. Hetero-
chromia will result in a mild anisocoria with the larger
pupil in the eye with the blue iris, and is considered
physiologic. Other forms of anisocoria should be
evaluated further.
The PLR is frequently described by authors as either
clearly present or absent but in reality it is a subjective
evaluation that has a great deal of interpretive variation
between clinicians of different levels of experience.
Pupillary light reflexes should be performed in a
darkened room with a bright light, such as a Finoff
 transill uminator, to produce maximum excursions (1.6).
1.4 Bilateral retropulsion of the globe into the orbit to compare 
compressibility between orbits. This is different from digital tonometry.
1.5
1.6
1.5 Fine- and course-tipped culture swabs with transport media.
1.6 Finoff transilluminator used for gross ocular examinations.
 PLR testing, and monocular indirect ophthalmoscopy.
ANAMNESIS AND THE OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION
15
The swinging light test employs a bright light shown
13 mm/min1s, 16. Schirmer values in the cat may be quite
alternately in each eye for 3-4 seconds at a time. Initial
variable and often a reading of 0 will be found in a
stimulation of the eye elicits the direct response, and the
perfectly normal eye. Unless there are clinical signs to
light is quickly shifted to the contralateral eye and the
reinforce the finding, of a low Schirmer value, it is
 pupil size observed. The initial observation is evaluation
prudent to repeat the test at a later time before
of the indirect or consensual reaction but as it is
prescribing medication for a tear deficiency. Berger and
maintained it becomes the direct reflex. This is repeated
King17 found a statistical difference over time and
back and forth at 3-4+ second intervals.
between breeds in the Schirmer values of dogs, but while
Normally, with a relaxed animal in a darkened room,
statistically significant the variation would rarely be
the PLR responses are brisk and the degree
of
 significant in making clinical decisions. Large breeds of
contraction is significant on direct stimulation. Due to
dogs have higher Schirmer values than small breeds of
the presence of the relatively cone-rich area centralis, a
dogs17. Hamor et al.18 evaluated the Schirmer values in
focal light directed temporally on the retina will
five breeds of dogs and found a difference only in the
stimulate a more complete constriction than a light
Shetland Sheepdog, where values were 4S mm/min
directed on the nasal retina. When the light is moved to
lower. In the dog, ocular signs are usually not associated
the opposite eye, it may be noted that the initial size of
with decreased tear production until values are between
the pupil is slightly larger in this eye and then constricts
5 and 10 mm. In the past, variations in the readings were
further. This is due to the unequal pupillomotor input to
attributable to the type of paper used in manufacture of
the consensually responding eye in the dog and cat, and
the strips19. Newer strips have the measuring rule on the
is a normal dynamic anisocoria12. Sustaining the light in
strip and a dye in the paper that is taken up with the tears
the eye may produce a small amount of redilation due to
to
delineate the amount of wetting. No clinically
adaptation of the retina to a weak light. If the sustained
significant differences were noted between brands of
illumination results in an obvious dilation, the test is
Schirmer tear test in two studies20, 21
positive {Marcus Gunn pupil) and is the result of a retinal
The Schirmer II test measures the basal tear secretion
or optic nerve lesion. It is relatively common for patients
by eliminating the reflex irritative component with a
with retinal/optic nerve blindness to have some degree of
topical anesthetic. After application of the topical
pupil reaction to a bright light, as vision is a more
anesthetic, the lower conjunctival cul-de-sac is dried by
complex function than the PLR. It is actually more
swabbing with a cotton-tip applicator and the tear
 production measured. The basal secretion in the dog is
due to efferent arc lesions of the PLR.
approximately 12 mm/min22.
 If anisocoria and PLR abnormalities are detected, then
special attention in the ocular examination should be
MYDRIASIS
devoted to vision testing, fundus examination, and
PLRs are evaluated before instilling the mydriatic of
diseases of the iris. The detailed examination should rule
choice. Most mydriatics take 10-15 minutes to act, s0
out synechiae, iris atrophy, iris hypoplasia, lens
to conserve time they should be given early in the
displacement, elevated IOP, anterior uveitis, and anterior
examination. Mydriasis is necessary for complete
uveal neoplasia, all of which commonly interfere with
ophthalmoscopy and for a thorough examination of
pupil mobility and/or shape.
the lens.
 If the iris appears normal, evaluation of the anisocoria
 The mydriatic of choice for diagnostic use should be
in darkness and ambient light should be performed.
effective and short in action. Atropine in the normal dog
Anisocoria associated with an afferent arm fusually
eye lasts for 3 days, and in the horse eye for 5-11 days.
retina or optic nerve) lesion of the PLR will dilate to
aueduas ioeiu ue oi anp wonu yep e u Aenba
chain. The anisocoria of Horner's syndrome remains or
is more pronounced due to a lack of sympathetic input to
the dilator muscle (see Anisocoria, p.97).
1.7
SCHIRMER TEAR TEST
Schirmer tear testing should be performed before any
topical medications are placed in the eye, and should be
considered part of the basic data collection with every
ophthalmic examination, and certainly with any ocular
surface disease. The test used most often in veterinary
ophthalmology is the Schirmer I test, which measures
basal and reflex secretion rate. The test is performed by
bending the strip at the notch and hooking the short end
over the medial lower lid into the conjunctival cul-de-sac
(1.7). Once the strip is in place, the retention can be
improved by closing the lids. The strip is removed after
one minute and the amount of wetting, measured in
millimeters, is immediately recorded. The normal values
of wetting for the dog are 20 ± 5 mm/min and for the cat
are 15-17 mm/min13, 14, The horse has been variably
1.7 Schirmer tear strips with an integral ruler on the strip and dye in
reported to have Schirmer values of 20-30 mm/min and
the paper.
16
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
Tropicamide 1% (0.s% may be preferred in cats) is the
(1.9) or a magnifying lens can be utilized but the slit lamp
 preferred mydriatic for diagnostics (1.8)23, 24. The alkaloid
Or
biomicroscope is the most sophisticated means of
drops traverse the nasolacrimal duct and, when licked from
 accomplishing
g a magnified examination (1.10)28-32. A
the nose, may stimulate profuse salivation in some animals.
 simplified slit lamp consisting of a lens and a battery-
due to the bitter taste. A transient, dramatic enlargement of
 operated focused light is marketed for about US$500 (1.11)
the submandibular salivary glands has been occasionally
(see Biomicroscopy, p.36 for technical details).
Xeu siseupau euxeu 'saiddnd Sunox ui ssieo u paou
A bright light source such as a transilluminator is
not be achieved or may be very fleeting. Combining a
directed at various angles and may be utilized in
parasympatholytic drug with a sympathomimetic drug
 conjunction with magnification to examine the lid
such as 10% phenylephrine may be necessary for good
margin, conjunctiva, third eyelid, cornea, anterior
mydriasis. Phenylephrine alone is a poor mydriatic in
chamber, iris, and lens. In addition to direct illumination,
several species, having minimal effect in the horse and
proximal illumination (lighting the region adjacent to the
 cat24, 26 A potential systemic side-effect of concentrated
object of regard) and retroillumination (examination
 phenylephrine solution is systemic hypertension27.
against background lighting) are also helpful (1.12).
DETAILED EXAMINATION OF THE
Retroillumination is a rapid and sensitive method
ANTERIOR SEGMENT
of detecting opacities in the clear media, i.e. lens,
 Magnification in the form of a loupe or slit lamp is a critical
cornea, vitreous, aqueous.
aid in ophthalmic lesion recognition due to the frequently
minute nature of lesions and the structures involved. This
The lids, lid margins, and canthal regions are
technique is mainly limited to the anterior ocular segment
examined for abnormalities of the cilia and meibomian
 and adnexa, unless the eye is aphakic. Various head loupes
glands. The former may be difficult to detect without
1.8
1.8 The two common
1.9
 mydriatics used in 
 diagnostic work. Note the 
red caps which are typical
 for any mydriatic solution.
Mydriacy1*1%
SCHEIN
NDC0364-2370-53
Stlution,
EYOROCHLORIDE
USP)
10%
Sterile15ml
1.9 Examples of head loupes used for magnification.
1.10
1.10 Kowa-2 portable slit 
1.11
lamp. It consists of a 
microscope, focused light,
 and light source connected 
to the microscope with a
fiber-optic cable.
1.11 Relatively inexpensive portable slit lamp that consists of a 20 D
lens and a focused light.
ANAMNESIS AND THE OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION
17
magnification. Retroillumination of the eyelids may be
The anterior vitreous can be examined for hyaloid
performed with a transilluminator when searching for
artery remnants, veils, haze {usually protein or cells) and
imbedded foreign bodies. The conjunctival surfaces are
blood clots, and retinal detachment.
examined for aberrant cilia (palpebral surface), foreign
bodies, and presence of follicles, hyperemia, chemosis,
A magnification source is critical in ophthalmic
symblepharon, and discharges. The cornea is examined
examination and manipulations and it is worth the
by retroillumination of the iris and fundus {dilated pupil)
investment to buy a quality instrument that is
to detect small opacities, and then studied in more detail
comfortable, has good optics and a reasonable
in
 direct illumination. Irregularities of the surface,
focal length, and is easily adjusted.
opacities, and neovascularization are searched for and
characterized based on extent and depth.
The anterior chamber is examined for changes in depth
LACRIMAL EVALUATION TESTS
and abnormal contents. The depth is increased with the loss
Schirmer tear test
of lens support faphakia, microphakia, posterior luxated
See page 15.
lens, hypermature cataract) and decreased with iris bombe,
peripheral anterior synechiae, intumescent lens, or a mass
Phenol red thread tear test
in or behind the iris. Abnormal contents in the anterior
A test utilizing a 75 mm thread impregnated with phenol
chamber such as leukocytes, erythrocytes, fibrin, cysts, the
red has been developed in Japan and tested in dogs and
lens, and tumors are noted. Changes in the blood-aqueous
cats. The end of the thread is hooked and placed in the
barrier can be detected by using a focused light source or
lower conjunctival cul-de-sac, similar to a Schirmer tear
thin beam of light to demonstrate the Tyndall effect or
strip. Tears turn the indicator red as they progress down
"flare' produced by an increased protein content (plasmoid
the thread. The small size of the thread does not create as
 aqueous) and cells in the anterior chamber (1.13).
much irritation on insertion as the Schirmer tear strip,
The iris is examined for texture, masses, color,
and the reading may be more indicative of the basal tear
vascularity, pupillary membrane strands, and stability.
secretion. The wetting is measured after 15 seconds; the
With loss of the lens support from a displaced lens or
mean wetting for normal dogs is 34 mm ± 4 mm and
peripheral iris adhesions, the iris trembles on ocular
movement (iridodonesis). If the PLRs have not already
obviously depends on its availability outside Japan.
been examined, they are recorded. The iris, particularly
the pupillary region, can be examined in the retro-
Tear break-up time (BUT)
illumination of the tapetum to detect areas of atrophy or
While previously discussed tear evaluation tests
hypoplasia. If the PLRs are incomplete or anisocoria is
evaluate quantity, tear BUT test is an attempt to
present, sphincter atrophy, hypoplasia, or synechiae may
evaluate the quality of the tears. The test is performed
be responsible. The pupil is examined for irregularities in
by instilling fluorescein on the cornea and not allowing
shape that may indicate atrophy or adhesions.
the patient to blink while observing the intactness of the
The lens is first examined in retroillumination from
fluorescein in the tear film. The time from instillation of
the fundus to detect opacities rapidly, and then in direct
fluorescein to the breaking up of the fluorescein sheet is 
and focal illumination to determine the depth of the
the BUT. It can be difficult to perform in animals
lesion. Observed opacities are characterized by their
because while the lids can be held open, the third eyelid
shape, number, color, texture, and location. Irregularities
cannot be controlled. This test is not performed
[yadns shoea ul paieoiu aq Aeu inq Aiauno
cataracts), shape {coloboma, lenticonus), and size
keratopathies. The normal BUT in the dog is reported
(microphakia, intumescent lens) may be observed.
as 19-20 ± 5 seconds35.
1.12
1.13
1.12 Principle of retroillumination of an object against an
1.13 Flare or Tyndall effect present in a petri dish that has a
illuminated background. (l: path of light; O: position of observer.)
colloidal solution. (Courtesy of Dr. M. Wyman.) 
18
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRiNArY MeDiCINE
OCULAR STAINING
If fluorescein strips are used and the ocular surface is
Fluorescein
not very moist, adding one to two drops of collyrium to
 Topical sodium fluorescein is an invaluable tool in detecting
the strip will ensure an adequate quantity of solution on
corneal epithelial defects as well as in monitoring the
the eye. If a dry strip is touched to the eye for moisture, it
healing process. Fluorescein is utilized mainly as single-use
should be placed on the conjunctiva rather than the cornea
strips, since it was discovered that the solution was a good
(1.15). Touching the cornea with the strip may give a slight
culture medium for Pseudomonas spp.36, although this has
positive staining at the point of contact. The eye is rinsed
recently been brought into question7. If used as a 1-2%
thoroughly with collyrium to remove excess fluorescein
solution in multiple-use bottles, care must be taken to avoid
and mucus, and the retention of stain is evaluated. With
contamination. Some clinicians make a fresh solution daily
small defects such as herpes epithelial ulcers in cats, the use
by placing a strip in a 3-6 ml syringe and filling it with
of an ultraviolet light ( Wood's light) or cobalt-blue filter in
sterile saline. This may be easier to apply in the horse but
a dark room will cause fluorescence of the fluorescein,
false negative staining may be encountered with this
 making minute stain retention visible.
method because the fluorescein is too dilute.
 Other uses for topical fluorescein stain in ophthal-
Aqueous fluorescein cannot penetrate the normal
mology are to detect aqueous leaks in perforating corneal
 lipophilic epithelium and thus is not normally retained. If
wounds (Seidal test) and to determine patency of the
intercellular junctions are widened or loss of epithelium
lacrimal outflow system. The Seidal test is performed by
occurs, fluorescein is retained by the epithelium or
applying a high concentration of fluorescein at the site in
stroma, respectively, and is visible as a bright green stain
 question without rinsing. The concentrated fluorescein
(1.14)38. Staining of extensive ulcerations may result in
will be orange; if aqueous is leaking from the site, a green
the fluorescein being visible in the aqueous. The corneal
rivulet willform in the orange background. Evaluation of
staining is transient {about 15-30 min), although in
devitalized corneas it may persist for several hours.
by applying fluorescein to the eye and observing
its
appearance at the nostril (1.16). Fluorescein can normally
be observed at the nostrils within a few minutes. A
normal test does not ensure the entire lacrimal ductal
1.14
 system is patent, as only one patent lacrimal canaliculus
and punctum is necessary for a positive test. The absence
of fluorescein may be due to ductal obstruction or an
anomalous orifice into the nasal cavity.
 Fluorescein may be given i.v. as a 10% solution to
visualize the fundus vasculature or the iris vessels {see
 Fluorescein angiography, p.35) and to measure limb-to-
retina circulation time.
Rosebengal
Rose bengal is a fluorescein derivative of the xanthene
group and it has been used in ophthalmology as a 1%
solution. Rose bengal was originally characterized as a
supravital stain that only stained degenerate epithelial cells
and mucus. Its main use has been in staining devitalized
cells in keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS), and it is thought
to be more sensitive than the Schirmer tear test (1.17)39.
1.14 Fluorescein staining of a superficial ulcer.
1.15
1.16
1.15 Application of a moist fluorescein strip to the conjunctiva.
1.16 Fluorescein staining visible in the nose after application to the
eye of a dog.
ANAMNESIS AND THE OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION
19
Rose bengal has also been used to stain herpes epithelial
1.17
ulcers and dysplastic epithelial cells with squamous neo-
plasia. Recently, the mechanism of action of rose bengal
has been questioned. Cell culture evidence indicates that
rose bengal stains cells that do not have a mucus layer or
the cornea with a deficiency of the preocular tear flm40.
Rose bengal will therefore stain healthy cells if they are not
protected by mucin, and it is intrinsically toxic to cells in
concentrations >0.01%. Exposure to light releases 0xygen
viracidal and bacteriocidal, and cultures should be
obtained before application of the stain. In a mouse
herpesvirus model, no virus could be isolated after a single
topical application of 1% rose bengal41.
CANNULATION_OF THE LACRIMAL
OUTFLOW SYSTEM
Cannulation and establishing patency of the lacrimal
1.17 Faint rose bengal staining of the cornea and conjunctiva of a
outflow system is indicated with a problem of epiphora
dog with KCs.
or a resistant or relapsing conjunctival infection. This is
readily performed in most dogs with topical anesthesia
and using restraint in lateral recumbency, A blunt
22 gauge needle, or a commercial malleable lacrimal
1.18
needle on a 6 ml syringe, is passed into either the upper
au ansn si wund addn ai 'nund iamo 1o
accessible. Ensuring the lid is kept taut, threading the
catheter down the canaliculus, and keeping it parallel to
the canaliculus all help to prevent kinking
and
 obstruction by the wall of the canaliculus, thus avoiding
a false impression of a pathologic obstruction {1.18).
Resting the hand with the syringe against the animal's
head minimizes traumatizing the duct if minor head
movement occurs. A fountain of fluid should emerge
from the opposite punctum and the nostril. If fluid is not
observed at the nostril, the opposite punctum is occluded
while flushing to force more fluid down the nasolacrimal
duct. Imperfect nasolacrimal ducts result in some dogs in
fluid running posteriorly into the pharynx and the
patient often starts to choke, sneeze, and swallow. If an
obstruction is present, heavy sedation or general
1.18 Flushing the nasolacrimal duct of a dog through the upper
anesthesia may be required, as the force necessary to
canaliculus, which is usually the easiest to expose and make taut.
 unblock the obstruction is painful.
Note the lateral recumbency of the patient and resting of the
Cats are more difficult to cannulate because of the 
examiner's hand on the patient's head.
small canaliculus and the animal's temperament. A
25-27 gauge blunt needle, ketamine sedation, and a
loupe should be used to obtain best results.
The horse's nasolacrimal system is most easily
1.19
evaluated by retrograde flushing from the nasal end of
the nasolacrimal duct. A #8 French urinary catheter or
infant feeding tube may be passed in a retrograde
direction and attached to a syringe for flushing. If the
nasolacrimal duct is blocked, the puncta are easily
cannulated after sedation.
DOUBLE EVERSION OF THE EYELIDS AND
MEMBRANA NICTITANS
The palpebral conjunctiva and bulbar surface of the third
eyelid can be examined by a process of double eversion.
Double eversion is performed under topical anesthesia by
gently grasping the lid margin with forceps and lifting it
up and caudally from the eye,while using an instrument
such as a stra bismus hook near the base of the lid to push
toward the eye. This will cause the lid to roll back over
the hook, exposing the palpebral conjunctiva (1.19). This
1.19 Double eversion of the upper lid of a dog to examine the
maneuver also can be performed on the third eyelid to
palpebral conjunctiva.
20
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETeRINARY MeDICINE
1.20
1.21
Bard-Parker
RIB-BACK*
CARBON STEEL
Surgical Blade
Sterile·Single Use
1.20 Preparation of a #10 Bard Parker blade for use a5 a scraping
1.21 Cytobrush used for collecting conjunctival cells. (Courtesy of
instrument to obtain cytology and culture specimens.
Dr. M. Willis, The Ohio State University.)
1.22
transferred to glass slides, air dried and fixed, and can be
stained with a variety of stains such as Giemsa and Gram
stains. The slides are evaluated for cell type, bacteria,
55CM
viral and chlamydial inclusion bodies, fungi, and foreign
material (see Chapter 8, p.183)44.
28
TONOMETRY
The measurement of intraocular tension may be made
with a variety of instruments, all of which were designed
 for use on humans. Indentation tonometry is exemplified
by the Schiotz tonometer, which is one of the more
applica ble tonometers for the dog and cat because of its
relatively low cost. This instrument measures the amount
 of corneal indention produced by a given weight, and the 
scale reading is converted to millimeters of mercury with
conversion tables (1.22). Conversion tables for the dog
and cat have been calculated and they result in higher
1.22 Schiotz tonometer with conversion scale.
IOPs than comparable scale readings on the human
considered to be <25-30 mmHg {3.3-4.0 kPajon the
human scale47-s1. The difference in IOP between the two
eyes should be ≤8 mmHg (1.07 kPa)48.
expose the lymphoid follicles and gland. It is invalua ble
in searching for hidden foreign bodies and evaluating the
Technique
tissue pathology.
After topical anesthesia is administered, the animal is
placed in dorsal to dorsolateral recumbency so that the
CONJUNCTIVAL AND CORNEAL CYTOLOGY
 eye being measured is directed vertically. The tonometer
Scraping the conjunctiva and/or the corneal surface after
is allowed to rest with its full weight on the central
topical anesthesia and examining the cells may enable a
cornea for 1-2 seconds {1.23). The scale reading is noted
rapid etiologic diagnosis to be made or may guide initial
aoisisuos auaiap oi sawi t-e paeadau si su pue
therapy. The scraping may be performed with various
Although most animals object to being placed on their
instruments. A metal instrument is used if the surface
 sides or backs, the sitting patient usually presents with
must be debrided to get to the level of the pathology. A
 poor eye position because of the vestibular-ocular reflex
malleable platinum spatula (Kimura) is commercially
that often results in the tonometer being placed near or
available but expensive. The author simply uses the
over the limbus. Inaccurate or spurious values with the
noncutting end of a sterile scalpel blade as a convenient
Schiotz tonometer can be produced by dried mucus and
disposable sterile scraper (1.20). For surface cytology, a
tears that have wicked up the plunger, a small corneal
 small disposable nylon bristle brush has given superior
curvature (microphthalmos will overestimate IOP), a
 preparations and is easier to insert into the conjunctival
large corneal curvature (such as in buphthalmos, which
will underestimate IOP), corneal scars, corneal edema, an
with the brush have fewer cells but the cells are scattered
anterior luxated lens, and transference of pressure to the 
and not clumped as with a spatula. The material is
globe while holding the lids open.
ANAMNESIS AND THE OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION
21
1.23 Application
1.23
1.24
of the Schiotz 
tonometer to the 
axial cornea with
the dog in dorsal
TONOPENXL
recumbency.
1.24 Tono-Pen with cover. The average IOP reading is displayed.
1.25
Applanation tonometry measures the force necessary
to flatten a given corneal area and may be measured with
a variety of instruments. A small hand-held electronic
applanation tonometer, the Tono-Pen, appears almost
ideal for veterinary medicine {1.24, 1.25). It is portable,
consistent, apparently accurate, and easily used on most 
species including exotics; however, it is expensive
(>US$2,000). The plunger is 1.5 mm in diameter and is
covered with a latex membrane to avoid disease
1.25 Tono-Pen in use by lightly tapping the cornea.
transmission and, more importantly, to avoid tears wick-
[uao aui uo auaumaue suddei uait uagund aui dn su
two-thirds of the cornea perpendicular to the point will
1.26
Acceptable readings  are
indicated by a clicking sound. Three to six acceptable
readings are averaged, a tone sounds, and the mean value
is displayed in a window with a bar over the coefficient of
yariance of the readings from 5->20%. The Tono-Pen
appears to overestimate IOP in the low range, is very
accurate in the normal range, and underestimates IOP in
Tono-Pen, mean IOP in the dog was 19 ± 6 mmHg (2.5 ±
0.8 kPa)57 and 17 ± 4 mmHg (2.3 ± 0.5 kPa)ss, s6, and in
the cat was 20 ± 6 mmHg (2.7 ± 0.8 kPa)ss, s6, In the
horse, the instrument underestimated the IOP at all
pressures, although by a predictable amount. In the horse,
wide fluctuations in IOP can be measured that are not
eliminated by auriculopalpebral nerve block. The mean
IOP in the normal horse was 24 mmHg (3.2 kPa) with the
MacKay-Marg applanation tonometer and 23 mmHg
1.26 Performing digital tonometry in a dog through the closed lids.
(3.1 kPa) with the Tono-Pens8.
Note that the two index fingers and not the thumbs are used.
The intraocular tension may be estimated by
palpating the globe through the closed eyelids alternately
with the index fingers {1.26). The 'give’ and *take' of the
 globe is estimated by gentle pressure. This differentiates
soft, medium, and hard eyes but is a poor substitute for
 an objective measurement.
appropriate f
formulas
 and
previously
calculated
TONOGRAPHY
constants, the coefficient of aqueous outflow can be
Tonography is a technique whereby the weight of a
 determined. Utilizing trained beagles, the normal facility
tonometer is allowed to rest on the globe for a given time
of aqueous outflow is 0.24 μl/mmHg/mins9. The lack of
{4 minutes). The weight of the tonometer forces fluid out
consistency and difficulty in recording in untrained
of the eye and the pressure decay is recorded. With the
animals relegates this to a research tool.
22
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
GONIOSCOPY
1.27
Gonioscopy is the act of viewing the iridocorneal angle.
This region contains the aqueous outflow pathways and
thus is important in the pathogenesis of many glaucomas.
To view the iridocorneal angle adequately a contact lens is
necessary to allow light to exit the cornea {1.27).
Gonioscopy is performed after ophthalmoscopy because
the coupling fluid utilized under the lens will interfere with
ophthalmoscopy. The procedure can be accomplished with
topical anesthesia and manual restraint in lateral
recumbency or in a sitting position {1.28). A variety of
gonioscopic lenses designed for use in human medicine are
available and most are applicable to the dog and cat
(1.29). A strong light and a source of magnification are
necessary. This can be provided by an otoscope head, a
loupe, and transilluminator, or by a slit lamp. In addition
 to investigating the pathogenesis of glaucoma, gonioscopy
is useful in evaluating lesions of the peripheral anterior
1.27 Dermonstration of light exiting from the angle when a contact
chamber such as iris cysts, foreign bodies, tumors of the
lens is applied for gonioscopy. The light can now exit the cornea
region, and traumatic lesions48, 49, 60-62.
because the refractive index has changed from cornea to plastic (or
The normal iridocorneal region in carnivores is
glass] and the curvature of the lens is different from the cornea.
dominated by a well developed pectinate ligament with a
allowing light to exit. Note where the examiner must be positioned
bluish-white trabecular region in the background (1.30).
to view the opposite angle region.
{For further（
discussion  on  gonioscopic findings see
Chapter 12, p.337.)
OPHTHALMOSCOPY
1.28
Ophthalmoscopy is one of the most difficult routine
 procedures that the veterinarian is asked to master. The
traditional  direct ophthalmoscope (1.31) is not 
the
instrument of choice in small animal practice because of
the inherent magnification and lack of stereopsis. The
technique of direct ophthalmoscopy is most applicable in
large animals because the larger eye has less inherent
magnification (see Table 1.1)63. Binocular or monocular
indirect ophthalmoscopy is preferred in the dog and cat
(1.32). The main disadvantage of the binocular indirect
ophthalmoscope is the cost {Us$ 1,000) but essentially all
that is necessary for indirect ophthalmoscopy is a
condensing lens and a focal beam of light.
With either technique, the pupil should be well dilated
for a thorough examination. Examination of the ocular
fundus should include evaluating the optic disk for size,
 1.28 Performing gonioscopy in a nonsedated dog utilizing a slit lamp
color, elevations, depressions, vascular pattern, and
and a Franklin goniolens.
shape. The tapetum, if present, is evaluated for its
reflectivity, mosaic detail, color, size, and retinal vascular
pattern. The nontapetum is evaluated for pigment
1.29
density, mottling, and vascular patterns. The normal
dog's ocular fundus has more variations than that of
other domestic animals and thus can present difficulties
for even an experienced examiner in differentiating mild
pathology from extremes in normal variations {see 
Cha pter 14, p.401).
Direct ophthalmoscopy
Direct ophthalmoscopy is the classical form of oph-
thalmoscopy and the procedure with which veterinarians
are most familiar. The direct ophthalmoscope is often
purchased as a set with an otoscope. Many of the
principles of direct ophthalmoscopy involving lesion
 of ophthalmoscopy.
The direct ophthalmoscope consists of a power source
1.29 Various goniolenses. Left to right are: Cardona type lens that
attaches to a fiberoptic light cable, Franklin lens with sialastic flange.
and a three mirror prism.
ANAMNESIS AND THE OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION
23
1.30
 pupil through a movable lens in the ophthalmoscope to
the observer. When examining an animal with frontal
eyes and a long nose, it is usually mechanically
advantageous for the examiner to avoid the patient's
nose by using his/her left eye to examine the patient's left 
eye and his/her right eye to examine the patient's right
eye. This is not as important in the horse and cow which
have laterally placed eyes. Alternating eyes in the
dominant eye that they prefer to use. Some of the
principles that Dr. William Havener espoused when
teaching ophthalmoscopy are described below64.
There are two dials for adjustment in the basic
ophthalmoscope. 
 The examiner looks through an
aperture of the large dial that contains a series of small
lenses that can be rotated into viewing position (1.31).
The numbers visible on rotating the large dial indicate
the strength of the lens that is in place, expressed in
diopters. A diopter is the reciprocal of the focal length
of the lens in meters, i.e. D = 1/focal length in meters.
The black or green numbers represent plus {+) lenses
1.30 Gonioscopic view of a normal canine iridocorneal angle with
which are convex or converging lenses. The red numbers 
various anatomic landmarks. [1: deep pigmented zone; 2: superficial
represent minus {-) lenses which are concave or
 pigmented zone; 3: uveal trabeculae in ciliary cleft; 4: conjunctiva
diverging lenses.
through the cornea; 
The second adjustment possible is one that selects the
5: iris; 6: major arterial
1.31
light beam size, shape, and color. 
Most of the
circle; 7: pectinate
examinations are performed with white light using the
ligament; 8: pupil.)
large circular aperture. Additional apertures usually
 available are a smaller circular aperture, a grid aperture,
a streak or slit aperture, and often various filters such as
blue and red-free filters. The small circular aperture is
usually used for proximal illumination, the grid to
measure relative sizes of lesions, and the streak to detect
irregular contours such as elevations and depressions.
The blue filters are used to examine the nerve fiber layer
and the red-free filter to examine blood vessels.
Initially the emmetropic (no refractive error) examiner
sets the diopter setting on zero with the large circular
aperture and places himself about 46-61 cm (18-24 in)
1.31 Direct
from the patient. The examiner has to align with two
ophthalmoscope. Power
apertures, the aperture of the ophthalmoscope and the
 5ources may be battery.
aperture of the pupil of the patient. By placing the
rechargeable battery, or
wall transformer.
1.32
1.33
1.32 Binocular indirect ophthalmoscope. This unit has a rechargeable
 1.33 Direct ophthalmoscope light pathway. (Pf: patient's fundus;
battery transformer that allows portability.
 Ef: examiner's fundus; LS: light source; A: prism or mirror.]
24
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
ophthalmoscope snugly into the brow, the aperture of the
 much easier to regain the alignment at a distance, since 
ophthalmoscope is steady and constant and the peripheral
small variations in the angle of incident light are
view through the aperture is maximized (1.34). The
magnified at the patient level.
  r adoo an s  a
Ophthalmoscopy should be performed close to the eye
patient's pupil by finding the fundus or tapetal reflection.
and through a dilated pupil. The closer to the eye and the
This will usually be a bright, green-yellow tapetal colored
more dilated the pupil, the greater the peripheral area
reflection through the dog or cat's pupil. This serves to
that can be examined (1.36). Ophthalmoscopy should
align the light correctly and quickly, and is a very sensitive
also be performed in a dark environment to maximize
means of picking up central opacities in the clear ocular
the contrast to the observer's eye.
media in front of the retina, i.e. vitreous, lens, anterior
A bright specular reflection is present from the corneal
chamber, and cornea by retroillumination. Even small
surface and is often quite annoying. Specular reflections
opacities will be detected as darker regions against the
are the light rays being reflected directly back from the
fundus reflection due to the blockage of returned light to
cornea to the observer and they can drown out fundus
the observer (1.35). The examiner often cannot localize
detail. If the pupil is dilated, this reflection can be
the opacity in depth with this method but is alerted to the
displaced by shifting the light slightly off center on the
pathology. This technique is a quick screening technique
cornea. If the pupil is miotic, this cannot be done as the
and with a trained eye it is a very sensitive test for
light will strike the iris (1.37).
detecting axial opacities.
 One of the difficulties in veterinary ophthalmoscopy is
In summary, find the fundus reflection and check
a lack of patient cooperation, with constant head and eye
for opacities of the clear ocular media fanterior
movement causing the examiner to lose the fundic image.
 chamber, cornea, lens, vitreous), then move in close
The quickest method of regaining alignment with the
 to the patient and perform ophthalmoscopy
patient's pupil is to back up 30 cm {12 in) or more, find
through a dilated pupil and in a dark room.
the tapetal reflection, and then move close again. It is
1.34
1.35
1.34 Pacement of the ophthalmoscope into the brow to eliminate
1.35 Retroillumination of a lenticular lesion from the fundus
movement in relationship to the ophthalmoscope and to maximize
reflection.
the observer's field of view.
1.36
1.36 Illustration of how dilating the
B
 patient's pupil and moving close to the
 eye (A)] increase the field of observation 
(compare with B].
ANAMNESIS AND THE OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION
25
The optic disk in a dog is about 1.5 mm diameter
which was the cavity of the embryonic optic vesicle
{1,500 μm). With the 17x magnification of the direct
before invagination occurred to form a cup and bring the
ophthalmoscope, structures approximating 30-90 μm in
e si il uoisodde u waponaonu aui jo sraei omi
diameter can be visualized (Table 1.1, 1.38). Because
this potential space that retinal detachments occur, which
lesions are often microscopic, it is important
to
technically are retinal separations.
appreciate the histology of the fundus. The normal
The holangiotic (retinal blood vessels over the entire
sensory retina is transparent and what are visualized are
retinal surface) fundus has two sources of blood vessels.
columns of blood (healthy vessels are transparent),
The superficial vessels are the retinal blood vessels, which
pigment, and the optic nerve. In most domestic animals,
supply the inner half of the retina. In the cow, the retinal
the tapetum that is in the superficial choroid and in the
blood vessels lie on, rather than within the retina, where
dorsal half of the fundus is also observed. The retina
they protrude into the vitreous. The outer half of the retina
consists of  the  pigmented 
epithelium and
the
receives nutrition by diffusion from the choriocapillaris. In
pigmented eyes (the norm), the choroidal vessels are
pigmented epithelium and the photoreceptors (1.39),
obscured by the pigmented epithelium and the
1.37
Table 1.1 Magnification factors for direct ophthalmoscopy.
(Modified from Murphy and Howland, 198763.)
 Species
Lateral magnification 
Axial magnification
Horse
7.9
84
Cow
10.59
150
Sheep
13.89
258
Human 
14.66
287
Pig
15.15
307
Dog
17.24
397
Cat
19.50
508
Rabbit
25.25
853
Rat
77.18
7,965
1.37 llustration of how to avoid specular corneal reflections by
moverment of the light slightly off the axis to point B.
1.38
1.39 A
1.39
schema tic
Sclera
30-90 μm
histology of
Large vessel-
the fundus.
 Choroidal
Note the
pigment
loca tion of
Tapetum 
pigment,
Choriocapillaris-
blood vessel5,
Pigment
epithelium
and tapetum.
Arrows
denote source
Rod + cone
of nutrition
for the retina.
1.5 mm
Inner nuclear
layer
1.38 llustration depicting lesions that are <0.1 of a disk diameter
 (DD) or in the micron range.
Ganglion cell-
Nerve fiber
layer
Retinal vessels
26
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
1.40
tapetum (1.39). In albinoid eyes that lack a tapetum and
pigment, both vascular systems can be visualized (1.40).
Similarly, there are two sources of pigment, retinal and
choroidal. In most domestic animals, the tapetal
 pigmentation is also in the dorsal choroid (1.41).
When performing ophthalmoscopy, as in all examin-
ations, it is desirable to establish a routine to ensure
thoroughness. The usual starting point is to find the optic
disk (papilla, nerve head) and then to examine each
qua drant peripherally from the disk. The optic nerve in the 
dog is unique in routinely ha ving myelination extending to
the level of the retina. In most species, myelination of the
optic nerve stops at the level of the sclera {lamina cribrosa).
In the dog, varying degrees of myelination of the nerve
produce great variation in the shape, size, elevation, and
color of the disk (1.41),. Of particular importance is the 
vasculature pattern on the disk, its density, origin, vessel
size, and color. The retinal arteries in domestic animals are
1.40 A normal canine albinoid, atapetal fundus. Note the two
cilioretinal in origin. Domestic animals lack a central
 50urces of visible blood vessel5.
retinal artery ({as found in humans) and thus the arteries are
found at the disk periphery. The surface of the cat's optic
disk is not myelinated, resulting in a small, round, dark
1.41
 optic disk, and the vessels all originate from the periphery
of the disk {1.42). {See Chapter 14, p.401 for further
species variations.)
 In the dog the smaller vessels originating near the
periphery are the arterioles. The larger darker primary
and smaller secondary veins go further onto the disk
surface, usually to an anastomotic arc {1.40, 1.41).
The vascular pattern on the disk and how the vessels
disappear or originate varies with the species but
variations may be a clue to pathology involving the disk.
 Fish-hooking of vessels over the edge of the disk and
being out of focus are often clues that a depression on the
disk, such as a coloboma or glaucomatous cupping, may
exist {1.43, 1.44). Due to the lack of stereopsis or depth
perception with direct ophthalmoscopy, the depression
may not be appreciated without these visual clues.
1.41 A normal canine pigmented fundus with a tapetum. Note the
absence of visible choroidal vesels and a triangular pinkish-white
 optic disk.
1.42
1.43
1.43 llustration of two views of retinal vessels on the disk: a vessel
that can be followed onto the disk until penetrating the nerve head
(A]; a vessel that disappearsat the edge of a shelf and then
reappears without obvious continuity (B). (Left panel:
ophthalmoscopic view; right panel: sagittal section.]
1.42 A wide-angle photograph of a feline fundus. Note the srmall,
round darker disk with vessels only at the periphery.
ANAMNESIS AND THE OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION
27
The color of the disk is quite variable between
may be present. Papillitis usually has a more profound
individuals and between species but extremes in pallor or
effect on the retinal vessels and optic nerve function than
hyperemia are usually significant. The dog, for instance,
 papilledema, and is accompanied by blindness.
normally has a pinkish-white disk due to a mixture of
myelin and capillaries. With atrophy of the nerve head it
In summary, changes in disk color, shape, and
becomes whiter to gray in color (1.45, 1.46). In addition,
 elevation or depression may be important
the myelination is destroyed so the fullness, shape, and
ophthalmoscopic signs. In the dog, the great
color are affected in the dog. However, in other species
breadth of normal variation may make it difficult
without myelination of the nerve head, color change is
to diagnose early pathologic changes for even the
the main finding of atrophy.
experienced examiner.
An increased redness of the disk is usually from
capillary engorgement, and may be active as in inflam-
As mentioned previously, the clinician can use the grid
mation (papillitis) or passive as in venous stasis that results 
 aperture to measure the size of lesions but the size of the
in edema (papilledema). With both papilledema and
 grid varies with the working distance. A more consistent
papillitis the disk is swollen and elevated, causing the
and convenient means of describing and locating lesions
vessels to bend to get onto the disk {1.45, 1.47). The
is to relate the lesions to the disk size and location. This
vessels are usually dilated and mild peripapillary edema
method utilizes the disk diameter {DD) size to describe a
1.44
1.45
1.45 llustration of pathology of optic disk vasculature: optic atrophy
with no capillaries (A): normal (B); hyperemic disk with inflammation 
 or congestion (papilledema] (C).
1.44 Qinical correlate of 1.43. The dog ha5s a coloboma of the disk
1.47
{white area] with vessels falling into this recess. Retinal vessels on one
side do not proceed onto the disk as they do on the opposite side.
1.46
1.46 Optic nerve atrophy in a dog with advanced progressive retinal
1.47 Papilledema in a dog with an engorged, elevated disk. Mild
 atrophy. Note the gray flat disk with scalloped edges.
peripapillary edema is present.
28
OPHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
1.48
1.49
凸
2DD
1
1DD
1.48 llustration of locating and describing lesions in relationship to
the disk and disk diameter (DD) 
F
1.50
1.49 Morphology of fluid lesions based on area of fundus:
preretinal/subhyaloid area (A);: nerve fiber layer (B);: intraretinal (C):
sub-neuroretina (D); choroidal (E).
lesion's size and distance from the disk, and the hands of
a clock to locate the lesion in relation to the disk (1.48).
This method allows accurate description of a lesion's size
and location to compare with at a later date.
There are various clues available for localizing the
depth of a lesion with the ophthalmoscope. One useful
1.50 llustration of preretinal hemorrhage that has settled, giving a
 clue for localization of fluid lesions such as hemorrhages
flat top. The clear top portion may be overlooked by the examiner.
is the morphology of the lesion. Fluid lesions must
conform to the anatomy involved and, as a result, have a
variety of shapes and sizes. Due to the loose attachment
1.51
of the vitreous to the retina, the neurosensory retina to
the pigmented epithelium, and the loose structure of the
choroid, hemorrhages of large size may occur in these
three spaces. Intraretinal hemorrhages are confined by
the axons, dendrites, and Miller cell processes, which
 run mainly in a vertical manner, so these tend to be small,
round hemorrhages. A hemorrhage in the nerve fiber
layer has to insinuate between the fibers so it is typically
flat and striated with feathered borders, and is often
called a flame-shaped hemorrhage (1.49). Preretinal
a aid ae so p e um sau
 and red, and the erythrocytes may settle out, producing a
flat top or keel-boat-shaped hemorrhage (1.s0, 1.51). If
the vitreous is liquefied, the preretinal hemorrhage
becomes diffuse hemmorrhage within the vitreous.
 The first principle of lesion location is that the
1.51 Cat fundus with multiple hemorrhages at different levels of the
morphology of fluid lesions is determined by the
fundus. Preretinal hemorrhages with flat tops (is the packed cell 
 adjacent anatomy. Familiarity with the tissue
volume normal?] and striated nerve fiber hemorrhages are present.
architecture will help in localizing the lesion.
ANAMNESIS AND THE OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION
29
1.52
Hemorrhage A
1.53
Vein
Artery
Hemorrhage
~Choroidal vessel
1.52 llustration relating the depth of lesions to the two
vascular systems.
1.53 llustration of the principle of parallax by observing the lesion
 from two perspectives and noting whether the lesion moves against
A second principle in lesion localization is to find a
the background. If the lesion moves, it is located in front of the
 structure of known depth and relate it to the lesion.
retina and not on it.
The usual structures sought for lesion localization are
 a retinal or choroidal blood vessel. Other structures such
 as pigment and the tapetum may also be related to the
1.54
lesion {1.52).
A third method of lesion localization is utilizing the
phenomenon of parallax. This is a very sensitive method of
determining if two points are in apposition or separated. This
works well in determining low retinal detachments (1.53).
Parallax is looking at the structure in question
against the background from two different
observation points and determining if the structure
moves in relation to the background. This will
establish whether the two points are separated.
The fourth method of lesion localization, unique to the
direct ophthalmoscope, is the use of various lenses to focus
on the object. Most animal's fundi will be in focus at 0 to
-2 diopters (D). A lesion that is blurred can be assumed to
lie either in front of or at the back of the plane of the
1.54 Illustration of using the ophthalmoscopes lenses to focus on
fundus. The plus (black numbers) lenses will converge
raised or depressed lesions: emmetropic eye focused at 0 (A]; + lenses
light allowing lesions elevated from the surface to come
used to focus on a raised lesion (B); - lenses focusing on a depressed
into focus. The negative lenses {red numbers) will bring
lesion (C).
into focus lesions that are below or beyond the level of the
 normal fundus (1.54). Approximately 4 D is equivalent to
1 mm in the canine eye. This varies by species due to the
1.55
1.55
inherent magnification of the eye.
Illustra tion of
the technique
 Summary
Transmission
utilizing 
The four methods of lesion localization with the
proximal
direct ophthalmoscope are:
illumina tion.
1. Lesion mor phology.
 2. Relating to structures of known depth.
 3. Utilizing the parallax phenomenon.
Light source
4. Diopter settings.
 Proximal illumination is a technique whereby the area
 in question is illuminated by shining the light adjacent to
the area being examined. The small circular aperture is
used in this instance. This may yield information regarding
Absorption
the structural nature of the lesion. If the lesion is cystic,
fluid, or of a low density, the lesion will transmit light
which will be reflected back to the observer's eyes. A dense
or hea vily pigmented lesion will absorb the light (1.55).
30
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
As with most techniques, competence comes only
examiner's hands to hold the lens and the patient (1.56).
with practice, practice, and more practice!
The function of the headset is not only to provide light but
to narrow optically the examiner's interpupillary distance
(PD) of 60 mm to 15 mm (1.57). Narrowing the PD allows
Indirect ophthalmoscopy
both eyes plus the light to be projected through the
Although the image may be confusing with the indirect
 patient's pupil; this allows the observer binocular vision
ophthalmoscope because it is upside down and reversed,
and stereopsis (Table 1.2). Many scopes now have a small
pupil feature that narrows the PD to as small as 6 mm.
components of indirect ophthalmoscopy are an adequate
Table 1.3 gives the minimum pupil size of the patient that
light source and a converging lens. The light source with
is necessary with three different strengths of condensing
the binocular indirect ophthalmoscope (BIO) is on a
lenses for binocular observation. The lens strength selected
headband or fits on spectacle frames, thus freeing the
will alter the magnification and size of field of the image,
1.56
1.57
60 mm
1.56 Binocular indirect ophthalmoscopy being performed. Note the
1.57 Optics of the binocular indirect ophthalmoscope and narrowing
working distance and lack of an assistant to hold the animal.
 the interpupillary distance of the examiner.
Table 1.2 Magnification factors for indirect ophthalmoscopy. (Modified from Murphy and Howland, 198763.)
 Lateral magnification
Axial magnification
 Species
14 D
20 D
30 D
40 D
14D
20 D
30 D
40 D
Horse
1.18
0.79
0.51
0.38
1.86
0.84
0.35
0.19
Cow
1.58
1.06
0.68
0.50
3.34
1.50
0.62
0.34
Sheep
2.07
1.39
0.90
0.66
5.74
2.58
1.07
0.58
Human 
2.19
1.47
0.95
0.70
6.39
2.87
1.19
0.65
Pig
2.26
1.52
0.98
0.72
6.83
3.07
1.28
0.70
Dog
2.57
1.72
1.11
0.82
8.85
3.97
1.65
0.90
Cat
2.91
1.95
1.26
0.93
11.31
5.08
2.11
1.15
 Rabbit
3.77
2.53
1.63
1.20
18.99
8.53
3.55
1.93
Rat
11.52
7.72
4.98
3.68
177.44
79.65
33.15
18.06
Table 1.3 Minimum patient pupil size for stereopsis with varying power of condensing lenses using binocular indirect
ophthalmoscopy. (Modified from Goldbaum et al., 198067.)
Interpupillary distance (mm)
Strength of condensing lens (D)
Interpupillary distance of
viewer's eyes as projected on
the patient's eye (mm)
15
30
1.5
15
20
2.25
15
15
3.0
ANAMNESIS AND THE OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION
31
the size of pupil that the fundus can be visualized through
The light source can be made very bright with a BIO,
stereoscopically, and the inherent stereopsis (Table 1.4).
as it is usually powered by 110 volts from a transformer
The higher the diopter strength of the lens, the smaller the
with a rheostat. In addition, the indirect image is
image but the larger the field of view, the smaller the pupil
that can be examined, and the less the stereopsis67, 68
 observer's eye. The bright light may allow observation
 For the majority of the time when utilizing the BIO,
through hazy media with the BIO that was previously
the examiner can handle the animal without having an
 unsuccessful with the direct form66. The light should be 
assistant to restrain the head {1.56). A teaching mirror is
 no stronger than necessary, as this washes out detail and
 also available for most models and video indirect scopes
creates patient discomfort with a resultant lack of
are available.
cooperation. Anesthetized patients that cannot move
 Before using the BlO a few adjustments are necessary.
may develop retinal burns due to the strong light. The
The headset band tension is adjusted so that it is firm
strength of the light must often be decreased for the
enough to keep from slipping and allow subtle movement
 tapetum and increased for the nonta petal region.
of the light by contraction of the brow, but loose enough
The image formed with a BIO is an aerial image which
to avoid a headache. If the headset is not in front of the
is upside down and reversed and formed between the
examiner's eyes, the headset is moved up or down. The
patient and the examiner (1.58)6s.
PD is adjusted for each eye by sliding the optics of each
The lenses used in indirect ophthalmoscopy are
eyepiece horizontally. The light should fall in the center
biconvex or converging lenses, usually ranging from +14 D
of the observation field for that eye and the two fields
lenses to +30 D in strength. When used with the binocular
should be fused. The adjustment of the light on a vertical
headset, additional magnification is built into the headset
basis is performed using the hand as a target. With the
 and magnification increases fourfold with the +14 D to
hand at the usual comfortable bent arms working
twofold with the +28 D lens, although this will vary with
distance, the light is adjusted to fall in the upper half of
the species (see Tables 1.2, 1.4). The magnification of the
the examiner's field.
retina is equal to diopter strength of the eye divided by the
diopter strength of the lens used67, 68 The strength of the
The usual binocular indirect ophthalmoscope has
lens affects not only the magnification but the amount of
three main adjustments to be made before use.
stereopsis or depth perception of the examiner. The higher
They are:
the diopter strength of the lens, the less the depth
1. Adjustment of the tension of the headband.
perception (Table 1.4).
 2. Adjustment of the interpupillary distance of the
 An additional factor in selecting a lens is the size of
eyepieces.
the patient's pupil. The higher diopter lens can project
3.
Vertical adjustment of the light in the eyepieces.
the examiner's pupil onto a smaller patient pupil (1.59,
Table 1.3)67. when examining the peripheral fundus, the
1.58
1.59
LS
CL
1.58 Optics of binocular indirect ophthalmoscopy. Note how the
examiner's pupil distance is narrowed by the prisms and that a real
aerial image is formed between the examiner and the patient. (E =
examiner's eyes; LS = light source; P = patient; Fl = patient's fundus;
Cl = corrective lens; F1 = image of patient's fundus in space.) (With
permission from Rubin, 196065.)
1000!
Table 1.4 Ocular characteristics of lenses. (Modified 
1.59 Optics comparing pupil size needed for various strengths of
from Goldbaum et al, 198067.)
condensing lens and the difficulty in projecting the light and viewer's
00 :snpun leayduad ay ma o dnd ayi y6nouy Aqanbuo saAa
Lens power
lens image of examiner's eyes and light projecting into a small pupil
Approximate
Field of
Approximate
 and when viewing the peripheral fundus (A]; 20 D lens image; note
(D)
magnification
view
stereopsis
the larger pupil size required and that the peripheral fundus can still
28-35
x2
60°
x 0.5 normal
be examined if the pupil is large (B): 14 D lens; the pupil must be
very large and oblique viewing effectively cuts the light out so the
20
x3
519
x 0.75 normal
peripheral fundus cannot be visualized (C). (Wwith permission from
14
30°
x 1 normal
Goldbaum et af., 198067.)
32
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
 patient's pupil becomes optically compressed or narrow,
Note: to bring an object into the central view, the
observer's head and hand lens move in the same
to use a higher diopter lens but lose some depth
 direction as the area to be viewed in the aerial image.
perception in the process (1.59). A good compromise if
only one lens is available is a +20 D lens. The size of the
 Movement of the head to bring objects in the image to
field of view is dependent on the diopter power of the
the center is a simple concept, but it is counterintuitive
lens and the diameter of the lens. The higher diopter lens
and requires practice (1.62).
produces a more panoramic view and, for a given lens
Parallax can be
 demonstrated  with 
indirect
strength, increasing the diameter of the lens increases the
ophthalmoscopy by tilting or shifting the hand lens or
field of view67, 68.
the head to observe the object from a slightly different
angle. If the object is separated from the background, it
 Selection of the strength of the lens will depend on
will then move in relationship to the background (1.63).
the patient's pupil size and the amount of stereopsis
 Due to the expense of a BIO many other light sources
{depth perception) and magnification desired.
can be used instead. Any light source that does not diffuse
out excessively can be utilized. If the light source is
The lens is held with the thumb and forefinger, and
battery operated, it allows easy portability. The light
the remaining fingers are used to retract the upper lid
sources can be as varied as a good penlight, a strong
and steady the lens in space {1.60). The strongest
otoscope or direct ophthalmoscope, or any fiberoptic
convex surface of the lens should be facing the observer
bundle. If the direct ophthalmoscope is used as the light
for the best image. Many lenses have an identifying dot
source, more magnification can be produced by adding
or white ring that identifies the side towards the
1-2+ D of lenses than if it is set at 0 D. Beyond 2 D the
patient. When using the lens it will be noted that a
image becomes blurred. Because there is no optical
bright specular reflection is present from the anterior
 narrowing of the examiner's PD without a headset, the 60
and posterior lens surface and is located in the center of
saed au oiuo paoaloud aq isnw (dd aaeaael wu
 aui oi renoiuadad piau si sual aun uaum sual aui
pupil and the technique requires a much larger pupil to
beam. These bright specular reflections are often
acquire binocular examination ( Table 1.5). Consequently,
 annoying, as they obscure the area of interest that is
it is termed monocular indirect ophthalmoscopy (1.64).
usually centered. These specular reflections can
be
 Another form of monocular indirect ophthalmoscopy is
decentered by tilting the lens slightly, which pushes the
available in which the instrument optically rights the
reflections to the side (1.61)69. Excessive tilting of the
reversed and inverted image, thus avoiding this source of
lens will create a prismatic effect, bending the light so
confusion. The image is smaller but there is a wider field
that it is not directed through the pupil.
than with direct ophthalmoscopy (1.65). The instrument
One of the difficulties in learning indirect ophthalmo-
 is expensive but extremely easy to use.
scopy is created by the reversed image. This confuses the
 Indirect ophthalmoscopy gives a lower magnification
beginner as to the direction to move to bring the object
but a larger field than direct ophthalmoscopy, and gives
of regard into better view.
the examiner a better overall p
picture. With
less
magnification the patient's ocular movements are less
 troublesome. Most forms of indirect ophthalmoscopy
utilize both of the examiner's eyes and thus stereopsis with
depth perception is an important advantage. With good
1.60
1.61
1.60 Technique of holding the lens 5o that the upper lid is held
1.61 llustration of specular reflections off the hand lens: specular
open, the lens is aligned, and the hand and lens move with the head.
reflex from each surface is centered in the lens that distracts from
viewing (A];: slight tilting of the lens pushes the specular reflection
to the side leaving the central area clear (B).
ANAMNESIS AND THE OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION
33
1.62
1.63
Axis of rotation.
Vessel
Lesion
B
1.63 Demonstration of parallax of a lesion with a BlO. The
lesion when viewed from one perspective is observed against a
background vessel; if the lesion is separated from the background 
vessel, the lesion will move in relation to the vessel by slight
1.62 The area to the side of the branching vessels in the fundus can
rotation of axis of observation.
 be observed by the examiner moving in the direction the vessels are
seen in the image.
Table 1.5 Relationship between lens power and patient
1.64
pupil size necessary to project both eyes of the examiner
into the fundus without a binocular headset. (Modified 
from Goldbaum et al., 198067.)
Average
Power of
Size of
interpupillary
 condensing lens
patient's
distance of 
(D)
pupil (mm)
humans (mm)
60
30
6
60
20
9
60
15
12
1.64 Monocular indirect ophthalrmoscopy being performed with a
 Fnoffiluminator. Note an assistant is necessary to hold the dog's head.
mydriasis the extreme peripheral retina can be examined.
1.65 Monocular indirect
1.65
The ora ciliaris retina is routinely visualized temporally
scope that optically corrects
and ventrally, less commonly nasally, and rarely dorsally
the image for the observer.
without scleral indention. Peripheral examination requires
practice in positioning and manipulating the hand lens to
 get a prismatic bending of light.
 In veterinary medicine an important advantage of the
BIO is that the examiner's head is a distance from the
patient. This is important from the standpoint of physical
trauma and, occasionally, contagious diseases 
in
laboratory animals. It is always important to compare eyes
in the examination and the BIO allows this to be done
quickly and thus to be more valid. Most BlOs have a
teaching mirror available, so colleagues or students can
 gain first hand observations with an experienced examiner.
 Most texts emphasize the difficulty of using a BIO
but in practice it is routinely more gratifying to the
novice to finally see the overall picture, so that it
encourages ophthalmoscopy rather than
discourages it.
 US$20-200. The magnification with this form of indirect
ophthalmoscopy is usually not as much as the BlO and,
The most important disadvantage of the usual BIO is
depending on the source of light, both of the examiner's
the cost. This is not prohibitive for the practitioner but it
hands are used, so an assistant is necessary. The patient's
is for the student. The monocular version of indirect
pupil must be larger 
to have binocular vision and
 ophthalmoscopy only requires a lens that may cost from 
stereopsis (Table 1.5).
34
O pHThAlMIC DiseAse In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
VISION EVALUATION IN SMALL ANIMALS
Menace response
Vision evaluation is at best very crude and testing has not
The menace response is a threatening, sudden movement
significantly improved over the years. In the dog with
presented near the eye, which elicits a blink. Before testing
partial decreases in vision, multiple forms of visual testing
for a menace response the examiner must make sure the
are performed to satisfy the examiner that there is a
facial nerve is intact by eliciting a blink reflex through the
deficit and to characterize it. With complete loss of vision,
 palpebral or corneal reflex. While menacing can still be
the result of maze or obstacle course testing is usually
performed without an intact facial nerve, the response is
dramatic. Cats present a special problem in testing their
subtler. The afferent arm of this response is the visual fibers
functional vision because they are often reluctant 
to
up to the visual cortex and the efferent arm is the facial
explore an area, making it difficult to differentiate a
nerve. Additional centers involved with the menace response
 normal shy behavior pattern from a visual deficit.
are the cerebellum, rostral colliculus, and the motor cortex.
Cerebellar disease produces an ipsilateral deficit in the
 menace response with retention of vision (1.66)70-72. The
menace response can be altered by nonvisual influences such
1.66
as mental status and cerebellar disease.
When trying to elicit a menace response, avoid air
currents that may stimulate the blink reflex. A transparent
Orbicularis
 shield may be placed in front of the eye or, more commonly,
oculi muscle
presentation of fingers rather than a broad hand are used to
avoid air currents. Complacent or trusting animals should
Optic nerve
 have the eyelids occasionally tapped to make them more
alert. The contralateral eye should be closed to determine
that it was not a binocular response to the stimulus. Due to
the mixture of ipsilateral and contralateral visual fibers,
Motor cortex
unilateral lesions above the chiasm do not produce
complete blindness in an eye, and a variable menace
response may be obtained depending on the visual field
stimulated. The predominance of crossed fibers (6s-75%)
in higher lesions results in a larger temporal field (nasal
 Internal
capsule
retina) defect in the eye contralateral to the defect. Nasal
feld defects {lateral retina) are more difficult to detect as
Lateral
they are smaller (2s-35%), and it is easier to stimulate the
 geniculate
 opposite eye inadvertently with movement if it is not closed.
nucleus
Table 1.6 summarizes the PLR, and menace responses with
 lesions at different anatomic locations.
^ Optic radiations
Dazzle reflex
Pontine nucleus
The dazzle reflex is a subcortical reflex that involves
Cerebellar
(midbrain)
stimulating the retina with a very bright light, resulting in a
cortex ~
bilateral narrowing of the palpebral fissure. The reflex
requires the retina, optic nerve, chiasm, optic tract, and,
Facial 
probably, _the supraoptic nuclei and the rostral
nerve 
colliculi70-72. The dazzle reflex persists with cortical
Facial nucleus
 blindness. A positive dazzle response helps to establish the
 (brain stem)
intactness of the lower visual system when vision cannot be
evaluated (such as with cataracts) and the PLR is altered
1.66 Menace response pathways.
due to efferent problems (such as iris atrophy, synechia).
Table 1.6 Comparative visual reflexes with unilateral complete lesions within the visual system 
Lesion location
PLR
Anisocoria
Menace response
ERG
 Retina 
Direct absent, +MG
Mild static
Absent
Extinguished in most cases
 Optic nerve
Direct absent, +MG
Mild static 
Absent
Normal
Complete chiasm
Absent OU
Dilated OU 
Absent
Normal
Optic tract
Present, -MG
Mild static
 Homonymous field defect 
Normal
Optic radiations/visual
cortex
Present
None
Homonymous field defect
Normal
 PLR: pupillary light reflex; ERG: electroretinogram; MG: Marcus Gunn (pupil); Homonymous: right nasal + left temporal field, or
left nasal + right temporal field; OU: both eyes.
ANAMNESIS AND THE OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION
35
Visual placing
electroretinography equipment less expensive and it is
Visual placing is a good test for animals with normal motor
 usually available in specialist practices.
function and mental status. The animal is held in space and
 The electroretinogram (ERG) is an action potential that
supported under the chest and head while approaching a
occurs when a sudden change of illumination falls on the
flat surface such as a table. The normal response is to
retina. The potential is divided into three major
extend and raise the legs in anticipation of standing on the
 components: A-, B-, and C-waves. The A-wave is the first
surface. If the expected response is not forthcoming, then
 negative deflection and arises from the photoreceptors; the
 tactile stimulation should be used to establish the normalcy
B-wave follows and is the first positive deflection and
of proprioception and the efferent arm of the reflex. Testing
arises from nonneuronal glia in the inner nuclear layer;
the response with both eyes open and then alternately
and the C-wave is a slow positive potential arising from
holding the lids closed will evaluate individual eyes.
the pigmented epithelium of the retina (1.67)73-7s. Figure
Approaching the surface from the lateral or medial aspect
         
may give an indication of intactness of the visual fields.
under dark adaptation (rod dominated response). The
usual flash ERG is generated by the outer half of the
Maze or obstacle course
retina, and diseases that preferentially affect the ganglion
An obstacle course in a nonfamiliar environment for the
cells or optic nerve, such as glaucoma, may result in a
 animal is one of the more common methods of evaluating
normal ERG in a blind animal.
functional vision. The maze test is usually useful with
A retinal electrical  potential  evoked with an
active animals but is often difficult to evaluate with cats
alternating patterned grating (patterned ERG, PERG)
that cower or do not move. The examiner usually scatters
evokes responses that may ha ve optic nerve and ganglion
objects of varying size through the main pathway of the
cell origins76. The PERG has also been utilized to
examination room. Most dogs move toward the exit door
estimate the visual acuity of animals77
or the owner's voice. Repeated trials through the maze
 Oscillatory potentials (OPs) are small oscillations that
 i  m p  on  n
are superimposed on the B-wave and there may be up to
performed. Dramatic differences in scotopic (night) and
four to five wavelets. They are observed best during dark
photopic (light-adapted) vision may be observed with
adaptation; their origin is the inner retina and they are
maze testing. Patching of individual eyes can be
thought to be from the amacrine cells. Wavelets O3 and
performed; with monocular blindness most patients
become preoccupied with the bandage and remove it
alterations in the OPs are observed with alterations in
when the good eye is patched.
retinal circulation, most notably in diabetes mellitus.
Visual evoked potentials {VEPs) are measured over the 
Visual cliff
occipital cortex after stimulating the retina with light.
A visual cliff test evaluates not only vision but depth
 The potentials are small and require computer averaging
perception. Some cats that are functionally blind will be
 and general anesthesia. VEPs measure the integrity of the
able to jump off a table.
optic nerve, optic tracts, and occipital cortex.
Cotton ball test
FLUORESCEIN ANGIOGRAPHY
 Cotton balls dropped into the visual fields of the patient
Fluorescein angiography is used to study the retinal,
are a common means to evaluate vision. Animals often
choroidal, and iris vasculature. After injection 
of
 get easily bored with this so initial impressions are the
10-25 mg/kg of fluorescein i.v., the circulation is observed
most important.
through a camera equipped with an exciter filter (500 nm)
to stimulate the fluorescence of fluorescein, a barrier filter
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGIC TESTS
that selects light at the peak emission for fluorescein
Electroretinography, visually evoked responses, and
(550 nm), a motorized film advancer, and a rapid strobe
electro-oculography are electrophysiologic responses that
recharging unit. The flow of dye through the vessels is
may be utilized in clinical investigations. While initially
sequentially observed as the choroidal, retinal arteriolar, 
limited to institutions, computerization has made the
1.67
1.68 Fluorescein
1.68
angiogram in a
dog in the late
venous phase.
Note the arteries
and veins are both
filled. (Courtesy of
'A!P/An
Dr. K. Gelatt.)
1
...................
5 msec/div.
1.67 ERG from a normal dog: A-wave (1]; B-wave (2)]; no C-wave is
recorded. Performed with blue light in a dark room. Note two
Oscillatory potential wavelets on the B-wave.
36
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
fluoresces at similar wavelengths as fluorescein, thus
endothelium, or lens is more likely. (See Table 1.7 for
reducing the contrast, but this can be minimized by a
aqueous humor laboratory values?2.)
barrier filter that transmits wavelengths over S30 nm82
Cultures obtained from the aqueous may be negative
with septic conditions because of the dilution and turnover
ULTRASOUND
of fluid. Vitreous is a more relia ble culture media for septic
Utrasonography in A and B modes has become routine in
 a si si a ig so
most centers for studying ocular lesions when the medium
complications (hemorrhage and creation of retinal holes)
is opaque. It is particularly helpful in detecting neoplasia,
 and so is reserved for seriously diseased eyes. A 22 gauge
phacoclastic uveitis, foreign bodies, vitreal pathology, and
needle is used due to the difficulty in aspirating formed
vitreous. The needle is passed 6-8 mm posterior to the
limbus in the lateral to dorsolateral quadrant where the
density of tissue. The more dramatic the acoustic interface,
pars plana is widest. The needle is pointed to the center of
the more the ultrasound waves are reflected back to the
the eye {1.71) utilizing extreme care to avoid hitting the
probe. A-mode ultrasonography gives an image of the
lens. The needle frequently needs repositioning to find
amplitude of reflections in one spatial dimension fanterior--
 pools of liquified vitreous.
posterior), whereas B-mode ultrasonography consists of
two spatial dimensions. A-mode is best suited for biometric
BIOMICROSCOPY
measuring of ocular dimensions, whereas B-mode is usually
The advent of portable slit lamps has made biomicroscopy
used for diagnostic imaging, although B-mode has been
the standard for examination of the anterior segment.
reported to be as accurate as A-mode for biometric
 Otto Uberreiter, an Austrian veterinarian, pioneered the 
measurementss, 86. The method of probe placement may
use of the slit lamp in veterinary ophthalmology28,29,94. A
be through a water bath (surgical glove filled with water)
aui Aau tepot asn ui are sduel as qeod jo Aaa
offset on the closed lids or, more commonly, directly on the
 in price from Us$500-3500 (1.72). In veterinary medicine,
cornea utilizing an ultrasound coupling gel. Typical probe
where patient movement is inherent, a disadvantage of the
frequencies used in ophthalmic ultrasound are 7-10 MHz.
newer slit lamp models is that the lowest magnification is
New instruments with probes that can focus at different
 often 10x, which is too high.
focal lengths have improved visualizing the anterior
 segment without an offset (1.69).
Biomicroscopic techniques
Slit lamps come in many variations but all consist
B-mode ultrasonography has greatly expanded our
essentially of an illuminating system with a focused light
diagnostic capabilities in eyes with opaque media.
pue roloo aun Apow on saniade snoea sey Aensn ieul
shape of the light beam, and a microscope. The light can be
An extension of the use of ultrasound has been color
rotated at various angles around the point of observation
flow Doppler studies of the eye and orbit to study blood
with the microscope. The slit lamp is unique in that the
flow, and ultrasonic pachymetry to measure corneal
microscope and the light source have the same focal length
thickness87, 88. Fifty MHz probes are now available, and
{about 7-10 cm [2.8-4 in]). Before using, the oculars of the
they produce a very detailed image of the anterior
microscope should be adjusted for the PD of the examiner
segment that rivals histologic sections. The latter are
and the focus of the oculars adjusted by observing the light
limited to 45 mm of tissue penetration and have been
on a target rod. Some instruments have lines within the
used to study the iridocorneal angle of dogs89
oculars to focus on. Because the light is focused, it is
The reported axial lengths of the dog eye vary with
 important to adjust the oculars for each individual so that
the head type. Mesocephalic dogs have a mean axial
jo ueau e aany sydaoop pue wu bet jo ysual
21.2 mm?6. Sedated Samoyeds have a mean of 22 mm90
1.69
B uaum Punog 5m 1 to7 Jo uaw leao ue ue
variety of breeds was examined91.
OCULAR CENTESIS
Aqueous and vitreous centesis are performed frequently
for cultures and cytology of intraocular disease92, 93.
Aqueous centesis can be performed under topical
anesthesia in a cooperative patient but most clinicians
will feel more comfortable using sedation. Aqueous
humor centesis is performed with a 25-30 gauge needle
entering the anterior chamber at the limbus, with the
needle passing parallel with the iris (1.70). The *seal on
the syringe should be broken prior to passing the needle
into the eye, to avoid awkward movement when
aspirating fluid. Unless the anterior chamber is collapsed
about 0.3 ml of aqueous humor can usually
be
aspirated. Centesis is used not only to obtain aqueous
humor but may be used to vacuum cells off lesions on
1.69 B-mode ultrasound image of a normal 1-year-old dog with a
the iris and aspirate cystic lesions. Centesis of the
10 MHz probe and direct contact with the cornea. Note that with newer
anterior chamber is usually safe but with opaque
technology that the anterior segment is well visualized. (1: cornea;
corneas or marked iris bombe, trauma to the iris,
2: anterior chamber; 3: lens; 4: vitreous; 5: optic nerve.]
ANAMNESIS AND THE OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION
37
1.70 Aqueous
1.70
1.71 Vitreal
1.71
centesis from a
centesis of a cat
cat with uveitis.
eye. Special care
should be taken to
avoid the lens.
1.72
Table 1.7 Baseline values for aqueous humor for the dog
and cat. (Modified from 0lin, 197792.)
Factor
Dog
Cat
Refractive index
1.335
1.335
 Protein content
24-54
15-55
口
(mg/100 ml)
11-55
Anterior chamber
0.4-0.6
0.6-0.9
volume (ml)
0.72
Cytology
 Occasional mononuclear cell or melanocyte
1.72 Kowa SL-14 slit lamp with recharging station.
the microscope and the light focus coincide. The target rod
is located at the focal point of the light source and the
1.73
oculars are adjusted so that the margins of the light image
 are sharp in each ocular. In general, the clinician should
utilize the least magnification possible and wider beam
widths for preliminary examinations, and should
selectively utilize higher magnifications for minute lesions.
The light beam is placed 20-30° from the axis of the
microscope, and in most dogs is oriented from the temporal
side of the eye because the nose interferes with placement
of the light. The light can be utilized from either side in
brachycephalic dogs, cats, and horses.
Most common illumination techniques
Direct focal illumination
This is the most common form of slit lamp examination
with the microscope and light beam focused on the same
1.73 Optic section and parallelpiped of cornea. Note the specular
point. The advantage of the focused light beam is that the 
reflections. The endothelium can be visualized with a quiet patient
sharp demarcation  of illuminated and  nonilluminated
utilizing specular reflections.
surfaces reduces scattered light that drowns out detail.
When observing the cornea and lens this produces a
parallelpiped or a three-dimensional block of light as it
overall impression. This is followed with the optic section
traverses the tissue (1.73). Examination of solid structures
which is produced by narrowing the width of the light so
such as the iris simply gives a magnified view with minimal
that the block of light becomes two dimensional, namely
glare. The parallelpiped of the cornea and lens allows 
length and depth (1.73). Coincidentally, the strength of the 
visualization of the two surfaces of the tissue as well as the
light usually must be increased. Examination of the tissue
intervening tissue. As the surfaces of the cornea and lens are
with the optic section allows exact localization in depth of
curved, specular reflections will be produced. Specular
lesions. When examining with an optic section, various
reflections appear as bright reflections near the center of the
zones of optical discontinuity will be observed in the cornea
vertical axis of the light beam. Examination with a broad
light beam producing a parallelpiped gives a preliminary or
 section at low magnification.
38
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
Retroilfumination
Examination of theposterior segment
Retroillumination can be categorized into direct and
In an eye with a lens, the slit lamp can only focus as far 
 indirect. Direct retroillumination examines structures or
posteriorly as the anterior vitreous cavity. Contact or
lesions against the background of the retroilluminated
noncontact lenses may be used to neutralize the cornea
light ({1.i2); indirect retroillumination examines the
and allow the fundus to be examined with the slit lamp.
retroilluminated structure against the adjacent dark
background (1.74). The technique of retroillumination
1.74
structures such as the iris or fundus, while focusing the
 microscope on the nearer structures studied such as the
cornea or lens (1.12j30-32. Retroillumination is an
extremely sensitive and rapid method of detecting
opacities of the clear media. Objects are observed
because they obstruct, refract, or reflect light. Structures
studied that obstruct light will appear darker in direct
retroillumination.
Oscillatory illumination
Oscillatory illumination is a minor variation of direct
focal illumination and retroillumination that utilizes the
movement of the light source to study the dynamics of
changing illumination on the structure or lesions.
Proximal or indirect illumination
Proximal illumination utilizes a focused beam directed
1.74 Direct and indirect retroillurmination of a corneal lesion. At
adjacent  to the object being studied.  Proximal
 position A direct retroillumination views the object in the cornea
illumination may determine the density of the lesion, i.e.
against the retroilluminated iris; at position B the object is illuminated
 solid versus cystic.
by the light but is examined against the dark nonilluminated iris.
(Modified from Berliner, 196695.)
REFERENCES
1 Marfurt C, Murphy C, Florczak J (2001)
7 Urban M, Wyman M, Reins M,
13 Rubin L, Lynch RK, Stockman WS
 Morphology and neurochemistry of
Marraro V {1972) Conjunctival flora in
{1965) Clinical estimation of lacrima]
canine corneal innervation. Investigatitve
clinically normal dogs. Journat of the
function in dogs. Journat of the American
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
American Veterinary Medicat Association
Veterinary Medicat Association
42:2242-2251.
161:201-206.
147:946-947.
2 Rubin L {1964) Auriculopalpebral nerve 
8 McDonald PJ, Watson ADJ {1976)
14 Veith LA, Cure TH, Gelatt KN (1970) A
 block as an adjunct to the diagnosis and
Microbial flora of normal canine
simple and helpful diagnostic tool: the 
 treatment of ocular inflammation in the
conjunctivae. Journat of Small Anima!
Schirmer tear test in cats. Modern
horse. Journat of the American Veterinary
Practice 17:809-812.
Veterinary Practice 57:48-49.
Medicat Association 144:1387-1388.
9 Murphy JM, Lavach JD, Severin GA
15 Marts Bs, Bryan GM, Preieur J (1977)
3 Manning J, St. Clair L (1976) Palpebral,
{1978) Survey of conjunctial flora in dogs
Schirmer tear test measurement and
frontal, and zygomatic nerve blocks for
with clinical signs of external eye disease.
lysozyme concentration of equine tears.
examination of the equine eye. Veterinary
Journatl of the American Veterinary
Journal of Equine Medicine and Surgery
Medicine/Small Animal Clinician
Medicat Association 172:66-68.
1:427-430.
71:187-189.
10 Shewen PE, Povey RC, Wilson MR
16 Williams RR, Manning JP, Peiffer RL
4 Trim C, Colbern G, Martin C {1985)
{1980) A survey of the conjunctival flora
(1979) The Schirmer tear test in the
 Effects of xylazine and ketamine on
of clinically normal cats and cats with
 equine: normal values and the
 intraocular pressure in horses. Veterinary
 conjunctivitis. Canadian Veterinary
contribution of the gland of the
Record 117:442-443.
Joumat 21:231-233.
nictitating membrane. Journat of Equine
5 Jones WG (1955) A preliminary report of
11 Hackner DV, Jensen HE, Selby LA (1979)
Medicime and Surgery 3:117-119.
 the flora in health and disease of the
A comparison of conjunctival culture
17 Berger SL, King VL (1998) The
external ear and conjunctival sac of the
techniques in the dog. Journat of the
fluctuation of tear production in the dog.
dog. Journat of the American Veterinary
American Animat Hospitat Association
Journat of the American Animat Hospitat
Medicat Association 127:442-444.
15:223-225.
Association 34:79-83.
6 Bistner SI, Roberts SR, Anderson RP
12 Lowenstein O, Murphy S, Loewenfeld I
18 Hamor RE, Roberts SM, Severin GA,
{1969) Conjunctival bacteria: clinical
{1953) Functional evaluation of the
Chavkin MJ (2000) Evaluation of results
 appearances can be deceiving. Modern
 pupillary light reflex pathways:
for Schirmer tear tests conducted with 
Veterinary Practice 50:45-47.
experimental pupillographic studies in
and without application of a topical
anesthetic in clinically normal dogs of five
49:656-670.
breeds. American Journat of Veterinary
Research 61:1422-1425.
ANAMNESIS AND THE OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION
39
19 Hawkins EC, Murphy CJ (1986)
 33 Brown M, Galland J, Davidson H,
47 Magrane WG (1957) Canine glaucoma. I.
 Inconsistencies in the absorptive
Brightman A (1996) The phenol red
Methods of diagnosis. Journat of the
capacities of Schirmer tear test strips.
thread tear test in dogs. Veterinary
Americam Veterimary Medicat Association
Journat of the American Veterinary
Comparative Ophthatmology 6:274-277.
131:311-314.
Medicat Association 188:511-513.
34 Brown M, Brightman A, Butine M,
48 Lovekin LG (1964) Primary glaucoma in
20 Hirsh S, Kaswan R (1995) A comparative
Moore T (1997) The phenol red thread
dogs. Journal of the American Veterinary
study of Schirner tear test strips in dogs.
tear test in healthy cats. Veterinary and
Medicat Association 145:1081-1091.
Veterinary Comparative Ophthatmology
Comparative Ophthatnology
49 Vainisi SJ (1970) Tonometry and
5:215-217.
7(4):249-252.
gonioscopy in the dog. Journat of Smatt
21 Woman M, Gilger B, Mueller P, Norris K
 35 Moore C, Collier L (1990) Ocular surface
Anwmat Practice 11:231-240.
(1995) Clinical evaluation of a new
disease associated with loss of
 50 Heywood R (1971) Intraocular pressures
Schirmer tear test in the dog. Veterinary
conjunctival goblet cell in dogs. Journat
in the Beagle dog. Journat of Smatl
Comparative Ophthatmology 5:211-214.
of the American Animat Hospitat
Anmat Practice 12:119-121.
 22 Gelatt KN, Peiffer Jr RL, Erickson JL,
Association 26:458-465.
51 Walde VI (1982) Glaukom beim hunde.
Gum GG {1975) Evaluation of tear
36 Vaughan DG (1955) Contamination of
Klemtier Praxis 27:343-354.
 forrmation in the dog, using a
fluorescein solutions. American Journat
52 Khan JA, Davis M, Graham CE, Trank J,
 modification of the Schirmer tear test.
of Ophthatmmotogy 39:55-61.
Whitacre MM (1991) Comparison of 
Journat of the American Veterinary
 37 Claoue C (1986) Experimental
oculab Tono-Pen readings obtained from
Medicat Association 166:368-370.
 contamination of minims of fluorescein
various corneal and scleral locations.
23 Rubin LF, Wolfes RL (1962) Mydriatic
by Pseudomonas deruginosa. British
Archives of Ophthatmotogy 109:1444-6.
for canine ophthalmoscopy. Journat of
Journal of Ophthatmology 70:507-509.
53 Boothe W, Lee D, Panek W, Pettit T
the American Veterinary Medicat
 38 Romanchuk KG {1982) Fluorescein:
(1988) The Tono-Pen: a manometric and
Association 140:137-141.
physiocochemical factors affecting its
clinical study. Archives of
24 Gelatt KN, Boggess III TS, Cure TH
fluorescence. Survey of Ophthatmotogy
Ophthatmology 106:1214-1217.
{1973) Evaluation of mydriatics in the
26:269-283.
54 Priehs D, Gum G, Whitley D, Moore L
cat. Journat of the American Animat
39 Gelatt KN (1972) Vital staining of the
{1990) Evaluation of three applanation
Hospitat Association 9:283-287.
canine cornea and conjunctiva with rose
tonometers in dogs. American Journat of
25 Willis M, Martin CL, Stiles J, Chaffin K
bengal. Journat of the American Animat
Veterimary Research 51:1547-1550.
{1997) Acute, transient sialoadenomegaly
Hospitat Association 8:17-22.
55 Miller P, Pickett P, Majors L, Kurzman I 
 in two cats following topical
40 Feenstra R, Tseng S {1992) Comparison
(1991) Evaluation of two applanation
 administration of tropicamide. Veterinary
of fluorescein and rose bengal staining.
tonometers in cats. American Journat of
Comparative Ophthatmology 7:206-208.
Ophthatmology 99:605-617.
Veterimary Research 52:1917-1921.
26 Gelatt K, Gum G, MacKay E (1995)
41 Roat M, Romanowski E, Araullo-Cruz T,
 56 Miller PE, Pickett JP, Majors LJ,
 Evaluation of mydriatics in horses.
Gordon J (1987) The antiviral effects of
Kurzman ID (1991) Clinical comparison
Veterinary and Comparative
rose bengal and fluorescein. Archives of
 of the Mackay-Marg and Tono-Pen
Ophthatmotogy 5(2):104-108.
Ophthatmology 105:1415-1417.
applanation tonometer in the dog.
27 Pascoe PJ, Elkiw JE, Stiles J, Smith E
42 Bauer G, Speiss B, Lutz H {1966)
Progress in Veterinary and Comparative
(1994) Arterial hypertension associated
 Exfoliative cytology of conjunctiva and
Ophthatmology 1:171-176.
with topical ocular use of phenylephrine 
cornea in domestic animals: a
57 Gelatt KN, MacKay EO (1998)
in dogs. Journat of the American
comparison of four collecting
Distribution of intraocular pressure in
Veterinary Medicat Association
techniques. Veterinary Comparative
dogs. Veterinary Ophthatmotogy
205:1562-1564.
Ophthatmology 6:181-186.
1:109-114.
 28 Uberreiter O {1956) Augenunters-
43 Willis M, Bounous D, Kaswan R, et at.
58 Millers P, Pickett P, Majors L {1990)
uchungsmethoden met besonderer
{1997) Conjunctival brush cytology:
 Evaluation of two applanation
berucksichtigung der mikroskopie am
evaluation of a new cytological collection
tonometers in horses. Armerican Journa!
lebenden tierauge. Wiener Tierarztliche
technique in dogs and cats with a
of Veterinary Research 51:935-937.
Monatsschrift 43:1-13.
comparison to conjunctival scraping.
59 Gelatt KN, Gwin RM, Peiffer RL,
 29 Uberreiter O (1956) Die mikroskopie am
Veterinary Comparative Ophthatmoiogy
Gum GG (1977) Tonography in the
 lebenden tierauge. Wiener Tierarztiche
7:74-81.
normal and glaucomatous Beagle.
Monatsschrift 43:77-82.
 44 Lavach JD, Thrall MA, Benjamin MM,
American Journat of Veterinary Research
30 Martin C (1969) Slit lamp examination
Severin GA (1977) Cytology of normal
38:515-520.
 of the normal canine anterior ocular
and inflammed conjunctivas in dogs and
60 Martin CL (1969) Gonioscopy and
 segment. Par I. Introduction and
cats. Jotrnat of the American Veterinary
 anatomical correlations of drainage angle
technique. Journat of Small Animat
Medicat Association 170:722-726.
Of the dog. Journat of Small Animat
Practice 10:143-149.
 45 Peiffer RL, Gelatt KN, Jessen CR,
Practice 10:171-184.
 31 Martin C (1969) Slit lamp examination
Gum GG, Swin RM, Davis J (1977)
61 Gelatt KN, Ladds PW (1971)
 of the normal canine anterior ocular
Calibration of the Schiotz tonometer for
Gonioscopy in dogs and cats with
segment. Part I. Description. Journat of
the normal canine eye. American Journat
glaucoma and ocular tumors. Journat of
Smafl Anumat Practice 10:151-162.
of Veterinary Research 38:1881-1889.
Small Animat Practice 12:105.
 32 Martin C {1969) Slit Jamp examination
 46 Picket J, Miller P, Majors L (1988)
62 Bedford PGC (1977) Gonioscopy in the
of the normal canine anterior ocular
Calibration of the Schiotz tonometer for
dog. Journat of Smatl Animat Practice
 segment. Part II Discussion and
the canine and feline eye. Proceedings of
18:615-629.
summary. Journat of Smatl Animat
the Americam College of Veterinary
63 Murphy C, Howland H (1987) The
Practice 10:163-169.
Ophthatmology 19:45-51.
optics of comparative ophthalmoscopy.
Vision Research 27:599-607.
40
O pHThAlMIC DiseAse In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
64 Havener WH (1966) Ophthalmoscopic
77 Sims M, Ward D {1992) Response of
86 Cottrill N, Banks W, Pecham R (1987)
 interpretation: a semi-programmed
pattern-electroretinograms (PERGs) in
 Utrasonography and biometic
instruction sequence. Notes pp. 1-30.
dogs to alterations in the spatial
evaluation of the eye and orbit of dogs.
65 Rubin LF (1960) Indirect ophthalmology.
frequency of the stimulus. Progress in
American Journat of Veterinary Research
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
Veterinary and Comparative
50:898-903.
Medicat Association 137:648-651.
Ophthatmology 2:106-112.
87 Schoster J, Wickman L, Stuhr C (1995)
66 Havener WH, O'Dair RB {1963) The
78 Sims M, Brooks D (1991) Changes in
The use of ultrasonic pachymetry and
 indirect ophthalmoscope. Eye, Ea, Nose
oscillatory potentials in the canine
 computer enhancement to illustrate the
C Throat Monthty 42:41-52.
electroretinogram during dark
collective corneal thickness profile of 25 
67 Goldbaum M, Joondeph H, Huamonte F,
adaptation. American Journat of
cats. Veterinary Comparative
Peyman G {1980) Retinal examination
Veterimary Research 51:1580-1586.
Ophthatmotlogy 5:68-77.
 and surgery In: Principtes and Practice of
79 Sims M, Sackman J, McLean R,
 88 Schmid V, Murisier N (1996) Color
Ophthatmology, vol I. G Peyman, D
Slaymaker C (1991) Effects of stimulus
Doppler imaging of the orbit in the dog.
Sanders, M Goldberg (eds). WB
intensity and conditioning on the
Veterinary Comparative Ophthatmoiogy
Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 988-1097.
electroretinogram and oscillatory
6:35-43.
68 Snead M, Rubinstein M, Jacobs P (1992)
potentials in dark-adapted cats. Progress
89 Gibson T, Roberts S, Severin G, Steyn P,
The optics of fundus examination. Survey
in Veterinary and Comparative
Wrigley R {1998) Comparison of 
of Ophthatmoiogy 36(6):439-445.
Ophthatmology 1:177-185.
 punosenjn pue Adoosojuoa
69 Havener WH, Gloeckner S {1967) Atlas 
80 Gelatt KN, Henderson Jr JD, Steffen GR
biomicroscopy for evaluating the
of Diagnostic Techniques and Treatment
(1976) Fluorescein angiography of the
iridocorneal angle in dogs. Journat
of Retinat Detachment. Mosby, St Louis,
normal and diseased ocular fundi of the
Americam Veterinary Medicat Association
pp. 1-200.
laboratory dog. Journat of the American
213:635-638.
70 Petersen-Jones SM (1989) Neuro-
Veterinary Medicat Association
90 Ekesten B {1994) Biological variability
ophthalmology. British Veterinary
169:980-984.
and measurement error variability in
Jounat 145:99-120.
81 Peruccio C, Helper LC, Monti F.
ocular biometry in Samoyed dogs. Acta
 71 Hart WM (1992) The eyelids. In: Adter's
 Brightman ⅢI AH {1982) Fundus
Veterinaria Scandinavica 35:427-433.
Physiology of the Eye, 9th edn. WHart
fuoroangiography in the cat. Journal of
 91 Gaiddon J, Rosolen S, Steru L, Cook C,
(ed). Mosby Year Book, st Louis, pp.
the American Animat Hospitat
Peiffer R {1991) Use of biometry and
1-17.
Association 18:939-945.
keratometry for determining optimal
72 Scaglliotti RH (1999) Comparative
82 Kommonen B, Koskinen L (1984)
power for intraocular lens implants in
 neuro-ophthalmology In: Veterinary
 Fuorescein angiography of the canine 
dogs. American Journat of Veterinary
Ophthatmology. K Gelatt (ed).
 ocular fundus in ketamine-xylazine 
Research 52:781-783.
Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins,
anesthesia. Acta Veterinaria Scandinavica
92 Olin DD (1977) Examination of the
Philadelphia, pp. 1307-1400.
25:346-351.
aqueous humor as a diagnostic aid in
73 Parry HB, Tansley K, Thomson LC
83 Rubin LF, Koch SA {1968) Ocular
anterior uveitis. Journat of the American
{1953) The electroretinogram of the dog.
diagnostic ultrasonography Journat of
Veterimary Medicat Association 171:557.
Journat of Physiology 120:28-40.
the American Veterinary Medicat
93 Hazel SJ, Thrall MAH, Severin GA,
74 Rubin LF {1967) Clinical
Association 153:1706-1716.
Lauerman Jr LH, Lavach JD (1985)
 electroretinography in dogs. Journat of
84 Hager DA, Dziezyc J, Millchamp NJ
Laboratory evaluation of aqueous humor
the American Veterinary Medicat
(1987) Two-dimensional real-time ocular
in the healthy dog, cat, horse, and cow.
Association 151:1456-1469.
ultrasonography in the dog. Veterinary
Americam Journat of Veterinary Research
75 Brown KT (1968) The electroretinogram:
Radiology 28:60-65.
46:657-659.
 its components and their orgins. Vision
85 Schiffer SP, Rantanen NW, Leary GA,
94 Uberreiter O {1959) Examination of the
Research 8:633-677.
Bryan GM (1987) Biometric study of the
eye and eye operations in animals. In:
76 Dawson WW, Maida TM, Rubin ML
 canine eye using A-mode
Advances in Veterinary Sciences, vol. 5.
{1982) Human pattern-evoked retinal
ultrasonography. American Joturnat of
Academic Press, New York, pp.1-80.
responses are altered by optic atrophy.
Veterinary Research 43:826-830.
95 Berliner ML (1966) Biomicroscopy of the
Investigative Ophthatmology and Visuat
eye: slit lamp microscopy of the living
Science 22:796-803.
eye. Vol 1. Hafner Publishing, New York.
41
2
Ophthalmic
Pharmacology
ROUTES OF ADMINISTRATION
be debrided to enhance drug penetration. In rabbits,
removal of 25-50% of the corneal epithelium increases
ToPICAL
the drug concentration in the cornea and aqueous
Topical administration is the usual route associated
 ninefold. Defects larger than 50% do not further increase
with ophthalmic drugs. Some of the many factors to
the drug concentrationst. Topical therapy will achieve 
consider when selecting a drug for topical therapy are:
therapeutic drug levels only on the ocular surface and as
what is the target tissue and can the drug reach the
far posteriorly as the iris-ciliary body. Topical therapy
targeted tissue in therapeutic levels; is the drug
should not be relied on for posterior segment diseases$6
available in ophthalmic form; what form of topical
drug to use if it is available in more than one form;
Frequency of application
what is the desired frequency of administration and
The frequency of therapy will vary with the severity of
 practicality of it being administered; owner compliance;
the condition, the vehicle used, and the duration of
patient cooperation; comparative cost of medications;
action of the drug administered. For instance, one
and potential side-effects and toxicities.
instillation of atropine in the normal eye will maintain
mydriasis for 3-4+ days, whereas in an eye with iritis,
Ability to penetrate the intact cornea
Ap d s te uoes aan a sisi
The intact cornea consists of the epithelium, which has a
 Antibiotics used for minor infections or prophylaxis may
high lipid content, the stroma, which has a high water
be given q12-8h but for an infected corneal ulcer the
content, and the endothelium, which also has a high lipid
concentration may be increased and it may be used
content. Most drugs penetrate the cornea by a proces of
hourly or by constant infusion.
passive diffusion, which depends on concentration
gradients, solubility characteristics, and for ionizable
Placement of topical drugs
molecules, the dissociation constantl. A drug applied
Most containers are multiple use and are often used on
topically must have a differential solubility in water and
different patients. Care must be taken so that the
lipid in order to penetrate the intact cornea2, 3. Many
container nozzle does not touch the hair or cornea and
drugs do not possess this characteristic: for instance,
become contaminated. A solution should be applied so
antibiotics are mainly water soluble, with the notable
that the drop falls onto the eye rather than have the
exception of chloramphenicol and the sulfonamides. The
container held into the eye and squeezed. The amount of
solubility of a drug may sometimes be improved by
fluid that the conjunctival cul-de-sac can accommodate is
combining it with certain organic salts iglucocorticoids
about 30 μl, and this is often exceeded by one drop from
an ordinary bottle. The moral is that one drop, if it hits
derivative of the drug, manipulated to improve a certain
the eye, is more than enough, and two drops are
characteristic such as solubility, which once absorbed is
excessive, wasteful, and also increase the potential for
regenerated into the parent compound {dipivalyl
 systemic side-effects from nasolacrimal absorptionl. To
epinephrine to epinephrine). Surfactants, such 
as
 minimize washout by subsequent drops, if more than one 
benzalkonium chloride, which is a frequent preservative
anuu s-e e uaued e oi uaag suag si uoneiedad
in ophthalmic solutions, also enhance absorption
interval should be observed between drops.
through the epithelial barrier by their epithelial toxicity.
 Ointments are harder to quantitate but a 1 cm
The main lipid barrier is broken with ulcerations and
{0.25-0.5 in) ribbon of ointment is adequate. After
lacerations so that in these conditions the water-soluble
application it is almost a reflex action to rub the
antibiotics may attain therapeutic concentrations. In
11 se papioae aq pmous siul inq bauoo al 1aao juawuo
conditions such as corneal abscesses, the epithelium may
 is traumatic, particularly if an ulcer is present.
42
O pHThAlMIC DiseAse In VeterinArY MedicINE
Vehicle
The vehicle chosen for topical therapy may be a solution,
Table 2.1 Advantages and disadvantages of solutions
and suspensions
suspension, ointment, or solid ocular insert. The advan-
tages and disadvantages of solutions and ointments are
 outlined in Tables 2.1 and 2.2. Comparable preparations
Advantages
in different vehicles are usually quite acceptable, and it is
 Less disturbance of vision (questionable importance in
often a matter of personal preference.
veterinary medicine).
Excibients of topical drugs
Lower incidence of contact dermatitis.
Excibients are the therapeutically inactive ingredients in
Less toxic to interior eye if an unsealed perforating
drugs but they are often critical to the success of the
corneal injury is present.
preparation. Excibients in topical medications are used to
●May be easier to apply for some owners.
buffer, maintain sterility, prevent oxidation, and increase
Disadvantages
absorption. The pH of the preparation may be buffered by
products such as acetic, boric, or hydrochloric acid or
Very short contact time (30 seconds), necessitates
bicarbonate, borates, citrates, and phosphates to increase the
frequent application (Robin and Ellis, 1978246; Shell,.
nonionized fom of the drug to improve lipid solubility, to
1982'). Important when considering owner compliance,
increase the drug's stability, and to improve ocular comfort.
 as the more frequent the application the less likely it is 
The viscosity of the solution will be altered by vehicles such
to be performed.
as polyvinyl alcohol, polyvinylpyrrolidone, and various
●Diluted out in irritated eyes with epiphora.
forms of methylcllulose; in general the goal is to increase the
● Often more expensive for short-term therapy when
 s aq p a  a oo ie
compared with a comparable ointment.
drainage. Surfactants such as benzylalkonium chloride are
 Suspensions often need excessive shaking to mix and
frequently found in ophthalmic solutions and they act as
deliver the intended dose.
antibacterial agents or preservatives, increase the solubility
 of hydrophobic agents, and enhance comeal penetration by
 Systemic absorption from nasolacrimal duct drainage is
their epitheliotoxic action. Other preservatives used are
 greater than ointments (Robin and Ellis, 1978246).
chlorhexidine, chlorobutanol, and thimerosal.
Agents such as dextrans, glycerine, and sodium
chloride are added to solutions to bring the tonicity to a
physiologic range of approximately 0.9%, in order to.
minimize ocular discomfort. Antioxida nts such as sulfites
Table 2.2 Advantages and disadvantages of ointments 
and EDTA are added to prevent degradation of many
3aj uaskxo pue yualuns Aq woy aaoeu1 ue oi sanup
Advantages
epinephrine, proparacaine). In suspensions, the particles
 Longer contact time, which means less frequent therapy
that hold the active ingredient are exhibients7, 8.
and higher drug concentrations are usually delivered.
Packaging of topical medications
Not diluted out by epiphora.
To avoid confusion in identifying topical solutions, by
 Protects the cornea from exposure and keeps it moist
convention they are coded by cap colors: mydriatics and
better than solutions.
cycloplegics are red; mitotics are green; carbonic
 Softens crusts and discharges.
anhydrase inhibitors {CAIs) are orange; beta blockers are
 May help to to prevent symblepharon.
yellow or blue; glucocorticoids are pink; nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are gray; and anti-
● Often less expensive than the comparable solution.
infective agents are tan or browne.
Disadvantages
● Add to the amount of discharge material from the eye.
Alternative topical delivery systems
More difficult for some owners to apply.
Membrane controlled delivery system
A polymeric membrane containing a reservoir of drug can
 Higher incidence of contact dermatitis.
be placed into the conjunctival cul-de-sac and this allows
 More toxic to the endothelium if a penetrating injury is
the drug to diffuse out at a predicta ble rate. The rate and
present.
duration will vary depending on the design. Such delivery
Interfere with epithelial healing more than solutions.
systems are commercially available for a few drugs such as
However, this is controversial, and some studies have
pilocarpine and epinephrine, which are used in glaucoma
found no significant difference or, if present, it is not
treatment, and these allow placement only once a week
clinically significant (Hanna et af., 1973247).
into the eye. The drug release is small but the effect is equal
Imprecise dosage.
'seataul ie doup e jo Adeiaui pasnd aut ueul iaaq 1o oi
Because of the lower concentration of drug released, the
More difficult to sterilize.
undesirable side-effects are not noted?. The commercial
 Drug release from the vehicle is variable so that 
 designs have not been satisfactory in the dog or cat as the
prolonged contact time may be negated, i.e. 0.1%%
third eyelid usually catches on the reservoir and flips it out
sodium dexamethasone phosphate solution penetrates
of the cul-de-sac. It is also a relatively expensive means of
better than the ointment (Cox et al., 1972248,
therapy, particularly for its main use in treating glaucoma,
Hanna et ot., 1973247].
which is a lifetime therapy.
OPHTHALMIC PHARMACOLOGY
43
Pellets 
Two basic techniques exist for applying SPL. The first
Solid pellet-like particles of methylcellulose that dissolve
is a two-hole system where the tubing is looped into and
slowly in the conjunctival cul-de-sac are commercially
back out of the conjunctival cul-de-sac, with one or more
 available. The main purpose is to give a slow continuous
 holes placed in the portion of the tube exposed to the cul-
release but in domestic animals the third eyelid often flips
de-sac. Placing the tube is difficult and requires two
them out of the cul-de-sac10.
punctures by a needle trochar {2.1); this technique was
popular before the advent of commercial SPL kits. The
 Collagen inserts
second technique is a single-hole SPL system that utilizes
Antibiotics impregnated into collagen inserts designed as
a silicone tube with a footplate. Both types of SPL require
rings to be inserted into the conjunctival cul-de-sac have
 placement of the holes at the fornix or furthest extreme
been experimentally utilized in cattle. Mechanical design
of the conjunctival cul-de-sac to avoid ulceration. The
and physical properties of the collagen produce
injection end of the tubing is place on a braided portion
 difficulties that have prevented successful applicationll.
of the mane with a tongue depressor and tape. The
Collagen shields, which when hydrated appear as soft
ae ieut saannq, pedei ym aoeid u piay si suqnt
contact lenses, are on the market for the cat and dog.
sutured to the skin. The placement of the first butterfly
They slowly dissolve over 3-5 days and may act as a
close to the eye is the most critical in keeping the tube
drug reservoir when soaked in water-soluble drugs such
pulled up away from the cornea. The tubing is slipped
as antibiotics. The pharmacokinetics will vary with each
through the barrel of a tuberculin syringe and a blunt
drug and cannot be anticipated but in general will be
comparable to frequent topical applications. Caution
ai ui saaeaiasaid aui se Pasioaxa aa Pnou
preparation are often toxic and they will also be
increased in concentration.
2.1
Soft contact lens
A soft contact lens can be soaked in water-soluble
drugs and used as a drug reservoir. Caution should be
taken with preparations containing preservatives as
these may reach toxic levels if there is prolonged
contact12.
Continuous and intermittent irrigation
A tube placed into the conjunctival cul-de-sac and
brought out through either lid (subpalpebral lavage,
SPL) or placed in the nasolacrimal duct and exiting.
through the false nostril can be used as a means of
applying drops to an uncooperative patienti3, 14. In the
past, when the tubes and footplates had to be
fashioned   individually, 
there
were
 significant
complications with the tube or footplate rubbing on
the cornea when the tube was placed in the upper lid1s.
As a result of the complications, clinicians advocated
utilizing the lower medial lid where the third eyelid
would protect the cornea or the nasolacrimal ducti4, 16.
With the advent of a commercial source of SPL sets
(Mila International, 7604 Dixie Highway, Florence,
Kentucky), corneal ulcerations from rubbing of the
footplate on the cornea have become uncommon. The
placement of a SPL has become routine in treating
horses with painful ocular disease that requires therapy
 over a prolonged period. Medication is placed in the
tube (0.1-0.2 ml) and then pushed through with a
bolus of air. Some horses object to the passage of air
into the cul-de-sac and may require larger amounts of
medication or a flush with saline to push the
medication onto the eye. These latter methods increase
the volume of drug and the expense, or run the risk of
diluting the medications.
2.1 Two-hole method of placing a subpalpebral lavage in the horse.
  s a n 
The initial hole is created by a 14 gauge needle to thread tubing 
tempting to combine them in one solution. In vitro
through (the direction can also be reversed] (A). Placement of a
 antimicrobial testing of solutions combining gentamicin,
second hole to thread tubing through back onto the lid (B). A knot
tobramycin, miconazole, and atropine for 6 hours did
is tied at the end of the tubing to secure with a suture, and a hole
not demonstrate any decrease in effectiveness against
 made in the tubing traversing the conjunctival cul-de-sac; taped
Pseudomonas spp. or Aspergillus spp.17.
butterflies are sutured to the skin (C).
44
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
2.2
 2.2 Single-hole method of placing 
5ubpalpebral lavage system in the horse.
A
A hubless needle trochar is placed in the
fornix and through the lid (A). Tubing is
threaded into the trochar and pulled 
through the lid. A cross-section illustration
to show placement of tubing in the fornix 
 or as high up in the conjunctival sac a5
possible (B). The footplate is pulled up to
the fornix, taped, and sutured in place and
a tuberculin syringe used to stabilize the
distal end of the tubing (C). The tubing is
threaded into the needle end of a 
Footplate
tuberculin syringe barrel and a blunt 22 g
C
OF
cannula is threaded into the tubing; the 
hub of the cannula seats or fits snugly into 
the tuberculin syringe. A catheter cap is
TB
added to the cannula; the syringe is then
syringe .
taped to a tongue depressor and the unit
is taped to a piece of braided mane.
Blunt
20 g
needle
Catheter 
cap
 22 gauge catheter threaded onto the tubing. The catheter
the need for dissection (Mila International). The pump
is seated snugly into the barrel of the tuberculin syringe
holds up to 125 ml of medication but the calculated
and a catheter cap placed on the catheter (2.2).
delivery rate is affected by the temperature and viscosity
Commercial SPL kits are now available so they do not
of the medication. Pumps are a great work saver when
have to be custom made. SPL units can be applied for
only giving one medication or if several medications are
several weeks but they must be monitored for placement,
to be given at the same high dosing rate. However, when
infection, and function. In a series of 156 SPL placements 
using multiple medications drugs are often given on
of a custom-made tube, serious complications requiring
varying dosing schedules. Also, even inexpensive drugs
premature removal developed in 16% of the place-
may become expensive when administered in the
ments1s. One of the most common complications,
 quantities necessary for continuous infusion.
subconjunctival migration of the footplate, is minimized
by using a commercial SPL kit with a larger footplate,
SUBCONJUNCTIVAL
which can decrease the rate of corneal ulceration.
Injection of drug under the bulbar conjunctiva is also
 Alternatively, in the horse it is easy to place a tube in
usually under Tenon's capsule and consequently the drug
the nasolacrimal duct and flush retrogradely with
is deposited against the sclera, thus bypassing the lipid
medications, although the tube is not as well tolerated.
 barrier that the intact cornea presents. Penetration of
Nasolacrimal catheters require larger volumes
of
drug is mainly by simple diffusion through the sclera,
medication to reach the eye, and more of the medication
although leakage through the needle hole and topical
is likely to reflux back as the tube does not reach the
absorption does occurs, 6. The use of repositol or long-
conjunctival cul-de-sac.
acting products can produce a prolonged therapeutic
 A micropump hooked to the subpalpebral unit will
effect, but there is nothing inherent in the route that
deliver medications in a continuous manner. The
allows the drugs to last for long periods of time. Most
micropump may be mechanical, e.g. Cormed ambulatory
animals can have the injection performed under topical
infusion pump (Medina, NY), elastomeric, or osmotic.
anesthesia (2.3). Injection in the usual anterior location
The osmotic pump may be implanted subcutaneously
and connected to a SPL or placed subconjunctivally after
segment, although if injected posteriorly, therapeutic
 priming with medication. Tissue fluids are drawn around
 e fo  e  a s 
the drug reservoir, resulting in pressure that pushes the
subconjunctivally in the palpebral conjunctiva, as is
drug out at a calculated rate for up to 7 days. The
frequently performed in food animal medicine, loses the
amount and duration of medication varies depending on
 advantage of being absorbed through the sclera. Drug
the size of pump18-20, An external elastomeric pump is
uptake is probably topical through leakage from the
commercially available that delivers 0.5 ml/h and avoids
needle hole and systemic from vascular uptake.
OPHTHAlMIC PHARMACOLOGY
45
2.3 Subconjunctival
2.3
in humans to treat cytomegalovirus retinitis. Experi-
 injection being
mentally in horses, cyclosporine intravitreal implants
administered in a
have been used to treat recurrent uveitis, and implants
 dog under topical
have been designed to achieve therapeutic cyclosporine
anesthesia with a
levels for up to 10 years22, 23.
25 gauge needle.
RETROBULBARINJECTION
anp jo anu uanbau ue si usalu reqngny
administration, although this may be a route to obtain
good drug levels in the optic nerve, vitreous, and
serum drug levels compara ble to levels given by systemic
 routes2s. Air or positive contrast material may be injected
retrobulbarly for radiographic studies of the orbit. With
the availability of computed tomography {CT) scanning,
these contrast techniques are rarely utilized. In the horse,
some surgeons administer retrobulbar local anesthesia to
position the eye better and decrease ocular movements,
thus allowing lighter general anesthesia.
SYSTEMIC
The systemic route is usually used to achieve
therapeutic drug levels in the posterior segment and
optic nerve. Just as in the cornea, the posterior and
anterior segments have barriers in the normal eye that
limit the penetration of many drugs. A blood-aqueous 
humor barrier exists in tight cellular junctions of the
ciliary body nonpigmented epithelium26 and iris
vascular endothelium, and a blood-retinal barrier exists 
due to tight junctions in the retinal vascular endo-
thelium and the retinal pigment epithelium27, 28. These
barriers require lipid soluble drugs to penetrate in the
Advantages:
healthy eye but with inflammation, the barriers become
Aqueous products can be absorbed into the eye.
more permeable. Systemic therapy is given when the
 If repositol type products are used, a prolonged drug
 drug is needed in the posterior segment, severe anterior
level can be obtained without the bother of frequent
segment disease is present, or it is the only route
topical medication.
available for the desired drug.
Disadvantages:
 Perforation of the globe with the needle can occur
ANTIMICROBIAL AGENTS
 Many drugs are irritating.
 If repositol products are used, it is difficult to
CONSIDERATIONS IN SELECTING AN
discontinue therapy, for instance to stop steroids if
ANTIMICROBIAL AGENT
 they become contraindicated.
Spectrum of activity and mode of action
 Increased systemic absorption and potential side-
of the drug
effects.
When the infectious agent is unknown, a broad-spectrum
agent or combination product is often used.
A
INTRAOCULAR OR INTRACAMERAL
preliminary selection of antibiotics is made based on the
ADMINISTRATION
presence and morphology of bacteria in scrapings or
Intraocular injections are given when heroic means are
aspirates, combined with previous  experience or
needed to control a problem. The dangers of the trauma
of injection plus the toxicity of many drugs to the corneal 
intra ocular infections require a bacteriocidal antibiotic to
 endothelium, lens, and retina have to be balanced against
 stop the infection as quickly as possible. Antimicrobial
the therapeutic benefit. The concentration of drugs is
 antagonisms are theoretically possible but due to the very
drastically reduced when intraocular injections are
specific timing and dose relationships that are required,
utilized. The injection can be in either the anterior cham-
clinical antimicrobial antagonism is uncommon32.
ber {intracameral) or the vitreous, or both, depending on
When used prophylactically or for mild surface
the condition (see Ocular centesis, p.36, for site). Intra-
 infections, potent antibiotics should not be used because
vitreal injections are often the only means of achieving
drug resistance is encouraged.
significant drug levels in the vitreous.
The most common drugs administered intracamerally
Where is the agent needed?
are antibiotics for endophthalmitis and tissue plasmino-
The target area for the antimicrobial agent determines
 gen activator for fibrin formation. Intraviteal implants of
the route and often the drug used, based on its known
polymers surrounding an antiviral drug have been used
ability to penetrate the various barriers.
46
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRiNArY MeDiCINE
Patient comfort
antibiotics   commercially
available as ophthalmic
Some preparations such as sulfonamides routinely sting
preparations is limited, particularly for resistant Gram-
and result in poor owner compliance. Cats are
positive organisms. In these cases it is necessary to formulate
dot rend e on auaoi na u aqidun
topical preparations (often cephalosporins) from systemic
 antibiotic (gentamicin drops are often not tolerated), and
antibiotics. The frequency of administration should be at
inflammation may increase the irritation for many drugs.
least 3-4 times a day and may be hourly, depending on the
severity and consequences of the infection (blindness with
Potential hypersensitivity to an antibiotic
intraocular infection, progressive ulceration). In severe
infections the commercial topical solution may be 'spiked'
sensitivity to an antibiotic that is used topically and thus
with the systemic form of the antibiotic to increase the
 preclude future systemic use of that antibiotic. This is a
antibiotic concentration.  Experimental  infections have
major consideration in humans but less of a concern in
confirmed the increased efficacy of the fortified pre-
animals. Alternatively, certain antibiotics such 
as
parations; for instance, tobramycin and gentamicin have
been recommended at a fourfold increase from the
reactions or, rarely, a systemic anaphylactic reaction.
The antibiotic selected will depend on the sensitivity
INDICATIONS FOR ANTIMICROBIAL AGENTS
(known or suspected) of the organism and where the drug
Topical antibiotics are used for infections or suspected
is needed. (See Table 2.3 for intraocular penetration of
infective processes involving the lids, conjunctiva, cornea,
antibiotics in the nonulcerated, noninflamed eye.) The
anterior chamber, iris, and ciliary body. The number of
fluoroquinolone antibiotics have become popular anti-
biotics when a broad-spectrum and bacteriocidal antibiotic
is needed either systemically or topically. Ofloxacin has
become the topical fluoroquinolone of choice because it
Table 2.3 Intraocular penetration of antibacterial agents
penetrates the
intact cormea
better
 than
other
fluoroquinolones3s. The main therapeutic weakness of the 
fluoroquinolones is their lack of effectiveness against
Agent
 Systemic
Topical
 Subconjunctival
 streptococci. The fluoroquinolones are also reported to
 Penicillin
Fair
 Poor
Good
 inhibit keratocyte proliferation and produce cytotoxicty in
Ampicillin 
Poor
 Poor
Good
tissue culture preparations36. Systemic fluoroquinolones,
Amoxicillin
specifically enrofloxacin, have been associated with acute
Good
Poor
Good
blindness in cats37 (see Chapter 14, p.401). The toxicity
Ciprofloxacin
Good
Poor
 affects the outer half of the retina and appears to be dose 
Ofloxacin 
Good
dependent. Risk factors are 
 iv. dosing, long-term
Methicillin
Good
Good
 administration, and aged animals38.
 Erythromycin
Poor
Good
Good
Cephalosporin
Poor
Poor
Good
 Colistin
Poor
Poor
Good
 Table 2.4 Subconjunctival antibiotic dosages
Gentamicin
Poor
Poor
Good
Agent
Dosage
Tobramycin
Poor
Poor
Good
 Ampicillin
50-250 mg
Kanamycin
Poor
Poor
Poor
Amphotericin B
125μg
Amikacin 
Good
?
? probably
 Bacitracin
10,000 U
Lincomycin
Good
Carbenicillin
100 mg
Neomycin 
Poor
Poor
Cefazolin
50 mg
Chloramphenicol  Poor/fair
Good
Good
Cephaloridine
100 mg
Tetracycline
Poor
Good
Good
Cephalothin
50-100 mg
Minocycline
Good
?
? probably
Chloramphenicol
50-100 mg
Bacitracin
Poor
Poor
Colistin
15-37.5 mg
 Rosacin
Poor
Good
Good
Erythromycin
100 mg 
 Polymyxin
Poor
Poor
Gentamicin
10-20 mg
Trimethoprimf
Tobramycin
10 mg
sulfadiazine
Good
Lincomycin
150 mg
Sulfonamide
Good
Good
Good
Methieillin
150-200 mg
(Compiled from: Bloome et al. 197024s: Rowley and Rubin, 1970250: Axelrod
Neomycin
250-500 mg
Penicillin G
0.5-1.0 x 106
Polymixin B
10 mg
 Streptomycin
50-100 mg
Hulem et1982abaratf,1986Wingeld etol1983
Jay et ol., 1984265)
Tetracycline
2.5-5.0 mg
OPHTHAlMIC PHARMACOLOGY
47
In addition to topical antibiotics, systemic and
Due to the limited effectiveness of aminoglycosides
subconjunctival antibiotics may be used in severe anterior
against Gram-positive organisms, a cephalosporine is
segment infections, and the systemic route is indicated for
often concurrently injected.
 posterior segment infections. Table 2.4 presents appro-
priate antibiotic dosages for subconjunctival injections.
The selection of topical antibiotics is not as varied
Fluoroquinolones, specifically enrofloxacin, should be
as one might anticipate, resulting in the need to
used cautiously in cats and avoided when other antibiotics
improvise in concentration and compounding of
would be just as effective. When utilized, a dose of
systemic preparations when resistant organisms are
2.5 mg/kg q12h is recommended, and fundus examination
encountered. Fortunately, many disease processes
should be performed on a weekly basis.
break down the barriers to drug absorption,
Intraocular  antibiotics  are  given 
 for intraocular
allowing therapeutic levels of antibiotics to be
infections and to destroy the aqueous humor secreting
achieved that might otherwise not be effective.
capacity of the eye. The concentration of antibiotic is critical
and must be supported by research data rather than
estimates (Table 2.5). Gentamicin can be tolerated at a
Antibiotic prophylaxis
maximum dose of 350-400 μg inside the eye. The larger
Topical antibiotics are frequently administered for
dose is given for bacterial endophthalmitis and may save the
1-3 days after lid, conjunctival, and corneal surgery. Also,
eye if given early Intravitreal injection is the only route that
whenever there is a break in the corneal epithelium {ulcer
will produce high vitreous drug levels, and therapeutic levels
or laceration), whether or not it is associated with
infection, it is routine to use prophylactic topical antibiotics
the retina and produce cataracts. Doses of 25-35 mg of
to prevent the native bacterial flora from becoming
gentamicin injected into the vitreous destroy the ciliary
established in traumatized tissue. Newer antibiotics should
epithelium and result in decreased, or cessation of, aqueous
 not be used indiscriminately for routine prophylaxis to help
humor production. Intravitreal gentamicin has been used as
avoid the development of resistant organisms to the drug.
a chemical means of treating some forms of advanced
In the horse, which is predisposed to fungal keratitis after
 glaucoma with permanent blindness1 but it should not be
 corneal ulceration, prophylaxis is often extended to the use
used in the functioning eye because this concentration will
of antifungal antibiotics. Subconjunctival and systemic
also destroy the retina. In one seriest2, 9% of injected eyes
prophylactic antibiotics are also given before and after
 developed phthisis an average of 15 months postinjection,
intraocular surgery by some surgeons.
and in 65% of the eyes glaucoma was controlled. In eyes
that required a second injection, the success rate was 50%.
Intravitreal  aminoglycoside antibiotics  vary  in
ANTIFUNGAL PREPARATIONS
toxicity: gentamicin > tobramycin > amikacin
=
Topical ophthalmic antifungal preparations are in the
kanamycin43. Due to the emergence of gram-negative
"orphan drug' category as fungal ophthalmic conditions are
 organisms resistant to gentamicin and the lower retinal
relatively uncommon and thus it is not economically feasible
toxicity of amikacin, 400-500 μg of amikacin intra-
for companies to develop such products. The only
vitreally has been recommended over gentamicin for
commercially available product marketed in the US for
treating endophthalmitis44.
ophthalmic use is natamycin 5% suspension. As natamycin
Paromomycin, an aminoglycoside antibiotic that is
 is quite expensive and not widely available, off-label use of
poorly absorbed from the gut and used to treat enteric
topical and systemic antifungal preparations has become
protozoal infections, produced acute renal failure, cataracts,
almost universally accepted. Systemic antifungal drugs may
and deafness in cats after a S-day course of oral therapy4s.
be formulated for topical therapy and topical antifungal
Three of four cats developed severe cataracts which were
agents for use on other surfaces may be used for ocular use.
 noted by the owners a few weeks after antibiotic therapy.
Antifungal drugs fall into several categories: polyenes,
 pyrimidines, imidazoles, and miscellaneous drugs46.
Table 2.5 Intraocular antibiotic dosages
 The selection of an antifungal drug is difficult because
of the lack of choice in commercially available
Agent
Dosage
products and the lack of knowledge regarding the
500μg
drug sensitivity of the organism. Performing mycotic
Amikacin
 sensitivity testing is expensive and time consuming,
Amphotericin B
1-5μg
with the results often returning after the patient is
Cefazolin
2.25 mg
cured {which usually takes several weeks)!
Cephalothin 
2mg
Cephaloridine
250 μg
Polyene antifungals
Ciprofloxacin 
100 μg
Polyene antifungals increase the cell wall permea bility of
Gentamicin
350-400 μg
fungi by binding irreversibly to ergosterol.
 Natamycin S% (pimaricin): natamycin is the only
Methieillin 
<10 mg
commercially available ophthalmic drug marketed for
Moxalactam
1.25 mg
topical therapy. Natamycin is a white suspension that
is water insoluble and is effective against filamentous
(Compiled from: Axelrod and Peyman, 19734; Daily et al., 1973266; May et ol.
fungi and yeast such as Candida spp.46. It penetrates
198268, Fett et ol, 198426;Talam0 et ol, 198644)
the intact cornea poorly and leaves a white precipitate
 on ulcerated surfaces, lids, and inside SPL tubes.
48
O pHThAlMIC DisEAse In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
●Amphotericin B: amphotericin B is best known as an
 Fluconazole is a newer imidazole that has been used
antifungal used in treating systemic mycoses. It has 
 systemically, topically, and intracamerally. It is a
been used in topical ophthalmic therapy as a
triazole and has the advantage of enhanced tissue
0.1-1.0% solution where it appears to be tolerated
but, unless the surface is ulcerated, corneal
Like miconazole, the i.v. preparation of fluconazole
 penetration is poor. Topical 1% amphotericin B
is used as a topical solution and penetrates very well
solution exhibits the most corneal toxicity and
with corneal debridements6. While anecdotal reports
interference with corneal healing of a variety of
are promising, fungal sensitivity testing indicates that
antifungal agents47. Amphotericin B has also been
 most of the isolates are resistant31. Systemic therapy
injected subconjunctivally and intravitreally, but
has been advocated for deep keratomycosis or
these routes ha ve significant problems.
corneal abscesses because of the drug's excellent
Subconjunctival amphotericin B is very irritating and
tissue penetrations7, starting with a loading dose of
it is questionable whether there is a safe dose with
2 mg/kg followed by 1 mg/kg q12h p.o. for 2 weeks.
intravitreal injection. Axelrod and Peyman48 and
With improvement the dose can be decreased to
Axelrod et al.49 recommended a very low dose of
1mg/kg q24h58, Latimer et al.$9 studied the
5-10 μg in the middle of the vitreous cavity to avoid
pharmacokinetics of fluconazole in the horse and
retinal toxicity. Souri and Green50 found that even
calculated that the loading dose should be 14 mg/kg
1 μg of intra vitreal amphotericin B was toxic to the
p.o., followed by 5 mg/kg q24h. This is a very
retina and lens in the rabbit.
expensive therapy for a horse. Fluconazole has also
Imidazoles
 Itraconazole is a newer triazole and it has improved
Imidazoles alter the fungal cell membrane by inhibiting
ergosterol synthesis, resulting in increased permeability
water solubility; Ball et al.60 enhanced corneal
of the cell wall. Some may also interfere with mito-
penetration by dissolving the drug in dimethyl
sulfoxide and creating a 1% ointment, with excellent
 accumulation of toxic substances. In one series of fungal
clinical success. Itraconazole (5 mg/kg) is also being 
sensitivities, Aspergillus sp. was the prevalent species,
used systemically with equine keratomycosis.
and the imidazoles were the most effective group of
Systemic itraconazole has been the treatment of
antifungals against this organisms1.
choice for systemic mycoses.
· Miconazole has a broad spectrum of activity against
yeast, filamentous fungi, and dermatophytes46. It
Itraconazole/DMSO 1% ointment was formulated
penetrates moderately well, especially if corneal
by dissolving 1 g of ultramicronized itraconazole in
ulceration is presents2. The i.v. form of miconazole 
33.3 ml 90% DMSO, heated to 80°C (176°F) while
has been used extensively as a topical 1% solution
agitated, and the heated mixture combined with 
for equine keratomycosis; 2% vaginal and
66.6 ml of petrolatum that had been heated to 80°C
dermatologic creams have also been used for topical
{176°F). The mixture was allowed to cool while
ocular therapy. The i.v. form has also been
agitated until it solidified60.
administered subconjunctiva lly.
Intraocular injection of miconazole is of questionable
Miscellaneous antifungals
safety due to the toxicity of the vehicle as well as the
 Betadine solution has been used in topical therapy of
drug. If injected intraocularly, the dose should not exceed 
keratomycosis.
40 μg in a small eye, such as in a dogs3; the safe dose for
 Silver sulfadiazine has been used as a topical cream
the larger equine eye is unknown. Intravenous micon-
for equine and human mycotic keratitis. It generally
azole has been taken off the market in the US but
is well tolerated, is inexpensive, and moderately
compounding pharmacies have been formulating a
effective61.
preparation. When compounding, it has been difficult to
Chlorhexidine gluconate 0.2% has been used as an
keep the drug in solution.
effective and inexpensive antifungal preparation in
 Clotrimazole has been used for topical ophthalmic
humans62.
therapy using 1% vaginal and dermatologic creams.
 Ketaconazole penetrates the cornea well and
Initiation of antifungal therapy in the horse is often
 dermatologic preparations have been used on the 
accompanied by a clinical worsening of the
cornea. Ketaconazole has a broad spectrum of
condition. This worsening is probably due to the
activity and isolates from equine keratomycosis have
Aq pauouu si Adeaui iauny jo yeap uappns 
been susceptible31, s1. It has been used extensively for
frequent corneal cytology if the condition is
treating systemic mycoses in the dog, where cataracts
superficial. If healthy fungal hyphae continue to be
have been a complication of long-term therapy4.
observed on cytology despite therapy, the antifungal
Thiabendazole paste has been used historically for
drug should be changed.
equine keratomycosis but has been supplanted by the
newer imidazolesss.
OPHTHALMIC PHARMACOLOGY
49
Table 2.6 Parasympathomimetic miotics used in ophthalmology
Drug
 Con cen tration /forms
Action
 Pilocarpine
0.5-10% solution, 4% gel, inserts
 Direct cholinergic, muscarinic action
Carbachol
0.75-30% solution
Direct and indirect cholinergic muscarinic and nicotinic actions 
 Echothiophate iodide
0.03-0.25%o solution
Cholinesterase inhibitor; irreversible, muscarinie and nicotinic actions
[soflurophate (DFP)
Withdrawn
 Cholinesterase inhibitor; irreversible, muscarinic and nicotinic actions
Demecarium 
Withdrawn
Cholinesterase inhibitor; reversible, muscarinic and nicotinic actions
TOPICAL ANTIVIRAL AGENTS
converted in the liver to acyclovir, result in systemic
toxicity. Cats given valacyclovir exhibited clinical signs
The topical antiviral agents are mainly directed against
of dehydration and lethargy associated with hepatic
herpesvirus in man and they are relatively specific for
necrosis and renal tubular necrosis after 12 days of
 DNA viruses. Their use in veterinary medicine is mainly
ads saads aede si aixo si 'sgideia
for ocular herpesvirus in cats and horses. The topical
One of the disadvantages of antiviral therapies is the
commercial agents are nucleic acid analogs and they
recommended frequency of application. Based on a
interfere with nucleic acid synthesis. They are virostatic
rabbit herpes keratitis model, it was recently suggested
and will not have an effect on viruses that are latent and
 that the application of trifluridine might be reduced to as
are not multiplying. There are three commercial topical
infrequently as q24h66.
ophthalmic antiviral preparations available in the US:
 [doxuridine {IDU): a first generation antiviral agent.
The use of topical antiviral therapy with feline
IDU substitutes for thymidine in the purine building
herpesvirus infections raises questions of cost/benefit
block of the DNA virus and is toxic to other
ratio and accuracy of diagnosis. The clearest
mammalian cells as well. IDU was available as a
indication for therapy is with active corneal
solution and an ointment. Therapy is frequent:
 epithelial ulcers that are characteristic of herpesvirus.
ointment is q4h and solution q1h or q2h. IDU is the
Other herpes virus-related diseases are either minor,
least expensive of the antiviral agents. Individuals
self-limiting, are difficult to diagnose definitively, or 
 may experience irritation from the solution and this
are the result of an immunological reaction.
is most likely if the product has become oxidized, as
Justification is therefore difficult for utilizing a drug
evidenced by a brown discolorization63. IDU has
that is not tolerated by many patients, requires
been discontinued in the US but can be obtained
 frequent therapy, and is expensive.
through compounding pharmacies.
●Adenine arabinoside (Ara-A or vidarabin): also a
Intravitreal injection of  the  systemic  antiviral
 structural analog for adenosine. Vidarabin is available 
cidofovir at a dose of 100-500 μg has been advocated as
as a 3% ointment, given q4h. Vidarabin is less toxic
a treatment for gla ucoma. Unlike intraocular gentamicin,
to mammalian cells and more effective than IDU63.
Cidofovir apparently is not toxic to the retina or lens67. It
Trifluorothymidine {TFT) {trifluridine): a thymidine
was originally noted that individuals given systemic
analogue inhibitor against DNA virus. It is a 1%
cidofovir developed marked hypotony. The safety and
solution, administered q4h. It is less toxic and more
efficacy of cidofovir for intraocular injections need
effective than other antivirals but more expensive.
further investigation.
 Acyclovir {acycloquanosine): an analog for
 guanosine that becomes a potent inhibitor of viral
DNA polymerase. Acyclovir is selectively activated
MIOTICS (CHOLINERGIC AGONISTS)
by phosphorylation by viral thymidine kinase but
PHARMACOLOGY
not by cellular thymidine kinase. This concentrates
the active form in viral-infected cells and so 
The cholinergic miotics are classified into direct and
minimizes toxicity to other mammalian cells63.
indirect according to their action. The direct acting
Acyclovir may be given both systemically and
miotics, e.g. pilocarpine, act directly on the cell to produce
topically, although it is not available in the US as an
an acetylcholine-like action. They will maintain their effect
ophthalmic preparation.
upon denervated structures. Pilocarpine has muscarinic
action (stimulation of smooth muscle and glands) but not
The relative efficacies of the antiviral agents are usually
nicotinic action (stimulation of striated muscle). By
quoted for human herpesvirus in man or rabbit. The efficacy
 convention, miotic solutions have a green cap.
with other species of herpesvirus may vary as well as
The indirect acting miotics are cholinesterase
between strains of the same species. A limited in vitro study
inhibitors and they act by preserving acetylcholine at the
of feline herpesvirus sensitivities indicated that TFT was
 nerve endings. They have no effect on denervated struc-
 most effective, followed by IDU, vidarabin, and acyclovir64.
tures where acetylcholine is not released. They are also
Systemic acyclovir has been used in cats but, due to its
categorized by their reversible or irreversible binding
limited bioa vailability and feline herpesvirus resistance, it
ability with acetylcholinesterase (Table 2.6). The
is of questionable benefit. Attempts at increasing the
indirect, nonreversible drugs are very potent drugs and
bioavailabity of acyclovir by using valacyclovir, which is
 severe side-effects from systemic absorption are possible.
50
OpHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Miotic preparations constrict the pupil (miosis),
Until recently there were no good clinical trials to
cause contraction of the ciliary muscle that produces
 ap au jo asneaq ing ogesn su yoddns 
accommodation, open the aqueous humor outflow
treating this disease, clinicians will use anything that
channels, and increase yascular permeability.
A
might have theoretical value. Because of their
transient breakdown of the blood-aqueous humor
convenience, the long-acting preparations are often
barrier may occur that resolves after about 48 hours68.
selected. Based on the studies to date, the type of
Miotics are used in man almost exclusively for
glaucoma medication used in prophylaxis does not
glaucoma therapy, where the important action is not
apparently make a significant difference80, 81.
the outward miotic effect but the contraction of the
ciliary muscle, which increases aqueous humor
Displaced lens
outflow69. Miotics are usually not very effective for
Miotics may be used to try to trap a subluxated lens in
glaucoma therapy in animals because of the typical high
suexni o hi daay oi apio u aqo roaisod a
IOP when the condition is recognized and the physical
a ul sual paiexnl 1oan ue de1 01 1o 'pim1og
obstruction present in the outflow pathway. The miotic
anterior chamber before surgery. Long-term miotic
and pressure lowering effectiveness also decreases with
therapy results in a decrease in miosis; in the author's
long-term therapy?
70-72
in producing sustained, marked miosis than the
INDICATIONS FOR USE
Glaucoma
Miotics are used in glaucoma therapy and work most
Hyphema therapy
effectively with open-angle glaucoma, which is relatively
 Miotics may be recommended for the treatment of
rare in the dog. Carrier and Gum70 found a statistically
hyphema because they increase the outflow of red blood
significant decrease in IOP in normal and glaucomatous
cells (RBCs) from the anterior chamber. Miotics also
Beagles with 4% pilocarpine gel q24h. However, the
produce vascular dilation and may induce secondary
animals were only treated for 3 days and during this time
bleeding. Miotic therapy will also aggravate traumatic
IOPs drifted back to baseline values. Mean IOP response
 encourage pupillary block.
various concentrations of pilocarpine from 0.s-8%
in
the glaucomatous Beagle, all concentrations produced
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (dry eye)
statistically significant decreases in IOP; all concen-
 Patients with some residual tear production may respond
trations were equally effective, although the higher
to stimulation with a parasympathomimetic drug to.
concentrations had more side-effects73. Carbachol and
increase their tear production?3. The oral use of
N-demethylated  carbachol  both  produced  similar
ophthalmic pilocarpine had been used successfully for
decreases in IOP as pilocarpine in the glaucomatous
years before the advent of topical cyclosporine. Most
Beagle and were not concentration-related, indicating
that weak solutions were as effective as the higher
multiple dog households where food is ad lib, the topical
concentrations74, 7s. The decrease in IOP was associated 
route has been recommended. The efficacy of the topical
with an increase in conventional outflow, with the
 route has been discounted by Smith et al.84 who found no
coefficient of outflow increasing from 0.33 μl/min/mmHg
saka paieaul ui shop pewou ul uonpoud reai ui aseaou
to 0.61 μl/min/mmHg in normal Beagles, and from
and, paradoxically, a decrease in tear production in the
0.15 μl/min/mmHg to 0.38 μl/min/mmHg in glauco-
 contralateral untreated eye.
 matous Beagles76.
The stimulation of lacrimation may take several
 Demecarium bromide and echothiophate iodide 
weeks and thus a trial of 4 weeks or more is
produced similar decreases in IOP as pilocarpine in the
recommended. The use of topical cyclosporine as a
glaucomatous Beagle, but the effect was for 3-4 days;
lacrimomimetic has almost completely supplanted the
thus the drugs decreased the opportunity for pressure
use of pilocarpine (see p.61). On rare occasions a dog
fluctuations during the day and would presumably
increase owner compliance if frequency of application
was reduced77. The pressure in acute closed-angle
Diagnostics
glaucoma (most common in the dog) is usually too high
Miotics may be used to define the cause of a dilated
for miotics to be of much benefit, and the angle
 pupil(s). Direct acting miotics should constrict the pupil
morphology so disrupted that outflow facility would be
a s s a   e s a ssa
unlikely to be improved. When treating acute glaucoma,
 Indirect acting miotics require an intact neuron in the iris
miosis is not observed until the IOP has been decreased.
to function, and thus will not cause miosis with
Intracameral carbachol (0.5 ml of 0.01%) has been
 peripheral parasympathetic denervation (Table 2.7).
used in humans and dogs at the conclusion of cataract
surgery. In the dog, carbachol minimized or eliminated 
SIDE-EFFECTS
the transient postoperative hypertensive episode that
 Ciliary muscle contraction or spasm may be
 stimulated. The discomfort is variable with patients,
usually lasts 5-10 minutes, and often a tolerance
Glaucoma prophylaxis
develops within several days.
Miotics have been advocated for years for prophylactic
Decreased vision may result if an axial lenticular
treatment of the normotensive eye when a unilateral
 opacity is present.
primary glaucoma is diagnosed (see Prophylaxis, p.364).
OPHTHALMIC PHARMACOLOGY
51
· Conjunctival congestion and mild flare (due to
While Mughannam et al.88 were unable to find any
increased protein) may occur in the anterior
change in IOP after atropine instillation in the horse,
chamber. This is a transient phenomenon.
Herring et al.89 found an i1% decrease in IOP in 10/11
 Systemic absorption from topical application or
horses, but one horse had a significant increase in IOP.
overdosing with oral medication will produce
Stadtbaumer et al.90 found significant increases in IOP
vomiting, salivation, and diarrhea. Dogs with a heart 
in the cat after 0.s% tropicamide. Unilateral instillation
block may be compromised. Systemic toxicity must be
of tropicamide produced bilateral stastically significant
considered when intensive treatment is administered,
increases in IOP of cats, but the mydriatic effect was
as is frequently recommended for acute glaucoma.
 only unilateral. While the mean increase in IOP was
Long-term topical use may produce drug
3 mmHg {0.4 kPa), some individual cats had increases
hypersensitivity, resulting in a severe folicular
in IOP of 18 mmHg {2.4 kPa), resulting in IOP values
conjunctivitis.
of 30-37 mmHg {4.0-4.9 kPa). The phenomenon was
age-related, with younger cats responding with higher
mean changes in IOP. The mechanism for bilateral
MYDRIATICS
response with unilateral treatment is unknown, but is
thought to be due to a systemic effect. The effect of
PHARMACOLOGY
tropicamide on the IOP of dogs is equivocal, with
Mydriatics produce pupillary dilation (mydriasis), and
 apparently minimal change91.
some agents are also cycloplegics fparalyze the ciliary
Examples of parasympatholytics:
muscles). As with the miotics, there are direct and
 Atropine 0.5-4% solution: atropine is the most
+
indirect acting mydriatics. The duration of action
commonly used mydriatic for therapy. In a normal
between drugs and variation between species may be
eye, one administration of atropine may last for
significant. Two groups of drugs are most commonly
45 days but when used in uveitis therapy more
used for mydriasis, either individually or in combination
frequent administration is required {q12-6h).
for maximum effect. By convention, mydriatic solutions
 Homatropine 2-5% solution: used in therapy. In a
have a red cap.
 normal dog eye, one administration may last for 
2 da ys.
Parasympatholytic agents
 Scopolamine 0.25-0.5% solution: used in therapy.
+
Parasympatholytic agents have both mydriatic and
Duration of action of one administration in a normal
cycloplegic actions and they are direct acting and
eye is 4-5 days.
compete with acetylcholine. The duration and strength of
+
Cyclopentolate 1% solution: potent drug that
their action varies8s. The rapidity and degree
of
frequently produces marked chemosis in the dog, so
mydriasis will vary with the age, species, and pigmen-
is not routinely used.
tation of the iris. Heavily pigmented irides bind many
 Tropicamide 0.5-1%: most common agent used for
drugs and the result is a slower onset and a decrease in
 diagnostic purposes because of its short duration of
magnitude of mydriasis but the duration of action may
6-12 hours.
be prolonged. This may explain why the pupils of some
horses remain dilated for weeks after long-term
Adrenergic agents/sympathomimetic agents
atropinization86. Some but not all rabbits produce
Due to the development of new drugs with activity
atropine esterase that inactivates atropine by hydrolysis.
targeted against specific adrenergic receptors, and due
Occasionally, a dog will respond, paradoxically, to
atropine or tropicamide with miosis. This is usually
drugs dilate the pupil. For instance, apraclonidine
encountered preoperatively and subsequent intraocular
dilates the dog pupil but constricts the cat pupil. Some
epinephrine
will dilate the pupil.
Long-term
adrenergic agonists such as nonselective alpha and beta
atropinization in young cats resulted in smaller resting
agonists and selective alpha agonists will generally
pupils after discontinuation of the drug, and this was
produce mydriasis without cycloplegia. Adrenergic
thought to be due to a compensatory increase
in
agents may be either indirect fact by stimulating the
cholinergic receptors due to deprivation of transmitter87.
release  of
norepinephrine) or
direct fact on
This phenomenon has been used to explain 
the
catecholamine receptors, similar to norepinephrine).
previously mentioned para doxical miosis with mydriatics
Catecholamine receptors are classified as alpha-1,
but it is lacking in evidence.
alpha-2, beta-1, and beta-2.
Table 2.7 Pharmacologic lesion localization with a dilated pupil
Central
Peripheral
Drug
Normal
Parasympathetic  Parasympa thetic
Iris atrophy
Glaucoma
Atropine
lesion 
lesion
blockage
1 % Pilocarpine
+ (hypersensitive)  0
0
0
0.01%o Phospholine iodide
0
0
+: constriction; 0: no response
52
O pHThAlMIC DiseAse In VeterinArY MeDicINE
 Sympathomimetic agents may be used to augment
vomiting. The side-effects in cats preclude using
mydriasis, in glaucoma therapy to increase aqueous
 commercially available 0.5% apraclonidine100.
humor outflow and decrease aqueous humor production,
Brimonidine is a selective alpha-2 agonist that is more
and in diagnostics to localize sympathetic lesions
 selective than apraclonidine. It lowers the IOP by decreasing
involving the pupil (Table 2.8). Examples are:
[apsoaan suseau s m s uonpoid sounq snoanbe 
● Epinephrine 0.1-2%: direct action, used for therapy
outflow. Gelatt et al.101 tested 0.2% and 0.5% brimonidine
and diagnostics. It is a nonselective alpha and beta
in glaucomatous Beagles and did not find a statistically
agonist and is used for glaucoma therapy, to dilate
signifcant decrease in IOP, although the pupil dilated.
the pupil intraoperatively, and for vasoconstriction
Tachyphylaxis results in a decreased effectiveness over time.
and hemostatic control in surgery.
 Dipivalyl epinephrine (propine): a prodrug of
The adrenergic agonists have not become an
epinephrine. It is the esterified form of epinephrine
important group of drugs for glaucoma therapy
and penetrates the cornea much better {9-17x) than
because of their minimal effectiveness combined
epinephrine, and can thus be used in lower
with significa nt side-effects.
concentrations. Once in the anterior chamber and in
the uvea it is hydrolyzed to epinephrine, which is
direct acting.
INDICATIONS FOR USE
+
 Paradrine (hydroxyamphetamine) 1%: indirect
Diagnostics
action, has been used for diagnostics for localizing
Mydriatics are used for examination of the lens and in
the sympathetic lesion in Horner's syndrome92, 93
ophthalmoscopy. A long-acting agent is undesirable and
It is no longer available as a commercial product.
sue  i te gio jo a a sadon
+ Phenylephrine 2-10% solution: a direct acting alpha
do not respond as well or as long, and the addition of a
agonist, used in diagnostics and thera py.
sympathomimetic agent may be necessary to achieve good
Phenylephrine is not effective as a mydriatic in the
dilation. The use of sympathomimetic drugs for lesion
cat, cow, and horse94-96. It has been used to localize 
localization in Horner's syndrome (sympathetic denervation
 sympathetic lesions in Horner's syndrome97.
to the eye and adnexa) is based on denervation hyper-
● Cocaine: indirect sympathomimetic which dilates the
 sensitivity and the ability, or lack thereof, to stimulate intact
pupil, causes vasoconstriction, and is a potent long-
sympathetic fibers in the iris. Direct acting sympatho-
acting topical anesthetic. It is rarely used now
mimetics are used to determine whether the iris is stimulated
because it is a Class IV controlled drug. It blocks the
by dilute concentrations of epinephrine, or similar acting 
uptake of epinephrine by nerve endings, allowing a
drugs, that are not effective in the normal eye. Hyper-
prolonged action of epinephrine and
norepinephrine98. It can be used to try to break
third neuron and that the nerve endings in the iris have
synechiae or adhesions of the pupil.
degenerated. Boydell97 μtilized the speed of pupil dilation to
 Apraclonidine: alpha-2 agonist that is used in
topical 10% phenylephrine to distinguish between first,
humans to treat postoperative IOP spikes and
second, and third order neuron involvement in Horner's
augment maximum medical therapy in glaucoma
syndrome in the dog. Dogs with frst order neuron disease
treatment. The selective alpha-2 agonists have been
responded to 10% phenylephrine in 50-60 minutes, second
developed for glaucoma therapy to overcome the
order neuron disease in 30-45 minutes, and third order
side-effects that topical epinephrine produces in
neuron disease in 10-20 minutes. Similarly, drugs such as
many patients. One percent apraclonidine decreases
 paradrine (hydroxyamphetamine) act by stimulating intact
aqueous humor formation by decreasing cyclic AMP
nerve endings to release norepinephrine, and thus a positive
and increases uveoscleral outflow in the treated as
response indicates an intact third neuron (Table 2.8). The
well as the untreated eye, and produces mydriasis98.
 results from these tests are highly variable and interpretation
Tachyphylaxis limits the duration of effectiveness of
is based on speed of onset and degree of reaction. Ideally, the
the drug for many patients.
 opposite eye (if normal) should be used as a control.
In normal dogs, 0.s% apraclonidine decreases IOP and
Therapy of corneal ulcers
produces mydriasis99. In normal cats, apraclonidine
 Intraocular pain may be decreased by producing
lowers IOP and produces miosis, bradycardia, and
'seds as A o ued an dois on eado
Table 2.8 Pharmacologic lesion localization in Horner's syndrome
Drug
Lesion 
Normal
Central
 Preganglionic
Postganglionic
10% Hydroxamphetamine
+
+
+
0
 10% Phenylephrine 
0
0
0
+
10% Phenylephrine
+60 min 
+30-45 min
+10-20 min
0.001% Epinephrine
0
0
+Pl!w
+
+: dilates; O: no response
OPHTHAlMIC PHARMACOLOGY
53
Ciliary muscle spasms may occur with stimulation of the
 Frequent therapy with atropine may result in
Vth cranial nerve endings in the cornea. The spasms are
disorientation and incontinence. This usually occurs
thought to arise from antidromic impulses that travel
in very old or small dogs.
down the sensory nerve to the muscles. Atropine is
 Topical 10% phenylephrine may induce significant
usually the agent of choice and is administered q12-8h.
systemic hypertension through systemic
While some horses appear sensitive to topical atropine-
absorption106.
induced colic at moderate doses q12-6h, intensive
Acute, transient enlargement of the salivary glands
therapy is more likely to induce colic. Williams et al.102
may occur in cats after administration of
induced colic with topical atropine administered hourly in
tropicamide and atropine. The conditions resolves in
4/6 horses. Topical atropine administration in horses may
about 30 minutes107.
 produce colic from systemic absorptionl02. Occasionally,
a pupil will remain dilated for weeks after multiple
atropine applications and this is probably due
BETA ADRENERGIC BLOCKERS
to
 depletion of atropine esterase or binding of atropine by
uveal pigment and subsequent prolonged release86
PHARMACOLOGY
Topical beta adrenergic blockers decrease the production
Therapy of anterior uveitis
 of aqueous humor by as much as 50% in humans108 The
Mydriatics, specifically atropine, are used in uveitis
mode of action on the inhibition of aqueous humor
therapy to dilate the pupil, minimize adhesions or
production is unknown, although beta adrenergic blockers
complications from complete adhesions, and decrease
are known to be potent inhibitors of cyclic AMP in the
ciliary muscle pain. Atropine is also used after surgically
ciliary body. The major receptor in the anterior segment is
induced uveitis.
the beta-2 receptor; thus drugs such as betaxolol, which
are beta-1 blockers, are less effective than nonselective
Unless severe uveitis is present, intensive use of
blockers but they have fewer systemic side-effectsi09 Beta
uaaq seq A1aains poe1eieo ul auidoue aalieuadoisod
blockers do not affect carbonic anhydrase or the aqueous
 discontinued by many surgeons in favor of no
humor outflow108 The effect of beta blockers is variable in
mydriatics or tropicamide.
different species, due in part to concentration differences
dog, higher concentrations of drug appear to be necessary
Nonsurgical therapy for axial cataracts
to produce a reduction in IOP than in humans, and this
Vision can be improved in patients with axial cataracts
may explain the early reports that beta blockers were
and a clear periphery by dilating the pupil. Mydriasis
ineffective in the dogllf. Two studies reported that
allows the patient to see around the central opacity.
timoptic, which is a nonselective beta-1 and beta-2
 blocker, was effective in both the dog and cat and in the
Medical therapy of equine glaucoma
The horse has a significant amount of aqueous humor
Topical 0.5 % timolol applied unilaterally in the normal
outflow via the uveoscleral route and it has been
cat eye reduced IOP by 22% in the treated eye, and by 16%
hypothesized that atropine may be beneficial in treating
in the untreated eye. In addition, the pupil in the treated eye
glaucoma in this species. Normal horses had a 11%
a1 u1 1ou 1q s1noy 71 1aao 1oy %8g Aq Pasuo
decrease in IOP when treated with atropine compared to
the control eye103.
timolol produced a significant mean reduction of 16%
(2.5 mmHg [0.33 kPa]) in IOP, a 34% reduction in pupil
SIDE-EFFECTS
size in the treated eye, and a 14% decrease in pupil size in
·  Parasympatholytics will decrease tear production and
 the untreated eye, whereas other studies were unable to
may produce transient keratoconjunctivitis sicca
demonstrate a. significant difference in IOP at this
(KCS). Atropine administered to one eye decreases
the Schirmer tear test (STT) in both eyes and may
gaucoma did respond, with a significant drop in IOP using
persist for 5 weeks or more after cessation of
0.5% timolol, but the decrease was only 45 mmHg
therapy. This is commonly observed in postoperative
(0.53-0.7 kPa). In the glaucomatous Beagle, concentrations
cataract patients104.
 of timolol of 4%, 6%, and 8% did produce a significant 
 Parasympatholytics may produce atony of the gut.
drop in IOP of 8-14 mmHg (1.0-1.9 kPa) in the treated eye
While atropine may be used in most horses as often
and a less extensive decrease in the untreated eye. This study
as q2-4h without problems, the gut motility should
 did not detect any changes in the pupil size but did note a
signifcant decrease in the heart rate at all concentrationsl12.
than others to atropine-induced colic.
Available beta blockers may be either nonselective,
pue siseupau paauooud aonpoud Aru aundouy
blocking both beta-1 and beta-2 receptors, or selective.
photophobia.
Timolol and levobunolol are nonselective beta blockers
 Sympathomimetics often sting and may cause self-
and are available as 0.2s% and 0.s% solutions; as
mutilation or rubbing. This tendency is most critical
previously indicated, these drugs are minimally effective
 after intraocular surgery.
in the dog and cat at this concentration. Betaxolol 0.5%
 Phenylephrine is toxic to the corneal endothelium
is a selective beta-1 blocker. While not studied as
and may produce corneal edema when used
extensively as nonselective beta blockers, in the dog it is
intensively in 10% concentration or if the absorption
 also questionably effective at this concentration. Therapy
is enhanced by breaks in the epithelium.
is usually administered q12h with both agents.
54
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Beta blockers can be additive in their effect when used
+
Glycerol or glycerine: administered orally at
with carbonic anhydrase inhibitors {61% decrease in
1-2 g/kg. Glycerol is irritating to the stomach and
IOP], parasympathomimetics, and even with epinephrine
frequently results in vomition unless diluted.
Glycerol is less expensive than mannitol and is an
The additive effect with epinephrine is confusing,
alternative in the horse.
considering that epinephrine is an adrenergic alpha and
Isosorbide: administered orally as a 50 % solution at
beta-1 and beta-2 agonist.
a dose of 1.5 g/kg.
INDICATIONS FOR USE
Indications for use
Beta blockers are used in glaucoma therapy and
 Glaucoma: mannitol is used in emergency glaucoma
 prophylactic treatment of eyes thought to be susceptible
therapy until surgery can be performed or until
to glaucoma (Table 2.9).
medical therapy becomes effective. Mannitol may
 also be used to treat transient post-cataract surgery
SIDE-EFFECTS
ocular hypertensive episodes if the IOP becomes
 Systemic absorption of beta-2 blockers may produce or
very elevated.
exacerbate pulmonary signs of bronchoconstriction and
spasms and cardiovascular signs of bradycardia and
Topical latanoprost oten produces dramatic
heart blocksl17. Decreased exercise tolerance may be 
decreases in IOP in acute glaucoma and may be
noted and therefore these drugs should be avoided in
used instead of mannitol in emergency therapy. If
athletic dogs. Corneal erosions may occur and may be
latanoprost does not realize the desired reduction in
related to a decrease in tear production118
IOP within 30 minutes, mannitol is then
administered.
DIURETICS
● Pre-, intra-, and postoperatively to reduce the
vitreous size and so minimize vitreous prolapse
Two specific forms of diuretics are routinely used in
through the pupil.
ophthalmology, osmotic and carbonic anhydrase
inhi bitors.
CARBONIC ANHYDRASE INHIBITORS
CAIs reversibly interfere with the hydration of carbon
OSMOTIC DIURETICS
dioxide to form carbonic acid. CAIs are sulfonamides
Osmotic diuretics are used to draw fluid from the eye
and are relatively ineffective diuretics but they decrease
(aqueous humor and vitreous), and they are of dramatic
zz izi%ot-og inoqe Aq uouonpoud xouny snoanbe
benefit in the emergency therapy of acute glaucomal19. They
CAIs affect only the aqueous humor and not the
produce systemic dehydration so they are limited as to their
vitreous. The exact mechanism of CAIs is still unknown
frequency of use. Since they expand the blood volume, the
but they are thought to act on the active secretory
presence of a weak cardiovascular system should
be
component of aqueous humor production and this is
considered, and care be taken in the speed of administration.
 independent of the kidney122.
The preparations usually used are:
Four isoenzyme forms of carbonic anhydrase have
+
 Mannitol: recommended dose is 1-2 g/kg i.v. via slow
been described.
Carbonic anhydrase
Ⅱis‘
the
 push (over 5 minutes) or 1 ml/kg/mini20. The author
predominant form present in the eye and is involved with
routinely uses 0.5-1.0 g/kg mannitol and obtains the
expected results with glaucoma patients. Mannitol
corneal endothelium, iris, and retina. In general, CAIs
 may crystallize out of solution if not kept in a fluid
must be given systemically to have an effect as >99% of
warmer. Mannitol tends to remain in the vascular
system and exits via the kidneys, thus producing less
anhydrase is ubiquitous in the body, nonselective
rebound of fluids into the interstitial spaces. This is
inhibitors are likely to produce side-effects other than the
not absolute, particularly with inflammation, and with
desired decrease in IOP. Systemic CAIs have historically
repeated administration it becomes less effective, until
been the backbone of medical maintenance therapy in
a minimal response is achieved after the third or
canine glaucoma therapy.
fourth dose. Lowered IOP is evident by
20-30 minutes and may last for 6-72 hours.
 Table 2.9 Topical ophthalmic beta blockers and their action
Drug
Concen tration/forms
Action
Timolol
0.259%o, 0.5%o solutions
Nonselective beta-1, beta-2 blocker
Levobunolol
0.259o, 0.5%% 5olutions
Nonselective beta-1, beta-2 blocker
 Carteolol
 2%o solution 
Nonselective beta-1, beta-2 blocker
 Metipranolol 
0.3%% solution
Nonselective beta-1, beta-2 blocker
 Betaxolol 
0.25%o ointment, 0.5%o solution
Selective beta-1 blocker
Levobetaxolol
0.59%o oin tment
Selective beta-1 blocker
OPHTHAlMIC PHARMACOLOGY
55
Enhancing the corneal penetration by increasing the
OTHER DIURETICS
liphophilia of the compounds has allowed topical
Ethacrynic acid in cell cultures of trabecular cells
preparations of CAls to produce modest decreases in
 produced reversible changes in cell shape. In enucleated
canine eyes, ethacrynic acid increased the outflow facility
pursued because of the frequent side-effects noted with
and decreased IOP when injected intracamerally in
systemic CAI therapy, and consequent poor patient
 monkeys and humans140, 141. Pilot studies in dogs with a
compliance. Dorzolamide was the first commercially
 2% solution were very disappointing. No changes in IOP
available topical CAl. It is not as effective as systemic
were noted, marked ocular irritation was produced, and
CAIs but does not have the usual side-effects
of
it was difficult to prepare a stable solution142.
systemic therapy. It is available as a 2% solution and
q8h therapy is recommended. In humans, dorzolamide
decreases the IOP by 17-20%, and is only slightly less
ARTIFICIAL TEARS
effective than timolol129, 130, Dorzolamide can be given
with beta blockers and the effect is additive. Intraocular
penetration of the drug is probably through the limbus
ophthalmic solutions, replace tears if deficient, protect
and sclera rather than the cornea. The hypotensive
eyes from exposure, and act as a filling substance
effect is greater in lighter pigmented irides than in the
between the cornea and a diagnostic lens (gonioscopy).
 darker irides found more commonly in animals. This is
lou op iei sonpoid ratunos-aui-laao aaue aue a
'uuelau aui Aq supuq snup oi anp xiqeunsaud
require a prescription. Their main goal is to lubricate the
Corneal  decompensation  or edema might be 
surface of the eye, and many agents or combinations of
 expected with CAls as carbonic anhydrase is present in
agents are capable of this goal to varying degrees. The
the endothelium and postulated to be responsible for
usual variables between the products are tonicity
pumping water out of the stroma. To date, corneal
{isotonic versus hypotonic), presence of preservatives,
and type and viscosity of lubricating agent used.
ficant decreases in IOP have been found in the horse,
dog, and cat after treating with dorzolamide and the
AGENTS
decrease is larger when combined with a beta blocker
 Methylcellulose, hydroxypropylmethylcellulose, and
such as timolol131-133.
While not as effective
as
carboxymethylcellulose: preparations with different
systemic CAIs, the lack of systemic side-effects and
viscosity are available.
cost for equine patients has made topical CAIs popular
Polyvinyl alcohol: 1.4-3%.
 in veterinary ophthalmology.
 Polyvinyl pyrrolidone: artificial mucus-like agent
Brinzolamide 1% is the newest topical CAI. It is
(mucomimetic).
equally effective in suppressing aqueous humor secretion
Hyaluronic acid: is not available as a tear substitute
as dorzolamide but with less ocular irritation134.
in the US but is marketed in other countries. Human
studies have indicated no particular advantage and
Systemic preparations
such viscoelastic agents are expensive. Hyaluronic
● Acetazolamide: is available as a tablet, spansule, and
acid is available in Canada as a 0.1s% preparation.
i.v. preparation. It is the most widely available CAI
It is packaged in single use containers because it
but, at a dose of 10-20 mg/kg q8-12h, many dogs
lacks a preservative, and one container provides one
ha ve side-effects.
day of therapy. The prolonged contact time imparts
 Dichlorphenamide: has fewer side-effects. It has
better corneal protection and lubrication than other
recently been discontinued by the manufacturer and
 artificial tears.
must be compounded. It was available only as a
 Various ointment bases are used as ocular
tablet ( 50 mg), and administered at 2-5 mg/kg 
lubricants with tear deficiencies and to protect the
q8-12h.
cornea from exposure fanesthesia, exophthalmos,
 Ethoxzolamide: 5 mg/kg q8-12h.
VIth cranial nerve deficiency). They usually
+ Methazolamide: 5 mg/kg q8-12h.
contain some combination of white petrolatum,
mineral oil, and lanolin.
Side-effects
Side-effects are common with systemic CAIs, in
particular with acetazolamide at the recommended
DYES
dose. Systemic acidosis, vomiting, diarrhea, anorexia,
panting,
 poorer temperament,
 and paresthesias
Most dyes are used for diagnostic purposes. The main
manifesting as lameness are possible. Ataxia is common
dyes used are fluorescein and rose bengal.
in cats. In humans, kidney stones and fatal blood
dyscrasias have been recorded135, 136. An individual
SODIUM FLUORESCEIN
patient may be sensitive to all or only one of the
Sodium fluorescein is available as a 1-2 % solution or on
preparations. Potassium supplementation has been
strips. The solution is a good culture medium because
recommended with long-term therapy. Besides ocular
preservatives are not used as they are inactivated by the
irritation, in humans, corneal edema, sterile muco-
dye. Multiple use vials were found to be a potential
purulent conjunctivitis, and nephrolithiasis have been
culture medium for Pseudomonas spp.143. Single
use
rare complications of topical CAls137-139.
strips or small volume bottles and care in application are
recommended to minimize iatrogenic infection.
56
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
Indications for use
leaving a mildly blue-stained lens capsule that is easier to
· To detect corneal epithelial loss and follow the
 See against the background of a white, mature cataract.
progression of healing. Water-soluble fluorescein
does not normally penetrate the intact epithelium
but if breaks in the epithelium exist it diffuses into
TOPICALANESTHETICS
the stroma where it is seen as a bright green color.
01 1ya aniq e susn Aq paioaap aq ueo syeaia leus
Topical anesthetics are used extensively and exclusively
excite fluorescence.
for diagnostic and manipulative procedures of the eye but
To determine the patency of the nasolacrimal duct.
not for medical therapeutics. They are rapid in their
 Fluorescein applied to the eye will usually appear at
onset, taking effect within 15-30 seconds and lasting
the nostril within 30-60 seconds. False negatives are
about 15 minutes. As a group, topical anesthetics are
possible and so a negative result should be followed
readily absorbed from mucosal surfaces but not from the
by nasolacrimal flushing.
skin. They are very toxic to the epithelium and retard
+
 Fluorescein i.v. is used to study the fundus
healing of the cornea by inhibiting both mitosis and
vasculature. Fluorescein is a small molecule and
cellular migration1so. Repeated usage creates tolerance,
approximately 80% is protein bound. The
nonprotein bound portion is readily diffusible but is
demonstrated that a reduced concentration can be used
 retained by tight intercellular junctions. Thus, it is
without toxic effects but the disadvantage of short
valuable in detecting alterations in vascular
duration of action still remains1s1. Repeated topical
 permeability and epithelial intercellular barriers144.
application of anesthetics to diseased epithelium, such as
 To detect an aqueous humor leak from a
 in corneal edema, may result in epithelial erosionsis2, The
 perforating corneal injury (Seidel test)14s. The
topical anesthetics are also bactericidal, so conjunctival or
Baie snooidsns aul ot pandde uaosaong aauen
corneal cultures should be taken prior to application.
will develop a green rivulet where the aqueous
Topical proparacaine has helped to maintain
humor trickles out of the wound.
mydriasis or prevent miosis and decrease the breakdown
of the blood-aqueous humor barrier as much as topical
ROSE BENGAL
NSAIDs; therefore it is being used preoperatively with
Rose bengal has been traditionally called a supravital
Stain that stains devitalized cells. The staining mechanism
has been questioned in that it will stain healthy cultured
Do not use topical anesthetics for the treatment of
cells. Recent evidence suggests that healthy corneal cells
corneal ulcers.
are protected from staining by tear components such as
 albumin and mucin that block the stain uptake146 When
rose bengal is applied to the cornea and conjunctiva it
AGENTS
will stain unprotected epithelial cells a rose color.
Proparacaine 0.5%: is the most commonly utilized
 It is used mainly in diagnosing KCS {dry eye), and it is
topical anesthetic.
supposed to be more sensitive than the STT for
Tetracaine 0.s-2%.
evaluating siccasl47, Rose bengal is viracidal and should
+
 Piperocaine.
not be used before culturing. It is also photodynamic and
+
Dibucaine.
intrinsically toxic to cells. Rose bengal is often irritating
+
Benoxinate 0.4%.
when applied as a solution; this can be decreased by the
Cocaine 0.5-4%: the original topical anesthetic
use of a topical anesthetic prior to use or the use of
but it is the most toxic to the epithelium. Cocaine
impregnated strips of rose bengal.
is a controlled drug, so is rarely used now for
this purpose.
INDOCYANINE GREEN
A 0.5% solution of indocyanine green has been used
intracamerally to visualize the capsule while performing
MATRIXMETALLOPROTEINASEINHIBITORS
curvilinear capsulorrhexis. Visualizing the capsule
against a mature white cataract is difficult and staining
The matric metalloproteinases {MMPs) are categorized
aids in identification for grasping with capsular
into subgroups according to their structure and matrix
specificity,
i.e.  collagenases, .
 gelatinases,
and
been injected i.y. and used for retinal angiography.
stromelysins. The MMPs are a family of zinc-dependent
Combined with diode laser it has been used to obliterate
endopeptidases that are present in low levels in normal
retinal neovascularization.
tissue and upregulated during normal and pathologic
remodeling of tissue, such as in embryonic development,
TRYPAN BLUE
inflammation, neoplasia, and angiogenesis. They cleave
Trypan blue has been used as a supravital stain to
collagen molecules and are secreted in a latent form. The
determine the yiability of corneal endothelial cells
in
catalytic domain for proteolytic activity contains a Zn2+
donor corneas for transplantation. It is also used to stain
binding site that is stabilized by Ca2fis4. Examples of
the capsule to facilitate capsulorrhexis during cataract
MMPs are collagenases {MMP-1, MMP-8, MMP-13),
surgery. Trypan blue is introduced into the anterior
gelatinases (MMP-2, MMP-9), stromelysins (MMP-3,
Aeme uieis aui daay oi aiaqnq 1e saiel e 1apun iaqweuo
MMP-10), elastase, and the serine proteases of plasmin
from the corneal endothelium and against the lens
and tissue plasminogen activatorls4-156, These enzymes
capsule. It is rinsed out after 30 seconds to 2 minutes,
are present in various cells such as migrating neutrophils,
OPHTHAlMIC PHARMACOLOGY
57
 phagocytes, corneal cells, and in infectious agents such as
Thiols and hydroxamic acids (MMP inhibitors): e.g.
+
Galardin; more effective than previous drugs but
The original ophthalmic interest in MMPs was in their
 experimental and is not yet availableiss, 1s6.
role in corneal ulceration. The regenerating corneal
epithelium interacts with the stroma to liberate the
For effective therapy, MMP inhibitors must be
enzyme collagenase (MMP-1)159. Collagenase is liberated 
administered frequently, probably every hour, to keep the
in a latent form by corneal cells, is activated by plasmin,
cells bathed in the inhibitor Acetylcysteine has been used
and is calcium dependent160, 161. If present in excessive
most frequently, because it is commercially available as a
amounts, collagenase cleaves the stromal collagen and
mucolytic agent for respiratory nebulization therapy.
creates a progressive ulcer in both depth and diameter.
Mucomyst is available as 10% and 20% solutions and
Once initiated, progression of a superficial ulcer to a
should be refrigerated; once opened it is relatively
perforated ulcer can be a matter of hours.
unstable. Mucomyst at the higher concentrations is toxic
 Strubbe et al.162 isolated MMP-2, MMP-9, and
to the cornea, so a 5-10% solution is recommended17s.
neutrophil elastase in higher levels from the tear film of
Serum from the patient is another alternative,
horses with corneal ulcerations than from normal aged-
 particularly for horses, but care must be taken to avoid
matched controls. Levels of MMPs were elevated
contamination since it is such a good culture medium.
whether the ulcer was sterile or was associated with
bacteria or fungi; MMPs were present in both eyes even
with a unilateral ulcer.
GLUCOCORTICOIDS
 Four natural inhibitors of MMPs {tissue inhibitors of
MMPs [TIMPs]) have been identified163, Various drugs
PHARMACOLOGY
cause collagenase inhibition and most of these work as
 Glucocorticoids found an early use in ophthalmology and
chelating agents against calcium and zinc. Clinically,
were a great therapeutic advance due to the importance of
results are often disappointing. A verifiably effective
minimizing scarring in the ocular healing process. As with
protocol for treating progressive corneal ulcers has yet to
all therapeutic modalities, glucocorticoid therapy was not
be decribed; however, due to the potential devestating 
 a panacea, and it has been responsible for many avoidable
outcome of rapidly progressive corneal ulceration,
ocular catastrophes.
Their  anti-inflammatory   and
clinicians utilize empirical treatment with a variety
of
immunosuppressive effects have made the glucocorticoids
products.
Glucocorticoid  t
therapy
is
 potentially
a1
 powerful tool in preventing scarring, maintaining
dangerous with active ulceration because the drugs
transparency, and 
 treating the immune-mediated
augment collagenase activity up to 15x164. Olliviero et
inflammations of some forms of keratitis, uveitis,
ali65 tested a variety of MMP inhibitors against tears
conjunctivitis, scleritis/episcleritis, and corneal transplants.
from horses with ulcerative keratitis and found all to
Glucocorticoids do not eliminate noxious stimuli 
but
have 92-99% inhibitory activity against MMPs in tears.
appear to only modify the response to the noxious stimuli.
Drugs tested were: EDTA, acetylcysteine, doxycyline,
Glucocorticoids at therapeutic doses have some action on
ilomastat {Galardin), and alpha-1 proteinase inhibitor.
every facet of the immune response (Table 2.10).
The interest in MMPs in  ophthalmology
has
expanded from corneal ulceration to aqueous humor
 outflow regulation, angiogenesis, and cancer163.
Table 2.10 Anti-inflammatory effects of therapeutic
AGENTS
doses of glucocorticoids
Topical sodium and calcium EDTA reversibly bind
calcium and zinc. Calcium binding interferes with
Block permeability of capillary endothelium.
the burst of respiratory energy necessary for the
Prevent intracellular edema.
 neutrophils to degranulate166,167.
Inhibit migration of neutrophils by decreasing vascular
Topical acetylcysteine binds calcium but it also acts
by reducing a disulfide bond and consequently is not
permeability and vasoconstriction.
 completely reversible by adding calcium166.
 Reduce neutrophil adherence.
Topical penicillamine binds calcium16, 167
 Inhibit ingestion of bacteria and release of proteolytic
 Topical serum globulin: serum contains alpha-2
 enzymes by neutrophils and macrophages.
macroglobulins which are nonspecific, irreversible
binders of collagenasel68 and are superior in action
 Prevent antibody production of B-lymphocytes before
humoral recognition.
on a molar basis than the metal chelators. Brooks et
w jo siaaal yaiy peq unias auinba ieut punoy 6gi
Suppression of lymphokines from stimulated
vitro inhibition of MMP activity that was effective
T-lymphocytes.
for up to 1 week, whether stored in a refrigerator or
 Interfere with complement subfractions.
 at room temperature; no differences were found in
 Inhibit histamine synthesis and counteract histamine
activity between fresh or frozen serum.
vascular effects.
Topical sodium citrate inhibits calcium167.
 Systemic ascorbate: there is conflicting evidence as to
 Decrease fibroblastic proliferation and collagen
its efficacy170-172.
deposition.
 Tetracycline given intramuscularly at 50 mg/kg/day
 Possibly stabilize lysosomal membranes.
was effective in treating alkali- and Pseudomonas
 Possibly affect prostaglandin synthesis.
deruginosa-induced ulcerations in rabbits173, 174.
58
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRiNArY MeDiCINE
A variety of corticosteroid glucocorticoids are available
become contraindicated. There is also an increased
commercially in topical preparations. In general, the more 
systemic effect from the subconjunctival route, and
potent the steroid the lower the concentration in the
patients routinely develop polyuria and polydypsia183.
solution. Considerations in selecting a glucocorticoid for
An occasional complication of subconjunctival repositol
topical therapy are: corneal penetration, anti-inflammatory
steroids is a subconjunctival granuloma184, which
effect, duration of action, and systemic and topical side-
appears as a smooth, circumscribed subconjunctival
effects176. Topical phosphate solutions are water soluble,
mass. A white residue from the repositol steroids is often
and acetates and alcohols are suspensions and biphasic.
visible for weeks after injection.
Experimental studies indicate that topical prednisolone
The systemic route is utilized for severe intraocular
acetate 1% produces the best anti-inflammatory effect in
conditions and when topical glucocorticoids may be
the intact cornea, followed by dexamethasone alcohol
contraindicated.
0.1% suspension, prednisolone phosphate 0.1 % solution,
and dexamethasone phosphate 0.05% ointment177
INDICATIONS FOR USE
Despite the advantage of prednisolone acetate suspension,
 Sterile immune-mediated ocular diseases, e.g.
vigorous shaking of the bottle is necessary to deliver the
 pannus, atopic conjunctivitis, VKH.
intended dosage, and marked discrepancies can occur
between brands of the same product. In one study, shaking
Two of the most common errors when treating
the bottle 40 times delivered 82% of the maximum
severe inflammatory conditions with topical
concentration of the product with one product and 22%
glucocorticoids are to use a weak product such as
with another producti78.
hydrocortisone and not to administer the drug
 All  the prednisolone derivatives penetrate  the
frequently enough (q4-6h).
blood-aqueous humor barriers equally when given
systemically. With the exception of methylprednisolone,
 Post-traumatic ocular inflammation, e.g- post-
which is a repositol glucocorticoid, the aqueous humor
 surgical inflammation.
levels are short lived, i.e. 2-3 hours.
 Ocular infections with significant destructive immune-
mediated inflammation, e.g. feline infectious 
ROUTE OF THERAPY
peritonitis {FIP) associated uveitis, feline
If possible it is desirable to limit steroid therapy to the
immunodeficiency virus (FIV) associated uveitis,
topical route to minimize systemic side-effects. Even with
Toxaplasma associated uveitis. Therapy with systemic
topical therapy there is ample evidence to show adrenal
infectious agents is almost always limited to topical
glucocorticoid therapy. Glucocorticoids are generally
absorption {through conjunctiva and oral absorption
not used with bacterial or mycotic ocular infections.
from licking the nose after exiting from the nasolacrimal
 Reduction of ocular scarring, neovascularization,
duct). Clinical signs of polyurea, polydipsia, and
 and pigmentation.
 increased appetite may occasionally be noted with topical
CONTRAINDICATIONS AND
difficult to control while on topical glucocorticoids.
NONRESPONSIVE CONDITIONS FOR
Subconjunctival repositol steroid products relieve the
TOPICAL GLUCOCORTICOID THERAPY
 In the presence of corneal ulcerations and abrasions:
the anterior segment (Table 2.11). However, there is
glucocorticoids activate collagenase and may induce
potential difficulty in stopping the steroid action if they
a progressive ulceration (2.4)i64, 185.
2.4
Table 2.11  Repositol subconjunctival glucocorticoids
Duration 
Relative anti-
of action
inflammatory
Drug
potency
 Methylprednisolone
acetate
14-30 days
5
Betamethasone
 sodium phosphate
and acetate
7-14 days
25
Dexamethasone
 sodium phosphate 
7-10 days
30
Triamcinolone
 acetonide
7-30+ days
5
 2.4 Collagenase ulcer in a dog following experimental wounding
and administration of repositol methylprednisolone. Five days after
Modified from Krohne and Vestre (1987]196.
wounding, the lesion progressed from a healing superficial lesion to
 a descemetocele within 6 hours.
OPHTHALMIC PHARMACOLOGY
59
 In general, the presence of bacterial or fungal
and conjunctival hyperemia. The effect on IOP varies
infections of the eye. The latter applies particularly
with the species, PG, dose, and time. In general, an
to the horse.
initial hypertension  is followed by a prolonged
hypotension. The signs of inflammation can be reduced
Glucocorticoids are ineffective against old scars of the
by prior treatment with PG inhibitors, and therefore 
cornea or elsewhere in the eye, stromal pigment, primary
they are ideally used before surgery to minimize post-
glaucoma, cataracts, and degenerative corneal diseases
surgical inflammation.
such as corneal endothelial degeneration with edema and
corneal lipids.
NSAIDS
 Glucocorticoids induce a protein called macrocortin
SIDE-EFFECTS AND COMPLICATIONS
{also called lipomodulin) that interferes with
● Increase corneal mycotic infections (horse), activate 
phospholipase A, and consequently affects both the
latent herpesvirus infection {cat), and in all species
may worsen a bacterial infection if not covered by
Glucocorticoids are selective inhibitors of cyclo-
appropriate antibiotic.
oxygenase 2 (see Glucocorticoids, p.57).
 Progression of corneal ulceration due to
 Aspirin is a cyclo-oxygenase pathway inhibitor.
 augmentation of MMPs.
Many dogs can tolerate a dose of 10 mg/kg q12h for
 Complications of posterior subca psular cataracts and
long periods. Aspirin has been demonstrated to
glaucoma as observed in humans were not thought to
decrease the protein in secondary aqueous humor
develop in domestic animals; however, subcapsular
(newly formed aqueous humor after an ocular insult
cataracts and ocular hypertension were produced with
 to the blood-aqueous humor barrier) in the 
topical dexamethasone sodium phosphate therapy in
cats186, 187, Anecdotally, dogs on systemic or topical
aspirin postoperatively due to an observed higher
glucocorticoids have been found with rapidly
incidence of postoperative hyphema, nor in equine
 developing cortical cataracts and lipid keratopathy.
recurrent uveitis due to perceived ineffectiveness.
 Band keratopathy or superficial calcification of the
+
 Flunixin meglumine: is not approved for use in small
cornea may occur with topical therapy using
 animals but many surgeons use it routinely before
phosphate salts of the glucocorticoidsi88
 eye surgery at a single dose of 0.5 mg/kg i.v. without
 Iatrogenic Cushing's syndrome and adrenal
problem. Higher doses may produce
suppression 181.
gastrointestional ulcerations and renal failure.
Flunixin should be used cautiously in patients who
are hypotensive or dehydrated1 94. Flunixin indirectly
PROSTAGLANDIN INHIBITORS (NSAIDS)
decreases aqueous humor protein after an ocular
AND PROSTAGLANDIN ANALOGS
injury by reducing PG-induced vascular permea bility,
 and it is additive when used in combination with
systemic dexamethasone {64% reduction) on 
PHARMACOLOGY
postoperative aqueous humor protein values19s, 196.
 Prostaglandins (PGs) are a group of oxygenated fatty acids
Systemic flunixin and topical flurbiprofen were
that in humans and higher animals are derived mainly
relatively equal in minimizing miosis after a laser-
from arachidonic acid. The precursors are stored as
induced injury but they also promoted post-injury
esterified phospholipids in cell membranes and are
ocular hypertension197. Flunixin is utilized
released by phospholipase A,. The precursors are rapidly
corneal and uveal diseases.
genase pathways. The cyclo-oxygenase pathway leads to a
 Flurbiprofen 0.03% was the original topical NSAID
variety of PG compounds and thromboxane Az. In the
preparation and was marketed to prevent
presence of epinephrine as a cofactor, the_main PGs
intraoperative miosis during cataract surgery. When
produced  are
PGD, PGE2,,
PGF2α
PGI,’and
used as a postoperative anti-inflammatory agent it
thromboxane. There are two cyclo-oxygenase isoforms:
does not inhibit corneal stromal healing198, 199.
pun anss aue ui s ie ie asand si I asaxo-o
aq 0i sieadde bupaaiq snoaueiuods aaeiadoruu
is responsible for the basal prostaglandin synthesis in
homeostasis; and cyclo-oxygenase 2 is inducible and
aui pasgaoap sey rouine aui arogaraut pue sioaiu
expressed in inflammatory sites by monocytes, macro-
intensive use of hourly flurbiprofen. It can be used as
 phages, and fibroblasts. Most NSAIDs are nonselective
an alternative anti-inflammatory when corneal
inhibitors of cyclo-oxygenase, and this results in many of
ulceration prohibits glucocorticoid thera py, or used
the undesirable side-effects of these drugs189.
in conjunction with glucocorticoids. Topical
The lipoxygenase pathway results in the production of
flurbiprofen has been shown to decrease significantly
various leukotrienes and hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acids
aqueous humor outflow in noninjured and injured
(HETEs), which are strong chemotactic agents for
eyes200, Flurbiprofen was more effective in
polymorphonuclear cells190.
 decreasing aqueous humor protein than systemic or
PG precursors are abundant in the anterior uvea and
topical steroids in two noninvasive models of
conjunctiva and are released whenever the iris is
inflammation, while in an invasive model, topical
injured. Species variations are present but in general the
1% prednisolone acetate was more effective than
result of PG release is intraocular inflammation, i.e.
topical NSAIDs1 53, 201, 202.
miosis, increased protein content in the aqueous humor,
60
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRiNArY MeDiCINE
●Diclofenac 0.1%, suprofen 1%, and 0.5% ketorolac
decrease the resistance to outflow in the extracellular
 are alternative topical NSAIDs and, depending on
spaces of the ciliary muscle209, 210.
the model used, they may not be as effective as
There is not much information on the use of
flurbiprofen in inhibiting miosis and aqueous flare.
latanoprost in canine glaucoma, but in the author's
Diclofenac has some cormeal analgesic properties
experience it frequently produces a dramatic drop in IOP
but, like topical anesthetics, the effect is relatively
in dogs within 30-60 minutes of instillation, often when
short lived203.
other drugs have not worked. The continued success of
treatment has been variable after the initial reduction, as
Topical NSAIDs are frequently utilized when the
it becomes ineffective in some dogs, while others maintain
cornea is ulcerated and an anti-inflammatory drug
a low IOP for extended periods. The author routinely uses
is still needed. The author has used flurbiprofen for
it q12h. Gelatt and MacKay21l found that 0.005%
years in this manner without complications, but 
latanoprost reduced the IOP in the glaucomatous Beagle
melting ulcers have been reported in humans with
model by 50-60%, and q12h therapy resulted in less
topical ketorolac and dichofenac204 NSAIDs, either
fluctuation in IOP through the day.
topical or systemic, are generally not indicated with
Latanoprost can be used with other antiglaucoma
 glaucoma due to the ocular hypertensive effect.
medications, including the beta blockers and topical and
systemic CAIs. Whether latanoprost should be used in
 Indomethacin is rarely used systemically in the dog
secondary glaucoma associated with breakdown of the
due to digestive tract complications. Topical
blood-aqueous humor barrier is not yet clear The
preparations are available commercially outside the
author has used it where there are postoperative
US. Indomethacin has been shown to decrease
cataract surgery pressure spikes with dramatic but not
significantly aqueous humor protein content in.
invariable results, and has not noted any increased
 postoperative inflammation.
Concentrations from 0.1-1% are equally effective.
 Diehl et al.212 found that latanoprost administered
 Phenylbutazone at 20 mg/kg i.v. decreased the
q24h produced a significant lowering of IOP in normal
 protein in the secondary aqueous humor after
horses, but adverse effects of epiphora, blepharospasm,
paracentesis to one-third that of controls193.
and blepharoedema were common. Clinically, the author
Clinically, phenylbutazone is not as effective as
has not observed a significant reduction in IOP with
flunixin in the horse in treating ocular pain and
latanoprost in glaucomatous horses. Latanoprost is not
inflammation. Nevertheless, it is used extensively for
mild to moderate ocular pain and inflammation
a very potent miotic13. Anecdotally, clinicians have
because it is much less expensive than flunixin.
thought it is effective in treating feline glaucoma.
 Carprofen is a systemic anti-inflammatory that is a
weak cyclo-oxygenase inhibitor and a free radical
Side-effects
scavenger The effect of carprofen on inhibiting
Like its action, the side-effects of latanoprost are also
breakdown of the blood-aqueous humor barrier is
unique and vary between species. In the cat and dog,
 compara ble to aspirin and flunixin207.
latanoprost produces a dramatic miosis that lasts for
 several hours213. Conjunctival hyperemia is variable but
Carprofen may be associated with gastrointestinal
may be marked. In humans, no miosis is noted but up to
signs and renal and hepatocellular toxicosis.
10% of patients may develop iris hyperpigmentation
after 3-5 months of therapy. Other side-effects reported
Most studies have shown that the maximum anti-
in humans are hypertrichosis of the cilia, macular edema,
inflammatory effect is achieved when combinations of
choroidal effusion, anterior uveitis, and facial skin
glucocorticoids and NSAIDs are given, rather than either
type of agent alone193, 199.
severity of herpesvirus keratitis and increased the risk of
recurrences16 If latanoprost proves ineffective in feline
PROSTAGLANDIN ANALOGS
 glaucoma, concern with aggra vating herpesvirus keratitis
Latanoprost, which is an ester prodrug of PGFza, was the
may not be of significance in veterinary medicine.
first PG analog introduced for topical glaucoma therapy.
It is available as a 0.o0s% solution and, in humans, is
It would appear that all the effects of latanoprost in 
normally only given q24h. It has been described as the
dogs are not currently known. The rapid decrease
most potent topical drug to date for treating glaucoma.
in IOP in responsive dogs would argue against the
Additional PG derivatives that have been recently
proposed mechanism of altering MMPs; such a
introduced are travaprost 0.004%, bimatroprost 0.03%,
 mechanism should have a lag time since MMPs
and unoprostone 0.15%.
exist in a latent form.
The effects of PGs vary with the type, dose, and
species so each species must be explored individually.
Latanoprost increases the unconventional outflow
{uveoscleral) pathway, which is unique for antiglaucoma
ANTIHISTAMINES AND DECONGESTANTS
medications. Latanoprost is more lipophilic, allowing
better corneal penetration than the end product,
PHARMACOLOGY
PGF,208. How it affects uveoscleral flow is still under
Histamine release from mast cells in the conjunctiva
investigation but one demonstrated effect is to increase
mediates the clinical signs of vasodilatation, edema, and
matrix metalloproteinases in the ciliary body, which may
itching through H1 and H2 receptors. H1 and H2
OPHTHALMIC PHARMACOLOGY
61
receptors both dilate small blood vessels. Intraocular
liver. These compounds interfere with the nucleic acid
effects of histamine are constriction of the pupil and an
metabolism by inhibiting the incorporation of normal
iris vasodilation, causing an increase in aqueous humor
 purine compounds. The purine analogs are most effective
protein176 Antihistamines and decongestants are widely
in inhibiting cell division during the S phase220, The
used in over-the-counter ophthalmic drugs that are used
immunosuppressive effect is through affecting T-helper
for 'red eyes'.
lymphocyte function, with little effect on humoral
immunity or B-lymphocytes unless large doses are
AGENTS
administered within 48 hours of antigenic priming221.
 Antazoline phosphate is an Hi blocker that inhibits
The purine analogs work best on cell-mediated immune
itching but not conjunctival redness, and so is often
diseases221 In the dog, it has been used most frequently
combined with a vasoconstrictor176. Other H1
in the therapy of Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada {VKH) uveitis
blockers used topically are pheniramine maleate and
and fibrous histiocytomas {nodular epikeratoscleritis) of
pyrilamine maleate.
the cornea222.
 Sodium cromolyn, a drug that prevents mast cell
Azathioprine is most commonly used at 50 mg/m2
degranulation, is available as a 4% ophthalmic
(2 mg/kg) p.o. q24h, reduced after 2 weeks to 1 mg/kg
solution. It inhibits all the signs of histamine release.
every other day for 2 weeks and then 1 mg/kg once a
Unfortunately, to be effective it must be given before
week if possible222. Azathioprine is usually given initially
the insult to prevent degranulation217.
with systemic glucocorticoids because there is a 3-5 week
 Lodoxamide tromethamine 0.1% inhibits mast cell
lag before clinical effects are evident20, Glucocorticoids 
 degranulation and is used in allergic conjunctivitis
are tapered once clinical improvement is noted and,
and eosinophilic keratitis in the horse. However, it is
hopefully, eventually discontinued. Weekly complete
expensive, which can prevent its use in routine
blood cell and platelet counts should be monitored until
treatment of atopic or allergic conjunctivitis. Its
 the minimal maintenance dose of azathioprine is reached,
effectiveness in feline eosinophilic keratitis has not
when monitoring can be reduced in frequency, depending
been reported.
on the blood cell counts.
Vasoconstrictive agents utilized in topical
 preparations are: naphazoline, tetrahydrozoline,
FOLIC ACID ANALOGS
and phenylephrine.
Methotrexate is the major drug in this category.
 Methotrexate competitively inhibits folic acid reductase,
which is involved in folate metabolism. Folic acid is
IMMUNOSUPPRESSIVE DRUGS
reduced to tetrahydrofolic acid, which is involved with
purine metabolism, and thus DNA and RNA synthesis
PHARMACOLOGY
and cellular replication are inhibited. Methotrexate has
Despite the potential for serious side-effects, ‘
the
been recommended for use as a subconjunctival injection
immunosuppressive drugs are developing a niche for
at 12.5 mg for treatment of intraocular tumors223
treating blinding ophthalmic inflammatory conditions
that are resistant to conventional glucocorticoid therapy.
CYCLOSPORINE A
Most of these drugs function by inhibiting the process of
Cyclosporine is the metabolite of two fungi and, unlike
cellular division. While the goal is usually to interfere
other immunosuppressive agents, its action is not
with lymphocyte proliferation and function, most of
mediated yia cytotoxicity. Cyclosporine's action is
them are nonselective in their inhibition, resulting in side-
incompletely understood but it is thought to act by
effects that are first noted in rapidly dividing cells.
interfering with  interleukin-2 and  T-cell activation.
Cyclosporine  is normally  administered  orally,
is
ALKYLATING AGENTS
expensive, and has potential renal toxicity218 A safer, less
Cyclophosphamide and chlorambucil are_ alkylating
expensive mode of therapy for ophthalmic use is topical
 agents and are cell cycle-phase nonspecific, affecting cells
application, and a 0.2% ointment is now available
in either the resting or proliferating phase. The alkylating
commercially for topical use in veterinary medicine.
agents produce cross-linking and breakage of DNA
Before this, veterinarians or pharmacists were diluting
strands and inhibition of DNA synthesis. While these
the oral preparation with corn oil to a 1% or 2%
agents will affect slow growing cells, they are most
solution for topical use.
effective on rapidly dividing cells; lymphocytes are very
Cyclosporine is lipophilic and thus is well absorbed
sensitive218, 219
through the cornea. A 1-2% solution and a 0.2%
The dose of cyclophosphamide depends on the
ointment have demonstrated an effect on a variety of
severity of the condition and concurrent drugs that are
experimental  immune-mediated ocular  inflamma-
being used. For immunosuppression, 1.s-2.s mg/kg
 every other day has been used2i9.
ophthalmology is in treating KCS but it has potential in
the treatment of a variety of immune surface diseases
PURINE ANALOGS
such as pannus, pigmentary keratitis, and allergic
Some purine analogs have been used for immuno-
suppression and others as antiviral agents. The two most
 secretion and will increase the tear production in normal
 important for immunosuppression are 6-merca ptopurine
and deficient dogs. In mice, this action of topical
and azathioprine.
cyclosporine was reversed with capsaicin, which depletes
Azathioprine is a prodrug that becomes 6-mercapto-
purine after reacting with sulfhydryl compounds in the
cyclosporine causes the release of the neurotransmitter
62
OpHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
substance P from sensory nerve endings, and that
25 μg are safe and effective but caution should be used
 substance P then stimulates parasympathetic nerves in
with vitreal injections. Most patients can be injected
the gland.
under topical anesthesia using a 30 gauge needle. Topical
Topical cyclosporine either as a 1% or 2% solution is
 application of tPA in a 0.1% solutions (1 mg/ml) has also
experimentally  resulted  in  detectable intraocular
of therapy varies with the condition treated but therapy
concentrations of tPA and dissolution of clots. However, 
for KCS is usually q12h and the duration of therapy is
 at this concentration expense is once again a factor242.
indefinite. Inflammatory conditions have been initially
treated at 6-hour intervals over a 2-3 week period and
 Tissue plasminogen activator is truly a miracle drug
continued at decreased frequency as long as needed to
to the surgeon/clinician who has struggled with.
 control the condition.
intraocular adhesions. To watch a large fibrin clot
Cyclosporine has been implanted in the vitreous in an
dissolve or synechiae release is amazing.
experimental sustained-release device to treat recurrent
uveitis in horses. The device was primed with
cyclosporine to deliver 4 μg/day for up to S years234.
HEPARIN
Complications from the procedure were minimal when
Heparin impairs the thrombin mediated formation of
the device was implanted in quiet eyes.
fibrin and is utilized intraoperatively during intraocular
surgery to minimize fibrin formation during and
TACROLIMUS
immediately after surgery. An increased risk of
Tacrolimus is derived from Streptomyces tsukabaensis
intraoperative and postoperative bleeding may occur.
 and is an immunosuppressant that is 10-100 times
 Preservative-free heparin is preferable. The dose is 1 U/ml
 more potent on a weight basis than cyclosporine. It
 of irrigating fluids.
suppresses T-cell activation and has some activity
in
HIRUDIN
suppression  of
humoral 
immunity. It is 
used
systemically to counteract transplant rejection and is
Hirudin is a direct acting antithrombin agent that blocks
used topically for eczema. It is being compounded for
the formation of fibrin from fibrinogen without an effect
topical ocular use as a 0.03-0.02% solution
or
 on platelets. It was originally isolated from leeches and is
ointment for treating KCs. Chambers et al.23s had a
now available in a recombinant form. It decreased the
96% success rate, although the severity of cases treated
amount of fibrin in a rabbit model when used
was not stipulated. As tacrolimus utilizes different cell
intraoperatively at 100 μg/ml in an infusion, and no
receptors than cyclosporine, it may be effective in
 intraocular hemorrhage was noted243.
cyclosporine resistant cases of KCS.
VISCOELASTIC AGENTS
ANTIFIBRIN AGENTS
Viscoelastic agents are transparent solutions of high
TISSUEPLASMINOGENACTIVATOR
viscosity and they have become important adjuncts to
Recombinant tissue plasminogen activator {tPA) is used
intraocular surgery. These agents are used to maintain
spatial relationships, separate tissue to prevent
patients with myocardial infarction and stroke. It acts by
adhesions, contain hemorrhage, act as a lubricant, and
binding fibrin and the complex then binds plasminogen
protect tissue from mechanical injury244. In addition,
and activates it to plasmin. Plasmin then accelerates the
they have been used on the corneal surface to lubricate
brea kdown of fibrinogen to fibrin degradation products
and replace tears and maintain optical clarity during
and fibrin to fibrin split products. Tissue plasminogen
surgery {see Artifical tears, p.55). While somewhat slow
activator injected at 25 pg into the anterior chamber has
to be accepted into veterinary ophthalmologic surgery
been successful in lysing fibrin clots and breaking
because of their significant cost, they have become
synechiae when used within 24-72 hours of their
almost universally accepted with the advent
of
formation236, 237. The author has used tPA in acute
phacoemulsification surgery. Their viscous nature helps
idiopathic inflammation and postoperatively in cataract
to maintain the anterior chamber during manipulations 
Vd jo asn aul gezraains junys houn snoane pue
through small incisions, and they protect the corneal
with hyphema that is not spontaneously resolving is a
endothelium from trauma during surgery and
Jo iasuep uoyuais e si aaui iq aaissod sudual
 introduction of intraocular lenses.
recurrent hemorrhage239, 240.
Wilkie and Willis24s reviewed the properties of
 Tissue plasminogen activator has demonstrated no
viscoelastic agents and compared the various properties 
toxic effects to the corneal endothelium or changes in the
available. Viscoelastic agents can be characterized in
IOP when ≤50 μg was injected in the anterior chamber of
terms of their rheologic properties of viscosity,
the normal canine eyel24. Injection of tPA in the vitreous 
pseudoplasticity, viscoelasticity, and surface tension.
in doses of ≥50 μg results in photoreceptor cell damage
Viscosity is a measure of the resistance to flow; high
but at least part of this toxicity is due to the vehicle241.
viscosity products have the desirable property of staying
Tissue plasminogen activator is packaged for systemic
 in the anterior chamber but they may be difficult to inject
use and is extremely expensive. Diluting the drug and
 through a small cannula. Pseudoplasticity is the change
repackaging into sterile vials that are stored at -70°℃
of viscosity that occurs with increasing shear rate, i.e.
(-94°F) until thawed for use has made the cost
decreasing viscosity with increasing movement; this
reasonable {US$20 per vial). Anterior chamber doses of
property allows the product to be injected through a
OPHTHAlMIC PHARMACOLOGY
63
 small cannula. Elasticity of a substance is the ability to
 Chondroitin sulfate-sodium hyaluronic mixture
return to its original shape after a deforming force has
provides increased coating of tissues and implants due
been applied and is related to cohesiveness. Cohesive
to the dispersive qualities of chondroiten and the
viscoelastics maintain spaces well and are aspirated more
cohesiveness of hyaluronate; the mixture thus remains
easily from the anterior chamber. A dispersive
within the eye to maintain spatial relationships.
viscoelastic is lower in molecular weight and viscosity
+
 Hydroxypropylmethylcellulose 2%: unlike the
 and spreads within available space24s. Viscoelastics with
previous two agents is not a natural substance in
dispersive properties spread and protect tissues and are
 animals. It is readily available and thus less
not expelled from the eye as rapidly during surgery as
expensive to manufacture and it is stable and
cohesive viscoelastics.
autoclavable. Hydroxypropylmethylcellulose is
 Ideally, because of the varying qualities needed from a
viscous and dispersive and is less cohesive than the
viscoelastic  
for
different
stages 
of performing
 other viscoelastics.
extraca psular extraction with phacoemulsification, more
than one product would be used during the procedure. In
Viscoelastic agents have made all intraocular
practice most surgeons utilize only one viscoelastic that
surgeons better surgeons, allowing manipulations
happens to be their favorite, often based on cost.
through small incisions that would previously have
been difficult to perform.
AGENTS
 Sodium hyaluronate was the first viscoelastic agent.
SIDE-EFFECTS
It was initially derived from rooster combs and
umbilical cords and most recently from genetic
● Postoperative pressure elevations. Postoperative IOP
engineering utilizing fermentation with streptococci.
elevations are reported in humans if viscoelastic
 Sodium hyaluronate is the benchmark against
 agents are not completely removed at the termination
which all other viscoelastic agents are compared.
of surgery but not in the dog. However, transient
There are various hyaluronic acid preparations on
postoperative pressure elevations are also common
the market, and the purity and viscosity may vary.
without the use of viscoelastic agents.
Thus, agents used for treatment of joint disease
 Endotoxins from nonophthalmic preparations may
 may not be acceptable for ophthalmology.
produce sterile postoperative inflammations.
Ophthalmic sodium hyaluronate is available in a
+
Postoperative corneal edema has been clinically noted
regular viscosity and, more recently, as a
with some batches of hydroxypropylmethylcellulose.
supercohesive form.
REFERENCES
1 Shell JW (1982) Pharmacokinetics of
 7 Mindel JS (1998) Alpha-adrenergic drugs.
13 Gelatt KN, Peterson GE, Myers V,
topically applied ophthalmic drugs.
In: Duanes Foundations of Clinicat
McClure R (1972) Continuous
Survey of Ophthatmotogy 26:207-218.
 Ophthatrotogy 3. W Tasman, EA Jaeger
subpalpebral medication in the horse.
2 Leno N, Refojo MF, Abelson MB (1994)
(eds). Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia, p.
Journat of the American Animat
 Pharmacokinetics. In: Principies and
1-17.
Hospitat Association 8:35-37.
Practice of Ophthatmology: Basic
8 Fiscella RG, Burstein NL (2001)
Sciences. DA Ablert, FA Jokobeic (eds).
 Ophthalmic drug formulations. In:
placement of ocular lavage systems in
WB Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 916-929.
Clinicat Ocular Pharmacology, 4th edn.
horses. Veterinary Medicine/Smatt
 3 Axelrod J, Daly JS, Glew RH, Barza M,
 JD Bartlett, SD Jaanus (eds). Butterworth
Animmat Ctimician 87:460-471.
 Baker AS {1995) Antibacterials. In:
Heinemann, Boston, pp. 19-40.
15 Sweeney CR, Russell GE (1997)
Principtes and Practice of
9 Richardson KT (1975) Ocular
Complications associated with use of a
Ophthatmology: Basic Sciences. DA
 microtherapy. Archives of
one-hole subpalpebral lavage system in
Ablert, FA Jokobeic {eds). WB Saunders,
Ophthatmotogy 93:74-86.
horses: 150 cases. Journat of the
 Philadelphia, pp. 940-961.
10 Gelatt KN, Glenwood GG, Williams LW,
American Veterinary Medicat Association
4 Johnson DA, Johns KJ, Robinson RD,
 Peiffer RL {1979) Evaluation of a soluble
211:1271-1274.
Head WS, O'Day D {1995) The
sustained-release ophthalmic delivery
16 Giuliano EA, Maggs JD, Moore CP,
relationship of corneal epithelial defect 
unit in the dog. American Journat of
Boland LA, Champagne ES, Galle LE
size to drug penetration. Archives of
Veter inary Research 40:702-704.
(2000) Inferomedial placement of a
Ophthatmotogy 113:641-644.
11 Punch PI, Costa ND, Edwards ME,
single-entry subpalpebral lavage tube for
 5 Mathis GA (1991) Clinical ophthalmic
Wilcox GE {1987) The release of
treatment of equine eye disease.
pharmacology and therapeutics. In:
 insoluble antibiotics from collagen ocular
Veterinary Ophthatmology 3:153-156.
Veterinary Ophthatmology, 3rd edn.
 inserts m vitro and their insertion into
17 Hinkle KM, Gerding PA, Kakoma I,
K Gelatt (ed). Lippincott, Williams and
the conjunctival sac of cattle. Journat of
Schaeffer DJ {1999) Evaluation of
Wikins Philadlphia, pp. 291336.
Veterinary Pharmacology and
activity of selected ophthalmic
6 Bartlett JD (2001) Ophthalmic drug
Therapeutics 10:37-42.
antimicrobial agents in combination 
delivery In: Clinicat Ocular
12 Fraunfelder FT, Hanna C (1974)
 against common ocular microorganisms.
Pharmacotogy, 4th edn. JD Bartlett, SD
 Ophthalmic drug delivery systems.
American Journat of Veterimary Research
Janus (eds). Butterworth Heinemann,
Survey of Ophthatmology 18:292-298.
60:316-318.
Boston, pp. 41-62.
64
OpHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
18 Eliason JA, Maurice DM (1980) An
31 Brooks D, Andrew S, Dillavou C, Ellis G,
44 Talamo JH, D'Amico DJ, Kenyon KR
Ocular perfusion system. Investigative
Kubilis P {1998) Antimicrobial
(1986) Intravitreal amikacin in the
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
susceptibility patterns of fungi isolated
treatment of bacterial endophthalmitis.
19:102-105.
from horses with ulcerative
Archives of Ophthatmology
19 Glaze M (1986) An implantable system
keratomycosis. American Journal of
104:1483-1485.
for perfusion of the equine eye.
Veterinary Research 59:138-142.
45 Gookin JL, Riviere JE, Gilger BC,
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
32 Leopold IH {1984) Anti-infective agents.
Papich MG {1999) Acute renal failure in
the American College of Veterinary
In: Pharmacology of the Eye. ML Sears
four cats treated with paromomycin.
Ophthatmologists 17:52-57.
(ed). Springer-Verlag, New York, p.
Journat of the American Veterinary
20 Blair MJ, Gionfriddo JR, Polazzi LM,
385-457.
Medicat Association 215:1821-1823.
Sojka JE, Pfaff AM, Bingaman DP
33 Kupferman A, Leibowitz HM (1979)
46 Yolton DP (2001) Antinfective drugs. In:
(1999) Subconjunctivally implanted
Topical antibiotic therapy of
Qinicat Ocuiar Pharmacology, 4th edn.
 microosmotic pumps for continuous
Pseudomonas deruginosa keratitis.
JD Bartlett, SD Jaanus (eds). Butterworth
 Ocular treatment in horses. American
Archives of Ophthatmology
Heinemann, Boston, pp. 219-264.
Journal of Veterinary Research
97:1699-1702
 47 Foster CS, Lass JH, Moran-Wallace K,
60:1102-1105.
34 Gilbert M, Wilhelmus K, Osato M
 Govanoni R (1981) Oeular toxicity of
 21 Hyndiuk RA (1969) Radioactive depot-
{1987) Comparative bioavailability and
topical antifungal agents. Archives of
corticosteroid penetration into monkey
efficacy of fortified topical tobramycin.
Ophthatmology 99:1081-1084.
 ocular tissue. II. Subconjunctival
Investigative Ophthatmotogy and Visual
48 Axelrod AJ, Peyman GA (1973)
 administration. Archives of
Science 28:881-885.
Intravitreal amphotericin B treatment of
Ophthatmology 82:259-262.
35 Donnenfeld ED, Schrier A, Perry HD
experimental fungal endophthalmitis.
 22 Gilger BC, Allen JB (1998) Cyclosporine
(1994) Penetration of topically applied
American Journal of Ophthatnology
A in veterinary ophthalmology.
 cprofloxacin, norfloxacin, and ofloxacin
76:584-588.
Veterinary Ophthatmology 1:181-187.
into the aqueous humour.
49 Axelrod AJ, Peyman GA, Apple DJ
23 Velez G, Whitcup SM (1999) New
Ophthatmology 101:902-905.
{1973) Toxicity of intravitreal injection 
 developments in sustained release drug
36 Setz B, Hayashi S, Wee WR, LaBree L,
of amphotericin B. American Journat of
 delivery for the treatment of intraocular
 McDonnell PJ (1996) In vitro effects of
Ophthatmology 76:578-583.
disease. British Journat of
aminoglycosides and fluoroquinolones
50 Souri EN, Green WR {1974) Intravitreal
Ophthatrmology 83:1225-1229.
on keratocytes. Investigative
amphotericin B toxicity. American
24 Hyndiuk RA, Reagan MG (1968)
Ophthatmotogy and Visuat Science
Journat of Ophthatmology 78:77-81.
 Radioactive depot-corticosteroid
37:656-665.
51 Coad CT, Robinson NM, Wilhelmus KR
 penetration into monkey ocular tissue.
37 Gelatt KN, Van der Woerdt A, Ketring KL,
{1985) Antifungal sensitivity testing for
 Retrobullar and systemic administration.
et αf. (2001) Enrofloxacin-associated 
equine keratomycosis. American Journat
Archives of Ophthatmology
retinal degeneration in cats. Veterinary
of Veterinary Research 46:676-678.
80:499-503.
Ophthatmotogy 4:99-106.
52 Foster CS, Stefanyszyn M (1979)
25 Wiejtens O, Sluijs V, Schoemaker R
38 Wiebe V, Hamilton P (2002)
Intraocular penetration of miconazole in
{1997) Peribulbar corticosteroid
 Fuoroquinolone-induced retinal
rabbits. Archives of Ophthatmology
 injection: vitreal and serum
degeneration in cats. Journat of the
97:1703-1706.
 concentrations after dexamethasone
American Veterinary Medicat
53 Tolentino Fl, Foster CS, Lahav M,
 disodium phosphate injection. Arerican
Association 221:1568-1571.
 Liu LH, Rabin AR (1982) Toxicity of
Journal of Ophthatmology
39 May DR, Ericson ES, Peyman GA,
intravitreous miconazole. Archives of
123:358-363.
 Axelrod AJ (1974) Intraocular injection
Ophthatmology 100:1504-1509.
 26 Smith R, Rudt L (1973) Ultrastructural
of gentamicin. Archives of
 54 da Costa and Meredith (1996) Cataracts
 studies of the blood-aqueous barrier. 2.
Ophthatmology 91:487-489.
in dogs after long-terrm ketaconazole
The barrier to horseradish peroxidase in
40 Zachary IG, Forster RK (1976)
therapy. Veterinary and Comparative
primates. American Journal of
Experimental intravitreal gentamicin.
Ophthatmotogy 6:176-180.
Ophthatmology 76:937-947.
American Journat of Ophthatmology
55 Upadhyay M, West EP, Sharma AP
27 Cunha-Vaz JG, Shakib M, Ashton N
82:604-611.
(1980) Keratitis due to Aspergiltus flauus
{1966) Studies on the permeability of the
41 Moller I, Cook Cs, Peiffer Jr RL,
successfully treated with thiabendazole.
blood-retinal barrier. British Journat of
Nasisse MP, Harling DE (1986)
British Journatl of Ophthalmotogy
Ophthatmology 50:441-453.
Indications for and complications of
64:30-32.
28 Hudspeth A, Yee A {1973) The
pharmacological ablation of the ciliary
56 Yee RW, Cheng CH, Meenakshi S,
intercellular junctional complexes of
body for the treatment of chronic
Ludden TM, Wallace JE, Rinaldi MG
 retinal epitheium. Investigative
gaucoma in the dog. Journat of the
(1997) Ocular penetration and
Ophthatmotogy and Visuat Science
American Animat Hospitat Association
pharmacokinetics of topical fluconazole.
12:354-365.
22:319-326.
Comea 16:64-71.
29 Moore CP, Collins BK, Fales WH (1995)
42 Bingaman DP, Lindly DM,
57 O'Day DM, Foulds G, Williams TE,
 Antibacterial susceptibility patterns for
Glickman NW, Krohne SG, Bryan GM
Robinson RD, Allen RH, Head WS
microbial isolates associated with
(1994) Intraocular gentamicin and
{1990) Ocular uptake of fluconazole
 infectious keratitis in horses: 63 cases 
 glaucoma: a retrospective study of 60
following oral administration. Archives
{1986-1994). Journat of the American
dog and cat eyes {1985-1993).
of Ophthatmology 108(7):1006-1008.
Veterinary Medicat Association
Veterinary and Comparative
58 Blair MJ, Gionfriddo JR, Krohne SG
207:928-933.
Ophthatmotogy 4(3):113-119.
{1996) Fluconazole therapy for mycotic
30 Moore CP, Collins BK, Fales WH,
43 D'Amico DJ, Caspers-Velu L, Libert J,
emdophthalmitis. Proceedings of the
Halenda RM {1995) Antimicrobial
et af. (1985) Comparative toxicity of
Scientific Meeting of the American
 agents for treatment of infectious keratits
intravitreal aminoglycoside antibiotics.
College of Veterinatry Ophthatmologists
in horses. Journat of the American
American Journat of Ophthatmology
27:66.
Veterinary Medicat Association
100:264-275.
207:855-862.
OPHTHALMIC PHARMACOLOGY
65
59 Latimer FG, Colitz CMH, Campbell NB,
69 Zimmerman TJ (1981) Pharmacology
80 Miller PE, Schmidt GM, Vainisis SJ,
Papich MG (2001) Pharmacokinetics of
of ocular drugs. Ophthatmology
Swanson JF, Hermann MK (2000) The
fuconazole following intravenous and
88:85-88.
efficacy of topical prophylactic
oral administration, and body fluid
70 Carrier M, Gum G (1989) Effects of
antiglaucoma therapy in primary
 concentrations of fluconazole following
 4% pilocarpine gel on normotensive
closed-angle glaucoma in dogs: a
repeated oral dosing in horses. American
and glaucomatous canine eyes.
multicenter clinical trial. Journat of
Journat of Veterinary Research
Amer ican Journat of Veterinary
the American Animat Hospitat
62:1606-1611.
Research 50:239-244.
Association 36:431-438.
60 Ball M, Rebhun W, Trepanier L,
71 Pickett P, Irby M, McCain W {1991)
81 Slater M, Erb H {1986) Effects of risk
Gaarder J, Schwark W (1997) Corneal
Short-term and long-term effects of
factors and prophylactic treatment on
 concentrations and preliminary
twice daily topical administration of
primary glaucoma in the dog. Journat
toxicological evaluation of an
0.125 % demecarium bromide in the
of the American Veterinary Medicat
 itraconazole/dimethyl sulphoxide
normal canine. Proceedings of the
Association 188:1028-1030.
ophthalmic ointment. Journat of
Scientific Meeting of the American
82 Bito LZ, Hyslop K, Hyndman J
Veterinary Pharmacotogy and
(1967) Antiparasympathomimetic
Therapeutics 20:100-104.
22:42.
effects of cholinesterase inhibitor 
61 Mohan M, Gupta S, Vajpayee R,
72 Pickett P, Irby M, McCain W (1991)
treatment. Journal of Pharmacology
Kalra V, Sachdev M (1988) Management
 Short-term and long-terrm effects of
and Therapeutics 157:159-169.
of keratomycosis with 1% silver
twice daily topical administration of
83 Rubin LF, Aguirre GD (1967) Clinical
sulfadiazine: a prospective controlled
 4% pilocarpine gel in the normal
use of pilocarpine for
clinical trial in 110 cases. In: The
canine. Proceedings of the Scientific
keratoconjunctivitis sicca in dogs and
Cornea: Transactions of the World
Meeting of the American Cottege of
cats. Journat of the American
Congress. D Cavanagh (ed). Raven
Veterinary Ophthatmotogy 22:43.
Veterinary Medical Association
Press, New York, pp. 495-498.
73 Whitley RD, Gelatt KN, Gum GG
151:313-320.
62 Rahman MR, Johnson GJ, Husain R,
{1980) Dose response of topical
84 Smith E, Buyukmihci NC, Farver T
Howlader SA, Minassian DC {1998)
pilocarpine in the normotensive and
{1994) Effect of topical pilocarpine
 Randomised trial of 0.2% chlorhexidine
glaucomatous Beagle. American
treatment on tear production in dogs.
guconate and 2.5% natamycin for
Jotrnat of Veterinary Research
Journat of the American Veterinary
fungal keratitis in Bangladesh. British
41:417-424.
Medicat Association 205:1286-1289.
Journat of Ophthatmology
74 Chiou CY, Trzeciakowski J, Gelatt KN
85 Rubin LF, Wolfes RL {1962)
82(8):919-925
(1980) Reduction of intraocular
Mydriatic for canine ophthalmoscopy.
63 Teich SA {1993) Topical and systemic
 pressure in glaucomatous dogs by a
Journat of the American Veterinary
antiviral agents. In: Dtuane's Foundations
new cholinergic drug. Investigative
Medicat Association 140:137-141.
 of Clinical Ophthatmology. M Yanoff, B
Ophthatmotogy and Visuat Stience
86 Salazar M, Patil PN (1976) An
Fine, JS Mindel, NB Leonard (eds).
19:1198-1203.
explanation for the long duration of
Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia,
75 Gelatt KN, Gum GG, Wolf D, White
my driatic effect of atropine in the eye.
pp. 1-39.
MM (1984) Dose response of topical
Investigative Ophthatmology
64 Nasisse MP, Guy JS, Davidson MG,
 carbamylcholine (carbachol) in
15:671-673.
Sussman W, De Clercq E (1989) In vitro
normotensive and early glaucomatous
87 Smith EL, Redburn DA, Harwerth RS,
susceptibility of feline herpesvirus-1 to
Beagles. American Journat of
Maguire GW (1984) Permanent
vidarabine, idoxuridine, trifluridine,
Veterinary Research 45:547-554.
alterations in muscarinic receptors and
acyclovir, or bromovinyldeoxyuridine.
76 Gum GG, Metzger KJ, Gelatt JK,
 pupil size produced by chronic
Aerican Journat of Veterinary Research
Gilley RL, Gelatt KN {1993)
atropinization in kittens. Investigative
50:158-160.
Tonographic effects of pilocarpine and
Ophthaimotogy and Visuat Science
65 Nasisse MP, Dorman DC, Jamison KC,
 pilocarpine-epinephrine in dogs.
25:239-243.
Weigler BJ, Hawkins EC, Stevens JB
Journat of Smalt Animat Practice
88 Mughannam AJ, Buyukmihci NC,
(1997) Effects of valacyclovir in cats
34:112-116.
Kass PH (1999) Effect of topical
infected with feline herpesvirus-1.
77 Gum GG, Gelatt KN, Gelatt JK,
atropine on intraocular pressure and
American Journat of Veterinary Research
Jones R {1993) Effect of topically
 pupil diameter in the normal horse
58:1141-1144.
 applied demacarium bromide and
eye. Veterinary Ophthatmology
66 Kaufman HE, Varnell ED,
echothiophate iodide on intraocular
2:213-215.
Thompson HW (1998) Trifluridine,
 pressure and pupil size in Beagles with
89 Herring IP, Pickett JP, Champagne ES,
cidofovir, and penciclovir in the 
 normotensive eyes and Beagles with
Troy GC, Marini M (2000) Effect of
treatment of experimental herpetic
 inherited glaucoma. American Journat
topical 1% atropine sulfate on
keratitis. Archives of Ophthatmalogy
of Veter inary Research 54:287-293.
intraocular pressure in normal horses.
116:777-780.
 78 Smith PJ, Brooks DE, Lazarus JA,
Veterinary Ophthatmotogy
67 Peiffer R, Harling D {1998) Intravitreal
Kubilis Ps, Norman K {1996) Ocular 
3:139-143.
cidofovir (Vistide) in the management of
 hypertension following cataract surgery
90 Stadtbaumer K, Kostlin RG, Zahn KJ
glaucoma in the dog and cat.
in dogs: 139 cases (1992-1993).
(2002) Effects of topical 0.5%
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
Journat of the American Veter inary
tropicamide on intraocular pressure in
the American Colege of Veterinary
Med icat Association 209:105-111.
normal cats. Veterinary
Ophthaimologists 29:29.
79 Stuhr CM, Miller PE, Murphy CJ,
Ophthaimology 5:107-112.
68 Krohne SG {1994) Effect of topically
 Schoster JV, Thomas CB (1998) Effect
91 Hacker DV, Farver TB {1988) Effects 
applied 2% pilocarpine and 0.25%
 of intracameral administration of
of tropicamide on intraocular pressure
 dermecarium bromide on blood-aqueous
 carbachol on the postoperative increase
 in normal dogs: preliminary studies.
barrier permeability in dogs. American
in intraocular pressure in dogs
Journat of the American Animat
Journat of Veterinary Research
undergoing cataract extraction. Journat
Hospital Association 24:411-415.
55:1729-1733.
of the American Veterinary Medicat
Association 212:1885-1888.
66
OpHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
92 Thompson Hs, Mensher JH (1971)
104 Hollingsworth SR, Canton DD,
116 Kass M, Korey M, Gordon M,
Adrenergic mydriasis in Horner's
Buyukmihci NC, Farver TB (1992)
Becker B {1982) Timolol and
syndrome: the hydroxyamphetamine
 Effect of topically administered
acetazolamide: a study of concurrent
test for diagnosis of postganglionic
 atropine on tear production in dogs.
administration. Archives of
defects. American Journat of
Journat of the American Veter inary
Ophthatmotogy 100:941-942.
Ophthatmo logy 72:472-480.
Medicat Association 200:1481-1484.
 117 Nelson W {1986) Adverse respiratory
93 Skarf B, Czarnecki Js {1982)
105 McLaughlin SA, Whitlely RD,
and cardiovascular events attributed to
Distinguishing postganglionic from
 Gilger BC (1991) Ophthalmic atropine
timolol ophthalmic solution,
 preganglionic lesions: studies in rabbits
in horses: is colic a serious problem?
1978-1985. American Journal of
with surgically-produced Horner's
Equine Veterinary Education 3:94-96.
Ophthatmotogy 102:606-611.
syndrome. Archives of Ophthatmotogy
106 Pascoe PJ, Elkiw JE, Stiles J, Smith E
118 Arthur B, Hay G, Wasan S, Willis W
100:1319-1322.
{1994) Arterial hypertension associated
{1983) Ultrastructural effects of topical
94 Gelatt KN, Boggess II TS, Cure TH
with topical ocular use of 
timolol on the rabbit cornea. Archives
{1973) Evaluation of mydriatics in the
phenylephrine in dogs. Journat of the
of Ophthatmology 101:1607-1610.
cat. Joturnat of the American Animat
Amer ican Veterinary Medicat
119 Robbins R, Galin MA (1969) Effect 
Hospitat Association 9:283-287.
Association 205:1562-1564.
 of osmotic agents on the viteous body.
95 Hacker DV, Buyukmihci NC,
107 Willis M, Martin CL, Stiles J.
Archives of Ophthatmology
Franti CE, Bellhorn RW (1987) Effect
Chaffin K (1997) Acute, transient
82:694-699.
 of topical phenylephrine on the equine
 sialoadenomegaly in two cats following
120 Lorimer DW, Hakanson NE, Pion PD,
pupil. Armerican Journat of Veterinary
topical administration of tropicamide.
 Merideth RE (1989) The effect of
Research 48:320-322.
Veterinary Comparative
intravenous mannitol or oral glycerol 
96 Gelatt KN, Gum GG, MacKay EO
Ophthatmology 7:206-208.
on intraocular pressure in dogs.
{1995) Evaluation of mydriatics in
108 Novack G (1989) Beta-blockers in
Cornell Veter imarian 79:249-258.
cattle. Veter inary Comparative
 ophthalmology. Clinics of North
121 Maren TH (1976) The rates of
Ophthatmology 5:46-49.
Amer ica 2:77-96.
 movement of NA+, CL-, and HCO3
97 Boydell P (1999) The accuracy of
109 Allen RC, Hertzmark E, Walker AM,
from plasma to posterior chamber:
 denervation hypersensitivity testing
Epstein DL (1986) A double-masked
effect of acetazolamide and relation to
with 10% phenylephrine eyedrops in
comparison of betaxolol vs. timolol in
the treatment of glaucoma.
Horner's syndrome in the dog.
the treatment of open-angle glaucoma.
Investigative Ophthatmotogy and
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
American Journat of Ophthatmology
Visuat Science 15:356-364.
the American Cotlege of Veter inary
101:535-541.
122 Friedman Z, Krupin T, Becker B
Ophthatmo logists 30:49.
110 Liu H, Chiou G, Garg L (1980)
{1982) Ocular and systemic effects of 
98 Mindel JS (1995) Alpha-adrenergic
Ocular hypotensive effects of timolol in 
acetazolamide in nephrectomized
drugs. In: Dtuane's Foundations of
cat eyes. Archives of Ophthatmology
rabbits Investigative Ophthatmology
Clinicat Ophthatmology. W Tasman,
98:1467-1469.
and Visuat Science 23:209-213.
EA Jaeger (eds). Lippencott-Raven,
111 Pickett J, Majors L {1989) Short-term 
123 Wistrand PJ, Schenholm M,
Philadelphia, pp. 1-24.
and long-term effects of topical timolol
Lonnerholm G (1986) Carbonic
99 Miller PE, Nelson MJ, Rhaesa SL
 maleate and betaxolol on intraocular
anhydrase isoenzymes CA I and CA II
{1996) Effects of topical administration
 pressure, heart rate, and blood pressure
in the human eye. Investigative
of 0.5% apraclonidine on intraocular
in normal dogs. Proceedings of the
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
pressure, pupil size, and heart rate in
Scientific Meeting of the American
27:419-428.
clinically normal dogs. American 
College of Veterinary
124 Gerding P, Essex-Sorlie D {1991)
Jotarnat of Veterinary Research
Oph thatmologists 20:115.
 Effects of intracameral injection of 
57:79-82.
112 Gum G, Larocca R, Gelatt K, Mead J,
tissue plaminogen activator on
100 Miller PE, Rhaesa SL {1996) Effects
Gelatt J (1991) The effect of topical
intraocular pressure, corneal
 of topical administration of 0.5%
timolol maleate on intraocular pressure 
endothelium, and fibrin in dogs.
 apraclonidine on intraocular pressure,
in normal Beagles with inherited
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
 pupil size, and heart rate in clinically
glaucoma. Progress in Veter inary and
the American College of Veterinary
normal cats. American Journat of
Comparative Ophthatology
Ophthatmotogists 22:90.
Veter inary Research 57:83-86.
1:141-148.
125 Remis LL {1994) Carbonic anhydrase 
101 Gelatt KN, MacKay EO (2002) Effect
113 Wilkie D, Latimer C {1991) Effects of 
inhibitors. In: Principles and Practice of
of single and multiple doses of 0.2%
topical administration of timolol
Ophthatmology: Basic Sciences.
brimonidine tartrate in the
 maleate on intraocular pressure and
DM Albert, FA Jakobiec (eds). WB
 glaucomatous Beagle. Veterinary
pupil size in dogs. American Journal of
Saunders, Philadelphia, pp.
Ophthatmo togy 5:253-262.
Veterinary Research 52:432-435.
1070-1075.
102 Williams MM, Spiess BM, Pascoe PJ,
114 Wilkie D, Latimer C {1991) Effects of
126 Stein A, Pinke R, Krupin T, et at.
 O'Grady M (2000) Systemic effects of
topical administration of timolol 
{1983) The effect of topically
topical and subconjunctival ophthalmic
 maleate on intraocular pressure and
administered carbonic anhydrase
 atropine in the horse. Veter inary
pupil size in cats. American Journat of
 inhibitors on aqueous humor dynamics
Ophthatmmo logy 3: 193-199.
Veterinary Research 52:436-444.
in rabbits. American Journat of
103 Herring IP, Pickett JP, Champagne ES,
115 Higgins R, Brubaker R {1980) Acute
Ophthatmology 95:222-228.
Troy GC (1997) The effect of topical
 effect of epinephrine on aqueous
127 Bar-Ilan A, Pessah NI, Maren TH
atropine sulfate on intraocular pressure
humor formation in the timolol-treated
{1984) The effects of carbonic
in the normal horse. Proceedings of the
normal eye as measured by
 anhydrase inhibitors on aqueous
Scientific Meeting of the American
fuorophotometry. Investigative
humor chemistry and dynamics.
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
Investigative Ophthatmotogy and
Ophthatmo logists 28:53.
19:420-423.
Visuat Science 25:1198-1204.
OPHTHALMIC PHARMACOLOGY
67
128 Flach AJ, Peterson JS, Seligmann KA
140 Quinn RF, Keller CB, Tingey DP
153 Krohne S, Gionfriddo J, Morrison E
{1984) Local ocular hypotensive effect
{1994) Evidence of sulfhydry)
{1998) Inhibition of pilocarpine-
of topically applied acetazolamide.
reactivity in cells cultured from the
induced aqueous humor flare,
American Journat of Ophthatmotogy
canine iridocorneal angle. Veterinary
hypotony, and miosis by topical
98:66-72.
Comparative Ophthatmology
administration of anti-inflammatory
129 Pfeiffer N (1997) Dorzolamide:
4:149-154.
and anesthetic drugs to dogs.
development and clinical application
141 Quinn RF, Keller CB, Yamashiro S,
American Journat of Veterinary
of a topical carbonic anhydrase
Tingey DP (1994) The effects of
Research 59:482-488.
inhibitor. Survey of Ophthatmology
ethacrynic acid on the facility of
' d ' z 1 4 t1
42:137-151.
 aqueous outflow in the enucleated
 Schopf E, Vanscheidt W, Norgauer J
130 Wayman L, Larsson LI, Maus T,
canine eye. Veterinary Comparative
(2000) Matrix metalloproteinases and
Alm A, Brubaker RB {1997)
Ophthaimology 4:155-159.
venous leg ulceration. European
Comparison of dorzolamide and
142 Keller CH {1997) The effect of
Journat of Dermatology 10:173-180.
timolol as suppressors of aqueous
topical ethacrynic acid on the
155 Schultz Gs, Strelow S, Stern GA,
humor flow in humans. Archives of
 jntraocular pressure in normal dogs: a
Chegini N {1992) Treatment of alkali-
Ophthatmotogy 115:1368-1371.
pilot study. Proceedings of the
injured rabbit corneas with a synthetic
131 Cawse MA, Ward DA, Hendrix D
Scientific Meeting of the American
inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinases.
{1999) Effects of topically applied 2%
Cottege of Veterinary
Investigative Ophthatmotogy and
 dorzolamide on intraocular pressure
Ophthatmotogists 28:11.
Visuat Science 33:3325-3331.
and aqueous humor flow in normal
143 Vaughan DG (1955) Contamination 
156 Barletta J, Angella G, Balch KC,
dogs. Proceedings of the Scientific
 of fluorescein solutions. Arerican
Dimova HG (1996) Inhibition of 
Meeting of the American Cottege of
Jou rnal of Ophthatmotogy 39:55-61.
pseudomonal ulceration in rabbit 
Veterinary Ophthatmotogists 30:48.
144 Kommonen B, Koskinen L (1984)
corneas by a synthetic matrix
132 Willis AM, Robbin TE, Wilkie DA
 Fluorescein angiography of the canine
metalloproteinase inhibitor.
{1999) Effect of topical dorzolamide
ocular fundus in ketamine-xylazine
Investigative Ophthatmotogy and
and dorzolamide-timolol on 
 anesthesia. Acta Veterinarid
Visuat Science 37:20-28.
 intraocular pressure in normal horse
Scandinavica 25:346-351.
157 Foster CS, Zelt RP, Mai-Phan T,
eyes. Proceedings of the Scientific
145 Schnider CM (2001) Dyes. In:
Kenyon KR {1982)
Meeting of the American Coltege of
Clinicat Ocutar Pharmacology, 4th
Immunosuppression and selective
Veterinary Ophthatmologists 30:48.
edn. JD Bartlett, SD Jannus (eds).
 inflammatory cell depletion. Archives
133 Rainbow ME, Dziezyc J (2001)
 Butterworth Heinemann, Boston,
of Ophthatmology 100:1820-1824.
 Effects of 2% dorzolamide on
pp. 349-366.
158 Seng WL, Kenyon KR, Wolf G
intraocular pressure in cats.
146 Feenstra R, Tseng S (1992)
{1982) Studies on the source and
Comparison of fluorescein and rose
release of collagenase in thermally
of the American Cotlege of Veterinary
bengal staining. Ophthatmotogy
burned corneas of vitamin A-deficient
Ophthatmologists 32:5.
99:605-617.
and control rats. Investigative
134 Ingram CJ, Brubaker R {1999) Effect 
147 Gelatt KN (1972) Vital staining of
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
 of brinzolamide and dorzolamide on
 the canine cornea and conjunctiva
22:62-72.
aqueous humor flow in human eyes.
with rose bengal. Journat of the
159 Brown SI, Weller CA {1970) Cell
American Journat of Ophthatmology
American Animat Hospitat
 origin of collagenase in normal and
128:292-296.
Association 8:17-22.
wounded corneas. Archives of
135 Kass MA, Kolker AE, Gordon M, et
148 Horiguchi M, Miyake K, Ohta I,
Ophthatrotogy 83:74-76.
αl. {1981) Acetazolamide and
Ito Y (1998) Staining of the lens
160 Berman M, Leary R, Gage J (1980)
urolithiasis. Ophthatmology
capsule for circular continuous
Evidence for a role of the plasminogen 
88:261-265.
 capsulorrhexis in eyes with white
activator-plasmin system in corneal
136 Fraunfelder FT, Meyer SM,
cataracts. Archives of Ophthatmotogy
uceration. Investigative
Bagby Jr GC, Dreis MW (1985)
116:535-537.
Ophthatmology and Visual Science
Hematologic reactions to carbonic
149 Silverman BS (2000) Anterior
19:1204-1221.
anhydrase inhibitors. American
capsule staining with indocyanine
161 Wang H, Berman M, Law M (1985)
Journat of Ophthatmotogy 100:79-81.
 green for continuous curvilinear
 Latent and active plasminogen activator
137 Carlsen J, Durcan J, Zabriskie N,
capsulorrhexis. Proceedings of the
in corneal ulceration. Investigative
Crandall A {1999) Nephrolithiasis
Scientific Meeting of the American
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
with dorzolamide. Archives of
Cotlege of Veterinary
26:511-524.
Ophthatmology 117:1087-1088.
Ophthatmologists 31:5.
162 Strubbe DT, Brooks DE, Schultz GS,
138 Konowal A, Morrison JC, Brown
150 Gundersen T, Liebman SD (1944)
et αf. (2000) Evaluation of tear film
SVL, et af. (1999) Irreversible corneal
 Effect of local anesthetic on 
proteinases in horses with ulcerative
 decompensation in patients treated
regeneration of corneal epithelium.
keratitis. Veterinary Ophthatmology
with topical dorzolamide. American
Archives of Ophthatmotogy 31:29.
3:111-119.
Journai of Ophthatmology
151 Maurice DM, Singh T {1985) The
 163 Clark AF (1998) New discoveries on
127:403-406.
 absence of corneal toxicity on low-
the roles of matrix metalloproteinases in
139 Schnyder CC, Tran VT, Mermoud A,
level topical anesthesia. American
cular cell biology and pathology.
Herbort CP {1999) Sterile
Journal of Ophthatmology
Investigative Ophthatmotogy and Visuat
 mucopurulent conjunctivitis associated
99:691-696.
Science 39:2514-2516.
with the use of dorzolamide eyedrops.
152 Rubin LF, Gelatt KN (1967) Corneal
164 Brown SI, Weller CA, Vidrich AM
Archives of Ophthatmology
epithelial sloughing in dogs with
{1970) Effect of corticosteroids on
117:1429-1431.
glaucoma. Journat of the American
corneal collagenase of rabbits. American
Veterinary Medicat Association
Journat of Ophthatmotogy 70:744-747.
151:1449-1452.
68
OpHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
165 Olliviero FJ, Brooks DE,
175 Sugar A, Waltman SR {1973)
186 Zhan GL, Miranda OC, Bito LZ
Kallberg ME, et af. (1992) In vitro
Corneal toxicity of collagenase
{1992) Steroid glaucoma:
effects of EDTA, doxycycline, N-
inhibitors. Investigative
corticosteroid-induced ocular
acetylcysteine, ilomastat, and alpha-1
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
hypertension in cats. Experimentat
 proteinase inhibitor on matrix
12:779-782.
Eye Research 54:211-218.
 metalloproteinase activity in the tear
176 Abelson MB, Allansmith MR,
187 Bhattacherjee P, Paterson CA,
film of horses with ulcerative keratitis.
Friedlaender MH {1980) Effects of
Spellman JM, Graff G, Yanni JM
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting
topically applied decongestant and
(1999) Pharmacological validation of
of the American Caltege of Veterinary
antihistamine. Ammerican Journal of
a feline model of steroid-induced
Ophthatmotogists 33:55.
Ophthatmotogy 90:254-257.
ocular hypertension. Archives of
166 Hook CW, Brown SI, Iwanij W,
177 Leibowitz HM, Kupferman A {1974)
Ophthatmotogy 117:361-364.
 Nakanishi I {1971) Characterization
Anti-inflammatory effectiveness in the
188 Taravella MJ, Stulting D, Mader TH,
 and inhibition of corneal collagenase.
cornea of topically administered
Weisenthal RW (1994) Calcific band
Investigative Ophthatmotogy
prednisolone. Investigative 
keratopathy associated with the use of
10:496-503
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
topical steroid-phosphate
167 Pfister RR, Haddox JL, Dodson RW,
13:757-763.
 preparations. Archives of
Deshazo WF (1984)
178 Apt L, Henrick A, Silverman LM
Ophthaimology 112:608-613.
 Polymorphonuclear leukocytic
{1979) Patient compliance with use of
189 Masferrer J, Kulkarni P {1997)
inhibition by citrate, other metal
topical ophthalmic corticosteroid
Cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors: a new
chelators, and trifluoperazine.
suspensions. American Journat of
approach to the therapy of ocular
Investigative Ophthatmology and
Ophthatmology 87:210-214.
inflammation. Survey of
Visuat Science 25:955-970.
179 Roberts SM, Lavach JD, Macy DW,
Ophthaimotogy 41:35-40.
168 Berman M (1975) Collagenase
Severin GA (1984) Effect of
190 Stjernschantz J {1984) Autocoids and 
inhibitors: rationale for their use in
ophthalmic prednisolone acetate on
neuropeptides. In: Pharmacology of
treating corneal ulceration. In:
the canine adrenal gland and hepatic
the Eye. ML Sears (ed). Springer-
Internationat Ophthatmology Clinics.
function. American Journal of
Verlag, New York, pp. 311-350.
D Pavan (ed). Little Brown, Boston,
Veterinary R esearch 45:1711-1714.
191 Flower R {1981) Glucocorticoids,
pp. 49-66.
180 Eichenbaum JD, Macy DW.
 phospholipase Az, and inflammatory
169 Brooks DE, Olliviero FJ, Schultz GS,
 Severin GA, Paulsen ME (1988) Effect
trends. Pharmacology and Science
et af. (2002) Duration of in vitro
in large dogs of ophthalmic
2:186-189.
inhibitory activity of equine serum
 prednisolone acetate on adrenal gland
192 Brightman AH, Helper LC,
 against equine tear film matrix
and hepatic function. Journat of the
Hoffman WE (1981) Effect of aspirin
metalloproteinases. Proceedings of the
American Animat Hospitat
on aqueous protein values in the dog.
Scientific Meeting of the American
Association 24:705-709.
Journat of the American Veterinary
College of Veterinary Ophthalmologists
181 Murphy CJ, Feldman E, Bellhorn R
Medicat Association 178:572-573.
33:54.
{1990) Iatrogenic Cushing's syndrome
193 Regnier A, Bonnefoi M, Lescure F
170 Pfister RR, Paterson CA {1977)
 in a dog caused by topical ophthalmic
{1984) Effect of lysine-acetylsalicylate
 Additional clinical and morphological
medications. Journat of the American
and phenylbutazone premedication on
observations on the favorable effect of
Animat Hospitat Association
the protein content of secondary
 ascorbate in experimental ocular
26:640-642.
aqueous humour in the dog. Research
alkali burns. Investigative
182 Glaze MB, Crawford MA,
in Veterinary Science 37:26-29.
Ophthaimology and Visuat Science
Nachreiner RF, Casey HW, Nafe LA,
194 Forrester SD, Troy GC {1999) Renal
16:478-487.
Kearney MT (1998) Ophthalmic
effects of nonsteroidal anti-
171 Pfister RR, Nicolaro ML,
 inflammatory drugs. Comp endiur on
Paterson CA {1981) Sodium citrate
in the dog. Journat of the American
Continuing Edtucation for the
reduces the incidence of corneal
Veterinary Medicat Association
Practicing Veterinarian 21:910-919.
ulcerations and perforations in
192:73-75.
195 Regnier A, Whitley RD, Benard P,
extreme alkali-burned eyes:
183 Regnier A, Toutain PL, Alvinerie M,
Bonnefoi M (1986) Effect of flunixin
 acetylcysteine and ascorbate have no
 Periquet B, Ruckebusch Y (1982)
meglumine on the breakdown of the
favorable effect. Investigative
Adrenocortical function and plasma
blood-aqueous barrier following
uas ponsia puo Csojouido
 biochemical values in dogs after
paracentesis in the canine eye. Journat
21:486-490.
subconjunctival treatment with
of Ocular Pharmacotogy 2:165-170.
172 Phan TM, Zelt RP, Kenyon KR,
methylprednisolone acetate. Research
196 Krohne SDG, Vestre WA {1987)
Chakrabarti B, Foster CS (1985)
in Veterinary Science 32:306-310.
 Effects of flunixin meglumine and
Ascorbic acid therapy in a thermal
184 Fischer CA (1979) Granuloma
dexamethasone on aqueous protein
burn model of corneal ulceration in
formation associated with
values after intraocular surgery in the
rabbits. American Journat of
 subconjunctival injection of a
dog. American Journat of Veterinary
Ophthatmology 99:74-82.
corticosteroid in dogs. Journat of the
Research 48:420-422.
173 Seedor JA, Perry HD, Mcnamara TF,
American Veterinary Medicat
197 Millichamp NJ, Dziezyc J (1991)
Golub LM, Buxton DF, Guthrie DS
Association 174:1086-1088.
Comparison of flunixin meglumine
{1987) Systemic tetracycline treatment
185 Martin C (1971) The effect of
and flurbiprofen for control of ocular
 of alkali-induced corneal ulceration in
topical vitamin A, antibiotic, mineral
irritative response in dogs. American
rabbits. Archives of Ophthatmology
oil, and subconjunctival steroid on
Jotrnat of Veterinary Research
105:268-271.
corneal epithelial wound healing in
52:1452-1455.
174 Levy JH, Katz HR {1990) Effect of 
the dog. Journat of the American
198 Lee BB, Kuperman A, Leibowitz HM
systemic tetracycline on progression of
Veterinary Medicat Association
{1985) Effect of suprofen on corneal
Pseudomonas deruginosa keratitis in
159:1392-1399.
wound healing. Archives of
the rabit. Annats of Ophthatmology
Ophthaimology 103:95-97.
22:179-183.
OPHTHALMIC PHARMACOLOGY
69
199 Leibowitz HM, Ryan WJ,
 210 Weinreb R, Kashiwagi F.
222 Latimer C, Wyman M, Szymanski C
Kupferman A, Desantis L {1986)
Tsukahara S, Lindsey J (1997)
{1983) Azathioprine in the
 Effect of concurrent topical
Prostaglandins increase matrix
management of fibrous histiocytoma
corticosteroid and NSAID therapy of
 metalloproteinase release from human
in two dogs. Jotrnat of the Armerican
experimental keratitis. Investigative
ciliary smooth muscle cells.
Animat Hospitat Association 19:155.
Ophthamology and Visuat Science
Investigative Ophthatmology and
223 Bussanich M, Rootman J, Kumi C,
27:1226-1229.
Visuat Science 38:2772-2780.
Gudauskas G {1985) Ocular
200 Millichamp NJ, Dziezyc J, Olsen JW
211 Gelatt KN, MacKay EO (2001)
absorption and toxicity of 
{1991) Effect of flurbiprofen on
Effect of different dose schedules of
methotrexate in the dog. Canadian
facility of aqueous outflow in the eyes
latanaprost on intraocular pressure
Veterinary Joturnat 26:263-266.
of dogs. American Journat of
and pupil size in the glaucomatous
224 Wiederholt M, Kossendrup D,
Veterinary Research 52:1448-1451.
Beagle. Veterinary Ophthatmology
Schulz W, Hoffmann F {1986)
201 Ward DA, Ferguson DC, Ward SL,
4:283-288
Pharmacokinetics of topical
Green K, Kaswan RL {1992)
212 Diehl KA, Willis AM, Hoshaw-
cyclosporine in the rabbit eye.
Comparison of the blood-aqueous
Woodard S, Kobayashi I, Vittuci M,
Investigative Ophthatmology and
barrier stabilizing effects of steroidal
Schmall M (2000) Effect of topical
Visuat Science 27:519-524.
and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
 0.005% latanoprost on normal eyes of 
225 Kaswan R, Martin C, Gardner S
agents in the dog. Progress in
horses. Proceedings of the Scientific
{1987) Pharmacokinetics of
Veterinary and Comparative
Meeting of the American Coltege of
ophthalmic cyclosporin. Proceedings
Ophthaimology 2:1i7-124.
Veterinary Ophthatmologists 31:15.
of the 2nd Internationat Congress on
202 Dziezyc J, Millichamp NJ, Smith WB
213 Studer M, Martin C, Stiles J {2000)
Cyctosporine 2:59.
{1995) Effect of flurbiprofen and
The effect of latanoprost 0.005% on
226 Kaswan R, Kaplan H, Martin C
corticosteroids on the ocular irritative
intraocular pressure in normal feline
[1988) Topically applied cyclosporin
response in dogs. Veterinary
and canine eyes. American Journat of
for modulation of induced
Comparative Ophthatmology
Veterinary Research 61:1220-1224.
immunogenic uveitis in rabbits.
5:42-45.
214 Rowe J, Hattenhauer M, Herman D
American Journal of Veterinary
203 Szerenyi K, Sorken K, Garbus J,
{1997) Adverse side-effects associated
Research 49:1757-1759.
 Lee M, McDonnell P {1994) Decrease
with latanoprost. American Journal of
227 Gratzek A, Kaswan R, Martin C,
in normal human corneal sensitivity
Ophthatmology 124:683-685.
Champagne E, White S (1995)
with topical diclofenac sodium.
215 Warwar R, Bullock J, Ballal D
Ophthalmic cyclosporine in equine 
American Journat of Ophthatmotogy
(1998) Cystoid macular edema and
keratitis and keratouveitis: 11 cases.
118:312-315.
anterior uveitis associated with
Equine Veterinary Jotrnat
204 Guidera AC, Luchs JI, Udell IJ
Jatanoprost use. Ophthatmology
27:327-333.
{2001) Keratitis, ulceration, and
105:263-268.
228 Sansom J, Barnett K, Neumann W,
 perforation associated with topical
 216 Kaufman HE, Varnell ED,
Schulte-Neumann S, Clerc B {1995)
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
Thompson HW (1999) Latanoprost
Treatment of keratoconjunctivitis sicca 
Ophthaimology 108:936-944.
increases the severity and recurrence
 in dogs with cyclosporine ophthalmic
205 Spiess BM, Mathis GA, Leber A
of herpetic keratitis in the rabbit.
 ointment: a European clinical field
{1991) Kinetics of uptake and effects
American Journat of Ophthatmology
trial. Veterinary Record 137:504-507.
 of topical indomethacin application
127:531-536.
229 Wiliams D, Hoey A, Smitherman P
on protein concentration in the
217 Allansmith M, Ross R {1986) Ocular
{1995) Comparison of topical
aqueous humor of dogs. American
allergy and mast cell stabilizers.
cyclosporine and dexamethasone for
Joturnat of Veterinary Research
Survey of Ophthatmology
the treatment of chronic superficial
52:1159-1163.
30:229-244.
keratitis in dogs. Veterinary Research
206 Regnier AM, Dossin O, Cutzack EE,
 218 Nussenblatt R, Palestine A (1986)
137:635-639.
Gelatt KN (1995) Comparative effects
Cyclosporine: immunology.
230 Yoshida A, Fujihara T, Nakata K
of two formulations of indomethacin 
pharmacology, and therapeutic uses.
{1999) Cyclosporin A increases tear
eyedrops on the paracentesis-induced
Survey of Ophthatmology
fluid secretion via release of sensory
inflammatory response of the canine 
31:159-169.
neurotransmitters and muscarinic
eye. Veterinary and Comparative
219 Stanton M, Legendre A {1986)
pathway in mice. Experimentat Eye 
Ophthatmology 15:242-246.
 Effects of cyclophosphamide in dogs
Research 68:541-546.
 207 Krohne SG, Blair MJ, Bingaman D,
 and cats. Journat of the American
231 Salisbury M, Kaswan R, Ward D,
Gionfriddo JR (1998) Carprofen
Veterinary Medicai Association
 Martin C {1990) Topical application of
inhibition of flare in the dog measured
188:1319-1322.
cyclosporine in the management of
by laser flare photometry. Veterinary
220 Beale KM (1988) Azathioprine for
keratoconjunctivitis sicca in dogs.
Ophthaimology 1:81-84.
treatment of immune-mediated
Journat of the American Animat
208 Patel S, Spencer C (1996)
diseases of dogs and cats. Journat of
Hosp itat Association 26:269-274.
Latanoprost: a review of its
the American Veterinary Medicat
232 Morgan R, Abrams K (1991) Topical
pharmacological properties, clinical
Association 192:1316-1318.
administration of cyclosporine for
efficacy, and tolerability in the
221 Foster SC (1994) Pharmacologic
treatment of keratoconjunctivitis sicca in
 management of primary open-angle
treatment of immune disorders. In:
dogs. Journat of the American Veterinary
glaucoma and ocular hypertension.
Principtes and Practice of
Medicat Association 199:1043-1046.
Drugs and Aging 9:363-378.
Ophthatmology: Basic Sciences. D
233 Olivero D, Davidson M, English R,
209 Lindsey J, Kashiwagi K, Kashiqagi F,
Albert, F Jakobiec (eds). WB
Nasisse M, Jamieson V, Gerig T (1991)
Weinreb R (1997) Prostaglandins alter
Saunders, Philadelphia, pp.
 Clinical evaluation of 1% cyclosporine 
extracellular matrix adjacent to
1076-1084.
for topical treatment of
human ciliary muscle cells in vitro.
keratoconjunctivitis sicca in dogs.
Investigative Ophthaimotogy and
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
Visual Science 38:2214-2223.
Medicat Association 199:1039-1042.
70
OpHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
234 Gilger BC, Wilkie DA, Davidson MG,
246 Robin JS, Ellis PP (1978) Ophthalmic
258 Hillman JS, Jacobs SI, Garnett AJ,
 Allen JB {2001) Use of an intravitreal
 ointments. Survey of Ophthatmology
Kheskani MB (1979) Gentamicin
sustained-release cyclosporine delivery
22:335-340.
penetration and decay in the human
 device for treatment of equine recurrent
 247 Hanna C, Fraunfelder F, Cable M,
aqueous. British Journat of
uveitis. American Journal of Veterinary
Hardberger R (1973) The effects of
Ophthatmology 63:794-796.
Research 62:1892-1896.
 ophthalmic ointments on corneal wound
259 Saunders JH, McPherson Jr SD (1980)
235 Chambers L, Fischer C, McCalla T,
healing. American Journat of
 Ocular penetration of cefazolin in
Parshall C, Slatter D, Yakley B {2002)
 Ophthatmotogy 76:193-200.
humans and rabbits after 
Topical tacrolimus in treatment of canine
248 Cox WV, Kupferman A, Leibowitz HM
subconjunctival injection. Armerican
keratoconjunctivitis sicca: a multicenter
{1972) Topically applied steroids in
Journat of Ophthatmology 89:564-566.
 preliminary clinical trial. Poster
corneal disease. Archives of
260 Sigel CW, Macklin AW, Grace ME,
Presentation at the Scientific Meeting of
Ophthatmology 88:549-552.
 Tracy CH (1981) Trimethoprim and
the American College of Veterinary
249 Bloome MA, Golden B, McKee AP
sulfadiazine concentrations in aqueous
Opthatmologists. Denver.
{1970) Antibiotic concentration in ocular
and vitreous humors of the dog.
236 Johnson R, Olsen K, Hernandez E
tissues penicillin G and
Veterinary Medicine/Smalt Animat
{1988) Tissue plasminogen activator
dihydrostreptomycin. Archives of
Clinician 76:991-993.
 treatment of postoperative intraocular
Ophthatmology 83:78-83.
261 Borden TB, Cunningham RD (1982)
fibrin. Ophthatmology 95:592-596.
250 Rowley RA, Rubin LF {1970) Aqueous
Tobramycin levels in aqueous humor
237 Jaffe G (1989) Treatment of 
humor penetration of several antibiotics
after subconjunctival injection in
postvitrectomy fibrin pupillary block
in the dog. Armerican Journat of
humans. American Journat of
with tissue plasminogen activator.
Veterinary Research 31:43-49.
Ophthatmology 93:107-110.
American Journat of Ophthatnology
251 Pohjanpelto PEJ, Sarmela TJ, Raines T
262 Hulem CD, Old SE, Zeleznick LD,
108:170-175.
(1974) Penetration of trimethoprim and
Leopold IH {1982) Intraocular
238 Martin C, Kaswan R, Gratzek A,
sulfamethoxazole into the aqueous
 penetration of rosoxacin in rabbits.
Champagne E, Salisbury M, Ward D
humor. British Journat of
Archives of Ophthatmology
{1993) Ocular use of tissue plasminogen
Ophthatmology 58:606-608.
100:646-649.
 acitvator in companion animals.
252 Purnell WD, McPherson Jr SD (1974)
263 Tabbara KF, Ghosher R, O'Conner R
Progress in Veterinary and Comparative
 The effect of tobramycin on rabbit eyes.
{1983) Ocular tissue absorption of
Ophthatrnology 3:29-36.
American Journat of Ophthatmotogy
minocycline in the rabbit. Archives of
239 Sternberg PL, Aguilar H, Drews C,
77:578-582.
Ophthatmotogy 101:1426-1428.
Aaberg T (1990) The effect of tissue
253 Rieder J, Ellerhorst B, Schwartz DE
264 Wingfield DL, McDougal RL, Roy FH,
plasminogen activator on retinal
 (1974) Ubergang von sulfamethoxazol
 Hanna C (1983) Ocular penetration of
bleeding. Archives of Ophthatmology
und trimethoprim in das
amikacin following intramuscular
108:720-722.
 augenkammmerwasser beim menschen.
injection. Archives of Ophthatmology
240 Howard G {1991) Intraocular tissue 
Albrecht von Graefes Archiv fut
101:117-120.
 plasminogen activator in a rabbit model
Klinische und Experimentelle
265 Jay WM, Shockley RK, Aziz AM,
of traumatic hyphema. Archives of
Ophthatmotogie 190:51-61.
Aziz MZ, Rissing JP {1984) Ocular 
Ophthatmmology 109:272-274.
254 Faigenbaum SJ, Boyle GL, Prywes AS,
 pharmacokinetics of ceftriazone
241 Johnson M (1990) Retinal toxicity of
Abel Jr R, Leopold IH (1976)
following subconjunctival injection in 
recombinant tissue plaminogen activator 
Intaocular penetration of amoxicillin.
rabbits. Archives of Ophthatmotogy
 in the rabbit. Archives of
American Journal of Ophthatmology
102:430-432.
Ophthatmology 108:259-266.
82:598-603.
266 Daily MJ, Peyman GA, Fishman G
 242 Lim J (1991) Intraocular penetration of
255 George FJ, Hanna C (1977) Ocular
{1973) Intravitreal injection of
 topical tissue plasminogen activator.
 penetration of chloramphenicol.
methicillin for treatment of
Archives of Ophthatmotogy
Archives of Ophthatmology
endophthalmitis. American Journal of
109:714-717.
95:879-882.
Ophthatmology 76:343-350.
243 Mittra R, Dev S, Nasir M, Toth C
256 Barza MB, Kane AB, Baum J (1978)
267 Rutgard JJ, Berkowitz RA, Peyman GA
(1997) Recombinant hirudin prevents 
Intraocular penetration of gentamicin
(1978) Intravitreal cephalothin in
postoperative fibrin formation after
after subconjunctival and retrobulbar
experimental staphylococcal
 experimental cataract surgery.
injection. American Journat of
emdophthalmitis. Annats of
Ophthatmology 104:558-561.
Ophthatmotogy 85:541-547.
Ophthatmology 10:293-298.
 244 Liesegang T (1990) Viscoelastic
 257 Kluge RM, Zimmerman T (1978) The
 268 Fisher JP, Civiletto SE, Forster RK
substances in ophthalmology. Survey of
 penetration of antistaphylococcal
{1982) Toxocity, efficacy, and clearance
Ophthatmology 34:268-293.
antibiotics into the aqueous humor of
of intravitreal injected cefazolin. Archives
245 Wilkie DA, Willis AM (1999)
rabbits. Annats of Ophthatmology
of Ophthatmology 100:650-652.
Viscoelastic materials in veterinary
10:1248-1251.
269 Fett DR, Silverman CA, Yoshizumi MO
ophthalmology. Veterinary
(1984) Moxalactam retinal toxicity.
Ophthatmotogy 2:147-153.
102:435-438.
71
Basic Ocular Pathology
K. Paige Carmichael
OVERVIEW OFINFLAMMATION
+ A mixture of blood and tissue components,
 collectively called the acute inflammatory exudate,
Inflammation is the response of living tissue to injury.
floods the affected area. The exudate carries
Some form of inflammatory response is seen in virtually
proteins, fluid, and cells from local blood vessels into
 all living organisms but the higher life forms have the
the damaged area to mediate local defenses.
unique ability to use the vascular system to transport
If a causative agent, e.g. bacteria or a foreign body,
and deposit fluid and cells in the extravascular space.
is present in the damaged area, it can be contained,
This is known as the inflammatory response. Inflamm-
 destroyed, and/or eliminated by components of the
ation may be due to physical damage, chemical
exudate.
substances, microorganisms, or other agents. The
+
The damaged tissue can be degraded and the debris
inflammatory response consists of changes in blood
removed from the site of damage. The process of
flow, increased permeability of blood vessels,
 and
healing and repair is linked to the inflammatory
escape of cells from the blood into the tissues. The
response, such that the inflammatory response is
changes are essentially the same whatever the cause and
continuous with the process of repair.
wherever the site.
There are no inflammatory reactions that are unique
The globe is a closed system that supports sharing of
to the eye but many of the familiar general
chemical messengers and inhibits removal of these and
inflammatory events are sometimes altered in their
Other potentially harmful humoral and cellular factors2.
expression by factors related to unique ocular anatomy
Injury to any part of the globe may result in an
and physiologyl. Such factors include an unusually
inflammatory or reparative reaction virtually anywhere
strong interdependence between the structural and
else within the globe. Chemical mediators or growth
functional elements of the eye, with intolerance for even
factors produced for use in one part of the globe will 
minor imperfections. For example, corneal disease can
often impact on a distant part of the globe, resulting in
lead to uveal inflammation, which in turn can cause
increased or at least prolonged ocular damage.
lenticular changes. In addition, even mild corneal
Acute inflammation can be divided into vascular and
disease causes a "bystander' anterior uveitis, and
cellular components, even though both components are
inflammatory disease within the uveal tract can change
in reality closely intertwined. The vascular response
the quantity and quality of aqueous humor production,
includes changes in blood flow and vessel caliber, and
lea ding to cataract formation.
the cellular response includes movement of the
Inflammation can be somewhat arbitrarily divided
inflammatory cells from within blood vessels to the
into two phases: acute inflammation and chronic
extravascular space.
inflammation.
VASCULAR EVENTS
Small blood vessels adjacent to the area of tissue
ACUTE INFLAMMATION
damage initially become dilated due to increased blood
flow, followed by a slowing of blood flow along the
Acute inflammation is short-lived, lasting only a few
vessels. In the early stages of inflammation, the affected
hours to days. If it persists for an extended period, then
tissue becomes reddened, due to increased blood flow,
it is referred to as chronic inflammation. Congestion,
 and swollen, due to edema fluid. These changes involve 
edema, and inflammatory cell infiltration characterize
 three main processes:
 acute inflammation. The acute inflammatory response 
+
 Changes in vessel caliber and, consequently, blood
has three main functions:
flow.
+
 Increased vascular permeability.
+
 Formation of the fluid exudate.
72
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
Congestion and hyperemia are terms that refer to
cells must pass through them in single file. The smooth
excessive blood within the vascular system (3.1) due to
muscle of arteriolar walls forms precapillary sphincters
the dilation of blood vessels and increased blood flow to
that regulate blood flow through the capillary bed. Flow
tissues. Hyperemia of the sclera and conjunctiva are one
through the capillaries is intermittent; some precapillary
of the earliest signs of acute ocular inflammation. These
sphincters form preferential channels for flow while
changes may be a sign of either local inflammation or,
others are usually shut down.
because of the interdependence of the structures in the
In blood vessels larger than capillaries, blood cells
eye, inflammation in the cornea or uveal tissues.
flow mainly in the center of the lumen {axial flow), while
 Edema is another manifestation of acute inflamm-
the area near the vessel wall carries only plasma. This
ation. This is the result of increased vascular permeability
feature of normal blood flow keeps blood cells away
and movement of low-protein fluid from within the
from the vessel wall.
vascular component to the extravascular tissues. Edema
Following injury, the initial phase of the vascular
of the cornea results in decreased corneal clarity;
component is vascular constriction, which is transient
therefore, even minor degrees of disruption by edema,
and probably of little importance in acute inflammation.
that in almost any other tissue would be insignificant and
The subsequent phase of vasodilation resulting in
even imperceptible, are significant in the eye?.
hyperemia may last from 15 minutes to several hours,
Serous exudate is not uncommon in early inflam-
depending upon the severity of the injury. Experimental
mation. This exudate consists of serum and plasma
evidence indicates that blood flow to the injured area
proteins that have moved from within the blood vascular
may increase up to tenfold.
system to the extravascular space. This fluid tends to be
higher in protein than the transudate seen with edema.
Increased vascular permeability
(Transudate is fluid low in protein, which is produced
A single layer of endothelial cells line capillaries. In some
primarily by either an increase in hydrostatic pressure or
tissues these form a blood-tissue barrier, composed of a
 decreased blood osmotic pressure without a change 
in
junctions) around the vessel wall. In other tissues there
example of a fluid exudate and it causes retinal
are areas of endothelial cell thinning, known as
detachment,
which can lead to blindness and
fenestrations. There are no tight junctions along the
 photoreceptor degeneration (3.2)1.
 anterior border layer of the iris. The blood-eye barrier is
Any damage to blood vessels can result in fluid
 at the level of the choroidal vascular endothelium3. Thus,
effusion into the globe. Hypertension is an example of
 any inflammatory cells or fluids that exude from the iris
vascular damage that is due to a combination of
vessels almost immediately enter the aqueous humor.
increased blood flow and hypoxia*. This leads to damage
Therefore, any cytokines or growth factors present in the
to the blood vessel (3.3), itself resulting in fluid effusion
 Bos sul aui oi ssaoe aay aaeu lm iounq snoanbe
and hemorrhage.
Heavy accumulation of edema or granulocytes is rarely
seen in the iris, even when there is massive accumulation
Changes in vessel caliber
u jo aouasqg aui oi anp touny snoanbe aul uuim
The microcirculation consists of the network of small
junctions in the anterior border layer of the iris3.
capillaries which lie between arterioles, which have thick
 The blood vessels within the ciliary processes are
muscular walls, and venules, which have thin walls.
freely permeable, and the blood-eye barrier exists at the
Capillaries have no smooth muscle in their walls
to
level of tight junctions between adjacent ciliary epithelial
control their caliber, and are so narrow that red blood
cells. It is thus common to see marked distension of
3.1
3.2
3.1 Histologic section of cerebral blood vessels from a dog. Blood 
 3.2 Histologic section of the subretinal space in the eye of a dog.
vessels are distended with erythrocytes. The interstitial connective
containing eosinophilic fluid consistent with serous effusion (arrow).
tissue is edermatous.
BASIC OCULAR PATHOLOGY
73
ciliary processes with edema during the early stages of
microorganisms, and coagulation factors (such as
inflammation, as the fluid is able to exude through the
fibrinogen), which result in fibrin deposition on contact
vessels but not through the ciliary epithelium'.
with the extravascular tissues. Hence, acutely inflamed
 The walls of small blood vessels act as a microfilter,
organ surfaces are commonly covered by fibrinous
 allowing the passage of water and solutes but blocking
exudate. There is considerable turnover of the
that of large molecules and cells. Oxygen, carbon
inflammatory exudate.
dioxide, and some nutrients transfer across the wall by
Circulating
neutrophils initially become closely
diffusion but the main transfer of fluid and solutes is by
apposed to the endothelium (pavementing), then adhere to
ultrafiltration. The high colloid osmotic pressure inside
the swollen endothelial cells (margination), then actively
the vessel, due to plasma proteins, favors fluid return to
migrate through t
the vessel basement membrane
the vascular compartment.
{emigration), passing into the area of tissue damage. These
events are mediated through expression of ligands on the
Increased vascular permeability in
 blood cel surface that interact with adhesion molecules on
acute inflammation
the endothelium1, 6. These leukocyte and endothelial cell
There are two mechanisms for increased permeability of
adhesion molecules are called selectins and integrins.
small vessels following tissue damage: toxins and
Cytokines control the expression of the adhesion
physical  agents may  cause necrosis of vascular
 molecules and thus orchestrate these cellular events. Later,
endothelium, leading to abnormal leakage finjury-
 small numbers of blood monocytes (macrophages) migrate
induced vascular leakage); and chemical mediators of
in a similar way, as do lymphocytes.
 acute inflammation may cause retraction of endothelial
Theoretically, since the cornea is normally an
cells, leaving intercellular gaps fchemical-mediated
avascular tissue, it cannot undergo inflammation.
vascular leakage).
However, the nomenclature of keratitis' is widespread in
As the vessels become leaky, they permit the passage
the clinical literature, even though many of the
of water, salts, and some small proteins from the plasma
 conditions included under that name are probably not
into the damaged area {exudation). One of the main
truly inflammatory. Neutrophils can gain access to the
proteins to leak out is the small soluble molecule,
cornea from any break in the continuity of the surface
fibrinogen. Endothelial cells swell and partially retract so
epithelium, or by migrating from the limbal blood vessels
that they no longer form a completely intact internal
 in response to any pathogens in the corneal stroma. The
lining. Expression of adhesion molecules on the ca pillary
 presence of inflammatory cells within the stroma can
endothelium allows white blood cells to adhere and
result in the development of bystander stromal injury
eventually migrate.
from granulocytic enzymes, and the production of
leukocyte-associated growth factors that will stimulate
CELLULAREVENTS
 corneal neovascularization and increased inflammatory
In acute inflammation, the capillary hydrostatic pressure
infiltrate. Deep stromal mycotic keratitis is almost
increases and vascular permeability increases, allowing
exclusively a disease of horses. The histologic lesion is
the escape of larger molecules such as plasma proteins
distinctive: a deep stromal purulent keratitis in which the
into the extravascular space. Consequently, much more
neutrophils are always karyorrhectic. They are most
fluid lea ves the vessels than is returned to them, resulting
numerous adjacent to Descemet's membrane, and the
in the net escape of protein-rich (<50 g/l) fluid {exudate).
fungi are also found in greatest numbers adjacent to, or
The proteins present include immunoglobulins, which
within, Descemet's membrane. In many cases this is the
may be important in the destruction of invading
only location in which they can be found. Because the
3.3
3.3 Choroidal blood vessel from a dog with hypertension. The vessel
wall is thickened (arow) and the surrounding choroid is hemorrhagic.
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
lesion is chronic and deep, there is frequently healing of
APPEARANCE OF ACUTEINFLAMMATION
the overlying stroma and epithelium, creating a deep-
Specific descriptive terms are used to describe the
seated stromal "abscess' (3.4, 3.5).
pathologic appearance of acute inflammation.
 Eosinophilic keratoconjunctivitis is another inflam-
matory disease of horses7. Heavy infiltrations of
Serous inflammation
eosinophils into the conjunctiva and, sometimes, the
In serous inflammation there is exudation of abundant
 cornea characterize this disease. The chemotactic agent
protein-rich fluid exudate with a relatively low cellular
for the eosinophils is not well understood.
content, for instance in acute conjunctivitis. Vascular
As previously noted, it is unusual to find large
 dilatation may be apparent to the naked eye, the serous
amounts of granulocytes outside the blood vessels of the
surfaces appearing injected, i.e. having dilated, blood-
uveal tract in early inflammation, due to the impervious
laden vessels on the surface, as in the conjunctiva in
nature of the vasculature. However, significant accumu-
"bloodshot' eyes.
lations of granulocytes are not uncommon in the anterior
chamber (hypopyon) or adhered to the endothelium and
Catarrhal inflammation
the posterior aspect of the cornea {keratic precipitates).
When mucus hypersecretion accompanies acute inflamm-
Blood (hemorrhage) in the anterior chamber is called
 ation of a mucous membrane, the appearance is described 
hyphema (3.6, 3.7).
as catarrhal. This type of inflammation is usually seen in
the acute stage of inflammation in tissue such as the
3.4
3.5
3.4 Histologic section of a cornea from a horse containing a dense
3.5 Increased magnification of 3.4 shows the fungal hyphae (arrows]
accumulation of neutrophils (arrow] consistent with a corneal
in Descemet's membrane deep to the corneal stromal abscess.
stromal abscess. (D, Descemet's membrane.) H&tE.
3.6
3.7
2
3.6 Hyphema in the anterior chamber of the eye of a horse.
 3.7 Photomicrograph of a dog with hyphema showing an
accumulation of free erythrocytes (arrow) in the anterior chamber.
(D, Descemet's membrane; C, corneal stroma.] H&tE.
BASIC OCULAR PATHOLOGY
75
conjunctiva that has goblet (mucus producing) cells. As the
 greenish exudate. Accumulation of pus in the anterior
disease progresses, other inflammatory exudates may be
chamber of the eye is termed hypopyon (3.8).
seen, such as neutrophils (mucopurulent) or fibrin.
Necrotizing inflammation
Fibrinous inflammation
The products of inflammation (such as proteolytic
When the inflammatory exudate contains abundant
 enzymes) and vascular occlusion and thrombosis may
fibrinogen, fibrin polymerizes into a thick fibrin coating.
result in widespread necrosis of the affected organ. The
Exudation of fibrin as well as other proteins frequently
term necrotizing can be used to describe this kind of
Occurs in the anterior chamber of the eye.
inflammation (3.9). As with other types of inflammation,
necrotizing inflammation can occur in conjunction with
Suppurative (purulent) inflammation
 an influx of neutrophils (necropurulent) or hemorrhage
The terms “suppurative’ and “purulent’ denote the
(necrohemorrhagic). In the eye, necrotizing inflammation 
production of pus, which consists of dying and degenerate
is seen most often in association with an infectious agent,
neutrophils, infecting organisms, and liquefied tissues. The
such as bacteria, fungi, and some viruses8, 9, and with
pus may become walled-off by granulation tissue or
 some poorly defined idiopathic lesions10.
fibrous tissue to produce an abscess fa localized collection
of pus in a tissue). This is often seen in cases of canine
CAUSES OF INFLAMMATION
distemper in which the conjunctiva is covered with thick
The most common cause of inflammation is microbial
infection. These microbes include viruses, bacteria,
protozoa, fungi, and parasites. Viruses lead to death of
individual cells by intracellular multiplication. Bacteria
synthesize and release specific exotoxins, which initiate 
inflammation, or endotoxins, which are associated with
3.8
their cell walls. Additionally, some organisms such as
 mediated inflammation through hypersensitivity reactions.
It is important to note here that there is a difference
 between inflammation and infection. Infectious agents can
ca use inflammation but not all inflammatory reactions are
caused by infectious agents. Examples of noninfectious
causes of inflammation are described below.
Hypersensitivity reactions
A hypersensitivity reaction occurs when an altered state
 of immunological responsiveness causes an inappropriate
 or excessive immune reaction that damages the tissues.
Physical agents
Tissue damage leading to inflammation may occur
through physical iperforating or 
blunt) trauma,
3.8 Photograph illustrating hypopyon in the anterior chamber of an
ultraviolet or other ionizing radiation, burns, or
equine eye (arrow]. This is an example of purulent exudate.
excessive cooling ("frostbite'). Trauma to the eye can
Awu asau sasuosan aoeui jo peau e ur insi
include immune-mediated inflammation, such as in lens-
induced uveitis, and inflammation as a result of infection,
3.9
such as in sepsis due to secondary bacterial infection of a
ruptured globe.
Irritant and corrosive chemicals
Corrosive chemicals (acids, alkalis, oxidizing agents)
 provoke inflammation through direct tissue damage. The
eye is susceptible and sensitive to damage by a variety of
corrosive chemicals, damage which often first manifests 
as corneal damage.
Tissue necrosis
Death of tissues from lack of oxygen or nutrients
resulting from inadequate blood flow (infarction) is a
potent inflammatory stimulus. In the cornea, kerato-
malacia is the specific term used to describe liquefactive
necrosis of corneal stroma. This is usually a sequela to
bacterial or fungal contamination, and results from a
3.9 Histologic section of equine choroid showing a large focal area
bystander effect of neutrophilic inflammation, as well as
 of necrosis surrounded by inflammatory cells.
other causes.
76
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
Another form of corneal necrosis is corneal sequestrum
Therefore, when a blood sample is taken, increased num-
{3.10). This is devitalization of the corneal stroma,
bers of neutrophils are counted. Sometimes, increased
usually secondary to ulcerationl1. The condition is most
numbers of monocytes can be present in severe or more
often seen in cats, although a similar lesion has been
chronic inflammation.
described in dogs and horses. In cats, the necrotic stroma 
The major cells in inflammatory responses include:
acquires a characteristic brown/black discoloration. The
mast cells, neutrophils, eosinophils, macrophages,
dead stroma becomes acellular and amorphous and is
endothelial cells, and platelets. These cells react to a
usually surrounded by a thin zone of lytic neutrophils.
variety of signals, stimuli, and irritants in order to
The lesion is slowly extruded through the corneal surface,
orchestrate the inflammatory response.
with gradual turnover of the corneal stroma.
Granulocytes consist of neutrophils, eosinophils, and
basophils.
MANIFESTATIONS OF INFLAMMATION
The manifestations of inflammation include cellular and
Neutrophils
biochemical changes.
Neutrophilic leukocytes are also known as polymorphs,
segmented cells or segs, and polymorphonuclear cells
Cellular changes
(3.11). In some species, notably guinea pigs, birds, rep-
An increased leukocyte count due to an increase in
tiles, and ra bbits, the term heterophil is used to describe
neutrophil count in the peripheral blood often occurs
the functional counterpart. These cells are key cells
in acute inflammatory responses. The leukocytes res-
involved  in  the
 earliest events associated  with
pond to chemical attractants {chemotaxins) originating
inflammation. There are a large number of neutrophils
from the site of injury. Leukocytes are released from
within the body; for instance, a dog has approximately
the bone marrow into the blood in larger numbers than
10°/kg body weight. About half of these are moving
are normally present under the influence of cytokines.
rapidly along with the circulation. Others are sequestered
in vascular eddies or are temporarily lining the vascular
walls (the marginal pool). There are also vast numbers of
mature and nearly mature neutrophils held in reserve in
3.10
the bone marrow (the storage pool).
Neutrophils are formed in the bone marrow from
 granulocytic stem cells, the myeloblasts. The nucleus of
a very immature neutrophil is slightly indented; with
maturity, it assumes a "band’ shape. As the neutrophil
continues to mature, the nucleus becomes hyper-
indented to take on a multilobed configuration with
multiple constrictions.
1
Even with the vast numbers of neutrophils in the
body, there are severe infections in which tissue demand
exceeds the vascular supply. The body responds by
releasing neutrophils from the storage pool in the bone
     a   
increase is called a neutrophilic leukocytosis. If the tissue
demand for neutrophils persists or even increases, many
of the immature forms or "bands' will be released as well.
3.10 Histologic section of feline cornea. The corneal stroma is
This is referred to as a left shift'.
amorphous (arrow] from coagulation necrosis and discolored brown,
There are two main types of cytoplasmic granules in
depicting a corneal sequestrum. H&tE.
neutrophils: azurophilic and neutrophil-specific. Azuro-
philic (or primary) granules contain myeloperoxidase,
lysozyme, defensins, and a variety of neutral proteases.
3.11
These azurophilic granules are generally denser than the
neutrophil-specific granules. Neutrophil-specific, or
secondary granules, contain lysozyme, collagenase,
plasminogen activator, and histaminase. Both types of
 granules fuse with phagosomes to form phagolysosomes,
where digestion of phagocytized material takes place. If
activated, the neutrophil-specific granules may also fuse
with the plasma membrane, releasing their damaging
enzymes out into the extracellular environment.
Neutrophils have a very short half-life; they probably
only survive about 6 hours at a site of inflammation and
last less than a few days in blood. Therefore, the pool
needs to be continually replenished. Neutrophils leave
the blood in response to tissue damage. They migrate
rapidly to where they are needed, and emigrate through
the wall in response to chemotactic signals. Such signals
3.11 Blood smear from a dog showing three mature neutrophils.
include bacterial components, a factor of complement
Note the lack of color in the cytoplasm and the multilobed nucleu5.
CS, fibrin, interleukin-8, and leukotriene B4.
BASIC OCULAR PATHOLOGY
77
Neutrophils are the most common cell in purulent
Eosinophils are similar to neutrophils in their
exudate. In fact, 
 pus is  an  accumulation of dead
maturation and release sequences. Like neutrophils,
neutrophils (3.12).
eosinophils are also end-cells that do not replicate after
release. They are more long-lived than neutrophils,
Most bacteria have very strong chemotactic factors
 persisting up to 8-12 days in tissue.
that attract neutrophils. Any accumulation of pus
 Eosinophils are most often associated with fungal and
 should trigger the suspicion that bacteria are present.
be allergic or anaphylactic {3.14)12, and some neo-
The myeloperoxidase in neutrophils give pus its green
plasmsl3, including mast cell tumors14 and some types 
color As neutrophils die in large numbers within
 of lymphoma1s.
inflamed tissues, their contents are released into the
Once eosinophils reach the tissue, they can function in
extracellular fluids. These contents are also further
several ways. They can be bacteriocidal, although not as
chemotactic to other neutrophils.
effectively as neutrophils; although eosinophils ha ve high
levels of peroxidase, they lack lysozyme. Eosinophils are
Eosinophils
most effective at killing metazoan parasites, due to major
Eosinophilic granulocytes are so called because of the
basic protein released from the eosinophil granule, which
presence of red-pink (the same color as erythrocytes)
appears to be enhanced by mast cell products.
cytoplasmic granules when stained with Wright's stain or with
hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) (3.13). These granules vary in
Basophils and mast cells
size and shape in the different species, being very large and
Basophils are the third type of granulocytic leukocyte
globular in the horse and quite small and rod-shaped in the
(3.15). Produced in the bone marrow, they occur in the
 cat. The granules contain major basic protein, which is toxic
circulation in very low numbers and emigrate into
to parasites and causes lysis of mammalian epithelial cells.
extravascular tissues at sites of inflammation. They have
3.12
3.13
3.12 Histologic picture of the hypopyon seen in 3.8, showing 
 3.13 Blood smear from a horse showing an eosinophil. Note the
accumula tions of neutrophils, cellular debris and necrosis (arrows). HtE.
eosinophilic granularity of the cytoplasm and the multilobed nucleus.
3.14
3.15
3.14 Photomicrograph showing infiltrations of eosinophils in the 
3.15 Blood smear showing a canine basophil. Note the blue
 conjunctiva of a horse with habronermiasis.
granularity of the cytoplasrm that obliterates the nucleus.
78
OpHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
a multilobed nucleus and large, globular basophilic
with a specific antigen, the population of cells that
 granules that can obliterate the nucleus.
 recognizes the antigen will proliferate in response16.
Although mast cells are granulated, they are usually
 Functionally, lymphocytes can be divided into two broad
not considered granulocytes. These cells are related to
classes. The primary function of B-cells, as mentioned
basophils but are present in connective and mucosal
earlier, is to produce antibodies. B-cells have specific
tissue and only very rarely in the circulation. They are
antibody on their surface that serves as a receptor to the
particularly abundant in skin, gastrointestinal mucosa,
homologous specific antigen. When specific antigen is
and respiratory tract, all host-environment interfaces.
bound to the surface of B-cells they are induced to divide
The nucleus is round to oval and contains a prominent
repeatedly, forming a line of memory cells and a line of
nucleolus. Mast cells possess distinct spherical basophilic
to metachromatic cytoplasmic granules.
 plasma cells only live for a few days but they work full-time
Neither mast cells nor basophils are end-cells, and
 producing large amounts of immunoglobulin (3.17). Plasma
both are capable of continued division at the site of
 cells have a unique appearance. They are smoothly spherical
inflammation. These cells are not phagocytic and are
or elliptical with much more cytoplasm than a lymphocyte.
only sluggishly motile. Their main function is the
The nucleus is usually eccentrically placed and the
degranulation of their cytoplasmic contents when
chromatin often is clumped at the periphery, creating a
stimulated, which releases a number of preformed
"wagon-wheel’ appearance. The cytoplasm contains
proinflammatory products contained within the gran-
abundant protein-producing machinery such as rough
ules. The end result is increased vascular permeability,
endoplasmic reticulum, and therefore takes on a slightly
vasodilation, anticoagulation, tissue destruction, and
basophilic tone. In many cells an area of pallor just adjacent
attraction of eosinophils.
to the nucleus can be seen histologically. This represents the
cell's packaging machinery, the Golgi apparatus.
Lymphocytes
T-cells are roughly divided into T-helper cells and T-
Lymphocytes are small round cells with a round,
 cytotoxic cells. The helper cells all have a CD4 molecule
hyperchromatic nucleus and scant, light blue-staining
 on the surface, which allows the helper cell to recognize
cytoplasm (3.16). Although lymphocytes all appear similar 
 an antigen presented by an antigen-presenting cell (any
morphologically, they come in two functional varieties, B-
cell with MHC II surface marker), usually a macrophage.
cells and T-cells. The B-lymphocytes are committed
to
The combination of T-helper cell and macrophage is
 a a u ao a s h
essential in complexing _with a B-cell to_allow the
and come to reside in extramedullary lymphoid issues. The
production of antibodies. The second type of T-cells is the 
precursors of T-lymphocytes migrate from the bone
CD8 group. The CD8 molecule complexes with
marrow through the thymic cortex to differentiate into
nonmacrophage-type cells, ie. cells with MHC I
mature T-cells. Approximately 80-90% of the cells in the
molecules on their surface. When the CD8 molecule
circulation are T-cells, while B-cells are much more
aligns with an MHC I expressing cell that also has specific
sedentary by comparison.
antigen on its surface, the T-cell destroys that cell.
 Lymphocytes are maintained in populations of clones
Lymphocytes are drawn into sites of inflammation by
that are each specific for a certain antigen. Each
a number of factors. Once at the site, they can either
lymphocyte clone is preprogrammed to recognize only a
 cluster around blood vessels or form nodular aggregates.
single antigen. In an animal there may be lymphocytes
The presence of these nodular aggregates is usually a
capa ble of responding to 10* different antigens, most of
nonspecific indication of chronic antigenic stimulation.
which have never been encountered. When challenged
In these cases, plasma cells are quite often also seen.
3.16
3.17
3.17 Two
plasma cells
Sop e wo
in a bone
marrow
aspirate. The
cells have
eccentrically
placed
nuclei and
abundant 
basophilic
Cytopla sm.
 3.16 Blood smear from a dog containing a lymphocyte. Note the
round nucleus and the paucity of cytoplasm.
BASIC OCULAR PATHOLOGY
79
Mononuclear phagocytes
accumulate, their main function is phagocytosis and
Macrophages are professional tissue phagocytes (3.18).
microbial killing.
The word macrophage is used to describe a monocyte
that has emigrated from the blood to the tissue. The term
-oeud paun si sand pos isasu (saseydonou
histiocyte is also used to describe these cells. There are a
number of factors that recruit monocytes to sites of
particle to be phagocytozed to the cell surface. This is
inflammation. Once there, however, they do not divide at
the site of inflammation. Compared to neutrophils, they
the attached particle by sending out pseudopodia
are more long-lived, surviving at an inflammatory site for
around it. These meet and fuse so that the particle lies in
as long as 1 month. In general, they are also slower to
a
phagocytic vacuole falso called a phagosome),
arrive at the site of inflammation, usually taking about
bounded by cell membrane. Lysosomes, membrane-
10 padeus-ueaq yum shlao aaiel se readde kaui 'sino 8t
bound packets containing the toxic compounds des-
oval nuclei with fine, diffusely scattered chromatin. The
cribed below, then fuse with phagosomes to form
cytoplasm stains a pale pink and may contain vacuoles or
phagolysosomes. It is within these that intracellular
particulate debris of phagocytozed foreign material.
killing of microorganisms occurs.
The function of macrophages is primarily phago-
cytosis and destruction of foreign materiali8. In
BIOCHEMICAL CHANGES
addition to their phagocytic function, activated
anos aq hnd saiel u paieipau si uoeuueu
macrophages can become glassy, eosinophilic, ‘epi-
substances found in plasma called mediators. Many
thelioid' macrophages. These cells produce and secrete
noncellular mediators of inflammation can be measured
a wide variety of biologically active substances. These
clinically. An increase in the concentration of acute-
 include: toxic oxygen metabolites, proteases, neutrophil
 phase proteins in the blood is commonly seen. (These 
chemotactic factors, nitric oxide, arachidonic acid
are normally present in small concentrations but
metabolites, growth factors that promote fibrosis, and
increase dramatically in response to acute inflamma-
 angiogenesis factors.
tion.) Produced by the liver, they are induced by
When the inciting cause remains for a long time,
 circulating cytokines. Specific acute-phase proteins, like 
macrophages will often fuse to form a multinucleated
uou ol pooiq ul panseau aq Aru 'usgoua
giant cell. These cells are metabolically active but their
 inflammatory processes.
phagocytic potential is significantly reduced. Macro-
The movement of leukocytes from the vessel lumen to
phages have been incriminated in proliferative neoplasm-
the site of tissue damage is by chemotaxis, and is
like diseases such as systemic histiocytosis19.
mediated by substances known as chemotactic factors
(chemotaxins), which diffuse from the area of tissue
Chemotaxis of leukocytes
damage. All granulocytes and monocytes respond to
During the early phases of the inflammatory response,
chemotaxins, and respond to a concentration gradient,
the normally inactive endothelium has to be activated to
moving from an area of lesser concentration of the factor 
allow adhesion of neutrophils. Normally inactive
to an area of greater concentration of the factor.
neutrophils have to be activated to enhance their ca pacity
Chemotaxins can be exogenous or endogenous. Most
for phagocytosis, bacterial killing, and generation 
of
 exogenous chemotaxins are bacterial or other microbial
inflammatory mediators. Neutrophils have to develop
products, e.g. endotoxin. Chemota xins bind to receptors 
the ability to move actively, from vessels towards the
on the surface of leukocytes and activate secondary
specific area of tissue damage. When leukocytes
messenger systems. These messenger systems work by
stimulating increased intracytoplasmic calcium. The
calcium then interacts with the cytoskeleton with
resulting assembly
of
cytoskeletal  
 specializations
involved in motility.
3.18
 In large part the acute inflammatory response is
orchestrated by plasma-derived and cell-derived chemi-
cal mediators.
Plasma-derived factors
The plasma contains four major protease cascade
systems  1
that 
contribute to acute inflammation:
complement, the kinins, the coagulation factors, and the
fibrinolytic systems. These are interrelated and produce
various inflammatory mediators.
 Complement system: the complement system consists
of approximately 20 known proteins and their cleavage
products. It can be activated during the acute
 necrosis, enzymes capable of activating complement are
released from dying cells. During infection, the formation
of antigen-antibody complexes can activate complement
3.18 Blood smear showing a canine monocyte. The nucleus is
via the classical pathway, while the endotoxins of Gram-
horseshoe shaped and the cytoplasm is vacuolated.
negative bacteria activate complement via the alternative
80
OpHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
pathway. Products of the kinin, coagulation, and
degranulation can be stimulated by trauma, cross-linkage
fibrinolytic systems can activate complement.
of cytophilic IgE with antigen, cytokines IL-1 and IL-8,
 Kinin system: the kinins are peptides of 9-11 amino
and binding of anaphylatoxins from the complement
acids; the most important vascular permeability factor is
cascade. Histamine is the primary mediator of immediate
bradykinin. The kinin system is activated by coagulation
vasodilation and increased vascular permeability in acute
factor XIl. Bradykinin is also a chemical mediator of the
inflammation.
pain that is a cardinal feature of acute inflammation.
Coagulation system: the coagulation  system 
is
Cytokines
responsible for the conversion of soluble fibrinogen into
Cytokines are proteins produced by many cell types that
fibrin, a major component of acute inflammatory
modulate cell function by interaction with cell surface
exudate. Coagulation factor Xll (the Hageman factor),
receptors
(Table3.1). The cytokines
 allow for
once activated by contact with extracellular materials,
communication between cells and they can have autocrine,
such as basal lamina, and various proteolytic enzymes of
 paracrine, or endocrine activity Included in this group are
bacterial origin, can activate the coagulation, kinin, and
interleukins, growth factors, and chemokines. Major
fibrinolytic systems. Tissue factor is another important
cytokines involved in inflammation include IL-1 a nd TNFo.
initiator of the coagulation cascade.
 from monocytes and macrophages, and INFy and TNFo.
Fibrinolytic system: plasmin is responsible for the lysis
from lymphocytes. In general, endothelial cells respond to
 of fibrin into fibrin degradation products, which may
inflammatory cytokines by expressing leukocyte adhesion
have local effects on vascular permeability. Kallikrein
molecules (E-selectins) and becoming more thrombogenic
from the kinin system can activate the fibrinolytic system
by production of tissue factor. Leukocytes respond by
by converting plasminogen to plasmin.
becoming activated and expressing surface molecules that
All four cascades are interrelated and participate at
bind to endothelial adhesion molecules.
different levels in each inflammatory response. All
IL-1 and TNFo have many similar activities. Once
cascades are under strict and redundant controls
synthesized and released from macrophages, these
designed to maintain homeostasis, and, at the same time,
cytokines have the following effects:
oo oi asuodsau aoieueui anedoidde ue io mo
● Endocrine: resulting in fever, cachexia (by
and resolve as needed.
 suppressing lipoprotein lipase), acute-phase protein
release from the liver, hemodynamic changes
MeDIATORS OF INFLAMMATION
(circulatory shock), and neutrophilia.
The mediators are numerous, have redundant activities,
 Endothelial cell activation: increased expression of
and include a variety of chemical groups. In any
leukocyte adhesion molecules, prostaglandin (PG) I
synthesis, IL-1, IL-8, IL-6, and platelet-derived
prerequisite to mediator release, de novo synthesis of
 growth factor (PDGF) synthesis.
mediators, degranulation, and phagocytosis. Leukocytes
 Fibroblast activation: proliferation of fibroblasts,
are activated by binding to numerous cytokines such as
 collagen synthesis, PG synthesis.
interferon gamma {IFNy) and tumor necrosis factor
 Leukocyte activation: increased cytokine secretion
{TNF), or other ligands such as the Fc portion of
 and priming.
antibody and complement components.  Activated
leukocytes are capable of a variety of functions such as
Chemokines
adhesion to and migration through endothelial cells,
Chemokines are classes of small proteins with specifically
chemotaxis, production of arachidonate metabolites,
phagocytosis, and oxidative burst and degranulation.
produced by a variety of cells including activated
Mediators such as histamine are preformed and stored
endothelial cells and macrophages. Chemokines activate
in granules. These granules can be released immediately
and attract leukocytes and some stimulate hematopoietic
upon activation. Other mediators such as arachidonic
progenitor cells. A key activity of chemokines is to
 acid metabolites require de novo synthesis. Endothelial
induce secretion of other cytokines from the leukocytes
cell activation results in expression of leukocyte adhesion
that they activate. Each class of chemokine recruits and
molecules and, 
sometimes, 
 procoagulant activity.
 activates different classes of leukocytes. For example,
Endothelial cells are activated by cytokines such as TNF
 IL-8 is chemotactic for neutrophils and basophils, and
and interleukin-1 {IL-1). Platelets are activated by a
eota xin is chemotactic for eosinophils.
variety of mediators to degranulate and participate in
coagulation, including thrombin, adenosine diphosphate,
and platelet activating factor (PAF).
CHRONIC INFLAMMATION
Cellular derived mediators are important in both
immediate and sustained inflammatory responses. The
Chronic inflammation is characterized by the formation
vasoactive amines are responsible for the immediate and
of fibrous connective tissue in the area of inflam-
short-lived responses in inflammation, including
mation20. Macrophages also may be a feature. This
vasodilation, increased vascular permeability, 
pu
fibrous connective tissue formation results in organiza-
smooth muscle contraction in the respiratory and
tion or scar formation. Chronic inflammation may lead
digestive tracts.
to repair and takes place in days to weeks.
Histamine is found primarily in mast cells that are
Chronic inflammation is the end result of a host
distributed throughout tissues, and it is also present in
response to an inciting stimulus. This form of
platelet granules. Histamine is a preformed mediator that
 inflammation is considered to be of prolonged duration,
is released upon mast cell degranulation. Mast cell
usually weeks to months. Instead of an exudative
BasIc OCuLAR PaTHOLOGY
81
Table 3.1 Important growth factors and cytokines involved in neovascularization and fibroblast proliferation
Mediator
Source
Function
 Platelet-derived
 Platelets, macrophages,
 Chemotactic for fibroblasts, macrophages, smooth muscle;
 growth factor
endothelium
mitogenic for fibroblasts
 Transforming growth
Platelets, T-cells,
Chemotactic for fibroblasts, leukocytes; stimulates proliferation
factor beta
macrophages
of fibroblasts, extracellular matrix.
 Fibroblast growth factor
Many cell types
Stimulates angiogenesis; mitogenic for endothelium, smooth muscle,
fibroblasts
Epidermal growth factor
 Platelets, macrophages 
Induces proliferation of epithelium, endothelium, fibroblasts;
increases production of glycosaminoglycans
 Insulin-like growth factor
 Fibroblasts, hepatocytes 
Mitogenic for fibroblasts
Interleukin-1
Macrophages,
 Chemotactic for leukocytes; stimulates proliferation of keratinocytes,
endothelium
fibroblasts, endothelium 
Tumor necrosis factor alpha
Macrophages
Mitogenic for fibroblasts; angiogenic
Interferon gamma
Lymphocytes
Inhibits fibroblast proliferation; inhibits collagen synthesis
3.19 Photomicrograph of the anterior chamber of
3.19
a canine eye. The lens capsule (LC) is ruptured and
there is a proliferation of fibroblasts (arrow). H&tE.
LC
response, chronic infammation usually consists
of
a feature of chronic inflammation. These mononuclear
connective tissue proliferation. Many of these changes 
 inflammatory cells include macrophages, lymphocytes,
 also represent the repair process, and there is a continuum 
and plasma cells.
between chronic inflammation and repair. In addition to
Most ocular tissues have very limited regenerative
the healing response, chronic inflammation tends to occur
capacity and have a propensity for scarring. The adult
with infections by organisms that are resistant to clearing.
retina and corneal endothelium have practically no
by the body. Such persistent organisms include some 
of
regenerative capacity21, the corneal stroma and the lens
the higher bacteria {including Mycobacterium), fungi, and
have poor regenerative capacity, and fibrous metaplasia
quite a few parasites. Histologically, chronic inflam-
is a very common phenomenon within the globe and a
mation is characterized by fibroplasia (3.19). In addition,
frequent response of corneal endothelium, lens epi-
infiltration with mononuclear inflammatory cells may be
thelium, and retinal pigmented epithelium.
82
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRiNArY MeDiCINE
GRANULATION TISSUE
CORNEA
Granulation tissue is new fibrovascular connective tissue
If the original injury has caused substantial loss of stroma,
formed in the early phases of repair. Granulation tissue
or if the bystander injury from neutrophilic inflammation
serves to fill in defects, replace lost tissue, and cause
has destroyed the superficial stroma, then epithelial healing
wound contraction. This newly formed fibrous tissue
will be delayed until new stroma can be built via
contains numerous small blood vessels. Eventually the
recruitment of granulation tissue from the nearest available
fibrous connective tissue may mature to have the normal
vascular bed, the limbus. After a lag period of about 4 days,
histology of the loose fibrillar connective tissue, but in
a combination of new vessels and fibroblasts will then
the formative stages the fibroblasts are plump and only a
Aep/w I Alaiewixodde ie snqwl aui wo moa oi uag
few collagen fibrils have been produced.
Although the blood vessels will become less
Contraction occurs as a result of the action of
prominent over time, and the haphazard fibroblasts will
myofibrobasts. These cells have features intermediate
become oriented parallel to the corneal epithelial surface,
between those of fibroblasts and smooth muscle cells,
such granulation tissue will never completely disappear
and appear in the wound area 2 or 3 days after injury.
and will always be clinically and microscopically
distinguishable from normal stroma. It is claimed that
derive either from perivascular cells (i.e. pericytes) or
injured corneal stroma will thus never be remodeled with
from mesenchymal cells. Contraction may reduce the
the extremely precise architecture required to ensure
original defect by as much as 70% and greatly
perfect corneal clarity.
facilitates healing.
Although the mature corneal endothelium is said to be
Fibroplasia begins early after injury, with existing
incapable of mitotic replication in some species, including
fibroblasts adjacent to the wound being the source of
the dog, cat, and horse, it seems to acquire proliferative
newf
fibroblasts.
The immature
fibroblasts
are
capacity when damaged and can undergo fibrous
characterized by their plumpness, l
basophilia, rich
metaplasia. Following injury, the normally inconspicuous
complement of rough endoplasmic reticulum, and
endothelium proliferates as fibroblast-like cells. These may
prominent nucleoli, all evidence of active synthesis
either be restricted to a plaque lining the cornea or the cells
(3.20). They are active in synthesizing glycosamino-
may migrate across the filtration angle to grow on the
glycans and collagen fibers.
 anterior surface of the iris. If this occurs, it may result in 
The new capillaries most commonly run in a
pupillary block or the cells may enter the posterior
 perpendicular direction to the outer surface of the
chamber. The cells are distinguished from true fibroblasts
wound, since their function is to carry supplies to the free
by the retention of PAS-positive basement membrane
surface, while fibroblasts tend to grow in from the side of
 production. In at least some instances, it is diffcult to
the defect to bridge the gap. This often produces a
determine whether all of the fibrous membrane has
histologic picture of capillaries running at right angles to
originated from corneal endothelium or whether it has
the direction of the fibroblasts. The formation of new
received  contributions f
from deep corneal stromal
capillaries is termed angiogenesis or neovascularization.
fibroblasts or from cells growing out of the iris stroma.
In the eye, neovascularization can occur in many areas.
Neovascularization of the normal avascular cornea is
UVEAL TRACT
probably the most well known of these phenomena22.
Chronic inflammation in the globe is usually in the form
Limbal blood vessels proliferate in response to corneal
of fibrosis. The iris is susceptible to the development of
injury. These blood vessels are leaky and can result in
 preiridial fibrovascular membranes?3. Angiogenic growth
corneal edema. Granulation tissue can also form on
many of the surfaces within the globe, including the
surface of the anterior and posterior iris and the
endothelium of the cornea.
These:
fibrovascular
3.20
membranes are also leaky and can bleed easily, resulting
in hyphema.
Remember, granulation tissue is part of the repair
process and consists of inflamed, proliferating
AC
fibrous tissue.
If the process continues too long, granulation tissue
will accumulate in excessive amounts and bulge above
the surface, causing severe disfigurement of the
structure. This excessive granulation tissue is termed
"proud flesh' or ‘exuberant granulation tissue'.
Exuberant granulation tissue is a common complication
to flesh wounds in the horse.
The proliferation of fibrovascular connective tissue in
wound healing is under the influence of growth factors
and various cytokines. The most important of these are
3.20 Histologic view of fibroblasts and inflammatory cell
the fibroblast growth factors. These can be secreted by a
infiltration in the cornea (C) and anterior chamber (AC) of a canine
wide variety of cell types, including the corneal
eye following a perforating injury. (D, Descemet's membrane.] H&tE.
epithelium and endothelium and the ciliary epithelium.
BASIC OCULAR PATHOLOGY
83
factors released from a detached retina, from intraocular
LENS
neoplasms, or as a consequence of chronic inflammation
The events surrounding attempted lens repair involve
anywhere within the globe are absorbed into the iris
 migration and fibrous metaplasia of the lens epithelium.
stroma, and act on the iridial blood vessels. These stromal
This normally inconspicuous epithelium is usually
vessels and accompanying fibroblasts grow outwardly
 present only under the anterior lens capsule. In chronic
onto the anterior face of the iris. From that location, there
injury this epithelium responds by undergoing posterior 
is a definite risk of migration which can cause occlusion
migration, hypertrophy, and hyperplasia. When the lens
of the filtration angle or pupillary block (3.21).
is ruptured and the epithelium escapes from the lens
The normal iris lies against the face of the lens. Acute
through the capsular defect, it is able to proliferate
inflammation that results in any exudation makes the iris
extensively within the globe. It will cause pupillary block,
sticky, and greatly increases the risk of fibroplasia and
occlusion of the filtration angle, and may even migrate
subsequent granulation tissue formation in chronic
into the vitreous. In the cat, this proliferative lens
cases24. Iridolenticular adhesion 
(posterior synechia)
epithelium has been shown to undergo malignant
occurs when the granulation tissue formation causes the
transformation, and is possibly the tissue of origin for the
lens to adhere to the iris. This, in turn, increases the risk of
 so-called post-traumatic ocular sarcoma that is unique to
pupillary block, thus leading to iris bombe and secondary
the cat (3.22)2s, 26.
glaucoma. Iridocorneal adhesion (anterior synechia) is
much less frequent, and is seen almost exclusively as a
POSTERIOR SEGMENT
consequence of perforating corneal injury.
The accumulation of inflammatory exudate within the
posterior chamber and the vitreous tends to organize by
fibrous metaplasia and to contract into a transverse band
that extends from the ciliary body across the globe to the
3.21
other side of the ciliary body. This is called a
retrolenticular fibrous membrane, also known as a
cyclytic membrane. It will usually incorporate the
detached retina into its posterior face {3.23).
GRANULOMATOUSINFLAMMATION
There is one specific subset of inflammation that is
usually considered as chronic. Granulomatous inflamma-
 tion is a definite type of chronic inflammatory reaction
and it is seen in a number of settings. Histologically, it is
very characteristic and is described as infitration of
macrophages (or histiocytes) with fibroplasia.
Granulomatous inflammation was initially described
 inflammation that included the presence
as
of
granulomas. A granuloma is characterized as discrete
accumulations of macrophages with centrally placed
lymphocytes surrounded by a rim of fibrous connective
3.21 Photomicrograph of the anterior face of the iris of a cat. The
tissue. The definition of granulomatous inflammation
prolifera tion of fibrovascular tissue is called rubeosis iridis.
3.22
3.23
3.22 Photomicrograph from a cat showing the eosinophilic lens
3.23 Retrolenticular fibrovascular membrane (arrows] in a dog. Note
capsule with prolific metaplasia of the lens epithelium into spindle-
the inflammatory cells admixed with the proliferating fibroblasts.
shaped cels (arrow). These cells have undergone malignant
(CP, ciliary process.) H&tE.
transformation to neoplastic cells. H&tE.
84
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
has been broadened and now means any inflammatory
Also, it follows that exposure to specific antigens will
response consisting predominantly of epithelioid
drive the reactions. There are some classical lesions that
(differentiated) macrophages {3.24). Their cytoplasm is
indicate an immune-mediated inflammatory response.
abundant and finely granular, with indistinct cell
 Lymphocytic infiltrations are characteristic of some types
boundaries, so that they resemble epithelial cells more
of immune-mediated inflammation. The presence of
than macrophages.
plasma cells characterizes other types of immune 
-ueui snnuna on anun sada mas ro
 reactions17. Other cell types that can be seen in immune-
mation include the multinucleated giant cells {3.25).
 mediated inflammation are eosinophils and mast cells27.
These are cells formed from tissue macrophages, and
Many types of immune-mediated lesions do not
their main function is secretion of cytokines that aid in
contain inflammatory cells; products of lymphocytes
the destruction of the offending antigen. Like epithelioid
cause the lesion, such as antibodies produced at a distant
macrophages, they are poorly phagocytic.
site or cytokines produced locally.
TYPE I: ANAPHYLACTIC OR ALLERGIC
IMMUNE-MEDIATED INFLAMMATION
HYPERSENSITIVITY
In type I hypersensitivity the first exposure to antigen
Immune-mediated reactions that damage normal tissue
causes plasma cells to produce IgE that binds to Fc
are called hypersensitivity reactions. They may result as
receptors on mast cells and basophils. Re-exposure to the
part of the normal response to antigens or occur in
same antigen causes binding of antigen to fixed IgE on
response to overwhelming antigen exposure or an
mast cells, resulting in mast cell and basophil
inappropriately regulated immune response to normal
degranulation with immediate release of histamine,
antigen load. Idealy, the antigen enters the host, elicits a
 serotonin, and proteases. Binding of antigen also results 
humoral or cell-mediated immune response, and is
in de novo synthesis of more inflammatory mediators.
effectively neutralized or eliminated. Things do not
Mast cell cytokines are released, resulting in recruitment
always go so smoothly. General disorders involving the
of eosinophils and, in some cases, neutrophils. Mediators 
immune system are grouped into four classes 
of
 from eosinophils amplify the inflammatory response and
hypersensitivity reactions. fhese reactions may be in
damage tissue. A large dose antigen re-exposure may
response to exposure to exogenous antigens, including
result in systemic release of mediators, which may lead to
allergens and infectious agents, or as part of an
anaphylactic shock. Smaller dose local re-exposure to
autoimmune disease, a response to endogenous antigen.
 antigen results in local signs, including cutaneous wheals 
Types I, II, and Il are mediated by serum immuno-
 and nasal or conjunctival discharge.
globulins. Type IV hypersensitivity is cell mediated and
TYPE Il: CYTOTOXIC HYPERSENSITIVITY
by a perivascular infiltrate rich in monocytes and lympho-
 In this form of hypersensitivity, exposure to antigen
 cytes. This classification of immune-mediated reactions is
causes plasma cells to produce IgG or IgM. This
imperfect. In reality many reactions are combinations of
antibody binds to host target cells with resultant cell
the four types with one type predominating.
injury. There are three possible mechanisms for cell
Immune-mediated inflammation is inflammation that
injury: activation  of 
complement  followed
by
is ca used by the immune response. All immune responses
 complement-mediated lysis or phagocytosis and removal
are directed by lymphocytes; therefore, lymphocytes and
by leukocytes; antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity
their products drive immune-mediated inflammation.
{ADCC); or  inactivation of  a  biologically  active
3.24
3.25
3.24 Sheets of vacuolated macrophages are present in the anterior
 3.25 Photomicrograph of canine tissue showing a large
chamber of a dog. This is an example of granulomatous inflammation.
multinucleated giant cell (arrow]. Note the large amounts
 of cytoplasm and the multiple nuclei. H&tE.
BASIC OCULAR PATHOLOGY
85
molecule. In the first instance, complement is activated
and adjacent normal tissues, often resulting in fibrinoid
and forms a membrane attack complex {MAC), resulting
necrosis of vascular walls.
in lysis of the target cell. The second possibility is for
Corneal endothelitis is often seen in animals with
antibody and complement to opsonize the target cell.
anterior uveitis. This is because the corneal endothelium
This would result in phagocytic destruction of the target
 may apparently be a specifc target for various viral antigens
cells by neutrophils or macrophages. The third possibility
 and deposition of antigen-antibody complexes. This results
can occur by the disruption of biologically functional
in a neutrophilic or mononuclear infiltration. The result is
molecules. The function of these molecules can
be
 transient or even permanent comeal edema. The cause for
 blocked or at least affected when autoantibodies bind to
the specific endothelial targeting in most naturally occurring
these molecules and render them nonfunctional.
examples is not known but experimentally there may be
Equine recurrent uveitis may be an example of type II
cross-reaction between corneal endothelium and infectious
disease antigen that makes the corneal endothelium an
that cross-reaction between leptospiral antigens and
accidental target for immune attack. Alternatively, viral
intraocular antigens plays an important role. The
infection of the endothelium may result in persistent viral
resultant inflammation and necrosis of the non-
pigmented ciliary epithelium is thought to be due to
complex disease) or cellular attack.
ADCC destruction of these cells {3.26, 3.27). In the cat,
a similar syndrome may occur with Toxoplasma but this
TYPE IV: CELL-MEDIATED (OR DELAYED)
suoisal aul 'sasiou ui sdeuad pue sies ul 'oguaaoudun st
HYPERSENSITIVITY
are correlated with the development of glaucoma by
some unknown mechanism.
This is a common response to many
intracellular
pathogens and to large or complex infectious agents,
TYPE IIl: IMMUNE COMPLEX HYPERSENSITIVITY
including
Mycobacteritm
tuberculosis,
viruses,
In immune complex hypersensitivity, exposure to
protozoa, fungi, and metazoan parasites. The cells bind
antigen in specific conditions causes plasma cells to
 specific antigen by means of T-cell surface receptors. The
produce IgG or IgM. In situations of persistent
sensitized  T-cells  release cytokines1
that attract
antigenemia and slight antigen excess, _ soluble
 macrophages and more lymphocytes to the area. The
antigen-antibody complexes can be formed. Exposure
lymphocytes further activate macrophages that are
further chemotactic. Activated macrophages can cause
sensitizes mast cells to release mediators, increasing
destruction of normal adjacent tissues by release of
vascular permeability. Increased vascular permeability
digestive enzymes and oxygen radicals. This results in
allows antigen-antibody complexes to be deposited in
formation of the classic granuloma.
vessels, or to form de novo in vascular basement
Type IV cell-mediated hypersensitivity is initiated by
membranes. The complexes deposited in the blood
T-lymphocytes specifically sensitized to locally deposited
vessels activate complement that causes mast cell
 antigen. The two effector mechanisms, delayed type and
degranulation and attracts neutrophils. The formed
direct cytotoxicity, are mediated by two different
complexes are usually tightly bound to the extracelluar
subpopulations of T-cells: CD4 cells mediate delayed
matrix around the blood vessels, and are too large to be
type reactions and CD8 cells direct cytotoxicity.
phagocytized by neutrophils. The frustrated neutrophils
Delayed hypersensitivity reactions are initiated by
release oxygen radicals and lysosomal contents into the
actively sensitized T-cells. However, only about 10% of
tissues. These substances destroy the blood vessel wall
the
mononuclearcellinfiltrate ina（
 delayed
3.26
3.27
3.26 Photormicrograph of the normal ciliary body epithelium
3.27 Photormicrograph of the ciliary body in a horse with equine
of a horse.
recurrent uveitis. Note the thickening due to necrosis of the ciliary
epithelium and protein deposition (P). H&tE.
86
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEAsE IN VeTeRiNARY MeDICINE
hypersensitivity reaction are specifically sensitized T-
cycle by appropriate stimuli, and others may never re-
cells; the other 90% are nonsensitized lymphocytes and
enter and eventually die.
macrophages attracted by lymphokines from sensitized
Normal cells of the body can be divided into several
T-cells to amplify the reaction. Macrophages activated by
categories: continually replacing cells fhematopoietic
INFy from lymphocytes are required to develop the
tissue, surface epithelium, some glandular epithelium); 
prominent inflammatory reaction and tissue damage in
nonrenewing cells with regenerative capacity (liver, kidney,
delayed hypersensitivity. They function through the
connective tissue, some glandular epithelium); and
release  of
proteolytic  é
enzymes, PGs, cytokines,
essentially nonreplacing cells (neurons, muscle). Relevant
TNF, leukotrienes, tissue thromboplastin, PDGF, and
to the study of abnormal cell growth is the category of
other substances, as well as through phagocytosis.
"continually replacing cells'. For example, hematopoietic
precursor cells comprise stem cells that are capable of an
Remember, development of type IV reactions does
indefinite number of divisions and progeny cells that either
not require antibody, and depends on T-lymphocytes.
proliferate or mature to a nonproliferative state ("end-
cells'). As the cells mature toward the end-cell state, they
The reaction is called delayed type hypersensitivity
lose their proliferative potential and gain characteristics of
because in the classical tuberculin reaction, physical
differentiation. In this context, abnormal cell growth can
detection is delayed for 24-48 hours after injection of the
be viewed as a disorder of maturation or differentiation, in
tuberculin antigen. This differs from the immediate
which many of the tumor cells remain in the replicating
response that occurs in type I reactions.
pool of undifferentiated stem cells.
The T-cell-mediated cytotoxicity reaction is a type IV
reaction, mediated by cytotoxic T-cells that directly cause
HYPERPLASIA, METAPLASIA, AND DYSPLASIA
cell injury. In direct cytotoxicity, recognition of a cell
Non-neoplastic cellular proliferations are not uncommon
surface antigen {in this case a virus) by the corresponding
and must be distinguished from neoplasia. Hyperplasia is 
receptor on a T-cell (CD8 cell) brings the T-cell (cytotoxic
an absolute increase in the number of cells per unit of
T-cells, TCTL) into close contact with the target cell,
tissue. It is generally initiated and regulated by defina ble
which triggers the T-cell to release perforin that causes
(such as hormonal) stimuli and may be useful to the host
apoptosis of the target cell.
(physiologic and adaptive hyperplasia).
 Both delayed type hypersensitivity (CD4-mediated)
 Metaplasia denotes a change of one type of adult cell to
 and direct T-cell-mediated (CD8-mediated) cytotoxicity
another. It is usually an adaptive response to an
are necessary immunologic reactions but they can cause
inflammatory or other abnormal stimulus and is usually
extensive tissue damage in some instances. Examples
reversible. Metaplasia is a change occurring within tissue in
include granulomatous reactions to fungi, parasites, and
which one mature cell type changes to another mature cell
mycobacteria, idiopathic granulomatous diseases31, 32,
type. Metaplasia is usually a protective mechanism and the
and so-called lens induced uveitis.
new cell type is a sturdier, hardier cell, e.g. columnar
The eye is considered an immunologically privileged
epithelium changes to squamous epithelium. This change
site. Denatured lens proteins from either a leaky lens
takes place over a period of several mitotic generations. In
(phacolytic uveitis) or a ruptured lens (phacoclastic
other words, the change takes place at the stem cell level
uveitis) are thought to incite an immune-mediated
and subsequent progeny, over a period of several cell
response33. Phacoclastic uveitis is a severe destructive
generations, begin to change shape, structure, and function,
 granulomatous endophthalmitis that occurs as a delayed
until eventually the cells that are produced are of the other
type hypersensitivity response to the ruptured lens. The
cell type. Metaplasia is generally a reversible process. Once
sudden presentation of large amounts of lens protein to
the stimulus has been removed the tissue can revert fover
the immune system overwhelms the low-dose tolerance
time) to its original type, unless there have been permanent
to lens protein and results in a severe chronic
changes such as proliferation of connective tissue.
inflammation. The symptoms of disease are typically
The term ‘cutaneous metaplasia' has been used to
delayed for one to several weeks after lens injury, and
 describe an extremely common corneal reaction to any
require that the lens capsular rupture be large enough to
persistent low-grade external irritant. Any disease of
allow the escape of a substantial amount of lens protein.
gradual onset that requires the cornea to become 'tougher*
 There is some species difference in the hypersensitivity
will cause the cornea to recall its cutaneous embryologic
response, with rabbits and birds undergoing a more
heritage. This term is somewhat of a misnomer, as the
classical granulomatous response than dogs or cats.
entire cornea and not just one cell type undergoes this
change, and it is probably more of a hyperplastic than a
metaplastic change. The histologic hallmarks of corneal
ABNORMAL CELL GROWTH AND NEOPLASIA
metaplasia include some or all of the following: epithelial
hyperplasia and keratinization, epithelial or stromal
Normal cell growth is controlled by a milieu of
melanin pigmentation, thickening of the basement
cytokines, growth factors, and hormones. The normal
membrane with development of rete ridges, superficial
cell cycle is divisible into four sequential phases that
stromal fibrosis, and stromal vascularization. All of these
culminate in cell division: the interphase gap (G1),
changes are reversible and are probably reflections of
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) synthesis (S), the gap.
changes that originate within the permanent replicative
between the end of DNA synthesis and the beginning of
 population of epithelial stem cells at the limbus. These are
mitosis {G2), and mitosis {M). A fifth interval, G0, is
the cells that retain unlimited mitotic capability, and it has 
designated for cells that are no longer in the normal
been proposed that corneal metaplasia is not actually an
cycle. Some of these cells may be induced to re-enter the
s p a a a m a ssand a
BASIC OCULAR PATHOLOGY
87
become skin-like but rather a process by which the
patchy gliosis, pigmentary migration, and scarring
pluripotential limbal stem cells fail to express the
identical to changes seen in the adult retina with similar
 specialized phenotype of cornea (3.28, 3.29).
infectious disease can be seen3s. In addition, however,
Dysplasia
isan.
 abnormal  atypical
　cellular
there will be futile attempts at retinal regeneration, the
proliferation
 (atypical hyperplasia)." It is usually
hallmark of which is retinal rosettes. These are considered
reversible and is not a tumor but possibly a precursor in
tubular/acinar accumulations of primitive photoreceptors.
some circumstances. Dysplasia is a regressive alteration
There are many hereditary retinal dysplasias of
in adult cells manifested by a variation in their size,
shape, and orientation. In some tissue types the change
is abnormal retinal maturation, with no degenerative
may be precancerous. In other cell types {especially the
changes. Retinal rosettes are also present but in this
[audoaaap e aq o1 anou s1 agueyo siui "eua
instance they are almost always just transverse sections
change or at least the result of an irn utero event. Corneal
through tubes of folded retina (3.30, 3.31).
dermoid is a form of dysplasia in which normal tissue
 The difference between abnormal cell growth and
(skin) is formed in an abnormal location (cornea }34.
neoplasia is clear Metaplasia is a reversible change of
Retinal dysplasia is a condition  characterized 
by
ad o aiieu iane oi ada lao e auo
disordered retinal development. This definition can be
Dysplasia is a reversible change in adult cells to an
somewhat confusing because the retina continues 
atypical or disorderly appearance. By comparison,
develop after birth, and disordered development can be
neoplasia is an irreversible change. This process is a
induced by in utero or postnatal infectious disease as well 
marked regressive change in adult cell type following
as by inborn errors of retinal development. In those cases
several generations of mitosis toward more primitive,
caused by perinatal infection {usually viral infection),
less differentiated cell types.
3.28
3.29
3.28 Photomicrograph of the normal corneal epithelium of a dog.
epithelium is keratinized (arrow) and pigmented and the stroma is
vascularized (Bv) and infiltrated with inflammatory cells. H&tE.
3.30
3.30 Photomicrograph of a normal retina of a dog.
 3.31 The section of this canine retina have multiple retinal folds
[arrows)]. H&tE.
88
O pHThAlMIC DiseAse In VeterinArY MeDiCINE
GROWTH CHARACTERISTICS OF TUMOR CELLS
3.32
The most fundamental properties of tumor cells are
relatively autonomous growth and reproduction and, for
malignant tumors, invasion and metastasis. Tumor cells
 proliferate without relation to the needs of the host in
which they arise. Tumor cells are self-controlling and
have various levels of independence from normal growth
control mechanisms.
In the tumor cell cycle, neoplastic cells may undergo
successive cycles of mitosis or leave the cell cycle and
enter G0. Some of the neoplastic cells in the G0 state will
 die, while others remain as dormant or latent tumor cells 
and may re-enter the cycle of cell division with the
appropriate stimulus. The cell growth kinetics of tumor
cells and the cell cycle time (from one mitosis to the next)
can be measured using radioactive DNA labeling and
autoradiography. The cell cycle time of tumor cells varies
with cancer type (72-260 hours) and, surprisingly, is
3.32 Photormicrograph of a benign conjunctival papilloma of a bovine.
often considerably longer than that of normal dividing
Note the regular arrangerment of the cells and the normal relationship 
cells, such as bone marrow precursor cells {18 hours) or
between the epithelial cells and the underlying stroma. H&tE.
colonic crypt epithelial cells (39 hours). The increased
sh shounn suua u ues uno sisou jo aunba
 cells compared to normal cells.
Tumors are broadly divided into benign {3.32) and
3.2). In general, malignant tumors differ from benign
tumors in four biological properties: structure, rate of
growth, invasive growth, and disseminated growth by
metastasis. Of these characteristics, metastasis is a
unique feature of malignant neoplasms. It is a major
factor in the fatal course of the disease, and is the main
obstacle to successful treatment.
In domestic animals, ocular tumors are often also
divided  into primary and 
1  metastatic intraocular
neoplasia. In general, melanomas are most common in
dogs, f
followed by ciliary body adenocarcinomas39. In 
 ae seuosiesoudul pue seuouelau siui asnhip 'sieo
most common26, 40.
3.33 Photormicrograph of a malignant epithelial tumor of a bovine.
BIOLOGICAL PROPERTIES OF BENIGN AND
The cells are of varying sizes and shapes (N, neoplastic cells) and 
MALIGNANT NEOPLASMS
there is invasion into the surrounding stroma. The stroma (arrow)
Histologically, all neoplasms are composed of two main
appears reactive (scirrhous or desmoplastic reaction]. H&tE.
parts: tumor cells, which comprise the parenchyma or
specific component and proliferate to enlarge the tumor;
and tumor stroma, a supporting framework consisting of
connective tissue and newly formed blood vessels elicited
 Table 3.2 Biological properties of neopla sms
from adjacent tissues. The stromal reaction of some
tumors is characterized by overproduction of fibrous
Benign
Malignant
stroma. This is termed desmoplasia or a scirrhous
reaction. Squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) are notorious
Structure
Resemblance to
Abnormal; less
in their ability to incite a desmoplastic reaction {3.34).
normal cells (well
similarity to normal
Some neoplasms, such as benign tumors and some
differentiated)
cells
 slowly growing malignant tumors, have a cellular maturity
and histologic organization similar to normal adult tissue
Mitoses
Few
Relatively common
 at the site of origin, and are said to be well differentiated.
Growth
Usually purely
Invasive
In comparison, more rapidly growing malignant tumors
expansive
show a greater degree of structural abnormality and
resemble immature embryonal tissues or stem cells capable
Growth rate
Slow
Rapid
of proliferative activity. The loss or absence of organiza-
Growth
May cease growing
Rarely cease
tional, structural, and functional differentiation of cells is
 duration
 or regress
growing or regress
termed  poorly  differentiated,
 undifferentiated,
or
 Encapsulation
Usually
Rarely
anaplastic (backward growth'). Anaplasia is a charac-
teristic property of malignant tumor cells. The grading of
Metastasis
None
Frequent 
a cancer is an estimate of its malignant behavior and is
BASIC OCULAR PATHOLOGY
89
based upon its degree of structural abnormality. In general,
In addition, invasion is a prerequisite for tumor cell
the more marked the anaplasia of a tumor, the more
metastasis. Metastasis is the physical separation and
malignant is its biological beha vior, as shown by tumor
dissemination of malignant tumor cells from the tissue of
 recurrence, invasion, and meta stasis.
origin to another site by lymphatic, vascular, and other
The cytological changes characteristic of malignant
routes. The presence or absence of regional and,
tumor
cellsreflect
"the degree of anaplasia
particularly, distant metastasis is a major factor in
(undifferentiation) and include: increased structural
 determining the prognosis of a malignant neoplasm.
variations (pleomorphism) in cellular and nuclear size
Conceptually, metastasis involves three steps or
and shape compared to corresponding normal cells; large
processes: tumor cell invasion, embolization, and
hyperchromatic nuclei containing a coarse, irregular
extravasation.
network of chromatin; increased nuclear to cytoplasmic
ratio of mass; tumor giant cells; large nucleoli; increased
Tumor cell invasion
or bizarre mitotic figures; chromosomal abnormalities;
 In the process of tissue invasion by an epithelial cancer,
and cytoplasmic changes.
tumor cells must traverse the barriers of the basement
In mucous membrane sites such as the eyelid, third
membrane and the stromal extracellular matrix. The
eyelid, and conjunctiva, where repeated clinical
sequence of events includes:
observation and tissue or cell sampling are possible,
 Detachment of tumor cells from the primary tumor.
+
Attachment to basement membrane matrix.
lesions. In SCC of horses and cattle, squamous papilloma
 Degra dation of basement membrane matrix.
and squamous plaque are considered preneoplastic lesions.
+
 Locomotion and infiltration of tumor cells.
The epithelial cells of these precursor lesions may have
Degradation of extracellular matrix.
 atypical features, among them: enlarged nuclei, somewhat
 Degra dation of vascular basement membrane matrix.
disorderly positional arrangement, and greater than
normal proliferative activity. This abnormal tissue
The detachment of cancer cells from the tissue of origin
development is commonly termed *dysplasia'. Dysplastic
apparently involves many factors, including decreased
squamous conjunctival plaques of horses may revert to
mutual adhesiveness, diminished number of cell
normal, while others progress over time to develop many
junctions, and other alterations in surface membrane
cellular features of SCC, except tissue invasion. Such an
structures.
intraepithelial lesion, with the cellular features of SCC but
The attachment of tumor cells to certain matrix
remaining confined to the conjunctival mucosa and not
components, such as the glycoprotein laminin, appears to
invading through the basement membrane, is termed
be a factor in the process of invasion. Some invasive tumor
carcinoma in situ.
cells have an increased number of laminin receptors on
their surfaces. It is possible that increased binding of tumor
TUMOR INVASION AND METASTASIS
cells to laminin facilitates their invasiveness.
The dual properties of invasion and
metastasis
The active degradation of components of the
distinguish malignant from benign tumor cells. Invasion
basement membrane, and subsequently of the stromal
of normal tissue is a fundamental characteristic of
extracellular matrix, is required for invasion. The
malignant tumor cells and is one of their potentially most
enzymatic breakdown of proteins and proteoglycans is
dangerous properties. Microscopic invasion of neoplastic
accomplished in various ways. Some invasive tumor cells
cells commonly occurs beyond the gross boundaries of a
 produce plasminogen activator, a serine protease that
primary tumor, and in some operative cases may extend
splits plasminogen into its proteolytically active form,
beyond the surgical margins of apparently normal tissue.
plasmin, whereas others release type IV collagenase
(which can cleave basement membrane collagen),
cathepsins, and heparinase. In some tumors, proteolytic
enzymes are released in the stroma by *cooperating' host
 cells, such as macrophages.
The next step in invasion requires active neoplastic
cell locomotion and infiltration into the region where the
matrix has been broken down. There, infiltrating cells
with the capacity to proliferate produce progeny cells.
The processes of matrix degradation and tumor cell
locomotion are repeated over and over as tumor cells
infiltrate normal tissue and finally invade lymphatic or
 blood vascular channels.
Tumor cell embolization
Even though malignant tumor cells may invade lymphatic
or blood vessels and enter the circulation, only an
extremely small number of embolized cells are apparently
able to establish metastatic lesions. For example,
experimental studies indicate that less than 0.01% (<1 in
10,000) of neoplastic cells entering the blood stream give
3.34 Photomicrograph of an invasive SCC from a horse. The neoplastic
 rise to metastatic tumors41. Tumor cell invasion of blood or
epithelial cells (arrows)] are surrounded by fibroblast proliferation of the
lymphatic vessels is not sufficient by itself to establish
stroma (S) (scirrhous or desmoplastic reaction]. H&tE.
metastatic growth. The host immune system plays an
90
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
important role in preventing the dissemination_of
often predispose to neoplasia. Heredity plays an
neoplastic cells and killing them in the vascular system. The
important role in many human tumors, including
survival and growth of metastatic cells is not a random
common cancers such as carcinoma of the colon and
 process but depends upon the selection of cancer cells
breast, and the same may be true for some tumors of
 possessing specific properties needed for metastatic growth.
domestic animals such as mast cell tumors in Boxers.
Familial
chromosomal
insta bility,
inherited
Tumor cell extravasation
abnormalities of DNA repair, and germline mutation of
This process involves more than the mere lodging of
various tumor suppressor genes have been associated with
embolized cancer cells in small vessels such as capillaries
tumorigenesis. In children with retinoblastoma, a mutant
or lymphatics. The sequence of mechanisms includes:
 gene whose normal function suppresses tumorigenesis is
 Adhesion to endothelial cells.
inherited from a carrier parent. An acquired mutation in,
 Endothelial cell retraction.
or loss of, the remaining normal gene (homozygosity for
+
 Migration.
( pu  aa jo ss no ae i
 Degradation of matrix.
results in absence of normal gene product, thereby
Locomotion.
permitting or resulting in tumorigenesis. In sporadic
(nonfamilial) retinoblastoma, loss of the normal gene
Neoplastic cells attach to the endothelial surface, induce
 product results from mutation or loss of both alleles. In
endothelial retraction, migrate through the breach,
most inherited predispositions to neoplasia, multiple
dissect beneath the endothelium, degrade the vascular
somatic genetic abnormalities occur that produce cancer.
basement membrane, and migrate out of the vascular
Thus, induction events can be based on activity of
compartment to form a metastatic tumor (3.35).
proliferation-promoting genes, on loss of normal
Within a primary tumor, there is a marked cellular
heterogeneity of metastatic potential. Factors which
negative regulatory pathways, and on loss of normal
influence the establishment of tumor metastases include:
 DNA repair mechanisms. The important interaction
genetic instability of the tumor cells; enzymatic degradation
between hereditary and environmental factors is obvious.
of basement membrane collagen; ability to withstand
trauma; size of the tumor cell embolus; interaction with
MORPHOLOGIC ALTERATIONS
cytotoxic T-cells, natural killer cells, and macrophages;
 One of the hallmarks of neoplasia is abnormal morphology.
entrapment by fibrin or platelets; and surface properties
which includes both cellular structure and tissue
(glycoproteins) which may favor the ability of variant
organization. Transformation, i.e. altered morphology in
tumor cells to reach and colonize specific organs.
vitro, is characteristic of cells that have undergone induction
events. However, morphologic alterations in vivo occur
ETIOLOGYOFNEOPLASIA
commonly in the absence of neoplasia.
Tumorigenesis is a complex multistep process, and even
Although morphologic alterations are the principal
clinically early cancers are late in the biological course of
method of identifying and classifying neoplasms, the
the disease. Intratumoral and intertumoral heterogeneity
 pathogenesis of these alterations at a cellular level is not
are common phenomena.
well understood. Cellular morphology is dependent upon
dynamic interactions of the structural components.
Induction events
Nuclear matrix forms an interlocking network with the
The specific causes of most types of neoplasia are
cytomatrix that extends throughout the cell and is
unknown but both environmental and hereditary factors
attached to the extracellular matrix via the cell
are involved. Induction is the multistep series of events
 membrane. The cytomatrix is composed in part of net
that converts a normal cell into one predisposed to
works of active microfilaments, intermediate filaments,
neoplasia. In chemical carcinogenesis, initiation results
and microtubules. Much of the macromolecular
from rapid, irreversible, permanent alterations in DNA
metabolism of cells fincluding synthesis of DNA, RNA,
after its interaction with the chemical. The specific
and protein) appears to respond to changes in cell shape.
 genetic target is known for very few carcinogens, e.g.
aflatoxin in hepatic carcinoma.
 Radiation also produces DNA damage, and many of the
3.35
critical changes in both chemical and radiation
tumorigenesis appears to involve conversion of normal
oncogenes or inactivation of suppressor genes42. Viral
 oncogenesis by both DNA and RNA viruses also involves 
alteration of cellular regulatory mechanisms. Some
oncogenic viruses encode an abnormal activated oncogene
product homologous to a proto-oncogene, which results in
abnormal overproduction of normal proto-oncogene
product, or eliminate normal function of a suppressor gene,
causing cellular proliferation.
Damage to DNA
(genotoxicity) is a common feature of these mechanisms of
 induction but nongenotoxic carcinogens also exist.
The processes of induction are not yet understood in
most human tumors. Diseases and conditions associated
 3.35 Neovascularization of the corneal stroma of a horse. A turmor
with  increased  cell proliferation (hyperproliferation)
embolus (arrow) is present in one of the blood vessels. H&tE.
BASIC OCULAR PATHOLOGY
91
Progressive loss of shape-responsive controls may be an
ROUTES OF METASTASIS
important factor in neoplasia.
The cells of primary neoplasms are heterogeneous for
 The mechanistic relationships
 between  genetic
metastatic properties. The process of metastasis is
alterations and abnormal morphology are poorly
 sequential and selective. Clonal dominance of a primary
understood. Growth-regulated cellular functions may be 
tumor by the subset of cells that have the ability to
an
metastasize may occur, due to selective pressures and
organized cytoskeleton that has been disrupted by the
growth advantages. Malignant tumor cells may spread
carcinogenic process. Also, cell-cell interaction probably
by three major routes: lymphatics, blood vessels, and
plays an important role in determining tumor architecture.
implantation (seeding) by  physical contact between
tumor and normal serosal or mucosal surfaces or surgical
TUMOR CELLPROLIFERATIONAND
instruments. The pattern of metastasis of tumors is not
TUMOR GROWTH
random. Both anatomy and local factors play a role in
Proliferation of normal cells is a tightly 1
regulated
the preferential pattern of metastasis which is evidenced
homeostatic function with numerous carefully balanced
by many types of cancers.
stimulatory and inhibitory pathways. Proliferation of tumor
Primary tumors arising in or near the tributaries to the
cells contributes to the growth of a tumor. Neoplastic cells
 portal vein often metastasize to the liver, while those in
 of the vast majority of tumors are derived from a single cell,
contact with the caval distribution disseminate to the
although the time during tumor development when
lungs. However, selective homing of tumor cells
sto
monoclonality begins is uncertain. Tumor progression is
particular organs outside the usual anatomic distribution
determined by the acquisition of permanent changes in one
occurs frequently. As expressed by Paget's hypothesis,
or more characteristics of a neoplasm. Heterogeneity within
both 'seed and soil' affect the pattern of dissemination.
a
neoplasm affects many  characteristics  including
That is, compatibility between the tumor cells (seed) and
morphology, cell surface receptors, karyotypes, growth
the parenchymal organ (soil) is needed for successful
properties, ability to invade and metastasize, and response
metastasis. Cell surface receptors between tumor cells
and endothelial cells are involved in “homing. The
to genetic instability, with random mutations leading to
parenchymal organ influences the endothelial receptors
selective production of new subclones.
by poorly understood mechanisms. Finally, some organs 
Tumor growth would seem at first glance to be
 are particularly resistant to metastasis of any kind, again
attributable to accelerated tumor cell proliferation.
for reasons that are not clear.
However, the rate of tumor cell proliferation is often not
increased over that of normal counterparts. Furthermore,
DIAGNOSIS OF NEOPLASIA
the length of the cell cycle is not shorter in tumors.
Specimens for the pathologic diagnosis of tumors may
Tumor growth is not often due to an increased growth
be obtained by excision, biopsy, intraoperative biopsy.
fraction (proportion of cycling cells), and the majority of
for "frozen section', needle aspiration, or preparation of
cells in a tumor are not replicating. Consequently, factors
Cytologic smears43,44 Routine staining techniques, such
as H&E, sometimes supplemented by special stains for
role in tumor growth.
cytoplasmic and secretory products, are most common-
Tumor cells can leave the proliferative pool by one of
ly used in the histopathologic evaluation of lesions by
four mechanisms:
light microscopy.
 Shedding due to reduced cohesion.
In some cases, more advanced techniques, such
Differentiation.
a s  immunohistochemistry fimmunoperoxidase/immuno-
+
Entrance into the resting phase (G0).
fluorescence), in situ hybridization, flow cytometry,
Apoptosis (programmed cell death).
chromosome analysis, and electron microscopy are
useful in the evaluation and classification of tumors.
In addition to accelerated proliferation, reduced cell
Understanding of the etiology of neoplasia continues to
death and cell loss is a primary factor in tumor growth.
expand at a remarkable rate. However, the complexity
This contribution to tumor growth has important
and  heterogeneity  of  the  abnormal processes  is
therapeutic implications: cytotoxic thera py directed only
 staggering. A major challenge is our ability to translate
at proliferating cells may fail to address a major
the advances in understanding into therapeutic aids that
determina nt of tumor growth.
will reduce morbidity and morta lity.
REFERENCES
1 Magone M, Whitcup S {1999)
3 Laurell C, Zetterstrom C {2000)
5 Foulds W (1990) The choroidal
Mechanisms of ocular inflammation.
Inflammation and blood-aqueous
circulation and retinal metabolism: an
Chemicat Immunology 73:90-119.
barrier disruption. Journat of Cataract
overview. Eye 4:243-248.
2 Holtkamp G, Kijlstra A, Peek R, de
and Refractive Surgery 26:306-307.
6 Green K, Paterson C, Cheeks L, Slagle
Vos A (2001) Retinal pigment
4 van der Woerdt A, Peterson ME (2000).
T, Jay W, Azaz M (1990) Ocular
epithelium-immune sy stem
Prevalence of ocular abnormalities in
blood flow and vascular pemeability
 interactions: cytokine production and
cats with hyperthyroidism. Journat of
in endotoxin-induced inflammation.
cytokine-induced changes. Progress in
Veterinary Internat Medicine
Ophthaimic Research 22:287-294.
Retinat Eye Research 20:29-48.
14(2):202-203.
92
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
7 Yamagata M, Wilkie DA, Gilger BC
19 Paterson S, Boydell P, Pike R {1995)
32 Herrera HD,Duchene AG {1998)
{1996) Eosinophilic
Systemic histiocytosis in the Bernese
 Uveodermatological syndrome
keratoconjunctivitis in seven horses.
Mountain Dog Journat of Smatt
{Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like
Journat of the American Veterinary
Animat Practice 36(5):233-236.
 syndrome) with generalized
Medical Association 209:1283-1286.
20 Peiffer R, Wilcock BP, Yin H {(1990)
depigmentation in a Dachshund.
8 Miller TR, Gaskin JM, Whitley RD,
The pathogenesis and significance of
Veterinary Ophthatmology
Wittcoff ML {1990) Herpetic keratitis 
pre-iridal fibrovascular membrane in
1(1):47-51.
in a horse. Equine Veterinary Journat
domestic animals. Veterinary
33 Pfleghaar S, Schaffer EH (1992) Lens-
Supplement 10:15-17.
Pathology 27:41-45.
induced uveitis {endophthalmitis
9 Bernays ME, Peiffer RL {1998) Ocular 
21 Peiffer R, Devanzo R, Cohen K {1981)
phakoanaphylactica) in domestic
 infections with dermatiaceous fungi in
Specular microscopic observations of
animals. Terarzt! Praxis 20(1):7-18.
two cats and a dog. Journat of the
clinically normal feline corneal
34 Neumann SM (1984) Corneal
American Veterinary Medicat
endothelium. American Jou rnat of
dermoid in a beef calf. Modern
Association 213:507-509.
Veterinary R esearch 42:854-855.
Veterinary Practice 65(7):553-554.
10 Ramsey D, Ketringn K, Glaze M,
22 Caffery B, Josephs J {1995) Corneal
35 Percy D, Scott F, Albert D {1975)
Render J (1996) Ligneous
vascularization. Optormetry Clinics 
Retinal dysplasia due to feline
conjunctivitis in four Doberman
4:19-29.
panleukopenia virus infection. Journat
Pinschers. Journat of the American
23 Williams R, Morter R, Freeman M,
of the American Veterinary Medicat
Animat Hospital Association
 Lavignette A {1971) Experimental
Association 167:935-937.
32:439-447
 chronic uveitis. Investigative
 36 Morris M (1965) Feline degenerative
11 La Croix N, van der Woerdt A,
Ophthatmotogy 10:948-954.
retinopathy. Corneft Veterinary
 Olivero D {2001) Non-healing ulcers
24 Garcia-Alonso M, Blanco A, Reina D,
60:295-308.
in cats: 29 cases (1991-1999). Journat
Serrano FJ, Alonso C, Nieto CG
 37 Narfstrom K (1983) Hereditary
of the American Veterinary Medicat
{1996) Immunopathology of the
 progressive retinal atrophy in the
Association 218:733-735.
uveitis in canine leishmaniasis.
Abyssinian cat. Journat of Heredity
12 Gardiner C, Dick E, Meininger A,
Parasite Immtunology
74:273-276.
Lozano-Alarcon F, Jackson P {1993)
18(12):617-623.
38 Narfstrom K, Wrigstad A, Ekesten B,
Onchocerciasis in two dogs. Journat
 25 Dubielzig R (1984) Ocular sarcoma
Nilsson SE {1994) Hereditary retinal
of the American Veterinary Medicat
 following trauma in three cats.
dystrophy in the Briard dog: clinical
Association 203:828-830.
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
and hereditary characteristics.
13 Rebhun W, Mirro E, Georgi M,
Medicat Association 184:578-581.
Veterinary &r Comparative
Kern T (1981) Habronemic
26 Dubielzig RR, Everitt J {1986) Feline
Ophthatmology 4:85-92.
blepharoconjunctivitis in horses.
ocular melanoma and post-traumatic
39 Schoster JV, Dubielzig RR, Sullivan L
Journat of the American Veterinary
sarcoma. Proceedings of the Scientific
(1993) Choroidal tmelanoma in a dog.
Medicat Association 179:469-472.
Meeting of the American Coltege of
Jotrnat of the American Veterinary
14 Hum S, Bowers JR (1989) Ocular
Veterinary Ophthatmologists
Medicat Association 203:89-91.
 mastocytosis in a horse. Australian
17:441-450.
40 Dubielzig RR (1990) Ocular neoplasia
Veterinary Jou rnal 66(1):32.
27 Brightman A, Vestre W, Helper L,
in small animals. Veterinary Clinics of
15 Rebhun W, Piero F {1998) Ocular
Godshalk C {1979) Chronic
North AmericafSmatt Animal Practice
lesions in horses with lymphosarcoma:
eosinophilic keratitis in the cat. Fetine
20(3):837-848.
21 cases (1977-1997). Journat of the
Practice 9:21-24.
41 Cook C, Peiffer R, Stine P {1984)
American Veterinary Medicat
28 Hines M, Halliwell R {1991)
Metastatic ocular squamous cell
Association 212:852-854.
Autoimmunity to retinal S-antigen in
carcinoma in a cat. Journat of the
16 Whiteley H, Young S, Liggitt H,
 horses with equine recurrent uveitis.
American Veterinary Medicat
Demartini J {1985) Ocular lesions of
Progress in Veterinary and
Association 185:1547-1549.
bovine malignant catarrhal fever.
Comparative Ophthaimology
42 Ching SV, Gillette SM, Powers BE,
Veterinary Pathotogy 22:219-225.
1:283-290.
Roberts SM, Gillette EL, Withrow SJ
17 Canapp SO, Cohn LA, Maggs DJ,
29 Romeike A, Brugmann M,
{1990) Radiation-induced ocular
Miller MA, Kerl ME, O'Brien DP
Drommer W (1998)
injury in the dog: a histological study.
(2001) Xerostomia, xerophthalmia,
Immunohistochemical studies in
Internationat Journat of Radiation
 and plasmacytic infiltrates of the
equine recurrent uveitis (ERU).
Oncotogy Biotogic Physics
 salivary glands (Sjogren's-like
Veterinary Pathology 35:515-526.
19(2):321-328.
syndrome) in a cat. Journat of the
30 Piper R, Cole C, Shadduck J (1970)
 43 Gelatt KN (1974) Ophthalmic biopsy
American Veterinary Medicat
Natural and experimental ocular
 procedures. Veterinary Clinics of
Association 218(1):59-65.
toxoplasmosis in animals. American
North America 4(2):437-438.
18 Fischer C (1979) Granuloma
Journat of Ophthaimology
 44 Havener VR (1980) Basic principles 
formation associated with
69:662-668.
for the submission and management
subconjunctival injection of a
31 Lindley DM, Boosinger TR, Cox NR
of ophthalmic specimens for 
corticosteroid in dogs. Journat of the
{1990) Ocular histopathology of
histopathology. Veterinary Clinics of
American Veterinary Medicat
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome
North American/Smalt Animat
Association 174:1086-1088.
in an Akita dog. Veterinary Pathotogy
Practice 10(2):497-508.
27(4):294-296.
93
4
Problem-Based
Management of
Ocular Emergencies
INTRODUCTION
Table 4.1 Ocular conditions associated with various
degrees of clinical urgency
There are relatively few true emergencies in ophthal-
mology where delaying treatment for a few minutes or
 Acute visual loss
 hours will change the outcome of the disesase but there
 Acute glaucoma
 are many that require timely therapy. Table 4.1 lists the
Luxated lens 
 Optic neuritis
usual ocular emergencies. The veterinarian is often asked
 Proptosis
 to respond to ocular conditions that are either dramatic
Acute detachment syndromes
and/or alarming to the owner but rather benign as far as
Iris prolapse
visual function is concerned. A good philosophy, when in 
Endophtha lmitis
doubt, is to see nonemergencies rather than risk turning 
Hyphema 
 away an emergency.
Acute cataracts
Jo ssi ane oii a aq u saaaa r
 Ruptured globe 
sight, imminent loss of sight, potential loss of sight,
Imminent visual loss 
 painful conditions but usually not blinding, and dramatic
Descemetocele
signs with no significant visual sequela (Table 4.1). In
Progressive ulcer 
 addition, systemic implications may be superimposed on
Endophthalmitis 
the ocular scoring, and the general practitioner should
Glaucoma
decide whether or not to refer the patient (Table 4.2).
Anterior uveitis 
The majority of ocular emergencies that have visual
 Corneal laceration 
implications should probably be seen by a veterinary
 Potential loss of sight
ophthalmologist, either for definitive therapy or to
Stromal ulcer
confirm your diagnosis and advise on therapy. Proptosis
Orbital cellulitis
Myositis of masticatory muscles
(prolapse) of the globe is one of the main exceptions for
referral. This condition can usually be readily managed
Anterior uveitis
Displaced lens 
without special instrumentation, and the outcome is
Immune-mediated keratitis
mainly dependent on the injury sustained by the eye at
 Corneal endothelial decompensation
the time of proptosis.
Cataract
Hyphema 
Lipids in aqueous
 Painful but not usually blinding
 Orbital cellulitis;abscess 
Superficial corneal ulcer 
Table 4.2 Ocular emergencies that should be referred
Corneal foreign body
 Entropion 
Distichia
 Most sight-threatening conditions
Aberrent cilia
Glaucoma
Myositis of masticatory muscles
Luxa ted/subluxated lens 
 Dramatic signs without visual significance
Optic neuritis 
 Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid 
Progressive ulcers
Protrusion of the third eyelid
Descemetoceles
Subconjunctival hemorrhage
lris prolapse from various causes
Chemosis
Acute retinal detachments: to determine cause
 Blepharoedema 
 Endophthalmitis 
Lacerations involving the third eyelid
 Acute cataracts
Lid lacerations
Uveitis workup
Lid bruising
Nontraumatic hyphema workup
94
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
Triaging ocular emergencies often begins on the
BLINDNESS
telephone. Knowing what questions to ask comes with
the experience of taking countless histories and listening
HISTORY
to clients interpret various ocular events {see Table 4.3
 Historical questions relating to blindness should include
for a list of questions regarding loss of sight). In general,
the duration of the problem, partial or complete loss of
it is difficult to interpret events from an owner's
vision, conditions under which it is observed {both
perspective, so when in doubt, timely examination
environment and light conditions), course, what the
should be encouraged.
animal can and cannot do visually, systemic or
Detailed management of all the possible ocular
neurologic signs, breed, and age of animal (Table 4.3).
a ng  s u m p aa ou lm saa
Many animals that have their environment changed
reader will be referred to the appropriate chapter for a
are thought by their owners to become acutely blind,
detailed discussion. The objective of this chapter is to
when in reality they have been chronically blind from an
develop a *mindset? or mental algorithm for managing
insidious problem. True acute blindness is usually
ocular emergencies.
associated with disorientation and anxiety, which should
Ocular emergencies can be categorized into one or more
be differentiated from signs and symptoms of senile
problems: loss of vision in one or both eyes, unequal pupils,
 dementia (cognitive dysfunction syndrome), such as
red eye, painful eye, ocular discharge, ocular opacity, and
pacing, circling, and panting, that are often interpreted
change in position of the eye. It is helpful to have an
by owners as being caused by blindness. When asked,
algorithm to investigate the various problems rationally.
many owners will note differences in vision with varying
amounts of ambient light. However, this information is
not usually spontaneously volunteered.
 The owner should be asked about systemic or
topical medications that the patient may have been
given in the recent past or is currently taking, and
Table 4.3 History taking questions for patients with
any history of systemic problems.
vision loss
Evaluation of patients with vision
 Qu estion
Variables
deficiency (4.1)
Clinical testing of vision is usually limited to a maze test,
Duration of deficit?
Acute, chronic
menace response, and the dazzle reflex. The maze test
Amount of deficit?
Complete, partial, one eye
 e a o u pd aa og
conditions. The pupillary light reflex (PLR) should be
Type of deficit?
 Complete, moving versus
evaluated with a bright light and the intraocular pressure
 stationary, large versus small,
{IOP) taken before dilating the pupils if they are not
 near versus far
already dilated. Interpretation of the PLR is not as
 Changes since first noted?
Static, progressive 
obvious as is often suggested, and incomplete sluggish
movement should not be interpreted as a normal
 Ability to see in various 
Night blind, day blind,
response. Conversely, a lack of response often occurs
ambient light conditions?
no difference
from something as innocuous as atrophy of the iris
 Environment when
No change, moved, different
sphincter. Examination with a penlight at this time will
first noted?
note other signs such as conjunctival hyperemia, corneal
opacification and irregularities, abnormal anterior
 Environment of animal?
Outside, inside, both
chamber contents (flare, hypopyon, hyphema ), irregula-
rities in the pupil margin and iris, and significant
 Medications past and
Preventive, therapeutic, how
opacities in the axial lens. Once the pupils are dilated, a
present?
much, how long, current
penlight examination will quickly determine whether the
Toxin exposure?
House plants, insecticides,
vision complaints can be attributible to the clear media
 pest control
by the presence or absence of a clear tapetal reflection.
Systemic signs?
 PU/PD, weight gain, appetite,
Assumptions should not be made until the pupils
 seizures, ataxia, weakness
are dilated; nuclear sclerosis is easily misdiagnosed
Intact or neu tered?
Used for breeding?
as blinding cataracts in aged patients.
Diet?
Commercial, formulated, table
food
Causes of blindness
 Other animals in 
Related, ages, similar signs,
 There are usually four broad categories of patients: blind
environment?
illness 
with PLR, with or without clear media, and blind with
no PLR, with or without clear media. If possible, a
Past medical history?
None, CNS signs, metabolic
fundus examination should now be performed. If the
signs, neoplasia
fundus can be examined, blindness should not be
PROBLEM-BASED MANAGEMENT OF OCULAR EMERGENCIES
95
4.1
Confirm blindness:
menace response, following hand motion, following falling cotton balls, maze test
Evaluate pupillary light reflexes (PLR)
Present
 Examine iris for
adhesions,
Absent
 atrophy, history
of atropine
medication 
Dilate pupils
Abnormal iris
Absent fundus reflex
Evaluate clear
media
 Examine for more than
 one ocular lesion 
Loca lize lesion:
Good fundus 
Cornea
reflex
Aqueous
 Lens
Vitreous
 Examine retinaf
Evalua te
clear media
 optic papilla
Abnormal
Abnormal
Evaluate retinaf
Normal
optic disk
Probable error
ERG
Abnormal
in interpretation
Measure intraocular
of PLR
pressure
Glaucoma if
 elevated 
Normal
ERG
Abnormal
Normal
'Cortical'
Neurologic
 Chiasm or
Diffuse
blindness
signs
 bilateral nerve or
retinal
tract lesions 
disease
Neurologic
evalua tion
4.1 Algorithm for evaluating blindnes5.
96
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE IN VeTeRiNARY MeDiCINE
attributed to opacification of the media. If media
If the fundus can be examined, the possibilities are:
opacification
 precludes  fundus examination, ↑
the
dramatic fundus lesions, optic nerve lesions, minor/focal
challenge is to determine the location of the opacity and
fundus lesions, or no lesions. Blindness with normal
PLRs, clear media, and a normal fundus usually equates
indeed, needs therapy ( Table 4.4). Acute corneal edema,
to central nervous system (CNS) blindness, either
large fibrin clots or lipids in the anterior chamber,
associated with metabolic disease (portocaval shunts) or
hyphema, acute cataract formation, hyalitis, and vitreal
diffuse or multifocal CNS disease. These cases should
hemorrhage are examples of opacities in the clear media
have medical and neurologic workup. Hemeralopia {day
that may be presented as an emergency.
blindness), a relatively rare disease, will mimic CNS
The two conditions that pose the greatest challenge to
blindness but will date back to a young age and evidence
recognition are lipids in the anterior chamber and hyalitis
of vision in a darkened environment.
{vitreal opacity). True acute cataracts, while not an
Bilateral blindness with sluggish or dilated pupils and
emergency in themselves, are typically intumescent
clear media implies an afferent arc lesion in the PLR
(swollen) and may have accompanying severe lens-
(bilateral retina, optic nerve, chiasm, or optic tract)
induced uveitis and/or glaucoma. The main rule out for
(Table 4.5). If the lesion is in the retina or anterior optic
true acute bilateral cataracts is diabetes mellitus and the
nerve, dramatic retinal lesions such as detachments,
 accompanying systemic implications. Ocular ultrasound
diffuse tapetal hyperreflectivity and vascular attenuation,
is invaluable with opaque ocular media to determine the
diffuse inflammatory lesions, diffuse retinal hemor-
full extent of the lesions and, sometimes, to diagnose the
rhages, or disc elevation with hyperemia and edema will
cause of the opacification, e.g. foreign bodies, intraocular
be present in most instances (Table 4.4). The three main
tumors, retinal detachment.
exceptions are sudden acquired retinal degeneration
Table 4.4 Causes of bilateral loss of vision
Opacification of the clear media
Lesions of the optic nerve, chiasm, optic tracts, or
 optic radiations
Keratitis: keratoconjunctivitis sicca, immune mediated,
multiple ulcerative events, chemical burns 
Hypoplasia of the optic nerves
Keratopathy: lipids, endothelial
 Granulomatous meningoencepha litis
 dystrophy/degenerationfinflammation
 Distemper encephalitis
Aqueous turbidity: fibrin, lipids, hemorrhage 
FIP
Cataracts: genetic, metabolic, toxic, nutritional,
Systemic mycoses
radiation, traumatic, inflammation
Neoplasia involving the chiasm
Vitreous: hemorrhage, inflammation, fibrous scars
Traumatic avulsion 
Myositis of masticatory muscles
Diseases of the retina
Vitamin A deficiency
Retinopathies
Genetic: PRA, inborn errors of metabolism,
Lesions of the occipital cortex
 hemerolopia
Hydrocephalus
Nutritional: taurine deficiency (cats), vitamin E
Cerebral malformations
Glaucoma
 Distemper encephalomyelitis
 Postinflammatory atrophy
FIP
SARD
Systemic mycoses
Toxic: enrofloxacin, ivermectin
Granulomatous encephalomyelitis
 Retinal detachment syndromes
Hepatoencephalopathy
 Genetic: Collie eye anomaly, retinal dysplasia
Inborn metabolic errors
 syndromes, Australian Shepherd anomaly
Ivermectin toxicosis
Exudative: systemic mycoses, protothecosis,
Hypoxia
ehrlichiosis, toxoplasmosis, FIP, FeLV, immune-
Vascular infarcts
 mediated choroiditis
 Traumatic edema andjor hemorrhage
Transudative: hypertension, i.v. solution overload
Postictus
Neoplastic: metatstatic, multicentric
 Chorioretinitis
 Distemper, systemic mycoses, brucellosis, FIP,
toxoplasmosis, ehrlichiosis, granulomatous
 meningoencephalitis, bacterial septicemia, VKH
syndrome
PROBLEM-BASED MANAGEMENT OF OCULAR EMERGENCIES
97
(SARD), retrobulbar neuritis, and chiasmal lesions
hypertension
and
sterile
(immune-mediated)
(pituitary tumor). The majority, but not all, of SARD
choroiditis. Nonseptic optic neuritis may respond to
patients may have accompanying cushingoid signs and
systemic glucocorticoids. Metabolic (liver disease)
clinical features. 
An  electroretinogram ( ERG)
 will
blindness_and some toxicities (ivermectin)  which
differentiate SARD (extinguished trace) from retrobul bar
produce CNS blindness may improve with specific
neuritis/chiasmal lesions (normal trace).
therapy or time.
Focal lesions that may be incidental are the most
difficult to interpret. The focal lesions may be clues in
ANISOCORIA
piecing the puzzle together or, more likely, be “red
Evaluation
herrings'. What appears to be a focal "scar in one eye
Cats or dogs with light colored irides are most likely to
may be geographic retinal dysplasia and indicates that
be presented for the complaint of unequal pupils. Dark
the retinal detachment in the contralateral eye is part of
irides are often difficult to evaluate against the black
 an inheritable dysplasia/detachment syndrome.
 pupil. The first decision is to determine which of the
Of the causes of acute blindness, only a small
pupils is abnormal; this is not always obvious if the
number can 
be successfully
 treated. Blindness
anisocoria is mild and both pupils are mobile.
associated with opacities in the clear media may be
reversible (inflammation, lipids, some hemorrhages,
While anisocoria has neurologic connotations to
glaucoma-induced corneal edema, luxated lens) 
"by
 most observers, ocular causes should always be
treating the ocular disease or by removing the opacity
ruled out first as these are much more common.
(cataracts). Blindness in eyes with clear media can
occasionally be treated. Examples of potentially
The pupillomotor pathways are presented in 11.8,
treatable retinal diseases are bullous detachments from
11.10. Anisocoria is evaluated in a dark room by shining
Table 4.5 Pupillary light reflexes with unilateral complete lesions at various levels of the visual system 
Location of lesion
PLR
Anisocoria
Menace
ERG
 Retina 
Absent direct
Mild static
Absent
Extinguished
Ipsilaterally, +MG
Optic nerve
Absent direct,
Mild static
Absent
Normal
Ipsilaterally, +MG
 Chiasm 
Absent OU
Mild static
Absent
Normal
 Optic tract
Present, -MG
Mild static
Homonymous field
Normal
defect
Optic radiations
Present
None
Homonymous field 
Normal
visual cortex
defect
PLR: pupillary light reflex; ERG: electroretinogram; MG: Marcus Gunn (pupil); OU: oculus uterque (each eye).
98
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
4.2
Anisocoria
Greater in dark
Grea ter in light
(suggests dilator
 (suggests sphincter
weakness or
weakness or
 Sympathetic lesion]
 parasympathetic
 Examine eye closely
[esion]
Normal
Normal
Constricted-
Abnormal
 Dilated
Stain cornea
Measure IOP
Ulcer
Iritis
Elevated
Normal I0P
 Examine for others
 signs of Horner's
syndrome
Glaucoma
Iris atrophy.
hypoplasia,-
synechia 
Visual
Dilates
Does not dilate
19o pilocarpine
Preganglionic
0.01-0.001%
lesion 
epinephrine 
Response
No response
hypersensitive
▼
No dilation
 Parasympathetic
Atropine
lesion
blockade
Reduced vision
Dilates
Swinging flashlight test
Postganglionic lesion
+MG
Optic tract
ERG
disease partial
chiasm lesion
Fat
Norma
Retinal disease
 Optic nerve
complete chiasm
lesion 
4.2 Algorithm for evaluating anisocoria. (IOP: intraocular presure; MG: Marcus Gunn (pupil); ERG: electroretinogram.)
PROBLEM-BASED MANAGEMENT OF OCULAR EMERGENCIES
99
the light at the base of the nose. This results in both
The main rule outs for static anisocoria associated
pupils being illuminated against the tapetal reflection.
with blindness and other ocular problems are glaucoma
Anisocoria should be evaluated under both dark and
(dilated pupil), uveitis {constricted or midpoint), or a
ambient light conditions. An algorithm for evaluating
combination of the two. A fixed dilated pupil with
 anisocoria is presented in 4.2. The PLRs are evaluated
blindness but without a red eye, may be due to an orbital
with the swinging flashlight test. Anisocorias can be
apex syndrome. The latter is usually due to a space-
classified as to whether the PLRs are static {constant) or
 occupying orbital lesion and will have decreased globe 
dynamic (manifest during or after light stimulation).
retropulsion. Detailed workups should entail finding the
underlying cause for these ocular signs.
Causes of anisocoria
Emergency therapy for anisocoria is indicated for the
ocular signs of uveitis (see Chapter 11, p.298) and
form most likely to be noted and is often associated with
glaucoma (see Chapter 12, p.337)
vision complaints (Table 4.5).  Static anisocoria 
is
associated with disease of the efferent side of the PLR reflex
OCULAR PAIN
arc from the parasympathetic nuclei to the iris. Evaluation
Evaluation
of static anisorcoria should start from the eye and work
 Ocular pain is a frequent cause of presentation of ocular
backwards to the brain. Ocular examination should
emergencies. The most obvious manifestations of ocular
determine if the pupil is constricted, midpoint, or dilated.
pain are blepharospasm, third eyelid protrusion, and
Constricted pupils are typical of acute uveitis, iris spasm
enophthalmos. Since the cornea is one of the most
such as from corneal pain, or drug induced. Midpoint
sensitive tissues in the body, it should be evaluated first.
irregular pupils are typical of a chronic uveitis. Irregular
 4.3 is an algorithm for evaluating blepharospasm. The
pupils may be congenital or be due to posterior or anterior
corneal nerve endings
aré
concentrated in the
synechia, iris atrophy, or a space occupying lesion in the
subepithelial region, and thus the degree of pain may be
iris. A dilated pupil may be irregular if associated with iris
inversely related to the seriousness of the corneal
 atrophy or synechia, and will be regular if associated with
disease: superficial ulcers may cause more pain than
 Oculomotor paralysis, glaucoma, or if drug induced.
deep ulcers. Corneal ulceration is the most common
If the cause of anisocoria is ocular disease, there are
 form of corneal disease associated with significant pain.
usually other ocular signs such
as conjunctival
However, nonulcerative disease is also a common cause
"ipiquni rouny snonbe oedo leauos 'eiuauaday
 of pain, especially in horses. All patients with corneal
altered anterior chamber depth, and blindness. Oculo-
pain should have fluorescein testing of the cornea to
motor nerve paralysis may be strictly internal, combined
 detect ulceration. In the cat, evaluation with a blue light
with external ophthalmoplegia (paralysis of extraocular
and/or rose bengal may be necessary to detect small
 muscles), or present with other neurologic signs that may
herpesvirus ulcerations.
 suggest neighboring lesions.
Blepharospasm 
Examine lid
 Perform Schirmer tear
Topical anesthesia
 conformation without
testing
head restraint 
Reevaluate conformation 
Normal
 Stain cornea
Positive -
Search for a
with fluorescein
physical cause
 and remove 
Entropion
Negative
 Examine conjunctival surfaces for foreign 
distichia
body, aberrent cilia, inflammation 
Examine intraocular structures for an acute anterior
 uveitis, acute glaucoma, or luxated lens 
4.3 Algorithm for evaluating blepharospasm.
100
O pHThAlMIC DiseAse In VeterinArY MeDiCINE
Causes of ocular pain
Depending on the surface area of the defect, some
If corneal ulcers are present, the examination should be
descemetoceles may be tolerated for an extended period
continued to search for the cause (Table 4.6). All ulcers
of time but it is best to assume they are an urgent
should be evaluated for depth and the likelihood of
problem. Descemetoceles are a surgical problem and
 progression, i.e. how serious an emergency is it. Epithelial
 should be referred by most general practitioners.
ulcers, while painful, do not represent a true emergency
Another source of corneal pain may be from a plant
despite the dramatic signs. Epithelial ulcers will have only
'e e si aoueieadde uowuoo isou aul apoq uaia1oj
a thin margin of epithelium visible at the edges without
brownish 1-2 mm lesion lying on the corneal surface
 any appreciable depth to the base of the ulcer (10.71).
{10.106). This type of foreign body can be easily
These ulcers may present problems with slow healing but
removed after application of a topical anesthetic.
rarely become progressive in depth except in some
Splinters are much more difficult to remove, requiring
brachycephalic breeds (see Chapter 10, p.241).
 general anesthesia and delicate forceps, so they should be
Stromal ulcers have some depth to the sides of the
 referred. Penetrating foreign bodies that are retained
ulcer {10.65), take up fluorescein stain, usually stimulate
aha aui oi ysu yueoyuais asod Aau spauajau a pinous
some neutrophilic infiltration,
and  have
some
through sterile as well as septic inflammation. Breeching
perilesional edema. If a mucopurulent exudate or a dense
the lens capsules with these injuries may necessitate lens
yellow perilesional halo accompanies the stromal ulcer,
 removal to save the eye.
both bacterial  sepsis and progression should be
anticipated, and intensive therapy should be initiated to
 Small self-sealing perforating injuries often belie the
arrest further development {see Chapter 10, p.241). For
seriousness of the incident if the lens capsule has
the general practitioner, these cases should be referred
been ruptured or vitreal/retinal pathology exists.
before they become surgical emergencies. An ulcer with
steep edges and a clear bottom that does not take up
Perforations, whether self-sealing or closed by iris
stain represents a descemetocele and is in imminent
entrapment, may be from BB (airgun) shot or pellet
danger of perforation {10.70). Care in manipulation of
injuries, lacerations, perforated ulcers, or ruptured
the eye and restraint of the patient are important in order
 globes following blunt trauma. Recognition of an iris
to avoid applying pressure to a severely weakened globe.
prolapse should prompt immediate referral.
All focal, peracute, perforating lesions, even if
sealed, should have ultrasound and/or radiographic
examination of the head to diagnose metallic
Table 4.6 Rule outs for the cause of corneal ulceration
foreign bodies.
Acute anterior uveitis and acute anterior lens
 Mechanical irritation 
luxation, with or without glaucoma, often manifest with
 Distichia, trichiasis, aberrant cilia, entropion, foreign
 bodies, dermoid cyst
acute ocular pain. Concomitant signs of selective
conjunctival hyperemia, corneal edema, and pupillary
Trauma
changes will accompany these syndromes. In the dog, if
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
the lens is clear and luxated, it probably represents a
 Deficiency in serous, mucous, or lipid layers 
primary luxation if in a predisposed breed, such as a
 Epithelial bulla rupture
terrier (see Chapter 13, p.369). If the lens is cataractous,
Corneal edema from endothelial disease: degeneration,
it is probably a secondary luxation, and the prognosis for
 inflammation, trauma
vision may be guarded. Emergency treatment of a
Lagophtha lmos
luxated lens consists of controlling the IOP with drugs
 Shallow orbits, Vllth cranial nerve paralysis,
that do not constrict the pupil. Pupillary constriction
exophthalmo5
with acetylcholine-like drugs or prostaglandin analogs
may aggravate a pupillary block. In the cat and horse,
Neurotrophic
Vth cranial nerve deficit, postsurgical, postlasering of
most lens luxations are secondary to uveitis and the
 ciliary body
 prognosis is more complex.
Acute anterior uveitis is typically treated with anti-
Infectious
inflammatory drugs, by topical and systemic routes, and
Viral: herpesvirus in cats 
Bacterial: Moraxelfa spp., secondary to trauma 
with topical atropine. Systemic glucocorticoids should
 not be used if there is known or suspected systemic
 Fungal: usually secondary to trauma
bacterial or fungal infection. Antibiotics are indicated
Immunologic: peripheral ulcerations and furrows, rarely
bullous epithelial diseases 
indications.
Degenerative
 Calcium and lipid plaques sloughing
OCULAR DISCHARGE
 Thermal injuries
Evaluation
 Chemical injuries
 If patients are presented for an ocular emergency because of
Acids, alkalies, soaps
andonu si aarusp au aed aaeos renoo ue
 Basal lamina defects 
or purulent and copious. Most patients presented with an
Indolent ulcers 
ocular emergency will at least have epiphora, although this
will not be the presenting symptom.
PROBLEM-BASED MANAGEMENT OF OCULAR EMERGENCIES
101
Virtually all patients with purulent ocular discharge will
Tear production should always be evaluated in
have conjunctival hyperemia. Additional signs such as pain
patients with ocular discharge. Patients with acute
and corneal lesions are common, as well as intraocular
keratoconjunctivitis sicca  frequently develop  deep
changes. The possible diagnoses with this problem include
corneal ulcers. Patients with acute glaucoma may have
conjunctivitis, keratitis, and enophthalmitis, and they are
decreased tear production with mucopurulent discharge,
differentiated by the associated signs. 4.4 presents a
or increased tear production with epiphora.
diagnostic plan. Conjunctival hyperemia with conjunc-
Conjunctival cultures and cytology are indicated in
tivitis is typically diffuse and primarily on the palpebral
 many patients with acute purulent discharge. Topical
surface {4.5). Selective large conjunctival vessel hyperemia
antibiotics are indicated for variable periods depending
is more typical of intraocular diseases (glaucoma, uveitis)
On the underlying cause.
and scleritis (4.6).
 Diagnostic Action
Diagnostic Action
4.4
Conjunetivitis
Glaucoma
Uveitis
Episcleritis
diffuse
selective
selective
 selective
Diffuse or selective
injection
Examine intraocular
normal
dilated, fixed 
constricted,
normal
structure
pupil
irregular pupil
Schirmer tear test
variable
normal or 
normal or
Fluorescein stain
normal
normal
normal
normal
Topical anesthesia
normal
elevated
low
normal or
Measure 10P
4.4 Algorithm for evaluating conjunctival hyperemia.
4.5
4.6
4.5 Conjunctival hyperemia typical of conjunctivitis in a dog. Note
4.6 Conjunctival hyperemia in a dog, typical of intraocular disease.
the diffuse hyperemia involving capillaries and the large vessel5.
with selective large vessel injection of the bulbar surface.
This involves both bulbar and palpebral conjunctiva, but is usually
 mainly palpebral.
102
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
CHANGES IN POSITION OF THE GLOBE
 specifically evaluated from a dorsal perspective, and by
Evaluation
testing ocular retropulsion (see Chapter 1, p.11, 1.4).
The ocular emergencies most commonly associated with
While not a strict ocular emergency, it is desirable to
this complaint are proptosis of the globe and acute
initiate systemic antibiotics as soon as possible to shorten
 orbital cellulitis. Proptosis of the globe does not represent
the course of the disease.
a diagnostic challenge, and the reader is referred to
Enophthalmos may be presented with a complaint of
Chapter 6 (p.113) for a more detailed discussion on
"film over the eye' or 'the eye is rolling up into the head'.
prognosis and therapy. While considered an emergency
These observations are of course due to protrusion of the
for humane reasons, the prognosis for vision is altered
third eyelid. The most common cause of acute
very little by prompt therapy.
enophthalmos that will be presented as an emergency is
 Orbital cellulitis is a questionable emergency from the
d reino uo uissnsp snaad an sash uind ieino
perspective of affecting vision but the dramatic pain and
and Chapter 6 [p.113].)
periocular swelling prompts the request for emergency
examination. Severe forms of orbital cellulitis may affect
OCULAR OPACITY
the optic nerve and vision. Early oribital cellulitis
juasad Aeu aedo renso ue ym jed ausaa a
 presents with a red eye and a protruding third eyelid. The
with problems as diverse as third eyelid protrusion,
exophthalmos at this time may not be noted unless
pannus, corneal edema, lipids in the aqueous humor, fibrin
in the anterior chamber, hyphema, and cataracts. The
opacities can be divided into red, white, or black. Tables
4.7-4.9 present causes of opacities based on color.
Table 4.7 Rule outs for a red eye
Third eyelid protrusion is a frequent cause for
emergency presentation and has been discussed with
ocular pain. In evaluating protrusion of the third eyelid it
Intraocu lar redness
is important for the examiner to keep in mind the factors
Hyphema 
that control the position of the third eyelid in order to
Vitreous hemorrhage
develop an algorithm for protrusion (see Chapter 8,
Normal albinotic fundus reflection
p.183). Emergency conditions that may be presented
Hemorrhage into the lens (rare) associated with
with this problem would be any condition that produces
 congenital vascular anomalies (PHTVL)
pain fconjunctivitis, corneal ulcers, glaucoma, acute
 Ocular surface redness 
uveitis, acute lens luxation); acute orbital space-
Conjunctivitis
occupying lesion (hemorrhage, inflammation, edema);
Anterior uveitis
head, neck, and chest trauma; poisoning (strychnine);:
Glaucoma 
tetanus; and systemic states that induce dehydration.
Episcleritis/scleritis 
Opacities of the cornea that are acute and may present
Subconjunctival hemorrhage 
 as an emergency include corneal edema (white), cellular
Corneal granulation in healed ulcer, proliferative
infiltration (creamy   white),  stromal  hemorrhage
keratitis
{relatively rare), and black lesions produced by uveal
 Corneal neovascularization: ulcerative and
prolapse. Profound corneal edema implies endothelial
 nonulcerative keratitis
disease or deep corneal involvement and may be caused
 Corneal hemorrhage: rare
by trauma, uveitis, glaucoma, or a luxated lens {see
Corneal neoplasia
Chapter 10, p.241, 10.24). Therapy should be directed at
Iris prolapse covered by fibrin-laceration, perforated 
the underlying cause of the opacity; topical hyperosmotic
corneal ulcer, ruptured globe, perforating injury
drugs will produce only minimal improvement. Chronic
Table 4.8 Rule cuts for white corneal opacities
Table 4.9 Rule outs for black corneal opacities
Lipid deposition: any depth
Chronic keratitis with melanin migration: superficial, flat
Calcium deposition: usually superficial
Limbal melanocytoma: usually raised
 Stromal scar: any depth 
aonsip ldnd pasien Alensn 'eioyadns sasdeloid s
 Edema: usually full-thickness
 chamber shallowed
Leukocytic infiltration: any depth
 Anterior synechia: deep, distorted pupil, shallow chamber
Infectious agents: mycotic plaques, 'Florida spots'
 Persitent pupillary membrane attachments: deep, may
 Descemet's membrane scars: PPM, anterior synechia,
have strands present, pupil usually not distorted
 perforating injuries, inflammatory
 Intraocular melanoma: extraocular invasion, extension to
Inclusion cyst: relatively rare, usually superficial
 posterior cornea, mass in globe
Corneal scleralization: extends from limbus 
 Corneal sequestrum: only in cats, superficial but extends 
Eosinophilic protein: present with eosinophilic keratitis
deep
syndromes in cat and horse
Dematiaceous fungi: rare, cytology
 Immune complex formation: often multifocal or
Plant foreign bodies: superficial
 zonular 
 Drug residues: rare, silver nitrate, epinephrine
PROBLEM-BASED MANAGEMENT OF OCULAR EMERGENCIES
103
corneal edema may be presented as an emergency due to
 Fibrin clots may produce acute opacities in the eye and
the formation of subepithelial bullae that rupture,
are often intermixed with hemorrhage {11.54). Dramatic
producing a painful acute ulcerative syndrome. The
fibrin clots are most commonly observed in neonatal
causes of chronic edema are similar to the ca uses of acute
septicemia in large animals (11.60),. The aqueous humor
edema, with the addition of senile denenerative disease.
may be sterile but antibiotics should be administered as
 Intense leukocytic infiltration, usually accompanied by
well as anti-inflammatories and atropine. Large fibrin clots
edema and neovascularization, is a common emergency
may undergo dramatic resolution over a 7-day period but
presentation  with septic ulcerative or nonulcerative
intraocular tissue plasminogen activator {tPA) will ensure
keratitis (10.86). Corneal abscessation is common in the
and hasten the resolution (see Chapter 11, p.298).
horse but less so in other species. The cause may be
 Subconjunctival hemorrhage is a common finding on
bacterial or fungal. Intense topical antibacterial and
ocular examination in trauma patients but is usually not
antifungal therapy is indicated. Systemic antifungal
the presenting complaint. In itself, subconjunctival
therapy can also be administered but is very expensive.
hemorrhage is a benign condition that does not require
Other causes for white corneal opacities are lipids,
therapy. The remainder of the eye should always be
calcium, eosinophils, and infectious agents. Lipids and
evaluated to ascertain if other more serious ocular lesions
calcium in the cornea are usually incidental findings,
may be present. Subconjunctival hemorrhage is usually
although exceptions may occur. Occasionally, lipid
due to tra uma but choking injuries and systemic diseases 
degeneration associated with hypothyroidism is diffuse
 should also be considered if other physical evidence of
and rapid enough to be presented with a sense of urgency.
trauma is not present.
Calcium is usually deposited superficially in the cornea,
Hyphema is commonly presented as an ocular
and denotes_ a degenerative condition; if rapidly
emergency but in reality there is no need for urgent
progressing, Cushing's syndrome should be considered.
treatment. However, the systemic implications of
Calcium plaques may slough and produce corneal ulcers.
hyphema may warrant an emergency visit. The outcome
Eosinophilic keratitis in the horse and cat may have
of traumatic hyphema is rarely dependent on the therapy
white plaques or spots in a bed of granulous tissue that,
but is dependent on the initial damage produced by the
 on cytology, reveals numerous eosinophils and mast
trauma and the amount of blood present. While trauma
cells. These patients will present with pain or red,
is the most common cause of hyphema, it is not the only
 granulating opacities ( 10.47, 10.48). The most common
cause. Unless there is physical evidence of trauma or
infectious cause for white to yellow plaques on the
trauma was witnessed, an underlying systemic disease
cornea is fungal infection. The horse is unique in its
should always be considered, such as hypertension,
susceptibility to fungal keratitis but it may occur
blood dyscrasias, diseases causing vasculitis such as tick
occasionally in the dog and cat (10.37). The diagnosis
born infection, and clotting and bleeding disorders. It is
 is made from corneal cytology.
common for the owner to presume trauma with hyphema
Hypopyon {leukocytes in the anterior chamber) is
and present it as historical fact, when it was not actually
common with septic ulceration and uveitis but is not
observed. Conversely, the patient may have suffered
usually the presenting symptom. It is recognized by the
trauma as a result of hyphema or blindness. The opposite
white boat-shaped opacity in the ventral anterior
eye and the fundus should also be examined for evidence
chamber (see Chapter 11, p. 298, 11.52). Hypopyon is
of hemorrhage. Hyphema may also mask and be caused
not an absolute indicator of intraocular sepsis. Sterile
by other ocular conditions such as neoplasia, glaucoma,
inflammation can also induce hypopyon but it is safer to
retinal detachment {acute or chronic), and chronic
assume sepsis and treat with antibiotics until proven
uveitis. Ocular ultrasonography is indicated to determine 
otherwise. Rarely, ocular lymphoma syndromes will be
the presence of other lesions and the extent of the ocular
 presented with marked hypopyon (11.51).
hemorrhage (presence in the vitreous).
Aasn e se siadde iaques rouaue au u pidr
The prognosis for hyphema depends on the cause and
white opacity and may be confused with diffuse corneal
associated ocular lesions. Simple traumatic hyphema
edema or a cataract with a dilated pupil (11.65). The
 involving less than half of the anterior chamber has a
lack of texture may help to differentiate lipid from
good prognosis, whereas complete hyphema has a
corneal edema, and the inabililty to see the iris should
guarded prognosis. Assessment of the degree of hyphema
differentiate it from a cataract. Lipid in the anterior
may vary with the animal's activity level. Hyphema
chamber indicates systemic hyperlipidemia, and may
usually settles out in the anterior chamber with rest and
occur with systemic metabolic diseases such as diabetes
becomes  dispersed   with activity.T
This _apparent
mellitus, pancreatitis, Cushing's disease, liver disease,
worsening of the hyphema is not accompanied by any
and essential hyperlipidemia of Schnauzers, or may result
change in the amount of blood in the anterior chamber.
 simply from ingestion of a fatty meal (garbage). Lipids
The main therapy for hyphema is cage rest and
tranquilization. While a variety of drugs have been used
the blood-aqueous humor barrier and their presence
to treat hyphema, none have shown clear benefit in
implies underlying uveitis. Consequently, most patients
controlled studies. Patients with traumatic hyphema
with lipid aqueous humor also have a red eye. Therapy
 should be assumed to have traumatic uveitis as well, and
should be directed at any systemic disease, treating the
should be treated accordingly. Surgical removal of the
uveitis with antiinflammatory drugs and atropine, and
blood is rarely indicated.
dietary restriction of fat.
Glaucoma may be
a
Acute onset of cataracts is occasionally presented as
complication of lipids in the anterior chamber, so the IOP
 an emergency. One of two scenerios is usually present 
 should be monitored and glaucoma therapy initiated if
with this complaint: insidious cataracts that have reached
the IOP is elevated (see Chapter 12, p.337).
a threshold that the owner has noticed, or truly acute
104
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
onset of bilateral cataracts. Most forms of cataracts are
Acute lid swelling from contusions should be further
usually significantly asymmetrical in their development
evaluated for globe and orbital injuries, and they may
with the significant exception of sugar and toxic
benefit from cold packing in the first 12-24 hours, and,
cataracts. Of these exceptions, diabetic cataracts are by
later, from hot packing. Acute cellulitis or abscessation is
far the most common. Diabetic cataracts may literally
a common emergency in cats, particularly free-roaming
appear overnight to the owners, and often the owners do
intact males. If treated early, systemic antibiotics will be
 not volunteer information regarding the accompanying
sufficient but at the stage of abscessation, drainage plus
systemic signs, such as polyurea and polydipsia. These
 local and systemic antimicrobial therapy is necessary. Lid
patients are often poorly regulated and ketotic, and can
abscessation often produces marked chemosis and may
sometimes be diagnosed by smelling their breath. Acute
drain into the conjunctival cul-de-sac but the globe is
diabetic cataracts are typically symmetrical, intumescent,
usua lly spared.
or swollen, and may have complications of uveitis and/or
Acute bilateral lid swelling caused by allergic
glaucoma. While the systemic state will take precedence,
 reactions {angioedema) may be accompanied by edema
the eyes should be treated for lens-induced uveitis with
of the nose and urticaria. Angioedema will improve with
topical atropine and anti-inflammatory drugs. In some
or without treatment {see Chapter 7, p.145) but is
instances the inflammation and/or IOP is not easily
usually treated with an injection of anthistamines and/or
controlled and will require lens removal to control.
glucocorticoids.
 Sometimes the lens ruptures.
Acute chemical burns to the lids and globe are,
Black opacities on the cornea that are presented as
unfortunately, often malicious. The main therapy is
emergencies are most likely to be uveal tissue prolapse
immediate and copious flushing with any water or saline
from a breech in the surface (Table 4.9). The lesion is often
solution at hand, and removal of any residue from the
raised and although the uvea is itself pigmented, the 
surface. Alkali burns are the most disastrous to tissue
exuding of fibrin from the surface often results in a red or
because of their deep penetration. The various self-
gray opacity (see Chapter 10, p.241, 10.100-10.105).
 defense sprays such as mace and pepper spray are often
Involvement of the iris can usually be confirmed by finding
blamed for various ocular lesions without definite proof
the anterior chamber is partially or completely shallowed
of exposure. While irritating, no lasting pathology
or collapsed, and the pupil tented or not visible.
 should occur with these chemicals; irrigating the eye and
 avoiding self-trauma should be sufficient therapy.
evaluation of intraocular structures. Uveal prolapse may
occur from a, perforated ulcer, penetrating injury,
usually associated with trauma or infection. Laceration,
laceration, or blunt traumatic rupture of the cornea. The
chemosis, and subconjunctival hemorrhage are the usual
 prognosis will vary according to the cause and amount of
sequelae to
 conjunctival
trauma.
Conjunctival
damage to intraocular structures {see Chapter 11, p.298).
lacerations do not need suturing unless the third eyelid
These patients should be referred immediately.
 attachments or cartilage are involved. Dramatic chemosis
Superficial corneal pigment may also be present as a
may occur from allergic reactions, trauma, or infection.
result of previous or chronic pathology. Other sources of
Differentiation will be based on associated lesions,
 pigment in the cornea may be the corneal nigrum in the cat
history, type of ocular discharge, and conjunctival
and, rarely, dematiaceous fungi that produce pigment.
cytology. Traumatic and allergic reactions are treated
with topical anti-inflammatory therapy fassuming no
EMERGENCIES THAT DO NOT THREATEN SIGHT
corneal abrasions), while antimicrobial therapy is 
Injuries and diseases of the lids, conjunctiva, and third
administered for suspected infection.
 eyelid may be presented as emergencies but in general do
Emergency presentation due to third eyelid disease is
not threaten sight. As such, they are examined to ensure
usually due to eversion of the third eyelid gland or
the process is localized to the adnexa and they can then
protrusion of the third eyelid. Cherry eye or eversion of
be managed at a more convenient time.
the gland is a common dramatic but nonemergency
Lid emergencies are usually lid lacerations or acute
event. The diagnosis can usually be made with some
swellings  f
from contusions, infection, 
angioedema,
confidence over the telephone from the age fup to
venemous bites, and burns, either heat or chemical. Of these
2 years) and breed of the dog. Similar signs in older dogs
only snake bites or chemical burns would indicate urgent
 may have more serious implications, such as an orbital
therapy. Lid lacerations are easily recognized and are most
lesion, but are not emergencies. Protrusion of the third
easily treated within the first 24 48 hours. Accurate
eyelid has been discussed previously (p.102, p.211).
apposition of the lid margin is the key to functional and
cosmetic success {see Chapter 7, p.145). Slips of lid margin
that may be hanging loose with lacerations running parallel
to the lid margin should not be removed.
105
L
Principles
Ophthalmic Surgery
INTRODUCTION
by the inherent risk of surgery should also be thoroughly
 counseled on the advantages and disadvantages of surgery,
The emphasis in this chapter will be on the preparation,
or perhaps should be encouraged to avoid elective surgery.
instrumentation, principles of surgery, and postoperative
The patient presented for surgery who has a
 care of patients for ophthalmic surgery of the adnexa and
periocular or conjunctival infection should have the 
cornea. Because of the investment in equipment and the
infection controlled before proceeding with surgery. A
uniqueness of the surgery, intraocular surgery should be
more dramatic dilemma is presented in the patient with a
delegated to those individuals who perform it on a
regular basis. Nevertheless, extraocular surgery is still the
cellulitis. The indication for enucleation is clear but
most delicate surgery that will be performed by the
 operating in an infected field is contraindicated. Humane
general practitioner. A knowledge of the anatomy
considerations must be balanced with good medical
involved and the acquisition of a few specialized
principles, and intense medical and supportive care
instruments will greatly facilitate performing extraocular
should precede and follow surgery.
surgery. The individual surgical procedures are discussed
in detail in the appropriate chapters.
Extraocular surgery is often elective and can be
 delayed until the animal is older, undergoing an
anesthesia episode for another condition, or until
PATIENT PREPARATION FOR SURGERY
the time is mutually convenient.
PATIENT SELECTION
ANESTHESIA/SEDATION
Ophthalmic surgery is often indicated for the very young
or the very old patient. Patient selection and preparation
are therefore extremely important in order to avoid
Many adnexal surgical procedures can be performed
unnecessary mortalities. Surgery on the very young
with local anesthesia and/or sedation, and this should be
patient (2-12 weeks) is difficult due to the constraints of
considered as an alternative to general anesthesia in the
size and the increased anesthetic risk. Surgery in the very
aged or high risk patient. If the surgery is elective and
young puppy or kitten for conformational defects that
general anesthesia is indicated, the high risk patient
are not producing significant corneal disease may be
should be evaluated by performing a thorough physical
postponed until adult conformation  is achieved
examination and organ function test. Age alone is not a
(5-6 months). If the cornea or vision is being affected in
contraindication for surgery or anesthesia.
the very young patient, either a provisional surgical
Unless performing a salvage procedure, glaucoma
procedure or medical therapy may extend the time until
 patients should have the IOP normalized before surgery.
a definitive procedure can be performed; for example,
If intensive preoperative diuretic therapy has been
everting lid sutures for entropion can be placed in the
 administered, electrolyte and acid-base imbalances may
Pake yim uany e u eauuos sui pue xddnd Sunox kiaa
be produced and create an increased anesthetic risk. In
 agenesis can be medically protected.
 general, potassium loss and a tendency to metabolic
 Ophthalmic surgery'is often elective and can be
acidosis can be assumed with the use of carbonic
performed at a mutually convenient time. The animal's
anhydrase inhibitorsl. Mannitol may be used pre-
temperament and the owner's expectations are important
operatively with glaucoma patients, or to reduce vitreous
to assess prior to surgery. Animals that are very nervous or
volume in intraocular surgery. If possible, mannitol
vicious will require at least one additional sedation for
administration should be performed before anesthesia
suture removal if absorbable sutures are not used.
induction as adverse side-effects are more common in the
 Complications from wound dehiscence from rubbing the
hypotensive anesthetized patient?.
face are more likely in the nervous, compulsive patient.
 If surgical intervention  is anticipated (particularly
Owners who have unrealistic expectations regarding the
intraocular), prolonged preoperative administration of
correction of complex conformational defects are seldom
prostaglandin inhibitors {aspirin) and topical cholinesterase 
satisfied and therefore require detailed and accurate
inhibitors should be avoided. Intraocular hemorrhage is
communication. The owner who is extremely distraught
more frequent and severe when these groups of drugs are
106
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
used. Similarly, the preoperative use of long-acting
PREPARATION OF THE SURGICAL FIELD
subconjunctival glucocorticoids is usually contraindicated
if a keratectomy is anticipated. Glucocorticoids in high
MINOR LID SURGERY
dosages or in a form that cannot be withdrawn may result
Postoperative lid infection is uncommon, so relatively
in corneal perforations in >20% of keratectomy cases3.
minor plastic surgery of the eyelid, such as simple
Aminoglycoside antibiotics, systemic cholinesterase
entropion, is managed as a “clean' procedure. The surgical
inhibitors such as insecticides, and some anthelmintics
area is prepared by modest shaving with a surgical blade or
should be avoided before and during surgery if an
clippers (5.1) and scrubbing with a 1:10 dilution of 10%
anesthetic  protocol  V
with  neuromuscular blockade
stock povidone-iodine solution for 2-4 minutes. This
(pancuronium) is to be used. These drugs will prolong the
dilution is nonirritating to the cornea and is as effective a
respiratory arrest and paralysis of the pancuronium.
 germicide as the concentrated solution. Alcohol is not used
in surface preparation, nor are other antiseptics, such as
 Preoperative topical and/or systemic medications such
hexachloraphene, which are irritating to the cornea.
as mannitol, carbonic anhydrase inhibitors,
The surgery site is covered with a fenestrated drape and
 cholinesterase inhibitors, glucocorticoids, and NSAIDs
sterile gloves are worn. A cap and mask are optional and a
may have important ramifications for safe anesthesia.
surgical gown is not necessary. This protocol is also used for
third eyelid surgeries, minor conjunctival surgery, and
While some anesthetic protocols are more ideal than
keratectomies. While some practitioners might argue that
others, there is no clear surgical advantage fother than
 more stringent asepsis should be adhered to, the cost-benefit
duration) of one anesthetic over another for eyelid
ratio does not warrant it; the procedure is often only
surgery. Surgery of the conjunctiva and cornea is
excision of a small piece of skin and suture of the defect.
keep the eye from rolling ventrally or constantly moving.
MAJOR LID SURGERY, LID SURGERY WITH
and therefore barbiturates and sedatives fother than
BURIED SUTURES, AND CORNEAL SURGERY
ketamine) are not preferred. Conjunctival flaps can be
FOR DEEP OR PERFORATED ULCERS
performed with sedation, if necessary, in debilitated 
 Unlike minor lid surgeries, extensive plastic procedures, such
patients. The author routinely uses an anesthetic
pq aanu youm saunpoud 1o uoisoxa ru aail se
protocol of preoperative atropine and acepromazine,
nonabsorbable sutures, are treated as aseptically as possible.
induction with i.v. thiamylal sodium or propofol, and
 Shaving or clipping the surgical site is more extensive than
intubation and maintenance on isoflurane/nitrous oxide.
for minor procedures, although the skin disinfection is
Neuromuscular blockade  with pancuronium or
similar. Careful shaving with a surgical blade after wetting
 atracurium may be used with intraocular surgery or for
the hair with a sterile water soluble lubricant is preferred to
the repair of a perforated cornea of the ventral medial
clipping (5.1). Clipper blades, when hot, may burn the skin,
region, where manipulation is necessary to bring the
are often contaminated from previous preparations, and do
surgical field into view. If neuromusclular blockade is
 not cut close on cats or shorthaired dogs. The draping of the
surgical site is usually by triangulation with three drapes or
avoid respiratory acidosis. Low-dose pancuronium may
 covering with a fenestrated drape. Preparation of the surgeon
provide ocular muscle paralysis with apparent intact
is the same as for all aseptic surgery. The surgeon's gloves
respirations; however, the respiratory efforts are not
should be wiped free of powder to avoid foreign body
sufficient to avoid hypercapniat.
reaction in tissues or in the eye.
The proper restraint {or lack of it) of an animal with
Surgery for deep corneal
ulcers and perforated
a descemetocele or perforated cornea should be
corneas is usually managed with litle skin preparation to
emphasized to personnel who are helping with anesthesia
avoid intraocular contamination with surface debris. If
induction. Many of the brachycephalic breeds which
the cornea is intact, the skin is prepared for 1-2 cm
develop these kinds of problem are extremely difficult to
restrain without putting pressure on the globe. If the
patient struggles, restraint of the animal should be
reduced in order to avoid rupture of the eye. Heavy
5.1
narcotic sedation is indicated for these patients.
 Extreme caution should be used when restraining
brachycephalic dogs with weakened globes, such as
with corneal lacerations and descemetoceles, to
 avoid inadvertent perforation of the globe.
The use of atropine to prevent the oculocardiac reflex
is not necessary for most procedures, unless significant
pulling on the optic nerve or extraocular muscles is
anticipated, such as with enucleation§. The horse seems
the most prone to problems with the oculocardiac reflex,
and glycopyrrolate is the drug of choice to counteract the
bradycardia in this species. Atropine is routinely with-
5.1 Shaving in a dog with a #10 Bard-Parker blade after wetting the
held preoperatively with parotid duct transplantation to
hair with a sterile water-soluble jelly. Shaving is with the direction of
facilitate the retrograde passage of a nylon suture up the
the hair. Cats and shorthaired dogs do not clip well, but they are also
parotid duct.
difficult to shave.
PRINCIPLES OF OPHTHALMIC SURGERY
107
5.2
5.3, 5.4 vacuum
5.3
 bag before applying
vacuum]  that is
utilized to
immobilize a dog's
head (5.3). The bag is
filled with beads so
that when a vacuum
is applied (5.4), it
holds the mold or
 shape that wa5
fashioned before 
applying the vacuum.
 Additional tape is
applied to the nose
to help position the 
5.4
eye for surgery.
9900
5.2 Preparation of a dog's eye for sterile surgery with a small
underlying plastic adhesive drape covered by a larger fenestrated drape.
Pnous aunssaud suareu paa au puosaq (us s'ot0)
not be exerted on the globe. A sterile water-soluble jelly
may be placed on the globe to trap loose hairs that fall into
the conjunctival cul-de-sac when shaving or clipping. The
water-soluble jelly is also placed on the blades of scissors
which are used to trim the lashes, in order to prevent the
cut cilia from falling onto the globe. If the cornea is
perforated, no lid shaving or preparation is performed
 other than cutting the lashes and cautiously cleaning the
Rinsing the conjunctival sac with sterile electrolyte
solutions increases the risk of contaminating 
the
5.5
conjunctiva and cornea with skin bacteria from any
backwashing that may occur7. A sterile plastic adhesive
drape is placed over the eye and this is covered with a
larger fenestrated drape or triangulated with drapes. The
larger drapes around the eye extend over the arms of an
operating chair and cover the patient (5.2).
While counter-intuitive, often minimal skin preparation
and irrigation results in less contamination of the
surgery site than extensive preparation; this may be
critical if wounds have perforated the globe.
PATIENTPOSITIONINGAND
EXPOSURE OF THE GLOBE
5.5 Positioning of the practitioner's arms and hands so that they are
 5upported is important for microsurgery, to allow smooth precise
 Positioning of the patient for ophthalmic surgery can vary
movement.
from dorsal, ventral, or lateral recumbency, depending on
the surgeon's preference, the skull conformation, and the
procedure to be performed. Lid and third eyelid
procedures are usually performed in lateral or ventral
Bags containing small beads, which when placed under
recumbency, and corneal or conjunctival flap surgeries can
a vacuum become rigid in the prevaccum conformation,
be performed in these positions as well as in dorsal
 are excellent for immobilization of the head in any
recumbency. Dolicocephalic dogs do not lend themselves
position, and are a good investment for all types of surgery
to positioning in dorsal recumbency because the nose
(5.3, 5.4). Alternatives are the use of 'sand bags' or bags of
obstructs medial placement of the hands. If bilateral lid
01 adei pue 'aul epos juads qiim Pal azis snoa
procedures are to be performed, the animal is usually
position the nose and head. All delicate ophthalmic
placed in ventral recumbency with the nose supported.
surgery is performed seated, with the hands and arms
This allows access to both sides without moving.
supported (5.5). Lid surgery is often performed standing
repreparing, and redraping the patient.
 and allows more flexibility in positioning of the patient.
108
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
After incision of the plastic adhesive drape, a method
meticulously placed with a good ophthalmic needle they
must be utilized to keep the lids open and expose the area
are often only anchored in the loose conjunctiva and are of
of concern. The usual method of holding the lids open is
minimal benefit. If manipulating an intact globe, such as
by the use of a lid speculum. Because of the diversity of
for a keratectomy, two small mosquito hemostats placed
breeds and species, more than one size of speculum is
180° from each other on the perilimbus conjunctiva offer
needed. A pediatric speculum is used for small dogs and
 good exposure. This method should not be used for a
cats. Wire lid speculums are preferred because of their
weakened globe, as pressure is transmitted to the globe.
simplicity, light weight, and low cost (5.6). Alternatively,
The third eyelid can be retracted with forceps or, less
sutures can be placed near the lid margins and held by an
traumatically, with a mattress stay suture that is passed
assistant or clamped to the drapes, or small clamps can
through the medial lower lid and into the third eyelid near
be fixed to the lid margins (two to a lid) and the lids
its margin, and back out of the skin. This pulls the third
retracted with sutures placed through the clamps. If the
eyelid into a retracted position, and the friction of the
globe is weakened or perforated, great caution must be
suture through the skin is often enough to hold it in place.
Spl al Pioq oi pasn si ieul uawnsul Aue yim uax1
open, to avoid transmitting pressure onto the globe.
Convenient positioning of the globe for surgery is
INSTRUMENTATION
often the most frustrating step for the beginner, and the
method used can be critical when dealing with a
Eponyms are common and confusing in instrument
perforated or weakened globe. One method for increa sing
nomenclature. Despite the wide array of names and
the surgical exposure is by doing a lateral canthotomy.
instruments, most represent variations of a few basic
This is performed by making a horizontal crimp at the
instruments.
lateral canthus for about 1 cm (0.5 in) using a hemostat,
and then cutting the crimp with scissors. With experience,
LID AND THIRD EYELID SURGERY
the need for a canthotomy decreases, except in patients
INSTRUMENTATION
with a very small palpebral fissure.
Many of the simple ophthalmic lid procedures can be
 Stay sutures placed near the limbus in the superficial
 performed without special instrumentation. However, 
sclera can be used to manipulate the globe, but unless
two instruments that facilitate lid procedures are a lid
plate and a large chalazion clamp (5.7). The eyelids are
loose, and it is difficult to make a smooth incision on the
eyelid unless it is held taut while incising. The lid plate is
5.6
an inexpensive contoured plate that is placed in the
conjunctival sac, producing a firm, taut, and immobile
skin surface that facilitates a clean precise incision. Since 
it stretches the skin, the surgeon must become
 accustomed to evaluating the amount of skin to excise
under these conditions.
A chalazion clamp facilitates the removal of aberrant
 cilia and small lid tumors. When clamped over the area
to be incised it provides hemostasis and a firm backing
for making an accurate, clean incision.
Forceps that are used for lid and third eyelid surgeries
5.6 Lid speculums appropriate for veterinary use. The wire speculum
are usually medium sized, rat-toothed forceps with the
is appropriate for small dogs and cats, whereas the larger speculum is
teeth at right angles, such as Adson or Bishop-Harmon
 necessary for large fissures in the dog and will work in the horse. The
forceps (5.8). These are inexpensive forceps and are
surgeon should be aware that pressure may be inadvertently applied 
preferred to more delicate forceps that are easily
to the globe with the larger speculum.
damaged. Since the suture material for lid and third
5.7
5.7 Instruments
5.8
5.8 various sizes
 Lused for lid surgery.
of forceps for
A variety of
adnexal and 
 chalazion clamps
 corneal surgery.
(C] of different
Left to right:
sizes are available.
Bishop-Harmon
They facilita te
conjunctival
excision of tissue
forceps, Adson rat-
and hemostasis.
 tooth forceps for
The lid plate (LP)
lids, jeweler's
facilita tes clean
forceps for cornea.
skin incisions.
Colibri corneal
Hemostats should 
forceps.
be available due to
the vascular nature
of the lid.
PRINCIPLES OF OPHTHALMIC SURGERY
109
eyelid surgery is not usually smaller than S-0 in size,
knots. Manipulation of suture with toothed forceps will
nonophthalmic needle holders will suffice, and are
damage the suture. Unfortunately, comeal forceps will be
 preferable for larger needles. Smaller ophthalmic scissors
one of the most expensive instruments to purchase because
such as tenotomy scissors (5.9) are an appropriate size
of the delicate teeth. Extreme care should be exercised in the
for ophthalmic plastic surgery but they can be easily
asn iadoudu se 'sday asau uum pads snss jo ad
damaged by misusing them on the skin.
will easily damage the teeth. If corneal surgery is performed
A loupe or magnification is usually unnecessary for lid
infrequently, an alternative to corneal forceps are the
surgery until the surgeon becomes presbyopic, and then they
jeweler's forceps used in electron microscopy laboratories.
will be necessary for everything, including suture removal!
These are inexpensive, accurate, smooth-tipped forceps (5.8).
However, the jeweler's forceps is very pointed on the end,
A well-stocked extraocular surgery pack for eyelids
which can be a danger when working on the cornea.
and third eyelid should include:
The third type of forceps is an angled rat-toothed or
A lid plate
splay-toothed forceps that is used for fixation and
A chalazion clamp
manipulation of the globe. When pressed against the
Adson rat-tooth forceps
globe and closed, they grasp the deeper layers of episclera
 Bishop-Harmon forceps
and sclera rather than the loose conjunctival surface, or
Small needle drivers (nonophthalmic)
when closed over a rectus muscle, they pass under the
Tenotomy scissors
muscle rather than entrapping the muscle (5.12).
Small mosquito forceps (2)
Towel clamps (3)
Cotton buds (e.g. Q-tips), gauze sponges
5.9
CONJUNCTIVAL AND CORNEAL SURGERY
Since conjunctival and corneal tissue is inherently more
delicate, smaller suture material is utilized and specialized
ocular instruments are preferable. In general, the
instruments are miniaturized and designed to hold like a
a pinous sue suosns aui pueu yoea u louad
supported on the table or chair arms, and often the hand is
steadied by support of at least one finger on the patient's
5ome lid surgeries. Note the round tips.
head (5.s). The action of the instrument is mainly
developed in the wrist and by rolling the instrument with
the fingers. Instruments, such as ophthalmic needle holders,
5.10
that are designed to roll between the fingers are usually
rounded or six-sided (5.10). Instruments that are not
rotated, such as scissors and many forceps, have flattened
handles or platforms for the fingers. Locking instruments,
such as a needle holder, should be designed to lock and
unlock smoothly with no change in hand position. Because
of the delicate nature of many of these instruments,
5.10 Ophthalmic needle holder with a locking mechanism. The small
inappropriate use may damage the instrument.
jaws do not deform small needles, and the round tubular handle is
designed for a rolling motion with the surgeon's fingers.
Lid speculum
 See globe exposure, p.107, 5.6.
5.11
Scissors
 Small blunt-tipped scissors such as tenotomy scissors will
suffice for conjunctival dissection (5.9). They may also be
used for cutting fine suture material. Sharp-tipped
scissors may create holes in the conjunctiva when bluntly
separating tissue.
5.11 Colibri corneal forceps. Small right-angled teeth are barely
Forceps
visible and a tying platform is located behind the teeth.
Two or three types of forceps are needed for conjunctival and
corneal manipulation. A right-angled rat-toothed forceps of
medium to small size (Bishop-Harmon)  is used to
5.12
manipulate the conjunctiva. Grasping with this type 
of
forceps captures only the conjunctiva and Tenon's capsule.
They are not used for fixation of, or moving, the globe. If the
cornea is to be manipulated or sutured, a pair of forceps with
very small right-angled teeth, such as the Colibri forceps or
smooth forceps, is used to hold the edges of the cornea
(5.11). Many of the corneal forceps also have a tying
5.12 Scleral fixation forceps with splayed teeth. The teeth will fixate the
 platform behind the teeth to hold fine suture while tying
deeper tissue such as the sclera when pressure is applied while closing.
110
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
Alternatives to forceps in manipulation of the globe are
include
e 1:10,000 epinephrine, flushing with an
fixation sutures or blunt instruments such as a strabismus
electrolyte solution, battery-powered low-temperature 
0l xjuoy aui oul paqsnd toieodde d uo1oo e 1o yooq
cautery, or bipolar wetfield cautery (5.15). Disposable,
move the globe in the appropriate direction. Extreme
low-temperature  cauteries are  quite effective  in
caution should be exercised with all forms of globe
controlling conjunctival, scleral, and corneal hemorrhage
manipulation if the cornea is weakened or perforated.
that continues despite flushing. They can be reused if
ethylene oxide sterilization is available.
Needle holders
Because the suture material is a minimum of S-0 in size
A well-stocked surgery pack for extraocular and
and the needles are very small, a needle holder that is
corneal surgery should include:
easily manipulated and will not damage the needle is
Instruments as in box, p.109
necessary for corneal and conjunctival surgery. A variety
Wire eyelid speculums, pediatric and adult size
of designs are available, with variations in whether or
Corneal forceps such as Colibri*
not they lock, the locking mechanism, and the size and
Ophthalmic needle holders *
shape of the jaws (5.10). The surgeon who only performs
Beaver blade holder or small handle for
the occasional ocular surgery will prefer the locking
Bard-Parker blade
needle holder. This instrument and the corneal forceps
Spatula such as a cyclodialysis or iris spatula
are the two most expensive instruments in a minor
Irrigation cannula
Cellulose sponges
*: expensive instruments
Miscellaneous instruments
A muscle or strabismus hook is an inexpensive
instrument which can be used for various manipula-
tions of the globe and eyelids, as well as in enucleation
(5.13). When performing an enucleation, the stra bismus
5.13
hook is used to hook the extraocular muscles by
passing it posterior to the equator, where the muscle
separates from the globe, and then coming forward to
catch the muscle.
A cyclodialysis-type spatula is a general purpose
instrument. It can be used for performing a superficial
keratectomy, sweeping anterior synechiae off the inner
cornea with perforated ulcers, and removing
fibrin
 5.13 Strabismus hook used to hook the extraocular muscles or
membranes from the pupil and iris {5.14). It is rarely
pushed into the conjunctival sac to rotate the globe.
used as originally designed  for  performing
the
cyclodialysis procedure for glaucoma, due to the poor
success rate of the surgery.
 Irrigation through a blunt lacrimal needle is used to
5.14
control hemorrhage in the surgical field and keep the
cornea moist. Lacrimal needles often have a malleable
end to adjust the angle to the surgeon's preference.
 A wide variety of scalpel blades for ophthalmic surgery
are available but most surgeons utilize only two types: a
small curved blade and a small pointed blade. While
specialized handles and blades (such as Beaver handles
5.14 Cyclodialysis spatula that can be used for teasing iris and fibrin
and blades) are preferred by some surgeons, the regular
membranes off of cornea, superficial keratectomies, and vitreous off
#15 and #11 blades are quite satisfactory. The corner of a
 of the posterior lens.
double-edged razor blade may be broken off and held in
a special holder for a sharp cutting instrument. Diamond
knives are the ultimate for a sharp instrument.
5.15
5.15 Methods for
a aua aq uo aaans uo u pasn sas
 controlling hemostasis
common cotton-tipped applicators or cellulose sponges. If
in extraocular and
corneal surgery. Cotton-
and inexpensive. Cellulose sponges are preferred when the
tipped applica tors are 
used if the eye is not 
surgery, to avoid loose cotton fibers entering the eye and
open. The cellulose
 Creating an inflammatory reaction (5.15).
 spears are preferred if
the globe is open, to
Hemostasis
avoid leaving residual
Hemostasis during ophthalmic surgery may be effected
foreign ma terial. Low-
by sponging and clamping with hemostats, as in general
temperature battery
surgery. Conjunctival, corneal, and iris hemostasis is
cautery will control
usually effected with cotton-tipped applicators, or with
conjunctival, corneal,
cellulose sponges if the eye is open. Alternative methods
 and iris bleeding.
PRINCIPLES OF OPHTHALMIC SURGERY
111
Irrigation solution
edge. If the needle is not entered vertically, the bite will
The type of sterile electrolyte solution used for irrigation
be very superficial, resulting in posterior gaping of the 
in extraocular and corneal surgery is not critical.
incision. If the needle does not have a steep curvature, it
Irrigating solutions used for prolonged intraocular
is difficult to place the suture deep in the cornea and have
it exit the cornea at the incision. The side of the incision
be balanced for pH, buffered with bicarbonate, and
being sutured should be held with forceps to provide
contain glutathione and glucose. Most intraocular
counterpressure to the force of driving the needle, and to
irrigation procedures take only a few minutes, and
allow eversion of the edge of the incision in order to
lactated Ringer's solution or Ringer's solution is as
visualize the depth of the needle tract. The needle
is
efficacious as the more expensive and
unstable
passed as deep as possible, emerging under the forceps
 commercial intraocular irrigating solutions8, 9.
 and just anterior to Descemet's membrane. The opposite
side of the incision is then sta bilized with the forceps and
Suture material
the needle is pushed across the incision at the same depth
Suture material for lid skin should be 4 to 5-0 in size. Silk
that it emerged from on the other side. The suture is tied
suture was the past gold standard but many shorthaired
with a minimum of two loops on the first throw, and if
dogs develop suture abscesses and excess granulation due
nylon is used, three loops are recommended. A second
to gamma globulin binding to the silk. Nylon or
and third throw of a single loop each is then placed. If
monofilament suture, and even synthetic absorbable 
10-0 nylon is used, the ends can be cut short and the
suture, can be used on the skin with good results. If
suture rotated to draw the knot into the suture tract.
difficulty is anticipated in suture removal because of
Larger sutures are cut close to the knot and left exposed.
location or temperament of the animal, synthetic
When suturing edematous, friable tissue, or incisions
absorbable sutures are indicated. Braided absorbable
with excess tension, for additional holding capacity the
sutures and monofilament suture should be avoided in the
 needle bite is usually extended to 2 mm from each edge.
skin if the ends may rub on the cornea. Conversely, they
Synthetic absorbable suture will dissolve in about
may be placed on the cornea with the ends pointing out,
3-4 weeks but may stimulate excessive vascularization. If
although some conjunctival irritation will result. If the 
this occurs, the sutures should be removed. Nylon suture
suture is to be buried in the lid, an absorbable suture fgut,
larger than 10-0 is removed. Suture removal can be
collagen, or synthetic), S to 6-0 in size, is usually used.
 performed after application of topical anesthesia in most
The general surgeon should have some ophthalmic
instances. Rather than using scissors, a blade should be
suture on hand for corneal lacerations and perforated ulcers.
used to cut the suture. Scissors are usually too large and
The size and type can vary with preference but the needle
if the animal moves during the procedure, the suture is
should be a good quality, ophthalmic, reverse cutting or
torn out rather than cut.
spatula needle. Use of an inappropriate needle when
suturing the cornea results in excessive distortion and stress
STORAGE AND CLEANING OF INSTRUMENTS
on the globe, and inaccurate depth placement of the needle.
The investment in and delicate nature of ophthalmic
Ophthalmic needles are very sharp and should be handled,
instruments dictate that care in cleaning and
with forceps, only on the shank, or they will be quickly
maintenance of instruments be emphasized. Cleaning of
 blunted. The needle must be pushed far enough through the
instruments is best performed with an ultrasonic cleaner.
tissue so that when pulled through, it can be grasped behind
Alternatively, careful brushing, avoiding instrument
the point, to avoid blunting the cutting edges.
contact and entanglement, and drying will prolong the
Gut and collagen sutures are rarely used on the cornea
life of the instruments. The hinges should be lubricated in
since the advent of newer synthetic absorbable sutures but
"instrument milk' after each use. Instrument corrosion
they are still a good suture for many conjunctival
may occur if the instruments are not thoroughly cleaned,
applications. Suture sizes used in the cornea vary from
instrument milk is not used, the instruments are not
6 to 10-0. Very fine nylon suture is the least reactive but
dried, and contact with other instruments is allowed.
it has inherent difficulties in handling if the surgeon is not
 Instruments should be stored and sterilized so they are
equipped (appropriate instruments and magnification).
not in contact with adjacent instruments. Special
instrument trays and storage devices are available but a
Ophthalmic suture in the smaller sizes and with
simple container, that has several narrow pockets sewn in
ophthalmic needles is very expensive; the general
it to hold the instruments, can be made from a draping
Aaea aui oi se snooipn! aq ot suem im uoaains 
cloth. This can be doubled over, rolled up, and sterilized
and sizes kept in stock. Six-0 synthetic absorbable
in a pack. Instruments with cutting edges and teeth
 suture with a spatula or reverse cutting needle will
should have the ends covered with tips that can either be
suffice for the majority of conjunctival and corneal
bought commercially or made from silicone tubing.
suturing, although the ophthalmologist would often
Damaged instruments can be repaired to new condition
use an 8-0 in small animals and a 7-0 in large
in most instances, and this is usually cost effective.
 animal corneal surgery.
 Sterilization of metal ophthalmic instruments can be by
any means if good technique is followed. If instrument milk
Technique
is not used, they should be dried before steam sterilization.
In the healthy cornea the needle entrance and exit from
Ethylene oxide sterilization is probably too expensive and
the incision or laceration should be 1 mm from the edge.
toxic to be used in the usual practice environment. The
The needle tip enters the cornea on a vertical plane. The
level of acceptable environmental contamination of
needle should be sufficiently small enough in curvature to
ethylene oxide has been reduced, and since it is difficult to
enter from this distance and exit deep in the incision
monitor, it is not worth the risk to personnel.
112
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
In patients who have had entropion surgery and have
Improper use, storing, and cleansing of instruments
had extensive blepharospasm and are very 'eye conscious',
often results in rust, bent, or damaged tips and
 it is usually prudent to omit any topical ocular therapy since
teeth of forceps and dull scissors.
any contact with the eyes will likely precipitate
blepharospasm. When topical medications are administered
postoperatively, the patient is held or observed for several
minutes afterwards to prevent self-trauma.
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
 Attention to prophylactic measures regarding self-
PREVENTION OF SELF-MUTILATION
trauma by the patient pays great dividends that are
Depending on the postoperative pain expected and the
 intangible when successful.
temperament of the animal, postoperative sedation and
mechanical devices used to prevent self-trauma will vary.
In general, it is preferable to err on the side of caution,
POSTOPERATIVE INFECTION PROPHYLAXIS
rather than have sutures pulled out or the
eeye
 Routine lid and conjunctival surgery is treated with a
traumatized. When animals are recovering from
prophylactic topical, broad-spectrum bacteriocidal
anesthesia, it is often necessary to hold them or their
antibiotic for 3-5 days. Parotid duct transplantation is an
head to prevent the eye being traumatized. Postoperative
inherently nonsterile surgery, and is treated with a
systemic analgesics and sedation may be used to
systemic, 
broad-spectrum   bacteriocidal  antibiotic
minimize self-trauma, particularly in the very nervous
immediately before and for 3 days postoperatively.
animal. Mechanical devices, such as the Elizabethan
 Perforated ulcers and intraocular surgery may be treated
collar, are commonly used to prevent self-trauma after
A   n i a
ocular and adnexal surgery. An alternative to commercial
before surgery, subconjunctival antibiotics such 
as
collars is a plastic bucket that has the bottom cut out,
gentamicin after surgery, and systemic postoperative
and with the edge that is placed over the head padded
antibiotics for 3-5 days. The use of prophylactic
and tied to a collar This arrangement is preferred for
antibiotics other than immediately before and after
dolicocephalic dogs or large dogs with short legs. Taping 
 aseptic surgery is questionable but the natural caution of
of the front dewclaws with a nonadhesive tape is an
the clinician with regard to postoperative infection is
additional measure to prevent self-trauma.
difficult to overcome10.
REFERENCES
1 Haskins S, Munger R, Helphrey M,
5 Clutton R, Boyd C, Richards L.
9 Nasisse M, Cook C, Harling D {1985)
et af. (1981) Effect of acetazolamide
Schwink K (1988) Significance of the 
 Response of the canine corneal
on blood acid-base and electrolyte 
oculocardiac reflex during ophthalmic
endothelium to intraocular irrigation.
values in dogs. Journat of the
surgery. Journat of Small Animat
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting
American Veterinary Medicat
Practice 29:573-579.
of the American Cotlege of Veterinary
Association 179:792-796.
6 Roberts S, Severin G, Lavach J {1986)
Ophthatmology 16:16-25.
2 Parker A {1973) Blood pressure
Antibacterial activity of dilute
10 Vasseur P, Paul H, Enos L, Hirsh D
changes and lethality of mannitol
povidone-iodine solutions used for
(1985) Infection rates in clean surgical
infusions in dogs. American Journat of
ocular surface disinfection in dogs.
procedures: a comparison of
Veterinary Research 34:1523-1528.
American Journat of Veterinary
ampicillin prophylaxis vs a placebo.
 3 Martin C (1971) The effect of topical
Research 47:1207-1210.
Journat of the American Veterinary
vitamin A, antibiotic, mineral oil, and
7 Isenberg S, Apt L, Yoshimieri R {1983)
Medicat Association 187:825-827
subconjunctival steroid on corneal 
Chemical preparation of the eye in
epithelial wound healing in the dog.
 ophthalmic surgery. I. Effects of
Journal of the American Veterinary
conjunctival irrigation. Archives of
MedicafAssociation 159:1392-1399.
Ophthaimology 101:761-763.
4 Sullivan TC, Hellyer PW, Lee DD,
8 Edelhauser H, Gonnering R, Van
Davidson MG (1998) Respiratory
Horn D {1978) Intraocular irrigating
function and extraocular muscle
solutions. A comparative study of BSS
 paralysis following administration of
plus and lactated Ringers solution.
 pancuronium bromide in dogs.
Archives of Ophthatmology
96:516-520.
1:125-128.
113
6
Orbit and Globe
ANATOMY
fascia or Tenon's capsule. The muscular fascia is divided
into three layers: a thick superficial layer which
The orbit, or enclosure for the eye and associated muscles,
 originates from the orbital septum; a middle layer which
nerves, and vasculature, is the conical cavity outlined by the
attaches just posterior to the limbus of the globe and
periorbita. The orbit is incompletely encased in bone
covers the extraocular muscles and attaches to the lateral
laterally and ventrally in all domestic animals. The bones
aspect of the third eyelid; and a deep muscular layer that
that form the orbit in the dog, cat, and cow are: the frontal,
covers the deep surface of the rectus muscles
and
lacrimal, zygomatic, maxilla, presphenoid, basisphenoid,
separates them from the retractor bulbi musclel. The
and palatine bones {6.1, 6.2). In the horse, the squamous 
bulbar fascia or Tenon's capsule is located deep to the
 portion of the temporal bone also contributes to the orbit.
deep muscular fascia.
The horse and cow have a complete bony orbital rim,
Circumferentially oriented smooth muscle is present
whereas in the cat and dog the lateral orbital rim is formed
in the periorbita, in the muscular fascia layers, and in the 
by the orbital ligament (6.1, 6.2).
area of the dorsomedial wall of the orbit. Contraction of
The periorbita is modified periosteum that becomes
this smooth muscle produces exophthalmos and,
thicker over the lateral and lateral-ventral orbit, where
conversely, loss of tone with sympathetic denervation
bone is lacking. The periorbita forms a cone with the
 produces enophthalmos2.
point at the optic foramina and orbital fissure and the
 In the dog, the size of the orbit varies with the skull 
base at the orbital rim. The periorbita divides at the
type and the size of the dog. Globe position in the orbit
orbital rim where the superficial leaf continues as the
is dramatically affected by the skull type. The size of the
periosteum of the facial and cranial bones, and the deep
orbit is also influenced by the presence or size of the
leaf continues into the lid as the orbital septum. In the
globe during development. Early enucleation or
orbit the periorbita is separated from most of the bone
dn Aq yqio aui jo azis aui asaap ku soudo
and periosteum by orbital fat. The periorbita reflects
to 27% but can be partially prevented by placing an
over the extraocular muscle and forms the muscular
implant in the orbit3.
6.1
6.2
Z
6.1 Skull of a mesaticephalic dog with the bones that form the orbit
6.2 Eqine orbital bones. (F: frontal; L: lacrimal; S: sphenoid;
and the major foramina. (F: frontal; L: lacarimal; M: maxilla; S:
T: temporal; Z: zygomatic; Op: optic foramen; Or: orbital fissure;
sphenoid; T: temporal; Z: zygomatic; Op: optic foramen; Or: orbital
E: ethmoidal foramen; A: rostral alar foramen.) (From Martin and
fissure; E: ethmoidal foramen; A: rostral alar foramen.) (From Martin
Anderson, 1981 152.]
and Anderson, 1981 152.)
114
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEAsE IN VeTeRiNARY MeDICINE
The foramina of the orbit in various domestic animals
6.3
and the structures that traverse them are listed in Table 6.1.
Optic foramen
The periorbita attaches around the optic foramen and
Orbital fissure
orbital fissure. The extraocular muscles and levator
 palpebrae muscle form a muscular cone that originates
Dorsa rectus m.
around the optic foramen. The optic nerve and internal
 Ophthalmic v.
 Oculomotor n.
ophthalmic artery and vein traverse the optic foramen. The
retractor bulbi muscle originates from the margins of the
Levator
Trochlear n.
orbital fissure. The oculomotor (Illrd), trochlear {IVth),
palpebrae m
Abducens n.
and abducens (VIth) cranial nerves, the ophthalmic division
of the trigeminal (Vth) cranial nerve, the orbital vein, and
 Dorsal oblique m.
the anastomotic artery traverse the orbital fissure {6.3).
The placement of the eye in the skull of animals is
Optic n. -
Medial rectus m.
usually correlated with the dietary evolution. Carnivores,
or hunting animals, have frontal eyes with an overlap of
Retractor bulbi m. -
visual fields that give them good binocular vision for depth
Lateral rectus m. -
perception.
Herbivores, or the hunted, have lateral
Ventral rectus m. -
 Ophthaimic br.
placement of the eyes to give a wide field of vision with
Anastomotic a.
Orbital v.
 of trigeminal n.
little or no blind spots, so that they can graze and watch
for the hunters {6.4). The lateral placement of the eyes is
also correlated with the degree of decussation of the optic
6.3 Orbital apex of the dog illustrating structures passing through
nerve fibers at the chiasm. The more lateral the eye, the
the optic foramen and orbital fissure, as well as extraocular muscle
more complete the decussation, i.e. 81% in horses, 83% in
attachements. (From Martin and Anderson, 1981152) (br: branch;
cattle, 89% in sheep, 88% in pigs, 75% in dogs, 65% in
m: muscle; n: nerve; v: vein.]
cats, and 50% in humans+. This translates functionally
into variations in the PLR. Animals with a high percentage
of crossed fibers have minimal consensual light reflexes
6.4
because the input is unequal to both eyes.
The size of the globe does not increase pro-
portionately to the body size between or within species
(Table 6.2). The ratio of eye weight to body weight in a
Table 6.1 Orbital foramina and associated structures in 
 domestic animals
Foramen
Presence in 
Structures
or fissures
domestic species
associated with
6.4 Visual fields of a cat compared to the horse. Note the frontal eye
foramen
 placement increases the binocular field with an attendant increase in
Maxillary artery.
depth perception in the cat. The horse, with lateral eye position and 
 Alar, rostral 
Equine, canine, feline 
horizontally elongated pupil, can see threatening objects from behind.
maxillary nerve 
without moving the head or eyes. (From Coulter and Schmidt, 1984153)
Ethmoid 
 All species
Ethmoidal nerve 
(one or more)
and vessels
 Orbital
Equine, canine, feline
Abducens,
ophthalmic
Table 6.2 Comparison of eye and body weight
trochlear, and
oculomotor cranial
Animal
Average
Weight of
Ratio
nerves
body weight
eyes (g)
Orbitorotundum Bovine
Oculomotor,
(kg)
trochlear, maxillary.
Horse
500
100.8
1:4960
ophthalmic, and 
Cow
400-500
65.0
1:6923
abducens cranial
nerves
Sheep
85
23.3
1:3648
Optic
 All species
Optic nerve,
Pig
75
19.0
1:3947
 internal ophthalmic
Dog (large)
36.55
14.2
1:2574
artery
 Dog (small)
4.7
8.6
1:545
Rotundum
Equine, canine, feline 
Maxillary nerve
Cat
2.9
10.9
1:267
Supraorbital
Bovine, equine, canine, Supraorbital nerve 
(variable feline)
and vessels
(Translated from Bayer J, 19145, measurements by Koschel.)
ORBIT AND GLOBE
115
6.5
small dog is 1:545 and in a large dog is 1:2,5745. The
globe in the cat and dog is somewhat spherical with the
three perpendicular axes (anterior-posterior, vertical,
transverse) being within 1 mm of each other. The globe
IP
of the cow, and less so the horse, is flattened in the
anterior-posterior axis {6.5). See Table 6.3 for the
various globe dimensions of domestic animals.
 The cornea of most domestic animals is slightly
oblong or egg-shaped, with the longest axis horizontal
6.5 Lateral view of the
and the narrow end temporal. The optic nerve enters the
canine and equine globe
globe ventro-temporally. Two long posterior ciliary
comparing the size of
arteries leave their course with the nerve at this point to
globe and the position of the optic nerve. (LP: long posterior ciliary 
course anteriorly in the sclera at 3 and 9 o'clock. These
artery; V: vortex vein; MN: mermbrana nictitans.] (From Martin and 
arteries are landmarks and guides in the orientation of an
Anderson, 1981152.)
enucleated globe.
The sclera of domestic animals is very thin at the
equator (0.5 mm [500 μm]) with little inherent rigidity.
Consequently, the globe collapses when opened surgically
6.6
and is difficult to prepare for histopathologic examination.
The globe is relatively immobile in a vertical and
horizontal plane in domestic animals compared with
humans but, unlike humans, animals can dramatically
move the eye in an anterior-posterior direction. Domestic
animals have, in addition to the four rectus and two
Oculomotor n.
oblique muscles, a retractor bulbi muscle that draws the
 branches to:
eye into the orbit for protection and passively allows the
Ventral oblique
third eyelid to move across the globe (6.6).
Trochlear n. Iv to
Ventral rectus m.
dorsal oblique m.
Dorsal rectus m.
VISION IN DOMESTIC ANIMALS
Medial rectus m.
 Humans have always been inquisitive as to how well or
Abducens n. Vl to
 aa su oi saeian s 'sas sue im 
Lateral rectus m.
SO
visually oriented that they assume that animals live in the
Retractor bulbi m.
same sensory world. In reality, many animals have a
Jo iel puokaq papuedxa 1ey sl ieun Puom Aosuas
IVI川
humans. The most common questions that the
veterinarian is asked regarding animal vision are related
to color perception and visual acuity.
6.6 Dorsal view of the extraocular muscles and their innervation in a
dog. (m: muscle; n: nerve.)
Table 6.3 Dimensions of the globe in domestic animals (mm)
A-P
Vertical
Transverse
Ratio
axis
axis
axis
Animals
A
V
T
A:V
A:T
V:T
Horse
43.68
47.63
48.45
1:1.09
1:1.10
1:1.01
Mule
43.00
47.50
48.50
1:1.10
1:1.12
1:1.01
Cow
35.34
40.82
41.90
1:1.15
1:1.18
1:1.02
Calf 
26.50
32.50
34.20
1:1.22
1:1.20
1:1.05
Sheep
26.85
30.02
30.86
1:1.11
1:1.15
1:1.02
Pig
24.60
26.53
26.23
1:1.08
1:1.06
1:0.99
6o0
21.73
21.34
21.17
1:0.98
1:0.97
1:0.99
Cat
21.30
20.60
20.55
1:0.97
1:0.96
1:0.99
(Translated from Bayer J, 19145.)
116
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
aalduooui sey u! pue snopoooaud you si Addnd aul
Horses are functionally precocious when born and
development of the visual system, first evident in the
their visual system reflects this compared to the dog. Foals
physiologic ankyloblepharon that  is present until
'uniedisod saep s Aq aaeiaae uo asuodsau aoruau e aaey
10-14 days postpartum. PLRs are present on opening of
 and all have PRLs on day 119. Horses have been calculated
snddiu yauxa pue ysiaanis aue kayn inq sp aui
as having visual acuities of 20/3520 to 20/6021. Most
(alternate dilating and constricting). The menace
horses are emmetropic, with equal amounts of very mild
response and visual cliff reactions are not present until
hyperopia and myopia found?2. Because the horse has
4 weeks postpartume.
only about 1 D of accommodation, early theories of how
Miller has writen two excellent reviews7, 8 on the
the horse focused objects at different distances were based
subject of animal vision, and readers are encouraged to
on a 'ramp retina' theory. This was based on the shape of
explore these publications further. Many of the following
the equine globe (6.5) that was supposed to produce a
comments are summarized from these articles. By necessity,
different focal length for light at different angles, with
veterinarians equate vision in animals based on their
axial light having the shortest focal length and ventral
comparative human experience, and it is probably fair to
light (ground) having the longest focal length23. This
 say this does not do justice to the visual world of animals.
theory was used to explain why horses move their head to
The dog obviously has a lower threshold 
for
view different objects. Sivak and Allen24 and Harman
au uo paseq sueuny ueu ua jo uoudarad
et al.20 discounted the ramp retina. Harman et al.20, in
predominant rod retina, a rhodopsin characteristic of
evaluating head position, visual fields, and visual acuity of
animals that function in dim light, and the presence of a
horses, found that binocular vision was present only in
tapetum. The tapetum, while enhancing light, also
front and down the nose but not straight ahead with the
induces a scatter factor that will decrease the resolution.
nose down. Thus when grazing, the binocular vision is
Vision in dogs is thought to be sensitive to motion because
toward the ground with the peripheral vision giving a
of the predominance of rods in the retina, and perhaps
panoramic view of the lateral horizon. If an object of
due to a horizontal visual streak. Dogs do not fuse
interest appears in the distance, horses raise their head to
individual flickers of light until 70 or more cycles/sec
look down their nose at the object with binocular vision.
(Hz), and this is often given as the reason most dogs do
Horses probably have dichromatic color vision and may
not watch television. Television is 60 Hz and a dog would
lack the ability to see green2s.
view it as individual frames rather than a fused picture.
The visual field of dogs varies between breeds, based on
the length of the nose and how frontal the eyes are. The
DISEASES OF THE ORBIT
total visual field is 240-250°, with up to 60° binocular or
overlap field. Visual acuity, the ability to discriminate
CLINICAL SIGNS
between objects, requires that the object be focused on the
Diseases of the orbit produce signs by altering the
retina. Most dogs tested are emmetropic, although myopia
volume of the orbit and/or the function of orbital
and hyperopia have been noted and may have some breed
structures. Alterations in the volume of the orbit produce 
predisposition?. The visual acuity of the dog given in the
either exophthalmos, enophthalmos, or deviation of the
familiar Snellen fractions is about 20/65-20/85 and varies
 globe. An additional accompanying sign of exophthal-
significantly with the methodology employed. Accommo-
mos may be either periocular or temporomandibular
dation in the dog is said to be only 2-3 D.
pain. Alterations in the function of orbital structures
 Dogs are similar to humans with deuteranopia fpartial
create signs as diverse as deviations in ocular alignment,
color blindness to red and green), discerning colors in the 
blindness, disparities in pupil size and function, vascular
blue and yellow spectrum and they are blind to the
congestion of the anterior segment, third eyelid prolapse,
red/green colors10.
altered tear secretion, and hypesthesia of the cornea
The cat tapetum is high in riboflavin, which produces
(Table 6.4)
the yellow color and tapetal fluoresencell. The amount of
light reflected is a function of the color, with the yellow
tapetum reflecting over 60% of the light and the green
tapetum reflecting 50%12. The amount of light required
for vision in the cat is 5.5-7x less than humans13. This is
facilitated by the tapetum and a large cornea and pupil
Table 6.4 Signs of orbital disease
which allow more light into the retina. Cats have a large
binocular field of approximately 130°, with a total
 Exophthalmos or enophthalmos
monocular field of 200° and a total field of view of
287914, The cat has a large lens that is positioned deep in
 Prolapsed third eyelid.
the eye to produce a small but concentrated image on the
Deviations of the ocular axis (+f-].
retina. The accommodative power of the cat has variably
Periorbital swelling (+f-).
been reported as 411 D15, 16, Anyone who has watched
Temporomandibular pain (+f-).
*(-i+) uogauny pue azis jidnd jewnougy
a cat follow an insect up a wall that was immediately in
 front of it would believe they have good accommodative
Exposure keratitis (+f-).
Blindness (+f-].
powers. Surprisingly, visual discrimination in the cat is
 Conjunetival hyperemia (+f-.
less than in the dog, being about 20/10017, 18 but
Papilledema (+f-).
sensitivity to light is better. The color vision of cats has
Optic nerve atrophy (+f-).
been variably reported but is probably partial, with
Orbital bruit (+f-).
weakness in distinguishing yellow from green.
ORBIT AND GLOBE
117
Exophthalmos
blindness, pressure striae in the fundus, prolapse of the
Exophthalmos is an increased prominence or protrusion
third eyelid, and vascular congestion and swelling of the
of the globe, and should be differentiated from
lids and conjunctiva may be present or may develop.
buphthalmos and the conformational exophthalmos seen
Table 6.5 presents the etiologies of exophthalmos. Further
in animals with a shallow orbit and a large palpebral
details will be discussed with the specific diseases.
fissure. In most instances this is not difficult but
measurements of the corneal diameter or ultrasonic
Diagnosis
measurements of the globe may be required to
Physical examination
differentiate the two. Exophthalmos signifies a space-
Physical examination of the mouth, sinuses, and teeth,
 occupying orbital lesion, whereas buphthalmos is specific
and history are very important in the workup of
for glaucoma. Exophthalmos can be produced by a
 exophthalmos. Pain on opening the mouth and decreased
space-occupying lesion of the orbit or the retro-orbital
retropulsion of the eye are typical of inflammatory
space due to the incomplete bony orbit. Specifically,
disease. In larger dogs, deep palpation of the orbit may
lesions of the muscles of mastication, the zygomatic
reveal a mass. Examination for ocular deviations or
salivary gland, and the adjacent soft tissues may produce
limitations of gaze may suggest the location of an orbital
exophthalmos.
lesion. Masses within the muscle cone push the eye
Manifestations of exophthalmos are detected by
straight forward, and masses outside the muscle cone
observation and palpation. The relative prominence of
push the eye away from the mass. Vascular lesions are
the two globes can be compared by observing from a
rare but produce unusual signs, such as an orbital bruit
dorsal vantage point and comparing the position of the
associated with an arteriovenous fistula26 or intermittent
two corneal apexes (6.7). Previous alterations in one
exophthalmos dependent on head position associated
eye/orbit, such as enucleation or phthisis/microph-
with a venous aneurysm (varix)27. Bilateral exophthal-
thalmos, do not allow this comparison. Palpation is
mos is relatively uncommon and is suggestive of a
performed to determine the compressibility of the orbital
myositis of the muscles of mastication, a multicentric
contents. Compressibility is determined by pushing the
 neoplasia, or systemic inflammatory/infectious disease28.
eye into the orbit through the closed lids, and
determining the resistance to retropulsion {see Chapter 1,
History
p.11, 1.4). The degree of retropulsion is then compared
The speed of onset and course are typically acute and
between the two orbits.
 short with inflammatory disease and hemorrhage, and
 chronic with neoplasia. The response to prior therapy
Orbital compressibility is an easy but frequently
such as antibiotics or administration of systemic
overlooked diagnostic test to confirm differences
glucocorticoids may be important information. Infor-
between the two orbits when evaluating an animal
 mation on relapse and pain should be obtained.
for exophtha lmos.
Radiography
Depending on the cause of the exophthalmos,
While noncontrast skull radiographs are routinely
additional signs of pain focular and on opening the
performed, it is, overall, a low-yield diagnostic test.
mandible), ocular deviations or restrictions in movement,
 Radiographs are examined for bone irregularities of the
orbit, involvement of adjacent sinuses or nasal cavity,
and tooth root lesions. Even when dramatic lesions from
neoplastic invasion of the bony orbit are present, the
6.7 Examination
6.7
changes on the radiographs are often subtle.
for unilateral 
exophthalmos from
the dorsal vanatage
point. There is some
periocular swelling 
 a5 well as mild
Table 6.5 Causes of exophthalmos
 exophthalmos. This
dog has orbital
 Orbital neoplasia: primary or secondary.
hemorrhage from
Retro-orbital neoplasia: bone, sinuses, nasal and oral
immune-media ted 
cavity.
thrombocytopenia.
 Orbital hemorrhage: trauma, blood dyscrasia, clotting
deficiencies.
 Orbital cellulitis/abscess.
 Retro-orbital cellulitis/abscess: tooth root, zygomatic
sialoadenitis, foreign body.
Orbital edema: trauma, immune-mediated?
 Orbital mucocele: zygomatic origin.
 Orbital cysts.
 Arteriovenous fistula: very rare.
Myositis of ocular muscles.
Myositis of muscles of mastication.
Mandibular hypertrophic osteoarthropathy in terriers.
118
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRiNArY MeDiCINE
Orbitography
Laterality
Radiographs of the orbit utilizing contrast material of air
Bilateral exophthalmos is usually due to systemic disease
or dye injected into the muscle cone or retroconal region
or myositis of the muscles of mastication or the
may be helpful in defining an orbital lesion29. If the
extraocular muscles. Multicentric neoplasia, such as
lesion cannot be localized by other techniques, then
lymphosarcoma, may occasionally create bilateral
contrast orbital radiography may be indicated. However,
exophthalmos in the dog and cat, and orbital
excessive effort and money is often expended with these
lymphosarcoma is well known in cattle42. Secondary or
techniques, and a specific diagnosis is still not made.
primary orbital neoplasia generally produces a unilateral,
chronic, slowly progressing, nonpainful exophthalmos
Venograms and arteriograms
but the author has observed neoplasia extending from
Venograms of orbital veins via the angularis oculi vein,
the nose/frontal sinus region that extended into both
or arteriograms of the orbit by injecting the infraorbital
orbits. Metastatic disease may occasionally involve both
artery, have been advocated for localizing and defining
orbits, and bilateral orbital multilobular osteochrodro-
orbital lesions30, 31.
 sarcoma has been reported in the cat43.
Uitrasonography
Pain
Ultrasonography
 has become almost universally
While pain is typical of inflammatory lesions, milder degrees
 available in veterinary medicine, and provides another
 Of discomfort in the periorbital region and temporo-
practical imaging technique for detecting orbital lesions.
mandibular joint may also be present with neoplasia. The
Two-dimensional, real-time {B-mode) ultrasonogra phy is
presence of pain on opening the mouth should always be
o s o si a  u n
evaluated with exophthalmos. Granulomas and chronic
nondiscrete and deforming or nondeforming lesions of
walled-off abscesses may not have significant pain, and are
the posterior globe32. In addition to transpalpebral and
 often referred to as pseudotumors, especially if idiopathic44,
transcorneal imaging, orbital lesions should be imaged
45. Cystic space-occupying lesions such as a mucocele are
by a temporal approach, placing the probe laterally
usually not painful46.
behind the orbital ligament?3. The results of ultra-
sonography, like radiography, are nonspecific in most
Ocular position
cases, and the main advantage is localization of the lesion
Ocular deviation usually points to the origin of the
for future surgical exploration or guided needle biopsies
exophthalmos. Lesions in the muscle cone may restrict
and fine needle aspiration.
ocular movement and produce exophthalmos, blindness,
and retinal pressure striae, but usually do not produce an
Fine needle aspiration
 ocular deviation. The lesion is typically opposite to the
Fine needle aspiration {FNA) is inexpensive, rapid, and
 direction of deviation.
relatively safe, and may yield a specific diagnosis. The
main difficulty with this technique is the lack of certainty
Onset
that the aspirated tissue is representative of the
Sudden onset is typical of inflammatory lesions but
pathology. When FNA is positive, it usually eliminates
owners will frequently underestimate the duration of
the need for more extensive orbital surgery. In a series of
exophthalmos with neoplasia.
fine needle aspirates in 35 animals with exophthalmos,
34 were diagnostic34. However, in the author's own
Vision
experience and that of others?5, FNA has not been as
Loss of vision with orbital disease is typically associated
successful in arriving at a specific diagnosis, and the
with involvement of the optic nerve and/or the chiasm
cytologists often diagnose the type of neoplasia
with the orbital lesion. Bilateral blindness may result
incorrectly. If lesions are observed on ultrasound, the
from chiasm involvement or, occasionally, from bilateral
FNA can be guided by ultrasound.
orbital disease. Retinal lesions may also contribute to
blindness through retinal detachment or orbital lesions
Imaging techniques
interfering with the retinal vascular system.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed
tomography (CT) scans of the orbit have supplanted
Lesion autonomy
contrast radiographic procedures. They are the ideal
 For prognostic and diagnostic purposes it may be helpful
 noninvasive diagnostic techniques to evaluate the orbital
to determine whether structures surrounding the orbit
contents but MRI or CT is not widely available 
in
are involved. Bone lysis is highly indicative of neoplasia,
e-geasusdxs si pe surid arua rus
as is nasal and/or sinus involvement on radiographs.
Orbitalexploration
Enophthalmos
Exploratory orbital surgery is the main diagnostic
Introduction/etiology
modality for those cases that ha ve not been diagnosed on
Enophthalmos, or a retraction of the globe into the orbit,
cytology from FNA, have not responded to medical
must be differentiated from a decrease in globe size
therapy, or are thought to be neoplastic. The surgical
(microphthalmos, phthisis bulbi). This differentiation may be
approach may vary depending on the animal's size and the
difficult because the globe may not be accessible to evaluate.
location of the lesion. Animals with a large orbit and an
The third eyelid is always prolapsed with enophthalmos.
anterior lesion may be explored and biopsied with a
Entropion from loss of lid-globe support and ocular
discharge are secondary events that may accompany
enophthalmos. Causes of enophthalmos include:
ORBIT AND GLOBE
119
6.8
 Extreme dehydration and cachexia: will produce
bilateral enophthalmos.
 Increased tone to extraocular muscles: tetanus and
strychnine poisoning will produce enophthalmos by
increased extraocular muscle {retractor) tone.
 Atrophy of orbital fat: trauma to the orbit may
result in post-traumatic atrophy of orbital fat and/or
fibrosis of tissues causing restricted globe movement.
Loss of perioribital lining: in the cat a paradoxical
 syndrome of enophthalmos with orbital neoplasia
may occur47. The enophthalmos is severe and may be
confused with microphthalmos or phthisis bulbi. The 
enophthalmos is thought to be due to loss of the
lateral-ventral periorbita, which essentially expands
the orbit.
6.8 Lateral-ventral deviation of the eyes in a puppy with
Loss of retro-orbital muscle mass: atrophy of the
hydrocephalus, due to expansion of the calvarium into the orbit.
muscles of mastication is a relatively common cause
of enophthalmos that may be unilateral or bilateral.
Lesions that may be concurrent with orbital
6.9
 disease: periorbital lesions in the mouth, nasal
 cavity, sinuses, upper arcades, muscles of
mastication; ocular lesions that may extend out of
the globe such as neoplasia, infection.
Diagnosis
Important factors in the differentiation of the causes of
enophthalmos are: bilateral versus unilateral,
the
 presence/absence of systemic signs, and the history.
CONGENITAL ORBITAL DISEASE
Shallow orbits
The most common congenital abnormality of the orbit
is a shallow orbit, usually observed in the brachy-
cephalic breeds. Expansion of the orbit with growth
depends on having a globe in the orbit and, conse-
6.9 Severe unilateral hypertropia with excyclotropia that is fixed in
quently, if an eye is microphthalmic or enucleated early
position in a young dog. Surgical exploration revealed aplasia of all
 aq u m as o u   
the extraocular muscles except the medial rectus and ventral
A shallow orbit may also develop from congenital
oblique, which were hypoplastic. The cornea is barely visible under
hydrocephalus, where the associated expansion of the
the upper lid.
calvarium  
encroaches on  t
the orbit from the
dorsomedial qua drant (6.8).
The significance of a shallow orbit depends on the
degree of exophthalmos and consequent lagoph-
6.10
thalmos. Animals with a shallow orbit are more
susceptible to tear film problems, exposure keratitis,
and tra umatic injuries ranging from corneal abrasion to
proptosis. A partial tarsorrhaphy (see Chapter 7, p.145
for technique) and ocular lubricants are utilized in both
a proactive and reactive manner in animals with this
conformation.
Extraocular muscle agenesis/hypoplasia
A congenital lack of most of the extraocular muscles
was described in a Miniature Poodle. The patient
was presented with a marked hypertropia in one eye,
that precluded vision, and an esotropia in
the
opposite eye (6.9). On orbital exploration, only the
medial rectus and ventral oblique muscles were
 present. Excision of the medial rectus freed the globe
and the muscle was diagnosed on histopathology to
6.10 Young goat with congenital strabismus due to aplasia and
be hypoplastic49. A similar syndrome was observed
 hypoplastic extraocular muscles. The globe is immobile, needing
in a goat kid (6.10).
forced duction or forceps to move the globe.
120
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
ACQUIRED ORBITAL DISEASE - INFLAMMATION
6.11
Orbital cellulitis/abscess, retro-orbital
cellulitis/abscess
DR
Introduction/etiology
Due to the incomplete bony orbit, the signs of inflam-
QN
mation inside the orbit are similar to retro-orbital
inflammation, and the process may extend from one
region to the other. Unless the cause of the space-
occupying lesion is uncertain and surgical exploration is
being considered, it is usually not important nor possible
to differentiate the two conditions. Most patients with
orbital inflammation are presented in the acute cellulitis
stage because of the dramatic signs. Abrams and
Goodwins0 reported that 52% of canine cases of orbital
cellulitis were presented during August and September.
The cause of the cellulitis was not established, which is
6.11 Dissected canine skull to illustrate the relationship of the upper
frequently the case.
dental arcade to the orbit. (G: posterior globe; DR: dorsal rectus
 An important cause of orbital cellulitis is extension 
muscle; ON: optic nerve; VR: ventral rectus muscle; TM: maxillary
from an infected tooth root, nasal sinus, or zygomatic
branch of the trigeminal nerve; PN: pterygopalatine nerve;
salivary gland (6.11)51-53 A migrating plant foreign body,
MA: maxillary artery: PT: medial pterygoid muscle; PM4: maxillary
such as a grass awn, or penetration of a foreign body
fourth prermolar tooth; M,: maxillary first molar tooth; M2: maxillary
through the soft palate or posterior pharyngeal area are
second molar tooth.) (From Ramsey et of., 199653.)
important and seasonal causes for retro-orbital cellulitis in
 many regions. When cellulitis is associated with extension
from teeth or sinuses, or caused from a foreign body, it will 
6.12
 asneo Aeuud aul jl asdejau inq Adeiaui oi puodsau uao
is not removed. Direct inoculation into the orbit from a
periocular injury through the lids or conjunctiva may
Orbital/retro-orbital inflammation is common in the
dog and less common in other species. Most cases are
due to bacterial infection, often anaerobics6, 57, and
respond promptly to antibiotics. However, mycotic
etiologies have been described. Systemic mycoses such
as Cryptococcus have been observed in the orbit of
 small animals and horsess8, s9, Cryptococcosis may be
generalized or spread from local lesions in the adjacent
sinuses and nasal cavity. Saprophytic fungi such
Ias
Penicillium spp. or Aspergillus spp. may rarely involve
the orbit60, 6l, and usually extend from the adjacent
6.12 Early orbital cellulitis in a dog manifesting with prolapsed third
sinuses or from systemic involvement. In many
eyelid, conjunctival hyperemia, mild mucopurulent exudation, and 
instances the origin of the inflammation is not
minimal periocular swelling. Easily misdiagnosed as conjunctivitis.
definitively determined.
6.13
6.14
6.13 A dog with orbital cellulitis, with more dramatic signs of
6.14 Moderately severe signs of orbital cellulitis in a dog, with
prolapsed third eyelid, conjunctival hyperermia, exophthalmos, and
dramatic periocular swelling and prolapsed third eyelid. The globe is
ocular discharge. Pain on opening the mouth will be evident.
 normal behind the third eyelid. The cause was a zygomatic
sialoadenitis (see 6.17].
ORBIT AND GLOBE
121
6.15
6.16
 6.15 Extreme signs of orbital cellulitis in a dog, with turgid swelling 
6.16 Examination of the mouth of a dog with orbital cellulitis under
a4l quainand sem uoeuidse uo ieul peau aul jo dol pue apis aul dano
general anesthesia. A swelling and fistula are present in the typical
animal had received systemic prednisone. Anaerobes were cultured.
location behind the last upper molar.
6.17
6.18
6.17 Inflamed zygomatic salivary gland papilla from the dog in 6.14.
 6.18 Chronic granulation under the eye from fistulation of an
Secretions were very viscou5.
infected lateral root of the fourth upper premolar tooth.
Clinical signs
6.19
 Orbital cellulitis typically has a sudden onset of unilateral
 protrusion of third eyelid, exophthalmos, and conjunctival
swelling and hyperemia {6.12-6.15). If observed before
exophthalmos is severe, it is likely to be misdiagnosed as
 and begins as a serous discharge that rapidly develops to a
mucoid to mucopurulent discharge. Retropulsion of the
globe is decreased, with varying degrees of periocular
swelling. The periocular swelling may migrate over the top
of the head and/or may become dependent when severe.
One of the most dramatic signs is often the severe pain
manifest on periocular palpation and on opening the
 mouth. The pain can be so severe that cervical disk disease
has been confused with the condition. Fever, depression, and
6.19 Aged Beagle with exophthalmos, prolapsed third eyelid, and
temporomandibular pain (note the muzzle). The edema below the eye
Usually, heavy sedation or general anesthesia.
is
is somewhat atypical for pure orbital cellulitis of this severity. Marked 
necessary to inspect the posterior oral cavity, and a
gum recession with root exposure is evident with several teeth of the 
swelling or fistula may be present in the roof of the mouth
upper arca de.
behind the last molar (6.16). The salivary gland papilla
 and posterior upper teeth should also be inspected for 
 obvious pathology. On occasion, some of the patients that
6.20 Fourth upper premolar
6.20
have a zygomatic sialoadenitis will have an inflamed
from the dog in 6.19. Note 
 papilla and altered salivary secretions (6.17). Depending
the black medial root.
on which tooth roots are infected, either orbital cellulitis
or a fistula that opens under the eye may be seen. The
latter is classical for infection of the lateral roots of the
fourth upper premolar tooth (6.18-6.20).
122
OpHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Orbital cellulitis is a dramatic syndrome and is
body, is indicated. If skull radiographs were not performed
most common in the dog. It usually responds to
initially, they are indicated at this time.
systemic antibiotics but a nidus for infection should
Because of the marked exophthalmos, lagophthalmos
be considered with relapsing conditions.
is frequently present and the cornea may have to be
 protected by the liberal application of ointments.
Surgical drainage of the orbit by lancing the mucosa
Diagnosis
behind the last molar is often recommended for the
Diagnosis of orbital cellulitis/abscess is made on the
treatment of orbital infection (6.23). However, since the
clinical signs of acute exophthalmos with pain, but
procedure sets the resolution process back by about
differentiation from masticatory myositis may.
be
48 hours and the yield for finding an abscess is low, the
difficult in the early stages. Diagnosing the cause of the
author does not use drainage if the area is not swollen or
cellulitis should involve inspection of the oral cavity for
discolored. If the area is swollen, drainage may
be
problems involving the upper molars and last pre-
achieved by puncturing and probing with a blunt
molars, and of the zygomatic papilla. If the area behind
the last molars is swollen or has a fistula, careful
probing may locate an abscess and culturing will
identify the infectious agent. Skull radiographs and
ultrasound are particularly indicated in atypical cases
6.21
or those that have relapsed.
Differential diagnosis
Differentials include other space-occupying orbital/retro-
orbital masses. Neoplasia may exhibit pain, ocular
discharge, and swelling but in general is nonpainful or not
as acutely painful as inflammation (6.21). Fulminating
 panophthalmitis that extends into the orbit will produce
and mimic orbital cellulitis but it has diffuse intraocular
lesions and results in blindness (6.22). A history of starting 
in the eye and later developing orbital signs, and the
obvious intraocular pathology, should differentiate
 panophthalmitis from simple orbital cellulitis.
Orbital hemorrhage manifests as an acute space-
occupying lesion, often with some degree of discomfort.
If the hemorrhage does not dissect forward to the
subconjunctival space, it may be confused with orbital
uand san peio jo asahns suis ym ason iz
cellulitis (6.7). Dicumerol poisoning causing retrobulbar
ocular discharge, periocular swelling, decreased orbital retropulsion].
hemorrhage has at times been difficult to differentiate
FNA and biopsy behind the zygomatic arch diagnosed a squamous
from cellulitis when the history is incomplete and the
cell carcinoma.
hemorrhage does not dissect forward.
 Early orbital cellulitis may have a similar presentation
to acute masticatory myositis, with swelling and pain,
except that myositis is typically bilateral. Cystic orbital
6.22
lesions such as mucoceles will not have the acute pain or
extensive periorbital involvement.
The main rule outs for orbital cellulitis/abscess are:
masticatory myositis, orbital neoplasia, orbital
hemorrhage, and cellulitis as an extension of
 pa nophthalmitis.
Therapy
Early in the course of the disease, penicillin administered at
a dose of 20,000-30,000 U/kg will usually arrest and cure
most uncomplicated cases of orbital cellultis. Alternatively,
other drugs that are effective against anaerobes, such as
metronidazole, amoxicillin-cla vulanate, (
chlora mphicol,
and clindamycin, may be used. Due to the pain on opening
the mouth, the injectable route is often used. In the author's
6.22 Hunting dog presented in the fall with an endophthalmitis
experience, procaine penicillin has been more consistent in
presumed to be due to a plant foreign body. Despite systemic
effecting a response than the broad-spectrum synthetic
antibiotics, the process progressed through the sclera to involve the
penicillins. I
Improvement  is usually
noted within
orbit within 24 hours. The dramatic ocular involvement differentiate5
24-48 hours. If a relapse occurs, re-examination for a nidus
this from a pure orbital cellulitis. Plant material (grass awns) wa5
of infection, such as an infected tooth root or a foreign
observed in the globe on histopatholgy with polarized light.
ORBIT AND GLOBE
123
instrument such as a hemostat. A blade should not be used
exophthalmos, conjunctival hyperemia, third eyelid
 as the infraorbital artery may be incised. If the periorbital
 prolapse and, occasionally, blindness from optic nerve
swelling is severe and has migrated over the head, and on
involvement. The myositis may be more generalized
needle aspiration the material is purulent, a Penrose drain
than just the muscles of mastication, and the term
is inserted. Obviously, if the source of the cellulitis is an
polymyositis is more appropriate when this is evident.
infected tooth root, the tooth is extracted (6.20).
Masticatory muscles are predominantly type 2M fibers,
whereas limb muscles contain types 1, 2A, and 2C
Eosinophilic (masticatory) myositis
fibers62, 63. Eosinophilic myositis is predominantly found
Introd uction/etiology
 in large breeds of dogs, less than 4 years of age64. The
Eosinophilic myositis is best known for its acute
syndrome was initially thought to affect primarily
involvement
of the muscles 
of mastication. The
German Shepherd Dogs (GSDs) or GSD crosses,
pronounced muscle swelling impinges on the nonbony
Samoyeds, and Doberman Pinschers but it is not
orbital wall, often producing dramatic ocular signs of
restricted to any breed63, 64.
 In the acute phase of the disease, the histolopathologic
findings  are  multifocal 
or
diffuse plasmacytic,
lymphocytic, macrophagic, and eosinophilic infiltration
of the muscles, with muscle necrosis63, 64. The disease is
6.23
 suspected to be immune mediated, with selective reaction
against the type 2M fibers63, and is characterized by
recurrent, acute attacks that eventually result in muscle
atrophy. The remission phase is variable, ranging from
A u do o a s s o s
also 0ccur64-66.
Masticatory myositis has been reported in a horse as
the main sign of nutritional selenium deficiency67. The 
signs were restricted to the masticatory muscles and eyes,
and were not generalized, perhaps because the horse had
been restricted to a stall.
 Clinical signs
Typically, masticatory myositis presents with bilaterally
swollen, firm muscles of mastication, although early in
the course the swelling may be asymmetrical (6.24). The
 swelling is accompanied by trismus (difficulty in opening
6.23 Lancing the soft area behind the last molar in a dog with
the mouth) and pain on opening the jaw. Peripheral
orbital cellulitis. Probing should be with a blunt instrument.
lympha denopathy may be present. On laboratory testing,
Sanguinopurulent material is draining from the opening, but often
 peripheral eosinophilia is uncommon but serum globulin
only blood is obtained if the area is not swollen.
 and creatine kinase levels are often elevated64.
The exophthalmos with masticatory myositis may be
dramatic and may produce a secondary exposure
keratitis. Conjunctival vascular injection produces a red
6.24
6.24
eye, and with exophthalmos the condition may mimic
Masticatory
glaucoma. The third eyelid is prolapsed from orbital
myositis
pressure, and blindness, that is later associated with optic
evidenced by
swollen
other signs of muscular involvement, such as gait
temporal and
abnormalities, (
 dysphagia, and profound weakness,
masseter
 polymyositis is probably present69.
muscles and
The disease is characterized by recurrent attacks with
difficulty
each episode lasting 2-3 weeks. With repeated episodes,
opening the 
muscle atrophy develops and may result in enophthalmos
mouth.
with prolapse of the third eyelid, weight loss from the
inability to eat, and loss of muscle mass of the head.
Diagnosis
The
signalment and
elevated 
serumcreatine
phosphokinase (CPK) during the acute phase (>200 IU/l)
are very suggestive of the diagnosis of masticatory
 myositis. Elevations of CPK can be due to other insults to
the muscles, such as trauma and medication injections.
Elevated levels of the muscle enzymes CPK, aspartate
aminotransferase, or lactic dehydrogenase have been
variable in polymositis, and normal levels do not rule out
the diagnosis69.
124
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
A muscle biopsy with mononuclear inflammation and
Therapy
eosinophils is the most definitive test but negative
The condition was initially reported as responsive to a
findings may occur due to sampling error since the
short course of systemic anti-inflammatory doses of
inflammation may be patchy. Phagocytosis of necrotic
glucocorticoids70. Ramsey et al. 71 reported poor response 
myofibers is the most common histopathologic finding63.
to therapy when less than 1.1 mg/kg q12h of prednisone 
 Electromyography is not widely available in practice
was administered, and a 57% relapse rate if the dose was
but it may give additional evidence of myositis or
tapered before 3 weeks. Recurrences 0ccurred in 81% of
polymyositis.
the dogs and may have been related to stress.
Therapy
Restrictive extraocular myositis
Treatment during the acute phase is systemic prednisolone
Introduction/etiology
at anti-inflammatory doses. Once the swelling and acute
Restrictive extraocular myositis presents as a rapidly
signs disappear the dose is halved for a period of
acquired, severe strabismus in young dogs of large
2-3 weeks, and if remission is maintained, it is halved until
breeds. It may be unilateral or bilateral. Reported breeds
a maintenance dose of 5-10 mg every other day is
have been the Irish Wolfhound, Shar Pei, Akita, Golden
obtained. Therapy should be continued for several months,
 Retriever, and Dalmatian72. No relationship was found 
and the animal monitored frequently for relapses. The
with masticatory myositis or generalized polymyositis.
emphasis is on control rather than on a cure. Alternatively,
 Restrictive extraocular myositis may be the end result of
concurrent systemic prednisolone and azathioprine may be 
 acute extraocular myositis as described in the Golden
given64; after 3-4 weeks the prednisolone is tapered off
Retriever but the breeds involved, variation in clinical
leaving a maintenance therapy of azathioprine.
signs, and laterality make it unlikely. Histopathology is
Some of the worst cases of orbital cellulitis and
characterized by muscle fibrosis, myonecrosis, and 
abscessation the author has observed had been
 mononuclear inflammation.
misdiagnosed as masticatory myositis and had received
immunosuppressive doses of prednisone (6.15). These
Clinical signs
cases were life threatening, were managed by experienced
Restrictive myositis presents as a rapidly developing
clinicians, and had undergone electromyography; such
strabismus in the ventral to ventromedial direction, and
cases emphasize the importance of muscle biopsies to
enophthalmos in young adult large breeds. Forced
make a diagnosis of masticatory myositis when presented
duction tests (forceps applied to the globe to move it) are
with an atypical clinical s yndrome.
positive or restricted when the globe is abducted or
sursumducted (elevated). Limited serology for immune-
Masticatory myositis and orbital cellulitis may be
difficult to differentiate in the prodromal phase
 2M fibers, and muscle enzymes are normal72.
and, unfortunately, their therapies are diametrically
 opposed.
Therapy
To date therapy has been surgical resection of the
affected extraocular muscles {ventral and medial rectus,
Prognosis
ventral 
oblique).
with
 good results, 
 although
The prognosis may be good if adequate glucocorticoid or
enophthalmos persists. If the patient presents with acute
other immunosuppressive therapy is administered early,
at appropriate doses, for an adequate period of
However, the former seldom occurs.
 3-4 weeks, and then tapered gradually64. Client educa-
tion is crucial to emphasize the importance of treating
any relapses promptly.
Extraocular myositis
6.25
Introduction/etiology
A syndrome of myositis restricted to the extraocular
muscles has been reported in the young {usually <1 year)
Golden Retriever, GSD, and Doberman Pinscher70.
About 30% of the patients had a recent, stressful event
associated with the onset of the signs. The earliest sign is
conjunctival hyperemia that develops into a nonpainful
bilateral exophthalmos and apparent lid retraction
(6.25). Vision is affected in 17% of cases, with
funduscopic lesions of vascular tortuosity, focal retinitis,
and papilledema that is reversible with therapy/l. The
result in strabismus and mild enophthalmos.
Histopathologic examination of the extraocular
muscles is characterized by a mononuclear infiltrate of T-
lymphocytes in the extraocular muscle bellies, with the
6.25 Young Golden Retriever with bilateral exophthalmos and wide-
muscles are normal clinically and histopathologically.
eyed appearance due to extraocular muscle myositis.
ORBIT AND GLOBE
125
Trauma (orbital fractures, hemorrhage.
Repair of fractures should be performed if bony
and edema)]
displacement is significant.
Introduction/etiology
 Blunt orbital trauma may result in fractures of the bones
Orbital mucocele
of the orbit or orbital rim. Swelling, crepitus, pain, and
Introduction/etiology
exophthalmos are usually present with acute fractures.
In the dog, a mucocele may rarely develop from the
Chronic fractures may not have pain and crepitus. In the
 Zygomatic salivary gland and extend into the orbit. Only
horse, fractures of the supraorbital process are relatively
 One case has been reported in the cat7s and ferret76. Most
common {6.26). Fracture of the medial portion of the
supraorbital process or the lacrimal bone may damage
the paranasal sinuses, resulting in epistaxis, and it is a
 presentation has been quite varied.
possible source for orbital sepsis73. Occasionally, severe 
orbital hemorrhage may occur secondary to tra uma.
Clinical signs
Shearing injuries to the optic nerve as it passes
Orbital mucoceles  are presented  with 
 nonpainful
through the optic foramen may result in blindness. In the
exophthalmos, or enophthalmos, depending on which
dog, the most common source of optic nerve injury
direction the mucocele is pushing the globe. Dissection of
secondary to trauma is associated with a proptosis of the
the mucocele behind the eye produces exophthalmos,
globe. In the horse, traumatic optic nerve injuries usually
and if dissection occurs forward to the orbital rim, it may
occur from a blow to the poll, and involve the region of
 push the globe caudally into the orbit. The location of
the optic nerve traversing the optic canal74 or the chiasm
the mucocele is variable and may present as a fluctuant
(see Trauma of the fundus, p.457).
swelling in the lower conjunctival cul-de-sac or on the
The cat frequently develops orbital trauma associated
top of the head (6.27)79, Accompanying the orbital
with multiple fractures of the head fpalatine,
mucocele, a ranula-like swelling may be present along the
mandibular) from automobile accidents. The resultant
duct in the mouth.
Optic neuropathy and corneal ulcerations may occur
may require a temporary tarsorrhaphy for protection.
as complications.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of traumatic orbital disease is made on the
The mucocele must be differentiated from other
history and associated contusions and abrasions, and by
periocular cystic lesions. Aspiration of the cyst may
radiography. Oblique radiographic views are often
disclose a “honey-like material but orbital cysts
necessary to demonstrate fractures, due to the complex
associated with nasal adenocarcinomas will have a
anatomy of the region.
similar consistency. The diagnosis is facilitated if an oral
 swelling involving the zygomatic duct located over the
Therapy
last molar is present. Sialography of the zygomatic
Therapy is directed at protecting the cornea if exposure
salivary gland is the most definitive method of diagnosis.
keratitis develops from proptosis or palpebral nerve
paralysis. Medical therapy is indicated in the acute case
Therapy
to relieve swelling, and may consist of cold compresses
If the zygomatic duct is swollen in the mouth,
(for the first 24 hours) followed by warm compresses,
marsupialization may be curative79 but most cases have
systemic glucocorticoids, and dimethyl sulfoxide.
A
had the cyst and zygomatic salivary gland excised
through an orbitotomy78.
6.26 Head trauma
6.26
6.27
in a horse resulting
 in bilateral fractures
of the supraorbital 
process of the
frontal bone. Severe
chemosis and
periocular swelling 
make it difficult to 
examine the eye.
The eye is deviated
ventrally, but it is 
normal. The
fractured proces5
was elevated and
the swelling
resolved.
6.27 A dog with a zygomatic mucocele presenting as a fluctuant
nonpainful swelling under the lower lid. The mucocele extended into the
orbit, and there was also a ranula-like swelling in the oral vestibule.
126
O pHThAlMIC DisEAse In VeterinArY MeDiCINE
Orbital neoplasia
Muftilobufar osteosarcoma
Introduction/etiology
Multilobular osteosarcoma is a dramatic but infrequent
 Neoplasia of the orbit is moderately uncommon and may
orbital tumor that has had multiple case reports.
be classified as primary or secondary. Secondary neoplasia
Historically, synonyms for the tumor have varied, creating
may arise from distant metastasis, multicentric neoplasia,
uq san ou au suidui ose pue uoisnuo
or extension from contiguous structures. While
the
Synonyms have included parosteal osteoma, multilobular
incidence of orbital neoplasia increases with age, many are
osteoma, chondroma rodens, and calcifying aponeurotic
 presented in the dog in young (2-3 year old) animals.
fibroma82 While multilobular osteosarcoma may initially
Cattle have a unique syndrome of bilateral orbital
be
 benign, follow-up examinations indicate that 58%
involvement with lymphosarcoma, that is relatively rare in
develop metastases by 14 months and this percentage
other species. This produces a gradually developing
increases if the tumor is incompletely excised. The lesions
unilateral or bilateral exophthalmos. The cow will usually
develop from the membraneous bones of the skull, i.e.
have involvement of other lymph nodes and target organs,
 mandible, maxilla, or cranium. The histologic feature is
 and the globe is not involved except secondarily from
nodules that have a cartilaginous or osteoid core,
exposure (6.28). Most animals die within 6 months42,
surrounded by fibrous tissue. Plain radiographs are often
Orbital lymphosarcoma also occurs in the dog, and is
suggestive of the diagnosis and demonstrate multiple
typically very fulminating and in young animals. The
lobules of tumor, which contain calcium. In one report the 
eyes are normal unless exposure keratitis develops (6.29).
overall median survival rate was 22 months82.
 In the dog almost all orbital neoplasia is malignant
(91-95%) and 75-82% are primary orbital tumors.
Canine orbital meningioma
The typical dog is_purebred, female, and middle-aged
Canine orbital meningioma is a relatively benign tumor
 that arises within the muscle cone, so it typically produces 
in the author's experience.
exophthalmos  without
strabismus.  Patients
with
 Over 18 tumor types have been reported from the orbit.
meningiomas frequently have visual complaints (60%)
Primary neoplasia originates from orbital bone, muscle,
and fundus lesions from involvement of the optic nerve
lacrimal gland, and neural, vascular, fat, and connective
(35%). Bilateral blindness may occur from invasion of the
tissue. Osteosarcoma, fibrosarcoma, multilobular ostero-
cranial vault and involvement of the chiasm. The tumors 
sarcoma (chondroma rodens), meningioma, glioma,
are epithelioid {meningotheliomatous) and the majority
rhabdomyosarcoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and
 contain bone or cartilage metaplasia83.
 adenocarcinoma may occur as primary neoplasms, with
Feline orbital tumors
cellulitis may be confused with neoplasia because both
Feline orbital tumors have similar characteristics to the
conditions may exhibit pain on opening the mouth and be
dog - age group (8.9 years old) and malignancy (90 %) -
transiently responsive to antibiotics. Thirty-six percent of
but secondary (71%) and epithelial (67%) orbital tumors
predominate. All primary orbital tumors in one report
Case reports abound on a variety of orbital tumors but
were mesenchymal84, and the mean survival time was 1.9
with relatively few series of cases. A few unique tumor
months. Enophthalmia was present in 24% of the cats and
types are discussed in detail below.
FNAs were diagnostic in only 45% of the patients.
 Enophthalmia is unique to orbital neoplasia in the cat47,84.
 Approximately 90% of orbital tumors are malignant
and about one-third mimic orbital cellulitis with
The short survival time of cats with orbital
exophthalmos and some degree of pain.
neoplasia is in large part due to early euthanasia.
6.28
6.28 Bilateral
6.29
lymphosarcoma of
the orbit in a cow.
producing marked 
exophthalmos and a
secondary exposure
keratitis. (Courtesy
of Dr. W. Rebhun
[deceased] of
Ithaca, NY.)
6.29 Bilateral orbital lymphosarcoma in a young Brittany. The eyes
were normal except for exposure keratitis. Exophthalmos is more severe
in one eye. Generalized peripheral lymphadenopathy was present.
ORBIT AND GLOBE
127
6.30
6.31
6.30 A dog with a multilobular osteosarcoma involving the ventral
6.31 A dog with a meningioma producing marked proptosis of the
and ventrormedial orbit. Note the prolapsed third eyelid, dorsolateral
globe. Severe exposure keratitis developed and the eye was blind.
5trabismus, and swelling below the eye that was very firm.
Orbital tumors in the horse
Orbital tumors in the horse are rare and are usually
6.32
 secondary tumors. Orbital extension of ocular or eyelid
squamous cell carcinoma and lymphosarcoma are most
common8s. Case reports of a variety of equine orbital
tumors exist without giving a clear picture of tumor
frequency and malignancy. Tumors reported from the
equine orbit
t are: melanoma?6, adenocarcinoma,
glioma?7, multiple osteoma?8, neuroepithelial tumor9,
and lipoma*0.
Paraganglioma
 Paraganglioma is a unique orbital tumor that has been
described in the horse90, 91. It arises from the
neuroendocrine system, and in the orbit is thought to
arise from the ciliary ganglion1. Paraganglioma may
invade the orbit from the nasal cavity and sinuses92. It
appears to be slow growing but may metastasize or
invade the cranial cavity through the optic foramen90.
Systemic hypotension may be a complication during
surgical resection.
6.32 A dog with severe papilledema produced by an orbital ma55
that was diagnosed as a carcinoma on FNA. A very advanced renal
 Clinical signs
carcinoma was also diagnosed and removed. It was not possible to
Orbital neoplasia typically presents with a unilateral,
determine whether the orbital lesion was a metastatic lesion or
nonpainful, slowly progressive exophthalmos with
primary lesion. Severe asteroid hyalosis obscures fine detail.
 decreased retropulsion of the globe. Metastases or, more
commonly, multicentric or secondary neoplasia from the
sinuses or nasal cavity, may be bilateral (6.29). Some
degree of pain may be present from inflammation;
6.33
Hendrix and Gelatt3s reported that 36% of dogs with
orbital neoplasia had signs of pain, ocular discharge, and
at least a transient response to antibiotics, mimicking
orbital cellulitis. The third eyelid is prolapsed and, if the
lesion is outside the muscle cone, a strabismus is present
(6.30). Lesions outside the muscle cone and anterior in
the orbit may be able to be palpated near the orbital rim.
Lesions within the muscle cone, such as meningiomas,
are likely to produce visual problems due to involvement
of the optic nerve (6.31). Papilledema may be present
early in the course of the disease {6.32), and optic nerve
an uo susuui si eisedoau aui j! aiel snsau aydoe
optic nerve. Pressure striae and indentation of the globe
may be visible on ophthalmoscopy (6.33).
An enophthalmos syndrome has been observed in
cats with the extension of a fibrosarcoma and squamous
 6.33 Canine fundus that is indented due to orbital involvement
cell carcinoma into the orbit. The enophthalmos is
with a multilobular osteosarcoma. Most of the dorsal fundus is
profound and is not due to pushing of the eye into the
pushed inward.
128
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
 orbit; rather, it is due to loss of the lateral periorbita
from an unknown mechanism. The loss of periorbita
essentially expands the orbital space and the eye sinks
into the expanded space (6.34).
Diagnosis
A slowly progressive exophthalmos with minimal pain is
highly suggestive of orbital neoplasia. Localization of the 
daap Aq sl A1aans A1oie1oldxa 1oy uoe1edaud u1 uoisal
orbital palpation, the direction of ocular deviation,
ultrasound, radiography, and CT or MRI scans.
Radiographs of the skull are taken to help define the
 composition of the neoplasia and to determine whether
bony lysis has occurred and whether the adjacent
structures, such as the nasal and frontal sinus cavities,
may be the source of the neoplasia. FNA should be
attempted if the location of the lesion is known. Because 
6.34 A cat with enophthalmos associated with a fibrosarcoma that
of questions on interpretation of the cytology, an
was present over the frontal sinus (shaved area] and invaded the
excisional biopsy is often still required for diagnosing the
orbit. The mass was not pushing the eye into the orbit, but wa5
type of tumor. For a definitive diagnosis, orbital
a55ociated with a loss of lateral periorbita that expanded the orbit
exploration and biopsy are performed.
The globe was normal on enucleation.
6.35
6.35 Modified transpalpebral
exenteration of the orbit. The
eyelids are closed with towel
forceps or sutured with a
continuous suture, and the skin is
incised with a blade or
electrosurgical scalpel (A).
 Scissors extend the dissection 
through the orbital septum into 
the orbit and remain external to
the conjunctiva and muscle cone 
if neoplasia is present. If orbital 
neoplasia is present, the
dissection is more liberal, with
the muscles transected further
back in the orbit rather than on
the globe (B, C). Transection of 
the optic nerve. The optic nerve 
may be crushed with a snare
device, an enucleation scissors, or
with a hemostat, and cut rostrally
to the hemostat or simply cut (D).
Two-layer closure of orbital
muscles and fascia and the
 superficial closure of the skin (E).
ORBIT AND GLOBE
129
In medium to large size dogs with adequate orbit size
Synthetic meshes have also been used to cover the orbital
and with lesions outside the muscle cone, the author
 opening and to prevent collapse of the surface.
usually uses a transpalpebral approach to the quadrant in
The use of an orbital prosthesis after evisceration is
which the lesion is localized. In patients in which the
Jo Aueue jo aaaap yty aui jo ua u anqeuousanb
lesion cannot be localized, the lesion is in the muscle cone,
these tumors.
or, in small dogs and cats, with minimal space in the orbit
to manipulate, a more extensive lateral orbitotomy with
Chemotherapy
 resection of the zygomatic arch is indicated40, 41.
Chemotherapy with doxorubicin resulted in remission of
 an undifferentiated orbital sarcoma of 7 months?s. Data 
Therapy
on protocols for chemotherapy of orbital neoplasia and
The literature has concentrated on tumor types and
 success rates are lacking.
clinical signs, with few reports of the results of therapy.
Despite the malignant nature of these tumors, it is not
Radiation therapy
uncommon to obtain survival rates of 6-12 months with
Data are also lacking for the results of deep radiation
combined surgical and radiation therapies. Hendrix and
therapy, or the combination of exenteration and radia-
Gelatt?5 reported 86% survival at 6 months of dogs
tion therapy, for malignant orbital lesions. Despite this,
following therapy. However, further analysis was
the author advocates a combination of surgical
impossible due to the small numbers of patients in each
 debulking or excision with deep radiation therapy.
therapy group.
In general, the prognosis for orbital neoplasia is grave
but depends on the type of neoplasia. In the author's
Excision
experience, patients have survived for up to 1 year with
Due to the malignant nature of most orbital tumors,
malignant lesions such as mucinous carcinoma, with no
excision is not curative but debulks the lesion and provides
 specific therapy.
a diagnosis. Primary orbital tumors that are isolated may
MISCELLANEOUS DISEASES OF THE ORBIT
respond to orbital exenteration. Exenteration of the orbit
rather than enucleation is indicated for neoplasia and
Emphysema [pneumatosis)
involves removal of the globe and orbital contents.
Introduction/etiology
Technically, exenteration is performed by stripping the
Accumulation of air in the enucleated orbit is a relatively
periorbita from the bone, staying outside the orbit with the
surgical dissection until the apex is ligated and excised. As
breeds. Air enters the orbit via the nasolacrimal duct.
usually performed, exenteration is not complete but is a
Due to a high positive pressure in the nasal cavity, air is
transpalpebral enucleation with excision of the extra-
apparently forced up the nasolacrimal duct and
ocular muscles (6.35).
maintains the patency of one or both of the cut lacrimal
Enucleation and exenteration often result in a sunken
 canaliculi. Increased pressure within the nasal cavity may
appearance over the orbit (6.36), and attempts
to
occur associated
 with exercise and mastication,
improve this appearance are important to make it a more
 producing a bellows effect in the nasal cavity and forcing
acceptable procedure to the owner. Suturing the muscle
air up the nasolacrimal duct96, 97.
layer under the skin as a barrier to sinking has limited
success. The use of a temporalis muscle flap to fill the
Clinical signs
 orbit has been described but is a relatively involved
The orbit becomes obviously distended and is nonpainful
and compressible (6.37). Needle aspiration of the swelling
used to close bony defects of the calvarium from
reveals only air. The amount of distention may periodically
neoplastic destruction and frontal sinus defects94.
get worse or improve, depending on physical activity.
6.36 An example of
6.36
6.37
extreme depression of the 
skin covering the orbit after
 enucleation in a horse.
6.37 Orbital emphysema in a Pug. The enucleated orbit wa5
 distended with air and the distention would recur after aspiration.
The condition increased in severity following exercise or excitement.
130
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Diagnosis
6.38
Diagnosis of orbital emphysema is by needle aspiration.
 Radiology may rule out a fracture into the sinuses as a
source of the air.
Therapy
Treatment has involved exploration of the orbit and
ligation of the canaliculus, if visible, or of the
nasolacrimal sac in the nasolacrimal fossa.
Orbital cysts
Introduction/etiology
Cysts may arise in the orbit either as congenital mal-
formations or acquired following trauma, surgery, inflam-
mation, parasites, or neoplasia. Congenital anomalies that
may be associated with cyst formation are microphthalmos
 and dermoids (6.38)98. Acquired cysts following trauma
may be a mucocele originating from the zygomatic salivary
6.38 Congenital bilateral cystic eye in a rabbit.
gland (6.27)46, 96, dacryops (a lacrimal cyst from the orbital
lacrimal gland or the gland of the third eyelid) (see Lacrimal
cysts, p.236, 9.35)9, or a hematic cyst from hemorrhage.
Retrobulbar hydatid cysts may be a rare cause for a
6.39
 chronic, space-occupying lesion in horses and mules100.
Mucinous carcinomas originating from the nose or
frontal sinus may invade one or both orbits, producing
cystic space-0ccupying lesions (6.39)46.
 Clinical signs
Cysts in the orbit present as slowly enlarging, nonpain-
ful, space-occupying lesions with exophthalmos. The
condition is usually unilateral (6.27, 6.38, 6.39).
Diagnosis
 Diagnosis of a cystic lesion is on the clinical signs, needle
aspiration of the orbit, ultrasonography, and CT scans.
The presence of bony and nasal cavity changes on
radiology may differentiate the malignant origin of cysts 
from a benign cyst.
6.39 Bilateral exophthalmos associated with a mucinous carcinoma
CT scans or MRI ha ve become the gold standard
of the frontal sinus in a dog. The neoplasia invaded both orbits and 
for diagnosing and localizing orbital masses.
eroded through the top of the frontal sinus, producing a small 
fluctuant swelling dorsocaudal to the eyes. On FNA of the orbit, a
Cytology may help to determine the cause of the cyst
thick tenacious material similar to a mucocele was aspirated. The dog
but can be inconclusive. For instance, in the author's
lived for 1 year after cobalt therapy.
laboratory, cytology failed to differentiate between a
neoplastic cyst and a zygomatic mucocele.
Therapy
and lesions in this area can affect all of them. The ocular
 Surgical excision of the cyst (except those associated with
signs are: complete ophthalmoplegia or inability to move
microphthalmos) is the preferred method of treating
the eye, dilated pupil, ptosis, and hypalgesia of the cornea
benign forms of orbital cysts. Aspiration and
and eyelids. Vision should be present. The cause of the
intralesional injection of oxytetracycline has been used as
ca vernous sinus syndrome is a mass lesion, and in the dog
 a sclerosing method for decreasing secretions. This will
and cat it may be either inflammatory or neoplastic in
 produce acute inflammatory signs and should be used
nature102. Confirmation of the location of the lesion is by
with caution101.
MRI or CT scans. The prognosis is guarded.
 The orbital apex syndrome involves structures exiting
Cavernous sinus and orbital apex syndromes
the optic foramen and orbital fissure. The cranial nerves
Neurologic deficits of clusters of nerves that innervate
and function affected are: the optic {Il, vision),
orbital and facial structures will occasionally be noted.
oculomotor (Ill, ophthalmoplegia, 
dilated pupil),
The cavernous sinus syndrome refers to multiple nerve
trochlear {IV, rotation of globe), abducens {Vl, retracts
impairment involving the oculomotor (III), trochlear (IV),
eye, lateral movement), and the ophthalmic division of
abducens (VI) cranial nerves, and the ophthalmic and
the trigeminal {V, sensory to cornea). Note that the
maxillary division of the trigeminal (V) cranial nerve.
maxillary division of the Vth is intact. Masses at the apex
These cranial nerves course through the cavernous sinus
Of the orbit are the usual cause.
ORBIT AND GLOBE
131
6.40
The eye may or may not be visually functional with
microphthalmia. Associated intraocular anomalies
include cataract, persistent pupillary membranes, uveal
colobomas, retinal detachment, retinal dysplasia, orbital
cyst, and goniodysgenesis. Inbreeding dogs with color
dilute genes (merling genes) and blue eyes often results in
 microphthalmia with multiple ocular anomalies103, 104. In
the Australian Shepherd Dog the trait is simple
horse and cat, there are no described inherited syndromes
as in the dog and cow. Guernsey calves have a syndrome
of microphthalmos with cardiac and tail defects that are
thought to be recessively inheritedl06. Hereford cattle
have a recessively inherited syndrome of microph-
thalmia, muscular dystrophy, and hydrocephalus107, and
Shorthorn  cattle have an inherited syndrome of
 microphthalmos108. A possible dominant trait has been
 6.40 Moderately severe bilateral microphthalmos in a puppy. with
reported, resulting in microphthalmos in half of the
lateral strabismus.
offspring of a Hereford bullfo9. Despite several known
inherited syndromes, most cases of anophthalmia-
microphthalmia in calves have no demonstrable genetic
basisiio. In utero infection with bovine virus diarrhea
6.41
virus may produce microphthalmos, cataract, retinal and
 optic nerve lesions, and cerebellar diseasell1.
Akita112, St Bernardl13, Collie, Doberman 
Pinscheri14, 1s, Cavalier King Charles Spaniell16,
Old English Sheepdog, Bedington Terrierl17,
 Soft Coated Wheaten Terrier120. (See Retinal
dysplasia, p.417 and Congenital cataracts, p.375.)
Teratogenic drugs: griseofulvin administered to
pregnant queens produces cyclopia or anophthalmia
and multiple neurologic, skeletal, and digestive tract
malformations 121.
 In utero viral infection: bovine virus diarrhea virus
 may produce microphthalmos among many other
ocular lesions if present between 76-150 days of
6.41 Unilateral clinical anophthalmos in a puppy.
gestation 1l1.
Many cases of microphthalmia are sporadic and
without a known causel10.
Clinical signs
Microphthalmos may be unilateral or bilateral. The
degree of reduction of globe size is usually obvious
when it is unilateral but mild decreases that are bilateral
may not be so obvious. In milder forms the condition is
compatible with vision but microphthalmos is often
 blinding due to the multiple ocular anomalies.
DISEASES OF THE GLOBE
Therapy
None.
CONGENITAL
Microphthalmos
Anterior segment dysgenesis
Introduction/etiology
Introduction/etiology
Microphthalmos
acongenitally
small
eve.
Anterior segment dysgenesis refers to a congenital syndrome
Microphthalmos includes a wide variety of anomalies
observed in various breeds of horse such as the Rocky
lu m azis u panau alaieq aqo e se yons
 Mountain, Kentucky Saddle, Mountain Pleasure, Morgan,
intraocular structures, a marked reduction in size of the
 ponies, miniature breeds, and American Saddlebred. It is a
globe with numerous intraocular anomalies, and a
 syndrome with varying degrees of manifestation depending
clinical anophthalmos in which no globe is present (6.40,
on the coat color The trait is dominant with incomplete
6.41). Most cases of clinical anophthalmos are extreme
penetrance that manifests only with the dominant silver
examples of microphthalmia, with dysplastic ocular
dapple locus that imparts a chocolate coat with a flaxen or
remnants in the orbit on serial sectioning.
white mane. Black horses are protected>3.
132
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRiNArY MeDiCINE
 Clinical signs
Strabismus
The basic lesion with anterior segment dysgenesis is
Introduction/etiology
ciliary body cysts that are manifested in the temporal
 Deviations of the normal visual axis are common in
region (see Iris and ciliary body cysts, p.305, 11.30).
brachycephalic and toy breeds, Siamese cats, and cattle.
Some of the horses with cyst manifestation will have
The condition is often inherited, although strabismus
peripheral retinal detachments, retinal dysplasia, and
may be acquired. In the Siamese cat, strabismus is
arcuate lines of retinal pigmented epithelium prolifera-
typically an esotropia and is associated with the albino
tion from previous retinal detachments. The homo-
gene (6.42). Various albino animals may have an
zygous individual with a flaxen mane will have, in
increased number of optic nerve fibers decussating at the
addition, varying degrees of multiple ocular anomalies,
optic chiasm from the temporal retina. This results in
consisting of cornea globosa (see Cornea globosa,
a bnormal retinotopic projections to the lateral geniculate
p.247, 10.14), goniodysgenesis and synechia, nuclear
cataracts, posteroventral luxated lens, miotic pupil, iris
be a compensatory mechanism, and develops in the first
stromal hypoplasia, large palpebral fissures, and
6 months of life in the Siamese catl2s. A fine pendular
microphthalmos$3
 nystagmus may be associated with the strabismus.
Congenital hypoplasia or aplasia of the extraocular
Therapy
muscles may, rarely, be responsible for dramatic ocular
Therapy is limited to genetic counseling of breeding to
deviations, and these conditions have been observed in
black stallions.
the dog and goat (6.9, 6.10)49.
Convergent strabismus with or without exophthalmos
is an inherited trait in Jersey and Shorthorn cattle126, and
is observed less frequently in Ayrshire, Holstein-
Friesian127 and brown Swiss cattle {6.43)106. Strabismus
may occasionally be observed in the horse, with the
6.42
Appaloosa most commonly affected with a hypertro-
been associated with night blindness130.
Bilateral exotropia with hypotropia {eyes are deviated
 down and out) is commonly associated with congenital
hydrocephalus, due to enlargement of the calvarium and
encroachment on the dorsomedial orbit {6.8). Ocular
deviations after replacement of globes are common. The
most common deviation is an exotropia-hypertropia
{dorsolateral) (6.44), although the deviation may occur
in any direction {6.45). The deviation usually results
from avulsion of the ventral and medial rectus muscles
or, possibly, nerve damage. The deviation moderates over
a period of 4-8 weeks but does not return to normal.
Therapy
6.42 sotropia in a Himalayan cat. The condition is associated with
In the majority of strabismus cases, no therapy is
 an increased percentage of fibers from temporal retina crossing at
 attempted.
. The strabismus in Siamese cats has not
the chiasm.
responded to surgical correction. Severe deviations
6.43
6.44
6.43 Microphthalmos and esotropia present bilaterally in a Holstein
6.44 A dog with typical postproptosis strabismus in a dorsolateral
cow. A pendular nystagmus wa5 present. The condition wa5 genetic.
direction. Note the irritation to the ventromedial globe and cornea.
ORBIT AND GLOBE
133
6.45
6.46
6.45 A dog with severe esotropia as the result of a prior
6.46 A dog with phthisis bulbi after cyclocryotherapy for glaucoma.
proptosed globe.
Note the dense corneal opacity and the mismatching of the globe
size to third eyelid and palpebral fissure. These features help to
differentiate phthisis from microphthalmo5.
associated with trauma may be treated by anchoring
sutures or medial tarsorrhaphies to improve the
appearance and protect the cornea. If forced duction tests
6.47
indicate limitations of movement, surgery can be
performed on the limiting muscles to weaken them by
 recession or removal of the muscle insertions49, 128.
ACQUIRED CONDITIONS OF THE GLOBE
Phthisis bulbi
Phthisis bulbi is a shrunken disorganized globe usually
resulting from massive intraocular pathology. Cyclitic
membranes or inflammatory membranes that stretch
across the globe between the ciliary body are usually
present and result in ciliary body detachment and marked
hypotony. A yellow-white corneal opacification, cataract,
and retinal detachment are usually present (6.46). The eye
is nonfunctional, and in veterinary medicine is often not
removed due to the owner's objection to the appearance of
an enucleated orbit. The danger of having a nonfunctional
eye with opaque media is that subsequent intraocular
6.47 Intraocular chondrosarcoma that fills the vitreous cavity in a
neoplasia may arise and not be recognized until very late.
 Cat. Sarcomas such as these have been related to past trauma and
In the cat, the increased recognition of intraocular
inflammation, and typically are advanced by the time they are
sarcomas after trauma and severe intraocular disease is an
detected because they arise in blind eyes with opaque media.
argument for the enucleation of phthisical eyes (6.47).
Other problems related to phthisis are appearance, subtle
discomfort, and poor lid-globe apposition that results in
6.48 Screech
6.48
 entropion and chronic ocular discharge.
owl with an
orbital
Microphthalmos and phthisi bulbi may be difficult
prosthesis after
 to differentiate if the animal's history is not
enuclea tion.
available. Diffuse corneal opacity is more typical of
phthisis bulbi.
The easiest solution to phthisis is the implantation of
an orbital prosthesis at the time of enucleation. Silicone
orbital prostheses have been applied in dogs, cats, birds
{6.48), and horses. Commercial methyl methacrylate
orbital prostheses have been successful in the dog but a
significant failure rate has occurred in cats due to an
accumulation of orbital fluid131.
Cats should have phthisical eyes enucleated to
avoid ocular sarcomas later in life.
134
OpHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
6.49
The size of implant that the orbit can accommodate
varies with head conformation in the dog. Often the
leading edge of the implant will be sha ved flat. The horse
will usually accommodate a 40-47 mm diameter sphere
and the dog a 20-22 mm sphere, unless it is a
brachycephalic dog where 14-16 mm is recommended131,
132. In the short term, orbital prosthesis is a significant
improvement over enucleation. However, with time some
prostheses will be pushed forward by orbital granulation,
resulting in a questionable cosmetic improvement.
Proptosis [prolapse] of the globe
Proptosis of the globe out of the orbit with subsequent
u juaaa oewne1 uowwoo p si sp aul Aq juawdeua
the dog and cat. Two forms of trauma are associated
with proptosis: car accidents, and dog fights. In
extremely brachycephalic dogs, simply grasping the skin
6.49 Proptosed globe in a cat. Note the miotic pupil.
over the back of the neck may result in proptosis. Since
the trauma necessary to cause proptosis in a cat or
mesaticephalic dog is much more than in a brachy-
cephalic dog, the attendant injuries to the globe are
6.50
usually more severe in the cat and longer nosed dogs.
Since proptosis is indicative of head trauma, many
patients have significant neurologic signs.
 It is rare to preserve vision in a proptosed globe in
a cat or dolicocephalic dog.
Clinical signs
Proptosis is obvious and often grotesque but evaluation of
other ocular signs is important for prognostic purposes
(6.49). A variety of pupil abnormalities may be present in
the affected eye but are not important in evaluating visual
function. If the direct PLR is present, this is a good sign.
The pupil of the affected eye may be dilated from
oculomotor nerve paralysis or constricted. Marked
constriction may result from an antidromic axonal reflex
6.50 Avulsion of the optic nerve and retinal vessels associated with
of the ophthalmic branch of the Vth cranial nerve, due to
a proptosis of the globe in a young Doberman Pincher. The optic disc
corneal pain or traumatic uveitis (see Chapter 10, p.241
is swollen, retinal hemorrhages are present, retinal vessels contain
and Chapter 11, p.298). The important pupillary reaction
only residual blood and are incompletely filled, and the retina ha5
for evaluating vision is often the consensual reaction; a
become white and opaque from infarction.
defect in the opposite eye indicates retinal/optic nerve
injury and a poor prognosis for vision.
The extraocular muscles, especially the medial rectus,
are usually torn and are responsible for the strabismus
6.51
that is a common complication of proptosis. Three or
more torn extraocular muscles has been cited as an
unfavorable prognostic indicatorl33but this is difficult to
ascertain in practice. Conjunctival tears are common,
 and the cornea appears dry and covered with mucus and
hair Superficial ulceration is common.
If the fundus can be visualized, severe damage may be
 observed associated with avulsion of the optic nerve and
retinal vessels. This presents in the acute stage with large
white ischemic areas of retina, bloodless blood vessels,
and papilledema (6.50). Later, the ta petal coloration may
be lost or, if present, it is hyperreflective with a lack of
retinal blood vessels, and a gray-white atrophied optic
disc is present.
Intraocular hemorrhage usually occurs with severe
intraocular damage, such as a ruptured globe, and
6.51 Proptosed globe in a cat with intraocular hemorrhage. Marked
indicates a poor prognosis (6.51). An important
hypotony was present on palpation of the globe.
prognostic sign is the IOP; specifically, if the globe is very
ORBIT AND GLOBE
135
soft it usually indicates that it is ruptured. The rupture is
6.52 Posterior rupture
6.52
usually posterior and not visible, although vitreous may
of the globe enucleated
herniate through conjunctival lacerations {6.52)
from 6.51.
A very soft proptosed globe probably has a
Diagnosis
The diagnosis is obvious but the prognosis should be
 determined for sight and appearance. Ultrasound may
 help in detecting posterior globe ruptures.
Prognosis
Gilger et al.133 reported retention of vision in only 27%
6.53
of dogs with proptosis, with a better prognosis for
brachycephalic dogs. No cats retained vision after
 proptosis. The prognosis is considered on the basis of
two outcomes, vision and cosmetic appearance. If the
prognosis for both is poor, then enucleation is
recommended as the eye will remain problematic.
Thera py
 Neurologic signs, if present, frequently preclude expedient
management of the proptosis. Patients with severe
 neurologic signs and proptosed globes often need to wait for
[uaa jo uensue a zs o sap ei
anesthesia. However, the prognosis for the proptosed globe
 in these patients is usually grave and enudleation is indicated.
General rule: you can always remove the globe but
you cannot put it back, so try to salvage most
globes for cosmetic purposes, even if the animal is
likely to be blind.
Enucleation
6.53 llustration of proptosis and how the rolled lid entraps the
 The eye should be enucleated if:
globe when caught posterior to the equator.
+ The owner is pragmatic: the globe after replacement
requires ongoing chronic postoperative care and if
the eye is blind, some owners do not appreciate the
expense and effort.
6.54
 The eye is very soft: it will be neither functional nor
cosmetic, as the eye will become phthisical.
The globe is dangling from a few muscles.
+
There is significant intraocular blood present, which
usually indicates that the globe is ruptured.
Replacement of the globe
Most owners will want to try and salvage the eye whether
it is functional or not. The lid margins must be lifted up
and over the equator of the globe while simultaneously
 pushing on the globe (6.53, 6.54). This maneuver usually
requires general anesthesia. The main difficulty occurs
when only the edge of the folded over lid is grasped, rather
than the lid margins. The lid margins can be rolled out by
placing hemostats parallel and near the rolled over edge,
and then rolling the hemostats. Another method is to
leap-frog' or alternately grasp with two pair of forceps
until the lid margin is reached. Once each lid margin is
elevated and everted outward, the globe is pushed into the
orbit and the lid margins are released as they pass the
equator of the globe. At this time, torn conjunctiva and
 6.54 llustration of replacement of a globe following proptosis. Note
avulsed muscles can be sutured if they can be found.
that the lid margins must be rolled out and away from the globe, while
simultaneously pushing on the globe to replace the globe in the orbit.
136
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRiNArY MeDiCINE
A tarsorrhaphy is placed with an everting suture
aui oi aseuep inq Anjuaaaun sieas Auanbay Ainlui
pattern (see Therapy, p.158, 7.30) and tied firmly so that
lens, vitreal hemorrhage, and retinal detachment are 
when the swelling subsides the sutures do not rub on the
common accompanying lesions. Vitreal hemorrhage is
cornea. Steroids should not be injected into the orbit and
important as it often leads to subsequent retinal detach-
systemic steroids should only be used cautiously, because
ment with contraction of the clot (6.55).
of the danger of corneal ulceration. Orbital swelling
improves quickly, and the main justification for using
 The size of the corneal defect with perforating
steroids is for treating traumatic optic neuritis. Injection
missiles and injuries has no prognostic value for
of systemic mannitol may also be justified for this reason
vision. The smallest corneal defect may result in
but not for simply replacing the globe. Neuroprotective
blinding sequelae.
therapy in the form of calcium channel blockers is
indicated for minimizing collateral nerve damage from
Larger pellets and BB shot injuries may mimic acute
 ischemia (see p.357). The tarsorrhaphy should be in place
 corneal ulcers with or without iris prolapse but they should
for 2 weeks as most cases have inadequate tear function
be differentiated for prognostic purposes (see Penetrating
and lagophthalmos. Upon removal of the sutures, the
and perforating wounds of the cornea and globe, p.280,
cornea should be observed for KCS over the next several
10.101). While infection is uncommon, sterile inflam-
days. Corneal ulceration is a common problem after
mation may be overwhelming. The initial traumatic
removal of the tarsorrhaphy, and supplemental artificial
inflammation may be controlled but 2-3 weeks or later
tears are often needed for several weeks.
another more severe inflammatory reaction occurs due to
Strabismus with the eye directed up and out is
phacoclastic uveitis. Penetrating injuries from sticks and
 common and slowly improves over 4-6 weeks in most
porcupine quills may or may not be obvious, depending on
cases. A strabismus will remain but is milder than the
whether they are retained in the eye.
original deviation and acceptable cosmetically. The
medial cornea often develops ulcerations due to the
Diagnosis
exposure that the dorsolateral stra bismus produces, and
The history of a peracute onset of the injury or perhaps
knowledge of the injury, as in hunting dogs, is important
cosmetic purposes (see p.160, 7.36).
to stimulate diagnostic testing. Typically, malicious injuries
have a history of the dog being let out for a couple of
Client education is critical with proptosed globes
hours and returning with a perforated cornea. The
 because of the frequency of long-term sequelae that
 perforating injury should be differentiated from an acute
require therapy, despite the globe being visually
perforating corneal ulcer With metallic missiles this is
nonfunctional.
easily accomplished with radiographs of the skull.
Ultrasound can also be utilized to determine the extent of
ocular injuries and to locate the foreign body more
TRAUMA
precisely. Nonmetallic penetrating foreign bodies, if not
 Perforating and penetrating ocular injuries
visible, are most easily diagnosed with ultrasonography57.
A perforating injury to the globe is one that enters and
exits the globe, while a penetrating injury is one that
 Peracute corneal perforations should not be confused
enters without exiting. Perforating injuries to the globe
with complicated corneal ulcers. Skull radiographs
with BB {airgun) shot and pellets are common and are
are indicated to find a metallic foreign body.
quite devastating to the function of the eye. The corneal
Prognosis
 Before initiating therapy, consideration should be given to
6.55
the three objectives of maintaining function, comfort, and
cosmesis. The prognosis is dependent on the extent of injury
to specific ocular tissue, whether the lens is damaged and the 
extent of damage {6.56), the presence of significant vitreal
hemorrhage, and the size of any exit wound. Small BB shot
perforating through the peripheral cornea and not hitting
the lens are compatible with good cosmesis, although the
sialad aarel papiena aq Aeu uououny 1oy sisousoid
injuries have more concussive force and are rarely
compatible with saving function and cosmesis. Infection is
uncommon with metallic foreign bodies, although severe
inflammation is common. Penetrating injuries from cat
claws, sticks, and porcupine quills are more likely to be
 infected, although not as often as one might anticipate.
 A perforating injury through the lens, with significant 
vitreal hemorrhage, signals an eye that has a high
probability of developing overwhelming inflammation,
 6.55 Multiple BB shot corneal perforations (arrows) that occurred in
as well as losing function from a detached retina. A
both eyes. Despite the self-sealing nature of the injuries, the
penetrating injury is less likely to have both anterior
 prognosis is very guarded for sight.
segment and posterior segment considerations  for
ORBIT AND GLOBE
137
prognosis. The type of metal retained will affect the
Methods for differentiating laceration from rupture
tissue reaction; lead is relatively nonreactive as an
have been discussed in the equine literature but
insoluble carbonate envelope develops that isolates the
incomplete historical data is not helpful137. (See Ruptures
 metal from surrounding tissue134.
of the globe, p.281 for more details.)
Therapy
Diagnosis
The objectives of therapy are to maintain function, limit
Differentiating a ruptured globe from a laceration is
inflammation, prevent or treat infection, and maintain a
facilitated if the history is complete or there is further
comfortable eye. The decision to treat may be based not
evidence of blunt trauma to the head. Injuries of the 
only on the prognosis but on prognostic uncertainties
cornea that cross the limbus are usually ruptures. In
and an owner who is adamant in wanting to save the eye.
horses, only approximately 4/24 of cases that had wounds
Any leaking corneal defect or iris prolapse should be
ueas-s aue suoisal leus Auru ing pauieda
 Uultrasonography may identify an absence of the lens,
Traumatic inflammation should be treated first, and this
retinal detachment, and perhaps vitreal hemorrhage in
usually subsides within 2 weeks with anti-inflammatory
rupture, features which are not typical for the usual
therapy given both topically and systemically. Anti-
laceration. Surgical exploration of a rupture usually
   aa 0n a a an a
 reveals the lens is missing or the lens capsule is ruptured.
extended period of time. Concurrent topical and systemic
antibiotics are administered for 7-10 days, and topical
Therapy
atropine administered to control ocular pain and to
 If the diagnosis of a ruptured globe is certain, enucleation
maintain a pupil. Lead foreign bodies such as BB shot
or evisceration with implantation of a silicone sphere is
and pellets in the orbit or globe are not removed, as they
recommended in order to minimize expense and pain.
are well toleratedi34 and the surgical trauma involved
Evisceration carries the risk of extruding the prosthesis
will usually far outweigh the benefit of removal.
but most are retained and the procedure prevents phthisis
With penetrating injuries (without posterior segment
bulbi. Enucleation should be the procedure of last resort.
lesions), the lens should be removed to prevent phaco-
Enucleation may be performed with a transpalpebral,
clastic uveitis if the lens capsule has a tear larger than
subconjunctival, or lateral approach. The transpalpebral
manifests
 approach (6.35) usually removes more orbital tissue than
Sh suaan seunen se isnl kinlui au iae syaam g-7
the other approaches and all of the conjunctival tissue,
resolving. While lens extraction can be performed,
and thus has less complications of postoperative
posterior segment injuries often preclude a visually
accumulation of secretions. If the ocular surface is
aka ue aaes oi Auebuns aaisuadxa ue s 1i os 'aka leuououny
infected or neoplastic, the transpalpebral approach
just for cosmetic purposes.
minimizes the risk of carrying infection or seeding of
 In humans, vitrectomies are routinely performed for
neoplastic cells deeper into the orbit. The method has
removal of vitreous hemorrhage, to prevent subsequent
two major disadvantages: most surgeons simply excise
retinal detachment, and to remove any metallic foreign
until the globe is free, with little attempt at retaining
bodies. The best timing for vitrectomy is still debated.
orbital tissue to minimize a postoperative shrunken
The use of both intravitreal and i.y. antibiotics with
appearance; and the skin and orbicularis oculi muscle
open globe injuries is also debatedl36. As veterinary
often bleed profusely if electroca utery is not used.
ophthalmologists develop the skills and instrumenta-
tion for performing vitrectomies, such procedures may
become routine in managing these types of injuries. It
should be emphasized that even with procedures
involving lensectomy, vitrectomy, and suturing the
sclera, or combination surgery, the prognosis for vision
6.56
is very poor.
Ruptured globe
 Blunt trauma to the globe may cause it to rupture either
posteriorly or anteriorly. Ruptures of the globe from blunt
trauma in the dog and cat are usually posterior and
associated with proptosis of the globe. In the horse,
ruptures are usually observed in the cornea and adjacent
sclera, and are due to throwing the head and hitting an
object or rearing over and hitting the floor (6.56). An
anterior rupture is accompanied by iris prolapse, and it
 may mimic a laceration or, occasionally, a perforated ulcer.
It is important to differentiate between these
conditions, as lacerations and ulcerations have a
relatively good prognosis for retaining vision,
whereas ruptured globes have a very poor
6.56 Horse that had suffered blunt trauma to the eye resulting in a
 prognosis and usually result in phthisis.
rupture across the entire corneal diameter. The lens was expelled at
the time of injury.
138
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETeRINARY MeDICINE
The subconjunctival approach eliminates bleeding from
 procedure. Postsurgical infection is usually managed
the skin and orbicularis muscle while performing the
with systemic antibiotics. When contamination is present
enucleation, is usually more clear and distinct in
 Or suspected at the time of enucleation, flushing the orbit
 dissection, but may not remove all the potential secreting 
with antibiotics such as crystalline penicillin, and
membranes (6.57). In animals with a tight globe-orbit
utilizing preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative
relationship, such as the cat, or buphthalmos, dissection is
systemic antibiotics is usually successful. Seatons or 
more difficult. The lid margins and the third eyelid with its
drainage tubes are used on rare occasions.
gland are excised before suturing the orbit closed (6.58).
A common complication of enucleation is excessive
Complications of enucleation include factors that
 orbital hemorrhage, with a swollen orbit after surgery.
made the procedure necessary, such as infection or
This can be treated with initial cold compresses, followed
neoplasia, as well as complications that are specific to the
after 24 hours with warm compresses. The condition
6.57
6.58
A
上
AV
G
6.57 Subconjunctival approach to enucleation. Incision and blunt
 6.58 After the globe is rermoved the third eyelid is excised after placing
dissection of conjunctiva from the globe, for 360° (A]. Individual
forceps at the base and ligating (E). The lid margins are removed with
extraocular muscles are lifted up with a strabismus hook and excised
 5pecial attention given to the medial canthus. The medial canthal
with tenotomy scissor (B). After the extraocular muscles have been 
ligament can be cut to loosen the skin from the skull and make it easier
excised from the globe, the optic nerve is crushed either with a Kelly
to dissect (F). Note the proximity to the angularis oculi vein (Av). An
forceps and then cut with scissors or a tonsil/enucleation snare is
 orbital prosthesis can be placed and the orbit closed in a deep layer of
 passed over the globe and used to crush/cut the nerve (C. D).
muscle and fascia, and a superficial skin closure performed (G, H).
ORBIT AND GLOBE
139
usually resolves without incident, although serum may be
expelled if the incision is disrupted. Increased attention
ulceration. Most of the time these proceses produce
to hemostasis will minimize bleeding, e.g. using an
an endophthalmitis {involvement of the inner tunic)
electroscalpel on the skin and muscle, ligating the base of
but if overwhelming infection occurs, the entire
the third eyelid before excising, and crushing the optic
thickness of the globe may become involved and
 nerve before cutting.
inflammation may extend into the orbit. Blindness and 
In the cat, the surgeon should be cautious of how
pain are the devastating end result, and the course is
much forward traction is placed on the globe during
often very rapid.
enucleation, to avoid optic chiasm damage. Cats have
Fungi,
aré
not
an
 uncommon
cause
of
become blind in the contralateral eye after enucleation,
panophthalmitis/endophthalmitis, and inflammation may
as a result of such damage138.
be due to systemic fungi, hematogenous saprophytic fungi,
or fungi inoculated into the eye from penetrating injuries.
 In the cat, a large globe and small orbit make
Viruses that produce vasculitis, such as malignant catarrhal
enucleation more difficult; pulling the globe 
fever in the cow and FIP in the cat, may produce a
forward for exposure may avulse the optic chiasm.
 panophthalmitis. Bacteria are the most common causes of
panophthalmitis, and the most feared form is postsurgical
An additional common complication of enucleation is
infection. While accurate statistics are not available for
orbital retention of sterile serous secretions that
large numbers of cases in veterinary medicine, in human
subsequently drain from the medial canthus. Removal of
intraocular surgery endophthalmitis occurs in about 0.1%
all the conjunctival surfaces and the third eyelid are
of patients. One would expect endophthalmitis post-
performed to try to prevent postoperative secretions, but
surgically to be higher in veterinary medicine, and the horse
 most surgeons do not remove the orbital lacrimal gland;
some patients continue to have orbital secretions that
reported four cases in 34 cataract surgeries. The most
 sis isou u ue s  ae asd
common causes of bacterial endophthalmitis in man144 and
drainage is tolerated. Therapy for chronic orbital
 animals143 are Gram-positive organisms.
drainage includes 95% ethanol injected into the orbit139,
 Occasionally, infection may occur due to contamina-
 orbital exploration for any remaining conjunctiva, and
tion of surgical instruments outside the surgical arena,
excision of the orbital lacrimal gland.
and when this occurs it usually produces clusters of
 In some very complicated cases that require
infections. Most bacterial infections arise from the
 enucleation, the eyelids and periorbital skin may not be
 patient's bacterial flora. In light of the high incidence of
viable for use in covering the orbit, either because of
culture-positive aqueous humor (24%)i4s that 0ccurs
infection or neoplasia. The cat, horse, and some small
during canine and human cataract surgery,
the
breeds of dog have very little mobile skin surrounding
incidence of infection appears to be very small. The
the eye, compared to the average and large breeds of
prevalence of intraoperative positive cultures has not
dog. In these instances, flaps of axial pattern skin grafts
been  affected  by  perioperative scrubbing146
or
can be used to cover the avascular bed of the enucleated
 antibiotics given by any route, and does not appear to
orbit. Axial flaps based on the distribution of the
 affect the postoperative outcome.
superficial temporal arteryl40, 141 and the caudal
auricular artery142 have been used successfully to close
Clinical signs
the orbit after enucleation.
 Panophthalmitis/endophthalmitis  is  characterized  by
The most common complication of enucleation is
 Ocular pain, marked conjunctival and episcleral injection,
cosmetic: a sunken orbit. (See p.129 and p.363 for
corneal edema with neovascularization, hypopyon
methods to minimize this objectionable appearance.) An
and/or hyphema, pupillary constriction, and a hazy
alternative to enucleating a ruptured globe is evisceration
vitreous if visible. Marked decrease in vision or blindness 
together with a silicone sphere implantation (see p.363).
is present. If the process has become a panophthalmitis,
These cases have an increased risk of extrusion of the
it has passed through the sclera and the conjunctiva will
sphere through the ruptured cornea but the implant
be very chemotic, the lids will be hot and tender, and
prevents phthisis from occurring.
 decreased orbital retropulsion will be present, appearing
The repair of the rupture can be performed by
 as orbital cellulitis. The rapidity of the development of
excising uveal tissue and suturing the fibrous tunic as for
signs will vary depending on the virulence of the
organism. In veterinary medicine, typically the signs
become phthisical and the cornea will be opaque.
develop peracutely in a period of 12-24 hours. In
Medical therapy consists of glucocorticoids (systemic-
humans, postoperative infection is often associated with
ally), prostaglandin inhibitors, and antibiotics.
low virulence organisms, and signs may not develop for
weeks or months after surgery. Because of the pain
INFLAMMATION OF THE GLOBE
involved, the animals may manifest systemic signs such
Panophthalmitisfendophthalmitis
as depression, colic, and leukocytosis.
Panophthalmitis refers to inflammation that involves
all tissues of the eye, i.e. fibrous (cornea and sclera),
Diagnosis
uveal, and neurosensory (retina). The vitreous is also
If endophthalmitis is suspected, bold, rapid, definitive
 aq a ssd ao au aan
 action is necessary. Aqueous and vitreous humor centesis
sterile or septic, with the latter being most common.
 is necessary to identify rapidly the organism on cytology
The infectious agent may originate either from
 and for culture and sensitivity testing.
hematogenous routes or be external in origin, such as
140
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
Therapy
Intraocular antibiotics should be administered at the time
of ocular centesis, with caution exercised over the dose
 clots, topical atropine for pain, systemic NSAID therapy,
and form of drug utilized. The vitreous is the most
hot-packing the lids, and cleansing the ocular surface.
difficult tissue to clear of bacteria, so intravitreal
 The prognosis remains very guarded for most cases of
injections are preferred. The data on safe antibiotic
 established endophthalmitis treated without surgery.
dosage should be verified by experimental work, as
Even when treated aggressively, the eye remains inflamed
toxicity of drugs or preservatives is of real concern. The
 long after it is sterile, as judged by cultures and cytology.
choice of antibiotics has varied over the years, based on
Panophthalmitis cases usually need enucleation but
the acquisition of bacterial resistance to drugs.
In
 selecting the appropriate time can be a difficult decision.
general, a drug, or combination of drugs, is used that will
When the field is septic, the author prefers to decrease
have both a Gram-positive and Gram-negative spectrum
the inflammation or have it resolved, and this may
of activity and be bacteriocidal. Historically, gentamicin
necessitate a delay of several days.
with a cephalosporin was recommended but because of
MISCELLANEOUS
drug resistance and drug toxicity, amikacin has replaced
gentamicin and second and third generation cephalo-
Head shaking in horses
sporins are used. Vancomycin has been advocated
Head shaking in the horse can be a serious fault that
because of its effectiveness against resistant staphylo-
results in a dysfunctional animal. A variety of causes have
cocci. The trend today is to inject intravitreally with
been proposed but removal of potential causes has
 0.4%/0.1 ml vancomycin and a third generation cephalo-
generally not been successful. The onset of head shaking is
sporin such as ceftazidime 2.25 mg/0.1 ml147, These two
usually noted in the spring and the condition becomes
drugs are incompatible and must be injected with
 chronic. Photic head shaking is a specific type that is
separate syringes.
Aq paddois aq ueo pue uaquns ot aunsodxa Aq paonpui
 Intraocular antibiotics are now universally accepted
blindfolding and a dark environmentisi. Exercise also
for the treatment of endophthalmitis but it remains
stimulates head shaking. Head shaking is usually in a
controversial whether concurrent antibiotics given by
vertical manner and is often accompanied by snorting.
 other routes such as subconjunctival148 or systemic are
 The condition may spontaneously improve, only to recur 
beneficiall44 149 Despite the evidence that they are not of
the following spring. Animals develop a voida nce behavior
additional benefit, they remain in widespread use
of natural light. The cause is unknown but it is compared
because of the catastrophic nature of the disease. If the
to photic sneezing in man. Interaction between the optic
process has become a panophthalmitis with orbital
nerve and the Vth cranial nerve are postulated to produce
involvement, systemic therapy is definitely warranted.
vasodilatation in the nose, or stimulation of the sensory
A routine component of treating endophthalmitis in
nerves in the nose, to stimulate the snorting and head
shaking. Therapies including anti-inflammatories, anal-
removes a burden of infection that is difficult to reach
 gesics, melatonin, and sedatives have been unsuccessful.
through any route of therapy except intraviteal injection.
Cyproheptadine, a H-1 histamine and serotonergic
Vitrectomies also remove the inflammatory cells that
blocking agent, was successful in treating 71% of a small
perpetuate inflammation and produce inflammatory
cohort of horses at 0.3 mg/kg q12h orally1s1.
membranes that result in retinal detachment. To date,
vitrectomies have not been commonly performed in the
treatment of acute endophthalmitis, with the exception
 Of equine recurrent uveitis1 s0.
ORBIT AND GLOBE
141
REFERENCES
1 Constantinescu G, McClure R {1990)
18 Bake R, Cool SJ, Crawford M (1974)
32 Morgan R (1989) Ultrasonography of 
Anatomy of the orbital fascia and the
Visual resolution in the cat. Vision
 retrobulbar diseases of the dog and cat.
third eyelid in dogs. Armerican Journat
Research 14:1211-1216.
Journat of the American Animat
of Veterimary Research 51:260-263.
19 Enzerink E {1998) The menace response
Hospitat Association 25:393-399.
2 McClure R (1974) The distribution and
and pupillary light reflex in neonatal
 33 Stuhr C, Scagliotti R (1996) Retrobulbar
action of the smooth muscle tissue in the
foals. Equine Veterinary Journat
ultrasound in the mesaticephalic and 
periorbital membrane in the dog.
30:546-548.
dolichocephalic dog using a temporal 
Anatonry Record 178:406.
20 Harman AM, Moore S, Hoskins R,
approach. Veterinary and Comparative
3 Kennedy R (1965) The effect of early
Keller P {1999) Horse vision and an
Ophthatmatagy 6:91-99.
enucleation on the orbit. American
 explanation for the visual behaviour
34 Boydell P (1991) Fine needle aspiration
Journat of Ophthatmology 60:277-306.
originally explained by the 'ramp?
biopsy in the diagnosis of
4 Herron M, Martin J, Joyce J (1978)
retina. Equine Veterinary Journat
exophthalmos. Journat of Smatl Animat
 Quantitative study of the decussating
31:384-390.
Practice 32:542-546.
optic axons in the pony, cow, sheep, and
21 Murphy CJ, Neitz J, Ver Hoeve JN
35 Hendrix DH, Gelatt KN (2000)
pig. American Journat of Veterinary
{1999) Temporal and spatial vision in
Diagnosis, treatment, and outcome of
Research 39:1127-1129.
the horse. Proceedings of the Scientific
orbital neoplasia in dogs: a retrospective
5 Bayer (1914) Angenheilkunde.
Meeting of the American College of
study of 44 cases. Journat of Small
 Braumueller, Vienna, p.22.
Veterinary Ophthatmologists 30:75.
Anmat Practice 41:105-108.
6 Fox M (1963) Postnatal ontogeny of the
 22 Stuhr CM, Abrams G, Bullimore M,
36 Lecouteur R, Fike J, Scagliotti R,
canine eye. Journat of the American
Murphy CJ (1999) The normal
 Cann C (1982) Computed tomography
Veterinary Medicat Association
refractive state of the equine.
 of orbital tumors in the dog. Journat of
143:968-974.
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
the American Veterinary Medicat
7 Miller PE, Murphy CJ {1995) Vision in
the American College of Veterinary
Association 180:910-913.
dogs. Joturnat of the Americam
Ophthatmotogists 30:74.
37 Boroffka SA, Voorhout G {1999) Direct
Veterinary Medicat Association
23 Nicolas E (1930) Veterinary and
and reconstructed multiplanar computed
207:1623-1634.
Comparative Ophthatmotogy. J & W
tomography of the orbits of healthy
8 Miller PE (2000) A Limited Review of
Brown, London.
dogs. American Journat of Veterinary
 Fetine and Equine Vision. Bill Magrain
24 Sivak JG, Allen DB (1975) An
Research 60:1500-1507.
 Basic Science Course for Veterinary
evaluation of the ramp’ retina of the
38 Daniel GB, MitchellSK {1999) The eye
Ophthalmologists, Ralaigh, 2, pp. 1-11.
horse eye. Vision Research
and orbit. Clinicat Techniques in Small
9 Murphy CJ, Zadnik K, Mannis MJ
15:1353-1356.
Anmmat Practice 14(3):160-169.
(1992) Myopia and refractive error in
25 Pick DF, Lovell G, Brown S, Dail D
 39 Dennis R (2000) Use of magnetic
dogs. Investigative Ophthatmotogy and
{1994) Equine color perception
resonance imaging for the investigation
Vistuat Science 33:2459-2463.
revisited. Apptied Animat Behaviorat
of orbital disease in small animals.
10 Neitz J, Geist T, Jacobs GH (1989)
Science 42:61-65.
Journat of Small Animat Practice
Color vision in the dog. Visuat
26 Rubin L, Patterson D (1965)
41:145-155.
Neuroscience 3:119-125.
Arteriovenous fistula of the orbit in a
40 Slatter DH, Abdelbaki Y (1979) Lateral
11 Elliott JH, Futterman S {1963)
dog. Cornell Veterinarian 55:471-481.
 orbitotomy by zygomatic arch resection
Fluorescence in the tapetum of the cat's
 27 Millichamp NJ, Spencer CP (1991)
in the dog. Journat of the American
Orbital varix in a dog. Journat of the
Veterinary Medicat Association
70:137-140.
American Animat Hospitat Association
175:1179-1182.
12 Weale RA {1953) The spectral
27:56-60.
41 Gilger BC, Whitley DR, McLaughlin SA
reflectivity of the cat's tapetum
 28 Koch S {1969) The differential diagnosis
(1994) Modified lateral orbitotomy for
measured in situ. Journat of Physiology
of exophthalmos in the dog. Journat of
removal of orbital neoplasms in two
212:30-42.
the American Animat Hospitat
dogs. Veterinary Sturgery 23:53-58.
13 Gunter R {1951) The absolute threshold
Association 5:229-237.
42 Rebhun W (1982) Orbital
for vision in the cat. Journat of
29 Ackerman N, Munger R (1979)
lymphosarcoma in cattle. Journat of the
Physiology 114:8-15.
 Intraconal contrast orbitography in the
American Veterinary Medicat
14 Duke-Elder S (1958) The perception of
dog. American Joturnat of Veterinary
Association 180:149-152.
space in the eye in evolution. In: System
Research 40:911-918.
43 Cottrill NB, Carter JD, Pechman RD,
of Ophthatmology vol 1. CV Mosby, St
30 Gelatt K, Guffy M, Boggess T (1970)
Dubielzig RR, Waldron DR {1987)
Louis, pp. 666-707.
 Radiographic contrast techniques for
 Bilateral orbital parosteal osteoma in a
15 Vakkur GJ, Bishop PO (1963) The
detecting orbital and nasolacrimal
cat. Joturnat of the American Animat
schematic eye in the cat. Vision
tumors in dogs. Journat of the American
Hospitat Association 23:405-408.
Research 3:357-381.
Veterinary Medicat Association
44 Dziezyc J, Barton CL {1992)
16 Vakkur GJ, Bishop PO, Kozak W
156:741-746.
Exophthalmia in a cat caused by an
{1963) Visual optics in the cat, including
 31 Lee R, Griffiths IR {1972) A comparison
eosinophilic infiltrate. Progress im
 posterior nodal distance and retinal
of cerebral arteriography and cavernous
Veterinary Cr Comparative
Jandmarks. Vision Research 3:289-314.
sinus venography in the dog. Journat of
Ophthatmology 2:91-93.
17 Wassle H (1971) Optical quality of the
Small Animal Practice 12:225-238.
cat eye. Vision Research 11:995-1006.
142
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETeRINARY MeDICINE
45 Miller S, van der Woerdt A, Bartick T
58 Scott EA, Duncan JR, McCormack JE
71 Ramsey DT, Hamor RE, Gerding PA,
(2000) Retrobulbar pseudotumor of the
{1974) Cry ptococcosis involving the
Knight B {1995) Clinical and
orbit in a cat. Joturnat of the American
postorbital area and frontal sinus in a
immunohistochemical characteristics
Veterinary Medicat Association
horse. Journat of the American
of bilateral extraocular polymyositis
216:356-358.
Veterinary Medciat Association
of dogs. Proceedings of the Scientific
46 Martin C, Kaswan R, Doran C (1987)
165:626-627.
Meeting of the American College of
Cystic lesions of the periorbital region.
59 Rebhun WC, Edwards NJ (1977)
Veterinary Ophthatmotogists
Compendium on Continuing Education
Cryptococcosis involving the orbit of
26:130-132.
for the Practicing Veterinarian
a dog. Veterinary Medicine/Smatt
72 Allgoewer I, Blair M, Basher T, et αf.
9:1021-1029.
Animat Clinician 72:1447-1450.
(2000) Extraocular muscle myositis
47 Pentlarge VW, Powell-Johnson G,
 60 Peiffer RL, Belkin PV, Janke BH
and restrictive strabismus in ten dogs.
Martin CL, et αf. (1989) Orbital
{1980) Orbital cellulitits and
Veterinary Ophthatmology 3:21-26.
neoplasia with enophthalmos in a cat.
pneumonitis by Penicilliu spp. in a
73 Caron J, Barber S, Bailey J, Fretz P,
Journat of the American Veterinary
cat. Journat of the American
Pharr J {1986) Periorbital skull
Medicat Association 195:1249-1251.
Veterinary Medicat Association
fractures in five horses. Journat of
48 Sarnat BG, Shanedling PD (1970)
176:449-450.
the American Veterinary Medicat
 Orbital volume following evisceration,
61 Willis MA, Martin CL, Stiles J {1999)
Association 188:280-284.
enucleation, and exenteration in rabbits.
Sino-orbital aspergillosis in a dog.
74 Martin C, Kaswan R, Chapman W
American Journal of Ophthaimology
Journat of the American Veterinary
(1986) Four cases of traumatic optic
70:787-799.
Medicat Association 214:1644-1647.
nerve blindness in the horse. Equ ine
 49 Martin CL (1978) Strabismus associated
62 Shelton GD, Bandman E,
Veter inary Journat 18:133-137.
with extraocular muscle agenesis in a
Cardinet GH {1985) Electrophoretic
75 Speakman AJ, Baines SJ,
dog. Journat of the American Animat
comparison of myosins from
Williams JM, Kelly DF (1997)
Hospitat Association 14:486-489.
 masticatory muscles and selected limb
Zygomatic salivary cyst with
50 Abrams K, Goodwin C (1996) Seasonal
muscles in the dog. American Jou rnat
mucocele formation in a cat. Journa!
influence of inflammatory orbital
of Veterinary Research 46:493-498.
of Small Animat Practice
disease in dogs in the northwest United
63 Shelton GD, Cardinet GH,
38:468-470.
States. Proceedings of the Scientific
Bandman E {1987) Canine
76 Miller PE, Pickett JP {1989)
Meeting of the American College of
masticatory muscle disorders: a study
Zygomatic salivary gland mucocele in
Veterinary Ophthatmologists 27:87.
of 29 cases. Muscte Nerve
a ferret. Journat of the American
 51 Simison WG {1993) Sialadenitis
10:753-766.
Veterinary Medicat Association
associated with periorbital disease in a
64 Gilmour M, Morgan RV, Moore FM
194:1437-1438
dog. Joturnat of the American Veterinary
{1992) Masticatory myopathy in the
77 Knecht C, Slusher RK, Guibor E
Medicat Association 202:1983-1985.
dog: a retrospective study of 18 cases.
{1969) Zygomatic salivary cyst in a
 52 Grahn B, Szentimrey, D, Battison A,
Journat of the American Animat
dog. Journat of the American
Hertling R (1995) Exophthalmos
Hospitat Association 28:300-306.
Veterinary Medicat Association
 associated with frontal sinus
65 Glauberg A, Beaumont P (1979)
155:625-626.
osteomyelitis in a puppy. Journat of the
Sudden blindness as the presenting
78 Schmidt GM, Betts CW (1978)
American Animat Hospitat Association
sign of eosinophilic myositis: a case
Zygomatic salivary mucoceles in the
31:397-401.
report. Journat of the American
dog. Journat of the American
53 Ramsey DT, Marretta SM, Hamor RE,
Animat Hospitat Association
Veterinary Medicat Association
et αt. (1996) Ophthalmic manifestations
15:609-611.
172:940-942.
 and complications of dental disease in 
66 Lescure F (1985) Myosite des
79 Martin C {1971) Orbital mucocele in
dogs and cats. Journat of the American
masticateurs et cecite chez le chien.
a dog. Veterinary Medicine/Smatl
Animat Hospitat Association
 Revue de Medicine Veterinaire
Animat Clinician 66:36-38.
32:215-224.
136:761-776.
80 Gross S, Aguirre G, Harvey C (1979)
 54 Koch S, Buell BE {1970) Medial orbital
67 Step DL, Divers TJ, Cooper B,
Tumors involving the orbit of the
abscess in a Collie dog. Journat of the
Kallfelz FA, Karcher LF, Rebhun WC
dog. Proceedings of the Scientific
American Veterinary Medicat
{1991) Severe masseter myonecrosis in
Meeting of the American Cotlege of
Association 156:1905-1906.
a horse. Journat of the American
Veterinary Ophthatmotogists
 55 Brightman AJ, McLaughlin SA,
Veterinary Association 198:117-119.
10:229-240.
 Brogdon JD, Ream VB, Szajerski ME
68 Lescure F {1983) La rubeose de l'iris
81 Kern T {1985) Orbital neoplasia in
{1985) Intraorbital foreign body in the
 chez le chat son traitement par
23 dogs. Journat of the American
dog: a case report. Veterinary Medicine
 Iacetate de methyl prednisolone.
Veterinary Medicat Association
80:45-48.
Revue de Medicine Veterinaire
186:489-491.
 56 Collins BK, Moore CP, Dubielzig RR,
134:527-531.
82 Straw RC, LeCouteur RA,
Gengler WR (1991) Anaerobic orbital
69 Kornegay J, Gorgacz E, Dawe D,
Powers BE, Withrow SJ (1989)
 cellulitis and septicemia in a dog.
Bowen J, White N, Debuy sscher E
Multilobular osteochrondrosarcoma
Canadian Veterinary Journat
{1980) Polymyositis in dogs. Journa!
of the canine skull: 16 cases
32:683-685.
of the American Veterinary Medicat
{1978-1988). Journal of the
57 Grahn BH, Szentimrey D, Pharr JW,
Association 176:431-438.
American Veterinary Medicat
Farrow Cs, Fowler D {1995) Ocular
 70 Carpenter J, Schmidt G, Moore F,
Association 195:1764-1769.
and orbital porcupine quills in the dog:
Albert D, Abrams K, Elner V {1989)
83 Mauldin EA, Deehr AJ, Hertzke D,
a review and case series. Canadian
Canine bilateral extraocular
 Dubielzig (2000) Canine orbital
Veter imary Journat 36:488-493.
polymyositis. Veterinary Pathology
meningiomas: a review of 22 cases.
26:510-512.
Veterinary Ophthatmotogy 3:11-16.
ORBIT AND GLOBE
143
84 Gilger BC, McLaughlin SA,
98 Walde I, Hittmair K, Henninger W,
111 Bistner S, Rubin L, Saunders L
Whitley RD, Wright JC (1992) Orbital
Czedik-Eysenberg T {1997)
{1970) The ocular lesions of bovine
neoplasms in cats: 21 cases
 Retrobulbar dermoid cyst in a
viral diarrhea-mucosal disease.
[1974-1990). Journal of the American
Dachshund. Veterinary and
Veterinary Pathotogy 7:275-286.
Veterinary Medicat Association
Comparative Ophthatmology
112 Laratta L, Ris R, Kern T, Koch S
201:1083-1086.
7:239-244.
(1985) Multiple congenital ocular
85 Rebhun W, Piero F {1998) Ocular
99 Harvey C, Koch S, Rubin L (1968)
defects in the Akita dog. Cornel!
lesions in horses with lymphosarcoma:
Orbital cysts with conjunctival fistula
Veter imarian 75:381-392.
21 cases (1977-1997). Journal of the
in a dog. Joturnat of the American
113 Martin C, Leipold H {1974) Aphakia 
Armerican Veterinary Medicat
Veterinary Medicat Association
and multiple ocular defects in Saint 
Association 212:852-854.
153:1432-1435.
 Bernard puppies. Veterinary
 86 Beech J (1983) Retrobulbar melanoma
100 Barnett K, Cottrell B, Rest J (1988)
Medicine/Small Animal Clinician
in a horse. Equine Veterinary Joturna!
Retrobulbar hydatid cyst in the horse.
69:448-453.
Supplement 2:123-124.
Equine Veterinary Journat
114 Arnbjerg J. Jensen O (1982)
 87 Finn JP, Tennant BC {1971) A cerebral
20:136-138.
Spontaneous microphthalmia in two
and ocular tumor of reticular tissue in a
101 Pickett J {1987) Intracystic injection
 Dobermann puppies with anterior 
horse. Veterinary Pathology 8:458-466.
 of tetracycline for cystodesis of an
chamber cleavage syndrome. Journat of
88 Richardson DW, Acland HM (1983)
intraorbital cyst in a dog. Proceedings
the American Animat Hospitat
Multilobular osteoma (chondroma
of the Scientific Meeting of the
Association 18:481-484.
rodens) in a horse. Journat of the
American Coltege of Veterinary
115 Lewis D, Kelly D, Sansom J (1986)
American Veterinary Medicat
Ophthaimologists 18:18.
Congential microphthalmia and other
Association 182:289-291.
102 Theisen SK, Podell M, Schneider T,
developmental ocular anomalies in the
89 Bistner S, Campbell J, Shaw D,
Wilkie D, Fenner W {1996) A
Dobermann. Joturnat of Small Animat
Leininger JR, Ghobrial HK (1983)
retrospective study of cavernous sinus
Practice 27:559-566.
Neuroepithelial tumor of the optic nerve
syndrome in four dogs and eight cats.
116 Narfstrom K, Dubielzig R (1984)
in a horse. Cornell Veterinarian
Journat of Veterinary Internat
 Posterior lenticonus, cataracts, and
73:30-40.
Medicine 10:65-71.
microphthalmia: congenital ocular
90 Basher AW, Severin GA, Chavkin MJ,
103 Lucas D {1954) Ocular associations
defects in the Cavalier King Charles
 Fran AA {1997) Orbital neuroendocrine 
of dappling in the coat colour of dogs.
Spaniel. Journat of Smatt Animat
tumors in three horses. Journat of the
Journat of Comparative Pathology
Practice 25:669-677.
American Medicat Veterinary
64:260-266.
117 Rubin L (1968) Hereditary of retinal
Association 210:668-671.
104 Gelatt KN, McGill LD (1973)
dysplasia in Bedington Terriers. Journat
91 Goodhead AD, Venter IJ, Nesbit JW
Clinical characteristics of
of the American Veterinary Medicat
{1997) Retrobulbar extra-adrenal
 microphthalmia with colobomas of
Association 152:260-262.
 paraganglioma in a horse and its
the Australian Shepherd Dog. Journat
118 Ashton N, Barnett K, Sachs D {1968)
surgical removal by orbitotomy.
of the American Veterinary Medicat
Retinal dysplasia in the Sealyham
Veterinary and Comparative
Association 162:393-396.
Terrier. Journat of Pathotogy and
Ophthatmology 7:96-100.
105 Gelatt K, Powell G, Huston K {1981)
Bacter iology 96:269-272.
92 van Maanen C, Klein WR, Dik KJ
Inheritance of microphthalmia with
119 Rubin L, Koch S, Huber R {1969)
{1996) Three cases of carcinoid in the
coloboma in the Australian Shepherd
 Hereditary cataracts in Miniature
equine nasal cavity and maxillary
Dog. American Journat of Veterinary
Schnauzers. Journat of the American
sinuses: histologic and
Research 42:1686-1690.
Veterinary Medicat Association
 immunohistochemical features.
106 Rebhun W (1979) Diseases of the
154:1456-1458.
Veterinary Pathology 33:92-95.
bovine orbit and globe. Journat of the
120 van der Woerdt A, Stades FC, van der
93 Tomlinson J, Presnell K (1981) Use of
American Veterinary Medicat
 Linde-Sipman JS, Boeve MH (1995)
the temporalis muscle flap in the dog.
Association 175:171-175.
Multiple ocular anomalies in two
Veterinary Surgery 10:77-79.
107 Urman JK, Grace OD (1964)
related litters of Soft Coated Wheaten
 94 Bentley J, Henderson R, Simpsons S
Hereditary encephalomyopathy: a
Terriers. Veterinary and Cormparative
(1991) Use of a temporalis muscle flap
hydrocephalus syndrome in newborn
Ophthatmology 5:78-82.
in reconstruction of the calvarium and
calves. Cornefl Veterinarian
121 Scott FAD, Schultz R, Bistner S, Ris R
orbital rim in a dog. Journat of the
54:230-249.
(1975) Teratogenesis in cats associated
American Aniat Hospitat Association
108 Leipold H, Gelatt K, Huston K
with griseofulvin therapy. Teratology
27:463-466.
{1971) Multiple ocular anomalies and
11:79-86.
95 Schoster J, Wyman M (1978) Remission 
hydrocephalus in grade beef
122 Creel D {1971) Visual system anomaly
 of orbital sarcoma in a dog using
Shorthorn cattle. American Journat of
associated with albinism in the cat.
doxorubicin therapy Journat of the
Veterinary R esearch 32:1019-1026.
Nature 231:465-466.
American Veterinary Medicat
109 Kaswan R, Collins L, Blue J,
123 Hubell D, Wiesel T {1971) Aberrant
Association 172:1101-1103.
Martin C (1987) Multiple hereditary
visual projections in the Siamese cat.
 96 Martin C (1971) Orbital emphysema: a
ocular anomalies in a herd of cattle.
Journat of Physiology 218:33-62.
complication of ocular enucleation in
Journat of the American Veterinary
124 Guillery R, Casagrande V,
the dog. Veterinary Medicine/Smatl
Medicat Association 191:97-99.
Oberdorfer M (1974) Congenitally
Animat Clinician 66:986-989.
110 Leipold H, Houston K (1968)
abnormal vision in Siamese cats. Natture
97 Bedford P {1979) Orbital pneumatosis
Congenital syndrome of
252:195-199.
 as an unusual complication to
anophthalmia-microphthalmia with
125 Blake R, Crawford M (1974)
enucleation. Journat of Smalf Anima!
associated defects in cattle.
 Development of strabismus in Siamese
Practice 20:551-555.
Pathologica Veterinaria 5:407-418.
cats. Brain Research 77:492-496.
144
OpHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
126 Holmes J, Young G (1957) A note on
136 Mittra RA, Mieler WF {1999)
146 Beigi B, Westlake W, Mangelschots E,
exophthalmos with strabismus in
Controversies in the management of
Chang B, Rich W, Riordan T (1997)
Shorthorn cattle. Veterinary Record
open-globe injuries involving the
Perioperative microbial contamination
69:148-149.
posterior segment. Survey of
of anterior chamber aspirates during
127 Julian RJ (1975) Bilateral divergent
Ophthatmology 44:215-225.
extracapsular cataract extraction and
strabismus in a Holstein calf. Veterinary
137 Lavach JD, Severin GA, Roberts SM
phakoemulsification. British Journat of
Medicine/Small Animat Clinician
(1984) Lacerations of the equine eye: a
Ophthatmology 81:953-955.
70:1151.
review of 48 cases. Journat of the
147 Roth DB, Flynn HW (1997) Antibiotic
128 Gelatt K, McClure J (1979) Congenital
American Veterinary Mediciat
selection in the treatment of
strabismus and its correction in two
Association 184:1243-1248.
endophthalmitis: the significance of drug
Appaloosa horses. Journat of Equine
138 Stiles J, Buyukmihci NC, Hacker DV,
combinations and synergy. Survey of
Medicine and Sturgery 3:240-244.
Canton DD (1993) Blindness from
Ophthatmotogy 41:395-401.
129 Lavach J (1990) Orbit, sinuses, and
damage to optic chiasm. Journat of the
148 Jaanus SD {1996) Prevention of
eyeball. In: Large Anirnat
American Veterinary Medicat
postoperative infection: limits and
Ophthatmology. CV Mosby.
Association 202:1192.
possibilities. Britsh Journat of
Philadelphia, p. 232.
139 Janig CJ, Hornblass A (1986)
Ophthatmology 80:681-682.
130 Rebhun WC, Loeu ER, Ris RC {1984)
Treatment of postenucleation orbital
 149 Davis JE (1996) Intravenous antibiotics
Clinical manifestations of night
cysts. Annats of Ophthatmotmogy
for endophthalmitis. American Journat
 blindness in the Appaloosa horse.
18:191-193.
of Ophthatnology 122:724-726.
Compendium on Continting Edtucation
140 Smith MM, Shults S, Waldron DR,
 150 Fruhauf B, Ohnesorge B, Deegen E,
for the Practicing Veterinarian
Moon ML (1993) Platysma
 Boeve M (1998) Surgical management
6:103-106.
 myocutaneous flap for head and neck
 of equine recurrent uveitis with single
131 Nasisse M, Van EER, Munger R,
reconstruction in cats. Head and Neck
 port pars plana vitrectomy Veterinary
Davidson M {1988) Use of methy]
15:433-439.
Ophthatmology 1:137-151.
 methacrylate orbital prosthesis in dogs
141 Fahie MA, Smith M {1997) Axial
151 Madigan JE, Kortz G, Murphy C,
and cats: 78 cases {1980-1986). Journat
 pattern flap based on the superficial
Rodger L (1995) Photic headshaking in
Of the American Veterinary Medicat
temporal artery in cats: an experimental
the horse: 7 cases. Equine Veterinary
Association 192:539-542.
study. Veterinary Surgery 26:86-89.
Jowrnat 27:306-311.
132 Provost P, Ortenburger A, Caron J
142 Smith MM, Payne JT, Moon ML,
152 Martin CL, Anderson BG {1981)
{1989) Silicone ocular prosthesis in
 Freeman LE {1991) Axial pattern flap
Ocular anatomy. In: Veterinary
horses: 11 cases (1983-1987). Journat
based on the caudal auricular artery in
Ophthaimology, 1st edn. K Gelatt 
of the American Veterinary Medicat
dogs. American Journat of Veterinary
(ed). Lea and Febiger, Philadelphia,
Association 194:1764-1766.
Research 52:922-925.
pp. 12-121.
133 Gilger BC, Hamilton HL, Wilkie DA,
143 Millichamp NJ, Dziezyc J (2000)
153 Coutler D, Schmidt G (1984) The
 van der Woerdt A, McLaughlin S,
Cataract phakofragmentation in horses.
eye and vision. In: Duke's Physiology
Whitley RD (1995) Traumatic ocular
Veterinary Ophthatmology 3:157-164.
of Dormestic Animais. M Swenson
proptosis in dogs and cats: 84 cases
144 Group EVS (1995) Results of the
(ed). Cornell University Press, Ithaca,
[1980-1993). Jourmal of the American
 endophthalmitis vitrectomy study: a
pp. 728-741.
Veterinary Medicat Association
randomized trial of immediate
206:1186-1190.
vitrectomy and of intravenous
134 Schmidt G, Dice P, Koch S {1975)
antibiotics for the treatment of
 Intraocular lead foreign bodies in four
 postoperative bacterial endophthalmitis.
canine eyes. Journat of Smatl Animat
Archives of Ophthatmology
Practice 16:33-39.
113:1479-1496.
135 Davidson M, Nasisse M, Jamieson V.
145 Taylor MM, Kern TJ, Riis RC,
English R, Olivero D {1991) Traumatic
McDonough PL, Erb HN (1995)
anterior lens capsule disruption. Journat
 Intraocular bacterial contamination
of the American Animat Hospitat
during cataract surgery in dogs. Journaf
Association 27:410-414.
of the American Veterinary Mediciat
Association 206:1716-1720.
145
Eyelids
INTRODUCTION
When making surgical incisions into the eyelid, the
orbicularis oculi muscle is encountered immediately under
The dog has the highest incidence of eyelid disease due to the
the skin. Motor innervation is via the palpebral branch of
wide variation in conformation that has been bred into the
cranial nerve Vll. The orbicularis oculi muscle is involved
species. Also, in this species a large number of dermatoses
 in the efferent arm of the palpebral reflex (tapping the lids
with eyelid involvement may involve the face. The dog will be 
results in blinking), the corneal reflex (touching the cornea
considered the model for discussion, unless otherwise noted.
results in a blink), the glabellar reflex (tapping the frontal
The opening of the eyelids is termed the palpebral
bone between the eyes results in a blink), and the menace
fissure and is usually somewhat almond shaped. The
u shnsan peau aul oi uoou suuaeaul el asuodsa
conformation will vary between individuals and breeds
blinking). The orbicularis oculi muscle is a strong muscle
 of dogs, depending on the size of the orbit and globe and 
that is responsible for the severe blepharospasm seen with
the amount of redundant skin.
ocular pain. It is anchored medially by the medial palpebral
(canthal) ligament, a palpable structure connecting the
medial commissure of the palpebral fissure to the frontal
ANATOMY
bone (7.2). The lateral palpebral ligament is poorly deve-
loped in most dogs and connects the lateral commissure of
SKIN
the eyelids to the orbital ligament.
The skin of the eyelids is typically thin and loosely adherent
to the underlying tissue to facilitate movement. This
Superciliaris muscle
looseness results in subcutaneous edema or hemorrhage
The superciliaris muscle is a superficial facial muscle that
accumulation from relatively minor trauma such as
helps to elevate the medial upper lid. Motor innervation
rubbing. The upper eyelid is the most mobile; medially it
is by cranial nerve VIl.
has a group of tactile hairs, the supraorbital pili.
Retractor angularis oculi muscle
MusCLES
The retractor angularis oculi muscle is a superficial facial
Orbicularis oculi muscle
muscle that draws the lateral canthus laterally, thus
The orbicularis oculi muscle is a superficial facial
acting as a lateral canthal ligament (7.2). Motor innerva-
sphincter muscle and is the only muscle that contributes
tion is by cranial nerve VII.
significantly to closure of the palpebral aperture (7.1).
Beginning from the lid margin, it may be divided into the 
Sphincter colli profundus pars palpebralis
pretarsal, preseptal, and orbital zones. It consists mainly
The sphincter colli profundus is also a superficial facial
of type 2 fast twitch muscle fibers, which are involved in
muscle, and the palpebral portion depresses the lower lid
initiating contractions of rapid and short duration1.
(7.1). Motor innervation is by cranial nerve VII.
7.1
7.2
Superficial temporal a.
Orbicularis oculi m.
 Zygomaticotemporal n.
Supraorbital n
Frontalis m. 
Angularis oculi v.
Infra trochlear n.
Deep facial v..
Palpebral n.
Med.
Superficial
palpebral
temporal a.
lig.
Sphincter
Retractor .
colli
angularis
profundus
oculi m.
m. (pars
Angularis
palpebralis]
oculi v.
Zygoma ticofacial n.
ventral and dorsal
Malar a.
palpebral a.
7.1 Gross anatomy of the eyelids and surrounding muscles, nerves.
7.2 Gross anatomy of the eyelids of the dog. (a: artery; lig: ligament; 
and vessels of the dog. (a: artery; m: muscle; v: vein.]
m: muscle; n: nerve; v: vein.]
146
O pHThAlMIC DiseAse In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
Levator palpebrae superioris
Ophthalmic division of trigeminal:
The levator palpebrae superioris muscle is the only
● Infratrochlear nerve: sensory to the medial dorsal
muscle of the eyelid that originates from within the orbit
 and ventral lid.
above the optic foramen. It is the main skeletal muscle
 Frontal (supraorbital) nerve: sensory to the middle
that elevates the upper lid (7.3). Motor innervation is by
 portion of the upper lid.
cranial nerve IIl.
Motor
Muller's muscle
Oculomotor (ll)
Miller's muscle originates from the dorsal surface of the
The oculomotor nerve supplies motor (somatic efferent)
levator palpebrae superioris muscle in the upper lid and
fibers to the levator palpebrae superioris muscle, as well
the ventral rectus of the lower lid. It is a smooth muscle
as to all the extraocular muscles except the dorsal
which inserts in the lids and third eyelid and keeps them
oblique and lateral rectus muscles. The oculomotor nerve
tonically retracted (7.3). Innervation is by sympathetic
 also supplies parasympathetic fibers (visceral efferent) to
fibers traveling in the nasociliary branch of the
the iris and ciliary smooth muscles, Miller's muscle, and
ophthalmic division of cranial nerve V.
smooth muscle in the third eyelid and periorbita.
FASCIA
Facial (vll)
The periosteum of the orbit (periorbita) divides at the
The facial nerve supplies the superficial facial muscles
 orbital rim to reflect as periosteum on the cranial and
 involving the lid, i.e. orbicularis oculi muscle.
facial bones and continues as a fascial sheath into the lids
to join the tarsus. This fascial sheet in the lids is termed
Sympathetic fibers
the orbital septum, and it provides an important barrier
Sympathetic fibers of the trigeminal nerve supply smooth
separating the orbit from the superficial lid. Lacerations
muscle in the lids (Miller's muscle), third eyelid, and the
or weak areas in the orbital septum may allow infection
lacrimal glands2, 3
to penetrate into the orbit.
The orbicularis oculi muscle closes the eyelids and
NERVES
is innervated by cranial nerve Vll; the levator
Sensory
palpebral (skeletal) and Miller's muscle (smooth)
The sensory innervation to the eyelids is entirely by
elevate the upper eyelid and are innervated by
Cranial nerve V (trigeminal). The sensory nerves emerge
cranial nerve Ill and by sympathetic fibers
around the orbital margin and can be blocked by a ring
respectively.
block or at specific sites of emergence (7.2).
Maxillary division of trigeminal:
LIGAMENTS
 Zygomaticofacial nerve: sensory to the lateral ventral
Medial canthal ligament
lid.
This is a well developed collagenous structure that
 Zygomaticotemporal nerve: sensory to the lateral
originates from medial fibers of the orbicularis oculi
dorsal lid.
muscle and inserts on the orbital rim of the lacrimal
bone. A comparable lateral ligament does not exist, but 
lateral fascial attachments and the retractor angularis
oculi muscle keep the palpebral aperture almond shaped
7.3
Muller's m.
rather than circular (7.2). In mesaticephalic broad-based
skulls, the lateral canthal ligament may be well developed
 and misdirected medially, producing tension on the
Leva tor
lateral canthus that may result in involution4.
tendon 
Orbicularis m.
BLOOD VESSELS
Superficial temporal artery
The superficial temporal artery courses with the
Fornix
palpebral nerve 1 cm (0.4 in) dorsal to the zygomatic
arch, and terminates in a dorsal and ventral palpebral
Tarsus
branch (7.2). Caution is required when injecting a local
 Palpebral conjunctiva
anesthetic to block the palpebral nerve to avoid intra-
arterial injection.
Meibomian gland
Malar artery
Gland of Moll 
The malar artery originates ventrally outside of the orbit
from the infraorbital artery. It supplies medial structures
such as the third eyelid and eyelid and anastomoses with
Gland of Zeiss
the ventral palpebral artery (7.2).
Cilium.
Angularis oculi vein
The angularis oculi vein is a branch of the facial vein. It
7.3 Histologic features of the upper eyelid of the dog. (m: muscle.)
passes superficial to the medial canthal ligament to enter
EYELIDS
147
the dorsal orbit (7.1, 7.2), where it becomes the dorsal
Glands of Moll
ophthalmic vein. The ophthalmic vein provides the major
The glands of Moll are rudimentary sweat glands that
venous drainage of the orbit and it courses through the
are located at the base of the cilia and open onto the lid
orbital fissure to join the cavernous sinus. The
 margin and the follicle of the cilia (7.3).
ophthalmic vein does not contain valves, and blood may
flow either towards the face or the cavernous sinuss.
Glands of Krause and Wolfring
aul 0i peauds Aew uiaa siui Sualoaul sassaood yudas
Texts frequently refer to the glands of Krause and
cranial cavity, and accidental cutting during enucleation
Wolfring as the accessory lacrimal glands, but they have
will result in profuse hemorrhage. The vein is readily
 not been demonstrated in the dog and cat. The gland of
accessible percutaneously or with a surgical cut down;
the third eyelid proba bly subserves this function.
injection of radiographic contrast material into the vein
enables the orbital veins, space-occupying lesions of the
Conjunctiva
orbit, and the base of the brain {for pituitary tumors) to
The conjunctiva that lines the eyelids is termed the
be studied6.
palpebral conjunctiva. It is composed of stratified
squamous epithelium and is more tightly adherent to the
Exuberant dissection in the dorsal medial eyelid
underlying tissues over the tarsus. Towards the fornix the
and orbit frequently transects the angularis oculi
epithelium is stratified columnar and has more goblet
vein and results in marked venous hemorrhage.
 cells. The conjunctiva reflects onto the globe at the fornix
to become the bul bar conjunctiva.
LID MARGINS
Lacrimal punctum
Surgery frequently involves the lid margin and accurate
In the dog, cat, horse, and cow a single lacrimal punctum
reconstruction is essential for cosmetic and functional
exists on the conjunctival surface of each lid, about 1 mm
considerations. Important landmarks are discussed.
from the lid margin. The orifices are slit-like and about
5 mm from the medial canthus in the lower lid and
Cilia
7-8 mm from the medial canthus in the upper lid. Not all 
The cilia are tactile organs present in 3-4 rows near the
 species have two puncta: the rabbit has one large ventral
margin of the upper lid in the dog (7.3). The cat is often
punctum.
said not to have true cilia, but in fact they are present,
although less well developed than the dog. The horse and
cow also have well developed cilia on the upper eyelid.
PHYSIOLOGY
The dog has numerous problems with cilia, while
 problems are relatively rare in other species.
FUNCTION OF THE EYELIDS
 Protect the eye from the entrance of foreign particles.
Lid trough
 Aid in removing foreign particles by blinking.
A trough or furrow runs the length of the lid on the
Distribute a tear film and aid in propulsion of tears
middle of the lid margin. The meibomian glands (tarsal
toward the lacrimal puncta. The palpebral fissure
glands) open into this trough and are observed as
closes in a zipper-like fashion, starting at the lateral
30-40 white orifices on each lid margin. The trough
canthus and moving to the medial canthus.
serves as a surgical landmark for procedures that involve
 Removal of visual stimuli for sleeping.
lid splitting or halving.
Contain glands that contribute to the tear film and,
therefore, are of importance in optics and nutrition
Tarsus
of the cornea.
 The tarsus is a fibrous plate that runs parallel to the lid
+
Cilia and vibrissae are important tactile organs.
margin and contains the embedded meibomian glands.
The tarsus gives some rigidity to the lids, but in domestic
BLINKING
animals is poorly developed compared to humans,
Reflex blinking
resulting in relatively floppy lids (7.3).
 Tactile, i.e. corneal, glabellar, and palpebral reflexes,
 are examples of tactile reflex blinking.
Meibomian glands
 Optical: the dazzle reflex is the induction of a blink
The meibomian (tarsal) glands are large sebaceous glands
in response to a strong light. It is used to evaluate
that can be viewed through the conjunctiva as white
the intactness of the lower visual system. In humans,
parallel streaks near the lid margin (7.3). Secretion from
the dazzle reflex is frequently accompanied by
the meibomian glands provides nutrition to the cornea
sneezing.
and forms the lipid layer of the precorneal tear film,
which prevents evaporation and spilling of tears onto the
The menace response is the sudden presentation of a
face. Alterations in secretion may produce lid and
threatening object to the eye which stimulates a blink. It
corneal pathology. The glands may undergo metaplasia
is not considered a reflex because it involves the cerebral
to become hair follicles, producing a hair that emerges on
cortex. The pathway for the menace response
is
the lid margin (distichia ).
 Somewhat vague, but it involves the visual pathways as
well as the motor cortex, cerebellum, and facial nerve
Glands of Zeiss
{1.66). The auditory response is seen when a loud noise
The glands of Zeiss are sebaceous glands located at the base
 produces a blink.
of the cilia and they open into the follicle of the cilia (7.3).
148
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
The menace response may not be present until 7-10
Coloboma
days after birth in foals and 4 weeks after birth in
Introduction/etiology
 puppies. Conditions other than blindness will
A coloboma is a fissure or notch-like defect of either the
 interfere with the menace response.
lid, iris, ciliary body, lens, or posterior segment. Small
notch-like defects are common in the upper middle to
medial eyelid of certain lines of dogs of varying breeds.
Spontaneous blinking
These defects ha ve very minor esthetic significance but no
Spontaneous blinking occurs without obvious stimuli. The
functional significance. The most notable colobomatous
rate of blinking varies greatly between species and under
defect of the lids is agenesis of the upper eyelid, observed
varying environmental influences. Blinking may occur
in kittens (7.5). This condition is part of a syndrome
unilaterally or bilaterally. The cat blinks less frequently
termed multiple ocular colobomas (MOC) that has been
than most other species (1-5 blinks/5 min7, 2 blinks/min8),
observed in snow leopards in zoos and in the domestic
with half of these being incomplete. The dog blinks about
cat. Usually an individual kitten is presented, but an entire
3/min7 to 14/min?, with most of them incomplete. This
litter may be involved with variable manifestations within
normal infrequent blinking may explain the higher tear
the litter, from minor defects in the upper lateral lids to
severe microphthalmosl3. The most common lesion of
in many animals compared to humans.
MOC is a bilateral lack of the lateral two-thirds of the
upper eyelid. The cause is unknown, and to date attempts
to prove a genetic link in the snow leopard have
DISEASES OF THE EYELIDS
failed14, 1s. There are no reports in the domestic cat to
 support a genetic ca use for either MOC or lid colobomas.
CONGENITAL DISEASES
Ankyloblepharon
Clinical signs
The dog and cat are born with a physiologic ankylo-
Young kitten with blepharospasm.
blepharon which lasts for 10-15 days. The ankylo-
 Bilateral defect of upper lids involving the temporal
blepharon may open prematurely with no adverse
two-thirds of the lid. The normal lid margin is
reaction, or an exposure keratitis may develop10, 1l. The
missing, usually resulting in the facial hairs being
corneal   pathology
may be related more to
an
misdirected toward the cornea (trichiasis). Varying
accompanying lack of lacrimal fluids and palpebral
degrees of malformation may be observed in a litter,
n jo sis f do ad oi u s
from mild thinning of the lateral canthus to a large
develop, either a tarsorrhaphy should be performed
defect in the upper lid (7.5).
utilizing local anesthesia or copious amounts of ocular
Variable amounts of keratitis are present under the
lubricants used to protect the cornea.
defect.
 In the dog, a persistent ankyloblepharon associated
 Persistent pupillary membrane is the most common
with pulmonary edema has been reported to be
associated defect observed in individual kittens.
associated with feeding raw eggs to the dam. It was
Colobomas of the optic nerve and peridisk region16
postulated that avidin was responsible for this syndrome,
(see Chapter 14, p.401).
as it corrected with cooking the eggs2.
Multifocal retinal dysplasia (see Chapter 14, p.401).
If neonatal conjunctivitis occurs, the ankyloblepharon
 Microphthalmia is the most severe manifestation of
may be detrimental due to retention of exudates (7.4). If
MOC.
exudate or swelling is present, the lids should be opened
by spreading a hemostat at the medial canthus and
Course
applying topical antibiotics. Corneal perforation is the
 The blepharospasm often abates with time; consequently,
most severe sequela of this syndrome. Cultures of the
as the cat gets older and is a better candidate for surgery,
exudate often yield a mixed bacterial infection.
the necessity to treat is often not as urgent.
7.4
7.5
7.4 Neonatal conjunctivitis in a puppy with physiologic
7.5 Young adult cat with bilateral eyelid agenesis or coloboma5.
ankyloblepharon. Note the swelling of the eyelids with 
 Note trichiasis but relatively normal cornea.
the purulent exudate at the medial canthus.
EYELIDS
149
7.6
7.7
 7.7 Patient in 7.5 24 hours after 5urgery, with a rotating pedicle
graft from the upper forehead and a rotating pedicle conjunctival
 Orbicularis m.
graft from the lower conjunctival sac.
Conjunctiva
- Tarsus
7.8
C
7.6 Rotating a pedicle flap from the lower lid to fill a colobomatou5
upper eyelid in a cat. The lid is split into skin and conjunctiva and a
pedicle flap is outlined from the lower lid (A). The canthus is cut to
allow rotation and squaring of the tip of the pedicle and minimize
ischermia (B). The layers are transposed, leaving conjunctiva (C).
Transposition (D). Sutured pedicle and donor area (E). (Modified from 
Roberts and Bistner, 196817) (m: muscle.)
7.8 Cutler-Beard two-stage procedure for repair of eyelid defect5.
Diagnosis
The procedure can be reversed for lower lid defects, but may create a
A young cat is usually presented with trichiasis, and
mild ptosis. A full thickness lid pedicle from the opposite lid is 
 upon detailed examination the normal mucocutaneous
created, leaving a bridge of normal lid approximately 5 mm wide (A].
junction of the margin is missing and the normal
The pedicle is placed and sutured in two layers; this is left to heal for
curvature of the upper lid is deviated dorsally. A full
6 weeks (B, C). The pedicle is cut after healing: because it is under 
ophthalmic examination should be performed in order to
 tension the cut should be about 1 mm from the continuation of the
look for other colobomatous defects.
adjacent lid margin (D). The cut conjunctiva is sutured to the skin in
a continuous pattern, to form a new mucocutaneous border (E).
Therapy
Due to the small size of most patients when initially
coloboma (7.6)17, 18. The author usually rotates the flap
presented with MOC, they are not good candidates for
down from the forehead, rather than take it from the
 surgery because of mechanical and anesthetic difficulties.
 lower lid, beca use of the danger of creating ectropion in
A variety of surgical procedures have been devised for
the lower lid. This approach also ensures the direction of
 correction. Definitive surgery is usually postponed until
the hair is away from the globe (7.7).
S-6 months of age.
Cutier-Beard procedure
Pedicle graft
The Cutler-Beard procedure will give excellent results,
A rotating pedicle skin graft from the lower lid, with or
but the eye is covered for several weeks, which is a major
without conjunctival grafting, may be used to fill the
disadvantage since agenesis is a bilateral disease (7.8)19.
150
O pHThAlMIC DiseAse In VeterinArY MedicINE
Cryoepilation
Therapy
Cryoepilation of the offending cilia is a rapid, easy
Therapy is surgical excision and repair of the defect (see
alternative to extensive plastic surgery, and can be
Eyelid neoplasia, Therapy, p.176). If the lesion extends to
performed on the very young kitten. This will remove the
the cornea, a superficial keratectomy will remove this
trichiasis but will not correct the defect or protect the globe.
 portion of the lesion.
Subderma! collagen injection with a modified
Diseases of the cilia
Stades procedure
Diseases of the cilia are very common in the dog but
Wolfer20 recently described the injection of bovine subdermal
relatively rare in other species. Most of the conditions are
collagen into the lid immediately above the eyelid coloboma,
probably inherited, but they have not been studied in
followed by lid splitting and removal of 1 cm (0.4 in) of skin 
enough detail to determine the mode of inheritance.
the length of the coloboma. The remaining bulbar con-
 junctiva was then mobilized and sutured about one-third of
Distichia
the distance across the wound bed that was created, with the
Introduction/etiology
remainder left to granulate. The relative simplicity of the
Distichiasis is the presence of an additional row of
 procedure facilitated its use in young kittens.
lashes on the lid margin. Distichia originate from
metaplastic meibomian glands (closely related to hair
Dermoid
follicles embryologically), and emerge on the lid
Introduction/etiology
margin. While most distichia are thought to be
A dermoid is a choristoma or congenital misplacement of
developmental, they are not usually observed in the
tissues that are not normal to the location. The
young puppy but manifest later in the growing dog.
misplacement involves dermal elements of skin, hair,
Distichia are also thought to arise due to chronic
 glandular tissue, and fat. Dermoids involving the eyelids
inflammatory irritation to the meibomian glands, and
may be an extension from extensive dermoids of the
cornea and conjunctiva or an isolated island of tissue,
fine, few or numerous (7.11). Distichiasis is very
usually near the lid margin.
Dermoids have been
common in many breeds of dogs such as the American
observed in both the dog and cat, where inheritance has
Cocker Spaniel (75%+ incidence), Pekingese, Toy and
been suggested but not defined in the Burmese cat (7.9),
Miniature Poodle, Shetland Sheepdog, Cavalier King
Dachshund, St. Bernard, and GSD21, 22. A bilateral
Charles Spaniel, and Golden Retriever (see Chapter 15,
syndrome has been found in Hereford calves, and
p.471). The mode of inheritance has been postulated as
pedigree analysis suggests either a recessive or a
 dominant with irregular penetrance2s.
polygenic trait for the condition23. The author has
observed very large dermoids on the cornea of calves,
 Clinical signs
and these dermoids ha ve reflected onto the eyelids (7.10).
 Most animals with distichia are asymptomatic, and
 therapy is not recommended simply because they are
 Clinical signs
present.
● Tufts or masses on the lid margin with hair that often
Mild signs include epiphora and nonulcerative
extends onto the conjunctival surfaces and cornea.
keratitis.
Hairs on the lid may point toward the eye and
 Severe cases of distichiasis will present with
produce epiphora, blepharospasm, and keratitis (7.9).
blepharospasm and ulcerative keratitis.
7.9
7.10
 7.9 Dermoid at the lateral canthus of a Burmese cat. Note corneal
 7.10 Massive dermoid on the cornea, extending across the
ulceration and neova scularization.
conjunctival sac to the lids, in a calf. The lesion was bilateral
and was surgically removed.
EYELIDS
151
Diagnosis
Surgical resection
au suaasqo Aq apeu si siseiuusip jo sisouaa
Surgical procedures involving the lid margins, such as lid
presence of one or more hairs on one or more lid
splitting and tarsoconjunctival resection (7.12), are
margins. Magnification is often necessary to observe the
currently out of favor with most surgeons, due to the risk
fine hairs. Examination against different backgrounds 
of postoperative deformities of the eyelid and regrowth of 
(such as cornea and sclera) may make the hairs more
 hairs. Tarsoconjunctival resection performed on the upper
visible. If distichia contact the ocular surface, they
lid removes most of the supporting tissue for the normal
become covered in a "dewdrop' of tears or mucus and
cilia, resulting in their collapse onto the cornea. A lid plate 
this may highlight their presence. If a hair is observed, it
 has been designed to facilitate lid splitting surgery28.
is important to determine that it is actually rubbing on
 Resection of the meibomian glands with their distichia
the cornea and is in the correct location to be associated
from the conjunctival surface is a preferable method
with the corneal pathology. Plucking out the distichia
because it spares the lid margin {D in 7.12). A strip of
 should then relieve the signs. The milder manifestations
tissue 2-3 mm in width is removed from the conjunctival
of distichia such as epiphora have many causes; most
side that includes the involved meibomian glands27, 29. The
dogs with distichia are asymptomatic; consequently, it is
author uses this method combined with cryotherapy for
important to establish cause and effect. If in doubt as to.
extensive numbers of distichia over the length of the lid.
the significance of the distichia, plucking with relief of
signs will confirm their role in producing the signs.
Distichia is the most common eyelid lesion
 observed in dogs, but it produces appreciable signs
7.12
in only a small percentage of affected animals. The
challenge is not in diagnosing distichiasis, but to
A
attribute ocular signs accurately to the condition to
 avoid unnecessary surgery.
Therapy
A wide variety of surgical therapies have been used over
 the years, with most having significant complications. The
most common complication of surgery is regrowth of
hairs. Preliminary to performing any of the procedures, the
meibomian glands should be expressed by squeezing
against a firm plate or the handle of an instrument. This
 procedure pushes hidden hairs out of the meibomian
orifice; these hairs would otherwise remain overlooked
 and be considered regrowth at a later time25-27.
+
7.11 Marked distichia of both lids, but only visualized well in the
7.12 Various lid splitting techniques devised for distichia removal.
photo of the upper lid of a Shih Tzu.
True lid splitting with both incisions on the lid margin (A, B).
Modification with only one lid margin incision (C). Tarsoconjunctival
resection is the safest procedure (D).
152
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRiNArY MeDiCINE
Electrofysis
Cryosurgery
Electrolysis is an old therapy for removing unwanted
The germinal epithelium of hair follicles and melanocytes are
hairs. It involves passing a fine needle into each indivi-
 most susceptible to injury from freezing, thus providing a
dual hair follicle to destroy the follicle with an electric
noninvasive, rapid technique that is more effective than
current (7.13, 7.14). This is a very tedious procedure
electrolysis. Nitrous oxide is used to obtain a tissue tem-
when the hairs are numerous. The strength of the current
ze y sus nom (eeh s- jo aead 
is critical to destroy the hair follicle without causing
clamp can be placed over the area of freezing to facilitate
excessive destruction of the lid. Recurrences are frequent
eversion and to decrease the blood flow to ensure an
when battery-operated electrolysis needles are used. If
adequate freeze. The author prefers not to use the chalazion
Xjdde 01 Asea A1aA sI i1 A1al1eq B 1ou sl Alddns 1amod au1
clamp on small dogs with very thin eyelids, to avoid excessive
excessive current, resulting in lid deformities and
tissue damage from excessive freezing. The probe is placed
depigmented spots on the lid margin (7.15).
on the conjunctival side over the area of the meibomian
glands until the ice ball reaches the trough on the lid margin
Electrocautery
(7.17). The author routinely double freezes the area. The
Electrocauteryf
 from the conjunctival side30 running
hairs are removed after freezing. Freezing can occur over the
parallel to the lid margin has been advocated for
distichia. This incision transects the base of the hair
The postoperative swelling with cryotherapy
is
follicle, allowing the hair to be easily plucked. Regrowth
usually mild and transient. A topical steroid
is
of hairs may be frequent (7.16).
administered after freezing unless the condition is
7.13
7.14
7.13 Electrolysis of distichia.
7.14 Battery operated electrolysis unit. This method is prone to
regrowth of hairs, but will not disfigure the lid.
7.15
7.16
7.15 Pekingese that has lid margin deformities after electrolysis with
7.16 Electrocautery used to cut across the base of the cilia. Distichia
 a hyfracator.
will easily pluck out but often regrow. (Courtesy of Dr. R. Ris, Cornell
Veterinary College, Ithaca, NY.)
EYELIDS
153
accompanied by corneal ulceration. Depigmentation of
All forms of distichia therapy will have some
lid margins occurs post freezing, but most dogs regain
regrowth of hairs in some patients.
the pigment over several weeks. The owners of show
dogs must be forewarned of this complication if the dog
has pigmented hair or lid margins.
Trichiasis
Introduction/etiology
Carbon dioxide laser
Trichiasis is when normally placed hair follicles or cilia are
The carbon dioxide {COz) laser has been used for
 abnormally directed toward the cornea. Trichiasis may be
distichia removal but is very tedious to use and has the
congenital or acquired from lid scarring or from
potential for excessive tissue damage. The CO, laser,
entropion.  Congenital trichiasis may be unilateral
.or
while expensive, has become available in practice. The
u punoy Aensn sl pue 'p1 raddn aui saaloau "jeuaie
author has no experience with the use of the CO, laser
small breeds of dogs (7.18). Acquired trichiasis may be due
for distichia, only with its complications.
to redundant skin over the head pushing down on the
upper lid, such as in the Shar Pei, Chow Chow, Bulldog,
Plucking
hounds such as the Bloodhound, and St. Bernard (see
Plucking of distichia is tedious, requires a pair of
 Ptosis, p.163). In all species, lacerations of the lid that are
nontoothed forceps with good apposition, and is only a
not properly attended to may result in trichiasis {see
temporary measure. Plucking is useful to ascertain
Lacerations, p.171). Entropion in all species is significant
whether hairs are responsible for the clinical signs, before
because of the trichiasis that it produces.
performing definitive surgery.
7.17 Cryothermy
7.17
to the meibomian
gland region
utilizing a
chalazion clamp
to position and 
restrict blood
flow, to treat
distichia in a dog.
 Freezing is
suspended when
the ice ball
rea ches the
middle of the lid
margin. This can
 be performed 
 over the lacrimal
 puncta without
injury.
7.18
7.18 Congenital trichiasis in a Pomeranian. Note the collapsed
eyelashes on the cornea. The condition was bilateral.
154
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEAsE IN VeTeRiNARY MeDICINE
 Clinical signs
7.19
 Epiphora is the mildest sign.
 Keratitis, either ulcerative or nonulcerative, is the
us ual significant sign.
4
 In congenital trichiasis, the cilia of the upper lateral
two-thirds of the lid are collapsed on the cornea but
the lid is not rolled inward.
Therapy
Trichiasis following scarring or from laceration may require
excision, advancing pedicle grafts, or rotating pedicle flaps
to correct the lid defect as well as to correct the tnichiasis.
Trichiasis/entropion due to excessive skin folds over the
top of the head is difficult to manage. Correction usually
requires massive resection of skin folds over the head and,
perhaps, anchoring sutures to the underlying periosteum or
fascia (see Entropion, p.157 and Ptosis, p.163). Stades has
 described a technique for removal of lid skin, allowing it to
removes the cilia, it has the esthetic disadvantage of a
wound healing by second intention.
Congenital trichiasis of the upper lid has been treated
similarly to entropion by excision of adjacent skin, but this
may relapse. Cryotherapy has been a rapid and effective
alternative method for destroying the offending hairs.
Adventitious, ectopic, or aberrant cilia
Introduction/etiology
In the dog, cilia frequently grow aberrantly through the
conjunctiva
toward
Ithe
globe.
The cilia
are
characteristically very short, 2-5 mm from the lid
margin, and are usually in the upper lid (7.20). There are
usually one or two cilia, although rarely an island of cilia
 may be present. The condition was originally described
in the Boxer28, 36 and is rare in other species37.
Preoperative appearance with skin folds (A]. Incision is made
 0.5-1 mm above the meibomian gland orifices; a second incision
Clinical signs
follows the dorsal orbital rim (B). The superior wound margin is
 Blepharospasm and varying degrees of a focal, usually
isnt 'shnagns ieagadied aul ot saanins padnaiu yim pauonisod
ulcerative keratitis are characteristic because the cilium is
superior to the base of meibomian glands (C), and then with
short and stiff (7.20). The history is often one of acute
 continuous suture (D). The remaining area granulates and contracts.
onset. The ulcer may be vertically linear, following the
(From Stades, 198734.)
path of the lid across the cornea while blinking.
Diagnosis
Aberrant cilia are often overlooked and consequently
7.20
misdiagnosed because the lid margin must be everted to
observe the conjunctival surface, and magnification
{5-10x) is critical to visualize the very short cilium. The
location of the cilium is suspected by the location of the
ulcer. A small elevation or depigmented spot is often
 present where the hair emerges.
 Magnification of 5-10x is usually necessary to.
visualize the short hairs. It is very easy to overlook
 aberrant cilia as the cause of a nonhealing ulcer.
Therapy
While this is the most difficult of the cilial problems to
diagnose, it is the easiest to treat. The therapy for aberrant
cilia is excision of a block of conjunctiva, utilizing a
chalazion clamp to fixate the region and maintain
hemostasis (7.21). Surgery is usually successful, although
7.20 Aberrant cilia (arrow) in the upper palpebral conjunctiva of a
new hairs or regrowth may occur due to incomplete
dog. It is recognized by the small depigmented spot and a very short
excision. Sedation and local anesthetic infiltration are all
cilia. Note the keratitis.
EYELIDS
155
that is necessary for restraint. The corneal ulcer usually
et al.38 measured the palpebral length in dogs and cats
heals rapidly after removal of the cilia.
and found a mean of 32.7 ± 4.2 mm for dogs and 27.8 ±
2.7 mm for cats. In general, breeds with longer palpebral
Trichomegaly
fissures are predisposed to entropion, but individuals
Trichomegaly (long eyelashes) is observed in the
u u snss iaui aeu nou op uoidoa i
American Cocker Spaniel and Shih Tzu. The cilia are
individuals of the same breed. In the Sphinx cat, macro-
 normally placed but of such extreme length that they fall
pblepharon with entropion has been observed.
forward over the eye (7.22). However, no ocular
irritation occurs with the syndrome and thus no therapy
Clinical signs
is required.
 Excessively large palpebral fissure that is most
evident when the skin over the head is pulled taut.
Macroblepharon (euryblepharon)
 Ectropion and perhaps entropion due to floppy lids.
Introduction/etiology
Conjunctivitis due to exposure.
Occasionally, macroblepharon fenlarged palpebral
 In the brachycephalic breeds, varying degrees of
fissure) is unilateral, but typically it is bilateral in various
ulcerative or nonulcerative keratitis may develop
breeds of hounds, St. Bernards, and spaniels, where it is 
from exposure with lagophthalmos and
associated with ectropion and often entropion (7.23). In
macroblepharon. A shallow orbit combined with a
breeds with taut skin, such as brachycephalics, ectropion
large palpebral fissure predisposes to proptosis with
is not present but varying degrees of exposure keratitis
minimal effort, such as with restraint from the nape
and proptosis of the globe is more likely (7.24). Stades
of the neck.
7.21
7.22
7.21 Rermoval of aberrant cilium utilizing chalazion forceps for
7.22 Trichomegaly in an American Cocker Spaniel. The appearance is
immobilization and hemostasis.
rather dramatic, but few signs are produced.
7.23
7.24
7.23 Macroblepharon with ectropion and entropion in a Mastiff.
 7.24 Macroblepharon in a Boston Terrier with increased amounts
of exposed globe. Corneal scarring and pigmentation is evident in
one eye.
156
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
7.25
7.26
B
 7.26 Blepharophimosis in a Pomeranian. The dog appears
C
 blepharospastic due to small fissures. Marked epiphora was present
due to tight lid-globe conformation resulting in a small lacrimal lake.
Enlargerment of the palpebral fissures relieved the epiphora.
Ectropion correction
Procedures to shorten the lids must also provide traction
D
 on the skin to avoid a shortened lid that still droops (see
Ectropion, p.161).
Microblepharon or blepharophimosis
Introduction/etiology
A small palpebral fissure in the absence of microph-
Breeds such as the Collie, Shetland Sheepdog, Chow
Chow, Shar Pei, Kerry Blue Terrier, and English Bull
 7.25 lateral canthoplasty using a halving technique for strength.
Terrier are typically affected. The condition does not
Triangles of skin and conjunctiva of equal size are rermoved from
usually produce signs, although marginally elevated IOP
opposite lids. The length of the triangle along the lid margin is equal
in the Bull Terrier has been associated with the condition.
to the amount of shortening desired. The upper lid is incised along xy.
xy is transposed and sutured to the tip of the triangle in the lower lid
Clinical signs
ayl waoy ot umop pasodsueul s! pll daddn ino ssauyp!l lny aul'()
+ Little if any exposed conjunctiva or sclera even with
new lateral canthus, and the remaining cut surfaces are sutured. This
 manipulation of the lids.
technique provides a broader healing area than cut lid margins, and 
 Tight lid-globe conformation, which may result in a
+
thus is less prone to dehiscence.
limited lacrimal lake and resultant epiphora (7.26).
 Globe may appear small because of limited exposure.
Entropion is the most serious sequela and usually
results in significant corneal pathology beca use of
Diagnosis
the tight lid-globe conformation.
 Diagnosis is by inspection.
Diagnosis
Therapy
The diagnosis is usually by inspection, but microblepharon
Conservative
may be overlooked as the predisposing cause for entropion.
Antibiotic/glucocorticoid preparations are used to con-
trol the conjunctivitis, but only with caution in brachy-
Therapy.
cephalic breeds. Ocular lubricants are administered to
● No therapy is necessary for most animals with
 protect the eye in brachycephalic breeds.
minimal signs.
 Chronic epiphora may be treated medically with low-
Canthoplasty
 dose tetracycline orally to lessen the tear staining.
Lateral  canthoplasty  is performed in  brachycephalic
 Surgical removal of the third eyelid gland may
breeds to protect the cornea (7.25)39. Alternatively, a
enlarge the lacrimal lake, but risks predisposing the
medial canthoplasty may be performed to shorten the
patient to KCS.
fissure and obliterate a medial entropion (see Entropion,
Entropion should be corrected; this may require
p.24). If medial entropion is not a problem, lateral
creation of a lateral canthal ligament to evert the
canthoplasty is preferred beca use of the esthetics.
lateral canthus (see Entropion, Therapy, p.158).
EYELIDS
157
Entropion
Entropion involving the lateral canthus in mesati-
Introduction/etiology
 cephalic breeds with broad heads may also be associated
Entropion is a rolling of the eyelid inward toward the eye.
with a lateral canthal ligament that is misdirected in a
It is a very common condition in dogs and is less common
more medial direction. Entropion is seen commonly in the
in the cat, horse, and cow. It is considered familial in the
lateral half of the lower lid. However, it may extend to the
dog, but the genetics are unknown40. It is probably a
lateral third of the upper lid in the St. Bernard, Bulldog,
combination of inherited conformation and exciting
Boxer, Chow Chow, Kerry Blue Terrier, Rottweiler, and in
environmental influences, and thus does not behave as a
 spaniels, retrievers, and pointers (7.28). Entropion
simple autosomal trait. In large animals it is most common
associated with ocular pain can occur in any breed. An
 in neonates. In sheep it is reported to be inherited41, 42.
entropion of the medial lower lid and, less frequently, of
The tarsus in domestic animals is poorly developed
the upper medial lid is seen commonly in the Miniature
ok yoaul uu aui u punoy Aii au sei pn
and Toy Poodle, Pekingese, Pug, English Bulldog,
aul Aq pauoddns aie sp!l aul 'uouppe ul '(p 1addn umo
Cavalier King Charles Spaniel, and Maltese.
daap, ym (sop anoedj sue u ien os aaoa
Entropions can be classified as conformational,
set' eyes, or in conditions of ocular pain where the
spastic, or cicatricial.
retractor bulbi muscle pulls the globe into the orbit, this
support is lost or is minimal. A loss of orbital mass or
Conformationa!
ocular mass (phthisis bulbi) may also be responsible for
Conformational entropion is often called congenital,
loss of lid support, resulting in entropion ( 7.27). Without
although entropion is not usually present at birth.
the internal support to the lid and with the additional
Entropion in the horse and sheep is usually present in
loss of support from the globe, contraction of the
 neonates and involves the lower lid. The Shar Pei typically
orbicularis oculi muscle causes the lid to roll inward.
has entropion of very early onset. Environmental
influences are also present, as most patients have a period
of normalcy before the entropion is noted. Early
halt the process and avoid definitive surgery.
7.27
Conformational features that predispose to entropion
are redundant folds over the head (see Ptosis, p.163),
deep set eyes that do not support the lids, wide head
conformation in mesaticephalic breeds that alters the
 direction of the tension of the lateral canthal ligament,
 and a personality trait of excessive guarding of the eyes
or blepharospasm with pain on ocular manipulation.
Spastic
Spastic entropion is secondary to a painful ocular
condition such as corneal ulcer. Most conformational
entropions are normal for weeks to months after birth
before becoming manifest, and are probably initiated by
conditions such as conjunctivitis that stimulate blepharo-
7.27 Enophthalmos in a horse after multiple fractures of the orbital
spasm. A vicious cycle of pain and blepharospasm occurs
bones and floor has resulted in entropion due to lack of lid support.
that, once it is well established in conformationally
predisposed animals, is not relieved by removing the
pain. Almost all entropions in cats begin as a spastic
entropion that, if allowed to remain, becomes perma-
7.28
nent. Topical anesthetic relieves the pure spastic
 entropion and allows the surgeon to estimate the spastic
component for surgical evaluation.
Cicatricia!
Cicatricial entropion may occur secondary to injury with
 scarring and contracture.
 Clinical signs
Mild
Epiphora and conjunctivitis, often associated with exces-
sive lymphoid follicles, is typical (7.28). It is proba ble that
conjunctivitis is the initiating factor in many instances, as
it is usuall present in both eyes, and entropion may be
 present in only one eye (thus entropion did not cause
conjunctivitis). Dogs with lower lid entropions may
protect the cornea by prola psing the third eyelid. Epiphora
7.28 Entropion of the lower lid in an &-week-old lrish Setter puppy.
produces depigmentation of the inverted lid margin.
No corneal lesions have yet developed due to the third eyelid and 
Varying degrees of blepharospasm are usually present.
deep orbit.
158
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Modest
7.29
Blepharospasm (moderate), corneal ulcer, or focal
superficial keratitis with scarring, pigment, and neo-
vascularization are present (7.29). Bacterial infection
may occur with mucopurulent ocular discharge, rather
than epiphora.
Severe
Extreme blepharospasm and, usually, a severe keratitis
 are present, although the cornea may be hard to evaluate
until the animal is anesthetized. Blepharospasm may even
 persist after anesthesia.
Diagnosis
Blepharospasm with absence of the normal hairless zone
 of the lid margin against the cornea is diagnostic. The
facial hairs extend to the apparent lid margin (7.28,
7.29). The head should be examined unrestrained, as
manipulation of the head will precipitate or exaggerate
blepharospasm in many dogs. The head is supported by
lifting under the mandible without touching the side or
top of the head. The animal should be examined before
and after the application of topical anesthetics.
 7.29 Entropion of the lower lateral lid and lateral canthus in a
 Rottweiler. Note the corneal pigmentation.
Therapy
Everting mattress sutures
Most patients that are temporized by placing everting
mattress sutures in the eyelid, later require definitive
7.30
surgery unless presented in the early, purely spastic,
 phase of the disease. The objective is to relieve the
 primary condition (corneal ulcer, conjunctivitis) and to
 stop the pain-spasm cycle. Spastic entropions, acute
onset entropions, and entropions in the neonate and
young animal of all species may be treated by placing
a u uaid ssiu pea e ui sanns uau e
skin of the appropriate lid (7.30)43. This has become
routine in Shar Pei puppies. In many instances this may
be curative or at least relieves the problem until the
puppy grows to the point of being suitable for a more
definitive procedure. The everting effect of the sutures
often only lasts a few weeks, but new sutures can be
placed periodically if necessary. Surgical staples have also
been utilized in place of everting sutures.
The author has also utilized tarsorrhaphies in 2-3-
week-old puppies, but the puppy cannot see if the
condition is bilateral. The sutures have often only
remained in place for 2-3 days, but have usually been
successful in correcting the spastic entropion.
Subcutaneous injection
Agents such as penicillin have been injected subcuta-
C
neously adjacent to the entropion in sheep and foals.
 Injection of approximately 1 ml of penicillin pushes the
lid away
from the globe and may break the
 pain-blepharospasm cycle. Injection of more irritating
substances, such as mineral oil, results in a foreign body
 granuloma and is not recommended.
Removal of skin
7.30 Placement of everting mattress sutures in a puppy to treat
Established entropion  requires  surgical  correction.
spastic entropion or to allow growth of the animal before performing
Various procedures have been devised, but most patients
a definitive procedure. Often such sutures are combined with a
respond to the simple removal of an ellipse of skin and,
Hotz-Celsus procedure (7.31] to counteract initial blepharospasm 
possibly, of underlying orbicularis muscle {Hotz-Celsus
from surgery and medications.
EYELIDS
159
7.31
 procedure) adjacent to the entropion (7.31). The amount 
of skin removed and the length of the incision is a
 judgment decision, which may be estimated by clamping
with hemostats. The ma ximum amount of skin removed
is usually about 5-6 mm at the widest part of the ellipse.
 Removal of underlying orbicularis muscle is certainly not
harmful, but is not necessary. If only a short length of lid
is affected, excising an ellipse without involving the
 normal adjacent lid is difficult, and correction using a
Y-V procedure may minimize a secondary ectropion
(7.32, 7.33).
Creation and cutting of lateral canthal figaments
In patients where the lateral canthus is rolling inward,
lateral canthal ligaments can be fashioned from the
 orbicularis muscle, as in 7.34. This procedure is also
frequently used when a second attempt at surgical
correction
is necessary44. However, in the author's
experience, the initial tautness produced is lost over
several weeks.
7.31 Hotz-Celsus procedure for correction of lower lid entropion in a
dog. The use of a lid plate facilitates incisions, and excision of 
orbicularis muscle is optional. The incision closest to the lid margin is
 just within the hairline and the maximum width is typically 4-6 mm.
7.32
7.34
7.33
+
7.32, 7.33 Y-V procedure for entropion in a dog. This is indicated
7.34 Modified Wyman's lateral canthoplasty in a dog. Strips of
for entropion involving a short length of the lid and avoids
 orbicularis muscle are fashioned and sutured under tension to the
 overcorrection of adjacent normal lid.
 Zygomatic bone periosteum to pull the lateral canthus outward. It is
rarely performed now as lateral canthal ligament tenotomy is superior.
There is a marked tendency for overcorrection, and the ligaments
 usually do not maintain contraction for more than a few weeks.
160
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEAsE IN VeTeRiNARY MeDICINE
7.35
7.36
A
7.35 Lateral canthal tenotomy performed in a dog by cutting the taut
band through the conjunctival surface. Additional lid shortening or
Hotz-Celsus may need to be performed, depending on the conformation.
Recently, a tenotomy of the overdeveloped lateral
inward rolling lateral canthus (7.35). Any remaining
 entropion of the lower and upper lid is repaired by skin
excision and/or the macroblepharon is shortenedt. This
snouoqel se iou si pue stjnsai poos uaaia sey ainpaooid
as creating the canthal ligaments.
Skin excision with tarsal pedicles
Elliptical skin excision with the creation of tarsal pedicles
 a method used to minimize a recurrence of entropion4s.
The principle is similar to the lateral canthal ligaments
procedure, except the tarsal pedicle tags are smaller and
the tension is perpendicular to the lid margin.
Medial canthoplasty
7.36 Pocket flap medial canthoplasty used to shorten the palpebral
Medial entropion in brachycephalics is most easily
fissure and obliterate medial entropion and lacrimal caruncle trichiasis in
the dog (A).The lid is split along thelngth to be shortened (B]. Damage
If treated by routine skin excision, entropion usually
 to the lower lacrimal canaliculus must be avoided (by passing a catheter
recurs in the brachycephalic breeds because of the
if necessary]. A strip of lid margin is removed (C). The inner half of the lid
redundant skin in this region. Medial canthoplasty
is cut along the border (D). The upper triangle is rotated into the lower
simply obliterates the lid region that had the entropion.
 pocket by a suture placed at the tip of the triangle (E). The cut lid
 Owners must be forewarned that the appearance will be
margins are sutured (F). The final appearance (G). The large healing 
modestly altered (7.37).
surfaces of lids that have been halved create stronger adhesion5.
Lateral canthal tenotomy
Mesaticephalic breeds with involution of the lateral can-
thus, usually in combination with entropion of the lower
7.37
lid, may respond to lateral canthal tenotomy by itself or,
more commonly, in conjunction with lid shortening or lid
eversion (7.35). After transection of the lateral canthal
ligament, the size and position of the lids are evaluated to
determine what additional steps are needed. Frequently,
lid shortening or eversion will also be necessary.
 No one surgical procedure is effective for all
patients with entropion. A detailed study of the
conformation while the patient is as relaxed as
 possible is necessary to select the most appropriate
 technique and location for surgery.
7.37 Lhasa Apso with bilateral medial canthoplasties, performed for
keratitis of the medial cornea from entropion and trichiasis. Note
that the eyes will appear further apart.
EYELIDS
161
7.38
7.40
7.38 Conformational ectropion in a Gordon Setter. Note the
C
 conjunctivitis.
7.39 Cicatricial ectropion in a Miniature Poodle that had trauma to
7.40 Modified Kuhnt-Szymanowski technique for ectropion
the lower lid several months previously. The condition is unilateral.
correction. The lids are studied to estimate the amount of shortening.
A skin incision is made 3 mm from, and parallel to, the lid margin
from the lateral one-half to three-quarters of the lower lid (A). The
Ectropion
aun puoaq wo s'l-o'l iuiod e on Aeaielosiop sano uoisiu!
Introduction/etiology
lateral canthus, following the natural curve of the lower lid. The skin
Ectropion is eversion of the lower lid. It is common in
flap is undermined from the orbicularis muscle, and the amount of 
dogs but rare in other animals. There are four forms:
estimated shortening is made by removing a triangular shaped piece
conformational, transient, cicatricial, and paralytic.
of lid margin from the middle of the lower lid (B). The
tarsoconjunctival layer is sutured with 6-0 absorbable suture in a
Conformationa!
simple interrupted or continuous pattern. The lid margin is tied in a
Dogs such _as hounds, setters, spaniels, retrievers, St.
figure of eight pattern, to avoid suture ends rubbing the cornea (C).
Bernards, Bulldogs, and Boxers are usually affected
The previously dissected skin flap is now made taut, the excess skin
{7.38). In some breeds, such as hounds, a degree of
excised, and the skin sutured (D, E).
ectropion is considered normal.
Transient
Therapy
Hunting breeds, such as retrievers and setters, may
While ectropion is common, therapy directed towards
 exhibit intermittent ectropion that becomes manifest late
the primary problem is relatively infrequently requested.
in the day, after exercise, or when the animal is relaxed.
Medical treatment of the associated conjunctivitis with
 This is actually a subtype of conformational ectropion.
topical antibiotic-steroid preparations is the most
 frequent form of therapy.
Cicatricia!
Surgical correction should be postponed until about
Ectropion may occur secondary to scar contracture in the
6 months of age or when adult conformation is obtained,
lid. This form is usually unilateral and is relatively rare
 as some animals improve with growth. A modification of
(7.39). Unfortunately, the most common cause is
the Kuhnt-Szymanowski procedure has given good
iatrogenic overcorrection from entropion surgery.
results in cases of moderate ectropion (7.40)48. A variety
of other procedures usually succeed in shortening the
Paralytic
palpebral fissure but do not correct the slackness.
Paralytic ectropion may occur from facial nerve paralysis.
Ectropions that are localized to a notch in the middle of
162
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
the lid can be repaired by simple excision of the notch
Large nasal folds
and shortening of the lid. The most difficult to correct
Introduction/etiology
are those associated with marked redundancy of skin
 Nasal fold problems are overdiagnosed as the cause of
over the head that has very little subcutaneous
corneal disease in Pekingese and other brachycephalic
 attachments. In this instance the usual lid shortening
breeds. Careful examination of the medial lids behind the
with minor tucks of skin is not sufficient to overcome the
nasal fold will often reveal the problem as a medial
looseness and weight of the skin over the side and top of
 entropion. Both factors may be present and producing
the head.
corneal disease (7.42).
Relatively few patients with ectropion undergo
Clinical signs
surgical correction unless it is accompanied by
 Mild: epiphora.
entropion.
 Modest: chronic superficial keratitis with a
 pigmented wedge in the medial conjunctiva and
 A V-Y blepharoplasty is specific and successful with
cormea.
modest amounts of cicatricial ectropion. The V-Y plasty
 Severe or acute signs: ulcerative keratitis in the
is not recommended for other types of ectropion ( 7.41).
medial cornea.
Signs may occur from multiple causes such as medial
entropion, distichiasis, and lagophthalmos due to
7.41
shallow orbits. Pekingese may l
have all of these
conditions, so sometimes it is difficult to know which of
A
the conditions is producing the problem.
Diagnosis
 Diagnosis depends on demonstration that the nasal fold
hairs are rubbing on the area of pathology, and that a
medial lower lid entropion is not behind the fold.
Therapy
Conservative
 In mild cases or in show dogs, applying ointments to
 make the hairs lie flat is all the owners may allow.
Surgical excision
Excision may meet with owner resistance as this is an
expected part of the breed conformation. Complete
 excision is performed by cutting at the base of the nosefold
and suturing the cut edges. Cut suture ends should not be
directed toward the eye, so a continuous pattern is pre-
ferred. Incomplete excision is a better cosmetic solution,
but if the eyes are extremely prominent, this may not be
sufficient to reduce contact with hair.
7.42
7.41 V-Y correction of cicatrical ectropion (A). Dissection of scar
7.42 Trichiasis from large nose folds in a Pekingese.
tissue (B). Mobilization of adjacent skin (C). Suturing the V incision 
without incorporating original incised lid skin pushes the skin toward
the eye (D). The final appearance (E).
EYELIDS
163
Lagophthalmos
Diagnosis
Introduction/etiology
ynot oi aqe Suiq Xq paieusuouap si sowreuudoset
Lagophthalmos is an inability to close the eyelids
completely. In animals, due to the presence of a third eyelid,
 a partial blink. With chronicity, most animals probably
lagophthalmos may be tolerated reasonably well, but the
also have decreased corneal sensation. The clinician must
ansodxa Arepuooas dolaaap oi Alexll sl au raao bauo
differentiate between lagophthalmos due to a lack of
problems. Lagophthalmos can be congenital or aquired.
motor innervation, and cranial nerve V paralysis and a
Congenital lagophthalmos is common in Pekingese
lack of sensation to the eyelids and/or cornea when
due to very shallow orbits. The eyes are often so
testing the palpebral and corneal reflexes.
prominent that the lids are unable to close completely
unless an added facial effort is made.
Clinical signs
Lagophthalmos as a result of facial nerve paralysis is
Signs of lagophthalmos are ulceration, pigmentation, or
a common isolated symptom in the American Cocker
Spaniel, and it occurs with inner ear disease in all
morning after sleeping with the eyes partially open.
breedst9. Facial nerve paralysis is idiopathic in 75%
of
dogs and 25% of cats. In the horse, most cases of facial
Therapy
nerve paralysis are far enough peripheral (halter injuries)
Lagophthalmos secondary to facial nerve paralysis usually
that they do not involve the lids. Exophthalmos from
does not require therapy unless the animal is also very
increased orbital mass, such as tumor, inflammation,
exophthalmic. Soft contact lens or partial permanent
hemorrhage, and edema, can ca use lagophthalmos.
tarsorrhaphy may be performed if signs are noted (7.43).
Lagophthalmos from exophthalmos due to orbital
space-occupying lesions may require tarsorrhaphy until
the orbital lesion is resolved.
7.43 Technique of placing
7.43
 Congenital lagophthalmos in the brachycephalic
tarsorrhaphy sutures. The
breeds will benefit from either lateral or medial
drawing depicts creating 
 canthoplasty to prevent multiple bouts of ulceration and
raw surfaces for adhesions.
decrease the risk of proptosis of the globe. Lateral
 but this is rarely performed.
canthoplasty gives better cosmetic results than medial
Sutures are placed half
canthoplasty (7.25 ).
thickness and emerge and 
Artificial tear preparations or lubricants are often 
enter on the lid margin. The
 administered in addition to the above procedures.
use of rubber band stents
and the suture pattern
Ptosis
force the sutures away from
Introduction/etiology
the globe. The sutures
Ptosis is an inability to elevate the upper eyelid to a
should be snug, to
 normal degree. Ptosis may be acquired or congenital, and
 eliminate exposure of
 due either to pathology of the muscles that elevate the lid
suture across the palpebral
(levator palpebrae or Miller's muscle) (7.44), disease of
fissure. The medial canthus
the peripheral nerves or CNS foculomotor or sym-
can be left open to
pathetic fibers or centers), or redundant skin over the
administer medica tion.
head weighing down the upper lid (7.45).
7.45 Ptosis in a
7.45
Shar Pei,
secondary to 
redundant skin
over the forehead.
7.44 Horner's syndrome in a cat after cleansing the ear canals. Note
the modest ptosis, prolapse of the third eyelid, and miosis.
164
OpHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
7.46
The most common cause of ptosis is weight of
redundant skin, and this is seen in St. Bernards,
English Bulldogs, Chow Chows, Shar Peis, and
hounds.
Clinical signs
 If ptosis is associated with neurologic disease, it may be
 accompanied by either a dilated or a constricted pupil.
With sympathetic denervation (Horner's syndrome), the
pupil is miotic (7.44); with oculomotor denervation, if
the parasympathetic fibers are affected, the pupil is
 dilated. Generalized muscular dystrophy may occasion-
ally be a cause of ptosis.
Diagnosis
7.46 The dog in 7.45 immediately after fold rermoval and entropion
The palpebral fissure should be carefully examined for
surgery of the lower lids. The lower lids appear overcorrected due to
 symmetry and to eliminate the presence of blepharo-
temporary everting mattress sutures.
spasm. A neurologic and physical examination should be
 performed and function of other extraocular muscles and
 pupil should be evaluated.
7.47
Orbital
Therapy
Frontalis m.
rim
 The treatment for ptosis is usually not specific except for
凸
redundant skin problems fsee Entropion, p.157, and
Trichiasis, p.154). Excision of skin folds is a laborious job of
suturing, but if adequate amounts are removed; it results in
 significant improvement (7.46). A technique of creating a
 sling of mersilene mesh that is anchored to the periosteum
of the skull to elevate the upper lid has given excellent
Periosteum
results in the dog (7.47, 7.48)s0-s2, While this requires
acquiring the mesh and runs the increased risk of infection
(burying a foreign body), the excellent results obtained to
date make it an attractive alternative to skin fold excision
for owners who are insistent on retaining the forehead folds.
ACQUIRED DISEASES
Blepharoedema
Introd uction/etiology
7.47 Ptosis correction utilizing a mersilene sling in a Shar Pei. Five
Blepharoedema is usually a sign rather than a disease in
5mall stab incisions are made in the skin (A] and the strip of
itself. The skin of the lid is thin and loose to allow
mersilene that is attached to a straight needle is passed from one
mobility, resulting in dramatic edema with minimal insult.
incision to the next, and finally anchored to the temporal bone 
Bilateral blepharoedema may be caused by an
periosteum (B). Usually two slings are needed per lid. (m: muscle.)
immune-mediated process, such as angioedema from
hypersensitivity to insect bites/stings, vaccines (7.49),
systemic medications, or food. Trauma, whether self-
7.48
inflicted or external in origin, is a common cause of
blepharoedema. The combination of ocular allergy with
mast cell degranulation and self-inflicted trauma from
rubbing, is common in the horse.
Venomous insect and snake
e bites, and topical
chemicals such as surgical scrubs, may produce
chemically-induced blepharoedema. Infectious causes
of periocular and orbital inflammation are common
 ca uses of blepharoedema.
Clinical signs
Blepharoedema is usually unilateral with trauma, bee
stings, and periorbital cellulitis, and bilateral with
allergic angioedema and many forms of blepharitis.
Associated signs are often of importance in differential
diagnosis: exophthalmos, dermatitis elsewhere, edema
7.48 Shar Pei that has had bilateral frontal sling surgery. Note the folds
of the muzzle, and perhaps urticaria on the body with
over the head are retained. Overcorrection can produce lagophthalmo5.
angioneurotic edema.
EYELIDS
165
7.49
7.50
 7.49 Bilateral angioedema in a puppy after vaccination.
 7.50 Hordeolum, ('stye] in a dog. It is a small acute abscess of the
meibomian glands.
7.51
7.52
7.51 Multiple pyogranulomas in an English Springer Spaniel. The
7.52 Local furunculosis or deep pyoderma of hair follicles in a dog.
history was compatible with an atopic dog. The dog responded
 Onset was rapid, and while the condition responded to antibiotics,
initially to 5ystemic antibiotics and steroids, but required low-dose
 5everal days of therapy were necessary.
steroids to keep the condition from recurring.
Therapy
 Allergic blepharoedema is usually treated with systemic
diffuse or focal and acute or chronic. Examples of focal
steroids and/or antihistamines, although most patients
blepharitis are hordeolums, chalazions, and focal
improve spontaneously. Trauma and acute inflammation
pyogranulomas. A hordeolum (stye) is an acute
(post surgical) often benefit from initial cold packs in the
abscessation of one or more meibomian glands of the
first 12-24 hours, and later by hot packing. Blepharoedema
eyelid (7.50). A chalazion is a chronic lipid granuloma,
secondary to infection should be specifically 
treated.
caused from meibomian gland contents being liberated
Elizabethan collars to prevent self-trauma in small animals,
into the adjacent tissue after blockage of the gland.
or face masks in the horse, may be beneficial.
Focal pyogranuloma and furunculosis (7.51, 7.52) are
deep infections of the hair folliclesS3, 54.
Blepharitis
The causes of blepharitis are similar to and as varied
Introductionjetiology
as the causes of dermatitis in general. Many forms of
Blepharitis is a common syndrome, but is often ignored
dermatitis with a potential for generalized involvement
if it is part of a more generalized dermatitis, unless 
or systemic implications have a propensity to begin
secondary corneal disease occurs. Blepharitis may be
with, or selectively involve, the eyelids.
166
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
Parasites
eyelid (7.s5)57. The larvae are carried by Musca domesticad
Mites. Demodectic mange in the dog and cat, notoedric
(housefly). Since ivermectin kills the Habronema larvae,
mange in the cat, and sarcoptic mange in the dog and
lesions have become a rarity with contemporary routine
cow (7.53) produce a dry scaly dermatitis that often
 deworming programs.
involves the eyelids. Demodectic mange is typically
nonpruritic, while notoedric and sarcoptic mange are
Bacteria
intensely pruritic. Secondary infections with bacteria
may produce a moist dermatitis and self-trauma.
Juvenile pyoderma is an excellent example of pyoderma
Cuterebra larvae. Cuterebra fly larvae are normal
with an affinity for the eyelids. It presents in puppies
subcutaneous parasites of rodents but on occasion they
less than 4 months of age as an acute, severe, deep
are found in the lids, conjunctiva, and eye of the cat and
 pyoderma that is usually restricted to the head. Culture
dog (7.54)5s, 56, The fly lays eggs along rodent paths and
of the lesions often reveals Stapbylococcus spp. but the
burrows where hunting cats might become exposed. The
pathogenesis is thought to be more complex than a
subcutaneous larvae stimulate a severe reaction, and a
simple infection. A hypersensitivity to the organism is
burrowing hole, within which the larvae can be
usually postulated to explain the response to
visualized, if present.
glucocorticoids and the explosive course.
Habronema larvae. In the warmer months, Habronemd
In the early stages a puppy may be presented with only
larvae produce a typical chronic medial canthal lesion in
swelling or pustules of the lids, but within a few days the
the horse (summer sores). The lesion is usually an
pyoderma extends to the ears and muzzle. The lesions
erosive/proliferative lesion with yellow caseated or calcified
become moist and purulent, and the submandibular lymph
particles, and involves the lid, conjunctiva, and third
 nodes become markedly enlarged (7.56). Affected puppies 
7.53
7.54
7.53 Demodectic mange in a dog. The condition was localized to
7.54 Cuterebro sp. larva visible near the lower lid margin of a cat.
the head.
Note the severe conjunctival reaction. (Courtesy of Dr. J. Stiles,
 Purdue Veterinary College.)
7.55
7.56
7.55 Habronema sp. infestation of the medial canthus of a
7.56 Juvenile pyoderma in a 10-12-week-old puppy Note the marked 
horse. Note the yellow caseous material and the erosive nature
eczematous lesions of the eyelids and nose. The ear canals are also 
of the lesion.
involved and the lymph nodes of the head are markedly swollen.
EYELIDS
167
7.57
7.58
7.57 Acute bacterial infection of the lids in a dog that resulted from
7.58 Cat with a bite wound abscess in the upper eyelid. The absce55
'spilling over' from a bacterial conjunctivitis.
is draining into the conjunctival sac. Note the bite wound just below
the practitioner's thumb.
may be anorexic, lethargic, or febrile. Usually only one
7.59
 animal in the litter is involved. Occasionally, puppies will
 develop a more generalized pyoderma.
In adult dogs, focal or generalized bacterial blepharitis
can be secondary to bacterial infection of cilial follicles
 or meibomian glands, bite wounds, clipper burns, and
"spilling over” from bacterial conjunctivitis (7.57). In
intact free-roaming cats the most common cause of
bacterial blepharitis is bite wounds (7.58).
 Chronic blepharitis and keratoconjunctivitis may be
associated
with
 staphylococcal
infection
and
meibomian gland dysfunction in humans, and possibly
in animals. A proposed mechanism of action is that
keratin plugs block the meibomian orifices, providing
the environment for the bacterial flora to thrive. The
bacteria then produce lipases that hydrolyze lipids to
toxic free fatty acidss8.
7.59 Cat with Microsporum dermatomycosis, characterized by dry.
Fungi
5caly dermatitis. (Courtesy of Prof. M. Lorenz, College of Veterinary
 Dermatophyte lesions may be limited to the periocular
Medicine, Oklahoma State University.]
region or can be part of a generalized infection in all
species. The appearance of the lesions is quite variable,
but a dry, alopecic, scaly lesion is common (7.59). Most
7.60
cases of localized dermatomycosis are self-limiting in the
dog and cat. Dermatomycosis is a zoonosis.
Protozoa
In the dog, the most common ocular lesion with
Leisbmania infantum is a scaly blepharitis or periocular
alopecia (7.60). Pena et al.s9 reported that 24% of all
dogs with leishmaniasis had ocular lesions; the most
common ocular lesion was either periocular alopecia or
blepharitis (52%). The appearance of blepharitis varied
from dry scaly lesions to diffusely thickened lesions that
were hyperemic or ulcerated. Focal nodular granulomas
may occur in the eyelids. Most reported cases of
leishmaniasis have a history of being in the Mediteranean
region, but a New World form of leishma niasis due to L.
chagasi has been reported in North, Central, and South
America. The dog is a reservoir for the parasite, which is
 7.60 Scaly dermatitis in a dog with leismaniasis. (Courtesy of
transmitted by sandflies60, 61
Dr. S. Pizzirani, Florence, Italy.)
168
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
Burns
Immune-mediated skin diseases
Sunlight on nonpigmented lids and mucocutaneous junctions
A range of immune-mediated diseases, from allergy to
will produce sunburn in all species, and chronic exposure
autoimmune diseases, may be characterized by facial
may eventually result in squamous cell carcinoma (SCC).
dermatosis63.
Therapeutic deep radiation for nasal and brain tumors often
Atopic blepharitis. Atopic blepharitis is typically
results in blepharitis and hair loss from surface burns (7.61).
associated with generalized pruritus, rubbing of the eyes,
Lyes, acids, and fire may induce facial and eyelid
otitis, and licking of the feet. It may be accompanied by
burns (7.62). Contracture of the eyelids in the healing
conjunctivitis. Most affected dogs begin to show clinical
phase often becomes a major complication of chemical
signs between 1-3 years of age. Predisposed breeds
and thermal burns.
include the Shar Pei, West Highland White Terrier and
other terrier breeds, Lhasa Apso, Shih Tzu, Golden
Seborrhea/keratinization disorders
Retriever, and La brador Retriever.
Generalized primary or secondary seborrhea in the dog,
Drug eruption. Immune-mediated reactions to drugs
and idiopathic facial dermatitis and primary seborrhea of
 may occur from systemically administered drugs or from
Persian cats, can be associated with blepharitis in
contact sensitivity to topical drugs. Both forms of
addition to other typical clinical signs. In Persian cats
exposure to sensitizing drugs may produce blepharitis
with idiopathic facial dermatitis, a black waxy material
and facial dermatitis. The topical exposure is limited to
becomes adherent to the hairs of the face and variable
the lids and face (7.63), whereas systemic drugs produce
amounts of underlying dermatitis are present. Otitis
 bilateral lids lesions and more generalized dermatologic
externa is often present and Malassezia pacbydermatitis
lesions (7.64).
 may be isolated from about half of the patients62.
7.61
7.62
7.61 Radiation-induced alopecia and dermatitis in a dog after
7.62 Severe burns over the upper lid of a horse, with diffuse les5
teletherapy for nasal neoplasia.
severe burns over the body. The eyelid lesions contracted with time
 producing marked distortion.
7.63
7.63 Contact
7.64
hypersensitivity to
topical medications 
in a horse utilized 
to treat corneal
lesions. Note the
 pattern of
distribution.
7.64 Erythema multiforme (Stevens- Johnson syndrome] in a dog
with skin reactions to systemically administered sulfa drugs for a
septicemia. (Courtesy of Dr. L. Medleau, Department of Small Animal
Medicine, University of Georgia.]
EYELIDS
169
Drug hypersensitivity should be suspected whenever
Discoid and systemic lupus erythematosus. The immune-
there is a worsening of the ocular condition once
mediated diseases of lupus erythematosus may occur as
thera py has commenced.
 discoid lupus erythematosus, a local disease limited to the
skin, or systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), which is a
Eosinophilic plaque. In the cat, lesions of the
multiorgan disease with skin involvement in 30-60% of
eosinophilic granuloma complex may manifest on the
cases. The lesions in both conditions are frequently a facial
lids and precede skin lesions at other sites64. These
dermatosis with eyelid involvement {depigmentation,
lesions usually reflect underlying hypersensitivity {flea
erosions, crusting) (7.66). Systemic lupus erythematosus has
allergy, atopy, food allergy).
an increased incidence in the Collie, Shetland Sheepdog, and
Pemphigus complex. The autoimmune skin diseases of
GSD63,67 Pathogenesis of skin lesions in the lupus diseases
pemphigus vulgaris, pemphigus vegetans, 
pemphigus
 involves antinuclear antibodies which bind to keratinocytes
foliaceus, pemphigus erythematosus, and bullous pem-
to cause cytotoxic injury and cytokine release, resulting in
phigoid are often accompanied by facial dermatosis and
attraction of lymphocytes and further epithelial damage.
eyelid involvement in the dog and cat {depigmentation,
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome. Vogt-Koyanagi-
Harada (VKH) syndrome produces skin lesions charac-
vegetans, and bullous pemphigoid are characterized
terized by vitiligo (skin depigmentation) and poliosis
{whitening of hair), which preferentially involve the
(7.65). The pemphigus complex is characterized by auto-
eyelids, lips, nose, food pads, and scrotum of young adult
antibodies against epithelial intercellular cement substance.
dogs (mean age 2.8 years)69, In occasional cases the skin
changes may be generalized70.
The skin lesions usually occur after ocular lesions
that typically manifest as a bilateral uveitis.
.65
While the eyelid lesions are characterized by depig-
mentation, some cases progress to a more erosive,
crusting dermatitis (7.67).
VKH syndrome has been
reported in a variety of breeds, but the Akita represents
 80% of reported cases70.
Clinical signs
Blepharitis lesions vary with the cause, chronicity,
modification with therapy, and amount of self-trauma.
Alopecia, crusts, edema, hyperemia, cicatrization, kera-
titis, and conjunctivitis are common signs.
Diagnosis
Historical data and other clinical findings, including the
7.65 Mucocutaneous lesions in a dog due to pemphigus vulgaris.
age, breed, environment, distribution of lesions, presence
(Courtesy of Dr. L. Medleau, Department of Small Animal Medicine,
of pruritus, and course and response to therapy, are often
University of Georgia.]
important clues to the specific cause.
7.66
7.67
7.66 Presumed discoid lupus erythermatosus in a cat. The cat was
7.67 vKH in an Akita. Note the moist erosive dermatitis with
positive on LE preparation and negative on immunostaining of skin
depigmenta tion.
biopsies for pemphigus. The condition responded to oral anti-
inflammatory doses of corticosteroids. Discoid lupus erythematosus
appears similar to idiopathic facial dermatitis of the Persian cat.
170
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETeRINARY MeDICINE
Skin scrapings and cytology should be performed
a few days. Meibomian gland dysfunction should be
on most cases of blepharitis to detect causative
 treated with baby shampoo to remove keratin plugs from
organisms such as parasites, bacteria, and fungi.
 the orifices and low-dose systemic tetracyclines to inhibit
 bacterial lipase productions8.
Cultures should supplement cytology when bacterial
 Focal pyogranulomas have been treated in a variety of
or fungal causes are suspected. Biopsy of Habronemd
-o yim anssh uoeut siai adai suois
intralesional antibiotics, curretage of lesion, staphylococcal
genolysis, eosinophils, mast cells, and neutrophils. If fine
vaccine, and tetracycline/niacinamide therapy. The latter
needle biopsy of mast cell accumulation is obtained, mast
combination is postulated to be an immunomodulator, and
cell tumor may be misdiagnoseds7.
it has been used to treat dogs with focal granulomas and with
 Serologic tests are available for diagnosing exposure
episcleritis/scleritis.  Tetracycline and  niacinamide are
to
Leishmania, 
but they will cross-react with
administered at a dose of 250-500 mg of each drug q8h, and
 Trypanosoma-positive dogs7l. Actinic/radiation/chemical-
dose frequency is gradually reduced once a response is
or heat-induced burns are diagnosed based on history and
observed54,75, 76. Supportive therapy consists of removal of
lesion distribution, and histopathologic findings.
scabs with warm moist gauze, hot packing for 15 minutes
Keratinization disorders are diagnosed by characteristic
q8-12h, and expressing and treating infections of
histopathology and clinical findings. Primary seborrhea is 
meibomian glands or lash follicles.
diagnosed only after all causes of secondary seborrhea
have been ruled out fallergies, infection, parasites,
Fungi
endocrine disease, nutritional disorders).
In dogs, localized disease may be self-limiting or may be
 For dogs with symptoms compatible with atopy,
treated with topical antifungal agents. Dogs with
intradermal skin testing may indicate the offending
 generalized or multifocal disease, and cats, are treated
allergen(s). Drug eruptions are diagnosed by establishing
with a combination of topical and systemic antifungal
a temporal relationship of lesion development to drug
medications (griseofulvin 50 mg/kg daily, ketoconazole
administration and resolution of symptoms with drug
5-10 mg/kg/day, or itraconazole 5-10 mg/kg/day). Dilute
discontinuation. Eosinophilic plaques are diagnosed by
bleach cleaning (1:10) of the immediate environment is
characteristic histopathologic findings. Autoimmmune
 indicated to prevent spread and reinfection77.
skin diseases are diagnosed by biopsy with characteristic
histopathology.
Immunostaining  may
demonstrate
Leishmaniasis
characteristic immunoglobulin deposition.
 Leishmaniasis therapy has traditionally used pentavalent
Histologic findings in VKH syndrome include
 antimony compounds administered until clinical remission
 pigmentary incontinence and a lichenoid infiltration with
is noted. The relapse rate is high (75%)78 unless therapy is
histiocytes, plasma cells, multinucleated giant cells, and
maintained on a long-term intermittent dose of allopurinol 
lymphocytes. Response to therapy is a common means of
 20 mg/kg daily for 1 week once a month79.
making a provisional diagnosis.
Burns
Therapy
Exposure to the most intense sun should be limited by
Mites
housing the animal during the day and using chemical
Mitocides are often used topically, but care should be
 sun-screens if necessary. Tattooing may be attempted, but
ta ken to avoid the eyes. Demodectic mange is usually self-
needs periodic retreatment.
limiting in a young dog. If limited to a few local regions
Chemical and thermal burns are treated acutely by
 such as the periocular area, specific therapy is usually
copious cool water lavage. Affected skin should then be
unnecessary. If the condition becomes generalized,
 kept clean of exudate and debris with gentle daily lavage.
treatment options include amitraz dips, oral ivermectin
Daily topical application of silver sulfadiazene cream can
(except in herding breeds)72, or oral milbemycin.
prevent secondary bacterial infection and speed healing
of injured skin. Reconstructive surgery may be needed to
Habronema
correct scarring/lid contracture.
Therapy consists of mechanical expression and debride-
ment of irritating granules in the lesion, followed by
Seborrhea/keratinization disorder
topical  or  intralesional injection of glucocorticoid.
Antiseborrheic shampoos are indicated, but care should
Systemic ivermectin (0.2 mg/kg) will kill the larvae73. Fly
be taken to avoid contact with the eyes. In severe cases,
control is important to prevent reinfestation.
steroids or retinoids may be helpful.
Bacteria
Immune-mediated
If infection is superficial, therapy consists of topical
Atopic blepharitis can be treated with topical steroids,
 antibiotic; if the infection is deep, systemic antibiotics are
oral antihistamines, or intermittent oral glucocorticoids.
usually required. Autogenous bacterins may be helpful in
Desensitization in an atopic animal is an adjunct or
recurrent or resistant cases74.
alternative   to  systemic
 glucocorticoids when the
Chalazions are treated by_ incision and curettage
offending allergen is known0.
through the conjunctival side. Tissue should be sent for
 Drug eruption/hypersensitivity is treated by withdrawal
histopathology as neoplasia may mimic a chalazion.
of the causative drug, with or without immunosuppressive
Acute hordeolum is treated by lancing from the con-
medication, if lesions do not spontaneously improve
junctival surface and a topical antibiotic administered for
within 2-3 weeks of starting treatment.
EYELIDS
171
Eosinophilic granuloma complex in cats is commonly
Discoid lupus erythematosis may also be successfully
treated with intermittent injectable or oral gluco-
treated with tetracycline and niacinamide, and dogs with
corticoids. Refractory lesions may respond to chloram-
localized disease may benefit from topical administration
bucil, gold salts, or radiation therapy. Cats with
of glucocorticoids or cyclosporine in vegetable oil. VKH
recurrent or refractory lesions should be evaluated and
of systemic glucocorticoids and azathioprine, in addition 
allergy, atopy, food allergy).
to topical ophthalmic glucocorticoids and atropine. After
Autoimmune diseases are usually treated with
remission is induced, drugs are slowly tapered over
systemic immunosuppressive doses of glucocorticoids
several months to the lowest dose of systemic drug(s)
which may be combined with chemotherapy with
which controls the disease.
azathioprine or cyclophosphamide in severe cases65, 68
After remission is induced, drugs are slowly tapered over
Lacerations
several months to the lowest dose which controls the
 Lacerations of the eyelids are common in all species. In
 disease. Glucocorticoids alone are inadequate in about
the dog and cat, lid lacerations are usually the result of
50% of pemphigus disease cases81. Refractory cases may
either fighting or automobile accidents. In large animals 
au u leu e 1o auim paqieq Aq pasneo Alensn aue kau1
stall. Lacerations should not be dismissed as not worth
the trouble to suture, as they may become quite
disfiguring if not treated. The usual sequela is a notch or
coloboma that allows spillage of tears or cicatrization,
which may result in entropion, ectropion, or trichiasis
7.68
that progresses to a secondary keratitis. Lacerations are
of two main types:
 Perpendicular to the lid margin. Even small nicks in
the lid margin will remain as notches due to the
orbicularis oculi muscle separating the edges (7.68).
This opposing tension must be considered when
repairing the lid or removing masses from the eyelid.
 Parallel to the lid margin. Lacerations of this type
 often consist of a very narrow pedicle of skin that is
tempting to excise ( 7.69). It is important to remember
that the pedicle contains the normal mucocutaneous 
junction of the lid. A common sequela to excision of
this pedicle is for trichiasis to develop months later
(7.70). This type of laceration does not have the
 opposing muscle tension pulling it apart.
Clinical signs
7.68 Lid laceration in a dog running perpendicular to the lid
The signs of lacerations are usually obvious but the globe
margin. Note the separation of the wound edges due to
should be examined for penetrating or perforating wounds.
orbicularis oculi tension.
7.69
7.70
7.69 Lid laceration in a dog running parallel to the margin, with a
7.70 Sequela of excision of a lid tag from a parallel laceration of
aq sAemle pinous shei asaul 'uibdeu pll aul buuieiuon bei mouneu 
the lid margin in a horse. Note the acquired coloboma, trichiasis of
sutured back in place.
the remaining cilia, and small hairs on the cornea in the
mucocutaneous junction.
172
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
Therapy
7.71
Lacerations should be repaired as soon as possible as
chronicity makes the edges indurated and thicker,
detracting from the cosmetic appearance. Typically, a
significant amount of debris and hair must be removed
from the wound. When preparing the site for surgery, if
clipping of adjacent hair is done, the wound should be
filled with sterile lubricant gel to trap the hair. The gel
with the hair can then be removed from the wound.
Minimal debridement is recommended, because most
tags of tissue remain viable.
 Lacerations perpendicular to the lid margin should
have at least two layers of sutures placed to minimize the
dehiscing force of the orbicularis muscle83. A layer of
5-0 to 6-0 gut or absorbable suture is placed in the
conjunctiva and subconjunctival stroma, with the knots
tied within the tissue so the cornea is not irritated.
7.71 Method of full lid thickness excision of small lid tumors. Note
4-0 monofilament is suitable for the muscle-skin layer.
the incision is perpendicular to the lid margin to give maximum
Extra care should be taken to appose the lid margin
tumor removal and minimum loss of lid margin (A]. Full thicknes5
accurately, as this is the most obvious cosmetic
excisions or lacerations should be closed in two layers (B). Different
landmark. If the margin is not smooth, the suture must
suturing strategies are shown to keep the suture ends from contact
be repositioned until the margin is in apposition, as it 
with the cornea (C, D).
will not self-correct. It is also important to develop a
strategy to avoid the suture ends from rubbing on the
cornea (see 7.71 for methods)84. Topical antibiotics are
 usually adequate postoperati ve therapy.
7.72
7.72 Eyelid
sebaceous
The temptation to excise pedicles of lid that contain the
 adenoma in a
mucocutaneous junction {lid margin) should be resisted
dog. Note the
and the pedicles should be sutured back in place. The 
cauliflower
vast majority of even thin pedicles will remain viable
 appearance. The
enough to preserve the normal lid margin.
site of origin can
be followed to
 the conjunctival
Eyelid neoplasia in the dog
side of the lid.
Lid neoplasia is very common in the dog but, fortunately,
75% are benign. Sebaceous adenomas, papillomas, and
melanomas account for about 82% of lid tumors, and more
than one type may occur in an individual. The most
common tumor arises from the meibomian gland and,
depending on the differentiation, will be termed as
sebaceous hyperplasia, sebaceous adenoma, adenocar-
cinoma, epithelioma, or basal cell tumor (7.72-7.74). The
1.73
7.74
7.73 Fine needle aspirate from a sebaceous adenoma in a dog.
7.74 Histopathology of a canine lid tumor diagnosed a5 a sebaceou5
Several vacuolate sebaceous epithelial cells are present, with fewer
epithelioma. The section is composed of large numbers of basaloid or
basophilic reserve cells (Wright's stain].
reserve cells arranged in lobules, with fewer mature sebaceous
epithelial cells (H&E stain).
EYELIDS
173
7.75
average age for developing lid neoplasia is 8 years, and
breeds such as the Boxer, Collie, Poodle, English Springer
 Spaniel, and American Cocker Spaniel have a higher
incidence than the hospital population. While about 25%
 are malignant, metastasis is rare?s. In the author's experi-
 ence the exception is mast cell tumor of the lid (7.75); this
probably has the worst lid tumor prognosis in the dog.
Fortunately, mast cell tumor of the lid is not common and is
easily diagnosed with fine needle aspirates (7.76). Other
tumors which are occasionally observed are squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC), fibroma and fibrosarcoma, and
histiocytoma6, 7 Two lid tumors typically occur in young
dogs: viral papilloma (7.77) and histiocytoma (7.78, 7.79),
and they are unique in that they develop rapidly and usually
regress spontaneously. Viral papillomas of the lid may occur
concurrently with oral papillomas. The papilloma is usually
typical in appearance with a pedunculated, cauliflower
hop aul hop e ui Apiden Aan padoaaap ieui aouni an isen 5i'4
 appearance. Surgical manipulation may result in multiple 
wa5 euthanized shortly after presentation, due to 5ystemic
papillomas occurring, and they may involve the conjunctiva
complications of disseminated mastocytosis. The tumor is easily
and cornea as well as the eyelidss8. The histiocytoma is
diagnosed by fine needle aspiration.
7.76
7.77
7.76 Fine needle aspirate from a mast cell tumor in a dog, with large
7.77 Viral-induced papilloma in a young Rottweiler dog. Papilloma5
round cells with nuclear and cytoplasmic pleomorphism. The
were also present in the mouth. Lesions were allowed to regres5
cytoplasrm contains basophilic cytoplasmic granules typical of mast
naturally over the follwing month.
 cells. A few eosinophils are present.
7.78
7.79
7.78 Histiocytoma of the upper lid of a young adult dog. Rapid
7.79 Fine needle aspirate of a histiocytoma in a dog. A monopopulation
onset, smooth broad-based lesion and age are indicators of
 of large cells with an oval, hyperchromatic nuclei and abundent
histiocytoma, and diagnosis is confirmed by fine needle aspiration.
Cytoplasm typical of histiocytes can be seen (wright's stain].
The lesion regressed spontaneously.
174
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
typically a broad-based, elevated red lesion with a relatively
Molander-McCrary et al.93 found no correlation with
smooth surface (7.78).
biologic behavior and histologic grading of the tumor, 
Systemic histiocytosis of Bernese Mountain Dogs
produces multiple cutaneous nodules over the body, with
subtypes based on these two characteristics. Wilcock
the eyelids being one of the common sites89.
et al91 found that about 75% (65/85) were solitary,
discrete nodules with mild atypia that behaved benignly,
Eyelid neoplasia in the cat
pue sisoiaosiue aow pey dnoua siul u uaaas qanoui
Eyelid neoplasia is rare in the cat. The most common lid
mitotic activity and spread or recurred within 3 months. A
tumor of the cat is SCC. The lesion is associated with
second morphologic form with histiocytic-looking mast
actinic radiation and usually occurs in white-furred cats.
cells that were often multiple nodules, occurred pre-
The location is usually on the lower lid near the medial
dominantly in young Siamese cats, and often regressed
canthus and most are erosive (7.80). Metastasis does not
spontaneously over 2 years.
appear to be common or early, but recurrences are
common. Other neoplasms of the feline lids are papilloma,
Eyelid neoplasia in the horse
adenoma/adenocarcinoma, basal cell tumor, fibroma/
Squamous cell carcinoma
fibrosarcoma, neurofibroma, mast cell tumor, hemangio-
Eyelid neoplasia in the horse and cow is less common
sarcoma, and xanthoma9°. In the cat, cutaneous mast cell
than in the dog. SCC is the most common tumor of the
tumors are usually benign91-93. Berger and Scott92 and
eye and adnexa in horses, and the eyelid is the least
common site (23% of cases) compared to the third eyelid
or limbus. It is usually found on the lower lid or medial
canthal region (7.81, 7.82). Ultraviolet radiation is
7.80
believed to be the primary excitor of SCC. About 16% of
SCCs may be bilateral. The incidence increases with age,
with the mean age ranging from 9-12 years, and is more
common in neutered animals. Males are twice as likely to
be affected as females, and the gelding is five times more
susceptible than the stallion. The Draft horse and
Appaloosa are at greater risk, as are horses with white,
creamello, and palomino hair colors94-98.
In spite of the well known predisposition for SCC
in color dilute horses, it is not unusual to observe 
SCC in hea vily pigmented horses such as bays and
in young adult horses of any coat color.
SCC has a high reccurrence rate (≥30%) but a late and
low metastatic rate. Reports vary as to whether the site
of origin influences the prognosis, with one report citing
7.80 Squamous cell carcinoma of the lower medial eyelid in a white
a higher recurrence with eyelid SCC than from the third
cat. A slowly progressive, proliferative erosive lesion in a white-furred
eyelid or limbus97, 98.
cat is a typical presentation.
7.81
7.82
7.81 Squamous cell carcinoma of the lower lateral lid in a white
7.82 Histopathology of a squamous cell carcinoma, showing sheets
horse. Previous brachytherapy had been given, but the lesion had 
of neoplastic squamous epithelial cells that show anisokaryosis.
recurred. Cryotherapy was administered and the horse was lesion-free
anisocytosis, and occasionally dyskeratosis. Several mitotic figures are
for at least 2 years. No plastic surgery was performed.
present. The horse does not typically exhibit epithelial pearls with 
5quamous cells, as does the cow (H&tE stain].
EYELIDS
175
Sarcoid
 presented with periocular alopecia or altered hair color
Sarcoid is the second most common tumor of the eyelid and
and had small subdermal nodules or plaques. Verrucose
the most common tumor in general in the horse. It has been
sarcoids had alopecia and hyperkeratosis of the periocular
associated with bovine papillomavirus and with 
a
region, with varying amounts of ulceration of the surface
retrovirus9,100. New molecular biology techniques have
and subdermal nodules. Nodular sarcoids were either a
confirmed the presence of bovine papilloma virus DNA in
well defined solid nodule or multiple nodules with an
the vast majority of equine sarcoidsio1, Early reports did
intact skin, or nodules with varying amounts of skin
not demonstrate a predilection for breed, sex, or coat color.
ulceration. Fibroplastic sarcoids were either pedunculated
Unlike most neoplasia, it is usually found in young horses.
or
 broad-based and were proliferative, with diffuse
A genetic predisposition has been demonstrated and
ulceration. Mixed sarcoids had characteristics of two or
related to the equine leukocyte antigen102, 103 Piscopo104
 more types, while a malignant sarcoid was one that had
reported a predisposition in the Quarter horse, Appaloosa,
grown rapidly and infiltrated deeply into the adjacent
and Arabian. When found periocularly, the lesions are
tissues and orbit. Lesions may be found on either the upper
proliferative, may have erosions, and are often firmly
or lower lids and canthal regions. While sarcoids may be
anchored to deeper structures (7.83, 7.84). Knottenbelt
locally invasive and frequently recur after therapy, they
and Kelly1os described six forms of periocular sarcoids and
 have no tendency for internal metastasis106. About one-
correlated the type with response to various therapies
third of horses with sarcoid may undergo spontaneous
administered over a 25-year period. Occult sarcoid
regression unrelated to any specific clinical parameter or
Other tumors described as arising from the equine lid
include mast cell tumor, lymphosarcoma, schwannoma,
7.83
and papillomas, 108, 109?
Eyelid neoplasia in the cow
SCC of the eye and adnexa is a significant economic
disease in cattle. It is found most frequently in the
Hereford, Hereford cross, Simmental, and Shorthorn
breeds, although it has been observed in a variety of other
breeds. The eyelids are the least common site for
involvement, accounting for only about 12-15% of cases
(7.85)110. The etiology is multifactorial, with ultraviolet
light and genetic predisposition being crucial. The amount
of circumocular pigmentation may be associated with
site of involvement in the cow (see Chapter 10, p.241).
Diagnosis
 A tentative diagnosis of eyelid neoplasia is usually made
7.83 Equine nodular sarcoid of the lateral upper lid. The lesion is
on appearance and confirmed by biopsy of the lesion.
firm and anchored.
7.84
7.85
7.84 Histopathology of an equine sarcoid. The dermis is composed of
7.85 Atypical appearance of a squamous cell carcinoma of the eyelid
interlacing bundles of spindle-shaped cells that form a palisading
in a young heifer.
interface with the epidermis. The epidermis has prominent rete-pegs
into the sheet of neoplastic spindle cels (H&E stain].
176
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
Biopsy of equine lid sarcoids may be
a noticeable shortening of the fissure. Tumor excision
contraindicated unless followed by definitive
should minimize lid margin excision while maximizing
tumor removal (7.71).
Accurate apposition of the lid margins is critically
 important for cosmesis, as is care to avoid sutures rubbing
Therapy
on the cornea. Large lesions require mobilization of
The appropriate therapy for eyelid neoplasia varies with
adjacent skin to repair the defect. A wide variety of plastic
the type and extent of the tumor, history of previous
procedures ha ve been advocated for repair of large defects,
therapy, systemic health, and resources available. As
but all have the disadvantage of not having a normal lid
most lid tumors are benign or slow to metastasize, the
margin,whichmayresultin trichiasis atalater datl17
most common complication is local regrowth. In most
The Cutler-Beard procedure can be used to fill a variety of
instances of benign tumors there is no clear evidence that
defects along the length of the upper or lower lids 7.8)118
one form of therapy is superior to another; selection of a
This procedure has given excellent cosmetic results, but
particular modality is based on familiarity and what is
the major disadvantage is that it is a two-stage procedure
a vailable to the clinician.
requiring two anesthetic episodes, as with many other
plastic procedures. Rather than try to master and
Surgical excision
remember a wide variety of plastic techniques that are
Excision is the main form of tumor therapy in practice,
rarely utilized, it is probably more pragmatic to be familiar
mainly because it does not require additional instru-
with one or two versatile techniques.
mentation. Surgery may consist of full-thickness or
 Surgical resection of equine lid neoplasia can present a
partial lid excision, depending on the tumor. The dog
challenge because of the lack of mobile skin. This
normally has adequate skin on the lid to accommodate
combined with a high recurrence rate with sarcoids
the removal of one-quarter to one-third of the lid margin
(35-50%)103 makes surgical resection one of the least
without a permanent cosmetic blemish. Toy dogs with
desirable forms of therapy in the horse. Excision of lid
small palpebral fissures, and cats, may not tolerate more
 SCC in cattle is frequently performed, and is preferable to
that one-quarter of the lid length being removed without
enucleation if there is no bony involvement. Mobile skin
makes excision followed by an advancing skin flap {H-
plasty) a reasonable procedure in the field (7.86, 7.87)ji19.
Cryotherapy
7.86
Cryotherapy is a rapid, rather imprecise means of
treating many tumors. When dealing with potentially
 malignant tumors, thermocouples should be implanted
to ensure adequate freezing of -20°C (-4°F). Therapy
can often be performed under sedation, which is an
advantage in the aged animal. Roberts and Severin87
reported that the rate of tumor recurrence in the dog
after surgery and cryotherapy was similar, although the
mean recurrence time after cryotherapy was 7.4 months
versus 28.3 months for surgery. In the author's
experience, nitrous oxide cryotherapy has a high rate of
7.87
7.86 H-plasty performed for excision of the lesion in 7.85.
7.87 The case in 7.85 at the time of suture removal 3 weeks later.
The location of the lesion allowed sparing of the lid margin.
EYELIDS
177
regrowth even with benign forms of lid neoplasia in
 and results in better cosmetic results than surgery and,
dogs. Liquid nitrogen, while usually more cumbersome
compared to radiation teletherapy, it requires fewer
to maintain and administer, has demonstrated its
anesthetic episodes. In the horse, brachytherapy with
effectiveness in treating a variety of neoplasms, especially
iridium-192 resulted in 87% lesion-free for sarcoid, and
82% for SCC at 1 year. At 5 years, 74% and 64% were
described cryotherapy as one of the more effective
lesion-free for sarcoid and  SCC  respectively126.
therapies for equine sarcoid, although Knottenbelt and
Knottenbelt and Kelly10s had almost 100% success with
 Kellyios found a high rate of recurrence with cryotherapy
 treating equine sarcoids with brachytherapy. Temporary
 and a transformation to a more aggressive sarcoid.
implants utilized are either cesium-137 or iridium-192.
Surgical debulking of the lesions should precede
The seeds are gamma radiation emitters, and require that
cryotherapy of large tumors. Despite sloughing of frozen
the animal be isolated from human exposure until the
tissue, the lid is usually able to maintain its architecture
seeds are subsequently removed. Disadvantages are the
without the need for secondary reconstructive surgery.
relative unavailability and cost of the implants, and
radiation exposure to the radiologist during implan-
Hyperthermic therapy
The use of heat to kill neoplastic cells became readily
superficial SCC in all species after debulking.
available with the advent of a commercial unit designed
to treat SCC in cattle (7.89). Hyperthermic therapy is
 Brachytherapy, while not widely available in practice,
based on the observation that neoplastic cells are killed
 is the most successful means of managing difficult lid
by temperatures of 50°℃ (122°F). It provides a rapid
tumors such as equine sarcoids, aggressive SCC of all
means of therapy and requires a minimum of technical
species, and canine mast cell tumors.
skills. The results of treating SCC with cryotherapy and
90% of squamous cell tumors regressed and the site
Chemotherapy
remained free of tumor for over 1 year. The lesions
Chemotherapy is rarely performed in the dog, due to the
should be debulked prior to therapy, and multiple
relatively benign nature of most lid tumors, the variety of
oe s ada aa ua ag a sadei
 other treatment modalities that are usually successful,
been successful in treating equine sarcoid after
and the lack of responsive tumors. The author has rarely
used chemotherapy for lid neoplasia in the dog, apart
with hyperthermia in ten Equidae involving 13 sarcoids.
from palliative glucocorticoid chemotherapy for mast
The initial therapy was a combination of debulking and
cell tumors. The injection of sterile saline in some mast
hyperthermia treatment and hyperthermia was repeated
cell tumors has been effective, resulting in lysis of cells
at 2-4-week intervals, with a minimum of five therapies.
 and shrinkage of lesions129.
 In the horse, intralesional cisplatin in sesame oil (1 mg/ml
Radiation therapy
 given every 2 weeks for 4 treatments) has been successful
Radiation therapy is often not readily available, but it is
 in treating periocular sarcoid and SCC. One year relapse-
a very effective therapy for SCC in all species and equine
free rates were 87% for sarcoid and 65% for SCC130.
sarcoid. Brachytherapy,
.or the implantation
of
When cisplatin intratumoral injections were combined
encapsulated radioactive
 materials, has been used
with surgical debulking for SCC and sarcoid in the horse,
extensively in malignant lid tumors of all species.
the relapse interval was 41 months. The concurrent use
Brachytherapy is more likely to prevent local recurrence
with surgery did not interfere with wound healing131.
7.88
7.89
7.88 Lliquid nitrogen cryotherapy unit. Delivery may be by a contact
 7.89 Commercial hyperthermic unit treating a squamous cell
probe as shown, or by a spray.
carcinoma of the lower lid in a horse, after debulking the lesion. The
tissue is heated to 50°C (122°F] between the probes, and treatment
time is typically 30 seconds at a site.
178
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
Cisplatin injections are appropriate to use on eyelid
 Immunotherapy has been most popular in the treatment 
lesions, but not on globe lesions due to toxicity to the eye.
of equine sarcoid, although it has also been successful in
The clinician should be cautious with intralesional
treating a SCC that had not responded to cryotherapy136.
injections of toxic preparations such as cisplatin, since the
Due to the large size of many of the lid lesions, regression
drug frequently leaks or oozes out of the surface of the
 rather than resection is desirable. Immunotherapy utilizing
tumor or, if the lesion is dense, the syringe may blow off
intralesional bacillus of Calmette and Guerin {BCG) or
the needlle, exposing the clinician to the drug.
BCG cell wall fraction in oil has had a high cure rate. The
 S-fluorouracil (S-FU) has been used topically for SCC
use of the cell wall fraction lessens the chance of
and equine sarcoids, with some success. Knottenbelt and
anaphylaxis. The tumor is usually saturated or given about
Kelly105s reported a 35-66% success rate with occult and
1 ml/cm? at 2-3 week intervals until regression is complete.
verrucose sarcoids, with two different forms of topical 5-FU.
Multiple therapies are needed and swelling, necrosis, and
exudation at the injection site can be expected, with the
Immunotherapy
most reaction occurring after the second injection. A 93%
Immunotherapy has been used for both SCC in cattle and
cure rate has been obtained if used in periocular sarcoids
equine sarcoid. While bovine SCC has been responsive,
< 7 cm (2.7 in) in diameter137-139. The evaluation of sarcoid 
the immunostimulant used was a mycobacterium cell
treatment in the horse and SCC treatment in the cow is
wall fraction, which had the disadvantage of turning the
 animals into tuberculin reactorsl32. A phenol-saline
regression with these tumors.
extract of bovine SCC also produced regression of lesions
when injected intramuscularly133, Regrowth may occur
The most important point to emphasize to owners
and be resistant to further immunization.
 of all species with SCC is that because of the
Oral cimetidine may be used as an immunomodulator
underlying genetic predisposition for SCC, the long-
for eyelid tumors. It has been reported as a treatment for
term outcome of therapy is not cure but control.
cutaneous equine melanoma and, in humans, to treat
While the present lesion may be cured', the
 ocular papillomatosisl34, It would seem most logical to
 probability for new lesions in the same or opposite
use immunomodulation to hasten resolution in condi-
eye is significant and periodic examinations for the
tions that have a normal involution, such as canine
life of the patient are critical to initiate treatment at
histiocytomas and papillomas in all species13s
an early stage.
EYELIDS
179
REFERENCES
1 Miller W, Braund K (1991) Morphologic
15 Schaffer E, Wiesner H, von Hegel G
29 Long R {1991) Treatment of distichiasis
 and histochemical features of the
{1988) Multiple oculare kolobome
by conjunctival resection. Journat of
normal canine orbicularis oculi muscle.
(MOC) mit persistierender
Small Anwmat Practice 32:146-148.
Progress in Veterinary and Comparative
 pupillarmembran beirm schneleopard
30 Ris RC (1982) Basal meibomian gland
Ophthatmotogy 1:150-154.
(Panthera uncia). Tieraztl Prax
cautery: a surgical technique for
2 Thomas JW (1961) The nerve supply to
16:87-91.
distichiasis. Proceedings of the Americam
 the nictitating membrane of the cat.
16 Bellhorn RW, Barnett KC, Henkind P
College of Veterinary Ophthatmology
Journat of Anatomy 95:371-785.
{1971) Ocular colobomas in domestic
and Internationat Society of Veterinary
 3 Powell C (1988) Innervation to the canine
cats. Journat of the American Veterinary
Ophthatmology, pp. 88-93.
lacrimal glands. Masters Thesis,
Medicat Association 159:1015-1021.
31 Chambers ED, Slatter DH (1984)
University of Georgia, pp. 1-17.
17 Roberts SR, Bistner SI {1968) Surgical
Cryotherapy (N²O) of canine distichiasis
4 Robertson BF, Roberts SM (1995) Lateral
correction of eyelid agenesis in the
and trichiasis: an experimental and
canthus entropion in the dog, Part I.
feline. Modern Veterinary Practice
clinical report. Journat of Small Animat
VeteTinary Comparative Ophthatmology
49:40-43.
Practice 25:647-659.
5:151-156.
18 Dziezyc J, Millichamp N (1989) Surgical
 32 Liu D, Natiella J, Schaefer A, Gage A
5 Miller M, Christensen G, Evans H (1964)
correction of eyelid agenesis in a cat.
(1984) Cryosurgical treatment of eyelids
The venous system. In: Anatormy of the
Jotrnat of the American Animat
and lacrimal drainage ducts of the
 Dog. WB Saunders, Philadelphia.
Hospitat Association 25:513-516.
Rhesus monkey. Archives of
p. 393.
19 Doherty MJ (1973) A bridge-flap
Ophthatmology 102:934-939.
6 Lee R, Griffiths IR {1972) A comparison
blepharorrhaphy method for eyelid
33 Wheeler CA, Severin GA {1984)
 of cerebral arteriography and cavernous
reconstruction in the cat. Journaf of the
Cryosurgical epilation for the treatment 
 sinus venography in the dog. Journat of
American Animat Hospitat Association
 of distichiasis in the dog and cat.Journat
Small Animat Practice 12:225-238.
9:238-241.
of the American Animat Hospitat
 7 Gum G (1991) Physiology of the eye. In:
20 Wolfer JC (2002) Correction of eyelid
Association 20:877-884.
Veterinary Ophthatmology, 2nd edn. K
 coloboma in four cats using subdermal
34 Stades FC (1987) A new method for
Gelatt (ed). Lea and Febiger,
collagen and a modified Stades
surgical correction of upper eyelid
Philadelphia, p. 124.
technique. Veterinary Ophthatmalogy
trichiasis-entropion: operation method.
 8 Carrington SD, Bedford PG, Guillon JP.
5:269-272.
Journat of the American Animat
Woodwards EG (1987) Polarized light
 21 Koch SA (1979) Congenital ophthalmic
Hospitat Association 23:603-606.
 biomicroscopic observations on the pre-
abnormalities in the Burmese cat.
 35 Stades FC, Boeve MH (1987) Surgical
corneal tear film. 3. The normal tear
Jotrnat of the American Veterinary
correction of upper eyelid
film of the cat. Journat of Smatl Animat
Medicat Association 174:90-91.
trichiasis-entropion: results and follow-
Practice 28:821-826.
22 Brandsch H, Schmidt V (1981)
up in 55 eyes. Journat of the American
 9 Carrington SD, Bedford PG, Guillon JP,
 Erbanalytische untersuchungen zum
Aniat Hospitat Association
Woodward EG (1987) Polarized light 
dermoid des auges beim hund.
23:607-610.
 biomicroscopic observations on the pre-
Veterinary Medicine 37:305-306.
36 Helper LC, Magrane WG (1970)
corneal tear film. 1. The normal tear
23 Barkyoumb S, Leipold H {1984) Nature
 Ectopic cilia of the canine eyelid.
film of the dog. Journal of Small Animat
and cause of ocular dermoids in
Journat of Smalt Animat Practice
Practice 28:605-622.
Hereford cattle. Veterinary Pathology
11:185-189.
10 Aguirre G, Rubin LF {1970)
21:316-324.
37 Hacker DV (1989) Ectopic cilia in a
Ophthalmitis secondary to congenitally
 24 Lawson DD {1973) Canine distichiasis.
Siamese cat. Companion Animat
open eyelids in a dog. Journat of the
Journat of Smaff Animat Practice
Pracitice 19:29-31.
American Veterinary Medicat
14:469-478.
38 Stades FC, Boeve MH, van der
Association 156:70-72.
25 Halliwell WH {1967) Surgical
Woerdt A {1992) Palpebral fissure
11 Gelatt KN {1974) Premature eyelid
management of canine distichia. Journat
length in the dog and cat. Progress in
opening and exposure keratitis in a
of the American Veterinary Medicat
Veterinary and Comparative
puppy. Veterinary MedicineSmatl
Association 150:874-879.
 Ophthamotogy 2:155-161.
Aniat Clinician 69:863.
26 Gelatt KN (1969) Resection of cilia-
 39 Kaswan RL, Martin CL, Doran CC
12 McCuistion WR (1965) Pulmonary
bearing tarsoconjunctiva for correction
(1988) Blepharoplasty techniques for
 edema and persistent ankyloblepharon
of canine distichia. Journaf of the
canthus closure. Companion Animat
in puppies. Veterinary Medicine/Smatl
Armerican Veterinary Medicat
Practice 2:6-8.
Animal Clinician 60:1206-1207.
Association 155:892-897.
40 Rubin L (1989) Inberited Eye Diseases
13 Martin C, Stiles J, Willis M (1997)
 27 Campbell LH (1977) Conjunctival
in Purebred Dogs. Williams and
 Feline colobomatous syndrome.
resection for the surgical management of
Wilkins, Baltimore.
Veterinary and Comparative
canine distichiasis. Journat of the
41 Littlejohn A {1954) Entropion in
Ophthatmology 7:39-43.
Armerican Veterinary Medicat
newborn lambs. Veterinary Record
14 Gripenberg U, Blomqvist L, Pamilo P, et
Association 171:275-276.
66:211.
af. (1985) Multiple ocular coloboma
 28 Bedford PGC (1971) Eyelashes and
42 Crowley J, McGloughlin P (1963)
(MOC) in snow leopards (Pantherd
adventitious cilia as causes of corneal
Hereditary entropion in lambs.
uncia). Clinical report, pedigree analysis,
irritation. Journat of Small Anmat
Veterinary Record 75:1104.
chromosome investigations, and serum
Practice 12:11-17.
protein studies. Hereditas 102:221-229.
180
OpHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
 43 Lenarduzzi RF (1983) Management of
57 Rebhun W, Mirro E, Georgi M, Kern T
70 Herrera HD, Duchene AG {1998)
eyelid problems in chinese Shar Pei
(1981) Habronemic
 Uveodermateological syndrome
 puppies. Veterinary Medicine/Small
 blepharoconjunctivitis in horses. Journat
(Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome)
Animal Clinician 78:548-550.
of the American Veterinary Medicat
with generalized depigmentation in a
44 Wyman M (1971) Lateral canthoplasty.
Association 179:469-472.
 Dachshund. Veterinary Ophthatology
Journat of the American Animat
 58 Doughterty J, McCulley J, Silvany R,
1(1):47-51.
Hospitat Association 7:196-201.
Meyer D (1991) The role of tetracycline
71 Vercammen F, Berkvens D, Le Ray D,
45 Wyman M, Wilkie DA {1988) New
in chronic blepharitis. Investigative
Vervoort J (1997) Development of a
surgical procedure for entropion
Ophthalmotogy and Visuat Science
slide ELISA for canine leishmaniasis and
correction: tarsal pedical technique.
32:2970-2975.
comparison with four serological tests.
Journat of the American Animat
 59 Pena MT, Roura X, Davidson MG
Veterimary Record 153:328-330.
Hospitat Association 24:345-349.
(2000) Ocular and periocular
 72 Medleau L (1994) Using ivermectin to
46 Jensen HE (1979) Canthus closure.
 manifestation of leishmaniasis in dogs:
treat parasitic dermatoses in small 
Compendium on Continuing Education
105 cases (1993-1998). Veterinary
animals. Veterinary Medicine
for the Practicing Veterinarian
Ophthatmotogy 3:35-41.
89:770-774.
10:735-741.
60 Kontos VJ, Koutinas AF (1993) Old
 73 Bridges E (1985) The use of ivermectin
 47 Moore CP (1982) Multiple indications
world canine leishmaniasis.
to treat genital cutaneous habronemiasis
for pocket-flap canthotomy in the
Compendium on Continuing Edtucation
in a stallion. Compendtu on 
canine. In: Praceedings of the American
for the Practicing Veterinaricn
Continuing Education for the Practicing
Society of Veterinary Ophthatmology
15:949-959.
Veterimarian 7:S94-S97.
and Internationat Society of Veterinary
61 Slappendel RJ, Ferrer L (1998)
74 Chambers ED, Severin GA (1984)
Ophthatmology, pp. 69-73.
Leishmaniasis. In: Infectious Diseases of
Staphylococcal bacterin for treatment of
48 Munger RJ, Carter JD {1984) A further
the Dog and Cat, 2nd edn. C Greene
chronic staphylococcal blepharitis in the
 modification of the
(ed). WB Saunders, Philadelphia,
dog. Journat of the American Veterinary
Kuhnt-Szymanowski procedure for
pp. 450-458.
Medicat Association 185:422-425.
correction of atonic ectropion in dogs.
62 Bond R, Curtis CF, Ferguson EA,
75 White SA, Rosychuch RAW, Reinke SI,
Journat of the American Animat
Mason IS, Rest J (2000) An idiopathic
Pardis M (1992) Use of tetracycline and
Hospitat Association 20:651-656.
 facial dermatitis of Persian cats.
niacinamide for treatment of
49 Kern T, Erb H {1987) Facial neuropathy
Veterinary Dermatotogy 11:35-11.
autoimmune skin disease in 31 dogs.
in dogs and cats: 95 cases {1975-1985).
63 Miller Jr WH (1979) Canine facial
Journat of the American Veterinary
Journat of the American Veterinary
dermatoses. Compendiurm on
Medicat Association 200:1497-1500.
Medicat Association 191:1604-1609.
Continuing Education for the Practicing
76 Rothstein E, Scott DW, Riis RC (1997)
50 Elder M (1993) Mersilene mesh and
Veter inarian 1:640-649.
Tetracycline and niacinamide for the
fascia lata in brow suspension: a
64 Latimer C, Dunstan RW (1987)
treatment of sterile
 comparative study. Ophthatmology
 Eosinophilic plaque involving eyelids of
 pyogranuloma/granuloma sysndrome in
Surgery 24:105-108.
a cat. Journat of the American Animat
a dog. Journat of the American Animat
 51 Kirschner S (1995) Modified brow sling
Hospitat Association 23:649-653.
Hosp ital Association 33:540-543.
technique for the upper lid entropion.
65 Manning TO, Scott DW, Kruth SA,
77 Moriello KA {1996) Treatment of feline
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
Sozanski M, Lewis RM {1980) Three
dermatophytosis. Fetine Practice
the American College of Veterinary
 cases of canine pemphigus foliaceus and
24:32-37.
Ophthatmmologists 25:68-69.
 observations on chrysotherapy. Journat
 78 Lester SJ, Kenyon JIM (1996) Use of
52 Willis M, Martin C, Stiles J, Kirschner S
of the American Animat Hospitat
allopurinol to treat visceral leishmaniasis
{1999) Brow suspension for treatment
Association 16:189-202.
in a dog. Journat of the American
of ptosis and entropion in dogs with
66 Scott DW, Miller Jr. WH, Lewis RM,
Veterinary Medicat Association
redundant facial skin folds. Journat of
Manning TO, Smith CA {1980)
209:615-617.
the American Veterinary Mediciat
Pemphigus erythematosus in the dog
79 Ginel PJ, Lopez LR, Molleda MMJ
Association 214:660-662.
and cat. Journat of the American
{1998) Use of allopurinol for
53 Barrie KP, Parshall CJ (1979) Eyelid
Animat Hospitat Association
maintenance of remission in dogs with
 pyogranulomas in four dogs. Journat of
16:815-822.
leishmaniasis. Journat of Small Anumat
the American Animat Hospitat
67 Walton DK, Scott DW, Smith CA,
Practice 39:271-274.
Association 14:433-437.
 Lewis RM (1981) Canine discoid lupus
 80 Scott DW (1981) Observations on
 54 Sansom J, Heinrich C, Featherstone H
erythematosus. Journat of the American
canine atopy. Journat of the American
(2000) Pyogranulomatous blepharitis in
Animat Hospitat Association
Aniat Hospitat Association
two dogs. Journat of Small Animat
17:851-858.
17:91-100.
Practice 41:80-83.
68 Caciolo Pl, Nesbitt GH, Hurvitz AI
81 Scott DW, Manning TO, Smith CA,
55 Rosenthal JJ (1975) Ctuterebra
(1984) Pemphigus foliaceus in eight cats
Lewis RM (1982) Observations on the
infestation of the conjunctiva in a
 and results of induction therapy using
immunopathology and therapy of
puppy. Veterinary MedicinefSmall
azathioprine. Journat of the American
canine pemphigus and pemphigoid.
Animat Clinician 70:462-463.
Animat Hospitat Association
Journat of the American Veterinary
56 Harris BP, Miller PE, Bloss JR,
20:571-577.
Medicat Association 180:48-52.
Pelliteri PJ (2000) Ophthalmomyiasis
69 Morgan RV (1989)
82 Ihrke PJ, Stannard AA, Ardans AA,
 interna anterior associated with
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome in
Griffin CE (1985) Pemphigus foliaceus
Cuterebra spp. in a cat. Journat of the
humans and dogs. Commpendiu on
in dogs: a review of 37 cases. Journal of
American Veterinary Medicat
Continuing Education for the Practicing
the American Veterinary Medicat
Association 216:352-355.
Veterinarian 11:1211-1218.
Association 186:59-60.
EYELIDS
181
83 Rebhun WC (1980) Repair of eyelid
98 Dugan S, Curtis C, Roberts S, Severin G
111 Anderson D, Lush J, Chambers D
Jacerations in horses. Veterinary
(1991) Epidemiologic study of
(1957) Studies on bovine ocular
MedicinefSmall Animal Clinician
ocular/adnexal squamous cell carcinoma
squamous carcinoma ('cancer eye'). II.
75:1281-1284.
in horses. Journat of the American
Relationship between eyelid
 84 Schoster JV (1988) Surgical repair of
Veterinary Medicat Association
 pigmentation and occurrence of cancer
equine eyelid lacerations. Veterinary
198:251-256.
eye lesions. Journat of Animat Science
Medicine/Smalt Animat Clinician
99 Cheevers W, Roberson S, Brassfield A,
16:739-746.
83:1042-1049.
Davis WC, Crawford TB {1982)
112 Nishimura H, Frisch J (1977) Eye
85 Krehbiel JD and Langham R F {1975)
 Isolation of a retrovirus from cultured
 cancer and circumocular pigmentation
 Eyelid neoplasms of dogs. American
equine sarcoid tumor cels. American
in Bos taurus and crossbred cattle.
Journat of Veterinary Research
Journat of Veterinary Research
Australian Journat of Experimentat
36:115-119.
43:804-806.
Agricuature and Animat Husbandry
86 Barrie K, Gelatt KN, Parshall CP (1982)
100 Trenfield K, Spradbrow P, Vanselow B
17:709-711.
 Eyelid squamous cel carcinoma in four
(1985) Sequences of papillomavirus
113 Gelatt KN {1967) Blepharoplastic
dogs. Journat of the American Aninat
DNA in equine sarcoids. Equine
procedures in horses. Journat of the
Hospitat Association 18:123-126.
Veterinary Journat 17:449-452.
Armerican Veterinary Medicat
 87 Roberts S, Severin G {1986) Prevalence
 101 Nasir L, Reid SW (1999) Bovine
Association 151:27-44.
 and treatment of palpebral neoplasms in
papillomaviral gene expression in equine
114 Gelatt KN, Blogg JR (1969)
the dog. American Veterinary Medicat
sarcoid tumours. Virus Research
Blepharoplastic procedures in small 
Association 10:1355-1359.
61{2):171-175.
animals. Journat of the American
88 Collier LL, Collins BK {1994) Excision
102 Lazary S, Gerber H, Glatt PA, Straub R
Animat Association 5:67-78.
and cryosurgical ablation of severe
{1985) Equine leucocyte antigens in
115 Blanchard GL, Keller WF (1976) The
periocular papillomatosis in a dog.
sarcoid-affected horses. Equine
rhomboid graft flap for the repair of
Journat of the Armerican Veterinary
Veterinary Journat 17(4):283-286.
extensive ocular adnexal defects. Journat
Medicat Associat ion 204(6):881-883.
103 Brostrom H, Fahlbrink E, Dubath ML,
of the American Animat Hospitat
89 Moore P (1984) Systemic histiocytosis of
Lazary S (1988) Association between
Association 12:576-580.
 Bernese Mountain Dogs. Veterinary
equine leucocyte antigens {ELA) and
116 Munger RJ, Gourley IM {1981) Cross-
Pathology 21:554-563.
equine sarcoid tumors in the population
lid flap for repair of large upper eyelid
90 Williams LW, Gelatt KN, Gwin RM
 of Swedish halfbreds and some of their
defects. Journat of the American
(1981) Ophthalmic neoplasms in the
families. Veterinary Immunology
Veterinary Medicat Association
cat. Journat of the American Animat
Immumopathology 19(3-4):215-223.
178:45-48.
Hospiat Association 17:999-1008.
104 Piscopo SE (1999) The complexities of
117 Hamilton HL, Whitley RD,
91 Wilcock B, Yager J, Zink M {1986) The
sarcoid tumors. Equine Practice
McLaughlin SA, Swaim SF (1999) Basic
 morphology and behavior of feline
21:14-18.
blepharoplasty techniques. Compendium
cutaneous mastocyctomas. Veterinary
 105 Knottenbelt DC, Kelly DF (2000) The
on Continuing Education for the
Pathology 23:320-324.
 diagnosis and treatment of periorbital
Practicing Veterinarian 21:946-953.
 92 Buerger R, Scott D {1987) Cutaneous
sarcoid in the horse: 445 cases from
118 Cutler N, Beard C (1955) A method
mast cell neoplasia in cats: 14 cases
1974 to 1999. Veterinary
for partial and total upper lid
{1975-1985). Journat of the Ammerican
161-691: 480p0g0
reconstruction. American Journat of
Veterinary Medicat Association
106 Tarwid J, Fretz P, Clark E {1985)
Ophthatology 39:1-7.
190:1440-1444.
Equine sarcoids: a study with emphasis
119 Welker B, Modransky PD, Hoffsis GF,
93 Molander-McCrary H, Henry C,
 on pathologic diagnosis. Compendiam
Wyman MW, Rings DM, Hull BL
Potter K, Tyler J, Buss M (1998)
on Continuing Edtucation for the
(1991) Excision of neoplasms of the
Cutaneous mast cell tumors in cats: 32
Practicing Veterinarion 7:S293-S300.
bovine lower eyelid by H-blepharoplasty.
cases (1991-1994). Journat of the
107 Studer U, Marti E, Stornetta D,
Veterinary Surgery 20:133-139.
American Animat Hospitat Association
Lazary S, Gerber H (1997) The therapy
120 Farris H, Fraunfelder F (1976)
34:281-284.
 of equine sarcoid with a non-specific
Cryosurgical treatment of ocular
94 Strafuss A {1976) Squamous cell
 immunostimulator: the epidemiology
 squamous cell carcinoma of cattle.
carcinoma in horses. Journat of the
and spontaneous regression of sarcoids.
Journat of the American Veterinary
American Veterinary Medicat
Schtweiz Arch Tierheitikd
Medicat Association 168:213-216.
Association 168:61-62.
139(9):385-391.
121 Holberg D, Withrow S (1979)
95 Lavach J, Severin G (1977) Neoplasia of 
108 Altera K, Clark L {1970) Equine
Cryosurgical treatment of palpebral
the equine eye, adnexa, and orbit: a
cutaneous mastocytosis. Pathologid
neoplasms: clinical and experimental
review of 68 cases. Journal of the
Veterinaria 7:43-45.
results. Veterinary Sturgery 8:68-73.
American Veterinary Medicat
109 Murphy C, Lavoie JP, Groff J,
122 Joyce J (1975) Cryosurgery for removal
Association 170:202-203.
Hacker D, Pryor P, Bellhorn RW (1989)
of equine sarcoids. Veterinary
96 Junge R, Sundberg J, Lancaster W
 Bilateral eyelid swelling atributable to
Medicine/Small Animat Clinic ian
(1984) Papillomas and squamous cell
lymphosarcoma in a horse. Journat of
70:200-203.
carcinomas of horses. Journaf of the
the American Veterinary Medicat
123 Grier R, Brewer WJ, Theilen G {1980)
American Veterinary Medicat
Association 194:939-942.
Hyperthermic treatment of superficial
Association 185:656-659.
110 Monlux A, Anderson W, Davis C
tumors in cats and dogs. Journat of the
 97 Schwink K (1987) Factors influencing
(1957) The diagnosis of squamous cell
American Veterinary Medicat
morbidity and outcome of equine ocular
carcinoma of the eye (cancer eye) in
Association 177: 227-232.
squamous cell carcinoma. Equine
cattle. American Journat of Veterinary
Veterinary Journat 19:198-200.
Research 28:5-34.
182
O pHThAlMIC DiseAse In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
124 Kainer R, Stringer J, Lueker D (1980)
130 Theon AP, Pascoe JR, Carlson GP,
135 Goetz TE, Ogilvie GK, Keegan KG,
 Hyperthermia for treatment of ocular
Krag DN {1993) Intratumoral
Johnson PJ (1990) Cimetidine for 
squamous cell tumors in cattle. Journat
chemotherapy with cisplatin in oily
treatment of melanomas in three horses.
of the American Veterinary Mediciat
emulsion in horses. Journat of the 
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
Association 176:356-360.
American Veterinary Medicat
Medicat Association 196:449-452.
125 Ford MM, Champagne ES,
Association 202(2):261-267.
136 McCalla T, Moore C, Collier LA
Giuliano EA, Galle LE, Kramer J,
131 Theon A, Pascoe J, Meagher D (1994)
{1992) Immunotherapy of periocular
Moore CP (2002) Radiofrequency
Perioperative intratumoral
squamous cell carcinoma with
hyperthermia as a treatment for equine
 administration of cisplatin for treatment
metastasis in a pony. Journat of the
 periocular sarcoids: ten cases.
of cutaneous tumors in Equidae. Journat
American Veterinary Medicat
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
of the American Veterinary Medicat
Association 200:1678-1681.
the American College of Veterinary
Association 205:1170-1176.
137 Wyman M, Rings M, Tarr M, Alden C
Ophthatmologists 33:29.
132 Kleinschuster S, Rapp H, Green S,
{1997) Immunotherapy in equine
126 Theon AP, Pascoe JR (1995) Iridium-
Bier J, Kampen K {1981) Efficacy of
sarcoid: a report of two cases. Journat
192 interstitial brachytherapy for equine
 intratumorally administered
of the American Veterinary Medicat
 periocular tumours: treatment results
mycobacterial cell walls in the treatment
Association 171:449-451.
and prognostic factors in 115 horses.
of cattle with ocular carcinoma. Journa!
 138 Murphy J, Severin G, Lavach J.
Equine Veterinary Journat
of the Nationat Cancer Institute
Helper D (1979) Immunotherapy in
27(2):117-121.
67:1165-1171.
ocular equine sarcoid. Journat of the 
127 Banks W, England RA (1973)
133 Hoffman D, Jennings P, Spradbrow P
American Veterinary Medicat
Radioactive gold in the treatment of 
[1981) Immunotherapy of bovine ocular
Association 174:269-272.
ocular squamous cell carcinoma of
squamous cell carcinomas with
139 Lavach J, Sullins K, Roberts S,
cattle. Journat of the Veterinary Medicat
 phenol-saline extracts of allogeneic
Severin G, et at. (1985) BCG treatment
Association 163:745-748.
 carcinomas. Austratian Veterinary
 of periocular sarcoid. Equine Veterinary
128 Turrel J, Koblik P {1983) Techniques of
Jourmal 57:159-162.
Journat 17:445-448.
afterloading iridium-192 interstitial
134 Shields CL, Lally MR, Singh AD,
brachytherapy in veterinary medicine.
Shields JA, Nowinski T {1999) Oral
Veterinary Radiology 24:278-283.
cimetidine (Tagamet) for recalcitrant,
129 Grier R, Kigurardo G, Schaffer C,
 diffuse conjunctival papilomatosis.
Pedrosa B, Myers R, Merkley DF,
American Journal of Ophthatmology
Touvenelle M (1991) Mast cell
128:362-364.
destruction by deionized water.
American Joturnat Veterinary Research
51:1116-1120.
183
8
Conjunctiva
and
Third Eyelid
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
2-3 mm posterior from the limbus, and is heaviest over
the rectus muscle insertions dorsally and ventrally. This is
The conjunctiva is a thin mucous membrane that lines the
clinically evident as the most difficult dissection area
posterior  surface  of  the  lids (palpebral  conjunctiva)  and
when performing conjunctival flap surgery.
reflects forward at the fornix or recess onto the globe (bulbar
The epithelium contains goblet cells that contribute to
conjunctiva). In animals lower than primates, it is also
the mucin layer of the tear film. The mucin allows an
reflected over a cartilage and glandular tissue to form the
aqueous solution to spread over a hydrophobic lipid corneal
membrana nictitans, or third eyelid in the medial-ventral
epithelium (8.1). The concentration of goblet cells varies
cul-de-sac. Depending on the location, the epithelium of the
with the area examined and, in the dog, they are most
conjunctiva is either stratified columnar or stratified
numerous in the lower medial fornix and are least numerous
squamous, and it is continuous with the comeal epithelium
 on the bulbar conjunctiva. The female dog has a greater
(8.1)1. The stem cells of the palpebral conjuctiva (rabbit) are
 density of goblet cells than the male. A lack of goblet cells
located at the mucocutaneous junction and migrate toward
results in a specific form of keratoconjunctivitis sicca
the fornix?. Presumably, the stem cells for the bulbar
(KCS)6, 7. The nerve supply of the conjunctiva is the long
conjunctiva reside at the limbus with the corneal stem cells.
ciliary nerve (ophthalmic division of the Vth cranial nerve).
Perilimbal pigment is present to a variable degree in
The third eyelid is well developed in domestic animals,
most animals. The presence of conjunctival pigment is a
while in higher primates it is a vestigial structure, the plica
protecting factor for development of squamous cell car-
semilunaris. It functions as a protective mechanism that is
cinomas, which are stimulated by ultraviolet {UV)
very active in grazing animals and birds, and is a source of
radiation. In the cow, perilimbal pigment has a herita-
tears. The movement of the third eyelid across the globe
bility factor of 0.s3, and pigmentation increases with
consists of a passive component and an active component,
age?. The conjunctival melanocytes migrate into the
the latter being found in birds and, perhaps, cats. The
cornea with corneal neovascularization, resulting in the
passive movement is produced when the globe is retracted
corneal pigmentation observed in an inflamed cornea4.
into the orbit by the retractor bulbi muscle, which results in
Tenon's capsule {or fascia) of the globe becomes
pressure on the base of the third eyelid pushing it forward.
intimately involved with the overlying conjunctiva about
Any condition that increases the orbital volume will push on
8.1 A
B
8.1 A: Bulbar conjunctiva of a dog near the fornix, consisting of stratified squamous epithelium with scattered goblet cells in the epithelium.
Note the loose stroma under the epithelium (HetE). B: Bulbar conjunctiva of a dog that has melanocytes scattered throughout the basal aspect
of the epithelium. The pigment is observed clinically and in large animals it is protective for development of squamous cell carcinoma.
184
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
the base of the third eyelid, and any decrease in orbital
A cluster of lymphoid follicles is found on the bulbar
volume may cause the globe to sink into the orbit and push
surface of the third eyelid in most animals (8.2). These
on the base of the third eyelid.
frequently become hyperplastic and hypertrophied with
 Birds lack a retractor bulbi muscle but have a very active
chronic antigenic stimulation. The margin of the third
third eyelid that is pulled from the dorsonasal quadrant
eyelid is usually pigmented, but individuals may lack
across the eye by the pyramidalis muscle, which originates
pigmentation in one or both eyes. Animals with
from the posterior globe?. The cat has been reported to
nonpigmented conjunctival surfaces are more prone to
have an active component of protrusion of the third eyelid
ocular irritation and neoplasia. In cattle, periocular
 due to slips of skeletal muscle that originate from the lateral
pigmentation has a heritability factor of 0.53 {about the
rectus muscle and insert near the free margin?. Innervation
same as lid pigmentation), increases with age, and is
is supplied by the VIth cranial nerve. These slips of skeletal
 protective for squamous cell carcinoma3, 1s.
 muscle were not confirmed by Nuyttens and Simoens10, but
aul oi yee ieui sds asnw yoos auu jodan pi ka
third eyelid; four protract and four retract the third eyelid,
EXAMINATION OF THE CONJUNCTIVA
and one has unknown function. These smooth muscles are
part of a fibroelastic plate that originates in the levator,
DIFFUSE LIGHT AND MAGNIFICATION
medial, ventral, and lateral rectus muscles.
The various conjunctival surfaces should be examined
 Similar dissections have not been reported for other
for hyperemia, chemosis, follicular development, type of
domestic animals, but most appear to have smooth muscle
exudation, mechanical factors, and involvement of other
that retracts the third eyelid tonically. Innervation of the
ocular or adnexal structures.
smooth muscle of the third eyelid in the dogll and the
MICROBIOLOGIC CULTURE
fibers arriving via the infratrochlear nerve, a branch of the
If cultures are indicated, swabs should be taken before
 ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve (Vth cranial
nerve). The smooth muscle in the ventral aspect of the
action, and before applying rose bengal stain due to its
third eyelid in the cat is innervated by sympathetic fibers
viricidal action16. Swabs should be plated immediately or
carried by the zygomatic branch of the maxillary division
placed in transport medium.
of the Vth cranial nervel2. Denervation results in
 protrusion of the third eyelid in Horner's syndrome.
SCHIRMER TEAR TEST (STT)
The third eyelid varies among species, but in general it
A STT should be performed in most cases of red eye to
consists of a T-shaped hyaline cartilage skeleton that is
evaluate for a sicca syndrome. It should be performed
covered with conjunctiva and has a gland enveloping the
before instilling topical drops. Sicca is a commonly
base (8.2). This gland is one of two lacrimal glands for
overlooked cause of chronic conjunctivitis.
each eye and is often referred to erroneously as the
Harderian gland. The true Harderian gland is deeper in
CONJUNCTIVAL SCRAPING
the orbit than the third eyelid gland, and is found only in
Conjunctival scrapings obtained with a spatula, cotton bud,
certain domestic animals such as the rabbit, cow, and
or cytology brush, and stained with either Giemsa or a quick
pigl3. These animals therefore have two glands asso-
stain for cytology and Gram stain for bacterial population,
ciated with the third eyelid. The secretions of the
are frequently helpful in making a specific etiologic diagnosis
 mammalian Harderian gland have a high lipid contentl4.
(Table 8.1). If indirect fluroescent antibody {IFA) staining is
to be performed, such as in the diagnosis of herpesvirus or
chlamydia, prior use of topical fluorescein should probably
be avoided. Conflicting evidence exists as to whether prior
staining of the comea and conjunctiva with fluorescein will
8.2
result in false-positive results with IFA staining17, 18
DOUBLE EVERSION OF THE LIDS
AND THIRD EYELID
Eversion of the lids is indicated, particularly in refractory
conjunctivitis and with refractive ulcerative keratitis, to
 make sure contributing mechanical factors such as an
LACRIMAL OUTFLOW
Chronic epiphora or a mucopurulent conjunctival
discharge, usually unilateral, may occur with obstruction
of the lacrimal outflow system, and thus must be
differentiated from conjuncti vitis.
MEIBOMIAN GLANDS
The meibomian glands may be the site of residual or
persistent infection that extends to the conjunctiva, or
8.2 Histologic section of a normal canine third eyelid. (A: cornea:
the source of irritating lipid breakdown products (see
B: gland of the third eyelid; C: cartilage; D: lymphoid follicles;
Blepharitis, p.165) resulting in chronic conjunctivitis.
E: palpebral surface.]
CONJUNCTIVA AND THIRD EYELID
185
Table 8.1 Cellular responses associated with
DISEASES OF THE CONJUNCTIVA:
 conjunctivitis
CONJUNCTIVITIS
INTRODUCTION/ETIOLOGY
Disease
 Cellular response
Conjunctivitis is the most commonly diagnosed ocular
 Acute bacterial
 Predominantly neutrophils, few 
disease in general practice. Chronic conjunctivitis is
 conjunctivitis
mononuclear cells, many bacteria,
frequently frustrating to treat, as the etiologic diagnosis is
degenerating epithelial cells
often presumptive and not based on laboratory results,
 Chronic bacterial
 Predominantly neutrophils, many
and the response to therapy is often inconclusive. How-
conjunctivitis
mononuclear cells, degenerate or
ever, neither veterinary nor medical ophthalmologists are
keratinized epithelial cells, goblet
very successful in arriving at a definitive diagnosis with
cells, bacteria may or may not be 
 seen, mucus, fibrin
CLINICAL SIGNS
Feline herpesviral
Neutrophils and mononuclear cell 
Hyperemia
conjunctivitis
numbers depend on stage of
Hyperemia of the conjunctiva is the hallmark of con-
infection
junctivitis and may vary in severity. Hyperemia of
 Feline mycoplasmal
Predominantly neutrophils, fewer
conjunctivitis should be distinguished from distension of
conjunctivitis
mononuclear cells, basophilic 
selected conjunctival veins draining the episcleral and
 coccoid or pleomorphic organisms
scleral veins. The latter is an important indicator of
on cell membranes
intraocular disease. The hyperemia of conjunctivitis is
Feline chlamydial 
Predominantly neutrophils,
diffuse and more severe toward the fornix and not
 conjunetivitis
mononuclear cells in subacute
restricted to a few large veins {8.3). The hyperemia of
cases are increased in number,
conjunctivitis is usually located in the palpebral con-
plasma cells, basophilic cytoplasmic
junctiva {8.4) but on occasion will involve all conjunc-
inclusions early in the disease
tival surfaces (8.3).
 Keratoconjunctivitis
Epithelial cells keratinized, goblet
sicca
cells, mucus, neutrophilic response
Chemosis
marked if there is infection,
 Conjunctivitis of acute onset produces variable degrees
bacteria
of chemosis (edema). A mild to moderate degree of
 Canine distemper
Varies with stage of disease: early:
chemosis is manifested by thicker folds of dorsal bulbar
 giant cells, mononuclear cells;
conjunctiva forming when the lid is rubbed against the
bulbar conjunctiva. The fluid retention, as well as the
later: neutrophils, goblet cells, and 
mucus. Infrequent cellular
hyperemia of the bulbar conjunctiva, obscures the epi-
inclusions
 scleral vessels and the underlying scleral venous plexus to
Allergic conjunetivitis
 Eosinophils, neutrophils may be
a variable degree. Shar Peis often ha ve the appearance of
chemosis (8.47), presumably due to increased amounts of
marked, basophils possible
glyosaminoglycans {mucin) in the conjunctival stroma,
similar to the subcutis (mucinosis).
8.3
8.4
8.3 Diffuse hyperemia of the palpebral and bulbar conjunctiva in a
 8.4 Typical appearance of conjunctivitis that preferentially involves
dog with conjunctivitis associated with atopy.
the palpebral conjunctiva more than the bulbar conjunctiva. Note 
chemosis (folds in conjunctiva] and diffuse hyperemia.
186
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRiNArY MeDiCINE
8.5
8.6
8.5 Marked chemosis without hyperermia in a cat. Chemosis of
8.6 Brownish-black waxy discharge in a cat with chlamydial
this degree without hyperemia is often due to topical medications
infection. Discharge is not specific for chlamydia, but is unique
or aller gens.
in certain cats for any conjunctival irritation.
8.8
8.7 Marked follicle formation visible on the palpebral conjunctiva
8.8 Mild ocular discomfort characteristic of cats with conjunctivitis.
 and palpebral surface of the third eyelid of a dog.
Note the mild blepharospasm with prominent third eyelid and ocular and
nasal discharge. The conjunctivitis was due to herpesvirus infection.
Adverse reactions to topical medications produce
Follicles
dramatic chemosis with minimal inflammation (8.5).
Lymphoid follicles may be present on the conjunctival
Cyclopentolate, a topical mydriatic, is very predictable in
surfaces in variable numbers.l
 Follicles have a
producing marked chemosis in dogs.
characteristic *cobblestone' appearance, and their num-
bers may not be fully appreciated until the lids are
Ocular discharge
ae Paie pul aul Jo saoens yog pue paiaae
The presenting complaint is usually ocular discharge.
examined. Follicular hyperplasia is frequently.
Ocular exudates may be minimal or absent, as observed in
nonspecific reaction to chronic conjunctival irritation
 cases of uncomplicated viral conjunctivitis and atopy. Mild 
(8.7). In the horse, they have been associated with
inflammation results in a serous discharge from hyper-
Onchocerca spp. infestation, and in the cat, possibly
secretion of the lacrimal glands due to irritation.
with herpesvirus.
The next degree of severity of ocular discharge is
excessive production of mucus. Small quantities of mucus
Pain
1 au ul alou juniodw ue sey snw pue teou a1
Pain or discomfort observed with conjunctivitis varies
flm. Depending on the nature of the irritant, variable
greatly with the type of conjunctivitis and the species. In
degrees of polymorphonuclear cell exudation may occur
humans, the discomfort of conjunctivitis is described as a
and, if severe, manifest as a purulent exudate. These
foreign body sensation on the eye'. Cats with con-
frequently, but not invariably, are associated with a bacterial
junctivitis frequently have some degree of blepharo-
infection and are usually accompanied by excess mucus and
spasm, whereas dogs often are oblivious to the condition
thus become mucopurulent in nature. Certain breeds of cats 
(8.8). When blepharospasm is present, corneal pain 
such as the Persian, Himalayan, and Siamese are predis-
should be ruled out by fluorescein staining before
posed to a black, waxy discharge with conjunctivitis. The
ascribing the pain to conjunctivitis.
source is probably the meibomian glands, as it may still be
present with sicca {8.6). This material may play a role in the
black deposits found with corneal sequestrum.
CONJUNCTIVA AND THIRD EYELID
187
Laterafity
fever of 39.5-40°℃ (102-104°F) may be present, but no
Most cases of conjunctivitis are bilateral and, when
 Other systemic signs.
unilateral, unique conditions such as mechanical
If observed early in the course of the disease,
irritation from a foreign body or hair should be
conjunctival scrapings frequently may have distemper
investigated. Some infectious conditions begin in one eye,
inclusion bodies in the cytoplasm of the epithelial cells
but usually spread to the opposite eye or have one eye
{8.10). There is usually an absolute lymphopenia in the
 more severely involved than the other.
blood count, and the animal may develop other signs of
distemper at a later date.
CLASSIFICATION BY ETIOLOGY
The usual classification of various inflammatory diseases
Diagnosis
of the conjunctiva has been based on descriptive
The diagnosis of distemper is usually based on history,
terminology of the duration (acute and chronic) and type
accompanying systemic signs, intracytoplasmic inclusions
 of exudate (mucoid and purulent). While this method-
 in epithelial cells on conjunctival scrapings {8.10), and an
 ology makes it convenient to label or make a superficial
absolute lymphopenia in the peripheral blood. A lack of
diagnosis, it adds very little to our understanding of the
inclusion bodies is not definitive as the peak observation
etiology of conjunctivitis. It is preferable to classify
 period of inclusions is 7-11 days post inoculation, with a
inflammatory lesions by emphasizing the cause.
range of 5-21 days22. Thus, chronic distemper cases are
often negative. Fluorescent antibody staining is more
Viral conjunctivitis
sensitive for detecting inclusions than routine cytology.
Viruses are common etiologic agents of conjunctivitis in
 all domestic animals. Often, the conjunctivitis is among
Adenoviruses
the least of the many signs produced in a particular viral
Canine adenovirus type 1 {CAV-1) and canine adenovirus
aui Aq pauouai aq ol uasouo aq Aew 'yons se pue aseasip
type 2 (CAV-2) both produce a conjunctivitis. CAV-1 is
clinician. The diagnostic challenge occurs when the
the agent of infectious canine hepatitis, while CAV-2 is
conjunctivitis is the main sign and represents either a
one of the etiologic agents of tracheobronchitis or kennel
 prodromal or subclinical systemic syndrome.
cough'. Both agents may be responsible for a bilateral
 conjunctivitis characterized by marked hyperemia and a
Canine distemper
serous to seromucous exudate23 The systemic signs may
Introduction/etiology
provide clues for differentiating the adenovirus infections
Distemper seems to be almost invariably associated with
from distemper, but it may be difficult to differentiate
some degree of bilateral conjunctivitis. The classical
 complicated tracheobronchitis from distemper.
picture is a mucopurulent ocular discharge in association
with other catarrhal signs. While the mucopurulent
Herpesvirus
exudate is usually described as typical for distemper, this
Introduction/etiology
form is usually not purely viral, as secondary bacteria
Cat. Conjunctivitis is present to a variable degree in all
and a variable degree of tear deficiency promote the
the feline viral respiratory syndromes. The herpesvirus,
mucopurulent exudation. Distemper may also present as
 calicivirus, and reovirus groups have been isolated from
bilateral marked hyperemia of the conjunctiva, with a
the respiratory tract and conjunctiva24. Serologic
minimal seromucoid discharge (8.9). The animal's
evidence indicates that herpesvirus and calicivirus are
pharynx and tonsils may also be inflamed, and a mild
widespread in the cat population and account for most of
6'8
8.10
8.9 Distemper conjunctivitis in an apparently healthy young dog that
8.10 Conjunctival cytology from the case in 8.9. A red cytoplasmic
was febrile when presented for vaccination. The palpebral conjunctiva
inclusion body is present (arrow) in the central epithelial cell 
wa5s severely hyperemic bilaterally and minimal exudation wa5
(Schorr's stain].
present. Conjunctival scrapings are presented in 8.10. Myoclonus
developed within 1 month.
188
O pHThAlMIC DiseAse In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
Dog. The herpesvirus responsible for neonatal puppy
Reovirus appears to be an insignificant cause of feline
death produces a transient follicular genital infection in
conjunctivitis26. The prevalence of the varying viral
adult male and females, as well as a transient (4-5 days)
causes has depended on the method of detection, with
conjunctivitis41. A
A herpesvirus was suspected in a
newer techniques utilizing polymerase chain reaction
syndrome of chronic follicular conjunctivitis and
(PCR) being more sensitive than IFA, cultures, and
balanitis of dogs. The disease was produced after passage
serology. It has been suggested that the more severe
es u sm e a nq ai anss yan
forms of conjunctivitis are associated with herpesvirus
Later work by the same authors could not duplicate the
(Table 8.2), but factors such as antigenic variants,
transmissibility  (
 of the syndrome43. A"follicular
individual immunity, potentiation by other viruses, and
conjunctivitis associated with balanitis or vaginitis does
bacteria may all modify the disease so that considerable
exist but an infectious cause has yet to be confirmed.
 Overlap occurs between clinical signs27.
A keratopathy that was similar in appearance to a
 Feline herpesvirus type 1 (FHV-1), the causative agent
lipid keratopathy has been reported to be associated with
of feline rhinotracheitis, has a tropism for conjunctival
herpesvirus, but has not been confirmed44.
and respiratory epithelium, where it replicates and
produces necrosis. This is most severe in the young
 The role of herpesvirus in producing significant
canine ocular disease in the adult remains
replicate in the corneal epithelium, producing ulceration,
speculative.
the most typical being a linear dendritic' ulceration30, 31
 a og    ad m
Of the cat occurs in the trigeminal ganglion32 33 and
Horse. Equine herpesvirus 2 may produce a kerato-
perhaps the corneal stroma3437 in about 80% of cats38.
conjunctivitis {see Chapter 10, p.241) and viral arteritis
In young cats, infection with herpesvirus may produce
may produce a conjunctivitis5-47, Viral conjunctivitis
severe conjunctivitis and usually there are upper
and keratouveitis may be observed with adenoviral
respiratory signs. Signs of conjunctivitis progress from
 infection in foals.
seromucoid to mucopurulent in 45 days, and the dis-
charge is often quite profuse (8.8, 8.11).
Cow. Bovine herpesvirus 1, the cause of infectious bovine
In young kittens, the conjunctival surface is often
rhinotracheitis (IBR), may produce infectious pustular
ulcerated, with fibrinous exudation resulting in persistent
vulvovaginitis or respiratory signs and may involve the
symblepharon (8.12, 8.13) 39. The resultant conjunctival
conjunctiva, to the extent that eye or ocular signs
adhesions may adhere to the cornea if it is concurrently
ulcerated, create a permanent protrusion of the third
virus. Conjunctival involvement typically produces
eyelid from adhesions, or obliterate the lacrimal lake or
elevated red plaques that are proliferations of lympho-
lacrimal puncta in the lower medial conjunctival cul-de-
sac, creating a chronic epiphora. Various degrees of
Ocular involvement may be observed with respiratory.
keratitis may occur with herpesvirus30, but keratitis is
signs and, in addition to conjunctivitis, consists of
not present with the other viral etiologies of the
anterior uveitis and a nonulcerative keratitis that is
respiratory disease/conjunctivitis complex. The duration
characterized by peripheral edema that spreads centrally.
 of the acute clinical signs is usually 10-14 days39. Adult
Lesions may be either unilateral or bilateral. As with
cats frequently manifest chronic herpesvirus conjunc-
other herpesvirus infections, animals often become latent 
tivitis unilaterally or bilaterally with minimal respiratory
carriers and may become symptomatic when stressed.
signs, and these represent the biggest diagnostic and
IBR virus has also been isolated from goats with
therapeutic challenge20, 21, 40.
ocular lesions of conjunctivitis and keratitis and
respiratory diseases1.
Table 8.2 Clinical differentiation of feline respiratory infection
FVR
FVC
Chiamydophila spp.
Severity
 Primary infection
Variably mild to moderate
Mild
typically severe
 Ocular symptoms
Conjunetivitis often prominent Conjunetivitis mild to absent
Chronic and marked
Nasal discharge
 Often profuse
Scanty to moderate
Scanty to moderate
Epithelial ulceration 
Very occasionally tongue
Very frequently tongue, als0
Not associated
 or pharynx
hard palate, external nares
Coughing
Common
Rare, if ever
Rare, if ever
(From Povey, 197627)
CONJUNCTIVA AND THIRD EYELID
189
Diagnosis
sneezing, and acute signs were correlated with positive
A presumptive diagnosis of viral conjunctivitis may be made
herpesvirus on PCR. Cats with conjunctivitis and which
by observing conjunctivitis associated with typical systemic
were
chlamydophila-positive  were younger（
cats
signs, exclusion of other etiologies, lack of response to
(9 weeks-6 months) and there was a seasonal incidence 
antibiotics in a condition that is contagious, or a typical
in the summer.
disease in that species. As diagnostic tests are not often
widely available, and are expensive or ambiguous, clinical
Viral cufture
judgement is often relied upon for making a diagnosis of
Viral cultures from conjunctiva may be performed, but
are usually reserved for outbreaks with multiple animals.
The main differential diagnosis of infectious conjunc-
With herpesvirus infection, cultures are frequently
tivitis in cats is Chlamydopbila felis (Chlamydia psittaci)
 negative because of the latent carrier state. Rose bengal
infection. Sykes et al.$2 correlated the clinical signs with
au o1 padde aq ou pinous pue iooa Aiay s!
the results of PCR testing for both chlamydophila and
 cornea before obtaining viral cultures16. Hickman et al.53
feline herpesvirus, and found that of cats with upper
found in a herpesvirus outbreak in a colony of specific
respiratory signs, 14% were positive for chlamydophila
pathogen-free (SPF) cats that only 4% of the cats were
and 21% were positive for herpesvirus. In cats with
actively shedding herpesvirus. Upon activation of
conjunctivitis, a history of recent exposure to other cats,
herpesvirus infection with glucocorticoid injections, 21%
8.11
8.12
8.11 A cat with chronic bilateral seromucoid discharge associated
8.12 Marked fibrinous reaction in a kitten with herpesvirus
with herpesvirus conjunctivitis.
conjunctivitis, resulting in symblepharon. The condition is bilateral.
8.13
8.14
8.13 Symblepharon (adhesions of conjunctiva to the third eyelid]. In
8.14 Marked conjunctivitis in a calf with respiratory and ocular
the cat these are usually associated with early herpesvirus infection
disease due to infectious bovine rhinotracheitis. Note the marked
a5 a kitten. This will result in epiphora from blockage of the lower
chemosis and white areas coalescing in the conjunctiva. On
puncta, and normal tear flow in the lower conjunctival cul-de-sac
histopathology, these represent infiltrations of lymphocytes and.
 and a more prominent third eyelid.
possibly, surface necrosis. Multiple animals were involved and other
calves had keratitis and anterior uveitis.
190
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
of previously negative cats shed the virus after one
in determining the cause of upper respiratory disease.
injection and an additional 12% after a second
Interferon given intranasally or topically onto the eye has
glucocorticoid injection. Maggs et al. 4 found 11% of
been used for therapy, although it has not been critically
clinically normal cats were culture positive,_which was
evaluated in clinical use. In vitro testing of feline
markedly higher than in previous reports3,37,ss, 6
 addition of alpha interferon at doses of 10-100 U61
Indirect fluorescent antibody staining and cytology
L-lysine {500 mg q12h p.o.) decreased the severity of
Inclusion bodies may be found with adenoviruses and
herpesvirus-induced conjunctivitis in cats, but did not
distemper virus (8.10) but herpesvirus inclusions are not
alter the duration of the disease or the ability to isolate
seen with routine cytologic processing57. Fixation for one
the virus. Lysine was administered 6 hours before
hour in Bouin's solution will retain herpesvirus inclusionss8
inoculation with the virus; this raises the question of
IFA staining is a more sensitive method of detecting
efficacy in the clinical situation, where therapy is
viral antigen than routine cytologic examination. Prior
 initiated after the infection is established62. Lysine may
application of fluorescein to the eye before taking
have a role in prophylaxis when administered daily in
samples for IFA may result in a false-positive tests9 but
catteries, in multi-cat households, or when new animals
this is controversial; reports in the human literature and
are introduced.
the author's own experience indicate that prior
The elimination of herpesvirus from catteries is best
fuorescein staining, does not interefere with IFA
 performed by PCR testing and culling of carriers. In an
interpretation17. Viral inclusions are often transient and
SPF colony, all cats with positive viral cultures of oral
present only early in the course of disease. Thus a
swabs before and 10 days after two injections of 5 mg/kg
negative result is inconclusive. IFA testing is positive in
methylprednisolone acetate i.m. at 6-week intervals were
only about 20% of cats experimentally infected with
culled from the colony. Despite these drastic measures,
herpesvirus40 and, in the author's research and clinical
 23% of cats herpesvirus negative after two glucocorticoid
 injections, were positive after a third injections3.
Many ophthalmologists dismiss conjunctival
Prophylaxis
 cytology as a low-yield test for feline conjunctivitis;
Prevention of viral conjunctivitis as well as other forms
however, it is a quick and inexpensive method to
 of infectious conjunctivitis should consist of segregation
diagnose chlamydophilal, mycoplasmal, and
of animals by age, function, and health status, and
eosinophilic conjunctivitis.
quarantine upon first acquisition. Immunization of new
animals before introduction into the main herd or
cattery, decreasing the concentration of animals, good
Serology
ventilation, and avoiding fomite transmission by hand
Serologic testing is complicated by the widespread
washing are important steps in minimizing outbreaks of
vaccination and ubiquitous nature of many of the viral
 infectious conjunctivitis. L-lysine (500 mg q12h) may be
agents. Maggs et al.54 found herpesvirus serology to be of
administered to animals in quarantine and throughout
no use in differentiating normal cats from diseased cats.
the period of introduction into the household or colony,
to minimize signs if exposed to herpesvirus.
Polymerase chain reaction
PCR testing of samples for virus is a very sensitive
Chlamydophila felis
technique. However, it is not widely available
to
Introduction/etiology
practitioners and carries the additional disadvantage of
The agent of feline pneumonitis has undergone various
oversensitivity, when many cats are carriers. The rate of
name changes, from Miyagawanella felis to Chlamydia
positive herpesvirus on PCR testing of normal cats has
psittaci; most recently, Chlamydia psittaci has been
varied from <1% 36, 37 to 4% s3.
divided into four new species, Chlamydopbila felis, C.
psittaci, C. abortus, and C. caviae. These respectively
Therapy
Treatment of viral conjunctivitis with topical antibiotics is
Chlamydopbila spp. are obligate intracellular Gram-
usually undertaken only if the disease is incorrectly
negative bacteria that have a tropism for mucous
diagnosed or thought to be complicated with bacteria.
membranes. There are two forms, the elementary body
{infectious form) and the reticulate body {intracellular,
virus or adenoviruses, but are effective against the
metabolically active form)65. Although mammalian
herpesvirus  group.
The  efficacy of  the various
strains are thought to have relatively low infectivity for
antiherpesvirus agents varies, but preliminary reports
humans, they should still be considered a zoonosis6, 67.
indicate that feline herpesvirus is sensitive in decreasing
order to triflurothymidine,
 adenine arabinoside,
Clinical signs
idoxuridine, and acyclovir60. While the course of the disease
While C. felis was initially described as an agent for
may be shortened with therapy, a cure is not produced due
pneumonitis in cats, subsequent studies have indicated the
to the carrier status that many animals develop.
conjunctiva and nasal cavity are the primary sites of
Immunization does not protect animals from most of
the ocular manifestations of herpesvirus infection, nor
survey of feline conjunctivitis, C. felis were cultured in
does it have a known role in therapy, although anecdotal
30% of cases71. Utilizing PCR for both herpesvirus and C.
reports may suggest otherwise. Sykes et al.s2 found
felis, Sykes et al.$2 found C. felis in 14% of cats with
previous vaccination history to have no statistical value
upper respiratory disease and all had conjunctivitis. Cats
CONJUNCTIVA AND THIRD EYELID
191
with conjunctivitis were as likely to be positive on PCR
2 days the secretion becomes mucopurulent and the
for herpesvirus as for C. felis; however, sneezing cats with
conjunctivitis and cats with acute disease were 2.2x and
The ocular discharge is progressively reduced until only a
2.3x as likely to be herpesvirus positive, respectivelys2.
scant or moderate mucopurulent exudate is present. In
No cats with upper respiratory disease without
chronic cases, hyperplasia, hyperemia, and follicle
conjunctivitis were positive for C. felis; coinfection with
formation may develop.
C. felis and herpesvirus was uncommon, and 56% of cats
Untreated, the disease may run a prolonged course of
with upper respiratory disease were negative for both
agents. C. felis had a higher prevalence in young cats
 may manifest neonatal conjunctivitis before the physio-
(5 weeks-9 months). Vaccination history was no help in
logic ankyloblepharon separates. Isolation of the feline
differentiating the  infectious agents  involved
 agent from humans with conjunctivitis indicates that it
 conjunctivitis and upper respiratory diseases2.
 may have zoonotic potentia166.
The conjunctivitis of C. felis infection is usually the pre-
Chlamydophila spp. may also produce conjunctivitis
dominant sign and may l
be unilateral on initial
and keratoconjunctivitis in the horse, sheep, goat, and pig
examination, although it usually spreads to the opposite
 and may be associated with polyarthritis74, 7s. Keratitis
eye in S7 days7,7 Inthe early stages, the conjunctiva s
may develop in these species, unlike the cat, where this
chemotic, smooth, shiny, and a grayish-pink color. In the
has not been described or documented (8.16). Two
initial stages, the ocular discharge is serous, but within
 serotypes of Chlamydophila have been described in cattle:
type 1 is responsible for abortion, genital infection, and
 polyserositis, keratoconjunctivitis, encephalomyelitis, and
pneumonia. Transmission has been proposed as via oral,
tick vectors, aerosol, and direct contact routes. With
8.15
aerosol and direct contact exposure the predominant
signs are conjunctivitis and pneumonia. The mani-
festation of the disease is dependent on the virulence of
the strain and the age and immunity of the animal76.
Diagnosis
Associated clinical signs will vary with the species.
Conjunctivitis is typically present in the young animal,
and is chronic and associated with a thickened,
hyperemic conjunctiva. Conjunctival cytology contains
primarily polymorphonuclear neutrophils {
(PMNs), but
some lymphocytes are present as well. Cytoplasmic
 inclusion bodies in epithelial cells may be found as long
as 50 days after infection, but are most numerous in the
first 2 weeks of the disease (8.17)57. A history of possible 
exposure such as boarding, cat shows, veterinary
hospitals, and introduction of new animals onto the
8.15 Chlamydial conjunctivitis in a cat. The condition was unilateral
 premises indicates exposure.
at this time. Note hyperemia, glistening follicles, and seromucoid
discharge. Inclusion bodies were found on cytology.
8.16
8.17
8.16 Chlamydial keratoconjunctivitis in a goat. Typical inclusion
8.17 Chlamydial inclusions (arrows)] in the cytoplasm of conjunctival
bodies were found on conjunctival cytology. The condition responded
epithelial cells of a cat (wright's stain].
to topical tetracycline. Several young goats were involved.
192
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
Therapy
Mycoplasma.
Topical tetracyclines have been the traditional therapy for
Introduction/etiology
chlamydial infections. Animals usually respond well if
As with mycoplasmal infections in other tissues and
treated early in the course of the disease. The enigma lies
species, the role of mycoplasma in ocular disease of cats
in controlling the disease in catteries, herds, and hospitals
is not without controversy. A stress factor appears to be
because of the carrier state and short-lived immunity. The
necessary in addition to the mycoplasma, as direct
carrier state resides in the gastrointestional tract and,
inoculation onto the conjunctiva does not produce the
consequently, treatment emphasis has shifted from topical
disease without prior cortisol administration57, 83, 84.
to systemic tetracyclines.
Clinically, the mycoplasma may occur as a sequela to, or
Systemic doxycycline {5 mg/kg q12h) for 3 weeks
in conjunction with, other viral upper respiratory
produced improvement
in signs within 3 days of
diseases. The pure clinical picture is distinctive enough to
commencing treatment and no relapse of disease was noted
help  differentiate  mycoplasmal conjunctivitis  from
in experimental infections6. T
The author's
personal
chlamydophilal and viral conjunctivitis73.
experience with using systemic doxycycline in treating
C. felis infection in a group of hospital blood donor cats has 
Mycoplasma is the least frequent of the infectious
not been as successful, with relapses common. An
causes of feline conjunctivitis fherpesvirus,
alternative to twice daily systemic doxycycline therapy is
Chlamydopbila).
 azithromycin; azithromycin (5 mg/kg q48-72h in the cat) is
a long-acting macrolide similar to erythromycin, that has
 proved efficacious against C. felis.
Clinical signs
 Feline mycoplasmal conjunctivitis is characterized by an 
clinical recovery as relapse is common26. Cats with
initial unilateral, serous to mucopurulent exudate that
infectious conjunctivitis and/or respiratory signs that have
usually extends to the (
opposite eye within 7 days.
 a prolonged course or have relapsing episodes should be
Conjunctival hyperemia is severe on all conjunctival
screened for immune suppression with feline leukemia
surfaces, with modest to marked chemosis, papillary
virus (FeLV) or feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV)7, 78.
hypertrophy, and blepharospasm (8.18). In 4-10 days,
Cats with C. felis and FIV infection shed Chlamrydopbila
the response moderates with less hyperemia, loss of
sp. for 270 days and have prolonged signs; dual infection
 papilla, pale conjunctiva with thickening and induration,
accelerates the progression of FIV78.
increased mucopurulent exudation and, in some cases, a
pseudodiphtheritic membrane. The disease is self-
paieuokqua uo umoia aq isnu dds vqdopduoao
limiting, having a course of about 30 days with little
eggs or tissue culture; before submitting samples the
change throughout the duration.
cost and availability of service should be checked
 Mycoplasma are also significant ocular pathogens in
with the diagnostic laboratory.
sheep and goats. In addition to an infectious con-
junctivitis, ocular lesions of keratitis5 and anterior
uveitis may be produced, as well as mastitis, pleuro-
Prophylaxis
 pneumonia, and arthritis.
 Previous killed vaccines have been ineffective but new,
 In cattle, Mycoplasma bovoculi and ureaplasma have
modified, live vaccines have demonstrated more
been isolated from herds with conjunctivitis. When
An inactivated feline C. felis vaccine
inoculated experimentally, the organisms produce a
demonstrated immunity for 1 year82. Vaccination
is
conjunctivitis syndrome  of  approximately  1  month
indicated in catteries and in situations where increased
duration. During the course of the syndrome, the signs
exposure to other cats is present.
vacillate between mild and severe86.
8.18
8.19
 8.18 A cat with acute mycoplasmal conjunctivitis. Marked chemosis
8.19 Mycoplasma organisms on conjunctival epithelial cells of the cat in
 and ocular discharge is present, mycoplasma organisms were cultured,
8.18; mycoplasma were also cultured from the conjunctival cul-de-sac.
and the conjunctival cytology was positive for mycoplasma (8.19).
CONJUNCTIVA AND THIRD EYELID
193
In swine, an infectious conjunctivitis and kerato-
Therapy
conjunctivitis syndrome without systemic signs has been
The course of the disease can be shortened to 4-5 days
attributed to mycoplasma*7. (
Ocular mycoplasma _syn-
with the use of topical tetracyclines, chloramphenicol,
dromes in the horse and dog have not been described3, 9
gentamicin, or erythromycin preparations.
Diagnosis
Bacterial conjunctivitis
Conjunctival cytology is the most practical method for
Introduction/etiology
 diagnosing mycoplasma. Mycoplasma appear as coccoid
Bacterial conjunctivitis is more important in the dog than
to coccobacillary organisms in clusters, on or near the
the cat (excluding mycoplasmal conjunctivitis)20. Cultures
surface of the epithelial cell(8.19). The organisms should
are readily obtained, but the difficulty lies in interpretation
be differentiated from pigment granules in the epithelial
of the results, assuming satisfactory collection techniques
have been observed. Urban et al.90 isolated bacteria from
polymorphonuclear57, 83, 84.
 91% of conjunctiva of clinically normal dogs. Other
studies utilizing different techniques yielded bacterial
 growth from 72-94% of cultures from the conjunctiva of
normal eyes varies between breeds and, as one might
expect, there is some correlation of isolates to lid
 conformation90. The normal flora is predominantly Gram-
Table 8.3 Isolation of bacteria from the conjunctival sac
of clinically normal dogs (%)
positive (Table 8.3). In the dog, streptococci, staphylo-
cocci, and diphtheroids are the predominant isolates from
both normal animals and those with conjunctivitis. Thus
 Bistner 
Urban
Hacker
some clinical judgment has to be made as to the
et al.
et al.
et ai.
significance of positive cultures95-98
 Organism 
(1969)91
(1972)90
(1979)93
Compared to dogs, cats have a relatively sterile
Staphylococcus
 conjunctiva with bacterial isolates reported in 34-67% of
70.7
conjunctival swabs from normal cats ( Table 8.4)83, 99, 100.
 spp. (total)
70.0
59.0
The horse conjunctival sac has a predominantly
Coagulase-positive
24.0
44.7
NR
Gram-positive resident flora with Cornybacterium spp-.
Stapbylococcus
Coagulase-negative
46.0
55.3
NR
epidermidis,
Bacillus
cerus, and
hemolytic and nonhemolytic Streptomyces being most
Streptococcus
prevalent101. In the horse, Streptococcus sp. (44%),
 spp. (total)
6.0
43.3
NR
Stapbylococcus spp. (24%), and Pseudomonas spp.
Nonhemolytic
NR
12.0
51.0
{14%) were isolated from the conjunctiva and cornea of
animals with extraocular disease102. 1
Nutritionally
Alpha-hemolytic
4.0
34.0
5.0
variant streptococci have been shown to be a significant
Beta-hemolytic
2.0
7.3
3.0
cause of equine corneal ulcers, and their significance in
extraocular infections is unknown. Cultures may be
Corynebacterium
negative as these organisms do not grow on the usual
 spp. (total)
75.0
30.0
NR
liquid or solid media unless the medium includes thiol-
Undifferentiated
NR
11.3
NR
containing compounds and B6, or has an additional
 organism growing that produces these compounds18.
C. psuedodiph-
theriticum
NR
9.3
NR
C. xerosis
NR
12.7
NR
Neisseria spp.
Table 8.4 Bacteria isolated from normal cats
(total)
NR
26.0
NR
Undifferentiated 
NR
4.0
NR
Location 
Organism
%
N. cotorrhatis
NR
8.7
NR
 Conjunctiva
Staphylococcus atbus
16.3
S. oureus
10.4
N. pharyngitidis
NR
4.0
NR
Mycoptasma spp.
5.0
N. sicca
NR
3.3
NR
M. fetis*
Bacillus spp.
2.9
N. coviae
NR
2.7
NR
Alpha-hemolytic streptococci
2.5
Corynebacterium spp.
1.3
N factamicus
NR
2.7
NR
Lids
S. atbus
13.8
N. flavescens
NR
2.7
NR
S. oureus
8.8
Pseudomonas spp.
NR
14.0
NR
Alpha-hemolytic streptococci
1.7
Baciltus spp.
1.7
Moraxetla spp.
NR
6.7
NR
Escherichia coli
0.4
Bacill us spp.
12.0
6.0
18.0
*Five Mycoplasma isolates were lost prior to identification.
NR: not reported
(Adapted from Campbell et ar., 197383.)
194
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
The virulence and number of organisms are factors in
obvious disease in other organs (skin, ear) or poor lid
infection, and so is the individual's resistance, such as
 conformation (8.21). Spaniels, St. Bernards, Bulldogs, and
immunoglobulin level and local or systemic stress.
hounds are frequently affected with chronic bacterial
Examples of stress may be local trauma, ultraviolet
conjunctivitis. If allowed to go unchecked, a superficial
radiation, and concurrent systemic or local disease. Since
keratitis eventually develops. Occasionally, a marginal
the animal's defenses are important, it is not surprising to
have the following concurrent problems: generalized
staphylococcal
 conjunctivitis. Tear production often
seborrhea, pyoderma, otitis externa, lip fold infections,
decreases with chronicity and this contributes to the
distemper, ectropion, entropion, trauma, and sicca.
conjunctivitis by keeping the surface debilitated (8.22).
Depending on the host's predisposing factors, the
infection may only be controlled rather than cured; a
Diagnosis
course of antibiotics, even if given for a prolonged
A STT should always be performed when examining
period, may only improve the ocular condition
chronic conjunctivitis. If the STT has only been
transiently.
performed late in the course of the disease, it may not be
possible to determine whether the sicca is primary or
Acute bacterial conjunctivitis
secondary. Despite this uncertainty, therapy will have to
Clinical signs
be directed at the sicca to effect an improvement {see
The signs of acute bacterial conjunctivitis are usually
Chapter 9, p.219). An additional important differential
associated with sudden onset of a dramatic purulent
diagnosis for chronic unilateral bacterial conjunctivitis
ocular discharge, marked diffuse conjunctival hyperemia,
and moderate chemosis (8.20). The infection may extend
onto the eyelids, producing an acute moist blepharitis.
8.20
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of acute bacterial conjunctivitis is usually
made on clinical signs and conjunctival cytology. Culture
and antibiotic sensitivity testing is performed to confirm
and guide the therapy, especially if an immediately
favorable
 response is not obtained. Conjunctival
scraping and Gram staining are rapid methods to aid in
the selection of antibiotic.
The head in general should be examined, as the early
stages of acute orbital cellulitis or retrobulbar infections
frequently mimic
acute
purulent conjunctivitis.
Differentiation
between
simple
acute
 purulent
conjunctivitis and endophthalmitis or panophthalmitis
with accompanying purulent exudation may be made by
the lack of active intraocular inflammation with
conjunctivitis. Predisposing factors such as conjunctival
foreign bodies, blocked nasolacrimal duct, and entropion
8.20 Acute unilateral bacterial conjunctivitis in a Weimaraner.
should be eliminated.
Therapy
Initial specific therapy is usually a broad-spectrum
8.21
topical antibiotic. Most animals respond well in 3-5
days. In the horse, many strains of streptococci are
resistant to the usual triple antibiotic or aminoglycoside
preparations, and chloramphenicol, erythromycin,
Or
ciprofloxacin preparations are more appropriate. 
In
resistant or relapsing cases, specific antibiotics are chosen
on the basis of culture and antibiotic sensitivity testing.
Cleansing the eye of exudate with a collyria and soaking
the crusts off the lid margins are important supportive
mea sures.
Chronic bacterial conjunctivitis
Clinical signs
Exudation varies from mucoid to mucopurulent and the
conjunctiva is thickened, hyperemic, and has redundant
folds. Some degree of follicular hyperplasia is usually
present and the process frequently extends to the dermis,
8.21 A dog with chronic staphylococcal pyoderma and chronic
resulting in depigmentation of the lid margins.
The
bilateral severe conjunctivitis. Note the thickened conjunctiva 
condition is often bilateral and may be associated with
with follicles and possibly pyogranuloma.
CONJUNCTIVA AND THIRD EYELID
195
is dacryocystitis. Blockage of the nasolacrimal duct
Mycotic conjunctivitis
results in stagnation of tears and bacterial infection that
Introduction/etiology
refluxes back into the conjunctival sac {see Chapter 9,
Mycotic agents are a rare cause of conjunctivitis in the
p.219). Differentiation is based on the results
of
dog and cat, although Nocardia spp., fungi, or yeast have
nasolacrimal duct flushing. Culture and antibiotic
been isolated in 17% of cultures from eyes with chronic
sensitivity testing are usually performed if prior
conjunctivitis9s. The significance of finding mycotic
antibiotic therapy has been unsuccessful.
elements in the conjunctiva is unknown, as in normal
animals 22% of dogs, 40% of cats, 95% of horses, and
Therapy
100% of cows culture positively for fungi103 This study
Specific therapy should consist of controlling systemic or
was performed in a subtropical climate and in a building
other local disease processes {ectropion, sicca, otitis), and
whose ventilation system was contaminated with fungi,
administration 
of antibioticC
or
 antibiotic-steroid
and thus may not be 
representative of other
 preparations based on culture and antibiotic sensitivity
environments. Other studies have found fungal isolates
tests. The medication may need to be continued at a low
from normal conjunctiva in dogs (12%94) and
frequency indefinitely or given intermittently as the signs
hospitalized and stabled horses (ss% and 83%
dictate. In many cases of keratoconjunctivitis,.
the
 s sm a a ann
importance of control rather than cure should
be
determining the presence of transient flora such as fungi,
daY uawea1 snooaia pue t1aumo aul 0i paziseyda
but did not influence the bacterial isolatesi01. In the
for use in the more “acute' exacerbations. Supportive
horse, 53% of the isolates were Cladosporium spp. 0r
therapy consists of cleansing the eye with collyria.
Alternaria spp.
Animals with mycotic conjunctivitis or keratitis often
have a history of treatment with a variety of topical
antibiotics or antibiotic-steroid preparations, that
8.22
static or regressed (8.23). The horse has a unique
 susceptibility to fungal infections of the cornea after
traumatic breaks in the epithelium. Primary fungal
conjunctivitis is rare, even in the horse.
Diagnosis
 Diagnosis is initially established by conjunctival cytology
and is confirmed by culture.
Therapy
A variety of antifungal antibiotics are available, but few
are marketed for ophthalmic use. Natamycin is the only
available topical ophthalmic antifungal preparation and,
 based on sensitivity testing, is the most effective101. The
lack of widespread availability and the expense of
natamycin limit its use (see Fungal keratitis, p.255).
8.22 Chronic conjunctivitis associated with sicca. The conjunctiva is
 Intravenous miconazole preparations are well tolerated
hyperemic, indurated, and has mucopurulent exudation.
and are effective as topical ophthalmic preparations, but
they have been removed from the market in the US and
must be compounded by a specialty compounding
8.23
pharmacy.
Itraconazole
i.v.
fluconazole have also been used topically for fungal
 keratitis. Topical silver sulfadiazine and other antifungal
agents used on other mucous membranes are often used in
place of natamycin.
Parasitic conjunctivitis
Introductionfetiology
Tbelazia is a genus of nematode worms that has been
recovered from a variety of domestic and wild animals
and is usually associated with mild conjunctival
irritation. The parasite is widespread in North America,
although it is not recognized as producing signs very
often. The worms reside within the ducts of the lacrimal
glands and on the conjunctival surface. Larvae are
released into the tears and ingested by the intermediate
host (thought to be Musca autumnalis), which transmits
8.23 Calf with a pseudomembrane adhered to conjunctiva.
 it after the larvae develop into the third stage10s.
Cytology and culture demonstrated Mucor sp. The calf had
In cattle, in one postmortem study the highest
5ystemic mucormycosis with joint and pulmonary signs.
incidence was in 3-4 year olds, with a 53% infection
196
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
rate106. A similar age predilection was found in younger
Diagnosis
horses in Kentucky, with a prevalence of 45% in 3 year
Diagnosis  (
 of immune-mediated conjunctivitis  is
olds and 50% in 4 year olds, with an overall prevalence
 frequently presumptive, relying on response to cortisone
of 43% for 1-4-year-old horses107. Other equine studies
therapy, history, and accompanying systemic signs.
 also indicate the highest incidence is in young horses
 Conjunctival cytology may aid diagnosis with findings of
<1-3 years old108, 109
eosinophils, lymphocytes, and plasma cells.
In birds, Philopbthalmus gralli, a trematode, has been
described in the conjunctival sac. The freshwater snail is
Therapy
the intermediate hostl10.
If possible, the offending antigen is removed. The most
common therapy is low doses of topical steroids if the
 Clinical signs
problem is confined to the eyes, or systemic steroids if
Infection may be unilateral or bilateral. In cattle, most
signs are more generalized. The least amount of drug.
 animals are unilaterally affected, whereas in the horse,
both in concentration and frequency of application,
most are bilaterally affected. The signs do not seem to be
should be employed to control the disease. In mild cases,
correlated with the worm burden and most animals are
the use of topical antihistamines may be of value.
asymptomatic. Signs usually consist of epiphora and
 Mast cell granule stabilizers such as sodium cromolyn
conjunctivitis,
 but conjunctival  nodules may
be
may be effective in treating allergic conjunctivitis;
produced by the worms and, rarely, conjunctival cysts
however, their cost and the fact that they are most
and keratitisll1.
effective when administered before exposure limits their
widespread use.‘
 Topical cyclosporine  is another
Therapy
alternative to topical glucocorticoids when treating
Mechanical removal with forceps or flushing the worms
conditions mediated via mast cells and eosinophils. In
out if they are numerous has been the standard
mice, topical cyclosporine therapy was as effective as
recommendation. Most systemic anthelmintics have not
topical glucocorticoids for the treatment of allergic
 been efficaciousll2, but topical application of doramectin
 conjunctivitisl14. Topical nonsteroidal drugs have also
(poured on the skin) is effective against eyeworms and
 reduced the signs of seasonal allergic conjuctivitis and are
 other gastrointestional and pulmonary wormsl13.
 another alternative to glucocorticoidsl1s, 116.
Sicca-related conjunctivitis
Eosinophilic conjunctivitis of cats
Reduced tear production should be investigated as a
Introduction/etiology
cause for all conjunctivitis patients not exhibiting
A condition in cats has been described, characterized by a
obvious epiphora. STT values below 12-15 mm/min are
 chronic conjunctivitis that is accompanied by eosinophil
often associated with variable degrees of conjunctivitis,
 and mast cell infiltration of the tissues and, in some cases,
and the condition may be acute or chronic, unilateral, or
by a peripheral eosinophilial17, Pentlargel17 described five
bilateral. Varying degrees of mucoid to mucopurulent
discharge is typical of sicca-associated conjunctivitis.
12 cases. This condition may be a variant of eosinophilic
With chronicity, the hyperemia involves all conjunctival
keratitis that is associated with herpesvirus; three of the five 
surfaces and the tissues are thickened. (See Chapter 9,
cats in the Pentlarge series had keratitis. In addition,
p.219, for a detailed discussion of KCS.)
 Laroccal19 reported a case with concurrent herpesvirus and
eosinophilic conjunctivitis that developed a dendritic ulcer
Allergic-fimmune-mediated conjunctivitis
when glucocorticoid therapy was initiated. The 12 cases in
Introduction/etiology
the Allgoewer series, however, had no keratitis and
Allergic conjunctivitis is probably overdiagnosed as it is
herpesvirus was not detected by PCR from Schirmer tear
often based soley on history and response to steroid
strip, although some saliva and nasal swabs were positive
therapy.
(test performed  on  8/12).  All palpebral  conjunctival
biopsies (from 6/12) were negative for herpesvirus on
Clinical signs
electronmicroscopy. The animals in this series were older
 The response of the conjunctiva to an allergen is usually
(mean 7.2 years) than in the other two series (mean
a serous discharge and moderate to intense hyperemia
4 years). All the animals in the Allgoewer and Larocca
{8.4). Chemosis, while occasionally dramatic, is usually
series had significant blepharitis of the lower lid.
mild. Pruritus is often present from mast cell
degranulation involving the eye, and is not expected with
Clinical signs
most infectious etiologies. Inflammation of the pharynx,
A severe conjunctivitis is present, involving the bulbar
gums, and ear canals, a serous rhinitis, and more
and palpebral conjunctiva of one or both eyes and often
 generalized dermatologic allergic manifestations may be
months in duration (8.24). The third eyelid conjunctiva
concurrent, and a seasonal incidence may be present.
may also be affected. Conjunctival papillae develop that
Topical medicaments are possible antigens, and a
produce a granular or cobblestone surface. Modest
blepharospasms are often present and minor amounts of
eye may be indicative of a drug allergy. This should be
superficial keratitis may 
develop with chronicity. An
differentiated from reactions to drugs which are irri-
erosive blepharitis with depigmentation and swelling may
tating, as well as from the vasodilatation and reactive
be present involving the lower lid and canthal regions.
hyperemia which may occur with many of the
Tear production may be decreased with chronicity but is
autonomic drugs.
normalized with appropriate therapy. Marked conjunctival
chemosis is thought to obstruct the lacrimal ductules.
CONJUNCTIVA AND THIRD EYELID
197
Diagnosis
associated  with a conjunctivitis (8.25). Read and
Diagnosis is based on conjunctival cytology or biopsy
Lucas120 described the condition in 21 eyes of 13 cats
that has numerous eosinophils and mast cells. if
 and found a mean age of 11 years and a preference for
decreased STT values are present, they may mislead the
 involvement of the palpebral conjunctiva of the lower lid.
clinician into misdiagnosing a primary KCs. Presumptive
On histopathology, the lesion is a lipogranuloma, but the 
evidence is based on the response to glucocorticoid
source of the lipids is unknown. Potential sources are the
therapy and lack of response to antibiotic therapy.
meibomian glands, adipose tissue in the conjunctiva,
systemic hyperlipidemia, or exogenous lipids from
Therapy
 medications121. Read and Lucas postulated thatthe lipids
 Topical glucocorticoids given frequently initially and
originate from the meibomian glands because of their
then tapered down for indefinite duration 
consistent location near the lid margin and inclusion of
maintenance therapy.
ruptured meibomian glands in some of the biopsies. The 
Topical inhibitors of mast cell degranulation, such as
relative high frequency in Australia and in lighter
sodium cromolyn or lodoxamine, may also be
pigment animals may indicate UV radiation may have a
indicated as well as topical cyclosporine.
contributing role.
● Artificial tears if sicca is present and until it is
resolved with the reduction of swelling.
Therapy
 Topical antiviral therapy should be considered if a
Curretage of lesions from the conjunctival side and
keratitis is present or develops with the use of
topical glucocorticoids has been curative. Since the cause
glucocorticoid therapy.
is not known, a thorough ocular and systemic
examination should be performed.
Actinic-related conjunctivitis
All species with lightly pigmented lid margins and lack
Ligneous conjunctivitis
 of pigmentation of the third eyelid are predisposed to
Introduction/etiology
solar blepharitis and conjunctivitis, that if chronic may
Ligneous conjunctivitis is a rare form of a chronic
result in SCC formation. Similarly, patients with SCC
 membranous conjunctivitis, that in animals at present is
characteristically
have
moderate
to
severe
limited to the Doberman Pinscher. The signs are very
conjunctivitis
.that is
more
diffuse
than simple
 dramatic, chronic, and resistant to conventional therapy.
mechanical irritation would produce. The reason for
The cause is unknown, but the disease has systemic
this is not clear, but may be due to factors liberated from
implications as oral, respiratory, and renal disease may
the neoplasm.
also be present. On histopathology, the conjunctival
blood vessel endothelium has multilaminar basement
Lipogranuloma
membranes, suggesting increased permeability. A thick,
Introduction/etiology
White nodular lesions of one or both eyes have been
substantia propria of the conjunctiva and contains T-
described in older cats. The lesion may be single or
lymphocytes122. In humans, it has recently been linked to
multiple, and involve one or both eyes, and it is
 a familial deficiency of plasminogen123.
8.24
8.25
8.24 Chronic unilateral eosinophilic conjunctivitis in a cat. The
 8.25 Unilateral lipogranuloma in a cat.
condition was diagnosed by conjunctival cytology and responded to
topical glucocorticoids. (Courtesy of Dr. V. Pentlarge, Athens, GA.)
198
O pHThAlMIC DisEAse In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
 Clinical signs
8.26
Ligneous conjunctivitis is characterized by bilateral,
marked firm swelling of the conjunctival surfaces
(including third eyelid) with gray membranes covering
the surface (8.26). The membranes are firmly adherent
and attempts to peel them off result in hemorrhage. The
cornea eventually becomes involved with pannus
formation, but it is often surprisingly healthy considering
the dramatic conjunctival lesions. Systemic signs relating
to the oral cavity and the respiratory and/or urinary
system may be present.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of ligneous conjunctivitis is made by the
dramatic signs of a thick membranous conjunctivitis
occurring in a Doberman Pinscher. Biopsy of the lesion
will confirm the nature of the membranes.
8.26 Ligneous conjunctivitis in a Doberman Pinscher. Note the 
Therapy
dramatic swelling of the conjunctiva that was firm with a relatively
Ligneous conjunctivitis has been resistant to convential
normal cornea at this time. The dog also had oral and skin lesions 
conjunctivitis therapy. The most successful therapy has
and eventually developed a keratitis. The condition wa5
been systemic prednisolone and azathioprine, with
 nonresponsive to topical therapies.
topical cyclosporine. In humans, an infant
was
Conjunctivitis secondary to physical irritation
Introduction/etiology
detailed examination of the eye and adnexa. Mechanical
Conjunctivitis due to irritation is usually mild to modest
factors such as distichiasis must be evaluated based on
in severity, with a serous to mucoid exudation. The
whether their presence correlates with the location and
factors for irritation can be endogenous or exogenous.
extent of signs. Entropion may cause conjunctivitis or be
Endogenous sources are usually aberrant anatomic
 produced by conjunctival irritation; therefore, both eyes
relationships such as trichiasis, distichiasis, entropion,
should be evaluated.
ectropion, exophthalmos, lagophthalmos, and nasal
folds. The cornea may be involved, with an ulcerative or
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF CONJUNCTIVITIS
superficial keratitis. Exogenous factors may be foreign
FROM OTHER OCULAR DISEASE
bodies of various forms, from fiberglass to plant awns.
Conjunctivitis is the most common ocular diagnosis in
Dust and wind are common irritants. Hunting dogs that
practice, but it is important to avoid overdiagnosing it
are frequently in the water may have problems with their
and undertreating a more serious intraocular syndrome.
eyes and ears throughout the working season.
Conjunctivitis produces a *red eye' and the emphasis is
usually on differentiating it from other conditions that
Diagnosis
produce conjunctival hyperemia. Conjunctivitis must be
Diagnosis is based mainly on history and exclusion of
differentiated from anterior uveitis and glaucoma.
other causes. Endogenous irritations are often obvious
 Scleritis and episcleritis are also important diseases that
on detailed examination. Exogenous sources of irritation
may mimic conjunctivitis. Differentiation of intraocular
are usually bilateral, unless due to a foreign body.
disease from conjunctivitis is important but is usually not
difficult in most instances if the clinician looks beyond
Therapy
the hyperemic conjunctiva (Table 8.5). The error of not
Removal of the source of irritation is usually curative,
observing is much more common than observing and not
although a topical antibiotic-steroid preparation is
correctly interpreting signs.
usually used if corneal ulceration is not present.
Uncomplicated conjunctivitis does not involve the
interior of the eye; therefore, signs such as anisocoria,
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF
 appreciable variation of ocular tension, anterior chamber
CAUSES OF CONJUNCTIVITIS
flare, and decreased visual acuity indicate intraocular
In general, serous to mucoid discharge of acute duration is
disease. The cornea is not involved in simple
suggestive of an irritant, allergic, or viral cause and not a
conjunctivitis, but in complicated or chronic cases a
bacterial cause. Chronic serous to mucoid discharge is
keratoconjunctivitis may be present. Thus, clarity of the
generally
the same etiology, although bacterial
cornea may not be a differentiating factor between
components are probably emerging as contributing
intraocular disease and complicated conjunctivitis.
factors. If the discharge is mucopurulent, this suggests
 Pain is quite variable in all the categories, and if present
definite bacterial association or complications; in addition,
with conjunctivitis, corneal ulceration should be looked
the status of the tear secretion should be evaluated.
for with fluorescein stain. Patients with conjunctivitis
The cause of conjunctivitis is determined by the
often do not exhibit pain but, when present, pain is mild
history, conjunctival cytology and culture, STT, and
to modest and in humans is described as “like having sand
CONJUNCTIVA AND THIRD EYELID
199
Table 8.5 Differential diagnosis of conjunctival hyperemia
Anterior uveitis
Conjunctivitis
Glaucoma
 Conjunctiva
Not thickened; episcleral 
Thick, folded, and hyperemic;
Not thickened
vessels easily seen
 episcleral vessels concealed
Conjunctival vessels
Selective injection of large 
Diffuse injection of
 Selective injection of large
conjunctival veins
conjunctival vessels, usually
 conjunetival veins
palpebral
 Secretion or discharge
Often serous
Serous to mucopurulent
 Often serous
Pain
Moderate (acute)
None to slight
 Subtle, behavior changes
Photophobia
Moderate
Mild
Slight
Cornea
Variable degree of edema
Clear
Variable degree of edema
 Pupil size 
Small, sluggish, iregular,
Normal
 Dilated, moderate to complete,
or fixed
fixed
Pupillary light response
Poor
Normal
Absent
Intraocular pressure
If uncomplicated will be low
Normal
Elevated
8.27
8.28
8.27 Diffuse conjunctival hyperermia, primarily of the palpebral
8.28 Selective conjunctival injection of the large vessels and
conjunctiva, that is typical of most cases of atopic conjunctivitis
the deeper episcleral vessels in a dog with secondary glaucoma
in dogs.
 (lymphosarcoma related). This vascular pattern is typical of
intraocular disease.
or grit in the eye(s)'. Anterior uveitis, especially of acute
examination. In conjunctivitis, the palpebral conjunctiva
onset, has appreciable pain, but in chronic cases, pain may
is
most commonly l
hyperemic, and the bulbar
not be noted. Glaucoma has variable amounts of pain
conjunctiva, when involved, is most severely hyperemic
ranging from severe to not appreciable. Ocular pain may
near the fornix, decrea sing toward the limbus (8.27). The
hyperemia of conjunctivitis is diffuse, involving even 
retraction of the globe in the orbit, but also by changes in
small caliber vessels.
behavior such as excessive sleeping or lethargy, rubbing
In glaucoma and anterior uveitis, deep congestion is very
the eye on the ground, and worsening of temperament.
noticeable just posterior to the limbus, in the episcleral
Ocular discharge of varia ble character may be found with
vessels and scleral venous plexus that lie under the conjunc-
all three conditions.
tiva. The conjunctival vessels which are engorged are the
Conjunctival  vascular  injection or congestion  is
numerous veins that drain the deeper scleral veins (8.28).
present in both conjunctivitis and intraocular disease.
The conjunctiva between the draining veins is not diffusely
The pattern of vascular congestion varies on close
hyperemic, as would be expected with conjunctivitis.
200
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Episcleritis/scleritis has a similar selective large conjunctival
8.29
 venous engorgement and, in addition, the episclera is
thickened to nodular, obscuring the scleral veins (8.29).
Episcleritis/scleritis often involves the peripheral cornea
with a rim of edema and neovascularization. An anterior
uveitis may be present with deep scleritis.
The pupil is a sensitive indicator of the presence of
intraocular disease. Unilateral  intraocular disease
produces anisocoria. In general, glaucoma dilates the pupil
and anterior uveitis contracts the pupil. Prior drug therapy,
 synechia, iris atrophy, and denervation may alter the pupil.
No change is expected with simple conjunctivitis.
Principles of therapy
When treating routine superficial infections of the eye
such as conjunctivitis, it is a good principle to use an
antibiotic or a combination of antibiotics which is not
generally administered systemically. This decreases the
 8.29 A dog with selective vascular injection with thickening of the
possibility of sensitizing the patient to a drug which may
episcleral tissue typical of episcleritis. Note the thin peripheral rim of
have some value in future systemic administration. Also,
corneal edema and early neovascularization.
the indiscriminate use of potent antibiotics is more likely
to result in resistant strains of bacteria and, as a result,
may eliminate future effectiveness in systemic therapy.
8.30
Topical therapy is adequate in the majority of instances,
and the frequency and duration of therapy varies
 depending on the severity and chronicity of the infection.
Most simple cases of acute bacterial conjunctivitis will
respond to therapy q6-8h for 7-10 days, whereas chronic
cases may require an intermittent or continuous low-
frequency therapy for prolonged periods of time if the 
underlying cause can not be determined or removed.
TRAUMA-ASSOCIATED CONDITIONS
SUBCONJUNCTIVAL HEMORRHAGE
Introduction/etiology
Subconjunctival hemorrhage is a common, often
dramatic lesion, but is of little consequence. However, it
signals that possible ocular trauma has occurred or
8.30 Petechial hemorrhages on the palpebral surface of the third
systemic disease may be present. Both eyes and the head
 eyelid in a dog with immune-mediated thrombocytopenia.
should be examined for other evidence of trauma, and a
good physical examination carried out for clues of
systemic disease. Owners often presume trauma when
they observe hemorrhage, and unless the trauma has
been observed or there is other evidence such as
8.31
abrasions of the head, it is often best to rule out other
 In neonatal foals, 8% may have subconjunctival
hemorrhage, usually in the dorsal conjunctiva. The
presence of subconjunctival hemorrhage is related to
foaling difficulty and is more common in multiparous
 mares that foal more rapidly. The hemorrhage resolves
spontaneously and has no long-term implications124.
Causes of subconjunctival hemorrhage include:
 Trauma: subconjunctival hemorrhage most commonly
 originates from direct trauma, but choking injuries
creating elevated intravascular pressure in the head
may produce subconjunctival hemorrhage.
 Blood dyscrasia and bleeding or clotting deficiency:
due to neoplasm, toxin, infection, or autoimmune
origin.
Vasculitis: may be either infectious, immune-, 0r
8.31 Acute diffuse subconjunctival hemorrhage in a puppy with a
neoplastic-mediated.
strangula tion injury.
CONJUNCTIVA AND THIRD EYELID
201
Clinical signs
8.32
A variable amount of blood is present under the bulbar
conjunctiva; this can be either unilateral or bilateral.
 Depending on the duration of the hemorrhage, the color
willrange from bright red (acute) to blue-green
(reabsorbing stage). The hemorrhage(s) may be petechial,
or be flat with little conjunctival elevation. In severe cases,
the conjunctiva is elevated (8.30-8.32). Occasionally, retro-
orbital hemorrhage may dissect rostrally to  the
subconjunctival space and present with additional signs of
anterior displacement of the globe, decreased retropulsion
of the globe, and prolapse of the third eyelid.
Diagnosis
A definite history of observed trauma or other evidence
 of trauma to the head should be present rather than
assumed. Alternatively, tra uma is diagnosed by exclusion
8.32 A dog with marked subconjunctival hemorrhage due to
by
performing a complete ocular and physical
dicoumarol poisoning. Retrobulbar hemorrhage had dissected
examination and searching for additional evidence of
 anteriorly into the subconjunctival space.
bleeding or coagulation defects. When trauma is the
cause of subconjunctival hemorrhage, it is a warning that
other ocular structures may have been disrupted, and a
8.33
complete ocular examination of both eyes should be
performed for accurate prognosis.
Therapy
Specific therapy for hemorrhage is not given unless the
 underlying etiology is treatable. Cold compresses may be
given in the peracute stage. Trauma to the lids and
sisoy au on ssaus suzqeisap e aq Ae Baounuo
mucous membranes, and a s
secondary  bacterial
conjunctivitis may develop and need treatment with
anti biotics. Most cases of traumatic origin do not require
any therapy, although antibiotics are often administered
 as a placebo to satisfy the owner.
LACERATIONS
 Most lacerations confined to the conjunctiva and less
than 0.s-1 cm will probably heal rapidly without
8.33 Prolapsed orbital fat in the lower conjunctival cul-de-sac of an
suturing. If the conjunctival insertion of the third eyelid
older horse. The third eyelid was rudimentary or had been excised
is torn, sutures are frequently necessary as the tissues do
(possibly for squamous cell carcinoma]. The owner had just purchased
not remain in apposition. If suturing is necessary, 6-0 gut
the horse so no history was available.
Or other absorba ble suture is utilized.
SUBCONJUNCTIVAL PROLAPSE OF ORBITAL FAT
8.34
Either congenital defects, senile weakness, or traumatic
rupture of the orbital septum may allow orbital fat to
prolapse under the conjunctiva. This presents as dorsal or
ventral, smooth, nonirritating swellings. The condition
may be unilateral or bilateral, and has been observed more
often in large animals than in the dog or cat. In cattle,
subconjunctival orbital fat is commonly observed dorsally
when the dorsal lid is retracted and the eye is rolled
ventrally. In the horse, the author has repeatedly observed
prolapse of orbital fat after third eyelid excision for SCC
(8.33). The condition may be surgically corrected by
excision and suturing the orbital septum, or ignored.
NEOPLASIA
 Neoplasia of the conjunctival surface is most common in
the horse and cow and is discussed further with third
eyelid and corneal neoplasia. The most common
8.34 Squamous cell carcinoma on the temporal limbus of a cow.
neoplasm of the conjunctiva in large animals is SCC
This is the most cormmon site of occurrence of Scc in cattle. Note 
(8.34). The occurrence of SCC in general is thought to be
the lack of periocular and lid pigmentation.
related to ultraviolet (UV) radiation and genetic
202
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
susceptibility, that in part is related to periocular and
Lymphoma in the horse and cow produces a bilateral
conjunctival infiltration that manifests as chemosis or
incidence of SCC was >S0% in cattle over 7 years of
swelling without significant redness (8.35). In one study
agel27. Clearly, advising on genetic selection has to be an
of lymphoma in the horse, the eye and adnexa was
important factor in treating herds with SCC. On a
involved in 20% of cases, and infiltration of the
molecular basis, mutations of the p53 tumor suppression
conjunctiva was the most common ocular lesion130. On
gene ha ve been implicated in UV-related skin cancers. The
physical examination, a marked lymphadenopathy is
p53 tumor suppressor gene monitors the genome and
regulates the cell cycle, delaying DNA replication if DNA
with lymphoma, but the ocular lesion may precede overt
is damaged. Mutant p53 may result in uncontrolled cell
systemic involvement130, 131
growth  and   selection
of
 malignant 
clones128.
 Mast cell tumors involving conjunctival surfaces have
Overexpression of the p53 gene has been demonstrated in
 been observed by the author in the dog, cat, and horse
SCC of the horse, cow, cat, and dog128, 129.
(8.36). Subconjunctival masses in the dog are chronic
and apparently benign, in that they respond to surgical
As SCCs have a strong genetic and environmental
excision132. Due to the unpredictable nature of mast cell
component, it is best to explain to the owners that
tumors, this may be the exception.
SCC is a treatable but not curable disease. The
Conjunctival melanoma is fortunately infrequent, since
individual lesion may be cured but new lesions
it is probably the most aggressive form of melanoma that
are likely to develop elsewhere. Periodic rechecks
arises from ocular tissue. In the horse, melanoma of the
are critical.
conjunctiva has rarely been reported, so insufficient data on
8.35
8.36
8.35 A Holstein cow with conjunctival swelling due to lymphosarcoma
8.36 Mast cell tumor in a horse arising from the palpebral
that mimics chemosis. Note the lack of hyperemia and tearing. The 
conjunctiva. lt was treated by excision and beta-radiation therapy.
 condition was bilateral and peripheral lymphadenopathy was present.
8.37
8.38
8.37 Conjunctival melanoma invading the cornea in a horse. The 
8.38 Conjunctival melanoma arising from the third eyelid in a
lesion had previously been resected and it relapsed after further
13-year-old dog.
resection and adjunctive diode laser therapy.
CONJUNCTIVA AND THIRD EYELID
203
involve the cornea by the time of presentation, and must be
differentiated from epibulbar melanoma that is progressing
should be treated by enucleation rather than excision. Wide
into the cornea and intraocular melanoma that has
excision is usually not possible and hemangiosarcomas
penetrated the sclera. Canine and feline conjunctival
appear resistant to adjunctive therapy of radiation,
melanoma is locally aggressive and may metastasize134-136
cryotherapy, chemotherapy, or immunotherapy. Murphy et
The third eyelid is the most common location for
al.142 reported bilateral hemangioma in a dog. Conjunctival
conjunctival melanoma of the dog (8.38, 8.39). Recurrence
hemangioma and hemangiosarcoma may recur in the dog.
 after surgical excision is common, and the preferred therapy
 uo pasal pahoda uaaq nou seu sisisiau ing
numbers)142, 143. The author has noted very aggressive
Conjunctival vascular tumors are most common in the
dog and horse. The vascular lesions may range from small
specimens that invaded the globe, and thus not all would
areas of telangiectasis {angiokeratoma) to hemangioma and
appear to be benign in behavior. Therapy should be wide
hemangiosarcoma. Angiokeratoma is a small, localized, red
excision and if this is not possible, enucleation.
raised lesion that does not progress and may be found on
the conjunctiva or third eyelid (8.40)137,138, Hemangiomas
 and hemangiosarcomas arise from the temporal limbal
MISCELLANEOUS CONJUNCTIVAL DISEASES
region and the third eyelid, perhaps reflecting the
relationship to solar radiation exposure (8.41). In the
ECTOPIC LACRIMAL GLAND TISSUE
Ectopic lacrimal gland tissue has been described under
Lesions are usually hemangiosarcomas and should be
the dorsal conjunctiva and involving the cornea of a
 4-month-old GSD144, Excisional biopsy was curative.
8.39
8.40
8.39 Massive conjunctival melanoma that had previously been
8.40 Angiokeratoma in a 9-year-old mixed breed dog.
 excised in an elderly mixed breed dog. Enucleation was performed.
8.41
8.42
8.41 Hemangioma of the third eyelid in an 11-year-old Brittany.
8.42 Aggressive hemangiosarcoma of the temporal conjunctiva in an
elderly white horse. The prognosis is guarded.
204
O pHThAlMIC DiseAse In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
INCLUSION CYSTS
Diagnosis
Inclusion cysts in the conjunctiva have been reported in
Identification of the free margin of the everted cartilage
the dog142, They appear as smooth, relatively small,
and demonstration of the scrolling may be performed
cystic structures that are diagnosed and treated by
with forceps. Occasionally, eversion of the cartilage may
excisional biopsy. The cause is unknown, although
be combined with a prolapsed gland. The main
trauma and therapy with ointments have been suggested.
 differential diagnosis is prolapse of the gland of the third
eyelid, which is more common.
CONJUNCTIVAL OVERGROWTH
A condition of progressive covering of the cornea by an
Therapy
overgrowth of bulbar conjunctiva may be observed
lin
 If the dog is 3-4 months of age, it may be advisable to wait 
rabbits. The dwarf or dwarf-cross rabbit may
be
for spontaneous improvement and treat the ocular irritation
predisposed. The conjunctiva is not adherent and
with topical steroids. 
Most cases do not improve
consists of a fold of redundant bulbar conjunctiva that
spontaneously, and surgical correction is necessary to make
progressively covers the cornea over several weeks.
a cosmetic improvement. Surgery consists of removing the
Simple excision usually results in regrowth. The cause is
bent portion of the cartilage through the bulbar conjunctiva,
unknown  and therapy has  consisted  of excision
combined with topical cyclosporine14s.
suturing as a third eyelid flap to the upper lid or globe during
 the healing process. The placement of the third eyelid over
CONGENITAL DISEASES OF THE
the globe allows the tissues to heal with a normal curvature
rather than allowing the free margin to be loose and floppy.
THIRD EYELID
COLOBOMA
EVERSION
A notch defect that bisects the third eyelid has been observed
Eversion of the third eyelid is a sporadic and fairly
in the horse and dog. The defect is bilateral and occurs with
benign condition found in developing large breed dogs.
other congenital ocular anomalies such as corneal dermoids
In the German Shorthair Pointer, it is thought to be
and coloboma of the optic nerve. The defect results in a
inherited as a recessive trait, but the inheritance is
reduced protective capability. Improvement can be made
unknown in other breeds146. The deformity has been
postulated to be due to either unequal growth rates of the
two conjunctival surfaces or a primary deformity of the
 prolapsed with the defect and may need reducing.
cartilage. Everted cartilage has been described as a
 genetic deformity seen in the Burmese cat, but it is not 
NONPIGMENTED MARGIN
clear whether it develops with growth {as in the dog), due
Introduction/etiology
to the variation in ages at presentation147.
The free margins of one or both third eyelids may be
 nonpigmented. This condition is often associated with
Clinical signs
other albinoid features such as blue irides, white hair,
Everted cartilage manifests as either unilateral or bilateral
and pink skin.
scrolling forward of the free margin of the third eyelid
(8.43). A serous ocular discharge is usually present and
Clinical signs
initially the conjunctival surface is very hyperemic.
The
The lack of a pigmented border to the third eyelid is
condition persists indefinitely, although in some instances it
usually most obvious when it is unilateral and the
improves spontaneously with growth. Chronic cases develop
contrast between the two eyes is noted (8.44). Patients
 pigmentation of the surface and become less noticeable.
are often presented for ocular irritation, due to the
8.43
8.44
8.43 Everted cartilage of the third eyelid in a young Great Dane. A
8.44 Unilateral lack of pigment on the free margin of the third
scrolling forward of the free margin is present and the gland is not 
eyelid in a Saluki. The asymmetrical pink tissue draws the observer's
visible. A seromucoid discharge is present.
eye to that side of the head.
CONJUNCTIVA AND THIRD EYELID
205
obvious pinkness, but this may be more apparent than
ACQUIRED DISEASES OF THE THIRD EYELID
real. The nonpigmented conjunctiva is more prone to
actinic radiation and, perhaps, carcinoma.
PROLAPSE OF THIRD EYELID GLAND (CHERRY EYE)
Introduction/etiology
Diagnosis
 Prolapse of third eyelid gland is a disease of young dogs,
Diagnosis is by observation.
from 4 weeks to 2 years of age. Cats rarely exhibit the
condition154, with the exception fBurmesel47,150,153A
Therapy
 unilateral or bilateral prolapse of the gland may appear as
Usually, symptomatic treatment of the conjunctivitis is
 a red mass in the medial canthus. The prolapse is sudden
given in the form of low-dose topical steroids or a
in onset but it may regress once or twice for a few days and
decongestant. Tattooing of the third eyelid margin is not
finally returns to remain for the animal's life. Certain
necessary or permanent in most instances.
breeds such as the American Cocker Spaniel, English
Bulldog, Boston Terrier, Lhasa Apso, Shih Tzu, Beagle, and
Dermoid
Pekingese are more prone to develop the condition. These
Dermoids involving the conjunctiva may be restricted to
are largely the same breeds that are prone to develop KCS.
the conjunctiva or involve the cornea and/or eyelid. The
The etiology is unknown, and there is disagreement as to
condition is usually recognized by finding a raised island
whether inflammation predisposes the animal to prolapse.
of hairs, and this is easily removed {8.45) (see Chapter
Dugan et aliss found only mild surface inflammation
10, p.241). Dermoids are sporadic and relatively
associated with prolapse in the Beagle. The histologic
uncommon. They are reported to be inherited in the
features in the gland may vary between breeds predisposed
Burmese cat and, perhaps, the GSD, Saint Bernard, and
to KCS and those not predisposed, such as the Beagle.
Severin1s6, without evidence, suggested that the condition 
is due to weak fibrous structures that normally hold the
gland in place.
aq o ieadde keu sha kuauo saouesunp uelo napun
8.45
infectious. Several dogs housed in proximity may develop the
condition and, occasionally, a febrile patient with depression,
tonsillitis, and partial anorexia may develop a cherry eye.
 Usually there is no history of systemic involvement.
Protrusion of the gland of the third eyelid is
occasionally observed in older animals, and these
animals should be investigated for orbital disease using
the history and a physical examination. Cherry eye has
been observed in dogs after orbital cellullitis and in dogs
with orbital neopla sia.
Clinical signs
Sudden development of a red mass at the medial canthus
is the most dramatic sign (8.46, 8.47). Acute cases often
have a mucopurulent discharge and may have have
reduced tear production1ss. Chronic cases develop
8.45 A dermoid in an Aberdeen Angus calf involving the third eyelid
pigmentation of the conjunctival surface and the gland
 and cornea.
8.46
8.47
8.46 Prolapsed gland of the third eyelid in a young American Cocker
8.47 Very large prolapsed gland of the third eyelid in a Shar Pei.
Spaniel. The condition was bilateral. Note the mucopurulent exudate that
Note the puffy conjunctiva that is typical of this breed.
can accompany a transient sicca or secondary bacterial infection.
206
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
become less noticeable. Corneal ulceration rarely develops
Excision
 as a complication. Usually there are no deleterious effects
Although not recommended by veterinary ophthalmolo-
 to the eye except for the risk of developing KCS.
gists, excision of the gland is still widely practiced by the
 general practioner. Excision is not the preferred method
Diagnosis
used by most ophthalmologists, as patients that have
 Diagnosis of a prolapsed third eyelid gland is made by
been treated by glandular excision and subsequently
observation of a red mass protruding over the free
 margin of the third eyelid.
found that 48% of 27 eyes treated by glandular excision
developed KCS within 0.S-6 years of surgery. In dogs
Therapy
that had the gland replaced, 14% developed KCS and
Initial  treatment  with a  topical antibiotic/steroid
42% developed KCS if the gland was allowed to remain
0l pueg aul asneo oi kuaisue1 1eadde Aew uoueiedaid
prolapsed. When only the high risk breeds for KCS were
become replaced. Prolapse may occur two or three times
evaluated, 59% developed KCS with excision of the
and eventually the gland remains prolapsed.
gland, 17% with gland replacement, and 75% when no
treatment was given.
8.48
8.48 Tacking of the prolapsed gland
to the orbital rim in a dog. This
 requires general anesthesia.
 Prolapsed gland of third eyelid (A].
Scissors are used to cut the fornix
of the conjunctiva in front of the 
third eyelid (B). A 1-0 or 2-0
monofilament suture with a cutting
needle is used to place the
anchoring portion of the suture to
the periosteum of the rim of the 
orbit (C). This is the most critical
 5tep and may be guided by a finger
on the skin side. If anchored 
correctly, the suture is very firm 
when tugged on.The needle is then 
passed from the outer surface of
the third eyelid to the inner side.
emerging on the top and to one side
 of the prolapsed gland. The needle
is then passed back into the hole 50
that little if any exposed suture is
present, and the needle is passed 
across to the opposite side of the 
top of the gland (D). The needle is
then redirected back into the tract 
and down to emerge in the original
incision and tied (E). Cross-section
of the third eyelid with gland pulled 
down and anchored to the rim of
the orbit (F).
CONJUNCTIVA AND THIRD EYELID
207
Repositioning the gland 
the posterior surface with the lymphoid follicles. Thus,
Because of the risk of KCS, various techniques have been
any technique that debrides the posterior surface to
developed for replacing and anchoring the gland in a
create adhesions may obliterate the ducts. Tacking the
more correct anatomic position.
 gland to the orbital rim (8.48, 8.49) gives good results if
A desirable technique should not only reposition the
the gland is well anchored to the orbital rim1s9, 160. The
 gland but spare the ducts on the bulbar surface. Moore
modification of Stanley and Kaswan allows easier
et al.1s8 investigated the location of the ducts of the third
placement of the critical orbital rim anchor.
eyelid gland and found multiple ducts that all exited onto
 8.49 Modification of the original
8.49
tacking procedure in 8.48. A skin 
incision is made over the medial 
ventral orbital rim (A, B] and the
 suture is anchored to the 
periosteum (C). The orbital rim is
 closer to the skin in larger dogs
 and it is easier to place the
 anchoring bite from this vantage
 point than from the conjunctival
fornix. The remaining suture
 pattern is similar to the original
procedure (D-F).
E
208
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
Anchoring techniques are  relatively difficult  to
Pocket technique on the bufbar surface of the third eyefid
perform and may fail if incorrectly performed. The risk of
(8.50) Two parallel incisions into the bulbar conjunctival
infection is probably higher when a monofilament suture
surface on either side of the prola psed gland are created,
is buried. Postoperatively, dogs with large palpebral
and the bases of these incisions are joined with a simple
fissures may ha ve the third eyelid more prominent.
continuous suture. When the suture is tightened the gland
8.50 A
8.50 Pocket procedure for replacing the third eyelid gland of a dog. Third eyelid everted with prolapsed gland (A]. A conjunctival incision through
the bulbar surface near the fornix (B). A second parallel incision adjacent to lymphoid follicles made with a blade and avoiding transection of the
cartilage (C). Two parallel incisions that do not meet (D]. A simple continuous suture of 6-0 absorbable suture (E). A bite is taken and knot tied on
the palpebral face before penetrating to the bulbar face. Cut conjunctival edges can be apposed or bites taken at the bottom of incisions and
apposed. The completed running suture with knot tied on palpebral side to avoid corneal irritation (F).
CONJUNCTIVA AND THIRD EYELID
209
is forced ventrally. The knots may be tied on the outside
8.51
pe suag au ie anq aiuand e uei aq aons
end of the suture pattern on the outside surface. The two
incisions should not connect; this avoids formation of a
retention cyst. This technique was 94% successful in one
studyi57. ‘The most common complications are
recurrence, a corneal ulcer from the suture knots, and a
retention cyst {8.51). The author has seen a recurrence of
prolapse 1-2 years after replacement, and the surgical
a dhesions were still in place.
Unfortunately, all the surgical techniques for gland
replacement may ha ve the complication of
reprolapse. Some breeds such as the English
Bulldog, Shar Pei, and Neopolitan Mastiff are more
prone to this complication.
8.51 Cyst formation 2 years after a pocket procedure for a prolapsed 
FOLLICULAR CONJUNCTIVITIS OF THE THIRD EYELID
gland in a dog. It was treated by opening the cyst from the bulbar
Introduction/etiology
side and allowing drainage. The gland remained in place.
Follicular conjunctivitis occurs primarily in dogs. Some
forms of conjunctivitis have a pronounced follicular
reaction, and the third eyelid is preferentially involved
heaq au uo sas lu al jo isday on an
surface. The cause is unknown, but is generally
considered to be due to chronic antigenic stimulation in
the dog. In the cat (Chlamydophila felis, herpesvirus),
horse (Oncbocerca spp.), and cattle (herpesvirus),
infectious agents may be  responsible.
Follicular
formation in the horse is typically perilimbal.
Any chronic antigenic stimulation to the conjunctival
surfaces is thought to be capable of initiating follicular
 hyperplasia. Other mucous membranes such as the prepuce
or vagina may have similar proliferations. A herpesvirus
has been discounted as an etiology in the dog42,43.
Clinical signs
Dogs are usually presented with a serous ocular
discharge, hyperemia and, in addition, marked follicular
hyperplasia on both conjunctival surfaces of the third
8.52 Marked follicular hyperplasia and hypertrophy of the normal
eyelid and oten the remaining conjunctiva (8.52). Some
patch of follicles on the bulbar surface of the third eyelid of a dog.
 dogs may have blepharospasm and the lids may appear
thickened in extreme cases. The author has observed
multiple pyogranulomas restricted to the inner third
8.53
eyelid of the dog,
. that mimicked severe follicular
conjunctivitis (8.53).
4. The cause was unknown, but
excision was curative.
Diagnosis
Careful observation of the conjunctival surfaces,
including both sides of the third eyelid, will reveal
numerous small raised lymphoid follicles. Determination
 of the cause of the hyperplasia is usually based on history
 and is presumptive.
8.53 Chronic conjunctivitis of the third eyelid that involved
both eyes in a dog. Excisional biopsy revealed pyogranuloma
 of unknown cause.
210
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
Therapy
Eosinophilic granuloma
If excess follicles are present, part of the therapy should be
In the cat, eosinophilic granuloma involves various
 directed at their removal. Follicles may be treated either by
ocular and adnexal tissues including the eyelids, cornea,
excision when clustered, such as on the inner third eyelid,
conjunctiva, orbit, and third eyelid162. Third eyelid
scraping off with a blade or gauze, or cauterizing with
 involvement is characterized by bilateral large red masses
copper sulfate crystals. The latter treatment can be easily
that are attached to the palpebral surface of the third
overdone and often is worse to tolerate than the disease.
eyelid. The lesions are covered with foci of white caseous
Removal of follicles is followed with topical glucocorticoid
material. An allergic cause has not been determined, and
therapy. Glucocorticoid therapy alone is not as effective as
excision followed by topical glucocorticoid therapy is
when combined with follicle removal.
curative. Herpesvirus testing would be prudent as
Nasisse et al.163 found that 76% of feline eosinophilic
Plasma cell conjunctivitis
keratitis patients were positive on PCR testing for FEV-1.
Introduction/etiology
GSD, GSD crosses, and Collie types may develop a bilateral
INFECTIOUS CAUSES OF INFLAMMATION
pinkish-gray nodular infiltration of the margin of the third
 eyelid that produces a thickening and loss of the pigmented
OF THE THIRD EYELID
margin. Some, but not all, of these dogs may eventually
 develop pannus or an immune-mediated keratitis. On
The infectious causes of conjunctivitis, previously
cytology/histology, the infiltration is found to be due to
discussed in the cat, usually involve the third eyelid.
plasma cells and thus the condition is thought to be
When the third eyelid is protruded, due to discomfort, it
immune mediated. The course of the disease is chronic161
may appear to be the predominant conjunctival surface
that is involved. Cryptococcus neoformans produced
Clinical signs
marked bilateral granulomatous reactions in the third
Plasma cell conjunctivitis manifests as a bilateral
eyelid of a cat without intraocular lesions (8.ss)164, No
thickening of exposed third eyelids with a gray-pink
other systemic signs were present or developed, even
infiltrate (8.54). A serous to seromucoid ocular discharge
though the cat had antigenemia, and the condition
accompanies the infiltration. Plasma cell conjunctivitis
 responded to systemic itraconazole.
may occur with chronic superficial keratoconjunctivitis.
Therapy
LACERATIONS OF THE THIRD EYELID
The most important and least practical therapy is to
change the environment. Hospitalization can result in
Lacerations involving the cartilage, even if they are very
noticeable improvement in some cases. Topical or
small, need suturing or they will leave a permanent
subconjunctival steroids only produce a very modest
cosmetic defect. Larger lacerations  involving
the
response. Similarly, beta-radiation therapy will improve
conjunctival attachments should have two layers of
the condition, but often topical glucocorticoids are still
absorba ble suture to minimize dehiscence (8.56).
necessary. Topical 0.2% cyclosporine q12h gives
excellent clinical and histopathologic improvement over
6 weeks. Therapy is presumed to be needed indefinitely.
8.54
8.55
8.54 Pasma cell conjunctivitis of the third eyelid in a German
8.55 Granulomatous inflammation of both third eyelids in a cat that 
Shepherd Dog. Note the roughened gray surface with depigmentation
wa5 due to Cryptococcus neoformans. No other ocular or 5ystemic 
of the margin of the third eyelid. The condition is bilateral.
lesions were noted and the condition responded well to topical and
Systemic antifungal therapy.
CONJUNCTIVA AND THIRD EYELID
211
FOREIGN BODIES OF THE THIRD EYELID
+
 Sympathetic denervation: Horner's syndrome, which
also has miosis and ptosis and is usually unilateral.
 Foreign bodies, usually from plant material, will lodge
Key-Gaskell syndrome in cats is a generalized 
behind the third eyelid, creating a refractive ulcerative
keratitis until they are discovered and removed (8.57).
has been described in the UK and parts of Europe.
The condition is usually unilateral, but may be bilateral
The cause is unknown.
and is common in areas with a hot dry season. Retained
+
Ocular pain from the cornea, iris, or conjunctiva
foreign bodies are important in the differential diagnosis
ca uses the globe to be retracted into the orbit,
of infectious keratoconjunctivitis in cattle in the dry
resulting in protrusion. The causes of pain may be
summer of the western US.
unilateral or bilateral.
+
 Increased extraocular muscle tone: if systemic, such
Any nonhealing ulcer, nonresponsive keratitis, or
as with tetanus or strychnine and mycotoxin
persistent blepharospasm should prompt eversion
poisoning, the condition is bilateral. If associated
of the third eyelid to look for a foreign body or a
with extraocular muscle fibrosis and contracture it
source of physical irritation. The longer the interval
may be unilateral.
 between presentation and diagnosis, the more
+
 Idiopathic: diagnosis by exclusion. A bilateral
embarrassment it will cause.
syndrome occurs in the cat that lasts 6-8 weeks and
may be associated with intestinal parasites or
gastrointestinal malfunction. A torovirus-like particle
PROTRUSION OF THE THIRD EYELID
was isolated from 14% of cats with watery diarrhea
Introduction/etiology
jo aus giaaa p supnd e papaad uum
The lay term for a protruding third eyelid is “haws'. The
the cats appeared to have decreased anal sphincter
causes of a protruding third eyelid are numerous, but in
tone. The disease lasted for more than 4 weeks in
 most cases the cause becomes readily apparent if a logical
about half of the cases, but could not be reproduced
algorithm is followed. When searching for the cause of a
by transmitting the virus to kittens. Further work is
 protruded third eyelid, the following should be considered:
needed to define the role of this or other viruses in
· Decreased orbital mass: dehydration and emaciation
 producing these symptoms.
with loss of orbital fat or volume is bilateral, but
traumatic atrophy may be unilateral. The eyes
 The protrusion of the third eyelid is a sensitive
become enophthalmic and the third eyelid protrudes.
 indicator of changes in orbital/ocular mass and
Decreased ocular mass: microphthalmos and phthisis
ocular pain.
bulbi, which may be bilateral or unilateral.
 Increased orbital mass: inflammation, neoplasia,
hemorrhage. These are usually unilateral, although
 multicentric neoplasia such as lymphoma will
 produce bilateral disease.
8.56
8.57 A dog with a
8.57
plant foreign body
behind the third
eyelid that had 
created a
superficial corneal
ulcer. Note the
amount of corneal
neova scularization
which correlates
with the duration
of injury. (Courtesy
of Dr. M. Wyman.]
8.56 A cat with a large laceration of the conjunctival attachment of
the third eyelid from fighting. Sutured with a two layered closure.
212
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEAsE IN VeTeRiNARY MeDICINE
Therapy
8.58
The cause of the protrusion should be defined and
treated.  Therapy   with topical  sympathomimetics
(epinephrine or phenylephrine q6-8h)  will  improve
idiopathic cases and those due to denervation.
A surgical procedure has been devised for correcting
a protruding third eyelid that involves shortening the
eyelid, but this is usually not necessary. The procedure
involves removing a full-thickness piece of the third
eyelid parallel to the free margin and above the gland.
The width of the excision is the amount of 'shortening'
and the defect is sutured in two layers. The margin can
also be shortened by removing a V-shaped piece at one
endl68. The third eyelid should not be removed for
benign conditions.
CYSTS IN THE THIRD EYELID
Cysts may develop in the base of the third eyelid and
8.58 Blue cyst (dacryops] at the base of the third eyelid in a young
have previously been described as a complication of
Shetland Sheepdog. It was treated by excision.
other disease/surgery: Thelazia spp. infestation in a calf,
 and surgical replacement of a prolapsed third eyelid
gland with the pocket technique {8.50). Spontaneous
cysts may occasionally be observed in the dog,
8.59
 presumably from blockage of the ducts of the third eyelid
smooth surface and, if necessary, by fine needle
aspiration (8.58). Excision is curative.
NEOPLASIA OF THE THIRD EYELID
Tumors of the third eyelid and conjunctiva are relatively
rare in the dog and cat, whereas they are the most
common tumors of the horse and cow. Neoplasms
arising from the conjunctival surfaces are SCC,
papilloma, angiokeratoma, hemangioma, hemangio-
sarcoma, f
fibrosarcoma, melanoma, lymphoma, aden-
 oma, and adenocarcinoma.
Neoplasia of the conjunctival surfaces is most
common in large animals and commonly originates from
the third eyelid and the conjunctiva near the limbus.
SCC of the third eyelid (8.59) is rare in smallanimalst71
8.59 Squamous cell carcinoma at the base of the third eyelid in a
In the cat, SCC is most frequent in the white-furred cat
cat. Note this cat is heavily pigmented.
and usually involves the mucocutaneous junction of the
lid. SCC must be differentiated from the more benign
lesions of papilloma and pseudoepitheliomatous hyper-
plasia172. In the cow, the third eyelid accounts for
8.60
7-15% of ocular and lid SCC, and is the most common
site of origin of ocular SCC in the horse (8.60) {see
Corneal tumors, p.284).
If diagnosed early, excision of the free margin of the
third eyelid with the involved tumor is the treatment of
choice and is relatively simple. When extension occurs to
adjacent conjunctival and corneal surfaces, excision is
more difficult. If the tumor extends deep into the orbit,
the prognosis guarded.
Vascular lesions of the conjunctival surfaces of the
third eyelid include telangiectasia, angiokeratoma,
hemangioma, and hemangiosarcoma (8.40-8.42)173, 174.
Angiokeratomas are benign superficial telangiectasia that
appear as small, red raised lesions that are differentiated
from
hemangiomas
on
histopathology
{8.40).
Angiokeratoma l
has dilated vascular spaces with
hyperplastic epithelium17s.
8.60 Squamous cell carcinoma of the third eyelid in a horse.
Papillomas may occur as one or more lobulated
The third eyelid is the most common site for Scc in the horse.
lesions near the mucocutaneous borders of the lids, and
It was treated by excision and beta-radiation therapy of the 
excisional margin.
CONJUNCTIVA AND THIRD EYELID
213
 involves the conjuncti va and cornea. Young and old dogs
8.61
have been presented with the disease. Young animals
may have oral papillomas, and the_ disease may be
 In a series of 12 conjunctival melanomas in the dog,
 83% arose from the third eyelid, 75% were in females,
and the Weimaraner had a breed predisposition136.
Metastatic rates were 17-33% depending 0n the
criterea used. The recurrence rate was Ss% after
surgical excision, reflecting the difficulty in obtaining
wide excision (8.37-8.39). Fewer reports are available
for the cat, but a malignant potential has been
documentedi80, 181.
Adenocarcinomas may arise from the third eyelid
 gland in all species, but they appear to be relatively rare,
with most of the reports being in the dog. The tumor
frequently recurs due to incomplete removal, and it may
8.61 Viral papilloma on the margin of the third eyelid of a young
metastasize to lymph nodes and lungs in the dog and
Shar Pei. A papilloma was also present in the oral cavity.
Fibrosarcomas have also been reported in the third
eyelid and clinically they may look similar to SCCs175.
 Systemic lymphoma may involve the third eyelid but it
8.62
has also been observed isolated to the third eyelid of the
dog and cat, with no evidence of systemic involvement
(8.62, 8.63). Incomplete excision results in regrowth. In
the author's experience, the disease has been associated
in the cat with FeLV-negative animals. Therapy has been
excision and systemic chemotherapy despite the lack of
obvious systemic neoplasia.
Clinical signs
An obvious mass or roughened area is observed on the
conjunctival surface of the third eyelid. Mild cases may
have only epiphora with a mildly "irritated' surface.
Diagnosis
Cytology or biopsy of the lesion can be performed if the
diagnosis is not obvious. SCC in large animals is so
 characteristic that excisional biopsy and adjunctive
 8.62 Lymphoma that was restricted to the third eyelid of a dog.
therapy are often given at the same time.
Therapy
The mass or the entire third eyelid should be excised if
the lesion is extensive. Neoplasia is one of the few
8.63
indications for entire excision of the third eyelid; keratitis
 may be a sequela of such treatment. Additional therapy
consists of cryotherapy of the remaining tissue, beta-
 radiation therapy, brachytherapy, or chemotherapy.
8.63 Lymphoma nodule involving the third eyelid of a cat that wa5
FelV- and Flv-negative and had no 5ystemic signs. The lymphoma
recurred quickly after simple excision. Excision and systemic
chemotherapy was successful for over 1 year until lost to follow up.
214
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETeRINARY MeDICINE
REFERENCES
1 Martin C, Anderson B {1981) Ocular
 15 Nishimura H, Frisch J (1977) Eye cancer
 26 Gaskell RM (1993) Upper respiratory
anatomy. In: Veterinary Ophthatmotogy.
and circumocular pigmentation in Bos
disease in the cat {including chlamydia):
K Gelatt (ed). Lea and Febiger,
tourus and crossbred cattle. Australion
control and prevention. Fetine Practice
Philadelphia, pp.12-121.
Journat of Experimentat Agriculturat
21:29-34.
 2 Wirtschafter JD, Ketcham JM, Weinstock
Animat Husbandry 17:709-711.
 27 Povey R (1976) Feline respiratory
RJ, Tabesh T, McLoon LK (1999)
16 Roat M, Romanowski E, Araullo-Cruz T,
infections: a clinical review. Canadian
 Mucocutaneous junction as the major
Gordon J (1987) The antiviral effects of
Veter imary Journat 17:93-100.
source of replacement palpebral
rose bengal and fluorescein. Archives of
28 Hoover EA, Rohovsky MW.
conjunctival epithelial cells. Investigative 
Ophthatmology 105:1415-1417.
Griesmer RA (1970) Experimental feline 
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
17 Vrabec M, McCanna P (1988) The effect
viral rhinotracheitis in the germ-free cat.
40:3138-3146
of topically applied fluorescein on
American Journat of Pathology 58:269.
 3 Anderson DE (1991) Genetic study of eye
fluorescent monoclonal antibodies in the
29 Nasisse M, Guy J, Davidson M, Sussman
cancer in cattle. Journat of Heredity
diagnosis of chlamydial conjunctivitis.
W, Fairley N {1989) Experimental ocular
82:21-26.
Armmals of Ophthatmoiogy 20:421-423.
herpesvirus infection in the cat.
4 Bellhorn R, Henkind P {1966) Superficial
18 Da Silva Curiel J, Murphy C, Jang S,
Investigative Ophthatmotogy and Visuat
 pigmentary keratitis in the dog. Journat
 Bellhorn R {1990) Nutritionally variant
Science 30:1758-1768.
of the Armerican Veterinary Medicat
streptococci associated with corneal
30 Bistner S, Carlson J, Shively J, Scott F
Association 149:173-175.
ulcers in horses: 35 cases (1982-1988).
{1971) Ocular manifestations of feline
5 Moore CP, Wilsman N, Nordheim E,
Journat of the American Veterinary
herpesvirus infection. Journat of the 
Majors L, Collier L (1987) Density and 
Medicat Association 197:624-626.
American Veterinary Medicat Association
distribution of canine conjunctival goblet 
 19 Jackson WB (1993) Differentiating
159:1223-1237.
cells. Investigative Ophthatmology and
conjunctivitis of diverse origins. Survey of
 31 Roberts S, Dawson C, Coleman V, Togni
Visuat Science 28:1925-1932.
 Ophthatmology 38(Supplement;:91-104.
B {1972) Dendritic keratitis in a cat.
6 Moore C, Collier L (1990) Ocular surface
 20 Nasisse M, Guy J, Stevens J (1993)
Journat of the American Veterinary
 disease associated with loss of
 Clinical and laboratory findings in
Medicat Association 161:285-288.
conjunctival goblet cells in dogs. Journat
chronic conjunctivitis in cats: 91 cases 
 32 Gaskell RM, Dennis PE, Goddard LE, et
of the American Animat Hospitat
[1983-1991). Journat of the American
αf. {1985) Isolation of feline herpesvirus
Association 26:458-465.
Veterinary Medicat Association
from the trigeminal ganglia of latently
7 Cullen CL, Njaa BL, Grahn BH (1999)
203:834-837.
 infected cats. Journat of Generat Virotogy
 Ucerative keratitis associated with
 21 Stiles J {1995) Treatment of cats with
66:391-394.
qualitative tear film abnormalities in cats.
ocular disease attributable to herpesvirus
33 Nasisse MP, Davis BJ, Guy JS, Davidson
Veterinary Ophthatmotogy 2:197-204.
infection: 17 cases {1983-1993). Journa!
MG, Sussman W {1992) Isolation of 
8 Duke-Elder S (ed) (1958) The eyes of
of the American Veterinary Mecdicat
 feline herpesvirus 1 from the trigeminal
birds In: Systems of Ophthatmotogy: the
Association 207:599-603.
ganglia of acutely and chronically
Eye in Evotution. Mosby, St Louis,
 22 Fairchild G, Wyman M, Donovan E
infected cats. Journat of Veterinary
pp.234-427.
{1967) Fluorescent antibody technique as
Internat Medicine 6:102-103.
 9 Rosenblueth A, Bard P {1932) The
a diagnostic test for canine distemper
34 O'Brien WJ, Taylor JL (1989) The
 innervation and functions of the
 infection: detection of viral antigen in
jsolation of herpes simplex virus from
nictitating membrane in the cat.
epithelial tissues of experimentally
rabbit corneas during latency.
American Journatl of Physiology
infected dogs. American Journat of
Investigative Ophthatmotogy and Visuat
100:537-544.
Veterinary Research 28:761-768.
Science 30:357-364.
10 Nuyttens J, Simoens P {1995)
23 Swango L, Wooding W, Binn L {1970)
35 Kaye SB, Lynas C, Patterson A, Risk JM,
 Morphologic study of the musculature of
Comparison of the pathogenesis and 
McCarthy K, Hart CA {1991) Evidence 
the third eyelid in the cat (Felis catus).
antigenicity of infectious canine hepatitis
for herpes simplex viral latency in the
Laboratory Animat Science 45:561-563.
virus and the A26/61 virus strain
human cornea. British Journat of
11 Powell C (1988) Autonomic imnervation
(Toronto). Journat of the American
Ophthatmotogy 75:195-200.
of the canine lacrimat giands. Masters
Veterinary Medicat Association
36 Stiles J, McDermott M, Bigshy D, et af.
Thesis, University of Georgia.
156:1687-1699.
{1997) Use of nested polymerase chain
12 Thompson JW (1967) The nerve supply
24 ScottF, Kahn D, Gillespie J (1970) Feline 
reaction to identify feline herpesvirus in
to the nictitating membrane of the cat.
viruses: isolation, characterization, and
ocular tissue from clinically normal cats
Journat of Anatomry 95:371-385.
pathogenicity of a feline reovirus.
and cats with corneal sequestra or
13 Prince J, Diesem C, Eglitis L, Ruskell G
American Journat of Veterinary Research
conjunctivitis. American Journat of
(eds) (1960) The orbit and ocular
31:11-20.
Vetermary Research 58:338-342.
adnexa. In: Anatonry and Histology of
25 Ardley R, Gaskell R, Povey R (1974)
37 Stiles J, McDermott M, Willis M,
the Eye and Orbit in Domestic Animais.
 Feline respiratory viruses: their
Roberts W, Greene C (1997)
CC Thomas, Springfield, pp. 3-12.
 prevalence in clinically healthy cats.
Comparison of nested polymerase chain
14 Sakai T, Yohro T {1981) A histological
Journat of Smatl Animat Practice
reaction, virus isolation, and fluorescent
study of the Harderian gland of
15:579-586.
antibody testing for identifying feline
Mongolian gerbils, Meriones meridianus.
herpesvirus in cats with conjunctivitis.
Anatonty Record 200:259-270.
Armerican Journat of Veterinary Research
58:804-807.
CONJUNCTIVA AND THIRD EYELID
215
38 Gaskell RM, Povey RC (1977)
50 Rebhun W, Smith J, Post J, Holden H
61 Weiss R (1989) Synergistic antiviral
Experimental induction of feline viral
{1978) An outbreak of the conjunctival
activities of acyclovir and recombinant
 rhinotracheitis virus re-excretion in FVR
form of infectious bovine rhinotracheitis.
human leukocyte (alpha) interferon on
recovered cats. Veterinary Record
Cornell Veterimarian 68:297-307.
feline herpesvirus replication. American
100:128-133.
 51 Mohanty S, Lillie M, Corselius N, Beck J
Journat of Veterinary Research
39 Speiss B (1985) Symblepharon,
{1972) Natural infection with infectious
50:1672-1677.
 pseudopterygium and partielles
bovine rhinotracheitis virus in goats.
 62 Stiles J, Townsend WM, Rogers QR,
 ankyloblepharon als folgen feliner herpes
Journat of the American Veterinary
Krohne SG (2002) Effect of oral
keratokonjunktivitis. Kleinter Praxis
Medicat Association 160:879-880.
administration of L-lysine on 
30:149-154.
 52 Sykes JE, Anderson GA, Studdert VP,
conjunctivitis caused by feline
40 Nasisse MP, Weigler BJ (1997) The
Browning GF (1999) Prevalence of feline
herpesvirus in cats. American Journat of
diagnosis of ocular feline herpesvirus
Chtamydia psitaci and feline
Veterinary Research 63:99-103.
infection. Veterinary and Conmparative
herpesvirus-1 in cats with upper
63 Herring AJ (1993) Typing Chlamydia
Ophthatmology 7:44-51.
respiratory tract disease. Journat of
psittac: a review of methods and recent
41 Hill H, Mare C {1974) Genital disease in
Veterinary Internat Medicine
fndings. British Veterinary Journa!
dogs caused by canine herpesvirus.
13:153-162.
149:455-475.
Arerican Journat of Veterinary Research
 53 Hickman J, Reubel G, Hoffman D,
 64 Sykes JE (2001) Feline upper respiratory
35:669-672.
Morris J, Rogers Q, Pedersen (1994) An
tract pathogens: Chtamrydophia felis.
42 Jackson J, Corstvet R {1975)
epizootic of feline herpesvirus type 1 in a
Compendium on Contiming Edication
Transmission and attempted isolation of
large specific pathogen-free cat colony
for the Practicing Veterinarian
the etiologic agent associated with
 and attempts to eradicate the infection
23:231-240.
lymphofollicular hyperplasia of the
by identification and culling of carriers.
65 Wyrick PB, Richmond SJ {1989) Biology
canine species. American Journat of
Laboratory Animal 28:320-329.
of chlamydiae. Journat of the American
Veterinary Research 36:1207-1210.
54 Maggs DJ, Lappin MR, Reif JS, et αf.
Veterinary Medicat Asociation
43 Jackson J, Corstvet R {1980) Study of
{1999) Evaluation of serologic and viral
195:1507-1516.
 nictitating membranes and genitalia of
detection methods for diagnosing feline
66 Schachter J, Ostler HB, Meyer KF (1969)
dogs with reference to lymphofollicular
herpesvirus 1 infection in cats with acute
Human infection with the agent of feline
 hyperplasia and its cause. American
 respiratory tract orchronic disease.
pneumonitis. Lancet 1:1063-1065.
Journat of Veterinary Research
Journat of the American Veterinary
67 Schachter J (1989) Chlamydial infections: 
41:1814-1822.
MedicatAssociation 214:502-507.
past, present, future. Journat of the
44 Keller W, Hinz R, Blanchard G (1972)
55 Harbour DA, Howard PE, Gaskell RM 
American Veterinary Medicat Association
Experimentaly produced canine herpetic
{1991) Isolation of feline calicivirus and
195:1501-1506.
keratitis. Proceedings of the Scientific
feline herpesvirus from domestic cats 
68 Hoover E, Kahn D, Langloss J (1978)
Meeting of the American College of
1980-1989. Veterinary Record
Experimentally induced feline chlamydial
Veterinary Ophthatmotogists 3:2-7.
128:77-80.
infection (feline pneumonitis). American
45 McChesney A, England J, Rich L (1973)
 56 Sykes JE, Studdert VP, Browning GF
Journat of Veterinary Research
Adenoviral infection in foals. Journat of
(1999) Comparison of the polymerase 
39:541-547.
the American Veterinary Medicat
chain reaction and cuture for the
69 Shewen P, Povey R, Wilson M (1978)
Association 162:545-549.
detection of feline Chlarrydia psittaci in
 Feline chlamydial infection. Canadian
46 Thein P, Bohm D {1976) Aeiologie und 
umtreated and doxycycline-treated
Veter inary Journat 19:289-292.
kinik einer virsubedingten
experimentally infected cats. Jounat of
 70 Bart MF, Guscetti F Zurbriggen A,
keratokonjunktivitis beim fohlen.
Veterinary Internat Medicine
Popischil A, Schiller I (2000) Feline
 Zentratbiatt fuer Veterinaermedizin
13:146-152.
 infectious pneumonia: a short literature
Reihe B 23:507-519.
57 Cello R {1971) Clues to differential
review and a retrospective
47 Collinson P, O'Rielly J, Ficorilli N,
diagnosis of feline respiratory infections.
immunohistological study on the
 Studdert M (1994) Isolation of equine
Journat of the American Veterinary
involvement of Chlanrydia spp. and
herpesvirus type 2 (equine gamma
Medicat Association 158:968-973.
distemper virus. Veterinary Journat
herpesvirus 2) from foals with
58 Plotkin J, Reynaud A, Okumoto M
159:220-230.
keratoconjunctivitis. Journal of the
{1971) Cytologic study of herpetic
71 Willis J {1988) Prevalence of Chlarrydid
American Veterinary Medicat Association
psittaci in different cat populations in
205:329-331.
85:597-599.
Britain. Journat of Srafl Animat Practice
48 Cook N {1998) Combined outbreak of 
 59 Da Silva Curiel J, Nasisse M, Hook R,
29:327-339.
the genital and conjunctival forms of
Wilson H, Collins B, Mandell C {1991)
72 Cello R {1967) Occular infections in
bovine herpesvirus 1 infection in a UK
Topical fluorescein dye: effects of
animals with PLT (Bedsonia) group
dairy herd. Veterinary Record
immunofluorescent antibody test for
agents. American Journat of
143:561-562.
feline herpesvirus keratoconjunctivitis.
Ophthatmotogy 2:244-248.
49 Abinati F, Plumer G {1961) The isolation
Progressin Veterinary and Comparative
73 Campbell L, Otis B {1983) Ocular
of infectious bovine rhinotracheitis virus
Ophthatmology 1:99-104.
dhanges associated with mycoplasmal,
from cattle affected with conjunctivitis:
60 Nasisse MP, Guy JS, Davidson MG,
dlamydial, and herpesvirus infections in
observations on the experimental
Sussman W, De Clercq E {1989) In vitro
the cat. Modern Veterinary Practice
infection. American Journat of Veterinary
susceptibility of feline herpesvirus-1 to
64:529-531
Research 22:13-17.
vidarabine, idoxuridine, trifluridine,
acyclovir, or bromovinyldeoxyuridine.
Armericam Journat of Veterinary Research
50:158-160.
216
O pHThAlMIC DiseAse In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
74 Hopkins J, Stephenson E, Storz J, Pierson 
87 Rogers D, Frey M, Hogg A {1991)
100 Espinola MB, Lilenbaum W (1996)
R {1973) Conjunctivitis associated with 
Conjunctivitis associated with a
 Prevalence of bacteria in the conjunctival
chlamydial polyarthritis in lambs.
 mycoplasma-like organism in swine.
sac and on the eyelid margin of clinically
Journat of the American Veterinary
Journat of the American Veterinary
normal cats. Joturnat of Small Anima!
Medical Association 163:1157-1160.
Medical Association 198:450-452.
Practice 37:364-366.
 75 Rogers DG, Andersen AA, Hogg A,
 88 Rosendal S (1982) Canine mycoplasmas:
101 Moore C {1988) Prevalence of ocular
Nielsen DL, Huebert MA (1993)
their ecologic niche and role in disease.
 microorganisms in hospitalized and
 Conjunctivitis and keratoconjunctivitis
Journat of the American Veterinary
stabled horses. American Journat of
associated with chlamydiae in swine.
Medicat Association 180:1212-1214.
Veterinary R esearch 49:773-777.
Journat of the American Veterinary
89 Rosendal S {1986) Detection of
102 McLaughlin S, Brightman A, Helper L,
Medicat Association 203:1321-1323.
antibodies to Mycoplasma fetis in horses.
Manning J, Tomes J (1983) Pathogenic
76 Idtse F (1984) Chlamydia and chlamydial
Journat of the American Veterinary
bacteria and fungi associated with
diseases of cattle: a review of the
Medicat Association 188:292-294.
extraocular disease in the horse. Journat
literature. Veterinary Medicine/Smatt
90 Urban M, Wyman M, Reins M, Marraro
of the American Veterinary Medicat
Animat Clinician 79:543-550.
V {1972) Conjunctival flora in clinically
Association 182:241-242.
77 Bech-Nielsen S, Fullton RW,
normal dogs. Journat of the American
103 Samuelson D, Andresen T, Gwin R
Downing MM, Hardy WD (1981) Feline
Veterinary Medical Association
{1984) Conjunctival fungal flora in
infectious peritonitis and viral respiratory
161:201-206.
horses, cattle, dogs, and cats. Journat of
diseases in feline leukemia virus infected
91 Bistner SI, Roberts SR, Anderson RP
the Armericam Veterinary Medicat
cats. Journat of the American Animat
{1969) Conjunctival bacteria: clinical
Association 184:1240-1242.
Hospitat Association 17:759-765.
appearances can be deceiving. Modern 
104 Ball M, Rebhun W, Gaarder J {1997)
78 O'Dair H, Hopper C, Gruffydd-Jones T,
Veterinary Practice 50:45-47.
 Evaluation of itraconazole-dimethyl
Harbour D, Waters H (1994) Clinical
92 McDonald PJ, Watson ADJ (1976)
sulfoxide ointment for treatment of
aspects of Chlatmrydia psittaci infection
Microbial flora of normal canine
keratomycosis in nine horses. Journat of
 in cats infected with feline
conjunctiva. Journat of Smalt Anima!
the American Veterinary Medicat
immunodeficiency virus. Veterinary
Practice 17:809-812.
Association 211:199-203.
Research 134:365-368.
93 Hacker DV, Jensen HE, Selby LA {1979)
105 Barker I {1970) Thelazia tacrymatis
 79 Mitzel J, Strating A (1977) Vaccination
A comparison of conjunctival culture
from the eyes of an Ontario horse.
against feline pneumonitis. Aerican
techniques in the dog. Journat of the
Canadian Veterinary Journat
Journat of Veterinary Research
American Animat Hospitat Association
11:186-189.
38:1361-1363.
15:223-225.
 106 Ladouceur C, Kazacos K {1981) Eye
80 Shewen P, Povey R, Wilson M (1980) A
94 Gerding PA, Cormany K, Weisiger R,
worms in cattle in Indiana. Journat of the
comparison of the efficacy of a live and
Kakoma I (1993) Survey and
American Veterinary Medicat Association
 four inactivated vaccine preparations for
topographic distribution of bacterial and
178:385-386.
the protection of cats against
fungal microorganisms in eyes of
107 Lyons E, Tolliver S, Drudge J,
experimental challenge with Chlamrydid
clinically normal dogs. Canine Practice
Swerczek T, Crowe M {1986) Eyeworms
psittaci. Canadian Journal of
18:34-38.
(Thelazia tacrymatis) in one- to four-year-
Comparative Medicine 44:244-251.
95 Verwer M, Gunnink J (1968) The
old thoroughreds at necropsy in
81 Gill M, Beckenhauer W, Thurber E
occurrence of bacteria in chronic
Kentucky (1984-1985). American
{1987) Immunogenicity and efficacy of a
purulent eye discharge. Journat of Sratl
Journat of Veterinary Research
 modified live feline chlamydia vaccine.
Anmat Practice 9:33-36.
47:315-316.
Norden Netus,summer edn., pp. 26-30.
96 Stone A, Schrock J {1972) Bacterial
108 Lyons E, Drudge J, Tolliver S (1980)
82 Wasmoen T, Chu H J, Chavez L,
conjunctivitis in the dog: preliminary
Age distribution of horses in Kentucky
Acree W {1992) Demonstration of one-
fndings. Journat of the American Animat
infected with the eye worm Thelazid
 year duration of immunity for an
Hospitat Association 8:10-12.
lacrymatis. Journat of the American
inactivated feline Chtamydia psittaci
97 Murphy J, Lavach J, Severin G {1978)
Veterinary Medicat Association
vaccine. Fetine Practice 20:13-16.
Survey of conjunctival flora of dogs with
176:221-223.
83 Campbell L, Fox J, Snyder S (1973)
clinical signs of external eye disease.
109 Robertson JT, Johnson FM (1980) Age
Ocular bacteria and mycoplasma of the
Joturnal of the American Veterinary
distribution of horses in Kentucky
clinically normal cat. Fetine Practice
Medicat Association 172:66-68.
infected with the eye worm Thelazid
3:10-12.
98 Gerding PA, McLaughlin SA, Troop MW
lacrymatis. Journat of the American
 84 Campbell L, Synder S, Reed C, Fox J
(1988) Pathogenic bacteria and fungi
Veterinary Medicat Association
{1973) Mycoplasma felis-associated
associated with external ocular diseases
176:221-223.
conjunctivitis in cats. Journat of the
in dogs: 131 cases {1981-1986). Journat
110 Greve J, Harrison G (1980)
American Veterinary Medicat Association
of the Armerican Veterinary Medicat
Conjunctivitis caused by eye flukes in
163:991-995.
Association 193:242-244.
captive-reared ostriches. Journat of the
85 Dagnall GJ {1993) Experimental
99 Gerding PA, Cormany K, Weisiger R,
American Veterinary Medicat Association
infection of the conjunctival sac of lambs
 Kakoma, I (1993) Survey and
177:909-910.
with Mycoplasma conjunctivae. British
topographic distribution of hacterial and
111 Miller P, Campbell B (1992)
Veterinary Journat 149:429-435.
fungal microorganisms in eyes of
Subconjunctival cyst associated with
86 Rosenbusch RF, Knudtson WU (1980)
clinically normal cats. Feline Practice
Thelazia gutosa in a calf. Journat of the
 Bovine mycoplasmal conjunctivitis:
21:20-23.
Aerican Veterinary Medicat Association
experimental reproduction and
201:1058-1060.
characterization of the disease. Cornelf
Veter imarian 70:307-320.
CONJUNCTIVA AND THIRD EYELID
217
112 Lyons E, Drudge J, Tolliver S (1981)
124 Munroe G {1999) Subconjunctival
136 Collins BK, Collier L, Miller M,
Apparent inactivity of several
haemorrhages in neonatal thoroughbred
Linton L (1993) Biologic behavior and
antiparasitic compounds against the
foals. Veterimary Record 144:279-282.
histologic characteristics of canine
 eyeworm Thelazia lacrymatisin equids.
125 Anderson D, Lush J, Chambers D
conjunctival melanoma. Veterinary and
American Journat of Veterinary Research
{1957) Studies on bovine ocular
Comparative Ophthatnology
42:1046-1047.
squamous cell carcinoma ('cancer eye").
3:135-140.
113 Marley S,Illyes E, Keller D {1999)
II. Relationship between eyelid
137 Buyukmihci N {1981) Canine
 Efficacy of topically administered
 pigmentation and occurrence of cancer 
conjunctival angiokeratomas. Journat of
doramectin against eyeworms,
eye lesions. Journat of Animat Science
the American Veterinary Medicat
lungworms, and gastrointestinal
16:739-746.
Association 178:1279-1282.
nematodes of cattle. American Journat of
126 Bailey CM, Hanks DR, Hanks MA
138 George G, Summers BA (1990)
Veterinary Research 60:665-668.
[1990) Circumocular pigmentation and
Angiokeratoma: a benign vascular
114 Whitcup S, Chan C, Luyo D, Bo P, Li Q
incidence of ocular squamous cell tumors
tumour of the dog. Journat of Small
{1996) Topical cyclosporine inhibits mast
 in Bos taurus and Bos indicus x Bos
Anmat Practice 31:390-392.
cell-mediated conjunctivitis. Investigatite
taurus cattle. Journat of the American
139 Vestre WA, Turner TA, Carlton WW
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
Veterinary Medicat Association
{1982) Conjunctival hemangioma in a
37:2686-2693.
196:1605-1608.
horse. Journat of the American
115 Tinkellman DG, Rupp G, Kaufman H,
127 Den Otter W, Hill G, Klein W, et af.
Veterinary Medicat Association
 Pugely J, Schultz N {1993) Double-
{1995) Ocular squamous cell carcinoma
180:1481-1482.
masked, paired-comparison clinical study
in Simmental cattle in Zimbabwe.
140 Moore PF Jacker DV, Buyukmihci NC
of ketorola tromethamine 0.5%
Armericam Journat of Veterinary Research
(1986) Ocular angiosarcoma in the
 ophthalmic solution compared with
56:1440-1444.
horse: morphological and
 placebo eyedrops in the treatment of
128 Sironi G, Riccaboni P, Mertel L.
immunohistochemical studies. Veterinary
seasonal allergic conjunctivitis. Survey of
Cammarata G, Brooks D (1999) p53
Pathotogy 23:240-244.
Ophthatmology 38:133-140.
 protein expression in conjunctival
141 Crawley GR, Bryan GM,
116 Notivol R, Martinez M, Bergamini MV
squamous cell carcinomas of domestic
Gogolewski RP (1987) Ocular
{1994) Treatment of chronic
animals. Veterinary Ophthatotogy
hemangioma in a horse. Equine Practice 
nonbacterial conjunctivitis with a cyclo-
2:227-231.
9:11-13.
 Oxygenase inhibitor or a corticosteroid.
129 Teifke JP, Lohr CV (1996)
142 Murphy CJ, Bellhorn RW,
American Journat of Ophthatmotogy
Immunohistochemical detection of p53
Buyukmihci NC (1989) Bilateral
117:651-656.
 Owerexpression in paraffin wax-
conjunctival masses in two dogs. Journa!
117 Pentlarge V {1991) Eosinophilic
embedded squamous cell carcinoma of
of the American Veterinary Medicat
conjunctivitis in five cats. Journat of the
cattle, horses, cats, and dogs. Journat of
Association 195:225-227.
American Animat Hospitat Association
Comparative Pathology 114:205-210.
143 Mughannam AJ, Hacker DV,
27:21-28.
130 Rebhun W, Piero F {1998) Ocular
Spangler WL {1997) Conjunctival
118 Allgoewer I, Schaffer E, Stockhaus C,
 Jesions in horses with lymphosarcoma:
vascular tumors in six dogs. Veterinary
Vogtlin A (2001) Feline eosinophilic
21 cases {1977-1997). Journat of the
chnd Comparative Ophthaimology
conjunctivitis. Veterinary Ophthatmology
American Veterinary Medicat Association
7:56-59.
4:69-74.
212:852-854.
144 Regnier A, Magnol J, Servantie J (1986)
119 Larocca R (2000) Eosinophilic
131 Joyce J {1973) Chemosis associated
Corneal and subconjunctival ectopic
 conjunctivitis, herpesvirus, and mast cell
with malignant lymphoma in a heifer.
lacrimal glands in a dog. Canadian
tumor of the third eyelid in a cat.
Veterinary MedicatSmall Animat
Practice 13:12-14.
Veterinary Ophthatmotogy 3:221-225.
Clinician 68:33-34.
145 Roze M, Ridings B, Lagadic M (2001)
120 Read RA, Lucas J (2001)
132 Johnson B, Brightman A, Whiteley H
Comparative morphology of epicorneal
 Lipogranulomatous conjunctivitis:
{1988) Conjunctival mast cell tumor in 
 conjunctival membranes in rabbits and
clinical findings from 21 eyes in 13 cats.
two dogs. Journat of the American
human pterygium. Veterinary
Veterinary Ophthatmology 4:93-98.
Animat Hospitat Association
Ophthatmotogy 4:171-174.
121 Kerlin RL, Dubielzig RR (1997)
24:439-442.
146 Martin C, Leach R {1970) Everted
 Lipogranulomatous conjunctivitis in cats.
133 Hamor R, Ramsey D, Wiedmeyer C,
membrana nictitans in German
Veterinary and Comparative
Gerding P, Knight B, Whiteley H (1997)
Shorthaired Pointers. Journat of the
Ophthatmmotogy 7:177-179.
 Melanoma of the conjunctiva and cornea
American Veterinary Medicat Association
122 Ramsey D, Ketringn K, Glaze M,
in a horse. Veterinary and Comparative
157:1229-1232.
 Render J {1996) Ligneous conjunctivitis
Ophthatmology 7:52-55.
147 Albert R, Garrett P, Whitley R, Thomas
in four Doberman Pinschers. Journat of
134 Cook CS, Rosenkrantz W, Peiffer RL,
K {1982) Surgical correction of everted
the American Animat Hospitat
 MacMillan A {1985) Malignant
third eyelid in two cats. Journal of the
Association 32:439-447.
 melanoma of the conjunctiva in a cat.
American Veterinary Medicat Association
123 Schott D, Beck P, Liermann A, et at.
Journat of the American Veterinary
180:763-766.
paund e ym Aderau (8661)
Medicat Association 186:505-506.
 148 Gelatt K {1972) Surgical correction of
 plasminogen concentrate in an infant
135 Patnaik A, Mooney S (1988) Feline
everted nictitating membrane in the dog.
with ligneous conjunctivitis and
melanoma: a comparative study of
Veterinary Medicine/Smatl Animat
 homozygous plasminogen deficiency.
ocular, oral, and dermal neoplasms.
Clinician 67:291-292.
Netw Engliamd Journat of Medicine
Veterinary Pathology 25:105-112.
 149 Kuhns E (1977) Correction of eversion
339:1679-1686.
Of the membrana nictitans in the dog.
Veterinary MedicatSmall Animat
Clinician 72:411-417.
218
OpHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
150 Koch SA (1979) Congenital ophthalmic
162 Keil S, Olivero D, McKeever P,
174 Peiffer R, Duncan J, Terrell T {1978)
abnormalities in the Burmese cat. Journa!
Moore F (1997) Bilateral nodular
 Hemangioma of the nictitating
of the Americam Veterinary Medicat
eosinophilic granulomatous
mermbrane in a dog. Journat of the
Association 174:90-91.
 inflammation of the nictitating
Aerican Veterinary Medicat Association
151 Brandsch H, Schmidt V {1982)
 membrane of a cat. Veterinary and
172:832-833.
Erbanalytische untersuchungen zum
Comparative Ophthatmology
 175 Buyukmihci N {1981) Canine
 dermoid des auges beim hund.
7:258-262.
conjunctival angiokeratomas. Journat of
Monutsheite fur Veterinarmedizin
163 Nasisse M, Glover T, Moore C, Weigler
the American Veterinary Medicat
37:305-306.
B{1998) Detection of feline herpesvirus-
Association 178:1279-1282.
152 Barkyoumb S, Leipold H {1984) Nature
1 DNA in corneas of cats with
176 Hare C, Howard E (1977) Canine
 and cause of ocular dermoids in
eosinophilic keratitis or corneal
cmnjunctivocorneal papillomatosis: a case
Hereford cattle. Veterinary Pathology
sequestration. American Journat of
report. Journat of the American Animat
21:316-324.
Veterinary Research 59:856-858.
Hospitat Association 13:688-690.177
153 Christmas R {1992) Surgical correction
164 Martin C, Stiles J, Willis M (1996)
Bonney C, Koch S, Dice P, Confer A
 of congenital ocular and nasal dermoids
 Oeular adnexal cryptococcosis in a cat.
{1980) Papillomatosis of conjunctiva and
and third eyelid gand prolapse in related
Veterinary and Comparative
adnexa in dogs. Journat of the American
 Burmese kittens. Canadian Veterinary
Ophthatmology 6:225-229.
Veterinary Medicat Association
Joumat 33:265-266.
165 Rochlitz I {1984) Feline dysautonomia
176:48-51.
154 Schoofs S {1999) Prolapse of the gland
(the Key-Gaskell or dilated pupil
178 Bonney D, Koch S, Confer A, Dice P
of the third eyelid in a cat: a case report
syndrome): a preliminary review. Journat
{1980) A case report: a
and literature review. Journat of the
of Small Animat Practice 25:587-598.
 conjunctivocorneal papilloma with
American Animat Hospitat Association
166 Sharp N, Nash A, Griffiths I {1984)
evidence of a viral etiology. Journat of
35:240-242.
 Feline dysautonomia (the Key-Gaskell 
Small Animmat Practice 21:183-188.
155 Dugan S, Severin G, Hungerford L,
 syndrome): a clinical and pathological
179 Sansom J, Barnett KC, Blunden AS,
Whiteley H, Roberts S {1992) Clinical
study of forty cases. Journat of Smaff
Smith KC, Turner S, Waters L {1996)
 and histologic evaluation of the
Aniat Practice 25:599-615.
Canine conjunctival papilloma: a review
 prolapsed third eyelid gland in dogs.
167 Muir P, Jones T, Howard P (1990) A
of five cases. Journat of Smatl Animat
Journat of the American Veterinary
clinical and microbiological study of cats
Practice 37:84-86.
Medicat Association 201:1861-1867.
with protruding nictitating membranes
 180 Schaeffer EH, Pfleghaar S, Gordon S,
156 Severin G {1995) Third eyelid. In:
and diarrhoea: isolation of a novel virus.
Knoedlseder M (1994) Maligne
Severin's Veterinary Ophthatmology
Veterimary Research 127:324-330.
mickhauttumoren bei hund und katze.
Notes, 3rd edn. American Animal 
168 Peruccio C {1981) Surgical correction of
Terderzt Praxis 22:382-391.
Hospital Association, p. 214.
 prominent third eyelid in the dog.
 181 Roels S, Ducatelle R (1998) Malignant
157 Morgan R, Duddy J, McClurg K (1993)
California Veterinarian 4:24-27.
melanoma of the nictitating membrane
 Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid 
169 Latimer C, Wyman M, Szymanski C,
in a cat. Journat of Comparative
in dogs: a retrospective study of 89 cases
Werling K {1983) Membrana nictitans
Pathotogy 119:189-193.
[1980-1990). Journat of the American
gand cyst in a dog. Journat of the
182 Wilcock BP, Peiffer RL {1988)
Animat Hospitat Association 29:56-60.
American Veterinary Medicat Association
Adenocarcinoma of the gland of the
158 Moore C, Frappier B, Linton L (1996)
183:1003-1005.
third eyelid in seven dogs. Journat of the
 Distribution and course of ducts of the
170 Martin C, Kaswan R, Doran C (1987)
American Veterinary Medicat Association
canine third eyelid gland: effects of two
Cystic lesions of the periorhital region.
193:1549-1550.
surgical replacement techniques.
Compenditrm on Contintuing Edtucation
183 Kkomaromy AM, Ramsey DT,
Veterinary and Comparative
for the Practicing Veterinarion
 Render JA, Clark P {1997) Primary
Ophthatmology 6:258-264.
9:1021-1029.
adenocarcinoma of the gland of the
159 Kaswan R, Martin C {1985) Surgical
171 Lavach J, Snyder S {1984) Squamous
nictitating membrane in a cat. Journat of
correction of third eyelid prolapse in
cell carcinoma of the third eyelid in a 
the Americam AnimatHospitat
dogs. Journat of the American Veterinary
dog. Journat of the American Veterinary
Association 33:333-336.
Medicat Association 186:83.
Medicat Association 184:975-976.
184 Buyukmihci N {1975) Fibrosarcoma of
160 Stanley R, Kaswan R (1994)
172 Peiffer R, Johnston S {1976)
the nictitating membrane in a cat.
 Modification of the orbital rim
Pseudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia of the
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
 anchorage method for surgical
 membrana nictitans in a dog. Veterinary
Medicat Association 167:934-935.
replacement of the gland of the third
Medicime/Small Animat Clinician
eyelid in dogs. Journat of the American 
71:636-637.
Veterinary Medicat Association
173 Hargis A, Lee A, Thomassen R (1978)
205:1412-1414.
Tumor and tumor-like lesions of
161 Teichert G (1966) Plasmazellulare
perilimbal conjunctiva in laboratory
infiltration des dritten augenlides beim
dogs. Journat of the American Veterinary
hund. Berliner und Muenchner
Medicat Association 173:1185-1190.
Tieraerztiche Wochenschrift 79:499.
219
Lacrimal System
The lacrimal apparatus may be divided into secretory
puncta on each eyelid {in most domestic species), a
and excretory components. The secretory components
lacrimal canaliculus draining the punctum into the
a  a ' p s a o 
lacrimal sac, and the nasolacrimal duct (9.1).
gland, and the glands of the eyelids. Cows, pigs, birds.
 and rodents have an additional deeper gland in the third
eyelid, the Harderian gland', the secretions of which are
ANATOMYANDPHYSIOLOGY
high in lipids2. In general, t
the gland is absent from
terrestrial carnivores and primates. The excretory
The orbital lacrimal gland and third eyelid gland are
components of the lacrimal system consist of a lacrimal
 mixed, mucoserous, compound tubuloacinar glands. The
glandular tubules contain serous granules and the acini
 contain sialomucin granules on histochemistry and
9.1
ultrastructural studies (9.2)3. In the third eyelid gland,
peripheral acini contain large amounts of lipids and no
striated ducts (9.3).
The ultrastructure of the normal equine lacrimal
glandt is similar to that of the dog, as are the lacrimal
glands of sheep and goats'. In the dog and cat, the gland
of the third eyelid surrounds the base of the cartilage of
the third eyelid, and the orbital lacrimal gland is
flattened and lies in a fold of periorbita beneath the
dorsolateral orbital rim and orbital ligament. Based on
extirpation of glands and measuring the decrease in tear
production, Gelatt et al.6 determined that, in the dog,
 approximately 62% of tear secretion is produced by the
main lacrimal gland and 35% by the third eyelid gland,
although either gland alone can supply adequate tears to
 maintain a normal eye. Helper et al.7 observed that in the
dog a 5-23% decrease in tear production 0ccurred with
9.1 Cast of nasolacrimal duct in a sculptured skull of a dog. Note the
removal of the lacrimal gland, and a 29-57% decrease
lack of a distinct lacrimal sac, the proximal bony portion, and the 
occurred with removal of the third eyelid gland. In the
 proximity to the root of the upper canine tooth.
cat, the orbital lacrimal gland contributes 13-46% of
9.2
9.3
 9.2 Normal canine third eyelid gland with acini granules staining
9.3 Peripheral lobules of a canine third eyelid gland containing acini
 positive for alcian blue (arrows] that indicates sialomucin; the 
with lipids (arrows]. (1 μm section, toludine blue stain.)
tubules (T, structures with lumen] do not stain as they contain serous
granules. (Alcian blue pH 2.5, nuclear fast red counterstain, x200.]
220
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
aqueous tears, and the third eyelid gland approximately
The lacrimal glands secrete a slightly alkaline, protein-
25% of the tears8. These percentages are misleading, as
poor, isotonic serous fluid with a small component of
they do not take into account the compensatory increase
mucin12. The secretion of the aqueous phase is the result
of tears by the remaining gland.
of passive osmotic drawing of water into the lumen from
Removal of only one of the two glands does not
active secretion of electrolytes, typical of most exocrine
produce a sufficient decrease in tears to produce
 glands. The tears lubricate the corneal surface, providing
disease6, 9. Removal of both the orbital lacrimal glands
a smooth, regular surface that enhances the optical
and the third eyelid gland results in KCS in the dog and
 properties of the cornea. Tears also mechanically cleanse
cat. Mucus is also produced by conjunctival goblet cells.
the conjunctival sac and function in the nourishment of
Accessory lacrimal glands are limited to the small glands
the cornea and conjunctiva. A variety of growth factors,
of Zeis and Moll in the eyelids. No comparable accessory
antibacterial substances, and proteases have been
lacrimal glands to glands of Krause and Wolfring have
 isolated from tears (Table 9.1). The concentration of the
been demonstrated in the dog and cat.
various proteins, and thus their importance, may vary
with species.
Removal of one of the lacrimal glands is tolerated
Although the tear film consists mainly of water, it is
in a healthy eye, but removal in a breed
not a homogenous solution. Traditionally, the tear film
predisposed to keratoconjunctivitis sicca may
is quoted as 7-9 μm thick and consisting of three layers
accelerate the onset of disease and will leave the
(9.4). Newer measurement techniques indicate the tear
stigma of an iatrogenic cause to the owner.
hydrophilic mucin, a mixture of glycoproteins proba bly
Sexual dimorphism in lacrimal gland morphology
secreted mainly by the goblet cells but also by the
exists in a variety of species, with males having a greater
lacrimal glands. The mucin contributes to the
mass of acinar tissuel0.
.This gender difference
also
glycocalix on the surface of the epithelium and makes
translates into functional differences and may partially
the naturally  hydrophobic epithelium  wettable. The
explain the effect of gender and neutering on the
mucus also protects the epithelium from bacteria and
incidence of KCS11.
other noxious agents. The second and most voluminous
Table 9.1 Tear proteins: their source(s) and function(s)
 Protein
Source
Function 
slgA
Lacrimal
First defense of ocular surface from microbes
IgG, IgM
Conjunctival leakage
Indicative of conjunctival inflammation
IgE
Conjunctiva
Allergic reaction
 Albumin, transferrin 
 Conjunctival leakage
Indicative of conjunctival inflammation
Lipocalin (TSP)
Lacrimal
Transport protein for vitamin A
Lactoferrin
Lacrimal
Binds iron, antibacterial
Lysozyme
Lacrimal
Antibacterial
Peroxidase
Lacrimal
Antibacterial
 Fibronectin
Cornea 
Corneal wound healing
Epidermal growth factor
Lacrimal
 Corneal wound healing
 Plasminogen activator
Lacrimal, conjunctiva, cornea
0-1-Antitrypsin
Cornea
Inactivates proteases, protects the cornea
 Procollagenases
Cornea, PMNs
 Debride cornea, reduce scarring, excess promotes corneal
melting 
Tryptase
Conjunctiva, mast cells
Ocular allergy
Cystatins
Lacrimal
Protease inhibitors
 Antitrypsins 
Lacrimal
 Protease inhibitors 
LDH
Cornea 
Metabolic enzyme, indicates corneal epithelial cell damage
Lysosomal enzymes
Lacrimal
>20 enzymes found, ineluding amylase, cathepsins; alkaline
phosphatase function is obscure
slgA: secretory immunoglobulin A; LDH: lactate dehydrogenase; TSP: tear specific prealbumin (now lipocalin)
(From Kaswan et or.,1995142.)
LACRIMAL SYSTEM
221
layer is aqueous, secreted by the lacrimal glands. The
9.4
glands in the lid margins and increases surface tension
Lipid layer
 and retards evaporation14. Recent concepts of the tear
film mucous layer favor a transition of mucus from the
mucus-rich corneal side extending into the aqueous
00
phase, resulting in a bilaminar model of aqueous-mucin
and lipid15.
The third eyelid gland and the lacrimal gland are
under dual autonomic control. The third eyelid gland
receives parasympathetic fibers that originate in the
facial nerve (nucleus intermedius), but arrive via a
branch of the  infratrochlear nerve jophthalmic
Aqueous
division
ofthe
Vth
 cranial
nervej16.
The
parasympathetic fibers of the orbital lacrimal gland
originate similarly to those of the third eyelid, but
reach the gland via the lacrimal nerve, which is a
branch of the ophthalmic division of the Vth cranial
the lacrimal flow rate and electrolyte content, and
adrenergic stimulation controls the macromolecular
content of the secretion. The control of goblet cell
mucus production is not understood, but a mucus
stimulating factor has been demonstrated to be present
in normal human tears and absent from individuals
Mucus
with various dry eye syndromes19.
Epithelium -
 9.4 Trilaminar structure of the normal tear film.
9.5
Gland of the
 3rd eyelid 
Infratrochtear n.
Nasociliary n.
 Ganglion
Lacrimal n.
Nerve of pterygoid canal
 Infraorbital n.
Pterygopalatine
ganglion
 Postganglionic parasympathetics
 Preganglionic parasympa thetics 
Unknown location of transfer of parasyrmpathetic fibers from nerve of pterygoid canal
to lacrimal n. and nasociliary n. to reach lacrimal gl. and gl. of the 3rd eyelid.
9.5 Proposed parasympathetic nerve supply to the lacrimal gland and the third eyelid gland. Preganglionic nerve fibers leave the skull via the
aau swieuiudo on ainqisip pue aau jeuen piohand aui ui uanan pue uoueh aueledoaid aul ui asdeuas pue auau jeuen piobhaid
branches. (n: nerve.) (From Powell, 198816.)
222
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Tears pool ventrally within the recess of the conjunctival
9.6
 sac in the medial canthus, forming a lacrimal lake. Drain-
lacrimal puncta. In the dog, the lower punctum is normally
situated about 5 mm from the medial canthus and 1-2 mm
from the mucocutaneous margin within the palpebral con-
junctiva. The dorsal punctum is similarly situated 5-8 mm
from the medial canthus in the dorsal lid. The rabbit has
only a single large ventral punctum and canaliculus.
The canaliculi converge in a vestigial lacrimal
lsac
encased within the lacrimal bone. The nasolacrimal duct
carries tears from the lacrimal sac to the anterior end of
the nasal vestibule. The lacrimal canaliculi, lacrimal sac,
and nasolacrimal duct have a stratified columnar
epithelium. The nasolacrimal duct consists of a proximal
portion encased in bone and a distal membranous portion.
The bone-encased portion is narrower and often has
constrictions in various species (9.1, 9.6)20,
21.
9.6 Normal canine dacryocystorhinography performed by injection
Imperfections may occur in the nasolacrimal duct of
of an aqueous contrast material. Note the ventral curvature of the
individuals, with the result that drainage may occur
proximal half (arrow) and how narrow the lumen is through the
posteriorly into the nasopharynx. These variations are
bony portion.
particularly common in brachycephalic dogs.
DISEASES OF THE LACRIMAL APPARATUS
 Most reports indicate no apparent sex predisposition
in most breeds, apart from the West Highland White
Most diseases of the lacrimal system can broadly be
Terrier, which has a marked female predominance24, 28.
categorized into problems of decreased tear production,
Neutering of either the male or female dog increases the
increased tear production, obstruction of the outflow
predisposition to KCS; because more females are
system, and abnormal masses.
neutered {3.4x) than males, more older females develop
KCS. The effect of neutering on KCS prevalence is not
KERATOCONJUNCTIVITIS SICCA
noted until animals are 10 years of agell. Androgens
Introduction/etiology
have an effect on lacrimal gland size and function and on
 Commonly called *dry eye? or xerophthalmia, KCS can be
autoimmunity, and may inhibit an endogenous tear
defined as a progressive inflammatory condition of the
suppresser such as prolactin. The incidence of KCS is
cornea and conjunctiva caused by a lack of tears. The
higher in older dogs (7-9 years at onset).
deficiency is usually in the aqueous phase, but deficiencies
English Bulldogs, Cocker Spaniels, and Dachshunds
in mucin have been recognized in the dog and cat22, 23 A
are predisposed to KCS, often with concurrent
deficiency of the precorneal tear film is commonly
generalized skin disease. The West Highland White
encountered in small animal practice. In a survey of
Terrier and Miniature Schnauzer have a high incidence of
14 veterinary colleges, approximately 0.4% of the general
KCS independent of skin disease. In exophthalmic
hospital population had KCs24. Updated analysis of the
breeds, lagophthalmos often complicates a deficiency of
same database has shown an increase in prevalence to
tears, causing the KCs lesions to be more pronounced.
1.52%, which probably represents an increased awareness
Even when STT values are only slightly reduced, dry
 as well as changes in breed popularityll.
spots and exposure keratitis develop easily with
With loss of the nutritive and protective functions of
lagophthalmos. In some breeds, such as the Pug and
the tears, a spectrum of acute and chronic corneal and
Pekingese, melanocyte activity is particularly intense and
conjunctival lesions are produced. In the acute to subacute
severe pigmentary keratitis is common. (See Table 9.2 for
patient, the epithelium of the cornea is thinned to 3-4
incidence of KCS in specific canine breeds.)
layers, with loss of the basal layer. The subacute
A variety of causes or conditions are known to be
epithelium develops keratinization and subepithelial
 associated with KCs. There is growing evidence that the
inflammatory cell infiltration. The epithelium with
 most common etiology of KCs is a genetically based
chronicity becomes thickened, develops rete pegs, contains
 autoimmune adenitis, often with systemic ramifications29.
 pigment granules, and is keratinized. The anterior corneal
stroma
develops
extensive
vascularization
and
 Congenital alacrima
mononuclear inflammatory cell infiltration. There is a
Congenital KCs occurs occasionally as an extreme
decrease in the number of goblet cells in the conjunctival
dryness, and is usually unilateral. It is most commonly
epithelium2s. Short-term studies in the cat indicate that the
observed in small breeds (9.7).
epithelial changes of decreased goblet cell density and
squamous metaplasia are not associated with decreased
Neurologic
tear film, but with the infiltration of subepithelial
KCS may be observed in animals with facial nerve palsy of
lymphocytic inflammatory infiltration, whatever the
central origin or occurring in the very proximal nerve
cause26. Kern et al.27 were unable to demonstrate
before branching of the parasympathetic fibers in the
decreased goblet cell numbers on scanning electron
petrous
temporal
bone30.
Denervation
of
the
microscopy in a subacute experimental model.
 parasympathetic fibers in the lacrimal nerve may also
LACRIMAL SYSTEM
223
Table 9.2 KCS breed distribution (597,516 cases)
9.7
Relative
Relative
population
incidence
Breed
(00]
 American 
Cocker Spaniel
2.8
6.76
Boston Terrier
0.76
3.89
 Bulldog
0.64
20.12
 Chihuahua
1.09
1.31
Dachshund
2.96
1.48
Doberman Pinscher
3.20
0.15
 German Shepherd Dog
7.60
0.57
9.7 Congenital lack of tears in a Chihuahua. This is typically
Lhasa Apso
0.56
16.56
observed in small breeds and is usually unilateral. Note the 
 Miniature Schnauzer
1.91
3.93
profound dryness.
Mixed breed
27.09
0.82
Pekingese
0.99
6.31
Pug
0.4
7.87
indicated that dogs <12 kg were at increased risk of
Shih Tzu
0.27
4.02
developing KCS45. KCS may develop after only a few
doses of sulfonamide; in one study most animals
Yorkshire Terrier
0.64
5.33
 developed KCS within the first week of therapy45, while
 in another study, KCS was found only after long-term
West Highland 
therapy46. Animals administered sulfonamide long term
wwhite Terrier
0.39
18.36
for conditions such as cystitis and colitis should be
monitored frequently for decreased tear production. No
association was found between the type of sulfonamide
used, dosage, or duration of therapy and the prognosis
for recovery from KCS46.
occur from damage such as proptosis in the dog and cat.
Beta-blockers such as timolol have been reported in
Ruskell31 reported that in primates, serous secretory cells
human ophthalmology to reduce tear secretion and
in the lacrimal glands require cholinergic innervation,
produce KCS symptoms in a small group of patients47,
whereas mucous secreting cells are autonomous. Trauma
but similar findings have not been reported in veterinary
to cranial nerve Vll with neurologic sequelae is the usual
medicine. There have been anecdotal reports of oral
cause of KCS in the horse32, 33.
etodolac {Eto Gesic) producing KCS in dogs but a critical
evaluation has not yet been reported.
Peripheral facial nerve paralysis does not produce
KCS but does produce more stress on the tear film
 Sulfonamide-induced KCS is devastating because it 
by producing lagophthalmos.
is bilateral, is usually permanent, is profound, and
is preventable.
Drug induced
Atropine, phenazopyridine, anesthesia, aminosalicylic
Viral infection
acid, and sulfonamides can ca use transient or permanent
 Distemper virus can cause a unilateral or bilateral acute
KCS in the dog, depending on how long the drug has
lacrimal adenitis. Corneal ulceration with descemetocele
formation frequently occurs. Sicca due to distemper
with species, and the lacrimal gland is unaffected in the
 usually resolves spontaneously in 6-8 weeks if the animal
cat, rabbit, or human42. Atropine- and anesthesia-
recovers  systemically.  Histopathologic  l
lesions are
induced KCS is usually transient, but may last for several
 marked glandular degenerative changes associated with a
days  when combined
withother
postoperative
mononuclear and neutrophilic cellular infiltration.
complications. Topical atropine applied to one eye
Despite the marked morphologic changes, glandular
decreased the STT yalue in both eyes for up to S weeks
function usually recovers48
in
In testing
various  sedative
combinations, xylazine and butorphanol caused the most
Obstruction of the lacrimal ductules
a g "w gh anea I ras ui asaap punood
Obstruction
due
to
chemosis
or
conjunctival
'tpaodai nou sem Aiaaooau qun uoenp
cicatrization can cause transient or permanent sicca.
Sulfonamide-induced KCS is frequently permanent. In
Decreased STT values are frequent in cats with marked
one study, KCS secondary to sulfonamide administration
conjunctival swelling and is often transient. Vitamin A
was permanent in 77% of dogs38. Another study
deficiency with squamous metaplasia of the ducts is a
224
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
cause of KCs in turtles, but is thought to be an unlikely
KCS associated with third eyelid gland removal is not
immediate but usually has a delayed onset of months
does not alter the volume of tears, but does alter the
or years. This delay may explain the diversity of
composition of tears as a result of marked changes in
opinion between ophthalmologists and general
 secretory granule developments0.
 practitioners regarding third eyelid gland removal.
Removal of the third eyelid gland
Controversy exits between ophthalmologists and general
Autoimmune-mediated adenitis
practitioners as to whether it is contraindicated to remove
 Evidence for an autoimmune cause was found in histology
a prolapsed third eyelid gland, or to remove the third
from a series of 2s third eyelid glands or main lacrimal
eyelid gland for the treatment of epiphora. For KCS to
 glands dissected from dogs with chronic KCS undergoing
occur, the orbital lacrimal gland must be damaged, as
parotid duct transplant. The most common lesion was
removal of the third eyelid gland in itself does not lead to
multifocal mononuclear cell infiltration with varying
sicca6-8, while the normal dog can tolerate removal of the
degrees of fibrosis (9.8, 9.9). In about 50% of the biopsies,
third eyelid gland, it is prudent to avoid surgical excision
for benign conditions in those breeds predisposed to KCS.
not so disruptive as to explain the lack of glandular
In breeds predisposed to cherry eye, 47% developed KCS
function, despite the chronicity and absolute deficiency of
after glandular excision, compared to 17% 
with
tears (9.10)s2, 3. On serum electrophoresis, the beta-2
glandular repositioning (see Chapter 8, p.183)51.
fraction of gammaglobulin was elevated in 90% of KCS
cases. Antinuclear antibodies and rheumatoid factor titers
were elevated in 42% and 50% respectively of KCS
been described in the horse, in which the histopathologic
response is predominantly eosinophilic adenitiss-s7.
Endocrine and otherdisease
Hyperadrenocorticoidism, hypothyroidism, diabetes 
mellitus,  
 demodectic mange,. and systemic lupus
erythematosus have been empirically associated with
 canine sicca. In one study, 29% of canine KCS cases had
other diseases related to immunologic disorders and 32%
had chronic refractory skin diseases?9. Peruccio58 reported
a 20% incidence of hypothyroidism in dogs with KCS as
evidenced by a low T3 and T4. Hypothyroidism and KCS
are probably associated through a multiglandular
autoimmune phenomenon, as hypothyroidism does not
cause KCS when experimentally induced59, 60. Dryness of
the nasal and oral mucous membranes occurs in 10-30%
of KCS cases and should be evaluated before performing
 parotid duct transposition. Dogs with multiglandular
involvement and circulating autoantibodies have signs
9.8 Extensive mononuclear adenitis with acinar atrophy and
resembling Sjogren's syndrome in man61.
interstitial fibrosis. (H&tE x150.)
6'6
9.10
9.9 Advanced fibrotic changes with acinar loss in a third eyelid
9.10 Modest mononuclear inflammation of the third eyelid gland 
gland from a dog with sicca. This gland may not improve with 
with intact acini in a dog with chronic KCs. This type of gland would 
therapy. (H&tE x1 50.)
be expected to respond to therapy. (HetE x150.]
LACRIMAL SYSTEM
225
Senile atrophy
obstruction of the lacrimal ductules, as evidenced by
It is unknown whether age-related atrophy exists in the
rapid improvement in STT values with resolution of the
dog as a cause of KCS.
chemosis (9.11). Ocular herpesvirus infection is thought
to be responsible for KCS in the cat, although it is
Irradiation
unknown whether the virus affects the gland or simply
Irradiation for cancer therapy near the eyes may result in
produces chemosis that may in turn cause obstruction.
glandular damage. Although irradiation is an uncommon
Neurologic disease, whether traumatic, infectious, or
cause of KCS, in patients undergoing radiation therapy it
neoplastic, may be associated with KCS in the cat.
is quite common. Megavoltage therapy of nasal and
Trauma to the orbit such as proptosis frequently results
paranasal lesions resulted in ocular complications in
in KCS for about 8-12 weeks.
75% of patients, of which 25% developed KCS62.
Supervoltage or cobalt-60 irradiation of the head region
Clinical signs in the dog
resulted in 84% of patients developing ocular lesions, 0f
Severity  of signs  varies 
with the species. The dog
which 35% were KCS63.
typically has the most dramatic signs, while in the cat,
signs are often minimal, even with an absolute lack of
Retrograde infection into the lacrimal glands
aqueous tears. The horse is intermediate in the severity
Chronic conjunctivitis with retrograde infection up the
of signs.
lacrimal ductules has historically been blamed as the
cause of KCs. In most instances it was not known
 Approximately 70% of KCS cases in the dog
whether the conjunctivitis was caused by, or produced,
eventually become bilateral. The eyes may be
the KCS. Retrograde infection is not thought to be a
sequentially or simultaneously involved.
significant cause of KCS in the dog, based on the absence
 of infectious agents on histopathology of the glands$3.
Pain
Androgen deficiency
Initially, corneal dryness is painful and may be associated
Androgens have a significant modifying effect on the
with blepharospasm. Chronic cases usually do not
morphology and function of the lacrimal gland.
exhibit blepharospasm, but there seems to be individual
Androgen therapy of mouse models of Sjogren's
 and breed differences as to the manifestation of pain. The
syndrome
(autoimmune  adenitis)  suppresses
the
cornea of brachycephalic breeds is less sensitive than that
lymphocytic inflammation in the lacrimal gland and
 of other breeds67.
improves the lacrimal function64. It has been theorized
that an androgen deficiency causes an atrophy of
In the author's experience, very acute onset of KCS
lacrimal gland acini that triggers an autoimmune
produces more dramatic signs of pain and corneal
response65. Sullivan et al.66 were unable to produce either
ulceration, but also has a greater chance for 
lacrimal gland inflammation or a decrease in function by
spontaneous remission over a 8-12-week period.
castrating mice, rabbits, and guinea pigs, examining mice
with dysfunctional androgen receptors, or examining
 men treated with antiandrogen therapy.
Conjunctivitis
 The bulbar and palpebral conjunctiva are usually intensely
Causes in the cat
hyperemic and thickened. Mucopurulent material is
The causes of KCS in the cat are not well documented,
usually abundant in the conjunctival folds (9.12).
but conjunctival chemosis may be the cause for
9.11
9.12
9.11 Cat with marked conjunctival chermosis associated with ocular
9.12 Hyperemic, thickened conjunctiva with tenacious exudate in
herpesvirus infection that resulted in a lack of tears. The tear
folds characteristic of KCS.
secretion returned when the chemosis decreased.
226
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRiNArY MeDiCINE
Ocular discharge
become so dense that the cornea loses all transparency and
Mucin, produced by conjunctival goblet cells, is not
blindness ensues (9.16). In the cat, chronic ulceration may
 dispersed because of the lack of an aqueous tear phase
lead to corneal sequestrum formation (9.17).
and, therefore, accumulates in varying degrees as
tenacious 'ropey' filaments. Mucin production is actually
Mucin deficiencies
decreased in KCS as the goblet cell density decreases.
Mucin deficiencies in the tear film are characterized by
Cellular exudation from secondary bacterial infection
recurrent corneal ulceration, chronic keratoconjunctivitis,
produces a mucopurulent discharge (9.13, 9.14).
.In
normal STT values, and a lack of ocular discharge. The
animals with severe tear deficiencies, this exudate, on
tear break-up time is less than 5 seconds, and on
culture, often contains heavy growths of coagulase-
conjunctival biopsy a deficiency of goblet cells with
positive staphylococci, l
beta hemolytic streptococci,
bacterial growth postparotid duct transplant was more
Clinical signs in the cat
consistent and heavier, and the flora more pathogenic
The signs of KCS in the cat are much more subtle than in
than before surgery69.
the dog. The diagnosis is based on multiple low STT
values and clinical signs. Cats may have very labile STT
Keratitis
values, and one low reading is not diagnostic for KCS.
Multifocal punctate or central corneal ulceration (9.15) is
KCS in the cat is characterized more by a conjunctivitis
common in the acute phase of KCs, and may progress to
and less often with a keratitis. Discharge is typically
 descemetoceles. In chronic KCS, the cornea develops a dull 
scant and mucoid. The conjunctivitis is characterized by
irregular appearance with neovascularization, fibrosis, and
hyperemia, chemosis, and thickened folds. KCS may be
pigmentation.
The
corneal
epithelium 
becomes
responsible for chronic nonhealing ulcers that develop a
hypertrophic. Pigment is deposited in patches or can
corneal sequestrum in the ulcer bed.
9.13
9.14
9.13 West Highland White Terrier with tenacious, copious exudate
9.14 Extensive tenacious mucopurulent exudate with KCS.
from KCs. The third eyelid gland had previously been rermoved.
9.15
9.16
9.15 Small descemetocele (arrow, dark spot] in a Boston Terrier
9.16 Same eye as 9.14 after cleansing. Note the thickened conjunctiva
with acute KCs. Note the tenacious discharge on the cornea and
and extensive corneal pigmentation and gray scarring of the cornea.
the dull surface.
LACRIMAL SYSTEM
227
Diagnosis
While variations occur in STT values of normal
Historically, KCs has been among the most commonly
dogs, they are usually not of such magnitude that
misdiagnosed ophthalmic diseases.  Bacterial  con-
they would result in an error of diagnosis. KCS is
junctivitis and recurrent idiopathic corneal ulcers are
diagnosed by correlating clinical signs with STT
commonly mistaken diagnoses made in cases of KCS.
yalues and, as with any laboratory test, STT should
Misdiagnosed cases treated frequently with any topical
be repeated when results do not correlate with
ophthalmic preparation usually  show transient
clinical signs.
improvement,
falsely
reinforcing the clinician's
confidence in the original diagnosis. Virtually all topical
Mucin deficiency is diagnosed by the presence of a
medications wet the eye and add lubrication and,
decreased tear film break-up time {BUT) and on biopsy of
therefore, have some therapeutic benefit. A high degree
the medial ventral palpebral conjunctiva to examine for
of suspicion for KCS should be held for any recurrent
goblet cells. The BUT is evaluated by instilling fluorescein
conjunctivitis, keratitis, or corneal ulceration. Even
 onto the cornea and examining it with a cobalt blue filter
aq pinous Lis e Kip ieadde iou Aeu eauuos aul yanou1
while keeping the animal from blinking. Tear film break-
performed as a routine part of the anterior segment
up is recognized by focal dark spots in the fluorescein
ophthalmic examination. The diagnosis should be based
film. The BUT is recorded as the time from last blink to
on multiple functional abnormalities, as has been
the presence of the first dark spots. Values <10 seconds
Suggested in human medicine71.
are definitely low and when combined with a STT value
A diagnosis of KCS is made when a decrease in STT
value occurs with mucopurulent keratoconjunctivitis,
Because the BUT is not routinely performed in practice,
corneal inflammation, 
ulceration,
 orpigment
deposition. The STT value in a normal dog is usually
Rose bengal staining of the cornea and conjunctiva is
16-24 mm/min, whereas in KCS cases the STT value is
suggestive but not specific for KCS. Rose bengal stains the
typically <10 mm/min, with the majority <5 mm/min
epithelial surface when it is not protected by mucin (1.17).
on repeated trials. Atropinization can cause transient
dryness for 2-6 days postoperatively. Fear-induced
Therapy
sympathetic stimulation also leads to sporadic low
Medical therapy
values, particularly in cats.
 Medical therapy should be attempted for 2-3 months to
 Inconsistencies have been demonstrated in STT values
evaluate whether the KCS is transient or permanent and
whether the patient is responsive to medications.
and the design of the strip73. Day to day variations in STT
values as large as 5-9 mm in 17% and 10-21 mm in 6%
Artificial tears
of normal young Beagles have been demonstrated74.
 Artificial tears are used to replace the wetting action of the
Berger and King7 were una ble to demonstrate significant
 natural tears. They should be used as often as possible.
puy PIp inq 'shuawanseaw Aep ol Aep ul suouea
Solutions
aré
used
q2-4h
or, minimally, q6h.
differences in week to week values and between dogs of
Methylcellulose ointments are used at night or when
different sizes. Large breeds of dogs had greater Schirmer
frequent administration is impossible. If the pet is kept
I and Il readings than small breeds of dogs. These
indoors,
 particularly
asa
"lap' dog, frequent
differences in STT values must be considered when test
administration of eye drops may be acceptable. Usually,
results do not correlate to clinical signs.
artificial tear therapy fails to control the progression of
lesions due to the client's inability or reluctance to treat the
eyes as often as necessary.
Artificial tear solutions vary in pH, osmolarity, and
individual tolerance to the agent. Methylcellulose and
polyvinyl alcohol increase surface tension and retard
evaporation. Polyvinyl pyrrolidone (PVP) increases the
1'6
ability of the solution to adhere to the hydrophobic
cornea, and therefore gives a longer tear BUT. The tear
film osmolarity has been found to be hyperosmolar in
human KCS patients compared to normal patients. This
hyperosmolarity has been suggested as a cause of the
pathology of the surface epithelium, and as being
responsible for the symptoms of discomfort76. As a
result,
hypo-osmolar tear substitutes have been
recommended. Slow release hydroxypropylcellulose
ophthalmic inserts can be used once or twice daily, but
they are difficult to keep in the conjunctival cul-de-sac of
the dog and cat due to the third eyelid. Viscoelastic
agents such as hyaluronic acid and chondroitin sulfate
have been used as tear substitutes, but they are quite
expensive. Dilution of hyaluronic acid to 0.4% has been
recommended as a means of making it more economic
 and it is reported to remain effective with infrequent
 9.17 Cat with trauma-induced KCS that is forming a corneal
therapy77. The lack of preservatives in hyaluronic acid
5equestrum (arrow) in an ulcer bed.
means the solution must be applied carefully to avoid
228
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
contamination from the lids or eye. A commercial tear
Retinoic acid
 preparation of 0.4 % hyaluronic acid is available.
Initial studies with topical retinoic acid indicated that the
Topical dilute serum (20% serum, 80% saline) has
conjunctival and corneal keratinization of KCS can be
been advocated in the treatment of Sjogren's syndrome in
reversed, patient comfort improved, and corneal scarring
humans78. This provides various substances that the tears
and pigmentation improved2, despite a lack of increased
would normally supply and that have a positive trophic
tear production. Long-term therapy of 8 weeks or more
effect on epithelial surfaces. In situ upregulation of mucin
resulted in regression of the initial improvement. The
was also demonstrated and thus topical dilute serum may
concentration must be <0.01%; stronger concentrations
have special benefit for mucin related dry eyes.
are very irritating to the eye83.
Pilocarpine
Topical cyclosporine
Pilocarpine may be used for its acetylcholine-like action
Topical cyclosporine has become the gold standard for
in stimulating residual lacrimal gland secretions. For an
 treating KCs. The original protocol of a 1-2% solution
average 25 lb {11 kg) dog, 1-2 drops of 2% pilocarpine
q24-12h gave remarkable results and quickly became the
placedinfoodandgivenq12his initially
main form of therapy for sicca. The response has been a
recommended79. If no improvement in the STT value
return of tear production {unlike with retinoic acid) and
Occurs, the dose can be increased by increments of one
decreased corneal scarring. The response is often very
 drop at a time. If hypersalivation, vomiting, or diarrhea
rapid, but some cases require 4-6 weeks to respond. It was
occur, the medication should be stopped until signs abate
initially recommended that both eyes be treated, even if the
 and then reinstituted at a lower dosage.
KCS was unilateral. Most clinicians now only treat the
 Bradycardia is a possible side-effect and pilocarpine
 affected eye. In general, the therapy controls but does not
will aggravate a pre-existing heart block. Topical dilute
cure the problem; when therapy is withdrawn the STT
(0.2s-1.0%) solutions of pilocarpine have been
value decreases again in many cases.
recommended in these cases, although they have recently
The main form of KCs that appears responsive to
cyclosporine is the immune-mediated (idiopathic) form.
be most useful in dogs with marginal tear secretion;
A statistically significant improvement in the glandular 
responsiveness decreases with disease progression.
Pilocarpine use has been supplanted by the use of
demonstrated, although a trend in improvement in
cyclosporine, but on occasion a dog that did not respond
histopathology lesions and regeneration of glandular
to topical cyclosporine will respond to oral pilocarpine.
lobules has been identified84. In preliminary tests, KCS
associated with distemper, trauma, and advanced fibrosis
Antibiotics
has not responded to cyclosporine. KCS associated with
Conjunctival overgrowth with commensal bacteria can be
systemic sulfonamide therapy has not responded when
treated with topical antibiotics when necessary. They are
the loss of tears was profound8s,86.
not usually a critical part of therapy as the discharge
Topical cyclosporine is thought to work in two
dissipates rapidly when the sicca is corrected.
distinct ways: a lacrimomimetic effect {stimulating tear
secretions) and an anti-inflammatory effect on the
Glucocorticoids
gland87 and ocular surface. The lacrimomimetic effect
If no active corneal ulceration is present, corneal
may occur by releasing neurotransmitters such as
neovascularization and/or conjunctivitis may be improved
substance P from sensory nerve endings in the lacrimal
with short-term (7-14 days) use of topical glucocorticoids,
gland?8. The anti-inflammatory effect on the ocular
q6-8h. A fluorescein dye uptake test is mandatory prior to
surface may produce clinical improvement without an
glucocorticoid usage because many cases of KCs have
recurrent ulceration. Based on the postulated autoimmune
produced on stimulation by cyclosporine is similar to
adenitis, topical, subconjunctival, or systemic gluco-
normal tears, without the decrease in secretory IgA that
corticoids would appear to be indicated. The author's
occurs with reflex tearing. Dogs with KCS that are
experience with injection of repositol glucocorticoids into
ai al u asaa e aau aso m pea1
the third eyelid was initially promising, but all dogs
IgG levels as a result of the anti-inflammatory effect on
relapsed and were later nonresponsive.
the re-establishment of the blood-tear barrieris.
Cyclosporine also has a direct beneficial effect on the
Mucolytic agents
conjunctival cells that have been altered by the induction
Mucolytic agents are used to break up tenacious
of KCS. Moore et al.89 induced KCS in dogs with
 discharge in cases of excessive mucous accumulation.
 bilateral excision of both lacrimal glands and found that
The agent commercially available is 10% and 20%
topical 2% cyclosporine rescued and maintained the
acetylcysteine and it should be diluted to 5% to avoid
quantities of mucin in the goblet cells, despite an ongoing 
epithelial toxicity. It can be used as often as q2h.
deficiency in aqueous tears. This resulted in a lesser
Acetylcysteine has a short shelf life once it is opened
 degree of conjunctivitis and less mucus discharge.
(4 days) and ideally requires refrigeration once opened.
 In patients with a STT value of 2 mm, all dogs responded
Combination preparations of topical agents can be used
to cyclosporine therapy with an increased STT value of
effectively if care is taken to use only those ingredients
5 mm, whereas if the STT value was 0 mm, 36% of the
necessary for each individual patient. The author reserves
 patients failed to respond. Subsequent studies have reported
acetylcysteine therapy for those patients with copious
a 75-82% success rate, and a 1% solution was found to be
amounts of discharge, as it contributes significantly
to
the cost of treating KCS and is also known to be toxic to
improved with cyclosporine therapy even in those patients
the corneal epithelium?1.
that did not have improved tear production. Duration of
LACRIMAL SYSTEM
229
KCS, gender, and breed had no affect on the outcome. The
 animals, the significance of their role is largely unknown94.
only correlation with outcome was the initial STT value.
As previously discussed, androgen deficiency may produce
The only adverse effect noted with the 1% and 2%
 acinar epithelial death that may trigger an immune-
solutions to date has been ocular irritation and blepharitis,
mediated inflammatory response6s. Topical androgen
 probably due to the vehicle or alcohol in the preparation.
therapy may become a form of therapy in the future, but
After topical application of a 2% solution of cyclosporine,
it has not been reported in domestic animals.
barely detectable blood levels are present and depression
of a lymphocyte proliferation test occurs, which may
Topical tacrolimus
indicate a depressed cell-mediated immunity92. The clinical
Tacrolimus suppresses T-cell activation and is 10-100x
implications of this are unknown.
more potent on a weight basis than cyclosporine. It is
Cyclosporine is commercially
 available as a 0.2%
being compounded for topical ocular use as a
ophthalmic ointment and in most cases, but not all this
0.03-0.02% solution or ointment for treating KCS.
has been as successful as the 1-2% solution93. Topical
 Chambers et al.9s obtained a 96% success rate, although
application of 0.2% cyclosporine ointment is not
the severity of cases treated was not stipulated. As
detecta ble in the blood with current assay techniques.
tacrolimus
utilizes
different
cell receptors than
Initial KCS therapy usually consists of topical artificial
cyclosporine, it has been effective in some cases of KCS
tears with topical cyclosporine; the tears are discontinued
which were resistant to cyclosporine.
as improvement is noted. If the patient is very responsive,
cyclosporine
maybe
decreased in frequency
0r
Surgical therapy
occasionally discontinued after several weeks or months;
 If medical therapy is unsuccessful after 90 days, parotid duct
however, in the majority of cases therapy is usually
 transposition (PDT) is recommended. With the advent of
 assumed to be lifelong.
cyclosporine therapy, PDT is infrequently performed but it
still has its indications. The basal salivation rate and patency
When re-evaluating an animal, the clinician should
of the parotid duct should be evaluated prior to anesthesia.
make sure that the patient has had the dose of
Some dogs with xerophthalmia have concurrent xerostomia.
 cyclosporine for that day, as many owners feel they
 In general, PDT done by a practiced surgeon is 63-90%
should withhold therapy before re-evaluation.
successful9%-99, Parotid duct transposition can be performed
in the cat, but it is technically more difficult and the success
Topical or systemic androgens
rate is approximately 50% in the author's experience.
While androgen receptors have been demonstrated in the
There are basically two methods of performing PDT:
nuclei of epithelium of the lacrimal gland, conjunctiva,
1) the original open method of exposingthe duct over the
cornea, meibomian glands, and lens, and in retinal
side of the cheek and dissecting it free (9.18, 9.19)96; and
pigment epithelium (RPE) in humans and laboratory
2) the closed method of performing all of the dissection
9.18
9.19
Facial vein
9.18, 9.19 Open parotid duct transplantation. Before making the cheek incision the duct is cannulated with 0- to 1-nylon suture and scissor5
used to dissect the papilla from the oral mucous membranes (A).A lazy Jincision is made in the cheek with the horizontal member ver the
parotid duct. The duct may be palpated if cannulated or assumed to be at the level of the lateral commissure of the mouth (A). The superficial
facial muscles are incised and the duct found on the surface of the masseter muscle between the dorsal and ventral buccal nerves. The duct is
elevated and kept under moderate tension to show the fascial attachments, which are cut (B).
The anterior dissection is more difficult because of the facial vein which crosses the duct; the duct burrows into the submucosa before forming
the papilla (C, D]. Once rermoved, the papilla is trimmed and the duct is run between the fingers to unwind any twists that may have formed with 
aul onu! palnd s! eded aul '(al sdaoaoy onbsou e yim ais ieihans aul pue aha aul uaamiag pawaoy s! lauuni v hl'h suoeindiueu aui
aul saael omi ul pasop s! uoisiou! leuibo aul (o) inh o-g jo saanins s-e yim eaiounuon aui on panins s! eded aul 'u)aes leasunguo
mouth may need suturing if the defect created by removing the papilla is large.
230
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRiNArY MeDiCINE
of the duct from the mouth, starting from the parotid
+
 Autoimmune dacryoadenitis probably has a genetic
 papilla and working posteriorlyi00. The closed method is
basis and caution should be expressed with breeding
rapid and more convenient when performing bilateral
from affected animals. It is not unusual to observe
PDT, but contamination from the mouth is probably
several generations of KCS in purebreds.
 greater, the dissection is more blind and incomplete, and
constricting forces on the tunnel from the conjunctiva are
ANOMALOUS NASOLACRIMAL DUCTS
not seen and relieved at the time of surgery. Variations of
Supernumerary nasolacrimal ducts that open on the face
the open method involve the placement of the skin
 below the eye have been described in brown Swiss cattle.
incision, degree of prior dissection of the papilla from the
The extra ducts originate from the proximal one-third of
mouth, type of cannula placed in the papilla, and the
the duct. The condition is usually bilateral and does not
placement of the papilla in the conjunctival cul-de-sac.
produce significant signs. The openings on the face may
Complications of PDT are: epiphora of varying
be delineated by hairless, pigmented areas. The mode of
degrees, lack of function due to prior sialoadenitis,
 inheritance has not been determined105.
twisting of the duct creating a stricture, cutting of the duct
during surgery, transection of the duct before the papilla,
EPIPHORA/LACRIMATION
infection of the surgery site, dilated duct over the
Introduction/etiology
zygomatic arch, sialoadenitis, blockage by a sialolith, and
Epiphora refers to an abnormal flow of tears down the
mineral deposits on the cornea and lidio1, 102 The most
face. Epiphora is often used to denote an obstructive
significant complication is mineral deposition  on the
cause of overflow, whereas lacrimation is used to denote
cornea and lids. Often this is mild, with modest *dusting"
an increased production of tears producing an overflow.
of the cornea with a white deposit (9.20). In severe
Constant epiphora causes the hair and skin around the
instances the opacity is plaque-like and very painful. The
medial canthus to be stained brown, and often causes a
 deposit may also accumulate on the lid margins and be felt
moist dermatitis of the medial canthus (9.23). Epiphora/
 0i puodsau Aew saseo PuW fi7'6 Ieuaieu Auua Aiaa B se
lacrimation can occur from an increased production of
topical 1% EDTA solution, but in severe cases the only
tears {usually ocular irritation), an obstruction to the
therapy to relieve the discomfort is partial or complete
outflow of tears, a wicking of tears onto the face from
parotid duct ligation. The author has been unable to find
hair, or from anatomic defects of the lower lid that
a method for medically altering or controlling parotid
permit " spilling' of the tears. Once reflex tearing or
secretion, but feeding a prescription diet in one patient
hypersecretion has been ruled out, obstructions of the
reversed the mineral deposits. The author discovered this
lacrimal drainage system should be considered in the 
effect accidentally, when a dog with a previous PDT and
differential diagnosis of epiphora.
corneal mineralization developed chronic renal failure and
was placed on a prescription diet which was low in
Congenital atresia of the lacrimal punctum
protein, magnesium, phosphorus, and calcium.
Congenital imperforate lacrimal puncta occur mainly in
When obstruction to the duct occurs, it is usually over
the American Cocker Spaniel, Bedlington Terrier, and
the region of the zygomatic arch and may result from
Golden Retriever. The lower punctum is usually involved
twisting, constriction of the tunnel created from the
and the condition is usually unilateral (9.24). Rarely, the 
conjunctival cul-de-sac to the surgical site, or from
entire canaliculus will be lacking106.
external trauma to the duct over the bone (9.22).
Obstruction at this site may be reversed by excision of
Congenital atresia of the nasal end of the
the constriction, freeing the duct as much as possible,
nasolacrimal duct
 and resuturing the duct to the conjunctiva103.
In the horse a syndrome of atresia of the distal end of the
 Epiphora is present to some extent in all successful
 nasolacrimal duct will result in epiphora and, eventually,
PDTs. Larger dogs with high salivary flow rates are most
mucopurulent ocular discharge, when dacryocystitis
 likely to have a pronounced epiphora. Brachycephalics may
develops from the stagnant fluid that promotes bacterial
have nose fold dermatitis from the chronic wetness, and
 overgrowth (9.25). The condition is unilateral and does
 others may develop a blepharitis on the lower lid. Partial
not usually become manifest until 3-4 months after
ligation of the parotid duct may be attempted to reduce
birth107, 108
salivary flow, either at the time of the primary procedure in
the larger breeds or as a secondary procedure.
Malplacement of the ventral punctum
The ventral punctum may be improperly positioned in its
Punctal occlusion
relationship to the lacrimal lake, so that tears are not
Occlusion of the lacrimal puncta will help preserve the
readily drawn into the ventral canaliculi. Entropion of
 natural tears as well as preserve topical medications used in
the medial lower lid that irritates the eye and causes
malposition of the lower punctum is a common cause of
epiphora. Congenital displacement of the lacrimal
 improvement noted by this therapy is minimal.
puncta can be observed particularly in the American
Cocker Spaniel.
Prevention
 As discussed earlier, third eyelid gland removal is not
Micropuncta
recommended in breeds with a predisposition for KCS.
 The lacrimal puncta may be very small in individual dogs
 Dogs placed on systemic sulfonamides should ha ve a
and, while patent, be unable to handle the outflow
STT performed at frequent intervals to monitor tear
without epiphora.
production.
LACRIMAL SYSTEM
231
9.20
9.21
9.20 Fine white deposits on the cornea and third eyelid of a dog
 9.21 Severe mineral deposits on the lids of a dog after parotid
 after parotid duct transposition. The lesion is gritty and iritating 
duct transposition that resulted in severe pain with blepharospasm.
when in high concentration and is thought to represent salivary 
The duct was ligated.
minerals deposits.
9.22
9.23
 9.22 Burmese cat with a dilated parotid duct over the zygomatic
9.23 Severe bilateral epiphora in a Bichon Frise. Mild medial
entropion and conjunctivitis were present.
9.24
9.25
 9.24 American Cocker Spaniel with atresia of the lower lacrimal
 9.25 Unilateral mucopurulent discharge from the eye of a young 
punctum that was ballooned up (arrow] from irrigating through the 
horse. The condition was chronic. On examination of the nasolacrimal
upper punctum.
duct, the distal end was not perforated, resulting in a blind tube that 
would become infected.
232
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRiNArY MeDiCINE
Taut lid-globe conformation
Shih Tzu and presumably other brachycephalics) had no
In toy breeds, the lids are so taut against the globe that it
correlation with lacrimation and Schirmer II tests.
is probable that the lacrimal lake is small and access to the
puncta is restricted (see Cha pter 7, p.145, 7.26). This may
Light and wind
also play a role in the brachycephalic cat with epiphora.
Many individual dogs have epiphora outside, but not
while indoors. Obviously, environmental irritants will
Acquired symblepharon
 aggravate an individual animal's eyes, but dogs with this
Acquired adhesions of the conjunctiva in the region of
type of reflex lacrimation will have marked epiphora
the puncta may obstruct the outflow of tears. This is a
outside, irrespective (
ofthe weather
or season.
condition seen in young kittens with severe herpesvirus
Lacrimation quickly subsides when sheltered. The Chow
conjunctivitis and following trauma to this area (see
Chow and Shar Pei are predisposed.
Chapter 8, p.183, 8.13.)
Clinical signs
Injuries to the lower lid
Epiphora is usually visible at the medial canthus, but
Lacerations that either disrupt the continuity of the lid
with lid defects or wicking of facial hairs, wetting and
margin or disrupt the lower punctum or canaliculus may
Pl ay fo yisua aui soe aaymaue no A suus
result in epiphora.
The condition is often chronic and, when associated with
congenital defects such as atresia of the puncta, it will
Wicking of tears
date back to when the animal was young. Additionally,
Wicking of tears onto the face may occur from long
in animals with congenital defects the lower puncta
facial hairs. These may be present at the medial or lateral
 cannot be visualized.
canthus or on the lacrimal caruncle. This is common in
Additional signs associated with the cause of epiphora
long-haired dogs such as the Poodle (9.26).
may be present, such as conformational defects,
Hypersecretion of the glands
Hypersecretion of tears may be due to irritation from
9.26
glandular inflammation. Enlargement of the third eyelid
gland (9.27), mononuclear inflammatory infiltration,
squamous metaplasia of ducts, and cystic ducts have
been observed in histopathology of the glands taken from
with swelling of the gland, decreasing the lacrimal lake,
or increased production of tears due to irritation.
However, it has been reported that in dogs with epiphora
the tear production was only 10% above normalii,112
 Histologic hyperplasia and clinical enlargement of the
nictitans gland was observed in a series of dogs with
clear, but removal of the gland improved epiphora,
tear production. The postsurgical STT value was not
significantly decreased from the presurgical STT value,
indicating the improvement may not have been due to
 9.26 Poodle with hairs on the medial canthus that wicked tears onto
reduced tear production.
the face.
Reflex lacrimation
9.27
Ocular and periocufar discomfort or pain
Irritation can be from mechanical etiologies such as
distichia, entropion, ectopic cilia, or foreign bodies. Atopic
conjunctivitis often results in chronic epiphora, and brown
 Staining may be present not only on the face, but on the feet
and flanks from licking. Pain associated with corneal
ulceration is an obvious cause of reflex lacrimation, but it
will also be noted with glaucoma and uveitis. Reflex
lacrimation may occur without obvious ocular discomfort
such as blepharospasm. Saito and Kotanil14 found that
97% of small breeds of dogs with epiphora had an
epitheliopathy, defined as epithelial staining with a mixture
of rose bengal and fluorescein. Schirmer I values were
 normal but the Schirmer II values were low, indicating an
increase in reflex lacrimation. The authors postulated that
a decrease in basal secretion was the cause of the
da pauoeap ui asaoui ue ieu pue Auedouida
 9.27 Adenitis of the third eyelid gland associated with epiphora.
cells might interfere with outflow and also increase reflex
The gland is swollen and the overlying conjunctiva is hyperermic
lacrimation. In animals with epitheliopathy, breed (such as
with minimal follicular involvement.
LACRIMAL SYSTEM
233
inflammation, or pain. Pain or blepharospasm of varying
fluorescein on the nares is not conclusive, nor does a
degrees may be associated with epiphora from reflex
positive test rule out obstruction of a single punctum.
lacrimation, and is not typical for epiphora from obstruction.
Nasolacrimal irrigation is necessary in most cases of
epiphora to demonstrate the patency of both puncta, the
Diagnosis
canaliculi, and the nasolacrimal duct. This is a crude test
In order to diagnose the cause of epiphora, the history
and does not evaluate the possibility of a functional
should be evaluated and a careful examination
outflow deficiency that may be present despite an
performed. It is easy to fall into the trap of trying to
anatomically patent outflow system. Atresia is diagnosed
associate certain etiologies with breed, without doing a
by cannulation and infusion of fluid in one punctum,
thorough examination. Often, multiple etiologies are
with the absence of flow out of the opposite punctum. A
present in the same animal; the examination should not
tenting of the conjunctiva at the site of the opposite
be curtailed when one possible etiology, such as distichia
punctum may be observed. Obstructions of the outflow
 or conjunctivitis, is found.
system are usually further examined by contrast
 On physical examination the integrity of the lid
radiography (9.6) (see Dacryocystitis, p.234).
margins, conformational
lid defects, causes
of
mechanical irritation, excess facial and caruncle hairs,
Nasolacrimal irrigation is a very minor procedure
ocular inflammation or discomfort, and whether the
that can be performed in the horse and dog under
puncta are grossly visible should be evaluated. STTs may
topical anesthesia. The same principles apply to
indicate an overproduction or an obstruction, and
 cannulations as to venepuncture:
fluorescein staining of the cornea may delineate a minute
 Direct the needle parallel to the course of the duct.
defect of the epithelium that has stimulated lacrimation.
 Seat the needle deeply in the duct.
In addition, visualization of fluorescein at the nostrils is
 Keep the hand holding the syringe in contact
indicative of a patent nasolacrimal duct. A lack of
with the animal's head to minimize the effects of
head movements.
9.28
Therapy
Treatment is specific for the etiology, if it can be found.
Medical therapy
Medical therapy for epiphora is either directed at
 inflammation and pain, if present, or reducing tear staining.
 Therapy aimed at reducing tear staining may involve just
masking the tearing with powders or trying to affect the
 stain itself Medical therapy directed at staining has often
been empirical, poorly documented, and controversial.
Tetracycine
Tetracycline (50 mg/day/dog) will decrease the staining
and wetness of the face in many “idiopathic' cases of
epiphora. The mechanism of action is not known, but
since it does not decrease tear production in normal dogs,
9.28 Same patient as 9.23. The dog has been on metronidazole for
it is thought to interfere with the brown staining of the
 2 weeks. Both the hair staining and weting have improved significantly.
facelis, In the author's experience, it not only reduces the
staining on the face, but reduces the wetness as well.
9.29
Metronidazole
Metronidazole {100 mg per average dog for 10 days) has
also been recommended for treating the tear staining of
epiphoral16. As with tetracycline, metronidazole does
 not decrease tear production or have a lacrimal toxic
effect when given in high doses for short periods of
timel17, and it decreases the wetness on the face (9.28).
After an initial trial period of 2-4 weeks, medical
needed to control the staining.
Surgical therapy
Opening an atretic lacrimal punctum can usually be
performed using topical anesthesia and restraint in
lateral recumbency. The procedure consists of nicking or
incising with a #11 blade the area where the punctum is
9.29 Opening an atretic lower lacrimal puncta in a Cocker Spaniel
expected to be or where the conjunctiva tents up when
with a #11 blade using topical anesthesia.
flushing (9.29). This is followed by insertion of a
 punctum dilator to distend the proximal end. Topical
234
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEAsE IN VeTeRiNARY MeDICINE
9.30A
9.30B
9.30A, B Dacryocystorhinogram of a Bichon Frise with a cystic
lesion in the nasolacrimal duct resulting in persistent purulent 
exudate in the conjunctival cul-de-sac. The condition was cured with
a rhinotomy and removal of the wall of the sac. Aberrant lacrimal
gland was associated with the wall of the cyst and the nasolacrimal
duct was patent. Contrast material was injected into the left side
 and cysts were visualized on both sides (arrows].
DACRYOCYSTITIS
Introduction/etiology
Dacryocystitis is an inflammation of the lacrimal sac and
nasolacrimal duct. Dacryocystitis usually produces an
obstruction or is caused by an obstruction to the lacrimal
outflow system. It is a relatively uncommon condition,
glucocorticoids are applied for several days to prevent
but must be considered when persistent signs of
healing. If the punctum seals, the procedure can be
conjunctival infection are present. Causes of dacrocystitis
 repeated or a nasolacrimal tube implanted for 2-3 weeks.
include:
Mechanical
problems:
such
entropion,
● Plant awns: foreign bodies are the most common
distichiasis, or excess hairs on the lacrimal caruncle are
cause in arid climates during the dry seasons120.
usually surgically corrected. 
Multiple potential
Facial bone fracture with occlusion of the
etiologies fi.e.
distichia,
conjunctivitis, medial
nasolacrimal duct.
entropion, wicking hairs) are often present in the same
Neoplasm of the nose, sinus, or bone that occludes
animal and clinical judgment is necessary in assigning
the nasolacrimal duct.
responsibility for the signs. Either the most obvious
+
 Aneurysmal dilation of the duct that allows fluid to
cause is treated first, the conditions amenable to
pool (9.30)121.
medical therapy are treated before surgery, or 
a
+
 Periodontal disease of the upper premolars or canine
simultaneous multipronged therapy is given.
teeth.
 In dogs with no obvious cause for the epiphora, such
as in many Miniature Poodles, removal of the third
Clinical signs
eyelid gland has been advocated109. This is an effective 
Epiphora is present, usually chronic and unilateral in
therapy, but the risk of contributing to KCS later in the
nature. Epiphora often changes to a chronic, unilateral,
animal's life is one that should be carefully considered.
mucopurulent 
conjunctival
discharge (9.31).. The 
Consequently, the author does not recommend excision
conjunctiva may or may not be significantly inflamed. The
 of the third eyelid gland for treating epiphora.
STT is normal and the discharge responds transiently to
Conjunctivorhinostomy
 has 
 been advocated for
topical antibiotics.  Rarely an acute abscessation will
surgical relief of epiphora. This consists of creating a
permanent
fistula
between
the
medial-ventral
conjunctival cul-de-sac and the nasal cavity or maxillary
Diagnosis
recessl18, 19 The procedure has not been as successful in
Irrigation of the nasolacrimal duct through one of the
the cat as in the dog. The cost and risk preclude this as a
 lacrimal puncta will demonstrate an obstruction; reflux
form of treatment for epiphora, except for the
of a mucoid to mucopurulent material from the opposite
exceptional case or demanding owner.
 punctum indicates a dacrocystitis (9.33).
LACRIMAL SYSTEM
235
9.31
9.32
 9.31 Marked purulent exudate caked on the lid margins and in the
9.32 Acute abscessation (arrow)] associated with dacryocystitis
 conjunctival cul-de-sac associated with obstruction of the
in a Chinchilla.
nasolacrimal duct of a dog. The condition was unilateral.
9.33
9.34
9.33 Reflux of purulent material out of the lower lacrimal punctum
9.34 Polyethylene tube sutured in place for the treatment of
while flushing through the upper punctum of a dog. This indicates
dacryocystitis (arrow) in a dog. The tube will be left in place for
dacryocystitis.
>3 weeks.
The duct may have a temporary obstruction that can
While improvement may occur, it is usually transient and
usually be relieved with forced irrigation. If the
repeat injections are necessary.
 obstruction is firm, the forced irrigation is painful and
 Most cases of dacryocystitis with obstruction will
requires heavy sedation or general anesthesia. Irrigation
 relapse; a polyethylene or sialastic tube should be placed
may expel the obstruction from the opposite punctum.
 in the nasolacrimal duct to maintain patency (9.34)12s.
Dacryocystorhinography  is  indicated   in most
Antibiotic solutions based on culture and sensitivity
instances
where
thecause
is   not  apparent.
results are applied topically and the tube left in place for
Dacryocystorhinography  is performed by  injecting a
3-4 weeks. Many dogs do not tolerate the tube well and
radiopaque contrast material through a fine polyethylene
 restraining devices must be used to minimize premature
or lacrimal catheter placed in one of the canaliculi, while
removal.
 occluding the opposite punctum to force the fluid nasally
 If grass awns are likely to be the cause, due to the
(9.6)122-124
season and incidence in the practice area, surgical
Therapy
In animals that cannot be successfully catheterized, a
Removing the cause of the obstruction is the basis of
 conjunctivorhinostomy may be indicated.
successful therapy but is not always possible. If the
anpod iensn iou saop pnp aui jo uoe osa
obstruction is removed by modest flushing pressure,
obstruction, but creates an area that has stagnant tears
topical antibiotic/glucocorticoid solutions, draining into
 and secondary infection. Treatment is by performing a
the nasolacrimal ducts, may be used. Injection of
rhinotomy and either removing the cyst or opening it
antibiotics directly into the duct may also be performed.
into the nose so that it can drain121.
236
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
LACRIMAL CYST
proximity of the cyst to one of the lacrimal glands is
Introductionfetiology
usually suggestive of the origin, but this may not always
Lacrimal cysts (dacryops) are rare cystic dilations of the
be obvious. Lesions may exhibit acute pain and
ducts or gland. They may be associated with the orbital
expansion due to hemorrhage within the cyst and
lacrimal gland or the third eyelid gland127-130 A condition
secondary bony malformations may occur around the
termed canaliculops, a cystic dilation of the lacrimal
cyst (9.35, 9.36).
canaliculus, may manifest under the medial canthus131.
The condition has only been reported in the dog.
Diagnosis
The cause of dacryops or canaliculops is usually
Dacryops is usually suggested by the clinical signs and
unknown, but dilation of the duct system weakened by
location, but is confirmed by surgical excision and
inflammation is suspected in humans132. Three of six
biopsy. In the author's experience, nasolacrimal duct
reported cases ha ve been in young Basset Hounds, which
flushing is usually normal, without enlargement of the 
suggests a genetic developmental defect may occur in the
cyst, and injection of radiopaque dye into the cyst or the
duct system.
nasolacrimal duct has not demonstrated a commu-
nication between the structures.
Clinical signs
Most lesions are recognized as cystic by their fluctuant
Therapy
nature and this can be easily confirmed by centesis. The
Careful dissection and excision of the cyst is curative.
 Methylene blue injected into the cyst may aid dissection.
Bony projections may have to be cut down with a rongeur.
ECTOPIC LACRIMAL GLAND(S)
9.35
Subconjunctival, corneal, and intraocular masses have
au ul pue  pewori oidoe se asdoiq uo pasouaeip uaag
dog, cow, and deer. Typically, the condition manifests
itself in the young animal, but the signs may not be
apparent until the lesion expands later in life133-13s.
Excision is successful when tissue is found on the ocular
surface. In deer, microphthalmos masks the ectopic gland
and is the predominant lesion.
PRIMARY LACRIMAL GLAND TUMOR
 Primary tumors arising from the lacrimal glands include
adenoma (9.37]136 and adenocarcinoma; they are rela-
tion therapy, but the prognosis is probably guarded for
both diseases. (See Neoplasia of the third eyelid, p.212.)
A pseudotumor of granulation tissue protruding from
the lower lacrimal punctum that took five attempts at
9.35 Dacryops in a young Basset Hound that had produced secondary
excision has been reported141.
bony changes in the facial bone ventral to the cyst. No communication
with the nasolacrimal duct or sac could be established.
9.36
9.37
9.37 A cystadenoma
of the lacrimal gland 
in a dog. The 
condition was treated
with surgical excision 
 and teletherapy.
9.36 Dacryops or lacrimal cyst in a young Basset Hound. The
condition was chronic and the cyst had blood tinged fluid. On
exploration, the cyst was independent of the lacrimal sac but
communicated with the gland of the third eyelid.
LACRIMAL SYSTEM
237
REFERENCES
1 Prince J, Diesem C, Eglitis L, Ruskell G
13 Prydal J, Artal P, Woon H, Campbell F
26 Johnson B, Whiteley H, McLaughlin S
(eds) (1960) The orbit and adnexa. In:
{1992) Study of human precorneal tear
(1990) Effects of inflammation and
Anatony and Histology of the Eye and
 film thickness and structure using laser 
aqueous tear film deficiency on
Orbit in Dommestic Animais. Charles C.
interferometry. Investigatiue
 conjunctival morphology and ocular
Thomas, Springfield, pp. 3-12.
Ophthatmotogy and Visuat Science
mucus composition in cats. American
2 Sakai T, Yohro T (1981) A histological
33:2006-2011.
Journat of Veterinary Research
study of the Harderian gland of
14 Ehlers N (1965) The precorneal film:
51:820-824.
Mongolian gerbils, Meriones 
biomicroscopical, histological, and
27 Kern T, Erb H, Schaedler J,
meridianus. Anatomy Record
 chemical investigations. Acta
Dougherty EP (1988) Scanning
200:259-270.
Ophthatmologica 81:4-134.
electron microscopy of experimental
3 Martin C, Munnell J, Kaswan R {1988)
15 Fullard R, Kaswan R {1994)
keratitis sicca in dogs: cornea and
The normal ultrastructure and
Characterization of tears induced by
bulbar conjunctiva. Veterinary
histochemical characteristics of canine
cyclosporine. European Society of
Pathology 25:468-474.
lacrimal glands. American Journat of
Veterinary Ophthatmoiogy and
 28 Barnett K {1988) Keratoconjunctivitis
Veterinary Research 49:1566-1572.
European Cottege of Veterinary
sicca: sex incidence. Journat of Smatt
4 Orlandini G, Bacchi A {1977) Sulla
 Ophthatmotogists, Dresden.
Animat Practice 29:531-534.
ultrastruttura della ghiandola lacrimale
16 Powell C {1988) Autonomic imnervation
29 Kaswan R, Martin C, Dawe D {1985)
negli equidi. Archives Itatian Anatomy
of the canine tacrimat glands. Masters
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca:
and Embryology 82:1-13.
Thesis, University of Georgia, pp. 1-77.
 immunological evaluation of 62
5 Sinha R, Calhoun L (1966) A gross,
17 Bromberg B (1981) Autonomic control 
canine cases. American Journat of
histologic, and histochemical study of 
 of lacrimal protein secretion.
Veterinary Research 46:376-383.
the lacrimal apparatus of sheep and
Investigative Ophthatmology and
30 Kern T, Erb H {1987) Facial
goats. American Journat of Veterinary
Vistat Science 20:110-116.
neuropathy in dogs and cats: 95 cases
Research 27:1633-1640.
18 Powell C, Martin C {1989) Distribution 
(1975-1985). Journat of the American
6 Gelatt KN, Peiffer Jr RL, Erickson JL,
of cholinergic and adrenergic nerve
Veterinary Medicat Association
Gum GG (1975) Evaluation of tear
fibers in the lacrimal glands of dogs.
191:1604-1609.
formation in the dog, using a
American Journat of Veter inary
 31 Ruskell G {1969) Changes in nerve
modification of the Schirmer tear test.
Research 50:2084-2088.
terminals and acini of the lacrimal
Journat of the American Veterinary
19 Franklin R, Bang B (1980) Mucus-
 gand and changes in secretion
Medicat Associat ion 166:368-370.
stimulating factor in tears. Investigative
induced by autonomic denervation.
7 Helper L, Magrane W, Koehm J.
Ophthaimology and Visuat Science
Zellforsch Mikrosk Anatomy
Johnson R {1974) Surgical induction of
19:430-432.
94:261-281.
keratoconjunctivitis sicca in the dog.
20 Latimer C, Wyman M, Diesem C,
32 Joyce J, Bratton G {1973)
Journat of the American Veterinary
Burt J (1984) Radiographic and gross
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca secondary
Medicat Association 165:172-174.
anatomy of the nasolacrimal duct of the
to fracture of the mandible. Veterinary
 8 McLaughlin S, Brightman A, Helper L,
horse. American Journat of Veterinary
Medicine/Smalt Animat Clinician
Primm N, Brown M, Greely S {1988)
Research 45:451-548.
68:619-620.
 Effect of removal of the lacrimal and
 21 Burling K, Murphy C, Da Silva
33 Spurlock S, Spurlock G, Wise M
third eyelid glands on Schirmer tear tests
Curiel J, Bellhorn R (1991) Anatomy
{1989) Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
in the cat. Journat of the American
of the rabbit nasolacrimal duct and its
associated with fracture of the
Veterinary Medicat Association
clinical implications. Progress in
stylohyoid bone in a horse. Journat of
193:820-822.
Veterinary and Comparative
the American Veterinary Medicat
9 Helper L (1970) The effect of lacrimal
Ophthatmology 1:33-40.
Association 194:258-259.
gland removal on the conjunctiva and
22 Moore C, Collier L (1990) Ocular
34 Bryan G, Slatter D {1973)
cornea of the dog. Journat of the
surface disease associated with loss of
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca induced by
American Veterinary Medicat
conjunctival goblet cells in dogs.
phenazopyridine in dogs. Archives of
Association 157:72-75.
Journat of the American Animat
Ophthaimology 90:310-311.
10 Cornell-Bell A, Sullivan D,
Hospitat Assoc iation 26:458-465.
35 Slatter D, Davis W (1974) Toxicity of
Allansmith M (1985) Gender-related
23 Cullen CL, Njaa BL, Grahn BH (1999)
phenazopyridine. Archives of
 differences in the morphology of the
Ucerative keratitis associated with
Ophthatmotogy 91:484-486.
lacrimal gland. Investigative 
qualitative tear film abnormalities in
36 Slatter D, Blogg J (1978)
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
cats. Veterinary Ophthatmology
 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca in dogs
26:1170-1175.
2:197-204.
associated with sulphonamide
11 Kaswan R, Salisbury M, Lothrop C
 24 Helper L {1976) Keratoconjunctivitis
administration. Austratian Veterinary
(1991) Interaction of age and gender on
sicca in dogs. Arerican Academy of
Jotumat 54:444-446.
 occurrence of canine
 Ophithatmology Otolaryngology
37 Vestre W, Brightman A, Helper L,
keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Progress in
81:624-628
Lowery J {1979) Decreased tear
Veterinary Ophthatmology and
25 Aguirre G, Rubin L, Harvey C {1971)
 production associated with general
Comparative Ophthatmology 1:93-97.
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca in dogs.
anesthesia in the dog. Journat of the
12 Holly F, Lemp M (1977) Tear
Journat of the American Veterinary
American Veterinary Medica!
physiology and dry eyes. Sturvey of
Medicat Association 158:1566-1578.
Association 174:1006.
Ophthatmotogy 22:69-87.
238
OpHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
38 Morgan R, Bachrach A (1982)
50 Hayashi K, Reddy C, Hanninen L,
62 Roberts S, Lavach J, Severin G,
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca associated
Wolf G, Kenyon K {1990) Pathologic
Withrow S, Gillette E (1987)
with sulfonamide therapy in dogs.
changes in the exorbital lacrimal gland
 Ophthalmic complications following
Journat of the American Veterinary
of the vitamin A-deficient rat.
megavoltage irradiation of the nasal
Medicat Association 180:432-434.
Investigative Ophthatmotogy and
and paranasal cavities in dogs. Journat
39 Arnett B, Brightman A, Musselman E
Visuat Science 31:187-196.
of the American Veterinary Medicat
{1984) Effect of atropine sulfate on
 51 Morgan R, Duddy J, MeClurg K
Association 190:43-47.
tear production in the cat when used
{1993) Prolapse of the gland of the
63 Jamieson V, Davidson M, Nasisse M,
with ketamine hydrochloride and
third eyelid in dogs: a retrospective
 English R {1991) Ocular complications
acetylpromazine maleate. Journat of
study of 89 cases {1980-1990).
following cobalt-60 radiotherapy of
the American Veterinary Medicat
Joturnat of the American Anirmat
neoplasms in the canine head region.
Association 185:214-215.
Hospitat Association 29:56-60.
Journat of the American Animat
40 Collins K, Moore C, Hagee J {1986)
 52 Moulimard J {1982) Contribution α
Hospitat Association 27:51-55.
 Sulfonamide-associated
t'etude etiologique de la kerato
64 Sullivan DA, Wickham LA, Rocha EM,
keratoconjunctivitis sicca and corneal
conjonctivite seche chez le chien.
Kelleher RS, Silveir LA, Toda I (1998)
ulceration in a dysuric dog. Journat of
These pour le Doctorat Veterinaire,
Influence of gender, sex steroid
the American Veterinary Medicat
Ecole Nationale Veterinaire D'Alfort.
hormones, and the hypothalmic-
Association 189:924-926.
 53 Kaswan R, Martin C, Chapman W
pituitary axis on the structure and
41 Barnett K, Hoseph E {1987)
{1984) Keratoconjunctivitis sicca:
function of the lacrimal gland. Aduances
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca in the dog
histopathologic study of nictitating
in Experimental Medicine and Biology
following S-aminosalicyclic acid
membrane and lacrimal glands from
438:11-42.
 administration. Human Toxicology
28 canine cases. American Journat of
65 Azzarolo AM, Mircheff AK,
6:377-383.
Veterinary R esearch 45:112-118.
Kaswan RL, et al. (1997) Androgen
42 Slatter D, Piek J, Costa N {1982) Lack
54 Kaswan R, Martin C, Dawe D {1983)
support of lacrimal gland function.
 of lacrimotoxicity to phenazopyridine
Rheumatoid factor determination in
Endocrime 6:39-45.
in rabbits. Journat of Veterinary
50 dogs with keratoconjunctivitis
66 Sullivan DA, Krenzer KL, Sullivan BD,
Pharmacology and Therapeutics
sicca. Journat of the American
Tolls DB, Toda I, Dana MR (1999)
5:209-212.
Veterinary Medicat Association
 Loes androgen insufficiency cause
43 Hollingsworth SR, Canton DD,
183:1073-1075.
lacrimal gland inflammation and
Buy ukmihci NC, Farver TB {1992)
55 Wolf E, Merideth R {1981) Parotid
aqueous tear deficiency? Investigative
Effect of topically administered
 duct transposition in the horse. Journat
Ophthatmotogy and Visuat Science
atropine on tear production in dogs.
of Equine Veterinary Science
40:1261-1265.
Journat of the American Veterinary
1:143-145.
67 Barrett P, Scagliotti R, Merideth R,
Medicat Association 200:1481-1484.
 56 Spiess B, Wilcock B, Physick-Sheard P
Jackson P, Alarcon F {1991) Absolute 
44 Dodam JR, Branson K, Martin DD
{1989) Eosinophilic granulomatous
corneal sensitivity and corneal
{1998) Effects of intramuscular
 dacryoadenitis causing bilateral
trigeminal nerve anatomy in normal
sedative and opioid combinations on
keratoconjunctivitis sicca in a horse.
dogs. Progress in Veterinary and
tear production in dogs. Veterinary
Equine Veterinary Journat 21:226-228.
Comparative Ophthatmology
Ophthatmotogy 1:57-59.
57 Collins K, Johnson P, Moore C,
1:245-254.
45 Berger S, Scagliotti R {1995) A
Collier L, Shaw M (1994) Immune-
68 Salisbury M-A, Kaswan RL, Brown J
quantitative study of the effects of
 mediated keratoconjunctivitis sicca in a
[1995) Microorganisms isolated from
tribrissen on canine tear production.
horse. Veter inary and Comparative
the corneal surface before and during
Journat of the American Animat
Oph thatmology 4:61-65.
topical cyclosporine treatment in dogs
Hospitat Association 31:236-241.
 58 Peruccio C {1982) Incidence of 
with keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
46 Diehl K, Roberts S {1991)
hypothyroidism in dogs affected by
American Journat of Veterinary
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca in dogs
 keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Proceedings
Research 56(7):880-884.
 associated with sulfonamide therapy:
Of the American Society of Veterinary
69 Petersen-Jones S {1997) Quanti fication
16 cases {1980-1990). Progress in
Ophthatmology and Internationat
of conjunctival sac bacteria in normal
Veterinary and Comparative
Society of Veterinary Ophthatology.
dbgs and those suffering from
Ophthaimology 1:276-282.
Las Vegas, p. 47.
keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Veterimnary
47 Van Buskirk EM (1980) Adverse
59 Miller P, Panciera D {1994) Effects of
Commparative Ophthatmotogy 7:29-35.
reactions from timolol maleate 
experimentall induced hypothyroidism
 70 Ralph R {1975) Conjunctival goblet cell
therapy. Ophthatmotogy 87:447-450.
on the eye and ocular adnexa of dogs.
 density in normal subjects and in dry
48 Martin C, Kaswan R {1985)
American Journat of Veterinary
eye syndromes. Investigative
Distemper-associated
Research 55:692-697.
Ophthaimology and Visuat Science
keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Journal of
 60 Dodds W (1997) Autoimmune
14:299-302.
the American Animat Hospitat
thyroiditis and polyglandular
71 Taylor H, Louis W (1980) Significance
Association 21:355-359.
 autoimmunity of purebred dogs.
of tear function test abnormalities.
49 Elkan E, Zwart P (1967) The ocular
Canime Practice 22:18-48.
Annats of Ophthatmology 12:531-535.
 disease of young terrapins caused by
61 Quimby F, Schwartz R, Poskitt T,
72 Hawkins EC, Murphy CJ (1986)
vitamin-A deficiency. Veterinary
Lewis R (1979) A disorder of dogs
 Inconsistencies in the absorptive
Pathology 4:112-118.
resembling Sjogren's syndrome. Clinicat
capacities of Schirmer tear test strips.
Immunology and Immunopathology
Journat of the American Veterinary
12:471-476.
Medicat Association 188:511-513.
LACRIMAL SYSTEM
239
73 van der Woerdt A, Adamcak A (2000)
 86 Kaswan R, Salisbury M, Ward D,
96 Lavignette A {1966)
Comparison of absorptive capacities of
Martin C, Ramsey J, Fischer C (1990)
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca in a dog
original and modified Schirmer tear test
Topical application of cyclosporine in
treated by transposition of the parotid
strips in dogs. Journat of the American
the management of keratoconjunctivitis
salivary duct. Journat of the American
Veterinary Medicat Association
sicca in dogs. Journat of the American
Veterinary Medicat Association
216:1576-1577.
Animat Hospitat Association
148:778-786.
74 Hakanson N, Arnesson K {1997)
26:269-274.
97 Baker G, Formston C {1968) An
 Temporal variation in tear production in
87 Tsubota K, Saito I, Ishimaru N,
evaluation of transplantation of the
normal Beagle dogs as deterrmined by
Hayashi Y {1998) Use of topica]
 parotid duct in the treatment of
Schirmer tear test. Veterinary
cyclosporine A in a primary Sjogren's
keratoconjunctivitis sicca in the dog.
Comparative Ophthatmotogy
syndrome mouse model. Investigative
Journat of Smatl Animal Practice
7:196-203.
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
9:261-268.
75 Berger SL, King V (1998) The
39:1551-1559.
 98 Gelatt K (1970) Treatment of canine
fluctuation of tear production in the
88 Yoshida A, Fujihara T, Nakata K (1999)
keratoconjunctivitis sicca by parotid
dog. Joturnat of the American Animat
Cyclosporin A increases tear fluid
duct transposition. Journat of the
Hospitat Association 34:79-83.
 secretion via release of sensory
American Animat Hospitat Association
76 Gilbard J, Farris L, Santamaria J (1978)
neurotransmitters and muscarinic
6:1-12.
Osmolarity of tear microvolumes in 
pathway in mice. Experimentat Eye
99 Schmidt G, Magrane W, Helper L
keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Archives of
Research 68:541-546.
(1970) Parotid duct transposition: a
Ophthatmotogy 96:677-681.
89 Moore CE, McHugh JB, Thorne JG,
follow-up study of 60 eyes. Journat of
77 Schadler H (1987) An alternative
Phillips TE (2001) Effect of cyclosporine
the American Animat Hospitat
treatment for keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
 on conjunctival mucin in a canine
Association 6:235-241.
Veterinary Medicine/Small Animat
 keratoconjunctivitis sicca model.
100 Glen J, Lawson D (1971) A modified
Clinician 82:1145-1148.
Investigative Ophthatmotogy and Visuat
technique of parotid duct transposition
78 Tsubota K, Goto E, Fujita H, et af.
Science 42:653-659.
for the treatment of
{1999) Treatment of dry eye by
 90 Morgan R, Abrams K (1991) Topical
keratoconjunctivitis sicca in a dog.
autologous serum application in
administration of cyclosporine for
Veterinary Research 88:210-213.
 Sjogren's syndrome. British Journat of
 treatment of keratoconjuncti vitis sicca in
101 Harvey C, Koch S {1971) Surgical
Ophthatmology 83:390-395.
dogs. Journat of the American
cmplications of parotid duct
79 Rubin L, Aguirre G (1967) Clinical use
Veterinary Medicat Association
transposition in the dog. Journat of the
of pilocarpine for keratoconjunctivitis 
199:1043-1046
American Animat Hospitat Association
sicca in dogs and cats. Journat of the
91 Olivero D, Davidson M, English R,
7:122-126.
American Veterinary Medicat
Nasisse M, Jamieson V, Gerig T (1991)
102 Stanley R {1997) Failure of parotid
Association 151:313-320.
Clinical evaluation of 1% cyclosporine
duct transposition due to sialolith
 80 Smith E, Buyukmihci, Farver T (1994)
for topical treatment of
formation. Veterinary and
 Effect of topical pilocarpine treatment 
keratoconjunctivitis sicca in dogs.
Comparative Ophthatmotogy
on tear production in dogs. Journat of
Journal of the American Veterinary
7:126-127.
the American Veterinary Medicat
Medicat Association 199:1039-1042.
103 Betts D, Helper L {1977) The surgical
Association 205:1286-1289.
92 Gilger B, Andrews J, Wilkie D, Lairmore
correction of parotid duct
81 Thermes F, Molon-Noblot S, Grove J
M {1996) Lymphocyte proliferation and
transposition failures. Journat of the
{1991) Effects of acetylcysteine on
blood drug levels in dogs with
American Animat Hospitat Association
rabbit conjunctival and corneal surfaces.
keratoconjunctivitis sicca receiving long-
13:695-700.
Investigative Ophthatmology and Vistuat
term topical ocular cyclosporine.
104 Startup F {1984) Intra-canalicular
Science 32:2958-2963.
Veterinary Comparative Ophthatmotogy
gelatin implants in lacrimal punctum
82 Tseng S, Maumenee E, Stark W, et af.
6:125-130.
surgery. Journat of Small Animat
{1985) Topical retinoid treatment for
 93 Sansom J, Barnett K, Neumann W.
Practice 25:635-637.
various dry eye disorders.
Schulte-Neumann S, Clerc B {1995)
105 Heider L, Wyman M, Burt J, Root C,
Ophthatmology 92:717-733.
Treatment of keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Gardner H (1975) Nasolacrimal duct
83 Vainisi S {1988) Personal
in dogs with cyclosporine ophthalmic
anomaly in calves. Journat of the
communication.
ointment: a European clinical field trial.
American Veterinary Medicat
 84 Bounous D, Carmichael P, Kaswan R,
Veterinary Record 137:504-507.
Association 167:145-147.
Hirsh S, Stiles J (1995) Effects of
94 Rocha EM, Wickham LA, da
106 Barnett K (1979) Imperforate and
ophthalmic cyclosporine on lacrimal 
Silveira LA, et af. (2000) Identification 
microlachrymal puncta in the dog.
gland pathology and function in dogs
of androgen receptor protein and 5
Journat of Smatl Animat Practice
with keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
alpha-reductase mRNA in human
20:481-490.
Veterinary and Comparative
 Ocular tissues. British Journat of
107 Lundvall R, Carter J {1971) Atresia
Ophthatmotogy 5:5-12.
Ophthatmology 84:76-84.
 of the nasolacrimal meatus in the
85 Kaswan R, Salisbury M, Ward D (1989)
95 Chambers L, Fischer C, McCalla T,
horse. Journat of the American
 Spontaneous canine keratoconjunctivitis
Parshall C, Slatter D, Yakley B (2002)
Veterinary Medicat Association
 sicca, a useful model for human
Topical tacrolimus in treatment of
159:289-291.
keratoconjunctivitis sicca: treatment
 canine keratoconjunctivitis sicca: a
108 Latimer C, Wyman M {1984) Atresia
with cyclosporine eye drops. Archives of
multicenter preliminary clinical trial.
of the nasolacrimal duct in three horses.
Ophthatmology 107:1210-1216.
Poster presentation at the Scientific
Journat of the American Veterinary
Meeting of the American College of
Medicat Association 184:989-992.
Veterinary Ophthatmologists, Denver.
240
OpHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
109 Kerpsack R, Kerpsack W (1966) The
121 van der Woerdt A, Wilkie D, Gilger B,
132 Brownstein S, Belin M, Krohel G,
orbital gland and tear-staining in the
Smeak D, Kerpsack S (1997) Surgical
 Smith RS, Condon G, Codere F (1984)
dog. Veterinary Medicine/Smatl Animat
treatrment of dacryocystitis caused by
Orbital dacryops. Ophthatology
Clinician 61:121-124.
cystic dilation of the nasolacrimal
91:1424-1428.
110 Loeffler K, Branscheid W, Rodenbeck
systerm in three dogs. Journat of the
133 Wyand DS, Lehav M, Albert DM
H, Ficus H {1978) Histologische
American Veterinary Medicat
{1972) Intraocular lacrimal gland tissue
 untersuchungen an nickhautdrusen von
Association 211:445-447.
with other ocular abnormalities
hunden mit vermehrtem tranenflub.
122 Gelatt K, Guffy M, Borgess T {1971)
Occurring in a white-tailed deer. Journat
Kleintier Praxis 23:215-220.
 Radiographic contrast techniques for
of Comparative Pathology 82:219-221.
111 Roberts S (1962) Abnormal tear
 detecting orbital and nasolacrimal
134 Linde-Sipman VD, Klein WR {1984)
 production in the dog. Modern
tumors in dogs. Journat of the Ammerican
 Ectopic lacrimal gland tissue in the
Veterinary Practice 43:37-40.
Veterinary Medicine Association
globe of a cow. Veterinary Pathology
112 Harrison V {1964) Clinical
156:741-746.
21:613-614.
observations on epiphora. Veterinary
123 Yakely W, Alexander J (1971)
135 Regnier A, Magnol J, Servantie J
Record 76:437.
Dacryocystorhinography in the dog.
{1986) Corneal and subconjunctival
113 Read R, Dunn K, Smith K, Barnett K
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
ectopic lacrimal glands in a dog.
{1996) A histological study of nictitans
Medicme Association 159:1417-1421.
Canadian Practice 13:12-14.
glands from dogs with tear overflow of
124 Gelatt K, Cure T, Guffy M, Jessen C
136 Kirayama K, Kagawa Y, Tsuzuki K,
unknown cause. Veterinary
{1972) Dacryocystorhinography in the
et al. (2000) A pleomorphic adenoma of 
Comparative Ophthatmology
dog and cat. Journat of Small Animat
the lacrimal gland in a dog. Veterinary
6:195-204.
Practice 13:381-397.
Pathology 37:353-356.
114 Saito A, Kotani, T {1999) Tear
125 Severin G {1982) Nasolacrimal duct
137 Rebhun W, Edwards N {1977) Two
 production in dogs with epiphora and
catheterization in the dog. Journal of the
cases of orbital adenocarcinoma of
 corneal epitheliopathy. Veterinary
American Animat Hospitat Association
probable lacrimal gland origin. Journat
Ophthatmology 2:173-178.
18:13-16.
of the American Animat Hospitat
115 Thun R, Abraham R, Helper L {1975)
126 Laing E, Spiess B, Binnington A {1988)
Association 13:691.
 Effect of tetracycline on tear production
Dacryocystotomy: a treatment for
138 Wilcock BP, Peiffer RL {1988)
in the dog. Journat of the American
chronic dacryocystitis in the dog.
Adenocarcinoma of the gland of the
Animat Hospitat Association
Journat of the American Animal
third eyelid in seven dogs. Journat of the
11:802-804.
Hospitat Association 24:223-226.
American Veterinary Medicat
116 Gale V {1976) Use of metronidazole in
127 Harvey C, Koch S, Rubin L {1968)
Association 193:1549-1550.
treating tear staining' in the dog.
Orbital cysts with conjunctival fistula in
139 Schaeffer EH, Pfleghaar S, Gordon S,
Veterinary Record 98:14.
a dog. Journat of the American
 Knoedlseder M (1994) Maligne
117 Filipek M, Rubin L {1977) Effect of
Veterinary Medicat Association
nickhauttumoren bei hund und katze.
 metronidazole on lacrimation in the 
153:1432-1435.
Tierdertl Praxis 22:382-391.
dog: a negative report. Journat of the
128 Playter R, Adams L {1977) Lacrimal
140 Kkomaromy AM, Ramsey DT,
American Animat Hospitat Association
cyst (dacryops) in 2 dogs. Journat of the
Render JA, Clark P (1997) Primary
13:339-341.
American Veterinary Medicat
adenocarcinoma of the gland of the
118 Long R (1975) The relief of epiphora
Association 171:736-737.
nictitating membrane in a cat. Journat
by conjunctivorhinostomy. Journat of
129 Latimer C, Wyman M, Szymanski C,
of the American Animat Hospitat
Small Animal Practice 16:381-386.
Werling K (1983) Membrana nictitans
Association 33:333-336.
119 Covitz D, Hunziker J, Koch S {1977)
gland cyst in a dog. Journat of the
141 Williams D, Long R, Barnett K (1998)
Conjunctivorhinostomy: a surgical
American Veterinary Medicat
Lacrimal pseudotumour in a young Bull 
 method for the control of epiphora in
Association 183:1003-1005.
Terrier. Journat of Small Animat Practice
the dog and cat. Journat of the
130 Martin C, Kaswan R, Doran C (1987)
39:30-32.
American Veterinary Medicat
Cystic lesions of the periorbital region.
Association 171:251-255.
Compendium on Contintuing Education
120 Lavach J, Severin G, Roberts S {1984)
for the Practicing Veterinarian
 Dacryocystitis in dogs: a review of
9:1021-1029.
twenty-two cases. Journat of the
131 Gerding P (1991) Epiphora associated
American Animat Hospitat Association
with canaliculops in a dog. Journat of
20:463-467.
the American Animat Hospitat
Association 27:424-426.
241
10
Cornea and Sclera
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
10.1
The cornea and sclera comprise the fibrous tunic of the
globe. The transitional zone where the sclera superficially
Overlaps the cornea is termed the limbus. This overlap is
widest dorsal and ventrally. When the globe is viewed
especially in ungulates, and when viewed from the side
the cornea has a greater curvature than the sclera f10.1,
10.2). The cornea of the dog has an average radius of
curvature of 8.5 mm and varies from 13-17 mm in the
horizontal axis and 12-16 mm in the vertical axisl, 2 The
cat cornea has an a verage radius of curvature of 8.6 mm,
horizontal axis of 17 mm, and vertical axis of 16 mm?.
Corneal measurements vary significantly in the horse,
with the horizontal axis ranging from 28-34 mm and
vertical axis ranging from 23-27 mm1, 4.
10.1 Frontal view of the cow cornea dermonstrating the egg shape or
 The thickness of the cornea of the dog and cat is often
elongated horizontal axis that is exaggerated in ungulates.
quoted as being thicker in the center than at the
10.2
Sclera
,Extraocular muscle
Choroidal vein 
Third eyelid 
Sclera
Chorioca pillaris
Choroid
Rod.
Pupil
Retina
Inner nuclear cell
Iris
 Ganglion cell
Macula
Lens
To optic
Retinal  Cone 
 Pigmented 
Tapetum
nerve
vessel5
epithelium
~ Retinal vessels
Cornea
~Optic disk 
Iris
~Nontapetal retina
Limbus 
 Hyaloid canal in the vitreous body
-Zonules
Conjuctiva ~
- Ciliary body
~ Scleral plexus
10.2 llustration of a cat eye to demonstrate the different radius of curvature of the cornea compared to the globe and the relationships of the
cornea and sclera at the limbu5.
242
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETeRINARY MeDICINE
periphery, unlike the cornea of humans1, 4. However,
10.3
early measurements were made post mortem and modern
measurement methods in the live animal confirm that the
central cornea is slightly thinner than the periphery, as in
humans. The central cornea of the dog is 0.62 mm (range
0.41-0.74 mm [410-740 μm] ] and of the cat is 0.56 mm
(560 μm)5, 6, 7, in the dog, females have a thinner cornea
than the male7. Moodie et al.8 studied the development of
the feline curvature and corneal thickness from 9 weeks
to 2 years of age and found that the thickness increased
mainly during the first 4 months of life. The corneal
thickness increased from 0.379 mm at 9 weeks to
0.548 mm at 16 weeks and to 0.567 mm at 1 year or
more. In the cat, an 8% increase in corneal thickness
occurs diurnally and is associated with lid closure?.
The cornea not only serves to support and protect the
interior ocular structures but has the unique property of
being transparent. It produces 70% of the refraction
( bending) of light rays that occurs in the dog eye. Almost
49 D of refraction occurs at the anterior corneal surface
and -5.8 D at the posterior corneal surface, yielding a
total refraction of 43 D2. The kitten's refractive power
10.3 Normal histology of the canine cornea. The epithelium has a
decreases from 55 D to 39 D at 1-2 years of age8. The
basal lamina but there is no distinct Bowman's membrane (E). The
cornea produces more refraction than the lens because
majority of the cornea is stroma, composed of collagen fibers that
refraction depends on:
traverse the cornea (S) without terminating. Descemet's membrane (D)
Curvature of surface.
abuts the deep stroma and is lined with a simple cuboidal epithelium.
·Difference in density of the two media.
The radius of curvature of the lens and cornea are fairly
similar. Light passes through air with a refractive index of
1, enters the cornea with a refractive index of 1.376, passes
into the aqueous humor with a refractive index of 1.336,
and finally into the lens with a refractive index of 1.42.
Thus the biggest difference in refractive index is between
the air and cornea and, consequently, more refraction
occurs here than between the aqueous humor and the lens.
The anatomy of the cornea and sclera is simple.
Although the cornea is obviously unique in ‘its
transparency, it is composed anteriorly of stratified
squamous epithelium with its basal lamina, the stroma,
which comprises the major portion, and the posterior
epithelium (erroneously termed the endothelium), which
has Descemet's membrane as an exaggerated basal
lamina (10.3).
The corneal epithelium in the dog and cat is 5-11 cells
10.4 Scanning electron microscopy of feline corneal epithelium 
thick and has a turnover rate of approximately 7
illustrating the light and dark polyhedral cells associated with the
days10. The flattened surface cells are polygonal and have
number of microplica on the surface (x480].
numerous microvillae and microplicae (10.4) that are
coated with a glycocalyx and which function to stabilize
the tear film.
glycosaminoglycan (GAG) of which is keratin sulfate.
The corneal stroma is 90% of the mass of the cornea
Dermatan sulfate is the other major GAG found in the
and consists of parallel lamellae {bundles) of collagen
stromall. The GAGs act as anions and bind water.
fibers that extend across the entire diameter of the cornea
Keratin sulfate is most concentrated in the posterior
(10.3). While the bundles are parallel to one another,
cornea, whereas dermatin sulfate is concentrated in the
they are not oriented in the same direction. The lamellae
anterior cornea12. The GAGs maintain corneal hydration
are most regular or parallel in the posterior stroma. The
and help to maintain the critical regular spacing of
anterior subepithelial lamellae are more oblique to the
collagen fibers necessary for corneal transparency.
surface, with more interweaving. This arrangement is
The comea is richly supplied with sensory innervation
responsible for the anterior stroma being more reflective
from the long ciliary branches of the ophthalmic division of
when seen on biomicroscopy. Keratocytes, which are
the Vth cranial nerve. The nerves are concentrated in the
fibroblasts with branching processes, are scattered
anterior stroma and penetrate into the epithelium where they
between the collagen lamellae.
terminate as naked nerve endings. The comeal epithelium is 
The ground substance surrounding the collagen fibers
 the most densely innervated epithelium in the bodyll. The
is composed of proteoglycans, the predominant
dog has an average of 12 nerve trunks13 and the cat i9 nerve
CORNEA AND SCLERA
243
trunksl4 that enter the cornea. The nerve endings are
The sclera is the major portion of the fibrous tunic; it 
sensitive to pain, pressure, and temperature. The dense
does not have any epithelial layers. The thickness varies
concentration of nerve endings in the epithelium accounts for
considerably, being thinnest at the equator and posterior
the severe pain observed with superfcial epithelial loss,
pole of the globe and thickest over the base of the iris.
whereas a deep ulcer often does not exhibit the same degree
of pain1s. A difference in comeal sensitivity is demonstrated
the fibers are fusiform in shape23. Elastic fibers are
between  dog  S
 skull types using a` Cochet-Bonnet
present in the sclera but are minimal in number. Cellular 
anesthesiometer. Not surprisingly, brachycephalics have
elements
consist
of
 scattered
fibroblasts
and
decreased sensitivity compared to dolicocephalic and
melanocytes. The episclera is a thin collagenous and
mesaticephalic breeds. The central cornea is more sensitive
vascular layer on the anterior surface of the sclera.
than the peripheral regions. Dogs and cats are relatively more
 insensitive than other species that have been tested13.
CORNEAL TRANSPARENCY
The sensory innervation has a positive trophic influence
Several anatomic peculiarities contribute to corneal
on the epithelium. Marfurt et al.16 investigated the
transparency:
anatomy and neurochemistry of canine corneal nerves and
 Smoothness of the epithelium aided by the tear film.
confirmed that, as in other species, the anterior half of the
+
Arrangement and size of the stromal collagen and
stroma and epithelium  is densely innervated  with
GAGs. A lattice of collagen fibers is formed that is
14-18 radially oriented superficial nerves from the limbus
regular and parallel. This is postulated to produce
that have repeated dichotomous branching. The epithelium
an interference of light which prevents the light from
has dense leashes of nerves that are not oriented in a
reflecting back to be visualized24. The small regular
specific direction, unlike in some species. Marfurt et al16
diameter of the collagen fibers is also thought to be
found that 99% of all the corneal nerves of dogs contained
important for corneal clarity2s.
both substance P and calcitonin gene-related peptide,
 Absence of blood vessels and pigment.
indicating their probable sensory function, while 30%
Relative dehydration of the stroma.
 contained tyrosine hydroxylase (TH). TH-positive nerves
were concentrated in the stroma and were absent in the
HEALING OF CORNEAL WOUNDS
epithelium. TH-positive nerves are thought to represent
Epithelial healing
autonomic nerves, principally sympathetic nerves in the
Epithelial wound healing is divided into three cellular
 cornea. The neuropeptide substance P may stimulate DNA
 phases: migration, proliferation, and adhesion.
synthesis for epithelial healing, since depletion of substance
+
 Cell migration. Epithelial cells at the margin of a
P slows epithelial healing17. Substance P, with insulin-like
wound retract and become thicker within the first hour
growth factor 1, stimulates corneal epithelial cell migration
following tra uma. Neutrophils from the tear film and
 and adhesion but not mitosis in cell culture18.
fibrinous material are present in the epithelial defect
within 1-3 hours. Hemidesmosomal attachments are
Any insult to the peripheral cornea and limbal
dissolved around the edge of the wound, superficial
region such as corneal incisions, lasering the
cells are desquamated, and the leading edge of the
adjacent sclera for glaucoma, or lacerations may
wound decreases to a single cell layer. After a latent
produce partial denervation of the cornea and loss
 phase of 3-6 hours, sliding or cell migration occurs26.
of neurotrophic influences, resulting in slow healing
The cells flatten and increase their surface area by
epithelial erosions.
increasing cell volume with water?7. Smaller defects are
covered by a monolayer in this manner, which
The posterior layer of cells lining the cornea is usually
eventually thickens by cellular proliferation.
referred to as the endothelium19, although it is not a true
endothelium. Its single l
layer of cells are usually
hexagonal and line the inner cornea (10.5). The
endothelial cell count is 2,700-2,800/mm? for both the
dog and cat and decreases with agee. While the
endothelium is metabolically active, its mitotic activity is
more questionable than the anterior epithelium.
The
the cat, good in the young dog20,21. Healing in the adult
is mainly by cellular enlargement and migration, rather 
than by mitosis. The posterior epithelium shows
typical 'endodothelial cell, fibroblasts, or an epithelial
cell type22. The epithelial cell type possesses desmosomal
 attachments and tonofilaments.
The basilar side of the posterior epithelium lies on the
stroma and produces a 1
 modified basal lamina,
Descemet's membrane (10.3). It is produced throughout
life and consequently is much thicker in the old animal
than in the young animal. Although clinically it acts as an
"elastic' membrane, it contains only fine fibrils that are
10.5 Scanning electron microscopy of equine corneal endothelium 
predominantly type IV collagen.
with the characteristic hexagonal shape of most of the cells (x1200].
244
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRiNArY MeDiCINE
● Cell proliferation. Mitosis occurs, after a 24 hour
with its disorganized stroma leaves some degree of
delay, to re-establish the epithelial thickness. The
residual scar. Clinically, scars are often described
stem cells for the corneal epithelium are located at
according to their size and density: a nebula is a small
the limbus28. They travel in a centripetal pattern
very faint scar or opacity, a macula is a small but distinct
from the limbus. Iif the healing is not accomplished
white opacity, and a leukoma is a large dense white
by sheets of cells, the small groups of migrating cells
opacity. An adherent leukoma is a dense white scar with
form a whorl or vortex pattern27. The stem cells are
an underlying adhesion of the iris to the cornea.
long-lived cells that have the ability to undergo
mitosis and are responsible for cell replacement and
CORNEAL VASCULARIZATION
tissue healing. They produce transient amplifying
The cornea is normally devoid of vessels but whether
cells that divide rapidly and eventually differentiate
vascularization is inhibited by a factor (e.g. angiostatin)
into the terminally differentiated cell of the tissue.
or is prevented by the compactness of the tissue is
The amplifying cell of the corneal epithelium is the
unknown. Conversely, many agents may stimulate
basal cell and the superficial cells are the postmitotic
vascularization but their physiologic significance is often
and terminally differentiated cells27. Removal of the
unknown. Hypoxia, neoplasia, and inflammation are
entire epithelium or removal of the limbal epithelium
frequent initiators of neovascularization. These events
will result in wound healing by conjunctival epithelium
trigger angiogenic factors such as tumor angiogenic
migrating over the cornea. Even lesions of the central
factor, fibroblast growth factor, transforming growth
corneal epithelium produce an increase in the mitotic
factor-beta, platelet-derived growth factor, and vascular
rate of the conjunctival epithelium29. The conjunctival
endothelial growth  factor. Lymphokines produced by
epithelium also produces goblet cells once on the
 activated T-lymphocytes and prostaglandin (PG) E1 are
cornea. These goblet cells eventually undergo a process
of transdifferentiation into corneal epithelial cells,
Loss of compactness, i.e. corneal edema, is a factor but by
which takes 6 weeks or more. If the cornea is
itselfis not suffcient to cause neovascularization40.
vascularized, the transdifferentiation is retarded, with
A variety of inhibitors of angiogenesis are known
 the epithelium retaining conjunctival characteristics30
(angiostatin, endostatin, thrombostatin, platelet factor 4,
Topical retinoids inhibit this transdifferentiation and
fibronectin, and prolactin) but their interactions are
 are thought to be the blood-borne factor responsible
 complex and incompletely understood at this time. MMPs
for inhibition?1.
 are enzymes that degrade the extracellular matrix, thereby
 Cell adhesion. Although the epithelium regenerates
allowing endothelial cell migration. Neutrophils are
rapidly, anchoring units are not formed until the
involved to some extent in most forms of corneal
defect is covered. If the basal lamina is intact,
neovascularization. While leukopenic animals can develop
hemodesmosomes are formed within 1 week. If the
neovascularization,
 the
reactionis
 amplified
by
basal lamina is removed, hemodesmosomes are much
slower to regenerate (6-7 weeks). Consequently, the
thought to involve a balance between inhibitors and
epithelium is susceptible to re-injury for a prolonged
stimulators of neovascularization and multiple mediators
period when the basal lamina has been lost, as the
 are probably responsible for varying phases of the process43.
epithelial attachment to the basal lamina is
important for adhesion to the stroma 32.
CORNEAL METABOLISM
The epithelium and endothelium utilize most of the
Stromal healing
corneal oxygen and receive most oxygen from the
Stromal healing initially involves the invasion of leukocytes
 atmosphere. Four sources of oxygen are:
from the tear film or limbus within a matter of a few hours33
+
 Aqueous humor - important for the endothelium.
au e suno uoeauisp aoax inou isiy au ui
Limbal ca pillaries.
margin of the wound, whereas beyond the margin the
Capillaries of the tarsus when the eyes are closed.
 keratocytes undergo activation. Two to three days after the
 Oxygen dissolved in the tear film layer. This is the
injury the wound margin is filled with a mixture of
most important source of oxygen.
keratocytes and fibroblast type cells. Whether the fbroblasts
are all transformed keratocytes or a mixture of transformed
Glucose is derived mainly from the aqueous humor and
keratocytes and monocytes is controversial34. After 3-6 days
is metabolized via anaerobic glycolysis and the hexos-
the fibroblasts invade the fbrin plug of the wound. The
monophosphate shuntll. The metabolic activity of the
initial ground substance of the scar is dermatan sulfate but by
stroma is low.
15-30 days post trauma, keratin sulfate is detected, which
indicates a transformation of fbroblasts to keratocytes. It
CORNEAL TURGESCENCE
takes up to 3 months to achieve normal levels of keratin
The normal cornea maintains a fairly constant thickness.
sulfate3s. The area of stromal healing is not transparent due
During the night a slight increase in thickness occurs due to
to the disorganized and large collagen fibers. The tensile
the absence of evaporation of tears when the lids are closed.
strength of the wound progresses slowly, with only 50%
 The cormea is about 75-80% water by weight but it still has
strength achieved by central corneal wounds in 100 days. A
a marked affinity for more water. As a result, an excised piece
lack of epithelium over the stromal healing markedly
of cornea immersed in solution becomes turgesced (swollen).
decreases the tensile strength of the wound36.
Most of this swelling occurs in an anterior-posterior
direction, with slight shortening of tangential length. The
Corneal scar formation and opacification
Epithelial healing will occur without scar formation, but
a loss of transparency. The imbibition of water is due to the
when the stroma is damaged the resultant fibroplasia
 ground substance or GAGs in the stroma.
CORNEA AND SCLERA
245
10.6
Stroma 
10.7
(Na+ 179 mEq/KgH,0) 
 Osmotic water flux
Epithelium
H+
Stroma
Na/K ATPase
CA
Na+
HCO  H,0 + CO,
Endothelium
ump
Na
Barrier
Aqueous humor
HOHCO
(Na+144 mEq/Kg H,0)
H,O
Pump 3RRRPRRRRR
10.7 Proposed endothelial pump mechanisms that draw water out of
the stroma into the aqueous humor. (Reprinted with permission from
Na/K ATPase
Waring et af., 19822)
CAO
Nat
The normal cornea is in a deturgesced state. Any
HCO-,
H,0
damage to or loss of epithelium will produce localized
edema, which is usually transient due to rapid
Barer DRRRRR
regeneration. Endothelial damage, however, is far more
serious, with marked and often permanent loss of
 transparency because of limited regenerative capabilities.
AC
 The mechanism for maintaining corneal deturgescence
in the endothelium and epithelium is associated with a
barrier function and a metabolic pump. The barrier
Tight junction
 Extracellular pathway
consists of intercellular junctions which are leaky to water
but this is offset by active pumping out of water in the
10.6 Illustration of the forces that control corneal hydration. The
normal cornea (10.6). Conditions that damage the barrier
endothelium is an incormplete physical barrier to water from tight
cause the leak rate to exceed the pumping rate and result
junctions at the lateral cell junctions. The intraocular pressure pushes
in stromal edema. The mechanisms by which water is
water through these tight junctions, resulting in water having to be
pumped out of the cornea into the aqueous humor are
pumped back into the anterior chamber. The pumping of sodium and
incompletely understood. Prevalent theories emphasize the
bicarbonate back into the aqueous humor osmotically draws water
movement of water secondary to sodium and bicarbonate
with them. (Reprinted with permission from Waring et o.,198222.)
ion movement into the aqueous. A Na+/K+ ATPase
metabolic pump is present on the lateral endothelial cell
membrane and pumps Na+ ions into the aqueous humor,
Table 10.1 Common causes of color changes noted in
 creating an osmotic gradient that draws water out of the
the cornea
stroma. Bicarbonate is also pumped into the aqueous
humor under the influence of carbonic anhydrase {CA)
and/or bicarbonate
ATPase pump (10.6, 10.7)22)
White lesions: edema, leukocytes, lipid, calcium, scar,
infectious agents.
Surprisingly, topical or systemic CAIs do not cause corneal
 decompensation except on the rare occasion.
Red lesions: neovascularization, stromal hemorrhage,
 Symblepharon, neoplasia.
 Dense corneal edema should prompt the clinician to
 Pigmented lesions: superficial benign melanin, sequestrum,
rule out various causes of endothelial dysfunction, i.e.
uveal pigment (usually deepl, pigmented neoplasia,
degeneration, uveitis, glaucoma, and trauma.
 dematiaceous fungi, exogenous pigment.
DISEASES OF THE CORNEA
Table 10.2 Categorization of corneal lesions
The cornea is easily visualized under magnification,
enabling the clinician to examine the pathology and use
 Congenital noninflammatory: superficial and deep.
diagnostic tests. However, due to the limited response of
the cornea to disease, many diseases affect the cornea
Acquired noninflammatory: superficial and deep.
similarly. One of the basic pathologic changes with
Nonulcerative inflammatory: superficial and deep.
corneal disease is a loss of clarity or opacification of the
Ulcerative: superficial, deep, and perforated.
cornea. The types of opacity can be categorized on color;
Table 10.1 presents some of the most common causes for
Proliferative: pseudotumors, congenital tumors, and
color changes in the cornea. The type of opacity, the
acquired neoplasia.
depth of the lesion, and whether it is acquired or
246
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
CONGENITAL SUPERFICIAL NONINFLAMMATORY
Clinical signs
DISEASE
Puppy band keratopathy manifests with a faint, usually
Puppy band keratopathy
incomplete, superficial (subepithelial) hazy band in
Introduction/etiology
suckling,puppies (10.8, 10.9). The opacity is most
Puppy band keratopathy denotes a common benign
commonly found adjacent to the medial and lateral
condition that is often transient in neonatal puppies. The
limbal region and is usually self-correcting.
cause is unknown but may be due to calcium in the diet.
Histologic features have not been studied because the
 Diagnosis
condition is benign. Roberts et al.44 reported a central
Diagnosis is by the appearance of the cornea and the age
superficial white opacity in Collie puppies due to an
of the puppy.
accumulation of a hematoxylin-staining amorphous
layer under the epithelium. However, the central location
Therapy
and appearance of the opacities in this study differed
 No therapy is necessary.
from the usual presentation. Puppy band keratopathy
may affect all breeds of dog but is most often found in
Sclerocornea
breeds which are screened for genetic disease as puppies,
i.e. Collie, English Springer Spaniel, Sheltie.
region. It is nonprogressive and occurs infrequently. The 
peripheral cornea has an extension of scleral-like tissue
into it (10.10), involving only a segment of the
circumference. The condition may be associated with
other congenital ocular lesions4s and may be unilateral or
bilateral. it has been observed in both the dog and horse.
10.8
CONGENITAL DEEP NONINFLAMMATORY
DISEASE
Persistent pupillary membrane attachment
(Peter's anomaly)
Introduction/etiology
This is a condition associated with corneal opacification
and embryonic aberrant persistent pupillary membrane
(PPM) strands attached to the inner cornea. The
condition is known to be inherited in some breeds such
as the Basenji, Welsh Corgi, and Chow Chow. In the
Basenji, the condition has been reported to be a
dominant trait but other studies have indicated that in
this breed the condition does not follow a simple
dominant or recessive trait648, Chapter 15 (Presumed
 inherited ocular diseases) includes a more extensive list of
affected breeds. It is observed less frequently in the cat.
10.8 Puppy band keratopathy in a Collie puppy visualized in
 In the cat, PPMs are commonly associated with eyelid
retroillumination. Note that the lesions are faint and will 
agenesis or MOC.
spontaneously resolve.
10.9
10.10
10.9 Puppy band keratopathy in a Collie puppy that is typical of the
10.10 Scleralization of the dorsal cornea of a horse. The
scleralization was most likely a congenital lesion. Acquired
the retroillumination of the tapetum and are typically adjacent to the
 multifocal corneal scars with vascularization are also present.
limbus and do not form a complete band.
CORNEA AND SCLERA
247
10.11
10.12
10.13
10.11 A dog with multifocal scars at
10.12 A more severe form of persistent
10.13 The appearance of the same dog in
Descermet's level with associated persistent
pupillary membranes (PPMs] in a 10-week-old
10.12 several months later after the edema
pupillary membranes. The corneal lesions are
Welsh Terrier puppy. The central cornea ha5 a
has subsided. A deep white 'scar' is residual
both pigmented and white.
dense edema, but strands of PPMs are visible
at Desecemet's level.
 at the periphery to differentiate from an
infectious canine hepatitis reaction.
 Clinical signs
questionable. Breeding from affected dogs with corneal
 Focal pigment deposits or a grayish-white opacity at
lesions should be discouraged.
Descemet's membrane are found. The lesions are
iir'oll eauoo eiauduad iey aui suueds jeixe alensn
Posterior polymorphous dystrophy
 Deep corneal lesions were recorded in 20% of Basenjis
Introduction/etiology
Posterior polymorphous dystrophy refers to a disease
blindness may result from severe corneal edema but the
that has been observed in the American Cocker Spaniel
edema often improves with age, leaving a residual deep
and is characterized by multiple  irregular-shaped
opacity at Descemet's level (10.12, 10.13). PPMs are
opacities present at Descemet's membraneso. The
usually present but may break with age, making it more
condition is congenital and nonprogressive. It is thought
difficult to associate the deep corneal opacities to a
to be inherited, with a suggested mode of a dominant or
 specific etiology.
 incomplete dominant trait. Histopathologic changes seen
 are focal endothelial necrosis and cell loss with fibrous
 Diagnosis
metaplasia of the endothelial cells. Focal areas may be
The cause of the corneal opacity, whether pigmented,
denuded of endothelial cells, with exposure of the
gray, or edematous, is obvious if associated with PPMs.
Descemet's membra ne.
Localization of the opacity to the Descemet's membrane,
without an overlying stromal scar jindicating
a
Clinical signs
perforating injury) or signs of prior intraocular
 Bilateral, multiple, nonprogressive, grayish opacities are
inflammation in a young animal, is presumptive evidence
present in the deep cornea. The opacities are scattered
of a PPM syndrome. Posterior polymorphous dystrophy
over the entire posterior surface and vary from linear to
will also produce white opacities at Descemet's
 vesicular in shape. There are no attachments of opacities
membrane but these are rare and relatively breed specific,
to uveal tags or PPMs. No visual problems are noted.
 and the lesions are more diffuse. Historically, severe
forms of infectious canine hepatitis with corneal edema
Diagnosis
were an important differential, because both conditions
 Diagnosis is made on the characteristic appearance and
 presented in young animals.
location of opacities, the breed, and lack of uveal
attachments to lesions.
The PPM syndrome with axial to paraxial 'scars' is
one of the most common causes of endothelial
Therapy
lesions in the dog. Many patients do not have the
No therapy is needed. Breeders should be advised that
diagnostic iridal strands and the diagnosis is
oauag papadsns e si Audosap snoqdouaod iouaisod
 presumptive, based on lack of stromal scarring.
disease.
breed involved, and age.
Cornea globosa
Therapy
Cornea globosa refers to a cornea that is large and
No therapy is usually given or needed in most cases. A
protruding due to a large radius of curvature. The corneal
penetrating corneal graft can be performed in severe
diameter is not abnormal and the globe itself is not
cases. It has been suggested that cutting the strands will
enlarged, compared to buphthalmos. The Rocky Mountain
improve the stromal edema but given the spontaneous
horse has an inherited congenital ocular problem with
improvement in most cases, the benefit of surgery is
multiple ocular lesions, possibly depending on genetic
248
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
10.14
10.14 Comparison of corneal curvature in a normal horse (left) with a Rocky Mountain horse with cornea globosa (right).
(Courtesy of Dr. D. Ramsey, Michigan State University.)
10.15
10.16
10.17
10.15 Axial dystrophic calcification in a dog
10.16 Band keratopathy in a horse after
10.17 Band keratopathy in a dog with chronic
with Cushing's disease. The lesions developed 
 cyclophotocoagula tion performed for
uveitis. The patient was presented for acute
rapidly within several days.
glaucoma.
pain from the ulcer that is stained with
fluorescein. Note the foamy appearance; this
is not as white or chalky as other examples of
 corneal calcifica tion.
than a horizontal band (10.15). In the horse, rapid corneal
was initially termed a megalocornea but the diameter is not
calcification can occur after laser cyclophotocoagulation
but most cases are associated with chronic endogenous
The globular cornea is made more apparent with the
uveitis54 (10.16). Corneal calcification can also occur in
presence of macropalpebral fissures (10.14).
 old corneal scars, in which case it does not have a band
 pattern. Old dogs may develop dystrophic calcium plaques
ACQUIRED SUPERFICIAL NONINFLAMMATORY
in the cornea that eventually slough, leaving ulcers of
DISEASE
variable depth.
Band keratopathy
The mechanism of corneal calcification is unknown but
Introduction/etiology
increases in tissue pH associated with inflammation and
Band keratopathy usually refers to a deposition of calcium
ssuodu sq on yanou aie sieat jo uoenodeaa
in the epithelium, basal lamina, and superficial stroma that
Medications containing phosphates, such as topical steroid
often follows the horizontal pattern of the palpebral
 phosphates6 and intracameral viscoelastic agents with
fissure. While metastatic corneal calcification can
 phosphate buffers, have produced band keratopathy57.
occasionally occur from systemic hypercalcemic states
(hyperparathyroidism, pseudohyperparathyroidism, dietary
Clinical signs 
intake), it is usually associated with chronic corneal or
A grayish-white, very superficial opacity is present,
intraocular inflammation. The dog and horse are most
extending in a horizontal band across the cornea to a
commonly affected. The author has also observed a
variable degree. The calcium does not extend to the limbus.
condition of rapidly  developing _corneal calcification
 Depending on the density of the calcium, it will appear as
associated with Cushing's disease'3, which differs from
gray and “moth-eaten' or a plaque-like white granular
band keratopathy by an axial or paraxial location rather
lesion. The lesion feels gritty if scraped (10.17).
CORNEA AND SCLERA
249
Depending on the cause of calcium precipitation,
10.18
concurrent signs of uveitis, keratitis, or corneal scars may
be present. As the calcium becomes dense and plaque-
like, it may slough, producing an ulcer of variable depth
and varying degrees of pain.
Diagnosis
A presumptive diagnosis of calcium deposition is usually
made by the clinical appearance but a definitive diagnosis
can be obtained with a biopsy, using a superficial
keratectomy or corneal scraping to demonstrate the
presence of calcium.
Therapy
Complete excision with a superficial keratectomy, or
removal of the epithelium and bathing the cornea with a
1-3% EDTA solution, are potential therapies. If the eyes 
are blind from the intraocular disease, no therapy is
10.18 Macular keratopathy in a young Sheltie visualized in
usually warranted unless the condition is painful or an
retroillumination. The lesions are multifocal, superficial, and
ulcer is created by sloughing of the calcium.
brownish at this stage. They later evolved into white lesions.
Superficial punctate keratopathy
Introduction/etiology
Superficial punctate keratopathy is a condition of
unknown etiology usually seen in the Shetland Sheepdog.
It is characterized initially by brown, faint, superficial
opacities that transform into multifocal grayish-white,
superficial round or irregular rings 1-3 mm in diameter.
condition is termed a lipid dystrophy if it is bilateral
It is observed in dogs as young as 4 months and may be
and presumed inherited, and a lipid degeneration if it is
a form of a corneal dystrophy.
associated with systemic lipid abnormalities or previous
 Histologically, the lesions are limited to the epithelium
corneal disease. Most lipid keratopathies would seem to
and are composed of dyskeratotic cells and degenerate
 be local metabolic disturbances as hyperlipidemia is
usually not present60. Breeds such as the Airedale,
evidence of：
inflammation but, with
1 chronicity,
Collie, S
Shetland Sheepdog, Siberian Husky, Beagle,
vascularization occurs. After months to years, the initial
Dachshund, Afghan Hound, Cavalier King Charles
white opacities appear as crystalline or lipid deposits.
Spaniel, and GSD seem susceptible, but definite
inheritance patterns are known in relatively few
 Clinical signs
breeds61-64. Lipid dystrophy is reported to be a
Initially, bilateral brownish circular maculae develop in
recessive trait in the Siberian Husky6s. In general,
the epithelium that progress to white maculae (10.18). No
females are affected more commonly than males66.
inflammatory signs, vascularization, or pain is present.
In the author's experience, many dogs with lipid
Chronic cases may develop blepharospasm from corneal
keratopathy have a history of being given a coat
erosions. Symptomatic dogs have reduced STT values
 conditioner, high energy dog food, dry food with added
{10-12 mm), decreased tear film BUT (<10 seconds), and
oils and fat, or a fatty diet. The condition may manifest
rose bengal stain retention. Vascularization is eventually
with a combination of dietary overload and a genetic
stimulated when corneal erosions are present.
intolerance to fat. Lipid keratopathy in the cat is
probably secondary to previous corneal vascularization
Diagnosis
 in most instances and is relatively infrequent67.
 Diagnosis is usually on the clinical signs and the breed of
Systemic abnormalities that result in high blood
dog. Superficial keratectomy can be used for biopsy
lipids may produce a lipid keratopathy that is often
purposes.
more rapid in development and is progressive. A
familial lipid storage disease in young Fox Terriers has
Therapy
been observed with corneal lipid accumulation in a
Artificial tears, hyperosmotic solutions, and soft contact
 peripheral circular ring adjacent to the limbus68. Lipids
lenses are recommended to protect the cornea. When
will also accumulate in the cornea at the leading edge of
vascularization is present but erosions are healed, topical
raised corneal lesions, such as neoplasms and
corticosteroids, topical NSAIDs, or topical cyclosporine
episcleritis, and in corneal lesions with previous
are used.
vascularization. When corneal lipid accumulations are
secondary to systemic or local ocular disease, the term
Lipid keratopathy
lipid degeneration or keratopathy is preferred to
Introduction/etiology
dystrophy. Topical use of corticosteroids may also
Lipid deposition at any or all depths of the cornea may
 predispose many patients to corneal lipid deposition;
be seen in a wide variety of dog breeds. The con-
use in patients with pre-existing lipid keratopathy
figuration, type of lipid, speed of progression, and age
should be avoided and, if this is not possible, therapy
of onset varies with the breed and disease. The
susuuisaq s uouisodap pidil uaum paddois aq pinous
250
O pHThAlMIC DiseAse In VeterinArY MeDiCINE
10.19
10.20
10.21
10.19 Axial superficial cholesterol crystals
10.20 Multifocal diffuse superficial lipid
10.21 Lipid degeneration in a Collie. The bitch
in a dog. These are usually bilateral and are
accumulation in an English Springer Spaniel.
had elevated cholesterol levels and had been 
 a common form of dystrophy in several
The condition was bilateral. The lesions were
on a high energy diet for parturition and 
 breeds. They can be modified by lirmiting
rapidly progressive and were modified by
nursing. The lesion was surgically removed
the dietary fat.
fat restriction.
and, with dietary restriction, did not recur
for the life of the dog.
 Clinical signs
10.22
Crystalline or white amorphous accumulations are
 present in one or both eyes. The texture of the lesion
will depend on the type of lipid deposited and the stage
of the lesion. Cholesterol crystals are typically needle-
like {10.19). Most cases are very superficial in nature
but lipids may accumulate at any level or through the
full stromal thickness. The pattern varies with breed,
cause, and chronicity of the condition (10.20). The
condition is usually slowly progressive and rarely
results in blindness. Often it will regress with long-term
restriction of dietary fat.
If the condition is rapidly progressive or peripheral
in location, 
 systemic lipid abnormalities should be
investigated with a lipid profile, and the adrenal,
thyroid, pancreas, and liver metabolism evaluated
(10.21, 10.22). Vascularization usually develops with
10.22 Arcus lipid degeneration in an Afghan Hound with chronic
chronicity but the lesion is not proportional to the
hypothyroidism. This pattern of target-like rings of cholesterol
vascularity (10.21, 10.22).
accumulation has been noted in other Afghan Hounds without
known metabolic disorders.
Axial superficial oval crysta lline cholesterol
deposits beginning in one cornea and eventually
becoming a bilateral disease are a very common
Corneal lesions with metabolic storage disease
lesion in a wide variety of breeds on diets of
Introduction/etiology
≥14% fat, or given oral coat conditioners.
types I and VI have been reported to cause a cloudy cornea
Diagnosis
types I and Vll have also been associated with a cloudy
The crystalline appearance suggests the diagnosis but
keratectomy
 with histopathologic examination  is
metabolic storage diseases may be overlooked because of
necessary for confirmation.
the severity of the systemic neurologic signs. The corneal
lesions are due to vacuolation of keratocytes and
Therapy
endothelium with GAGs. The lesions are throughout the
Therapy is often not given due to the minimal opacity
full thickness of the corneal stroma.
and slow benign course of most cases. Restriction of
dietary fat is recommended. Superficial keratectomy can
Clinical signs
be performed in larger or progressive opacities if they are
Bilateral, diffuse, hazy corneas are present that may be
superficial. Although the underlying cause is not
accompanied by blepharospasm or the animal may hold
addressed, the cornea may remain clear postoperatively
the eyes partially closed. It is difficult to localize the haze 
for extended periods. Any systemic abnormality in lipid
because it is full thickness. Accompanying signs are
meta bolism should be controlled, e.g. hypothyroidism.
referable to skeletal and neurologic systems.
CORNEA AND SCLERA
251
10.23
10.24
10.25
10.23 Doberman Pinscher that was treated
10.24 Stromal corneal edema from
10.25 An 11-year-old Boston Terrier with
for a cardiomyopathy and developed diffuse 
endothelial degeneration in a Miniature
advanced diffuse endothelial degeneration and
bilateral corneal edema from tocainide toxicity.
 Poodle. The condition was initially unilateral
accompanying corneal edema. A few bullae
but developed bilaterally and progressed 
are present and pigment is starting to invade
 rapidly within 12 months. Note the lack of
the cornea dorsally.
inflammatory signs at this stage.
10.26
appears to be a spontaneous senile degeneration of the
endothelium. Pathologically, the endothelial cells are 
reduced in number, increased in size, bizarre in shape,
and may have  increased fibrillar deposition on 
Descemet's membrane76, 77
A hereditary corneal dystrophy in the Manx cat
manifests with severe corneal edema resulting in epithelial
bullae, but the endothelium is morphologically normal78.
Mild, bilateral, axial, focal corneal edema develops at
45 months and slowly progresses. Late in the course,
recurrent ulcerations develop from ruptured bullae. A
similar condition of corneal edema has been reported in a
 domestic shorthaired cat79. While the pathogenesis has not
been clarified, the endothelium appears to have at least a
functional deficiency in the pump mechanism.
In cattle wormed with phenothiazine and allowed in
the sunlight, a photosensitivity may develop that results
resulting in corneal edema with multiple bullae. The bullae rupture,
in bilateral diffuse corneal edema. The edema is
producing acute painful ulcerative episodes that may result in the
typically in the lower two-thirds of the cornea80.
 owner requesting enucleation or euthanasia.
Animals on a low plane of nutrition may be more
susceptible. Recovery may occur in 1 week if the animal
is restricted indoors, or recovery may be prolonged to
Diagnosis
Aew suoneiaoin ainised uo iday si ll fl suuou 5-7
Neurologic and ophthalmic signs are suggestive of the
occur secondary to the edema.
 diagnosis, as are histopathologic changes. Screening for
Long-term systemic tocainide was associated with
mucopolysaccaridosis can  be performed on urine
diffuse corneal edema in Doberman Pinschers that were
samples dried on filter paper and stained with toluidine
being treated for cardiomyopathy. The condition 
is
blue. Definitive diagnosis of the type of deficiency is
reversible if recognized in the early stages (10.23) but is
made by measuring the lysosomal enzyme activities of
 permanent at later stages31.
leukocytes and fibroblasts.
Clinical signs (dog)
ACQUIRED DEEP NONINFLAMMATORY DISEASE
A focal area of stromal edema is observed in one eye,
Corneal endothelial dystrophy/degeneration
often beginning temporally {10.24). Initially there is no
Introduction/etiology
 inflammation in the cornea or in the eye but most eyes
Endothelial dystrophy manifests as a slowly progresive
develop significant conjunctival  vascular injection.
corneal edema_in one eye that eventually l
becomes
Edema slowly progresses over months to involve the
bilateral. The Boston Terrier is predisposed, and the
entire cornea and eventually the second eye (10.25).
disease manifests mainly in older females. A variety of
Epithelial bullae often develop from the increased water
other breeds (Poodle, Chow Chow, Basset Hound,
in the stroma collecting under and in the epithelium
Chihuahua, Dalmatian) may develop the disease but it is
(10.26). The bullae frequently rupture, producing an
not restricted to females in these breeds. In most cases it
acute superficial ulceration. The erosion is often slow to
252
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
heal as the basic cause is not cured. The end result is
often blindness. Chronic edema combined with multiple
cornea) with a low temperature battery cautery may
ulcerative episodes results in eventual vascularization
 produce enough scarring to prevent recurrent ulcerations
and pigmentation of the cornea (10.27).
and pain. The corneal fibrosis reduces the ability of the
Cataracts frequently develop concurrently but how
cornea to swell and opacification may decrease.
they are related to the corneal edema is unknown.
Striate keratopathy
Diagnosis
Striate keratopathy is usually due to breaks in Descemet's
 Diagnosis is usually by ruling out other causes of endothelial
membrane and is usually the result of glaucoma. The
damage such as trauma, uveitis, luxated lens, PPMs, drug
condition ma nifests as curvilinear, often branching, double
toxicity, or glaucoma. Biomicroscopy of the endothelium
white lines that can be localized to Descemet's membrane
 may reveal multiple holes in the endothelial sheet.
with the slit lamp (10.29). Lines have been described in the
normal horse eye due to thinning of Descemet's
Therapy
membrane. Glaucoma should always be ruled out before
Therapy is usually palliative, consisting of hypertonic salt
dismissing these lines as an innocent lesion82. In the horse,
solution {which draws water out of the cornea) and soft
the signs of glaucoma may be very subtle, and the lack of
contact lenses. Hypertonic ointments or solutions have
readily available instruments to measure the IOP makes
minimal effect and are surprisingly expensive. Soft lenses
glaucoma an underdiagnosed disease in the field. The
make the eyes more comfortable and the condition more
author has observed acute corneal edema that followed the
acceptable to the owner. Corneal grafting may 
be
course of previous striae in the horse {10.30) and the
 attempted but if performed late in the course, corneal
edema was the first obvious sign of glaucoma to the owner.
vascularization will increase the chances of graft
Normal IOP at the time of examination does not rule out
rejection (10.28). The concurrent development
of
past elevation as being the cause for striate keratopathy.
cataracts often complicates the prognosis for vision.
No therapy is given for the corneal lesions.
10.27
10.28
10.27 Miniature Poodl with advanced stages of endothelial
10.28 Full-thickness penetrating keratoplasty that wa5 performed 
degeneration that has left the chronically edematous cornea
on the patient in 10.24 later in development. The graft was rejected 
vascularized and pigmented.
approximately 4 weeks later.
10.29
10.30
10.29 Striate keratopathy or multiple breaks in Descemet's
10.30 Acute striate keratopathy with overlying corneal edema in a
 membrane in an Elkhound with glaucoma.
horse. Multiple bullae are present in the edematous streak. Glaucoma
was the cause of the striae and edema was the first sign noted.
CORNEA AND SCLERA
253
10.31
10.32
10.33
10.31 Relatively acute corneal abscess in
 10.32 A dog with intense neovascularization
10.33 Two Horida spots in a dog. The opacities
a horse. Note the early, but intense, corneal
of the cornea and a stromal keratitis associated 
are white, stromal, with hazy borders and there
neovascularization. The dense creamy opacity
with Lsteria monocytogenes. Corneal edema is
 is no evidence of an inflammatory response.
represents neutrophils, whereas the lighter
 associated with bullae over the neovasculariza tion.
corneal opacity is due to edema.
The patient responded well to antibiotics.
SUPERFICIAL NONULCERATIVE INFLAMMATORY
positive organisms found are Stapbylococcus spp. and
DISEASE
Streptococcus spp., and the most common Gram-negative
Superficial keratitis
 organisms found are Pseudomonas spp., Escherichia coli,
Introduction/etiology
and Acinetobacter spp84, 85, Listeria monocytogenes has
Superficial keratitis may be unilateral or bilateral and it
been isolated from both the dog and horse cornea (10.32).
is caused by a variety of agents. The condition may be
Many corneal abscesses in the horse are due to fungal
focal or multifocal, or progressive and diffuse. There are
 organisms. All abscesses should be treated with both
many causes of superficial keratitis.
 antifungal and antibacterial agents, due to the difficulty
 in obtaining a representative sample for culture. In a
Mechanica!
series of 16 horses undergoing corneal transplantation
Hairs and foreign bodies are common causes of focal
for corneal abscesses, Michau et al.86 found that 56% of
unilateral keratitis. Such factors should be considered,
corneal buttons were positive for fungi while only 12%
particularly in unilateral cases, as the resulting keratitis is
had bacteria. In a larger series of 62 cases of transplants
usually curable and improvement will not occur until the
in horses for corneal abscesses, Lassaline et al.87 found
cause is corrected. In grazing animals and working dogs,
fungi in 56% of corneal buttons.
plant foreign bodies are a significant cause of keratitis in
Moore et al88 described a series of six cases of
the late summer and fall. Any chronic nonhealing
 postraumatic keratouveitis that were postulated to be
keratitis should prompt re-evaluation and a careful
sterile abscesses that required vascularization to heal.
search for an embedded foreign body in the conjunctiva
The lack of positive cultures from the aqueous humor or
or behind the third eyelid (8.57).
tissue in three of the six horses was thought to indicate a
sterile immune process due to corneal necrosis. The
Infectious
author still treats such abscesses as septic since, when it
Bacterial. Bacteria usually require breaks in the epithelium
is possible to obtain a culture, a number are positive for
to become established, or they are carried into the stroma
 infective organisms, particularly for fungi9.
Xensn si seax ieuaieq aa punom aunound e aq
 A syndrome of granuloma formation in the cornea
ulcerative, corneal abscessation from a puncture wound
associated with an acid-fast bacterium has been described
often no longer stains with fluorescein by the time of
in the cat and is thought to be associated with feline
presentation. Abscessation is uncommon in the dog and
leprosy90. Both diagnosis and therapy involved a superficial
cat; when present it is often in hunting dogs with punctures
keratectomy. The nine-banded armadillo is used as an
 from plants and in cats with claw injuries from fighting.
0i aandaosns s l se Asodal ueunq ioy lapou jewue
Abscessation is most common in the horse and may be
Mycobacterium leprae without immune suppression. As in
superficial or very deep. It is recognized by a focal
humans, armadillos may develop lepromatous corneal
accumulation of yellow-white neutrophils in the stroma
 granuloma and anterior uveal lesions91.
and confirmed by corneal scrapings and culture. Corneal
 In southern Florida, a disease characterized by multifocal
vascularization is eventually very intense and is a necessary
small superficial macula (Florida spots) has been found in
part of the healing process {10.31). Deep abscessation is
the dog and cat; investigators have reported acid-fast
aul ul saan 1oaiue Arepuooas p Aq paueduooe uao
bacteria present in the lesions on biopsy {10.33). Other
horse. Determining the organism in deep abscessation is
investigators have found no organisms in the lesions.
difficult since surface cultures are not representative and
The lesions are not characterized by inflammation clinically
the aqueous humor is usually steriles3. Bacterial isolates
or histopathologically, and they were previously assumed to
from equine infectious keratitis are about equally divided
be due to Rhinosporidium spp92,93 Florida spots are more
between Gram-positive and Gram-negative organisms on
common in cats than dogs. Histologically, they consist of
initial culturing but this shifts to Gram-negative isolates
abnormal collagen fibrils. The lesions do not respond to
after intensive medical therapy. The most common Gram-
either steroids or antibiotics and do not progress in number
254
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
10.34
10.35
10.36
10.34 A cat with mycotic keratitis. The
10.35 Early mycotic keratitis in a horse. The
10.36 Mycotic keratitis in a horse that is more
yellowish-white opacities were mycotic
lesions are subepithelial and no inflammatory
advanced than in the horse in 10.35 but is still
plaques. The cat had been treated for months
response has been mounted. Fusarium spp.
quite superficial. The lesion is subepithelial and
with a topical corticosteroid. Debridement and
was subsequently cultured.
will require vascularization in addition to
antifungal therapy instituted a rapid response.
antifungal therapy before it is healed.
10.37
 of spots once the initial episode is over94. Therapy is not 
10.37 Mycotic
plaque in a horse
recommended. Interestingly, humans in southern Florida
cornea due to
also get nontuberculous mycobacterial keratitis that appears 
Fusarium spp.
 similar and is not responsive to antibiotics9s.
 Debridement of the
plaque to reduce
Fungal. Fungal keratitis is most common in the horse;
the fungal mass wa5
when observed in the dog and cat it is usuall in
performed 
individuals that have received topical corticosteroids or
repea tedly, in
topical antibiotics, have high endogenous corticosteroids,
addition to topical
 or are immunocompromised animals96, 97. Any lesion that
 antifungal therapy.
has initially improved and then regressed, is characterized
by plaques, and/or is antibiotic resistant should be
considered for mycotic keratitis (10.34). Dematiaceous
fungi such as Curvularia spp. and Cladosporium spp. are
10.38
10.38 Rapidly
Aeu Aaui ieun u anbun ane jnq suoaju uououn 
melting corneal
 produce a black pigmentation of the cornea 98-100.
ulcer in a horse.
Aq papaoad Ansn si asoy au u seay ieaung
 Culures and
corneal abrasion and treatment with an antibiotic or
cytology were
antibiotic-corticosteroid. The history is usually one of
 nega tive for 
improving and then stabilizing or relapsing. Mycotic
 bacteria but an
keratitis is so common in the horse that the author avoids
Aspergilftus sp. wa5
using glucocorticoids if at all possible for equine corneal
cultured. Note the
disease, and often treats simple abrasions and ulcers
 massive neutrophilic
prophylactically with topical antifungal drugs as well as
response and
antibacterial drugs.
 malacic cornea
In the mildest form, the patient is presented with
ventrally.
epiphora and mild blepharospasm. On examination of
the eye, the cornea has a faint to moderate superficial
edema with characteristic subepithelial, multifocal white
10.39
10.39 Focal opacity
macula with hazy edges. The epithelium is loose,
at Descemet's 
roughened, and easily removed (10.35). Patients that
membrane adjacent 
have had topical corticosteroid therapy, and therefore
to the flash artifact
may be more chronic, often have deeper stromal lesions 
in a horse. Full-
and more pronounced edema. [
 Deeper lesions may
thickne55
develop surrounding furrows and slough, leaving deep to
keratoplasty "button'
 perforating lesions (10.36, 10.37). The most severe form,
had fungal hyphae
with the worst prognosis, is the progressive stromal ulcer
 on histopathology.
that often results in perforation (10.38)101.
 Some conditions have a gritty plaque formation that is
formed from a colony of organisms, often Fusarium spp.
or Aspergillus spp. (10.36, 10.37)102. The predominant 
isolate may vary with the region and environment. Fungi
CORNEA AND SCLERA
255
10.40
available and it is very expensive. This has resulted in the
use of a wide variety of nonophthalmic agents that have
antifungal properties. Such agents include:
 Topical tincture of iodine or povidone-iodine swabbing
may be used in conjunction with other drugs.
+
 Polyene antifungals: act by binding to ergosterol in the
fungal cell wall thus altering membrane permeability
and causing disruption of the cell. Natamycin
(pimaricin) is a polyene antifungal manufactured as a
 5% suspension. The drug is effective against
filamentous fungi. Therapy is frequent, at least hourly
initially, and tapering to q2-4h. Corneal absorption is
poor if the epithelium is intact 104.
Amphotericin B as a topical 0.5-1% drug has
been used and is effective, but unfortunately it is
10.40 Corneal cytology from a horse with mycotic keratitis. The
the most toxic to the cornea of the various agents.
hyphae are more dense in this preparation than usual and they may
It is most efficacious against yeasts and Fusarium
represent cytology from a fungal plaque.
spp. Nystatin is rarely used topically due to
toxicity and poor ocular penetration.
 Imidazole antifungals: these drugs are fungistatic at
low concentrations ( by inhibiting ergosterol
synthesis) and fungicidal at high concentrations
are frequently the cause of deep corneal abscessation at
(having a direct damaging effect on the cell wall).
Descemet's membrane and seem to have an affinity for this
High concentrations are difficult to obtain or sustain
location. The inaccessibility of the membrane makes
in ocular tissue, so these drugs are essentially
clinical confirmation difficult (10.39). It is not uncommon
clinically fungistaticlos.
through the course of mycotic keratitis to have
Thiabendazole deworming pastes have been used
complications with bacterial infection. The course of the
topically to treat fungal keratitis106 but, with more
disease, even when specifically treated, is chronic, often
appropriate products available, their use is no
lasting 6-8 weeks before the eye is 'quiet' and comfortable.
longer recommended. Clotrimazole is available as a
dermatologic and vaginal cream that is tolerated by
Diagnosis of bacterial and fungal keratitis Diagnosis is
the eye. It is effective against Aspergillus spp.
by corneal scraping for cytology and cultures, with
Miconazole i.v. solution is used as a topical drop
emphasis placed on the cytology for directing the initial
and dermatologic or vaginal creams have been
therapy (10.40). Cytology is pivotal in diagnosing fungal
tolerated reasonably well by the eye. However, the
keratitis, except for deep stromal lesions, since culture
drug does not penetrate the intact corneal
requires ≥2 weeks for a definitive result. Massa et al.103
epithelium. Miconazole has a broad spectrum of
reported a positive result with infectious keratitis: 54%
activity against yeasts and filamentous fungi and
from cytology, 60% from culture, and 73% from both
is a commonly used agent.
cytology and culture. Hendrix et al.89 reported that of 24
Ketaconazole is successful as either oral or topical
horses with corneal abscesses only three were positive by
therapy. Topical concentrations of 1-5% are
routine culturing. Specimens taken during surgical
toleratedl0s
intervention yielded a positive result for fungal or
Fluconazole, as topical and oral preparations, is
bacterial organisms in another five cases, resulting in a
being used for therapy. Oral fluconazole has been
total of 37% positive results for an infectious agent.
used for deep fungal keratitis by giving a loading
dose of 2 mg/kg q12h for 1-4 days, followed by a
Therapy of bacterial and fungal keratitis Therapy for
maintenance dose of 1 mg/kg q12h for 2 weeks or
bacterial keratitis is often fortified topical antibiotics q4h.
more. Latimer et al107 studied the pharmacokinetics
Removal of the epithelium may be performed to enhance
of fluconazole in the horse and recommended
antibiotic penetration. Deep abscessation often requires
14 mg/kg q24h as a loading dose and 5 mg/kg q24h
both systemic and topical antibiotics In the horse, if treating
as a maintenance dose. Since fluconazole is very
without the benefit of cultures, more than one antibiotic is
expensive, this regimen would make therapy very
usually used. An antibiotic such as a cephalosporin, that is
expensive. One study of isolates found it to be the
effective against Streptococcus spp., should be one of the
least effective of the various imidazoles for 
selections. It may have to be compounded because few
commercial topical preparations are available for resistant
Fluconazole does have the property of achieving high
 organisms. The responsible agent is usually not isolated so
tissue levels and it has been argued that the in vitro
antifungal therapy is also given. Ideally, antifungal
sensitivity testing does not reflect the in vivo effect.
sensitivity testing should guide therapy but the relative
Itraconazole 1%/DMSO ointment can be
mavailability, cost, and time do not make it very practical.
formulated that achieves good therapeutic corneal
 A wide variety of drugs and methods have been used
concentrations. It was effective in eight of ten eyes
to treat fumgal keratitis, which is a reflection of the
treated. The author has used this preparation
frustration involved. Natamycin is the only ophthalmic
extensively and has hadonly modest success,
antifungal agent on the US market but it is not widely
256
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
· Silver sulfadiazine cream has broad antibacterial and
Lack of tears
antifungal properties. It is available and is tolerated
KCS is an important etiology for keratitis in the dog and
on the eye as a 1% creamll1, It is effective against 
less so in the cat and other species. (See Chapter 9,
both yeast and filamentous fungi.
p.219.)
 Chlorhexidine 0.2 % has been used in humans in
underdeveloped countries as an inexpensive and
Chemical
effective topical antifungal agentl12, Special care
Chemical injury with a strong alkaline solution is a
should be taken with the concentration, because
 devastating injury and more damaging to the cornea than
chlorhexidine can be very toxic to the cornea.
a strong acid. Alkaline solutions penetrate deeper into the
cornea, whereas acidic solutions precipitate proteins that
Antibiotics are also administered in addition to the
act as a barrier to deeper penetration. Many of these
antifungal agent as mixed bacterial-fungal infections or
injuries are of a malicious nature. Immediate therapy is
secondary bacterial infections are not uncommon. Ocular
 thorough rinsing of the ocular surface and removal of any
discomfort is controlled with atropine and NSAIDs.
retained particulate material. Strong soaps for bathing are
Systemic NSAIDs such as flunixin or phenylbutazone, are
common causes of superficial ulcerative lesions.
used for pain relief and secondary uveitis.
The course of corneal bacterial abscesses and fungal
Parasitic
keratitis is typically chronic and the lesions usually require
In the horse, Oncbocerca cervacalis microfilaria that have
vascularization to occur before improvement is noted. For
died in the cornea may produce a keratitis. It is
this reason, peripheral corneal lesions usually heal faster. It
characterized in the acute stages by multifocal opacities and
is not unusual for the condition to worsen after the
later by vascularization and scarring in the stroma (10.41).
initiation of therapy. This has been attributed to the release
Perilimbal follicular formation, anterior uveitis, and
of exotoxins from the killed fungi. Welch et all13 were
conjunctival vitiligo may also be present. The condition is
able to demonstrate in vitro antiangiogenic properties of
usually bilateral (see Chapter 11, p.298). The diagnosis of
certain isolates of clinical cases of mycotic keratitis;
onchocercal keratitis is often presumptive. Conjunctival
theoretically, these properties may be responsible for
snip biopsy containing motile microfilaria is suggestive but
slowing down the defensive mechanism of the host to the
not an absolute indicator due to the presence of microfilaria
fungi. Therapy is usually frequent and the patient becomes
in horses without ocular diseasell7 The role of Onchocerca
uncooperative, necessitating using SPL. Because of these
microfilaria in producing ocular lesions has been reduced
demands, hospitalization is often necessary and this results 
with the use of routine deworming with broad-spectrum
in significant expense to treat the condition.
anthelmintics.
The prognosis will vary with the depth of the lesion.
Superficial infections, while expensive to treat, usually carry
Leishmaniasis. Leishmaniasis
may
produce
a
reported a 95% success in maintaining the eye and a 92%
dogs with leishmaniasis had ocular/periocular lesions
success for visual function with fungal keratitis. Others have
and 34% had some form of keratoconjunctivitis. In
 not been as successful, with 64% retention of a visual eye
addition, 42% of ocular leishmaniasis produced anterior
 and 25% enucleation rate with fungal keratitisl1s.
uveitis and/or secondary glaucoma that often resulted in
Surgical  augmentation  of medical  therapy  with 
a
corneal  lesions 
such as
corneal
edema
and
keratectomy combined  with conjunctival grafting  will
 neovascularization.
 The keratitis observed 
with
enable better sa mpling for microbiological testing, removal
leishmaniasis  varied from focal corneal edema with
of part of the infectious burden and necrotic tissue, and
 neovascularization and cellular infiltration adjacent to
bring a blood supply to the lesion more rapidly. Smaller
the limbus, to focal nodular lesions near the limbus.
deep lesions can be removed entirely by a penetrating
keratectomy or a posterior lamellar keratoplastyl16.
Diagnosis and therapy. See leishmaniasis involving the
 Posterior lamellar grafts were placed by dssecting a square
eyelid (Protozoa, p.167) and anterior uveitis (p.312-314).
of superficial lamellar graft on three sides, leaving it hinged
 on the remaining side, and removing the deep abscess using
Immune-mediated
 Superficial keratitis due to immune-mediated processes are
placing a donor button in the trephined graft, the superficial
common but are incompletely understood.
The
lamellar flap was sutured over the deeper graft. Despite
 mechanism is often presumed, based on bilaterality, lack of
obtaining deeper tissue surgically, in many cases an infectious
infectious or mechanical etiologies, mononuclear cellular
infiltrates on histopathologic examination, and response
Medical therapy is necessary for an average of 45 days*9. The
to corticosteroids or other immunosuppressants. Keratitis
 risks of anesthesia must be weighed against the benefit of
in many of the infectious diseases also has an immunologic
surgery. The expense of medical or surgical therapy is
component.  Examples of immune-mediated superficial
 roughly equivalent. Despite the difficult nature of the disease
 nonulcerative keratitis are described below.
to treat, most eyes remain visual.
Pann us
Viral. Herpesvirus is the main viral agent producing
Introductionfetiology Pathologically, pannus is the
keratitis. The various conditions in different species will
 subepithelial proliferation of vessels and connective tissue.
be
discussed under ulcerative keratitis, although
The term pannus is used clinically to signify a bilateral
nonulcerative syndromes are common.
 superficial keratitis that is thought to be immune mediated
CORNEA AND SCLERA
257
10.41
10.42
10.43
10.41 Horse with multifocal stromal opacities 
10.42 Early pannus formation in a Boykin 
10.43 Advanced pannus in a German
adjacent to the limbus that were associated with 
 Spaniel. The condition was bilateral and 
 Shepherd Dog.
Onchocerca cervicafis Conjunctival perilimbal 
responded well to topical corticosteroid 
follicular hyperplasia was also present.
therapy.
in the GSD and GSD crosses. Similar syndromes have been
 pitalization. A genetic predisposition, combined with UV
observed in the Greyhound, Shetland Sheepdog, Siberian
exposure at high altitude, altering a corneal antigen so
Husky, Scotch Collie, Border Collie, Belgian Tervuren,
that it is recognized as foreign and resulting in in-
au oi bpunsuoea pue doa praudaus ueensny
fammation, has been proposedl19. While the breed
histopathologic
changes
are
characterized
Aq
specificity of the condition and the fact that pannus is
neovascularization and fibroplasia, and by plasma cell,
more difficult to control in patients from geographic
lymphocyte, macrophage, and melanocytic cell infiltration.
 oua e iss pon ae rar jo s
While the epithelium remains intact, it becomes variable in
interacting with environmental factors, the heritability
thickness from hyperplastic to thin; surface changes may be
has not been elucidated.
observed early in the course of the disease using electron
microscopyl21-123 Petrick and van Rensberg10 reported
Clinical signs The age of onset is usually 4-5 years in the
that GSDs with pannus had very thin corneal epithelial
GSD but it may vary with the altitude of the region and
layers compared to other breeds of dogs. In addition, a
the breed of dog. The lesion begins as an area of
number GSDs in the control group had thinned epithelium,
vascularization and granulation at the temporal limbus,
loose corneal stroma, and decreased corneal tensile
usually in both eyes (10.42). Most dogs have a
strength. This was proposed as denoting a predisposing
conjunctivitis and about 10% may have plasma cell
factor for pannus. An increase in eosinophils and mast cells
involvement of the third eyelidi22 The disease progresses
at the limbal regions of GSDs compared to other breeds has
over weeks and months with invasion from the medial
been reported and may be associated with exposure to
and ventral areas of the cornea. Eventually, the entire
light124,12s, Lastly, cytoplasmic inclusions were found in
cornea is covered with a gray to red roughened
corneal
fibroblasts,
vascular
endothelial
cells,
superficial opacity {10.43). Focal gray spots are often
macrophages, and trabecular cells of GSDs with and
present in the clear cornea adjacent to the infiltrating
without pannus. Virus cultures were negative and the
lesion. Some individuals with pannus will develop heavy
 significance of the cytology is unknown126
pigmentation,
which
obscures
the 
underlying
While pannus is thought to be immune mediated,
inflammatory reaction. The end result is often blindness.
most of the testing has been nonspecific and/or the
significance of findings is unknown. An increase in
 Diagnosis Diagnosis of pannus is presumptive when
immunoglobulin {Ig) G has been demonstrated in the
bilateral proliferative keratitis is present in a “typical
corneal stroma but not in the epithelium123, 127. The
      n s 
elevated IgG is probably a nonspecific finding with
inflammatory therapy.
 stromal inflammation. Dogs with pannus have also been
reported to have low serum IgG128. Leukocytes from
Therapy
Glucocorticoids. The main therapy for pannus is topical
when exposed to corneal and iridal antigens, suggesting 
glucocorticoids to suppress corneal inflammation. The
a delayed hypersensitivity reaction. However, another 
route, frequency, and form of glucocorticoid therapy
study.
was unable
to
 demonstrate
. lymphocytic
varies with the individual circumstances and preferences.
Stimulation to soluble corneal antigens129, 130
 Initial therapy is intensive but later maintenance therapy
Epidemiologic studies relate the occurrence of pannus
is reduced and titrated to the individual response. The
to geographic areas with an elevation of 4,s00 feet or
duration of therapy is indefinite, perhaps for the life of
higher in 95% of cases119, 120 Spontaneous improvement
the animal. Initially, topical prednisolone acetate 1%
s paanoad Aa paaaoe uaaq sry shuud aaaas u1
suspension is given q4h for 7-10 days. At this time a
258
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEAsE IN VeTeRiNARY MeDICINE
10.44
10.45
10.44 Same dog as 10.43 after 2 weeks of topical corticosteroid
10.45 Same dog as 10.43 after 10 weeks of topical corticosteroid
therapy q4h.
therapy decreasing in frequency and maintained on q24h therapy.
Note residual corneal pigmentation and focal opacities.
dramatic improvement should occur and the dose can be
incorrectly, therefore nitrous oxide is preferred.
decreased to q6h for 7-10 days. The frequency
is
 Cryotherapy does not take the place of corticosteroids
decreased progressively at weekly intervals as long as
 and they should be continued after healing.
improvement is maintained (10.44, 10.45).
Maintenance therapy of q24-12h is usually achieved
Radiation
therapy. Beta-radiationt
therapy is an
but may have to be adjusted periodically. It is extremely
alternative therapy available mainly at teaching
important that the owner realizes that the therapy will
institutions. Beta-radiation may be used to disperse the
control but not cure the condition. Many dogs with
pigment and suppress inflammation in cases that are
controlled long-term  glucocorticoid  medication {for
difficult to control with corticosteroids. The dose used is
years) may not require further treatment but the diligent
quite variable and bullous keratopathy is a complication
owner at this point is often wary of stopping therapy.
from endothelial damage (see Corneal tumors, p.286).
If the initial intensive topical therapy is not likely to be
 given, then topical glucocorticoids can be supplemented
Surgery. Superficial
keratectomies
will
produce
with long-acting subconjunctival glucocorticoids such as
immediate, but usually temporary, improvement.
betamethasone, triamcinolone, or methylprednisolone.
Keratectomies are used mainly to treat patients with
The injections may be repeated if exacerbation occurs
heavy pigmentation and as a last resort {see Corneal
but they do not replace the use of topical glucocorticoids.
dermoids, p.282, 10.110). The initial effect from surgery
is short-lived as granulation occurs in the healing
The most common error in treating pannus is not
process. Topical corticosteroids, (
cyclosporine, and
to treat intensively for the first 2 weeks and/or to
NSAIDs postoperatively are necessary to moderate the
use weak concentrations of glucocorticoids.
inflammatory reaction in the cornea. These drugs must
be monitored carefully to avoid complications.
Topical cyclosporine. Topical 1.5% and 0.2% cyclosporine
 Corneoscleral grafting of the involved area has been
reported in four dogs but this technique has not gained
i32. Whether cyclosporine should be used alone or
in
oh anp sgsd if ade aaat e se uuo
conjunction with topical corticosteroids for best results is
the technical difficulty, expense, questionable results, and
unresolved at this point. It is an alternative drug that can be
difficulty in obtaining donors.
 used in resistant cases and may prevent the necessity for
surgery in these instances. Topical cyclosporine has an
Eosinophilic keratitis
advantage for long-term therapy in that it does not have the
Introduction/etiology
y Eosinophilic keratitis is unique
systemic effects of corticosteroids.
to cats and horses.
 It manifests as a proliferative,
progressive, superficial
I keratitis.
Cryotherapy. Cryotherapy of the corneal surface has
unknown
but
histopathology, a S
on
 superficial
been used to slough superficial pigment. When
 granulomatous
inflammation
with
numerous
pigmentation is extensive, cryotherapy of the corneal
eosinophils and mast cells is present. Some cases may
surface for 10-20 seconds at each site using nitrous oxide
have a peripheral eosinophilia but this and any
association with the feline eosinophilic complex is very
Liquid nitrogen spray for 15 seconds and double freezing
has also been reported to be successful in removing
for herpesvirus-1 {FHV-1) was positive in 33% and
corneal pigment134. Liquid nitrogen is more capable of
PCR for FHV-1 was positive in 76% of cats with
producing permanent corneal edema if performed
eosinophilic keratitis139, 140
CORNEA AND SCLERA
259
10.46
10.47
10.48
10.46 Relatively early eosinophilic keratitis at
10.47 Advanced eosinophilic keratitis in a cat.
10.48 Multifocal eosinophilic keratitis in a
the nasal limbus in a cat. Note the white surface
The condition is characterized by superficial
horse. The white material easily shelled out
on the proliferative mass. Eosinophils, mast cells.
white material. The patient was treated with
of the cormea, leaving an ulcer, and it wa5
and lymphocytes were readily found on scrapings
oral megestrol acetate and responded well.
rich in eosinophils. The patient responded 
from the lesion. The patient responded well to 
(Courtesy of Dr. S. Winston, Atlanta, GA.)]
dramatically to topical corticosteroid therapy.
topical corticosteroids, but the second eye
become involved several months later.
10.49
and corneal neovascularization. The white plaques in the
 multifocal form 'shell out' of the cornea with manipulation.
Diagnosis Diagnosis is usually based on the unusual
cytology of numerous mast cells and eosinophils.
Differential diagnosis should include mast cell neoplasia,
which may have similar cytology.
 Therapy If topical glucocorticoids have not been previously
used, they should be given a trial since most cases are
responsive. In cats it is also prudent to treat concurrently
with a topical antiviral agent when administering topical
glucocorticoids, 
due to the high percentage of FHV-I-
positive cats. If relapses or an incomplete response occurs in
the cat, megestrol acetate (5 mg/q24h for 1 week and
 2.5-5 mg/week maintenance) has been recommended.
10.49 Proliferative keratitis with a white plaque in a cat. This
In horses with the multifocal form of eosinophilic
syndrome does not have eosinophils on histopathology. (Courtesy
keratitis, response to topical glucocortioid therapy 
is
of Dr. V. Pentlarge, Athens, GA.
rapid. The ulcerative and limbal based forms respond to
mast cell stabilizers such as 0.1% lodoxamide q6h.
Therapy will probably be very prolonged.
Clinical signs (cat) Initially, the keratitis is unilateral but
it may become bilateral. A progressive red granulating
This condition is yet another reason why the
proliferation usually begins at the superior temporal or
clinician should become comfortable in performing
inferior nasal limbus and eventually covers the cornea
cytology of ocular surfaces for diagnostic rea sons.
(10.46, 10.47). Whitish deposits of cheesy consistency,
that are rich in eosinophils, are present in chronic cases.
Proliferative keratitis in the cat
STT values may be decreased but improve with
 treatment. Blepharospasm is present in about 20% of cases
variant of eosinophilic keratitis143. A proliferative 
and the conjunctiva and third eyelid adjacent to the corneal
chronic superficial keratitis with white cheesy deposits
lesions may be severely affected. Whether this overlaps
 on the surface has been described with clinical signs
with eosinophilic conjunctivitis as described in Chapter 8
 similar to eosinophilic keratitis. Histopathologically, no
(p.196) is unknown. After an initially positive response to
eosinophils were present and the white material was an
therapy, relapse is common (66%) after several months.
amorphous eosinophilic deposit144, 14s.
Clinical signs (borse) Two forms have been observed in the
Clinical signs A superficial proliferative keratitis is present,
horse: an acute multifocal form (10.48) with white plaques
which usually is bilateral and begins temporally. There are
in the superficial cornea and a more diffuse limbal based
white deposits on the surface of the cornea {10.49).
form with white deposits which may be ulcerativel41, 142.
Adjacent conjunctiva may have similar proliferations and
The inflammation stimulates epiphora and blepharospasm
deposits. The cats are usually middle aged.
260
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
Diagnosis Biopsy of the lesion and eosinophilic material
Various metals such as iron, copper, gold, and silver
near the basal lamina differentiates the condition from
may stain the cornea. The most common metallic stain is
eosinophilic keratitis. Corneal scrapings or cytology have 
iron, usually from a retained corneal foreign body.
not been reported but presumably eosinophils are absent.
Corneal staining as a complication of silver nitrate stick
 cauterization of the cornea has been described in a dog147.
Therapy The condition is responsive to topical
A variety of topical and systemic medications have
corticosteroids but may relapse or occur in the other eye.
 been documented to produce corneal pigmentation, but
If the condition is resistant or relapsing, oral megestrol
most of the drugs are either not often used or are not
acetate should be considered. Relapses occur when
therapy ceases, so long-term therapy should be
 topical epinephrine may induce a dark pigmentation in
anticipated. If corticosteroids are effective, they should
the conjunctiva and cornea.
be used to avoid the complications of megestrol acetate.
Amiodarone is an antiarrhythmic drug that has long
been recognized to produce pigmented fine deposits in the
Pigmentary ker atitis
basal cells of the corneal epithelium when used long term
Introduction/etiology It is not unusual for clinicians to use
in humans. Typically, the deposits are reversible after
this term as a specific diagnosis. However, the condition
cessation of therapy. Dogs appear resista nt to amiodarone
should not be viewed as a separate entity. The term
deposits; of six dogs administered amiodarone, only one
pigmentary keratitis is used for those forms of keratitis in
dog developed mild deposits after 11 weeks of therapy149
which superficial pigmentation is prominent and is often so
On histopathology the typical cytoplasmic inclusions
dense that the inflammatory response of neovascularization
Bop pane a jo seo ieseq au ui punoy aram
may not be visible. Sources of pigmentation on or in the
Nevertheless, periodic ocular examinations are prudent
cornea may be categorized as either endogenous or
for animals on long-term amiodarone therapy. Lesions,
exogenous in origin. Superficial corneal pigment results
when present, are observed on biomicroscopy as fine dots 
from the migration of limbal melanocytes along blood
in the epithelial layer of the cornea.
vessels. Corneal neovascularization is thus a prerequisite
Pigmentation of the cornea of the cat is common with
for
 superficial
1  stromal  pigmentation  (melanin)146.
formation of a corneal sequestrum condition fsee
Alternatively, latent or amelanotic melanocytes may be in
Corneal sequestrum, p.272). Dematiaceous fungi will
the cornea and activated by neovascularization, or
 also produce a darkly pigmented cornea 8-100
epithelial pigment may arise from stem cell stimulation at
 The author categorizes pigmentary keratitis into focal
the limbus. Pigment that is in the epithelial layers will be
nonprogressive and diffuse progressive forms. The focal
sloughed with the turnover of epithelium if the cause is
form is common in brachycephalic breeds and is usually
corrected or controlled. Stromal pigmentation remains
 caused by long-term mechanical irritation such as medial
indefinitely. Breeds such as Pugs, Shetland Sheepdogs, and
entropion, nasal fold irritation, or a stromal ulcer that
Dachshunds respond to corneal inflammation  with
has been slow to heal. These often take the shape of a
 pigmentation more than other breeds.
wedge of pigment on the medial cornea that points to the
Deep melanin pigmentation may occur from uveal
axial cornea (10.52). Often, by the time these areas are
sources such as PPMs, anterior synechiae, or ruptured
recognized by the owner, they are not in the progressive
iris cysts. Blood staining may occur from hemoglobin
or developing phase.
breakdown products from some forms of hyphema or
from intracorneal hemorrhage (10.50, 10.51).
10.50
10.51
10.52
10.50 A dog with blood staining the cornea
10.51 Intrastromal hemorrhage in the cornea 
10.52 Medial corneal pigmentation and
from a chronic hyphema with increased
of a dog that had cobalt radiation therapy and 
 granulation in a Pug due to irritation from
intraocular pressure.
developed a sterile stromal abscess.
medial entropion. The lesion is still active but
will not cover the cornea. Both eyes were
treated with a medial canthoplasty.
CORNEA AND SCLERA
261
Diffuse pigmentary keratitis is often insidious and
Diffuse pigmentary keratitis is very frustrating to
progresses to complete or near complete coverage of the
monitor for the owner and the clinician, since the
cornea and blindness (10.53). The condition may be
 progression is insidious and the increased
unilateral or bilateral. The underlying cause may be KCS,
pigmentation remains in most cases as a high
lagophthalmos, or immune-mediated keratitis. Some
water mark' for the inflammation.
forms of pannus in the GSD are characterized more by
pigment than by granulation tissue. The underlying
Surface cryotherapy and beta-radiation therapy have
inflammation is variably masked by the pigment.
been used to disperse the pigmentation when severe.
While the pigment may （
disperse, residual corneal
Clinical signs Superficial corneal pigmentation is the
scarring is often severe. A superficial keratectomy will
predomina nt sign. Focal pigmentation in brachycephalics
remove the pigment. However, since the pigment
is usually a limbal based triangle of pigment in the medial
 deposition recurs  in  immune-mediated conditions,
cornea (10.52). Diffuse pigmentation may have a vortex
appearance with the tip directed to the central cornea.
 Postsurgical  complications of infection and  melting
The latter pattern is explained by the pigment following
ulcers are common in brachycephalic breeds if the cornea
the stem cell migration from the limbus, which occurs in
is not covered or lubricated well.
a whorl or vortex pattern27.
 Depending on the stage of development and cause of
DEEP NONULCERATIVE INFLAMMATORY
the pigment, additional signs of pain, discharge, and
DISEASE
neovascularization may be present. Blindness is common
Stromal or interstitial keratitis
when the condition is bilateral and diffuse.
Hepatitis ocular reaction is described as the typical
 example of deep keratitis in the dog. Most cases of deep
Diagnosis The underlying cause of pigmentation should
keratitis that are not complications of deep ulcerations,
be determined and treated.
accompany an anterior uveitis. Thus the causes of
 stromal keratitis are often the same as uveitis.
Therapy Mechanical causes such as medial entropion in
Neovascularization associated with stromal keratitis
brachycephalic breeds should be corrected if the keratitis
is usually characterized by vessels that are relatively
is in the developing stage. However, patients are often
straight and, with the slit lamp, can be localized deep in
 presented once the condition is established and surgery
the cornea (10.54). Because the corneal endothelium
will not change the pigment. As most medial entropions
 participates in the process, yarious degrees of corneal
do not cause any visual signs, therapy may be dictated by
edema and cellular deposits (keratic precipitates) on the
other signs that are present, such as epiphora.
 endothelium are common (10.55), as are signs relating to
 In the progressive forms, therapy is directed at the
an anterior uveitis (synechiae, hypotony, and flare).
cause (e.g. KCS) or the underlying inflammation (e.g.
An anatomic diagnosis is made by the straight vascular
immune-mediated inflammationj. If the inflammation is
 pattern, localization of lesions to the deep cornea, and
controlled, most animals will retain vision despite the
uveal signs. Therapy is directed at the anterior uveitis and,
presence of diffuse pigmentation. Topical cyclosporine
if the condition is not thought to be an infectious process,
also appears promising at decreasing the pigmentation,
usually consists of corticosteroids. Prednisolone acetate
both in cases associated with KCS and with other forms.
1% is the best topical steroid for corneal inflammation.
10.53
10.54
610.55
10.53 Progressive pigmentation that will
10.54 Deep stromal vessels with minimal
10.55 Stromal keratitis in a dog with
cover the cornea in this Pug if the stromal
branching in a cat with stromal keratitis.
toxoplasmosis-induced episclerokera touveitis.
inflammation is not controlled. Note
Note the focal deposits, which are keratic
thickening of the cornea and 
precipitates on Descemet's membrane, and
neovascularization. Vision will improve by
secondary corneal edema from endothelial
controlling the inflammation and thinning the 
compromise. An episcleritis was associated
cornea, even if the pigmentation remains.
with the keratitis dorsally.
262
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
Infectious canine hepatitis
Canine adenovirus-1 (CAV-1), whether virulent or
Introduction/etiology
attenuated as a vaccine strain, may produce a condition
Interstitial keratitis due to infectious canine hepatitis (ICH)
of acute anterior uveitis and endothelitis with corneal
is almost an historical disease. The routine use of canine
edema. The ocular signs begin about 10-14 days after
adenovirus-2 {CAV-2) for vaccination has all but eliminated
vaccination, 6-8 days after i.v. injection, or in the
the previous vaccine-related reaction and, since natural
recovery stage of clinical disease, and are the result of an
ICH is now quite rare, clinicians seldom see the condition.
On rare occasions typical ocular reactions have been
uveitis and the corneal edema is due to damage from
reported 2 weeks following immunization with CAV-2.
neutrophilic lysosomal enzymes. Most cases improve
spontaneously over 2-3 weeks but some patients have
persistent corneal edema and/or secondary glaucoma.
Table 10.3 Possible pathogenesis of infectious canine
Breeds such as the Siberian Husky, Afghan Hound, and
hepatitis blue eye151
other sight hounds may have an increased incidence of
Viremia:
goniodysgenesis
may be more susceptible to the
 Viral growth in reticuloendothelial tissue, kidney, liver
complication of glaucoma. (See Table 10.3 for the
 proposed pathogenesis of ICH ocular lesions.)
▼
± Viral growth in anterior uvea/corneal endothelium (CE)
Clinical signs
No growth - no uveitis
Occasionally, observant owners will present patients
Growth - CE, vascular endothelium, trabeculae
with signs of anterior uveitis such as blepharospasm,
▼
miosis, fare, and hypotony. Within 24-36 hours the
 Local immune response 
familiar sign of corneal edema develops. Corneal edema
 Lymphocytes and plasma cells in anterior uvea
Jo aoueueadde aul seu ll pue asny 1o leooy aq Aeu
Restricted viral growth 
ground glass (10.56). In 10-15% of cases the edema is
▼
bilateral. Epithelial bullae may develop and rupture,
producing corneal ulceration. If severe hypotony is
Viral growth arrested or viral persisitence in restricted sites
present, the cornea may develop keratoconus. The
 No persistence - no clinical signs
 Persistence - CE, trabecular meshwork cells
conjunctiva is usually hyperemic and, after a lag of
 Viral antigen release into aqueous fluid 
 2-3 days, neovascularization of the cornea begins. Most 
others have partial improvement, delayed improvement,
Immune complex formation (CAV-1 antibody)
Virusfantibody excess: slight or no pathogenicity
or no improvement of the edema with eventual
development of pigmentation, Patients whose corneas do
Virusfantibody balance: complement (C'l) binding;
not clear in the expected 2-3 weeks may show clearing
pathogenic
 after a lag of several weeks or months. In these patients,
▼
 residual pigmentation is usually present in the cornea.
C'-mediated release of biologically active components 
Leukocyte chemotactic factors
Immune adherence factor
 Enhanced phagocytosis of immune complexes
1
10.56
Leukocyte infiltration into anterior chamber
▼
 Phagocytosis of immune complexes-C' by neutrophils
 and macrophages 
▼
Lysosomal enzyme release
 Injury (focal) to CE at points of contact with
leukocytes?
Infiltration of leukocytes between CE and 
 Descemet's membrane
Aqueous fluid permeates into corneal stroma
 Corneal edema
▼
 Digestion of immune complexes within phagocytic
vacuoles and removal
If lesions in CE focal: resolution in 1-3 weeks
If lesions extensive: no CE regeneration, persistent or 
permanent corneal damage. Bullous keratopathy.
10.56 Diffuse stromal edema associated with infectious canine
hydrophthalmos, or extensive corneal pigmentation 
hepatitis vaccination with CAv-1 2 weeks earlier. The uveitis is
with complete loss of vision.
masked. As most of these reactions occur in puppies, many will
spontaneously improve in 2-4 weeks.
CORNEA AND SCLERA
263
10.57
10.58
10.59
10.57 Presumed herpes-induced stromal
10.58 Severe herpes-induced keratouveitis
10.59 Keratouveitis in a young calf due to the
keratitis in a cat. Note also the symblepharon.
in a young Persian cat. The endothelial
(herpesvirus] infectious bovine rhinotracheitis.
decompensation produced marked bullae
Intense peripheral leukocytic infiltration is
 on the corneal surface. The condition wa5
present compared to the central ulcerative
bilateral and took several weeks to abate.
lesion found in infectious bovine keratitis.
The condition was bilateral and the calf also
had respiratory sign5.
Therapy
10.60
It is questionable whether therapy alters the course of ICH-
 induced disease. Most cases improve spontaneously but if
the condition is iatrogenically-induced, the clinician will
probably treat using the placebo effect. Topical steroids and
atropine are indicated for the uveitis but the regeneration of
drugs. If the cornea has bullae, steroids should be used with
caution due to the risk of corneal erosion. IOP should be
monitored since the clinical signs will mask glaucoma until
the eye enlarges. CAIs are indicated for glaucoma.
Herpesvirus stromal keratitis
FHV-1 is a common cause of stromal keratitis in the
cat. Herpesvirus stromal keratitis may accompany
epithelial
erosions
with
 immune  suppression
(glucocorticoid administration) or develop after the
erosions have healed. Stromal keratitis is usually
associated with recurrent ocular disease and not with
primary ocular disease. Stromal keratitis may be
10.60 Typical corneal edema in a cow with malignant catarrhal
produced by certain strains of herpesvirus that
fever. The corneal edema from endothelial inflammation is obvious
replicate in the stroma and it is the result of an immune
 but a panophthalmitis is produced by the herpesvirus.
reaction of the host to the virus1ss, is6. Experimentally,
 stromal disease accompanied primary epithelial disease
when cats were
 pretreated
 with subconjunctival
 group consisted of corneal calcification, KCS, and the 
(MCF) typically produces a diffusely edematous cornea
corneal nigrum or sequestrum syndrome. Occasionally,
(10.60) that simulates an ICH eye in the dog. This
herpesvirus corneal involvement in the cat will produce
characteristic of MCF is important in differentiating
such severe edema and bullae that the endothelium has to
neurologic diseases of cattle. The edematous cornea
be involved (10.54, 10.57, 10.58). The iris usually has
masks the preceding uveitis.
some color changes, indicating uveitis; the course of the
disease is usually weeks to months in duration, with little
Endothelitis
apparent response to antiviral therapy.
Acute corneal edema that is not associated with vaccination,
Herpesvirus infection in cattle may also produce deep
systemic disease, increased IOP, or overt anterior uveitis
stromal
keratitis andé
endothelial
I  damage.
The
may represent focal endothelitis. Focal opacities at
herpesvirus of IBR may produce a severe nonulcerative
Descemet's membrane, with overlying corneal edema, are
keratouveitis
(10.s59) (to be differentiated
1from
typical. In humans, endothelitis may be associated with
'pinkeye'); the herpesvirus of malignant catarrhal fever
autoimmunity and herpesvirus infection158-161
264
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
10.61
10.62
10.63
10.61, 10.62 Bilateral endothelitis in a horse without overt anterior uveitis. Cellular deposit5
10.63 A dog with corneal malacia due to a
are visible at Descemet's membrane, with overlying corneal edema. The patient responded 
wasp sting. There was evidence of other stings
initially to anti-inflammatory therapy but uveitis occurred with synechia and blindness over
 around the head. Note the lack of cellular
a period of 2 years. The cause was unknown but possibly due to herpesvirus.
reaction in the cornea at this time. Compare
this appearance to that of a septic ulcer.
10.64
10.64 Diffuse
Physical
superficial 
As with nonulcerative keratitis, it is important to look for
ulceration in a dog
 and remove mechanical causes. Agents such as trauma,
after having been 
trichiasis, distichiasis, insect bites (10.63), and foreign
ba thed and
bodies are common causes of ulcers in all species. Thermal
 groomed. Soap or
burns from house and barn fires may be occasional causes
chemical burns are
of epithelial ulcerations. In the dog, a single small aberrant 
typically diffuse.
cilium that protrudes through the palpebral conjunctiva
Note the miosis
(see Cilia, p.154, 7.20) is a frequently overlooked mecha-
from corneal pain.
nical cause. High magnification is necessary to identify and
locate the hair but once diagnosed the ulcer is easily treated.
Foreign bodies may lodge under the third eyelid and may
 not be visible without eversion (see Foreign bodies, p.211,
8.57). Small foreign bodies embedded in the conjunctiva
can be very difficult to detect.
Chemical
Chemical agents such as soap and other dermatologic
On several occasions the author has been presented with
 preparations are a common cause of diffuse superficial
a horse with focal to multifocal corneal edema, of sudden
corneal ulceration in dogs after bathing {10.64). Mali-
onset. Overt anterior uveitis was absent but multifocal
cious burns from strong acids or alkalis will occasionally
opacities at Descemet's membrane were visible (10.61). The
 be observed. While pet owners frequently blame corneal
condition was responsive to, but not cured by, topical
ulceration on mace and pepper spray, the corneal
corticosteroids or topical cyclosporine (10.62)162. Based on
changes induced by these chemicals are mild163.
the response to anti-inflammatory therapy and the corneal
edema and endothelial lesions, a presumptive diagnosis of
Infectious
endothelitis of unknown etiology was made. This
 Bacteria, viruses {FHV-1), and fungi are the usual agents
condition should be differentiated from the corneal edema
involved in ulcerative keratitis. Most surface bacterial infec-
Of glaucoma, trauma, and anterior uveitis in the horse.
tions are not strictly primary; other debilitating conditions 
often potentiate the pathogenicity of organisms that are
ULCERATIVE INFLAMMATORY DISEASE
indigenous to the ocular surface. Control of the normal
Introductionjetiology
ocular flora is maintained by rinsing the ocular surface with
Ulcerative corneal disease has the potential to change
-ossu al ou siai aun sausnd ieun suu pue siei
quickly and subsequently results in disastrous ocular
lacrimal system. Tears also contain IgA and other anti-
consequences. The signs of ocular pain are often very
bacterial substances such as lactoferrin. Competitive
dramatic and ulceration should be ruled out whenever
interaction between the indigenous flora helps to keep the
 ocular pain is present. The basic tenet when evaluating
 organisms low in numbers, whereas disrupting this balance
ulcers is to look for, and remove, any underlying cause
may cause an overgrowth of one species. Debilitating con-
(especially mechanical). Healing often occurs rapidly
ditions to the ocular surface such as reduced tear secretion,
after correction but may be delayed for months if the
UV radiation, systemic disease with immunosuppression
underlying cause is ignored. Many factors are involved as
such as diabetes mellitus and Cushing's disease, and trauma
 causative agents in the development of corneal ulcers.
which creates breaks in the epithelial barrier may allow
CORNEA AND SCLERA
265
10.65
10.66
10.67
10.65 Staphylococcal hypersenstivity ulcer
10.66 A dog with a marginal furrow paralling 
10.67 Macular keratitis in a Cocker Spaniel.
adjacent to the limbus in a dog with
the limbus that was acute in onset. The condition
Multifocal white superficial infltrates stained
staphylococcal keratoconjunctivitis. The central
was treated with cyclosporine and responded 
with fluorescein are present. The condition
 ulcer is almost healed and this was the initiating 
rapidly. The ulcer healed with granulation. This
was bilateral. Note the intense vascular
problem. The patient responded quickly to topical
 condition is similar to Mooren's ulcer in humans.
reaction in the conjunctiva and cornea.
 antibiotic and corticosteroid therapy.
Compare with 10.69 taken after therapy.
indigenous bacteria to adhere to the ocular surface and/or
10.68 Macular
10.68
overgrow, thus causing disease.
kera titis in a
Bacteria must adhere to replicate and then invade the
Miniature Poodle.
tissue to become established. Bacteria may differ in their
Characteristic
ability to adhere to varying, epithelial surfaces, thus
multifocal white
explaining why organisms are relatively specific for different
infiltrates with an
tissues. In most cases, adherence does not occur with healthy
intense vascular
cells, only with injured cells, frequently associated with prior
reaction are present.
trauma. The factors involved with adhesion are incompletely
The condition was
understood but require both a bacterial component, such as
bilateral and 
fimbriae or pilus, and a host cellular receptor. Cellular injury
responded quickly
may expose these cellular receptors or the bacteria may
to topical
adhere to fibrinectin that is bound to the damaged cell. Once
corticosteroids.
 adhered, the bacteria are engulfed by the cell and then invade
the stroma where inflammation is stimulated.
Inadequate tear film
An absolute lack of tears as in KCS or an inadequate tear
film due to excessive exposure from lagophthalmos, facial
considered immune mediated if a mechanical cause cannot
nerve paralysis, or exophthalmos are common causes of
be found to explain the unusual location and if cytology is
recurrent ulceration. The Pekingese is thought to have an
negative for infectious agents. These ulcers are typically
unsta ble tear film due to retention of mucus on the surface
moderately deep and may develop into a descemetocele.
contaminating the lipid layerl64 The resultant dry spots
They may be associated with staphylococcal conjunctivitis
may result in corneal ulcers. Most nonexophthalmic dogs
are able to tolerate facial nerve paralysis without ulcerative
bacteria or toxins. Peripheral furrows that may encircle
keratitis if the tear production is normal.
the cornea have also been observed, similar to Mooren's
ulcer in humans (10.66, 10.70).
Neurotropic
Peripheral ulcers may be dramatically responsive to
Loss of sensory innervation to the cornea may result in
topical glucocorticoids or cyclosporine but therapy
central corneal ulceration that is slow to heal. Corneal
should be closely monitored. This condition is one of the
epithelial metabolism and mitotic rate may be partially
few
exceptions
 where  glucocorticoids 
are not
dependent on intact sensory innervation. Neurotropic
 contraindicated in treating corneal ulceration.
ulcers may be observed with neurologic patients, after laser 
Macular keratitis or superficial punctate keratitis is
 cyclophotocoagulation16s, and after intraocular surgery.
observed in the dog and should be differentiated from
superficial  punctate 
e keratopathy of Shelties. Macular
Immunological
keratitis is characterized by bilateral multifocal, white,
Large corneal epithelial erosions have been observed on
 superficial stromal infltrates that are often ulcerative and are
occasion in the horse and dog with autoimmune bullous
accompanied by intense pain and neovascularization (10.67,
skin diseases. Immune-mediated ulceration, which is more
10.68ji6. The condition is typically observed in medium to
frequently observed, is indicated by the presence of
B sey punaoea pauy-suon aui isaop jo spa lus 
peripheral ulcers adjacent to the limbus with a small rim
predisposition. Repeated attacks leave a scarred cornea. The
of clear cornea (10.65, 10.70). These ulcers should be
condition is very responsive to either topical glucocorticoid
266
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
 or cyclosporine therapy, with improvement noted in
Therapy
24 hours (10.69). Low-level maintenance therapy is advised 
All corneal ulcers have the potential for rapid change and
 to prevent relapse of the disease.
thus should be monitored frequently (every 2-3 days) or
the patient hospitalized (for high risk patients such as
It is prudent for the clinician to realize that
brachycephalic breeds). Since the epithelial barrier is
ulceration associated with an immunologic
broken, bacterial infection by resident flora is possible 
pathogenesis is uncommon. These cases require
 and topical prophylactic antibiotics are routine therapy.
therapy that is antithetical to dogma for treating
 Superficial ulcers are usually more painful than deep
most ulcers and, consequently, should be followed
ulcers and topical atropine, given q2412h to reduce
closely by the clinician.
reflex ciliary spasms, is the second arm of routine therapy.
Topical anesthetics are too toxic to use therapeutically. In
the horse, systemic PG inhibitors are commonly
Metabolic
administered for ocular pain. Most uncomplicated ulcers
Cushing's
disease is associated  with  ulceration
will heal in 3-5 days but indolent or very slow healing
characterized by rapid progression and slow healing. It is
superficial ulcers are not uncommon.
unknown whether the elevated endogenous steroids
actually induce an ulcer or whether they simply
Indolent epithelial erosion (slow healing ulcer.
complicate an ulcer produced from another cause. The
Boxer ulcer, rodent ulcer)
elevated steroid levels are thought to activate MMPs
Introduction/etiology
-lis r oiu 1aon leaiou ue nn pue (asruairoo)
Indolent epithelial ulcers are common and may occur in
threatening disease.
all species. They may be divided into those with edema
and those with little, if any, edema. Those with corneal
Dystrophic corneal changes
edema are probably secondary to epithelial and
Endothelial dystrophy with severe corneal edema often
subepithelial bulla formation from endothelial disease, as
results in bullae that rupture, producing an ulcer that
previously discussed.
may heal slowly or allow bacterial contamination. More
Spontaneous erosions without significant corneal
commonly, spontaneous epithelial erosions that are
edema are typically epithelial ulcers with little tendency
usually very slow to heal {indolent epithelial ulcers) are
to progress in depth, but they may spread over the
thought to result from abnormalities in the basal
surface. It may be months until vascularization is
epithelial cells and consequent basal lamina changes.
Stimulated and the ulcers then heal by granulation.
Indolent epithelial erosion was originally thought to be
Clinical signs
 specific to Boxersl67 but it has since been observed in a
Signs of ocular pain such as blepharospasm and epiphora
variety of breeds168-170, Biopsies from superficial kera-
are the most common reason for presentation with a
[eseq auiui sasueuo aaeiauaaap Aa paydai are saioial
corneal ulcer. Ocular discharge is usually mucopurulent
epithelial cells, loosely adhered epithelium near the ulcer
with septic ulcers. Superficial corneal ulcers and erosions
margin, disorganized epithelial maturation, incomplete or
often present with more dramatic pain than deep
absent basal lamina over the ulcer, production of an
ulcerations. On examination, the normal smooth corneal
irregular basal lamina beside the ulcer, and a mild
surface is usually irregular and may have varying degrees
of corneal opacification due to focal corneal edema
and/or leukocytic infiltration.
 Corneal neovascu-
epithelium but reported normal or possibly thicker basal
larization is stimulated with stromal and septic ulcers but
lamina in areas distant to the ulcer. They reported an
epithelial erosions may go for weeks without stimulating
acellular layer on the ulcer bed that was PAS-positive and
 a vascular response. The duration of the ulcer can often
was covered with fibronectin but only irregularly with
be surmised by the vascular response.
lamina, collagen IV, and collagen Vil. Whether these
changes are the cause of the erosion or the result of
Diagnosis
Fluorescein staining should be performed when there is
reported normal corneal sensation in dogs with chronic
 any undiagnosed ocular pain. While fluorescein may not
 epithelial erosions and increased numbers of substance P
be necessary to diagnose an ulcer, it is valuable in
nerves in the epithelium adjacent to the erosion.
evaluating the healing progress. Descemetoceles have no
Occasionally the condition is bilateral but usually the
overlying stroma to retain fluorescein stain (10.70).
second eye is affected at a later time. Approximately
Stromal ulcers require both fibroplasia and epithelial
50% of patients will have a recurrence in the same or
healing to fllin the defect. Technically, deep ulcers can be
opposite eye. The mean age of onset in the Boxer is
"healed’ over with epithelium but they often retain a facet
or depression for months and may be mechanically weak.
169, 172, 173. The relatively recent discovery that the
When evaluating facets in the stroma with fluorescein
corneal epithelial stem cell is at the limbus may suggest
stain, the eye should be thoroughly rinsed to remove
that the problem is at the limbus rather than in the basal
pooled fluorescein in the tear film and avoid a false-
cells. In rabbits, loss of limbal epithelium results in
 positive interpretation. Corneal scrapings for cytology are
recurrent erosions, 
delayed healing, and corneal
a rapid and inexpensive method to help rule out bacterial
vascularization after a delay of 6 months174.
and fungal causes of ulcerative keratitis. These methods
 zaissagoid kue ioj pasn Ajaunou aq pinous
or
surgical procedures at or near the limbus. Diabetic dogs
nonhealing ulcer. The result of scrapings helps to guide
had decreased corneal sensitivity compared to normal
therapy until the result of cultures is known.
dogs but no correlation could be demonstrated with either
CORNEA AND SCLERA
267
10.69
10.70
10.69 Same patient as 10.67 after only
10.70 Peripheral descemetocele in a West 
10.71 A dog with spontaneous epithelial
48 hours of topical cyclosporine and 
Highland Wwhite Terrier. Note the clear dark
erosion with loose epithelial edges. Note the
 corticosteroid therapy.
bottom that has no stroma to become
diffusion of the rose bengal stain under the
 edematous. The lesion was sterile and progressed
loose epithelium.
 around the circumference, despite performing a
hood conjunctival flap. The diagnosis wa5 a
 probable Mooren's ulcer.
the duration or control of diabetes17s. Decreased corneal
ulcer with loose overhanging epithelial borders and with
no mechanical ca use.
blinking and lacrimation, thus exposing the cornea to.
various traumatic stimuli, or through deficiencies of
Therapy
neurotrophic regulation of epithelial proliferation,
 Indolent ulcers have been managed in a variety of ways
migration, and adhesion. The predisposition to epithelial
with no single therapy working consistently. When
ulcers with altered corneal nerves may also be mediated
healing does not occur in the expected time, the
through substance P nerves170.
condition should be re-evaluated to make sure a
Indolent epithelial ulcers are observed in the cat and
mechanical cause has not been missed.
 are typically central or paracentral. These ulcers are over-
represented in Persian and Himalayan breeds. Van der
Medica!
Routine medical therapy consists of prophylactic
36 indolent ulcers. The mean age of the cats was
topical antibiotics and, if the condition is painful,
7.7 years and no sex predilection was reported. A history
atropine. Hypertonic topical preparations to dehydrate
of previous respiratory infection or recurrent conjunc-
the cornea are often advised but when compared
tivitis was noted in 72% of the cats, reinforcing the clini-
critically are of no benefit.
cal suspicion that many cases are associated with FHV.
Topical fibronectin has shown promise in treating
 Slow healing epithelial erosion has also been described
 persistent epithelial defects; purified fibronectin may be a
in the horse177, 178. The clinical signs are similar to those
means of treating the condition in the futurel80. Topical
in the dog; however, erosion in the horse appears
serum has been used with success as a source of fibronectin
refractoryto
mostt
 therapies   except_. superficial
 and other growth factors in treating humans with indolent 
keratectomy. Hakanson and Dubielzigi79 described
epithelial erosions from a variety of causesi81. Topical
chronic epithelial erosion that did not have loose
recombinant epidermal growth factor (100 μg/ml) given
epithelial borders in a subset of horses. These ulcers had
a thin acellular membrane on the anterior stroma, which
concentration may be excessive: studies in the rabbit
was felt to represent a corneal sequestrum. Unlike the cat,
indicate that >5 μg/ml stimulates healing and a maximum
the sequestrum remained superficial and did not pigment.
[a an o m po si an 
suisa ym paieopui aq ot ieaddr iou saop ioe yimois
Clinical signs
from corneal edema or with herpesvirus ulcers.
Superficial epithelial erosion with loose epithelial borders
Topical 5% polysulfonated GAG (PGAG) has been
is the diagnostic criterion for an indolent ulcer (10.71).
advocated for the treatment of indolent epithelial
The ulcer is usually central or paracentral. Unlike a
erosions, with a healing rate of 82%184. PGAG is an
simple abrasion, the ulcer fails to heal within 1 week and
inhibitor of proteolytic enzymes. It may benefit epithelial
may spread around the cornea, healing on one side and
healing if there is an imbalance in proteolytic activity
extending on the other side. Gross corneal edema is
that promotes epithelial cell migration at the expense of
minimal  or absent and  neovascularization is 
not
disrupting cellular adhesion. Seventy-seven percent of
stimulated for an extended period of time. Very chronic
dogs with epithelial erosions had elevated levels
of
lesions heal by granulation. Many dogs exhibit severe
proteolytic activity that were decreased with PGAG
pain but this is quite variable.
therapy and returned to normal levels when healed18s.
Murphy et al.170 treated 21 dogs with chronic epithelial
Diagnosis
defects with topical substance P and achieved 70-75%
Diagnosis is on the presence of a nonhealing epithelial
healing. While this novel therapy appears highly successful,
268
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEAsE IN VeTeRiNARY MeDICINE
10.72
10.73
10.72 A dog with epithelial erosion before debriderment with
10.73 Same erosion as 10.72 after debriderment of the loose epithelium
a cotton tip applicator.
and application of a soft contact lens. The armount of epithelium
rermoved is often startling for the veterinarian and the owner.
10.74
reduced epithelial adhesion due to a reduced concentration
of hemidesmosomes190. Soft lenses may not promote
healing but do improve patient comfort.
An alternative to soft lenses in the dog is to use a
commercially available collagen shield. While this tends to
be retained better than a sof lens, it dissolves over a period
of 3-5 days and may not last long enough tobe effectivel91
In a controlled study comparing various therapies for
epithelial erosions, Morgan and Abrams192 found that
debridement alone and collagen shields are the least
successful therapies.
Surgica!
Debridement If an epithelial erosion has loose edges or a
history of slow healing, the edges are debrided
mechanically or chemically with iodine, no matter what
10.74 Treatment of an indolent epithelial erosion with debridement
other therapy is planned. This is especially important if
of the epithelium and a grid keratotomy with a 25 gauge needle.
the margins are loose and nonadherent. Debridement may
remove a much larger area of epithelium than the original
ulcer, but the epithelium regenerates rapidly and often
heals with no further specific therapy (10.72, 10.73).
 other procedures are similarly successful. Why additional
substance P should be beneficial when Murphy et al. found
Punctate  or
linear
keratotomy. Keratotomy
in
increased amounts in the cornea of dogs with chronic
combination with epithelial debridement is now the first
epithelial erosions was not addressed in the study.
choice of many clinicians for surgical therapy in the dog.
While not recommended on a routine basis, the
The technique consists of multiple punctures or cross-
 author has resorted to topical glucocorticoid therapy
hatching of the basement membrane with a 25 gauge
when conventional therapy was unsuccessful, 
 and
[ un pd aq u s i apau
achieved rapid improvement. If indolent ulcers have
 anesthesia with the animal restrained in lateral recumbency.
healed by granulation, topical glucocorticoid therapy
Keratotomy exposes the epithelium to the stroma, which
produces rapid resolution of the granulation and
promotes a more secure binding of the epithlium. There are
minimizes the scarring process. Glucocorticoids should
many theories to explain the benefit of a keratotomy:
be used with caution in any ulcerative condition and the
 penetrating the basal lamina to expose the epithelial cells to
patient should be monitored at frequent intervals.
the stroma, thus promoting adhesions; breaching the basal
Soft contact lenses are available for both the dog and
lamina coupled with an abnormal hyaline zone in the
horse and may be used as a pressure bandage to aid
 superficial cornea may be inhibiting epithelial adhesion193,
healing186, 187. Depending on the fit and conformation, the
and stimulating extracellular matrix proteins promotes
lens may not be retained and, if lost, results in significant
epithelial adhesions194. Healing occurs within 1-2 weeks in
financial loss, especially in the horse. In humans, soft
the majority of instances. The healing rate with a grid
contact lenses slow healing and increase the complication
keratotomy has been variably reported as 72-85% after
rate when used in the treatment of ulcers188,189 In cats
One therapy192-196, A mean of 13 days was necessary for
with intact corneas, extended contact lens wear results in
healing with grid keratotomy193
CORNEA AND SCLERA
269
10.75
In the author's experience, grid keratotomies are not 
successful in the horse with indolent epithelial erosions
and should be used with extreme caution in the cat. Van
der Woerdt and Olivero176 found that 31% of cats with
indolent epithelial erosions treated by debridement and
keratotomies developed a corneal sequestrum, whereas
10% developed a sequestrum when treated only by
debridement. If some indolent ulcers in the cat are
associated with herpesvirus, an additional concern with
keratotomies is inoculation of the virus deeper into the
 stroma to produce a stromal keratitis.
Keratotomies are utilized only on indolent superficial
epithelial erosions and not on stromal ulcers.
Superficial keratectomy. A superficial keratectomy is
10.75 Placement of a third eyelid flap. This is the most common
successful in 100% of cases but it is technically more
 5uture pattern used. Note the stints on the skin side and the suture
difficult, requires general anesthesia, and thus is more
is placed back from the lid margin to ensure pulling the third eyelid
expensive (see Dermoids, p.282-283, 10.110,10.111).
up for pressure, rather than just pulling the upper lid down.
The theoretical benefit of a superficial keratectomy is to
remove the abnormal basal lamina and underlying
hyaline membrane present in the anterior stroma. The
author uses superficial keratectomies in dogs only in
10.76
those patients resistant to other therapies, but uses the
procedure more in cats and routinely in horses. In the
horse, superficial keratectomies can be performed under
heavy sedation combined with topical anesthesia.
Third eyelid flap. Bandaging the eye by placing a third
eyelid flap for 10-14 days will promote healing in most
 patients (10.75-10.77). Suturing to the bulbar conjunctiva
produces the least rubbing on the cornea but is also the most
difficult to perform, requiring a small ophthalmic needle
(10.76). Approximately 75% of indolent ulcers without
edema will heal with a third eyelid flap. While healing may
 be promoted, a third eyelid flap does nothing to improve
 cellular adhesion.
10.77
10.76 A-D Technique of suturing the third eyelid to the
10.77 Suture pattern used to place a third eyelid flap that allows
diametrically opposite episclera. This requires a good ophthalmic
5tints to be used on both sides. This should be considered in dogs or
cutting needle to pick up the tough episclera, as sutures only in the
animals that require a lot of tension on the third eyelid to cover the
conjunctiva will pull out. The advantage is that the globe and third 
globe. The disadvantage is that often the cartilage of the third eyelid
eyelid are a unit rather than independent in their movement.
is deformed after removal due to bending over the stint.
270
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
Prophylaxis
experience is rarely positive. Previous fluorescein staining
In many instances, the ulcer is not only slow to heal but
of the cornea has been reported to give a false-positive IFA
recurs in the same or the other eye. This is very
test (see Chapter 8, p.183). Routine conjunctival cytology.
discouraging for the owner and clinician who have just
-oudouaod pue saioudual sey paedad Aleoidai se
 spent a great amount of time and money to get the initial
ulcer healed. In the past when diethylstilbesterol was
n lm nou  i us sung u pax sus
available it was used in low doses to try and prevent
the inclusion bodies20s Negative findings on cytology are
recurrences. The rationale behind this therapy is not
common with chronic stromal disease because of viral
known; many of the patients were old and neutered but
latency. Animals should also be tested for FeLV and feline
this is by no means consistent.
immunodeficiency virus (FIV).
Biopsy via a superficial keratectomy may demonstrate
When presented with a potential indolent ulcer,
virus particles on electron microscopy or inclusion bodies
communication with the client is critical in order to
on light microscopy. Viral cultures have traditionally
minimize the frustration encountered with the time and
been considered the gold standard for diagnosing
expense incurred from repeated visits and the potential
herpesvirus but PCR testing is more sensitive.
for relapses in the same or opposite eye. Forewarning
Unfortunately, PCR testing for herpesvirus is not yet
o u aq oi edde u ai sa isa ne
widely available.
When the clinical presentation is a dendritic epithelial
ulcer, it is considered pathognomonic for herpesvirus.
Viralulcers in cats
 Sneezing or upper respiratory signs are additional indicative
Introduction/etiology
signs of a presumptive diagnosis of herpesvirus infection.
FHV-1 will commonly produce an epithelial ulcer that
Lastly, the response to specific antiviral therapy may be used
may be dendritic {linear branching) or geographic
retrospectively to diagnose herpesvirus infection.
{irregular) or, when complicated, produce a stromal ulcer
that may develop into a descemetocele. In severe
Ocular examination of cats with ocular complaints
instances, keratouveitis may develop with marked
should routinely employ fluorescein staining of the
corneal edema and epithelial bullae formation. One or
cornea and examination using a blue light to find
both eyes may be involved. Affected cats are usually not
small defects. Herpes virus-induced epithelial defects
ill with respiratory disease and typically are young adult
are easily overlooked.
 primary infection and is self-limiting, being up to 24 days
in experimental cats157.
Therapy
Most cats with herpesvirus become lifelong carriers.
Antivira!
The virus resides in a latent form in the sensory ganglia,
 Idoxuridine (IDU) was the first specific antiviral agent used
totreat herpesvirus ulcerative keratitis. Adenine
evidence suggests that the corneal stroma may also host
arabinoside (Ara-A) and trifluorothymidine (TFT) are
the herpesvirus in a latent or nonreplicative form200-202
newer antiherpes medications, with the latter being more
effective, less toxic, and having better corneal penetration.
 Clinical signs
Unfortunately, TFT is very expensive for routine use.
The cat is usually presented with epiphora and mild
Topical ophthalmic acyclovir {acycloguanosine) is available
blepharospasm. The typical lesion is a superficial, linear or
 irregular ulcer (10.78, 10.79) which is usually epithelial if
uncomplicated. Lesions begin as small dots that coalesce
'udap ui ssasoud Aeu Aaqi inq uoisoia reau e woy o1
cellular thymidine kinase. Acyclovir is available for
Due to the small size of the lesions, a blue light or
systemic use but unfortunately is not a good option in the
magnification may be necessary to detect fluorescein
 cat because therapeutic levels produce renal, liver, and bone
staining. Rose bengal staining may be preferred due to the
marrow toxicity208. Despite the toxicity of systemic
epithelial necrosis that the virus produces. Stromal
acyclovir, clinicians are using the drug in cats at low doses
keratitis may develop later in one or both eyes, as diffuse
for severe herpesvirus infections. In humans, oral acyclovir
neovascularization  with multifocal gray maculae.
 has been successful in decreasing the relapses of ocular,
Epithelial erosions may or may not be present with
 genital, and orofacial herpes simplex infections. Ocular
stromal keratitis (10.54, p.261, 10.57, 10.58, p.263).
herpes simplex relapses were decreased by 50% when
Affected cats may have a history of intermittent sneezing
 patients were maintained on oral acyclovir for 1 year209. It
and ocular discharge, indicating a carrier state.
is unknown whether similar decreases in relapses could be
produced in the cat at a dose of acyclovir that would be safe
Diagnosis
for such a long period of administration.
Diagnosis of herpesvirus ocular lesions is often difficult
due to the carrier state and the ubiquitous nature of the
Interferon
virus; herpesvirus can be either cultured, or detected with
 Recombinant human leukocyte interferon is synergistic with
PCR, from 10% of conjunctivae and from 50%
of
corneas of normal cats202. Maggs et al.203 found 11%
This has prompted either topical or oral use of interferon in
and 28% of normal cats positive for herpesvirus using
conjunction with topical antivirals in patients who have
virus isolation and IFA testing, respectively.
been unresponsive to antivirals alone. Topical interferon is
IFA testing of conjunctiva or corneal scrapings for
empirically formulated at 0.s-1 IU drop of artifical tear
herpesvirus is the easiest definitive test but in the author's
solution and is considered to be clinically successful.
CORNEA AND SCLERA
271
10.79
10.80
10.78 Herpesvirus dendritic epithelial ulcer in 
 10.79 Herpesvirus dendritic epithelial ulcer
10.80 Faint subepithelial macular opacities
a cat viewed against the fundus reflection and
in a cat viewed against the tapetal reflection.
 in a horse. Herpesvirus was suspected, but 
after staining with fluorescein. Small dots.
 Note the linear opacity with small branches
biopsies and culture could not confirm
branching linear lesions, and a geographic
and, beyond the linear opacity, 5mall 
the dia gnosis.
erosion are present.
punctate defects.
L-lysine
of FHV-1 or detection of virus shedding in various tissues
Oral L-lysine {500 mg q12h) reduced the severity of
after experimentally-induced relapses by the prior
herpesvirus conjunctivitis in cats2l1 and presumably would
vaccination of animals with an intranasal vaccine. FHV
be beneficial  in  treating corneal  manifestations (
of
vaccination mainly decreases the severity and duration of
herpesvirus infection as well. L-lysine was administered
the signs but does not prevent infection or latency219.
 before the induction of experimental infection and thus may
This is of special concern to breeders of cats that develop
not be as effective in the clinical setting, where therapy is
severe problems. Persian cats have more frequent and
started after the animal has signs of infection. L-lysine
more severe ocular symptoms.
(400 mg q24h) decreased the amount of viral shedding with
Good preventive medicine measures will decrease the
mild stressors but did not prevent shedding when challenged
incidence
 of herpesvirus infection in a cattery.
with  glucocorticoid
1 administration2i2.  A  proposed
Quarantining new cats for several weeks before
mechanism of action if L-lysine is by competing with
admission to the cattery, segregation of cats by age group
arginine for absorption from the gut and the renal tubule.
and pregnancy status, good ventilation (10 air
Arginine is required for in vitro replication of herpesvirus
exchanges/hour) and sanitation, disposable food, water,
and elevated levels of L-lysine may deprive the virus of
and litter trays, and handling the younger cats before the
older cats are helpful in decreasing the spread of
plasma levels of lysine but did not affect plasma levels of
herpesvirus. Obvious carriers of the virus such as cats
 arginine, which is fortunate for therapy as the cat is very
with sinusitis and recurrent conjunctivitis should be
removed from the colony. If dealing with a problem
cattery, early vaccination with a killed vaccine followed
Immunosuppressants
later with a live virus vaccine is recommended220.
The use of immunosuppressants in stromal keratitis may
 Screening for FeLV and FIV may be helpful in
be considered with moderate to severe disease but they
explaining frequent and severe forms of herpesvirus
should always be used concurrently with antiviral drugs.
infection in a cattery. Stressing latent carriers with
Glucocorticoids are blamed for many of the progressive
 5 mg/kg methlylprednisolone injections and identifying
ulcerative conditions seen in herpesvirus keratitis of
carriers with viral cultures of saliva 8-10 days later was
humans214. Experimental feline herpesvirus infection was
used in a pathogen-free colony to cull carriers and
made much more severe with glucocorticoid immuno-
therefore reduce the incidence of upper respiratory
and a rebound effect after cessation of glucocorticoid use
6 weeks. Nevertheless, 8 months later another outbreak
of
herpesvirus
upper respiratory tract i
infection
with feline herpesvirus stromal conditions. However,
 developed after a stressing event.
cyclosporine therapy should also be used with caution
 and in conjunction with antiviral therapy216. Systemic
Viral ulcers in horses
cyclosporine prolonged and
1 worsened experimental
Equine herpesvirus-1 has been incriminated as a cause of a
 stromal keratitis in rabbits217.
multifocal superficial punctate keratitis {10.80). The 
keratitis may be accompanied by frank corneal ulceration
Prophylaxis
or fine punctate fluorescein staining. The etiology has not
In the author's clinical experience, prior vaccination
paou-snuasadiay aq ol paisaaans sem inq uaaoud uaag
against FHV infection does not prevent the development
because it is responsive to antiviral therapy222. Equine
of subsequent ocular manifestations, nor is it of value as
herpesvirus-2 was isolated from an outbreak of kerato-
conjunctivitis in foals. The disease was characterized by
272
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
10.81
10.82
10.83
10.81 Large corneal sequestrum in a Persian
10.82 Himalayan cat with a corneal
10.83 Conjunctival pedicle flap in a cat
cat. Note the conjunctivitis and corneal
sequestrum. Note the blepharospasm and the 
that has healed in place after removal of a
neovascularization. The patient was treated with 
brownish-black discharge caked on the eyelids.
5equestrum and is about to be excised or
a keratectomy and conjunctival pedicle flap.
trimmed. Note the faint pigmentation that
has developed adjacent to the flap.
epiphora to mucopurulent discharge, conjunctivitis, and
herpesvirus in 55% of cases in one study140; in another
superficial focal macular opacities223 Keratoconjunctivitis
study there was no significant difference in recovery of
characterized by epiphora, blepharospasm, and focal
 herpesvirus (18%) from herpesvirus infected animals than
crystalline deposits with punctate fluorescein staining was
from controls22. The study by Nassse et al.140 found that
observed in 12 horses224. Equine herpes-2 virus was
in DSH and domestic longhaired {DLH) cats, the rate of
isolated from a corneal biopsy of two foals with a
recovery was 80% while in the Persian-Himalayan breeds
unilateral keratoconjunctivitis. Two horses had similar
it was about 50%, suggesting an alternative pathogenesis 
lesions that responded to antiviral therapy2s. Topical
for these breeds. The histopathologic lesions of corneal
al "suoisal au jo asdeiau u pannsau spiososni
sequestra are desiccated and degenerative stromal necrosis,
significance of herpesvirus in equine keratitis is unknown
but evidence suggests that it should be considered as an
etiology in ulcerative and nonulcerative keratitis. In the
Clinical signs
 author's practice area, small subepithelial white foci are
The appearance of a black plaque on the cat cornea is almost
usually of fungal origin.
 pathognomonic for corneal sequestrum. The surface of the
plaque may be smooth or roughened. While normally the
Corneal sequestrum (nigrum)
plaque is assumed to enlarge slowly, the author has observed
Introd uction/etiology
progression from a pinpoint spot to a 6-7 mm lesion in
In the Persian, Siamese and, occasionally, domestic
2 weeks in his own cat. As the condition progresses, the
shorthaired (DSH) cats, slow-healing epithelial defects from
 plaque separates from the adjacent tissue and may eventually
a variety of causes may result in a corneal nigrum or
slough from the surface. Ocular pain and corneal fluorescein
sequestrum. This is a brownish-black plaque or deposit that
 staining is variable.
iS
usually central or paracentral and stimulates
vascularization (10.81). On occasion, the plaque will
Diagnosis
Occupy the majority of the cornea. The lesion may or may
 Diagnosis is on clinical appearance.
not be painful and occasionally will be bilateral. It may
begin as a small superficial spot and progresses quickly
Therapy
(2-3 weeks) in width and depth. The black appearance has
Therapy is somewhat controversial, with two camps, the
been speculated to be iron, catecholamines, and desiccation.
 Cutters and the observers. If the eye is comfortable, one may
wait for weeks to months for spontaneous sloughing. The 
small initiating ulcer plays a role in the condition.
disadvantage of waiting is that the lesion may extend in
 Cats which develop sequestra usually have a similar
depth. If the lesion is painful, owners are not tolerant of
colored mucus on the lid margins whenever the eyes are
waiting and the therapy is a superficial keratectomy. Often
irritated {10.82). This mucus is not from tears (since the
aul ol anp pasioxa Ajaladuoo aq rouueo anssy umouq au
mucus is observed in cats with no tears), but apparently
depth of the lesion. If the keratectomy site is not covered and
from the glands of the conjunctiva or lids. Davidson
the comea is slow to heal, the nigrum may recur. To try and
 ui s aue pp oi aen am zte ia
avoid recurrence in the keratectomy bed, most surgeons
proteins from normal cats and cats with sequestra. The
suggest covering the site with either a corneal graft, a
predisposing ulcerative condition may be obvious or
occult, such as from small herpesvirus epithelial defects.
Conjunctival grafts have the disadvantage of leaving a scar
This is supported by the development of corneal sequestra
that is usually axial. To avoid this problem, lamellar feline
in 50% of cats with experimental herpesvirus infection
grafts and canine grafts have been used to repair the defect
that had_chronic ulcerations due to glucocorticoid
with excellent results (see 10.91)234. Unfortunately, the
recurrence rate with corneal graffing is unknown.
CORNEA AND SCLERA
273
10.84
10.85
10.86
10.85 Corneal hydrops in a foal that developed
within hours. Culture was negative and no 
10.84 Corneal hydrops in a cat. Note the
bacteria were found on histopathology of the
10.86 Pseudomonas descemetocele in a
marked protrusion of the edematous cornea
tssue. Compare this appearance to that of a
horse. Note the strong leukotactic response,
that has been stained with fluorescein. The
septic ulcer. The patient was treated by
diffuse corneal edema, and impending
condition developed peracutely and was
debriderment of the protruding malacic cornea and
va scular response.
treated successfully with a third eyelid flap.
 a partial tarsorraphy to protect and apply pressure.
 The epithelium will not heal over the edematous
raised stroma. Most patients heal in 7-10 days.
Bullous keratopathy (corneal hydrops)
eyelid flap works well
l  as  a  pressure bandage
Introduction/etiology
(10.75-10.77). In the horse the author prefers a partial
Peracute marked localized swelling of the cornea is
tarsorrhaphy that provides splintage but remains
observed in both the cat and horse. The lesions present as
accessible for treatment and observation (7.43). Topical
ulcerations that have marked focal edema, producing an
'aaisuaui aq iou psu inq pasn aue suaae lqouue
elevation and a gelatinous stroma with loss of structural
and systemic analgesics are usually not necessary. In the
integrity (10.84, 10.85). The surrounding cornea is clear
horse, after two or three debridements of the area the
and infectious organisms are not present unless due to
lesion stabilizes and begins to epithelialize.
contamination from the surface. The condition usually
Occurs in young to young adult cats or in horses in foals or
Deep corneal ulcers
in young adults, and may sequentially involve the second
Introduction/etiology
junsisuoo e iou si inq juasaid aq Aeu suiaan 'sezaha
Tissue damage from infection is caused by a combination of
finding. The cornea may become infected and perforation
toxins liberated by the organism and MMP enzymes liber-
may occur The initiating cause is unknown, although the
ated by the ocular tissue and neutrophils. MMPs are
mechanism of progression is probably via MMP digestion.
involved in a variety of normal processes throughout the
The author has observed lesions in several cats either on or
body, such as tissue remodeling, as well as pathologic condi-
that had had topical or systemic dexamethasone therapy.
tons such as cancer, wound healing, and angiogenesis36
When observed early, prodromal lesions are small, single or
There are >20 MMPs described, based on their substrate
multifocal ulcerations that may be accompanied by small
specificity, with four endogenous tissue inhibitors of MMPs
bullae that rapidly coalesce to form large bullae. In the
(TIMPs). Older nomenclature used for these enzymes
horse, prior drug therapy has not been associated with the
includes collagenase (MMP-1), gelatinase A (MMP-2),
condition. One possible theory, based on the peracute
stromelysin-1 (MMP-3), and gelatinase B {MMP-9). Endo-
history, a lack of significant inflammatory cells on cytology
genous MMP may be secreted by keratocytes, leukocytes
 and biopsy, and sterility on culture is that foals and young
and, perhaps, corneal epithelium. They normally exist as
horses tend to lie down when sleeping and insect bites such
pro-enzymes or are latent, but when activated after a lag
as from spiders may be initiating the condition.
period, rapid melting of the stroma may occur.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is the usual l
bacterial
Diagnosis
organism involved in producing progressive, often
Diagnosis is by the marked focal edematous lesion of
perforating, ulcers. P aeruginosa has a variety of
 gelatinous stroma, with adjacent normal cornea devoid of
 proteolytic enzymes237 and has been shown to activate
edema, leukocytic infiltration, or vascular reaction. Cytology
and biopsy of the gelatinous material is typically sterile on
such as Pseudomonas spp., the host's response is very
culture, lacks significant inflammatory cells or bacteria, and
s s  a   
consists of disoriented collagen fibrils with marked edema
lysosomal é
enzymes from neutrophils may be more
separating the fibrils. Bullous keratopathy must
be
important than direct damage by P'aeruginosd
differentiated from an acute, progressive, melting, septic
 ulcer that will have organisms and neutrophils on cytology.
 oxygenase pathway and increase the neutrophilic response
will accelerate corneal ulceration240. Ulceration associated
Therapy
with bacteria usually has a more intense leukotactic
Therapy entails removing the exposed gelatinous stroma
 Stimulus, resulting in a dense creamy-white infiltrate and
and covering the cornea to 'splint' it. In the cat, a third
 an intense neovascular response (10.86).
274
OpHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
In one study, Pseudomonas spp. and other Gram-
rods are observed on scrapings, a fortified ophthalmic
negative organisms were reported to be the most
gentamicin (10-12 mg/ml) or amikacin solution q1h has
common isolates from ulcerative keratitis in horses102
been  recommended?4s.'
Alternatively,
the
newer
but a repeat study 12 years later and other studies
fuoroquinolone antibiotics such as ofloxacin are used.
showed that Streptococcus spp. and Stapbylococcus spp.
 Frequent topical antibiotics have been more effective in
 are the most common isolates84, 241. The incidence of
clearing the cornea of organisms in experimental
Gram-negative isolates and their antibiotic resistance
 infections than subconjunctival or parenteral routes246, 247
increases with previous therapy*s. Another cause of
In the horse, due to the frequency of resistant
rapidly melting ulcer is an insect bite from fire ants,
streptococci and mixed infections with fungal organisms,
spiders, or bees (10.63).
the author suggests using an antibiotic that has a good
Gram-positive spectrum of activity, e.g. cephazolin
Clinical signs
formulated as a S% solution, and an antifungal
Crater defects with visible stromal walls indicate that the
 preparation in addition to an antibiotic effective against
ulcer has extended into the stroma. Associated corneal
Gram-negative organisms. Resistant organisms may
edema with thickening of the stroma often exaggerates
require formulation of topical antibiotics from systemic
the depth of the ulcer. If the bottom of the ulcer is clear
preparations. Fluoroquinolone antibiotics such as
or dark, it usually indicates that there is no residual
ciprofloxacin and ofloxacin are now used more commonly
stroma and the ulcer has progressed to Descemet's
in bacterial ulcers because of their broad-spectrum activity
membrane (10.70).
and bactericidal properties. Their weakness is in treating
Varying degrees of white corneal opacity will be
streptococcal ulcers. Aggressive antibiotic therapy of
present due to combinations of corneal edema and
 Pseudomonas spp. ulcers without surgical intervention
leukocytic infiltration. Marked leukocytic infiltration is
 resulted in excellent function in 73% of cases248
indicative of sepsis and is usually more yellow-white than
 MMP inhibitors {anticollagenase inhibitors) are often
pure stromal edema (10.86). After a lag time of 48 hours,
administered hourly if the process is in the progressive
superficial and deep vascularization develops depending
stages of ulceration, but their effectiveness against
On the chronicity and stimulus.
tetracycline may be an alternative. Tetracycline was
Diagnosis
beneficial with P. aeruginosa ulcers in an experimental
Diagnosis of stromal ulceration is usually from the defect
model and the benefit was thought to be independent of
in the stroma that has sharp sides and deep walls and
the antibacterial effect250.
stains with fluorescein.
Vygantas et al.2s1 found that bacitracin was more
effective in vitro in inhibiting MMP-9 from wounded
 Some considerations when interpreting fluorescein
canine corneas than tetracycline, thus adding yet another
staining are:
drug as a possible MMP inhibitor Acetylcysteine 10% is
Deep defects may pool fluorescein but may not 
 available as a nebulizing agent in respiratory therapy and
actually take up stain. These may be healed
has anticollagenase activity; it is therefore often used due
facets of previous deep ulcers that have not filled
to
convenience.
Serum is often used for 
its
in with fibroplasia.
anticollagenase activity, particularly in the horse.
● Descemetoceles do not stain since there is no
 stromal tissue to take up stain.
Surgica!
Unless pinpoint or about 2 mm in diameter, deep ulcers
The etiologic diagnosis may be made by performing a
or those involving >75% of the corneal thickness should
corneal scraping for cytology and culture, although
be considered surgical problems. The procedure of choice
cultures are often retrospective if the progression is ra pid.
depends on the ulcer size, its location, whether it is still 
With tissue necrosis, anaerobic bacteria may cause
in the progressive stage, the clinician's experience, and
ulceration and will not be diagnosed by the usual
the instrumentation available.
streptococci require thiol-containing compounds and
Tissue glue. Small deep ulcers may have a small amount
vitamin Bg and have been reported to be a significant
of tissue glue {cyanoacrylate) applied to reinforce the
cause of corneal ulceration244. Nutritionally variant
streptococci do not grow on most bacteriological media
 dry ulcer bed and a minimum amount applied, since any
unless  a pyridoxal
 secreting organism, such
as
excess creates a very irritating surface (10.87). Keeping
the cornea dry {often using a hair dryer) and carefully
develop as satellite colonies. Equine ulcers frequently
applying a very small drop usually requires general
have mixed bacterial and fungal agents, particularly if
anesthesia. Patients often benefit little from this
they have been previously treated102
 technique, due to the frequent premature loss of the glue
and, if retained, the resultant marked irritation. If general
Therapy.
 anesthesia is required, the author recommends using a
Medica!
 more beneficial procedure.
The vast majority of patients with deep corneal ulcers
should be hospitalized for intensive medical and surgical
Cormeal sutures. Sutures placed across the ulcer bed to
therapy. Medical therapy is guided by corneal scraping but
obliterate it may be used in small deep ulcers that are
a bactericidal antibiotic with known effectiveness for
stable. If the condition is still progressive, the sutures
Pseudomonas spp. is usually selected. The antibiotic
of
will slough out. The disadvantage is that even a small
choice is constantly changing due to resistance patterns. If
ulcer produces considerable distortion of the corneal
CORNEA AND SCLERA
275
10.87
10.88
10.87 A dog that has had cyanacrylate glue placed over an ulcer
(arrow). It is very difficult to get a small enough drop (even with 30-25
 gauge needle] that does not extend significantly beyond a small ulcer.
10.88 Dissection steps for performing a 360° conjunctival flap for a
 central ulcer. Central corneal ulcer (A). The limbal conjunctiva is
excised with scissors for 360° (B) . Dissection consists of cutting and 
then spreading the scissors under the conjunctiva to separate Tenon's
fascia. This is thickest dorsally and ventrally adjacent to the rectus
muscles. Failure to perform this step correctly results in prermature
retraction of the conjunctiva. Once the dissection is complete the 
conjunctiva should easily pull over the cornea (C) and can be sutured
in a variety of patterns (D). The critical time is 5-7 days if retraction 
is going to occur. The flap is left for approximately 3 weeks and then
trimmed, leaving minimal adherence at the ulcer. The conjunctiva 
does not have to be resutured in place.
surface when a round defect is closed in a linear
pattern. A purse-string pattern is favored over a linear
closure. The sutures should be 7-0 in size, and should
10.89
include a 2-3 mm bite on each side to minimize pulling
out of the stroma.
Conjunctival flaps. A technique that reinforces or
patches the weakened cornea is indicated with deep
ulcers of larger size. If the ulcer is acute and in the
progressive stage, any procedure that relies on sutures
embedded in the adjacent cornea will probably fail. The
ae rog aad isaq aue ls si dee eaunuos og
central ulcers that are in a progressive stage {10.88). The
hemorrhage that results from conjunctival dissection and
the immediate vascularization that the flap brings to the
ulcer are beneficial to halting progressive collagenase
destruction of the stroma2s3.
Variations of the 360° conjunctival flap are possible
and, other than requiring placing fine sutures in the cornea,
they are usually easier and faster. Such variations include: a
10.89 A dog with a bridge conjunctival graft in place for a central
hood or 180° flap, a bridge flap (10.89), a conjunctival
ulcer. These need to be sutured adjacent to the ulcer to keep them 
pedicle flap (10.83), a tarsoconjunctival pedicle flap, and a
from moving.
free conjunctival patch254-256. (
Conjunctival flaps are
usually a two-step procedure, with the second step
 s   s  ( ae o l
excess conjunctival tissue from the adhered region of prior
276
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETeRINARY MeDICINE
10.90
A
Limbu5
Conjunctiva
_ Subconjunctiva
Sclera
G
H
10.90 Autogenous corneoconjunctival graft. If an ulcer has enough adjacent normal tissue to cover it as in (A], a half-depth larmellar dissection is
performed out to the limbus (B). The width of the dissection should be somewhat wider than the ulcer. The conjunctiva is then excised with scissors,
again wider than the space to be filled to counteract contraction (C), and the underlying Tenon's capsule is removed (D). The remaining limbal zone is
cut and this willallow radial moverment of the dissected tissue into the ulcer (E, F). As this procedure is often a source of hemorrhage, it is prudent to
"(h) leaie 0-h o a 4im paanins s!lean aua aul(o) dasin aul i ot pawun s! lein peauios aut jo pua aul sel anpaooad aui on
ulceration, topical steroids are often administered for
difficult, it is preferred for central ulcers to minimize
 2-3 weeks to minimize the scar. The final appearance, with
scarring (10.91). Homologous corneal grafts frozen in a
continued shrinkage of the scar, may take several months.
standard freezer have been used to patch corneal defects in 
A scar will always be present with stromal ulcers, due to
 dogs, cats, and horses. These grafts remain opaque but they
healing by fibroplasia. Complete 360° conjunctival flaps
successfully patch the defect and salvage the eye or enlarge
are easily dissected in the horse but are more likely to
retract prematurely. Pedicle, bridge, or free grafts are more
With nonperforating ulcers in the dog and cat, frozen
successful than 360° flaps in the horse.
lamellar grafs provide excellent postoperative results260.
The grafts become edematous, stimulate intense 
Cormeal grafts. Free corneal grafts can be performed to fill
neovascularization, and then are clear by 60 days.
 defects from ulceration but a sliding autogenous lamellar
A variety of materials have been used as *patches" to
 graft is more practical and successful if there is enough
 cCover an ulcer, similar to a free-hand conjunctival graft.
normal cornea adjacent to the lesion (10.90)257. In one 
 Porcine small intestinal submucosa261, equine renal
study, 95% of these grafts were translucent and the
capsule262, equine pericardium263, and xenologous
experimental group had the corneal endothelium re-
 amniotic membrane264 have been been used as patches.
established2s This procedure will give better functional
Covering the ulcer with a patching material when dealing
results than conjunctival flaps and, while technically more
with septic problems has the disadvantage of not bringing
CORNEA AND SCLERA
277
10.91
10.92
10.93
10.91 Kitten that has had a corneoconjunctival
10.92 Dense corneal leukoma in a horse. The
10.93 A horse with a corneal tattoo
sliding graft for a herpesvirus descemetocele.
scar was cosmetically objectionable to the 
immediately after applying platinum chloride.
The vascular portion is the conjunctival part and 
owner, who requested corneal tattooing.
Note the adjacent corneal edema which
the corneal portion is mainly clear. The clinical
detracts from the cosmetic improverment.
appearance was clearer than the photograph
would indicate.
a blood supply to the ulcer. The advantage of most of the
Age: young animals have the highest incidence of
nonconjunctival patches is that they leave less scarring;
disease, which suggests that some immunity is
however, they should only be used in a stable ulcer.
acquired from previous exposure270.
 Season: peak incidence of disease is usually in
Corneal tattooing Deep corneal ulcers will invariably have
warmer humid months. Winter outbreaks have been
a significant scar If pigmentation has not accompanied the
associated with reflected UV light from the snow. In
healing process, a significant cosmetic blemish may compel
addition, crowded conditions in the winter may lead
the owner to seek a solution. Corneal tattooing with
to outbrea ks.
platinic chloride offers a cosmetic improvement. After
UV radiation: outbreaks of IBK can be correlated
debriding the epithelium, 2% platinic chloride is soaked
with peak UV radiation. Experimental infections are
 into the scar and then precipitated with 2% hydrazine265.
created by first irradiating the eyes with UV light.
A black precipitate is formed in the scar which does not
UV radiation produces degeneration and increased
improve
 function but does blend with the usual
sloughing of the epithelial cells and promotes
background of a dark equine iris {10.92, 10.93).
conditions for attachment of M. bovis271. The most
critical wa velength is 270 nm272.
Infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis (pinkeye)
 Breed: Bos indicus breeds (Brahmam type) are
Introduction/etiology
generally resistant.
Infectious bacterial ulcerative keratitis occurs in both
 Ocular and periocular pigmentation: breeds and
cows and sheep. The disease is worldwide and has a
genetic lines of animals with less pigment are more
significant economic impact from weight loss and cost of
susceptible273
treatment. In one retrospective study of a beef herd, one-
Flies: Musca domestica and Musca autumnalis may
third of the calves at weaning
g had infectious bovine
carry the organisms between animals and may
keratoconjunctivitis {IBK). Two-thirds of the affected
 mechanically injure the corneal surface267
calves had unilateral involvement and one-third had
 Dust, tall grass, wind: these may produce mechanical
 bilateral involvement. The average suppression of weight
irritation to the ocular surface.
in calves with unilateral involvement was 11 lb {5 kg) and
 Other infectious agents: concurrent infection with IBR
virus or vaccination with a live IBR virus increases the
 The consensus is that the primary etiology in the cow
 severity and prevalence of the 0cular lesions274-276.
is Moraxella bovis but multiple factors play a role in
 Mycoplasma spp. may promote colonization of the
both the susceptibility of the animal and the severity of
conjunctiva by Moraxella spp. but do not have a
the disea se267-269
 primary role in producing IBK277, 278
Enhancing factors
Transmission
 Strain of Moraxella bovis: piliated hemolytic strains
Direct transmission without the enhancing factors
which produce rough cultures are the pathogenic
described above or other enhancing factors is of minimal
strains. Passage on blood agar quickly reduces the
importance. Only one of 20 calves developed clinical IBK
virulence and promotes conversion to smooth
from close contact when housed in conditions 
that
 minimized other risk factors such as fly control279.
278
OPHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
10.94
10.95
10.94 Uncomplicated early infectious bovine keratitis lesion in the
10.95 Complicated infectious bovine keratitis lesion that has
anterior stroma. The lesion is typically axial.
resulted in a descemetocele. The calf was valuable, so was treated
 successfully with a pedicle conjunctival graft.
Clinical signs
10.96
In order of development:
 Epiphora, photophobia, and conjunctivitis are very
early signs.
A focal axial corneal opacity or small abscess
develops followed by ulceration in 2-4 days (10.94).
The central ulcer may heal or progress in depth.
Simple ulcerations may heal in 1-2 weeks.
Progression of the ulcer in depth often occurs with
descemetocele formation or perforation and iris
prolapse. Corneal vascularization is stimulated as
well as leukocytic infiltration of the cornea (10.95),
This produces opacification of the cornea peripheral
to the ulcer. Healing of the ulcer bed is frequently by
vascular invasion of the ulcer bed, resulting in a
raised bed of granulation tissue ( 10.96). Deep and
perforated ulcers heal over in 1-2 months by fibrosis.
10.96 Healed infectious bovine keratitis lesion with granulation. The
An endophthalmitis may develop with deep or
cow develops corneal granulation more readily than other species.
perforated ulcers.
A central corneal scar that shrinks in size over several
months is present in most recovered animals (10.97).
10.97
Therapy
Moraxella bovis is susceptible to a wide variety of
antibiotics but the number of affected animals and
p juasand shuawean sunban supiaoud u Ano
challenge. Topical antibiotics are effective but unless 
 only a few animals are affected, and they are confined
for treatment, this route is not practical. Subcon-
junctival injection of an antibiotic is often administered
to8
avoid frequent therapy. Procaine penicillin given
either through the upper lid into the dorsal fornix
region or subconjunctivally in the bulbar conjunctiva
achieves a therapeutic concentration in the conjunctival
fluid for 68 and 40 hours, respectively280. Parenteral
administration of long-acting oxytetracycline, given at
20 mg/kg i.m. q72h, was successful both in treating and
 in eliminating the carrier state in all but one animal281.
Treatment with long-acting oxytetracycline is approved
10.97 Typical axial corneal scar indicative of prior infectious bovine
by the Food and Drugs Administration (FDA), except in
kera titis infection.
CORNEA AND SCLERA
279
10.98
10.99
10.98 Peracute developing descemetocele with small iris prolapse in a
10.99 Acute iris prolapse from an ulcer in a Yorkshire Terrier. Note
Boston Terrier. The lesion began as an epithelial ulcer The iris prolapse is
 the lack of adjacent corneal reaction indicating the acute nature.
covered with fibrin and thus is not brown or black. Culture was negative.
Because of the acute nature, prognosis is good to guarded. The
The patient was treated with a 360° conjunctival flap because of the
 patient was treated successfully with a pedicle flap.
 progressive nature of the condlition. Vision was retained.
lactating dairy cows. Florfenicol fa chloramphenicol
s.c. vaccination with a bacterin that contains pilus
derivitive) has also proved highly effective in treating.
antigens should be considered in problem herds.
IBK; 98% of animals heal with one s.c. injection of
Vaccination can be as early as 3 weeks of age and
should be repeated in 3 weeks and annually thereafter.
20 mg/kg q48h282.
While experimental evidence suggests that multiple
Corticosteroids
areoften
given topically
or
inoculation of a piliated bacterin reduces the incidence
subconjunctivally with antibiotics for treating IBK; this
of clinical disease, the effectiveness of available vaccines
defies the rule of not using corticosteroids with infection
has been questioned285, 286.
or ulceration. Despite this contradiction, most clinicians
feel that it shortens the course of the disease and markedly
Infectious ovine keratoconjunctivitis
improves the appearance of the cornea. A frequently used
Infectious keratoconjunctivitis is recognized worldwide
drug combination of penicillin and dexamethasone given
in:
 sheep.
The condition  is（
 characterized
by
subconjunctivally on 3 consecutive days was recently
conjunctivitis and a peripheral keratitis that is usually
demonstrated to have no therapeutic benefit when
not ulcerative. Organisms thought to be responsible are
compared to control calves that received no thera py283.
Mycoplasma conjunctivae and, less commonly,
Topical atropine ointment may be given for pain, and
eye patches may be glued to the skin in severe cases to
occur in the more severely affected lambs. Animals
protect the eye from flies, dust, and sun. Alternatively, a
infected with chlamydial forms of conjunctivitis may
third eyelid flap is frequently used in severe cases.
also have joint disease..
Mycoplasma-associated
Chromic catgut is used to suture the third eyelid; the gut
keratoconjunctivitis increases in severity with age.
sutures will dissolve spontaneously, which is an
Branhamella ovis, Escherichia coli, and Staphylococcus
advantage when treating animals in large pastures or in
aureus are commonly cultured from diseased and
great numbers284.
agents, although this is controversial29o. The disease is
Prophylaxis
self-limiting but the course can be shortened with
Because of the significant economic impact of IBK,
antibiotics.
particular emphasis should be placed on prevention.
Emphasis should be placed on good husbandry
Perforated ulcers
techniques such as quarantine of all new animals,
Introduction/etiology
avoiding purchase of animals from public auction if
Perforated ulcers are managed similarly to deep ulcers
possible, and/or treating all new animals with long-acting
but have the additional factors of a protruding iris,
alterations of intraocular structures, and an increased
to minimize the risk of carrier animals.
risk of intraocular infection.
 The iris prolapse may
Fly control during the summer with devices such as
appear black, gray, or red, depending on the chronicity
aie 'saie papeus jo uoisiaoid pue 'sarq isnp 1o sael 1e?
and the amount of fibrin layered on the surface {10.98,
important to minimize potentiating factors. Live IBR
10.99). The fibrin adds to the mass, producing a
vaccine should be avoided during the IBK season and
 mushroom shape. The fibrin becomes organized with
280
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
time and the condition is often termed a corneal
staphyloma at this stage (10.100). The mushroom shape
inflammation (phacoanaphylaxis, phacoclastic uveitis),
of the protruding iris and layers of fibrin may create a
that usually destroys the eye, and vitreous hemorrhage,
false impression as to the size of the ulcer and consequent
often resulting in traction-induced retinal detachment as
 assessment of how difficult it will be to repair Judgment
the hemorrhage organizes. Whenever a peracute iris
 as to the prognosis and means of surgical repair should
 prolapse occurs without prior ocular signs, a perforating
be made after the iris has been stripped of the fibrin and
corneal missile injury should be suspected. Many missile
the extent of the injury determined.
injuries are malicious and thus a history is lacking.
Smaller BB pellet wounds are often self-sealing and do
Therapy
not have an iris prolapse, whereas larger air rifle pellet
The protruding iris is usually excised unless the condition
wounds usually have a small iris prolapse {10.101).
is only a few hours old and/or it is very small. Bleeding
Screening skull radiographs are used to diagnose
will be encountered with iris excision and may
be
metallic perforating foreign bodies. With metallic
controlled with irrigation, low temperature cautery,
missiles, infection is rarely a problem but intense steroid
viscoelastic agents,
and/or
topical
epinephrine
therapy is indicated to control the inflammation.
(1:10,000). Anterior synechiae to the posterior cornea
 Porcupine quills may perforate the eye directly or from
are released by sweeping with a spatula and the anterior
the orbital region. Orbital porcupine quills are readily
chamber maintained with viscoelastic agents while
recognized on ultrasound by a double-banded linear
covering the defect with a surgical patch. The anterior
chamber will reform if the perforation is hours or a few
naive puppies, are often self-sealing, and are recognized
days old but older lesions will resist expansion of the
by a full-thickness linear lesion. The lens capsule is often
anterior chamber due to posterior pooling of aqueous
ruptured with claw injuries and while infection is of
humor in the vitreal compartment. A surgical patch,
concern, surprisingly it often does not materialize.
usually of conjunctiva or cornea, is devised and sutured
If the injury is self-sealing, surgical repair of the
in place. Intensive topical and systemic antibiotic therapy
cornea is not necessary. Lesions with iris prolapse are
is given. Despite the potential gravity of these conditions,
 managed as a perforated ulcer, if attempts to salvage the 
the prognosis may be quite good if the anterior chamber
 eye are to be made. If the lens capsule has suffered a tear
can be reformed.
>1.5 mm, it has been recommended that the lens be
removed to reduce subsequent  immune-mediated
PENETRATING AND PERFORATING WOUNDS
inflammation292.
OF THE CORNEA AND GLOBE
A penetrating injury is one that enters but does not pass
CORNEAL LACERATIONS
through the structure, while a perforating injury is one
Corneal lacerations are relatively easy to manage
that does pass through the structure. Injuries from
compared to corneal ulceration, since usually there is no
missiles, sticks, porcupine quills, and claw wounds may
tissue missing (10.102). The prognosis and treatment of
mimic corneal ulcers but they have a very different
lacerations will depend on the chronicity and amount of
prognosis. Pellets and BB shot usually produce multiple
collateral damage, such as uveal and lens lacerations. The
injuries at various depths in the globe that lead to more
length of the laceration in horses correlates with prognosis,
chronic complications and blindness. Accurate diagnosis
with all lacerations >15. mm resulting in phthisis,
is important so that an accurate prognosis can be given.
blindness, or enucleation293. These results indicate that
10.100
10.101
10.100 Corneal staphyloma in a Pekingese. This is a chronic
10.101 Smalliris prolapse in a dog that was very peracute in onset.
problem and the prognosis for vision is very poor. Because of the
without a prior history of an ocular problem. The prolapse was due
size, either a 360° conjunctival flap or, preferrably, a corneal graft
to a perforating pellet. X-rays will quickly confirm a metallic foreign
should be used to fill the defect. The collapsed anterior chamber
body. The condition should be differentiated from a perforated ulcer
will be dlifficult to reform.
for prognosis and therapeutic reasons.
CORNEA AND SCLERA
281
10.102
10.103
10.104
10.102 Corneal laceration in a dog with iris
10.103 Corneal laceration in a horse after 
10.104 Corneal rupture from blunt trauma in a
prolapse. Most acute lacerations will have a
suturing. A residual blood clot retracted
horse. Lesions extend through the limbus on each
good prognosis for vision if the lens is not
spontaneously, but tissue plasminogen 
end and, on exploration, the lens had been
involved. Depending on the extent and
activator could be injected in a couple of days 
 expelled. Utrasound of the eye prior to surgery
acuteness, the iris may be replaced or
to hasten the resolution. Lacerations should be
 would reveal loss of the lens and probable retinal
excised before suturing.
differentiated from a corneal rupture.
detachment. The typical outcome is phthisis bulbi.
most corneal lesions >15 mm are probably corneal
10.105 Cormeal
10.105
ruptures from blunt trauma. Lavach et al.294 found that
foreign body in a
 only 12% of horses with corneal perforations involving
dog. This is a seed 
the cornea and sclera were managed successfully.
hull and a common
 Lacerations require accurate apposition of edges with
foreign body in all 
sutures and treatment for potential infection. Lacerations
 5pecies. The hullies 
of the cornea that are not perforating may not require
in a facet and
 sutures. If the edges of a nonperforating laceration gape,
usually requires
then sutures are indicated. Perforating lacerations require
mechanical flicking 
 management of the prolapsed iris by excision and freeing
out' under topical 
any anterior synechiae from the posterior cornea. The
anesthesia.
anterior chamber is reformed with viscoelastic agent and
the cornea is accurately sutured. If the anterior chamber
has been collapsed for a long time, it may not reform
well. Suturing should be with a minimum S-0 and
preferrably 7- to 9-0 material (10.103). Nylon suture will
minimize scarring but will have to be removed at a later
time. Lacerations should be differentiated from ruptures
Diagnosis
of the cornea and sclera.
Diagnosis of a rupture as opposed to a laceration is on
the history of a blunt injury. Ruptures of the cornea
RUPTURES OF THE GLOBE
usually extend into the sclera, whereas lacerations are
Introduction/etiology
often restricted to the cornea {10.104). Ultrasound of the
Rupture of the cornea and often the sclera from blunt
eye, showing loss of the lens, indicates a ruptured globe.
trauma mimics a laceration but the prognosis is much
worse294. The sudden decompressive force associated
Therapy
with a rupture usually results in such severe internal
If the diagnosis is certain, enucleation is recommended,
ocular injury that it rarely leaves a functional eye and the
because the eye will be blind, with an extensive recovery
globe frequently becomes phthisical. Ruptures of the
period that ends in phthisis bulbi. Exploration of the
cornea frequently extend across the limbus into the
globe during attempts to suture the defects may reveal a
sclera. Posterior ruptures of the sclera that are not visible
ruptured or missing lens. Silicone spheres have been
should be suspected when the globe is very soft,
implanted after evisceration of the globe and suture of
following an injury such as proptosis of the globe. In
the rupture, in an attempt to prevent phthisis. A definite
small animals, ruptures are usually the result of trauma
risk of extrusion of the sphere is present when
from automobiles and usually accompany proptosis of
implantation is performed under these conditions.
the globe; in the horse, ruptures are commonly found as
a result of throwing the head or rearing over and hitting
CORNEAL FOREIGN BODIES
the floor. Ruptures of the cornea can be managed
Corneal foreign bodies are usually vegetable matter. A
similarly to a laceration, but almost invariably the cornea
flat brownish seed hull is the most common foreign body
will have severe permanent edema and the globe will
{10.105) and it can usually be removed under topical
become phthisical.
anesthesia by irrigation or “flicking' it out with a
282
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRiNArY MeDiCINE
10.106
10.107
10.106 Splinter in the cornea of a cat (arrow). These are difficult to
10.107 Equine dermoid at the lateral limbus accompanied by a
remove and require general anesthesia, magnification, cutting down
coloboma of the third eyelid and of the optic disk.
 over the splinter, and good forceps to grasp the splinter.
10.108
10.109
10.108 German Shepherd Dog puppy with a corneal dermoid at the
lateral limbus.
10.109 Removal of a corneal dermoid with a superficial keratectomy.
The dermoid is outlined and the incision at the tip is extended 
slightly to make it cruciate, to facilitate picking the tip up. The edges
25 gauge needle or cytobrush. Splinters in the cornea are
of the incision should have mild gaping to indicate incision into
more difficult to remove unless one end is protruding
 the stroma rather than scratching the epithelium. (Courtesy of
from the cornea (10.106). Splinters usually require
Dr. M. Wyrman, The Ohio State University.]
incising over them so they can be grasped with forceps.
A rare complication of vegetable foreign bodies may be
fungal keratitis.
MASSES IN THE CORNEA AND SCLERA
Clinical signs
Dermoids
Owners usually
present the patient because of
Introduction/etiology
 blepharospasm and epiphora resulting from the dermoid
A dermoid is a choristoma or congenital tumor
hairs. In the dog, most dermoids are unilateral but they
composed of tissues not normally present in that site.
are often bilateral in cattle. The size of the dermoid in the
Dermoids are observed occasionally in all species but are
dog and cat is usually rather small. The most common
most common in the dog and cow. Dermoids are thought
site of corneal dermoids in the dog is at the temporal
to be an inherited trait in some dog breeds, cattle, horses,
limbus (10.108). In cattle, dermoids often involve the
and the Burmese cat295, 296. Dermoids have been
central cornea and may extend onto the third eyelid and
observed occurring with coloboma of a hypoplastic third
conjunctiva (see Dermoids, p.205, 8.45).
eyelid in the dog (Neapolitan Mastiff), cat, and horse
(10.107). A syndrome of iris hypoplasia, limbal dermoid,
 Diagnosis
and cataract was observed in the offspring of one
Diagnosis of a dermoid is usually obvious because hairs
Quarter horse stallion297.
are present on the mass.
CORNEA AND SCLERA
283
10.110
10.111
10.110 Technique for performing a superficial keratectomy. The blade
10.111 Corneal inclusion cyst in a dog. This presents a5 a raised,
is rotated so it is tangential to the cornea and a bluish-white tension
5mooth mass on the cornea that is pink to creamy in color. Most
line will indicate the line of dissection. If the lesion involves the
are superficial and can be dissected with a superficial keratectomy.
limbus, dissection should start from the corneal side to avoid
bleeding during the majority of the dissection. Excess tension on
the cornea will leave tufts of torn fibers rather than incised fibers.
N10.112
A variety of specialty blades can be utilized for the dissection.
Therapy
Dermoids, even when massive, are always superficial and
 can be removed with a superficial keratectomy when the
 animal is old enough to undergo general anesthesia
(10.109, 10.110). Until the animal has attained a size to
make the surgery practical, ointments can be applied to
 protect the cornea.
Pseudotumors
● Epithelial inclusion cysts are rare but they may mimic
a tumor. They are raised, smooth-surfaced lesions that
are filled with a milky fluid (10.111). A central
location on the cornea differentiates the cyst from
10.112 Nodular granulomatous episclerokeratitis (NGESK) in a Collie.
neoplasia. A history of prior trauma or surgery in the
The main differential is a neoplastic process. Both eyes are probably
region months previously is helpful but not 
involved in NGESK and some response will occur with anti-
inflammatory therapy.
performing a superficial keratectomy. If incised during
surgery, the cystic nature is obvious. Most epithelial
inclusion cysts are superficial in the cornea but,
depending on their origin, it is possible to have almost
NGESK usually respond initially to topical or
full-thickness corneal involvement and so require a
subconjunctival steroid therapy but often become
surgical patch of conjunctiva or cornea after excision.
unresponsive with time. Superficial keratectomy
 Nodular granulomatous episclerokeratitis (fibrous 
followed by topical steroid therapy may be curative
histiocytoma) (NGESK) is the most common
but systemic azathioprine has supplanted surgery as the
pseudotumor observed. Collies are predisposed.
therapy of choice302. The recommended dose of
Fibrous histiocytoma is a misnomer as this condition is
 azathioprine is 2 mg/kg q24h until clinical
not considered neoplastic in dogs and cats; it is in
improvement occurs, reducing to 1 mg/kg q24h, then
humans. NGESK manifests as proliferative pink
masses, usually at the temporal limbus of one or both
lesion response and results of weekly hemograms.
eyes {10.112). An arc of lipid is often present in the
Therapy may eventually be terminated after long-term
cornea adjacent to the advancing edge of the lesion.
maintenance therapy303 An alternative to azathoprine
Occasionally, the masses are on the lids, third eyelid,
is cryotherapy or superficial keratectomy followed by
examination, the masses consist of subepithelial
therapy is not used304. Successful primary treatment of
inflammatory cells that range from predominantly
scleritis with oral tetracycline (500 mg q8h) and
lymphocytes and plasma cells to predominantly
niacinamide (500 mg q8h) has been reported30s. The
histiocytes. NGESK is thought to be an immune
frequency of dose can be reduced to qi2-24h, based
mediated disease based on histopathology, breed
on response. This therapy can also be used when anti
predisposition, and response to therapy. The masses in
inflammatories have failed.
284
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEAsE IN VeTeRiNARY MeDICINE
10.113
10.114
10.113 Nodular fascitis (episcleritis) that is invading the peripheral
10.114 Corneal papilloma in an aged Gordon Setter. The papilloma
cornea. The lesion was excised for therapeutic and biopsy purpo5es
wa5s rermoved with a superficial keratectomy.
 and controlled with topical corticosteroid therapy.
●Nodular fascitis: the literature is confusing regarding
10.115
differentiation of this lesion from NGESK or fibrous
histiocytoma. The confusion is compounded by use
Of the synonym nodular episcleritis306,307 Clinically,
nodular fasciitis is often a subconjunctival mass
 attached to the sclera but it may involve the cornea,
third eyelid, and lids {10.113). Unlike fibrous
histiocytoma, the American Cocker Spaniel and
Golden Retriever are predisposed to nodular
fascitis38. The condition may be static or expand
Aaaissassr Aiaa aarueq pue Aipidei
Histopathologically, the two conditions are similar,
with fibroblasts in a lamellar pattern and
mononuclear inflammatory cells. The inflammatory
 cell component is not as severe with nodular fascitis
usually curative but aggressive lesions may require
azathioprine therapy.
10.115 Epibulbar melanocytoma in a young German Shepherd Dog.
Note the arc of lipid in advance of the tumor. The patient was treated
CORNEAL TUMORS
by excision and corneoscleral graft.
Introduction/etiology
Tumors of the cornea in the dog and cat are not
common, unlike in the horse and cow. Most tumors arise
 near the limbus and extend into the cornea.
Dog and cat
often require only surveillance. The leading edge of the
Tumors  such
as  melanomas,
 melanocytomas,
tumor onto the cornea frequently has an arc of lipid in
hemangiomas, hemangiosarcomas, papillomas, and SCC
front of the advancing edge {10.115). Epibulbar
have been observed (see also Conjunctival neoplasia,
melanomas should be differentiated from extension of an
p.201) (10.114). While SCC in the dog is rare, chronic
intraocular melanoma. They are relatively benign and
KCS or chronic keratitis in general may be a predisposing
rarely metastasize314-316. Feline _epibulbar melanoma
factor311-313.
appears to be similar to the dog317.
Epibulbar melanomas are more appropriately termed
melanocytomas, considering the predominant plump
Horse
melanocytes present on histopathologic examination and
SCC is the most common tumor of the eye and adnexa of
their benign nature. They are most common in the GSD.
the horse. It originates from the cornea/limbus in 25-30%
In the young dog, the tumor may invade axially into the
cornea as well as deeper into the iridocorneal angle and
cornea until late in the progression of the condition, and
ciliary body. Some melanocytomas may remain static for
can be excised even when it covers most of the surface area.
long periods of time and, when present in an old dog,
About 16% of cases may be bilateral. The incidence
CORNEA AND SCLERA
285
10.117
10.118
10.116 Corneal squamous cell carcinoma in a 
10.117 Corneal invasion of a limbal
10.118 Typical location of an early squamous
9-year-old Clydesdale. Despite the extensive 
hemangiosarcoma. The prognosis is guarded
cell carcinoma in a cow. Lesions of this size
invasion the lesion remains superficial in most
because of the metatstatic potential;
are easily treated by a variety of modalities.
instances. The patient was treated with a
enucleation is the therapy of choice.
but cryotherapy is probably the most common.
5uperficial keratectomy followed by beta-
radiation therapy.
10.119
found on the equine cornea and limbal region. They can
usually be identified clinically by their vascular
appearance (10.117), While they can be excised
surgically, they have a high potential for metastasis and
the prognosis for the animal's long-term survival is
guarded {18
Angiosarcomas
are
whether more aggressive therapy such as enucleation
improves the prognosis.
Other tumors reported in the cornea of the horse are
melanocytomas, basal cell carcinomas, and mast cell
tumors 326, 327
MOO
 SCC of the eye and adnexa is most frequent in Herefords,
Hereford crosses, Simmentals, and Shorthorns and it has
a significant e
economic  impact. The etiology is
10.119 Extensive squamous cell carcinoma of the cornea. Range cattle
multifactorial with UV light and genetic predisposition
that are not observed at frequent intervals may present at this late
being crucial. The amount of circumocular pigmentation
5tage. The tumor usually prefers to grow outward, but later will invade
has been reported as being associated with neoplasia but
the globe. Enucleation is the most pragmatic therapy at this stage.
a
genetic
predisposition exists,
 independent
of
most common site of origin of SCC lesions (70%), which
then spread over the cornea. Approximately 10% of cases
are bilateral and 30% have multiple lesions. Precursor
increases with age, with a mean age ranging from
lesions to SCC are benign raised white hyperplastic
9-12 years. SCC is more common in neutered horses. In
keratinized plaques and papillomas and about one-third
intact animals, males are twice as commonly affected as
spontaneously regress, although they may recur.
females and geldings are five times more susceptible than
Metastasis is late, with rates of about 5-15%. The
 stallions. Draft horses, Appaloosas, and horses with white,
tumor willinvade the globe in advanced cases (20%) but 
creamello,
, and palomino hair color have a greater
the path of least resistance is across the cornea and
risk318-322
outward (10.118, 10.119)331
SCC has a high recurrence rate {30-42%) but a late
and low metastatic rate {6-1s%). Reports vary as to
Diagnosis
whether the site of origin influences the prognosis: one
Aensn si shouni sou jo Aioisu pue auereadde aul
suggestive of the diagnosis but excisional biopsy.
is
from the third eyelid or limbus; another found 
no
 definitive. Cytology gives numerous spurious results,
relationship
between tumor 
 location and final
usually negative ones. Pseudotumors such as fibrous
outcome322
Hemangiosarcomas are relatively rare and may be
 and by being progressive in nature.
286
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
10.120
Therapy
If progressive, epibulbar melanocytomas should have 
凸
 keratectomy or superficial keratectomy followed by diode
or neodymium:yttrium, aluminum, and garnet ( YAG) laser
 therapy. Lasering is preferred due to ease332, An alternative
to a corneal graft is patching the defect with an
autogenous cartilage and conjunctival patch from the third
eyelid232 Papilomas and SCCs are removed with a
keratectomy. Because of the inability to obtain a wide
excision in the cornea, the surgical bed is often treated
with either cyrotherapy, diathermy/hyperthermia, or beta-
radiation therapy (10.121)333. Success rates as high as
97% have been reported with a double-freeze technique
for treating bovine SCC334 and as high as 80-91% when
excision is carbon dioxide laser ablation337.
0i apio u unodui si saseo jo dn mou anba
recognize and treat promptly any early recurrences. The
author routinely rechecks 3-4 weeks after initial therapy and
 at 3-month intervals for the first year. Suspicious areas are
biopsied and re-treated with cryotherapy under sedation.
 Because of the genetic implications of SCC it is prudent
when discussing prognosis to emphasize control rather
than cure; the likelihood of another separate tumor
developing in the same or contralateral eye with time is
G
H
very high. Early therapy is often very simple.
Medical therapy of SCCs with intralesional cisplaten
 or S-fluorouracil (s-FU) has become a mode of therapy
for lid lesions. Injections are repeated at 2-week intervals
There is no successful therapy for hemangiosarcomas,
10.120 Technique of performing a corneoscleral graft for neoplasia
 although excision followed by cryotherapy may
be
 of the ocular surface. Rermoval of a full-thickness piece of cornea and
recommended. Enucleation is also recommended for
sclera with the neoplasm in-bloc (A, B]. Placement of a free-hand 
hemangiosarcomas if advanced at the time of diagnosis.
fresh or frozen graft of sclera and cornea (C-H). The suturing and
cutting of the graft are performed one side at a time.
Prophylaxis
Owners are advised to avoid pasturing horses until late
afternoon if possible, and for the horse to wear a fly
mask. In cattle, it is important to emphasize the genetic
predisposition and cull affected bulls. It is not
economically feasible to cull large numbers of grade
10.121
 intervals is recommended. Since spontaneous regression 
occurs in a significant number of cattle {33%), smaller
lesions can be observed for growth and, if present,
DISEASES OF THE SCLERA
Staphyloma
A staphyloma is a thinned outpocketing of the fibrous
Woy ase A i oui iaan au Aq pau si iei ouni
congenital maldevelopment or may be acquired.
Congenital staphylomas may occur with Collie eye
Shepherd Dog. The term corneal staphyloma is used for
a prolapsed iris and associated deposition of multiple
10.121 Application of a beta-radiation probe to a keratectomy site
layers of fibrin {10.100). As the fibrin organizes and
after rermoval of a squamous cell carcinoma in a horse. This is a 5oft
matures, a layer of collagenous tissue covers the
radiation that does not penetrate more than 2-3 mm.
protruding iris.
CORNEA AND SCLERA
287
10.122
10.123
10.124
10.122 Intercalary 5taphyloma in a Basset
10.123 Sector episcleritis in an American 
10.124 Diffuse episcleritis in an American 
Hound with chronic glaucoma. Note the
Cocker Spaniel. Note the selective vascular
Cocker Spaniel. Note the thickened episclera.
bluish-black of the uveal tract bulging under
 engorgerment and thickening of the episclera.
 selective conjunctival engorgement, and 
the bulbar conjunctiva.
The adjacent cornea may have a mild edema
 peripheral corneal edema and
with neovascularization.
neovascularization. Because of the breed,
these signs might be confused with glaucoma.
 Intercalary staphyloma is located near the limbus and
10.125 Necrotizing
10.125
has been described as a late complication of limbal
scleritis in a dog 
with Ehrfichio conis
 acquired intercalary staphyloma is chronic glaucoma
infection. The
{10.122) and necrotizing scleritis (10.125).
 condition became
bilateral and
Scleritisfepiscleritis
initially presented
 Fischer342 classified canine scleritis/episcleritis based on
because of a uveitis
clinicopathologic changes into:
with hermorrhagic
 Episcleritis
overtones.
simple
 nodular episclerokeratitis
 Scleritis
 non-necrotizing
 superficial
deep
 necrotizing
Simple episcleritis is common and is recognized by
non-Collie breeds on histopathologic examination. Non-
engorgement of the superficial episcleral vessels and a
Collie forms of nodular episcleritis are characterized by
diffuse or sector thickening of the episcleral space
degenerate  collagen  with   scattered  mononuclear
(10.123, 10.124). The peripheral cornea usually has a
inflammatory  cells. Collie  nodular episcleritis 
is
narrow rim of edema and mild neovascularization. The
characterized by fibroblasts but no degenerative collagen.
condition is benign and is responsive to topical or
Non-necrotizing superficial scleritis tends to be
intralesional corticosteroids, although the drugs may
bilateral and involves the anterior sclera, cornea, and
have to be given for an indefinite period. The bulbar
anterior uvea. It manifests as mildly elevated, red lesions 
vascular hyperemia appears similar to intraocular
in the anterior sclera. The histopathologic changes in the
 diseases such as glaucoma and anterior uveitis, and may
superficial and deep forms are similar, with mononuclear
be confused with conjunctivitis. Differentiating features
inflammation and a few giant cells. It is responsive to
are the thickened episclera under the conjunctiva and
corticosteroid therapy but may relapse.
peripheral corneal edema (10.124) with normal IOP,
Deep non-necrofizing scleritis involves the anterior
unless accompanied by anterior uveitis. An association
 and posterior sclera, uvea, and retina. The condition may
with positive toxoplasmosis titers has been found in
be bilateral and loss of ocular function is possible.
some areas, the significance of which is unknown343. An
Fortunately, this is a rare condition. Corticosteroid
immune panel may have positive antinuclear antibody
therapy is frequently unsuccessful and azathioprine or
(ANA) titers but these are quite variable.
cyclophosphamide therapy should be used.
Nodular  episclerokeratitis  was  described
earlier
Necrotizing scleritis is uncommon; the interior ocular
(Pseudotumors, p.283) and, according to Fischer, fibrous
    pn a s
histiocytoma and nodular fascitis are variations of the
 inflammation. The process may progress rapidly, similar to
same process (10.112, 10.113). Deykin et al,.308 considered
melting
ulcer
of
the
sclera,
.and results
in
nodular episcleritis significantly different in Collies and
subconconjunctival iris prolapse (10.125). The condition
288
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
may occur bilaterally and systemic disease should be
or more conjunctival masses on the sclera. All the dogs
suspected in this form. Ebrlichia canis infection has been
had associated signs of periorbital swelling (23),
 documented in multiple instances of necrotizing scleritis343.
exophthalmos (23), ocular discharge, ocular pain,
 Parasitic granulomas from Onchocerca spp.
have
conjunctival hyperemia, and protrusion of the third
been reported in the dog, involving the episcleral/scleral
eyelid. Episcleral granulomas were present in most cases
regions adjacent to the limbus344346. Reports of three
{1 8/23) and involvement of the anterior or posterior uvea
dogs from the western US suggested the species involved
was a complication in 60%. Peripheral eosinophilia was
was O. lienalis or O. stilesi that normally infect cows,
present in 8/23.
and thus were thought to be aberrant infections. No
Diagnosis was made by finding the parasite either
intraocular involvement was noted in these cases.
 protruding from the granuloma on clinical examination,
 Epibulbar involvement with Oncbocerca spp. appears
or in the tissues obtained from surgical excision of the
to be endemic to Greece, where 23 cases were reported
granulomas. Both live and dead parasites of both sexes
Over a 3-year period346. In the Greek cases, the species
were found in the granulomas. Therapy consisted of
was unique, with most ungulate-infecting species ruled
surgical excision of the granulomas followed by medical
out by various morphologic criteria. The authors
therapy with melarsomine {2.5 mg/kg q24h i.m.) for
postulated that the infective agent was a unique species,
 2 days followed by ivermectin (50 μg/kg. q24h) for
that had not been recognized to date, probably from an
30 days. Initial therapy resulted in increased periocular
unknown wild ungulate.
swelling and pruritis that abated within 1 week. No
Ocular onchocerciasis may be either unilateral or
relapses were noted for at least 1 year.
bilateral. In the Greek study it was characterized by one
REFERENCES
1 Bayer {1914) Augenheikunde. Wilhelm
9 Chan-Ling T, Efron N, Holden B {1985)
16 Marfurt C, Murphy C, Florczak J
Braumuller, Leipzig, pp. 1-630.
Diurnal variation of corneal thickness 
 (2001) Morphology and neurochemistry
 2 Dice P (1981) Veter inary
in the cat. Investigative Ophthatmology
of canine corneal innervation.
Ophthatology. Lea and Febiger.
and Visuat Science 26:102-105.
Investigative Ophthatmology and Visuat
Philadelphia.
10 Petrick S, van Rensburg I {1989)
Science 42:2242-2251.
3 Freeman R {1980) Corneal radius of
Corneal anatomical differences in the 
17 Murphy C, Reid T, Mannis M,
curvature of the kitten and the cat.
aetiology of chronic superfical keratitis.
Iwahashi C {1990) The role of
Investigative Ophthatmotogy and
Journat of Small Animat Practice
 neuropeptides in corneal wound healing.
Visuat Science 19:306-308.
30:449-453.
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
4 Prince J, Diesem C, Eglitis I, Ruskell G
11 Watsky MA, Olsen TW, Edelhauser HF
the American Coltege of Veterinary
[1960) The globe. In: Anatomy and
[1995) Cornea and sclera. In: Duane's
Ophthatmologists 21:81.
Histology of the Eye and Orbit in
Foundations of Clinicat
18 Nishida T, Nakamura M, Ofuji K, Reid
Domestic Animais. CC Thomas.
Ophthatmology. W Tasma, E Jaeger, PL
T, Mannis M, Murphy C {1996)
Springfield, pp. 13-42.
 Kaufman (eds). Lippincott, Williams
Synergistic effects of substance P with
5 Stapleton S, Peiffer R {1979) Specular
and Wilkins, Philadelphia, pp. 1-29.
insulin-like growth factor-1 on epithelial
microscopic observations of the
12 Castoro JA, Bettelheim AA,
migration of the cornea. Journat of
clinically normal canine corneal
Bettellheim FA (1988) Water gradients
Celta tar Physiology 169:159-166.
endothelium. American Journat of
across the bovine cornea. Investigative
19 Shamsuddin A, Nirankari V, Purnell D,
Veterimary Research 42:1803-1804.
Ophthatmotogy and Vistual Science
Chang S {1986) Is the corneal posterior
6 Peiffer R, Devanzo R, Cohen K {1981)
29:963-968.
cell layer truly endothelial?
 Specular microscopic observations of
13 Barrett P, Scagliotti R, Merideth R,
Ophthatmmotogy 93:1298-1303.
clinically normal feline corneal
Jackson P, Alarcon F {1991) Absolute
 20 Van Horn D, Sendele D, Seideman S,
endothelium. Amer ican Journat of
corneal sensitivity and corneal
Buco PJ {1977) Regenerative capacity of 
Veterinary Research 42:854-855.
trigeminal nerve anatomy in normal
the corneal endothelium in rabbits and 
 7 Gilger B, Whitley D, McLaughlin S,
dogs. Progress in Veterinary and
cats. Investigative Ophthatmology
Wright J, Drane J (1991) Canine 
Comparative Ophthatmotogy
16:597-613.
corneal thickness measured by
1:245-254.
21 Befanis P, Peiffer R, Brown D {1981)
ultrasonic pachymetry. American
14 Chan-Ling T (1989) Sensitivity and
Endothelial repair of the canine cornea.
Journat of Veterinary Research
neural organization of the cat cornea.
American Journat of Veterinary
52:1570-1572.
Investigative Ophthatmology and
Research 42:590-595.
8 Moodie K, Hashizume N, Houston D, et
Vistat Seience 30:1075-1082.
22 Waring G, Bourne W, Edelhauser H,
αl. (2001) Postnatal development of
15 Duke-Elder S, Gloster J {1968)
Kenyon K {1982) The corneal
corneal curvature and thickness in the
Physiology of the eye and of vision. In:
endothelium: normal and pathologic
cat. Veterinary Ophthatmology
Systems of Ophthatmotogy. CV
structure and function. Ophthamology
4:267-272
Mosby, St Louis, pp. 337-363.
89:531-590.
CORNEA AND SCLERA
289
23 Martin CL,Anderson BG {1981}
36 Gasset A, Dohlman C {1968) The
50 Gwin R, Cunningham D, Shaver R
Ocular anatomy. In: Veterinary
tensile strength of corneal wounds.
(1983) Posterior polymorphous
Ophthatotogy. K Gelatt (ed). Lea
Archives of Ophthatmology
dystrophy of the cornea in Cocker
 and Febiger, Philadelphia, pp. 12-121.
79:595-602.
 Spaniels: preliminary clinical and
24 Maurice D (1957) The structure and
37 Benezra D (1978) Neovasculogenic
specular microscopic findings.
transparency of the cornea. Jou rnat of
ability of prostaglandins, growth
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting
Physiotogy 136:263-286.
factors, and synthetic
Of the American College of Veterinary
25 Goldman J, Benedek G, Dohlman C,
chemoattractants. American Journat
Ophthaimotogists 14:154-166.
Kravitt B {1968) Structural alterations
of Ophthatmotogy 86:455-461.
51 Ramsey DT, Ewart SL, Render JA,
affecting transparency in swollen
38 Glaser B, D'Amore P, Michels R, et af.
Cook CS, Latimer CA {1999)
human corneas. Investigative
{1980) The demonstration of
Congenital ocular abnormalities of
Ophthaimotogy 7:501-519.
 angiogenic activity from ocular
Rocky Mountain horses. Veterinary
26 Pfister R {1975) The healing of
tissues. Ophthatmology 87:440-446.
Ophthaimology 2:47-59.
 corneal epithelial abrasions in the
39 Lutty G, Liu S, Prendergast R {1983)
52 Ramsey DT, Hauptman JG, Petersen-
rabbit: a scanning electron microscope
Angiogenic lymphokines of activated
Jones SM {1999) Corneal thickness,
Study. Investigative Ophthatmology
T-cell origin. Investigative 
intraocular pressure, and optical
and Visuat Science 14:648-661.
Ophthaimology and Visuat Science
corneal diameter in Rocky Mountain
27 Dua H, Gomes J, Singh A {1994)
24:1595-1601.
horses with cornea globosa or
Corneal epithelial wound healing.
40 Maurice D, Zauberman H,
clinically normal corneas. American
British Journat of Ophthatmology
Michaelson I {1966) The stimulus to
Jotrnat of Veterinary Research
78:401-408.
 neovascularization in the cornea.
60:1317-1321.
28 Kruse F, Chen J, Tsai R, Tseng S
Experimentat Eye Research
53 Ward D, Martin C, Weiser I {1989)
{1990) Conjuntival
5:168-184.
Band keratopathy associated with
transdifferentiation is due to the
41 Fromer C, Klintworth G {1975) An
hyperadrenalcorticism. Joturnat of the
incomplete removal of limbal basal 
evaluation of the role of leukocytes in
Amer ican Animat Hospitat Association
epithelium. Investigative
the pathogenesis of experimentally-
25:583-586.
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
induced corneal vascularization. I.
 54 Rebhun WC, Murphy CJ, Hacker DV
31:1903-1913.
 Comparison of experimental models
{1993) Calcific band keratopathy in
29 Danjo S, Friend J, Thoft R {1987)
of corneal vascularization. Ammerican
horses. Compendium on Continuing
Conjunctival epithelium in healing of
Jou rnal of Pathology 79:537-550.
Education for the Practicing
 corneal epithelial wounds.
42 Epstein R, Stulting R, Hendricks R,
Veterinar ian 15:1402-1409.
Investigative Ophthatmology and
Harris D (1987) Corneal
 55 Doughman DJ, Olson GA, Nolan S,
Visual Science 28:1445-1449.
neovascularization: pathogenesis and
Hajny RG {1969) Experimental band
30 Tseng S, Hirst L, Farazdaghi M,
inhibition. Cornea 6:250-257.
keratopathy. Archives of
Green W (1984) Goblet cell density
43 Casey R {1997) Factors controlling
Ophthatmo togy 81:264-272.
 and vascularization during
ocular angiogenesis. American Journat
56 Taravella MJ, Stulting D, Mader TH,
conjunctival transdifferentiation.
of Ophthatmology 124:521-529.
Weisenthal RW (1994) Calcific band
Investigative Ophthatmology and
44 Roberts SR, Dellaporta A, Winter FC
keratopathy associated with the use of
Visual Science 25:1168-1176.
{1966) The Collie ectasia syndrome:
topical steroid-phosphate preparations.
31 Tseng S, Hirst L, Farazdaghi M,
pathology of eyes of young and adult
Archives of Ophthatmotogy
Green W {1987) Inhibition of
dogs. American Joturnat of
112:608-613.
conjunctival transdifferentiation by
Ophthaimology 62:728-752.
57 Nevyas As, Raber IM, Eagle RC,
topical retinoids. Investigative
45 Molleda JM, Simon M, Martin E,
Wallace IB, Nevyas HJ {1987) Acute
Ophthaimology and Visuat Science
Ginel PJ, Navales M, Lopez R {1994)
band keratopathy following
28:538-542
Congenital corneal opacity resembling
intracameral Visacoat. Archives of
32 Khodadoust A, Silverstein A,
human sclerocornea concurrent with
Ophthatmotogy 105:958-964.
Kenyon K, Dowling J (1968)
 scleral ectasia syndrome in the dog.
58 Dice P {1982) Corneal opacities in the
 Adhesion of regenerating corneal
Veterinary and Comparative
Shetland Sheepdog: preliminary report.
epithelium: the role of basement 
Ophthatmology 4:190-192.
Proceedings of the Annuat Meeting of
membrane. American Journal of
46 Roberts S, Bistner S {1968) Persistent
the American Society of Veterinary
Ophthatmotogy 65:339-348.
pupillary membrane in Basenji dogs.
Ophthatmotogy and Internationat
 33 Robb R, Kuwabara T (1962) Corneal
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
Society of Veterinary Ophthatmology
wound healing. I. The movement of 
Medicat Association 153:533-542.
13:5 8-64.
polymorphonuclear leukocytes into
47 Barnett K, Knight G {1969) Persistent
59 Dice P {1984) Corneal dystrophy in
corneal wounds. Archives of
 pupillary membrane and associated
the Shetland Sheepdog. Proceedings of
Ophthatmology 68:592-642.
defects in the Basenji. Veterinary
the Scientific Meeting of the American
34 Weimar V (1958) The sources of
Record 85:242-249.
Cattege of Veterinary
fibroblasts in corneal wound repair.
48 Bistner S, Rubin L, Roberts S {1971b)
Ophthatmologists 15:241.
Archives of Ophthatmology
A review of persistent pupillary
60 Roth A, Ekins M, Waring G, Gupta L,
60:93-109.
 membranes in the Basenji dog. Journat
Rosenblatt L {1981) Oval corneal
35 Kitano S, Goldman J (1966) Cytologic
of the American Animat Hospitat
opacities in Beagles. IIl. Histochemical
 and histochemical changes in corneal
Association 7:143-157.
demonstration of stromal lipids
wound repair. Archives of
49 Mason T (1976) Persistent pupillary
without hyperlipidemia. Investigative
Ophthaimology 76:345-354.
 membrane in the Basenji. Austratian
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
Veterinary Jounal 52:343-344.
21:95-106.
290
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETeRINARY MeDICINE
61 Veenendaal H (1937) Dystrophia
75 Haskins M, Desnick R, DiFerrant N,
 87 Lassaline M, Andrew S, Brooks D,
corneae adiposa bij de hond. Tijdschr
Jezyk P, Patterson D {1984) β-
 Detrisac C (2002) Histologic analysis of
Diergeneesk 64:913-921.
glucuronidase deficiency in a dog: a
keratectomy specimens from horses
62 Dice P (1974) Corneal dystrophy in the
 model of human
undergoing corneal transplantation for
Airedale. Proceedings of the Scientific
mucopolysaccharidosis VIl. Pediatric
stromal abscess. Proceedings of the
Meeting of the American Callege of
Research 18:980-984.
Scientific Meeting of the American
Veter inary Ophthatnologists 5:80-86.
76 Gwin R, Polack F, Warren J,.
College of Veterinary Ophthatologists
63 Waring G, Muggli F, MacMillan A
Samuelson D, Gelatt K (1982)
33:32.
[1977) Oval corneal opacities in
Primary canine corneal endothelial cell
88 Moore C, Halenda R, Grevan V,
Beagles. Journat of the American
dystrophy: specular microscopic
Collins B {1998) Posttraumatic
Animat Hospitat Association
evaluation, diagnosis, and therapy.
keratouveitis in horses. Equine
13:204-208.
Journat of the American Animat
Veterinary Journat 30:366-372.
64 MacMillan A, Waring G, Spangler W,
Hospitat Association 18:471-479.
89 Hendrix D, Brooks D, Smith P,
Roth A (1979) Crystalline corneal
77 Martin C, Dice P {1982) Corneal
Gelatt K, Miller T {1995) Corneal
opacities in the Siberian Husky. Journat
endothelial dystrophy in the dog.
stromal abscesses in the horse: a review
of the American Veterinary Medicat
Journat of the American Animat
of 24 cases. Equine Veter inary Journat
Assoc iation 175:829-832.
Hospitat Association 18:327-336.
27:440-447.
65 Waring G, MacMillian A, Reveles P
78 Bistner S, Aquirre G, Shively J {1976)
90 Dice P {1977) Intracorneal acid-fast
{1986) Inheritance of crystalline 
Hereditary corneal dystrophy in the
granuloma. Proceedings of the Scientific
corneal dystrophy in Siberian Huskies.
Manx cat: a preliminary report.
Meeting of the American College of
Journat of the American Animat
Investigative Ophthatmology
Veterinary Ophthatmologists 8:91-92.
Hospitat Association 22:655-658.
15:15-26.
91 Malaty R, Togni B (1988) Corneal
66 Crispin S, Barnett K {1983) Dystrophy.
79 Olin D, Tenbroeck T {1973) Corneal
changes in nine-banded armadillos with
degeneration and infiltration of the
dystrophy in a cat. Veterinary
leprosy. Investigative Ophthatmology
canine cornea. Journat of Smafl Animat
Medicine/Small Animat Clinician
ond Visual Science 29:140-145.
Practice 24:63-83.
68:1237-1238.
92 Peiffer R, Jackson W {1979) Mycotic
67 Carrington S {1983) Lipid keratopathy
80 Bistner S, Shaw D, Sartori R (1981)
keratopathy of the dog and cat in the
in a cat. Journat of Smatt Animat
Ocular manifestations of low-level 
southeastern United States: a
Practice 24:495-505.
 phenothiazine administration to cattle.
 prelirminary report Journat of the
68 Sandersleben J (1986)
Cornefl Veterinarian 71:136-143.
American Animat Hospitat Association
 Lipispeicherkrakheit vom typ der 
81 Gratzek A, Calvert C, Martin C,
15:93-97.
wolmanschen erk rankung des
Kaswan R (1993) Corneal edema in
93 Fischer C, Peiffer R {1987) Acid-fast
 menschen beim Fox Terrier.
 dogs treated with tocainide. Progress
 Organisms associated with corneal
Terdrzttiche Praxis 14:253-263.
 in Veterinary and Comparative
opacities in a dog. Proceedings of the
69 Collins L, Munnell J, Lorenz M (1978)
Ophthatmology 3:47-51.
Scientific Meeting of the American
The pathology of feline GM,
82 Walde I (1983) Band opacities. Equine
Cotlege of Veterinary Ophthatmotogists
 gangliosidosis. American Journat of
Veterinary Jou rna 32(Supplement
18:241-243.
Path ology 90:723-730.
2):32.
 94 Karpinski R (1999) Veterinary
70 Cowell K, Jezyk P, Haskins M,
83 Rebhun W (1982) Corneal stromal
Ophthalmologists Listserve.
Patterson D {1976)
abscesses in the horse. Journat of the
95 Ford JG, Huang AJ, Pflugfelder SC,
Mucopoly saccharidosis in a cat.
American Veterinary Medicat
Alfonso EC, Forster RK, Miller D
Journat of the American Veter inary
Association 181:677-679.
{1998) Nontuberculous mycobacterial
Medicat Association 169:334-339.
84 Moore C, Collins K, Fales W (1995)
keratitis in south Florida.
71 Langweiler M, Haskins M, Jezyk P
Antibacterial susceptibility patterns
Ophthatmology 105:1652-1658.
{1978) Mucopolysaccharidosis in a
for microbial isolates associated with
96 Rheins M, Suie T, van Winkle G,
litter of cats. Journat of the American
infectious keratitis in horses: 63 cases
Havener W (1966) Potentiation of
Animat Hospitat Association
(1986-1994). Journal of the American
mycotic ocular infections by drugs.
14:748-751.
Veterinary Medicat Association
British Journat of Ophthatmology
72 Haskins M, Jezyk P, Desnick R,
207:928-933.
50:533-539.
McDonough S, Patterson D (1979)
85 Moore CP, Collins BK, Fales WH,
 97 Schmidt G {1974) Mycotic
Mucopoly saccharidosis in a domestic
Halenda RM {1995) Antimicrobial
keratoconjunctivitis. Veterinary
shorthaired cat: a disease distinct from
agents for treatment of infectious
Medic ine/Small Animat Clinician
that seen in the Siamese cat. Journat of
keratitis in horses. Journal of the
69:1177-1179.
the American Veterinary Medicat
American Veterinary Medicat
98 Miller D, Blue J, Winston S {1983)
Association 175:384-387.
Association 207:855-862.
 Keratomycosis caused by Cladosporitar
73 Breton L, Guerin P, Morin M (1983) A
 86 Michau T, Maggio F, Pizzirani S.
spp.in a cat. Journat of the American
 case of mucopolysaccharidosis VI in a
Davidson M, Gilger B (2002) Findings
Veterinary Medicat Association
cat. Journat of the American Animat
from 16 consecutive cases of
182:1121-1122.
Hospitat Association 19:891-896.
 penetrating keratoplasty for deep
99 Qualls C, Chandler F, Kaplan W,
74 Shull R, Munger R, Spellacy E, Hall C,
 stromal abscess in the horse
Bretschwerdt E, Cho D {1985) Mycotic
Constantopoulos G, Neufeld E {1982)
[2001-2002). Proceedings of the
keratitis in a dog: concurrent
Canine alpha-L-iduronidase deficiency:
Scientific Meeting of the American
Aspergilus spp. and Curvataria spp.
 a model of mucopolysaccharidosis I.
Cotlege of Veterinary
infections. Journat of the American
American Journat of Pathology
Ophthaimologists 33:30.
Veterinary Medicat Association
109:244-248.
186: 975-976.
CORNEA AND SCLERA
291
100 Bernays ME, Peiffer RL {1998) Ocular
111 Mohan M, Gupta S, Vajpayee R,
122 Bedford P, Longstaffe J (1979) Corneal
infections with dematiaceous fungi in
Kalra V, Sachdev M (eds) (1988)
pannus (chronic supericial keratitis) in
two cats and a dog. Journat of the
Management of keratomycosis with
the German Shepherd Dog. Journat of
American Veterinary Medicat
1% silver sulfadiazine: a prospective
Small Animat Practice 20:41-56.
Association 213:507-509.
controlled clinical trial in 110 cases. In:
123 Eichenbaum J, Lavach J, Gould D,
101 Bistner S, Ris R (1979) Clinical
The Cornea: Proceedings of the Wortd
Severin G, Paulsen M, Jones R (1986)
 aspects of mycotic keratitis in the horse.
Congress on the Cornea. III. Raven
Immunohistochemical staining patterns
Cornell Veterinarian 69:364-374.
Press, New York, pp. 495-498.
of canine eyes affected with chronic
102 Moore C, Fales W, Whittington P,
112 Rahman MR, Johnson GJ, Husain R,
superficial keratitis. American Journat
 Bauer L {1983) Bacterial and fungal
Howlader SA, Minassian DC (1998)
of Veterimary Research 47:1952-1955.
isolates from Equidae with ulcerative
Randomised trial of 0.2%
124 Peterhans E (1978) Histologische
keratitis. Journat of the American
chlorhexidine gluconate and 2.5%
unitersuchungen zur pathogenese der
Veterinary Medicat Association
natamycin for fungal keratitis in
keratitis superficialis chronica
182:600-603.
Bangladesh. British Journat of
Ueberreiter des deutschen
103 Massa KL, Murphy CJ, Hartmann FA,
Oph thatmology 82:919-925.
schaferhundes). Sehtweizer Archiv fur
Miller PE, Korsower Cs, Young KM
113 Welch P, Gabal M, Betts D,
Tierheikunde 120:41-45.
{1999) Usefulness of aerobic microbial
Whelan N, Studer M (2000) In vitro
125 Clerc B {1982) Immunological
culture and cytologic evaluation of
analysis of antiangiogenic activity of
reactions in chronic superficial keratitis
corneal specimens in the diagnosis of
fungi isolated from clinical cases of
(pannus): attempts to prove the
infectious ulcerative keratitis in animals.
equine keratomycosis. Veterinary
 presence of immediate type
Journat of the American Veterinary
Ophthatmology 3:145-151.
hypersensitivity in chronic superficial
Medicat Association 215:1671-1674.
114 Andrew S, Brooks D, Smith P,
keratitis in the German Shepherd Dog.
104 O'Day D, Ray W, Head S,
Gelatt K, Chmielewski N, Whittaker C
Proceedings of the Annuat Meeting of
 Robinson R {1984) Influence of the
{1998) Equine ulcerative
the American Society of Veterinary
corneal epithelium on the efficacy of
keratomycosis: visual outcome and
Ophthatmology and Internationat
topical anti fungal agents. Investigative
ocular survival in 39 cases
Society of Veterinary Ophthatmology.
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
{1987-1996). Equine Veterinary
Las Vegas, pp. 54-55.
25:855-859.
Joumat 30:109-116.
126 Rapp E, Kolbl S (1995) Ultrastructural
105 Johns K, O'Day D (1988)
115 Gaarder J, Rebhun W, Ball M,
study of unidentified inclusions in the
 Pharmacologic management of 
Patten V, Sang Shin EH (1998) Clinical
 cornea and iridocorneal angle of dogs
keratomycoses. Sturvey of
 appearances, healing patterns, risk
with pannus. American Jouarnat of
Ophthatmology 33:178-188.
factors, and outcome of horses with
Veterimary Research 56:779-785.
106 Joyce J (1983) Thiabendazole therapy
fungal keratitis: 53 cases {1978-1996).
127 Tellhelm E, Reinacher N, Tellhelm B
of mycotic keratitis in horses. Equine
Journat of the American Veterinary
{1982) Klinische, immunhistologische,
Veterinary Journat Supplement
MedicafAssociation 213:105-112.
und elektronenmikroskopische
2:45-47.
116 Andrew S, Brooks D, Biros H, Denis T,
utersuchungen der keratitis superficials
107 Latimer FG, Colitz CMH,
Cutler T, Gelatt K (2000) Posterior
chronica (Uberreiter) des Deutschen
Campbell NB, Papich MG (2001)
 lamellar keratoplasty for treatment of
schaferhundes. Kleintierpraxis
Pharmacokinetics of fluconazole 
deep stromal abscesses in nine horses.
27:131-144.
following intravenous and oral
Veterinary Ophthatmology 3:99-103.
 128 Anderson L, Keller W, Blanchard G,
administration and body fluid
117 Cello R {1971) Ocular onchocerciasis 
Bull R (1974) Serum immunoglobulin 
concentrations of fluconazole following
in the horse. Equine Veterinary Journat
changes associated with canine
 repeated oral dosing in horses.
3:148-153.
 pigmentary keratitis. Proceedings of the
American Journat of Veterinary
118 Pena M, Roura X, Davidson M
Scientific Meeting of the American
Research 62:1606-1611.
 (2000) Ocular and periocular
College of Veterinary Ophthatmotogists
108 Brooks DE, Andrew SE, Dillavou CL,
 manifestations of leishmaniasis in dogs:
5:102-118.
Ellis G, Kubilis PS (1998) Antimicrobial
105 cases (1993-1998). Veterinary
129 Campbell L, Okuda H, Lipton D,
suspectibility patterns of fungi isolated
Oph thatmology 3:35-41.
Reed C (1975) Chronic superficial
 from horses with ulcerative
119 Slatter D, Lavach J, Severin G,
keratitis in dogs: detection of cellular
keratomycosis. American Journat of
Young S (1977) Uberreiter's syndrome
hy persensitivity. American Journat of
Veterimary Research 59:138-142.
(chronic superficial keratitis) in dogs in
Veterinary Research 36:669-671.
109 Ball M, Rebhun W, Gaarder J (1997)
the Rocky Mountain area: a study of
130 Peiffer R (1978) Chronic superficial
 Evaluation of itraconazole/dimethyl
463 cases. Journal of Smalt Animat
keratitis response of lymphocytes from
sulfoxide ointment for treatment of
Practice 18:757-772.
dogs affected with chronic superficial
keratomycosis in nine horses. Journat of
120 Chavkin MJ, Roberts SM,
keratitis to soluble homologous corneal
the American Veterinary Medicat
Salman MD, Severin GA, Scholten NJ 
antigen. Proceedings of the Scientific
Association 211:199-203.
{1994) Risk factors for development of
Meeting of the American College of
110 Ball M, Rebhun W, Trepanier L,
 chronic superficial keratitis in dogs.
Veterinary Ophthatmologists 9:51-62.
Gaarder J, Schwark W (1997) Cornea]
Journat of the American Veterinary
131 Jackson P, Kaswan R, Merideth R,
concentrations and preliminary
Medical Association 204:1630-1634.
Barrett P {1991) Chronic superficial
toxicological evaluation of an
121 Kupper W (1975) Oberfachenstruktur
keratitis in dogs: a placebo controlled
jtraconazole/dimethyl sulfoxide
ker hornhaut bei der keratitis
trial of topical cyclosporine treatment.
ophthalmic ointment. Journat of
 superficialis chronica (Uberreiter).
Progress in Veterinary and Comparative
Veterinary Pharmacology and
Bertiner und Muenchner Tierarztliche
Ophthatmology 1:269-275.
Therapettics 20:100-104.
Wochenschrift 88:371-374.
292
O pHThAlMIC DiseAse In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
132 Williams D, Hoey A, Smitherman P
145 Pentlarge V, Ris R {1984) Proliferative
159 Khodadoust A, Attarzadeh A {1982)
{1995) Comparison of topical 
keratitis in a cat: a case report. Journat
 Presumed autoimmune corneal
cyclosporine and dexamethasone for
of the American Animat Hospitat
endotheliopathy. American Journat of
the treatment of chronic superficial
Association 20:477-480.
Ophthatmmotogy 93:718-722.
keratitis in dogs. Veterinary Record
146 Bellhorn R, Henkind P (1966)
160 Vannas A, Ahonen R, Makitie J {1983)
137:635-639.
Superficial pigmentary keratitis in the
 Corneal endothelium in herpetic
133 Rickards D, Carter K {1978)
dog. Journat of the American Veterinary
keratouveitis. Archiwes of
Cryosurgery in canine pannus. Canine
Medicat Association 149:173-175.
Ophthatmotogy 101:913-915.
Practice 5:48-50.
147 Rubin L, Koch S (1969) Silver nitrate
161 Holbach L, Fonnt R, Haumann G
134 Holmberg D, Scheiffer H, Parent J
burn of the dog cornea. Journat of the
(1990) Herpes simplex stromal and
{1986) The cryosurgical treatment of
American Veterinary Medicat
endothelial keratitis. Ophthatmology
pigmentary keratitis in dogs: an
Association 155:134-135.
97:722-728.
experimental and clinical study.
148 Pilger I (1983) Pigmentation of the
162 Gratzek A, Kaswan R, Martin C,
Veterinary Sturgery 15:1-4.
cornea: a review and classification.
Champagne E, White S (1995)
135 Kuhns E, Keller W, Blanchard G
Annats of Ophthatmology
Ophthalmic cyclosporine in equine
{1973) The treatment of pannus in
15:1076-1082.
keratitis and keratouveitis: 11 cases.
dogs by use of a corneal-scleral graft.
149 Bicer S, Fuller G, Wilkie D,
Equine Veterinary Joturnat 27:327-333.
Journat of the American Veterinary
Yamaguchi M, Hamlin R (2002)
163 Vesaluoma M, Muller L, Gallar J, et at.
Medicat Association 162:950-952.
Amiodarone-induced keratopathy in
(2000) Effects of Oleoresin capsicum
136 Brightman A, Vestre W, Helper L,
healthy dogs. Veterinary
pepper spray on human corneal
Godshalk C {1979) Chronic
Ophthatmotogy 5:35-38.
morphology and sensitivity. Investigative
eosinophilic keratitis in the cat. Fetine
150 Stiles J, Carmichael P, Kaswan R,
Ophthatmology and Vistuat Science
Practice 9:21-24.
Bounous D, Moore A, Hirsh S (1995)
41:2138-2147.
137 Collins K, Swanson J,
Keratectomy for corneal pigmentation
164 Carrington SD, Bedford PG, Guillon J,
MacWilliams P {1986) Eosinophilic
in dogs with cyclosporine responsive
Woodward EG (1989) Biomicroscopy of 
 keratitis and keratoconjunctivitis in a
 chronic keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
the tear film: the tear film of the
cat. Modern Veterinary Practice
Veterinary and Comparative
Pekingese dog. Veterinary Record
67:32-35.
Ophthatmotogy 5:25-33.
124:323-328.
138 Paulsen M, Lavach J, Severin G,
151 Carmichael L (1965) The pathogenesis
165 Johnson S (1998) Neurotrophic
 Eichenbaum J {1987) Feline
of ocular lesions of infectious canine 
corneal defects after diode laser
eosinophilic keratitis: a review of 15
hepatitis. Pathologica Veterinarid
cycloablation. American Journat of
clinical cases. Journal of the Ammerican
2:344-359.
Ophthatmmology 126:725-727.
Animat Hospitat Association
152 Carmichael L, Medic B, Bistner S,
166 Clerc B, Jegou J (1996) Superficial
23:63-69.
Aguirre G {1975) Viral-antibody
punctate keratitis. Canine Practice
139 Morgan R, Abrams K, Kern T
complexes in canine adenovirus type 1
21:6-11.
{1996) Feline eosinophilic keratitis: a
{CAV-1) ocular lesions: leukocyte
167 Roberts S {1965) Superficial indolent
retrospective study of 54 cases
chemotaxis and enzyme release. Cornell
ulcer of the cornea in Boxer dogs.
{1989-1994). Veterinary and
Veter marian 65:331-351.
Journat of Smalt Animat Practice
Comparative Ophthatmology
153 Curtis R, Barnett K (1973) The ocular
6:111-115.
6:131-134.
lesions of infectious canine hepatitis.
168 Gelatt K, Samuelson D {1982)
140 Nasisse M, Glover T, Moore C,
Journat of Smalt Animat Practice
 Recurrent corneal erosions and
Weigler B {1998) Detection of feline
14:737-745.
epithelial dystrophy in the Boxer dog.
herpesvirus-1 DNA in corneas of cats
154 Curtis R, Barnett K {1973) The ocular
Journat of the American Animat
with eosinophilic keratitis or corneal
lesions of infectious canine hepatitis. I.
Hospitat Association 18:453-460.
sequestrum. American Journat of
Clinical features. Journat of Smalfl
169 Kirschner S, Niyo Y, Covitz D,
Veterinary Research 59:856-858.
Animat Practice 14:375-389.
Betts D {1989) Idiopathic persistent 
141 Ramsey DT, Whiteley HE, Gerding PA,
155 McNeil J, Kaufman H (1979) Local
corneal erosions: clinical and
Valdez RA {1994) Eosinophilic
antivirals in a herpes simplex stromal
pathological findings in 18 dogs.
keratoconjunctivitis in a horse. Journat
keratitis model. Archives of
Journat of the American Animat
of the American Veterinary Medicat
Ophthatmnology 97:727-729.
Hospitat Association 25:84-90.
Association 205:1308-1311.
156 Wander A, Centifanto Y, Kaufman H
170 Murphy C, Marfurt C,
142 Yamagata M, Wilkie DA, Gilger BC
{1980) Strain specificity of clinical
McDermott A, et af. (2001)
{1996) Eosiniphilic
isolates of herpes simplex virus.
Spontaneous chronic corneal epithelial
keratoconjunctivitis in seven horses.
Archives of Ophthatmology
defects (SCCED) in dogs: clinica]
Journat of the American Veterinary
98:1458-1461.
features, innervation, and effect of 
Medicat Association 209:1283-1286.
157 Nasisse M, Guy J, Davidson M,
topical SP, with or without IGF-1.
143 Prasse K, Winston SM (1996)
Sussman W, Fairley N (1989)
Investigative Ophthatmology and
 Cytology and histopathology of feline
Experimental ocular herpesvirus
Visual Science 42:2252-2261.
eosinophilic keratitis. Veterinary and
infection in the cat. Investigative
171 Bentley E, Abrams G, et af. (2001)
Comparative Ophthaimology
Ophthatmology and Vistuat Science
Morphology and
6:74-81.
30:1758-1768
jmmunohistochemistry of spontaneous
144 Bedford P, Cotchin E {1983) An
158 Green W, Zimmerman L (1967)
chronic epithelial defects (SCCED) in
unusual chronic keratoconjunctivitis
 Granulomatous reaction to Descemet's
dogs. Investigative Ophthatmology
in the cat. Journat of Small Animat
membrane. Amer ican Journat of
and Visuat Science 42:2262-2269.
Practice 24:85-102.
Ophthatmology 64:555-558.
CORNEA AND SCLERA
293
172 Krahenmann A {1976) Die
184 Miller W (1996) Use of polysulfated
196 Pickett JP (1995) Treating persistent
rezidivierende hornhaut-erosion des
glycosoaminoglycans in treatment of
corneal erosions with a cross-hatch
Boxers. Schtweizer Archiv fu!
 persistent corneal erosions in dogs: a
keratotomy technique. Veterinary
Terheitkunde 118:87-97.
pilot clinical study. Veterinary
Medicine 90:561-572.
173 Scherrer K (1983) Histologische
Medicine 91:916-922.
197 Bistner S, Carlson J, Shively J.
untersuchungen zur pathologie der
185 Willeford K, Miller W, Abrams K,
Scott F {1971) Ocular manifestations 
 erosio recidiva corneae des Deutschen
Vaughns B {1998) Modulation of
of feline herpesvirus infection. Journat
Boxers. Sehtweizer Archiv fur
 proteolytic activity associated with
of the American Veterinary Medicat
Tierheilkunde 125:337-344.
persistent corneal ulcers in dogs.
Association 159:1223-1237.
174 Huang A, Tseng S {1991) Corneal
Veterinary Ophthatmology 1:5-8.
198 Roberts S, Dawson C, Coleman J,
 epithelial wound healing in the
186 Schmidt G, Blanchard G, Keller W
Togni B {1972) Dendritic keratitis in a
 absence of limbal epithelium.
{1977) The use of hydrophilic contact
cat. Journat of the American
Investigative Ophthatmology and
lenses in corneal diseases of the dog
Veterinary Medicat Association
Vistat Science 32:96-105.
and cat: a preliminary report. Journaf
161:285-289.
175 Good K, Maggs D, Hollingsworth
of Small Animat Practice 18:773-777.
199 Nasisse MP, Davis BJ, Guy JS,
S, Scagliotti R, Nelson R (2003)
187 Morgan R, Bachrach A {1984) An 
Davidson MG, Sussman W (1992)
Corneal sensitivity in dogs with
 evaluation of soft contact lens usage
Isolation of feline herpesvirus-1 from
diabetes mellitus. American Journat
in the dog and cat. Journat of the
the trigeminal ganglia of acutely and
of Veterinary Research 64:7-11.
American Animat Hospital
chronically infected cats. Journat of
176 Van der Woerdt A, Olivero D
Association 20:885-888.
Veterinary Internat Medicine
{1999) Nonhealing corneal ulcers in 
188 Wi1liams R, Buckley R (1985)
6:102-103.
cats: 29 cases. Proceedings of the
Pathogenesis and treatment of
200 O'Brien W, Taylor J (1989) The
Scientific Meeting of the American
 recurrent erosion. British Journat of
isolation of herpes simplex virus from
College of Veterinary
Ophthatmology 69:435-437.
rabbit corneas during latency.
Ophthatmotogists 30:84.
189 Ali Z, Insler M {1986) A comparison
Investigative Ophthatmology and
177 Rebhun W (1983) Chronic corneal
 of therapeutic bandage lenses,
Visuat Science 30:357-364.
epithelial erosions in horses.
tarsorrhaphy, and antibiotic and
201 Cook S, Hill J (1991) Herpes simplex
Veterinary Medicine/Small Animat
 hypertonic saline on corneal epithelial
virus: molecular biology and the
Clinician 78:1635-1638.
wound healing. Annats of
possibility of corneal latency. Sturvey of
178 Cooley P, Wyman M (1986)
Ophthatmotogy 18:22-24.
Ophthatmology 36:140-148.
Indolent-like corneal ulcers in three
190 Madigan M, Holden B (1992)
202 Stiles J, McDermott M, Bigsby D,
horses. Journat of the American
Reduced epithelial adhesion after 
et at. (1997) Use of nested polymerase
Veterinary Medicat Association
extended contact lens wear correlates
chain reaction to identify feline
188:295-297.
with reduced hermidesmosome density
herpesvirus in ocular tissue from
179 Hakanson NE, Dubielzig RR (1994)
in cat cornea. Investigative
clinically normal cats and cats with
Chronic superficial corneal erosions
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
 corneal sequestra or conjunctivitis.
with anterior stromal sequestrum in
33:314-323.
American Journat of Veterinary
three horses. Veterinary and
191 Aquavella J, Del Cerro M, Musco P,
Research 58:338-342.
Comparative Ophthatmotogy
Ueda S, Depaolis M {1987) The effect
203 Maggs DJ, Lappin MR, Reif JS, et at.
4:179-183.
of a collagen bandage lens on corneal
(1999) Evaluation of serologic and 
180 Phan T, Foster C, Boruchoff A,
wound healing: a preliminary report.
viral detection methods for diagnosing
Zagachin L, Colvin R {1987) Topical
Ophthatmic Surgery 18:570-573.
feline herpesvirus-1 infection in cats
fibronectin in the treatment of
192 Morgan R, Abrams K {1994) A
with acute respiratory tract or chronic
 persistent corneal epithelial defects
comparison of six different therapies
disease. Journat of the American
and trophic ulcers. American Journaf
for persistent corneal erosions in dogs
Veterinary Medical Association
of Ophthatmology 104:494-501.
and cats. Veterinary and Comparative
214:502-507.
181 Tsubota K, Goto E, Shimmura S,
Ophthaimotogy 4:38-43.
204 Cello R {1971) Clues to differential
Shimazaki J {1999) Treatment of
193 Stanley RG, Hardman C,
diagnosis of feline respiratory
persistent corneal epithelial defect by
Johnson BW (1998) Results of grid
infections. Journat of the American
autologous serum application.
keratotomy, superficial keratectomy.
Veterinary Medicat Association
Ophthatmatogy 106:1984-1989.
and debridement for the management
158:968-973.
182 Kirschner S, Brazzell R, Stern M,
 of persisten corneal erosions in 92
205 Potkin J, Reynaud A, Okumoto M
Baird L {1991) The use of topical
dogs. Veterinary Ophthatmology
{1971) Cytologic study of herpetic
epidermal growth factor for
1:233-238.
keratitis. Archives of Ophthatmology
treatment of nonhealing corneal
194 Hsu J K, Rubinfeld R, Barry P,
85:597-599.
erosions in dogs. Jaurnat of the
 Jester J {1993) Anterior stromal
206 Nasisse MP, Guy JS, Davidson MG,
American Animat Hospitat
 pucture: immunohistochemical studies
Sussman W, De Clercq E {1989) In
Association 27:499-452.
in human corneas. Archives of
vitro susceptibility of feline
183 Kitazawa T, Kinoshita S, Fujita K,
Ophthaimology 111:1057-1063.
herpesvirus-1 to vidarabine,
et αf. {1990) The mechanism of
195 Champagne E, Munger R (1992)
idoxuridine trifluridine, acyclovir, or
 accelerated corneal epithelial healing
 Multiple superficial punctate
bromovinyldeoxyuridine. American
by human epidermal growth factor.
keratectomies for the treatment of
Journat of Veterinary Research
Investigative Ophthatmology and
 recurrent erosions in dogs. Journat of
50:158-160.
Vistat Science 31:1773-1778.
the American Animat Hospitat
Association 28:213-216.
294
OpHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
207 Owens J, Nasisse M, Tadepalli S,
219 Tham K, Studdert M (1987)
 231 Schmidt V {1977) Herdformige
 Dorman D (1996) Pharmacokinetics of
 Response of cats to feline herpesvirus
hornhautnedrose der katze.
acyclovir in the cat. Journat of
type 1 infection. Veterinary Record
Manatshefte fiur Veterindrmedizin
puo Csojooouiqd Ainuiaa
120:321-326.
32:493-495.
Therapeutics 19:488-490.
220 August J (1990) The control and
232 Blogg J, Dutton A, Stanley R (1989)
208 Nasisse MP, Dorman DC, Jamison
 eradication of feline upper
Use of third eyelid grafts to repair full-
KC, Weigler BJ, Hawkins EC,
respiratory infections in cluster
thickness defects in the cornea and
Stevens JB {1997) Effects of
populations. Veterinary Medicine
sclera. Journat of the American
valacyclovir in cats infected with feline
85:1002-1006.
Animat Hospitat Association
herpesvirus-1. American Journat of
221 Hickman J, Reubel G, Hoffman D,
25:505-512.
Veter imary Research 58:1141-1144.
Morris J, Rogers Q, Pedersen {1994) An 
233 Blogg J, Stanley R, Dutton A (1989)
209 Group THEDS (1998) Acyclovir for
epizootic of feline herpesvirus type 1 in
Use of conjunctival pedicle grafts in
the prevention of recurrent herpes
a large specific pathogen-free cat colony
the management of feline keratitis
simplex virus eye disease. Netu
 and attempts to eradicate the infection
nigrum. Journat of Smatt Animat
Engtand Journat of Medicine
by identification and culling of carriers.
Practice 30:678-684.
339:300-306.
Laboratory Animat 28:320-329.
234 Gimenez M, Farina I {1998)
210 Weiss R {1989) Synergistic antiviral
222 Matthew A, Handscombe M (1983)
 Lamellar keratoplasty for the
activities of acyclovir and recombinant
Superficial keratitis in the horse:
treatment of feline corneal
human leukocyte (alpha) interferon on
 treatment with the antiviral drug
sequestrum. Veterinary
feline herpesvirus replication. American
idoxuridine. Equine Veterinary Joturnat
Ophthatmology 1:163-166.
Jotrnat of Veterinary Research
 Supplement 2:29-31.
235 Glover TL, Nasisse MP,
50:1672-1677.
223 Collinson P, O'Rielly J, Ficorilli N,
Davidson MG (1994) Acute bullous
211 Stiles J, Townsend WM, Rogers QR,
Studdert M (1994) Isolation of equine
keratopathy in the cat. Veterinary and
Krohne SG {2002) Effect of oral
herpesvirus type 2 {equine gamma
Comparative Ophthatmology
administration of L-lysine on
herpesvirus-2) from foals with
4:66-70.
conjunctivitis caused by feline
keratoconjunctivitis. Journat of the
236 Clark AF {1998) New discoveries on
herpesvirus in cats. American Journat
American Veterinary Medicat
the roles of matrix metalloproteinases
of Veterinary Research 63:99-103.
Association 205:329-331.
in ocular cell biology and pathology.
212 Maggs D, Nasisse M, Kass P (2003)
224 Thein P, Bohm D {1976) Aeiologie und
Investigative Ophthaimotogy and
 Efficacy of oral supplementation with
kinik einer virsubedingten
Vistat Science 39:2514-2516.
L-lysine in cats latently infected with
keratokonjunktivitis beim fohlen.
237 Gray L, Kreger A (1975) Rabbit
feline herpesvirus. American Journat of
Zentratbtatt der Veterinarmedzin
 corneal damage produced by
Veter inary Research 64:37-42.
23:507-519.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection.
213 Maggs D, Collins K, Thorne J.
225 Thein P {1978) The association of
Infection and Immunity 12:419-432.
Nasisse M (2000) Effects of L-lysine
EHV-2 infection with keratitis and
238 Matsumoto K, Shams NB,
 and L-arginine on in vitro replication
research on the occurrence of equine
Hanninen LA, Kenyon KR (1993)
of feline herpesvirus type 1. American
 coital exanthema (EHV-3) of horses in
Cleavage and activation of corneal
Journat of Veterinary Research
Germany. In: Equine Infectious Diseases
matrix metalloproteases by
61:1474-1478.
IV. J Bryans, H Gerber (eds). Veterinary
Pseudomonas aeruginosa proteases.
214 Ostler H, Pavan-Langston D, Abelson 
Publications, Princeton, p. 33-41.
Investigative Ophthaimotogy and
 M {1978) Glucocorticoid therapy in
226 Souri E {1975) The feline corneal
Vistal Science 34:1945-1953.
ocular herpes simplex. Survey of
migrum. Veterinary Medicine/Small
239 Steuhl K, Doring G, Henni A,
Ophthatmology 23:35-48.
Animal Clinician 70:531-534.
Thiel H, Botzenhart K (1987)
 215 Nasisse M {1991) Anti-inflammatory
227 Davidson HJ, Gerlach JA, Bull RW
Relevance of host-derived and
 therapy in herpesvirus
{1992) Determination of protein
bacterial factors in Pseudomonas
keratoconjunctivitis. Progress in
concentrations and their molecular
deruginosa corneal infections.
Veter inary and Comparative
weight in tears from cats with normal
Investigative Ophthaimotogy and
Ophthatmology 1:63-65.
 corneas and cats with corneal
Visuat Science 28:1559-1568.
216 Boisjoly H, Woog J, Pavan-Langston D,
sequestrum. American Journat of
240 Moreira H, McDonnell P, Fasano A,
 Park N {1984) Prophylactic topical
Veterinary R esearch 53:1756-1759.
Silverman D, Coates T, Sevanian A
cyclosporine in experimental herpetic
228 Knecht C, Schiller A, Small E {1966)
{1991) Treatment of experimental
stromal keratitis. Archives of
Focal degeneration of the cornea with
Pseudomonas keratitis with cyclo-
Ophthatmmology 102:1804-1807.
 sequestration in a cat. Journat of the
oxygenase and lipox ygenase
 217 Meyers-Elliot R, Chitjian P, Billups C
American Veterinary Medicat
inhibitors. Ophthatmotogy
{1987) Effects of cyclosporine A on
Association 149:1192-1193.
98:1693-1697.
 clinical and immunological parameters
229 Gelatt K, Peiffer R, Stevens J {1973)
241 McLaughlin S, Brightman A,
in herpes simplex keratitis.
Chronic ulcerative keratitis and
Helper L, Manning J, Tomes J (1983)
Investigative Ophthatmoiogy and
 sequestrum in the domestic cat.
Pathogenic bacteria and fungi
Visuat Science 28:1170-1180.
Joturnat of the American Animat
associated with extraocular disease in
218 Weigler B, Guy J, Nasisse M,
Hospitat Association 9:204-213.
the horse. Journat of the American
Hancock, Sherry B (1997) Effect of a
 230 Formston C, Bedford P, Staton J,
Veterinary Medicat Association
live attenuated intranasal vaccine on
Tripathi R {1974) Corneal necrosis in
182:241-242.
latency and shedding of feline
the cat. Journat of Smatl Anima!
242 Perry L, Brinser H, Kolondner H
 herpesvirus-1 in domestic cats.
Practice 15:19-25.
[1982) Anaerobic corneal ulcers.
Archives of Virotogy 142:2389-2400.
Ophthaimotogy 89:636-641.
CORNEA AND SCLERA
295
243 Rebhun WC, Cho JO, Gaarder JE,
254 Peiffer R, Gelatt K, Gwin R {1977)
 266 Killinger A, Valentine D, Mansfield M
Peek SF, Patten VH (1999) Presumed
Tarsoconjunctival pedicle grafts for
{1977) Economic impact of infectious
clostridial and aerobic bacterial
deep corneal ulceration in the dog and
bovine keratoconjunctivitis. Veterinary
infections of the cornea in two horses.
cat. Journat of the American Animat
Medic ine/Small Animat Clinician
Journal of the American Veterinary
Hospitat Association 13:387-391.
72:618-620.
Medicat Association 214:1519-1522.
255 Hakanson N, Merideth R (1987)
267 Wilcox G {1968) Infectious bovine
244 Da Silva Curiel J, Murphy C, Jang S,
Conjunctival pedicle grafting in the
keratoconjunctivitis: a review.
Bellhorn R (1990) Nutritionally
treatment of corneal ulcers in the dog
Veterinary Btlletin 38:349-360.
variant streptococci associated with
and cat. Journat of the American
268 Pugh G, Hughes D (1971) Infectious
corneal ulcers in horses: 35 cases
Animat Hospitat Association
 bovine keratoconjunctivitis induced by
{1982-1988). Journat of the American
23:641-648.
different experimental methods. Cornell
Veterinary Medicat Association
256 Scagliotti R {1988) Tarsoconjunctival
Veterinarian 61:23-45.
197:624-626.
island graft for the treatment of deep
 269 Nayar P, Saunders J {1975) Infectious 
245 Hyndiuk R, Skorich D, Davis S,
corneal ulcers, descemetoceles, and
bovine keratoconjunctivitis. I.
Sarff L, Divine K, Burd E {1988)
perforations in 35 dogs and six cats.
Experimental production. Canadian
 Fortified antibiotic ointment in
Seminars in Veterinary Medicine and
Journat of Comparative Medicine
bacterial keratitis. American Journat
Surgery 3:69-76.
39:20-31.
of Ophthatmology 105:239-243.
257 Parshall C {1973) Lamellar
270 Hughes D, Pugh G (1970) A five-year
246 Davis S, Sarff L, Hyndiuk R {1979)
corneal-scleral transposition. Journa!
study of infectious bovine
Comparison of therapeutic routes in
of the American Animat Hospitat
keratoconjunctivitis in a beef herd.
ex perimental Pseudomonas keratitis.
Association 9:270-277.
Journat of the American Veterinary
American Journat of Ophthatmology
 258 Brightman A, McLaughlin S.
Medicat Association 157:443-454.
87:710-716.
 Brogdon J (1989) Autogenous
271 Vogelweid C, Miller R, Berg J.
247 Leibowitz H, Ryan W, Kupferman A
lamellar corneal grafting in dogs.
Kinden D (1986) Scanning electron
{1981) Route of antibiotic
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
microscopy of bovine corneas irradiated
administration in bacterial keratitis.
Medical Association 195:469-475.
with sun lamps and challenge exposed
Archives of Ophthatmotogy
259 Hacker D {1991) Frozen corneal
with Moraxela bovis. American Journat
99:1420-1423.
grafts in dogs and cats: a report on 19
of Veterimary Research 47:378-384.
248 Sweeney CR, Irby NL (1996) Topical
cases. Journat of the American Animat
272 Kopecky K, Pugh G, Hughes D (1980)
treatment of Pseu domonas spp.
Hospitat Association 27:387-398.
Wa velength of ultraviolent radiation 
infected corneal ulcers in horses: 70
260 Hansen PA, Guandalini A (1999) A
that enhances onset of clinical infectious
cases {1977-1994). Journat of the
retrospective study of 30 cases of
bovine keratoconjunctivitis. Armer ican
American Veterinary Medicat
frozen lamellar corneal graft in dogs
Journat of Veterinary Research
Association 209:954-957.
and cats. Veterinary Ophthatmology
41:1412-1415.
 249 Bohigian G, Valenton M,
2:233-241.
273 Pugh G, McDonald T, Kopecky K,
Okumoto M, Caraway B(1974)
261 Lewin GA (1999) Repair of a full-
Kvasnicka W (1986) Infectious bovine
Collagenase inhibitors in
thickness corneoscleral defect in a
keratoconjunctivitis: evidence for
 Pseudomonas keratitis. Archives of
 German Shepherd Dog using porcine
 genetic modulation of resistance in
Ophthaimology 91:52-56.
small intestinal submucosa. Journat of
 purebred Hereford cattle. American
250 Levy J, Katz H {1990) Effect of 
Smatl Animat Practice 40:340-342.
Journat of Veterinary Research
systemic tetracycline on progression of
262 Andrade AL, Laus JL, Figueiredo F,
47:885-889.
 Pseudomonas deruginosa keratitis in
Batista CM (1999) The use of
274 Pugh G, Hughes D, Packer R (1970)
the rabbit. Annais of Ophthatmotogy
 preserved equine renal capsule to
 Bovine infectious keratoconjunctivitis:
22:179-183.
repair lamellar corneal lesions in
interactions of Moraxefla bovis and
251 Vygantas K, Janicki J, Whitley R,
normal dogs. Veterinary
infectious bovine rhinotracheitis virus.
Wright J, Dillon A, Tillson D {2001)
Ophthatmology 2:79-82.
American Journat of Veterinary
In vitro inhibition of matrix
263 Barros PS, Safatle AM, Malerba TA,
Research 31:653-662.
metalloproteinases in experimentally-
 Burnier M (1995) The surgical repair
275 Webber J, Selby L (1981) Risk factors
induced corneal ulcers. Proceedings of
of the cornea of the dog using
related to the prevalence of infectious
the Scientific Meeting of the American
pericardium as a keratoprosthesis.
bovine keratoconjunctivitis. Journat of
College of Veterinary
Brazilian Journat of Veterinary
the American Veterinary Medicat
Ophthaimologists 32:34.
Research and Animat Science
Association 179:823-826.
252 Peruccio C, Bosio P, Cornaglia E
32:251-255.
276 George L, Ardans A, Mihalyi J.
{1983) Indications and limits of the
264 Barros PS, Garcia JA, Laus JL,
Guerra R (1988) Enhancement of
cyanoacrylate tissue adhesive in
Ferreira AL, Gomes TL {1998) The
infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis
corneal ulcers and perforations.
 use of xenologous ammiotic membrane
by modified live infectious bovine
Proceedings of Scientific Meeting of
to repair canine corneal perforation
rhinotracheitis virus vaccine. Ammerican
the American College of Veterinary
 created by penetrating keratectomy.
Journat of Veterinary Research
Ophthatmotogists 14:135-152.
x8opouogdo kiouiann
49:1800-1806.
253 Conn H, Kenneth B, Langer R,
1:119-123.
277 Pugh G, Hughes D, Schulz V (1976)
Gage J (1980) Stromal vascularization 
 265 Pischel D (1930) Tattooing of the
 Infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis:
 prevents corneal ulceration.
cornea with gold and platinum 
experimental induction of infection in
Investigative Ophthaimotogy and
chloride. Archives of Ophthatmology
calves with mycoplasm and Moraxella
Visuat Science 19:362-370.
3:176-181.
bovis. American Journat of Veterinary
Research 37:493-495.
296
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETeRINARY MeDICINE
278 Rosenbusch R, Ostle A {1986)
289 Hopkins J, Stephenson E, Storz J,
301 Blogg R (1977) Proliferative
Mycoplasma bovoculi infection
Pierson R {1973) Conjunctivitis
keratoconjunctivitis in the Collie.
increases ocular colonization by
associated with chlamydial polyarthritis
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
Moraxela ovis in calves. American
in lambs. Journat of the American
the American Coltege of Veterinary
Journat of Veterinary Research
Veterinary Medicat Association
Ophthatmotogists 8:89-90.
47:1214-1216.
163:1157-1160.
 302 Paulsen M, Lavach J, Synder S, Severin 
279 Kopecky K, Pugh G, McDonald T
 290 Egwu G, Faull W, Bradbury J,
G, Eichenbaum J (1987) Nodular
{1986) Infectious bovine
Clarkson M (1989) Ovine infectious 
granulomatous episclerokeratitis in
keratoconjunctivitis: contact
keratoconjunctivitis: a microbiological
dogs: 19 cases {1973-1985). Journat of
transmission. American Journat of
study of clinically unaffected and
the American Veterinary Medicat
Veterinary Research 47:622-624.
affected sheep's eyes with special
Association 190:1581-1587.
280 Abeynayake P, Cooper B (1989) The
reference to Mycopiasma confunctivae.
303 Latimer C, Wyman M, Szymanski C
concentration of penicillin in bovine 
Veterinary Record 125:253-256.
(1983) Azathioprine in the management
conjunctival sac fluid as it pertains to
291 Grahn BH, Szentimrey D, Pharr JW,
of fibrous histiocytoma in two dogs.
the treatment of Moraxela bovis
Farrow Cs, Fowler D {1995) Ocular
Journat of the American Animat
infection. I. Subconjunctival injection.
and orbital porcupine quills in the dog:
Hospitat Association 19:155-158.
Journat of Veterinary Pharmacotogy
a review and case series. Canadian
304 Wheller C, Blanchard G, Davidson H
and Therap eutics 12:25-30.
Veterinary Journat 36:488-493.
{1989) Cryosurgery for treatment of
281 Smith J, George L {1985) Treatment
292 Davidson M, Nasisse M, Jamieson V.
recurrent proliferative
of acute ocular Moraxeffa bovis
English R, Olivero D (1991) Traumatic
keratoconjunctivitis in five dogs. Journa!
infections in calves with a parenterally
anterior lens capsule disruption. Journa!
of the American Veterinary Medicat
administered long-acting
of the American Animat Hospitat
Association 195:354-357.
oxytetracycline formulation. American
Association 27:410-414.
305 Rothstein E, Scott DW, Ris RC (1997)
Jotrnat of Veterinary Research
293 Chmielewski NT, Brooks DE,
Tetracycline and niacinamide for the
46:804-807.
 Smith PJ, Hendrix DV, Whittaker C.
treatment of sterile
282 Angelos JA, Dueger EL, George LW,
Gelatt K {1997) Visual outcome and
 pyogranuloma/granuloma syndrome in
et af. (2000) Efficacy of florfenicol for
Ocular survival following iris prolapse in
a dog. Journat of the American Animat
treatment of naturally occurring
the horse: a review of 32 cases. Equine
Hosp itat Association 33:540-543.
 infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis.
Veterinary Journat 29:31-39.
306 Peiffer R, Gelatt K, Gwin R {1976)
Journat of the American Veterinary
294 Lavach JD, Severin GA, Roberts SM
Proliferative episcleritis in the dog.
Medicat Association 216:62-64.
{1984) Lacerations of the equine eye: a
Veterinary Medicine/Small Animat
283 Allen L, George L, Willitis N (1995)
review of 48 cases. Journat of the
Clinician 71:1273-1278.
 Effect of penicillin or penicillin and
American Veterinary Mediciat
 307 Schadler H {1985) Azathioprine in
dexamethasone in cattle with
Association 184:1243-1248.
treatment for ocular nodular episcleritis.
infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis.
295 Barkyoumb S, Leipold H (1984)
Veterinary Medicine 80:64-67.
Journat of the American Veterinary
Nature and cause of bilateral ocular
308 Deykin AR, Guandalini A, Ratto A
Medical Association 206:1200-1203.
dermoids in Hereford cattle. Veterinary
{1997) A retrospective histopathologic
284 Anderson J, Gelatt K, Farnsworth R
Pathology 21:316-324.
study of primary episcleral and scleral
{1976) A modified membrana
296 Christmas R (1992) Surgical correction
inflammatory disease in dogs. Veterinary
nictitans flap technique for the
of congenital ocular and nasal dermoids
amd Comparative Ophthaimology
treatment of ulcerative keratitis in
and third eyelid gland prolapse in
7:245-248.
cattle. Journat of the American
related Burmese kittens. Canadion
309 Bellhorn R, Henkind P {1967) Ocular
Veterinary Medicat Association
Veterinary Journat 33:265-266.
nodular fascitis in a dog. Journat of the
168:706-708.
297 Joyce JR, Martin J, Storts RW, Skow L
American Veterinary Medicat
285 Lehr C, Jayappa H, Goodnow R
{1990) Iridal hypoplasia (aniridia)
Association 150:212-213.
{1985) Controlling bovine
accompanied by limbic dermoids and
 310 Gwin R, Gelatt K, Peiffer R {1977)
keratoconjunctivitis with a piliated
cataracts in a group of related Quarter
Ophthalmic nodular fascitis in the dog.
Moraxelia bovis bacterin. Veterinary
horses. Equine Veterinary Journat
Journat of the American Veterinary
Medicine 80:96-100.
Supplement 10:26-28.
Medical Association 170:611-614.
286 Smith P, Blankenship T, Hoover T,
298 Koch S, Langloss J, Schmidt G (1974)
 311 Latimer K, Kaswan R, Sundbery J
Powe T, Wright J {1990) Effectiveness
Corneal epithelil inclusion cysts in four
(1987) Corneal squamous cell 
 of two commercial infectious bovine
dogs. Journal of the American
carcinoma in a dog. Journat of the
keratoconjuncti vitis vaccines.
Veterinary Medicat Association
American Veterinary Medicat
American Journat of Veterinary
164:1190-1191.
Association 190:1430-1432.
Research 51:1147-1150.
299 Schmidt G, Prasse K {1976) Corneal
312 Ward DA, Latimer KS, Askren RM
287 Dickinson L, Cooper B (1959)
 epithelial inclusion cysts associated with
{1992) Squamous cell carcinoma of the
 Contagious keratoconjunctivitis of
keratectomy in a dog. Journat of
corneoscleral limbus in a dog. Journat of
sheep. Journat of Pathology and
American Veterinary Medicat
the American Veterinary Medicat
Bacterialogy 78:257-266.
Association 168:144.
Association 200:1503-1506.
288 Langford E {1971) Mycoptasmα and
300 Smith J, Bistner S, Riis R {1976)
 313 Bernays ME, Flemming D, Peiffer RL
 associated bacteria isolated from ovine
 Infiltrative corneal lesions resembling
(1999) Primary corneal papiloma and
pinkeye. Canadian Journat of
fibrous histiocytoma: clinical and
squamous cell carcinoma associated
Comparative Medicine 35:18-21.
pathologic findings in six dogs and one
with pigmentary keratitis in four dogs.
cat. Journat of the American Veterinary
Journat of the American Veterinary
Medicat Association 169:722-726.
Medicat Association 214:215-217.
CORNEA AND SCLERA
297
 314 Martin C (1981) Canine epibulbar
326 Martin C, Leipold H (1972)
337 English R, Nasisse M, Davidson M
melanomas and their management.
Mastocytoma of the globe in a horse.
{1990) Carbon dioxide laser ablation
Journat of the American Animat
Journat of the American Animat
for treatment of limbal squamous cell
Hospitat Association 17:83-90.
Hospital Association 8:32-34.
carcinoma in horses. Journat of the
 315 Ditter R, Dubielzig R, Aguirre G,
327 Hirst L, Jabs D, Stoskopf M,
American Veterinary Medicat
Acland G {1983) Primary ocular
 Strandberg J (1983) Benign epibulbar
Association 196:439-442.
 melanoma in dogs. Veterinary
 melanocytoma in a horse. Journat of
 338 Theon A, Pascoe J, Carlson G, Krag D
Path ology 20:379-395.
the American Veterinary Medicat
[1993) Intratumoral chemotherapy with
316 Ryan A, Diter SR {1984) Clinica]
Association 183:333-334.
cisplatin in oily emulsion in horses.
 and pathologic features of canine
328 Anderson D, Lush J, Chambers D
Journat of the American Veterinary
ocular melanomas. Journat of the
{1957) Studies on bovine ocular
Medicat Association 202:261-267.
American Veterinary Medicat
squamous carcinoma ('cancer eye').
339 Theon A, Pascoe J, Meagher D (1994)
Assoc iation 184:60-67.
I. Relationship between eyelid 
Perioperative intratumoral
317 Harling D, Peiffer R, Cook C
 pigmentation and occurrence of
administration of cisplatin for treatment 
{1986) Feline limbal melanoma: four
cancer eye lesions. Journat of Animat
of cutaneous tumors in Equidae. Journat
cases. Journat of the American
Science 16:739-746.
of the American Veterinary Medicat
Veterinary Medicat Association
329 Nishimura H, Frisch J (1977) Eye
Association 205:1170-1176.
22:795-802.
cancer and circumocular pigmentation
340 Sloss V, Smith T, Gao D {1986)
318 Dugan S, Curtis C, Roberts S,
in Bos tourus and crossbred cattle.
Controlling ocular squamous cell
Severin G (1991) Epidemiologic
Austratian Journat of Experimentat
carcinoma in Hereford cattle. Austratian
 study of ocular/adnexal squamous
Agrictulturat Animat Husbandry
Veterinary Joturnat 63:248-251.
 cell carcinoma in horses. Journat of
17:709-711.
341 Gelatt K, Rubin L {1969) Delayed
the American Veterinary Medicat
330 Otter W, Hill G, Klein W, et af. (1995)
 postoperative staphylomas in dogs.
Association 198:251-256.
Ocular squamous cell carcinoma in
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
319 Dugan SJ, Roberts SM, Curtis CR,
Simmental cattle in Zimbabwe.
Medical Association 154:283-288.
 Severin GA {1991) Prognostic factors 
American Joturnat of Veterinary
342 Fischer C (1982) A clinicopathologic
and survival of horses with
Research 56:1440-1444.
classification of episcleritis and scleritis
ocular/adnexal squamous cell
331 Monlux A, Anderson W, Davis C
in the dog. Proceedings of the Scientific
carcinoma: 147 cases (1978-1988).
{1957) The diagnosis of squamous cell
Meeting of the American Cotlege of
Journat of the American Veterinary
carcinoma of the eye (cancer eye) in 
Veterinary Ophthatmotogists 13:1-18.
Medical Association 198:298-303.
cattle. American Journat of Veterinary
343 Willis M, Martin C, Stiles J {1996)
320 Strafuss A {1976) Squamous cell
Research 28:5-34.
 Infectious disease as a possible cause for
carcinoma in horses. Journat of the
332 Sullivan TC, Nasisse MP,
scleritis and episcleritis in dogs.
American Veterinary Medicat
Davidson MG, Glover TL {1996)
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
Association 168:61-62.
Photocoagulation of limbal melanoma
the American College of Veterinary
321 Lavach J, Severin G (1977)
in dogs and cats: 15 cases (1989-1993).
Ophthatmologists 27:45.
Neoplasia of the equine eye, adnexa,
Journat of the American Veterinary
344 Orihel T, Ash L, Holshuh H,
and orbit: a review of 68 cases.
Medicat Association 208:891-894.
Santenelli S (1991) Onchocerciasis in a
Journat of the American Veterinary
333 Rebhun W (1990) Treatment of
Californian dog. Arerican Journat of
Medicat Association 170:202-203.
advanced squamous cell carcinomas
Tropicat Medicine and Hygiene
322 Schwink K {1987) Factors
involving the equine cornea. Veterinary
44:513-517.
influencing morbidity and outcome
Surgery 19:297-302.
 345 Gardiner C, Dick E, Meininger A,
of equine ocular squamous cell 
334 Farris H, Fraunfelder F {1976)
Lozano-Alarcon F, Jackson P (1993)
carcinoma. Equine Veterinary Journat
Cryosurgical treatment of ocular
Onchocerciasis in two dogs. Journat of
19:198-200.
squamous cell carcinoma of cattle.
the American Veterinary Medicat
323 Hacker D, Moore P, Buyukmihci N
Journat of the American Veterinary
Association 203:828-830.
{1986) Ocular angiosarcoma in four
Medicat Association 168:213-216.
346 Kommenou A, Eberhard M,
horses. Journat of the American
335 Grier R, Brewer W, Paul S, Theilen G
Kaldrymidou E, Tsalie E, Dessiris A
Veterinary Medicat Association
 {1980) Treatment of bovine and equine
(2002) Subconjunctival filariasis due to
189:200-203.
ocular squamous cell carcinoma by
Onchocerca sp. in dogs: report of 23
324 Moore PF, Hacker DV,
 radiofrequency hyperthermia. Jourmat of
cases in Greece. Veterinary
Buyukmihci NC {1986) Ocular
the American Veterinary Medicat
Ophthatmotogy 5:119-126.
 angiosarcoma in the horse:
Association 177:55-61.
morphological and
336 Kainer R, Stringer J, Lueker D (1980)
immunohistochemical studies.
Hyperthermia for treatment of ocular
Veterinary Pathology 23:240-244.
squamous cell tumors in cattle. Journat
325 Bolton JR, Lees MJ, Robinson WF,
of the American Veterinary Medicat
Thomas JB, Klein KT {1990) Ocular
Association 176:356-360.
neoplasms of vascular origin in the
horse. Equine Veterinary Journat
Supplement 2:73-75.
298
11
Anterior
Uvea and
Anterior Chamber
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
peripheral ciliary zone and a thinner central pupillary zone,
with the collarette forming the junctional area {11.3).
The uvea is the vascular tunic of the eye and the anterior
Remnants of the embryonic pupillary membrane may
uvea consists of the iris and ciliary body {11.1, 11.2). The
occasionally be observed arising from the collarette region.
most striking species differences in the anterior uvea is in
The pupillary border has a ruff' of pigment formed by the
 pupil shape and reactivity to light. The PLRs of ungulates 
 central extension of the posterior pigmented epithelial
are
more
 sluggish
than thoseof
 carnivores.
layers. In ungulates, this pigment extension is exaggerated
Topographically, the iris is divided grossly into a thick
dorsally and ventrally to form the granula iridica or
11.1
 Conjunctiva
Medial
canthus
Iris
Third eyelid
Pupil
(nictitating membrane]
Sclera
 Choroid
 Iridocorneal angle
 Retina
Cornea 
 Tapetum lucidum
Iris
Optic nerve
Lens
 Cloquet's canal
Anterior chamber
Vitreous body
 Zonular fibers
 Non-tapetal region
Ciliary body
Conjunctiva
Beaek
11.1 llustration of the canine globe with the three tunics of the eye.
ANTERIOR UVEA AND ANTERIOR CHAMBER
299
 Anterior ciliary a., v.
11.2
Vortex vein
Scleral venous plexus
Circumlimbal a.
Long posterior a., v.
Major arterial
 Choroidal a., v.
circle of iris 
Short posterior a., v.
Ophthalmic a., v.
 Optic
Retinal a., v.
Venous sinus of
 Choroidal a., v.
 ciliary body
Chorioca pillaris
Retina
 Circular ciliary a.
 Scleral venous plexus -
 Circumlimbal a.
11.2 llustration of the canine uveal tract. (a: artery: v: vein; n: nerve.)
11.3
11.4
11.3 Canine iris with the lighter peripheral ciliary zone and the
11.4 Equine corpora nigra or granula iridica on the dorsal pupil
darker pupillary zone. Note the persistent pupillary membranes 
margin. Fine white lines on the cornea are artifactual reflections
 originating from the collarette.
of the cilia.
corpora nigra (11.4). In addition to pigmented epithelium,
coloration can vary within an eye, between eyes, and
 small capillaries are present in the granula iridica.
between individuals. The darker the iris the more dense
The iris rests on the anterior lens surface and when
 and compact the iris and iris surfacel. Crypts or surface
this support is lost, iridodonesis or trembling of the iris is 
 defects in the iris, when present, are usually in the lighter
noted with movement of the globe. Loss of support may
 pigmented irides and in the pupillary zone.
occur from lens displacement, removal or resorption, or
Topographically, the ciliary body is divided into an
forward placement of the iris due to peripheral anterior
anterior pars plicata (ciliary processes) and a posterior
synechiae (congenital or acquired). Normal
iris
pars plana. The pars plicata is a ring of >70 ciliary
300
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
 processes and the pars plana is the flat posterior portion
Unless the iris is torn or incised at the 12 o'clock
between the ciliary processes and   the_peripheral
position, the location of the major arterial circle
termination of the retina (ora ciliaris retinae). The width of
results in hemorrhage when the peripheral portion
the pars plana is narrower medially and ventrally due to
of the iris is incised or excised.
the more anterior extension of the retina in these
quadrants. The usual site for vitreous centesis is dorsal or
The iris muscles of mammals are smooth muscles with a
dorsolateral, where the pars plana is 7-8 mm posterior to
sphincter muscle located adjacent to the pupil and a dilator
the limbus in a medium-sized dog?. The ciliary processes in
muscle that runs radially from the iris root to near the pupil
carnivores are blade-like and are ensheathed with zonular
(11.7). The dilator muscle arises from the anterior epithelial
fibers which originate from the pars plana (11.5). The
layer of the posterior iris. In species with an elongated
ciliary processes in the horse are capped with a broad band
pupil, the dilator is poorly developed on the axis of
of cells that stops short of the tips of the processes (11.6).
elongation6. Each muscle has dual reciprocal autonomic
The anterior chamber is the space demarcated
innervation. The sphincter muscle is predominantly under
posteriorly by the lens and iris and anteriorly by the
parasympathetic  control  {lllrd   cranial  nerve)  with
cornea and iridocorneal angle ({11.1). The posterior
inhibitory adrenergic fibers (mediating relaxation). The
chamber is delineated anteriorly by the posterior surface
dilator muscle is predominantly under sympathetic control
of the iris, peripherally by the ciliary body, and
{via the nasociliary nerve of the ophthalmic division of the
posteriorly by the anterior vitreous humor.
Vth cranial nerve) with inhibitory cholinergic fibers7. The
The iris consists of an anterior border layer, stroma,
two muscles are not equal antagonists, the sphincter muscle
and posterior epithelium (11.7). The anterior border
being stronger than the dilator muscle. When the pupil
layer is well developed in the dog and cat and consists of
dlates, the posterior leaf of the iris initially contracts and,
a layer of fibroblasts and one or more layers of
with maximum dilation, the anterior leaf of the iris also
melanocytes; it is not a true endothelial or epithelial layer
contracts. Prostaglandins have been demonstrated to
as has been reportedl, 3, 4. The stroma of the iris contains 
contribute to the muscle tone of the sphincter muscle and,
collagen fibrils, blood vessels, nerves, melanocytes,
to a lesser extent, the dilator muscle*, which may be of
fibroblasts, and the sphincter muscle.
 significance in inflammation.
Suol au Aq papuoud si sui aui ol Aiddns rejnosra aul
The afferent arm of the PLR consists of three neurons:
 posterior ciliary arteries, which form the major arterial circle
the bipolar cells, the ganglion cells, and the neurons in
of the iris that is visible in the peripheral third of the iris (11.2,
the pretectal nucleus (1i.8). The afferent arm of the
11.7). The circle is incomplete at 6 and 12 o'dock1, s.
 pupillomotor fibers course with the visual fibers until just
before they reach the lateral geniculate body. Seventy-five
percent of visual and pupillomotor fibers in the dog and
65% in the cat decussate or cross at the optic chiasm?.
11.5
The majority of pupillomotor fibers then cross again in
the pretectum to the original sidel0. In animals with
11.6 Scanning
11.6
 electron microscopy of
equine iris and ciliary
body. (1: iris; 2: lens 
capsule; 3: pars plana :
4: zonules originating 
from pars plana; 5:
ciliary cleft; 6: ciliary
muscles; 7: sclera.]
Note the convolutions 
that cap each ciliary
process but stop short 
of the tips (large
11.5 Scanning electron microscopy of the canine ciliary body viewed
arrow) (SEM x18).
from the vitreous. The blade-like ciliary process are ensheathed and 
 (From Martin and 
capped by the lens zonules. The posterior iris surface is visible dorsal
Ander5on, 19811)
to the zonules (x45).
11.7
11.7 Montage of canine iris and ciliary body. (1:
cornea; 2: limbus; 3: anterior chamber; 4: anterior
layer of iris; 5: major arterial circle; 6: pigment in
posterior stroma; 7: dilator muscle; 8: sphinchter
muscle; 9: pigmented epithelium; 10: lens capsule;
11: ciliary processes; 12: meridonal ciliary muscle
tendons: 13: anterior hyaloid membrane; 14: ciliary
stroma (x35]. (From Martin and Anderson, 19811.)
ANTERIOR UVEA AND ANTERIOR CHAMBER
301
11.8
11.9
PTN
11.9 D-shaped pupil in a cat due to hemiparalysis of the nasal
 branch of the short ciliary nerves.
11.8 Visual and pupillomotor pathways. The vision and pupillomotor
pathways are common at (1, 2, 3). Near the lateral genulate body (5)
Paralysis of one of the two short ciliary nerves in
the pupillomotor fibers separate from the optic tract at (4] to
the cat produces a hemiplegia, resulting in a "D'- or
 5ynapse in the pretectal nucleus (PTN). These fibers cross in the same
"6'IL) UIdnd padeus-U, pasuaaal
proportion that they did at the optic nerve chiasm to synapse in the 
 parasympathetic nuclei (8] of the oculomotor nerve. The
Evaluation of PLR and dynamic anisocoria requires
parasympathetic fibers travel with the oculomotor nerve and synapse
 an appreciation of the differences in the proportion of
in the ciliary ganglia before entering the eye as the short ciliary
optic nerve fibers that cross at the chiasm and
nerves. Visual fibers 5ynapse in the lateral geniculate body (5) and
subsequently in the midbrain in the particular species 
continue in the optic radiation (6] to the visual cortex (7].
stimulating the PLR in one eye explains the dynamic
anisocoria present in the normal dog, i.e. the
consensual reflex is not as strong or complete as the
laterally placed eyes, the decussation increases: 81% in
direct PLR. Data transposed from humans and
the horse and 83% in the cowll. Since this same
primates, where So% of the fibers cross, is not
aul 0i ndui aui 'unoaiaud aul ul uiege ssoo aaeuaad
completely applicable.
opposite eye is minimal and is responsible for the weak
Sympathetic innervation to the iris provides the
 consensual reflex in these species.
stimulation for dilation by relaxing the sphincter muscle
The efferent arm of the PLR consists of two neurons:
and contracting the dilator muscle. The sympathetic
the first originates in the parasympathetic nucleus of the
chain is long and consists of three neurons {11.10). The
oculomotor nerve {Illrd cranial nerve) and remains
first neuron originates in the hypothalamus, passing with
ipsilateral to synapse in the ciliary ganglion; the second
some decussation down the brainstem and cervical spinal
neuron passes from the ciliary ganglion in the short
cord to synapse at the level of thoracic vertebrae T1, T2,
ciliary nerves to the iris sphincter muscle {11.8). The
 and T3. The second neuron passes through the rostral
short ciliary nerves differ in the dog and cat. In the dog.
chest and up the neck in the vagosympathetic trunk, to
multiple branches supply the globe whereas in the cat,
synapse in the cranial cervical ganglion. The third neuron
only two branches are presentl2.
traverses the tympanic bulla and joins the ophthalmic
11.10 Sympathetic pathway to the eye. The first
11.10
order neuron originates in the hypothalamus and 
Hypothalamu
 Synapses in the interomedial cell column of the
first three thoracic spinal segments. The second 
order neuron passes out of the ventral roots into
Optic 
the ramus communicantes, then into the 
 5ympathetic trunk, which continues into the 
vagosympathetic trunk and synapses in the
cranial cervical ganglia. Postganglionic fibers
then join the internal carotid artery and pa5s 
Nasociliary n.
Orbital
through the tympanic bulla before entering the
fissure
cranial vault to join the Vth cranial nerve and 
reach the eye via the nasociliary branch of the
Ophthalmic
ophthalmic division of the Vth cranial nerve.
branch V.
(n: nerve.]
302
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
11.11
11.12
11.11 Marked miosis in a dog with acute uveitis.
11.12 Horner's 5yndrome in a Boxer with chronic otitis. Note
 the anisorcoria but the miosis is not pinpoint. Classic ptosis.
enopthalmos, third eyelid prolapse, and miosis were present.
Table 11.1 Signs of Horner's syndrome in different species
Third eyelid
Species
prolapse
Ptosis
Miosis
Enophthalmos 
Facial sweating
Dog
+
+
+
Cat
+
+
+
Horse
Slight +
Slight +
Cow
Slight +
Slight +
 Decreased muzzle secretions
division of the Vth cranial nerve in the cranial vault, to
Miosis (a constricted pupil) is a common ocular sign and
reach the globe via the long ciliary nerve.
may be from ocular or neurologic disease or be
 Anisocoria can be classified as a static or dynamic
pharmacologically induced. Intense miosis is a common
inequality of pupils. Static anisocoria manifests without
Jo leoidai si pue ued io uouei renoo jo uoueisauu
stimulation of the PLR and is constant, whereas dynamic
acute uveitis and corneal pain {11.11). This miosis is often
anisocorias become manifest during or immediately after
resistant to atropine dilation. Neurologic disease involving
stimulation of the PLR.
the midbrain may produce an intense miosis, whereas the
 Direct and consensual reflexes are best determined in
miosis seen with sympathetic dennervation {Horner's
dim ambient light utilizing a strong stimulating light. The
syndrome) is usually moderate {11.12). The miosis
direct response is determined and the consensual
associated with superfical corneal pain may mimic Horners
response evaluated while alternately directing the light
syndrome by being accompanied by third eyelid prolapse
quickly from one eye to the other at 2-4 second intervals
and a narrowed palpebra fissure from blepharospasm. The
(swinging light test). The pupils will normally have
manifestation of Horner's syndrome varies by species (see
minimal excursions when performing the swinging light
Table 11.1) and in small animals approximately half of the
test. An eye with an afferent defect in the PLR can be
cases are idiopathicl3. The Colliel4 and Golden Retrieveris
detected even if an efferent arm lesion such as synechia or
 are breeds predisposed to idiopathic Horner's syndrome.
oculomotor paralysis is present.
The color of the iris is dependent on the amount of
Afferent arm lesions are detected in the presence of a
pigment in the stroma and the pigmented epithelium.
unilateral efferent lesion with the swinging light test by
Blue irides have a lack of pigment in the stroma but
the presence of further constriction of the opposite
 retain the pigment in the pigmented epithelium. Albino
normal eye when the light is swung over to it. This test is
animals have melanocytes but, due to an enzyme
not as sensitive in animals as in humans due to the
deficiency {usually tyrosinase), they are unable to
normal dynamic anisocoria that is present with the
 synthesize pigment granules. White-furred animals have
unequal decussation of the optic nerve.
no melanocytes in the stroma due to a neuroectoderm
defect and many may also be deaf6. A defect in the
Afferent arm lesions in the retina and optic nerve
tapetal pigment is also present in white-furred animals.
are detected by the swinging light test; dilation of
The ciliary processes consist of a capillary tuft, stroma,
the pupil occurs when light is shone in the affected
and two layers of epithelium that are a continuation from
eye (Marcus Gunn pupil).
 the retina. The sensory retina continues onto the pars plana
[uau au pue iakel leuda pauauaiduou iauu au se
ANTERIOR UVEA AND ANTERIOR CHAMBER
205
11.14
11.15
11.13 A dog with persistent pupillary
 11.14 Incidental polycoria (arrow) in a cow that
11.15 Congenital dyscoria in a dog. Note the
 membranes that are iris to iris. Most are 
was presented for SCC at the medlial canthus.
tented, tilted pupil.
originating from the collarette.
The cornea has some edema medially and 
reflections of cilia are present on the cornea.
pigmented epithelium as the outer pigmented epithelial layer
11.16
of the ciliary body. The tight epithelial junctions between the
epithelial cells are the basis for the blood-aqueous humor
barrier. The capillaries of the ciliary body are fenestrated
 and do not provide a barrier to large moleculesl7.
The ciliary processes are responsible for aqueous
humor formation. The pars plana cells are the origin of
the zonules and, in conjunction with the ciliary muscles,
have a function in accommodation. The ciliary muscles
are not as well developed in domestic animals as in
primates 
and
consequently
the
amount
of
accommodation achieved is very modest. The anterior
insertions of the ciliary muscles form the trabecular
meshwork in the angle and thus have an effect on
aqueous humor outflow (11.7).
11.16 Dyscoria and corectopia in an Australian Shepherd Dog
with a hypoplastic iris. Note the transillumination of the iris from
the fundus reflection.
DISEASES OF THE IRIS AND CILIARY BODY
CONGENITAL DISEASES
Persistent pupillary membrane[s)
hypoplasia or atrophy, that results in holes in the iris near
Embryologically, the lens is surrounded by a vasuclar
the pupillary border.
p.369) and normally the anterior remnants of the
Dyscoria
network disappear by 3-5 weeks of age19. When
Dyscoria is a congenital or acquired abnormal shape or
remnants of the embryonic vessels persist, they are visible
form of the pupil (11.15). The condition is usually of no
either on the iris surface or bridging the pupil and are
functional importance. It is observed as a congenital
termed persistent pupillary membranes (PPMs). Variable
finding in the microphthalmos syndrome of merled
degrees of retained PPMs are frequently observed as a
genetic trait in the Basenji, Welsh Corgi, Golden
Retriever, Chow Chow, and English Cocker Spaniel.
 observed with corectopia or a displaced pupil. Dyscoria
When adherent only to the iris, they present no clinical
is more commonly observed as an acquired finding
problem except in genetic counseling (11.3, 11.13). In
secondary to iridal degeneration, trauma, neoplastic
the cat, agenesis of the upper lids in kittens is frequently
infiltration, and inflammatory synechiae.
 associated with PPMs20. Aberrant PPMs attached to the
cornea and lens are discussed in Chapters 10 (p.241) and
Aniridia
13 (p.369), respectively.
Aniridia {absence of the iris) is a misnomer. While an
apparent clinical absence of the iris may be present, it is not
Polycoria
usually a complete anatomic absence. The condition is
Polycoria is the presence of more than one pupil in the
more correctly termed iris hypoplasia. The condition is rare
eye, each having a sphincter muscle (11.14). It is rare and
and will usually manifest as a very dilated pupil. Glaucoma
is often confused with the more common condition of iris
 may develop from adhesions or synechiae over the angle.
304
OpHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
In Belgian horses, it is inherited as an autosomal dominant
deafness occurs on the side of the blue eye if the deafness
trait and thus genetic influences should be suspected when
is unilateral.
Deafness is the result of defective
 observed in other species2s-27, Aniridia and aniridia with
 development in the organ of Corti and degeneration of
limbic dermoids and cataracts have been reported in
White cats with a black spot on the forehead are less
dominant in nature. Aniridia has been described in Jersey
likely to be blue-eyed and deaf.
cattle with multiple ocular defects of microphakia, luxated
The merling gene in the dog is dominant and, in many
lenses, and cataracts. It was reported as an autosomal
breeds, homozygous individuals for merling have
 recessive trait in the Jersey cow29. Two cases of aniridia in
microphthalmic or severe ocular malformations as well as
deafness23 32, 35 Animals with heterochromia exhibit a mild
Varying degrees of keratitis have frequently been noted
anisocoria with the blue eye being slightly more dilated.
with aniridia and the cause for this is unknown.
Siamese cats and cats  with Chediak-Higashi
 Aniridia presents with bilateral widely dilated pupils
syndrome are considered partial albinos; they are not
that expose the ciliary processes, zonules, and lens
deaf but may have chiasmal misrouting of optic nerve
equator. Animals will probably exhibit photophobia due
fibers16, 37. Conversely, the white-furred cat has normal
s  u rs oi si a jo Aiqei ai 0
routing of optic fibers at the chiasm, with normal
Varying degrees of cataract formation are usually
retinogeniculate projections.
present. Superficial keratitis over the dorsal cornea has
been observed in many species of animals and in humans
Ectropion uvea
with aniridia. The cause is unknown.
Ectropion uvea refers to the pupillary margin everting
forward to expose the posterior pigmented epithelium. This
Coloboma
may occur as a congenital anomaly (11.18) or, more
Coloboma of the iris is manifested as a notch-like or
 commonly, is acquired due to contracting membranes on
"keyhole’ defect in the iris. A typical coloboma occurs
the iris surface. The contracting membranes (preiridal
ventronasally in the iris due to incomplete closure of the
fibroblastic membranes, PIFMs) are observed with ocular
choroidal fissure, while atypical colobomas occur
 inflammation, neoplasia, or chronic retinal detachment.
elsewhere {11.17). The condition may be an isolated
event or found with other ocular anomalies such as in the
ACQUIRED DISEASES
Australian Shepherd Dog.
Altered iris pigmentation
Introduction/etiology
Heterochromia
Focal pigment proliferations or densities may.
be
Heterochromia is a lack of iris pigmentation within a
observed on the surface of the iris and should
be
portion of a pigmented iris or of the entire iris when the
 differentiated from neoplastic pigmentary changes. Iris
opposite iris is pigmented. In certain breeds of dogs with
freckles are clusters of melanocytes on the surface of the
the merling gene and cats with white haircoats, deafness
iris and are only a few cells thick. This results in a focal,
may be associated with blue eyes31-36. In the white-furred
flat, hyperpigmented patch on the surface of the iris. A
cat, the eye color may be blue, yellow, or heterochromic;
nevus is a benign accumulation of either the precursors
the genes for eye color are independent of white fur but
of melanocytes or of atypical melanoctyes. It has varia ble
the blue eye color is expressed only in the presence of the
amounts of pigmentation, is more extensively elevated,
gene for white fur In the white-furred cat, deafness may
and extends deeper into the stroma than a freckl33 39
be unilateral or bilateral; if heterochromia is present,
The nevus is thicker and may undergo malignant
11.17
11.18
11.17 Gobe of an Australian Shepherd Dog with a typical iris coloboma
11.18 Ectropion uvea in a dog. Ectropion of the pupil margin is
(arrow). The globe has been transected at the equator and the observer
visible dorsomedially and has no apparent cause. Either preiridal
is looking forward from the vitreous cavity through the pupil. Note the
fibrovascular membranes from lens-induced uveitis or congenital
6 o'clock defect. Note also the defect in the ciliary body and zonules
deformity was the suspected cause.
 and the flattened lens equator in this region (coloboma of lens).
ANTERIOR UVEA AND ANTERIOR CHAMBER
305
11.19
11.20
11.21
11.19 Iris nevus in the peripheral iris of a
11.20 Suspect iris freckle in a cat from
11.21 Sphincter iris atrophy in an aged
Border Collie. The lesion was followed for
 6-8 o'clock. The lesion must be followed for
Miniature Poodle. Note the dilated pupil with
over 3 years without change.
months to years to differentiate it from an
scalloped borders and isolated strands on the
early diffuse iris melanoma.
pupil border.
transformation. Most melanomas are thought to
11.22
originate from nevi. 
Multiple flat or diffuse flat
pigmented lesions may be freckles that coalesce and be
very difficult to differentiate clinically from malignant
 progression of a melanoma unless it is bilateral, in which
case it is usually a benign lesion. In the cat, these
[eoads e asod pue aae ym asaioui sauoied pauauaid
problem for differentiating benign changes from early
diffuse melanomas that are typical for this species.
Increases in iridal pigmentation also occur with
chronic insidious uveitis in all species. This is so insidious
that unless it is unilateral it may not be appreciated by
the examining clinician.
 Clinical signs
A flat, focal, pigmented spot is present on one or both
irides. Nevi may be mildly elevated but should have
sharp borders (11.19, 11.20).
11.22 Stromal iris atrophy viewed against a cataract in a diabetic
Poodle. Note the dyscoria and corectopia from loss of iris ma55.
Therapy and prognosis
Pigmented spots of questionable significance should be
photographed and observed for change over several
months. Benign lesions will remain static. If the lesion
· Stromal iris atrophy is the second form of iris
changes in thickness or expands, diode or YAG laser
 atrophy and is less frequent. This is usually observed
ablation should be considered.
in toy breeds of dogs. It manifests with large defects
in the iris stroma and frequently results in almost
Iris atrophy
complete loss of the iris stroma. The pupil may have
Two forms of iris atrophy are frequently observed and
dyscoria and may be displaced to the opposite side
are considered senile in origin. A third form of iris
 of the atrophy ( 11.22). The presumed cause is
atrophy is observed secondary to inflammation and/or
vascular insufficiency.
glaucoma. Iris atrophy is observed most commonly in the
dog, although blue-eyed cats will frequently manifest
The main clinical significance of iris atrophy is recognition
 both congenital hypoplasia and atrophy with age.
 of its presence when interpreting PLRs. When severe iris
 Sphincter iris atrophy is the most common form of iris
atrophy is present with cataracts it becomes difficult to
atrophy and involves the pupillary portion of the iris.
evaluate retinal function without an ERG. Glaucoma has
This form is present in most Miniature Poodles as they
not been documented as a complication of iris atrophy in
 age. Mild sphincter atrophy is characterized by
the dog as it has in humans.
scalloped pupillary margins and loss of the pupillary
ruff. As it progresses, asymmetrical or symmetrical loss
Iris and ciliary body cysts
of the PLR is noted and depigmented areas of iris at
Clinical signs
the pupillary margin are visible on transillumination.
Iris cysts manifest as variably pigmented cystic structures
Advanced atrophy results in fixed dilated pupils or
 in the anterior or posterior chamber or pupil. The eye
 anisocoria. Pseudopolycoria and/or PPM-like strands
may contain one or more cysts which, in the dog, are
are often present at the pupillary margin (11.21).
often free floating in the anterior chamber The condition
306
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETeRINARY MeDICINE
11.23
11.25
11.23 Multiple lightly pigmented iris cysts in 
11.24 Multiple heavily pigmented iris cysts in 
11.25 Ruptured iris cysts on the posterior
the anterior chamber of a Basset Hound.
the anterior chamber of a Basset Hound. Cyst5
cornea of a dog. Cysts are recognized by a
were aspirated with a 25 gauge needle.
round flat pigment deposit on the posterior
cormea, angle, or lens.
11.26
11.27
11.28
11.26 Multiple iris cysts in a cluster and
11.27 A cat with a large smooth iris cyst that
11.28 Stromal iris cyst in a horse. Note the
attached to the pupil border in a cat.
was fixed in place. It was treated with diode
appearance of bombe or a mass in the iris.
laser energy, which was only partially
The lesion is most visible on pupil constriction.
 successful in decreasing the size.
is quite common in the dog, with breeds such as the
readde Aeoidai kaui ieui ul iap ieo aul u sisho sul
Boston Terrier, La brador Retriever, and Golden Retriever
as pigmented clusters still attached to the pupillary
predisposed to the formation of cysts. If a cyst is densely
margin (11.26, 11.27).
pigmented and solitary, it must be differentiated from a
 In the horse, stromal iris cysts may manifest as a
pigmented tumor (11.23, 11.24). Cysts may rupture and
localized intrastromal swelling44. Bhyukmihci et al.4s
become deposited in the angle region, lens, or on the 
refuted that they are cysts and stated that they are
posterior cornea where they are visible as a circular
hypoplastic areas of the iris and, when the pupil is
pigmented deposit (11.25).
miotic, the pressure in the posterior chamber pushes
Cysts originate either from the posterior epithelium of
 the hypoplastic region forward. Clinically, stromal iris
the iris or the epithelium of the ciliary body (ciliary body
 cysts appear as smooth focal swellings that are usually
cysts)40 Iris cysts are usually of no clinical significancel
darker than the adjacent iris and are in the basilar
except as minor opacities of the lens or cornea. Ciliary
aspect of the iris. They are more common in the dorsal
body cysts in the Golden Retriever and Great Dane have
 region but may be found in the ventral iris (11.28). The
.The
swellings transilluminate when the iris is examined in
mechanism of glaucoma production is unknown and is
the miotic state and they produce a shallowing of the
thought to be through cyst pressure resulting in angle
anterior chamber. The condition may be bilateral or
closure, although PIFMs are also observed in both breeds.
unilateral and must be differentiated from iris bombe
The pathogenesis of PIFMs {fibrovascular membranes on
and a localized growth. Equine stromal cysts are more
the iris) with ciliary body cysts is unknown. Uveitis is also
commonly observed in lighter colored irides and Welsh
associated with iridocorneal cysts in the Golden Retriever.
 ponies may have a predisposition44.
ANTERIOR UVEA AND ANTERIOR CHAMBER
307
11.29
11.30
11.31
11.29 Cyst of the lower corpora nigra in a
11.30 Ciliary body cyst in a Tennessee
11.31 Iridodialysis in a dog's iris from blunt
horse. It was treated with diode laser, but 
Walking horse.
trauma. The anterior and posterior leaves of
needle aspiration is as effective.
the iris have separated and the pupil is
dyscoric from rupture of the iris sphincter.
The most common type of iris cyst in the horse involves
tear (11.31). The IOP should be monitored and therapy
the granula iridica, which manifests as large attached
is symptomatic.
swellings at the pupillary margin (11.29). Owners
frequently feel the cysts are responsible for behavior or
Iridoplegia
 performance changes and request cyst removal.
Introduction/etiology
ai ui sisho apog are sa 9yie ia ozaa
Iridoplegia (immobile pupilis) in a mydriatic state may
inferotemporal quadrant in three ponies of unspecified
occur due to end-organ dysfunction {iris sphincter),
breed or color, with no other ocular lesions. Large cysts
efferent nerve dysfunction (parasympathetic fibers or
of the ciliary body are also observed as the main lesion of
nuclei of the oculomotor Illrd cranial nerve), or bilateral
 anterior segment dysgenesis (ASD) observed in the Rocky
afferent limb dysfunction (retina, optic nerve or chiasm,
Mountain horse and related breeds such as the Kentucky
optic tracts) of the PLR. Pharmacologic iridoplegia occurs 
Mountain Saddle horse, Mountain Pleasure horse, and
from the use of topical mydriatic agents or the ingestion of
Morgan horse47.1
ASD is a dominant trait with
hyoscyamine, hyoscine, solanine, and belladonnine
incomplete penetrance that is expressed in color-dilute
alkaloids from various poisonous plants {Black Henbane,
 animals with light manes. If the animal is heterozygous,
Jimson weed, Nightshades, and Ground Cherry).
the only lesions observed by looking obliquely through
Pharmacologic iridoplegia may last from 4-5 days to
the pupil are large cysts located temporally behind the
several weeks fin horses) after the last exposure to
iris {11.30). Animals with the full syndrome may have
atropine. If the application was accidental, the history
large globose corneas, dyscoria, cataracts, temporal
may not be helpful and the cause can only be diagnosed
retinal detachment, retinal dysplasia, PPMs, large
by the lack of synechia or iris atrophy, normal IOP, and
 palpebral fissures, and persistent hyaloid arteries47.
the lack of response to direct-acting miotic drugs
(pilocarpine). Improvement after several days aids a
Therapy
retrospective diagnosis of drug-induced mydriasis.
No therapy is usually required for iris cysts, although the
Iridoplegia from posterior synechiae and sphincter iris
cyst(s) can be easily aspirated through a needle if
atrophy is a common phenomenonon. Anterior uveitis is
necessary. Pigmented cysts can be treated noninvasively
characterized by a tonic pupil in the mid-point to
by diode or YAG lasering. In some individuals with
constricted state, and glaucoma by a tonic pupil in the
numerous cysts, removal may be indicated to clear the
dilated state. Blunt trauma may produce iridoplegia,
visual pathway and to reduce pathology to the cornea
which is usually temporary.
 and lens. If there is any difficulty in differentiating cysts
Iridoplegia due to parasymathetic denervation results
from neoplasia because of location or concurrent
in a dilated pupil that, depending on the cause, may be
pathology, ocular ultrasound should be performed. Even
unilateral 
or bilateral.
Efferent denervation
when heavily pigmented, cysts are smoother and rounder
characterized by a visual eye unless multiple nerve injury
than most neoplasms. In the Rocky Mountain horse, the
occurs),lack of a direct or consensual PLR, and response
 genetic implications should be recognized.
to direct-acting cholinergic drugs. Peripheral oculomotor
nerve injury usually has somatic efferent deficits as well
Iridorhexis (iris tears)
and, depending on the location of injury, multiple nerve
Tears in the anterior uvea may occur as the result of
deficits may occur. Total
 ophthalmoplegia   from
blunt or perforating trauma. The tears may be full
or
peripheral oculomotor nerve lesions results in a dilated,
partial thickness. Hyphema or varia ble amounts of blood
fixed pupil and a ventrolateral deviation of the globe.
in the anterior chamber may result and obscure the uveal
Cavernous sinus and orbital fissure syndromes manifest
pathology. The iris root is the thinnest portion of the iris
with oculomotor paralysis as well as deficits involving the
and is most prone to tra umatic tears. Pupillary shape and
abducens, trochlear, ophthalmic, and maxillary nerves.
function may be altered depending on the extent of the
The orbital apex syndrome also involves the optic nerve.
308
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
Unless multiple orbital nerve deficits are associated with
and thrombocytopenia are the usual causes. Uveitis may
tra uma, such as a proptosed globe, the prognosis is usually
 or may not accompany the iris hemorrhage.
very guarded for thelfe of the patient, because the cause
Hyphema {blood in the anterior chamber) is the
is often orbital or intracranial neoplasia or intracranial
result of either blunt (11.33) or perforating traumatic
 granulomatous inflammation.
disruption of the anterior uveal vasculature, a bleeding
Feline dysautonomia
or clotting defect, systemic hypertension, neoplasia, or 
dysautonomia with dilated pupils. The condition is
neovascularization. The condition is usually unilateral.
described mainly in the UK and sporadically in other
regions. The etiology is unknown and the incidence has
chamber and may or may not remain unclotted. The
decreased markedly in the last decade. It does not appear
larger the hemorrhage the more likely it will be clotted.
to be related to FeLV, as does alternating anisocoria. Cats
Factors which determine whether the hyphema is fluid
with dysautonomia may have an initial anisocoria but,
or is cloted are incompletely understood but, unlike
subsequently, the pupils are dilated and equal, the eyes are
external hemorrhages, blood in the anterior chamber is
visual, the third eyelid is prolapsed, and the tear secretions
immediately diluted with aqueous humor. Blood in the
are decreased. The lesion is characterized as an efferent
anterior chamber undergoes rapid fibrinolysis due to
arm  parasympathetic  lesion.  Additional signs 
jo aseaiai au pue ioung snoanbe kq uoun
dysautonomia are constipation, regurgitation, dry mucous
fibrinolytic agents {e.g. tPA) from the iris. Since
membranes, bradycardia, and urinary incontinence48, 49 It
coagulation of the hyphema interferes with resorption,
is possible in the cat to ha ve an isolated palsy of one of the
these two factors are beneficial for resorption but they
also favor the possibility of rebleeding and increased
fibers). This produces a D- or reversed D-shaped pupil due
complications. Rebleeding presents a physiologic
to the hemidilation (11.9)12.
dilemma since the intrinsic and extrinsic factors of
 Spastic pupils have been observed in FeLV-positive
 Coagulation are not activated completelys1.
cats that manifest with paradoxical pupillary changes.
Hyphema in the acute stages is bright red but if it is not
The animal may have anisocoria that alternates
at
resorbed and new hemorrhages have not occurred, the
intervals of hours to days, or have widely dilated or
constricted pupils. The condition is attributed to FeLV
involvement of the ciliary ganglias0.
Causes of iridoplegia includer
11.32
+
 Midbrain lesions from trauma, neoplasia,
inflammation, or degenerative conditions.
Cavernous sinus lesions, usually inflammatory
 or neoplastic.
 Orbital fissure lesions that may be traumatic,
 neoplastic, or inflammatory.
Increased IOP, usually >40 mmHg (5.9 kPa).
 Pharmacologic induction or ingestion of certain
toxic plants such as Jimson weed and
Nightsha des.
Orbital lesions involving the parasympathetic
fibers or ciliary ganglion.
 Sphincter iris atrophy.
 Bilateral afferent arm lesions of the PLR, i.e.
retina, optic nerve, chiasm, or optic tracts.
11.32 Iris pectechia/ecchymoses in a Siberian Husky with immune-
 Posterior synechia development while the pupil
media ted thrombocytopenia.
is mydriatic.
Diagnosis
11.33
Ocular lesions must be eliminated from the diagnosis by
 a thorough ocular examination including measurement
of IOP. The PLRs are tested and a neurologic
examination performed. The response of the pupil to
 autonomic drugs may be tested (see Table 2.7).
Therapy
Therapy is directed at the underlying cause rather than
the iridoplegia.
Iridal hemorrhage and hyphema
Introduction/etiology
Petechiae of the iris stroma may be observed in blue
irides but are rarely observed in hea vily pigmented irides
(11.32). Petechiae usually indicate a. problem with
11.33 Partial hyphema in a dog from blunt trauma. Hyphema of this
platelets or a vasculitis. Tick-borne infectious diseases
size has a good prognosis if no new bleeding occurs.
ANTERIOR UVEA AND ANTERIOR CHAMBER
309
lg nuaie, ue paieuaisap sl 1 tyiep sauoog poong
The pupills), if visible, may be constricted due to
hemorrhage if the entire anterior chamber is filled with
anterior uveitis, corneal pain {abrasions), or concurrent
dark blood. Hyphema that is incomplete and fluid settles 
brainstem hemorrhages that are irritative, or dilated due to
if the animal has been quiet, whereas clotted blood often
glaucoma, concussion to the iris with iridoplegia, efferent
remains over the pupil region. With fluid hyphema the
lesions of the oculomotor nerve, or from progressive or
amount of blood often appears to change quickly; this is
paralytic brainstem lesions with head trauma.
often a function of the animal's activity level. If the animal
has been quiet, the blood settles ventrally in the chamber
Diagnosis
and the remainder of the anterior chamber is clear.
The anatomic diagnosis is usually obvious but the cause
ai u ra si aa an re a so iad 
often requires an accurate history, good physical
Jenoo ol anp 'asiom sieadde Aep aui ul aiel mq suuuou
examination, ultrasonography, and laboratory testing.
motion mixing the blood with aqueous humor. Blood
The remainder of the ipsilateral globe and orbit and the
pigments may stain the corneal stroma if the endothelium
opposite eye should be examined and a physical
is not functional or if there is increased IOP.
examination should be performed to determine the
Blood leaves the anterior chamber through the
 presence of hemorrhages elsewhere or other lesions of
aqueous humor outflow pathways, with minimal
trauma. This is important to provide clinical clues for the
absorption by the iris. The iris is an important source of
origin of the hemorrhage and to give a prognosis.
fibrinolysin that frees the erythrocytes from the fibrin so
they may escape, but this also may dislodge clots in torn
Therapy
vessels and cause rebleeding or secondary hemorrhage.
Therapy for hyphema has included a great number of
The etiology of hyphema includes:
 drugs and procedures, most of which, when examined
 Tra uma: blunt and penetrating/perforating globe
with double blind studies, ha ve demonstrated no benefit.
injuries are a common source of hyphema.
The outcome of hyphema is more dependent on the
 Blood dyscrasias such as hyperviscosity,
amount of instantaneous damage done by the trauma
thrombocytopenia, polycythemia, and leukemia may
 cause hyphema.
is not trauma, control of the primary processes, such as
 Bleeding and clotting deficiencies: dicoumarin
blood dyscrasia,
 bleeding/clotting
a
defect,
or
 poisoning, inherited clotting factor deficiencies,
hypertension, is essential for resolution of the condition.
acquired clotting deficiencies with renal and liver
The concurrent uveitis is treated with corticosteroids
failure, and consumption of clotting factors may
and atropine provided corneal abrasions or ulcerations are
ca use hyphema.
 not present. If the trauma is perforating, glucocorticoids
 Hypertension is a common ca use of ocular bleeding
may be contraindicated if sepsis is present. Aspirin and
in the cat and occasionally manifests as hyphema.
other NSAIDs are usually not given due to their
Vascular anomalies such as persistent hyperplastic
interference with platelet function, which can promote
tunica vasculosa lentis may cause hyphema.
secondary hemorrhagess, Cage rest and tranquilization is
 Neovascularization associated with PIFMs that
probably the most significant therapy for traumatic
 develops with inflammation, neoplasia, and chronic
hyphema but also the most difficult to enforce.
retinal detachment is a common cause of hyphemas2, 53.
If the IOP is elevated, the patient is treated
The conditions that produce PIFMs stimulate diffusible
symptomatically with topical or systemic CAIs or topical
angiogenic factors that stimulate neovascularization of
beta-blockers. If traumatic in origin, the presence of
the iris surface. Neovascularization is leaky and
glaucoma with complete hyphema of 7-10 days duration
susceptible to hemorrhage. PIFMs are a common
is one of the few indications for invasive surgery or
histopathologic finding in the horse, dog, and cat but
irrigation to remove the bloods6. While this might seem
 are usually not clinically visibles2.
an obvious choice of therapy, removing blood from the
Vasculitis: a variety of infectious diseases such as
anterior chamber usually results in more trauma and
tick-borne diseases may cause ocular hemorrhage
 more hemorrhage once the IOP is lowered.
from vasculitis.
 Erosion of vessels from neoplasia or
Surgery is rarely performed to remove hyphema
inflammatory/infectious processes.
and then only if associated with tra uma.
Clinical signs
The use of pilocarpine with hyphema is controversial.
Red to black hemorrhage is present to varying degrees in
 Pilocarpine is often recommended because it opens the
the anterior chamber. If the hemorrhage is unclotted and
trabecular meshwork pores, allowing erythrocytes easier
the animal is quiet, the hemorrhage settles ventrally and
egress, and it presents a larger iris surface, which is a source
has a flat top {11.33). If the blood is diffuse, it is either a
for fibrinolytic activity. Pilocarpine also dilates the uveal
large amount or due to a partial hyphema that becomes
vasculature, which may increase the chances of rebleeding.
mixed with the aqueous humor after physical activity.
and it causes ciliary muscle spasms that accentuate ocular
Clotted blood is often localized and suspended in the
discomfort if traumatic anterior uveitis is present.
anterior chamber The pupillary area may retain a clot
Vasoconstictors such as epinephrine and phenylephrine are
longer than other areas due to the lack of adjacent iris
often recommended but are of questionable benefit.
with fibrinolytic factors.
Fibrinolytic therapy to dissolve clots and facilitate
IOP may be increased, decreased, or normal depending
egress of nonclearing hyphema from the eye has been
 on the cause and extent of the hyphema and accompanying
advocateds7. Dramatic resolution of fibrin   and
ocular lesions.(
Concurrent lesions of trauma may be
hemorrhagic clots occurrs with 25 pg tPA injected into
abrasions and contusions on the lids, head, or body.
the anterior chamber but secondary bleeding is common.
310
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
Antifibrinolytic therapy  with  agents such   as
seal a corneal perforation or injury salvages the eye and
aminocaproic acid or tranexemic acid has been used to
does not greatly hinder function. Animals requiring
prevent
 rebleeding.
.Aminocaproic 
acid  inhibits
 sharp vision, such as hunters, have more protected eyes
 plasminogen activations8. Antifibrinolytic therapy is still
 and do not respond to injury to the same extent.
considered experimental.
Causes of uveitis in all species include:
Experimental clotted hyphema benefited from i.y.
 Infectious agents: viral, bacterial, protozoal, mycotic,
mannitol.
 Also, subconjunctival methylprednisolone
rickettsial, algal.
 administered before clotting occurred resulted in poor clot
Metazoan parasites: worms, flukes, fly larvae.
formation and faster resorptions9. Systemic corticosteroids
Tra uma: perforating and blunt.
were thought to be beneficial in humans with hyphema by
 Immune mediated: lens-induced, systemic immune-
 decreasing the incidence of secondary hemorrhages but a
mediated diseases.
double-blind study failed to show any benefit60, 61
Neoplastic: primary, multicentric, metastatic.
 Blood dyscrasia: neoplastic, immune-mediated.
UVEITIS
 Idiopathic: this is a large group in all species.
Introduction/etiology
Anterior uveitis, iritis, and iridocyclitis are synonyms for
Clinical signs of anterior uveitis in the dog and cat
inflammation of the iris. In most instances, both the iris
[see Table 11.2]
and ciliary body are involved and the preferred term is
 Selective bulbar conjunctival and episcleral vascular
anterior uveitis. The
e causes of uveitis are varied and
injection (11.34).
often elusive in all
 species. The condition may
be
Miosis that does not easily dilate with mydriatics
unilateral or bilateral and may be either confined to the
(11.11). In mild and chronic anterior uveitis, the
anterior uvea or be panuveal.
pupils are usually not constricted but are not as
 Unlike many areas of the body, physiologic function in
responsive to mydriatic agents.
associated with intraocular inflammation. Consequently,
the eye has developed a moderating protective
mechanism against the inflammatory reactions of many
Table 11.2 Clinical signs of anterior uveitis in the dog
 antigens within the anterior chamber. This is termed
and cat
anterior chamber-associated immune deviation {ACAID),
which
downgrades the delayed l
hypersensitivity
Signs
Sensitivity and specificity
immunity to many antigens that are presented to the
Conjunctivalf
Sensitive but not specific:
anterior chamber. This has the effect of minimizing
episcleral injection 
glaucoma, episcleritis also produce
immune-mediated destruction but may allow the antigen
similar injection
(infectious or neoplastic) to progress unchecked. This
Miosis
Neither sensitive nor specific:
immune privilege is the result of a lack of lymphatic
mainly acute forms, multiple causes
drainage in the eye, with antigens bypassing regional
Blepharospa sm
Neither sensitive nor specific:
lymph nodes and being presented directly to the spleen.
mainly acute forms, multiple causes
Suppressor T-cells that downplay cell-mediated responses
 Aqueous flare
Sensitive and specifie: indicative of
 are produced by the spleen62.
active uveitis
 Inflammatory damage may be due to cytotoxic effects
Synechia
Specific for past, but not active,
of an infectious agent, chemical mediators produced by the
Uveitis
host defense, and proliferative cellular reactions that
 Change in iris 
Sensitive (lighter irides), specific:
disrupt normal morphology. Examples of chemical
texture and color
 but must differentiate from
mediators with potentially harmful cellular effects are
complement, cell-derived lytic enzymes, cytokines, and
neoplasia
arachidonic acid metabolites. The arachidonic acid
Iris nodules
Not sensitive: usually
metabolites that utilize the cyclo-oxygenase and lipo-
 granulomatous; specifie if
differentiated from neoplasia
 Oxygenase pathways have been studied the most and they
 provide the rationale for utilization of NSAIDs in uveitis
 Keratic precipitates
Specific: usually granulomatous,
therapy. Proteolytic enzymes released by neutrophils have
 may persist after inflammation 
been assumed to damage the tissues directly but evidence
Hypotony
 Sensitive and specific: often persists 
is accumulating that oxygen metabolites, such as hydrogen
after resolution
peroxide and hydroxyl and superoxide radicles, damage
 Secondary glaucoma
 Not sensitive or specific: persists
the tissue, potentiate arachidonic acid metabolites, and
 after inflammation 
prolong the life of proteolytic enzymes63. Future anti-
Stromal keratitis 
 Not sensitive or specific: usually in 
inflammatory therapy may incorporate antioxidants and
 chronic forms
hydroxyl radical scavengers.
Species variations exist in the response to ocular
Rubeoisis iridis
Not sensitive or specific: chronic 
injury. Bito64 argued that species that are grazers or the
uveitis, observed most easily in light 
irides
hunted respond with exaggerated breakdown of the
'saunq au oi paieduoo iauieq rouq snoanbe-pooa
Cataracts
Nonspecific: usually capsular and 
Grazing animals typically have exposed globes for a wide
outer cortex
field of vision that are subject to injury. These animals do
 Decreased vision
 Nonspecific and not sensitive 
not have sharp vision; a massive outpouring of protein to
ANTERIOR UVEA AND ANTERIOR CHAMBER
311
11.34
11.35
 11.34 Selective injection of the the conjunctival and episcleral
11.35 Serofibrinous clot in the anterior chamber of a cat with
vessels in a dog with uveitis due to Brucelfa conis. The pupil is
anterior uveitis.
pha rmacologically dila ted.
11.36 Lens-induced
11.36
11.37 Iris bombe
11.37
uveitis in a
and hyphema in a
Minia ture Poodle.
dog with uveitis
Note the selective
associated with
 conjunctival
Ehrfichia canis.
injection and dark 
iris. The pupil is
irregular from
 posterior synechiae,
 and the anterior
lens capsule is
dusted with pigment
from the iris.
11.38
+ Photophobia and blepharospasm, particularly in
acute cases.
 Plasmoid aqueous humor and possible fibrin clots in
the anterior chamber due to alterations in the
blood-aqueous humor barrier. The presence of flare
from plasmoid aqueous humor is the clinical
 hallmark of anterior uveitis (see Chapter 1, p.11
1.13). Clotted or unclotted hyphema may be present 
and the leukotactic stimulation so intense that
hypopyon may develop (11.35).
 Synechiae: with fibrinous exudation from the uveal
vasculature, the iris adheres to adjacent structures
resulting in variable degrees of synechiae. These
 may manifest as posterior synechiae, producing
11.38 Marked darkening of the iris in a Siamese cat with chronic
immobile or irregular pupil(s). Uveal pigment
uveitis of undetermined cause.
disruption and synechiae often result in pigment
deposits on the anterior lens capsule (11.36).
Complete posterior synechiae (pupil seclusion)
 Change in iris texture and color: the iris becomes
result in iris bombe (balooning forward) with a
thicker, loses its delicate surface mosaic texture, and
shallowing of the anterior chamber (11.37).
becomes darker in color with inflammation. The
Peripheral anterior synechiae involving the
blue and gold irides become brown, which is striking
iridocorneal angle may develop independent of, or
in appearance if it occurs unilaterally, and the brown
secondary to, iris bombe.
iris becomes blacker (11.38).
312
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
· KPs: cellular debris often accumulates on the corneal
11.39
11.39 Large mutton
endothelium, forming KPs. Large deposits (mutton
fat keratic
fat) that can be seen with the unaided eye are formed
precipitates in a dog 
by macrophages and mononuclear cells, whereas
with panuveitis and
small deposits are usually neutrophils (11.39, 11.40).
exudative retinal
 Hypotony is typical of uncomplicated uveitis and is
detachment due to
due to decreased aqueous humor production and
systemic mycoses.
 increased uveoscleral outflow190.
 Synechiae and/or fibrin or cellular debris may block
the aqueous humor outflow pathways and produce
secondary glaucoma.
 Stromal keratitis usually accompanies chronic
anterior uveitis and, conversely, most deep corneal
problems also produce anterior uveal involvement
(see Chapter 10, p.241).
 PIFM (rubeosis iridis) or neovascularization of the
iris surface is present with many cases of chronic
11.40
11.40 Mutton fat
uveitis2. Rubeosis, while a common histopathologic
keratic precipitates
lesion2, is not often clinically visualized without
in a cat with Felv-
fluorescein angiography. Rubeosis is most easily
associated uveitis.
detected in lighter pigmented irides. Rubeosis often 
extends into the iridocorneal angle and may be
responsible for spontaneous hyphema and a very
intractable form of gla ucoma.
 Cataracts, either anterior or posterior capsular
 opacities, or both, may occur with anterior uveitis
and are termed complicated cataracts. The opacities
may be from pigment dispersion, synechiae, or
deposition of inflammatory debris on the ca psules.
Eventually, impaired nutrition to the lens may result 
in varying degrees of cortical cataracts. Cataracts that
are the result of uveitis should be differentiated from
cataracts that cause uveitis or cataracts that resulted
from a common initiating factor such as trauma.
young adult dogs. Sight hounds and the Siberian Husky seem
to be at higher risk66. The anterior segment reaction is
Causes of uveitis in the dog (Table 11.3)
thought to be an Arthus-type immune inflammatory
Systemic infectious diseases
reaction67,68 Severe instances will result inglaucoma and/or
Infectious canine hepatitis, ehrlichiosis, Rocky Mountain
persistent comeal edema, the most serious sequelae. Most
spotted fever {RMSF), systemic mycoses, protothecosis,
cases improve spontaneously over 2-3 weeks (see Chapter
toxoplasmosis,
leishmaniasis,
ca nine 
brucellosis,
10, p.241).
mycobacteria, leptospirosis, and bacterial septicemia are
Ehrlichia canis, E. platys, and Rickettsia rickettsii are tick-
examples of infectious diseases that may cause uveitis.
borne rickettsial diseases that produce a vasculitis that often
Massa et al65 found that in over 100 dogs with uveitis
 manifests as unilateral or bilateral anterior uveitis, often with
unrelated to the lens or trauma, 18% were related to
s d o    a r
systemic infectious agents. These authors found that the
(11.37)69-73. In the author's experience, 0cular manifestations
most common agent was Ehrlichia canis. Obviously, the
 due to Ebrlichia spp. are usually more severe than with
infectious agents involved with uveitis will vary with what is
RMSE Ehrlicbia spp. may also cause posterior uveitis
endemic for the geographical region. Some infectious agents
manifested with infiltrates and/or retinal detachment due to
may cause an immune-mediated inflammation, rather than
exudation (see Chapter 14, p.401).
destruction by the infectious agent itself. Anterior uveitis
Borrelia burgdorferi {Lyme disease) is a tick-borne
with toxoplasmosis and systemic mycoses may have
nq ean iouaisod aul ul aqesuuap Apeau susueao
 and ocular hemorrhage74. Most reports used antibody
organisms are rarely present in the anterior uvea. This results
testing, which can be unreliable; recently, however, the
in speculation that anterior uveitis is more immune mediated
than due to direct tissue damage by the infecting organism.
Contagious bacterial infections such as Brucella canis,
CAV-1 (causing ICH) mainly produces a nongranulo-
leptospirosis, and tuberculosis may also manifest with
matous anterior uveitis with involvement of the corneal
uveitis. Brucella canis has been found both experimentally
endothelium. The ocular lesions typically manifest 10-14
and
clinically
to
 produce
anterior
uveitis
days after immunization with adeno-1 modified live vaccine
endophthalmitis, 
either unilaterally or bilaterally. The
(MLV) or in the convalescing stage of clinical hepatitis. The
uveitis is often accompanied by hemorrhage and, like the
use of adeno-2 MLV vaccines has dramatically decreased but
systemic disease, becomes a chronic insiduous process
has not eliminated the incidence of vaccine-induced uveitis.
despite therapy (11.41). The ocular lesions may be the only
Three percent of uveitis cases in a recent report were
clinical signs of brucellosis76-79, Noncontagious bacterial
associated with vaccination6s.(
Ocular lesions manifest
infections from a variety of sources may result in
unilaterally in 85% of cases and occur in young puppies to
embolization to the eye, with inflammation.
ANTERIOR UVEA AND ANTERIOR CHAMBER
313
Table 11.3 Causes of canine anterior uveitis
Etiology
Diagnostic aids
Systemic infectious diseases 
Infectious canine hepatitis 
History of vaccination, age, appearance
Ehrtichia spp.
Hemorrhagic uveitis, titers, response to tetracycline, low
platelet count
Rickettsia rickettsif
Petechiae, titers, response to tetracycline, low platelet count
Bruceffa conis
Hemorrhagie uveitis, history, titers 
Leptospira spp.
Renal and liver signs, titers 
Borretia burgdorferi
Polyarthritis, renal disease, serology, W/estern blot
Systemic mycoses 
Pulmonary, bone, skin, or CNS signs, chest X-ray, titers,
cytology of lesions, geographic location 
Toxoptasma gondii
Elevated IgM or rising IgG titers 
Leishmania donovani
History of Mediterranean travel, Fox Hound, cytology of marrow, titers
Prototheca spp.
Hemorrhagic diarrhea, ocular cytology, cytology of urine
 Metazoan parasites
 Observation of worm or larva in eye, wandering tracts in fundus
Trauma
 Blunt or perforating
Physical examination, history, X-ray or ultrasound with missile
and foreign bodies
Neoplasia
History, physical examination, ultrasound, cytology of ocular fluids
Extension from keratitis
 Deep ulceration, history, ocular examination 
Immune-mediated processes
 Phacoclastic uveitis
Lens-induced uveitis
i.e. cataracts, breed, dermal depigmentation, response to anti-
VKH syndrome
inflammatory drugs
Sclerouveal syndromes
Steroid responsive retinal
detachment syndrome
11.41 A 2-year-old
11.41
11.42 Anterior
11.42
Labrador Retriever
uveitis with
with anterior uveitis
exudative retinal
a55ociated with
detachment in a
Bruceffa conis. The
dog with
cornea is edematou5
blastomycosis. The
due to elevated
pupil is irregular due
 intraocular pressure.
to synechia and the
Note the free blood 
detached retina can
in the anterior
be visualized
chamber.
through the pupil.
Systemic mycoses often present with anterior uveitis
uvea, suggesting the possibility of an immune-mediated
that is usually part of a panuveitis. Histoplasmosis
reaction being responsible for the anterior uveitis.
 sasou siisas au jo  iseai a si so
Secondary glaucoma from iris bombe is a common
produce ocular signs in the dog80. The incidence of
 complication of anterior uveal involvement (11.42). The
histoplasmosis, blastomycosis, and coccidioidomycosis is
complication of blindness with ongoing painful ocular
often very regional. Cryptococcosis is sporadic
and
 disease, after systemic improvement with therapy, is a
widespread, often associated with pigeon feces and
common cause for euthanasia request. Disseminated
 poultry houses81. Coccidioidomycosis and blastomycosis
opportunistic fungal diseases associated with sa prophytic
are common etiologies of uveitis in the dog in their
fungi have a predisposition for the German Shepherd
respective endemic regions. The portal of entry is usually
Dog. Organisms such as Aspergillus spp., Candida spp.,
the respiratory tract, with hematogenous spread to the
Penicillium spp., and Paecilomyces spp. may disseminate 
eye. Despite the systemic origin of the organism, the
to the eye, causing uveitis84. Toxoplasma gondi infection
ocular complaint is often primary. F
Blastomycosis and
in the dog is worldwide and common, based on serologic
cryptococcosis typically produce a bilateral granulo-
and
histopathologic
surveys;,
clinical
signs  and
matous anterior and/or posterior uveitis {1l.42).
recognition of the disease are relatively rare due to the
Coccidioidomycosis is bilateral in only 20% of patients
mildness or ambiguity of the signs8s. Clinical systemic
and 40% have no systemic signs82. Blastomycosis
disease is most common in dogs <1 year and in dogs with
involves the eye in >40% of cases with systemic
 distemper86. The cat is more often affected than the dog.
disease?3. Organisms are usually easily demonstrated in
Systemic signs may or may not be present with ocular
the posterior uvea but are less common in the anterior
disease. In the dog, the most common ocular lesions with
314
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
toxoplasmosis are cyclitis and retinitis (11.43).
and the vitreous and are associated with inflammation
Organisms are often found in the posterior segment
(11.44). The source of the inflammation may be either
lesions but are usually absent in the anterior uvea7, 88.
mechanical trauma or immune mediated. Removal of the
Many previously diagnosed cases of toxoplasmosis,
worms results in rapid improvement, although peristent
based on histopathology, may have been due to
Neospora caninum due to similarities in morphology of
between the anterior and posterior compartments and
T. gondii and N. caninum. N. caninum is transmitted
stimulate anterior uveitis, as well as produce wandering
transplacentally and thus most reports are of infection in
tracks in the subretinal space. A bright light seems to
neonates, where it usually produces an ascending
 stimulate movement of the parasites away from the light.
paralysis. Ocular lesions have included retinochoroiditis,
 anterior uveitis, and extraocular myositis89.
Trauma
Leisbmania infartum is transmitted by the sandfly
Trauma is a common cause of canine anterior uveitis and
and the dog is a reservoir host. It is endemic in the
may be perforating or blunt. Trauma-induced uveitis is
Mediterranean region, Africa, and Asia and may be
0l sake yioq ioy uanbaui lou si i inq leuaielun Allensn
responsible for endophthalmitis in the dog90-92
.The
be affected in BB shot injuries. Blunt trauma-induced
ocular inflammation is relatively confined to the anterior
uveitis may be difficult to diagnose without a complete
uvea, cornea, and lids. The inflammation is mononuclear
history or other periocular injuries to suggest the cause.
and organisms are present in the histiocytes.
The
Perforating injuries may mimic perforating corneal ulcers
majority of cases reported in North America have
but the prognosis for perforating injuries is much worse.
traveled in the Mediterranean, although a form of
Cat claw injuries to puppies and kittens are common and
Leisbmania chagasi is found in South and Central
while infection is a potential complication (11.45), the
America and in the US. The Fox Hound appears uniquely
most serious complication is usually rupture of the lens
susceptible to Leishmania chagasi in the Us93. The mode
capsule during trauma. Tearing of the lens capsule often
 of transmission in the US has not been clarified but may
results in a severe sterile inflammation 2-3 weeks after
involve direct transmission as well as an insect vector.
initial trauma, when the initial traumatic uveitis is
 Prototbeca spp. is an ubiquitous algae found in soil and
subsiding (11.46, 11.47). This uveitis is termed
water but is rarely associated with systemic disease in the
phacoanaphylaxis or phacoclastic uveitis and is due to
dog. The portal of entry is thought to be the digestive tract,
 altered tolerance to lens protein.
with hemorrhagic diarrhea being the most common sign.
Ocular involvement with a granulomatous posterior
Neopfasia
uveitis or panuveitis is present in >50% of cases*4. Ocular
 Neoplasia mimics simple anterior uveitis by producing
lesions may occur without systemic signs9s.
tissue necrosis, hemorrhage, and glaucoma. Primary ocular
Aberrent parasites such as fly larvae in the dog and
neoplasia is unilateral but secondary multicentric ocular
 neoplasia or metastatic neoplasia may be bilateral. The
most common secondary ocular tumor in all domestic
horse101, and nemotodes such as Dirofilaria immitis02-106,
 species is lymphosarcoma. Lymphosarcoma will produce
 and mimic inflammation in all species (11.48, 11.49)109.
in dogs may be relatively rare causes of anterior uveitis.
 Massa et al. 65 reported that neoplasia accounted for 25%
The most common ocular parasites in the dog are
of uveitis cases and 68% were due to lymphosarcoma. The
immature adult male and female Dirofilaria immitis that
Rottweiler and Golden Retriever were most commonly
ha ve been identified as moving between the aqueous humor
affected. All cases of ocular lymphosarcoma had systemic
11.43
11.44
11.45
11.43 A dog with granulomatous uveitis and
11.44 Dirofilaria in the anterior chamber
11.45 Penetrating claw injury that has
5cleritis associated with toxoplasmosis. Note
of a dog with anterior uveitis. (Courtesy of
induced a bacterial uveitis in a young cat.
the keratic precipitates ventrally that are
 Dr. M. Glaze, Louisiana State University
Note the dark linear penetrating corneal injury.
associated with corneal edema: peripheral
Veterinary College.)
A secondary glaucoma is producing mild
corneal infiltrates dorsally are associated
corneal edema and the dilated pupil. The
with scleritis. The iris is darker and thicker
condition responded rapidly to intraocular
than normal.
 gentamicin but vision was not restored.
ANTERIOR UVEA AND ANTERIOR CHAMBER
315
11.46
11.47
11.46 Intractable phacoclastic uveitis and secondary glaucoma in a
11.47 Globe from patient in 11.46. Only an empty collapsed
dog. A penetrating scleral injury was responsible. Enucleation was
capsular bag remains of the lens (arrow). The iris is very thick
eventually performed.
 and inflammatory membranes (M] are present behind the lens.
signs of lymphosarcoma. Hemangiosarcoma, transmissible
11.48
venereal tumor, and adenocarcinoma may metastasize
bilaterally to the anterior or posterior uvea.
Secondary to deep corneal ulceration and keratitis
Anterior uveitis secondary to deep corneal inflammation
is often sterile even if the process is septic. Bacterial toxins
and  inflammatory mediators freely diffuse through
Descemet's membrane to stimulate 
 anterior uveal
inflammation, shown in a cat (11.50). Aqueous humor
centesis may be utilized to determine whether sepsis is
present in the anterior chamber but, because of aqueous
humor turnover, false-negative responses may occur.
Immune mediated
Many forms of anterior uveitis are sterile and/or cannot be
associated with serologic evidence of infection. Such forms
11.48 An Old English Sheepdog with bilateral iris bombe and secondary
are assumed to be immune mediated by exclusion. Massa
glaucoma due to lymphosarcoma. The white subconjunctival deposit is
et al.65 reported that 58% of uveitis cases in the dog were
from a previous injection of methylprednisolone by the referring 
idiopathic/immune mediated; this figure would ha ve been
veterinarian. The dog had advanced lymphadenopathy that was missed
even higher had they not excluded lens-induced uveitis
because it was not self-evident with the long hair coat. Despite
 cases from the series. Circulating immune complexes from
improvement with chemotherapy, the animal was blind from glaucoma.
11.49
11.50
11.49 Presentation in a dog with bilateral marked hypopyon, uveitis.
11.50 Hypopyon in a cat with a relatively superficial corneal ulcer.
and secondary glaucoma due to lymphosarcoma. The cornea ha5
neovascularization and edema, a large mass of cells is present in
the anterior chamber, and the pupil is dilated from the elevated 
intraocular pressure.
316
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
elsewhere in the body may localize in the uvea, or humoral
incubated with an antigen in sensitized animals. This
and/or cellular immune-mediated processes_ may be
 augmentation was thought to be due to absorption of
 directed against ocular tissue (melanin, retinal S antigen,
immunoglobulin or antigenl14. In humans, VKH
lens protein), infectious agents, or foreign material in the
syndrome has been associated with meningeal signs in
eye. The ocular inflammation may be part of a systemic
Bop aul ui uowmooun Auaedde si sn tsuaed auos
immune response or be localized to the eye.
since only one dog has been reported with neurologic
 Phacoanaphylaxis (phacoclastic) and lens-induced uveitis
 signsl1s. VKH syndrome is observed most frequently in
{LIU) are examples of immune-mediated responses against
the young adult Akita, Irish Setter, Siberian Husky, and
ocular antigens. Phacoanaphylaxis is a chronic severe
Samoyed. The panuveitis is chronic, bilateral, and
inflammatory reaction that occurs in some individuals 1-3
 granulomatous in nature. Depigmentation of the skin and
  i adn s asdeo sual ai ahe saa
hair often occurs after the initiation of ocular
granulomatous reaction in some species but in the dog it is
inflammation (see Chapter 7, p.145, 7.67)18. Blindness
characterized by a ruptured lens capsule with neutrophilic
may occur from secondary gla ucoma, retinal detachment,
invasion of the lens and a surrounding lymphocytic-
retinal degeneration, and/or complicated cataracts116-120?
plasmacytic reaction around the lens and in the anterior
 Pigmentary uveitis has been described in the Golden
uveallo. Perilenticular fibroplasia with iris adhesions
Retriever and may involve other breeds as well. The
frequently results in intractable glaucoma (11.46, 11.47)11.
condition is chronic, low grade, and progressive, resulting
 The traditional view of phacoanaphylaxis is that the body is
in secondary glaucoma and loss of vision in most eyes
reacting to the exposed lens protein, because the lens was
despite extensive systemic and topical therapy. The
sequestered early in development and the immune system
condition is characterized by radially oriented pigment
does not recognize it as 'self. This has been challenged as
deposits on the anterior lens capsule, low-grade flare,
normal individuals have circulating antilens antibodies. An
fibrin in the anterior chamber, development of posterior
alternative theory is that the tolerance to lens protein is
 synechia and angle closure, and iridociliary body cysts2
altered by the massive exposure to lens antigens, which
The mean age of the patients was 8.6 years and laboratory
Overrides the effects of intraocular Tsuppressor cell2. A
testing and histopathology was negative for systemic
 second type of lens-induced immune-mediated anterior
disease. Glaucoma led to blindness in 47% of these
uveitis is more frequent and observed with mature to
patients and only one eye remained visual once the
os s uid su a u s ai
pressure was elevated. Histopathologically, a mild
through an intact lens capsule (11.36). This has been called 
a anq saa t u sd sm u u
LIU or phacotoxic uveitisl13. LIU is usually mild and easily
 patients  had received  extensive  treatment before
treated but may result in secondary glaucoma and phthisis
enucleation. The role of iridociliary cycts in uveitis and
bulbi in some animals if untreated. It is characterized by
glaucoma is unclear but an association has been made by
mild lymphocytic-plasmacytic iridocyclitis. With chronicity,
 several authors42,43. A genetic link is also likely since the
the zonules are dissolved by inflammatory cell enzymes and
incidence in the Golden Retriever varies with the lineage
the lens may subluxate or luxate. While these two forms of
 and thus varies in geographic regions.
uveitis are presented as separate entities, they probably
A syndrome of bilateral exudative (transudative)
represent opposite ends of a spectrum of inflammatory
retinal detachment, optic neuritis, and anterior uveitis is 
reactions to lens proteins.
 idiopathic but is thought to be immune mediated, mainly
VKH syndrome is thought to be an immune response
due to a lack of a demonstrable cause and a response to
to melanin that results in depigmentation of the skin, hair,
 and uvea and inflammation. Kaya et al.l14 found melanin
further in Chapter 14 (p.401).
to lack antigenicity or immunogenic properties. Free
melanin granules, when injected into the anterior
Causes of uveitis in the cat (see Table 11.4)
chamber, did not stimulate inflammation but they did
Most cases of anterior uveitis in the cat are bilateral and,
significantly augment intraocular inflammation when
if granulomatous, they are often indicative of severe
Table 11.4 Causes of feline anterior uveitis
Etiology
Diagnostic aids
Systemic infectious diseases 
Feline leukemia virus 
FeLV testing +f- systemic signs 
Feline immuno-deficiency virus
FIV titers, chronic infections, gingivitis 
 Feline infectious peritonitis
 FIP titer, physical examination, elevated globulins
Toxoplasma gondlii
Elevated lgM and rising lgG titers
Systemic mycoses
Cytology of ocular centesis, titers
Bortonella hensetoe
Serology, yet to be established as cause
Herpesvirus felis 
PCR testing, yet to be established as cause
Trauma
History, physical examination, evidence of ocular perforation
Immune-mediated processes
Negative on infectious disease titers, steroid responsive?
Cataract induced
Idiopathic
Neoplasia
History, ultrasound, ocular cytology
Idiopathic
Negative on infectious disease titers, older cats
ANTERIOR UVEA AND ANTERIOR CHAMBER
317
11.51 Gray nodular
11.51
11.52
infiltra tes or 
 granulomas in the
iris stroma of a cat.
Cryptococcus spp.
organisms were
observed on
aqueous humor
centesis.
11.52 Intraocular extranodal lymphosarcoma in a cat that was negative
for FelV on EUSA testing of serum and bone marrow. PCR testing for FelV
was also negative. The FlV serum antibody titer was negative but FIV
antigen was found with PCR. Note the marked iris hyperemia and tan
infiltrate of the peripheral iris, producing dyscoria. This resulted in
systemic disease, with poor prognosis for the cat. Most
 therapy. Malignant cells were noted on aqueous humor cytology.
cats with granulomatous anterior uveitis will die of
systemic disease within 6 months in the author's
experience. Granulomatous uveitis in the cat
characterized by bilaterality, large keratic precipitates
(KPs), a chronic course, posterior synechia,
11.53
and
secondary glaucoma as a sequela. Small nodules may be
present on the iris surface but are very inconsistent
(11.40, 11.51).
Feline leukemia virus (FeLV) complex
Anterior uveitis has been commonly associated with
     o 
retrospective histopathologic study of feline uveitis,
 about 20% of cases were due to lymphosarcoma12s, This
was obviously a biased study as it reflected only
enucleated eyes. A clinical study of feline uveitis in
 53 eyes reported approximately the same percentage of
cats had FeLV or lymphosarcomal26. Some eyes have
obvious mass lesions in the iris with FeLV but most
appear simply as uveitis; aqueous humor aspirates
11.53 Cat with Felv-associated lymphosarcoma and bilateral iris
typically have nonmalignant lymphocytes and macro-
bombe with secondary glaucoma. The kidneys were also involved.
phages (11.52, 11.53). It is not clear whether the
lymphocytic uveitis is always neoplastic. Nonmalignant
anterior uveitis has been experimentally produced by s.c.
injection of feline sarcoma virus and FeLy127. Clinically,
11.54
the frequency of cats presented with ocular lesions asso-
 ciated with FeLV appears to have dramatically decreased
in the last decade and the incidence of nonviremic
summarized 57 cases of lymphosarcoma submitted for
%9e ieut punoy pue sueak zl isel aui ul Asojouiedoisu
of cases with uveitis and lymphosarcoma were positive
for FeLV; of eyes with only lymphosarcoma, 16% were
positive for FeLV. Extranodal lymphoma or single tumor
masses affecting an organ without systemic illness are
usually of B-cell lineage and may be associated with FIV.
Feline infectious peritonitis (FiP)
Anterior uveitis due to FIP occurs either alone or in
conjunction with posterior uveitis and optic neuritis and is
11.54 Young kitten with FIP-induced bilateral anterior uveitis with
similar in clinical manifestation to the FeLV syndrome
 fibrin clots in the anterior chamber. Effusions were also present in 
the chest and abdomen.
318
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
 present, the etiology is more likely to be FIP than FeLV.
In a histopathologic study of 158 cat eyes with
Ocular lesions are typically associated with the “dry' or
uveitis12s, the most common lesion (29%) was diffuse 
noneffusive form of FIpi31 Ocular lesions were noted in
lymphocytic-plasmacytic anterior uveal inflammation.
about 50% of cases with neurologic manifestations, 
or
Inflammation was bilateral, with a mean age of 7.4 years 
about 15% of the total cases of Fip, in one study132.
A
with no breed or gender predisposition. No infectious
histopathologic study of feline uveitis found 20% of the
agents were apparent. Two cats were serologically
eyes with typical FIP lesions12s but in a clinical study of
 positive for toxoplasmosis and the remaining cats, when
S3 cases of feline uveitis only one was diagnosed as FIp126.
tested, were negative for FeLV and FIP. A nodular form
The perivascular pyogranulomatous lesions of FIP and the
of lymphocytic-plasmacytic uveitis was less frequent
association of a more severe disease in seropositive cats are
(3%), developed in slightly older cats {8.8 years), and
compatible with an immune-mediated Arthus-type of
was usually unilateral. In the remaining group of eyes in
 reaction, rather than direct viral toxicity133.
this study, 22% were consistent with FIP lesions, 21%
were lymphosarcoma, 10% were traumatic or secondary
Systemic mycoses
to keratitis, 8% were LIU, and 5% were secondary to
As in dogs, the incidence of systemic mycoses in cats is
 systemic mycotic disease. The study was biased towards
often very regional. In endemic river bottoms,
the most severe forms of uveitis since the cats either died
histoplasmosis with ocular involvement is more common
or had the worst ocular lesions and sequela (glaucoma)
in cats than in dogs. Feline histoplasmosis signs mimic the
and the eyes were therefore enucleated.
systemic and ocular signs of FeLV and FIpi34-137.
A clinical study of S3 cats with
 nontraumatic
Cryptococcosis is more widespread than other systemic
uveitis126 found 70% were considered idiopathic and
 mycoses and about 20% of reported systemic cases in the
17% were due to FeLV/lymphosarcoma, with one case
cat have ocular lesions. This figure is probably
an
each of FIP and toxoplasmosis. The idiopathic form was
underestimation as another series had almost a 50%
chronic (247 days), free of systemic disease, had a mean
incidence of ocular lesions when the fundus was examined
age of 9.3 years, was bilateral in 32% of cases, and was
(see Chapter 14, p.401)138 Blastomycosis139, 140, coccidio-
more common in the male {4.3:1). Thirty-six percent of
idomycosisl41, and candidiasisl42 are rare causes of uveitis
the cats had enucleation and the idiopathic form was
in the cat.
characterized by lymphocytic-plasmacytic infiltration of
the anterior uvea. Sera from 20 of 53 cats with idiopathic
Toxopiasmosis
uveitis were retrospectively tested for FIV and 21% were
Toxoplasma gondi has frequently been associated
positive. It is clear from the previously cited studies that
serologically with anterior uveitis but the organisms are
histopathologic studies are limited in elucidating the
etiology of chronic nongranulomatous uveitis.
uveitis may or may not be granulomatous in nature. Cats
Serologic testing of uveitis patients raises different
with uveitis associated serologically with toxoplasmosis
questions than the histopathologic studies; in one series
do not usually have concurrent systemic signs.
of 124 cats, 83% had positive serology. In this series, T.
Conversely, 60-82% of cats with systemic toxoplasmosis
gondi was the most common cause (74%) found on
have ophthalmic signs, with anterior uveitis being the
serologic testing {54% Toxoplasma-positive prevalence
most common14s.
in healthy normal cats) followed by FIV {13%), FeLV
(12%), and FIP (6%), and 17% were negativel47.
Bartonella henselae
 Another series from the same laboratory reported a 90%
Bartonella benselae, one of the causes of cat scratch
positive response for infectious agents with serologic
disease, has been serologically linked to unilateral
testing in uveitis patients. In this series the seroprevalence
chronic anterior uveitis in a catl46, Bartonella spp. are
of infections was 79% for T. gondi, 23% for FIV, 6%
Gram-negative bacteria that are prevalent in cats and
for FeLV, and 27% for FIp148.
may produce disease in cats, dogs, and humans. The
The exact role of T. gondii in anterior uveitis is
importance of Bartonella spp. in animals as a cause of
unknown. The availablility of ELISA tests for
uveitis remains to be elucidated.
Toxoplasma antigen, and feline anti-T. gondii IgG and
IgM has caused a reassessment of the role of
Nongranulomatous anterior uveitis
Nongranulomatous anterior uveitis is common in the
with anterior uveitis may have serologic evidence of
cat. Unilateral causes are often due to trauma,
T. gondi infection, the histopathology reports from eyes
neoplasia, or lens injury, or are idiopathic. Bilateral
enucleated for secondary glaucoma fail to demonstrate
cases are often presumed to be immune mediated or
manifestations of systemic disease but often the
 in cats that have died from histologically proven systemic
relationship is tenuous, relying on serologic testing.
toxoplasmosis was recently reconfirmed. In this study of
Viral infections, immune-mediated conditions, and
100 cases over a 38 year period, the eyes of 27 of the cats
toxoplasmosis are a few of the etiologies to consider.
were available for examination and 82% had intraocular
The division of nongranulomatous from granulomatous
inflammation. T. gondii was histologicall observed in
is rather arbitrary and blurred. An acute fibrinous
was the most common lesion. Fatal toxoplasmosis with
reaction with mutton fat.
KPs. In two series,
histologic confirmation is rare when considered in light
nongranulomatous anterior uveitis/lymphocytic uveitis
 Of the serologic prevalence.
accounted for 32% and 70% of casesi2s, 126.
 Davidson and Englishis1 have summarized the various
ANTERIOR UVEA AND ANTERIOR CHAMBER
319
theories in the literature on the possible link between
Clinical signs of acute equine recurrent uveitis (ERU)
T. gondi and uveitis in humans and other animals. The
Synonyms for equine anterior uveitis are equine recurrent
rarity of finding organisms in the anterior uvea of the cat
uveitis (ERU), periodic ophthalmia, and moon blindness.
has lead to various hypotheses:
Equine uveitis is worldwide, has been known from
● Anterior uveitis is associated with inflammatory
antiquity, and is considered the leading cause of
 mediators from the posterior segment.
blindness in horses and mules.
 Organism numbers are so low they are difficult to
· Lids and conjunctiva: blepharospasm, lacrimation
detect.
turning to mucopurulent discharge, chemosis, and
 Ocular inflammation is the result of memory
marked conjunctival hyperemia are typical. The
immune cells homing to the eye after exposure to
 animal may be depressed and anorexic.
 organisms at nonocular sites.
+
Cornea: the cornea develops varying degrees of
●  Molecular mimicry is involved, where peptides of the
edema and may turn very yellow from neutrophilic
organism are close to self-antigens that drive the
infiltration (11.s5). Neovascularization develops
inflammation.
after several da ys.
 Circulating immune complexes of T. gondii and
+
 Aqueous humor: aqueous flare is the hallmark of
antibody are deposited in the anterior uvea.
uveitis, with possible hypopyon and hemorrhage in
 Nonspecific upregulation of antibody production in
severe cases (11.56). Aqueous formation is
uveitis has increased T. gondii antibodies.
decreased, resulting in hypotony.
 Iris: the iris is miotic, dull, thicker, and darker
 The response to therapy with clindamycin has been cited
{11.56). Posterior synechiae develop rapidly.
 as indirect evidence for the role of T. gondi in uveitis.
Lens: lens changes are a common cause of eventual
Clindamycin (25 mg/kg q12h) alone or with gluco-
blindness of the animal. The lens often has pigment 
corticoids was more effective in reducing inflammation
deposits or nests of pigment from iris adhesions, a
capsular haze develops from deposits of cells and fibrin
and, eventually, cortical opacities develop. Uveitis is the
the morbidity and mortality of treated animals compared
 most common cause of cataracts in the horse.
to controls. In a Syrian Golden hamster model of retinal
Vitreous: the vitreous usually develops inflammatory
toxoplasmosis, of the variety of drugs used to treat
infiltrates which result in a haze and, later,
toxoplasmosis none affected the acute clinical course and
organization into strands and floaters.
only atovaquone reduced the number of tissue cysts and
 Retina and optic nerve: peripapillary multifocal to
had any affect on the chronic coursel52.
confluent areas of pigment disruption in the
FIV has been associated with anterior uveitis,
 nontapetum are most typical. Vascular alterations of the 
characterized by anterior uveitis, glaucoma, and pars
nerve head and blurring of the nerve margins may be
planitis. Inflammation was usually mild to moderate,
present (see Chapter 14, p.401).
chronic, and characterized by aqueous flare, peripheral
iridal hyperemia, posterior synechia, anterior sub-
capsular cataracts, and hypotony. Pars planitis 
is
diagnosed by the presence of white cellular infiltrates in
the peripheral anterior vitreous that often coalescei53.
11.56
11.55 Acute ERU-associated corneal edema
11.56 Acute bilateral ERU with miosis and
masking the uveitis.
fibrin exudation in the anterior chamber.
320
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRiNArY MeDiCINE
Clinical signs of chronic ERU
has a course that varies from acute to chronic and
Each acute to subacute bout of ERU leaves more scarring
insidious. The acute forms become quiescent with time or
 in the eye. The pupil is commonly immobile in a constricted
nsa ie 1noa1 1o 5asdeau aaeu uayo 1q Adea
position due to synechiae {11.57). While adhesions are
common, glaucoma is not a common complication and
hypothyroidism, and nutritional influences (vitamin A
phthisis bulbi is much more likely to develop in the late
and riboflavin157,158) on ERU. However, in humans and
stages {11.58). Chronicity results in corneal scarring that is
mice the interaction of genetic factors with immunologic
usually quite diffuse and is at various levels. Band
reactions has been linked to the major histocompatability
keratopathy or corneal calcifiction  is  a  frequent
antigens. In humans, specific major histocompatability
complication. The anterior capsule becomes fibrosed and
 antigen HLA-B27 has been associated with certain forms
covered with pigment nests and, in the late stages, a dense
of anterior uveitis159 and similar associations have been
yellow-white cataract develops. Subluxation of the lens
proposed for horsesl60. Mules are more resistant than
may occur (11.59). The iris is darker than normal and the
horses  to recurrent uveitis 
sesooleddy pue 
are
granula iridica are often missing.
disproportionately represented (25% of cases)160, 161.
Vitreal opacities and bands may be visible {11.59) if
 Sixty-eight percent of Appaloosas became blind with the
the lens is not opaque and the retina may be detached
disease compared to 36% of non-Appaloosas160.
due to traction bands. Peripapillary scars of varying
Onchocerca cervicalis microfilaria have long been
degrees are the most common fundus lesions. Blindness is
thought to be a major cause of ERU. O. cervicalis
frequently due to optic nerve atrophy that is manifest as
microfilaria pass from the lid to the conjunctiva and
a pale optic nerve with decreased or no visible retinal
cornea and then into the eye with the episcleral blood
vessels (see Chapter 14, p.401).
vessels. Dead larvae are thought to incite the
inflammation rather than live larvae. The infection in
Causes of ERU
horses is similar to the onchocerciasis in humans that is
There are multiple etiologies for uveitis in the horse.
endemic in parts of Africa. The importance of
Trauma and deep corneal infection, which are common
O. cervicalis may vary with geographic region: the
causes of equine uveitis, will not be included in this
 incidence of O. cervicalis larvae in England is too low to
discussion. ERU is most commonly manifested as an
 account for ERU, while in the US it is found in 50-87%
anterior uveitis but it may be a panuveitis or be restricted
to the posterior uvea and optic nerve. It is
a
site of microfilaria localization in the eye is at the limbus
nongranulomatous uveitis that usually becomes bilateral
and adjacent cornea and conjunctiva, which has resulted
and it is relapsing in nature. Histopathologically, it has been
aul ie saisdoiq dius Aq sisouaeip e axew ol siduaiie u1
 suggested that the findings of infiltration of lymphocytes
lateral bulbar conjunctivai67. The routine use of broad-
 and plasma cell into the nonpigmented ciliary epithelium,
 spectrum dewormers has markedly decreased O.
a thick acellular hyaline membrane adherent to the inner
cervicalis as a major cause of uveitis.
aspect of the nonpigmented epithelium, and eosinophilic
 Leptospira spp. have been associated with uveitis in
linear inclusions in the nonpigmented ciliary epithelium are
the horse experimentally and naturally. Leptospira spp.
diagnostic of ERU154, 1ss.
have been isolated from eyes with recurrent uveitis,
A wide variety of suggested etiologies have been
 uaag seu sisoei po poa pnsn aun yno
proposed over the years for recurring keratouveitis that
 'ai o sn  o sai s
11.57
11.58
11.59
11.57 Chronic ERU that is presented with
11.58 Appaloosa with ERU that has resulted
11.59 Chronic equine recurrent uveitis that
multiple posterior synechiae.
in phthisis bulbi. The opposite eye had
has resulted in posterior luxation of the lens
glaucoma.
(arrow). Note the very dark iris and
membranes in the anterior vitreous.
ANTERIOR UVEA AND ANTERIOR CHAMBER
321
et al.168 were able to culture Leptospira interrogans from
{L. interrogans) is currently thought to be the process
52% of vitrectomy samples from horses with chronic
involved with ERU183 but the inciting antigen might be
ERU, whereas all normal control samples were negative
 different in various regions. The histopathology, presence
on culture. Finding a higher titer in the aqueous humor
of a predominance of T-cells in the cellular reaction,
than in the serum is presumptive evidence of a causal
expression of major histocompatibility complex antigens
relationship169-173 
Experimental
infection  with
in ocular cells183, and elevated antibody levels against
retina S-antigen and other retinal proteins184, 18s
are
inflammation after a lag of 1 year or later in 61% of the
findings compatible with an immune-mediated process.
eyes174. While in many geographic areas of the US
The recurrences may be associated with persistence of
leptospiral titers indicate that L. interrogans plays a major
antigen, re-exposure to an antigen in the presence of a
role in recurrent uveitis, in England the prevalence is so
leaky blood-aqueous humor barrier, or acquired
low that it is not considered a probable cause17s. The
sensitivity to autoantigens through either alteration or
predominant serovar reported varies with the geographic
suppression of tolerance174, 182, 183
region. In Germany, it is L. grippotyphosa (no L. pomond
As with other species, a combination of infectious
is found)176. In the US, L. pomona and L. bratislava are
agents and immunological mechanisms is the favorite
the common serovars associated with uveitis.
current etiology of ERU. It is probable that the
Borrelia burgdorferi has been implicated as causing
condition has a different primary cause in different
panuveitis in a pony; the organism was isolated from the
geographic areas.
anterior chamber. This may be an additional cause for
recurrent uveitis in endemic areas for Lyme disease177.
Miscellaneous uveitis syndromes in various species
 Brucella abortus has been suggested as a cause of
 Neonatal horses with Rhodococcus equii or other
recurrent uveitis but surveys of normal and affected
bacterial septicemia frequently develop dramatic
horses could not find a correlation178, 179.
bilateral uveitis characterized by large fibrin clots
Streptococcus equi was suggested as a possible cause
and hypopyon in the anterior chamber {11.60). The
of an outbreak of peripapillary chorioretinitis in horses
foals are systemically ill and the uveitis usually
because of an earlier outbreak of strangles. Whether the 
improves dramatically with systemic antibiotics,
condition  resulted  from  direct infection or.a
topical corticosteroids, and atropine. Intraocular
hypersensitivity to the organism is not known180.
injections of 25-50 μg tPA will rapidly lyse the 
Streptococcus spp. are not thought to play a significant
 anterior chamber fibrin clot and synechia.
role in ERU.
 Uveitis secondary to a keratitis is very common in
Strongyle infection (Strongylus vuigaris) has been
the horse and may be associated with ulcers infected
postulated to have a role in ERU. The addition of
with bacteria or fungi, corneal abscesses from
phenothiazine and riboflavin to the ration prevented
bacteria or fungi, and sterile keratouveitis from
au ul pasn anam shouoo ou inq piay e un syeaqno
trauma or unknown causes (see Chapter 10, p.241).
feeding trial181. Viruses such as adenovirus and influenza
Topical steroid therapy is not administered with
virus have been clinically implicated in uveitis182.
infectious or suspected infectious keratouveitis,
Immune-mediated responses are an important factor
rather the uveitis is treated with systemic NSAIDs
in combination with one or more of the other factors
and topical atropine.
discussed. Delayed hypersensitivity to an antigen
11.60
11.60 A foal with rhodococcal joint infection that has resulted in a
 bilateral uveitis with marked fibrin exudation.
322
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETeRINARY MeDICINE
●The rabbit has a phacoclastic form of uveitis that is
11.61
 spontaneous and not associated with trauma or
swollen mature cataracts. The syndrome is
characterized by granuloma in the anterior chamber
and typical signs of uveitis usually in a young dwarf
ra bbit. The microsporidium Encep balitozoon
cuniculi is thought to associated with this syndrome,
based on finding organisms in the lens that are
 morphologically compatible186, elevated titers of E.
cuniculi, and DNA of E. cunicul187, The
 pathogenesis is unknown. Therapy is topical
glucocorticoids to quiet the eye, followed by lens.
removal188 and albendazole 15-30 mg/kg q24h187 if
relapses occur.
 Uveitis in cattle is common with bacterial septicemic
diseases such as thromboembolic
meningoencephalitis {11.61), listeriosis, neonatal
septicemia (11.62), and herpesvirus diseases such as
11.61 A downer cow with infectious thromboermbolic
[BR {10.59, 11.63) and MCF (10.60). An idiopathic
meningoencephalitis due to Hemophitus somnus. The pupil is
anterior and posterior uveitis was described in a herd
 constricted, the cornea is diffusely edematous, and hypopyon is present.
of Holstein cows that affected 65% of the herd. No
 husbandry problems or infectious disease agents
Could be identified with extensive testing189
11.62
Diagnosis of the cause of uveitis
Anterior uveitis may be l
unilateralor
bilateral,
endogenous or exogenous in origin, acute or chronic in
course, and granulomatous or nongranulomatous. All
these factors may provide diagnostic clues to direct the
search for an etiology. A thorough history and general
 physical examination should be performed to search for
a definitive diagnosis. Bilateral uveitis is often a
manifestation of systemic disease that may have a
 possible is desired.
Laterality
 Systemic disease should be considered when both eyes
 are involved, although systemic diseases do not always 
result in bilateral uveitis, e.g. ICH in the dog. With
11.62 A calf with E. cofi scours that developed diffuse corneal edema
unilateral disease the clinician should rule out something
 and anterior uveitis.
unique to that eye, such as trauma or neoplasia. Bilateral
BB shot or multicentric neoplasia such as lympho-
sarcoma are exceptions of traumatic and neoplastic
11.63
causes of uveitis that may be bilateral.
Granulomatous versus nongranulomatous
These are pathologic descriptive terms that are subject to
error when based on clinical findings, and they change
with time. The finding of large or 'mutton fat' KPs is the
main clinical diagnostic criterion for granulomatous
uveitis (11.39, 11.40). Focal proliferative lesions may
also be present on the iris surface but are not as
consistent a finding as large KPs (11.51). An additional
limitation of this differentiation is the changing nature of
the inflammation over the course of the disease.
Despite these limitations, the terminology persists
and, particularly in the cat, may narrow down the
etiology. In the dog, defining the nature of the inflam-
mation is not as helpful in finding the cause, although a
nonviral etiology such as systemic fungal infection
11.63 Acute bilateral anterior uveitis in a young cow,
should be considered more strongly with granulomatous
characterized by miosis, thickening of the iris, and peripheral
inflammation.
corneal neovascularization. Infectious bovine rhinotracheitis
was the suspected cause.
ANTERIOR UVEA AND ANTERIOR CHAMBER
323
Ocular centesis with aqueous humor testing
produced by FIV and FeLV may make cats susceptible to
Centesis with cultures and cytology is important in
mixed infections with FIP and T gondi. The testing
diagnosing sepsis, either bacterial or fungal. Aqueous
methodology for T. gondi should be noted, as latex
humor centesis is easily performed but may yield false-
ae sisai uoueunjaauau paipu aul pue uoueunae
negative findings due to the fast turnover of aqueous
not as sensitive and specific as the ELISA technique for
humor Vitreous cultures are much more reliable for
 detection of T. gondi-specific IgG and IgM192. An IgM and
cultures but the procedure is also potentially more
IgG antibody titer ≥1:64 has been considered positive but
traumatic to the eye. In general, cytology is not very
in regions where the titers are ubiquitous, most clinicians
informative except in sepsis or neoplasia.
require higher titers for diagnosing toxoplasmosis. Elevated
PCR testing, looking for minute quantities of DNA,
IgM titers are considered evidence of active, acute infection.
may become a more widespread diagnostic aid in the
Additional tests for systemic mycoses may be
future. Antibody titers can also be performed on the
performed if the initial tests are not diagnostic. Not all
aqueous humor and, when compared with serum titers,
cats with FeLV complex ocular manifestations are
will be higher if local antibody has been produced. The
viremic, so a negative test does not rule this out.
Goldmann-Witmer coefficient or C value theoretically
indicates local antibody production if the levels are above
Imaging
1191. The C value for a specific antibody is:
Radiology, ultrasound, CT, and MRI may be useful when
both searching for a cause for uveitis and giving a
specific IgG in aqueous humor
 total IgG in serum
prognosis for vision. Special imaging is particularily
 specific IgG in serum
total IgG in
valuable when the ocular media is so hazy that direct
aqueous humor
observations cannot be made and it can diagnose lens-
induced uveitis, trauma, neoplasia, and iris cysts.
 Even with high C values, caution is recommended in
Imaging is also very important in determining
a
interpreting active toxoplasmosis infection.
prognosis for vision based on posterior segment changes
such as retinal detachment.
Biopsy
Biopsy of the iris to aid diagnosis (particularly with
Diagnosis of ERU
neoplasia) can be performed by aspiration or excision.
 Diagnosis of uveitis is usually not difficult but whether it
Vacuuming the surface of a lesion without puncture may
is ERU or from an exogenous cause such as trauma or
yield diagnostic cytology without the risk of hemorrhage.
extension from corneal pathology may not always be
Skin biopsy may also be indicated for VKH syndrome
 obvious when the uveitis is unilateral. Bilateral pathology
and lymph node biopsy for lymphoma.
usually indicates ERU. The history in chronic cases may
indicate recurrent bouts of pain and epiphora. If the
Physicalexamination
condition is acute without evidence of primary corneal
 Clinicians are often quick to resort to expensive laboratory
pathology such as a deep abscess, a diagnosis of ERU is
testing before obtaining a thorough history and performing
probably correct.
a basic physical examination. Physical examination should
Testing is often restricted to serum and perhaps
look for a source of sepsis, other systemic signs, and
aqueous humor Leptospira spp. titers. Leptospirosis is
involvement of other systems. For example, dermal
ideally diagnosed in individual animals by obtaining
depigmentation may be associated with VKH syndrome,
aqueous humor and serum samples and demonstrating
peripheral lymphadenopathy with lymphoma, petechiae
local ocular antibody production193. If multiple animals
with vasculopathies and blood dyscrasia, and altered
are to be examined, testing is usually limited to sera. Faber
kidney size or thyroid size with hypertension.
 et al.194 were unable to correlate positive aqueous humor
cultures of Leptospira spp. with serology; however,
Blood tests
Wollanke et al.i68 found that of the horses from which
 Serology provides presumptive evidence of infection and
Leptospira spp. were isolated from the eye, 76% had a
should demonstrate either very high or rising titers.
fourfold increase in titer from the vitreous compared to the
Brucella
canis,
toxoplasmosis,
leishmaniasis,
serum. In the future, PCR testing for Leptospira spp. in
leptospirosis, systemic mycoses, tick-borne rickettsial
aqueous humor will probably be utilized.
diseases, borreliosis, FIP, and FIV are a few of the
 etiologies searched for in this manner.
Past dogma was that Leptospira spp. organisms were
When combined with a sterile centesis, antinuclear
not present in the eye at the time of ERU signs and
antibodies (ANA), rheumatoid factor, and lupus
the disease was an immune response. However, there
erythematosus cells may occasionally indicate a diagnosis
is mounting evidence that Leptospira spp. organisms
of immune-mediated uveitis. While many causes of uveitis
are still present in the eye at the time of the ERU.
are thought to have an immune component, the diagnosis 
is usually presumptive based on ruling out other etiologies
Conjunctival snip biopsies can be taken from the
deiaui aaissauddnsounuui oi easuodsau aul pue
lateral bulbar region and examined for O. cervicalis
Complete blood count (CBC) and chemistry profile do
larvae. The tissue is placed in saline and allowed to warm
not usually contribute to the diagnosis in the dog, unless
on the microscope light for a few minutes and then
related to a systemic disease such as infection, blood
examined for motile larvae.
dyscrasia, or metabolic disease. A CBC, chemistry profile,
Toxoplasma gondii titer, FIV and FIP titers, and FeLV test
In the author's experience, looking for microfilaria
are the initial recommendations for diagnostic work up of
in conjunctival biopsies has a low test yield in
most cases of feline uveitis. The immunosuppression
horses with ERU and is rarely performed today.
324
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRiNArY MeDiCINE
Therapy (all species)
day and combinations of atropine and phenylephrine
Specific therapy
may give maximum mydriasis. In chronic cases with
In the horse with a severe, painful, acute uveitis, the first
broad synechiae, the pupil cannot usually be mobilized
step may be to place a SPL unit to administer topical
despite using frequent therapy, utilizing concentrations of
 medications. Specific therapy is often not feasible. Some
 >1% atropine, and combining with other mydriatics such
of the infectious causes of uveitis may have zoonotic
 as phenylephrine and cocaine.
potential, e.g. canine brucellosis and canine leptospirosis,
and the risk to the owner should be fully explained
Tissue plasminogen activator (tPA). tPA may be used
before recommending therapy. Even with specific
therapy, eliminating the organism from secretions or
anterior chamber or break down early synechiae. When
excretions may be difficult and may require long-term
 dealing with endogenous uveitis as opposed to traumatic
therapy and repeat testing. Systemic or subconjunctival
 uveitis, it may be necessary to give repeated injections at
and topical antibiotics are indicated if a bacterial cause is
approximately 5-day intervals, because of an ongoing
suspected, e.g. from a perforating injury, or is known to
inflammatory process. In small animals, 25 pg is injected
be present, eg. brucellosis or tick-borne diseases, but
into the anterior chamber, usually using a 30 gauge
often antibiotics are used indiscriminately. Despite the
needle, without sedation, after application of a topical
role of Leptospira spp. in ERU, intraocular antibiotics
anesthetic; in the horse, S0 μg is administered after
have not been a critical or routine part of therapy,
topical anesthetic application in the standing sedated
although this may change in the future. Systemic
animal, often with a dramatic response.
antibiotics tend to be expensive for use in the horse and
in the author's experience have not made an observable
Glucocorticoid drugs. Glucocorticoids are indicated in
 Clinical improvement.
sterile uveitis or uveitis in which the immune-mediated
Topical antiviral agents do not penetrate the cornea
response is thought to be a significant factor. Topical,
and the systemic antiviral preparations used to treat
subconjunctival, and systemic routes, either individually
aquired immunodeficiency syndrome {AIDS) and herpes
or together, may be indicated depending on the severity.
in humans have not, as yet, become part of therapy in
Despite the poor prognosis for systemic disease, the
 treating viral uveitis in cats.
granulomatous uveitis of cats with FeLV and FIP is
Antifungal agents such as systemic amphotericin-B or
responsive to glucocorticoids. If therapy is instituted
imidazole therapy are used for systemic mycoses.
after extensive synechiae formation, the IOP may become
Subconjunctival amphotericin-B may be administered,
elevated as the inflammation subsides, and glaucoma
although it is irritating. If concurrent systemic therapy is
therapy may be necessary.
being administered, subconjunctival administration is of
 Injection of subconjunctival repositol steroids should
questionable beneft. Intraocular injection of amphotericin-
be given only when the clinician is confident that the
B should be reserved for blind eyes since it is so toxic it is
uveitis is not a septic bacterial or fungal process and the
debatable whether there is a safe dose (see Chapter 2, p.41).
cornea is not ulcerated. Subconjunctival repositol steroid
Hendrix et al.19s could find no difference in the number of
a dministration is a common method to treat ERU in both
Blastomyces dermatitidis organisms found on  histo-
the chronic and acute stages. Methylprednisolone or
pathology of the eyes between itraconazole-treated and
triamcinolone can be given subconjunctivally in horses
nontreated affected dogs. This argues for enucleation of
(20-40 mg) and small animals (10-20 mg).
eyes with blastomycosis to remove a nidus of infection and
to try to avoid relapse.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Systemic non-
Antifilarial treatment for O. cervicalis should be
steroidal therapy with aspirin (25 mg/kg), butazolidin, or
administered after the inflammation has subsided, as
flunixin are important in controlling pain and
killing the microflaria may exacerbate the condition167
inflammation in the horse. Aspirin has been advocated
To minimize this, repositol corticosteroids are initiated
before treatment. Ivermectin in a single 0.2 mg/kg i.m.
common  with  endogenous immune-mediated uveitis
dose is very effective in removing dermal microfilaria for
such as ERU. In the author's experience, aspirin therapy
about 6 months196. The author has, on occasion, noted
has not been successful in preventing relapsing episodes.
uveitis after routine deworming with ivermectin.
In the dog, systemic NSAIDs, commonly carprofen
In cats with positive T. gondii titers, clindamycin
(0.5 mg/kg q12h), are used197, Topical NSAIDs are often
(12.5 mg/kg p.o. q12h) for 14-21 days may be indicated,
used to supplement topical corticosteroids.
although this treatment is controversial if there are no
systemic signs.
Other :
immunosuppressive agents. Severe
ocular
inflammation may be nonresponsive or incompletely
Further reading of internal medicine and infectious
responsive to corticosteroids. Patients with "VKH
diseases texts is recommended for specific and
 syndrome may not be controlled with corticosteroids and
 supportive therapy, prognosis, and zoonotic risk
treatment with systemic azathioprine (2 mg/kg q24h for
before treating systemic infectious diseases.
2 weeks, followed by 1 mg/kg q48h) may be necessary.
Nonspecific uveitis therapy
 and azathioprine; the steroids are tapered off after 3-4
Atropine or mydriatics. Atropine is used with uveitis
weeks as the inflammation diminishes and 
.the
therapy to minimize posterior synechiae. It is also
azathioprine blood levels have plateaued. These patients
indicated for the relief of pain from ciliary spasms.
 should have a complete blood count and platelet count
Treatment may have to be administered several times a
 performed at biweekly intervals.
ANTERIOR UVEA AND ANTERIOR CHAMBER
325
Experimentally, vitreal implants containing cyclo-
Prognosis (all species)
The prognosis for uveitis may vary. Chronic recurrent
ERU and experimental immune-mediated uveitis. These
uveitis, such as ERU and VKH syndrome in dogs, should
implants may deliver therapeutic levels of drugs for
always have a guarded to unfavorable prognosis for long-.
term vision. Horses with recurrent uveitis or evidence of
mercially available.
prior episodes are considered unsound. The Appaloosa has 
a poorer prognosis than other breeds for maintaining
Patching. Patching the eye and/or keeping the animal in
vision161. Dwyer and Kalsowl61 reported vision loss in one
a dark environment are supportive measures for acute
or both eyes in 44-56 % of all horses with uveitis. Blindness
uveitis. In small animals, patching is rarely performed,
occurred in one or both eyes in 36-46% of non-Appaloosa
especially when frequent therapy is to be administered. In
breeds and in 68-81% of Appaloosas160. Of horses
large animals, masks are available to protect the eye and
seronegative for leptospirosis, 24-52% became blind in
avoid self-trauma (11.64).
one or both eyes, while 59% of seropositive horses were
blind in one or both eyes. If the horse was seropositive for
 Surgical therapy. In Germany, investigators have been
L. pomona, then vision loss in one or both eyes occurred in
 performing partial vitrectomies on selected ERU cases.
100% of Appaloosas and 51% of non-Appaloosasi61
Vitrectomy has produced a significa nt decrease in relapse,
Obvious uveitis associated with systemic mycoses
although the visual prognosis has not altered, usually
also carries an unfavorable prognosis, although focal
because of cataract formation and retinal detachment20,
granulomas
may
heal. Uveitis  associated  with
201. The goal of vitrectomy is to reduce or elimuinate pain
penetrating trauma also should be given a guarded
and recurrent attacks and not to preserve vision. Brooks
prognosis, especially if the lens is damaged and not 
et al.202 reported very poor results in horses in Florida,
surgically removed. Uveitis in cats associated with FIP
with cataract formation occurring in 46% and one-third
and FeLV carries a guarded prognosis for sight and an
of these becoming complete cataracts. The lack of
unfa vorable prognosis for long-term survival.
experience with the technique and the preponderance of
the Appaloosa breed in the studies may have been
responsible for the poor results. The proposed beneficial
ALTERED AQUEOUS HUMOR
effect was to remove immunological memory cells from
the vitreous that
may
be driving the ongoing
 As discussed under the signs of uveitis, breakdown of
inflammation. Pragmatically, the procedure is successful
the blood-aqueous humor barrier produces a dramatic
in minimizing relapse, although it is difficult to justify in
increase in the protein content of the aqueous humor.
visual eyes that are controlled with medical therapy.
In the milder forms this produces a “flare', but in more
In all cases of uveitis, secondary glaucoma should be
 severe breaches a fibrin clot of variable proportions
monitored and controlled with medical therapy.
may be formed (11.35, 11.54, 11.60). Varia ble degrees
of cellular exudation are often found with
Prevention (all species)
inflammation and, when severe, results in the
An equine vaccine for leptospirosis is not available but
accumulation of leukocytes in the anterior cha mber
many practitioners in high risk areas are utilizing the
(hypopyon) (11.50, 11.61). These changes may have a
bovine vaccine. Anaphylaxis may occur with the bovine
degree of hemorrhage associated with them (11.35).
vaccine so it is not without risk. The efficacy of vaccines
Fibrin clots may be treated by intraocular tPA as
in preventing ERU or relapsing episodes is unknown.
previously discussed and hypopyon is treated by
    su   a x
treating the cause.
vaccine that included six serovars of Leptospira
interrogans  and 
were unable to demonstrate 
a
statistically significant difference in the number of uveitis
 episodes after vaccination. No significant adverse effects
11.64
were noted in the vaccinated horses.
 In animals with perforating trauma and lens injury,
lens removal in the acute stage to avoid phacoclastic
uveitis is indicated if vitreal hemorrhage, retinal
 detachment, and scleral rupture are not present204.
Sequelae (all species)
 Interstitial keratitis with corneal scarring and/or
endothelial dysfunction with edema.
Complicated cataracts.
 Posterior synechiae may result in a fixed pupil,
irregular pupil, and iris bombe.
 Secondary glaucoma may result from synechiae.
 Iris color changes {usually darker).
Prolonged hypotony.
 Phthisis bulbi from cyclitic membranes {a
fibrovascular membrane passing from one side of the
11.64 Commercial face mask for a horse that provides protection
ciliary body to the other) that detach the ciliary body
from self trauma and minimizes photophobia. It is usually used with
 and disorganize the ocular anatomy.
subpalpebral lavage.
326
OpHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
● Lipids may occur in the anterior chamber and cause a
of the iris will be noted earlier as it invades the anterior
sudden diffuse gray-white opacity that fills the anterior
chamber and distorts the pupil (11.66). Melanoma of the
chamber (11.65). The condition is usually unilateral
ciliary body is usually discovered at a later stage after it
and occurs in animals that have concurrent
has invaded into the vitreous, forward into the iris and
hyperlipemia, either from ingestion of a high fat meal
iridocorneal angle, or through the sclera (11.69). Many
or from a metabolic problem2os. It may be confused
apparent iris masses actually have expanded from the
with a diffuse corneal opacity or a cataract with a
Aaissaraae aiaa pe Aeu seuoulau ienoo Xpoq aie
dilated pupil. However, with a focal light or slit lamp
locally with rapid growth and invasion of adjacent
the opacity can be localized to the anterior chamber.
 structures such as the sclera and orbit (11.69).
Lipids are thought to gain access to the anterior
Efforts to predict the biologic behavior of canine
 sn nn pn un  am
 melanomas have resulted in conflicting reports. Bussanich et
break down of the blood-aqueous humor barrier. The
al.216 reviewed the literature and found only seven
author has observed precipitation of glaucoma by
metastases in 190 cases of reported intraocular melanoma.
lipids in those patients predisposed by the presence of a
While melanomas frequently destroy the eye with their
closed angle. Centesis of the anterior chamber will
 growth and invade the sclera and the orbit, it is clear that
produce a moderate clearing and visualization of the
<5% metastasize. Classification of melanomas by the
interior structures. Therapy is restriction of dietary
Callender system (used with human ocular melanomas) to
fats, topical corticosteroids to treat the anterior uveitis,
predict biologic behavior has been controversial. This
and systemic heparin (10 IU/kg s.c.).
increasing anaplastic characteristics; spindle A, spindle B,
epithelioid, and mixed cell type. Many authors have
NEOPLASIA OF THE IRIS AND CILIARY BODY
considered the histopathologic characteristics of Callander's
mixed and epithelioid cell types as predictors of
Primary tumors
Introduction/etiology
and secondary glaucoma the only predictors of metastatic
The anterior uvea is the most common origin of primary
potential, while Wilcock and Peiffer221 onsidered the
intraocular tumors in all species of domestic animals.
mitotic index to be the only reliable predictor of metastasis.
Primary intraocular tumors are not common and, as a
Giuliano et al222 studied the survival rate of canine ocular
result, extensive follow-up data to determine epidemiologic
melanoma patients compared to age-matched controls and
statistics has only recently been forthcoming. In the dog,
found no correlation to tumor extension, tumor size, or
melanoma is about twice as common as all the other
 mitotic index, although the malignant melanoma group had
primary intraocular tumors combined. Adenocarcinoma
a
shorter survival time than the benign melanoma
and adenoma are the only other primary intraocular tumors
(melanocytoma) group. Clinically, it seems prudent to treat
those tumors with a history of rapid growth and invasion of
 adjacent structures more aggressively, ie. with enucleation.
coma, fibrosarcoma, ganglioglioma, medulloepithelioma,
The vast majority of canine intraocular melanomas
1nq siseiseiaw Aq paapn! se uauaq A1eoigojo1g a1e
Dog
they destroy the eye by growth.
The average age of dogs with ocular melanoma is 9 years
at the time of diagnosis. Anterior uveal melanomas arise
Bilateral melanomas have been described in two
from the anterior surface of the iris or from the ciliary
body and are usually raised, pigmented masses, although
systemic metastasis)223 and the other was thought to be
 amelanotic melanomas 0ccur (11.66-11.68). Melanoma
 primary in both eyes224. Breed predisposition for benign 
11.65
11.66
11.67
11.65 A dog presented with acute unilateral
11.66 Iris melanoma in a dog. This is an ideal
 11.67 Melanoma in a dog that involves the
opacification of the eye due to lipids in the 
 candidate for laser ablation of the tumor.
iris, but originated in the ciliary body.
anterior chamber. This is easily confused with
corneal edema or a large cataract.
ANTERIOR UVEA AND ANTERIOR CHAMBER
327
 melanocytoma and malignant mela noma includes mixed
eventually coalesce and form a diffuse thickened
breeds, Labrador Retrievers, (
Golden Retrievers,
 pigmented iris (11.72-11.74). Feline melanomas also differ
Schnauzers, and Cocker Spaniels222 Inherited melanoma
from canine melanomas in that they metastasize more
that occurred at a young age {most between 1-2 years)
has been described in the Labrador Retriever2s.
(average 11 years) and in one study, 63% of cats with
Adenocarcinomas and adenomas are typically pink
 anterior uveal melanomas died from metastatic disease231.
masses arising behind the iris from the ciliary body or
 Duncan and Peiffer232 reported a 56% mortality rate and
 invading the iridocorneal and peripheral iris (11.70). Many
found malignancy correlated with the mitotic index. In a
adenomas may contain pigment and melanomas may be
survival study of feline ocular melanomas, the melanoma
amelanotic (11.68), making it difficult clinically to
group as a whole died earlier than controls but when
differentiate epithelial tumors from sarcomas. Labrador and
Golden Retrievers are susceptible to epithelial tumors226 as
well as melanomas. The biologic behavior of epithelial
11.68 Amelanotic
11.68
tumors appears similar to intraocular melanomas in the
melanoma of the
dog, in that while often locally invasive, even carcinomas
ciliary body in a
German Shepherd 
Dog that extended
Cat
anteriorly into the 
 In the cat, intraocular melanomas typically arise from the
iris and anterior
iris as flat, diffuse to multifocal pigmented lesions, rather
 chamber. The type
than nodular lesions228. Initially, feline iris melanoma
 of tumor was
 appears as a focal, flat, dark spot on the iris that is difficult
difficult to diagnose
to differentiate from a benign nevus or a senile pigment
even with aqueous
change (11.71). With progression, the lesion not only
humor centesis and
enlarges but multifocal pigmented patches develop that
 eventual biopsy.
11.69
11.70
11.69 Extraocular extension of an intraocular
11.70 Ciliary body adenocarcinoma in a
11.71 Early diffuse iris melanoma in a cat.
 melanoma in a Norwegian Elkhound. This 
Labrador Retriever.
should be differentiated from a more benign
epibulbar melanoma.
11.72
11.73
11.74
11.72 Moderately advanced diffuse iris
 11.73 Advanced iris melanoma in a cat that
11.74 Advanced iris melanoma in a cat that
melanoma in a cat.
has resulted in secondary glaucoma.
is viewed obliquely. The lesion has nodular a5
well as diffuse characteristics.
328
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
stratified according to ocular involvement, the less the
Secondary tumors
invasion of various ocular tissues, the better the survival.
Introduction/etiology
Thus, early enucleation when the tumor is confined to the
Lymphosarcoma is the most common secondary tumor of
 iris improves the survival to that of controls233.
Experimentally, feline sarcoma virus (FeSV) injected
and horse, the ocular signs are usually accompanied by
intraocularly causes disease similar to feline intraocular
advanced systemic signs, while in the cat the ocular signs
melanoma234. The experimental model has a higher rate of
 may be prodromal to the systemic signs. The ocular signs
metastasis if the eye is enucleated, as is the case in human
are mainly in the anterior uvea and manifest as bilateral
melanomas, which raised queries on the advisability of this
uveitis, often with the complication of secondary
procedure
 in.the veterinary
clinical
 setting
235
glaucoma (11.48, 11.49, 11.52, 11.53)109,25s,256
Kalishman et al.233 re-enforced that early enucleation in
 Metastasis of tumors to the anterior or posterior uveal
the cat improves survival but did not comment on whether
tract in the dog and cat is a relatively rare occurrence but
late enucleation hastens metastasis. In the author's
number of case reports have documented the
experience, cats with intraocular melanoma are FeLV
phenomenon. Adenocarcinomas from a variety of sources
negative. Stiles et al.236, however, found FeLV-FeSV DNA
ha ve been reported metastasizing to the eye in the dog and
in three of 36 melanomas using PCR, the significance of
which is unknown, but it tends to bring clinical relevance
reported in the cat262-265, Less frequently, fibrosarcoma,
to the experimental FeSV model of melanomas.
pheochromocytoma, and malignant angioendothelio-
Feline intraocular melanomas arising posterior to the
matosis have been reported2s6-268
iris have been described and, while multifocal, they are
Bilateral metastatic lesions have been observed with
characterized by round pigmented cells that are not
transmissible
venereal
tumor,
 hema ngiosarcoma,
typicaly anaplastic as is found in iridal melanomas237
squamous cell carcinoma, transitional cell carcinoma,
Typically, these tumors are late in their presentation and
 seminoma, and pulmonary carcinoma264, 269-273. In the
may have metastasized.
author's experience, hemangiosarcomas have been the
 (   0 1   
Feline intraocular melanomas differ from canine
usually manifest in the posterior uvea, mimicking
intraocular melanomas in their clinical presentation
hemorrhage (see Chapter 14, p.401).
as relatively flat, coalescing pigment patches on the
iris and in their propensity to metastasize.
Clinical signs of ocular neoplasia
● A mass on the iris or protruding into the pupil
In the cat, post-tra umatic spindle cell sarcoma has been
region from behind the iris is present that may or
described. Trauma usually occurred years earlier and
may not be pigmented (11.66).
resulted in blind or phthisical eyes. The differentiation of
Hyphema.
the tumor may 
vary._from  osteosarcoma  to
an
 Secondary glaucoma.
+
 Progressive irial color change, usually an increase in
in eyes with opaque media, the tumor is usually not
 pigmentation.
discovered until it fills the globe. No instances of
metastases have been described but aggressive local
Diagnosis
 Diagnosis of an intraocular neoplasia may be obvious if
Most cases have rupture of the lens capsule and loss of lens
visualized as a mass protruding from the ciliary body or
substance and it has been speculated that the lens
iris. However, the lesion may be masked by hemorrhage,
epithelium may be the origin of the tumor242. This is an
uveitis, or secondary glaucoma. In the past, the presence of
argument for the enucleation of blind eyes with opaque
a tumor when the clear media was opaque was usually
media or eyes that are phthisical. Cats with spindle cell
made after enucleation, but ultrasound now allows an
 sarcoma are negative for FeSV and FeLV243.
inexpensive and rapid method for evaluating these eyes74.
Horse
Ocular ultrasound should be performed on eyes
 iq ao a ui ai ar s aan ra
with opaque media that have glaucoma, hyphema,
found predominantly in grays24-246. A review of the
or uncontrolled uveitis of an unknown cause.
literature found only 12 reported cases and six possible
 additional cases247. Ten of 12 cases where coat color was
The type of tumor cannot be determined with
known were gray horses and, thus, other dermal
certainty unless cytology, biopsy, or enucleation is
melanomas may coexist with ocular melanomas. Equine
 performed. FNA of the lesion may be a practical method
ocular melanoma appears to originate from the anterior
for making a definitive diagnosis if representative tissue
uvea and, based on the limited data, the cells appear
is obtained27s. Vacuuming the surface of iridal lesions
histologically to have a low malignant potential (11.75).
will  minimize  the   risk  of hemorrhage  (11.77).
Medulloepithelioma is a rare tumor that has been
Hemorrhage and seeding of the tumor along the needle
observed in horses and dogs, arising from the ciliary
 tract are possible complications276.
from the nonpigmented ciliary epithelium or from
should be differentiated from metastatic neoplasia, as the
undifferentiated cells that form the inner layer of the
latter disease has a grave prognosis. Epibulbar neoplasia
primitive optic cup. The cells form tubular cords that,
 should be differentiated from extraocular extension of
when cut on cross-section, form rosettes; in the older
intraocular neoplasia (11.69). Differentiation of primary
literature
they
weré
often
erroneously
called
from metastatic
tumor is by l
history, physical
retinoblastomas252.
examination, and histopathologic examination.
ANTERIOR UVEA AND ANTERIOR CHAMBER
329
Therapy
followed by systemic 5-fluorouracil in five dogs that were
Considering the relatively benign nature of most primary
diagnosed with ciliary body adenocarcinoma. Whether
intraocular tumors in the dog, consideration should be given
the tumors excised were actually adenocarcinomas rather
[ero jo Adeuan iasl no uoisxa Aq uouaanaui auea oi
than adenomas was questioned and, consequently,
lesions in an attempt to save the eye. Both YAG and diode
 chemotherapy may not have been necessary282.
lasering of canine ocular melanoma have been advocated277,
 The ocular lesions of generalized lymphosarcoma may
 278. The best candidate for laser therapy appears to be
dramatically regress with systemic therapy but often the
melanoma of the iris, which is accessible. Melanoma of the
secondary glaucoma has produced permanent blindness.
ciliary body is usually larger by the time it is diagnosed and
Conversely, a worsening of the ocular condition has been
it cannot be lasered as effectively due to size and location.
noted when medical therapy is given for transmissible
Minimal complications occur with smaller iris lesions that
venereal tumor. This is presumably due to necrosis of
do not touch the cornea. Larger tumors of the ciliary body
metastatic tumor in the eye that stimulates a severe uveitis.
induce significant uveitis, hemorrhage risk, and some degree
In the cat, early focal iris melanomas or nevi may be
of cataract formation when lasered.
treated with laser ablation, although it is more
Cimetidine has been used successfully to treat or arrest
controversial due to the malignant nature of the tumors;
dermal melanoma in three horses but it has not been tested
the effectiveness of lasering has not been evaluated. Many
on ocular melanoma or in other domestic animals.
owners refuse permission to enucleate an eye that is quite
Cimetidine therapy involves multiple doses each day for
functional. Enucleation of eyes with spindle cell sarcoma
months the optimal response is after 3-4 months of therapy.
should include as much of the optic nerve as possible.
The action of cimetidine is unknown but it is descnibed as a
Histopathologic examination of the nerve should be
biologic modifier with antitumor properties"279. It is
performed because of the tendency to spread up the nerve.
hypothesized that cimetidine acts by inhibiting histamine
activation of suppressor T-cells. Whether intraocular
Pseudotumors (granulomas)
 Concentrations can be achieved is unknown.
Pink iridal masses of 1-2 clock hours or more in FeLV-
 Surgical excision, with or without chemotherapy, has
 negative cats have been presented to the author. Centesis
 been advocated for ciliary body adenoma and, perhaps,
 of the eye has not been diagnostic and the lesions have
adenocarcinoma280, 281
Clerc281
achieved
good
regressed with steroid therapy, or by waiting 3-6 weeks.
functional and cosmetic results with surgical excision
The etiology is unknown (11.78, 11.79).
11.75
11.76
11.77
11.75 Early iris melanoma in a gray horse.
11.76 Metastatic hemangiosarcoma in the iris
11.77 Cytology of a feline diffuse iris melanoma
of a dog.
obtained by anterior chamber centesis and 
vacuuming the surface of the lesion.
11.78 A young adult
1.78
11.79 Same lesion
11.79
cat with a raised iris
a5 11.78 after
mass occupying the 
2 months of topical
dorsolateral quadrant.
glucocorticoid 
The cat had a history
therapy.
of a previous mass in 
the same location
that had 
spontaneously
resolved. Aqueous
humor centesis and 
vacuuming of the 
surface were
nondliagnostic.
The cat was FelV
negative.
330
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETeRINARY MeDICINE
REFERENCES
1 Martin C, Anderson B (1981) Ocular
15 Boydell P (1995) Idiopathic Horner's
28 Joyce JR, Martin J, Storts RW, Skow L
anatomy. In: Veterinary Ophthatmofogy.
sy ndrome in the Golden Retriever.
(1990) Iridal hypoplasia (aniridia)
Ist edn. K Gelatt (ed). Lea and Febiger,
Journat of Smatt Animat Practice
accompanied by limbic dermoids and
Philadelphia, pp. 12-121.
36:382-384.
cataracts in a group of related Quarter
2 Smith PJ, Pennea L, MacKay EO,
16 Thibos L, Levick W, Morstyn R (1980)
horses. Equine Veterinary Journa!
 Mames RN (1997) Identification of
 Ocular pigmentation in white and 
Supplerment 10:26-28.
sclerotomy sites for posterior segrment
Siarmese cats. Investigative
 29 Saunders L, Fincher M (1951) Hereditary
surgery in the dog. Veterimary and
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
multiple eye defects in grade Jersey cows.
Comparative Ophthatmology
19:475-486.
Cornefl Vetermarian 41:351-366.
7:180-189.
17 Smith R, Rudt L (1973) Ultra structural
30 Crispin SM, Bazeley KJ, Long SE, Gould 
3 Shively J, Epling G (1969) Fine structure
 studies of the blood-aqueous barrier. 2.
 DJ, Watts JA (2000) Two cases of
 Of the canine eye: iris. American Journa!
The barrier to horseradish peroxidase
aniridia in Llanwenog sheep. Veterinary
of Veterinary Research 30:13-25.
in primates. American Journa! of
Record 147:364-365.
4 Donovan R, Carpenter R, Schepens C,
Ophthatmology 76:937-947.
31 Bamber R, Herdman E (1933)
Tolentino F (1974) Histology of the 
18 Herrera HD, Duchene AG (1998)
Correlation between white coat colour,
normal Collie eye. II. Uvea. Annais of
 Uveodermatological syndrome
blue eyes, and deafness in cats. Journa!
Ophthatmology 6:1175-1189.
(Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like
of Genetics 27:407-413.
5 Purtscher E (1962) The large arteries of
 syndrome) with generalized
32 Lucas D (1954) Ocular associations of
the canine iris. Berfimer und Munchener
depigmentation in a Dachshund.
dappling in the coat colour of dogs.
Terarztfiche Wochenschrift 74:436-438.
Veterinary Ophthatmology 1(1):47-51.
Journal of Comparative Pathology
6 Prince J, Diesem C, Eglitis I, Ruskell G
19 Fox M (1963) Postnatal ontogeny of
64:260-266.
(1960) The globe. In: Anatomy and
the canine eye. Journa! of the American
33 Bergsma D, Brown K (1971) White fur,
Histology of the Eye and Orbit in
Veterinary Medical Association
 blue eyes, and deafnessin the dormestic
 Domestic Animais CC Thomas,
143:968-974.
cat. Journat of Heredity 62:171-185.
Springfield, p. 13-42.
20 Bellhorn RW, Barnett KC, Henkind P
34 Mair I (1973) Hereditary deafness in the
 7 Yoshitomi T, Ito Y (1986) Double
(1971) Ocular colobomas in domestic
white cat. I. Hereditary and clinical
 reciprocal innervations in dog iris
cats. Journa! of the American
aspects. Acta Otolaryngofica Supplement 
sphincter and dilator muscles.
Veterinary Medical Association
314:5-11.
Investigative Ophthalmology and Visua!
159:1015-1021.
35 Dausch D, Wegner W, Michaelis M,
Science 27:83-91.
21 Gelatt K, Veith L (1970) Hereditary
Reetz I (1977) Ophthalmologische
8 Yoshitomi T, Ito Y (1988) Effects of
multiple ocular anormalies in Australian
befunde in einer merlezucht. Deutsche
 indomethacin and prostaglandins on the 
Shepherd Dogs. Veterinary
Tierarztiche Wochenschrift 84:453-492.
 dog iris sphincter and dilator muscles
Medicime/Small Anima! Cfinician
36 Coulter D, Martin C, Alvarado T (1980)
Investigative Ophthamology and Visua!
65:39-42.
A cat with white fur and one blue eye.
Science 29:127-132.
22 Gelatt KN, McGill LD (1973) Clinical
California Veterinarian 9:11-14.
9 de Lahunta A (1977) Visual systerm-special
characteristics of microphthalmia with
37 Creel D, Collier L, Leventhal A, Conlee
sormatic afferent system. In: Veterinary
colobomas of the Australian Shepherd
J, Prieur D (1982) Abnormal retinal
Neuroanatomy and Clinicat Neurology.
Dog. Journa! of the American
projections in cats with the
WB Saunders, Philadelphia, p. 266.
Veterinary Medical Association
Chedaik-Higashi syndrome. Investigative
10 Lowenstein O, Murphy S, Loewenfeld I
162:393-396.
Ophthaimology and Visuat Science
(1953) Functional evaluation of the
23 Gwin R, Wyman M, Lim D, Ketring K,
23:798-801.
 pupillary light reflex pathways:
Werling K (1981) Multiple ocular
38 Gelatt K, Johnson K, Peiffer R (1979)
experimental pupillographic studies in
 defects associated with partial albinism
Prirmary iridal pigmental masses in three
cats. Archiwves of Ophthatmology
and deafness in the dog. Journa! of the
dogs. Journat of the American Anima!
49:656-670.
American Animat Hospital Association
Hospitat Association 15:339-344.
11 Herron MA, Martin JE, Joyce JR (1978)
17:401-408.
39 Peiffer R (1981) The differential
Quantitative study of the decussating
24 Gelatt K, Powell G, Huston K (1981)
diagnosis of pigmented ocular lesions in
optic axons in the pony, cow, sheep, and
 Inheritance of rmicrophthalmia with
the dog and cat. Catifornia Veterinarian
pig. American Journat of Veterinary
 coloboma in the Australian Shepherd
5:14-18.
Research 39:1137-1139.
Dog. American Journa! of Veterinary
40 Carter J, Mausolf F (1970) Clinical and
12 Christensen K (1936) Sympathetic and
Research 42:1686-1690.
histologic features of pigmented ocular
 parasyrmpathetic nerves in the orbit of
 25 Eriksson K (1955) Hereditary aniridia
Cysts. Journat of the American Anima!
the cat. Journal of Anatomy
with secondary cataract in horses.
Hospitaf Association 6:194-200.
70:225-232.
Nordisk Veterinary Medicin
41 Corcoran K, Koch S (1993) Uveal cysts
13 Morgan RV, Zanotti SW (1989) Horner's
7:773-793.
in dogs: 28 cases (1989-1991). Journa!
syndrome in dogs and cats. Journaf of
26 Joyce J (1983) Anridia in a Quarter
of the Armerican Veterinary Medica!
the American Veterinary Mediciat
horse. Equine Veterinary Journa!
Association 203:545-546.
Association 194:1096-1099.
 Supplement 2:21-22.
42 Deehr A, Dubielzig R (1998) A
14 Herrera J, Suraniti AP, Kojusner N
27 Irby N, Aquirre G (1985) Congenital
histopathological study of iridociliary
(1998) Idiopathic Horner's syndrome in
aniridia in a pony. Journat of the
cysts and glaucoma in Golden Retrievers.
Collie dogs. Veterinary Ophthaimology
American Veterinary Medicat
Veterinary Ophthaimology 1:153-158.
1:17-20.
Association 186:281-283.
ANTERIOR UVEA AND ANTERIOR CHAMBER
331
43 Spiess B, Bolliger J, Guscetti F, Haessig 
58 Crouch E, Frenkel M (1976)
72 Davidson M, Nasisse M, Breitschwerdt
M, Lackner P, Ruehli M (1998) Multiple
 Aminocaproic acid in the treatment of
E, Roberts S, Armstrong P (1986)
diliary body cysts and secondary
taumatic hyphema. American Journa! of
Ocular manifestations of Rocky
glaucoma in the Great Dane: a report of
Ophthaimofogy 81:355-360.
Mountain spotted fever in dogs.
nine cases. Veterinary Ophthatmology
59 Masket S, Best M, Fisher L, Kronenberg
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
1:41-45.
S, Galin M (1971) Therapy in
the American Coltege of Veterinary
44 Rubin L (1966) Cysts of the equine iris.
experimental hyphema. Archives of
Ophthalmologists 117:335-337.
Journat of the American Veterinary
Ophthaimology 85:329-333.
73 Glaze M, Gaunt S (1986) Uveitis
Medicaf Association 149:151-155.
60 Yasuna E (1974) Management of
associated with Ehrfichia platys
45 Buyukmihci N, MacMillan A, Scagliotti
traumatic hyphema. Archives of
infection in a dog. Journat of the
R (1992) Evaluation of zones of iris
Ophthatmofogy 91:190-191.
American Veterinary Medica!
hypoplasia in horses and ponies. Journaf
61 Spoor T, Hammer M, Belloso H (1980)
Association 188:916-918.
of the American Veterinary Medica!
Traumatic hyphema: failure of steroids to
74 Cohen ND, Carter CN, Thomas MA,
Association 200:940-942.
alter its course: a double-blind
Angulo AM, Eugster AK (1990)
46 Dziezyc J, Samuelson DA, Merideth SR
prospective study. Archives of
Cinical and epizootiologic
(1990) Ciliary cysts in three ponies.
Ophthaimology 98:116-119.
characteristics of dogs seropositive for
Equine Veterinary Journa! Supplement
62 Streilen J (1990) Anterior chamber-
Borretia burgdoreri in Texas: 110 cases
10:22-25.
associated immune deviation: the
(1998). Journa! of the American
47 Ramsey DT, Ewart SL, Render JA, Cook
privilege of immunity in the eye. Survey
Veterinary Medical Association
CS, Latimer CA (1999) Congenital
qf Ophthatmofogy 35:67-73.
197:893-898.
 ocular abnorrmalities of Rocky Mountain
63 Rao N, Romero J, Fernandez M,
75 Weigt AK, Duncen RB, Pickett JP
horses. Veterinary Ophthatmology
Sevanian A, Marak G (1987) Role of free
(2000) A report of Lyme disease
2:47-59.
radicals in uveitis. Survey of
(Borrefia burgdorferi) with primary
48 Rochlitz I (1984) Feline dysautonomia
Ophthaimofogy 32:209-213.
ocular involvement in a dog.
(the Key-Gaskell or dilated pupil
64 Bito L (1984) Species differences in the
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
 syndrome): a preliminary review. Journaf
reponse of the eye to irritation and
the American Coltege of Veterinary
of Smafl Anwmat Practice 25:587-598.
tauma: a hypothesis of divergence in
Ophthaimologists 31:60.
49 Sharp N, Nash A, Griffiths I (1984)
 ocular defense mechanism, and the choice
 76 Riecke J, Rhoades H (1975) Bruceffa
 Feline dysautonomia (the Key-Gaskell
of experimental anirmals for eye research.
canis isolated frorm the eye of the dog.
 syndrome): a clinical and pathological
Experimenta! Eye Research 39:807-829.
Journat of the American Veterinary
study of 40 cases. Journa! of Smaff
65 Massa K, Gilger B, Miller T, Davidson M
Medicaf Association 166:583-584.
Animal Practice 25:599-615.
(2002) Causes of uveitis in dogs: 102
77 Saegusa J, Ueda K, Goto Y (1977)
 50 Scagliotti R (1980) Neuro-
cases (1989-2000). Veterimary
Ocular lesions in experimental canine
Ophthalmology. In: Current Veterinary
Ophthaimnology 5:93-98.
brucellosis. Japanese Journa! of
Therapy VII, 7th edn. R Kirk (ed). WB
66 Curtis R, Barnett K (1973) The ocular
Veterinary Science 39:181-185.
Suanders, Philadelphia, pp. 510-517.
lesions of infectious canine hepatitis. 1.
78 Gwin R, Kolwalski J, Wyman M,
51 Pandolfi M (1978) Intraocular
Clinical features. Journat of Smalf Anima!
Winston S (1980) Ocular lesions 
hemorrhages: a hemostatic therapeutic
Practice 14:375-389.
associated with Brucelfa canis in a dog.
approach. Survey of Ophthalmology
67 Carmichael L (1965) The pathogenesis of
Journa! of the American Anima!
22:322-334.
ocular lesions of infectious canine
Hospital Association 16:607-610.
52 Peiffer R, Wilcock B, Yin H (1990) The
hepatitis. Veterinary Pathology
79 Gordon J, Pue H, Rutgers H (1985)
 pathogenesis and significance of pre-
2:344-359.
Canine brucellosis in a household.
 iridal fibrovascular membrane in
68 Bistner S, Aguirre G (1972) Further
Journal of the American Veterinary
domestic animals. Veterinary Pathology
studies in the immunopathogenesis of the
Medical Association 186:695-698.
27:41-45.
 ocular manifestations of canine hepatitis
80 Gwin R, Makley T, Wyman M,
53 Nelms SR, Nasisse MP, Davidson MG,
virus. Proceedings of the Scientific
Werling K (1980) Multifocal ocular
Kirschner SE (1993) Hyphema associated
Meeting of the Armericam Colfege of
histoplasmosis in a dog and cat.
with retinal disease in dogs: 17 cases
Veterinary Ophthaimologists 3:46-68.
Journa! of the American Veterinary
(1986-1991).Journat of the American
69 Keenan K, Buhles W, Huxsoll D, Williams
Medicaf Association 176:638-642.
Veterimary Medicat Association
R, Hildebrandt P (1977) Studies on the
81 Ajello J (1958) Occurrence of
202:1289-1292.
pathogenesis of Rickettsia rickettsi in the
Cryptococcus neoformans in soils.
54 Havener W (1978) Ocular
dog: clinical and clinicopathologic
American Journat of Hygiene
Pharmacology. CV Mosby, St Louis, pp.
changes of experimental infection.
67:72-77.
703-719.
Armerican Journal of Veterimary Research
82 Angell J, Merideth R, Shively J.
55 Ganley J, Geiger J, Clerment J, Rigby P,
38:851-856.
Sigler R (1987) Ocular lesions
Levy G (1983) Aspirin and recurrent
 70 Troy G, Vulgamott J, Turnwald G (1980)
associated with coccidioidomycosis in
hypherma after blunt trauma. American
Canine ehrlichiosis: a retrospective study
dogs: 35 cases (1980-1985). Journa! of
Journal of Ophthalmology 96:797-801.
of 30 naturally occurring cases. Journa!
the American Veterinary Medica!
56 Wilson F (1980) Traumatic hypherma:
of the American Animat Hospita!
Association 190:1319-1322.
 pathogenesis and managerment.
Association 16:181-187.
83 Legendre A, Walker M, Buyukmihci N,
Ophthalmology 87:910-919.
71 Kuehn N, Gaunt S (1985) Clinical and 
Stevens R (1981) Canine
57 Lambrou F, Snyder R, Williams G (1987)
hematologic findings in canine
blastomycosis: a review of 47 clinical
 Use of tissue plastminogen activator in
ehrlichiosis. Journal of the American
cases. Journa! of the American
experimental hyphema. Archives of
Veterimary Medical Association
Veterinary Medical Association
Ophthaimology 105:995-997.
186:355-358.
178:1163-1168.
332
O pHThAlMIC DiseAse In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
84 Watt PR, Robins GM, Galloway AM,
97 Kaswan R, Martin C (1984)
113 Fischer C (1972) Lens-induced uveitis
 O'Boyle DA (1995) Disserminated
Ophthalmomyiasis interna in a dog and
in dogs. Journat of the American
opportunistic fungal disease in dogs:
cat. Canme Practice 11:28-34.
Anima! Hospitat Association 8:39-48.
ten cases (1982-1990). Journal of the
98 Johnson BW, Helper LC, Szajerski ME
114 Kaya M, Edward D, Tessler H,
Armerican Veterinary Medica!
[1988) Intraocular Cuterebrα in a cat.
Hendricks R (1992) Augmentation of
Association 207:67-70.
Journat of the American Veterinary
intraocular inflammation by melanin.
85 Quinn P, McCraw B (1972) Current
Medica! Association 193:829-830.
Investigative Ophthatmology and Visuat
status of Toxopiasma and
99 Abdelbaki Y, Davis R (1972)
Srience 33:522-531.
toxoplasmosis: a review. Canadian
Ophthalmoscopic findings in
115 Cottrell B, Barnett K (1987) Harada's
Veterinary Journa! 13:247-262.
 elaeophorosis of domestic sheep.
disease in the Japanese Akita. Journa! of
 86 Dubey J (1985) Toxoplasrmosis in dogs:
Veterimary Medic ime/Smalf Anima!
Smaff Anima! Practice 28:517-521.
a review. Canine Practice 12:7-28.
Clinician 67:69-74.
116 Asakura I (1977) Harada's syndrome
 87 Piper R, Cole C, Shadduck J (1970)
100 Shoho C (1994) Chronological review
(uveitis diffusa acuta) in the dog.
 Natural and experimental ocular
 of the literature relating to 'the worm in
Japanese Journal of Veterinary Medicine
toxoplasmosis in anirmals. Americam
the eye' of the horse and cattle.
673:445-455.
Journal of Ophthatmology
Japanese Journat of Veterinary History
 117 Bussanich M (1982) Granulomatous
69:662-668.
31:19-45.
 panuveitis and derrmal depigmentation
88 Bussanich M, Rootman J (1985)
101 Rames DS, Miller DK, Barthel R, et αf.
in dogs. Journa! of the Ammericam
 Implicating toxoplasmosis as the cause
(1995) Ocular Halicephalobus (syn.
Animat Hospitat Association
of ocular lesions. Veterinary Medicine
Micronemia) defetrix in a horse.
18:131-138.
80:43-51.
Veterimary Pathology 32:540-542.
118 Kern T, Walton D, Riis R, Manning T,
89 Dubey JP, Koestner A, Piper RC (1990)
102 Bellhorn R (1973) Removal of
Laratta L, Dziezyc J (1985) Uveitis
Repeated transplacental transmission of
intraocular Dirofilaria immitis with
associated with poliosis and vitiligo in
Neospora canimum in dogs. Journat of
 subsequent corneal scarring. Journa! of
six dogs. Journa! of the American
the American Veterinary Medicaf
the American Animat Hospita!
Veterinary Medicat Association
Association 197:857-860.
Association 9:262-264.
187:408-414.
90 McConnell E, Chaffee E, Cashell I,
103 Brightman A, Helper L, Todd K (1977)
119 Romatowski J (1985) A
Garner F (1970) Visceral leishmaniasis
Heartworm in the anterior chamber of a
uveodermatological syndrome in an
with ocular involverment in a dog.
dog's eye. Veterimary Medicime/Smal!
Akita dog. Journat of the American
Journa! American Veterinary Medicine
Animaf Cfinician 72:1021-1023.
Animat Hospitat Association
Association 156:197-203.
104 Blanchard G, Thayer G (1978)
21:777-780.
91 Giles R, Hildebrandt P, Becker R,
Intravitreal Dirofiaria immitis in a dog.
120 Campbell K, McLaughlin S, Reynolds
Montgomery C (1975) Visceral
Journa! of the American Anima!
H(1986) Generalized leukoderma and 
leishmaniasis in a dog with bilateral
Hospitat Association 14:33-35.
poliosis following uveitis in a dog.
endophthalmitis. Journa! of the
105 Forney M (1985) Dirofilaria imitis in
Journat of the American Anima!
American Animat Hospitat Association
the anterior chamber of a dog's eye.
Hospita! Association 22:121-124.
11:155-159.
Veterinary Medicime 80:49.
121 Sapienza J, Domenech F, Prades-
92 Tryphonas L, Zawidzka Z,
106 Miller W, Cooper R (1987) Identifying
Sapienza A (2000) Golden Retriever
 Bernard MA, Janzen EA (1977)
 and treating intraocular Dirofilarid
uveitis: 75 cases (1994-1999).
Visceral leishmaniasis in a dog: clinical,
immitis in dogs. Veterinary Medicine
Veterinary Ophthaimology 3:241-246.
hematological, and pathological
82:381-385.
122 Gwin R, Wyman M, Ketring K,
observations. Canadian Journa! of
107 Perry AW, Hertling R, Kennedy MJ
Winston S (1980) Idiopathic uveitis and
Comparative Medicime 41:1-12.
(1991) Angiostrongylosis with
exudative retinal detachment in the dog.
93 Swenson CL, Silverman J,
disserminated larval infection associated
Journa! of the American Anima!
Stromberg PC, et af. (1988) Visceral
with signs of ocular and nervous disease
Hospitaf Association 16:163-170.
leishmaniasisis in an English Fox
in an imported dog. Canadian
123 Andrew SE, Abrams KL, Brooks DE,
Hound from an Ohio research colony.
Veterimary Journa! 32:430-431.
Kubilis PS (1997) Clinical features of
Journa! of the American Veterinary
108 King MC, Grose RM, Startup G
steroid-responsive retinal detachments
Medicat Association 193:1089-1092.
{1994) Angiostrongylus vasorum in the
in 22 dogs. Veterimary and Comparative
94 Migaki G, Font R, Sauer R (1982)
anterior charmber of a dog's eye. Journa!
Ophthaimology 7:82-87.
Canine protothecosis: review of the
of Small Animat Practice 35:326-328.
124 Corcoran KA, Peiffer RL, Koch SA
literature and report of an additional
109 Saunders L, Barron C (1964)
(1997) Histopathologic features of
case. Journat of the American
 Intraocular tumours in animals. IV.
feline ocular lymphosarcoma. Veterimary
Veterinary Medicat Association
Lymphosarcoma. British Veterinary
and Comparative Ophthalmology
181:794-797.
Journa! 120:25-35.
5:35-40.
95 Schultze AE, Ring RD, Morgan RV,
110 Wilcock B, Peiffer R (1987) The
125 Peiffer R, Wilcock B (1991)
 Patton CS (1998) Clinical, cytologic,
pathology of len-induced uveitis in dogs.
Histopathologic study of uveitis in cats:
and histopathologic manifestations of
Veterinary Pathology 24:549-553.
139 cases (1978-1988). Journa! of the
protothecosis in two dogs. Veterinary
111 Fischer C (1971) Lens-induced uveitis
American Veterinary Medica!
Ophthatrology 1:239-243.
and secondary glaucoma in a dog.
Association 198:135-138.
96 Gwin R, Merideth R, Martin C,
Journal of the American Veterinary
126 Davidson M, Nasisse M, English R,
Kaswan R (1984) Ophthalmomyiasis
Medica! Association 158:336-341.
Wilcock B, Jamieson V (1991) Feline
 interna posterior in two cats and a dog.
112 Marak G (1992) Phacoanaphylactic
anterior uveitis: a study of 53 cases.
Journat of the American Anima!
endophthalmitis. Sturvey of
Journat of the American Anima!
Hospital Association 20:481-486.
Ophthatmology 36:325-339.
Hospitat Association 27:77-83.
ANTERIOR UVEA AND ANTERIOR CHAMBER
127 Lubin J, Albert D, Essex M, Noronha F,
140 Nasisse M, van Ee R, Wright B
153 English R, Davidson M, Nasisse M,
 Ris R (1983) Experimental anterior
(1985) Ocular changes in a cat with
 Jarmieson V, Lappin M (1990)
uveitis after subcutaneous injection of
disserminated blastomycosis. Journa! of
Intraocular disease associated with feline
 feline sarcoma virus. Investigative
the American Veterinary Medica!
immunodeficiency virus infection in cats.
Ophthaimofogy and Visuat Science
Association 187:629-631.
Journat of the American Veterinary
24:1055-1062
141 Angell J, Shively J, Meredith R, Reed 
Medica! Association 196:1116-1119.
128 Dubielzig R, Steinberg H, Fischer B,
R, Jamison K (1985) Ocular
154 Cooley PL, Wyman M, Kindig O
 Jackson M, Moore P (2000) Feline
coccidioidomycosis in a cat. Journa! of
(1990) Pars plicata in equine recurrent
 primary ocular lymphosarcoma:
the American Veterinary Medica!
uveitis. Veterinary Pathology
 immunophenotyping of leukocytes, FeLV
Association 187:167-170.
27:138-140.
status, and relationship to idiopathic
142 Miller WW, Albert RA (1988) Ocular
155 Dubielzig RR, Render JA, Morreale RJ
 lymphoplasmacytic uveitis. Proceedings
and systemic candidiasis in a cat.
(1997) Distinctive rmorphologic features 
of the Scientific Meeting of the American
Journa! of the American Anima!
of the ciliary body in equine recurrent
College of Veterinary Ophthaimotogists
Hospitat Association 24:521-524.
uveitis. Veterinary and Comparative
31:46.
143 Vainisi S, Campbell H (1969) Ocular 
Ophthaimology 7:163-167.
129 Doherty M (1971) Ocular
toxoplasmosis in cats. Journa! of the
156 Jones T, Maurer F (1942) Heredity in
 manifestations of feline infectious
American Veterinary Medica!
periodic ophthalmia. Journa! of the
peritonitis. Journat of the American
Association 154:141-152.
American Veterinary Medica!
Veterimary Medicat Association
144 Lappin M (1989) Clinical feline
Association 101:248-250.
159:417-424.
toxoplasmosis: serologic diagnosis and
157 Jones T, Roby T, Maurer F (1946) The
130 Slauson D, Finn J (1972)
therapeutic managment of 15 cases.
relation of riboflavin to equine periodic
 Meningoencephalitis and panophthalrmitis
Journat of Veterinary Internat Medicine
ophthalmia. American Journa! of
in feline infectious peritonitis. Jourma! of
3:139-143.
Veterimary Research 7:403-416.
the American Veterimary Medica!
145 Dubey J, Carpenter J (1993) Histologically
158 Jones T (1949) Riboflavin and the
Association 160:729-734.
 confirmed clinical toxoplasmosis in cats:
ontrol of equine periodic ophthalmia.
131 Neu H, Pfeifer E (1985) FTP (feline
100 cases (1952-1990). Journaf of the
Journat of the American Veterinary
infektiose peritonitis): klinische
Armerican Veterimory Medicat Association
Medica! Association 94:326-329.
fruhsymptome und vorausgengangene
203:1556-1566.
159 Saari KM, Solja J, Hakli J, et af. (1981)
belastungen. Kleintier Praxis 30:307-314.
146 Lappin MR, Black JC (1999)
Genetic background of acute anterior
132 Kornegay J (1978) Feline infectious
 Bartoneffa spp. infection as a possible
uveitis. American Journa! of
 peritonitis the central nervous system
cause of uveitis in a cat. Journaf of the
Ophthaimology 91:711-720.
form. Journal of the American Anima!
American Veterinary Medica!
160 Dwyer A, Crockett R, Kalsow C (1995)
Hospita! Association 14:580-584.
Association 214:1205-1207.
Association of leptospiral seroreactivity
133 Wess R, Scott F (1981) Pathogenesis of 
147 Lappin M, Marks A, Greene C, et af.
and breed with uveitis and blindness in
 feline infectious peritonitis: pathologic
{1992) Serologic prevalence of selected
horses: 372 cases (1986-1993). Jourma!
changes and immunofluorescence.
infectious diseases in cats with uveitis.
of the American Veterinary Medica!
American Journat of Veterinary Research
Journa! of the American Veterinary
Association 207:1327-1331.
42:2036-2048.
Medicaf Association 201:1005-1016.
161 Dwyer A, Kalsow C (1998) Visual
134 Mahaffey E, Gabbert N, Johnson D,
148 Chavkin M, Lappin M, Powell C
 prognosis in horses with uveitis.
Guffy M (1977) Disserminated
(1992) Seroepidemiologic and clinical
Proceedings of the Annuat Meeting of
histoplasmosis in three cats. Journa! of
observations of 93 cases of uveitis in
the American Society of Veterinary
the American Anima! Hospita!
cats. Progress in Veterinary and
Ophthatmology. Chicago, pp. 1-8.
Association 13:46-50.
Comparative Ophthaimology 2:29-36.
162 Stannard A, Cello R (1975)
135 Peiffer R (1979) Ocular manifestations
149 Lappin M, Greene C, Prestwood A
Onchocerca cervicafis infection in horses
 of disseminated histoplasmosis in a cat.
{1989) Enzyme-linked immunosorbent
from the western United States.
Fetime Practice 9:24-29.
assay for detection of circulating
American Journat of Veterinary
136 Wolf A, Belden M (1984) Feline
 antigens of Toxoplasma gondit in the
Research 36:1029-1031.
histoplasmosis: a literature review and
serum of cats. American Journa! of
163 Lloyd S, Soulsby E (1978) Survey for
retrospective study of 20 new cases.
Veterinary Research 50:1566-1586.
infection with Onchocerca cervicafis in
Journat of the American Animat Hospita!
150 Lappin M, Greene C, Prestwood A,
horses in the eastern United States.
Association 20:995-998.
 Dawe D, Tarleton R (1989) Diagnosis 
American Journat of Veterinary
137 Cinkenbeard K, Cowell R, Tyler R
 of recent Toxopiasmosis gondii
Research 39:1962-1963.
{1987) Disseminated histoplasmosis in
infection in cats by use of an enzynme-
164 Lyons E, Drudge J, Tolliver S (1981)
cats: 12 cases (1981-1986). Journa! of
linked immunosorbent assay for
Prevalence of microfilariae (Onchocerca 
the American Veterimary Medica!
immunoglobulin M. American Journa!
spp.) in skin of Kentucky horses at
Association 190:1445-1448.
of Veterinary Research 50:1586-1590.
necropsy. Journat of the American
138 Blouin P, Cello R (1980) Experimental 
151 Davidson M, English R (1998) Feline
Veterimary Medica! Association
ocular cryptococcsis prelirminary studies
 Ocular toxoplasrmosis. Veterinary
179:899-900.
in cats and mice. Investigative
Ophthatmofogy 1:71-80.
165 Attenburrow D, Donnelly J, Soulsby E
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
152 Gormley P, Pavesio C, Minnasian D,
(1983) Periodic ophthalmic (recurrent)
19:21-30.
Lightman S (1998) Effects of drug
uveitis of horses: an evaluation of the 
139 Alden C, Mohan R (1974) Ocular
therapy on Toxopiasma cysts in an
aetiological role of microfilariae of
blastomycosis in a cat. Journaf of the
animal model of acute and chronic
Onchocerca cervicafis and the clinical
American Veterinary Medical Association
disease. Investigative Ophthatmology
management of the condition. Equine
164:527-528.
dnd Visuaf Science 39:1171-1175.
Veterinary Journat Supplement 2:48-56.
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETeRINARY MeDICINE
166 Cummings E, James E (1985)
178 Jones T (1940) The relation of
191 Chavkin MJ, Lappin MR, Powell CC,
 Prevalence of equine onchocerciasis in
brucellosis to periodic ophthalmia in
Cooper CM, Munana KR, Howard LH
the southeastern and midwestern United
Equidae. American Journa! of Veterinary
ppadspuo8 musdoxol (t66 1)
States. Journal of the American
Research 1:54-57.
antibodies in the aqueous humor of cats 
Veterinary Medical Association
179 Davis G, Wood R, Gadd J, Kennedy R
with toxoplasmosis. American Jourmaf of
186:1202-1203.
{1950) The incidence of Brucelfa
Veterimary Research 55:1244-1249.
167 Cello R (1971) Ocular onchocerciasis in
 agglutinins in horses and their
192 Lappin M, Powell C (1991) Comparison
the horse. Equine Veterinary Journa!
relationship to periodic ophthalmia.
of latex agglutination, indirect
3:148-153.
Cornefl Veterimarian 40:364-366.
hermagglutination, and ELISA techniques
168 Wollanke B, Rohrbach B, Gerhards H
180 Roberts S (1971) Chorioretinitis in a
for the detection of Taxoplasma gondi-
(2001) Serum and vitreous humor
band of horses. Journa! of the American
specific antibodies in the serum of cats.
antibody titers in, and isolation of,
Veterimary Medicat Association
Journat of Veterimary Internal Medicine
Leptospira interrogans from horses with
158:2043-2046.
5:299-301.
recurrent uveitis. Journa! of the
181 Quin A (1950) The control of equine
193 Davidson M, Nasisse MP, Roberts SM
Americam Veterimary Medicat Association
strongylosis and periodic ophthalmia
(1987) Immunodiagnosis of leptospiral
219:795-800.
with a ration additive. British Veterinary
uveitis in two horses. Equine Veterinary
169 Rimpau W (1947) Leptospirose being
Journa! 106:116-118.
Journal 19:155-157.
pferde. Terarztfiche Umschau
182 Matthews A, Handscombe M (1983)
194 Faber N, LeFebvre R, Crawford M,
2:177-178.
Uveitis in the horse: a review of the
Madigan J, Buyukmihci N (1998)
170 Heusser H (1948) Die periodische
 aetiological and immunopathological
Presence of Leptospira sp. in the aquous
augenentzundung, eine leptospirose?
aspects of the disease. Equine Veterinary
humor of horses with recurrent uveitis.
Schtueizer Archiv fur Tierheifkunde
Journat Supplement 2:61-64.
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
90:288-312.
183 Romeike A, Brugmann M, Drommer W
the American College of Veterinary
171 Roberts S (1958) Sequelae of
 {1998) Immunohistochemical studies in
Ophthaimologists 29:49.
leptospirosis in horses on a small farm.
equine recurrent uveitis (ERU).
195 Hendrix D, Bochsler P, Rohrbach B
Journat of the American Veterinary
Veterinary Pathology 35:515-526.
 2000) Effect of itraconazole therapy on
Medicaf Association 133:189-194.
184 Hines M, Halliwell R (1991)
the histopathologic findings in the eyes of
172 Halliwell R, Brim T, Hines M, Wolf D,
Autoimmunity to retinal S-antigen in
dbgs with blastomycosis. Proceedings of
White F (1985) Studies on equine
horses with equine recurrent uveitis.
the Scientific Meeting of the American
recurrent uveitis. I. The role of infection
Progress in Veterinary and Comparative
Coffege of Veterinary Ophthaimologists
with Leptospira mterrogans serovar
Ophthaimology 1:283-290.
33:52.
pomona. Current Eye Research
185 Maxwell S, Hurt D, Brightman A,
196 Herd R, Donharm J (1983) Efficacy of
4:1033-1040.
 Takermoto D (1991) Hurnoral responses
jvermectin against Onchocerca cervicafis
173 Sillerud C, Bey R, Ball M, Bistner S
 to retinal proteins in horses with
microfilarial dermatitis in horses.
[1987) Serologic correlation of suspected
recurrent uvetis. Progress in Veterimary
Armericam Journat of Veterimary Research
Leptospira interrogans serovar pomona-
cnd Comparative Ophthatmology
44:1102-1105.
 induced uveitisin a group of horses.
1:155-161.
197 Krohne SG, Blair MJ, Bingaman D,
Journat of the American Veterinary
186 Wolfer J, Wilcock B, Percy D (1993)
Gionfriddo J (1998) Carprofen inhibition
Medicat Association 191:1576-1578.
Phacoclastic uveitis in the rabbit.
of flare in the dog measured by laser flare
174 Williams R, Morter R, Freeman M,
Veterinary and Comparative
photometry. Veterinary Ophthatmology
 Lavignette A (1971) Experimental]
Ophthaimology 3:92-97.
1:81-84.
chronic uveitis. Investigative
187 Stiles J, Didier E, Ritchie B,
198 Gilger BC, Allen JB (1998) Cyclosporine 
Ophthaimology 10:948-954.
Greenacre C, Willis M, Martin C (1997)
A in veterinary ophthalmology.
175 Matthews A, Waitkins S, Palmer M
Encephafitozoon cunicufi in the lens of a
Veterinary Ophthatmology 1:181-187.
{1987) Serological study of leptospiral
rabbit with phacoclastic uveitis:
199 Velez G, Whitcup SM (1999) New
 infections and endogenous uveitis among
 confirmation and treatment. Veterimary
developments in sustained release drug
horses and ponies in the United
and Comparative Ophthaimology
delivery for the treatment of intraocular
Kingdom. Equine Veterinary Journa!
7:233-238.
disease. British Journa! of
19:125-128.
188 Wolfer J, Grahn B, Taylor M, Laperriere
Ophthaimofogy 83:1225-1229.
176 Wollanke B, Gerhards H, Brem S,
E(1995) Treatment of phacoclastic
200 Winterherg A, Gerhards H (1997)
Gothe R, Wolf E (1999) Studies on
uveitis in the rabbit by
Langzeitergebnisse der pars-plana-
vitreous and serum samples frorm horses
 phacoemulsification. Proceedimgs of the
vitrektomie bei equiner rezidivierender
with equine recurrent uveitis (ERU): the
Scientific Meeting of the American
uveitis. Pferdeheikunde 13:377-383.
role of Leptospira, Borrefia burgdorferi,
College of Veterinary Ophthatmologists
201 Fruhauf B, Ohnesorge B, Deegen E,
Borna disease virus, and Toxapfasma in
26:12.
Boevé M (1998) Surgical managerment of
the etiology of ERU. Proceedimgs of the
189 Davidson HJ, Blanchard GL, Coe PH
equine recurrent uveitis with single port
Scientific Meeting of the American
[1990) Idiopathic uveitis in a herd of
pars plana vitrectomy. Veterimary
College of Veterinary Ophthatmofogists
Holstein cows. Progressin Veterinary
Ophthaimology 1:137-151.
29:31.
and Comparative Ophthalmology
202 Brooks D, Cutler T, Andrew S, et af.
177 Burgess E, Gillette D, Pickett P (1986)
2:113-116.
(2001) Outcome of pars plana vitrectomy
 Arthritis and panuveitis as rmanifestations
190 Toris C, Pederson J (1987) Aqueous
 in 24 eyes of 18 horses with equine
of Borrelia burgdorferi infection in a
humor dynamics in experimental
 tecurrent uveitis. Proceedings of the
Wisconsin pony Journaf of the American
iridocyclitis. Investigative
Sientific Meeting of the American
Veterinary Medica! Association
Ophthaimology and Visuat Science
Colfege of Veterinary Ophthaimologists
189:1340-1342.
28:477-481.
32:38.
ANTERIOR UVEA AND ANTERIOR CHAMBER
335
203 Hendrix D, Rohrbach B, Ward D
217 Ditter R, Dubielzig R, Aguirre G,
231 Patnaik A, Mooney S (1988) Feline
Cawrse M (2002) Effects of an
 Acland G (1983) Primary ocular
melanoma: a comparative study of
 inactivated vaccine against Leptospira
melanoma in dogs. Veterinary Pathology
ocular, oral, and dermal neoplasms.
nterrogans on the frequency of uveitis in
20:379-395.
Veterinary Pathofogy 25:105-112.
horses with equine recurrent uveitis.
218 Ryan A, Diter SR (1984) Clinical and
232 Duncan D, Peiffer R (1991)
Proceedingsof the Scientfic Meeting of
 pathologic features of canine ocular
 Morphology and prognostic indicators
the American College of Veterinary
melanomas. Journaf of the American
Of anterior uveal melanomas in cats.
Ophthaimologists 33:52.
Veter inary Medicat Association
Progressin Veterinary and
204 Davidson M, Nasisse M, Jamieson V,
184:60-67.
Comparative Ophthaimology 1:25-32.
English R, Olivero D (1991) Traumatic
219 Schaffer E, Funke K (1985) Das primar-
233 Kalishman J, Chappell R, Flood L,
anterior lens capsule disruption. Journa!
intraokulare maligne melanom bei hund
Dubielzig R (1998) A matched 
of the American Animat Hospita!
md katze. Tierarztfiche Praxis
observational study of survival in cats 
Association 27:410-414.
13:343-359.
with enucleation due to diffuse iris
205 Olin D, Roger W, MacMillan A (1976)
220 Trucksa R, McLean I, Quinn A (1985)
melanoma. Veterinary Ophthaimofogy
Lipid-laden aqueous humor associated
 Intraocular canine melanocytic
1:25-29.
with anterior uveitis and concurrent 
neoplasms. Journa! of the American
234 Albert D, Shadduck J, Craft J,
hyperlipermia in two dogs. Journat of the
Animat Hospitat Association 21:85-88.
Niederkorn J (1981) Feline uveal
American Veterinary Medica! Association
221 Wilcock B, Peiffer R (1986) The
melanoma model induced with feline
168:861-864.
morphology and behavior of primary
sarcoma virus. Investigative
206 Bellhorn R, Henkind P (1968)
ocular melanomas in 91 dogs. Veterinary
Ophthalmofogy and Visuat Science
 Adenocarcinoma of the ciliary body: a
Pathofogy 23:418-424.
20:606-624.
report of two cases in dogs. Veterimary
 222 Giuliano E, Chappell R, Hogge G,
235 Niederkorn J, Shadduck J, Albert D
Pathofogy 5:122-126.
Fscher B, Dubielzig R (1998) Canine
(1982) Enucleation and the appearance
207 Bellhorn R (1971) Ciliary body
ccular melanocytic tumors: clinical profile
of second primary tumors in cats
adenocarcinoma in the dog. Journa! of
and survival in 244 cases (1988-1998).
bearing virally-induced intraocular
the American Veterimary Medica!
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
tumors. Investigative Ophthaimofogy
Association 159:1124-1128.
the Americcm College of Veterinary
and Visua! Science 23:719-725.
208 Peiffer R, Gwin R, Gelatt K, Jackson W,
Ophthatmologists 29:2941.
236 Stiles J, Bienzle D, Render JA,
Williams L, Hill C (1978) Ciliary body
223 Render J, Rarmsey D, Ramsey C (1997)
Buyukmihci NC, Johnson EC (1999)
epithelial tumors in four dogs. Journa of
Contralateral uveal metastasis of
Use of nested polymerase chain
the American Veterimary Medica!
malignant anterior uveal melanoma in a
reaction (PCR) for detection of 
Association 172:578-583.
dog. Veterinary and Comparative
retroviruses from formalin-fixed,
209 Peiffer R (1983) Ciliary body epithelial
Ophthaimology 7:263-266.
paraffin-embedded uveal melanomas in
tumours in the dog and cat: a report of
224 Roperto F, Restucci B, Crovace A (1993)
cats. Veterinary Ophthalmology
thirteen cases. Journat of Smaff Anirma!
Bilateral ciliary body melanomas in a
2:113-116.
Practice 24:347-370.
dog. Progress in Veterinary and
237 Harris BP, Dubielzig RR (1999)
210 Barron C, Saunders L (1959) Intraocular
Comparative Ophthalmology 3:149-151.
Atypical primary ocular melanoma in
turnors in animals. I. Primary
225 Cook C, Lannon A (1997) Inherited iris
cats. Veterinary Ophthatmology
 nonpigented intraocular tumors. Cacer
 melanoma in Labrador Retriever dogs.
2:121-124.
Research 19:1171-1174.
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
238 Woog J, Albert D, Gonder J,
211 Verwer M, Thije P (1967) Tumour of
the Americam Coflege of Veterinary
Carpenter J (1983) Osteosarcoma in a
the epitheliurm of the ciliary body in a
Ophthaiologists 28:106.
phthisical feline eye. Veterinary
dog. Journa! of Smalf Animat Practice
226 Dubielzig R, Steinberg H, Garvin H,
Pathofogy 20:209-214.
8:627-630.
 Deehr AM, Fischer B (1998) Iridociliary
239 Dubielzig R (1984) Ocular sarcoma
212 Saunders L, Geib L, Barron C (1969)
epithelial tumors in 100 dogs and 17 cats:
following trauma in three cats. Journaf
Intraocular ganglioglioma in a dog.
a morphological study. Veterinary
of the American Veterinary Medica!
Veterimary Pathology 6:525-533.
Ophthaimology 1:223-231.
Association 184:578-581.
213 Wilcock B, Williams M (1980)
227 Glickstein JM (1974) Malignant ciliary
240 Miller W, Boosinger T (1987)
Malignant intraocular
body adenocarcinoma in a dog. Journa!
 Intraocular osteosarcoma in a cat.
medulloepithelioma in a dog. Journaf of
of the Arerican Veterinary Medica!
Journa! of the American Anima!
the American Animat Hospita!
Association 165:455-456.
Hospitat Association 23:317-320.
Association 16:617-619.
228 Acland G, McLean I, Aguirre G,
241 Hakanson N, Shively J, Reed R,
214 Brooks DE, Patton CS (1991) An ocular
Trucksa R (1980) Diffuse iris melanoma
Merideth R (1990) Intraocular spindle
ganglioneuroblastoma in a dog. Progress
in cats. Journal of the American
cell sarcoma following ocular trauma
in Veterimary and Comparative
Veterimary Medical Association
in a cat: case report and literature
Ophthaimology 1:299-302.
176:52-56.
review. Journaf of the American
215 Read RA (1993) Ciliary body
229 Bellhorn R, Henkind P (1970)
Anima! Hospital Association 26:63-66.
haemangioma in a dog with seoondary
Intraocular malignant melanoma in
242 Dubielzig RR, Hawkins KL, Toy KA,
glaucoma. Journaf of Smaff Anirma!
dbmestic cats. Journa! of Smatf Anima!
 Rosebury WS, Mazur M, Jasper TG
Practice 34:405-408.
Practice 10:631-637.
(1994) Morphologic features of feline
216 Bussanich NM, Dolman PJ, Rootman J.
230 Bertoy R, Brightman A, Regan K (1988)
ocular sarcomas in ten cats: light 
 Dolman CL (1987) Canine uvea]
Intraocular melanoma with multiple
microscopy, ultrastructure, and
 melanomas: series and literature review.
metastases in a cat. Journat of the
imm unohistochemistry. Veterinary and
Journal of the American Anima! Hospita!
Arerican Veterimary Medical Association
Comparative Ophthaimology 4:7-12.
Association 23:415-422.
192:87-89.
929
O pHThAlMIC DiseAse In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
243 Cullen C, Haines D, Jackson M, Peiffer
258 Bellhorn R (1972) Secondary ocular
271 Szymanski C, Boyce R, Wyman M
R, Grahn B (1998) The use of
adenocarcdinoma in three dogs and a cat.
(1984) Transitional cell carcinoma of the
 irmmunohistochemistry and the
Journal of the American Veterinary
urethra metastatic to the eyes in a dog.
 polymerase chain reaction for detection of
Medica! Association 160:302-307.
Journat of the Americam Veterinary
 feline leukermia virus and feline sarcoma
259 Whitley R, Jensen H, Andrews J,
Medicaf Association 185:1003-1004.
virus in six cases of feline ocular sarcoma.
 Simpson S (1980) Renal adenocarcinoma
272 Hogenesch H, Whiteley H, Vicini D,
Veterimary Ophthatmology 1:189-193.
with ocular metastasis in a dog. Journa!
 Helper L (1987) Seminoma with
244 Murphy J, Young S (1979) Intraocular
of the American Anirmat Hospita!
metastases in the eye and the brain in a
melanoma in a horse. Veterinary
Association 16:949- 953.
dog. Veterimary Pathology 24:278-280.
Pathology 16:539-542.
260 Murphy CJ, Canton DC, Bellhorn RW,
273 Cassotis NJ, Dubielzig RR, Gilger BC,
245 Neumann S {1985) Intraocular
Okihiro M, Cahoon B, Dufort R (1989)
 Davidson MG (1999) Angioinvasive
 melanoma in a horse. Modern Veterimary
 Disserminated adenocarcinoma with
pulrmonary carcinoma with posterior
Practice 66:559-560.
Ocular involvement in a cat. Journa! of
segment metastasis in four cats.
246 Davidson H, Blanchard G, Wheeler C,
the Americam Veterinary Medica!
Veterinary Ophthatmology 2:125-131.
Render J (1991) Anterior uvea]
Association 195:488-491.
274 Dziezyc J, Hager D, Millichamp N
 melanoma with secondary keratitis,
261 Gionfriddo JR, Fix AS, Niyo Y,
(1987) Two-dimensional real-time ocular 
cataract, and glaucoma in a horse.
Miller LD, Betts DM (1990) Ocular
ultrasonography in the diagnosis of
Journat of the American Veterinary
 manifestations of a metastatic pulmonary
ocular lesions in dogs. Jourmat of the
Medica! Association 199:1049-1050.
 adenocarcinoma in a cat. Journa! of the
Americam Animat Hospitat Association
247 Barnett KC, Platt H (1990) Intraocular
American Veterimary Medicat Association
23:501-508.
 melanomata in the horse. Equime
197:372-374.
 275 Bussanich M (1984) Don't overlook
Veterinary Journat Supplement 10:76-82.
 262 Hayden D (1976) Squamous cell
fne-needle aspiration biopsy to
248 Bistner S, Camphell J, Shaw D,
carcinoma in a cat with intraocular and
differentiate intraocular tumors.
Leininger JR, Ghobrial HK (1983)
orbital metastases. Veterimary Pathofogy
Veterimary Medicime 79:1055-1060.
 Neuroepithelial tumor of the optic nerve
13:332-336.
276 Karcioglu Z, Gordon RA, Karcioglu G
in a horse. Corneff Veterimarian
263 West SC, Wolf ED, Vainisi SJ (1979)
[1985) Tumor seeding in ocular fine
73:30-40.
Intraocular metastasis of mammary
teedle aspiration biopsy. Ophthatmology
249 Szymanski C (1987) Malignant teratoid
adenocarcinoma. Journa! of the American
92:1763-1765.
medulloepithelioma in a horse. Journaf of
Animat Hospital Association
 277 Cook CS, Wilkie DA (1999) Treatment
the American Veterinary Medica!
15:725-728.
of presumed iris melanoma in dogs by
Association 190:301-302.
264 Cook C, Peiffer R, Stine P (1984)
dode laser photocoagulation: 23 cases.
250 Ris RC, Scherlie PH, Rebhun WC
 Metastatic ocular squarmous cell 
Vterinary Ophthalmology 2:217-225.
(1990) Intraocular medulloepithelioma in
carcinoma in a cat. Journal of the
278 Nasisse MP, Davidson MG, Olivero DK,
a horse. Equine Veterinary Journa!
Armerican Veterimary Medical Association
Brinkmann M, Nelms S (1993)
Supplement 10:66-69.
185:1547-1549.
 Neodymium: YAG laser treatment of
251 Ueda Y, Senba H, Nishimura T, Usui T,
265 Hamilton H, Severin G, Nold J (1984)
 primary canine intraocular tumors.
Tanaka K, Inagaki S (1993) Ocular
Pulmonary squamous cell carcinoma with
Progress in Veterinary and Comparative
 medulloepithelioma in a thoroughbred.
intraocular metastasis in a cat. Journa! of
Ophthaimofogy 3:152-157.
Equine Veterimary Journa! 25:558-561.
the Americam Veterinary Medica!
279 Goetz T, Ogilvie G, Keegan K,
252 Bistner S (1974) Medulloepithelioma of
Association 185:307-309.
Johnson P (1990) Cimetidine for
the iris and ciliary body in a horse.
266 Fulton LM, Bromberg NM,
treatment of melanomas in three horses.
Cornett Veterinarian 64:588-595.
Goldschmidt MH (1991) Soft tissue
Journat of the Americam Veterinary
253 Barron C, Saunders L, Jubh K (1963)
fbrosarcoma with intraocular metastasis
Medicat Association 197:449-452.
 Intraocuar tumors in animals. l.
in a cat. Progress in Veterinary and
280 Bellhorn RW, Vainisi SJ (1969)
 Secondary intraocular tumors. Armerican
Comparative Ophthatmology 1:129-132.
Successful removal of ciliary body
Journal of Veterinary Research
267 Nyska A, Herrmalin A, Jakobson B, et af.
adenoma. Modern Veterimary Practice
24:835-853.
(1992) Intraocular vascular embolization
50:47-49.
254 Rebhun W, Piero F (1998) Ocular
 of a malignant canine
281 Clerc B (1996) Surgery and
lesions in horses with lymphosarcoma: 21
pheochromocytoma. Progress in
chemotherapy for the treatment of
cases (1977-1997). Journaf of the
Veterinary and Comparative
adenocarcinoma of the iris and ciliary
American Veterimary Medica! Association
Ophthatmofogy 2:129-132.
body in five dogs. Veterinary and
212:852-854.
 268 Kilrain CG, Saik JE, Jeglurm KA (1994)
Comparative Ophthatmology 6:265-270.
255 Cello R, Hutcherson B (1963) Ocular
Malignant angioendotheliomatosis with
282 Peiffer RL (1997) Letters to the editor:
changes in malignant lymphoma of dogs.
 retinal detachments in a dog Journat of
adenocarcinoma commentary. Veterinary
Cormeff Veterimarian 52:492-523.
the Americam Veterinary Medica!
amnd Comparative Ophthaimology 7.
256 Lavach JD (1984) Disserminated
Association 204:918-921.
 283 Gaunt PS, Confer AW, Carter JD,
neoplasia presenting with ocular signs: a
269 Barron C, Saunders L, Seibold H, Heath
Trucksa RC, Neafie RC, Litchtenfels JR
report of two cases. Journat of the
M (1963) Intraocular tumors in animals.
(1982) Intraocular strngylidiasis in a
American Animat Hospitat Association
V Transmissible veneral tumor of dogs.
dbg. Journat of the American Anima!
20:459-462.
American Journa! of Veterinary Research
Hospitaf Association 18:120-122.
257 Ladds P, Gelatt K, Strafuss A, Mosier J
24:1263-1269.
(1970) Canine ocular adenocarcinoma of
270 Szymanski C (1972) Bilateral metastatic
rmammary origin. Journat of the
 intraocular hermangiosarcoma in a dog.
American Veterinary Medical Association
Journal of the Armerican Veterinary
156:63-68.
Medica! Association 161:803-805.
337
12
Glaucoma
INTRODUCTION
ultrafiltration and active secretion. The emphasis on the
importance of secretion versus ultrafiltration has varied over
Glaucoma is defined as an elevation of the IOP beyond
the years, but it is now thought that active secretion is the
that which is compatible with the health of the eye.
pue uoeoy sownq snoanbe un ssaooud juniodwl isou
Elevation of IOP may arise from a variety of causes and,
takes place in the nonpigmented ciliary epithelium.
thus, is a final common pathway for many disease
Hydrostatic and oncotic pressures in the ciliary processes are 
processes. Therefore, glaucoma is a sign and not the
not great enough to promote ultrafiltration as a major
basic disease itself and every effort should be made to
contributor of aqueous humor production. While species
understand why the IOP is elevated.
variations exist in aqueous humor composition and,
 In the last decade, human glaucoma has been defined
 perhaps, in formation, Na+/K+-activated ATPase is thought 
 as a progressive optic neuropathy with elevation of the
to be the major transporter of solutes into the aqueous
IOP being only one of the causes for optic neuropathy.
humor and is found in highest concentration along the
Glaucoma
is  now considered a neurodegenerative
 lateral cellular membranes of the nonpigmented epithelium?.
diseasel-3. In time, veterinary medicine may also
 Sodium is thought to be transported into the intercellular
recognize
 ‘“normal tension glaucoma’ as they do in
 channels, creating an osmotic gradient that pulls fluid into
humans and we may shift our focus in treating glaucoma
the channels and thence into the posterior chamber. Oubain,
from controlling IOP to treating neurodegeneration.
which inhibits Na+/K+-activated ATPase, decreases aqueous
Glaucoma results in blindness if it is not controlled
humor production by up to 70%. Carbonic anhydrase
and thus has to be considered one of the main causes of
 inhibitors (CAIs) have long been known to decrease aqueous
a 'potentially' treatable blindness. In a survey of 162,000
humor production, but theories on the mechanism have
dogs seen at veterinary teaching hospitals, the diagnosis
been somewhat controversial. CAIs decrease both sodium
of glaucoma was made in one out of every 204 patients4.
 and bicarbonate transport into the aqueous humor although
In one review, glaucoma represented almost 9% of
how this coupling occurs is unknown?. The endogenous
ophthalmologic diagnoses, 6
influences on aqueous humor formation are multiple,
 complex, and incompletely understood.
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
AQUEOUS HUMOR EGRESS
Once secreted into the posterior chamber, aqueous
Aqueous humor is continuously produced by the ciliary
humor passes through the pupil and exits the eye
 aaissed jo ssaod e Aq raqueuo nouaisod aui ui sassd
through the iridocorneal angle {angle) (12.1). Fluid in
12.1 Normal canine iridocorneal angle
12.1
illustrating the alternative routes by which
aqueous humor can egress from the angle region.
 Arrows 1 and 2 indicate the major aqueous
humor flow through the vascular pathways.
Aqueous humor is collected from the trabecular
meshwork into the large scleral venous plexu5 
and may exit anteriorly into the anterior ciliary
and conjunctival vein, or posteriorly into the 
vortex venous 5ystem. Arrow 3 indicates the
uveoscleral flow through the ciliary muscle 
interstitium to the suprachoroid. (From
Martin, 198373.]
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
12.3
12.2 Scanning electron micrograph of a normal canine iridocorneal
12.3 Frontal view of the canine iridocorneal angle. (1: iris;
angle as viewed from the anterior chamber or on a gonioscopic
 2: pectinate ligament; 3: uveal trabecula; 4: corneal endothelium.]
view. The iris is pulled down and the cornea excised (x21). (From
(SEM x60.] (From Martin, 197534.)
Martin, 197534)
12.4
12.5
12.5 Feline
iridocorneal
 angle on sagittal
5
section.
(1: anterior
chamber; 2: iris;
 3: pectinate
ligament;
4: uveal
trabecula filling
the 5: ciliary
cleft; 6: aqueous
plexus; 7: scleral
venous plexus.]
(SEM x43.] (From
Martin and 
Anderson,
12.4 Histologic section of the normal canine iridocorneal angle
198114)
(1 : limbus; 2: plexus venosus sclerae; 3: collecting veins; 4: aqueou5
plexus; 5: anterior chamber; 6: pectinate ligament (accessory row] :
7: ciliary cleft filled with 8: uveal trabecula; 9: corneoscleral trabecula;
10: ciliary body: 11: iris.) (From Martin and Anderson, 198114.)
12.6
the angle passes through the pectinate ligament to the ciliary
cleft or sinus {12.2, 12.3). The ciliary cleft is filled with a
porous uveal trabecular network (12.4, 12.5). Lying external
to the uveal trabecular meshwork is the corneoscleral
trabecular meshwork, which separates the small aqueous
plexus from the ciliary cleft (12.4) The aqueous plexus
vessels are very small and merge into the larger collecting
veins and finally into the scleral venous plexus {12.1, 12.4,
12.6). The scleral veins communicate freely with episcleral
veins, anterior ciliary veins, and the vortex venous system
(12.1)9-12, Arteriovenous anastomosis between the anterior
ciliary artery and the scleral veins has been demonstrated to
 affect aqueous humor outflow by altering venous pressurel3.
A system of fine capillaries, that are normally bloodless, run
radially to drain the aqueous humor from the corneoscleral
meshwork. These have been variously termed trabecular
12.6 Aqueous plexus of a dog viewed on sagittal view. (1 : collecting 
veins or capillaries, aqueous veins, angular plexus, or
vein: 2: trabecular plexus or aqueous plexus; 3: corneoscleral meshwork.]
aqueous plexusl2, 14-16 This plexus is oriented radial to the
The inner surface of the trabecular meshwork is covered by a sheet of
limbus but does have some circumferential anastomosis
cells (open arrow). Holes are present in the sheet but may represent
between channels. The plexus arises within the corneoscleral
artifact in preparation. Dark arrow denotes the direction of the anterior
meshwork (12.6), with outpockets or diverticulae. It drains
chamber. (SEM x411.)]
GLAUCOMA
339
12.7 Normal equine
12.7
12.8 Goniophotograph
12.8
iridocorneal angle on 
of a canine iridocorneal
histology. Note a large
angle with landmarks.
ciliary cleft at the base
(1: deep pigmented
of the iris with a large
zone; 2: superficial
uveal trabecula and a
pigmented zone;
lack of a significant 
3: uveal trabeculae
vascular system in the
in ciliary cleft;
adjacent sclera
4: conjunctiva through
compared to the
the cornea; 5: iris: 
dog (H&tE).
6: major arterial circle;
7: peculnate ligament;
8: pupil)
The extracellular matrix {ECM) of the the trabecular
shoanbe 01 aoueisisa1 jo aunos uew al 2q 01 nuano
12.9
humor outflow from the eye, and alterations within it may
be the elusive underlying cause for open-angle glaucoma.
The ECM consists of a variety of macromolecules, of which
the GAGs have been of particular interest because of the
 observation that perfusion of hyaluronidase in the anterior
chamber reduces the outflow resistance24, 2s. GAGs are
demonstrable in the trabecular meshwork and trabecular
capillaries. Alterations in the composition of GAGs may
onu snoanbe oi suisisan ui souus ui nsa
 ou  si as u i 
 present in the normal Beagle27. Other constituents of the 
ECM are collagen (types I, III, IV, V, VI, and VIIl), elastin,
 and the adhesive glycoproteins fibronectin, laminin, and
vitronectin28. A variety of influences such as gluco-
corticoids, growth factors, and MMPs affect the ECM.
In addition to aqueous humor outflow via the
aqueous plexus and venous channels, an unconventional
12.9 High power goniophotograph of a canine iridocorneal angle.
or uveoscleral flow of fluid has been demonstrated in
The uveoscleral route passes through the ciliary cleft and
 into the ciliary muscle interstitium to the suprachoroidal
space, to be absorbed by the choroidal veins and trans-
sclerally to the orbital lymphatics (12.1). The relative
importance of the two pathways varies with the species.
 g rm s u  te p
The uveoscleral route accounts for 15% of aqueous
scleral venous plexus in the mid sclera. The scleral venous
6te au ul %e Auo inq zgaop aui ul jesiadsp houny
plexus communicates posteriorly with the vortex venous
While not measured in the horse, the uveoscleral flow is
system, draining the posterior uvea, and anteriorly with the
thought to be important based on microsphere
 episcleral venous plexus (see Chapter 11, p.298, 11.2),11, 12.
injection?3. Additionally, in the horse a uveovortex flow
The method of entry of aqueous humor into the vascular
was demonstrated from the large ciliary sinus at the base
channels is unknown: two proposed routes are intracelluar
of the iris (12.7, Chapter 11, p.298, 11.6). Spheres from
or transcellular channels and  intercellular channels.
this space progress into the iris vessels and then to the
Intracellular channels are thought to occur through giant
vortex venous system33.
sensitive to IOP changes18,i9, The significance and, indeed,
GONIOSCOPIC ANATOMY
the existence
 of intracellular 
vacuoles has been
The terminology utilized in describing structures of the
iridocorneal angle has varied greatly over time and with
be more important for the intravascular transport of
investigator.
 Recently, Samuelson16 summarized the
historical comparative anatomy  and terminology of
infrequently identified giant vacuoles in the canine
mammalian iridocorneal angles. In carnivores, 
the
 endothelium of the aqueous plexus1s. Direct channels from 
predominant structure on frontal or gonioscopic view is the
the trabecular meshwork to the capillaries can be easily
pectinate ligament, which is composed of strands that
demonstrated with injection techniques and scanning
originate from the base of the iris and insert on the peripheral
inner cornea (12.2, 12.3, 12.5, 12.8, 12.9). Strands of the
340
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
ligament are usually single but may have branching
tra beculae are extensions of the longitudinal ciliary muscle
connections to adjacent ligaments. Thinner strands originate
that lines the inner sclera and inserts at the point of the
behind the primary row of the pectinate ligament to form an
pectinate ligament insertion. In the horse, a supraciliary
space filled with trabeculae lies external to the ciliary
color as the iris and, therefore, are usually pigmented. On
muscle and is the entrance for the uveoscleral flow14, 37.
histologic section the pectinate ligament strands are usually
The feline iridocorneal angle is similar to the dog.
 incomplete, because the section is unlikely to be cut parallel
 except that the pectinate ligament tends to be longer and
to the full length of the ligament strand (12.4).
more slender (12.s, 12.10). In the horse and other
The pectinate ligament inserts on the inner peripheral
ungulates, the pectinate ligament consists of thick cords
cornea at a uniform level and, in most instances, is
and is more of a sheet with pores near the iris {12.7,
associated with deep corneal pigment near the
12.11, Chapter 11, p.298, 11.6)14, 16, 36.The equine
termination of Descemet's membrane. This forms a
scleral venous plexus is much less developed (12.7) and a
 pigmented zone (deep) that is visible on gonioscopy. The
large ciliary cleft is present that extends into the base of
pigment continues to line the shelf of the limbus or
the iris14, 16, 37, 38
corneoscleral overlap and is visible on gonioscopy as the
Theoretically, increased IOP may occur from an
superficial pigment zone {12.8). This zone is grayer, as it
increased rate of aqueous humor production, obstruction
is viewed through the intervening corneall. The presence
to aqueous humor outflow either at the pupil or angle
of the pigmented zones varies between dogs as well as in
region, or an increased episcleral and orbital venous
various quadrants of the same eye.
hydrostatic pressure. In practice, the obstruction to outflow
at the pupil or angle is the usual cause of glaucoma. It may
 The pectinate ligament is the predominant structure
be that the other two possibilities are important but are
yisualized on gonioscopy; if it is not observed, it is
 difficult to assess in clinical veterinary medicine.
because of angle pathology, the angle of
observation is incorrect, or the goniolens is not
positioned correctly on the corneal apex.
CLINICAL SIGNS OF GLAUCOMA
Posterior to the pectinate ligament lies the ciliary cleft
Since glaucoma is a sign rather than the basic disease, it is
that is filled with fine interwoven nonpigmented fibers of
necessary to study each case as thoroughly as possible to
the ciliary or uveal trabecular meshwork (12.3, 12.4,
 determine the underlying cause(s). Externally, the signs of
12.5). The spaces of the trabecular meshwork are often
glaucoma are too nonspecific in the majority of primary
termed the spaces of Fontana36. On gonioscopy, the
 glaucoma cases to help differentiate the cause, so special
individual uveal trabecular beams are not recognized and
diagnostic procedures must often be pursueds, 6, 39,40
the region of the uveal trabecular meshwork is seen as a
bluish-white zone behind or through the pectinate
The signs of glaucoma vary between species, degree
ligament (12.8-12.10)11, 34. External (sclerad) to the loose 
of elevation of IOP, cause of the glaucoma, and
uveal trabecular meshwork are the more compact
chronicity. The dog tends to have the most florid
trabeculae of the corneoscleral trabecular meshwork
signs; the horse and cat have more subtle forms.
(cribriform ligament) (12.4)11, 16. The corneoscleral
12.10
12.11
12.11 Combined
sagittal and 
frontal view of an
equine
iridocorneal angle.
 Note the pectinate
ligament that is
sheet-like with
holes near the iris
(1) base (SEM
x178). (CE: corneal
endothelium.]
上
12.10 Goniophotograph of a feline iridocorneal angle. Note the long 
slender pectinate ligament that does not contrast very much with the
uveal trabecula because of the lighter pigmentation.
GLAUCOMA
341
INCREASED INTRAOCULAR PRESSURE
In general, the TonoPen overestimates the real IOP in
aq a sy  an 1oy dol lu 
the normal and low range and underestimates the real
quoted as 25-30 mmHg (3.3-4.0 kPa) and should not
IOP in the elevated ranges2 S3 The variations from real
vary between_theé
eyes by more t
than 4-8 mmHg
IOP are not clinically significant and do not cause
(0.5-1.1 kPa)39-44. Gelatt and MacKay44 used four
diagnostic dilemmas.
different applanation tonometers in a variety of breeds
Applanation tonometers such as the Mackay-Marg
 and found a mean canine IOP of 19 mmHg (2.5 kPa),
{out of production) and, more recently, the TonoPen,
with a range of 11-29 mmHg (1.s-3.9 kPa). No
are preferred because of their accuracy, adaptability to
differences were noted between breeds measured but
various species, and fewer sources of error. However,
[OP did decrease with age by 2-4 mmHg (0.3-0.5 kPa).
these instruments are expensive fUs$2,s00 for the
Utilizing the TonoPen, Miller et al.45, 46 reported a
TonoPen, see Chapter 1, p.11)45,46, 54, ss The TonoPen
mean IOP of 17±4 mmHg ((2.3±0.5 kPa) in the dog,
is easy to use and will potentially pay for itself if
20±6 mmHg (2.7±0.8 kPa) in the cat, and 23 mmHg
tonometry is performed routinely in general practice.
{3.1 kPa) in the horse. Diurnal IOP variations occur; in
Digital tonometry is a crude means of estimating IOP
the dog, IOP is 2-4 mmHg {0.3-0.5 kPa) higher in the
and is not satisfactory except for detecting extremely
morning,
which coincides.
with
variation
 soft or hard eyes.
similar across a variety of species.
PUPIL AND IRIS CHANGES
Elevated IOP is the only specific sign of active
Changes in pupil function are common but not specific
glaucoma. The most practical measuring instrument
signs of glaucoma. Elevation in IOP impairs function
based on cost in small animal ophthalmology is the
of the iris sphincter muscle more than the function of
 11 hd '1  aa  z
the dilator muscle. This results in a defect in the
calibrating the Schiotz tonometer for use in the dog
efferent arm of the PLR that is nonresponsive to
have been published and they yield IOPs several units
pilocarpine
constriction56.
The
impairment
is
be
associated with, but not entirely due to, iris ischemia
diagnosed in many normal dogs if these conversion
that develops when the IOP exceeds the diastolic blood
tables are used. Canine and feline IOP taken with
pressures7"
 Because most veterinary, patients are
applanation tonometry correlates most closely with
presented with IOPs that are very high, ie. >50-60
human Schiotz conversion tables fthat come with the
mmHg (6.7-8.0 kPa), the pupil is usually dilated if
instruments) and, while differences exist, they are not
there are no iris adhesions {12.12). If the IOP is around
clinically significants0, 51
30 mmHg {4.0 kPa), the pupils may be normal in their
light reaction or miotic due to uveitis or PG release
Schiotz tonometers are frequently purchased by
(12.13). With chronicity the iris may undergo atrophy,
veterinarians but are infrequently used.
which further interferes with function. Iridodonesis
Consequently, erroneous readings are common and
(trembling of the iris) may occur due to a lack of
 confidence in the results is often lacking.
 support from a displaced lens.
2.12
12.13
12.12 A cat with unilateral glaucoma with the most obvious sign of
12.13 Selective large vessel injection of the bulbar conjunctiva
pupil dilation, producing anisocoria. Note the lack of obvious corneal
of a Cocker Spaniel with an intraocular pressure of 30-40 mmHg
edema and conjunctival injection of the limited exposed sclera.
[4.0-5.3 kPa]. Note the lack of pupillary dilation.
342
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
12.14
12.15
12.16
12.14 A Basset Hound with acute intraocular
 12.15 Marked buphthalmos in a 4-month-old
12.16 Marked selective conjunctival
press5ure of >80 mmHg (10.7 kPa]. Inten5e
dog that developed subsequent to a
hyperemia and staphyloma from scleral
conjunctival hyperemia, pupil dilation, corneal
perforating cat claw injury.
thinning in a Basset Hound with chronic
edema, and a 3+ flare in the anterior chamber
glaucoma.
were present. The aqueous humor protein was
4.5 g/dl (45 g/l).
CONGESTION OF EPISCLERAL VESSELSAND
CONJUNCTIVAL VEINS
corneal edema where the lens touches the cornea.
Due to the free communication of the ocular venous
Descemet's membrane breaks are permanent and manifest 
system, when the posterior intrascleral venous channels are
as one or more single or branching deep curvilinear double
 obstructed from scleral distention, the anterior ciliary veins
white lines (12.18). They may or may not be associated
and episcleral veins become distended. This is typically a
with corneal edema. In the horse, acute breaks in
selective injection of the episcleral and large conjunctival
 Descemet's membrane with edema are often the presenting
veins but may, with very acute high pressures or PG release,
sign of glaucoma. Breaks in Descemet's membrane are
involve the entire conjunctival vasculature {12.13, 12.14).
quite specific for a history of glaucoma but the process
The horse and cat have minimal to modest congestion of
may not be active at the time of examination. Descemet's
the episcleral and conjunctival veins with glaucoma. In
membrane breaks are one of the most consistent signs with
addition, these species have tight lid-globe conformation
equine glaucoma but striate keratopathy has also been
which makes observation difficult. In the horse, the lack of
observed in equine eyes without glaucoma (see Striate
congestion may be related to the lack of or rudimentary
keratopathy, p.252).
scleral venous plexus.
Corneal scarring or pannus is observed in chronic
glaucoma where chronic edema, corneal hypesthesia, and
BUPHTHALMOS
repeated
1 trauma have occurred (12.19). Corneal
Buphthalmos {enlargement of the globe) is frequent in the
epithelial erosions may occur associated with repeated
dog, cat, and horse due to high IOP and distensible sclera.
trauma of tonometry or a reaction to topical anesthetics.
young puppy or kitten with gla ucoma (12.15). Staphyloma
OCULAR PAIN
may develop from the extreme thinning of the sclera
Manifestations
of
pain
discomfort
with
(12.16). Prolonged elevated IOP produces permanent
uncomplicated glaucoma are often subtle and are related
enlargement, despite spontaneous or therapeutic lowering
to changes in temperament, activity, and general well
of the IOP. Corneal measurements can be used to detect
being, rather than obvious ocular discomfort such as
questionable enlargements, especially if unilateral. Normal
blepharospasm. In humans, the pain of acute high IOP is
horizontal diameter is 15-17 mm in the dog and 17 mm in
 one of a radiating headache. Owners frequently note the
the cat. Enlargement of the globe can only be caused by
temperament changes after the animal improves, rather 
glaucoma but the presence of buphthalmos does not imply
than as it worsens.（
Glaucoma
associated  with
an active glaucoma. Many chronic buphthalmic eyes are
inflammation often has more acute pain.
yoei uensau ym Apoq Aie aul jo Audoie ot anp yos
of aqueous humor secretion. Buphthalmos should be
As advocates for the patient, the clinician must
differentiated from exophthalmos.
assume pain is present with most forms of
glaucoma and encourage some form of resolution
CORNEAL OPACIFICATION
for ocular pain.
Corneal opacities may be due to edema, breaks in
Descemet's membrane, or pannus in chronic glaucoma.
Corneal edema is due to endothelial damage or
RETINAL AND OPTIC NERVE CHANGES
compromise and is rapidly reversible when the IOP is
The observable fundus changes with glaucoma vary from
lowered. Edema may be very dense or very faint
possible papilledema and peripapillary hemorrhage in
(bedewing) (12.17).  Glaucoma associated with an
very acute cases to the more cormmion optic disk cupping.
GLAUCOMA
343
12.17
12.18
12.19
12.17 Corneal edema associated with
12.18 Breaks in Descermet's membrane
12.19 Advanced pannus or scarring in a
glaucoma in a Basset Hound.
producing curvilinear white tracts in a horse 
Wirehaired Fox Terrier with absolute or long-
with glaucoma. Note the subluxated lens.
 standing glaucoma.
12.20
12.21
12.22
12.20 Ocular fundus of a Siberian Husky with
12.21 Fundus of a dog with acute glaucoma.
12.22 Canine fundus with diffuse tapetal
acute closed-angle glaucoma. The optic disk is
The gray areas surrounding the optic disk are
hyperreflectivity, retinal vascular attenuation.
 cupped with retinal vessels stopping at the
acute retinal infarcts. At this time the vessels.
optic disk atrophy, and cupping from chronic 
edge of the disk. Peripapillary hemorrhages 
tapetum, and optic nerve appear normal.
glaucoma.
and white choroidal infarcts are present. (From
Martin and Vestre, 198576.]
optic disk atrophy, peripapillary retinal atrophy, focal
12.23
infarcts of the retina, diffuse retinal atrophy, and
attenuation of retinal vessels {12.20-12.22). Optic nerve
cupping is the most specific of the fundus changes
(12.23) but is difficult to detect early in the dog, due to
the marked variation in the myelination of the optic disk.
With progression the disk becomes atrophied (12.20,
12.22j. The cat has a normal, 
small, cupped
nonmyelinated disk and does not demonstrate the typical
cupping or atrophy of glaucoma.
DECREASED VISION
Vision loss with glaucoma is variable; in some patients it
may become permanent within 2-3 days, while some
 patients may retain vision despite chronically elevated
 pressures. The degree and rapidity of elevation of IOP
are proba bly responsible for these variations in tolerance.
Damage to the retina and optic nerve are thought to arise
from two mechanisms:
12.23 Photomicrograph with marked optic nerve cupping from
 Ischemic changes to the retina.
chronic glaucoma in a dog (H&tE).
344
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
●Blockage of axoplasmic flow of the ganglion cells at
LENTICULAR CHANGES
the lamina cribrosa from a deregistering of the pores.
Subluxation of the lens is often associated with stretching
The lamina cribrosa is the weak point of the fibrous
of the globe and rupture of part of the zonules {12.18,
tunic and elevated IOP results in outward bowing,
12.24). Since lens displacement can be an active rather
causing the pores within it to deregister. This
than a passive component in the pathogenesis of
glaucoma, it is important to try to determine the cause of
to modest elevations probably only affect axoplasmic
the displacement. The degree of buphthalmos and close
flow, whereas the usual high IOP observed in the dog
examination of the opposite eye are important in
produces ischemia as well as obstructing axoplasmic
determining the role of the lens in glaucoma. Cataract
flow. Retinal ischemia is presumably responsible for
formation is common with chronic glaucoma.
the diffuse full-thickness retinal atrophy observed on
histopathology with many forms of high pressure
glaucoma. The retinal ganglion cells are the most
DIAGNOSIS OF GLAUCOMA
sensitive cells in the retina to ischemia, and alpha
neurons with large diameter axons are most sensitive
All of the signs of glaucoma except elevated IOP are
to hypoxia and glaucoma62.
nonspecific  for active
glaucoma. Despite
this,
veterinarians still seek to make the diagnosis without this
At the molecular level, ganglion cell death may be caused
key piece of information because the tonometer is not
by excitotoxins, whether initiated by traumatic or vascular
considered a basic instrument in practice. The diagnosis
injury. Glutamate is one excitotoxin that has been studied
of glaucoma per se is only the first step. The second step
extensively.(
Glutamate is the primary excitatory
is to determine the cause of the glaucoma.
neurotransmiter in the CNS and retina and the most
 abundant free amino acid in the CNS. Glutamate binds to
Early diagnosis of glaucoma can only be
several receptors that are all ion channels. One important
accomplished with a tonometer; early therapy has
glutamate receptor, N-methyl D-aspartate (NMDA), is
the best chance of preventing blindness.
highly permeable to calcium. Ischemia or trauma to cells
results in increased permeability of the cell membrane and
the release of glutamate from the damaged cell. Increased
PROVOCATIVE TESTING
levels of glutamate in the extracellular environment of
adjacent normal cells produces an overstimulation of the
provocative testing have not met with widespread
NMDA receptors on the cell membrane and a resultant
acceptance, due to the difficulty in reproducibility in
influx of toxic levels of intracellular calcium. Toxic levels of
untrained animals, expense, difficulties in interpretation,
intracellular calcium result in activation of a variety of
and risk. Testing for glaucoma susceptibility has been
performed with the water provocative test, tonography,
This may become a self-perpetuating process and explains
and mydriasis.
how retinal and optic nerve degeneration continues to
 progress despite normalization of IOP in some patients.
Water loading
Increased glutamate levels have been found in the vitreous
The water provocative tests forces a water load (1 l),
of humans, rabbits, and dogs with glaucoma65-67.
given by stomach tube, onto the vascular system and
produces a subsequent increased rate of aqueous humor
FLARE IN THE ANTERIOR CHAMBER
formation. The normal dog may have an increase in IOP
Many of the very congestive cases of glaucoma have high
aqueous humor protein content, as well as pigment clumps
aqueous humor outflow channels are compromised, the
floating in the anterior chamber. The significance of the
elevation of IOP is beyond the normal range. Acute
breakdown in the blood-aqueous humor barrier is
glaucoma has been produced by this test and so it is not
unknown; it may be due to the anterior uveitis that had
without risk.
precipitated the glaucoma, or the high pressure may have
liberated PGs that broke down the blood-aqueous barrier.
Tonography
 Tonography is placing the weight of a tonometer {usually a
 Schiotz) on the cornea for a specific time period (usually
12.24
12.24Ventrolateral
 4 minutes) and observing the decay of IOP due to the weight
 subluxa tion of the
of the tonometer. If the aqueous humor outflow channels are
lens secondary to
compromised, the decay is not as great as in a normal eye.
buphthalmos in a
The C value (coefficient of facility of aqueous humor
dog with glaucoma.
outflow   is (
0.24-0.30
μlmmHg/min in the dog,
 Note the aphakic
0.34 μl/mmHg/min in the cat, and 0.24 μl/mmHg/min in
crescent
humans. While tonography has been used in research
dorsomedially.
colonies of dogs with glaucoma, it has not become a clinical
 tool despite its advocates70, 71.
Provocative testing for glaucoma is rarely
GLAUCOMA
345
 Table 12.1 Proposed classification of veterinary glaucomas
Open-angle glaucoma. Glaucoma associated with a normal
· Slack zonules with forward displacement of the lens that
iridocorneal angle.
creates a pupil blockage which further aggravates the
A. Primary open-angle glaucoma. Glaucoma associated with
anterior displacement of the peripheral iris (12.27). In the
a normal angle, with no obvious anatomic precipitating
cat, the lens may push forward so far as to almost touch
factors, bilateral disease potential, and a genetic
the cornea.
predisposition.
● Shallow anterior chamber associated with a small
anterior ocular segment. This creates a narrow
B. Secondary open-angle glaucoma. Glaucoma associated 
iridocorneal angle (in degrees) and is more susceptible to
jelnasea io siuajuoo snoanbe inq 'ajbue uado ue 4aim
pupillary blockade and subsequent forward displacement
hypertension interfere with aqueous egress:
of the peripheral iris and angle closure (12.28, 12.12].
1. Inflammation: cells, fibrin, or serum obstruct outflow 
● Plateau iris: the iris plane is flat but the peripheral iris 
pathways.
has a recess adjacent to the iris which is susceptible to
 2. Hyphema: erythrocytes and fibrin obstruct outflow 
closure if pupillary blockage occurs (12.29).
pathways.
 3. Obstruction of orbital venous return: orbital lesion, 
B. Secondary closed-angle glaucoma. Acquired lesions
 arteriovenous fistula, or other causes of an elevated
precipitate closure of a normal angle. Also, the angle 
episcleral venous pressure that decreases the pressure
conformations listed under (2) below (bullet points 1-3) have 
 differential favoring aqueous humor uptake.
'heyoog Aeldnd ot Aigdaass paseaui ue
 4. Pigment deposition or proliferation in the angle that
1. Associated with pupil block:
obstructs aqueous humor outflow.
●Intumescent cataract (12.30).
 5. Anterior luxated lens: lens may obstruct access to the
● Posterior synechia, iris bombe (12.31).
angle and aqueous humor outflow.
● Subluxated lens (12.25].
6. Vitreous herniation with aphakia/displaced lens (12.25).
●Vitreous herniation with aphakia/displaced lens (see
12.32).
Closed-angle glaucoma. Angle is collapsed or covered with
● Increased volume in vitreous compartment pushes lens-
 peripheral iris or connective tissue.
 iris diaphragm forward.
A. Primary closed-angle glaucoma:
 2. No pupil blockage:
1. Congenital maldeveloped angle (goniodysgenesis,
●Neoplasia invasion of angle and iris (12.33].
pectinate ligament dysplasial. Angles are bilaterally
● Inflammation with peripheral anterior synechia.
involved, often breed predisposition, age of onset varies
● Displaced lens pushing iris base forward (see 12.25).
● Fibrovascular proliferation over angle.
{12.26].
 2. Acquired closure associated with abnormal anterior
· Epithelial downgrowth into anterior chamber.
chamber conformation:
Anun buuad io Abns jo uedo
 Pigment proliferation in the angle with obstruction.
 Cause is unknown.
CLASSIFICATION OF GLAUCOMA
12.25
The classification of glaucoma in veterinary medicine
(Table 12.1) is basically borrowed from terminology in
human medicine. This approach is probably valid up to a
certain point but species differences in anatomy and genetic
traits have produced marked differences in the prevalence
of the different forms of glaucoma72. Glaucoma is broadly
divided into primary and secondary forms. Primary
glaucoma has an implied familial and bilateral tendency.
Simplistically, primary glaucoma has no antecedent ocular
disease associated with the pressure rise40. Secondary
glaucoma is associated with concurrent or antecedent
intraocular disease. Confusion with these definitions occurs
when some of the causes of apparent secondary glaucoma
12.25 Illustration of a tilted subluxated lens pushing forward on the
are closely investigated, because the obvious secondary
peripheral iris, closing the iridocorneal angle or collapsing the ciliary
cause may have been only a precipitating factor on a
cleft. Vitreous herniation through the pupil may create a pupillary
compensated, but abnormal, system.
block or obstruct the angle. (From Martin, 198373)
Congenital glaucoma is associated with congenital
anterior segment anomalies and, in humans, may manifest
up to the fourth decade in life (translated = 8 years in the
dog?). As the term is a misnomer based on time of onset, and
disease73. As we learn more about the pathogenesis of
this is the only form of glaucoma where age is considered, it
glaucoma, this definition may need modification.
would seem appropriate to place the cause(s) of congenital
Absolute glaucoma is a term frequently used and is
 glaucoma under the appropriate primary or secondary forms
simply an end-stage blind eye from any cause of
of glaucoma and to redefine primary glaucoma. Therefore,
 glaucoma and thus has no etiologic connotation.
primary glaucoma can be defined as a gaucoma that is not
A basic assumption when classifying glaucoma is
associated solely with acquired intraocular lesions or
 knowledge of the status of the iridocorneal angle, since
346
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
12.26
12.27
12.26 lllustration of goniodysgenesis that is characterized by a sheet
12.27 llustration of forward placerment of the lens-iris diaphragm
covering the angle where the pectinate ligament would normally be
that reduces the depth of the anterior chamber and creates a pupil
visualized. Flow holes are usually present in the sheet on the corneal
 block. Note the iris hugs the lens so firmly it outlines the len5.
side. (From Martin, 198373.)
(From Martin, 198373)]
12.28
12.29
12.28 llustration of a small anterior chamber that creates a narrow 
12.29 llustration of a plateau iris that is characterized by a recess
iridocorneal angle. This is more susceptible to closure if pupillary 
in the periphery of the iris plane and then a plateau or flat plane
block should occur from lens growth or pathologic conditions. (From
centrally. On gonioscopy this may look like a closed angle unless the
Martin, 198373)
lens is tilted toward the angle under observation. lt may lead to
peripheral anterior synechiae due to close apposition of adjacent 
tissues. (From Martin, 198373)
12.30
12.31
12.30 llustration of how an intumescent cataractous lens shallows
12.31 llustration of pupil seclusion from posterior synechiae 
the anterior chamber, producing a relative pupillary block, which may
resulting in iris bombe. The pressure head of the aqueous humor
result in closed angles. Chamber conformations such as in 12.27.
 balloons the iris forward. Peripheral anterior synechiae and collapse
12.28, 12.29 may have a higher risk of closing with lens
 of the ciliary cleft subsequently develop. (From Martin, 198373.)
intumescence. (From Martin, 198373.)]
GLAUCOMA
347
12.32
12.33
12.32 llustration of an anterior lens luxation and how the attached
12.33 llustration of an intraocular tumor pushing forward on the iris
vitreous may produce a pupillary block or the lens may physically
base creating iridocorneal angle closure and infiltrating the angle to
block the iridocorneal angle. (From Martin, 198373.)
 obstruct flow directly. Other mechanisms are through stimulation of
preiridofibrovascular membranes, hemorrhage, inflammation, and
excessive thickening of the iris to dose the angles. (From Martin, 198373)
both primary and secondary glaucoma are divided into
open- and closed-angle glaucoma.
. This requires
 gonioscopy or ultrasonic biomicroscopy74 (see Chapter
1, p.11) .
PRIMARY OPEN-ANGLE GLAUCOMA
Open-angle glaucoma  is relatively uncommon 
in
animals. The Beagle has an autosomal recessive form of
 primary open-angle glaucoma that has been well
 documented7s. Other breeds of dogs, such as the
Norwegian Elkhound, proba bly have a form of primary
 Open-angle glaucoma but it is not well documented76, 77.
 In the Beagle, open-angle glaucoma is bilateral and
IOP elevations begin at 6-8 months of age.
On
12.34
gonioscopy the angles are open in the early and
moderately advanced stages {12.34). In the early stages
the clinical signs are subtle and the IOP is 35-45 mmHg
{4.7-6.0 kPa). With chronicity, varying degrees of lens
displacement and a secondary closure of the angle
progresses, the IOP is often very erratic and high and the
clinical signs are more 'typical' of canine glaucoma.
The cause of the obstruction in aqueous humor
outflow is unknown but GAG alterations in the angle
have been demonstrated27. The major GAG in normal
and glaucomatous Beagles is chondroitin sulfate and the
amount of chondroitin sulfate decreases with the
duration of the glaucoma, while an enzyme-resistant
form of a GAG increases. Open-angle glaucoma is
qoq ui suo iog pue aiaqns shi aq pazaeie
eyes at the same time. While not reported to have
 anomalous lenses, Beagles appear to have small spherical
lenses, as judged by the curvature of the lens and the ease
of observation of the lens equator (12.34). The disease in 
Elkhounds appears similar to that in the Beagle, except
12.34 Goniophotograph of a Beagle with moderately early open-angle
the age of onset of clinical signs is somewhat later
glaucoma. Note the relatively normal pectinate ligament and open
{6-7 years) and small spherical lenses are not observed.
fltering cleft, but the lens is very round and protruding through the pupil.
348
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
12.35
This represents the largest group of primary glaucomas in
Narrow angle
the dog but semantics and incomplete knowledge have
created a great deal of confusion. The iridocorneal angle
may be described as closed as well as narrow. A narrow
Pso e on osand iod e Aenad si aun
angle and is due to a shallowing of the anterior chamber 
(12.35). In veterinary medicine, the term narrow angle
has often been used to describe the apparent narrow or
collapsed filtering zone or clefr seen on low power
 gonioscopy, which is not necessarily related to a shallow
 anterior chamber as in humans (12.36)80. This definition
of narrow-angle glaucoma has been used to typify
glaucoma in the American Cocker Spaniel. To be
12.35 Concept of narrow angle in which the anterior chamber depth
accurate, the gonioscopic description should include
is reduced, bringing the peripheral iris closer to the cornea and being
 descriptions of open, narrow, and collapsed ciliary cleft if
 more susceptible to closure from pupil block.
possible, as well as open, narrow, and closed iridocorneal
angles81. It is possible to have a narrowed or closed
filtering cleft with a normal open angle (early to middle
12.36
stage open-angle glaucoma) and an open ciliary cleft with
closed or
almost closed:
iridocorneal. angle
(normotensive eye with goniodysgenesis) ( 12.37)82
A histopathologic study of glaucomatous eyes, in
which closed iridocorneal angles were only diagnosed if
peripheral anterior synechiae were present?i, added
further confusion to the terminology. In this study all
glaucomatous eyes, whether primary or secondary, 1)
had collapsed or closed ciliary clefts, and 2) all primary
glaucomas had obstructive tissue in front of the cleft that
was intrepreted as goniodysgenesis but were still
classified as open-angle glaucoma.
 For the purposes of this chapter, an angle is closed if
it is either covered or collapsed. Primary angle closure
may arise from developmental anomalies in the
pectinate ligament (goniodysgenesis, pectinate ligament
dysplasia), the result of adhesion of the iris base to the
12.36 Normotensive eye of a 4-year-old Cocker Spaniel with
inner sclera from an acquired collapse of the ciliary cleft,
unilateral glaucoma. Note the apparently narrow filtering cleft that is
or aquired obstruction from the peripheral iris
actually closed or covered with a sheet that is not pigmented, except
(peripheral anterior synechiae due a narrow angle). The
for some streaks. This is typical of goniodysgenesis.
causes of acquired closure in primary glaucoma are not
known, and while most ophthalmologists believe this
phenomonon occurs, progressive closure has not been
12.37
documented in a systematic way. Acquired collapse of
the ciliary cleft is a universal histopathologic occurrence
with glaucoma but the causes for the collapse in primary
glaucoma that does not have obstruction in the angle are
 not usually understood.
 One form of glaucoma that commonly occurs in the
1
American Cocker Spaniel is characterized by colla pse of the
ciliary cleft, collapse of the pectinate ligament outward
 against the cornea, and resultant angle closure. The closure
of an angle could also occur due to anatomic predisposition
of a shallow anterior chamber that creates a narrow angle
{in degrees) between the plane of the iris and the cornea
(12.28, 12.29, 12.35). With a shallow anterior chamber or
narrowed iridocorneal angle, occlusion by the adjacent
 peripheral iris may occur as a result of various conditions,
Increased resistance of fluid flow through the pupil results
12.37 Photomicrograph of the normotensive eye from a Basset
in pushing the iris base forward, which is more likely to
Hound with unilateral glaucoma. llustrates goniodysgenesis or closed
obstruct or close the iridocorneal angle because of the
angle with an open filtering cleft. Note how the base of the iris is
shallow peripheral anterior chamber. This closure may be
pulled forward. (1: anterior chamber; 2: iris; 3: limbus; 4: pectinate
acute or slow and insidious83. A gonioscopic study of
ligament dysplasia; 5: open ciliary cleft.]
Samoyeds found no relationship between goniodysgenesis
and ‘glaucoma but did correlate glaucoma with
GLAUCOMA
349
12.38
12.39
12.40
12.38 Goniophotograph of a nommotensive eye of 1
 12.39 Closed angle in a normotensive eye of
12.40 Scanning electron micrograph of a
a 2-year-old Samoyed with unilateral glaucoma.
 a Basset Hound with unilateral glaucoma.
normotensive eye of a Basset Hound with
The angle is covered or closed by a sheet of tissue
Note the narrow white zone that mimics the 
unilateral glaucoma similar to 12.39. Note
that is lighter in pigmentation than the iris and
opening of the ciliary cleft. If the eye is
the solid sheet with flow holes near the
has pigmented streaks. This simulates a narrow
normotensive, flow holes can be observed
 corneal insertion (arrows). (From Martin and
cleft but open angle. This is typical of the
 around the circumference of the angle.
Wyman, 197882.)
 appearance and degree of goniodysgenesis that is
a55ociated with glaucoma.
12.41 Scanning 
12.41
electron micrograph of
 the iridocorneal angle 
closed angles84. This study, for some reason, differentiated
from a 1-day-old puppy.
2
Note the hammocking of 
 severe goniodysgenesis that manifests as a closed angle. No
a fibrillar sheet [1] acros5
 evidence for the presence of peripheral anterior synechiae
the angle with focal
attachments to the
demonstrated that the anterior chamber is not as deep, the
corneal side (arrows].
lens is thicker and further forward, and the vitreous is
The pores noted on
 sheets in the adult
controls4. These findings may be additive or eventual
(12.39, 12.40)
decompensating factors on a compromised closed angle
correspond to the
from goniodysgenesis. Every Samoyed presenting with
openings on the corneal
 unilateral glaucoma when examined by the author has had
 side of the embryonic
closed angles from extensive goniodysgenesis in the
 sheet. (2: corneal 
opposite normotensive eye (12.38).
endothelium; 3: iris.)]
High magnification is necessary to 0
differentiate a
(From Martin, 197487.)
 solid sheet that has linear pigment streaks that simulate
ligaments (as is common with goniodysgenesis) from a
12.42
collapsed cleft with ligaments that are pushed out and
 adherent to the inner cornea (closed cleft, as is frequent
in the American Cocker Spaniel). High magnification
gonioscopy or scanning electron microscopy indicates
that they are not narrow, normal angles but closed
angles, and they are most compatible histologically
with developmental anomalies (12.37-12.40)34, 81, 85
To date, there is little if any evidence that the angles are
initially normal and then became closed. In fact, a
recent 
study
on Flat Coated Retrievers with
 goniodysgenesis found that the severity of the problem
is not statistically related to age86.
Goniodysgenesis is  an  arrest  in the  normal
development of the pectinate ligament that may occur as
late as 7-14 days post partum. The pectinate ligament
arises from rarefaction of a sheet of fibrils that arise
diffusely from the peripheral iris and insert by focal
attachments to the peripheral cornea (12.41)37. Various
degrees of angle maldevelopment occur but glaucoma is
12.42 Goniophotograph of a normotensive eye of a 6-month-old
typicallyassociated with the very severe orms34586,
Basset Hound. Note that about half of the angle has webbing of the
proximal pectinate ligament on the iris side. This is a mild anomaly
developed but recognizable pectinate ligament {12.42,
without significance for clinical disease.
350
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
12.43
12.44
12.43 Scanning electron micrograph of a Basset Hound with modest
12.44 Photomicrograph of the iridocorneal angle of a Basset Hound
goniodysgenesis, consisting of webbing of ligaments, which is on the
with goniodysgenesis and a closed ciliary cleft (arrows). The opposite
iridal side of the ligaments.(From Martin, 1975 34.8s.)
uaag pey aha siul pue Asnoiaad aear l snoieuioonelh auooag peu aaa
normotensive on multiple examination. The cleft was open in some
quadrants and closed in others on histology and scanning electron
microscopy. This may represent a preglaucomatous phase with
12.43); severe degrees of maldevelopment manifest as a
progressive closure of the cleft.
solid sheet that pulls the iris forward, creating the
 appearance of a narrow filtering cleft that is actually a
closed angle, with small flow holes visible near the
anterior chamber, and decompressing the anterior 
corneal  attachment if the eye is normotensive
chamber surgically have been precipitating factors but not 
(12.36-12.40). If the holes become obstructed, the sheet
the only ones) for glaucoma in eyes with goniodysgenesis.
is forced outward against the cornea and the ciliary cleft
Owners may relate the onset of glaucoma to a variety of
becomes collapsed {12.44). While the predisposition to
 conditions such as weather (barometric changes), diet, and
primary closed-angle glaucoma is bilateral, glaucoma
stress. Many Basset Hounds are initially observed with
usually manifests sequentially. It is important to examine
miosis, flare, and low IOP that rapidly develops into florid
the *normal eye to determine the sequence of events in
gla ucoma with dilated pupils. While this might technically
the affected eye and whether there is a risk to the
be called secondary glaucoma, the plasmoid aqueous
normotensive eye. The question arises, when examining
humor is much more likely to obstruct an angle with a few
a diseased organ, whether the lesion is primary or
flow holes than a normal angle. An analogy would be the
secondary. This can be resolved by looking at the normal
decompensation of a chronic nephritis patient into renal
twin organ before the secondary effects of increased IOP
failure by stress such as surgery or water restriction. Is the
become apparent. While the sheets of tissue are very
renal failure due to the stress or due to the chronic
obvious, it may be questioned whether deeper angle
nephritis? Whether an eye with goniodysgenesis manifests
structures are also involved with aqueous humor
glaucoma, at any age, is a combination of the severity of
obstruction. Some authors86 prefer the term pectinate
the abnormality and the presence of the appropriate stress
ligament dysplasia as gonioscopically this is all that can
to the eye. The stress may be of endogenous or exogenous
be ascertained. Pectinate ligament dysplasia results in
 origin and this variability will predict the difficulty in
histologic anatomic alterations in the angle, pulling the
determining the genetics of glaucoma.
iris base forward, and an altered relationship between the
A study comparing the number of mast cells in globes
termination of the corneoscleral tra becula and the ciliary
enucleated for glaucoma and normal controls found
cleft and anomalous ligament (12.37). Thus the more
fewer mast cells in the glaucomatous eyes, irrespective of
inclusive term of goniodysgenesis may be correct.
the cause of glaucoma. The significance is unknown and
Several interesting and unexplained statistics have
it is possible that mast cells may not have been identified
arisen repeatedly from studies of closed-angle glaucoma.
due to their degranulation93. Other factors such as
Several reports have found as high as a 3:1 predominance
increased thickness of the lens with age, forward
of females to males for glaucoma39,40, 8-91 The left eye
placement of the iris and lens, and enlargement of the
tends to be affected first in the American Cocker and
vitreous may all contribute to pupillary block and
Welsh Springer Spaniel39, 40, 89, Most cases of closed-
shallowing of the peripheral anterior chamber with
angle glaucoma are presented in the winter months39-41
eventual closure of the angle94 (12.30). Much of this
The age of onset of glaucoma varies a great deal, with
aaaas Ag paonoud aa osie pinoo uoeangyuoo
Suosag sisauaashpouos Aq paioae spaaig isou
goniodysgenesis that typically has a sheet of shorter
glaucomatous as young adults from 3-6 years old38, 89,92
length than the normal pectinate ligament. Consequently,
but all ages, from the neonate to the aged animal, can be
the iris base is pulled forward (12.37).
affected. Closed-angle glaucoma in general occurs from
 The conformation of the anterior chamber may vary.
considerably between individuals, the significance of
 A major unresolved question is the precipitating
which is currently unknown. Individual dogs are
factor(s) for glaucoma in an eye that has been
observed in which the iris “hugs' the lens very tightly and
compensated for years. Anterior uveitis, lipids in the
the outline of the lens is visible through the iris {12.30,
GLAUCOMA
351
12.45
12.46
12.45 Goniophotograph of a normotensive eye of a 2-year-old
12.46 Goniophotograph of an American Cocker Spaniel with
American Cocker Spaniel with an open angle, but a very tight
moderate goniodysgenesis of half of the viewed angle (arrow).
iris-lens contact that outlines the lens through the iris (see also
12.27]. This view is not ideal for showing the angle.
12.45). These individuals would presumably be more
12.47 Scanning
 electron micrograph of 
12.47
susceptible to pupil block and subsequent angle closure
but this has not been proven. Also, individuals are
a 2-year-old American
observed which have a flat plateau of an iris plane
Cocker Spaniel with
(plateau iris) but a recess at the iris root, which may be
goniodysgenesis over
more susceptible to angle closure {12.29).
about half of the angle
Closed-angle glaucoma is common in the Basset
circumference. The dog
Hound and American Cocker Spaniel in the US, but a
was euthanized for
wide variety of purebred and crossbred dogs have been
nonocular reasons.
observed with similar gonioscopic findings+1, 95.
. The
(1: cornea; 2: sheet
English Cocker Spaniel, Samoyed, Siberian Husky, Chow
over filtering cleft;
Chow, Shar Pei, Welsh Springer Spaniel, Bouvier des
3: iris; arrows: flow
 Flandres, and Flat Coated Retriever are also predisposed
holes.) (x56.) (From
Martin and wyman.
dysplasia {PLD) in Flat Coated Retrievers in the UK was
197882.]
found in 35% of the examined dogs and, when graded
on severity, only those with 63% or more of the angle
involved had glaucoma. If the offspring of severely
affected dogs was examined, 83% of the offspring
had
PLD86. The heritability was calculated as 0.7 in the Flat
Coated Retriever?6. The Bouvier des Flandres has a high
incidence of goniodysgenesis ( 75%) and glaucoma (23%
as ya aui ue adng u (sp s ui saseo jo
Spaniel, goniodysgenesis is possibly a dominant trait9.
In Norway, English Springer Spaniels had a prevalence
rate of 24% for PLD (goniodysgenesis )97. Bjerkas et al.97
found a correlation between PLD and narrow angles, and
Acquired causes for closed angles in primary
PLD and narrow angles with glaucoma. Glaucoma is
glaucoma are not understood and their progression is
rarely documented. Elevation of IOP by itself will cause
normal sire and dam produced 85% of offspring with
the ciliary cleft to collapse and the angle to close, as
normal iridocorneal angles, while breeding from either
 observed in the Beagle in the late stages of open-angle
one or both parents with PLD produced abnormal
glaucoma78. In the American Cocker Spaniel, the
iridocorneal angles in 41-s7% of offspring..
A
pectinate ligament appears to have been forced outward
polygenetic trait was postulated for PLD. While
and is collapsed against the inner cornea. This could be
seq euoonela pue pauaqui Aiqeqoud si sisauaasapoiuos
explained by a collapse of the ciliary cleft from an
been observed in numerous families of dogs, the genetic
unknown cause. PLD has been documented in the
mode of transmission of goniodysgenesis or glaucoma in
American Cocker Spaniel by the author (12.46, 12.47)
most breeds is unknown. Goniodysgenesis is not a
but most American Cocker Spaniels with glaucoma
significant problem in the cat but goniodysgenesis may
appear to have a collapsed and closed ciliary cleft
have been present in a case of congenital glaucoma98.
without evidence of PLD.
352
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRiNArY MeDiCINE
Diagnosis of closed-angle glaucoma
SECONDARY GLAUCOMA
Diagnosis of closed-angle or closed-cleft glaucoma is based
Secondary glaucomas may be the predominant form of
 on gonioscopic examination. Often the angle of the affected
glaucoma in a geographical region due to popularity of
eye cannot be examined because of corneal edema or
aqueous humor turbidity. It is then necessary to examine the
rather obvious causes of angle obstruction but close 
opposite eye to give a prognosis for future glaucoma, as well
examination of both eyes may help to explain why some
as to determine the presumed cause of the affected eye. The
dogs develop ocular hypertension following an insult and
severe
degreeof 
 goniodysgenesis  on  gonioscopic
 others do not. The lens in particular should be looked at
examination typically manifests as a solid sheet with no
critically when assigning it a role in secondary glaucoma.
pectinate ligament visible {12.38, 12.39). On low-power
 gonioscopy, a thin white zone simulates a narrowed filtering
Etiology and mechanisms
cleft with some fine darker radial streaks that may mimic a
Hyphema
pectinate ligament. With magnification, the angle is covered
ado u seu ans eauday m piioss o
with solid iridal tissue that is less pigmented as it crosses the
 angle that is occluded with blood and fibrin. Later, due
angle. A few flow holes can often be detected near the
to traumatic uveitis, synechiae may produce a closed-
corneal insertion of the sheet of tissue {12.39, 12.40). The
angle gla ucoma.
sheet occupies 75% or more of the circumference when it is
associated with glaucoma*6. The sheet is shorter than the
Trauma
normal pectinate ligament, which pulls the base of the iris
Trauma may result in open- or closed-angle glaucoma.
forward and produces a very flat iris plane and, rarely,
Tra uma-induced anterior uveitis may result in anterior or
iridodonesis due to lack of lens support. While clinically the
posterior synechiae, with resulta nt obstruction of aqueous 
 angles with goniodysgenesis look similar whether the IOP is
humor flow (12.50). Trauma may also produce a tear in
elevated or not, the changes in the deeper angle structures
the pectinate ligament and the ciliary cleft, resulting 
in
are obvious on histopathologic examination. When flow
recession of the angle. The tear heals by fibrosis and the
holes become obstructed the sheet, which is the pectinate
resultant loss of function may produce glaucoma months
ligament precursor, is pushed outward against the limbal
later. Perforating corneal trauma often results in the iris
region by the pressure gradient. The ciliary cleft is
moving forward to plug the defect, and the shallow
obliterated and venous channels in the sclera collapse
anterior
 chamber, combined with inflammation, may
(12.44, 12.48). This lesion has erroneously been described
result in angle closure. Gaucoma is relatively rare in the
as a peripheral anterior synechia99. If the angle is
 horse and trauma is a significant cause. Four of nine globes
normotensive, a sheet is present that pulls the iris root
in one histopathologic series showed evidence of
forward and the ciliary cleft is open, indicating that aqueous
 perforating or nonperforating trauma101.
humor is passing behind the sheet (12.37, 12.49)73.
Inflammation
 The role of goniscopic findings in predicting
Intraocular inflammation {uveitis) from a variety of
glaucoma risk is quite controversial within the
causes is a common cause of secondary gla ucoma. Uveitis
veterinary ophthalmology community and requires
 may produce severe posterior synechiae that results in iris
ongoing systematic investigation and statistical
bombe and sufficient shallowing of the anterior chamber
analysis. What began as clinical impressions are
to produce secondary closure of the angle with peripheral
now being supported by accumulating statistical
anterior synechiae {12.31). Alternatively, inflammation
data in a variety of breeds.
may produce peripheral anterior synechiae without
posterior synechiae {12.51).
12.48
12.49 Scanning
 electron micrograph of 
the normotensive eye
of the Basset Hound 
viewed in 12.14.
12.44. Unlike the
CCC
 quadrant viewed in
12.44, this quadrant
has an open ciliary
cleft. (From Martin 
and Wyman, 197882.)
(1: iris; 2: anterior
chamber; 3: pectinate
ligament dysplasia :
4: limbus, 5: ciliary
cleft.)
12.48 Photomicrograph from the eye of a Basset Hound that ha5
glaucoma (from 12.14). Note the iris-like tissue lining the peripheral
cornea (arrow), collapse of the ciliary cleft (ccC), and absence of
scleral venous channels.
GLAUCOMA
12.50
12.51
12.50 Miniature Poodle that had blunt trauma from a golf ball
12.51 Peripheral anterior 5ynechia in the angle of 14-year-old
hitting the eye 6 months prior to presentation with glaucoma. The
American Cocker Spaniel with a hypermature cataract and lens-
eye developed a cataract and a difference in the width of the
induced uveitis. The opposite angle was normal. Note the irregular
filtering cleft is present, due to peripheral anterior synechiae (arrow].
hypermature lens surface. The angle has no visible pectinate
The open portion may represent angle recession a5 a pectinate
ligament, there is pigment dispersion in the angle, and the width 
liga ment is not visible.
of the angle is irregular.
Aphakic and pseudophakic glaucoma
incidence. Risk factors for glaucoma in the study were
common in the dog. The cause is unknown and it is
hypermature cataracts {1  in  4 develops glaucoma),
differentiated from glaucoma because of the lack of
purebreds, aphakia, and male dogs. About 33% of
optic nerve damage in most cases. The incidence of
aphakic eyes developed glaucoma compared to 10% for
aul pue %os yoroudde Aeu uoisuauadky aaeiadoisod
pseudophakes; however, the multiple reasons for not
IOP may exceed 50 mmHg (6.7 kPa). The IOP usually
 placing an intraocular lens (IOL) at the time of surgery
 peaks by 3 hours and normalizes by 24 hours102. The
might be the predisposing factor(s), rather than aphakia
cause of the hypertension is unknown but the concern
is that these patients may be predisposed to glaucoma
not found to be predictive of later glaucoma, although
at a later date. Miller et al.103, in a nonblinded study in
half of the eyes that had postoperative hypertension
normal
dogs
undergoing.
phacoemulsification,
developed glaucoma.
demonstrated that the ciliary cleft was narrow 24 hours
after surgery, despite IOP normalization. The cause and
Neoplasia
significance of these findings are unknown. Two studies
Anterior uveal neoplasia may invade the ciliary body
on glaucoma after postcataract surgery found no
and obstruct outflow, shed cells that clog the outflow
correlation with transient postoperative hypertension
channels, or have necrosis with inflammation and
 and later development of glaucoma104, 10s.
hemorrhage that occludes the outflow channels (12.33).
Glaucoma following cataract surgery may not
Neoplasia may also stimulate PIFMs or rubeosis iridis
deserve a separate category and is undoubtedly
that, when advanced, covers, obstructs, and collapses
associated
with multiple mechanisms. If routine
the iridocorneal angle106. Lymphosarcoma in the dog
gonioscopy is performed prior to cataract surgery,
and cat is the most common secondary ocular neoplasia
varying
degrees
of
acquired
closure
and
and usually manifests as a bilateral inflammatory
goniodysgenesis will often be noted. However, the
secondary glaucoma (see Chapter 11, p.298, 11.48,
frequency of postoperative glaucoma has not yet been
11.53). Melanoma in the dog and cat eventually
correlated with preoperative gonioscopy.
'Finding
 produce glaucoma and may be masked by hyphema or
 gonioscopic lesions does not often abort the cataract
inflammation (see Chapter 11, p.298, 11.67, 11.73).
surgery but it may forewarn the owner and surgeon of
When presented at this stage, ultrasonography is
increased postoperative risks.
necessary for diagnosis. In a pathologic study
of
glaucoma in cats, 41% had glaucoma from one
of
factors for glaucoma in a series of cataract surgeries. Of
346 operated eyes, 17% developed glaucoma. More
because of being based on enucleated specimens.
compelling was that 29% of the eyes followed for
12 months developed glaucoma. Median follow up for
Uveal cysts
all dogs was only 5.8 months, so this figure might
Cysts in the ciliary body have been associated with
significantly
underrepresent the  true
 long-term
glaucoma in the Great Dane and Golden Retriever.
354
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
12.52
12.53
12.52 Episcleral pigment in a Cairn Terrier that may be the precursor
12.53 Goniophotograph of the normotensive eye of a Scottish Terrier
to more extensive intraocular pigmentation and glaucoma. The 
with unilateral glaucoma. Note the heavy pigmentation of the angle that
intraocular pressure was high-normal in this patient.
has obscured and filled up most of the spaces of the pectinate ligament.
Normally, most cysts in the anterior chamber are
12.54
considered benign. In a pathologic study, 5% of
glaucomatous globes were from Golden Retrievers and
52% of their globes had iridociliary cystsl08. In
 glaucoma the cysts may mechanically push forward on
the lens-iris diaphragm, closing the angle and interfering
with aqueous humor flow, or the contents of ruptured
cysts may obstruct the trabecular meshworkios, 109.
What was not reported (because it was a pathology
 study) was the percentage of Golden Retrievers without
 glaucoma that had cysts.
Pig ment proliferation
The Cairn Terrier and Scottish Terrier have a form of
glaucoma that is associated with increasing numbers of
melanocytes in the angle region, that eventually obstruct
outflowlio, 111. This is thought to be a familial disease of
older Cairn Terriers. The term melanocytic glaucoma
12.54 Anterior lens luxation in a dog producing glaucoma. The clear
was suggested to differentiate the origin of the pigment
lens may be easily overlooked in the anterior chamber.
Auauaid ul uawaid pazoosrud 1o pasiadsp wo
glaucoma in humans. The pigment is seen as plaques on
the sclera {12.52), as well as clumps floating in the iris
 and a marked thickening of the iris. On gonioscopy, the
angle is very dark and the pectinate ligament becomes
masked and the cleft narrowed, due to deposition of
 pigment (12.53). It is an insidious disease and has been
strands of vitreous may obstruct the angle. Posteriorly
refractory to therapy.
luxated lenses may produce a low-grade uveitis with
peripheral anterior synechiae or changes in the ciliary
Lens displacement
cleft. (See also Chapter 13, p.369.)
Lens displacement is the most significant cause of
secondary glaucoma (65%) in terrier breedss, 6, 100, 112
FELINE GLAUCOMA
but is not restricted to terriers. Anterior lens luxation
Cats are presented quite late in the course of glaucoma and
may physically obstruct aqueous humor flow or the
owners either note an enlarged eye or a dilated pupil
accompanying vitreous may obstruct the flow at the
(12.12). In the cat, most glaucomas are thought to be due
 pupil (12.32, 12.54). Subluxated lenses are less likely to
to, or associated with, inflammation. Sixty percent and
 produce glaucoma and it is often less obvious how they
 87% respectively of cats in two clinical seriesl13, 114 and
interfere with aqueous humor dynamics. Subluxation of
41% of glaucomatous eyes in a pathologic series107 were
the lens to one side may produce a regional shallowing of
 associated with inflammation. In the pathologic series, the
the chamber and restriction of flow at the pupil {12.32).
inflammatory  lesion  was a lymphocytic-plasmacytic
uveitis that could be either diffuse or focal, or both. In
GLAUCOMA
355
12.55
12.56
12.55 Goniophotograph ofa Siamese cat with glaucoma in the opposite
12.56 Bilateral glaucoma in an aged cat with chronic uveitis. Note 
eye. Note the irregularity of the iris base that is pulled forward because
one eye with a widely dilated pupil and the other with an anteriorly
of peripheral anterior synechiae over much of the viewed angle
luxated opaque lens.
 suspected, based on bilateral involvement in many patients
12.57
 without overt uveitis. As infectious diseases are a leading
cause of uveitis, titers should be performed on cats with
gla ucoma.
Lens
displacement
is
frequent
with
inflammation and may be associated with glaucomatous
or normotensive eyes, presumably because of the large
anterior chamber of the cat (12.56).
A unique form of glaucoma occurs in the cat in which
the lens-iris diaphragm moves forward and collapses the
anterior chamber completely. The lens is not luxated in
that the zonules are still intact but the pupillary block
and collapsed angle result  in moderate pressure
elevations. The condition is usually unilateral and may
persist for months. It is thought to represent a form of
'malignant' glaucoma in which the aqueous humor pools
posteriorly in the vitreous, pushing the lens-iris
diaphragm forward (12.57). Medication does not relieve
12.57 B-mode ultrasound of a 15-year-old domestic shorthaired cat
the problem, although it may control the pressure.
with a unilateral shallowing of the anterior chamber and forward 
Phacoemulsification has been curative in the author's
displacement of the lens with intact zonules (right frame). Compare
limited experience, although some clinicians also
the depth of the anterior chamber with the opposite normal eye (left
 recommend anterior vitrectomy.
frame]. Phacoemulsification of the lens cured the peristent
moderately elevated intraocular pressure.
EQUINE GLAUCOMA
Glaucoma in the horse is uncommon but is being
recognized with increasing frequency. The prevelence of
most instances there were obstructive lesions from either
dsu suoi aruiaa auo u sasu ui eona
the inflammatory cells or collapse of the ciliary cleft and
was 0.11% and in a national data base of teaching
 peripheral anterior synechiae (12.55), but in 13% of these
 hospitals was 0.07 %116. Besides being infrequent, most 
practitioners do not have the instrumentation to measure
cause of glaucoma107. Three of the cats were classified as
IOP in the horse, even when glaucoma may be suspected.
having primary glaucoma because no inciting cause was
The IOP of horses can be quite labile, presumably due to
evident. Hampson et al.l1s described a form of primary
a strong retractor bulbi and orbicularis oris muscle. Both
glaucoma in Burmese cats in Australia in which there was
muscles when contracted may place increased tension on
no evidence of inflammation and the angles were open,
the globe, thus elevating the IOP. The clinician must be
 narrow, or closed. Blocker and van der Woerdtl14 decribed
judicious in interpreting elevations of 30-40 mmHg
 glaucoma in 82 cats, of which five were thought to be
(4.0-S.3 kPa) and take multiple readings. While
primary glaucomas. Goniodysgenesis does not appear to
auriculopalpebral blocks are not reported to alter the
play a significant role in feline glaucoma. There is very
 IOP in horses117, they are often important to minimize
little documentation decribing the forms of primary
artifactual elevations. Digital tonometry is notoriously
glaucoma in the cat but it may be more prevalent than
unrelia ble in the horse.
356
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
12.58
12.58 Unilateral
12.59
eul euosnen
horse that has
buphthalmo5,
pupillary dilation,
and multiple breaks 
in Descemet's
membrane with
edema localized to
the breaks.
12.59 Photomicrograph of an equine eye that has glaucoma. This eye is
similar to a glaucomatous canine eye because the ciliary cleft and pectinate
ligament are collapsed against the inner sclera and cornea (arrow). Uveitis
Glaucoma in the horse is usually unilateral and the
is not apparent and this may represent a primary closed-angle glaucoma.
incidence increases with age. The presenting signs are
buphthalmos, corneal edema and striae, dilated pupil,
 and blindness (12.58). The signs of glaucoma are often 
Despite the availability of new and more effective
subtle and usually the horse is presented in a chronic
topical glaucoma medications and new surgical
state with an indefinite history of onset. In a series of
procedures, it is very difficult to maintain vision in
nine cases with histopathologic findings, about half had
 those forms of glaucoma characterized by markedly
lesions suggestive 
of
previous
 perforating
or
elevated IOP
nonperforating ocular trauma101. (
Glaucoma as a
complication from adhesions due to recurrent uveitis is
 Pragmatically, the prognosis for vision will also modify
uncommon, but rubeosis iridis or PIFMs are common
Ausnl oi imop si i adeiaul jo adai pue Asuaui aul
histopathologic lesions in glaucomatous globesl18. The
 a a si ieun aa ue ui slns aso
PIFM traverses the pectinate ligament and may block
 addition, the results of surgery are equivocal, and yet most
lo uaueai aeuad aui yanouui saaa rounq snoanbr
ca ses are not controlled with long-term medical treatment.
absorption from the iris surface. It is unclear whether the
membrane is the cause of the glaucoma, as three out of
MEDICAL THERAPY
five cases still had an open ciliary cleft, which should
Emergency therapy
have collapsed if an upstream obstruction to flow was
All recently visual eyes with glaucoma should have
present (12.59). The cause of the fibrovascular
emergency medical therapy to normalize the IOP. The
membrane was unknown since there was no obvious and
retina can survive for hours only rather than days in
classical pathology of recurrent uveitis.
dogs with glaucoma in which the IOP elevations are
 Miller et all1 reported that 11 of 14 cases of equine
commonly 60-90 mmHg (8.0-12.0 kPa)119. Clines et
 glaucoma had evidence of previous or concurrent uveitis
al.120 correlated the return of vision with the duration
and were over 3 years of age. Because of the ERU
of the initial acute episode and the ability to lower IOP.
connection, it was not surprising that Appaloosas were at
 Forty-two percent of patients that had the IOP lowered
increased   risk;  l
however, risk(
of glaucoma
was
to
<20 mmHg (2.7 kPa) and had signs of <3 days
independent of risk of uveitis in Appaloosas. How ERU
duration had return of vision. If the IOP was
produced glaucoma was not clinically evident as the
<50 mmHg (6.7 kPa) for <3 days, 52% had return of
usual synechiae and angle closure were not present on
vision in the short term. Patients with both a history of
gonioscopy, although transparent PIFMs that were noted
3 days duration and an IOP >50 mmHg (6.7 kPa)
e a aa a  uo
 responded less well and only 18% had return of vision.
The author has observed possible primary glaucoma
 Traditionally, the most important emergency medical
in horses with sequential bilateral involvement and no
therapy was the use of osmotic diuretics that pull fluid
obvious intraocular inflammation (12.59).
from both the aqueous humor and the vitreous. While a
variety of hypertonic solutions have an ocular effect, only
 glycerol and mannitol are in widespread use. The author
THERAPY OF PRIMARY GLAUCOMA
prefers mannitol, which is given i.v. in a slow push
technique over 15 minutes. Mannitol at 1-2 g/kg produces
Glaucoma is a therapeutic challenge, if not an enigma,
a reliable and dramatic decrease in IOP for 6 hours and,
for the veterinarian. Glaucoma, although theoretically
 occasionally, for 2-3 days. Water should be restricted for
treatable, is a major cause of blindness. Therapy should.
the first 2-4 hours or the osmotic effect of the mannitol is
depend on the type of glaucoma, the functional status of
decreased. Glycerine or glycerol is given orally at 1-2 g/kg 
the eye {vision), and the resources and philosophy of the
but, unless diluted, often results in vomiting. The main
owner. As glaucoma is a final common pathway for a
advantage of glycerol is low cost and not having to
variety of intraocular diseases, specific therapy should
perform venepuncture. Both preparations can be repeated
vary with the etiologic diagnosis; therefore, diagnosis
2-3 times at 6-12 hour intervals but it is important to
and therapy should be interdependent.
GLAUCOMA
357
diminishes with multiple doses, due presumably to a
to concern of filtering failure if the eye had previously
rebound effect from leakage of the diuretic molecules into
been treated with timolol. Other prostaglandin analogs
may be equally or more effective as latanoprost but
to ma nnitol or glycerol, or may result in increased IOP due
have not yet been used as extensively as latanoprost {see
to leakage of the large molecules into the eye. The author
Chapter 2, p.41).
is reluctant to use mannitol immediately before
 Neuroprotective therapy is a new therapeutic strategy
cyclodestructive surgery because the mannitol may
that is being used by many ophthalmologists3, 64. A
aggravate the postoperative rise in IOP due to the
variety of strategies are possible to interrupt the cascade
breakdown of the blood-aqueous humor barrier.
of events that leads to apoptosis of the retinal ganglion
 A CAI diuretic can be administered in combination with
cells, but no specific drug has proven to be of benefit, and
an osmotic diuretic to reduce aqueous humor production.
approved for this  use, is currently available.
Oral acetazolamide is the most widely available CAI but it
Consequently, clinicians have resorted to available
also seems to have the most side-effects. Acetazolamide is
calcium channel blockers used in treating systemic
available as an i.v. preparation but is seldom administered
hypertension. Amlodipine (0.125 mg q24h) has been
as such when used with an i.v. osmotic diuretic.
used empirically for this purpose in the dog.
Dichlorphenamide has been a favorite CAl of many
ophthalmologists but it has been withdrawn from the
Maintenance therapy
market and now must be obtained through a compounding
Once IOP is normalized with emergency therapy,
pharmacist. Methazolamide (2-5 mg/kg q12-8h) has
maintenance medical therapy should aim to maintain a
supplanted dichlorphenamide because of its availability.
normal and consistent level of IOP. Dogs presented with
Skorobohach et al.f21 found a 13-19% decrease in IOP in
high IOP and closed-angle glaucoma are usually not
normal dogs given multiple doses of methazolamide, but
controlled well or for very long with traditional medical
they were unable to demonstrate a difference in the
maintenance therapy. Animals presented with an IOP <50
decrease between dosing at 2.5 mh/kg q8h and 5 mg/kg
mmHg (6.7 kPa) or with open-angle glaucoma are more
q8h. This would justify utilizing the lower dose rate to
successful candidates for ongoing medical therapy. In the
minimize side-effects of the drug. Despite administering the
past, maintenance medical therapy comprised a CAI
drug q8h, the morning IOP returned to baseline and the 
diuretic with ancillary topical miotic, miotic-epinephrine,
evening IOP consistently had a rebound increase.
or
beta-blocker
therapy.
 Epinephrine,
dipivalyl-
It is not uncommon to find a dog intolerant to one
epinephrine, pilocarpine, pilocarpine-epinephrine, timolol,
or all of the CAIs at therapeutic doses. Toxicity may
and carbachol have been demonstrated to lower the IOP in
manifest as vomiting, diarrhea, panting, weight loss,
Beagles with open-angle glaucoma more than in normal
anorexia,
depression,
irritability, and presumed
Beagles126-129p
but the decrease is very modest.
parasthesias (lameness). Long-term use of CAIs has
Concentrations of 4-6 % of timolol are necessary in the dog
been linked to KCS fCAIs are chemically related to
and cat129. Unfortunately, these concentrations are not
sulfa drugs). On a short-term emergency basis, some of
available fthe strongest concentration of commercial
Shoieoipul aq Aew Aaul inq paieialol aq ueo suais a5au
timolol available is O.s%) and they also increase the
that the main form of medical maintenance therapy
incidence of systemic side-effects. Decreases of IOP of
may not be tolerated, and thus dictate alternative
6-10 mmHg (0.8-1.3 kPa) with 4-6% timolol appear
therapies (surgery). If surgery is anticipated after
dramatic but must be compared to decreases of 5 mmHg
emergency medical therapy, the dehydration from
(0.7 kPa) in placebo controls given methylcellulose.
intensive diuretic therapy and the metabolic acidosis
It is unusual to control acute closed-angle glaucoma in
created by CAI diuretics must be considered when
veterinary medicine with only classic topical glaucoma
 assessing the anesthetic risk122.
medication. The newer topical medications of latanoprost
Topical emergency therapy in the form of some
and dorzolamide {topical CAI) are more likely to control
combination of miotics, alpha agonists, beta blockers,
the IOP, but many cases that are initially controlled
 and CAIs is usually administered but by themselves they
become tolerant with time. Topical CAls such as
are usually not adequate in the acute, high pressure,
dorzolamide and brinzolamide are about 50% as effective
closed-angle
glaucoma 
 patient.
If
miotics
are
 as systemic therapy. Medical management of visual eyes
administered frequently, as is the usual recommendation
may only delay surgical intervention and results in more
ocular damage. In dogs, medical control of elevated
should not be used as significant systemic absorption
 pressure was reported in one series to be successul in 10%
occurs. Also, if filtering procedures are anticipated, the 
cholinesterase inhibitors will potentiate inflammation
 study retained vision131. Both of these studies did not have
and hemorrhage for several days to weeks.
the benefit of the newer topical agents such 
as
The author uses topical 0.o0s%
latanoprost
 prostaglandin analogs, CAIs, and alpha-adrenergic drugs.
o li se dop au ui adeiayi Aouaaaua ioy aauno
reduces IOP within 15-30 minutes if it is successful.
Topical latanoprost use has often avoided the use of
financial considerations, not realizing that it is
mannitol and CAIs. Latanoprost is not effective in the
possible to spend Us$200-300 per month on a
cat123 and produces frequent, moderately severe side-
combination of the newer topical medications and
effects and minimal response in the horsei24. Treatment
frequent visits for monitoring IOP.
of rabbits for 18 months with topical timolol and/or
latanoprost resulted in  increased
amounts
of
 In cats, only 15% of the cases treated medically were
subepithelial collagen in the timolol-treated rabbits but
 controlled; successful retention of sight was very low due to
not in the latanoprost-treated rabbits12s. The result led
the late stage of presentation to the veterinarian131 Blocker
358
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
and van der Woerdtl14 reported that 72% of feline
12.60
glaucomatous eyes were blind at the time of initial
presentation, but that medical management maintained
vision in 44% of the visual eyes. In the horse, medical
therapy of glaucoma has only been an option if the IOP
was marginally elevated, since it is not practical to keep
horses indefinitely on oral CAIs. Topical medications have
been marginally effective in the horse. Topical atropine has
been recommended as a therapy for equine glaucoma
because of the presumed importance of the uveoscleral
flow116. However, it had no effect on IOP in the normal
horsel32 and the author has not had any notable clinical
success using it. Latanoprost may lower the IOP in the
horse, but the frequency of adverse side-effects of epiphora,
blepharospasm, and blepharoedema was high124.
SURGICAL THERAPY
If most cases of closed-angle glaucoma in the dog are not
controlled medically, what are the surgical alternatives?
Due to the severe obstruction in the outflow pathways,
surgical procedures that open the angle (cyclodialysis),
remove the obstruction (trabeculectomy), or circumvent
the obstruction {filtering procedures, shunts) would,
logically, be indicated. All of these procedures have failed
to give predictable or long-lasting results in the author's
 experience, although individual cases are successful.
Filtering
Successful results (30-50%) with filtering surgeries have
filtering procedures is fibrosis of the scleral defect. Future
improvement in the success of filtering surgeries will
depend on utilizing various additional medical protocols 
with drugs such as glucocorticoids, 5-fluorouracil, and
and retinal detachment often occur, despite control of the 
IOP. In humans, 32% of patients receiving shunts have
serious retinal complications, with 67% requiring retinal
attempts to include multiple surgical strategies to bypass
the angle is shown {12.60). It includes a cyclodialysis to
relieve obstruction due to peripheral anterior synechiae
or goniodysgenesis and resultant collapsing of the ciliary
cleft, an iridectomy to minimize iris obstruction under
the scleral defect, and a large sclerotomy to produce a
communication between the anterior chamber and the
subconjunctival space. Long-term results from this
 strategy have been poor in the author's experience.
Reports on the use of antifibrotic therapy in filtering
 Surgery have not been published.
Cyclocryotherapy
 Cyclocryotherapy for acute or chronic glaucoma of visual
aaq suans iso rg aioup go ainad aui sem saa
it was replaced by laser cyclophotocoagulation. Unlike
other surgical procedures that have the objective of
12.60 Combined sclerectomy, cyclodialysis, and peripheral iridectomy
acts (
surgery for glaucoma in a dog. A, B: preparation of eye with a
Cyclocryotherapy  is  a  transconjunctival/trans-scleral
 canthotomy for exposure; C, D: preparation of a limbal-based
application of a cryogen to damage noninvasively part of
conjunctival flap to expose the sclerectomy site; E, F: dissection of full-
the ciliary body in order to decrease aqueous humor
thickness scleral block (preferably using an electroscalpel to minimize 
production. Cryogens evaluated have been either nitrous
bleeding]; G: cyclodialysis spatula introduced to open the angle
Oxidelqditgen30339tus xiis
obstruction; H, I: retraction of iris at 12 o'clock to perform a peripheral
able to_achieve a temperature of -10°C to -13°℃
iridectomy with cautery: J, K, L: suturing the conjunctival flap over the 
{148.6°F), rather than -20°C (4°F) necessary for tissue
 5clerectomy to form a filtering bleb. (From Vainisi, 1973181)
GLAUCOMA
359
necrosis. The goal of cyclocrotherapy is to impair rather
Cyclophotocoagulation
than destroy; therefore, the recommended procedure for
Trans-scleral YAG or diode laser cyclophotocoagulation
use of nitrous oxide as a cryogen is 2 minutes at a site.
(CPC) has been successful in canine, feline, and equine
Freezing 270° of the ciliary body will decrease the aqueous
a tieo au ui %os se yonu se Aq uonpoud 1ouny
action of CPC is explained by cyclodestruction and a
histopathologic changes produced by freezing are reversed
decrease in aqueous humor production146-1s1. The
functional changes and morphologic lesions of CPC and
The patient's IOp is normalized with emergency
cryotherapy are not as great in albino animals, which
medical therapy before cyclocryotherapy Presurgical
suggests that melanin absorbs the laser energy, although
antiPG therapy {flunixin meglumine 0.5 mg/kg i.y.) is
damage is also present in the ciliary body stroma, pigmented
administered. If a nitrous oxide probe is used, it is placed
epithelium, and nonpigmented epithelium1$2,153. Due to the
5 mm posterior to the limbus and each site frozen for
expense of the YAG laser, the diode laser is the more
2 minutes (12.61). The probe is applied to the full
popular alternative. Low energy (2.5w) diode lasers are
circumference of the globe, except at the 3 and 9 o'clock
compact and are marketed for the veterinarian (12.62). The
positions to avoid the long posterior ciliary arteries. It is
wavelengths of the YAG and diode lasers are very similar
then thawed and repeated at each site. If a liquid nitrogen
(1064 nm and 810 nm, respectively) and are absorbed by
probe is used, it is placed at a similar location posterior
 pigment and blood. Diode and YAG lasers produce similar
to the limbus but freezing is stopped when the ice ball
ocular lesions in postmortem eyes: a zone of coagulation
reaches the cornea. Because of the larger probe, a fewer
necrosis centered at the scleral-ciliary stroma interface that
number of freezes is required. The freezing is repeated
 does not extend to the ciliary epithelium149. The diode laser
after thawing. A subconjunctival injection of O.s mg
produces lesions at lower energies than the YAG laser due
dexamethasone is given and topical glucocorticoids and
to better scleral transmittance and better absorption (<2) of
CAIs are administered postoperatively.
g aa k doi a zaay rhe 
several hours to several days. If the eye is visual, this
temporary elevation should be prevented. Most eyes have 
12.61 Applica tion
12.61
normalized pressure by 3 days and the IOP continues to
of a nitrous oxide
decrease up to 7-8 days. Once the IOP is normal, CAIs are
probe to the globe
 stopped. A variable degree of chemosis occurs post freezing,
for cyclocryo-
which can be moderated with glucocorticoid therapy.
therapy. This is
Dogs with eyes that are simply being salvaged may be
usually performed
treated as an outpatient or hospitalized until the ocular
for 360°, avoiding
appearance is acceptable. This is not an ideal salvage
long posterior
 procedure because a significant percentage of cases will
ciliary arteries at
require repeat cryotherapy to control IOP. Patients with
3 and 9 o'clock.
recently visual eyes are hospitalized to monitor IOP for
3-5 days or until normalized. If completely successful,
additional antiglaucoma maintenance medication is not
nq Adenau leoaw anbau Aew saed auos Kressarau
it should be remembered that invariably they were not
medically controlled before freezing. Follow up checks are
usually given at 2 weeks, 2-3 months, and quarterly unless
the response is borderline.
A significant number of dogs {about 30%) treated with
either nitrous oxide or liquid nitrogen cryotherapy have a
recurrent increase in IOP within 6-12 months; therefore,
visual eyes should be periodically monitored. Liquid
12.62
nitrogen gives better results than nitrous oxide, particularly
cases was 73% in one series and 25% in another131, 142.
Chemosis, sometimes very dramatic, is expected for 
several days post freezing Transient increases in IOP are
common and are the most serious complication that may
 destroy the remaining vision in a marginally functional eye.
A variable degree of anterior uveitis is present with all
Successful cryotherapies. Iris depigmentation may occur
with anterior segment necrosis if the anterior ciliary arteries
are destroyed. Retinal detachment due to choroidal edema
is common and self-correcting. Phthisis bulbi is uncommon.
The main contraindications for cyclocryotherapy for
glaucoma are similar to other antiglaucoma therapies,
A
i.e. ocular neoplasia or infection. Cyclocryotherapy has
12.62 Commercial diode laser for veterinary ophthalmology.
the inherent disadvantage of a lack of quantitation, i.e. a
Attachments for use with the operating microscope, binocular
certain amount of freezing cannot be recommended for a
indirect ophthalmoscope, and probes for cyclophotocoagulation
 given elevation of IOP.
and retinopexy are available.
360
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
 energy by melanin144 The acute lesions produced by the
Aqueous humor shunts
diode laser are hemorrhage and coagulation necrosis of the
Implantation of a tube from the anterior chamber to the
ciliary epithelium. This is centered in the inner sclera and
subconjunctival  or orbital  space is a relatively old
radiates outward with time to involve the ciliary processes,
technique that is undergoing a resurgence of interest as
peripheral retina, and trabecular meshworkis1 Diode laser
commercial implants have become availableis7-159.
A
lesions involve the ciliary epithelium more than the ciliary
variety of tube configurations have been devised in
 stroma or scleral54. Because of the lower energy levels
conjunction with various medical protocols, but to this
utilized with the diode laser, complications of cataract are
point a relatively consistently successful combination has
less common than with the YAG laser.
not been found. In the author's and other investigator's
 In the dog, lasering 3 mm posterior to the limbus, with
experience, the shunts function better in normal eyes
the beam aimed at the center of the eye to avoid the lens,
01 anp aq Aeu sii 'saka snoiuonejg ui usu
will strike the ciliary processes, whereas lasering 5 mm
alterations in aqueous humor in glaucomatous eyes that
posterior to the limbus with the same angle of application
stimulate fibroplasia160. Animals heal with more
burns the pars plana {12.63). With the YAG laser, 3-7 J
fibroplasia than humans {adult, Caucasian) which has
are delivered in 30-40 spots 3 mm posterior to the limbus
resulted in veterinary medicine having difficulty in 
in either a contact or noncontact model43. When the
duplicating the success of this operation in humans.
energy level is held constant, more tissue disruption
The high rate of failure with drainage devices is either
Occurs with the shorter time duration, i.e. high watts and
 due to fibrin obstruction of the intraocular portion of the
short timelss. 7
The technique with both lasers applies
tube or, more commonly, fibrosis of the region adjacent
to the extraocular end of the tube. The latter creates a
Postoperatively, the external reaction to laser CPC is not
 nonabsorbent bleb resulting in back pressure into the
as severe as the usual cryoreaction. The postlaser intra-
eye. The design of the tube does not appear to alter the 
ocular inflammation is less or comparable to the cryo-
adki aui inq igipaonpoid si reul uouelnsdesua jo unoue
induced inflammationis3 Unfortunately, postlasering IOp
of biomaterial is important, with silicone having the least
spikes occur quite consistently with both YAG and diode
reaction1ss. Various tube designs can be made out of
lasers. The success rate in a series of 56 canine eyes using
silicone tubing with bands and sheets. Commercially
noncontact YAG laser was 83% during the 3-4 month
produced shunts are now being marketed but they are 
follow up. Failures were noted mainly in albinotic eyes of
quite expensive. The trend is to implant less extensive
Siberian Huskies143. The main reported complications
devices than the original encircling Schocket and Joseph
were intraocular hemorrhage (16%), cataracts (37%,
implants, because of the extensive dissection these
most were incipient cataracts), and phthisis bulbi in one
implants require (12.64, 12.65).
eye. In one report, diode laser success rates in dogs
Bedford163 reported on the implantation of a
utilizing setings that averaged 1500 mW and 1500 msec
modified Joseph device (consisting of a silicone tube
were reported as 65% at 6 months foff all medications),
attached to a flat silicone strap that partially encircles
and 53% of eyes that were judged to be potentially visual
the globe) into 21 eyes of 15 patients. At 9 months 24%
were still visual at 12 months144.
were not controlled or were failures. Approximately
In the horse, positioning of the laser probe should be
50% of cases also required medical therapy to maintain
4-6 mm posterior to the limbus for the dorsal, temporal,
controll63. Another study, utilizing the commercial
and ventral quadrants to target the ciliary processes. The
 Baerveldt shunt, only had a 30% success rate and, more
nasal quadrant should be avoided because the width of
importantly, only two of seven (29%) normotensive eyes
the pars plicata and pars plana is very narrow in this
remained normotensive, with most having a crisis
region1s6. Cyclophotocoagulation in the nasal quadrant
of the horse is likely simply to injure the retina.
in that shunts appear to be more successful in
maintaining patency when placed in normal eyes versus
glaucomatous eyes. In humans, shunt surgery failures
increase with time and of those 26% fail by 3 months,
12.63
63% fail by 12 months, and 80% fail by 24 months165.
Complications of shunt surgery, in addition to bleb
failure, include extrusion of the tube or implant,
bacterial infection, cataract, collapse of the anterior
chamber, hypotony, and corneal edema. Despite these 
problems, shunt surgery is a technique that holds
promise and deserves much more work on tube design
 and pharmacologic manipulation of the inflammatory
reaction of aqueous humor-stimulated fibrosis.
Most effort has centered around the use of topical
Aaea e ui aqni aul jo juauaoeid io suaae suouauuun
of alternative 
 anatomic locations. Antifibrotic agents
usually used are topical 5-fluorouracil and mito-
topical application to the surgical site at the time of
 surgery. Attempts to alter tissue fibrosis at the distal end
have led some investigators to implant the distal end into
12.63 Diode laser probe placed to deliver trans-scleral energy to the
some very unlikely places such as the nasolacrimal duct,
 ciliary body.
various facial veins, and the frontal sinus166-168.
GLAUCOMA
361
12.64 Placement of an 
12.64
aqueous humor shunt.
The shunt consists of a
Dorsal rectus m.
5mall silicone tube in 
Medial
the anterior chamber
rectus m.
that connects to an
encircling band to 
expand the area of
aqueous humor
absorption. A, B: a
limbal-based 
conjunctival flap is 
dissected and the
silicone strap placed 
under the rectus
 muscles and sutured in 
Scleral flap
place. A partial-
Limbal based -
thickness limbal-based 
Conjunctival
scleral flap is made and
flap
an 18-20 gauge needle
 enters the eye to make a
tract for the smaller
silicone tube; C: the
silicone tube is placed in 
1
the anterior chamber 
 and cut to length and 
the corners of the
 scleral flap are sutured
 and the tube is also
sutured to the sclera;
 D: the limbal-based 
 conjunctival flap is
 5utured. (From Martin,
1993182) (m: muscle.)
Currently, some clinicians combine laser CPC with
12.65
 aqueous humor shunts. The rationale is that while the
 shunts may not function on an ongoing basis, they will 
probably function long enough to neutralize the
postlasering pressure spike and either one or both of the
procedures will control the IOP on a long-term basis.
Bentley et atl162 reported that 11 out of 19 cases (58%)
were still visual after 1 year with a combined shunt/
cycloablation procedure and 14 out of 19 (74%) had an
IOP <25 mmHg (3.3 kPa).
The quest should go on for the right combination of
tube design, materials, placement, and pharmacologic
control of fibrosis, as shunts are a more rational
approach to surgical therapy than cyclodestruction.
THERAPY OF SECONDARY GLAUCOMA
12.65 A commercial aqueous humor shunt (arrow] in place in a
SECONDARY GLAUCOMA DUE TO
Siberian Husky. Note the subluxated lens. The shunt functioned for
LENS DISPLACEMENT
only 3 weeks, when a fibrous walled subconjunctival cyst developed
Lens subluxation and complete luxation are frequently
where aqueous humor was accumulating. Attermpts to remove the
associated with glaucoma and it is often difficult to
cyst and restore function were unsuccessful. No antifibrotic agents
decide whether they have an active or passive role in
other than glucocorticoids were used.
362
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEAsE IN VeTeRiNARY MeDICINE
producing glaucoma. The objectives of removing an
THERAPY OF ABSOLUTE GLAUCOMA
anterior luxated lens are 1) to normalize IOP, 2) to return
or retain sight, and 3) to reverse corneal pathology. If the
Therapy for eyes that are chronically blind from a variety
lens is luxated anteriorly, examination of the opposite
of etiologies touches on humane and philosophical
angle is important to determine if there are other
questions. Most owners are not aware of the pain or
associated factors causing the glaucoma. If the angle in
suffering of an animal with glaucoma as it often
the normotensive eye is closed, it is very probable that
manifests in subtle ways. Patient comfort should be a
removal of the luxated lens may not be entirely curative
consideration for veterinarians when advising clients on
on a long-term basis. This does not mean that lens
chronic glaucoma management.
removal should not be performed but it does indicate a
more guarded prognosis for cure and the need for long-
ENUCLEATION
term postoperative surveillance of IOP.
The most pragmatic treatment for absolute glaucoma is
Acute anterior lens luxation should be treated by
to enucleate the globe but this has significant client
removing the lens but the clinician should be aware of
resistance, especially if the process is bilateral
or
the
many potential
 postoperative complications.
potentially
bilateral.
.Enucleation is  indicated
in
 Persistent postoperative corneal edema, usually focal, is
secondary glaucoma associated with neoplasia, infection,
not uncommon, due to endothelial damage from the lens,
deep corneal ulceration, and overwhelming inflam-
surgery, and postoperative vitreous adhesions. Recurrent
mation such as phacoanaphylaxis (see Chapter 6, p.138
IOP elevations may occur from pressure-induced angle
for technique). The use of a methyl methacrylate or
pathology, predisposing angle pathology, or pupillary
silicone orbital prosthesis has been used in small animals
blockage from vitreous herniation or postoperative
and horses to minimize the postoperative sunken
adhesions. Vision is often lost due to the initial high
preoperative IOP or, in the long-term postoperative
A 40-47 mm orbital prosthesis is recommended for the
course, from retinal detachments, which are relatively
horse and 14-22 mm spheres for the dog and cat, to
common in the first year.
compensate for postsurgical atrophy of orbital contents.
 Lens removal in an eye with chronic anterior lens
However, cats are not good candidates for sphere 
luxation is often problematic. The eye will usually be
implantation; 40% fail due to fluid accumulation in the
 irreversibly blind, the cornea will have permanent edema
and scarring, and the IOP may not be normalized if, indeed,
implants (14-16 mm).
it is elevated. If the eye is blind with a markedly elevated
Orbital
 prostheses   give  an  initial
cosmetic
IOP, the author usually treats with ocular evisceration.
improvement but with time and fibrosis the prosthesis
Posteriorly luxated lenses are rarely removed.
may be pushed forward in the orbit and appear simply as
 Subluxated lenses are removed if the angles are open,
a round subcutaneous object that is sharply outlined,
the pressures are not controlled medically, and the
resulting in questionable long-term cosmetic improve-
clinician can find no other contributors to IOP elevation.
 ment over a sunken orbit.
Topical latanoprost q12h can be used to trap a
 subluxated lens in place, since it is a very potent miotic
OCULAR EVISCERATION WITH IMPLANT
as well as a good ocular hypotensive agent.
Pet owners, including horse owners, have an inherent
Forward displacement of the lens with intact zonules
aversion to enucleation and will almost always chose an
in the cat has responded well to phacoemulsification with
alternative option if presented to them. Ocular evisceration
 a posterior ca psulotomy.
with silicone sphere implantation is an attempt to
overcome the aesthetic objections to enucleation (12.66,
SECONDARY GLAUCOMA
12.67)171, In the author's opinion, ocular evisceration is
DUE TO INFLAMMATION
contraindicated with ocular neoplasia and infection and the
Glaucoma secondary to inflammation is generally not
implant is likely to be extruded when placed in an eye with
treated surgically, _unless the adhesions resulted from
deep corneal ulceration. The buphthalmic eye will contract
cataract surgery. Secondary glaucoma associated with
around the silicone sphere and become more normal in
 active inflammation is often very painful. If vision is still
size. The sphere size implanted is equal to the normal
present and if the process is not due to infection, medical
corneal diameter but an additional 2-3 mm larger sphere
glaucoma therapy and glucocorticoid therapy are
may be implanted in the buphthalmic eye. The intraocular
indicated. Treating intraocular inflammation with gluco-
contents should be submitted  for  histopathologic
corticoids may exacerbate glaucoma due to improve-
examination to confirm the clinical diagnosis and avoid
ment in ciliary body function as the inflammation
missing neoplasia or infectious causes of secondary
resolves. As the aqueous humor production returns to
normal, intraocular adhesions in the aqueous humor
placement with undetected ocular neoplasia may not have
pathway may become manifest. If surgery is attempted
regrowth because most canine ocular tumors are benign173.
to break down synechiae, viscoelastic agents should be
The postoperative recovery time for evisceration is
used in an attempt to maintain tissue separation.
If
typically longer than for enucleation. Postoperative
vision is lost and the eye is painful, the patient is treated
problems are usually limited to lid and orbital swelling
for absolute glaucoma.
 and can reduced by the use of systemic NSAID therapy
pre- and postoperatively. If operating on a severely
SECONDARY OPEN-ANGLE GLAUCOMA
buphthalmic eye, a tarsorraphy postoperatively
is
Glaucoma associated with hyphema or other substances
indicated to prevent exposure keratitis while the tissues
that clog the angle are treated medically. The primary
are swollen. Intraocular hemorrhage cannot be avoided
condition is treated if possible.
and most eyes undergo various color changes from the
GLAUCOMA
363
12.66
remaining blood. Also, some corneas undergo an intense
vascular response that subsequently subsides. The author
has treated a horse that had postoperative evisceration
discomfort that could not be controlled and required
subsequent enucleation. The reason for the discomfort
was not apparent on histopathologic examination.
Corneal ulceration may occur due to trauma to a blind
buphthalmic eye or be neurotrophically mediated; the ulcer
may perforate and result in extrusion of the implant.
Anecdotally, many ophthalmologists feel there is an increase
in KCS in patients with globes eviscerated for a long time.
Lastly, the occasional globe shrinks up to 2 years after
evisceration, yet on enucleation the implant is still in place.
 Pena et al.174 described evisceration of the globe and
injection of silicone oil rather than placement of a solid
prosthesis. Only five dogs were included in the study and
so this technique cannot yet be adequately compared for
complications and long-term cosmetic outcome to the
more common solid prosthesis.
CHEMICAL ABLATION OF THE CILIARY BODY
Chemical destruction of the ciliary body is an inexpensive
 and quite reliable means of lowering IOP in blind, painful
lowering IOP of 65% in the dog and cat, with about 9% of
the eyes developing phthisis. Most clinicians administer
aui oui uoau kq au o-sh jo asop e ie uouuaa
vitreous cavity after removal of an equal volume of
vitreous. The intraocular dose should not exceed the
 maximum daily systemic dose of 4.4 mg/kg178. In general,
the higher the IOP, the higher the dose of gentamicin
necessary. Gentamicin at this concentration destroys the
12.66 Technique for performing ocular evisceration with silicone
retina and the procedure is contraindicated if the eye is
 5phere implantation. A: a limbal- or fornix-based flap is dissected to
visual or potentially visual. It also is contraindicated in
exposure the sclera; B: a scleral incision is made with an
 secondary glaucoma due to neoplasia or nonresponsive 
electroscalpel 3-4 mm posterior to the limbus of about 160°: C, D, E:
infectious agents such as systemic mycoses or prototheca.
the contents of the globe are removed with an evisceration spatula
Repeat injections of gentamicin for those failing to respond
or a lens loop, making sure to include the lens; F: the appropriate size
is only 50% successful178. Concurrent injection
of
silicone sphere is introduced with a sphere inserter or by everting the 
 dexa methasone into the vitreous cavity is of no benefit.
scleral incision edges with forceps; G: the sclera is sutured with
Complications of chemical ablation of the ciliary body
4-0 absorbable suture and the conjunctiva with a running 6-0
are cataract formation, intraocular hemorrhage, and
absorbable suture. (From Martin, 1993182.)
phthisis bulbi {12.68). The eye appears normal on a
short-term basis but over several months a cataract
12.67
12.68
12.67 A Shar Pei with bilateral ocular prostheses. While the cornea5
12.68 Phthisis bulbi in an American Cocker Spaniel several months
may not appear normal in many animals, the appearance is
after intravitreal gentamicin injection. A cataract is present and
cosmetically preferred to bilateral enucleation.
 conjunctival vascular injection remains.
364
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
develops and phthisis bulbi is common, resulting in a
using a variety of drugs (timolol, dichlorphenamide,
poor cosmetic appearance. In an attempt to decrease the
echothiophate) lengthened the time before the onset of
incidence of phthisis bulbi, lower doses may be used but
glaucoma in the second eye from 5 to 10 months in
they are often not successful in softening the eye. The
breeds predisposed to glaucoma90. A prospective study of
author prefers evisceration as a salvage procedure, unless
primary closed-angle glaucoma patients found that either
the animal's systemic health or the owner's financial
0.5% betaxolol q12h, 0r a (
cholinesterase inhibiting
limitations are the determining factors.
miotic plus a glucocorticoid q24h, increased the time
Cidofovir (Vistide) is a systemic antiviral agent that is
interval for the second eye to become glaucomatous to
used in humans for cytomegaly virus infections and was
31 months versus 8 months in a retrospective control
found to produce marked ocular hypotony. This led to it
being used intraocularly, where if is supposed to be
consistent form of therapy, whereas the former study did
selectively toxic to the ciliary epithelium, sparing the
not. A double-blind study is necessary due to the marked
retina and lens. The recommended dose in dogs and cats
variations observed in glaucoma.
is 100 μg {range from 100-500 μg) and it is usually given
The long-term use of echothiophate should be
intra vitreally, although sometimes cidofovir is injected
cautioned due to collapse and proliferative changes in the
into the anterior chamber. Almost all of the data are
lamellae of the corneoscleral meshwork, degenerative
anecdotal. Multiple injections may be needed to control
changes in the ciliary muscle, and inflammation of the
IOP. At a dose of 100 μg per injection, the success of
ciliary body and iris in the monkey180.
lowering IOP below 20 mmHg (2.7 kPa) was 40%, and
90% at 500 μg per injection. Cats have not been as
responsive, with <30% success179.
An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure!
The clinician should remember to treat the 'normal
eye prophylactically in patients with suspected
PROPHYLAXIS
unilateral primary glaucoma. Maintaining the eye for
an average of 31 months without glaucoma is far
The use of topical antiglaucoma medications in a
longer than the duration of success when treating
 prophylactic manner has until recently been empirica191.
glaucoma with any surgical or medical protocol.
A retrospective study found that prophylactic therapy
REFERENCES
1 Anderson D (1980) Glaucoma: the
9 Troncoso M {1942) The intrascleral
 17 Tripathi R {1971) Utrastructure of the
damage caused by pressure. XLVI
 vascular plexus and its relations to the
exit pathway of the aqueous in lower 
Edward Jackson Memorial Lecture.
aqueous outflow. American Journat of
mammals (a preliminary report on the
American Journat of Ophthatmotogy
Ophthatmotogy 25:1153-1162.
'angular aqueous plexus'). Experimenta!
108:484-495.
10 Uberreiter O {1959) Die
Eye Research 12:311-314.
 2 Quigley HA (1993) Open-angle
kammerwasservenen reim hunde.
 18 Lee WR, Grierson I (1975) Pressure
glaucoma. New England Journat of
Wiener Tierarzttiche Monetsschrift
effects on the endothelium of the
Medicine 328:1097-1106.
46:721-722.
trabecular wall of Schlemm's canal: a
3 Weinreb RN, Levin LA (1999) Is
11 Martin CL (1969) Gonioscopy and
study by scanning electron microscopy.
neuroprotection a viable therapy for
anatomical correlations of drainage
Albrecht von Graefes Archives fur
glaucoma? Archives of Ophthatmology
angle of the dog. Journat of Smatf
Klinische und Experimentelle
117:1540-1544.
Animat Practice 10:171-184.
Ophthatmotogie 196:255-265.
4 Martin C (1974) Glaucoma. In: Current
12 Van Buskirk M {1979) The canine eye:
 19 Grierson I, Lee WR (1997) Light
Veter inary Therapy IV, 4th edn. RW
the vessels of aqueous drainage.
microscopic quantitation of the
Kirk (ed). WB Saunders, Philadelphia,
Investigative Ophthatmotogy and
endothelial vacuoles in Schlemm's canal.
pp.513-518.
Visuat Science 18:223-230.
American Journat of Ophthatmology
5 Boeve M, Stades F (1985) Glaucoom bij
13 Rohen J (1956) Arteriovenose
84:234-246.
 hond en kat, overzicht en retrospectieve
 anastomosen im limbusreich des
 20 Epstein D, Rohen J (1991) Morphology
evaluatie van 421 patienten. I.
hundes. Atbrecht von Graefes Archiv
of the trabecular meshwork and inner-
Pathobiologische achtergronden,
fur Ophthaaimotogie 157:361-367.
wall endothelium after cationized ferritin
indeling en raspredisposities. Tydschrift
14 Martin CL, Anderson BG {1981)
 perfusion in the monkey eye.
Voor Diergeneeskunde 6:219-227.
Ocular anatomy. In: Veterinary
Inestigative Ophthatmoiogy and Visuat
6 Boeve M, Stades F {1985) Glaucoom bij
Ophthaimotogy, 1st edn. K Gelatt 
Science 32:160-171.
 hood en kat. I1. Klinische aspecten.
(ed). Lea and Febiger, Philadelphia,
21 Sit AJ, Coloma FM, Ethier CR,
Tidschrift Voor Diergeneeskunde
pp.12-121.
Johnson M (1997) Factors affecting the
6:228-236.
15 Bedford P, Grierson I {1986) Aqueous
pores of the inner-wall endothelium of
7 Green K (1984) Physiology and
drainage in the dog. Research in
Schlemm's canal. Investigative 
 pharmacology of aqueous humor
Veterinary Science 41:172-186.
Ophthaimology and Visuat Science
inflow. Suruey of Ophthatmology
16 Samuelson D {1996) A re-evaluation
38:1517-1525.
29:208-214.
of the comparative anatomy of the
22 Ethier CR, Coloma FM, Sit AJ,
 8 Caprioli J (1992) The ciliary epithelia
eutherian iridocorneal angle and
Johnson M (1998) The pore types in the
and aqueous humor. In: Adter's
associated ciliary body musculature.
inner-wall endothelium of Schlemm's
Physiology of the Eye 9th edn. W Hart
Veterinary and Comparative
canal. Investigative Ophthatmology and
(ed). Moshy Year Book, St Louis, pp.
Ophthatmology 6:153-172.
Visuat Science 39:2041-2048.
228-247.
GLAUCOMA
365
23 Costa-Vila J, Ruano-Gil D {1988)
37 Samuelson D, Smith P, Brooks D
52 Priehs D, Gum G, Whitley D, Moore L
Scanning electron microscope study of
{1989) Morphologic features of the
{1990) Evaluation of three applanation
the communications between the
 aqueous humor drainage pathways in
tonometers in dogs. Amer ican Journat
 anterior chamber and the sinus venosus
horses. American Journat of Veter inary
of Veter inary Research 51:1547-1550.
sclerae in primates. Acta Anatomica
Research 50:720-727.
53 Dziezyc J, Millichamp N, Smith W
131:342-345.
38 De Geest JP, Lauwers H, Simoens PDS
{1992) Comparison of applanation
 24 Barany EH {1956) The action of
{1990) The morphology of the equine
 tonometers in dogs and horses. Journat
 different kinds of hyaluronidase on
iridocorneal angle: a light and scanning
of the American Veterinary Medicat
resistance of flow through the angle of
electron microscopic study. Equine
Association 201:430-433.
the anterior chamber. Acta
Veterinary Joturnat Veterinary
54 Gelatt K {1977) Evaluation of
Ophthatmologica 34:397-403.
Oph thatology Supplement 10:30-35.
applanation tonometers for the dog
 25 Gum GG, Samuelson DA, Gelatt K
39 Magrane WG (1957) Canine
eye. Investigative Ophthatmotogy and
{1992) Effect of hyaluronidase on
 glaucoma. I. Methods of diagnosis.
Visuat Science 16:963-968.
 aqueous outflow resistance in
Journat of the American Veter inary
55 Miller P, Pickett P, Majors L {1990)
 normotensive and glaucomatous eyes of
Medicat Association 131:311-314.
 Evaluation of two applanation
dogs. American Journat of Veterinary
 40 Magrane WG (1957) Canine
tonometers in horses. American Journa!
Research 53:767-770.
glaucoma. II. Primary classification.
of Veter imary Research 51:935-937.
26 Richardson T {1982) Distribution of 
Journat of the American Veter inary
 56 Rutkowski P, Thompson S {1972)
glycosaminoglycan in the aqueous
Medicat Association 131:372-374.
Mydriasis and increased intraocular
outflow system of the cat. Investigative
41 Lovekin LG (1964) Primary glaucoma
pressure. I. Pupillographic studies.
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
in dogs. Journat of the American
22:319-329.
Veterinary Medicat Association
57 Rutkowski P, Thompson S {1972)
 27 Gum GG, Gelatt KN, Knepper PA
145:1081-1091.
Mydriasis and increased intraocular
{1993) Histochemical localization of
 42 Bryan G (1965) Tonometry in the dog
 pressure. I. Iris fluorescein studies.
glycosaminoglycans in the aqueous
and cat. Journat of Small Anima!
Archives of Ophthatmalogy 87:25-29.
outflow pathways in normal Beagles and
Practice 6:117-120.
58 Minckler D, Spaeth G (1981) Optic
 Beagles with inherited glaucoma.
43 Heywood R (1971) Intraocular
nerve damage in glaucoma. Survey of
Progress in Veterinary and Conparative
pressures in the Beagle dog. Journat of
Ophthatmotogy 26:128-148.
Ophthatmology 3(2):52-57.
Smafl Animal Practice 12:1i9-121.
59 Samuelson D, Gelatt K {1983)
28 Yue B {1996) The extracellular matrix
44 Gelatt KN, MacKay EO (1998)
 Orthograde rapid axoplasmic transport
 and its modulation in the trabecular
 Distribution of intraocular pressure in
 and ultrastructural changes of the optic
meshwork. Survey of Ophthatnology
dogs. Veterinary Ophthatnotogy
nerve. Part Il. Beagles with primary
40:379-390.
1:109-114.
open-angle glaucoma. Glaucomd
29 McMaster P, Macri F {1968) Secondary
45 Miller P, Pickett P, Majors L, Kurzman
5:174-184.
aqueous humor outflow pathways in the
 I {1991) Evaluation of two applanation
60 Williams L, Gelatt K, Gum G (1983) 
rabbit, cat, and monkey. Archives of
tonometers in cats. American Journat
Orthograde rapid axoplasmic transport
Ophthatmology 79:297-303.
of Veter inary Research 52:19i7-1921.
and ultastructural changes in the optic 
30 Gelatt K, Glenwood G, Williams L,
 46 Miller PE, Pickett JP, Majors LJ.
nerve. Part I. Normotensive and acute 
Barrie K {1979) Uveoscleral flow of
Kurzman ID {1991) Clinical
ocular hypertensive Beagles. Giaucomd
aqueous humor in the normal dog.
comparison of the Mackay-Marg and
5:117-128.
American Joturnat of Veterinary Research
Tono-Pen applanation tonometer in the
61 Brooks D, Samuelson D, Gelatt K
40:845-848.
dog. Progress in Veterinary and
 {1989) Ultrastructural changes in
31 Cruise L, McClure R {1981) Posterior
Comparative Ophthatmoiogy
laminar optic nerve capillaries of
u aaeueip rounq snoanbe ioy demuned
1:171-176.
Beagles with primary open-angle
the dog. American Journat of Veterinary
47 Gelatt K, Gum G, Barrie K, Williams
glaucoma. American Journat of
Research 42:992-995.
W {1981) Diurnal variations in
Veterinary Research 50:929-935.
32 Samuelson D, Gum G, Gelatt K,
intraocular pressure in normotensive
62 Glovinsky Y, Quigley H, Dunkelberger
Barrie K (1985) Aqueous outflow in the
and glaucomatous Beagles. Gtaucomd
G {1991) Retinal ganglion cel loss is
 Beagle: unconventional outflow using
3:21-24.
size dependent in experimental
different-sized microspheres. American
48 Peiffer RL, Gelatt KN, Jessen CR,
glaucoma. Investigative
Journal of Veterinary Research
Gum GG, Swin RM, Davis J (1977)
Ophthalmology and Visuat Science
46:242-248.
Calibration of the Schiotz tonometer
32:484-491.
33 Smith PL, Samuelson D, Brooks D,
for the normal canine eye. Amer icam
63 Schumer R, Podos S (1994) The nerve
Whitley R {1986) Unconventional
Journat of Veterinary Research
of glaucoma! Archives of
 aqueous humor outflow of microspheres
38:1881-1889
Ophthatmology 112:37-44.
perfused into the equine eye. American
49 Picket J, Miller P, Majors L {1988)
64 Brooks DE, Komaromy AM,
Journat of Veterinary Research
Calibration of the Schiotz tonometer
Kallberg ME (1999) Comparative optic
47:2445-2453.
for the canine and feline eye.
nerve physiology: implications for
34 Martin C {1975) The normal canine
Proceedings of the American Cottege of
glaucoma, neuroprotection, and
iridocorneal angle as viewed with the
Veterinary Ophthatmotogists 19:45-51.
neuroregeneration. Veterinary
scanning electron microscope. Journat of
 50 Miller P, Pickett J (1992) Comparison 
Ophthatmology 2:13-25.
the American Animat Hospitat
of the human and canine Schiotz
65 Dreyer E, Zurakowski D, Schumer R,
Association 11:180-184.
 tonometry conversion tables in
 Podos S, Lipton S (1996) Elevated
35 Bedford P (1977) A gonioscopic study of
 clinically normal cats. Journat of the
glutamate levels in the vitreous body of
the iridocorneal angle in the English and
American Veterinary Medicat
humans and monkeys with glaucoma.
American breeds of Cocker Spaniel and
Association 201(7):1017-1020.
Archives of Ophthatmology
the Basset Hound. Journat of Small
 51 Miller P, Pickett J (1992) Comparison
114:299-305.
Anmat Practice 18:631-642.
of the human and canine Schiotz
66 Brooks D, Garcia G, Dreyer E,
36 Troncoso M, Castroviejo R (1936)
tonometry conversion tables in
Zurakowski D, Franco-Bourland R
Microanatomy of the eye with the slit
clinically normal dogs. Journat of the
(1997) Vitreous body glutamate
lamp microscope. American Journat of
Amer ican Veterinary Medicat
concentration in dogs with glaucoma.
Ophthatmotogy 19:481-492.
Association 201(7):1021-1025.
American Journat of Veterinary
Research 58:864-867.
366
OpHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
67 Dreyer E (1997) Amino acid
 82 Martin C, Wyman M (1978) Primary
96 Wood J, Lakhani K, Read R (1998)
 abnormalities in the vitreous of the 
 glaucoma in the dog. Veterinary Clinics
 Pectinate ligament dysplasia and
buphthalmic rabbit. Veterinary and
of North America 8:257-286.
glaucoma in Flat Coated Retrievers. II.
Comparative Ophthatmology
83 Yeon Y, Jung H (1997) Clarifying the
Assessment of prevalence and
7:192-195.
nomenclature for primary angle-closure
heritability.Veterinary Ophthatology
 68 Lovekin L (1971) Water provocative test 
glaucoma. Survey of Ophthatmology
1:91-99.
for glaucoma: range of normal
42:125-136.
97 Bjerkas E, Ekesten B, Farstad W (2002)
tonometric responses of the canine eye.
84 Ekesten B, Narfstrom K (1991)
 Pectinate ligament dysplasia and
Aerican Journat of Veterinary Research
 Correlation of rmorphologic features of
rarrowing of the iridocorneal angle
32:1179-1183.
the iridocorneal angle to intraocular
associated with glaucoma in the English
 69 Gelatt K, Peiffer R, Jessen C, Gum G
pressure in Samoyeds. American Journat
Springer Spaniel. Veterinary
{1976) Consecutive water provocative
of Veterinary Research 52:1875-1878.
Ophthatotogy 5:49-54.
 tests in normal and glaucomatous
85 Martin C (1975) Scanning electron
98 Schaffer E, Wallow I (1974) Kongenitales
Beagles. American Journat of Veterinary
 microscopic examination of selected
gaukom bei der katze? Berliner und
Research 37:269-273.
canine iridocorneal angle abnormalities.
Mhanchener Tierarzttiche Wochenschrift
70 Gelatt KN, Gwin RM, Peiffer RL,
Joturnat of the American Animat
3:49-53.
Gum GG (1977) Tonography in the
Hosp itat Association 11:300-306.
99 Lovekin L, Bellhorn R (1968)
normal and glaucomatous Beagle.
86 Read R, Wood J, Lakhani K (1998)
 Cinicopathologic changes in primary
American Journat of Veterinary Research
Pectinate ligament dysplasia (PLD) and
gaucoma in the Cocker Spaniel.
38:515-520.
glaucoma in Flat Coated Retrievers. I.
American Journat of Veterinary Research
71 Gelatt K, Gum G, MacKay E {1996)
Objectives, techniques, and results of a
29:379-385.
 Estimations of aqueous humor ouflow
PLD survey. Veterinary Ophthatmology
100 Krahenmann A (1978) Sekundar-
facility by pneumatonography in normal
1:85-90.
glaukorme beim hund. Schweizer Archiu
 genetic carrier and glaucomatous
87 Martin C {1974) Development of the
fur Tierheitkunde 120:67-80.
Beagles. Veterinary and Comparative
 pectinate ligament structure of the dog:
101 Wilcock B, Brooks D, Latimer C {1991)
Ophthatmotogy 6:148-151.
study by scanning electron microscopy.
Glaucoma in horses. Veterinary
72 Walde I (1984) Klassifikation des
American Journat of Veterinary Research
Pathology 28:74-78.
glaukomas beim hund. Tierarztiche
35:1433-1439.
102 Smith P, Brooks D, Lazarus J, Kubilis P.
Praxis 12:65-78.
88 van der Linde-Sipman Js (1987)
Gelatt K (1996) Ocular hypertension.
73 Martin CL (1983) The pathology of
Dysplasia of the pectinate ligament and
following cataract surgery in dogs: 139
gaucoma. In: Comparative Ophthatmic
 primary glaucoma in the Bouvier des
ases {1922-1993). Journat of the
Pathotogy. RL Peiffer (ed). Charles C
Fandres dog. Veterinary Pathology
Americam Veterinary Medicat
Thomas, Springfield, pp. 137-169.
24:201-206.
Association 209:105-111.
74 Gibson T, Roberts S, Severin S, Steyn P.
89 Cottrell B, Barnett K (1988) Primary
103 Miller PE, Stanz KM, Dubielzig RR,
Wrigley R (1998) Comparison of
 glaucoma in the Welsh Springer Spaniel.
Murphy CJ (1997) Mechanisms of acute
gonioscopy and ultrasound
Journat of Smatt Animat Practice
intraocular pressure increases after
biomicroscopy for evaluating the
29:185-199.
phakoemulsification lens extraction in 
iridocorneal angle in dogs. Journat of the
90 Slater M, Erb H {1986) Effects of risk
dogs. American Journat of Veterinary
American Veterinary Medicat
factors and prophylactic treatment on
Research 58:1159-1165.
Association 213:635-638.
primary glaucoma in the dog. Journat of
104 Biros DJ, Gelatt KN, Brooks DE, et αf.
75 Gelatt K, Gum G {1981) Inheritance of
the American Veterinary Medicat
 (2000) Development of glaucoma after
 primary glaucoma in the Beagle.
Association 188:1028-1030.
cataract surgery in dogs: 220 cases
American Journat of Veterinary Research
 91 Miller PE, Schmidt GM, Vainisi SJ,
{1987-1998). Journat of the American
42:1691-1693.
Swanson JF, Hermann MK (2000) The
Veterinary Medicat Association
 76 Martin C, Vestre W (1985) Glaucoma.
 efficacy of topical prophylactic
216:1780-1786.
In: Textbook of Small Animat Sturgery.
 antiglaucoma therapy in primary closed-
105 Lanmek E, Miller P (2001)
vol.2. D Slatter (ed). WB Saunders,
angle glaucoma in dogs: a multicenter
 Development of glaucoma after
Philadelphia, pp. 1567-1584.
clinical trial. Journat of the American
 phakoemulsification for removal of
77 Ekesten B, Bjerkas E, Kongsengen K,
Animat Hospitat Association
cataracts in dogs: 22 cases (1987-1997).
 Narfstrom K (1997) Primary glaucoma
36:431-438.
Journat of the American Veterinary
 in the Norwegian Elkhound. Veterinary
92 Corcoran KA, Koch SA, Peiffer RL
Medicat Association 218:70-76.
and Comparative Ophthatmology
 {1994) Primary glaucoma in the Chow
106 Peiffer R, Wilcock B, Yin H {1990) The
7:14-18.
Chow. Veterinary and Comparative
 pathogenesis and significance of pre-
78 Gelatt K, Peiffer R, Gwin R, Gum G,
Ophthatmology 4:193-197.
iridal fibrovascular membrane in
Williams L {1977) Clinical
93 Louden C, Render J, Carlton W (1990)
domestic animals. Veterinary Pathotogy
 manifestations of inherited glaucoma in
Mast cell numbers in normal and
27:41-45.
the Beagle. Investigative Ophthatnology
glaucomatous canine eyes. American
107 Wilcock B, Peiffer R, Davidson M
cnd Visuat Science 16:1135-1142.
Journat of Veterinary Research
{1990) The causes of glaucoma in cats.
 79 Peiffer R, Gelatt K {1980) Aqueous
51:818-819.
Veterinary Pathology 27:35-40.
 humor outflow in Beagles with inherited
94 Ekesten B {1993) Correlation of 
108 Deehr A, Dubielzig R (1998) A
glaucoma: gross and light microscopic
 intraocular distances to the iridocorneal
histopathological study of iridociliary
observations of the iridocorneal angle.
 angle in Samoyeds with special reference
cysts and glaucoma in Golden
Armerican Journat of Veterinary Research
to angle-closure glaucoma. Progress in
Retrievers. Veterinary Ophthatmology
41:861-867.
Veterinary and Comparative
1:153-158.
80 Bedford P (1975) The aetiology of
Ophthatmology 3:67-73.
109 Spiess B, Bolliger J, Guscetti F,
primary glaucoma in the dog. Journat of
 95 Martin C, Wyman M (1968) Glaucoma
Haessig M, Lackner P, Ruehli M (1998)
Small Animat Practice 16:217-239.
 in the Basset Hound. Journat of the
Multiple ciliary body cysts and
 81 Smith RI, Peiffer RL, Wilcock BP {1993)
American Veterinary Medicat
secondary glaucoma in the Great Dane:
Some aspects of the pathology of canine
Association 153:1320-1327.
a report of nine cases. Veterinary
glaucoma. Progress in Veterinary and
Ophthatmology 1:41-45.
Comparative Ophthatmology 3:16-28.
GLAUCOMA
367
110 Covitz D, Barthold S, Diter R, Ris R
123 Studer M, Martin C, Stiles J (2000) The
135 Tinsley D, Niyo Y, Tinsley L, Betts D
{1984) Pigmentary glaucoma in the
effect of latanoprost 0.005% solution on
{1995) In vitra evaluation of the
Cairn Terrier Proceedings of the
intraocular pressure in healthy dogs and
effects of 5-fluorouracil and
Scientific Meeting of the American
cats. American Journat of Veterinary
mitomycin-C on canine
College of Veterinary Ophthatmotogists
Research 61:1220-1224.
subconjunctival and subtenon's
15:246-250.
124 Willis M, Diehl K, Hoshaw-Woodard S.
fibroblasts. Veterinary and
111 Petersen-Jones S {1991) Abnormal 
 Kobayashi I, Vitucci M, Schmall M
Comparative Ophthatmology
ocular pigment deposition associated
(2001) Effects of topical administration
5:218-230.
with glaucoma in the Cairn Terrier.
of 0.005% latanoprost solution on eyes
136 Tinsley D, Niyo Y, Tinsley L, Betts D
Journat of Small Animat Practice
of clinically normal horses. Armerican
{1995) In vivo cinical trial of
32:19-22.
Journat of Veterinary Research
perioperative mitomycin-C in
112 Walde I (1982) Glaukom beim hunde.
62:1945-1951.
combination with a drainage device
 IV. Mitteilung. Klenintier Praxis
125 Mietz H, Schlotzer-Schrehardt U,
implantation in normal canine globes.
27:387-410.
Strassfeld C, Krieglstein G (2001) Effect
Veterinary and Comparative
113 Ridgway M, Brightman A (1989) Feline
of latanoprost and timolol on the
Ophthaimology 5:231-241.
glaucoma: a retrospective study of 29
histopathology of the rabbit conjunctiva.
137 Law S, Kalenak J, Connor T, Pulido
clinical cases. Journat of the American
Investigative Ophthatmotogy and Vistuat
J, Han D, Mieller W (1996) Retinal
Animat Hospitat Association
Science 42:679-687.
complications after aqueous shunt
25:485-490.
126 Whitley R, Gelatt K, Gum G {1980)
surgical procedures for glaucoma.
114 Blocker T, van der Woerdt A (1999)
 Dose response to topical pilocarpine in
Archives of Ophthatmoiogy
Feline glaucoma: 82 cases (1995-1999).
 the normotensive and glaucomatous
114:1473-1480.
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
Beagle. American Journat of Veterinary
138 Vestre W, Brightman A {1983) Ciliary
the American Colege of Veterinary
Research 41:417-424.
body temperatures during
Ophthatmologists 30:59.
127 Gelatt K, Gum G, Brooks D, Wolf D,
cyclocryotherapy in the clinically
115 Hampson E, Smith R, Bernays M
Bromberg N {1983) Dose response of
normal dog. American Journat of
(2001) Primary glaucoma in Burmese
topical pilocarpine-epinephrine
Veterinary Research 44:135-143.
cats. Proceedings of the Scientific
combinations in normotensive and
139 Vestre W, Brightman A {1983) Effects
Meeting of the American College of
glaucomatous Beagles. American Journat
of cyclocryosurgery on the clinically
Veterinary Ophthatnologists 32:23.
of Veterinary Research 44:2018-2027.
normal canine eye. American Journat
116 Miller TR, Brooks DE, Gelatt KN, et
128 Gelatt K, Gum G, Wolf D, White M
of Veterinary Research 44:187-194.
al. (1995) Equine glaucoma: clinica]
{1984) Dose response of topical
140 Higginbotham E, Lee D, Bartels S,
fndings and response to treatment in 14 
carbamylcholine chloride (carbachol) in
 Richardson T, Miller M (1988) Effects 
horses. Veterinary and Comparative
normotensive and early glaucomatous
 of cyclocryotherapy on aqueous humor
Ophthatmology 5:170-182.
Beagles. American Journat of Veterinary
dynamic in cats. Archives of
117 van der Woerdt A, Gilger B, Wilkie D,
Research 45:547-554.
Ophthaimology 106:396-403.
 Strauch M (1995) Effect of
129 Gelatt KN, Larocca RD, Gelatt JK,
141 Roberts S, Severin G, Lavach J
 auriculopalpebral nerve block and
Strubbe T, MacKay E {1995) Evaluation
{1984) Cyclocryotherapy. 1. Evaluation
 intravenous administration of xylazine
of multiple doses of 4% and 6% timolol,
of a liquid nitrogen system. Journat of
on intraocular pressure and corneal
and timolol combined with 2%
the American Animai Hospitat
thickness in horses. American Journat of
pilocarpine in clinically normal Beagles
Association 20:823-827.
Veterinary Research 56:155-158.
and Beagles with glaucoma. American
142 Vainisi S, Schmidt G (1986)
118 Wilcock B, Wolfer J (1991)
Journat of Veterinary Research
Retrospective survey of
Neovascular glaucoma in five horses.
56:1325-1331.
 cyclocryosurgery for the control of
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
130 Roberts S, Severin G, Lavach J (1984)
canine glaucoma. Proceedings of the
Cyclocryotherapy. II. Clinical
Scientific Meeting of the American
Ophthatmologists 22:29-36.
comparison of liquid nitrogen and
College of Veterinary
119 Hayreh S, Weingeist T (1980)
 nitrous oxide cryotherapy on
Ophthatmotogists and Internationa!
Experimental occlusion of the central
 glaucomatous eyes. Journat of the
Society of Veterinary Ophthatmology
artery of the retina. IV. Retinal tolerance
American Animat Hospitat Association
17:194-201.
time to acute ischaemia. British Journat
20:828-833.
143 Nasisse M, Davidson M, English R
of Ophthatmology 64:818-825.
131 Stades F, Boevé M (1986) Methods,
{1990) Treatment of glaucoma by use
120 Clines J, Marrion R, Ring R, Stuhr CH,
 techniques, and results of glaucoma
of trans-scleral neodymium: yttrium
Covitz D, Roldan R (1999) A
therapy in the dog and cat. Proceedings
aluminum laser cyclocoagulation in
retrospective study evaluating the
of the Scientific Meeting of the American
dogs. Journat of the American
prognosis for intraocular pressure
College of Veterinary Ophthatmotogists
Veterinary Medicat Association
reduction and restoration or
hiui jo kaos uuiui p
197:350-354.
 maintenance of vision following
Ophthatmology 17:183-194.
144 Cook C, Davidson M, Brinkmann M,
teatment for the acute onset of primary
132 Mughannam AJ, Buyukmihci NC, Kass
 Priehs D, Abrams K, Nasisse M (1997)
glaucoma in the canine patient.
PH (1999) Effect of topical atropine on
Diode laser trans-scleral
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
 intraocular pressure and pupil diameter
cyclophotocoagulation for the
the American College of Veterinary
 in the normal horse eye. Veterinary
treatment of glaucoma in dogs: results
Ophthatmologists 30:58.
Ophthatmotogy 2:213-215.
 of six and twelve month follow up.
121 Skorobohach B, Ward D, Hendrix D
133 Bedford P (1977) The surgical
Veterinary and Comparative
(2003) Effects of oral administration of
teatment of canine glaucoma. Journat of
Ophthatmotogy 7:148-154.
 methazolamide on intraocular pressure 
Smatl Animat Practice 18:713-730.
145 Whicham HM, Brooks DE,
and aqueous humor flow rate in
134 Peiffer R, Gwin R, Gelatt K, Schenk M
Andrew SE, Gelatt KN, Strubbe T,
clinically normal dogs. American Journat
{1977) Combined posterior sclerectomy.
Biros DJ (1999) Treatment of equine
of Veterinary Research 64:183-187.
cyclodialysis, and trans-scleral
gaucoma by trans-scleral
122 Haskins S, Munger R, Helphrey M,
iridencleisis in the management of 
neodymium:ytrium aluminum garnet
et at. (1981) Effect of acetazolamide on
primary glaucoma. Comadian Practice
laser cyclophotocoagulation: a
 blood acid-base and electrolyte values in
4:54-61.
retrospective study of 23 eyes of 16
dogs. Joturnat of the American Veterinary
horses. Veterinary Ophthatmotogy
Medical Association 179:792-796.
2:243-250.
368
OpHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
146 Nasisse M, Davidson M, MacLachlan J
158 Lim KS, Allan BDs, Lloyd AW, Muir A,
 172 McLaughlin S, Render J, Brightman A,
{1988) Neodymium:yttrium, aluminum,
Khaw PT (1998) Glaucoma drainage
Whiteley H, Helper L, Shadduck J
and garnet laser energy delivered trans-
devices: past, present and future. Brtish
(1987) Intraocular findings in three dogs
sclerally to the ciliary body of dogs.
Journat of Ophthatmotogy
and one cat with chronic glaucoma.
Aerican Journat of Veterinary Research
82:1083-1089.
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
49:1972-1978.
159 Gelatt K, Gum G, Samuelson D,
Medicat Association 191:1443-1445.
147 Schuman J, Puliafito C {1990) Laser
Mandelkorn R, Olander K,
173 McLaughlin S, Ramsey D, Lindley D,
cyclophotocoagulation. Internationa!
Zimmerman T {1987) Evaluation of the
Glger B, Gerding P, Whitley R (1995)
Ophthatmology Clinics 30:111-119.
krupin-denver valve implant in
Intraocular silicone prosthesis
148 Sapienza JS, Miller TR, Gum GG,
 normotensive and glaucomatous Beagles.
implantation in eyes of dogs and a cat
Gelatt KN {1992) Contact trans-scleral
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
with intraocular neoplasia: nine cases 
cyclophotocoagulation using a
Medical Association 11:1404-1409.
(1983-1994). Journat of the American
 neodymium:ytrium aluminum garnet
160 Herschler J, Claflin A, Fiorentino G
Veterinary Medicat Association
laser in normal dogs. Progress in
(1980) The effect of aqueous humor on
207:1441-1443.
Veterinary and Comparative
the growth of subconjunctival fibroblasts
174 Pena M, Luera M, Garcia F {1997) A
Ophthatrotogy 2:147-153.
 in tissue culture and its implications for
new type of intraocular prosthesis for 
149 Quinn R, Parkinson K, Wilcock B,
glaucoma surgery. American Journat of
dogs. Veterinary Record 146:67-68.
Tingey D (1996) The effects of
Ophthatology 89:245-249.
175 Vainisi S, Schmidt G {1983) Intraocular
 continuous wave Nd:YAG and
161 Peiffer R, Popovich K, Nichols D
 gentamicin for the control of
semiconductor diode laser energy on the
(1990) Long-term comparative study of
mdophthalmitis and glaucoma in
canine ciliary body: m vitro
the Schocket and Joseph glaucoma tube
animals. Proceedings of the Scientific
thermographic analysis. Veterinary and
shunts in monkeys. Ophthatmic Sturgery
Meeting of the American Colege of
Comparative Ophthatmotogy 6:45-50.
21:55-59.
Veterinary Ophthatmologists 14:134.
150 Rosenberg LF, Karalekas DP, Krupin T,
162 Bentley E, Miller PE, Murphy CJ,
176 Moller I, Cook Cs, Peiffer Jr RL,
Hyderi A (1996) Cyclocryotherapy and
 Schoster JV (1999) Combined
Nasisse MP, Harling DE (1986)
 noncontact Nd:YAG laser
Cycloablation and gonioimplantation for
Indications for, and complications of,
cyclophotocoagulation in cats.
treatment of glaucoma in dogs: 18 cases
pharmacologic ablation of the ciliary
Investigative Ophthatmology and Visuat
[1992-1998). Journat of the American
body for the treatment of chronic.
Science 37:2029-2036.
Veterinary Medicat Association
gaucoma in the dog. Journat of the
151 Nadelstein B, Wilcock B, Cook C,
215:1469-1472.
American Animat Hospitat Association
 Davidson M {1997) Clinical and
163 Bedford P {1989) A clinical evaluation 
22:319-326.
histopathologic effects of diode laser
177 Spiess B {1986) Erfahrungen mit einer
trans-scleral cyclophotocoagulation in
treatment of canine glaucoma. Journat of
reuen methode zur behandlung des
the normal canine eye. Veterinary and
Smatt Animat Practice 30:68-75.
absoluten glaukoms beim hund und bei
Comparative Ophthatmology
164 Bentley E, Nasisse M, Glover T, Nelms
der katze. Schtweizer Archiv fur
7:155-162.
 S{1996) Implantation of filtering devices
Terheikunde 128:469-473.
152 Cantor L, Nichols D, Katz J (1989)
 in dogs with glaucoma: preliminary
178 Bingaman D, Lindley D, Glickman N,
 Neodymium-YAG trans-scleral
results in 13 eyes. Veterinary and
Krohne S, Bryan G (1994) Intraocular
cyclophotocoagulation: the role of
Comparative Ophthatmology
gentamicin and glaucoma: a
 pigmentation. Investigative
6:243-246.
retrospective study of 60 dog and cat
Ophthatmology and Vistuat Science
165 Lavin M, Franks W, Wormald R,
eyes. Veterinary and Comparative
30:1834-1837.
Hitchings R {1992) Clinical risk factors
Ophthatmology 4:113-119.
153 Schubert H, Federman J (1989) A
for failure in glaucoma tube surgery.
179 Peiffer R, Harling D (1998) Intravitreal
 comparison of CW Nd:YAG contact
Archives of Ophthatmology
cidofovir (Vistide) in the management of
tans-scleral cyclophotocoagulation with
110:480-485.
gaucoma in the dog and cat.
cyclocryopexy. Investigative
166 Raffan PJ (1990) A method of surgical
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
Ophthatmotogy and Visuat Science
correction of glaucoma in a dog. Journat
the American Coltege of Veterinary
30:536-542.
of Small Animat Practice 31:305-308.
Ophthatmologists 29:29.
154 Brancato R, Leoni G, Trabucchi G,
167 Hakanson NW (1996) Extraorbital
180 Lutjen-Drecoll E, Kaufman PL (1979)
Cappellini A (1991) Histopathology of
diversion of aqueous in the treatment of 
Echothiophate-induced structural
continuous wave neodymium:yttrium
glaucoma in the dog. Veterinary and
alterations in the anterior chamber angle
aluminum garnet and diode laser contact
Comparative Ophthaimology 6:82-90.
of the Cynomolgus monkey.
trans-scleral lesions in rabbit ciliary
168 Cullen CL, Allen AL, Grahn BH (1998)
Investigative Ophthatmology and Visuat
body. Inwestigative Ophthatmotogy and
Anterior chamber to frontal sinus shunt 
Sctence 18:918-929.
Vstuat Science 32:1586-1592.
for the diversion of aqueous humor: a
181 Vainisi S {1973) The diagnosis and
155 Echelman DA, Nasisse MP, Shields B,
pilot study in four normal dogs.
therapy of glaucoma. In: Veterinary
McGahan MC, Fleisher LN (1994)
Veterinary Ophthatmotogy 1:31-39.
Qinics of North America, Vol. 3. G.
Influence of exposure time on 
169 Nasisse M, van Ee R, Munger R,
Aguirre (ed). WB Saunders, Philadelphia,
inflammatory response to enodymium:
 Davidson M (1988) Use of methy)
p. 435-465.
YAG cyclophotocoagulation. Archives of
 methacrylate orbital prosthesis in dogs
182 Martin C (1993) Glaucoma. In:
Ophthatmology 112:977-981.
and cats: 78 cases (1980-1986). Journat
fiasins pouuy nusjo zoogixa
156 Miller T, Willis M, Wilkie D, Hoshaw-
of the American Veterinary Medicat
Vol. 2. D. Slatter (ed). WB Saunders,
Woodard S, Stanmley J (2001).
Association 192:539-542.
Philadelphia, pp. 1263-1276.
Description of ciliary body anatomy and
170 Provost P, Ortenburger A, Caron J
identification of sites for trans-scleral
{1989) Silicone ocular prosthesis in
cyclophotocoagulation in the equine eye.
horses: 11 cases (1983-1987). Journat of
Veterinary Ophthalmology 4:183-190.
the American Veterinary Medicat
157 Pritchard D, Hamlet M {1970) A
Association 194:1764-1766.
silastic-dacron implant for the treatment
171 Brightman A, Magrane W, Huff R,
of glaucoma. Veterinary Medicine/Sall
 Helper L {1977) Intraocular prosthesis in
Animal Clinician 65:1191-1194.
the dog. Journat of the American Animat
Hosp itat Association 13:481-485.
369
13
Lens
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
EMBRYOLOGY AND ANATOMY
The lens develops from a plate of surface ectoderm, the
INTRODUCTION
lens placode, that is formed by gestational day 15 in the
The lens is a biconvex clear structure located behind the
 dog. The lens placode invaginates to form a pit and later
iris in the patellar fossa of the anterior vitreous. It is held
forms a vesicle (gestational day 19) that migrates into the
in place by the zonules or the tertiary vitreous. While the
optic vesicle (gestational day 25). The periphery of the
lens is not the major refractive medium of the eye, its
original lens vesicle is lined with epithelium but the cells
ability to vary in refractive power with accommodation
from the posterior surface elongate and fill the vesicle
makes it unique. The lens is also unique in its
(gestational day 30) and are called the primary lens fibers 
transparency, high protein content, high carbonic
(13.1)4. The primary lens fibers later lose their nuclei and
 anhydrase (CA) levels, high glutathione levels, and lack
form the embryonic nucleus in the adult. The original
 of vascularity and innervation1. 2. The lens depends on
cells that line the vesicle produce the “elastic’ basal
the aqueous humor and vitreous for nutrition and
lamina, or lens capsule, by 35 days of gestation. After the
elimination of waste products. The lens is composed of
elongation of the primary lens fibers, the epithelium is
the lens capsule, lens epithelium, and lens fibers, with
 present only under the anterior half of the lens capsule,
very minimal intercellular constituents. The lens in the
as in the adult. The presence of epithelium under the
dog is about 10.5 mm in diameter and 7.5 mm in axial
anterior capsule is responsible for the continuing
thickness, in the cat is 9-10.4 mm in diameter and 7.5
development of the anterior and equatorial capsule,
mm in axial thickness, and in the horse is 21 mm in
resulting in thicknesses of 40-50 μm at the anterior pole
diameter and 12.75 mm in axial thickness?.
and 3-5 μm at the posterior poles. The anterior capsule
13.1 Stages of embryonic lens development.
13.1
(From Hamming and Apple, 1980186)
oboa
Lens plate
Lens pit (early)
Lens pit (late)
Lens vesicle (early)]
电
Lens vesicle (late)
 Embryonic lens nucleus 
370
OPHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
13.2
13.3 Cortical lens
fibers of the dog a5
seen on sagittal
section. Note the
hexagonal cro55-
section, surface
convolutions, and 
the ball and socket
joint along the 
edges of the fibers
(SEM x4,212).
 (From Martin and 
Anderson, 19817.)
13.2 Origin of lens sutures from abutment of lens fibers that do not
 extend across the entire diameter of the lens. (Adapted from Hogan
et of., 1971187]
13.4
B
13.4 llustration of an adult dog lens with lens bow (A] and various
zones. Note the anterior capsule (B) is thicker than the posterior
capsule and the epithelium is only under the anterior capsule.
(C: anterior cortex; D: anterior adult nucleus; E: anterior fetal
nucleus; F: embryonal nucleus.) (From Martin and Anderson, 19817)
is the thickest basal lamina in the body2. The cuboidal
lens bow (13.4). Older fibers are pushed and compacted
 cells lining the anterior capsular region migrate to the
toward the middle and this region is called the nucleus.
equator, become more columnar, and they form fibers
 The nucleus is often subdivided into chronological stages
anteriorly and posteriorly that reach toward the opposite
 such as embryonal, fetal, and adult (13.4)8, 9.
equator. Where the fibers from opposite cells abut each
 The various regions of the lens can be seen clinically
other, a suture line or pattern is created that is clinically
as "zones of optical discontinuity' with a slit lamp or a
au u h, uaun ue si sun edai 'i7'eil aqia
focal beam of light as the beam passes through the lens
anterior lens and an inverted *Y" in the posterior lens,
{13.5). The continued growth increases the size of the
although more complex branching patterns are not
e i aa an s un ran in ae ym suai
uncommon. The lens fibers are hexagonal in cross-
becomes more compact, causing a loss of elasticity with
section and interdigitate snugly. In addition, they attach
guaeos uail u1 aseaiou1 ue pue aae
The embryonic lens is surrounded by a vascular tunic,
surface convolutions {13.3)6, 7.
the tunica vasculosa lentis, that develops posteriorly
The lens continues to form new fibers throughout most
from the anterior extension of the hyaloid artery and
of an animal's life. The region of most recent lens fiber
anteriorly from the network of the pupillary membrane
formation is immediately under the capsule and is termed
(13.6). The hyaloid artery begins to atrophy by 45 days
the cortex. Cell nuclei, which have been pushed inward
of gestation but remains of the tunic are normally seen
from the equator, form an arc which bends anteriorly, the
until 14+ days post partum in the dog4.
LENS 
371
13.5
13.5 Canine lens with optical zones of discontinuity viewed with a slit
lamp. The fetal nucleus is not viewed because the beam is off center.
[1: cornea; 2: anterior cortex; 3: anterior nucleus; 4: posterior nucleu5:
5: posterior cortex.]
13.6
Day 25
Day30
Day 35
Day 45
Birth
13.6 The ermbryonic vascular 5ystem of the dog eye at different stages of fetal life.
(1: hyaloid artery; 2: tunica vasculosa lentis; 3: vasa hyaloidea propria; 4: pupillary
membrane; 5: annular vessel.) (From Stades, 1983 188)
372
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
13.7 SEM of the
The lens is held in place by zonules that attach at, and
13.7
feline zonular
adjacent to, the equator {13.7, 13.8). The zonules are
 attachments to
collagenous fibrils that arise from the pars plana of the
the lens equator.
ciliary bodyl0. Helmholtz's theory of accommodation states
viewed from the
that the zonules are under tension when the ciliary muscles
vitreal side. Note
are in a relaxed state; with contraction of the ciliary muscles
how the zonules 
the zonular tension is relaxed and the lens capsule molds the 
pass between the
lens into a more spherical structure or a stronger converging
ciliary processes
lensl1. This process is termed accommodation and is very
and attach both
limited in domestic animals, being, about 1 D in the
 anteriorly and
horse12, 13. Schachar et al.14 proposed a different model of
posteriorly to the
accommodation that remains controversiall5. Schachar's
lens equator (x20].
model explains accommodation by increased tension on
the equatorial zonules from contraction of the radial
ciliary muscles, while the anterior and posterior zonules
 are more relaxed. This increased tension on the equator 
13.8 SEM of
flattens the peripheral lens and steepens the central lens.
13.8
zonular fiber
PHYSIOLOGY AND BIOCHEMISTRY
insertions into the
lens capsule of a
The lens is composed of 65% water and 34% protein,
dog. Note how the 
 the latter concentration being higher than in any other 
attachment
 e suio ose 'aog ae u anss
surface area is
concentration of glutathione than any other tissue. The
increased by the
 proteins of the lens are broadly divided into soluble and 
'unraveling' of the
insoluble fractions. The soluble fractions are termed
larger fibers into
 crystallins and make up 90% of the protein. In mammals
the component 
there are three subgroups of crystallins, alpha, beta, and
fibrils (x400].
gamma, based on molecular weight. fhe crystallin
(From Martin and
Aiaa aie pue sual aun u suanond jeinns aie suaiod
Anderson, 19817)
closely related to various metabolic enzymes. Alpha
crystallin is ubiquitous in the animal kingdom and is
found in many tissues throughout the bodyl6 Crystallins
are very stable proteins that last for the life of the
individual.  The insoluble protein fraction is termed
albuminoid, and is formed from alpha crystallins.
13.9
 Glycogen 
13.9 Pathways of
Aqueous
[storage]
Faclitated 
 sugar metabolism 
 transport
Henodinase
0onj6-d-9
conate
in the lens. The
Glucose
ATP
ADP
Roman numerals
Lens
NADP
NADPH + H+
/NADP
Fructose-6-P
indicate the 
IY
NADPH + Ht
NADPH + Ht
ATP
importance of the 
Adose reductase
Phosphofructo
Ribulose 5-P
NADP
respective
kinase
↑ADP
Sedoheptulose 7-P
pathways with 1
Sorbitol
ructose-1, 6-diP
Ribose 5-p
Xylulose 5-P
being the most
NAD
important. (From 
Polyol dehydrogena
Dihydroxyacetone P
NADH + H+
Glyceraldehyde-3-P
 Hexose mon oph osph ate sh unt 
Jose, 19831.)
 NAD.P,
Fructose
NADH +H+
 Sorbitol pathway
1,3 diphosphoglycerate
Fructose
1-P
ADP
ATP
V Dihydroxy
Acetone-P
sphoenol pyruvate
FPH2
NADH+H+
ADP
 
Mitochondnia
Cytoplasm
 Pyruvate kinase
 Glyceraldehyde 
NAD
ruvate
Glycerophosphate
NADH + H+
α-Glyceroph osphate cycle
Lactate 
dehydrogenase
actate
Embden-Meyerhof pathway of glycolysi5
LENS
373
The cortex contains high concentrations of the
interpret as a *cataract' in the old animal. While the light
crystallins, which decrease toward the nucleus, where the
is scattered, it is not blocked appreciably and vision is
albuminoids increase in concentrationl. Also, the levels
 not lost. On pupil dilation the central nucleus appears as
of albuminoids increase with age. The clinical correlate is
a lens within the cortex (13.10). Nuclear sclerosis begins
the ability of some juvenile cataracts to undergo dramatic
to manifest at about 7 years of age in the dog and 15
resorption, whereas cataracts in older patients rarely
years in the horsel8. With experience the lens density can
 undergo complete resorption. Because the lens is walled
be used to age an animal as easily and accurately as
off by the capsule early in embryonic development, the
dental examination. Utilizing a standard for lens
proteins are sequestered from the body's immunologic
transparency
 and size
of
 specular
 reflections
surveillance system. This may result in immune-mediated
(Purkinje-Sanson images), a complicated formula was
inflammation against the lens proteins if the capsule is
developed to predict the age of dogs and cats19.
ruptured or the proteins leak out'. This traditional
explanation of lens-induced inflammation is being
Nuclear sclerosis is not a senile cataract, does not
questioned with an alternative hypothesis: that massive
 produce blindness, and can only be differentiated from
exposure of proteins of the lens results in overwhelming
a cataract by examination after pupillary dilation.
of_the suppressor 
 T-cells that normally  prevent
inflammatory reactions to lens proteins17
Metabolism of the lens is mainly
yby anaerobic
DISEASES OF THE LENS
glycolysis, of which the first enzyme, hexokinase, is
present in limited amounts and is the rate-limiting factor
Pathological changes in the lens, which are limited in
(13.9). Only about 3% of glucose is metabolized
type, will be discussed under the following headings:
aerobically via the Kreb's cycle but it accounts for 25%
absence, abnormal size, abnormal shape, opacification,
of the energy produced. Ninety percent of the energy is
 and displacement.
used for active transport. While anaerobic metabolism
can occur throughout the lens, the Kreb's cycle is limited
CONGENITAL DISEASES OF THE LENS
to the epithelium. The hexose monophosphate shunt and
Aphakia
op inq sual aul ui aaneado osle aie kemuied jongios au1
Aphakia is a congenital absence of the lens. It is very rare
 not generate significant amounts of energy (13.9)1.
and probably only occurs with multiple ocular anomalies.
The lens actively accumulates amino acids, potassium,
 Primary aphakia is a developmental lack of lens tissue and
taurine, and inositol and actively extrudes sodium. A
is associated with severe ocular malformations. The lens
 plays a critical role in inducing the development of the
low in sodium and high in potassiuml. Lens clarity is
cornea and vitreous and the absence of the lens results in
dependent on minimal intercellular water and the tight
retinal folds and microphthalmos20. Secondary aphakia
regular packing of the lens fibers.
refers to degeneration and resorption or expulsion of the
Nuclear sclerosis refers to the normal aging changes
lens from the eye and may not be accompanied by severe
Aue u nsau hou saop pue sual au ul ino ieu
ocular anomalies. Microphthalmos, aphakia, acoria,
appreciable loss of vision. The continued growth of the
anterior chamber dysgenesis, and retinal dysplasia and
lens results in compacting of the lens center and, in
detachment have been described in St. Bernards (13.11) and
combination with biochemical protein changes, produces
iapaaui aq oi yanou ane pue siuosud ueuaaog
 a noticeable increase in reflection of light. This appears
Aphakia has also been described with multiple
 ocular
clinically as a very hazy lens or what many owners
anomalies in a colt but the genetics are unknown24.
13.10
13.11
13.10 Nuclear sclerosis in a dog when viewed against the tapetal
13.11 Central calotte of a buphthalmic globe from a St. Bernard
reflection and a dilated pupil. Note the lens within the lens' and that
puppy with bilateral aphakia and acoria. Note the retinal detachment
pinpoint cortical opacities are observed in the ventral half of the pupil.
and no lens behind the iris.
374
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
Primary aphakia may not be diagnosed until
Microphakia is recognized by observing the lens
histopathologic 
examination  because of  ocular
equator easily when the pupil is dilated. In the cat,
anomalies such as absence of the pupil and corneal
elongated ciliary processes that attach to the lens are
opacities that obscure examination of the lens region.
present.
Accompanying
lens
displacement
is
Ultrasound is the antemortem method of diagnosing
common2s,28. No therapy is necessary unless the lens is
aphakia when other ocular anomalies preclude direct
luxated or subluxated {13.12, 13.13) (see Lens luxation).
visualization. There is no therapy for aphakia. Owners
 should be advised about possible inheritance.
Coloboma
Introduction/etiology
Microphakia
 A coloboma of the lens is manifest as an equatorial defect
Microphakia {a small lens) is not uncommon and may be
or flattening of the lens and is relatively uncommon. Lens 
 associated with future dislocation of the lens2s 26 Micro-
coloboma may be associated with iris coloboma or, if
phakia may occur in a normal globe or be associated with
isolated, may be occult due to its peripheral location or
a proportional decrease in globe size (microphthalmos).
may be observed incidentally when the pupil is dilated.
Microphthalmos has been suggested to be a dominant
The lens coloboma may be secondary to a coloboma of
inherited trait in the Beagle?7. Microphakia may be
the zonules in that area and a resultant lack of tension on
associated with spherophakia {a round lens). Microphakia
the lens equator26.
is less common in the cat than in the dog. Three out of four
 reported cases in cats have been in the Siamese28.
13.12
13.13
13.12 Young cat with bilateral microphakia and anterior luxation.
13.13 Five-month-old Brittany with bilateral anterior luxations
Note the few remaining anomalous zonules and the corneal
associated with microphakia. Note the small clear lens behind the 
 neovascularization from the lens contact.
corneal edema.
13.14
13.14 Lens coloboma observed in an 8-year-old Old English
Sheepdog. Note the flattened lens equator and focal cataract in the
adjacent lens. Due to the lack of signs the congenital lesion was not
detected in the young dog.
LENS
375
13.15 SEM of a
13.15
13.16
lens coloboma 
from a young
Australian 
Shepherd Dog 
with an iris
coloboma and 
 multiple other 
ocular anomalies.
Note the lack of
 zonules in the
colobomatous
region compared
to the adjacent 
equator (x10).
(From Martin.
19786.)
13.16 Posterior lenticonus in a young Siberian Husky. The lenticonus
is demarcated by the axial circular lenticular opacity.
 Clinical signs
13.17
 Flattening of the peripheral equatorial lens that is
visible on pupillary dilation (13.14).
 Lack of zonules in the area of equatorial flattening
(13.15).
 The lens coloboma may or may not be associated
with other ocular anomalies or colobomas.
Differential diagnosis
Congenital coloboma may be difficult to differentiate
or it may be confused with an aphakic crescent with a
subluxated lens.
Therapy
No therapy is necessary.
Lenticonus and lentiglobus
13.17 Young Scottish Terrier with a fetal nuclear cataract. All three
Introduction/etiology
dogs in the litter were affected with the same opacity. There was no
Lenticonus is a rare lenticular anomaly characterized by
 history of orphan milk supplementation. Opacities in this region are
a conical protrusion of the lens, usually axially, on
 stable and do not progress.
either the anterior or posterior surfaces. Lenticonus
may be an isolated anomaly or be associated with
multiple
ocular
anomalies
in a
variety
of
Prophylaxis
In the Akita, Doberman Pinscher, Cavalier King Charles
ultrasound when accompanied by severe ocular
Spaniel, Staffordshire Bull Terrier, Bloodhound, and
anomalies. The appearance of primary lenticonus may
Miniature Schna uzer, 
. lenticonus is part of a more
be confusing if it is not observed with a slit lamp.
generalized ocular syndrome that is inherited.
Lentiglobus is a spherical protrusion. The protrusion
may be clear or opaque and is usually unilateral.
Congenital cataracts
Introduction/etiology
Clinical signs
A cataract is any opacity of the lens or its capsule. The 
Protrusion of the anterior or, more commonly, the
 definition does not specify any particular degree of
 posterior curvature of the lens is observed. An opacity at
 severity or that blindness is a consequence.
the margin of the protrusion or over the entire protrusion
 Congenital cataracts may be inherited or be due to other
 may produce a circular opacity with a clear center or a
 in utero insults. They may be an isolated anomaly (primary)
saucer-shaped opacity, respectively {13.16). Because the
or one of several ocular anomalies (secondary congenital
posterior capsule is anomalous, rupture of the capsule
cataract), such as with microphthalmos. If an isolated event,
 may occur, risking phacoclastic uveitis.
the cataract is often stationary, with improvement in vision
occurring with further growth of normal new fibers. When
Therapy
observed in the older animal, congenital cataracts are
Therapy is not usually necessary and lenticonus is not
typically in the center of the lens or on the anterior capsule
known to be a genetic trait when observed alone.
(13.17). The center of the lens represents the embryonal and
376
OPHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
13.18
13.19
13.18 Anterior capsular cataract associated with persistent pupillary
13.19 Doberman Pinscher puppy with posterior capsular markings
membranes. All puppies in this litter of Walker Hounds were affected.
(arrow) associated with persistent tunica vasculosa lentis and 
 but the parents were normal.
hyaloid artery. Wwhile the condition has been studied extensively
in the Doberman Pinscher, these capsular markings are common 
in a variety of breeds and are often familial with no documented 
13.20
 detrimental effect.
fetal region, while anterior and posterior capsule opacities
are often associated with persistent remnants of the
embryonic vascular tunic of the lens {PPMs and persistent
tunica vasculosa lentis [PTVL]) (13.18, 13.19). When the
retention of vascular elements on the posterior capsule is
associated with excessive glial or scar tissue, it is termed
 persistent hyperplastic tunica vasculosa lentis (PHTVL).
Dog
Congenital cataracts as part of an inherited microph-
 thalmos have been described in the Akita, Cavalier King
CharlesS
Spaniel, Miniature 
 Schnauzer,  Australian
13.20 Anterior axial capsular pigment deposits, presumably from
ShepherdDog,and Old EngishShepdog31,34,3530
 pupillary membranes. These are common findings in a variety of
Cataracts associated with PHTVL are often inherited.
 breeds and are often familial.
Cataracts may be associated with PPMs in the Basenji,
Beagle, Red Cocker Spaniel, Welsh Corgi, and many other
 breeds. A common appearance is a nest of pigmented dots 
13.21
on the axial anterior capsule that is presumed to be an area
of touching or attachment of previous pupillary
 membranes (13.20). These are familial and are seen in a
wide variety of breeds. Similarily, posterior capsular
vascular markings that are white are very common
(PTVL). However, persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous
(PHPV) and persistent hyperplastic tunica vasculosa lentis
(PHTVL) is relatively rare {13.21, 13.22) but is inherited
in the Doberman Pinscher, Staffordshire Bull Terrier, and
vitreal hemorrhage, and phacoclastic uveitis may develop 
from spontaneous rupture of the lens capsule in the severe
forms of PHPV/PHTVL. (See Chapter 14, p.401 for futher 
discussion of PHPV/PHTVL.)
 Minor anterior and posterior capsular markings
produced by the embryonic tunica vasculosa lentis
13.21 Persistent hyperplastic tunica vasculosa lentis in a Bernese
are very common and are of minimal clinical
Mountain Dog puppy. Both puppies in a liter of two were affected.
significance as they do not progress.
Note the white capsular opacities in addition to the retrolental blood
vessels. A subsequent litter from the bitch was normal.
LENS
377
13.22
13.23
13.22 Bouvier des Flandres puppy with persistent hyperplastic tunica
13.23 Congenital nuclear cataract in a cat about 6 months old. Note
vasculosa lentis and blood-filled pupillary membrane vessels. A puppy
the clear peripheral cortex. As new lens fibers are normal the opacity 
band keratopathy and peripheral corneal pigmentation and sclerosis 
will not progress in size.
was bilateral.
13.24
Congenital cataracts and corneal opacification are
 part of inherited retinal dysplasia-skeletal dysplasia in
the Labrador Retriever+5, skeletal dysplasia-retinal
 detachment in the Samoyed+6, and retinal dysplasia in the
 English Springer Spaniel47.
Cat
Complete congenital cataracts are relatively rare in the
cat48, although minor lens opacities are not uncommon.
Congenital inherited cataracts have been occasionally
described in cats, usually in breeds with a Persian
background (13.23)49.
13.24 Mature cortical cataract in a foal. Note the lens suture which
Horse
was fractured due to fluid imbibition.
Congenital cataracts represent 3s% of the ocular
 anomalies in the horses0. While they may be associated
with microphthalmos, the remainder of the eye is usually
 suture lines, in which case they are nonprogressive and
and multiple ocular anomalies as well as hydrocephalus,
 nonblindings3, but they usually involve the entire nucleus
cerebellar hypoplasia, and myopathy60, 61
 and produce visual impairment (13.24). Often the cause 
of the cataracts is unknown but they are known or
Clinical signs
suspected to be inherited in Belgian horses, Quarter
● Visual impairment: in dogs and cats, if the lens
 opacities are complete or the cataracts are part of
Morgan horse, the opacities are in the fetal nucleus
severe ocular anomalies, blindness is noted at 4-5
without any visual impairment. While familial, the mode
weeks of age when the puppies and kittens start to
of inheritance has not been determineds6. In the Belgian
move around. Improvement in vision may be noted
horse, cataracts may be observed with aniridia and as a
after a period of growth, if the opacities are 
dominant trait4. Lens subluxations were noted in one
stationary and other ocular anomalies do not
foal with congenital cataractss7.
preclude vision.
Incidental capsular or nuclear opacities: congenital
Cow
 opacities may be noted on either the anterior or
posterior capsule, or the central lens, as an
Jersey, Hereford, Holstein, Shorthorn, and Holstein-
incidental finding in the older animal and can
Friesian8-60. In the Jersey lens displacement, microphakia
usually be traced to their temporal origin by their
 and buphthalmos may occur as a simple recessive trait59.
location and, perhaps, vascular shape {13.17,
In Shorthorns, the cataracts occur with microphthalmos
13.19, 13.20).
378
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
· Cataracts associated with PHPV/PHTVL may be
Congenital cataracts are not synonymous with
 associated with the unusual occurrence of hemorrhage
inherited cataracts. The author has observed entire
into the lens {13.25). This may be associated with
litters of affected puppies with cataracts from
acute blindness. Vascular remnants varying from
normal parents; repeat breeding from the parents
 pigment or gray markings on the capsule to obvious
resulted in normal litters.
vascular structures that may or may not have blood in
the lumen will be present with PHTVL {13.19-13.22).
ACQUIRED DISEASES OF THE LENS
Diagnosis of congenital origin
Cataracts
 Observation in the first few weeks of life may date the
Introduction/etiology
origin of the opacity but in the dog, neonatal cataracts,
Cataracts can be classified by various schemes and the
such as those induced by orphan milk formulas, must 
classifications are often combined.
 be differentiated from congenital cataracts.
 Cataracts classified according to anatomic location:
+
 Nuclear opacification of the lens or cataracts located
 anterior capsular, anterior cortical, equatorial, anterior
on the capsule with associated embryonic vascular
nuclear, fetal nuclear, posterior nuclear, posterior
remnants will date the origin of the opacity.
cortical, posterior subcapsular, posterior capsular, axial,
 Lenticular opacities in association with other
 and sutural are some of the anatomic descriptors.
congenital anomalies.
Cataracts classified according to age: congenital.
neonatal, juvenile {up to 5-6 years in the dog), and
Therapy
senile are age classifications. Nuclear sclerosis, a
Cataract surgery in the foal typically has been performed
with a needle irrigation-aspiration technique, through a
approximately 7 years of age in the dog, should be
 small incision. While the larger eye of the horse would
differentiated from senile cataracts. All very old
not appear to lend itself to standard phacoemulsification 
 animals will develop a significant gray cast to the
because of the short phacoemulsification needle, the
lens from the light scattering that occurs from
author has, nevertheless, routinely been able to perform
nuclear sclerosis, and this is easily confused with a
this procedure successfully without resorting to the
senile cataract.
longer lithotriptor needle (13.26)62. Needle irrigation-
 Cataracts classified according to stage or degree of
aspiration surgery is most successful (77%) in foals
opacification: this is a common method of describing
<6 months of age and is 60% successful in foals 6-12
cataracts and is somewhat arbitrary. The incipient
months of age63. when a lithotriptor needle is used on
Pnom siaumo ieql Aioedo lews Auea ue sl pereieo
cataracts in foals, the success rate is 90%62.
not observe (13.27), while the immature cataract is a
more diffuse cortical opacity but does not block all
Prophylaxis
light to the fundus and the animal is still visual if the
 Prophylaxis involves recognition of cataracts as a genetic
pupil is dilated. The immature cataract is easily
trait in many instances. In addition, drugs or potential
observed (13.28). The mature cataract is a complete
teratogenic agents should be avoided during pregnancy.
cortical opacity that blocks the fundus or tapetal
reflection completely and the eye is blind (13.29).
pue pauaneos si inq Aioedo stul saieauad is iuait
does not form a coherent image. The PLR and dazzle
reflex are normal with a bright light but a menace
response is absent with a mature cataract. The mature
cataract is often swollen or intumescent from fluid
imbibition that produces dark fluid clefts through the
 anterior cortex and in the suture pattern where fluid
13.25
can accumulate. The hypermature cataract has
undergone a variable degree of resorption of water
 and, often, protein. This is recognized by the resultant
shrinkage of the lens and wrinkling of the lens capsule
(13.30). The opacity often has a fine granular texture
that may be due to cholesterol crystals from
breakdown of cell membranes64. Lens resorption can
be partial or complete fusually in dogs <2 years of
 age), resulting in the retention of the capsule with
variable amounts of calcific deposits (13.31). The
Morgagnian cataract is a hypermature cataract that
has a liquefied cortex with the solid nucleus settled
within the cortex (13.32). Animals with marked
resorption often regain variable amounts of their
vision if there is no other ocular pathology such as a
retinal detachment or retinal atrophy.
Cataracts classified according to the cause: a variety
13.25 Intralenticular hemorrhage from persistent hyperplastic tunica
of etiologies are possible but in clinical practice only
vasculosa lentis in a Bernese Mountain Dog puppy.
a few are of significance.
LENS
379
13.26
13.27
13.26 Setting up for phacoemulsification of a cataract in a foal.
13.27 Example of an incipient cataract in a dog. This would not be
 Despite the limitations of a short needle, this procedure has been
noted by the owner or produce visual symptoms.
very successful for soft cataracts in the foal.
13.28
13.29
13.30
13.28 Immature cortical cataract. Note the
13.29 Mature cortical cataract in a dog that
13.30 A hypermature cortical cataract in a
 green tapetal reflection around the periphery.
blocks all tapetal reflection on pupillary
dog that is shrinking in size and is subluxated.
Often these dogs are still functional,
dilation. Note the prominent anterior cortical
 particularly with pupil dilation.
 suture that is separated due to fluid imbibition
and the selective hyperemia of large
 conjunctival vessels, indicating LIU.
13.31
13.32
13.31 Amost complete lens resorption in a young dog, leaving an empty
13.32 Morgagnian cataract in a 2-year-old Miniature Poodle. Note the 
capsular bag flled with a few crystals. The dog would have been visual
denser nucleus settled ventrally in the lens because the cortex is liquified.
except that a retinal detachment also developed during the process.
380
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
Table 13.1 Inherited or suspected inherited cataracts in the dog
Breed
Approx age
Mode of 
Characteristic
Course
Associated
of onset 
inheritance
early appearance
ocular lesion5
 Afghan Hound 
6 months-2 years
AR
 Equa torial, cortical 
P
Akita
C
？
Nuclear
Microphthalmo5
American
1-2 years:
AR
 Posterior, axial, cortical;
 Cocker Spaniel
3-5 years
 anterior cortical
Australian
C
 AR with incomplete
 Nuclear, cortical
 Microphthalmos
Shepherd Dog 
penetrance
Beagle
C
？
Axial, anterior subcapsular
5
 Persistent pupillary
membranes +
Beagle
1 year
？
Axial, posterior subcapsular S
 Boston Terrier
 4-6 months;
2
Cortical; nuclear; equatorial  P; P - slow.
 3-4 years; senile
P- 5low
Cavalier King
C:J-
?:-
 Nuclear posterior cortical;
P+;P
Lenticonus+:
Charles Spaniel
 Posterior capsular, cortical
microphthalmos
Chesapeake
6 months-
 Dominant
 Axial, posterior
S (usually)
 Retriever
6 years
subcapsular triangle
 Doberman Pinscher 
C
AR?
 Posterior capsular 
P+
Posterior lenticonus, PHPVf 
PHTVL, microphakia 
 English Cocker Spaniel C
AR
 Nuclear, cortical, sutural
 Retinal dysplasia
 German Shepherd 
C; 8 weeks
 Dominant, AR 
 Axial, anterior; Posterior
S; P but
Dog
 sutural
not blindness
 Golden Retriever
6 months-
 Dominant
 Axial, posterior subcapsular 
S (usually)
6 years
Labrador Retriever
C
？
 Nuclear, cortical
5
 Corneal opacity, retinal 
dysplasia, retinal detachment
Old English
C
Nuclear, cortical
P+
 Retinal detachment, +
Sheepdog 
microphthalmos
 Poodle, Miniature/Toy
 2-10 years
？
Cortical
P
Poodle, Standard
Several months 
AR
Equa torial
P
 Red Cocker Spaniel 
C
？
 Axial, anterior subcapsular
S
PPM5+
Siberian Husky
 6 months-6 years
AR
 Posterior subcapsular
Schnauzer, Miniature 
C:J
AR:?
Nuclear, cortical; cortical
P+;P
Microphthalmos+; -
Staffordshire
2-6 months; C
AR; AR
Nuclear: posterior capsular
P;S (usually)
-; PHPV/PHTVL,
Bull Terrier
microphthalmos
Welsh Corgi
AR?
 Posterior cortical
Welsh Springer Spaniel 8 weeks
AR
 Posterior cortical vacuoles
P- blind by 2 years -
 West Highland
C?
AR?
 Posterior sutural
P- 50me
White Terrier
AR: autosomalrecessive; C: congenital; J:juvenile: P: progresive;PHPV/PHTVL: persistent hyperplastic vitreous/persistent tunica vasculosa lentis:
 S: stationary. For references see Chapter 15: Presumed inherited ocular disea ses.
Inherited cataracts
13.33
 Cataracts that are inherited are very common in the dog
 and are relatively uncommon in the cat48. The age of
onset of inherited cataracts may be congenital, juvenile,
or senile. Most have a recessive inheritance but some
are thought to be dominant. (See Table 13.1 for a list of
inherited cataracts.)  The most common forms of
inherited cataracts are in the juvenile age range
[<6 years].
While many juvenile cataracts are
progressive and result in blindness, a common form
found in many retriever breeds, Malmutes, Siberian
Huskies,. and others is a focal axial 
posterior
subcapsular opacity that is either triangular or saucer-
 shaped. These posterior subcapsular opacities are
usually, but not invariably, nonprogressive {13.33).
Inherited cataracts in individual instances are often
diagnosed by association rather than by firm genetic
13.33 Axial posterior subcapsular triangular cataract in a Chesapeke Bay
evidence. Usually inheritance is presumed, based on the
Retriever that is typical of juvenile cataracts in Retrievers. The opacity
typical appearance and age in a breed known to be
has been moved off center to avoid the bright specular reflection.
LENS
381
13.34
Glucose
Glucose
Glucose
Glucose
Glucose
CI
Sorbitol
Sorbitol
Sorbitol
CI
Fru ctose
CI
Inositol↓
Fructose
GSH↓
Protein Synthesis↓ Nal
Na
ATPLAA
ATP ↓GSH ↓
Proteins
Na
ATP↓GSH↓
Water
Water
13.34 Sequence of events leading to a diabetic cataract. As the glucose in the lens increases, it becomes shunted to the sorbital pathway due to
overwhelming of hexokinase in the glycolysis pathway. Sorbital cannot diffuse out of the capsule, resulting in an osmostic gradient to pull water
into the lens. (From Kinoshita, 198673)
 predisposed to cataracts. While more objective evidence
75% developed cataracts by 1 year. The importance of
such as having afflicted littermates, parents, or relatives
galactose in veterinary medicine is uncertain.
is preferred, the individual pet owner often cannot
The proposed pathogenesis of sugar cataracts is that
 provide this information.
the increase in glucose in the aqueous humor is also
manifested in the lens, which overloads glycolysis and
Unless other causes are evident from the
the hexose monophosphate shunt {13.9). The extra
examination and history, most cataracts in the dog 
sugar is shunted into the sorbitol pathway where
are assumed to be inherited.
polyols (sorbitol) are formed.  Polyols accumulate
because they diffuse poorly out of the lens and are not
metabolized rapidly68 This creates an osmotic gradient 
Metabolic cataracts
that pulls water into the lens, creating vacuolation and,
Hyperglycemia.  While
a
variety
of：
sugars
are
later, protein aggregation (13.34). One of the reason for
experimentally capable of inducing cataracts, only glucose
and   galactose 
clinically
important and
the
may be due to variable aldose reductase activities.
pathogenesis studied extensively. On initial presentation
Those animals with high levels of aldose reductase, such
and without complete ophthalmic examinations, cataracts
as the dog, convert more glucose into sorbitol and
are noted in almost 60% of cases of canine diabetes
mellitus6', whereas they were noted in none of a series of
found that lenses from dogs and young cats had high
30 cats with diabetes66. 1
 Bean et al.67 found that 50% of
aldose reductase activity when incubated with glucose
dogs with diabetes developed cataracts by 6 months and
in vitro and developed cataracts. Lenses from older cats
(>4 years) in vitro had low aldose reductase activity and
were resistant to glucose-induced cataracts. As most
cats develop diabetes when older, this is probably the
reason for the infrequent appearance of cataracts in the
13.35
dia betic cat.
The younger dog is more susceptible to sugar
anterior and posterior sutures and then vacuoles at the
equator (13.35),
, extending into the anterior and
posterior cortex.
 This process often _progresses to
inhibitors of aldose reductase can inhibit the onset and
 severity of sugar cataracts70, 72, 73.
Diabetic cataracts typically are bilateral and
symmetrical, develop rapidly, and frequently are
 intumescent from fluid imbibition.
13.35 Early diabetic cataract in a dog. Note the vacuoles from the
lens equator extending axially.
382
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
13.36
Hypocalcemia.
 Hypocalcemia
associated
with
parathyroid dysfunction, postparturient hypocalcemia,
 and severe nutritional imbalances in the young animal
produces characteristic multifocal anterior and posterior 
cortical opacities74, 7s. The opacities do not seem to
 progress and thus do not produce signs of blindness
(13.36, 13.37). The mechanism is probably through
alterations of lens cell membrane permeability from
altered extracellular levels of calcium?.
Nutritional deficiencies. Feeding orphan diets to wolf
puppies produced cataracts, which were attributed to an
 arginine deficiency in the diet76. Cataracts have also been
 observed clinically in the dog and cat with commercial
 orphan diets77, home formulated diets, and goat's milk.
Nutritional
cataracts
havé
been  reproduced
experimentally in puppies and kittens, but were quite
13.36 Typical hypocalcemic cataracts characterized by dot and linear
mild and improved after weaning78, 79. In the author's
opacities along a specific level of cortical lens fibers that were
experience, cataracts produced by orphan diets are more
forming during the hypocalcemic episode. This dog had
severe when the diets are fed to nondomesticated species,
hypopara thyroidism.
such as wolves, racoons {13.38), and coyotes and,
 perhaps, to large breeds of dogs. Additional arginine and
methionine has been added to commercial milk
formulas30, but this does not appear to have completely
13.37
eliminated the problem. It is important to differentiate
 nutritional cataracts from inherited forms. Typically, the
 orphan diet cataract is posterior cortical in the puppy
(13.39), posterior sutural in wolf puppies, and becomes
nuclear in older animals.
 Suckling rats injected with sodium selenite develop
cortical and nuclear cataracts that are associated with
water influx and cortical liquifaction81. The lens opacities
clear over several months, indicating that the lens does
possess some reparative capability. Para doxically, selenium
has been touted in veterinary medicine as a cure for
cataracts and nuclear sclerosis82, 83.
In hatchery raised fish, cataracts have been produced
by a variety of nutritional deficiencies. In trout and
Atlantic salmon, diets deficient in methionine, thiamine,
 zinc, riboflavin, or tryptophan produced cataracts4-87.
13.37 Hypocalcemic cataracts in a puppy with severe nutritional
13.38
13.39
13.38 Complete cortical cataract in a racoon raised on a commercial
13.39 Typical nuclear cataract in a Collie puppy raised on a
canine orphan milk substitute.
commercial orphan milk substitute.
LENS
13.40
13.41
13.40 A dog with a cataract induced by a perforating cat claw injury.
13.41 Blunt trauma- (proptosed globe) induced cataract in a dog
Note the scar in the cornea that is aligned with the lens opacity.
outlining the anterior suture.
13.42
Trauma
 Blunt or perforating trauma is an etiology that must be
considered with a unilateral cataract. Perforating trauma
that has ruptured the lens capsule is the most obvious
cause and, potentially, it may initiate severe intraocular
inflammation, termed phacoanaphylaxis or phacoclastic
uveitis. The hallmark of a cataract due to a perforating
injury is a duplicate opacity of the overlying cornea
{13.40). A history of blunt trauma may not be known
and the cataract not be observed until long after the
incident. Thus the appearance of the cataract may be
difficult to correlate with the cause {13.41).
 No matter what the cause of a cataract is, most
owners can associate it with a traumatic incident in
the dog's life.
13.42 Complicated cataract in a cat that had Fely-associated
anterior uveitis and lymphoma that were treated successfully for
Intraocufar disease
1 year. Note the opacity is mainly associated with capsular
Cataracts secondary to intraocular disease are often
inflamma tory debris.
termed complicated cataracts. Three common causes for
complicated cataracts are:
+ Inflammation: cataracts associated with inflammation
may be capsular due to deposition of cells, pigment,
and fibrin on the surfaces, or in the lens associated
with impaired nutrition. This is the most common 
type of cataract in the cat and horse (13.42).
+
 Secondary to chronic glaucoma: animals with
● Secondary to retinal degenerations: certain breeds
chronic glaucoma often develop cataracts and the
with progressive retinal atrophy {PRA) almost
ca use is unknown, although multiple causes are
always develop cataracts, usually late in the course
possible. The stagnation of aqueous humor that
of the disease. Whether the cataracts are associated
occurs with glaucoma probably has a deleterious
with a diffusible product that is released by the
nutritional effect on the lens. In addition, the
degenerating retina or a gene associated with PRA is
prolonged elevated IOP may affect the lens 
unknown. The appearance of these cataracts is not 
epithelium. These factors, combined with the variety
unique so they cannot be distinguished from other
 of drugs and surgical insults used to treat glaucoma,
forms of inherited cataracts.
 are possible contributing factors to cataractogenesis.
384
OpHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Toxic cataracts
cataracts in the laboratory, there are not many examples of
Various compounds either ingested or injected parenterally
 involvement of drugs that are routinely used in veterinary
or intraocularly may produce cataracts. Toxic cataracts in
medicine. Most animals that develop drug-related
the dog have been described in two patterns. The first
cataracts have been given drugs because of systemic signs.
 pattern is the development of vacuoles at the equator or in
Whether stress, disability, or the drug are causal factors,
a band in the peripheral posterior cortex, which may
either individually or in combination, is unknown.
Antibiotics have usually been the suspected cause of
subcapsular region (13.43). The second pattern is
these transient cataracts. The vacuolar opacities may
 development of opacification along the posterior sutures
resolve rapidly when the drugs are changed or the animal
and the junction of the posterior sutures, or a combination
improves. Oral paromomycin, an aminoglycoside that is
of suture and equatorial  vacuoles (13.44).
With
 poorly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract, induced
progression, the anterior axial region is involved and
acute renal failure and cataracts in four cats treated for
eventually a total cataract may develop88.
enteritis9. It was postulated that toxic levels of the drug
The author has observed toxic cataracts 
most
were absorbed through the denuded mucosa. The cataracts
commonly in the cat, often as an incidental finding. These
were noted in the recovery period of the acute renal failure
forms of cataracts are not specific for toxic cataracts as
but the course of the lens opacities was not noted.
equatorial vacuoles may be seen with early diabetic
 Disophenol, an injectable whipworm medication, may
cataracts. While a variety of chemicals may produce
produce cataracts in puppies. However, the cataracts are
usually transient and the cataractogenic dose is 2-3x the
clinical dose90, 91. The cataracts consisted of vacuoles and
were transient, indicating that osmotic changes were
13.43
probably responsible. Disophenol is not used as an
anthelmintic today so it is only of historical interest (13.45).
Diazoxide {an antihypertensive agent) administered
i.v. in the dog, produces transient cataracts consisting of
 attributed to drug-induced hyperglycemia.
 Dimethyl sulfoxide in the dog, administered orally or 
aq seu ieui eidou snod keu auap pde
 reported to be associated with an increase in nuclear haze
 or, conversely, a decrease in cortical relucency93, 94. These
changes persisted after cessation of therapy for the
duration of the observation period of 92 days.
 Hypolipidemic drugs such as the hydroxymethyglutaryl-
CoA (HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitors can produce
cataracts in dogs at doses of 40-60x the clinical dose. The
cataracts produced  are  posterior subcapsular and
occasionally anterior subcapsular opacities. The posterior
13.43 Bilateral toxic cataract in an Abyssinian cat, possibly drug-
a  pe d a s as
induced. The cataract is located in the anterior peripheral cortex.
to a complete cortical cataract?s.
13.44
13.45
13.44 Young cat with bilateral toxic cataracts from antibiotics. The
13.45 Experimental toxic cataracts in a dog given disophenol. The
opacity consists of a ring of equatorial vacuoles and posterior sutural
opacity is a sheet of posterior cortical vacuoles that extend axially.
vacuoles. The cataracts resolved spontaneously on discontinuation of
Severe cases also involve the anterior cortex. The cataracts resolve
the antibiotic therapy.
spontaneously.
LENS
385
Topical glucocorticoids and miotic agents are known
Electricity
to produce cataracts in humans but animals seem
Animals that have had an electrical shock may develop a
resistant and the risk is minimal. There are no
typical axial anterior subcapsular cataract months after
 documented accounts of cataracts in dogs from topical
the shock 102.
glucocorticoid or miotic use, although many clinicians
have the impression that many atopic dogs on oral
Diagnosis
glucocorticoids have an increased risk of cataracts. The
Good pupil dilation is important to determine the full
cataracts may be associated with the atopy fas in
extent of a cataract and to differentiate it from nuclear
humans), rather than with the glucocorticoids. In cats,
sclerosis. A focal slit beam is helpful in localizing the
topical dexamethasone has produced cataracts and mild
depth of the opacity. The Purkinje-Sanson images from
ocular
 hypertension.
Topical
 prednisolone
and
the anterior and posterior capsules are of some aid in
dexamethasone produce subcapsular opacities after
depth localization. Nuclear sclerosis after pupil dilation
40 days of application, and they continue to progress
appears as a lens within the cortex or a lens within the
while the animal is on therapy%6. Significant cataract
lens' but when viewed through a moderate to small sized
development has been documented  in  groups
of
pupil, the light scattering it produces mimics a senile
experimental  cats  given systemic dexamethasone
to
cortical cataract. The importance of differentiating
induce diabates mellitus. Since the cat is very resistant to
nuclear sclerosis is that it does not produce blindness or
 diabetic cataracts, the glucocorticoids were blamed for
clinical signs, whereas a cortical cataract will often result
the cataract development (13.46).
 in blindness.
Oral long-term ketaconazole administration has
 produced bilateral, rapidly progressive cataracts in dogs.
Prognosis
The mean duration of therapy before cataracts were
The location of the cataract may be a clue to the
noted was 15 months, with a range of 3.5-37 months of
potential progression and cause. Most cataracts have no
treatment97.
distinguishing features regarding cause or progression
and only repeated examinations can help in giving a
Radiation
prognosis. Capsular and subcapsular opacities are
Ionizing radiation is cataractogenic and is recognized
variable but usually stationary in their course
(13.18-13.20). Fetal nuclear opacities do not progress
 exist as gamma radiation exposure to cattle, swine, and
(13.17,13.23) but equatorial and cortical opacities may
burros resulted in cataract formation in only 6.7% of
progress (13.35).
 cattle98. Cataracts were produced in 11% and 28% of
 In a given patient, the difference between eyes in their
 canine patients treated with cobalt-6099 or megavoltage
stage of cataract formation can be quite marked and thus
teletherapy, respectively 100.
a unilateral cataract does not preclude genetic influences.
Cataracts develop 3-9 months after therapy, and are
The speed of cataract progression is highly variable,
ranging from days to years. Rapidly developing cataracts
microwave radiation can induce anterior and posterior
subcapsular cataracts experimentally in dogs, the clinical
importance of this form of radiation is unknown101.
swollen. These cataracts are characterized by vacuoles
Long-term exposure to UV from sunlight is thought to be
 and clefts when the opacity is viewed with magnification
 a major cause of senile cataracts in humans2.
in the early stages.
13.46
13.47
13.46 Cortical cataracts in a cat that had been given 5ystemic
13.47 Radiation-induced cataracts in a cat 1 year after receiving
dexamethasone and growth hormone to induce diabetes mellitus.
cobalt therapy to the head region.
All the cats in the research colony given the protocol developed
cataracts and several developed bullous keratopathy.
386
O pHThAlMIC DiseAse In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
While rapid progression with vacuole formation may
Medical therapy
occur with many forms of cataracts, diabetes mellitus
should be considered when the condition is bilateral and
topical atropine 2-3 times a week to maintain pupil
symmetrical. Posterior synechiae or aqueous flare does
dilation and allow vision around the central opacity.
not necessarily indicate that a cataract is secondary to
Topical glucocorticoids and/or NSAIDs are administered
inflammation. Phacogenic or lens-induced uveitis is a
if a lens-induced uveitis develops, or to prevent lens-
very common phenomenon and, if an accurate history is
induced uveitis.
not available, may be confusing to the clinician. Lens-
induced uveitis usually develops with late immature to
Surgical therapy in the dog
hypermature cataracts.
Cataract surgery should be performed by a specialist, or
at least by a surgeon who performs the procedure on a
Therapy
regular basis. The investment in instruments, the practice 
Cataracts can either be ignored or surgically removed.
necessary to perform the procedure smoothly, the
Through the years a variety of medical therapies have been
number of complications, and the fact that it is an
empirically touted in veterinary medicine for treating
elective procedure make it questionable whether the
nuclear sclerosis or cataracts in general. Oral selenium82,83
generalist should carry out the surgery. Nevertheless, it is
intraocular superoxide dismutase (orgotein)103, and topical
very helpful for any veterinarian referring cataract
zinc ascorbate were said to have anticataractogenic benefits
patients to know some details about the procedure in
but they have been discounted as effective medical therapy
order to gain an understanding of the postoperative
for established cataracts104,10s, In humans during the last
complications and limitations of the procedure.
decade, aspirin and oxygen scavengers, including various
Historically, cataract surgery in animals utilized an
vitamins, have been variably reported in their effectiveness
extracapsular extraction (removing the anterior capsule
and the lens) with an open sky or large incision
therapy may arrest the advancement of certain types of
approach. Because of the significant postoperative
cataracts, such as diabetic and toxic cataracts. Aldose
complications, most surgeons operated on one eye at a
reductase inhibitors have been used to prevent
time and waited until both cataracts were advanced or
experimental diabetic and galactose cataracts70, 72
the animal was blind. This conservative attitude of
Congenital, neonatal, and early juvenile cataracts can be
waiting until there was everything to gain and nothing to
ignored for a period of time to assess whether they are
lose was prevalent.
arrested or
will  resorbl12
With the advent
of
Davidson et al.l15 evaluated the success rate of unilateral
 phacoemulsification and increased success rate of surgery,
versus bilateral exracapsular surgery These authors found
most surgeons would not wait for resorption in juvenile
the short-term (4-6 weeks) success rate of unilateral surgery
cataracts since the rate of complications will increase. A
was 80%; the success rate was the same when bilateral
concern in congenital cataracts is whether amblyopia will
 surgery was performed, when compared on an eye basis (no
Occur if the brain is not subjected to visual images at an
significant  complications  from  performing
bilateral
early age. Amblyopia is known clinically in humans and
 surgeries). When evaluated on one or both eyes being
can be experimentally reproduced in animals.
successful, a 99 % success rate at getting the animal visual
Waiting for resorption of cataracts does increase the
was achieved, with only one animal having a failure in both
risk of lens-induced uveitis and luxation of the lens. The
eyes. At 3-6 months follow up, the unilateral group had a
complication of lens-induced uveitis may result in mild to
69% success rate and the bilateral group had a 93% success
severe intraocular sequelae such as secondary glaucoma
when evaluated as one or both eyes having functional
or phthisis bulbi. Also, posterior segment changes occur
vision. However, only 45% of the patients had vision in
with hypermature cataracts as manifested by a low
both eyes. The major potential disadvantage of bilateral
amplitude ERG and an increased incidence of retinal
surgery is the danger of intraoperative contamination from
detachment. Lens-induced uveitis is usually responsive to
paoad aieains ireeies u inq spiooioson eidoi
intraoperative infection is a relative rare complication in the
in eyes with previous uveitis, the postoperative
dog but perhaps not so in the horse.
inflammation is usually more severe.
 Phacoemulsification or ultrasound to fragment the
lens and then aspirate the pieces has become the standard
Ignoring cataracts is not an option. Chronic
technique for cataract surgery in small animals in the last
cataracts that do not have LIU controlled often
deca de. The advent of reconditioned phacoemulsification
become luxated and the eye may become
equipment and machines targeted for veterinary surgeons 
glaucomatous or, eventually, phthisical.
has brought the price into a practical range. The
technique often looks deceptively simple in a soft
The long-term success rate of extracapsular cataract
cataract but requires considera ble practice to master and
lo auo ui saan paonu-sual ym shuand ui aaans
requires the use of an operating microscope.
both eyes (not necessarily the operated eye) was 28%
versus 53% success in patients without evidence of
Patient selection. Patient selection should be based on
preoperative l
lens-induced uveitisl13. Another study
cataract surgery being an elective surgery. Historically,
compared the success rate of cataract surgery in eyes
patients were selected that had advanced cataracts
with uveitis to the opposite eye without uveitis. The
success rate in the eyes with uveitis was 78% and 39% at
because of the cataracts, so the surgeon had everything
2 and 6 months respectively, while in the noninflammed
to gain. With the advent of better surgical results from
eye the success rate was 85% and 71%114.
phacoemulsification, the ease of removing the softer
LENS
387
earlier cataracts versus the hard hypermature nucleus,
problems {Miniature Schnauzers) is lipid developing in
and the documentation of increased complication rates
 the anterior chamber associated with lipemia.
with late cataracts, the philosophy of patient selection
has changed significantly. Surgeons now prefer to
Preoperative therapy. Preoperative and postoperative
 protocols ha ve been simplified over the years and this has
soft and before lens-induced uveitis has developed. This
resulted in better outcomes, with fewer side-effects and
often translates into operating on a dog that is still
better owner compliance. Obviously, some patients will
visual or has only a unilateral cataract. Operating when
require more intensive therapy but this should be specific
only one eye is blind has the disadvantage that the
to the individual and not be based on a done protocol fits
owner may not note any improvement but, in the
all patients’ approach. Preoperative therapy usually
author's experience, most owners note an increase in
 consists of obtaining maximal pupillary dilation, treating
[iaielun pey aaey ieul sieo pue shop ul laaal Aa1oe
 and preventing infection with antibiotics, and treating
cataract surgery. The advantage of operating when one
and 1
 minimizing intraocular inflammation with anti-
eye is blind is that the animal is never completely blind.
inflammatory drugs. The route of administration,
Theoretically, diplopia develops in patients with one
frequency, and duration of preoperative medication vary
phakic eye and one aphakic eye if an intraocular lens is
from surgeon to surgeon. The author routinely initiates
not implanted.
topical therapy with atropine, prednisolone acetate, and
 Patients selected for cataract surgery should have
an antibiotic on the afternoon before surgery. A systemic
cataracts that are not associated with other blinding
NSAID is given during the preparation procedure or is
lesions such as PRA, retinal detachment, or optic nerve
initiated topically on the morning of surgery.
disease. Most retinal diseases are ruled out by an ERG
but, in the absence of an ERG, practitioners must rely on
Anesthesia. Anesthesia with intraocular surgery_is
early fundus examination before the cataracts are dense
greatly facilitated with neuromuscular blockade. The
or, less ideally, the PLR and the dazzle reflex. PLRs are
author has used neuromuscular blockade routinely for
subjective and often erroneously interpreted. PLRs
 20 years without any significant complications. Low-
should be normally reactive with dense cataracts but
Pisisse inoum pasn uaaa sry uoud aso
secondary changes such as uveitis, adhesions, and
ventilation but this is potentially dangerous due to PCO2
atrophy of the iris sphincter interfere with iris mobility
buildup. Animals breathe naturally but the depth of
 and interpretation of the PLR. Ocular ultrasound is now
breathing is shallow and, unless arterial CO, is being
 monitored, the patient may be at risk long before the PO,
detect retinal detachment and vitreal disease. Retinal
reflects problemsl19. The author's preference is for
detachment was found on preoperative ultrasound in
 atracurium neuromuscular blockade because of its short
19% of cases with hypermature cataracts, 7% with
 duration. One dose of atracurium is adequate for one eye
mature cataracts, and 4% with immature cataracts116.
and, if a bilateral procedure is performed, a second dose
 Secondary cataracts from inflammation are common
is administered. When using neuromuscular blockade the
in the horse and cat. Patients with secondary cataracts
 clinician should be aware that a variety of systemic drugs
are not good candidates for surgery since the
 may potentiate the length of paralysis. Drugs known to
postoperative complications are increased significantly
lengthen
neuromuscular
blockade 
include 
 the
and posterior segment disease is common.
aminoglycosides, lincomycin, clindamycin, bacitracin,
Cataract surgery patients should have a good
polymixin B, verapamil, and anesthetics such as
temperament because they will be handled frequently
enflurane, isoflurane, and halothane120, 121.
and struggling or senile patients are often destructive to
the eye. Owners must be committed to the postoperative
Surgery. Different surgeons use different techniques for
effort, which is often months in duration and is very
extracapsular lens extraction.
Variations  in  technique
important. Patients should have good systemic health.
include position of the animal; fixation of the eye for
 Age in itself is not a reason for denying surgery. Diabetes
 surgery; method and location of entering the eye; method of
mellitus should be ruled out as a cause of the cataracts.
opening the anterior lens capsule and removal of the lens;
Diabetic patients can be operated on but control of
whether the inis is incised or excised; method of irrigation of
diabetes and client education should precede surgery. It is
lens fragments; placement of an intraocular lens; method of
amazing how many owners are preoccupied with the
suturing and type of suture used to close the eye; method of
cataracts in their diabetic dogs but do not have the same
 reforming the anterior chamber; and whether or not the eye
dedication to the diabetes treatment and control. Bagley
 is covered. A traditional open sky extracapsular extraction
 and Lavachl17 found the complication rate was no higher
is rarely performed today, unless it is necessary to convert
in diabetic dogs than in nondiabetic dogs undergoing
from phacoemulsification because of a very hard nucleus or
phacoemulsification with no intraocular lens {IOL)
technical difficulties.
implants. The author has experienced increased numbers
 Patient positioning for phacoemulsification is usually in
of pre- and postoperative corneal erosions in diabetic
dorsal recumbency. Phacoemulsification techniques can be
dogs, as have othersl18 Corneal erosions complicate the
carried out using a one-handed technique with one incision
use of anti-inflammatory therapy. An increase
in
or a two-handed technique with two incisions. The
postoperative corneal edema may also be noted
in
phacoemulsification handpiece has the capability of
diabetic animals, since the corneal endothelium may be
irrigation, irrigation/aspiration, or irrigation/aspiration/
compromised and surgical trauma hastens decompen-
ultrasound, depending on the position of the foot pedal.
sation. One unique and transient postoperative risk 
to
Phacoemulsification  is performed through  a  small
diabetic patients and other patients with lipid metabolic
incision(s) and fluid infusion maintains the anterior
888
OpHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
chamber throughout the procedure until an IOL is inserted
lenses specifically designed for the dog and at a modest
(13.48). This is obviously more physiologic than open sky
price has facilitated their use. The lens power has
extracapsular lens extraction and, typically, results in less
increased dramatically to the current recommended
postoperative inflammation. Early techniques performed
phacoemulsification  in  the anterior chamber  after
necessary for functional vision postoperatively, the
rupturing the capsule and prolapsing the lens. This
clinical impression is that the animals can see better and
technique was traumatic to the corneal endothelium and is
 are more rapidly visually reha bilitated. Vision in aphakic
 not practiced unless emulsifying a luxated lens.
patients can be quite variable, from clinically normal to
The various methods of opening the anterior capsule,
markedly disorientated. The author's impression is that
whether the central anterior capsule is removed before or
older dogs do not adjust well to aphakia. Through
after emulsifying the lens, or whether the anterior capsule
objective   measurements  
utilizing  visual
 evoked
is even removed, all have their advocates. Emulsification
responses, emmetropic Beagles' visual acuity was
within the capsule or *bag' {endocapsular) through a small
equivalent to 20/60 to 20/80 and aphakic visual acuity
stab incision in the capsule serves to protect the corneal
(14 D defocus) was 20/850 in one study136.
endothelium122. In the rabbit, 1.2% of corneal endothelial
While IOLs have historically been experimentally placed
cells were lost with endocapsular extraction versus 6.6%
in the anterior chamber and pupil of animals, the location
when a capsulectomy was performedi23. Early phaco-
of choice is now the capsular bag (13.49, 13.50)137-139. If a
emulsification studies in the dog, where viscoelastic agents
capsular bag is not present, e.g. after removal of a luxated
to protect the corneal endothelium were not used,
lens, a posterior chamber implant with haptics sutured
produced a 22% loss of corneal endothelial cells versus a
through the sclera has been advocatedl40, 141. This is a
 34% loss with extracapsular extraction124.
technique that has the potential for significant compli-
The management of the anterior capsule varies from
 cations and is not universally endorsed by surgeons.
performing a simple incision and emulsification in the
While not absolutely necessary, the use of viscoelastic
"bag'  t
toperforming various types of anterior
agents to protect the corneal endothelium, to maintain
capsulectomies before phacoemulsification. In fact, in the
spatial relationships while performing the capsulor-
 dog the anterior capsule can be left without any apparent
rhexis, and to expand the capsular bag are highly
adverse
effects such as secondary.
cataract 
or
recommended before placing the IOL. If phaco-
emulsification is performed, the 3 mm incision must be 
capsule can be removed with a cystotome, forceps,
T0l aul jo uoonpou moe oi ww 6-8 ol pagiejua
The lens is then introduced, taking care to avoid the
the technique used will depend not only on the surgeon's 
 corneal endothelium. The distal haptic (loop), positioned
preference but also on the nature of the capsule. Capsules
 away from the operator, is placed into the capsular bag.
with hypermature cataracts are often very thick and
The proximal haptic is placed into the bag with forceps
difficult to tear without rupturing zonules, so scissors are
by flexing, or dialed into place by rotating the IOL in the
often necessary for part of the capsulotomy.
The
bag {13.49, 13.51). The dialing maneuver also helps to
preferred technique used by most surgeons 
 isa
center the lens in the pupil.
continuous  circular capsulorrhexis (CCC)  performed
Once the lens is seated and centered, the incision is
with forceps {13.48). Performing a good capsulorrhexis
sutured and remaining viscoelastic agent is irrigated out of
can be the most demanding step in dogs that are
 the eye. The use of an IOL and viscoelastic agents usually
presented with such variable and extreme stages of
adds about US$150-200 to the cost of cataract surgery.
cataract maturation. The circular capsulorrhexis opening
Most lenses in use now are made of polymethylmethacrylate
will not produce radial tears when stretched during
and are rigid (13.51) but a foldable acrylic lens that can be
placed through a smaller (45 mm) phacoemulsification
A capsulorrhexis can be difficult to perform in a
incision is also available for the dog142.
mature cataract due to difficulty in visualization of the
IOLs for humans are currently made out of four
capsule against a dense white background. Staining of
materials: polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA), silicone,
the capsule with indocyanine green or trypan blue
acrylic, and hydrogels (polyhydroxyethylmethacrylate or
 PolyHema). The latter three lenses can be folded to
visualization for capsulorrhexis manipulationsi29, The
introduce through a small incision. Lens design and
opening of the capsulorrhexis should be centered so it
materials may l
have an effect on postoperative
will be over and slightly smaller than the future IOL
complications of cellular reactions and inflammation and
posterior capsular opacities. The silicone lens induces less 
capsulorrhexis with the edges on the IOL had fewer
inflammation than the PMMA and PolyHema lenses in
posterior capsular opacities and better visual acuities
than those with a larger capsulorrhexis.
epithelioid cell deposits and these can be visualized
The actual technique of phacoemulsification varies
clinically as lens precipitates.
but the goal is to preserve the posterior capsule and
Ocular inflammation is not only related to the lens
remove all of the lens material. The most common (17%
material but to how y
well  it is manufactured.
of cases) intraoperative complication is rupture of the
Unfortunately, manufacturers of animal lenses do not have
posterior capsule, which is only about 5 μm thick132. The
to meet FDA regulations and so it is prudent to use those
dorsal nucleus and cortex are the most difficult parts to
that are manufactured under the same standards as for
reach and visualize.
human lenses. An early study found significant variation in
 Placement of an IOL has been practiced for several
the quality of lenses that were marketed at that time for
 years and has become routine for many surgeons. Some
dogsi44. Veterinary ophthalmologists eagerly await the
surgeons prefer not to place an IOL. The availability of
availability of more choices in materials for IOLs.
LENS
389
13.48
13.49
H
13.48, 13.49 Phacoermulsification and placement of an I0L. A: 3 mm 
stab incision is made in a groove prepared for enlargement to 8 mm for
IOL placement; B: injection of viscoelastic agent; C: a circular
capsulorrhexis is made with Utrata forceps; D: phacoemulsifica tion:
E: soft cortex is removed with irrigation-aspiration handpiece; F: incision
is closed if no IOL is placed; G: enlargement of original 3 mm incision is made with scissors to accommodate the IOL; H: capsular bag and anterior
chamber are filld with viscoelastic; I:IOL is introduced into the anterior chamber; J: distal haptic is placed in the capsular bag and the proximal haptic
 is then dialed into the bag or placed with forceps; K:IOL is in the bag and the eye is sutured after removal of the remaining viscoelastic.
13.50
13.51 Typical
13.51
appearance of a one-
piece polymethyl-
 methacrylate lens for
veterinary use. The
haptics are the arms
that hold the lens in 
place. The holes at 
the end of the
haptics and on the
 optics are variably
 present and are for
dialing the lens into 
position.
13.50 Appearance of a dog immediately postoperative with an IOL in
place. Note the haptics (arms] of the IOL.
Most lenses are now designed so that they push
 against the posterior capsule when in place. The physical
 success rates reported based on a return of functional
presence of the lens then inhibits the migration of lens
vision' have varied from about 30-95%115, 14s-1s1. The 
epithelial cells from the equator to the posterior axial
region where they can form opacities.
earlier
surgical
intervention,
and
improved
The results of cataract surgery have been frequently.
intraoperative and postoperative medical management.
reported but often the results are flawed by the design of
A success rate with phacoemulsification of >90% is
the study. Follow up
ohas often been by owner
expected on a 3-week to 3-month postoperative evaluation.
observation, the criteria for success are vague, and the
The reported success rate of extracapsular surgery at
390
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
around 2 years postoperatively declines to 50-80% and to
Davidson et ali1s1 found that the most frequent
about 85% with phacoemulsification11s,150,151. This figure
blinding complication of phacoemulsification was retinal
for phacoemulsification is considered rather optimistic by
detachment, which occurred in S% or more of cases
many surgeons.
followed for a mean of 22 weeks. Retinal detachment
may be present before surgery and preoperative
Complications. The technique and the preoperative and
ultrasound examination of the eye is used to detect these
 postoperative regimes vary greatly and yet the results of
most experienced surgeons are similar.
Whereas
risk for postoperative retinal detachment, focal trans-
complications  from corneal trauma and extensive
scleral cryopexy or laserpexy of the retina at multiple
synechiae such as iris bombe are the most common
spots is often performed following vitrectomy. The
complication of extracapsular extraction113, 147, 149, 152,
effectiveness of this procedure is unknown.
phacoemulsification  complications  are mainly retinal
In the first 2-6 hours postoperatively, about 50% of
detachmentis1, posterior capsule opacification, corneal
cases will spike an elevated IOP which may be in excess of
50 mmHg (6.7 kPa). This usually normalizes by the next
often present with phacoemulsification but are usually
morning but the concern is that some elevations may be
very focal and do not disrupt function or create iris
sufficient to produce retinal and optic nerve damage, and
bombe, as with extracapsular extraction.
these patients might be at risk for glaucoma much later due
Posterior capsular opacification (PCO) of some degree
tocolla of thilayclf16Thcauseof this sp
is common with phacoemulsification but it is usually not
is
 unknown. Strategies for dealing with postoperative
blinding {13.52). Minor or early PCO has been treated in
hypertension have included ignoring the IOP, administration
the dog, as in humans, with the Q-switched YAG laser but 
 of intraoperative carbachol after suturing the incision, and
preoperative CAls Stuhr et al1l reported excellent results
the proliferation, migration, and metaplasia of retained
with’ intraoperative carbachol for prevention of the
lens epithelial cells from the equatorial and anterior
postoperative hypertensive episode. A minor disadvantage is
the marked miosis that occurs for the first day.
to fibrocytes that form plaques and have contractile
Glaucoma still remains the most significant long-term
properties, producing wrinkles in the capsule. The design
complication with phacoemulsification, despite the lack of
meticulous
removal of all
cortex1$7,
type
of
16% of eyes developed glaucoma postoperatively _by
capsulorrhexisl30, and age of the animal all affect the
6 months, and 29% had glaucoma by 12 months. The
 degree of PCO1ss, Design features of the IOL that decrease
sauasuad asaui os suuoui g's auo sem dn moloy ueau
PCO are posterior angulation of the optic so it presses
may be underestimating the risk. Risk factors for
against the posterior capsule and a square edge profile to
glaucoma are hypermature lenses (2s% develop
the optic that helps to prevent posterior migration of
glaucoma), purebred breeds, aphakia, and female dogs.
epithelial cells. The hydrophobic acrylic lenses and
No:
 relationship was observed between transient
continuous circular capsulorrhexis are associated with less
 postoperative hypertension and later development of
PCO. Young animals most consistently produce marked
glaucoma. Aphakia per se may not predispose to
PCO. The use of heparin in the irrigating solution
glaucoma but the reasons for not placing an IOL may
decreases the incidence of PCO by 50% in rabbits and is
predispose to glaucoma, i.e. uveitis and posterior capsule
routinely used by many surgeons for minimizing
intraoperative and postoperative fibrin formation158.
 gla ucoma in a select group of patients that had minimal or
13.52
13.52 Same patient as 13.50, 4 months after surgery, with mild
capsular fibrosis. This would be considered an excellent postoperative
result by most surgeon5.
LENS
391
no preoperative LIU. Sixteen percent of the dogs
surgeons prefer the use of tropicamide rather than
developed glaucoma. Risk factors for glaucoma were
atropine for this, due to its short duration of action.
breed, specifically Boston Terriers, operative hemorrhage,
Postoperative topical glucocorticoids and/or NSAIDs are
and concurrent {often minor) ocular disease such as iris
often administered for months at a low frequency
atrophy
and
iris cysts.
Transient postoperative
maintenance dose.
hypertension, mild LIU, and posterior capsule rupture
with or without vitreous herniation did not increase the
Cataract surgery in the cat
risk of postoperative glaucoma. Glaucoma developed from
Cataract surgery in the cat is similar to the dog but is
1 week to 55 months (mean 10 months) after surgery and
relatively infrequently performed. While series of
was often a gradual increase in IOP that was amenable to
postoperative results have not been published, the
treatment for a median of 14 months. The potential for
impression is that the cat has less postoperative
glaucoma development to occur months to years after
inflammation than the dog and consequently the results 
surgery argues for periodic rechecks so that therapy can be
 are very good. If an IOL is placed, the strength should be
initiated  before l
 blindness develops. In general, the
52-53 D and the haptics 18 mm in diameterl68, 169.
pathogenesis of postoperative glaucoma and how it is
Obviously, a dog IOL is not a good substitute for use in
associated with various risk factors is speculative.
the cat.
Gerardi et al163 examined 16 postcataract surgery
glaucomatous globes and found a membrane lining various
Cataract surgery in the horse
 anterior segment structures that was derived from the lens
The most common form of cataract operated on in the
epithelial cells. Thus, like posterior capsular opacities,
exuberent proliferation by remaining lens epithelium may
 been removed by an irrigation-aspiration technique but
produce long-term complications of glaucoma.
are now easily removed with phacoemulsification. The
Postoperative infection is a relatively rare but
success rates with the older aspiration techniques for
devastating complication of intraocular surgery. Most
equine cataracts operated on in the first year of life are
bacterial infections originate from the patient's flora but
77% in foals <6 months and 60% in foals 6-12 months
infections can originate from improper sterilization of
old63. Because the cataracts are soft in the young horse,
tubing and instruments. Surgeons typically use antibiotics
phacoemulsification can be performed even though the
via a variety
 of routes preoperatively and even
 available needles for most machines are short. The lens
intraoperatively, and prepare the eye with antiseptics.
of the horse appears softer than the dog's, allowing
However, it is disturbing to find that all of these
short phacoemulsification times. Because the vitreous
precautions do not seem to lessen the ability to culture
face pushes forward, even with neuromuscular
bacteria from the aqueous humor during surgery. Taylor et
blockade tears in the posterior capsule are common. A
 al.164 found bacterial contamination of 24% of canine eyes
modified lithotriptor, which has a longer needle, has
undergoing lens removal, although no patients developed
been utilized but additional equipment, a lack of
endophthalmitis, nor was the surgical outcome affected.
coordinated fluid infusion, postoperative corneal
The usual isolates were Gram-positive organisms but no
edema, and corneal ulceration adjacent to the needle
correlation was found between cultures from the adnexa
from thermal burns indicate that this technique needs
and the aqueous humor.  Phacoemulsification  was
more modifications62, 170.
associated with a lower contamination rate than large
An IOL is not available for the horse but the aphakic
incision lens surgery and this was attributed to the smaller
horse performs very well. A common problem with
incision. The  continuous
infusion present  with
cataract surgery in young horses is the behavior of the
phacoemulsification may also have diluted and washed
horse rather than the surgery. Postoperative problems often
out any contamination. In humans, similar rates of
result from trauma to the eye and contamination from lying
aqueous humor contamination have been found with
down, despite the routine use of a protective mask.
similar 0rganisms (24%165, 20-29%166, 27-31%167). No
 Postoperative infection several days after surgery appears
statistical differences were found with the technique of lens
extraction,
oruse
of  preoperative  antibiotics  or
While most of the cataracts in adult horses are
intaoperative heparin.
secondary to inflammation or trauma, primary cataracts
are
observed
puB
removed.
Traditionally,
an
While phacoemulsification and newer drug protocols
 extraca psular technique has been performed for removal
have increased the short-term success of cataract
 of cataracts in adult horses. Although an intracapsular
 surgery in veterinary medicine, it is not without
technique has been described, it is not recommended71.
serious ocular complications and usually requires
Millichamp and Dziezyc170 reported a 58% success rate
long-term follow up and reassessment. Owner
 in horses of all ages, utilizing phacofragmentation.
 compliance to therapy and rechecks is critical for the
As in the dog, muscle paralysis with drugs such as
long-term success of the procedure.
atracurium is an important aid in minimizing forward
bulging of the posterior capsule and iris prolapse
during surgery.
 Postoperative therapy. Postoperative therapy consists of
mydriatics, antibiotics, and anti-inflammatory drugs
Displaced lens
administered in a variety of routes, frequencies, and
Introduction/etiology
durations. Mydriatic therapy is not used as vigorously as
The lens may l
be displaced completely (luxated)
in the past, with the usual intent only of keeping the
anteriorly into the anterior chamber or posteriorly into
pupil mobile by letting it dilate and constrict. Some
the vitreous cavity. Partial displacement (subluxation)
392
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
may be dorsal, ventral, or sideways. Lens dislocation
Cottrell181 described a Cavalier King Charles Spaniel cross-
may or may not produce other ocular complications and
bred that exhibited skin fragility with joint laxity, lens
may or may not be produced by other ocular conditions.
luxation, cataract, lens coloboma, corneal edema, and a thin
Primary lens luxations refer to those that occur without
blue sclera. Most cases of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome manifest
antecedent ocular disease and they are usually thought to
lid conformational problems without ocular lesions.
be familial or inherited.
Primary luxation is a bilateral disease, although the
onset of displacement will vary between eyes. Primary
Primary lens dispiacement
lens displacement is thought to be due to zonular
On rare occasions, congenital (
or early-onset lens
malformations, although lens-induced uveitis with
displacement may occur. Martin26 described a case in an
digestion of the zonules by migrating leukocytes has been
8-week-old Brittany that had bilateral lens luxation
proposed as a mechanism for primary lens luxation182.
accompanied by microphakia and moderately severe
All of the dogs in the study had cataracts and lens
corneal edema (13.13). On scanning electron microscopy
displacement was probably not primary.
{SEM), the zonular attachments to the equator were
Curtis183 found on SEM that the zonules attaching to
signicantly reduced and abnormal in appearance (13.53).
the posterior capsule in Tibetan and Jack Russell Terriers
Similarily, microphakia with lens luxation has been
had a fine reticular network over and between the ciliary
processes that were not observed in normal dogs. He
litter {ten puppies) of Soft Coated Wheaten Terriers has
postulated that these represented weak abnormal zonules
been describedi72. Most of these puppies also had a wide
that fracture over time. Zonular pathology from primary
variety of ocular lesions {PPM, choroidal coloboma,
luxations occurring in 45-year-old dogs has been
posterior staphyloma, microphthalmos) and three had
reported from a variety of breeds26. The lenses had
cardiovascular anomalies.
evidence of prior attachment of torn zonules at the equator 
Primary lens displacement is  observed 
most
(13.54), compatible with Curtis' finding that the zonular
commonly in adult dogs usually 4-5 years of age. It is
defect was more proximal near the ciliary processes.
common in terrier breeds such as the Wirehaired Fox
Terrier, Sealyham Terrier, Tibetan Terrier, Jack Russell
Secondary fens displacement
Primary  lens
An increased circumference of the globe with buphthalmos
displacement without intraocular disease is also seen
frequently results in rupture of some of the zonules and a
sporadically in a variety of other breeds, including the
subluxated lens {13.55). Displaced lenses can also
Border Collie, Australian Blue Heeler, German Shepherd
precipitate glaucoma and thus the history, examination of
 Dog, and Shar Pei178-1s0. These are usually isolated cases 
the second eye, and degree of displacement may be clues as
presented by pet owners and thus the genetic influence is
to the role of the lens in glaucoma. The triad of glaucoma,
unknown or questionable. In the Tibetan Terrier and
uveitis, and displaced lens is common; usually uveitis is
Shar Pei, primary lens luxation has been documented as
considered the basic underlying disease when all are found
an autosomal recessive trait175, 180 and it has
sbeen
together. In the horse, lens subluxation is usually associated
 suggested that it is also recessive in other terriers177.
with uveitis or buphthalmos (13.56).
A very rare cause of primary lens luxation is complete
In the dog, lens displacement is a common sydrome
manifestation of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Barnett and
associated with advanced cataracts. The degenerative
13.53
13.54
13.53 SEM of the luxated canine lens 5een in 13.13 with
13.54 SEM of an anterior luxated lens from an Australian Blue Heeler
microphakia and early luxation. Note the infrequent anomalous areas
with primary lens luxation. This area has nurmerous fractured zonules
of zonular attachment (arrows). Only one large anomalous zonule is
(1] indicating a mechanical tearing. The anterior vitreous face (2) is
present in this quadrant (1]. Vitreous fibrils (2] and anterior hyaloid 
collapsed on the lens. (3: artefact.) (SEM x24). (From Martin, 197826).
(3] face are collapsed onto the posterior lens (SEM x23]). Compare to
13.54. (From Martin, 197826.)
LENS
393
 process of cataract formation may extend to the zonules
cats studied with uveitis had displaced lenses18s.
and capsular attachment, or lens-induced uveitis with
Glaucoma may or may not be present and frequently
inflammatory cell zonulysis may result in
lens
animals are blind at the time of presentation despite
displacements with advanced cataracts (13.57).
being normotensive (13.58).
Lens luxation in aged cats is a distinct condition. A
 Trauma is usually over-rated as an etiology and
 study of 332 cases found Siamese cats and males to be over-
excluding ruptures of the globe, trauma is not an
important cause of lens displacement.
While usually unilateral, bilateral displacement occurred in
21% of cases. Uveitis was commonly coincident (67%)
Lens luxations/subluxations and glaucoma
with lens
luxation,  which suggested zonulysis by
represent the classic question of "which came first,
leukocytes. Of 31 tested cats, all were negative for FeLV but
the chicken or the egg?". The answer has important
5/9 cases {55%) were positive for FIV.
implications for therapy and prognosis of the
Another study
of  Toxoplasma
gondii  serologic
condition.
prevalence in cats with uveitis found that all cats with a
displaced lens were positive for T. gondi and 13% of the 
13.55
13.56
13.55 Secondary posterior luxated lens in a 2-year-old American
13.56 Secondary and chronic anterior luxation of the lens in a horse
Cocker Spaniel with marked buphthalmos. Note the breaks in
with glaucoma. Note the breaks in Descemet's mermbrane.
Descemet's membrane.
13.57
13.58
13.57 Secondary and chronic anterior luxation of a hypermature
13.58 Secondary anterior luxation of the lens in a cat with chronic
cataract. Note the irregular lens outline, indicating lens shrinkage,
uveitis. In the cat the IOP is often normal with anterior luxation.
 and the corneal neova scularization.
394
O pHThAlMIC DIsEASE IN VeTeRiNARY MeDiCINE
Clinical signs
Subluxation
Anterior luxation
Mild or early subluxated lenses may be asymptomatic,
Anterior lens luxation usually manifests with acute
with the only sign of ocular disease being vitreal strands
epiphora and blepharospasm. Luxation of the lens into
in the anterior chamber. Usually, the conjunctiva and
a no ig a si  a a
 episclera is injected and, if the pupil is dilated, an
associated with increased IOP. Selective vascular
aphakic crescent is visible (13.60). Iridonesis (iris
injection of the large conjunctival vessels is almost
tremblingl and phacodonesis may be present and the
invariable and will occur with or without an elevation of
IOP may be elevated. Localized shallowing of the
IOP. The lens will usually be readily visualized in the
 anterior chamber may occur from the lens pushing the
anterior chamber if it is opaque or sclerotic {13.56-
iris forward. The mechanism of glaucoma with a
13.58) but it may be overlooked if corneal edema is
subluxated lens is often not clinically obvious and other
severe or if the lens is perfectly clear {13.59). Chronic
predisposing factors for glaucoma should be ruled out
luxation results in cataract formation. Corneal edema
in the affected (as well as the normal) eye, since lens
will occur where the lens touches the endothelium and is
removal may not be curative.
often permanent, despite removal of the lens (13.59). The
lens may migrate back and forth through the pupil and
Posterior fuxation
the signs will vary depending on the location.
Posterior lens luxation into the ventral anterior vitreous
produces a large aphakic crescent and, if opaque, the lens
is visualized lying in the ventral vitreous {13.61). Often,
the only sign of posterior luxation is modest selective
conjunctival injection from low-grade uveitis.
13.59
Diagnosis
 Unless the cornea is opaque or the pupil is not or cannot
be dilated, displaced lenses are easily diagnosed on the
clinical signs. It may be more difficult to differentiate 
primary from secondary forms of displacement. Primary
displaced lenses are differentiated by breed, lack of other
'aha anisoddo aul ui saupuy pue 'sasneo suisodsipard
13.59 Primary anterior lens luxation in a Beagle. Note the
vascular hyperemia was due to irritation rather than glaucoma.
13.60
13.61
13.60 Apakic crescent with subluxation of the lens in a terrier.
13.61 Aphakic crescent due to posterior lens luxation in an aged cat.
The lens is tilted backwards and is visible because of the widely
dlilated pupil from glaucoma.
LENS
395
Therapy
a 14% incidence of retinal detachment 46 weeks after
Posterior luxation is treated conservatively with topical
intracapsular lens extraction and this percentage
glucocorticoids in most instances. The therapy for a
undoubtedly increases over a longer follow up. Many
subluxated lens is more controversial and is determined
surgeons now perform prophylactic laser retinopexy after
by the severity of signs, the surgeon's preference, and the
intracapsular extraction in an attempt to minimize this
owner's financial resources and concern with surgery.
complication. The use of a cryophake to attach to the lens
Subluxation may be treated conservatively, if glaucoma is
for removal allows a less traumatic and more controlled
not a problem, by using miotics or latanoprost to try and
 means of delivering the lens, while simultaneously wiping
trap the lens in the posterior chamber. Latanoprost
the vitreous from the posterior lens.
(1  drop q12h) has been more successful in producing
 Closed techniques utilizing phacoemulsification can
sustained miosis than cholinergic drugs. Topical steroids
be performed on an anteriorly luxated lens but, if
are indicated if the eye is inflamed. If the IOP is elevated,
performed on a hard subluxated lens, may result in the
adde salaue aut f paaowau aq aiqeqoid pnous suai aul
lens falling into the vitreous. Typically, postoperative
open in both eyes. Medical therapy often only delays
inflammation is less with intracapsular lens extraction
surgery until complete luxation occurs.
Acute anterior luxations are surgically removed in
reported a success rate of 72% 4 weeks after surgery but
the dog, as most are associated with glaucoma. The
this is too short a follow up to give a true picture of the
surgical removal of a luxated lens is intracapsular and
complications. Glaucoma persisted in 23% of cases at
carries a high risk of complications from vitreous
4 weeks but this can be expected to increase over time.
herniated
into the anterior chamber.
Vitreous
Chronic anterior luxation is sometimes a dilemma. If
herniation may produce pupillary block glaucoma, may
the eye is blind from glaucoma, it is difficult to
touch the cornea and produce edema or posterior
 rationalize an expensive lensectomy but the IOP may not 
adhesions may produce retinal holes and tears resulting
be medically controlled. Cyclocryotherapy, cyclophoto-
in retinal detachment.
coagulation, or evisceration with a silicone ball
 Preoperative i.v. mannitol to dehydrate and shrink the
implantation may be performed in patients with
vitreous, positioning the animal in dorsal recumbency,
 glaucoma and a blind eye. If the eye is soft, no therapy is
and excision of all prolapsed vitreous from the anterior
 needed unless uveitis is present.
chamber are steps taken to minimize complications of
vitreous in the anterior chamber Glover et af.179 reported
REFERENCES
1 Jose J {1983) The lens. In: Biochermistry
7 Martin CL, Anderson RS {1981)
 12 Henderson T {1926) The anatomy and
of the Eye. R Anderson (ed). American
Ocular anatomy. In: Textbook of
physiology of accommodation in
Academy of Ophthalmology, San
Veterinary Ophthatmology, 1st edn. K
Mammalia. Proceedings of the 
Francisco, pp. 111-144.
Gelatt (ed). Lea and Febiger,
Ophthatmotogy Society of the United
2 Paterson C, Delamere N {1992) The lens.
 Philadelphia, pp. 12-121.
Kingdom 46:280-308.
Adler's Physiotogy of the Eye, 9th edn.
 8 Berliner ML (1966) Biomicroscopy of
13 Knill L, Eagleton R, Harver R {1977)
WHart (ed). Mosby Year Book, St
the Eye; Stit Lamp Microscopy of the
 Physical optics of the equine eye.
Louis, pp. 348-390.
Living Eye. Hafner Publishing, New
American Journat of Veterinary
 3 Bayer J (1914) Augenheikunde. Wilhelm
York, p. 152.
Research 38:735-737.
 Braumuller, Leipzig, pp. 1-630.
9 Martin C (1969) Slit lamp examination
14 Schachar RA, Black TD, Kash RL,
 4 Aguirre G, Rubin L, Bistner S {1972)
of the normal canine anterior ocular
Cudmore DP, Schanzlin DJ (1995) The
Development of the canine eye.
segment: Part I1. Description. Journat
mechanism of accommodation and
American Journat of Veterinary
of Smalf Animal Practice 10:151-162.
presbyopia in the primate. Annats of
Research33:2399-2414.
10 Tucker R {1973) Comparative and
Ophthatmotogy 27:58-67.
5 Donovan R, Carpenter R, Schepens C,
functional studies on the suspensory
15 Glasser A, Kaufman PL {1999) The
Tolentino F (1974) Histology of the 
 apparatus of the lens (Mammalia).
mechanism of accommodation in 
normal Collie eye. Il. Lens, retina, and
Zeitschrift fur Morphotogie und Tiere
primates. Ophthatology 106:863-872.
optic nerve. Annats of Ophthatmology
74:171-191.
16 Horwitz J (1993) The function of alpha-
6:1299-1307.
11 Helmholtz H {1855) Uber die
crystalin. Investigative Ophthatology
6 Dickson D, Crock G (1972) Interlocking
accommodation des auges. Atbrecht
cnd Visual Science 34:10-22.
 patterns on primate lens fibers.
von Graefes Archives Klin
17 Marak G (1992) Phacoanaphylactic
Investigative Ophthatmology
Ophthaimology 1:1-89.
endophthalmitis. Survey of
11:809-815.
Ophthaimology 36:325-339.
396
OpHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
18 Lavach J (1990) Lens. CV Mosby,
31 Barrie K, Peiffer R, Gelatt K, Williams L
43 Olesen H, Jensen O, Norn M (1974)
Philadelphia, pp. 185-208.
{1979) Posterior lenticonus,
Congenital hereditary cataract in
19 Tobias G, Tobias T, Abood S, Hamor
microphthalmia, congenital cataracts,
Cocker Spaniels. Journat of Smalf
R, Ballam J {1998) Determination of
and retinal folds in an Old English
Animat Practice 15:741-750.
age in dogs and cats by use of changes
Sheepdog. Journat of the American
44 van Rensburg I , Petrick S, van der
in lens reflections and transparency.
Animat Hospitat Association
 Lugt J, Smit M (1992) Multiple 
American Journat of Veterinary
15:715-717.
 inherited eye anomalies including
Research 59:945-950.
 32 Stades F {1980) Persistent hyperplastic
persistent hyperplastic tunica vasculosa
20 Columbre A {1969) Regulation of
tunica vasculosa lentis and persistent 
Jentis in Bouvier des Flandres. Progress
 ocular morphogenesis. Investigative
hyperplastic primary vitreous
in Veter inary and Comparative
Ophthatology 8:25-30.
(PHPTVL/PHPV) in 90 closely related
Ophthatmology 2:133-139.
21 Martin C, Leipold H (1974) Aphakia
 Doberman Pinschers: clinical aspects.
45 Carrig C, MacMillan A, Brundage S,
and multiple ocular defects in Saint
Journat of the American Animat
Pool R, Morgan J {1977) Retinal
Bernard puppies. Veterinary
Hospitat Association 16:739-751.
dysplasia associated with skeletal
Medicine/Small Animat Clinician
33 Gelatt K, Samuelson D, Barrier K, et af.
abnormalities in Labrador Retrievers.
69:448-453.
{1983) Biometry and clinical
Joturnal of the American Veterinary
22 Peiffer R, Fischer C {1983)
characteristics of congenital cataracts
Medicat Association 170:49-57.
Microphthalmia, retinal dysplasia, and
and microphthalmia in the Miniature
46 Meyers V, Jezyk P, Aguirre G,
 anterior segment dysgenesis in a litter 
Schnauzer. Journat of the American
Patterson D {1983) Short-limbed
of Doberman Pinschers. Journat of the
Veterinary Medicat Association
dwarfism and ocular defects in the
American Veterinary Medicat
183:99-102.
Samoyed dog. Journat of the American
Association 183:875-878.
 34 Narfstrom K, Dubielzig R (1984)
Veterinary Medicat Association
23 Bergsjo T, Arnesen K, Heim P, Nes N
 Posterior lenticonus, cataracts, and
183:975-979.
{1984) Congenital blindness with
microphthalmia; congenital ocular
47 Lavach R, Murphy J, Severin G {1978)
ocular developmental anomalies,
defects in the Cavalier King Charles
Retinal dysplasia in the English
including retinal dysplasia, in
Spaniel. Journat of Smatt Animat
Springer Spaniel. Journat of the
 Doberman Pinscher dogs. Journat of
Practice 25:669-677.
American Animat Hospitat Association
the American Veterinary Medicat
35 Laratta L, Ris R, Kern T, Koch S {1985)
14:192-199.
Association 184:1383-1386.
Multiple congenital ocular defects in the
48 Peiffer R, Gelatt K (1975) Congenital
24 Trapp C (1957) Congenital
Akita dog. Cornefl Veterinarian
cataracts in a Persian kitten. Veterinary
maldevelopment of the eyes of a colt.
75:381-392.
Medicine/Smalt Animat Clinician
Cornell Veterinarian 57:467.
36 Leon A, Curtis R, Barnett K (1986)
70:1334-1335.
25 Aguirre G, Bistner S {1973)
Hereditary persistent hyperplastic
49 Collier L, Moore C, Prieur D {1987)
 Microphakia with lenticular luxation
 primary vitreous in the Staffordshire
 Familial congenital cataracts in cats.
and subluxation in cats. Veterinary
Bull Terrier. Journat of the Armerican
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
Medicine/Smalt Animat Clinician
Anirmat Hospitat Association
the American College of Veterinary
68:498-500.
22:765-774.
Ophthaimologists 18:22-30.
26 Martin C {1978) Zonular defects in
 37 Venter IJ, van der Lugt JJ, van
50 Priester W {1972) Congenital ocular
the dog: a clinical and scanning
Rensburg IB, Petrick SW (1996)
defects in cattle, horses, cats, and dogs.
electron microscopic study. Journat of
Multiple congenital eye anomalies in
Journat of the American Veterinary
the American Animat Hospitat
 Bloodhound puppies. Veterinary and
Medicat Association 160:1504-1511.
Association 14:571-579.
Comparative Ophthaimology 6:9-13.
51 Garner A, Griffiths P {1969) Bilateral
27 Rubin L {1971) Hereditary
38 Rubin L, Koch S, Huber R {1969)
 congenital ocular defects in a foal.
 microphakia and microphthalmia
 Hereditary cataracts in Miniature
British Journat of Ophthatmalogy
syndrome in the Beagle. Proceedings
Schnauzers. Joturnat of the Ammerican
53:513-517.
of the Scientific Meeting of the
Veterinary Medicat Association
 52 Dziezyc J, Kern T, Wolf D (1983)
American College of Veterinary
154:1456-1458.
Microphthalmia in a foal. Equine
Ophthatmotogists 2:50-55.
39 Gelatt K, Veith L (1970) Hereditary
Veterinary Journat Supplement
28 Molleda J, Martin G, Ginel P {1995)
multiple ocular anomalies in Australian
2:15-17.
Microphakia associated with lens
Shepherd Dogs. Veterinary
53 Walde I {1983) Some observations on
luxation in the cat. Journal of the
Medicine/Small Animat Clinician
congenital cataracts in the horse.
American Animat Hospital
65:39-42.
Equine Veterinary Journat Supplement
Association 31:209-212.
40 Donovan R {1971) Congenital cataracts
2:27-28.
29 Aguirre G, Bistner S {1973) Posterior
 in the Miniature Schnauzer. Proceedings
54 Eriksson K {1955) Hereditary aniridia
lenticonus in the dog. Cornelt
of the Scientific Meeting of the
with secondary cataract in horses.
Veterinarian 63:455-461.
American Coltege of Veterinary
Nordisk Veterinaer Medicin
30 Lavach J, Severin G (1977) Posterior
Ophthatmologists 2:36-43.
7:773-793.
lenticonus and lenticonus internum in
 41 Barnett K, Knight G {1969) Persistent
55 Joyce J {1983) Aniridia in a Quarter
a dog. Journat of the American
pupillary membrane and associated
horse. Equine Veterinary Journat
Animat Hospitat Association
defects in the Basenji. Veterinary Record
Supplement 2:21-22.
13:685-687.
85:242-249
56 Beech J, Aguirre G, Gross S (1984)
42 Hirth R, Greenstein E, Peer R {1974)
 Congenital nuclear cataracts in the
Anterior capsular opacities (spurious
Morgan horse. Journat of the American
cataracts) in Beagle dogs. Veterinary
Veterinary Medicat Association
Pathology 11:181-194.
184:1363-1365.
LENS
397
57 Matthews A, Handscombe M (1983)
70 Sato S, Takahashi Y, Wyman M,
83 Brooksby LO (1979) A practitioner's
Bilateral cataract formation and
Kador P (1991) Progression of sugar
 experience with seleniurn-tocopherol
subluxation of the lenses in a foal: a
cataract in the dog. Invest igative
in treatment of cataracts and nuclear
case report. Equine Veterinary Journat
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
sclerosis in the dog. Veterinary
Supplement 2:23-24.
32:1925-1931.
Medicine/Small Animat Clinician
58 Detlefson J {1920) The inheritance of
 71 Richter M, Guscetti F, Spiess B (2002)
74:301-302.
congenital cataract in cattle. Armerican
Aldose reductase activity and glucose-
84 Poston HA, Ris RC, Rumsey GL,
Naturatist 54:277-280.
related opacities in incubated lenses
Ketola HG (1977) The effect of 
59 Gregory P, Mead S, Regan W (1943)
from dogs and cats. American Journat
 supplemental dietary amino acids,
A congenital hereditary eye defect of
of Veterimary Research 63:1591-1597.
 minerals, and vitamins on salmonids
cattle. Journat of Heredity
72 Fukushi S, Merola LO, Kinoshita JH
fed cataractogenic diets. Cornel
34:125-128.
{1980) Altering the course of cataracts
Veterinarian 67:472-509.
60 Gelatt K {1971) Cataracts in cattle.
in diabetic rats. Investigative
85 Ketola HG (1979) Influence of dietary
Journat of the American Veterinary
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
zinc on cataracts in rainbow trout
Medical Association 159:195-200.
19:313-315.
(Satmo gairdneri). Journat of
61 Leipold H, Gelatt K, Huston K {1971)
73 Kinoshita J {1986) Aldose reductase in
Nutrition 109:965-969.
Multiple ocular anomalies and
the diabetic eye. American Journat of
86 Hughes SG, Riis RC, Nickum JG,
hydrocephalus in grade beef 
Ophthatmology 102:685-692.
Rumsey GL (1981) Biomicroscopic
Shorthorn cattle. American Journat of
74 Goldman H (1929) Experimentelle
and histologic pathology of the eye in
Veterinary Research 32:1019-1026.
tetaniekatarakt. Von Graefes Archiw fur
riboflavin deficient rainbow trout
62 Dziezyc J, Millichamp N, Keller C
Ophthatmotogy 122:146.
(Satmo gairdneri). Carnetl
{1991) Use of phakofragmentation for
75 Kornegay J, Greene C, Martin C,
Veterinarian 71:269-279.
cataract removal in horses: 12 cases
Gorgacz E, Melcon D {1980) Idiopathic
87 Poston HA, Rumsey GL {1983)
{1985-1989). Joturnat of the American
hypocalcemia in four dogs. Journat of
Factors affecting dietary requirements
Veterinary Medicat Association
the American Animat Hospitat
and deficiency signs of L-tryptophan
198:1774-1778.
Association 16:723-734.
in rainbow trout. Journal of Nutrition
63 Gelatt K, Myers V, McClure R {1974)
 76 Vainisi S, Edelhauser H, Wolf D,
113:2568-2577.
Aspiration of congenital and soft
Cotlier E, Reeser F {1981) Nutritional
88 Heywood R {1971) Drug-induced
cataracts in foals and young horses.
 cataracts in timber wolves. Journat of
lenticular lesions in the dog. British
Journat of the American Veterinary
 the American Veterinary Medicat
Veterinary Journal 127:301-303.
Medicat Association 165:611-616.
Association 179:1175-1180.
89 Gookin JL, Riviere JE, Gilger BC,
64 Brooks A, Drewe R, Grandt G,
77 Glaze M, Blanchard G (1983)
Papich MG {1999) Acute renal failure
Billington T, Gillies W {1994)
Nutritional cataracts in a Samoyed litter.
in four cats treated with
Crystalline nature of the iridescent 
Journat of the American Animat
paromomycin. Journat of the
particles in hy permature cataracts.
Hosptiat Association 19:951-954.
American Veterinary Medicat
British Journat of Ophthatmotogy
78 Martin C, Chambreau T {1982)
Association 215:1821-1823.
78:581-582.
Cataract production in experimentally
90 Martin C, Christmas R, Leipold H
65 Ling G, Lowenstine L, Pulley T,
 orphaned puppies fed a commercial
{1972) Formation of temporary
Kaneko J {1977) Diabetes mellitus in
replacement for bitch's milk. Journat of
cataracts in dogs given a disophenol
dogs: a review of initial evaluation,
the American Animat Hospitat
preparation. Journat of the American
 immediate and long-term
Association 18:115-119.
Veterinary Medicat Association
 management, and outcome. Journal of
79 Remillard RL, Pickett JP, Thatcher CD,
161:294-301.
the American Veterinary Medicat
Davenport DJ {1993) Comparison of 
91 Martin C {1975) The formation of 
Association 170:521-530.
kittens fed queen's milk with those fed
cataracts in dogs with disophenol: age
66 Schaer M (1977) A clinical survey of
milk replacers. Armerican Journat of
susceptibility and production with
thirty cats with diabetes mellitus.
Veterimary Research 54:901-907.
chemical grade 2,6-diiodo-4-
Journat of the American Animat
 80 Ralston S, Isherwood J, Chandler M.
nitrophenol. Canadian Veterinary
Hospitat Association 13:23-27.
Poffenbarger E, Severin G, Olson P
Jouma! 16:228-232.
67 Bean S, Correa MT, Davidson MG
 {1990) Evaluation of growth rates and
92 Schiavo D {1976) Reversible lenticular
{1999) A retrospective cohort study
 cataract formation in orphan puppies
aberrations in Beagle dogs given
on the development of cataracts in
fed two milk replacer formulas.
diazoxide intravenously. Veterinary
dogs with diabetes mellitus: 200 cases.
Conference on Veterinary Perinatotogy
Medicine/Small Animat Clinician
Veterinary Ophthatmology
im Confunction tuith the Neonatat
71:190-195.
2:169-172.
Society, Cambridge, Engiand 2:56.
93 Rubin L, Mattis P {1966) Dimethy]
68 Kinoshita J (1974) Mechanisms
81 Anderson RS, Trune DR, Shearer TR
sulfoxide: lens changes in dogs during
initiating cataract formation.
{1988) Histologic changes in selenite
oral administration. Science
Investigative Ophthatmotogy and
cortical cataract. Investigative
153:83-84.
Visuat Science 12:713-724.
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
94 Smith E, Mason M, Epstein E (1969)
69 Wyman M, Sato S, Akagi Y (1988) The
29:1418-1427.
The ocular effects of repeated dermal
dog as a model for ocular
82 Poulos P {1966) Selenium-tocopherol
applications of dimethyl sulfoxide to
 manifestations of high concentrations of
treatment of senile lenticular sclerosis in 
dogs and monkeys. Journat of
blood sugars. Journat of the American
dogs (four case reports). Veterinary
Pharmacology and Experimentat
Veterinary Medicat Association
Medicine/Small Animat Clinician
Therapeutics 170:364-370.
193:1153-1156.
61:986-988.
398
OPHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
95 Gerson R, MacDonald J, Alberts A
107 West SK,Munoz MS,Newland HS,
119 Sullivan TC, Hellyer PW, Lee DD,
{1990) On the etiology of subcapsular
Emmett E, Taylor HR (1987) Lack of
 Davidson MG {1998) Respiratory
lenticular opacities produced in dogs
evidence for aspirin use and prevention
function and extraocular muscle paralysis
receiving HMG-CoA reductase
of cataracts. Archives of Ophthatmotogy
 following administration of pancuronium
inhibitors. Experimentat Eye Reseaich
105:1229-1231.
bromide in dogs. Veterinary
50:65-78.
108 Seddon J, Christen W, Manson J (1991)
 Ophthatmology 1:125-128.
96 Zhan G, Miranda C, Bito L (1992)
Low-dose aspirin and risks of cataracts
120 Forsyth S, Ilkiw J, Hildebrand S (1990)
Steroid glaucoma: corticosteroid-induced
in a randomized trial of Us physicians.
Effects of gentamicin administration on
ocular hypertension in cats. Experimentat
Archives of Ophthatmology
the neuromuscular blockade induced by
Eye Research 54:211-218.
109:252-255.
atracurium in cats. Anerican Journat of
97 da Costa PD, Merideth RE, Sigler RL
109 Group U-T S {1992) Does aspirin affect
Veterimary Research 51:1675-1678.
(1996) Cataracts in dogs after long-term
the rate of cataract formation? Cross-
121 Pumb D (2002) Veterinary Drug
ketoconazole therapy. Veterinary and
sectional results during a randomised
Handbook. Iowa Press, Ames, pp.
Comparatite Ophthatnology
double-blind placebo controlled trial to
7-78.
6:176-180.
prevent serious vascular events. British
122 Boldy K, Schanzlin D, Gindi J {1985)
98 Brown D, Margrane W, Cross F,
Journat of Ophthatmology 76:259-261.
 Endocapsular cataract surgery in dogs.
Reynolds R {1972) Clinical observations
110 Gupta SK, Joshi S, Velpandian T,
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeing of
of eyes of cattle, swine, and burros
Varma SD (1997) Protection against 
the American College of Veterinary
surviving exposure to gamma and mixed
cataract by pyruvate and its ocular
Ophthatmologists 16:4-15.
 neutron-gamma radiation. Armerican
kinetics. Annats of Ophthatmology
123 Solomon K, Gwin T, O'Morchoe D
Jotrnat of Veterinary Research
29:243-248.
{1989) Protective effect of the anterior
33:309-315.
111 Mares-Perlman JA, Lyle BJ, Klein R,
lens capsule during extracapsular cataract
99 Jamieson V, Davidson M, Nasisse M,
Et αf. (2000) Vitamin supplement use
extraction. Ophthatmology 96:591-597.
 English R (1991) Ocular complications 
and incident cataracts in a population-
124 Gwin R, Warren J, Sammuelson D,
following cobalt 60 radiotherapy of
based study. Archives of Ophthatmotogy
Gum G {1983) Effects of
 neoplasms in the canine head region.
118:1556-1563.
 phakoemulsification and extracapsular
Journat of the American Animat Hospitat
112 Rubin L, Gelatt K (1968) Spontaneous
lens removal on corneal thickness and
Association 27:51-55.
resorption of the cataractous lens in
endothelial cell density in the dog.
100 Roberts S, Lavach J, Severin G,
dogs. Journat of the American Veterinary
Investigative Ophthatmology amd Visuat
Withrow S, Gillette E {1987) Ophthalmic
Medical Association 152:139-152.
Science 24:226-227.
 complications following megavoltage
113 Paulsen M, Lavach J, Severin G,
125 Gwon A, Gruber L, Mundwiller K
 irradiation of the nasal and paranasal
Eichenbaum J (1986) The effect of lens-
(1990) A histologic study of lens
cavities in dogs. Journat of the American
induced uveitis on the success of
 regeneration in aphakic rabbits.
Veterinary Medicat Association
extracapsular cataract extraction: a
Investigative Ophthatmology amd Visuat
190:43-47.
retrospective study of 65 lens removals
Science 31:540-547.
101 Lipman R, Tripathi B, Tripathi R {1988)
in the dog. Journat of the American
126 Morgan JE, Ellingham RB, Young RD,
Cataracts induced by microwave and
Aniat Hospitat Association 22:49-56.
Trmal GJ (1996) The mechanical
jonizing radiation. Survey of
114 van der Woerdt A, Nasisse M,
properties of the human lens capsule
Ophthatmology 33:200-210.
 Davidson M (1990) Phakolytic uveitis in
following capsulorrhexis or radio-
102 Brightman A, Brogdon J, Helper L,
the dog: a retrospective study of 151
frequency diathermy capsulotomy.
 Everds N {1984) Electric cataracts in the
cases. Proceedings of the Scientific
Archives of Ophthatmotogy
 canine: a case report. Journat of the
Meeting of the American College of
114:1110-1115.
Americon Animat Hospitat Association
Veterinary Ophthatmotogists 21:161.
127 Spiess BM, Bolliger J, Ruhli MB (1996)
20:895-898.
115 Davidson M, Nasisse M, Rusnak R,
 Radio-frequency anterior capsulotomy to
103 Brainard J, Hanna C, Petursson G
Corbett W, English R {1990) Success 
facilitate phacoemulsification and
{1982) Evaluation of superoxide
rates of unilateral versus bilateral
 intraocular lens implantation. Veterinary
dismutase (orgotein) in medical treatment
cataract extraction in dogs. Veterinary
and Comparative Ophthatmotogy
of canine cataract. Archives of
Sturgery 19:232-236.
6:233-236.
Ophthatmology 100:1832-1834.
116 van der Woerdt A, Wilkie D, Myer C
128 Assia EI, Apple D, Barden A, Tsai JC,
104 Yakely W, Filby R {1971) Selenium in
{1993) Ultrasongraphic abnormalities in
Castaneda VE, JoggattJS (1991) An
the lens of the dog. Journat of the
the eyes of dogs with cataracts: 147
experimental study comparing various
Americam Veterinary Medicat Association
cases {1986-1992). Journat of the
anterior capsulectomy techniques.
158:1564-1571.
American Veterinary Medicat
Archives of Ophthatmology
105 MacMillian A, Nelson D, Munger R,
Association 203:838-841.
109:642-647.
et af. (1986) A comparison of zinc
117 Bagley L, Lavach J (1994) Comparison
129 Horiguchi M, Miyake K, Ohto I Ito Y
ascorbate versus saline placebo in the
of postoperative phacoemulsification
{1998) Staining of the lens capsule for
treatment of canine cataracts.
results in dogs with and without diabetes
circular continuous capsulorrhexis in eyes
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
mellitus: 153 cases {1991-1992). Journat
with white cataracts. Archives of
the American College of Veterinary
of the American Veterinary Medicat
Ophthatmnology 116:535-537.
Ophthatmologists and Internationat
Association 205:1165-1169.
      
Society of Veterinary Ophthatmotogy
118 Good K, Maggs D, Hollinsworth S,
{1999) The effect of capsulorrhexis size
17:484.
Scagliotti R, Nelson R (2003) Corneal
on posterior capsular opacification: 1-
106 Cotlier E {1983) Aspirin and senile
sensitivity in dogs with diabetes mellitus.
year results of a randomized prospective
cataract in rheumatoid arthritis. Lancet
American Journat of Veterinary Research
trial. American Journat of
1:338-339.
64:7-11.
Ophthatmology 128:271-279.
LENS
399
131 Hollick EJ, Spalton DJ, Ursell PG, et at.
143 Ravalico G, Baccara F Lovisato A,
155 Apple D, Solomon K, Tetz M, et at.
{1999) The effect of polymethy]-
 Tognetto D (1997) Postoperative
(1992) Posterior capsule opacification.
 methacrylate, silicone, and polyacrylic
 cellular reaction on various intraocular
'91-Lize C8opounpggdo jo kaains
intraocular lenses on posterior capsular
Jens materials. Ophthatology
156 Hayashi J, Hayashi K, Nakao F,
 opacification 3 years after cataract
104:1084-1091.
 Hayashi F {1998) Quantitative
surgery. Ophthatmology 106:49-55.
144 Olivero D, Davidson M, Nasisse M,
comparison of posterior capsule
132 Nasisse M, Davidson M, Jamieson V,
Dykstra M (1993) Canine intraocular
 opacification after
English R, Olivero D {1991)
lens quality control: light and scanning
polymethylmethacrylate, silicone, and
 Phakoemulsification and intraocular lens 
electron microscopic evaluation.
soft acrylic intraocular lens
implantation: a study of technique in 182
Progress in Veterinary and Comparative
implantation. Archives of
dogs. Progress in Veterinary and
Ophthatmology 3:98-105.
Ophthatmology 116:1579-1582.
Comparative Ophthainology
145 Knight G {1957) The extraction of
157 Ram J, Apple D, Peng Q, et at. (1999)
1:225-232.
dislocations and the cataractous
Update on fixation of rigid and foldable
133 Gaiddon J, Rosolen S, Steru L, Cook C,
 crystalline lens of the dog with the
posterior chamber intraocular lenses.
 Peiffer R (1991) Use of biometry and
 object of preserving some useful vision.
Part I. Choosing the correct haptic
keratometry for determining optimal
Veterinary Record 68:318.
fixation and intraocular lens design to
 power for intraocular lens implants in
146 Startup F {1967) Cataract surgery in
help eradicate posterior capsule
dogs. American Journat of Veterinary
the dog. II. Published results. Journat of
opacification. Ophthatmology
Research 52:781-783.
Smatt Animat Practice 8:671-674.
106:891-900.
134 Murphy C, Nasisse M, Olivero D,
147 Magrane W (1969) Cataract
158 Zaturinsky B, Naveh N, Saks D,
 Brinkman M, Campbell L, Hellkamp A
extraction: a follow up study {429
Solomon A {1990) Prevention of
{1991) Refractive state of the
 cases). Journat of Small Animat Practice
posterior capsular opaci fication by
 pseudophakic canine eye. Proceedings of
10:545-553.
cryolysis and the use of heparinized
the Scientific Meeting of the American
148 Spreull J, Chawla H, Crispin S {1980)
irrigating solution during extracapsular
College of Veterinary Ophthatmotogists
 Routine lens extraction for the
lens extraction in rabbits. Ophthatmic
22:95.
treatment of cataract in the dog.
Surgery 21:431-434.
135 Peiffer R, Gaiddon J {1991) Posterior
Journat of Small Animat Practice
159 Smith P, Brooks D, Lazarus J,
chamber intraocular lens implantation in 
21:535-554
Kubilis P, Gelatt K (1996) Ocular
the dog: results of 65 implants in 61
149 Rooks R, Brightman A, Musselman E,
hypertension following cataract surgery
patients. Journal of the American Animat
Helper L, Magrane W (1985)
in dogs: 139 cases {1922-1993). Journat
Hosp itat Association 27:453-462.
 Extracapsular cataract extraction: an
of the American Veterinary Medicat
136 Murphy C, Mutti D, Zadnik K,
 analysis of 240 operations in dogs.
Association 209:105-111.
Hoeve J {1997) Effect of optical defocus
Journat of the American Veterinary
160 Miller PE, Stanz KM, Dubielzig RR,
on visual acuity in dogs. Armerican
Medicat Association 187:1013-1015.
Murphy CJ (1997) Mechanisms of acute 
Jotrnat of Veterinary Research
150 Miller T, Whitley D, Meek L,
intraocular pressure increases after
58:414-418.
Garcia G, Wilson M, Rawls B (1987)
phakoemulsification lens extraction in
137 Fox S, Vainisi S, Gerstein M {1979)
 Phacofragmentation and aspiration for
dogs. American Journat of Veterinary
 Lens extraction with anterior chamber
cataract extraction in dogs: 56 cases
Research 58:1159-1165.
lens implantation in the Macaque.
[1980-1984). Journat of the American
161 Stuhr C, Miller P, Murphy C,
American Journat of Veterinary Research
Veterinary Medicat Association
Schoster J, Thomas C {1998) Effect of
40:214-220.
190:1577-1580.
 intracameral administration of
138 Olson R, Kolodner H {1981)
151 Davidson M, Nasisse M, Jamieson V,
carbachol on the postoperative increase
Intraocular lens implantation in cats.
English R, Oliverso D {1991)
in intraocular pressure in dogs
Annats of Ophthatmology 13:975-977.
 Phakoemulsification and intraocular
undergoing cataract extraction. Journat
139 Draeger J, Guthoff R, Kohler L,
lens implantation: a study of surgical
of the American Veterinary Medicat
Allmeling G (1983)
results in 182 dogs. Progress in
Association 212:1885-1888.
Veterinarmedizinische ophthalmologische
Veterinary and Comparative
162 Lannek E, Miller P (2001)
mikrochirurgie. Kieintier Praxis
Ophthatmology 1:233-238.
Development of glaucoma after 
28:65-68.
152 Startup F {1967) Cataract surgery in
 phacoemulsification for removal of
140 Stark W, Goodman G, Goodman D,
the dog. I1. Factors responsible for
cataracts in dogs: 22 cases (1987-1997).
Gottsch J {1988) Posterior chamber
failure. Journat of Small Animat
Journat of the American Veterinary
 intraocular lens implantation in the 
Practice 8:675-679.
Medicat Association 218:70-76.
 absence of posterior capsular support.
153 Biros DJ, Gelatt KN, Brooks DE, et af.
163 Gerardi JG, Colitz C, Dubielzig R,
Ophthatmology Surgery 19:240-243.
(2000) Development of glaucoma after
Davidson M {1999)
141 Nasisse M, Glover TL, Davidson M,
cataract surgery in dogs: 220 cases
Immunohistochemical analysis of lens
Nelms S, Sullivan T (1995) Technique
{1987-1998). Journat of the American
epithelial-derived membranes following
for the suture fixation of intraocular
Veterinary Medicat Association
cataract extraction in the dog.
lenses in dogs. Veterinary and
216:1780-1786.
Veterinary Ophthatmology 2:163-168.
Comparative Ophthatmalogy
154 Nasisse M, Davidson M, English R,
164 Taylor MM, Kern TJ, Ris RC,
5:146-150.
Roberts S, Newman H (1990)
McDonough P, Erb HN (1995)
142 Gaiddon JA, Lallement PE, Peiffer RL.
Neodymium: YAG laser treatment of
Intraocular bacterial contamination
(2000) Implantation of a foldable
lens extraction-induced pupillary
during cataract surgery in dogs. Journat
intraocular lens in dogs. Journat of the
 opacifications in dogs. Journat of the
of the American Veterinary Mediciat
American Veterinary Medicat Association
American Animat Hospitat Assoc iation
Association 206:1716-1720.
216:875-877.
26:275-281.
400
O pHThAlMIC DiseAse In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
165 Chitkara DK, Manners T, Chapman F,
173 Formston C {1945) Observations on
182 Gwin R, Samuelson D, Powell G,
Stoddart MG, Hill D, Jenkins D {1994)
subluxation and luxation of the
Gelatt K, Wolf D, Meredith R {1982)
 Lack of effect of preoperative
crystalline lens in the dog. Journat of
Primary lens luxation in the dog
norfloxacin on bacterial contamination 
Comparative Pathotogy 55:168-184.
associated with lenticular zonule
of anterior chamber aspirates after
174 Lawson D (1969) Luxation of the
degeneration and its relationship to
cataract surgery. British Journat of
crystalline lens in the dog. Journat of
glaucoma. Journat of the American
Ophthatmology 78:772-774.
Small Animat Practice 10:461-463.
Animat Hospitat Association
166 Beigi B, Westlake W, Mangelschots E,
175 Willis M, Curtis R, Barnett K,
18:485-491.
Chang B, Rich W, Riordan T (1997)
Tempest W (1979) Genetic aspects of
183 Curtis R {1983) Aetiopathological
Peroperative microbial contamination of
lens luxation in the Tibetan Terrier.
aspects of inherited lens dislocation in
 anterior chamber aspirates during
Veterimary Record 104:409-412.
the Tibetan Terrier. Journat of
extracapsular cataract extraction and
176 Curtis R, Barnett K (1980) Primary
Cormparative Pathotogy 93:151-163.
 phakoemulsification. British Journat of
lens luxation in the dog. Journat of
184 Olivero D, Ris R, Dutton A,
Ophthatmology 81:953-955.
Small Animat Practice 21:657-668.
Murphy C, Nasisse M, Davidson M
167 Manners TD, Turner D, Glenn AM
177 Curtis R, Barnett K, Lewis S {1983)
{1991) Feline lens displacement: a
{1997) Heparinised intraocular infusion
 Clinical and pathological observations
retrospective analysis of 345 cases.
and bacterial contamination in cataract
 concerning the aetiology of primary lens
Progress in Veterinary and Comparative
surgery. British Journat of
luxation in the dog. Veterinary Record
Ophthatmotogy 1:239-244.
Ophthatmology 81:949-952.
112:238-246.
185 Chavkin M, Lappin M, Powell C
168 Gilger BC, Davidson MG, Colitz CM
178 Foster S, Curtis R, Barnett K {1986)
{1992) Seroepidemiologic and clinical
{1998) Experimental implantation of
 Primary lens luxation in the Border
observations of 93 cases of uveitis in
posterior chamber prototype intraocular
Collie. Journat of Small Animat Practice
cats. Progress in Veterinary and
lenses for the feline eye. Arerican
27:1-6.
Comparative Ophthatmology 2:29-36.
Jotrnat of Veterinary Research
179 Glover TL, Davidson M, Nasisse M,
186 Hamming NA, Apple D {1980) In: 
59:1339-1343
Olivero D {1995) The intracapsular
Principtes and Practice of
169 Gilger BC, Davidson MG,
 extraction of displaced lenses in dogs: a
Ophthatology Vol.1. G Peyman, D
Howard PM (1998) Keratometry.
retrospective study of 57 cases
Sanders, M Goldberg(eds). WB
ultrasonic biometry, and prediction of
{1984-1990). Journal of the American
Saunders, Philadelphia, p. 9.
intraocular lens power in the feline eye.
Animat Hosp itat Association 31:77-81.
187 Hogan M, Alvarado J, Weddell J
American Journat of Veterinary
180 Lazarus JA, Pickett JP, Champagne E
(1971) Histotogy of the Hurman Eye.
Research 59:131-134.
{1998) Primary lens luxation in the
WB Saunders, Philadelphia.
170 Millichamp NJ, Dziezyc J (2000)
Chinese Shar Pei: clinical and hereditary
188 Stades F {1983) Development of the
Cataract phacofragmentation in horses.
characteristics. Veterinary
vitreous and related {vascular) structures
Veterinary Ophthatmotogy 3:157-164.
Ophthatmology 1:101-107.
in persistent hyperplastic tunica
171 van Kruiningen H {1964) Intracapsular
181 Barnett KC, Cottrell BD {1987)
vasculosa lentis and persistent
cataract extraction in the horse. Journat
Ehlers-Danlos syndromme in a dog:
hyperplastic primary vitreous
Of the American Veterinary Medicat
ocular, cutaneous, and articular 
(PHTVL/PHPV) in the Doberman
Association 145:773-785.
abnormalities. Journat of Smatt Animat
Pinscher. Utrecht, p. 12.
172 van der Woerdt A, Stades FC, van der
Practice 28:941-946.
Linde-Sipman JS, Boevé MH (1995)
Multiple ocular anomalies in two
 related litters of Soft Coated Wheaten
Terriers. Veterinary and Comparative
Ophthatmology 5:78-82.
401
14
Vitreous and
Ocular Fundus
VITREOUS
charged hyaluronic acid polymers fill the spaces2.
 Hyaluronic acid is responsible for the viscosity of the
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
vitreous and the relative amounts of collagen and
The vitreous is the largest of the ocular structures,
 hyaluronic acid determine whether the vitreous is in a gel
Occupying the space bounded anteriorly by the lens and
 or fluid state. The negatively-charged hyaluronic
zonules and peripherally by the ciliary body, retina, and
 molecules repulse each other, causing expansion of the 
 optic nerve (14.1). The vitreous is a hydrogel consisting
gel. The addition of positively-charged ions causes the
of 99% water It is relatively lacking in cells with the
vitreous gel to collapse, due to the neutralization of the
normal cellular components being  macrophages
repulsive negative charges3. Hyaluronic acid is produced
(hyalocytes) that originate from the bloodl. Most of the
hyalocytes are located in the peripheral vitreous near the
 peripheral vitreoust. The percentage of vitreous that is
ciliary body. Noncross-linked type II collagen fibers
fluid increases with age.
make up the framework and hydrated, negatively-
14.1
Sclera
Extraocular muscle
Choroidal vein
Third eyelid 
Sclera
Chorioca pillaris
Choroid
Rod.
 Pupil
Retina 
Inner nuclear cell
Iris
 Ganglion cell
Macula
Lens
To optic 
Retinal Cone Pigmented
Tapetum
nerve
vessels
 epithelium
~Retinal vessel5
Cornea 
-Optic disk
Iris
Nontapetal retina
~ Hyaloid canal in the vitreous body
Limbus
Zonules
Conjuctiva -
Ciliary body
 Scleral plexus
14.1 Schematic eye of a cat. Note the sinusoidal hyaloid or Cloquet's canal traversing the vitreous from the optic nerve to the back of the len5.
402
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRiNArY MeDiCINE
Embryologically and anatomically, the vitreous is
distance in the dark nonrelucent Cloquet's canal (see
divided into primary, secondary, and tertiary vitreous.
Chapter 11, p.298, 11.1). The anterior extremity of
· Primary vitreous is the first tissue to develop in the
Cloquet's canal attaches to the anterior vitreous face,
optic cup between the lens and the retina. It consists
which is collapsed against the posterior lens capsule. This
of ectodermal components and the mesodermal origin
attachment is seen on biomicroscopy as an arcuate white
aash sual iiay aue saddns ie aiss Aaie pieay
ring farcuate line of Vogt) near the lens axis. The dorsal
Chapter 13, p.369). The primary vitreous is
roof of Cloquet's canal is termed the dorsal plica and the
surrounded (begins about 25 days post fertilization)
floor of the canal is the ventral plica.
by the newer secondary vitreous of neuroectoderm
The retention of embryonal vascular remnants of the
 origin, which is the majority of the postnatal vitreouss,
primary vitreous may be mild, with only the continuity
6. The primary vitreous passes through the secondary
and patency of the artery maintained. This condition is
vitreous in a tunnel, called Cloquet's canal. In the
relatively common in some lines of Shetland Sheepdogs
young animal, the tunnel is straight but sags with
and usually produces no clinical signs, although vitreous
growth, developing a sinusoidal curve (14.1)7.
hemorrhage may occur. Retention of remnants of the
 Secondary vitreous is most firmly attached to the
tunica vasculosa lentis, as evidenced by small white linear
peripapillary region, the peripheral retina/ora ciliaris
or dot opacities or pigmented dots on the posterior
retinae, and the posterior lens capsule. The
capsule, is a very frequent incidental finding and is often
peripheral attachment is called the vitreous base. The
familial. More pronounced degrees of retention of the
lenticular attachment is the hyaloideoca psular
hyaloid artery may be associated with proliferative
ligament ( Wieger's ligament) and this is relatively
changes that are fibrovascular or fibrous in nature. These
firm in the dog and cat, making intracapsular lens
may manifest in the anterior and/or posterior extremity
extraction difficult without vitreous loss. The major
 of the hyaloid system. Anterior hyperplastic changes are
portion of the vitreous face is easily separated from
recognized as axial posterior capsular cataracts with
the retina. The secondary vitreous is divided into the
vessels intermixed.
 peripheral cortical vitreous and central vitreous. In
Mild glial proliferation on the surface of the disk from
the dog and cat, the cortical vitreous is fluid and the 
incomplete involution of the hyaloid artery is termed
central vitreous is dense8, 9.
Bergmeister's papilla. It is routinely visualized in
 Tertiary vitreous is the zonules that hold the lens in
u ou nq 'daaus pue (z'ti) moo aul se yons shu
place.
the dog and cat. Posterior hyperplastic changes are
The vitreous has been demonstrated to have a
PHPV and manifest with proliferative changes on the
optic disk (papillary) or adjacent to the optic disk
 antiangiogenic factor may be responsible for the lack of
(peripapillary) (14.3)i7. Folds in the retina or retinal
regression and overgrowth of the tunica vasculosa lentis
detachment may develop in the peripapillary region as
 in some breeds of dogs, e.g. the Doberman Pinscherll.
the glial tissue contracts or growth of the eye occurs. The
condition may be unilateral or bilateral and may be
accompanied by persistence of the tunica vasculosus
DISEASES OF THE VITREOUS
lentis. Anterior PHPV is known to be a genetic trait in
the Doberman Pinscher, Staffordshire Bull Terrier, and
CONGENITAL DISEASES
ay lou op sea asaui inq saiue sap 1anog
Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous
posterior lesions5, 6, 18, 19.
Introduction/etiology
Persistent hyperplastic
C primary vitreous {PHPV) is also
discussed in Chapter 13 (p.369) with PHTVL. The
involution and disappearance of the primary vitreous is
14.2
somewhat variable in time. In the young pup or kitten,
the course of the hyaloid artery is straight and
continuous between the optic nerve and the lens and
occasionally it will be patent and contain blood. The
closure of the hyaloid artery in Beagle pups usually
found an intact hyaloid artery in the majority of foals up
to 4 days of age and Koch et al.14 found remnants up to
30 days. Blood was often present in the hyaloid artery in
the first neonatal day but only one foal had blood in the
artery 2 days after birth13, 15.
With growth of the eye and involution of the artery,
the artery is disrupted and only the anterior extremity is
noted in the sinuous-shaped Cloquet's canal. The
anterior extremity is routinely observed as a white dot
(Mittendorf's dot) just behind the lens capsule and
ventral to the junction of the posterior cortical sutures16.
14.2 Bovine fundus with a dark nonrmyelinated oval disk. Note a
 In the adult, the anterior hyaloid artery is observed as a
pinkish white proliferation at the confluence of the retinal vessels
pig's tail-like remnant, coursing posteriorly for a short
that is the remnant of the hyaloid artery (Bergmeister's papilla).
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
403
PHPV may occur spontaneously as an isolated
 dysplasia-skeletal dysplasia in Labrador Retrievers7, 23-25.
unilateral condition but the clinician should be suspicious
Congenital vitreal syneresis is probably more common
of an inherited trait if the condition is bilateral.
than is reported. Pronounced vitreal veils are noted in
 PHPV/PHTVL is rare in the cat but has been reported
some individuals, particularly in Miniature Schnauzers.
without indication of it being an inherited trait?20.
The significance of this is unknown.
Clinical signs
ACQUIRED DISEASES
● Mild: pigmented dots and linear streaks on the
Hemorrhage
posterior lens capsule. The hyaloid artery may be
Introduction/etiology
prominent and may contain blood {see Chapter 13,
Hemorrhage into formed vitreous results in clots {14.4),
p.369, 13.19).
whereas if the vitreous is liquefied, the hemorrhage will
●  Moderate: posterior axial subcapsular cataract, posterior
become diffuse. Hemorrhage in a solid vitreous often
lenticonus, retained hyaloid artery, and possibly vitreal
remains for extended periods of time. The blood exerts a
hemorrhage may occur. The ciliary processes may rarely
destructive effect on the gel structure, resulting in
 be elongated and visible in the pupi21.
liquefaction and collapse of vitreal strands around the
 Severe: extensive cataract, lenticonus, hemorrhage
hemorrhage26 . Hemoglobin and iron stimulate macrophage
 into the lens, lens coloboma, extensive pigment on
migration into the vitreous to phagocytoze hemosiderin
posterior capsule, and extensive fibrovascular
 after cellular hemolysis27. The low-grade inflammation is
membrane on or adjacent to the optic disk may be
an additional stimulation for glial cell migration into the
present (14.3), (see Chapter 13, p.369, 13.21,
vitreous, through small breaks in the inner limiting
13.22). Hyphema, uveitis, and secondary glaucoma
membrane of the retina. Miller's cells, retinal astroglial
 may be severe complications of PHPV22?
cells, and retinal pigmented epithelium (PE) are additional
 sources of cells that can produce fibrous membranes28. If
Therapy
the membrane is attached to the retina, contraction of the
 Therapy is not usually necessary in mild to moderate
membrane results in traction and subsequent detachment.
 Iron toxicity or siderosis to the retina by the breakdown
ultrasound is not routinely performed on all cataract
of hemoglobin has been considered to be a complication of
patients, the surgeon may not be aware of PHPV/PHTVL
vitreal hemorrhage but this has been questioned based on
before surgery. If cataract surgery is performed on the
 an experimental model29. Massive vitreal hemorrhage will
severe manifestations of PHPV, the prognosis should be
extinguish the ERG but, if cleared, the ERG will return
guarded because of the risk of hemorrhage and the
(one of the few known causes for reversal of an
 necessity of doing an anterior vitrectomy.
extinguished ERG) and so the ERG may not be a useful
Miscellaneous conditions
hemorrhage is not due to iron toxicity or decreased
  
anomalies of unknown
electrical conductivity through tissue31.
significance have been observed. A congenital coloboma
The causes of vitreal hemorrhage are numerous and
or absence of the vitreous has been observed in a Collie
may be associated with either blunt or perforating
with Collie eye anomaly. This would only be noted by slit
trauma, blood dyscrasia such as thrombocytopenia,
lamp examination. Vitreous syneresis {a liquefied vitreous)
hyperviscosity syndromes and leukemias, vascular
is observed with Collie eye anomaly, in microphthalmic-
lesions such as congenital malformations, systemic
retinal dysplasia of the Bedlington Terrier, and in retinal
hypertension, inflammatory disease, and neoplasia.
14.3
14.4
14.3 Posterior persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous in a Poodle.
14.4 Vitreal hemorrhage in a young Collie. Note the blood is
confined in clots because of the gel state of the vitreous.
404
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETeRINARY MeDICINE
The course and resolution of vitreal hemorrhage is
of dogs and between various age groups can be quite
very difficult to predict. The prognosis should be 
striking. Vitreous herniation into the anterior chamber
 guarded because contractile forces during the
is thought to indicate zonular defects and to be a risk
resolution of clots may produce retinal detachments.
factor for subsequent lens displacement. While finding
vitreal strands in the anterior chamber is obviously not
Clinical signs
normal, the predictive value for future lens
Decreased vision will be noted if significant bilateral
displacement has yet to be proven. The more subjective
hemorrhage occurs. As little as 12.5 μl of blood in 5 ml
findings of an 
 increased entanglement of vitreal
membranes  and
fluid vitreous awaits further
The hemorrhage will be recognized as red 
clots
investigation as to their significance. Despite this lack
suspended in the vitreous {14.4), or diffuse redness if the
 of knowledge and observer subjectivity, breeding dogs
vitreous is liquefied. Clots gradually shrink and turn to a
are being culled for 'vitreal degeneration'.
 gray residue in the vitreous.
OTHER DISEASES
Therapy
Inflammation of the vitreous (hyalitis)
Medical therapy is of no known value for vitreal
Introduction/etiology
hemorrhage. In humans, vitrectomy or removal of the
Hyalitis is part of any endophthalmitis and may be sterile
vitreous is performed for vitreal hemorrhage and
or septic. Primary hyalitis may occur with penetrating
membrane formation. However, in veterinary medicine
injuries or postsurgically, and it can in turn spread to the
the prognosis is so poor, because of the accompanying
retina and uvea. It presents as a haze in the vitreous from
ocular lesions or the underlying cause, that vitrectomies
infiltration of cells and results in an inability to focus
are rarely performed for vitreal hemorrhage.
sharply on the fundus during ophthalmoscopy. Focal
hyalitis is common over any active area of retinal or optic
DEGENERATIVE DISEASES
nerve head inflammation, particularly if infectious in
Asteroid hyalosis
origin. If septic endophthalmitis is suspected, the vitreous 
Asteroid hyalosis is a degenerative condition of unknown
is a more reliable source for culturing than the aqueous
cause. It is characterized by variable numbers of multiple
humor, due to the high turnover rate of fluid in the
small spheroidal bodies, suspended mainly in the anterior
aqueous humor.
vitreous of one or both eyes (14.s). With ocular
movement they vibrate but the bodies do not completely
 Clinical signs
settle out in the ventral vitreous when the eye
is
Loss of vision is common with hyalitis. Episcleral and
a  ae i 5sa a a '5
scleral vascular injection are externally visible. Hyalitis is
condition is bilateral in about 50% of patients. If
recognized biomicroscopically by the presence of cells
unilateral, the left eye is affected more frequently. While
 a 1  soa i a 1 az P
there was no correlation with specific ocular disease, 33
vitreous are differentiated by color and size. Pigmented
of 40 dogs {82%) with asteroid hyalosis had lesions of
cells are noted by color and large size, erythocytes by
the posterior ocular segment33 34. The density of the
their color and small uniform size, and leukocytes by
inq Azey ieumauos aq ot snpuny aul asnes Aeu saipoq
their intermediate size and uniformity.
signs referable to the asteroid hyalosis are unusual.
Severe asteroid hyalosis is a common finding when
Therapy
evaluating older and diabetic cataract patients with
Adequate drug levels are very difficult to achieve in the
ultrasound. Poor visual performance has been observed
vitreous because of its inert nature. If septic hyalitis is
after cataract surgery on animals with asteroid hyalosis;
suspected, high levels of antibiotics that penetrate the
this improved after vitrectomy. Asteroid hyalosis is not
 blood-aqueous humor barrier and intravitreal injection
responsible for the *fly biting' syndrome in the dog.
of antibiotics are indicated. Surgical removal of the
Asteroid bodies are liquid crystals composed 
of
vitreous combined with intravitreal antibiotics may one
calcium and phospholipids3 Therapy is not necessary in
day be employed in veterinary ophthalmology as in
the vast majority of patients.
 human ophthalmology.
Syneresis
Aberrant parasitic migrations
Liquefaction
ofthe vitreous can result from
Parasite migration may occur through the vitreous with
inflammation, hemorrhage, as part of a congenital
Dirofilaria immitis (see Chapter 11, p.298), various fly
syndrome (Collie eye anomaly), or as a degenerative
larvae (ophthalmomyiasis interna)36, and Toxocara canis
   sis   s  a
larvae37.
 Echinococcus cysts (hydatid cysts) may be
importance by itself.
found rarely in the vitreous.
Vitreal degeneration
Synchisis scintillans
Vitreal degeneration is a vague term used to describe
Synchisis is a rare condition of cholesterol crystals that
changes in the vitreous, ranging from strands
of
 gravitate ventrally in a liquefied vitreous and disperse
 vitreous appearing in the anterior chamber to increased
with movement of the eye. The crystals are usually the
membranes and disorganized membranes floating in the
result of an old vitreal hemorrhage. It should not be
anterior vitreous that is often liquefied. The variation in
confused  with the more common condition of
asteroid hyalosis.
VITR EOUS AND OCULAR FuNDUS
405
14.5
14.6
10
14.5 Severe asteroid hyalosis in a dog viewed through a dilated
aui aq sahueuo snoineieie woy paieiuaa aq uen sl 'dnd
vibration of the spherical bodies with ocular movement and their
position behind the len5.
OCULAR FUNDUS
14.6 Montage of kitten retina and inner choroid. (C: choroid with
The ocular fundus is that region in the posterior segment
 numerous blood vessels and melanocytes: T: tapetal cells, arrows
that is viewed with the ophthalmoscope and, collectively,
point to capillaries penetrating tapetum: 1: retinal pigmented
consists of the retina, choroid, and optic disk or papilla.
epithelium (not pigmented over the tapetum];: 2: layer of rods and 
The healthy retina is transparent with the exception of
cones; 3: external limiting membrane; 4: external nuclear layer:
the retinal blood vessels and minor reflections off the
5: external plexiform layer; 6: internal nuclear layer: 7: internal
internal limiting membrane.
plexiform layer: 8: ganglion cel layer; 9: nerve fiber layer:
10: internal limiting membrane; arrowheads indicate retinal blood
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
vessels.] (1 μm section x175.) (From Martin and Anderson, 198151.)
Retina
The retina is classically divided into ten layers, nine of
which are the neurosensory retina and the tenth being the
PE. The original embryonic optic vesicle space is the
potential space between the neurosensory retina and the
PE and it is loosely adherent. Retinal detachment is
essentially retinal separation since the separation is
discrimination between objects. In addition, rods are
between the neurosensory layer and the pigment
more sensitive to shorter wavelength light {blue).
epithelium. The retina of the puppy or kitten is immature
Cones have less convergence so that one cone may
at birth, reaching maturity histologically and by
affect one ganglion cell, which results in more
discrimination (14.1, insert). Rods greatly outnumber
The neurosensory retina is composed of: the outer
cones, although the ratio varies with the location in the
photoreceptor layer frod and cone inner and outer
retina. In the central retina, and specifically in the area
segments), external limiting membrane, outer nuclear
centralis or macula, the cones are at their highest
layer (nuclei of rods and cones), outer plexiform layer
(I'lil spou Aa paaqununo ls aue inq uoeiiuaouo
(synapses between the photoreceptors and inner nuclear
This area is utilized for central or acute visual
layer), inner nuclear layer (contains the nuclei
of
discrimination. The periphery of the retina has a ratio
amacrine cells, horizontal cells, bipolar cells, and
of 65-100:1 of rods to cones, although the absolute
Miller's cells), inner plexiform layer (synapses of inner
 number of rods may be less than in the central retina41,
nuclear layer to the ganglion cells), ganglion cell layer,
42. Rods are used in dim light (scotopic vision) and
nerve fiber layer (axons of ganglion cells), and the
cones for daylight (photopic vision), discrimination,
internal limiting membrane (14.6).
 and color vision. The degree of color vision among
Several rods are connected to a single ganglion cell
animals is controversial. In general, most domestic
(convergence or summation) that makes them more
animals, except swine, are reported to have limited
sensitive in picking up dim light but not sensitive in
color vision {See Chapter 6, p.113).
406
OpHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
14.7
 The double membrane disks of the outer segments of the 
rods and cones contain the photopigments {14.7). Four
types of photopigments may be present in species with
color vision: three in the cones with peak absorption
sensitivity at blue, green, and red wavelengths, and
rhodopsin in the rods. The photopigment's main function is
transduction, or converting light energy into a neurologic
electrical signal. Rhodopsin, the most studied form of the
photopigments, consists of a vitamin A aldehyde {retinal)
and a glycoprotein fopsin). The 11-cis isomer of retinal is
the photoactive form. Light striking the 11-cis isomer peak 
absorption is 500 nm or dark green light) converts it to the
all-trans isomer through a series of unstable conforma-
tional changes, which are the earliest events in trans-
duction. Light is only necessary for the first step and energy
is not necessary for this transformation. The final step is the
separation of the retinal from the opsin and the reduction
of retinal to retinol (alcohol) (14.8)43.
 Regeneration of active rhodopsin does require energy
and takes place mostly in the PE, although a small amount
 of regeneration occurs in the outer segments. Retinol is
stored in the PE as an ester. The photoreceptors in the dark
are maintained in a depolarized state by being permeable to
sodium and pumping out calcium. Activation of the
photopigment alters the calcium pump so that calcium
accumulates in the cytoplasm; it in turn alters the channels
 for sodium leakage, blocking sodium influx, and resulting
14.7 Canine rod outer segment composed of disks or lamella that
in hyperpolarization fincreased intracellular electro-
 are separated from each other. (From Martin and Anderson, 198151)
14.8
14.8 Proposed steps in transduction and
Light
regeneration of rhodopsin. (Modified from
Marmor, 198043]
Rhodopsin 
IT
Disc
Unstable intermediary molecules
membrane 
 Metahodpsin Il 
(380 mm)
Parahodopsin
(465 mm]
Opsin
Il-cis-retinal
All-trans-retinal
Isomerase
(380 mm)
Outer
 segment
Il-cis-retinal
All-trans-
retinal
Inner
 segment
Il-cis-retinal esters 4 
 All-trans-retinal esters
Pigment
epithelium 
Il-cis-retinal
All-tranis-retinal
IT
vitamin A
Blood
 Retinal binding protein
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
407
negativity). The summation of this hyperpolarization is
 The tapetum is a reflective structure that is present in
seen clinically as the A-wave in the ERG. The B-wave of the
most domestic animals except the pig and birds. It is
d ay ta ra  ae aa ia si 
located in the dorsal one-half to one-third of the choroid
cells and Miller's cells, and the C-wave is generated by the
and lies just under the choriocapillaris. Its function is to
PE cells++ (see Chapter 1, p.11).
reflect light back onto the photoreceptors, in order to
PE cells are hexagonal and are loosely adherent to the
photoreceptors. They have occluding junctions between
is best developed in nocturnal animals where it is located
them which act as the blood-retinal barrier for the outer
dorsally to receive light originating from the ground and
half of the retina against diffusion of substances or drugs
not the sky. Two forms of tapetum exist: a cellular form
from the very leaky underlying choriocapillaris4s. The PE
that is found in carnivores (14.6) and a fibrous form,
does not contain melanin granules over the tapetum or in
composed of collagenous fibers, found in ungulates
individuals with an albinoid fundus. The function of the
(14.9). The color varies between individuals and the
pigment is not certain but has been postulated to act as a
pigment in the tapetum varies with the species. The
scavenger for free radicals, minimize light reflection
fibrous tapetum is not pigmented; the color is due to the
between photoreceptors, and to absorb and convert light
refraction of light. The cat has a high concentration of
energy into heat6 One of the functions of the PE is to
riboflavin in the tapetum and the dog has a high
phagocytoze the shedding disks of the distal rod and
concentration of zinc cysteine. Many fish have a tapetum
cone outer segments. This serves to conserve vitamin A
with guanine as the pigment§2.
and polyunsaturated lipids. As a byproduct of this
process, lipofuscin accumulates in the PE. The disks of
the rods and cones are produced at the base of the outer
segment. Older ones are shed and phagocytozed at the
distal or scleral end, so that every 6 days there is a
14.9
turnover
of the entire average canine outer rod
is cyclic and requires a photoperiod. The period of most
intense shedding for the rods is at the beginning of the
a e si sauoo an o u u) ao o
beginning of the dark cycle (night or sleep)49.
The PE is important in collecting and storing vitamin A
from the blood for future use in the photoreceptors. It also
actively takes up taurine and fatty acids from the blood.
The degree of retinal vascularization between species
varies from abundant to absent. Retinal vessels are
autoregulated or unaffected by moderate changes in
perfusion pressure and have tight cellular junctions,
unlike the leaky uveal vasculature. The retinal vessels are
 part of the blood-retinal barrier for the inner half of the
retina. In general, when they are present, the retinal
vessels supply nutrition to the inner half of the retina.
holangiotic, in which the entire retinal surface receives a
direct blood supply (cat, dog, cow, sheep); merangiotic,
in which the vessels are localized to a region of the retina
(rabbit); paurangiotic, where the vessels are limited to the
immediate peripapillary region fhorse, guinea pig); and
anangiotic, in which retinal blood vessels are absent
(certain rodents, bat, armadillo, sloth, birds)50.
Choroid
 The choroid is the posterior portion of the vascular uveal
tract. It consists mainly of blood vessels, pigment and, in
some species, a tapetum {14.1, insert). The vascular beds
are supplied mainly by the short ciliary arteries that enter
around the optic nerve and end in the choriocapillaris
that lies just under the PE. The choriocapillaris supplies
14.9 Inner choroid and outer retina of a young horse. Large
nutrition by diffusion to the outer half of the retina. The
choroidal veins (1] lie under the fibrous tapetum (2] that is separated
capillaries are fenestrated and leaky but the diffusion of
from the outer retinal pigmented epithelium by the choriocapillaris
substances is obstructed by the tight junctions of the PE.
(3] and Bruch's mermbrane (4]. The pigmented epithelium (5] contains
The venous system is freely anastomotic and drains
very few pigment granules over the tapetum. (6: photoreceptor outer
anteriorly via the vortex veins and posteriorly around
segments; 7: photoreceptor inner segments; 8: external limiting 
the optic nerve to the orbital veins {see Chapter 11,
membrane; 9: outer nuclear layer; 10: outer plexiform layer: 11: inner
p.298, 11.2). Sensory nerves have been demonstrated in
nuclear layer] (x375.] From (Martin and Anderson, 198151.)]
the choroid1.
408
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
14.10
14.11
14.10 Future tapetal region in a 4-week-old puppy.
14.11 Immature fundus of a 6-7-week-old puppy with a blue-violet
colored tapetum and a small incompletely myelinated optic disk.
14.12
Normal canine fundus
The first task, once the technique of ophthalmoscopy is
mastered, is to recognize normal variations in the fundus.
This challenge of differentiating normal from abnormal
is greatest in the dog, where there is an infinite
variability. Even the experienced examiner will have
 difficulty in differentiating extremes in normal variation 
 from mild pathologic changes.
 For discussion purposes, the fundus will be divided
into the tapetum, optic disk, blood vessels, and
nontapetum.
 In the adult dog, the tapetum is a brightly colored
right scalene triangle, with the right angle at top and the
 most acute angle positioned nasallys3, Its function is to
collect light under dim illumination and reflect light back
to the retina, to stimulate it once again.
14.12 Adult canine fundus with a well developed tapetum. This is
The tapetum is part of the choroid {behind the retina)
a large breed of dog and the disk is within the tapetum and is well
and develops after birth. Thus adult coloration may not
myelinated, imparting a triangular shape and white color. Note the
be present until 10-12 weeks of age. In the 4-5-week-old
dark spot in the center of the disk. This is the physiologic pit.
10l00 Ae1a 01 ysium01q 8 5l uoba1 [eiade1 au1 4ddnd
(14.10), which changes to blue and violet colors at about
6-7 weeks (14.11), becoming adult in color by 3 months
14.13
in most puppies (14.12). The absence of a visible
tapetum can be a normal variation and is most common
in animals with blue irides or albinoid eyes. Albinoid
Conversely, pigment in the PE and/or hypoplasia of the
tapetum may obscure the view of the tapetum (14.14).
An inherited tapetal anomaly in Beagles is characterized
by a diffuse reddish-brown fundus without an observa ble
tapetum (see Tapetal dysplasia, p.422 )54.
The tapetal coloration varies a great deal, with no
correlation to coat color. The tapetum may have
 predominant hues of blue, green, yellow, or orange. The 
ta petum is thickest in the center. The mosaic aspect of the 
 tapetum increases with age and varies from very uniform
 and homogeneous in color (14.15) to being composed of
individual beads or clumps of beads (14.16). The size of
the tapetum varies with the size of the dog: larger dogs
14.13 Normal canine albinotic fundus with an absence of tapetum
 have a relatively larger tapetum, with the optic disk being
and pigment. The dense choriocapillaris imparts the diffuse redness,
within the tapetum (14.12), whereas smaller dogs have a
although the white sclera can be observed in small patches. This dog
small tapetum, usually with the disk outside the
will have blue irides.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
409
14.14
14.15
14.14 Canine fundus with a poorly developed tapetum represented
14.15 Canine fundus with a very homogeneous yellow tapetum.
by a few islands of color, but the overall area is gray or pigmented.
The optic disk has very little myelination and is 'cat like.
This is common in breeds such as the Labrador Retriever.
14.16
tapetums3. The junction of the tapetal-nontapetal border 
is sharp in shorthaired dogs, whereas longhaired dogs
have a transitional zone {14.12).
Changes in tapetal reflectivity, whether dull or
hyperreflective, generally indicate pathology, although
minor variations of normal may be seen. Conus is an
area of hyperreflectivity around part or all of the optic
disk and is considered normal. Hyperreflectivity of the
tapetum is usually attributed to thinning of the overlying
retina, the latter acting as a neutral density filter. Electron
microscopy is probably necessary to study the disruption
and alteration of the tapetal rodlets with subtle reflective
changes of the tapetum.
The optic disk or papilla in the dog is unique, in that it
is routinely myelinated. In most species, myelination stops
 at the lamina cribrosa or the sclera. The disk of the dog has
14.16 Canine fundus with a tapetum that is very granular, composed
great variations in shape, elevation, and color due to the
of individual yellow, green, and orange beads.
amount of myelination in individual animals. Extreme
amounts of myelin may occur in large breed dogs and can
produce marked elevation of the entire disk or the rim of
the disk. In these individuals it is difficult to detect mild
papilledema. The added myelin may also give the disk an
14.17
overlying white appearance, instead of a pinkish-white
color (14.17). Myelin tends to follow the larger blood
vessels on the disk (usually 3-4) and this may impart a
 triangular shape to the disk. Occasionally, myelin does 
extend more peripherally into the retina (medullated nerve
fibers). The disk is 1.5-2 mm in diameter and is located
ventrotemporally to the anatomic axis.
A small dark spot, the physiologic pit, can be very
prominent in the center of some disks and this is where
the embryonic hyaloid artery has atrophied {14.12,
14.14). Some optic nerves are normally quite cupped and
this variation may be difficult to differentiate from
glaucomatous cupping or minor degrees of congenital
coloboma of the disk.
The retinal vessels in domestic animals are cilioretinal
{originate from short posterior ciliary or choroidal
arteries) in origin and a central retinal artery is absent. The
14.17 Canine ocular fundus with a well myelinated optic disk.
largest vessels are the primary veins (2-5 in number). Most
The disk is triangular and elevated around the rim from the myelin
dogs have 3-4 primary veins and these have an
and is more depressed in the center.
410
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
14.18
14.19
14.18 Canine ocular fundus. Note the optic disk is in the
14.19 Canine fundus that has a lightly pigmented nontapetum that
nontapetum, the presence of two primary veins dorsally, and the
is typical for individuals with liver coat colors.
dark nontapetum that is lighter in a zone adjacent to the disk.
anastomotic arc or a circle in the center of the disk {14.13,
14.20
14.17, 14.18). The arc often appears to pulsate when
under observation but the pulsations do not correlate with
the cardiac pulse. The pulsations are caused by the
blanching of the vessels when increased pressure is placed
on the globe during retraction of the eye into the orbit.
Secondary veins are the same size as the arteries but
can be differentiated by their origin from the anastomotic
Ansn aue inql aqunu ul oz oi dn aue saaie aui 
10-12), are small, and originate from the edge of the
optic nerve (not the papilla, due to the myelin). The
arteries are not paired with a vein as in some species. The
tortuosity of the vessels, their size, and number varies
The retinal capillaries extend to the interface of the
outer plexiform layer and the inner nuclear layers. The
choroidal vessels are not visualized in most dogs.
However, in eyes with a blue iris the pigment in the PE is
14.20 Wide-angle photograph of a feline fundus. Note the disk
decreased or absent and the tapetum may be absent,
is within the tapetum, the avascular macular area dorsotemporal
resulting in complete or partial visualization of the
to the disk, and the pairing of arteries and veins. (Courtesy of
choroidal vessels (tigroid fundus) (14.13).
Dr. A. MacMillan, San Diago, CA.]
The ventral fundus has been called the tapetum
nigrum but this is considered an incorrect term in that it
implies the presence of a tapetum. In the ventral fundus,
in turn obscures visualization of the choroid and sclera.
Normal feline fundus
Usually, the ophthalmoscope light will need to be
The feline fundus has much fewer variables than the
brighter to see any detail in this region. The peripapillary
canine fundus. The tapetum is usually present, except in
region is often lighter and may have pigment disruption
blue-eyed, white-furred cats {14.20, 14.21). The blue-
eyed Siamese has a tapetum but the nontapetal region is
homogeneous darker nontapetum (14.18). Dogs with a
 albinotic. The tapetum in the cat is large, with the optic
liver or reddish-tan coat color often have less pigment in
disk always well within it {14.20). The color of the
the nontapetum. This, combined with the pattern of the
tapetum can vary from yellow to blue to blue-green and
underlying choroidal vessels, imparts an orange color to
 does not have as much beadiness or mosaic appearance 
the nontapetum (14.19).
as is present in some dogs. The myelination of the cat
optic nerve stops at the lamina cribrosa and thus the
The variations in the normal dog fundus are quite
optic disk does not have the variability in size, shape, and
remarkable and often make it difficult to determine
 elevation that is present in dogs.
 early pathology of the fundus. Despite the extreme 
Occasionally, medullation of the nerve fiber layer
variation, owners do not seem to detect any
adjacent to the disk will be observed (14.22). The optic
functional change in vision, i.e. owners of atapetal
nerve is almost always within the tapetum, is round, and
dogs do not note nyctalopia in their dogs.
is peach-colored to dark in color, and is slightly cupped
ViTrEous And OcuLar FunduS
411
14.21 Normal
14.21
14.22
tigroid atapetal
fundus of a
white-furred,
blue-eyed cat.
The sclera is
visible between
the choroidal 
veins. Note the
 small circular
disk with the
retinal blood
vessels at the
 periphery of 
the disk.
14.22 Medullation of the nerve fiber layer adjacent to the disk
of a cat. This produces a blurred region that may be erroneously
interpreted as inflamma tion.
14.23
14.24
14.23 Normal equine fundus. Note the blue-green tapetum, which is
14.24 Normal equine fundus from a Palomino. Note the yellow
the most common color, and the oval disk in the nontapetum with
tapetum and the retinal blood vessels are more easily visualized
fine barely visible blood vessels.
because the fundus is not as dark. A narrow white rim is present
above the optic disk.
Normal equine fundus
below the level of the retina. Fine focusing on the surface
The horse has a paurangiotic fundus, with retinal vessels
will often demonstrate a grid-like pattern that is the
 limited to the peripapillary region. The horse has about
exposed lamina cribrosa. All blood vessels originate from
50 vessels radiating in a kidney-shaped pattern 15 mm
the circumference of the disk. There are usually three
horizontally and 10 mm vertically (1-2 disk diameters).
pairs of primary arteries and veins, with one
pair
The arteries cannot be distinguished from veins and the
dorsonasally 
that curves temporally,
one
pair
vessels traverse only in the nerve fiber layer. The vessels
ventronasally, and one pair ventrotemporally. A
all originate from just within the optic disk border. The
relatively
 avascular  area is 
　present
3-4
mm
'uniadeiuou aui u paieool Aeoidk si ysip odo
dorsotemporally from the optic disk, which represents
ventrolateral to the posterior pole. The disk is
the area centralis or macula {14.20). Smaller vessels are
nonmyelinated, pinkish-white in color, oval with the long
present between the major pairs of vessels that supply the
axis horizontal, and cupped (14.23, 14.24). The disk
peripapillary region7, 8
dimensions are 5-7 mm horizontally and 3.5-5 mm
The nontapetum is dark, except in blue-eyed cats
vertically. Foals have a more circular disk. Often a faint
where it lacks pigment, thus exposing the choroidal
grid can be seen in the center, which is the lamina
vasculature (tigroid fundus). All Siamese cats, while
cribrosa. A narrow nonpigmented zone frequently partly
possessing a tapetum, have a tigroid nontapetum.
surrounds the optic disk (14.24).
412
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
14.25
14.26
14.25 Normal equine fundus of a Palomino that has a slash of
14.26 Normal equine fundus with a hypoplastic violet tapetum
hypoplastic pigmentation of the retinal pigmented epithelium 
allowing visualization of underlying choroidal vasculature. Retinal
and choroid that exposes the choroidal vasculature.
vessels are easily seen against this background.
14.27
m uadei uaaa-ana e aay Aeoidki sasio
 distinct fine dark spots (stars of Winslow) but the color
may be more yellow to red {14.23, 14.24). The most
common fundus variable is related to color dilute
animals, that may lack part or all of a tapetum and have
varying_degrees of choroidal vasculature exposed (14.25,
14.26)39, 60. While the optic disk is normally cupped and
nonmyelinated, myelination occurs occasionally as a
minor anomaly {14.27). A distinct ophthalmoscopically
visible macula is not present but a linear horizontal band
above the disk, that parallels the lower edge of the
tapetum, is said to represent the maculas0. A second
macula temporal to the first may also exist. The
nontapetum is typically homogeneous dark brown,
except in color dilute animals. The nontapetal
peripapillary region is the frequent location for
multifocal depigmented lesions.
14.27 Myelination of the optic nerve of a horse. The condition was
bilateral and it was found on a soundness examination where it may
Normal bovine and ovine fundus
have created a question for the examiner.
The bovine optic disk is oval with the long axis
horizontal, and it is located in the nontapetum, with the
dorsal aspect just touching the tapetum. The average size
is 4.2 mm x 3.5 mm; however, in bulls the disk may be
14.28
more circular The optic disk is typically nonmyelinated,
resulting in a dark to pinkish-white color (14.2). The
 disk is cupped and the veins originate from near the
accompanied by arterioles. The dorsal pair of arteries
and veins are usually intertwined. The arterioles
originate more peripherally on the disk. Fifteen to
 20 smaller vessels originate from the disk and disappear
1-2 disk diameters away from the disk. The larger vessels
are epiretinal (on the surface) rather than running in the
nerve fiber layer. A gray spot in the center of the disk
 Bergmeister's papilla. In calves, the hyaloid vessel usually
has blood present. Partial myelination of the optic disk
may 0ccasionally be observed (14.28)61.
pue uaaa Yue Aensn ae inq A1a sooo [eade
 stippled, with dark spots or stars of Winslow. Distinct
14.28 Myelination of the optic disk of a cow producing a dramatic
 pigment islands are frequently present in the nasal tapetal
departure from the normal dark, cupped disk. Compare to 14.2.
region and are bilateral. Albino cattle, like other species
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
413
14.29
14.30
14.29 Normal ovine fundus with a kidney-shaped disk and
am aui aion hen buno e u! punoy euooion leidhl oe'tl
Bergmeister's papilla.
hyaloid artery remnant. The coloboma is cupped, as evidenced 
by the deviation of the vessel passing over the center.
with albinoid eyes, variably have a tapetum and the
14.31
nontapetum is tigroid with the choroidal vasculature
visible against the sclera 62.
The ovine fundus is similar to the cow but the disk is
kidney-shaped (14.29) with a hilus or indention on the
ventral surface.
DISEASES OF THE RETINA AND CHOROID
CONGENITAL DISEASES
Coloboma
Introduction/etiology
Coloboma is a cup or pit-like lesion that is congenital
and nonprogressive. Unless extreme, colobomas are not
accompanied by an appreciable loss of vision. They are
classified as typical if located ventronasal on or from the
disk, since they arise from incomplete closure of the optic
14.31 Intercalary staphyloma and coloboma in the far periphery of the
fissure {cleft in the optic cup where the hyaloid
fundus in an Australian Shepherd Dog. This is not the optic disk but a
vasculature gains entry into the fetal eye) {14.30), and
cupped lesion in the far periphery. Note the relative lack of choroidal
 are considered atypical if located elsewhere. Colobomas
vasculature and cilioretinal vessels emerging from the coloboma.
frequently involve the optic disk or the immediate region
 around the disk but may be located in the peripheral
fundus (14.31).
14.32
Coloboma manifests as a sharply circumscribed,
usually pale, depigmented area with reduced or
 anomalous vasculature and is often cupped. Examples of
inherited colobomatous defects are found in albino
Herefords, Collie eye anomaly, Australian Shepherd 
Dogs (14.31), Basenjis, and Charolais cattle62-65
 In the cat, multiple ocular coloboma syndrome (MOC)
has been described in snow leopards and the domestic
choroidal colobomas, scleral ectasia, retinal dysplasia, and
tapetal hypoplasia {14.32). Entire litters will be affected,
with variable degrees of anomalies, but the cause is
unknown, although in utero viral infection is suspected.
In Charolais cattle, the colobomas are inherited as a
dominant trait, with complete penetrance in bulls and
incomplete penetrance in cows (14.30)65. Colobomas are
also observed as a sporadic syndrome, without evidence
14.32 Posterior pole coloboma in a kitten with multiple ocular
 Of genetic transmission68
coloboma.
414
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
Posterior colobomas involving the optic nerve and
dysplasia but due to the lack of pathologic features
peridisk region have been observed sporadically in the
common to retinal dysplasia and confusion of the term
horse69. Colobomas have been observed in the foal
with retinal dysplasia, t
this term  was discontinued.
{14.33) with dermoids and malformed third eyelids. No
Chorioretinal hypoplasia is a variably-sized pale region
therapy is available except genetic counselling.
located temporai to the disk. The pale area may be
separated or confluent with the disk. It is a region of
Collie eye anomaly
attenuated pigment in the choroid and retina, with a
Introduction/etiology
thinned hypoplastic choroid and tapetum. The choroidal
Collie eye anomaly {CEA) is a congenital, nonprogressive,
vasculature in this white area is decreased in density
(14.34). Chorioretinal hypoplasia is essentially a static
common and widespread geographically in the Collie
lesion, with the exception of the 4-S-week-old puppy. In
breed, and it is also found less frequently in the Shetland
the very young puppy, very mild degrees of chorioretinal
Sheepdog, Australian Shepherd Dog and, perhaps, the
hypoplasia can be observed as small breaks in the
German Shepherd Dog71-73. The incidence in Collies has
pigmentation temporal to the disk. By 6-8 weeks these
au1 u1 saa1ns u1 1aya1y 1o %08 aq 01 pauodai aag
become pigmented and appear normal. These puppies
US74,75,41% inNorway76,13% in Austria77, and 32% in
are significant in that they later breed as affected
 Switzerland?8 The incidence in the Shetland Sheepdog is
{homozygous)  individuals. Breeders refer to  this
much less in the US but was 48% in one small series in the
condition as 'go normals. In the Blue Merle Collie with
Netherlands72. In the Collie, the condition has been
a blue iris, the fundus is albinotic and mild to moderate
considered due to a simple recessive gene without any
chorioretinal hypoplasia is difficult or impossible to
relationship to sex or coat color79. Wallin-Hakanson
recognize with confidence. One study found that when
examining puppies, all puppies with colobomas had
postulated a polygenetic trait. The authors additionally
chorioretinal hypoplasia but in older dogs 11 of 66
 noted that mating of parents with colobomas resulted in
(17%) had colobomas without chorioretinal hypoplasia.
smaller litter size.
This was thought to represent individuals who
pigmented with age or the *go normal population76,
 Clinical signs
 Dogs that manifest with only chorioretinal hypoplasia
CEA lesions are often not symmetrical between eyes.
 have no visual disturbance and willfunction well as a pet
Tortuous retinal vasculature is considered the mildest
but they should not be used for breeding. Affected dogs,
sign but, because of normal variation between individual
no matter how mild, are of course genetically undesira ble
animals, the clinician is often reluctant to call these
but most breeders use mildly affected dogs rather than
animals affected. Breeding trials indicate that these
animals are homozygously affected and thus should not
mildly affected offspring but others will produce litters
be used for breeding?
with the entire range of lesions for CEA. Wallin-
Chorioretinal hypoplasia appears to be the basic
lesion and, therefore, the most common lesion of CEA.
chorioretinal  hypoplasia  increases the incidence of
The original terminology for this lesion was chorioretinal
chorioretinal hypoplasia from 54% to 68%. However,
14.33
14.34
14.33 A 3-month-old Quarter horse that has bilateral coloboma and
14.34 Collie eye anomaly in a 6-week-old puppy with moderate
optic nerve atrophy. The coloboma involves the disk and peridisk
chorioretinal hypoplasia temporal to the disk and a small typical
region and is cupped and avascular. The animal is blind.
coloboma under the disk. Note the lack of pigment, hypoplastic
 choroidal vasculature, and tortuous retinal vessels.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
415
the prevalence of dogs with colobomas {8%) is not
located beside the disk, or involve the entire peripapillary
affected and thus is not compatible with a simple
region, resulting in the disk being positioned at the
recessive gene for the entire CEA. The author has noted
bottom of a large staphyloma (14.37, 14.38). Most
that certain matings breed true whereas others do not,
 colobomas are very evident on examination but some are
with mildly affected animals begetting the gamut of
 masked by glial tissue. Despite the frequent dramatic
lesions from mild to severe.
 appearance, little or no visual deficits are noted. The disk 
Pits, cups, or colobomas are all terms used to describe
is often misshaped and tilted. The vast majority of
the same phenomenon (14.35, 14.36). Other terms used
Collies with these colobomas also have chorioretinal
with severe manifestations of coloboma involvement are
hypoplasia but not the reverse. In breeds such as the
posterior scleral ectasia and posterior staphyloma. These
Shetland  Sheepdog and 
 German Shepherd Dog,
colobomas are usually classified as atypical colobomas in
colobomas may be observed without chorioretinal
that they are not limited to the ventronasal region of the
hypoplasia. About one-third of affected Collies in early
 optic disk or peripapillary region82. The colobomas may
surveys had colobomas but this has decreased due to
affect any portion of the disk or the entire disk, may be
 selective breeding74, 75, 83.
14.35
14.36
14.35 Collie eye anomaly with retinal vascular tortuosity.
14.36 Collie eye anomaly with vascular tortuosity, chorioretinal
chorioretinal hypoplasia adjacent to the disk, and an oval pit or
hypoplasia, and a coloboma that involves the entire nerve head.
 coloboma in the disk. The pit is a different color, has no vasculature,
Note the vessels originating from the edge of the anomalous disk.
 and has a vertical ridge.
14.37
14.38
14.37 Collie eye anomaly with a large posterior scleral ectasia
14.38 Histopathology of a Collie eye with a retinal detachment
involving not only the optic disk but the peridisk region as well.
and a large optic nerve coloboma/posterior scleral ectasia such
as in 14.37.
416
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
 Retinal detachment occurs in 4-5% of affected eyes7s, 83
Ancillary findings found in Collie puppies unrelated
It may start as focal bullous detachment adjacent to a
to CEA are: opacities at the tips of the posterior lens
coloboma (14.39) but most are complete detachments, with
sutures, band opacities on the cornea, and vermiform
dialysis or large tears at the periphery (14.40). Detachment
folds in the retina, all of which disappear with age.
is present in most cases in the 6-week-old puppy and may
Vermiform folds {14.41) are curvilinear lines in the
 represent retinal nonattachment. Bullous detachment may
puppy retina, which represent folds that subsequently
 progress to complete detachment or actually regresses over
flatten out as the eye grows.
a matter of months. Bullous detachment is associated with
holes in the retina that allows fluid vitreous to gain access to
CEA is still very prevalent in the breed due to the
the subretinal space84. CEA is asymptomatic in most
continued breeding from dogs with chorioretinal
instances, unless retinal detachments are present, and this is
hypoplasia. However, it is difficult to fault breding.
undoubtedly why the gene became so disseminated through
from mildly affected dogs when the vast majority of
the Collie population.
the gene pool for the breed would be culled for a
Vitreal or anterior chamber hemorrhage may occur
condition that only produces visual complaints or
when the retina detaches. Vascular anomalies may also
blindness in about 4-s% of affected animals.
contribute to intraocular hemorrhage in some families of
dogs. Ocular hemorrhage is not considered a basic part
Diagnosis
of the disease, rather a result of it.
The preferred age of examination for CEA is 6-8 weeks
of age, because of the eye size. Puppies may be examined
as early as 4-s weeks of age to detect mild cases of
Aue si auaut j inq i sjeuou os, eisejdoday leuaoouo
 doubt they should be examined again later.
14.39
Therapy
 Therapy is not usually necessary except to cull affected
 animals from breeding programs. Mildly affected dogs
with chorioretinal hypoplasia are bred by most breeders.
Most dogs with mild to moderate colobomas will make
 acceptable pets with little risk of later vision problems.
 Focal posterior bullous detachments associated with
colobomas
havé
been  successfully treated
1 by
photocoagulation?s, Occasional attempts at retinal
u ae inq ggedai uaq sa Aiaans s
performed routinely. Most cases presented in the
 advanced stages of detachment are not good candidates
for surgery.
14.39 Collie eye anomaly with a optic nerve coloboma and a bullous
detachment adjacent to the disk. The detachment is recognized by
the slightly blurred background from subretinal fluid.
14.40
14.41
14.40 Collie puppy with a complete retinal detachment recognized
14.41 Vermiform folds or retinal folds in a Collie puppy.
by the presence of retinal blood vessels in focus through the pupil.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
417
Peripheral albinotic spots
Defining a clinical syndrome with a pathologic term
Peripheral congenital white spots in the fundus may be
that has such diverse connotations to the eye has
created a great deal of confusion among veterinarians
with blue irides?9. Anomalous cilioretinal vessels may be
and breeders regarding the prognosis, significance,
associated with the anomaly and, when present, help
cause, and amount of overlap between conditions.
differentiate the lesions from postinflammatory scars.
The white spots may be multiple and are usually not
Although retinal dysplasia is usually considered a
more than a disk diameter in size. The choroidal
 static disease, small focal folds of dysplastic retina may
Ou aaey siods aui 'eaue aui ul paienuane si aunienosa
fatten out and become less evident with age or
known significance.
degeneration, and gliosis of the dysplastic areas may
occur with time?1, making them larger and more visible.
Retinal dysplasia
While considered congenital and thus visible in young
Introduction/etiology
 puppies, some forms of presumed retinal dysplasia have
Retinal 
dysplasia
is a congenital
or neonatal
not been observed until after 10 weeks of age*2. The
malformation that is characterized on histopathologic
nature of the lesions was not documented but they were
examination by rosettes, formed of tubules of primitive
characteristic of what most examiners have assumed to
photoreceptors cut on cross-section (14.42)90. The
be retinal dysplasia.
rosettes may be classified according to the number of cell
Retinal dysplasia has been described in the Rocky
layers from one to three. Three-layered rosettes are
Mountain horse with anterior segment dysgenesis
basically the normal retina which is thrown into a fold.
{ASD)93
3 (see Chapter 6, p.113) and in kittens with
The two- and single-layered
 rosettes represent
DO Jo ano aui inq yaua si sasou u asy 'go
maldevelopment of a more 
 primitive retina. Retinal
in cats is unknown.
dysplasia is a
pathologic
diagnosis but, through
Retinal dysplasia may be due to a variety of in utero
correlation with the clinical appearance and known
insults that result in hyperplastic extension of the
syndromes in certain breeds, it is often used as a clinical
retina away from the retinal pigmented epithelium
diagnosis. Retinal dysplasia is a manifestation of the
{RPE), retinal nonattachment, defective RPE, or
retina's limited ability to respond to injury at a critical
necrosis of developing retina94. The RPE is thought to
 stage of development and may result from a variety
of
play a critical role in retinal development and loss of
injuries (see Table 14.1). Retinal dysplasia may range in
contact or damage to the RPE results in retinal
severity from mild, with focal maldevelopments, 
to
dysplasia. In wtero insults that have resulted in retinal
severe associated with multiple ocular anomalies and
 dysplasia are listed in Table 14.1.
retinal detachment. Retinal dysplasia is likely to be found
with any severe ocular anomaly and is often the least
significant lesion.
14.42
 Table 14.1 in utero insults known to cause retinal
dysplasia
Trauma
Viral infection: panleukopenia in the cat, BVD in cattle,
 blue tongue virus in sheep, parvovirus and herpesvirus
infection in the dog
Radiation
 Nutrition: vitamin A deficiency
 Drug toxicity: antimitotic drugs
Inherited syndromes
14.42 Retinal rosettes on histopathologic examination of a retinal
deta chment (H&tE).
418
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Table 14.2 Inherited retinal dysplasia
14.43
Breed
Type of
Mode of
dysplasia
inheritance
Australian
Generalized 
Recessive
 Shepherd Dog 
Akita
Multifocalf
Recessive
microphthalmos
American
Multifocal
Recessive
 Cocker Spaniel
Beagle
Multifocal
?
 Bedlington
Generalized
Recessive
Terrier
 Cavalier King
Circinate and
？
 Charles Spaniel
multifocal
14.43 Geographic retinal dysplasia in a young Labrador Retriever.
Doberman
 The lesion is focal and located at 12 o'clock above the disk. A gray
Generalized
Recessive
 Pinscher
lesion with a small orange and pigment spot represents the lesion.
Labrador
Focal
Incomplete 
 Retriever
dominant
14.44
 Old English
Multifocalf
?Recessive
Sheepdog
microphthalmos
Rottweiler
Multifocal
？
Saint Bernard
Generalized
？
Sea lyham
Genera lized
Recessive
Terrier
 Springer Spaniel
Focal
Recessive
Yorkshire Terrier
Generalized 
Recessive
14.44 Geographic retinal dysplasia in an adult Labrador Retriever.
The location of the lesion is similar to 14.43, but the lesion is more
 sharply demarcated and mimics a postinflammatory scar.
Inherited retinal dysplasia
 Focal or geographic retinal dysplasia: overlaps with
The terminology used in retinal dysplasia is confusing when
generalized retinal dysplasia, in that some
attempts are made to correlate findings with the prognosis
individuals develop retinal detachment and have
for sight. For purposes of prognosis, retinal dysplasia will
multiple ocular anomalies. Because of the
be discussed in three categories of severity. However,
possibility of detachments, the author does not feel
overlaps occur between categories in the eyes of individuals
it should be grouped with the milder condition of
and between individuals of the same breed (Table 14.2).
multifocal retinal dysplasia. Geographic retinal
Further evidence that inherited retinal dysplasias have
fundamental differences in embryonic origin is illustrated in
the Labrador Retriever and the English Springer
differences in RPE between diseases. Detailed examination
Spaniel.
of English Springer Spaniels has found no morphologic
changes in the RPE, whereas RPE morphologic changes are
The condition in the Labrador Retriever is quite complex
evident in the Australian Shepherd Dog91, 95
genetically and in its manifestations, Mild cases of
· Generalized retinal dysplasia: is associated with
geographic retina dysplasia in the Labrador Retriever
retinal nonattachment or detachment, vitreal
have focal hyperreflective perivascular lesions or focal
liquefaction and, usually, multiple ocular anomalies
lesions of irregular size, often with pigment clumping
including microphthalmos. It is inherited in many
(14.43, 14.44). The lesions are typically above and
breeds and species64,9%-106 Animals with this
adjacent to the disk. Dogs with focal lesions may have a
condition are usually unilaterally or bilaterally blind.
loss of central vision that manifests as an inability to see
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
419
14.45
14.46
14.45 Complete retinal detachment in a Labrador Retriever with
14.46 Labrador Retriever littermates with skeletal dysplasia.
retinal dysplasia. Note the retinal vessels are in focus, indicating 
Note the bo wed forelimbs.
forward placement.
14.47
14.47 Fundus of an English Springer Spaniel puppy with geographic
retinal dysplasia evidenced by aberrent coloration above the disk.
Retinal dysplasia is difficult to diagnose at this age, but possible.
nonmoving objects. Some dogs may develop a retinal
 skeletons have mild ocular lesions and homozygotes with
detachment up to 1-2 years of age {14.45). Skeletal
skeletal lesions have severe ocular lesions.
 dysplasia and severe ocular lesions may occur. Skeletal
The use of the term retinal dysplasia has perhaps given
dysplasia manifests with bowed short forelimbs with less
too much emphasis to the relationship with retinal
involvement of the hindlimbs, hip dysplasia, ununited
 detachment. Blair et al24, 2s found that the detachments are
anconeal  and 
 coronoid processes, and _ delayed
 due to giant peripheral circumferential tears or dialysis and
development of epiphysis (14.46). Animals with skeletal
are associated with vitreous syneresis and peripheral
dysplasia are more likely to have retinal detachments,
 proliferative vitreous changes that tear the retina. In the
corneal opacities, cataracts, and optic nerve atrophy. A
 author's experience the retinal dysplasia may not be the basic
litter may have both mild focal dysplasia and severe
lesion, as puppies with skeletal dysplasia and detachments
ocular anomalies with skeletal dysplasia.
often have little or no clinical or histopathologic evidence of
The problem of retinal dysplasia in Labrador Retrievers
retinal dysplasia, i.e. rosette formation.
in the US is unique to the field trial strains. The genetics
 Retinal dysplasia in the English Springer Spaniel
are more controversial, and have been variably reported to
usually manifests similarly to the moderately affected
be a recessive or dominant gene with incomplete
Labrador Retriever, i.e. focal perivascular or irregularly
shaped hyperreflective areas, dorsal and adjacent to the
that the condition is caused by a single gene that is
optic disk. The lesions are often asymmetrical in degree
recessive for skeletal dysplasia and incompletely dominant
 of involvement. The 6-week-old puppy has very subtle
for ocular lesions. In general, heterozygotes with normal
but observable lesions {14.47). Pigmentary clumping
420
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
may occur and retinal detachments may develop.
condition as similar to that in Labrador Retrievers with
Hyperreflectivity and pigment clumping occur with
skeletal dysplasia and retinal dysplasia. In a breeding
maturity as secondary atrophy occurs (14.48). Retinal
experiment, two littermates with unilateral detachment
 detachments are reported to occur in the first 6 months
 and skeletal dysplasia produced offspring with unilateral
of life1. Congenital cataracts and superficial band
detachment (at 4 months), focal cataracts, and prominent
keratopathies may be present, the latter resolving with
hyaloid arteries but no clinical or histopathologic
agello. The condition is inherited as an autosomal
evidence of retinal dysplasia. Conversely, Acland and
recessive traitll1.
Aguirrel13 bred from two Samoyeds with multifocal
 A condition in the Samoyed dog has been described,
dysplasia and produced a liter with skeletal dysplasia,
with unilateral or bilateral complete retinal detachment,
 normal skeletons, and multifocal dysplasia, and a puppy
modest multifocal cortical cataracts, and skeletal
with multifocal cataracts and persistent hyaloid artery.
dysplasial12. The cataracts are congenital, but the retinal
The conclusion was that dogs with multifocal dysplasia
detachments occur from 4-6 months of age due to
should be considered heterozygous carriers of the more
peripheral dialysis or tears. The fundus before detachment
has red-brown streaks in the tapetal region, converging to
condition. The condition is probably a simple recessive
the optic disk {14.49). Some authors ha ve categorized this
trait. This is an example where multifocal retinal
dysplasia may not be an innocuous condition.
 Circinate retinal dysplasia: is uniquely shaped and is
a supposed form of focal retinal dysplasia found in a
variety of breeds including the Labrador and Golden
14.48
Retriever, Cavalier King Charles Spaniel, and
Siberian Husky. The shape is circular or U-shaped,
with a depressed center and raised periphery (14.50),
and may have retinal folds adjacent to it. The
condition is usually unilateral and, in Retrievers,
may not necessarily be congenital, thus raising the
question whether it is actually dysplasia?2. The
author has observed circinate lesions of the Cavalier
King Charles Spaniel in S-6-week-old puppies and it
has also been diagnosed in 4-5-year-old adults that
have had up to three normal annual examinations by
other ophthalmologists. The location may be in
either the tapetum or nontapetum and is often in the
midperiphery. To date, retinal detachments have not
been associated with the condition and the
histopathology has not been reported. How it is
related to geographic retina dysplasia in the
La bra dor Retriever is unknown.
 and pigment clumping in the typical position for retinal dysplasia
in this breed.
14.49
14.50
14.49 Ocular fundus of a young Samoyed with skeletal dysplasia and
14.50 Circinate or geographic retinal dysplasia in a Cavalier King
Charles Spaniel (arrows]. The periphery of the lesion is elevated and 
breaks in the tapetum are not known, but they were the only lesions
displaces the retinal blood vessels, while the center is depressed.
before retinal detachment occurred at 4 months of age. No evidence
 of retinal cysplasia was found on histopathologic examination.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FuNDUS
421
· Multifocal retinal dysplasia: deserves a separate
Hypoplasia of the optic nerve[s)
clinical category from focal dysplasia, at least in some 
Introduction/etiology
breeds, in that it has not been documented to result
Hypolasia of the optic nerveis) is a nonprogressive
in retinal detachment or visual impairment. Perhaps a
condition, characterized by a reduced number of axons 
better term would be retinal folds rather than retinal
in the optic nerve and consequent reduced size. A
dysplasia. It has been described as an isolated
corresponding decrease in retinal ganglion cells is also
syndrome in the Beagle, American Cocker Spaniel
present122 123 It is usually described as hypoplasia or
(14.51),and Rottweilerl14-116, The condition may be
lack of development of the ganglion cells but it may
bilateral or, in milder cases, unilateral. In the Cocker
actually be congenital atrophy. Normally, many more
Spaniel, it is common with a 12-20% prevalence 
axons are found in the embryonic optic nerve than in the
 reported, and it is thought to be inherited as a
adult. In the maturation of the optic nerve, there is a
recessive tratl5,11 IntheBeagl, 3% of a colony
normal loss or atrophy of these supernumerary axons to
had dysplastic lesions, and while thought to be
the level of the adult statel24. In hypoplasia of the optic
nerve, it is theorized that this atrophy does not stop but
Crispin120 postulated a simple recessive trait for
is carried to an extremel2s. The histopathologic finding
multifocal retinal dysplasia for the Golden Retriever
in dogs of excess gliosis of the nerve suggests that
in the UK. Crispin et al. 121 found a prevalence of 3%.
 atrophy may play more of a role than hypoplasia126.
 Multifocal retinal dysplasia manifests with one or
The condition is observed sporadically in a variety of
many dot, linear, or linear branching streaks,
s h q aee eo posi ue se zispaq so
 anywhere in the fundus. Tapetal lesions are darker
thought to be inherited in the Miniature Poodlei28.
than the tapetum and may have a surrounding
Breeding of affected animals may be difficult. In the
hyperreflective border. In the nontapetum, lesions are
author's experience, repeat breedings of parents with
white (14.51, 14.52). The lesions usually become
fainter and disappear with time.
complicated by small litter size, interpretation is difficult.
Hypoplasia of the optic nerve may also occur with more
 Retinal dysplasia semantics and the genetic and
 generalized ocular anomalies, such as microphthalmos.
 clinical interplay of the various forms is confusing
In the cat, hypoplasia of the optic nerve may result
to the lay person as well as the professional.
from in utero or neonatal panleukopenia infection and
Diagnosis
Complete aplasia of the optic nerve has been described in
Diagnosis is made on the clinical signs in a known
the cati30. An accompanying reduction in coccygeal
affected breed. Some lesions of focal retinal dysplasia
vertebrae may occur as part of this condition.
mimic a postinflammatory chorioretinal scar.
Therapy
Genetic counseling is indicated in diffuse and focal forms
14.52
of retinal dysplasia. It is prudent to advise dog breeders
to avoid inbreeding dogs with multifocal dysplasia.
14.51
14.51 Multifocal retina dysplasia or folds in the nontapetum and 
14.52 Multifocal retinal dysplasia in a dog in which the lesions are
tapetum of a young adult American Cocker Spaniel. The lesions in
mainly dots with a few curvilinear streaks.
this dog are mainly curvilinear.
422
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
A condition termed optic nerve hypoplasia has been
Tapetal dysplasia
reported in the horse. However, the condition may
Introduction/etiology
represent a neonatal or congenital optic nerve atrophy,
An inherited trait has been observed in the Beagle and
since the disk is relatively normal in size and the retinal
other breeds, where the tapetum appears to be absent in
vasculature is losti31 Optic nerve hypoplasia has been
a pigmented fundus (14.54). This is often considered a
described in Shorthorn cattle with multiple ocular
normal variation but is more likely a pathologic trait.
anomalies of retinal dysplasia, 
cataract, retinal
Histologically, the tapetum is present and the overlying
detachment, microphthalmos, and hydrocephalus. The
RPE is nonpigmented. The tapetum has irregularly
 condition is thought to be genetic98.
 shaped cells and, ultrastructurally, the tapetal rodlets are
In women, the use of anticonvulsants such as
absent. Abnormally spaced inclusions are present in
 phenytoin has been implicated as causing optic nerve
place of the tapetal rodlets54. On chemical analysis the
hypoplasia. Veterinarians should therefore be on the alert
tapetum is lacking in both zinc and cysteinel33. Not only.
for drug-induced optic nerve hypoplasia in veterinary
 are the tapetal rodlets abnormal but the cells of the PE of
medicine132.
the iris, ciliary body, and retina lack pigment granules. In
addition, pigment granules are reduced in the stroma of
Clinical signs
the uveal34. The condition is thought to be due to a
Optic nerve hypoplasia may be unilateral or bilateral.
 simple recessive gene.
Blindness with dilated pupils is the presenting sign at 5-8
weeks of age if the condition is bilateral and severe. On
Clinical signs
ophthalmoscopy the optic disk(s) is very small and
 Dogs with tapetal dysplasia have an absence of tapetum
appears ‘cat like', ie. small, round, cupped,
 with a pigmented fundus but have no visual complaints.
nonmyelinated disk with the vessels at the periphery
(14.53). The retinal vasculature may be either normal or
ACQUIRED DISEASES
tortuous and either a hyperreflective or dark ring may
This group of retinal diseases may not always belong in
surround the disk. Unilaterally affected patients are often
the category of “acquired', since detailed studies have
detected later in life while incidentally looking at the
 shown that while a disease may manifest later in life it
fundus, or if the good eye has suffered a blinding disease
starts as dysplasia or maldevelopment.
or injury. When the condition is unilateral, the unaffected
(or less affected) eye can be observed for comparison.
Progressive retinal atrophy
Mild to moderate degrees of hypoplasia are difficult
Introduction/etiology
to diagnose because of the subjectivity and range of
 Progressive retinal atrophy (PRA) is an umbrella name
normals. If the diameter of the disk is half of normal, the 
variety
offamilial or hereditary retinal
area or volume to hold fibers is a quarter of normal. The
degenerations that have a similar clinical manifestation
term micropapilla is used for animals with small disks
but a diversity of origins. By definition, PRA is an
but normal vision. This is inherited in several breeds,
inherited, bilateral, progressive degeneration of the retina
most commonly in Belgium Terruvians and Irish Setters.
that eventually results in blindness. Generally, PRA is
initially a disease of the photoreceptors that eventually
Therapy
involves all of the retinal layers.
There is obviously no therapy but owners should be
advised to be cautious about breeding, because of the
 potential genetic implications.
14.53
14.54
14.53 Optic nerve hypoplasia in a 3-month-old Miniature Poodle
 presented for blindness. The optic nerve is small and 'cat like.
 results in an overall pigmentation to the fundus from choroidal
 pigment.
VITREOUS AND OCULAr FuNDUS
423
If the photoreceptors do not reach their adult
14.55
maturation before degenerating, the process is termed a
photoreceptor dysplasia (not to be confused with retinal
dysplasia). If the photoreceptors reach their adult
 maturation and then begin to degenerate, even at a young 
age, it is termed an abiotrophy or degeneration. Some
conditions initially involve either the rods, the cones, or
both the rods and cones. Therefore, the possibilities exist
for a rod dysplasia, cone dysplasia, rod-cone dysplasia,
rod degeneration, cone degeneration, or rod-cone
 degeneration. Additionally, initial dysplasia of one type
of photoreceptor may be paired with or initiate
subsequent degeneration of the opposite photoreceptor.
Without detailed studies, it cannot be anticipated which
form of degeneration/dysplasia is occurring in each breed
with PRA.
Clinical signs
14.55 Progressive retinal atrophy in an American Cocker Spaniel.
 Despite the dissimilarities in the origin of the PRA, the
The condition is moderately advanced with diffuse tapetal 
clinical signs are usually quite similar.
hyperreflectivity and moderate retinal vascular attenuation.
Externaf signs or those noted by the owner
●Night blindness is often the first sign but may not be
14.56
appreciated or given as the presenting complaint.
Night blindness progresses to day blindness over
months to years.
 Dilated pupils with increased eyeshine or tapetal
reflection.
 Cortical cataracts (appear late in the course). Most
dogs in the late stages of PRA develop cortical
cataracts and it is not known whether this is
associated with a separate gene or due to the
 liberation of a substance from the degenerating.
retina that is toxic to the lens. One such potential
substance is docosahexenoic acid liberated from the
photoreceptor outer segments. Docosahexenoic acid
can undergo auto-oxidation to malondialdehyde and
lipid radicals and has been demonstrated to produce
avoids discussion of the cause of the associated
14.56 Advanced progresive retinal atrophy in a 7-year-old
cataracts.
Miniature Poodle. Note the gray disk, bright tapetum with striation5,
· Usually a purebred dog.
 and loss of almost all retinal vasculature.
Ophthaimoscopic signs
The lesions of PRA are bilateral and symmetrical.
Lesions consist of increased reflectivity to the tapetum,
14.57
and many breeds may develop fan-shaped striations of
 altered tapetal refectivity that converge at the disk. The
hyperreflectivity is generally diffuse and is thought to be
due to retinal thinning. Concurrently, retinal blood
vessels decrease in number and size. PRA is not, however,
a vascular disease since the photoreceptor degeneration
occurs long before the vascular changes are evident
(14.55-14.57). The retinal vascular attenuation
is
thought to be associated with thinning of the retina that
brings the retinal vasculature in closer apposition to the
choroidal vasculature. This increases the oxygen tension
 in the retina, which is a stimulant to vasoconstriction136.
14.57 Peripheral tapetum of the ca5e in 14.56 with a low strobe
light to illustrate the fan-like striations toward the optic nerve.
424
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
Late in the course of PRA the nontapetum may develop
When affected (homozygous) dogs of different breeds
clumping of pigment or depigmentation (14.58, 14.59).
are bred, the offspring may be normal due to nonallelic
Generalized depigmentation is more common. Optic
 genes. This seems to occur with photoreceptor dysplasia
 atrophy is also a late sign, manifested by a whitish-gray
disk, scalloped borders, and disk cupping (14.59).
Photoreceptor degeneration (rod-cone degeneration,
prcd) is a mid- to late-onset disease and may occur on
Inheritance
 allelic genes since Miniature Poodle-American Cocker
 uaaa seu vod 'liap ul Painis saaa le u
 Spaniel, Miniature Poodle-English Cocker Spaniel, and
autosomal recessive trait except for a form in the
American Cocker-English Cocker Spaniel crosses will
Siberian Husky and Samoyed, where it is sex-linkedi37
manifest PRA142. In a breeding colony of Miniature
and in the Mastiff and Bull Mastiff where it is a
Poodles, when affected females are bred with
dominant trait138. Recessive traits pose a dilemma; if
heterozygous males, the number of affected offspring is
only one dog in 1,o00 is affected, then one dog in ten
50%. When affected males are bred with heterozygous
females, the number of affected pups is fewer than
Miniature/Toy Poodle, Irish Setter, and Labrador
expected {19%), possibly due to gamete selection. The
Retriever have an increased risk, while the Dachsund,
implication of this data is that when test breeding, the
Boxer, Beagle, German Shepherd Dog, and mixed breeds
results from one litter of seven pups {99% probability of
have a low risk. The male Irish Setter has 4.5 times the
normal subject if all pups are normal) are reliable when
risk as the femalel40. Because PRA is recessive in the vast
majority of breeds studied, it can be expected to be found
Canine Eye Registration Foundation (1985) reported
predominantly in purebreds.
 79 breeds affected by PRA (as diagnosed by veterinary
ophthalmologists) but the vast majority of these cases
have not been confirmed or studied in detailed.
14.58
Age of onset
The age of onset of clinical signs varies both with the breed
and within the breed. External influences may hasten the
 Course of PRA in individuals. The onset of clinical signs 
varies from 6 months to 10+ years (Table 14.3).
Rod-cone dysplasia (rcd, early-onset PRA)
The Irish Setter, Collie, Welsh Corgi, Miniature
Schnauzer and, perhaps, the Tibetan Terrier have rcd
conditions that have been studied in detail. The outer
 segments of the rods and cones fail to develop normally
and   subsequent  progressive 
degeneration of the
photoreceptors and the inner retina occurs. Degeneration
of the cones is slower than that of the rods. Despite these
similarities, the diseases are different biochemically and
 genetically in being nonallelic genes between breeds144.
14.58 Pigment clumping in a 'bone corpuscular pattern in a
Miniature Poodl with progressive retinal atrophy.
14.59
Table 14.3 Age of onset of ophthalmic signs of
progressive retinal atrophy
Early onset,
Late onset of
rapid progression
clinical signs
Akita
 5-18 months 
Golden
 American
Retriever
1-3 years
 Cocker Spaniel
2-3 years
Minia ture
Collie
 3-6 months
Poodle
3-5 years
Dachshund 
<1 year
Minia ture
Schnauzer
2-3 years
 English 
 Cocker Spaniel
Norwegian 
2-4 years
 Elkhound 
1-2 years
 Gordon Setter
3-6 months
Samoyed
3-5 years
Irish Setter
3-6 months
 Tibetan Terrier
1.5-2.5 years
Longhaired 
Dachsund 
<1 year
Toy Poodle
3-5 years
14.59 Advanced progressive retinal atrophy in an English Springer
Spaniel. The tapetum is hyperreflective, almost all the retinal vessels
Welsh Corgi
3-6 months
have disappeared, the nontapetum has lost pigment, and the optic 
disk is atrophied.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
425
The disease in the Collie, Welsh Corgi, and Irish Setter,
American and English  CockerS
Spaniel. While
but not in the Miniature Schnauzer, is characterized by
degeneration can be demonstrated in the Poodle
defects in retinal cyclic nucleotide metabolism that leads
electrophysiologically and ultrastructurally as early as 9
to elevations of cyclic guanosine monophosphate (GMP)
weeks of age, the progression is slow and clinical signs
in the retina. This is the result of a deficiency in the beta
 often do not manifest until >3 years of age. The Poodle
subunit of cyclic GMP phosphodiesterase {PDE) in Irish
with prcd was initially reported to have an altered ERG
Setters (rcd1j14s, 146 and the alpha subunit in the Welsh
at 9 weeks of age but this is unusual and 8-12 months is
Corgi (rcd3)147. The defect in PDE in not known in the
more commonly the age of earliest ERG changes. In the
Collie (rcd2). These biochemical changes can be
Miniature Poodle, the rod amplitudes are initially
demonstrated before the subsequent photoreceptor
reduced at a rate of about 7% per month, followed by
degeneration. In the Irish Setter, Welsh Corgi, and Collie
reduced cone amplitudes. Implicit times may be
the photoreceptor and subsequent retinal degeneration
prolonged if a focal light is applied but they are not
progresses rapidly over a few months, while in the
increased with a Ganzfeld (diffuse) illumination160 161
Miniature Schnauzer it progresses slowly over a few
In the Poodle, the earliest recognized abnormality is a
years148-1s1. While some Irish Setters may not develop
defect in renewal of photoreceptor outer segment
blindness until mid-lifel40, it usually is the same disease
membranes but the visual pigment in the photoreceptors
as rcd1 as shown by breeding1s2 and DNA studies146.
is normal162. The cones degenerate more slowly than the
The late-onset PRA in Irish Setters may also have other
rods and, consequently, night blindness is an early sign.
mutations than the rcd1 mutation, as one affected dog
Most of the prcd conditions investigated to date have an
tested did not have the rcd1 mutation.
 autosomal recessive trait and many involve allelic genes,
PRA in the Miniature Schnauzer has been designated
as indicated by affected offspring from affected parents
a rod-cone dysplasia but a PDE deficiency is not present.
of different breeds. No other systemic or local
While abnormal photoreceptor morphology can be
abnormalities (such as deafness) have been associated
observed at 4 weeks of age and the rod density decreased
by 50% by 19 weeks, the process slows down and
rod-cone degeneration, plasma levels of docosahexenoic
clinical signs are not evident until 1-2 years of age and
acid,  which 
is an important constituent of the
blindness is not evident until 4-6 years133
phospholipids of t
theouter
segments oft
the
photoreceptors, are reducedl67. To date, this has not
Rod dysplasia (rd] in the Norwegian Elkhound
been utilized or advocated as a screening test for affected
Rod dysplasia with subsequent cone degeneration has
or carrier animals.
been described in the Norwegian Elkhound. This is not a
In the Tibetan Terrier, congenital stationary night
disease of cyclic GMP, as observed in rod-cone dysplasia
blindness was subsequently shown to progress slowly to
in the Collie and Irish Setter. Despite being dysplasia, the
retinal degeneration. Most recently, it was demonstrated
progression  
of degeneration, is. relatively slow,
to be a meta bolic storage disease, with accumulation of
ceroid lipofuscin systemically and in various layers of the
be made as early as 6 weeks with meticulous ERG
retina168, 169. This syndrome is distinct from PRA in
techniques utilizing controls. The ERG utilizing a white
Tibetan Terriers which is widespread in Europe and is
light is diminished in rod dysplasia but is nonspecific,
characterized by a reduction of the B-wave by 10 months
while the diminished amplitude with red light and dark
of age, although patchy disorganization of the outer
ada ptation is specific1ss, is6.
segments of the rods and cones has been observed as
early as 9 weeks of age. It is thought to be degeneration
Early retinal degeneration in the Norwegian Elkhound
rather than dysplasia and the cyclic GMP levels are
A separate disease, early retinal degeneration {ERD), has
normal. Night blindness is usually present at 1 year and
been characterized in the Norwegian Elkhound. This
 progresses to blindness by 2-3 years of age170.
disease manifests clinically with night blindness at 6
 In the Akita, two ophthalmoscopic patterns of PRA
weeks of age and progresses to blindness at 6-12 months
are observed. Night blindness occurs from 1-3 years of
of age. The rod and cone outer segments develop
age and at this time a hyperreflective horizontal band,
abnormally, fail to develop mature synaptic terminals,
that originates from the area centralis and extends
and subsequently degenerate. The renewal process of the
outward, is observed in most dogs. This eventually
isagans Aew pue 'ayil-auoo Sueadde 'pewouqe si spom
involves the entire tapetum. A second pattern begins as
that the disk membranes are contiguous. The condition
peripheral tapetal  reflectivity, that progresses  to
differs from rod dysplasia in this breed morphologically,
generalized 
hyperreflectivityi71, 172
 Morphologic
electrophysiologically, and in the rate of degeneration.
changes are present in the retina at 11 weeks of age but
The ERG is characterized by failure of development of
 ERG changes may not be noted until 15 months of age.
the B-wave. In the young dog, the A-wave is normal but 
The condition is a rod-cone degeneration.
this slowly deteriorates with age. The lack of a B-wave
corresponds to the lack of development of the synaptic
Cone degeneration
photoreceptor terminals. This produces a predominantly
Hemeralopia or day blindness has been described in
detail in the Alaskan Malamute. In its classical form,
the condition is characterized by a profound blindness
Progressive rod-cone degeneration (prcd)
in daylight conditions but not in dim light. The PLRs
Rod-cone degeneration is the most common form of
and the 0cular fundus are normal173,174 The condition
PRA and is typically later in onset. It has been extensively
 develops in the young puppy and does not progress to
studied in the Miniature Poodle, Tibetan Terrier, and
the rods173, 174., The cones develop normally but the
426
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEAsE IN VeTeRiNARY MeDICINE
cone outer segments degenerate, leaving a pure rod
Genetic testing, if widely utilized by breeders, holds
retinai7s, 176. The condition is inherited as a simple
the promise of significantly affecting the prevalence
recessive trait177.
of PRA of the prcd (adult type) where screening.
 More recent reports of hemeralopia in Alaskan
ophthalmoscopic examinations have not succeeded.
Malamutes in Australia describe a more complex
condition that varies from mild to severe day
Therapy
blindness178. The fundus in the Australian dogs is
No therapy is available to arrest the progression of the
normal, similar to other Malamutes, and the ERG
 disease. The standard recommendation that affected dogs,
flicker is fused above 30 Hz. A condition similar to that
 littermates, or parents not be used for breeding is being
in Malamutes has been observed in the German
modified if genetic testing is available for the breed.
Shorthaired Pointer1 79.
Electroretinography confirms the cone defect by
Atypical PRA in the dog
demonstrating a flicker fusion with low intensity white
 Because of the diversity of breeds and diseases included
light at frequencies >25/second (normal is 45-80) and a
under PRA, it is not surprising to find conditions that do
reduced response to red light in early dark adaptation.
not fit the usual description of PRA.
White light single flash and blue light ERGs are
The Greyhound has retinal atrophy of unknown
normal148
genetics. It manifests in dogs as early as 12 months of
age, with decreased vision but no evidence of night
Diagnosis of PRA
blindness. It is atypical in the earlier stages because
 Ophthalmoscopic appear ance: PRA is characterized
Greyhound retinal atrophy is focal and is usually close
by bilateral, symmetrical, altered tapetal reflectivity
to the optic disk. Vascular attenuation is not a
 and vascular attenuation. Nongenetic forms of
prominent feature. With advanced disease, the fundus
diffuse retinal atrophy will usually be asymmetrical
is similar to classical PRA fundus descriptions.
in their presentation and may have focal or
Affected dogs may have equatorial cataracts and
multifocal scars with pigment clumping.
 corneal stromal opacities180
 History: night blindness progressing to day blindness
 Progressive retinal degeneration has been described in
the Borzoi that begins as a multifocal degeneration and
information unless specifically asked. If the dog is of
 progresses to a diffuse degeneration. It may be detected
a breed known to be affected and there is a history
as young as 6 months of age and blindness occurs from
 of affected relatives, genetic retinal degeneration may
3 years onward. On initial examination the lesions may
be suspected.
be confined to one eye but progress to bilateral
 Electroretinography: a bnormalities in ERG
involvement. The earliest lesions are multifocal
 amplitude and latency will occur much earlier than
alterations of tapetal coloration, usually at the peripheral
ophthalmoscopic changes but the ERG is not a.
temporal
tapetal-nontapetal
junction.
Pigment
viable screening technique for large numbers of dogs.
disruption is present in the nontapetal region and the
Early detection requires general anesthesia and
retinal blood vessels are normal until late in the course.
exacting techniques. Late in the course the ERG is
extinguished or very flat and can be readily detected
and Grahn182
were unable to demonstrate any
without anesthesia, utilizing computer averaging
progression of the peripheral pigmented lesions to a
techniques. An extinguished ERG is not specific for
general retinal degeneration in S5 Borzois over S years.
PRA since a variety of other severe retinal diseases
The lesions developed between 6-18 months of age and
will extinguish the ERG. Due to the common
were not noted to progress. Dominant and sex-linked
occurrence of cataracts late in the course, it is
modes of inheritance were ruled out.
important to perform ERGs before undertaking
 cataract surgery in purebred dogs.
Stationary night blindness
Genetic testing: for a limited group of dogs a genetic
Introduction/etiology
blood test is available to determine affected,
Night blindness that does not progress to day blindness
 normals, and carriers for PRA. Since this has
un apqeqoid si adoosoweuudo uo snpuny peuou e y
commercial appeal it will undoubtedly change. At
inherited condition in the Appaloosa horsel83 and the
the time of writing, a mutation-based blood test is
 available for the Irish Setter, Welsh Corgi, one form
ep ru ue i wp io uoee yp rpun
of PRA in the Miniature Schnauzer, sex-linked PRA
conditions is easily demonstrated. The condition has
in the Siberian Husky and Samoyed, and the
been demonstrated in a 1-month-old foal and was
dominant PRA in the Mastiffs. The Labrador
thought to be congenital but animals may not be noted
Retriever, Chesapeake Bay Retriever, Portuguese
to have a deficit until several months of age. Stationary
Water Dog, Australian Cattle Dog, and Toy and
night blindness is differentiated from early PRA with
Miniature Poodles have a linkage or marker blood
night blindness by the characteristic ERG and lack of
test that can be performed for genetic analysis (see
 progression to day blindness. An ERG in a horse and in
Chapter 15, p.471). The traditional method of test
a Collie was characterized by only having an A-wave,
breeding is very expensive and time consuming and
that increased on dark adaptation. Histologically, the
is not practical for late-onset forms.
retina in the horse was normal and this, combined with
the ERG, indicated that the site of the lesion was in the
transmission of the neural impulse from the
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FuNDUS
427
 photoreceptors to the bipolar cells186, 17. A reduction of
Spaniels and Nizzinis197. The latter two breeds show
the scotopic ERG B-wave may indicate a carrier state. In
the greatest decrease in vitamin E levels and commonly.
a case report on a Collie, the number of nuclei in the
also have accompanying neurologic signs 
of
inner nuclear layer was decreased, although the tissues
proprioceptive deficits, ataxia, and altered spinal
were poorly fixed for ultrastructural analysis187.
reflexes198. The biokinetics of vitamin E appear to be
 Briards have stationary night blindness but it may be
abnormal in that vitamin E absorption from an oral
more complex than is found in other breeds and
dose is near normal but the plasma levels decline much
species184. Affected dogs varied from having only night
faster after peaking197.
blindness, having night blindness with reduced day
vision, or animals that were completely blind.
The
Clinical signs
fundus was normal in affected dogs although the resting
Signs are usually bilateral and symmetrical but one eye
pupil diameters were increased over controls. Differences
may be more advanced. Early changes are brown clumps
in the ERG and ultrastructure indicate that the condition
of pigment in the macular and perimacular region. The
may be related to rcd or a lipid metabolic defect (see
 area of pigmentation increases with time, coalesces, and
Disorders of lipid metabolism, p.430). The ERG
is
then may fade late in the course of the disease {14.60).
characterized by a decreased B-wave as well as reduced
 The nontapetal region is usually normal.
flicker fusion, which indicates cone dysfunction184.
The tapetum develops mild increases in sheen between
Ultrastructurally, large lipid inclusions are found in the
the pigment clumps and the retinal vascular caliber
retinal PE at'S weeks of age that ！
 progress 
to
decreases but not to the extremes found in PRA. Central
photoreceptor degeneration with time188. Plasma lipid
vision is lost and this results in complaints of inability to
 abnormalities may also be noted in the Briardi89, 190.
see stationary objects. Visual loss is slow and variable.
The earlier the onset, the more rapid the loss of vision.
Clinical signs
 Dilated pupils may occur late in the course of the disease.
Animals with stationary night blindness are presented
with obvious night blindness when tested in dim light.
CPRA is rare today in North America and has
Typically, the history indicates problems since the animal
almost become an historical disease.
was young, with no progression to day blindness except
in some Briards. On ophthalmoscopy the fundus
is
Therapy
normal and the scotopic ERG has a relatively normal A-
In light of the link to vitamin E deficiency, supple-
wave but no B-wave.
mentation would be prudent.
 Retinal pigment epitheliopathy (central progressive
retinal atrophy [CPRA]]
Introduction/etiology
 Retinal pigment epitheliopathy is a rare disease in the US
today. Unlike PRA, which is a disease of the
photoreceptors, CPRA is a disease of the RPE and is
probably related to vitamin E deficiency. It is a disease of
the Briard, Labrador Retriever, Shetland Sheepdog,
14.60
English Cocker Spaniel, Border Collie, and Collie. It is
slowly progressive, causing central vision to be lost so
that stationary objects are not recognized. The condition
progresses so slowly that the animal may never become
completely blind.'The lipopigment from the RPE
migrates into the neurosensory retina, resulting in
the lipofuscin pigment in the neurosensory retina reflects
a failure of the PE to phagocytoze adequately the
 photoreceptor outer segmentsi92, In contrast to PRA,
cataracts are rarely associated with CPRA193.
In the Briard, a survey in England indicated that
about 30% of the population was affected and it was
postulated to be a simple recessive trait194. In other
breeds, the genetics are still not known but it has been
suggested to be a dominant trait with incomplete
similar to those of experimental and clinical vitamin E
deficiency on the canine retina (see Nutritional
retinopathies, p.430). The disease seems to have
decreased markedly both in the US and in Europe,
perhaps indicating an environmental or nutritional
14.60 Retinal pigment epitheliopathy or CPRA in a Labrador
Retriever. Note the multiple light brown accumulations in the
found in affected Briards and in affected Cocker
tapetal region. Mild vascular attenuation may be present.
428
O pHThAlMIC DiseAse In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
Multifocal retinopathy
and England. As in the dog, two conditions with different
Retinopathy.
 o  s
 ages of onset have been described. The Scandinavian cats
detachment has been described in the Great Pyrenees,
have visible lesions by 1.5-2 years of age, while the English
 group has a later onset at 6 years of age. Clinical signs are
condition does not produce visual complaints and develops 
 similar to the dog, ie. bilateral tapetal hyperreflectivity and
in the Great Pyrenees at approximately 13 weeks of age
vascular attenuation (see Taurine deficiency, p.430). The
and then slowly regresses. The lesions consist of focal
 process affects the peripheral fundus first and progresses to
detachment of the RPE with overlying serous detachment
the central retina when advanced. The disease in the older
of the neurosensory retina. The focal bullae vary in color
cat is primary photoreceptor degeneration with initially
from gray to tan/orange and are predominantly in the
severe disorganization of the outer segments of the rods
tapetal region (14.61, 14.62). Secondary focal retinal
and, later, of the cones217-22. In the Swedish colony, the
degeneration occurs with hypertrophy of the PE. The ERG
 defect was a simple recessive trait221.
is normal and the condition is inherited, probably as a
Instances of suspected inherited retinal atrophies have
 simple recessive trait199. The condition is thought to be a
been reported occasionally in other breeds. A suspected
focal defect in the RPE199.
rcd has been reported in the young Persian, in the DSH,
Inherited PRA in the cat
Abyssinian cats is rapid, with blindness ocurring by 6
Introduction/etiology
weeks to 4 months of age.
Inherited retinal degeneration in the cat appears to be
 Diffuse retinal degenerations are still observed in cats 
rather uncommon, except in the Abyssinian in Scandinavia
despite the improvement in taurine supplementation to
cat food. Patients are typically presented very late,
Siamese (12 years) or in DSHs at 8 years of age22s.
14.61
Whether this condition is a form of feline PRA is
unknown, but it is suggestive.
Clinical signs
The  ophthalmoscopic 
 signs
of
 inherited
retinal
 degeneration in the cat are detected in an advanced stage
with
bilateral,
symmetrical,
diffuse
tapetal
hyperreflectivity and with an almost complete loss of
retinal vasculature {14.63). In the Siamese and DSH, the
early lesions of PRA have not been described. In the
Abyssinian, gray mottling of the peripapillary region of the
fundus and the macular region is an early sign. The gray
 discoloration progresses and mixes with hyperreflectivity
of the tapetum. Retinal vascular attenuation begins in the
 periphery and progresses to complete loss of vessels. Late
in the course the nontapetum develops pigment clumping
 and depigmentation.
14.61 Multifocal subretinal bulla in a Coton de Tulears, noted on 
screening examination. Some lesions are tan while others are clear.
 The condition improved spontaneously over a year.
14.62
14.63
14.62 Multifocal bullous retinopathy in a young English Bulldog. A
14.63 Advanced bilateral retinal degeneration in an aged Siamese
lesion beside the disk is tan, while a lesion under the disk is clear.
that had normal taurine blood levels. Since dietary corrections may
have occurred, the normal blood levels are of unknown significance.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
429
Diagnosis
Disorders of lysosomal enzymes
The diagnosis of PRA in the cat is on the clinical signs of
 GM1- and GM2-gangliosidosis: has been described in
bilateral, diffuse, retinal degeneration, supplementing a
the cat, with ocular lesions similar to both lipid storage
history that is often incomplete. Inherited atrophies
diseases and mucopolysaccaridosis, in that two distinct
should
be differentiated from other causes such as
types of material accumulate. Ocular signs consist of a
nutritional, toxic, and glaucoma-induced retinal
diffuse haze to the cornea and focal gray spots in the 
degeneration.
retina, although vision is normal. Clear vacuoles
representing accumulations of GAGs are present in
Retinal degeneration associated with syste mic
fibroblasts, corneal endothelium, and lens epithelium,
metabolic disease
and lamellated bodies, representing glycolipids, are 
A variety of metabolic storage diseases have associated
present in the ganglion cells of the retina202, 203 Cats
histopathologic lesions in the retina but the animal may
with GM-gangliosidosis also have neurologic lesions
not manifest ophthalmoscopic signs. The neurologic
that develop near weaning. The neurologic signs are
signs are often so severe that they overshadow the
ataxia and tremors with hypermetria that progress in
ophthalmic lesions.
severity. Abdominal distention and an enlarged liver
may be present. Dogs with gangliosidosis have not
Disorders of amino acid metabolism
been reported to have corneal lesions.
Ornithinuria associated with a deficiency of ornithine
The mucopolysaccaridoses: are a group of recessively
aminotransferase has been described in the cat. The
inherited diseases that result from the defective
significant findings are limited to the eye and result in a
degradation of GAGs. Three different forms have
 diffuse retinal atrophy when observed late in the course.
been described in the cat and dog, based on the
The histopathologic changes are extensive neuroretinal
specific lysosomal enzyme deficiency.
and pigmented epithelial damage, with a variable
Mucopolysaccaridosis types I, VI, and Vll have been
decrease in the size of the choriocapilaris21 Progressive
described in the cat. All forms have skeletal
gyrate atrophy of the choriocapillaris is the typical
deformities and facial dysmorphia (shortening),
ophthalmoscopic finding in humans with ornithinuria.
ocular lesions consisting of a diffuse hazy cornea and
This manifests as scalloped white areas of sclera that are
retinal degeneration, and neurologic deficits.
visible when the choroid atrophies. The clinical
Metachromatic granules are present in leukocytes in
manifestations have been observed occasionally by the
author but whether they represent ornithinurea 
or
diagnosis of mucopolysaccaridosis is by a toluidine
choroidal vascular atrophy from other causes 
is
blue spot test on the urine. Mucopolysaccaridosis
unknown {14.64). The diagnosis is made by finding
types I and Vll have been described in the dog. Both
marked elevations of ornithine in the urine or plasma.
forms have corneal clouding and histopathologic
accumulation of inclusions in the RPE but only type
Vll has retinal degeneration208.
 Mannosidosis: is a recessively inherited condition of
defective brea kdown of mannose-rich glycoproteins.
The defect has been recorded in Persians and DSHs.
The cats exhibit retarded growth, tremors, ataxia,
corneal haze, lenticular vacuoles, and a horizontal
 gray retinal band that extends from either side of the
macula209.
 No clinically visible ocular lesions have been reported
with lipidoses in the dog and cat. Optic nerve lesions
14.64
may be extensive and blindness a clinical sign
 associated with severe neurologic deficits.
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis is a group of inherited
meta bolic diseases characterized by the accumulation of
lipopigments (predominantly ceroid) in neurons and
other tissues, including the retina. They are not
considered lysosomal storage diseases and the defects are
thought to be associated with lipid peroxidation, but the
biochemical defect has not been definitively demon-
strated210, 211. The disease has been studied in most detail
in the English Setter While reduced ERG amplitudes in
rod- and cone-mediated A- and B-waves and inclusions
were present in all the retinal layers, no ophthalmoscopic
lesions were reported211.
Other affected breeds are the Australian Blue Heeler,
14.64 Gyrate atrophy of the choroidal vasculature and diffuse retinal
Chihuahua, Border Collie, Saluki, Dachshund, Tibetan
atrophy in a Siamese. The cat was hyperthyroid and was noted to be
Terrier, Miniature Schnauzer, and Cocker Spanie|212-214.
blind after multiple bouts of ketamine anesthesia for diagnosis and 
Both the Tibetan Terrier and the Miniature Schnauzer
trea tment of the hyperthyroidism.
manifest retinal degeneration on ophthalmoscopy169, 213.
430
O pHThAlMIC DisEAse In VeterinArY MeDiCINE
Disorders of lipid metabolism
deficiency are: degeneration of the photoreceptors and
Progressive retinal degeneration in the Briard has been
tapetum, lack of development of the olfactory bulb,
paieioosse sl ieul adoang ul pue Sn aul ul paquosap
ca rdiomyopathy,
 reproductive
failure,
growth
with a defect in essential fatty acid metabolism or
retardation, platelet hyperaggregation, and altered
 absorption. The condition begins with night blindness
immune function232-237
at 6 months of age or earlier, at which time the ERG is
Although taurine is present in the brain as a
flat. Pendular nystagmus may be present. Initially,
 neurotransmitter, 
 neurologic signs have not been
ophthalmoscopic lesions are minimal hyperreflectivity
attributed to a deficiency. Taurine in the diet as low as
of the tapetum, with normal retinal vasculature. Day
 0.1% will prevent deficiency. Due to the variable levels
vision is slowly lost and small multifocal linear
 stored in the liver and the degree of deficiency of the diet,
nontapetal depigmentations occur but the tapetal
       s
region is normal. Systemically, lipemia is present and
initiating a deficient diet in kittens232, 233 238-240 The age
blood arachidonic acid levels of affected animals are
of onset of the deficiency may affect the rapidity of the
twice normal. Serum vitamin A and E levels and thyroid
lesion's development. Young animals are thought to be
more susceptible; cats 6 months of age took only
in the RPE on histopathologic examination.
11 months to develop focal lesions240, 241
Taurine is low in commercial dog foods, probably
because many diets are plant-based. Plant products and
NUTRITIONAL RETINOPATHIES
cow's milk are low to devoid of taurine. Most animal
Taurine deficiency in the cat
products are high in taurine but heat treatment will
Introduction/etiology
destroy taurine242, 243 Heat-processed can formulations
For years, veterinary ophthalmologists have been aware
require twice as much added taurine as dry, extruded
of two forms of retinal degeneration that occur in the cat.
foods to maintain similar levels of taurine, due to bacterial
The first is a blinding, bilateral, diffuse “PRA-like*
degradation of intestinal taurine244. Focal and diffuse
disease, that often has a history of a nontraditional diet
retinal degeneration have been described in households
or a dog food diet226, This concept of a nutritionally-
with multiple cats fed dog food that is low in taurine24s.
induced diffuse retinal degeneration is reinforced by the
 production of a similar condition induced by feeding a
 Clinical signs
diet high in casein227. The second form of retinal
Ocular lesions of taurine deficiency initially manifest
 degeneration is focal macular degeneration which,
in
with bilateral focal mottling or hyperreflective lesions in
 most instances, is nonprogressive. The lesions are usually 
the macula (14.65, 14.66). The macular lesions progress
round to oval and are hyperreflective but some extend as
to a hyperreflective band across the top of the optic disk
a hyperreflective band above the optic disk. The focal
(14.67). The lesion initially follows the area of highest 
lesions are asymptomatic and are picked up on routine
cone concentration and, at this stage, the condition can
be arrested by supplementation. If the diet remains
different stages of a taurine nutritional deficiency.
deficient, a diffuse tapetal hyperreflectivity with
Taurine is a sulfur-containing amino acid that, in species
concurrent decrease in retinal vessel numbers and size
other than the cat, is not essential, being manufactured in
occurs {14.68). Blindness is present with diffuse retinal
the liver from methionine and cystine. The cat, however,
atrophy. Advanced lesions are nonreversible.
requires taurine in the diet and the known results of a
14.65
14.66
14.65 Early taurine deficiency in a cat with mild alterations in
14.66 More advanced macular degeneration in a cat attributable to
the macula.
taurine deficiency.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
431
Diagnosis
whereas meat and seafood are high. Cow's milk has
Historically,
 presumptive  taurine  deficiency
was
one-third the amount of taurine that is in cat's milk.
 diagnosed by the typical bilateral ophthalmoscopic signs
Taurine supplementation of 50-100 mg/day will meet
of either macular lesions or diffuse retinal degeneration.
the taurine requirements of the cat. If treating for
Often the cat had a history of eating food deficient in
 cardiomyopathy, the recommended therapy is 500 mg
taurine, such as canned dog food. The condition was
of taurine q12h246. There is no therapy for diffuse
undoubtedly overdiagnosed and included diffuse retinal
retinal atrophy.
degeneration that is observed today and is thought to be
possible PRA. Plasma amino acid analysis can
be
Thiamin deficiency in the cat
performed but dietary alterations can negate the value of
Thiamin deficiency in the cat is characterized by
current plasma levels correlating with past disease.
anorexia and neurologic signs of tremors, ataxia,
Normal cat taurine values are 60-120 μmol/l.
ventroflexion of the head (14.69), and convulsions.
Ocular signs usually consist only of bilateral mydriasis,
Therapy
 due to midbrain hemorrhages. Rarely,
 retinal neo-
Early cases of taurine deficiency with macular
vascularization, vascular tortuosity, and peripapillary
degeneration can be arrested by
correcting  the
edema are present (14.70)247,248.
nutrition. Vegetable and cereals are low in taurine,
14.67
14.68
14.67 A cat with a band of retinal atrophy progressing from the
14.68 A cat with advanced taurine-induced retinal degeneration
macula across the top of the optic disk from taurine deficiency.
evidenced by diffuse hyperreflctivity and marked attenuation and
loss of retinal vascula ture.
14.69
14.70
14.69 Ventroflexion of the head when suspended in a cat with
14.70 Fundus of a cat presented with neurologic signs and
thiamin deficiency. Deficiency was induced by feeding commercial cat
responsive to thiamin injections. Retinal hemorrhages,
food that had the thiamin content destroyed by heat treatment.
 neovascularization, vascular tortuosity, and retinal edema are
 present. Most cats with thiamin deficiency have a normal fundus.
432
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRiNArY MeDiCINE
Vitamin E deficiency in the dog
drought stricken pastures, in animals fed poorly cured
Puppies fed a diet deficient in vitamin E develop
and stored forage, or feedlot cattle being fed diets high in
retinopathy 3 months after weaning. The lesions develop
by 3 months of age as a fine mottling in the posterior
tapetal region. By 4 months of age, the puppies are night
The dura mater becomes thickened in response to
blind and the mottling has spread peripherally.
At
vitamin A deficiency and this results in decreased
6 months of age, the mottled areas are surrounded by
absorption of CSF by the arachnoid villi. This results
hyperreflectivity of the tapetum and vascular attenuation
in increased CSF pressure, which is thought to be the
is noted. At 8-12 months of age the tapetum has discrete
earliest detectable change with vitamin A deficiency
multifocal  yellow-brown areas and is hyperreflective
and is the cause of seizures. In young animals
(14.71). The vasculature is attenuated and has focal
<6 months of age that have normal remodeling of the
constrictions. On histopathology, the focal pigment is
 skull during growth, the sphenoid bone with the optic
lipofuscin and photoreceptor degeneration is present in
canal has a predominant production of bone without
resorption. This overproduction of bone and thickened
the presumed inherited retinal pigment epitheliopathy.
dura mater produces direct compressive forces on the
Davidson et al.2s1 described a cluster of spontaneous
optic nerve, as well as vascular ischemic changes. The
vitamin E deficiency in hunting dogs fed food scraps,
compression produces demyelination and malacia of
cattle offal, and turkey carcasses and associated with
the optic nerve. This does not occur experimentally in
slowly progressive blindness. Ophthalmoscopic signs
older (2-year-old) animals2ss-258.
were identical to experimental vitamin E deficiency,
consisting of multifocal golden brown accumulations in
Clinical signs
the central tapetal fundus that gradually increased in
 In yearling and younger cattle, night blindness is often
severity with age (14.71). Mild tapetal hyperreflectivity
the first sign but it is frequently not noted because of
and vascular attenuation were also present. Optic nerve
atrophy, a decrease in pigment clumping, asteroid
blindness, which is often the first sign noted. This
is
hyalosis, and minor cataracts eventually developed with
accompanied by pupillary dilation. The blindness is
end-stage disease. Serum level of vitamin E was <3 pg/ml
irreversible.
(normal is 6-10 μg/ml).
 Bilateral papilledema is the first useful objective sign
{14.72). It is reversible in the early stages and is present
Equine motor neuron disease
before blindness occurs. Papilledema precedes optic nerve 
Equine motor neuron disease is characterized by diffuse
canssaad iso paseauoui oi anp s! pur uousuisuoo
neuromuscular disease, weight loss with good appetite,
 Papilledema is not as consistent in adults as it is in growing
 generalized weakness, excessive lying down, sweating.
 animals261, It is manifest by the loss of distinct borders,
are
enlargement, and elevation of the disk. The disk color
similar to vitamin E deficiency in the dog, specifically
changes to pinker-white with obscuration of the vessels by
multifocal brown spots in the tapetum and, in addition,
a brown band at the junction of the tapetum and
nontapetum. Visual deficits are not usually appreciated
by the owner. Autofluorescent ceroid lipofuscin
accumulates in the PE and retina with photoreceptor
degeneration252. Ophthalmoscopy is an excellent field
14.71
test for diagnosing equine motor neuron disease.
Vitamin A deficiency in the dog
Vitamin A deficiency is a rare disease in carnivores but,
when experimentally produced, results in similar
neurologic and ophthalmologic signs as in the cow.
Neurologic signs of circling, ataxia, agitation, and
convulsions are noted. Despite normal cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) pressures, ophthalmic signs of blindness and
 papilledema develop2s3.
Vitamin A deficiency in cattle
Introduction/etiology
Vitamin A deficiency is a significant disease in cattle. The
clinical signs vary with the age of the animal. Vitamin A
is provided in cattle feed as retinoids or as a provitamin
beta-carotene that is found in leafy green plants. Cereal
grains are deficient in beta-carotene, except for corn.
Deficiency can produce signs in 48 months, with
14.71 Spontaneous vitamin E deficiency retinopathy in a hunting
Bel ai Xiideu arou suais sudoaaap siewue iasunoa
dog with a bizzare home-made diet. Note the multifocal brown
period depends on the residual liver stores and the degree
accumulations in the tapetal fundus. Compare to 14.60, a case of
of deficiency in the diet. The conditions under which it is
central retinal atrophy. (Courtesy of Dr. M. Davidson, North Carolina
observed are usually in young growing animals on
State University, Raleigh, NC.)
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
433
Prognosis
adjacent to, the disk (14.72). If the condition is chronic,
Adult animals will show improvement of night blindness
the optic disk becomes atrophic with a gray color and loss
 or vision loss but young animals, if blind, will not have
of elevation. Retinal degeneration occurs. This is most
reversal of blindness due to optic nerve changes. Night
 obvious in the nontapetal peripapillary region as pigment
blindness and papilledema are reversible if treated before
disruption (14.73). Vitamin A is necessary for production
complete blindness occurs.
of rhodopsin and deficiency results in disruption of the
 photoreceptors as well as damage to the RPE260.
DRUG-A
AND TOXIN-INDUCED
 Miscellaneous ophthalmic signs consist of bilateral
RETINAL/UVEAL DEGENERATION
exophthalmos and a decrease in corneal sensitivity.
Methylnitrosurea and ketamine hydrochloride
Nonophthalmic signs consist of tono-clonic seizures of
A dramatic, rapid, diffuse retinal degeneration with
short duration, ataxia, gaunt and unthrifty animals,
blindness develops when ketamine is administered to cats
poor growth, (
decreased mental status, diarrhea,
also given methylnitrosurea. Either drug alone does not
anasarca, and pneumonia.
 produce the retinal lesion. Twenty-four hours after the
Vitamin A deficiency in older animals results in less
combination of ketamine and methylnitrosurea is given,
dramatic signs of night blindness that proba bly will not
diffuse retinal edema is detected but PLRs are normal.
progress, papilledema without constriction of the optic
Retinal degeneration develops S days after drug
nerve, and mottling of the tapetal colors and the nontapetal
administration  and is  characterized  by  vascular
pigment261. 1
Nonophthalmic signs are incoordination,
attenuation and a hyperreflectivity of the tapetum that is
seizures, diarrhea, anasarca, and pneumonia.
most severe at the tapetal-nontapetal junction. The
appearance in chronic cases is similar to advanced retinal
Diagnosis
atrophy from taurine deficiency. Pathologically, acute
Clinical signs of papilledema, blindness, retinal
lesions are a diffuse and severe loss of photoreceptors
degeneration, and seizures are highly suggestive when
 and the outer nuclear layer264.
 combined with supportive historical data regarding feed.
A variety of drugs have been demonstrated to have
 Plasma vitamin A levels <200 μg/l (<20 μg/dl) and liver 
toxicity to the retina or choroid; however, they are not
vitamin A levels <2 μg/g are diagnostic. Liver levels are 
 drugs that are used for therapeutic purposes in veterinary
ae Aaui se sisoae ui siaaal eseid uei aaeau a
medicine or they are not used in doses sufficient to
not as variable.
produce lesions. Examples of such drugs are chloroquine,
iodoacetate, phenothiazine derivatives, diphenylalkane
Therapy
derivatives, diethylidthiocarbimate, and  1
hydroxy-
Cattle with papilledema but which are not blind will
pyridinethione264.
respond to 440 IU/kg vitamin A injection i.m. or p.o.
Dietary supplementation should be up to 80 IU/kg if on
a high energy diet262, 263.
14.72
14.73
14.72 Severe papilledema in a steer with vitamin A deficiency. Note
14.73 Retinal pigment disruption in the nontapetal region in a steer
the change in color, elevation, hyperemia, and splinter hemorrhages
with vitamin A deficiency.
in the disk. Compare to the normal bovine fundus in 14.2.
434
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
Fluoroquinolones, specifically.
enrofloxacin,
aré
with transudation of fluid from the choroid to the
 suspected of producing an acute blindness with pupillary
 subretinal space266. The author has also observed retinal
dilation and reduced ERG amplitude in dogs and cats.
detachment and retinal vitreal hemorrhage in the dog
Ophthalmoscopic lesions show varying degrees of tapetal
associated with experimental ethylene glycol intoxication.
hyperreflectivity and vascular attenuation from mild to
severe (14.74). Whether this is dose related, idio-
Ivermectin toxicity
syncratic, or superimposed on a compromised retina
 Massive overdosage of ivermectin to dogs has resulted in
from other causes is unknown. If enrofloxacin is used in
temporary blindness, tremors, ataxia, emesis, and 
cats, it is recommended that the dose does not exceed
salivation. The overdosage usually occurs when large
S mg/kg/q24h26s, If recognized early and the antibiotic is
animal ivermectin preparations are used carelessly in
discontinued, vision may return. The pathogenesis of the
dogs. Acute blindness is noted, with poor PLRs.
blindness is unknown.
Ophthalmoscopic findings may be papilledema and
 retinal edema, producing retinal folds, but in the author's
Ethylene glycol intoxication
 experience, most patients have a normal fundus, dilated
Retinal hemorrhages, focal transudative retinal detachment,
pupils, and blindness that improves within 48 hours.
 and a mosaic or gyrate pattern of retinal folds from edema
 s n  so  1 
have been described in a cat that survived ethylene glycol
poisoning {14.75). The cause of the retinal lesions was
been noted with chronic ivermectin therapy (14.76),
postulated to be due to obstruction of choroidal capillaries
14.74
14.75
14.74 Siamese cat presented with acute blindness after receiving
14.75 Retinopathy observed with ethylene glycol toxicity in a cat. The
enrofloxacin orally. The tapetum is mildly hyperreflective and the 
retina is thrown into gyrate folds due to subretinal fluid transudation
retinal vasculature is attenuated. Vision may return if the antibiotic
from the choroid. The condition resolved following recovery of the cat
is stopped.
from the intoxication. (Courtesy of Dr. R. Ris, Ithaca, NY.)
14.76
14.76 Atrophy of the pigmented epithelium in a dog with decreased
vision that had been treated with ivermectin for mange.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FuNDUS
435
Locoweed poisoning
the process, degree of IOP elevation, and individual
Cattle, sheep, and horses with locoweed (Astragalus 
variation in IOP tolerance will produce variable fundus
mollissimus) poisoning are blind, with a dull corneal
lesions. The pathogenesis of glaucomatous retinal and
surface. While the dull appearance is due to tear film
optic nerve changes may be twofold: {1) interference in
problems from lacrimal gland lesions, blindness is
axoplasmic flow, which damages axons and neurons,
probably due to lesions observed in the ganglion and
and (2) ischemia to the nerve and retina. Acute high
bipolar cells of the retina. Ophthalmoscopic lesions have
tension glaucoma probably has both mechanisms at
not been described269.
work because a full-thickness retinal atrophy usually
 develops. Lower tension glaucoma may be characterized
Bracken poisoning
only by atrophy of the optic nerve, nerve fiber layer, and
Bracken (Pteris aquilina)  ingestion  by sheep has
ganglion cells, which may occur from a mechanical
produced retinal degeneration. The long-term ingestion
restriction at the disk, interfering with axoplasmic flow
of bracken produces blindness in sheep usually older
of the nerves. This may create retrograde degeneration of
than 2 years of age. Ophthalmoscopic signs are a diffuse
hyperreflective tapetum, optic disk atrophy, and
attenuated retinal vessels. The histologic lesions are
found evidence of a progressive retinal degeneration
initially photoreceptor degeneration and, later, inner
from cellular apoptosis in glaucomatous eyes that began
retinal cell loss270.
 in the ganglion cel layer and progressed to full thickness
retinal cell death. The massive apoptosis began about 3
Male fern poisoning
days after the glaucoma attack and lasted until at least
Cattle ingesting male fern (Dryopteris felix mas) may
the 7th day after the attack.
develop acute blindness, weakness, and constipation. In
the acute stages the ophthalmoscopic signs are dilated
Knowledge of the progressive nature of
pupils, papilledema, and papillary and peripapillary
glaucomatous retinal degeneration after the IOP
hemorrhage. Some animals will recover vision but, with
has been normalized adds to the frustration and
chronicity, the acute signs develop into optic nerve
pessimism associated with treating glaucoma.
atrophy, retinal vascular attenuation, and disruption of
ruoaan jeiadeiuou Arededuad aui ui juawaid au
Clinical signs
Histopathologically,.
the
primary
lesion
is
The most typical fundus lesion with glaucoma is a
a
noninflammatory  destruction  of
the axons
and
variable degree of optic disk cupping and atrophy. Unless
medullary nerve sheaths of the retrobul bar nerve271.
the optic nerve changes are unilateral or observed
au u azuooa oi io aa Aew Aau eanbas
GLAUCOMA-INDUCED RETINAL DEGENERATION
early stages due to the great variability in the canine
Introduction/etiology
fundus. The evidence for optic nerve cupping and
Glaucoma is a common cause of retinal and optic nerve
 atrophy is loss of myelin, often with a pigmented ring
degeneration. Depending on the cause of the glaucoma,
around the disk visible after receding of the myelin, a
the fundus changes will be unilateral or bilateral, and
 gray color to the disk, and posterior deviation of vessels
sequential or simultaneous in occurrence. The rapidity of
on the disk surface (14.77). These changes are not
recognized in the cat unless extreme. In very acute
elevations of IOP, papilledema and peripapillary
hemorrhages and triangular patches of retinal edema,
that may represent infarcts adjacent to the disk, may be
present (see Chapter 12, p.331, 12.20, 12.21). Vascular
attenuation is common but variable, and retinal atrophy
14.77
or peripapillary. Choroidal atrophy may be visible in the
albinoid fundus as a loss of vasculature and may follow
 an arcuate pattern.
Diagnosis
Usually the specific cause of the retinal atrophy is
identified by accompanying ocular signs. Lower tension
 glaucoma should be considered when optic disk cupping
and atrophy are present.
Glaucoma preferentially affects the ganglion cells and
axons. In the lower pressure insidious forms of
glaucoma, the ERG may be normal but the animal is
blind. In this instance it will mimic optic neuritis. In
advanced cases of high pressure glaucoma, the ERG is
usually flat or extinguished.
14.77 A dog with diffuse tapetal hyperreflectivity and optic nerve
atrophy and cupping, associated with glaucoma.
436
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRiNArY MeDiCINE
PERIPHERAL RETINAL DEGENERATION
14.78
Peripheral retinal cysts {Blessig-Iwanoffs cysts) are very
common degenerative changes adjacent to the ora ciliaris
retina (14.78, 14.79). They are usually multiple and are
 most easily observed with the indirect ophthalmoscope at
the temporal and ventral ora ciliaris retina. They vary in
size, number, and degree of elevation and are considered a
senile aging change. In a series of 86 Beagles 8 years of age,
 85% had peripheral retinal cysts276. Pathologicall, the
cysts represent the condition of retinoschisis (splitting of the
neurosensory retina). They are usually present without
evidence of retinal detachment, although idiopathic retinal
 detachment associated with giant tears of the peripheral
retina is not uncommon in the dog. Small to moderate
numbers of peripheral cysts are considered normal277. In
one study of senile retinal breaks, five out of 100 eyes had
ruptured cysts that produced retinal holes278. The same
study demonstrated that 24% of the eyes had complete
14.78 Peripheral retinal cysts adjacent to the ora ciliaris retinae in
retinal breaks, although none of the eyes had retinal
a dog.
detachments and an additional 38% of the eyes had
incomplete breaks. Thus a total of 62% of the senile eyes
 had lesions predisposing them to retinal detachment.
14.79
RETINAL DEGENERATIONS OF UNKNOWN CAUSE
Sudden acquired retinal degeneration syndrome
[SARDS]
Introduction/etiology
Sudden acquired retinal degeneration syndrome (SARDS)
has also been termed toxic retinopathy or silent retina.
This is a syndrome of sudden blindness in dogs, that has
been recognized with increased frequency in the US. It is a
bilateral selective loss of the photoreceptors that clinically
 mimics retrobulbar neuritis, because there are minimal, if
any, ophthalmoscopic changes in acute cases. No breed or
 genetic predisposition was initially reported, but more
contemporary reports indicate that the Dachshund,
Miniature Schnauzer, Brittany, and Beagle may be at
increased risk279-281 Both purebreds and mixed breeds are
affected. SARDS occurs in mid-life to older animals, with
14.79 Pathologic specimen from a Cocker Spaniel opened to reveal
dimorphism with 70-86% of cases 0ccurring in females;
the posterior globe. Note the multiple cysts at the ora ciliaris retinae.
the vast majority are in neutered animals. Approximately
Apoq Aue aui jo eueid sied aut pue uoexy wouy Aein s! euian aul
50% of the patients have systemic complaints
of
is the heavily pigmented side.
polyphagia, weight gain, polyuria, and polydipsia281.
 A variety of exotic and routine laboratory examinations
have found no consistent _abnormality, nor have
epidemiologic questionnaires. Elevation of liver enzymes,
syndromes associated with pulmonary carcinomas and
white blood cell counts consistent with a stress leukogram,
melanomas may have some similarities. These cancer
and an abnormal ACTH stimulation test or low-dose
retinopathies are thought to induce an autoimmune
dexamethasone suppression test are found in many, but
reaction to retinal proteins such as recoverin and enolase.
not all, animals with SARDS. Twelve to 17% of the cases
 Abnormal melanin synthesis and metabolism in the
have laboratory profiles compatible with Cushing's disease
 RPE has been postulated to affect the phagocytosis of the 
but not all of the series were evaluated critically for
photoreceptor outer segments, that leads to a degenerative
Cushing*s279. Holt et al280 found 21% of 38 dogs had a
process of the photoreceptors. Adrenocorticotropic
positive screening test for Cushing's disease. Preliminary
hormone (ACTH) and melanocyte-stimulating hormone
results have demonstrated an antiretinal compliment-fixing
(MSH) may have a hormonal influence on the RPE that
antibody.in the serum of dogs (S/5) affected with
leads to this degenerative process279.
SARDs283 This is very interesting in light of all the
A neurotoxic reaction has also been postulated.
negative findings with this syndrome. A breakdown in the
Excitotoxins which produce sustained plasma membrane
blood-retinal barrier, that allows retinal proteins such as
depolarization have been suggested, based on similar
interphotoreceptor retinoid-binding protein (IRBP)
to
histopathologic changes in SARDS and the experimental
enter the bloodstream and generate an antibody response,
model in the rat. Examples of excitotoxins are the
has been postulated. There does not appear to be a
frequently used food additives such as glutamate, ibotenic
comparable syndrome in humans, although paraneoplastic
acid, aspartane, and cysteine-s-sulfonic acid284. Elevated
VITREOUS AND OCULAr FuNDUS
437
14.80
14.80 Fundus of a dog with acute sudden acquired retinal
degeneration syndrome, with mild vascular attenuation and
a near normal fundus except for a small linear 'scar.
 glutamate levels have been found in the vitreous of dogs
Therapy
with SARDS but whether glutamate is the cause or the
To date, no therapy, including anti-inflammatory doses
result of the retinal degeneration is unknown. Glutamate
 Of glucocorticoids, has been successful.
has a preferential toxicity for ganglion cells and SARDS
preferentially affects the photoreceptors. It must be
RETINAL DETACHMENT
emphasized that the cause of SARDS is unproven at this
Introduction/etiology
time. SARDS may be a syndrome rather than a specific
As mentioned previously, retinal detachments are a
disease. Anecdotal reports of partial blindness, slowly
separation of the neurosensory retina from the REP.
 progressive blindness, and unilateral involvement only
Retinal detachments develop from three mechansims:
serve to confuse the issue by adding more variables. A
 Rhegmatogenous, or those due to holes and tears in
corollary would be our understanding of PRA 30 years
the retina.
 ago, when it was considered one disease, but we now know
+
 Proliferative preretinal membranes that produce
it to be an umbrella term for multiple specific diseases.
traction forces on the retina.
 In the early stages of the disease, the histopathologic
 Subretinal effusion or exudation of fluid.
lesions are mainly a total loss of photoreceptor outer
Congenital
nonattachment 
may.occur
insome
swelling of amacrine cells, bipolar cells, and ganglion
 inherited/congenital conditions. Retinal detachment may be
cells in a very acute case. The RPE was reported as
bilateral or unilateral and is often associated with
attenuated and lacking apical processes in a chronic case.
 hypermature cataracts287, congenital ocular anomalies such
With chronicity, the remainder of the retina undergoes
as retinal dysplasia and CEA, glaucoma288, and intraocular
degeneration282
surgery. The basic cause is oten unknown, although
 trauma, microtrauma, and vascular and zonular tension on
SARDS is unique to the dog but if it is associated
the peripheral retina may play a role. Posterior capsular
with environmental factors, it might have
rupture with cataract surgery or intracapsular lens
significa nt implications for humans.
extraction  is a risk factor for retinal detachment.
Degenerative changes in the peripheral retina may create
Clinical signs
holes or circumferential tears and result in retinal
Acute SARDS
S patients are presented as blind and
 detachment. On routine screening, 62% of senile dog eyes
 confused, with dilated pupils and a normal fundus. The
have been shown to have partial or complete retinal breaks
retinal vessels
may
have
 vascular
sacculations
but no retinal detachments were found in this series. The
(inconsistent) or be mildly attenuated in size. This
lack of either posterior vitreous detachment or liquefied
contrasts with most retinal diseases where, if the process
vitreous may have prevented the retina from detaching with
is severe enough to produce blindness, obvious retinal
 these degenerative changes278.
changes are usually present.
Chronic SARDS cases develop mild-modest tapetal
 Clinical signs
hyperreflectivity and vascular attenuation {14.80). While
Uunilateral complete retinal detachment will present
the pupils are dilated at rest, they react sluggishly to
with a Marcus Gunn (MG) pupil, when testing the PLR
light. On electroretinography, the tracing is extinguished
with the swinging light test. T
The MG response
or flat. The ERG differentiates retinal blindness from
manifests as a very limited direct reflex in the involved
Optic nerve blindness, where the ERG is normal.
eye but the pupil constricts with the consensual reflex
438
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
14.81
14.82
14.81 Peripheral dialysis in a English Springer Spaniel associated
14.82 A dog with complete peripheral dialysis of the retina that is
with retinal dysplasia. The folded retina is visible behind the lens,
visible hanging limply from the optic disk.
without an ophthalmoscope.
14.83
when the light is swung to the good eye. When the light
is then swung back to the involved eye for a repeat of
the direct response, the pupil dilates rather than
remains constricted.
If the media is clear, variable degrees of retinal
detachment may be directly observed with a simple light
because the torn retina has moved forward behind the
lens {14.81). Low partial detachments or complete
 peripheral dialysis can often only be visualized with an
ophthalmoscope (14.82, 14.83). Traction membranes 
 may occasionally be visible on the retina ( 14.84). Tearing
of retinal vessels when detaching may create vitreal clots
chamber. Chronic retinal detachments are often
associated with neovascularization of the anterior
segment of the eye, which often results in hyphema
and/or glaucoma289, 290.A
Another mechanism for
14.83 Low-lying retinal detachment with a visible hole in the retina.
glaucoma with rhegmatogenous retinal detachment may
The dog had aplastic anemia and the lesion was picked up on a
be obstruction of the outflow channels by photoreceptor
 screening consultation exa mination.
outer segments. This mechanism has been implicated in
producing glaucoma in humans291, and while outer
segments have been detected in the aqueous humor of
14.84
dogs with rhegmatogenous detachments, they have not
detachments are discussed with chorioretinitis (p.439)
and hypertension (p.454).
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of retinal detachment is made on
ophthalmoscopic examination if the media is clear, or by
 ocular B-mode ultrasound if opacities are present.
Therapy
Usually no therapy is attempted for rhegmatogenous
retinal detachment, 
particularly when found in the
 advanced stages with complete or almost complete giant
 peripheral
retinal
dialysis. Surgical  t
therapy
of
rhegmatogenous retinal detachment has been performed
 infrequently in veterinary medicine, utilizing techniques
14.84 Preretinal membrane on the retina causing a focal traction
 routine in human ocular surgery87, 38
detachment. The detachment was observed originally on a screening
genetic eye examination in a Siberian Husky and did not change over
several years.
ViTREOUS AND OCULAr FuNDUS
439
INFLAMMATION OF THE RETINA AND CHOROID
14.85
Introduction/etiology
When evaluating a suspected inflammatory fundus
lesion, four questions should arise:
· Is this an inflammatory lesion or some other process?
 Is the inflammation active or inactive?
· Is the inflammation granulomatous or
nongranulomatous?
+
What are the possible causes of the inflammation?
Inflammation of the posterior segment is usually referred
to as chorioretinitis or posterior uveitis. If the primary
focus is in the retina, it is termed retinochoroiditis; if the
 primary focus is in the choroid, it is termed chorioretinitis.
Clinical signs
The signs of inflammation of the structures of the
fundus are often not specific or dramatic enough to
14.85 Acute nongranulomatous inflammation over the tapetum in
make it obvious whether a lesion is inflammatory,
 a dog. The lesions are gray with indistinct borders. The lesions were
degenerative, vascular, or neoplastic. Furthermore, once
a5sociated with acute distemper infection.
a lesion is recognized as inflammatory, there is little
evidence morphologically that can determine the cause
of the inflammation.
14.86
Active inflammation is characterized by edema that
 may manifest as an opacification of the retina, increased
reflections from the internal limiting membrane, loss of
tapetal mosaic detail, decreased tapetal reflectivity and,
 perhaps, elevation of the retina (14.85).
Retinal vascular hyperemia is often difficult to
 recognize because of the subjectivity of vascular size and
hemorrhages at various levels in the fundus {see
Ophthalmoscopy, p.22).
Cellular exudation may be recognized by a haze in the
vitreous and “exudates’ in the retina. The term retinal
describe a focal lesion that may have sharp or fuzzy
preu, paan are sanepnxe panaproq dieus siaprog
exudates' and are usually degenerative lesions such as
hyaline deposits. "Soft exudates' have fuzzy borders and
14.86 Acute and chronic granulomatous lesions in a dog with
histologically are usually cytoid bodies fa swollen area of
cryptococcosis. The acute lesions have a halo of edema, wherea5
ganglion cells and axons) that are infarcts of the ganglion
the chronic dark lesions are sharply circumscribed.
cells. In veterinary ophthalmoscopy the term hard
exudate' is rarely used or observed and the term exudate
is used to describe acute inflammatory lesions of
14.87
exudation and edema. Acute cellular exudation produces
soft exudates (14.86). Occasionally, cellular exudation
may be perivascular in distribution. Depending on the
intensity, perivascular cuffing variably manifests as a
white sheath, a perivascular altered reflective zone, or
 perivascularly aligned focal exudates.
Inflammation in the nontapetal region in the acute
stages often obscures the pigment with white exudation
or edema (14.87). Pigment clumping and disruption
 occurs in the acute stages if the RPE reacts, and in the
chronic stages as macrophages scavenge.
Presumptive confirmation of active inflammation is
often made by watching the dynamic course, i.e. it either
 o  s  as  s
therapy. Fluorescein angiography will demonstrate active
inflammation by vascular leakage.
14.87 Acute inflammation in the nontapetum of an Akita dog with
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada 5yndrorme.
440
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
Inflammation of the optic papilla or disk is manifested
In the nontapetum, postinflammatory scars are sharply
by hyperemia of the disk, hemorrhages on and around
defined and depigmented lesions (14.89, 14.90). When
the disk, elevation of the disk from edema, retinal vessel
inflammation of the fundus has been diffuse, the
deviation, haze over the disk from cellular exudation,
postinflammatory appearance may be very similar to
 and peripapillary edema (14.88). Post inflammation, the
PRA (14.91). However, inflammatory retinal atrophies
 optic nerve usually manifests varying degrees of atrophy.
are usually asymmetrical in severity between the two
Atrophy of the optic nerve is recognized by a gray-white
eyes, whereas PRA is almost always symmetrical.
 coloration, loss of myelin that may convert an elevated
When possible, it is 
pertinent to define
the
disk to a flat or cupped disk, a decrease in size and
inflammation 
clinically
into
 granulomatous
or
number of retinal vessels and, sometimes, peripapillary
nongranulomatous lesions, although this is essentially a
pigmentary changes.
pathologic diagnosis. Granulomatous lesions usually
When evaluating lesions, one should attempt to
have an easier definable infectious etiology than
 determine whether they are quiescent or active. Active
nongranulomatous  lesions. Granulomatous  lesions
lesions usually have blurred borders, a haziness or
typically have size or mass to them, resulting in deviated
dullness, or lack of tapetal detail over the lesion (14.85,
retinal blood vessels and elevation of the retina {14.86,
14.86). Postinflammatory scars are hyperreflective over
see Blastomycosis). The causes of chorioretinitis are the
the tapetum, have sharp borders, and may have pigment
same as for anterior uveitis (see Chapter 11, p.298) plus
clumping in the center or at the periphery of the lesion.
a few additional agents.
14.88
14.89
14.88 Acute inflammation of the optic nerve (papillitis, optic neuritis),
14.89 Focal chorioretinal scar in a dog, evidenced by
evidenced by a hyperermic, swollen blurred disk, and hemorrhages. The
 hyperreflectivity with sharp borders and pigment clumping within
dog was also blind, which differentiates this from papilledema.
the lesion. The cause was, and is often, unknown at this stage.
14.90
14.91
14.90 A dog with focal, sharply circumscribed, depigmented scar5
14.91 Unilateral diffuse retinal degeneration with focal scars in a
with an overlying glial reaction on the retinal surface.
 6-year-old Chesapeake Bay Retriever. The tapetum is diffusely
hyperreflective, with marked retinal vascular attenuation and optic
at leid aie sahueuo asnp aui uo pasuadns ydoie aau
 postinflammatory scars, with pigment clumping and hyperreflective
regions. The cause is unkno wn.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
441
Etiology of chorioretinitis
Specific diseases
Dog
Viral
 Infectious: distemper, parvovirus, and herpesvirus (in
Canine distemper
the neonate), bacterial embolism from focal sepsis,
The
distemper
virus is a common etiology f
for
Brucella canis, tuberculosis, systemic mycoses,
 nongranulomatous chorioretinitis and optic neuritis in
Aspergillus fumigatus, prototheca, Ehrlichia canis
the dog. Distemper ocular lesions are most commonly
and E. platys, Rickettsia rickettsii, Toxoplasmd
observed in animals during the encephalitic phase, but
gondi, Hepatozoon americanum, and migrating
they may be found during the typical acute catarrhal
metazoan parasites.
phase or in animals that have no systemic signs.
 Immune-mediated: VKH syndrome, steroid-
Typically, distemper produces multifocal retinitis that is
responsive retinal detachments.
characterized by ill-defined altered reflective areas in the
Tra uma: blunt or perforating injuries.
tapetum {14.85) and focal white hazy lesions in the
 Neoplasia.
 nontapetum {14.92). The lesions are usually bilateral,
although asymmetrical. The lesions have been reported
Cat
to be more common in the ventral nontapetal region but
· Infectious: FIP, FeLV, panleukopenia fin utero and
this has not been the author's experience. Lesions may
neonate only), FIV, systemic mycoses, Toxoplasmd
u u aag e  a oi so
gondii, bacterial embolism from focal sepsis,
Occasionally, periva scular cuffing is recognized.
tuberculosis, and migrating metazoan parasites.
 Optic neuritis may be completely retrobul bar without
Immune-mediated.
changes on the optic disk, or it may extend to the nerve
 Tra uma: blunt or perforating.
head (14.93). If the inflammation extends to the papilla,
+
 Neoplasia.
it is hyperemic, elevated, and hazy and the animal is
blind in the involved eye(s). Distemper fundus lesions are
Horse
usually asymptomatic, unless the optic nerve or chiasm is
+ Infectious: leptospirosis, Streptococcus equi,
involved. Blindness with dilated pupils associated with
toxoplasmosis, neonatal and adult septicemia, and
 distemper is usually due to bilateral optic nerve lesions,
 metazoan parasites such as Onchocerca cervicalis.
chiasm, or bilateral optic tract lesions. If the animal
· Immune-mediated: ERU.
survives the systemic involvement, the postinflammatory
 appearance of severe distemper chorioretinitis and optic
MOO
neuritis may mimic PRA.
+ Infectious: bovine virus diarrhea {BVD), rabies,
The histopathologic lesions with distemper are more
malignant catarrhal fever (MCF), infectious
degenerative than inflammatory. Although perivascular
thromboembolic meningoencephalitis, listeriosis,
cuffing with mononuclear cells may be observed in the
septicemia particularly in calves with scours and
retina, more typical changes are neuronal degeneration,
umbilical infections, tuberculosis, and toxoplasmosis.
edema, atrophy of the photoreceptors, and swelling and
proliferation of the PE. Cytoplasmic inclusion bodies 
may be observed in the glial cells of the retina and optic
nerve293-29s.
14.92
14.93
14.92 A dog with acute distemper lesions in the nontapetum.
14.93 Optic neuritis in a dog that was acutely blind and had
Note the hazy borders.
distemper. The optic disk is elevated and hazy and the retinal
vessels are hyperemic.
442
OpHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Parvovirus
produce posterior segment lesions but, rarely, the author
In both the puppy and kitten, parvoviruses, with their
has observed blindness with pupillary dilation in cats after
 affinity for rapidly dividing cells, may affect the developing
recovery from upper respiratory disease. The fundus and
retina in utero or in the early neonatal period. Active
ERGs are normal and the assumption is that the blindness 
inflammation is not present when examined later in life and
 is due to a retrobulbar neuritis.
the changes are usually noted as an incidental finding.
Inflammation in the developing retina results in retinal
Feline infectious peritonitis
dysplasia and retinal atrophy. These lesions are noted as
Posterior segment lesions with FIP are highly variable.
multifocal or solitary, sharply demarcated lesions of altered
 Ophthalmoscopic lesions include diffuse alterations in
reflectivity in the tapetal region, and depigmentation with
tapetal coloration from choroiditis, retinal edema, focal
and total exudative retinal detachment, retinal vasculitis,
and optic neuritis (14.94, 14.95). The severe form of the
Herpesvirus
 disease causes panophthalmitis, which often precludes
Herpesvirus in the canine neonate produces a marked
detailed fundus examination. Ocular disease is most
panuveitis with keratitis, cataracts, retinal necrosis and
 common with the noneffusive form of FIP (see Chapter
disorganization, retinal atrophy and dysplasia, and optic
11, p.298)300.
 neuritis and atrophy299. Since the infection is fatal in most
 puppies, it is not a recognized clinical syndrome. Surviving
Felineleukemia virus
puppies would probably demonstrate retinal dysplasia and
 Lesions of the posterior segment associated with FeLV
retinal scars. Feline herpesvirus has not been proven to
are usually due to blood dyscrasias. The most common
14.94
14.95
14.94 Focal bullous detachment dorsal to the disk (arrows] in a cat with
14.95 More advanced FIP choroiditis in a cat with exudative
 FIP and FeLV. The detachment is recognized by the change in texture 
detachment in the dorsal fundus. Note the altered tapetal 
aaaday aeinosen au aion wnadei puaoeipe aul ot paneduo
coloration from the inflammatory infiltration of the choroid.
14.96
14.96 Multifocal retinal and preretinal hermorrhages in a cat with 
pancytopenia associated with Felv. Note how pale the retinal vessels
are from the anemia.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
443
lesions are various types of hemorrhages associated with
Bacterial
severe anemia or thrombocytopenia (14.96). Occasional
Bacterial embolism to the eye from a focal source of
multifocal, small dark infiltrates will be noted in the
 infection is not very common in small animals. However,
retina, representing neoplastic
infiltration. Retinal
it is common in large animals with neonatal septicemia.
 detachment may also be observed.
Many cases are undoubtedly missed if the eyes are not
examined. If lesions are limited to the ocular fundus, they
Bovine virus diarrhea (BVD)
are usually ‘silent’ with only focal hemorrhages and
BVD, which is caused by a member of the genus
retinal/subretinal exudates noted305. Lesions have been
Pestivirus, will produce ocular and cerebellar lesions in
noted in dogs with bacterial meningitis, endocarditis, and
the fetus if infected during 76-150 days of gestation. The
dental infections (14.98).
neonate has neurologic signs of ataxia, intention tremors,
Endocarditis in a horse has been reported to result in
and may not be able to stand. Ocular lesions include
a unilateral optic neuritis and blindness306 Calves with
microphthalmos, cataracts, tapetal color changes and
scours and infections centered around the joints and
loss of texture, attenuated retinal vessels, and focal
umbilicus often develop signs of anterior uveitis, with
 depigmentation of the nontapetum (14.97)301, 302
miosis and a large fibrin clot in the anterior chamber.
Embolic lesions may also be visualized in the retina and
Mafignant catarrhal fever
include hemorrhages, soft exudates, retinal detachment,
MCF, which has two forms caused by herpesviruses,
and papilledema 
a {14.99). Agents include streptococci,
produces vasculitis of the entire eye but anterior uveitis
Corynebacterium, E. coli, Rhodococcus equi, Listerid
and corneal edema preclude fundus examination in most
 monocytogenes, and Pasturella spp.
cases303, 304.
14.97
14.98
14.97 A calf that had been infected in utero with bovine virus
14.98 Multiple small hemorrhagic lesions near the termination of
diarrhea and was born with cerebellar ataxia. The tapetum ha5
 end arterioles in a dog with bacterial endocarditis.
multifocal patches of pigmentation and altered color and the 
 nontapetum has numerous sharply demarcated depigmented lesions.
14.99
14.99 Bullous retinal detachment from exudate with multiple
hemorrhages and exudates in a calf with vestibular signs. The
condition was responsive to antibiotics.
444
OPHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
 In the dog, contagious bacterial infections characterized
with miosis and hypopyon. The most common lesions
by septicemia, such as Brucella canis infections, are more
are in the posterior segment. Ophthalmoscopic lesions
likely to produce ocular lesions. Unilateral or bilateral
are relatively specific, and consist of multifocal retinal
uveitis has been frequently noted with canine brucellosis
hemorrhages and exudates that are often seen at the end
(see Uveitis, p.310). In countries with adequate controls,
of retinal vessels {14.100, 14.101). The exudative lesions
tuberculosis has been rarely reported as a cause of
 consist of inflammatory exudates as well as ganglion cell 
 granulomatous chorioretinitis in the cat307.
 necrosis. Focal retinal detachment and papilledema may
 Infectious  thromboembolic  meningoencephalitis 
is
be present308.
produced in cattle by Hemopbilus somnus and is
Leptospirosis is considered a major etiology of ERU.
The fundus
Slesions are typically located in the
cattle. If the animals do not die peracutely, ocular lesions 
peripapillary region, as multifocal alterations in the
will be found in about 50% of cases and help to make a
 nontapetal pigment. The lesions are often described as
rapid diagnosis. Externally visible lesions may include
 butterfly lesions because of their distribution {14.102).
strabismus, nystagmus, keratitis, and anterior uveitis
The optic nerve, in the acute stages, is hyperemic with
14.100
14.101
14.100 Multiple retinal hemorrhages in a yearling feedlot 5teer
pua yim paieiosse saheuouau pue aiepnxa peuaans tot'tl
with acute neurologic signs associated with thromboermbolic
arterioles in a steer with thromboembolic meningoencephalitis.
 meningoencephalitis. Note how many of the hemorrhages are
 associated with end arterioles.
14.102
14.103
14.102 Typical butterfly' scar adjacent to the disk associated with
14.103 A very hyperemic optic disk with overlying cellular reaction
recurrent uveitis in a horse. The lesions are sharply demarcated
in a horse with recurrent uveitis. The hyperermia indicates active 
indicating that they are scars, and while the disk looks pale, the
inflammation, but the marked pigment disruption around the disk
retinal vessels are visible so optic nerve atrophy is not observed.
 appears chronic and sharply demarcated.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
445
haze from cellular effusion {14.103)in the vitreous.Later
extend up the optic nerve to the eye. Systemic mycoses
the nerve atrophies, with loss of retinal vessels and a pale
 involve the posterior segment (choroid) preferentially,
color (see Uveitis, p.310j309 Retinal detachments are seen
in the late stages of the disease (14.104) and may be
examination. The lesions are characteristically bilateral,
 difficult to recognize beca use of the paurangiotic vascular
focal to multifocal granulomatous lesions that elevate the
 pattern of the horse retina.
retina {14.86, 14.105, 14.106) or, alternatively, a
complete exudative retinal detachment is produced
Systemic mycoses
(14.107). Optic nerve involvement is common. Vitreous
The systemic mycoses are a significant etiology for
 centesis is a rapid means of confirming the etiology.
chorioretinitis/endophthalmitis in the dog on a regional
Systemic aspergillosis with panuveitis is found 
German Shepherd
 Dogs.
 Immunosuppression
1S
Chapter 11, p.298). The mycotic organisms usually enter
considered a predisposing factor for such an ubiquitous
the body through the respiratory system and reach the
 organism to become disseminated but the underlying
eye hematogenously, although CNS cyptococcosis may
cause in this breed has not been determined311.
14.104
14.105
14.104 Complete retinal detachment in a horse with advanced
14.105 Focal subretinal granuloma and retinal hemorrhages in a
recurrent uveitis. Detachment may be confused with vitreal 
Labrador Retriever with blastomycosis.
 membranes as there are no retinal blood vessels visible to allow
differentia tion.
14.106
14.107
14.106 Multifocal subretinal bullae associated with cryptococcosis
14.107 Complete exudative retinal detachments in a Beagle with
in a cat. The lesions changed minimally over months of treatment.
blastomycosis. Note the multiple retinal hemorrhages. The condition
The cat was initially blind but vision returned rapidly with therapy
 was bilateral and the dog was presented for blindness, not for
and no other CNS signs were present.
5ystemic disease.
446
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
Protothecosis
Rickettsial infection
Prototbeca is a ubiquitous algae and infections are
Canine ehrlichiosis is a tick borne disease produced by
relatively rare. When present, the posterior ocular
Ebrlichia canis, E. platys, and E. equi314. E. canis is the
most important agent and is transmitted by the brown dog
the
tick, Rhipicephalus sanguineus. The disease is divided into
systemic signs may be occult and the animal is presented
the acute (1-3 weeks), subclinical (average 11 weeks), and
for blindness313. The author has made the diagnosis on
chronic stages. While ocular signs may be present in all
multiple occasions from vitreous centesis and,
on
stages, animals are not usually presented for diagnosis
rechecking a urinalysis, has found the organism present
until the chronic stage. Experimentally, S0% of inoculated
in the urine, which was missed by the laboratory on the
dogs developed ocular lesions and ocular lesions were
initial examination. Lesions vary from bilateral,
present in the acute state31s. The prevalence of ocular
multifocal, dark chorioretinal granulomas to large areas
lesions has been given as 10-15% and, when present, can
of massive, white subretinal accumulations (14.108).
 produce deva stating functional results.
Exudative retinal detachment is the end stage of the
The ocular lesions are the result of either platelet
process. Inflammatory cell reaction is minimal. No
deficiency and/or, more commonly, vasculitis. Massive
effective therapy has been reported in animals, although
orbital and ocular hemorrhage has been observed but,
itraconazole is used in humans.
more commonly, uveitis with ocular hemorrhage is the
basic lesion (see Chapter 11, p.298). Retinal hemorrhage
is common and retinal detachment may be observed either
from massive subretinal  hemorrhage or exudates
(14.109)316. Optic neuritis with engorged retinal vessels
 and papillary hemorrhage may occur. Experimentally,
14.108
discrete perivascular infiltrates have been described in the
 subacute stage but have not been described in clinical
cases317.
Rickettsia rickettsii, the agent of RMSF, produces
 Ocular lesions that are similar but milder than E. canis.
The vector and reservoir are the ticks Dermacentor
andersoni, D. variabilis, and Amblyomma americanum.
Retinal petechiae, retinal vasculitis, and mild anterior
uveitis are common, occurring in nine out of 11 dogs
(82%) in one series (14.110)318
Protozoa
Toxopfasmosis
Toxoplasmosis is a well publicized disease, due to its
zoonotic potential. While exposure is widespread based on
serologic surveys, toxoplasmosis as a systemic clinical
 disease is not very common. Ocular lesions have been
14.108 A dog with extensive subretinal exduate associated with
described for both the dog and the cat and posterior
Prototheca. The lesions began as 5mall multifocal dark lesions and 
 segment lesions are described as retinochoroiditis, due to
progressed to retinal detachment. Diagnosed by vitreal centesis.
the organism's predilection for the retina. Ophthal-
14.109
14.110
14.109 Massive retinal detachment due to subretinal hemorrhage in
14.110 Multiple retinal hermorrhages in a dog with Rocky Mountain 
a dog with ehrlichiosis.
spotted fever. Note how many hemorrhages are associated with 
end arterioles.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FuNDUS
447
moscopic lesions range from small multifocal infiltrates
Older dogs are often blind and have more diffuse lesions
(14.111) with a ring of edema, to focal retinal detachments.
of retinal and choroidal atrophy, perivascular plasma cell 
Granulomatous anterior uveitis may develop but organisms
infiltration, hyalitis, and characteristic peripapillary
are often not present with anterior uveal involvement.
necrosis of the nontapetal retina. The feeding of raw
mutton has been postulated to be responsible for the 
toxoplasmosis is frequently associated with distemper and
difference between the incidence in urban and rural dogs.
both agents may produce ocular lesions. (See Chapter 11,
Intraocular migrating Diptera (fly) larvae (ophthal-
p.298 for a more thorough discussion of toxoplasmosis.)
Many of the previously diagnosed cases of toxoplasmosis
and cat fundus, and they leave characteristic curvilinear
may have been caused by Neosporum caninum.
wandering paths in the subretinal space. The lesions can be
observed as chronic scars without evidence of an active
Hepatozoon americanum
larva, or acute with the larva present {14.112, 14.113).
Hepatozoon americanum  is a protozoan parasite
The larvae can be very motile and seem to be photophobic.
transmitted by the ticks Amblyomma maculatum and
The tracts have characteristic
dark clumps._and
Riphicephalus sanguineus; reported cases in the US have
hemorrhages may be present if the tracts are recent36, 323.
been limited to the Gulf coast states. It produces a
  sido j si is   
chronic wasting disease with myalgia and lymph-
usually not identified but the cattle bot fly {Hypodermd
adenopathy. Ocular signs consist of ocular discharge,
bovis) and reindeer warble fly (Oedemagena tarandi) have
uveitis, and chorioretinal scars. Radiographs of affected
been identified in association with the condition.
dogs in the US reveal periostitis. Diagnosis is usually
made on muscle biopsy. In other parts of the world,
hepatozoonosis is often asymptomatic, the organism is
found in large numbers in the blood, and bone lesions are
14.111
rare320. Death usually occurs within 24 months of the
initial signs. Despite initial improvement in signs with
various anticoccidial therapies, relapses occur unless
long-term therapy is administered.
Metazoan parasites
 Ssaiaun inq uosun ue an sansed uozin
etiology for posterior uveitis. Migrating Toxocara larvae
were initially reported to produce small focal retinal and
choroidal granulomas that were of little clinical
consequence321.
 Aberrant Toxocara larvae have been
found associated with severe posterior chorioretinitis and
endophthalmitis that often results in blindness37, 322.
Usually, the dogs are of rural origin. Lesions observed are
multifocal  areas of  tapetal  hyperreflectivity
and
hyperpigmentation. When histopathologic examination
is performed on young dogs, the inflammation is active,
14.111 Cat with multifocal chorioretinitis associated with
Toxocara larvae are found, and the dogs are still visual.
toxoplasmosis. Note the larger lesions have fuzzy edges.
14.112
14.113
14.112 Cat with extensive wandering curvilinear retinopathy and 
14.113 Cat with curvilinear tracts with residual debris in the tracts,
retinal hermorrhages, typical of ophthalmomyiasis.
typical of ophthalmomyiasis. The lesions are not as obvious in the 
tapetum but are visible.
448
OpHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Onchocerca cervicalis has been considered to be one
Immune-mediated chorioretinitis
of the main known etiologies of ERU and migrating
Most instances of nongranulomatous chorioretinitis are not
larvae have been demonstrated in the posterior uvea on
definitively diagnosed. Immune-mediated disease is often
suspected, based on associated systemic signs or lack thereof,
is characteristic (14.102). The optic nerve in the acute
 histopathologic examination in which no infectious agents
m punoy uaho aow si ll inq oaaday aq aw saaiis
are found or cultured, and inflammation which is
a loss of retinal blood vessels and a pale color later, in the
mononuclear or the result of vascular insult.
 atrophic stage.
A transient multifocal serous *chorioretinitis' has been
In sheep, goats, and wild ruminants, Elaeopbord
described as an incidental finding in Beagles. On
schneideri, which inha bits the common carotid and other
histopathologic
examination, (
only
focal:
serous
 arteries, may produce ocular lesions in addition to the
accumulations of fluid without inflammatory cells
typical cutaneous lesions of the head. Ocular lesions
 between the neurosensory retina and the PE are observed.
consist of keratitis, cataract, anterior uveitis, retinal
The cause is unknown32s. Similar multifocal retinal lesions 
edema, chorioretinal atrophy, retinal vessel attenuation,
were described in a series of Doberman Pinschers 10-30
 and optic nerve atrophy.
days after receiving sulfadiazine for the first time. The
 condition was characterized by nonseptic polyarthritis,
glomerulonephropathy, polymyositis, skin rash, fever,
anemia, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia, in addition to
retinal lesions. The fundus lesions were one-quarter to
14.114
one-half disk diameter in size and resolved 2 weeks after
cessation of therapy. This was hypothesized to be an
 immune complex disease or a type Il hypersensitivity326
 Rapidly developing bilateral retinal detachment due to
 subretinal exudates has been observed in predominantly
large breeds of dogs. Associated focal dark choroidal lesions
 are often present and the condition is thought to represent
 choroiditis and choroidal vasculitis {14.114, 14.115). Optic
 neuritis is observed with choroiditis. A lack of systemic signs,
negative cultures from the subretinal fluid, histopathologic
findings, and improvement with systemic glucocorticoids are
 suggestive of an immune-mediated choroiditis327, 328. Some
 animals have circulating autoantibodies.
 Many dogs in the late stages of VKH syndrome develop
exudative retinal detachment. The choroid typically has a
marked infltrate of mononuclear cells. The RPE is destroyed
and the neurosensory retina undergoes milder perivascular
14.114 German Shorthair Pointer presented with acute blindness.
inflammatory changes and degenerates {14.87). The
Both retinas had low lying detachments and hyperemic vessels, and
pigmented portions of the fundus develop patchy
the choroid had large multifocal infiltrates that progressed to
depigmentation, which later becomes confluent (14.116).
confluence. Vitreous centesis was sterile and the condition responded 
The lesions are presumably due to an immune reaction
to 5ystemic immunosuppressive doses of prednisone. This condition
 against melanin (see Chapter 7, p.145).
may be difficult to differentiate from systemic mycoses.
14.115
14.116
14.115 A dog with steroid-responsive retinal detachment and focal
14.116 An Akita with Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome and
choroidal infiltrates. Note the vascular hyperemia, swollen disk and
depigmented lesions in the nontapetum. The uveitis was being treated
deta chment ventrally.
aggressively at this time and was quiescent. Compare to 14.87.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
449
Phacoanaphylaxis or phacoclastic uveitis that is
Therapy
induced by lens capsule rupture predominantly produces
Therapy is directed at the underlying disease, if associated
a severe anterior uveitis, but the majority of patients also
with systemic disease. Because of the difficulty of obtaining
have  a lymphocytic-plasmacytic retinal  perivascular
therapeutic drug levels in the posterior globe, systemic
reaction329. The latter lesions are rarely noted clinically
antibiotics are often administered if infection is suspected, or
due to the severe anterior uveal reaction.
immune suppressors administered for immune-mediated or
traumatic problems. If acute bacterial infection is known or
Diagnosis of chorioretinitis
· Like anterior uveitis, nongranulomatous
Chapter 2, p.41).
chorioretinitis is often not definitively diagnosed,
 despite exhaustive testing. Appearances are not
absolute.
DISEASES OF THE OPTIC NERVE
 Lesions should be categorized into granulomatous or 
nongranulomatous, to limit the etiologies.
Optic neuritis
Lesions should be correlated with systemic signs and
Introduction/etiology
history, i.e. environment, exposure. Laboratory tests
The temm optic neuritis is usually used to connote a disease
such as CBC, chemistry profile, immune profile,
that interferes with optic nerve function, whether or not it is
radiographs of the chest, and serology for various
inflammatory. Optic neuritis may be part of a condition with
infectious diseases such as brucellosis, systemic
generalized fundus lesions {neuroretinitis) or it may be
mycoses, ehrlichiosis, RMSF, and toxoplasmosis, are
isolated to the optic nerve(s). Optic neuritis may be unilateral
often indicated in the acute stages. Culture and
 or bilateral, and may involve the optic disk or be confined to
cytology of vitreous or subretinal fluid are usually
the retrobulbar nerve. The condition is associated with loss of
reserved for cases with severe active lesions. Patients
nerve conduction, i.e. blindness in the involved eye, and is
should be screened for antigens such as FeLV,
 often sudden in onset. The etiology of unilateral optic neuritis
Toxoplasma, and Cryptococcus. Enucleation for
can usually be defined, whereas bilateral optic neuritis in
histopathologic examination is a valid procedure if
the eye is nonfunctional.
 In the dog, distemper should be considered as a cause in
all bilateral cases of optic neuritis, even if the animal is
Procedures for biopsy of the choroid-retina have been
vaccinated and there are no systemic complaints (14.93).
devised. However, the cost, lack of surgical experience,
Systemic mycoses, toxoplasmosis, ehrlichiosis, orbital
and problems with obtaining representative samples with
neoplasia, orbital cellulitis, orbital trauma such as
focal lesions make this procedure rarely performed, even
 proptosis, and granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis
in a specialty practice330.
{GME, inflammatory reticulosis) are all possible causes of
optic neuritis in the dog. GME may extend down both
Chorioretinal lesions with systemic disease are
optic nerves from the brain to produce blindness,
frequently of diagnostic, therapeutic, and
papilledema, retinal hemorrhage, and retinal detachment 
prognostic importance. Infectious organisms may
{14.117, 14.118). The condition is usually responsive to
remain sequestered in the globe and blindness may
 systemic glucocorticoids on a short-term basis and should
alter the owner's desire to treat the infectious
be considered with multifocal neurologic lesions and optic
disease aggressively.
nerve lesions333-33s. The Miniature Poodle and other
 small breeds have an increased incidence of GME.
14.117
14.118
14.117 A dog with optic neuritis associated with granulomatous
14.118 Optic neuritis in a dog with granulomatous
meningoencephalomyelitis. Note the peripapillary hemorrhages,
meningoencephalomyelitis. Blindness was the first sign:
elevated disk deviating the retinal vessels, haze over the disk, and
later, multilfocal neurologic signs developed.
vascular hyperemia. The condition was bilateral.
450
O pHThAlMIC DiseAse In VeterinArY MeDicINE
Optic neuritis can be produced by FIP and crypto-
Therapy
pue aeo u uosasu uay a ieo an ui sjso
If an infectious disease is diagnosed, this should be
treated specifically. Idiopathic cases or those thought to
horse. In many instances the cause of optic neuritis is
be due to GME should have 2-4 mg/kg. of systemic
idiopathic, and these cases are typically systemically
 prednisone divided daily and then decreased over a 3-4.
 normal, acute in onset, and bilateral.
week period. If GME is diagnosed, the therapy should be
prolonged. Therapy should be initiated as soon as
Clinical signs
'puodsai oi suios si quaned aui j! pue 'ajqissod
Optic neuritis may present either unilaterally
0r
improvement is generally seen in the first 5-7 days.
bilaterally. If presented with bilateral involvement, the
Many of the idiopathic cases, if treated early, have a
patient is blind with dilated pupils that typically respond
 partial response with a return of some vision and an
very sluggishly and incompletely to light. Affected dogs,
improvement in PLRs. The optic disk swelling is slower
even though they are blind, often act photophobic in that
to regress and, over a period of several weeks, variable 
they resist the examination light.
degrees of optic nerve atrophy become evident.
The fundus may be normal if the condition is
The treatment of distemper optic neuritis is a dilemma
completely retrobulbar but the typical appearance is of a
for the clinician. Due to the severity of the signs, i.e.
swollen optic disk with deviation of retinal blood vessels.
blindness, the psychological pressure to treat is great. The
The retinal vessels are usually congested, as are the
risk of immunosuppressive drugs creating a fulminating
capillaries of the disk. Hemorrhages are common on and 
disease is possible but there is also rationale for anti-
adjacent to the disk, and peripapillary edema may be
inflammatory therapy of distemper demyelinating lesions.
present. Inflammation may create a mild haze over the
optic disk and, if it is part of a more diffuse disease,
Papilledema (choked disk)
chorioretinal lesions may be present {14.88, 14.117,
Introduction/etiology
14.118).
Papilledema is a passive swelling of the optic disk or
papilla, as opposed to the active swelling and hyperemia
Diagnosis
with optic neuritis. It is usually associated with increased
A presumptive diagnosis of optic neuritis is made when a
CSF pressure and does not result in blindness, although the 
patient is presented with a sudden onset bilateral
basic cause of the increased CSF pressure may produce
blindness and a swollen optic disk. If the condition is
blindness. The pathogenesis of papilledema is disputed but
retrobulbar neuritis, the main differential diagnosis is
it is probably not simply a restriction of venous drainage
SARDS. The ERG of optic neuritis patients is normal but
from the disk. Interference with axoplasmic flow results in
is extinguished with SARDS. If electroretinogra phy is not
swollen axons and is common to most of the etiologies of
available, it is better to err on the side of optic neuritis,
papilledema. An increase in interstitial fuid in the nerve
which may be a treatable disease.
head from the peripapillary choroid and local blood
Optic neuritis is often responsive to glucocorticoid
vessels also occurs but is not as important as the
therapy but such thera py is contraindicated with many of
interference in axoplasmic flow in producing swelling338.
the infectious causes. To avoid inappropriate therapy a
The condition may be unilateral or bilateral. If bilateral,
good history, physical and neurologic examination,
 marked asymmetry may still be present. Early papilledema
screening laboratory tests of CBC and serum chemistry
is difficult to recognize in the dog because of the variable
profile, and a cerebrospinal tap are indicated. A CT or
amounts of myelin in the nerve head. Serial examinations
MRI scan may also provide diagnostic information.
and comparisons to the opposite eye, if it is normal, allow
Definitive diagnosis of GME may be difficult but
more critical evaluation. Papilledema is rarely manifest in
increased protein and pleocytosis of plasma-lymphocytic
the cat and horse optic disk, unless very severe.
cells and, rarely, reticulum cells in the CSF, multifocal
Any space-occupying mass of the CNS may cause
neurologic disease, and a temporary response to systemic
papilledema but the usual cause is a brain tumor. In one
glucocorticoids is suggestive of the diagnosis36.
study of brain tumors, 48% of the patients had
papilledema337 but the myth still persists that the dog
 Differential diagnosis
does not manifest pa pilledema with brain tumors. Space-
 Differential diagnosis should include any of the diffuse
occupying lesions of the orbit such as neoplasia,
retinal diseases since they produce similar signs of dilated
hemorrhage, and inflammation may impinge on the optic
 pupils and blindness. Most diffuse retinal diseases that
 nerve, producing papiledema.
 are severe enough to produce blindness are advanced and
Hydrocephalus is a rare a cause of papilledema, with
 dramatic, with the major exception of SARDS.
 most cases having normal optic disks. Hyperviscosity
Cortical blindness is accompanied by brisk PLRs.
syndromes such as polycythemia or gammopathy are
Papilledema   appears  
similartooptic neuritis
relatively rare causes of papilledema. Severe systemic
ophthalmoscopically but pure papilledema does not
hypertension may produce papilledema in the dog and an 
cause blindness. However, the causes of papilledema,
association with pancreatitis has been made.
such as CNS neoplasia, may produce blindness.
In
Acute severe hypotony or acute glaucoma are
general, the pupils should be reactive if the animal is
blind from cortical lesions. Since cortical lesions can also
Vitamin A deficiency in young cattle produces dramatic
be accompanied by midbrain lesions with pupillary
papilledema; papilledema is an early sign in this
 abnormalities, differentiation may be more complex337-
condition that is present before blindness (14.72)260.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FuNDUS
451
 Clinical signs
The lesion consists of plump cells filled with an
The optic disk with papilledema becomes elevated and
eosinophilic foamy cytoplasm. The cytoplasm is partially
enlarged, ca using the retinal vessels to bend upward onto
positive for PAS stain and oil-red-O but negative for
the surface. The disk is typically congested and may have
luxol-fast blue. The lesion was originally described as
 small hemorrhages on or adjacent to the disk. A halo of
 neoplastic and termed an astrocytoma339. The neoplastic
 peripapillary edema may be present in the subretinal
origin is not accepted today and the lesion has been
space (14.119).
 compared to xanthelasma in humans340, 341.
The author has recognized this condition as an
Differential diagnosis
incidental finding on examination. He has also seen acute
In the dog, the normal heavily myelinated optic disk
lesions of extrusion of myelin from the nerve head after
typical of many large breeds of dogs can be difficult to
colic surgery, and in postmortem eyes after enucleation
differentiate from mild to moderate papilledema. In all
with a chain echraser that resemble proliferative optic
species, aberrant myelination of the retinal fiber layer
neuropathy in appearance. Crushing the optic nerve near
may simulate papilledema (14.27, 14.28). Papillitis
or
the globe may result in myelin extrusion onto the optic
optic neuritis may be identical in appearance 
to
disk, as well as into the vitreous.
papilledema but is accompanied by blindness.
Platt et al342 reviewed the equine literature on
degenerative optic nerve lesions and found proliferative
A fundus examination with critical evaluation of
reactions described on the optic nerve in many cases.
the optic disk should be part of the physical
Common to many was a history of acute blood loss or
 examination of patients with neurologic signs.
suspected trauma. Similar lesions are reported in two
horses that had undergone occlusion of the internal and
extermal carotid arteries and the greater palatine artery
Proliferative optic neuropathy in horses
for treatment of guttural pouch mycosis. The horses were
blind upon recovery from anesthesia but the optic disk
 condition that is usually found as an incidental finding
lesions were not observed until the third postoperative
on the nerve head of older horses. The condition is
day343. It is tempting to consider proliferative optic
unilateral and consists of an elevated grayish ca uliflower-
neuropathy lesions as chronic and milder variations of
like proliferation on the optic nerve (14.120).
acute blinding myelin extrusion syndrome.
14.119
14.120
14.119 Papilledema in a dog with a brain tumor. Note the
14.120 Proliferative optic neuropathy found as an incidental
swollen disk that deviates the retinal blood vessels and the 
finding in one eye of an aged horse. This probably represents
 peripapillary edema.
extruded myelin.
452
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
BLOOD-VASCULAR DISEASES OF THE FUNDUS
14.121
A variety of blood dyscrasias and vascular diseases are
manifest in the ocular fundus since it is a convenient
window to the body's microvasculature. Most of these
 are systemic diseases and the fundus lesions may be
either a diagnostic clue or the presenting sign.
Polycythemia
Polycythemia, an absolute increase in erythrocytes, must
become quite extreme before manifesting in the retinal
vasculature. The usual causes are cyanotic congenital
heart disease and polycythemia rubra vera. When the
66-69%, the retinal vasculature must accommodate to
ual u huseaui pue sue Aq awnioa paseaui aul
(tortuous vessels). The blood is also darker in color
{14.121,14.122). Transudative retinal detachment may
develop, perhaps associated with hyperviscosity. If the
14.121 A 4-month-old English Bulldog with cyanotic congenital
condition is chronic and extreme, retinal and vitreal
heart disease and secondary polycythemia. Note the dark ruddy
hemorrhage will eventually occur344, 34s.
color and distension of the vessels.
Serum hyperviscosity syndrome
Monoclonal gammopathies associated with multiple
Thrombocytopenia
myeloma and, occasionally, lymphosarcoma are the usual
The level of platelets that is necessary to prevent
etiologies for most hyperviscosity syndromes. The
hemorrhage appears to have individual variation. In
increased colloidal pressure results in an increased blood
 general, platelet counts below 50,000/μl usually result in
volume and dilated, kinked retinal vessels, and may
 petechiation. The fundus is a good microvasculature bed
produce sausage-like sacculation. Hemorrhagic diathesis
to
 detect petechiation (14.126). Common causes of
results in retinal hemorrhage, which is the most common
thrombocytopenia
are
immune-mediated diseases,
lesion, but its cause is not fully understood (14.123)346-348.
rickettsial diseases, and neoplasia.
Retinal detachment may occur and multiple focal
intraretinal cysts under the internal limiting membrane
Clotting disorders
have been observed {14.124). These cysts were initially
 Inherited or acquired clotting disorders may occasionally
thought to be focal retinal detachments but their
manifest as retinal hemorrhages.
relationship to the retinal blood vessels and biomicroscopy
of the retina indicate they are intraretinal. The retinal cysts
Leukemia
persist, despite improvement in the systemic disease. In
Fundus lesions from various types of leukemias
humans, ciliary body cysts are common with multiple
usually
manifest as hemorrhages but neoplastic
myeloma. Anterior segment lesions of glaucoma and
infiltrates may develop. Patients with myelogenous
 anterior uveitis may also be present349.
leukemia seem especially prone to retinal hemorrhage.
Hemorrhagic diathesis with neoplasia may develop
Severe anemia
despite normal platelets, and this is thought to
Acute anemia with PCVs <7% regularly manifest with
represent vasculitis.
pale retinal vessels and varying degrees of retinal
hemorrhage, irrespective of the thrombocyte count
Lipemia
(14.96, 14.125). When the condition is combined with
Hyperlipemia has been associated with lipids in the
thrombocytopenia, the hemorrhage is more extensive.
anterior chamber, secondary glaucoma, anterior uveitis,
Chronic profound 
l anemia has been associated with
corneal lipidosis, and lipemia retinalis3$2, Increases in
retinal detachment in the dog316. In the horse, acute
serum triglycerides above 2,500 mg/100 ml may manifest
 blood loss may rarely result in blindness associated with
with a pinkish color of the retinal vessels flipemia
 a retinopathy and optic nerve atrophy. The retinal lesions
retinalis). In animals with a tapetum, it is easier to detect
the color change in the vessels over the nontapetum
The relationship of blindness to hemorrhage is tenuous
(14.127)3s3. Elevations in cholesterol do not result in a
but a similar condition occurs in elderly people, usually
lipemic fundus.
with gastrointestinal bleeding. Blindness from optic nerve
 Lipemia is usually associated with diabetes mellitus,
infarction is not immediate but in humans it usually occurs
hypothyroidism, pancreatitis, liver disease, and familial
within 3-10 days after bleeding. It is hypothesized that
hyperlipidemia354.
White retinal
deposits  
with
hemorrhage superimposed on existing vascular disease
hemorrhage and optic disk hyperemia have been
may result in the condition since it is not observed in
described in a dog with dia betes mellitus that was lipemic
young adults such as soldiers with war wounds351.
but did not manifest lipemia retinalis. The white deposits
were thought to be lipids as they resolved with dietary
 restriction of fat. The hemorrhages and papilledema may
have resulted from systemic hypertension35s.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FuNDUS
453
14.122
14.123
14.122 Calf with cyanotic congenital heart disease that resulted
14.123 A dog with a hypergarmmopathy with multiple retinal
in severe secondary polycythemia. The vessels have lengthened.
hemorrhages, peripapillary edema, papilledema, and vascular
 resulting in tortuosity, and have dilated to accommodate the 
engorgement.
additional vascular volume. The blood is also darker than normal.
14.124
14.125
14.124 Multiple faint intraretinal cysts (arrows] and retinal
14.125 Canine fundus manifesting severe anemia with almost no
hemorrhages in a dog with multiple myeloma and a
visible blood in the vessels, a pale disk, and some increased tapetal
hypergammopathy.
reflectivity. This mimics progressive retinal atrophy, but the dog is
visual and the retinal signs will correct with systemic improvement.
14.126
14.127
14.126 Dog with immune-mediated thrormbocytopenia and multiple
14.127 Lipemia retinalis in a dog with acute pancreatitis.
retinal hemorrhages.
The pink hue to the vessels is most easily observed against
the nontapetal background.
454
O pHThAlMIC DisEASE In VeteRiNArY MeDiCINE
Arteriosclerosisfatherosclerosis and hypertension
Clinical signs
Introduction/etiology
Ocular signs are usually the presenting signs of
 Examination of the ocular fundus is an excellent method
hypertension but cardiac and neurologic signs may also
of observing a vascular bed. On ophthalmoscopic
examination, the normal vessel walls are transparent and
of hypertension, such as renal failure or hyperthyroidism,
the clinician is observing the column of blood within the
also often contributes to the patient's signs. The cat
vessel. With early arteriosclerosis the blood column is
appears to manifest ocular lesions with systemic
narrowed and the vessel is straighter. With increased
hypertension more readily than the dog. The mean age of
severity the vessel walls become opaque and the vessel is
then observed as a white or silver line of irregular width,
The lesions observed with hypertension in the dog and
 cat are typically advanced unless observed on a screening
small vessels of the choroid produce circular alterations in
examination. The most common ocular lesions noted in
reflectivity, corresponding to the distribution of the
the cat when presented for signs of hypertension are:
affected end arterioles (14.128). Arteriosclerosis
1S
varying degrees of retinal detachment (62%) and 52%
infrequently recognized clinically in the dog. When
had bilateral detachments; retinal vessel tortuosity; and
recognized, it is usually because of hypertension and is
preretinal, vitreal, retinal, or subretinal hemorrhages in
associated with hypothyroidism356,357
56% of eyes368. Multifocal bullae of the retina may be
 Hypertension in the dog and cat is being diagnosed
noted early in the course.
with increasing frequency, often because of sudden
Hypertension is manifested in the ocular fundus as
blindness associated with retinal detachment, retinal
 dilated tortuous vessels, retinal edema, retinal hemorrhages,
hemorrhage, or hyphema. The systemic signs of
vitreous hemorrhages, perivasculitis, papilledema, and focal
a uno si i pue ansea io jewuu aie uoisuanaday
or
 generalized
 transudative
retinal
detachment
fundus lesions that are symptomatic and suggestive of the
(14.129-14.132). Sustained increases in blood pressure
diagnosis. Hypertensive retinopathy is probably the
result in vasoconstriction of autoregulated (as in the retina)
leading cause of blindness in old cats.
peripheral arterioles. This results in hypertrophy and
Causes
 arteriosclerosis/atherosclerosis
 and
hyperplasia of the tunica media, loss of the internal elastic
hypertension include:
membrane and, eventually, fibrinoid necrosis371. Hayreh
Hypothyroidism3$6-38
out saiewud ui suois snpuny au papiap ezs 'zesie ia
 Renal disease: hypertension has been recognized in
hypertensive retinopathy, choroidopathy, and optic
61% of dogs with renal tubular disease and 80% of
neuropathy The retinal changes occur significantly earlier
dogs with glomerular renal disease359. Sixty-one
than the choroidal and optic nerve changes but the
 percent of cats with chronic renal failure were found
ete pue sop a ui aeuad Au su oo
to have hypertension 360.
The earliest retinal lesions in primates are intraretinal, focal,
 Pheochromocytoma fcatecholamine secreting tumor
periarteriolar white transudates that are pinhead size and
 of the adrenal medulla) is a rare ca use of
round and last 2-3 weeks. They are distinguishable from
hypertension361.
'cotton wool spots", which are ischemic lesions in the nerve
Hyperparathyroidism.
fber layer that appear later The transudates arise from loss
Hyperthyroidism: while untreated hyperthyroidism
of autoregulation of the retinal arterioles which dilate and,
 due to damage to the endothelium, become permeable to
cats (87%360; 23%362), the link between
hyperthyroidism, hypertension, and hypertensive
been described with hypertension in the dog and cat.
 retinopathy is more tenuous. Stiles et al362 found
If retinal detachment is present, resolution of the 
only one of the hypertensive cats in their study with
 hypertension will be accompanied by resolution of the
hypertensive retinopathy and van der Woerdt and
retinal detachment. However, secondary retinal atrophy
 Peterson363 examined 100 hyperthyroid cats without
a single case of hypertensive retinopathy. Sansom
 glaucoma and hyphema may be noted.
 et al.364 found one cat out of 16 presented for lesions
of ocular hypertension had hyperthyroidism. In two
Diagnosis
years of screening hyperthyroid cats prior to I-131
 The measurement of blood pressure is easily performed by
therapy, the author failed to find a single cat with
indirect techniques but the interpretation of modest
hypertensive retinopathy.
elevations in untrained animals in unfamiliar circumstances
High salt diet365.
 is open to dispute. Multiple, consistent readings in relaxed
Hyperaldosteronism361.
animals of at least moderate elevations in blood pressure
 A primary form or essential hypertension has been
are necessary in order to be confident of the results. A
 common source of error when performing indirect blood
hypertension may also be a very significant cause of
 pressure measurements is not using the appropriate size
hypertension in the cat. About 50% of 69 cases of
cuff. The cuff width should be 40% and the length 150%
hypertension in the cat had no underlying cause
of the circumference of the limb. Small cuffs will give
diagnosed368.
erroneously high readings and large cuffs will give low
 Hyperadrenocorticism: 86% of dogs with untreated
pituitary dependent hypera drenocorticism and 100%
pressure is 60-110 mmHg {8-14.7 kPa) and the systolic
of dogs with adrenocortical tumors were
pressure is 110-190 mmHg (14.7-25.3 kPa). Blood
 documented as having systemic hypertension369.
pressures >160 mmHg (21.3 kPa) systolic and 95 mmHg
(12.7 kPa) diastolic are considered hypertensive37s.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
455
14.128
14.129
14.128 Arteriosclerosis in an aged obese dog with hypothyroidism.
14.129 Multiple retinal hemorrhages, papilledema, and vascular
Nuclear sclerosis interferes with photography. The retinal vessels are
 congestion in a dog with systemic hypertension.
5traight, narrow, and irregular in width and the underlying scalloping 
 pattern is presumably from involvement of the choriocapillaris.
14.130
14.131
14.130 Hypertensive retinopathy in an older cat. Multiple retinal
14.131 Complete bullous retinal detachment associated with
and subretinal hemorrhages, a low lying retinal detachment, and 
 5ystemic hypertension in a cat.
choroidal streaks are visible.
14.132
Feline hypertension is usually established as systolic
blood pressure in excess of 165-170 mmHg (22-22.7 kPa)
in a relaxed cat. Multiple readings may be necessary if
the animal is obviously stressed and resisting restraint.
When utilizing Doppler ultrasound for measuring blood
pressure, the author has simply taped the probe and cuff
in place and placed the animal in a cage; multiple
readings can then be taken without handling the cat.
Most cats with clinical signs and systemic hyper-
tension have systolic blood pressures in excess of
200 mmHg (26.7 kPa).
 Evaluation of the retinal vascular system is often an
inexpensive diagnostic test when a patient has any
systemic disease that involves the vascular system
14.132 Fundus of a cat that has controlled systemic hypertension.
or blood elements.
Multiple lesions are presumed to be previous bullae that had formed
during the hypertensive crisis. In most cases, evidence of previous 
bullous detachments are folds in the retina from stretching (see 14.135].
456
O pHThAlMIC DisEAse In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
Therapy
In dogs with hypertension, the therapy of choice is not
When‘acute blindness is the presenting sign of
established. A combination of calcium channel blockers
hypertension, emergency therapy to reduce the blood
 and ACE inhibitors appears to be necessary to control
 pressure is indicated. Delay in reducing retinal detachment
hypertension in many canine patients. Obviously if the
may result in permanent blindness. Pharmacologic therapy
cause of the hypertension is treatable, such as
 of hypertension has not been well established in veterinary
hyperadrenalcorticoidism or hyperthyroidism, this
medicine. Traditionally, veterinarians mimicked the
should be addressed. Dietary restriction of salt to
approach by physicians of utilizing drugs with the fewest
0.1-0.3% dry weight is recommended for hypertension.
side-effects first and monitoring for 2-4 weeks. This is not
acceptable when acute blindness has occurred and it has
Solute fluid overload
 proved very frustrating to ophthalmologists who feel a
Patients with renal failure frequently receive very
sense of urgency to minimize ocular sequelae. In cats, the
aggressive fluid therapy. The author has noted on several
drug of choice is the calcium channel blocker amlodipine.
occasions that multiple retinal bullae which progress to
 Amlodipine (0.625 mg q12-24h) has proven very reliable
complete transudative retinal detachment may occur
in producing a rapid {within a few days) drop in blood
bilaterally in these patients (14.133-14.135). Initially, it
was thought this was due to hypertension related to renal
disease, although the typical retinal hemorrhages of
Maggio et al 36 reported that amlodipine was successful
hypertension are not present. The blood pressures are
in lowering blood pressure in 31 of 32 cats with systemic
normal and it is suggested that the detachments are due
hypertension.
to solutes diffusing out of the leaky choriocapillaris into
the choroid and subretinal space, pulling water with
them. Discontinuing the fluids or improvement of renal
 function will correct the bullous detachments.
14.133
Diabeticretinopathy
Retinal vascular lesions are infrequently observed in the
diabetic dog and cat. The basic vascular lesion with
diabetes mellitus is the microaneurysm (14.136).
 Experimentally, retinal microaneuryism requires 4 years
to develop but most dogs have developed cataracts by
this stage that obscure retinal examination376. Most of
the reports of diabetic retinopathy have been pathologic,
utilizing fat retinal preparations with trypsin digestion
to isolate the vasculature. The pathologic vascular lesions
are degeneration and a decrease in numbers of
 cellular retinal capillaries and a few microaneurysms in
the posterior pole376-380, Proliferative diabetic retino-
pathy (hemorrhage, glial membrane proliferation, retinal
detachment) has not been reproducible and the dog is
14.133 A dog in acute renal failure and on fluid therapy that is
developing bullous retinal detachments in each eye. The 5ystemic
 blood pressure was normal.
14.134
14.135
14.134 Severe bullous detachment a5 the result of overhydrating a
14.135 Residual retinal folds in a cat that previously had bullous
dog in renal failure. The systemic blood pressure was normal.
detachment from overhydration. The condition can both manifest
and resolve rapidly.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
457
thought to be spared from this disabling change. This has
Oxygen-induced retinopathy
been questioned by the finding of microaneurysm,
Increased arterial oxygen tension as the result of pure
hemorrhage, irregularity in vascular width, retinal
 Oxygen administration in the early neonatal kitten and
atrophy, and vitreous degeneration in a dog with a 7-year
 puppy (first 2-3 weeks of life) is toxic to the developing
retinal vasculature. The developing retinal blood vessels in
ophthalmoscopic findings  in 13 spontaneous canine
the peripheral retina undergo vasoconstriction and vaso-
diabetics. They reported clinical findings of dilatation of
obliteration in response to increases in pO,. Later, a
retinal veins, localized venous sacculations, venous
secondary vasoproliferative phase develops at the terminal
tortuosity, microaneurysm, retinal hemorrhage, focal
ends of the developing vascular bed when the patient is
hyperreflectivity of the tapetum, depigmentation of the
returned to normal atmospheric oxygen tension. The
nontapetal fundus, and retinal exudate. However, the
vasoproliferation invades the vitreous, hemorrhage from
documentation of exudates and microaneurysms in this
fragile vessels may occur, and contraction of vitreal and
study is not convincing and the alterations in venous
vascular membranes may detach the retina389, 390.
caliber are subjective and not dramatic. The focal retinal
atrophy or scars are nonspecific and may not be related
TRAUMA OF THE FUNDUS
to diabetes. The use of an age-matched control
Traumatic injury to the fundus and optic nerve may be in
population would help determine whether focal retinal
the form of blunt injuries to the eye, perforating missile
atrophy is found with increased frequency with diabetes.
injuries, and avulsion of the retinal-choroidal vessels from
Diabetes is usually diagnosed in the aged dog and it
proptosis of the globe. Proptosis is discussed in Chapter 6,
may be that most animals do not live long enough to
p.134. Blunt blows to the globe may produce a contra-
manifest the more serious retinal changes unless the
coup injury that results in fundus hemorrhage and bullous
diabetes is juvenile in onset. Long-term administration of
retinal detachment (14.137). Severe blunt injury may
megestrol acetate in two cats was thought to be
rupture the globe and the sudden decompression will
responsible for diabetes mellitus and associated bilateral
 create retinal and choroidal detachments and expulsion of
retinal hemorrhage and exudative retinal detachment.
the lens.
The ocular changes were thought to be due to diabetes
sanun lalad io nous g se yns sanu sunad 
but complications, such as hypertension, were not
may be obscured by anterior segment pathology or
eliminated as factors in producing retinal detachment383.
vitreous hemorrhage. Posterior exit wounds may
be
 Galactose-fed dogs develop microaneurysmal vascular
observed in the acute or chronic stages. Wounds with
changes similar to diabetic dogs but at an accelerated
vitreous hemorrhage that have a tract that extends to the
rate. Microaneurysms developed by 24 months in this
retina are in danger of producing traction retinal
detachment as the hemorrhage organizes.
48-60 months of feeding384. Lens removal is necessary to
 In the horse, a distinct syndrome of blunt trauma to the 
observe the retinal changes. Aldose reductase inhibitors
back of the head or poll may result in unilateral or bilateral
prevent the microangiopathy in dogs38s, 386 and cats387.
blindness. Injuries to the poll are usually associated with
 Retinal arteriolar aneurysm, independent of diabetes
rearing and hitting the head on a beam, or falling over and
mellitus, has been documented in the dog, possibly due
hitting the poll on the ground. Mild epistaxis is often
to a congenital defect, and this may result in vitreous
present but the amount of blood loss and the resultant
hemorrhage388.
pathology are not consistent with neuroretinopathy. On
examination of the eyes, they are usually normal within
days of the trauma, except for dilated, fixed pupils. The
ERG with a diffuse light source is normal.
14.136
14.137
14.136 Presumed microaneurysms in a diabetic dog. These appear
14.137 Choroidal hemorrhage with overlying retinal folds and retinal
a5 minute red dots in the fundus. Fluorescein angiography would 
and preretinal hemorrhages in a Siamese kitten after head trauma.
be needed to confirm that they are microaneurysms.
458
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
14.138
14.139
14.138 Unilateral optic nerve atrophy in a 3-month-old foal after
head trauma. Note the lack of retinal blood vessels and the white
color of the disk.
After a period of 4-6 weeks the ophthalmoscopic
 examination reveals loss of the retinal vessels and a pale
optic disk. I
 aq Aeu uodnsip uauaid aiededad
examination of the nerves, the intracanalicular portion of
the optic nerveis) has marked constriction associated
with malacia of the nervous tissue (14.139). The
pathogenesis of the lesion is thought to be due to
14.139 Optic nerves and chiasm of a horse that had bilateral
stretching of the nerve and associated vessels by the
blindnes secondary to trauma to the poll 6 weeks earlier. Note
backward momentum of the brain against the fixed
 the marked constriction of the nerves anterior to the chiasm that
 intracanalicular portion of the optic nerve391.
corresponds to the region of the optic foramen.
Clinical signs of posterior pole trauma
 Ocular hemorrhage at any or multiple levels of the eye is
common with trauma. Contra-coup lesions may evidence
long-term discomfort that will be experienced to retain
as retinal edema and bullous detachment, and
the globe in the animal.
perforating missile injuries may evidence as exit wounds
The recommendation for treatment of acute cases of
in the fundus. Chronic changes are pigment disruption in
traumatic nerve damage have included high dose systemic
the fundus and, potentially, complete retinal atrophy or
 glucocorticoids, mannitol i.v., PG inhibitors, and DMSO
optic nerve atrophy (14.140).
{1 g/kg in 5% dextrose i.v. over 30 minutes)393. In
humans with traumatic optic neuropathy, no clear benefit
Diagnosis
Diagnosing traumatic fundus lesions is based on the
Neuroprotective therapy in the form of calcium channel
history and evidence from physical examination of
 blockers may also be considered395, 396.
concurrent trauma to the head. Perforating missiles may
have entrance wounds in the anterior segment and skull
NEOPLASIA OF THE FUNDUS
 radiographs will detect metallic missiles.
Primary neoplasia of the ocular fundus is very rare. The
most common tumor described is melanoma or, more
Therapy
correctly, melanocytoma. Melanomas described in the
Nonperforating injuries should be treated as nonseptic
dog are flat, sharply circumscribed, slow-growing, and
uveitis, i.e. atropine and topical and systemic
 have benign behavior. As the lesion grows, the retina may
glucocorticoids. Pellet injuries are usually sterile and
detach and extension through the sclera and into the
should be treated as nonperforating injuries; usually the
optic nerve may develop, but metastasis has not been
corneal wound is self-sealing. If the lens capsule has been
ruptured and the tear is larger than 2 mm, the lens should
result in hyphema or secondary glaucoma, obscuring
be
removed
to avoid
phacoclastic  uveitis
or
phacoanaphylaxis392. Ruptured globes should
be
pathologic examination, the cell type is usually either a
enucleated or the rupture sutured and the globe
 plump pigment-filled cell without evidence of mitosis or
eviscerated and a silicone sphere placed. These globes will
spindle cell1397, 398. The plump pigment-filled cells
a5
undergo phthisis bulbi and are not worth the expense and
 resemble cells observed in the epibulbar melanoma. The
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
459
14.140
14.141
14.140 Marked optic nerve atrophy in a herding dog that had been
14.141 A dog with metastatic hermangiosarcoma in the fundus. The
previously kicked in the head by a horse. There was no history of a
condition was bilateral. The ocular lesions must be differentiated 
 proptosed globe.
from ocular hemorrhages. Lesions may be very small or large.
 Pulmonary metastasis was also present.
14.142
cell type and behavior indicate similarities to melano-
cytoma, which is a benign tumor, rather than
mela noma 399-402.
 Retinoblastoma is a congenital tumor arising from the
 developing retina, from either the glial or photoreceptor
elements. Contemporary literature has reclassified older
case reports of retinoblastoma in animals as being
medulloepitheliomas403, One case report of a retino-
blastoma has been confirmed in the dog by immuno-
 cytochemical anal ysis+404.
Metastatic ocular neoplasia rarely develops in the
fundus. Metastatic lesions are more aggressive and
nonpigmented in most instances, which helps to
 differentiate them from primary neoplasia. Bilateral
metastatic lesions rarely occur.
Metastatic hemangiosarcoma will mimic fundus
hemorrhage (14.141).
14.142 Gordon Setter with an orbital osteosarcoma that deformed
When sudden hemorrhage or retinal detachment
the globe and produced scleral depression.
interferes with a thorough fundus examination,
ultrasonography of the eye should be considered to rule
out neoplasia.
 In the cat, a unique angioinvasive pulmonary
carcinoma has been observed in the choroidal and retinal
vasculature, which results in large infarcts in the retina
 Primary neoplasia of the fundus is rare in all of our
and choroid4os. The condition may be unilateral or
domestic animals.
bilateral and manifests with retinal detachment, retinal
hemorrhage, and retinal vascular attenuation. Unlike
Ae uoisal suadnsso-aeds Aue o eiseldoau peo
other metastatic lesions, this disease does not have mass
put compressive forces on the globe and deform it.
lesions but rather thrombi or emboli in the retinal and
Ophthalmoscopically, manifestations may vary from
choroidal vasculature. Similar ischemic lesions are often
pressure striae to indentations of the globe that appear
found in the digits.
similar to (but are not) bullous detachments (14.142).
460
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETeRINARY MeDICINE
REFERENCES
1 Gloor B {1973) Zur entwicklung des
10 Lutty G, Thompson D, Gallup J,.
22 Bayon A, Tovar M, Fernandez del
gaskorpes und der zonula. III.
Mello R, Patz A, Fenselau A {1983)
Palacio M, Agut A (2001) Ocular
Herkunft, lebenszeit und ersatz der
Vitreous: an inhibitor of retinal extract-
complications of persistent hyperplastic
 glaskorperzellen beim kaninchen.
induced neovascularization.
primary vitreous in three dogs.
Albrecht von Graefes Archiv fur
Investigative Ophthatmology and
Veterinary Ophthatmoiogy 4:35-40.
Klinische und experimentelle
Vistuat Science 23:52-56.
23 Rubin L {1963) Hereditary retinal
Ophthatmologie 187:21-44.
11 Boevé M, Linde-Sipman T, Stades F
detachment in Bedlington Terriers.
2 Snowden J, Swann D {1980) Vitreous
{1988) Early morphogenesis of
Veterinary Medicine/Smatl Animat
 structure. V The morphology and
persistent hy perplastic tunica vasculosa
Climician 3:387-389.
thermal stability of vitreous collagen
lentis and primary vitreous.
24 Blair N, Dodge J, Schmidt G (1985)
fibers and comparison to articular
Investigative Ophthatmotogy and
Rhegmatogenous retinal detachment in 
 cartilage (ty pe II) collagen.
Vistat Science 29:1076-1086.
Labrador Retrievers. I. Development of
Investigative Ophthatmology and
12 Duddy J, Powzaniuk W, Rubin L
retinal tears and detachment. Archives
Vistat Science 19:610-618.
{1983) Hyaloid artery patency in
of Ophthatmology 103:842-847.
3 Balazs E (ed) (1961) Molecular
neonatal Beagles. American Journal of
25 Blair N, Dodge J, Schmidt G (1985)
morphology of the vitreous. In: The
Veterinary Research 44:2344-2346.
 Rhegmatogenous retinal detachment in
Structure of the Eye. Academic Press,
13 Munroe G (2000) Study of the hyaloid
Labrador Retrievers. I1. Proliferative
New York, pp. 293-310.
apparatus in the neonatal
vitreoretinopathy. Archives of
4 Osterlin S, Jacobson B (1968) The
thoroughbred foal. Veter inary Record
Ophthatology 103:848-854.
synthesis of hyaluronic acid in
146:5 79-584.
26 Forrester J, Lee W, Williamson J (1978)
vitreous. I. The presence of soluble
14 Koch SA, Cowles RR, Schmidt GR,
The pathology of vitreous hemorrhage.
transferase and nucleotide sugar in
Mayo JA, Bowman RW (1978) Ocular
 I. Gross and histological appearances.
the acellular vitreous gel.
 disease in the newborn horse: a
Archives of Ophthatmology
Experimentat Eye Research
preliminary report. Journat of Equine
96:703-710
7:511-523.
Medicine and Surgery 2:167-170.
27 Burke J, Smith J (1981) Retinal
5 Stades F {1983) Persistent hyperplastic
15 Munroe G {1999) Subconjunctival
proliferation in response to vitreous
tunica vasculosa lentis and persistent
haemorrhages in neonatal
hemoglobin or iron. Investigatitve
hyperplastic primary vitreous in
thoroughbred foals. Veterinary Record
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
 Doberman Pinschers: genetic aspects.
144:279-282.
20:582-592
Journat of the American Animat
16 Martin C (1969) Slit lamp examination
 28 Miller B, Miller H, Ryan S (1986)
Hospitat Association 19:957-964.
of the normal canine anterior ocular
Experimental epiretinal proliferation
6 Stades F {1983) The development of
 segment. I. Description. Journat of
induced by intravitreal red blood cells.
the vitreous and retated (vascular)
Smalf Animat Practice 10:151-162.
American Journal of Ophthatmotogy
strtcttures in persistent byperplastic
17 Kern T (1981) Persistent hyperplastic
102:188-19.
tunica vascutasa tentis and persistent
primary vitreous and microphthalmia
 29 Ehrenberg M, Thresher R,
byperplastic primary vitreous
in a dog. Journat of the American
Machemer R {1984) Vitreous
(PHTVL/PHPV) in the Doberman
Veterinary Medicat Association
hemorrhage nontoxic to retina as a
Pinscher. Thesis, Utrecht, pp. 11-21.
178:1169-1171.
stimulator of glial and fibrous
7 Tolentino F, Donovan R, Freeman H
18 Leon A, Curtis R, Barnett K (1986)
proliferation. American Journal of
{1965) Biomicroscopy of the vitreous
Hereditary persistent hyperplastic
Ophthatmology 97:611-626.
in Collie dogs with fundus
 primary vitreous in the Staffordshire
30 Abrams G, Knighton R {1982) Falsely
abnormalities. Archives of
Bull Terrier. Journat of the American
extinguished bright-flash
Ophthatmology 73:700-706.
Animal Hospital Association
electroretinogram. Archives of
8 Eisner G, Bachmann E {1974)
22:765-774.
Ophthatmology 100:1427-1429.
Vergleichend morphologische
19 van Rensburg I, Petrick S, van der 
31 Daslak M, Hsu P {1984) A theoretical
spaltlampenuntersuchung des
Lugt J, Smit M {1992) Multiple 
study of the effect of vitreous
gaskorpers bei der katze. Atbrecht
inherited eye anomalies including
hemorrhage on the electroretinogram.
von Graefes Archiv fur Klinische und
persistent hy perplastic tunica vasculosa
Investigative Ophthatmology and
Experimentelle Ophthatmologie
Jentis in Bouvier des Flandres. Progress
Visuat Science 25:233-235.
191:343-350.
in Veterinary and Camparative
32 Thompson J, Stoessel K (1987) An
9 Eisner G, Bachmann E (1974)
Oph thatmology 2:133-139.
analysis of the effect of intravitreal
Vergleichend morphologische
20 Allgoewer I, Pfefferkorn B (2001)
blood on visual acuity. American
spaltlam penuntersuchung des
 Persistent hyperplastic tunica vasculosa
Journat of Ophthatmology
gaskorpers von schaf, schwein,
lentis and persistent hyperplastic
104:353-357.
hund, affen, und kaninchen. Atbrecht
 primary viteous (PHTVL/PHPV) in
33 Rubin L {1963) Asteroid hyalosis in the
von Graefes Archiv fur Klinische und
two cats. Veterinary Ophthatnology
dog. American Journat of Veterinary
Experimentele Ophthatmologie
4:161-164.
Research 24:1256-1262.
192:9-17.
21 Rebhun W {1976) Persistent
34 Schaffer E (1985) Asteroide hyalose
hyperplastic primary vitreous in a dog.
beim hund. Tierarztiche Praxis
Journat of the American Veter inary
13:71-75.
Med icat Association 169:620-622.
VITR EOuS AND OCULAr FuNDUS
461
35 Miller H, Miller B, Rabinowitz H,
50 Prince J, Diesem C, Eglitis I,
66 Gripenberg U, Blomqvist L, Pamilo P
 Zonis S, Nir I{1983) Asteroid bodies:
Ruskell G {1960) The globe. In: 
(1985) Multiple ocular coloboma
an ultrastructural study. Investigatite
Anatomy and Histology of the Eye
(MOC) in snow leopards (Pather
Ophthatmotogy and Visuat Science
and Oibit in Domestic Animais. CC
uncia): clinical report, pedigree
24:133-136.
Thomas, Springfield, pp. 13-42.
analysis, chromosome investigations,
36 Kaswan R, Martin C {1984)
51 Martin C, Anderson B 1981) Ocular
and serum protein studies. Hereditas
Ophthalmoyiasis interna in a dog and
anatomy. In: Veterinary
102:221-229.
cat. Canine Practice 11:28-34.
Ophthaimology, 1st edn. K Gelatt 
67 Martin C, Stiles J, Willis M (1997)
37 Johnson B, Kirkpatrick C, Whiteley H,
(ed). Lea and Febiger, Philadelphia,
 Feline colobomatous syndrome.
Morton D, Helper L {1989) Retinitis 
pp. 88, 92, 98
Veterinary and Comparative
 and intraocular larval migration in a
52 Pirie A {1965) The chemistry and
Ophthatmology 7:39-43.
goup of Border Collies. Journat of the
structure of the tapetum lucidum in
68 Rubin L {1963) Atypical coloboma
American Animat Hospitat Association
animals. In: Aspects of Comparative
of the choroid in a dog. Journat of
25:623-629.
Ophthaimology. O Graham-Jones
the American Veterinary Medicat
38 Parry HG {1953) Degenerations of the
(ed). Pergammon Press, London, pp.
Association 143:841-842.
dog retina. I. Structure and development 
57-75.
69 Schuh JC (1989) Bilateral colobomas
of the retina of the normal dog. British
53 Wyman M, Donovan E {1965) The
in a horse. Journat of Cornparative
Journat of Ophthatmotogy 37:385-404.
ocular fundus of the normal dog.
Pathofogy 100:331-335.
39 Donovan A {1966) The postnatal
Journat of the American Veterinary
70 Roberts S, Dellaporta A {1965)
development of the cat retina.
Medicat Association 147:17-26.
Congenital posterior ectasia of the
Experimentat Eye Research 5:249-254.
54 Bellhorn R, Bellhorn M, Swarm R,
sclera in Collie dogs. I. Clinical 
40 Gum G, Gelatt K, Samuelson D {1984)
Impellizzeri C {1975) Hereditary
features. American Journat of
Maturation of the retina of the canine
tapetal abnormality in the Beagle.
Ophthatmology 59:180-186.
neonate as determined by
Ophthatmic Research 7:250-260.
71 Brahm V, Brahm E, Saers K (1978)
electroretinography and histology.
55 Engerman R, Molitor D,
Collie-augen-anomalie {CEA).
American Journat of Veterinary
 Bloodworth J (1966) Vascular system
Kleinter Praxis 23:221-224.
Research 45:1166-1171.
of the dog retina: light and electron
72 Barnett K, Stades F (1979) Collie eye
41 Koch S, Rubin L {1972) Distribution of
microscopic studies. Experimentat Eye
anomaly in the Shetland Sheepdog in
 cones in the retina of the normal dog.
Research 5:296-301.
the Netherlands. Journat of Smaf!
American Joturnat of Veterinary
57 Henkind P (1966) The retinal vascular
Animal Practice 20:321-329.
Research 33:361-363.
systern of the domestic cat.
73 Rubin L, Nelson E, Sharp C {1991)
42 Steinberg R, Reid M, Lacy P {1973) The
Experimentat Eye Research 5:10-20.
Collie eye anomaly in Australian
distribution of rods and cones in the
 58 De Schaepdrijver L, Simoens P,
 Shepherd Dogs. Progress of
retina of the cat (Felis domesticus).
Lauwers H {1997) Morphologic and
Veterinary and Comparative
Journal of Comparative Neurology
fluorangiographic study of the feline
Ophthatmology 1:105-108.
148:229-248.
retina. Veterinary and Comparative
74 Donovan E, Wyman M (1965)
 43 Marmor M (1980) Clinical physiology
Ophthatmotogy 7:216-225.
Ocular fundus anomaly in the Collie.
of the retina. In: Principies and Practice
59 Gelatt K, Finocchio E {1970)
Journat of the American Veterinary
of Ophthatmotogy. G Peyman, D
Variations in the normal equine eye.
Medicat Association 147:1465-1469.
Sanders, M Goldberg (eds). WB
Veterinary Medicine/Smatt Animat
75 Yakely W (1972) Collie eye anomaly:
Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 823-856.
Clinician 63:569-574.
decreased prevalence through
44 Brown KT (1968) The
60 Barnett K {1972) The ocular fundus of
selective breeding. Journat of the
electroretinogram: its components and
the horse. Equine Veterinary Journat
American Veterinary Medicat
their orgins. Vision Research 8:633-677.
4:17-20.
Association 161:1103-1107.
45 Hudspeth A, Yee A {1973) The
61 McCormack J (1977) Appearance of
76 Bjerkas E {1991) Collie eye anomaly
intercellular junctional complexes of
the normal optic disk in cattle.
in the Rough Collie in Norway.
 retinal epithelium. Invest igative
Veterinary Medicine/Smalt Animat
Journat of Smalt Animat Practice
Ophthatmology 12:354-365.
Clinician 72:1494-1496.
32:89-92.
46 Records R (1986) Retina: metabolism
62 Gelatt K, Huston K, Leiopold H
77 Holzhacker W (1988) Uber die
and photochemistry. In: Biochemicat
(1969) Ocular anomalies of
verbreitung der Cotie-augen-
Foundations of Ophthatmology, vol 2.
 incomplete albino cattle:
anomatie (CEA) in ostosterreich.
T Duane, E Jaeger (eds). Harper and
 ophthalmoscopic examination.
Doctor medicinae veterinariae thesis,
Row, Philadelphia, pp. 1-23.
American Journat of Veterinary
Veterinarmedizinischen, University of
47 Buyukmihci N, Aguirre G (1976) Rod
Research 30:1313-1316.
Wien, pp.1-102.
disk turnover in the dog. Investigative
63 Roberts S (1969) Collie eye anomaly.
78 Kellner S, Leon A (1985)
Ophthatmmology 15:579-584.
Journat of the American Veterinary
Augenanomalie bei Collies in der 
48 Anderson D, Fisher S, Steinberg R
Medicat Association 155:859-865.
schweiz. Kleintierpraxis 31:63-65.
[1978) Mammalian cones: disk
64 Gelatt K, Veith L (1970) Hereditary
79 Yakely W, Wyman M, Donovan E,
sheding, phagocytosis, and renewal.
multiple ocular anomalies in
Fechheimer N {1968) Genetic
Investigative Ophthatmotogy and Vistuat
Australian Shepherd Dogs. Veterinary
tansmission of an ocular fundus
Science 17:117-133.
Medicine/Smalt Animat Clinician
anomaly in Collies. Journat of the
49 Hollyfield J, Basinger S (1978) Cyclic
65:39-42.
American Veterinary Medicat
 metabolism of photoreceptor cells.
 65 Barnett K, Ogden A {1972) Ocular
Association 152:457-461.
Investigative Ophthatnotogy and Vistuat
colobomata in Charolais cattle.
Science 17:87-89.
Veterinary R ecord 91:592.
462
O pHThAlMIC DiseAse In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
80 Wallin-Hakanson B, Wallin-
93 Ramsey DT, Ewart SL, Render JA,
106 Kaswan R, Collins L, Blue J,
Hakanson N, Hedhammar A (2000)
Cook Cs, Latimer CA (1999)
Martin C {1987) Multiple hereditary
Influence of selective breeding on
 Congenital ocular abnormalities of
ocular anomalies in a herd of cattle.
 prevalence of chorioretinal dysplasia
Rocky Mountain horses. Veterinary
Journat of the American Veterinary
and coloboma in the Rough Collie in
Ophthatmology 2:47-59.
Medicat Association 191:97-99.
Sweden. Journat of Small Animat
94 Silverstein A, Osburn M, Bennie I,
107 Barnett K, Bjorck G, Kock E {1970)
Practice 41:56-59.
Prendergast R {1971) The pathogenesis
Hereditary retinal dysplasia in the
 81 Wallin-Hakanson B, Wallin-
of retinal dysplasia. American Journat of
Labrador Retriever in England and
Hakanson N, Hedhammar A (2000)
Ophthatmology 72:13-21.
Sweden. Journat of Small Animat
Collie eye anomaly in the Rough Collie
95 Cook C, Burling K, Nelson E {1991)
Practice 10:755-759.
in Sweden: genetic transmission and
 Embryogenesis of posterior segment
108 Carrig C, MacMillan A, Brundage S,
influence on offspring vitality. Journat of
colobomas in the Australian Shepherd
Pool R, Morgan J (1977) Retinal
Small Animat Practice 41:254-258.
 Dog. Progress in Veterinary and
dysplasia associated with skeletal
82 Latshaw W, Wyman M, Venzke W
Comparative Ophthatmotogy
abnormalities in Labrador Retrievers.
(1969) Embryologic development of an
1:163-170.
Journat of the American Veterinary
anomaly of the ocular fundus in the
96 Ashton N, Barnett K, Sachs D (1968)
Medicat Association 170:49-57.
Collie dog. American Journat of
Retinal dysplasia in the Sealyham
109 Carrig C, Sponenberg D, Schmidt G,
Veterinary Research 30:211-217.
Terrier. Journat of Pathotogy and
Tvedten H {1988) Inheritance of 
83 Donovan R, Freeman H, Schepens C
Bacteriology 96:269-272.
associated ocular and skeletal
[1969) Anomaly of the Collie eye.
97 Rubin L {1968) Hereditary of retinal
dysplasia in Labrador Retrievers.
Journat of the American Veterinary
dysplasia in Bedlington Terriers. Journat
Journat of the American Veterinary
Medicat Association 155:872-875.
of the American Veterinary Medicat
Medicat Association 193:1269-1277.
 84 Brown G, Shields J, Patty B, Goldberg R
Association 152:260-262.
110 Lavach R, Murphy J, Severin G
{1979) Congenital pits of the optic nerve
98 Leipold H, Gelatt K, Huston K {1971)
{1978) Retinal dysplasia in the English
head. 1. Experimental studies in Collie
 Multiple ocular anomalies and
Springer Spaniel. Journat of the
dogs. Archives of Ophthatmology
hydrocephalus in gradebeef Shorthorn
American Animat Hospital
97:1341-1344.
cattle. American Journat of Veterinary
Association 14:192-199.
 85 Vainisi s, Peyman G, Wolf D, West C
Research 32:1019-1026.
111 Schmidt G, Ellersieck M, Wheeler C,
{1989) Treatment of serous retinal
 99 Martin C, Leipold H (1974) Aphakia
Blanchard G, Keller W (1979)
 detachments associated with optic disk
 and multiple ocular defects in Saint 
Inheritance of retinal dysplasia in the
pits in dogs. Journat of the American
 Bernard puppies. Veterinary
 English Springer Spaniel. Journat of
Veterinary Medicat Association
Medicine/Smatl Animat Clinician
the American Veterinary Medicat
195:1233-1236.
69:448-453.
Association 174:1089-1090.
86 Rubin L {1970) Correction of retinal
100 Stades F (1978) Hereditary retinal
112 Meyers V, Jezyk P, Aguirre G,
detachment in a dog. Journat of the
dysplasia (RD) in a family of Yorkshire
Patterson D {1983) Short-limbed
American Veterinary Medicat
Terriers. Tydschrift Voor
dwarfism and ocular defects in the
Association 157:461-466.
Diergeneeskunde 103:1087-1090.
Samoyed dog. Journat of the
 87 Dziezyc J, Wolf D, Barrie K {1986)
101 Arnbjerg J, Jensen O (1982)
American Veterinary Medicat
Surgical repair of rhematogenous retinal
 Spontaneous microphthalmia in two
Association 183:975-979.
detachments in dogs. Journat of the 
 Dobermann puppies with anterior
113 Acland G, Aguirre G {1991). Retinal
American Veterinary Medicat
 chamber cleavage syndrome. Journal of
dysplasia in the Samoyed dog is the
Association 188:902-904.
the American Animat Hospitat
heterozygous phenotype of the gene
88 Vainisi SJ, Packo KH {1995)
Association 18:481-484.
(drds) for short-limbed dwarfism and
 Management of giant retinal tears in
102 Peiffer R, Fischer C {1983)
ocular defects. Proceedings of the
dogs. Journat of the American Veterinary
Microphthalmia, retinal dysplasia, and
Scientific Meeting of the American
Medicat Association 206:491-495.
anterior segment dysgenesis in a litter of
Coltege of Veterinary
89 Herrmann M, Junziker J, Szymanski C,
Doberman Pinschers. Journat of the 
Ophthaimologists 91:44.
Koch S (1973) Peripheral retinal
American Veterinary Medicat
114 Heywood R, Wells G (1970) A
albinotic spots in three dogs. Journat of
Association 183:875-878.
retinal dysplasia in the Beagle dog.
the American Veterinary Medicat
103 Bergsjo T, Arnesen K, Heim P, Nes N
Veterinary Record 87:178-180.
Association 163:1175-1176.
(1984) Congenital blindness with ocular
115 MacMillian A, Lipton D {1978)
 90 Wilcock B (1983) Ocular anomalies. In:
developmental anomalies, including
Heritability of multifocal retinal
Comparative Ophthatmic Pathalogy. R
retinal dysplasia, in Doberman Pinscher
dysplasia in American Cocker
Peiffer (ed). CC Thomas, Springfield,
dogs. Journat of the American
Spaniels. Journat of the American
pp. 3-46.
Veterimary Medicat Association
Veterinary Medical Association
91 Toole D, Severin G, Neumann S {1983)
184:1383-1386.
172:568-572.
 Retinal dysplasia of English Springer
104 Laratta L, Ris R, Kern T, Koch S
116 Bedford P {1982) Multifocal retinal
Spaniel dogs: light microscopy of the
[1985) Multiple congenital ocular
dysplasia in the Rottweiler. Veterinary
postnatal lesions. Veterimary Pathalogy
defects in the Akita dog. Cornell.
Record 111:304-305.
20:298-311.
Veter inarian 75:381-392.
117 Williams L, Peiffer R, Gelatt K,
92 Holle D, Stankovics M, Sarna C,
105 Lewis D, Kelly D, Sansom J (1986)
Gum G {1979) A survey of ocular
Aguirre G (199) The geographic form
Congential microphthalmia and other
findings in the American Cocker 
 of retinal dysplasia in dogs is not always
developmental ocular anomalies in the
Spaniel. Journat of the American
 a congenital abnorrmality. Veterinary
Doberman. Journat of Small Animat
Animat Hospitat Association
Ophthatmotogy 2:61-66.
Practice 27:559-566.
15:603-607.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FUNDUS
463
118 Weisse I, Stotzer H, Seitz R {1973)
133 Wen G, Sturman J, Wisniewski H,
144 Acland G, Fletcher R, Chader G,
 Die neuroepitheliale invagination, eine
MacDonald A, Niemann W (1982)
Aguirre G (1989) Nonallelism of three
form der netzhaut-dysplasie beim
 Chemical and ultrastructural changes
genes (red1, rcd2, and erd) for early-
Beagle-hund. Zentratbtatt der
in the tapetu of Beagles with a
onset hereditary retinal degeneration.
Veter inarme dizin 20:89-99.
hereditary abnormality. Investigative
Experimentat Eye Research
119 Schiavo D, Field W (1974) Unilateral
Ophthalmology and Visuat Science
49:983-998.
focal retinal dysplasia in Beagle dogs.
23:733-742.
145 Aguirre G, Farber D, Lolley R,
Veter inary Medicine/Smatt Animat
134 Burns MS, Tyler NK, Bellhorn RW
Fetcher R, Chader G {1978) Rod-cone 
Clinician 69:33-34.
{1988) Melanosome abnormalities of
dysplasia in Irish Setters: a defect in
120 Long SE, Crispin SM (1999)
ocular pigmented epithelial cells in
cyclic GMP metabolism in visual cells.
 Inheritance of multifocal retinal
Beagle dogs with hereditary tapetal
Science 201:1133-1134.
dysplasia in the Golden Retriever in the
degeneration. Current Eye Research
146 Ray K, Baldwin VJ, Ackland GM,
UK. Veterinary Record 145:702-704.
7:115-123.
Blanton SH, Aguirre GD {1994)
121 Crispin SM, Long SE, Wheeler CA
135 Goosey J, Tuan W, Garcia C {1984)
Cosegregation of codon 807 mutation
{1999) Incidence and ocular
A lipid peroxidative mechanism for
of the canine rod cGMP
 manifestations of multifocal retinal
posterior subcapsular cataract
phosphodiesterase B gene and rcd1.
 dysplasia in the Golden Retriever in the
formation in the rabbit: a possible
Investigative Ophthatmotogy and Visuat
UK. Veterinary Record 145:669-672.
model for cataract formation in
Science 35:4291-4299.
122 Gelatt K, Leipold H {1971) Bilateral
tapetoretinal diseases. Investigative
147 Petersen-Jones SM, Entz DD,
optic nerve hypoplasia in two dogs.
Ophthatmotogy and Visuat Science
Sargan DR {1999) cGMP
Canadian Veterinary Journat 12:91-96.
25:608-612.
phosphodiesterase-alpha mutation
123 Ernest J (1976) Bilateral optic nerve
136 Gerstein D, Dantzker D {1969)
causes progressive retinal atrophy in the
hypoplasia in a pup. Journat of the
Retinal vascular changes in hereditary
Cardigan Welsh Corgi dog. Investigative
American Veter inary Medicat
visual cell degeneration. Archives of
Ophthatmotogy and Visuat Science
Association 168:125-128.
Ophthaimology 18:99-105.
40:1637-1644.
124 Sengelaub D, Finlay B {1982) Cell
137 Acland G, Blanton S, Hershfield B,
148 Aguirre G, Rubin L {1975) The
 death in the mammalian visual system
Aguirre G (1994) XLPRA: a canine
 electroretinogram in dogs with inherited
 during normal development. I. Retinal
retinal degeneration inherited as an X-
cone degeneration. Investigative
ganglion cells. Journat of Comparative
linked trait. American Journat of
Ophthatmotogy 14:840-847.
Neurofogy 204:311-319.
Medical Genetics 52:27-33.
149 Wolf E, Vainisi S, Santos-Anderson R
125 Lambert S, Hoyt C, Narahara M
138 Kijas J, Cideciyan A, Aleman T, et af.
[1978) Rod-cone dysplasia in the Collie.
{1987) Optic nerve hypoplasia. Survey
(2002) Naturally occurring rhodopsin
Journat of the American Veterinary
of Ophthatmology 32:1-8.
mutation in the dog causes retinal
Medical Association 173:1331-1333.
126 Saunders L, Rubin L {1975)
dysfunction and degeneration
150 Aguirre G, Farber D, Lolley R, et af.
Ophthatmic Pathotogy of Animats, 1st 
mimicking human dominant retinitis
{1982) Retinal degenerations in the dog.
edn. S Karger, Munchen, pp. 154-155.
pigmentosa. Proceedings of the
Ⅲl. Abnormal cyclic nucleotide
127 Weisse V, Stotzer H {1973)
Nationat Academy of Science
metabolism in rod-cone dysplasia.
Hypoplasie des nervus opticus und
99:6328-6333.
Experimentat Eye Research
 kolobom der papille bei einem jungen
139 Black L {1972) Progressive retinal
35:625-642.
Beagle. Berliner und Munchener
atrophy: a review of the genetics and
Chader G (1991) Animal mutants of 
Tierarztliche Wochenschrift 86:1-2.
 an appraisal of the eradication
hereditary retinal degeneration: general
128 Kern T, Riis R {1981) Optic nerve
scheme. Journat of Small Animat
considerations and studies on defects in
 hypoplasia in three Miniature Poodles.
Practice 13:295-314.
cyclic nucleotide metabolism. Progess in
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
140 Priester W {1974) Canine progressive
Veterinary and Comparative
Medicat Assoc iation 78:49-54.
 retinal atrophy: occurrence by age,
Ophthatmotogy 1:109-126.
129 Greene C, Gorgacz E, Martin C
breed, and sex. American Journat of
152 Parry HG (1953) Degenerations of the
{1982) Hydranencephaly associated
Veterinary R esearch 35:571-574.
dog retina. Il. Generalized progressive
with feline panleukopenia. Journat of
141 Aguirre G {1976) Inherited retinal
atrophy of hereditary origin. British
the American Veterinary Medicat
degeneration in the dog. Transactions
Journal of Ophthatmology 37:487-502.
Assoc iation 180:767-768.
of the American Academy of
 153 Parshall CJ, Wyman M, Nitroy S,
130 Barnett K, Grimes T {1974) Bilateral
Ophthatrology and Ototaryngotogy
Acland G, Aguirre G (1991)
 aplasia of the optic nerve in a cat.
81:667-676.
 Photoreceptor dysplasia: an inherited
British Journat of Ophthatmology
142 Aguirre G, Acland G {1988)
progressive retinal atrophy of Miniature
57:663-667.
Variations in retinal degeneration
Schnauzer dogs. Progress in Veterinary
131 Gelatt K, Leipold H, Coffman J
phenotype inherited at the prcd locus.
cmnd Comparative Ophthatmnology
{1969b) Bilateral optic nerve
Experimentat Eye Research
1:187-203.
hypoplasia in a colt. Journat of the
46:663-687.
154 Cogan D, Kuwabara T (1965)
American Veterinary Medicat
143 Acland G, Boughman J, Aguirre G
Photoreceptive abiotrophy of the retina
Assoc iation 155:627-631.
{1981) Inheritance of progressive rod-
in the Elkhound. Veterinary Pathology
132 Hoyt C, Billson F {1978) Maternal
cone degeneration: a case of gamete
2:101-128.
 anticonvulsants and optic nerve
selection? Proceedings of the Scientific
155 Aguirre G, Rubin L {1971) The early
hypoplasia. British Journat of
Meeting of the American Cottege of
diagnosis of rod dysplasia in the
Ophthatno logy 62:3-6.
Veterinary Ophthatmologists 12:115-
Norwegian Elkhound. Journat of the 
128.
American Veterinary Medicat
Association 159:429-433.
464
O pHThAlMIC DiseAse In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
156 Aguirre G, Rubin L (1971)
167 Anderson R, Maude M, Alvarez R,
179 Acland G (1998) Day blindness in
 Progressive retinal atrophy (rod
Acland G, Aguirre G {1991) Plasma 
German Shorthaired Pointers in the
dysplasia) in the Norwegian
lipid abnormalities in the Miniature
United States: clinical and
Elkhound. Journat of the American 
 Poodle with progressive rod-cone
electroretinographic findings.
Veterinary Medicat Association
degeneration. Experimentat Eye
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
158:208-218.
Research 52:349-355.
the American College of Veterinary
157 Acland G, Gustavo A, Parkes J,
168 Loew E, Ris R (1983) Congenital
Ophthatmologists 29:33.
Liebman P {1983) A new early-onset
nyctalopia in the Tibetan Terrier.
180 Slatter D, Blogg J, Constable I (1980)
inherited retinal degeneration in the
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting
 Retinal degeneration in Greyhounds.
Norwegian Elkhound. Proceedings of
of the American Cotlege of
Australian Veterinary Journat
the Scientific Meeting of the American
Veterinary Ophthatmologists
56:106-115.
Coltege of Veterinary
14:82-97.
181 Scagliotti R, MacMillian A (1977)
Ophthaimotogists 14:98-103.
169 Riis R, Loew E {1988) Pathological
Retinal degeneration in the Borzoi: a
158 Acland G, Aguirre G {1987) Retinal
notations of retinal degeneration {rdi)
preliminary report. Proceedings of the
degenerations in the dog. IV. Early
 in Tibetan Terriers. Proceedingss of
Scientific Meeting of the American
retinal degeneration (ERD) in
the Scientific Meeting of the
College of Veterinary Ophthatmotogists
Norwegian Elkhounds. Experirmenta!
American College of Veterinary
18:67-68.
Eye Research 44:491-521.
Ophthatmologists 19:89.
182 Storey E, Grahn B (2002) Borzoi
159 Acland G, O'Brian P, Aguirre G
170 Millichamp N, Curtis R, Barnett K
retinopathy. Proceedings of the
{1989) Rod renewal is cone-like in
(1988) Progressive retinal atrophy in
Scientific Meeting of the American
early retinal degeneration (erd).
the Tibetan Terrier. Journat of the
College of Veterinary Ophthatmologists
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting
American Veterinary Medicat
33:36.
of the American Coltege of Veterinary
Association 192:769-776.
183 Witzel D, Riis R, Rebhun W.
Ophthatmologists 20:152.
171 O'Toole D, Roberts S {1984)
Hillman R {1977) Night blindness in 
160 Aguirre G, Rubin L (1972)
Generalized progressive retinal
the Appaloosa: sibling occurrence.
 Progressive retinal atrophy in the
atrophy in two Akita dogs.
Journat of Equine Medicine and
Minature Poodle: an
Veterinary Pathology 21:457-462.
Surgery 1:383-386.
electrophysiologic study. Jou rnat of
172 Paulsen M, Severin G, Young S.
184 Narfstrom K, Wrigstad A, Ekesten B,
American Veterinary Medicat
et αf. (1988) Progressive retinal
Nilsson SE (1994) Hereditary retinal
Association 160:191-201.
atrophy in a colony of Akita dogs.
dystrophy in the Briard dog: clinical
161 Sandberg M, Pawlyk B, Berson E
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting
and hereditary characteristics.
{1986) Full-field electroretinograms in
of the American Coltege of
Veterinary and Comparative
 Miniature Poodles with progressive
Veterinary Ophthatmologists 19:1-3.
Ophthatmology 4:85-92.
rod-cone degeneration. Investigative
173 Rubin L {1971) Clinical features of
185 Aguirre G, Baldwin V, Pearce-
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
hemeralopia in the adult Alaskan
 Kelling S, Narfstrom K, Ray K, Acland
27:1179-1184.
Malamute. Journat of the American
G {1998) Congenital stationary night 
162 Parkes J, Aguirre G, Rockey J.
Veterinary Medicat Association
 blindness in the dog: common mutation
 Liebman P (1982) Progressive
158:1696-1698.
in the RPE65 gene indicates founder
rod-cone degeneration in the dog:
174 Rubin L {1971) Hemeralopic in 
effect. Motectalar Vision 4:23-36.
 characterization of the visual pigment.
Alaskan Malamute pups. Jaurnat of
186 Witzel D, Smith E, Wilson R,
Investigative Ophthatmology and
the American Veterinary Medicat
 Aguirre G (1978) Congenital stationary
Visuat Science 23:674-678.
Association 158:1699-1701.
night blindness: an animal model.
163 Barnett K (1965) Canine
175 Koch S, Rubin L {1971)
Investigative Ophthatmology and
retinopathies. I1. The Miniature and
 Distribution of cones in the
Visuat Science 17:788-795.
Toy Poodle. Journat of Smatt Animat
hemeralopic dog. Journat of the
187 Pickett J, Lindley D, Boosinger T,
Practice 6:93-109.
American Veterinary Medicat
 Toivio-Kinnucan M (1991) Stationary
164 Aguirre G, Alligood J, O'Brien P,
Association 159:1257-1259.
night blindness in a Collie. Progress in
Buy ukmihci N (1982) Pathogenesis of
176 Aguirre G, Rubin L {1974)
Veterinary and Comparative
 progressive rod-cone degeneration in
 Pathology of hemeralopia in the
Ophthatmology 1:303-308.
Minature Poodles. Investigative
Alaskan Malamute dog. Investigative
188 Wrigstad A, Nilsson SE, Narfstrom K
Ophthaimotogy and Visuat Science
Ophthatmology 13:231-235.
{1992) Utrastructural changes of the
23:610-630.
177 Rubin L, Bourns T, Lord L {1967)
retina and the retinal pigment
165 Acland G, Marsh R, Northington J
Hemeralopia in dogs: hereditary of
epithelium in Briard dogs with
{1985) Auditory testing of dogs with
hemeralopia in Alaskan Malamutes.
hereditary congenital night blindness
 inherited retinal degeneration.
American Journat of Veterinary
and partial day blindness. Experwmentaf
Investigatitve Ophthatmotogy and
Research 28:355-358.
Eye Research 55:805-818.
Visuat Science 26:785-788.
178 Stanley RG, Acland GM, Vingrys A,
189 Ris R, Siakotos A {1989) Inherited
166 Aguirre G, O'Brien P {1986)
et αf. (1998) Day blindness in
lipid retinopathy within a dog breed.
 Morphological and biochemical
Alaskan Malmutes in Australia:
Investigative Ophthatmology and
studies of canine progressive rod-cone
 clinical and electroretinographic
Visuat Science 30(Supplement):308.
degeneration. Investigative
findings. Proceedings of the Scientific
190 Watson P, Simpson K, Bedford P
uais ponsia puo ksopouudo
Meeting of the American Cottege of
{1993) Hypercholesterolaemia in
27:635-655.
Veterinary Ophthatmologists 29:22.
Briards in the United Kingdom.
Research in Veterinary Science
54:80-85.
ViTrEous AND OCULar FuNDUS
465
191 Parry H (1954) Degeneration of the
204 Cowell K, Jezyk P, Haskins M,
216 Riis R, Siakotos A {1988) The Briard
dog retina. VI. Central progressive
 Patterson D {1976)
lipid retinopathy update. Proceedings of
atrophy with pigment epithelial
Mucopolysaccharidosis in a cat. Journat
the Scientific Meeting of the American
fo pouinof gsnig xydonsip
Of the American Veterinary Medicat
College of Veterinary Ophthatmotogists
Ophthatmology 38:653-668.
Association 169:334-339.
19:87.
192 Aguirre G, Laties A {1976) Pigment
205 Langweiler M, Haskins M, Jezyk P
217 Barnett K {1982) Progressive retinal
epithelial dystrophy in the dog.
{1978) Mucopolysaccharidosis in a
atrophy in the Abyssinian cat.
Experientat Eye Research
litter of cats. Journat of the American
Journat of Smalt Animat Practice
23:247-256.
Aninat Hospitat Association
23:763-766.
193 Curtis R {1988) Retinal diseases in the
14:748-751.
218 Carlile J, Carrington S, Bedford P
 dog and cat: an overview and update.
206 Haskins M, Jezyk P, Desnick R,
{1984) Six cases of progressive retinal
Journat of Small Animat Practice
McDonough S, Patterson D (1979)
atrophy in Abyssinian cats. Journat
29:397-415.
Mucopolysaccharidosis in a domestic
of Small Animat Practice
194 Bedford P {1984) Retinal pigment 
shorthaired cat, a disease distinct from
25:415-420.
epithelial dystrophy {CPRA): a study of
that seen in the Siamese cat. Journat of
219 Narfstrom K (1985) Progressive
the disease in the Briard. Journat of
the American Veterinary Medicat
retinal atrophy in the Abyssinian cat.
Small Animal Practice 25:129-138.
Association 175:384-387.
Investigative Ophthatmoiogy and
195 Barnett K (1969) Genetic anomalies of
207 Breton L, Guerin P, Morin M {1983)
Vsuat Science 26:193-200.
the posterior segment of the canine eye.
A case of mucopolysaccharidosis VI in
220 Narfstrom K, Nilsson S (1986)
Transactions of the Ophthatmotogy
a cat. Journat of the American Animat
Progressive retinal atrophy in the
Society 89:301-313.
Hospitat Association 19:891-896.
Abyssinian cat. Investigative
196 Barnett K {1969) Primary retinal
208 Aguirre G, Stramm L, Haskins M,
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
dystrophies in the dog. Journat of the
Jezyk P (1984) Animal models of 
27:1569-1576.
Armerican Veterinary Medicat
metabolic eye diseases. Proceedings of
 221 Narfstrom K (1983) Hereditary
Association 154:804-808.
the Scientific Meeting of the American
 progressive retinal atrophy in the
197 McLellan GJ, Watson P, Paganga G,
College of Veterinary Ophthatrnologists
Abyssinian cat. Journat of Heredity
Elks R, Lybaert P, Bedford PG {1997)
15:174-240.
74:273-276.
Vitamin deficiency in canine retinal
 209 Jezyk P, Haskins M, Newman L
222 Rubin L, Lipton D {1973) Retinal
 pigment epithelial dystrophy (central
{1986) Alpha-mannosidosis in a Persian
degeneration in kittens. Journat of
retinal atrophy). Proceedings of the
cat. Journat of the American Veterinary
the American Veterinary Medicat
Scientific Meeting of the American
Medicat Association 189:1483-1485.
Association 62:467-469.
ssiopoudo Aiafoaao
 210 Siakotos A, Armstrong D,
223 West-Hyde L, Buyukmihci N (1982)
28:38.
Koppang N, Connole E (1978) Studies
Photoreceptor degeneration in a
198 McLellan GJ, Cappello R, Mayhew IG,
on the retina and the pigment
family of cats. Journat of the
et αf. (2000) Systemic manifestations of
 epithelium in hereditary canine ceroid
American Veterinary Medicaf
vitamin E deficiency in canine RPED
lipofuscinosis. I. The subcellular
Association 181:243-247.
(CPRA). Proceedings of the Scientific
distribution of lysosomal hydrolases
224 Kelly D, Lewis D (1985) Rapidly
Meeting of the American College of
and other enzymes. Investigative
 progressive diffuse retinal
Veterinary Ophthatmotogists 31:41.
Ophthatmotogy and Visuat Science
degeneration in a kitten. Journat of
199 Grahn BH, Philibert H, Cullen CL,
17:618-633
Smalf Animat Practice 26:317-322.
Houston DM, Semple HA, Schmutz SM
211 Berson E, Watson G {1980)
225 Giuliano E, van der Woerdt A
{1998) Multifocal retinopathy of Great
Electroretinograms in English Setters
{1999) Feline retinal degeneration:
Pyrenees dogs. Veterinary
with neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis.
dinical experience and new findings
Ophthatmotogy 1:211-221.
Investigative Ophthatmology and
{1994-1997). Journat of the
200 Grauwels M {1999) Multifocal
Visuat Science 19:87-90.
American Animat Hospitat
retinopathy in a population of Coton de
212 Sisk D, Levesque D, Wood P, Styer E
Association 35:511-514.
Tular dogs. Proceedings of the
(1990) Clinical and pathologic features
226 Rubin L {1963) Atrophy of rods
 Internationat Society of Veterinary
of ceroid lipofuscinosis in two
and cones in the cat retina. Journat
Ophthatmotogy/Eturapean Callege of
Australian Cattle Dogs. Journat of the
of the American Veterinary Medicat
Veterinary Ophthatmologists Meeting.
American Veterinary Medicat
Association 142:1415-1420.
Netwstetter 11:10.
Association 197:361-364.
227 Morris M (1965) Feline
 201 Valle D, Boison A, Jezyk P, Aguirre G
 213 Smith RE, Sutton RH, Jolly RD,
degenerative retinopathy. Cornelf
{1981) Gyrate atrophy of the choroids
 Smith KR (1996) A retinal degeneration
Veter inarian 60:295-308.
and retina in a cat. Investigative
associated with ceroid lipofuscinosis in
228 Brucker R (1949) Uber den
Ophthatmotogy and Visuat Science
 adult Miniature Schnauzers. Veterinary
ophthalmoskopischen nachweis von
20:251-254.
and Comparative Ophthatmotogy
 fovea und arei bei tieren.
202 Murray J, Blakemore W, Barnett K
6:187-191.
Ophthatmologica 118:969-980.
{1977) Ocular lesions in cats with
214 Minatel L, Underwood SC,
229 Bellhorn R, Fischer C {1970) Feline
GM1-gangliosidosis with visceral
Carfagnini JC (2000) Ceroid
central retinal degeneration. Journaf
involvement. Journat of Smafl Animat
lipofuscinosis in a Cocker Spaniel dog.
of the American Veterinary Medicat
Practice 18:1-10.
Veterimary Pathology 37:488-490.
Association 157:842-849.
203 Cork L, Munnell J, Lorenz M (1978)
215 Ris R, Aguirre G {1983) The Briard
230 Soure E {1972) Observations of
The pathology of feline GM2
problem. Proceedings of the Scientific
feline retinal degenerations.
gangliosidosis. American Journat of
Meeting of the American College of
Veter inary Medicine/Smatl Animat
Pathology 90:723-734.
Veterinary Ophthatmotogists 14:62-81.
Clinician 67:983-986.
466
O pHThAlMIC DiseAse In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
231 Bellhorn R, Aguirre G, Bellhorn M
245 Aguirre G {1978) Retinal
258 Hayes K, Nielsen S, Eaton H {1968)
{1974) Feline central retinal
degeneration associated with the
 Pathogenesis of the optic nerve lesion in
degeneration. Investigative
feeding of dog foods to cats. Journat of
vitamin A-deficient calves. Archives of
Ophthatmotogy 13:608-616.
the American Veterinary Mediciat
Ophthatmotogy 80:777-787.
232 Rabin A, Hayes K, Berson E {1973)
Association 172:791-796.
259 Spratling F, Bridge P, Barnett K,
 Cone and rod responses in
246 da Costa P, Hoskin J (1990) The role
Abrams J, Palmer A (1965)
 nutritionally-induced retinal
of taurine in cats: current concepts.
 Experimental hypovitaminosis-A in
degeneration in the cat. Investigative
Compendium on Continuing Education
calves. Veterinary Record
Ophthatmo logy 12:694-704.
for the Practicing Veterinarian
77:1532-1542.
233 Hayes K, Carey R, Schmidt S (1975)
12:1235-1240.
260 Barnett K, Palmer A, Abrams J,
 Retinal degeneration associated with
 247 Loew F, Martin C, Dunlap R,
Bridge P L, Spratling F, Sharman I
taurine deficiency in the cat. Science
Mapletoft R, Smith S (1970) Naturally
[1970) Ocular changes associated with
188:949-951.
 occurring and experimental thiamine
hypovitaminosis A in cattle. Bitish
234 Anderson P, Baker D, Corbin J,
deficiency in cats receiving commercial
Veterinary Journat 126:561-573.
Helper L (1979) Biochemical lesions
cat food. Canadian Veterinary Journat
261 Moore I(i941) Some ocular changes
associated with taurine deficiency in
11:109-113
and deficiency manifestations in mature 
the cat. Journat of Animat Science
 248 Rubin L {1974) Atlas of Veterinary
cows fed a ration deficient in vitamin A.
49:1227-1234.
 Ophthatmotogy. Lea and Febiger,
Journat of Dairy Science 24:893-902.
235 Wen G, Sturman J, Wisniewski H,
Philadelphia, pp. 1-470.
262 Divers T, Blackmon D, Martin C,
Lidsky A, Cornwell A, Hayes K {1979)
249 Hayes K, Rousseau J, Hegsted D
Worrell D (1986) Blindness and
Tapetum disorganization in taurine-
{1970) Plasma tocopherol
convulsions associated with vitamin A
depleted cats. Investigative
 concentrations and vitamin E deficiency
deficiency in feedlot steers. Journat of
Ophthatmotogy and Vistuat Science
in dogs. Journat of the American
the American Veterinary Medicat
18:1200-1206.
Veterinary Medicat Association
Association 189:1579-1582.
236 Pion P, Kittleson M, Rogers Q.
157:64-71.
263 Van Donkersgoed J, Clark E {1988)
Morris J {1987) Myocardial failure in
250 Ris R, Sheffy B, Loew E, Kern T,
 Blindness caused by hypovitaminosis A
 cats associated with low plasma
 Smith J (1981) Vitamin E deficiency
in feedlot cattle. Canadian Veterinary
taurine: a reversible cardiomyopathy.
retinopathy in dogs. American Journat
Journat 29:925-927.
Science 237:764-768.
of Veterinary Research 42:74-86.
264 Schaller J, Wyman M, Weisbrode S,
237 Williams-Retz L, O'Brien S (1990)
251 Davidson MG, Geoly EJ, Gilger BC,
Olsen R {1981) Induction of retinal
The role of taurine in the feline well
McLellan GJ, Whitley W (1998) Retinal
degeneration in cats by methylnitrosurea
being. Iotua State University
 degeneration associated with vitamin E
 and ketamine hydrochloride. Veterinary
Veter imar ian 52:23-26.
 deficiency in hunting dogs. Journat of
Pathology 18:239-247.
238 Berson E, Hayes K, Rabin A,
the American Veterinary Medicat
265 Evans E (2000) Bayer, Agricultural
Watson G {1976) Retinal degeneration
Ass0ciation213:645-651.
Division (letter sent to veterinarians).
 in cats fed casein. II. Supplementation 
252 Jackson CA, Ris RC, Rebhun WC,
266 Barclay S, Ris R {1979) Retinal
with methionine, cysteine, or taurine.
et af. (1995) Ocular manifestations of
detachment and reattachment associated
Investigative Ophthaimotogy
 equine motor neuron disease.
with ethylene glycol intoxication in a
15:52-58.
Proceedings of the American
cat. Journat of the American Animat
239 Schmidt S, Berson E, Hayes K {1976)
Association of Equine Practitioners
Hospitat Association 15:719-124.
Retinal degeneration in cats fed casein.
41:225-227.
267 Hopkins K, Marcella K, Strecker A
1. Taurine deficiency. Investigatiue
253 Tvedten H, Whitehair C (1977)
(1990) Ivermectin toxicosis in a dog.
Ophthatmology 15:47-52.
Torulopsis giabrata and vitamin A
Journal of the American Veterinary
240 Barnett K, Burger I {1980) Taurine
deficiency in dogs. American Journat of
Medicat Association 197:93-94.
deficiency retinopathy in the cat.
Veterimary Research 38:1941-1948.
268 Ketring K {1990) Presumed ocular
Journat of Smalf Animat Practice
254 Paulsen M, Johnson L, Young S {1989)
toxicity of ivermectin. Proceedings of
21:521-534.
 Blindness and sexual dimorphism
the Kat Kan Symposium, Colombus,
241 Ricketts J {1983) Feline central retinal
associated with vitamin A deficiency in
Ohio 13:109-110.
 degeneration in the domestic cat.
feedlot cattle. Journat of the American
269 Van Kampen K, James L (1971)
Journat of Smalf Animat Practice
Veterinary Medicat Association
Ophthalmic lesions in locoweed
24:221-227.
194:933-937.
poisoning of cattle, sheep, and horses.
242 Brewer N (1982) Nutrition of the cat.
 255 Moore L, Huffman C, Duncan C
Anerican Journal of Veterinary
Joturnat of the American Veterinary
[1935) Blindness in cattle associated
Research 32:1293-1295.
Medicat Association 180:1179-1182.
with a constriction of the optic nerve
270 Watson W, Barnett K, Terlecki S (1972)
243 Erbersdobler VH {1983) Durch
 and probably of nutritional origin.
Progressive retinal degeneration (bright 
taurinmangel bedingte
Journat of Nutrition 9:533-551.
 blindness) in sheep: a review. Veterinary
 augenkrankheiten bei katzen sowie zur
256 Wetzel J, Moore L {1940) Blindness in
Record 91:665-670.
taurinversorgung von katzen.
cattle due to papilledema. Armerican
271 Rosen E, Edgar J, Smith J {1970) Male
Tierarzttiche Umnschau 38:340-344.
Journat of Ophthatmology 23:499-513.
 fern retrobullar neuropathy in cattle.
244 Hickman MA (2000) Bioavailability
257 Blakemore F, Ottaway C, Sellers K,
Journat of Smatt Animat Practice
of taurine for cats. Compenditum on
Eden E, Moore T {1957) The effects of
10:619-625.
Continuing Education for the
a diet deficient in vitamin A on the
Practic ing Veterinarian 22:33-35.
development of the skull optic nerves.
and brain of cattle. Journat of
Comparative Pathotogy 67:277-288.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FuNDUS
467
272 Quigley H, Addicks E (1980) Chronic
282 Acland G, Irby N, Aguirre G, Gross S,
 293 Parry H (1954) Degenerations of the
 experimental glaucoma in primates. I.
Nitroy S, Notarfrancesco K {1984)
dog retina. IV. Retinopathies associated
 Effect of extended intraocular pressure
Sudden acquired retinal degeneration in
with distemper-complex virus infections.
 elevation on optic nerve head and
the dog: clinical and morphologic
British Journat of Ophthatmotogy
axonal transport. Investigative
characterization of the 'silent retina*
38:295-309.
 Ophthatmology and Vistuat Science
syndrome. Proceedings of the Scientific
294 Jubb K, Saunders L, Coates H (1957)
19:137-152.
Meeting of the American Coltege of
The intraocular lesions of canine
273 Williams L, Gelatt K, Gum G,
Veterinary Ophthatmotogists
distemper Journat of Comparative
 Samuelson S, Merideth R (1980)
15:86-104.
Pathology 67:21-29.
Orthograde rapid axoplasmic transport
283 Bellhorn R, Murphy C, Thirkill C
295 Fischer C {1971) Retinal and
 and ultrastructural changes of the optic
{1988) Antiretinal immunoglobulins in
retinochoroidal lesions in early
nerve of normotensive, acute ocular
canine ocular diseases. Serminars in
neuropathic canine distemper. Journat of
hypertensive, and glaucomatous
Veterinary Medicine and Surgery
the American Veterinary Medicat
Beagles. Proceedings of the Scientific
3:28-32.
Association 158:740-752.
Meeting of the American College of
284 Ris R {1990) EM observations of a
296 MacMillian A (1974) Retinat dysplasid
Veter inary Ophthatmotogists
SARD case. Proceedings of the Scientific
and degeneration in the young cat: feline
11:172-206.
Meeting of the American College of
panteukopenia virus as an etiologic
274 Minckler D, Spaeth G {1981) Optic
Veterinary Ophthatnologists
agent. Davis PhD dissertation,
nerve damage in glaucoma. Survey of
21:112-113.
University of California.
Ophthatmo togy 26:128-148.
285 OToole D, Nunmaker R (1992)
297 Percy D, Scott F, Albert D {1975)
275 Whiteman A, Klaus G, Miller P,
Sudden acquired retinal degeneration
Retinal dysplasia due to feline
Nayden D, Dubielzig R (1999)
 (silent retina syndrome) in two dogs.
panleukopenia virus infection. Journat
Progressive retinal degeneration in
Veterimary Record 130:157-161.
of the American Veterinary Medicat
 spontaneous canine primary glaucoma
286 Miller PE, Glbreath EJ, Kehren JC,
Association 167:935-937.
during the seven days following the
Steinberg H, Dubielzig R (1998)
298 Severin G {1995) Severin's Veterinary
 onset of clinical disease in Cocker
 Photoreceptor cell death by apoptosis in
 Ophthatmology Notes. Design Pointe
Spaniels and Basset Hounds.
 dogs with sudden acquired retinal
 Communications, Fort Collins, pp.
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
degeneration syndrome. Armerican
1-546.
the Armerican Cotlege of Veterinary
Journat of Veterinary Research
299 Albert D, Lahav M, Carmichael L
Ophthatmo logists 30:43.
59:149-152.
(1976) Canine herpes-induced retinal
276 Heywood R, Hepworth P, van
287 van der Woerdt A, Wilkie D, Myer C
 dysplasia and associated ocular
Abbe N (1976) Age changes in the eyes
(1993) Utrasonographic abnormalities
anomalies. Investigative Ophthatology
of the Beagle dog. Journat of Small
in the eyes of dogs with cataracts: 147
15:267-278.
Anmat Practice 17:171-177.
cases {1986-1992). Journat of the
300 Doherty M {1971) Ocular
277 Bellhorn R, Haring B (1974)
Armerican Veterinary Medicat
manifestations of feline infectious
Peripheral retinal cysts. Veterinary
Association 203:838-841.
peritonitis. Journat of the American
Medicine/Small Animat Clinician
 288 Hendrix DV, Nasisse M, Cowen P,
Veterinary Medicat Association
69:1528-1530.
 Davidson M (1993) Clinical signs,
159:417-424.
278 Okun E, Rubin L, Collins E {1961)
concurrent diseases, and risk factors 
301 Bistner S, Rubin L, Saunders L {1970)
 Retinal breaks in the senile dog eye.
associated with retinal detachment in
The ocular lesions of bovine viral
Archives of Ophthatmotogy
 dogs. Progress in Veterinary and
diarrhea mucosal disease. Veterinary
66:702-707.
Comparative Ophthatmology 3:87-91.
Pathology 7:275-286.
279 van der Woerdt A, Nasisse M,
 289 Peiffer R, Wilcock B, Yin H (1990)
302 Martin C {1981) Retinopathies of food
 Davidson M (1991) Sudden acquired
 The pathogenesis and significance of
animals. In: Current Therapy of Food
 retinal degeneration in the dog: clinical
 preiridal fibrovascular membrane in
Animats. J Howard (ed). WB Saunders,
 and laboratory findings in 36 cases.
domestic animals. Veterinary Pathology
Philadelphia, p. 1067-1072.
Progress in Veterinary and
27:41-45.
303 Jubb K, Saunders L, Stenius P (1960)
Comparative Ophthatmotogy 1:11-18.
290 Nelms SR, Nasisse MP, Davidson MG,
 Die histologischen augenveranderungen
280 Holt E, Feldman E, Buyukmihci N
Kirschner SE (1993) Hyphema
beim bosartigen kartarrhalfieber des
{1999) The prevalence of
 associated with retinal disease in dogs:
rindes. Schtweizer Archiv fur
hyperadrenocorticism {Cushing's
17 cases {1986-1991). Journat of the
Tierheitkunde 102:392-400.
syndrome) in dogs with sudden
American Veterinary Medicat
304 Whiteley H, Young S, Liggitt H,
acquired retinal degeneration (SARD).
Association 202:1289-1292.
Demartini J {1985) Ocular lesions of 
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
291 Netland PA, Mukai S, Covington H
bovine malignant catarrhal fever.
the American Cottege of Veterinary
{1994) Elevated intraocular pressure
Veterimary Pathology 22:219-225.
Ophthatmo ogists 30:35.
 secondary to rhegatogenous retinal
305 Meyers S, Wagnild J, Wallow I, et at.
281 Abrams K, Gareen I, Marchand K
detachment. Survey of Ophthatmology
(1978) Septic choroiditis with serous 
(2001) Factors assocoiated with canine
39:234-240.
detachment of the retina in dogs.
sudden acquired retinal detachment
 292 Sith PJ, Mames RN, Samuelson DA,
Investigative Ophthatmology and Visuat
syndrome (SARDS): 350 cases.
Lewis PA, Brooks DE {1997)
Science 17:1104-1109.
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
 Photoreceptor outer segments in
the American Cotlege of
aqueous humor from dogs with
Ophthatmo logists 32:17.
rhegmatogenous retinal detachments.
Journat of the American Veterinary
Medicat Association 211:1254-1256.
468
OpHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
306 Hatfield C, Rebhun W, Dietze A,
319 Vainisi S, Campbell H {1969) Ocular
334 Russo M (1979) Primary reticulosis of
Carlisle M (1987) Endocarditis and
toxoplasmosis in cats. Journat of the
the central nervous system in dogs.
 optic neuritis in a Quarter horse mare.
Armerican Veterinary Medicat
Journat of the American Veterinary
Compendium on Continuing Education
Association 154:141-152.
Medicat Association 174:492-500.
for the Practicing Veterinarian
320 Macintire DK, Vincent-Johnson N,
335 Garmer N, Naeser P, Bergman A
9:451-454.
Dillon AR, et af. (1997) Hepatozoonosis
{1981) Reticulosis of the eyes and the
307 Formston C (1994) Retinal detachment
in dogs: 22 cases {1989-1994). Jourmnat
central nervous system in a dog.
and bovine tuberculosis in cats. Journat
Of the American Veterinary Medicat
Journat of Smatt Animat Practice
of Small Animat Practice 35:5-8.
Association 210:916-922.
22:39-45.
308 MacDonald D, Christian R,
321 Rubin L, Saunders L (1965)
336 Bailey C, Higgins R (1986)
Chalmers G (1973) Infectious
 Intraocular larva migrans in dogs.
Characteristics of cerebrospinal fluid
thromboembolic meningoencephalitis:
Veterinary Pathology 2:566-573.
associated with canine granulomatous
literature review and occurrence in
322 Hughes P, Dubielzig R, Kazacos K
meningoencephalomyelitis: a
Alberta. Canadian Veterinary Journat
{1987) Multifocal retinitis in New
retrospective study. Journal of the
14:57-61.
Zealand Sheepdogs. Veter inary
Amer ican Veterinary Medicat
309 Roberts S {1962) Fundus lesions in
Pathology 24:22-27.
Association 188:418-421.
equine periodic ophthalmia. Journat of
323 Brooks D, Wolf E, Merideth R {1984)
 337 Palmer A, Malinowski W, Barnett K
the American Veterinary Medicat
Ophthalmoyiasis interna in two cats.
(1974) Clinical signs including
Association 141:229-239.
Journat of the American Animat
 papilloedema associated with brain
310 Walde V, Burtscher H (1980) Ablatio
Hospitat Association 20:157-160.
tumors in twentyone dogs. Journat of
retinae infolge kryptokokkose beim
324 Cello R {1971) Ocular onchocerciasis
Snall Anumat Practice 15:359-386.
hund. Kleintier Praxis 25:251-264.
in the horse. Equine Veterinary Journat
338 Hayreh S {1978) Fluids in the anterior
311 Gelatt K, Chrisman C, Samuelson D,
3:148-153.
part of the optic nerve in health and
Shell L, Buergelt C (1991) Ocular and
325 Weisse I, Seitz R, Stegmann H (1981)
disease. Survey of Ophthatmology
systemic aspergillosis in a dog. Journat
Eine multifokale serose chorioretinitis
23:1-24.
of the American Animat Hospitat
beim Beagle. Veterinary Pathology
 339 Gelatt K, Leipold H, Finocchio E,
Association 27:427-431.
18:1-12.
Coffman J (1971) Optic disk
312 Migaki G, Font R, Sauer R {1982)
326 Giger U, Werner L, Millichamp N,
astrocytoma in a horse. Canadian
Canine protothecosis: a review of the
Gorman N {1985) Sulfadiazine-induced
Veterinary Journat 12:53-55.
literature and report of an additional
allergy in six Doberman Pinschers.
340 Saunders L, Bistner S, Rubin L {1972)
case. Journat of the American Veter inary
Journat of the American Veterinary
 Proliferative optic neuropathy in the
Medicat Association 181:794-797.
Medicat Association 186:479-484.
horse. Veterinary Pathology 9:368-378.
313 Schultze AE, Ring RD, Morgan RV,
327 Gwin R, Wyman M, Ketring K,
341 Vestre W, Turner T, Carlton W (1982)
 Patton Cs (1998) Clinical, cytologic,
Winston S {1980) Idiopathic uveitis
 Proliferative optic neuropathy in a
and histopathologic manifestations of
and exudative retinal detachment in the
horse. Journat of the American
protothecosis in two dogs. Veterinary
dog. Journat of the American Animat
Veterinary Medicat Association
Ophthatmology 1:239-243.
Hospitat Association 16:163-170.
181:490-491.
314 Glaze M, Gaunt S (1986) Uveitis
328 Andrew SE, Abrams KL, Brooks DE,
342 Platt H, Barnett K, Barry D, Bell A
associated with Ehrtichia piatys
 Kubilis PS (1997) Clinical features of
{1983) Degenerative lesions of the optic
infection in a dog. Journat of the 
steroid-responsive retinal detachments
nerve in Equidae. Equine Veterinary
American Veterinary Medicat
 in twenty-two dogs. Veterinary and
 Journat Supplement 2:91-97.
Association 188:916-918.
Comparative Ophthatmotogy 7:82-87.
343 Hardy J, Robertson J, Wilkie D (1990)
315 Swanson J, Dubielzig R {1986) Clinical
329 Wilcock B, Peiffer R (1987) The
Ischemic optic neuropathy and blindness
and histopathological characteristics of
pathology of len-induced uveitis in
after arterial occlusion for treatment of
acute canine ocular ehrlichiosis.
dogs. Veterinary Pathology
guttural pouch mycosis in two horses.
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting of
24:549-553.
Journat of the American Veterinary
the American College of Veterinary
330 Constable I, Slatter D, Horne R
Medicat Association 196:1631-1634.
Ophthatrmotogists 117:219-232.
[1980) Chorioretinal biopsy in dogs.
344 Martin C, Leipold H, Radostits O
316 Martin C (1982) Ocular signs of
Investigative Ophthatmalogy and
(1972) Polycythemia in a calf: ocular
 Systemic diseases. Modern Veterinary
Vistuat Science 19:603-609.
findings. Veterinary Medicine/Small
Practice 63:799-804.
331 Fischer C, Jones G (1972) Optic
Animal Ctinician 67:885-889.
 317 Ellett E, Playter R, Pierce K {1973)
neuritis in dogs. Jouarnat of the
345 Lombard C, Twitchell M (1978)
Retinal lesions associated with induced
Amer ican Veterinary Medicat
 Tetralogy of fallot, persistent left cranial
 canine ehrlichiosis: a preliminary report.
Association 160:68-79.
vena cava, and retinal detachment in a
Journat of the American Animat
332 Walde V, Swoboda R (1980) Die,
cat. Journat of the American Animat
Hospitat Association 9:214-218.
plotzliche Erblindung des hundes,
Hospitat Association 14:624-630.
318 Davidson M, Nasisse M,
diagnostik-therapie-prognose. Kleintier
346 Shull R, Osborne C, Barrett R, et at.
Breitschwerdt E, Roberts S,
Praxis 25:61-78.
[1978) Serum hyperviscosity syndrome
Armstrong P (1986) Ocular
333 Fischer C, Si-Kwang L {1971) Neuro-
associated with IgA multiple myeloma
manifestations of Rocky Mountain 
ophthalmologic manifestations of
in two dogs. Journat of the American
spotted fever in dogs. Proceedings of the
 primary reticulosis of the central
Animat Hosp itat Association 14:58-70.
Scientific Meeting of the American
nervous system in a dog. Journat of the
College of Veterinary Ophthatmotogists
Amer ican Veterinary Medicat
117:335-337.
Association 158:1240-1248.
VITREOUS AND OCULAR FuNDUS
469
347 Center S, Smith J (1982) Ocular lesions 
360 Kobayashi D, Peterson M, Graves T,
371 Keyes J, Goldblatt H {1938)
 in a dog with serum hyperviscosity
 Lesser M, Nichols C {1990)
 Experimental hypertension. VIII.
secondary to an IgA myeloma. Journat
Hypertension in cats with chronic renal
Vascular changes in the eyes. Archives
of the American Veterinary Medicat
failure or hyperthryoidism. Journat of
of Ophthatmology 20:812-825.
Association 181:811-813.
Veterinary Internat Medicine 4:58-62.
372 Hayreh S, Servais G, Virdi P {1985)
348 Bublot M, Thiriart C, Grauwels M,
 361 Dukes J (1992) Hypertension: a review
 Fundus lesions in malignant 
et af. (1985) Myelome multiple a IgG
of the mechanisms, manifestations, and
hypertension. II. Arterial blood
complilque du syndrome
 management. Journat of Smatt Anirmat
pressure, biochermical, and fundus
d'hyperviscosite chez un chien. Annales
Practice 33:119-129.
changes. Ophthatmology 92:45-59.
de Medicime Vetermaire 129:555-564.
362 Stiles J, Polzin DJ, Bistner SI {1994) The
373 Hayreh S, Servais G, Virdi P {1985)
349 Hendrix DV, Gelatt K, Smith PJ,
 prevalence of retinopathy in cats with
 Fundus lesions in malignant
Brooks DE, Whittaker C {1998)
systermic hypertension and chronic renal
 hypertension. IV. Focal intraretinal
Ophthalmic disease as the presenting
failure or hyperthyroidism. Journat of the
 periarteriolar transudates.
complaint in five dogs with multiple
Amer ican Animat Hospitat Association
Ophthaimology 92:60-73.
myeloma. Journat of the American
30:564572.
374 Morgan R {1986) Systemic
Animat Hospitat Association
363 van der Woerdt A, Peterson ME (1998)
hypertension in four cats: ocular and
34:121-128.
 Prevalence of ocular abnormalities in cats
medical findings. Journat of the
 350 Gelatt K {1979) Neuroretinopathy in
with hyperthyroidism. Proceedings of the
American Animat Hospital
the horse. Equine Medicine and Sturgery
Scientific Meeting of the American
Association 22:615-621.
3:91-96.
College of Veterinary Ophthatmologists
375 Ross L {1990) Hypertensive disease. In:
351 Ballen P, Fox M, Weissman G {1985)
29:26.
Current Veterinary Therapy, 10th edn.
 Ischemic optic neuropathy secondary to
364 Sansom J, Barnett KC, Dunn KA,
R Kirk {ed). WB Saunders, Philadelphia,
intestinal hemorrhage. Annais of
Smith KC, Dennis R {1994) Ocular
pp.2047-2056.
Ophthatmology 17:486-488.
disease associated with hypertension
376 Engerman R, Bloodworth J (1965)
 352 Kern T, Ris R {1980) Ocular
in 16 cats. Journat of Smaft Anima!
 Experimental diabetic retinopathy in
 manifestations of secondary
Practice 35:604-611.
dogs. Archives of Ophthatnology
hyperlipidemia associated with
 365 Turner L, Brogdon J, Lees G,
73:205-210.
 hypothyroidism and uveitis in a dog.
Greco D {1990) Idiopathic
377 Patz A, Berkow J, Maumenee A, Cox J
Joturnai of the American Animat Hospital
hypertension in a cat with secondary
{1965) Studies on diabetic retinopathy.
Association 16:907-914.
hypertensive retinopathy associated
I. Retinopathy and nephropathy in 
353 Wyman M, McKissick G {1973)
with a high-salt diet. Journat of the
spontaneous canine diabetes. Diabetes
 Lipemia retinalis in a dog and cat: case
American Animat Hospitat
14:700-708.
reports. Journat of the American Animal
Association 26:647-651.
378 Gepts W, Toussaint D (1967)
Hosp itat Association 9:288-291.
366 Bovee K, Littman M, Crabtree B,
Spontaneous diabetes in dogs and cats: a
354 Rogers W, Donovan D, Kociba G
Aguirre G {1989) Essential
pathologic study. Diabetotogid
(1975) Idiopathic hyperlipoproteinemia
hypertension in a dog. Journat of the
3:249-265.
in dogs. Journal of the American
American Veterinary Medicat
379 Sibay T, Hausler H {1967) Eye findings
Veterinary Medicat Association
Association 195:81-86.
 in two spontaneously diabetic related
166:1087-1091.
367 Paulsen M, Allen T, Jaenke R,
dogs. American Journat of
355 Halenda RM, Moore CP (1998)
Ching S, Severin G, Hammond T
Ophthatmology 63:289-294.
 Presumed lipid retinopathy in a diabetic
{1989a) Arterial hypertension in two
380 Toole D, Miller G, Hazel S {1984)
dog. Veterinary Ophthatmology
canine siblings: ocular and systemic
 Bilateral retinal microangiopathy in a
1:171-174.
manifestations. Journat of the
dog with diabetes mellitus and
356 Gwin R, Gelatt K, Terrell T, Hood C
American Animat Hospitat
hypoadrenocorticism. Veterinary
{1978) Hypertensive retinopathy
Association 25:287-295.
Pathofogy 21:120-121.
associated with hypothyroidism,
368 Maggio F, DeFrancesco TC,
381 Barnett K {1981) Diabetic retinopathy
 hypercholesterolemia, and renal failure in
Atkins CE, Pizzirani A, Gilger BC,
in the dog. British Journat of
a dog. Journat of the American Animat
 Davidson MG (2000) Ocular lesions
Ophthatmology 65:312-314.
Hospitat Association 14:200-209.
associated with systemic hypertension
382 Monti F, Bellan B, Berardi S,
 357 Manning P (1979) Thyroid gland and 
in cats: 69 cases {1985-1998). Journaf
Peruccio C {1976) The clinical picture of 
 arterial lesions of Beagles with familial
of the American Veterinary Mediciat
diabetic retinopathy in the dog. Folia
hypothyroidism and
Association 217:695-702.
Veteriniaria Latina 6:249-274.
hyperlipoproteinemia. Armerican Journat
369 Ortega T, Feldman D, Nelson R,
383 Herrtage M, Barnett K, MacDougall D
of Veterinary Research 40:820-828.
Willits N, Cowgill L (1996) Systemic
{1985) Diabetic retinopathy in a cat
 358 Rubin L {1975) Ocular manifestations
arterial blood pressure and urine
with megestrol acetate-induced diabetes.
 of arteriosclerosis and hypertension in
 protein/creatinine ratio in dogs with
Journat of Small Aninat Practice
dogs. Proceedings of the Scientific
hperadrenocorticism. Journat of the
26:595-601.
American Veterinary Medicat
384 Takahashi Y, Wyman M, Ferris F.
Veterinary Ophthatmalogists 6:56-68.
Association 209:1724-1729.
Kador P {1992) Diabetes-like
359 Cowgill L, Kallet A {1983) Recognition 
370 Elliott J, Barber P, Syme H,
 preproliferative retinal changes in
 and management of hypertension in the
Rawlings J, Markwell P (2001) Feline 
galactose-fed dogs. Archives of
dog.In: CurTent Veterinary Therapy
hypertension: clinical findings and
Ophthatmology 110:1295-1302.
VIII. RW Kirk (ed). WB Saunders,
 response to antihypertensive treatment
Philadelphia, pp. 1025-1028.
 in 30 cases. Journat of Small Animat
Practice 42:122-129.
470
OpHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
385 Kador PF, Akagi Y, Terubayashi H,
391 Martin C, Kaswan R, Chapman W
 398 Schoster JV, Dubielzig RR, Sullivan L
Wyman M, Kinoshita JH (1988)
{1986) Four cases of traumatic optic
[1993) Choroidal melanoma in a dog.
Prevention of pericyte ghost formation
nerve blindness in the horse. Equine
Journat of the American Veterinary
in retinal capillaries of galactose-fed
Veterinary Journat 18:133-137.
Medicat Association 203:89-91.
dogs by aldose reductase inhibitors.
392 Davidson M, Nasisse M, Jamieson V,
399 Weisse V, Stotzer H {1971)
Archives of Ophthatmotogy
 English R, Olivero D {1991) Traumatic
Intraokulares melanom bei einerm
106:1099-1102.
anterior lens capsule disruption. Journat
jungen Beagle kasuistische mittilung.
386 Kador PF, Akagi Y, Takahashi Y,
of the American Animat Hospitat
Bertiner und Munchener Tierarztliche
 Ikebe H, Wyman W, Kinoshita JH
Association 27:410-414.
Wochenschrift 84(17):328-330.
{1990) Prevention of retinal vesse]
393 Rebhun W (1986) Traumatic optic
400 O'Toole D, Murphy J {1983) Spindle B
changes associated with diabetic
neuropathy: how to prevent permanent 
cell melanoma in the choroid of a dog.
retinopathy in galactose-fed dogs by
blindness. Veterinary Medicine/Small
Journat of Small Animat Practice
aldose reductase inhibitors. Archives of
Anmat Clinician 81:350-353.
24:561-567.
Ophthatmology 108:1301-1309.
394 Levin LA, Beck RW, Joseph MP,
401 Aguirre G, Brown G, Shields J.
387 Mansour SZ, Hatchell DL,
Seiff S, Kraker R {1999) The treatment 
Dubielzig R (1984) Melanoma of the
Chandler D, Saloupis P, Hatchell MC
of traumatic optic neuropathy: the
choroid in a dog. Journat of the
{1990) Reduction of basement
international optic nerve trauma study.
American Animat Hospitat Association
 membrane thickening in diabetic cat
Ophthatmology 106:1268-1277.
20:471-476.
retina by sulindac. Investigative
395 Brooks DE, Komaromy AM,
402 Dubielzig R, Aguirre G, Gross S,
Ophthatmatogy and Visuat Science
Kallberg ME (1999) Comparative optic
Diters R (1985) Choroidal melanomas
31:457-563.
nerve physiology: implications for
in dogs. Veterinary Pathotogy
 388 Schiavo D, Field W (1975) Retinal
 glaucoma, neuroprotection, and 
22:582-585.
arteriolar macroaneurysms in a Beagle
 neuroregeneration. Veterinary
403 Hogan RN, Albert DM (1991) Does
dog. Veterinary Medicine/Smatl Animat
Ophthatmotogy 2:13-25.
retinoblastoma occur in animals?
Clinician 70:733-736.
396 Weinreb RN, Levin LA {1999) Is
Progress in Veterinary and Comparative
 389 Patz A (1965) The effect of oxygen on
neuroprotection a viable therapy for
Ophthatmatogy 1:73-82.
immature retinal vessles. Investigative
glaucoma? Archives of Ophthatmology
404 Syed NA, Nork M, Poulsen GL,
Ophthatmology 4:988-999.
117:1540-1544.
Ris RC, George C, Albert DM (1997)
390 McLeod DS, D'Anna SA, Lutty GA
397 Collinson PN, Peiffer RL {1993)
Retinoblastoma in a dog. Archives of
{1998) Clinical and histopathologic
Clinical presentation, morphology, and 
Ophthatmotogy 115:758-763.
features of canine oxygen-induced
behavior of primary choroidal
405 Cassotis NJ, Dubielzig RR, Gilger BC,
proliferative retinopathy. Investigative
melanomas in eight dogs. Progress in
 Davidson MG (1999) Angioinvasive
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
Veterinary and Comparative
pulmonary carcinoma with posterior
39:1918-1932.
Ophthatmotogy 3:158-164.
segment metastasis in four cats.
Veterinary Ophthatmology 2:125-131.
471
15
Presumed Inherited
Ocular Diseases
R. David Whitley
Kristina R. Vygantas
INTRODUCTION
Other countries are also making efforts to formalize
certification schemes for inherited ocular diseases3, 6.
Diagnosis and clinical assessment of visual changes in the
The utilization of molecular genetic techniques has
dog are important aspects of small animal practice. Pet
revolutionized the diagnosis of hereditary ocular
owners often assume that an eye problem affects an animal
disease. Many of the first veterinary diagnostic DNA
to the same extent as it would a person. Thus the owner
tests were developed in the field of veterinary
can become extremely apprehensive about the disorder.
 ophthalmology, specifically in the diagnosis of inherited
 Knowing or suspecting that the underlying cause of a
retinal degeneration. Genetic diagnostic techniques are
disorder is heritable has considerable influence on the
 now also being developed for other systemic hereditary
advice a veterinarian gives an owner or breederl. 2. To
diseases such as von Willebrand's disease, pyruvate
 provide an accurate diagnosis and prognosis, and to offer 
kinase deficiency of Basenjis, and copper toxicosis of
genetic counseling, veterinarians should be aware of
 Bedlington Terriers?.
breed predispositions and inheritability of ocular
If the specific mutation responsible for a given disease
diseases. Signalment, history, and ophthalmic examin-
is known, then a mutation based test can be developed
ation findings form the diagnostic data base.
that can very precisely identify the presence or absence of
The Canine Eye Registry Foundation (CERF), which
that mutation in a given dog's test sample. In autosomal
was established in 1974, serves as a data collection
recessive diseases, two copies of the mutant allele are
agency for purebred dogs. The CERF also functions as a
necessary for expression of the given disease. Dogs that
registry for *clear-eyed dogs (dogs free of major herita ble
 are *carriers" do not have the disease but carry one copy
eye
 diseases such as cataracts, PRA, and corneal
of the mutant gene that they can pass on to offspring.
dystrophies). To register a dog with the CERF an owner
Most canine hereditary retinal degenerations are caused
must have the dog examined by a member of the
by autosomal recessive disorders. Mutation based tests
American  College of  Veterinary Ophthalmologists
can identify with 100% accuracy dogs that are
{ACVO) before applying for a CERF registry number.
genetically normal with respect to a particular gene, dogs
The examination is performed after the pupils are
that are carriers, or dogs that are affected. These tests can
dilated, utilizing slit lamp biomicroscopy and indirect
be performed at a very early age, even before the onset of
 ophthalmoscopy. The registration is valid for 1 year from
 Clinical signs of the disease&.
the date of examination. A CERF number is evidence
Commercially available mutation based tests currently
that the dog was examined and determined to be
exist for three specific forms of retinal degeneration in
 phenotypically free of major hereditary eye disease as of
the dog. In Irish Setters, rod-cone dysplasia 1 (rcd-1) is 
the date examined.
characterized by abnormal development of rod and cone
The CERF and the veterinary medical database at Purdue
photoreceptors due to a_mutation in the cGMP
mainly for certification of Rocky Mountain horses124
of phototransduction in the retina. Through the
The European College of Veterinary Ophthalmolgists
technique of mismatch PCR, the test is able to determine
(ECVO) has developed a process to certify animals free
whether a dog is genetically *clear', is a carrier that will
of inherited eye disease. A common certificate is used
 never develop rcd-1, or is affected due to the presence of
throughout Europe3, 4. Examinations are performed by
two copies of the mutant allele.
ECVO diplomates, ACVO diplomates, or nonECVO
Rod-cone dysplasia type 3 (rcd-3) is a disease of
diplomates who are trained and tested by the ECVO to
Cardigan Welsh Corgis that is caused by a mutation in
become eye scheme examiners {ESEs), under the
the C-subunit of cGMP phosphodiesterase {PDE6A),
leading to nonfunctional, prematurely truncated protein
performed, following pharmacological mydriasis, using 
slit lamp biomicroscopy and indirect ophthalmoscopy. In
formed, whereas the cones initially develop normally but
some breeds in which iridocorneal angle anomalies occur,
are quick to degeneratell. The technique of allele specific
gonioscopy is also used. Currently each country
1S
PCR is employed in the commercially available test
collating data independently but efforts are underway to
offered by Michigan State University. Allele specific PCR
exchange data between countries'.
utilizes two sets of primers: one to amplify only the
472
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
C dogs are mated with A dogs, none of the puppies will
It is therefore possible to determine whether a given
sample contains only normal copies of the genes
these guidelines, no dog must be removed from the
(genetically *clear' or normal), one normal copy and one
breeding pool17.
mutant copy (carrier), or only mutant copies (affected).
Unfortunately, since marker based testing is not
Congenital stationary  night blindness  is
an
looking for the mutation itself, but instead for a
autosomal recessive disease of Briard dogs caused by a
relationship to a given set of genetic markers, the
mutation in RPE65, a highly conserved gene that is
possibility for a “false positive' allele exists. A false
expressed in the RPE of the retina13. Affected Briards
positive allele can occur because numerous generations
are congenitally night blind and have varying degrees of
 ago the marker haplotype existed even before the
    i   h
 genetic mutation occurred. When the prcd mutation
disease is a progressive disorder that does not cause
occurred, it was passed on to subsequent generations in
 ophthalmoscopic abnormalities until later in life14. The
conjunction with the marker haplotype. The normal
test amplifies a 13s-base pair segment of DNA across
gene that had not undergone mutation was passed on in
the mutation site using PCR. The mutant gene copy will
conjunction with the same marker haplotype as well.
be four-base pairs shorter than a normal DNA segment.
Although it is unusual, a dog that is categorized as
This four-base pair difference can be visualized on a
pattern B may actually have a copy of the false positive
high resolution agarose gel, allowing accurate
allele, together with a normal copy of the gene. This
identification of the presence of normal as well as
would make the dog genetically normal, not a carrier of
mutant copies of the gene&.
prcd. Even more rarely, a pattern C dog may actually be
The diagnosis of genetic diseases for which the specific
a carrier or even normal. Once the prcd mutation is
mutation responsible for the disease has not been
 specifically identified, a mutation based test can be
definitively identified is still possible, although the results
developed that will eliminate the ambiguity created by
are not as definitive as with mutation based tests.
the false positive allelel7.
Linkage or marker based tests are often used when the
 The implications of genetic testing for breeding are 
specific mutation has not yet been discovered. These tests
 tremendous. By selectively breeding normals to carriers,
rely on the relationship of a set of markers (micro-
 phenotypic expression of disease can be avoided. The
satellites, for example) to the given gene of interest.
argument may also be made that even affected dogs can
Consistent inheritance of a particular marker in dogs
be used for breeding to genetically normal dogs, since the
affected by the genetic disease allows testing for that
resultant puppies will be carriers, but will not be affected
particular marker, instead of for the specific mutation
by disease. Affected dogs with other exceptional traits
may therefore still be able to pass these valuable traits on
specific genes, this can facilitate the development of the
to future generations. Significant narrowing of the gene
test. Individuals inherit alleles of the markers, just as they
pool has previously occurred in some breeds, when
inherit alleles of the gene determining the disease1s.
A marker based test is utilized in the diagnosis of
eliminating known carriers from the breeding
progressive rod cone degeneration (prcd), a widespread
population. In some cases, this narrowing of the gene
form of retinal degeneration that affects many breeds of
pool has resulted in the promotion of other genetically
dogs. Prcd is an autosomal recessive disorder that
based diseases.
generally causes night blindness by 2-5 years of age and
This chapter provides a list of breed predispositions
complete blindness by 5-12 years of age. Since it affects
for ocular diseases. The information is derived from
many breeds of dogs, the phenotypic expression of the
current veterinary ophthalmic texts, journal articles,
disease can vary according to the breed. The gene
newsletters, personal communication with colleagues,
responsible for prcd has been localized to a specific
and personal experience. Although the authors suspect
region of canine chromosome 916. Even though the exact
these disorders are inherited, inheritance has not been
m paieioose usaq su i paypi usaq iou seu auaa
 proved in all instances.
a set of genetic markers. The marker based test for prcd
Retriever, Chesapeake Bay Retriever, English Cocker
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Spaniel, and Portuguese Water Dog17.
The test for prcd is able to identify genetically normal
This list was made possible in part by Raymond and
Margaret (deceased) Hammond, Ponte Vedra Beach,
identified as ‘pattern A' dogs and may be used for
Fla.; the K-9 Obedience Club of Jacksonville,
breeding with dogs of any other pattern type. Pattern B*
Jacksonville, Fla.; Seminole Dog Fanciers Association,
dogs have a marker haplotype (finger print') that is
Longwood, Fla.; Greater Orange Park Dog Club, Orange
always associated with the normal gene, as well as a
Park, Fla.; Greater Daytona Dog Fanciers Association,
d aui oi payu uaag sey iel adioidey laye
Daytona Beach, Fla.; Brevard Kennel Club, Coca, Fla.;
mutation. In almost all instances these dogs are carriers
Treasure Coast Kennel Club of Florida, Fort Pierce, Fla.;
of the disease but are not affected themselves. Mating of
and Okaloosa Kennel Club, Fort Walton Beach, Fla.
B dogs with A dogs will yield all phenotypically normal
dogs, although some will still be carriers of the disease.
*Pattern C' dogs have two copies of the marker haplotype
that has been associated with the mutant gene, and
almost always are affected by retinal degeneration. If
PRESUMED INHERITED OCULAR DISEASES
473
Table 15.1 Breed predisposition to eye disease in dogs
 Affenpinscher
Glaucoma
Cataracts (rare)18
Imperforate lacrimal punctum
Kera toconjunctivitis sicca
 Afghan Hound 
Lens subluxation (secondary glaucoma]20. 24
Cataracts: recessive trait18. 19
 Congenital retinal detachment (complete retinal dysplasia]18
Mesodermal dysgenesis glaucoma
Corneal dystrophy18,20-22
 Microphakia, nuclear and perinuclear cataracts, and persistent
Eversion of the third eyelid 23
pupillary membranes
Medial canthal pocket syndrome18
Optic nerve coloboma2
 Mesodermal dysgenesis (goniodysgenesis) (some affected dogs
Optic nerve hypoplasia
will develop glaucoma)25
Oversized palpebral fissue (macroblepharon)
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Oversized palpebral fissure (euryblepharon)20, 23
Posterior polymorphous dystrophy18
Persistent pupillary membranes1, 20
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Progressive retinal atrophy
Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid
Airedale Terrier
Proliferative episcleritis (fibrous histiocytoma)
Cataracts
 Redundant forehead skin23
 Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)18 21, 22
Retinal dysplasia: geographic/detachment?,retinal folds:
 Congenital retinal detachment (complete retinal dysplasia)18
autosomal recesive trait34
 Corneal dystrophy26
 Trichomegaly: inherited trait
Distichiasis20, 21, 23
 American Eskimo Dog
Entropion18
Cataracts
 Progressive retinal atrophy
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Akbash Dog
American Pit Bull Terrier
Cataracts22
Progressive retinal atrophy
Akita
Cataracts
American Staffordshire Terrier
Corneal dystrophy18, 27
Ca taracts
Distichiasis
Distichiasis
 Entropion18
Entropion21. 22
 Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous21
 Eversion of the cartilage of the third eyelidz
Progressiveretinal atrophy1
Glaucoma18
 Multiple ocular anomalies: microphthalmia, congenital
American Water Spaniel
 cataracts, posterior lenticonus, retinal dysplasia28 
Cataracts18
 Persistent pupillary membranes 
Distichiasis
 Progressive retinal atrophy (most commonly diagnosed in
 Entropion 
 2-3-year-old males]29
 Microphthalmia
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds18
Retinal dysplasia: retinal foldsi8 21. 22
 Uveodematologic syndrome (vitiligo and uveitis
Australian Cattle Dog (Queensland Heeler, Blue Heeler)
syndrome]30, 31
Cataracts21,22
Alaskan Malamute
Ceroid lipofuscinosiszz
Cataracts18
Lens luxation
 Coloboma of the optic nervel8 
 Persistent pupillary membranes18
 Corneal dystrophy1l 20
 Progressive retinal atrophy35
Glaucoma
 Hemeralopia (cone dysplasia): autosomal recessive traitl8 
Australian Kelpie
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Progressive retinal atrophy21
 Progressive retinal atrophy (diagnosed at 2-4 years of age)
 Australian Shepherd Dog
Refractory superficial corneal ulcer2, 18
 Cataracts: anterior cortical, nuclear (5-8 years of age)8,
 Retinal dysplasia
shean g-sunuow gtj ieinbuen elnsdegns nelod iojaisods
 American Cocker Spaniel
of age)], 1
Collie eye anomaly18
Cataracts: recessive trait32 33
Corectopia/dyscoria/colobomafequatorial staphyloma
 Corneal dystrophy2?: posterior polymorphous,
 (homozygons merle): autosomal recessive trait36
 epithelial/stromal
Microcornea37
 Distichiasis: dominant trait suspected
Ectopic cilium 
Microphthalmiafheterochromia
Ocular coloboma/staphyloma without microphthalmia2l
Ectropion 
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Ectropion/entropion 
 Progressive retinal atrophy (2-7 years of age)
Encircling third eyelid
 Retinal detachment 
Entropion 
Exposure keratopathy syndrome
(continued overleaf)
474
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
Table 15.1 Breed predisposition to eye disease in dogs (continued)
Australian Shepherd Dog (continued)
Microphthalmia
 Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds
Nasolacrimal duct stenosis18
lelawous san pue ob aopuas sioteaoaan
Progressive retinal atrophy
Retinal dysplasia and detachment: autosomal recessive18
Australian Terrier
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds
 Progressive retinal atrophy
 Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds18
Belgian Malinois
Cataracts
 Basenji
 Progressive retinal atrophy21
 Corneal dystrophy: endothelial, epithelial/stromal
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds 
 Optic nerve coloboma
 Persistent pupillary membranes: inherited trait18 33
Belgian Sheepdog (Belgian Shepherd Dog - Groenendael)
 Posterior segment coloboma
Cataracts18
 Progressive retinal atrophy18
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)2. 45
 Retinal detachment!8
Micropapilla
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Basset Hound
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Cataracts22
 Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds
 Ectropion
 Retinopathy (congenital blindness): recessive trait
 Entropion
Eversion of the cartilage of the third eyelid?
Belgian Tervuren
Iris cysts39
Cataracts18
 Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)
Oversized palpebral fissure23
 Micropapilla21
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Primary glaucoma (narrow- or closed-angle)
 Progressive retinal atrophy
 Progressive retinal atrophy
 Bernese Mountain Dog
Redundant forehead skin23
 Secondary glaucoma (subluxation of the lens)20
Cataracts
 Cataracts/retinal detachment39
Beagle
 Entropion 
Cataracts: incomplete dominant trait
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Corneal dystrophy: epithelial/stromal
Systemic histiocytosis 
 Distichiasis18
Bichon Frise
Ectropion27
Cataracts
 Encireling third eyelid
 Corneal dystrophy: epithelial/stromal18, 27
Iris cyst39
Entropionis
 Micropapilla
 Strabismus (exotropia]18
 Microphtha lmia/multiple ocular anomalies
Distichiasis
 Optic nerve hypoplasia
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Oval corneal opacity (corneal dystrophy)
 Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds
 Palpebral neoplasia41
 Persistent pupillary membranes 
Bloodhound
 Primary glaucoma (open- or narrow-angle): autosomal
Ectropion20 
recessive trait42
 Ectropion/entropion 
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Entropion
 Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid
Eversion of the cartilage of the third eyelid
 Retinal dysplasia
 Prolapse of the gland of third eyelidz1
Tapetal cell degeneration: autosomal recessive trait 
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca'
Macroblepharon
Bearded Collie
 Persistent pupillary membranes18 
 Cataracts (2-5-year old males)18
Redundant forehead skin20, 23
 Congenital retinal detachment (complete retinal dysplasia)43
 Corneal dystrophy
 Black and Tan Coonhound
 Persistent pupillary membranes18
Cataracts
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Retinal dysplasia: retinal foldszl
Border Collie
Cataracts (4-6 years of age)18
 Bedlington Terrier
Central progressive retinal atrophy (1-3 years of age)
Cataracts
Ceroid lipofuscinosis 
Distichiasis
Collie eye anomaly (choroidal hypoplasia)18
Entropion4
Fibrous histiocytoma
Imperforate lacrimal punctum
Lens luxation 
 Micropalpebral fissure
 Persistent pupillary membranes 
PRESUMED INHERITED OCULAR DISEASES
475
Table 15.1 Breed predisposition to eye disease in dogs (continued)
 Progressive retinal atrophy (2-5 years of age)
Corneal dystrophy: epithelial/stromal
Proliferative keratoconjunctivitisa. 3
 Central progressive retinal atrophy (inherited vitamin E
 Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds
deficiency)51-53
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Border Terrier
Cataracts18, 21, 2
British Bulldog
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Cataracts18
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds18
Distichiasis
 Eetopic cilium 
Borzoi
Cataracts (posterior pole; 1-4 years of age)18
 Ectropion 
Ectropionfentropion
 Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)2
 Entropion (medial aspect of the lower eyelid)
Microphthalmia (multiple ocular anomalies)
 Persistent pupillary membranes18
Iris cyst39
 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Nasal fold trichiasis 
 Retinal degeneration
 Cversized palpebral fisure (euryblepharon)
Retinal dysplasia
Persistent pupillary membranes20
Boston Terrier
 Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid
Cataracts, congenital: juvenile27; late-onset45
 Redundant forehead skin23
 Corneal endothelial dystrophy (average age 7.5 years)
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds
Corneal dystrophy: epithelial/stromal
Brittany
Distichiasis
 Entropion (medial)20
Cataracts
Distichiasis18
Glaucoma23
Glaucoma25
Hypertrophy (prolapse) of the gland of the third eyelid
 Iris cyst20
Iris cyst2. 39
Lens luxation21
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Progressive retinal atrophy
 Retinal dysplasia
 Progressive retinal atrophy
 Refractory superficial corneal ulcer18. 47
Brussels Griffon
 Strabismus (exotropia)18, 23
Cataracts
 Distichiasis20, 23
Boykin Spaniel
Cataracts21
Ectopic cilium21
 Exposure keratopathy syndrome22
 Corneal dystrophy: epithelial/stromal
Distichiasis
Optic nerve colobama
 Persistent pupillary membranes22
 Progressive retinal atrophy (retinal atrophy: generalized)
Progressive retinal atrophy18
 Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds
Vitreous degeneration
 Bouvier des Flandres 
Cataracts (congenital),48
Bullmastiff
Entropion 18, 22
Cataracts21
Glaucoma49
Distichiasis
 Entropion 
 Mesodermal dysgenesis glaucoma 
 Eversion of the cartilage of the third eyelid
 Persistent hyperplastic tunica vasculosa lentis
Glaucoma18. 22
 Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous50 
 Persistent pupillary membranes22
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds 
Boxer
Cataracts18
Bull Terrier
Ectropion2z
 Entropion 
 Corneal dystrophy: epithelial/stromal
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca54
 Distichiasis
Micropalpebral fissure (blepharophimosis)
 Ectropion
Entropion
 Progressive retinal atrophy
 Prolapse (hypertrophy) of the gland of the third eyelid21
 Nonpigmented third eyelid
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Bull Terrier (Miniature)
 Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid
Entropion2z
 Refractory superficial corneal ulcer (basement membrane
 Lens luxationss
dystrophy!
Cairn Terrier
 Briard 
Cataracts18
Cataracts
Ectopic cilium20
 Congenital stationary night blindness (hereditary retinal
dystrophy in Briards]22
(continued overleaf)
476
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Table 15.1 Breed predisposition to eye disease in dogs (continued)
Cairn Terrier (continued)
Ectropion 18
 Lens luxation with secondary glaucoma
Entropion
 Pigmentary glaucoma (ocular melanosis with secondary
Entropion (lateral canthus)
 glaucoma)
Glaucoma2. 61
Progressive retinal atrophy: recessive trait56
Micropalpebral fissure (blepharophimosis)
Retinal dysplasia18
Oversized palpebral fissure23
 Cardigan Welsh Corgi
Persistent pupillary membranes: inherited trait22, 62
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Cataracts
 Central progressive retinal atrophy
 Redundant forehead skin 
Distichiasis
Clumber Spaniel
Entropion18
Amaurosisis
Lens luxation with secondary glaucoma
Cataracts
Persistent corneal epithelial erosion.1
Ectropion
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Entropion 
 Progressive retinal atrophy (rod-cone dysplasia): recessive
Distichiasis
trait12, 22, 56
Keratoconjunetivitis sicca
 Refractory superficial corneal ulcer 
Macroblepharon22
Retinal dysplasia: focal or multifoca12. 18, 21
 Microphthalmia21
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Cavalier King Charles Spaniel
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds21
Cataracts18
Corneal dystrophy: epithelial/stromal
Collie (Rough or Scotch, and Smooth)
Distichiasis23
Cataracts18
Entropion
Central progressive retinal atrophy8 23
Exposure keratopathy/macroblepharon22
 Collie eye anomaly: autosomal recessive trait (choroidal
 Microphthalmia with multiple ocular anomalies 
 hypoplasia, staphyloma/coloboma, retinal detachment, 
 Posterior lenticonus, cataracts, and microphthalmia (reported
 retinal hemorrhage, optic nerve coloboma]63
in Swedenj57
Corneal dystrophy
Progressive retinal atrophy (1-5 years of age)8.22
Distichiasis
Retinal dysplasia: geographic/detachment)22, retinal folds18
 Entropion secondary to enlarged orbit/enophthalmos
Fibrous histiocytoma
Chesapeake Bay Retriever
Microcornea23
Micropalpebral fissure (blepharophimosis)64
Central progressive retinal atrophy23
Microphthalmia
Distichiasis
 Optic nerve hypoplasia2
Entropion: lateral canthus, lower eyelid
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Eversion of the cartilage of the third eyelid
 Persistent pupillary membranes21
 Progressive retinal atrophy (rod-cone dysplasia): autosomal
 Progressive retinal atrophy
recessive trait16
 Retinal dysplasia: geographic/detachment22, retinal folds18
 Proliferative keratoconjunctivitis20
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds
Chihuahua
Stationary night blindness
Cataracts
 Corneal endothelial dystrophy (average age of onset 9.5 years)
Coonhound
Cataracts18
Entropion 
 Central progressive retinal atrophy
Glaucoma18
 lridal atrophy20
Ectropion 
Entropion21
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Lens luxation and secondary glaucoma
 Progressive retinal atrophy
 Persistent pupillary membranes 
Coonhound (Redbone Hound)
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Central progressive retinal atrophy2 20 23
Trichiasis2
 Ectropion 
Vitreous degeneration
 Entropion: inherited traitzz
 Chinese Crested Dog
Coton de Tulear
Cataracts
Cataracts65
Vitreous degeneration2l
 Retinal dysplasia: folds/bullae2z
 Retinal atrophy (generalized)2z
Chow Chow
 Anterior chamber cleavage syndrome2
Curly Coated Retriever
Cataracts59
Cataracts2
 Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)60
Corneal dystrophy, epithelial/stromal
Corneal dystrophy, endothelial21
Distichiasis
Displaced lacrimal punctum20
Ectropion 18
PRESUMED INHERITED OCULAR DISEASES
477
Table 15.1 Breed predisposition to eye disease in dogs (continued)
Entropion20
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Progressive retinal atrophy2
 Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds18
Dachshund
Dogue de Bordeaux
Cataracts18
Ectropion'
 Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus): inherited trait3, 45
Entropion 
Corneal dystrophy: endothelial inherited trait,
English Cocker Spaniel
epithelial/stromal
Cataracts: recessive trait suspected
 Dermoid: inherited trait2 18
 Central progressive retinal atrophy (inherited vitamin E
 Distichiasis
deficiency)18, 5, 52
Ectopic cilium
 Distichiasis: dominant trait suspected
Entropion18
Ectropion2z
Glaucoma18
 Ectropion/entropion
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca23
 Entropion (lower eyelid)
Micropapilla21
 Glaucoma (narrow-angle)
 Microphthalmia/multiple ocular anomalies
Multiple ocular defects (homozygous merle]21
Imperforate lacrimal punctum 
Lens luxation18
 Optic nerve coloboma
Optic nerve coloboma (pits)
 Optic nerve hypoplasia2 63
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Progressive retinal atrophy (progressive rod-cone
 Progressive retinal atrophy: recesive trait suspected20
degeneration: autosomal recessive]71
 Punctate keratitisz2
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds 
 Recurrent epithelial erosion 
 Uveodematologic syndrome
English Setter
Cataracts24
 Dachshund (Miniature)
 Ceroid lipofuscinosis21. 72
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)
Chalazion
 Progressive retinal atrophy (degeneration): autosomal
Corneal dystrophy: epithelial;/stromal
recessive20, 23, 66
Distichiasis
Da lmatian
Ectropion 
Cataracts22
Ectropion/entropion2
 Ceroid lipofuscinosis67
 Entropion 
 Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)18
Eversion of the cartilage of the third eyelid
Dermoid23
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca2
 Distichiasis18
Macroblepharon 18
Entropion2
Palpebral neoplasia41
Glaucoma24. 68
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Microphthalmia39 
 Progressive retinal atrophy
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds 
 Dandie Dinmont Terrier
English Springer Spaniel
Cataracts
Cataracts18
Entropion18
 Cataracts/lenticonus2
Glaucoma
 Central progressive retinal atrophy
 Mesodermal dysgenesis glaucoma61
 Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)18
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Coloboma of the optic nervei8
 Refractory superficial corneal ulcer
 Corneal dystrophy
Distichiasis23
 Doberman Pinscher
Ectropion?
Entropion20
dysplasia2 69
Glaucoma73
Cataracts
 Optic nerve hypoplasial7
Coloboma
 Persistent pupillary membranes23
Distichiasis
Progressive retinal atrophy
 Enophthalmos18. 26 
 Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds: autosomal recessive trait
 Entropion: lower eyelid, secondary to enlarged
Geographic detachment: autosomal recessive trait74
 orbit/enophtha lmos/large zygoma
Eversion of the cartilage of the third eyelid20, 21
English Toy Spaniel (King Charles, Prince Charles, Ruby.
 Microphakia, nuclear cataracts (7 months of age)
Blenheim)
 Microphthalmia with multiple ocular anomalies
Cataracts21
 Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous
Corneal dystrophy: epithelial/stromal
 Persistent hyperplastic tunica vasculosa lentis4s. 70 
Distichiasis
 Persistent pupillary membranes37
(continued overteaf)
478
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
Table 15.1 Breed predisposition to eye disease in dogs (continued)
English Toy Spaniel (continued)
 Central progressive retinal atrophy (reported in Europe)
Entropion
 Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)45
 Persistent hyaloid artery22
Coloboma
 Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous/persistent hyperplastic
 Corneal dystrophy: epithelial/stromal18 
tunica vasculosa lentis22
Dermoid, conjunctiva, cornea, eyelid
Retinal dysplasia: retinal foldszl
Ectropion 18
Eversion of the cartilage of the third eyelid
Entlebu cher
Lens luxation18
Cataracts22
 Optic nerve hypoplasia2 18
 Field Spaniel
 Oversized palpebral fissue (euryblepharon], juvenile,
Cataracts18
transient23
Distichiasis22
 Progressive retinal atrophy
 Progressive retinal atrophy21
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds, geographil
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds, geographic2
Third eyelid conjunctivitis (plasma cell infiltration]20 
Fila Brasileiro
 German Shorthaired Pointer
 Ectropion?
Cataracts18
Entropion
 Corneal dystrophy
 Finnish Spitz
Distichiasis22
Cataracts22
 Entropion (lower eyelid)
Eversion of the cartilage of the third eyelid?8
 Flat Coated Retriever
Hemeralopia22
Cataracts18
Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous/persistent hyperplastic
Distichiasis
 tunica vasculosa lentisz
Ectropion18
 Persistent pupillary membranes 
 Entropion 
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Glaucoma22
Strabismus20
 Progressive retinal atrophy2l
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds
Fox Terrier (Smooth)
German Wirehaired Pointer
Cataracts22, 75
Cataracts18
 Corneal epithelial dystrophy23
 Entropion 
 Glaucoma21. 22
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds
Lens luxation with secondary glaucoma
Golden Retriever
 Persistent pupillary membranes 
Progressive retinal atrophy18
Cataracts79-81
 Central progressive retinal atrophy
Trichiasis
 Coloboma of the optic nerve18
Fox Terrier (Toy)
 Lens luxation with secondary glaucoma
Distichiasis2
Trichiasis23
Ectropion
 Enophthalmos
Fox Terrier (Wire)
Entropion
 Cataracts (juvenile)
Iris cyst
 Corneal endothelial dystrophy
Glaucoma
 Corneal epithelial dystrophy23
 Optic nerve hypoplasials
Distichiasis23
 Persistent pupillary membrane562
Entropion18
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Glaucoma2 76
Lens luxation with secondary glaucoma (3-7 years of age)2
 Pigmentary keratitis22
 Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds, geographic/detachment
 Progressive retinal atrophy
 Uveodermatologic syndrome (vitiligo and uveitis syndrome)31
 Refractory corneal ulcer2
French Bulldog 
Gordon Setter
Cataracts18
Cataracts
Ectropion
 Distichiasis21
 Entropion (lower eyelid);macroblepharon
 Entropion
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca2
 Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds
 Persistent pupillary membranesz2
 German Pinscher 
 Progressive retinal atrophy
 Corneal dystrophy, epithelial/stroma|22
Retinal dysplasia: retinal foldsz
Cataracts22
German Shepherd Dog
 Cataracts: congenital'", cortical
PRESUMED INHERITED OCULAR DISEASES
479
Table 15.1 Breed predisposition to eye disease in dogs (continued)
 Great Dane
Optic nerve hypoplasia2
Cataracts
Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous18
Ciliary body cyst22
Persistent pupillary membranes
 Distichiasis
 Progressive retinal atrophy (rod-cone dysplasia): autosomal
 Ectropion
recessive trait18. 87
 Ectropionfentropion 
Uveodermatologic syndrome (vitiligo and uveitis syndrome)31
 Enophthalmos
Persistent hyaloid arteryz2
sowleuydouastiqio pabiejua on Aepuooas uodous
Eversion of the cartilage of the third eyelidz
Irish Terrier
 Glaucoma2. 25
Cataracts
Hemeralopia 18
 Progressive retinal atrophy21
 Mesodermal dysgenesis
Irish Water Spaniel
Microphthalmia
Cataracts18
Multiple ocular anomalies (homozygous merle)7s
Distichiasis
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Entropion
Retinal dysplasia (harlequin)
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Progressive retinal atrophy13, 21
 Great Pyrenees (Pyrenean Mountain Dog)
 Ectropion (lateral aspect of the eyelid)/entropion (medial
Irish Wolfhound
aspect of the eyelid) 
Cataracts18
Entropion
Corneal dystrophy: epithelial/stroma|22
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Distichiasis
 Progessive retinal atrophy2l
 Entropion21
 Eversion of the cartilage of the third eyelid18
 Greater Swiss Mountain Dog
Cataracts22
Italian Greyhound
Distichiasis
Cataracts2
 Corneal dystrophy18
 Greyhound
Glaucoma2l
Cataracts
 Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)83
Iris cyst
 Corneal dystrophy
 Micropapillaz2
Distichiasis
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Lens luxation2z
 Optic nerve hypoplasiazz
 Progressive retinal atrophy
 Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous84
 Retinal degeneration (generalized)z2
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Vitreal degeneration21
 Griffon
Jack Russell Terrier
 See Brussels Griffon
Cataracts2
Lens luxation with secondary glaucoma
Havanese (Toy)
Cataracts
Japanese Chin
Distichiasis22
Cataracts
 Persistent pupillary membranes18
Distichiasis22
Entropion
 Progressive retinal atrophy
 Progressive retinal atrophy18
 Retinal detachment21
Vitreous degeneration22
Keeshond
Cataracts18
Ibizan Hound
Cataracts18, 21
 Central progressive retinal atrophy
Distichiasisz2
 Retinal dysplasia?
 Ectopic cilium20
Irish Setter
Glaucoma
 Amblyopia with quadriplegia5, 36
 Optic nerve hypoplasials
 Anterior chamber cleavage syndrome2
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Cataracts
 Central progressive retinal atrophy
Kerry Blue Terrier
 Corneal dystrophy23
Cataracts18
Distichiasis
Distichiasis
Enophthalmos 
 Entropion (lower eyelid)
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca2, 54
 Entropion 
 Entropion secondary to enlarged orbit/enophthalmos/large
Micropalpebral fissure (blepharophimosis)
 Progressive retinal atrophy
zygoma
Eversion of the cartilage of the third eyelid18
Trichiasis (upper lateral]23
Lens luxation2. 18 
(continued overleaf)
480
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
Table 15.1 Breed predisposition to eye disease in dogs (continued)
Komondor
Progressive retinal atrophy21
Cataracts18
 Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid
 Entropion 
Traumatic proptosis
Kuvasz
Lowchen
Cataracts18
Cataracts
Entropion2z
 Progressive retinal atrophy21
Distichiasis2
 Persistent pupillary membranesz2
 Persistent pupillary membranes22
Retinal atrophy (generalized)22
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Vitreous degeneration
Labrador Retriever
Maltese
 Cataracts: dominant or incomplete dominant trait81
 Caruncular trichiasisz
 Central progressive retinal atrophy: incomplete dominant trait
Cataracts
suspected
Distichiasis
 Corneal dystrophy: epithelial/stromal
Entropion
Corneal opacity20 23
Epiphora 
Distichiasis23
Glaucoma18
Ectropion18
 Persistent hyaloid remnant22
 Enophthalmos
 Progressive retinal atrophy
 Entropion (lateral canthus)
Retinal dysplasia, retinal folds 18
 Entropion (lower eyelidjz
 Iris melanoma
Manchester Terrier (Toy and Standard)
Cataracts22, 44
Nystagmus23
Lens luxation with secondary glaucoma18. 75
Persistent hyaloid
 Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous/persistent hyperplastic
 Progressive retinal atrophy
tunica vasculosa lentis22
Mastiff
 Persistent pupillary membranesz2
Cataracts22
 Progressive retinal atrophy (progressive rod-cone
 Corneal dystrophy18
degeneration): autosomal recessive
Ectropion23
 Retinai detachment (retinal dysplasia)i8
 Entropion 
Retinal dysplasia: autosomal recessive trait 
Macroblepharon/exposure keratopathy syndrome
Focal or geographic detachment, without skeletal
 Persistent pupillary membranes
dysplasia: presumed autosomal recessive
 Progressive retinal atrophyz1
Folds, geographic;detachment with skeletal defects:
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds 
 presumed incomplete dominant trait62, 88
Miniature Bull Terrier
Lakeland Terrier
 Lens luxation2z
Cataracts18
 Persistent pupillary membrane22
 Distichiasis23
Lens luxation89
Miniature Pinscher
 Persistent pupillary membranes17
Cataracts
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)18
Large Munsterlander
Corneal dystrophy: epithelial/stromal21
Cataracts90
Entropion (medial canthus)23
Leonberger
Keratoconjunetivitis sicca
 Persistent pupillary membranesz2
 Progressive retinal atrophy20
Cataracts
Vitreous degeneration
Lhasa Apso
Neapolitan Mastiff
 Aberrant dermis
Cataracts21
Cataracts2. 18
Dermoid 
 Ciliated caruncle2z
 Ectropion/macroblepharon2l
 Corneal dystrophy18
 Entropion 
Distichiasis
 Eversion of the cartilage of the third eyelidz
Eectopic eilium2. 23
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Entropion
 Entropion (medial lower eyelid)z
 Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelidz
Exposure keratopathy syndrome/macroblepharon
Newfoundland
 Imperforate lacrimal puncta22
 Anterior chamber cleavage syndrome18
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca54
Cataracts21
Lagophthalmos;exophtha lm05
Ectropion 
 Macroblepharon
Ectropion (lateral aspect of the eyelid)/entropion (medial
 Persistent pupillary membranes
aspect of the eyelid)
PRESUMED INHERITED OCULAR DISEASES
481
Table 15.1 Breed predisposition to eye disease in dogs (continued)
 Entropion (lateral canthus)
 Exposure keratopathy syndrome/macroblepharon'. 2
 Eversion of the cartilage of the third eyelid 
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Iris cyst
Lacrimal punctum atresia 
 Macroblepharon21. 64 
Lagophthalmos/exophthalmos
 Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelidzz
Lens luxation 18
Retinal dysplasia: retinal foldsz2
Macroblepharon
Norbottenspets
Nasal fold trichiasis
Cataracts22
 Pigmentary keratitis
 Progressive retinal atrophy
 Norfolk Terrier 
Traumatic proptosis
Cataracts18
Trichiasis (lateral upper eyelid)
 Coloboma of the optic disk18
Ulcerative keratitis
Lens luxations9 
 Pembroke Welsh Corgi
 Norwegian Buhund
Cataracts18
Cataracts22
Corneal dystrophy (vascularization)18
 Norwegian Elkhound
Distichiasis22
Cataracts
Lens luxation
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Distichiasis23
 Progressive retinal atrophy21
 Entropion (lateral canthus)2. 91
 Glaucoma2. 92, 93
Lens luxation
 Petit Basset Griffon Vendeen
 Progressive retinal atrophy:
Cataracts
 Rod dysplasia: autosomal recessive trait
 Corneal dystrophy: endothelia|22
 Early rod degeneration: autosomal recessive trait
 Persistent pupillary membranes 
 Persistent pupillary membranes22
 Pigment deposition on posterior corneal surface; possible
Retinal dysplasia: retinal foldsz2
 persistent pupillary membranes18
 Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds18
Norwich Terrier
 Corneal dystrophy18
Pharoah Hound
Lens luxations9 
Cataracts22
 Nova Scotia Duck Tolling Retriever
 Optic nerve hypoplasia18
Cataracts21
Pointer
 Corneal dystrophy: epithelial/stromal
Cataracts: dominant trait
Distichiasis
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)
 Persistent pupillary membranes22
Corneal dystrophy18
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Entropion18, 23
 Old English Sheepdog
Progressive retinal atrophy
 Cataracts (congenitall: recessive trait suspecteda4
 Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds22
 Distichiasis20
 Polski Owczarek Nizinny (Polish Owczarek Nizinni, Polish
Entropion
Lowland Sheepdog)
 Microphthalmia/cataracts: multiple ocular anomalies
Central progressive retinal atrophy22
 Persistent pupillary membranes22
Ceroid lipofuscinosis72
Progressive retinal atrophy18, 23
 Persistent pupillary membranes2z
 Retinal detachmentcataractsz1
 Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds18
 Pomeranian
 Uveodematologic syndrome
 Blepharophimosis18
Cataracts (2-4 years of age)18
 Papillon 
Distichiasis27
Cataracts18
Entropion
 Corneal dystrophy21
Epiphora 
 Entropion 
 Lacrimal punctum atresia
 Persistent pupillary membranes22
 Progressive retinal atrophy21
Progressive retinal atrophy95 96
Trichiasis27
Vitreous degeneration22
Poodle (Miniature and Toy)
Pekingese
 Caruncular trichiasis18
 Aberrant dermis (medial canthus)
Cataracts (juvenile): autosomal recessive
 Caruncular trichiasis (ciliated caruncle)18. 21
Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)
Ca taracts
Corneal dystrophy: endothelial, epithelia|20 27
 Distichiasis: dominant trait suspected
Distichiasis: dominant trait suspected
Ectopic cilium23
 Entropion (lower medial eyelid)
(continued overleaf)
482
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Table 15.1 Breed predisposition to eye disease in dogs (continued)
Poodle (Miniature and Toy) (continued)
Rhodesian Ridgeback
 Entropion (medial lower eyelid)
Cataracts18
Epiphora 
Distichiasis22
Glaucoma (open- or narrow-angle)
 Entropion 
Hemeralopia (Miniature Poodle)
Eversion of the cartilage of the third eyelid
Imperforate lacrimal punctum
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Iridal atrophy20. 23
 Progressive retinal atrophy21
Lens luxation24
Microphthalmia
Rottweiler
 Optic nerve hypoplasia63
Amaurosis2z
 Cataracts: congenital, inherited2. 99
 Optice nerve micropapilla
 Persistent pupillary membranes22
 Corneal dystrophy: epithelial/stromal2z
Distichiasis
 Progressive retinal atrophy (progressive rod-cone
degenerationl: autosomal recessive97
to enlarged orbit/enophthalmos/large zygoma
 Recurrent epithelial erosion (basement membrane 
Iris coloboma (inherited)2i
 dystrophy)27
 Retinal detachment18
Iris cyst 18
Trichomegaly20, 23
Microphthalmia 
Vitreous degeneration2z
Oversized palpebral fissure (macroblepharon)
 Persistent pupillary membranes 
Poodle (Standard)
 Progressive retinal atrophy43
Cataracts: recessive trait suspected98
Refractory superficial corneal ulcerl8
 Congenital night blindness18
 Retinal degeneration
 Distichiasis
 Retinal detachment18
 Entropion
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds21, 43
Glaucoma
Imperforate lacrimal punctum
Saint Bernard
Microphthalmia21
Cataracts
Dermoid
 Microphtha lmia/cataracts/persistent pupillary
membranes/kera topathy2
Distichiasis
 Optic nerve hypoplasia?
Ectropion 
 Ectropion (lateral aspect of the lower eyelid)/entropion
 Optic nerve micropapilla
(medial aspect of the lower eyelid)
 Persistent pupillary membranes 
 Entropion (lateral canthus)27
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Vitreous degeneration22
Eversion of the cartilage of the third eyelid
Microphthalmia
 Portuguese Water Dog
 Multiple ocular anomalies2. 100
Cataracts21
 Oversized palpebral fissure (macroblepharon]23
Distichiasis
 Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid
 Microphthalmia and multiple congenital anomalies18, 21
Redundant facial skin20, z3
 Persistent pupillary membranes 
Uveodermatologic syndrome (vitiligo and uveitis syndrome]31
 Progressive retinal atrophy (progressive rod-cone
Sa luki
 degeneration]: autosomal recessive
Cataracts21
Pug
 Corneal dystrophy101
 Aberrant dermis (medial)1. 18
Entropion2z
 Caruncular trichiasis18
Iridocorneal angle abnormality (glaucoma)25
 Corneal dystrophy23
 Persistent pupillary membranes 
Distichiasis2
 Posterior suture line imperfection2
 Entropion (medial lower eyelid)
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Exposure keratopathy syndrome/macroblepharon
 Retinal detachment20
Lagophthalmos/exophthalmos/macroblepharon
 Retinal dysplasia23
 Nasal fold trichiasis
Samoyed
Pigmentary keratitis
Cataracts
 Progressive retinal atrophy21
 Coloboma of the optic nerve 
 Traumatic proptosis 
Corneal dystrophy: stromal2. 37, epithelial
Trichiasis
 Distichiasis18
Ulcerative keratitis
 Entropion 
Puli
Glaucoma22. 25
Cataracts18
 Mesodermal dysgenesis (goniodysgenesis]25
 Progressive retinal atrophy18
Microphthalmos
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds
 Persistent pupillary membranes23
Primary glaucoma
PresuMeD INHeRIteD OculAr DIsEAsES
483
Table 15.1 Breed predisposition to eye disease in dogs (continued)
 Progressive retinal atrophy (3 years of age at onset):
Shar Pei
 presumed autosomal recessive102
 Blepharitis
 Refractory superficial corneal ulcer2. 18
Cataracts
 Retinal detachment and cataracts with skeletal dwarfism 18. 103
Corneal dystrophy: epithelial/stromal
Retinal dysplasia: folds/detachment with skeletal dwarfism22
 Ectropion/entropion
Geographic/detachment20, 27
 Entropion 
 Uveodermatologic syndrome30
Glaucoma
Schipperke
Lens luxation
Cataracts18
 Mesodermal dysgenesis glaucoma 
 Progressive retinal atrophy2l
Distichiasis
 Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid 
 Entropion 
 Narrow palpebral fissure23
 Redundant facial skin
Retinal dysplasia (cataracts)18
 Persistent pupillary membranes 
Strabismus (esotropia]18
 Progressive retinal atrophy
 Shetland Sheepdog
 Schnauzer (Giant)
Cataracts18
Amaurosis18
 Glaucoma18
Cataracts21
 Central progressive retinal atrophy39
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Choroidal hypoplasia (Collie eye anomaly)
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds
 Corneal dystrophy (bilateral, central, circular) (6 months-4
Schnauzer (Miniature)
years at diagnosis]2, 18, 103
 Cataracts: congenital (microphthalmia, posterior lenticonus):
Distichiasis2
 simple autosomal recessive trait104
 Eetopic cilium20
 Juvenile: autosomal recessive trait21. 44
 Micropalpebral fissure (blepharophimosis)20
 Ceroid lipofuscinosis: presumed autosomal recessive22
 Optic nerve coloboma
 Corneal dystrophy20
Optic nerve hypoplasia18
Distichiasis
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Entropion (medial lower eyelid)27
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
 Retinal dysplasia: retinal foldsz 18
Lacrimal punctum atresia
Uveodermatologic syndrome30, 107
Microcornea
Optic nerve hypoplasial8
Shiba Inu
Cataracts22
 Persistent hyperplastic primary yitreous27
 Persistent pupillary membranes23
Distichiasis22
Progressive retinal atrophy (rod-cone dysplasiao5
Persistent pupillary membranesz2
 Retinal atrophy: low amplitude electroretinogram22
Shih Tzu 
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds8
Aberrant dermis 
 Caruncular trichiasis (ciliated caruncle)8, 2
 Schnauzer (Standard)
Cataracts18
Cataracts
 Congenital cataracts and microcornea18
Distichiasis
 Corneal dystrophy: epithelial/stroma|22
 Eetopic cilium 
 Entropion (medial lower eyelid)
Distichiasis
 Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous20 
 Exophthalmos/lagophthalmos
Retinal atrophy (generalized)22
 Exposure keratopathy syndrome/macroblepharon
Oversized palpebral fissure (macroblepharon)
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds
 Pigmentary keratitis
Scottish Deerhound 
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Cataracts18
 Retinal detachment18
Traumatic proptosis
Scottish Terrier
Ulcerative keratitis
Cataracts
Vitreous degeneration 18
Lens luxation
 Persistent pupillary membranes23
Siberian Husky
 Progressive retinal atrophy21
Cataracts
 Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)23
 Sealyham Terrier
 Corneal dystrophy: endothelia|27
 Cataracts: recessive trait suspected
 Epithelial/stromal: presumed autosomal recessive108
Glaucoma2, 25
Distichiasisz2
Imperforate lacrimal punctum 
 Lens luxation with secondary glaucoma 
 Entropion 
 Glaucoma (goniodysgenesis)61. 92, 93
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds: presumed autosomal recessive
 Geographic/detachment: presumed autosomal recessivel8
(continued overleaf)
484
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETeRINARY MeDICINE
Table 15.1 Breed predisposition to eye disease in dogs (continued)
Siberian Husky (continued)
Ceroid lipofuscinosis
 Glaucoma2. 68
Distichiasis22
Lens luxation22
Lens luxation: autosomal recessive trait suspected!0. 11
Palpebral neoplasia 
Persistent pupillary membranes23
Nyctalopia l12
 Progressive retinal atrophy: presumed x-linked21
 Retinal dysplasia: geographic2l
 Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds18
Vizsla
Uveitis22
 Uveodermatologic syndrome30 54
Cataracts21
Corneal dystrophy: epithelial/stroma|22
 Silky Terrier
 Entropioni8
Cataracts
 Progressive retinal atrophy
 Persistent pupillary membranes18
Weimaraner
Progressive retinal atrophy
Cataracts and retinal dysplasia18
 Skye Terrier
 Corneal dystrophy (1-8 years of age)18
Distichiasis
Distichiasis2
Lens luxation18
 Enlarged orbit
 Entropion: lower eyelid27, secondary to enlarged
 Soft Coated Wheaten Terrier
orbit/enophthalmos
Cataracts18
 Eversion of the cartilage of the third eyelid
Distichiasis22
 Medial canthal pocket syndromel8 
 Microphthalmia with multiple ocular anomalies22
 Progressive retinal atrophy18
 Optic nerve hypoplasia18
Refractory superficial corneal ulcer18. 47
 Persistent hyaloid artery22
 Persistent pupillary membranes 
Welsh Springer Spaniel
Progressive retinal atrophy2l
Cataracts: autosomal recessive traitll4
Retinal dysplasia: retinal foldsz2
Distichiasis?
 Glaucoma: autosomal dominant trait73
Spinoni Italiani
 Persistent pupillary membranes18
Cataracts22
 Progressive retinal atrophy (5-7 years of age)
Ectropion21
Welsh Terrier
Spitz
Cataracts18
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Distichiasis22
Staffordshire Bull Terrier (English)
Glaucoma73
 Cataracts (juvenile): recessive trait suspected
Keratoconjunctivitis siccazz
Entropion2i
Lens luxation (secondary glaucoma]20, 24, 89, 90
 Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous and lenticonus109
 Persistent pupillary membranes22
 Progressive retinal atrophy
West Highland White Terrier
 Sussex Spaniel
 Cataracts: autosomal recessive trait15
Cataracts
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Distichiasis
Lens luxation
Entropion2l
Microphthalmia18
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds18, 21
 Persistent pupillary membranes18
Retinal atrophy (generalized)22
Swiss Hound
Progressive retinal atrophy (rare)2z
Retinal dysplasia: retinal folds
Whippet
Tbetan Mastiff
Cataracts18, 21
 Persistent pupillary membranes18 
 Corneal stromal lipid dystrophy
Tbetan Spaniel
Lens luxation (8-10 years of age)'
Cataracts22
Micropapilla1&
Distichiasis22
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Entropion
Vitreous degeneration2, 22
 Micropapilla
Yorkshire Terrier
 Microphthalmia18
 Persistent pupillary membranes18
Cataracts (3-6 years of age)
Corneal dystrophy: epithelial/stromal18. 2
 Progressive retinal atrophy18, 21
Distichiasis20
Tbetan Terrier
Entropion 
Cataracts
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
 Central progressive retinal atrophy (rare)]8
Persistent pupillary membranes (rare)
PrESuMED INHERITED OCULAR DISEASES
485
Table 15.1 Breed predisposition to eye disease in dogs (continued)
Retinal dysplasia: geographic/detachment'8, (reported in
Europe): hereditary/recessive trait suspected
Subepithelial geographic corneal dystrophy (in puppies)2 18
Table 15.2 Breed predisposition to eye disease in cats 
 Abyssinian
Manx
 Retinal degeneration16, 117
 Corneal dystrophy!l 
Burmese
Persian 
 Dermoid
 Corneal sequestration 
 Third eyelid gland prolapse
Siamese
Himalayan
Corneal sequestration
 Corneal sequestration 
Table 15.3 Breed predisposition to eye disease in horses
 American Saddlebred
 Macrocornea (cornea globosa): presumed semidominant
Cataracts 19
Microphthalmos with multiple ocular anomalies
Miosis
Appaloosa
Cataracts120, 121
Optic nerve hypoplasia
 Persistent pupillary membranes 
 Congenital hypertropia122
Lens subluxation
 Congenital stationary night blindness123
Retinal cyst
 Equine recurrent uveitisi21
 Retinal dysplasia: presumed semidominant
 Glaucoma optic disc coloboma
 Retinal detachment 
 Iris hypoplasia124
ae lanem-uy, ueaoid ieaunda puawiid ieua
Microphthalmos124
 of previous retinal detachment127
 Scleral ectasia124
Vitreous degeneration
 Arabian
Miniature Horse
Cataracts
Cataracts: presumed semidominant 
 Belgian Draft Horse
Choroidal hypoplasia
Aniridia (iris hypoplasia125 126
 Cilliary body cyst
Cataracts24
Dyscoria: presumed semidominant127
 Limbal dermoid124 
Goniosynechialfabsence of iridocorneal angle/primary
 pectinate ligament dysplasia 124, 127
Kentucky Mountain Saddle Horse 
Hypertelorism
 Cataracts: presumed semidominant
Iris coloboma
 Choroidal hypoplasia
 Iris hypoplasia: presumed semidominant
 Ciliary body cyst
Lens subluxation 
Dyscoria: presumed semidominant
 Macroblepharon
 Goniosynechialfabsence of iridocorneal angle/primary
Macroconea (cornea globosa): presumed semidominant127
Macrophthalmos with multiple ocular anomalies
Iris coloboma
 Iris hypoplasia: presumed semidominant
Miosis
Optic nerve hypoplasia
Hypertelorism 
Macroblepharon
(continued overleaf)
486
OpHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Table 15.3 Breed predisposition to eye disease in horses (continued)
Miniature Horse (continued)
Macrophthalmos with multiple ocular anomalies127
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Miosis
Retinal cyst 
Optic nerve hypoplasia
 Retinal detachment
 Persistent pupillary membranes
Retinal dysplasia: presumed semidominant
 Retinal cyst 
Retinal pigment epithelial proliferation ('high-water marker')
 Retinal detachment
 Of previous retinal detachment127
Vitreous degeneration
Retinal pigment epithelial proliferation ('high-water marker')
 of previous retinal detachmenti24. 127
Morgan Horse
 Cataracts, nuclearl28
Vitreous degeneration
Glaucoma
Quarter Horse
 Retinal dysplasia and detachment
Cataracts120
Coloboma
Mountain Pleasure Horse
Entropion
 Cataracts: presumed semidominant
lris hypoplasia (aniridia)121
 Limbal dermoid124
Ciliary body cyst
 Dyscoria: presumed semidominant
Shetland Pony
 Goniosynechiae/absence of iridocorneal angle/primary
 Cataracts: presumed semidominant124 
pectinate ligament dysplasia124. 127
 Choroidal hypoplasia
 Hypertelorism
Ciiary body cyst
Iris coloboma
 Dyscoria: presumed semidominant
Iris hypoplasia: presumed semidominant 
 Goniosynechiae/absence of iridocorneal angle/primary
Lens subluxation 
 pectinate ligament dysplasia124, 127
 Macroblepharon
 Hypertelorism
 Macroconea (cornea globosa): presumed semidominant127
Iris coloboma
 Macrophthalmos with multiple ocular anomalies
Iris hypoplasia: presumed semidominant
Miosis
Lens subluxation 
 Macroblepharon
 Persistent pupillary membranes
 Macrocornea (cornea globosa): presumed semidominant127
 Retinal cyst
 Macrophthalmos with multiple ocular anomalies
 Retinal detachment
Miosis
Retinal dysplasia: presumed semidominant124. 127
Optic nerve hypoplasia 
 Retinal pigment epithelial proliferation ('high-water marker')
 Persistent pupillary membranes 
 of previous retinal detachment127
Retinal cyst
Vitreous degeneration
Retinal detachment
 Retinal dysplasia: presumed semidominant
Paso Fino
 Congenital stationary night blindness129
Retinal pigment epithelial proliferation ('high-water marker')
 of previous retinal detachment127
Glaucoma 119
Vitreous degeneration
Rocky Mountain Horse
Anterior segment dysgenesis127
Standardbred
 Cataracts: presumed semidominant124
 Congenital stationary night blindness
Retinal detachments]19
 Choroidal hypoplasia
 Cilliary body cyst
Thorou gh bred 
Dyscoria: presumed semidominant 
Cataracts: presumed dominant traiti20. 130
 Goniosynechiaefabsence of iridocorneal angle/primary
Nuclear: presumed dominant trait124
 pectinate ligament dysplasia 124. 127
 Entropion
Hypertelorism
Microphthalmia associated with multiple ocular anomalies
Iris coloboma
 Progressive retinal atrophy123, 131
 Iris hypoplasia: presumed semidominant127
 Retinal dysplasia and detachment131
Lens subluxation 
Macroblepharon
Warmbloods
Glaucomal19
PrESuMED INHERITED OCULAr DISEASES
487
 Table 15.4 Breed disposition to eye disease in cattle
 Aberdeen Angus
Congenital cataracts: autosomal recessive139
Heterochromia iridis
Convergent strabismus with exophthalmia: recessive133 15.140
Microphthalmia
 Austrian Murboden 
 Multiple ocular anomalies141
Heterochromia iridis132
Ayrshire
Hereford 
 Coloboma with albinism 14z
Esotropia 133 134,135
 Congenital cataracts139
Heterochomia iridis132
Dermoid143
Brown Swiss (Braunviek)
 Retinal dysplasia
Estropia 133, 134, 135
Heterochromia iridis13z
Holstein
 Esotropia133 134. 135
 Supranumerary openings of the nasolacrimal system 136
 Heterochomia iridis132
 Charolais
Coloboma 137. 138
Holstein-Friesian
 Congenital cataracts139
Guernsey
Heterochromia iridis132
Shorthorn 
 Convergent strabismus with exophthalmia133. 135. 140
Jersey
 Multiple ocular anomalies14, 145. 146
 Aniridia
 Retinal dysplasia with multiple ocular anomalies144, 145
488
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETeRINARY MeDICINE
REFERENCES
1 Whitley RD {1988) Focusing on eye
15 Ostrander EA (2000) Proceedings of the
29 O'Toole D, Roberts S (1984)
disorders among purebred dogs.
18th American College of Veterinary
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy
Veterinary Medicine 83:50-63.
 Internal Medicine Meeting. Seatle, pp.
in two Akita dogs. Veterinary
 2 Whitley RD, McLaughlin SA, Gilger 
299-301.
Pathology 21:457-462.
BC {1995) Update on eye disorders
16 Acland GM, Ray KN, Mellersh CS et αf.
30 Bussanich MN, Rootman J, Dolman 
 among purebred dogs. Veterinary
{1998) Linkage analysis and comparative
CT (1986) Granulomatous pan uveitis
Medicine 90:574-592.
 mapping of canine progressive rod-cone
 and dermal depigmentation in dogs.
3 Speiss BM (2000) Personal
 degeneration (prcd) establishes potential
Journat of the American Animat
communication.
locus homology with retinitis pigmentosa
Hospitat Association 22:121-124.
 4 Stades FC (2000) Personal
(RPI7) in humans. Proceedings of the
 31 Kern TJ, Walton DK, Riis RC,
communication.
Nationat Acadenty of Sciences
Manning TO, Laratta LJ, Dziezyc J
5 Bedford PGC {2000) Personal
95:3048-3053.
{1985) Uveitis associated with poliosis
communication.
17 Optigen@ (2000) Optigen for the genetic
and vitiligo in six dogs. Journat of the
6 Ofri R (2000) Personal communication.
advantage. Optigen LLC.
American Veterinary Medicat
7 Mostoskey, UV, Padgett GA, Stinson 
<http://www.optigen.com/>
Association 187:408-414.
 AW, Duffendack JC (2000) Canine
18 Rubin LF {1989) Inherited Eye Diseases
32 Olesen HP, Jensen OA, Norm MS
molecular genetic diseases.
in Purebred Dogs. LF Rubin (ed).
{1974) Congenital hereditary cataracts
Compendium on Contintuing
Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore.
in Cocker Spaniels. Journat of Smatf
Education for the Practicing
19 Roberts SR, Helper LC {1972) Cataracts
Animimat Practice 15:741-750.
Veterinarian 22:480-489.
in Afghan Hounds. Journat of the
33 Yakely WL (1978) A study of
 8 Peteersen-Jones SM {2000) Persona]
American Veterinary Medicat
heritability of cataracts in the
communication.
Association 160(4):427-432.
American Cocker Spaniel. Journat of
9 Aguirre GD, Lolley R, Farber D,
20 Blogg JR (1980) Appendix A. In: The
the American Veterinary Medicat
Fletcher T, Chader G {1978)
Eye in Veterinary Practice: Extraocular
Association 172(7):814-817.
Rod-cone dysplasia in Irish Setter
Disease. Vol. 1. JR Blogg (ed). WB
34 Millan AD, Lipton DE (1978)
dogs: a defect in cyclic GMP
Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 501-510.
Heritability of multifocal retinal
metabolism in visual cells. Science
 21 ACVO Genetics Committee (1992)
dysplasia in American Cocker Spaniels.
201:1133-1135.
Ocular Disorders Proven or Suspected to
Journat of the American Veterinary
10 Aguirre GD, Farber D, Lolley R, et af.
be Hereditary in Dogs. American College
Medicat Association 172:568-572.
{1982) Retinal degenerations in the
of Veterinary Ophthalmology, Baton
35 Laratta LJ {1988) Personal
 dog. IIl. Abnormal cyclic nucleotide
Rouge, pp. 1-289.
communication.
metabolism in rod-cone dysplasia.
22 ACVO Genetics Committee {1999)
 36 Gelatt KN, Powell NG, Huston K
Experimentat Eye Research
Ocular Disorders Presumed to be
(1981) Inheritance of microphthalmia
35:625-642.
Inherited in Purebred Dogs, 3rd edn.
with coloboma in the Australian 
11 Petersen-Jones SM , Entz DD, Sargan
American College of Veterinary
Shepherd Dog. American Journat of
DR (1999) cGMP phosphodiesterase-
 Ophthalmology, Baton Rouge, pp. 4-
Veterinary Research 42:1686-1690.
alpha mutation causes progressive
270.
37 Nelson DL, MacMillan AD (1986)
retinal atrophy in the Cardigan Welsh
23 Slatter DH (2001) Appendix 1. In:
Diseases of the cornea. In: Current
Corgi dog. Investigative
 Fundamentals of Veterinary
Veterinary Therapy IX (Small Animal
Ophthaimology and Visuat Science
Ophthalmology, 3rd edn. WB Saunders,
Practice). RW Kirk (ed). WB Saunders,
40:1637-1644.
Philadelphia, pp. 609-616.
Philadelphia, pp. 642-649.
12 Petersen-Jones SM, Zhu FX (2000)
 24 Slatter DH {2001) Lens. In:
38 Bistner SI, Rubin LF, Roberts SR
Development and use of a polymerase 
 Fundamentals of Veterinary
{1971) A review of persistent pupillary
chain reaction-based diagnostic test
Ophthalmology, 3rd edn. WB Saunders,
membranes in the Basenji dog. Journa!
for the causal mutation of progressive
Philadelphia, pp. 393-410.
of the American Animat Hospitat
retinal atrophy in Cardigan Welsh
25 Brooks DE (1986) Canine and feline
Association 7:143-157.
Corgis. American Journat of
glaucomas. In: Current Veterinary
39 Wyman M (1986) Manual of Small
Veterinary Research 61:844-846.
Therapy IX (Small Animal Practice). RW
Animal Ophthalmology. Churchill 
13 Aguirre GD, Baldwin V, Pearce.
Kirk (ed). WB Saunders, Philadelphia,
Livingstone, New York, pp. 196;
Kelling S, Narfstrom K, Ray K,
pp.656-659.
235-236.
Acland GM (1998) Congenital 
 26 Gelatt KN (1991) Textbook of
40 Wyman M, Ketring K (1976)
stationary night blindness in the dog:
Veterinary Ophthalmology, 2nd edn. KN
Congenital glaucoma in the Bassett
 common mutation in the RPE 65 gene
Gelatt (ed). Lea and Febiger.
Hound: a biological model.
indicates founder effect. Molecula!
Philadelphia, pp. 437-440, 478-498.
Proceedings of the American Academy
Vision 4:23-27.
27 Bistner SI, Aguirre G, Batik G (1977)
of Ophthatmotogy and
14 Narfstrom K, Wrigstad A, Ekesten B,
Appendix 1. In: Atlas of Veterinary
Otolaryngology 81:645-657.
Nillsson SE (1994) Hereditary retinal
 Ophthalmic Surgery. WB Saunders.
41 Roberts SM, Severin GA, Lavach JD
dystrophy in the Briard dog: clinical
Philadelphia, pp. 279-290.
(1986) Prevalence and treatment of
and hereditary characteristics.
28 Laratta LJ, Ris RC, Kern TJ, Koch SA
palpebral neoplasms in the dog: 200
Veterinary and Comparative
[1985) Multiple congenital ocular defects
cases {1975-1983). Journat of the
Ophthaimology 4:85-92.
 in the Akita dog. Cornell Veterinarian
American Veterinary Medicat
75:381-392.
Association 189:1355-1359.
PRESUMED INHERITED OCULAR DISEASES
489
42 Gelatt KN, Gum GG {1981) Inheritance
55 Curtis R, Barnett KC (1983) Primary
69 Peiffer RL Jr, Fischer CA {1983)
 of primary glaucoma in the Beagle.
lens luxation in the Miniature Bull
Microphthalmia, retinal dysplasia in a
Amerian Journat of Veterinary
litter of Doberman Pinschers. Journat
Research 42:1691-1693.
112:328-329.
of the American Veterinary Medicat
 43 Bedford PGC (1982) Multifocal retinal
56 Keep JM (1972) Clinical aspects of
Association 183:875-878.
dysplasia in the Rottweiler. Veterinary
 progressive retinal atrophy in the
 70 Stades FC (1983) Persistent
Record 113:304-305.
Cardigan Welsh Corgi. Australian
hyperplastic tunica vasculosa lentis
44 Rubin LF, Koch SA, Huber RJ (1969)
Veterinary Journat 48:197-199.
and persistent hyperplastic primary
Hereditary cataracts in Miniature
57 Narfstrom, K, Dubielzig R (1984)
vitreous in Doberman Pinschers:
Schnauzers. Journat of the American
Posterior lenticonus, cataracts and
genetic aspects. Journat of the
Veterinary Medicat Association
 microphthalmia: congenital ocular
American Animat Hospitat
154:1456-1458.
defects in the Cavalier King Charles
Association 19:957-964.
45 Slatter DH, Lavach JD, Severin GA,
Spaniel. Journat of Smatt Animat
71 Aguirre G, Acland G (1983)
Young S {1977) Uberreiter's syndrome
Practice 25:669-677.
 Progressive Retinal Atrophy in the
(chronic superficial keratitis) in dogs in
58 Gelatt KN, Whitley RD, Lavach JD,
English Cocker Spaniel. Proceedings
the Rocky Mountain area: a study of
Barrie KP, Williams LW (1979)
of the Scientific Meeting of the
463 cases. Journat of Small Animat
Cataracts in Chesapeake Bay Retrievers.
American Coltege of Veterinary
Practice 18:757-772.
Journat of the American Veterinary
Ophthatmology 14:104-108.
46 Curtis R {1984) Late-onset cataracts in
Medicat Association
72 Narfstrom K, Wrigstad A {1995)
the Boston Terrier. Veterinary Record
175{11):1176-1178.
Clinical, electrophysiological, and
115:577-578.
59 Collins BK, Collier LL, Johnson GS,
morphological findings in a case of 
 47 Whitley RD, Gilger BC (1999) Diseases
 Shibuya H, Moore CP, daSilva-Curiel
neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis in the
of the canine cornea and sclera. In:
JM {1992) Familial cataracts and
Polish Owezarek Nizinny (PON) dog.
Veterinary Ophthalmology, 3rd edn.
concurrent ocular anomalies in Chow
Proceedings of the ISVO, ESVO,
KN Gelatt (ed). Lippincott Williams
Chows. Journat of the American
ECVO Joint Meeting, Amsterdam,
 and Wilkins, Philadelphia, pp.
Veterinary Medicat Association
April 22-23 1995.
635-673.
200:1485-1491
 73 Cottrell BD (1986) Primary glaucoma
48 Stades FC (1986) Diseases of the lens
60 Hamor RE (1990) Personal
 in the Welsh Springer Spaniel.
and vitreous. In: Current Veterinary
communication.
Proceedings of the International
Therapy IX (Small Animal Practice).
61 Corcoran KA, Koch SA, Peiffer RL
Society of Veterinary
RW Kirk (ed). WB Saunders,
(1994) Primary glaucoma in the Chow
 Ophthalmologists, New Orleans, pp.
Philadelphia, pp. 660-668.
Chow. Veterinary and Corparative
165-176.
49 Boevé MH, Stades FC {1985) Glaucom
Ophthatmology 4:193-197.
74 Schmidt GM, Ellersisck MR, Wheeler
bij hond en kat. Oversicht en
62 Nelson DL, MacMillan AD {1983)
CA, Blanchard GL, Keller WF {1979)
retrospectieve evaluatie van 421
Multifocal retinal dysplasia in field trial
Inheritance of retinal dysplasia in the
 patients. 1. Pathobiologische achter
Labrador Retrievers. Journat of the
English Springer Spaniel. Journat of
gronding indeling en raspredisposities.
American Animat Hospitat Association
the American Veterinary Medicat
Tijdschr Diergeneeskd 110:219-227.
19:388-392.
Association 174:1089-1090.
 50 van Rensburg IBJ, Petrick SW, van der 
63 Moore CP, Whitley RD (1984) Visual
75 Helper LC {1989) Appendix 1. In:
 Lugt J, Smit MME (1992) Multiple
disturbance in the dog. I1. Disease of
Magrane's Canine Ophthalmology.
 inherited eye anomalies including
the retina and optic papilla.
4th edn. Lea and Febiger,
 persistent hyperplastic tunica vasculosa
Compendiumm on Continuing Education
Philadelphia, pp. 275-277.
lentis in Bouvier des Flandres. Progress
for the Practicing Veter inarian
 76 Martin CL, Wyman M (1978) Primary
in Veterinary and Comparative
6(7):585-607.
glaucoma in the dog. Veterinary
Ophthatmotogy 2:133-139.
64 Munger RJ (1983) Disease of the eyelid.
Clinics of North America 8:257-286.
51 Bedford PGC (1984) Retinal pigment
In: Current Veterinary Therapy VII
77 Barnett KC (1986) Hereditary
epithelial dystrophy (CPRA): study of
(Small Animal Practice). RW Kirk (ed).
cataracts in the German Shepherd
the disease in the Briard. Journat of
WB Saunders, Philadelphia, pp.
Dog. Journat of Smalt Animat Practice
Small Anat Practice 25:129-138.
537-543.
27:387-395.
52 McLellan GJ, Richelle M, Elks R,
65 Clerc B (2000) Personal
78 Martin CL, Leach R {1970) Everted
Lybaert P, Bedford PGC (1997) Vitamin
communication.
membrana nictitans in German
E deficiency in canine retinal epithelial
66 Curtis R, Barnett KC {1993) Progressive
Shorthaired Pointers. Journat of the
dystrophy {RPED) - results of the oral
 retinal atrophy in Miniature Longhaired
American Veterinary Medicat
vitamin E tolerance test in clinically
Dachshund dogs. British Veterinary
Association 157:1229-1232.
normal dogs and in RPED affected
Jourmal 149:71-85.
79 Rubin LF {1974a) Cataracts in Golden
cocker spaniels. Proceedings of the
67 Slater MR, Erb HN {1986) Effects of
Retrievers. Journat of the American
World Small Animal Veterinary
risk factors and prophylactic treatment
Veterinary Medicat Association
 Association Congress, Birmingham, UK.
 on primary glaucoma in the dog.
165:457-45 8.
53 McLellan GJ (2002) Personal
Journat of the American Veterinary
80 Barnett KC (1980) Cataracts in the
communication.
Medicat Association 188:1028-1030.
Golden Retriever. Veterinary Record
54 Kern TJ (1986) Disorders of the
68 Goebel HH, Dahme E (1986)
111:315-316.
lacrimal system. In: Current Veterinary
Utrastructure of retinal pigment
81 Curtis R, Barnett K {1989) A survey
Therapy IX (Small Animal Practice).
epithelial and neural cells in the
of cataracts in Golden and Labrador
RW Kirk (ed). WB Saunders,
neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis-affected
Retrievers. Journat of Smatl Animat
 Philadelphia, pp. 634-641.
Dalmatian dog. Retina 6: 179-187.
Practice 30:277-286.
490
OpHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
 82 McLaughlin SA (1983) Multiple
96 Narfstrom K, Ekesten B (1998)
109 Leon A, Curtis R, Barnett KC
ocular defects associated with partial
Electroretinographic evaluation of
{1986) Hereditary persistent
 albinism in three Great Dane puppies.
Papillons with and without hereditary
hyperplastic primary vitreous in the
Canine Practice 10:12-16.
retinal degeneration. American Journat
Staffordshire Bull Terrier. Journat of
 83 Peiffer RL, Gelatt KN, Gwin RM
of Veterinary Research 59:221-226.
the American Animat Hospitat
{1977) Chronic superficial keratitis
97 Acland GM, Boughman JA, Aguirre
Association 22:765-774.
(pannus) in related Greyhounds.
GD {1981) Inheritance of progressive
110 Curtis R {1983) Aetiopathological
Veterinary Medicine/Smalt Animat
rod-cone degeneration: a case of
aspects of inherited lens dislocation in
Clinician 72:35-37.
 genetic selection. Proceedings of the
the Tibetan Terrier. Journat of
84 Grimes TD, Mullaney J {1969)
Scientific Meeting of the American
Comparative Pathotogy 93:151-163.
 Persistent hyperplastic primary
Coltege of Veterinary Ophthatmotogy
111 Willis MB, Curtis R, Barnett KC,
vitreous in a Greyhound. Veterinary
12:115-128.
Tempest WM (1979) Genetic aspects
Record 85:607-611.
98 Rubin LF, Flowers RD (1972)
of lens luxation in the Tibetan Terrier.
85 Palmer AC, Payne JE, Wallace ME
 Inherited cataracts in a family of
Veterinary Record 104:409-412.
{1973) Hereditary quadriplegia and
Standard Poodles. Journat of the
112 Loew E, Riis R {1983) Congenital
amblyopia in the Irish Setter. Journat
American Veterinary Medicat
nyctalopia in the Tibetan Terrier.
of Smalt Animat Practice 14:343-352.
Association 161:207-208.
Proceedings of the Scientific Meeting 
86 Sakai T, Harashima T, Yamamura H,
 99 Bjerkas E, Bergsjo T {1991) Hereditary
of the American College of Veterinary
Nitaya R, Ikeda T {1994) Two cases
cataracts in the Rottweiler dog.
Ophthalmologists, pp. 82-97.
of hereditary quadriplegia and
Progress in Veterinary and
113 Millichamp NJ, Curtis R, Barnett 
amblyopia in a litter of Irish Setters.
Comparative Ophthatmology 1:7-10.
KC {1988) Progressive retinal atrophy
Journat of Smafl Animat Practice
100 Martin CL, Leipold H {1974)
in Tibetan Terriers. Journal of the
35:221.
Aphakia and multiple ocular defects in
American Veterinary Medicat
87 Aguirre GD {1976) Inherited retinal
Saint Bernard puppies. Veterinary
Association 192(6):769-776.
degenerations in the dog. Proceedings
Medicine/Small Animat Clinician
 114 Barnett KC {1980) Hereditary
of the American Academy of
14:448-453.
cataracts in the Welsh Springer
Ophthatmatogy and Otolaryngology
101 Lavach JD (1985) Personal
Spaniel. Journat of Smatt Animat
81:667-676.
communication.
Practice 21:621-625.
88 Carrig CB, Sponenberg DP, Schmidt
100 Dice PF {1980) Progressive retinal
115 Narfstrom K {1981) Cataracts in the
GM, Tvedten HW (1988) Inheritance
 atrophy in the Samoyed. Modern
West Highland Terrier. Journat of
of associated ocular and skeletal
Veterinary Practice 61:59-60.
Smatl Animat Practice 22:467-471.
dysplasia in Labrador Retrievers.
103 Meyers VN, Jezyk GD, Aguirre G,
 116 Narfstrom K (1985) Progressive
Journat of the American Veterinary
Patterson DF (1983) Short-limbed
retinal atrophy in the Abyssinian cat:
Medical Association 193:1269-1272.
 dwarfism and ocular defects in the
clinical characteristics. Investigative
89 Curtis R, Barnett KC {1980) Primary
Samoyed dog. Journat of the American
Ophthatmology and Visuat Science
lens luxation in the dog. Journat of
Veterinary Medicat Association
26:193-200.
Small Animat Practice 21:657-668.
183:975-979.
117 Seeliger MW, Narfstrom K (2000)
90 Barnett KC (1985) The diagnosis and
104 Gelatt KN, Samuelson DA, Bauer JE,
Functional assessment of the regional
differential diagnosis of cataracts in
et al. (1983) Inheritance of congenital 
distribution of disease in a cat model
the dog. Journat of Small Animat
cataracts and microphthalmia in the
of hereditary retinal degeneration.
Practice 26:305-316.
 Miniature Schnauzer. American
Investigative Ophthatmotogy and
91 Schmidt GM (1977) Diseases of the
Journat of Veterinary Research
Vsuat Science 41:1998-2005.
eyelids. In: Current Veterinary
44(6):1130-1132.
118 Bistner SI, Aguirre G, Shively JN
Therapy VI (Small Animal Practice).
105 Aguirre G, Parshall C, Acland G
(1976) Hereditary corneal dystrophy
RW Kirk {ed). WB Saunders,
{1985) Progressive retinal atrophy in
in the Manx cat: a preliminary report.
Philadelphia , pp. 603-604.
 the Miniature Schnauzer. Proceedings
Investigative Ophthatmology
92 Brooks DE (1990) Glaucoma in the
of the Scientific Meting of the
15:15-26.
dog and cat. Veterinary Clinics in
American Coltege of Veterinary
119 Brooks DE (1999) Equine
North America (Smalt Animat
Ophthalmotogists 16:226-237.
ophthalmology. In: Veterinary
Practice) 20:775-797.
106 Dice PF {1986) Corneal dystrophy in
Ophthalmology, 3rd edn. KN Gelatt 
93 Whitley RD {1987) Recent advances
the Shetland Sheepdog. Proceedings of
(ed). Lippincott Williams and
in glaucoma therapy. Proceedings of
the Scientific Meeting of the American
Wilkins, Philadelphia, pp.
the World Small Animal Veterinary
Coltege of Veterinary
1053-1116.
Association Congress, Montreal, pp.
Ophthatmotogists 15:241-242.
 120 Whitley RD, Meek LA, Millichamp
148-163.
107 Campbell K, McLaughlin SA,
NJ, McRae EE, Priehs DR {1990)
94 Koch S {1972) Cataracts in
 Reynolds HA (1986) Generalized
Cataract surgery in the horse: a
 interrelated Old English Sheepdogs.
Jeukoderma and poliosis following
review of six cases. Equine Veterinary
Journat of the American Veterinary
uveitis in a dog. Journat of the
Journat Supptement 10:85-90.
Medicat Association 160:299-301.
American Animat Hospitat Association
121 McLaughlin SA, Whitley RD, Gilger
95 Hakanson N, Narfstrom K (1995)
22:121-124.
BC {1992) Diagnosis and treatment of
Progressive retinal atrophy in Papillon
108 Waring GO, MacMillan A, Reveles P
lens diseases. Veterinary Clinics of
dogs in Sweden: a clinical survey.
{1986) Inheritance of crystalline
North America (Equine Practice)
Veterinary and Comparative
corneal dystrophy in Siberian Huskies.
8:575-585.
Ophthalmology 5:83-87.
Joturnat of the American Animat
Hospital Association 22:655-658.
PresumeD INHeRIteD OculAr DIsEAsES
491
122 Gelatt KN, McClure JR {1979)
130 Barnett KC (1975) The eye of the
139 Gelatt KN {1971) Cataracts in cattle.
 Congenital strabismus and its 
newborn foal. Journat of
Journat of the American Veterinary
correction in two Appaloosa horses.
Reproduction Pertility Stupptement
Medicat Association 159:195-200.
Journat of Equine Medicine and
23:701-703.
140 Willoughby RA {1968) Congenital
Surgery 3:240-241.
131 Rubin LF {1974) Atlas of Veterinary
eye defects in cattle. Modern
123 Rebhun WC, Loew ER, Riis RC,
 Ophthalmoscopy. Lea and Febiger,
Veterinary Practice 49:36-40.
Larratta LJ {1984) Clinical
Philadelphia.
141 Saunders LZ, Fincher MG (1951)
 manifestations of night blindness in
132 Huston R, Leipold HW, Freeman AE
Hereditary multiple eye defects in
the Appaloosa horse. Compendiurm on
{1968) Heterochromia irides in dairy
grade Jersey calves. Corne
Continuing Edtucation for the
 cattle. Journal of Dairy Science
Veterinarian 41:351-366.
Practicing Veterinarian 6:S103-S106.
51:1101-1102.
142 Gelatt KN, Huston K, Leipold HW
124 ACVO Genetics Committee {1999)
133 Regan WM, Gregory PW, Mead SW
{1969) Ocular anomalies of
Ocular Disorders Presumed to be
{1944) Hereditary strabismus in Jersey
incomplete albino cattle: ophthalmic
 Inherited in Purebred Horses. Equine
cattle. Journat of Heredity
examination. American Journat of
Eye Registration Foundation, Baton
32:233-234.
Veterinary Research 30:1313-1316.
Rouge, pp. 1-16.
134 Willoughby RA (1970) The eye and
143 Barkyoumb SD, Leipold HW (1984)
125 Erikson R {1955) Hereditary aniridia
its adnexa. In: Bovine Medicine and
 Nature and cause of bilateral ocular
with secondary cataracts in horses.
Surgery, 1st edn. American Veterinary
dermoids in Hereford cattle.
Nordic Veterinary Medicine
 Publications, Santa Barbara, pp.
Veterinary Pathotogy 21:316-324.
7:773-779.
617-630.
144 Leipold HW, Gelatt KN, Huston K
126 Joyce JR {1983) Aniridia in Quarter 
135 Rebhun WC, Loew ER, Riis RC,
{1971) Multiple ocular anomalies and
horses. Equine Veterinary Journat
Larratta LJ (1979) Diseases of the
hydrocephalis in grade Shorthorn
Supptement 2:21-22.
bovine orbit and globe. Journat of the 
cattle. American Journat of Veterinary
127 Ramsey DT, Ewart SL, Render JA,
American Veterinary Medicat
Research 32:1019-1026.
Cook CS, Latimer CA (1999)
Association 175:171-175.
145 Greene HJ, Leipold HW (1974)
 Congenital ocular abnormalities of
136 Heider L, Wyman M, Burt J, Root C,
Hereditary internal hydrocephalus and
Rocky Mountain horses. Veterinary
Gardner H {1975) Nasolacrimal duct
retinal dysplasia in Shorthorn calves.
Ophthatotogy 2:47-59.
anomaly in calves. Journat of the
Cornelt Veter inarian 64:327.
128 Beech J, Aguirre G, Gross S {1984)
American Veterinary Medicat
146 Miller TR, Gelatt KN (1991) Food
Congenital nuclear cataracts in the
Association 167:145-147.
animal ophthalmology. In: Veterinary
Morgan horse. Journat of the
137 Barnett KC, Ogden AI {1972) Ocular
Ophthalmology, 2nd edn. KN Gelatt 
American Veterinary Medicat
colobomata in Charolais cattle.
(ed). Lea and Febiger, Philadelphia,
Association 184:1363-1365.
Veterinary Record 91:592-593.
pp. 611-655.
129 Rebhun WC, Loew ER, Riis RC,
138 McCormack J, Powers RD, Albert
Larratta LJ (1992) Retinal and optic
RA {1975) Typical colobomas in
nerve diseases. Veterinary Clinics of
 Charolais cattle. Veterinary
North America 8:587-608.
Medicine/Small Animat Clinician
70:182-185.
This page intentionally left blank
493
Appendix 1
Systemic Disease
Rule Outs Based
on Ocular Lesions
EYELIDS
Bacterial septicemia
Trauma
BLEPHARITIS
Mycoplasmosis
Leishmaniasis
Thromboembolic meningoencephalitis
 Pemphigus complex
Warfarin toxicity
Dermatophytosis
Feline infectious peritonitis
Bullous pemphigoid
Sulfonamide toxicity
Systemic mycoses
 Feline leukemia virus infection
 Discoid lupus erythematosus
Lymphoma
Ocular myiasis
 Salmon poisoning
Dermatomyositis
Hypertension
 Demodectic mange
Toxemia
Atopy
 Sarcoptic mange
VKH
CORNEA/SCLERA
Notoedric mange
Drug eruption
ULCERATIVE AND NONULCERATIVE
Cheyletiellosis
Canine herpesvirus infection (neonate)
Seborrhea
CNS neoplasia involving Vth or VIIth cranial nerves
Onchocerciasis {dog)
Feline herpesvirus infection
Eosinophilic granuloma complex
Systemic mycoses
Habronemiasis
Equine herpesvirus I and II infection
Juvenile pyoderma
Canine ehrlichiosis
Viral papillomatosis
Malignant catarrhal fever
Generalized pyoderma
Trauma
Bite wound infection
Infectious bovine rhinotracheitis
Trauma
Hypera drenocortism
Burns
Canine hepatitis
Lymphosa rcoma
 Feline infectious peritonitis
CONJUNCTIVA
Burns
Feline leukemia virus complex infection
ConJunctIvitis, ConJunCtIvAL
Chemical ca ustics
HYPEREMIA, HEMORRHAGE
Canine distemper (KCS)
Canine distemper
 Bullous skin diseases
Polycythemia
Chlamydiosis
Canine adenovirus 1 and 2 infection
 Masticatory myositis (exposure)
Chlamydiosis
Intraocular dirofilaria
Hyperviscosity syndrome
Riboflavin deficiency
Herpesvirus infection {all species of animals)
Listeriosis
Leptospirosis
Bovine thromboembolic meningoencephalitis
Deh ydration
Calicivirus infection
Borreliosis
CORNEA/SCLERA
Atopy
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
DEGENERATIVE
Hepatazoonosis
Hypothyroidism
Thrombocytopenia
Mucopolysaccaridosis
Ehrlichiosis
Diabetes mellitus
494
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
Lipid storage disease
Hypocalcemia
Hypercalcemia
Toxoplasmosis
Gangliosidosis
Trauma
Hyperlipoproteinemia
Radiation
Phenothiazine toxicity
Atopy
Hypera drenocorticism
Diabetes mellitus
Chronic ketaconazole therapy
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
ANTERIOR UVEA/GLAUCOMA
FUNDUS
Canine adenovirus 1 infection
Encephalitozoonosis
HEMORRHAGE
Malignant catarrhal fever
 Systemic mycoses
Trauma
Infectious bovine rhinotracheitis
Systemic mycoses
Intraocular filaria
Hypertension (renal-, thyroid-, adrenal-related)
Canine neonatal herpesvirus infection
Ehrlichiosis
Systemic aspergillosis
Hyperviscosity syndrome
 Feline herpesvirus infection
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Toxoplasmosis
Thrombocytopenia (immune-mediated, infection-related,
 Feline leukemia virus infection
toxicity-related, neoplasia-related)
Neosporosis.
Borreliosis
 Feline infectious peritonitis
Vasculitis finfection-related, neoplasia-related, immune-
Protothecosis
mediated)
Feline immunodeficiency virus infection
 Bacterial septicemia, i.e. endocarditis, neonatal
Leishmaniasis
 Neoplasia (metastatic, multicentric, leukemia)
Ehrlichiosis
Thromboembolic meningoencephalitis
Hepata zoonosis
Anemia (severe, rapid onset)
 Rocky Mountain spotted fever 
Vitamin A deficiency
VKH
Polycythemia
Bartonellosis
Immune-mediated
Brucellosis
OPTIC NEURITIS/PAPILLEDEMA
Trauma
Tuberculosis
Canine distemper
Metastatic neoplasia
Masticatory myositis
Bacterial septicemia
Systemic mycosis
Lymphosa rcoma
Orbital cellulitis
Ehrlichiosis
VKH
HYPHEMA
 Feline infectious peritonitis
Brain tumor
Ehrlichiosis
Gra nulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis
Canine brucellosis
Toxoplasmosis
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Vitamin A deficiency
Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia
Trauma
Borreliosis
Pancreatitis
Hypertension
Feline leukemia virus infection
Lymphosa rcoma
RETINAL DEGENERATION
 Feline infectious peritonitis
Trauma
Taurine deficiency
Leptospirosis
In utero bovine virus diarrhea
Bone marrow aplasia
Vitamin A deficiency
 In utero feline panleukopenia
Metastatic neopla sia
Vitamin E deficiency
Leukemia
 Posthypertensive retinal detachment
Vasculitis
Enrofloxacin toxicity
 Aberrant parasitic migration
Ivermectin toxicity
LENS [CATARACT, LENS DISPLACEMENT]
 Metabolic storage disease
Trauma
Bovine virus diarrhea
 Neonatal canine parvovirus infection
Orphan milk replacers
Angioinvasive carcinoma
Feline immunodeficiency virus infection
Postinflammatory (all infectious causes of uveitis)
495
Appendix 2
Glossary
blepharo pertaining to the eyelid
astigmatism optical distortion usually caused by
core central part; in the eye, the pupil
irregular corneal curvature that prevents a clear
cyclo pertaining to the ciliary body
focus of light at any point
dacryo pertaining to tears
 bedewing delicate or mild edema of the corneal
gonio pertaining to the iridocorneal angle
epithelium, recognizable by biomicroscopy
hyal pertaining to the vitreous
bifocal double lens usually prescribed for older persons
iridic pertaining to the iris
who can no longer accommodate; the lower portion
kerato pertaining to the cornea
focuses for near vision
 papilla pertaining to the optic nerve head
binocular vision normal simultaneous use of both eyes
 phaco pertaining to the lens
(which results in depth perception)
biomicroscope clinical examination instrument (slit
abducens nerve VIth cranial nerve that innervates the
lamp microscope) that combines a microscope with
lateral rectus muscle
 a very thin beam of light and permits observation of
abduction rotation of an eye temporally or laterally
detail within the transparent eye
 accommodation near focusing of the eye; accomplished
blepharitis inflammation of the eyelid
Paaaioe pue sual aui jo qauas ui aseau ue Aq
blepharospasm involuntary contraction of the
by contractions of the ciliary muscle
orbicularis muscle
acuity ability of the eye to see fine detail
blindness although the ophthalmologist usually
adduction turning of an eye medially
considers blindness to mean inability to see, legal
adnexa adjacent structures of the eye, e.g. lids or
blindness is defined as vision fcorrected by
extra ocular muscles
eyeglasses) of 20/200 or less or <20° of visual field
amaurosis little-used synonym for blindness; frequently
in the better eye
used to designate visual loss in a structurally normal
bombe (of inis) forward displacement of the iris ca used
eye {as from a pituitary tumor)
by blockage of the pupil that prevents forward flow
amblyopia reduced vision in an eye that appears normal
of aqueous humor
on examination; this term is most commonly used
buphthalmos enlargement of the eye due to glaucoma
as 'suppression amblyopia', which refers to cerebral
 canaliculus portion of the lacrimal drainage apparatus
 blocking of vision in an eye that is deviated or
between the punctum and the lacrimal sac
suffers from a refractive error more marked than
 canthus outer or inner angle between the eyelids
that of the good eye
aniridia absence of the iris
capsule
 anisocoria difference in size of the two pupils
 chalazion granulomatous inflammation of the eyelid
 ankyloblepharon adhesion between the margins of the
associated with lipids from meibomian glands, that
upper and lower eyelids
have had blocked ducts
 anophthalmia total failure of the eye to develop
ciliary body portion of the uveal tract between the iris
anterior chamber space between the cornea and iris that
and choroid that contains the muscles of
contains aqueous humor
accommodation and secretes aqueous humor
 aphakia absence of the lens 
cilium eyelash
applanation tonometry measurement of intraocular
collyrium synonym for eye drops
 pressure by an instrument that flattens a
coloboma any notch-like defect in the eye or lids
predetermined area of the cornea
concave lens an incurved (center thinner than edges)
aqueous humor clear fluid secreted by the ciliary
lens that corrects nearsightedness by diverging the
processes that flls the anterior and posterior
light rays
chambers
concomitant strabismus nonparalytic strabismus that
 asteroid hyalosis condition of the vitreous body, in
 does not change in amount with different position
which degenerative vitreous change causes
of the eyes
numerous tiny white nodules to develop within the
 cone retinal cell used for daylight vision
vitreous framework; it rarely impairs vision
496
OpHTHAlMIC DIsEAsE IN VeTeRiNARY MeDICINE
 conjunctiva mucous membrane lining the back of the
endocapsular extraction performing
lids (palpebral) and the front of the eye {bulbar)
phacoemulsification through a small anterior
except for the cornea
capsule opening or “in the bag"
convergence turning of the two eyes toward each other
endophthalmitis inflammation of the entire interior of
 convex lens an outcurved (center thicker than edges)
the eye
lens that corrects farsightedness by converging the
enophthalmos abnormal displacement of the eye
light rays
backward into the orbit due to atrophy of tissue or
 corectopic eccentric position of the pupil; a small
loss through a fracture
 deviation is normal
entropion abnormal inward displacement of the lid
couching primitive surgical practice of dislocating a
margin toward the eye
cataract into the vitreous; visual improvement
enucleation surgical removal of the entire eye, including
obtained in this way is transient since lens-induced
the sclera
inflammation usually destroys the eye
 epiphora tearing due to blockage of the lacrimal
cross-eyes lay term for convergent strabismus
drainage apparatus or overproduction of tears
cul-de-sac upper or lower {conjunctival) recess
episclera loose connective tissue on the scleral surface
cyclitis inflammation of the ciliary body
episcleritis inflammation of the episclera
equator midportion of the globe between the anterior
ciliary body from the sclera, thereby creating a new
and posterior poles
exit for the aqueous humor
evisceration removal of the contents of the eye with
cyclocryotherapy antigla ucoma operation that partially
retention of the sclera in the orbit
 destroys the ciliary body by freezing, thereby
exenteration removal of the eye and orbital contents
reducing aqueous humor formation
exophthalmos abnormal displacement of the eye
cycloplegia paralysis of accommodation
forward in the orbit due to an increase in volume of
cyclophotocoagulation antigla ucoma therapy that
the orbital contents or to an abnormally shallow
 destroys the ciliary body epithelium by laser energy
 orbital bony structure
dacryoadenitis inflammation of a lacrimal gland
extraocular pertaining to structures outside the
dacryocystitis inflammation of a lacrimal sac, usually
sclerocorneal covering of the eye
due to faulty drainage
farsightedness (hyperopia) refractive error in which
 descemetocele protrusion or baring of Descemet's
 parallel light is focused behind the retina; 
membrane; occurs after loss of corneal stroma from
accommodation is required in order to see clearly in
disease or injury
the distance
Descemet's membrane modified basal lamina of corneal
feld of vision entire area that can be seen by the eye
endothelium on the posterior corneal surface
foaters opacities within the vitreous space that cause
detachment separation of one layer of the eye from the
moving shadows on the retina
adjacent layer; a choroidal detachment is separated
fornix conjunctival recess, where the bulbar conjunctiva
from the sclera, a retinal detachment is separation
reflects onto the lids; cul-de-sac
of the neurosensory layer from the pigment layer, 
fundus (ocular) internal surface of the posterior eye,
and a vitreous detachment is separation of the
including the optic disc, the retina, and the
vitreous from the retina
choroidal or scleral details visible through the retina
diopter unit in which the refracting strength of a lens is
fusion cerebral synthesis of the two ocular pictures into
designed; calculated as the reciprocal of the focal
a single mental picture
length of a lens measured in meters
 diplopia double vision; usually due to faulty alignment
focused retinal picture and reduces visual acuity
of the two eyes
glaucoma abnormally increased intra ocular pressure
disc portion of the optic nerve visible with an
that is not compatible with ocular health
ophthalmoscope
 goniolens special type of contact lens that permits
distichiasis reduplication of the eyelashes; the inner
examination of the periphery of the anterior
lashes originate from the meibomian gland orifices
chamber; study of this portion of the eye is of
and may irritate the cornea
importance in patients with glaucoma
dyscoria distorted pupil shape
 gonioscopy study of the angle of the anterior chamber
 dystrophy inherited degenerative change, e.g. the cornea
with the aid of a special contact lens
and retina may be affected by a number of different
hemeralopia inability to see well in daylight
types of dystrophy
 illumination, with preservation of good night vision
 ectasia bulging outward of a weakened cornea or sclera;
hemianopia loss of vision in approximately 50% of the
ectasia is differentiated from staphyloma, which is a
visual field
bulging area lined with uveal tissue
heterochromia difference in color of the two irides or in
ectropion abnormal outward displacement of the lid
 parts of the same iris
away from the eye
 hippus rapidly alternating increase and decrease of
electro-oculogram recording of the electrical potential
pupil size associated with neurologic disturbances or
of the whole eye
occurring, to a lesser degree, physiologically
electroretinogram recording of the electrical potential of
homonymous indicates involvement of the same side of
the retina
the two visual fields, e.g. right homonymous
emmetropia refractive condition of an eye that is
hemianopia
perfectly focused for distance without the aid of
hordeolum (sty) acute inflammation of a gland near the
accommodation
eyelid margin
APPENDIX 2 - GLOSSARY
497
hyalitis inflammation of the vitreous body
ophthalmoplegia paralysis of ocular muscles
hyperopia farsightedness; the refractive error in which
ophthalmoscope instrument for clinical examination of
light rays focus behind the retina
the posterior portion of the eye
hyphema blood in the anterior chamber
opsin the protein constituent of the visual pigment
hypopyon accumulation of neutrophils and fibrin in the
rhodopsin
anterior chamber
optician technician who prepares and dispenses
iridectomy procedure in which a small portion of the
eyeglasses
 iris is excised, usually for treatment of glaucoma
 optometrist medically trained refractionist and primary
iridencleisis antiglaucoma operation in which a wick of
eye care specialist
iris is used to maintain a scleral opening through
ora ciliaris retina anterior boundary of the retina with
which aqueous humor drains to sub-Tenon's space
the ciliary body
inidocyclitis inflammation of the iris and ciliary body
orbicularis oculi muscle that closes the eyelids
inidodialysis tearing of the iris from the ciliary body
palpebral referring to the eyelids 
iridodonesis trembling of the iris with eye movement,
pannus superficial vascular corneal scar
indicating loss of lens support, e.g. in aphakia or
panophthalmitis generalized inflammation of all tunics
with a dislocated lens
of the eye
iridoplegia paralysis of the iris
papilledema swelling of the optic disc visible
iris colored portion of the eye surrounding the pupil
ophthalmoscopically; due to increased intracranial
keratectomy excision of a superficial portion of the
 pressure or interference with axoplasmic flow
cornea
papillitis {optic neuritis) inflammatory swelling of the
keratic precipitates inflammatory deposits on the
optic disc
posterior surface of the cornea
periorbita periosteum lining the inside of the orbit
keratitis inflammation of the cornea
 peripapillary surrounding the optic disc
keratoconus cone-shaped distortion of the central
peritomy surgical separation of the conjunctiva from
 cornea due to degeneration of the stromal lamellae
the limbus; performed as a preliminary step in
keratoplasty corneal grafting
various surgical procedures
autogenous graft is from the patient
 phacoanaphylaxis intraocular reaction resulting from
lamellar replacing a portion of the anterior cornea
sensitivity to lens material
penetrating replacing the full thickness of a section
phacoemulsification surgical procedure of breaking the
of cornea
lens up with ultrasound and aspiration of the
refractive placing and autogenous or homologous
fragments
 graft that has been shaped to improve the
phoria refers to latent ocular deviation; phoria is
optical properties of the cornea
 differentiated from tropia, which is a manifest
tectonic grafting cornea to fill a defect in the cornea
 ocular deviation
lacrimation excessive tearing
photopic vision vision at daylight illumination
lagophthalmos failure of the eyelids to close completely
photoreceptor rod or cone cell
leukocoria white pupil caused by opaque tissue within
phthisis bulbi acquired soft, disorganized, small eye due
the eye
to very severe infection or injury
leukoma dense scar of the cornea
pinkeye acute bacterial conjunctivitis
limbus junction of cornea and sclera
plano lens having no refractive strength
loupe binocular magnifier; useful in ophthalmic surgery
plus lens convex lens
meibomian glands sebaceous glands within the tarsal
polycoria congenital anomaly in which an eye has more
plates that open on the lid margin
than one pupil
microphthalmia abnormally small eyeball
presbyopia loss of accommodation due to age
minus lens conca ve lens
pseudophakia state of having an intraocular lens
miotic medication causing the pupil to constrict
 impla nted
monocular pertaining to one eye
pseudopterygium superficial vascularized corneal scar
 morgagnian cataract hypermature, partially liquefied
pterygium elastic degenerative change that slowly
cataract, with a freely movable central nucleus
 proliferates from the conjunctiva onto the cornea
mydriatic medication causing the pupil to dilate
ptosis drooping of the upper eyelid due to deficient
myopia nearsightedness; the refractive error in which
innervation or muscular strength
 parallel light rays focus in front of the retina
refraction clinical measurement of the error of focus in
nasolacrimal duct channel between the lacrimal sac and
an eye
the nasal cavity
retinopathy noninflammatory disease of the retina
nearsightedness myopia
retrobulbar behind the eye
retroillumination valuable technique of examination of
choroid, iris, or conjunctiva; pigmented tumors may
translucent tissues by light reflected from behind;
 arise from a nevus
 useful in biomicroscopy and ophthalmoscopy
 nyctalopia night blindness; in Europe it is a term for
rhodopsin light-sensitive pigment contained in the
erods
might vision
rod visual cell used when the eye is dark adapted
nystagmus rhythmic involuntary oscillation of the eyes
rubeosis iridis neovascularization of the iris
oculomotor nerve IHlrd cranial nerve
 scotoma area of loss of vision within the visual field
ophthalmologist medically and surgically trained eye
scotopic vision night vision; mediated by the rods
specialist
498
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MEDICINE
slit lamp microscope (biomicroscope) instrument for
tears lacrimal secretion 
examining the eye under high magnification and in
Tenon's capsule connective tissue or fascial sheath
 optical section, using a finely focused slit of light
encircling the eyeball posteriorly
squint synonym for stra bismus
tonography measurement of the rate of aqueous humor
 staphyloma bulging defect of the cornea or sclera that is
outflow
lined with uveal tissue
 tonometer instrument for measuring intra ocular
stereopsis binocular depth perception
pressure
 strabismus failure of straightness of the eyes; one eye
trabeculum meshwork in the anterior chamber angle
(the fixing eye) looks directly at the object of
through which the aqueous humor flows to leave
attention, whereas the other eye {the deviating eye)
the eye.
jou saop
transillumination method of determining whether a
sty (hordeolum) acute infection of a gland of the eyelid
lesion is solid or cystic, using transmitted light
margin
trichiasis aberrant lashes that turn against the cornea
subluxation of lens partial displacement of the lens
lvea vascular and pigmented layer of the eye, including
from its normal position
the choroid, ciliary body, and iris 
 suture junction of the ends of lens fibers, which results
vitreous gel that fills the eye behind the lens
in the formation of "Y' and stellate figures within
 xerophthalmia dryness of the eyes
the lens
zonule system of fibrils that suspends the lens
 synechia adhesion of the iris to the lens or cornea
tarsorrhaphy partial or complete fusion of the lids for
the purpose of protecting the cornea from exposure
499
Index
olu aeopui adii pioq ui saqunu aaed anon
anemia 452
discussions of topics.
anesthesia 105-6, 387
topical  56
angioedema 104
abscess 74
angiokeratoma 203, 212
eyelid 104
angularis 0culi vein 146-7
orbital/retro-orbital 120-3
aniridia 303-4
see also corneal abscessation
anisocoria 97-9, 302
acetazolamide 55, 357
causes 99
acetylcysteine 57, 228
dynamic 301,302
 actinic-related conjunctivitis
197
evaluation 14-15, 97-9, 301
 acute inflammation 71-80
static 99, 302
appearance of 74-5
ankyloblepharon 148
 biochemical changes 79-80
anophthalmos 131
plasma-derived factors 79-80
antazoline phosphate 61
causes 75-6
anterior chamber 300
cellular events 73-4
centesis 36
manifestations of 76-9
cysts 354
mediators of 80
examination 17
vascular events 71-3
flare in 344
 changes in vessel caliber 72
lipids in 103, 326
increased vascular permeability 72-3
 anterior chamber-associated immune deviation (ACAID)
see also inflammation
310
acyclovir 49, 270
anterior segment dysgenesis 131-2, 307
adenine arabinoside 49, 270
anterior uveitis
100, 199, 310-26
 adenitis, autoimmune-mediated 224
causes 310,312-19
adenocarcinoma 213, 327
cat 316-19
adenoma 327
dog 312-16
a denoviruses
horse 320-1
canine adenovirus {CAV) 262, 312
clinical signs 310-11
conjunctivitis 187
equine recurrent uveitis 319-20
adrenergic agents 51-2
diagnosis 322-3
alacrima, congenital 222
equine recurrent uveitis 323
alkylating agents 61
prevention 325
 allergic conjunctivitis
196
prognosis 325
allergic hypersensitivity 84
sequelae 325
American College of Veterinary Ophthalmologists
therapy 53,100, 324-5
{ACVO) 471
surgery 325
amino acid metabolism disorders 429
antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC)  84-5
aminoglycosides 47
antifibrin agents 62
amiodarone 260
 antifungal preparations 47-9
amphotericin B 48, 255
 antihistamines 60-1
anamnesis 11-12
 antimicrobial agents 45-7
 anaphylactic hypersensitivity 84
indications for use 46-7, 228
anaplasia 88-9
prophylaxis 47, 112
 androgen deficiency 225
selection of 45-6
 androgen therapy 229
see also antifungal preparations
500
OpHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
antiviral agents 49
blindness 94-7
aphakia 373-4
causes 94-7
 apraclonidine 52
hemorrhage and 452
aqueous humor 337
history 1i, 94
centesis 36, 323
hypertension and 454-6
changes in uveitis 325-6
 stationary night blindness 426-7
egress 337-9
genetic test 472
plasmoid 311
blinking 147-8
shunts 360-1
blood tests 323
aqueous plexus 328-9
Borrelia burgdorferi 312, 321
 arteriograms 118
bovine herpesvirus 188
arteriosclerosis 254-6
bovine virus diarrhea {BVD) 443
artificial tears 55, 227-8
brachytherapy 177
aspirin 59
 bracken poisoning 435
asteroid hyalosis 404
 breed predispositions to eye disease 473-87
atherosclerosis 254-6
brinzolamide 55, 357
atropine 15, 51,53
Brucella spp. 312, 321
pre-operative 106
bullous keratopathy {corneal hydrops) 273
side-effects 53
buphthalmos 12, 117
uveitis therapy 324
glaucoma 342
 autoimmune-mediated adenitis 224
lens displacement and 392
azathioprine 61
burns 168, 170
B-lymphocytes 78
canaliculops 236
bacterial infection
cancer see neoplasia; tumors
anterior uveitis and 312, 321, 322
canine distemper 187
blepharitis 166-7, 170
 chorioretinitis 441
chorioretinitis 443-5
Canine Eye Registry Foundation (CERF) 471
conjunctivitis 190-5
 cannulation, lacrimal outflow system 19
acute 194
canthal tenotomy 160
chronic 194-5
canthoplasty
156, 160
therapy 194, 195
carbonic anhydrase inhibitors 54-5, 337, 357
corneal ulceration 264-5, 273-4, 277-9
side-effects S5
keratitis 253-4
 carcinoma see pulmonary carcinoma; squamous cell
therapy 255-6
carcinoma
orbital cellulitis 120
carprofen 60
see also specific infections
cataracts 96, 312, 375, 378-92
band keratopathy 248-9
acute onset 103-4
 puppy band keratopathy 246
classification 378
Bartonella henselae 318
clinical signs 377-8
basophils 77-8
congenital 375-8
beta adrenergic blockers 53-4
cat 377
indications for use 54
cow 377
pharmacology 53-4
2-925 80p
side-effects  54
horse 377
binocular indirect ophthalmoscope {BIO)  30-3
diagnosis 378, 385
biomicroscopy  36-8
inherited 380-1
direct focal illumination 37
metabolic 381-2
oscillatory illumination 38
diabetic 104, 381, 387
posterior segment examination 38
prognosis 385-6
proxima l/indirect illumination 38
prophylaxis 378
retroillumination 38
systemic disease rule outs 494
biopsy, iris 323
therapy 53, 378, 386-92
blastomycosis 313
anesthesia 387
blepharitis 165-71
cat 391
atopic 168, 170
complications 390-1
causes 165-9
dog 386-91
diagnosis 169-70
horse 391
 systemic disease rule outs 493
medical therapy 386
therapy 170-1
patient selection 386-8
blepharoedema 164-5
postoperative glaucoma 353
blepharophimosis  156
postoperative therapy 391
blepharospasm 99
 preoperative therapy 388
INDEX
501
cataracts (continued)
clotrimazole 48
toxic 384-5
coagulation system 80
see also opacities
cocaine 52, 56
catarrhal inflammation  74-5
coccidioidomycosis 313
cavernous sinus syndrome 130
collagen inserts 43
cell-mediated hypersensitivity 85-6
collie eye anomaly {CEA) 414-16
centesis 36, 323
clinical signs 414-16
central progressive retinal atrophy {CPRA)  427
diagnosis 416
chalazion 165, 170
therapy 416
 chalazion clamp
108
coloboma 148-50
 chemical injury 104
iris 304
corneal ulceration and 
：264
lens 374-5
inflammation and 75
retina 413-14, 415
keratitis and 256
therapy 149-50
chemokines 80
third eyelid 204
chemosis 185-6
color changes see ocular color changes
see also edema
color vision 405
chemotaxins 79
 complement system 79-80
chemotherapy 129, 177-8, 329
hypersensitivity and 845
cherry eye 205-9
complete blood count (CBC) 323
 clinical signs 205-6
computed tomography (CT) 118, 323
therapy 206-9
cones 405-7
 Chlamydophila sp. infection 189, 190-2
degeneration 425-6
 clinical signs 190-1
 progressive rod-cone degeneration (prcd) 425
diagnosis 191
genetic test 472
prophylaxis 192
rod-cone dysplasia 424-5
therapy 192
genetic tests 471-2
chlorambucil 61
congenital alacrima 222
chlorhexidine 256
conjunctiva 147
 cholinergic agonists see miotics
anatomy 183
chondroitin sulfate-sodium hyaluronate 63
cytology 20
chorioretinal dysplasia 414
ectopic lacrimal gland tissue 203
chorioretinal hypoplasia 414
examination 17, 19-20, 184
chorioretinitis 439
follicles 186
causes 441-9
inclusion cysts 204
immune-mediated 448-9
microbiologic cultures 14, 184
diagnosis 449
neoplasia 201-3
choroid 407
overgrowth 204
inflammation 439-49
palpebral conjunctiva 19-20, 147
see also fundus
surgical instrumentation 109-10
chronic inflammation  81-4
trauma 104,200-3
cornea 82
see also conjunctivitis
granulation tissue 82
conjunctival flaps 275-6
 granulomatous inflammation 83-4
conjunctival hyperemia
.101
lens 83
conjunctivitis 185-200
posterior segment 83
 classification by etiology
187-98
uveal tract 82-3
clinical signs 185-7
 see also inflammation
differential diagnosis 198-200
cidofovir 364
follicular conjunctivitis of the third eyelid 209-10
cilia 147
keratoconjunctivitis sicca and 225
 diseases of 150-5
laterality 187
adventitious, ectopic or aberrant cilia 1545
plasma cell conjunctivitis 210
ciliary body 299-300
systemic disease rule outs 493
acquired diseases 304-7
therapy 200
chemical ablation 363-4
 conjunctivorhinostomy 234
congenital diseases 303-4
 continuous circular capsulorrhexis (CCC)  388
cysts 305-7, 353
cormea 115
neoplasia 326-9
anatomy 241-3
glaucoma and 353
calcium deposition 103, 248-9
ciliary processes 302-3
cytology 20
cimetidine 329
diseases of 245-86
cisplatin 177-8
acquired noninflammatory disease 248-52
clindamycin 319
 congenital noninflammatory disease 246-8
Cloquet's canal 402
nonulcerative inflammatory disease 253-64
502
O pHThAlMIC DIsEASE IN VeTeRiNARY MeDiCINE
cornea, diseases of (continwed)
creatine phosphokinase {CPK) elevation 123
 systemic disease rule outs 493-4
cryoepilation 150
ulcerative inflammatory disease 264-80
cryotherapy.
see also corneal abscessation; cormeal tumors;
distichiasis 152-3
corneal ulceration; specific diseases
eyelid tumors 176-7
drug penetration 41
glaucoma 358-9
edema 71, 102-3
pannus 258
glaucoma and 342
cryptococcosis 120, 210, 313
endothelial dystrophy/degeneration 251-2, 266
crystallins 372-3
examination 17
Cushing's disease 266
foreign bodies 281-2
cutaneous metaplasia 86
inflammation 82
Cuterebra larvae 166
masses 282-4
Cutler-Beard procedure 149, 176
dermoids 282-3
cyclo-oxygenase
59
 pseudotumors
283-4
inhibitors 59-60
see also corneal tumors
metabolism 244
cyclodialysis spatula 110
metaplasia 86-7
cyclopentolate 51
microbiologic cultures 14
cyclophosphamide 61
surgery
cyclophotocoagulation 359-60
 instrumentation 109-10
cycloplegics 51
 surgical field preparation 106-7
cyclosporine 61-2, 325
transparency 243
topical 228-9, 258
tra uma
cysts
lacerations 280-1
inclusion 204,283
 penetrating and perforating wounds 280
lacrimal 236
rupture 281
orbital 130
turgescence 244-5
peripheral retinal 436
vascularization 244
third eyelid 212
wound healing 243-4
uveal 305-7
epithelial healing 243-4
glaucoma and 353-4
scar formation and opacification 244
Cytokines 80
stromal healing 244
cytotoxic hypersensitivity 84-5
cornea globosa 247-8
corneal abscessation 253
stromal 74
dacryocystitis 234-5
therapy 255, 256
dacryocystorhinography 235
corneal grafts 276-7
dacryops_236
corneal hydrops 273
dazzle refex 34, 94
corneal sequestrum (nigrum) 272
debridement 268
corneal sutures 2745
decongestants 60-1
corneal tattooing 277
delayed hypersensitivity 85-6
corneal tumors 284-6
 dermatomycosis 167
cow 285
dermoid 150
dog and cat 284
conjunctiva 205
horse 284-5
cornea/sclera 282-3
prophylaxis 286
eyelid 150
therapy 284
descemetocele 100
corneal ulceration 264-80
Descemet's membrane, glaucoma and 342
causes 264-6
desmoplasia 88
deep corneal ulcers 273-7
dexamethasone 58
 anterior uveitis and
315
diabetic cataracts 104, 381, 387
epithelial 100,266-8
diabetic retinopathy 456-7
pain and 99, 100
dichlorphenamide 55, 357
perforated ulcers 279-80
diclofenac 60
prophylaxis 270, 271
dipteran larvae 447
stromal 100
discharge see ocular discharge
systemic disease rule outs 493
 discoid lupus erythematosus 169
therapy 52-3, 57,266-77
distemper 187, 223
surgery 106-7, 268-70, 274-7
 chorioretinitis 441
viral 270-2
distichiasis 150-3
cats 270-1
therapy_ 151-3
horses 271-2
diuretics S4-5
cotton ball test 35
carbonic anhydrase inhibitors 54-5, 357
INDEX
503
diuretics {continued)
enophthalmos (continued)
indications for use 54
causes 119
osmotic diuretics 54, 356-7
enrofloxacin 434
side-effects SS
entropion 155, 157-60
dorzolamide 5s, 357
cicatricial 157
drug administration routes 41-5
clinical signs 157-8
glucocorticoids 58
conformational 157
intracameral 45
diagnosis 158
intraocular 45
spastic 157
retrobulbar injection  45
therapy 158-60
subconjunctival  44-5
enucleation 135
systemic 45
glaucoma therapy 362
topical 41-4
eosinophilic conjunctivitis of cats 196-7
ability to penetrate the cornea 41
eosinophilic granuloma 169, 171, 210 
application frequency 41
tosinophilic keratitis 103, 258-9
collagen inserts 43
eosinophilic keratoconjunctivitis  74
continuous and intermittent irrigation  43-4
eosinophilic myositis 123-4
drug placement 41
eosinophils 77
excibients of topical drugs 42
epinephrine 52
membrane controlled delivery system 42
epiphora 230-4
packaging of topical medications 42
clinical signs 232-3
pellets  43
diagnosis 233
soft contact lenses 43
therapy 233-4
vehicle 42
episcleritis 200, 287-8
 drug-induced disorders 168, 170
simple 287
cataracts 384-5
episclerokeratitis, nodular 2
287
keratoconjunctivitis sicca 223
equine herpesvirus 188
 retinal/uveal degeneration 433-5
equine motor neuron disease 432
dry eye see keratoconjunctivitis sicca
équine recurrent uveitis {ERU) 319-21
dyscoria 303
acute 319
dysplasia 87, 89
causes 320-1
chorioretinal 414
chronic 320
pectinate ligament 350, 351
diagnosis 323
retinal 87, 417-21
ethacrynic acid 55
rod 425
ethylene glycol intoxication 434
rod-cone 424-5
European College of Veterinary Ophthalmologists
genetic tests 471-2
{ECVO} 471
tapetal 422
euryblepharon 155-6
everting mattress sutures 158
examination 12-38
early retinal degeneration (ERD) 425
see also specific conditions; specific techniques
ectropion 155, 161-2
excibients of topical drugs 42
therapy 156, 161-2
exophthalmos 12, 102, 117-19
uvea 304
causes 117
edema 72
diagnosis 117-18
corneal 72,102-3
laterality 118
glaucoma and 342
extraocular muscles
see also chemosis
agenesis/hypoplasia 119
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
392
myositis 124
Ebrlichia spp. 312, 446
eyelids
Elaeophora schneideri 448
 acquired diseases
164-78
electro-oculography 35
anatomy 145-7
electrocautery 152
blood vessels 146-7
electrolysis 152
fascia 146
 electrophysiologic tests 35
lid margins
147
electroretinography (ERG) 35, 426
ligaments 146
patterned {PERG) 35
muscles 145-6
emphysema 129-30
nerves 146
Encepbalitozoon cuniculi 322
skin 145
endophthalmitis 139-40
blinking 147-8
therapy 140
congenital diseases 148-64
endothelial dystrophy/degeneration 251-2, 266
double eversion 19-20, 184
endothelitis 85, 263-4
examination 16-17
enophthalmos 102, 118-19
function 147
504
OPHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
eyelids (continued)
fungal infection (continued)
lacerations 104, 171-2, 232
keratitis 254-6
neoplasia 172-8
therapy 255-6
cat 174
see also specific infections
cow 175
furunculosis 165
dog 172-4
horse 174-5
therapy 176-8
gangliosidosis 250
surgery
genetic tests 471-2
 instrumentation 108-9
gentamicin 47, 363
 surgical field preparation 106-7
glands of Krause and Wolfring 147
swelling 104
glands of Moll 147
taut lid-globe conformation 232
glands of Zeiss 147
see also third eyelid
glaucoma 101, 199
 anatomy and physiology 337-40
cataracts and 383
facial nerve 146
 surgery complications 390-1
feline herpesvirus 187-8, 263
classification 345-56
corneal ulceration and 270-1
aphakic 353
feline infectious peritonitis (FIP)_ 317-18, 323, 442
congenital 345
feline leukemia virus {FeLV) 317, 318, 323, 442-3
equine 355-6
fern poisoning 435
feline 354-5
fibrin clots 103, 325
primary closed-angle 348-52
fibrinolytic system 80
primary open-angle 347
fibrinous inflammation  75
pseudophakic 353
fibrosarcoma 213
 secondary 352-4
filtering surgery 358
clinical signs 340-4
fine needle aspiration (FNA) 118
buphthalmos 342
flare in the anterior chamber 344
corneal opacification 342
Florida spots 253-4
flare in the anterior chamber 344
fluconazole 48
increased intraocular pressure 341
flunixin meglumine 59
lenticular changes 344
fluorescein angiography 35
pupil and iris changes 341
fluorescein staining 18, 55-6
retinal and optic nerve changes 342-3
2-9 sauoounboson
vascular congestion 342
toxicity 434
vision loss 343-4
flurbiprofen 59
definition  337
focal pyogranuloma 165, 170
diagnosis 344, 352
folic acid analogs 61
prophylaxis 50, 364
follicles 186
retinal degeneration and 435
follicular conjunctivitis of the third eyelid 209-10
systemic disease rule outs 494
forceps 108, 109-10
therapy 50, 53-5, 60, 356-64
foreign body 100
 absolute glaucoma 362-4
cornea 281-2
emergency medical therapy 356-7
third eyelid 211
maintenance therapy 357-8
fracture, orbital 125
primary glaucoma 356-61
fundus
secondary glaucoma 361-2
anatomy 405-13
surgery 358-61, 362-3
bovine and ovine 412-13
see also intraocular pressure
canine 408-10
globe
equine 411-12
acquired conditions of 133-6
feline 410-11
anatomy 113-15
blindness evaluation 94-6
congenital diseases of 131-3
blood-vascular diseases 452-7
inflammation 139-40
glaucoma-induced changes 342-3, 435
position 113-14
neoplasia 458-9
changes in 102
 ophthalmoscopy 24-5
trauma 136-9
trauma 457-8
perforating and penetrating injuries 136-7, 280
see also choroid; optic disk; retina
ruptured globe 137-9, 281
fungal infection
glucocorticoids 57-9
anterior uveitis and 313, 318
 contraindications and nonresponsive conditions
blepharitis 167, 170
58-9
chorioretinitis 445
indications for use 58, 228, 257-8, 324
conjunctivitis 195
pharmacology 57-8
INDEX
505
glucocorticoids (continued)
hypersensitivity reactions 75, 84-6
route of therapy 58
type I (anaphylactic or allergic)  84
 side-effects and complications 59, 385
type II (cytotoxic) 84-5
glycerol 54, 356-7
type Ill (immune complex) 85
GM1-gangliosidosis 429
type IV (cell-mediated/delayed) 85-6
GM2-gangliosidosis 429
hypertension 454-6
goblet cells 183
hyperthermic therapy 177
goniodysgenesis 348-50, 351
hyphema 74, 103
gonioscopy 22, 339-40, 352
glaucoma and 352
 granulomatous inflammation 83-4
iris 308-10
granulation tissue 82
systemic disease rule outs 494
 granuloma 83-4, 253, 329
therapy 50, 103, 309-10
eosinophilic 169, 171, 210
hypocalcemia 382
episcleral 288
hypoplasia
parasitic 288
chorioretinal  414
extraocular muscles
119
optic nerve 421-2
Habronema larvae 166, 170
hypopyon 103
Harderian gland 184
hypothyroidism 224
haws 211
head shaking in horses
140
hemangioma 203, 212
idoxuridine {IDU) 49, 270
hemangiosarcoma 203, 285
imidazoles 48, 255
metastatic 459
immune-mediated disorders 
hemeralopia 96
 anterior uveitis 315-17, 321
hemorrhage 28, 103, 122
chorioretinitis 449-50
iris 308-10
conjunctivitis 196
retinal 452
keratitis 256
subconjunctival 200-1
skin disorders 168-9
 systemic disease rule outs 493, 494
immune-mediated inflammation  84-6
vitreal 403-4
type I (anaphylactic or allergic hypersensitivity)  84
hemostasis 110
type II (cytotoxic hypersensitivity) 84-5
heparin 62
type Ill (immune complex hypersensitivity)  85
Hepatozoon americamum 447
 type IV (cell-mediated/delayed hypersensitivity)
hereditary diseases 471-2
85-6
breed predispositions 473-87
see also inflammation
herpesvirus 187-8, 442
immunosuppressive drugs 61-2, 271, 324-5
bovine 188
immunothera py
178
equine 188
inclusion cysts 204, 283
feline 187-8, 263
indirect fluorescent antibody {IFA) staining 190
 corneal ulceration and 270-1
9s uaaa auueaoopui
keratitis 256, 263
indolent epithelial erosion 266-70
heterochromia 304
prophylaxis 270
hirudin 62
therapy 267-9
histamine 80
indomethacin 60
histiocytoma 173-4
infection
fibrous 283
anterior uveitis and 312-14
histoplasmosis 313, 318
corneal opacities and 103
history 11-12
corneal ulceration and 264-5
blindness 94
inflammation and 75
exophthalmos
117
postoperative, prophylaxis
112
homatropine 51
see also specific infections
hordeolum 165, 170
infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis {IBK) 277-9
Horner's syndrome, lesion localization 52
clinical signs 278
Hotz-Celsus procedure 158-9
enhancing factors 277
hyalitis 404
prophylaxis 279
hyaloid artery 402
therapy 278-9
hyaluronic acid 55, 63, 227-8, 401
infectious canine hepatitis {ICH) 262-3
hydroxypropylmethylcellulose 63
 infectious ovine keratoconjunctivitis 279
hyperemia 72
inflammation 71
conjunctival 101,185,493
cataracts and 383
hyperglycemia 381
glaucoma and 352
hyperlipemia 452
therapy 362
hyperplasia 87
globe 139-40
506
O pHThAlMIC DiseAse In VeteRinArY MeDiCINE
inflammation {continued)
keratitis (continued)
retina and choroid 439-49
pigmentary 260-1
causes 441-9
proliferative keratitis in the cat 259-60
clinical signs 439-40
stromal 73-4, 261-4, 312
diagnosis 449
 superficial 253-6
vitreous 404
chemical 256
 see aiso acute inflammation; chronic inflammation;
immune-mediated 256
 immune-mediated inflammation
infectious 253-6
interferon therapy 270
mechanical 253
interstitial keratitis 261-4
parasitic 256
intracameral drug administration 45
punctate 265
intraocular drug administration  45
ulcerative see corneal ulceration
intra0cular lens {IOL) implants 388, 390
keratoconjunctivitis, eosinophilic 74
intraocular pressure {IOP)
see also infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis {IBK);
drug effects on S1-5
infectious ovine keratoconjunctivitis
beta blockers 53-4
keratoconjunctivitis sicca {KCS) 101, 222-30
diuretics S4-5
causes 222-5
mydriatics 51
clinical signs 225-7
 prostaglandin analogs 60
diagnosis 227
increased 341
keratitis and 256
postoperative 353
prevention 230
measurement
sicca-related conjunctivitis 196
tonography 21, 344
therapy 50,61-2,227-30
tonometry 20
surgery 229-30
see also glaucoma
third eyelid gland problems and 205-7, 224
iridocorneal angle 337-8, 348
keratomalacia 75
 gonioscopy 22, 339-40
keratopathy
iridocyclitis see anterior uveitis
band 248-9
iridoplegia 307-8
puppy band 246
iridorhexis 308
bullous (corneal hydrops) 273
iris
lipid 249-50
acquired diseases 304-10
striate 252
anatomy 298-9, 300-2
superficial punctate 249
atrophy 305
keratotomy, punctate/linear 268-9
color 302
ketaconazole 48, 255
 changes in
 11,311
ketamine hydrochloride, retinal toxicity 433
 congenital diseases 303-4
kinins 80
cysts 305-7
Kuhnt-Szymanowski procedure 161
examination 17
glaucoma and 341
hemorrhage and hyphema 308-10
L-lysine 271
inflammation 82-3, 310
lacerations
see also anterior uveitis
conjunctiva 201
neoplasia 326-9
cormea 280-1
 pigmentation changes 304-5
eyelids
104, 171-2, 232
tears 307
iris 307
iritis see anterior uveitis
third eyelid 210
irradiation see radiation therapy
lacrimal cyst 236
irrigation 43-4
lacrimal ductule obstruction 223-4
solution 111
lacrimal evaluation 17, 101, 184
isosorbide 54
phenol red thread tear test 
17
itraconazole 48, 255
Schirmer tear test 15, 184
ivermectin toxicity 434
tear break-up time {BUT) 17
lacrimal gland 219-21
ectopic 203, 236
keratectomy, superficial 269
hypersecretion 232
keratic precipitates (KPs) 312
primary tumors 236
keratinization disorder 168, 170
lacrimal punctum 147
keratitis 73, 103
congenital atresia 230
anterior uveitis and 315, 321
malplacement 230
eosinophilic 103, 258-9
micropuncta 230
interstitial 261-4
occlusion 230
keratoconjunctivitis sicca and 226
lacrimal system 219-36
macular 265
 anatomy and physiology 219-22
INDEX
507
lacrimal system (continued)
lipids in the anterior chamber 103, 326
diseases of 222-36
lipogranuloma 197
outflow system cannulation 19
locoweed poisoning 435
lacrimation 230-4
lodoxamide tromethamine 61
reflex 232
loupes 16
lagophthalmos 163
lymphocytes 78
laser therapy
lymphoma 202
corneal tumors 286
lymphosarcoma 3
314-15, 328, 353
cyclophotocoagulation  359-60
orbital 126
distichiasis 153
lysosomal enzyme disorders 429
uveal tumors 329
latanoprost 60, 357
side-effects 60
macroblepharon 155-6
lateral canthal ligament, creation and cutting of
macrophages 79
159-60
 magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 118, 323
laterality
malar artery 146
anterior uveitis 322
male fern poisoning 435
conjunctivitis 187
 malignancies see neoplasia; tumors
exophthalmos 118
malignant catarrhal fever (MCF) 263, 443
leishmaniasis 167, 256, 314
mange 166
therapy 170
mannitol 54, 356-7
lens
preoperative use
：105
anatomy 369-72
mannosidosis 429
color changes 11
 mast cell tumor
diseases of 373-95
conjunctival 202
 acquired diseases 378-95
of the lid 173
congenital diseases 373-8
mast cells 77-8
systemic disease rule outs 494
masticatory myositis see eosinophilic myositis
see also cataracts
 matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) inhibitors 56-7, 273
displacement {luxation/subluxation) 100, 391-5
maze test 35, 94
 anterior luxation 394
 medial canthal ligament 146
diagnosis 394
medulloepithelioma 328
glaucoma and 344, 354, 361-2
Meibomian glands 147, 184
posterior luxation 394
melanoma 202-3, 213, 326-8
primary 392
epibulbar 284
secondary 392-3
fundus 458
subluxation 394
glaucoma and 353
 systemic disease rule outs 494
therapy 329
therapy 50, 361-2, 395
membrana nictitans see third eyelid
embryology 369-70
 membrane controlled drug delivery system 42
examination 17
menace response 34, 94, 147-8
inflammation 83
 meningioma, canine orbital 126
nuclear sclerosis 373
metabolic storage disease 250-1
physiology 372-3
metaplasia 86-7
lens-induced uveitis {LIU) 316
meta stasis 89-90, 328
lenticonus 375
routes of 91
lentiglobus 375
metastatic hemangiosarcoma 459
Leptospira spp. (leptospirosis) 320-1, 323, 444-5
methazolamide 357
vaccination 325
methotrexate 61
leukemia 452
methylnitrosurea, retinal toxicity 433
leukocytes 76-9
metronidazole 233
activation 80
miconazole 48, 255
chemotaxis of 79
microaneurysm 456-7
levator palpebrae superioris 146
microbiologic cultures 14, 184
lid margins 147
microblepharon 156
nonpigmented 204-5
microphakia 374, 392
lid plate 108
microphthalmos 131, 376
lid speculum 108
micropuncta 230
lid trough 147
miosis 302, 310
ligneous conjunctivitis 197-8
miotics 49-51
lipemia 452
diagnostic use 50
lipid keratopathy 249-50
indications for use 50, 357
lipid metabolism disorders 430
pharmacology 49-50
lipidoses 429
side-effects S0-1
508
OPHTHAlMIC DIsEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
mites 166, 170
ocular color changes 11, 245
mononuclear phagocytes 79
ocular discharge 11, 100-1
Moraxella bovis 277, 278
conjunctivitis 186
 motor neuron disease, equine 432
evaluation 100-1
mucin deficiencies 226
keratoconjunctivitis sicca 226
mucocele, orbital 125
ocular emergencies 93-4
mucolytic agents 228
emergencies that do not threaten sight 104
mucomyst 57
see also specific emergencies
mucopolysaccharidosis 250-1, 429
ocular evisceration with implant 362-3
Miller's muscle 146
 ocular fundus see fundus
multifocal retinopathy 428
ocular pain 11-12, 99-100
multiple ocular colobomas (MOC) 148, 413
causes 100
Mycoplasma 192-3, 279
conjunctivitis 186
mycotic infections see fungal infection
glaucoma 342
mydriasis 15-16
keratoconjunctivitis sicca 225
mydriatics 51-3
evaluation 99
indications for use 52-3, 324
with exophthalmos 118
 pharmacology 51-2
ocular staining 18-19
 adrenergic agents 51-2
fluorescein 18, 55-6
 parasympatholytic agents 51
indocyanine green 56
 sympathomimetic agents 51-2
rose bengal 18-19, 56
side-effects S3
trypan blue 56
myositis
 oculomotor nerve 146
eosinophilic 123-4
ofloxacin 46
extraocular 124
Onchocerca spp. 256, 288, 320, 448
restrictive 124
opacities 12, 102-4, 245
blindness and 96
glaucoma 342
nasal folds, large 162
lipids in the anterior chamber 103, 326
nasolacrimal ducts 222
 ocular color changes 11
anomalous 230
 ophthalmoscopy 24
congenital atresia of the nasal end 230
 posterior capsular opacification (PCO) 390
natamycin 47, 255
see also cataracts
necrosis 75-6
ophthalmic examination 12-38
necrotizing inflammation 75
see also specific conditions; specific techniques
needle holders 110
ophthalmic surgery 105-12
neoplasia 87
anesthesia/sedation  105-6
anterior uveal 326-9
hemostasis 110
glaucoma and 353
instrumentation 108-12
uveitis and 314-15
conjunctival and corneal surgery 109-10
conjunctival 201-3
 6-80l Aiaauns pake puu pue p
diagnosis 91, 328
storage and cleaning of instruments 111
etiology 90
patient positioning 107-8
fundus 458-9
patient selection 105
growth characteristics of tumor cells 88
postoperative care 112
morphologic alterations 90-1
surgical field preparation
106-7
orbital 126-9, 459
tumor therapy 129, 176
third eyelid 212-13
see also specific conditions
see also eyelids; tumor cells; tumors
ophthalmic vein  147
neuritis
ophthalmoscopy 22-35
optic 441, 449-51
direct 22-9
retrobulbar 97
indirect 30-3
neuromuscular blockade 106
lesion location 27-9
neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis 429-30
optic disk 25, 26-7, 409-12
neutrophils 76-7
disk diameter {DD) 27-8
activation 79
glaucoma and 342-3
nodular fascitis 284
inflammation 440
 nodular granulomatous episclerokeratitis (NGESK) 283
see also fundus
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) 59-60,
optic nerve
324
atrophy 27,440
nutritional deficiencies 382
diseases of 449-51
glaucoma and 342-3
hypoplasia 421-2
obstacle course 35
injury 125
INDEX
509
optic nerve (continued)
pectinate ligament 339-40
 myelination 26
dysplasia {PLD) 350, 351
optic neuritis 441, 449-50
goniodysgenesis 348-50, 351
 systemic disease rule outs 494
pedicle graff 149
orbicularis oculi muscle 145
pellets  43
orbit
pemphigus complex 169
 anatomy 113-14
penetrating injuries 136-7, 280
cysts 130
perforating injuries 136-7, 280, 457
diseases of 116-30
periorbita 113-14, 146
acquired disease 120-9
peripheral albinotic spots 417
clinical signs 116-19
peripheral retinal cysts 436
congenital disease 119
persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous (PHPV) 376,
exploration of 118
402-3
mucocele 125
 persistent hyperplastic tunica vasculosa lentis (PHTVL)
shallow orbit 119
376, 402-3
trauma 125
persistent pupillary membrane {PPM) 246-7, 303
see also orbital cellulitis; orbital neoplasia
 persistent tunica vasculosa lentis (PTVL) 376
orbital apex syndrome 130
petechiae 308
orbital cellulitis 102, 120-3
Peter's anomaly 246-7
clinical signs 121
phacoanaphylaxis 316, 449
diagnosis 122
phac0emulsification 386-7, 388-90, 391
therapy 122-3
complications
390-1
 orbital neoplasia 126-9, 459
phagocytosis 79
clinical signs 127-8
phenol red thread tear test 17
diagnosis 128-9
 phenylbutazone 60
therapy_129
phenylephrine 16, 52
 orbitography 118
side-effects 53
ornithinuria 429
photopigments 406
 oscillatory potentials (OPs) 35
phthisis bulbi 133-4, 364
osmotic diuretics 54, 356-7
pigmentary keratitis 260-1
osteosarcoma, multilobular 126
pigmentary uveitis 316
oxygen-induced retinopathy 457
 pigmentation changes
glaucoma and 354
iris 304-5
pain see ocular pain
pigmented epithelium (PE) 407, 417-18
 palpebral nerve block 13
pilocarpine 228
pancuronium 106
pinkeye see infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis
pannus 256-8
 plasma cell conjunctivitis 210
therapy_ 257-8
pneumatosis 129-30
panophthalmitis
139-40
see also emphysema
therapy 140
polycoria 303
 papilledema 27, 433, 450-1
polycythemia 452
systemic disease rule outs 494
polyene antifungals 47-8, 255
papillitis 27
polymyositis 123
papilloma 212-13
posterior capsular opacification (PCO)  390
viral 173
 posterior polymorphous dystrophy 247
paradrine 52
posterior segment
paraganglioma 127
biomicroscopy  38
parallax 29, 32
inflammation 83, 439
 parasitic infection
postoperative care 112
anterior uveitis 314
prednisolone 58
blepharitis 166
progressive retinal atrophy (PRA)  422-31
chorioretinitis 447-8
age of onset 424
conjunctivitis 195-6
atypical, in the dog
426
keratitis 256
cataracts and 383
scleritis 288
clinical signs 423-4
vitreous 404
 cone degeneration 425-6
see also specific infections
diagnosis 426
parasympatholytic agents 51
early retinal degeneration (ERD) 425
side-effects 53
inheritance 424
paromomycin 47
inherited, in the cat 428-9
0-a7z (a uoisodsueu ionp puoued
progressive rod-cone degeneration (prcd) 425
parvovirus 442
genetic test 472
patching 325
rod dysplasia (rd) 425
510
OPHTHAlMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
 progressive retinal atrophy (PRA) (continued)
retina, diseases of (continued)
rod-cone dysplasia {red, early-onset (PRA) 424-5
see also progressive retinal atrophy (PRA);
genetic tests 471-2
retinal detachment; retinal dysplasia;
 systemic metabolic disease and 429-31
retinopathy
 progressive rod-cone degeneration (prcd) 425
ophthalmoscopy 25
 genetic test 472
see also fundus
prolapse
retinal detachment 25, 405, 416, 437-8
subconjunctival prolapse of orbital fat 201
clinical signs 437-8
third eyelid gland 205-9
retinal dysplasia and 419-20
clinical signs 205-6
therapy 438
therapy 206-9
retinal dysplasia 87, 417-21
uveal 104
inherited 419-21
proliferative keratitis in the cat 259-60
circinate 420
proliferative optic neuropathy 451
focal/geographic 418-20
proparacaine 56
generalized 418
proptosis 102, 134-6
multifocal 421
therapy 135-6
 retinal pigment epitheliopathy 427
enucleation 135
retinoblastoma 459
replacement of the globe 135-6
retinochoroiditis 439
prostaglandin analogs 60
retinoic acid 228
side-effects 60
retinopathy
 prostaglandin inhibitors see nonsteroidal anti-
diabetic 456-7
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
hypertensive 454
prostaglandins (PG) 59
multifocal 428
prothecosis 446
nutritional 432-3
Prototheca 314
 oxygen-induced 457
 protozoan infection
 retractor angularis oculi muscle 145
anterior uveitis 313-14
retro-orbital cellulitis 120-3
blepharitis 167
retrobulbar drug injection 45
chorioretinitis 446-7
retrobulbar neuritis 97
pseudotumors 283-4, 329
retroillumination 38
ptosis 163-4
Rhodococcus equii 321
pulmonary carcinoma 459
rhodopsin 406
pupillary changes
rickettsial infection 446
glaucoma 341
rods 405-7
pupillary light reflex (PLR) 14-15, 94, 300-2
dysplasia (rd) 425
puppy band keratopathy 246
 progressive rod-cone degeneration (prcd) 425
purine analogs 61
genetic test 472
pyoderma 166
rod-cone dysplasia 424-5
genetic tests 471-2
rose bengal staining
18-19, 56
radiation therapy
rubeosis iridis  312
cataracts and 385
ruptured globe 137-9, 281
eyelid tumors 177
 keratoconjunctivitis sicca and 225
orbital tumors 129
pannus 258
sarcoid 175
radiography 117, 323
 sarcoma, spindle cell 328
restraint 12-13, 106
Schiotz tonometer 20
restrictive myositis 124
Schirmer tear test (STT) 15, 184
retina 405-7
scissors 109
blood vessels 25-7, 407, 409-13
sclera 115
diseases of 413-49
anatomy 241-3
acquired diseases 422-31
diseases of 286-8
congenital diseases 413-22
 systemic disease rule outs 493-4
 drug/toxin-induced retinal degeneration 433-5
masses 282-4
 glaucoma-induced retinal degeneration 342-3,
rupture 281
435
see also cornea
inflammation 439-49
scleritis 200, 287-8
nutritional retinopathies 432-3
 deep non-necrotizing 287
 peripheral degeneration 436
necrotizing 287-8
sudden acquired retinal degeneration (SARD)
 superficial non-necrotizing 287
96-7, 436-7
sclerocornea 246
systemic disease rule outs 494
scopolamine 51
INDEX
511
seborrhea 168, 170
T-lymphocytes  78
sedation
delayed hypersensitivity and 85-6
for examination 12-13
tacrolimus 62, 229
for ophthalmic surgery 105-6
tapetal dysplasia 422
 self-mutilation prevention 112
tapetum 407, 408-13
serology 323
tarsus 147
 serous inflammation 74
taurine deficiency 430-1
 serum hyperviscosity syndrome 452
tear break-up time {(BUT) 17
sicca-related conjunctivitis 196
tear production 219-22
silver sulfadiazine 256
wicking of tears 232
slit lamps 16, 36-8
see also epiphora; lacrimation
sodium cromolyn 61
 tear tests see lacrimal evaluation
 sodium fluorescein see fluorescein staining
tears see lacerations
sodium hyaluronate 63
Tenon's capsule 183
 soft contact lenses, drug delivery 43
tetracycline 57, 233
solute fluid overload 456
Thelazia 195-6
sphincter colli profundus muscle 145
thiabendazole 48, 255
 sphincter iris atrophy 305
thiamin deficiency 431
spindle cell sarcoma 328
third eyelid
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) 88, 89
 acquired diseases of 20s-10
conjunctival 201-2
anatomy 183-4
corneal 284-6
congenital diseases of 204-5
eyelid 174, 175
cysts 212
therapy 176-8
eversion 204
third eyelid 212
double eversion 19-20, 184
staining see ocular staining
follicular conjunctivitis 209-10
staphyloma 286-7
foreign bodies 211
 stationary night blindness 426-7
infectious causes of inflammation 210
genetic test 472
lacerations 210
strabismus 132-3
neoplasia 212-13
strabismus hook 110
protrusion 102, 104, 205, 211-12
striate keratopathy 252
surgical instrumentation 108-9
stromal iris atrophy 305
third eyelid flap 269
stromal keratitis 73-4, 261-4, 312
third eyelid gland 219-21
herpesvirus stromal keratitis 263
eversion 104
Strongylus vulgaris 321
keratoconjunctivitis sicca and 205-7, 224
subconjunctival drug administration 44-5
prolapse 205-9
 subconjunctival hemorrhage 200-1
removal 224
subconjunctival prolapse of orbital fat 201
thrombocytopenia  452
subpalpebral lavage (SPL) 43-4
timolol  357
sudden acquired retinal degeneration (SARD) 96-7,
tissue glue 274
436-7
tissue necrosis 75-6
sunburn 168, 170
tissue plasminogen activator 62, 324
superciliaris muscle 145
Tono-Pen 21
superficial keratitis see keratitis
tonography 21, 344
superficial punctate keratopathy 249
tonometry 20-1
superficial temporal artery 146
topical drugs see drug administration routes; specific
suppurative (purulent) inflammation 75
drugs
 surgery see ophthalmic surgery
 toxin-induced retinal/uveal degeneration 433-5
suture material 111
Toxocara 447
suture technique 111
Toxoplasma gondi (toxoplasmosis) 313-14, 318-19,
sutures
323, 393
cormeal 2745
retinochoroiditis  446-7
everting mattress 158
trauma 104
 symblepharon, acquired 232
 anterior uveitis and 314
 sympathomimetic agents 51-2
cataracts and 383
side-effects 53
conjunctiva 104, 200-3
synchisis scintillans 404
eyelid 104, 171-2
synechiae 311
fundus 457-8
syneresis 404
glaucoma and 352
systemic drug administration 45
globe 136-9
systemic lupus erythematosus
169
 perforating and penetrating injuries 136-7, 280
ruptured globe 137-9
hyphema and 103
512
OpHTHALMIC DISEASE IN VETERINARY MeDICINE
trauma (continued)
visual cliff 35
inflammation and 75
visual deficiency 11, 118
orbital 125
glaucoma and 343-4
see also lacerations
see also blindness
triage 93-4
visual evoked potentials {VEPs) 35
trichiasis 153-4
visual placing 34-5
trichomegaly 155
vitamin A deficiency 432-3
trifluorothymidine {TFT) 49, 270
cattle 432-3
trigeminal nerve 146
dog 432
tropicamide 16, 51
vitamin E deficiency 427, 432
trypan blue 56
vitreal degeneration 404
tumor cells
vitrectomy 140
embolization 89-90
vitreous
extravasation 90
 anatomy 401-2
 growth characteristics 88
centesis 36, 323
invasion 89
diseases of 402-4
proliferation 91
acquired 403-4
see also neoplasia
congenital 402-3
tumors 88-9
degenerative 404
benign 88
inflammation 404
corneal 284-6
primary 402
growth of 91
secondary 402
iris and ciliary body 326-9
tertiary 402
lacrimal gland 236
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada (VKH) syndrome 169, 316,
malignant 88-9
448
orbital 126-9
see also neoplasia; specific tumors
water loading 344
ulcers see corneal ulceration
ultrasonography 36, 118
xerophthalmia see keratoconjunctivitis sicca
uvea 298
 drug/toxin-induced degeneration 433-5
ectropion 304
neoplasia 326-9
glaucoma and 353
see also ciliary body; iris
uveal cysts 353-4
uveal prolapse 104
uveal tract inflammation 82-3
uveitis see anterior uveitis; inflammation
uveoscleral flow 329
vascular congestion, with glaucoma 342
vascular permeability 72-3
venograms 118
viral culture 189-90
viral infection
chorioretinitis 441-3
conjunctivitis 187-90
therapy 190
 corneal ulceration 270-2
cats 270-1
horses 271-2
keratitis 256
keratoconjunctivitis sicca and 223
see also specific infections
viral papilloma 173
viscoelastic agents 62-3
side-effects 63
vision 115-16
color vision 405
evaluation 34-5,94