Self-Assessment
Colour Review
LEARN·REVISE·REINFORCE
Veterinary
Parasitology
Hany M Elsheikha
JonSPatterson
Clinical cases
Problembased
Fullyillustrated
MANSON
PUBLISHING
小尾巴宠物健康中心http：//ttahc.taobao.com
Self-Assessment Colour Review
Veterinary Parasitology
Hany M Elsheikha
BVSc, MVS, PhD, FRSPH, FHEA, DipEVPC
School of Veterinary Medicine and Science
University of Nottingham, UK
Jon S Patterson
DVM, PhD, DipACVP
College of Veterinary Medicine
Michigan State University, USA
MANSON PUBLISHING/THE VETERINARY PRESS
2
Disclaimer
Therapeutics is an ever-changing field. Readers are advised to
check the most up-to-date product information provided by
the manufacturer of each drug to verify the recommended
dose, the method and duration of administration and adverse
familiar with the laws governing drugs in their practice areas
and in their country. No responsibility is assumed by the
publisher or the authors for any injury and/or damage to
persons or property as a matter of products liability,
negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any
methods, products, instructions or ideas contained in this
book. While the use of unlicensed drugs or licensed drugs for
unlicensed applications occurs in practice when there are no
suitable alternatives, the authors and publisher cannot assume
responsibility for the validity of unlicensed drugs mentioned
in this book or the consequences of their use. The mention of
these drugs is solely for the purpose of specific information
and does not imply recommendation or endorsement.
Copyright @ 2013 Manson Publishing Ltd
ISBN: 978-1-84076-188-7
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any
      
copyright holder or in accordance with the provisions of the
Copyright Act 1956 (as amended), or under the terms of any
licence permitting limited copying issued by the Copyright
3
Licensing Agency, 33-34 Alfred Place, London WC1E 7DP,
UK.
Any person who does any unauthorized act in relation to this
claims for damages.
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the
British Library.
For full details of all Manson Publishing Ltd titles please
write to:
Manson Publishing Ltd, 73 Corringham Road, London NW11
7DL, UK.
Tel: +44(0)20 8905 5150
Fax: +44(0)20 8201 9233
Website: www.mansonpublishing.com
Commissioning editor: Jill Northcott
Project manager: Paul Bennett
Copy editor: Peter Beynon
Illustration and layout: Cathy Martin
Colour reproduction: Tenon & Polert Colour Scanning Ltd,
Hong Kong
Printed by: Butler Tanner & Dennis, Frome, England
Preface
The rationale behind this first edition of Self-Assessment
Colour Review Veterinary Parasitology developed out of our
experience  with   case-based
[  teaching
andteaching
parasitology to undergraduate veterinary students for more
than 17 years. It became clear as we strived to develop a
course that would encourage understanding and enhance
         
fosters students′ interest, reasoning and critical thinking. The
continuous development and evolution of the discipline of
veterinary parasitology add another challenge as concepts
change and new discoveries are recognized.
Parasitic diseases are encountered on a daily basis in
veterinary practice and there has been a flood of new
information in the literature in recent years. This clinically
oriented book brings together a wide variety of cases and
clinical situations relating to diseases caused by parasitic
agents in domestic livestock, wild animals and exotic animals.
Each case scenario includes key questions regarding
diagnosis, treatment and control of the infection. For
example, what are the pearls in the clinical presentation that
suggest a specific parasitic agent? How do you interpret these
findings? What is the best therapeutic option? The questions
are followed by explanatory answers.
This book is not meant to be a reference book, but rather it is
a compilation of useful diagnostic scenarios seen in livestock
and    companion    small
animals (primarily)   and  is
representative of common parasitic problems. Many of the
5
described   situations  are accompanied by detailed and
challenging epidemiological input, which will encourage the
reader to think about differential diagnoses.
There are interesting and important inclusions for exotic
species and for fish. Cases are randomly mixed throughout
the book, but a broad classification of cases by body system
(e.g. cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, nervous) and an index of
host and parasite species are provided to guide the reader to
specific areas of interest.
With its unique case-based approach, veterinary practitioners,
animal health advisers, industry technical representatives,
livestock producers and veterinary students should find this
book an indispensable addition to the resources they access to
expand their knowledge of parasitic diseases of concern and,
in addition, be a resource for continuing professional
development.
Hany Elsheikha
JonPatterson
6
Contributors
Alexandra Brower, DVM, PhD, DipACVP
School of Veterinary Medicine & Science
University of Nottingham, UK
Peter J Brown, BVS, PhD, DipECVP
School of Veterinary Medicine & Science
University of Nottingham, UK
John E Cooper, DTVM, FRCPath, FSB, CBiol, FRCVS
Department of Veterinary Medicine
University of Cambridge, UK
Hany M Elsheikha, BVSc, MVS, PhD, FRSPH, FHEA,
DipEVPC
School of Veterinary Medicine & Science
University of Nottingham, UK
Aiden Foster, BVSc, BSc, PhD, DipACVD, CertSAD.
MRCVS
Veterinary Investigation Officer
VLA Shrewsbury, UK
Thomas Geurden, DVM, PhD, DipEVPC
Neesveld 4, 3040 Huldenberg, Belgium
Gayle D Hallowell, MA, VetMB, PhD, CertVA, DipACVIM.
MRCVS
School of Veterinary Medicine & Science
University of Nottingham, UK
7
Craig Hunt, BVetMed, CertSAM, CertZooMed, MRCVS
Chine House Veterinary Hospital
Leicestershire, UK
Steven McOrist, BVSc, PhD, DipECVP
Clinical Associate Professor and Reader School of Veterinary
Medicine & Science
University of Nottingham, UK
Vincent Obanda, BS, MSc
Veterinary Services Department
Kenya Wildlife Service, Nairobi, Kenya
Jon S Patterson, DVM, PhD, DipACVP
Department of Pathobiology & Diagnostic Investigation
Diagnostic Center for Population & Animal Health
College of Veterinary Medicine
Michigan State University, USA
Antonio Ortega Rivas, BPharm, PhD
Faculty of Pharmacy
University Institute of Tropical Diseases & Public Health of
the Canary Islands
University of La Laguna, Spain
Paul Sands, BSc, BVetMed, CertVD, MRCVS
Scarsdale Veterinary Group, Derby, UK
Neil Sargison, BA, VetMB, PhD, DSHP, DipECSRHM,
FRCVS
Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies
University of Edinburgh, UK
8
Christina Tellefsen, BVSc, MRCVS
46 Dudley Street
Leighton Buzzard, UK
Chun-Ren Wang, BVSc, MVetSc, PhD
College of Animal Science & Veterinary Medicine
Heilongjiang Bayi Agricultural University Daqing, People's
Republic of China
Paolo Zucca, DVM, PhD
Zooanthropology Unit
Healthcare Services Agency
Trieste, Italy
Abbreviations
ALP
alkaline phosphatase
ALT
alanine aminotransferase
AST
aspartate aminotransferase
Bands
immature neutrophils
BBB
blood-brain barrier
BRSV
bovine respiratory syncytial virus
BUN
blood urea nitrogen
BVD
bovine viral diarrhoea
BW
body weight
CBC
complete blood count
CK
creatine kinase
10
CNS
central nervous system
CPK
creatine phosphokinase
CSF
cerebrospinal fluid
CT
computed tomography
CVSM
cervical vertebral stenotic myelopathy
DIC
disseminated intravascular coagulation
DMSO
dimethyl sulphoxide
DNA
deoxyribonucleic acid
DSH
domestic shorthair
EDM
equine degenerative myelopathy
EEE
Eastern equine encephalitis
EGS
equine grass sickness
11
EL4
early fourth stage larvae
ELISA
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
EM
encysted metacercariae
epg
eggs per gram
EPM
equine protozoal myeloencephalitis
GABA
gamma-aminobutyric acid
GGT
gamma glutamyl transferase
1D
gastrointestinal
Hb
haemoglobin
HC1
hydrochloric acid
H&E
haematoxylin and eosin
IBR
infectious bovine rhinotracheitis
12
IFA
indirect fluorescent antibody
IgG
immunoglobulin G
IGR
insect growth regulator
HI
intermediate hosts
IM
 intramuscular
IV
intravenous
L1
first-stage larva
L2
second-stage larva
L3
third-stage larva
L4
fourth-stage larva
MCH
mean corpuscular haemoglobin
MCHC
mean corpuscular haemoglobin concentration
13
MCV
mean cell volume
MF
microfilariae
ML
macrocyclic lactone
MRI
magnetic resonance imaging
NSAID
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug
PAIR
puncture, aspiration, injection and re-aspiration
PCR
polymerase chain reaction
PCV
packed cell volume/haematocrit
PI-3
parainfluenza-3 (virus)
PO
per os
PT
post treatment
RA
right atrium
14
RBCs
red blood cells
RLB
reverse line blot hybridization
RMSF
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
RV
right ventricle
SACs
South American camelids
SC
subcutaneous
Segmenters mature neutrophils
TCBZ
triclabendazole
WBCs
white blood cells
WNV
West Nile virus
15
Acknowledgements
This book brings together a diverse group of authors from
four continents, including experts in a variety of disciplines
from academia, industry, research and private practice
settings. We are profoundly grateful to all the authors who
contributed their time and effort to this book.
All the cases were reviewed by eminent parasitologists from
Europe and North America, and we would like to thank them
for their detailed comments and helpful suggestions.
The support and encouragement of the staff at Manson
Publishing, in particular Jill Northcott, Michael Manson, Paul
Bennett and Peter Beynon, has been superb and we are
indebted to them all for their help.
Lastly, we would like to express our gratitude to and respect
for all of those dedicated colleagues who have committed
themselves to the field of veterinary parasitology.
16
Image acknowledgements
5a Courtesy Mrs Nicole Shultz and Mr Charles Musitano
150a, b, 190 Courtesy Dr Mike Targett
42a, b From Craig M (2011) Culicoides hypersensitivity in
horses. UKVET Companion Animal 16(4):5-9, with
permission
57 Courtesy IDEXX Laboratories Inc
86a, b From Elsheikha HM (2009) Human health risk
implications of ocular myxoboliosis in fish. Veterinary Times
39(9):26-27, with permiss1on.
100a, b, 103 Courtesy Dr Joe Rook
112a Courtesy Dr Mark Stidworthy
130 Courtesy Dr Michael Scott
132a, 142 Courtesy Edward Elkan Reference Collection
141a, b, 154, 166b Mlustration by Mr Richard Cooke
162, 172 Courtesy Michigan State University, Diagnostic
Center for Population and Animal Health
163a From Bartley D (2011) Anthelmintic resistance in cattle
nematodes Part 1: a problem for the future. UKVET Livestock
16(6): 19-22, with permission
17
188a-c From Elsheikha HM, Brown P, Middleton B (2011)
Soft thoracic subcutaneous mass in a rabbit (Oryctolagus
cuniculus).  Lab  Animal  Europe  11(11):10-14,  with
permission
189 Courtesy Dr John W McGarry
18
Classification    of   cases
by
organ
systems
Note: Some cases appear under more than one system.
Numbers in bold denote cases that have zoonotic
implications.
Cardiovascular: 14, 23,89, 112. 126,140, 159, 164, 176
191
Gastrointestinal: 1,2,3,4, 6, 9, 18, 25,26,29,32,33, 35,
41,43,45, 47, 54, 55, 57,60, 62, 63, 67,72, 80, 81, 85, 91,
100,101,102,103,105,107,108,118,120,121,143,144,
145,147,148,151,152,153,156,158,167,169,171,172
177,180, 183, 187, 189, 190,193,194, 195,197,198,201,
203,205,206,207
Liver and pancreas: 1, 26, 61, 63, 69, 87, 110, 149, 162.
165, 175, 178, 190, 202
Nerv0us: 12.13,16.33, 34. 46.51, 76. 78, 82. 83,90, 106
115,116,123,146,150
Ocular: 20, 86
Polysystemic: 21, 71,91, 97, 104, 119, 125, 130, 132, 136.
141, 170, 173,192
Respiratory: 2, 10, 15, 22, 27, 36, 37, 65, 66, 77, 124, 133,
139,154,163,174,179,198,203
19
Skin, muscles and soft tissue: 3, 5, 7, 8, 11, 17, 19, 24, 28,
30, 31,33, 38,39,42, 44, 48, 49, 50, 52, 53, 56, 58,59, 64
68,70,73,74,75,77,79,84, 86,88,91,92,93,94,95,96.
97,98,99,106,109,111,112,113,114,117,122,126,127,
128,129, 131, 134,135, 137,138,142, 155,157,160,161,
166,168, 181,182,184, 185,186, 188, 199, 196, 200, 204
Urogenital: 40, 146, 170
20
About the authors
Hany Elsheikha is a Lecturer in the Division of Veterinary
Medicine at the University of Nottingham School of
Veterinary Medicine and Science, UK. He is a board-certified
    a    
teaching experience in  veterinary parasitology. He has
 i   h   
and authored the book titled‘Essentials of Veterinary
Parasitology'. His research interests include host-parasite
interactions    and    development    of    novel   antiparasitic
therapeutics.
Jon Patterson is a  Professor in the Department off
Pathobiology and Diagnostic Investigation and the Diagnostic
Center for Population and Animal Health at Michigan State
University College of Veterinary Medicine, USA. He is a
board-certified veterinary pathologist with over 24 years of
experience in teaching, research and diagnostic service. His
research interests include student assessment in veterinary
education and diseases of the nervous system
21
Self-Assessment
Colour
Review:
Veterinary Parasitology
1, 2: Questions
Ib
1 The viscera from a group of 100-kg pigs are presented at a
slaughter facility with multifocal fibrotic lesions in their livers
and noticeable nematodes within the small intestine (1a). The
pigs had been raised in a semi-outdoor management farm
system with groups of 30- to 100-kg pigs kept on the same
site. A faecal flotation examination of cohort 90-kg pigs is
made (1b).
i. What is your parasitic diagnosis, and what is the prepatent
period of this parasite?
ii. Explain why this problem is less likely on a conventional
indoor pig farm.
ili. What treatments are most suitable for this problem?
22
Faeces
Rubber
tubing
Clamp
Metal
clamp
stand
2 What is this apparatus (2)?
1, 2: Answers
1 i. Intestinal parasitism due to the nematode Ascaris suum.
Its life cycle includes larval movement through the liver and
lungs, then maturity in the intestines, with a 6- to 8-week
prepatent period after ingestion of an infective ascarid egg
from residual faecal material. Larval movement of A. suum is
the cause of the ^milk spot' liver lesions.
ii. The incidence of ascariosis declined with the construction
of indoor farms in the 1970s, with raised, slatted concrete
floors breaking the oral-faecal cycle. The incidence is
increasing again and is significantly higher in outdoor and
23
‘organic’ farm systems. Infection of farm sites requires only a
small number of infected pigs from variable sources to enter
the site. The thick-coated A. suum eggs (1b) are highly stable
and infectious in the environment of outdoor systems for
several years.
ii. Endemically infected farms should employ on-going
medication   programmes.   Routine    benzimidazoles   or
ivermectins are adequate. Medication is aimed at prevention
of mature intestinal infections by medicating finisher pigs at
monthly intervals. In outdoor pig systems, careful attention
must be paid to stock management, with field rotations, light
stocking   densities  and regular  anthelmintic    treatment.
Clearing sites of ascarid eggs is not practical unless floor
surfaces can be flame treated
2 A Baermann apparatus, used to detect, separate and
concentrate larvae from faeces, grass, tissue or soil. The
Baermann technique is based on active migration or
movement of larvae from the faeces, minced tissue, grass or
soil into water of a warmer temperature, which is brought into
contact with the bottom of the material to be examined.
Faeces are suspended in lukewarm water. The larvae move
into the water, sink to the bottom and are collected for
identification. Larvae may be observed migrating into the
water within 10-15 minutes (usually); however, the largest
recovery can be obtained by allowing the material to remain
in the funnel for 24 hours. The technique is used mainly for
diagnosing lungworm infection and for isolating larvae from a
faecal culture. It is relatively insensitive for low larvae
intensities, therefore sequential samples taken days apart
should be obtained and analysed.
24
3, 4: Questions
1
3 A 12-year-old Thoroughbred horse is presented in late
autumn as an emergency because of signs of distress. On
arrival at the livery yard you note that the horse has a bloody
tail head (3) from rubbing on the walls of the stable. The
whole livery yard has a worming protocol that involves a
yearly rotation of dewormers and this year the horses have
been dewormed with ivermectin every 8 weeks and were
treated for tapeworm infection 2 months ago with an
appropriate dose of pyrantel. Physical examination reveals no
other obvious abnormalities, although the horse is extremely
difficult to evaluate because of its stressed condition
i. What is your differential diagnosis for this case?
ii. How would you confirm your most likely diagnosis?
ili. Why might this animal have this condition despite regular
anthelmintic treatment?
iv. How might you treat this animal?
25
4 A 12-week-old dwarf lop rabbit is presented with a history
of acute lethargy and diarrhoea. A fresh faecal smear reveals
large numbers of two different organisms (4).
i. Identify the larger organism.
ii. Identify the smaller organisms.
li. How would you treat this patient?
3, 4: Answers
3 i. The most likely differential diagnosis is Oxyuris equi
(pinworm)
）infection.Other
 possible  causes include
Culicoides hypersensensitivity (although not likely at this
time of year, and there likely would be some mane
involvement), a foreign body embedded within or beneath the
tail head and irritation of the perineum (e.g. secondary to
loose faeces).
26
li. Adult pinworms are found in the colon. However, adult
female worms migrate to the anus to deposit eggs, which are
then cemented in the perianal region. Diagnosis is made by
  s    
around the anus.
ili. In this horse it seems most likely that either the drug had
not been administered or that the horse had received a
sub-therapeutic dose. Questioning revealed that the horse was
extremely difficult to deworm.
iv. A suitable anthelmintic needs to be administered and
assessment of the horse's worm burden performed. Options
include a different oral anthelmintic (which the clients were
unwilling to administer) or, alternatively, administration of a
parenteral avermectin administered off-label with warmnings of
animal revealed that there were <50 epg. However, worm egg
counts are very insensitive for Oxyuris eggs and are not
normally used in this situation because the worms produce
eggs in the perianal region. Management of the excoriated,
oozing wound should include oral prednisolone and topical
broad-spectrum antimicrobial ointment. Antimicrobials may
be required if the pruritus does not improve quickly.
4 i. Coccidia (Eimeria species) oocyst; 13 species of intestinal
Eimeria have been described in the rabbit, the two most
pathogenic being E. magna and E. irresidua. A single species
E. stiedae, affects the liver. Oocysts of all species are excreted
in the faeces.
ii. Saccharomyces guttulatus, a commensal yeast.
ili. Toltrazuril (25 mg/kg PO for 2 days, repeated after 5
days), trimethoprim/ sulphadiazine (30 mg/kg PO q12h for 7
days) or trimethoprim/sulphamethoxazole (40 mg/kg PO ql2h
27
for7
days)
are all
effective
against
coccidiosis.
Saccharomyces requires no treatment.
5, 6: Questions
5a
5 What is this instrument (5a), and how is it used?
a
6 These worms (6a) were collected from the small intestine of
a chicken during post-mortem examination (6b).
i. What are these worms? How do chickens become infected?
li. What is their clinical significance?
28
ili. What treatment and control options would you
recommend?
5, 6: Answers
5b
5 A biopsy punch, a surgical instrument used to punch a hole
through the uppermost layers of the skin to collect a sample
of skin tissue. Skin punch biopsy is a quick, simple and safe
procedure and a valuable aid in diagnosing many skin
conditions. It offers a suitable histological specimen with a
minimum amount of scarring and little or no discomfort to the
patient. Some skin biopsies can be done with injection of
local anaesthetic (e.g. lidocaine) into the subcutaneous tissue.
When using a punch biopsy, rotate in one direction and use
the punch only once as the blade is easily dulled and may
7-mm size punches because they provide a good sample size.
There are a number of parasitic skin infections for which
confirming the diagnosis. For example, a punch biopsy taken
from a donkey with skin lesions that failed to respond to
conventional treatments was processed for histopathology
29
with H&E staining. Microscopical examination revealed
parasite cysts of Besnoitia species in the skin (5b), therefore
more specific treatment was decided based on these findings.
6 i. The ascarid nematode Ascaridia galli, a common parasite
of chickens. Birds become infected via ingestion of ascarid
egg-contaminated food or water. Earthworms may act as
paratenic hosts.
li. A. galli infection can cause reduced weight gain and feed
efficiency, diarrhoea and death, but it is not generally a
problem in broiler chickens because of the short grow-out
time. These clinical signs are due to toxins produced by the
worms, which adversely influence enzyme systems of the
intestinal mucosa and interfere with the normal digestion and
absorption of nutrients.
ili. Most anthelmintics, including fenbendazole, piperazine,
levamisole and ivermectin, are effective. Regular deworming
       
breaking the life cycle by reducing contact with the source of
contamination (e.g. faeces) by caging. Good sanitation (e.g
removal of dead birds, removal of contaminated litter)
followed by disinfection and restrictions on the movement of
equipment and personnel can help reduce infection, especially
when parasite numbers become excessive. Birds of different
ages should not be raised in close proximity, as older birds
can serve as a reservoir for infection of young birds.
7, 8: Questions
30
 7 This organism (7) was isolated from the gills of a catfish.
i. What is it?
ii. Is it male or female?
ili. What is its clinical significance?
iv. How would you treat infested fish?
31
1000 μm
8 This organism (8) was found on a dead European honey
bee.
i. What is it?
ii. Is it important?
ii. What is the link between this organism and decreased bee
populations?
iv. What recent change has allowed this organism to become
more problematic?
7, 8: Answers
7 i. The crustacean copepod parasite Lamproglena species.
Diagnosis of copepod infestation can be made by gross
visualization or wet mount examination
li. An adult female. Mature females are differentiated based
on the presence of two easily recognized egg sacs.
il. The impact of Lamproglena infestation can range from
mild pathological damage to  stress-induced mortality of
infested fish. Also, during the infestation process the damage
and minor wounds caused by attachment and feeding of
32
secondary bacterial, viral and fungal infections.
iv. There is no ideal treatment. However, organophosphates
can be effective; prolonged immersion treatment should be
repeated weekly for 4 weeks. Diflubenzuron is less toxic to
fish and is effective. It is not inactivated at high temperatures,
as are organophosphates. However, diflubenzuron can be
harmful to non-target arthropods. Formalin or potassium
permanganate baths are also effective.  Formalin is
carcinogenic and depletes oxygen, so additional aeration is
required. Some fish are very sensitive to this treatment. Drugs
should be used as part of an integrated health management
strategy to mitigate the losses.
8 i. Varroa mite (V. destructor or V. jacobsoni)
ii. Yes. Varroa is a highly damaging ectoparasite of honey
bees. The demise of billions of honey bees has been attributed
to Varroa infestation. The widespread population decline of
honey bees on this scale also affects the pollination of
economically important crops and exotic plants.
ii. Varroa feed on the haemolymph of honey bee pupae and
adults, and in so doing they transmit infections that reduce the
life expectancy of the bees and cause the colony to decline.
For example, Varroa-borme viral infections can cause
permanent physical impairment (e.g. deformed wing virus) or
even death of affected bees
iv. Recent climate changes might have allowed increased mite
range, thus increasing the risk of transmission over larger
geographical regions.
9: Question
33
9a
9 i. With which type of parasite is this life cycle (9a)
associated?
ii. Name and describe each of the lettered stages.
ili. What are the main clinical signs characterizing acute
infection by this parasite?
9: Answer
34
9 i. The sheep abomasal nematodes Haemonchus contortus
and Teladorsagia circumcincta. In this case it is H. contortus
based on the morphology of the male worm posterior end,
which has a characteristic bursa (copulatory organ) with its
asymmetrical dorsal lobe and y-shaped dorsal ray (9b)
ii. (A) immature eggs passed in dung; (B) first larval stage
(L1) in dung; (C) second larval stage (L2) in dung; (D) third
larval stage (L3) in dung: (E) L3 (infective stage) on grass;
(F) L3 is eaten in water droplet on grass; (G) L3 moults to
fourth larval stage (L4) in abomasal glands; (H) L4 moults to
fifth larval stage (L5) in abomasal glands; (I) adult nematode
reaches maturity in abomasal lumen; (J) contamination phase;
(K) free-living phase; (L) parasitic phase.
35
Ili. Anorexia, depression, loss of condition, anaemia and pale
mucous membranes due to blood loss. Also, submandibular
oedema (bottle jaw) due to the accumulation of fluid caused
by hypoproteinaemia.
10, 11: Questions
10a
10 A gamebird farm suffers reduced egg production and
increased mortality among the breeding stock. Birds of
different species show sneezing, coughing, head shaking and
respiratory distress. Some birds open their beaks and stretch
their necks, gasping for air ('gaping posture'). Faecal
examination reveals a large number of worm eggs (10a).
i. What is the name of the parasite that produces these eggs?
What anatomical  structure(s)  is/are primarily  affected in
birds? Which avian groups are most susceptible to this
infection?
ii. What is your differential diagnosis?
ili. What is the suggested treatment?
36
11 Microscopical examination of a skin scraping from a koi
carp during a routine health check reveals this organism (11).
i. What is this organism?
ii. Is it significant?
lli. Describe its life cycle.
iv. What treatment would you advise?
10, 11: Answers
37
Iob
10 i. Syngamus trachea (10b), a ^gapeworm’ commonly
found in the trachea of gamebirds and pheasants, although it
can infect any species of cage and aviary bird. The infection
rate in some groups of wild birds is high and young birds are
most commonly affected. Fertilized eggs are swallowed by
the bird and spread with the faeces or directly expelled onto
the ground from the trachea. Earthworms can act as a
transport host.
ii. Even though the gaping posture is pathognomonic, the
differential diagnosis  should  take into account  other
conditions that cause respiratory distress (e.g. aspergillosis,
38
mycoplasmosis, tracheal mite infection).
ili. It is difficult to control tracheal worm infection in birds
kept on the ground in open-air enclosures/aviaries. Therefore,
parasitological examination of the faeces should be performed
regularly throughout the year. Benzimidazoles are the
first-choice drugs and these are usually administered in the
feed. (Refer to an avian/exotic animal formulary for dosage
and duration of treatment.)
11 i. Gyrodactylus species, a monogenean parasite (skin
fluke) of aquatic animals.
ii. Gyrodactylus flukes feed on the skin and mucus, causing
irritation. Stress and injury, as a result of fish attempting to
dislodge parasites by rubbing their bodies against substrate
and furnishings, predispose to secondary bacterial and fungal
infection
ili. Gyrodactylus is viviparous/larviparous and has a direct
life cycle with the potential to reach high numbers rapidly
under favourable conditions.
iv. Over-the-counter remedies  containing  formalin  and
methylene blue may be successful. Other treatments include
sodium chloride (1-5 g/l permanent bath, or 30-35 g/l 45
minute bath); mebendazole (l mg/kg as a 24-hour bath);
praziquantel (2-10 mg/1 bath for up to 4 hours every 5 days
for 3 treatments, or 5-12 g/kg feed q24h for 3 days)
Deficiencies in water quality, husbandry and stocking density
should be rectified.
12, 13: Questions
39
12a
I2b
I2c
12 A 2.5-year-old Standardbred stallion is euthanized after a
2-month  history  of progressively  worsening  ataxia  and
weakness of all four limbs, with severity one grade worse in
the hindlimbs compared with the forelimbs. There is also
40
moderate gluteal muscle atrophy on the right side and the tail
is hypotonic. The horse's appetite has decreased steadily over
the past 2 weeks. The tentative clinical diagnosis is EPM.
Examination of formalin-fixed spinal cord reveals grey-brown
discolouration of the ventral grey and white matter in the C2
and L6 spinal cord segments (12a). Histopathological sections
were obtained (12b, c). Describe the nature of the
inflammatory reaction in the spinal cord if the diagnosis in
this case is indeed EPM.
13 What is ^gid'?
12, 13: Answers
12 Granulomatous inflammation, with a predominance of
macrophages and lesser numbers of lymphocytes and plasma
cells (12b). Eosinophils are occasionally seen in cases of
EPM. Protozoal organisms (schizonts) are rarely found in
chronic lesions, but may be identified more easily in acute
lesions (12c).
13 Coenurosis ('gid', ^sturdy') is a disease of the brain and
spinal cord caused by invasion and development of Coenurus
cerebralis, the larval stage of Taenia multiceps. The disease
occurs in sheep and, rarely, in cattle. C. cerebralis causes
cortical meningitis and encephalitis. Affected sheep hold their
head to one side and in some cases the animal turns in circles.
There may be unilateral partial blindness, pain response on
pressure over the cystic area, paralysis of limbs and pressure
atrophy of the brain and bones of the skull adjacent to the
cyst. Dogs and other carnivores act as definitive hosts by
harbouring adult tapeworms, thus serving as a continuous
source of infection through discharge of eggs in the faeces.
41
Eggs excreted from infected dogs contain hexacanth larvae.
Sheep become  infected  via  ingestion  of eggs  with
contaminated food or water. Embryos hatch, burrow through
the intestinal wall and travel to the brain and spinal cord via
the blood. Once in the brain, a cyst develops within several
months and grows to a size that results in the onset of clinical
signs. When dogs or other canids ingest infected sheep tissue.
the parasite develops into the adult tapeworm and passes
mature egg-containing  segments 
1n
the faeces.Fallen
carcasses  or slaughterhouse-disposed
1visceracontaining
mature Coenurus cysts pose a serious threat to dogs or other
wild
1carnivores.
Treatment
ranges
from administering
albendazole, niclosamide or praziquantel to surgical removal
if the cyst can be located. Controlling coenurosis through
vaccination is still at an early stage. The frequency of
coenurosis in humans is unknown, but this is a serious
zoonosis and can lead to pathological conditions in affected
humans.
14, 15: Questions
42
14 A 4-year-old neutered male DSH cat was found dead. At
necropsy, the heart's appearance was consistent with
hypertrophic
C cardiomyopathy  (HCM).  Histopathological
assessment revealed large numbers of cystic structures (14) in
sections of skeletal muscles (neck, intercostal muscles and
diaphragm) and in cardiac muscle.
i. What is the most likely diagnosis?
ii. How would you confirm the diagnosis?
Ili. How did the cat get these cysts?
iv. What is the link between cardiomyopathy and these cysts?
15
15 A 3-year-old female owlis presented withsevere
dyspnoea and very poor body condition.A swab of the
oropharynx reveals large numbers of inflammatory cells, but
no aetiological agents. Several nematode eggs, each with a
43
barely visible operculum and 8 blastomeres (15), are seen on
faecal examination.
i. What is your diagnosis?
ii. How would you treat this owl?
14, 15: Answers
14 i. The cysts have morphological features consistent with
sarcocysts of Sarcocystis species, most likely S. felis. Usually,
   a      s
diagnosis is made if the cat has a concomitant infection or
condition, as in this case.
ii. A tentative diagnosis is based on clinical history,
post-mortem   and
histo-pathological examinations and
serological tests (e.g. IFA for IgG antibodies against S. cruzi.
S. neurona or Toxoplasma gondii). Confirmation is by DNA
sequencing and phylogenetic analyses. Electron microscopy
will reveal ultrastructural features of the bradyzoites and wall
of the sarcocystis cysts
lli. Sarcocystis species have a two-host life cycle. Cats act as
the definitive host by harbouring Sarcocystis oocysts in their
intestines. They can also serve as an IH by developing
sarcocysts in their muscles. Sarcocysts have been reported in
skeletal and cardiac muscles of cats, where the animals were
(e.g.   pancytopenia,   metastatic   neoplasia,   generalized
lymphosarcoma, HCM). It is difficult to determine whether
the cysts in this cat were derived from oocysts/sporocysts
through faecal-oral autoinfection or from other carnivores.
unusual presence of sarcocysts in cats, as indicated above.
This cat was in good condition and showed no evidence of an
44
impaired immune system.
iv. The low prevalence of sarcocysts in cardiac muscles
HCM is probably coincidental. HCM is a common cause of
sudden death in cats and usually results in hypertrophy and
stiffness of cardiac muscles. HCM mostly occurs in
middle-aged animals; however, it has been reported in kittens
as young as 2 months old. The condition may be due to an
autosomal recessive mode of inheritance or other genetic
components. The aetiology in this case remains unknown.
15 i. Syngamus (Cyathostoma) bronchialis.Syngamus trachea
is also a possibility.
li. With benzimidazoles or levamisole via the water. One
week post treatment a faecal check revealed no eggs, but the
owl died within 10 days following treatment.
16, 17: Questions
16 You are presented with a 3-year-old Percheron brood mare
that is currently 4 months in foal and is housed in a remote
area of central Califormia (USA). The mare is asymmetrically
ataxic with the left hindlimb worse than the right. You
suspect EPM in this case. However, immunofluorescent
testing of serum and CSF is positive for Neospora hughesi.
but negative for S. neurona.
i. How does the life cycle of N. hughesi differ from that of S.
neurona?
ii. What other differences are there between these two
organisms?
45
17 You are asked in late spring to examine a 10-year-old
Warmblood gelding that has ulcerated, raised lesions around
the corners of its mouth (17). The owner reports that these are
interfering with the bit. She reports that the horse appears
slightly sensitive around the lesions. The horse has no other
abnormalities, is regularly dewormed and is vaccinated
against influenza and tetanus. For the previous 5 years the
horse has shown no evidence of skin disease.
i. What is the differential diagnosis for these clinical signs?
ii. What is the life cycle of the parasite that is causing these
clinical signs?
Ili. How would you treat and manage this condition?
16. 17: Answers
16 i. Less is known about the life cycle of N. hughesi. The
definitive host for Neospora caninum is the domestic dog and
this may or may not be the same for N. hughesi. Both
tachyzoites and tissue cysts have been found in horses.
ii. In the USA the seroprevalence of N. hughesi is low
compared with S. neurona, therefore at the present time its
46
role in causing disease is likely to be limited. It has been also
identified in Canada and New Zealand. Another key
difference is that congenital infections with N. hughesi have
been confirmed, therefore transplacental transmission occurs,
as is found with N. caninum in cattle, but not with S. neurona
in horses. Further research is needed regarding how this
protozoan organism causes neurological disease in horses and
why the prevalence is so low.
17 i. The main differential is cutaneous habronemosis. Other
potentialdifferentials
include
  bacterial
  and
funga]
granulomas, exuberant granulation secondary to a previous
wound or trauma (likely in this case from the bit), squamous
cell carcinoma and, potentially, a sarcoid.
ii. Adult worms (Habronema microstoma and H. megastoma)
live in the stomach of the horse. Larvae are excreted in the
faeces and ingested by house flies (Musca domestica) or
stable flies (Stomoxys calcitrans) in which they mature and
become infective. Infective larvae are deposited near the
mouth of the horse and swallowed. Lesions on the skin are
caused by an inflammatory response to the infective larvae as
they are deposited on skin and wounds, which are often wet,
as they attempt to migrate to the mouth.
ili. By treating the inflammatory response and eliminating the
parasite. The former involves the use of oral steroids
(prednisolone or dexamethasone); the latter the use of ora]
ivermectin or moxidectin, which may require a second dose
2-4 weeks later. Fly control is required; topical repellents
containing permethrin are the most effective. Proper
management of manure is essential to reduce the fly burden
around the stables.
47
18, 19: Questions
18 You are presented with a 12-year-old Thoroughbred-cross
mare that has a 4-month history of chronic intermittent colic.
with
1the horse showing signs of abdominal
pain
approximately once weekly. Each of these episodes responds
favourably
tothe
 administrationof
intravenous
phenylbutazone. Transabdominal ultrasonography reveals no
abnormalities; the intestinal walls show normal thickness and
motility is normal. Biopsy of the pyloric antrum reveals
granulomatous tissue with a large number of eosinophils and
focal areas of necrosis.
i. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case, and what
other differential diagnoses would you consider?
ii. Why is this horse showing clinical signs of abdominal
pain?
li. How would you treat this horse?
19a
19b
19 A 3-year-old female miniature donkey is presented with
multifocal white to yellow pinpoint glistening papules (up to
1 mm in diameter) in the submucosa of the inner lip (19a).
ocular sclera (19b), eyelids and external nares.
i. What is your diagnosis?
48
ii. What other clinical signs would be present in this
condition?
lli. How would you confirm the diagnosis?
iv. What are the therapeutic options for managing this case?
18, 19: Answers
18
18 i. Gastric habronemosis. Possible differential diagnoses
include gastric squamous cell carcinoma, exuberant response
to Gasterophilus species larvae and severe gastric ulceration
ii. Because there is an intermittent obstruction of the pylorus
(18). When the stomach fills and cannot empty, stretch
receptors will be activated.
Ili. Oral ivermectin or moxidectin is effective, although one or
more doses may be required at 2-week intervals. Fly control
using topical repellents and good management of manure is
required to reduce the fly burden around the stables
19 i. Besnoitiosis, an infectious disease of equids caused by
the intracellular protozoan Besnoitia bennetti.
ii. Focal areas of rough lichenified skin with raised small
dermal nodules on the head, the base of the ears, the
shoulders and the inner aspects of the hindlimbs as well as the
49
perineal and  perivulvar  regions.  Multifocal  to coalescing
areas of alopecia and hypotrichosis, with thickened, irregular,
crusty, hyperpigmented skin, can be found on the neck,
around the muzzle and eyes and on the distal extremities. The
severity of the lesions can vary from mild thickening with
slight superficial scaling to marked thickening associated with
hyperpigmentation, fissuring and epidermal ulceration with
serous exudation and crust formation.
ili. Histological examination of skin biopsies of affected
lesions and demonstration of thick-walled Besnoitia cysts,
0.1-0.5 mm diameter (see 6b), within infected skin and ocular
lesions.
iv. There is no effective treatment because most infections are
followed by cyst formation, with a thick cyst wall, that is
impermeable  to  therapeutic agents.   Trimethoprim  and
sulphamethoxazole   may  have  some prophylactic  and
therapeutic value if given early in the course of disease. Daily
sulphamethoxazole (20 mg/kg) for 42 days can lead to some
clinical  improvement.  Donkeys  treated  with  trimethoprim
(160 mg) and sulphamethoxazole (800 mg) tablets (5 tablets
daily) for 7 months showed clinical improvement. Pruritic
dermatitis resolved  inadonkeymedicated with
sulphamethoxazole for 30 days, discontinued for 30 days and
then treated for an additional 30 days, but results have not
been validated by biopsy.
20, 21: Questions
50
07
20 A fancy goldfish is presented with bilateral fluid cysts
beneath the eyes (20).
i. What is the cause of these structures?
li. How would you treat the condition?
21 How might an ELISA be useful in the diagnosis of
parasitic disease?
20, 21: Answers
20 i. This is a ‘normal’ fancy variety of goldfish called a
"bubble eye'.
ii. No treatment is required.
21 An ELISA is a serological test used for immunodiagnosis
of parasitic infections. It can be used for testing for humoral
51
immune responses (i.e. antibody titres) against parasites
(21A) or for the presence of parasite antigen (21B). In the
former, purified parasite antigens are precoated onto an
ELISA plate. The patient's serum, which contains antibodies,
  a   s     
antigens. Animal species-specific secondary immunoglobulin
coupled with an enzyme is then applied. The enzymes used
most often are
horseradish
1peroxidaseandalkaline
phosphatase, both of which release a dye (chromogen) when
exposed to their substrate. The substrate for the enzyme
changes colour when cleaved by the enzyme attached to the
secondary antibody. Colour development indicates that all the
patient's serum. For the antigen test, the ELISA plate is
coated with parasite-specific antibodies and the unknown
antigen is bound. The test is read following a second addition
of antibody specific to the antigen, which is also conjugated
to an enzyme. Lack of colour indicates that the antigen is
absent. ELISA is a sensitive, easily run, quantitative test that
can be used to determine the presence and level of antibody in
the tested serum. However, it is important to consider whether
the patient has had time to develop an immune response to a
parasite. Monitoring immune responses with ELISA or other
serological tests could have a considerable impact on the
diagnosis and treatment of parasitic disease and evaluation of
therapeutic immune responses. Because false positives occur,
a verification test may be necessary (e.g. Western blot)
52
21
Nash
Antigen
Add specific
Add enzyme-
Add substrate
coated well
antibody
conjugatedsecondary
(S) and measure
antibody(E)
colour
Was
Antibody
Add antigen
Add enzyme=
Add substrate
coated well
conjugated secondary
(S)and measure
(3)Apoqnue
colour
22, 23: Questions
22
22 Groups of fattening pigs (30-120 kg) are raised partly
indoors and partly outdoors with access to apples and other
fallen fruits in a large open orchard. Some of the older pigs
develop poor body condition and a deep hacking cough. A
faecal flotation from affected pigs shows occasional small
embryonated eggs. At post-mortem examination of one
affected pig, numerous worms are found in the bronchial tree
(22)
53
i. What are these worms?
ii. Describe this parasite's life cycle.
ili. How do these worms cause damage in the lungs of the
pig?
23 i. As a clinician, how would you describe ^vena caval
syndrome', caused by the parasite Dirofilaria immitis, to a
client?
ii. How would you treat a dog with vena caval syndrome?
22, 23: Answers
22 i. The pig lungworm Metastrongylus apri, a slender
nematode worm, up to 50 mm in length, found in the small
bronchi and bronchioles of the lungs.
ii. The life cycle is indirect. Eggs are laid by adult worms in
the bronchi and then coughed up, swallowed and passed out
via the faeces. They are eaten by earthworms in which they
develop through larval stages over 10 days to become
infective. The cycle is completed by the pig eating the
infected earthworm. Infection, therefore, only occurs where
pigs have access to earthworms (e.g. outdoor farms with open
 ground). Ingested larvae within the earthworms penetrate the
intestinal wall and migrate via the lymph nodes and blood
vessels to the lungs. The prepatent period is 3-4 weeks.
ili. The damage is primarily due to irritation as the larvae
migrate through the lungs, and the presence of the worms and
their eggs in the bronchi. This produces a persistent cough
and mild pneumonia. The lung damage can precipitate or
    s   s
impaired.  Control  is by preventing access to infected
earthworms.
54
23 i. Caval syndrome is a severe complication of heartworm
disease in dogs associated with the presence of a large
number of worms in the right ventricle (RV), the right atrium
(RA) and the vena cava (VC). Tangled masses of worms in
the VC and RA (23) interfere with blood return and disrupt
the tricuspid valve apparatus, causing tricuspid regurgitation.
The syndrome is characterized by acute onset of anorexia.
lethargy, weakness, respiratory distress and dark red urine.
Clinical signs result from cardiogenic shock, intravascular
haemolysis and right heart failure.
ii. (1) administration of oxygen to relieve the hypoxaemia
caused
 by poor   cardiac
Coutput; (2)intravenous fluid
administration to support circulation; (3) blood transfusion to
stabilize the
patient
prior
to
wormremoval;(4)
anti-inflammatory doses of glucocorticosteroids and heparin
prior to worm removal because of the risks of antigen release
and anaphylactic reaction (associated with worm maceration)
and thromboembolism; and (5) surgical worm removal via
jugular venotomy with the use of a long (20-40 cm), small
diameter, flexible alligator forceps, preferably using
echocardiographic or fluoroscopic guidance. Owners should
be advised that prognosis is guarded to poor, with a mortality
rate of 30-40%, and that strict rest must be enforced.
55
23
24, 25: Questions
24
56
24 A pet rabbit is presented following recapture after straying
among a wild rabbit population. Several organisms (24) are
identified firmly attached to the pinnae.
i. What are these organisms?
ii. What is their significance?
ili. How would you treat this condition? What treatment
should you avoid and why?
2.5
25 A captive bird of prey presents with clinical signs of
regurgitation. A biopsy of the bird's crop reveals parasites
(25)
i. What are these parasites?
ii. What is their clinical significance, and how are they
transmitted?
Ili. How might this infection be treated or controlled?
24, 25: Answers
24 i. Rabbit fleas, Spilopsyllus cuniculi, easily recognized by
their predilection for the pinnae. Rabbits may also be infested
with cat and dog fleas (Ctenocephalides felis and C. canis,
57
respectively), though these have a predilection for the dorsum
and tail base. Species identity is confirmed by looking at the
arrangement of the genal and pronotal combs (spines).
ii. Fleas  can cause
severepruritusand
cutaneous
hypersensitivity reactions and in severe infestations may
cause anaemia. Rabbit fleas are an important vector in two
fatal  viral  infections of rabbits: myxomatosis and  viral
haemorrhagic disease.
ii. Imidacloprid is the only licensed treatment for rabbit fleas
in the UK. Selamectin (6-18 mg/kg) appears effective and
safe. Fipronil, while effective against fleas, has caused fatal
        
collars should be avoided. Not only can rabbits hurt
themselves trying to bite the collar off, the chemical dosage
on the flea collar is generally at toxic levels. Flea dips and
powders should also be avoided. Baths are stressful for
rabbits, as they can go into shock. It is important to treat the
environment because this is where the eggs and larvae live
and develop. Treatment of all in-contact animals is advisable.
A spot-on solution should be applied to the back of the
rabbit's neck where the rabbit cannot lick it off. Segregate
treated rabbits so they cannot lick the medication off each
       
stomach problems.
25 i. Nematodes, formerly called Capillaria contorta, now
renamedEucoleuscontortus.
li. As the history indicates, these worms can be one cause of
regurgitation in birds of prey - so-called ‘oesophageal
capillariosis'. Other causes of such clinical signs include
bacterial infections, candidosis and trichomonosis. The life
cycle is direct. Transmission is usually from one bird to
another following ingestion of eggs.
58
ili. Worms can be killed using anthelmintics (e.g. ivermectin,
fenbendazole  or mebendazole).  Control measures  involve
good hygiene to reduce the spread of parasites from bird to
bird.
26: Question
26
26 A 9-month-old female Rhea is presented for post-mortem
examination. There is a significant amount of mucus in the
oropharynx and a small amount in the caudal portion of the
oesophagus. On histopathological examination, the caeca
show severe, subacute, diffuse, fbrinous and necrotizing
typhlitis with pale staining, 5-20 micron bodies. The liver
also has numerous similar bodies (circled) within sinusoids
(26)
i. What is the likely aetiology of these lesions?
ii. How does the bird become infected with this parasite?
Ii. How can the disease be managed?
59
26:Answer
26 i. The intestinal and hepatic lesions are typical of
disease), a disease of gallinaceous birds caused bv the
protozoanHistomonasmeleagridis
li. The protozoan can be transmitted through vectors (caecal
worms [Heterakis gallinarum] as an IH or earthworms as a
paratenic host). Also, the disease can be transmitted
horizontally by ingestion of fresh faeces containing live
trophozoites. Most blackhead transmission is due to ingesting
infected caecal worm eggs. Direct transmission of H.
meleagridis by ‘cloacal drinking’ may occur whenever the
cloaca of the bird comes into contact with infected fresh
         
peristalsis. After initial infection, the flagellated histomonad
resides in the caeca before invading the intestinal tissue. The
histomonad undergoes a flagellate-to-amoeba transformation
during tissue invasion and then travels to the liver through the
portal vein, causing necrotic liver lesions.
ii. Good management is the most effective method of
preventing histomonosis as many of the effective drugs used
in past years are no longer available commercially. Caecal
wormcontrolis necessaryto reduce the incidence of
blackhead disease. Drugs that reduce the presence of caecal
worms, and thus reduce the infection rate, are available but do
not have any effect on Histomonas organisms. Because
healthy chickens often carry infected caecal worms, any
contact between chickens and Rhea should be avoided
Grouse and quail also may carry infection to Rhea yards
Because H. gallinarum eggs can survive in soil for many
60
months or years, Rhea should not be put on ground
contaminated by chickens or turkeys.
27, 28: Questions
27a
27 During a post-mortem examination, several tiny mites are
found inside the trachea of a canary (27a).
i. What is this parasite?
ii. Which avian species are mostly affected?
ili. What are the main clinical signs of infection? What is the
differential diagnosis?
iv. What treatment should be used?
61
28a
28b
condition, pruritus, thickened skin, alopecia, erythema and
crust formation, mainly distributed over the ventral abdomen
(28a). The face and ears are also affected. Scrapings are taken
from skin of the affected areas (28b).
i. What is this organism, and is it significant?
ii. Describe the histopathological features associated with this
condition.
i. How can this problem be treated and prevented?
27, 28: Answers
62
27b
27 i. Sternostoma tracheacolum, a lung mite that is
distributed worldwide (27b)
li. Sternostomosis has been recorded in canaries and in
several other species of captive and wild Passeriformes
including finches, starlings, blackbirds, orioles, swallows,
parrots, parakeets and sparrows.
ili. Clinical signs are related to respiratory distress (open
mouth breathing, coughing, sneezing, tail bobbing). These
signs are not
 pathognomonic 
because
ebacterial(e.g.
Mycoplasma) and viral (e.g. avian pox) infections can cause
similar signs. Isolation of the mite from the trachea, lungs or
other portions of the respiratory tract is required for a
definitive diagnosis.
iv. Ivermectin suspension as a spot-on or pyrethroid (or
derivates such as permethrin) delivered via aerosol. (Refer to
an  avian   formulary
 tailored
1  to   medicines   available  in
individual countries for appropriate dosages, timings and
duration of therapy.)
28 i. Sarcoptes scabiei var. auchinae, the causative agent of
sarcoptic mange. Sarcoptic mange is a potentially serious
clinical problem in llamas and other South American
camelids. The mite is very contagious and has the ability to
63
cause serious clinical disease on a herd level, especially when
inappropriate treatments are administered.
li. Histopathological examination of affected skin may show
multifocal hyperkeratosis, parakeratosis, acanthosis, a large
number of mites within the epidermis, multifocal to
coalescent crust formation, multifocal superficial infiltration
and epidermal transmigration of a mixed inflammatory cell
population including eosinophils, multifocal  to coalescent
pigmentary incontinence, absence of hair follicles and
occasional microabscesses. The pathogenic effects of these
mites have been attributed to their burrowing activity and the
mechanical damage caused by the mites during excavation,
the irritant action of the mites' secretion and excretion.
allergic reactions to some of their extracellular products and
the secretion ofhost inflammatory cytokines.
ili. Subcutaneous injection of ivermectin (o.2 mg/kg body
weight every 14 days) should give satisfactory results
   o n    a
associated with the introduction of new animals to a herd and
the responsible use of drugs that are available without
veterinary prescription. The owner should be advised to wear
protective clothing when handling this animal because of the
zoonoticrisk.
29: Question
64
29a
29b
29 At the beginning of December (northern hemisphere), an
outbreak of ill thrift with brown, watery diarrhoea and
submandibular oedema is investigated in a group of 50
7-month-old weaned beef calves (29a). The cause of the
problem is found to be multifactorial, involving fasciolosis,
cooperiosis and nematodirosis. The calves had all been
treated with a doramectin pour-on anthelmintic drug on
arrival at the farm 6 weeks previously. They had then been
turned out onto fields that had been grazed by yearling cattle
65
the previous summer. These older cattle had been injected
with a depot formulation of moxidectin at turnout in May.
Using the McMaster technique, the mean faecal Nematodirus
helvetianus egg count (29b) of 12 of the 7-month-old calves
at the beginning of December is found to be 77 epg, with
individual counts ranging from 0 to 550 epg.
i. Are these faecal N. helvetianus egg counts significant?
ii. How can the diagnosis of nematodirosis be explained.
given the grazing management and anthelmintic treatment
history?
29: Answer
29 i. Yes. A mean count of 77 epg in low dry matter,
diarrhoeic faeces represents a very high female worm burden
that could be clinically significant; a similar count in high dry
matter faeces may be less important.
li. The expectation was that the pastures that had been stocked
by yearling cattle, which had been injected with a depot
formulation of moxidectin at turnout, would be ‘safe'.
against reinfection with Ostertagia ostertagi, it will achieve
little or no persistence against N. helvetianus. It is therefore
possible that the absence of O. ostertagi from the abomasum
of the yearling cattle created an environment that favoured the
establishment of N. helvetianus and subsequent pasture
contamination with N. helvetianus eggs. Development to N.
helvetianus L3s takes place within the egg shell. The critical
     
understood and may differ between populations, as in the case
of N. battus. The grazing management and anthelmintic
treatment hstory in this case suggests that the N. helvetianus
66
eggs did not require a period of chilling before hatching and
that pasture L3s could have arisen from egg contamination by
the yearling cattle during the same grazing season. However,
the possibility of autumn to autumn transmission, requiring
overwinter chilling and a high critical hatching temperature,
cannot be discounted. In fact, it seems likely that the parasite
has the potential to change under the selective pressure of
grazing management systems and anthelmintic drug use. It is
unlikely that the newly weaned calves would have harboured
significant N. helvetianus burdens when they arrived on the
farm. While pour-on doramectin treatment might have been
expected to kill and protect against reinfection with O.
ostertagi for about 35 days, it would have lacked efficacy
against. N. helvetianus. Thus, in the absence of a significant
modulatory effect of O. ostertagi, N. helvetianus L3s acquired
from contaminated pasture could have given rise to the
pathogenic worm burdens seen.
30, 31: Questions
30
67
30 Restlessness, reduced growth rate among growing hens
and reduced egg production among layers are reported at an
egg production facility.  Clinical examination reveals skin
irritation (manifest as redness), increased feather picking and
weight loss. On post-mortem examination, a few tiny dead
mites (30) are found on the carcasses.
i. What is the most likely diagnosis?
ii. What treatment  and  control
measures
could
be
recommended?
li. What are the consequences of this infection?
iv. Are there any zoonotic risks?
31
31 This parasite (31) is collected from among the feathers of a
laying hen.
i. What is it, and what is its significance?
ii. How can infestation by this parasite be controlled?
68
30, 31: Answers
30 i. Infestation with red mite (Dermanyssus gallinae), one of
the most serious parasitic diseases of poultry farms in Europe.
The mite is a temporary, obligatory haematophagus
ectoparasite and spends most of its life cycle hidden in
crevices and cracks in the poultry house. It is found on the
host only when feeding, usually during the night.
i. Controlling red mite infestation is difficult for several
reasons: the life cycle of the mite is very short; it is able to
hide itself in small spaces all over the farm; and several
antiparasitic drug resistances have been reported. Currently.
pyrethroids are the first-choice acaricide drugs used in poultry
and non-food birds because of their low toxicity and egg
contamination risk. Whenever resistance is suspected, rotation
to a different acaricide drug or searching for alternatives to
synthetic chemical agents is suggested. The acaricidal effects
of plant-derived essential oils (e.g. neem oil) have been tested
for red mite control and found to reduce significantly the mite
numbers in poultry houses fitted with traps containing 20%
oil in water, as compared to those houses that contained traps
with water alone. Also, garlic-based acaricides developed for
use against poultry red mite appear to hold promise for
poultry mite management.
ili. Severe from an economical and medical viewpoint.
Feeding mites cause irritation, restlessness, anaemia,
significant decrease in egg production and increased mortality
rates. They may act as a vector for a number of poultry
bacterial and viral infections. Therefore, the presence of red
mites on the farm should be monitored regularly.
iv. Several cases of human infection have been reported, with
69
skin irritation, dermatitis and hypersensitivity to the mite bite.
especially in poultry house workers.
31 i. Argas persicus, a soft tick found in tropical and
subtropical areas of the world. It acts as the vector of Borrelia
anserina (avian spirochetosis) and Aegyptianella pullorum
(aegyptianellosis). Besides being vectors of some poultry
diseases, infestation by this tick can also cause weight loss.
depression, decrease in egg production, toxaemia and
paralysis. Red spots can be seen on the skin where the ticks
have fed. All life cycle stages (larva, nymph and adult) feed
several times per night. Because this tick is nocturnal,
infested birds may show some uneasiness when roosting. This
and other Argas species can cause great irritation when
feeding on humans.
ii. After houses are cleaned, walls, ceilings, cracks and
crevices should be treated thoroughly (using a high-pressure
sprayer) with carbaryl, coumaphos, malathion, stirofos or a
mixture of stirofos and dichlorvos. Cracks and crevices
should be filled in.
32, 33: Questions
32
70
32 Individuals among groups of outdoor farm pigs show mild
diarrhoea and poor body condition. The pigs were born and
raised outdoors in open-range conditions, with minimal
supplementary feeding. At post-mortem examination of one
older pig, among other pathological findings there were
numerous nodules and long parasites in the small intestine
(32)
i. What is the genus and species name of this parasite? To
what phylum of parasites does it belong?
ii. Describe these adult worms and their location. Are they
pathogenic? On what do they feed?
lli. Describe the unusual life cycle of this parasite.
33 True or false?
i. The presence of fresh blood in the faeces may indicate the
presence of a hookworm infection
li. Notoedres cati is called the ^walking dandruff mite of cats.
ili. Culicoides hypersensitivity typically lessens in severity
with age.
iv. Macrocyclic lactones (MLs) cause starvation and paralysis
channels, leading to depolarization of nematode muscle cell
membrane.
v. It is recommended to treat dogs with whipworm infections
monthly for 3 months, as opposed to 2 weeks after an initial
treatment, as with most other intestinal worm infections.
vi. Lufenuron is effective against both larvae and adult fleas.
32,33: Answers
32
2i.Macracanthorhynchushirudinaceus
(giant
thorny-headed worm). This is an acanthocephalan worm, a
71
rare group, not related to cestodes.
ii. They measure 100-400 mm in length and are found within
the lumen of the small intestine. The anterior end has a
retractile proboscis with six rows of curved hooks, which hold
the worm to the small intestinal wall. Large numbers of adult
worms can cause considerable damage to the wall of the small
intestine due to granulomatous nodule formation. M.
hirudinaceus lacks any trace of a gut. Feeding is by
assimilating nutrients from the intestinal contents of the host.
lli. There are male and female adult M. hirudinaceus worms,
which copulate to fertilize the females’ eggs. Females then
lay numerous embryonated eggs, which are deposited into
nearby soil via the faeces of host pigs. The white larval grubs
of Phyllophaga beetles (May or June beetles) eat these eggs.
Soon after, the worm embryo (the acanthor) hatches from the
egg and uses its blade-like hooks to cut through the gut of the
beetle larva. At this stage it is a parasite of the beetle larva,
feeding and growing. The pig eats the infected beetle larvae
to complete the cycle, becoming 1nfective in 60-90 days.
33 i. False. Blood associated with hookworm infection is
blackened because it is digested in the small intestine. Fresh
blood would be seen in the faeces if infection had occurred in
the large intestine.
l1. False. Cheyletiella blakei is the ^walking dandruff? mite of
cats. This surface-dwelling mite prefers to reside on skin and
in the hair coat. “Walking dandruff refers to debris from
dermatitis that moves with the mites.
ili. False. This condition worsens with age.
iv. False. MLs act by binding to receptors on worm nerve
cells, causing chloride channels to remain open so that there
is a continuous flow of chloride ions through the nerve cell
membrane. This flow of chloride ions prevents transmission
72
of stimuli to the next nerve cell, causing the parasite to
become paralyzed and die.
v. True. Because whipworms take 3 months to mature, this
regimen will destroy the worms as they mature, prevent
contamination of the environment and address reinfection.
vi. False. Lufenuron disrupts the synthesis and deposition of
chitin by blocking the enzyme chitin synthetase, and chitin is
necessary for the survival of eggs and larvae. Lufenuron has
ovicidal and larvicidal activity, but no deleterious effects on
adult fleas.
34, 35: Questions
34 A 5-year-old female cat is presented with marked tremors,
muscle fasciculations and hyperexcitability within 4 hours of
spot application of a permethrin-based topical insecticide for
fleas.
i. Are these clinical signs associated with exposure to the
insecticide?
ii. Why are cats more prone to toxicity with permethrin
products than other animal species?
ili. Name some other causes of seizures in cats.
iv. How would you manage this cat?
v. What advice would you give to the owner?
73
35
35 These organisms (35) were identified in the intestine of a
juvenile gerbil during a post-mortem examination. The gerbil
was one of a group displaying signs of diarrhoea, lethargy and
ill thrift.
i. What is this organism?
ii. What is its significance?
ili. How would you treat the remaining gerbils?
34, 35: Answers
34 i. Yes. Permethrin toxicity is a common cause of severe
 generalized tremors in cats. This can occur after some dog
flea products are applied to cats.
ii. The specific reason for this increased sensitivity to
permethrin is thought to be associated with a deficiency in
glucuronidase, which is necessary for permethrin metabolism
via glucuronidation. Additionally, the hydrolytic enzymes that
degrade pyrethroid esters have a slow rate of hydrolysis in
cats compared with other species, thus increasing their
74
susceptibility.
ili. Hepatic encephalopathy, meningioma, lymphosarcoma
(which may affect the CNS), feline infectious peritonitis (with
meningitis
or
meningoencephalitis),
intracranial
intra-arachnoid cyst, hydrocephalus,
insulin   overdose.
thiamine deficiency, Toxoplasma gondii intracranial cyst,
Cuterebralarvae
myiasis  (causing
 feline ischaemic
encephalopathy).
iv. Treatment is aimed at controlling seizures and tremors and
administering supportive care. Diazepam can be used to
control seizures or tremors. Gaseous anaesthesia may be
necessary for refractory seizures. Once the cat has been
stabilized it can be bathed in lukewarm water, with detergent
to wash off residual insecticide. Intravenous fluids should be
administered to maintain hydration.
         
contraindicated in this species. Follow the manufacturer's
instructions carefully and never give more than the dosage
stated on the packet. Carefully monitor your cat after giving
any flea/ tick medication. Seek the advice of a veterinarian
before using any flea  or 
　tick
medication,  especially
over-the-counter products
35 i. The dwarf tapeworm Rodentolepis nana (formerly
Hymenolepis nana) or the rat tapeworm Hymenolepis
diminuta. The two species can be morphologically
differentiated, based on the size and shape of the eggs. Also.
R. nana adults have an armed rostellum, whereas H. diminuta
adults have no hooks on the scolex
ii. These tapeworms are often asymptomatic; however, they
may be associated with signs of debilitation, diarrhoea and
dehydration, intestinal obstruction and death. Both are
75
considered zoonotic
Ili. Praziquantel is considered effective.
36, 37: Questions
36a
36 During the course of a routine post-mortem examination of
a macaque monkey, small nodular lesions are detected in the
lungs. Histological sections
(36a)
 reveal  morphological
changes in the pulmonary parenchyma.
i. What are the features of these lesions?
ii. What is the cause of these lesions?
ili. Describe the life cycle of the associated organism.
iv. Is treatment advisable/feasible?
76
37
37 A 2-year-old male Border Collie presented with a dry
cough, dyspnoea and stridor. An initial diagnosis of “kennel
cough' was made and the dog was treated with amoxicillin
and prednisolone, which temporarily relieved the clinical
signs, but signs recurred when medication was stopped
Further examination by direct endoscopy revealed multifocal
raised submucosal masses in the caudal trachea and adjacent
portions of mainstem bronchi (37). The masses contained
slowly moving nematodes, some of which protruded and
retracted from the nodules.
i. What is your diagnosis?
ii. Describe the life cycle of these nematodes.
li. How should the dog be treated?
36, 37: Answers
77
36b
36 i. The lesions consist of bullae, or coalesced alveoli, many
of which show a fibrous tissue reaction.
ii.  Histological  examination reveals portions of arthropod
parasites (36b). These are typical of Pneumonyssus mites,
which inhabit the respiratory system of certain taxa of
primates.
ili. The life cycle takes place entirely in the lungs. It is
believed that transmission is by direct contact because
transmission  to newborn monkeys can be prevented by
isolating them from infected mothers. A nymphal stage has
been reported in one species, Pneumonyssus simicola.
iv. Treatment is generally not recommended because dead
mites   can  elicit  a  marked   inflammatory/foreign  body
response, which may be deleterious to the monkey.
37 i. The presence of characteristic nodules at the tracheal
bifurcation with intralesional nematodes strongly suggests
Filaroides(Oslerus)osleri
li. O. osleri has a direct life cycle. Dogs are infected by
ingestion of L1s through different routes: (1) puppies become
infected with larvae from the saliva of their mother while she
is licking or cleaning them; (2) dogs become infected by
78
eating regurgitated food and ingesting larvae from infected
faeces. Following infection, Lls penetrate the mucosa of the
small intestine and migrate to the right side of the heart via
lymphatics or the hepatic venous circulation and then to the
lungs via pulmonary arteries. Maturation of larvae into adult
worms triggers an inflammatory reaction inside the dog's
respiratory  tract,  causing the formation of fibrotic
tracheobronchial nodules. Adults reside in these nodules and
the gravid females protrude their caudal end through the
respiratory epithelium to lay embryonated eggs in the lumen.
Many eggs hatch immediately, releasing Lls that are directly
infectious. Eggs and larvae are coughed up and either
expectorated in sputum or swallowed and voided in faeces.
ili. Fenbendazole (50 mg/kg for 10-26 days) controls the
clinical signs and leads to resolution of tracheobronchial
nodules. Oxfendazole (10 mg/kg/day for 28 days) gives the
same efficacy. Regimens using ivermectin or doramectin
(usually  off-licence)  provide  a  shorter  treatment  course.
(Note: Ivermectin must be used with care in Collie-type
dogs.)
38, 39: Questions
79
38
38 What is this instrument (38), and what is it used for?
39
39 A very pruritic 10-year-old German Shepherd Dog is
   t     
The owner has not been using any flea prevention, but says
80
she herselfhas developed some bites around her ankles
i. If a client has a pre-existing household infestation of fleas,
how long will it take to eradicate the infestation once correct
treatment of the pet and household is initiated?
li. What treatment/advice would you recommend?
ili. What is an insect growth regulator (IGR), and when would
you use this?
38, 39: Answers
38 A tick removal device. Ticks are irritating arthropods that
prey on livestock and companion animals. They are excellent
carriers and transmitters of many microbial diseases during
the taking of a blood meal. The best method of controlling
ticks and the diseases transmitted by them is through a
combination of tick avoidance and using tick preventive
medications. However, ticks can still be found attached to an
animal's body. Therefore, finding and quickly removing them
is important in reducing the risk of associated disease. Pets
should be checked frequently for signs of ticks after coming
back from a potential tick-infested area, even if already using
tick prevention medications. Removing a tick is best done by
using a commercially available tick removal device or a
tweezers to pull it off. Grab the tick as close to the head as
possible and with steady, gentle pressure, pull the tick out of
the skin. Do not twist the tick - pull straight up and out. If the
head of the tick remains in the skin, try to grab it and remove
as much as possible. Wear gloves when removing a tick to
minimize the chance of personal infection.
39 i. The pupal window period is usually 2-3 months.
Because no insecticide kills the pupae, this is the time it takes
81
to allow hatching of existing flea pupae in the environment
which will depend on temperature, relative humidity and
availability of hosts. Pupae can lie dormant for up to l year if
left undisturbed in colder climates.
ii. Minimum treatment involves: use of veterinary flea
product on all pets in the household; spraying the entire
house/car/caravan/shed with an IGR; increasing temperature
and humidity within the home; washing bedding at 60?C; and
vacuuming to stimulate pupal hatch. Explain to the client that
she will continue to see fleas on her pets until all the pupae
have hatched (for 2-3 months on average).
ili. IGRs act to inhibit development into the next immature
life stage of an insect. For instance, they may impede rigidity
of the flea egg tooth, preventing the larvae hatching from
eggs (lufenuron), or may mimic juvenile growth hormone
levels, which would normally drop to initiate the next life
stage (s-methoprene). Spot-on formulations should be used in
conjunction with an adulticide to prevent laying of viable
eggs into the environment. Household spray formulations
should be used during a household infestation to kill
pre-existing eggs and larvae. An adulticide on the pet will
prevent further infestation of the environment.
40, 41: Questions
82
40a
40b
40 Individual pigs within groups of outdoor breeding pigs
(2-3 years old) show poor body condition and some have
noticeable blood in the urine. The pigs are raised in muddy,
open-range conditions in an area with a semi-tropical climate
an older affected animal, multifocal fibrotic lesions are noted
in the liver and dark thick nematodes are noted in the fat
above the kidney (40a). Microscopical examination of urine
sediment shows eggs (40b).
83
i. What is the name of these nematodes? Are they pathogenic?
li. Discuss the nematode's life cycle. Why do these parasites
occur only in warm damp climates?
41 List some of the problems associated with faecal egg
counts.
40, 41: Answers
40 i. Stephanurus dentatus, the pig kidney worm. Adult
worms have a predilection for the walls of the ureter and
capsules in the perirenal fat. They are large-bodied worms
(2-4 cm long) with a dark mottled appearance because the
transparent cuticle shows the internal organs. Larvae cause
severe damage, particularly in the liver, as they migrate
throughout the body and they cause loss of appetite and body
condition. Blood is often passed in the urine. There may be
considerable muscle wastage.
ii. Adult females live in cysts in the kidney fat and ureters and
pass eggs into the urine. Eggs develop into infective larvae in
the environment in 2-7 days. The life cycle can be direct
through the oral intake of infected larvae or by cutaneous
penetration,  or  indirect   through 
consumptionof
larvae-infected earthworms. After ingestion, larvae migrate
from the intestine throughout the body (particularly the liver)
      s   pd  g
kidneys to mature. The cycle from egg to adult takes up to 1
year and females lay large numbers of eggs each day.
Infection is more common in pigs raised outdoors in warm,
temperate, subtropical and tropical regions because the
pre-parasitic larvae are free living and may also utilize
84
earthworms as transport hosts. Larvae die out quickly in cold.
dry conditions.
41 (1) The consistency of faecal material can influence egg
counts; watery diarrhoea can cause a dilution effect, whereas
very dry faeces  or constipation  can  cause  a relative
concentration of parasite numbers.
(2) Eggs can be expelled from hosts at different rates
throughout the day, therefore if following a group of animals
over time, it is best to obtain each sample at a similar time of
day.
and this is thought to be of particular issue in horse and cattle
samples.
(4) Some parasites (e.g. Fasciola hepatica) have a natural
intermittent shedding pattern of eggs, therefore the absence of
eggs is not necessarily an indication of lack of parasites. Also,
immature stages of parasites do not shed eggs, and in
parasites where inhibition at an early stage of development is
commonplace (e.g.  with cyathostomins  in horses or
Ostertagia ostertagi in cattle), accurate determination of
worm burdens can be very difficult at certain times of the
year.
(5) A relaxation of immunity can occur around parturition in
some hosts (particularly sheep) with an associated increase in
parasite development or acquisition of new infections, with a
resultant increase in egg counts.
85
(6) The McMaster technique commonly used has a detection
limit of 50 epg, therefore improved sensitivity methods are
needed to detect drug resistance in certain situations
42, 43: Questions
42a
42 It is August in England and you are asked to evaluate a
7-year-old Thoroughbred-cross mare that was purchased 6
months ago. The horse has broken hairs, excessively flaky
skin and thickening of the skin of the mane and tail (42a).
The horse is constantly rubbing these regions and it also rolls
excessively in the field and stable.
i. What is the differential diagnosis for these clinical signs?
ii. How would you confirm your diagnosis?
lli. How would you treat this case?
86
43
43 A collection of captive companion (non-food) birds of
different species is affected by roundworms. One outdoor
aviary hosts a colony of corvids used for ethological studies
(43)
i. Would you treat all the different species of birds with the
same anthelmintic drug?
li. How do you choose the route of administration?
ili. How do you treat corvids without interfering with the
behavioural experiments?
iv. How often would you monitor the endoparasite reinfection
rate in outdoor aviaries hosting companion birds?
42, 43: Answers
87
42b
42i.  Culicoides hypersensitivity，  the sucking
glouse
Haematopinus asini and psoroptic mange cause pruritus
affecting the mane. H. asini, Oxyuris equi, psoroptic mange
and Culicoides hypersensitivity cause pruritus of the tail.
        s
common cause of pruritus in the horse. Always check for
broken hairs and skin thickening in the mane and tail at
pre-purchase examinations. There may be a hereditary
predisposition in some cases.
ii. History and clinical signs plus a skin scrape and biopsy of
the affected area. Histopathological findings for Culicoides
hypersensitivity include perivascular eosinophilic dermatitis
with epidermal spongiosis, tissue necrosis and collagen
degeneration. An intradermal skin reaction test (42b) is
available.
ii. Reduce exposure to the Culicoides flies and manage the
delayed hypersensitivity reaction to the saliva of the fly.
Management of the  overexuberant inflammatory response
usually requires administration of oral steroids (problematic
in animals that have other concurrent problems such as
laminitis). Oral antihistamines can be used to manage mild to
moderate pruritus.
88
associated with side-effects in some companion avian species.
Before starting any treatment you should refer to an avian
formulary for a review of the species-specific pharmacology
and pharmacokinetics data, when available.
ii. The route is chosen according to several factors, such as
the number of birds to be treated, the stress sensitivity of the
avian host to handling procedures and the pharmacokinetics
of the drug
s fo snoi n nso an o ao a s "
The parasitological treatment of birds used as a model for
behavioural studies requires a different therapeutic approach
because the choice of drug has to deal with the route of
administration and the negative emotional effects of bird
handling. Handling and stressful clinical procedures should be
avoided if possible.
iv. Direct contact with wild birds, availability of invertebrates
as paratenic or IHs and the natural ground increase the
frequency of reinfection. Seasonality should also be taken
into account; parasite burdens grow quicker during the hot
season and birds living in outdoor aviaries can be reinfected
in a relatively short period (1-2 months), therefore the
frequency  of  parasitological  screening should  be  higher
during summer and autumn.
44, 45: Questions
44 What advice would you give to the owner of the horse
described in case 42 in terms of long-term management?
89
45
45 You perform  a routine faecal examination
ona
captive-bred kestrel and find eggs such as the one shown (45)
i. Identify the egg.
ii. How would you treat this parasitic infection?
ili. What control measures would you implement to prevent
this infection?
44, 45: Answers
44 Several factors can be used to manage horses with
Culicoides
hypersensitivity,mainly
involvingreducing
exposure to the flies:
· Culicoides species prefer stagnant water, damp soil and
warm, decaying vegetation for completion of their life cycle.
90
Therefore, wet fields should be avoided and breezier areas
sought as they will be less popular for the flies. Avoid areas
with still water and make sure that areas of rotting vegetation
are removed. These include muck heaps, poached land and
areas of old forage.
* Culicoides flies prefer to feed at dusk and dawn, therefore it
is worth stabling horses at these times to limit exposure to the
flies. If possible, close stable doors and windows.
• Fans within the stable create a less favourable environment
for the fly. Insect repellents or insecticides are sometimes
useful.  Insecticides  include  daily  application  of benzyl
benzoate to susceptible areas, or permethrin and related
compounds, which tend to have longer-lasting effects.
· Boett blankets and hoods are very effective in preventing fly
bites and can be used long term. The blankets must be
well-fitting and not have any holes in them. Ideally, horses
should be wearing the rugs as a preventive measure prior to
developing clinical signs.
45 i. Capillaria species.
ii. Capillaria parasites often demonstrate multiple drug
tolerance to levamisole, avermectins and standard doses of
fenbendazole. Fenbendazole (20-25 mg/kg PO q24h for 5
   i    s (
kg PO once) may also be effective. Repeat faecal testing is
recommended 3-4 weeks after treatment  to  confirm
successful treatment.
ili. Capillaria species usually have a direct life cycle, but may
use earthworms as IHs. For successful parasite control.
91
is essential. This may be achieved by using concrete floors or
impermeable membranes covered with non-contaminated
substrate. Faecal screening should be performed twice yearly.
46, 47: Questions
46
46 A 2-year-old Standardbred stallion is presented for
stumbling and falling twice in the past week. In addition, the
horse's appetite has decreased over the past 5 days and he
seems ‘unsteady' on his hindlimbs. Physical examination
hoof. There is moderate gluteal muscle atrophy on the right
side, while the left gluteal muscle mass is normal (46). The
gait is evaluated at a walk and at a trot, and the horse's
movements are evaluated when he is circled in wide and tight
circles to the left and to the right. Weakness, ataxia, dysmetria
and spasticity are graded on a scale of 0 (normal) to 4+
(severely abnormal), and results are as follows:
92
Weakness
Forelimbs, 2+
Right hindlimb, 3+; Left hindlimb, 2+
Ataxia
Forelimbs, 1 +
Hindlimbs, 2+
Spasticity
Forelimbs, I +
Right hindlimb, 2+; Left hindlimb, 1 +
Dysmetria
Forelimbs, I +
Right hindlimb, 2+: Left hindlimb, 1 +
I+ = manipulative tests ane necessary in order to detect a deficit: 2+ = deficit detectable at a walk or
trot, but subtle; 3+ = deficit detectable at a walk or trot, but obvious; 4+ = the horse is in danger of
falling because of a sewene defit.
The ^sway response’ to pushing laterally, to the right and to
the left, against the shoulders is normal. The sway response to
pulling laterally on the tail reveals less resistance when pulled
to the right than when pulled to the left.
i. Based on the physical and neurological examination
findings, where anatomically is this horse's problem?
ii. What is the ^sway response', and what does it evaluate?
i. What diseases should be considered in your differential
diagnosis?
47 What is hypobiosis'? Which parasite species of ruminants
use this phenomenon? Can this condition be managed with
anthelmintics?
46, 47: Answers
46 i. Neurological deficits in all four limbs and no cranial
nerve abnormalities implies a lesion in the Cl/C5 portion of
the spinal cord. Also, gluteal muscle atrophy suggests a lower
  ns  a    
lumbosacral spinal cord (L6/S2) or the motor nerves
supplying the gluteal muscles (cranial and caudal  gluteal
nerves).
ii. It checks for weakness and ataxia and helps to assess the
symmetry of neurological signs; normally, one can pull a
93
horse 30% off midline with the tail pull.
ili. Equine protozoal myeloencephalitis (EPM) caused by the
protozoan parasite Sarcocystis neurona, cervical vertebral
stenotic myelopathy (CVSM, wobbler syndrome), traumatic
injury  (e.g.  vertebral fracture,   subluxation),  equine
herpesvirus type 1 myelopathy, West Nile virus infection and
equine degenerative myelopathy (EDM). Clinical signs for
CVSM and EDM are usually symmetric. Eastern equine
encephalitis (EEE) virus infection would be unlikely based on
the relatively long duration of clinical signs. The presence of
gluteal muscle atrophy implies “lower motor neuron’ spinal
cord involvement, which is common in EPM, but less likely
in all other differentials
      a  is, 
development of nematode parasites inside host animals. This
phenomenon enables parasites to survive in their host in a
dormant state during adverse conditions that may otherwise
kill the parasite or prevent its progeny from surviving in the
external environment. Therefore, larvae tend to become
    ss  s 
parasite-specific) or to seasonal conditions (e.g. ‘summer?
inhibition in response to dry summer conditions or ^winter'
inhibition in more temperate climates). Many important
nematode species (e.g. Haemonchus contortus, Teladorsagia
and Dictyocaulus) undergo hypobiosis. Other nematodes (e.g
Trichostrongylus
species,
Chabertia
ovina and
Oesophagostomum venulosum)are alsolikelyto enter an
arrested state. Levamisole, benzimidazoles and MLs have
killing activity against the inhibited stages of H. contortus and
Teladorsagia spp., although this is variable for levamisole.
The new anthelmintic monepantel recorded  high efficacy
against the inhibited fourth-stage larvae of H. contortus and
94
Teladorsagia species at all locations within the abomasum
when administered orally to sheep at 2.5 mg/kg
48, 49: Questions
48
48 An adult fish is presented with rapid gilling behaviour and
gasping. Wet mount preparations made of scrapings of the
body and gill surfaces reveal active parasites that move in a
95
jerky manner. The parasites are fixed and stained (48)
i. What are these parasites, and where do they live?
ii. What are the major types of these parasites?
lli. Can infection with these parasites be fatal to the fish?
iv. How should this fish be treated?
49
49 During examination of an injured wild tawny owl, several
flies (49) are found crawling among the plumage.
i. What are these flies?
i. What is its significance?
ili. What treatment would you advise?
48, 49: Answers
48 i. Monogeneans, single-host flatworms (flukes) that are
very common in marine water and freshwater fish. They live
mainly on the skin and gills of affected fish, but a few species
can be found on the eye, in the body cavity and in ureters. In
freshwater fish, the primary species seen are Dactylogyrus
(gill fluke) and Gyrodactylus (skin fluke); however, either can
96
be located on the skin and gills.
ii.Dactylogyrus flukes are egg
layers  (oviparous);
Gyrodactylus flukes are embryobearing (viviparous).
Oviparous monogeneans release eggs into the water, which
hatch into a free-swimming stage (oncomiracidium) that
seeks out a fish host. Viviparous monogeneans release live
larvae that are immediately parasitic. Dactylogyrus can be
recognized by the prominent 2-4 anterior eyespots and a
   )   
eyespots and often have an embryo visible inside the fluke
(see 11).
ili. Yes. Monogenean-infected fish will exhibit flashing.
rubbing, gasping, lethargy, clamped fins, excess mucus
production, secondary cutaneous ulcerations, scale loss and
death in severe infections.
iv. Affected fish should be quarantined and treated with 2
ppm praziquantel for 3 days. Other treatments include
organophosphates, formalin, potassium permanganate and
mebendazole.
49 i. Hippoboscid flies, otherwise known as louse or flat flies.
ii. Hippoboscid flies are common on many owls, but are
generally considered to be non-pathogenic. However, they
can cause blood loss and anaemia and are potential vectors for
a variety of pathogens including Leucocytozoon species,
Haemoproteus species and poxvirus.
ili. Fipronil spray (3 ml/kg) applied under each wing is
effective.
50, 51: Questions
97
50
50 A 3-year-old male Syrian hamster presented with diffuse
generalized scaling and alopecia, as well as a poor appetite
and lethargy. A distended abdomen was palpated and on
ballottement there
was a fluid thrill. Microscopical
examination of a scrape from the skin lesion revealed this
organism (50).
i. What is your diagnosis?
ii. How do you confirm the diagnosis?
Ili. What is your differential diagnosis?
iv. How can this problem be managed?
51 Equine protozoal myeloencephalitis is diagnosed in the
horse in case 46.
i. What parasite causes this disease, and how is the infection
acquired by horses?
i. What tests are available for the diagnosis of this infection?
What is the basis of each type of test?
98
50, 51: Answers
50 i. Demodicosis. This animal also had epitheliotropic
lymphoma of the skin and lymphoma in the abdomen.
ii. Examination of plucked hair or a skin biopsy.
ili. Demodex aurati and D. criceti infestation. There is often
an underlying condition such as malnutrition, neoplasia or
intercurrent infection. D. aurati is found in hair follicles with
minimal inflammation, whereas D. criceti is usually present
in epidermal pits. There is no evidence of spread between
hamsters. Notoedres notoedres and N. cati have occasionally
been reported on the ears, nose, feet and perineal areas.
Dermatophytosis  and
 hyperadrenocorticism   are   rarely
reported in hamsters. Allergic dermatitis is recognized by
some authors. Hamster polyoma  virus infection  is a
consideration, as some hamster colonies are affected by this
cutaneous neoplastic disease associated with viral infection.
iv. Establish the underlying cause of the demodicosis and
remove if possible. There are no effective treatments for
hyperadrenocorticism or lymphoma. Old hamsters with
extensive demodicosis, which is a marker for underlying
disease, are frequently euthanized. However, some normal
hamsters may be seen with many Demodex mites, therefore
check the diet and husbandry. There are various protocols for
the use of amitraz (e.g. 0.025% dips every week for several
weeks), but this treatment can be fatal.
51 i. Sarcocystis neurona, a protozoan parasite. The opossum
is the definitive natural host for this organism. Horses are
accidental hosts, becoming infected following ingestion of
feed or water contaminated with S. neurona sporocysts in
opossumfaeces.
99
ii. The most commonly used test is Western blot analysis for
antibodies to certain antigens on the protozoan (16-kDa and
30-kDa proteins). The test can be run on serum or CSF
However, a high percentage of horses are seropositive, which
indicates only exposure to the agent and not necessarily CNS
infection, so a positive result on CsF is more meaningful. A
PCR-based test was developed several years ago to detect S.
neurona DNA in CSF. However, this test is rarely used
because of the high number of false-negative results. Both
tests therefore have limitations and results should be
interpreted  in combination with neurological  examination
findings, clinical history and other diagnostic findings.
Currently, definitive diagnosis of EPM is by identifying the
protozoan in nervous tissue (histopathology or culture from
fresh tissue) at necropsy.
52: Question
52
100
52 A 3-month-old male guinea pig is presented with pruritus
and multifocal small areas of alopecia over the trunk. This
organism (52) is found in a skin scrape.
i. What is your diagnosis?
ii. How would you confirm the diagnosis?
illi. What is the differential diagnosis?
iv. How would you treat this guinea pig?
v. Is there any zoonotic potential?
52:Answer
52 i. Trixacarus caviae. Dermatophytosis was also detected.
i. A hair pluck may identify this mange mite.
ii. T. caviae infestation; dermatophytosis (Trichophyton
mentagrophytes) (normal in up to 13.3% of guinea pigs)
starting at the head and spreading to the dorsal lumbar area;
inflammation associated with an allergic response to fungal
elements; Malassezia ovale has been reported to cause skin
lesions; lice infestation (Gliricola porcelli, Gyropus ovalis)
usually does not cause major problems - they are obligate
     s   ss
deficiency -
-inappropriate diet or secondary to other
debilitating conditions; Chirodiscoides caviae (fur mite),
Sarcoptes scabiei, Notoedres muris, Myocoptes and Demodex
caviae are uncommon to rare; alopecia associated with
aggression, intense breeding, weaning, (self-) barbering 0r
ovarian imbalance - may be associated with diffuse alopecia;
fleas, especially if a multipet household and guinea pig
allowed into communal areas
iv. Ivermectin (0.4 mg/kg SC or PO every 10 days for 3
treatments). Establish appropriate diet formulation: ensure
fresh good quality guinea pig pellet food and hay, fresh
101
cabbage, parsley, spinach, red and green peppers, broccoli,
tomatoes, kiwi fruit, kale and oranges. Daily supplementation
of drinking water with vitamin C (200 mg to 1 g/l). Plenty of
fresh water. Fungal infections: consider bathing with
chlorhexidine and miconazole shampoos. Oral itraconazole
has been recommended (5 mg/kg q24h for 14 days).
v. T. caviae can cause a transient skin problem for humans in
contact with an affected guinea pig. Dermatophytosis may
also be a potential zoonosis.
53, 54: Questions
53a
53b
53 Flea infestation is a commonly encountered problem in
companion animals (53a)
i. If you want to control a flea problem, what parts of the flea
life cycle should you target, and with what types of drugs or
chemicals?
ii. What is the connection between a flea infestation and a
tapeworm infection?
102
ii. Apart from finding adult fleas on a cat or dog, the
presence of ^flea dirt' is also considered a definitive diagnosis
of an infestation. What is flea dirt (53b)?
iv. Are companion animal fleas hazardous to humans?
v. Why is it important to treat both the surrounding
environment and the pet during a flea infestation?
54
54 A flock of finches has a history of diarrhoea, weight loss
and sensory depression. Young birds seem to be more
affected than older birds, and the mortality rate is higher in
young  birds.  Gross  necropsy  reveals  hyperaemia
1and
thickening of the intestinal wall. Fresh smears of the intestinal
content show the presence of these tiny round organisms (54)
i. Identify these parasites.
ii. Are they important in avian medicine?
ili. Which bird families are most affected by these parasites?
iv. How do birds become infected?
53,54: Answers
103
53c
53 i. Adult fleas with an adulticide and/ or environmental
stages with either sprays with insecticidal or IGR activity or
by relying on newly emerged fleas being killed once they
have located a suitable treated host.
ii. The tapeworm Dipylidium caninum (53c) uses fleas and
chewing lice as an IH. Cats or dogs are infected with
tapeworms   when 
they
ingest
tapeworm
larvae
(cysticercoid)-infected fleas.
Ili. Flea faeces.
iv. Yes, fleas can bite humans and some individuals become
hypersensitive.
v. By the time the owner notices a flea infestation there can
be a large number of immature fleas in the environment.
Stages in the environment may be controlled by insecticidal
treatment of the host (e.g. treated dander falling into the
environment) or by direct treatment of the environment.
54 i. Unsporulated oocysts of Isospora species, a single-cell
coccidian protozoan parasite.
i. Coccidiosis is one of the most serious diseases of poultry
and companion birds. Most of the coccidian families are
intracellular parasites of the epithelial cells of the vertebrate
intestine.
ili. All bird species can be infected by coccidia, although
104
some avian families (e.g. finches, canaries, galliformes.
falconiformes, columbiformes and some psittaciformes) seem
to be particularly sensitive to coccidian infection.
     s   
contaminated by  faecal material  containing  the  infective
sporulated oocysts. Under natural conditions birds are
repeatedly exposed to small numbers of oocysts and so
develop some protective immunity. However, intensive
farming conditions and stressful events such as transportation
and high bird density, along with conditions that permit the
build-up of infective oocysts in the environment, can lead to
the development of overt disease.
55: Question
55
55 A 7-month-old male kitten is presented with chronic
diarrhoea and poor body condition. The perineum and
hindlimbs are stained with a yellow faecal material. Motile,
flagellated trophozoites (55) of trichomonads, featuring a
105
pear-shaped body with an undulating membrane and three
free anterior flagella, are visible on direct microscopical
examination of a rectal faecal swab.
i. What is your diagnosis?
ii. How do cats become infected with this parasite, and what
are the risk factors for infection?
ili. What other laboratory tests are required to confirm this
infection?
iv. How can this infection be treated?
v. Can this parasite infect people?
55:Answer
55 i. Feline intestinal tritrichomonosis, caused by the
protozoan Tritrichomonas foetus, which has recently attracted
attention as a cause of chronic large-bowel diarrhoea.
ii. Transmission from cat to cat is by the faecal-oral route.
The disease is mainly seen in densely housed young cats (i.e.
where faecal-oral transmission may readily occur). Cats
living in multicat households (catteries or shelters) are at high
risk of infection. Young, pedigree cats in high-density
housing appear to be most susceptible to infection.
ili. Microscopical examination of wet mounts of freshly
voided faeces, faecal culture in selective media (e.g
InPouchTM, TF-Feline medium), colonic/ileal biopsy and
immunohistochemistry    or    PCR-based   assays 
using
species-specific primers. This should form part of the routine
work-up of chronic diarrhoea in cats, particularly in young
purebred cats and cats with large-bowel diarrhoea.
iv. Fenbendazole (50 mg/kg q24h for 5 days) with
metronidazole (10 mg/kg ql2h) may beeffective.
Tritrichomonosis can be successfully treated with ronidazole
106
(30-50 mg/kg ql2-24h for 14 days); the use of this drug is
off-label and close monitoring is mandatory because cats
treated with high doses may exhibit neurological signs. Also.
reduce environmental stress, optimize litter tray hygiene and
treat or isolate in-contact cats, which may be a source of
reinfection.
v. Yes. People in contact with infected cats are advised to
take basic hygiene precautions to avoid ingesting the parasite.
Cat scratches or bites should always be washed immediately
with soap and water. Anyone with a weakened immune
system should not handle cat faeces or litter boxes.
56, 57: Questions
56a
56 You are the wildlife veterinarian of a mountain natural
reserve that hosts a large population of ungulates, including
ibex, chamois and deer. An adult chamois is found dead
inside the reserve near the end of winter. The animal shows
severe chronic lesions on the face, ears, trunk, abdomen and
limbs. The skin is very thickened and heavily encrusted, with
fissuring (56a)
107
i. Given the pathological findings, what is the most likely
aetiology of this condition?
ii. What laboratory tests can be used to confirm the diagnosis?
lli. If you want to carry out a serological survey to determine
the prevalence of infection, what factors should be considered
in sampling the chamois herd?
iv. How should this condition be managed in a wild naive
ungulate population?
57
57 This is a patient-side SNAP Giardia Test kit designed for
use with dog and cat faeces (57)
i. What is the kit specifically detecting in an animal's faeces?
ii. What other tests are available for diagnosis of giardiosis?
i. How reliable is a positive SNAP Giardia test result?
iv. Is giardiosis in dogs and cats considered zoonotic?
56, 57: Answers
56b
108
56 i. Sarcoptic mange, one of the most severe parasitic
diseases in chamois, with high mortality rates in naive
populations.
li. Microscopical identification of the mites (56b) in deep skin
scrapings. A diagnostic ELISA has been developed
ili. To be epidemiologically significant, the sample size
should   be   calculated   based   on   the   estimated/known
prevalence of infection and the population size. For example.
if a reserve hosts a population of 2,ooo chamois and the
estimated prevalence, based on available data from the closest
infected area, is 5%, the lowest sample size needed to exclude
the presence of the disease within the natural reserve is 58.
Several free online software programs are available to
calculate the size of the sample and other useful
epidemiological parameters.
iv. In stable, wild ungulate populations, sarcoptic mange
ep1zoot1cs
usually
run  their  course. Although  naive
populations suffer a high mortality rate the first time they are
exposed to the mite, they usually recover fast. Later
epizootics occurring after intervals of 10-15 years show a
lower mortality rate, which is frequently confused with
normal winter mortality. In some cases (e.g. captive ungulate
collections or endangered populations) treatment with
avermectin may be suggested.
57 i. The test is a rapid enzyme immunoassay for detecting
Giardia antigen in canine and feline faeces. Positive results
indicate the presence of antigen of Giardia trophozoites or
cysts in the intestine
ii. Detection of Giardia cysts and occasionally trophozoites in
the faeces of affected animals. However, giardiosis is often
difficult to diagnose because many of the signs are
non-specific and because of the low  sensitivity of
109
microscopical methods (e.g. examination of faecal smears or
flotation materials). This is due to the small size and low
numbers of cysts present in the faeces and the intermittent
shedding of thesecysts.
ii. The sensitivity of the test is 95% and the specificity 99%
compared with immunofluorescence microscopy, and 85%
and 100%, respectively, compared with faecal floatation. The
advantage of this test kit is that it permits the diagnosis of
avoids  the  difficulties associated  with  flotation  and
microscopy.
iv. Up to 50% of infected dogs and cats are believed to shed
zoonotic genotypes. Therefore, diagnosis and treatment of
clinical signs, but also to prevent transmission to other
animals and humans.
58: Question
110
58a
58b
58 About 500 Scottish Blackface ewes are kept on an upland
and hill farm in the southeast of Scotland. The ewes are
routinely scanned for pregnancy via ultrasonography in early
March. Those with twin lambs are kept in upland fields and
those with single lambs are returned to the hill (58a). The
flock is routinely vaccinated against chlamydial abortion and
toxoplasmosis. During May, 49 of 300 ewes that had been
scanned as pregnant with single lambs are identified as being
barren (58b). Several abortions have been noted, especially in
younger ewes, and there is evidence of scours in several ewes.
A similar problem has occurred occasionally in recent years.
Laboratory examination of aborted fetuses and placentae has
indicated diagnoses of toxoplasmosis, chlamydial abortion,
111
salmonellosis   and
 campylobacteriosis  in i
 individual
submissions, but has not identified a consistent cause of the
flock's problem. No abortion or barren ewe problem has
occurred in the animals scanned as pregnant with twin lambs.
i. How should this problem be further investigated?
ii. What is ‘tick-borme fever'?
58:Answer
58c
58 i. Common causes of abortion can be ruled out on the basis
of clinical presentation, vaccination history and laboratory
investigation results. The fact that the problem only occurred
in ewes that were returned to the hill after scanning is
significant, introducing the unlikely possibility of deficiency
or toxicity diseases and the more likely involvement of
tick-borne fever. The manner in which the hill had been
grazed could have created an ideal Ixodes ricinus habitat and
the opportunity for early spring infestation of ewes. The
farmer had seen ticks (58c) on the faces of sheep grazing on
the hill in the past, and the weather during March and April
had been mild enough for questing to have occurred during
112
those years when the problem had occurred, but had been too
cold during problem-free years.
li. An infection of sheep WBCs caused by the rickettsial agent
Anaplasma phagocytophilium, which is transmitted by
regurgitation of tick gut contents during blood feeding. The
entire nymph and adult I. ricinus population on the farm may
be affected, having acquired infection while feeding as larvae
or nymphs on infected hosts. Infection of WBCs causes
neutropenia, lymphopenia and  thrombocytopenia, usually
accompanied by a high fever lasting for up to 3 weeks, and is
an important cause of abortion in naive ewes.
59, 60: Questions
59 i. How can a diagnosis of tick-borne fever be confirmed in
the ewes described in case 58?
ii. How can abortions due to tick-borne fever be avoided in
future years?
60
113
60 These two Raillietina species (cestode or tapeworm) eggs
(60) are found during a routine parasitological survey of a
zoological collection of birds. Indoor and outdoor aviaries
host different species of birds, according to their temperature
needs.
i. What are the pathognomonic signs in birds affected by this
parasite?
ii. What is the clinical significance of tapeworms in birds?
ii. Is one more likely to find avian tapeworm infection in
indoor or in outdoor aviaries?
59, 60: Answers
59 i. On knowledge of tick activity, confirmed by
and demonstration of A. phagocytophilium inclusion bodies in
cytoplasmic  vacuoles  of monocytes  and neutrophils  in
Giemsa-stained blood smears. However, these are only seen
during or shortly after the initial infection and are seldom
useful for retrospective diagnosis of the cause of high barren
or abortion rates. In this case diagnosis was suspected on the
basis of neutropenia in 5/7 barren ewes, supported by
serological  identification  of  high  A.  phagocytophilium
antibody titres in 6/6 barren ewes that were sampled.
ii.By controlling I. ricinus populations. Control by
management of the environment is generally impractical,
uneconomic or environmentally
insensitive.  Avoidance
strategies can reduce the risk of vector-borne diseases, but
need to be permanent because they only lead to a reduction in
tick numbers when few altermative tick hosts are present.
Most farmers rely on the use of acaricides to prevent
infestation of their sheep. Plunge dipping of late-pregnant
114
ewes is generally considered to be impractical. Deltamethrin
and high cis cypermethrin pour-ons do not afford significant
levels of persistent activity against I. ricinus, while
alphacypermethrin affords 8-12 weeks' protection against
reinfection. Options currently available for prevention of
abortions caused by tick-borne fever are to avoid grazing the
hill with pregnant ewes or to apply an alphacypermethrin
pour-on drug to the single-bearing ewes at scanning time. The
latter strategy may not prove to be wholly effective, because
the highest concentrations of the pyrethroid drug are in the
fleeced areas of the skin, rather than on hair-covered parts
favoured bv f. ricinus ticks
60 i. Very frequently, avian tapeworm infections are
asymptomatic, although some birds show diarrhoea, weight
loss, eosinophilia and, rarely, fatal intestinal impaction due to
a large number of adult parasites.
ii. This aspect is quite controversial because the pathogenicity
of tapeworms differs according to the different avian goups/
families and age classes. Young birds are more sensitive than
adults to tapeworm infection and some families seem to show
a higher prevalence of infection. The negative impact of
tapeworms on avian health is probably underestimated
because of the lack of specific signs and the low or
inconsistent number of eggs/proglottids excreted in the faecal
drops (intermittent shedding)
ii. Cestodes have an indirect life cycle and they need an
invertebrate IH for completion of their life cycle. For
example, Raillietina species use ants as an IH. Therefore,
aviary birds housed on natural ground outdoors have easier
access to IHs and a higher risk of tapeworm infection
115
61, 62: Questions
6la
61 A 4-year-old Greyface ewe is submitted for post-mortem
examination following sudden death. The carcass is in a poor
condition and shows pale discolouration of the mucosa, a
distended abdominal cavity and areas of  wool  loss.
Examination of the liver reveals the presence of these
abnormal structures (61a).
i. What is your diagnosis?
ii. How do sheep become infected with this parasite?
Ili. How do you confirm the diagnosis?
iv. What advice would you offer to prevent this infection?
  o        
discharge. The anamnesis indicates that all six foals have
access to the same paddock and they were dewormed once at
2 months old, but the owner cannot recall what product was
used. A routine faecal examination is performed, and three of
the six foals are found to be positive for Parascaris (epg 50,
150 and >1,000). All the foals are treated with generic
116
ivermectin and re-examined 4 weeks later; the faeces of one
foal still contains Parascaris eggs.
i. What is the explanation for the continued parasite problem
despite treatment?
ii. How would you manage this problem?
61, 62: Answers
61b
61 i. Fasciolosis, caused by liver flukes of the genus Fasciola
li. By ingestion of infective larvae (encysted metacercariae)
Juvenile forms excyst in the intestine, burrow through the gut
wall, migrate across the peritoneal cavity and penetrate the
liver parenchyma until they enter the bile ducts.
ili. Post-mortem examination reveals liver damage and flukes
in the bile ducts (61b). Faecal examination reveals fluke eggs.
In live animals, glutamate dehydrogenase values are typically
10-20 times normal and remain elevated for several weeks
even after treatment. Albumin concentrations are low (20 g/l
[28-35 g/]); globulin concentrations are elevated (>60 g/]
[35-45 g/l]). Immunological tests have been developed to
detect specific antibodies in the serum, and some can be used
in milk samples.
117
iv. Administer anthelmintics to suppress fluke egg output and
pasture metacercarial challenge. Improve drainage to reduce
the rate of egg hatching and survival of free-living stages of
flukes and prevent the establishment of snail populations.
Grazing management to avoid contact between metacercariae
and susceptible final hosts. Risk of resistance may be reduced
by ensuring the correct drug dose is administered, using
different drugs at strategic times and avoiding unnecessary
treatment. Quarantine treatment of introduced animals using a
sequentially administered combination of a benzimidazole
and a salicylanilide derivative (or clorsulon in cattle) will
reduce the spread of resistant flukes into new areas.
62 i. There is treatment failure, probably due to one or more
of the following reasons: (1) incorrect administration; (2)
expired anthelmintic drug: (3) slow mode of action of
ivermectin against P. equorum, which is known as the
dose-limiting species of equine nematodes  for most
broad-spectrum equine anthelmintics; it can take several days
after treatment before the worms are killed; (4) lower quality
of ‘generic’ ivermectins versus ‘quality-brand’ ivermectins;
(5) presence of ivermectin-resistant P. equorum on the farm.
as there are increasing reports in several countries of failure
of ivermectin treatment against P. equorum; (6) there is no
reduced treatment efficacy, and the eggs observed in the
faeces are due to coprophagy, slow washout of eggs after
treatment or single surviving worms because of resistance or
the dose-limiting nature of the drug.
ii. Use a brand-name ivermectin or another ML, or use a
benzimidazole, as they are known to have a high efficacy
against ascarids. Follow-up on the efficacy, preferably 2
weeks after treatment.
118
63, 64: Questions
63a
63 This parasite (63a, in forceps) is seen during routine
inspection of a fish used for feeding dolphins at a zoological
garden.
i. What is this parasite?
ii. How do fish acquire them?
Ili. What is their clinical significance?
iv. Can humans become infected?
119
64
64 This organism (64) is observed on a skin scraping taken
from a goldfish.
i. What is it, and what is its significance?
ii. What treatment might be given?
63, 64: Answers
63b
63 i. L3 of the nematode parasite Anisakis simplex. They have
a coiled filiform appearance (63b) and are normally observed
in the body cavity, on the liver or stomach and, less
120
frequently, in muscle.
ii. Anisakis cycle in three hosts. Worms develop into adults in
the gastric mucosa of the definitive host (dolphins, other
  ssd     sg  
faeces. In seawater, the eggs mature into Lls and then to
free-living L2s. These are ingested by small crustaceans (first
IH) in which the parasite matures into L3s, which are
subsequently consumed by marine fish or squid (second IH).
L3s migrate into the viscera and peritoneal cavity of the
second IH. Utimately, ingestion of infected fish by a marine
mammal leads to development of L4s and then adults
ili. Infected fish exhibit no external abnormalities. However,
larvae of these nematodes are a major problem for
commercial  fishing industries. Infected marine animals
exhibit ulcers, pain and bleeding. Fish used in feeding marine
mammals must not be fed raw. Heating or freezing to -20°C
(4°F) for 24 hours is effective in killing the parasite.
iv. Yes, by consumption of raw or inadequately cooked
infected marine fish or squid. This disease occurs where such
dietary customs are practised (e.g. Japan, coastal regions of
Europe, the USA). Live parasites penetrate the gut wall and
cause acute gastroenteritis, abdominal pain, nausea and
vomiting
64 i. Chilodenella species, a mobile ciliate protozoan that
infects the skin and gills of fish. Most Chilodenella species
are free living, but a few species are pathogenic to fish. Some
free-living species can cause damage in weakened fish in
polluted waters, especially if the fish are stressed.
Chilodenellosis is insidious and severe damage can occur
before gross pathology is evident. Damage is mainly caused
by the feeding activities of the parasites. They penetrate the
host cell epidermis with their cytostome and suck out the
121
contents of the epithelium. This feeding elicits strong cellular
responses. In advanced stages there will be skin ulcers and
secondary bacterial infections and mortalities.
i. Formalin bath; formalin prolonged immersion; potassium
permanganate prolonged  immersion;  copper prolonged
immersion. Drugs should be used as part of an integrated
health management strategy to mitigate the losses.
65, 66: Questions
6.5
65 A 15-month-old male neutered DSH cat dies under
anaesthesia during an elective surgical procedure. The cause
of death is respiratory insufficiency due to severe pneumonia.
Multiple types of parasitic larvae and eggs (65) are identified
on histopathological examination of lung tissue.
i. What is your diagnosis and differential diagnosis?
i. How do cats become infected with this parasite?
ili. Why are some cats more prone to this disease than others?
122
66
66 The life cycle of the bovine lungworm (Dictyocaulus
viviparus) is shown (66).
i. Name and describe each of the lettered stages in the life
cycle.
ii. What is the role of Pilobolus fungi in the life cycle?
ili. Why has the infection rate with this parasite in yearling
and adult cattle been rising in some countries?
iv. Why is it necessary periodically to repeat faecal testing or
perform serological testing to diagnose lungworm infection?
65, 66: Answers
65 i.
Aelurostrongylosis,
casuedby the
lungworm
Aelurostrongylus
abstrusus.
Differentials
are other
cardiorespiratory diseases of cats including parasitosis (e.g
Dirofilaria immitis or Eucoleus aerophilus), metastatic
neoplasia, mycotic disease, chronic bacterial bronchitis, feline
allergic bronchitis and tuberculosis. Baermann technique can
123
be used to detect the larvae in faecal samples. CT scanning
may be useful to differentiate aelurostrongylosis from other
diseaseswith similar clinicalsigns.
li. Adult worms live in the terminal bronchioles and alveolar
ducts of the definitive host (cats) and, after mating, the gravid
females deposit eggs that hatch into Lls. These pass up the
bronchial escalator, are swallowed and released via faeces
into the environment to continue their life cycle in a variety of
slug and snail species. Cats become infected by ingesting the
intermediate or paratenic (e.g. rodents, frogs, lizards, snakes,
birds) hosts. After ingestion, the larvae migrate to the lungs
via the blood and lymphatic vessels and evolve into adult
stages, which reach sexual maturity after approximately 6
weeks post infection.
ili. Outdoor lifestyle: cats living outdoors (strays or owned
but free ranging) become infected by preying on intermediate
and/or paratenic hosts harbouring infective stages. Young
age: kittens <l year are 70% more likely to become infected
due to the higher preying instinct of young animals.
66 i. (A) L1 shed in faeces: (B) L1 matures in 5-7 days: (C)
L3 (infective); (D) Pilobolus fungi; (E) herbage contaminated
with L3s; (F) cow ingests grass contaminated with L3s; (G)
L3s mature to adult worms in the pulmonary tissue
ii. They facilitate the spread of lungworm larvae in pastures.
Larvae located on sporangiophores are disharged several
metres when the sporangiophores explode, ejecting spores.
lli. It can be attributed to several factors, including changes in
weather patterns and cattle farm management systems, a
reduction in usage of vaccine and/or common use of
broad-spectrum anthelmintic treatments to control lungworm
and GI parasites, which precludes adequate parasite antigen
exposure, depriving the animal of subsequent immunological
124
boosting.
iv.  Laboratory  confirmation  of  lungworm  infection  by
detection of Lls in faeces is only successful in a proportion of
outbreaks. This is because false-negative results can occur if
the lungworm infection is still in the prepatent period. Also.
disease may occur in the absence of a patent infection in adult
cattle, which may have a degree of immunity. For these
reasons, repeating
g faecalanalysis and/or detectionof
parasite-specific
serum
antibodies by
ELISAis
recommended.
67, 68: Questions
67
67 A captive, wild-caught, African rock python is found on
post-mortem examination to have in its intestine a large
nodule from which large worms are protruding (67).
i. What is the likely composition of the nodule?
ii. Are the worms and the lesion of clinical significance?
Ili. How might the python have acquired the infection?
iv. How would such infections be treated or controlled?
125
68a
68b
68 A young sea turtle is found stranded on a beach. Many
small-
 tomedium-sized
1barnacles(Balanusspecies,
Chelonibia testudinaria,Stomatolepas elegans and others) are
found encrusted on the plastron, the carapace, inside the oral
cavity and especially on the skin (68a). Many mobile small
whitish crustacea (Caprellidae species), about 0.5-1 cm long,
are grasped in the distal area of the carapace (68b). On
clinical examination, the turtle is severely depressed with
mucus exuding from epidermal lesions close to the encrusted
barnacles. Haematology and clinical biochemical tests reveal
severe
 anaemia
and
1 low total protein and
 glucose
concentrations, while CPK and BUN levels are elevated.
i. Based on the anamnesis and the laboratory results, what is
your diagnosis?
ii. Are the epibiont crustacea (Amphipoda) found on the
carapace pathogenic?
Ili. What is the suggested method for removing epibionts?
67, 68: Answers
67 i. Inflammatory and necrotic material associated with the
presenceof
nematode
parasites. The predominant
inflammatory cells would be eosinophils and heterophils. The
latter, the reptilian equivalent of mammalian neutrophils.
126
usually contain intracytoplasmic acidophilic bodies and can
be confused with eosinophils. The worms are Ophidascaris
species, an ascarid nematode well-recognized in pythons.
ii. Their significance is not entirely clear. They are
widespread in free-living pythons and it has been suggested
that there is a well-adapted host-parasite relationship. When
worms produce granulomata, there may be adverse effects
such as blockage of the intestine, secondary infection and.
possibly, predisposition to intussusception.
ili. Eggs containing L2s can remain infective for up to 7
years. The IHs are small mammals such as rodents. Eggs
hatch in these hosts and the larvae migrate to the liver, lungs
and subcutaneous tissues, where they moult to L3s. When the
IHs are eaten by a snake, L3s migrate to the lungs, where they
stay for 3 months or more. After moulting again, the larvae
move up to the throat and are swallowed, moving to the
oesophagus as L4s and eventually to the stomach, where they
undergo a further moult and become adults
iv. By a combination of improved hygiene (including
exclusion of IHs) and treatment with anthelmintics. Killing
the worms may have a negative effect if, as a result, the
intestine or lesion undergoes inflammatory changes because
of a foreign body reaction to dead worms.
68 i. The clinical picture, along with the presence of a heavy
barnacle and crustacean load and the results of haematology
and clinical biochemistry tests, suggest that this sea turtle is
affected by debilitated turtle syndrome. The aetiology of this
syndrome is unclear.
ii. If a turtle hosts a lot of epibiont crustacea on its carapace
algal patches, they might become pathogenic. However, the
main clinical sign of this syndrome is attributed to the
increased burden of barnacles encrusted all over the turtle
127
ili. Epibiont crustacea can easily be removed manually or by
means of a brush, while barnacles require specific treatment.
The barnacles should not all be removed at the same time,
especially those attached to skin. These parasites are very
sensitive to osmotic shock and therefore bathing sea turtles
for short time intervals in fresh water on a daily basis is a
good method of killing barnacles. It is easier to remove them
gently from the turtle after 3-4 days of this treatment.
69, 70: Questions
69a
69 These parasitic cysts (69a) were found in the liver and
lungs of a 15-year-old female Thoroughbred mare during a
post-mortem examination.
i. What are these cysts?
ii. How do you confirm your diagnosis?
Ii. How do horses become infected?
128
70
70 An injured tawny eagle is presented (70).
i. Which of the following groups of ectoparasites might be
found on the integument of this bird - Siphonaptera.
Mallophaga, Hippoboscidae, other Diptera?
ii. How would you detect such ectoparasites?
lli. Give an example of a blood parasite that can be
transmitted by one of these ectoparasites.
69, 70: Answers
129
69b
69 i. Hydatid cysts, the encysted larval stage of the intestinal
carnivore (wild or domestic canids) tapeworms of the genus
Echinococcus. Equine cystic echinococcosis can be caused by
various
tcysts from both
Echinococcus granulosus and Echinococcus equinus (the
(horse strain') have been reported in the lungs and livers of
horses.
. Cystic echinococcosis in horses is diagnosed at
slaughter or post-mortem examination. The liver and lungs
are the most commonly affected organs.
ii. Light microscopical examination of fluid material aspirated
from within the hydatid cyst can reveal the presence of
protoscolices (69b). Protoscolices are produced as the next
generation of Echinococcus tapeworms and their presence in
the cysts indicates that this cyst is fertile (i.e. able to establish
an infection in the definitive host).
ili. Horse infection and larval development begins with
ingestion of eggs that have been shed into the faeces of an
infected dog/fox, the definitive host of Echinococcus
tapeworms.
130
70 i. All of those listed can be parasitic on a tawny eagle
Siphonaptera (fleas) are rarely found. If found, they may have
been acquired from prey animals.
ii. The bird is gently anaesthetized by enclosing it in a plastic
bag and introducing a volatile anaesthetic agent such as ether,
chloroform or isoflurane. The skin can then be examined with
a hand lens.
ili. Haemoproteus species can be transmitted by louse flies
(Hippoboscidae)  and  biting midges (Diptera:  Culicoides
species).
71, 72: Questions
71a
71b
131
71 A female freshwater roach fish from a private pond is
presented with abnormal abdominal swelling (71a). The
owner of the pond mentions that he has recently seen some
fish with altered shapes. These worms are removed from the
abdominal cavity of the fish (71b).
i. What are these worms, and how are they transmitted to
fish?
ii. How do these worms affect fish health?
lli. How would you manage this problem?
72 Starting with the initial infection of a chicken, describe the
life cycle of the genus of parasite that causes coccidiosis
71, 72: Answers
71 i. Plerocercoid larvae of the tapeworm Ligula intestinalis
(a pseudophyllidean Cestoda). They mainly affect Cyprinid
freshwater fish, especially the roach. This cestode has a
complex three-host life cycle with crustacean copepods as the
first and planktivorous fish as the second IH. Fish-eating
piscivorous birds (e.g. gulls, grey herons) act as the definitive
host in which L. intestinalis reaches sexual maturity in a few
days and releases eggs into the water.
ii. The larvae have considerable effect on fish health.
fecundity and behaviour, and can be a major threat to natural
and farmed fish populations. They cause emaciation, stunted
growth,  reproductive
  dysfunction    and
suppressed
gametogenesis/gonad development in both sexes of their
intermediate fish hosts.
ili. By disrupting the life cycle of the parasite and changing
plans for fish movement and stocking. Control measures
include culling any fish-eating birds and utilization of
132
predators such as perch (Perca fluviatilis) and pike (Esox
lucius), present in the water, to control infected roach
numbers.
72 The life cycle is split into an internal phase in the gut of
       -  
ingesting sporulated oocysts. This is followed by a period of
massive multiplication in epithelial and sub-epithelial cells.
culminating in shedding of oocysts in faeces. Once ingested
and released there is/are one or more cycle(s) of asexual
reproduction(schizogony)andone cycle ofsexual
reproduction (gametogony). Oocysts enter the GI tract and the
sporozoites are released and invade the intestinal epithelia
The sporozoites develop into merozoites (first-generation
schizont), which can reinfect and develop into a secondary
generation of schizont. The merozoites differentiate into
female macrogametes and male microgametes. These fuse to
form the zygote, which develops into an oocyst that leaves the
chicken gut with faeces as a non-sporulated oocyst. Further
development and maturation of the oocysts (non-sporulated
become sporulated) occurs outside the host. The sporulated
00cyst (72b)
contains four sporocysts, each with two
sporozoites.
133
72b
Micropyle cap
Micropyle
Sporocyst
Sporozoite
Residual
body.
Oocyst
wall
73, 74: Questions
73a
73 Groups of open-range village pigs (100-120 kg) in Peru
are herded to a local butcher for slaughter and consumption.
The pigs had been kept around the village for scavenging
food scraps. At slaughter, numerous small cysts are noted in
the tongue and in the shoulder muscles (73a).
i. Name this parasite stage and the other stage and habitat of
this parasite. Describe the life cycle connecting these stages.
134
ii. Describe the pathological features of the muscle cyst
ili. Describe the clinical signs that each parasite stage can
cause.
74 A concerned owner notices this tick (74) on his dog after
coming back from a trip in the woods in Michigan (USA).
i. What is the name of this tick species?
ii. What diseases is this dog at high risk for?
i. Should the dog's owner be concerned about his health.
too?
73, 74: Answers
135
73b
73 i. Cysticercus cellulosae, found in pig muscle; it is the
 s    s s n
two-host parasite that occurs in the small intestine of humans.
After ingestion of infected pork, the larvae/ cysticerci
evaginate and attach to the proximal part of the intestine,
where they develop into 2-4-metre long adult stages of T.
solium. The parasite can also develop an autoinfection, with
the larval form of Cysticercus migrating within tissues (e.g.
CNS), causing neurocysticercosis. Subcutaneous cysticercosis
and ocular cysticercosis have been reported. Ingestion of eggs
or proglottids shed in human faeces by scavenging pigs is the
most frequent way of transmission of cysticerci to swine.
Larvae/oncospheres hatch from eggs in the pig intestine and
migrate to muscle, liver and other organs.
ii. After 2-3 months of cysticercus development in pigs.
pearl-shaped, white cysts, which have a thin fibrotic wall and
an invaginated Taenia scolex (73b), may be seen in the
muscles.
Ili. In infected pigs, fever and muscle stiffness may be noted.
Adult Taenia in humans cause few clinical signs; however,
autoinfection of the CNS with the larval form of Cysticercus
136
may manifest as headache, dizziness, hydrocephalus, loss of
vision and nausea.
74 i. The American dog tick, Dermacentor variabilis, which
is widely distributed east of the Rocky Mountains and also
occurs on the Pacific Coast of the US. Males and females are
recognized by having pale whitish or yellowish markings on
the scutum or dorsal shield.
ii. In addition to tick paralysis, the risk of blood loss and the
discomfort caused by tick infestation, ticks may carry a
number of diseases that are readily transmitted when an
infected tick feeds on the dog. These include Lyme disease,
ehrlichiosis, anaplasmosis, Rocky Mountain spotted fever
(RMSF) and babesiosis.
ili. The dog is the preferred host of the adult D. variabilis.
although this tick species feeds on many large mammals.
including humans. This tick species is known to transmit
RMSF and tularaemia to humans. It may also induce tick
paralysis by elaboration of a neurotoxin that induces rapidly
progressive flaccid quadriparesis.
75: Question
137
75a
75 i. Approximately 400 ewe lambs from a flock of 1,500
Scottish Blackface ewes are routinely wintered indoors, while
the rams are run with mature pregnant ewes on hilly pastures.
All the sheep on the farm had been gathered and plunge
dipped in an organophosphate diazinon solution during the
autumn months. The shepherd calls you in mid-winter to
express concern that several of the indoor ewe lambs are
showing signs of pruritus (75a). Several lambs are also noted
to be rubbing against the fences. What immediate advice
would you offer to the shepherd?
li. How should these ewe lambs be treated?
75:Answer
138
75b
75c
75 i. The important differential diagnoses for pruritus
affecting several individuals within a group of sheep are
sheep scab (Psoroptes ovis), chewing lice, Chorioptes and
sheep
ked
(Melophagus
(snuiAo
infestation.The
consequences of potentially introducing sheep scab to a flock
of pregnant ewes are serious, so the first concern is to ensure
adequate biosecurity on the return of the ewe lambs into the
fully mixed flock in spring. Confirmation of the diagnosis is
important. Keds and chewing lice are visible on examination
of wool partings over the body of affected animals. Sheep
scab can be confirmed by microscopic examination of skin
scrapings from the edges of any distinct lesions. P. ovis are
0.5-0.75
mm
long,
oval-shaped
mites
(75b)
with
three-segmented
pedicels
  and
1funnel-shaped
 suckers.
Scab-affected lambs must be treated before they are mixed
with scab-free ewes. Mites can survive in the environment for
up to 17 days while retaining the ability to affect new sheep,
therefore make sure lambs are not moved into fields or pens
that will be used by scab-free animals during this period.
These constraints are not easily addressed because sheep pens
may be required for clostridial disease vaccination of the
pregnant ewe flock, or there may be insufficient grazing
available for the lambs.
ii. Plunge dipping
in（
diazinon
or administrationof
139
endectocide injections. A single injection of doramectin or
1% moxidectin affords 17 or 28 days residual protection,
respectively, while a single injection of long-acting
moxidectin affords about 60 days residual protection. In this
case, where the ewe lambs are to be moved to a scab-free area
after treatment, there is no clear reason to use the long-acting
product. In fact, while endectocide injections may be easier to
perform than plunge dipping, it means having to move sheep
onto scab-free pasture immediately after treatment, because of
the time it takes (10 days or so) after systemic endectocide
treatment before all P. ovis mites are killed. Therefore, sheep
scab treatment options requiring immediate activity involve
plunge dipping of the sheep in diazinon, taking care to ensure
that every animal is immersed for l minute, with its head
submerged twice during this period (75c)
76, 77: Questions
76 You are presented with a 4-year-old male llama that has
         
The owners report that the animal appears ‘drunk' and has
been struggling to stand  from a recumbent position.
Neurological  examination   reveals  that  the  animal  is
asymmetrically ataxic with the left forelimb and hindlimb
equally affected, while the right side is normal. Routine
haematology and biochemistry profile reveals only increased
fibrinogen concentration.
i. What is the differential diagnosis for this case, and how
would you attempt to distinguish the various disease
possibilities?
l1. What is the life cycle of the parasite you would consider in
140
your differential diagnosis? Are other animals on the premises
at risk?
77
77 An adult mute swan is presented to a veterinary clinic for a
pre-release health check, after previously being entangled in
some discarded fishing line. During the clinical examination a
parasite is removed from the nares (77).
i. What is this parasite?
li. Is it considered significant clinically?
ili. How would you treat this swan?
76, 77: Answers
76 i. The llama appears to have an asymmetrical lesion
affecting the left cervical region of the spinal cord.
Differentials include vertebral fracture, vertebral abscess,
neoplasm or granuloma in the spinal canal and aberrant
parasite migration (most likely the meningeal 
worm
Parelaphostrongylus tenuis). Animals with fractures and,
sometimes, abscesses are often in pain and unwilling to move
141
their necks: this is not evident in this case. As this animal has
responsible for the clinical signs. Cervical radiographs will
rule out a cervical vertebral fracture and myelography under
anaesthesia will rule out a space-occupying lesion within the
cervical spinal canal. CSF analysis may reveal an eosinophilia
with aberrant parasite migration, but this is not specific to P.
tenuis.
ii. White-tailed deer are the definitive host for P. tenuis
(meningeal worm of white-tailed deer'), but seldom show
signs of infection. P. tenuis migrates much more extensively
in the CNS of incidental hosts, often causing severe, disabling
neurological disease. Adult P. tenuis parasites live in the
subdural space of the CNS and in associated blood vessels.
Adult females lay eggs in the venous vessels and Lls emerge
in the pulmonary capillaries. They enter the alveoli and are
coughed up and swallowed. Lls then leave the host in the
mucus covering of the faeces and penetrate slugs and snails
that are residing in the pasture. Lls develop into L3s in the
IH. Accidental ingestion of snails containing infective L3
larvae continues the life cycle. L3 larvae leave the GI tract of
the host and enter the CNS in 1-2 weeks. Larvae develop in
the grey matter of the dorsal horn of the spinal cord and
migrate to the subdural space approximately 5 weeks later in
white-tailed deer, but persist in the grey matter in aberrant
hosts, leading to clinical disease. As this llama was the only
animal imported from the USA and is an aberrant host, it will
not produce eggs and is not a risk to other animals in the herd.
There are no white-tailed deer in the UK to transmit this
disease to other llamas either.
77 i. The aquatic nasal leech (Theromyzon species), which
affects ducks and other large aquatic birds. Fourteen species
142
of leeches are described. Parasites are usually identified by
direct visualization or nasal flushing.
ii. Nasal leeches are often asymptomatic in ducks and swans.
When present in high numbers they may be associated with
conjunctivitis, sinusitis, head shaking and respiratory distress.
ili. A single injectable dose of ivermectin (0.2 mg/kg) is
usually effective for treatment. Manual removal of the leech
and flushing of the nares may also be performed.
78: Question
143
78a
78b
78c
78 Over the past 2 weeks, a guinea pig breeder in the USA
has noticed that 25 of his juvenile and adult guinea pigs (out
of a group of approximately 60o) have their heads cocked to
one side or the other (78a). A few affected animals also move
in circles when they walk or have difficulty maintaining their
balance and fall over. Their appetites remain good, and they
144
seem bright and alert. Most of the affected animals are young
breeding stock. Necropsy of one affected guinea pig reveals
moderate granulomatous and eosinophilic encephalitis in the
areas of the brain consistent with the CNS clinical signs
(78b). In one tissue section, a cross-section of a nematode
larva is identified (78c)
i.  Localize the neuroanatomical lesion(s), based on the
presenting clinical signs.
li. What is your diagnosis?
ili. What is the life cycle of this parasite in the natural host?
iv. What are your recommendations to the producer with
regard to eliminating the parasite eggs that have contaminated
his guinea pig areas?
v. What are your recommendations to the owner regarding
treatment of his guinea pigs?
78: Answer
78 i. Head tilt suggests a lesion in the pontomedullary portion
of the brainstem or the peripheral or central vestibular system
Tilt is usually toward the side of the lesion. Circling suggests
a lesion in the hypothalamus or cerebrum.
ii. Baylisascariosis, caused by the intestinal roundworm
Baylisascaris procyonis, which is associated with American
raccoons. The breeder has recently begun feeding hay to his
guinea pigs, and although the hay is stored in a ésecure' barm
on the affected farm, it was purchased from a farm where the
barn was not secure and raccoon faeces could have
contaminated the hay before delivery to the breeder. Pelleted
feed and processed bedding materials are less likely sources
of contamination
ili. Raccoons becomes infected by ingesting eggs containing
145
infective larvae passed in faeces from other infected raccoons,
or by ingesting larvae in the tissues of IHs such as rodents,
rabbits and birds. Larvae develop into adults in the small
intestine and these pass eggs into the faeces.
iv. Baylisascaris eggs are difficult to kill. Steam cleaning the
facilities with boiling water is necessary to kill the eggs, but
they can be washed away with water under high pressure.
Bleach (or another detergent) can be added to the water to
make the eggs more slippery.
v. Ivermectin does not readily cross the blood-CNS barrier,
therefore itwould be unlikelytoreacheffective
concentrations. In some studies, the development of clinical
neurological  larval migrans  with B.  procyonis  has been
prevented by treatment with albendazole (1oo% protection),
mebendazole (80%) or thiabendazole (80%), fed daily from
days 1 to 10 after infection. Once clinical signs develop,
treatment may be ineffective.
79, 80: Questions
146
79
79 Canaries in a breeding flock exhibit pruritus and poor
feather condition. Close inspection of the birds reveals several
tiny ectoparasites attached to the feathers (79).
i. What is this parasite?
ii. What is the suggested treatment for this infestation?
80 A 5-year-old Thoroughbred gelding is presented with
clinical signs of moderate to severe abdominal pain (evidence
of rolling, sweating, kicking at the abdomen, flank watching).
Physical examination reveals pink mucous membranes,
capillary refill time of 2-3 seconds and adequate pulse
quality. Heart rate is 56 beats per minute. Borborygmi are
reduced in all four quadrants. Rectal examination reveals no
obvious abnormalities, except for a hard, painful mass in the
right caudodorsal abdomen. Nasogastric intubation recovers 4
litres  of   fetid   fluid  and    peritoneocentesis  recovers
straw-coloured fluid with a total solids value of 20 g/l (normal
147
<20 g/l)
i. What is your differential diagnosis for this case?
li. What other clinical presentations have been associated with
the parasitic infection included in your differential diagnosis?
i. What is the best way to confirm the parasitological
diagnosis?
iv. What is the life cycle of the parasite most likely associated
with this clinical syndrome?
v. What would you recommend regarding management and
prevention in this case?
79, 80: Answers
79 i. Menacanthus species, a biting louse (Order
Mallophaga).
ii. These ectoparasites spend their entire life cycle on the
avian host and are easily removed by pyrethroid treatment
repeated weekly 2-3 times.
80 i. Anything that may cause ileus in the horse. This includes
EGS (UK and Europe), anterior enteritis, strangulating small
intestinal lesions
(e.g.epiploic
Cforamenentrapment,
pedunculated lipoma), ileal  impaction  and large  colonic
displacements (inhibit gastrocolic reflex, leading to small
intestinal ileus). More nasogastric reflux is often obtained in
animals with anterior enteritis and EGs. With strangulating
small intestinal lesions, the horse usually has no audible
borborygmi and increased total solids on peritoneocentesis.
The rectal  examination findings are  suggestive of ileal
impaction, which is often associated with moderate to severe
clinical signs of abdominal pain, as is evident in this case.
Ileal impactions have been associated with infection with
148
Anoplocephalaperfoliata,the equine tapeworm.
ii. Spasmodic colic, intussusceptions of the ileum, caecum
and colon, poor growth and unthriftiness.
ili. Measurement of IgG (T) concentrations to specific A.
perfoliata antigens using an ELISA correlates well with
parasite burden. Alternatively, faecal analysis can be used,
but    definitive
  diagnosis can
be challengingusing
conventional  methods because eggs  are  often released
intermittently in small numbers or are still within tapeworm
segments.   Double centrifugation  and  faecal flotation
techniques using a concentrated sugar solution can increase
the sensitivity of this technique.
iv. Adult tapeworms attach to the mucosa of the ileum,
caecum and ileocolic
 junction.
Proglottids (tapeworm
 ssd a sa a  (s  s
the faeces and are ingested by free-living oribatid mites. The
larval tapeworm develops in the body cavity of the mites in
2-4 months. The mites crawl onto vegetation in the spring
and summer and are then ingested by grazing horses. Once
ingested the adult tapeworm develops in approximately 8
weeks.
v. This is a disease of horses at pasture. Management is
challenging as it is not possible to control the IH. Regular
removal of faeces can help reduce the number of eggs or
        
oribatid mites. Pharmacological management includes oral
administration of pyrantel (double the dose recommended for
other equine parasites) or praziquantel.
81, 82: Questions
149
81
81 During a routine parasitological survey of injured birds of
prey hospitalized in a raptor centre, faecal examination
reveals
many
brownish,thick-shelled
eggswith
characteristically asymmetrically opposed plugs at each end
(81).
i. What is this parasite, and what is its anatomical localization
in the infected bird?
ii. What is its pathogenicity?
ili. What are the implications of this finding for the avian
raptor centre management?
82 You are presented with a 5-year-old Thoroughbred brood
mare that has been recently imported into the UK from a stud
farm in Virginia (USA). The mare has been normal until 2
days ago when the yard manager noted that the horse was
‘wobbly', particularly on the right hindlimb. Physical
examination revealed some gluteal muscle atrophy evident on
the right side. On neurological examination the horse
appeared normal in the forelimbs, but grade II/IV ataxic in the
left hindlimb and IHl/IV ataxic in the right hindlimb.
Additional neurological signs included spasticity and poor
150
foot placement when evaluated in a straight line. The horse
nearly fell when turned in a tight circle. What is your
differential diagnosis?
81, 82: Answers
81 i. Capillaria species, a tiny roundworm that has worldwide
distribution and affects a wide variety of avian species. The
worms can be localized in several sites of the GI tract,
depending on the avian host and the Capillaria species.
i. It can be quite pathogenic, especially for some avian
groups such as pigeons, psittacines, gallinaceous birds,
corvids and birds of prey.
ili. The life cycle of this parasite is usually direct and fast and
some Capillaria populations have developed a degree of
tolerance to common anthelmintics and their eggs are not
sensitive to common disinfectants. Therefore, reinfection of
avian hosts is very frequent in outdoor aviaries. Prophylaxis is
the best strategy to be used against Capillaria infections;
colonies affected by high parasite burden should be examined
on a regular basis with a faecal flotation test and the aviaries.
including the ground, should be cleaned with water/steam.
Flubendazole and fenbendazole are effective drugs for avian
capillariosis.
82
Cervical vertebral  malformation.  May  have  been
exacerbated by trauma during travel. Usually associated with
symmetrical ataxia and not with muscle atrophy and affects
both the forelimbs and hindlimbs. Is a common cause of
ataxia in the UK. Radiography revealed no evidence of
narrowing of the spinal canal.
151
· EDM. Presumed to be due to vitamin E and/or selenium
deficiency so is unlikely in this case as the mare lives
predominantly    at    grass.  Normally 
associatedwith
symmetrical ataxia affecting the forelimbs and hindlimbs and
not with muscle atrophy.
· Equine herpes virus myeloencephalopathy. Usually seen in
younger horses following a history of respiratory disease and
there is often more than one animal affected. Neurological
signs usually progress rapidly and are associated with other
clinical signs including decreased tail tone and urinary (and
faecal) incontinence.
·Spinal cord abscess. Quite rare and could cause
asymmetrical ataxia, but would need to be more than one to
also cause muscle atrophy. Often, but not always, associated
with pain and an inflammatory leucogram.
· Verminous encephalitis. Rare and although there may be
asymmetrical ataxia, not usually associated with muscle
atrophy. Changes will be evident on CSF analysis (e.g.
pleocytosis with or without eosinophilia)
· EPM caused by the protozoan Sarcocystis neurona.High up
on the differential list in this case because of the history of
recent travel from the eastern USA, the asymmetric ataxia and
muscle atrophy
83, 84: Questions
83 i. Assuming the diagnosis in the Thoroughbred brood mare
in case 82 is EPM, how would you confirm your diagnosis?
Why may this be challenging?
152
ii. Should this horse be isolated in light of the parasite's
presumed life cycle?
84
84 An ornamental goldfish is presented with bilateral,
symmetrical “lesions? on the pectoral fins (84).
i. What are these ^lesions'?
ii. How would you treat this condition?
83, 84: Answers
83 i. Appropriate history and clinical signs. Radiography
ruled out cervical vertebral malformation. Other differentials
can be ruled out by CSF evaluation and assessment of vitamin
E and selenium concentrations. Tests to evaluate exposure to
S. neurona include evaluating antibody concentrations in
serum and CSF. The CSF must not be contaminated with
blood. Antibodies can enter the CSF and therefore their
         
active infection.
153
ii. No. The definitive host is not present in the UK and
infection is not transmitted transplacentally. This parasite has
an obligatory 2-host life cycle (83 - see page 243). Infective
the horse or the IH (skunks, raccoons, armadillos, domestic
cats) by the definitive host (opossum). When ingested by the
IH, sporozoites excyst from the sporocyst, exit the GI tract
and enter the arterial endothelial cells in a multitude of
organs. Meronts develop, rupture the host cells and release
merozoites into the blood, which undergo a second stage of
multiplication in the capillary endothelial cells, enter muscle
and develop into cysts. When the muscle of IHs is ingested by
opossums, the life cycle is completed by the bradyzoites
within the cysts. The horse is a dead-end host, although it
may occasionally act as an IH. Ultimately, S. neurona can
invade the CNS of the infected horse only (other IHs do not
develop neurological disease), causing focal or multifocal
inflammation and clinical disease (EPM)
84 i. Nuptial tubercles. These consist of multicellular
keratinous nodules and are most prominent over the opercula
and leading edge of the pectoral fins of male goldfish during
the breeding season.
ii. The condition is normal and requires no treatment.
85: Question
154
85a
85b
85 Severe ill thrift is reported during August in Texel-cross
ewes and lambs on a farm in the east of Scotland, UK
Twelve lambs have died during the previous 2 weeks. There
is no evidence of diarrhoea, but many of the ill animals are
anaemic and show signs of submandibular oedema (85a). The
lambs were 250 and 6,100 epg, respectively. The affected
sheep were all in a group of 120 ewes and about 190 lambs
that had been turned onto a 23-acre field after lambing during
March. The field had been resown during the previous year
and had not subsequently been grazed by sheep. Another
155
group of about 450 ewes that were grazed on 90 acres of older
grass were healthy and their 700 lambs had gained about 250
g liveweight/day. The flock is closed and biosecure, with the
exception of 3 or 4 rams, which are purchased annually from
ram sales in the south of Scotland. All of the ewes and lambs
were orally dosed with ivermectin at marking during May and
thereafter the lambs were dosed with ivermectin at 4-week
intervals. Post-mortem examination of a single dead lamb
shows anaemia and the presence of about 28,000
Haemonchus contortus in the abomasum (85b)
i. Is the diagnosis of haemonchosis on this farm surprising or
unusual?
ii. How might the haemonchosis problem have arisen?
85: Answer
85 i.Outbreaks of haemonchosis in Scottish sheep flocks are
unusual compared with their southern English counterparts,
not favour survival of significant numbers of infective larvae
on pasture. This outbreak was also unexpected because the
aq peu pue ased as, uo paz uaaq pey daaus paina
given regular, albeit irrational, anthelmintic treatment, while
the animals that were grazed on probably-contaminated
pasture had achieved performance targets.
ii.Unexpected
1 outbreaks of nematode parasitism are
becoming commonplace due to combinations of parasite
evolution, climate change, changing farm  management
practices and the emergence of anthelmintic resistance. This
case demonstrates the capacity of H. contortus to exploit
       n
opportunities afforded by consecutive warmer and  wetter
156
autumn and spring months for egg hatching, rapid
development to infective L3s and their survival on pasture
The likely source of H. contortus was one or more of the rams
that had been purchased during the previous autumn, but not
treated with an anthelmintic on arrival. The biotic potential of
H. contortus is high enough to ensure that just one ram
shedding 1,ooo H. contortus epg could give rise to several
hundred H. contortus in a high proportion of the ewes, which
could then have overwintered as early L4s before completing
their development the following spring and giving rise to
significant levels of pasture contamination during the 4-week
period between lambing and anthelmintic treatment of the
ewes. Unseasonably warm and wet spring weather would
have enabled rapid development of eggs to L3s, which might
not have occurred during a‘typical’ Scottish spring, giving
rise to the early infection of naive lambs. The introduction of
a single infected animal might therefore result in a serious
production-limiting disease within 1 year in regions where H.
contortus is otherwise umcommon.The occurrence of
haemonchosis only in the group of sheep that were grazed on
previously ^safe' pasture is noteworthy and may be due to a
lack of effects of Teladorsagia circumcincta larvae on the
establishment of H. contortus within the abomasums of the
naive lambs.
86: Question
157
86a
86b
10 μm
86 A freshwater tilapian fish is presented with bilateral
whitish/yellowish spots in the sclerae (86a). There are cysts,
ranging from 1-2 mm in diameter, in the episclera, causing
slight exophthalmia. The detected cysts contain a large
number of mature spores that have a relatively consistent
morphology (86b).
i. What are these spores?
li. How do fish aquire them?
158
86: Answer
86c
Polar
filament
Polar
capsule
Sporoplasm
lodinophilus
vacuole
I μm
86 i. The morphological features and dimensions of the spores
(approximately
10 μm long and 7 μm wide) suggest
Myxobolus dermatobia.M. dermatobia was first described
from the skin cysts of the Japanese eel (Anguilla japonica). It
was reported in the stomach, intestine and gills of wild
Anguilla anguilla in England. It was also reported from
tropical countries in smears from skin, kidneys, liver and
intestines of Tilapia species.
ii. Spores of Myxobolus species are composed of two shell
valves that join at a sutural plan, a sporoplasm that is infective
to the host and two polar filaments that lie coiled within two
polar capsules (86c). When appropriate, hosts ingest the
spores and the polar filaments within the polar capsule are
159
expelled and used for anchoring. Transmission of the parasite
takes place mostly through the water supply, as in other
Myxobolus species. The aquatic oligochaete Tubifex tubifex (a
sludge worm) (the invertebrate host for Myxobolus cerebralis,
the causative agent of salmonid whirling disease) was found
in the same location that the present fish was captured.
87, 88: Questions
87a
87b
87 Il thrift is reported in a group of sheep grazing on Machair
in the west coast of Scotland, UK. Post-mortem examination
160
of an ill ewe reveals a swollen liver with white, fibrotic
lesions beneath its capsular surface (87a) and throughout its
substance (87b)
i. What is the parasitological cause of the problem?
ii. How can the diagnosis be confirmed?
Ili. How can the parasite be treated and controlled?
88 Why is it not unusual to see a few fleas (<l0) on correctly
treated pets?
87, 88: Answers
87c
87d
87i. Dicrocoeliosis, caused by Dicrocoelium dendriticum.
ii. The 5-l0-mm long, lanceolate flukes are seen in incised
affected livers and within bile ducts (87c). Several thousand
flukes are commonly found. Diagnosis depends on
identification of D. dendriticum eggs (87d) in faecal
sedimentation preparations. Eggs are small (~40 x 25 μm),
brown, translucent and operculate, with a flattened side. The
miracidium can be seen within eggs in freshly voided faeces.
lli. Most fasciolicidal anthelmintics are ineffective against D.
dendriticum at the recommended dose rate. Netobimin is
effective at 20 mg/kg (not available in the UK). Albendazole
is effective at 20 mg/kg (twice the dose required to kill adult
161
F. hepatica), while praziquantel is effective when given at the
extremely high dose rate of 50 mg/kg. (Note: Praziquantel is
available in the UK in combination with levamisole, and is
used at a dosage of 3.5 mg/kg for control of Monezia
expansa. Administration at the dosage required to kill D.
dendriticum
 involves  giving  highly
toxicamountsof
levamisole.)
88 Because none of the flea treatments act as repellents and
so the flea has to be on the pet to come into contact with the
product and die. Most flea treatments aim to kill fleas within
24 hours, before they lay eggs.
89, 90: Questions
89
89 A 2-year-old cat is presented with depression, inappetence,
a roughened hair coat, exercise intolerance, weight loss,
weakness, tachycardia, tachypnoea and vomiting. A blood
smear is made (89)
162
i. What is your diagnosis?
li. How do cats become infected with this parasite?
ili. What public health risk is associated with this infection?
90 A veterinary clinic is presented with a 5-year-old Welsh
pony gelding that lives at a private establishment along with a
horse and a Shetland pony. None of the animals leaves the
premises and endoparasites are managed with regular faecal
removal from pasture. Over the last few days the pony has
developed limb ataxia, has fallen over twice and has struggled
to get up. The owner feels that the animal is getting worse. On
evaluation the pony is severely ataxic and hypermetric on the
left forelimb and hindlimb. Haematology reveals an
eosinophilia and monocytosis and  increased fibrinogen
concentration. Analysis of lumbosacral CsF reveals increased
cellularity, with 60% neutrophils, 20% monocytes and 10%
eosinophils, few RBCs and a total protein concentration of 50
g/1.
i.  Which parasites have been associated with aberrant
migration into the nervous system of horses?
ii. What are the options for confirming the parasite aetiology?
Ili. How can this case be managed?
89, 90: Answers
89 i. Feline babesiosis, caused by infection by the
haemoprotozoan Babesia. Many species of Babesia have been
documented in cats. Diagnosis depends on demonstration of
the organism  within erythrocytes or positive serological
testing
ii. Babesia are tick-borne parasites. Ticks of the genera
Ixodes,Dermacentor,Rhipicephalus,Amblyomma and
163
Haemophysalis are known to infest cats and are likely vectors
for transmission. Mechanical transmission via other biting
insects and arthropods may also occur. Transmission via
blood transfusion or vertical transmission from queen to
kittens  is possible. Babesia organisms multiply within
        
merozoites. Ticks become infected on ingestion of parasitized
cat erythrocytes. Within ticks, babesial merozoites undergo
multiple fission resulting in the production of sporozoites
(infective undeveloped cells) within the arthropod salivary
glands. These are then passed during biting via tick saliva into
the host circulation. The adult female tick is considered most
important   in  vector  transmission   as  transstadial   and
transovarial (multiplication in the ovaries and eggs
perpetuating the life cycle over multiple generations)
infections occur.
ili. The organism does not infect humans. However, cats can
harbour ticks which carry other zoonotic agents into the
human environment.
90 i. Aberrant parasite migration causing neurological signs is
rare in horses. The following parasites have been confirmed at
post-mortem examination as being responsible for these
clinical signs: Halicephalobus (Micronema) deletrix - usually
causes no disease in horses, but there are more case reports of
this parasite than any other; Strongylus vulgaris and S.
equinus, especially L4s and L5s, are involved in thrombi
formation leading to asymmetric disease in the brain and,
occasionally, the spinal cord; Draschia megastoma - usually
associated with granulomatous lesions in the stomach and
mild gastritis; Setaria species - usually cause no significant
effects; Angiostrongylus cantonensis - aberrant migration and
usually causes no disease in horses; Hypoderma species -
164
horses are accidental hosts of warble fly larvae.
ii. Confirmation is based on history, clinical signs and ruling
out all other likely causes, which include trauma, fracture,
neoplasia and abscess. Protozoal and viral causes of
meningoencephalitis  should  be  considered.  Post-mortem
examination offers a definitive diagnosis.
ili. Management of this type of parasitic case is often
unrewarding and options available include the administration
of
anti-inflammatory
drugs   and
1 parasiticides (e.g.
benzimidazoles).
91, 92: Questions
91 True or false?
i. The pathological damage associated with Nematodirus
infection is   caused  by  adult
tworms, which
 migrate
extensively within the mucosa of the small intestine.
ii. Treatment of cattle grubs (Hypoderma bovis infestation)
outside the recommended time scale is contraindicated.
ii. Collies are tolerant to treatment with ivermectin
iv. The use of ML treatment to control Psoroptes scabies in
cattle should not have any effect on anthelmintic efficacies
against nematodes.
165
92
92 This insect (92) was collected off the fleece of a ewe.
i. What is it? Describe its characteristic features.
i. What is its significance?
li. How would you control it?
91, 92: Answers
9
166
91 i. False. Once ingested it is the larvae, not the adult worms,
that cause damage
by  large  numbers  simultaneously
burrowing into the gut, causing massive destruction and
inflammation. A significant factor in mortality is that
pathology can occur before the development of the adult stage
in heavy infections (ie. before eggs can be found in the
faeces), which makes diagnosis challenging. Thus, diagnosis
is difficult during the prepatent period, but during the patent
period diagnosis is easily made on the basis of the
characteristic eggs (91).
ii. True. Killed migrating larvae stimulate a hypersensitivity
reaction, inflammation, pressure on spines and paralysis,
especially in hindlimbs.
ii. False. Collies are sensitive to treatment with ivermectin
because of a mutation in the multidrug resistance gene
(MDR7) (see case 123). These dogs become intoxicated and
possibly die when exposed to ivermectin.
iv. False. ML treatment against Psoroptes scabies could also
select for resistant nematode populations and lead to reduced
anthelmintic efficacies.
92 i. A sheep ked (Melophagus ovinus), a 46 mm long,
wingless, hairy fly, with a short broad head, a brown thorax
and a large sac-like abdomen. Legs are strong and end with
stout claws. Sheep keds live on various body parts, especially
the neck, shoulders and belly. The entire life cycle is spent on
the host sheep.
ii. Anaemia may occur because keds pierce the skin with their
mouthparts and suck blood. The piercing mouthparts cause
infection. Ked bites cause pruritus over much of the host's
body; sheep will often bite, scratch and rub themselves,
damaging the fleece. The excrement of the keds causes
167
permanent discolouration, which can reduce the value of the
wool. Heavy infestations can considerably reduce the
condition of the host. Keds also transmit Trypanosoma
melophagium, a non-pathogenic protozoan parasite found in
the blood of sheep. Parasite worry and decreased appetite
result in less growth and, possibly, weight loss.
ili. Dips and sprays are effective and treatment should be
effective control when used during routine parasite contro]
programmes. Shearing reduces ked populations and removes
many pupae and adults. Therefore, shearing before lambing
and subsequent treatment of the ewes with insecticides that
have a residual activity of ≥3-4 weeks to control the
remaining keds can significantly reduce the possibility of
lambs becoming heavily infested. The keds that emerge from
the pupae are also killed.
93, 94: Questions
168
93a
93b
93 A debilitated, 10-year-old Simmental-cross cow is seen
during April (northern hemisphere) to be covered in 2-3 mm
long dark-bodied lice (93a). Several animals in a group of
yearling Angus-cross cattle on a neighbouring farm are noted
to spend long periods of time rubbing against fixed objects or
nibbling at their flanks. Patchy areas of hair loss are seen over
their bodies. Brown, 1.5-2.0 mm long lice (93b) are seen in
hair partings over the necks and backs of affected cattle.
Which louse species are involved at each farm?
94 You are asked to evaluate a 10-year-old Cob gelding in
March (northern hemisphere). The horse is biting his distal
forelimbs and stamping his feet. The feather hairs are broken.
169
There are no abnormalities elsewhere on the coat. The horse
has been getting progressively worse over the previous week
and bathing the distal limbs with chlorhexidine has not
improved the clinical signs.
i. What is the differential diagnosis in this case?
ii. How would you establish a definitive diagnosis?
ili. How would you manage the potential parasitic causes of
this condition?
93,94: Answers
93c
93 Lice are easily visible to the naked eye and can be picked
offtheir host and examinedmicroscopically.The
Simmental-cross cowis infested with Linognathus vituli
(long-nosed cattle sucking lice), which are identifiable by
their long, narrow and pointed heads. Linognathus are
differentiated from Haematopinus species (other sucking lice)
by having no ocular points and their second and third pairs of
legs are larger than the first pair and end in large claws. In
contrast, Haematopinus species have prominent ocular points,
legs of equal size and distinct sclerotized paratergal plates,
which are visible on abdominal segments. The Angus-cross
170
cattle are infested with Bovicola bovis chewing lice, which
are identifiable by their smaller size and broad heads with
biting mouthparts. Adult female lice glue their eggs to the
cattle hairs (93c). Eggs hatch within 10-15 days and nymphs
develop through three moults to become adults within 2-3
weeks. Long hair and a warm moist environment close to the
skin surface favour louse development, hence the most severe
infestations are seen in housed cattle during late winter.
Transmission requires relatively close animal contact.
94 i. Includes the sucking louse Haematopinus asini,
chorioptic mange, Trombicula autumnalis, Dermatophilus
congolensisandHabronema species
ii. Identification of lice and eggs, hair brushing, skin biopsy,
 sn ,    sd 
scabs. The time of year will also guide the likely diagnosis.
Lice and chorioptic mange will often be identified in the
winter, Habronema in late spring and summer, and D.
congolensis at wet, warm times.
ili. Oral ivermectin may be effective for chorioptic mange
and, failing that, topical drugs. Management of sucking lice
includes administration of oral ivermectin on 3 occasions
every 2 weeks. Other precautions with lice include cleaning
all tack and grooming supplies and decontaminating the
stable. Some horses with habronemosis will respond to a
single dose of oral ivermectin, whereas others will require
anti-inflammatories (corticosteroids, DMSO). ‘Red mites’ (T.
autumnalis)canoftenbeidentifiedunder thescabsonthe
distal limbs and topical insecticides are often effective for
treatment.
171
95, 96: Questions
95 i. What are the potential consequences of the infestations
diagnosed in the animals described in case 93?
li. How can the problem at each farm be treated?
96
96 A 2-year-old female lop eared rabbit is presented with
signs of aural discomfort, head shaking and ear rubbing of 2
weeks’ duration. Physical examination reveals occlusion of
the ear canals with a dry brown exudate (96)
i. What is the most likely diagnosis?
ii. What tests would you perform to establish the diagnosis?
ili. How might the disease progress if left untreated?
iv. What are the treatment options?
95, 96: Answers
95 i. Heavy sucking louse infestation can result in anaemia
and the presence of lice is a cause of low-grade pruritus.
Chewing lice feed on skin debris from the base of hairs. Hair
172
balls are often found on post-mortem examination within the
rumens of infested calves. Animals with heavy sucking or
chewing louse burdens often show ill thrift, but there is little
evidence to show that louse infestation per se causes
significant weight loss. The lice probably exploit the fact that
  u 'o o d u  s ou 
most ectoparasitic infestations, the presence of lice leads to a
localized allergic skin reaction, which can cause hide damage,
referred to as ^cockle'. Damaged hides are only apparent after
they have been tanned, so cannot readily be tracked back to
the farm of origin. Therefore, the substantial cost is borne by
the farming, abattoir and tanning industries. L. vituli has been
implicated  in  transmission  of  bovine anaplasmosis  and
theileriosis.
ii. While there is little evidence to show any effect on
production, debilitated animals will always benefit from
removal of lice. Effective control requires treatment of all
in-contact cattle within a period of time govermned by the
and ML pour-ons kill both sucking and chewing lice, but they
donot eradicate them. Chewing
louseresistanceto
pyrethroids has been documented. MLs administered as
endectocide injections are effective against sucking lice, but
not against chewing lice.
96 i. Infestation with the rabbit ear mite, Psoroptes cuniculi.
ii.Otoscopic
  examination  followed   by  microscope
examination of aural debris mounted in potassium hydroxide
or  mineral  oil.   Although microscopical examination is
0.75 mm long) may be visible without magnification.
lli. Secondary bacterial infection is common. Rupture of the
tympanic membrane can occur, leading to otitis media/interna
173
with associated clinical signs such as head tilt. The mite can
occasionally cause lesions on the body.
iv. Ivermectin (0.4 mg/kg SC every 10-14 days for 3 doses) is
usually curative. Altermatively, selamectin (8-16 mg/kg
for 2 doses). Crusts will resolve with treatment, but may be
softened by instilling mineral oil into the affected ear canals.
rabbit, even under sedation, so only the minimum amount of
material should be removed. NSAIDs (carprofen [2-4 mg/kg]
or meloxicam [0.3-0.6 mg/kg] SC or PO) are indicated for
analgesia and to reduce inflammation. Acaricidal ear drops
       
acaricidal benefit.
97: Question
174
97b
216
PL6
97 Four mouthparts (97a-d), of four different fly species, are
pictured here. What are these flies, and what is the
significance of each?
97: Answer
97 a. Stomoxys calcitrans (stable fly’ or ^biting house fly'). It
has a bayonet-like, needle-sharp proboscis which, when at
rest, protrudes forward from the head. Stable fly mouthparts
are relatively coarse compared with needle-sharp mosquito
mouthparts. Both male and female stable flies are blood
feeders, feeding on any warm-blooded animal, although
horses are the preferred hosts. Stable flies are mechanical
175
vectors of anthrax, surra and equine infectious anaemia, and
the IH for Habronema muscae, a nematode found in the
stomach of horses.
b. Tsetse fly (Glossina species), an important blood-feeding
fly found in Africa. Both sexes are blood feeders. Their long,
forward-directing, biting mouthparts can be easily seen when
the flies are at rest. Tsetse flies serve as the IH for several
species of trypanosomes that cause fatal diseases in domestic
animals (nagana) and humans (African sleeping sickness).
c. Calliphora species (blue bottle flies’ or “blow flies').
Adult blow flies do not bite because they have mouthparts for
sponging only, but the larvae can be harmful and cause
myiasis in somegeographic
Cregions.Calliphoraare
in forensic entomological investigations in assessing time
intervals since death. In sheep, blow flies are attracted to, and
lay eggs on, fleece contaminated with faeces, urine, blood or
body fluids. Although Calliphora maggots feed on dead
tissue, they can cause considerable harm to animals (e.g. skin
irritation, reduced animal growth and productivity and
secondary    bacterial
1infection).(
Calliphora have been
implicated in the transmission of some taeniid tapeworms.
d. House fly (Musca domestica), which is closely associated
with humans, livestock, poultry and companion animals.
House flies do not bite because they have fleshy, retractable
around organic wastes. House flies can feed on exposed
blood, sweat, saliva, tears and other body fluids of animals.
Animals respond by shaking their heads, switching their tails
and becoming restless. Importantly, house flies have
significant potential  for transmission of diseases of both
veterinary and public health implication. They can act as a
vector for transmission of Escherichia coli, Salmonella
176
Shigella, Campylobacter and Enterococcus to animals and
humans. They serve as IH for two horse nematodes,
Habronema muscae and Draschia megastoma, which cause
gastric and cutaneous habronemosis, respectively. They also
act as host for the chicken tapeworm, Choanotaenia
infundibulum.
98, 99: Questions
98 It is September (northern hemisphere) and you are asked to
evaluate a Thoroughbred Irish draught-cross gelding who has
been stamping his feet and biting at his legs for the previous
14 days. The owner washed the limbs with chlorhexidine and
administered oral ivermectin 10 days ago, which has not
improved the clinical signs. On examination of the limbs the
hairs are broken and in some non-traumatized areas there is
evidence of papules and wheals. Some of these lesions have
red centres.
i. What is the most likely diagnosis, and what are other
possible diagnoses for the condition in this case?
ii. What stage of the life cycle of this parasite causes clinical
disease?
ili. How would you treat this condition?
177
99 Several Belgium Blue cattle are suffering from severe
dermatitis and pruritus (99). Psoroptic mange infestations
have been reported on the farm in previous years. Despite the
application of acaricide sprays on the affected animals every 3
weeks, the problem seems to escalate. How would you
manage this problem?
98,99: Answers
178
98
98 i. Infestation with Neotrombicula autumnalis larvae (98)
(the red centres of undisturbed lesions represent the
trombiculid  larvae).  Other differentials  include  chorioptic
mange, habronemosis and infestation with Dermatophilus
congolensis. Although Chorioptes is a possible cause of the
clinical signs, there should have been some improvement
following administration of oral ivermectin, although there
have been some reports of ivermectin resistance of this mite.
It is a little late in the year for Habronema lesions, which are
associated with the response to deposition of infective larvae
by flies and are usually identified in late spring and summer.
The lesions are more ulcerated rather than simple papules or
wheals. D. congolensis usually appears initially as paintbrush
lesions, which progress to moist crusts. This animal appears
more pruritic than would be expected with D. congolensis.
i. Larval stage. Adult mites are free-living and lay eggs in
vegetation in a variety of areas. Larvae hatch and attach
themselves to a variety of mammalian species. They inject
digestive enzymes into the skin, the inflammatory response to
which leads to severe pruritus. Larvae then feed on digested
179
epithelial cells. After feeding on the hosts, larvae fall to the
ground and develop into free-living nymphs and then adults.
ili. Avoid areas where the horse has been in contact with
larvae, kill larvae using topical insecticides and manage the
host's inflammatory response when severe. Short courses of
oral glucocorticosteroids will reduce the inflammation and
pruritus. If areas have become secondarily infected due to
self-trauma, oral antimicrobials may be required.
99 Once it is confirmed that Psoroptes ovis is the mite
causing the skin lesions, all animals on the farm should be
treated with injectable ivermectin (0.2 mg/kg). A second
treatment should be given 10 days later. A herd visit and skin
scrapings should be done 9 days after the 2nd treatment. All
animals with acute signs and/or live mites in the scraping
should be treated again as described above. A subsequent visit
to the farm should be made 9 days after the second treatment
and skin scrapings re-examined from animals with lesions or
from animals that are treated a second time. In practice, more
  g    s   
formulations of MLs (e.g. doramectin, moxidectin) are
available for control of psoroptic mange (0.2 mg/ kg), but not
in lactating dairy cattle. Treated cattle should be isolated in
quarantine for 2 weeks after treatment before they are
reintroduced to the healthy herd.
100,101: Questions
180
100a
100b
100 A farmer has a small flock of Suffolk sheep (two rams,
30 ewes, 43 lambs). It is June (northern hemisphere) and
during the past week, three 3-month-old lambs have lost
weight and appear unthrifty. One of the lambs died this
morning, and one of the remaining sick lambs has brown,
watery diarrhoea. The flock has been on pasture for about 6
weeks and all animals were dewormed with fenbendazole just
before pasture turn-out. The lambs were also dewormed 2
weeks ago. The rams and ewes all appear healthy. Physical
181
examination of the two sick lambs reveals pale ocular (100a)
and vulvar mucous membranes. The perineum of the lamb
with diarrhoea is stained with watery faeces (100b).
i. What parasites are eliminated with fenbendazole?
li. What diseases or conditions should be considered in a
differential diagnosis?
ili. What is the FAMACHA system, and how is it used?
10la
101 A 10-year-old guenon is presented with diarrhoea and
abdominal pain. Characteristic barrel-shaped helminth eggs
(101a) with clear, prominent bipolar plugs are detected by
faecal flotation.
i. What helminth genus would most likely produce eggs that
fit the description of those seen in the faecal specimen?
ii. What is the common name of this helminth?
Ili. Describe its life cycle.
iv. How would you manage this patient?
100, 101: Answers
100 i. Adult and larval forms of nematodes and cestodes
Fenbendazole has minimal effects on trematodes (e.g. liver
182
flukes), has a wide margin of safety and can be used in
pregnantewes.
ii. Pale mucous membranes suggest anaemia associated with
blood loss in an animal of this age. Haemonchus contortus, a
nematode parasite that infects the abomasum, is associated
with blood loss and, potentially, with hypoproteinaemia and
emaciation/weight loss. Differentials for diarrhoea in a lamb
of this age include: coccidiosis; enteric helminth parasitism
(Teladorsagia, Trichostrongylus, Cooperia, Nematodirus,
Trichuris,Bunostomum,Strongyloides); Salmonella species
infection; Yersinia species infection; Campylobacter jejuni
infection; and change in diet (animals recently turned out onto
lushpasture).
ili. An on-farm system used for classifying animals by the
degree of anaemia, based on the colour of the conjunctivae.
Since anaemia is the primary effect from infection with H.
contortus, this system is useful for making treatment
    s   
require treatment based on this scheme, and thus the chance
of development of resistance to anthelminthics is minimized.
101 i. Trichuris species. Trichuris trichiura is the species that
infects humans and non-human primates.
ll. ^Whipworm', because the adult worm resembles a whip
(101b). This nematode has a long, slender, thread-like
anterior portion (whip portion) and a thicker posterior portion
(whip handle). The adult male worm is smaller than the
female and has a coiled tail.
ili. T. trichiura has a direct life cycle. Eggs are passed in the
faeces of the definitive host (guenon in this case). After
approximately 2 weeks in moist soil, eggs become mature
(i.e. contain Lls), and at this time they are infective. Animal
infection with T. trichiura is acquired by ingestion of food or
183
water containing embryonated eggs. The shell is digested in
the small intestine. Worms develop in the large intestine.
They attach by inserting their slender anterior ends into the
intestinal mucosal epithelium. In about 3 months the adult
worm begins to lay eggs.
iv. Prevention of infection requires adherence to good
hygiene practices and avoidance of contaminated food or
water, as well as not using faeces as fertilizer. Mebendazole
and albendazole are effective drugs for treatment of
whipworm infection.
10lb
102, 103: Questions
102a
184
102 A necropsy on a 2-year-old male goose showed multiple
small white structures within the large intestine. Low-power
microscopy revealed these parasites (102a).
i. What is this parasite, and what is its significance?
ii. How did the goose become infected?
ili. What measures can be taken to prevent this infection?
103
103 Necropsy of the dead lamb in case 100 reveals a thin
animal with a moderately distended abdomen. The skeletal
musculature is a lighter red-brown colour than normal. The
blood is slightly more watery than normal. All mucous
membranes are pale pink to white. There is very little
mesenteric or perirenal fat, and the epicardial fat is clear and
gelatinous (serous atrophy). The abomasum contains dark
brown to black, granular material and numerous white to tan,
thread-like, 2-4 cm long Haemonchus contortus
(103)
Intestinal contents are fluid and brown.
i. How do you interpret the necropsy findings?
ii. What types of strongyles are associated with diarrhoea in
sheep?
102, 103: Answers
185
102b
102 i. The fluke Notocotylus attenuatus. Severe infection with
these flukes can lead to significant losses in production. In
live animals diagnosis is made by faecal examination and
detection of specific eggs (102b). Eggs are small (~20 μm in
length, 10 μm in width), ovoid, with two long filaments (200
μm) at the polar plugs, and they already contain miracidia.
ii. Adult flukes live in the caecum of the goose and produce
eggs that are passed in the faeces. When the eggs reach water,
miracidia hatch and penetrate into the snail IH (Galba pervia,
Lymnaea auricularia, Lymnaea peregra). The miracidia
develop into sporocysts, rediae and cercariae. Finally,
cercariae develop into metacercariae in snails or on vegetation
following excretion of cercariae. Geese become infected
when
they
ingests
snails
r  vegetation
containing
or
metacercariae
ili. In endemic areas, control is based on the periodic use of
anthelmintics
S together  with  measures
toreduce
snail
populations. Niclosamide, bithionol and
1praziquantelare
known to be effective against these flukes.
103 i. Haemonchus contortus, Teladorsagia circumcincta and
Trichostrongylus axei commonly infect the abomasum. Of
these three, H. contortus is most often associated with blood
186
loss. The dark brown to black material in the abomasal
contents suggests digested blood or haemorrhage, and the
paleness of the musculature and mucous membranes indicates
anaemia. Serous atrophy of fat, and lack of body fat in
general, indicate significant weight loss. Hypoproteinaemia
with H. contortus infection. Diarrhoea would be more likely
caused by other parasites, which would make a faecal
flotation examination warranted.
li. Trichostrongylus species (mentioned above), Cooperia
species and Nematodirus species. Their life cycles are similar
and ^direct’ (i.e. no IH). It is the adult worms that cause
damage to the GI tract, except Nematodirus, where most of
the pathological damage is attributed to the extensive
destruction and burrowing through the mucosa of the small
intestine by the migrating larvae. Diarrhoea is associated with
maldigestion and malabsorption
104, 105: Questions
104 True or false?
     a     
compromised by heartworms.
ii. Selamectin is lethal to parasites, but it is safe for dogs, cats
and other mammals
Ili. Because of the effectiveness of current topical medications
for flea infestation in dogs and cats, it is not necessary
additionally to treat the pet's environment.
iv. The Ixodes ricinus tick is known as the ^lone star tick'.
v. Frequent anthelmintic treatment is the single greatest risk
factor for anthelmintic resistance.
vi. Hard ticks have only one host.
187
105a
105b
105 A 2-year-old male Belgian Malinois is presented with
vomiting and haemorrhagic diarrhoea. His condition further
deteriorates resulting  in pyrexia, collapse and  severe
dehydration. The dog is later euthanized at the owner's
request. Post-mortem examination reveals an ileocolic
intussusception (105a) with extensive necrosis, along with
enteric parasitism (105b).
i.
Describe
the
mechanisms
underlying
ileocolic
intussusception.
ii. What nematode parasites may be associated with this
disorder? How do you confirm the diagnosis?
i. What are the treatment options for this infection?
188
104, 105: Answers
104 i. True. Young adult worms are often found in the
branches of the pulmonary arteries, while mature adults can
be found in the main pulmonary arteries and right ventricle in
heavy infection. This leads to physical obstruction of the
pulmonary artery and its branches, impeding blood flow from
the right side of the heart.
ii. True, because the glutamate-gated chloride channels
activated by selamectin do not occur in mammals. Also,
although selamectin can activate other chloride channels in
mammals, such channels are localized to neurons in the CNS
and are thus protected from selamectin by the blood-brain
barrier.
ili. False. Because most of the flea's life cycle is spent off the
host, it is important to treat the environment as well as the pet.
iv. False. The lone star tick is Amblyomma americanum and is
so-called because of the white spot on the female's back.
v. True. Excessively frequent anthelmintic treatment will
greatly diminish refugia and cause parasite populations to be
under continuous selection pressure for resistance
vi. False. Although some hard ticks have only one host, where
the larva, nymph and adult forms develop on the same animal,
some have as many as three hosts
105 i. An ileocolic intussusception occurs when the ileum
invaginates into the colon. Intussusceptions can occur after
death (i.e. as a post-mortem artefact), but in such a case the
invagination    is    easily
reduced.Anantemortem
intussusception cannot be easily reduced, as the invaginated
segment becomes trapped and congested and undergoes
ischaemic necrosis. There is extensive haemorrhage and fibrin
189
receiving segment may also become congested and inflamed.
li. Whipworm (Trichuris vulpis) infection has been suggested
as one cause of ileocolic intussusception, and whipworms
were found in the caecum and large intestine of this dog.
Crypt necrosis  suggestive of  parvovirus  infection  was
identified in the small and large intestine, plus full-thickness
(mucosal  and  transmural)  necrosis of  the  intussuscepted
segment of bowel. Parvovirus infection is believed to be the
primary aetiology, although PCR or other specific testing is
necessary to confirm this diagnosis. Intussusception was
probably secondary to hypermotility caused by the enteritis,
although direct parasitism may also have contributed.
ili. Anthelmintics including fenbendazole, flubendazole,
mebendazole and milbemycin. Trichuris can be difficult to
treat and requires repeated examination and treatment.
Treatment should be repeated three times at monthly intervals
because of the long prepatent period.
106: Question
190
106a
106b
106 Members of a family raising pigs on a small rural farm
develop fever, muscle weakness and oedema of the face and
eyelids after eating raw pork. As part of the investigation,
portions of tongue and diaphragm muscle are taken from
 s s  'ss  d  si r
pork muscle placed directly under a microscope, encysted
larval forms are noted (106a). Histological sections of the
muscle are then prepared (106b)
i. Name this nematode parasite, and describe its host range
and life cycle.
ii. Discuss control measures in places where the nematode is
common.
191
106: Answer
106 i. Trichinella spiralis, the muscle nematode, which
parasitizes pigs, rodents and carnivorous mammals, as well as
humans. After ingestion of infected muscle, digestive
enzymes liberate the larvae from their cysts; these penetrate
the lining of the small intestine and develop in the intestine
wall into sexually mature adults, which are only 1-4 mm
long. The newborm larvae are motile and reach the striated
muscles by the lymphatics and blood stream. There they grow
and curl up in a spiral coil within a cyst (106a). Larvae may
persist in the muscles for a long period of time or they may
die and become mineralized
ii. Control is based on ensuring that pig meat is always well
cooked; using microwave ovens and curing, drying, salting or
smoking are not effective at killing the nematode cysts.
Methods thatinactivateTrichinellalarvaeinclude cooking to
reach a core temperature of >71°C (159.8°F) for at least 1
minute. Freezing at -15°C (5°F) for 3-4 weeks can inactivate
T. spiralis larvae in meat, but this can impose a public health
risk. For example, T: britovi larvae (the second most common
species of Trichinella that may affect human health) in pork
   () -       
t on dn aaans uo (oto-) .8I- ne uazo na asoy ui
weeks and game meat often harbours freeze-resistant species
of Trichinella. Another approach to inactivating Trichinella
larvae is irradiation, but this method is available only in
countries where irradiation of food is permitted. Equally
important is the control of infection in pigs. Pigs at highest
risk for Trichinella infection are those raised on small
holdings with minimal confinement (backyard pigs'),
because they often have access to rodents and wildlife.
192
Control of rats on pig farms is important as they will eat
be allowed to eat carrion, food scraps or other forms of
meat-containing waste.
107, 108: Questions
107a
107 This post-mortem photo (107a) shows the visceral organs
from a 2-year-old female rabbit.
i. Describe the lesions you see and offer an interpretation or
diagnosis.
ii. How would you confirm your diagnosis?
ili. What can be done to prevent this disease in other rabbits
in the herd?
193
108
108 During the course of a zebra culling exercise in East
Africa, a white-backed vulture is found dead. At post-mortem
examination, insect larvae are found in its crop. Histological
examination demonstrates numerous larvae (108).
i. What pathological changes are present, and to what
organism are the changes attributable?
li. What is the life cycle of these larvae?
lli. Do you think the vulture died from this infestation?
iv. Can the parasite affect humans?
107, 108: Answers
107b
194
107 i. There are cystic structures, which look like a bunch of
grapes, on the omen-tum and mesentery. There is also
evidence of peritonitis, with increased abdominal fluid. The
liver is slightly enlarged. A diagnosis of cysticercosis is
likely.
ii. The host specificity, predilection site and the structure and
pattern of the cysticerci support the presumptive diagnosis of
infection by Cysticercus pisiformis (larval stage of the dog
tapeworm Taenia pisiformis). Within each cysticercus cyst
           
cysticercus wall. The microscopical findings of four suckers
and two laps of small hooks from the scolex confirm the
diagnosis(107b)
ili. Regular treatment of dogs using praziquantel can
eliminate adult tapeworms. Nitroscanate and fenbendazole
have efficacy against Taenia. Epsiprantel is marketed in some
countries. Prevention of infection in dogs is possible by
exclusion from their diet of rabbit material containing C.
pisiformis. This is achieved by denying dogs access to
abattoirs and, where possible, by proper disposal of rabbit
carcasses on the farm.
108 i. These are lesions produced by Gasterophilus (botfly)
larvae. The section shows erosion and damage to lining
epithelium with haemorrhage and slight oedema in the
submucosa, and infiltration by mononuclear cells and, in
smaller numbers, eosinophils and heterophils. The lesions
shown are far fewer in number and less in extent than those
seen in the equine stomach, where each larva occupies a
distinct pit produced largely by an inflammatory reaction.
ii. Adult botflies lay eggs on hairs of horses and zebra. Larvae
emerge, enter the buccal cavity and eventually reach the
stomach, where they attach to the gastric mucosa. The larvae
195
remain in the stomach for several months and finally pass out
through the rectum to pupate on the ground.
ili. The crop lesions, although fairly severe, are unlikely to
have proved fatal. Larvae are often ingested by vultures, but
in the majority of cases they do not attach to the crop wall.
The vulture may have died for some other reason. There is
concern about the decline of vultures in Asia and the use of
diclofenac has been shown to be responsible.
iv. Humans are occasionally affected by this parasite.
resulting in creeping eruption under the skin. This is caused
by the first instar larvae, which usually develop no further and
are fairly easily removed.
109: Question
109a
109 A 2-year-old female rabbit is presented for diarrhoea, hair
loss, anorexia and weight loss. A fetid smell emanates from
the perineum and tail fold region, and dermatological
examination reveals traumatized skin with extensive tissue
196
necrosis. These larvae (109a) are collected from the skin
lesions and preserved in 70% ethanol for examination.
i. What is your diagnosis?
ii. How did the rabbit acquire this problem?
i. What is the prognosis? What factors make rabbits more
vulnerable to this problem?
iv. How should this rabbit be treated?
v. How could this condition be prevented?
109: Answer
109b
109 i. ^Fly strike', also known as ^blowfly strike or myiasis'
an infestation of skin with maggots (larvae) of certain species
of Diptera flies (mainly blowfly [109b][Lucilia sericata] in
the UK and Europe; botfly larvae [Cuterebra species] in the
USA).
ii. Fly strike occurs when flies lay their eggs around a rabbit's
         
with faeces and/or urine are attractive to flies and oviposition.
Eggs hatch into maggots, which mature and eat away at
surrounding tissues, producing varying degrees of pathology
        
development.
197
ili. Favourable if a diagnosis is made early, the lesions are not
advanced and the case is managed appropriately. However,
due to the progressive nature of this infestation, any delay in
diagnosis or treatment may result in  severe pathogenic
effects, multiple infestation and death. Rabbits suffering from
obesity, dental problems, diarrhoea, arthritis and skin wounds
are at high risk of fly strike. Flies are attracted to rabbits with
dirty bottoms or wet fur. Rabbits living in dirty hutches are
more susceptible, as flies like damp and smelly conditions
iv. Intravenous fluid therapy to compensate for dehydration
and fluid losses, which may be significant if large skin areas
are affected. Supportive intravenous nutrition given that the
rabbit may have been ill and anorexic for a number of days.
Administration of analgesics and NSAIDs to eliminate the
shock and pain resulting from the considerable damage to the
epidermal, dermal and subdermal tissues. Removal of all L2s
and L3s under anaesthesia or heavy sedation to minimize
stress and discomfort. Removal of eggs and Lls, using a flea
Chemical treatment to kill or halt the growth of any remaining
eggs and larvae (e.g. cyromazine, imidacloprid, ivermectin,
permethrin). Antibiotics if there is a concomitant bacterial
infection. Wound management, including debridement of
necrotic tissue and hydrogel and hydrocolloid dressings to
encourage wound healing. Identification and treatment of any
underlying infection or problem (e.g. faecal soiling, urine
scalding) that attracts flies. Advanced cases where large
numbers of L2s/L3s have attacked the deeper tissues carry a
poor prognosis. Euthanasia is warranted in such cases.
v. Set up fly-screens on hutches and runs to prevent flies
laying their eggs on rabbits. Use insect repellents. Understand
and prevent the risk factors likely to make a rabbit prone to
fly strike. Regular checking and cleaning of the rabbit,
198
removal of dirty bedding every day and disinfection of
hutches weekly are recommended.
110, 111: Questions
110
110 These parasites (110)
were found inthe liver of a
5-year-old Holstein cow at necropsy.
i. What type of parasite is pictured here?
ii. What are the clinical and pathological effects of these
parasites?
li. How would you control these parasites?
iv. Can these parasites infect humans?
199
111 This parasite (111) has a distinct head, thorax and
abdomen, legs adapted for grasping hairs and is found on a
cat.
i. What is it? How does it live? What is its significance?
ii. Describe the life cycle of this parasite.
i. How would you control infestation by this parasite?
110, 111: Answers
110 i. The small liver fluke Dicrocoelium dendriticum, also
known as the ^lancet fluke'. Adult flukes live in the bile ducts
and gall bladder of domestic and wild grazing ruminants
(cattle, buffaloes, sheep, goats, deer, camelids) and
occasionally affect rabbits, pigs, dogs and horses.
li. Dicrocoelium rarely cause clinical manifestations, but
severe infection can lead to weight loss, anaemia, oedema and
cirrhosis and economic losses attributable to reduced milk and
200
meat production. The flukes induce chronic inflammation,
fibrosis and eventual cirrhosis of the liver and thickening.
distension and effacement of the bile duct. Pathological
damage is attributed to mechanical irritation by the buccal
stylets of the flukes.
ili. Proper husbandry practices and strategic treatment of
animals. Benzimidazoles (e.g. albendazole, fenbendazole,
mebendazole,  thiabendazole)
  and   pro-benzimidazoles
(netobimin, thiophanate) have been used, but at higher doses
than those used against other helminth infections.
iv. Although uncommon, Dicrocoelium infections have been
reported in humans. However, the finding of Dicrocoelium
eggs in human faecal specimens is occasionally seen as an
indication of false (spurious) infection caused by ingestion of
beef or other species livers containing adult flukes.
Differentiation between true and false infection requires
repeated stool examinations of samples from patients with a
liver-free diet and, possibly, examination of duodenal or
biliary fluid.
111 i. Felicola subrostratus, the biting louse of cats. It is the
only louse species affecting cats. Predilection sites include
face, back and pinnae where they feed on skin scales and
secretions from skin lesions, causing non-specific lesions
characterized by scaling, papules, crusts, pruritus and a dull
coat. The damage to the skin from scratching may result in
alopecia and crusts, inflammatory excoriation and secondary
bacterial involvement.
li. F. subrostratus is highly host specific and a permanent
ectoparasite, with survival off host limited to 2-3 days. It has
an   incomplete metamorphosis and  transmission  occurs
essentially by direct contact. Eggs are attached to the hair coat
and after 10-20 days give rise to nymphal stages followed by
201
the reproductive imago (adult). The complete life cycle may
require from 4-6 weeks.
ili. The entire life cycle is spent on the host, so louse control
primarily involves treating infested cats with insecticides.
Biting lice on cats can be successfully treated with a single
topical spot-on application of selamectin. All pets in the
household should be treated. Bedding and grooming
equipment from infested animals should be cleaned and
disinfected.   Adequate   nutrition    makes   animals  less
susceptible to lice.
112, 113: Questions
23
112 A 2-year-old female parakeet is presented with a history
of anorexia, vomiting, tremors and lethargy. Postmortem
examination reveals numerous large cyst-like protozoan
structures in cardiac muscles (112a).
i. What are these cysts?
ii. What is their significance in relation to this bird's clinical
history?
Ili. What is the likely source of infection by this parasite?
202
113
113 This parasite (113) is found in materials swabbed from
the ears of a 2-vear-old male cat.
i. Describe this parasite and its habitat. On what does it feed?
ii. What is its significance?
lli. How would you control infestation by this parasite?
112, 113: Answers
203
112b
112 i. The morphology of these cystic structures is consistent
with the megaloschizont stage of Haemoproteus species, a
ii. Haemoproteus usually causes an inapparent or mild, acute
infection. It is often regarded as non-pathogenic (perhaps
because hosts may become chronic carriers after recovery
from acute infection). In Europe, asymptomatic infections by
Haemoproteus have been observed with an especially high
prevalence
：in songbirds. However, Haemoproteus has
emerged over the past three decades as the cause of fatal
outbreaks among aviary-kept psittacine birds in Australia.
blood-sucking insects including mosquitoes, hippoboscid flies
(112b) and Culicoides species (biting midges). The infective
stage is the sporozoite, which is present in the salivary glands
of the insect vector.
113 i. Otodectes cynotis (ear mite or ear canker mite) occurs
worldwide in the external auditory canal of dogs, foxes, cats.
ferrets and other carnivores. Occasionally, this mite has been
reported in ruminants and humans. The mite is about 0.4 mm
long, with a body flattened top to bottom and four pairs of
204
long legs. The epimeres (apodemes) extending from the bases
of legs 1 and 2 are joined. All developmental stages are found
on the surface of the external ear canal, without being buried
in the skin. The mite feeds on desquamated epithelial cells
and aural exudates, but occasionally the mites pierce the skin
to feed on blood, serum or lymph
ii. The clinical importance of O. cynotis in pets is very high
Fifty percent of otitis externa cases in dogs and 85% of cases
in cats are caused by O. cynotis. Mites are very annoying to
cats. They cause severe irritation and thick, red crusts in the
external ears. Eventually, infested ears droop and show a
discharge. If the infestation is untreated, infection may spread
from the outer to the inner ear, with possible serious bacterial
involvement. The tympanic membrane may be perforated and
otitis media and nervous signs (e.g. convulsions) can develop.
ili. Affected ears should be cleaned and an acaricide applied
Antibiotics should be given in severe cases to combat
secondary bacterial infections
114, 115: Questions
14b
114 From July to September, seven cows from a herd of 24 in
Southern China became ill, with fever above 40°C (104°F),
photophobia and subcutaneous oedema. Some cows also had
205
erythematous    udders    and    exhibited   hypersalivation.
depression and inappetence. The skin of many cows was
thickened and firm, with areas of folding, cracking, hair loss
and accumulation of debris (scurf) on the surface (114a).
i. What abnormality is shown in the scleral conjunctiva of this
cow (114b)?
ii. What is your diagnosis?
li. How does a cow become infected with the causative
agent?
iv. How might you treat this condition?
115 A 4-year-old female llama is presented because of a
3-day history of lethargy and ataxia involving all four limbs.
Treatment with flunixin, ivermectin and fenbendazole is
instituted, but the llama's condition continues to deteriorate
over the next 5 days. The animal becomes recumbent and has
difficulty rising, and euthanasia is elected.
i. In view of the treatment protocol selected for this animal,
what is the major differential in this case?
ii. What is the life cycle of the agent that causes this disease?
114, 115: Answers
206
114 i. There are several, conspicuous white cysts, up to 1.5
mm in size
ii. The clinical signs and detection of Besnoitia cysts in the
scleral  conjunctiva or bradyzoite-containing  tissue cysts
(114c)in the thickened skin confirm the diagnosis as
besnoitiosis. Besnoitia besnoiti is the causative agent in cattle.
Characteristic thickening of the skin, accompanied by the
changes described for this cow, is why besnoitiosis is
sometimes referred to as ^elephant skin disease'
ili. The most likely route of infection is through ingestion of
sporulated oocysts from cat faeces. Other possible routes
include mechanical spread by biting flies. Cattle feeding on
skin lesions of other animals may be another route of
transmission.
iv. There is no specific effective drug at the present time,
although albendazole and robenidine hydrochloride are
considered the drugs of choice for acute bovine besnoitiosis
Praziquantel is effective for chronic besnoitiosis in cattle.
Suramin and antimony preparations (1 %) can relieve the signs
and oxytetracycline can have some therapeutic potential
against B. besnoiti.
207
115i.Ivermectiniscommonlygivenwhen
Parelaphostrongylus  tenuis  larval  migration  is  suspected.
White-tailed deer are the natural hosts for this parasite, but
camelids are highly susceptible aberrant hosts. The parasite
migrates through the CNS and can cause signs related to brain
and/or spinal cord involvement.
li. Adult worms reside in the veins and sinuses of the dura
mater of the brain, where eggs are laid. Eggs travel through
the bloodstream to the lungs, hatch into larvae in the alveoli
and are then coughed up, swallowed, passed in the faeces and
eaten by small slugs and snails. Larvae mature in 3-4 weeks
in these IHs. When deer eat infected slugs and snails, larvae
penetrate the stomach wall, enter nerves and travel to the
spinal cord, where they mature for 20-30 days. Adult worms
then move into the CSF and brain. Once in the brain, adults
pass through the dura mater and into the veins and sinuses.
The entire life cycle takes 82-91 days. Llamas become
infected by eating slugs and snails containing P. tenuis larvae.
These follow the same path to the spinal cord as in deer, but
in the unnatural host the parasite essentially ^gets lost' and
causes damage to the nervous tissue of the spinal cord and
brain (instead of winding up in the dura). Infection is not
contagious from one llama to another.
116, 117: Questions
116 i. With regard to the llama in case 115, what are the
typical gross and histological lesions associated with parasitic
migration through the CNS, especially in aberrant hosts?
l1. What is the antiparasitic spectrum of ivermectin?
li. What is the antiparasitic spectrum of fenbendazole?
208
17
117 Studies  on  endangered  Moorean  gastropod  snails
included
post-mortem
examination
and
histological
investigation of all snails that died. A section of the soft
tissues of one of the snails revealed these worm-like
organisms (117).
i. What are these organisms?
ii. Is there evidence of a host response?
li. What is the clinical significance of these organisms?
116, 117: Answers
209
116a
116b
116 i. Gross lesions may appear as areas of discolouration
associated with tissue damage
 (degeneration, necrosis),
inflammation and/or haemorrhage. The linear or tract-like
nature (116a) is characteristic of a lesion caused by migration
of an adult or larval parasite. Histologically, the reaction is
typically granulomatous (dominated by macrophages), with
tissue debris and possibly haemorrhage. Eosinophils may be
present (116b). The culprit nematode is not often found, as it
will have ^moved on' in response to the host's reaction.
ii. Ivermectin kills nematode helminth parasites and many
ectoparasites. It is not effective against trematodes or
210
cestodes.
lli. Fenbendazole is effective against adult and larval forms of
nematodes and cestodes. It has minimal effects on trematodes.
117 i. Nematode worms of uncertain identity
ii. Although snails can be infected in vivo by nematodes, the
autolysed appearance of some of the tissue and the absence of
a cellular response in this specimen suggest that these worms
invaded the snail post mortem. Free-living nematodes abound
in the environment (in soil, on plants and in surface films of
water) and quickly colonize a dead or dying animal.
lli. Probably none. However, the relevance of these worms in
terms of captive breeding of rare species is that the detection
and removal of sick or dead snails may not be as efficient as it
should
1be.Improved
d management,
especially
regular
inspection of cages, may be advisable.
118, 119: Questions
118
211
118 As part of the diagnostic work-upfor an anorexic
Hermann's tortoise, you perform a faecal flotation (118).
i. Name the parasite seen in the flotation.
ii. Is it clinically significant?
li. How would you treat this animal?
119 i. Match the anthelmintic drugs listed below with their
mechanism of action.
a.Fenbendazole
1. GABA receptor agonist and stimulates inhibitory GABA
transmission at the parasite neuromuscular junction, leading to
flaccid paralysis of adult worms.
b.Levamisole
2.Binds to the nematode beta-tubulin subunit,preventing its
dimerization and subsequent polymerization during microtubule
assembly.
c. Piperazine
 3. Acts as agonist at nematade nicotinic acetylcholine receptor,
causing worm paralysis.
d.Abamectin
4.Stimulates the permanent opening of ligand-gated chloride
channels, especially glutamate-gated channels in the membrane
of neurones in invertebrates, causing an ion imbalance in the
nervous system, resulting in paralysis.
e.Emodepside
5. Paralyses worms by attacking the receptor Hco-MPTL-1, which is
only present in nematades.This is a unique kind of acetylcholine
receptor.
f.Manepantel
6.A depolarizing neuromuscular blocker that has a cholinergic action
on the musculature of the parasite.
g.Pyrantel
7. Binds to the latrophilin receptor and the Ca2+-activated K+ ion
channel (SLO-1) in the parasite,leading to paralysis and death.
ii. How does resistance develop against an anthelmintic?
ili. What are the most common causes of anthelmintic
resistance?
iv. Describe a protocol for monitoring anthelmintic resistance.
118, 119: Answers
118 i. Eggs of an oxyurid nematode.
ii. Often asymptomatic and in moderate numbers may aid
212
digestion. Heavy burdens may cause debility and occasionally
intestinal obstruction. Oxyurids have a direct life cycle, which
can lead to large increases in worm numbers, especially in
small enclosures.
ii. Fenbendazole is effective when treatment is deemed
necessary. Enclosure hygiene and prompt removal of faeces
aid reduction in reinfection
119 i. (a - 2); (b - 3); (c - 1); (d - 4); (e - 7); (f- 5); (g - 6).
i. Worms employ different strategies to achieve a state of
reduced susceptibility towards a given anthelmintic. These
include: modification of the drug target (e.g. binding site) so
that the drug is no longer recognized; increasing target site
numbers (e.g. neuronal receptors) or amplification of target
genes to overcome the
drug action;1
modification in
metabolism that expels the drug (e.g. upregulation of
P-glycoprotein exporter in helminths); change in the
distribution of the drug in the target parasite that prevents the
drug from getting to its site of action (e.g. increased
sequestration of the drug).
ili. Frequent treatment, treating all animals at the same time,
treating when there are low levels of refugia on pasture,
frequent use of larvicidal drugs, underdosing, introducing
        
treat-and-move strategies.
iv. Anthelmintic resistance should be monitored regularly
Observe and note even the smallest changes in the animal's
behaviour, eating habits, faeces, coat and general condition.
Perform periodic faecal examinations to monitor the efficacy
of the deworming programme and assess the burden of
infection. The type and frequency of deworming can be based
on egg counts (testing before and after using a dewormer and
looking for significant reduction in eggs). Ideally, the count
213
should decrease by 90-100% following treatment. If it does
not, this indicates there is a resistance problem
120, 121: Questions
120a
120 A 3-month-old male goose is submitted for post-mortem
examination. Anorexia, emaciation, diarrhoea, anaemia and
limb muscle weakness are reported by the owner at the time
of submission. Necropsy reveals catarrhal and haemorrhagic
enteritis associated with parasites (120a)
i. What are these parasites, and what are their distinguishing
features?
ii. Describe the life cycle of this parasite.
Ili. What advice would you give to the owner?
214
2
121 Several litters of neonatal piglets raised in the farrowing
rooms of a modern pig farm have scours that are soft, pasty
and grey (121). Most affected piglets are 10-14 days of age
and have poor body condition. The mothers appear normal.
i. Describe the life cycle of the common coccidial parasite
that is the likely diagnosis in these piglets.
i. Outline the gross pathological features associated with this
condition.
iii. What treatment and preventive measures are usually
advised for this particular problem?
120, 121: Answers
120b
215
120i.Tapeworms(Drepanidotaenia[Hymenolepis]
lanceolata). Adults are pale yellow or white in colour and
measure 6.5-9.5 cm in length (120b). The worm has a
spear-shaped head or  scolex bearing attachment organs
(rostellar hooks and suckers), a short unsegmented neck and a
chain ofbody segments.
li. Gravid tapeworm proglottids are passed in the faeces of the
definitive host, in this case the goose. IHs, such as Cyclops
and Diaptomus (two genera of copepods), then ingest the
eggs. The embryo (larva) hatches from the egg in the intestine
of the IH. In 7-13 days the larva develops into a cysticercoid
and remains in the body cavity of the IH until eaten by the
goose. The cysticercoid is activated by bile in the goose and
attaches to the mucosa of the small intestine. Development of
proglottids starts immediately. The prepatent period is about
20days
ili. Deworm adult geese with praziquantel at the beginning of
winter and spring. Implement sound hygiene and management
strategies  to reduce environmental contamination and
transmission of infection.
121 i. The life cycle of Isospora suis includes both asexual
and sexual cycles within the epithelial cells of the intestines
of host piglets. Numerous new-generation oocysts are passed
via the faeces within 5-7 days after uptake of sporulated
oocysts. These oocysts are located on the floor of the
q  s si  n  s 
ii. Post-mortem examination of piglets affected with I. suis
usually shows fibrinous enteritis, which mainly affects the
middle and posterior part of the jejunum.
ili. Treatment is usually with oral or rectally delivered
trimethoprim/sulpha  products  and  electrolytes. No  piglet
vaccines  are  available.  For  prevention,  the  potent
216
anticoccidial drug toltrazuril is recommended as a single oral
dose at 3-4 days of age. The floors of farrowing rooms should
be sterilized using high-pressure hot water. I. suis oocysts are
known to be resistant to many disinfectants. However, there
have been some reports of a reduction in the number of
oocysts when compounds that are able to penetrate the oocyst
wall are used (cresolic acid, chlorine or ammonia in a 50%
solution).
122, 123: Questions
122
122 A helmeted guinea fowl, part of a wildlife health study in
East Africa, is found to have multiple small arthropod
parasites attached to the skin on its face. These are collected
and mounted. One of the parasites is shown (122).
i. What is this parasite?
li. Is it pathogenic?
Ili. How might such an infestation be controlled?
 d e pe psd si io H Po-e-ii  
with generalized tremors, ataxia, disorientation, distress,
dilated pupils, slowed heart rate and hypothermia 18 hours
217
after   accidental  application   of  a  spot-on   jivermectin
preparation by the owner.
i. If the ivermectin preparation caused the neurological signs
in this cat, what would be the underlying mechanism?
ii. How would you treat this cat?
ii. What other animal species can develop ivermectin
intoxication?
122, 123: Answers
122 i. A sticktight flea (Echidnophaga gallinacea), one of the
'sessile’ fleas that remain attached to their host rather than
moving around among the hairs or feathers.
i. Yes, like all fleas. It sucks blood and can make its host
anaemic. Sticktight fleas cause a local inflammatory lesion
and can, especially if the bird scratches itself, provide a portal
of entry for bacterial infections. It may also be capable of
transmitting blood parasites.
ili. Control of infestation can prove difficult. Hygiene is
important as the fleas flourish in dirty conditions, where eggs
shed by attached female fleas lie undisturbed and where the
larvae can grow and metamorphose. Treatment of adult fleas
is best achieved by direct application of a (safe) insecticide
(e.g. pyrethrum-based product). The fleas will also die if
petroleum jelly or some other oily substance is smeared over
them; this blocks the flea's spiracles and prevents it from
breathing
123 i. Ivermectin toxicity can occur when excessive doses
(not only spot-on products) are administered. The observed
clinical signs are attributed to the enhancement of neuronal
inhibition due to ivermectin binding to GABA-gated chloride
218
channels that are confined to the CNS
ii. The prognosis is always guarded. There is no specific
antidote and  therapy is mainly  supportive.  A propofol
infusion can lead to temporary resolution of clinical signs, but
these can return as the cat regains consciousness. Affected
animals may remain recumbent for long periods, therefore
frequent  turning,  appropriate bedding,  physical  therapy,
attentive nursing care and other routine treatment measures
fora recumbent animalare
important. Respiratory,
cardiovascular and nutritional support may be required. With
adequate supportive care most animals can make a full
recovery.
ili. The breeds of dogs most commonly affected are Collies
and Collie-crosses because of a mutation in the multidrug
resistance
egene
(MDR1).This
gene
encodes
for
P-glycoprotein, which restricts the entry of ivermectin into
the brain by an efflux mechanism. Hence, MDRl
P-glycoprotein-lacking dogs have less tolerance for treatment
with ivermectin because their blood-brain barrier becomes
more permeable to ivermectin, leading to accumulation of
ivermectin in the brain and severe signs of neurotoxicosis.
Other breeds (e.g. Australian Shepherd Dogs, Shelties) also
carry the MDR7 mutation. Small birds such as parakeets
(because of their body weight and difficulty in delivering the
appropriate dose) can be overdosed with ivermectin following
treatment for scaly leg mites (Cnemidocoptes mutans).
219
124, 125: Questions
124
124 A captive snake shows clinical signs of dyspnoea,
 including open-mouth breathing. Treatment with antibiotics is
of no avail. The snake dies and postmortem examination
reveals parasites attached to the animal's (one) lung (124).
i. What are these parasites?
lii. Describe their life cycle.
Ili. How might this parasitic infection have been diagnosed in
the live snake?
iv. Are these parasites a danger to humans?
125 A 2.5-year-old Doberman Pinscher is presented with
severe depression, malaise, fever (40.6°C [105°F]) and
tachycardia (120 bpm). Blood results are as below:
220
Parameter
Value
Reference range
RBCs (1012/)
4.17
5.5-8.5
Hb (g/)
115
120-180
HCT (VI)
0.4
0.37-0.55
MCV (fl)
60.5
60-77
MCH (pg)
20.8
19.5-24.5
MCHC (g/)
311
320-360
Platelets (109/)
210
200-500
WBCs (109/1)
0.3
6-17
Segmented neutrophils (109/)
8.1
3.0-11.5
Band neutrophils (109/1)
0
0.0-0.3
Lymphocytes (10°/l)
1.1
1.04.8
Monocytes (10*/)
0.15-1.35
Eosinophils (109/)
0.3
0.10-1.25
Basophils (109/)
0.6
0.0-0.2
i. What is your assessment of the haemogram?
li. What is your differential diagnosis?
i. What diagnostic test is appropriate next?
124, 125: Answers
124 i. Pentastomes (linguatulids or ^tongue worms'). Despite
their worm-like
eappearance, they are more related to
arthropods, with an exoskeleton composed of chitin.
ii. Snakes are the definitive hosts, with wild rodents as IHs.
Female pentastomids lay embryonated eggs in the lung of the
snake. The eggs are then expectorated and swallowed before
being expelled with the faeces. Eggs are eaten by IHs and
 s o   s   
released when the IH is ingested by the snake. They burrow
through the intestinal wall of the snake before migrating to
221
the respiratory tract where they develop into adult
pentastomes.
ili. By one or more of the following: detection of eggs in
faeces or pulmonary fluids; radiography or other imaging
modalities; endoscopic examination of the interior of the lung
using a flexible or rigid endoscope of appropriate (narrow)
diameter.
iv. Yes. Humans can serve as accidental hosts as a result of
handling infected snakes or hand to mouth contamination.
Human infections are not common, but have been reported
(e.g. in Central Africa where snakes are sometimes eaten).
Parasites migrate through the intestine and enter mesenteric
lymph nodes (MLNs), which become enlarged. Nymphs may
be found in many places in addition to the MLNs (e.g. under
pleura of intestinal wall and viscera [liver], mesenteries,
lungs). Clinical signs of human pentastomosis may mimic
appendicitis.
125 i. There are reduced levels of all the cells produced by
bone marrow (pancytopenia), namely RBCs (anaemia),
WBCs (leukopenia), lymphocytes (lymphopenia), eosinophils
ii. Includes infectious diseases (e.g. ehrlichiosis, parvovirus
infection), bone marrow necrosis (e.g. endotoxin, toxins),
myelofibrosis, myelophthisis, haemophagocytic syndrome,
malignant  histiocytosis,  hypersplenism,  myelodysplasia.
radiation damage,
crug-associated
1pancytopenia(e.g
estrogen,  chemotherapeutic  agents, 
phenylbutazone,
meclofenamic acid, trimethoprim/sulphadiazine, quinidine.
thiacetarsamide, captopril, albendazole, cephalosporin) and
idiopathic causes.
li. Bone marrow aspirate and histopathological evaluation of
a bone marrow core sample are required. Also, serological
222
titres to rule out infection (e.g. tick-borne diseases, canine
parvovirus infection).
126, 127: Questions
126
126 This organism (126) was found in a blood smear made
from a dog living in a heartworm-endemic region.
i. What is it, and how would you confirm your diagnosis?
ii. How do dogs acquire this organism?
ili. Is it clinically significant?
127
223
127 This organism was seen in a wet mount obtained from the
skin of a fish (127).
i. What is it?
ii. Is it clinically significant?
ili. How can this fish be treated?
126, 127: Answers
126
i.
Microfilaria
(mf)
of
Dipetalonema
(Acanthocheilonema) reconditum. In dogs the most common
species of filariae are Dirofilaria immitis, D. repens and D.
reconditum.
Infection
can
be
diagnosed
through
morphological observation of circulating mf, detection of
circulating antigens (D. immitis only), histochemical
or
immunohistochemical staining of circulating mf or through
molecular approaches.
D.
reconditum mfs
should
[ be
differentiated from D. immitis (cause of heartworm disease)
mf because their occurrence often overlaps in the same
endemic area (see below).
Criteria
D.reconditum
D.immitis
Head end
Blunt (parallel-sided)
Tapered
Tail
Button-hooked
Straight
Body
Mostly curved
Straight
Length
240-292 μm (<300 μm)
270-325 μm (often >300 um)
Width
4.7-5.8μm
6.7-7.3 μm
Acid phosphatase
Stains pink overall
Shows distinct red acid-
activity
phosphate positive spots at the
excretory pore and anus
ii. Adult nematodes live in the subcutaneous tissues, kidney
and body cavity of dogs and other canids. Fertilized females
shed larvae/mf, which migrate into the blood stream. Fleas.
the brown dog tick, the dog sucking louse and the dog biting
louse act as IHs for D. reconditum. Following ingestion of an
224
infected blood meal by the IH, mf develop to the infective
stage in about 1-2 weeks and then migrate to the head of the
insect. The mf pass to the dog when the infected IH feeds on
the next host.
ili. Yes, because of the close morphological similarity of D.
reconditum mf to those of D. immitis, which may lead to
misdiagnosis, especially in heartworm-endemic areas. Several
other Dipetalonema species affect humans. Treatment is not
normally indicated because this parasite is not usually
considered pathogenic. However, the presence of adult worms
may occasionally
 cause  subcutaneous  ulceration   and
abscessation. Control measures should be directed at control
of the IHs.
127 i. Trichodina species, a ciliate protozoan parasite of fish.
ii. Trichodina infection normally results in a relatively mild
disease that presents as chronic morbidity. In some cases it
can cause significant losses and high mortalities, especially in
young or stressed fish.
li. Trichodinids  can be eliminated by application of
appropriate  treatment (e.g. formalin  bath,  formalin
immersion, copper immersion or potassium permanganate
immersion)
128, 129: Questions
225
128a
128b
128c
128 A 20-month-old male dwarf rabbit is presented with
scaling and alopecia (128a) on the dorsal neck and shoulder
region. Microscopic examination of a skin scraping from the
skin lesions reveals this organism (128b) and eggs (128c).
i. What is your diagnosis?
ii. What is your differential diagnosis?
ili. What diagnostic tests would you use to reach a definitive
diagnosis?
iv. How would you treat this rabbit?
v. What is the zoonotic potential here, if any?
226
129
129 A kite presents with dry, lustreless plumage. On
examination of feathers, multiple raised pale structures are
seen (129).
i. What might these be?
ii. How can their identity be confirmed?
ili. If of non-parasitic origin, what is their clinical
significance?
iv. How might they be controlled or treated?
128, 129: Answers
128 i. Infestation with the mite Cheyletiella parasitivorax.
ii. Includes: C. parasitivoraxi
infestation;Leporacarus
(Listrophorus) gibbus infestation; dermatophytosis (usually
Trichophyton mentagrophytes, but Microsporum canis and
other species are also reported); other parasites (Psoroptes
mites, sucking  lice [Haemodipsus
ventricosis],  fleas
[Spilopsyllus cuniculi],  trombiculids, rarely  Demodex
cuniculi, scabies, Notoedres cati); hair loss due to barbering
an yo sdn ae ro yq pue a a uo Ansn)
rabbits) or nest building; sebaceous adenitis rarely described,
with
 histological 
 changes  consistent
t  witherythema
227
multiforme; cutaneous epitheliotropic lymphoma.
li. Microscopical examination of hair plucks, adhesive clea1
tape preparations, superficial skin scrapes and coat brushings.
iv. MLs, including ivermectin (0.4 mg/kg), may be applied
every 2 weeks for three doses. Selamectin (6-12 mg/kg) is
effective against Psoroptes and Cheyletiella. Dusting, bathing
or spraying with a cat or dog flea product (e.g.
permethrin-based powder or shampoo). Selenium sulphide
shampoo has been used as a weekly wash for fur mites. Do
not use fipronil in rabbits. Imidacloprid is licensed for use on
rabbits for cat fleas. It can be applied weekly for control of
Cheyletiella mites. Clean the hutch and environment as for
flea infestation
v. While the rabbit may appear to be unaffected by the
pruritus, the owner is best advised to have the infestation
treated to reduce human exposure (especially young children).
In-contact animals including guinea pigs should be treated.
129 i. Either eggs of biting lice ('nits′) or keratinous deposits
left on the barbs when the feathers emerge from their vascular
sheaths.
ii. By examining them closely with a hand lens or dissecting
microscope. Louse eggs will be consistent in shape and size.
while debris will consist of disparate pieces of keratin. Look
for lice, as the eggs were laid by them. Alternatively, retain an
affected piece of feather and see if immature lice eventually
emerge.
ili. Residual deposits of keratin on feathers are usually a sign
of a moulting disorder or poor  feather development,
sometimes attributable to a nutritional deficiency. Full clinical
examination and laboratory tests are warranted.
iv. Lice can be controlled by careful use of appropriate
228
treatment; most free-living birds of prey harbour lice and only
when parasite numbers increase (often a sign that the host is
not preening properly) is there a need to investigate and,
possibly, treat the parasites.
130, 131: Questions
130
130 The dog in case 125 had been treated with fenbendazole
(50 mg/kg P0 ql2h) for lungworm infection 11 days prior to
presentation. On histopathology, the bone marrow was
hypocellular', with decreased numbers of all cell lines, as
illustrated in this representative image (130).
          
this dog?
ii. What is fenbendazole, and how does it work?
Ii. How should this dog be managed?
229
131
131 You are asked to evaluate a 7-year-old Thoroughbred
mare used for show jumping. She shakes her head in the
stable and, when exercised, rubs her ears and the top of her
head at all available opportunities. Duration of signs is 5 days
The owner reports that the mare has had white, proliferative
areas within the ear pinnae (131) for the previous 6 months
and these have also been seen in other horses on the premises.
As yet, no other horses appear to be displaying pruritus or
head shaking
i. What is your differential diagnosis for this condition?
ii. What are the white, proliferative areas in the ears, and are
they likely to be clinically significant?
Ili. How would you confirm your diagnosis?
iv. How would you manage this condition?
230
130, 131: Answers
130 i. If infectious, neoplastic, autoimmune and toxic
aetiologies are ruled out, the pancytopenia may be due to
bone marrow toxicosis associated with an idiosyncratic
side-effect, idiosyncratic reaction is an unpredictable drug
reaction that leads to toxicity at therapeutic dosages in a small
percentage of the population and has no relationship to
administered dosages. The reaction may be unique to this dog
in this case. Diagnosis is confirmed if resolution of clinical
signs occurs after discontinuation of drug administration.
ii. A benzimidazole anthelmintic widely used in veterinary
medicine to treat various parasitic infections. Benzimidazoles
act by binding to parasite tubulin, inhibiting cellular division
and polymerization
beta-tubulin
dimers to  form
microtubules,t
thereby
altering
 cellular
metabolism
Differences in affinity between parasitic and mammalian
tubulin, as well as differences in the pharmacokinetics of
benzimidazoles between  parasites
 and
mammals, are
responsible for the high therapeutic index for this class of
drug. Despite a wide safety margin, adverse drug events
associated with fenbendazole have been recorded
lli. Withdrawal of fenbendazole, supportive therapy with
fluids and/or blood transfusion and administration  of
antibiotics.
131 i. A foreign body reaction within the ears, otitis exterma
due to bacterial infection or secondary to irritants used to try
and manage the aural plaques, irritation due to black flies, and
Psoroptes equi infestation. Other causes of headshaking
include trigeminal nerve neuritis, ophthalmic conditions and
231
behavioural causes, but these usually only occur or are worse
at exercise
ii. ‘Aural plaques', a condition of unknown aetiology and
with no known effective treatment; it is not usually associated
with irritation.
ili. Evaluation of the ear canal in horses usually requires
heavy sedation or anaesthesia. History revealed that the
owner had not tried to treat the plaques, the ears did not smell
and culture revealed only commensal organisms. Cytology
from the discharge within the ear and inner pinna scraping
revealed a 6-legged mite larva with an oval-shaped body
consistent with Psoroptes equi. This condition is reportable in
the USA (but not in the UK), as it is highly contagious to
otherhorses.
iv. All tack and other potential fomites need thorough
washing. Administration of oral ivermectin every 2 weeks for
2-3 treatments should be effective at treating this parasite.
Topical fipronil and other products have also been used.
132, 133: Questions
232
132a
132b
132c
132 A toad is observed by a keen naturalist to be lethargic. It
is easily caught and examined. Post-mortem examination
reveals a streaked appearance to the body musculature (132a).
A closer view (132b) illustrates these lesions better. A
histological section (132c) shows the remains of a parasitic
organism.
i. Which species of toad is this?
ii. What are the features of the histological lesions?
li. What are the reservoir hosts of the causal organism?
133 You are asked to evaluate a 17-month-old unbroken Cob
filly that has been coughing for approximately 4 weeks. The
filly lives with three adult horses and two donkeys. The filly
      s   s
appropriate dose of oral clenbuterol administered twice daily
in feed for 4 weeks, but there is no improvement. At the end
of the treatment period, tracheal wash cytology reveals
increased cellularity due in part to a slightly increased
233
non-degenerate neutrophil population (40%; normal range
<30%o), but mainly because of an increased eosinophil
population (25%; normal range <5%). None of the other
horses on the farm are showing clinical signs of illness.
i. What is the most likely cause of these findings?
ii. How would you confirm your diagnosis?
ili. What other samples would you obtain from the other
equids to evaluate if they are affected?
iv. How would you treat this condition?
132, 133: Answers
132 i. Common toad (Bufo bufo), a typical bufonid species.
ii. This is a naturally occurring case of plistophorosis, an
infection with the parasite Plistophora myotrophica, which is
a microsporidian protozoan parasite (Myxosporidia) of toads
Affected amphibians become emaciated and die. The striated
muscles of the body wall and limbs contain depots of
fusiform organisms, giving an appearance of white lines
(132b). These parasites are clearly visible when sections are
stained with Giemsa and Feulgen (132c)
ili. Fish and invertebrates. The life cycle of the parasite is
uncertain.
133 i. This horse may be suffering from inflammatory airway
disease, but the increased percentage of eosinophils on
cytology is suggestive of a parasitic infection. This could be
due to pulmonary migration of Parascaris equorum, but
because the filly lives with two donkeys, Dictyocaulus
arnfieldi is a possibility. D. arnfieldi is a patent infection in
donkeys, but rarely causes clinical signs. However, this
lungworm may cause clinical signs in horses, but the parasites
234
rarely develop into adults (become  patent).  Bacterial
pneumonia can occur as a primary disease or be secondary to
parasitic infections, but the neutrophil percentage would
usually be higher if bacteria were involved and the
neutrophils would appear degenerate on cytology.
li. As this disease rarely reaches patency in the horse, eggs are
rarely if ever found in horses’ faeces. However, it may be
possible to  identify  D. arnfieldi larvae  on  cytological
evaluation, either within the mucus in tracheal wash samples
or in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. Eosinophilia is sometimes
       
required.
ili. As the disease is often patent in donkeys, larvae or adults
may be identified on transbronchial endoscopic examination
or  visualized  on cytologicalevaluation of tracheal or
bronchoalveolar washes. The Baermann technique can be
used to confirm the presence of larvae in faeces when the
infection is patent.
iv.  Treat the affected horse and in-contact animals.
particularly the donkeys, with ivermectin or moxidectin.
Occasionally, an inflammatory response to the dying larvae
(and occasionally adults) develops within the lungs and
requires treatment with oral glucocorticosteroids. Sometimes,
a concurrent secondary bacterial infection is present and
agents.
134, 135: Questions
235
134a
134 The ear of a 7-year-old female wild cheetah is shown
(134a). Note the lichenification and scaling. There are also
skin lesions on the neck and various sites of the head.
i. What is this cheetah's dermatological problem?
ii. What diagnostic test is most cost-effective in making a
definitive diagnosis?
lli. How did the cheetah most likely contract this condition?
iv. How should she be treated?
135
135 Ticks are significant ectoparasites, infesting almost all
animal species. Ticks infesting a sheep are shown (135). Not
236
only do ticks cause direct damage, but they are also important
vectors of a number of infections. How can tick infestation be
controlled?
134, 135: Answers
134b
134 i. Dermatitis due to itching and scratching of the skin.
cheetahs as young as 6 months old. However, it is common in
adults 7-9 years old and tends to be severe in older cheetahs
ii. Microscopical examination of skin scrapes for detection of
the mites and eggs.
ii. In the wild, cheetahs are more likely to become infested
with S. scabiei via contact with one of its infested prey hosts
Thomson's gazelles are select prey for cheetahs. They are
commonly infested, therefore may act as a reservoir to
maintain the life cycle in the wild
iv. The cheetah should be immobilized before treatment (1.6
mg of medetomidine plus 1.6 mg of ketamine). Ivermectin
(0.2 mg/kg) should be administered subcutaneously  three
times with 7-day intervals. Mange can cause skin itching.
leading to abrasions, scratching and ulceration, which may
237
cause death as a result of secondary bacterial infection and
septicaemia. Penicillin/amoxicillin-based antibiotics  should
be given as well. Iodine may be applied topically on the
resultant scab (134b).
135  Many  chemical  products are useful against  ticks
including, but not limited to:
• Phenylpyrazol. High safety margin in dogs as well as cats
due to a selective action on invertebrate GABA receptors.
·Formamidine. Has a selective action on octopamine
receptors. Amitraz, a formamidine acaricide, is one of the
most popular acaricides for the control of cattle ticks
Rhipicephalus(Boophilus)microplus.
· Pyrethroids. Long-term effect varies (from some days to
several weeks) according to pharmaceutical forms.
   a      
treatment rather than prevention. Acaricides are usually
applied by dipping, spraying, spot-on, pour-on or slow-release
ear tags.
Organophosphates, pyrethroids and MLs have all been
employed. Some acaricides prevent infestation for a number
of weeks following treatment. Organophosphate dips give
about 3-6 weeks′ protection and kill all ectoparasites residing
on the animal. However, concerns about exposure to and
disposal of large volumes of toxic chemicals are leading
farmers  increasingly  to  select  pour-on  treatments  in
preference to dips
238
136, 137: Questions
136
D
136 During a survey for haemoparasites in a large avian
zoological collection, you find several suspected extracellular
and intracellular organisms in leucocytes or RBCs (136A-D.
Wright's-stained peripheral blood smears).
i. Identify the parasites, and name their IHs/vectors.
ii. What are the clinical signs associated with these parasites?
li. How would you control these parasites?
137 Given the rise of acaricide resistance and the decreasing
rate of discovery of new antiparasitics, using alternative
239
non-chemical approaches for tick control is essential. Discuss
some of these non-conventional approaches.
136, 137: Answers
136
i.
(A)
Haemoproteus
species
(louse
flies
[Hippoboscidae],
biting
midges
[Culicoides]);
(B)
Leucocytozoonspecies
(black
flies[Simuliidae]
and
Culicoides); (C, D) Plasmodium species (mosquitoes).
li.Haemoproteus
species
are
usually
 considered
non-pathogenic and clinical signs (e.g. anaemia) are rare;
some species of Leucocytozoon species are pathogenic and
the most frequent clinical signs are anaemia, dyspnoea,
spleno/hepatomegaly and occasionally death; for Plasmodium
species there are non-pathogenic, pathogenic and highly
pathogenic  strains that may
cause anaemia, anorexia,
depression, dyspnoea and death.
ili. Prevent exposure of birds to the IHs/vectors.
137 Non-conventional approaches include:
· Agronomical measures. Destroy tick areas by restricting
animals to low-ground, tick-free pastures and keeping grass
and weeds cut short in tick-infested areas. Lowering the
stocking rate of animals has also been shown to lower tick
populations, as it is more difficult for questing ticks to find a
host. Establishment of tick-free areas is hampered by the
presence of small wild mammals, which harbour and
transport the immature stages of multiple-host tick species,
acting as reservoirs of infection.
240
· Biological control. Use of tick predators such as oxpecker
birds  and   entomopathogenic
fungi(e.g.Metarhizium
anisopliae,Beauveria bassiana)
· Pheromone-based technologies. Anti-tick products based on
these technologies can be exploited to aid tick control.
· Tick resistant animals. Genetically resistant animals that
show a heritable ability to be resistant to tick infestation can
be an important element of many tick control strategies (e.g
the one-host cattle tick Rhipicephalus [Boophilus] microplus)
+ Vaccination. The vaccine against the cattle tick R. microplus
is the only commercial tick vaccine available, and only in
Australia and Cuba.
138, 139: Questions
138
138 A captive garter snake is found dead at a local zoo. On
post-mortem examination it is found to have pale muscles and
viscera and occasional petechial haemorrhages. Heart blood
culture yields a pure culture of the bacterium Aeromonas
241
hydrophila. Closer examination of the skin of the snake's
ventral surfaces reveals small dark particles between the
scales, apparently adherent to the underlying tissues. A
histological section is prepared (138).
i. What does this reveal?
ii. Is there any zoonotic implication?
Ili. What advice would you provide to staff and visitors?
139 A 2-year-old male cat is presented with tachypnoea,
dyspnoea,  increased breathing
 sounds and coughing
Heartworm disease is suspected because the cat came from a
region where heartworm infection is common in dogs.
i. What other signs would you expect to see if the cat has
heartworm disease?
ii. Why is diagnosis of heartworm disease in cats challenging?
lli. How would you treat a cat with heartworm?
138, 139: Answers
138 i. A mite, probably the snake mite Ophioryssus natricis,
between two scales.
ii. O. natricis can cause skin lesions in some people either
directly or through a hypersensitivity reaction to the mite or
its exoskeleton.
ili. Health and safety regulations usually require that a proper
risk assessment is carried out before staff or visitors at a
facility with reptiles handle them, as they may harbour mites
such as O. natricis. Even shed reptilian skins may contain
mites or mite remains.
139 i. A right-sided heart murmur if worms disrupt the
tricuspid valve. GI signs such as vomiting can be seen.
Rarely, syncope, neurological signs, embolic events and caval
242
manifest in cats during initial worm migration into the
pulmonary arteries or at the time of death of the worms. Cats
tend to have more lung damage than dogs, because worms die
faster in cats. Sudden death occurs due to acute respiratory
failure from pulmonary thromboembolism.
ii. False negatives are common in cats due to the low worm
burdens, light antigen load, all-male infection and the fact that
cats are rarely microfilaraemic (i.e. blood evaluation for
larvae is very insensitive). Therefore, a thorough diagnostic
approach using a combination of chest radiographs, serology
(forboth antibody and antigen) and echocardiographyis
necessary. Necropsy confirmation of heartworm disease is the
'gold standard'
ii. Treatment is difficult in cats because sudden worm death
caused by treatment with adulticides can lead to severe
inflammatory  reaction  and  thromboembolic complications
Cats with mild signs may resolve the infection on their own.
Oxygen, bronchodilators (e.g. theophylline), corticosteroids
and/or IV fluids are considered a standard medical treatment
in cats with severe signs. Microfilaricide treatment is usually
unnecessary since cats have few circulating microfilariae.
Surgical treatment, where adult worms are physically
removed from the heart, is indicated in cats that develop vena
cava syndrome.
140: Question
243
140a
140b
140 A flock of cashmere goats are grazing in the water
meadows in Heilongjiang Province, China (140a). Four
months later, all the animals exhibit diarrhoea, anaemia,
emaciation, jaundice and abdominal distension. Examination
of faecal samples from some of the goats reveals parasite eggs
with a terminal spine and a short appendage at the other end
(140b).
i. What is this parasite?
ii. Could this be the causal agent of the clinical signs?
244
ii. How do goats become infected with this parasite?
iv. How would you treat the affected goats?
v. What measures would you take to prevent this infection?
140: Answer
140c
140 i. Orientobilharzia species, a blood fluke that causes
orientobilharziosis in cashmere goats and other farm animals.
ii. Yes. During the acute phase of the disease, severe ascites is
seen and numerous male-female fluke pairs can be found in
the mesenteric veins on necropsy (140c). However, other
factors may be involved in the signs, therefore it is important
to perform haematological and serum biochemistry analyses
on the diseased goats to rule out other infections.
lli. Adult blood flukes are parasites of veins of the digestive
tracts of animals. Sexes are separate and the slender female
resides in the gynecophoric canal of the stouter male. Females
produce eggs that are excreted in the host's faeces. These
hatch in water and the miracidia penetrate appropriate snails
(e.g. Radix auricularia), where they undergo several
developmentalstages
S(mothersporocysts, daughter
sporocysts, cercariae). Cercariae escape from the snail and
245
into contact with the final host (goats), cercariae penetrate
directly through the skin, losing their tails in the process, and
invade the circulatory system. The schistosomula or young
flukes travel via the blood stream through the heart and lungs
to the portal and mesenteric veins and develop into adults
iv. Praziquantel (30 mg/kg) is the drug of choice against both
immature and adult blood flukes in sheep and goats. To avoid
the toxicosis caused by large numbers of dead worms, in
severe cases the dose should be reduced to 15 mg/kg for
initial treatment and repeated after 2 days.
v. Avoid grazing water meadows, provide a piped water
supply to troughs and prevent access to natural water. Regular
application of a molluscicide at the water source and manual
removal of snails may be necessary. Prophylactic deworming
of animals in endemic areas is recommended. Warn the
owners that this disease has zoonotic potential.
141, 142: Questions
141 True or false?
i. Dogs undergoing adulticide therapy for heartworm disease
must be hospitalized.
ii. Adult Trichuris vulpis (whipworms) live in the small
intestine of the dog.
[      s    
infested with mites.
iv. Ivermectin should not be given to a heartworm-infected
dog until the dog is tested negative for the presence of
microfilariae.
v. Controlling soft tick infestation is difficult
vi. Ticks are insects.
246
142
142 A colony of clawed toads is found to exhibit skin lesions.
A biopsy, taken under anaesthesia, reveals these parasites
(142)
i. Describe the environment in which clawed toads live in the
wild.
ii. What might be the relevance of such an environment to the
spread of microbial organisms?
ili. What does the biopsy show?
iv. Name the parasite
141, 142: Answers
247
14la
141b
141 i. True, because severe post-treatment cardio-pulmonary
complications sometimes occur.
i. False. Whipworms normally live in the large intestine.
ili. False. Repeated treatment is necessary to kill newly
emerged larvae and nymphs. Some products have long-lasting
activity (e.g. MLs on cattle, some on sheep, organophosphate
dips for sheep).
iv. True, because ivermectin may induce a hyper-sensitivity
reaction in microfilariae-positive animals.
v. True, because soft ticks do not live on the host; they feed
         
248
extended periods.
vi. False, because ticks are arachnids and possess four pairs of
legs (141a). Insects have only three pairs of legs and their
bodies are composed of head, thorax and abdomen (141b).
Larval ticks also possess four pairs of legs
142 i. They are almost entirely aquatic, living in ponds, wells
and drains.
ii. The spread of parasites and ‘microparasites’ such as
bacteria is facilitated if the volume of water is small and
hygiene is poor.
lli. Neuromasts of the affected toad, which have become dark
in colour as a result of proliferation of melanophores.
iv. The metacercariae causing this syndrome are strigeid
trematodes (genus Neasus). These digenetic flukes usually
occur in an encysted or non-encysted larval form in the
tissues of aquatic animals, especially amphibians such as
clawed toads. The adult worms develop to sexual maturity in
the intestine of birds (final host), where they can cause tissue
reactions including enteritis
143: Question
249
143
143 A 5-year-old gelding, purchased 12 months ago,
presented with loose faeces, depression, dark pink mucous
membranes and poor pulse quality (143). Rectal examination
revealed very loose faeces and ~2-cm long larvae were
present on the rectal glove. Peritoneocentesis recovered
straw-coloured fluid with total solids of 25 g/l (normally
<20g/l). The horse had been dewormed in the 8 months since
purchase with oral pyrantel administered every 6 weeks. It
was also treated with praziquantel 4 months ago.
i. What parasite larvae do you think were present on the rectal
glove?
ii. If your diagnosis is correct, how would you manage this
case?
143: Answer
143 i. Cyathostomins (also known as small redworms), the
most prevalent and pathogenic parasites of horses today.
ii.This horse has severe hypovolaemia due to fluid
250
sequestration into the GI tract secondary to the inflammatory
response in the colonic wall. Management involves
eradication of the L4s, control of the inflammatory response
and correction of the hypovolaemia. The most effective
treatments for killing L4s are a 5-day course of fenbendazole
and a single dose of moxidectin. In animals with clinical
disease, the burden of hypobiotic larvae is large and it is
   q ss S  s  is
marked inflammatory response to the dying larvae. Therefore,
pre-treating with  dexamethasone is necessary prior  to
administration of the anthelmintic. This will dampen the
inflammatory response to the emerging larvae. It is then
necessary to manage the hypovolaemia, colitis and peritonitis.
This  involves  administration  of  IV fluids,  other
anti-inflammatories
(e.g.
flunixin
meglumine)
and
antimicrobials to prevent secondary bacterial infection or if
bacteraemia is suspected. Bismuth subsalicylate or codeine is
to have topical anti-inflammatory properties and may be used
in certain cases. Care must be taken when administering
codeine   as   secondary   bacterial   infections   have 
been
associated with larval cyathostomosis; it is usually reserved
for management of chronic cases. This horse may be at risk of
developing laminitis so prophylactic support in the form of
cooling the feet with ice and foot pads may be recommended.
Acetylpromazine is contraindicated as the drug would further
reduce perfusion to the GI tract and may predispose the horse
to collapse. The horse's appetite is likely to be reduced so it
should be offered tasty feeds, and triglyceride concentrations
should be monitored.
251
144, 145: Questions
144 i. What aspect of the life cycle of the parasite described
in case 143 allows it to be so successful and a common cause
of diarrhoeal disease in horses in the 21"t century?
ii. Why has this animal developed parasitic disease despite the
use of a deworming protocol?
145a
145 You are presented with a 10-day-old Thoroughbred filly
with mild to moderate diarrhoea. The foal is otherwise bright.
alert and responsive and has normal parameters on clinical
examination (145a). The dam is normal.
i. What is your differential diagnosis for this case?
ii. How would you confirm your most likely parasite-related
diagnosis?
ili. Which drugs would be most effective for treatment of this
condition?
252
144, 145: Answers
144 i. Its success relates to its hypobiotic phase where L3s
enter the colonic wall and are largely non-susceptible to
anthelmintics. Resistance in adults and susceptible late-stage
S  s      
particularly the benzimidazoles. As this is a prepatent disease,
using a worm egg count to assess the degree of infection and
hypobiotic worm burden is not accurate and does not predict
the likelihood of developing clinical disease.
ii. Most likely because the horse had not received an adequate
deworming protocol prior to purchase and the larvae were in
their hypobiotic phase (in refugia) and thus were not
susceptible to the anthelmintics administered. Another reason
is that the cyathostomin population was partly or largely
resistant to the anthelmintics administered prior to purchase
and since.
145 i. *Foal heat’ diarrhoea is of unknown cause, but may
    s     s  
to changes in GI structure and function at this age. Diarrhoea
may also be associated with infectious agents (e.g.
Cryptosporidium, rotavirus, bacteria  [Escherichia coli,
Clostridium perfringens, C. difficile]).Strongyloides westeri
(threadworms) is a possible parasitic causative agent.
ii. By evaluating faeces for the characteristic eggs produced
by S. westeri (145b). As the prepatent period is 5-7 days,
eggs may not be evident in the faeces. Response to
anthelmintic therapy can also be used in these cases as a
diagnostic tool, but foal heat diarrhoea will resolve
spontaneously.
ii. Benzimidazole or ivermectin anthelmintics (many not
253
licensed in the UK for foals this young). Ivermectin and
thiabendazole can be used in the USA.
145b
146, 147: Questions
146
146 The body of a 5-month-old spayed female Labrador
Retriever, which presumably died of canine distempel
254
(clinical signs included depression, inappetence, hypermetria,
ataxia, blindness and circling), is submitted for postmortem
evaluation. A cytological imprint preparation of the brain is
made (146)
i. What does this smear reveal?
ii. What further diagnostic tests are indicated to confirm the
diagnosis?
Ili. How can this disease be treated in a live dog?
iv. Is there zoonotic potential?
147b
147 Post-mortem observation of 4- to 8-mm long, pink.
conical parasites between the papillae on the ventral wall of
the rumen (147a, b) and along the margins of the reticular
groove of both sheep and cattle has become commonplace
throughout the UK and Ireland.
i. What are these parasites?
ii. What is their clinical significance?
146, 147: Answers
146 i. The obligate intracellular microsporidial parasite
Encephalitozoon  cuniculi,  the　 agent  of  canine
encephalitozoonosis. E. cuniculi has been occasionally
identified as a cause of neurological or renal disease in dogs,
255
with fatal consequences in puppies. The main clinical
manifestation
of
canine    encephalitozoonosis   is   an
encephalitis-nephritis syndrome, which can be confused with
canine distemper. E. cuniculi is best known as a cause of
subclinical   granulomatous  encephalitis  and   nephritis  in
rabbits and rodents.
ii. Parasite spores can be detected in faeces and/or urinary
sediments from infected dogs. Other tests include in-vitro
culture of parasites from fresh brain and/or kidney tissues and
serological detection  of anti-parasite antibodies. Definitive
identificationofEncephalitozoon
 is  achieved
[by
ultrastructural examination, whereas species and strain
identification is dependent on DNA analysis using PCR.
ili. No treatment has been reported for use in dogs.
Albendazole (a benzimidazole), is not approved for use in
dogs, but it might be an off-label treatment option.
iv. Human infection, via ingestion or inhalation of infective E.
cuniculi spores, has  been
 reported,  particularly
1n
immunocompromised patients.
147 i. Paramphistomum species, trematode parasites with a
worldwide
 distribution
（in
the
UK and Ireland.
Paramphistomum cervi is the most likely species). They have
a two-host life cycle involving ruminants as final hosts and
Planorbis or Bulinus species water snails as IHs (147c - see
page 243). Development of free-living stages and asexual
multiplication in snails is similar to the life cycle of Fasciola
hepatica. Metacercariae ingested with herbage excyst in the
duodenum of the final host. Young flukes attach to and feed
on plugs of duodenal mucosal tissue for about 6 weeks before
migrating to the ventral forestomach, where they mature. The
prepatent period is about 8 weeks and, under favourable
conditions, development in the snail takes about 4 weeks
256
ii. Adult flukes are often present in large numbers in the
rumen and reticulum, but do not cause clinical disease. Heavy
infection by immature flukes in the duodenum causes erosion
of the duodenal mucosa and has been associated with
diarrhoea, inappetence and dehydration in young calves.
Disease may also occur while the parasite migrates from the
duodenum to the rumen and reticulum along the submucosal
lining of the omasum and abomasum. Co-infection with
SalmonelladublinandSalmonellatyphimurium has been
reported, although the role of paramphistomes in triggering
disease associated with salmonellosis is unclear
148, 149: Questions
148 i. How can a diagnosis of the parasite disease described
in case 147 be confirmed in live animals?
ii. How can this parasitic infection be treated and controlled?
149
149 In a sheep breeding farm in Heilongjiang Province,
China, animals of one flock show anorexia, recumbency and
depression. One of the affected animals dies and post-mortem
      
257
pancreatic duct (149)
i. What abnormality can be seen?
ii. How do sheep become infected with this parasite?
ili. Would the clinical signs exhibited by the sheep be
associated with infection by this parasite?
iv. What measures can be taken to prevent this infection?
148, 149: Answers
148
148 i. Examination of a faecal sedimentation preparation for
the presence of the characteristic paramphistome eggs can be
used to confirm prepatent infection, but is of little value for
diagnosis of disease caused by migrating larval stages. The
egg is roughly oval, thin-shelled, about 150 μm long and
operculate, similar to F. hepatica eggs. Unlike F. hepatica
eggs, which are brown due to bile staining, P. cervi eggs are
clear (148).
ii. Resorantel and oxyclozanide are reported to be effective
for treatment of both immature and adult P. cervi, although
neither is licensed for use in the UK. Evasive management
strategies are not straightforward in countries where the
epidemiology of paramphistomes is not fully understood,
258
such as in the UK. The IH snails require a permanent water
source, from which they are dispersed by flooding and heavy
rainfall. Cercarial production by the snails occurs when the
water levels recede, making the metacercariae available to
grazing ruminants. The situation is complicated by aestivation
of the snails when the water masses dry out and their
reactivation following rainfall.
149 i. Digenetic flukes of the genus Eurytrema (e.g. E.
pancreaticum), which live in pancreatic ducts of ruminants in
parts of Asia, Brazil and Venezuela.
li. There are two consecutive IHs, a land snail followed by a
grasshopper. Infection of the definitive host (sheep) occurs
via ingestion of a grasshopper infected by the larval stage.
The flukes then migrate from the small intestine to the
pancreatic duct.
ili. Eurytrema is not a serious threat unless the animal is
severely infected. Mildly infected sheep do not generally
show obvious clinical signs, but severely infected sheep
exhibit poor condition, emaciation, indigestion, depression,
anaemia, submandibular oedema, diarrhoea and mucus in
faeces. The presence of E. pancreaticum in the pancreatic
ducts causes inflammation and scar tissue formation in some
areas of the pancreas
iv. Control of infection is difficult due to the longevity of E.
pancreaticum eggs and the wide distribution of the IHs.
Preventive measures include routine deworming and reducing
exposure to the IHs. Eurytrema species are zoonotic,
therefore prevention of human infection is very significant.
150: Question
259
150a
Length 1.023cm (15.399pk)
150 An MRI scan of a 7-year-old female cat presented with a
history of circling and behavioural changes is shown (150a).
i. Describe the imaging abnormalities.
ii. What is the differential diagnosis?
ili. What other diagnostic tests should be carried out to
establishadefinitivediagnosis?
iv. How common is this problem in cats, and is it a problem
in humans?
v. How should this patient be managed?
150:Answer
260
150b
150 i. There is a spherical lesion approximately 1 cm in
diameter of T1 hypointensity/T2 hyperintensity within the
forebrain on the left side.
ii. Includes neoplasia (meningioma is the most common
intracranial neoplasm in cats), a parasite cyst and infectious
meningomyelitis. Based on the clinical history and MRI
appearance, the cystic brain lesion is suggestive of ^gid or
sturdy'
li. Histopathological examination of the resected cyst
revealed scolices growing on the intermal layer (150b), a
feature highly suggestive of larvae of some taeniid species
(e.g. Coenurus serialis, C. cerebralis). These species can use
the cat as an IH, therefore differentiation among them is
necessary. Taenia serialis and T. multiceps can
Ibe
differentiated on a morphological basis, but to date little work
has been done to differentiate them at the molecular level.
The coenurus found in this case is likely to be C. serialis
because of the linearly distributed scolices (characteristic of
C. serialis, the larva of T. serialis)
iv. Reports of cerebral coenurosis in cats are uncommon.
However, CNS infection with Coenurus has been reported in
261
many human cases, especially children, who become IHs of
T. multiceps after ingesting its eggs. The occurrence of
coenurosis in this cat indicates that T. multiceps is capable of
crossing the species barrier in this geographic locality and its
larval development can occur in unusual hosts; this may
constitute
a
zoonotic
risk,
especially
for
immunocompromised humans. For these reasons, feline
cerebral coenurosis should be given more consideration even
if the number of reported cases in cats is small.
v. By surgical removal of the cyst followed by prophylactic
antibiotics and administration of mebendazole, albendazole or
praziquantel. Corticosteroids can be given to reduce pericystic
oedema within the brain.
151, 152: Questions
512
151b
151 Groups of fattener pigs (50-120 kg) are being raised in
both  indoor and  outdoor  pens.  Occasional  pigs have
262
voluminous soft faeces with specks of blood and mucus
(151a). Close examination of the partially washed colon of
one affected runt pig at necropsy shows nematode worms
protruding from the mucosa (151b)
i. What is the name of this parasite? Describe its life cycle.
and compare it with that of other porcine nematodes.
ii. Discuss treatment and control options for this parasite in
outdoor pigs.
152 You are called to a poultry farm where the owner
suspects he has a problem with coccidial infection.
i. What types of protozoa cause avian coccidiosis?
ii. Describe the signs of coccidial infection that you might
observe in the flock.
151, 152: Answers
151c
151 i. Trichuris suis, the common whipworm. Variations in
thickness of the anterior and posterior segments give the
parasite its characteristic ^whip-like’ appearance. Like Ascaris
suum, the life cycle of T. suis is direct and does not require
any IH in the environment. However, unlike A. suum larvae,
263
T. suis larvae do not migrate extraintestinally and therefore
there are no respiratory tract or liver lesions. Whipworm eggs
(151c) are oval and yellow-brown with bipolar plugs. Eggs
are passed in faeces from infected animals. They are single
celled and not infectious for 1-2 months. Like A. suum, these
eggs are highly resistant and can remain viable in outdoor
conditions for several years. Ingested eggs are partially
 e  doa  d a  s
intestine mucosa. The adult  worm's thicker posterior
lumen, while the thin anterior two-thirds remains embedded
in the mucosal layers. The prepatent period is 68 weeks.
ii. Pasture rotation and properly timed anthelmintic treatment
reduce contamination. Eggs stay in the upper 3o0 mm of soil.
Clinical cases in pastured pigs require a large infectious dose,
so cases tend to be sporadic unless pigs are kept for long
periods in a small area. Groups of pigs may be treated for A.
suum with piperazine, but this is not effective against
Trichuris. Other anthelmintic products, including ivermectin,
doramectin, flubendazole, fenbendazole, dichlorvos and
levamisole, are generally effective against Trichuris.
152 i. At least nine species of Eimeria (phylum Apicomplexa,
family Eimeriidae) occur in chickens and six are important
(E.acervulina, E. maxima, E. brunette, E. necatrix, E. mitis
and E. tenella). All chicken Eimeria species are host specific
and tissue tropic (occur in particular parts of the intestine).
For example, E. tenella infections are found only in the caeca.
i. Birds will show loss of appetite, emaciation and weight
loss, weakness and diarrhoea. Deep tissue invading species
such as E. maxima, E. necatrix and E. tenella cause severe
necrosis, haemorrhage of the intestinal mucosa and bloody
diarrhoea and may result in death
264
153, 154: Questions
153a
153b
153 A breeder of canaries and native finches is experiencing
heavy mortality among recently fledged birds. The birds are
often found dead with no previous signs of illness; some have
exhibited respiratory signs shortly prior to death. The breeder
submits a recently deceased goldfinch for post-mortem
examination. The coelomic cavity (153a) and an impression
265
smear of the liver (153b) are shown.
i. What is your diagnosis?
ii. What other lesions might you expect to find at necropsy?
How can you diagnose this disease in live birds?
ili. What treatment would you advise?
iv. How would you advise the breeder on prevention in future
years?
154 You are called to a free-range poultry farm to investigate
the cause of death of some young birds. While at the farm you
notice that some birds are extending their necks and appear to
be gasping for breath. What is the most likely diagnosis, and
how can the diagnosis be confirmed?
153, 154: Answers
153 i. Atoxoplasmosis caused by Isospora serini.
ii. An enlarged, sometimes mottled liver, splenomegaly and
oedematous small intestine are often found at necropsy.
Impression smears of spleen and lungs in addition to the liver
often reveal parasites within the cytoplasm of monocytes.
Coccidia may occasionally be found in the faeces, but it is
difficult to differentiate oocysts of Isospora serini from
oocysts of intestinal Isospora species.
ili. Treatment  of severely  affected  birds  is  usually
sulphachlorpyrazine in the drinking water for 5 days a week
months until after the moult
iv. Preventive measures include minimizing stress in adult
breeding birds. This will boost birds immune system and in
turm reduce faecal oocyst shedding. Reducing stress can be
266
achieved by reducing stocking densities, ensuring good
nutrition and employing good hygiene protocols.
154 Infection by Syngamus trachea, a nematode that
parasitizes the trachea of a wide range of birds. The disease is
usually seen in young birds and in birds reared in outdoor
pens. The related Cyathostoma bronchialis causes a similar
condition in geese. Diagnosis is based initially on the classical
clinical signs of ^gasping’ and detection of eggs on faecal
flotation, and confirmed on necropsy by finding adult worms
in the characteristic position (ie. adult males and females are
a s   go  o  u (]
should be discriminated from those of Capillaria species.
Syngamus and Capillaria eggs both have bipolar plugs
However, Syngamus eggs are larger and contain several
well-defined cells (morula) when passed in faeces (see 15).
154
267
155, 156: Questions
155a
155b
155 An adult male Cashmere goat is presented with severe
exudative dermatitis affecting the entire body. The overlying
hair is wet to touch, discoloured and matted (155a). The
animal is extremely pruritic and in poor body condition.
Several other animals in the herd are also pruritic. Many are
seen nibbling their feet and the skin of their limbs distal to the
accessory digits is covered by dry, crusty scabs (155b)
i. What is the most likely cause of this severe skin disease,
and how can the diagnosis be confirmed?
li. How can this problem be managed?
268
156
156 This organism (156) was found during a routine faecal
screen of an adult Russian tortoise.
i. What is the organism?
ii. Is it significant?
lli. How would you treat this tortoise?
155, 156: Answers
155g
155d
155 i. Chorioptic mange caused by Chorioptes caprae. C.
caprae and C. ovis are specific host-adapted synonyms of C.
bovis. The mites feed on epidermal debris, causing exudative
269
dermatitis.  The  skin lesions
areamite-induced
hypersensitivity    reaction.   Diagnosis   is   confirmed   by
microscopical examination of superficial skin scrapes or clear
adhesive tape applied to the edges of distinct lesions. C. bovis
are 0.25-0.50 mm long, 0val-shaped mites (155c). They are
identified as Chorioptes by their rounded mouthparts, short
unjointed pedicels and bell-shaped suckers (155d). The
anterior epimeres run more or less parallel. Mites tend to form
clusters, so failure to find them in skin scrapes from
individual animals with obvious lesions does not rule out a
diagnosis of chorioptic mange.
ii. Treatment in goats is problematic because topical
treatments may fail to penetrate to the skin because of matting
of the overlying hair. There is little information available
regarding the efficacy or safety of endectocide drugs used
under the prescribing cascade.
156 i. Nyctotherus species, a ciliate protozoan.
ii. Nyctotherus is generally considered to be a normal
commensal of the GI tract of tortoises and is frequently
encountered in faeces. It may be pathogenic in high numbers.
ili. Generally, treatment is not necessary. High numbers of
Nyctotherus are often associated with an inappropriately high
level of fruit in the diet and numbers reduce when fruit is
eliminated from the diet. Metronidazole is effective if
treatment is needed.
157, 158: Questions
157 What are the consequences of infestation with Chorioptes
caprae in a sheep flock (see also case 155).
270
158
158 Several birds of prey from a private collection housed
outdoors
have progressive weight loss, anorexia and
diarrhoea. The birds are fed fresh pigeons. Repeated
antiprotozoal treatments administered by the owner are not
effective and after 1 month, one Eurasian sparrowhawk dies.
Gross necropsy reveals complete occlusion of the intestine by
roundworms immediately visible through the intestinal wall
(158). Faecal flotation testing is negative for coccidia and
other protozoan parasites.
i. What is your diagnosis?
ii. How common is this infection in cage and aviary birds?
Ili. How would you manage the remainder of the collection?
157, 158: Answers
271
157a
157b
157 C. bovis infestation causes low-grade pruritus and
exudative dermatitis over the poll, above the coronary bands.
around the accessory digits (157a) and over the pasterns of
the hindlimbs of ewes and rams, and on the scrotum of rams
Lesions on the limbs and poll are of little clinical
significance, but severe mange affecting more than one-third
of the scrotum can raise the temperature of the testes and is an
important cause of impairedS
 spermatogenesis  and   poor
reproductive performance. Scrotal mange is characterized by
superficial, exudative, fissured and haemorrhagic lesions,
with some serous exudation and matting and staining of any
overlying wool on the lower third of the scrotum (157b).
272
Handling of the scrotum often initiates a nibble response
Thickening and fissuring of the scrotal skin, without evidence
of scab formation or bleeding, is a common finding,
particularly when rams have previously been winter housed,
and is not necessarily indicative of scrotal mange. In some
cases these lesions might be associated with skin penetration
by infective Strongyloides papillosus larvae.
158 i. The most likely diagnosis, based on the high intensity
of infection, location of the worms in the small intestine and
the roundworm morphology, is ascarid infection.
ii. Ascaridiosis is one of the most common roundworm
infections in birds housed in outdoor aviaries. Access to the
ground is the most important source of ascarid egg ingestion.
ili. By performing a parasitological screening on a regular
basis (at least 2-3 times every year). Ascarid eggs are
resistant to common disinfectants, therefore cleaning the
q a ns a a o o isd q uo
means of steam is recommended.
159, 160: Questions
159
273
159 A 7-year-old Boxer dog is referred to your clinic and a
diagnosis of heartworm disease is made. The owner elects
euthanasia and permits a necropsy. Diagnosis is confirmed on
post-mortem examination (159).
i. What are “heartworms'?
ii. Describe the typical clinical signs in dogs.
ii. How is this disease diagnosed in the live animal?
iv. How can this disease be prevented?
160 Flea infestations are common and elimination can be
expensive and time-consuming
i. How can you determine whether fleas on a pet are coming
from the outdoor environment or from inside the home?
ii. When would you spray your home with an IGR, and what
does this do?
159, 160: Answers
159 i. Filarial parasites (Dirofilaria immitis) that are spread
from host to host through the bites of mosquitoes. The
definitive host is the dog, but cats, wolves, coyotes, foxes,
other animals and humans can also be infected.
ii. Adult worms reside in the pulmonary arterial system and
cause damage to the lung vessels and tissue. Occasionally.
adult heartworms migrate to the right side of the heart and
even the great veins entering the heart in heavy infections.
Infected dogs may show exercise intolerance, decreased
appetite, loss of weight, cough and listlessness. Animals with
severe heartworm disease will show lack of endurance during
exercise and in rare situations they may die of sudden heart
failure.
li. By one or more of the following approaches:
274
morphological identification of circulating microfilariae (mf)
via direct blood smear, modified Knott's test or after
millipore
filtration
of
blood;
histochemical
or
immunohistochemical staining of circulating mf; serological
testing (a patient-side heartworm test kit with 99.2%
sensitivity and 1oo% specificity is commercially available);
through molecular approaches; radiography to evaluate the
severity of lung damage caused by the presence of worms.
iv. Chemoprophylaxis is nearly 1oo% effective in preventing
heartworm  infection   when    administered   appropriately.
Several drugs are available. MLs (ivermectin, milbemycin
oxime, moxidectin, selamectin) are the drugs of choice for
chemoprophylaxis in  dogs.  All   the chemoprophylaxis
medications are  microfilaricidal whenadministered
continuously over a period of time. Some MLs may also have
an adulticidal effect if used continuously for a prolonged
period.
160 i. If the owner has bites around the ankles, this is a sure
sign that the infestation is coming from inside the home.
Some people are less sensitive to bites than others, so if the
owners have not noticed bites, this does not rule out an
internal infestation. If the pet has more than 10 fleas on it, it is
more likely that the pupae are indoors than outdoors.
ii. With a household infestation, the pet should be treated with
a veterinary flea product. Meanwhile application of an IGR
willprevent existing
g eggs in the environment from
developing into larvae and prevent larvae developing into
pupae. No insecticide kills the pupae because they are buried
deep in the pile of the carpet, in cracks and crevices in the
floor or within soft furnishings and are protected by their
cocoon, which in turn is covered in debris. Once the pupae
275
hatch, the newly emerged fleas will jump onto the treated pet
and die.
161, 162: Questions
161
161 A 9-week-old female Norfolk Terrier is presented with
pruritus and excessive dorsal scaling (161). The puppy was
purchased from a breeder 2 weeks previously. The owner
reports pruritic papular lesions on both of her forearms. The
puppy's limbs and ventrum are unaffected, although a
bilateral ceruminous otitis exterma is noted.
i. What is your differential diagnosis?
ii. What diagnostic tests would you perform?
Ili. Is this condition specific to dogs?
iv. What are the appropriate treatment options?
276
162
162 A rabbit breeder has had increased mortality among her
young stock over the past 3 months, which happen to coincide
with the summer months and hot weather. She estimates that
approximately 25% of rabbits 3-6 months of age have
decreased appetites and poor weight gain, and about 20% of
these animals eventually die. The rabbits are raised in wooden
hutches with wire floors, in a small building behind the
breeder's home. One 9-week-old female rabbit, which died
recently, is submitted to a diagnostic laboratory for necropsy.
Findings include emaciation and small nodular lesions in the
liver (162)
i. What is the likely diagnosis, and what agent causes this
disease?
ii. What would you expect to see histologically in tissue
sections containing the liver lesions?
161, 162: Answers
161 i. Pruritic papular lesions on the owner are compatible
with a diagnosis of cheyletiellosis, although flea infestation,
otodectic mange and scabies should also be considered. Less
likely differentials include pediculosis, primary seborrhoea,
277
malnutrition and demodicosis.
ii. Examination of debris from a coat brushing, preferably
onto a dark surface, using a hand lens. Low-power
microscopical examination of superficial skin scrapings in
liquid paraffin or acetate tape preparations from the skin
surface may allow identification of the mite. Large numbers
of eggs, nymphal stages and adult mites of Cheyletiella
yasguri can be detected by these techniques. Similarly,
examination of ear wax using a hand lens or microscope may
reveal Otodectes cynotis mites, as in this case.
ili. No, cheyletiellosis is found in dogs, cats and rabbits.
Cheyletiella yasguri is the species found on dogs, although
there is no host specificity. All species can transiently affect
in-contact humans. Puppies and kittens, particularly those
from breeding establishments, appear most susceptible.
iv. Insecticidal efficacy does not always equate to acaricidal
efficacy, and baths may be more effective than low-volume
aerosols in reaching mites that are protected by surface scale.
Selenium sulphide 1% is frequently used for the treatment of
cheyletiellosis. Amitraz, phosmet and ivermectin have also
been used. Use of a 0.25% fipronil spray has recently been
reported. Affected and in-contact animals should be treated
for 6-8 weeks and regular use of an effective environmental
flea control product is recommended.
162 i. Based on the clinical history and necropsy findings, this
rabbit had hepatic coccidiosis caused by Eimeria stiedae
ii. The nodular white to pale yellow foci are areas of biliary
epithelial hyperplasia and hypertrophy. In addition, there is
usually some degree of chronic inflammation (cholangitis:
inflammation of bile ductules),  with  infiltration  of
lymphocytes, macrophages and plasma cells, in affected
portal triads.
278
163, 164: Questions
163a
163 A 7-year-old cow is presented with coughing, dyspnoea,
respiratory distress (163a), weight loss, reduced milk yield
and unthriftiness. A diagnosis of lungworm (D. viviparus)
disease is made based on the history, character and nature of
the dyspnoea and the failure of antibiotic therapy to
ameliorate the condition. How can a definitive diagnosis of
lungworm disease be achieved?
279
164
164 During assessment of a grounded wild hobby, you
examine a blood smear and find several erythrocytes
containing intracytoplasmic inclusions that appear to wrap
around the erythrocyte nucleus without displacing it (164).
i. What are these inclusions?
li. Are they significant?
Ii. What clinical signs might you expect to see?
iv. If you decide to treat this condition, what would you use?
163, 164: Answers
280
163b
163 Presumptive diagnosis is based on clinical signs, grazing
history and knowledge of  the  patterns of 
 parasite
epidemiology. However, clinical signs of this disease are not
pathognomonic and are often confused with bacterial or viral
pneumonia. Therefore, lung-worm disease should be included
in   the differential diagnosis  for  persistent respiratory
manifestations
incows，
especially in enzootic   areas.
Definitive diagnosis can be made after the demonstration of
Lls in faeces using the Baermann technique. However, Lls
may be absent if this was reinfection syndrome. Tracheal
washes may provide cytological evidence of eosinophilic
inflammation
 consistent
with
parasitic
 bronchitis
Serological tests have been developed based on crude or
somatic antigens of D. viviparus. However, serology may fail
281
to differentiate between recent and past infection, or to detect
antibodies during the prepatent period. Also, seroprevalence
rates do not always accurately reflect the presence of clinical
disease. Confirmation of diagnosis is made by the detection of
adult nematodes in the bronchi and trachea at post-mortem
examination. Adult lungworms are long, thin white worms
with small buccal cavities. Males are 17-50 mm in length;
females 23-80 mm. A small copulatory bursa with
characteristic spicules can be seen in males (163b)
164 i. Haemoproteus species gametocytes, which contain
refractile iron pigments and often encircle more than half of
the erythrocyte's nucleus without displacing it.
ii. Haemoproteus is common in wild raptors and is generally
of low pathogenicity
ii. Ill-thrift, exercise intolerance, anorexia and haemolytic
anaemia, especially if the bird is immunocompromised.
Harris' Hawks, Tawny Owls and Snowy Owls may be more
susceptible to severe disease.
iv. Chloroquine, mefloquine and primaquine have been
reported to reduce parasitaemia in some cases.
165: Question
282
165
165 i. To which parasite does this life cycle (165) belong?
ii. Name and describe each of the lettered stages.
i. What is the clinical significance of this parasite?
iv. What are the treatment options for this parasite?
165: Answer
165 i. Liver flukes of the genus Fasciola
ii. (A) Immature eggs shed in manure; (B) eggs mature and
embryos hatch; (C) miracidia; (D) rediae; (E) cercariae; (F)
cercariae encyst on grass into metacercariae (infective stage);
(G) adult flukes reach sexual maturity in liver and gallbladder
of the definitive host.
li. Fasciola species are of considerable importance in the
veterinary and agri-food sectors, especially in temperate
regions of the world. Fasciolosis is a significant zoonotic
283
infection of humans, with upward of 180 million people at
risk of infection. Climatic changes may favour transmission
of the developmental stages of the parasite within the IH
(snails), so prevalence is anticipated to increase further.
iv. Triclabendazole (TCBZ) is the mainstay of chemotherapy
against liver fluke infection. It is a benzimidazole with
fasciolicidal activity against Fasciola hepatica, F. gigantica,
F. magna and Paragonimus species, but not against cestodes
or nematodes. It is the only drug that can target the migratory
juvenile stages from just 2 days post infection through to the
mature adult flukes, thus offering effective control for both
acute and chronic fasciolosis. However, overuse has led to the
development of drug resistance in some fluke populations.
Synergistic combinations of drugs with two mechanisms of
actions (e.g.  TCBZ plus clorsulon and TCBZ plus
luxabendazole) have been used in an effort to slow the
development of resistance.
166, 167: Questions
166a
284
166 Individuals within a group of 30-kg pigs on a small
family farm show continual rubbing of the body against the
sides of pens, frequent head shaking and the occurrence of
aural haematomas. Closer examination shows waxy, dark
brown encrustations within the ears, encrusted elbows and
scurfy, dirty hindlimbs. Numerous ear and skin scrapings are
collected and occasional microscopic parasites are noted in
one or two samples (166a).
i. What is this parasite?
ii. Is this diagnosis easy to make via skin scrapings?
ili. What secondary effects or sequelae can occur in infected
pigs?
167
285
167 A 2-year-old male lovebird is presented with feather
picking, weight loss, diarrhoea and skin irritation (167).
Faecal flotation using a commercial sodium nitrate solution
does not reveal any parasite eggs. However, a second
flotation with a zinc sulphate solution prepared to a specific
gravity of 1.18 allows the detectionof severaloval to
ellipsoid, 10 μm organisms. A direct smear of a faecal
dropping at 100x magnification reveals tiny, fast moving,
pear-shaped 15 μm organisms.
i. What is described in the faecal flotation and direct faecal
smear? Does this explain the clinical signs seen in the
lovebird?
ii. Why is zinc sulphate solution superior in the identification
of this organism?
ii. Why are mobile microorganisms seen only in fresh direct
faecal smears?
iv. Is this infection zoonotic?
166, 167: Answers
286
166b
GradeI
Grade 2
Grade 3
166 i. Pig mange mite, Sarcoptes scabei var suis. Mites
burrow into the skin and lay eggs in tunnels in the skin, which
causes severe host irritation and pruritus
ii. Reliable and sensitive diagnosis is the main problem for
adequate control  and  eradication programmes.  Definitive
diagnosis of swine scabies is not always easy because of the
minute size of the parasite and its intracutaneous localization.
ili. This mite continues to cause problems for the pig industry
worldwide despite the availability of effective treatments (e.g.
ivermectin). Aural haematomas can occur due to the pig
frequently shaking its head and ears, and middle ear damage
can result. Other sequelae include greasy pig disease
(Staphylococcus hyicus), which flourishes in damaged skin,
and papular dermatitis, which is part of an allergic host skin
response commonly seen in pigs with mange. Large numbers
of small red papules occur over the body and persist for long
periods. This reaction forms the basis of a slaughter facility
287
check for mange (ie. grading the severity of papular
dermatitis at slaughter using a 0 to 3 scale for classifying
carcasses, 166b)
167 i. Based on the morphometric characteristics of the
organisms detected, this bird is probably infected with
Giardia species, a flagellate protozoan. Giardia infection is
mainly associated with diarrhoea in several species of animal,
and in the Class Aves giardiosis is also frequently related to
feather picking and skin irritation. It is quite common in
several species of psittacines such as lovebirds, cockatiels and
budgerigars.
ii. Sodium nitrate solution distorts Giardia cysts very rapidly.
whereas zinc sulphate solution maintains the parasite
morphology and, therefore, facilitates its identification.
ili. Giardia trophozoites do not survive for a long time away
from the host and their motility is also affected by
temperature.
iv. The role of avian hosts in the transmission of Giardia to
humans is not well documented.
168: Question
288
168a
168b
168 A 14-year-old male crossbred dog is presented with
generalized patchy alopecia affecting particularly the ventral
neck, chest, abdomen and limbs (168a, b). Pruritus is reported
to be mild. Erythema and crusting are present on the medial
289
thighs. Tufts of hair are easily epilated from affected areas.
Mild scaling and comedones are also noted in these areas.
i. What is your suspected diagnosis, and how would you
confirm this?
ii. What is your differential diagnosis in this case?
ili. How would you treat this dog?
168: Answer
168c
168 i. Generalized, adult-onset demodicosis, confirmed by
demonstrating Demodex mites (168c) in deep skin scrapings
or hair pluckings from affected areas, examined initially
under low power. (Note: Demodex mites can be present in
small numbers in normal dogs, but detection of even one mite
should alert the clinician to search for more by further
sampling.)
290
1i.
Dermatophytosis,
pyoderma,
drug
eruption,
dermatomyositis.
ili. This is a challenging canine skin disease to treat. Reported
cure rates for topical amitraz vary from 0-92% and may be
influenced by the concentration and frequency of application
of the solution. Treatment may be aided by bathing the dog in
a 2.5% benzoyl peroxide shampoo, towel drying and then
applying a 0.05% amitraz solution. This is repeated weekly
for 12 weeks. A systemic antibacterial drug (e.g. cephalexin)
    r      
concurrent pyoderma. Weekly amitraz bathing should be
continued for 3 weeks beyond negative skin scrapings.
Avermectins are of value in the management of demodicosis,
used either solely or in addition to amitraz. Ivermectin is
contradicted in Collies and related cross-breeds as it can
cause potentially fatal idiosyncratic reactions.
169, 170: Questions
169
291
169 A captive baboon collection has an ongoing problem with
diarrhoea, lethargy, abdominal pain, weight loss, inappetence
and dehydration. An egg is observed on faecal flotation (169)
i. What is this egg?
ii. What anthelmintic should be recommended for treatment?
170
170  Improper  disposal of  livestock carcasses  provides
opportunities for farm dogs to gain access to carcasses and
become infested with various parasites (170).  It is
commonplace for farm dogs to be kept in parts of buildings
 arn ieua snoy daaus g pasn unbaqns a p
potential sheep parasitic disease threats posed by these
practices?
169, 170: Answers
169 i. The distinctive oval shape with a thick brown shell and
plugs at both ends are specific features of eggs of the
nematode Trichuris trichiura. This species infects the large
intestine and caecum of captive and wild primates as well as
humans. Different Trichuris species affect various domestic
292
animal species (e.g. T. vulpis in dogs, T. suis in swine)
li. Fenbendazole (50 mg/kg PO for 3 consecutive days) can be
very effective.
        
Sarcocystis tenella and S. arieticanis, and sheep are IHs.
Sheep ingest sporocysts from feed or pasture contaminated by
dog faeces. Sarcocysts (cystic stage) are found in heart and
skeletal muscles of most sheep, but outbreaks of clinical
disease only occur when the environmental challenge is high.
Sarcocysts within the brain and spinal cord are a common
cause of vague neurological disease including generalized
tremors, compulsive nibbling and recumbency, and fore- or
hindlimb paralysis in 6-12-month-old lambs.
protozoal parasite to Toxoplasma gondii and is an important
cause of abortion in dairy cattle. The definitive host for N.
caninum is the dog, which sheds oocysts. Recognized IHs are
cattle and horses. Abortions and birth of congenitally infected
lambs have been demonstrated following experimental
infection during the early stages of pregnancy, but it is not
conditions.
(3) Tapeworms. Dogs and/or wild canids are definitive hosts
for the cestode parasites Taenia hydatigena (Cysticercus
tenuicollis),Taenia multiceps (coenurosis),Taenia ovis
(Cysticercus  ovis)
and
Echinococcusgranulosus
(hydatidosis), which can cause clinical disease, result in
downgrading or condemnation of carcasses or present serious
human health risks. Sheep and other IHs are usually infected
when they ingest tapeworm eggs containing oncospheres
293
from pasture contaminated by infected canid faeces.
Oncospheres then penetrate the gut wall of the IH and travel
via the blood to different target organs, where they develop
into metacestodes (cysticercus, coenurus, hydatid), which
occupy normal tissue and may result in clinical disease.
171: Question
171 You are presented with three 2-3-year-old Thoroughbred
fillies that are kept in a closed yard with 47 other horses. The
 a a  a  i   s 
dewormed every 8 weeks with ivermectin and were treated
with ^double-dose’ pyrantel in the autumn. Worm egg counts
taken 6 weeks prior to your examination of the animals were
negative. The horses were reported to have had intermittent,
self-limiting diarrhoea over the past 6-8 weeks and have been
lying down for a considerable amount of time each day. Over
the past week, one of the horses became so weak that it could
barelystand
(171).
The horse was euthanized and
294
of adult Parascaris equorum parasites.
i. Why did these horses become weak and thin?
li. What other clinical signs can be associated with infection
with these parasites?
li. How could these horses have such massive infections of P
equorum with no worm egg counts on faecal flotation?
iv. Why did these horses have such massive infections when
they were being dewormed so aggressively?
171: Answer
171 i. The likely reason is that the worm burden was such that
the energy being consumed was not being absorbed due to the
physical intestinal obstruction caused by these parasites. In
addition, the parasites consume the liquid contents in the
intestine, further robbing the horse of nutrients.
li. Clinical signs are usually associated with the migration of
L4s, which migrate through the lungs causing coughing in
young horses (usually <l year). In severe cases the pulmonary
phase can be associated with secondary bacterial infection
and, occasionally, bleeding into the airways. In addition, this
condition can be associated with clinical signs of abdominal
pain caused by physical obstruction of the small intestine by
the parasites, which can rarely lead to intestinal rupture.
lli. The prepatent period of P. equorum is approximately 3-4
months, therefore it is possible that when these horses were
sampled they had large worm burdens, but the worms were
not yet producing ova (prepatent infection). Also, if faeces are
examined when horses have diarrhoea, there can be a
dilutional effect on those ova that are present, so the worm
burden and number of ova actually being produced can be
underestimated.
295
iv. Either the worm burden was so high that they were largely
protected from the action of the drugs administered, or the
parasites were resistant to the anthelmintics administered.
172, 173: Questions
172 The gastric mucosa from a 10-month-old Quarter horse
colt is shown (172).
i. What parasites are pictured here?
ii. What are the major clinical effects of these parasites?
i. What are the main pathological effects or lesions caused
by these parasites?
iv. What type(s) of anthelmintics would be effective against
these parasites?
296
173 How can the protozoal and cestode disease threats
discussed in case 170 be averted?
172, 173: Answers
172 i. Larvae of botflies (Gasterophilus species). Three
species of botfly are distributed worldwide: G. intestinalis
 p (oq d o asou) sioo  (oq uoo)
nasalis (throat bot).
ii. Even with large numbers, there are usually no clinical signs
associated with bots. Owners may notice the small, cream
coloured eggs on the hairs of the legs or throat.
ili. The oral hooks of the larvae may cause erosions or
ulcerations in the GI mucosa, and these lesions may heal with
raised rims of hyperplastic mucosal epithelium or fibrosis.
Oral stages of the larvae may cause tracts lined by purulent
exudate in the gingiva
iv. Avermectins are effective against oral and gastric stages of
the bots. Moxidectin is effective against gastric stages.
Current recommendations are for at least two treatments
annually, one in the early spring, when the first bot eggs are
seen on the hair coat, and one toward the end of the fly
   o    s  
additional treatments may be necessary.
173 By preventing dogs and wild canids from having access
to sheep carcasses. They should be kept in a secure area while
awaiting removal. Feed stores should be kept biosecure (173).
in particular ensuring that it is impossible for dogs to enter
and defecate in them. Dogs that may have access to areas in
which sheep are kept should be treated with a cestocide every
6-8 weeks. Praziquantel is effective against all the common
297
dog tapeworms, including E. granulosus, while nitroscanate is
effective against T. ovis and T. hydatigena, but not against E.
granulosus. Dogs should be confined for 48 hours after
       
disposed of. Meat or offal fed to farm dogs should either be
thoroughly cooked to 56°C (133°F) or frozen to -10°C (14°F)
for 10 days to ensure death of the larval cysts. On many
farms, attempts to disrupt the sheep-to-dog life cycle of
cestodes and Sarcocystis species are hindered by public
access and dog walking activity.
173
174: Question
298
174a
174b
174 In early September (northern hemisphere), coughing is
noted in 6-month-old spring-born calves in a herd of 250 beef
suckler cows. The cattle are grazed in groups of 20 and 40
with their calves in different enclosed fields on an upland
farm. During mid-September, a 2.5-year-old Charolais-cross
cow at pasture is seen with severe, acute respiratory disease;
this cow dies the following morning. Two weeks later,
another 2.5-year-old Charolais-cross cow, two 2.5-year-old
Limousin-cross cows and a 3.5-year-old Limousin bull from
the same group are presented with severe, acute-onset
respiratory
distress
(174a).
These
animalsdisplay
299
open-mouth breathing and moist coughs. It is mostly young
cows in the group that are affected (174b), while older
animals are unaffected. The affected group of cattle was
grazed during August and the first 3 weeks of September on a
field that had been ploughed and resown with grass two
summers prior and thereafter was only periodically grazed by
sheep. The cattle had been moved onto an adjacent field of
       s 
respiratory disease
i. List a differential diagnosis for this respiratory disease
outbreak.
li. How would you support a diagnosis of parasitic disease?
lli. How should the severely affected cattle be treated?
174: Answer
174c
174 i. Parasitic bronchitis (lungworm), commonly seen in
grazing cattle during the autumn. Fog fever: acute-onset
pulmonary oedema rarely seen in the autumn after adult cows
        
300
aftermath pastures. Bacterial infection (Mycoplasma bovis,
Mannheimiahaemolytica[lesslikely] orHistophilus somni).
Viral infection (BVD, IBR, PI-3, BRSV).
ii. Identification of adventitious lung sounds on auscultation.
particularly affecting the caudal lung fields, supported by
finding L1 Dictyocaulus viviparus in Baermannized faecal
died revealed the presence of large numbers of D. viviparus in
the bronchi and trachea and of parasitic pneumonia affecting
adjacent parts of the lungs.
ili. Broad-spectrum anthelmintic administration is necessary,
but could exacerbate the signs due to an allergic pneumonia if
dead lungworms remain in situ. Therefore, levamisole, which
paralyses lungworms rather than killing the larvae outright, is
recommended. Corticosteroid therapy (not beyond the third
month of pregnancy) is indicated, along with broad-spectrum
antibiotic treatment of secondary bacterial infection.
175: Question
301
175
175 You are presented with a group of five female alpacas
that are part of a herd of 30 animals that have shown signs of
weight loss of 3 weeks′ duration (175). Haematology reveals
a moderate anaemia and a blood smear reveals inclusion
bodies consistent with Mycoplasma haemollamae. Blood
biochemistry profile reveals a significant increase in serum
activities of GGT and ALP. Faecal worm egg count is
negative except when faecal sedimentation is performed, and
then a moderate number of fluke eggs are identified. A
presumptive diagnosis of chronic disease caused by Fasciola
hepatica is made.
i. Why is this animal anaemic?
ii. How does the diagnosis of F. hepatica differ in camelids
compared with cattle?
Ii. How can disease be treated and prevented?
302
175: Answer
175i.Probablymultifactorialin thiscase.Fasciolahepatica
worms ingest and destroy red cells and there is likely to be a
reduction in red cell production due to the underlying chronic
disease process. In addition, South American camelids are
often carriers of M. haemollamae, an intracellular organism
affecting red cells. When animals become debilitated for other
reasons, the number of M. haemollamae increases, which can
also lead to red cell destruction
ii. Diagnosis in cattle is based on history, physical
examination (weight loss, anaemia, diarrhoea, submandibular
oedema), increased liver damage indicators and decreased
total
protein  and
[ albumin 
concentrations.Faecal
sedimentation can identify fluke eggs. There is also an ELISA
that measures exposure to the parasite through measurement
of antibodies in both serum and milk. All of these diagnostic
methods can be used in alpacas, except for the ELISA, which
is specific to cattle
ili. As in ruminants, this disease requires ingestion of
infective metacercariae that have developed within the
mollusc Lymnaea truncatula. Preventing access to wet areas
where these snails can propagate the disease is important in
control. Treatment of affected individuals, and in-contact
animals at risk of developing disease, involves administration
of a flukicide (e.g. triclabendazole, albendazole, clorsulon).
176: Question
303
176
176 A 6-year-old male Dalmatian is presented with a
1-month-history of cough and respiratory distress that does
not
respond  to antibiotic  therapy.  A lateral thoracic
radiograph is obtained (176).
i. Describe the radiographic abnormalities present.
ii. What is your differential diagnosis for these findings?
ili. What other tests are needed to distinguish between these
diagnoses?
iv. Assuming the diagnosis is parasitic pneumonia, how can
the disease be treated?
v. Is this parasitic disease zoonotic?
176: Answer
176 i. Multifocal bronchial and peribronchial interstitial and
alveolar patterns
 associated
1with moderatelydilated
pulmonary arteries.
ii. Heartworm disease, Angiostrongylus vasorum infection.
right-sided heart failure and right atrial haemangiosarcoma.
304
Clinical signs and radiological findings indicate A. vasorum
as the most likely cause. Radiographic changes seen in
heartworm disease (right-sided cardiomegaly, enlarged main
pulmonary artery, dilated and tortuous lobar pulmonary
arteries, blunting of pulmonary arteries, enlarged caudal vena
cava) are not present here. Also, heartworms that are obvious
in the RV and RA as a mass of short parallel lines on
echocardiography are not seen. There is no dilation of the RV.
The cardiac silhouette was not abnormal (so a mass was not
apparent).
ili. Detection and identification of Lls in faecal samples using
the Baermann technique; cytological examination of tracheal
wash or bronchoalveolar lavage; CBC; serological assays to
rule out heartworm.
iv. With a variety of anthelmintic treatments (e.g. levamisole.
ivermectin, fenbendazole). The treatment dose and length
vary greatly and various protocols have shown differing
degrees of success, due to the variable nature of the clinical
signs. Supportive treatment with antibiotics, bronchodilators
and corticosteroids is commonly given.
v. No cases of A. vasorum infection have been reported in
humans; however, they can be infected
withother
Angiostrongylus species (e.g. A. cantonensis)
177, 178: Questions
305
177 You examine a fresh wet-mount of a crop wash from a
cockatiel displaying signs of lethargy, weight loss and
regurgitation. Many motile organisms, with single long
flagella, are visible. A dried, stained smear from the same
cockatiel is shown (177). The cockatiel is one of a group
housed in a small outdoor aviary.
i. What are the organisms observed?
ii. How would you treat this individual?
Ili. What preventive measures would you advise?
306
178
178 A 58-year-old man from a sheep-rearing area is seen by
   a     is ss
mass in the right upper quadrant of the abdomen. CT reveals a
round space-occupying lesion in his liver (178).
i. Assuming the liver mass is parasite induced and based on
the symptoms, what parasitic infection do you think this
patient has probably contracted?
ii. How do humans become infected with this parasite?
ii. What risk to the patient exists during surgical removal of
the cyst?
iv. How should this patient be treated?
177, 178: Answers
177 i. Trichomonas gallinae, a motile protozoan parasite.
ii. With metronidazole, ronidazole or carnidazole.
ili. T. gallinae has a direct life cycle, being spread via
contaminated food and water bowls and perches. Preventive
307
measures include reducing stocking densities, ensuring food
and water bowls are not placed under perches and regular
cleaning and disinfection of perches and food bowls
178 i. Hydatidosis, caused by Echinococcus granulosus.
Microscopical examination of aspirated cyst fluid can reveal
the presence of hydatid sand, a granular material consisting of
free scolices and amorphous germinal material (see 69b).
i. E. granulosus eggs and proglottids are passed in dog faeces
and ingested by humans. Eggs hatch, penetrate the intestinal
wall, enter the circulation and form hydatid cysts in organs,
especially the liver and lungs.
ili. During surgical removal and aspiration, fluid or tissue
may leak out into the peritoneal cavity. Hydatid sand or bits
of tissue may produce new cysts and cause disseminated
infection. Spillage of hydatid fluid during open surgery has
been shown to result in serious anaphylactic reaction.
iv. Surgical removal of the cystic lesion has a high success
rate.   Chemotherapy   with    benzimidazole    compounds
(mebendazole, albendazole) has also been used with some
success to sterilize the cyst, decrease the chance of
anaphylaxis and reduce the complications and recurrence rate
postoperatively. In recent years, PAIR (puncture, aspiration.
injection, re-aspiration) has been introduced and this is
indicated for patients who cannot undergo surgery.
179, 180: Questions
308
179
179 You are called in the spring to examine a flock of sheep
in which four 6-week-old grazing lambs died unexpectedly.
Post-mortem examination of the dead lambs reveals enteritis
associated with very large numbers of adult nematodes in the
small intestine. Some surviving lambs have scours, and faecal
flotation reveals the presence of parasite eggs (179), despite
the fact that the entire flock was recently treated with an
anthelmintic.
i. What is your diagnosis?
ii. Why might you suspect N. battus rather than other GI
nematodes?
309
180a
180b
180 A 6-year-old neutered male DsH cat is presented with
acute diarrhoea, vomiting, anorexia, lethargy, dyspnoea,
dehydration and weakness. The cat is euthanized at the
intestine (180a) and some eggs are detected in the faeces
(180b).
i. What is your diagnosis?
ii. How do cats become infected with this parasite?
i. How should this infection be treated and controlled?
310
179, 180: Answers
179 i. Based on the clinical history, faecal examination
(characteristic egg size and morphology) and post-mortem
examination of the lambs, the infection is due to Nematodirus
battus.
ii. N. battus infection affects young lambs, causing
considerable disease, especially among newly weaned lambs.
Adult sheep are seldom or never affected. In addition.
Nematodirus infection occurs in a restricted season (with
specific environmental conditions) during which the majority
of deaths occur. After a cold spring, any warmth in early
summer encourages a mass hatch of eggs laid on pasture the
previous year. N. battus hatches in response to an increase in
environmental temperature following a period of chilling,
resulting in a rapid increase in parasite infective stages on
pasture over a short period of time. Hatching of larvae on
pasture associated with rising temperatures increases the risk
of disease in young lambs due to infection with N. battus.
However, new reports suggest that some eggs hatch without a
cold period. A change in the patterm of the disease has been
reported with an increased autumn hatch of Nematodirus,
which may reduce the numbers of eggs left to cause disease in
spring, leading to an increase in autumn disease in lambs.
180 i. Tapeworm infection. Note the typical taeniid-type eggs
(i.e. surrounded by a brown striated eggshell and containing a
six-hooked embryo/embryophore).   Based  on  the body
segmentation of the worm, the characteristic features of the
eggs and the location in the cat's intestine, this worm is most
likely Taenia taeniaformis. Cats are the definitive host.
Infected cats are asymptomatic, but motile proglottids may be
311
seen in the faeces or on the perineal fur
ii. From scavenging rodents (IH) in which the larval stage
(Cysticercus fasciolaris) is present
ili. Praziquantel is the most useful drug for cestodes and is
effective at killing adult tapeworms. Some species require a
higher dose (30-35 mg/kg) than the standard one (5-10 mg/
kg). Drugs currently used to treat heartworm and other
ectoparasite and endoparasite diseases are not effective
against cestodes. Therefore, using such anthelmintic agents in
cats will neither protect against nor treat cestode infections.
Vigilance must be employed with at-risk patients having a
history of accessto rodents and no regular tapeworm
[       t  
examination. Where possible, hunting by cats should be
discouraged, but for those that do hunt, tapeworm prevention
should be considered.
181: Question
312
18la
181b
181 Seventeen sheep that are part of a flock of 70 animals are
presented with pruritus, alopecia and crusting, with patches of
wool loss particularly prominent over the flanks, dorsum and
shoulders. There is also matting and a yellow to brown
discolouration of the fleece. Alopecic areas are variably
erythematous, excoriated and heavily crusted (181a, b)
Touching or rubbing lesional areas evokes a ‘nibbling
response in most individuals.
i. What is your differential diagnosis for sheep with these
clinical signs?
ii. How would you confirm the diagnosis?
ili. How should these sheep be treated?
181: Answer
313
181c
181 i. The large number of animals affected, together with
lesion distribution and clinical signs, suggests a highly
contagious ecto-parasitic infestation, most likely psoroptic
mange (scab). Sheep scab should be differentiated from other
causes of pruritus, alopecia and crusting in sheep including
dermatophilosis (mycotic dermatitis), pediculosis caused by
biting (Damalinia) or sucking (Linognathus) lice species, ked
infestation (Melophagus ovinus), Chorioptes infestation and
dermatophytosis.
ii. Microscopical examination of superficial skin scrapings
may reveal numerous Psoroptes ovis mites (181c), nymphs
and eggs. Impression smears can be obtained from the
underside of crusts, air-dried and stained with a fast Giemsa
stain or Diff-Quik? stain and examined under oil immersion
to look forDermatophilus species.
li. The whole flock should be isolated and treated with an
effective dip or injectable acaricidal agent. No pour-on, spray
314
or jetting product is effective in the treatment and control of
scab. Because of the problems associated with dipping of 70
sheep (labour-intensive procedure with potential  chemical
dangers to handlers and environment), an injectable acaricidal
product is recommended. Ivermectin, although licensed for
control of sheep scab when injected twice, 7 days apart, offers
little protection against reinfestation. Also sheep must be
moved after each treatment to a fresh pasture that has not
carried sheep for the previous 16 days. Doramectin requires
one injection for treatment and control. Moxidectin, a
milbemycin, has been demonstrated in laboratory and field
conditions to be highly effective in the treatment of sheep
scab. Visibly affected animals should be separated from the
flock until the second injection and given supplementary
feeding. Trailers and pens should be thoroughly disinfected
and no sheep should leave or enter the flock for at least 3
weeks. In addition, newly purshased sheep should be
quarantined and treated before entering the flock. These
measures should lead to complete resolution.
182, 183: Questions
182 A 4-year-old female alpaca is presented with weight loss
of 6-8 weeks' duration. On observation it is noted that she is
constantly biting the distal aspects of both forelimbs. Closer
inspection reveals that the fleece fibres over the limbs distal
to the carpi are broken and the skin is hyperaemic and
thickened
i. What is the differential diagnosis for these clinical signs?
ii. How would you distinguish between these diagnoses?
li. How would you treat this animal?
315
183
183 You examine a faecal flotation (183) from a 10-week-old
captive-bred peregrine falcon displaying signs of lethargy,
inappetence and weight loss.
i. Identify this parasite.
ii. Describe its life cycle.
ili. How would you treat this individual?
182, 183: Answers
316
182
182i.Sarcoptic
 mange; chorioptic mange; bacterial
folliculitis; dermato- philosis; dermatophytosis; biting and
sucking lice; immune-mediated skin disease. The lesion
distribution suggests sarcoptic or chorioptic mange, more
likely sarcoptic mange because of the degree of pruritus.
ii. With cytology from a deep skin scrape, swab or hair
brushing, histo-pathology from a skin biopsy and culture of a
swab from an affected, but non-traumatized, area of the limb.
Mites are not always easy to find on scrapes, particularly in
the acute phase of disease, which is why multiple samples
should be taken from different parts of the limbs. Sarcoptes
scabei was confirmed on histopathology from a skin biopsy
(182).
ili. Most treatments for sarcoptic mange are not licensed in
South American camelids. Treatments include frequent
subcutaneous ivermectin, topical eprinomectin, doramectin.
selamectin or moxidectin, or a combination of parenteral and
topical products. The fibres of alpacas do not contain lanolin.
which is necessary for the effective spreading of topically
317
applied products, and this may partly explain therapeutic
failures in alpacas. When using pour-ons it is necessary to
apply the products directly to the skin. Judicious use of
anti-inflammatories  may  be  required  in  very  pruritic
individuals.Secondary
y bacterial infections may require
antibiotic treatment.
183 i. Caryospora species.
ii. Adult birds demonstrate a pre-breeding season increase in
faecal shedding of oocysts. Oocysts sporulate and become
infective 2-4 days after being shed and remain viable in the
environment for up to 12 months.
ili. Toltrazuril (25 mg/kg PO once weekly for 3 weeks)
appears most effective. The 2.5% solution designed for
 is       
50:50 with a carbonated drink may reduce the likelihood of
emesis or, alternatively, a 5% solution may be better
tolerated. Supportive care with systemic antibiotics, fluid
therapy and oral administration of electrolyte solutions and
critical care formulas may be required in severe cases.
184, 185: Questions
318
184
184 What makes hard ticks (184) efficient vectors of
diseases?
185b
185a
185  Anintensely pruritic baboon of Kenyan origin is
presented with extensive alopecia on the abdomen (185a).
This organism (185b) is found on microscopical examination
of skin scrapings taken from alopecic areas.
i. What is the organism?
li. How should this animal be treated?
319
184, 185: Answers
184 They are haematophagous ectoparasites and have a
remarkable ability to transmit a wide variety of pathogens to
humans and animals compared with other arthropods. Ticks
can transmit infectious pathogens to the host mechanically
when they move from one host to another and their
mouthparts are contaminated with blood-containing agents.
Ticks can also transmit pathogens biologically, where the
pathogen undertakes some sort of development or maturation
within the tick. After this occurs, the pathogen is transferred
either transstadially (between stages) or transovarially (from
female to offspring via the egg).
The important role of ticks in disease transmission is
reinforced by the fact that ticks have a worldwide distribution,
periods of time and on a variety of vertebrate hosts as they
develop from juveniles to adults. Even one-host ticks, such as
Boophilus (Rhipicephalus) microplus, cause major losses to
bovine herds, especially in tropical regions. Ticks have a
long, slow life cycle that takes several years. Because of this
longevity, ticks can carry infectious organisms over
prolonged periods of time, thereby not only serving as
vectors, but also acting as reservoir hosts for the pathogens
they carry. Ticks have salivary glands that play a major role
not only in pathogen transmission and establishment, but also
in the secretion of bioactive products of various critical
functions (e.g. antihaemostatic, anti-inflammatory and
immunosuppressive)
320
185 i. A sarcoptic mange mite, which has a worldwide
distribution. Sarcoptic mange is rare in non-human primates
and appears to be limited to primates maintained in natural or
seminatural settings.
ii.  This baboon
 wascaptured alivevia
 chemical
immobilization using ketamine (10 mg/kg). Treatment
involved the use of ivermectin (0.3 mg/kg SC, repeated after
10 days for 4 weeks). This treatment regimen was sufficient
to cause complete resolution of the clinical signs.
186, 187: Questions
186a
186b
321
186 Numerous individual pigs within pens of adult and young
pigs show rubbing of the flanks and slight pallor and
depression. The pigs are housed in an older draughty farm
shed, which has housed pigs for many years. Close
examination of the pigs reveals several cutaneous parasites on
the abdominal flanks (186a), on the proximal aspects of the
legs and on the ears. Closer examination of these parasites
under a hand lens shows not only adults, but egg-like
structures (186b)
i. What is the name of this parasite, and how does it feed on
the pig?
ii. What are the small pale egg-like structures?
187 An outbreak of diarrhoeal illness causes the death of 12
guinea pigs at a pet ^superstore'. A diagnosis of coccidiosis is
confirmed. Diarrhoea is also noted in rabbits in the same pet
shop.
i. What is the name of the parasite that causes intestinal
coccidiosis in guinea pigs?
ii. Can the rabbit illness be attributed to the same parasite that
is causing the deaths in guinea pigs? Explain.
ili. How can this disease be prevented?
186, 187: Answers
322
186c
186 i. Haematopinus suis, the giant pig louse (186c), which
only infests pigs. It grips the hair on the skin with its claws
and moves along in a side-to-side fashion. Young nymphs
spend much of their time in the ears; as they mature, they
move to the abdominal region. Adult H. suis are the largest of
the sucking lice, measuring >0.5 cm long. They feed
exclusively on pig blood; their modified mouthparts burrow
into skin venules for feeding. H. suis is a permanent parasite;
if it becomes dislodged from the host, it only lives for 2 or 3
days, compared with an average 35-day lifespan spent in
association with the host.
ii. The small pale structures are lice eggs ('nits'). After
mating, females lay eggs on the pig's hair close to the skin.
They lay 3-6 eggs a day for about 25 days. The eggs have an
operculum, which serves as lid, cover and flap. It has small
    s     e so
    h    
323
nutrients to their eggs before laying them, and abandon them
afterwards.
187 i. Eimeria caviae, a protozoan parasite
li. No. The two observations would not have an identical
specific (the rabbit species cannot infect guinea pigs and vice
versa).
ili. Control of Eimeria infection in captive situations requires
strict attention to sanitation and good husbandry including
continual removal of contaminated feed and litter, avoidance
of stress and frequent disinfection of cages, hutches, transport
carriers and litter pans by steam cleaning, immersion in
boiling water or by a 1o% ammonia solution (household'
ammonia), which is lethal to coccidial oocysts that are often
resistant to many disinfectants. However, if ammonia solution
is used, all equipment must be thoroughly rinsed to remove
residual solution, which is caustic to mucous membranes and
sk in.
188: Question
324
188a
188b
188 A 2-year-old female rabbit is presented with a swelling
over the left side of the ribcage. Surgical exploration reveals
the presence of a 5-cm diameter cystic mass (188a). The
resected cyst has a translucent capsule and contains slightly
opaque fluid along with numerous white granules (188b).
i. What is your differential diagnosis?
ii. How would you confirm your diagnosis?
ili. What are the treatment options for this rabbit? Compare
the likely effectiveness of the various options.
188: Answer
325
188c
188 i. Includes abscess, cellulitis, cyst, neoplasm, foreign
body granuloma,  traumatic haematoma and encysted
tapeworm metacestode. The morphological appearance of the
resected cyst is suggestive of the cysticercus stage of a
tapeworm (188b)
ii. Traditional identification techniques are unhelpful because
parasite  eggs  are not 
present
t inthe rabbit's faeces.
Cytological  evaluation   of
fine needle
aspirationwill
determine the nature of the cyst's content and PCR will
confirm the species identity of the cestode. Radiology, CT
and MRI should be considered. In this case, histopathological
examination showed a cyst containing serous fluid. The
multiple dots on the surface of the cyst were protoscolices
(188c)
)of encysted metacestodes.  These features are
consistent with the larval stage of a Taenia species tapeworm.
most likely T. serialis because the protoscolices are arranged
in lines (versus clustered arrangement of protoscolices in T.
multiceps) and it is the only Taenia species known to develop
326
coenurus cysts in subcutaneous tissues and muscles of rabbits
ili. Medical and surgical interventions have been advocated
for treatment of rabbit cysticercosis caused by T. serialis
coenurus infection. Oral praziquantel and albendazole can be
effective. Praziquantel exerts its action by inducing muscle
contraction and vacuolization of the cestode's tegument in the
growth zone of the neck region, leading to the death of the
parasite. Albendazole irreversibly binds tubulin, disrupting
cell function, with loss of microtubules and cell death. While
effective, death of cestode larvae can lead to a marked
    s  q  
by concurrent administration of corticosteroids. Coenurus
infection can also be managed by surgical excision of the
whole coenurus cysts. Leakage of cyst fluid during surgery is
unlikely to reseed new cysts and surgery is often curative.
Additionally, coenurus cysts can be punctured and the
contents aspirated without affecting the rabbit's health
189, 190: Questions
327
189
189 A 4-year-old neutered male dog is presented with anal
irritation and rubbing its perineum along the ground. Parasite
eggs (189) are observed on faecal flotation.
i. What parasite do you think is causing this dog's signs, and
how do you confirm the diagnosis?
ii. How is this parasite transmitted?
i. What treatment options exist for this infection?
iv. Is this parasite zoonotic?
328
190
190 A 14-year-old female red-tailed guenon of African origin
is presented with a l-year history of a grossly distended
abdomen, leading to distress. Ultrasound examination reveals
numerous cystic mass lesions in the abdominal cavity. A
lateral abdominal MRI scan is performed (190).
i. What is your differential diagnosis for these clinical signs?
ii. What is the prognosis?
Ili. What are the treatment options?
iv. What is the public health implication of this infection?
189, 190: Answers
189 i. The unique morphology of egg packets of 15-30 eggs
in the faeces confirms the diagnosis of the dog tapeworm
Dipylidium caninum. Proglottids with their ^cucumber seed
329
shape can be seen crawling on the dog's coat. Segments are
usually described as ‘rice grain-like', with two common
genital pores, one on each margin of each mature segment,
which enables differentiation from segments of Taenia, which
has only one pore.
li. Adult tapeworms reside in the small intestine and gravid
proglottids pass out with faeces. They disintegrate and release
eggs, which are ingested by the larvae of an IH such as the
flea (Ctenocephalides species) dog louse (Trichodectes canis)
or human flea (Pulex irritans). The tapeworm matures into a
cysticercoid stage in the developing fleas or lice. Dogs
become infected after ingestion of  an  infected IH.
Cysticercoid larvae are then released and grow to maturity in
the dog's intestine about 1 month after infection.
ili. Treatment of choice is praziquantel (niclosamide and
epsiprantel are also effective) combined with measures to
control fleas and lice to limit the opportunity for dogs to
acquire infection through ingestion of infected fleas or lice.
Because flea infestation is difficult to prevent entirely, routine
monthly deworming of some dogs may be indicated.
iv. Yes. Humans can accidentally ingest an infected flea or
louse.
190 i. Includes abdominal hydatidosis, abdominal abscess,
cysticercosis, hepatic carcinoma, hepatic abscesses, hepatic
cysts, tuberculosis, biliary cirrhosis, right-sided heart disease
and peritonitis. Based on the MRI scan and the disseminated
patterm of the lesions, abdominal hydatidosis caused by
animal.
ii. Very poor. The disseminated infection and wide
distribution pattern of the hydatid cysts in this animal indicate
that some underlying immunosuppressive disease exists,
330
which allowed for this extensive degree of parasite infection
This pattern could also be due to multiple infections, a
genetically susceptible host or prior rupture of a cyst.
Aggressive treatment is necessary. Even then, there is no
guarantee of survival.
li. Albendazole and mebendazole have been used with
limited success. In this case, treatment is at best palliative and
may simply extend the lifespan of the affected monkey.
iv. Hydatid infection poses public health risks in that guenon
to carnivore and, possibly, carnivore to human transmission
of hydatidosis  could  create  a  perpetual  reservoir  of
complicated infections. It is critical that the carcass of the
dead animal is disposed of hygienically (e.g. incineration) and
in such a way that does not allow canids access.
191, 192: Questions
9
191 A 3-year-old female Pit Bull Terrier from Texas (USA) is
presented for evaluation after a 3-day history of progressive
lethargy, icteric mucous membranes, weakness and anorexia.
331
A stained blood smear is made (191)
i. What is your diagnosis?
ii. How did the dog become infected with this parasite?
Ili. How should this case be managed?
192 i. Match the following pesticide agent with its mechanism
of action:
a  Fpronil
I. An agonist to nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in post-synaptic
nerve membranes.
b. Imidacloprid
 2. Increases permability in neuronal chloride channels. This increase in
permeability and rapid influx of chloride ions inhibit the electric
activity of target insects and result in rapid flaccid paralysis with
death and elimination from the host.
C.Niten pyram
3. Acts on the GABA receptor as a non-competitive blocker of the
GABA-gated chloride channels or glutamate-gated channels.
Blockade of the GABA receptors results in neural excitation and
death in target insects.
d. Selamectin
4. Disrupts the synthesis and deposition of chitin of target insects by
blocking the enzyme chitin synthetase. It has no deleterious effects
on the adult fleas, but has ovicidall and larvicidal activity.
e. Lufenuron
5. Binds to nicotinergic receptors in post-synaptic nerves to prevent
acetylcholine from binding and transmitting information. Receptor
blockade results in impairment of normal nerve function and death
of the insect
ii. What are the common causes of insecticide resistance?
ii. List some general strategies or recommendations for when
using insecticides.
191, 192: Answers
191 i. Infection with Babesia gibsoni, a haemoprotozoan
parasite. Microscopically, the parasite forms small, round to
    p s ssdod g
ii. Following attachment of an infected tick, Babesia
sporozoites are released into the blood, infecting erythrocytes.
Binary fission (an asexual form of division) occurs in the
332
cytoplasm of the RBC and results in merozoites. Ticks
become infected with merozoites during feeding and can
remain infective for more than one generation via transovarial
and transstadial transmission. B. gibsoni is also transmitted by
direct blood contamination; potential sources include dog
fights and sharing of surgical instruments. Transplacental
transmission from bitch to offspring can also occur.
ili. With a combination of atovaquone (13.3 mg/kg q8h) and
azithromycin (10 mg/ kg q24h). Glucocorticoids can be used
at acute stages to reduce immune-mediated RBC destruction;
however, long-term use may result in decreased splenic
clearance of the organism. Two injections of imidocarb
dipropionate (5.0-6.6 mg/kg SC or IM at an interval of 2-3
weeks) are effective. Supportive therapy such as intravenous
fluids and blood transfusions should be employed when
necessary.Preventionof B.gibsoni infectionincludes tick
control,
 sterilizing   surgical   instruments,   screening
programmes  in breeding kennels and prevention of dog
fighting. Animals that survive babesiosis remain subclinically
infected and these dogs may suffer a relapse of disease in the
192 i. (a - 3); (b - 5); (c - 1); (d - 2); (e - 4).
ii. The loss of efficacy of insecticides can be attributed to (1)
 ( s    d 
detoxication (metabolism) of insecticides, (3) decreased
sensitivity of the target site (ie. receptor) or (4) increased
ili. Reduce the number of treatments and use insecticides only
when necessary.
Consider   reducing  dependence  on
insecticides and integrate procedures for managing animal
effective agents. Continuously monitor for the presence of
333
resistance to optimize the timing of insecticide use and to
determine the need for additional treatments. Administer the
insecticide effectively (always follow the manufacturer's
instructions). Avoid introducing resistant  insects - use
quarantine treatments. Adopt strategies to maintain refugia
(i.e. susceptible individuals) which, by mating with resistant
individuals, reduces the resistance level of the population
193, 194: Questions
193 You are presented in early summer with two 3-year-old
castrated male reindeer that are depressed and have reduced
appetites; one also has diarrhoea. These are part of a herd of
10 reindeer that live in a 2-acre enclosure that is partially
concrete and partially grass; the grass is very short. There is
no paddock rotation. The reindeer are fed commercial goat
pellets and hay. They are not vaccinated and were last
dewormed with injectable doramectin 12 months ago. One
reindeer from this herd died 5 days ago after showing similar
clinical signs for 2 days. Gross post-mortem examination
reveals no abnormalities. The worm egg count from the
faeces of this reindeer at the time of its death was 1,5o0 epg
(trichostrongyle eggs).
i. What are the potential management problems with these
reindeer? Compare this with their behaviour in their natural
habitat.
ii. What clinical presentations are seen in ruminants with
trichostrongyle infection?
ili. How would you manage and treat these affected
individuals and the in-contacts in this group?
334
1994
194 A captive tortoise defecates (194)
i. Which species of tortoise is this?
i. List the parasites that might be detected in the faeces.
ili. Are any of zoonotic potential?
iv. Should such parasites be routinely treated?
193, 194: Answers
193 i. Reindeer are browsers and rarely eat grass. They also
travel over large distances so are unaccustomed to ingestion
of faecal parasites. As they originate from relatively cold
climates, the period when infective larvae are available for
ingestion would also be short. These reindeer live in a small
paddock with a high stocking density and were last dewormed
12 months ago. Since effective removal of the small faecal
pellets from the grass part of the paddock is impractical, the
worm burden in this area will remain high, particularly in a
temperate climate during the summer. Reindeer are easier to
         
which can be easily cleaned.
ii. Trichostrongylosis is often associated with non-specific
335
signs including poor production, unthriftiness, diarrhoea and
weight loss. Unless infection is severe, disease in ruminants
would not normally be as severe as in this instance,
particularly with a presumed mild to moderate infection.
ili. Management includes supportive care for the diarrhoea
and depression and eradication of the parasites in affected and
parenteral corticosteroids and NSAIDs to combat intestinal
inflammation    and
 systemic
inflammatory responses
secondary to bacteraemia.They were alsotreatedwith
parenteral antimicrobials because of the likelihood of
secondary bacteraemia. All were treated with parenteral
ivermectin. Reindeer may not respond appropriately to
injectable doramectin. Ideally, animals need to rotate through
multiple paddocks. If this is not possible, a concrete pen
allows for more effective parasite control. Feeding off the
ground will reduce the number of eggs ingested. A
prophylactic anthelmintic protocol should be instituted to
prevent development of clinical disease in the future.
194 i. A leopard tortoise, which is found throughout
sub-Saharan Africa. Large numbers of this species are now
kept in captivity, often successfully bred, in Europe and North
America.
ii. Various protozoa, nematodes and trematodes.
ili. They are unlikely to be zoonotic. However, ascarids and
oxyurids have direct life cycles with autoinfection, and
parasite populations can quickly build up in the immediate
environment.  Also,  bacterial   infection,  especially
salmonellosis, is a recognized danger from these and some
other reptiles.
iv. Treatment may be desirable in captivity. Whenever
possible, treatment should follow the examination of faeces
336
for evidence of parasites. Work on Mediterranean tortoises
          
plant material  and  make it available for digestion by
commensal protozoa and bacteria.
195, 196: Questions
195
195 A recently captured bush viper is found to have dark.
particulate bodies in its buccal cavity (195).
i. What are these bodies?
ii.How might
t  these structures be best removed for
identification?
337
196
196 This pest (196) is collected from a household in a rural
village.
i. What is it, and how does it feed?
ii. Describe its typical environment and clinical significance.
ili. What are the treatment options in humans?
iv. How would you control this pest?
195, 196: Answers
195 i. Trematodes of the genus Mesocoelium. They are
parasites of amphibians and lizards and largely confined to
Africa. The larvae are found in molluscs, which are the IHs.
The adult flukes are usually located in the intestine of the
reptile, but occasionally, as in this case, they migrate through
the stomach, up through the oesophagus and into the buccal
cavity. The fluke feeds on food debris and mucus in the
gastrointestinal tract of the reptile.
338
ii. By using a cotton bud soaked in normal saline. They can
then be mounted for microscopical examination.
196 i. The bed bug Cimex lectularius, a wingless insect 5-7
mm in length. Bed bugs are obligate blood-feeding
ectoparasites of humans and other warm-blooded animals.
They usually become active at night and prefer feeding when
host activity is minimal.
i. After a meal, they leave the host and retire to a safe haven
(e.g. in cracks, under mattresses or in other dark places),
where they survive for months without feeding. Although bed
bugs are not likely to act as vectors of diseases, they cause
loss of sleep, general discomfort, psychological distress and
unpleasant skin irritation due to  their blood-feeding
behaviour. Some individuals are sensitive to bed bug bites
and show allergic reactions. Affected areas are usually those
exposed while sleeping. Bed bug infestation imposes
economic loss on the household owing to the costs of pest
control and replacement of infested infrastructure.
ili. Reducing pruritus with topical corticosteroids and oral
antihistamines and preventing secondary bacterial infection
due to scratching and excoriation. Secondary infection is
treated with topical or systemic antibiotics.
iv. By thorough inspection of the infested sites and
application of insecticides such as pyrethroids. However,
insecticide resistance has been reported with increasing
frequency and is a likely reason for the recent bed bug
resurgence  in  developed countries.  Severely infested
mattresses should be discarded. Early detection may help
retard spread into non-infested areas.
197, 198: Questions
339
L61
197 A 2-year-old male pet rat is presented with abdominal
pain and diarrhoea associated with weight loss and reduced
appetite. This parasite egg (197) was seen microscopically in
a fresh faecal smear.
i. What is this egg?
ii. Describe its life cycle.
Ii. Is this parasite zoonotic?
iv. How can this infection be treated and prevented?
340
198
198 Several diurnal and nocturnal birds of prey hospitalized
in a raptor rehabilitation centre appear ruffled and emaciated,
with signs of laboured breathing. Some of them have large
masses around the oropharynx (198). Some birds died
because of anorexia and subsequent starvation. Post-mortem
findings revealed large yellowish caseous lesions in the upper
digestive and
1 respiratory tract mainly located on  the
oropharynx, tongue, nasal cavity, hard palate, trachea and
larynx. All the birds are fed with fresh pigeons.
i. What is your most likely diagnosis?
ii. What is your differential diagnosis?
ili. How can you stop the spread of the infection in the raptor
centre?
iv. How can you treat sick raptors?
341
197, 198: Answers
197 i. The rat tapeworm Hymenolepis diminuta.
ii. H. diminuta is a rodent parasite for which coprophilic
arthropods (fleas and coleoptera) act as IHs. Rodents.
particularly rats, are the definitive hosts and natural reservoirs
of H. diminuta. Tapeworm eggs ingested by the arthropods
develop into cysticercoid larvae within these insects. Rats
become infected by   ingesting infected insects. The
cysticercoids present in the body cavity of the insects break
open and develop into adult worms in the rat intestine. The
eggs are then passed in the faeces.
ili. Humans, usually children, can accidentally be infected
through the same mechanism of ingesting infected fleas.
Although uncommon, H. diminuta infection in humans has
been reported, especially in rural areas. The human intestinal
form of H. diminuta infection is often asymptomatic, but
abdominal pain, irritability, itching and eosinophilia have
been reported.
iv. Praziquantel is the drug of choice. Disposal of the bedding
hygienically and replacement with clean material is important
intermediate insect hosts can assist in breaking the life cycle
of tapeworm transmission.
198 i. Trichomonosis (frounce), caused by Trichomonas
gallinae.
ii. Includes infection by Aspergillus species, Candida species
and nematodes of the genus Capillaria, and vitamin A
deficiency. Isolation of motile Trichomonas stages from fresh
  s s o    s  
342
confirm Trichomonas infection
ii. Birds of prey are sensitive to Trichomonas and
transmission occurs through direct contact or ingestion of
contaminated food or water. Live pigeons and doves are
frequent sources of infection for captive raptors. It has been
reported that 80-90% of pigeons and doves are infected, with
a high prevalence of asymptomatic carriers. Before pigeons
and doves are fed to raptors they should be inspected and
their carcasses frozen for at least 24 hours. This procedure
appears to kill the parasite or at least significantly reduces its
pathogenicity.
iv. Infected birds should be isolated and treated. The drugs of
choice are metronidazole and dimetridazole, although
ronidazole or carnidazole can be used. Several antiprotozoal
agents used in avian medicine have a low therapeutic index
and are toxic for certain avian species. (Refer to an avian/
exotic animal formulary before starting any treatment.)
199, 200: Questions
661
343
199 This small insectivorous mammal is ubiquitous among
European wildlife (199).
i. What is this animal?
ii. Identify the ectoparasite present.
ii. What is the suggested treatment for this parasitic
infestation?
iv. Describe the public health risk posed by this animal.
200
200 Four grower chickens are found dead in a free-range
poultry farm. All the carcasses are very pale and large
numbers of mites (200) are present in the feathers.
i. What is your diagnosis?
ii. What animal health and welfare issues may be associated
with this condition?
lli. How should affected birds be treated?
199, 200: Answers
199 i. A European hedgehog (Erinaceus europaeus).
ii. Likely Ixodes ricinus (sheep tick, pasture tick, castor bean
344
tick, deer tick), a tick found all over Europe, North Africa and
the Middle East. It feeds on numerous different hosts
including small mammals, birds and reptiles. It might also be
I. hexagonus, the hedgehog tick, which is very similar and
with similar distribution.
ili. Physical removal of ticks with a proper tick removal
device, followed by application of a pyrethroid powder/bath
treatment to prevent new infestation.
iv. Injured hedgehogs must be treated as soon as they are
hospitalized to avoid environmental contamination of the
facilities by ticks. I. ricinus can transmit a great number of
tick-borne diseases to its hosts, including humans.
200 i. Infestation with the poultry red mite Dermanyssus
gallinae.
li. D. gallinae infestation may have a serious impact on the
production and welfare of laying hens. In high-intensity
infestation the mites cause anaemia and even death of infested
hens. In moderate to severe infestations, feeding mites may
result in significant stress to hens with a resulting negative
impact on bird condition, growth rate and egg production.
Low-level infestation may pose fewer problems to the birds;
however, the mite can serve as a vector for a number of
poultry pathogens.
ii. Control has usually been achieved by use of synthetic
contact acaricides including carbaryl, diazinon, dichlorvos
and permethrin, but the continued use of these products is
hampered by issues of mite resistance and decreasing product
availability. A recent study has shown that effective control of
D. gallinae can be achieved for a period of at least 28 days
after spraying of spinosad. Treatment with carbaryl dusting
powder, or oral ivermectin or moxidectin, is also effective. It
is essential to treat the environment at the same time with safe
345
residual insecticides.  Neem  tree  oil has been  used
successfully for red mite control.
201, 202: Questions
201
201 A well-established pig farm has several open-walled but
sheltered grower- finisher pens. The farmer uses deep straw
bedding over a soil base within the pens. The abattoir
regularly reports back to the farmer regarding lesions (201) in
the livers of slaughtered pigs.
i. What are these lesions, and how are they formed?
ii. What clinical significance does this hold?
lli. What other conditions would you want to check for on this
farm that may be part of an enteric complex?
346
202
202 A 2-year-old male bearded dragon is found dead. On
necropsy, the liver appears yellow and spotted. Histologically,
the yellow foci correspond to areas of inflammation with
many scattered organisms (202)
i. What organisms are most likely present in these lesions?
ii. How would you confirm your diagnosis?
ili. What advice would you give to the owner?
201, 202: Answers
201 i. Whitish healing foci (^milk spots’), which occur in the
liver  stroma  when  migrating
Ascarissuumlarvaeare
immobilized by the host's inflammatory reaction. Milk spot
lesions observed in the abattoir generally provide information
on A. suum challenge in the last 4 weeks before slaughter
li. The presence of milk spots leads to considerable losses due
347
to offal condemnations. Housing conditions (i.e. floor type)
and management practices (e.g. cleaning and disinfection
 u aoe  u ed ( go  s
development of A. suum. Milk spots, if present, tend to occur
asymptomatically, being  incidental post-mortem  findings.
Therefore, the presence of A. suum, or its lesions, cannot
easily be detected in the live pig. Diagnosis is made either
directly (faecal egg detection or serology) or indirectly
(presence of migration lesions in lung or milk spots in liver).
Ili. Besides nematode parasitism, other oral-faecal transmitted
diseases will thrive in bedding or outdoor systems where the
floor cannot be cleaned. In some cases, pigs will suffer an
enteric disease complex consisting of ileitis due to Lawsonia
intracellularis,colitisdue to Brachyspiraspecies,
salmonellosis and ascariosis. Although not really an enteric
disease, experience suggests that erysipelas is also common in
these systems, due to oral infection derived from soil and
bedding contamination. The potential rise of salmonellosis in
particular under these systems raises food safety concerns.
202 i. The morphological features of the organisms contained
within the rounded vacuoles suggest infection with an
apicomplexan protozoan parasite, such as Toxoplasma gondii
orNeosporacaninum
ll. By immunohistochemistry. However, because of the
possibility of false-positive results due to serological
cross-reactivity, further testing (e.g. electron microcsopic
      
essential to confirm the diagnosis (T. gondii in this case).
ili. Cats and other felids are the only kmown definitive hosts
for T. gondii. Infection in the bearded dragon was probably
associated with ingestion of oocysts excreted in the faeces of
cats. Scavenging on infected rats is another possible route of
348
infection. Therefore, to prevent occurrence of the same
infection in the future, cats should not be allowed to have
contact with bearded dragons. Owners should also be aware
of the high zoonotic potential of T. gondii, especially for
pregnant women and immunocompromised individuals.
203, 204: Questions
203
203 A young, wild native hedgehog is presented after being
found wandering in a residential area in the middle of the day.
The  hedgehog  appears underweight,  tachypnoeic  and
       s  os
fresh faecal smear is shown (203).
i. What are the objects on the smear?
ii. Would they explain the clinical signs described?
Ili. How would you treat this patient?
349
204a
204 These structures (204a) are found within the muscles of
an Egyptian freshwater tilapian fish.
i. What are they?
ii. What is their significance?
203, 204: Answers
203 i. Capillaria species eggs. Hedgehogs are host to several
species of Capillaria, C. aerophila affects the lungs, C.
erinacei and C. ovoreticulata affect the intestines.
ii. Capillaria infection is often asymptomatic, but heavy
burdens may cause respiratory signs (C. aerophila) or green,
mucoid diarrhoea and weight loss (C. erinacei and C.
ovoreticulata).  Mixed lung infections with Crenosomd
striatum are common and may exacerbate respiratory signs
and predispose to secondary bacterial infections.
ii. Levamisole and fenbendazole are effective anthelmintics
in the hedgehog. Supportive care, including oxygen therapy,
nebulization, mucolytics and systemic antibiotics, may be
required depending on the severity of the clinical signs.
204 i. Encysted metacercaria (larval stage) of digenetic
trematodes. The dimensions of these metacercariae (cyst size.
350
260-340 μm; cyst wall thickness, 5.5-9.2 μm) are consistent
with those of the family Heterophyidae, a group of minute
intestinal trematodes infecting avian and mammalian hosts.
The larval stage encysts in the muscles of fish, whereas adult
flukes inhabit the intestines of fish-eating mammals,
morphological
characteristics of adult flukes
(204b)
recovered   from   small  intestines   of  laboratory-reared,
parasite-free puppies approximately 3 weeks after feeding the
puppies with the metacercaria.
li. Freshwater fish are IHs and a source of human infection for
many heterophyid trematodes. More than 22 heterophyid
species that cycle in marine or freshwater fish are known to
infect humans worldwide. Human infections are usually mild.
However, infection with heterophyids can be accompanied by
abdominal pain and diarrhoea, and the parasite egg can
disseminate haematogenously to extra-intestinal locations and
may produce eosinophilic granulomas in the heart, brain and
spinal cord (in both humans and animals).
204b
351
205, 206: Questions
205 Data in the table below represent faecal egg counts
(FECs) carried out using the McMaster technique on faecal
samples from 15 randomly selected sheep 1 week before and
2
2weeks after treatment with fenbendazole. The FEC
reduction (FECR) for each animal has been calculated using
the formula below:
mean FEC after treatment
FECR (%) = 100 >
mean FEC before treatment
FEC
FEC
Sheep
(before
(after
FECR
No.
treatment)
treatment)
(%)
250
50
80
2
1.369
0
100
3
960
0
100
4
0
0
0
5
3.450
150
95.6
6
1,900
0
100
7
1.389
317
77.1
8
2.400
45
98.1
9
0
0
0
10
1.250
0
100
1.190
0
100
12
0
0
0
13
2,200
25
98.8
14
1,960
45
97.7
15
640
0
100
1.263.86
42.13
96.6
352
i. Considering a good anthelmintic efficacy is defined as
FECR ≥95%, is there any indication that there are nematodes
resistant to fendendazole on the farm?
ii. What measures should be taken to slow down
the
development of resistance to fendendazole on this farm?
206
206 A 5-year-old spider monkey at a zoo presents with
diarrhoea of 3 days duration. Faecal investigation reveals this
organism (206).
i. What is present in the faeces?
ii. How can infection by this parasite be managed?
205, 206: Answers
205 i. The average for the flock is 1,263.86 ± 1,006 before
     6 1 h  
FECR of 96.6%. On a flock level there does not appear to be
a problem with using fenbendazole. However, at the
individual level, two sheep (1 and 7) have an FECR of <95%.
This indicates that worms in these two sheep are less
susceptible to fenbendazole and that there is a potential for
resistance to this drug to develop in the flock; however, this
353
apparent prevalence of reduced anthelmintic efficacy may not
necessarily be attributed to the presence of resistant parasites,
but could also be due to other confounding factors such as the
incorrect administration of the anthelmintic or underdosing of
the two sheep.
li. Treat only those sheep that need therapy. The rest of the
flock should be left untreated as a reservoir of unselected
worms. This will dilute out the worms in which resistance to
the drug has been selected for. Breed only from sheep that
have shown a natural resistance to GI parasitic nematodes and
eventually a flock will develop that needs little anthelmintic
treatment. Resistance to fenbendazole is so widespread that it
should be used with caution in prophylactic dosing regimens
unless FECR proves that the drug is still effective.
206 i. Trophozoites of Entamoeba species.
li. Treat affected animals with an amoebicidal drug such as
metronidazole. Entamoeba infection is a significant zoonotic
disease in non-human primates, therefore good hygiene.
Entamoeba infection risks as they disturb the faecal-oral
route of transmission. Quarantine procedures for new arrivals
shouldinclude faecalexamination on multiple samples
utilizing the most accurate detection method available
preparation  with  good quality  water, appropriate hand
disinfection and disinfection or disposal of keeper footwear.
clothing and gloves and enclosure cleaning equipment.
Disinfection must be practised when moving between
different animal enclosures. Microfiltration of water features
within enclosures and effective drainage within and between
enclosures is critical. Proactive pest control reduces arthropod
354
vectors, including houseflies and cockroaches, which can
transport the infective cystic stage between enclosures.
207, 208: Questions
207
207 A 6-day-old Holstein male calf is presented with a 2-day
history of anorexia, lethargy and haemorrhagic diarrhoea
(207). Despite the use of antibiotics, fluid therapy and
supportive care, the calf dies within 12 hours. You suspect
Cryptosporidium infection.
i. What husbandry practices contribute to this infection?
355
ii. What are the available treatment options?
ili. How would you prevent this problem?
208
       
purchased with no known history and moved to a small
property with four other horses. The horse is showing clinical
signs of moderate to severe abdominal pain (208), such as
rolling, sweating, kicking at its abdomen and flank watching.
Physical
examination
 reveals  dark oral pink mucous
membranes, capillary refill time of 3 seconds and poor pulse
quality. Heart rate is 68 beats per minute and borborygmi are
absent in all four quadrants. Rectal examination reveals no
obvious abnormalities, although the horse is uncomfortable
on palpation of the intestines. Nasogastric intubation recovers
no fluid, but peritoneocentesis recovers serosanguineous fluid
with a total solids of 30 g/l (normal <20 g/l)
i. What is your differential diagnosis for this case, and what
parasitic diseases in particular should be considered?
ii. What would you recommend regarding management of this
case?
207, 208: Answers
207 i. Inadequate management measures, including intensive
dairy cattle production, overcrowding, poor hygiene and
356
direct contact between animals. are risk factors for
cryptosporidiosis and other diarrhoeal diseases on farms.
ii. There is no specific antiparasitic chemotherapy for
cryptosporidiosis. Most immunocompetent animals recover
within 1-2 weeks of infection with supportive care (e.g. fluid
therapy). Paromycin has been used with limited success in
cats and human patients, but its efficacy in other species has
not been determined. Oral bovine serum concentrate has been
used in calves with experimentally induced cryptosporidiosis.
Bovine  serum administration  reduces the volume  of
diarrhoea, reduces intestinal permeability and enhances ideal
crypt depth and villous surface area (i.e. promotes epithelial
   s    
of bovine cryptosporidiosis.
ili. Cryptosporidium species are highly zoonotic. Any contact
with affected animals will lead to infection, therefore better
management of cryptosporidiosis is essential from both
veterinary and public health points of view. Good hygiene is
important in reducing the incidence of infection transmission.
Measures include cleaning matermity pens, housing and
 s e  sa is o p s s
to reduce contamination, plus early detection of anorexia,
diarrhoea and dehydration in neonatal calves. Dam and calf
should be provided with good nutrition. Administration of
high-quality colostrum within the first 6 hours after birth
helps reduce infection. Halofuginone is approved for use
against calf cryptosporidiosis.
208 i. Possible differential diagnoses include a small
intestinal   strangulating    lipoma   and   epiploic   foramen
entrapmentof aloopofsmallintestine.Thelatterwouldbe
more likely due to the lack of increased fluid obtained on
nasogastric intubation and no distended loops of small
357
intestine palpable on rectal examination. The horse could also
have a large colonic volvulus, although it would be expected
to be in more pain and have more severe abnormalities on
clinical  evaluation. Other possibilities include  colitis or
enterocolitis that has not yet produced diarrhoea. Possible
aetiologies for this include emergence of cyathostome larvae
with recent anthelmintic treatment, right dorsal colitis
secondary to NSAID administration and infectious causes
(e.g.Clostridium
species, Salmonella  species  and
Neorickettsia risticii [Potomac horse feverl). Ischaemic
damage to the intestine caused by thrombi formation can also
cause this presentation, the most common cause being the
migrating larval stages (L4) of Strongylus vulgaris.
li. Analgesia and sedation could be provided, but a poor
prognosis should be anticipated. On referral to a surgical
centre, transabdominal and rectal ultrasound revealed no
distended loops of small intestine and no fluid-filled colon.
However, the intestinal wall of the left ventral colon was
thickened and appeared oedematous. Exploratory laparotomy
revealed 1.8 metres of large intestine (including caecum and
left ventral colon), which was red to purple in colour. The
horse was euthanized and adult Strongylus vulgaris worms
were found in the caecum and colon
358
Further reading
Bowman DD (2009) Georgi's Parasitology for Veterinarians,
9th edn. Elsevier, St Louis.
Colwell DD, Dantas-Torres F, Otranto D (2011) Vector-borne
parasitic zoonoses: emerging scenarios and new perspectives.
Vet Parasitol 182:14-21.
Conboy G (2009) Helminth parasites of the canine and feline
respiratory tract.Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
39:1109-1126.
Elsheikha HM, Naveed Khan (2011) Essentials of Veterinary
Parasitology, 1st edn. Caister Academic Press, Wymondham
Foster N, Elsheikha HM (2012) The immune response to
parasitic helminths of veterinary importance and its potential
manipulation for future vaccine control strategies. Parasitol
Res 110:1587-1599.
Francescon1 F, Lup1 O (2012) Myiasis. Clin Microbiol Rev
25:79-105.
Hoste H, Torres-Acosta JF (2011) Non chemical control of
helminths in ruminants: adapting solutions for changing
worms in a changing world. Vet Parasitol 180:144-154.
Nielsen MK, Fritzen B, Duncan JL et al. (2010) Practical
aspects of equine parasite control: a review based upon a
workshop discussion consensus. Equine Vet J 42:460-468
359
Rivero A, Vézilier J, Weill M et al. (2010) Insecticide control
of vector-borme diseases: when is insecticide resistance a
problem? PLoS Pathogens 6(8):e1001000
Sargison ND (2011) Pharmaceutical control of endoparasitic
helminth infections in sheep. Vet Clin North Am Food Anim
Pract 27:139-156.
Sutherland IA, Leathwick DM (2011) Anthelmintic resistance
in nematode parasites of cattle: a global issue? Trends
Parasitol 27:176-181.
Taylor MA, Coop RL, Wall RL (2007)
Veterinary
Parasitology, 3rd edn. Wiley- Blackwell, Oxford.
Torgerson PR, Macpherson CN (2011) The socioeconomic
burden of parasitic zoonoses: global trends. Vet Parasitol
182:79-95.
Wall R, Rose H, Ellse L et al. (2011) Livestock ectoparasites:
integrated management in a changing climate. Vet Parasitol
180:82-89
Wells B, Burgess ST, McNeilly TN et al. (2012) Recent
developments in the diagnosis of ectoparasite infections and
disease through a better understanding of parasite biology and
host responses. Mol Cell Probe 26:47-53.
Zajac AM, Conboy GA (2006) Veterinary Clinical
Parasitology, 7th edn. Wiley-Blackwell, Ames.
360
Appendix: Life cycles
72a
Sporogony
Chick ingests
sporulated
oocysts
Exogenous
Fuse to form ZYGOTE
Endogenous
Micro-
gametes
Microgametocytes
Sporozoites
invade intestinal
epithelial cells
and develop into
first-generation
Gametogony
merozoites
Merozoites differentiate
into macro- and
Asexual
microgametes
Merozoites reinvade
reproduction
cells and produce
phase
more merozoites
(Schizogony)
(several cycles)
361
8
'Predator'
definitivehost
Un-sporulated
oocyst
Sporulated
Aberrant
intermediatehost
'Prey'
intermediatehosts
147c
Fluke eggs are
Metacercariae are
ingested by the
shed in faeces
final host
Miracidia develop
within theegg
Cercariae swim
and encyst as
metacercariae on
vegetation
Miracidia swim
until they finda
Each miracidium multiplies asexually
snail host
through sporocysts and rediae to
several hundred cercariae
362
Glossary
Acaricides: compounds  that act against
 ectoparasites
belonging to the Acari group (mites and ticks).
Anthelmintic: chemical drug used to remove worms, usually
from the intestinal tract and/or respiratory tract of a host.
Asexual reproduction: multiplication of parasite stages by
binary or multicellular fission without production of sexually
differentiated stages.
Bots: larvae of several fly species, particularly Gastrophilus
(horse bot), Oestrus (sheep bot) and Dermatobia and
Hypoderma (affect cattle and other species).
Bradyzoite: slow-growing zoite or meront of the pseudocyst
of Toxoplasma and related tissue cyst-forming coccidian
protozoa.
Buccal capsule: mouth cavity of a nematode.
Bursa (copulatory bursa): cuticular copulatory structure at the
posterior end of males of the suborder Strongylida. Its
morphological attributes are useful in nematode taxonomy
and species identification.
a    a  s
from a sporocyst or redia in snail intermediate hosts.
363
Coenurus: fluid-filled metacestode of some tapeworms of the
family Taeniidae. Has a non-laminated wall that produces
protoscolices, but without brood capsules.
Coprophagous: feeding on manure.
Cysticercoid: tapeworm larva that develops in an invertebrate
intermediate host; characteristic of many cyclophyllidean
families  such  as  Hymenolepididae,  Dilepididae  or
Anoplocephalidae.
Cysticercus: tapeworm larva in which the scolex develops in
an inverted form and which has a fluid-filled bladder
surrounding it. It is characteristic of the cyclophyllidean
family Taeniidae.
Definitive or final host: host in which the parasite attains its
sexual maturity (cf. intermediate hosts).
Ectoparasiticide: compound developed for on-animal use as a
therapeutic agent to eliminate any existing ectoparasite
infestation and prevent reinfestation.
Egg or ovum: germ cell of a female.
Engorgement: distension of a feeding tick with blood; cannot
occur in male hard ticks because their back is covered
completely by a hard scutum.
Epimeres (= apodemes): grooves in the cuticle that extend
from the base of each leg. Have a diagnostic value in
discriminating mites.
364
Erratic parasites: found in their normal hosts, but in unusual
 m pdpn po a ae trm u snss no s
       
shell, which covers the cystic stages, such as oocyst.
Feral: feral cycle of a parasitic agent is one that takes place in
the wild as opposed to an urban site.
Gamogony (= gametogony): formation of gametes
Haematophagous: bloodsucking; usually refers to the feeding
habits of various insects and acarines such as mosquitoes and
ticks.
Hexacanth:  six-hooked,  first-stage  larva  of  certain
tapeworms; stage that hatches from the cestode egg and
infects the intermediate host
Horizontal transmission:  transmission of a parasitic agent
among members of a group.
Insecticides: compounds that act  against ectoparasites
belonging to the Class Insecta.
Intermediate host: host that provides the parasite with a
temporary environment for completion of immature stages of
its life cycle, but one in which only the asexual or immature
stages of the parasite occur.
Juvenile: organism similar to the adult of the species, but
sexually immature.
365
Larva: embryo that becomes self-sustaining and independent
before it has developed the characteristic features of the adult
form.
Merogony: type of asexual reproduction in which there is
nuclear replication without plasmotomy (i.e. without division)
and then two to many merozoites or daughter cells are
produced simultaneously; a type of schizogony in which
merozoites are formed; examples are found in many members
of the Apicomplexa, such as Eimeria and Plasmodium.
Merozoite: product of merogony; usually an elongate
organism that infects another host cell to undergo either
merogony again or gamogony.
Metacercaria (-iae): infective stage of a fluke enclosed in a
protective cyst that resists adverse environmental conditions.
This stage develops from the cercaria and is infective for the
definitive host.
Metacestode: immature tapeworm that develops from the
    s  x
intermediate host (mammal), but one not yet sexually mature.
Microfilaria: stage of filarial worm transmitted to the biting
insect from the definitive host
Miracidium: first developmental stage larva of a fluke;
hatches from the egg and penetrates the snail intermediate
host.
Moulting (= ecdysis): shedding of an extermal covering such
as integument or exoskeleton; in arthropods and nematodes.
366
shedding the external covering allows the parasite to expand
in its new skin.
Nymph: preadult stage of an insect.
Oncomiracidium: free-swimming, ciliated larva of members
of the Subclass Monogenea.
Oncosphere: six-hooked embryo that is contained in the egg
membranes of members of the Class Cestoda. See Hexacanth.
Oocyst: stage in the life cycle of certain members of the
Phylum Apicomplexa in which the zygote secretes a wall
around itself; often highly resistant  to environmental
conditions.
Operculum: lid or cap-like structure at one or both ends of
certain worm eggs (i.e. fluke); the larval parasite emerges
from the egg at the operculum
Paratenic host: host in which there is no development of the
immature parasite; this host does not favour or hinder the
parasite in the completion of its life cycle. The parasite may
Patent infection: mature infection that is producing immature
stages such as eggs or oocysts.
Permanent parasites: spend most of their life cycle in
association with their hosts.
367
Plasmotomy: a type of asexual reproduction in which a
protozoan celldivides into two or more multinucleate
daughter cells.
Plerocercoid: larva  or metacestode developing from a
Pseudophyllidea; this type of tapeworm larva is solid and has
a rudimentary holdfast at the anterior end.
Procercoid: larva or metacestode that does not have a scolex
similar to that of the adult tapeworm; commonly found in
members of the tapeworm order Pseudophyllidea
Proglottid: body segment of a tapeworm containing a
complete set of reproductive organs.
Protoscolex (protoscolices): holdfast of tapeworms of the
order Cyclophyllidea, which forms from a germinal
epithelium in a coenurus or hydatid cyst.
Questing: process whereby ticks wait for a suitable host to
pass them by before attaching to the host.
Redia: trematode stage in the snail intermediate host that
develops from the sporocyst and becomes the cercaria
Reportable disease: disease that, by law, must be reported to a
health authority.
Reservoir host: infected definitive host serving as a source
from which other animals or humans can become infected.
The reservoir host never suffers from such association.
368
Rostellum: prominence on the anterior end of the scolex of
with rows ofhooks.
Schizogony: type of asexual reproduction in which there are
multiple nuclear divisions and then plasmotomy takes place,
giving rise to a large number of daughter cells; occurs often in
members  of  the  Phylum  Apicomplexa; merogony  and
microgametogony are types of schizogony.
Scolex (scolices): holdfast or organ by which a tapeworm
attaches to the intestine of its host.
Scutum: hard plate or shield on the dorsum behind the
capitulum of hard ticks. Much more extensive in male than in
female ticks.
Spicule (= copulatory spicule): an elongate, sclerotized
structure of male nematodes used in holding open the vulva of
the female during copulation and transfer of sperm
Sporocysts: stage within oocysts that contains the sporozoites
sporozoite.
Sporozoite: cellular infective stage in some members of the
Phylum Apicomplexa. Evolves from excystation of oocysts
and sporocysts.
Sylvatic: refers to a forest or a wooded area; used as an
adjective to describe the location of a disease cycle in the
wild.
369
Tachyzoite: fast-reproducing parasite stages within the host
cell.
Temporary parasites: visit their hosts occasionally and at
intermittent times for taking their meal (e.g. mosquitoes
bugs).
Transport host: host that is not needed for the parasite to
complete any stage of its life cycle but is merely used to carry
the non-developing parasite to the next host without further
disseminate them as they pass through its gut).
Trophozoite: growing, feeding stage of a protozoan. In some
species it is also called the vegetative stage.
Vector: agent of transmission. When the final or intermediate
host that delivers the infectious agents to the animal or human
is an arthropod it is defined as a vector (e.g. ticks act as a
vector host for Babesia and mosquitoes act as a vector for
malaria),
Vertical transmission: transmission of a parasite from one
generation to the next through the egg or in utero.
Zoonosis (-es): diseases that are transmitted from animals to
humans.
Zoonotic: an organism that causes a zoonosis.
370
Host index
Note: references are to case numbers
alpaca 175, 182
amphibian 180
Anguilla anguilla 86
Anguilla japonica (Japanese eel) 86
armadillo 83
bearded dragon 202
birds 60
bird of prey 25, 81, 158, 164, 198
helmeted guinea fowl 122
hobby 164
kite 129
bush viper 195
canaries 27, 79, 153
cat 14,33, 34,53, 55,57,65, 83, 89, 111, 113,123, 139, 150.
180
371
cattle 29,41, 93,95, 99,110, 114, 147,148, 170, 174, 207
chamois 56
cheetah 134
chicken 6, 200
cockatiel 177
corvids 81
deer 56. 110.115.116
dog 23, 33,37, 39, 53, 57, 74, 91, 105, 107,123, 125,126
130,139, 141, 146,159, 161,168, 170, 173,176, 178,189,
191
donkey 5, 19, 114
dove 198
Eurasian sparrowhawk 158
European hedgehog 199
finches 54
goldfinch 153
fish 48, 63, 127, 204
catfish 7
372
goldfish 64
koi carp 11
ornamental goldfish 20, 84
roach 71
tilapian fish 86, 204
gallinaceous birds 81
gamebird 10
gerbil 35
g0at 13,110, 140, 155, 157
g0ose 102, 120
guenon 101, 190
guinea pig 52, 78, 187
hamster 50
hedgehog 203
hen 30, 31
honey bee 8
horse 3, 12, 16, 17, 18, 33,41, 42,44, 46, 51,62,69, 80,82,
83,90,94, 98,123,131, 133,143, 144, 145,171, 172,208
373
kestrel 45
1lama 28, 76, 115, 116
Moorean gastropod snails 117
mute swan 77
non-human primate 206
bab0on 169, 185
macaque monkey 36
red-tailed guenon 190
spider monkey 206
opossum 83
owl 15,49
parakeet 112
peregrine falcon 183
Phyllophaga beetles 32
pig1,22,32,40,73, 106,121, 151, 166, 186, 201
pigeon 81
poultry 72, 152, 154
374
psittacines 81, 112, 167
lovebird 167
python 67
rabbit4, 24,96, 107, 109, 128, 162,188
raccoons 78, 83
rat 197
reindeer 193
reptile 180
rhea 26
rodents 67, 180, 197
ruminants 147, 148
sea lion 63
seal 63
sea turtle 68
sheep 9, 13,41, 58, 59,61,75, 85, 87,92, 100, 103, 147, 148.
149,170,173,178,179,181,205
skunk 83
sludge worm (aquatic oligochaete) 86
375
snake 124
garter snake 138
South American camelid 115, 116, 175, 182
tawny eagle 70
Thomson's gazelles 134
toads
clawed toads 142
common toad 132
tortoise 156, 194
Hermann's tortoise 118
Russian tortoise 156
ungulates 56
whale 63
white-backed vulture 108
white-tailed deer 76, 115, 116
zebra 108
376
Parasite index
Note: references are to case numbers
Acanthocheilonemareconditum126
Aelurostrongylus abstrusus 65,139
Amphipoda 68
Anaplasma phagocytophilium58,59
Angiostrongylus cantonensis 90, 176
Angiostrongylus vasorum 37, 176
Anisakis simplex 63
Anoplocephalaperfoliata 80
ascarids 67, 158, 194
Ascaridia galli 6
Ascaris suum 1,151, 201
Babesia 89, 184
B. bigemina 184
B. cati 89
B. felis 89
377
B. gibsoni 191
B. herpailuri 89
Baylisascaris procyonis 78
Besnoitia 5
B. bennetti 19, 114
Bovicola bovis 93, 95
Bunostomum 100
Calliphora sp. 97
Capillaria 45, 81, 154, 198,203
C. aerophila 203
C. contorta 25
C. erinacei 203
C. ovoreticulata 203
Caprellidae 68
Caryospora sp. 183
Chabertia ovina 47
Cheyletiella 128
378
C. blakei 33
C. parasitivorax 128
C. yasguri 161
Chilodenella sp. 64
Chirodiscoides caviae 52
Cimex lectularius 196
Choanotaenia infundibulum 97
Chorioptes 75, 98, 181
C. bovis 155, 157
C. caprae 155, 157
C. ovis 155, 157
Cnemidocoptes mutans 123
coccidia 54, 153, 158
Coenurus 188
C. cerebralis 13, 150
C. serialis 150
Cooperia 100, 103
379
copepods
Cyclops and Diaptomus 7, 120
Crenosoma striatum 203
Cryptosporidium 207
Ctenocephalides spp. 189
C. canis 24, 126
C. felis 24, 126
Culicoides 42, 44, 70, 112, 136
Cuterebra 34
cyathostomins 41, 143, 144
Cysticercus cellulosae73
C. fasciolaris 180
C. ovis 170
C. pisiformis 107
C. tenuicollis 170
Dactylogyrus 48
Damalinia 181
380
Demodex 104, 168
D. aurati 50
D. canis 168
D. caviae 52
D. criceti 50
D. cuniculi 128
Dermacentor variabilis 74
Dermanyssus gallinae 30, 200
Dicrocoelium dendriticum 87, 110
Dipetalonema 126
Diphyllobothriumlatum180
Diplopylidium acanthotetra 180
D. nolleri 180
Dipylidium caninum 53, 180, 189
Dirofilaria immitis 23, 65, 126,139, 159
D. repens 126
Draschia megastoma 90, 97
381
Drepanidotaenia lanceolata120
Echidnophaga gallinacean122
Echinococcus 190
E.equinus 69
E. granulosus 69,97, 150, 178, 170, 173
Eimeria 54
E. acervulina 72, 152
E. cavia 187
E. irresidua 4
E. magna 4
E. necatrix 72, 152
E. stiedae 4, 162
E. tenella 72, 152
Encephalitozoon cuniculi 146
Entamoeba sp.206
Eucoleus aerophilus 37, 65
E. contortus 25
382
Eurytrema pancreaticum 149
Fasciola 61, 165
F. gigantica 165
F. hepatica 41,61, 87, 147, 148, 165, 175
Fascioloides magna 165
Felicola subrostratus111
filaria 126, 159
Filaroides hirthi 37
F. milski 37
F. osleri (Oslerus osleri) 37
fleas 33, 53, 70, 88, 160, 197
Formica spp. 87, 110
Gasterophilus 18, 108, 172
G. haemorrhoidalis 172
G. intestinalis 172
G. nasalis 172
Giardia 57, 91, 167
383
Gliricola porcelli 52
Glossina sp. 97
Gyrodactylus 11, 48
Gyropus ovalis 52
Habronema 94, 98
H. megastoma 17
H. microstoma 17
H. muscae 97
Haematopinus asini 42,44,94
H. suis 186
Haemonchus contortus 9, 47, 85, 100, 103
Haemoproteus 49, 70, 112, 136, 164
Halicephalobus (Micronema) deletrix 90
heartworms 104, 126, 139, 141, 159
Heterakis gallinarum 26
Heterodoxus spiniger 126
Heterophyidae 204
384
hippoboscid fly 49, 70, 112, 136
Histomonas meleagridis 26
house flies 17 See Musca domestica
hydatid cysts 69, 170, 178, 190
Hymenolepis 120
H. diminuta 35, 197
Hypoderma bovis 90, 91
Isospora spp. 54
I. serini 153
I. suis 121
Ixodes ricinus 58, 59, 89, 199
I. hexagonus 199
Joyeuxiella pasqualei 180
J. echinorhyncoides 180
J. fuhrmanni 180
Lamproglena sp. 7
Leporacarus (Listrophorus) gibbus 128
385
Leucocytozoon spp. 49, 136
Ligula intestinalis 71
Linognathus 181
L. setosus 126
L. vituli 93, 95
liver fluke 110
lungworms 174
Dictyocaulus arnfieldi 133
D. viviparus 47, 66, 163, 174
Metastrongyhus apri 22
Macracanthorhynchus hirudinaceus 32
Melophagus ovinus 75,92, 181
Menacanthus 79
meningeal worm 76 See Parelaphostrongylus tenuis
Mesocestoides lineatus 180
Mesocoelium 195
mites 28, 30, 33, 36
386
Monezia expansa 87
monogenean 11, 48
mosquitoes 112, 136
Musca domestica 17, 97
Myocoptes 52
Myxobolusdermatobia86
M. cerebralis 86
Nematodirus 91, 100, 103
N. battus 29, 179
N.helvetianus2
29
Neospora caninum 170
N. hughesi 16
Neotrombiculaautumnalis98
nits 129
Notocotylus attenuatus 102
Notoedres cati 33, 50, 128
N.muris 52
387
N. notoedres 50
Nyctotherus 156
Oesophagostomum venulosum 47
Ophidascaris 67
Ophionyssus natricis 138
oribatid mites 80
Orientobilharzia sp. 140
Ostertagia ostertagi 29, 41
Otodectes cynotis 113, 161
oxyurids 118, 194
Oxyuris equi 3, 42, 44
Paragonimus spp. 165
P. kellicotti 139
Paramphistomum cervi 147, 148
Parascaris 62
P. equorum 133, 171
Parelaphostrongylus tenuis 76, 115, 116
388
pentastomes, linguatulids 124
Pilobolus 66
Plasmodium 136
Plistophora myotrophica 132
Pneumonyssus simicola 36
Psoroptes spp. 91, 128
P. cuniculi 96
P. equi 131
P. ovis 75,99, 181
psoroptic mange (scab) 42, 44, 99, 181
Pulex irritans 126, 189
Raillietina sp. 60
red mite 30 See Dermanyssus gallinae
Rodentolepis nana 35
Sarcocystis 173
S.arieticanis 170
S. cruzi 14
389
S. felis 14
S. neurona 14, 16, 46, 51, 82, 83
S. tenella 170
Sarcoptes scabei 52, 56, 134,182
S. scabiei var. auchinae 28
S. scabei var. suis 166
sarcoptic mange 56, 182, 185
Setaria 90
snails 102
Galba pervia 102
Galba truncatula 87
Lymnaea auricularia102
Lymnaea peregra 102
Partula sp. 117
Planorbis or Bulinus spp. 147, 148
Radix auricularia140
Zebrina sp. 87
390
Spilopsyllus cuniculi 24, 128
Spirometra
erinaceieuropaei180
S. mansonoides 180
Stephanurus dentatus 40
Sternostoma tracheacolum27
Stomoxys calcitrans 17, 97
strigeid flukes 142
strongyles 143, 144
Strongyloides spp. 100
S. papillosus 155, 157
S. westeri 145
Strongylus vulgaris 90, 208
S. equinus 90
Syngamus trachea 10, 15, 154
S. (Cyathostoma) bronchialis 15, 154
Taenia spp.
391
T. hydatigena 170, 173
T. multiceps 13, 150, 170, 188
T. ovis 170, 173
T. pisiformis 107
T. serialis 150, 188
T. solium 73
T. taeniaformis 180
Teladorsagia circumcincta 47, 85, 100, 103
Theromyzon sp. 77
ticks 33, 38, 104, 141, 184, 191
Amblyomma americanum 89, 104
Argas persicus 31, 141
Boophilus (Rhipicephalus) microplus 135,137, 184
Dermacentor 89
Haemophysalis 89
Ixodes ricinus 104
Rhipicephalus sanguineus 89,126
392
Toxoplasma gondii 14, 34, 170, 202
Trichinella spiralis 106
Trichodectes canis 189
Trichodina 127
Trichomonas gallinae 177, 198
trichostrongyle 85, 193
Trichostrongylus 47, 100, 103
T. axei 103
Trichuris spp. 100
T. suis 151, 169
T. trichiura 101, 169
T. vulpis 105, 141, 169
Tritrichomonas foetus 55
Trixacarus caviae 52
Trombicula autumnalis 94
Trypanosoma melophagium 92
Varroa destructor (jacobsoni) 8
393
General index
Note: references are to case numbers
abamectin 119
abdominal pain, horse 80, 208
abomasal nematodes 9, 85, 100, 103
abortion 58, 59
acaricides 59, 135
acetylpromazine 143
aegyptianellosis 31
Aelurostrongylusabstrusus65
albendaz0le 78, 87, 146, 188
alkaline phosphatase 21
alpacas 175, 182
Amblyommaamericanum104
amitraz 161, 168
ammonia, “household’ 187
anaemia
394
classification in farm animals 100
liver fluke infection 175
louse infestation 95
Anaplasma phagocytophilium 58, 59
Angiostrongylus spp. 90, 176
Anisakis simplex 63
Anoplocephalaperfoliata80
anthelmintic drugs
mechanisms of action 119
reduced efficacy/resistance 105, 119, 205
see also named drugs
Argas persicus 31
ascaridiosis, birds 6, 158
Ascaris suum 1, 151, 201
ataxia 16, 82
atovaquone 191
atoxoplasmosis 153
395
aural haematoma 166
aural plaques 131
avermectins 3, 45, 172
aviaries 43, 158
azithromycin 191
Babesia spp. 89, 191
baboon 169, 185
Baermann apparatus 2, 65
barnacles 68
Baylisascaris procyonis 78
bearded dragon 202
bed bug 196
bees 8
benzimidazoles 1, 10, 110, 130
benzyl benzoate 44
Besnoitia spp. 5, 19, 114
bile ducts, flukes 61, 87
396
birds
behavioural studies 43
Capillaria parasites 25, 45, 81
captive 79, 153, 158, 167, 177
coccidiosis 54, 72, 152
companion (non-food) 43
lung mite 27
birds of prey
ascarids 158
Capillaria infection 25, 81
Caryospora infection 183
Haemoproteus infection 164
lice 129
trichomonosis 198
bismuth subsalicylate 143
blackhead disease (histomonosis) 26
blood fluke 140
397
blood smears 89, 164, 191
blow fly 97, 109
Boett blankets 44
bone marrow, hypocellular 130
Boophilus (Rhipicephalus) microplus 184
botflies 108, 172
bottle jaw 9, 85
Bovicola bovis 93
bronchitis, parasitic 174
"bubble eye′ goldfish 20
Bufo bufo 132
Bulinus spp. 147
Calliphora spp. 97
camelids 28, 115, 116, 175, 182
canaries 27, 79, 153
Capillaria spp
birds 25, 45, 81
398
differentiation from Syngamus 154
hedgehogs 203
carbaryl dusting powder 200
carcasses (livestock) 170, 173
cardiomyopathy, hypertrophic 14
carnidazole 198
Caryospora spp. 183
catfish, copepod parasites 7
cats
babesiosis 89
biting lice 111
cerebral coenurosis 150
ear canker mite 113
heartworm 139
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 14
ivermectin toxicity 123
lungworm (aeluro-strongylosis) 65
399
outdoor roaming 65
permethrin toxicity 34
tapeworm infection 180
Toxoplasma gondii 202
tritrichomonosis 55
'walking dandruff mite 33
cattle
cryptosporidiosis 207
grubs 91
lancet fluke 110
lice 93, 95
lungworm 66, 163, 174
Nematodirus helvetianus 29
psoroptic mange 99
caval syndrome 23
cercariae 102, 140
cervical spine malformation 82
400
chamois 56
cheetah 134
Cheyletiella spp. 33, 128, 161
chickens, see poultry
chilodenellosis 64
Chorioptes caprae 155
chorioptic mange 94, 155, 157
Cimex lectularius 196
circling 78
coccidiosis 4, 54,72, 152, 162
avian 54, 72, 152
pigs 121
rabbits 4, 162
cockatiel 177
codeine 143
coenurosis 12, 13, 150, 188
Collies/Collie-cross dogs 91, 123, 168
401
Cooperia spp. 103
copepod parasites 7
corvids 43
Crenosoma striatum 203
cryptosporidosis 207
Culicoides hypersensitivity 33, 42, 44
Cyathostoma bronchialis 15, 154
cyathostomins (small redworm) 143, 144
cysticercosis 73, 107, 120, 180, 188
Dactylogyrus spp. 48
debilitated turtle syndrome 68
deer, white-tailed 76, 115
demodicosis 50, 168
Dermacentor variabilis 74
Dermanyssus gallinae 30, 200
dermatitis, exudative 155
Dermatophilus congolensis 94, 98
402
dermatophytosis 52
diarrhoea
beef calves 29
cats 55
‘foal heat' 145
lambs 100, 103
pigs 32
reindeer 193
diazinon 75
diclofenac 108
Dicrocoelium dendriticum 87, 110
Dictyocaulus arnfieldi 133
Dictyocaulus viviparus 66, 163, 174
diflubenzuron 7
dimetridazole 198
Dipetalonema reconditum 126
Dipylidium caninum 53,189
403
Dirofilaria immitis 126, 159
dogs
access to livestock carcasses 170, 173
adult-onset demodicosis 168
Babesia gibsoni 191
cheyletiellosis 161
encephalitozoonosis 146
Filaroides osleri 37
fleas 39, 53
heartworm disease 23, 104, 141, 159, 176
ileocolic intussusception 105
ivermectin toxicity 91, 123, 168
lungworm 126, 130
pancytopenia 125
tapeworm 13, 170, 173, 189
vena caval syndrome 23
dolphins, feeding 63
404
donkeys 19, 133
doramectin 29, 75, 181, 193
Draschia megastoma 90, 97
Drepanidotaenialanceolata120
eagle, tawny 70
ear mites
cats 113
rabbit 96
earthworms 22, 27, 45
Eastern equine encephalitis 46
Echidnophaga gallinacea 122
Echinococcus spp. 69, 178, 190
Eimeria spp. 152, 162, 187
‘elephant skin disease′ (besnoitiosis) 19, 114
ELISA 21, 175
emodepside 119
encephalitis, verminous 82
405
Encephalitozoon cuniculi 146
Entamoeba spp. 206
enteric disease complex 201
enterohepatitis, infectious (histomonosis/blackhead disease)
26
epibiont crustacea 68
epsiprantel 107, 189
equine degenerative myelopathy 46, 82
equine protozoal
myeloencephalitis 12, 46, 51, 82, 83
causative parasite 51
diagnosis 83
erysipelas 201
essential oils 30
Eucoleus contortus 25
Eurytrema spp. 149
faecal egg counts 3, 29, 205
406
problems with 41
faecal flotation tests 1, 118, 179, 183
faeces, fresh blood 33
FAMACHA system 100
Fasciola spp. 41, 61, 165, 175
life cycle 165
Felicola subrostratus 111
fenbendazole 37,45, 55, 100, 116
idiosyncratic reaction 130
mechanism of action 119
reduced efficacy 205
finches 54, 153
fipronil 24, 161, 192
fish
chilodenellosis 64
feeding of marine mammals 63
flukes 11, 48, 204
407
freshwater 71, 86, 204
goldfish 20, 64, 84
tapeworm 71
Trichodina infection 127
fleas
control 53, 88, 160, 192
diagnosis of infestation 53
household infestations 39, 104, 160
rabbits 24
sticktight 122
and tapeworms 53, 189
flies
control 17, 18
disease transmission 17, 97
ectoparasitic on birds 70
hippoboscid 49
mouthparts 97
408
flukes
alpaca 175
birds 102
blood 140
bush viper 195
cattle 110
causing anaemia 175
fish and aquatic animals 11, 48, 142, 204
human health risk 110
Paramphistomum spp.147, 148
rumen 147
sheep 61, 87, 147, 148, 149
fly strike 97, 109
formalin 7, 11
formamidine 135
‘frounce' 177, 198
game meat 106
409
gamebirds 10, 26
gapeworm’ 10, 15, 154
garlic-based acaricides 30
Gasterophilus spp. (botflies) 108, 172
geese 102,120
gerbil 35
giant thorny-headed worm 32
giardiosis
avian 167
SNAP test kit 57
'gid' 13, 150
Glossina spp. 97
gluteal muscle atrophy 46, 82
goats 140, 155
goldfish
chilodenellosis 64
ornamental 20, 84
410
greasy pig disease 166
grouse 26
guenon 101, 190
guinea fowl 122
guinea pigs 52, 78, 187
Gyrodactylus spp. 11, 48
Habronemaspp
cutaneous 17, 94
gastric 18, 97
Haematopinus spp.93,186
Haemonchus contortus 9, 85, 100, 102
Haemoproteus spp. 70, 112, 136, 164
Halicephalobus (Micronema) deletrix 90
halofuginone 207
hamsters 50
head tilt 78
heartworm
411
cats 139
chemoprophylaxis 159
dogs 23, 104, 141, 159, 176
hedgehogs 199, 203
histomonosis (infectious enterohepatitis/blackhead diseaase)
26
hobby, wild 164
honey bees 8
hookworm 33
horseradish peroxidase 21
horses
abberrant parasite migration 90
abdominal pain 80, 208
aural plaques 131
botflies 172
causes of pruritus 3, 42, 94, 98
chorioptic mange 94
Culicoides hypersensitivity 33, 42, 44
412
cyathostomins 143, 144
cystic echinococcosis 69
EPM 12,46, 51, 82, 83
habronemosis 17, 18
lice 94
lungworm infection 133
Neospora hughesi 16
Neotrombiculaautumnalis98
Parascaris equorum 62, 171
pinworm 3
Psoroptes equi 131
Strongylus vulgaris 208
tapeworm 80
threadworm 145
house fly 97
human health risks
bed bugs 196
413
cryptosporidiosis 207
dog tapeworm 189
Encephalitozoon cuniculi 146
Entamoeba spp. 206
fish nematodes 63
flies 97
giardiosis 57
hydatid infection 178, 190
lancet fluke 110
pentastomes 124
pork meat 73, 106
snake mites 138
Taenia spp. 73
tritrichomonosis 55
hydatidosis 69, 178, 190
Hymenolepis spp. 35, 120, 197
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 14
414
"hypobiosis’ 47
Hypoderma spp. 90, 91
hypoproteinaemia 103
ileocolic intussusception 105
ileus 80
imidacloprid 192
immobilization, chemical 134, 185
immunodiagnosis 21
inflammatory response, cyathostomins 143
insect growth regulator 39, 104, 160
mechanism of action 192
insecticides
flea control 34, 160, 192
mechanisms of action 192
recommendations for use 192
resistance 192
toxicity 34
415
intussusception, ileocolic 105
Isospora spp. 54, 121, 153
ivermectin 1,6,45, 52, 161, 181
antiparasitic spectrum 116
failure of treatment 62
injectable 28, 99, 134
toxicity 91, 123, 168
Ixodes spp. ticks 58, 59, 199
kestrel 45
kite 129
koi carp 11
leeches, aquatic nasal 77
Leucocytozoon spp. 136
levamisole 6, 45, 119, 203
lice
birds 79, 129
cats 111
416
cattle 93, 95
dog 189
horse 94
pig 186
life cycles 9, 72, 83, 147, 165
Ligula intestinalis 71
linguatulids 124
Linognathusvitula93
liver
histomonosis lesions 26
hydatid cysts 69
‘milk spot' lesions 1, 20
liver flukes
anaemia 175
cattle 110
life cycle 165
sheep 61, 87, 148, 149
417
1lama 28, 76, 115, 116
lovebird 167
lufenuron 33, 192
lung mites 27, 36
lungs, hydatid cysts 69
lungworm
bovine 66, 163, 174
cat 65
dogs 126, 130
horse/donkey 133
pigs 22
Lymnaeatruncatula175
macaque monkey 36
McMaster technique 29, 41, 205
Macracanthorhynchus hirundinaceus 32
macrocyclic lactones 33, 91, 95, 99, 128
seealso named drugs
418
mange
chorioptic 94, 155, 157
psoroptic 75, 91, 99, 181
sarcoptic 28,56, 134,182, 185
mebendazole 11, 78
medetomidine 134
Melophagus ovinus 92
Menacanthus spp.79
‘meningeal worm’ 76
merozoites 72, 89, 191
Mesocoelium 195
metacercariae 102, 147
Metastrongylus apri 22
methylene blue 11
metronidazole 55, 156, 198
‘milk spots', liver 1, 201
miracidia 102
419
mites
Cheyletiella spp. 33, 128, 161
lungs 27, 36
poultry 30, 200
Psoroptes ovis 75, 91, 181
Sarcoptes scabei 28, 134, 166, 182
snakes 138
tapeworm transmission 80
treatment 141
monepantel 47, 119
Monezia expansa 87
monkeys 36, 206
moxidectin 75, 172, 181
multidrug resistance gene (MDR7) 91, 123
Musca domestica 17, 97
muscle cysts 73, 106
muscles, atrophy 46, 82
420
Mycoplasma haemollamae 175
myiasis 97, 109
Myxobolus spp. 86
nasal leech 77
Neasus spp. 142
neem oil 30, 200
Nematodirus spp. 29, 91, 103, 179
Neospora spp. 16, 170
Neotrombicula autumnalis 98
netobimin 87
neurocysticercosis 73
neurological disease
baylisascariosis 78
coenurosis 13, 150
horses 12, 16, 46, 82, 83, 90
1lama 115, 116
meningeal worm 76
421
neuromasts 142
neutropenia 59
niclosamide 189
nitenpyram 192
nitroscanate 107, 173
‘nits' (lice eggs) 186
Notocotylus attenuatus 102
Notoedres spp. 50
nuptial tubercles 84
Nyctotherus spp. 156
oedema, submandibular 9, 85
‘oesophageal capillariosis’ 25
oncospheres 170
00cysts 54, 72, 121, 183
Ophidascaris spp. 67
Ophionyssus natricis138
opossums 51, 83
422
organophosphates 7, 75, 135
Orientobilharzia spp. 140
otitis externa 113
Otodectes cynotis 113
owls 15,49
oxfendazole 37
oxyclozanide 148
oxyurid nematodes 118
Oxyuris equi 3
pancreatic ducts, flukes 149
pancytopenia 125, 130
parakeets 112, 123
Paramphistomum spp. 147, 148
Parascaris equorum 62, 171
Parelaphostrongylus tenuis 76, 115, 116
paromycin 207
parvovirus infection 105
423
pasture management 85, 193
pentastomes 124
peregrine falcon 183
permethrins 17, 44
toxicity 34
pheasant 10
phenylpyrazol 135
pheromone-based technology 137
phosmet 161
pigeons, fed to raptors 198
pigs
Ascaris suum 1, 151,201
cysticercosis 73
giant thormy-headed worm 32
kidney worm 40
louse infestation 186
lungworm (Metastrongylus apri) 22
424
mange mite 166
muscle nematode 106
outdoor management 1, 22, 32,40, 73, 106, 151
whipworm (Trichuris suis 151
Pilobolus spp. 66
pinworms 3
piperazine 6, 119, 151
Planorbis snails 147
Plistophora myotrophica132
plunge dipping 75
polyoma virus 50
pork meat 73, 106
potassium permanganate 7
poultry 30
ascarid infestations 6
coccidiosis 54, 72, 152
free-range farms 154
425
red mite 30, 200
ticks 31
praziquante1 11, 80,87, 107, 140, 173, 180, 188, 189
primates, non-human 101, 169, 185, 190, 206
proglottids 120, 189
protoscolices 69
Psoroptes cuniculi 96
Psoroptes equi 131
Psoroptes ovis 75, 91, 181
psoroptic mange 75, 91, 99, 181
punch biopsy 5
pyrantel 80, 119
pyrethroids 30, 135
python, rock 67
quail 26
rabbits
Cheyletiella mites 128
426
coccidiosis 4, 162
cysticercosis 107,188
ear mites 96
fleas 24
fly strike 109
raccoons 78
Raillietina spp.60
raptors, see birds of prey
red blood cell infection 89, 191
‘red mites'
horses 94
poultry 30, 200
redworms, small (cyathostomins) 143, 144
reindeer 193
resorantel 148
rhea 26
roach 71
427
robenidine hydrochloride 114
Rocky Mountain spotted fever 74
Rodentolepis nana 35
rodents 106, 180, 197
ronidazole 55, 198
Salmonella spp. 147
salmonid whirling disease 86
sanitation 6, 177, 187
Sarcocystis felis 14
Sarcocystis neurona 51, 82, 83
sarcocystosis, dogs 170, 173
Sarcoptes scabiei 134, 182
var auchinae 28
var suis 166
sarcoptic mange 28, 56, 134, 182, 185
schizonts 12
scrotal mange 157
428
sea turtle 68
selamectin 24, 104, 128, 192
selenium sulphide 128, 161
Setaria spp. 90
sheep
Chorioptes mange 157
flukes 61,87, 147, 148, 149
`gid' 13
haemonchosis 9, 85
keds 92
myiasis 97
Nematodirus infection 91, 103, 179
scab (Psotoptes ovis) 75, 181
tick infestations 59, 135
skin punch biopsy 5
snails 76, 102, 115, 140, 147, 175
nematode parasites 117
429
snakes 124, 138,195
SNAP Giardia test 57
sodium chloride 11
songbirds 112
spider monkey 206
Spilopsyllus cuniculi 24
spinal cord abscess 82
spinosad 200
spirochetosis, avian 31
sporozoites 72, 112
stable fly 17, 97
Staphylococcus hyicus 166
Stephanurus dentatus 40
Sternostoma tracheacolum27
sticktight flea 122
Stomoxys calcitrans 17, 97
Strongyloides westeri 145
430
Strongylus spp. 90, 208
‘sturdy' 150
sudden death
cat 14
sheep 61
sulphachlorpyrazine 153
swans 77
'sway response′ 46
Syngamus spp. 10, 15, 154
Taenia spp. 73, 170, 180, 188
T. multiceps 13, 150
T. pisiformis 107
T. serialis 188
tapeworms
birds 60
brain cysts 150
cat 180
431
dogs/wild canids 13, 107, 170, 173, 189
encysted metacestode 188
fish 71
and fleas 53, 189
geese 120
gerbil 35
horses 80
hydatid cysts 69, 178, 190
muscle cysts 73
rat 197
techniques and apparatus 2, 5, 38
Teladorsagia circumcincta9
thiabendazole 78
threadworm 145
tick-borne fever 58, 59
ticks 141
American dog 74
432
chemical control 59, 135, 141
disease transmission 31, 59, 74, 89, 184, 191
hard 104, 184
hedgehog 199
lone star 104
non-conventional control 137
poultry 31
removal device 38
sheep 59, 135
Tilapia spp. 86
toad
clawed 142
common 132
toltrazuril 4, 121, 153, 183
‘tongue worms’ (pentastomes) 124
tortoises 118, 156, 194
Toxoplasma gondii 202
433
tracheal parasites 10, 27, 154
Trichinella spp. 106
Trichodina spp. 127
Trichomonas spp. 177, 198
trichostrongylosis 47, 103, 193
Trichuris spp. 100
T. suis 151, 169
T. trichiuria 101, 169
T. vulpis 105, 141
triclabendazole 165
trimethoprim/sulphadiazine 4
trimethoprim/sulphamethoxazole 4
tritrichomonosis, feline intestinal 55
Trixacarus caviae 52
Trombicula autumnalis 94
true 0r false? 33, 91, 104, 141
Trypanosoma melophagium 92
434
tsetse fly 97
Tubifex tubifex 86
turtles, epibionts 68
urine, blood 40
vaccines, cattle tick 137
Varroa mite 8
'vena caval syndrome′ 23
viper, bush 195
vitamin C 52
'walking dandruff mite 33
Western blot analysis 51
whipworms 33, 101, 105, 141, 151
yeasts 4
zebra 108
zinc sulphate 167
435
436
437
438